4235.5 S120630 99855825 176981
THE SIGNES OF THE WICKED MAN. Together with Directi∣ons that shew how the seue∣rall Gifts and Graces of Gods Spirit may be attained. NEEDFVLL For such as want those Graces, and for such as desire to increase in them. By N. BIFIELD, Preacher of Gods Word at Isleworth in Middlesex. LONDON, Printed by GEORGE PVRSLOVV for RALPH ROVNTHVVAITE, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Flower de-luce and Crowne in Pauls Church-yard. 1619.
TO THE MVCH Honoured Lady: the Lady BRIDGET TRA∣CY, NICHOLAS BI∣FIELD wisheth all pros∣perity in the things of the Kingdome of CHRIST. MADAM, BEING des∣titute of a bet∣ter gift to bestow vpon your Ladiship, to testifie my thankefulnesse or ob∣seruance, I present this lit∣tle Treatise vnto you. It may haue more vse then
it shewes for: for if things shine more cleerely when their contraries are set by them; then may this de∣scription of the estate of a wicked man by Signes, serue much to establish the godly in the point of Assurance, when hee seeth himselfe freed from those fearefull & forlorne marks. And if men vse to make much of all those directi∣ons by which any gaine or treasure may be certainely compassed: then ought the Directions not to bee despised, that shew how the Spirit of God, and the graces thereof may bee at∣tained:
For by these di∣rections, both those that want the true graces of Christ, may here learne how to get them, and such as haue them but in weake measure, may by the same Rules learne how to in∣crease them. I haue been induced to thinke of your Ladiship in this Dedication, partly in acknowledgement of the great respect due to the Family out of which you came, as it hath beene a principall meanes of cau∣sing the light of the Gos∣pell for many yeares to shine in those places where
the people had sitten in darkenesse, and in the sha∣dow of death: And part∣ly drawne by the many prayses I haue obserued in your Ladiship, since the time of your soiourning in the noble Family you now liue in: Your great respect of my Ministery, and your constant paines to employ your selfe about Religious duties, deserue from mee more acknow∣ledgement then so meane a gift as this can discharge. Madam, you are happy aboue many, that GOD hath inclined your heart to beare the yoke of
Christ in your youth, and discerne the glory of the spirituall Kingdome of Iesus Christ. Your meeke∣nesse assures me liberty to beseech you to goe on in the good way of God, and to cleaue fast with all hearty affection vnto the Truth, as you haue lear∣ned Iesus Christ, It shall be a great increase of your glory, to increase in the knowledge and grace of Christ, and (in sound de∣nyall of your selfe, and con∣tempt of the world) to fa∣shion your selfe to all the courses by which you may be pleasing in the eyes of
God, whiles multitudes in the Gentry of the Land of both Sexes, by following foolish vanities, forsake their owne mercy. Now the God of peace sanctifie you throughout, and so prosper his owne worke in you, that your whole spirit, and soule and body may bee preserued blamelesse vnto the com∣ming of our Lord Iesus Christ, March. 9. 1618. Your Ladiships to bee commanded in Christ Iesus, N. BIFIELD.
The Contents. THE Preface, shew∣ing the necessity of the tryall of mans estate, and the causes why wicked men will not try themselues; and also why diuers godly persons are negligent herein, page 1. to 18. CHAP. I. THirty signes of an open wicked man. p. 18. to 33
CHAP. II. THirteene signes of an Hypocrite. p. 33. to 40 CHAP. III. SIxteene Signes of such Professors as are likely to fall away. p. 40. to 47 CHAP. IIII. SEVEN Arguments of hope, that shew a wic∣ked man that hee may bee saued, if he will be direc∣ted. p. 47. to 52
CHAP. V. HOw hee may get faith. p. 53. to 59 CHAP. VI. HOw hee may get to bee poore in spirit. p. 59 to 68 How hee may attaine godly sorrow. p. 68. to 77 CHAP. VII. HOw the Spirit of Adop∣tion may be had. pa. 78. to 81 How hee may get a loue to the
Word. p. 81. to 86 How he may get the gift of prayer. p. 86. to 94 How hee may attaine to the feare of God. P. 94. to 95 How he may be made to loue his enemies. p. 96. to 99 CHAP. VIII. HOw sauing knowledge may bee gotten and increased. p. 99. to 102 How the loue of God may be wrought in vs. p. 102. to 106 How the loue of the godly may bee attained, and how it may bee preserued. pag. 106. to 111
CHAP. IX. HOw vprightnesse and sound sincerity of con∣uersation may bee attai∣ned. p. 111. to the end.
The Preface to the Christian and carefull READER. HOw necessa∣ry it is for al sorts of men in the visi∣ble Church to try their estates whether they bee true Christians or no, may appeare by the expresse charge giuen in the Scrip∣tures
concerning it. The Apostle Paul chargeth men to examine themselues whether they be in the faith, and whether Christ Iesus be in them, vnlesse they be re∣probates, 2. Cor. 13. 5. And the Apostle Peter would haue all Christians, dili∣gent to make their Calling and Election sure, 2. Pet. 1. 10. And the like comman∣dement lay vpon men in the Church of the Iewes in the old Testament, as may appeare by that exhortati∣on, Lam. 3. 40. Let vs search and try our wayes, and turne againe vnto the Lord: and the Prophet Dauid in this
case, chargeth men to commune with their owne hearts, Psal. 4. 4. How can men draw neere vnto God in the full assurance of faith, if they will not bee at the paines to examine them∣selues? Heb. 10. 22. Or how shall wee euer know that wee are of God, or at∣taine vnto any confidence of faith, as we ought to do? 1. Ioh. 5. 19. Ephes. 3. 12. How fearefully this point of sound tryall is neglected, and how mise∣rably most men are decei∣ued for want of it, may ap∣peare by this obseruation, which may vsually bee
made of men in the most places, viz. that many that are carnall men, say they are godly; and many that are godly men, say they are but carnall: Besides that a multitude of men, both good and bad, liue in se∣curity; the one not caring to get out of so woefull an estate; and the other not regarding the riches of Assurance. The causes of this mi∣serable security, may bee obserued and noted both in wicked & in godly men. In wicked men these things may bee easily dis∣cerned.
1. A lothnesse to exa∣mineWhy wic∣ked men neglect the triall of their estates. 1. Because they are afraid all is not wel. themselues and try their estates exactly, for feare lest they should find that they are not in a good estate: Their hearts secret∣ly condemne them, and they thinke, if they should take particular notice of their owne condition, it would be found, that they haue indeed no true grace in them; and therefore they rather choose to liue in that doubtfull estate, then to bee put out of doubt, and made to know, that they haue yet no right to the kingdome of hea∣uen; neuer considering
that the knowledge of our misery may be one degree to get out of it. 2. In such as see all is2. They are sloth¦full. not well with them: the cause is slothfulnesse, min∣gled with horrible pre∣sumption; they had rather weare out their daies in danger, then bee at the paines to vse the meanes for their owne repentance and reformation: They will wretchlesly put it to the venture. 3. Others will aduen∣ture3. They rest vpon the com∣mon hope vpon their common hope of mercy: They haue certaine generall confu∣sed apprehensions of mer∣cy
in God, vpon which they wilfully engage their hopes, without care of re∣formation, or the parti∣cular warrant of their hopes from the Word of God, and so miserably perish: their hopes pro∣uing, but as the house of the spider; and, the imagina∣rie mercy failing them, they die either as stockes, without sence; or as Iudas, in horrible despaire. 4. Others rest them∣seluesOr 4. vpon their out∣ward pro∣fession of Religion. vpon their outward profession of Religion, and some generall things wrought in them, and the good opinion others haue
of them, and so being somewhat neere the king∣dome of God, they are con∣tent to rest there, as the Israelits did neere Canaan, though they neuer posses∣sed it. Wee see many thinke, there needs no more to be sure they are in a good condition, then to heare Sermons, and ab∣staine from grosse out∣ward prophanenesse, and to bee well reputed of a∣mong the godly, &c. plea∣sing themselues with the shew of godlinesse, though as yet they deny the power of it, as hauing attained no other righteousnesse,
then the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharises. 5. In multitudes ofOr 5. they haue euill opinions about As∣surance. men there are seated euill opinions about assurance: They thinke either it is impossible to be had, or it is needlesse, or it is presumpti∣on to seeke it. 6. All wicked men are hindred by their beloued6. They are letted by their belo∣ued sinnes sinnes, which they are not willing to part with, but of purpose forbeare the care of heauen, that they may the more securely liue in sinne. Thus of wicked men: It is true also, that many godly Christians haue
beene, and are extremelyWhy some that are godly, neg¦lect, the triall of their e∣states. faulty in neglecting the triall of their estates, and their Assurance: and the causes of this negligence in them are diuers: As 1. Some are so much1. Euill o∣pinions. mis-led by the surmises of their owne hearts, that they thinke that Assu∣rance would breed secu∣rity, and that it is a better way to keepe their owne hearts humble, to be some∣what doubtfull: not know∣ing, that vnbeleefe is the chiefe cause of slothful∣nesse and security; and that the assurance of faith is the chiefe meanes to
purge the heart, and quiet the soule, and workes ef∣fectually in all the duties of loue. 2. In the most, Igno∣rance2. Igno∣rance. of their owne gifts and Gods promises, is the cause: for if Christians did see distinctly, how far the Lord had brought them by his grace, and withall did behold the eui∣dences of their faith, and hope in Gods promises, they could not faile of comfort, & establishment of heart. 3. Smothering of doubts3. Smo∣thering of doubts and temp∣tations. and temptations, is a great let in many: Diuers Chris∣tians
are secretly, and dai∣ly assaulted with certaine strange doubts; which if they did propound, and get sound answer vnto, their hearts would heale within them, and the work of faith prosper. 4. Some Christians areThey are wicked o∣uermuch. kept without Assurance, through the ouermuch viewing of their owne daily infirmities in all parts of Gods seruice: They are wicked ouermuch; where∣as if they would study those Scriptures, that shew how graciously the Lord stands inclined toward his people, notwithstanding
their daily wants, their hearts would bee much ea∣sed, and their minds cleer∣ly resolued to trust vpon the euerlasting mercies of their God. 5. In some, the cause is5. Melan∣choly. found in the disease of their bodies: Melancholy, when it is growne to a di∣sease, is a most stiffe and pertinacious aduersarie to Comfort and Assurance: It doth fill the heart with so many sad conceits and fancies, and is a humor so vnteachable, that comfort for the most part is as wa∣ter spilt vpon the ground: And the more difficult it
is to remoue this let, be∣cause vsually the parties possest by this humour, are so far from seeking helpe, that they will not bee per∣swaded that they are trou∣bled with any such disease. 6. Some Christians are6. Passions hindred by their owne Passions; they are so fro∣ward and vnquiet in their dispositions, that their hearts are daily lifted off from the benefit of settled Assurance by their owne habituall discontents: Fro∣wardnesse is a mischieuous distemper, that weakens both body and minde; and assurance and strength of
faith, seldome dwels in an vnquiet minde. 7. Others want assu∣rance,7 Neglect of the meanes. because they neg∣lect the meanes of Assu∣rance: they do not try all things, and keep that which is good; or they call not vp∣on God daily, feruently, and constantly, to giue them the spirit of reuelation, to shew them the hope of their Calling, and their glorious Inheritance, Ephe. 1. 18, 19. 8. A barren life is an8. A bar∣ren life. vncomfortable life: and contrarywise, to abound in1 Cor. 15. 58. good workes, hath stedfast∣nesse, and a secret rest of heart, as an vnseparable
companion of it. 9. The loue of earthly9. Too much loue of earthly things. things is another great im∣pediment: many Profes∣sors haue their thoughts and cares so eaten vp with worldlinesse, that they cannot seriously seek Gods Kingdome, nor constant¦ly hold out in any course for the attainement of Assurance: This degree of faith requires some de∣gree of the contempt of the world. 10. In some, there lod∣geth10. Secret sinne. some secret sinne, which they know, and do not iudge themselues for, and doth daily preuaile in
them; and this either keeps out faith, or keepes it downe in the cradle, that it can get no strength. When I say secret sinnes, I mean secret from others, not from themselues. For sinnes of meere ignorance God doth not scourge in his seruants so, as to with∣hold his graces from them.
CHAP. I. Containing the signes of o∣pen wicked men. THE try∣all of the estates of all sorts of Chris∣tians, may bee per∣formed by examining themselues by two sorts of signes; some are such
as describe the wicked man, and some such as de∣scribe the godly man; and of the tryall of the godly man, I haue intreated be∣fore. Wicked men in the Church are not all of a sort: for some are mani∣festly prophane and care∣lesse of the Kingdome of God; and some are in out∣ward shew, such as professe the seeking of Gods King∣dome, but yet in deed and in heart are without God and without Christ, and such are all Hypoctites. Wicked men of the first sort, are discerned by such markes as these: and so
he is a wicked man, 1. That can spend whole1. Hee is a wicked man, 1. That liues with∣out God. dayes or weekes without seeking after God, or Christ, that accounts it no part of his care to looke after God, or any secret ac∣quaintance or communi∣on wirh God in Iesus Christ, that liues, as the A∣postle sayth, without God, and without Christ, and therefore without hope in the world: that seldome or neuer thinkes seriously of God, Ephes. 2. 12. 2. That continually2. That a∣uoids the society of the godly. shuns and striues to auoyd the company and society of such as feare God, and
in his heart loues not such as be religious, and make conscience of their wayes: This man is certainely in darkenesse, that hates Gods children, as the Apostle Iohn often shewes in his first Epistle; especially when he hates them, be∣cause they follow good∣nesse. 3. That sauours only the3. That sa∣uours only earthly things. things of the flesh, that finds a taste and rellish on∣ly in earthly things, that placeth al his contentment in the things of this life: Rom. 8. 1. Ioh. 2. 15. 4. That is vncapeable and vnteachable in the
things of God, and god∣linesse,4. That is, discerns not the things of God. hauing the Gospell and the glory of Religion hid from his heart, so as he sees nothing in the King∣dome of Iesus Christ to be admired, and desired of him, and when he enioyes the meanes, cannot dis∣cerne the things of God, 1. Cor. 2. 5 That willingly haunts5. That sorts with wicked men. with wicked and prophane persons, and delights in them, and chooseth them for the companions of his life, Psal. 50. 2. Cor. 6. 6. That of malice per∣secuteth6. That of malice persecu∣teth the Truth. and reprocheth & despighteth the knowne
Truth, speaking euill of the good way of God, which hee himselfe hath knowne, and acknowledged before, Heb. 10. 7. That hath in him7. That al∣lows him∣selfe in A∣theisticall thoughts. thoughts of Atheisme raig∣ning, conceiuing vile things of God, without sorrow or trouble of heart for them, or rather desi∣ring he could proue them to be true, wishing there were no God at all, Psalme 14. 1. 8. That calls not vpon8. That calls not vpon God the name of the Lord, who is such a one, as who∣ly neglects this seruice of God in himselfe and his
Family, vnlesse it bee for fashions sake, without care or vnderstanding, Psalme 14. 4. 9. That was neuer chast∣ned9. That is not chaste∣ned of God. of the Lord: For they are bastards and not sons, Heb. 12. 10. That can spend his10. That neuer ex∣amines himselfe in known sinne. dayes without examining himselfe, whether Iesus Christ bee in him or not: That mindes it not to bee sure, that he is in the faith, 2. Cor. 13. 5. Ioh. 17. 3. 11. That flattereth him∣selfe11. That applauds himselfe in known sinne. in his owne eyes, when hee is threatned for sin, and blesseth himselfe in his heart, when his iniquity
is found worthy to bee hated, Psal. 36. 1, 2. Deut. 29. 19. 12. That secretly lothes,12. That lothes the Word of God con∣stantly. and contemnes, and in his heart constantly frets at the Word, when it is con∣scionably and powerfully preached, that findes in the good word of God a dead∣ly sauour, 2. Cor. 2. 15. 13. That liues in hypo∣crisie,13. That allowes himself in Hypocrisie and knowes he dis∣sembles constantly in the seruice of God, and doth not desire to leaue it, nor take any course to resist it, or humble his soule in se∣cret for it. 14. That desires not the14. That refuseth knowlege. knowledge of Gods wayes,
and seriously accounts good courses to be vnpro∣fitable courses, Iob 21. 14, 15, 16. 15. That hauing the15. That in great dis∣tresses humbles not him∣selfe. hand of God vpon him, & liues in sorrow and misery, & yet neuer seekes to God, nor humbles his soule before God, nor acknow∣ledgeth Gods hand, or if he doe, doth not labour to make his peace with God, 2. Cor. 7. 10. Ier. 5. 2, 3. 16. That cannot be tou∣ched16. That cares not for the af∣flictions of the godly. with compassion, or care for the afflictions of the Church and people of God, Amos 6. 5. and is mer∣cilesse, Mat. 25. Iam. 2. 1. Ioh. 3.
17. That hath no desire17. That will not vnder∣stand to do good. to be taught to doe good, but either cares not for Heauen and godlinesse, or thinkes himselfe wise e∣nough to finde the way without asking, Psalme 36. 1, 3. 18. That is not affected18. That is insensi∣ble of spi∣rituall Iudge∣ments. with feare or sorrow vnder spirituall iudgements, such as the famin of the Word, absence of God, hardnesse of heart, or the like. 19. That is a customa∣ry19. That is an ordi∣nary swea∣rer. swearer, and repents not of it: God threatens he will not iustifie such offenders, but pursue them as his e∣nemies, Com. 3.
20. That makes not con∣science20. That is carelesse of Gods Sabbaths. to keepe Gods Sabbath: for God hath gi∣uen the Sabbath as a signe between him and the peo∣ple in the point of their Sanctification: so, hee that cares not to prophane the Sabbath, by that signe is known to be none of Gods people, Exod. 31. 21. That not only com∣mits21. That is a worker of iniqui∣ty. sinnes against his knowledge, but serues sin, and is a worker of iniquity, loues it, defends it, and re∣solues to continue in it, & placeth his felicity in it. 22. That beleeues not in22. That beleeues not in Christ. the Sonne of God, as they do
not, that either deny his comming in the flesh, or his person, or his offices, or else rest not vpon him for life and happinesse, Marke 16. Iohn 3. 17. 1. Iohn 4. 23. That in any one23. That hates to be reformed. particular sinne, knowing it to be a sinne, hates to be re∣formed, Psal. 50. 24. That hath not the24. That hath not the Spirit of Christ. Spirit of Christ. For if any man haue not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his, Rom. 8. 25. That cannot forgiue25. That cannot forgiue his enemies. his enemies, nor pray for them that hate him, and wrong him, Mat. 6. For if men forgiue not vnto men
their trespasses, neither will God forgiue them their sins, as is likewise shewed by the parable, Mat. 18. 32. 26. That loues not God,26. That loues not God. and shewes it, 1. By an habituall for∣getfulnes of God, of which before. 2. By his vnwillingnes to doe Gods worke, his com∣mandemēts being alwaies grieuous vnto him, and it seeming euill to him to serue the Lord, 1. Ioh. 5. 3. 3. By insensiblenesse of the dishonor of God. 4. By louing his pleasures, or profits, more then God.27. That feare not God. 27. That feares not God,
and shewes it, 1. By not caring for Gods displeasure, so hee might escape Gods pu∣nishment. 2. By comming into Gods presence constantly, without any awfull regard of Gods Maiesty. 3. By sinning in secret withall security, being one∣ly carefull to auoide the eyes of men. 4. By contempt of the threatnings of God in his Word. 28. That is dead in tres∣passes28. That is dead in sinne. and sinnes, Ephes. 2. 1, 2. that can be guilty of ma∣ny and monstrous crimes,
and that as if hee were a dead man, continues vnder the burthen of them with∣out sorrow, or feare, or re∣morce, or care of amend∣ment, Ephes. 2. 1. 29. The Apostle Paul29. That is guilty of any of his sinnes in the Apo∣stles Ca∣talogue. puts a number of offen∣ders in diuers grose sinnes into a Catalogue, and pro∣nounceth of them all, that without repentance they cannot inherite the King∣dom of Heauen, 1. Cor. 6. 9 Fornicatours, Idolaters, Adulterers, the Effemi∣nate, Sodomites, Theeues, Couetous persons, Drun∣kards, Reuilers, and Extor∣tioners: and so in the Gal.
30. All those that cānot re∣pent,30. That cannot re∣pent. that is such as cannot pray, nor cōfesse their sins to God, nor bewaile them, nor any way set themselues soundly to reforme them. CHAP. II. Containing the signes of Hy∣pocrites. THus of the markes of notorious and wicked men: The signes by which hypocrites may be known, follow, and these are of two sorts. First, such as describe2. sorts of these signes them so, that themselues
may thereby know them∣selues. Secondly, such as giue occasion to men to feare their soundnes, and shew, that they are likely to fall a∣way, though for the pre∣sent they make shew and profession of Religion, and doe escape much of that filthinesse, which is in the outward liues of others. For the first, these are the signes of an hypocrite. 1. To professe Gods13 Signes of hypo∣crites. Couenant with his mouth; and deny it in his workes, Psal. 50. 16. 2. To do his workes of purpose to be seen of men,
when hee might conceale the knowledge of them, & doth this of purpose chief∣ly, because he would haue the praise and applause of men, not seeking the ap∣probation, or praise of God, Mat. 6. Rom. 2. 26. 3. To make cleane the out-side of the platter, and let the inside be foule: To bee like a painted sepul∣chre: To auoide apparant outward faults, and yet to harbour a world of wic∣kednesse in his heart, with∣out any true repentance for it, Math. 23. 4. To censure small matters in others, and be
guilty of great crimes him∣selfe: To see a moate in another mans eye, and not care to cast out the beame in his owne eyes, Math. 7. 5. To pretend care of piety towards God, and yet be vnmercifull to men; or neglect works of mer∣cy to the poore, that hee is able to do; and yet vn∣conscionably omits it, Iam. 1. 26. 6. To require many things of others in their practice; and yet make no conscience of obser∣uing them in his owne practice: To binde heauy burthens vpon other mens
shoulders, and not to touch them with his owne finger, Math. 23. 7. To arrogate to him∣selfe the titles of godli∣nesse, and yet enuy and hate goodnesse in others, and to endeuour to hinder them, or oppose them, that would enter into the King∣dome of heauen, Math. 23. 8. To praise the dead, or the absent seruants of God, and yet despise and persecute such of Gods faithfull seruants, as are set ouer them, and to disobey them, Math. 23. 9. To speake faire to mens faces, and behinde
their backes to reuile and slander them. 10. To draw neere to God with his lips, when his heart is far from him: In the daily seruice of God to allow himselfe in the habite of distractions, making no conscience to worship God in his spirit, Esay 28. 11. Neuer in secret to make conscience of prayer to God; and not to cry to God, except it be in sicke∣nesse, or great aduersity; dis-regarding prayer in health, and prosperity, Iob. 17. 9, 10. 12. With prophane∣nesse
to neglect Gods commandements, and to be onely diligent to vrge & obserue mens precepts, or the traditions of men, Math. 15. 13. To punish, or re∣proue sinne in some, be∣cause he hates them; or to forbeare reproofes or pu∣nishments of others, be∣cause he feares or fauours them.
CHAP. III. Containing the signes of such as are likely to bee vnsound, and will not hold out. THus of the first sort of signes of Hypocrites: Now follow such proba∣ble signes of hypocrites, as men may take notice of, and doe vsually fore∣shew their falling away at length, though for the pre∣sent they make great shewes. Amongst them16. Signes of an vn∣sound Professor. then that make profession of Religion aboue the
common sort of people; these are likely to bee vn∣sound, and not hold out▪ 1. That ioyne not them∣selues to Gods people, but forbeare constantly, or forsake apparantly their fellowship, Heb. 10. 24. 2. That are not care∣full and desirous to re∣forme their housholds, & to set vp Gods worship in their Families; that are good abroad, but practise not godlinesse at home. 3. That customarily liue in any sinne knowne to bee so to themselues, without sorrow, or amendment, whether it be in their par∣ticular
Calling, or gene∣rall Conuersation. 4. That constantly and with delight choose out vngodly men to bee their chiefe companions and friends. 5. That are wilfull in the vse of the vanities of the world, and will not be reclaimed from their ex∣cesses, or offences that way. 6. That are stiffe-nec∣ked, and will not abide re∣proofe and admonition, but shew themselues con∣ceited, and selfe-willed. 7. That are full of rash zeale, and shew it by pas∣sions,
and violent furies about lesser matters, and yet haue some notable faults in themselues, wich they make no conscience of. 8. That are swift to speake, and full of words, and forward to expresse their masterlike conceits, when they neither haue calling, nor fitnesse, or power of the holy Ghost. The language of an hum∣ble Christian, that hath true grace, differs wonder∣fully from the empty and impertinent language of the hypocrite, who is seldome assisted with effi∣cacie
of matter. 9. That liues inordi∣nately, being idle, and at∣tends not the labours of a lawfull Calling, that is found ordinarily in his neighbours house, and is apparantly negligent and slothfull in the duties of his Calling. 10. That is more vexed for want of respect from others, then for his owne disabilities in his conuer∣sation. 11. That seemes glad of the company of some that feare God, but can∣not abide others, either for the meannesse of their
place, or because the world contemnes them, though without cause, & though there be no iust exception against their sincerity. They that haue Religion in respect of persons, loue not any for Religions sake. 12. That liue customa∣rily in the sinne of swea∣ring, or lying. 13. That is carelesse of the sanctification of Gods Sabbath. 14. That hath had no maner of affliction of spi∣rit for particular sinnes. 15. That is pertinacious in the defence of gainfull
and delightfull sinnes. 16. That confirmes himselfe in the customary neglect of some of Gods Ordinances altogether, ei∣ther publike, or priuate. CHAP. IIII. Shewing vnto the wicked the hope to bee saued, if the fault bee not in him∣selfe. HItherto of the signes of wicked men, who must bee perswaded to a∣bide the triall without des∣paire; for the signes doe not shew them, that they
cannot be saued; but one∣ly, that for the present they are not in the estate of sal∣uation actually, which though it may, and ought to be grieuous vnto them, to consider in what feare∣full misery and sinne they liue in: yet they haue rea∣son to know and beleeue, that they may bee saued as well as others: yea, the acknowledgement of their misery is one step to salua∣tion. Now that wicked men may not die, but take a course to bee saued, two things are by them to bee attended: first, the argu∣ments
of hope, that prooueArgumēts of hope. they may bee saued, and that there is a remedy for their misery. Secondly, the rules, that shew them what they must do, which being done, they may bee certaine of their saluation. For the first, that they be saued, these things may hopefully assure: 1. That God hath sworn,1. Gods oath. that hee desires not that the wicked should die, but ra∣ther that hee should turne from his euill waies, and liue, Ezech. 18. 21. 2. That God hath with2. Gods patience. singular patience borne with him all this while,
and hath not laid him be∣neath for all his sinnes, who long since deserued Hell; and the Lord hath taught it too, that hee is patient, that men might re∣pent and bee saued, Rom. 2. 4. 2. Pet. 3. 9. 3. That God offers his3. The of∣fer of grace to all. grace to all, and hath made no exception against a∣ny particular man, and therefore why shouldest thou except thy selfe from saluation, when Gods grace is tendered to thee as well as others? God sends his Gospell to euery creature, euen to all Nati∣ons, Mark. 16. 13.
4. That God hath sent4. Suffici∣ent satis∣faction made by Christ. his owne Sonne to be a suf∣ficient sacrifice and propiti∣ation for the sinnes of all men: Hee is the Lambe of God, that taketh away the sinnes of the world, Ioh. 1. Rom. 3. 25. 1. Ioh. 2. 1. and in him is God well pleased, and would haue all men know, that hee is content to take satisfaction from Christ, Math. 3. 17. 5. That God hath pla∣ced5. The meanes continued them in the visible Church, and doth yet continue the meanes that is able to saue their soules, Act. 20. 32. Iam. 1. 21. 6. That God hath de∣clared
himselfe concer∣ning sinne, that there is one onely sinne that in it6. One onely sin simply vn∣pardona∣ble. selfe is simply vnpardona∣ble; All the rest may bee forgiuen. 7. That God hath saued7. As great sinners sa∣ued. as great sinners as they, such as were Manasses, Mary Magdalene, Dauid, Paul: Many amongst the Corinthians were fornica∣tors, drunkards, raylors, and the like, yet were ius∣tified, sanctified, and saued, 1. Cor. 9. 10, 11. And these haue obtained mercy, that in thē Iesus Christ might shew forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should
afterwards beleeue to euer∣lasting life, 1. Tim. 1. 13, 16. CHAP. V. Shewing how faith may bee gotten. THE rules of directi∣on follow. This then is the question: What should a man doe, that he may be sure of his saluati∣on, the man, I say, that for the present doth not finde the grace of Christ in his heart? I answer: That his principall care must bee to vse all meanes to get the graces of the godly Chris∣tian
formed in his heart: And herein the Lord hath shewed vnto men singular mercy, that as hee hath shewed wayes in his Word, how his seruants may dis∣cerne the graces, that are as so many signes & pledges of Gods loue, and their own saluation; so hath hee in the same Word laid downe cleere directions, that shew how euery grace may bee attained and for∣med, and nourished in the hearts of men. And first I will beginne with faith, & the Question is: What should a man do, that he might attain faith?
He that would beleeue, must obserue these rules. 1. Hee must in the first1. He must consider of Gods promises. place betake himselfe to Gods promises: For with∣out the promise of grace it is vnpossible, faith should euer be formed aright in a man, hee must labour to see what the Lord saith distinctly vnto sinners: I will instance in that one promise, Ioh. 3. 16. God so loued the world, that hee sent his onely begotten Son, that whosoeuer beleeueth in him, should not perish, but haue life euerlasting: Now his care must bee, seriously to marke, and cleerely to vn∣derstand
Gods meaning, which in this promise is to assure saluation to any in the world, that will beleeue in Christ. 2. Hee must then con∣sider2. He must take no∣tice of Gods cō∣mande∣ment to beleeue. Gods commandement concerning faith, that God doth require him to be∣leeue, and is so farre from being displeased with him for beleeuing in Christ, that for this cause hee will damne him in Hell, if hee beleeue not, Ioh. 3. 17. 1. Ioh. 3. 23. Hee doth as exactly require vs to relye vpon this course of saluation by Iesus Christ, as hee doth require any thing of vs in
the Morall Law: and as we ought not to sweare, or commit adultery, or steale; so ought we not to dare to liue without beleefe in Ie∣sus Christ. 3. Hee must pray hear∣tily3. He must pray for faith. to God to giue him a heart to beleeue, and to forme faith in him; for faith is the gift of God, Eph. 2. 8. Hee should pray ouer the promises, and beseech God to incline his heart to rest vpon them, as the best treasures in the world: cry vnto the Lord, Lord help my vnbeleefe. 4. Hee must absolutely lay aside all thought of his
owne righteousnesse by the4. He must renounce his owne righteous∣nesse. workes of the Law, and look onely to Iesus Christ, and the righteousnesse in him, else hee will faile of the righteousnesse of God, Rom. 10. 3. 5. Hee must waite vp∣on5. He must waite vpō the Word preached. the powerfull Prea∣ching of the Gospell, as the onely outward ordinary meanes to beget faith, offe∣ring his soule daily vnto God, and attending to the Word of God, ready to obey the motions of the Spirit, knocking at the doore of his heart in the Ministerie of the Word, knowing that from this
Ordinance of God, hee is to expect the gift of faith: Hee should betake him∣selfe to it, with resolution to waite with daily expec∣tation, till the Lord bee pleased to send the Holy Ghost into his heart: And this is a generall rule for this, and all other graces of the Spirit: as men loue their owne foules, so they must prouide to liue where the Word of God is prea∣ched constantly, & in the power of it: for from thence they shall receiue vnspeakeable help and fur∣therance in all the wayes of God, Rom. 10. 14.
CHAP. VI. Shewing how true humiliati∣on may be attained. THVS of faith: In the next place he must la∣bor for true and sound hu∣miliation for his sinnes: and to this end hee must distinctly striue to get for∣med in him two things: 1. Pouerty of spirit, 2. godly sorrow, for to these two belong all the branches of true humiliation. For the attaining of spi∣rituall1. Gather a Catalogue of thy sins, either▪ by memory, pouerty, these rules are of great vse: First, make a Catalogue
of thy sinnes, which thou maist do either by memo∣ry or by booke: By memo∣ry thus: Goe aside, set thy soule before the Lord, as if thou we rest presently to be iudged of him; call to minde particularly, what∣soeuer thou canst remem∣ber by thy selfe; consider thy wants, thy Omissions, and Commissions of euill, in youth or riper age: in heart, or life, in things that concerne God, or men, or thy owne soule, and dispo∣sition, thoughts, affections, words, or deedes. Thou maist then see an Army of rebellious euils thou hast
beene guilty of. By bookOr by booke. thus? Procure thee the la∣bour of some reuerend Diuine, that hath briefely gathered the sins of euery Commandement, and from thence gather out so many sins, as thou know∣est by thy selfe that thou hast beene guilty of: Lay those sins dayly before thy conscience, and consider how many wayes thou hast made thy selfe guilty. Secondly, consider then2. consider Gods▪ Ius∣tice. the Iustice of God, how he hateth all sinne, which thou maist be assured of, if thou remember how hee plagued our first Parents,
the old World, Sodome, & Gomorrha: how feare∣fully he neglected the Gen∣tiles, cast off the Iewes, yea how he spared not his owne Son Iesus Christ, when he became a surety for other mens sinnes. Thirdly, thinke of the3. Thinke of his threat∣nings. terrible woes, and threat∣nings, and curses which are denounced euery where in Scripture against such offences as thou art guilty of. Fourthly, force vpon4. Remem∣ber thy latter end. thy selfe the remembrance of thy latter end, and thy appearance before the tri∣bunall scate of Christ, to re∣ceiue
according to all that thou hast done in thy flesh. Fifthly, obserue with5. Obserue Gods Iudge∣ments vp∣on the wicked. what iudgements the Lord euery day fights against wicked men, in all parts of the world, sometimes by common Plagues, some∣times by speciall and par∣ticular calamities. Sixtly, aboue all things,6. Especi∣ally Gods goodnesse to thee. marke with all thy heart Gods goodnesse to thee in particular; in during all this at thy hands, his bles∣sings of all sorts dayly be∣stowed vpon thee, chiefely his mercy offered to thee in Iesus Christ, that can be content to forgiue thee all
thy debts, so thou be sorry, and weary of offending. Nothing can more breake thy heart, then to obserue how God dealeth with thee, euen with thee in particular, that hast de∣serued so much euill at his hands. Seuenthly, try thy selfe7. Try thy self by the signes. by a particular examinati∣on of thy owne estate, by e∣uery particular of the signes of Gods children, and then thou maist see, what a poore creature thou art, what shew soeuer thou makest in the world, and what naturall gifts or praises soeuer thou hast;
for then thou shalt finde, how exceeding empty thy heart is of sollid gifts, and the best graces, and that many a poore creature, that maketh little shew in the world, hath a heart bet∣ter graced by farre then thine. Eighthly, thou must beg8. Beg an humble heart of God. heartily an humble heart of God, and a greater dis∣cerning of thine own vile∣nesse. The Lord will bee sought vnto, & he is ready to be foūd, if thou seek him constantly and diligently: It is not a small worke to breake the pride and sto∣ninesse of thy heart. It
needes power from a∣boue. Ninthly, prouide to liue,9. Liue vn∣der a sear∣ching mi∣nistery. if it may be, vnder a force∣able ministry: where thou maist heare such doctrine dayly, as will search thy heart, & ransacke thy life; where thou maist feele the Word of God goe downe into thy heart and reines. Tenthly, marke what10. Watch against the things thou art naturally proud of. things they are, which by nature thou art proud of, and labour seriously both by arguments & restraint, to alienate thy affections from them: In particular, take heed of the snare that is in gay clothes, delicious
fare, worldly titles, and the like. Eleuenthly, shun and a∣uoide11. Auoide the flatte∣rer. with detestation the flatterer, and seeke vnto thee a righteous compani∣on, that may smite thee for thy faylings, and re∣prooue thee, and not hate thee in his heart. Twelfthly, labour to12. Thinke still of som of thy worst fruits. keepe in thy memory and thoughts, 6. or 8. or more, or fewer of thy faults, that thou wouldst bee more a∣shamed off, and thou hast more offended in, & com∣pel thy self daily to remem∣ber them: this will won∣derfully do thee good▪ and
tame thy pride, and make thee more meeke & more tractable, and mercifull, all the day after thou hast duely thought of them. Thus of the way how to get thy spirit to bee truely poore and humble. The next question is, what a man should doe to get a soft heart, and true godly sorrow, that hee might bee able to mourne for his sinnes, before God. 1. He must first consider1. Cōsider Gods pro∣mise about a soft hart. of Gods promises, who hath bound himselfe by couenant to take away the stony heart, & giue a heart of flesh vnto them that seek vn∣to
him for it, Ez. 36. 26, 32. 2. He must dayly in the best words he can, keepe a2. Dayly confesse thy sins to God, constant course in the con∣fession of his sinnes before God, begging of God with al importunity this mercy,And beg sorrow. that hee would melt, and soften his heart, & resolue, that he would neuer stand before the Lord, but hee would remember this peti∣tion, alwayes iudging him∣selfe, giuing glory to God: It may bee the Lord will heare at the first, or second time of prayer, but if he do not, thou must resolue to watch and pray still, with∣out limiting God to the
time of effecting thy de∣sire, as knowing that it ought not to seeme grie∣uous vnto thee, that the LORD doth not pre∣sently worke what thou prayest for, considering how long the Lord hath called vpon thee, and thou didst not answere, and withall the Lord is well pleased with these prepara∣tions in thy heart, and ac∣cepts thy endeuour to mourn because thou canst not mourne. 3. Hee must obserue3. Be thāk∣full for e∣uery mer∣cy in pray∣er. how the Lord deales with him in prayer, and be sure with all thankefulnesse to
acknowledge any mercy God shewes him in pray∣er, as if hee make him wil∣ling to pray, or giue him words in prayer, or let him feele any ioy in the time of prayer, or that he finde his heart in any degree to melt, hee should bee won∣derfull thankefull, if he can get but one teare in pray∣er, or that he find his heart in any degree to melt: and this obseruation of Gods goodnesse letting him know, that hee regards his particular requests, will melt his heart indeed fur∣ther, and perhaps set him all on a flame in desires to
praise God, and to abase himselfe euen to the dust before the Lord, Hosh. 3. 5. 1. Thess. 5. 4. That Rule of the4. Ac∣knowlege thy faults to others. Apostle Iames is some∣times of singular vse in this case of breeding soft∣nesse of heart, and that is acknowledging your sinnes one to another, when in se∣cret we make our moanes to wise & mercifull Chris∣tians, and shame our selues for our speciall offences, it many times hath melting of heart ioyned with it: so as that heart, that before seemed hardened and dry, now easily dissolues
into teares, Iam. 5. 5. To go into the house5. Go into the house of mour∣ning. of mourning may bee in this case profitable: resort to such as be in sorrow for the hand of GOD vpon them, especially such as mourne through the af∣fliction of their Spirits: Conuerse with humble & tender-hearted Christians, Eccles. 7. 6. In all the seruices of6. Take heed of distraction in Gods seruice. God be sure to draw neere to God, and keep thy minde from distraction and hypo∣crisie: The Sunne cannot haue such force to melt the waxe, as the beames of Gods presence haue to
melt the heart, Iam. 4. 6, 7. 7. The Apostle Paul be∣ing7. Studie the tenth Comman∣dement. a sturdy Pharise, had his heart beaten to powder with the feare of the tenth Commandement, that told him, hee must not lust: The knowledge and consi∣deration of the aboun∣dance of sinne-guiltinesse hee had drawne vpon himselfe, by the inward fruits of his euill nature, kil'd him out-right, brake his pride, and mortified him, as hee at large re∣peates, Rom. 7. 8. Remember the Pas∣sion8. Remem∣ber the sorrowes of Christ for thy sin. of thy Sauiour, the pouerty, banishment, ig∣nominy,
temptations; the apprehension, forsaking, arraignement, condem∣ning, and cruell death, which hee suffered for thy sinnes: Looke vpon him that was pierced for thy sake, Zach. 12. 12. 9. If of thy selfe thou9. Get o∣thers to pray for thee. canst not yet attaine vnto sorrow for thy sinnes, get some godly Christian, that is endued with the gift of prayer, to ioyne with thee in priuate, that so the Lord may bee pleased to grant in heauen, what we of him doe aske on earth. 10. Lastly, If al other means10. Vse fasting. faile, then set a day apart
by fasting; for the day of a fast was called the day of afflicting, or humbling the soule, Leu. 16. both because it was the maine duety to bee striuen after on that day, and besides, because the Lord vsually did blesse his owne Ordinance so, as he gaue an humbled heart to those, that sought it of him.
CHAP. VII. Shewing how the Spirit of Adoption may bee attai∣ned, and also how the se∣uerall gifts of the Spirit may be framed in vs. THus of humiliation: It followeth that I shew how hee may attaine to the other sacred gifts, which are markes of a godly man: as in the first sort of gifts, how hee may attaine to the loue of the Word, the gift of Prayer, the feare of God, the loue of his enemies, and the desire of the comming of
Christ: But before I enter vpon these, it is necessarie to shew him how hee may attain the Spirit of Adop∣tion, which is necessarie for these and all other gra∣ces. And concerning theHow the Spirit of Adoption may bee had. Spirit of Adoption, if a∣ny aske how it may be ob∣tained: Or rather, how it may bee stirred vp in vs, that we may feele his wor∣king in vs? I answer, that hee is had1. He must pray for it and stirred vp by inuoca∣tion: God is pleased to declare himselfe willing, and ready to bestow his holy Spirit vpon men, if
they aske him of him by hearty prayer: Hee that hath giuen vs his Sonne, will not deny vs the Spirit of his Sonne to be giuen in∣to our hearts, Gal. 4. 7. And this our Sauiour Christ assures vnto vs in the Para∣ble, Luke 11. 9. And I say vnto you, Aske, and it shall be giuen you: Seeke, and yee shall finde: Knock, and it shall be opened vnto you. 10. For euery one that asketh, receiueth, and he that seeketh, findeth, and to him, that knocketh, it shall be opened. 11. If a sonne shall
aske bread of any of you, that is a father, will hee giue him a stone? Or if hee aske a fish, will hee for a fish, giue him a Ser∣pent? 12. Or if hee aske an Egge, will hee giue him a Scorpion? 13. If yee then, which are euill, can giue good gifts vnto your children, how much more shall your heauenly Father giue the Holy Ghost to them, that desire him? 2. We must waite vp∣on2. Waite vpō Prea∣ching. the preaching of the Gospell, where the Holy Ghost vsually falls vpon
the hearts of men. 3. When wee feele the3. Cherish the moti∣ons of the Spirit. motions of the Spirit knocking at our hearts▪ or any way surprising vs, wee must with all readinesse open the doores of our hearts, that the King of Glory by his Spirit may enter into vs. The next question isHow wee may get a loue to the Word. then, what we should do to get and preserue in vs the constant loue to the VVord? 1. The answer is: first,1. Settie vnder a powerfull Ministery. that we should seeke to set∣tle our selues vnder the powerful preaching of the Word; euen such a Mi∣nistery
as doth set out the glory of the Truth, and of the Kingdome of Iesus Christ. 2. Wee must make a2. Pray God to quicken thee. conscience of it to pray vnto God to quicken vs, and inflame our hearts to the loue of his Lawes, as Dauid often did, Psal. 119. 3. Take heed of exces∣siue3. Take heed of worldly cares. cares, and the ouer∣teaching of thy desires in the imployments of the world, or the immoderate vse of worldly delights; for those choake the seed of the Word, and alienate the affections from it; and so doth any grosse, or belo∣ued
sinne, Heb. 3. Math. 13. 4. Take heed also of4. And of personall discord with such as feare God. personall discord with such as feare God, especially with thy Teachers; for this doth by secret degrees make the heart carelesse and negligent, and in some things wilfull; and if it bee not looked to in time, will bring men from the li∣king of the Word, as they haue beene drawne from the liking of such as loue the Word. 5. Take heed of vn¦godly5. And of vngodly company. company: For in such company is quen∣ched the sparkles of liking▪ when they are kindled; yea,
and the flames of affecti∣on are much dulled, in whom they are best exci∣ted, Psal. 119. 115. 6. Such, as finde some6. And of neglect of the in∣crease hereof: beginnings of desire after the Word, and liking to it, must take heed, that they estrange not them∣selues from the exercises thereof: For if they heare, or reade but now & then; either the heart will neuer be throughly heated, or if it bee, it will easily waxe cold againe: and yet here∣inOr excesse some are to be warned to take heed of disordered excesse; for that will breed dulnesse, as well as neg∣lect:
As when they will reade daily for diuers houres; or when they pro∣uide vnto themselues a heape of Teachers, as some that liue in great Ci∣ties, thinke it Religion to heare all sorts of men, and all the Sermons can bee come vnto: As if the pow∣er of godlinesse lay onely in the vse of the meanes of godlinesse. 7. Wee must practise7. Practise what thou hearest. what we heare, and labour to shew forth the fruit of the doctrine. Hee that would be in loue with hus∣bandry, must sow his seed in his ground, and then
the gaine of the Haruest will still allure him to like the Trade: If we be fruit∣lesse hearers of the Word, we cannot loue it; or if we doe, it will bee but for a flash, or small time. Thus of the loue to the Word. Hee that would learneTo attain the gift of prayer. to pray, must follow these directions: 1. Hee must go to God1. Pray God to teach thee in the name of Christ, and beseech him to giue him words, and by his Spirit to teach him to pray: It is God onely can make a man speak a pure language; for hee onely can instruct
the heart of man, and in∣due it with this heauenly gift, Rom. 8. 26. Ephes. 3. 9. 2. It will much helpe2. Ioyne with such as can pray. him to ioyne himselfe to such as call vpon the name of the Lord with a pure heart, especially in the daies of their humiliation, 2. Tim. 2. 22. 3. There are three dis∣tinct3. How he may fur∣nish him∣selfe in e∣uery part of prayer. things, which a man may with singular profite propound vnto himselfe in his prayers: Confession of sinnes: Petition for grace: and thankesgiuing for mercies receiued. Now the weakest Christian may be, through Gods blessing,
comfortably furnished for his own particular, if hee take such a course as this; To go aside, and with all3. Ques∣tions. secresie, and attention of heart before the Lord, aske himselfe these three Questions: 1. What sinnes haue I committed, which either now do trouble me; or, if I were to die, would make me afraide? Let him set them downe in a paper, or in his memory distinctly, till hee can bethinke him∣selfe of no more. It is no great matter for the order, how he sets them down, so hee bee sure hee haue the
chiefe sinnes, in which hee daily offends, or hath of∣fended. 2. What would I haue the Lord do for mee, if I might haue what I wish? Let him set the particulars downe till he can remem∣ber no more: As for ex∣ample, I would haue him forgiue me my sinnes, and I would haue him giue me knowledge; and I would haue him giue me strength against such and such sins; & I would haue him giue me faith and assurance; and I would haue him giue me heauen, when I die: and so go on with all the things
he feeles a desire in his heart to seek of God, till he can remember no more: and if at any other time hee remember some speci∣all thing, which he would further haue, which hee hath not in his Cata∣logue, let him set it down, as from time to time hee sees cause. 3. What speciall fa∣uours hath God shewed to me, which I see I ought to take speciall notice of. Let him set them downe distinctly, whether they be deliuerances, or such and such spirituall or outward mercies, preseruing the
memorie principally of the chiefest of them. Now when hee hath thus furnished these three heads with things, that in particular concerne him∣selfe, they being all mat∣ters of weight, hee must now carry these things, or the chiefe of them in his minde, and frame his heart to speake to God in the best words hee can get, to signifie his detestation of those sinnes, his humble requests for those graces, and his vnfaigned thanke∣fulnesse for those blessings: Howsoeuer hee may bee rude, or vnperfect in his
language about these at the first, yet exercise will bring him to a ripenesse, and by this course he shall be sure to speak of things, that concerne himselfe neerely; and that God, which hath taught parents to regard the vnperfect language of their little children, when they begin to speake vnto them, will himselfe much more de∣light to heare the desires of his seruants, that are grie∣ued, that they cannot speake in a better sort vn∣to him: The profite and comfort of this course will appeare by experience to
bee exceeding great; Be∣sides, it is an easie way, when there is in any a true desire to bee at the paines to learne this language of speaking to God by pray∣er, and Gods Spirit will helpe and teach the poore Christian, and draw his Petitions for him, and prompt him both with words and affections; and the Christian must know this, that when hee hath confessed his sinnes, and shewed what hee would haue God doe for him, with the best words hee could in the truth of his heart, hee hath made a
most effectuall prayer to God. Thus of Prayer. The awfull feare of God,How the feare of God may be begot∣ten in vs. and the reuerent dreading of God, may be begotten and increased in vs, if wee throughly remember and deeply ponder vpon, 1. The surpassing glo∣ry and transcendent excel∣lencie and perfection of his Nature, his absolute Purity, and exact Iustice, and Holinesse. 2. The wonderfull works of God, especially those standing miracles shewed in the hanging of this mighty earth, and those
huge heapes of water in the clouds, and the boun∣ding of these mighty feas, and such like. 3. His fearefull threat∣nings of all sorts of woes against the transgressions of men. 4. The terrour of the last Day, and the dreadful∣nesse of death and Iudge∣ment. 5. The fearefull and sudden iudgements which haue falne vpon wicked men; either recorded in Scripture, or reported in Histories, or obserued in experience. 6. Especially, if wee
thinke much and seriously of the great goodnesse of God to vs, how hee hath striuen with vs to ouer∣come vs with his mercies. Thus of the feare of God. Wee should striue to stir vp in vs affection, and loue to our very enemies, by such considerations as these: 1. Because Christ, to whom wee are infinitely bound, hath expresly char∣ged vs to look to this, that wee do loue our enemies; and therefore for his sake we should deny our selues, and our owne corrupt de∣sires,
and affections, and striue to shew the truth of our loue euen towards them, that hate and per∣secute vs. 2. There is none so wic∣ked, but they haue some∣thing good in them, and worthy to be respected. 3. Our enemies doe vs good, though they intend it not, we ought to like the very rod that mends vs, and regard the water that washeth vs white, & make much of the stone that tryes vs, and the glasse that shewes vs our spots, and not mis-like the tents that search our wounds.
4. If euer God turne their hearts, they will be effectuall instruments of our praise and Gods glory in the day of their visita∣tion, they will then wil∣lingly beare the shame of their owne sinfull opposi∣tions. I forbeare to set downe the directions for the at∣tainement of the loue of the appearing of Christ, because I haue at large handled that point in the Treatise of the Cure of the feare of Death.
CHAP. VIII. Thus of the directions that concerne the first sort of gifts, concerning the at∣tainement of the other graces: the directions now follow. ANd first, for the attain∣mentHow to get and increase sauing knowledge. 1. He must be wise for himselfe. of sauing know∣ledge, and the increase of it, these directions are of excellent vse. 1. First, in hearing or reading the Scriptures he must bee wise for himselfe, that is, marke distinctly what hee heareth or rea∣deth,
that may specially concerne himselfe, Prou. 9. 12. 2. He must study those2. He must study only profitable things. things exactly, which most concerne him, auoiding vaine questions, and fruite∣lesse contemplations, and vaine ianglings, and con∣trouersies: he must especi∣ally labour to know Gods Nature aright, and the dis∣tinct manner of Gods true Worship, how he may serue him: hee must study to know his owne particular of∣fences, and Christ crucified as his Sauiour, with the be∣nefits of his meditation, & the necessary things that
concerne his owne Iustifi∣cation, Sanctification, and finall Saluation. 3. Hee must redeeme the3. He must redeeme the time. time, and by forecast, and order prouide so, that som time may be dayly allow∣ed for holy studies to re∣couer his former time lost. 4. He must inquire and4. He must propound his doubts. take counsell, hee must take heede of smothering his doubts, but must carefully seeke satisfaction to his conscience, as occasion a∣riseth. There is more pro∣fit in this rule, then many5. He must not con∣sult with flesh and bloud. Christians are aware of. 5. Hee must take heede of consulting with flesh and
bloud: He must not regard other mens opinions, or his owne carnall reason; but resolue to giue the glory to Gods Word, so as to submit himselfe to what hee shall finde there∣in required to bee belee∣ued, or done, or auoided. Other Rules he may find in the directions for the priuate reading of the Scriptures: as also in the Rules of life. Thus of Sauing Know∣ledge.How the loue of GOD may bee wrought in thee. That thou maist inflame in thy heart the loue of God: 1. Thou must auoide
with speciall care, these things. First, Forgetfulnesse of1. Thou must a∣uoide for∣getfulnes of God, & the loue of the world. God; Thou must not dare to goe whole daies, or weekes, without commu∣nion with God, or remem∣bring his holy presence. Secondly, the loue of the world: Wee cannot loue the Father, while our harts dote vpon any earthly things: Of necessity, some degree of the contempt of the world must be bred in vs, before wee can loue God. 2. We must labour for2. Thou must study Gods prayses. a distinct knowledge of the dreadfull praises of Gods
Nature and Workes, as they are described in the Scriptures, or may be ob∣serued by experience: This is a needfull direction, and miserably neglected. 3. Wee must frequent3. Thou must fre∣quent his house. his House; especially when his glory doth most shine in the power of his Ordi∣nances in his Sanctuary. 4. Wee should especi∣ally4. Thou must study Gods mer∣cies. studie the mercies of God, and all the good things hee hath promised, or giuen vnto vs, that wee may after a solid manner cause our hearts to know, how infinitely wee stand bound to God.
5. We should obserue5. Thou must ob∣serue thy daily infir∣mities. carefully and daily, our owne sinfulnesse and vile∣nesse, and vnworthinesse: For vnlesse we cast out self. loue, we shall neuer get in the true loue of God. 6. Wee should pray6. Thou must pray much. much; for a holy course in prayer doth breed in men a wonderfull loue of God, and admiration of that fellowship, which thereby they haue with God. 7. Wee should resort7. Thou must re∣sort to ex∣perienced Christians often to such, as vse to speake much of the praises of God, and marke the experience of Gods won∣derfull prouidence, or the
glory of his Word. 8. It will much further8. Thou must be∣haue thy selfe lo∣uingly to∣wards the godly. the loue of God, to get and increase in vs a louing respect of, and behauiour towards such, as feare God, and beare his Image. Thus of the loue of God. Concerning the loue of the brethren, two questi∣ons may bee demanded:What we must doe to get the loue of the godly. The one what wee must doe to get a hearty loue to the godly: And the other what wee must doe to pre∣serue it when it is gotten. For the first, hee that would heartily be affected towards all the godly with a brotherly loue, must ob∣serue
these Rules: 1. He must not haunt1. Auoide the com∣pany of the wic∣ked. with vicious persons, nor goe with dissemblers, nor hold needlesse societie with such, as hate godli∣nesse, and godly persons, Psal. 26. 4, 5. 2. Hee must much me∣ditate2. Medi∣tate much of Gods loue to vs. of Gods loue to him, and of the great things were done by Iesus Christ, and of those rich mercies are offered him in Christ, and of the won∣derfull loue, that God and Christ doe beare to true Christians, and how glo∣rious they shall bee in the Kingdome of heauen.
The arguments taken from Gods loue to vs, or Christs suffering for vs, are often vsed in the first Epistle of Iohn, to per∣swade vs to the loue of the brethren, as 1. Ioh. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Psalm. 16. 2, 3. 3. He must take notice3. Consi∣der Gods comman∣dement. of Gods peremptory com∣mandement, who requi∣reth this of him as one principall duty, that hee loue the godly; with an vtter disclaiming of him, if hee doe not loue them,For the preserua∣tion of our loue 3 things must bee looked to. 1. Ioh. 3. 10, 11, 12, 23. For the second, that hee would continue & increase and abound in loue.
1. Hee must seeke, and hold, and not forsake the fellowship that hee hath with the godly in the Gos∣pell, but make them the constant companions of his life, Heb. 10. 25. 2. When hee finds his affections stirred vp, hee must make vse of all op∣portunities, by his deeds to shew the fruites of his loue vpon all occasions of mercy, and wel-doing, else affections will die in him. The fruits of righte∣ousnesse must bee sowed by practice, 1. Ioh. 3. 18. If affection be onely in shew or in words, or in the cor∣ruptions
of the hart, & be not expressed and made fast by the engagements of practice, it will much decay, if not wholly bee lost. 3. He must by all means take heed of discord with any of them, striuing for a resolution to take things in the best part, to beleeue all things, and endure all things, suffering long, with∣out enuy, or reioycing in iniquity, doing all things without reasonings or murmurings, or censuring, or complaining; auoiding vaine ianglings, and selfe∣conceitednesse, begging
of God an abilitie to beare with the infirmities of o∣thers. See further directi∣ons about this point, in the Rules of life. CHAP. IX. Hitherto of the directions that concerne the attaine∣ment of the sacred gifts of the minde: now it fol∣loweth to shew, what thou must doe that in all thy waies thou mightst walke vprightly, and attain vn∣to sound sinceritie of heart and life. HEE that would walke vprightly, or take a
sound course to continueHow soūd sincerity of con∣uersation may bee formed in thee. in his vprightnesse, must earnestly looke to these Rules: 1. If thou haue bin guil∣ty of any grosse sin, know it is vnpossible, thy heart should be vpright, till thou haue with speciall repen∣tance humbled thy selfe, before God for that sinne, and that also by conscio∣nable practice thou keepe thy selfe from the great transgression: Psal. 19. 13. 2. Thou must in a spe∣ciall manner ach, and striue against Hypocrisie, and that in two things chiefely: First, that in thy
setting out into Religion, thou fashion not thy course more to get credit then grace. 2. Secondly, that in Gods seruice thou by all meanes auoide di∣stractions, and so resist and check thy pronenesse of heart thereunto, iudging thy selfe seuerely, when thou so offendest, till thou be able in some happy de∣gree to serue God with thy spirit as wel as with thy bo∣dy: The habite of dissem∣bling with GOD is ex∣tremely dangerous. 3. In thy conuersation take heede of that fearefull carelesnesse of the most
men, shewed in the known and wilfull practice of sin, vpon pretence that it is but a small offence, or secret: Take heed of the sinnes of deceit, how gainefull soe∣uer they might be to thee: thou maist together with vprightnesse lose the King∣dome of heauen, for da∣ring so wilfully to breake one of those little cōman∣dements, Math. 5. 19. Take heed in generall of a stiffe and wilfull heart: They are seldome vpright, that are heady and peremptorie, and hard to be perswaded, Iam. 3. 17. Prou. 21. 29. Hab. 2. 4.
4. As much as may be, accustome thy heart to the obseruing of Gods pre∣sence, walk, as before him, Gen. 17. 2. 5: Yeeld thy selfe ouer to bee wholly guided by Gods Word; Without knowledge the minde cannot bee good, Prou. 19. 2. and he, that walketh according to this rule, shall haue peace in his heart and conscience, Gal. 6. 16. Let Gods Law bee the light for thy feete, and the lanthorne for thy pathes, Psal. 119. Labour therefore to get a particular warrant for the lawfulnesse of thy practice in the occasions
of thy Calling, either ge∣nerall or particular, where thou doubtest enquire, so shalt thou walke in a sure way, and delight thy selfe in much peace. 6. Take heed of idle∣nesse, and prouide to walke faithfully and diligently in some honest calling of life. 7. Bee sure thou hold a constant course of confes∣sion of thy sins to God, & doe it without hiding, or extenuating; iudging thy selfe for euery knowne sin and especially praying a∣gainst, and resisting the sin thou art most prone vnto. 8. Be not well pleased
with thy selfe, till thou canst approue thy care to bee good at home, as well as abroad; looke to this Rule, and take heed of fro∣wardnesse, and peruerse behauiour in thy Family; Thou wilt hardly get any cōfortable euidence, that thou art sound at heart, if the vsuall Family sinnes raigne in thee. 9. Thou mightst won∣derfully aduance, and esta∣blish vprightnesse of heart in thee, if thou wouldst carefully but acknowledge this honour to God in his VVord, that whensoeuer thou didst feele thy con∣science
wounded, or smit∣ten for any particular of∣fence, by the VVord of God, that then without de∣lay thou wouldst in secret go to God, and humble thy selfe by confession, and from that time forward re∣member to striue against that sinne: And so likewise when God with some spe∣ciall glory of his truth doth affect thee in the hea∣ring of some needfull du∣ty to bee done, not to dare to delay, but haste to the obedience of that good Word of God. FINIS.
