18507.237 S122564 99857687 177411
Ianuary 12. Numb. 6. THE CONTINVATION OF OVR VVEEKELY AVISOES, since the 2. Ditto to the 12. of the same. Containing amongst divers other things these particulars following; The arrivall of the Queene of Sweden at the Citie of Wit∣tenburg, where a few houres after came a messenger from the King of Sweden, that presented her with these particulars following. An Image of the Child Iesus of pure gold, another of sil∣ver, and the head of pure gold; and another Image of S. Martin of pure gold; all which amongst other he had taken, being ornaments of Popish Churches. The present state of Tillyes Armie, and how they are dis∣posed, also what miserie they are in. The rendring of the Citie of Mentz, and Oppenheym, with the taking of that Castle by assault, with the Ar∣ticles of agreement vpon the former rendring. The cruell and barbarous behaviour of the Spanisp to∣wards all the Townes which they doe forsake before they depart away from them. The King of Sweden hath lately taken in the Palatinate these Townes; Oppenheym, Crutznatk, Bagrag, aden∣burg, Slakenburg, and all the Bergstraight; and is now at Mentz, where his Majestie keepes his Royall Court. LONDON. Printed for Nath: Butter and Nicolas Bourne, 1632.
The Continuation of our Weekely NEWES. From Sallie in Barbary the 15, of November, 1631. IT is fifteene yeares agoe, since the Peace was broke betweene France and Vs; the cause of that breach was by reason that a certaine French-man, a renegado or revolted Christi∣an had stolen out of the Library of the King of Maroco among other Bookes all Saint Augustines Workes, written with that holy Fathers owne hand, which were bound vp so costly with pearles and preci∣ous stone, that they were valued at the worth of millions of Florens. This renegado convayed those Bookes into Spaine, where they are reserved vntill this day. But now there is a treatie in hand to re-establish the former Peace betweene the French and Vs. To this end by the commaund of his King the Cardinall Richelieu hath sent two Deputies, who haue al∣ready concluded a good Peace betweene the Moores and the French. From Dusseldorf the 2. of December. From Rhynberck are departed ten Companies of foote, most of them being Wallons, they march now towards Trier or the Palatinate. And it is supposed, that fifteene Cornets of horse, and 10000. more of foote shall shortly follow. From Wittenbergh the 21. of December. A few dayes since the Queene of Sweden arrived here a∣bout nine of the clock in the evening, and was well received. A few houres after, arrived a messenger from the King, with many costly presents sent to the Queene, which presents were Church-ornaments which his Majestie hath obtained for bootie, among other things, an Image of the childe Iesus
of pure gold. And two other Images, one the Salvator of silver, and the head of fine pure gold. Another of St. Martin of pure gold. And many other the like toyes. Which were seene of all men that would. These images were garnished with Diamonds and costly Stones. The Swedish haue taken Rohenfeld, and slaine about 800. men there. Freydenburgh, in the Wetteran is also taken by them. Eger in Bohemia is also taken by fiue Companies of Saxonians with the helpe of the Citizens. The great overthrow of the Commaunder Dieffenback and Gotzens Army by the Saxonians, vnder the Commander Arn∣heym is now certainly confirmed. From Norimberg the 22. of December. Generall Tilly with the Commander Altringer a few dayes since passed by here, from Swabach to Gigitserhof with all their forces, thorough the wood, as also Papenheyms forces, their march continued at least six houres in passing by. Wee made after them at least with fiftie Canon shot from this Ci∣tie. They marched to Roodt, where the Generall lay still two nights; from thence he departed to Donaweerdt, to treate with Bavaria. He hath parted his Army into three parts, with one part the Commaunder Altringer is marched into Bohemia, the other into Swaben, and with the third the Gene∣rall is to remaine in Bavaria. He hath braue Cavallery, but very poore and impotent foote-forces. In their March from Ansbach to Guntsbach, they left behinde them in the streetes and wayes aboue 1500. sicke and dead Soudiers. The Com∣maunder Murtha at this present is still at Loef, Harsburgh, and the adjoyning Villages: at Loef he hath shut vp two of the Gates, intends to winter there. But as soone as the Swe∣dish reliefe shall be come hither (which daily is expected) he will haue no great stomacke to remaine there long, but to depart with his forces both from thence and other places. The Magistrates of this Citie are now very well affected to the King of Sweden, and will in no wise hearken to the Em∣perour, they cause great search to be made continually. Some of those which held correspondency with the Emperour are
held close prisoners, and some others were rackt, so that the very next day they dyed. Neare vnto Hasfurt many new levied forces for the Empe∣rour assemble together, which shall be mustered in the Bi∣shopricke of Bambergh. From the Lower Palatinate 23. Ditto. It is written that the 17. of this moneth the strong Sconce by Oppenheym was yeelded to his Majestie of Sweden by a∣greement. Which Sconce being taken, his Majestie caused the Citie and Castle to be furiously assaulted, which were ta∣ken by force. Those of the Citie had Quarter, but those in the Castle were all slaine. But hereof we must expect more cer∣taintie, there being come other Letters that say, Oppenheym was surrendred vpon composition. The convenient passage over the Rhyne was discovered and made knowne to his Ma∣jestie by a certaine Shipper of Wormes, nam Hild, who in the night time brought downe from Worms two great Ponts, and many small Boates downe the Rhyne, with which vessels he vndertooke to transport his Majesties Army over the Rhyne at Stockstadt. His Majestie himselfe went over in the first Pont, who with small resistance landed his foot Forces, which kept the Horsemen of the Emperour play so long till his Majesties horse were also landed. Which caused them presently to retire, Gernsheym (where 350. men were in gar∣rison) yeelded presently to the King of Sweden. The strong hold called Steyn, the Spanish also left, but they first fired the same. The Lorrain forces left Wormes in like manner, whee they did great harme with pillaging. The whole Berghstrae is now in the King of Swedens power, onely Starckenburgh excepted. Also Laudenbergh is the Kings, who very quietly and willingly surrendred. From Mentz 22. Ditto. The 19. of this moneth, the Spanish fired all the Shippes that were before this Citie, amongst which also was the great Ship of the Elector. After this, all the Commaunders and Officers caused their Wagons and horses to be in readi∣nesse and sadled, and so they were kept ready twentie-foure
houres together, desiring to depart and to be gone before the comming of his Majesties Army, for they durst not stay till then. They pillaged many houses, and killed most inhumane∣ly many of the Citizens, at least 19. or 20. Whereupon the Citizens taking their recourse to the Commaunders made an earnest Complaint to them, as namely, to Wigdenhorst, and the Commaunder Waldeck, who laboured to appease the Souldi∣ers, and suppresse their insolencies and misdemeanours, but the Souldiers were so farre from listning to their admoniti∣ons, that they laughed them to scorne, and rayled at them with all manner of base termes. From Franckford the 24. Ditto. After his Majestie had taken Oppenheym and many other places in the Palatinate, he marched to Mentz, which Citie yesterday was yeelded vp to the said King. The Spanish which were in that Citie haue pillaged many houses of the same, and abused the Citizens extreamely, left the same, and so be∣tooke themselues to Franckendale and other places. It is thought that Franckendale by this time is taken, for we haue heard great shooting. There lay a strong Garrison in Franckendale of 7000. men, and of them were 5000. Spani∣ards. Wee vnderstand that the Dutch haue betaken them∣selues into his Majesties service. The Landt-Grave of Hessen is yet on this side of the Rhyne, in the Rhynegaw, even neare Bingen, so that now his Majestie hath shut vp the Rhyne, both aboue and below. At this pre∣sent the Swedish march to Creutznach. After that the Magistracy and Councell of this Citie had taken the oath of fidelitie to his Majestie of Sweden. His Ma∣jestie gaue vnto every of the chiefe Magistrates a golden Chaine, with a peece of Gold, wherein was engraven his Majesties Image, and to the Aldermen and inferiour Magi∣strates he gaue a Golden Cup. Strong levie is made for the Landt-graue of Hessen, the Bishopricke of Fulda and Pater∣born: there are alreadie thirtie Companies compleate, and at Cassel twelue Companies more of foote and six Cornets of horse, which very speedily are to march forth.
Yesterday here were mustered 1200. new levied Soul∣diers and divided into 6. Companies. Over-wesell, Bobert and Coblentz are beset with Spanish for∣ces. The Castles in the Mountaines are againe well furnished with provision. The Landtgraue of Hessen hath taken the Castle Erenfels, and the Blockhouse over against Bingen. Another the 25. Ditto. After his Majestie had taken Oppenheym, the garrison in Worms fled; those of Mentz in like manner after they had most wickedly behaved themselues among the Citizens. The Garrisons that fled from Mentz were pursued by some Swedish forces, and are vtterly defeated: the Swedish in the said exploit obtained a very great bootie. It is now without all question that his Majestie hath taken Mentz, some report that his Majestie is in Frankendale also, of which I shall bet∣ter certifie you hereafter. From Cullen the 28. Ditto. The Regiment levied at Luyck vnder Colonell Lambay was mustered before this Citie in the presence of our Elector the Commaunder Pappenheym and the Earle of Ysenburg. The Regiment of Newhousen shall march with them into West∣phalia. The two other Regiments of Horse, as that of Wester∣holt and Westphalia are in the Bishopricke of Munster. It is supposed that they will labour with this Armie to beset and guard the River Weser. Graef Heudricke Vanden bergh is with his Lady arrived at Dusseldorf, to visite the Duke of Newburgh, and congratulate his marriage. Here is great inquirie made for a great dwelling house for some great Lord, it is thought for the Archbishop of Mentz. From Paris the 28. December. It is certaine that his Majestie perceiving that the Gover∣nour of Millan did by all subtilties and divices levie forces underhand and made a secret preparation for warre: and did labour to divert and seduce the Allies of his Majestie; as namely the Grizons, Switzers, Valtoliners, some with gifts and monies, other with threats, by that meanes at the begin∣ning
of the Spring to fall into those Countries, and so endan∣ger Montferat and Mantua;) hath sent therevpon his for∣ces which came from those parts backe againe. And besides this hath sent the Duke de Rohan as Generall into the Valtolin, both with men and monies, there to ensure all places with good Garrisons, and to fortifie some other which he hath al∣ready done. So that all the Frontiers as well of Mylan as Germanie are very well kept with Switzers and French. Mar∣shall Thorax is gone into the Citadell of Cassall at the Kings injunction with 600. French; and he makes great preparati∣on against the next Spring. Whereas his Majestie now hath left the Kingdom, here is great care taken in his Majesties ab∣scence to further all affaires and resolue vpon matters left in trust by the King. Another from the same place. The Duke of Lorraine is againe returned to Nancy, where he is bed-rid with sicknesse; his Troupes in Germanie are late∣ly dispersed, and his Lieutenant Geneall Prince of Palsburg is lately deceased, as it is written, but the truth hereof wee must expect. The Kings Majestie was lately at Verdun, from thence went to Mentz, he hath sent from Paris for his Scepter, Royall robes and ornaments, &c. so that it is very probable that hee will not very soone returne againe into France: he hath cho∣sen in his absence for his Lieutenant General the Lord Count de Soyson. The Pope hath written very earnestly to his Majestie, and exhorted him very pathetically, as being the eldest sonne of the Catholicke Church, to employ his levied Armie against the Heretickes in Germanie. The Marshall Ʋetre will within few dayes depart hence to Valtoline. From Amsterdam the 3. of Ianuarie. The King of Bohemia we vnderstand will in few dayes go vp towards the Palatinate with certaine thousands of horse and foote. The Paltz-graue of Lweibzrick is this weeke arri∣ved in the Hage, what his intent is we cannot yet learne.
From Wimpsen the 10. of December. I have not of long written unto you, because we dare not write, it being dangerous every where about us. How∣soever I thought good to hazard this little letter, to tell you, that the Imperialists have not lost their presumption as yet. There are many Garrisons in the Townes alongst the River of Tanber, so that the warre may well hold out a while thereabouts. The Towne of Bambeg, and the strong Towne of For∣cheim hold out both likewise, there lying strong Garri∣sons in the same of the Emperors forces, who do now hin∣der that Bishop, to doe what else he would doe, so that by calling in those defenders, he hath put himselfe under their guardianship like a child, and will be undone worse by them then if he had fulfilled the Treaty he first beganne with the King of Sweden, whose forces have spoiled all his Country, so that when the Imperialists shall have spent their provisions, they will without any strokes forsake the said places. I can tell you no certaine newes out of Bohe∣mia, for some say and write one thing, some another. But as for Mentz, that is taken, and the Towne and Vniversity there have rendred thēselves upon cōposition to the King, paying (as I am informed) in ready mony 80000. Ryxdol∣lers. I understand also, that the Spaniards, yt were the repu∣ted defenders thereof, before they ran away from thence, playd many Spanish tricks, robbing some rich Burgers, and not sparing the Canons and Church men, and committing many insolencies and violences, but especially (as it is written) they poysoned the principall fountaine there▪ whereby a mortality was occasioned, that there dyed dai∣ly about 30. or 40. Burgers and souldiers. But these offen∣ding defenders will shortly receive the payment due unto them. The King found exceeding great store of warlike amunitions in that Towne, especially of powder and shot, &c.
Extract of a Letter written from Bonne the 30. of December. I Am assured by Letters, that Tilly hath beene with the Duke of Bavaria at Munden, and it is confirmed that he is both uncapable and unwilling to continue in his charge of Generall, so that now it is beleeved, he will put in execution his resolution long since taken, to make him∣selfe a Monke. The Duke of Bavaria is now at Donawert, with the Deputies o the three Ecclesiasticall Electors, to consult a∣bout their affaires And it is said that the said Electors are shortly to meet i person at Colen, which is easie for them, for our Prince is already there, and the two others he of Mentz and of Trie, are not farre off. The King of Sweden his Forces have brought all the Bergstrat under his power, they have lately taken both Ladenburg and Starkenburg. It is confirmed that the Swedish and Saxonionian Army have met with the Imperiall Army in Bohemia, and have had a bloudy fight, but the victory fell to the Swedish and Saxons: And that thereupon Arnheym went presently before Limpurg, and besieging the same in one or two dayes, tooke the same by force. That whole King∣dome (we understand) is against the Emperour, except Pilsen and Budwise. Concerning the passage of so great a consequence called the Guldensig, I beleeve there will be a great quarrell a∣bout it, for the Imperialists goe thither to take the same, and I understand that the Count of Thurus is also come thither.
Out of another Letter from Dusseldorf of the same date. NOw we have received assured newes by severall lt∣ters, that Wismar hath beene surrendred on the 24. of December, unto Duke John Albert of Meckelburg, (who, as you know, is the younger brother) according to an agreement made betwixt him and Colonell Gram, who did command within that Citie. Thus there are now more forces to be spared for other service of the King of Sweden. As for Magdenburgh it is now in extremi∣ty. For we are assured that Generall Bannier hath utterly defeated a Convoy of Magdenburg consisting of 600. their best men, who were appointed to fetch wood, wher∣of the besiedged have great need. You know that the Infanta hath had an Ambassador at Collen; offering to that Citie and Elector assistance of Sol∣diers, and to perswade them to accept the same, the sayd Elector of Collen should have had the command over the troopes which the Spaniard would have sent and payd. But the Town had no mind to have such defenders, whose great and enormous actions but lately performed at Mentz, Worms, and other places, are yet so fresh, that the memory thereof hindered the Councell at Collen to forget themselves so much, as to take them on, &c. From Bonne the 20. of December. I send you here the capitulations made at Oppenheim upon which that towne was taken before Mentz, and doe here the Castle there was taken by assault and all the Spaniards put to the sword, I wish those that have beene here had all beene there. Don Philip de Sylva (we doe understand) is retired into Frankendal, and there is newes, that some of his troopes marching thither have also beene intercepted and cut in peeces. Nay there is more yet for you. Monsieur Mezi∣cres, who lay within Mentz, and whose souldiers have
so well defended that towne, that no towne, that hath any wise man in it, will ever receive the Spaniards for its defenders, marching or rather flying out of Mentz, hath also beene met by some Swedes, and lost all that were with him, he himselfe escaping by the courage of his heeles. Soone after some Swedish troopes came to Creuznach and tooke the same place, the Spaniards, forgetting their grauity bring their enemies from one place to another. We understand that Mentz was surrendred to the King of Sweden upon the same conditions as was Oppen∣heim, whereby that King hath now all the passages of the river of Maine in his power. The Capitulation or agreement concluded and agreed upon be∣twixt the King of Sweden on the one part, and the Gover∣nour of Oppenheim on the other part, about the surrendring of the said towne and Fort, on the 7. of December 1631. For the Towne. 1. THe garrison is to depart the very same night out of the Fort with their bag and Baggage, colours flying, drum beating, matches lighted and their bandeliers filled &c. 2. They are to haue assurance not to be molested on their way, eyther by the Kings forces, nor by the Land∣grave of Hessens troopes, nor others. 3. A Captaine shall be given them for Hostage, (as likewise they shall leave one of these) And thirs shall bee conveyed by 1000. Musketiers, who shall conduct them that same night to a village distant halfe a league from thence, & the next morning they shall be conveyed further upon the borders of the Maine. 4. His Maiesty of Sweden is to furnish them during their march, with victualls &c.
For his Royall Maiesty. 1. All those that shall be found in the Fort, are to take their way towards Bingen. 2. They are first to passe over the river of Maine and afterwards the Rhine. 3. From thence they shall not goe to Mentz, but to any other place where there is a Spanish garrison. 4. They shall leave all their Ordnance behind them, and carry none away. 5. They shall not pillage nor doe harme to any towne, Village, nor any souldiers that serue his Maiesty, during their march. Extract of a Letter from Collen, the 25. of December. VVE doe learne by some Letters, that the Duke of Friedland will come againe upon the stage, and that he hath at last accepted, to be Generall for the Em∣peror in Bohemia and in his hereditary dominions for a certaine time. Wee doe also vnderstand, that the Swedes have taken the Imperiall towne of Frieburg, and that the Spaniards have forsaken Baccarach and all other places along the Rhine, So that if the King of Sweden should take Coblents, we can∣not see, who can hinder him to take both Bonne and this Citty of Collen, And indeed I have heard from the mouth of a Cheife Minister of our Elector heere. That his Prince is in great perplexity, and sayes, that he cannot imagine whether in the world hee could flye for his safety. The French King, in whom consists all his hope being farre from him, and he will not trust himselfe into the Spaniards hands. Koningstein, being a Castle upon a high hill and esteemed impregnable, hath beene taken by the Landgrave of Hes∣sen, you know of what a great consequence that Castle is, commanding all the Country about. There hath beene found great store of provision, and above 60. peeces of brasse Ordnance. I doe heare that the said Landgrave lost
one of his yonger brothers there, who was shot. But howsoever he hath done a noble and great service by ta∣king so strong a place. Spire is also treating with the King of Sweden, and will receive Garrison as well as Worms. We doe now receive newes, that some of the Swedish horse commanded by a Rhinegrave, have defeated Collonel Fust, who comman∣ded many forces in the Palatinate, both for the Duke of Bavaria and the Spaniard, and hath taken from them five Cornets, which he hath sent to the King of Sweden to Mentz, where his Majesty keepes his Campe royall. Out of another Letter. The Magistrate of Collen hath assuredly sent some De∣puties unto the King of Sweden to make some agreement with him, whereof you shall shortly, heare more. The Duke of Lorraine Pfaltsburgh is come home again, and hath brought the corps of his Brother in law with him, who dyed lately in Germany: So all the fruits, which that Duke hath gotten by his assistance given to the Em∣peror, seemes to be Repentance. What the French King intends to doe, is not knowne, but it is well presumed. That the Ecclesiasticall Electors and the Duke of Bavaria (who all seeme to forsake the house of Austria and consequently the Spaniards) have their onely trust and hope upon that King, either to helpe them against the King of Sweden, or to bee a meanes for their neutrality with him, whereof time will shortly shew the effects. Out of a Letter from Collen the 30. of December. I Forgot in my last to tell you, how we are not ashamed here to acknowledge our poverty and need of money, as you see by this printed briefe or proclamation, publi∣shed here the contents whereof abstracted say thus much. Ferdinand by the Grace of God Archbishop of Collen
and Elector, Bishop of Paderborne, Liege and Munster, Ad¦ministrator of Hildesheim, Berehtsgad and Stabull, Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of upper and lower Bavaria, Westphalia, Angaria, and Bouillo, Marquis of Franchimont, &c. Gree∣ting. Whereas our saving Catholicke Religion is fallen in∣to extreame danger and necessity in our deare Countrey the Holy Roman Empire at these troublesome times of warre, so that following the ouncell of some wise and godly per∣sons and the example of the people of Israel (who did de∣liver up most cheerefully and liberally their private treasure and the very gold rings of their fingers for the building and setting up of the Tabernacle of the Alliance and of the Temple) we have thought good for the preservation of the said Catholicke Religion and of the most ancient Church-grants, to make a publicke and free collection and contribution within this our Archbishopricke: Therefore we doe hereby fatherly pray and exhort all good and god∣ly Patriokes and Countrimen, to take to heart the said ex∣treame need and necessity, and that every one would put foorth and open his hand according to his ability, and te∣stifie, how much he doth preferre to all worldly goods both the honour of God of his most blessed mother Ma∣ry, and all loving Saints, and the conservation of our Ro∣man Catholicke Religion, and the most ancient and excel∣lent Church-grants. And to the end that every one may be sure of the fruits of his benevolent and liberall contribu∣tion and of the profitable expenses and imployment there∣of, we have to that end caused to be set here in the Carthu∣sian Cloister within this Citty of ollen a Chist, with two Keyes, wherof the one is delivered to the hand of the Prior, and the other unto Godfrid Damiam, Oeconomus of our Se∣minary here, so that none without the other, is to open the same, but both together are upon our speciall gracious order to take out and imploy the collected monies: But for the better bringing in and colecting of the same, we haue graciously appointed our beloved the pious Father Wig and Spar, Guardian of the order of Saint Francis ac Observantia
in our Citty of Bonne, and some other fathers of his order, who haue to the same end a white booke, where they are to write in every mans Name, and the summe of his boun∣ty and liberality. And that this our godly intent might be knowne to all, and rightly understood; we doe hereby stri∣ctly charge and command all and every our Curates and Vicars, to represent from the pulpit with more circumstan∣ces this great & urgent necessity & danger unto our people, and to read withall these our Letters Patents, exhorting and perswading most zealously and effectually all good Ca∣tholicke persons, to bestow a bountifull and suficient con∣tribution, and to set these our Letters at every Church doore, &c. In witnesse whereof, we have confirmed the same by our hand and Electorall Seale. Given at Collen the 34. of December, 1631. Although there was in the beginning thought by this con∣tribution to raie a great sum of mony, yet men seeing h strangely affaires goe and change daily, they are now very backward, thinking it better to spare their monies for the contribution which they feare will fall upon them to save themselves and their goods from their enemies, then by ha∣stening in this subsidie, to cast themselves to a double losse. FINJS.
