25656 S103312 99839069 177823
LOTS WIFE. A SERMON PREA∣CHED AT PAVLES Crosse. AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Iohn Flasket, and are to be sold at his shop in Paules Churchyard at the signe of the black Beare. 1607.
TO THE RIGHT HO∣NORABLE SIR EDVVARD DENNY, Lord Baron of Waltam, all peace and happines in this life, with the blessed hope of the life to come. THe particular respects, whereby I am and haue been these ma∣ny yeares indebted to your Ho∣nor, haue made me (Right Honorable) a long time carefull to finde out some good occasion, whereby I might make knowne my dutifull affe∣ction to you: And forsomuch as I knew nothing either more sutable for mee to present, or more acceptable to your Christian deuotion, then a meditation of the mer∣cies and iudgements of God, I haue therefore prepared you a sauourie meate to ruminate vpon, and such (as I thought) your soule loued; which yet I must confesse, I haue not newly taken for you with my bow and quiuer, as Esau did his venison, but I haue fetched out of my former store, as Iacob did a id out of the flocke: And yet I had not so done neither, but that Rebeccah bad
me; and not Rebeccah onely, but many other of my Christian and louing friends, haue most earnestly im∣portuned me thereunto: yet what I haue yeelded to their intreatie, I haue dedicated to your protection, as part of payment of my more especiall dutie. If any man shall thinke the Text too short for such an Auditorie, let him acknowledge, it is a peece of the bread of life, which while we breake it, increaseth in our hands, as the few loaues wherewith our Sauiour fed so many thousands; yea rather let him think that we our selues are too short, too weake, and too shallow to sound but the depth of or∣dinarie Diuinitie, and Who is sufficient for these things? If any man shall thinke either the Text, or the Sermon to be too salt (indeed a Salt-stone giues taste vnto both) yet let him consider againe, that the age is corrupt wherin we liue, & it is now no time to annoint, but to search men in their sins. God giue vs all grace to know our selues in truth, to reforme our selues in wise∣dome, and to waite for the rewards with patience. And thus I humblie take my leaue; beseeching God, who hath laid in your person a foundation of an Ho∣norable familie, to continue and increase your Honor, to the glory of his name, the supporting of his Church, and to the good of the state wherein you liue. Your Honors true affected in all Christian loue and dutie, R. W.
LVKE 17. 32. Remember Lots Wife. IN the two and twentith chap∣ter of S. Matthew, the calling of the world to the preaching of the Gospell, is by Christ him∣selfe compared to the inuiting of men to a feast: howbeit (Right Honorable and welbeloued in Christ) it falleth out far otherwise with me; who though a seruant of the same Christ, and a preacher of the same Gospell, yet must inuite you to day to a lumpe of salt: yet salt is good (saith Christ) and e∣uery sacrifice must be seasoned with salt, Mark. 9. yea and our speech must be powdred with salt too; Coloss. 4. 6. and therefore forsomuch as the mercie of God is as sweete meate, and the iudgements of God as a sharpe sauce (and such things common∣ly accord together,) I hope it shall not be amisse amidst the manifold preachings of the mercies of God, to adde now and then some examples of the iustice of God, as a sprinkling or casting on of salt to season them.
This short Scripture which I haue read vnto you, is a Remembrance or rifling vp of an olde and knowne historie, in which historie there is a tragedie, and in which tragedie there is a Meta∣morphosis or strange transformation of a misera∣ble, a sinfull and wofull woman, for but a glaunce of her eie, and for but winding her head awry, yet suddainly blasted, and destroyed vnrecouera∣blie: Now happie (I feare) had she been, if shee had neuer been, and better to haue been borne blind, then to see with such eies, or to haue raked them out with her nailes, then to look so vnlucke∣ly: but howsoeuerit happened vnhappily for her, yet makes it for Gods glory, to which end euen our sinnes are directed, and still it makes for our example, for which it was first by Moses writ∣ten, and now againe by Christ remembred, Re∣member Lots wife; that as she remēbred where she liued, so we might remember how she died, and looke back to her, as she looked backe to Sodom. Two things are in this Scripture distinctly to bee considered: First, to what part of the minde this exhortation is directed, which is not to the first vnderstanding or originall apprehension, but to the Memorie; Remember: Secondly, the sub∣iect or matter of this Remembrance, which is, Lots wise. For the first, we are to consider, that Re∣membring alway presupposeth foreknowing, for in order of nature, once we learne to know, and euer after we call to minde what first wee learned
and knew before, so as neither can a man forget what hee neuer knew, neither can any man re∣member but what hee knew before; therefore Christ doth not heere take vpon him to bee the Author of the storie, or to plot out a new descrip∣tion or narration of the matter, but takes it vp at the second hand from Moses, as Moses at the first hand had it by reuelation from God, and so vpon good and iust occasion he remembreth it to the Church anew: therefore as S. Paul saith of the Law, I speake to them that know the Law, Rom. 7. 1. so doth Christ of Lots wife heere, hee speakes to them that know her well enough, that haue of∣ten read, and much heard of her, that as they know her, so they may remember her; for they go together, Prou. 4. 5. Get wisedome, get vnder∣standing, and forget not; first to get, and then not to forget: and as the Psalmist saith, o my people heare my law, Psal. 78. and Salomon saith, My sonne, forget not my law, Prou. 3. So do Moses and Christ in one and the same subiect answere one another; Moses teaching to know it, but Christ admonish∣ing to remember it. Themistocles was wont to say, that it was needfull for men to learne the arte of forgetfulnes, in that sense wherein Paul sapke, Philip. 3. I forget that which is behind; that if men had attained to perfection in any thing, they should forget what they had already, lest by re∣membring it too much, they should grow idle and secure, and care to get no more: And surely
if it can be any way expedient to learn the Art of forgetfulnes, to which we are so apt by nature, as we need no helpe of Art; then must it needs be e∣uery way necessarie to learn the Art of Memory, which is Ars artium, an art adding perfection to euery art, in which regard many haue written whole bookes to adde perfection to it; for if (as men say) it bee no lesse a vertue to hold a good thing then to get it, and as great an honor to keep a Castle as to winne it, then to remember a good thing shall be as needfull as to learne it, and to re∣taine knowledge as singular a vertue as to attaine it; nay it is great pitie that he should euer know a thing that cannot remember it: he that learnes a thing, and then forgetteth it, is like him that findes a treasure and then loseth it, which as hee was very fortunate to find, so was he a very foole to lose; put both together, and they spell a fortu∣nate fool: The Ostrich, Iob 39. layeth many good∣ly egs; but she layeth them in the sand, and when she hath layed them, there she leaueth them, and comes no more at them, for which cause God there condemneth her for a foole. A feather of that bird doth he beare, and a bird of that feather shal he be, that learnes to know a thing, and then forgets it; like Adam, who was once possest of Pa∣radise, and could not hold it; and like the diuell, who had once a place in heauen, and then went and lost it. Therefore (Beloued) Memorie will come to
haue a singular place in Diuinity, and in religion; yea euery man by memory becomes excellent in euery Art; the Schollar, the Lawyer, the Physiti∣on, the Mathematician; yea and many a Mer∣chant thinkes his booke of Accounts or remem∣brances to be his Canticum Canticorum, the most Catholike and Canonicall booke he hath: there∣fore let no man looke to excell in matters of reli∣gion, and not to keepe a register, that is, not to re∣member it; especially religion being a thing which men are so apt to forget. S. Hierom saith of the conquering Romanes, that amiddest their greatest pompe and triumphes, they had euer one at the backe of the Chariot to pull the Con∣querer by the sleeue, and so oft as the people shouted and cried, to crie to him againe, Memento te hominem esse, Remember thou art a man. And is it possible, a man should forget himselfe to be a man? much more then had wee neede of one thought, to stand vp alwaies in the chariot of our heart, and to crie, Memento Deum esse, Remember there is a God; for we are indeed by nature for∣getfull: Pharaohs Butler forgat Ioseph, Gen. 40. and Ioseph forgat his fathers house, Gen. 41. 51. The Disciples of Christ (which men seldome doe) forgat to take bread with them, Matth. 16. Nebu∣chadnezzar once dreamed, and forgat his owne dreame, Dan. 2. Yea we read of one Messala Cor∣uinus so sottish and forgetfull, as hee forgat his owne name; much more may wee suspect our
selues and feare, lest we forget Gods name, for the Creator and the creature being names so neere a kin, we may not forget the one, and then thinke to remember the other; therfore we must so learne to know God, as that we may remem∣ber him, and so heare of the iudgements of God, as that we may meditate on them; yea it was Da∣uids vsuall phrase, not to say, I look vpon thy law, as men commonly come to church to look vpon the walles, and then forget that euer they were there, but, O how I loue thy law (saith he) it is my continuall meditation; Psalm. 119. and the best way to helpe memory is continuall meditation. That we should as well remember the iudge∣ments of God, as learne to know them, God hath ordained a Sabbath for remembrance, not that we should remember God but one day in seuen, but that if we would be forgetfull, yet we should remember him one day in seuen at the least: for this cause hath God ordained a Sacrament for re∣membrance, Hoc facite in commemorationem mei, Do this in remembrance of me, Luk. 22. yea and for this end hath God filled the world with remem∣brancers, ordaining the creatures continually to put vs in mind of the Creator, in the heauens to behold his greatnes, though God bee greater then the heauens; in the Sunne to behold his brightnesse, though God bee brighter then the Sunne; in the Starres to see his beautie, albeit there be no beautie like to his; in the thunder the
terror of his presence, albeit the thunder roare not halfe so loud as he; in the fowles of the ayre, his care and prouidence; in the course of nature, his mutable wisedome; in the creation of the world, his eternall power and God-head; that so often as we see these (and we cannot but see them often) so often wee should remember him that made them. That God did not meane the law should be forgotten, it may appeare by the first publishing of it, which as it is Exod. 19. was giuen in thun∣der and lightning, that the amazing of their minds with such a terror might make them to re∣member it the better; as a Schoolemaster, when he will haue his scholar not to forget such a rule, sets it on with a beating; so likewise did Moses when he had written Exodus, which was indeed the booke of the law, afterward wrote Deuterono∣mie, which was nothing else but a remembrance of the law. Hitherto likewise tended the practise of the Church, which kept the tables of the Law in the Arke, Deut. 10. and the booke of the Law in the Arke, Deut. 31. and caused it afterward to be read euery Sabbath in the Synagogues, Act. 13. Lest all this should not serue to keep the Law in mind, Moses took a surer course to set it beforeDeut. 6. their eyes; for the Iewes were commanded to binde it on their hands, that their hands might learne to liue by law: they were commanded to hang it between their eies, that they might learne
not to looke, but to looke by law, yea to weare it vpon their foreheads, (the very seat of memory) that they might alwaies remember and meditate of the Law: they were commanded to write it on their gates and doores without, that they migh remember they had their entrance and first admission in condition of obedience to the Law: they were commanded to write it on the walles and postes within, that they might remember their standing was supported, and their state maintained by law: they were commanded to write it on the phylacteries and skirts of their gar∣ments, that they might remember their chiefest beautie, ornament, and honor was to honor God in the keeping of the Law: such care had God to keepe his law in their hearts, as their heads, and their hands, and their houses, and their gates, and their garments must be garnished with it, and all for this end that they might remember it. In Le∣uit. chap. 11. those only beasts were cleane, which when they had eaten a thing, did ruminate and chew vpon it; so are they the best hearers, which when they haue heard a thing doe ruminate and meditate vpon it, that is, remember it. In the ce∣remoniall law, Moses was commanded when hee had made the candlesticke, to make the snuffers too, Exod. 25. 38. whose vse was, when the lights in the Tabernacle were cloyed, to cleare them, or (as commonly we say) to snuffe them; wherein mystically ye must thus much vnderstand, that so
often as the spirituall light of knowledge growes dimme in your minds, the Priest hath Ius repur∣gandi, authoritie and power to cleere it, that is, by remembring it anew, to adde a new impression and strong imagination to it: and therefore if yee will heare of Lots wife, or any good thing, and then againe forget it, take it how yee will; God hath put the golden snuffers into our hands, and howsoeuer you snuffe, we must snuffe too. In the Gospell the blessing is not onely vpon him that heareth the Word, but, Blessed are they that heare the Word of God and keepe it, Luk. 11. In the Church of God there is not only Paul to plant, but Apol∣los comes after with his water pot to water what Paul hath planted, lest it die; 1. Cor. 3. So as vnlesse you will driue Apollos, and all the disciples of A∣pollos, that is, all waterers out of the Church, yee must giue Christ leaue to remember what Moses had taught before, and your selues must endeuor to remember what ye haue learned before. Lit∣tle cares the diuell how much men heare, so they remember nothing; yea the diuell (to chuse) would haue men to heare, so they did not re∣member, that in hearing, and then againe forget∣ting, they might stand more answerable for that they heare. The inconueniences of not remem∣bring, do no where better appeare then in Peter, for Christ told Peter, Luk. 22. that the diuell had a desire to sift him, and indeed the diuell did sift him, and shake so much out of him, as by not re∣membring
the words of Christ, hee forsware Christ; for when he remembred the words, the text saith plainly, He went out and wept bitterly; andLuke 22. 61. 62. what is this, but for a man to haue a sieue in his hand, and to haue eares like a sieue, when he shall receiue instruction at one eare, and let it out at both? like a sieue which takes in water at one place and lets it out at an hundred. And therfore when a man hath heard a Sermon, and streightway for∣getteth it, let him strongly suspect, the diuell hath sifted him. In the parable of the sower, one part of the seed fell by the high way side, and that the little birds picked vp, Matth. 13. which is nothing else but the Word preached to forgetfull hearers; and the little birds, what bee they, but worldly thoughts and cares, which consume and eate vp the spirituall seed as fast as it is sowen? Therefore to our planting wee must adde watering, and to our hearing remembrance. And where are then our fine Athenian eares, such as neuer vouchsafe to open, but when some new thing is deliuered? If a man come with Sci∣tote, and teach to know some new thing, hee is welcome; but Mementote, a remembrance of the old is a meere Bis coctum, stale, and vnsauorie; and hee that preacheth so, is like him that powreth twice sodden broath out of the pot. Men come now adaies to a Sermon as to a play, Aut nouum dicas, aut nihil dicas, either some new thing or no∣thing, either a new matter or none at all. Speake
ye of Lots wife! and what of her! our pulpits are made for Moses that tels the tale while it is new; the bel-frey is good enough for him that remem∣breth it when it is old. Preaching is become like apparelling, we can fancie it no longer then the fashion is new: If wee come to a Sermon and heare no new thing, we think that time was lost, and bid Fie on such a man, as the Israelites did on Manna, because they had it euery day; heere is Manna, and Manna, and nothing but Manna; and so say we, we heard to day the high-way points of faith and good workes, with the vulgar do∣ctrine, and common place of repentance, and heard nothing but that we knew before, and men grow angrie if they heare of one thing twice, as if their patience were greatly abused: Nay wee are come to that nicenes now, that we can scarce endure to heare one man twice; when a man comes out first, we admire him without measure, and euery man is readie to cast vp his cap, to carie branches of palme before him, and to crie Hosan∣na, yea and to say of him, as the Samaritanes said of Simon Magus, This man is that great power of God; but when nine daies are once ouer, and hee be∣gins to be stale, why then, Arescit anima nostra, our soule is dried vp with this Manna, giue vs some other meate. But (beloued) if ye will haue your minds reformed, the way is, not to draw vp your minde to your eares, but to carrie downe your eares to your minde, that ye may relish, not
that which is most plausible, but that which is most profitable; and say not, when you haue heard what you haue heard before, that ye knew all this before; for how then! It seemeth by this that you came to Church, and knew not why, like the men of Ephesus who assembled together, and could yeeld no reason why: for what is the endAct. 19. 32. of mens assembling and meeting at the Church? Ye will say, to heare and to learne some new thing: Indeed that may well be one end among other, though not the only end excluding all o∣ther; for as ye come to learne anew, so come ye likewise to remember the old: nor must yee thinke that we preach alway to your vnderstan∣ding, to teach you what ye knew not before, but most commonly to your memory, to put you in mind of that ye knew, lest ye forget it: I haue not written vnto you (saith S. Iohn) because ye know not the truth, but because yee know it, 1. Ioh. 2. 21. A very strange consequent: and S. Paul to the Romans, I am perswaded of you, that yee are full of all goodnesse; yea and more then so, that yee are full of all know∣ledge; yea and more then so, that yee are able to ad∣monish one another, they were so grounded as eue∣ry priuate man amongst them was meete to make a Preacher: neuerthelesse (saith he) I haue writ∣ten vnto you, as one that puts you in remembrance; Rom. 15. 14. 15. Neither must ye thinke that all Scripture is only for instruction, but chiefely for remembrance: I write no new commandement to you,
but an old (saith S. Iohn) which ye haue had from the beginning: 1. Ioh. 2. 7. nor was Paul ashamed to say ouer againe, what he had said immediatly be∣fore, As I said before, so I say againe, if any man preach otherwise then that yee haue heard, let him bee accursed, Gal. 1. 9. And againe, I haue told ye oft, and now againe I tell yee weeping, that many walke as ene∣mies of the Crosse of Christ: Philip. 3. 18. Nor doub∣ted Peter to say, that he wrote his second Epistle only for remembrance, This second Epistle write I now vnto you, to call to your remembrance the words of the Prophets and Apostles, 2. Pet. 3. 1. 2. For he that driues a naile into a knottie peece of wood, knocks not once, but againe and againe to fasten it: so God minding to settle deep in our dull hearts, both the knowledge and conscience of the Law, did by often repetitions remember it; euen as Pharaoh when he dreamed of the plen∣tie, and famine in Egypt, his dreame was dou∣bled, because (as his Interpreter told him) God would establish it, Gen. 41. 32. Yea and where A∣theists barke at the Scriptures for being by often repetition tedious, the deuout and sober minded do thence take occasion to adore, whence they to detest; for it hath been held as a rule in former times, Quoties Scriptura repetit, mysterium est, that so oft as the Scripture repeates and saith one thing ouer and ouer, there is sure some mysterie, or some great matter in it; for as when the Hounds open loude and free, the huntsman gathereth
that there is some game; so when the Scripture vseth importunitie in a point, it is a signe there is some great thing to be marked. Be ye therefore I beseech you (Right honora∣ble and well beloued) be ye I beseech you of Da∣uids mind, for God spake once or twice (saith Dauid) that power belongeth vnto God, and I heard it, Psal. 62. 11. No doubt a patient auditor; God spake of one thing twice, and he heard it, whereas com∣monly if we speake of one thing twice, or but re∣member an old matter, we can get no audience, no man will heare it. Now if this be so, then am I cleane lost and shamed. If this be the course, that men may remember no old matters, but still to teach, and to bring in new, then what shal I do with Lots wife heere, or of all places, what doe I heere? I must remember to you the iudgement of God vpon Lots wife; I know ye know it alrea∣die; yea and I know this besides, that I can ob∣serue nothing, and teach nothing out of it, but that which hath been obserued and taught be∣fore, Et nihil dictum quod non dictum priùs, I shall say nothing but that which hath bin said before: yet if there be any heere which knoweth not the storie of Lots wife, then shall I stand in Moses stead to teach it him: If ye know the storie of Lots wife, yet giue me leaue, a poore disciple of Apollos, to water your knowledge, that is, to Remember it: if ye did once know it, and haue now forgotten it, yet heare it againe, and ye shall remember it bet∣ter,
and ye shall find it true which S. Paul saith, It grieues not mee to write the same things to you, and for you it is a sure thing, Philip. 3. 1. But say ye both know it well, and well remember it, yet the very act of remembrance in the actes and iudgements of God, is one of the most diuine duties we can performe to God; Dauid often testifying of him∣selfe, that he did meditate in the Law of God, and of the workes of GOd, and that not once in seuen daies, but seuen times in a day, yea and all the day, and therfore pronounceth him the hap∣pie man that so doth: Blessed is hee whose delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law doth meditate day and night, &c. And so much for the first part generall, concerning Remembrance. The subiect of this remembrance is Lots wife, who in the second place comes to be considered of. A more plausible subiect (I am sure) it had bin, to speake vnto you of Lot himselfe, then of Lots wife, for he was saued, and she was destroy∣ed, he a speciall figure of mercie and saluation, but she a partaker of the common condemnati∣on, and what haue we to do with them that were condemned? Euery man saith now, we liue in the time of the Gospel, what haue we to do with the iudgements of the Law? We are come to theHebr. 12. 22. peaceable hill of Sion, why are we then brought backe againe to mount Horeb? When the Law was first giuen, the Iewes ranne away for feare, and euer since when the iudgements of the Law
are remembred, we are readie to go away for an∣ger; for we haue Euangelicas aures, our hearts in∣deed are all sinne, but our eares are all of mercy, and therefore he that will set vs a song, must set it to the tune of the Gospell: as if the Law (like an old almanake) were cleane out of date, we must heare of nothing but Pax vobis, Peace and peace; and we must see nothing, but Ecce Agnus Dei, Be∣hold the Lambe of God; but yet wee must re∣member that that Lambe was a Lion too, Reuel. 5. 5. 6. and that Christ and Moses met both vpon the mount, in whom the Law and the Gospell did both shake hands together: Matth. 17. And what if Christ be our peace? yet is he Iustice too; for in him it was prophecied, that Mercy and truth should meet, that Iustice and Peace should kisse one an∣other, Psalm. 85. And from him proceeded Bles∣sings to the meek, Blessings to the mercifull, Bles∣sings to the pure in heart; and from him likewise, Wo to thee Corazin, and wo to thee Bethsaida. And therefore if we liue in sinne, the Law and Iudge∣ment must be preached vnto vs, yea though in the time of the Gospell. There is a time to slay, and a time to heale, saith Salomon, Eccle. 3. Now the time of healing is when men haue sinned and are wearie of it, but the time of wounding is when men sinne and sinne, and yet are senselesse in it, which is the sicknes of this age, euen of this last and worst age wherein we liue; yea Christ prophecieth heere plainly, that toward the latter
end of the world men shall grow senselesse, and secure, and asleepe in sensualitie, that they shall do as they did in the daies of Lot, and in the deso∣lation of Sodom, that they shall do as in the daies of the flood, they shall eate till they surfet, and drink till they be drunke, they shall marrie, and giue in mariage, they shal buy and sell, and plant and build, they shal build houses, as Stratomachus saith of the men of Rhodes, Aedificant quasi sem∣per victuri, comedunt quasicras morituri, They build houses, as if they should liue euer, but they eate and drinke as if they should die to morrow: ther∣fore to such men, and to such a time Christ thought it much better to remember Lots wife, then to remember Lot. Now forsomuch as no man is remembred for nothing; but either for some good thing, or for some euill, either for being notable, or else for being notorious, two things in Lots wife are very memorable and worthy our meditation, the one is the sinne committed by her, the other is the punishment inflicted on her; so then wee must remember her for that shee did, and wee must re∣member for that she suffered; we must remember how she liued, and we must remember how shee died; we must remember how she turned from God to embrace the world, and (which is euer memorable) how in embracing it, she perished with it. Who list to vnderstand the storie of her sinne, may reade it at large in the report of Moses,
who in the nineteenth of Genesis recordeth a bill of inditement against her, thus; That whereas God for the abomination of those sinfull cities had sent downe an Angell of vengeance to de∣stroy them, yet Lot found such fauor for himselfe and his familie, as that in the vtter wast and deso∣stroy them, yet Lot found such fauor for himselfe and his familie, as that in the vtter wast and deso∣lation of foure whole cities, he only was exemp∣ted, and the fift citie (which was Zoar) for his sake preserued; only this required at his hands, to make haste and bee gone: but what haste Lot made, wee will not now dispute; and yet by his leaue (though it stood vpon his life) he made no more then he should; but Moses puts in a sweete parenthesis, (God being mercifull to him.) But hisGen. 19. 16. wife, this woful woman, of whom we are now to speake, shee made much lesse, yea shee made a great deale too little, for while her husband was a great way before, she was a great way behind, and lingred so long that she lost her life. And for so much as it seemeth to point out a doctrine more particularly for women, I would she might stand vp as a piller for all women to looke vpon, yea and as well for men too, to let both men and women know how dangerous a thing it is for man to tempt his Maker, and to dallie with the iudgements of God. Moses seemeth to endite her for two things, first for being behind, secondly for looking behind; to which was added a punishment in proportion, that she was left behind. Now his wife behind
him looked backe, and she became a piller of salt, Gen. 19. 26. His wife behind; How behind? I hope, not behind with the world, for she loued the world too well; but behind either with God, in preferring smoake and vanity before him; or behind with the Angels of God, notwithstan∣ding the great haste imposed by them; but chief∣ly behind her husband in lingring vpon the way, and losing ground of him; and if she did so, it was her fault, yea it was a trespasse in marriage, for her husband was her standard, whom shee ought not in times of trouble to forsake: yea the wife must neither be before her husband, nor be∣hind him, but iust with him; for neither was she made of any part before, nor of any part behind, but out of his side, that she might go side by side. Mariage is resembled to a yoake, Be not vnequally yoaked with infidels, 2. Cor. 6. Now they which are yoaked must goe in paires, one iust beside ano∣ther, for if one go before, and another go hehind, then are they not like oxen, but like horses, not like cleane beasts, but like vncleane. It was neuer well in wedlock since Satan first preuailed to se∣uer the wife from her husband; I speake not of a diuorcing of their persons, but a diuiding of their wils, whē as if he wil one thing, she wils ano∣ther; if he like one thing, she likes another; if he be behind, she will be before; or as Lots wife heer, if he be before, she wil be behind, and I thinke sure, that amongst other circūstances of her sin, she was
punished for her neglect and contempt in this. But Lot was at this time much more then a hus∣band to his wife, for the Angels came especially to him, the destruction of Sodom was reuealed to him, the promise of particular preseruation made to him, the charge of making haste was laid on him, all came at the first hand to him; so as now he is made a Prophet, an oracle, a leading starre to his wife; and yet for all this, His wife be∣hind him. But it is a wonder to see in men made all of one mother earth, such difference of met∣tall, and contrarietie of spirits; some men like S. Peter runne before their masters, and their pa∣ternes, for Christ had scarce begun the parlee, when he had got out his sword, and charged vp∣on the maine battell; and therefore it is no mar∣uell if the race of the Peters euer since do run be∣fore the rest of the Church, since the first Peter of whom they hold, outran euen Christ himselfe. Some women likewise runne before their hus∣bands; like Eue, who had plucked and eaten vp the apple, before Adam durst to touch it; and where Iob ment to curse but the night or the day of his birth, his wife went before him, and poin∣ting him to heauen, bad him Curse God and die.1. King. 21. But Achabs wife was a woman beyond all wo∣men, yea a woman by her selfe, for Achab came faintly, and vpon faire conditions to buy or change a vineyard, and could not; and because he could not, he went to bed heauy, halfe dead
vpon it, but iezebel deliuereth him speedily with∣out purchase or change, what he could not buy for loue nor for money. Some men cleane con∣trarie are of heauy, lumpish and leaden spirits, like Ionas when the winds roared, and the seas raged, as if heauen and earth would haue gone toge∣ther, then was he fast a sleep in the bottom of the ship; he had lead in his eies: and the two disci∣ples that went to Emaus, they were Tardi corde,Luke 24. 25. they had lead in their hearts, as Lots wife heere had lead in her heeles. But let vs call her to ac∣coūt, & aske what cause she had to hang so far be∣hind; will she say she limpt, or that she was lame? then was it, Animo magis qùam corpore, her limbes were all right, but her heart was out of ioynt; or will she say, shee was weary? weary indeed, but it was of well doing; or will she say she was ti∣red, or that she fainted? and so perhaps she did, but it was in her faith; or will she say, she was not well at ease, or that she was sicke? so said Rachel when her father bad her rise, she was not well she said, for The maner of women was vpon her, Genes. 31. 35. And what is the maner of women? to pretend one thing when another is the cause? yea and so it is a sore disease with men too. But of what disease did she labour, or whereon was she sicke? she was sicke of Sodom, as Achab was of Naboths vineyard; she was sicke of her owne wil, for she went vnwillingly: No maruell then if she made no more haste, since she went whither she
would not. Ah that crooked wil of ours, so eager on that which is euill, and so vnwilling to any thing which is good; so hot and so hastie to his owne hurt, but so loath, so lingring, and so far be∣hind, when mercie and saluation is before. But no maruell if this woman lingred so farre behind, for she looked backe, as if she would haue gone back, or as if she had left her heart behinde; And vbi amor ibi oculus; as where the treasure is, there will the heart be also, so where the heart is, there will the eye be also: of the heart and the eie, we may say as Iacob of Simeon and Leui, Bre∣thren in iniquitie: The eie is but a broker to the heart; the eie sheweth what is louely, the heart loueth; the eie liketh, the heart affecteth; the eie looketh out like a skoute, and saith, a louely ob∣iect commeth, the heart putteth on affection and pursueth: The eie saith, Hoc est pulchrum, the heart saith, Hoc est meum. This sympathie betweene her heart and her eie, did Lots wife feele when shee came from Sodom, that she might haue said to her selfe, as Salomon to the Spouse, Thou hast woun∣dedCantic. 4. my heart with a looke of thine eyes: For whither went she? to Zoar; whence came she? from So∣dom; from her kindred and from her friends, from her country where she had liued, from her house where shee had dwelt, from her gardens, and from her pleasures, from sweet aire, greene pastures, and pleasant waters, yea from a paradise, (For as was the garden of the Lord, euen so was Sodom
before it was destroyed, Gen. 13.) from thence came this wofull woman, and as if she thither would a∣gaine, thither she lookes; she goes forward and lookes cleane backward, as if God had broke her necke when he brought her thence: And but that God cut her off, somewhat sure she had to say to Sodom, when she looked vpon it, as if shee would haue taken her leaue of it, and bid it fare∣well, as if she would haue wept vpon it, as Hagar wept on Ismael, or Christ vpon Ierusalem: And must I leaue thee Sodom, and part for euer from thee? then once againe let me looke vpon thee, since I must looke no more, yea let me die with thee, since thou must liue no more; for where was euer Paradise if not in thee! or what wil hea∣uen be when thou art gone! O thou the light of mine eies, and delight of my soule, whom heauen it selfe doth but match in happinesse, ouermat∣ching only in eternity; what a life it was to liue in thee! If we wished for wealth, we wallowed in it; if for honor, it waited on vs; and when we would bee merrie, Plentie, ease, and peace sang melodie to it. Such a bewitching it is to the soule of man to fall in loue with the world, that we oft times looke back, and go back, and wish we were there, from whence without great grace we were not deliuered. Therfore fie vpon the fleshpots of Egypt, for it is they which haue bewitched vs: but Remember Lots wife; yea remember Moses whoHebr. 11. 25. forsooke the court of Pharaoh, and chose to suffer
aduersitie with Gods people, rather then to en∣ioy the pleasures of sinne for a season: Remem∣ber Eliseus, who forsook the gold and siluer at the2. King. 5. Dan. 1. 8. hands of Naaman: Remember Daniel, who despi∣sed the daintie meats of Babylon: Remember Christ, who fled into a mountaine when theyIohn 6. would haue made him King; yea remember all the Prophets, Martyrs, and Saints of God from time to time, which held the world in skorne, and stood at defiance with it; as Peter with Simon Ma∣gus, when he tempted him with money. Thinke thou art now betweene Sodom and Zoar, that is, going from the world to God; the Angels haue cried vnto thee, as Reuel. 18. Come out of Babylon, so come out of Sodom, lest ye be partakers of her plagues; yea thinke that Angels are come into thy house to fetch thee out and to hasten thee; therefore looke not aside, for the way is full of snares; nor looke behind, for Sodom cals vpon thee and saith, come againe, come againe to So∣dom; she sends out her messengers, Epicures and carnall companions to call vpon thee, and euery one saith, come againe, come againe to Sodom; yea she casteth vp her lures to tempt and allure thee, come againe, come againe to Sodom: but Remember Lots wife. In remembring of whom, flesh and blood may happily be offended to heare, that for being behind, and for looking behind God should in∣flict so heauy a iudgement; for can the eie trans∣gresse
so grieuously, or doth God set such a law for lookes? yea we are so secure vpon small sins, as if a man reproue such a sinne, we thinke him more guiltie in remembring it, then we in com∣mitting it, as if the smaller sinnes must be preser∣ued for breed: yet in the law trespasses and sinnesLeuit. 4. done of ignorance, (which were euer thought to be the least) yet were not purged but by fire and by blood; God shewing the strength of the disease in the nature of the purgation: and in the Gospell where mercy more aboundeth, we must account For euery idle word, and that at the day of iudgement, Matth. 12. and he that cals but Foole, shall be punished with hell fire, Matth. 5. Yea he that taught vs to pray for remission, taught vs not to say, Forgiue vs our great offences, but Forgiue vs our trespasses, or, as it is originally, Forgiue vs our debts; not our theft, or what we haue stollen vniustly, but euen the debt which we cannot pay through pouertie, for each penie whereof in the rigour of the law, we shall be pend vp in hell, or if any sinne be lesse then a peny, if but a halfe-pe∣ny; yea if lesse then a halfe-peny, if but a farthing, yet shall we not come forth til we haue paid that vttermost farthing. And where are then our little sinnes? yea let any sinne be as little as it will, yet being sinne it generally carieth thus many defor∣mities with it; first a preferring of a mans owne will before the law of God; secondly a contempt of the iustice of God, for where God hath set our
damnation vpon it, if we do it, yet (let hell bee what it will) we will do it: thirdly a contempt of the rewards proposed, if we do it not; for where God saith, Do not this and ye shall liue, yet let life be what it will, we will accomplish our vile desires, and spare not to sell heauen for a halfe-peny: and then lastly, there is in euery sinne a flat contempt of God himselfe, for rebellion is like witchcraft, wherein a man sets vp the suggestion of the di∣uell, his owne witte, or his owne will, and leaueth God vnobeyed, to obey one of these. Therefore let no man thinke any sinne to be little, which is done to the dishonor of the great God. In obedience the nature of the commande∣ment is not so much to be regarded, as the Maie∣stie and authoritie of God that commands, and therefore God sometime forbiddeth things in themselues indifferent, as the apple in Paradise, which was not forbidden because it was euill, for God made nothig but was good; but it was therefore euill because it was forbidden, and God forbad it, being in it selfe not euill, vt dominum seAugust. habere intelligerent, that they might vnderstand by that restraint they had a God; for if we giue God leaue to command the greater things and not the lesse, then do we circumcise his authoritie, and make him but halfe a God, who is to vs Ita mag∣nus in maximis, vt non sit etiam minor in minimis: So great in the greatest things, as hee is no whit lesse in the least things; and therefore if hee say,
Thou shalt not kill, it is good; and if hee say, go not backe, or looke not backe, it is good too; God in this, and God in that, yea God as much in this as in that, of whom we may say in euery letter of the law, Non suscipit magis aut minus, hee admit∣teth no degrees of more or lesse. Sometimes a∣gaine God forbiddeth or commandeth slight things seuerely, thereby to make proofe of our o∣bedience, as a master to trie his seruants trust, sometime forgetteth his money and leaueth it a∣broad, to see if his man will bee picking or nib∣bling at it. If therefore before we haue commit∣ted sinne, we say, it is but a little sin, and God will surely forgiue it, this is to sinne that grace may a∣bound; a sinne of presumption, and presumpti∣on maketh a little sinne to be great: If when we haue committed sin, we say it was but a little sin, we pleade against our selues, for how shall God obtaine the greater matters at our hands, when we deny him in the least? beside, the lesse any sin was, with so much more facilitie we might haue resisted it: and Augustine saith well, Tanto maiori iniustitia violatum est mandatum &c. That a man is more wicked in doing that sin, which he might so easily haue left vndone. But when we reade of Lots wife, do we thinke her sin to be so light? then descend with me a little (I pray you) into the par∣ticular aggrauations of it, and though she did but linger and looke behind her, yet looke with indif∣ferent eies, and tell me how light it was. Euery sin
is sure so much ye greater, by how much the more and greater graces are abused in it; in which cōsi∣deratiō a heap of witnesses, yea a cloud of witnes∣ses wil come in to condemne this sinfull woman: for first we find that she had particular warning of the destruction of Sodom, which (her house and kindred excepted) none in Sodom had be∣side her; and do we thinke it nothing to abuse, not the ordinary word of God, but the extraordi∣nary mercy of God, when it waites euen by reue∣lation vpon vs? Secondly, the warning was giuen by an Angell, an example rare and singular, both in regard of the Angels, and of themselues; in re∣gard of the Angels first; for they which before were set with a shaking sword to keepe men out of Paradise, were made to her the messengers of peace to bring her out of Sodom; yea the very same Angels which destroyed Sodom, brought her out of Sodom; in regard of themselues, it was no ordinary thing for men to be admonished by Angels, but by the ministery of men, as the world was before by the preaching of Noah, yet an An∣gell from heauen was sent to her. Thirdly the Angels appeared to her, not as to Iacob on a ladder, nor as to Moses in a bush, nor as to Samuel in the tabernacle, but they came into her house, and did eate and drinke with her; as to vs the Go∣spel and saluation is come to our doores. Fourth∣ly, she hath leaue not only to saue her selfe, but al∣so to bring out of the citie whatsoeuer she had in
it, and as the Prouerb is, Cum sarcinis enatare, to scape with bag and baggadge, so as she needed not to come poore out of Sodom, but to bring her riches with her. Fiftly, she was pardoned one delay before, for while her husband and she pro∣longed the time, the Angell caught them both vp, and set them without the citie, and yet shee could not take heede, but offend in the like a∣gaine. Sixtly and lastly, where it is said she looked backe, she had from the Angell an expresse and literall charge not to looke backe, and yet shee made bold to do it: therefore iudge in these cir∣cumstances how light her sinne was. But we commonly discerne of sinne as we do of the sunne, which we iudge to be little, because we are fare from it; so in sin the neerer we come to it, and the better we examine it, the greater it seemes. It is true that the Scripture maketh diffe∣rence of sinnes, setting out some for beames, andMatth. 7. some for moates, that is, making some of a grea∣ter sise and some of a lesse, but when we say that any sinne is little, we say it respectiuely and in re∣gard of a greater; for in regard of the Maiestie of∣fended, Angels and men were all too meane to make satisfaction for the eating of an apple. Sin is like a poyson, whereof but one drop empoiso∣neth the soule, therefore the lesse we take of it the better it is, and best of all, if we could take none at all. Well saith S. Augustine, Nolite contemnere ve∣nialia quia minima, sed timete quia plurima, Con∣temne
not the smaller sinnes because they be lit∣tle, but rather feare them, because they be many. Egypt was as much plagued with flies and with lice, as with the greater plagues. And what is lesse then the drops of raine? yet being many the fill vp the chanels of the earth, they make the riuers swel, they cast downe houses, and drowne whole countries; therefore euer worthy our remem∣brance is it, not to contemne the smaller sins: For sinne indeed doth no way preuaile so much a∣gainst vs, as by being contemned, Nam maior cul∣pa & citius cognoscitur, & celerius emendatur, saith S. Gregorie, The greater sinne is easilier discerned and sooner reformed; but the lesse sinne while it is thought to be no sinne, is with more securitie retained in vse. Christ told Peter (as ye heard be∣fore) that the diuell had a desire to sift him. Now we thinke all to be well, that the diuell comes but with a sieue, for the holes be so narrow, as what can be got out there? but we must consider that as they be narrow, so they be many, and the grace of God, yea the whole kingdome of God whichMatth. 13. is no greater then a graine of Mustard seed, will easily sincke thorough. The diuell comes some∣time like a Lion, a Dragon, or like a huge and mightie Whale; but when he comes with such a port, and carrieth such a breadth, we haue the ad∣uantage of him, for we can discouer him before he come; sometime he comes not like a great beast, but like a little bird, and what doth he then?
then he pickes vp all the seed which was sowen, and gathers all grace cleane out of our hearts: yea sometime he comes but in a seed, for the enuiousMatth. 13. man did but cast in tares, a small seed, yet by that little seede he choaked the wheate: therefore no sinne can be so little, but the diuell can conuey himselfe into it, and hide the hooke of our dam∣nation in it. O remēber therefore the sleights and subtilties of this wilie Serpent, yea remember to resist him euen where he seemeth most reasona∣ble. The diuell will not say at the first, Go backe to Sodom (though that be principally intended) but rather, Looke backe to Sodom, hoping that he which yeeldeth to look back will also go back in the end, which this woman in all likelihood would haue done, had not God by death pre∣uented her; Verecunda sunt initia omnis peccati; Sin is euer bashfull and shames to beg too much at the first, though we be bountiful in yeelding, and say to it, as Herod to his daughter, Aske what thou wilt, and I wil giue thee: Sinne like a Fox craues first to put in but a foote, but then wrings in his head, and then his whole bodie, and so by little and little comes at last with maine strength vponMark. 6. 22. vs. Sloth asketh but a little, Yet a little sleepe, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleepe, but Po∣uerty in the end comes like an armed man, Prou. 6. Delay asketh but a little, Suffer mee but to burie my father, or but to bid my friends farewell, Luk. 9. Sed modicum & modicum non habebat modum, saith
Saint Augustine, A little and a little growes vn∣measurable at the last; Sinne will say to thee, as the father said to his sonne in law the Leuite, Ta∣rie,Judg. 19. but to eate a moresell of bread, and then go thy way; and when thou hast taried that, it will say a∣gaine, Tary now all night and then go thy way; and when thou hast granted that, it will say the next day, Tary now till midday and then go thy way: So if thou grant sin one day, it will haue se∣uen daies, like that euill spirit, Matth. 12. which came at the first alone, but brought at the next time seuen spirits worse then himselfe. O remember ther∣fore how insensibly sin steales vpon thee, and re∣member to represse it euē whē it is least sensible: Take euen the little foxes which destroy the vine, saith Salomon, Cantic. 2. Suppresse schismes & heresies when they first begin to bud, and kill vnruly lusts (as Pharaoh did the Israelites) euen in the birth. The Lacedemonians seeing a little child which took pleasure in killing young birds, said, that he in time would kill men, and did therfore put him to death: so deale thou with the least of thy sins, and be secure of no sinne, because it is little, but remember him that said, that not only beames, butMatth. 7. also moates must be cast out of the eie, though in their order; yea and blame not vs if sometime we de∣scend to reproue the small diminutiue sinnes. In∣deed the politike law hath wel prouided for nets, that they should be of a sise, not too straite, nor too narrow, for feare of destroying the younger
fishes, that is, the frey; but S. Peters nets must not be brought to the sise, nor corrected by the sta∣tute, because we fish, as to saue soules, so to kill vp sinnes; and as an Emperour said, E pessimo genereIul. Maxi∣mus. ne catulus educandus, of an ill store not a kitling may be kept. Therefore not to speake alwaies of your couetousnes insatiable, ambition intolera∣ble, your lust and sensualitie brutish and abomi∣nable; not to speake alwaies of your vsurie, simo∣ny, bribery, your grinding the faces of the poore, your griping and catching at the goods and pos∣sessions of the Church, your plotting, and plan∣ting, and supplanting one another; not to speake alwaies of these great and capitall sins, we must sometimes descend euen to Mynth and Annise; For euen these things ye ought to haue done too, Mat. 23. and we must tell you sometimes of your tricks and complementall toies, your affected and effe∣minate gestures, your vaine discourse and vnsa∣uourie iesting; your idle sports, idle labors, and idle times; and yet (I doubt) idlenes will scarce come in among the smaller sinnes: and we must tell you sometimes of your sinnes of meere omis∣sion, indeliberate thoughts, want of due reue∣rence in reuerend things, with many pettie pro∣phanations: And sometime wee must come a∣mong women, and tell them as the Prophet EsayEsay 3. doth, of many prettie superfluities, and sinnes of supererogation; as for example, their stretching and casting out their neckes, as if they were in di∣stresse and gasping for aire; their minsing and
shuffling, and tinkling with their feete, as if they were still meditating and practising to daunce; for euen for these things the Prophet threateneth desolation vpon them, as Christ for each idle word conuenteth to the day of iudgement, and Lots wife for but looking backe had a iudgement heere. Therefore as we haue remembred her for her sinne, so must we in the next place remember her for Gods iudgement on her, for since sinne and iudgement go commonly together, I see not wel how they should be taught asunder, yea it is the cause of much wickednes in the world, that men remember Lots wife sinning, and forget her dy∣ing, that is, that remember the examples of sinne and Gods iudgement apart. Death and desolati∣on they grow out of sinne, as a conclusion out of the premisses; For, Why doth the land perish? be∣cause they haue forsaken the law of the Lord, saith Iere∣mie, chap. 9. 12. 13. Sinne and death are Relatiues, Posito vno ponitur & alterum, say the one, and yee may sweare the other. Sin and death are like two twinnes, bred and borne both in a day, for what day the diuell brought in sinne, sinne brought in death, according to that, Gen. 2. In the day thou eatest of it thou shalt die the death; and so it was in∣deed, death followed the sinner as Iacob follow∣ed Esau, it caught him by the heeles and ouer∣threw him. I know not how so fitly to resemble sinne, as to the apple which Eue did eate, for while we stand as it were to cheapen it, to like and
looke vpon it, It is pleasant to the eye, to be desired for knowledge, it is good for meate, and many good pro∣perties it hath belonging to it; but when we haue once eaten and swallowed it, wee are presently stricken with shame and with feare, we are naked, dishonored and confounded by it; answerable to that of Zophar, Iob 20. wickednes was sweete in his mouth, and he hid it vnder his tongue, but it was as bitter in his bowels as the gall of Aspes; and who would not looke back, yea and go back to Sodom, if there were not fire and brimstone belonging to it? Therefore in the punishment of this woman, three things are fearefully to be re∣membred, A suddaine stroake, A strange iudge∣ment, A piller of shame: She was punished sud∣dainly, for she did but turne, and she was turned; she was punished strangely, turned into salt; and she was punished famously, for she became a pil∣ler of salt. The suddainnes of her punishment is the thing which Christ heere chiefely intended to remem∣ber, that as the old world was taken suddainely, and the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah were ta∣ken suddainly, and as Lots wife was taken sud∣dainly; so the latter world, and this citie, and eue∣ry other citie, and my selfe, and euery other man, and euery other woman might feare to be taken suddainly. Death come it neuer so gently, yet it is as the Philosopher calleth it, Terribilium terribi∣lissimum, of all terrible things the most terrible; but when it commeth suddainly and giueth no
warning, it redoubleth the terror, and seemeth to kill not only him that feeleth it, but like that fla∣ming fornace, Dan. 3. 22. euen so many as come neere to behold it: And whereas there is none of vs which prayeth against death, yet against sud∣daine death wee all pray, as if to die suddainly were worse then to die; yet against death there is some comfort, first because It is the way of all the world, Ioshu. 23. 14. so as though it be a plague, yet no man is singular in bearing it: secondly, as it is vniuersall, so it is necessarie, for It is appointed to men, that they must once die, Hebr. 9. 27. And what greater wisedome is there then patiently to beare what we cannot forbeare? but suddaine death we thinke neither common to all, nor necessarie to a∣ny one, but like a Cains marke set vpon some few for example of horrible iudgement. And though many vpbraid it as a blemish in our Liturgie, that wee pray against suddaine death, yet hee that taught vs to pray, taught vs to say, Deliuer vs from euill; but what is euill if this be not? And where they say, we may not pray against it, because we alwaies ought to be ready for it; so ought we like∣wise to beare pouertie when it commeth, and yet Agur prayeth deuoutly, Giue mee not pouertie, Prou. 30. 8. We may pray against all temporall e∣uils, as Christ prayed in his conflict, If it be possibleMatth. 26. let this cup passe from me &c. Where first he prayeth not against all affliction, for that were vnreasona∣ble, but against That cup, that fearefull kind of af∣fliction. Secondly, he made no absolute request
neither, but vnder condition of the will of God, and so do we against suddaine death. Surely in all carnall reason, it were better to die in a moment, then to lie sicke a moneth; for what wearines in the bones, what torments in the whole bodie are cut off by this meanes? yea what terror of God, what horror of the graue, what conflicts with na∣ture? The friends stand by sighing, the wife wringing her hands, the children weeping, and euery teare seemeth a drop of blood, so as in such distraction a natural man hath much ado to go to God; beside the stroake of death is so fearefull, as euen the strongest in faith are afraid of it when it comes: yet all this notwithstanding, it stands with good deuotion to pray against suddaine death. For first it is a godly desire, that as in our life, so in our death we might haue leaue to glorifie God, and by example of Christ, to giue back the spiritLuk. 23. 46. with to him that gaue it. Secondly, we may wish with Hezekiah to haue time in death to set our house in order, 2. King. 20. In death I say, at what time our wils and deeds are commonly more consciona∣ble, our consciences in all causes are vsually bet∣ter, yea at what time our ghostly counsels, re∣proofes, and exhortations are of more weight with the hearer, and God oft reuealeth more wisedome to the dying speaker. Thirdly, we de∣sire of God that we might haue time as to set our houses, so to set our selues in order. To which if it be answered, that our whole life is allowed as a time to do it; we acknowledge it true, yet sure an
humble mind is neuer so possest or secure of any former preparation, but that in death he may pre∣pare better, it being commonly attended with sicknes, with feare, and with feeling of sinne, the true mortifying meanes and wasters of worldly loue. Lastly, since euery man desires as in life to be well thought of, so in death to be charitablie iudged of, and it is cruelty so to care for consci∣ence, as we neglect our good name, surely if for no other reason, a man would pray against sud∣daine death, yet for this one deuoutly, that wee might at our end giue testimony to the world, that we die in God, which of men dying sudden∣ly, our iudgeing nature will hardly beleeue: and yet when we haue thus praied, we pray withall, Thy will be done, this being one of the petitions which God is not tied to graunt. It is our wise∣dome therefore howsoeuer we pray, to prepare notwithstanding, and so to liue daily, as if wee thought euery day to be the last, for which the vncertaintie of the worlds continuance, the frail∣tie of our earthen vessels, the sudden chances and changes of time do incessantly call vpon vs, for when we rise we are not sure we shall go to bed againe, when we go to bed, we are not sure that we shall rise againe, and when with Lots wife we look but back (so many things fall betweene the cup and the lip) as we are not sure we shall euer looke right forth againe; and therefore Christ to keepe vs alway waking, telleth vs that the thiefe is vncertainly comming, Matth. 24. yea God him∣selfe
shall come as a thiefe in the night, 1. Thess. 5. In the night while men are in their dead sleep se∣cure in sin and sensuality, and thinke not of him; while men are sleeping as Sisera, a naile comes and a hammer comes, and strikes them into the head; while men are feasting and iunketting and banquetting, as Iobs children, a wind comes, and the diuell comes and flings downe a house vpon their heads; while men are building and planting and buying and selling, a floud comes as in the daies of Noah, and drowneth them vnawares: while men are swearing and deceiuing, and lying as Ananias and Sapphira, a secret blast from hea∣uen comes and strikes them stone dead. And remember with the suddennes of her pu∣nishment the strangenes of it; A woman turned into salt! an vnspeakeable, vnnaturall, and horri∣ble change: Death is indeed the way of al the earth, 1. King. 2. 2. and sudden death the way of some, but such a death as this, (I thinke) was ne∣uer the way of any; for come to instance or ex∣amples, and there is none to match it; come to nature, and there is no analogie, proportion, or way vnto it; for wheras in euery natural chāge there is some mediate thing to conuey from one forme to another, what transition or passage of nature could there be from flesh and blood to a lumpe of salt? so as we may truly say with Ieremie in another case, Creauit Deus nouum super terram, God hath done a new and a strange thing vpon the; earth Ierem. 31. Which that we may con∣ceiue
a right, we must not think that in this chāge any singular thing did befal this transformed wo∣man, more then did the rest of Sodom, because all Sodom was so turned, euen all to salt; and why to salt? because salt is by nature fretting, and an enemy to growth; and Gods wrath was not satis∣fied in destroying Sodom, vnlesse hee did curse the ground whereon it stood, and therefore hee laies an eternall barrennes vpon the earth too; in imitation whereof Abimelech when he destroyedJudg. 9. 45. Sichem sowed salt in it, that for euer after it should be vnfruitful. Why but the story maketh no men∣tion of salt in the destruction of Sodom. Indeed the storie in Genesis maketh no mention of it, but Deuteronomy & Zephanie make it plaine; for in Genesis is described onely the manner of the burning, but in those Scriptures the face and out∣ward shew of those cities being burnt; out of which it may be gathered that in the Sulphur or brimstone, there was a power or nature of salt, in∣to which, as into ashes, the fire did conuert the parts consumed; therefore Moses speaking of the destruction that should come on Canaan, if Isra∣el kept not the Couenant, saith, That land shall burne with brimstone and salt, neither shall it be sowne, nor bring forth, nor any grasse shall grow in it, like as in the ouerthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, Deut. 29. 23. And in Zephany more plainly, As I liue (saith the Lord) Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah, euen the breeding of nettles and pits of salt, Zephan. 2. 9. By which it may bee
gathered, that those cities being consumed did lie in heapes and pits of salt, hand that Lots wife by all likelihood being by her lingring within the compasse of the fire when it fell, was caught with it, euen with the same fire wherwith Sodom was burnt, and so left standing vpright in her fashion, like an image or picture of salt; and vnto this the Prophet may seeme to allude, both for the sinne and punishment, where he saith, Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arme, and withdraweth his heart from the Lord, he shall inhabit the parched places in the wildernesse, in a salt land and not inhabited, Ierem. 17. 5. 6. And thus as Iob saith,Iob 31. 3. There shal be strange punishment to the workers of iniquitie: and when men will sinne strangely, they must reape what they sow, & look to be pu∣nished strangely: for what is it that hath brought into the world so many plagues and iudgements of new & vnwōted fashion, but that men by new and inordinate affections doe prouoke the pati∣ence of the Almightie? for this cause oft appeare wonders in the heauens, perturbations in the ele∣ments, fearefull accidents and matters of occur∣rence in the earth; for this cause oft appeare pro∣digious birthes, horrible deathes, and strange markes vpon the bodies of men. Thus at the first the sonnes of God most vnkindly matched with the daughters of men, & brought forth for a pu∣nishment of their sinne a strange breed of Giants into the world, Gen. 6. 4. euen as when AnahsGen. 36. 24. Asse and his Mare mingled, there came foorth a
Mule, a monstrous creature out of a monstrous generation. Thus the accursed seed of Cham, the Egyptians, Moores & Ethiopins had for a stamp of their fathers sinne, the colour of hell set vpon their faces. Thus came in men of gastly and grisly shapes, & that (as Cosmographers say) euen pro∣pagating children of the same shape; which wee cannot ascribe to any ordinary impotēci or de∣fect in nature, for that naturally deformed men beget children of a comely shape and forme, nor can we thinke that any at the first were created so, since all had their originall out of the loynes of Adam; but it may well be beleeued, that as men in their minds did grow monstrous, so God did turne the course of nature to breed monsters a∣mong them, that so by the horror of the punish∣ment wee might conceiue hatefully of sinne, on which naturally we dote and are besotted, euen as this woman was on Sodom. Come we to par∣ticular iudgements, and euer we find that as wee offend, so are we punished; Aarons sonnes offred strange fire vpon the Altar, and therfore a strange fire from heauen destroyed them, Leuit. 10. And what a hideous thing was that in the sixteenth of Numbers, where the earth claue in sunder, and swallowedvp Corah and his company, as ouer∣charged with the burdē of such rebelliō? & what a fearfull thing was that, the great Nebuchadnez∣zar, The hammer of the whole world, yea the god ofJer. 50. 23. the world to eate grasse with an Oxe, to be haire∣growne like a beast, & to haue long clawes like a
bird? Dan. 4. 30. But he that would ascend aboue the clouds, and be like the most high, Esa. 14. 14. was for punishment of his pride laid leuell with the lowest of the creatures. But I thinke all feare and astonishment, will giue place to that which is remembred heere, whether we consider it but in the person of this woman, or in the common calamitie of the place wherin she perished; for are wee not amazed to remember what is now be∣come of Sodom? That which once was wel peo∣pled and inhabited, now to be wild and desolate, yea not desolate only, but detested: That which once was fruitfull and pleasant like Paradise, now barren and hatefull like the gates of hell; yea that which once was a land, now turned into a black and filthie lake: Salomon saith, that in his daies, it smoaked, Wisd. 10. 7. as if hell had there found a chimney whereout to vent his smoake: In later times it seemes turned all to sea, which for that it neither breedeth nor preserueth any liuing crea∣ture, it is commonly called Mare mortuum, the dead sea, being so contagious as if a bird but flie ouer it, she is presently dampt, and fals downe dead into it; and as S. Ierom saith, If by the swel∣lingHieron. sup. Ezech. 47. of Iordan the fishes but flow ouer into it, they die straight and flote aboue the waters: yea and as late Authors report, which are as they say eye witnesses of their owne report, it casteth out continuall filthie vapours, by whose stinch and breath the mountaines and valleyes many miles about are as it were scorched, blasted, and made
vtterly barren, beside many vglie shapes and shewes of terror in it, beside apples of goodly co∣lour growing by it, which being touched turne all to smoake and ashes, to remember faire So∣dom which now is turned to ashes. And thus be∣cause we thinke it nothing to abuse the patience of God, we are taught by the punishment how great the sinne is. O what a fearefull change was that where earth was wasted with fire! O what a fire was that whose ashes were salt! and how hor∣rible is it to thinke that brimstone should come from heauen! brimstone should rather come frō hell, where there is (as S. Iohn saith) A lake of fire and brimstone, Reuel. 20. 10. But this would God do to let vs see, how sin turneth heauen into hell, and maketh the mercifull Sauiour an vnmercifull tormentor; for is it not a strange contempt, that God should offer mercy, and we not to accept it? Mercy ought to be sought, to bee followed and pursued, yea bought with losse of life, and there∣fore on a strange contempt, as strange a iudge∣ment is inflicted: Therfore if ye thinke it horrible which Dauid saith of Ioab, for a man Not to go to his graue in peace, 1. King. 2. If ye feare what Moses saith of Corah and his companie, Not to die the common death of men, Numb. 16. If ye be afraid of that which God threatned against the house of Eli, to do such a thing, As who so heard of it, their eares should tingle, 1. Sam. 3. make not then light account of the mercy of God, abuse not the pati∣ence and long suffering of God, tempt not God
the Sauiour to be an vnmercifull and strange tor∣mentor, but remember Lots wife. Thirdly, remember in her punishment, that as it was sudden and strange, so was it famous and publike too, for which purpose she was turned not into a hill or heape of salt, but into a piller of salt, that she might stand for a monumēt of Gods wrath to all that passed by that way. In the place before named, Wisdom. 10. 7. Salomon saith, that in his daies it stood to be seene, which was about nine hundred yeares after the thing was done; and many hundred yeares after him, yea some yeares after Christ, Iosephus the Iew reporteth that he saw it where it stood, yea and still it stan∣deth to be seene, if they may be credited who a∣uouch they haue seene it in the way betweene Engaddi and the dead sea: so endlesse a piller ofBrocard. Sa∣ligniacus. shame it is to renounce the Creator, for loue of a∣ny creature. Now vpon this piller are written two things, Shame to her, and Instruction to vs. As it respecteth her selfe it is a piller of shame, for since our euill doing tendeth to the dishonor of God, it is very proportionable that it bring dishonor to it selfe; answerable to that in the seuenth of Mat∣thew, With what measure ye mete, it shall be mea∣sured to you againe; therefore if thou wilt not o∣bey (saith Moses) the Lord shall send vpon thee cursing, trouble, and shame, Deut. 28. And what worse thing could the Church wish her enemies then this, Let them be confounded & troubled, yea let them be put to shame? Psal. 83. and euery
where the Israelites are threatned, that if they for∣sake1 King. 9. 8. Ierem. 22. 8. Lamet. 2 15. the couenant of the Lord, they shal be a Pro∣uerb and a common talke, and men shal hisse, and clap their hands, and wag their heads & say, Why hath the Lord done thus to this great citie? And though the reproach that followeth sinners in their sin be not the greatest portion of their pain, yet is there nothing which worldly men feare more then worldly shame; for when Saul percei∣ued that God had cast him off, yet stroue he still to maintaine his honor with the people, and still intreated Samuel to honor him before the Elders of the people, 1. Sam. 15. 30. But that which wic∣ked men feare most shall fal vpon them; and their sin shall be written, not with a finger, as Exod. 8. Digitus Dei est hic, The finger of God is heere, but they shall say with Belshazzar, Dan. 5. Video ma∣num, I see a whole hand writing vpon the wall, when their disgrace shall be written in great and capital letters, that as Abacuk saith in another case,Apoc. 2. 2. A man may run and reade it: It shall be written, not as Christ wrote, when he wrote in the dust, Ioh. 8. where euery wind may blow it away, but it shall be written, as Ieremy saith, with a pen ofIerem. 17. iron, and point of a diamond, as it were in tables of stone and steele, that wee may see there is no∣thing but dishonour to them, which honour the world aboue him that made it. Againe as shee standeth vp in a piller of shame to her self, so like∣wise as a piller of instruction to vs, therfore pitcht vp in a piller that she might be seene and remem∣bred
of vs; that as the brasen serpent in the wil∣dernesse, men did looke vpon it and were healed, so this piller in Sodom, men might looke vpon it and be warned; yea she was turned into salt (saith S. Augustine of this woman) Vt prudentes exemplo condiret, that she might season the wise by her ex∣ample, and as Ezechiel saith of the mysticall wo∣man, That all women may bee taught not to doe after such wickednes, Ezech. 23. 48. Where God punish∣eth he doth not as we do, who if where wee hate we can induce the Iudge, bribe the witnesses, and bring the matter to a Crucifige, we desire no more; but when God punisheth one, he doth in the pu∣nishment of that one, intend the reformation of another; Nolo mortem peccatoris; God sure desireth not the death of a sinner, Ezech. 33. but if sinners will needs die, his next desire is, that he which di∣eth may stand vp as a piller, and giue example to other. Whatsoeuer things are written, are written for our instruction, saith S. Paul, Rom. 15. and is it not as true, that whatsoeuer things are done, are done for the same end? The Israelites committed fornication and fell in the wildernes, They temp∣ted Christ, and were destroied of Serpents, They murmured and were destroied of the destroier; and what of all this? Why, these things came vpon them for our example, & were written to admonish vs, 1. Cor. 10. And it is indeed the true vse of exam∣ples, Lego Historiam, ne siam historia, so to reade the stories of other men, lest we our selues come into a storie, and a storie be made of vs; that is, ne∣uer
to see, heare, or reade any famous example of iudgement, but presently to thinke of our selues, as whē we reade of Pharaoh plagued for the hard∣nes of his heart, to imagine streight that Moses stands by vs with the rod of God in his hand, to powre out all that wrath on vs; when we reade of Nadab & Abihu consumed with fire from heauen, to thinke there is in heauen as hot and as consu∣ming fire for vs; when wee reade of Corah, Da∣than and Abiram swallowed vp into the bowels of the earth, to thinke the earth can gape as wide for vs; when we reade of Saul discarded and cast out of his kingdome, to feare lest for our rebellion a better kingdome be taken from vs; and when we reade of Lots wife standing vp in a piller before vs, to feare lest for our apostasie, as famous a pil∣ler be set vpon vs. The vse of examples, is it not one of the talents? and shal we not one day yeeld account what profit and benefit we haue reaped by it? Tyrus and Sidon neuer saw the mightie workes, and yet there is a iudgement for them, Matth. 11. What then shall become of Corazin and Bethsaida which saw so much, and did so lit∣tle? But that which exceedeth all the rest, is it not an admirable fauour to vs, that the losse of other men should so become a gaine to vs, that wheras wee haue our selues deserued to bee made exam∣ples to other, yet other must stand vp for pillers, and be made examples to vs? much like the cruci∣fying of Christ, where Barrabas was begged, and Christ hanged vp; right the world turned vpside
downe: Christ an innocent must giue example to Barrabas, and Barrabas an old thiefe and a mur∣derer must take example by Christ: yea it is said expressely, Luk. 13. that they on whom the tower of Silo fell, were not greater sinners; but Christ sheweth the vse, that wee amend by such punish∣ments, lest we likewise perish: how much more should we amend when wicked men are takē and stricken in their sinnes? To make vse of this in the seuerall kinds; First  to you Men; heere is a Memorandum, or remem∣brance for you; ye see how ill it succeeded with Lot, who being aduised by the Angell to saue himselfe in the hill, went notwithstanding into Zoar the citie, and lost his wife by it, so as where before he had a wife to looke vpon, now he hath a lumpe of salt: A horror to his heart, and a wo∣full spectacle to his eie; and so shall it bee with them all that forsake Gods word to follow their owne fancie, God shall turne their sugar into salt, and their chiefest blessing into a curse: Remem∣ber that. Secondly, to you women; heere is a Memoran∣dum, or remembrance for you; Not to straggle or decline too much from the good steppes and ad∣monitions of your husbands, for as a souldier fly∣ing from his captaine, or a sheep wandring from the shepheard, so is a wife forsaking him whom God hath ordained to be her guide, Prou. 2. 17. More temptation attendeth you in such rebelli∣on; as the diuell by all probabilitie set vpon Eue
while she was from Adam; beside greater punish∣ment falleth on you for such presumption; as Lot himselfe being gone before into the citie, and his wife lingring behind in the field, the fire of God ouertooke her. Remember that. Thirdly, to you of ouer-pitifull hearts, and eies; heere is a remembrance for you; Looke not back with the eies of pitie where God hath cast the eies of his wrath: Abraham indeed had leaue to behold with his eies the burning of Sodom, Gen. 19. 27. 28. because he was a stranger to it; but Lot and his wife had friends, and acquaintance, and kindred in it, and therfore to preuent foolish pite, were forbiddē to look toward it; for though excesse in clemencie be the lesse extreame, yet is it an extreame, & therfore punished oft extreame∣ly: for Saul for sparing Agag lost his kingdome; and Achab for sparing Benhadad lost his life, and Eli for too much lenitie toward his children, lost both his Priesthood and his life; and because this woman would needs looke backe, and shew her selfe more mercifull then God, she shewed mer∣cy, but found none. Remember that. Fourthly, to you secure and carelesse of heart; heere is a remembrance for you; only foure per∣sons escaped out of Sodom, and yet not all they saued neither, and why do we then presume, as if one temptation or danger ouer-past, there were no more to come? yea why work we not out our saluation with feare and trembling, & alway feare lest a worse thing fall vnto vs? The Israelites came
well out of Egypt, yet fell to murmuring in the wildernesse; and Lot came safe out of Zoar, yet fell to incest in the mountaines; & his wife came as safe out of Sodom, yet miscaried in the way. Remember that. Fifthly, ye that dally with Gods mercie, and post off the time of your repentance; heere is a remembrance for you: think it not in your power to repent at pleasure, and to turne to God when yee list, but rather with S. Paul learne while yee haue time to do good, for a time may come whē oile shall be to seeke, yea and lamps to seek, when faith, and knowledge, and all good things shal be to seek; yea a time may come when time shall be to seeke; for who can make himselfe a lease of his life, or truly to determine of what shal be to mor∣row? but sometime euen Hac nocte, A summons comes to night, and sometimes in an houre, yea sometime as Lots wife, a man but turnes, and ta∣ken before hee can returne againe. Remember that. Sixtly, to you Apostaes and back-sliders, yee that come out of Sodom, and then looke back a∣gaine; heere is a remembrance for you: No man that puts his hand to the plow (saith Christ) and then lookes back is fit for the kingdome of God, Luk. 9. No man that beings a good course, and then quailes in it, that washeth himselfe from any sin, and then walloweth in it againe, shall euer haue part in God, yea it were better neuer to haue knowne the way of righteousnesse, then hauing
once knowne it, to decline from it, for if we sin after grace receiued, A worse thing is threatned toIoh. 5. 14. come vnto vs. Remember that. In the seuenth place, to you Presumptuous; heere is a Memorandum for you; you that tempt the patience of God and make bold to sinne still, because ye haue done so long, & yet vnpunished for it. The pitcher that goes so often to the well, yet comes home broken at the last; and the flie that plaies so long with the flame, yet is burnt at the last; and though God forbeare a long time, yet he paies home at the last: Lots wife had war∣ning ouer night to goe, but shee made no recke∣ning of that, & shee was commanded in the mor∣ning not only to go, but to make haste, yet she ca∣red not for that, and when her husband and shee prolonged the time, they were not punished for that; and when they took liking of another place then the Angel had appointed, they were not pu∣nished for that; but when she would still tempt God and prouoke him farther, she aduentured to looke back, and was stricken for that. Remember that. In the eighth place, to you peruerse and croo∣ked of heart; heere is a remembrance for you: Lots wife had first an expresse precept not to look backe, and yet she did look back, and I thinke she did it the rather; such a raging lust there is in na∣ture to do forbidden things: secondly, shee had manifest examples against that shee did, for Lot and his two daughters went to Zoar, and yet shee
winded toward Sodom: Now sure (I thinke) if they had gone to Sodom, she had turned to Zoar; And there is a breed of such singular spirits that turne their backes vpon vs, and go to Sodom, on∣ly for that cause, because wee go to Zoar, Fugi∣tiues & runnagates of the Romish Church, that haue renounced not their country only, but their faith too, and there by barking like dogs in a den, to pronounce for heresie whatsoeuer we say, and to detest as execrable whatsoeuer we do; sworne enemies to Church and Common-wealth, to Prince, Priest, people, and to all men, as if they were borne to bid battell to all, or came into the world, as Golias into the field, to defie all; but for such singular spirits God hath a singular plague: Remember that. In the ninth place, to you hypocrites which hold of Iudas; heere is a Memorandum for you: The more blessings ye haue, and the more know∣ledge ye haue, and the better that name is which ye abuse, the more heauy shall your iudgement be; for God will search the sins of Ierusalem with a candle, Zephan. 1. and it shall be easier for Tyre and Sidon then for you, Mat. 11. For an ill Chri∣stian is the worst creature in the world, and there∣fore worse befell Iudas that liued in the bosome of Christ, then any of them that mocked, whip∣ped, and crucified Christ: And whereas all other men and women in Sodom were burnt to ashes, and there an end, Lots wife aboue all was made an example to all, and the more blessings shee recei∣ued,
the more heauily shee was punished: Re∣member that. In the tenth place, to you that hold of S. Luke, Luke-warme men; heere is a Memorandum for you; you that are neither hot nor cold; you whose feete are to Zoar, but your face to Sodom; you that go one way and looke another, that mooue forward & looke backward; Professors in mouth, Atheists in life; Protestants in appearance, Pa∣pists in heart; zealous in shew, nothing in deede; heere is for you. Elias speakes to you; Why halt ye betweene two opinions? I would ye were either hot or cold: Be something, or be nothing; Lots wife was not in Sodom, nor in Zoar, but betweene Sodom & Zoar, in the mid-way betweene both, and yet destroyed; and if you be neither hot nor cold, God shall spew you out of his mouth. Re∣member that. In the eleuenth place; to you the inhabitants of this honorable citie; heere is a remembrance for you: yee know what is said, The sins of So∣dom were pride, idlenes, and fulnes of bread, E∣zech. 16. Therefore thinke (I beseech you) that these are euill stones to stumble at: Do in this case as the Priests of Dagon did, though with a wiser zeale, because their god Dagon fell downe vpon the threshold, & there brake his necke, they vowed neuer to treade on that threshold any more, 1. Sam. 5. and is it not a faire warning (think ye) for all cities of all sinnes to abiuere these, when they heare how sweetly Sodom and Gomorrah
paid for these? And if the same sins bee found in Sion, which were in Sodom, how then? shal not God do to one citie as he hath done to another? or shall there be any difference betweene one and other? sauing that, it shall be easier in the day of iudgement for them of Sodom, then for Sion; and the more grace men haue receiued, the more fearefully to bee tormented; yea and be sure of this, that if the Lord from heauen did so plague a seely woman, which only pitied Sodom in her punishment, would he not much more seuerely punish those which should partake with Sodom in her sinne? But I hope for better things of the holy citie. In the last place, (for it were past remembrance to exceed) to you worldlings and citizens of So∣dom; heere is a Memorandum for you, you whom the beautie of this world hath bewitched; why looke ye so often back? or what do yee see when ye looke backe? yee will say, your country; so thought Lots wife indeed, for she was warme, wel setled, richly seated, and loath to remoue; but she was dedeiued; for as the Apostle saith, we haue no country, nor standing citie heere, Hebr. 13. but with Abraham wee are alway ready to re∣moue, from Caldee to Canaan, from Canaan to Egypt, from Egypt to Bethel, from Bethel to He∣bron, &c. That as Iacob said of his time, The time of my pilgrimage, Gen. 47. so wee might say of the place we dwell in; The place of our pilgrimage; for we are but pilgrims heere, & the world is but a
place of exile to vs, wherein we euer looke to be remoued, either carried into captiuitie, chased with the sword, or driuen away with persecution, lest if we should dwell heere, wee should forget heauen, and settle our affections heere, and so ta∣king too good a liking of this life, wee should thinke our way to be our waies end, and do as the two tribes, Gad and Ruben did, which sate them downe before they came to Canaan. But the Saints of God neuer looked backe to the world, but confessed they were pilgrims heere. Noah, Abraham, Iacob, and the most of the Fathers to testifie vnto the posterity, that their hope was not heere, did liue in tents, and built no houses heere, but their houses were like themselues, euer ready to remooue, it was but the plucking vp of a pin, and they were gone; and no maruell, for euen Christ himselfe when he was heere, had not so much as a hole wherein to hide his head. But come to wicked men, and to worldlings, and they build houses heere; They build houses (saith the Psalmist) and call them by their name, Psalm. 49. yea they build cities heere, for the first city which euer was built, was built by Cain a figure of the malignant Church, Gen. 4 17. Afterward came in the accursed brood of Cham, Nimrod & his route, and they built a citie too; yea a citie would not serue, but they must haue a tower too, euen Babel must be built, a castle of confusion, a fort of defi∣ance against the Almightie; and so doe they all that plant their felicitie heere; for we haue but a
tent heere, and if we build heere, what do we, but gather vp the stones of Babel which God hath cast downe? Well: look ye back on Sodom; yea take your fill in looking on it, yet well may yee feare, lest while yee looke vpon it, the fire do fall from hea∣uen to consume it; for so shall bee the end of all this golden pompe and glory; your pleasant gar∣dens shall one day be as wild as the wildernesse, your gallant houses shall lie leuell with the ground, and ye your selues if ye could sell all the world to make a tombe, in that tombe to set vp a name for eternitie, yet that tombe shall one day tumble downe, & in spite of your teeth the grasse shall grow vpon your graues: yea he was not past an hundred and twentie yeares since a crowned King, and great commaunder of this land, who ruled, and raged, and killed, and made the king∣dome to quake, and yet now hath neither house, nor herse, nor Hic iacet, but a horse or a cow to grace vpon his graue, that worldly men might be amazed to see so mightie a worldling, so soone, and in such silence to vanish. And who can point out now but any one of those rich Pyramides, pil∣lers pitched vp only for monuments of honor? or what is now become of that wonder of the world, that brazen and ambitious image which men proudly called, Colossus Solis, The Colossus of the Sunne? or what is now become of that golden image, which the Babylonians erected in in the plaine of Dura, full threescore cubits high?
Dan. 3. or what is now become of the rich and wealthie Carthage? or who can shew vs now but where faire Sodom stood? or of Babels tower, but one stone vpon another? And so shall one day this hill of stones behind you be, yea so shall one day this goodly citie faire London be. And if this be the end of iron, stone, and steele, and of these more enduring substances, if these things which consume and eate out one age after another, bee in the end consumed themselues, then what shall flesh and blood expect, but while we looke vpon them to be blasted with them? And what is indeed become of the great and wealthie worldlings, which held the world in ad∣miration, and spent their daies in looking on it? are they not all consumed and worne away with their wealth! Where are the glorious and migh∣tie Monarches, on whom the world it selfe did waite, which neuer were seene but with traines and troupes to attend them? are they not all dead and buried in their dust? where are the noble o∣rators, the silken courtiers, the inuincible con∣querors, are they not all sunke and gone? is not all their glorie coutched in earth and ashes, and all their memory in a few verses? so as now being gone, no man can say, Heere haue they trod or set a foote: Thus faire Sodom serueth them that serue it, and deceiueth them that looke vpon it. Let vs therefore take heed how we look back on the world, or any worldly thing to loue it, lest while we looke vpon it, we perish with it, as Lots
wife did with Sodom: but if wee will looke on the world, then must wee doe as Elisa did to the2 King. 2. children that mocked him, when he looked back vpon them and cursed them, for the world deser∣ueth not a blessing, but a curse at our hands, be∣cause it mocketh vs, for it leadeth vs on with pro∣mises, and promiseth a felicitie which it hath not, like the diuell which told Christ he would giue him all the kingdomes of the world, whereas he had not one foote of land but in hell; so the world telleth vs of ease, when it hath nothing but vexation of spirit, it telleth vs of certaintie, when all is vanitie, it telleth vs of comfort, when all is care: Is not this to mocke vs? but if we will learne to looke right, we must looke neither for∣ward, nor backward, but vpright, that is, to hea∣uen, from whence we looke for the Lord Iesus, Philip. 3. 20. For if we look for him on earth who is in heauen, then shall we lose our labour, and say with the Church, Cantic. 3. I sought him whom my soule loued, I sought him, but I found him not; and no maruell, for she sought him where he was not; and if we seek Christ in the world, or any world∣ly thing, we may imagine it said to vs, which the Angell saith, Luk. 24. Resurrexit, non est hic; he is risen and gone, he is not heere: but looke vp to heauen and ye shall find him there; look for him in the Church where he is preached, and ye shall heare of him there; look for him by inuocation, by newnesse of life and sanctification, and the ho∣ly Ghost will shew him there; and when ye haue
found him, yee shall go vp to heauen with him, and raigne with him there, euen there where Lot now dwels which came out of Sodom; euen there where Abraham dwels, which gaue away Sodom; euen there where Angels dwell, which call vs out of Sodom; euen there where Christ dwels, who redeemed vs out of Sodom; yea euen there where the Father dwelleth in the Sonne, and the Sonne in the Father, and the holie Ghost in both, and we in all. God graunt vs in the meane time so to loath the world, that at the last we may be par∣takers of that heauenly societie. Amen, Amen. FINIS.
