B5800 [ocm]10624521 204715
THE HISTORY OF THE Rights of Princes In the disposing of Ecclesiastical Benefices and Church-Lands. Relating chiefly to the Pretensions of the Crown of France to the REGALE, And the late Contests with the Court of Rome. To which is added, a Collection of Letters written on that occasion: And of some other Remarkable Papers put in an Appendix. By GILBERT BURNET, D. D. LONDON: Printed by John Darby, for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-Yard. 1681.
THE PREFACE. OƲr Gazettes and News-Letters, have been of late so filled with the Contests between the Pope and the French King, that it has been no small part of the Conversation of the Town; and the pe∣remptoriness of both sides has made some sanguine People hope, that it might in the end produce a Breach between those two mighty Potentates. For the Pope, being a Man of a generous Temper, who has hitherto carried himself like one, that re∣solved to raise his Family no higher than he found it; and has not entred in In∣treigues with Princes, for the aggran∣dizing or maintaining his Nephews and Kindred, will probably adhere more steadily to what he has once resolved on, than most of his Predecessors; who have been,
for the greatest part, determined by Dome∣stick Considerations, in all their Treaties and Negotiations with Secular Princes. Ʋpon these accounts it has been concluded, that he would not depart from that which he has so solemnly declared to be one of the Rights of the Church, established under the pains of Excommunication, by the Council of Lions, which is received in France as a General Council. On the other hand, the French King has been so tender of his Glory, that to maintain it, he engaged in a long and terrible War; the Consequences whereof have been fatal to so great a part of Christendom. From whence all are apt to infer, that when he once declares any thing to be a Right of his Crown, he will not be induced to part with it on any terms: Of which he is daily giving such fresh Instances in his Disputes about Dependencies, that there is little reason to doubt of his Constancy in every thing, in which his Glory is once concerned. From the Proceedings on both sides, many have been induced to think, that if the Pope happened to live long, to the great grief of the expecting Cardinals, these Debates might be much more impor∣tant in their Conclusion than they are in
themselves. And when they look back to the last Age, and remember in what the Negotiation of King Henry the Eighth's Divorce ended, they have made some Re∣flections, with which Speculative People do often entertain themselves. It was indeed an unheard of thing, that the Court of Rome, that has been always so gentle and easy to Princes, especially in Matrimonial Matters, giving leave either to contract them, in forbidden Degrees, which former Ages condemned as Ince∣stuous, and contrary to the Divine Law, or to dissolve them on the slightest pre∣tences, should have ventured so far, as to lose the Obedience of so great a King, and the Profits of so Rich a Kingdom. But as it is plain to those who are acquain∣ted with that Transaction, that Clement the Seventh would not have run the risque, if he had not been overawed by the Empe∣ror, and the Party he had in the Consi∣story: so it is not to be doubted, but if they had believed at Rome, that the Breach would have produced such Effects as have since appeared, they would have used more Caution, and been slower in their Resolutions and Censures. The pre∣sent Case is totally different from that; for as the French King is not under so
powerful an Engagement in this Matter, as King Henry's Affections were; so on the other hand, there is no other Prince that has Force enough to set on these Diffe∣rences so far, till they are past recon∣ciling. And Rome being to fight it out by her own Weapons, without such a Pa∣tron as Charles the Fifth, will not ven∣ture on so unequal a Contest, as the Ful∣minations of the Vatican, and the French Troops would prove to be: And the Ex∣periment they made in the Matter of England, has taught them so much Wis∣dom, that they will not relapse into the like Error, especially in a Matter that is entirely in their own power. And therefore it may be very reasonably believed, this Con∣test will be at some time or other, taken up; and the Canonists, who are good at seeking out Expedients, by which the Rights on both sides seem to be still kept up, will in conclusion find some tem∣per. But while this Matter is so variously discoursed of, and such Idea's of Poli∣ticks are set up, as Men of different Per∣suasions are apt to delight in, the ground of the Contest is little understood among us. This enclined me at first to enquire, with some exactness into the Matter of
Fact, and from that to examine the Right. I was furnished with Copies of many Letters and Instruments that passed in France, before this Affair was carried beyond the Mountains; together with se∣veral Letters that have passed since, be∣tween the Courts of Rome and France. With these I had likewise several Books sent me, some printed, but more in Manuscript; in which I clearly saw where the Right is supposed to lie: and by these I was di∣rected to such Authors as had formerly treated on this Subject; the chief of whom is, the late most Learned Arch-bishop of Paris, de Marca, who has written very largely, and with great judgment and exactness on this Argument. But I can∣not commend his ingenuity so much, as I must do his other excellent Qualities; for he has written defectively, and has concealed very many things, to which a Man, so conversant in all parts of Eccle∣siastical Learning as he was, could not be a Stranger. From these Authors, my cu∣riosity led me into a Wood, while I went to examine the whole Matter, with a great many other things which I found so in∣volved with it, that a full acount could not be given of the one, without consider∣ing the other likewise.
The Reader will better judg of what I have performed when he has gone over it; nor shall I forestal his Opinion, either by telling him at what pains I was at in making this Collection, or by making Pro∣testations of my sincerity and fidelity in it. For tho I have not knowingly left anything unobserved that I thought belonged to this Subject, in all the Authors which I run over; nor have I said any thing without a very good Authority; yet I know this will not be the more believed for my say∣ing it. I confess I have gone much fur∣ther than I proposed at first, when I re∣solved to publish the Letters which are in the Collection, to which I intended only to have prefixed some short Account of the State of the Question; but I have been led to treat somewhat copiously of several things, that I did not think of when I first set about this Work. The Subject is large, and I have not declined to handle it in its utmost extent; which I the ra∣ther did, because many things occurred to me, that are generally but little under∣stood among us, and which may be of no small use here. For the best way to find out proper Remedies for all the Diseases of the Church, is to know the steps and progress of the Diseases themselves; and
as nothing has misled People more in their Notions and Desires of Reformation, than their not being able to distinguish be∣tween some Abuses, and the Functions corrupted by them; so that instead of taking away Abuses, they have gone to change ancient and excellent Constituti∣ons; So on the other hand, nothing has perhaps heightned this weakness more, than that some have been so zealous for the defence of these Abuses, that one would think they love the Function chiefly for the sake of the Abuses, and would be lit∣tle concerned for it, if these were sepa∣rated from it. Others that dislike the Abuses, yet know not how to part with them, fearing that the making of some Changes may draw more after it; and that a humour of making Alterations be∣ing thus put in fermentation, may grow so violent, that it will not be easily re∣strained or governed. It was upon this Maxim, that all the Resolutions of Adri∣an the Sixth, and some other Popes, for the Reformation of divers Abuses, were withstood by others, who said, That if some Corruptions were once acknowledged and amended, that would give credit to the Complaints which the Hereticks made, and be a publick confession that the Church
had Erred, and would set on foot an humour of making Changes, which could not be easily limited or managed. These Politicks prevailed at Rome, so that in∣stead of removing Abuses, all were justi∣fied and maintained: and yet, humanely speaking, it is not to be imagined, but that if some Corruptions in the Government, and some more palpable Abuses in the Worship, such as the scandalous use of Images, the denying the Chalice, and say∣ing the Offices in an unknown Tongue, had been corrected, the Reformation could not have made so great a progress as it did. Wise Men are unwilling to make great Changes, and the Rabble are wrought on, not so much by Speculations, and subtil and learned Arguments, as by prejudices from some publick Abuses, of which they are all sensible; and while these are continued, it will be easy to heighten their dislike of them, and to lead them almost into any Opinions, to which the hatred they bear to the Abuses may any way dispose them. And the defending or maintaining of Abuses, which cannot be defended, endangers the whole Cause, in the Opinion of those who judg of Parties in gross, and not by the retail of particu∣lar Arguments; as many Towns have been
lost, by an obstinate keeping of an inde∣fensible piece of Ground; so the yielding up a Ground that cannot be maintained, and is no way necessary to the main Fort, gives those within a more united strength, and preserves them from the Accidents that might follow on their being beaten out of the Outworks, when they are weak and not tenable. But the offence that some unwary Men take at those Abuses by which they are so much byassed, is not the greatest mischief which these bring on a Church. By them Mens minds are corrupted, and God is highly offended: and indeed, as Solomon compares the beginnings and growth of strife, to the letting in of Waters, where a small defect in the Banks, through which some drops run out, will soon make way for a whole stream; so it has been in many of the Corruptions of the Church which have ri∣sen from small and undiscerned begin∣nings; and some Abuses being once esta∣blished, others grew necessary to maintain and defend these. The opening this Matter clearly and faithfully, may be of some use to discover the progress of those Evils, which have in some things altered the frame of the Government of the Church, from what it
was in the Apostles days, and for some Ages after, and then impartial Men will soon see their mistake, that have accused the Order of Bishops, and their superio∣rity over Presbyters, as that which gave occasion to these Corruptions, since that Function is so far from being guilty of any such Charge, as the Enemies of it are willing to load it with, that, moral∣ly speaking, it was not possible that the World could have been converted to the Christian Religion by any other Form of Government; and it is not reasonable to expect, either the establishment of the Protestant Religion, or the Reformation of the Nation, from that great corruption of Manners that has so over-run it, by any other Constitution; and these Rea∣sons will easily determine a considering Man to believe, that a Constitution so ne∣cessary and useful, had a Divine and A∣postolical Original. Separated Congrega∣tions, when their Number is small, and their Zeal is warm, may seem to go on well for a while; but if their Numbers encrease, and their Zeal cools, they will either run to confusion, or settle in some sort of Ʋnion and Authority, as they have done in New-England. An equality a∣mong Pastors, cannot hold long without
great Faction; and the majority of all Societies is apt to be corrupted, so we can∣not long hope for much Order, where the major Vote determines every thing. But as in Civil Government, a Prince govern∣ing by Law, and having high Preroga∣tives, by which he may do all the good he has a mind to, which yet he cannot abuse to act against the Law, and who is obliged often to consult with his People in what relates to common safety, by whose assistance he must be enabled to put in execution the good things he designs, is certainly the best Expedient for prevent∣ing the two Extreams in Civil Society, Confusion and Slavery. So a Bishop that shall have the chief inspection, both in the forming of those whom he is to ordain, and over the Labours of those already placed, whom he shall direct and assist in every thing, and who governs himself by the Rules of the Primitive Church, and the Advice of his Brethren, is the likliest Instrument both for propagating and pre∣serving the Christian Religion. Mankind is not so vitiated with prejudice, as to condemn such a Constitution for any trifling Arguments that may be brought against it, tho' some Abuses which were brought in in the later and darker Ages,
may have, in some Particulars, made Alterations in this Excellent Govern∣ment. The raising it to what it was at first, had been a far better Design, in those who pretended to a greater purity and strictness, than the tearing a Church in pieces upon some ill-grounded Mistakes, and misunderstood places of Scripture. The vulgar prejudice against this is, that there is no mention made in the New Te∣stament of more than two Orders, Bi∣shops and Deacons; and that therefore the raising a third Order, was at first but a humane and political Device; but this must vanish to nothing, if we exa∣mine carefully what is the importance of the term Deacon. It signifies nothing but a Minister; and in the New Testa∣ment it is applied to very different sorts of Persons; by which it appears, that it was not appropriated to any one rank of Men, but did in general belong to all that were in any Function, that obliged them to be serviceable to others. Christ is called a DeaconRom. 15.8.. Magistrates are so calledRom. 13.4.. All Church-men generally are called, the Ministers or Deacons of Righteousness2 Cor. 11.15.. The Apostles them∣selves are frequently so called1 Cor. 3, 5. 2 Cor. 3 6. & 6.4. c. 11.23. Eph. 3.7. Col. 1.23, 25.. S. Paul
calls TychicusEph. 6.21., EpaphrasCol. 4.7., and Timothy1 Thess. 3.2. Deacons. So that we are not to appropriate all that we find con∣cerning Deacons in the New Testa∣ment, to that Order of Men that car∣ried that designation afterwards. It is indeed a common mistake in all, that do not examine things very critically, to take terms that they find in ancienter Wri∣tings, in the same sense in which they are commonly understood in their own Time; and since, without derogating to the reverence otherwise due to the Fa∣thers, it must be acknowledged that they did not examine the use of terms very critically, I hope it will not be thought too bold to question, Whether the Deacons mentioned by St. Paul, in his Epistles to the Philippians, and to Timothy, are the same that in after-times went under that Name, or if they are not rather Presbyters? I confess, I cannot think that the Deacons of whom he speaks, as a degree previous to that of Bishop, were other than Ministers of the Word and Sacraments: To imagine they were only the distributers of the Alms, such as those were mentioned in the 6th of the Acts, seems ve∣ry unreasonable; for those were Persons chosen for that Time at Jerusalem; and
some of them were, by their Function, Evangelists, and so of a rank really superior to Bishops, and next in order to the Apostles. Therefore I cannot look up∣on that Action as the beginning of a new Function, but only as the chusing of Trustees for the distribution of Alms upon that occasion; for the Zeal of those Converts leading them to sell their Lands and Possessions, it was necessary to put the Mony so brought in, into the hands of Persons that were universally esteemed and confided in. But by that choice it doth not appear that they were made Church-men of a lower Rank and Order. For tho' the Apostles laid their hands on them, yet Imposition of Hands was then given upon many more occasions, than the ordaining Men to be Church-men, and was a Ceremony joined to every publick Blessing. Therefore the Office of a Dea∣con is not to be sought for there, but in St. Paul's Epistles. And tho' the names of Church-Offices came afterwards to be appropriated to the several Functions; yet both Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon, were then promiscuously used. So by Deacon, in these Epistles, it seems un∣reasonable to understand any other Office but that of Presbyters; for the Characters
and Qualifications are so high, the very same almost with those of a Bishop, that it seems clear to me they can be no other. And I am confident, if our Translators had rendred the word Deacon, Minister, as well they might, so that what is now Bishop and Deacons, had been Bishop and Ministers, there had never been such Contests and Mistakes about the Form of Church-Government as there has been; which in a great measure has been occa∣sioned, for want of a right understand∣ing of the term Deacon. There are also some Passages in Saint John's first Epistle, that do very much convince me, there were then but two Fun∣ctions of Church-men, and that these were Bishops and Presbyters. He directs his Epistle to three Orders of Men,1 John 2.12, 13, 14. Fa∣thers, Young Men, and Little Chil∣dren. It is clear, that by little Children, he meant the Body of the Christians that were newly converted, and were yet but weak in the Faith; which appears, both by the many Instructions he gives them in the other parts of the Epistle, and by the Reasons which he there mentions for his writing to them. The one is, Be∣cause their Sins were forgiven them for his Names-sake; that is, they were
baptized into the remission of Sins through Christ: The other is, Because they had known the Father. For the first Con∣verts, were either such Jews as had been bred up in the knowledg of the True God, or such Gentiles as had been Wor∣shippers of God, and Proselites of the Gates. That by Fathers he understood the Bishops, or Pastors, who by preaching the Gospel, begat more Converts or Sons into God, is also clear; and the reason of his writing to them confirms this, Be∣cause they had known him that was from the beginning: If we compare this Phrase with the beginnings, both of his Gospel, and of this Epistle, it will ap∣pear that it is a description of Christ. So those Fathers are the Bishops who knew Christ, that was from the beginning. Either they might have seen Christ in the Flesh, or they were well instructed in every thing that concerned him; and therefore he wrote to them. The middle Rank to whom he writes, are the Young Men, who had overcome the wicked One, and were strong, and had the Word of God abiding in them. They are the same that St. Paul puts in opposi∣tion to Novices, out of whom Bishops were to be ordained, who had given proof
of the Power of Religion in them, by their resisting Temptations and enduring Trials; and were Persons that instructed others, and for that end had the Word of God abiding in them. It is plain, these are Qualifications of a sort of Men above the ordinary Christians, and it seems most reasonable to understand them, not only of well confirmed Christians, but of a Rank between the Bishops and Fa∣thers, and the Converted Christians: and therefore I conclude they were Pres∣byters. So far I have digressed, to give an ac∣count of my Design, that I may not be misunderstood in setting out the Rise and Progress of some Abuses, as if I meant thereby to lessen the esteem of that Form of Government, which I do verily believe was begun by the Apostles, and was continued down in an uninterrupted Succession, in all parts of the Christian World to our days: and I look on it as the greatest and best Expedient possible for the advancement of the Christian Re∣ligion, for preserving the Protestant Re∣ligion, and for carrying on the main Ends of all true Religion; I mean, the reforming of Mens Lives and Conversa∣tions.
To return to my present Subject; the best of the French Writers seem very sensible of the disorder their Church has been in ever since the Concordat was set up, by a Bargain that was made between Francis the First, and Pope Leo the Tenth, in the room of the Pragmatical Sanction, by which the freedom of Ele∣ctions had been restored; but by the Concordate, they were put wholly in the King's Hands, who nominates; and in the Pope's, who confirms all Bishops. Of which Mezeray speaks with a freedom, very well becoming one that may be justly reckoned the greatest Writer of History in this Age. Thus under a colour of taking away the Inconveniences of Elections, to which it had been easy to have found a Remedy, Authority was given to other Inconveniences, that are much greater, and that can never be remedied. This is more grave∣ly and copiously enlarged on, by the excel∣lent Bishop of Venice:Gaudeon Disc. sur les Odies Sacres Disc. 2. Our Fathers have groaned, and all that love the Order of the House of God, will still groan as long as Elections continue to be put down, so that we must needs enter into the Sanctuary by the way of the Court. The Clergy of France,
the Parliament of Paris, and the Uni∣versity did vigorously oppose the In∣troduction of that new Device of Se∣cular Nominations, which changed the Face of the Gallican Church, and from being a Queen, made her become a Slave. But all their Complaints were without success; and God to punish us for our Sins, did permit that the Discipline under which she had so long flourished, was altered in such a Point, which was, as it were, the Key of the Vault. But, says he, we must accom∣modate our selves to the Laws which we find established, since we cannot change them. And therefore he in∣fers, That one nominated by a Prince, not having pushed himself forward in order to it, and without having desi∣red it, or entred into Intrigues about it, or making Promises by way of Ac∣knowledgment, that are any way con∣trary to Equity, may, without scru∣ple, accept of it, and believe himself called of God to it. And a little after he adds; These Promotions have been always fatal to the Church, and the Bi∣shops that the Court has made, have been ordinarily the chief Advancers of Schisms, Heresies, and of the Oppres∣sion
of the Church; Of which he gives some Instances. And concludes, One cannot read Nazianzen's Verses of the Prelats of his Time, without being struck with horror, and forced to ac∣knowledg, that a Secular Temper is totally contrary to the Episcopal Spirit. Thus do two of the best Writers that France, or the Age had produced, la∣ment the Disorders of their Church, in the great Change that was introduced by the Concordate. But to speak impar∣tially, they did not sufficiently consider, that the Clergy coming to have so great a share in the State, it was in some sort necessary for Princes to assume an extra∣ordinary Interest in their Nomination, so that they ought rather to complain of the Disorders of former Ages, wherein, by the Cheats with which the Clergie deceived the World, so vast a proportion of the Wealth and Power of Europe was brought into their hands; and these Arts being so successful, and running on in a course of so many Ages, it was no wonder that Princes finding the best Portions of their Dominions, fallen into the hands of Church-men, endeavoured to assert their Regal Power over these, both in the pro∣viding of Persons to them, and in sub∣jecting
them to such Services and Duties as their other Lands were liable to. That a Merchandize was set up, and that Pennances due for Sins were dispensed with, to such as purchased them, by giv∣ing Lands and Goods to the Church, is apparent from several Testimonies in the Ages in which those Endowments were most frequent. Charles the Great, in his first Capitular, in the Year 803, speaking of the Goods of the Church, calls them, The Vows of the Faithful, the Prices of Sins, and the Patrimonies of the Poor: which upon that, became a common Phrase in that and in the follow∣ing Age. It returns often in Hincmare's Works. And in the Decretal Epistles that were forged about that time, it is put in that Epistle which is ascribed to Pope Urban. Edgar of England in his Laws,Leg. Angl. Sax. per Wheel fol. 84 & Spelm. Conc. Tom. 1. p. 471. does in plain words set down Rules for the Compositions to be made for Sins, both for the Rich, and for the Poor; and he begins with the building of Churches, and endowing them with Lands, and providing Men to serve in them. The building of Bridges, and relieving the Poor, comes next to these; and afterwards he sets down the Rates of these Compositions. A day of Fast∣ing
was to be redeemed by one Penny, and a whole Years Fasting by thirty Shillings. And that the Poor might not think they were cruelly used for their Po∣verty, the saying so many Psalms and Paters, (Aves were not then said) is enjoined them instead of their Pennan∣ces. And this was so well understood by one of the learnedest and best Clergie-men of that Age in which he lived, Petrus Damiani a Cardinal, that in a Letter which he writ to a Bishop, against the Di∣lapidations of the Revenues of the Church, he uses this,Baron. ad An. 1055. Numb. 6. among other Reasons; You are not ignorant, that when we receive any Lands from Penitents, we relax their Pennance according to the pro∣portion of their Gift; as it is written, A Man's Riches are his Ransom. Weigh it well, and consider with a suteable care, that as those who give their Lands to the Church, are justly eased of the burden of their Pen∣nance; so he that withdraws these, is liable to be oppressed with the Load of that Pennance, which they who give the Lands should have under∣gone. The relaxing of Pennance in this life, together with the rescuing of Souls out of
Purgatory in the next, were sure Engins to work on credulous and superstitious People, and these were played with so many Visions, Dreams, and wonderful Stories, that no wonder all the Princes of Christendom felt their strength much abated by those Endowments. So it was necessary at least to tie those that were to possess them very firmly to their Interests, and to keep up those Rights which they had over their Lands, before they were con∣verted to be Ecclesiastical Benefices; which being Branches of their Regal Au∣thority, were called the Regalia; and from being an Adjective Plural, is now made a Substantive Singular; and the sig∣nification of it is appropriated to the Right which Kings have during the Vacancy of a See. One part of it is, the Nomina∣tion of the New Bishop, which is come in the room of the Elections. The other (which is the sense in which the Regale is at present taken) is, the conferring all the Benefices without Cure, such as the Deanries and Chanonries which are at the Bishops Gift, if these fall during the Vacancy; and the seizing on the vacant Revenues, and keeping them till the new Bishop has sworn Fealty to the King: upon the registring of which Oath, a Writ
goes out for restoring the Temporalities. The Original and Progress of all these shall be enlarged on in the following History. I shall therefore at present only give the Reader in short, the state of the present Controversie between the Pope and the French King. The Pope pretends, that by the Council of Lions, the Rights of the Regale are restrained to those Churches that were then in use to be sub∣ject to them; and that it is prohibited, under the pain of Excommunication, that any Person, of what Rank soever, should extend them to those Churches that were not then subject to them. So the Writers for the Court of Rome assert, that the Rights of the Regale are only due to Princes by the Concession of the Church; and that those Churches where this Con∣cession has not been made, ought to enjoy their freedom from this servitude, which they say cannot be brought on them but by the consent of the Church: And there being several Provinces in France that were under particular Feudatary Prin∣ces at that time, who either did not chal∣lenge, or had discharged the Regale, these becoming since the Dominions os the Crown, it is said, they are not under it; and that therefore all that endeavour to
violate their Rights, and to subject them to it, are liable to Excommunication, by the Authority of that Council, which is received in France as a General Coun∣oil. On the other hand it is alleadged, on the behalf of the Court of France, That the Regale is an inherent Right of the Crown, which can never be cut off for want of possession; and that the Princi∣palities which are annexed to the Crown of France, do immediately come under this subjection; and that this doth not at all depend on the Consent and Laws of the Church; so that no Decree of a Coun∣cil can cut it off, or hinder it to operate. Some of the Bishops of the four Provin∣ces, which are Languedoc, Guienne, Provence, and Dauphiné, stood firm to their Rights, and refused to register their Oaths, which was a yielding up the Point as they thought. But all the Bi∣shops, except two, thought fit at last to submit to the King's positive Orders. Indeed these two were very extraordi∣nary Men, eminent enough, both by their great Piety, and their exemplary Labours in their Diocesses, to give a reputation to any thing that they should so stifly main∣tain. They were the Bishops of Alet and
Pamiers, Men of whom their Friends say, the World was not worthy: who shewed how much it was possible, even in this Age, to raise the value and esteem of the Episcopal Order, that has suffered so much by the ill conduct of others: They lived constantly in their Diocesses, and went never to Court to make way for higher Preferment; on the contrary, they detested the thoughts of it, reckoning that they were married to their Flocks, and th t that tie could not be easily dis∣solved. They cut off all the pomp and superfluity of living, which has in these later Ages arrogated the Name of Hospi∣tality to it self. They were great Ex∣amples for Fasting, Devotion, and strictness of Life. Their Cloathing and Diet was mean and simple. They set up Seminaries, as Nurseries of Education for their Clergie, where they spent much of their Time, and on which they employed the greatest part of their Revenue. They were very careful in examining those whom they ordained; and were so criti∣cal in that Matter, that for many Years they ordained few or none at all, not be∣ing satisfied concerning the Internal Vo∣cation of those that came to receive Or∣ders: For till that appeared to them, they
would not confer them. They were fre∣quently employed in all Spiritual Offices, even about the Sick; and did the Duties of the Inferior Clergie-men upon many Occasions; so that they were in all things accounted the greatest Patterns which that Order has afforded in this Age. Only they were too much leavened with a super∣stitious conceit of the Rights of the Church, which involved the former of them in many Law Suits. These were the Men that refused to comply with the De∣clarations which the King set; and per∣haps the high estimation in which they li∣ved and died, made the King less willing to go to extremities as long as they lived, for they were so tempered, that no Threat∣nings were likely to work on them; and no doubt the proceeding to any high Se∣verities against them, would have given great offence: So that the King seeing they were resolved to have resisted, even to Martyrdom, did not push this Affair to the uttermost point against them: Yet it went so far against the Bishop of Pa∣miers, that all his Revenue was seized on, so that for twenty months before he died, he had nothing to live on but the Charities and Alms of his People. But they being dead, the Matter has gone on,
since that time more smoothly, no opposi∣tion being made but by some of the Chap∣ter of Pamiers, whom the Bishop had pos∣sessed with his own Notions, and formed into a temper like his own. During this Contest, the Jesuits have given a clear discovery of their Maxims. Hitherto they have pretended, that by virtue of their fourth Vow of Absolute Obedience to the Pope, they were linked in a closer manner than any other▪ Order was to the Interests of that Chair; and by that means, as upon all occasions, they have received the most particular marks of Affection and Confidence which that See could bestow on them, So of late, du∣ring Pope Innocent's and Alexander's Reign, they had run down the Jansenists, had procured Processes and Censures upon their Persons, as well as upon their Books, as often as they moved for them: And all the Complaints which the Jansenists made of their impious and lewd Morals, could only procure a lame and insignificant Cen∣sure from Pope Alexander. And by their constant flatteries of Popes, and their raising the Papal Authority so high, as to assert the infallibility of that Chair as an Article of Faith, they seemed to have entitled themselves to all the Favours
from it to which they could pretend: for not content with what was looked on for∣merly, as sufficient for establishing the Pope's Authority, the Infallibility of his Decisions in Controversies of Religion, they raised it higher, to such a pitch, that all the World was ashamed of it; for they asserted his Infallibity, even in Matters of Fact, which depending on the Autho∣rities of Witnesses, and other fallible E∣vidences, cannot be supposed to be in any that is not Omniscient. But upon this Pope's advancement, the Scene changed; for he being a Man of a severe temper, and of great probity, conceived a very ill opinion of the whole Order of the Je∣suits, and a very good one of the Janse∣nists; which being understood by Letters, which, as it is said, he writ to some of the chief of them with his own hand, they resolved to make an Address to him, dis∣covering the abominable Doctrines of the Modern Casuists, who have been for the greatest part, of the Order of the Jesu∣its. It was penned by Mr. Nicol, the famous Jansenist; and with it he drew out of their Books 200 Propositions, which were to be offered to the Pope to be censured by him. And they also adverti∣sed him of the defectiveness of the Cen∣sure
that Pope Alexander the Seventh had passed on some other Doctrines then complained of; for they were not condem∣ned, as contrary to the Law of God, or to the Christian Faith, and so were not declared impious and heretical, but were condemned only as rash and scanda∣lous, and that amounted rather to a Pro∣hibition (the Doctors of that Church being required in the virtue of holy Obe∣dience, and under the pain of Excom∣munication to punish them no more) than to a Condemnation. So they war∣ned the Pope, that such a Censure had been ineffectual, and therefore desired one in more formal and peremptory terms. But tho' in March 1679, a Censure was made by him, and published, yet to the surprize of all People it was found to run in the same terms that the former had done; so that it can have no conside∣rable Effect: Yet some of these Proposi∣tions are of such a nature, that one would think, that instead of condemning them in such soft and gentle terms, they de∣served the highest and severest that could be invented; of which the Reader will judg best by a recital of a few of them.
5. We dare not condemn a Man of Mortal Sin, that had never any Act of Love but one to God in his whole Life. 6. It is probable, that the Precept of loving God, doth not oblige ri∣gorously, and of it self, no not once every fifth Year. 7. It onely then obliges us, when we are bound to put our selves in a state of Justification, and have no o∣ther mean left us by which we can do it. 16. It is enough to have one Act of Faith in our whole Life. 30. It is lawful for a Person of Ho∣nour to kill a Man, that intends to calumniate him, if there is no other way left to avoid that reproach. The same is also to be said of one that gives another a box on the Ear, and cud∣gels him, and runs away after such beating and cudgeling. 43. Why may it not be said, That it is only a Venial Sin in any, to les∣sen the great Authority of another, which is hurtful to himself, by charg∣ing him with some false Crime.
56. Frequent Communion, even in those that live as Heathens, is a mark of Predestination. 68. Absolution is neither to be de∣nied, nor delayed, to a Penitent that has a custom of sinning against the Laws of God, of Nature, or the Church, even tho' there is no hope of his amendment, if he says he is sorry, and purposes an amendment. 63. It is lawful to seek the nearest opportunity of sinning, for the Spiri∣tual or Temporal Good, either of our selves, or of our Neighbours. When the Letter to the Pope was drawn, it was designed, by those that managed the Interests of the Jansenists at Paris, to pro∣cure many hands to it, and to send it to Rome, as a general complaint made by a great Body of the Clergie of France. But the Jesuits finding so great an alte∣ration in their Affairs at Rome, and that the Pope would be easily induced to do any thing that might humble them, and in particular, that he detested their Im∣pious Morals, applyed themselves to the French Court, and represented to the King and his Ministers, of what ill example it would be to suffer such appli∣cations to be made to the Pope, that it
would tend to the diminution of the King's Glory, and would revive the Heats that had been in France, between the Jansenists and them. They had also then designed the extirpation of that they call Heresy (the Protestant Religion) out of France; and did remonstrate, that no Divisions must be suffered to a∣rise among Catholicks, but that all must unite against a common Enemy; and they so far prevailed, that a Circu∣lar Letter was writ by the Agents of the Clergie, and sent over France, pro∣hibiting all, in the King's Names, to sign the Letter that was drawn for the Pope: And Mr. Pompone Secretary of State, and Nephew to the famous Mr. Arnauld, was ordered to write to him, and give him a Reprimand in the King's Name, for endeavouring to revive those Debates. To which he wrote an An∣swer, vindicating himself from all Fa∣ctious and Turbulent Designs, and said, that he thought the representing the horrid Doctrines of the late Casuists, many of them being as pernicious to the State, as contrary to the purity of the Christian Religion, in order to a Censure, could not, if rightly understood, be miscon∣strued; and he wished, that the Proposi∣tions
of which they intended to complain, might be read to the King, not doubting but the bare hearing of them recited, would strike horror in all Peoples minds. He also observes the versatile Temper of the Jesuits, who took all Advantages in a favourable Conjuncture, to represent them at Rome, as Men ill-affected to that See, that were Obstinate, Schis∣matical, and lovers of Novelties: But when they found the Pope's Ears were like to be open to them, and that they ad∣dressed themselves humbly to him, then they complained of them to the State as Seditious Persons, who intended to raise the Papal Authority too high. The Let∣ter, as I am informed, was sent to the Pope, tho' signed by fewer Hands than was at first intended; and I having pro∣cured a Copy of it, and of the Letter which the Agents writ against it, and of Mr. Arnauld's Letter to his Nephew, have put them in the Appendix. The first to the Pope, being in Latin, I have tran∣slated it; but I thought it not so necessa∣ry to render the other two that are in French. By the Letter to the Pope it will appear, that all the Complaints and Accusations which the Protestants have made of the Corruptions taught by the
Jesuits come really short of this Address: So that hence-forth those who read this Letter, will be no longer uneasy in be∣lieving the truth of that Charge, and par∣ticularly that they teach their Disciples to deny upon Oath, and in Judgment, things which they know to be true, when the confessing them would be a prejudice to themselves or their Friends. Which will appear to be taught by them, for the following Propositions, are two of those there complained of, and since condemned by the Pope. 26. A Man, either alone or before others, may, either when he is asked, or of his own accord, or for his diver∣sion, or any other end, swear that he did not do a thing which he really did, having a secret meaning, either of some other thing which he did not do, or of another way of doing it, or of any other Truth which he adds to it; in which Case he is in truth neither a Liar, nor is he perjured. 27. A just cause of using those Se∣cret meanings is, as oft as it is necessary or profitable for the preservation of Life or Honour, or saving ones Goods, or for any other Act of Vertue; so
that the concealment of Truth, seems in that case expedient or desirable. But tho' the Censure which the Pope made was a very slight one, and such as they easily may elude; for a Faculty that may be privately granted, takes off the Obligation of it entirely; Yet the Jesu∣its had no mind that a Censure of any sort, setting forth their Impieties, should be printed and published in France; and therefore this being passed, as things of that nature are, in the Congregation de Propaganda Fide, that is, in the In∣quisition, they informed the Procureur Ge∣neral, that since that Court was not ac∣knowledged in France, it was a preju∣dice to the King's Authority, to suffer any Decree made in it to be printed in France; and seemed now to forget the many Censures they had formerly pro∣cured from the same Court, against the Books of the Jansenists. Ʋpon this a Remonstrance was made to the Court of Parliament of Paris, and the Censure was declared to be of no Authority in France, and so an Impression that was made of it was called in, and since that time it has not been publickly sold there.
Nor were the French Jesuits satisfied with this, but it seems were resolved to be revenged on the Pope for this usage; which, tho' all others censured it as too remiss, yet they complained of it as too severe: and therefore two of the most eminent of that Order have been, since that time, employed to execute their re∣venge. Maimbourg, a vain and an affected Writer, who has published several pieces of History, rather in the strain of a Novel or Romance, than of a History; and has corrupted the Truth of Matters of Fact, in every Book he has writ, so notoriously, that if his Temper, and the Spirit of his Order, did not set him a∣bove the modesty of blushing, he could not have a countenance to look the World in the face any more, having so grosly a∣bused it: Yet he engaging to write of some Contests that were between the Popes and the Emperors, did affect a sort of impartiality; and tho' in his History of Arrianism, he had in many places run in that high strain of an Infallibility in Matters of Fact, yet he has of late, upon all occasions, fallen severely on the Popes; and that not only in personal Reflections, but has directly set up the Interests of
Princes, in opposition to the Papal Pre∣tensions. This how true and well-grounded soever it might be, yet flowing from a Writer that had shewed no regard to Truth for Truths-sake, it could be impu∣ted to nothing but spite and resentment. His Book has been censured at Rome, and he has been frequently cited by the General of his Order, Oliva, to appear there, and answer to the things laid to his charge. But he, by his interest at Court, procured an Order from the King, requiring him not to go out of France; and so by obeying that, broke his Vow of Absolute Obedience. And tho' a Sum∣mons has been issued out of late, in very peremptory terms, both against him, and P. de la Chaise, which is the last Paper that I have put in the Collection; yet they have both continued in their Resolu∣tion of not venturing beyond the Moun∣tains: Since that time a Command has been sent from Rome to expel Maim∣bourg out of the Order; yet in obedience to an express Command sent from the Court of France, that was not obeyed, to his great grief, as I am informed. For that Order being capable of no prefer∣ment but that of a Cardinals Hat, he is out of hope of ever attaining that Dig∣nity;
and apprehends that his Fate shall be such as Pasquin lately said should be∣fal his Friend the Arch-bishop of Paris, Pudebit sed non erubescet, alluding to the Cardinals Colours, which are Scarlet. So Maimbourg despairing of the Scarlet, is believed to desire the Purple. And it is reported, that he was not a little trou∣bled for his not being expelled the Order, since that slight piece of suffering must have been an effectual recommendation to great Preferments in France. The Designs of the Court of Parlia∣ment of Paris, and of the Ministers for subjecting all France to the Regale, were like to be opposed by none so much, as by those of the Jansenist Party, and in par∣ticular, by the two Bishops formerly men∣tioned; to whom, whether the Jesuits bore greater hatred for their enmity to them, or for the eminent strictness of their Life, it is hard to determine. They therefore to be revenged of them, set on the Matter of the Regale all they could: And the Pope having writ to those Bi∣shops, encouraging them in their Labours, and proposing them as Examples to all the other Bishops of France, the Jesuits were the more earnest to be revenged, both on the Pope and them at once. And so
P. de la Chaise, having linked himself into a strait correspondence and friend∣ship with the A. B. of Paris, has, in concur∣rence with him, driven on this Business all he could. By these means the King was in∣duced to prosecute with more than ordinary earnestness, his claim to the Regale in all his Dominions: Ʋpon which has followed all that Contradiction from Rome, that is to be related in the following History. But that the Zealous Catholicks of France might not be scandalized with a method of proceeding, that seemed con∣trary to the Obedience usually paid to the See of Rome, the Jesuits, in con∣cert with the Arch-bishop of Paris, re∣solved to carry on, at the same time, ano∣ther Design, that should both clear them of the Imputations which might have otherwise been cast on them, of designing to divide France from that See, and likewise gratify their hatred of the Pro∣testants; and so they set on the King to prosecute them with all the ways, both of Craft and Severity, that could be inven∣ted: and by this zeal against Heresy, they suggested that the King might well cover his Contests for the Regale, which he pretends is due by the Right of the Crown. Of this they make great use in all the
Letters they write to Rome, in vindica∣tion of the King's Proceedings. It is also believed that P. de la Chaise, being the King's Confessor, has so wrought upon his Conscience, as to make him look on it as a Duty indispensably necessary for him to extirpate Heresy out of his Dominions. It is evident, that what-ever that great King is perswaded to do, is very justifia∣ble, according to the Doctrines of that Church; and tho' the common Impressions of Humanity must needs be very strong in so glorious a Prince, who in many things has equalled, if not exceeded, the most renowned Kings that have been for many Ages; yet if these are born down by ill Opinions in Religion, his Religion is more to be blamed than himself for it; tho' his being so much governed in these Matters; by a Bishop that has not edified the World so much in the course of his Life, that he is like to be canonized after his death; and by a Jesuit, who is, to speak softly, but moderately learned in Di∣vinity, must needs make him appear less in the Eyes of those who are otherwise disposed to hold him in as high esteem, as is due to any thing that is mortal. It is certain, that all Revealed Religion is designed, to raise the
Impressions of Vertue and Goodness higher in our minds, by proposing better Pat∣terns, stronger Motives, and more effe∣ctual Assistances, to perfect us in that to which the Light of Nature doth but faintly lead us. And it is not to be de∣nied, that it were better there were no Revealed Religion in the World, than that Mankind should, by its influences, be so vitiated, as to become more barba∣rous and cruel than it would be, if acted by no higher Principles than those are with which Nature inspires Men. The Chri∣stian Religion is in nothing more emi∣nent, than in the Precepts it gives for taming all the rough and boisterous Pas∣sions of the Mind, Anger, Wrath, Ma∣lice, Evil-speaking, and Revenge. It doth not allow us to hate our Enemies, or render Evil for Evil, or Railing for Railing; but proposes for our imitation, the Example of the Divine Bounty and Goodness, in making the Sun to shine, and the Rain to fall on the Good and Bad. And in particular, a strict charge is gi∣ven to Church-men,2 Tim. 2.24. not to strive, but to be gentle unto all Men; to be apt to teach, and patient, in meekness in∣structing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them
Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth; that so such as are taken captive by the Devil, may recover themselves out of his Snare: And our Saviour check'd the indiscreet heat of the Apostles, who would have been calling for Fire from Heaven to consume a Town that refused to grant him admittance. But he told them,Luke 9.55. they knew not what spirit they were of. It was angry and cruel Rage, which they mistook for Zeal: But he added, That he was not come to destroy Mens Lives, but to save them. These are sufficient Indications of the Doctrine of the Gospel in this particular. The Primitive Christians used the same Arguments against the Persecutions which they suffered from the Heathens,Tert. ad Scap. (that they were contrary to Humanity and natural Right) that lie against these bar∣barities that are set on foot in the Church of Rome, with this advantage, that our Holy Religion fortifies those tendernesses of nature, with the Authorities that are in it, against all sort of cruelty. After the Empire became Christian, as they that received this Faith, did not return upon the Heathen the Cruelties which they had suffered at their hands in the former Per∣secution; so all that was done to some
Hereticks, was only the banishing them. The Arrian Emperors did first practise great Cruelties on the Orthodox, who studied no revenge when the Empire fell again to Men of their Party. Those Bishops that first prosecuted Hereticks, so that they were put to death on that ac∣count under Maximus, were universally condemned for it, and Excommunicated for it by some Bishops of that time. In St. Austin's days, the violences and fury of the Donatists, forced the Bishops of Africk to implore the Emperor's Prote∣ction and Help; but the punishment of Insolencies, and the banishment of some of their Teachers, were the highest Seve∣rities then used: And even in these Cases St. Austin and the other Bishops interposed often and vigorously for mode∣rating the sharpness of the Civil Judges, so far were they from enflaming them to further Cruelties. And in Gregory the Great's Time, when some in Naples would not suffer the Jews to celebrate the Festivities of their Religion, that Pope wrote a Letter concerning it to Paschose Bishop of that City, which Gratian liked so well, that he has put it in his Decree. In it he writes thus,Greg. Ep. lib. 11. Ep. 15. Decret. Dist. 45. cap. 3. Such as would, with a sincere Design, draw over the
Aliens from the Christian Religion, to the Orthodox Faith, must do it with gentle Methods, and not with rough∣ness, lest ill usage drive away such whose minds might have been wrought on by clear Reasonings: and whoever will do otherwise, and under this pre∣tence will hinder any from their custo∣mary ways of Worship, it is evident thereby, that they follow their own ends more than the Cause of God. This he prosecutes largely, and shews that Men ought to be gained by the force of Reason, and the ways of Meekness, and not by Cruelties. But from the days of the Albigenses, about the beginning of the 13th Century, Burnings and Cruelties have been gene∣rally practised in that Communion; and all Princes have been required, by the Authority of General Councils, to root out Hereticks out of their Dominions, under no less pains, than their being first excommunicated, and then deposed; and that their Dominions should be given away to others; which has not been only a high threatning, but has been frequent∣ly put in practice: and the conviction of Heresy, upon which the Secular Judg was obliged to burn those condemned for it,
was either pursued in the Bishops Courts by summary Methods, and the Oaths ex Officio, with every thing else that could facilitate the dispatch of the Business; or by a more peculiar sort of Courts, called the Inquisition, which are too well known to need any fuller explanation to be made of them. In them all things were managed secretly; the Friends of the Party had no access to him, nor could he call for Witnesses for his own Purgation. They had also Authority to put Men to Tor∣tures, and so to extort Confessions from them; and upon these they proceeded, either against themselves or others. Bi∣shops were also tied, by all the ways that could be thought on, to shew no mercy to Hereticks. For in the Oath they are to swear at their Consecrations, one clause is, That they shall oppose and persecute Hereticks to the uttermost of their Power. It is no wonder then, that Princes whose Consciences are governed by the Maxims of that Religion, should be soon determined to use the severest Methods possible for the extirpation of all whom they judg Hereticks. So that I cannot see, with what reason P. de la Chaise should be so much inveighed against upon
this account, except it be for his being of so cruel a Religion. For without all que∣stion, such Cruelty is necessary by the Do∣ctrines of that Church; so that in this case, inclinations to Mercy and Compassion must pass but for the feebleness of Na∣ture. And among the other Mortificati∣ons which they prescribe hereafter; one must be of all compassion and pity towards Hereticks. And thus one of the Performan∣ces of their Religion must be, to devest a Man of one of the best Dispositions that Nature has endowed him with. Thus are those unhappy Clergy-men, persuading their redoubted Monarch to stain his Glory with so mean and unbecoming a Triumph. That must certainly go down uneasily with him, since nothing is more contrary to those Heroical Qualities, for which he is so highly extolled, then to use poor Inno∣cents so severely, for that which is not in their Power; Men are not masters of their own Persuasions, and cannot change their Thoughts as they please: He that believes any thing concerning Religion, cannot turn as the Prince commands him, or accommodate himself to the Law, or his present Interests, unless he arrive at that pitch of Atheism, as to look on Re∣ligion only as a Matter of Policy, and
an Engine for Civil Government. If the Sentiments of Humanity and good Nature are thus defaced, it is no wonder if those of Justice and Fidelity are of no great force. I need not reckon up the Merits of the Protestants of France; they preserved the House of Bourbon in the last Age, so that chiefly by their means was Henry the Fourth established on the Throne; and then he, partly as a reward for their Services, partly out of some Inclinations that might re∣main with him for their Religion, and partly out of a politick regard to their Numbers, their Industry, and their In∣nocency, granted them a perpetual and irrevocable Edict at Nantes, which was confirmed in all their Courts of Parliament. But it is suitable enough to the Decree of the Council of Constance, to perswade a Prince to break his Faith and Promises to Hereticks. Since that time they have done nothing to forfeit this Right so se∣cured to them; for what a few Towns did in the Reign of the last King, ought to be no prejudice to those that concurred not in it. When those Wars were over, it was again declared, that the Edict should be inviolably observed; and now for a∣bove fifty Years, Malice it self can lay
nothing to their Charge. They were the chief Instruments in preserving the King that now reigns, during the Wars in his Minority. They have submitted to all the Hardships of the Government, and had no share in the Tumults that were lately raised in some of the Provinces; nor has any of them been found practising a∣gainst the State: much less are they ac∣cused of the horrid wickedness of Poison∣ing, that has been of late so common in France. They have been as forward in War, and as industrious in Trade, as any of the Subjects of France; so that their Enemies being Judges, there is no∣thing that can be objected to them, but that in the way which they call Heresy, so do they worship their God. The Method in which they have been prosecuted, has not been such as became so Illustrious a Monarch; for he has been perswaded to proceed in a way very unsui∣table to the Glory of his other Actions. If he did in plain terms declare, that he would extirpate Heresy, that were more di∣rect; but to do it with all the Tricks and Chicanery possible, savours more of the pedantry of a Jesuit, than the sublimity of a crowned Head. To talk of the obser∣vations of the Edict of Nantes, when
the infractions of it are every day so no∣torious and visible, is below the greatness of Majesty. P. de la Chaise tryed, with ill success, what Converts he could make with his Pen, as will appear in the unhappy attempt he made on Mr. Spon; by whom the Je∣suits Letter, inviting him to change, was answered, with so much strength of Rea∣son, and curiosity of Learning, that I thought it not only very well worth the being put in the Appendix, but have also added an English Translation to it, that it may be more generally understood. But when the Confessor found Men were not to be won over by such Arguments, as can work on none but weak and mercenary Minds, he resolved to lay down those gentle Tools and to seek out sharper ones, which he hoped would prove more effectu∣al; measuring perhaps the rest of that Religion, by such wretched Hirlings as those were, who had sold their Consciences for a little Mony. Julian of old having observed, that the Christian Religion was propagated, in∣stead of being suppressed, by the violence of Persecution, and being much set a∣gainst our Holy Faith, and bent on the raising of the Credit of Heathenism, he re∣solved
not to persecute the Christians di∣rectly, but to bear them down by all the uneasy Pressures which he could contrive; to cherish all the Differences that were among them; to shut up all their Schools, and deny them all the ways of instructing their Flocks. And at the same time he was very earnest with his Heathen Priests, to perswade them to live strictly and so∣berly; to whom, for the great honour of the Christians of those days, he proposes them as Patterns; and particularly, for the Love and mutual Charity which he observed among them. All these Methods, except the last, which doth not agree too well with the Courtly Genius of the Arch∣bishop of Paris, and the Morals of the Jesuits, did these Enemies of the Refor∣med Religion resolve on. They at first gave out, that the King would persecute none, but reduce his Erring Subjects to the Sheepfold of the Church, by gentle and rational Methods; and begun with many Processes for the razing of their Chur∣ches; with some particular Severities, which were not so much taken notice of, because they fell only on a few. But since the last Peace (the time that here, as well as there, the Bigots had marked out for extirpating this Pestilent Heresy,
in their secret Correspondencies) they have made greater steps, and advan∣ced more bare-faced in their Designs. I shall only relate what has pass'd this last Year, by which it will appear how vi∣gorously they have promoted their De∣signs. Those born in the Communion of the Church of Rome, are required not to change their Religion, which was left free before. Schools and Colleges are suppressed in most Places: The Churches which the Protestants had in the Country, or small Towns, are generally razed; and all Religious Meetings in private Houses are forbidden. Their Synods, and the Colloquies of their Clergie, are forbid∣den, except a Popish Commissioner is present. The singing of Psalms is pro∣hibited. When they are sick, they are forced to admit the Popish Magistrates to come, with Witnesses, to exhort them to change their Religion. No Midwives are permitted to practise but Papists, that so they may baptize their Children; upon which it may be afterwards pretended, if they continue Protestants, that they are re∣lapsed, because they were baptized by a Pa∣pist, and the punishment of this is ter∣rible. No Minister, Elder, or Deacon,
may go and visit their Flocks, to confirm them in their Religion, when they are wa∣vering in it. Accusations are brought up∣on the slightest Pretences, against the Ministers, or others that are noted for their Zeal in the Cause of Religion: up∣on which, Orders for their Imprisonment are easily given out, and they are either forced to fly, or are ruined by a long Im∣prisonment: and the Intendants of the Provinces oppress them most unmerciful∣ly, with design, as may be easily guessed, to drive them into a Rebellion, that so a pretence may be given to destroy them all at once. No Protestants can be admit∣ted to any Charge or Employment, how mean soever it be; nor may they be re∣ceived to any Trading or Mechanical Cor∣poration: and to take from them all Con∣fidence or Credit in Trade; if any Pro∣testant Merchant turns Papist, he cannot be sued for his Accompts or Debts for three Years thereafter. These Orders and Laws are severe enough in themselves, but they are much heavier in the manner in which they are executed: For instance, the Order or Arrest for the exhortation to be made to the Sick to turn Papists, appoints only that it be done gently, and in the presence of two Popish
Witnesses; but in the way of the execution of it, the manner is most barbarous, for the Priests break into their Houses with great rudeness and insolence, and turn all Persons out of the Room where the sick Man lies, not excepting his Wife and Children; and then use such perswasions to him as they think fit; and what an∣swer soever he makes, they give it out, if he dies, that he became a Convert, so that his Children are taken from their Protestant Kindred, as being the Chil∣dren of a Roman Catholick, and are bred up in that Religion; and if he lives, they threaten to prosecute him as a Relapse, and so force him, by the fear of the punishment of Relapses, to change his Religion. But when neither these Me∣thods, nor those sordid ones, in which Mr. Pellison is the main Director, were followed with such success as they had promised themselves, they procured a new Edict, which cannot be paralleled in Hi∣story, except by the Decree Pharaoh made against the Israelites Children, that at seven Years old (which as I hear may by their Law be interpreted, to be six Years old and a day) they may be converted; and the Reason given (is such an abuse put on the Dignity of that King, that it
is to be hoped, when he comes to see the mischievous Effects of these Councils, he will highly resent it) is, That at that Age they are capable of a choice in a matter of such importance, as is the Salvation of their Souls. Till now it has been always thought, that the more important the Matter was, it was necessary to use the more deliberation; but to admit of a slight deliberation, because the Matter is important, is a Consequence becoming only the modesty of a Jesuit, but certainly un∣suitable to the candor of so Glorious a King. What Notion can those Men have of Religion, or of the Salvation of Souls, that think an Age, to which all Laws have denied a capacity of disposing of their Goods, Estates, and Persons, capable of so great a priviledg of judging in Points of Religion, and this before they can perhaps read or repeat a short Catechism, or a shorter Prayer. If it had been pretended, that the King, by the Dominion he had over his People, would give order concerning the education of their Children, this had been severe and unjust, but yet there were some more sense in it, and colour for it, than that they have thought fit to pitch upon. It is true, up∣on one account, that Age is the fittest
time to make Proselites in; for the Ima∣ges, the Musick, the Machins, the Riches, and the Pageantry of that Religion, are such, that no wonder if Children despise the simplicity of the Protestant Churches, and be taken with the Pomp that is in theirs. This was as good an Argument in the first Ages of Christianity, in the hands of the Heathens; and all that pretend to know what the Design and Nature of the Christian Religion is, must needs despise such Methods; and be thereby enclined to believe, that those who use them, know, that the best Arguments to draw over any to their Religion, are those which are fit to work only on Children and Fools. How much this is contrary to the Law of Na∣ture and Nations, to the Rules of the Go∣spel, and the Edicts in France, is so ap∣parent, that the greatest part of it needs no proof. Yet for the Readers further satisfaction, he shall find in the Appen∣dix, both the Edict it self, and the Address which the Protestants have made to the King upon it: tho' notwithstanding all the strength of Reason that is in it, so effectual are the Persuasions of the Arch-bishop of Paris, and the Confessor, that it has procured no abate-ment of this unexampled Rigour.
On the contrary, they proceed to ex∣tream Severities, bitter and more insup∣portable than Death it self. For where∣as a single Death gives the Party that suffers it a speedy deliverance; they in∣vent ways of Oppression, that shall make the Lives of those whom they torment, extreamly painful to them; and yet shall not in conclusion give them the Crown of Martyrdom: But as we find it in the History of Julian the Apostate, that tho' at first he seemed resolved against ex∣tream Cruelties; yet the opposition he met with in that Method, which he thought surer, because it was slower, did so dis∣order him, that he lost his temper, and began to persecute; and it was believed, that had he returned victorious from the Ex∣pedition, he was engaged in against the Persians, he had set on the cruellest Per∣secution of the Christians that ever was: So those who endeavour the extirpation of the Protestant Religion out of France, tho' they do now perswade their King that it will be brought about without shedding of Blood, yet they must needs know the contrary. For they may probably think that the People growing weary of their Lives, by the Pressures they groan under, may forget that Temper which they have hitherto kept,
to the admiration of all the World; tho' it is to be hoped, that as the Principles of their Religion have tamed their Resentments hi∣therto to such a pitch, that their Patience ex∣ceeds even the Rage of their Enemies; so they will continue in that excellent course of suffering as becomes Christians. But if they should chance to fly out into any Disor∣ders, their Persecutors, who will be then ready to aggravate their Rebellion, and to punish it extreamly, yet must be looked on as the true Authors of it, who have dri∣ven them to such extremities of Despair by their Oppression, which makes even a wise Man mad. Or if this fail, then the next thing they will hope to bring a∣bout, will be, the making some few of those they account the most obstinate among the Heriticks publick Examples: and it will be suggested (as it was here in Eng∣land to Queen Mary) that some few In∣stances of Severity will accomplish the Bu∣siness, and so by this means a down-right Persecution will be set on foot. Perhaps a few Ministers, or some that are noted for their Zeal, will be first begun with: And if a Persecution is once begun, it will be no hard thing to continue it; for their King will be then supposed concer∣ned for his Glory to carry it on; and to be
obliged, by the steadiness of his Govern∣ment, to overcome the sullenness and the obstinacy of those, on whom all that train of Oppression, under which they now lie, can neither prevail to renounce their Re∣ligion, nor to shake off their Allegiance to their King. That this must be the consequence of such Counsels, and Proceedings, a little reflection on the History of the last Age, and on the nature of that Religion will soon demonstrate. No sooner do Jesuits, or those addicted to their Interests, get hold of the Conscience of any Prince, tho' otherwise ever so generous and mer∣ciful, than the unhappy and dismal Effects of it do appear. The present proceedings in Poictou, shew what the rest are to look for: The mercenary Agents of Mr. Pe∣lisson, prevailed so far on the weakness and Necessities of many, as to draw them to abjure their Religion; but not a few of these, soon after repenting of that base bargain, by which, for a few Crowns, they had sold their Souls; and openly ex∣pressing their horror for it, were clapt in Prison, where they lie still in great mi∣sery; only their Numbers are such, that it seems it is not thought fit to proceed to Extremities against so many at once.
But the Intendant of that Province, Mr. de Marilliac, whether directed by secret Orders, or set on by the fierceness of his own Temper, or by his Confessor's, is not known, has resolved to take a severe revenge of the rest of that Religion, for the sake of those unhappy Relapses, and has treated them not as peaceable and obedient Subjects, but as open Rebels, and declared Enemies. Their Goods and their Houses are robbed, and their Persons violently assaulted; and all that is done by the Intendant's Order. The Souldiers under his command, are lodged only in the Houses of those of the Religion, where they do not only ruin their Hosts by the excessive Charge they put them to, and by the Contributions they exact from them, but use all the means they can think of to frighten them out of their Religion; tho' the horrid Oaths and Blasphemies they break out daily in, are but ill Argu∣ments to perswade Men to turn. If they refuse to go to Mass, they cudgel them; they drag the Women by the Hair of the Head, with Ropes about their Necks; they torture some with their Screws: They bind Men of eighty Years of Age, and abuse their Children before their Eyes; and such of the Souldiers as are not
guilty of those Cruelties, yet spoil and rob their Goods, and sell them publickly. They threaten them often with death, if they will not change, having naked Swords in their hands, or holding Pistols to their Breasts; and if all these means are ineffectual, then they carry them in Sheets to Churches, and fling Holy Water on them, and tell them, now they are made Catholicks, and if they return again to their Heresy, they threaten them that they will accuse them as Relapses. And when House-keepers are by these means quite ruined, yet they must not give up their Houses, tho' they can keep them no longer, but are fined in 500 Livres if they quit them. And that which has always been the priviledg of the Miserable, is now denied them: for when they come to complain of these Vio∣lences to the Intendant, he, without hear∣ing them, or observing the common Forms of Justice, sends them presently to Prison, and keeps them still there, without fram∣ing any Processes against them: and not content with all this, tho' it is scarce to be imagined what can come after it, or rise beyond it, when he heard that Com∣plaints were made of these Outrages to the King, he sent upon that his Officers to many of their Houses, to force them
to sign a Denial of the truth of these Vio∣lences which they had suffered. All these things will appear, by an Ad∣dress that they of that Province made to the King, which I have put in the Ap∣pendix; in it they reckon up all those Par∣ticulars, and undertake to prove them, be∣fore such Judges as the King shall ap∣point, at the peril of their Lives. And none that know the Severity of the French Government, and the ill Circumstances of the Protestants, can upon this doubt of the truth of those Severities of which they have thus complained. For if their Enemies did not know the truth of this Charge, they would soon have procured a Commission to try it, that so they might have a good colour to punish those who had abused the King, and calumniated his Ministers by such false Representations; but they knew well the truth of them, and all the reparation those desolated Families can in Reason expect, is some good words, and perhaps the stopping the course of that Rage for a little while, and after some short intermission, it will be let loose again. It is no wonder, if Men who hear of the Cruelties of that Reli∣gion, and of the Severities of that Go∣vernment, are very unwilling either to
receive the one or the other: for Life and Liberty are things equally desirable, or ra∣ther the latter is to be preferred, for Free∣men die but once, whereas Slaves are ever dying, being constantly either under the fears of it, or in pressures equal to it. These are the Merits with which the Clergie of France upbraid the Pope in behalf of their King. They boast,Remonst. du Clerge de France le 10 Juil, 1680. that their King has given over conquering, because it pleased him so to do; and that upon his Will, the Fates of Common∣wealths, Kingdoms and Empires de∣pend. They acknowledg, that now instead of the Addresses which the Clergy of France were formerly wont to make to their Kings, to repress the insolence of the Hereticks, they have no occasion for these any more, but most convert them into Panegyricks and Acknowledgments, that their Zeal is exceeded by their King's; that he is every day setting out new Edicts a∣gainst the Hereticks, and is resolved to purge his Kingdom of them. These they call gentle and innocent Means, wor∣thy of the Goodness and Wisdom of their King, and suitable to the Bowels and Mercies of this great Shepherd: (tho' their greatest Enemies ought not to
wish them a share of such Mercies). Flattery has no bounds, and Men that in∣tend to make them court, do on such oc∣casions consider more what are the highest things that can be said, than what is either true in it self, or suitable to the gravity and sincerity of their Profession, or to the true Glory of their King; for all Princes must appear less to Posterity, for having been indecently flattered by their Subjects, such a prostitute manner of addressing being generally thought an ef∣fect, either of Tyranny or great Vanity in the Princes that admit of it; so that their King may suffer in the Opinion of the World, by the abjectness of their stile, but can receive no addition from it, be∣ing really above all that they can say of him. What can be thought of the Conclusion of their Remonstrance, in which they declare, that they will infuse in their Peo∣ple a sense of their happiness, in being go∣verned by a Prince, under whose Empire they enjoy a perfect Liberty, joined with a perfect Obedience, far beyond what was in the happiest Times of old Rome. They will be Masters indeed in the Arts of Persuasion, if at a time in which the Taxes and Impositions are so high, they
can raise in the People raptures of Joy at the prospect of such a Felicity; in which we that are their Neighbours can assure them, we do not envy them so extraor∣dinary a happiness. But there is one Period in their Re∣monstrance, that deserves to be more largely considered; they tell their King, That his Conduct is far different from the rigor with which the Catholicks are used in the Neighbouring King∣doms, that are infected with Heresy; and that he does thereby evidently discover the difference that is between Reason and Passion, between the gentleness of Truth, and the violence, of Imposture; between the Zeal of the House of God, and the Fury of Babylon. From this, one that is unacquainted with the present state of both King∣doms, will be apt to form an Idea of all, that Rage and Fury can inspire Men with, and judg of us according to that; and measure the Proceedings of France by a very different Standard; but flat∣tery is impudent, and observes no Mea∣sures. What Acts of Cruelty, or popu∣lar Fury, can they complain of here? Have the Rabble, at any time, broke vio∣lently
into the Houses of those of their Religion? Or has the Government en∣couraged any to destroy them? What Laws have been broken? Whose Children have been violently taken from him? Af∣ter all the provocations they have given, by their Intrigues, to destroy our Reli∣gion, and subvert our Government, who have suffered for it, but those who have been found guilty in legal Trials, either of Treason or Felony? And I leave it to the Consciences of all the World to judg, Whether upon a discovery of secret pra∣ctices of the Protestants of France who had been found in a Correspon∣dence with the King of Great Britain, the Northern Kings, the States, the Can∣tons, and the Princes of Germany, not only to introduce the Protestant Religion, but to extirpate Popery as a Pestilent He∣resy: If their Letters, full of comtempt and hatred of the King, had been dis∣covered; and if any of the Officers of Justice, who had been engaged much a∣gainst them, for instance Mr. de Maril∣liac, had been secretly murdered, tho' there had been nothing but presumptions to fasten it on the Protestants, whether upon all this the Government and People of France, would not have concurred to
have extirpated that Religion, and per∣haps have offered up many thousands as Sacrifices to the Ghost of the murthered Officer. I need not add another Difference be∣tween the state of the Protestants in France, and the Papists in England, the one had perpetual and irrevocable Edicts made in their favours, whereas the others had not only no Laws here for their security, but on the contrary, the Laws made against them now, for almost an hundred Years, have been so far from being executed with any rigour, that no sort of Men in the Nation enjoyed a more entire quiet than they did, till within these three Years, that their restless pra∣ctices have provoked the Nation to exe∣cute, and that but very moderately, the old Laws against them, no new ones be∣ing made but one, excluding them from voting in Parliaments; and for all the clamour that may be raised in Forreign Parts, those that live among us see how far they are from any such Oppression or Persecution. And upon the whole mat∣ter it is evident, that a Protestant Go∣vernment has much more reason to be a∣fraid of Papists, than Papists can pre∣tend against Protestants; the one Reli∣gion,
if it should prevail, must perse∣cute, burn, and destroy the other, which being appointed by the fourth Council of the Lateran, is a part of their Religion; but no such thing can be objected to the Protestants. The Papists by their de∣pendance on a Forreign Jurisdiction, are apt to be determined by such Measures as are given them from beyond Sea; where∣as Protestants, under a Popish Prince, have no dependence on any but their own Soveraign. The Church of Rome has also so formally established the Doctrine of deposing Princes for Heresy; that no wonder if all Protestants are jealous of a sort of Men that believe Princes may be deposed, and Subjects be burnt for their Religion. All the Characters by which any Tradition of the Church is pretended to be proved among them, agree so clearly to this Opinion, that Transub∣stantiation it self is not so well proved. It was the Doctrine, both of all the Schoolmen and Canonists for above five Ages. It was declared by a Succession of many Popes, who not only put it in pra∣ctice, but asserted the right of it, as de∣rived from Christ and St. Peter; it was confirmed by the third and the fourth Councils of the Lateran, and the first
at Lions, which are esteemed General Councils in that Church, and it was uni∣versally received by the whole Body of the Church for above 500 Years. So that Cardinal Perron had reason to say,Harangue au tiers E∣stat Recu∣eil Gene∣ral des af∣faires du Clergé de France. That all the Parts of the Catholick Church, and the Church of France in particu∣lar, and all the Schools of Divinity before Calvin's days were of that Opi∣nion; and that since the Schools of Divinity were first set up in France, there was not one Doctor, Divine or Lawyer, or any Decree, Council, or Sentence, either of Parliament, or any one Magistrate, Ecclesiastical or Politi∣cal, that had asserted, that in case of Heresy or Idolatry, Subjects might not be absolved from their Oaths of Fide∣lity to their Princes. And he calls the contrary Opinion, A Doctrine that breeds Schism, a Gate that leads unto all Heresy, and so detestable, that he and his fellow Bishops were resolved to burn at a Stake rather than consent to it. From such Authorities we may justly infer, that a Heretical Prince can have no security from Men of that Religion, except it be from their want of power to do him mischief. Such Panegyricks made by the Clergie of France, upon Persecution are
excellent Motives to perswade Prote∣stants to love that Religion, and to de∣sire to come under the Tyranny of such Clergie-men who will govern them with these gentle & innocent methods, by whom the insultings of Scorn will be added to the Cruelties of Persecution; but it is not unreasonable for those, that against the Evidence of sense believe Transubstantiati∣on, to be likewise wrought on to think, that tho' their senses assure them that this is a violent and terrible persecution, yet it is only a gentle and innocent Method of reducing Hereticks. The Pope seems little affected with all this, and instead of making returns in those gross and fulsome strains of flat∣tery, which has so corrupted the stile of the French, that even the poor suffering Protestants are infected with it, as will appear in some parts of their Addresses which I have put in the Appendix; he continues to press his Point still. In which how much soever he may be in the wrong, as to that which is the foundation of the Controversy, yet this must be ac∣knowledged, that he manages his part with a decent magnanimity, and true courage, without the insolences of style in which former Popes have affected to write,
or that abjectness of mind which the French Bishops express on this occa∣sion. But a Pope that is regardless of his Ne∣phews and Kindred, may proceed with more undaunted Resolutions, since he has no private ends of his own, for which the Protection of Princes may be ne∣cessary to him, to byass him. And his being now so many Years in that Chair, without shewing any partial regard to his Family, together with the means he has used for ever to deliver that See from the mischief of a Nepotismo, seem to de∣monstrate the fixedness of his purpose in that particular; tho' as it is given out, he cannot yet bring the Cardinals to con∣sent to a Bull which he designed for that effect. If it is so, that so notorious an Abuse, which has been so often hurtful, and almost fatal to that Chair, cannot be condemned, even when a Pope sets it forward, it may be from thence reasona∣bly concluded, that there is no hope of reforming other Points. For when a Hadrian, a Marcellus, and he that now reigns, (the best Pope that has been for many Years) cannot procure a Reforma∣tion of the grossest things among them; it is a vain and fond imagination for
any to hope that a Reformation of other more disputable Points can ever be car∣ried on there. I have, for satisfying the Readers curiosity, concluded the Appen∣dix with the Minute of a Bull to that end, of which I had some Copies sent me from Forreign Parts. Perhaps such things would be more vigorously advanced, and gain more credit if the present Pope, were not so extreamly ignorant in all the parts of Learning, that, as I hear, he scarce understands or can read Latin. For it is reported at Rome, that Cardinal Albici, who opposed his Election vehemently, said, in the Conclave, to the Cardinals that were promoting him, For the love of God let us at least have a Pope that is so learned, that he may be able to read the Gospel in the Mass. And that same Cardinal expressed no greater esteem for his Judgment, than he had for his Learning. For when some other Cardinals said in his commenda∣tion, that he digested things well; he answered, That nothing could be expected from his Digestion, but that which is not decent for me here to mention. If a Pope, so weak and so ignorant, yet can∣not digest some of their Abuses; but be∣ing moved by the Impressions which com∣mon
honesty makes on a Man of Honour, endeavours to reform them; What Work must a Pope make, that had but an ordi∣nary measure of Ecclesiastical or Theolo∣gical Learning, in a See and Church that is so over-run with them, that scarce any sound part remains? I know I have exceeded the bounds of a Preface; but if the particulars which I have touched, give the Reader any sa∣tisfaction, it is no matter whether they are mentioned in a Preface, or in the Book it self: And being to say here all that relates to those Papers which are in the Appendix, I have taken the liber∣ty to enlarge somewhat copiously on them. I have endeavoured to write as be∣comes an Historian that is of neither Party, and approves and condemns both sides, as he sees cause for it, and not for any partial affection to either of the Courts of Rome, or of France; since I can hardly measure for which of these I am least partial in my inclinations or wishes. I hope I shall offer to the Reader some useful parts of Ecclesiastical Learning, that may not only entertain him as they are Historical Relations, but give him some Lights to judg of several other
things; which tho' they do not so necessa∣rily belong to this Matter, yet are not so forreign to it, but that they may well be treated of in such a Work. POSTSCRIPT. SInce the printing of the following Sheets, I understand from France, that the Committee appointed to consider the Business of the Regale, made their Report to the Assembly on the 11/1 of De∣cember, by the mouth of the Arch-bishop of Rheims, to this effect; That they were of opinion, that the King had a clear Title to the Right of the Regale in all the Bi∣shopricks of his Kingdom. But they moved that he should be addressed to not to extend it, but only to the Benefices, of which the Bishops have the nomination, as being pos∣sessed simply of their Rights. The meaning of this is, that in many places the Bishops and Chapter give Benefices by turns; and in other places the Bishop has but one voice in the Chapter in the disposal of them; but it being pretended that the King can have no Equal; the nomination of these
was taken entirely into the King's Hands. So now they desire, that the King shall assume no more than what was the Bishop's Right. They also proposed, that for those Benefices or Dignities to which a Spiri∣tual Function was annexed, such as Arch-deacons, the Penitentiary and Theo∣logical Chanons, who ought to be Divinity Readers, the King shall only present the Persons to the Vicars, during the Vacancy, to judg of their capacity: who shall thereupon give them institution, and in case they reject them, the King shall name others; and they propose that for Regular Benefices, Regulars shall only be named. By this, some abatement of the King's Pretensions is offered at, both to give the Pope a colour to reconcile him∣self with the King, since that against which the Objections lay strongest, is parted with; and to remove the force of an Argument, which without acknowledging an Ecclesia∣stical Supremacy in the King, is not easily answered; that the Arch-deacons and others, who have a Spiritual Authority, being named, and instituted, or collated by the King, without the Judgment of any Ecclesiastical Person or Court; here a Spiritual Office is derived meerly from the Temporal Power.
In the next place, they advise that the As∣sembly should write to the Pope, to exhort him to Peace & Ʋnion, and to desire him to make a perpetual Grant to the King of the Regale, on the terms above-mentioned. This does not agree well with the former part of the Report, that the Right of the Regale is fully in the King; for that being established, how can the King ac∣cept of the Pope's Grant, since by that he must acknowledg his possession hitherto, to have been an Ʋsurpation: and the Pope's Grant against the Decree of a General Council, cannot be valid, unless his Au∣thority were acknowledged to be superior to the Councils: and at best this Grant might take place till a Council should meet, but then it might be condemned; so by accepting this, the King should give up his pretensions to the Regale in the Right of his Crown, and should accept a Grant of it, only of Grace and Favour from the Pope, and take a Concession, which caanot be valid in Law; and at best is to be tried in the Ecclesiastical Courts, and may be vacated by a Council. But the design of this is, to bring off the Pope, for it is intended only that he shall grant it, but the King is not to take any notice of it. And this is suitable enough to
the Methods of the Canonists, by which the Popes have been often made to offer their Confirmations officiously, when none demanded them; and all People being ready to take any thing that seems to strengthen their Rights; they were re∣ceived by some that were not well advised, but upon these the Popes have founded no small Pretensions, for they made themselves afterwards the Judges of all that was so Confirmed, they being the Expositors of their own Grants; and they set up these as Precedents, to oblige others in the like cases to have recourse to them. By this Expedient, the Clergie of France give the Pope a handle to draw him out of the Difficulties into which he has been involved, both by offering a Regulation, and desiring him to grant the Regale for ever to the Crown of France. In the last place, they propose that the King should be prayed to desire his Am∣bassador at Rome to move the Pope to send a Nuncio to France to give a pub∣lick demonstration of good understanding between those mighty Potentates. This Report was agreed to by the whole Assembly; so it was ordered that the Pre∣sidents should carry it next day to the
King; which being done, he promised them an Answer within a week, (which no doubt will be favourable) and when that is sent to them, they intend to ad∣journ till after Twelve day. If this is done in concert with Rome, which is ge∣nerally believed, to adjust this Matter, then here the Contest will end: tho' the same Reason that inclines them to desire that the King should only Present, and not Institute Arch-deacons, and other Chanons that have a Spiritual Function annexed to their Charge, will hold good for all the other Dignities of the Chapter, since during the Vacancy, they are the Guardians of the Spiritualities; so that in that Interval, a Spiritual Function belongs to them: and therefore by the same parity of Reason, the King should only Present, but not Collate pleno jure to them..
THE CONTENTS. CHAP. I. OF the Elections and Provisions of the Clergie, till the time of the Council of Nice, Page 1 CHAP. II. Of the Progress of this, to the time of the Council of Chalcedon, Page 26 CHAP. III. Of the Elections and Provisions of the Clergie under the Eastern Empire, till the sacking of Constantinople by the Turks, Page 75 CHAP. IV. Of the State of the Churches in the West, but particularly of those in France, from the overthrow of the Roman
Empire, till Charles the Great's Time, Page 101 CHAP. V. Of the Progress of these Matters, from Charles the Great's Time, to the Reign of Philippus Augustus, Page 146 CHAP. VI. Of the Rights of the Regale, and of the Progress of it from the Time of Philippus Augustus to the present Age, Page 194 CHAP. VII. The History of the Pragmatical Sancti∣on, and of the Concordate, Page 230 CHAP. VIII. Of the Contests now on foot, between the Pope and the French King, con∣cerning the Regale, Page 260 The Conclusion, Page 318
THE TABLE OF THE COLLECTION. 1. A Letter of Mr. de Bezons, to the Bishop of Alet, upon his having denounced an Excommunica∣tion against those that pretended to Benefices in the Right of the Re∣gale, pag. 3 2. The Bishop of Alet's Answer, justify∣ing his Proceedings, pag. 8 3. A Letter of the Bishop of Alet's to the French King, concerning the Re∣gale, pag. 16 4. Another Letter of his to the French King, delivered after his death, pag. 30
5. A Judgment given by the Arch∣bishop of Tholouse, upon an Appeal from the Bishop of Pamiers, in fa∣vours of the Regalists, pag. 33 6. An Instrument made by the Bishop of Pamiers against it, pag. 43 7. A Letter of the Popes to the French King, against his extending the Re∣gale to all the Churches of France, pag. 67 8. A second Letter of the Popes to the same effect, pag. 75 9. Another most vehement Letter to the same purpose, in which the Pope threa∣tens the King with Censures, pag. 80 10. A Letter of the Popes to the Bishop of Pamiers, encouraging him in his opposition to the Regale, pag. 87 11. A second Letter from the Pope to the same Bishop, to that effect, pag. 89 12. A Letter of the Popes to the Arch∣bishop of Tholouse, reproving him for his compliance, pag. 90
13. A Letter of the Popes to the Cardi∣nal d'Estree, requiring him to inter∣pose in that Affair, pag. 94 14. Cardinal de Estree's Answer, highly to the praise of the French King, pag. 97 15. The French King's Letter to the Pope, pag. 103 16. The Pope's Answer to it, pag. 104 17. The Pope's Letter to the Bishop of Pamiers, comforting him in his Suf∣ferings, pag. 106 18. The Bishop of Pamier's Letter to the Procureur General, complaining of the Sentence past against him in the Par∣liament of Paris, pag. 109 19. The same Bishop's Letter to P. de la Chaise, representing the injustice of those courses which he so much promo∣ted, pag. 115 20. The Vicar General of Pamiers's Letter to the Pope, concerning their Sufferings, for opposing the Regale, pag. 122
21. A Summons from Father Oliva, General of the Jesuits, to P. de la Chaise and Maimbourg, to appear at Rome, pag. 133 The Appendix. 1. A Letter to the Pope, setting forth the Corruption of the Jesuits Morals; and demanding an effectual condemnation of them; in Latin, pag. 137 2. A Translation of it, in English, pag. 150 3. A Circular Letter of the Agents of the Clergie of France, requiring them not to sign the former Letter for the Pope, pag. 165 4. A Letter of Mr. Arnaud, to Mr. Pompone, concerning the design of the Letter to the Pope, pag. 168 5. A Letter from P. de la Chaise, persuading Mr. Spon to change his Religion, pag. 174
6. Mr. Spons Answer to it, pag. 176 7. An English Translation of it, pag. 194 8. A Declaration of the French King's, that Children at the Age of seven Years may change from the Protestant to the Popish Religion, pag. 207 9. An Address made by the Protestants for recalling the former Declara∣tion, pag. 211 10. An Address made to the French King, complaining of the Severities used in Poictou, against those of the Religion, pag. 223 11. The Heads of a Bull prepared by the present Pope against a Nepotism, or the Popes enriching their Kindred with the Goods of the Church.
ERRATA. IN the Preface, Page 15. Marg. line 4. for 1. read 3. P. 20. l. 24. Venice, r. Vence. Marg. Gaudeon, r. Godeau. P. 29. l. 13. after set, r. out. P. 32. l. 12. punish, r. publish. P. 56. l. 20. mean, r. main. P. 59. l. 2. bitter, r. bitterer. P. 96. l. 3. them, r. their. In the History; P. 17. l. 1. dele their, l. 24. dele of after us. P. 20. l. 25. dele that. P. 28. l. 34. after other, r. point he. P. 35. l. 15. Valentinius, r. Va∣lentinian. P. 36. l. 13. Scheme, r. Schisme. P. 39. l. 1. was, r. were. P. 41. l. 24. after such, r. as. P. 57. l. 5. claim, r. chair. l. 28. 16, r. 26. P. 61. Marg. Junor, r. Innoc. P. 65. l. ult. Accomptant, r. Steward. P. 72. Marg. l. 10. c, r. 2. P. 75. l. 14. them, r. Bi∣shopricks. P. 76. Marg. l. 2. Tom. 2. r. Brev. P. 84. Mar. l. 2. Nob. r. Nov. P. 85. l. 16. 320, r. 360. P. 86. Marg. l. 2, and 5, Nob, r. Nov. P. 104. l. 3. Acts, r. Arles. l. 9. after Rome, r. in. P. 126. l. 29. it, r. the former robbery. P. 144. l. 29. were, r. was. P. 149. l. 7. first Staffe, r. Staff first. P. 151. Marg. Sap. r. Cap. P. 184, l. 23. after terms, r. on. P. 197. l. 23. twenty, r. thirty. P. 208. l. 20. Mons, r. Mans. P. 220. l. 12. dele both after sent, and put it after King. P. 235. l. 2. dele Life. P. 317. l. 19. dele not. In the Collection; P. 4. l. 25. passoire, r: possessoire. P. 86. l. 13. injustitiam, r. justitiam. P. 93. l. 15. 1680, r. 1679. P. 101. l. 8. mentis, r. meritis. P. 108. l. 21. 20 Decembris, r. 17 Julii. P. 208. l. Author, r. Authors. Some Errors in the French will be easily corrected, by those who understand that Language.
THE HISTORY OF THE Rights of Princes, In the disposing of Ecclesiastical-Benefices and Church-Lands. The INTRODƲCTION. IT will be necessary, in order to the right understanding and stateing of this Matter, to observe the progress of it in the several Ages of the Church: And this will be best found out, by casting those into some Epocha's, and considering distinctly what falls within the compass of every one of them. The first shall be of the Time that fell between the first preaching of the Gospel, and the Council of Nice.
The second shall be of the interval be∣tween that and the Council of Chalcedon, in which for above an hundred Years, the Church enjoyed the protection of Christian Emperors; and soon after that was the Western Empire broken. The third shall be the interval between the Council of Chalcedon, and the fall of the Eastern Empire, when Constantinople was taken by the Turks: in which the State of the Greek Churches shall be considered. The fourth shall be the new Face of the Western Empire, particularly in France, under the first race of their Kings, and to the end of Charles the Great's Reign. The fifth shall be the progress of that Matter from that Time, to the Reign of Philippus Augustus. The sixth shall contain the progress of the Regale, from his Time to the begin∣ning of this Age. The seventh shall be a Digression, con∣taining the History of the Pragmatick Sanction, and of the Concordate. And the last shall contain the Progress of the Regale in this Age, and the Debates now on foot concerning it. Of all which I shall treat in order as di∣stinctly as I can, and with that largeness of Observation which the Subject requires, as far as the compass of my Studies and Read∣ing can carry me.
CHAP. I. Of the Elections and Provisions of the Clergie, till the Time of the Council of Nice. IN this Interval it cannot be imagined that we shall meet with any thing of the Power of Princes, before the days of Constantine the Great. But a right appre∣hension of the Constitution of the Church at this time, will direct us better in the un∣derstanding the Changes that came after∣wards. The first Election that the Apostles madeAct. 1.23 to the end. was by Lot, they referring the Choice wholly to God, and only naming two. But as this was to so high an Office as that of an Apostle; so it was before the Holy Ghost de∣scended upon them. After which time one of their extraordinary Gifts being1 Cor. 12.10. the discerning of Spirits, they were thereby immediately directed in the proving or trial of those that were fit to be ordained. So when Paul and Barnabas were sent out to the Apostleship of the Gentiles, they were marked outAct. 13.2. by a Revelation of the Holy Ghost. When St. Paul ordained Ti∣mothy, as there were1. Tim. 1.18. Prophecies before of the great Services he was to do the
Church; so that was declared1 Tim. 4.14. by his laying on of Hands, with the assistance of those whom he calls the Presbytery. As for the Deacons mentioned in the 6th of the Acts,Act. 6.3. they seem to be only the Trustees of the Charities then brought in, and no sta∣ted Office. But because those extraordinary Gifts were not to continue long, and that there might be setled Rules, by which a thing that imported so much the happiness of the Church, might not be Arbitrary; the A∣postles gave Rules by which such as were to succeed in their Offices, should be examin∣ed: Of which we have a great many in the Epistles, which St. Paul wrote to Timothy and Titus concerning Bishops and Deacons, whom I can look on as no other but those, who were afterward called Presbyters. These were to be first1 Tim. 3.10. . proved and tryed: both they and the Bishops were to be blameless, and to have a good report of them that were without; that is, according to the phrase of the New Testament, of the Hea∣thens. But the proof or trial was not only the examining of their Lives, whether free of Blemishes since their Conversion, but was something of greater strictness, by which the Bishop that was to Ordain them, was to be so well satisfied concerning them, that he might1 Tim. 5.22. lay Hands suddenly on no Man, and so not be partaker of other Mens Sins. This was done even by the Apostles themselves, (who by that eminent Gift of
trying of Spirits, could not be mistaken in their Choice) with the consent and liking of the whole Church or Congregation of Christians: Of which we have an unque∣stionable confirmation in that whichEp. Clem. Cle∣mens Romanus writes to the Corinthians soon after St. Paul's suffering; he tells them, That the Apostles having received Authority from Christ, and being persuaded by his Resurrection of the truth of what he delivered to them, went through Countries and Cities, and ordained the first Fruits of them, (whom they proved by the Spirit) to be Bishops and Deacons, for them that should afterwards believe. And a little after, they gave Rules how others should suc∣ceed in the room of those whom they had Or∣dained: and concludes, That such as were appointed (that is, ordained) by the Apo∣stles, or afterwards by other worthy Men, with the consent of the whole Church, could not be without injustice driven from their Ministra∣tion. So that it is plain the People gave more than a bare Testimony, it was a Consent and Approbation: And it is not to be doubted but those converted by the Apostles, would willingly consent to such as they set over them. After that time, the Choice or Nomina∣tion, both of Bishops and Pastors, began generally among the People; which the Circumstances of that Time made necessary upon several accounts: For the Clergy were chosen out of the Body of the Peo∣ple among whom they were to serve; and none could chuse these so properly as the
People themselves. In that infancy of Chri∣stianity, it was also necessary that the Peo∣ple and Pastors should be in an extraordi∣nary manner endeared to one another, and the Clergy had then no other Maintenance but the Free-will Offerings of the People. All which shew clearly that the Elections must have been in the hands of the People. There were also a great many previous De∣grees set up, through which Men were led, before they were made Deacons (that is, Presbyters, in the sense of St. Paul, and S. Clement) or Bishops. First, The Tru∣stees for the Charities were made a previous step, and those came to have the Name of Deacons appropriated to them, which was generally setled in Ignatius's Time, as ap∣pears from his Epistles. About an Age after that, there were se∣veral other preparatory Degrees brought in: for St. Cyprian speaks often of them as in use in his days, and mentions Sub-Deacons, Acolyths, Readers, Exorcists and Porters. And in the account which Cornelius gives to Fabius Bishop of Antioch, of the Clergy of Rome, he enumerates 46 Presbyters, seven Deacons,Ap. Eus. l 6. c. 43. 15. Can. Nioces. and as many Sub-Deacons, (for the Church did long adhere to that number of Deacons, in imitation of the first insti∣tution) 42 Acolyths, and 50 Exorcists, Readers and Porters. Readers were the lowest of these: for Porters seem to have been onely Servants. Saint Cyprian in his Epistles,Cypr. Ep. 33. clearly declares, that in all the Ordinations which he made, he
used to consult with them, (to whom he then writ, who were the Presbyters, Deacons, and People) and by their common advice, to weigh every Persons Manners and Merits; and there∣fore he excuses himself for having ordained two Readers without their Suffrages, who had confessed the Faith in the Persecution. So that even the lowest Office, or first De∣gree of Probation, was not conferred, but by the Choice and Consent of the People. And in hisEp. 40: Epistle directed to the whole People of Carthage, he appeals to them con∣cerning himself, that he was chosen by their Suffrage, and the Judgment of God. And writing concerningEp. 41. Cornelius and No∣vatian, he says, A Bishop being once made and approved of, by the testimony and judgment of his Collegues, and of the People, another must not be placed in that Chair. And in hisEp. 52. 52 Epistle, he gives a particular account of Cornelius's Advancement, that he was made Bishop by the Judgment of God, & of his Christ; by the Testimony of almost all the Clergie, and by the Suffrage of the People then present, and of the College of the Ancient Priests and good Men. Where we see these things concur∣red; First, Marks of a Divine and Holy Temper, which were Indications of the Divine Judgment; as he explains that a little after, telling, how he received the Bishoprick, for which he had courted none, nor was it extorted of any, but it came to him by the Will of God, who makes Priests. To this was joined the Choice of the Clergy, (for Te∣stimony and Suffrage are used promiscuously
by him) with the Suffrages of the People. And last came the College of the Ancient Priests and good Men, who were the Neigh∣bouring Bishops that met, and with whom some eminent Men of the Laity (Confes∣sors perhaps) might come along to join in the Election; and these used presently after to ordain the Person so Elected: And a little after, he says, there were 16 Bishops present at that Election. And in hisEp. 68. Epistle to the Clergy and People, in some Churches of Spain, whose Bishops had fallen into Ido∣latry in the Persecution, he tells them, that the People ought to separate from such sinful Bishops, and not to mix in the Sacrifi∣ces of a Sacrilegious Priest, since they had chiefly the power of chusing worthy Priests, and rejecting the unworthy. And a little after he says, They ought diligently to observe and fol∣low that which came from Divine Tradition, and Apostolical Practice, which was observed by them, (in Africa) and almost in all the Provinces: That in order to the having Ordi∣nations lawfully made, the neighbouring Bishops of the Province come and meet with the People, over whom the Bishop is to be ordained; and the Bishop is chosen, the People being present, who know most perfectly every Man's Life, and has observed, from his Conversation, what his Abi∣lity is. Which he sees they had observed in the Ordination of Sabinus, to whom the Bishoprick was given by the Suffrage of the whole People, and the Judgment of the Bishops that came and met with them, who thereupon ordained him.
From these Passages it appears, that upon the meeting of the Bishops, the People and Clergie were called together, and the Per∣son was pitched on by them: And then the Bishops judged whether he was fit or not, and accordingly they ordained him. So that without going further we may rest up∣on this Authority as an unquestionable Evi∣dence in this Matter. And in these Times, tho' in Towns so rich as Rome was, there might be perhaps many that aspired to the Episcopal Dignity; yet in most other pla∣ces, where there were not those tempta∣tions of Wealth and Dignity, that were in the Imperial City, we may rather wonder that they found Men who would accept of an Employment that had no Advantages to recommend it, and both brought them under the most formidable Trust in the World, which is the Charge of Souls, and like∣wise exposed those who were in it to the first fury of the Persecution. For Instan∣ces of this, the Life of Gregory Bishop of Neocesarea, gives us two that are very sig∣nal, as it is written by Gregory of Nyssa. This Gregory▪ being much set on the study of Philosophy, was afraid of engaging in the Pastoral Charge, and therefore avoided all occasions in which he might have been laid hold on and ordained: Which Phe∣dimus a neighbouring Bishop observing, tho' Gregory was then distant three days journey from him, he did by Prayer dedicate him to the Service of God at Neocesarea, where there were then but seventeen Christians;
to which the other submitted, and came and served there. Whether he received any new Orders, is but dubiously and darkly expressed by that Author. He becoming afterwards very famous, was sent for by the City of Comana, to come and assist, or direct them in the choice of a Bishop: And the chief Men of the Town were anxiously enquiring for the most eloquent and best born Man, thinking these things would have been much esteemed of by this Holy Man; and so there were differences among them in giving their Voices. But Gregory liked none of those that were named, and was searching if he could find one, whose manner of Life and Vertues declared him to be a Priest, even before he should be ordained one. But when they that were recommending those for whom they gave their Voices, prest him to pitch on one, he wished they would look among the meaner sort, if any of them might excel in the Gifts of his Mind, those that were above them in the Gifts of For∣tune. But with this many were offended, and one said, in a jeering way, If you will pass by these that are named, and pitch on a Trades-man, then chuse Alexander the Collier, and we will agree to it. Upon that he desired to see him: and he was brought out, and made a sad appearance, being but half clothed, and miserably poor and sor∣did, so that the Assembly fell a laughing. But when Gregory examined him, he found he was a Philosopher, who had chosen that state of
Life, that so he might pass through the World humble and unregarded; and be∣ing a beautiful Man, he had chosen that Trade, that by much labour he might both subdue his Appetites, and also render his Person unacceptable, by the Work in which he was employed. So after he had exa∣mined him well, he caused them to wash and cloath him, and then he appeared to be another Person than he had formerly seemed to be: and in the end, with the approbation of all, he ordained him. By this Story, we see the first Nomination was from the People, but the Approbation of that depended on the Bishops. And soHom. 6. in Levit. Origen says, That the Election was in the presence of the People, that none might afterwards retract what was then done, and that no Scruple might remain concern∣ing it. And this he founds on those words of St. Paul, That a Bishop ought to have a good report from them that are without. Thus it continued till Constantine turned Christian, but then a considerable Change was made in Elections; for instead of the Rabble of the People, that grew very nu∣merous and turbulent, the Body of the Town, called the Community, (where it was Christian, somewhat like our Common-Councils) came to do that which the Crouds did before. And this is all I think can be meant by theCan. 13. Canon of Laodi∣cea, That the Crouds were not to be suffered to make the Elections of those who were to Officiate in Holy Things. Some have thought that
this Canon relates to the Inferior Clergy; And that as theCan. 12. former regulated the Election of Bishops, so this is for the other lower Degrees, and that hereby the elect∣ing the Inferior Clergy is only taken from the People. But that will not hold; for, as shall be afterwards observed, when we come to speak of St. Austin, the People still continued to chuse Presbyters as well as Bishops. And JeromeLib. 1. con. Jovin. says the Peo∣ple and Vulgar, were sometimes mistaken in the Choice of the Priests; andIn 24. Ezek. speaks of the Peoples chusing both their Bishops and Presbyters. He was indeed very ap∣prehensive of the ill Effects of that; but I cite him as an Historian, not as a Doctor. Chrysostome was also chosen to be a Priest by the People of Antioch. And bothColl. Cn tit 7 John the Patriarch of Constantinople in Justinian's Time,De E∣lec. Ep. Cap. 2. and Martin of Braga, under∣stood the Canon, as relating to the Election of Bishops, as well as the Inferior Clergy; And so both Balsamon and Zonaras likewise understand it. But the fuller proof of this will fall within the time to be treated of in the next Chapter. The Canon of Laodicea immediately be∣fore that formerly cited,Can. 12. establishes that which was the practice in Cyprian's Days, That Bishops were to be appointed (i. e. ordained) by the Judgment of the Metropo∣litan and the neighbouring Bishops, after they had been long tryed, both in the Faith, and the dispensation of the true Doctrine. Whether this trial relates only to the examination of
a Bishop upon his Election, or to the pre∣vious Degrees he had gone through in the former parts of his Life, I shall not deter∣mine. Soon after this came the Council of Nice, in which mention is made of Elections by the People in the second and the sixth Ca∣non. In the second,Can. 2. & 6. they provide against an abuse, of which some were guilty, in bringing Men from Heathenism to be bap∣tized of a sudden; and as soon as they were baptized, promoting them to be Bi∣shops or Presbyters, which clearly relates to the popular Elections. In the sixth Ca∣non, a provision is made, that none shall be ordained but by the Metropolitan, (which is also appointed by the 4th Canon, but was to be done with the concurrence of the Bishops of the Province, at least of three of them, the rest signifying their consents in writing): It was also decreed, that when one was chosen by the common Suffrage of all, which was both the most reasonable way, and suitable to the Canon of the Church, if two or three out of a contentious humour opposed it, in that case the Suffrage of the greater number was to take place. So it is plain, that then the Elections were made by the Church that wanted a Pastor, and the Metropoli∣tan, and the neighbouring Bishops, were only to judg of the fitness of the Person whom they had chosen, and to ordain him as they saw cause. So that to speak in mo∣dern terms, The right of presentation re∣mained with the People, and of Collation with the Bishops.
But a Change was now growing in the Church in one particular, in which the In∣terest that the People had in Elections did in a great measure depend; which was, that none served in any Church, but those who were baptized and educated in it; so that those who were ordained in one Church, could not leave it to go to another. But now when Wealth and Prosperity began to shine upon the Church, some Presbyters were willing to remove from the Churches in which they were Ordained, it is likely to great Towns, where they might hope to become Bishops. The Council of ArlesCan. 2. & 21. condemned this, and appointed all Per∣sons to continue in those places where they were first ordained. And they took care afterwards to prevent their going, to seek perhaps, for other places.Can. Laod. c. 41, 42. For they might not go out of their Parish, i. e. Dio∣cess, without the Bishop's Command, and his Letters. This is put harder by a Decree of the Council of AncyraAnc. c. 18., in case any was made a Bishop, and yet not received by the Parish to which he was named, (some sudden Faction being raised against him after his Election); if he went violent∣ly to intrude himself into other Parishes, he was to be put from the Communion: But such were to continue among the Presbyters where they were before. To these Abuses, the Council of Nice made this provision,Can. 15. That whereas an evil custom (of making Translations) was brought into some parts, that was contrary to the Canon, and occasioned great
Tumults and Seditions, they therefore abolish it, and decree, That no Bishop, Presbyter, or Dea∣con, should be removed from City to City. If any did otherwise, every such Translation was to be annulled, and the Person was to be restored to the Church, in which he was ordained Bishop or Presbyter. And by the next CanonCan. 16. they decreed, That such Presbyters and Deacons as left their own Church, should not be received in any other Church, but be obliged to return to their own Parishes; and all were required to deny them the Communion if they did it not. And if any Bishop did take the Clerk of another Bishop, without his consent, and ordained him, the Or∣dination is declared null and void. Thus all the Clergy were accounted a Property be∣longing to the Church, and without a Ma∣numission from the Bishop, no other Bishop could employ them. The Bishop was the Head of the Family of the Clergy, and it was left to him to declare them foris Fami∣lias, in imitation of the Right of Parents by the Roman Law, all the Clergy being of the nature of Adopted Children; which might give the rise to the custom of calling Bishops Fathers. And this was the state of Elections at the time of the Council of Nice. In the next place I shall give an account of the Provisions that were made for the Clergy. In the beginning of the Christi∣an Religion, there was a wonderful fervor in the minds of such as were converted, so that many sold their Possessions. Whether they did this because they intended to go themselves and serve in the Ministry of the
Gospel, and so disposed of the Lands that were to be no more useful to them, or because they knew that Judea was to be speedily over-run by the Romans, accord∣ing to our Saviour's Prophesy; or out of the great fervour of their Zeal, needs not be determined. It is certain, this was not enjoined by the Apostles as any way neces∣sary by the Rules of the Gospel: For on the contrary, they gave Rules to Rich Men how to use their Wealth, and to bestow it charitably; and no where commanded them to sell their Estates, and distribute the price of them among the Poor, but ad∣vised them, that on the first1 Cor. 16.2. day of the Week, every one should lay by him in store, as God had prospered him, in order to the relief of the Poor at Jerusalem, with∣out fixing any determinate measure or pro∣portion. St. Paul also asserts1 Cor. 9. Chap. the right of maintenance, to those that ministred to them in Spiritual Things, as due by a natu∣ral Equity; but sets no rate on them. Yet it is not to be doubted, but that in the first Fervors of Christianity, there were large Offerings made, sufficient for the Occasi∣ons that called for them. ForLuc. Peregrinus Lucian takes notice of the great readiness of the Christians to relieve any that came among them, especially such as suffered for the Faith. AndAdvl Heres. l. 4. . 7. c. 34. Ireneus writes, That where∣as the Jews were commanded to give Tythes, Christians divided all that they had among the Poor; and whereas the other were under bondage, they who were set at
their liberty, did not give less than the Jews did, but in imitation of her that gave all her substance to the Poor, did convert all they had to religious uses. Besides private Charities, there was a common Stock that was committed to the Bishop's Care, as2 Apol. Justin Martyr informs us. He says, Such as were wealthy, did (as they pleased, every one freely) bring in what they thought fit, which was gathered together, and put into the hands of the Pre∣sident, (i. e. the Bishop) who out of it re∣lieved Orphans, Widows, sick Persons, Prisoners, Strangers, and all such as were in want. CorneliusAp. Eus. l. 6. c. 43. writes, that in his Time there were at Rome 1500 Widows and afflicted People, who were supplied by the Grace and bounty of God, that is, by Charity: So great were the numbers of the Poor, and so large were the charitable Ob∣lations of the Rich. And from hence we may gather what were the numbers of the Christians then at Rome. AndEp. 34. & 60. Cyprian tells us of the manner of dividing these Ob∣lations, was according to the Roman Custom of distributing the Bounty of a Patron in a Basket, or Sportula, among those that were his Clients or Retainers. So they had at Carthage a monthly Dividend, in which all the Ranks of the Clergy had their share: and the ordering of this Distribution was at the Bishop's Discretion. This Cyprian urges as a reason, that Clergy-men ought not to involve themselves in secular Affairs, since as the Levites had the Tythes under
the old Law, that so being compleatly pro∣vided for, they might be under no distra∣ction, whereby they should be obliged ei∣ther to meddle in, or to think of secular Affairs. Instead thereof, says he, Such as are once by any Clerical Ordination promoted in the Church of God, ought not to be called a∣way by anything from the Divine Ministry, nor be involved in worldly Troubles and Affairs: but being admitted to the honour of the Bre∣thren, that were supplyed by the Sportula, which they received as a sort of Tythe of the Fruits of the Earth, they should not withdraw from the Altar and Sacrifices, (that is, the Communion Table, and other Divine Of∣fices) and should be day and night employed in heavenly and spiritual Matters. And the Barbarians near Numidia, having taken many Captives, the sameEp. 60. Father writ to the Bishops in order to the redeem∣ing them, and sent a Collection of 100000 Sesterces, which is about 800 pound: Much of it was collected upon that occasion, both from the Clergy and People, and some part of it, was out of his own proportion. The same Father takes notice of an abuse that was growing in his Time, and proved afterwards one of the greatest Mischiefs of the Church; which was, That Bishops en∣gaged themselves in secular Affairs. The occasion of it was, That in many Places the Christians were so few, and so poor, that the Clergy could not be maintained by them; so that they were forced to work for themselves, as St. Paul and some of his
Companions had done. And they being generally both the most knowing, and best esteemed of the Church, some put their Estates in their Hands to be governed by them: So that they were in a manner their Stewards. This engaged them in a great deal of Business, which made them oft leave their Flocks to look after these Affairs, and drew them into another inconvenience of lending Mony at high rates. Of all which CyprianSer. de Lapsis. complains heavily, and setting out the Sins of the Church, that had provoked God to visit them with that per∣secution, A long Peace, as he says, having corrupted that Heavenly Discipline which they had received from God; he reckons this a main one, Many Bishops who ought to be the Examples and Encouragers of others, having despised the Divine Stewardship, became the Dispensers of Secular Things; and forsaking their Chairs, and deserting their People, they travelled up and down through other Provinces, looking after Markets for their gainful Traf∣fick, and did not relieve their Brethren in the Church that were pining with hunger, but stu∣died to have Mony in great abundance, and to possess themselves of Lands by Snares and Frauds, and to swell up the profit of their Mo∣ny by a Multiplication of Ʋsury. Yet not∣withstanding this severe Reprehension of Cyprian's, that ill custom was not laid down. For we find Censures passed upon it in the Councils that were held in the beginning of the 4th Century. By18 Can, Eib. one of these, Bi∣shops, Presbyters, and Deacons, are re∣quired
not to leave the places of their abode for Traffick's sake, nor to run up and down to seek out the best Markets. But if it was necessary to do it, that thereby they might gain their Living, they might send their Sons, Servants, or Friends on such Occa∣sions: And if they drove a Trade, it was to be confined within the Province where they lived. By4 Can. Laod. . another Canon they condemned Clergy-men that dealt in Usu∣ry, particularly a sort of Usury expressed by a word that signifies the half of the Stock, which is 50 per cent. And17 Can. Nic. by the 17th Canon of the Council of Nice, Clergy-men are appointed to be deposed who took Usury: Of which several sorts are reckoned up, among which that named in the Canon of Laodicea is also mentioned. In all this time none writ to set any Rule for the Charities or Offerings of the Peo∣ple. He that came nearest it wasHom i. in Num. Ori∣gen, who treating of the Law among the Jews, to bring the First Fruits to the Priests, runs out in a long discourse concerning those Precepts that are still binding, and that those that are not so; and concludes that it is useful and decent to offer first Fruits to the Priests under the Gospel. And since Christ hath said, That the tything of Mint and Anise should not be left undone, and the Righteousness of his Disciples ought to exceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees, he from thence infers, That the first Fruits should be still offered. Now the proportion of the first Fruits, is gathered to be the six∣tieth
part, fromEzek. 45.13, 14.15. Ezekiel. For a Homer they were to bring the sixth part of an Ephah: and there were ten Epahs in a Homer. They were also to offer the hun∣dredth part of Liquors, such as Oil; and the two hundredth part of their young Cattel for the first Fruits; so it was set∣led in Ezekiel's Time; but by the first institution in the Law, no proportion was determined: But this of the first Fruits was carried no further than a private reasoning of that Writer, and it took not place among the Christians. In Rome, and it may be supposed in o∣ther great Cities, the Charities of the Peo∣ple were large. Prudentius describing Lau∣rence's Martyrdom, brings in the Heathens accusing Christians, that they used to sell their Lands, and bring in the prices of them. But how much of this is to go for Poetry is hard to determine. They charge them that they used, Offerre fundis vendi∣tis—Sestertiorum millia; and complain that, Addicta avorum praedia—Foedis sub auctioni∣bus—Successor exhaeres gemit—Sanctis egens parentibus—Et summa pietas creditur—Nu∣dare dulces liberos. But in the last Persecu∣tion, it was found that some had left Lands, or rather, Fields and Gardens, to the Church, which were upon that seized on and confiscated. AndEus. l. 10. c. 5. when Constantine tur∣ned Christian, he sent an Order to restore to the Churches all those Possessions which they formerly had, with the Gardens or Houses, or any thing else that belonged to them.
This was the State in which Constantine found things when he turned Christian. It was no wonder, if on his first Conversion he was carried by a great force of Zeal to do every thing, for the honour of that Reli∣gion, that he could think on. And the late Sufferings had raised the Credit and Repu∣tation of Church-men very high, and had filled the World both with tenderness and esteem for them. So that all the honour or advantage that could be added to the Ec∣clesiastical Functions was look'd on but as a just and suitable Reward for their labours. At first Constantine in the Edict he pub∣lished at Milan,Ibid. did only make it free and safe to all to profess that Religion, and or∣dered the Places in which they had met, and the Lands which belonged to them as a Bo∣dy, to be restored. But his Zeal did not stop here; for soon afterIbid. he sent another Edict to Anulinus the Proconsul of Affrick, by which he granted an Exemption to all the Clergy that were under Cecilianus, then Bishop of Carthage, from all Publick Em∣ployments and ServicesEus. l. 20. c. 7. For there were several Publick Offices, such as the Onus Cu∣riale, Some Services in the Court, and in the Army, and the Decuriones (somewhat like a Constable or Sheriff among us) in which the Subjects of the Empire were bound to serve, as they were called to them; So that by this the Clergy of that Town were freed from that trouble. But what was now granted as a special favour to the Clergy of Carthage, was seven Years after
extended to the whole Empire, in the Year 319.Cod. The∣od. de Ep. & Pres. l. 2. All Clergy-men being every where exempted from Publick Services. The Year after that the ill Effects of this Ex∣emption began to appear, for many to be preserved from those expensive and mean Employments were putting themselves in Orders, which was like to bring a weak∣ning on the Empire. So Constantine made ano∣ther Law,Ib. l. 3. That no Decurions, nor their Sons, nor rich Men, or such as were fit for Publick Services should be made Clerks: and this was so understood afterwards, that if such Persons had a desire to be ordained, they were to quit their Estates to others, who should serve the Publick in their stead. So St. AmbroseEp. ad Valentin. centra Simmach. says, That because the Clergy were exempted from these Services, they were made to renounce all that de∣scended upon them from their Parents, and all their own Possessions: of which none of them complained, tho' the Heathen Priests would have thought it hard if they had been put to purchase their Ministry, with the loss of all that belonged to them. But the next Year produced a LawGod. The∣od. l. 4. ut sup. that was the first legal Foundation of the Wealth of the Church: and tho' it was directed only to the People of Rome, yet it took place almost every where. By it it was left to every Man's liberty to leave by his last Will what he thought fit to the Church. By the Roman Law Fraternities were capa∣ble of enjoying Estates. So now the Chri∣stians were established in a Fraternity, and
are called in the Law, The most holy Coun∣cil of the Catholick and Venerable Faith. These were the Laws made in favour of the Church before the Council of Nice met; but there was one Rule begun by the Council of AncyraCan. 5. Anc., and established by the Coun∣cil of NiceCan. 12. Nice.: which tho' it was then well intended, yet as it was afterward managed, was the chief Engine of raising the Wealth of the Clergy, till the Opinion of Purga∣tory proved more effectual. The chief business of all the Meetings of Bishops from St. Cyprian's days, was to establish a severe and rigorous Discipline, by which those who had either denied the Faith in the Persecution, or lived scanda∣lously, were to be separated from the Com∣munion of the Church for many Years, and not to be restored to the Priviledges of Christians, but after a long course of Pe∣nitence; and in that there were several steps, through which they were to pass by degrees, before they could be again resto∣red to that state from which they had fal∣len. But the execution of this, without distinction, might have been fatal to some, and hurtful to many: therefore a Power was lodged in the Bishop by these Councils, that as he saw great signs of true and sincere sorrow, he might abate for that the length of the Penitence. They thought it more reasonable to lodg this with the Bishop, than with every Presbyter, as it is now done in the Church of Rome. But the Ef∣fect of this was, that such Sinners as were
Rich gave much Alms, and were very li∣beral to the Church. And at first, some good Bishops might be really wrought on by this so far, as to conclude that Repen∣tance was signal which produced such Ef∣fects; but afterwards it brought in a base Merchandise into the House of God. And so far have I considered the state of the Elections and Provisions of the Clergy in the first Interval. I have cited nothing out of the Canons or Constitutions that are called Apostolical: for as the latter is ac∣knowledged a Work of the Fifth, so I cannot look on the former as ancienter than the Fourth Century; and therefore I have quoted no Authorities out of them, tho' there are in them many Rules condemning the secular Employments of Clergy-men, and the removal of Bishops, or other Church-men, from City to City; with se∣veral other particulars that will come in afterwards, and shall be mentioned in the next Interval, to which I am now advanced.
CHAP. II. Of the Progress of these Things to the Time of the Council of Chalcedon. NOw we enter on a new Scene, where∣in we shall find the Church cherished by the favour and protection of the Empe∣rors, and the bounty and affections of the People. But at the same time we shall ob∣serve the Corruptions which followed this great encrease of Wealth and Authority, wherein tho' the better and sounder part that endeavoured to bear them down, did always prevail in Publick Synods to procure Condemnations of every Abuse, as soon as it did appear; yet those that could not re∣sist the Credit and Authority of the rest in Publick Assemblies, went on too confident∣ly in their ill Practises: and a secular Spi∣rit began to spread mightily among many of the Clergy. They affected greatness and Dominion, followed much the Court, and neglected their Dioceses; and instead of carrying on the Conversion of the World to the Chri∣stian Faith, engaged in Quarrels and Facti∣ons, and in violent Disputes concerning the Mysteries of Religion, which proved to be one of the mightiest Engines of Hell against the growth and purity of this Holy
Faith. But I shall confine my Discourse to the two Points I have undertaken to ex∣plain. As for the Elections, the former Cu∣stom was still continued, that the Bishops were first nominated, or (as the phrase grew common in this Age) desired by the People and Clergie. I shall not enlarge on all Par∣ticulars that occur in this interval, but shall only name so many, as will clearly shew what were the established Rules and Pra∣ctises in it: and shall begin with Alexan∣dria, because the first Vacancy fell to be in that See; Athanasius being chosen soon af∣ter the conclusion of the Council of Nice. It is clear that St. Jerom writ loosely, when he said, the custom of Alexandria was, that in that Town the Presbyters did chuse their Bishop. We shall find the contrary to be very plain; for the Bishops of Egypt, in an Encyclick Letter, which they wrote up∣on Athanasius's Ordination, declareIn Apol. 2. Athanas., That the whole Multitude and People of the Catho∣lick Church met, and with one Soul and Body desired that he might be made their Bishop, and continued in their earnestness for it many days and nights. Sozomen doth indeed sayL. 2.17., that A∣thanasius was designed by Alexander to be his Successor; and that when Athanasius was intending to fly away, Alexander's persua∣sions prevailed on him to accept the Bi∣shoprick; but this was a Story framed long after, so that the Historian was deceived by it: for the Bishops that ordained him, do expresly say, it was after Alexander's
Death, and ascribe his Election wholly to the earnestness of the People in desiring him. It is very probable that what Alex∣ander had observed of his acting the Bishop in a mock Baptism, when he was a Boy, might have led him to look on that as an Omen of his being to become afterwards a Bishop. And when he grew up, and ex∣pressed so much zeal for the Faith, he might perhaps have recommended him to be his Successor. Yet if that had been publickly done, it is likely the Bishops in their Vin∣dication of his Ordination would have ta∣ken notice of it. And the words of Apol∣linaris, that are cited by the Historian, a∣mount to no more than this: for the deliver∣ing of the Bishoprick into his hands, im∣ports nothing but a phrase of Speech, of his making way for him by Death. Fif∣teen Years after that he was turned out, and Gregory put in his place without the choice of the People, being also a Stranger at Alexandria, and ordained to be their Bi∣shop at Antioch, and brought thither with a Guard of Souldiers to assist and establish him. The right of the Peoples Electing was upon that occasion asserted, both by Athanasius & Pope JuliusEp. ad Orthod.; the former say∣ing that Gregory's Election was not accord∣ing to the Ecclesiastical Canons, and the words of St. Paul, by which it ought to have been made, and the People and Clergy that desired him being present. And upon that other, saysEp. ad Solitar., That in this particular Constantius endeavoured to change the Or∣der
that our Lord had appointed by his Apostles, and the Customs of the Church, and to bring in a new way of making Bi∣shops, sending them from a remote place to a People that were unwilling to receive them, with Threatnings and Letters to the Judges. And Julius in his Letters to the Bishops of Egypt, argues against the validi∣ty of that ElectionI Apol. 2. Athan., since Gregory was a stranger to Alexandria, not baptized there, nor known to the Multitudes, and neither desired by the Presbyters, the Bishops, nor the People. He also exepts to his being Or∣dained elsewhere, and says, That the Bi∣shops of the Province ought to have or∣dained him in the Church where he was to serve, and at the Altar, and that he ought to have been one of the Clergy of that City. So that Nazianzen, upon a very good Au∣thority, saidOrat. 21. de Athan., That Athanasius was cho∣sen by the Suffrages of the whole People. When Athanasius died, we see the new method of Election plainly describedTheod. l. 4. c. 20.; for as Athanasius had recommeded Peter to be his Successor, when he died; So all the Clergie (not only the Presbyters) and those who were in the Magistracy, and in Dignities, elected him, and the whole People applauded it. For now the Government of the City being in the hands of Christians, those in Authority with the Clergy made the choice, the Rabble of the People only testifying their approbation. This way of Election was not a privi∣ledge peculiar to Alexandria; we have two
great Instances that shew that Constantine did not interpose in Elections. The one was in Nicomedia, where Eusebius being turned out by the Order of the Council of Nice, as well as Theognis Bishop of Nice; Constantine, writingTheod. l. 1. c. 20. to those of Nicomedia concerning their chusing a new Bishop, says, That was in their Power, and depended on their Judgment. And near the end of his Letter he says, That it was in their Power to raise that joy in him, which he had when he found pure, Or∣thodox, and well-tempered Bishops. And when Eustachius was turned out of Antioch, upon the false suggestions of the Arrian Party, Eusebius of Cesarea was chosen to be put in his room; upon which an Instrument, or Decree of Election was made: but he refu∣sing to accept of it, Constantine writ to them.Eus. de vit. Const. l, 3. In which he takes notice that their Custom was to use great care, prudence and diligence in the seeking out such a Bishop as was fit for them. And in another LetterIb. c. 62. to the Bishops that were then at Antioch, he recommends two Persons to them, Euphroni∣us and Georgius; but desires, that when they proposed these or any others to be chosen, the Election should be made according to the Rule of the Church, and the Tradi∣tion of the Apostles. This is but a re∣commendation; two are offered, but leave is given to the Bishops to put more in the List; and a charge is added to manage the Election according to custom. It was no wonder that all complied with such a re∣commendation, and chose him that was first
named. But it is visible that the Emperor left them to their liberty. Great Confusions followed in the Reign of Constantius, by reason of the Arrian Heresy, many of the Orthodox Bishops being turned out, and others put in their rooms, by the Emperor's Authority; whom among other things, Hilary accuses for this, that he gave Bishopricks to those of his Party: And writing against Auxentius, addresses himself thus to these Bishops pla∣ced by the CourtLib. 1. in Const.; O ye Bishops, I pray you, what Suffrages did the Apostles make use of? did they receive their Dignity from the Palace? And he runs out more copiously on those Court Bishops, in his Exposition of the first Psalm; He says, The ambition of Secu∣lar Honours had corrupted them, and that they were polluted by the pestiferous contagion of those Affairs in which they were conversant. When that Storm was over, and the short, but terrible Cloud raised by Julian, was dissipated, then the ancient Method of E∣lections was again continued. But two things occasioned great Contentions in them; The one was, the Wealth and Dig∣nity of some Sees; the other was, the Heats that had been raised by the Arrian Heresy, by which Peoples minds were embittered one against another. Of this we find the most copious ac∣count in Nazianzen's Works. Among his Epistles, there is one that was written by his Father to the Church of CesareaEp. 22.; He addresses himself in it, both to the Clergy
and Monks, to those in the Magistracy and Council; and lastly, to the whole People: in which he earnestly recommends Basil to them. But concludes, If this did not please them, and if this matter were judged in their Companies or Brotherhoods, and if they can∣vassed about it among their Kindred, so that a tumultuary hand did over-rule that which was more exact, they might do as they pleased, he should be quiet. And the Son, inOrat. 19 his Oration upon the memory of his Father, speaks of the Seditions that had been at Cesarea, which he imputes partly to the temper of the People, partly to their fervor in the Faith, and partly to the glory of the Chair. He tells, that in one Election they did chuse one that was indeed a vertuous Man, but not yet bap∣tized, and not without violence they forced the Bishops that met on that occasion to baptize him first, and then to Ordain him. He wishes that Elections were left, if not only, yet chiefly to the Clergie, and to the better and purer part of the People, whom he calls the Nazarites, and not to the richer or more pow∣erful, or to the popular Torrent. And in his following Oration, which is on the memory of St. Basil,Orat. 20 he laments that many were made Bishops on a sudden, without passing through previous Degrees, contra∣ry to the custom of all other Professions or Arts. So that he was afraid lest the Ho∣liest of all Orders should become the most ridi∣culous, while Bishopricks were not attained by Vertue but Wickedness; and not the wor∣thiest,
but the mightiest were advanced to those Seats. And thus things stood at the meeting of the second general Council, which was almost in the middle of this Interval. But before I look into what was done there, I shall ob∣serve the progress of the Laws both Civil and Ecclesiastical, made concerning these Heads of which I now treat. The Year after the Council of Nice, Con∣stantine madeCod. Theod. de Ep. & Pres. Tit. 2. l. 6. a Law, directed to Abla∣vius, to restrain the great numbers of those who entred into Orders; and that none should be ordained, but in the room of those that died; and that Men of great Estates, or nobly born, should not be put in Orders. The Reason given, is, because it was fitting that those who were wealthy, should serve the Necessities of the State; and that the Poor should be maintained by the Wealth of the Church. Constantine did also appoint aTheod. l. 4 c. 4. proportion of Corn to be given to every Church for the relief of the Clergy: And this was continued till Julian's Time, but he took it away; yet Jovian restored it. But at first there being a Famine in the Empire, he ordered only the third part of that Allowance to be given them; but pro∣mised that when the Famine was over, he would do as Constantine had done. These were the Laws that Constantine made. His Son Constantius, besides the Arrian Heresy with which he was infected, was a superstitious weak Man; of whom Mar∣celline makes this Observation, not more
sharp upon him, than honourable to the Faith he professed: that he confounded the Chri∣stian Religion, which was plain and simple, with his doting Superstition. He wearied out the Bishops, and undid all that kept the pub∣lick Stage Waggons, by the many Councils that were held during his Reign. The Laws he made do also shew, that his Notions concerning Church-men were all wrong, and taken up on false grounds. By a Law made in the sixthCod. Theod. de Ep. & Pres. Tit. 2. l. 8. Year of his Reign, he exempted the Clergy from all new and extraordinary Tributes, (so that they were only subject to the common Cen∣sus) and from being obliged to lodg any of the Court or Army; and exempted such Clergy-men who exercised Merchandize meerly that they might live by it, from the paying of Custom, which is expressed by gran∣ting them an Immunity. And three Years after this,L. 10. he gave them a larger Immu∣nity, both for themselves, their Wives and Children, and that not only from new Taxes and Exactions, but from the com∣mon Tax or Census. This gave great en∣couragement to a Disorder, that all good Church-Men complained severely of; par∣ticularly St. Jerome, who in many of his Epistles, inveighs against those Trading Clergy-men: And therefore in his Advices to Nepotian, he says, Shun those Trafficking Clerks as you would do the Plague, who from mean Men grow Noble, and from being Poor, become Rich. Yet the Fathers that met at Arimini, liked these Exemptions so well,
that they petitioned Constantius to enlarge his former Favours. So a Year after that he made a LawL. 15. which exempted all that  traded in small Wares, called Copiatae: For the rest, he appoints a Matricula, or Re∣gister, to be in every Church, where their Names were to be entred; and such of them as traded, were to pay the ordinary and Fiscal Taxes. But the Year after, by another Law,L. 16. he exempted them from all personal Services. He did also hire ma∣ny Bishops to consent to what he did in Matters of ReligionLibellus precum Marcell. & Faust. by giving some Lands to their Churches. Valentinius, Gratian, and Valens, renew∣edL. 17. Constantine's Law; against the Or∣daining Rich Persons. It appeared then, that great Disorders had followed upon the the Liberty that Constantine gave to the Ro∣mans, to leave to the Church what they pleased by their last Wills; of which we have many particulars mentioned in Je∣rom's Epistles, the Clergy using all the basest and sordidest Arts possible to draw Lega∣cies from Rich Widows; therefore the Emperors sent an OrderAt. 370 l. 20. to Pope Da∣masus, which, as is mentioned in the Law, was read in the Churches, That Clergy-men might receive no Legacies from Wid∣dows and Orphans, and might not so much as go within their Houses. Of this Law, Jerome says,Ep. ad Nepotian. he does not complain, but of those Clergy-men that by their Miscar∣riages had made it necessary. Ammian Marcellin takes particular notice of this, in
that account which he gives of the Con∣tests that were in the Election of Damasus and Ʋrsinus, which both proves that Electi∣ons were then made by the People, and shew the Mischief that followed on the ex∣cessive Wealth of that Church, by which Men were so wrought on, that they did ve∣hemently, and out of all measure aspire to that Chair.Lib. 27. In the Church of Sicininus, where the Christians used to meet, he says, there were 137 Men killed on the place. This heat was chiefly raised on the Luciferian Scheme: For by the Petition which Mar∣cellinus and Faustinus sent to the Emperor, it appears that Ʋrsinus, who was Damasus's CompetitorLib. prec. Mar. & Faust. was one of their number: And that Damasus having complyed with the Arrians, they would not communicate with him. So that the Presbyters of their Party went apart and chose Ʋrsinus, when the rest chose Damasus, (the phrase of desiring is used by them of both, according to the custom of that Age); but Damasus upon that gathered a company of Carmen, and others of the Rabble, who brake in upon the other Party, and used them with great cruelty for three days together, killing ma∣ny of them: And some days after, he, hear∣ing that they had met together in Liberius's Church, gathered the Rabble again, and set fire to the Doors, and uncovered the Roof of the Church, and made so great a slaughter, that 160 of them were killed, not one of his Party being killed by them. Whether the Number set down by Marcel∣line
belongs to the first or second Slaughter; or if they both relate to the same Time, whether of the two were mistaken in the number, it is not material to know. But upon the whole Matter it is plain, this was the Effect of the diversity of their Opini∣ons, and of Damasus's Cruelty, and that it can signify nothing to the reproach of popular Elections. The Historian adds, That it was no wonder they strugled so for that Chair, since they were sure that if they were once possessed of it, they would be en∣riched by the Oblations of the Matrons, carried in Chariots, and curiously cloathed; that they lived high, and gave great Entertainments, so that their Feasts exceeded the Tables of Kings. And of them he adds this Censure, which shews his great Judgment, as well as their Corruption: They might have been indeed happy, if despising the greatness of the City they had lived as the other Country Bishops of Italy did, whose moderation in eating and drinking, with their great abstemiousness; the meanness of their cloathing, and the lowliness of their carriage, did recommend them both to the Eternal Being, and all his true Worshippers, as Men who were both holy and modest. And thus we see what let in the Confu∣sions that were in some Elections. It was partly the differences in Religion, and chiefly the Wealth and Dignity of Sees in the great Towns. An Instance of this ap∣peared at Milan, where upon the death of  Auxentius who was an Arrian, theTheod. l. 4. c. 6, 7. Em∣peror called the Bishops together, and de∣sired
them to chuse such a Bishop as might, both by his Life and Doctrine, instruct those whom he was to govern, and that he might see such a Person set up, to whom he that held the Empire, might chearfully submit himself, and receive his Reproofs as a heathful Medicine, since he himself was a Man and had many failings. The Sy∣nod upon this desired that he would name the Person. But he said, that was above him to undertake, and so he left it to them. Upon which the Bishops went to consult about it; and the Townsmen all gathered together, being much divided; some were for an Arrian, and some for an Orthodox Person. And Ambrose being the Go∣vernor, not yet baptized, going among them to prevent a Tumult, they all cried out, and wished, that he might be their Bi∣shop. So the Emperor made the Bishops both Baptize and Ordain him; tho' Pauli∣nus says, that he was first baptized, and then went through the Ecclesiastical De∣grees, and that on the eighth day he was ordained. Thus we see the Emperors de∣clined to meddle in these Elections, and left them still free. Let us next see the Rules that the Church made in these Matters. In the Council of Gangra,Cen.]] Gangr. c. 7, 8. we first meet with the Oeco∣nomi and Stewards of the Goods that be∣longed to the Church; which the Bishops, to avoid the envy and suspicion that might fall upon them, if they were entirely in their hands as they had been at first, did put under the care of some of the Presby∣ters,
who was to keep an account of them, and to distribute them by the Bishops Or∣der. The next Council that made Ecclesiasti∣cal  Canons, consisted of Arrians, who meeting at Antioch to Ordain Gregory, in the room of Athanasius, established some Rules which were afterwards esteemed, not so much for the Authority of those who made them, as because most of the Rules were found to be good: Yet when they were objected to Chrysostome, who being bred there understood the Authority of those Canons best, he rejected them as made by Arrians, and not at all binding. One of themC. 11. was against those, who being deposed by a Synod, should go and complain of it to the Emperor; they appoint such to be excommunicated, and decreed, That none should go to the Court without Letters from the Metropolitane and the other Bishops. This was designed to hin∣der Athanasius, or such as they turned out from complaining. By another Canon they decreed,C. 17. That if any Bishop that was out of Employment, should possess himself of any Se, tho' chosen by the whole Peo∣ple, if he did it without the consent of the Metropolitan and Synod, he should be turned out. This was to hinder Athanasius and the other ejected Bishops, from setling elsewhere in any vacant See. By another Canon they de∣creed,C. 18. That if any Bishop, being ordain∣ed and appointed to go to a See, should not go thither, he should be excommunicated.
This was to give Gregory a colour to go to Alexandria, since he was otherwise to fall under a Censure. And by the next Canon they decreed,C 19. That if a Bishop went not to the Parish for which he was ordained, so that it was not by his own Fault, but because the People would not receive him; or for some other Reason that flowed not from him, in that case he should not be cen∣sured, but might undertake any other Charge such as the Synod should enjoin. This was to save Gregory, in case the Alexan∣drians would not receive him. By anotherCar. 22. they forbid all translations of Bishops, either flowing from their own desires, the choice of the People, or the commands of a Synod. This was to make the ejected Bishops uncapable of being employed in any other Church. By anotherCan. 23. they forbid a Bishop to name his own Successor; which is very probable they designed, as a reflection upon Athanasius, whom his Pre∣decessor had recommended. By anotherCan. 24 they appoint that the Presbyters and Deacons shall know what are the proper Goods of the Bishop, and what belonged to the Church; that so the Bishop may at his death, leave what belongs to himself as he pleases, but may not dispose of the Goods of the Church. And by the last Canon, They appoint the Bishop to di∣spense the Goods of the Church with great caution, and the fear of God: that if he stood in need, he should take a share of them for his own necessary uses, and for the
relief of strangers. But if he, not conten∣ted with that, should convert the Goods of the Church to his own uses, and not ad∣minister the Revenue of the Church by the advice of the Presbyters and Deacons, but but should commit the care of it to his Brethren, Kindred, or Children, so that thereby the Church should suffer, he was to answer that to the Synod. Six Years after this, the Council of Sar∣dica met; and from their Canons we may guess what were the Abuses of the Arrians, as well as by the former we may judg of their Designs. The firstSardic. Can. 1. is against Bi∣shops  removing from one City to another, which they ascribe to Avarice or Ambition, since none removed from a greater to a meaner City; this relates to Eusebius of Ni∣comedia. By the second, theyCan. 2. reject that pretence for translations of their being desired by the City, since that was procured by Mony or Rewards. By the seventhCan. 7. they appoint, That no Bishop should go to the Emperor, but such he called by his Let∣ters. The Arrians had put it in the Me∣tropolitan's Power to grant a License to go to the Court, and by this means they sent those of their own Party, and barred others: Which this Council doth prevent, by forbidding all equally to go, unless they were sent for. By the ninth they appoint, That none should send aCan. 9. a Petition to the Emperor, without procuring the Me∣tropolitan's Letters, recommending it to those Bishops in whose Towns the Empe∣ror
happened to be at the time. A Bishop might send a Servant to them or to his other Friends, or come to Julius then Bishop of Rome; and having obtained his approbati∣on of it, might then go on: This was but a temporary provision and personal to Ju∣lius. By the tenthCan. 10. they appoint, That Bishops should pass through the degrees of Reader, Deacon, and Presbyter, that so Novices, and Men of whom they had no experience, might not be ordained. In the Preamble to it, they mention a Custom of some rich and ambitious Lawyers turning Church-men. The eleventhCan. 11. is, That no Bishop stay long out of his own Town, and Preach in the City of another, by which the other may be brought into contempt. And that therefore, unless he have great Occasions, he stay not above three weeks out of his Parish. The next shews us,Can. 12. That sometimes one Church had Lands be∣longing to it lying in the bounds of ano∣ther; and so provision is made for remove∣ing all Emulation among Bishops; that when a Bishop went to look after his Lands in another Parish, he should stay in the Country, and meet for worshipping God in the nearest place where the Assemblies were held, and go seldom to the City. The fif∣teenth is,Can. 15. against a Bishops ordaining any of the Clergy belonging to another Bi∣shop: And they conclude, renewing their former Order concerning Bishops going to Court, and appoint that the Bishops, through whose Towns the Road to the
Court (or Canalis) lay, when they found any Bishops travelling to the Court, except it were according to the former Provision, should not sign their Letters, (somewhat like a Pass-port) nor communicate with them. That same Year sat the first Council of  Carthage, where we find the same Order made that was in the other Councils,Can. 5. That no Bishop might ordain any of the Clergy (and they add, nor of the Laity) of another Parish without the Bishop's Letter. By another CanonCan. 6. they condemn all Church-mens medling in secular Matters, such as Stewardships, or the Government of Families; if they did otherwise they were to be deprived. And by another they appoint, That such as had been Stew∣ards or Tutors (i. e. Guardians) to Chil∣dren, should not be ordained till all their Accounts were cleared. So far we have seen what Provisions the Bishops made in their Synods. One thing is observable, that tho' the Arrians did begin that Custom of holding a Synod in a remote place, and there ordaining a Bishop for a vacant See; yet it came to be soon afterwards a common practice. For the Metropolitans, whose Power was much raised by the Council of Nice, used to Or∣dain in their own Towns; But then they observed this Method, The vacant Town made their Election, which they put in writing; this was called their Decree, by which they desired such a one to be their Bishop; and the Metropolitan and the
Synod met, and if they saw cause, appro∣ved of it, and ordained the Person so cho∣sen, and then sent him to the Town for which he was appointed, with Letters, cer∣tifying what they had done, and desiring them to receive him kindly. Of which there is a remarkable Instance in St. Basil's Epistles: He writes to the Citizens of Ni∣copolisEp. 194 thus; The Ecclesiastical Dispensa∣tions are given indeed by those that are en∣trusted with the care of them, but are confirmed by the People. So since the Bishop, whom he sent to them, was now ordained by other Bishops, that which remained was, that they should receive him affectionately. And towards the end, he says, You thought him worthy of this Trust, and we have consented to it. So in another Epistle to the Church of Neocesarea,Ep. 62. after he had condoled with them upon the death of their former Bi∣shop, he speaks of the choice of another, thus; It belongs to you to desire him, having first purged your mind of all Contention and Ambition; and then God is to design him. It may be gathered from hence, and from what was formerly quoted out of St. Cy∣prian, that the words of Ordination might be then the same (or near it) that they are still in the Greek Church: in which they nei∣ther ordain as the Latins did from the sixth Century downwards for some Ages, by a Prayer to God, nor as they have done these last 400 Years, by imperative and formal words: But the Form of the Greeks is de∣clarative, in these words; The Divine Grace,
that heals the things that are weak, and per∣fects the things that are imperfect, promotes this Reverend Priest to be a Bishop: Let us therefore pray, that the Grace ef the Holy Spi∣rit may come down on him: And then they all say, Kyrie Eleison. Thus they pretend only to judg concerning the Divine Voca∣tion. So that they challenge no other share in giving Orders, but the authoritative De∣claration of the Call or Judgement of God. These are the most remarkable things that occur to me, before the second Gene∣ral Council that met at Constantinople: In which a debate arising concerning Gregory Nazianzen's being Bishop of that See, he presently withdrew, and then it was taken into consideration who should succeed; and as the HistorianSozom. l. 7. c. 28. reports it, a List was brought to Theodosius, by the Bishops, of such as they thought fit for it: and Mele∣tius,  to gratify Diodorus Bishop of Tarsus, put in Nectarius's Name among them, and the Emperor pitched on him. But the Council finding that he was not yet baptiz'd, would have diverted the Emperor from it: Yet he continued resolute, so that Nectari∣us was first baptized, and then ordained. Yet there is reason to call all this in questi∣on; for another Historian says,Socr. l. 5. c. 8. he was vio∣lently seized on by the People, and so chosen. Or if any part of it were true, the Empe∣ror only recommended him to the Clergy and City: for in the Letter which that Council writ to Damasus, and the other
Bishops of the West, they let them know that they had ordained Nectarius in the presence of the Emperor, with an unani∣mous consent, all the Clergy and the whole Peo∣ple giving their Suffrages for him. They al∣so signify to them, That Flavian was made Bishop of Antioch by all the Bishops of that Province, and of the Eastern Diocess, the whole Church having chosen him with one con∣sent. So that it was now a setled and un∣contested practice, for the People and Clergy to chuse their Bishop, and to send the Decree to the Metropolitan; who thereupon, with the Advice of the Bishops of the Province, did confirm it, and or∣dain the Person so chosen; and so it con∣tinued to the time of the Council of Chal∣cedon. It is true, in Constantinople, where the Seat of the Empire was then fixed, it was natural for the Emperors to concern them∣selves more than ordinary in the Elections; yet upon Nectarius's death, when they went about the choice of a new Bishop, it was then understood that the People were to chuse:Pall. in vit. Chrys For many Presbyters that aspired to it, courted the People, falling down on their knees to beg their Suffrages: Others applyed to the Court, some offering Mony for it: Upon which, as Palladius says, the People being disturbed by these practices, besought the Emperor to provide a fit Bishop for them: and he, by Eutropius's suggestion, sent to Antioch to bring Chrysostom, secretly from thence, for fear of a Tumult. So∣crates
says,L. 6. c. 2. The Emperor sent for him by the common Suffrage both of the Clergy and People. Sozomen says,L. 8. c. 2 That the People and Clergy having chosen him, and the Empe∣ror having consented to it, some were sent to bring him thither. Theodoret says,L. 5. c. 27. The Emperor sent for him, and called a meeting of Bishops to ordain him. All these Diversities may be easily reconciled, thus; The People were to chuse their Bishop, and being di∣stracted by a croud of Pretenders, they re∣ferred it to the Emperor: Upon which Eu∣tropius proposed Chrysostom; and the Empe∣ror being satisfied with it, named him; and then the Clergy and People did choose him, and the Emperor assented to it, and sent for him. So that story is no small con∣firmation of the Rights of the People and Clergy in Elections. Soon after this, a great Abuse began to creep in the Ordination of Bishops. The Power of Metropolitans being now so ad∣vanced that they had a negative Voice in it, and they beginning to draw Ordinations to their own Churches, instead of going to the Town, when the new Bishop was to officiate, added another Abuse to that,Pall. in vit. Chrys. (k) which was, the exacting Mony of the Bishops, according to the Revenue of the Churches. So six Bishops of Asia having brought a complaint against Antonin Bishop of Ephe∣sus, because he had appropriated the Lands and Goods of the Church to his own uses, and had sold some of them, and had also sold the Ordinations of Bishops;
Chrysostom resolved to begin with enquiring into the last particular. So after some Wit∣nesses were brought who proved it, the Bishops that had been so ordained, confes∣sed it; but said, they took it for a Custom, and so had offended ignorantly, thinking that the Mony was to be paid as a Fee, for their being released from any tie, that might be on them by the Law to serve the Court. Antonin was dead by this time; but Chry∣sostom ordered them to recover from his Heirs what they had given, and likewise deprived them. And tho' they were suf∣fered to receive the Sacrament within the Altar, (i. e. the Chancel) yet they were to officiate no more. So severely did he cen∣sure that ill Custom, which has, notwith∣standing that, prevailed mightily since his Time. The same Author tells of him, that he used always to ordain after Fasting and Prayer, and a severe tryal of the Cler∣gy; whereas others did it amidst the ex∣cesses of eating and drinking, and the re∣ceiving of the Gifts. But now I shall give an account of the Laws made by the Emperors, during the  rest of this Interval. Valentinian, Theodo∣sius and Arcadius, madeCod. Theod. de Ep. & Fresb. Tit. 2. l. 27. a Law that no Widow, tho' she had been made a Dea∣conness, might give either Goods or Lands to the Church, either in her life-time, or by her Will at her death: and if she left any thing in trust for the Church, that is also annulled. But two months afterwards this Law was so far repealed,Ib. l. 28. that
such Widows might, during their Lives, give what they pleased out of their Perso∣nal Estate to the Church. This Law was made upon the Complaints that some brought against Clergy-men for devouring Widows Houses; but the bounty of other Persons who were supposed to act more on their own Judgment, was not restrained. Eight Years after this, it being represen∣ted that many left their Employment and turned Clergy-men, ArcadusIb. l. 32. made a  Law, That those who were to be ordained, should be chosen out of Monasteries, and not taken from another state of Life, that so none might be ordained but such as were well tried. For the Monastick State then was an Institution, in which such as did intend to lead exemplary lives, either betook them∣selves to labour, or were preparing their minds by an abstraction from the World, to be fitted for entring into Orders. They were obedient to the Bishop, and subject to the Clergy, tho' afterwards they assumed to themselves the name of Religious, ac∣counting other Clergy-men Secular, as in∣deed they became so too much. In the 407 Year of Christ, the Clergy of Affrick desired that the Church might have Advocats or Defensors. For clearing of this, it is necessary to know, that in the Roman Empire there were Defensors for all Countries and Cities: Of one of whom PlinyLib. 10 Ep. 111. makes mention. These were deputed by those Bodies to sollicit their Affairs. And now since the Church came to be
troubled with many Affairs, the Bishops were generally the Patrons of the Poor, and so used to interpose in their Matters. They had also Lands and Possessions, which put them sometimes to Suits of Law, be∣sides several Affairs that they might have at Court. So the fifth Council of CarthageCan. 9  ordered an Address to be made to the Emperors, That by reason of the great numbers of the Poor, who could not main∣tain their Rights against the Oppressions of the Rich, the Bishops might name Defen∣sors for the Poor: But it does not appear that any thing was done upon this. But nine Years after that, the African Bishops sent to the Emperors, to obtain leave of them to constitute Defensors for their Churches; and that whereas the Presbyters or the Bishops had before sollicited their own Causes, these Lawyers might hereaf∣ter undertake it. So six months after that,Cod. Theod. Ib. l. 38.  a Law was made, exempting the Clergy from looking after their Causes, and that their Defensors might afterwards do it in their Names, and have all the Priviledges that other Defensors had. So this was the be∣ginning of those Advocates of the Church, that were called afterwards in France the Vicedams; in England the Stewards, and in Scotland the Bishops Bailiffs, and came to ex∣ercise the secular Authority that was given to them in their Temporalities: Which per∣haps received one of its first encreases, from a Custom begun in this same Emperor's Reign, by Silvanus Bishop of Troas, who
Socr. l. 6 c. 37. being much troubled with the Suits that were brought before him, of which St. Au∣stin, and many other good Bishops com∣plained mightily; and observing that some Clergymen made advantages by their hear∣ing of those Causes that were referred to them, would never appoint Clergy-men to determine those Matters, but appointed some Lay-men, of approved Vertues, to set∣tle these Causes, and so took off many from a litigious prosecution of their Suits. On this, and other accounts, he was much esteemed. And it is not improbable, that the custom of having Lawyers for the Defensors of the Church, running over the World, the Bi∣shops might ease themselves of that great trouble of hearing Causes, by devolving the greatest part of it on them, whose pro∣fession made them more capable of judging in them. And thus came the Niceties of the Law, with all those subtilties of Eva∣sions practised in other Courts, to be a plague to the Church. Things went on be∣fore plainly and easily, but hereafter great Corruptions followed upon this, which was at first meant to deliver the Church from trouble: but to how great a mischief it has turned since that time, is too visible. Five Years after this, Honorius and Theo∣dosius made a LawCod. ib. l. 40. containing many Ex∣emptions  of the Church from the common Burdens of the Empire, as from all sordid Services, the mending of all High Ways, all new Taxes, the mending of Bridges; the Charge the Provinces were at when the
Court made a Progress, or Armies were marching, and from all Levies. (So Gotho∣fred understands the Praestatio auraria). But Justinian in hisCod. l. 1. Tit. 2. l. 7. Codex, sets down ano∣ther Law of theirs, in which they repealed that part of it, concerning the Exemption from mending High-Ways, and making of Bridges. So also Charles the Great, in his Capitulars, subjected the Lands of the Church to those ServicesCp. l. 4. cap. 43.: And this gave the rise to that Service that Church-Lands were liable to before the Conquest here in England, called (Trinoda Necessi∣tas) the three knotted Necessity; which was, the fortifying of Castles, the building of Bridges, and the Rate for an Expedition or an Aid for a War, which is in many Charters during the Saxons Time. Another Law was made by the same Em∣perors, that mightily raised the Episcopal Power, or rather corrupted it. Upon Theo∣philus Bishop of Alexandria's Death, there were great contentions in the choice of his Successor. Abundantius the General oppo∣sed Cyrill's Election; but he being Ne∣phew to the former Bishop, was preferred, and installed the third day after his death. The suddenness of this was doubtless oc∣casioned by some meeting of Bishops hap∣pening to be then at Alexandria. But he not satisfied with that great Dignity, aspired to the Secular Dominion there, as well as he had done to the Government of the Church. OneSocr. l. 7. c. 7. great Engine for advancing this, were the Monks that lived in the Desarts;
who by much solitude and great austerities, had brought their minds to a sort of savage∣ness, that made them apt to be soon stirred up, and brought down to raise Tumults in that City, which was much disposed to them. One great advantage they had, was, that the Physicians in Alexandria, called the Parabolani, were Clergy-Men: for these Monks, as in other things they followed the customs of the Essens, so particularly in this that they studied Physick. These therefore being both very numerous, and having great Interest in the City, being Men that visited out of Charity, the Prefect of Egypt endeavoured to regulate this Matter.  So heCod. ut sup. l. 42. procured a Law, by which it was provided, that there might not be above 500 of these; that they should be chosen by the several Companies, and confirmed by the Augustal Prefect: and that they should not come into Courts of Justice, (where they used to commit great Insolen∣cies) and might not go to see the publick Diversions (Spectacula), where they were also apt to raise Tumults. But eighteen months after that, Cyril procured a newIb. l. 43. Law, by which provision is made, that there might be 600 of these Parabolani, and they were to be chosen and governed by the Bishop. Upon which followed a scandalousSocr. l. 7. c. 13. Tumult against the Prefect, in which one of the Monks wounded him on the Head with a Stone; whom the Prefect put to death for it: But Cyrill buried him in the Church, and magnified his Courage to a
pitch that gave great scandal, for he called him a Martyr. And that famous Lady Hy∣patia, that read Philosophy publickly at Alexandria, being suspected to have stirred up the Prefect against Cyrill, was dragged out of her Chariot into a Church, where they first strip'd her naked, and then tore her Body to pieces, and burnt it to Ashes: which, as may be easily imagined, brought no small scandal, not only on those that did it, but on the whole Christian Religion. But now I turn to a better Scene, to the African Churches, where all Order and Discipline was best observed; and parti∣cularly at this time, the schism of the Do∣natists did so exercise them, and that Af∣fliction was so well improved by them, that it set them on establishing the best Rules for the Government of the Church that we find in any Age: So that the Code of their Ca∣nons, is truly one of the best Remains of Antiquity. For they saw well that the chief Advantages which Schismaticks took, were from the Disorders that were observed in the Persons, and conduct of Church-men, and so did reasonably conclude, that the reforming these would soon remove the Prejudices with which the Vulgar were pos∣sessed; since in those lies the strength of all Dividers from the Publick Constitutions. But before I reflect on their Canons, I shall consider the Method of Elections among them; which we find, in the end of the Fourth Century, did agree so exactly, ex∣cept in one Particular, to what it had been
in the middle of the Third in St. Cyprian's Time, that we may justly conclude, there was no considerable change made in all this Interval: Of which we have so clear an Instance in the Life of St. Austin, that there will be no need to enquire further into it. After his Conversion, he came and lived at Hippo; and one day Valerius,Possid. Vit. Aug. c. 4. Bishop of that City, made an Exhortation to the People concerning the providing and or∣daining of a Presbyter, there being then need of one. St. Austin was in the Croud, and the People laid hold on him, and, as was ordinary in such Cases, carried him up to the Bishop to be ordained; and all with one consent desired that it might be done, adding earnest entreaties and shoutings to their desires: Upon which he having a just sense of the weight of that Charge, sub∣mitted to it not without floods of Tears. But soon after ValeriusIb. c. 8. being then old, and afraid that some neigbouring Church should rob him of his excellent Presbyter, dealt with the Primate of the Province that he might come to Hippo, and ordain him to be Bishop there during his own Life. So he and some other Bishops coming thither, the old Bishop declared to them, and the Clergy of the Town, and to the whole People what it was that he desired: To which they all agreed, and earnestly prayed that it might be done: And so they per∣swaded St. Austin to submit to it, telling him that so it used to be done every where;
and that both in Provinces beyond the Me∣diteranean Sea, as well as in the African Churches. Yet St. Austin found after∣wards, that this was against the Decree of the Council of Nice, where it had been ap∣pointed that there should be but one Bishop in a City: which the Fathers of Nice intended chiefly against Schismatical Bi∣shops, such as the Novatians had been, and the Donatists were beginning to be; and perhaps to condemn the ordaining a Suc∣cessor to one yet alive, as had been done at Jerusalem, while Narcissus did still live: AndEus. l. 7. c. 26. Theotecnus had ordained Anatolius his Successor in Cesarea. It is certain St. Au∣stin applied it to his own case: So when he grew old, he called a solemn Assembly of the Clergy and People. There met to∣gether upon it, seven Presbyters, (it is like all that were in Town, and in Health) with the rest of the Clergy and People. St. Au∣stin  told themEp. 110. he was now old, and be∣cause he knew, that after the Death of some Bishops, their Churches used to be distracted by ambitious and contentious Men; therefore he resolved to prevent that. And whereas there had been lately some disorder at Milevi, because tho' the deceased Bishop had designed his Successor, yet he had not published it, (which he go∣ing thither had setled); he to obviate that, named Eradius to succeed himself; which all the People assented to. But he told them he would not have him to be ordained as he had been in his Predecessor's Time:
for they had been both ignorant of the Ca∣non of the Council of Nice; and therefore he made such as could write, subscribe the Decree of Election, and did then devolve a great part of the business of that claim upon him. This is a full and manifest proof of the custom of the Affrican Churches, to the last period of that pure and excellent Church, which soon after this was over∣run and destroyed by the Vandals. It seems they either did not know, or did not much regard the Canon of the Council of Antioch,Can. 24. Anti. against a Bishop's declaring his Successor. But there was good occasion afterwards to forbid this, lest thereby Bishops might have entailed their Sees to their Kinred or Friends. Having now considered the state of Ele∣ctions in the Affrican Churches, I shall next run over their Code,Cod. Can. Eccl. Affr. Can. 16. in which these remarkable Canons occur. In the 16th, they renew former Canons against Church∣mens medling in Secular Affairs, or gaining their livelyhood by any sordid or dishonou∣rable Employment: founding it (as Saint Cyprian hath done) on those words of St. Paul, No Man that warreth, entangleth himself with Secular Affairs. The 16thCan. 26. is against the selling any part of the Estate of the Church, without the Primat's consent, or the satisfying the neighbouring Bishops a∣bout the Necessities that forced them to it. The 32Can. 32. is, That Bishops, or other Clergy-men, being ordained Poor, (ac∣cording to the formerly mentioned Impe∣rial
Law) and yet should, during their Ministry, buy any Estate or Lands in their own names, they should be esteemed the Invaders of Sacred Things, if when ad∣monished of it, they did not restore those Lands to the Church. But if any thing was left particularly to them, or did fall to them by Inheritance, they might dispose of that as they pleased: if they did other∣wise, they were to be judged unworthy of the Ecclesiastical Honour, The 74 CanonCan. 74. discovers another Custom they had du∣ring Vacancies; which was, to send some neighbouring Bishop to carry on the Electi∣on, and to settle any Differences that might arise concerning it: He was called the Mediator. But to prevent the Abuses that might follow on this, they decreed, That no Intercessor should take a vacant Chair, tho' desired ever so earnestly by the People. And if within a Year a Bishop was not chosen, another Intercessor was to come in his room. They also renewed for∣mer Canons, against ordaining the Clergy of another Diocess without the Bishop's consent; and against going to Court with∣out leave. In the 4th Council of Carthage, some other remarkable things occur, (tho' the Authority of these Canons is not very evi∣dent). In the first,Con. Carth. 4. Can. 1. The Qualificati∣ons of a Bishop are enumerated; and it is provided, that he being found well quali∣fied, should be ordained with consent of the Clergy and Laity, by a meeting of the
Bishops of the Province, the Metropolitan being either present in Person, or signifying his consent. By the 15th CanonCan. 15. it is ordained, That a Bishop shall have plain Furniture, a mean Table and Diet, and acquire the Authority that is due to him by his Faith and Merit. By the 17thCan. 17 he is eased of the Care of the Widows, and Orphans, and Strangers, whom he is to commit to the inspection of the Arch-Pres∣byter or Arch-Deacon. By the 20th,Can. 20. He is not to be troubled with Domestick Affairs, (that is, the looking after the Re∣venues of the Church) that so he may be at leasure to follow nothing but his Study, his Devotion, and the preaching of the Word of God. By the 22,Can. 22. he was not to ordain any Clergy-man without con∣sent of his Clergy, and asking the appro∣bation and testimony of the Laity. By the 23Can. 23. he was to hear no Causes but in pre∣sence of his Clergy; and if otherwise, the the Sentence he gave was of no force. This relates to the Causes that were setled in these Courts, called the Bishops Audiences. And to take away all suspicion of Corrup∣tion, all private Hearings, with Judgments made thereupon, are condemned. By the 31,Can. 31. (q) The Bishop is to use the Goods of the Church, as Things lent him, and not as his Propriety. By the 32,Can. 32. If he gave, sold, or exchanged them, without the Con∣sent and Subscriptions of his Clergy, it was to be of no force. By the 27,Can. 27. They moderate the severity of the former Rule
against all Translations; and only condemn them, when they were made out of Ambi∣tion; and provided that the Decree of the Clergy and Laity desiring a Translation, should be approved of by the Synod. In these Councils, they were so jealous of the aspiring of some Cities, chiefly Rome, that they would not fix the Metro∣politan Jurisdiction to any See; for the Senior Bishop was Primate: and so the precedency of Bishops being governed by the date of their Ordinations, they de∣creed,Con. Mi∣lev. c. 13, 14. That when any was ordained, an Instrument should be made upon it, in which the Name of the Consuls for that Year should be marked: And hereafter be∣gan the exactness of Registers to be more carefully looked to than had been formerly. From the Affrican, go we next to the Italian Churches. P. Siricius writing to the  Bishop of Tarracon,Ep. 1. c. 10. concerning the time in which Lay-men, who were bapti∣zed in their old Age, should be detained in the previous degrees of the Clergy, ap∣points, that after two Years they might be made Readers; and after five Years they might be Deacons; and after some time they might be made Bishops or Presbyters, if they were pitched on by the choice of the Clergy and People. By which it appears that the People there did chuse Presbyters as well as Deacons. He also writEp. 3. c. 1. against making Men Bishops out of partial Affecti∣on. He speaks of it as a thing that was done by the Judgment of the People, and
of the Metropolitan. By Pope Innocent's Letters it appears, that in Spain, Secular Men got to be Bishops, without going through previous Degrees, against which he writesJunor. Ep. 2. c. 11. Ep. 4. c. 3, 5 Vide Zo∣sim Ep. 1. c. 1. Ep 9. with much vehemence. These Persons were, without question, chosen by the People, and promoted by their Interest among them: And these being Secular or Military Men, brought in with them that Temper and these Customs, which they had formerly contracted, into the Church. At P. Boniface's Election, there was a Schism, after a Vacancy of above seven Months; in which Eulalius and Boniface being chosen by two several Parties, and both ordained, Honorius the Emperor approved of Boni∣face; and being desired by him to make some Law against such Schisms for the fu∣ture, he made an Edict,Resc. Hon. ad Boni 2 Tom. Conc. p. 1583. declaring, That if thereafter two Bishops should be ordained by two different Factions, neither of them should have the Chair, but a new Man should be chosen out of the Clergy, by the consent of the whole Ʋniversity or Body. A complaint was also made to that Pope,Bon. Ep. 3. of Patroclus Bishop of Arles, that had ordained a Bishop for the Church of Lu∣teve, without a Petition from the Clergy and People; which shews how necessary that was then esteemed. Celestin complains, in his Letters to the Bishops of the Provinces of Vienna and NarbonCe. Ep. 2. c. 3. & 5. in France, that Men were promoted to be Bishops, without go∣ing through the other Degrees; and that some of the worst of the Laity were
made Bishops, which no doubt flowed from the Factions that were in the popular Ele∣ctions. Yet he doth not for that condemn them; but says, Let no Bishop be obtruded on those who are unwilling to receive him, but let the consent of the Clergy, the People, and the Order (i. e. the Magistrates) be requi∣red, that so he may be the more acceptable to them. He writ also to the Bishops of Apu∣lia and Calabria,Ep. 3. c. 2. against raising Lay∣men to be Bishops. And when Nestorius was deposed by the third General Council at Ephesus, he writEp. 14. to the Clergy and People of Constantinople, recommending Maximian to them: And in his Letter to the EmperorEp. 12. Theodosius the Second, he speaks of the Cities having made choice of Maximian to be their Bishop. In that Epi∣stle there is mention made of Lands left by Proba, a Lady of Quality, to the poor Clergy and Monasteries of Rome, which lay in Asia; so some Churches, that of Rome especially, had Lands lying very re∣mote.  The Council at RiezReg. c. 6 appoin∣ted that which was formerly observed in the Affrican Canons, that in the vacancy of a Bishoprick, the neighbouring Bishop should go thither as Visitor, and should take an account of the state of the Church, and administer it during the Vacancy: And for preventing all Ambition or Contention, no Clergy-man might go to a vacant Church without the Metropolitan's Letters. This is against those, who aspiring to Bishopricks, came to vacant Sees and got
themselves to be chosen, and then gave it out, that they were chosen by Violence. After this comes Pope Leo, in whose Time sate the Council of Chalcedon. His Opinion of this Matter is very clear. In the Epistle which he wrote to Rusticus, in answer to several Questions that he had sent to him; the first being concerning those Priests and Deacons that had pre∣tended they were ordained Bishops, but were not; He answers,Ep. 2. Resp. ad Quest. 1. It is not reaso∣nable to esteem those Bishops, who were not cho∣sen by the Clergy, nor desired by the People, nor ordained by the Bishops of the Province, with the Metropolitan's approbation. Here we have an enumeration of what was then thought necessary, to make an Ordination Canoni∣cal. And the same Pope, writing to the Bishop of Thessalonica, gives him this Rule;Ep. 12. c. 5. When there shall be occasion to treat of the choice of a Bishop, Let him be preferred, who is desired by the unanimous consent of the Clergy and People. If they happen to breaks in∣to Factions, the Metropolitan shall decide in favour of him who has most Merit, and is most earnestly desired, yet so as none be ordained for those that are unwilling to receive him, and do not desire him: lest a City, put under a Bishop that was not desired by it, may come to despise or hate him. And in his next Epistle, which is to the Metropolitan of Achaia,Ep. 13. c. 3. he ac∣cuses one that had ordained Bishops, con∣trary to the Rules of the Fathers, the Peo∣ple being unwilling, and opposing it: And says, The Metropolitans Power doth not extend so
far, that they might ordain a Bishop without the consent of the Clergy or People, but that they ought to ordain him that was chosen by the consent of the whole City. And writing to Bishops of the Province of Vienna in France,Ep. 10. c. 6. he laments the Violences that were used in some Elections, where a Military force over-ruled the freedom of Choice; there∣fore he vehemently obtests them, to hinder such things for the future, that so the Bi∣shops might be nominated peaceably. Let there be, says he, the subscription of the Cler∣gy, the Testimony of the honourable Persons, and the consent of the Order, (i. e. the Town Council) and of the People. There were about this time some odd and unusual Transactions at Constantinople; in which, no wonder if the Emperors as∣sumed a more than ordinary Authority. When Sisinnius died, there was a competi∣tion between Philippus and Proclus, and great Heats and Animosities were raised upon that account. But Theodosius the Second,Socr. l. 7. c. 29. would not suffer any of the Clergy of that City to be chosen, lest Contenti∣ons should arise through their aspirings. So he sent for Nestorius out of Antioch, as his Father had done for Chrysostom; tho' Cassian, that lived then, says, he was cho∣sen. Perhaps it was as in Chrysostom's case, that upon the Emperor's Nomination, all agreed to it. When Nestorius was deposed, Maximianus, as was mentioned before, was chosen regularly; and upon his death, the Emperor appointed, that for preventing of
Tumults, Proclus should be ordained, even before Maximinus was buried. He had been ordained Bishop of Cyzicum; so the Canon of the Council of Antioch was objected to him, for he did not go to his See. Those of Cyzicum having chosen another, they got him to be ordained before Proclus came to them, who had bin ordained at Constantinople by Sisinnius, he stretching in this his Patriar∣chical Power too far: And Proclus being a prudent and peaceable Man, would not make disturbance, but continued still at Constantinople, where he was much esteemed, and so was now advanced to that Chair. But upon this occasion Socrates,Ib. c. 36 to justify the Translation of a Bishop from one City to another, reckons up twelve Bishops that were so translated; and goes back near sixty Years to Gregory Nazianzen, to fetch In∣stances, which shews that it was very seldom done: Tho' in this particular P. CelestineIb. c. 40. confirmed it; or rather, gave his Opinion in his favours. And now I am arrived at the Council of Chalcedon; in which we will see what the sense of so great an Assembly was, of many Abuses that had then crept into the Church. By the second Canon,Can. 2. they condemn those that made any Ordinations for Mony; and so exposed to sale that Gift which could not be purchased for Mony. But not only do they condemn the giving Ordinations to the Sacred Functions for Mony, but the promo∣ting of an Advocate, Defensor, or an Accomptant for Mony. The Seller was to
be in danger of losing his Degree, and the Buyer was peremptorily to lose it. So that by this Canon, the sale of these secu∣lar Employments is also condemned. And tho' these were of no long standing, yet so early did Lawyers begin to purchase them, and some corrupt Bishops to sell them. By the third Canon,Can. 3. they condemn all Church-men that took Farms, or under∣took Secular Affairs, and so neglected the Divine Ministry, running up and down to the Houses of Secular Men, out of cove∣tousness undertaking the management of their Affairs. The fourth,Can. 4. takes notice of the great Corruptions of the Monastick State, and subjects the Monks entirely to the Bishops Jurisdiction. The fifthCan. 5. re∣news all former Canons against the Tran∣slations of Bishops, or other Clergy-men. The sixthCan 6. annulls all Ordinations, in which there was not a designation of a par∣ticular place joined with them. This was occasioned partly by the scandals that were given by some idle vagabond Clarks that had procured themselves to be put in Or∣ders; and partly by the Complaints that the Emperors made of the excessive num∣bers of those who were ordained; by which the Empire was weakned, so many being excused from the Publick Services. By the tenth,Can. 10. they provide against a new Abuse, of which I find no Instance in former Times, tho' too many in latter A∣ges, which is Pluralities; but they decreed that no Clergy-man might be at the same
time in the Catalogues of two Churches; that is, have a Dividend both in that where he was at first ordained, and in that to which, out of vain-glory, he had been tran∣slated, it being better than the other. In that case he was either to be restored to the Church where he was first ordained; or if he was already translated, he was to carry no Profits out of it after him: who so did otherwise, was to be degraded. By the 22 Canon,Can. 22▪ another Abuse is condemned, of robbing the Bishops Goods after his Death. It had been before often provided, that a Bishop should not enrich himself by the Goods of the Church, but yet he might dis∣pose of what was otherwise his own by In∣heritance or Legacies; tho' we have ob∣served, that the Emperors had taken care, by the Laws which they made, that they should not have much that way neither. But some Bishops, by the importunities of their Kindred, or other Motives, converted some of the Rents, or Goods of the Church, to their own uses: Upon that the Clergy, who thought that all they had did of right belong to them, seized on all that they found in their Houses when they died; which Cu∣stom was now condemned. This is the first beginning of the spoils of the Bishops, of which we shall give a larger account af∣terwards. By the 25 CanonCan. 25. they appoint, That Metropolitans should not delay the Ordina∣tions of Bishops to vacant Sees above three
months, unless it were on an extraordinary necessity; and that the Revenue of the vacant Church, (called the Widowed Church) should remain entire in the hands of the Steward of the Church. And this is as fully contrary to the Right of the Regale as any thing can be. But the change of the state of the Church, which came in the succeeding Ages, brought that after it, with many other far greater Mischiefs. By the 26Can. 26. they appoint, That whereas in some Churches the Bishops did, without a Steward, and by themselves, administer the Revenues of the Church; thereafter every Bishop should appoint one of the Clergy to be the Steward of their Revenue and Incomes, that so the Goods of the Church might not be dissipated, and there might no Reproach lie on the Holy Function, when all things were done before Witnesses. This was designed, both to prevent the Mischief that might be done by bad Bishops, and the Scandal that might fall on the Good. And so far have I run through the second Interval, in which, as several Abuses have appeared to rise, so as good Provisions as could be thought on were made, for the preventing them for the future; and parti∣cularly in the Matter of Elections; tho' there fell out great Disorders in many Places, yet instead of putting them down, the Re∣medies they thought on were, That the Town Councils, where they were Christi∣ans, should chuse, instead of the Rabble: That none should be made Bishops, till
they had passed through the previous De∣grees: That a Bishop should be sent to the vacant Church, and see the Election car∣ried on orderly. And, finally, that the Metropolitan should have a Negative Voice, that so he might stop the Ordination of those who were factiously elected. And perhaps that was also to avoid the Violences that had been put on Bishops when they met for an Election, that they ordained the Bishops no more upon the place where they were to serve, but did it in the Metro∣politan Church, to which the Decree of Ele∣ction was brought and was there laid up a∣mong their Records. For in a Contest that was managed before the Council of ChalcedonAct. 13. between the Bishops of Nicomedia and Nice, under which of them the See of Ba∣silinopolis was to be reckoned; the former, among other things, alleadgeth this; I of∣fer to shew the Decrees of those of Basilinopo∣lis, in which they have desired a Bishop; do you shew whether they ever desired the Bishops of Nice to give them one. It is true, Eusebius, Bishop of Ancyra, complainedAct. 16. much of the great Charge Bishops were at, in going to other places to be ordained; and said, that if they were not ordained in the City where they were chosen, it would break their Stocks. So it was ordained, that the Bishops of Con∣stantinople might ordain Metropolitans in the Asian, Pontick, and Thracian Dioceses; In this manner, The Decree was first to be made by the Clergy of the City, by the Proprietors of Lands, (the same that are
in other places called, the Honourable Per∣sons) and the Eminent Men; and then the Bishops of the Province were to approve this, and so to transmit it to the Bishop of Constantinople; and he was at his discre∣tion, either to call the Bishop to him and ordain him, or to give Authority to the Bishops of the Province to do it. There is also another Passage in the Journals of this Council, which shews the Method of Cano∣nical Ordinations.Act. 12. Bassianus and Ste∣phanus, that had been ordained by Men of several Parties, to the See of Ephesus, did plead their Titles; and Stephanus said for himself, That forty Bishops had ordained him, the Decree or Suffrage being made by the eminent Men, the select Council, the Clergy, and all the rest of the whole Town. So much may suffice to clear this Point; I am now to add somewhat concerning the Provisions of the Clergy. In this Interval, as the Emperors and Persons of Quality, were giving both Lands and movable Goods of great value to Churches; so the ordering of all these, as has been formerly observed, was left whol∣ly to the Bishop, who made the Dividend according to his discretion, and disposed of the Clergy as he saw cause; sometimes sending them to one place, and sometimes to another. But there was no proportion set off in those Divisions; only Stewards were appointed for keeping of Accompts, as has been already told. Yet some of the
Laity used to give particular Gifts, not only to Monasteries, but to particular Churches; over which the Presbyters that were setled in those Churches, had the in∣spection; and these began to withdraw themselves from the Bishop's Obedience, as well as the Monks did: which was con∣demned in the Council of Chalcedon,Can. 8. that speaks of the Clerks of Hospitals and Monasteries, and appoints them to be sub∣ject to their Bishop. The Motives upon which People were induced to endow Churches, were not such as were afterwards invented, when the Opinion of Purgatory was set up. What they were, may be gathered from those old formulae published by Sirmundus, which were made according to the Roman Law. The Preamble of the first of these is,Formu∣lae Sirmun. For. 1. That they made that Gift, in consideration of the end of the World, which by certain Signs seemed then to approach, (this was perhaps about the Time that the Barbari∣ans made their Invasions into the Roman Empire) and of the heinousness of their Sins, and the goodness of God, that had said, Give Alms, and all things are clean with you. The second hath this Pream∣ble,Form. 2. That being confident of an eter∣nal Reward for what they gave to the Churches of the Saints, or the Poors Stock, they gave, &c. In another, which seems much later,Form. 35, & 36. the Motive is almost the same, only with this addition, that both out of reverence to God, and to such a
place, where such a Saints Body was laid, and for Remedy of their own Soul, they gave, &c. There was no Rule set during this In∣terval for the proportion of their Charity. ChrysostomHom. 35 in Gen. treating of Abraham's giv∣ing the Tithes to Melchisedeck, takes occa∣sion from that, to exhort his Hearers to Charity; but doth not speak of a tenth part, but only of offering the First Fruits, which it is probable he took from Ori∣gen. And elsewhere speaking of every ones private Charity,Hom. 43 in 1 Ep. ad Cor. c. 16. he adviseth a tenth part, that Christians may at least give as much as the Jews did. But he adds, that in this he did not pretend to make a Law, or to restrain them that they should give no more. St. Jerome says,Com. in 3 Malach. That Christians are not only bound to give Tithes, and First Fruits, but to sell all that they have, (it is to be supposed, that he meant in extra∣ordinary Cases); and if they will not do that, at least, they ought to follow the beginnings of the Jews, to give the Poor their share; and to the Priests and Levites the Honour that is due to them. St. Austin,In Psal. 146. exhorted all earnestly to Charity, and to set off a consi∣derable share of their Walth for the Poor. He says, The Tithe is too little; for the Righ∣teousness of the Christians should exceed the Jews; and yet he laments that many did not give the thousandth part in Charity. I insist not on the spurious Treatises that are a∣scribed to him. In the Apostolical Con∣stitutions,Lib. c. Constit. c. 25. which were a forgery of
this Age, Tithes, and First Fruits, are requi∣red to be given as necessary by the Command of God, and the Bishops are required not to devour these themselves, but to distribute them among Widows, Orphans, the Poor, and the Stran∣gers. And in another place,Lib. 8. Constit. c. 30. all are commanded to offer the First Fruits to the Bi∣shop for himself, and for the Priests and Dea∣cons, and the Tithes for the other Clergy, the Widows, the Virgins, and the Poor. This Work, tho' it is of no Authority, yet being, as all Forgeries are, accommodated to the Age in which it was made, shews, that all that was then designed for the share of the Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons, was the First Fruits. But whether the Oblations that were then made, amounted to that proportion which the First Fruits were ra∣ted at under the Jewish Law, is not certain by all that I can discover. And thus I have ended my Observations on this Interval, with which the Western Empire vanished, being over-run by the Barbarians, and cantoned into many King∣doms: And the Eastern Empire did also fall much short of its former greatness and splendor. In this Interval, the Clergy were maintained by the Oblations of the People, and so no wonder if they were chosen by them. For there being no compulsive Law obliging the People to make Oblations, it is not to be imagined how a Bishop could subsist that was not chose by them, or at least was not willingly received and submitted to: for there were but few Churches that had
Lands and Rich Endowments. Those in the populous and great Cities had them; but it is not to be imagined, that in poorer Towns they had any setled Revenues; or if they had, they were but small. I now advance to the Third Inter∣val.
CHAP. III. Of the Elections and Provisions of the Clergie in the Eastern Empire, till the sacking of Constantinople by the Turks. THe Church began now to put on ano∣ther Face, I cannot say a better; for ever after this great Disorders brake into it. Wealth and Ambition corrupted the Minds of Church-men. The Emperors did con∣tribute liberally to the raising of their Power and Riches; but that being done, they took the nomination of them into their own Hands, and then gave them either to such illiterate Monks as were much esteemed of for the strictness of their Lives, but were Tools for any Designs on which they set them; or to such of their Courtiers or Souldiers, that had merited best at their hands. And by these means were the Greek Churches brought to that pass, for Igno∣rance and Corruption, that it is no wonder they were given up by God to such terrible Calamities as were brought upon them, first by the Saracens, and then by the Othoman Family, of which I shall give some few Ob∣servations, still restraining my self to the Subject of my present Enquiry.
Dioscorus, Bishop of Alexandria, having been deposed by the Council of Chalcedon, the Noble-men of the CityLiberal. Tom. 2. Con. c. 14. chose Prote∣rius to be their Bishop. It seems that the Emperors expected, that, at least in the Patriarchal Sees, their assent should be de∣sired. For when that Council wrote to the Clergy of Alexandria, giving them notice of Dioscorus's Deposition, they charged them to look to the Concerns of the Church, as became those who were to give account of them, to him that should be ordained their Bishop by the Emperors approbation. But some Years after that,Evagr. l. 2. c. 8. the Eutychians raised a Tu∣mult against Proterius; and tho' he fled to a Church, they pursued him, and killed him in it, and dragged him about the Streets, with other barbarous Cruelties. Timothy, called Solofaciolus, was chosen in his room, both by the Clergy, the People, and all the Faithful there, as LeoP. Leo Ep. 139. writes. About that time the Eutychians raising likewise Tumults in Antioch, Zeno the Emperor, commanded, That the Election of the Bishop of that City should be made at Constantinople, about which he wrote to Pope Simplicius, excusing it, and promising it should not be brought into Precedent. The Pope answered,Simpl. Ep. 14. allowing it in those Circumstances; but it is like, fearing lest the Emperor might or∣der all the other Elections to the Patriar∣chal Sees, to be made in the same manner; he tells him, That he had laid up his Letter among the Records, as an assurance that it should not be done so any more. The Sedi∣tions
that were raised at Alexandria,Evagr. l. 3. c. 12. made those of the City fear, that the Em∣peror might take the right of chusing from them: So one John was sent to Court a∣bout it; and it seems the Emperor appre∣hended that he intended to get himself to be chosen: of which he purged himself by Oath, and obtained a Law, That he should be the Bishop there, whom the Clergy and Com∣munity (i. e. the Magistracy, for that is the meaning of the ) should chuse. But he persidiously broke his Faith, and got himself to be chosen, and for that was turned out. After this time, the different Opinions in Religion raised such Heats, especially in the great Towns, that the strength of the Empire was not a little broken by them; especially that being a time when the inroads of the Barbarians, and the desolations of the West, seemed to call upon them to moderate their Differences. Upon this the Emperors made some General Formuls for comprehending Men of all Perswasions. But both the Popes, and the other Bishops, opposed this much, and called it, A corrupting of the Faith, and the embasing it with Heretical Mixtures. Zeno, the Emperor, intending  to have a Bishop at Constantinople that should favour his Design; instead of suffering a free Election, he ordered the choice of the new Bishop to be made in this manner;Nicep. l. 16. c. 18. He laid a Paper on the Altar, and prayed that God would cause an Angel to write on it, the Name of him that should
be their Bishop: and he shut up the Church, and ordered Fasting and Prayers to be for forty days: at the end of which he resol∣ved to visit the Paper. But one Flavitas corrupted the Eunuch, that had the keep∣ing of the Door, to that Altar trusted to him, and so his Name was writ on the Pa∣per. Yet this came to be discovered by means of the Bankers that lent the Mony, which was given for promoting this Cheat; of which the Emperor, or some about him, had a share. But after this, Zeno left the Elections to the Bishops. Anastasius, be∣ing resolved to take away the Authority of the Council of Chalcedon, did turn out the Bishops of some of the Patriarchal Sees, and put in new ones by his own Authori∣ty; and so things continued in great confu∣sion in the East. There was some settlement made in Ju∣stinian's Time: For Agapetus coming to Constantinople, a Council was held there, in which Anthimus the former Patriarch was deposed, and Menas was chosen, both by the Emperor, and the whole Clergy and People; of which that Pope says vainly in his Letter, That he believes it was a great ad∣dition to his Dignity, that he was ordained by his Hands, he being the first Bishop whom that See had ordained in the East from the days of St. Peter. And now having arrived at the Age of Justinian, I shall bring the Laws which re∣late to my Subject, that were made by him and the former Eastern Emperors, under
the Readers view. MartianCod. Li. T. 2. l. 12. confirmed  all the Privileges that had been granted to the Churches, and annulled all Laws or Pragmaticks made against them, and ap∣pointed all the Salaries that were paied to them out of the Publick, to be paid with∣out diminution. And the next Year he made a Law,Ib. l. 13. by which he left it free  to all Persons, both Men and Women, by their last Will, or any other way, to give what they thought fit to the Church, or to any other pious use; and this might be done, either by a written or a nuncupative Will. This Law must be imputed to Pul∣chera's Interest, that was even to Supersti∣tion set on raising the Authority and Great∣ness of the Church. And it may be easily supposed it was so managed, that it very much raised the Churches Patrimony. But fifteen Years after this, the Emperor Leo made a LawIb. l. 14. against the Clergies selling  or lessening the Lands that belonged to the Church, by it he annulled all the Bargains they had made, unless they tended to the im∣proving the value of their Lands: and gave many Rules concerning the Mortga∣ges or Leases of Church Lands. After this followed many Laws to the same purpose, which are of so intricate a nature, that without going far into the Grounds of the Roman Law, it will not be easy to make the Reader comprehend the meaning of them. But the chief design of them all is obvious; which is, that the present Incumbents should not either alienate or let them to their
Friends, or enrich themselves by them, but should live on the Revenue, and improve it all they could, for the good of their Succes∣sors. And it is plain, that the Custom of taking Fines at the renewing of Leases, when the Mony so taken is not applyed to the use of the Church, is directly contrary to the meaning of those Laws, In which the Fra∣mers of Justinian's Code and Novels, seem to have used as much application, as in any one thing whatsoever. And indeed since new Improvements, as well as the old Rents, belong to the Church, I do not see how the practice of levying Fines, and convert∣ing  them to secular Uses, can be defended. The Emperor Leo made another LawCed. Li. T. 3 l. 31. against the giving or taking of Mony, in the Elections or Ordinations of Bishops, and appointed all that were found guilty of it, to be not only degraded, but to be de∣clared infamous; In which are these re∣markable words; So far ought a Bishop to be from any aspirings, that he must be sought out and forced; and being invited, or desired, he is to refuse and withdraw himself: for which he needs give no other reason, but that he ought to excuse himself, for he is unworthy of the Priesthood that is not unwillingly ordained. He  made also another Law, Ib. l. 39. That Bishops should not force any to come and make Obla∣tions, or vex, or excommunicate them, or deny them the Sacraments for it. Who so trans∣gressed this Law, was to be degraded and fined.
Justinian made a long Law, Ib. l. 42. soon af∣ter  his coming to the Empire, concerning the Election of Bishops, that upon a Va∣cancy, the Inhabitants of the City should make a Decree for three Persons, that so the most deserving of these might be or∣dained. But he does not in this Law de∣clare who shall chuse the Person out of the three. By the same Law, he appoints, that a Bishop may not, by his last Will, dispose of what he has acquired during his being a Bishop, either by the Gifts of o∣thers, or by any other way, excepting on∣ly what was left to him by his Father, his Uncles, or his Brothers. For it is suppo∣sed, that what others gave him, was in regard to his being a Bishop, and that what he acquired, was out of the Estate of the Church: and therefore the Stewards are charged to take a strict account of all that is left by them when they die, that so it may be appropriated to the Church; and they are required to take care, that whatever was over and above in the Rents of the Church, or of any pious Endowments, be∣yond the necessary Expence, should be ap∣plyed to some new Purchase, that so the Goods of the Church might be improved: And the giving of Mony in Ordinations, or for making Stewards or Defensors, is for∣bid: those that do otherwise, both Takers and Givers, are to be degraded. In order to the understanding of this, it is to be considered, That the Council of Chalcedon having condemned all Ordina∣tions
for Mony, an Evasion was soon found out; for the Mony was given after the Or∣dination, and it was pretended, that this was not contrary to that Decree. But Gennadius, Bishop of Constantinople, oppo∣sed this earnestly, and denounced an Ana∣themaJus Graeco Rom. l. 3.  on all that were guilty of it; and says, that whether the Mony were given be∣fore or after Ordination, both were con∣trary to the Mind of the Council. And in a Council of 73 Bishops he condemned it; as appears by the Letter which he writ con∣cerning it, that is in the Tomes of the CouncilsTom 4. Conc. p. 1025.. But in Justinian's Time, the use of Inthronisticks had crept in; of which we shall afterwards see what regulation he made. By another Law,Cod. Li. T. 1. l. 19. he restrained the Peoples Bounty to the Church, that had been encouraged by Marcian, and Enacted, That none might give above 50 Solid. to any pious use, without putting it in wri∣ting and on Record. The Clergy continued still subjected to the common Obligation of being Tutors (i. e. Guardians) to Children, as appears in the third Canon of Chalcedon. But Ju∣stinian exempted them from thisCod. Li. T. 3. l. 5.. He also, by many Laws, provided, that those Officers that belonged to the Court should not be ordained, unless they had lived fif∣teen Years in a Monastery. They were also to pay the fourth part of their Estate to the Fisk. He likewise restrained the number of the Clergy of the great Church of Constantinople: But it may be easily
judged how great the Revenue of it was, by the numbers which he allowed,Coll. 1. T. 3. Nov. 3 who were 60 Presbyters, 100 Deacons, 40 Dea∣connesses, 90 Subdeacons, 100 Readers, 25 Singers, 200 Ostiarii; tho' there was then a far greater number of them. But he commanded that none should be ordain∣ed in the room of any then in Office that died, till they fell down to this proportion. And it appears, that many other Chur∣ches were maintained out of the Revenues of that ChurchCap. 2.. After this came another LawCol. 1. T. 6. Nov. 6 con∣cerning the Ordination of Bishops, of their Qualifications, the Testimony that was to be given them, their Residence in their Dio∣cesses, and their not coming to Court; to∣gether with many excellent Rules for the In∣ferior Clergy. The Law that comes after it contains many Provisions concerning the Leases of Church Lands. By another Law, we see the vastness of the great Church of Constantinople,Nov. 43 that there were 1100 Bearers for Funerals belonging to it that were free from Taxes. By another Law,Nov. 57 c. 2. he provides, That if any built a Church, and endowed it, the Patriarch was not to be obliged to ordain any that the Patron pleased to name, but was only to do it, in case he judged them fit for it, that so the Holy Things of God might not be profaned. This proved an effe∣ctual Provision, as long as Ordinations were not given, but with a determination to a particular place. But after that these
were given more loosly, a great servitude has been brought upon the Church, by the Laws that require Bishops to give Institution up∣on the Patrons Presentations, by which so important a piece of their Pastoral Care is taken out of their hands, and can never be recovered, but by great exactness, in their conferring that holy Character. In another NovelNob. 123. he explains these things that were not determined in the first Laws which he made about Ordinations. The Clergy, and the chief Men of the Ci∣ty, were to make a Decree for three Per∣sons, having first made Oath, that they did it neither for Mony, nor the promise of it, nor for favour, nor upon any other ac∣count, but that they knew those whom they named to be Orthodox, of good Life, and Learned; to which several other Qualifi∣cations are added. If they knew not three that had those Qualifications, they might put two, or but one in their Decree; and out of these, the Metropolitan was to name the Person; and if within six months the City did not make a Decree, their right devolved to the Metropolitan. ButIb. c. 2. if any objected ought to the Person so chosen, his Ordination was to be delayed till that was discussed. And the Person to be ordain∣ed, might either before or after it, give his E∣state, or a part of it, to the Church. Then he taxesC. 3. the Sum to be payed for an Inthro∣nistick, that it should not be above twen∣ty pounds of Gold for a Patriarch, or as much less as the Custom was. Other Bi∣shops
were to pay to the Metropolitan, a 100 Solidi, and 300 to the Notaries and Clerks, if their Revenue was between ten and thirty pound of Gold; and if it was betwen ten and five, they were to pay 50 Solidi for Inthronisticks, and 200 for other Dues; and so proportionably the rate is set for poorer Bishopricks. Only those whose Revenue was short of two pound of Gold, were to pay nothing. A pound of Gold, is about thirty six pound English Mony. So by this it appears, that the Re∣venue of some Sees was not seventy two pound, and the highest rank of Bishopricks here taxed, is of those that were between 320 and 1080 pound Revenue; and yet out of that the Bishop had only his share, for both the rest of the Clergy, and the Poor, were to be maintained by it, besides the expence of the Fabrick. But in such Poor and ill-endowed Sees, the Oblations were no doubt larger; which we may reaso∣nably suppose still abated much, as the Sees grew to be well endowed. By that same Law,C. 4. he declares the Ordination of a Bishop, to be a Manumission from the Au∣thority his Father had over him. He also forbids any Clergy-men to exercise any Se∣cular EmploymentC. 6.; and forbids any Mony to be paid at OrdinationsC. 16., ex∣cept what was according to the Custom, gi∣ven to the Servants of the Ordainer, which should not exceed a Years Rent of the In∣come, with severe pains both on the Givers and Takers, and those that should go be∣tween
them. Another ProvisoCap 18. is, That those who built & endowed Churches, might name those who were to serve in them. But if they named unworthy Persons, then the Bishop might ordain whom he pleased, and judged well of. By another LawNob. 131. c. 5. he makes all Church-Lands liable to the mending of Ways, and the making and mending of Bridges, but exempts them from all sordid Services. In the same Law,C. 13. he also provides that a Bishop shall not dispose, by his last Will, of any thing that he acquired after his Ordi∣nation to any of his Kindred, except an Inheritance fell to him from some of his Kindred, in the nearest degrees. In ano∣ther Law,Nob. 137. he renewed what he had for∣merly commanded, concerning the Electi∣ons and Ordinations of Bishops; in which there is a great deal cited out of Nazian∣zen, of that purity of Soul that ought to be in the Clergy; and of the preparation that must go before their being raised to that Station. To the former Provisions he adds this, That the Person to be ordained, should subscribe to the Faith, and swear, that he had neither, by himself nor others, given or promised any thing, or was to give any thing, either to him that ordained him, or to those that gave their Voices for him. And thus I have extracted the most re∣markable Laws that are in Justinian's Code or Novells, relating to this Matter. Yet tho' by those Laws, the Clergy and Town
Councils had the right to name three, the same Emperor, if the Historians say true, both turned out and made Bishops by his own Authority. Procopius puts it worse, and says,Pr. Ar∣cana Hist. Theodora the Empress disposed of Bishopricks as well as of Governments, that so there should be no good Man advanced to either of them, who might at any time refuse to obey her Orders. The Greek Emperors, after this, did generally promote Bishops to the greater Sees by recommendations, which they di∣rected at least to the Ordainer; so that the choice of one out of three, in all the emi∣nent Sees, came to depend wholly on the secret notice that the Emperor gave to the Metropolitan; which made some later Greeks think, it was the Emperor that na∣med the Person; but in that they mistook what was done, by a secret intimation for a publick Act of the Emperors. But the establish'd form of Elections was for the most part kept up. In the sixth General Council, Con. 6. Act. 12. the  Bishop and Clergy of Antioch petitioned the Judges, that sat there in the Emperor's Name, that they would interpose with the Emperor to give them a Bishop, and ac∣cordingly, within two Sessions after that we find they had one. And among the Ca∣nons of the Council in TrulloCan. 20., one is, That if any Bishop, or Clergy-man, were or∣dained for Mony, and not by tryal, and a re∣gard had to the course of his Life, both the Or∣dainer and the Ordained were to be deposed.
The Greek Writers do grow after this Age so partial, that little Credit is due to them; For where they like a Bishop, they praise him so unreasonably, and reproach others as incredibly, that it is hard to tell what we ought to believe. One thing is clear, that where they intend to magnify a Bishop, they generally set out his Election as made by the People and Clergy; and where they reproach him, they ascribe his promotion meerly to the Emperor's Favour. So that the one was still held in estimation, and the other was ill thought of. They make GermanusCedr. to be chosen by the Clergy and People, but turned out by Leo Isaurus, because he would not break down Images; in whose room he put Anastasius by his own Authority. So they tell us,Theoph that Constantine, called Copronimus, both elected and declared a Patriarch by his own Authority, whom he afterwards degraded and killed, but put another in his room. Then Irene proposed TarasiusCedr. 781., to which all the People assented. In his Time met the second Nicene Council, that established the Worship of Images. In it a Decree was madeCan. 3., annulling all Elections by Princes, and they cite for it both the 38 Canon (cal∣led Apostolical) and the Canon of the first Council of Nice: And add, that a Bishop ought to be chosen by the Bishops of the Pro∣vince. Upon the Death of Tarasius, they tell us,Cedr. Zonar. that Nicephorus was chosen by the Suffrage of the whole People, by the Em∣peror and the Clergy.
The next remarkable contest concerning an Election, was between Ignatius and Pho∣tius, under Bardas the Emperor. He had turned out Ignatius, and had put that most learned Greek in his room. So a Synod being called to judg about it, they objected to Ignatius, Nicet. in vita. Ignat. that he was never lawfully  chosen. Ignatius answers, that he was cho∣sen Canonically, both by the Bishops and the Church; but that Photius came in by the Secular Authority against the Canons. The issue was, Ignatius signed a Confession, ac∣knowledging that he came in without an Election; tho' his Party said, that he was forced to it by Torture and other Cruelties. But by this Proceeding it appears, that they still looked on Elections as a thing necessa∣ry; and that the want of it, even after a long possession, (for this was sixteen Years after Ignatius's Ordination) was sufficient for degrading a Bishop. And it appears that Photius was Canonically chosen; for when the Synod met afterwards that condemned him, all that was objected to him was, That he being a Lay-man, was on a sudden carried through the Ecclesiastical Degrees, and made Patriarch. Upon which they made a Decree, Con. 8. Gen. Act. 10. c. 5. That none that was a Lay∣man,  and of the Senatorian Order, and became a Monk or a Clergy-man, with de∣sign to be made Patriarch, should be ad∣vanced to it, even tho' he had staid some considerable time in every one of the pre∣vious degrees. The time they appoint is ten Years, dividing them thus; he was to
be a Reader one, and a Sub-Deacon two, a Deacon three, and a Presbyter four Years; unless he had been formerly a Monk for some considerable time. Any Person may see the unreasonableness of this, and that it was done meerly to serve that turn, since it was never observed in any Age. And yet upon this they not only degraded Photius, but against all sense or equity, they annul∣led all the Ordinations made by him. Afterwards many Instances occur, of Emperors putting in or out Patriarchs at pleasure; but none is so gross as that of the Emperor Romanus, who made one Tryphon Patriarch; but upon a promise that he should resign it when his Son Theophilact grew of Age. So when his Son was 25 Years old, he required the Patriarch to perform what he had promised; which he refused to do. Upon this a Synod was cal∣led, in which he was accused as an illiterate Person; and one came to him under colour of Friendship, and told him, it was re∣presented to the Emperor that he could not write: So he desired him to write his Name, with his Title, on a piece of clean Paper; which he did, mistrusting nothing: But a Resignation was written over his Subscrip∣tion, and he was turned out upon it, and the Emperor's Son was put in his room. After him came Poleiuctus by an Election. In his TimeZorar. there arose a Debate be∣tween him and the Bishops concerning the Elections. He said, The Common Electi∣ons
were carried by private Affection, and without a true Judgment, and therefore proposed that the Bishops and he might meet and consult who should be chosen, but the other Bishops were against it. This the Emperor Nicephorus Phocas observing, took occasion from thence to make a Law, by which he assumed to himself the power of naming Bishops, and commanded that none should be admitted into any Church but by his Order. And not only so, but he made a Law,Cedren. that Churches might have no Lands nor real Estates belonging to them; pretending this for a Reason, That the Bishops did not distribute faithfully the proportion that was due to the Poor. And when Bishopricks fell vacant, he used to send one of his Courtiers to examine the true state of the Revenue, and ordered so much as he thought fit to be allowed to the next Bishop, but reserved the rest to himself. Zimisces conspiring against him, and kil∣ling him, repealed this Law,Curo∣pal. that so he might have the Patriarchs favour. But the Emperors continued still to make the Patriarchs; yet that was held an irregu∣lar thing; For Basilius having made Alexius Patriarch, his Brother Michael had a mind to the Chair; so a Synod was called to de∣pose Alexius. The Pretence used by the Bishops was, that he was not chosen by the Bishops, but put in by the Emperor, con∣trary to the Canons. To whom he an∣swered stoutly, That if his Ordination was null, then all the Metropolitans whom
he bad ordained, during the eleven Years of his Administration, ought to be likewise degraded; and many of the Bishops being concerned in this, were willing to let it fall. After this, sometimes, tho' very sel∣dom, we hear of an Election by the Clergy and the Peoples Suffrages. So in Isaac Com∣nenus's  Time Constantin Lichudes was cho∣sonZon.. And tho' the Emperor opposed it a little, yet in conclusion he gave way to it. After him came John Xiphilinus the Epi∣tomizer of Dion's HistoryCuro∣pol., who was also elected; but it is not expressed by whom, whether only by the Bishops, which was the more common way, after the Time of the second Council of Nice, or if it was by the Clergy and People. By this time that Church was fallen into so much Disorder, and the Emperors were so wicked, that the Conspiracies and Re∣volutions in the State, and the Changes that were made in the Church, were such, that it is rather a wonder that Empire stood so long, than that it fell at last. And it was not strange, if so good a Man as Cos∣mus, the Patriarch under Alexius Comnenus,  seeing such Corruptions among them, and no hope of any effectual Reformation, bad his Reader one day carry after him his Psalter out of the Church: upon which he retired, and would never return to the Church any more; And so an ignorant Eu∣nuch was put in his room. In this Empe∣ror's Reign, as there were great aspirings to the Patriarchal Dignity, so they could
hardly find Men to go and be Bishops in Asia, that was then impoverished by the Saracens, so that the Churches there had no Revenues. To redress this, he made a LawLex. 7. Alex. Com for Pluralities; but the most excu∣sable that ever was, That such Bishops as had any Place in the Cathedral at Constantinople, or were set over a Monastery, should still enjoy it, as long as that Church to which they were sent, remained in so miserable a condition. This Emperor's Grand-Child, John  ComnenusLib. 2. Jur. Gr-Rom., began first to condemn the use of the Regale, the seizures of Bishops Goods after their Death, under very severe pains. And his Brother, Manuel ComnenusL. 7-M. Com.,  made a memorable Law about it. He sets forth, that he heard of a wicked Custom of the Officers of the Treasury, who used upon the death of a Bishop, to seize on the Revenues of the See. So he condemns this practice, and appoints the Goods of the deceased Bishop to be disposed of ac∣cording to his last Will; or if he made none, according to the Laws and Canons; and that the Revenues of the Church should be left entirely in the hands of the Clergy, till a new Bishop should be ordained. And he appoints severe punishments for such as broke this Law. They were to restore all they had taken from the Church, and to pay a Fine to the double of the Value of it, besides cor∣poral Punishment, & perpetual Banishment. So here the Regale is most severely condem∣ned. And yet by another Law of his it
appears,Lib. 3. Jur. Gr-Rom. that the Churches of the East had then Towns and Customs, Taxes and Courts, with all those other Rights, which were comprehended under the Name of the Regalia in the West. In the 12th Century, the Holy Wars were set on foot; and the Princes of the West possessed themselves of several Towns in the East; and in those the Bishops were chosen by the Clergy and People, the Kings giving their Royal Assent. So William, Bi∣shop  of TyreGul. Tyr. l. 21. c. 9. tells, that himself was made Bishop of that City in that manner, and gives many other Instances of such Elections. But now the Greek Emperors did directly assume to themselves that which Ju∣stinian had left to the Metropolitan. For Alexander Comnenus got a Law, which he madeJus Gr-Rom. l. 2. c. 4. to be confirmed in a Synod, by which it was left free to him to order all things relating to Elections as he pleased; yet his Grand-Son, Manuel, upon a Va∣cancy, called the Senators and Clergy of Constantinople together, where there was a free Election made. For tho' the Emperor named him who was afterwards ordained: Yet many others were also named; and in conclusion, they did almost all of them agree to the Emperor's nomination. So Michael was ordained,Nicetas who is said to have been, both a Good and a Learned Man. But three Years after that, he was ashamed of himself, for his having changed the po∣verty of a Monastical Life with the dignity of that Chair. So he left it, and returned
to his Cell, and fell down among the Monks, desiring every one of them to tread on him for leaving them. Af∣ter this the Emperors continued to make and depose the Patriarchs at their pleasure. In the beginning of the 12th Century, the Latins took Constantinople, but the Greeks, who seated themselves at Adrianople, conti∣nued to have their Patriarchs: And Theo∣dorus Lascarus, perhaps to gain the favour of the Clergy, restored again the Form of Elections; which of late had bin made in this manner, All that had Dignities and Offices in the great Church, did chuse the Patriarch, of which the Emperor approved: Yet that Liberty did not continue long, for the Emperors returned to their old Practices. And now the Customs which the Popes had put down in the West, came to be used in the East; that the Emperors, by the deli∣very of the Pastoral Staff, did confer Bi∣shopricks. The first Instance I find of it, is under Andronicus Paleologus, in the 14th Century; tho' it appears, by the account given of it, that it was no new Custom, but had been long in use among them, tho' we find no traces of it in any particular Instances before his time. He gave the Pastoral Staff to George of CyprusNiceph. Greg. l. 6., and so declared him Patri∣arch; and it is added, according to the An∣cient Custom; it does not appear when this Custom began. It is probable it was taken up in hatred to the Latins; and the Empe∣rors
finding the Popes had so strugled to wrest the Investitures out of the hands of the Princes of the West, did the rather, in contradiction to that, take it up: For it was not ordinary, according to the Cu∣stoms of the East, to give either Lands or Dignities by the delivery of a Symbole. Yet hereafter this Custom was kept up; and CodinusDe Offic. Constant. c. 20. gives us this account of the manner of it, as it was practised till the taking of Constantinopl:. There were twelve Bishops at least called to meet for chusing the three; and out of these the Emperor named the Person, and then gave him the Staff, with a Prayer, al∣most in the same words that were used in the Ordination; The Holy Trinity, by the Royal Power that is given to us, advances thee to be Arch-Bishop of Constantinople, which is New Rome; and Ʋniversal Patriarch. And then the Patriarch was sent to Sancta So∣phia, where the Bishop of Heraclea, with the other Bishops present, were to ordain him. And whereas in other Ordinati∣ons they used to pray twice over the Person, and cross him twice, they did that but once in the Ordination of a Patriarch; for it was thought, that what the Emperor said, supplied one of these. But for the other Bishops, they were first confirmed and ordained by the Patriarch, and then they came and did homage to the Emperor, which this Author calls a worshipping of him; and upon that they received their Pastoral Staff; all which was certainly borrowed
from the West. And tho' the nomination of the Patriarchs was taken by the Empe∣rors into their own hands, yet the other Bishops were still Elected. For in the Di∣rectionJus Graeco-Rom. l 6. that was given to the Metro∣politans, one is, That in the Ordination of Bishops, they should avoid all Simony, and promote those Bishops that had a good Testi∣mony given them, both of their Lives, their Doctrine, and Spiritual Exercises, and were canonically Elected. In Andronicus's long Reign, many were put in and out, to the great scandal of the Church: Of which the Historian makes this remarkNie . Greg. l. 7.; Princes choose such Men to that Charge who may be their Slaves, and in all things obsequious to what they shall prescribe, and may lie at their feet, and not so much as have a thought contrary to their Commands. No wonder he broke out into so severe a Censure, when many were raised to that Dignity that could neither Read nor Write. Not long after this came John Cantacuzenus to the Empire; and he, as he relates himself, left the Election of the Patriarch free in one or two Elections; and afterwards when the Bishops met to chuse a Patriach in Calistus's room, who had retired to a Monastery, and refused to return, tho' much pressed to it by the Em∣peror, the Emperor made a SpeechCan∣tac. Hist. l. 4 c. 37. to them to this purpose: He said, They ought to follow the steps of the Apostles and Fathers; who being met together, invocated the Holy
Ghost, and implored the Grace of God to di∣rect them in the choice of one that should go∣vern the Church according to his Will. But he acknowledged, that in Elections great Errors had been committed, which Men were apt to excuse, as they did all their other Sins that were dear to them: For it was certainly a mocking of God, first to resolve who shall be Patriarch, and then to meet, and hypocritically to pray for the Divine Direction or Assistance. This he confessed had been done by himself, and he did not doubt but his Predecessors had been guilty of it likewise. Wherefore he ingenuously confessed his Sin, and declared, he would be guilty of it no more. Therefore he left them to their ancient liberty of chusing three, and out of that list he named the Person. And thus it continued till the fatal fall of that Empire, which is in a great measure to be ascribed to the cruelty of the Popes, who seeing the Empire brought almost to no∣thing, chose rather to let it fall under the Turkish Tyranny, than to support a Church that did not submit to the Papal Authority: And on the other hand, it is no less surprising to see the obstinacy of the Greeks, who resolved rather to hazard all, than to come under the Jurisdiction of the See of Rome. For tho' other Points were controverted, yet the Point of the Juris∣diction was the main one; in which, if they had been tractable, the Popes would have been more easily induced to have yielded in other particulars. But all the
Attempts the Emperors made, for recon∣ciling the two Churches, failing, or being soon after brought to nothing; and the Sins of that Church and State growing to a great height, God thought it fit to give them up as a prey to the Othoman Cruelty. Constantinople being taken upon the first  Vacancy,Phran∣zes Proto∣vest. lib. 3. c. 19. Ameras, (as the Greeks call him) or Amurath the Bashaw, commanded the Bishops to chuse a new Patriarch; they pitched on one George a Lay-man, whose Name was changed into Gennadius; and Ameras gave him the Pastoral Staff, which was a very rich one set with Pretious Stones and Pearls, and conveyed him out to the Palace Gate, where a Horse richly trapped was made ready for him; and so he went in a Cavalcade, as was wont to be done, to the Church of the Apostles, which was now appointed to be the Cathedral. But GretzerObserv. in Codin▪ tells this Story differently: For, he says, it was the Emperor Maho∣met himself that gave Gennadius the Staff, and declared him Patriarch. But alas! this was soon at an end; for instead of confirm∣ing the Elections, the Turks have not on∣ly taken this Matter wholly into their own hands, but have so expos'd it to sale, and have found so many base-minded and ambitious Church-men, that are as ready to buy as they are to sell; that those Churches which were once the Glory of the Christi∣an World, are now become Dens of
Thieves and Robbers. But as those Miseries are to be lamented in them, so we who hear of them, ought to remember the words of our Saviour; If these things are done in the green Tree, what shall be done in the dry? And thus far have I carried down my Observations in this Epocha; in which I have at the same time given an account both of their Goods and Wealth, and of such Laws as I found made about them. I now return again to the West, and shall proceed to the next Interval.
CHAP. IV. Of the State of the Churches in the West, but particularly in France, after the Ruin of the Roman Empire, till the Days of Charles the Great. IN the account I shall give of this Inter∣val, I shall make no large Reflections on the Elections of the Bishops of Rome; for that has been so copiously examined by the Writers of Controversy, and they are so well known to every one that is acquainted with Ecclesiastical Learning, that it will be needless to give any larger account of them. The Desolations and Confusions that followed the Incursions which the Barba∣rous Nations made upon the Western Em∣pire, were unspeakable. But till new Go∣vernments and Laws were setled, the Ro∣man Law still took place, and the Churches were governed according to the former Canons. Some of the Barbarians were Arrians, as the Gothes and Vandals; others were Heathens, as the Franks. The for∣mer exercised great Cruelties, chiefly in Africk; but the latter were not acted by any other Rage, than that with which their Tempers inspired them: And so they
left the Christians to follow their old Rules and Customs. In a time of so much mili∣tary License, it was ordinary for ambiti∣ous Men to employ Souldiers, and by their means to extort an Election to a Vacant See: Concerning which, some Complaints made by the Popes, were mentioned in the second Chapter. In the second Council of Arles,Arlet 2. c. 5. a Canon was made, That no Bishop should be ordained but by the Metropolitan, or by one commissioned by him, and by three of the Bishops of the Province, all the rest being warned to come: And in case of a Contest in the Election, the Metropolitan was to receive him that was chosen by the greater number. By another Canon,Can. 32. if any carried Matters of Religion before the Secular Powers, and neglected the Synod, he was to be excommunicated. This was appointed, because of the confusion in which things were then; for it had been of most mischievous consequence, for any at that time, to use the help of barbarous Princes, or military Men; but it ought not to be applyed to regular and setled Times. By another Canon, they reversed the former method of ElectionsCan. 54.; and to prevent all Simony, or the buying or hi∣ring of Suffrages, they ordered, that the Bishops of the Province should name three Persons, and leave it to the Clergy and People, to chuse one of these three. But it does not appear that ever this took place; and indeed the Credit due to all these Ca∣nons
is not very clear. In another Canon, we find the Original of Peculiars belonging to one Bishop, but lying in another Dio∣cess. It was before observed, that some Churches had Lands lying remote from them; so Rome had Lands in Asia. But it was now providedCan. 31., That if a Bishop should build a Church in another Bishop's Limits, for the convenience of any Lands that he had there, and did endow it, yet the dedicating of the Church, and the or∣daining the Presbyters in it, was to belong to the Bishop of the Place. But whereas every Bishop had his share out of the Re∣venue of all the Churches in his Diocess, the Bishop was to have none from Churches so endowed by another Bishop; this was but a moderate exemption. From this begin∣ning, the Churches so built and endowed, came by degrees to enjoy an entire exemp∣tion. Two Years after this Council, there was another at Anjou, intended chiefly to cor∣rect the Irregularities of some Presbyters: And the chief mean they fell on for it, was, the subjecting them entirely to the Bishops Authority. Not long after this, some cor∣rupt Bishops began to sell the Lands of the Church. Some pretended it was to pay Ransom for Captives. Some pretended their Lands were so spoiled that they could make nothing of them. Others found out other Shifts. So Pope Hilary,Ep. 8. c. 5. in a Letter that he writ to the Galican Churches, admonished them to sell none of their
Lands, but by the Advice and Approbati∣on of a Synod. There are several Canons, both in the Council of Orange, and Acts, that shew that there were then several Slaves that belonged to the Church; and the Bishops had the same Authority over them, which the Roman Law gave to Ma∣sters. Under that Pope a Council met at Rome; which upon a report made concern∣ing  some Bishops that declared their Suc∣cessors in Spain, that practice being carried thither out of Africk, by which Bishopricks were like to be entailed to Families, it was condemned for the future. Under the next Pope is the first mention made of the famous Division of the Rents of the Church into four parts; of which one was to go to the Bishop, another to the rest of the Clergy, a third for the Poor, and a fourth for the Fabrick. But the first mention of it, is in the nature of a Censure passed upon Gaudentius Bishop of Aufin,Ep. 3. Simplicii. who having made some unlawful Ordi∣nations,  the Pope thereupon writ to some other Neighbouring Bishop, and appoints those, so ordained, to be put from the Priestly Office, and that Gaudentius should ordain no more, nor dispose of the Reve∣nues of the Church, but only have a fourth part sent him; and the other three shares were to be divided among the rest of the Clergy, the Poor, and the Fabrick. Of this Division I can see no Traces before this; and yet, especially after the Stewards were every where set up by the Council of
Chalcedon, it is not to be doubted but there was a general proportion and rate set, which was universally followed. The fourth part went to the Bishop, because the enter∣taining and the relieving of Strangers lay wholly on him; for then no Clergy-man could travel, that observed Rules, without Letters Recommendatory, which were ad∣dressed to the Bishop. He was also obli∣ged to make Visitations: so the Expense that lay on him was such, that no wonder a fourth part was allowed him; and the Clergy who had nothing before, but ac∣cording to his discretion, were now wil∣ling enough to have somewhat certain for their share; the Poors share was but a rea∣sonable proportion. And then, when they were every where setting up and building good Churches, it was no unreasonable quota to appoint so much for the Fabrick, tho' when the Churches were built, it might have been expected that should have fallen off. But then the Ornaments of the Church, the Plate, the Garments in which the Clergy Officiated, with other pompous Rites, were so costly, that the providing them came in the room of the Fabrick. And so that which was laid on Gauden∣tius, as a punishment, was soon after esta∣blished by Pope GelasiusAd Ep. Lucaniae, c. 27. as a general Rule, and did universally take place for many Ages over all the Western Churches. And now the Church being generally well endowed, several Laws were made, both by the Popes and Councils, against the alie∣nating
of Church-Lands. Pope SimmachusAd Ce∣sarium Arl. c. 1.  writes to the Bishop of Arles, That Lands given to the Church should not be alienated upon any pretence, or by any manner whatsoever; and if it were neces∣sary to let Leases of them, these should be only during Life. And the same Pope made a Rule, in a Synod at Rome, which is put in the Canon Law,Caus. 12 Qu. 2. c. 20 That the Pope cannot alienate Lands, belonging to the Church, in any manner, or upon pretence of any necessity what∣soever: And the Giver and Seller of Church-Lands is to be degraded; and any Church-man may oppose such Alienations, and recover them, these notwithstanding. This I the rather ob∣serve, that it may appear how uncertain a Title it will be, to relie upon any Confirma∣tion, that a Pope may grant of Church-Lands so alienated, since there are grounds in their Law to annul those, when ever a good opportunity shall offer it self. It was no wonder there was great care used at this time to preserve Church-Lands, both to encourage all Men to give liberally, remove∣ing this Objection that might arise, from the apprehensions of Church-mens giving them away to their Friends and Kindred, and to prevent the Mischief which some covetous Clergy-men might bring on the Church by profuse Dilapidations. At this Time a great Change fell out in France, for now their King Clouis was con∣verted to the Christian Faith; and both he, and many of those Noble Franks that fol∣lowed his Example,Hod. l. 1. c. 14. gave great Posses∣sions
to Rhemigius, in several Provinces, by which not only the See of Rheim, but several other Churches were enriched; and Clouis either to expiate for his other Crimes, or as an expression of his Zeal for Religion, not only gave Lands to many Churches, but granted Immunities both to the Lands and the Clergy, (which is to be understood, of a freedom from Publick Taxes, and Publick Services) and was still going on, giving more and more as it's declared in the Council of OrleansCon. Au∣rel. c. 5.. These they ordered  to be divided for the repairing of Churches, for the maintenance of the Clergy and the Poor, and for the redemption of Captives. He was also advised, by Remigius, To give much honour to the Priests; and to have fre∣quent recourse to their Councils. It was a natural Consequence of his en∣riching of Churches, and his calling Bishops to be of his Council, that he should assume a great interest in the choice of them. And indeed, Gregory of Tours, through his whole History, represents the promotion of Bi∣shops, as a thing that did then wholly de∣pend on the King's Favour: For his com∣mon phrase is, Such a one was made Bishop upon the King's Writ, or by his Command: yet Elections were still continued. For in the second Council of Orleans, Aurel. 2. c. 7. they  appointed the Ordination of Metropolitans, according to the ancient Custom, which had been of late neglected, to be again set up; and that they should be chosen by all the Provincial Bishops, the Clergy, and
People, and be ordained by all the Bishops of the Province. A little before this, there was a Decree  made in a Council of Valentia in SpainValent. c. 2., against the Spoils of a Bishop's Goods at his Death, made by the Clergy: which shews that Custom had run from the East to the West. For the Clergy reckoned that the Bishop had nothing but what belonged to the Church; and what-ever he laid up, they thought was kept from them: so that the seizing on their Goods, or their Spoils, was the taking of what had of right be∣longed to themselves. But that Synod con∣demned this, andCan 6 ordered all to be pre∣served to the Successor: and that within a week after a Bishop's Death, the neigh∣bouring Bishop should come to his House, and write down an Inventory of his Goods, and send it to the Metropolitan. It was also appointed, in the second Council of Orleans, that the Bishop, who came to bury the dead Bishop, should call the Presbyters together, and set down an exact Inventory of all his Goods, and trust the keeping of them to fit Persons: which was also de∣creed  long before by the Council of Riez in ProvenceReg. c. 6.. The Kings of France assumed a right of recommending and making Bishops where they thought fit; which is probable they did in the richer Sees: yet they left a free∣dom for Elections in many Places, perhaps in the poorer ones: and in these the great Men took upon them to obtrude their
Friends; and so things were violently car∣ried every where. Therefore in a Synod in AuvergneArven. c. 2. sub Rege The∣odeberto. they decreed, That a Bishop  should be raised by the choice of the whole Body, and not by the favour of a few; and the Election of the Clergy and Citizens, with the consent of the Metropolitan, are de∣clared necessary. And the assistance of Great Men, together with all Practises, and Rewards, or Threatnings, for pro∣curing the Decree of Election, are condem∣ned. Three Years after, in a Council that was held under Childeberts DivisionAurel. 3. c. 3., a∣nother  of Clouis's Sons, it was decreed, that a Metropolitan should be chosen by all the Bishops of the Province, with the con∣sent of the Clergy and Citizens; the Reason given is, because he that is to be set over all, is to be chosen by all: and a Bishop was to be chosen by the Metropolitan, the Clergy, and Citizens. Eleven Years after this there was another Council at OrleansAurel 5 c. 10, 11., consisting of  71 Bishops, that were either in Person, or sent a Proxy, during the same Kings Reign; in which it was appointed, that the Bishop should be ordained (being approved by the King, and elected by the Clergy and People) by the Metropolitan, with the Bishops of the Province. And that if any procured himself to be ordained by Mony, he should be deposed. They also condemn all Oppression or Violence, in order to the obtaining the Decree from the Clergy or Citizens: So that none should be made a Bi∣shop over an unwilling People. But this addi∣tion,
by which the King's approbation is made necessary, is left out of several Co∣pies, as Sirmondus informs us. Or perhaps it was inserted in the other Copies without any good Authority, which is reasonable to believe, because a Council met in Au∣vergne soon after this, under King Theode∣bald, in which the first sixteen Canons of the former Council are repeated, but these words are not mentioned in the Breviat that is made of them. It seems the Kings of France, tho' they were willing to let a shadow of an Election remain, yet they had then taken the thing into their own hands, and would not suffer their Orders to be called in question. For EmeriusGreg. Turon. l. 4. c. 26. being made Bishop of Saintoinge by Clothaire's Au∣thority; but neither canonically chosen nor ordained; Leontius, Bishop of Bourdeaux, called a Synod and deposed him; and He∣raclius being chosen in his room, was sent to Charibert Clothaires Son to obtain his con∣sent; but he took that so heinously, that he banished Heraclius, and ordered his Offi∣cers to hurry him away in a Cart full of Thorns; and fined Leontius with the other Bishops, and forced them to receive Eme∣rius. That King went further in his pressures upon the ChurchIdem. l. 4. c. 1.; for finding the Bi∣shops increased in Wealth, he made a Law, that they should pay the third part of their Revenues into his Treasury: to which most of the Bishops submitted, tho' unwil∣lingly, only Injuriosus, Bishop of Tours, re∣fused
to do it, and with great boldness told the King, That if he robbed the Poor of that by which they were to subsist, and took away that which was consecrated to God, he would take his Kingdom from him. This had such Effects on Clotaire, that he repealed his Law, and besought that Bishop to recom∣mend him in his Prayers to God, that what he had done amiss might be forgiven him. But under this race of Kings, one Cu∣stom remained among them, taken up from the Roman Government, which occasioned great confusion, and did not a little con∣tribute to the Corruption of the Episcopal Order. The King's divided their Domi∣nions among their Children, without sub∣jecting the Younger to the Elder as supe∣rior: So that they being all equal in Dig∣nity, there were frequent Wars among them. In these the Bishops medled at first as Mediators, but afterwards they became Captains, and fought in their Armies. Some of them, from this, grew to be common Robbers and Murderers. Two of these, Sagittarius and Saloninus, were deposed in a Synod held at LyonsIdem. l. 5. c. 20., but were recom∣mended by the King to the Pope, who writ back and appointed them to be restored to their Sees: But they did not change their course of Life. The Northern Parts of France fell to Childeberts share, who reigned 47 Years, and was much set on enriching the Church by great Endowments; and here we find
the Bishops asserted the right of free Ele∣ctions, first in the Synods at Orleans, and more directly in another held at Paris near the end of that long Reign, by which it is to be supposed that the King became much addicted to the Counsils of the Bishops, and enclined to consent to any thing which  he knew they desired so muchPa is 3. c. 8.. They declared, that as they intended to have Canons and ancient Customs to be well ob∣served, so no Bishop ought to be ordained, but he that was chosen by the Clergy and People with the greatest freedom; and that the Choice should not be carried by the Princes Command: and that if any, by the King's Authority, were made a Bishop, the Bishops of the Province should not receive nor acknowledg him, under the highest pains. But for all this, the King's Autho∣rity prevailed in the next Reign; and the Clergy, as they were promoted by the Court, so they continued not only to med∣dle in all Affairs of State, but to assist or appear in the Judgments of Life or Death. Against this, the Zeal of some Bishops ap∣peared vehemently: For in a Synod at  AuxerreAn isio∣do, c. 33, 34., they decreed, That no Priest or Deacon might see any Person tortured, or be so much as present in a Court where one should be adjudged to die. And more  severely at MasconMatis∣con 2 Can. 16., they appointed, that no Clergy-man might, under pain of Deprivation, and of being numbred a∣mong the Laity, go to any Court where there were Capital Trials; or look on,
and see any Executions. For they con∣cluded, the mildness and peaceableness of a Church-man's temper, did not agree with the looking on these Severities of Justice. It is like they thought, that as among the Heathens, the Flamen Dialis, Jupiter's High Priest, might not so much as see an Army; so the Priests of a Religion, infinitely more merciful and compassionate, were not to defile their Souls with sights that might let in barbarous or cruel Ideas into them. But another Canon of that Council, will require a longer digression, it being a Foun∣dation for a second Endowment of Chur∣ches; and indeed so vast an addition it proved, that if there had not been distin∣ctions found for making the Payments easy, it had been the heaviest Tax that any Na∣tion ever came under. They begun it with a Preamble,Ib. c. 5. That they ought to restore things, which had fallen under great Corruptions, to their first state. And since the Law of God had appointed the Tithe of all the Fruits of the Earth to be brought to the Priests and Ministers of the Church; which had been long observed by the Christians, but was then almost universally ne∣glected; therefore they appoint the Tithes to be brought to the Clergy, who distributing them for the Relief of the Poor, or the Redemption of Cap∣tives, should by their Prayers intercede effectually for the People: And this they enjoyn under the pain of Excommunication. Eighteen Years before this, the second Council of ToursTom. 5. Con. p. 867 writ a Circular Letter to all the People  belonging to their Charge, representing to
them a great Calamity which seemed then imminent; and this was perhaps apprehended from the Musters and Motions of the Longo∣bards, for they brake into Italy the Year after this. In this Letter they offer them many advices, as that they might delay their Mar∣riages, and give themselves to Fasting and Prayer, discharge every tenth Slave, and pay somewhat for every Son they had, towards the Redemption of Captives; and among other things, they exhort them, in imitation of Abraham, to pay the Tithes of all they had. But they now raised their Stile much higher at Mascon: Perhaps they thought the modest Stile of those at Tours could not draw in the World to so high a contribution. For all that I find done about that time of this kind, was a Constitution that Clotaire set out,Balu. Capit. Tom. 1 p. 8. Constit. Clot. An. 560. Art. 11. being under great horror of mind for his unnatural Cruelty to his Son that had rebel∣led against him, he having caused Fire to be set to a House where his Wife and Children were. So to make some amends for that, and to regain the Hearts of the People, particu∣larly of the Clergy, he set out a Constitution, in which, among other things, he gives the Church Agraria, Pascuaria, vel (which in the latter Ages stands for a conjunctive Particle) Decimas Porcorum. This gene∣rally passes for a grant of the Tithes of the Hoggs to the Church; tho' it is strange that this should be the first Tithe that should be given. But this Concession seems not to be rightly understood by any that have considered it. For this is not a Gift to the
Church, but a discharge of Taxes. The com∣mon Tax paid the King, was a tenth part, and this in Lands Pastures was rated; and the Tax upon these was called Agrari∣um & Pascuarium; and these the Church paid for the Lands belonging to it. Other Tithes perhaps were not brought to a rate, and those were taken in specie, as the Swine might be. So the meaning of this Constitu∣tion is, That Clotaire exempted the Lands of the Church from those Impositions; which is cleared in the following words, in which he forbids his Officers or Tithers to meddle with what belonged to the Church: And he also confirms the Immunitie from personal Services which had been granted to Church∣men. He also exemptedArt. 10. all the Offerings made to the Church from Taxes, and he confirmed the Churches Title, where a pos∣session of thirty Years had intervened. He gave also the BishopsArt. 13. an Authority in his absence to look into the proceedings of the Judges, and to punish them if they did not judg according to Law. And the Clergy, to let the People see, that they did not ma∣nage the King's horror of Conscience, meer∣ly for their own ends, got him to pass very good Laws in favour of his Subjects. One particularly, that if any procured the King's Authority to be made use of contrary to Law, it should be of no force. That the Crown had then the Tenths, is clear in all the old French Authors, which came to be called the NinthsMezeray, after the Church had the Tithes. Concerning this, there was an
express LawCapit. l. 5. c. 278. made, against those who ne∣glected cultivating the Lands of the Crown, so that they could not pay the Ninths out of them. The same Custom was also received in Germany, and other placesBetrand d'Argen. Cons. Brit. art. 266. Spec. Sax. l. 2. art 58 p. 2. tho in the Lands given away to the Princes, it was afterwards converted into Military Service. But in those Lands that were reserved as the De∣mesnes of the Crown, the rate of the Rents was a tenth part. It was the share which the Roman Emperors reserved out of MinesCod. l. 11 Tit. 6 de Metal. l. 3.: And it seems it was the Custom of the Kings of the East, by that which Samuel says, when he was setting out the Severities they might expect under a Kingly Govern∣ment1 Sam. 8.15, 16.; And he will take the Tenth of your Seed, and of your Vineyards: and a little af∣ter, and the Tenth of your Sheep. And tho' Joseph, when he purchased all Egypt to the Crown, took a fifth part yet that was by virtue of the Purchase, and not in the right of the Crown. And thus Abraham did,Heb. 7.2.4. perhaps as an Homage to Melchisedeck the King of Salem, give him the Tenth of the Spoil; which St. Paul seems to confirm, for he makes the Reason of it to be, because he was a King; and so infers from it, that he must therefore have been a great Person. For Jacob's Vow, it was a particular Devo∣tion, not founded on any precedent tie. This clears the Law of Tithes among the Jews; for God, by a special Authori∣ty declared from Heaven, gave them the Land of Canaan, and reserved to himself the share that was paid in other Nations to
their Kings, they being a Theocracy, and immediately under the Civil Laws and Go∣vernment, which were prescribed by God, and dictated to Moses on Mount Sinai. And the Priests and Levites were Officers, only attendant on the Service of God, but had not the Charge of Souls as Church-men now have. The Priests had only the First Fruits, and the Tenth of the Tithes; but the Levites were a vast number of People, tho' seldom above the thirtieth part of the Na∣tion. But there was no reason to apply this to other Nations, where the Soil was not given by an immediate Charter from Hea∣ven, and where the number of the Priests was so inconsiderable. The Land of Judea was so fruitful, that even the double or the treble Tithe was no heavy Tax. For as it may be gathered from the Parable in the Go∣spel, of the good Ground bringing forth, some thirty, some sixty, and some an hun∣dred fold, these were the common returns of the Soil; so that thirty was the lowest that good ground yielded, even in our Sa∣viour's Time, when the Country was not near so well peopled, and by consequence the Land not so well manured as formerly. Now suppose an hundred Measures, as that encrease of 30, yields 3000, then the First Fruits will be 50, the Tithe will be 295: out of which Tithe, the Priests Tenth will be 29½, the second Tithe will be 255½: So there will remain 2400, which is still a fair encrease: even in the third Year another
Tithe might be well paid in such a Soyl. And this double tithing amounting to a fifth part, was the Rate at which Jo∣seph taxed Egypt. So as Pharaoh giving the Egyptians their Lands, reserved that Rent to himself, it was at the same rate that God taxed the Israelites when he gave them this good Land, where the encrease was so great. This was no severe Tax in such a Soil, but it would have proved a most heavy one in more Nothern and barrenner Climats, where the Returns are not above ten or five, and in some colder ones not above three; yet the same Rule was applied to all. Only it is strange, that when the Law of Tithing was imposed on the Church, as due by the Mosaical Law, which was all that was pretended for it at first, that they did not afterwards double it, according to the same Law. For they could have brought a Divine Right for that, if they had pleased to search for it, as well as for the other; but the World could not well bear it. At first it was said, that the Tithes were to be distributed a∣mong the Poor; yet afterwards they assig∣ned but a third part of it for them; and in conclusion, the Poor had nothing but some small Alms out of it, at the discreti∣on of the Clergy, and so were left to be relieved by the Charities of the People. The Bishops were glad to set this on; for by this means the Clergy and the Poor be∣ing supplied out of the Tithes, they kept
the Church Lands entirely in their own hands, without making a Dividend; so that instead of a fourth part, which was formerly their share, the whole Revenue of the Church was now absolutely at their disposal. Charles the Great did make Laws for the  paiment of TithesCap. 3. & Cap. l. 1. c. 157. to the Parish Church: Yet that was not always observed, for in the latter Ages, Princes and others disposed of their Tithes as they pleased; and for the greatest part, they gave them here in England to the Monasteries. These Grants were indeed confirmed by the Bi∣shops, who signed the Charters; but it may be justly doubted, whether those who subscribed with our Kings, did it only as Witnesses; or if any Authority was added to the Grants by them, which seems to be more probable. But then since Dukes, Counts, and others subscribed, as well as Bishops and Abbots: It may seem reasonable to look on these as Parliamentary Confirma∣tions; and this will confirm their Opinion, who think that Tithes were at first given, and were afterwards disposed of by the Civil Powers. For if by a Divine Right the Tithes were due to the Parish Church, even the consent of the Bishops and Abbots could not give Authority to those Alienati∣ons, especially the Parish-Priests not con∣senting; and if they had given consent, that could not bind their Successors; for all Grants against a Divine Right, must be null and void of themselves. And so much
may suffice for shewing how Tithes were first brought into the Church, and upon what grounds they were demanded. In which the Bounty of those Princes is much to be esteemed, who took care to make such liberal Provision for the Clergy and the Poor; and this being the Proportion setled by Law, it is a great wickedness to take away, or to detain that which is thus dedicated to Holy Uses, and the support of those who are to minister to the People in the concerns of their Souls. But I now return to observe the Progress of Elections. In the fifth Council of Paris, there is an odd discovery of the weakness or disinge∣nuity of the Bishops. For on the same day, they both made Canons, and consented to Laws set out by the King, tho' they are of  very different Natures. In the Canons they decree,5 Paris, Can. 1. That a Bishop shall be chosen by the Metropolitan, and the other Bishops of the Province. with the consent of the Clergy, and People of the City. But if any should be other∣wise ordained, either by Authority, or upon any other account, such Ordinations are de∣clared null: Thus they renewed the former Laws. But King Clotaire the Second, who was then sole Monarch of France; in the Constitution made that very day, the 18th of October, in which mention is made of the Bishops, the Nobles, and his other (fideles) Liegemen, by whose advice he had made it, puts it in a far other Method. For as he confirms the way of Elections by
the Metropolitan, the Bishops of the Pro∣vince, with the Clergy and People. So he adds two other Clauses to it; the one is, for making the Royal Assent necessary, That the Person so Elected, should be ordained upon the Princes Command. But the other destroys it all, in these words; Except he is chosen out of the Palace; and then he is to be Ordained, a trial being first made of his Merit and Do∣ctrine. It must be left to conjecture, whe∣ther this passed by the Majority, and so is said to be by consent of the whole Parts that constituted that Parliament, or if only some Bishops consented to it, and either thought it enough to save all, by making their Canons with other Provisoes; or which is most probable, perhaps they drew their Canons according to the Rules of the Church, and so presented them to the Par∣liament, which afterwards changed them in this part. One of the Canons then a∣greed on5 Paris, c. 7., tho' not mentioned among those that were confirmed by the King and the other Estates, is, That upon the death of a Bishop, or Clergy-man, none should meddle with their Goods, neither by vertue of any Writ, or the Authority of any Judg, or any other Per∣son whatsoever; but the Arch-Deacon and Clergy were to preserve and defend them: and if any did otherwise, he was to be excommuni∣cated as a Murderer of the Poor. At Rheims,65, or with o∣thers, 630. in the next King's Reign,Conc. Rhem. c. 3. they confir∣med the Chapters of Canons made by the Synod of Paris, which their King Clotaire called together. It seems some did not re∣ceive
the King's Constitution, and there∣fore this Confirmation was thought neces∣sary to take away all disputes. And to shew that they confirmed the King's Edict, and not the Canons, as the Bishops had agreed them, they expresly mention that,Can. 24. and appoint that such Judges as procured War∣rants from the King, contrary to the Edict of Paris, should be excommunicated. And yet in the very next Canon,Can. 25. they ap∣point, that Bishops should be elected by the universal consent of the whole People, and the neighbouring Bishops; and that the Persons so chosen, should be Men born in the place. If any were otherwise ordained, they were to be deposed; and those who ordained them, were to be suspended for three Years. And thus what they confirmed in one Canon, they overthrew by another. Nineteeen Years after this, at Chalons,Cabilon c. 10.  they again renewed the former Canons of Elections by the Bishops of the Province, the Clergy, and the People. More I do not find done in Synods under the first Race. It appears by Dagabort's LawsLeg. Dagob. l. 9., that some Bishops were made by the King, and others were chosen by the People. It is like the one took place in the Richer Sees, and the freedom of Elections were left to the People in the poorer Sees. In the 7th Year of that Kings Reign he promoted  Didier to be Bishop of CahorsBaluz. ad leg. Dagob., by a Precept, in which he sets forth, that he being his Treasurer, was desired by the Ci∣tizens and Abbots, and that he had consented
to it: therefore he decrees, that he should be made Bishop, the Clergy and People ap∣plauding it, which it seems was ordinary on such occasions. The Kings of France carried about with them always some of their Bi∣shops, and of their Nobles, to consult with them in all their Affairs: And upon that, they came to set up a new form of Electi∣ons in the Palace; in whice, instead of the Choice made by the Clergy and Citizens, the Person was chosen in this Council, that is, at the King's Pleasure. And in the Formuls of Marculphus, we have the Form of that WritMar∣culphi Form. f. 5, & 6.. In the Preamble is set forth the great importance of providing good Bishops, and that nothing was more suitable to the Care a Prince ought to have of his People: and that therefore the King having treated about it with his Bishops and Nobles, he pitched on such a Person who was judged to be well qualified. Therefore the Bishop to whom it is direct∣ed, is required to gather some Bishops to∣gether and to ordain him. The same Wri∣ter does also set down the Form of the De∣cree, which was made by the Community of the Town CouncilForm. 7., in the case of an Election: by which they certify that they had elected such a Person, and desired that the King would appoint him to be their Bishop. This took place often, and the King upon the Decree issued out a Warrant for Ordi∣nation. Yet some times the Kings rejected the DecreeGreg. Turon. l. 4. c. 15. l. 8. c. 23. l 5. c. 47., and named another. Some came sordidly with the Price or Present in their hands to buy the Bishoprick. But
tho' it is not to be doubted but such un∣worthy Persons were too often received; yet they were sometimes rejected, and ac∣cording to the different Tempers of Prin∣ces, or the Circumstances of their Affairs, or the esteem that some Clergy-men were in, this Matter went variously sometimes by an Order from the Court, and at other Times, by an Election confirmed by the King; for there are several Instances of both sorts during the first Race. Yet as all things of that nature are still by degrees advanced, it came to be the more ordinary way for Bishops to be named by the King till Charles Martell's Time; and he finding the state of the Clergy much enriched, and yet much corrupted, instead of endea∣vouring to reform them, he left them to go on in their Disorders. But being engaged in great Wars with the Moors, that had subdued Spain, he thought it would be more for the strength of the Kingdom, to have the Revenues of the Church di∣stributed among his Captains and Armies.Flodo∣ard. lib. 2. c. 12. So he took the Bishoprick of Rheims from Rigobert and gave it to Milo a Captain. At first the Bishop was driven away; but af∣terwards Milo hoping to get Rigobert to assign the Lands of the Bishoprick to him, brought him back, and treated with him about it, but he could not perswade him to it: So he let him officiate still, and live upon the Offerings that were brought to one Altar. The Clergy hated Martell much, for this and some other things of
this kind. Yet his great Conduct, the con∣stant Success of his Arms, and the Security that France enjoyed under his Administra∣tion, did so raise his Glory, that those who intended to take their revenge on his Memory, could find nothing to object to the course of his Life. But they have en∣deavoured to blacken both the ends of it all that was possibleFlodo∣ard. ibid.. For as they tell us, that he was a Bastard, and that his Mother was a Slave; so a whole Synod of themCarisi∣aca Syn. cap. 7. represented to Charles the Bald, that  he was damned for robbing the Church. This they say was revealed to St. Eucherius Bishop of Orleans, who being in an Extasy, saw him in Hell; and an Angel told him, that for his Sacrilege, he was cast both Bo∣dy and Soul into Hell. Upon which Eu∣cherius told it to Boniface, and Fulrade Abbot of St. Dennis, and to Pepin's Chaplain, and desired them to search his Coffin, and if his Body was not there, then they might believe him. So his Monument was open∣ed, which was all found black and burnt within; and when they looked into his Coffin, they saw no Body there, but a Dragon seemed to fly out of it. This Tale was very ill composed, for Eucherius died some Years before Martell, and so could see no Visions after his Death, as Baronius reckons, tho' Mezeray believes that he out-lived him. That the whole Story was a Contrivance will be easily acknowledged now. But in an Age that was not so criti∣cal as to examine the Niceties of Chrono∣logy,
and was apt to believe any wonderful Relation, this had mighty effects. And some such odd Stories of Martell, wrought much on his Children. For both Carolo∣man  and Pepin held Synods not long after. The oneCarolm cap. 1. declares, that by the advice of his Priests & Nobility, he had appointed Bishops in Germany, and had restored the Goods that had been taken from them: and Pepin did the same at SoisonsAn. 744.. And in a Coun∣cil at Liptin743. cap. 2., Carloman appointed, that such Lands as had been taken from the Church, might for some time be still kept by those that possessed them, since the Wars did still continue; but with a Proviso, that they should take a Grant from the Church, (called Precarium) for holding it during Life only, and should pay a small Rent for it: But when the Tenant died, the Lease should be renewed if the Prince required it. Yet still care was to be taken that the Church should not suffer Want. In that case, their Lands were to be put into their own hands. This was all that Martell's Sons did. But while they took such care to restore to the Church the Lands that belonged to it, they did not endeavour to remove the cause of it; which was occasioned by the great Scandals that had been given the World, by the Irregularities of the Bishops and Clergy, who were become corrupt and dissolute to the highest degree. They ge∣nerally quitted their Habits at pleasure, and turned, not only Souldiers, but Rob∣bers
and Murderers. There had been no Synods in France for about 80 Years: So there was no care taken to repress or cor∣rect these Disorders. And this Matter was not brought to any ripenss before the Reign of Charles the Great, who set about it in good earnest. He reigned long, and had great success: He was not only a great Pa∣tron of Learning, but was himself very LearnedConcil. ap. S. Ma∣cram. c. 8.. And during his whole Reign of 46 Years, he made it one of his chief Studies, to observe and write down every thing that occurred to his Thoughts; and had always some Counsellors about him, by whose Advice he governed himself. And when he came to his Parliament, (or Pla∣citum) he laid all his Affairs before them, and concluded all Matters with their good liking. And he was indeed the greatest Prince, not only in the extent of Domini∣on, but in true Knowledg, and Heroical Vertues, of any that was before or after him for many Ages. In the whole course of his Reign, he expressed a most wonder∣ful Zeal for the Church, which his Interest might perhaps lead him to at first, since his right to the Crown of France was founded on the Resolution which P. Zachary had sent, when his Father was made King: but it will appear, that tho' Interest or Su∣perstition had their shares in what he did; yet he likewise governed himself by a strong and clear judgment in most things. The first Law he made, was at the desire of all his LiegmenFideles., and chiefly of his
Bishops and other Priests, (that is, Abbots then called to Parliament)▪cap. 1. In it, he  forbids all Clergy-men to carry Arms, or to go to the Wars, excepting only a few of them for performing Divine Offices. Hecap 7. appointed his Bishops to visit their Di∣ocesses every Year, for confirming and in∣structing their People, and for the rooting out of Paganism, which it seems was not quite extirpated: andcap. 8. that every Pres∣byter, in Lent, should give his Bishop an account of his Ministry. In the Laws which he published ten Years after this, in another Parliament, he com∣mands  the Tithes to be paidC. 7.; and that they should be dispensed by the Bishops Order. And he renewed a Law which his Father had madeC. 13. concerning the Lands of some ChurchesAn. 756, which by the King's Order some of the Laity did still possess; that they should keep the Houses in repair, and pay the Publick Taxes, and the Ninths and Tenths out of them to the Church. The Tenths were now believed to belong of right to the Church by the Law of God; and the Ninths were the easy Rates at which the Lands of the Crown were let. So the Tenant was to pay this for his Rent, and the publick Taxes besides. This was renewed by Charles the Great; and he added a small Rent besides, of a Solidum for fifty Houses: And likewise ordered Leases to be taken for these Lands, by which the Possessions of the Church were still to be known. By that Law it appears, that the
Lands let by the King's Order, were let much cheaper than they might otherwise be. After this, he observing the great Ig∣norance of the Clergy, orderedAn. 788. Schools to be set up in every Bishoprick and Mona∣stery. The Year after that, he having conquered a great part of Germany, gave out Capitulars at AquinAn. 789 for the Refor∣mation of the Clergy, drawn in a great part out of Ancient Councils, in which he particularly condemned all Translations of Bishops, and all Simony in Ordinations. And when he setled the Episcopal Sees in Saxony, he endowed them with great Re∣venues, and indeed, put the best part of the Country into their hands. But he did not at first determine whether it was ne∣cessary to force those Nations that were newly converted to pay Tithes. Alcuin desired him to consider well, whether it was fit or suitable to the Methods which the Apostles followed, to make those who were not yet well setled in the Faith, pay so heavy an Imposition. But the Impressi∣ons the Clergy made on him, prevailed more than Alcuin's Modesty. So in the Laws which he made for them789. c. 17., he at first appointed that a Tithe should be paid out of all his own Revenue, and out of all Forfeitures; and he backed that with ano∣ther, That all Persons should pay the Tithe, both of their Revenue and their Labour; which was afterward called the Personal Tithe. Five Years after thisAn 794., he gave the Bishops Authority to hold
Courts of Judicature, for doing of Justice in their Parishes; and an Appeal did go from the Bishop to the Metropolitan; and if the Metropolitan referred the Cause to the Emperor, they were to come with his Letters to the Court: and (the Comites or) his Lieutenants were obliged to come to the Bishops Courts. He also renewed his for∣mer LawC 23. about the Ninths and Tenths, and required all to pay their Tithes ex∣actly: in which he says, a Famine had fol∣lowed, and that Devils had destroyed the Corns where they were not paid. He also renewed the old CanonsC. 39. concerning a Bishops Estate, how much of it was to go after his death to his Kindred, and how much of it was to return to the  Church. In the Year 800 he made a Law, by which he condemned those who placed Priests and other Clergy-men in Churches without the Bishops consent; and refused to pay the Ninths and Tenths, or to take Leases; he severely required them to amend those things, otherwise he would call them to a strict account for them. Thus he went on making Laws for the Wealth and good Government of the Church. Having freed the Popes from the uneasy Neighbourhood of the Longobards, he was crowned Emperor: And among other Pri∣vileges that were granted him, one was, declared in a Synod of 150 Bishops, and many AbbotsSigon. l. 4., That he should give the Investitures, and appoint all Arch-Bishops and Bishops; so that none should be consecrated, till
they were first approved of, and invested by him: This is related by Sigebert, a Writer near that Time, but placed by him in a wrong Year. So that all Baronius's Argu∣ments only prove it to be an Error in point of Time, as it is set down by that Histo∣rian.de Conc. Imp. & Sa∣cer. l. 8. c. But de Marca (z) has so clearly made out the Truth of the Thing, and it is so evident to all that know History, that I shall take no pains to confirm it. Not long after this, the Emperor in∣tended to make recompence to the Church for the Honours which the Popes had con∣ferred on him. So he set out new Capitu∣lars  at AquinCap. A∣quisgr. c. 1. By the first, he pro∣vided against the Alienation of the Goods of the Church, which he calls the Vows of the Faithful, the Prices of Sins, and the Pa∣trimony of the Poor. And by the second, he restored the freedom of Elections; for he declared, That being not ignorant of the Ca∣nons, and that the Church might more freely enjoy her Honour, he had assented to the Eccle∣siastical Order, that Bishops should be chosen by the Clergy and People out of the Diocess, in which they were to serve. This Sirmundus believes was not done by him, but by his Son Lewis; but Baluzius assures us of the contrary, upon the credit of very good Manuscripts. The same Year, at Worms,Cap. 8. VVorm. all his People did, on their knees, pe∣tition him, that the Bishops and Priests might not be forced to go the Wars; (by which it appears, that his first Capitular had not taken place in Germany). But they add, that they did not intend by this
to rob them of any of their Goods, which they intended rather to encrease, knowing them to be the Offerings of the Faithful, and the Prices of Sin. The meaning of this was, that Bishops holding their Lands by Te∣nures, which obliged them to do Service to the King in his Wars; it seems it was sug∣gested, that the exempting them from Mi∣litary Service, was on design to take their Lands from them: Since it might seem a fair enough Inference, that if they were not capable of that Service, then they were to forfeit the Lands, for which it was due to the Crown. To this Petition the Emperor assented, and made a Law, by which they were exempted, both from shedding of Blood, and from being in Council concern∣ing it, (nec effusores Sanguinum, vel agitato∣res sint): And he declares, that they were to be employed in their Ministry, and to be interceding with God in their Pray∣ers for the Armies that went out; but were to send all their Men to serve in them. Yet this was strangely misunderstood by some, as if hereby a disrespect had been done to the Clergy, which occasioned ano∣ther Law for explaining the Reasons upon which it was done more fully. By another Law,An. 804 cap. 3. he appropriated the Tithes to the Parish Church: and if any built new Chur∣ches, the old Church was not to lose the Tithes. But this Rule was much changed in the succeeding Ages, for the Parish Churches lost the Tithes in many places, and they were either given to Monasteries, or during the Holy Wars, were converted to Lay-fees.
Thus did Charles go on conquering, and making Laws, both for Church and State: but in his old Age he lost two of his Sons, first Pepin, and then Charles, which did so much affect him, that he set himself, after that, wholly to thoughts of Peace and Re∣ligion. Of which we see two very good proofs, in two Memorials which he wrote for his own use: They have been often published, but seem not to have been right∣ly understood. They are put among the  CapitularsC. 1, & 2, as if they had been Laws made by him, whereas they are only pri∣vate Notes, which shew us what Judgments he made of Ecclesiastical Affairs, after all that Experience he had of Persons and Things. By them itappears that he intended to inform himself, by the means of his Bishops and Abbots, about several things that he had observed; particularly, How far Church∣men might meddle in Secular Affairs, and Se∣cular Men might meddle in Ecclesiastical Mat∣ters; and that they should most exactly weigh the importance of those words, No Man that warreth, entangleth himself with the Affairs of this Life; and to whom they did belong. What Men promised, or renounced in Baptism; and how that Vow was broken? Whether those believed in God, that thought they might safe∣ly break his Commandments? How Men should know if they were truly Christians, which might be easily discovered by the course of their Lives. What the Lives and Manners of Bishops ought to be; who not only by teaching, but by living, ought to give a good Example, and be followers
of the Apostles. In his second Paper he a∣gain puts that Question, How far a Church∣man may meddle in Secular Affairs? and how those that left the World, should be distinguish∣ed from those that lived in it? If it was only that they were not married, and might not carry Arms? And whether those had left the World, who were daily endeavouring to encrease their Wealth, terrifying People with the threat∣nings of eternal Punishment, (Purgatory is not here mentioned) and so perswading them to give them all their Estates, and to dis∣inherit their Children; who were thereby redu∣ced to great Necessities, and became Thieves and Robbers. And he observed that sometimes the Cler∣gy hired false Witnesses, and their Advocates were covetous, false, and cruel Persons: They built new Churches, and carried about Reliques, and so drew People to make new Donations; and per∣swaded them, that thereby they merited at Gods Hands. And he asks, Why some were made Monks and Clergy-men against their Will? And what profit did it bring to the Church, that many Clergy-men desired more to have a great Assembly about them, than a selected company of worthy Persons; and studied more to have their Clerks sing well, than live well: And were more concerned for noble Fabricks, than good Lives; tho' the former belonged to the old Dispensation, and the latter to the new. Upon all which he concludes, That if Christ and his Apostles, and their Followers, were to be set up as Patterns, then he must establish the Ecclesiastical Discipline in many Parti∣culars, otherwise than he had hitherto done,
and must change many things then in use. From these Notes, which may be well reckoned amongst the curiousest Remains of former Ages that are extant, we may see what sense that great Emperor had of the state of the Church, and of the Chri∣stian Religion, and of the Corruptions then among the Clergy. He used great endea∣vours to reform many Abuses; and after this, he ordered five Synods to be held in France and Germany, at Arles, Mentz,  Rheims, Tours, and Chalons upon Saone, in which many Canons were made for Refor∣mation, according to the Directions which he sent them, as is acknowledged in the Prefaces to them, tho' all was far short of what was necessary. These he ratified by civil Sanctions, which carry the name of Capitulars: So he ended his long and glori∣ous Reign. But these good Apprehensions which he had, were not reduced into pra∣ctice by himself; and he left his Empire to one that could think on nothing but as he was driven on by others. So that what Charles the Great had designed for the real Good of the Church, not taking place in his own Life, ended with it: And indeed he had raised the Church so high, had gi∣ven it such Dominions; and had, by so many repeated Laws, established their Ju∣risdiction and Temporalities so much, that perhaps it was not in his Power, chiefly in his old Age, when the vigor and heat of his Spirits had failed him, to rectify what was amiss.
As for the State of the Churches in Ita∣ly, during the Power of the Greek Empe∣rors there, the Popes were chosen by the Clergy and People of Rome; but were not consecrated till the Emperor confirmed the Election. So that whenGreg. Turon. l. 10. c. 1. Jo∣an. Diac. l. 1. c. 39, 40. Gregory the Great was chosen, he wrote earnestly to Mauritius the Emperor not to confirm the Election. Afterwards the Popes were ex∣cused from sending to Constantinople, and it was thought enough to send to the Empe∣rors Exarch or Lieutenant at Ravenna. When Italy threw off the Emperors Yoke, Rome being for some time a free City, there was no Confirmation necessary. But upon Hadrian's crowning Charles the Great, this was thought a Right that did belong to the Imperial Dignity, and so he enjoyed it. In Spain, upon the Conversion of their King Recared from Arianism, a new Method of Elections was set up; but it doth not appear that it continued long. At  BarcelonaSyn. Barcin. c. 3., the Bishops of the Province of Tarraco did appoint, that no Lay-man should be raised to be a Bishop, either by the King's Writ, the Choice of the Clergy and People, or by the Election of the Bishops; (which shews that by these several ways Bishops were then promoted): And they decreed, That the Clergy and People should chuse two or three, and present them to the Me∣tropolitan, and the other Bishops, who were to fast and pray, and then to refer the nomination of the Person to Lots. If any did otherwise, both the Ordainers, and the Person ordained,
were to be deposed; but how long this pre∣vailed we do not find it recorded. In the Province of Toledo (o) it was decreed,Tolet. 4. c. 19. That  none should be esteemed a Bishop, but he that was chosen by the Clergy and the People of the City, and was appointed by the Authority of the Metropolitan, and the Bishops of the Province. Yet from several of the Spanish Writers, we clearly gather that the King did so or∣der the Matter, either by Recommendati∣ons, or giving or denying their Assent, that the Elections went generally as they intended they should go. But upon this, Simony likewise crept in there, which was condemned in theTol. 4. c. 19. 4th,Tol. 6. c. 4. 6th, andTol. 8. c. 3. 8th Synods of Toledo. In the 12th Council at Toledo,Tolet. 12. c 6. the Royal Power of naming Bishops was established: and upon pretence of Delays that might otherwise intervene, it was agreed, that the Arch-Bishop of Toledo should ordain such Bishops as the King should name, and he himself should approve of, to what Province of Spain soever they might belong. So the Matter was now setled in the King's hands, and continued so for many Ages. In England, the Bishops among the Bri∣tains, were, no doubt, chosen according to the Customs which were spread over the rest of the Roman Empire. Austin the Monk was sent over as an Apostle by Gre∣gory: He ordained LaurensBeda l. . c. 4. to be his Successor, according to the Affrican Cu∣stome. Venerable Bede tells us, that Ho∣noriusIb. c. 18. was chosen to succeed Justus in
the See of Canterbury, but does not express by whom he was chosen. PaulinusIb. c. 20 was made Bishop of Rochester, at the desire of Honorius, and of King Eadbald. Con∣walch, King of the West SaxonsL. 3. c. 7., did turn out Agilbert that was Bishop there, and put another (Wini) in his room; but after∣wards he sent for Agilbert; yet he having gone to France, refused to return, but sent, to supply his room, his Nephew Eleuthe∣rius. Both King and People received him kindly, and desired Theodore to ordain him. In the progress of the History we find, that some Bishops were made by the Arch-Bi∣shops, and others by the King. Bede hath written carelesly of this matter; so that from him it is not certain how the Electi∣ons were managed. But since we find the popular Elections did afterwards take place in England, we have reason to conclude, it was so from the beginning. For Power sel∣dom returns to the People, after it is once taken out of their hands. And thus we see how the Elections and Ordinations of Bishops went in this Interval. As for the Revenues of the Clergy, what they had formerly, was now much encrea∣sed by the addition of the Tithes: And Charles the Great did every where, chiefly in Germany (where he conquered the Coun∣try, and founded the Bishopricks) give them great Dominions. The Form of making Gifts, as almost of all other Deeds, was, by delivering some Symbole, or Token, which was kept as a proof of the Gift, and
was sometimes folded up in the Charter of Donation. This was often a Staff, and was called the Tradition (per Festucam) by a Staff: Of which there are Instances in the Ancient Forms of Donations, gathered by Marculphus and others. The Tithes were by Charles the Great,Car. M. Capital. c. 7. appointed to  be divided in three parts; one for the Clerks of the Parish, another for the Fa∣brick, and a third for the Poor, and so the Bishop was to have nothing out of them. Some Priests began to take Mony instead of the Tithes in specie. But because by this means the Priest might make ill Bargains, and so cheat the rest, this was condemnedCabil. 2. c. 18.. The Custom of the Quadripartite Division, continued still in Italy; and Gregory the Great, ordered Austin the MonkResp ad 1. Quest. to use the same Method in England. The Saxon Kings set themselves, both to enrich the Clergy, and to cover them from all publick Burdens. OswiBed. l. 3. c. 24. He died 670. having, upon a Vow he made, gained a Victory, gave twelve Farms, or rather Mannors, to the Church; for there were ten Families in every one of them. They are rendred in the Saxon Bocland; he also freed them from all Obligation to Military Service. The paying of Tithes came not so early in England; for about the end of the seventh Century, it was thought only a sublime piece of Charity, which some did of their own accord. And it is said of Eadbert,Bede l. 4. c. 29. that succeeded  Cuthbert in the See of Lindasferne, that he was celebrated for his knowledg of the
Scriptures, and his observing the Divine Precepts; in particular for his Alms-giving: For he gave, according to the Law, yearly, the Tenth, not only of his Cattel, but of his Corn and Fruits. But this was not setled by Law till near 150 Years after his Time.He reigned from 712, to 727. Ina in his Laws only commands the payment of the First Fruits, (called Cyric-Sceats) which were the Churches al∣lotment or Sceat: And such as did not pay these by the Feast of S. Martin, were to be fined in forty Shillings, and to pay them twelve times over. These his Laws were made by the advice of Hedda and Erken∣wald his Bishops, and all his Aldermen, and the wise Men of his People. About the mid∣dle of this Century, there is a Collection  of Canons ascribed to EgbertExcerp∣ta Egbert. c. 99. Arch-Bishop of York, in which the right of Tithes is asserted from the Law of Moses, and from St. Austin's Sermon de Tempore. But this is certainly a later Collection, for ma∣ny things in it are taken out of Charles the Great's Capitulars that were made long af∣ter. And this is all I find remarkable in our English History. In Spain they had not the four-fold, but a three-fold division of the Goods of the Church, which is mentioned in several of  their Canons, but specified in those made at MeridaCon. Emer. c. 14. One third part was to be the Bishops, the Presbyters and Deacons were to divide another among themselves, ac∣cording to their Dignity and Order; and the rest of the Clergy were to have the other
third part; as for the Poor, they were by this wholly cast over to the Charities of the Laity. The Bishop was not to have a third part of the Oblations that were made in the Parish Churches of his DiocessesBracar. 3. c. 2.:  Nor was he to exact any thing from them but two shillings a piece when he made his Visitations: and the third, which the Bishop might have claimed from them, was to be employed for Lights and Repairs. There is no mention made of Tithes in Spain. And it must be acknowledged, that Pepin began, and Charles the Great setled the paiment of them, and other Princes generally followed their Example; which is the true Original of them, tho' the Clergy were unwilling to own it to humane Laws, and did uni∣versally agree to set up a pretension to a Divine Right, and were not satisfied to claim it from Moses's Law, but run back to Adam, and pretended that the Law of Tithes was first given to him, and that Abel was a true Tither, and Cain was a false one; with a great deal of such-like stuff, too irksome to repeat. Other Abuses were at this Time creep∣ing in, which the Synods that then met condemned. One was, that Bishops ex∣acted an Oath of Obedience from their Clergy, and made use of that as Engine to enslave them. This was condemned at ChalonsCabil. 2. c. 13. by a Canon, that sets forth, That some made those whom they were to or∣dain to swear, that they were worthy or fit for it; that they should do nothing against the
Canons; and that they should be obedient to the Bishop that ordained them, and to the Church in which they were ordained. This Oath they judged might be of ill Consequence, and therefore they all, with one accord, forbid it to be used. In Spain they appointed a Promise to be made by those that were ordained,Telet. 4. c. 2.  that they should live chastly and pure∣ly in the fear of God, and should observe the Discipline of a Holy Life, as long as they continued in that profession. But forty Years after that, this Promise was en∣larged,Tolit 11. c. 10.  and the Clergy were required, not only to declare their Faith, and to promise to adhere to it, and to live well, but also to observe the Canons, and to pay all due honour and reverent Obedience to their Su∣periors. This was also practised by the Bishops in Lombardy; but Charles the Great having observed the ill Effects of it, took care to have it laid aside. Another Abuse is condemned by the same Council,Cabil. 2 c. 17. which took its rise from the former: which was, That the Presby∣ters paid a yearly Tax to their Bishops; which tho' it was then but light, yet the same Authority which exacted that, might have raised it much higher; and therefore they appointed that Custom to be quite a∣bolished. Another Abuse was, That Bi∣shops when they made their Visitations, exacted a Subsidy from the Clergy for bearing their Charges. This was done in imitation of Princes, whose Subjects and Vassals were bound to entertain them when
they went a Progress. So a Canon was madeCabil. 2. c. 14. that obliged Bishops in their Vi∣sitations to confirm their People, to enquire into Disorders, to preach the Word of God, and to endeavour to gain Souls, and not to prey upon their People, or rob them, and thereby to give scandal to their Bre∣thren; so they were charged, not to op∣press or scandalize their People; and if at any time they took any thing, they were to use great discretion in it: Or if they were so poor that they could not bear their own Charges, they might take help from their Brethren, (that is, from richer Bishops); for which end the Richer are appointed to contribute willingly, and to imitate St. Paul, who wrought with his own hands, that so he might be grievous to none. But the greatest Abuse, which was most universally complained of; and yet, by the often repeated condemnations of it, it seems it was still too much practised; was Simony, by which Bishops and Presbyters purchased, not onely their Elections to Churches, but their Ordinations. Lay-Pa∣tronages were first set up by Justinian, and had now run over the West: for every Man was encouraged to build and endow a Church in his Lands, with the offer of the right of providing Clerks to it as he plea∣sed: And by this the Bishop was eased of the Charge of maintaining those Clerks, which otherwise he must have born. The Clerks whom the Bishops maintained, were absolutely at his disposal, but those that
were in endowed Churches, depended on the Patron, and upon that there has followed a base Merchandize, which has defiled the House of God as much as any thing what∣soever. For Benefices in Lay-mens Gifts, came to be purchased as the best sort of Annuities; and those who had agreed first with the Patron, were next to make their Bargain with the Bishop for Orders: And so Ordination came to be looked on only as a Ceremony, like the being admitted into any Fraternity or Company, which was ne∣cessary, before Men could be capable of those Annuities: And thus some purchased both their Degree and their ChurchRhem. 2. . 21., The Council of Chalcedon had condemned the giving of Mony in Ordinations: but Evasions were found to break the force of that Censure; first Mony was not given, but promised; and when that was con∣demned, Mony was given largely; but it was pretended to be only as a Fee to Clarks and Notaries. And then another Abuse was brought in, which begat great Disorders. They had sumptuous Feasts at Ordinati∣ons; and in loose Ages, those commonly ended in the excesses of eating and drink∣ing: And sometimes the giving of those Feasts, were compounded for, and the Or∣dainers converted the Feast into Mony. This was grown into a common practice in Gregory the Great's Time: So in a Synod at Rome he decreedDecr. Greg. c. 5., that in Ordinations, neither the Ordainers nor their Notaries, should take any Money, either for the
Instruments and Papers, or on the account of the Feast: And he appointed, that no Fees should be set, either on the Pall or on the Instruments; but if after these were freely given, any person did, of his own accord, offer a Gratuity to the Clerk, that was left to their freedom. That Pope writ many LettersLib. 4. Ep 53. l. 7. Ep. 5. 114, 115., both to France and other Pla∣ces, to have all Simony put down. But this was too deeply rooted, to be easily cured. So neither did his Letters, nor the severe Canons that were made afterwards, parti∣cularly under Charles the Great, prove effe∣ctual for delivering the Church from so great a Mischief. And now I have made all the Remarks, that I find concerns my Subject in this In∣terval: On which I have insisted the more largely, because it is acknowledged, that what Justinian did, in collecting the Roman Laws, the same did Charles the Great in bringing the Gothick, Saxon, and Longo∣bard Laws into Method; and the Capi∣tulars which he made, took place for some time, and the Collection of them was look'd on as a New Codex, both of Civil and Ec∣clesiastical Laws.
CHAP. V. Of the Progress of these Matters from Charles the Great's Time, to the Reign of Philippus Augustus. I Shall not hereafter enlarge so copiously on all particulars, as I did in the former Chapters; for now all Ecclesiastical Order, and the Rules by which former Ages had been in some sort governed, were general∣ly laid aside; and if at any time they were pretended to, it was only for some parti∣cular end. And after this time we ought to frame an Idea, of all that Ignorance and Corruption could drive the Church to, and by that we shall form a just Notion of those Ages, which grew to be worse than an or∣dinary Fancy can present them to us; and all the Corruptions, which were daily en∣creasing, flowed in a high degree from that great Change which was brought on Eccle∣siastical Officers. In order to the explaining this, it will be necessary to understand the new Constitu∣tion of the Church, brought in by the Beneficiary Laws; to which Church Lands were now subjected. Princes reserved some Lands for themselves, which were called their Dominicatus, or Demesnes: These
were let out to Tenants, who paid a Tenth out of them: The rest of their Domini∣ons, were either Alodia, that is, Lands li∣able to no Service, but only to the Publick Taxes; or▪ were distributed among their Military Men, who were bound to bring out such a proportion of Souldiers, as their Lands were rated at upon the King's Sum∣mons, and these were called Benefices. Some derive this from the Roman Customs. It is true, Valerius MaximusVal. Max. l. 4. c. 8. tells us, The Romans resolved rather to give Asia to King Attalus as a Benefice, than to draw a Reve∣nue out of it. And Cesar tells us of the Clientes among the Gaules. Augustus also gave Assignations of Lands to his Pretorian Souldiers. Alexander Severus continued these to their HeirsLam∣prid.; and Constantine gave Lands to his Captains for everPompon Letus.. Ammian Marcellin speaks oft of the Scutati and Gentiles: the one were the Roman Soul∣diers, that had Lands assigned them; and the other were those of the better sort in the Provinces, that were bound to come & serve as Auxiliary Troops, which was the Original of the Titles of Squires and Gentlemen. But all this will not amount to a proof, that there was a setled Law concerning Benefi∣ciary Tenures in the Roman Time. Mezeray ascribes the beginning of them to Charles Martell, and believes, that he first distributed great Possessions among his Captains, for Rewards of their Services, which were called Beneficia; It is probable enough, that he who intended to put down
the first Race of Kings, that were then fal∣len under great contempt, should use such a Policy to gain the chief Men, that might otherwise have opposed him, to his Inte∣rests: PasquierLib. 2. des Re∣cher. c. 13. thinks they began in the Time of Clovis. But Mezeray is the exacter Writter, and has seen more than the other did. Before this Time, all Church Lands were rated, and paid their proportion in the common Taxes: But now, that a new Rule was set up, they came to be made Be∣nefices, and so the Bishops were obliged to give the King such an Assistance in his Wars, as their Lands were valued at. The Kings also called their Parliaments often, which consisted of all that held Lands of them, either as their Beneficiaries, or as their Tenants; or that held Alodia of them. The last were properly their Liege∣men; for the Derivation of Liege from Lot, or Leud, that is, Alodium, seems no forced Criticism. As for the Tenants of their Beneficiaries, they were not, as far as appears to me, parts of this Parliament, to which only those came, that held Lands immediately of the King. All Church Lands were at first of the nature of Alodia; and the small Possessions of the Inferior Clergy continued to be so still, under no Tenure, but were only bound to pay the common Tax. But the Bishops Lands being now encreased to so high a degree, they were obliged to come to Parliaments, and to send their Tenants and Vassals to the
King's Army, but not any longer to go in Person as they did at first. Benefices were given by the Prince, with the solemnity of some Symbole: a Staff (fe∣stuca) was that most commonly used. So when Bishops were to be ordained, they had the first Staff delivered to them, and by that the Temporality of the Bishoprick was given to them; upon which they were to be ordained: And as in Lay Benefices, when they lapsed, or when the Heir was  under Age, they fell then back to the Prince,Tit. 53. Car. l. cap. 9. or were in his Guardianship: So all Bi∣shopricks, when they fell to be vacant, were in the King's keeping. These being the chief Laws relating to Benefices, Bi∣shopricks came to be subjected to them. The Bishops were also obliged to swear fealty to the Prince, when they received the Be∣nefice at his hands. And because they had large Dominions chiefly in Germany, they had not only their old Spiritual Courts, but an addition of other Courts, in which those formerly called Defensors of the Church, now called Vicedomini, the Bishops Lieute∣nants in Secular Matters, exercised the same temporal Jurisdiction that other Prin∣ces did in their Dominions: They muster∣ed their Men, and led them out to the War, and so had much of the Secular Authority committed to them. They were often in∣solent, and quarrelled with the King's Lieu∣tenants, having always this specious pre∣tence on their side, That they asserted the Rights of the Church.
And thus were the Bishops raised to a new sort of Dignity, which former Ages understood not: Their Course of Life was now changed; instead of the Humility and Sobriety of former Times, they affected the Titles and Grandeur of Secular Men, and lived in great Pomp and Splendour. Instead of living in their Diocesses, and la∣bouring in the Work of the Gospel, they were, for the most part, in the Courts of Princes, and turned over the Care of Souls as a thing unbecoming their Greatness, to the Visitors, Vicars, or Arch-Deacons, and busied themselves wholly in Secular Affairs, and got into all Offices of State: and the Secular Men in these days understanding the handling of their Arms, more than even such a common measure of Learning, as to read and write, employments that re∣quired some knowledg, were for most part put in the hands of Clergy-men, be∣cause other fit Persons could scare be found to execute them: And the Princes of those daysOnu∣phrius Pa∣nuvinus. did not only give Bishops many Immunities and Privileges, which were Branches of the Regal Power, but as Lay Benefices fell in their hands, by the death of their Beneficiaries, they gave these often to the Church, and not again to Lay-men: By which they thought the Imperial dignity was not lessened, since the Bishops were to be named by themselves. If credit is due to Aimonius,Lib. 1. de reb. Franc. c. 7. that lived near the end of the ninth Century, the Beneficiary Te∣nure began sooner. For he tell us, That
Clovis gave Dutchies first as Benefices: but there are no foot-steps of that remaining, so that it is not reasonable to believe it be∣gan so early, otherwise no doubt we should find more Instances of it. Having given this general view of the Interval that I am now in, I shall prosecute my Historical Remarks. Soon after Charles the Great's death, his Son called a Council at Aquin, where a great Collection was made out of Ancient Canons and Fathers concerning the Duty, the Manners and Rules that Clergy-men  ought to observe. It is large, and is a very good and profitable Collection, but indeed it signified little. It is probable that Charles the Great had infused his own Notions into his Son, who, though he was far short of his Fathers Parts, yet was a Prince of great Vertues, and so intended to have reformed Abuses, but had not the Spirit to do it: And to speak freely, the Constitution of his Em∣pire, and the Change made in the Episco∣pal Order, could scarce admit of an effe∣ctual Reformation. Lewis not only confir∣med those Canons, but set out Capitulars in the Parliament which he held at Aquin at the same time. In which he renews those two Laws816. Sp. p. 131: which his Father had made about the preserving the Goods of the Church, and the restoring the freedom of Elections to the Clergy and People: AndC. 16. he condemned a Custom which was used by the Bishops of Lombardy, of exacting Oaths of Obedience, and Presents, from those
whom they ordained.Cap. 19. By another Law, he commands the Bishops not to be bur∣thensome to their People, when they went about to Preach and Confirm; and says, The Bishops had promised to him, to execute their Function, so as might tend most to the edi∣fication of their Flocks. The Year after this, a Survey was made of all the Monasteries in his Dominions: Of which there were three Ranks. Some owed the King no Duty, but Prayers; this was the Tenure called Frank Almoin. O∣thers payed the King Prayers and Taxes; this was Allodial. And others paid him Prayers, Taxes, and Military Services; this was the Beneficiary Tenure. The same Year it is said,Cap Ego Ludovicus that he gave great Domi∣nions and Revenues to the Papacy, and en∣larged their Privileges; which were preten∣ded to be given to St. Peter, according to the Superstition of that Time; and these Pri∣viledges were afterwards called the Regali∣ties of St. Peter. And he also renounced the Right of confirming the Popes Electi∣on, but appointed that Person to be consecra∣ted without any delay, whom all the Romans should chuse with one consent and agreement. So here the freedom of Elections was again restored; yet this, if true, was af∣terwards reassumed. I confess, I look up∣on all this as a forgery, much of a piece with the Donation of Constantine; for most of the Towns and Provinces which were now, by this pretended Gift, dedicated to St. Peter, continued to be enjoyed by his
Sons, and after them by other Princes, with∣out any dispute, the Popes not so much as pretending a Title to them. And Mathil∣dis, that was most superstitiously addicted to the Interests of that See, enjoyed them without any scruple, and at her death left them to the Papacy, which was the first Title they could with any truth build up∣on; tho' afterward both Constantine's and Lewis's Donations were set up. That Do∣nation does likewise relate to others made by Pepin and Charles the Great, by which the last is said to have given the City of Rome to the Popes; the contrary of which is evi∣dent in History. By this Donation, Lewis is also made to give some Islands, and other Places, that by the Treaty which his Fa∣ther made with the Eastern Emperors, be∣longed to them. It is neither mentioned by Nithard, Aimonius, nor Anastasius; nor was it ever spoken of, till after the Fall of Charles the Great's Family. In the Grant which Otho the Emperor made, there are some of the same Places included in it, without mention of any former Grant. On the contrary in the Preamble, he speaks of some suppositi∣tious Writings, which he rejects. Perhaps these words relate to this, or to the forge∣ry of Constantine's Donation; nor is there any Preamble in Lewis's Donation which was usual at that Time: And the Subscrip∣tions of Vassals, joined to the Emperors, was not practised in that Age. Upon all which Reasons it seems to me, that there is as little credit due to this Donation, as to
that ascribed to Constantine. It appears  from FlorusApud Papir Masso., who lived in this Emperor's Time, that the Royal Assent was asked and obtained, before any Bishop might be ordained, which he approves as a thing that conduced much to Publick Peace: but by no means does he acknowledg it so ne∣cessary, that Ordinations were to be an∣nulled when it was not granted: And he thought Princes by it, did only add their Authority to the Rules of the Church, but ought not to impose upon it. This was not all; Lewis also writ to vacant Sees, recom∣mending to them the Person whom they should chuse: so he did in the Vacancy of  ƲtretchtIn Vita Fred. Ep. Traject.; and as it is reported in the Life of one of their Bishops, he named the same Person on whom they had before pitched. But whether that is added as a flourish, to raise the Bishops Credit higher, I shall not enquire. Sometimes Lewis re∣jected those that were elected; for he ap∣pointed his Arch-Chaplain (whose Power was somewhat like the Vicegerents set up by Henry the Eighth in England) to exa∣mine the Person elected; and if he judged him not fitly qualified, he might reject him. So the Church of SensForm. Sirm. l. 2. f. 10. having chosen a Bishop, he was rejected by the King; and having chosen another, those Missi whom the King sent to assist at the Election, did also reject him. It is like, the Reason of this repeated rejecting the Person Elected, was, because the City would not chuse him whom the King had recom∣mended:
Upon which they wrote, both to the Empress and the Arch-Chaplain. In their Letters, they mention the License that the Emperor had given them to chuse, and add, that he had rejected him whom they chose at first, and his Officers had reject∣ed him whom they chose the second time: they therfore pray that the denial of his con∣firmation might be stop'd, till it should be ex∣amined whether he was not such a Person as would be both profitable to them, and fit for the King's Service. And thus we see, that not∣withstanding the shew of Liberty which seemed to be granted in Elections, yet it was understood, that all was to be done by the Emperor's Orders. And therefore the Sy∣nod of ParisConc. Paris, l. 3. c. 22. addressed to him, praying  him to take great care to place Good Pa∣stors in the Church, and that otherwise both the Ecclesiastical Order, and the Christian Religion, would suffer by it, and it would bring his Soul into great Dangers. The Form of Elections as it was setled by him, was thusForm Sirmond. Promot. Episcop. l. 2 Form. 6.; A Bishop was sent to be the Visitor of a vacant Church, whose duty it was, to call together all the Pres∣byters, and the Inferior Clergy, with the Virgins and Widows, that is, the Monks and Nuns, and all the Nobility, and the rest of the Laity; and then he was to ex∣hort them in a Speech, of which the Form is yet extant; to fast and pray three days; and after that, to chuse the fittest and best Man. Of the Vacancy, the King was to
be advertised by the Metropolitan,Ib. Form. 1. that so he might appoint a Visitor to go and oversee the Election: And the Visitor was to carry back the Decree of Election to the King, who confirmed it as he saw cause, by gi∣ving the Investiture; and then the Metropoli∣tan was obliged to ordain the Person elected. In Hincmar's Time the same Custom was continued: for he himself was chosen af∣ter a Vacancy of the See of Rheims for  ten Years, which followed upon Ebbo's De∣position. FladoardLib. 3. c. 1. says, that he was chosen by the Clergy and People, by the Bishops of the Province, and the Arch∣bishop of Sens, and the Bishop of Paris, and the Abbot and Monks of St. Denis; to all which he adds, and by the King's Favour. And some Years after that, he writ to He∣denulfe Bishop of LaonFor. Sir. 2. l. 2. f. 2., whom he sent Visitor to Cambray, and ordered him to de∣clare the manner in which the Election was to be made; That it was not to be done only by the Clergy of the City, (to which it seems they were then pretending) but by all the Monasteries, and Deputies sent from the Presbyters and Possessors in the Country, and the Nobility and Citizens; for the Bishop must be chosen by all that are bound to obey him. He writ also to the People, directing them to Fast and Pray in order to itIb. Form. 3.. Sometimes the King recommended before the Election, as in the Case of AeneasIb. Form. 8. Bishop of Pa∣ris. At other times the People and Clergy made the choiceIb. Form. 7., and the King confir∣med it; which was more frequent. And
when Bishops were ordained, the Metro∣politan writ to those of the Church where they were to serve, signifying the Ordina∣tion of their Bishop, and exhorting them to receive him kindly. It is observable, that in the Letter which Hincmare writ to the Church of LaonIb. Form 18., with Hedenulfe Bishop  of that See, he says, That he had given him Rules how to govern himself; and a∣mong others which he largely reckons up, one is, That he should not force those whom he ordained to swear to him: and he says, Those Oaths are contrary to Holy Rules, and such as ought not to be exacted. But yet it appears clearlyHincm. Ep. 35. in Principio., that in his Time, Bishops promised Obedience to the Metro∣politan, and Metropolitans to the Pope. There are also some other Instances of this way of ElectionSirm. Form. Ib. Form. 14, & 15., by the Clergy of the City, the Monks, and the Priests of the Country Parishes, and the Noble Laymen a∣mong those ancient Formularies. And this Custom continued till the middle of the eleventh Century; for we have yet remain∣ing the Form of the Election of the Bishop of Rota.Rotensis. Borell was chosenIb. Form. 20. by the Count that was Lord of the Country, and  by his Nobles, and by the Abbots, the Ca∣nons, the Arch-Priest, and many others both of the Clergy and Laity, who are ex∣pressed by name in the Decree of Election. And at the Synod of RheimsRhem. c. 1▪, a little  before that, it was decreed, that none should be made a Bishop without the Election of the Clergy and People. When the Decree
of Election was signified to the Metropoli∣tan, with the King's Confirmation, he sometimes wrote to those who had signed it, letting them know that he was resolved to ordain the Person so chosen, and the Letter was directed to the Presbyters, the Deacons, the Honourable Men, the Clergy, (i. e. the inferior Orders) the Possessors, and the whole PeopleCorde∣sii Form. For. 3.. Yet it is not to be de∣nied, but some Instances occur of Persons, that were promoted meerly by the King's Authority, without any Election; and these were Men of Quality, that had ser∣ved the King in the Palace, and were re∣warded by him with Bishopricks: Of which de Marca gives some InstancesCon∣cord. Imp. & Sacer. l. 8. c. 16., but this was still looked on as a Servitude on the Churches. And so someIbid. procured (it is likely for Mony) a perpetual Privilege for a free Election, as was granted by Charles the Gros, to the Churches of Geneva and Chalons. The Form of Ordination, shews the miserable corruption of those Ages: when the first Questions that were to be put to the Person that was to be consecratedRit. Tholos apud Morin. de Ord. Sacris, were, De Arsenoquita, quod est Coitus cum Masculo, pro Ancilla Deo Sacrata, quae a Francis Nouna dicitur; pro Quadrupedibus & Mu∣liere alio viro conjuncta. These are things that raise such horror, that I shall not put them in English. But by these it may ap∣pear what Scandals went then upon the Clergy, since he that was to be ordained, was required to purge himself by an Oath upon
the Sacrament, that he was not guilty of these monstrous Abominations. And thus it is clear, that the custom of Elections was continued in France, till the time that the Contests were raised between the Popes and the Secular Princes about the Investitures; and that the People, par∣ticularly the Gentry, had all that while a share in them. I shall next observe some memorable Things that passed in this Time. Lewis the Good, in his Capitulars at Aquin,C. 27.  commanded all the Vassals of Bishops and Abbots, excepting only so many as were necessary for keeping the Peace, and looking after the Corns, to come to his Wars, under high pains: and required the Bishops and AbbotsC. 28. to come to his Courts, (Placita) or to send a Proxy. It seems that good Prince was afterwards sensible of the Distractions that Bishops were brought under by Secular Cares: Therefore when he sent Visitors over his Kingdom, he gave them this Charge in their Instructions, to enquireCapit Lud. how the  Bishops fulfilled their Ministry; what was their Conversation; and how they did govern the Churches and the Clergy committed to them: And in what things they were most conversant, whether in Spiritual or Secular Affairs; and if in their Visitations they were burthensome to the poor Churches; and if their Officers did exact undue Presents from the Presbyters. In the Council that met at Paris that YearCan. 31., it was decreed, That Bishops should exact nothing in their Visitations, either from
the Clergy or Laity. And tho' a fourth part of the Tithes and Oblations was due to the Bishop by the Canons, yet if he had whereupon he could live without it, he was  required not to exact it. At AquinAquisgr Can. 141. a Rule was made for the Bi∣shops hospitality: order was given for a Lodg to be fitted up near his House, for the Poor and the Strangers, and he was to appoint an Allowance for them, & the Canons were re∣quired to give a tenth part of the Oblations to the Hospital: and the Bishop was to ap∣point Overseers to take care of the Poor; and in Lent he was to go often among them himself to wash their Feet. The detaining what was due to them, is reckoned a great Wickedness, because, according to the Phrase of that Age, the Goods of the Church were the Prices of Sin, and the Food of the Poor. But this Hospitality came af∣terwards to be converted to great Pomp and Luxury, as if it had been the Rich and Voluptuous, and not the Poor and the Hun∣gry, to whom the Clergy were to apply  their Bounty. It was afterwards ordered,2. A∣quisgr. c. 1 that whithersoever a Bishop went, he should exercise Hospitality, and should ga∣ther the Poor about him, and feed them. In this same Council, many other excellent Canons were made, for the direction of Bishops and other Clergy in the discharge of their Duties. In a Synod held at To∣louse, the chief Business they met about,  was, to regulate the Bishop's Expence in his VisitationCan. Thol., that it might not be too great
a Charge to his Clergy. He was to make one Visitation for five Parishes, and the Priests of four of these, were to bring, every one of them, so many Loaves, so much Wine, and some boiled Meat, two Pullets, ten Eggs, and a measure of Corn for the Bishops Horses. But the fifth Priest, in whose House he was to lodg, and in whose Church the Visitation held, was to give nothing but Wood, and Utensils for preparing what the rest brought in: But this was afterwards converted to Mony, and was the beginning of Synodals and Procurations. When Lewis died, his Children carried on that unnatural War, which was first be∣gun against their own Father, and was now continued against one another, they being dissatisfied with their Share in the Division of his Kingdoms; and Charles the Bald and his Brother fought with Lothaire that bloo∣dy Battel at Fountenay, in which 100000  Men were killed on the place. There were many Bishops in both Armies: the two Brothers that were Victorious, were much grieved to see so many Men killed, by which France was much weakned, and the strength of the Caroline Family so broken, that it never recovered it againMere∣ray.. But the Bi∣shops, to pacify their disturbed Minds, gave both them and their Armies Absolu∣tion. Whether this gave them distast, or if their Necessities forced them to it, is not certain; but which way soever it was, both Lothaire and Charles seized upon many of
the Church Lands, when Churches were vacant by the death of their Bishops, and the delays of the Election. Hincmare indeed gives this a higher Original; for, he says, that upon Tilpin the Bishop of Rhemes's death, Charles the Great took the Rents of the Bishoprick into his hand, as a part of his own Demes∣nesHinc∣mare apud Roulliard Relief. 1.. Yet this doth not agree with the Capitulars made by him in the Year 803: And if such a practice was then used, it seems strange, that among all his Laws, none should be made to regulate this Mat∣ter. But on the other hand, Hincmare li∣ved so near that Time, and was so exact a Man, that his Authority, relating to his own See, is not to be questioned, if he be faithfully cited by Roulliard, for I cannot find that Passage in all his Works, so that I encline to think there may be a mistake in the Citation. But what truth soever is in that, it was done at this Time more rigo∣rously; and Bishopricks were kept long vacant on purpose, that the King, or ra∣ther his Officers, might make the more ad∣vantage by the Guardianship. And seve∣ral parcels of the Church Lands were again given to Secular Men, as Charles Martell had formerly done. Heavy complaints were made of these things in two Synods, both held in one Year, in the Dominions of these two Brothers, at Thionville and Ver∣na.  In the formerCa. 2, & 4. the Bishops did re∣monstrate to Lothaire, the wickedness of in∣vading Holy Things; and that God had blessed his Father and Grand-father, who had been very
bountiful to the Church: that even in Egypt the Priests Lands were not medled with. They tell him, That if he went on in such ways, God would take his Kingdom from him: But with∣al, they offer to bring him Aid when it was necessary, according to their Lands, as they had formerly done to his Ancestors; and prayed him, that Bishops might be speedily named by him to the vacant Sees. In the otherC. 12▪, they represented to his Brother Charles the same things; That the Rents of the Church were given to Secular Men, and that he had ill Counsellors about him: And tho' the Infirmity of some Bishops forced them to stay at home,C. 8. and others were excused by the King from accompanying him to his Wars; yet they promised they should take care that his Armies should not suffer by their ab∣sence, and that they should send out their Men. It appears by their desire, that a Bishop might be put in RheimsC. 9. that it had been spoiled, (it is like, this relates to the Sei∣zures the King's Officers had made upon Ebbo's deprivation). They also prayed, that the Bishop ordained for OrleansC. 10. might be confirmed: for Wenilo Arch-Bi∣shop of Sens, having ordained Agius for Orleans, without the Royal Assent, which gave the King offence, they interceded that it might be passed over. Perhaps his being ordained in that manner, was, be∣cause the King did delay to give his Assent, that so the vacant Rents might continue in his hands the longer. These Remonstran∣ces had the desired Effect; for the Year
following it is recorded, in the Synods of Bauvais and Meaux, that the Lands of the Church were restored. Thus, under the pretence of the King's being the Guardian of the vacant Chur∣ches, his Officers used to rob the Bishops Houses and Goods; but the King restored what had been taken from the Church; as he did to Hincmare, in a special WritFlod. l. 3. c. 4., in which he acknowledged, that during the Vacancy, he had given the Lands in Com∣mendain to some of his Vassals, that it was a corruption to which he had been pressed, by great Necessity, and very much against his Will. Yet the Restitution relates only to the Lands that were now put in Hinc∣mare's hands, but not to the Fruits or mean Profits; but in it, he charges his Succes∣sors not to follow that Precedent; and pro∣mises himself to do so no more. Hincmare argued much against this Custom, and as∣serted, That the Goods of the Church, du∣ring the Vacancy, ought to be kept by the Stew∣ard to the next Bishop; and that Emperors and Kings ought to defend and keep them, but not  to rob, invade, or dispose of themHincm. Ep. 9. c. 41.. He also writ vehemently to Lewis the second,Ep. 4. c. 7. Ep. 12. c. 4. against spoiling the Goods of the Church; and whereas some had perswaded him that he might dispose of the Goods of the Church, he says, That proceeded from the Devil; and comes often over with that Expression in the Capitulars, that the Lands of the Church were the Vows of the Faith∣ful, the Prices of Sins, and the Patrimonies of
the Poor. And notwithstanding all the Zeal he expressed against that impudent Forgery of the Decretal Epistles, by which the World was then beginning to be imposed on, yet he does not stick to make use of them on this occasion, when they made for his purpose, and cites that Epistle which was ascribed to Pope Ʋrban, and quotes some Passages out of it, in particular, those concerning Church Lands, as dictated by the Spirit of God. I need not add to this, the many Laws that are in the Books of the Capitulars, against all Men whatsoever, who should in∣vade or spoil the Goods or Lands of the Church; which seem clearly to prove, that the Spoils or Seisures of the Goods and mean Profits, during a Vacancy, were not then practised, since all invasions of their Lands are condemned as Sacrilegious, with∣out making any exceptions of the Seisures made by the King's Officers. Charles the Bald was prevailed with, not only to give over this practice, as we have observed, but to pass a plain Law against it at Pavie, in a Parliament held there,Vide acta Syn. Pontigon. cap. 14. when he was  made Emperor. In which he decreed, That when a Bishop died, none should invade or rob his Goods to his own destruction, but the Stew∣ard of the Church, and those that distributed the Alms, should make Inventories of them, and reserve them to his Successor; and all that did otherwise, were to be fined without fail. It may seem, that this only relates to the Spoil of what belonged to the Bishop that
was dead; but taking it with what goes before, it imports more,Ib. C. 10. That none should presume to invade the Goods of the Church, whether moveable or immoveable, and that all Lands taken from the Church should revert to it, that so the Rulers of the Church might enjoy them in Peace and Quiet, and pray for the King and Kingdom, and distribute the Portions due to the Poor, and govern the House of God justly and reasonably: And the Offen∣ders were to be severely punished. At this Time it seems every Church-man had a share of Land assigned him, which was his Alodes, so called, from the Tenure by which it was held. For in the Canons which Hincmare proposed to the Synod at Rheims,Cap. 4.  mention is made of the Alodes, which was assigned to every Church-man in the day of his Ordination, out of the Reve∣nues of the Church, which he was to lose if he lost his Order, that is, if he were de∣posed. And he forbids all Church-men, Bishops, or others, to purchase new A∣lodes, since thereby the Poor were depri∣ved: for the Mony, by which it was bought, was, no doubt, taken out of their Share. It appears, that the often condemned Custom of the Inferior Clergy, robbing the Goods of a Bishop after his death, was also now practised; and it is not unlikely that the King's Officers strove with them,  who should be the first Spoilers. Therefore in a Synod at WormsWormat c. 75. that practise was condemned, according to the Canon of
the Council of Chalcedon. And Charles the Bald the last Year of his Life, when he went into Italy, to defend the Pope from the Impression which the Saracens had made, who advanced even to the Ports of Rome, called an Assembly of his Estates, to appoint some Provisions how France should be governed in his absence: and one is, upon a Question what should be done, in case any Honours were opened before his re∣turn? The Answer is, firstCap. 8. concerning  Ecclesiastical, and then concerning Civil Honours: If an Arch-Bishop died, the next Bishop, with the Count, was to oversee all till the King were advertised: And if a Bishop died, the Arch-Bishop was to appoint a Visitor, who, with the Count, should be the Guardians of the Church, that it might not be robbed till the King were advertised. Then follow Rules, in case a Count died, and for other Vassals, and they Charge, both Bishops and Abbots to take care, that none might rob the Goods of the Church, or hinder the distri∣bution of their Alms, under the pain of mak∣ing satisfaction, and being further punished at the King's Pleasure. All this is fully con∣firmed, by the Answer which the King madeCap. 4.. So Baluzius seems to be in an Error, when, from the phrase of Honours being opened, he concludes,Baltz Notae, p. 1286. that according to the present phrase of the opening the Regale, during the Vacancy, the Revenue belong∣ed then to the Emperor, since the Provision there made, demonstrates the contrary ve∣ry plainly: and the opening of Honours sig∣nifies
only a Vacancy: and it is very evi∣dent, that the King had only the Guardi∣ancy, but not the Propriety, or a right to dispose of the Rents then raised. It is true, Hincmare did acknowledgIbid., that when the King placed a Bishop, tho' against the Canons, the Revenues were to be paid to him, because these were at the Emperors disposal. So when Lothaire made Gunt∣bert Bishop of Cambray, he wrote to the Clergy, and Gentlemen of that Church, not to receive him as their Bishop, but yet to pay him the Rents of the Lands belonging to the See, because these were the Emperors. At this time the Bishops endeavoured to take the choice of the Clergy, both Pres∣byters  and BishopsSyn. Lingen. c. 8. in p. 6. Conc. Tull.,wholly out of the hands of the People; but it did not take place, for the People continued to chuse their Bishop. It is true, that the Presby∣ters were no more chosen by the People, as had been done anciently, except in those Churches where a right of Patronage was reserved, but in all other Places that was left wholly to the Bishop. I need not re∣peat it again, that in this Interval, Laws were often renewed against Simony. For tho' the Election was left, in outward ap∣pearance, free to the Clergy and Laity; yet generally the King's Recommendation took place; and so the Pretenders to Va∣cances brought great Presents to the Prince,  or his Ministers: which is complained of in a Council at RouenRotom. c. 2., and called a perni∣cious Custom, that ought to be rooted out
of the Church. This was the Handle which Princes gave the Popes to wrest the Investi∣tures out of their hands: Before I enter upon that Matter, I shall make some Observations on the progress of Church Affairs in England. Alfred was the first that I find passed a Law for the paiment of Tiths; for there are many Evidences that prove Ethelwolph's Charter to be a forgery; and indeed all the Charters of the Monks before Edgar's time, are liable to great suspicion: Alfred's Law was confirm'd afterward by Athelstane, who commanded his Officers to pay Tithes out of his Revenue; and at that time Odo B. of Canterbury set up a new  PretensionConst. 1., to which neither the French not German Bishops had laid Claim, That no Tax could be laid on the Church; and to justi∣fy it, he made use of the words of our Sa∣viour, That the Sons ought to be free; and so he appointed, that through the whole Kingdom, they should be free from all Temporal Taxes;He reigned from 959, to 975. Spelm. Tom. 1. p. 445. yet they were obliged to pay in the cases of an Expedition, or for the building of Castles and Bridges. Edgar made an extraordinary Law for bringing in the Tithes, That if any did not pay them, the King's Officers, with the Bishop or Priest, should first make him pay the Tithe, and then should leave him another Tithe, and divide the remaining eight arts, between the Lord of the Mannor and the Bishop. This was renewed by Canutus. Edward the Confessor made a Law,  that Tithes should be given out of all things, Great and Small: for these, says he, were given by the King, and his Barons, and
People. And as a Council at Engilen∣hemEngilh. c. 9.  had appointed, That all Suits for Tithes should be tried in the Ecclesiastical, and not in the Secular Courts: So EdwardLeg. Edw. l. 4. made a Law, That all who held of the Church, or dwelt upon the Lands of the Church, should not be forced to plead but in the Ecclesi∣astical Courts. Yet an Appeal was allowed in case of Injustice, which was specially con∣firmed by William the ConquerorLeg. Gul. Con. l. 4, 7, 8.. He also confirmed the paiment of Tithes, of Corn, Cattel, Milk, Wool, Bees, Meadows, Parks, and of all Traffick, that is, personal Tithes: And if any refused to do it, they were to be forced to it by the Bishops Courts; and the Kings likewise, if need were. For these things had been taught by St. Austin, (i. e. the Monk, tho' that is a mistake) and were granted by the King, and his Barons, and People. But afterwards many, by the instigation of the De∣vil, did detain them; and rich Priests did not look after them. The Tithes were to be di∣vided into three partsCan. Aelfrici, c. 7., one went for the Fabrick, another for the Poor, and a third for the Ministers that served the Parish. But if King William was bountiful to the Inferior Clergy, his hand lay as heavy on the Bishops and Abbots, who had formerly held their Baronies in Franck Almoin, and so were obliged to pay nothing but Pray∣ers,  and were freed from all Secular Service. For he brought in the Custom of FranceMatth. Paris., by which their Baronies were made liable to Military Service; and made Rolls at his pleasure, of the number of the Souldiers whom they should be bound to send him in
time of War, and laid up these Rolls in his Treasury, and banished those Clergy-men that refused to submit to that establishment. As for Elections, Ingulph of CroylandIngul∣phus. says, That for many Years there had been no free Election, but that the King gave both Bishopricks and Abbies at his Pleasure, by the delivery of the Ring and Staff. But Matthew ParisMatth. Paris, ad An. 1093. tells a Story, that shews Elections were still in use, tho' perhaps directed as the King gave order. For when King William the second com∣manded Lanfranc to depose Ʋlstan Bishop of Worcester, as being a simple Man that had no French, and could not assist in the King's Council, he obeyed him; and having gi∣ven Sentence, Ʋlstan was commanded to deliver up his Pastoral Staff. But he said, in his own defence, That he had been rightly chosen, for he had both the Election of his Brethren, the Petition of the People, the consent of the Bishops, the liking of the Nobili∣ty; and which he preferred to them all, King Edward's Command. So it seems there was at least a shadow of those things preserved even then. The Clergy, by this Time, were become very rich: for Walter Bishop of Duresme, bought from the King the County of Nor∣thumberland; Thus involving himself (says theMatth. Paris. Historian) in Secular Things, against  the Episcopal Dignity. Upon this I will offer a Remark that perhaps is not common; the naming of a Bishops Diocess a Bishoprick, seems to be derived from the Regality
which the Bishop of Duresme had in that part of Northumberland, which has ever since been called Bishoprick, without any addition. The old Saxon names for a Dio∣cess, were Biscophad, Biscopdom, Biscopscire, Biscopsceat, and Biscopsetle, as may be seen in Alfred's Saxon Translation of Bede; tho' in one of the Titles of the Chapters,Bede, l. 4. c. 6. one Copy has it Biscoprice; but in the Body of the Chapter it is Biscophad. In the Saxon Chronology, which comes down to the 12th Century, Biscoprice is sometimes used towards the end, after the Year 867, which shews that even then it was not much in use; but afterwards all the Diocesses were called Bishopricks, tho' the Bishops were not such Lords over them all as he of Duresme was in his. Now Bishops and Abbots were become great Princes, and affected all the State and Grandeur of Princes. They exacted Oaths of Obedience from their Clergy, which had been condemned in former Ages as an In∣strument of Tyranny. Rodulphus Glaber  saysVita Gul. Ab. Dijon, c. 4., That in his Time an ill Custom was creeping in, that none was made a Dea∣con till he had first promised Obedience to his Bishop by Oath. Another piece of state, was the use of Mitres, which is spo∣ken of by none of the Church Writers till the 11th Century; tho' for two Ages be∣fore that, there was scarce any thing more copiously enlarged on, than all the Rituals and Ceremonies of the Church: And the Writers of those Ages found a Mystical
signification for every piece of the Priestly Garments. But about the 11th Century Mitres were first in use; and then all the Writers of that Age mention it, and de∣rive it from the Mitre which the High Priest wore under the Law of Moses; and Allegorical Expositions were made on its being forked at top, as signifying the Old and New Testament. Cardinals used them, till the first Council of Lions appointed  them a Red Hat for distinction. In the Year 1049, Pope Leo the Ninth, sent a Mitre to Everhard Arch-bishop of Triers. And from that time, it was not only common for all Bishops to wear them, but some Ab∣bots got both Mitres, Sandalls, Gloves, Ring, and Staff, and so were reckoned Prelats: and in some Cathedrals in Germany, (as in Prague and Bamberg) the Canons afterwards obtained a Privilege, granted them by Papal Bulls, to wear them on great Festivities. But little credit is due to those Medals that we find in Mezeray's History, in which Re∣migius is represented, baptizing Clouis with a Mitre on his Head. And among King Pepin's Medals, in one Stephen is repre∣sented, anointing him with a Mitre; but in another, he receives Keys from Pepin with a triple Crown upon his Head. After that time, there are many Medals in his History of Popes with a Triple Crown, and Bi∣shops with Mitres. But these were made by Monks in latter times, and were fitted to the custom of the Age in which they were coined.
The Staff at first was the common Fe∣stuca, the ordinary Symbole of Donations,Marcul. Form. 13. Linden∣brog. Form. 18. but afterwards it was more artificially made, long, but crooked at the upper end; the Hook was to draw in good natured People, and the long end was for the pu∣nishment of the stubborn. The Canonists give a pleasant account why the Pope has no Pastoral Staff, except he should happen to come within the Diocess of Triers. For they say, St. Peter sent his Staff to Eucha∣rius Bishop of Triers; who by the virtue that was in it, raised Materinus to life, and on that kept it still, so that it was never sent back. This was a good enough invention, for People that believed every thing. Yet it is very probable, that the Bishops of Rome had a Staff for their See; for OnuphriusIn vita Hildebr. gives many Instances of Popes that were invested by the Emperors. The custom of giving Investitures, was in this manner; Upon a Bishop's death, the Staff and the Ring wete sent to the Prince; and when he confirmed the Election of the new Bishop, he delivered him the Staff and Ring, which put him presently in possession of the Tem∣poralities, as the delivery of the Gospel was the Symbole of giving him the Spiritualities of the BishoprickSeld. ad Ead.. This was early used, for in the Life of St. Romanus Bishop of  Rouen, it is said, that Clovis the Second, having called together some Bishops and Abbots, delivered him the Pastoral Staff. The Ring was at first used as a common Symbole of Marriage among the Goths
and Lombards; and the care of a See being generally compared to the Marriage Bond, this came to be likewise one of the Sym∣bols of the Investiture. But fanciful Men found another Mystery in a Seal Ring, that it signified the various Gifts of the Holy Ghost, which the Bishop conferred in Or∣dinations, or Benedictions, as a Seal makes an impressionRup. Tuit. de Divin. Offic. c. 25.; and so instead of a com∣mon, they used a Seal Ring. When the Church was thus richly en∣dowed, the Bishops full of Wealth, and eased of the Charge of maintaining the Inferior Clergy, who were well provided out of the Tithes; and when the Abbies were mightily enriched, Gregory the Seventh intended to make himself master of all this, and perhaps hoped to have set up such an Empire over Christians, as the Caliphs had over the Mahometans: He therefore set himself much to wrest the Investitures out of the hands of Princes, and for that end was furnished with a very plausible Argument from the Simony that had been universally spread over Europe: It was said, that Princes had sold the Bishopricks and Ab∣bies, and had also made ill choices; which it is probable enough was true in a great degree. But the chief Argument against them was, That the Judgment of the Bi∣shops, concerning the Persons chosen to be Bishops, was quite taken away by the In∣vestiture before Ordination, since the Elect, being thereby already possessed of the Temporalities of the Bishoprick, the
Metropolitan was either to ordain him, or he was still to enjoy the Revenue. The words of the DecreeMarcul∣phi For. 7. directed to the King, that prayed him to institute such a one to be their Bishop: And the words of the Writ, by which the Bishop was confirmed, being that to him the King did in the Name of God, commit the Episcopal Dignity, gave great advantages to infer from thence, that the King conferred a Spiritual Authority; tho' it was understood that nothing was imported by these words, but an assent to the Election, and a conferring of the Tempo∣ralities: And therefore IvoEp. 60. writing to the Bishop of Lions, justifies the Investitures from the Precedents of Princes, who gave them to the Popes themselves; and says, That Kings did not intend to confer any Spi∣ritual Authority by them, but only to give the Bi∣shops those Lands, which the Churches owed, to their bounty. And he thought it was of no consequence, whether this was done by the Hand, or a nod of the Head; by the speak∣ing a Word, or the delivering of a StaffEp. 233.. Tho' he calls the giving the Investitures SchismaticalEp. 236., after the Popes had con∣demned them; yet he would not acknow∣ledg it to be heretical. I shall not prosecute this Matter further; it is so well known, that nothing needs to be said about it. In a word, that Pope resolved to begin where he hoped to find the least opposition. So Philip the First of France, being a lewd and vicious Prince, who had delivered himself up to his
Pleasures, he set upon him first; and ac∣cusing him for his Vices, he writ to the Bishops of FranceGreg. 7. L. 2. Ep 5., exhorting them to admonish him for his Faults; and if he did not change his course of Life, he requires them to put the whole Kingdom under an Interdict: and if after all, he did not a∣mend, he lets them know what he would do, of which he was desirous that none should be ignorant or doubtful: By the help of God, says he, we will endeavour, by all means, to wrest the Kingdom of France out of his hands. This licentious Prince was, by reason of those Scandals of his Life, less able or wil∣ling to grapple with the Ecclesiastical Power, in a time in which there was scarce any other sense of Religion in the World, but what was much corrupted with Super∣stition. So he yielded up this Right; and soon after a Synod was held at PoictiersPictav. c. 4.  by the Pope's Legats, in which, all Bishops, and other Clergy-men, were forbid to re∣ceive their Benefices out of a Lay hand: and it was appointed, that a Bishop should be invested by his Metropolitan, and other Clergy-men by their Bishops; and if Lay∣men did it by violence, they were to be ex∣communicated, and their Churches put un∣der an Interdict. Seventeen Years after this Ʋrban the Second came into France to Clerment, where a great Council was as∣sembled of several Cardinals, 13 Arch∣bishops,  225 Bishops, and above 90 Ab∣botsClarom Can. 15, 16, 17. In this Assembly it was decreed,
that no Church-man might receive any Ec∣clesiastical honour from the hands of the Laity; that no King should give Investitures any more; and that no Bishop nor Priest should swear Liege-Fealty in the hands of any King or Prince. From this it appears, that the Popes had a mind to dissolve the Ec∣clesiastical State from all obedience to the Crown, and intended to subject them wholly to themselves: For those that received Be∣nefices, were bound to swear to be true and faithful to him of whom they held it, and to be in no Council against him; and to as∣sist him in defence of his Life and Mem∣bers. This last was added, by reason of the barbarity of those Ages, in which the putting out of Princes Eyes was commonly practised. When Pope Gregory invested Richard Prince of CapuaLib. 1. Ep. post. Ep. 21., and Robert Prince of Calabria and SicilyLib. 8. post Ep. 1., he made them swear Fealty to himself, and that they should de∣fend the Papacy, and the Royalties of St. Peter. He made the Bishops also swear such an Oath to him. So we find the Bi∣shop of Aquileia swears to him, in the sixth Roman Council1079.; and this Oath was in substance, the same with that, which by the Feudal Law all Vassals were obliged to swear to their LordConsuet Feud. l. 2. Tit. 7.. So it is plain, that this Contest, concerning Investitures, was not meerly about a Punctilio, as some have thought. The Pope intended to have him∣self be looked on as the Supream Lord of all Church Lands; and in order to the ad∣vancing
this, and the establishing the new Empire which he had projected, it was no imprudent thing to proceed so severly a∣gainst the Married Clergy; for the Persons of the Clergy being held Sacred, there was nothing that could so much subject them to the Civil Government, as their having Wives and Children, by which they gave Pledges to the State. Thus did the Kings of France suffer the giving the Investitures to be taken out of their hands: After this, the Bishops re∣ceived the Ring and Staff from the hands of those who ordained them; and Collects were fitted to that Ceremony, so that it became a part of the Office. By this it ap∣pears, that the fourth and sixth Ritual of Ordination, which are published by Mori∣nusMorin. de Ordin. Sacris., as Ritualls that are 800 Years old, cannot be much above 600, since in them we find the Rites of giving the Ring and Staff, put in the Office of the Consecration of a Bishop. But this whole Matter was not fully setled before the Council atRhem. c. 2.  Rheims, to which P. Calistus came in Person. There met in it 15 Arch-bishops, and a∣bove 200 Bishops, with many Abbots, who were brought together out of England, France, Spain, Italy, and Germany. Thither came also the King of France, Lewis le Gros, with his Barons, to complain of Henry King of England; and there were all Lay Investitures again condemned: and a con∣demnation was also passedC. 3. against those who should seize or detain the Possessions of
the Church, which are declared to be gi∣ven to it for ever, and so not to be alie∣nable. The Reason of the Actings of this Coun∣cil, is to be gathered from what Henry the Fifth did at his Coronation. When the Pope required him to yield up the Investi∣tures, he accepted of this Imposition, on condition that the Pope would require the Bishops to yield up the Regalities to the Emperor; which from the days of Charles, Lewis, and Henry, had belonged to the Crown: Which are thus enumeratedPetr. Diac. Chron. Cassin. l. 4 c. 87.; That none of them should meddle with the Rights of the Crown; nor possess themselves of Cities, Dutchies, Earldoms; the privileges of Coining; Cu∣stomes, Markets; the Advousons of the Em∣pire, the Rights of Captains, and of Courts, which were derived from the Empire, with all things appertaining to them. To this the Pope consented;An. 1111. but the Emperor after∣wards seized on his Person, and forced him to crown him, and to yield him up the right of giving Investitures: In which Concessi∣on these words are remarkable, That when any Bishop was Canonically Elected by the Cler∣gy and People, he should not be Consecrated, till he had the Ring and Staff given him by the Emperor: So that both Clergy and People continued to chuse their Bishops in the Em∣pire. It also appears, that both the People and Clergy did then Elect in France, by a Letter, in which the Clergy and People of Arras signify their choice of a Bishop to the Arch-bishop of RheimsTom. 10. Conc. p. 464..
It seems the Pope was not unwilling to have resigned up all the Regalities, which had been granted to the Bishops by the Em∣perors, so the other would have parted with the Investitures. But the Emperors pressing it further, and putting the Pope under a Force, gave him a pretence to break this whole Agreement. The Pope's Arti∣fice, in calling a Council in the Lateran, to annul that Agreement to which he himself had sworn, was as gross as the Wit of the Council was course, in playing on the word Privilegium; and saying, it was ra∣ther a Pravilegium. In conclusion, all that Agreement was made void, by which the Pope had reserved nothing to the Church as due by right, but the Oblations and Possessi∣ons which they had received from the Devo∣tions of the People, and yielded up those Lands which they derived from the Bounty of Princes; and therefore he assured the Em∣perorPasch. Ep. 22., that he should never trouble him more in that Affair; and promised, that the Bishops should never pretend to the Re∣galities, but by the King's favour: And he also complained, That contrary to the Laws of God, and the Church, the Clergy med∣led so much in Secular Affairs. It is cer∣tain, the Bishops were become in those Ages so corrupt, that if this Agreement had stood, they would have thanked the Pope little for it: for they had purchased that exemption too dear, if they had par∣ted with their Regalities for it: and there∣fore they took care, that under the pre∣tence
of their not being invested by the King, it might not be afterwards inferred that they had no Right to their Tempora∣lities; and so they did add the Canon for∣merly mentioned concerning the Lands of the Church in the Council of Rheims. But while Christendom was thus distra∣cted with the Contentions and Wars, which the Dispute about Investitures had produ∣ced, Geofry Abbot of VendosmGoffr. ad Cal. c. 3, & 4. found out a temper, that Princes should give the Re∣gal Investiture, not to the Bishoprick, which imported a Spiritual Authority, but to the Lands that had been given to the See, by the Bounty of Princes. So a Council was held in the Lateran, where the Matter was thus made up; The Emperor did yield up the right of Investiture by the Ring and the Staff, and promised to give way to Canonical Elections, and free Consecrations; and the Pope did also consent, that the Elections of Bi∣shops and Abbots in Germany should be made in the Emperor's Presence, but without Simony or Violence; and if a Difference arose concerning them, the Emperor was to give his Assent, and help to the sounder side. The Person elected, was to receive the Regalities that belonged to his See, by the Scepter, and so was to be consecrated. As for the Emperor's other Dominions, the Bishops were to come within six months after their Consecration, and Receive the Regalities by the Scepter. So this Contest, that had occasioned the effusion of a Sea of Blood, was thus compounded, that a touch of the Scepter was put instead of the giving the
Ring and Staff; and within Germany this was to be done, even before the Conse∣cration. But in other places, Princes did not de∣liver up the disposal of Bishopricks to Church-men, but still retained three things in their own hands; the one was, That Elections were not to be made, till they gave leave for it by a special Writ; the other was, That they secretly recommend∣ed the Person whom they intended to pro∣mote; and Ivo says, Their Recommenda∣tions, or Desires, were indeed Threat∣nings: the third was, That they continued still to be the Guardians of the See during the Vacancy. For immediately upon the death of the Bishop, a Commission was issued out, called, Custodia Temporalitatis. In Charles the Bald's Time, we see it was en∣acted, that this should not be done; for the Metropolitan, or the next Bishop, and the Count or Lord Lieutenant were to do it. But afterwards special Commissions were given. The defectiveness of the Re∣cords of elder Times, makes that the be∣ginnings of this do not appear among us in England, for they are as ancient as any we have. This Commission was commonly directed to the Kings Officers, or Escheators, and the Temporalities continued in their hands, till the new Bishop came to the King, and swore Fealty; upon which a Writ went out, called, Restitutio Temporalitatis. And by this Method did Kings oblige their Bishops to depend upon them. And as in case
of Rebellion, a Feudatory is to fall from his Right to the Benefice; so when the Bi∣shops were in Rebellion, it was ordinary for Princes to take their Lands into their own hands. There is no Reason to doubt of all this; the only thing in question is, To whom the Revenues of the Bishoprick belonged in that Interval? Whether the King was only the Guardian, and was bound to preserve all to the succeeding Bi∣shop; or was the Proprietor, and so might dispose of them as he pleased? The Deci∣sion is easy; By the Feudal Law, it is with∣out dispute, that when there is no certain Heir, or when the Heir is under Age, so that the Prince cannot have those Services, which are the Conditions upon which the Fee is granted, then he may take the Lands into his own hands, and is the Proprietor in that Interval. But then this can only be applyed to those Lands which the Prince, or his Progenitors, have granted to the See on those terms which Benefices were granted. And, without all question, if neither in the Original Grant, nor by any Law made af∣terwards, they were not specially exempted from it, they are liable to this burden, as well as all other Benefices whatsoever. But for the Lands that were given by devout or superstitious Persons, which were, as Charles the Great calls them, The Prices of their Sins, these are not liable to this; and the Tithes, tho' perhaps they are not due by any Divine Law, yet those Princes who made Laws for the payment of them to the
Church, founding them on the Law of God, they are also exempted from the same bur∣den. If we examine this Matter by the Laws of the Church, all Ecclesiastical Ca∣nons, even from the days of the Council of Chalcedon, have been contrary to this Cu∣stom, and that not only before Benefices were conferred on Church-men, and added to their Sees, but also afterwards. These were confirmed by Charles the Bald, as has been told; and when that Abuse was again taken up, and complained of in a Synod met at TrosleTrosle. Can. 14., it was condemned in a  long Decree; in which many Authorities are cited out of the Councils of Valence and Ries, to shew, That all the Goods of the de∣ceased Bishop, and the other Goods of the Church, were to be preserved entire to the next Bishop, and were not to be robbed. And Silvester the second, when he was Arch∣bishop of Rheims, writing to the Clergy and People of a vacant SeeEp. 118, commands them to take great care, That, according to the Laws, both of God and Man, they should preserve all the Goods, both moveable and im∣moveable, of the deceased Bishop, to him that should succeed him. In England this Rule was observed in William the Conqueror's Time, tho' he otherwise held a heavy hand over the Lands of the Church. His Son William RufusMalmes lib. 4. Mat. Paris, ad An. 1090. first seized on the vacant Sees, and wasted them grievously, giving them to Lay-men as Lay-Fees; and keeping them long vacant, that he might be enriched by
their Spoils. But this he look'd on as a Sin when he happened to fall sick, and then he placed Bishops in the vacant Sees. His Suc∣cessor Henry, when he came to the Crown, either out of Policy or Conscience, granted a Charter of LibertiesIn the red Book in the Chequer.; among which one is, That upon the death of an Arch∣bishop, Bishop, or Abbot, he should take nothing of their Demesnes, (for so Dominium signifies here) nor from the Vassals of the Church during the Vacancy; and yet he con∣tinued firmly to assert the Right of the Crown in the Point of Investitures; of which I need say nothing, that part of his Story being so well known. In France this Matter was fully setled by the Council of Nismes, where the Pope was present in Person; and Philip King of France coming thither to him to receive Absolution, did, no doubt, consent to it.  The Canon is,Ne∣maus. Can. 5. That upon a Bishop's Death, two of the Clergy of that Church should be appointed to dispose of his Goods, ac∣cording to his last Will, and should preserve what belonged to the See to the next Successor. But if any Tyrant should break into the Bi∣shop's House, and rob it, he was to be excom∣municated, and the Church was to be put un∣der  an Interdict. And in the Council held at TholouseTholos. c. 4. vide Baluz. ad cap. 18. l. 8 Concord. Imp. & Sa∣cer. by Pope Calistus, with a great number of Bishops, it was decreed, That the First Fruits, the Tithes, the Obla∣tions, the Houses and other Goods of a deceased Bishop, should not be spoiled, or kept, by Prin∣ces, or other Lay-men, under the pain of Ex∣communication.
It is true, Henry the Second of England, did not only claim the Right of the Guardianship of vacant Sees and Abbies, which could not be disputed, but  pretended also,Art. 12. Clarend. That all the Rents and Fines belonged to him, as much as his other De∣mesnes did; and that Elections ought to be made in the King's Chappel, by such Persons of the Church as he should appoint; and upon his assenting to them, the Bishop Elect ought to do him Homage before his Consecration. This was one of those Articles which the Pope con∣demned: for both his claiming the vacant Revenues, and appointing that the Electi∣on should be in his Palace, and that Homage should be done before Consecration, were directly contrary to the Maxims which the Popes had now set up. So no wonder if the Pope innsisted much to have this con∣demned, as well as ten of the other Arti∣cles. Tho' it is true, that in the Letter which Becket writ to the Bishop of London against those Articles, this is not mentioned by him: Yet when the Pope, having a great advantage of the King upon Becket's death, forced him to come to a submissionRoger Hoved., the seventh Article of his Oath was, That he should lay down all those Customs which were brought in during his Reign, against the Chur∣ches of his Dominions. Now tho' to be Guardian was no new Custom; yet to ap∣ply the vacant Revenue to his own use, was a new one. And the word Custom doth in∣clude all the condemned Articles; for the Title given to them was, A Recognizing of
the Customs and Liberties of the King's An∣cestors. But the enjoying the mean Profits during the Vacancy was now so universally claimed, not only by the Kings of England, but by most of the Princes of Christendom, that that Article was only changed in those two parts of it, concerning the Election in the King's Chappel, and the Homage that was done before Consecration: but as to the other Particular, of the King's taking the Revenue during the Vacancy, it has continued in practice without dispute, ever since that time to this day. And tho there were Complaints made often in Parliament to the Kings, of the Rapine & Spoil made by their Officers, when the Regale was opened; yet the Rights of Guardianship, & of raising the mean Profits were never controverted. In Arragon the Princes were so much wrought on by some Considerations, that they renounced the Rights of possessing the Spoils of the deceased Bishops, or  of the vacant Sees: Of which Baluzius has published some GrantsAd. l 8. c. 18. Con∣cord. Imp. & Sacer.: Ermengard Vicecountess of Narbonne did, in conside∣ration of a sum of Mony paid by the Arch∣bishop of NarbonneIbid., oblige her self and her Heirs for ever, not to rob the Goods of the deceased Bishop, nor take away Honours, (that is, Benefices in the Bishops Gift) nor Fruits, during the Vacancy; and appointed, that all that was so taken, should be restored; which was soon after confirmed by Papal Bulls. From hence it appears, that the Abuses of the Spoils were still continued,
notwithstanding the former Condemnati∣ons. But the seizing on them, was rather imputed to the ravenousness and violence of Bailiffs and Stewards, than justified on any good Title: And the Sum that was gotten for the See of Narbonne being 2000 Solides, was so inconsiderable, that it seems it was given rather to make the Grant the more irrevocable, since purchased by an Onerous Title, (as the Civil Law calls it) than as a valuable consideration in any de∣gree equal to the favour obtained by it. The ancientest Privilege of this kind was obtained by Foulk Arch-bishop of Rheims,Flodo∣ad. l. 4. c. 2 from Charles the Simple; who needing his assistance against Eudo; would deny him nothing that he desired. So he procured a Bull from Pope Formosus, that upon the death of the Arch-bishop, the Rents of that See should not be applyed to the King's Treasury, but reserved for his Successor; and that the Metropolis (i. e. the Chap∣ter) should only meddle with them. Yet this did not secure it from the Regale after∣wards. It was often questioned, whether the datory Princes, or the Soveraign, had the right to the Regale. Pasquier shews that the Dukes of Guienne had itRecher∣ches de la France. l 3. c. 31.; but whether it was by an express Provision, as was made with the Dukes of Brittain, or by the Nature and Rights of their Princi∣pality, is not clear. When Lewis the Se∣venth married Eleanor Dutchess of Guienne,  (afterwards divorced by him, and married
to Henry the Second of England) both his Father Lewis the Gross and he, did, at the Petition of the Bishop of Bourdeaux and his Suffragan Bishops, grant them a full and a canonical Liberty in the choice of their Bishops and Abbots, (by which they were neither obliged to sue out a Congé d'Elire, nor a Confirmation of the Election); and he freed them from doing of Homage, and provided, that in a Vacancy, all the Goods of the former Incumbent, should, by the King's Authority, be reserved to his Successor. These Favours were granted, to induce the Clergy the more willingly to concur in the reunion of Guienne to the Crown. But in another Privilege granted by the same King to the See of Chalons, at the de∣sire of the Bishop, that thereafter, upon his death, there should be no Spoils made of the Furniture within the House, or of the Cattel belonging to him, as was wont to be  by ancient custom, he exceptedLibert de l' Egl. Gall. c. 16. art. 1. Corn, Wine, Gold, and Silver; all which he says he would, according to ancient custom, retain, and have them come under the King's Hand and Power. By this we see, that a general Spoil was commonly practised in that Age, and that in an Act of special Favour, yet the things of greatest Consequence were still reserved. As for the other parts of the Regale, which are the enjoying the Va∣cant Fruits, and the Collation of simple Be∣nefices, it appears he thought them unlaw∣ful, and did not claim them; and was so far from it, that when Pope Lucius the
Second, to court his Favour, sent him a Bull with a Privilege, that in all his Cathe∣drals he should dispose of the first Vacancy, and enjoy the mean Profits; he burnt the Bull with Indignation, and said, He had rather burn a thousand such Grants, than have his Soul be tormented in Hell FireWals. Hypod. Newstria ad An. 1148.. And now I shall close the Chapter, having clearly shewed that this Servitude which the Church came under, was one (and but one of the least) of the ill Effects of the excessive Elevation of the Episcopal Dig∣nity, and that Bishopricks being endowed to so high a degree, it was almost necessary for Princes to secure the Peace of their Kingdoms, by taking their Elections really into their own hands: tho' a shaddow of one was still left, and now that was lessened in one main Point, which was, That the Peo∣ple, after the 12th Century, had no other  share in them, but that they met and ap∣plauded what choice soever the Clergy had  madeEp. 1. Celest. 2..Ep. 1. Alex. 3. The Popes were, no doubt, willing to bring the Elections wholly into the Hands of the Clergy, as well as they had assumed the Investitures to themselves, and Princes were not unwilling to take it likewise out of popular hands: So of all sides they were forsaken: and it grew also to be generally received, that instead of the whole Clergy, only those of the Chapter did chuse; and instead of the concurrence of the Peoples Suffrage, there was only a publication
made of the choice, in which the Chapter had agreed: upon which a shout of ap∣plause was made, and this passed for the consent of the People. By what steps it grew to this from Hincmare's Time, in the end of the 9th Century, in which we are sure it went far otherwise, is not so cer∣tain. For in those Ages, as they writ very carelesly, so their Writings are really such, both for Stile and Matter, that it is a very painful thing to search much into them. As for the distribution of the Churches Revenue, that proportion formerly set for the four-fold Division, was now forgot. And as Zonaras says, That in the East there were no Stewards in his Time, which ought to have been in every Church, according to the Council of ChalcedonZon. ad Can. 26. Calced.; So there was no occasion for it in the West, except for the Chapters, since there was no more any Dividend made of the Bishop's Revenue. Calistus in this Age, continues to useEp. 8. that Phrase that is in Charles the Great's Ca∣pitulars, That the Goods of the Church were the Vows of the Faithful, the Prices of Sins, and the Patrimonies of the Poor. Yet they did now eat up the Sins of the Peo∣ple, and defrauded the Poor of their Pro∣vision. It is said of Ado Bishop of Vien∣naMezer., that he had this always in his Mouth, and in his Thoughts, That the Goods of the Church were the Patrimonies of the Poor, and that a Church-man ought not to
use them but for his Necessities. And pursu∣ant to that Maxim, his whole Family con∣sisted but of one Priest, and one Servant. To which that incomparable Historian adds, with a freedom that becomes him well, this Reflection, By this good Exam∣ple, he let all Prelats see, that he who is great in himself, needs not an Equipage and Servants to make him appear great.
CHAP. VI. Of the Rights of the Regale; and of the Progress of this Matter, from the Time of Philippus Augustus, to the present Age. AS long as Church-men were adorned with the Vertues that became their Profession, and that Holy Religion which they were to propagate, it was no wonder that both Princes and Subjects contributed liberally towards the support of a sort of Men, who deserved so well of the World, and imployed what was put in their hands so worthily. But the Cross and Persecution have proved the greatest Blessings to the Church; and the Christian Religion seems calculated for such a State, more than for great Prosperity. It was a sad, but a true Remark, that when the Chalices were of Wood, the Priests were of Gold; but when the Chali∣ces grew to be of Gold, the Priests became woodden. And whether that be true or not, of the Voice in Constantine's Time; To day is Poison poured out on the Church, the Effects of it have shewed, that what was one of the greatest blessings of Heaven, was in a course of some Ages so perverted by the covetousness and ambition of some corrupt
Church-men, that it is scarce credible to what a degree those Abuses were carried. Church-Benefices were no more considered as anciently, to be heavy and painful Em∣ployments; in which the more exalted the Degree was, the greater were the Labours; but were look'd on as places of Honour and Profit, to which Men did aspire by all the basest Methods of Simony, or servile Compliances: And when they were pos∣sessed of them, they dream'd of nothing, but either of Intrigues of State, or of the Pomp and Pleasures of Life. But for a Care of Souls, a strict inspection into the Lives and Labours of the Clergy, and a severe preparation of those who were to be brought into Holy Orders, these things were quite laid aside. The Government of the Church was put into the hands of their Chancellors; who as they were Canonists by Profession, which is the fullest of Tricks, and empty Distinctions of any Study in the World, so they have for many Ages been universally complained of, as an exacting and cheating sort of People: And for the other parts of the Episcopal Function, that is, Ordination, Confirmation, with the other Branches of that Office, if the bare doing of them, in the slightest manner possible, was enough, then they performed their Duties: But the using that care which became Men, that were to give an account of the Souls committed to them, was not in their thoughts. There followed besides an infinite deal of other palpable Corrup∣tions,
such as Children being made Bi∣shops; Dispensations for Pluralities and Nonresidences, and that vile Trade of Gratia expectativàs, Resignations in favorem, Coadjutores, Ʋnions, Commendams, with many more that were brought in and de∣fended by those wretched Corrupters of all Ecclesiastical Rules, the Canonists. It was no wonder if the World became so much scandalized at these things, that it was lit∣tle considered how Bishops were either made or oppressed. For whereas it was an ancient Maxim, That a Benefice must be joined to an Office, which was meant of some spiritual Employment, the Canonists un∣derstood the word Office, in the modern acceptation, for some of the Rituals of the Church: So that if a Church-man did per∣form some parts of these, it was thought that he discharged himself of the Obliga∣tion that lay upon him. But with what Niceties soever the Canonists might dispute about those Matters, the world saw through them, and perceived plainly, that the bounty of former Ages were strangely mis∣applyed; and therefore, as the Corrupti∣ons of their Courts occasioned many Ap∣peals and Prohibitions, which were gran∣ted by the Civil Judicatories, by which their Authority was almost wholly enerva∣ted: So they were making inroads upon them, by Taxes, and extending the Regale, and the other Rights of the Crown, so far upon them, that the Church came to be as much changed in the Immunities and Li∣berties
which she formerly enjoyed, as Church-men were in the exemplariness of their Lives, and the strictness of their La∣bours: of which I shall give some account in this particular of the Regale. The first Authentical Evidence of the  whole Regale in its full extent, is in the Te∣stament made by Philippus Augustus, before he went to the Holy Land; by which as he setled the Regency, during his absence, on the Queen, and the Arch-bishop of Rheims; So among other Provisions, one is,Libert. de l' Eglise Gall. c. 16. art 3. That they should hold the Regalia in their hands, till the Bishop Elect was consecrated and blessed; and that then they should restore them, without any dispute; and if a Prebend, or any Ecclesiastical Benefice, should fall vacant while the Regalia was in the King's hand, then they were charged to bestow it in the best manner they could, to good and learned Men, by the advice of Frier Bernard. Here are both Branches of the Regale, mentioned as things then in use; and indeed twenty Years be∣fore this, it appears that the vacant Reve∣nue was then looked on, as belonging pro∣perly to the King; and that he was not on∣ly the Guardian, and obliged to keep it for the next Bishop, but might dispose of it  as he pleased; for in a grant of that KingsIb. art. 2 he expresses a dislike of converting the Ob∣lations and Rents of Altars to his own uses, and tho' he took the vacant Revenue of Paris into his own hands; yet he gave the Profits of the Chevet, or High Chappel,Capiceria. to a Nunnery. Thus it appears that he look'd
on himself as having a right to assign them to what good use he pleased; but did not believe that he was obliged to reserve them for the next Successor. At the same time, a Letter of Pope A∣lexander the Thirds, mentions, that Henry the second of England, did not only bring the vacant Revenue into his Exchequer, but did also give the Prebends that fell during the VacancyCenc. Imp. & Sacr. l. 8. c. 22. art. 7; which he does not cen∣sure, for he only complains that he had gi∣ven two Prebends to one Person, and so does not question the Right of conferring them, but only the ill use of it. Yet it seems this must be only understood of a Presentation to Prebends, and not of giv∣ing Collation to them;Ep. 28. for that Pope, by a Decretal sent to the Bishops of England, condemned all Collations made by Lay∣men, either to Churches or Prebends, and declared them null and void. The Learned Arch-bishop of ParisIb. c. 23.  thinks, that upon the Agreement which Pope Calistus made with the Emperor; by which the Bishops were obliged to do for ob∣taining their Regalities, the things that ought to be done; they were now brought under all those Services and Duties to their Princes, that other Lay-fees were liable to; and that from that time, during the Vacancy, those Profits were made out of their Lands, to which all other Fees were subject. He al∣so urges the Silence of these Popes, that di∣sputed the Right of Investitures, concern∣ing the Regale, to shew that it was not then
in use, otherwise they had not been so re∣served in such a Point: Therefore he thinks Princes, to recompence themselves for the abatement of their Prerogative in the matter of the Investitures, did convert the vacant Revenues to their own uses, and confer Benefices. But Lewis the 7th calling it an ancient Custom in the Year 1147, we must give it a higher Original than an Agreement made five and twenty Years before; so that Mezeray seems to have hit it better. It has been observed, that the Clergy used to spoil the Goods of the deceased Bishop, pretending they had a right to them; and after that the People, at least the Poor, came to do it, pretending likewise to a Right; and that what the Bishop had sa∣ved, was out of their share: Upon which it is reasonable to think, that the King's Officers assumed it as a Right of the Crown, to which all the Rights of the People did accrew. Yet at first this was every where condemned as an Abuse; but as Princes do commonly assert a Right for any thing which their Ancestors have once practised, it came after some time to be claimed as a Right of the Crown. As for the mean Profits, nothing can be pretended for applying them to the Princes uses, but the Feudal Laws, that gave the Lord of the Fee the Guardianship and Rents of their Vassals Lands, when they were under Age. The Guardians named by the King, did gather in the Rents during
the Vacancies. And it is not to be doubted, but the Elect Bishops at first, to procure their Investitures to be easily granted, were willing to discharge the Guardian for his Intromission; and it might grow by degrees into an use; that whereas at first the Guar∣dian was to keep the Profits for the next Bishop, the Bishop might forgive them, and so the Prince either made the Guardian ac∣count for them to himself, or gave them away. This of the Guardians named by Princes enjoying the Fruits, was first begun in the time of Lothaire and Charles the Bald; and tho' it was condemned not long after, and a Law was made against it by the latter of these, yet now the Reverence which for∣mer Ages had for the Church, being through the miscarriages of Clergy-men converted to Contempt and Envy, every way that lessened their Profits was well liked of, and Princes thought all was good Purchase that they could draw from Church-men. So what was begun as an Abuse, and condemned by Law, yet con∣tinued to be practised, till upon that pra∣ctise a Right, formerly not thought on, was grounded: And among the Simoniacal Con∣tracts, for which Gregory the Seventh Ar∣raigns the Bishops that were Invested by Princes, it is probable enough this Release of the Guardian from all Accounts might be one of them. For it is plain, that he asserted the Successors Right to the Reve∣nues of the vacant Church, and that no Lay-man was to meddle, either with the
Spoils or Lands of the Church, which ap∣pears in his Sentence of Deposition against the Bishop of BambergLib. 2. Ep. 76.: And Bishops being obliged to pay a Fine at their Entry or Investiture,Con. Rhotom. Can. 1. it was perhaps agreed, that the discharge of the Mean Profits might be a part of this Fine: and the Ca∣nons made soon after that, against the Spoils of Bishops, seem to be intended to condemn the Regale, which was still a Con∣sequent of the other; for both the Spoils and the Revenues were seized in the King's Right as Guardian: And it must be con∣fessed, that if the Guardians might not seize what was in the Bishop's Hands, much less might they raise the Rents; but that these were to be preserved to the next Suc∣cessor. As for the Right of Presentation to all Benefices that fell, it was certainly in the King's Hand as Guardian; but for giving Collation to them, it is not easy to appre∣hend, how by the Principles of that Church it can be defended: For the Bishop's Colla∣tion or Institution upon the Presentation, is an Act of Spiritual Jurisdiction, by which he gives judgment in favour of the Per∣sons presented. It is true, the Corrupti∣ons of former Ages have occasioned the passing of Laws, and serving of Writs in some Nations, by which a Bishop is forced to Collate, unless he can give a good Rea∣son why he does it not. It not being enough for him to say, he doth not judg the Person fitly qualified for the Charge, which is no
small part of the slavery Bishops are brought under. For it is evident, by daily experience, that there are many Persons against whom nothing in Law can be objected, who yet are far from being duly qualified for a Charge to which they may be presented, and they may perhaps be capable to serve in a lower Sphere, or privater Place, and yet not fit to be advanced very high. In this Bishops are now shackled, and have no more the judgment of Discretion left them in their Collations. But still the Collation is an Act of the Bishops Jurisdiction; and tho' the Presentation to Benefices in the Bishops Gift, may belong to the Temporality, yet the Collation certainly belongs to the Spi∣rituality, though, both in such Cases are put in the same Writing: because it is not natural for a Bishop to present to himself, and then to collate upon it. So both these Acts, tho' flowing from the Bishop by se∣veral Qualifications, yet being mixed, the Kings of France have assumed this power of collating to Benefices without Cure, with the rest of the mean Profits. The Canonists have found out an excuse for this,Panorm ad cap. ult. de foro Compt. that the King being anointed with Holy Oil, has thereby this Right, so they make the King a mixt Person, com∣pounded of an Ecclesiastical and Civil Ca∣pacity. And in particular, the Kings of France are, by the Right of the Crown, Canons of the ChurchesPasqu. l. 3. c. 32. of Angiers, Mans, Tours, and Poitiers; as the Empe∣ror is a Canon of Saucta Maria de la Torre.
Others argue from the roundness of the Crown, that therefore the King's Preroga∣tive extends equally to all his Subjects. But this were a far better Argument to prove their King should be Universal Monarch, and so the round World and the Round Crown should go together: Only all other Kings Crowns being round, which has ever been so since Heads were round, spoils the force of it. Ruzous carries this to a pitch of Flattery that is scarce to be imitated; for, he says, the King confers Benefices by his single Authority, because he has the perfect knowledg of all things in his Breast. But this is all trifling, and like the Canonists way of reasoning. Certainly the Coronation is nothing but a solemn Investing and Bles∣sing of the King; and the Rites used in it, give him no Ecclesiastical Power at all. But now Men are ashamed to argue so loosly, and therfore it is said, that the Reason why the King gives Collations for Benefices without Cure is, because that in these there is nothing to be done, but barely the Offices of the Church; and therefore the King's Grant may qualify a Man for them: To which it is unanswerably replyed, accord∣ing to the Principles of that Church, That if the King in the Vacancy makes the Dean the Arch-deacon and the Chapter, he con∣fers that in which there is a Jurisdiction in∣volved, which may be easily reduced to a Cure of Souls, since the Dean & Chapter are in many Sees the Vicars for the Spirituality
during the Vacancy, and the Arch-Deacon is the Bishops Visitor, so that from their Authority many Acts that are purely Spi∣ritual do flow, and yet they derive their Power only from the King's Grant. To this I see not what Answer can be well made, without acknowledging a Suprema∣cy in Ecclesiastical Matters, as a Right in∣herent in the Crown: and to speak plain∣ly, for all the Noise the Church of Rome makes against the King of England's Su∣premacy, this of collating to Benefices without Cure, in which the Government of the Church is so much concerned, which our Kings did before the Reformation, and the Kings of France do to this day, is as high an Act of Supremacy as any, that our Princes since the Reformation have pre∣tended to. So if it is acknowledged, as it is in that Church, that there is such a di∣stinction between the Temporal and Spiri∣tual Authority, as that a Secular Prince has no Authority over all Persons in all Causes; then it cannot be justified, that a Spiritual Power should be conferred by a Secular Per∣son. Nor can I see how the seizing on the Tithes or Oblations can be justified, accord∣ing to their Principles. For if these belong to the Church by a divine Law, then what right soever a Prince may have, as Lord of the Fee, to appropriate to himself the Rents of the Barony, or Temporal Lordship, in that Interval, yet he ought not to ex∣tend that to those Endowments which the Church did not derive from the Bounty of
his Ancestors, unless they were either mix∣ed with the other Fees, or were appropria∣ted as a Lay-see, as the Tithes were in many places. By the Will of Philippus Augustus it ap∣pears, that in his Time the Right of the Regale was not so inherent in the Person of the King, as it has been since pretended to be, so that the Regent could not meddle with it. It continued so in St. Lewis time;Lib. de l' Egl. Gall. c. 16. art. 12 for when he went to the Holy Land, he  declared his Mother Regent; and among her other Powers, one was, That she might confer Ecclesiastical Dignities and Benefices; re∣ceive the Fealties of Bishops and Abbots; re∣store the Regalities, and grant Licenses for making Elections. And afterward, when he made his Voyage in the Year 1269Ib. art. 17. he lodged that power wholly in the hands of  Church-men; for the Arch-bishop of Paris was authorized to present to all Benefices Vacant, as well by the Regale, as any other way, by the advice of the Chancellor of Paris, the Prior of the Dominicans, and the Guardi∣an of the Franciscans. But the Notion of the Canonists, concerning the King's being a Sacred Person, taking place, the Regents were not allowed to confer Benefices, ac∣cording to Le MaistreCap. 8. de Regal.; tho' du TilletCap. de Regent. ad fin. is of another mind. During King John's Captivity in England, when his Son Charles, then Dauphin, was Regent; he in∣deed gave the Benefices, but all was con∣firmed by his Father when he was set at li∣berty: And when Francis the first was a
Prisoner in Spain; and his Mother was ap∣pointed Regent; the Parliament of Paris represented to her, that she could not con∣fer Benefices. So it seems this was thought to be derived from the Holy Oil, and inhe∣rent in the King's Person. Some Sees came and compounded for their freedom from the Regale, and for a liberty of Election; and others pretended they were not subject to it. The King di∣spensed  with it to the See of ArrasPasqu. l. 3. c. 31.; and both granted them a liberty of chusing their Bishop, without asking a License for it; and also discharged them of all Milita∣ry Service, only they were obliged to bring their Bishop Elect, after he was confirmed, to swear Fealty, and to pay what was customary for Procurations yearly, if the King came among them. As for Military Service, that Au∣thor tells us what the old Rates were for some SeesIbid.; Sens was to set out four Horses, Paris three, Chartres three, Orle∣ans two, Troyes two, Noyon five, Beauvais five, Auranches five, Lisieux twenty, and Bayeux twenty. There is great inequality in these, and the numbers are not propor∣tioned to the Wealth or Dignity of the Sees; but the rating them in this manner, was either done by favour, or with relati∣on to their Neighbourhood to some Enemy at that time, or to the other Burdens that might then lie on them. In another ex∣emption granted to the Bishop of Auxer∣re,Ibid.  in which the Regale is discharged, the Military Service, and the giving of
Aids is reserved; and in the discharge that the See of Nevers obtained, both the Mili∣tary Service and Procurations are reser∣ved. As for the Procurations, all Lay-fees were  liable to a Tax, when the King made his Progress to visit his Provinces, and do Ju∣stice in them. In the room of which, are the Circuits and Assizes now in England. These Progresses being an ease to the Coun∣try, when Justice was brought to their doors, it was thought reasonable that the King's Vassals should defray that Charge, at least some part of it. Some were taxed at an hundred Livres Tournois for a Jest or Gist, that is, a nights Lodging. In the Year 1382, the Bishop of Arras was for this taxed at 240 Francs of Gold. There were several other Exemptions procured in this and the following Reigns; but tho' it is very probable there was some consideration given to the King for these Grants, yet there is nothing mentioned in them, but that the King gave them out of his regard to Religion, and for the Remedy of his Soul, and the Soul of his Parent. Other Sees it seems pretended to Exemptions, but did, upon trial, renounce their Pretensi∣ons: For the Bishop of MasconLib de l'Egl. Gul. C. 16. art. 4 did,  in the Name of the Dean and Chapter, ac∣knowledg the King's Right to the Regale, both in that See, and in all the other Sees in the Kingdom of France, (in which we are not to include all that is at this day reckoned the Kingdom of France, but only what was
then in the King's possession); and that if a Bishop died Intestat, all his Moveables, as well as the Rents of the See belonged to the King. In which it is to be observed, that the Spoils of the deceased Bishop is here reckoned a part of the Regale: and so all those Canons that condemned those Spoils, are to be applied likewise to the raising of the Mean Profits, since these two went al∣ways together. Pope Innocent the Fourth  did a little after this acknowledg,Ib. art. 5 That the King of France might confer Prebends du∣ring a vacancy, according to the ancient and approved Custom of the Kingdom. And when Provinces held by Feudatory Princes, re∣verted to the Crown, the Bishops, tho' they did not judg themselves obliged to swear Fealty to their Prince, yet did it to the King, as appears by a Record of a Protestation made by the Bishop of Mons,Ib. art. 7  upon his swearing Fealty to the King; which sets forth that he had done it as the other Bishops of France did; the King likewise declaring, that he should not ob∣lige him to come to his Army in Person, nor send any on his own Charge; and that he would not lay any new Imposition upon his Church; and that upon the Metropoli∣tan's Letters certifying his Confirmation, the Regale should be restored: But for the future, the Bishop Elect was obliged to come, within forty days after the restitu∣tion of the Regale, and swear Fealty to the King, if he was within the Kingdom: and if he failed to do it, the King might
again seize on the Regalia, and keep them in his hands till he had swore Fealty. And in conclusion he protests, that if that Coun∣ty came to be separated from the Crown, the Bishop should not be bound to swear such an Oath to the Count. Yet this par∣ticular of restoring the Regale when the Metropolitan certified the Confirmation, obliging the Bishop to come afterward and swear within fourty days, was not thought so safe: So it has been since that time changed, and the Regale is not now restor∣ed till the Oath of Fealty is registred, and upon that the King's hand is taken off. By this it also appears, that the Bishops thought they were not liable to the Regale, when they were subject to any In∣ferior Prince. But we find that the Counts of Tholouse  pretended to it in their Dominions. It is true, Count Alphonsus did not only re∣nounce it, but condemned it. And in a grant by which he discharged the See of  Tholouse of it, he calls it,Catel. His. de Countes de Tolouse. that most wicked custom of his Ancestors, by which they seized violently on the Goods of the deceased Bishop. It is very probable, the other cus∣tom of enjoying the mean Profits had not then prevailed, otherwayes, it is like he would have yeilded that up likewise. But it seems his Successors did not think them∣selves bound by this, for afterwards their Officers did make Seizures. But the Popes condemned them for it, and when the Offi∣cial of Tholouse had excommunicated the
Counts Officers for assuming the Guardi∣anship of that See, upon a report of the Bishop's death, which afterwards proved to be false, Pope Clement the third did con∣firm the Sentence. And indeed in Languedoc the chief Co∣lour for the Regale is wanting, which is the Feudal Tenures: For the Lawyers there say, that all their Lands are held in Franc Aloide, and not for Military Ser∣vice. But Raimond Count of Tholouse be∣ing excommunicated by P. Innocent for his favour to the Albigenses, submitted to what Conditions he was pleased to im∣pose  upon him: And among these it was providedBal. ad c. 26. l. 8. Con. Imp. & Sac. that he should lay no Imposi∣tions on the Church, nor seize on the Spoils of the Bishops, nor upon any pretence of Cu∣stom take the Guardianship of them, nor any way meddle in their Elections: To all which he submitted and confirmed them by Char∣ter. And this includes those Churches in the Provinces of Vienna, Arles, Nar∣bonne, Ausch, Bourdeaux and Berry, that were under his Dominion. Thus an op∣portunity was then taken, when the Prince was not able to resist the Thunders of Rome, to force him to yield up those Pri∣vileges. The Pope watched all such Oc∣casions to make Princes yield up their Rights in this particular. Frederic the Se∣cond being advanced to the Imperial Dig∣nity in a great measure by Pope Innocents  means, was likewise prevailed on to re∣nounceGoldas. the abuse of seizing on the Spoils of
the Bishops after their death, or the Revenues of vacant Churches, and to give up all the Spiritualities (which is to be understood of the Collation of Benefices or the re∣straint upon Elections) to the Pope and the other Bishops. It was no Wonder that Frederic granted this; for Otho the Fourth  had some Years before this granted that Branch of it, which relates to the Spoils of the Bishops. Upon this it is alleaged, that Provence and Dauphine being then Fees of the Empire, were included within this, which became a Law of the Empire: For it was confirmed by a Golden Bull in the Year 1219. The King of England as Duke of Guyenne, had some Dispute with the Dean and Chapter of Bourdeaux about the Guardi∣anship and the Regalia of that See: whether they pretended an Exemption upon the grant of Lewis the Seventh, or disputed it because he was not their anointed King, does not appear. But King Edward the First thought it not safe to provoke the Clergy of that Principality, it being at so great a distance from him, and in such danger of falling under the Crown of France, therefore he, as it is expressed in  his Charter,4. Edw. 1 Rot. pat. num. 13. out of his regard to God and his own Soul, and the Souls of his An∣cestors and Heirs, discharged the See for ever of it, and commanded his Bailiffs not to seize upon it either on pretence of the Guardianship or the Regalia. But even in that Grant he asserts his Right to it, and the Possessi∣on
of his Ancestors, tho for the future he  yields it up. Upon this, the Year after that, the Chapter of Bourdeaux procured a Sentence in the Court of Parliament of Paris, declaring, that the Guardianship of that See in the Vacancy belonged to them. By which it appears, that they had disputed it for some time with the King of England, and that he had not till then yeilded up the Point to them: but he still retained it in the other Churches of Guyenne. In his Father Henry the Third's time, it is clear, the Kings of England were in Possession of the Regale in those parts; for we have yet among our Records a Writ of that  Kings directed to his Steward in GascoigneVasc. 26 Hen. 3. p. 1. num. 5. to seize on the Lands of the Bishoprick of Baiess, the Bishop being dead, and to keep them in his hands so long as the See was va∣cant. But as Edward the First yielded up his Right to the Chapter of Bourdeaux, so he came likewise to an Agreement with the Bishop and Chapter of BaiessVafi. 6. & 7. Ed. 1. num. 3., by which, as they yeilded up several things to the King, so it was agreed that the Chap∣ter should have the Custody of the Rents of the Bishoprick during the Vacancy of the See; and this was agreed to, and con∣firmed by the King five Years after12. Ed. 1. m. 8.. It grew upon this more common for other Sees, to purchase the Guardianship during the Vacancy from the Kings of England. For in the seventeenth Year of that same King's Reign17. Ed. 1. m. 12., the Bishop and Chap∣ter of Arie compounded for it, and gave
the King a Mojety of their Rents to be employed for their Defence, and in Lieu of that, he renounced his Right of Seizing the Lands of the Church during the Vacancy, in the Right of the Regale, or upon any other frivolous account whatsoever. So it is plain that Edward the First who came to the  Crown two Years before the Council of Lions, was in the Possession of the Regale at that time, both in Guyenne and Gasco∣igne; and his renouncing it was, either out of Policy to engage the Clergy to his Interests, or by Sale the Grants being purchased from him by the Agreements, which the Bishops and Chapters made with him. So that from this it must be acknowleged, that the extending the Regale to Guyenne and Gascoigne, does not at all contradict the De∣cree of the Council of Lions, since it is no new custom introduced since that time, but was then possessed by the Kings of En∣gland. But tho they delivered up the Re∣gale in their Southern Dominions; yet in Normandy, where they thought themselves in less danger of losing the Country, they kept this Right still in their own hands, as they did also in all the Sees in En∣gland. The Dukes of Britain enjoyed the same Rights in former times, and even in St. Lew∣is's  time, when the Duke called Mal-Clerk (for his ignorance and weakness) was forced to submit himself, and do Homage for his Dutchy; yet the Regale (called in Britain the Regaire) was still reserved to
him. Almost all the little Princes in France pretended to the same Right: For when the Brothers of the Crown had Domini∣ons assigned them in Appanage, all the Au∣thority that the King had in those Terri∣tories was transferred to them, Homage being only to be done by them to the King as Supream Lord. This of the Regale went among the rest till St Lewis's time, and he perhaps observing the Simony and other Corruptions, to which the necessities of these lesser Courts might sometimes expose them, thought fit to reserve the Rights of the Regale to the Crown, in the Investiture, which he gave his Brother Charles into the Counties of Anjou and Mans: And so it grew a custom after his time for the Kings of France to reserve that to themselves, as it was declared in a Process between the Count of Alencon, Brother to Philip the Hardy, and the Bishop of Seez. In England tho the King had the Regale over all England, yet Gilbert de ClareRot. Pat. 8. Ed. 1. Earl of Glocester, Hereford and Gla∣morgan  pretended that the Guardianship, and the giving of Dignities did belong to him, during the Vacancy of the See of Landaffe. The King on the other hand claimed, that the Guardianship and Collation of Dignities belonged to the Crown. But they came to an Aggree∣ment upon these Terms; The Earle and his Lady, were during their Lives to enjoy it as their Ancestors had done, but the Bishop Elect was to swear Feal∣ty
to the King, and then a Writ was to go out requiring the Earl to restore him the Temporalities, but after their death it was to be united to the Crown. The Regale being now established in most  places under crowned Heads, but not yielded without Dispute to Princes of a lower Dignity, the second Council of Li∣ons was summoned by Gregory the Tenth: there met in it above five hundred Bishops, besides many Abbots. And among their other Canons, one relates to this matter,2 Ludg. c. 12. and is now the chief ground on which the Pope founds all his proceedings; By it they condemned all Persons whatsoever, that should begin a new Pretension to the Regale or Guardianship of vacant Benefices, and seize on their Goods; and decreed that how eminent soever their Dignity were, both they and their Officers, whether Clergy men or others, should (ipso facto) without any Process be under Excommunication; and the Clergy that did not oppose them, all they could, were to be su∣spended from receiving the mean Profits of their Churches. But a Proviso was added, that such persons as claimed those Rights, either by Ancient Custom, or as Founders of Churches, should not abuse their Rights, and they are required to charge their Officers not to seize on any thing, that did not belong to the Fruits or Revenues of the vacant place, and that they should not make Wasts or Dilapidations. De Marca in the Memorial which he drew for proving the Exemption of many of the Churches of France, says, that this Decree
of the Council of Lions was procured at the desire of Philip the Hardy, who had some Scruples in his Conscience concern∣ing this matter, and desired the Determi∣nation of the Council in it; and at that time the Popes, being wholly linkt into the Interests of France by the House of An∣jou's heading the party of the Guelfs in Ita∣ly, and being made Kings of Naples, were ready enough to do any thing that might please the French Court, that being an Age in which Favours were granted or denied with the grossest partiality possible. But two Years before the sitting of this Coun∣cil,  King Philip, under whom Languedoc was united to the Crown, commanded the mean profits of the Church of Alby to be restored, because he found they did not be∣long to him by custom. This Council being received as a Gene∣ral Council, particularly in France where is was held; the Churches of the Provin∣ces, then in the hands of Feudatary Princes, or that had been under them, and had procured their Sees to be exempted from that burden, did now reckon themselves secure: And after this when any dispute arose, whether the Regale was due or not,  the Decision was to be always made accord∣ing to Use and Wont. And about fifty Years after this, in the Council of AvignonAven. c. 24., an Excommunication ipso facto was denoun∣ced against all Laymen of what Rank or Dig∣nity soever, that should seize on the Rents of Vacant Sees, except it was allowed of either
by Priviledge or Custom. So that by this decree the Churches were not obliged to prove their Exemptions, but it lay upon Princes to prove their Titles: For it was supposed that Church Lands, being once separated for Holy uses, were so far sa∣cred, that none might meddle with them without a very good Authority. This was accounted a part of their Liberty, and according to the Roman Law, Liberty proves it self; whereas Servitude was to be be made out by good Evidence. And hence it was that the Provinces of Guienne, Languedoc, Dauphine and Provence, being annexed to the Crown, the Kings of France did not extend this Prerogative to them for some Ages: And so Philip of Valois,Pasq. Recher. l. 3. c. 31.  in an Ordinance which he made con∣cerning the Regale, mentions it not as a General Right, but as restrained to those Churches in which he had that Right. And so the Bishop of Poitiers in the Year 1306ibid., having been made to accompt for the Vacant Fruits, it was afterwards found that he was not Subject to the Regale, and so the Mony he had payed was restored to him. And Philip le Bel did by an express order free the Churches of Narbonne from being brought under the Regale, tho as de Marca has observed, there was a very important error committed when the Copies of that order came to be printed, Volumus being put for Nolumus, which is in the Original Record. In that King's time the Original of the
Right of the Regale was fully stated in an order which the King sent to the Arch∣bishop of Sens and the Bishop of AuxerreCon. Imp. & Sa∣cer. l. 8. c. 36. ib. c. 22. to represent it to the Pope, upon a Con∣test that rose concerning the Church of Chartres, which is to this effect; That as a Fee when there was no Vassal in it, was pos∣sessed by the Superior Lord, and the Reve∣nues were enjoyed, because there was none to do Homage for it, till one came that was oblig∣ed to perform the Service due by that Fee; So the King and his Predecessors had during the Vacancy of that See taken the Temporal Ju∣risdiction and Revenues into their own hands. It has been clearly made out formerly, that this was not so ancient as their Be∣neficiary Tenures, but crept in later as a part of the Feudal Law. One difficul∣ty was afterwards raised by that mad Pope Boniface the EightSponda∣nus ad an. 1302. concerning the Colla∣tion of Benefices, which he would not at all allow of, because it had not been expresly named by the Council of Lions; for in the Decree they made, the Fruits and Reve∣nues were only named, tho several of the former Popes had approved even of that point, and the Canonists had set it up as a Rule in Law, that Collations belonged to the Fruits; but Boniface said it was a Spiritual thing, and called them Hereticks that said Benefices could be conferred by the Laity. Yet Philip the Fair got some learned Men to assert hi Right, which was justified as found∣ed on Custom, and on the great advantage which the Church had by the Defence and
Protection it received from the King. It is observable, that during that quarrel, the King never pretended to an unconfined Regale in all his Kingdom, but expresly li∣mited it to those Churches that were subject to it. And upon this whole matter the clear progress of the Rights of the Regale, was as follows. The King's Officers at first seized on the Spoils, and they kept them in their hands till a new Bishop was chosen, and then accompted for them to him. But there could be no occasion for long Va∣cancies before the custom of not choosing, till a Licence was obtained, came in: For an∣ciently the Election was often made before the dead Bishop was buried, so that there was no occasion given to complain of any things but of the Fruits. But when the Con∣ge d'Elire was made necessary, the granting of it came to be delayed according to the humour of Princes, or the Interest which those about them had. These delays of Elections were first complained of in the Reignes of Lothaire and Charles the Bald, and after that Priviledges were granted to some Churches to choose without a Li∣cenceLibert. de l'eglise Gal. c. 15. art. 17. ib. art. 19.. But the abuse of delaying the Conge d'elire was taken up in the twelth Cen∣tury, and was then looked on as a new and unheard of thing: for St. BernardEp. 222. writing concerning the King of Fran∣ce's delaying the Licence first for the See of Bourges, and then for the Sees of Chalons, Rheims and Paris, says, By what Right doth
he presume to waste the Possession and Lands of the Church. He doth not suffer Shepherds to be set over the Flock of Christ: in some he stops the Ordination of those who are elected, and in others he makes the Election to be delay∣ed, which was never before heard of, by which all the Goods of the Poor were consumed and wasted. From this it appears that the delay∣ing Elections, was then lookt on as a new abuse that was creeping in. The Writ of the Conge d'Elire came in the room of the Visi∣tors, who were sent both by the King to observe and manage the Election, and then if a Visitor was not sent there could be no Election. Afterwards the trouble or charge of that was such, that instead of a Visi∣tor a Writ was sent. For the Visitor's busi∣ness, being to hinder tumults and to go∣vern a multitude with some Authority during the popular Elections; when these were put down, there was less need of that, because the Elections were brought into the hands of a few Prebendaries or Chanons. In this Interval of the Vacancy, the King's Officer that made the Seizure, raised also the mean Profits, and so ac∣counted for them to the King, and Pre∣sentations and Collations to Benefices without Cure, being accounted a part of the mean profits; these were also assumed by Princes. But it was done by degrees, and it followed upon those two things, the Seizure of the Spoils and the delaying the Licence, it being ordinary for Lawyers about Prin∣ces to found a Right upon Precedents. So
that the abuses of their Officers within an Age or two came to be claimed as Rights and Prerogatives. But the Kings of France came afterwards to look on those Revenues as Sacred, and so would not bring them into their Trea∣sure as had been done formerly. There∣fore St. Lewis having built the holy Chap∣pel in the old Palace, where the Courts of Judicature do now sit, Charles the Se∣venth did assign to the Dean and Canons of that Chappel for the Service and Fa∣brick, all the Rents raised by the Regale for three years, and continued his Grant from three years to three years, and after∣wards renewed it for four years. Lewis the Eleventh granted them for Life, but the Court of Parliament refused to verify that, and confirmed it only for nine years, yet afterwards every new King granted them during his Life, till Charles the ninth by the Edict of Moulins 1561.Pasq. l. 3. c. 33. granted them for ever to that Chappel. The Dean wears a Mitre, and has a Ring with all the other Episcopal Ornaments except a Crosier; but this Grant is now recalled, for the late King gave that Chappel an Abbey in recompence, and appointed the  mean profits during the Vacancy to be accompted for to the next Bishop, and now as I am informed, it is ordered that two thirds shall go to the Successor, and the other third is reserved for the buying in of Converts: of which Traffick, Mr. Pellison is the Superintendent.
So far I have brought down this matter from its first beginnings, till its final Esta∣blishment. But in Conclusion, for satis∣fying the curious, I shall add some other particulars touching the Regale, as I gather them out of the Code the French Law which was made in Henry the Fourth's timeCode Henry l. 7. Tit. 1. art. 47.. The King by the Regale gives Benefices with∣out Cure, because he that has a simple Ton∣sure is capable of these; Pasquier gives the same reason, and observes that the Clergy of the Cathedrals were anciently the Bishops Seminary, out of which he removed the Clerks as they grew to be well qualified, to a Benefice with Cure, tho since that time, they that at first were considered as Infe∣riour to the beneficed Clergy, are now be∣come Superiour to them, which has been ever since the Election of the Bishops, came to be wholly engrossed into their hands. The occasion of which was this; The Electi∣ons were to be made by the Clergy with the Applause of the People; but when a custom was set up, that together with the Licence to choose, there was sent an order from the Court to choose such a one, none thought it worth their pains to come to such a pre∣limited Election, and so none but the Clergy of the Cathedral used to be pre∣sent, and by this means they came to be the only Electors. So that when St. Lewis by his pretended Pragmatical San∣ction (of the credit of which I shall give my opinion in the next Chapter) restored the Liberties of Election, the Clergy of
the Cathedrals, having been for a great while only in use to choose, the Ele∣ctions were appointed to be made by themLib. de L'Eglise Gal. c. 15. art. 31.. In the forecited CodeCode art. 48. a List is given of all the Sees that were Subject to the Regale, all Normandy is without excepti∣on liable to it, which, as is before obser∣ved, was subjected to it by the Kings of England. As for Benefices of Cureart. 50., the Collating to them belongs either to the Chapter or the future Bishop; and the Regale is also openedart. 51. in case any dies in the Court of Rome; nor can the Pope's Reservations or Mandats take it away. It gives the King likewise a powerart. 52. to give all Benefices that are vacant either by Right or in Fact. If the Chapter refuse to instal a Regalistart. 57., Letters are to go to compel them to do it, otherwayes their Revenues are to be seized on. The King has a Rightart. 58. to use this Regale any time within thirty Years, if it was forgot to be used during the Vacancy. The Re∣gale is openedart. 59. as soon as a Bishop is made a Cardinal; which was first judg∣ed when the Bishop of Morienne was made  a CardinalLib. de L'Eglise Gal. c. 16. art. 31., for that was looked on as a Translation to Rome; so that in that moment the Church was vacant and sub∣ject to the Regale. And it was but reaso∣nable, that when Bishops were so incor∣porated into the See of Rome, they should be understood to fall from what they did enjoy, in any King's Dominions,
till they obtained a new Grant of it If a Bishop break his Oath of Fidelity and becomes a RebelCode art. 60., the Regale is  opened. An Instance like this is in Ri∣gordusad ann., who tells us that in Philip Au∣gustus's  time the Bishops of Auxerre and Orleans, pretended that they were not bound to go to the King's Armies, or send Souldiers to them, except when He went in Person: Yet general custom was found to be against them; but they continuing obstinate, the King seized on their Tem∣poralities, but not on their Tithes and Oblations: For he says, that he thought he could not with a good Conscience meddle with these. He kept them in his hands two Years; and it is probable the Privilege granted for Auxerre, in which the Mili∣tary Service is reserved, was made upon the Agreement with the Bishop, tho the  Historian puts this Seizure three Years after the date of that Privilege, in which perhaps he placed it wrong. But tho the Spiritual Revenues were then exempted from the Regale, yet they are now involved in it. It is also provided, that if a Bishop does not come and swear Fealty to the King in personCode art. 61., but doth it only by a Proxy, in that case the Temporalities are to be restored: but the King's Right of providing to Benefices continues till he swear in person. It is true, Charles the Fifth did restore the Regale and all the
other Rights belonging to it, to a Cardinal upon the Homage and Fealty that was sworn  by his ProxyLib. de L'Eglise Gal c.. 16. art. 34: but the Pope by a Bull declared it should be no Precedent for the future. But afterwards, Charles the Se∣venth made a General EdictIbi. art 42., found∣ed,  as is expressed, upon ancient customs, that till the Oath of Fealty was made by the Bishop in person, the right of confer∣ing Benefices was to continue still in the King. The Court of Parliament of Pa∣risCode art 63., is the only Court before which all Trials concerning the Regale do come; which was first declared in the Reign of Lewis the EleventhLib. ut sup ar. 44.. All Bishops are  obliged to swear Fealty to the KingCode art. 63.; both because of the Importance of their Char∣ges, and for the Noble Fees which they hold of the Crown. Upon this somewhat remains to be said. The first mention I find of Bishops swear∣ing Allegiance to their Prince is, in the fourth Council of Toledo, where in a long  Decree concerning the Obedience due to their King, they say among other things, Let us keep that Faith and Engagment which we promised to our Prince (i).Tolet. 4. c. 75. And in the tenth Council of Tolledo, a Decree is madeTolet. 10. c. 2.  against those Bishops, Clergy Men, or Monks, who did break the General Oath which they swore for the safety of the King, the Nation, and their Country; and it was appoint∣ed, that they should be deposed till the King forgave them. The Oaths to their King are  also mentioned in the Council of ToursTuron. 3. c. 1.,
under Charles the Great: For all the Bi∣shops are charged to keep inviolate that Faith (or Fealty) which they had promised to the Emperor. And this promise of Fidelity was, a natural Consequence of the Fees which the Bishops held then of the Emperor: So according to the Feudal Laws, upon the Breach of that Faith, they were to forfeit their Fees. And it was decreed in  the second Council at AquinAqui- gr. 2. c. 2. Can. 12., that if any Clergy man should fall from his Obedience, and break the Oath of Fealty, or joyn himself to Rebels, he should lose his Degree. This was occasioned by the treasonable revolt, which that Emperor's Sons made against him: In which, they being so successful as to seize on his Person, called a Synod of Bishops by the means of Ebbo, Arch∣bishop of Rheims; Who tho he was the Emperor's Foster-brother, and had been bred up always about him, yet, he with the other Bishops, after many reproaches, and much hard usage, had degraded the poor Emperor three years before this. But he getting out of their hands, was a∣gain set up, and upon his success called the Synod at Aquin, where this Decree was made. He also turned out Ebbo, but it seems did not put him quite out of hope; for either that consideration, or the im∣portunity of those who enjoyed the Re∣venue during the Vacancy, prevailed with him to keep it ten years destitute of a Pa∣stor. But it appears by what HincmareTo. 2. Ep. 4. c. 15. wrote on this head to Lewis the second,
that Bishops took their Oaths to Princes before their Consecration, meerly in ac∣knowledgment of the Temporalities, and he approves it on these terms, but con∣demns it, if done after Consecration; and says, that the hands which make the Sacra∣ment of Christ's Body, ought not to touch the Se∣cular Oath. After this, the Bishop's swearing of Fealty was still continued, and one Cere∣mony was afterward added to it, which was the doing Homage, they kneeling down, and putting their hands between the King's hands, declaring, That they became his Liegemen, and so promising him Fidelity. For as Bishopricks were conferred, not only by a Writing, but by the Symbole of the Staff and Ring; so the Bishop Elect did not only by Oath promise Fidelity, but by the Rite of putting his hands between the Kings; he de∣clared, that these hands should be always em∣ployed in his service, and so he became the King's Man, that is, his Vassal. But when Gregory the seventh set himself against the In∣vestitures, he resolved likewise to take away this custom, as was formerly observed, and no doubt, intended to dissolve the Eccle∣siastical State from all dependance on Kings, and to subject it wholly to himself. But all that he found fault with at first was, the Ceremony of doing it by the Hands: And Pope Ʋrban, in a discourse which he made against this manner of doing HomageRoger. Hoved., laid out very vehemently the Indecency of subjecting those hands to the Empire, perhaps
of a lewd and cruel Tyrant; by which they created that God that had created all things, and offered him up to his Father for the Sal∣vation of all Men: So excellent a Figure did Transubstantiation put in the Pope's mouth. But all this was but Canting; and if they did not intend wholly to change the Alle∣giance of the Bishops, from the King to the Pope, it was a very poor matter by whatsoever Rite this Oath was sworn, or openly declared. In England, Henry the First was positive in the demand of HomageMal∣me-bur.. So the Pope and He came to this Agreement, that the Elect Bishops should continue to do the King Homage; but he should not invest them by the Ring and Staff. In France the Bishops do no Homage, but only swear Fealty, as both Pasquier and de Marca as∣sure us; but this must have come in of late: For by a Record in the time of Philip de Valois, mention is made of some Bishop∣ricks, for which the Bishops were bound both to do Homage and to swear Fealty;  and of others, for which they were only bound to swear FealtyLib. de L' Eglise Gal. c. 16. art. 26.. And Gregory the Eleventh, in a Bull to Charles the Fifth,, which was formerly cited, doth  plainly say, that the Arch-bishop of Ro∣ven, was obliged both to the doing of Ho∣mage, and the swearing of FealtyIb. art. 34.. But as for the Rite of doing it, by putting the Bishops hands between the Kings, it was no wonder if the Kings of France did not contend much about it, for that was but a
Ceremony; and none that has any Degrees of Common-sense, after he has once sworn Fealty, will look on himself as either more or less bound, whether it be done with the Rite used in Homages or not. And so far I have carried the Reader through this Interval, and now I am ar∣rived at the present Age; but before I en∣ter on that, I suppose it will not be an un∣grateful Entertainment to give an account of the present Method of the Promotion of Bishops of France, and of the Pragmatical Sanction, and of the Concordate. The Hi∣story of this is little known, not being fully related in any Book that I know, except oneApud Pinsonii. Hist. Prag. & Concor. which is no common piece of Hi∣story. It will give an Idea both of the Courts of Rome and France; and shew the faint attempts of the Courts of Parliament of Paris, for preserving the Liberties of the Crown, and of the Church of France.
CHAX. VII. The History of the Pragmatical Sanction, and of the Concordate. THE Diseases of the Church grew to that height, in the 15th Century, that there was neither Learning enough re∣maining to discover the steps by which they had crept in, nor Judgment enough to understand what were the proper Re∣medies to such distempers: Yet the whole Body was sick, and every one complain∣ed. The Oppressions of the Court of Rome, were the Symptoms that appeared most visibly, and under these the World had groaned above 500 Years; but tho all People were sensible of them, yet they knew not how to shake them off. At last, a Schism in the Popedom, and a Division that followed in Europe between the Churches, that obeyed the Roman and the Avignon Popes, was thought the best Con∣juncture that the Bishops could ever hope for to recover their Authority, which had been so long trodden under foot by the Papacy. And if it had not fallen in so ig∣norant an Age, it is very probable they had found out more effectual Provisions a∣gainst it. But the Bishops that met at Con∣stance, made too much hast to heal the Breach in the Papacy, in the conti∣nuance
of which their strength consisted. For all being again united, it appeared, that none of the Regulations they made, were strong enough to fetter that unlimi∣ted power; and that Act for perpetual General Councils to be assembled every tenth year, which was to meet without Sum∣mons if the Popes failed to call them, u∣pon which they built all their hopes, prov∣ed in conclusion as ineffectual as all the rest; tho Men that understood not the cunning of the Court of Rome, might have concluded, that the Liberty of the Church for the future, was well secured by those two Foundations which they had laid; the one was, that the Pope was subject to a General Council; the other, that Coun∣cils were to meet frequently whether the Pope would or not: But no Law can limit or resist a vast power supported by a great Wealth, and managed by much Cunning. Yet tho the Provisions they made did not retain their Authority long, yet by vertue of them, did the Council of Basil meet, and then the Bishops endeavouring, as far as Men, so void of Learning as they were, could do, to bring in a Reformation of the disorders in the Government of the Church; they were sensible, that the establishing good Rules for the Elections of Bishops was, as they expressed it in the Preamble  of their DecreeS ss. 12. Decr. de Electi., the laying a good Foun∣dation, and the setling such Pillars and Bases, upon which the Fabrick of the Church might securely rest. They observed Abuses of
two sorts in this matter; the one was, that Princes had made themselves the Ma∣sters and Directors of those Elections, so that they were managed at their Pleasure, and Men were either promoted to them by Simoniacal Bargains, or by base and ser∣vile Compliances, or they were disposed of by Papal Bulls and Provisions: There∣fore the Council considering, that there ought to be great caution in the choice of Pastors, to whose care those Souls were com∣mited, for whom Christ's Blood was shed, de∣creed, that the Papal Provisions should there∣after cease, and that those to whom the Right of Election belonged, should meet with great previous Preparation, and take an Oath to God, and the Saint of the Church, that they would choose him whom they thought likely to be most profitable to it, both in Spirituals, and in Tem∣porals; and that they should not give their Voices for any that had (as far as they knew) either made any Promise or Present, or used any Entreaties by themselves or others, or had done any thing either directly, or indirectly, to get themselves to be chosen: And besides some other Provisions, they did most earnestly exhort all Princes and States, not to write to the Electors in favours of any that had either by themselves, or others, made Suit for ob∣taining those Letters; and that much less should they use any Threatnings, by which the Freedom of Elections might be restrain∣ed. I need not run far into the History of the Contests, between that Council and the
Pope, which is generally well known, but shall keep close to the Subject I handle. While things hung thus in a Ballance, there was a great Assembly of the French Clergy gathered at Bourges, that declared for the  Council of Basil, and addressed to the King, (Charles the seventh) desiring him to un∣dertake the Protection of the Council, and to send Embassadours to Pope Eugenius, to disswade him from Translating it: For under the disguise of that soft Term, he intended to break it. At that time, the Council of Basil sent to the King an Abstract of their Decrees, consisting of 37 Articles, by which, Decennial Councils, and the Authority of the Council above the Pope, was Established, Provisions, Reservations Gratia expectativa's, Annats, Appeals, ex∣cept to the immediate Superiour, with many other abuses, were condemned: and among these, the fourth was the Abstract of the Decree they had made concerning Elections. All these were considered in that Assembly, where not only the Dau∣phin, and the Princes of the Blood, but the chief Nobility of France were present, and by their advice, was the famous Prag∣matical Sanction made in confirmation of those Articles: only that clause against the Recommendations of Princes for Elections was thus mollified; That it was not judged a thing to be reproved, if the King, or the Prin∣ces of his Kingdom, should use gentle and kind Incercessions for deserving Persons, they for∣bearing to use any violent Threatnings of any
sort. It is true, some years after this, a Pragmatical Sanction was published in the name of St. LewisLib. de L'Eglise Gal. c. 15. art. 31. n. 2, by which the World was made believe that he had established the Freedom of Elections to Cathedral and o∣ther Churches. The credit of so great a Name did not a little support the Regula∣tion now made; but to speak impartially, there are many reasons that perswade me to look on this only as a Forgery, which I shall offer to the Reader's censure. It was not spoken of in the Assembly at Bourges, nor mentioned before the opposition which the Parliament made to Lewis the Eleventh,An. 1461. when he went to abrogate the Pragmati∣cal Sanction. The Writers of that King's Life say nothing of it; nor had the Popes given him any occasion to make that part of it which is against their ExactionsIbid. num. 5., and we find no opposition made to it by the Court of Rome in his time. And he him∣self by the Pope's Authority made the Clergy pay him a Tenth, notwithstanding the opposition which the Chapters in some Provinces made to it, which doth not a∣gree with that part of the Sanction, that is against the Pope's laying Impositions upon the Clergy, and the phrase, ad perpetuam rei memoriam was not in use in his time, so that there are great grounds of suspecting the truth of that Sanction; of which Elie of Bourdelle, Archbishop of Tours, speaks as a doubtful pieceDefens Concord.. But how true soever that might be, now under Charles the Seventh was this Sanction
made, and it was observed all his Reign Life: And if we may believe the Writ∣ers of that time, the Churches of France be∣gan upon it to put on a new face, when Me∣rit and not Court-Interest advanced Men. But Lewis the Eleventh was observed to be averse to this Sanction. He thought it would not be for the Interest of France to be thus in a state of War with the Papacy, and therefore he gave some assurances, that upon his coming to the Crown he would repeal it; and perhaps he thought it might be a diminution of his Prerogative if E∣lections were left free, so that the Prelats of France should not owe their Advancement wholly to his favour. Aeneas Sylvius, who had been Secretary to the Council of Basil, and had writ in defence of it against the Pope, being one of the ablest Men of that time, was taken off by the Court of Rome, and made a Car∣dinal, and was afterwards chosen Pope, and reigned by the name of Pius the second: of whom this memorable saying is report∣ed, that shews how little Conscience he had, tho he was Master of more Learning and Judgment than was ordinary in that Age: When one reproached him for his changing Sides, he answered, The Popes gave Abbies, Bishopricks, and red Hats to their Creatures, and the Council had none of those to give. When he was promoted to the Popedom, he did most severely inveigh against all that the Council of Basil had done, and particularly against the Pragmatical
Sanction, and no wonder, since it cut off so great a Branch off his Revenue and Au∣thority. He also complained in the Council  that he held at Mantua, that the Episcopal Authority was by that means ruined, tho the Bishops thought to have established their power by it; for now Ecclesiastical Causes were brought into the Secular Courts, and Benefices were still disposed of at the plea∣sure of the King; thus did he declaim ve∣hemently against it. But that being pu∣blished, Danesius, the Procureur General, set out a Protestation against it in France, and appealed from the Pope to a Gene∣ral Council. Soon after this, Charles the seventh died; and the Bishop of Arras, being Lewis the Eleventh's great Favour∣ite, had the Promise of a red Hat made him if he should procure that Sanction to be repealed; and whereas the King was most likely to be wrought on by this Pol∣litick Consideration, that much Mony was by that means kept in France, which must be sent to Rome, if the old abuses came to take place again; This expedient was proposed, that there should be a Legat al∣ways resident in France, in whose Courts, Bulls should be expeded without going to Rome. That King, who is celebrated for his Craft, and for turning every thing to serve his present Interest, having marri∣ed his Daughter to John of Anjou, Grand∣child to Rene King of Sicily, and finding the Pope's Favour to be necessary for the regaining that Kingdom from Ferdinand,
that was then possessed of it, promised in order to that, to revoke the Pragmatical Sanction; and so on the 27th of November, 1461 he signed the Revocation. But the Parliament of Paris interposed vigorously, by a Remonstrance which, they made a∣gainst it. The other Parliaments did also oppose it; and when it was registred in the Parliament of Tholouse, they added that it was done by the King's most express com∣mand signified to them, both by his Letters and Messengers sent by him. At Rome the tydings of the Revocation were received with great Triumph, the Pope wept for joy; and at Midnight-Mass on Christmas-Eve, he consecrated a Sword with a rich Scabbard which he sent to the King. The Bishop of Arras had likewise a Cardinal-Cap; and the Pragmatical Sanction was dragged about the Streets of Rome with great scorn: But in the business of Naples the Pope did not answer the King's Expe∣ctations, for he had no mind to have a King of Naples that should depend on France. The Cardinal of Arras was also disgusted, for he asked two Bishopricks of the Pope; who made answer, that he would give him either of them at his choice, but he could not give one Man two Bishopricks. Whether the Pope used this for an excuse or not, we do not know. It is certain, as Mezeray well observes, that pluralities will be always defended by Men, that consider Ec∣clesiastical Benefices only as Revenues, but they will still be condemned by those who look on them
as having a charge of Souls belonging to them. By these means, both the King and his chief Minister were so provoked, that there was no more done in the Revocation of the Pragmatical Sanction, so that it continued still in force, and the Parliament took no notice of the Revocation. Six years after this, Paul the second, did again endeavour to promote what his Prede∣cessors had but imperfectly begun, & a Car∣dinals Hat was offered to Balue, the Bishop of Evreux, who had then great power with the King, if he should obtain a Confirmation from the Parliaments of the King's Revo∣cation. Upon this, that ambitious Bishop set about it with the zeal of an aspiring Cardi∣nal. So a Court was called at Paris in Vacati∣on time, and the King wrote to them requir∣ing them to give Obedience: The Court or∣dered the King's Council to deliver their opinions about it. So the Procureur Ge∣neral made a long Argument, setting out the Advantages which the Kingdom receive∣ed by the Pragmatical Sanction, and the prejudice it had suffered by the Interrup∣tion lately put to it: Since for 22 Bishop∣ricks that had obtained Bulls from Rome during the present King's Reign, 500000 Crowns had been sent out of the Kingdom, as much had gone for 62 Abbies, and 120000 Crowns had been sent for Deanries, Priories, and other Dignities. He also argued from several other Topicks, and concluded, that the King was bound to main∣tain the Rights and Liberties of his Crown.
Balue was enraged at his Opposition, and threatned to turn him out. His answer was suitable to his Argument; He said the King had freely bestowed that Office on him, and he would discharge it faithfully as long as the King thought fit to continue him in it, and should be ready to lay it down whenever it pleased the King; but he would suffer all things, rather than do any thing against his Conscience, or the King's Honour, and the good of the Kingdom. Upon this, Balue prevailed with the King to discharge him of this place. But that crafty King gave him secretly great rewards, and esteemed him the more for his resolute behaviour. The Rector of the University came in the name of that Body, and protested against what was de∣manded. For there were several Provisions in the Pragmatical Sanction, made in favour of those that had taken Degrees in the Universities; but the King was then in a fear of a Combination against him, and his Brother was then in a Treaty with the Duke of Burgundy for his Daughter, and for that end was soliciting a Dispensation at Rome, they being within the forbidden Degrees. So the Pope made use of this to terrify the King, who thereupon promised again to abolish the Pragmatical Sanction. And because the bestowing of high Titles is a very cheap Favour, that Pope granted him the Title of the most Christian King, which tho it was given in Complement to some former Kings of France, yet it was now first made one of the Titles of the
Crown. And yet from the account which Philip de Comines gives of that King (who is more partial in his Favours, than in any other part of his History) it will be hard to find out the merit which could intitle him to so glorious a Compellation: but Rome made good Bargains with Princes, when for Titles, Roses or Swords, She got such advantagious Concessions. Yet towards the end of his Reign, he held a great Assembly at Orleans, to consult about the means of re-establishng the Pragmatical Sanction, tho his concern was chiefly to keep the Mony that used to be sent to Rome, within the Kingdom. In the beginning of Charles the Eight's Reign, an Assembly of the States being cal∣led at Tours, the third Estate petitioned, that the Pragmatical Sanction might be a∣gain set up: They reflected on those Bishops that were promoted by the favour of the Court, and called them the Court Bi∣shops. So it was again set up; yet the Popes continued to struggle vehemently against  it. But Lewis the Twelfth made a perpe∣tual Edict in Confirmation of it. Pope Julius the Second complained vehemently of this in that packt Assembly, which was called the Council in the Lateran, where a Sermon was made against it, and then Monitories were given out, requiring all persons concerned, whether Princes or Parliaments, to appear within 60 days, and give their reasons why it should not be A∣brogated. But Pope Julius dying, Leo
the Tenth that succeeded him, gave more time; and Lewis the 12th was better disposed to treat with him, than with his ill-natured Predecessor, so he renounced that Phan∣tasm of a Council that was at Pisa, and sent his Ambassadors to Rome. Soon after that he died, and Francis the first succeeded. He had great Designs upon Italy, and found it necessary to get the Pope to be of his side, and therefore was willing to treat with him for the abolition of the Pragma∣tick Sanction; on such terms as might both save his own Prerogative, and yet give the Pope contentment. The Pope and he had an Interview at Bononia, where they treated  of an Agreement; but the King's Occasi∣ons calling him to Milan, he left his Mini∣sters to finish what he had begun; and so was the Concordat brought forth, and put in form of a Bull; and to give it the more Authority, it was confirmed in the Council of the Lateran. By it the King and the Pope agreed to divide the Promotions to all Prelacies be∣tween them; for the King was to nominate the Person within six months after a Va∣cancy; and the Pope was to confirm him, if no lawful exception did lie against him. Upon this a Legat was sent into France, to see the Bull received by the Courts there; and the King summoned a great Assembly of Bishops, Abbots, the Courts of Parlia∣ments, the Chapter of Paris, the Sorbon and the Supposts of the University, to whom the Chancellor made a long Speech,
in which he set forth the Straits to which the King had been reduced, that had forced him to consent to the Concordate. He told them, that the Pope and the Council had resolved to condemn the Pragmatical San∣ction; after which first Censures, and then an Interdict must have followed; and this would have disordered his Affairs much, especially he being then engaged in a War; and therefore the King had made the best terms he could; and among the other things for which he had engaged, this was one, That his Parliaments should approve what he had done, and therefore he expected they would do it, and required them to give a punctual Obedience to his Orders. To this the Clergy answered, That they could not approve it, they being but a part of the Gallican Church; and therefore they proposed that a National Synod might be called to give their Judgment concerning it; but the Chancellor answered, That they should either approve of it, or the King would send them to Rome to dispute the Matter with the Pope. The President of the Court of Parliament answered, That they would consider of it, and would do what should please God and the King. To this the Chancellor answered, That the King must be obeyed, and that without de∣lay; he wished them therefore to consider well what they did. So Letters Patents ra∣tifying the Bull, were sent to the Parliament to be verified by them; but they appointed the Kings Council to see them; and thereupon
the King's Advocate remonstrated to them the danger of carrying Mony out of the Kingdom, and of infringing the Liberties of the Gallican Church; and he moved that a Committee might be appointed to examine the Matter. So four were deputed for it; and after they had considered of it for ten days, they moved that other four might be added to them, which was done; and a week after that, the King's Advocate protested, that the Pragmatical Sanction ought to continue still in force, and that the Revocation ought not to be confirmed. But then a new Order came from Court, which was brought to them by the Bastard of Savoy, that was the King's Uncle by his Mother. In it, the King required them immediately to publish the Concordate, and to admit the Bearer to be present at all their Consultations about it. Upon this they complained, that the freedom of De∣bate was taken away, when one that was not of their Court, was to be a Witness to their Consultations; and they sent three of their number to represent this to the King. But the King answered them harshly; he said, There were some wise Men among them, but some of them were Fools. He heard some of them complained of his Ex∣pence, but they must know he was King, and was as absolute as his Predecessors were; they had flattered Lewis the 12th, and gave him the Title of the Father of Justice; but as he had banished some of them, so if they did not speedily obey him, they were to
expect no better usage at his hands; and he was positively resolved, that his Uncle should hear all they said. Upon this they were forced to deliver their Opinions; which every one did, Man by Man, so largely, that they began to do it on the 13th of July, and ended on the 24th, all in the hearing of the Bastard of Savoy; and they all concluded that they ought not, and could not publish the Letters Patents, but were obliged still to maintain the Pragma∣tical Sanction; and that it could not be a∣brogated, till they had heard what the Clergy, and the University that were con∣cerned in it, could say in defence of it; so they desired the King's Uncle to report what had passed, with all candor, to the King. It may be easily imagined, the King looked on this generous Integrity of theirs with an ill eye; and thought it a lessening of his Credit and Authority, that any of his Courts should refuse to approve what he had done, or take upon them to dispute his Pleasure. For the nature of Arbitra∣riness is such, that the most modest defence of Law and Justice, when it crosses the Humour of an abused Prince, passes for Obstinacy and Disobedience. But the Court of Parliament being apprehensive of the King's displeasure, sent two of their number to give him the Reasons of their Proceedings. The King ordered them to put what they had to say in writing, that being the best method, when Advantages
are to be taken against any. It was a month after their coming to Court, before they got their Answer; and tho' they de∣sired to be admitted to speak in the King's hearing, yet that was denied them. The Chancellor did, in a long Harangue, pre∣tend to answer the Paper they had given in; but they could not obtain it in writ∣ing. In conclusion, the King told them, There was but one King in France, and that what he had done in Italy, should not be annulled in France by his Subjects. They were not a Senate, as that in the Republick of Venice, to give him directions, there∣fore he would be obeyed; and if they did it not, he would make them Ambulatory as they were anciently, and oblige them to follow his Court. He also said, there were many Church-men among them, that pretended Zeal for the Liberties of the Church, who did neglect their Breviary, medled in Secular Matters, and judged in Causes of Blood, contrary to the Rules of the Church. In fine, he said, He was their King, and had full Authority to abrogate the Laws which his Predecessors had made; and so required them to return to Paris im∣mediately. They begged a little delay, be∣cause the ways were bad; but the King commanded them to be gone by such an Hour, otherwise he would imprison them for six months, and there they might talk of their Liberties. So they returned with this severe Message, and La Tremoville was sent after them, to tell the Court, That the
King thought the Chancellor's Reasons were better than theirs, and comman∣ded them to publish the Concordate without any further debate; and told them, that at his being dispatched in less than a quarter of an hour, the King re∣peated this ten times to him, That he would not have his Promise to the Pope broken. The Parliament did again call for the King's Council, to see if they had nothing to object. But they said, They had resolved to oppose it in the King's Name, but were straitly charged not to insist on it. The King's Advocate boldly said, He was sorry to see the King was led by such Councils; but he thought it was better at present to publish it, than to draw such a Storm on them as might perhaps follow; and he thought the publishing of it would signify nothing; for it would be of no force in Law, since the Clergy that were concerned in it, were not heard to object against it. The ill Effects of the Concordate, he said, would soon appear, and the King might, by a little complyance at present, be molli∣fied, and be prevailed on afterwards to re∣peal it, as Lewis the 11th had done. But he desired them, that when the King's Let∣ters Pattents were registred, to add a Prot∣estation, That it was done in obedience to the King's express Orders, often repeated, and that they did not approve of it, but intended still to follow the Pragmatical Sanction in all their Decisions.
On the 18th of March, they came to this  resolution, That they were still of the same mind they had been of in July last; but yet they agreed to publish the Concordate meerly in obedience to the King, tho' they did not approve of it. They did at large set out the Progress of the opposition they had made to it, and that their Liberties had been invaded, and they threatned and forced to it. They intended to have published this Protestation with the Concordate, and desired that la Tremoville, or the Chancel∣lor, would hear it made. But la Tremo∣ville told them, If they continued obsti∣nate, he had an Instruction yet behind, which he had not intimated to them, and it was believed it was a dissolution of the Court. So they made the Protestation in Court before the Bishop of Langres a Duke and Peer of France; and in it they decla∣red, That they would not observe the Concor∣date, but would observe the Pragmatick San∣ction, and that they did adhere to the Appeal made from the Council of Lateran, that con∣demned the Pragmatick Sanction, to a Pope better advised, or to the first General Council: And of all this they made a copious Rela∣tion, and put it on Record. On the 21 of March, the Rector of the University came to the Court, and desired that their Body might be heard object a∣gainst their Concordate. The Petition was received and registred, with the Answer made to it by the Court; which was, That tho' they published the Concordate, yet
they were resolved not to observe it, but to continue judging according to the Prag∣matick Sanction. The next day the Dean of Paris appeared and protested, that the Publication should not be made till the Church were heard; and that therefore the Rights of the Gallican Church should not be hurt by it. Yet on the 24th of March the Concordate was published, and the Court renewed their Protestation against it. But on the 27th of March, the Rector of the University fixed a Mandate, by which the Printers of the University were requi∣red not to print it, under the pains of be∣ing cut off from that Body: And with that he published a large Discourse against it, and against the Abuses of the Court of Rome; and said, That the King being in Italy, was forced to consent to the Concor∣date, and therefore he appealed to the Pope better informed, and to a free Gene∣ral Council. This was also affixed, and the Preachers did generally inveigh against it in the Pulpits. The King was highly offended at all this. He writ to the Court, that the Protestati∣on they had made was scandalous, rash, and foolish: That he was their Monarch, and had no Superior to whom an Appeal lay. He also commanded the Concordate to be printed and affixed. But Tumults followed between those that affixed it, and some of the University that pulled it down. Upon that the King sent an Order to the University, to give over all further medling
in that Matter, otherwise he would take their Privileges from them. So they sub∣mitted, and made no more resistance. The Heads of the Reasons upon which the Opposition was grounded, to that part of the Concordate, by which Elections were taken away, were, That the right of chusing Pastors was inherent in the Church, that it was founded on the Law of God, and was confirmed by the Decrees of many Councils, and by the Laws of many Kings of France, such as Clovis, Charles the Great, and his Son Lewis the Good, St. Lewis, Phi∣lip the Fair, Lewis Huttin, John and Charles the Sixth, and Charles the Seventh. If A∣buses had crept into Elections, these might be reformed; but upon pretence of these, a right so well grounded ought not to be taken away: And if Preferments were bestowed meerly by the favour of the Court, this would encourage ambitious and aspiring Men to make Applications there; and thus either by corrupting those that had the King's Favour, or by servile Compliances, or Court Intrigues, a sort of Men would get into Preferments, whom the Church in all Ages had endeavoured to keep out by all means possible, and that true Merit which is commonly accompanied with Modesty, would be neglected. The Heads of the Answer that the Chancellor made to this, were, That there was generally Factions and Simony in Elections; and the Clergy were as unfit to be trusted with such a Power as any Per∣sons
whatsoever; and therefore the King, as representing his People, and the Pope as representing the Church, ought rather to have this lodged in their hands. He also shewed what Changes happened in the manner of Elections. First, The Popes made Bishops by their Authority, and sent them to gather Churches; then the People and the Clergy did chuse them; then Prin∣ces with the People, and afterwards with∣out them, named the Bishops. After that the whole Clergy, excluding the People, made the choice: and last of all, the Ca∣nons and Chapters had engrossed it into their hands, leaving out the rest of the Clergy. So he inferred from hence, That the Chapters right of chusing Bishops, which was the Point then in question, was not founded on the Law of God, but on∣ly on Custom, and on particular Laws or Canons, which might be changed, as oc∣casion was given for it. Thus was the Matter carried in the Court of Parliament of Paris, in which, as the integrity and courage that the Court expressed, deserve all the high Characters with which after Ages can honour it; so we see how feeble the resistance, even of the worthiest Judges, is to a Prince, who has possessed himself of the whole Legislative Power, when he intends to break through established Laws and Constitutions, and gives up the Rights of his Crown, and the Interests of his People, to serve particular ends of his own. If the Assembly of the
States of France had retained their share in the Legislative Power, and had not given up that great Right, which the People of France had, of taxing themselves by their Representatives, then the Judges would have been better supported, and their Op∣position would have brought upon them all the publick Expressions of Honour and Esteem, that a Nation oweth to the Trustees of their Right and Liberties, when they maintain them resolutely, and dispence them equally: Whereas in their Circum∣stances, they saw themselves exposed to the Resentments of an high-spirited King, who thought himself the Master of all the Rights of his People, and that he might make what Bargains he pleased about them. Yet the Court of Parliament shewed after∣wards, that the Protestation they had made, in which they declared that they would give Judgment still according to the Pragmatick Sanction, and not according to the Concordate, was not intended by them meerly to save their Credit; sor that same Year, the Bishop of Alby dying, there  was one chosen by the Chapter to succeed him, and the King named another; upon which a Suit followed between the Person Elected and the Person nominated. It be∣gan before the Parliament of Tholouse, but by Appeal was brought before the Parlia∣ment of Paris, and they gave judgment in favours of the Elect against the King; at which he was highly offended.
Some Years after this, Francis passed the Mountains, and left his Mother Regent of France. So the Court of Parliament took occasion to remonstrate to her, the Invasi∣ons that had been made upon the Rights of the Gallican Church; and desired her to interpose, that the Pragmatical Sanction, and the freedom of Elections, might be a∣gain restored: Yet nothing followed upon that, till the King was taken Prisoner by Charles the Fifth, at the Battel of Pavie; and then his Mother declared, that she look'd on her Sons misfortune as a Judg∣ment of God upon him for abolishing the Pragmatick Sanction; and she promised to use her utmost endeavours with him, when he should be at liberty, to set it up again, but she would not take on her to change any thing in her Sons absence. So there were several Contests between those that had the King's Provision to Bishopricks, and those that were Elected; in which the Parliament judged always for those that were elected. But the King being at Li∣berty, and returning to France, he inhibi∣ted the Parliament to meddle more in those Matters, and resolved to maintain the Concordate; and therefore all Suits concerning Titles to Sees, were removed from the Parliament to the King's Great Council: and he was not satisfied with this, but many Sees having obtained of the former Kings Privileges for a free Election, as was before touched, he procured a Bull from the Pope, by which all those were
annulled. So many of those Grants were  called in and burnt. Thus were the Canonical Elections, or rather that which carried the Name of them, put down in France: and indeed, when the choice of the Bishops was meerly in the hands of a few Chanons, it was no wonder that small regard was had to that: For in the first institution of Chanonries, they were designed to be a Seminary for the Diocess, and Clerks were to be prepa∣red in them for Benefices of Cure; and there∣fore as it was before observed, a simple Ton∣sure qualified a Man for them; so that there was no colour for them to maintain the Custom that had of late prevailed, that the Elections belonged of right to them, since all the Body, both of the Clergy and Laity, had as good a Title to it as any they could pretend to. Upon the whole Matter, the People did at first chuse with the Clergy, but it was when there was neither Prince nor Magi∣strate of the Christian Religion; after∣wards the Community or Order, that is, the Town Council, with the eminent or honourable Men, came in the room of the Rabble, who only applauded what they did. From that Princes perhaps argued, That as these had taken it from the Body of the People, so they might take it from them. And indeed, tho' in Fact the Peo∣ple did chuse at first, yet that was not founded so much on a Right due to them, otherwise it had been declared in the
Gospel; and in that case it were inaliena∣ble, and no Prescription could take it away, as on the Circumstances of that time, in which we cannot imagine how it could have been otherwise: but as the numbers of the Christians encreased, in which there must have been a mixt multitude, it was thought necessary to contract the number of Electors; first to the Magistracy and Eminent Men, with the Clergy; then only to the Clergy, the People still giving their applause. From that it fell into the hands of the Chapter; and it was no wonder that Princes upon that assumed it into their own hands, especially the Factions and Corrup∣tions of Chapters being such, that it was necessary to put some check to them; but instead of bringing in the rest of the Cler∣gy, and admitting the chief of the Magi∣stracy and Gentry to share with them, it was thought more suitable to the Interest of Monarchy, to take it entirely into the King's hands. Francis the First continued to govern according to the Concordate during his whole Reign; yet in a Remonstrance made by the Clergy of France, in the Year 1585, they assert, that at his Death, he declared to his Son, that nothing trou∣bled his Conscience more, than his taking away Elections, and his assuming the no∣mination of Bishops to himself. But his Son considered little his last words, as well in this as the other Directions which he left him. So he went on as his Father had
done. Upon his death, the prosecution of Heresy being then much set on by the Car∣dinal of Lorrain's means, the Parliament of  Paris remonstrated, that the growth of Heresy flowed chiefly from the Scandals that were given by bad Clergy-men, and ill Bishops, and that the ill Choice that had been made by the Court since the Concor∣date was brought in, did give occasion to the growth of Heresy, more than any thing else whatsoever. And indeed no other could be expected from so lewd and vicious a Court as that was. When Charles the Ninth succeeded his Brother, an Assembly of the States being soon after called, the first Estate prayed that the Pragmatick Sanction might again take place, particu∣larly in that Point which concerned the freedom of Elections; and they backed their desires with great Authorities drawn from the Decrees, both of Ancient and Modern Councils, and these not only Pro∣vincial, but General; the other two Estates concurred with them. The Court thought to shift this off, by promising to send one to Rome to treat about it. But that did not satisfy the States; so a Decree was drawn to this effect, That an Arch-bishop should be chosen by the Bishops of the Province, by the Chapter of his Cathedral, and twelve of the chief of the Laity; and a Bishop by the Metropolitan and the Chap∣ter; but the Court of Parliament opposed this, and thought, that the Laity ought to have no share in the Elections, and there∣fore
they were for setting up the Pragmati∣cal Sanction, without any change or addi∣tion. But in conclusion the Decree was thus amended and agreed to, An Arch∣bishop was to be chosen by the Bishops of the Province and the Chapter; and a Bi∣shop was to be chosen by the Arch-bishop, the Bishops of the Province and the Chap∣ter, and by 24 of the Laity, to be thus chosen; all the Gentry were to meet, and were to chuse twelve to represent them at the Election, and the vacant City was to chuse other twelve; and these, with the Chapter and the Bishops, were to make a Decree for three Persons which was to be brought to the King, and he out of that number was to name the Person. Thus it was designed to bring the manner of Elections as near the Customs used under the Roman Law, as they could in those Circumstances. But this vanished into Air, and was never put into practice. Yet the Clergy conti∣nued still to use their endeavours for re∣storing the freedom of Elections. Afterwards President Ferrier was sent to Rome about it, who in a long Speech that he made con∣cerning it, insisted much on this, that nei∣ther the Gallican Church, nor the Courts of Parliaments, had ever received the Concordate, that shadow of Approbation which the Parliament of Paris had given, being extorted by force. It is not to be imagined that the Court of Rome would ever part with the Authority and Advantages which it received from the establishment
of the Concordate; but the Clergy conti∣nued incessantly to complain of it, and in most of the Remonstrances which were made, or the Books which were written against it, they always enlarged on this popular Prejudice, that from the time in which the Concordate was set up, Heresy had been still spreading in France. And it must be confessed, that tho' the gross Er∣rors and Corruptions that were in their Worship, did much dispose all considering and inquisitive People to forsake that Com∣munion and receive the Reformation, yet nothing wrought more on the Vulgar, who seldom go far into speculative Points, than the palpable Ignorance and notorious ill Lives of the Clergy, which gave great scandal to the whole World, and made all People easy to believe ill of a Church that was so miserably out of order. The Body of the People are generally determined much by the good or the ill Lives of Clergy-men; and therefore even Julian the Apostate, having observed the good Lives of the Christian Bishops, and the ill Lives of the Heathen Priests, was convinced, that one of the chief means of restoring Heathenism, on which he was much set, was the reforming the ill Man∣ners of the Priests, and therefore gave strict Orders about it. And it is observa∣ble, that the best Clergy-men have been al∣ways the most gentle to those that differed from them; for they confiding in the good∣ness of their Cause, and in that true Merit,
of which every one that has it, must be conscious to himself, and yet without Pride or Vanity, are perswaded, that by the Methods of Love and Meekness, they shall, with the help of some time, and the use of all due prudence and caution, overcome Errors or Schismts. But the unworthy, who know that a good Cause may be spoiled, but is not likely to prevail in their hands, and who will not trouble themselves with the slow and laborious Methods of conquering Errors, are always apt to fly to extream and cruel Courses, since they know they must either prevail by these or by none at all. And as a worthy Clergy is the only means, since Miracles are ceased, to main∣tain and propagate the Christian Religion; so great strictness and exactness in giving of Orders, is the chief means imaginable for having a worthy Clergy: And the confer∣ring of Orders being trusted to the Bishops, it is visible of how great Consequence it is to the very being of the Christian Religi∣on, that they may be well chosen, and that true Merit, and not Ambition, or Court Interest, ought to be the Standard by which they should be measured. And it is hard to imagine, as long as the nomination of them is in the Kings of France, without any other check but what may be given to it at Rome, that the Abuses of that Church will be much mended; and therefore they do wisely to fly to Persecution, as the only mean by which they can hope to extirpate that which they call Heresy▪ For tho' it
may be thought, that an Election by the Chapter, especially when it is not safe for them to chuse any other than the Person re∣commended, is not an effectual Remedy, yet it is at least some stop to an ill Nomi∣nation; for if either one that is Heretical in his Opinions, or Scandalous in his Life, should be recommended, it is to be hoped, that a Chapter would represent this to the Prince, and either prevail with him to in∣sist no further; or if that could not be ob∣tained, that they would put all to hazard rather than chuse a very ill Man; and if their Objections were just and well-ground∣ed, it is not likely that a Prince, unless he were very severe in his temper, would pro∣ceed to Extremities; and if he did, it would be a degree of Martyrdom to suffer on so honourable an account.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Contests now on foot, between the Pope and the French King, con∣cerning the Regale. I Am now arrived at the present Age, and the Contests that are now on foot be∣tween the Pope and the French King, which I shall open as largely, as the Informations and Papers that have been sent over do di∣rect  me. In the beginning of this Century, Henry the Fourth made an Edict, in which he declared, that he would use his Right of the Regale as his Predecessors had done; and that he did not intend to bring those Sees that were exempted, under it. This the Parliament of Paris not only refused to ve∣rify;  but two Years after that they made an Arrest,Lib. de l'Egl. Gal. c. 16 art. by which they declared, That the King had the Right to the Regale, in all the Churches within his Dominions; and pro∣hibited all Advocates or Procurors to make any motions to the contrary. At this the Clergy of France were allarmed; and therefore the Assembly General made an Address to the King, earnestly desiring him to take the Cognizance of that Affair out of the Parliaments hands, and examine it in Council. They looked on the Court
of Parliament as engaged against them. For it has been every where observed, that no sort of Men has made head against those things which have been called the Rights of the Church, with more Zeal and Indigna∣tion, than Lawyers and Secular Courts. This Ecclesiasticks impute to their Enmity to the Church, and their envy at her pro∣sperity. On the other hand, Lawyers pre∣tend that their Studies carry them further than other Men into the discovery of those Cheats and late Inventions, by which the World has been imposed on in former Ages. Henry the Fourth having been for many Years (that which they call) an Heretick, stood not so firm in his Contests, either with the Pope or his Clergy, as other Princes that had been educated in another manner, would perhaps have done. So he complyed with his Clergy, and the tryal of the Extension of the Regale, was removed from the Parliament and brought before the Council: But Ravilliac putting an end to all his Designs, it seems this Matter was let fall. For the first step that I find Lewis the Thirteenth made in it, was in the Year 1629; in which he set out an Edict  confirming what his Father had declared, of exercising the Regale only as it had been in his Predecessors time. But his Advocate and Procuror General,  were for extending it to all the Churches of France without distinction;Lib. de l'Egl. c. 16. Art. 51. and in a Paper which they offered to the King, some Years after that, they gave their Opinion, That
the Right was universal over the whole Kingdom; that it was the Ignorance of former Times that made any to doubt of this, that it was annexed to the King's Person, and incorporated in the Crown; so that none were exempted from it, ex∣cept those who had purchased it by an Onerous Title; and that no prescription or disuse could be a prejudice to the Rights of the Crown. As for those Edicts by which the former Kings had limited this according to use and wont; they an∣swer, That this was a Right of the Crown, which could not be yielded up by the King: and there being at that time a Dispute concerning the Sees of Ausch, Cahors, Dol, and Carcasson, they con∣cluded, that they were subject to the Regale as well as others. After this there followed a long course of many Processes, in which the Lawyers were always heavy upon the Clergy. Yet in many Tryals, the Council judged against the Regale. In the Year 1615, a Trial was between a Regalist, and one provided by the Canon of Tholouse, during the Vacancy of that See; where the Canons have their Weeks by turns, in which they confer such Bene∣fices as fall; and after a long hearing of both sides, it was judged against the Rega∣list. Many other such Judgments were gi∣ven, and particularly one provided to a Canonry of Pamiers, according to the Rule of that Chapter, during the Vacancy, was preferred to a Regalist, in the Year 1636.
But in many other Instances it was judged in favour of the Regalist, and many Bi∣shops who would not submit to the General Rule of Registring their Oath of Fealty, were denied the privilege of conferring Benefices; for in the Process Verbal of the Assembly General of the Clergy of France 1656, they set forth, That there were some Bishops who had been promoted above fifteen and twenty Years before, (that is, before 1642, and 1636) as those of Lombeez and du Puy; and several others who had never conferred any Benefice without a Process, because their Oaths were not registred. Yet in conclusion, Lewis the Thirteenth was enclined to settle this Matter in favour of the Clergy; and as a step to that, he revoked the perpetual Grant that had been made to the Holy Chappel of all vacant Revenues, and an∣nexed  to it an Abbey in lieu of it, and gave it to the succeeding Bishops for ever. But the Chamber of Accompts would not ve∣rify his Edict, without adding a Proviso, by which the Right of the Regale was entirely reserved to the King; so that it was still to depend on the King's Bounty and Gift; and the succeeding Bishops were obliged to take out a special Grant of them, to entitle them to them. After the death of Lewis the Thirteenth, during the minority of this King, there wat a long Process made concerning this Affair; and all that pretended to exemp∣tions, were required to appear and shew their Titles, particularly those of the
four Provinces. But the Syndic of Languedoc did protest, before the Clergy there would plead to it, That what they did, was only to testify their Obedience to the King's Edicts; and that the Churches of that Province, having at all times enjoyed this freedom as a part of their natural Liber∣ties, which they had both before and after the union of that Province to the Crown of France; therefore what they then did in their Name, was not to be looked on as a submitting of their Right to the plea∣sure of the Council. In the Year 1656, the Clergy interposed to stop the Proceed∣ings of the Council; and by their Order, Monsieur de Marca, afterwards Arch-bishop of Paris, drew a Memorial, setting forth the Exemption of the four Provinces: On which he has since enlarged more copiously, in the last Book of his most Learned Work, De Concordia Imperii & Sacerdotii. But the King's Council went on still, and after a Process of near thirty Years continuance, at last, in the Year 1673, they came to a conclusion; upon which a Declaration was made, asserting, That the King had the Right of the Regale in all his Dominions, with∣out distinction, except only in those Sees that had purchased their Exemption from it: and therefore all Bishops that had not yet registred their Oaths of Fidelity in the Chambers of Ac∣compts, were required to do it, and to take out a Writ upon it for closing the Regale, other∣wise their Bishopricks were still to be looked on as under it. So that Benefices which sell,
that were in the Bishop's Gift, were to be conferred by the King. Another Edict followed two Years after, explaining some Particulars in the former, and confirming it in the rest. And so has the King of France asserted and established his Right to the Regale. This being thus done, and it being un∣derstood that the King was resolved to have his Edicts obeyed, some of the Bishops that had formerly expressed much Zeal in this Matter, were now reduced to great straits. They had no mind to draw the Indignation of the Court on them, and therefore they thought on a temper to save themselves and their Rights both. Some would not go about it in Person, but let their Chapters do it; others made Prote∣stations for preserving their Rights, and put them in their Registers: But, in short, all, except the Bishops of Alet and Pamiers, submitted. If those other Bishops thought the Liberties of the Church were invaded in any thing that belonged to the Spiritua∣lity, they shewed little honesty, and less courage, in such a manner of proceeding: And therefore the Arch-bishop of Rheims had reason to treat them with great con∣tempt in his Speech to the Assembly of Bi∣shops in May last; for it savours too much either of the Chicane of the Canonists, or of the Morals of the Jesuits, to employ others to do a thing in a Man's Name, which he will not own himself: Since what one does by a Proxy, it is understood he doth it him∣self:
and it is a vain thing to register a Protestation for keeping up a Right, when by another Act, the same Person gives it up. If this had only related to their Lands and Revenues, the necessity of the time might excuse their compliance. But it being about a spiritual Point, such as the conferring of Benefices is, from which Acts of Spiritual Jurisdiction flow, it must be confessed, that if they do not acknowledg a Supremacy in the Crown over all Persons, and in all Cau∣ses, this cannot be defended. But the other two Bishops governed themselves by Maxims very different, which were indeed suitable to the probity and sincerity they had expressed in the whole course of their Lives, of which we shall now see the Se∣quel. The Dean of Alet happened to resign his Deanry: So in January 1676, Mr. de Foix had a grant of it from the King, as fallen in his hands. The Regale being then understood to be open, because the Bishop of Alet, tho' he had enjoyed the Bishoprick 36 Years, had not registred his Oath of Fealty. So the Bishop being informed, that several Persons, as well as de Foix, had obtained Collations from the Court to Ca∣nonries in his Cathedral, made an Ordi∣nance,Mar. 5. 1676. in which he sets forth, That some had obtained Grants to Benefices, then in the possession of others, that had been Canonically provided to them, which was contrary to the Liberties of the Province of Narbonne, that they had enjoyed in
all times: And that after he had go∣verned that See 36 Years, it was against Reason to imagine, that it could be in the state of a Vacant See, or under the Re∣gale; and yet one had procured the Grant of the Treasurer's place in his Cathedral, and another was provided to a Canonry, to which a small Cure of Souls did be∣long, whose Name was not yet known to him: He therefore required his Chapter not to receive or instal them, under the pains of suspension: and denounced the same pains on all those Ecclesiastical Per∣sons that should be assisting to them; and he declared the Regalists themselves ex∣communicated, ipso facto, if they should come and intrude themselves into those Benefices. This, as may be easily ima∣gined, gave great Offence at Court: So Mr. de Besons, one of the Agents of the Clergy writ to the Bishop, (which is the first Letter in the Collection); and after a beginning, full of that respect that was due to so good a Man, he blames him for not registring his Oath of Fidelity,May 5. Col. N. 1. which would have preserved him from this trou∣ble that he was drawing upon himself: and he also censures him for making him∣self the judg of his own Cause, by pro∣ceeding to Censures against the Regalists; whereas the way he ought to take, should be, to bring the Matter before the Great Chamber of the Court of Parliament of Paris; to which the right of judging in such Causes did belong, and in which Justice
was given against the Regalists, as well as in their Favour, according to the Merits of the Cause. To this the Bishop writ answer. (which is likewise in the Colle∣ction) In it he justified his not registring his Oath;May 30. Col. N. 2. for he looked on that as a yielding up of his Right, and an acknowledging of the King's. He thought all the Province of Narbonne was free from that Yoke, not by special Privilege, but by natural Liberty; for these Churches were founded free, and had enjoyed that Liberty before the Mo∣narchy of France was begun: therfore the Decree of the Council of Lions was properly applicable to his Case. He had indeed writ to the Assembly of the Clergy, to address to the King concern∣ing this Affair. But they thought not fit to interpose; and therefore nothing re∣mained for him to do, when he under∣stood the Regalists were coming to dis∣possess those whom he had canonically placed, but to execute the Decree of the Council of Lions: and whereas it was ob∣jected, that he was singular in his Opposi∣tion; he says, Many other Bishops had, by the Protestations which they had left on Record, declared their dislike of those proceedings. But not content with this, he wrote like∣wise to the King,Col. N. 3. (which is also in the Col∣lection, tho' without Date). After those be∣coming Expressions of his Duty and Loy∣alty, he desires him to consider, That the Churches of Narbon had enjoyed their Free∣dom,
while they were under the Counts of Tholouse, and when they were united to the Crown under St. Lewis, these were likewise preserved to them; and they were confirmed under his Son in the Council of Lions; which was received in France by an Ordinance which Philip the Hardy made. Philip the Bel did also, by Letters Patents, confirm their Freedoms from the Regale; the Original of which was also preserved among the Archives of Narbonne; and since that time, both in the Reigns of Charles the Sixth, and Charles the Seventh; Lewis the Eleventh, and Lewis the Twelfth, new Declarations had been made to the same purpose. He shews the difference between those that were free from it, and those who were exempted by special Privilege, and affirms that according to the Judgments given for∣merly by the Parliament of Paris, and the Opinions of all that had treated of that Subject, the Regale could not be extended to those of the former sort. The Parlia∣ment had indeed Authority to judg con∣cerning those who were exempted by spe∣cial Title, but not of those whose Title was Custom and perpetual Liberty. He represents to him what his Grand-father and Father had done in this Affair; and says, That Lewis the Thirteenth had re∣solved to have setled it so, as to have se∣cured for ever the Liberties of the Chur∣ches, but died before it was effected. He puts the King in mind of that part of his
Coronation Oath, that he should main∣tain the Canonical Privileges of the Bi∣shops; and concludes with great prote∣stations of his Zeal and Obedience to him, and that nothing but the sense of an indi∣spensable Obligation binding him to de∣fend the Rights of his Church, could en∣gage him in any thing that was contrary to his Majesty's Commands. But these things had not the Effect which he desired; so on the 7th of August an Or∣der was made in Council, requiring the Chapter of Alet to put Mr. de Foix in pos∣session of the Deanry; and that in case of refusal they should be compelled to it by all due and reasonable ways: And on the 17th of August, he was also commanded, by a Warrant under the Signet, to go and take possession. So he came to Alet about the middle of October, and demanded of the Chapter to be installed. The Ordinance which the Bishop had formerly made, was intimated to him, but that did not move him; then the Bishop, by word of Mouth, used all the Arguments he could, and pres∣sed them, both with great Authority, and much mildness, but all to no purpose, for the Regalist put himself in possession.Octob. 17 1676. On the day following, the Bishop made a second Ordinance, in which he set forth what had passed; and that the Regalist was acting contrary to the Council of Lions, and to common Justice, in turning out a Dean that was in possession without a Sentence; there∣fore he required him to desist, otherwise,
as he had already incurred the censure of Excommunication, he would publish the Sentence against him, and would repeat his Monitions from three days to three days. Upon this the Regalist appealed to the Arch-bishop of Narbonne, and the Matter lay almost a Year quiet; whether this was kept so long in suspence, in order to an accommodating of the Matter or not, I am not fully informed. In September the next Year,Sept. 22. 1677. the Vicar General of Narbonne, under Cardinal Bon∣zi the Arch-bishop of that See, received the Appeal, in which the Regalist set forth his Pretensions, and complained of the Or∣dinance made by the Bishop of Alet, upon these Reasons; 1. Because no Man can do himself justice; The Kings of France had at the desire of the Clergy, brought the Examination of the Regale before them∣selves in Council, and the Declaration made 1673, was in foro Contradictorio, where the Syndic of Languedoc was heard, and the Rights of that Province were exa∣mined. 2. No Man may alledge a right that has been already examined & condemned. 3. Every good Subject ought either to obey the King's Commands, or to address to him concerning them, but ought not to act contrary in them. 4. The Sentence of Excommunication ought not to be pro∣ceeded to, but with Charity and Circum∣spection; and if the Decree of Lions were applicable to this Case, then the King himself would fall within it: for all, how
eminent soever their Dignity is, that break it, ought to be Excommunicated. 5. The Decree of that Council, and the Censures founded on it, falls not on the Regalists, but on the Invaders of the Possessions of the Church. 6. Excommu∣nication supposes a mortal Sin, and con∣tumacy in it precedeing: therefore it ought not to be made in a probable case as this was, which was founded on two of the King's Declarations, many Judgments of Parliament, the Opinion of many Bi∣shops and Divines; the submission of the Clergy of France in their last Assembly, and a constant possession in the Province of Languedoc: Of which he gives In∣stances, as that the King named the Stew∣ards, that he gave the Bishops a new Grant of the Fruits during the Vacancy; and that being done in the Right of the Regale, all those Bishops who have ac∣cepted of it, fall under the same Censure. The Council of Lions did declare, That such a right might rise out of Custom, and therefore confirmed what was then in use. Since that time the right of nominating all the Bishops in France was assumed by their Kings, tho' it might be pretended that it was contrary to Ancient Canons and Liberties; and yet all France had sub∣mitted to it, at least by a tacit consent; and Languedoc had submitted to the Right of Oeconomat: Upon all which Reasons, he pleaded, that his Appeal ought to be received, and that the Ordinance made by
the Bishop of Alet might be declared of no force. So Judgment was given for the Apellant, the Ordinance was condemned, and the Bishop was required not to execute, nor publish any Censures upon that Head; the Chapter was also required to instal the Regalist; and this Judgment was appoin∣ted to be published, both at Narbonne and Alet, and in all the other Diocesses of that Province. Intimation was made of this on the 28th of the month to the Bishop; but he went on as he had formerly intended to do; and on the 22d of OctoberOctob. 22 made a third Ordi∣nance, in which he complained, That the Official, who was a Priest, should thus exalt himself above the Episcopal Digni∣ty, and Judg in so great a Case: Where∣as an Official had no Authority over Bi∣shops, nor to make Orders that should be read in Churches. He also complained of him, for declaring, that his Ordinances were against the Laws of the Kingdom, for that belonged to the Secular Tribunal, and was a thing of which he could take no Cognizance; and he cited the Decla∣rations made by Henry the Fourth, and Lewis the Thirteenth, with some Arrests made in this Matter: and alledged, that an Official's Jurisdiction, did not extend so far as to hinder the execution of the Decrees of General Councils; and that all this was done without ever citing or hearing the Parties concerned. Upon which Reasons he declared, that he would
have no regard to that Judgment; and required his Chapter and Clergy not to consider it. So he appointed his former Ordinance to be executed, and that none should have regard to the Judgment made by the Official, under the pains of Excom∣munication. And the day after this he writ a Circular Letter to the Bishops of the Province, within which he enclosed his Ordinance; and desired them to consider what Measures they ought to take for main∣taining, at least that which remained of the Episcopal Dignity, till a fit Opportunity should offer it self for the recovering that which was lost. This was signified to Cardinal Bonzi: So on the 5th of November he published an Ordinance,Nov. 5. 1677. in which he declared, That his Vicar had acted by his Authority; and ci∣ted some Passages of the Canon Law to prove, that a Vicar represented the Person from whom he derived his Power, and that therefore his Censures ought to have the same Effects.Nov. 15. 1642. And says, That when the Bishops of the Province addressed to his Predecessor Rebé, that his Officials might not judg or repeal their Ordinances; he had granted it, but still reserved power to himself, or to his Vicar, to do it. And when the Clergy of France addressed to the King, that Appeals from Bishops Sen∣tences might only be received by the Arch-bishops or Primates in person: the  Answer was, That it should be done in that manner,Art. 4. except in case of absence.
It was no new thing for Bishops to dele∣gate their Authority to Priests or Dea∣cons: and in such cases, they represen∣ted the Person whose Proxies they were; and so had presided in General Councils, and had judged Patriarchs; and many of their Proxies are to be found in all the General Councils. A Vicar had also Au∣thority to hold a Provincial Synod. Up∣on these Reasons he justifies his Vicar, and takes notice, that the Bishop of Alet had cited the Declarations made by Henry the Fourth, and the late King, but did not mention those that were made by the present King, tho' the latter derogated from the former; and the King's Decla∣rations were of the greater force, because the Clergy had submitted the whole Mat∣ter to him. Nor did his Vicar pretend to oppose the Decree of the Council of Lions, but only the Abuses founded on it; and the Reasons being given by the Chap∣ter, upon which they refused to instal the Regalist, the Vicar might judg of the va∣lidity of them, without citing the Parties concerned. In conclusion, he confirms the Judgment passed by his Vicar, and con∣demns the Ordinance made by the Bishop; and orders his Sentence to be intimated to him and the Chapter, and requires them to obey it, under pains of Excommunication. But the good Bishop was now dying; so all that I understand he did in this Affair, was, that he made an Appeal from his Me∣tropolitan to the Pope, and sent it to Rome.
He likewise writ a Letter to the King, which he ordered to be delivered after his Death: and he dying the 8th of December, it was delivered to the King, and read in Council; which is in the Collection. The  substance of it was; That according to the Rule of our Saviour, of being reconciled, before any should offer a Gift at the Altar, he who was then about to offer up to God his last Sacrifice, which was his Life, de∣sired earnestly to be rightly understood by the King. He makes great protestati∣ons of his Duty, and that he judged him∣self bound, in discharge of his Conscienc, to do those things which were represented as Acts of Disobedience to his Majesty. He also makes it his last demand, that the King would take pity of those Clergy-men who had been banished, only for obeying him that was their Superior, in a Point in which he had good Authority to command them. By this it seems some of his Cathedral had been banished, but whe∣ther upon his death they submitted, and were restored or not, I do not know. It seems they were, for I find no Complaints made by the Pope with relation to the Clergy of that See: And this is all that passed at Alet, as far as I have been in∣formed. It must be acknowledged, that the Bi∣shop proceeded with great Courage and Resolution; and that according to the Principles on which he went, he had a ve∣ry good Authority for what he did: For
it is not to be denied, that he executed the Decree of the Council of Lions. As for that Point relating to the Vicar or Offici∣als Authority, if it is acknowledged, as it is by all the Church of Rome, that there is a Jurisdiction setled in the Church by Jesus Christ; I confess I cannot understand how that delegation of Authority can be ju∣stified, either from Bishop to Priests, or from Clergy-men to Lay-men, by which they are authorized to do Acts of a Spiri∣tual Nature: for if that Authority flows from their Character, the Acts are insepa∣rable from the Character. And as in Tem∣poral Jurisdictions, none that are deputed to any Imployment, can depute others to act in their room, unless by their delegati∣on there is Authority granted to make Sub∣stitutes. So in Sacred Commissions, as I do not see how it can be pretended, that by their Commissions they have Authority to substitute others; so I cannot understand how they can lawfully do it without any such Warrant. As for the Proxies sent to General Councils, I look on those not as Deputies trusted with the Episcopal Au∣thority, but as Men employed only to sig∣nify that Bishop's Mind from whom they came. So this doth not give Authority to those Delegations that have been set up in the latter Ages, in which the Episcopal Power is trusted either to a Priest or Lay-man, who is thereby impowred to proceed to Spiritual Censures. Either there is no∣thing Divine in the Ecclesiasticall Juris∣diction,
or it ought to be dispensed by those to whom it is trusted: And I think it is as hard to defend their giving Authority to Priests, to deprive, as to ordain Priests; and to Lay-men to Excommunicate, as to Baptize. But now I turn to the Contests at Pa∣miers. One Paucet was provided in the Right of the Regale to be Arch-deacon of Pamiers, who went thither to be installed; but being rejected by the Bishop and Chap∣ter, in the same manner that had been used at Alet, he appealed to the Arch-bishop of Tholouse, who gave judgment in favour of the Regalist, [which is in the Collection].  In it he sets forth, That the Clergy of France had by many Remonstrances made upon the judgment of the Court of Par∣liament, An. 1608. prayed the King to take to himself the cognizance of that Affair, that the Clergy of the four Pro∣vinces had shewed their Titles before the Council, that after a long Process the King had declared that his Right was the same in all the Churches of his Domini∣ons; and that the Bishop of Pamiers had promised to obey the Declarations made by the King, but had not done it: So the Regale not being closed by the registring of his Oath, the Arch-deaconry falling void, the King had on the 18th of Ja∣nuary provided Paucet with it. But he coming on the 27th of April last to be put in possession, the Bishop had made an Or∣dinance against him; upon which the
Chapter on the 22d of June refused to ad∣mit him. Of this he complained; First, That it was contrary to the King's Decla∣ration. 2. It was contrary to the Council of Lions: for the Gloss upon that Canon explains the Regale to be new Tributes and Impositions, whereas this Right was not new in Languedoc; for ever since the foun∣dation of those Churches it belonged to the Crown; and if former Kings en∣joyed it not, or neglected and quitted it, that could be no prejudice to the Crown; for the Rights of the Crown do neither fall by prescription, nor can they be alie∣nated; therefore the Bishop of Pamiers Censures were null, and tended to Sedi∣tion. Other things were objected to Paucet, as that he was a Secular Priest, whereas the Benefice was Regular; but on that I shall not insist, because it belongs not to my Subject. In conclusion, he desired, That since the Reasons of the Chapters re∣fusing to admit him were contained in the Bishop's Ordinance, it being ordinary in such Cases to give Judgment, without citing the Parties, that it might be so done in this case. So Sentence was given, the Bishops Ordinance was declared contrary to Law, and null, and the Chapter was required to instal him: and this Judgment was appoin∣ted to be affixed at Tholouse and Pamiers, and in all the other Sees of the Pro∣vince. This being signified to the Bishop of Pamiers, he made an Instrument against it,
(which is in the Collection): In it he sets forth his Reasons why he could not submit to it; He excepted to many things in it, both as to Matter and Form. For the latter, he said, it was against natural Law to condemn any Person unheard; and cited a Decretal of Pope Innocent the Fourth, That in an Appeal, upon Excom∣munication, the Metropolitan ought to cite the Bishop. In Acts of Grace it was not necessary, but in Acts of Justice it was indispensable: and tho' some Rea∣sons had been specified in his Ordinance, yet they did not know that these were all he went upon, as indeed he had more: nor could the validity of any Reasons be judged, till they were heard in a contra∣dictory Judgment; for then they were more strongly urged than was usual in an extra-judicial Instrument; and no cause could be given for not citing him, unless it were that they were afraid to hear him urge his Reasons: Nor did they know whether he would adhere to his Or∣dinance or not. Therefore all that was done, he not being cited and heard, was null. 2. It was against the nature of Ec∣clesiastical Courts, to declare any thing to be contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom; and it was contrary to the Episcopal Dig∣nity to condemn a Bishop, and the anci∣entest Bishop of the Province, without advertising him. He complains also of some false Suggestions: As, 1. That he had promised to the King to obey his
Declarations, which he had never done. 2. That he had misunderstood the De∣cree of the Council of Lions; the contra∣ry of which, was evident. 3. That he had designed to stir up the People against the King: Which was far from his thoughts, he having payed a constant Fi∣delity to the King, and perswaded all others to do the same. But it was neces∣sary first to fear God, and then to honour the King: and his Obedience to the King was so much the firmer, that it was found∣ed on true Principles, and not on Interest or Flattery. And whereas it was said, That his Censures had raised great dis∣quiet in the minds of the People, he had done nothing but declared the Censures already made in the Canon: and in such Cases, it was better to raise a little trou∣ble in Peoples Minds, than let them go on and perish in their sins: and it was very unsutable for one that pretended to be an Arch-deacon, whose Office it was to exe∣cute the Canons, to complain of his obey∣ing them. As for the Matter, he com∣plains, that he having done nothing but executed the Decree of a Council, which was received in France, and esteemed a General Council for 400 Years, the Arch-bishop had required him to desist: Whereas all that he ought to have done in such a case, was to call a Provincial Council to consi∣der, whether he had exceeded the Decree or not; which could hardly be supposed, for his Ordinance was word for word
according to it. And by the Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, if a Clergy-man complained of his Bishop, it was to be done before the Synod of the whole Province; and much more in case the whole Province was concerned in it. Up∣on the whole Matter, it must either be said, that the Decree of the Council is not to be understood of the Regale, or that the Council was not received in France; or that Pamiers was then under the Regale. But the Decree and Gloss shew, that it was to be understood of the Regale, as it was then in use both in France and England. All the Assertors of the Regale built upon that Decree, as a Con∣firmation of an Immemorial Practise that was then received in many Places: And de Marca had made it evidently appear, that the Kings of France had, ever since that time, governed themselves by the Rule that was then set up. Philip le Bel had, by a particular Charge, excepted the Province of Narbonne, that is, all Lan∣guedoc, to which Pamiers did at first be∣long: nor was it ever in use to be subject to it, as Paucet did falsly insinuate. The Foundation of those Churches will on∣ly prove, that the King has the Right of Patronage; but the Regale cannot be in∣ferred from thence. He had never appeared before the King's Council, nor pleaded his Title: And the Agents General of the Clergy could not submit his Rights without special Authority from him. He
concludes, That he ought to have been heard plead to all these Particulars, before his Ordinance was annulled; and that therefore he was not bound to give Obe∣dience to that Judgment. How much further this Matter was car∣ried, and whether ever this Paper was an∣swered or not, I do not know. Upon this the Bishop of Pamiers appealed, as the Bi∣shop of Alet had done, from the Sentence passed by the Metropolitan to the Pope, and so it was lodged in his hands. One thing much urged for the obeying the King's Declarations, cannot bear the weight that is laid on it: it is, That since the Cler∣gy had prayed the King to take cogni∣zance of that Affair, they did thereby sub∣mit it to him, and so are obliged to ac∣quiesce in the decision he has made: But as some Bishops did not at all concur in that, so others made Protestations, that the pro∣ducing their Titles, ought to be no pre∣judice to their Rights. But even without that, it is no fair Inference to argue, that because the Clergy, upon the Parliament of Paris declaring against them, desired the King to take cognizance of the Affair; that therefore they referred it absolutely to him, and so made him the Arbitrator of their Rights. For unless their Remon∣strance has expresly such a clause in it, it is not just to conclude from thence, that they are bound to acquiesce in the King's Sentence; for they might desire the King to consider their Liberties when they were
invaded, as they thought, by the Court of Parliament, hoping to be able to prevail more with the King, than they could do with the Parliament, without being there∣by obliged to submit to his Decision. And for the Rights of their Sees, I do not see how the Act of an Incumbent, that is but an usufructuary, can be any prejudice to the See, or bring his Successors under any Obligation: much less can the faint actings of the Agents General, who are often Men that are resolved to make their Court, be looked on as obligatory to the rest. And thus far I have given an Abstract of what passed in France concerning this Af∣fair, before it was put in the Pope's hands. I go next to give an Account of what has occurred since that Time. On the 12th of March, 78, the Pope wrote his first Brief  to the French King, (which is in the Col∣lection); He did by it in soft, and yet pres∣sing Terms, complain of these Invasions made on the Liberties of the Church, and the Authority of the Council of Lions, contrary to the Practice of his Ancestors; He puts him in mind of the great En∣largement of the Royal Authority gran∣ted not long ago by that See, in the Nomi∣nation of all the Bishops of France; and he hoped that he was rather considering how to ease his Conscience of so great a load, than to encrease that by a new addition. Therefore he admonishes the King to re∣store all things again to the state in which
they were formerly; and uses some se∣vere reflections on those who were setting him on to such Courses. He takes notice of the King's late endeavours to preserve the Christian Religion in remote and for∣reign Parts, (which relates to the Troops he sent to Candy); and hopes he who shewed such Zeal then, will not now lessen the Authority of the Church. He exhorts him to imitate his Ancestors, or rather to continue to be like himself: and says, He cannot forget those Popes his Predecessors, who upon the like Occasions, had endu∣red great and long affliction, trusting in the Divine Assistance. This was the sub∣stance of the first Brief; in which the Pope, by calling to mind what other Popes had formerly done, tacitly insinuates his Resolution, not to give over his Oppositi∣on, what danger soever might follow on it. And since he neither magnifies the King for his War against the Heretical States, nor his proceedings against his Heretical Sub∣jects at home; but runs back as far as the Siege of Candy, to find Matter for a Com∣plement, we may in some measure guess at his sense of these things. What the King's Answer was to this, I can only gather from the Popes second Brief, which is also in the Collection: In it he writes, That by the King's Answer of the 5th of April, and  by what he had heard from his Nuncio, he perceived it was come to that, that he must either be wanting to his Duty, or perhaps be uneasy to the King: Upon
which he remonstrates the great danger the King was in, in reference to his Eter∣nal State by such Proceedings. He pre∣tended, that the Right of the Regale was Inherent in the Crown, and that it had been enjoyed by his Ancestors, and deri∣ved down from them to him: But the Pope on the contrary affirms, that the Secular Powers have no right to things Sa∣cred, but as it is derived to them by the Authority of the Church; and that the Church had not granted any such Right, but had expresly limited it by the Council of Lions, which had been observed now 400 Years; as appeared even by the Re∣cords of the Crown of France. He could not therefore forbear representing to him how fatal an Error this would prove, both to his own Conscience, to the Kingdom of France, and to the whole Church, which he aggravates with very severe words: and therefore prays the King to consider seriously of it; and if his other Affairs took up his own time, so that he had not leisure for it himself, that he would ap∣point some others to do it, who were pious and sincere Men: which Qualities were in this case more necessary than great Learning; this Matter being so plain, that little Learning would serve to make it understood. He desires him also to consi∣der the Proceedings of the Clergy of France, that were lately printed; and therefore he hopes there will be no occa∣sion given him to renew his Entreaties to
him on this Subject; for this concerned the Dignity and Safety of the whole Church so much, that he was resolved to suffer all things, rather than proceed slack∣ly in it. From this which bears date the 21 of September 1678, till the 27th of Decem∣ber 1679, the Matter lay quiet between the two Courts. But in the mean while the Regale was not only claimed in the See of Pamiers, in that Point which concerned the Vacant Benefices; but in the other Branch of it that relates to the Mean Profits: for the King's Officers seized on them likewise; so that the good old Bishop had nothing to live on the last twenty months of his Life, but the Oblations and Charities of his People: Upon which the Pope writ several consolatory Letters to him, encouraging him to bear his Afflictions patiently. The first was the 4th of January 1679, which contains only general Expressions of his esteem of him, and sympathy with him in his Sufferings. Upon that the Bishop of Pamiers wrote a long Letter to the Pope, of which I have not been able to procure a Copy. In it he expressed his sense of the corrupt and impious Doctrines of the Mo∣dern Casuists; and complained of many Abuses in the Government of the Church, and proposed some Expedients for re∣forming both the Secular and Regular Clergy; and then laid out the necessity of securing the Church from the Encroach∣ments of the Civil Powers, and Secular
Tribunals; which is no doubt an excellent Letter: But tho' the Letter it self has not been made publick, some hints of it appear in the Answer which the Pope writ,Collect. N. 10. that is in the Collection. After that the Pressures which both the Bishop and his Chapter suffered, for refu∣sing to submit to the Orders of the Court, made him write again to the Pope; to the which the Pope not only wrote a very af∣fectionate Answer,Collect. N. 11. which is likewise in the Collection, but wrote his third Brief to the King upon it, dated the 27th of Decem∣ber,Col. N. 9. which is also in the Collection. In it he takes notice, that by two former Let∣ters he had laid before him, how contra∣ry his Declaration, concerning the Regale, was to the Rights of the Church, which he hoped he would have recalled: But finding things grew daily worse and worse, he could be no longer silent; and therefore with great vehemence he obtests him, rather to hearken to the wholsome Advices that he sent him, than to those Sons of Disobedience, who contrary to the Duty of their Office, and the Practice of their Predecessors, and to their Oaths at their Consecration, did give up the Rights of the Church. He represents to the King, That in the great Day of Judg∣ment, Princes must appear before God, without Guards and Attendants, or the Ensigns of Regal Dignity, to give an ac∣count of their Actions to the Searcher of all Hearts, with whom there was no
respect of Persons, who can cast them in∣to Hell. He says, Anciently the Bishops-of France had used, upon the like occasi∣ons, to represent to their Princes freely the sin of invading the Rights of the Church. After this severe reflection on the French Bishops, he takes notice of the King's Zeal for Religion; and the late Decrees he had made against the Here∣ticks; and therefore prays, That what he built up with his right hand, might not be pull'd down by his left. There were not wanting some resolute and zealous Bishops in France, but they were restrain∣ed by a fear, that they judged just and pardonable: yet he thought it vain, and unbecoming the Episcopal Function, and injurious to the King, since it kept them from asserting their Rights. In con∣clusion he presses him to recal his Declara∣tions, otherwise he was afraid that he should fall under the Wrath of God, of which he gave him warning now the third time. He would trouble him with no more Letters on that Subject; and yet he would not be slack in using that Authori∣ty which he had, and to which he must have recourse in such an extremity. Nor was he afraid of any danger that could befal himself, being resolved chearfully to undergo any sufferings he might be put to for Righteousness-sake, and to glory in the Cross of Christ, therefore he would do his Duty, and leave the Event to God.
Not long after he wrote to Cardinal de Estree,Collect. N. 13. which is also in the Collection, desi∣ring him to interpose in this Affair, as one that was more than ordinarily concerned in the Dignity of the Apostolick See; and insinuates, that the See of Laon, of which he was Bishop, was not anciently subject to the Regale; and that therefore both ge∣neral and particular Obligations concur∣ring, he expected his assistance in this Matter. To this the Cardinal wrote an Answer the last of May, all in the Style of a Court Bishop;Collect. N. 14. He lays out the Dangers that would follow, if any Dissentions should arise between the King and the Pope. He reckons up the King's Me∣rits, his Zeal for the Faith, and his Re∣spects to the Apostolick See: and adds, That wonderful were the things done by him against the Sect of Calvin, since he had taken the Administration of Affairs into his own hands. It is true, some small remainders of that perverse Sect were yet unextinguish'd; but the King did not spare them, and was wholly set on root∣ing it out entirely: and for that only end new Edicts were every day put out. He promoted Learned and Pious Men to Bi∣shopricks; and for the Vacant Revenues, he either granted them to the Successor, or appointed a part of them to be distributed among such as were converted from Here∣sy: And in sum, such were his Merits to∣wards the Church, that if he had not the Title of the most Christian King derived
down to him from his Ancestors, he had deserved that it should be bestowed on himself. He tells the Pope with how great a King he had to do, the most powerful of all Europe; so admired, not only for his Glory and Victories, but for the rare temper of his mind in all his Suc∣cesses; and that no King of France had ever his whole People so entirely subjected and engaged to him: therefore he takes notice of the sharpness of his Style, which was such, as if his Letters had been di∣rected to an Invader of the Faith, and not to a Prince that had, both in Hungary, Africk, Greece, and Holland, as well as in the Heart of France, done so much for the Catholick Faith. And therefore he wishes, that as the Pope did imitate Gre∣gory the Great in his Innocence, Faith, Constancy, contempt of worldly Things, in his wonderful Humility, and the great∣ness of his Mind; so he would resemble him in his discreet and prudent Methods, of gaining upon the Hearts of Princes: And concludes, laying before him the great happiness that would follow on a good understanding between him and the King, and the Mischiefs that would fol∣low on a Breach. The French King did not, it seems, think fit to write any large Answer to the Brief; and therefore in the end of June, he sent Cardinal de Estree to Rome with a Letter of Credence; which,Collect. N. 15, 16 with the Pope's Answer to it, is in the Collection. His Instructions
were secret: for all that was published concerning them was, that he had Orders to treat immediately with the Pope him∣self: But that was refused by the Pope, and he appointed him to treat with Cardi∣nal Cibo, who is reported to be a Man of great Vertues, and extraordinary Wis∣dom. It has been given out, that he was much enclined to accommodate the Matter, but the Pope continues firm and resolute. Other Accidents have likewise fallen in, which have given fresh occasion to the Pope to complain of the Arch-bishop of Tholouse and Paris, concerning two Abbesses that were set over two Nunneries, by the King's Authority, against the Rules of those Houses; but I shall not digress to give any account of these, that being forreign to my Subject. In the Letter which the Pope wrote to the Arch-bishop of Tholouse,Collect. N. 12. con∣cerning the business of Pamiers, he begins with a most grievous complaint of a Vio∣lence committed, in the intruding an Ab∣bess on the Ʋrbanists at Tholouse by a Mili∣tary Force, to which he was so far from making any opposition, that he was as∣sisting at it. This the Pope esteemed to be so heinous a wickedness, that he could not have given credit to it, if it were not that he remembred what he had done al∣most two Years before in the business of Pamiers; therefore he severely admo∣nishes him to correct what was done amiss, otherwise he would seriously think of proper Remedies.
After that, the Pope understanding the ill state of the Bishop of Pamiers Health, and the great Poverty and other Troubles in which he was involved, wrote to him a Consolatory Letter, in terms so full of esteem and sympathy,Collect. N. 17. that it had been in∣deed a very pertinent Letter, if he had been in hazard to be burnt for the Christian Faith; for in that case the stile could not have been raised to a higher pitch. But this is no new thing; for those that have been thought the Martyrs for the Rights of the Church, have been always celebrated far beyond those Martyrs, that suffered for the Christian Religion: for which I need not go out of England for Instances, since Thomas Becket, that was a proud versatile and factious Man as any was in that Age, being killed by some of the officious Ser∣vants of Henry the Second, was presently afterwards canonized; and had not only one day assigned him for a Festival, but besides the day of his pretended Martyr∣dom, there was another Holy-day for the Feast of his Translation; and every fiftieth Year there was a Jubilee granted for fifteen days, to those that came and visited his Tomb; and as appears by some Records yet extant, there was sometimes 100000 Pilgrims at Canterbury on that occasion: and to that pitch did this superstition arise, that in the Hymn for him they prayed, That by the Blood of Thomas, which he had shed for Christ, they might be made to mount up to Heaven after him. And this was not
all, for the Oblations to his Altar did as far exceed those that were made at the Altar of the Blessed Virgin, as those made to her had exceeded those made at our Saviour's Altar: of which the Lieger Books of Can∣terbury give us this account, That in one Year there was offered at Christ's Altar 3 l. 2 s. 6 d. at the Virgins 63 l. 5 s. 6 d. but at St. Thomas's 832 l. 12 s. 3 d. Yet this Proportion changed mightily in ano∣ther Year, in which nothing was offered at the Altar of our Saviour, and but 4 l. 1 s. 8 d. at the blessed Virgins; whereas 954 l. 6 s. 3 d. was offered at St. Thomas Becket's Altar. So much higher was the value of this Saint raised, not only above the Blessed Virgin, but above Jesus Christ himself: and it is not to be doubted, but if any of the French Souldiers had killed the Bishop of Pamiers, we should have had another St. Francis, who might have vied even with the great St. Francis, notwith∣standing all the Legends of the Conformi∣ties. The good Bishop was not shaken in his Resolution to maintain his Rights, as he apprehended them; neither the seizure of his Revenues, nor the proceedings against those Clerks that intimated his Ordinances, nor the Judgments given against him in the Court of Parliament of Paris, upon the emergents of new Vacancies, were able to divert him.Collect. N. 18. A little before his Death he wrote to the King's Procureur General, excusing himself for not appearing before
the Parliament, to justify two Ordinances of his that were complained of as abusive, and were reversed. But he writes that his Poverty was such, that he could not bear the charge of a Process, having no∣thing to live on but the Charities of his Friends; for he had been then, for above twenty months, without any Revenues, not so much as a necessary Alimony being reserved to him; tho' it was well known that he had no Estate of his own, and that he continued to do his Duty, as much as his Age and other Infirmities did allow him: Nor did he expect any equal deal∣ing from the Parliament, which was so much set on extending the Regale. For his part he had done nothing but obeyed the Decree of a General Council, in which if he had exceeded the Limits of it, he was to be judged by the Pope, and not by any Secular Court. And his Revenues that were of late seized on, were Tithes, which were Spiritual, and were so neces∣sary for the celebration of Divine Offices, that if God had not otherwise provided, they could not have been performed with that decency that was necessary. As for the complyance and submission of other Bishops; that ought not to be objected to him who had no share in it; and yet the Protestations that others had made, shew∣ed, that their submission was only to a∣void other Inconveniences which they thought greater. And whereas it was
objected, that he made himself Judg of his own Cause, he answered, That he him∣self had judged nothing, but had only executed the Decree of a General Coun∣cil: He thought a Bishop was bound, even at the peril of his Life, to defend the Li∣berties of the Church, as well as the Ar∣ticles of the Faith. He wrote also to P. de la Chaise the King's Confessor on the same Subject.Collect. N. 19. He first tells him, That he had been long in doubt whether he should write to him or not: On the one hand, he believed it would be to no purpose, and it might be thought it flowed from a particular discontent; but on the other hand, he resolved not to be wanting to any thing that might be a Ser∣vice to the Church; therefore he was prevailed on, by his Friends, to put it to hazard, and leave the Event of it to God. He confesses, that if he had any distast at him, or his Society, he had many occa∣sions given him to make complaints; and they were such, that equitable Judges would acknowledg that he had reason of his side; but he thought himself bound to keep silence, till an indispensable ne∣cessity forced him to speak; and he ho∣ped, that tho' he, or his Order, were dissatisfied with him, they would not take their revenge on the Church. That Fa∣ther had acknowledged to him, that the Regalists were a company of Wolves; and yet he had not only exposed his Flock
as a prey to them, but had encouraged them to fall on it; by which his Cathedral, that was established under the Rules of a Religious Society, was like, by his means, to be turned Secular again. He asks him, Where was that profound Reverence, and blind Obedience, which upon other occa∣sions he had pretended to the Holy See? The World saw clearly how he had abu∣sed that confidence, which the quality of Confessor procured him with the King. It was not possible that he had carefully stu∣died the Matter of the Regale, otherwise he must know, that his Church, and ma∣ny others, were not subject to it: and if he had not sufficiently examined it, he asks him, How he could contribute to the Severities they suffered, which were as great, as if they were Enemies to the Church and State. Tho' they were in the wrong, it would be hard to justify such a manner of proceeding against a Bishop and his Chapter, who were guilty of no other Crime, but their Zeal to maintain the Rights of the Church, and to obey the Decree of a General Council. But he believed it was not so necessary to in∣form him, as to dispose his mind aright; yet that was only in the Hand of God, since the fear of incurring the King's Dis∣pleasure, if he should understand that he had been flattered by him, who of all other Persons was the most obliged to tell him truth; the aversion he had to confess
his Error, and his desire to disgrace a Bishop, that did not approve of all the Maxims of his Order, because he judged them contrary to those of Jesus Christ and his Saints, were such invincible Pre∣judices, that none but he, in whose hands all hearts were, could overcome them. But he represents to him, that he was drawing on himself, both the Wrath of God and the King, who, at some time or other, would come to apprehend and condemn those ill Counsels which he gave him. He wishes that he would be so cha∣ritable, as to leave a Bishop now 70 Years of Age, in the 34 Year of his Ministry, to die in peace; and that he would not give up the Religious Society that was estabished in his Cathedral, to the rave∣nousness of those Enemies to a Regular Life, that were gaping after Prefer∣ment. The last Ordinance that the Bishop made in this Matter, was on the 31 of May, before the Clergy and People of Pa∣miers; in which, after a long preamble, setting forth the Grounds on which he went, that have been formerly opened, he excommunicated all those that asked, ac∣cepted of, or took possession of any Bene∣fices in his Diocess, in the Right of the Re∣gale; and did charge all Persons, under the same pains, not to raise any of the Re∣venues of his Bishoprick, Chapter, Cathe∣dral, or of any other Benefice in the Right
of the Regale; nor to advise, aid, or as∣sist any that did raise them, and reserved the absolution of them only to himself. He died not long after, on the 17th of August; and at his Death, was lamented by almost all sorts of People in his Diocess, with as sensible a grief, as if every one had lost in him their natural Father; only the Jesuits said he was damned, for he had ex∣communicated three of their Order, and had put them all under an Interdict of hearing Confessions in his Diocess. Yet this could not restrain the People from all the ex∣pressions of esteem and veneration for him possible. They cut his Episcopal Gar∣ments in pieces, every one thinking him∣self happy if he could get a snip of them. They published, that he had some of the symptoms of Saintship about him; that his Face look'd still as if he had been alive; and that his Body did not smell; and some gave out, that Miracles were wrought at his Tomb, which might flow from the heat of their Imagination, who were possessed with a high opinion of him. Yet if there come such a Revolution in France, that his Memory shall be held in high esteem at Court, it may not be impossible to procure his Canonization. There are many names in the Kalendar, that do not deserve their place there so well: and at Rome we need not doubt, but one that adhered so tena∣ciously to the Rights of the Church, will be easily dignified, that being the most meritorious Title there.
Upon his Death the Chapter was assem∣bled; who, during the Vacancy, were to chuse the Vicar General, as being the Guardians of the Spiritualities. They named two, Aubarede and Rech. Two days after that three Regalists came thi∣ther, accompanied by the Arch-bishop of Tholouse's Chaplain, assisted by the Magi∣strate, and directed by the Jesuits; and required them to instal them; but Auba∣rede intimated to them the Excommunica∣tions denounced by the late Bishop; and therefore said, He was resolved not to re∣ceive them, nor to suffer the People to communicate with them; upon this they refused to acknowledg him. So after he had repeated his Admonition three times, he denounced them Excommunicated; and all the People that were present applauded it; insomuch, that the Magistrate was af∣fraid lest some affront should have been put on the Regalists. Soon after this Aubarede was seized on, and carried to a remote Prison, where the report went, that after much cruel usage, he was famished to death. Carlot the Prior, a Man almost fourscore, who was look'd upon as the Person by whose advice the late Bishop was chiefly governed, of whose piety ma∣ny extraordinary things are also reported, was carried to another remote Prison, in which he died not long after; and it is said, that his Jaylors were so severe, that at his death he could not have the Sacra∣ments
given him. Four Troops of Horse were also sent to Pamiers; and they took up their Quarters only in the Houses of those who refused to communicate with the Regalists, who were the far greater num∣ber of the Inhabitants. The Regalists were installed by Military Force; yet when they said Mass, not only the Clergy, but almost the whole Town, refused to be present; and tho' force prevailed with some, yet few came of their own accord. But the Chapter meeting again, chose Cerle and Charlas to be joint Vicars with Rech; and in case they should be likewise banished, they substituted many Parish Priests to ex∣ercise that Authority in their several Divi∣sions. But the Intendant put Rech in Pri∣son, and required the other Canons to com∣municate with the Regalists; and the Arch-bishop of Tholouse having named a Vicar General, he charged them to obey him. Yet the Canons stood upon their Rights, and said, The Arch-bishop could not name a Vicar, but in case of their ne∣glecting to do it; and they also adhered to the Censures of the late Bishop, and did not regard the Arch-bishops Sentence that annulled them. So many of them were put in Prison, only Cerle kept himself out of their hands, and made an Ordinance, which he got to be affixed, condemning all that was done by the Arch-bishop of Tholouse. This occasioned new Severities; for all that were concerned with him in
that Matter, were banished and searched for, and their Benefices were seized on; which they all seemed to bear, not only patiently but chearfully, and gloried in their Sufferings as in a Persecution. Many of the People who adhered to them, and re∣fused to communicate with the new Vicar and the Regalists, were likewise beaten, fined, and put in Prison: of all which I have seen several Accounts, but the fullest is,Collect. N. 20. a Letter sent by Cerle to the Pope, which I have put in the Collection. The first thing the new Vicar did, was, to take off the Interdict from the Jesuits; and there was now nothing to be heard in all the Pulpits, but Invectives against the Jansenists, and all their Maxims; tho' this was not very consistent to their own Max∣ims, being now in open opposition to the Pope's Authority, to declaim against them as Hereticks, for holding Opinions which they could not prove Heretical, but be∣cause they were condemned by a Papal Sentence. But Cerle was not behind with them in ill words; for he charges them with the old Henrician Heresy, (the name by which the Pope studied to make those odious, who adhered to Henry the Fourth the Emperor, in the Wars that were rai∣sed about the Investitures) and doth hea∣vily accuse the Jesuits as the great suppor∣ters, or rather promoters of this Invasion, made upon the Rights of the Church. He calls Ferrier, the late Confessor, the Parent
or Contriver, le Chaise the Nurse or Ad∣vocate, and Maimbourg the Herald that proclaimed it, and writ for it; and says, That the Advantages made by the Regale, did chiefly accrue to them. As soon as the Pope heard the news of the Bishop of Pamiers death, and of the Order setled by the Chapter, he wrote to the new Vicars on the 25th of September. He run out mightily in the Bishop's Com∣mendation, and exhorted them to go on to imitate the Example he had set them, in maintaining the Rights of the Church; and being afterwards informed, that the Arch-bishop of Tholouse had absolved those whom the Bishop of Pamiers had excom∣municated; he wrote to him on the se∣cond of October, accusing him for it, say∣ing, That it was both contrary to the Council of Lions, and to the Appeal which the Bishop of Pamiers had made to the Apostolick See. Therefore he required him to correct what he had done amiss; but it is obseveable, that he neither begins nor ends the Letter with a Blessing, ac∣cording to the common form. He also writ, at the same time, a second Letter to the Chapter of Pamiers, confirming their Election of the Vicars, and condemning the Nomination made by the Bishop of Tholouse. And by another Letter of the first of January, 1681, he annulled all things that were done by any Vicar, that was not chosen by the Chapter; and re∣quired
all Persons, in the virtue of Obe∣dience; and under the pains of Excom∣munication, Deprivation, and perpetual Disability, not to exercise any Jurisdi∣ction by any other Authority; and he-declares, that all that should obey such Vi∣cars, and particularly the Jesuits, and the Metropolitan himself, had incurred those Censures, reserving the power of Absolution to himself; and declares all Confessions, Marriages, Institutions, or Licenses, that flowed from that Authori∣ty, null and void. Here the Pope made a hardy step in∣deed, but it was not easy to find ways to execute this, the Chapter of Pamiers being now dispersed so that none of them could do it; and it was in vain to send it to the Arch-bishop of Tholouse, for when the fore∣mentioned Letter of the second of October was brought to him, he made a Protesta∣tion, in the hands of a Publick Notary, that it was contrary to the Liberty of the Gallican Church, for him to open or read any Letter from the Pope, without leave obtained from the King: And soon after that, the Court of Parliament of Tholouse made an Order, at his suggestion as it was believed, That none should receive any Brief from the Pope, till it should be first examined and approved of in the King's Council. Yet the Brief was printed, and privately affixed in Tholouse, with an Or∣dinance from Cerl intimating it, but
without the ordinary Formalities. The Procureur General upon this, infor∣med the Court of Parliament of Paris, of the Irregularities of the Brief, & set forth, That the Chanons of Pamiers, who were placed by the late Bishop, that had not Authority suf∣ficient for doing it, had met to chuse a Vi∣car, without calling those who were pro∣vided by the King, for the Benefices that were vacant by the Regale; upon which an Appeal had been made by him against the Election as abusive, and a Prohibition was served upon those Vicars, not to ex∣ercise their Functions; and an entire Chapter was ordered to be called; which not being done, the Arch-bishop of Tho∣louse had the right of naming one devolved on him. Neither had the Pope power to declare him excommunicated; for in the first instance he ought to be judged by the Bishops of the Province; nor could the Pope take any cognizance of the Fact but upon an Appeal; and in that case it was not to be judged at Rome, but upon the place by Delegates appointed for that effect. The Pope had also threatned o∣thers with the same Censures for obeying the King's Orders, who were only ac∣countable to the King. The Church had indeed authority to punish Men for Here∣sy or ill Life: But the World was now too well enlightned, not to discern that the Thunders of Rome had been for seve∣ral Ages vainly employed, for stretching their Authority beyond all due Bounds.
The due bounds set to it, were to be found in the Canons of the Church that were re∣ceived, by which the Pope, as well as o∣thers, ought to govern himself, and in which he ought to give a good example to the rest of the World: therefore he desi∣red that the Brief might be suppressed; which was accordingly done, by a Judgment of the Court of Parliament, on the last of March 1681. At this time there was an extraordinary meeting called, of all the Bishops then at Pa∣ris; there were present six Archbps, 26 Bi∣shops, and 6 that were named to Bishopricks; to whom the Agents of the Clergy represen∣ted the Invasions made on the Liberties of the Gallican Church, by the Pope's Briefs, both in general concerning the Regale, and in particular in the Affair of Pamiers, and the Nunneries; and concerning a Book of Gerbais, a Doctor of the Sorbonne, de Cau∣sis Majoribus, which were equally con∣trary both to Church and State, to the Canons and the Concordate, by which the Pope, upon a simple complaint, without any Appeal, did, by the plenitude of his Power, judg at Rome concerning the validi∣ty of Elections, and the Authority of Arch-bishops and Primats; and they enu∣merating the King's great Merits, reckon up these following Particulars among them, that there was almost an infinite number of the Temples of the Hereticks pulled down; the Exercise of their Religion was forbid∣den, and that great numbers were con∣verted;
to which they likewise add, his care to stifle Novelties in their first birth, which relates to the forsaken Jansenists; and conclude, That the King had given many publick Marks of his Piety, of which any one in former Ages was thought enough to build upon it a Panegyrick, for the most Religious Princes; therefore they laid the Matter before these Bishops, who were then accidentally in Paris to consider what was fit to be done upon that occasion. To this a few words were added by the Arch-bishop of Paris; then the Assembly named a Committee of six to consider of the whole Affair, and make report; and of these, the Arch-bishop of Rheims being the first, the Report was made by him on the first of May. He took notice of the sharpness of stile that was in the Pope's Briefs, and enlarged on the King's great Merits, particularly his Zeal for the destruction of Heresy, to which that severe stile was unsutable; but he laid the blame of it chiefly on the late Bishop of Pamiers Agents at Rome, who had made strange representations of the Regale, as a sort of Heresy which would destroy the purity of Religion in France; and by those means had much inflamed the Pope. They also pretended, that many of the best Bishops in France were of the Bi∣shop of Pamiers mind, tho' they did not openly declare it: These were in all but two or three, who had made Protestati∣ons against it; and by so doing, shewed
that they did not think the Matter was of such great consequence, otherwise they would have acted in another manner. The rest of the Bishops of the four Pro∣vinces, having duly considered the mis∣chievous effects of a breach between the two Powers of the Church and State, had submitted to the King's Declarations: but if the thing had been in it self criminal, not only they, but even the other Bishops, whose Sees were, without dispute, subject to the Regale, would have stood up for the Church, with the Courage that became their Function, and he did not doubt but so good a Pope (of whom he speaks in terms full of particular esteem) being rightly informed by the Cardinal d'Estrée would come to be more temperate. The Right of the Regale was approved by Popes and General Councils; all the Que∣stion was only concerning the extent of it. It had always been considered as a Right of the Crown, since the days of Philip le Bel, and so was not submitted to an Ec∣clesiastical Tribunal. The Kings of France, in the Matters of Policy and Govern∣ment, did never look on themselves as bound by the Decrees of those Courts. Upon the Judgment given by the Parlia∣ment of Paris 1608, the Bishops desired the King to examine the Matter in Coun∣cil, without making such Protestations as had been done formerly in the like cases, that they did not refer it to the King's Judgment, but only came to inform his
Conscience: There was indeed no other Court before whom it could be brought; and their Kings had always judged in the like cases how far the Regale was to be ex∣tended. It is true, it was a Servitude that could not be imposed on the Church without its consent, which was given in the Council for these then subject to it; and now that the King's Declarations were published, the rest ought also to submit. It was only a matter of Disci∣pline, whether the King's Officer, the Steward of the Church, or the Bishop Visitor, should raise the Revenues, or whether the vacant Benefices should be conferred by the King, the Chapter, or the succeeding Bishop. The Church had made great changes in matters of Disci∣pline. In the Ancient Church, the Peo∣ple had a Voice in the choice of their Bi∣shops; the Clergy of both Town and Country were also called, which after∣wards fell into the hands of the Chapters. In the last Age, a Pope and a Council had taken away Elections, and put the Nomi∣nation of Bishops wholly in the King's hands. But in all these Alterations, Reli∣gion was not concerned. The Design of the Council of Lions, was chiefly to regu∣late the Abuses, of which the King's Of∣ficers were accused, which yet had no ef∣fect: And so little was that Council con∣sidered, that in the famous Contest be∣tween Philip le Bel, and Boniface the 8th, the King founded his Pretensions on the
practice of St. Lewis, and not on the De∣cree of that Council. There was at pre∣sent less reason given by the King for such complaints; for he did not so much as ap∣ply the Revenue of those Sees, that were without question subject to the Regale, to his own use, as many of his Progenitors had done, but either gave them to the Successor, or to converted Hereticks. The Canons of Councils were not in all other Cases observed; for not to speak of those made in the Council of Nice and Chalce∣don, even those made in the Councils of the Lateran and Trent were not executed; therefore a Decree of Council that is not well understood, and was not executed soon after it was made, ought not to be so much insisted on. The King look'd on the Regale as a Right of his Crown which was not subject to the decision of a Coun∣cil, and could not be alienated by his Pre∣decessors. So if a Breach should fol∣low upon such a Point, the Prejudices that would redound from it, would be of far greater consequence, than that the Privi∣ledges of the four Provinces could ever ballance them; therefore he proposed to the Bishops, that they should use their ut∣most endeavours to compose this diffe∣rence. And as the Council of Lions, in acknowledgment of the Services the Kings of France had lately done the Church, by freeing it from the Heresy of the Albi∣genses; and in consideration of Philip le Hardie's greatness, had confirmed the
possession of the Regale; so he thought all that was applicable to the present Occa∣sion. After this the Assembly justified Gerbais his Book; in which he had asserted the Au∣thority of National Churches, for judging of all Matters, both of Faith and Manners: which was indeed the great Principle on which the Reformation of England was founded in the last Age; as I have copi∣ously shewed in my History of that great Change. And so it is no wonder if a Do∣ctrine that may prove so pernicious to the See of Rome, is condemned there. But it is to be hoped, that if the French Clergy once admit of that Proposition, that Na∣tional Churches may reform Errors in the Faith, they will not only judg more mildly of what was done here in our Reforma∣tion, but may be induced to follow the Ex∣ample which was then set them; and their present Severities against the Protestants, ought not to put us quite out of hopes, since the Burnings that were in the begin∣nings of Henry the Eighth's Reign, and the Severities of his Temper, together with the Engagements he had brought himself under by writing on those Points, set the prospect of a Reformation further off in England, than even the Proceedings in France do at this day. After this, another Author, David a Lawyer, that perhaps in hopes of prefer∣ment, had extolled the Pope's Power out of measure, and had seemed to advance
that extravagant Assertion, of which the Jesuits were of late so fond, concerning the Pope's Infallibility in Matters of Fact, did either disclaim or retract it. After that the Arch-bishop of Rheims went on in his Report; He opened both the Matter of the Nunnery of Charonne, and the late Briefs in the Business of the Vicars of Pamiers; and shewed how the Episcopal Authority, and Liberties of the Gallican Church, were struck at by them; and that they were not only contrary to An∣cient Right, but to the latter Regulations agreed on by the Concordate. Some flat∣terers of the Court of Rome, had pre∣tended that the Concordate was a pure Act of Grace of Pope Leo the Tenth's, and had raised the Pope's Power above that of the Church, contrary to the Decisions of the Council of Constance and Basil, which were received in France. He confessed the Pope was the Head & Center of the Church, but all other Bishops as well as he derived their Power and Jurisdiction likewise from Christ. The Concordate was a Treaty between the Pope and the King of France, by which the Pope received great Advantages, and it being confirmed in the Council of the Lateran, he could not repeal it, without annulling that. In con∣clusion, after some aggravations of the Matter, and some Instances of former Bishops that had expostulated with Popes upon such Provocations, he sums all up, and examines a motion that was made for
writing to the Pope, both in the Matter of the Regale, and concerning their Juris∣diction. A Precedent for that was brought from an Assembly of the like Nature with theirs, that had writ to the Pope upon the first beginnings of the Heresy of the Jansenists; but he thought such a Remon∣strance would have more Authority, if it came from a National Council, or an As∣sembly of the Clergy, (which consists of two Bishops out of every Province, and two Priests, that have only a consultative Voice). And since all the Churches were concerned in the Matter, it seemed better to reserve it entire to such a Meeting. To this they all agreed. The Speech that wants none of the Ornaments, both of Eloquence and Learning that the Subject could bear, was ordered to be printed, with the whole Proceedings of that Assembly. So all end∣ed in an Address to the King, praying him to give leave, either for a National Coun∣cil, or an Assembly General. The latter being that in which there is the least dan∣ger, was preferred, and was summoned to meet the first of October. In chusing the Deputies for this Assembly, the good old Cardinal Grimaldi was a little uneasy; but a mean was found to manage the Election in his Province, without engaging him in it. Cerle made his Protestation against all that this Assembly shall do; for the Pro∣vincial Assembly of Tholouse was held, without any citation served on him, that was the lawful Vicar of Pamiers confirmed
by the Pope. Nor were the Elections at Tho∣louse free, as he alleges, for the A.Bp. had re∣ceived secret Orders from Court, concern∣ing the Persons who should be chosen; so that there was no reason to trust the Rights of the Church in such Mens hands; and particularly he protested, that nothing could be done in prejudice of the Church of Pamiers, they not being cited nor heard; and he alledged, that that Matter was now lodged with the Pope by a lawful Appeal; and it being a general Concern of the whole Church, was to be reckoned among the Causae Majores; and that the rather, because it was judged to be of that impor∣tance, that an Assembly General was cal∣led about it; therefore he refused to ac∣knowledg that Assembly, and appealed again to the Pope. But in this Interval a new Occasion was given to the Order of the Jesuits, to express thier Zeal for the Crown of France, and that they prefer it even to their fourth Vow, which has been hitherto the Foun∣dation of all their Merit at Rome: The Pope resolved to make trial of their Since∣rity, so he gave their General Authentical Copies of his Brief of the first of January, and charged him to send them to the Pro∣vincials both of Paris and Tholouse requiring them to publish them; this was obeyed by him on the 23d of Ap. The Provincial of Pa∣ris being out of the way, the Superiour and the others that were most Eminent there, instead of executing this Order, gave no∣tice
of it to the Procureur General, and on the 18th of June, he represented it to the Court of Parliament; so they were cited to appear on the 20th, and upon their Ap∣pearance the Court told them of what they had been informed concerning the Orders sent to them from Rome, which was con∣trary to the Laws of this Kingdom: They complained that the King, who had not ceased to conquer, till he was pleased to do it, and had given Peace to Europe, could not enjoy it himself, even at a time in which he was imploying both his Thoughts and Treasures for the destruction of Heresy; but they confessed it was happy that these Orders had fallen in the hands of such Wise and Loyal Men. The Jesuits being thus required, gave an account of the matter of Fact; so the King's Advocate shewed that this was a Novelty contrary to the Laws of France, in which no Briefs ought to be pub∣lished without the King's leave; he com∣mended the conduct of the Jesuits, whose carriage did appear to be good, by the Re∣proaches that were made them, in the Let∣ters which the Pope and their General writ. Then he enlarged upon the Right of the Regale, which the King could no more renounce, neither in whole nor in part, than he could destroy the Salick Law; or quit the Soveraignty of any of the Provin∣ces of France; and, he said, they would all quit their Employments, rather than consent to the least diminution of that Right. The Court commanded the Jesuits
to produce the Pacquet sent from Rome, which they did. And judgment was given, requiring them not to publish the Brief, nor the Orders sent to them by their General; and the Superiors of all Religious Orders whatsoever, were also straitly charged un∣der the pains of forfeiting all the Privi∣leges they had in France, not to publish or execute any Briefs or Bulls, except those that concerned the Internal Discipline of their Order. Upon which the Jesuits sub∣mitted, more as became Loyal Subjects, than Men under so blind an Obedience to their General, as their Vows import; and indeed, in this whole Matter, both sides of the Clergy of France have given such In∣stances of their accommodating their Opi∣nions to their present Interests, that no wonder the World is not much edified by it. About twenty and thirty Years ago, when the Jesuits were Omnipotent at Rome, they and all their Party were raising the Authority of that See the highest that was possible; and the Jansenists were de∣pressing it as much, and had nothing in their mouths so often, as the Episcopal Autho∣rity, and the Rights of the Gallican Church. But now that the Jesuits have not their Or∣dinary Interest there, and that they find the support of the Crown of France more considerable, than that of the Apostolick Chair; they and their Friends are become zealous Assertors of the Liberties of the Gallican Church, and of the Authority of the Bishops of France: And on the other
hand, the Jansenists are now supporting the Pope's Authority, when it is on their side, as much as they detracted from it, when it was set against them: which way of proceeding, savours more of a Jesuitical nimbleness, than of that sincerity which the others profess, who are indeed Men of another temper; tho' the low condition to which they are reduced, has prevailed too much with them to prefer the refinings of Policy to the simplicity of Religion. The Assembly is now met; the late Bi∣shop of Condom, now of Meaux, preached the Sermon at the opening of it, which is much cried up. Committees have been al∣so appointed, both for the Regale, and for the business of the Nuns. But they have not yet made any progress; it is like mea∣sures are  to be taken according to the Dispatches that come from Cardinal de Estree; and if the Pope doth not become more tractable, it is believed that they will write to him, and declare their submission to the King's Declarations, and justify both the King's Right, and their Obedience, and will also assert their Episcopal and Me∣tropolitan Jurisdiction; and that the Pope cannot judg any Causes relating to their Churches, in the first instance, nor receive any Appeal, till the Cause has gone through all the other Superior Courts; and that even then he cannot judg of it at Rome, but must appoint Delegates to examine it upon the Place. This is the utmost that proba∣bly this Assembly will do.
The Conclusion. HAving thus stated the whole matter of Fact, as fully as my Informations can carry me; I shall conclude with a short ac∣count of my Thoughts, concerning this Contest, that from so inconsiderable a be∣ginning, has now grown up to such a heighth. It may seem a little too presump∣tuous for me to give a Judgment in so criti∣cal a Point; but having ventured thus far with my Reader, I shall not break off ab∣ruptly, but shall deliver my Opinion with the same plainness, that I have used in rela∣ting the matters of Fact. In order to this, I shall consider, first, what is the Power of a King in this case, abstracting from those particular Rules, to which all the Roman Communion are bound up; and then I shall consider, what the French King, or any other of that Commu∣nion, may do according to the received Principles of that Church; and since there are two Branches of the Regale; the one concerning the vacant Revenues, the other, concerning the Collation of Benefices; I shall apply what I am to say, to both these. For the first, It must be acknowledged that all the Soil or Lands of any Kingdom are liable to what Taxes shall be laid on
them, of what kind soever, by the Soveraign Legislative Power. Severe Governments may exceed a due measure, but still the Lands are liable to their Impositions; this is so clear from the nature of Society and Government, that there can be no dispute a∣bout it; and whether those Taxes are con∣stant and yearly, or casual, such as the en∣joying vacant Revenues, the taking of Annats, or first Fruits, and Tenths, here in England, the Government may enact them, and the Subjects ought to obey; for common Safety is the chief Rule and End of Government; and a Treasure being necessary in order to that, all the easy and gentle Methods of encreasing Treasure, are necessary for publick Security; and tho' the Supream Government should exceed a due proportion in this, yet the Subjects must and ought to bear it. If then a Prince, in whom the Legislative Power is singly vested, makes any Rule of this kind, it must be born and obeyed. It is true, there is a natural Equity to be observed; and things dedicated to God, ought not to be so invaded, that those who are to officiate, shall come to want necessary and convenient Supplies; but that being observed, nothing can be objected to Laws that are made concerning Impositions: and if that Rule is not observed, tho' the Prince sins in making such Laws, yet his Subjects are in that case bound to obey him, that notwithstanding. Nor is there any thing in the Christian Religion contrary to this:
There is nothing so dedicated under the New Testament, as was under the Old. All that of Consecrations, by which any thing is made sacred and inalienable, being introduced into the Christian Church by designing Men, who borrowed it from Ju∣daism and Heathenism; and yet under the Jewish Law, in a publick necessity, one of the best of their Kings,2 King. 18.15, 16. Hezekiah, took not only all the Mony that was in the House of the Lord, but cut off the Gold with which the Doors and Pillars of the Temple were overlaid. If a Church has by many Ar∣tifices, of which some are now disco∣vered and acknowledged on all hands, enriched it self to that degree, that almost a third or fourth part of a Nation is brought into Clergy-mens hands, Princes should be thereby strangely weakned, if those Lands were so separated from their Obligation, to contribute towards the Pub∣lick Treasure, that the Civil Power could lay no Imposition on them. So I conclude, that a King, as King, or any Publick Body, in which the Legislative Power is lodged, has a sufficient Authority to lay Impositions on all the Lands within his or their Domini∣ons: And therefore the Kings enjoying the Vacant Revenue, being a casual Tax esta∣blished by Law, is both justifiable in it self, and ought to be submitted to, by all Subjects of what Rank soever they be. As for Benefices, and the Collation, or as we call it, the Institution to them, the dif∣ficulty is greater. If there is a Spiritual
Power lodged with Church-men, then it seems most agreeable to reason, that this should only be derived from Spiritual Per∣sons; and that Benefices which entitle Men to Acts of Spiritual Authority, should not be conferred, but by those who have that Authority committed to them; Since it is a constant Maxim, That no Man can give that which he has not. But it is to be consi∣sidered, that the Spiritual Authority it self, and the application of it to such an Object, are very different things. Every Church-man, by his Ordination, is qualified for all those Acts that belong to his Function; and this is only done by Church-men. But the applying that to this, or the other Place or Time, is a thing of Jurisdiction, which may fall under the Prince's Power: in which case he gives no Spiritual Authority, but applys the Spiritual Power, which the Church gave, to such a special Matter; and this the Civil Power may do. Anciently, the Priestly Function was so regulated among the Jews, that it cannot be pretended there is so exact a Scheme gi∣ven for it under the Gospel.1 King 2.27, 35. Yet Solomon put Abiathar from the High Priesthood, and put Zadock in his Room; and tho' the High Priesthood came to be put out of its due Channel of Primogeniture, established by Moses, and was sold in our Saviours Time, so that some times the High Priest was but an∣nual;Joh. 11.51 yet Christ acknowledged Cajaphas to be High-Priest, and he as High-Priest pro∣phesied. As for the inferior Priests, David
divided them into 24 Orders;1 Chron. 24.3. so that the applying their Priestly Power to such a Time, was wholly the Act of the Civil Government.2 Chron. 19.11. Jehoshaphat named a Presi∣dent for the Sanhedrim in the Matters of the Lord, as well as for the King's Matters. And both Ezra,Ezra 7.25. tho' not the High Priest, and Nehemiah, tho' not at all a Priest, acted by a Commission from Artaxerxes,Nehem. 13.28. which impowered them to teach them that knew not the Law of God, and to execute the Laws of God, as well as the King's Laws; and by that Authority Nehemiah turned out one of the Priests: So that tho' the Priestly Office was a Divine Institution, yet the applying and suspending that Authority, was a part of the Civil Power. Christian Emperors made often Penal Laws, with relation to Church-men; the Pains of which were, Suspension or Deprivation. Of which there are so many Instances, both in the Old Roman Laws, and in the Capitulars, that it is needless to insist on the proof of it. It is certain, that if a Prince can make a Law, the Pains whereof shall be the dis∣solving the Application that a Church-man has to his particular Charge, he is Master of that, and may, by his Authority, if need be, place another: And tho' these Laws were to be executed by Bishops; yet since they had only cognizance of the Matter of Fact, and were limited by the Imperial Law, in the Judgments which they gave, then the faulty Person was deprived by vir∣tue of the Civil Authority. Upon these
Reasons I conclude, that there is no good Argument to prove the unlawfulness of a King's granting Collation to a Spiritual Be∣nefice. The distinction in this Matter, be∣tween Benefices without Cure and with Cure, seems ill-grounded, and savours too much of the Niceties of the Canonists: for the Direction and Cure of the whole Dio∣cess lying in the Chapters hands during the Vacancy, and in some of their hands even after it, as in the Arch-deacons; I do not see that the conferring the Chanonries can be defended, if the King may not likewise grant Benefices with Cure. I acknowledg that in all this Matter, a great distinction is to be made between what is lawful, and what is convenient. I only assert what Kings may lawfully do, without passing beyond the Bounds of their Office; and therefore a Protestant King, that asserts his Ecclesiastical Supremacy, may well ex∣ercise the Regale, and doth not thereby ei∣ther commit Sacrilege, or encroach on the Spiritual Power of the Church. I go next to the second Branch of this Question; Whether taking things as they are, the Kings of France being in the Com∣munion of the Roman Church, may, ac∣cording to the Principles of that Religion, exercise this Power or not. The great Objection against it is, the Decree of the Council of Lions, with other subsequent Decrees; which being received in France, the Authority of a General Council seems to have determined this
Matter. In order to the apprehending this Right, it will be necessary, first, to under∣stand what is the Authority of such Assem∣blies, according to their own Doctrines. All agree in this, that they are infallible, especially when they are confirmed by the Pope; but yet they have a Sphere, in which this Infallibility doth only belong to them. If they should judg between two Preten∣ders to a Crown, or between two Kings in War one with another, their Decrees would be of no force, and be judged null in them∣selves, since they were concerning a Subject that is without their limits. For their Au∣thority lies in this, that they are the last re∣sort of the Church, that the final Decision of all Controversies belongs to them; and that when they declare the Faith, all are bound to submit to them. When they make a perpetual and universal Rule in Re∣ligious or Moral Matters, it is also obliga∣tory; for that is supposed to be founded on a Divine Authority. So when they condemn Usury, or the marriage of the Clergy, these Decrees are to take place as well as Canons, concerning Articles of Opinion: And therefore when they make General Rules, (as for instance, the De∣crees of the fourth Council of the Lateran for the extirpating of Hereticks, the de∣posing such Princes as favour them, the absolving their Subjects from their Oaths of Fidelity, and the giving away their Do∣minions to others); these are as obligatory as the Canon or Decree which that Council
made for Transubstantiation: for Faith and good Life being things equally necessa∣ry for the Salvation of Mankind, in which the latter seems rather more indispensable than the former, all those Arguments that prove their Decisions in Articles of Faith to be infallible, will also prove that the Universal Rules, in the practical part of Religion, which they prescribe, are of the same Authority: and therefore what De∣cisions soever they make of that sort, are indispensably obligatory. But if they make partial Rules, by which it is visible that they go off from the bottom of a Divine Authority, and act by other measures, they cannot thereby, even according to their own Principles, impose a Yoke upon Princes, when it is visible they do not proceed as a Council declaring the Will of God, but as a Cabal of Men, act∣ing upon Interest, or other Considerations. If the Council of Lions had condemned the Regale universally, as a sacrilegious invasi∣on of the Lands of the Church, and an usurpation on the Spiritual Authority, then all within that Communion, who receive that Council, must be for ever obliged to submit to it: for Sacrilege, and the limits of the Spiritual Power being matters with∣in their sphere, they might well make per∣petual Rules concerning them. But when they tacitly yielded this Right to those Princes who were then in possession of it, and only condemned the extending it fur∣ther, they did thereby go off from all pre∣tension
to a Divine Right, which is equal in all cases, and so they acted upon other measures, in which their pretended Infalli∣bility and Authority will not support them. Therefore I look on their Decree, concern∣ing the Regale, as null of it self. It is true, Councils may make Tempo∣rary Rules for Church-men and others, and may proceed to Censures upon them, but they cannot make Rules, by which some Princes that are in their favour may have some Rights allowed them; of which others, that are as much Soveraigns as they are, are deprived. They may as well judg of the extent of a King's Prerogative, or of his Territories: and as in such a case their Decision would be of no force; so in this I do not see that even, according to their own Principles, this Decree is of any Authority. To all this, two things may be objected; the one is, That the Council quitted those Rights to Princes that were then in posses∣sion of them; which not being done uni∣versally; Princes have only a precarious Right by their Concession, and so cannot extend it further than the Concession car∣ries them. But this is founded on a mi∣stake; for Princes had been above 150 Years at least, in possession of the Regale be∣fore this Council met; and several Popes had before that time acknowledged their Right, and the whole Church had received it. So that long before that Council sat, Princes had as good a Right to it as they
had afterwards. Nor doth the Decree of the Council give them that Right, but sup∣poses it to be already in them. For it con∣tains no grant of any such Right, but speaks of it as a thing then in use; which they did not question; so Princes had this Right an∣tecedently, and the Council only acknow∣ledged the lawfulness of it, by the regula∣tion which they made of the use and extent of it. Therefore it must be confessed, that either the Regale is sacrilegious in all Princes, and in all places; or every Prince may assume it when and as he will. The other Objection is; That the Kings of France did then, and have ever since re∣ceived this Decree, and have followed it in their practice, and therefore they are bound still to adhere to it. But this is of no force; for if in ignorant Ages things were with∣out ground imposed on the World, that doth not oblige Princes to continue in the same mistake, when they grow better en∣lightned; and therefore when those Mi∣stakes are discovered, they are at liberty to assume these Rights, from which those Pre∣judices had in former times barred them. As for Prescription, and long use founded on that Decree, that is but a Temporal Right, and is to be determined, both as to Right and Fact, by the Secular Courts; but it not being founded on Divine Right, can∣not be the subject Matter of the Decision of a Council, or of Ecclesiastical Censures. I confess, a great deal might be said against the Regale in general, according to the
Doctrine of the Roman Church, both up∣on the head of Sacrilege and Spiritual Ju∣risdiction; but this will be equally strong against the Regale in all places. Therefore upon the whole Matter, I can see no good reason why the Regale being allowed in most Provinces of France, it should not be like∣wise allowed in the four Provinces; and it seems evident, that the French King, both as he is a King, and in particular, as he is in the Communion of the Church of Rome, may extend the Regale equally to all the Churches of his Dominions. FINIS.
A COLLECTION Of some LETTERS AND INSRUMENTS That have passed during the Late Contests In FRANCE Concerning the REGALE. LONDON: Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-Yard. 1681.
I. A Letter of Mr. De Be∣zons, to the Bishop of Alet, upon his having de∣nounced an Excommuni∣cation against those that pretended to Benefices in the Right of the Regale, May 1676. Monsieur, JE ne serois pas si long temps sans vous asseurer de mes tres humbles services, & vous renouveller de temps en temps les protestations pub∣liques que je fais d'honorer vostre vertu & vostre merite, si je ne Craignois de vous de'tourner de vos
Saintes occupations, & des moments qui sont si utilement employez pour la gloire de Dieu, & le bien de vostre Dio∣ceze; Et si je mets aujourdhuy la main à la plume, c'est pour faire que vostre quie∣tude ne soit point alterée, ny vostre repos agité. C'est au suiet de l'Ordonnance que vous avez rendue touchant la Regale, je n'entre point dans la question de sçavoir si vostre Dioceze y est suiet, ou non, Mais je sçay qu'estant en possession de vostre euesché depuis trente huitans, il eust esté aisé de prevenir toutes ces contestations en faisant Registrer vostre serment de fidelité, & que par la l'on auroit asseuré la possessi∣on de tous ceux qui estoient pourueus, & empesché l'ouverture de la Regale dans la suite; & ce qui a paru extraordinare, c'est que vous Jugiez vous mesme vostre cause, que vous prononciez excommunication contre ceux qui seroient porteurs de pro∣visions en Regale, estant certain qu'un homme n'est point Intrus quand il a un tiltre veritable ou coloré, & que c'est aux Juges a en connoistre, & que la possessoire des Be∣nefices en France a tousiours appartenu pour la jurisdiction aux laiques, & que dans les matiers de Regale, jamais ny petitoire ny possessoire n'ont esté que de la jurisdi∣ction de la grand Chambre du Parlement
de Paris, cela ne faict pas que le Regaliste, gaigne touiours sa cause, il est souvent con∣demné lors quil a un mauvais droit, & bien que dedans la question generale, on ait Jugé au Parlement que le droit du Roy estoit égal par tout, cela a receu neant∣moins ses modifications dans les cas portez par la Declaration du Roy, & dans les circonstances particuliers l'on a souvent maintenu le pourveu par l'ordinare contre le Regaliste, si bien que la declaration ne contient rien qui ne soit conforme aux an∣ciens arrets, & la pretention du Regaliste d'avoir l'estat du benefice par provision, & de ne pouvoir estre poursuivy qu'á la grande Chambre, sont des maximes si cer∣taines qu'aucuns de nos auteurs qui ont traité de ces matieres il y a deux siecles, ne l'ont revoqué en doute: Comment done Aujourdhuy pouvez vous estre Juge en vo∣stre propre Cause, interdire à un tribunal la connoissance d'une Affaire dont il est en une si ancienne possession que son Establis∣sement, & excommunier un homme pour deffendre les droits de la Couronne, que la pieté des Roys predecesseurs de sa Ma∣jesté, leurs qualitez de fils aisnez de l'Eglise, celle de protecteurs, & de fondateurs des Eglises Cathedrales leur ont incontestable∣ment acquis, que les Conciles ont reconnu,
& qu'un usage inviolable a auctorise; que si vostre Eglise pretend en estre exempte, elle a ses voyes pour faire entendre ses Remonstrances, la Justice ne luy sera point desniée, & le respect que l'on a pour vostre vertu la rendra tousiours favorable: Mais vos serviteurs ont veu avec desplaisir que l'on publioit vostre Ordonnance comme une atteinte aux droicts du Roy; Et si les predecesseurs de sa Majesté ont esté Louez d'avoir empesché les enterprises de la Cour de Rome contre les libertez de l'Eglise Gal∣licanne, s'ils ont heureusement presté leur Ministere pour maintenir les Evesques con∣treles usurpations que l'on vouloit faire sur leur autorité; sa Majesté pourroit-elle dis∣simuler uneatteintemortelle que l'on donne à un des plus anciens droicts de sa couronne; estant uray que la Regale est un droit & non pas un privilege, c'est cequi faict que ceux qui vous honorent particulierement souhaiteroient que la chose peut prendre un autre train, & de ne vous pas engager à soustenir vostre Ordonnance, comme les officiers du Roy seroient obligez de souste∣nir ses droicts, vous sçavez Monsieur Com∣bien la paix de vostre Dioceze vous a Cousté, & ceux qui connoissent la since∣rité, & la droiture de vos intentions, sçavent que vostre esprit est fort esloigné
de toutes les Contestations, que vous avez un Attachement particulier pour le Service du Roy, un respect & un amour particulier pour sa personne, & qu'ainsy dans une oc∣casion où tout le Clergé de France n'a pas creu devoir se plaindre de ce qui avoit esté faict vous ne voudriez pas vous distinguer. Pardonnez moy Monsieur la liberté que je prends de vous mander ces choses, le seul principe qui me faict agir, est celuy de contribuer à vostre satisfaction & ceux qui sont dans vos veritables interests ne peuvent point avoir d'autres sentiments, les miens seront tousious d'honnorer vostre personne & vostre vertue, de conserver soigneuse∣ment la Memoire de l'amitiè que vous avez bien voulu avoir pour moy, & d'estre toute ma vie avec une veneration & un respect particulier. A Paris, May 5. 1676. Monsieur Vostre, &c.
II. The Bishop of Alet's Answer, justisy∣ing his Proceedings. Monsieur, JE me sens tres particulierent obligé des Marques, que vous me donnez de vostre souvenir dans la Lettre, qu'il vous a pleu de m'escrire le cinquiesme de ce mois, & que je receu la semaine derniere au retour d'un voyage que J'ay faict dans mon Dioceze. C'est une continuation de la bonté que vous m'avez tesmoignez en plusieurs occa∣sions tandis que vous avez eu l'administra∣tion de la Justice en cette Province, & dont je conserve tres cherement la memoire. Vous me donnez, Monsieur, une nouvelle preaue bien sensible dans la part que vous prenez dans l'Affaire de la Regale. Et par les aduis que vous me proposez touchant l'Ordonnance que J'ay rendue: Je les ay receus avec tout le respect que je dois, & J'ay fait une attention particuliere à tout ce qu'il vous a plêu de m'escrire sur ce suiet, vous tesmoignez d'abord que vous ne
voulez pas entrer dans la question si mon Dioceze est suiet à la Regale, ou s'il n'y est point suiet; Mais qu'il vous paroist que puisque je suis en possession de mon Eues∣che depuis trente huict ans, je pouvois aisement prevenir toutes ces contestations en faisant Registrer mon, serment de fide∣lité, cequi auroit asseuré la possession de ceux qui sont pourveus de Benefices dans mon Dioceze, & empesché l'ouverture de la Regale à l'advenir. J'aurois bien souhaité de pouvoir separer ces deux choses comme vous le proposez, mais c'est cequi n'a pas esté possible. Il ma piru que l'une depen∣doit necessairement de l'autre, & qu'il falloit supposer absolument que mon Dio∣ceze, est suiet à la Regale avant que me determiner à cet enregistrement, qui n'est autre chose qu'un acquiescement expres & positif à la Declaration du Roy qui estend ce droict par tout le Royaume. Or je vous avoué, Monsieur, qu'ayant examiné à fond cette question pour pouvoir regler selon Dieu la conduitte que je devois gar∣der en ce recontre; J'ay esté pleinement persuadé que mon Dioceze n'est point suiet à la Regale, & son droict en ce point m'a paru tres certain & tres evident, les Raisons qui m'en ont persuadé ne sont point particulieres à mon Eglise, elles luy sont
communes avec toute la Province Eccle∣siastique de Narbonne, qui n'a esté Jamais Suiette à la Regale, non par un privilege & exemption particuliere, mais par un droit commun, une franchise naturelle, & une liberté Canonique, oú elle est dés son Origine, & oú elle a tousiours esté con∣servée; l'Eglise Metropolitane de Nar∣bonne qui est une des plus anciennes du Royaume, & d'oú celle d'Alet a esté tirée, & est née avec cette liberté; elle en estoit en possession avant la naissance de la mo∣narchie, elle est venue à la couronne avec cette mesme liberté sous le Regne de Saint Louis, & elle y a esté conservée & main∣tenue par ce Saint Roy & par les Roys ses successures; Ensuite du Concile General de Lyon, qui a defendu d'introdure de nouveau la Regale dans les Eglises ou elle n'estoit point en usage, & l'on ne voit point que l'Eglise de Narbonne & les autres de cette Province ayent Jamais esté troublees dans cette possession. C'est cequi est provué tres clairement par le memoire que feu Monsieur de Marca dressa sur cette matiere en mil six Cens Cinquante Cinq. à lapriere de l'Assemblée Generale du Clergé, & dans son huictiéme liure de la concorde de l'Eglise & de l'Empire, & par les Tiltres & les Actes, Rapportez en tres
grand nombre dans les recveils du Clergé. Viola ce qui m'a retenu de faire registrer mon serment de fidelité ensuite de la De∣claration de sa Majesté, n'ayant point creû le pouvoir faire sans blesser ma conscience, & sans manquer au devoir de ma charge; J'en estois demeure lá d'abord. Mais on ne m'a pas permis de garder long temps cette retenue. Quelques particuliers se sont avisez d'∣obtenir en Regale les Benefices de mon Dioceze, comme si saute d'avoir fait Regi∣strer mon serment de fidelité, mon Evesché estoit devenu vaccant apres trente huit années de possession, & ils se sont presentez pour se mettre en possession de ces Bene∣fices en vertu de ces provisions de Regale. C'est ce qui m'a obligé de me declarer plus expressement estant clair que c'eust esté Reconnoistre positivement le Regale & abandoner le droict de mon Eglise que de ne dire mot en Cette rencontre. Je me resolus donc d'en escrire à l'Assemblée Ge∣nerale du Clergé qui se tenoit alors à St. Germain, pour l'engager à prendre part en cette Affaire à l'example des preceden∣tes Assemblées, & â faire sur cela des Remon∣strances à sa Majesté, je n'entre point dans les motifs qui l'ont portée à ne point faire ces Remonstrances qui paroissoient, si justes & si necessaires & à se separer sans prendre
aucune deliberation sur une chose si im∣portante au Clergé. Mais quelques mois apres sur l'aduis que j'eus qu'on avoit de noveau obtenu des provisions en Re∣gale de plusieurs Benefices de nostre Eglise Cathedrale, & autres de mon Dio∣ceze, en vertu des quelles on pretendoit déposseder les titulaires qui en ont esté pourveus canoniquement, & qui en sont en possession paisible depuis plusieurs An∣nées, je creû qu'il estoit de mon obliga∣tion indispensable de m'y opposer par l'¦Ordonnance que j'ay rendue, comme estant le seul moyen qui me restoit pour deffendre le droit de mon Eglise, & pour Empescher l'effect de ces provisions qui y donnoient atteinte. Je ne l'ay fais que dans la derniere extremité, & dans la necessité indispensa∣ble d'une juste deffense; Et si l'on en con∣sidere bien les Motifs & les Raisons j'espere qu'on trouvera quelle ne blesse en rien les veritables droicts de sa Majesté, & qu'elle tend seulement à conserver ceux de mon Eglise. Je ne touche point au droict de Regale dans les Provinces & les Eglises oú le Roy, en est en possession par une coustume ancienne; Mais comme je suis persuadé qu'on ne peut l'introduire de no∣vueau dans les Eglises qui n'yont Jamais esté suiettes sans blesser les Reigles de la
Justice, & les libertez de l'Eglise, j'ay crû pouvoir user du pouvoir que Dieu m'a donné pour Conserver autant que je le puis à mon Eglise un droict considerable dont elle est en possession, & que je crois luy appartenir tres legittiment. Je ne suis pas seul dans cette persuasion; la pluspart des Messieurs les Prelats sont dans le mesme sentiment, & ils ne font point de difficulté de s'en expliquer dans les occasions, quoy que par d'autres Considerations ils se soient portez à faire registrer leur serment de fide∣lité. Je suis mesme tres bien informé que quelques uns d'entre eux ont fait des pro∣testations par eserit qu'ils ont mises dans les archives de leurs Diocezes, afin qu'elles servent dans la suite pour la conservation du droict de leurs Eglises: En effect ce droict est si certain & si evident, qu'on ne peut penser autre chose sinon qu'on ne l'a pas faict connoistre tel qu'il est a sa Majesté; on luy a faict entendre, comme il paroist par les termes de sa Declaration que la droict de Regale est aussy ancien que la Couronne, qu'il luy est necessairement at∣teché, & qu'il doit Estre general & uni∣forme dans tout le Royaume: Et cepen∣dant il se trouve que ces Maximes sont evidemment contraires aux tesmoignagesde l'histoire, à la decision d'un Concile Gene∣ral
receu & Autorise dans tout le Roy∣aume, aux anciennes & aux nouvelles Or∣donnances des Roys, aux Tiltres authenti∣ques qui se conservent dans la Chamber des Comptes de Paris, aux arrests du Parlement rendus pendant pres de trois siecles, & aux sentiments des plus celebres auteurs qui ont escrit sur cette matiere on a encore ob∣ligé ces Eglises à Rapporter les Tiltres & les Preuves de leur exemption, comme si c'estoit par des Privileges, Par des Des∣charges gratuites, ou par des Contracts passez avec sa Majesté qu'elles pretendissent n'estre point suiettes à la Regale, ainsy que quelques autres Eglises qui y ont esté au∣tresois sousmises, & qui sont dans les Pro∣vinces, o'u ce droict est reconnu; au lieu que c'est par une franchise & une liberté qui leur est naturelle, & dans laquelle elles ont tousiours est conservées, & apres qu'on les a ainsy confondues avec les Eglises exemptes de la Regale à tiltre particulier, on a crû pouvoir les y assuiettir nonobstant leur possession constante & immemoriale par cette Raison que le droit de Regale est inalienable & imprescriptible: Cequi est proprement supposer ce qui est en question, puis qu'∣auant qu'un droict soit declare imprescrip∣tible & inalienable il faut qu'il ait subsistè, & qu'il soit estably & reconnu, si l'on eust
bien expliqué ces choses au Roy, & qu'on luy eust faict connoistre le veritable droict de ces Eglises, sa Majesté a trop de Justice & de Religion pour les avoir voulu priuer d'une liberté dont elles jovissent depuis leur origine, & dans laquelle elles ont esté conservées par tous les Roys ses Prede∣cesseurs. Je vous dis ces choses, Monsieur, avec d'autant plus de confiance que je sçay que vous avez eu long temps l'administra∣tion de cette Province, & que vous avez esté pleinement informé de ses droicts, & de ses custumes, & de tout ce qui regarde cette Affaire, je ne sçaurois mesme appre∣hender que le Roy eust desagreeable cette liberté, & J'ose esperer que lors que sa Ma∣jesté connoistra le fond de cette affaire elle ne desapprouvera pas ma conduitte, mais plustost la Regardera comme une marque de mon attachement inviolabile à son ser∣vice, & du desir tres sincere que j'ay de contribuer a sa veritable gloire. Je finis Monsieur en vous suppliant de me conti∣nuer l'honneur de vostre amitié, & d'estres persuadé que je suis tousiours avec beau∣coup de Respect & de Reconnoissance. de Alet ce 30 May, 1676. Monsieur, Vostre tres humble & tres obeissant serviteur, Nicholas Evesque d'Alet.
III. A Letter of the Bishop of Alet to the French King, concerning the Regale. SIRE, LE profond respect que j'ay pour vostre Majesté, & la crainte que j'ay de luy estre importun dans un temps où je sçay qu'elle a de si grandes occupations m'ont empesché Jusques j'ey d'executer le dessein qui j'avois de me donner l'honneur de luy escrire touchant l'Affaire de la Regale; Mais j'ay creu que je ne pouvois plus me dispen∣ser de le faire depus que l'Ordonnance que j'ay esté obligé de rendre sur ce suiet est devenue publicque, & que j'ay appris qu'on en a parlé à vostre Majestè. Connoissant comme je fais sa sagesse, sa justice, & sa bonté, j'ose esperer qu'elle me fera la grace de m'escouter favorable∣ment, & qu'elle ne desapprouuera pas la liberté que je prends de luy representer ce qui luy peut servir à l'esclaircissement de cette Affaire.
Il s'agist, Sire, d'un droict important de mon Eglise qui luy est commun avec toutes celles de la Province Ecclesiastique de Nar∣bonne qui n'ont Jamais esté suiettes à la Re∣gale, non par un privilege & une exemp∣tion que les Roys leur ayent accordé, mais par un droict commun, une franchise na∣turelle, & une liberté aussy ancienne que leur fondation. Elles ont jouy de cette liberté sous la premiere & seconde race de nos Roys, lors que cette Province estoit possedée par les Comtes de Thouloze, & autres Seigneurs particuliers, elles sont venues à la cou∣ronne avec cette mesme liberté sous le Regne de Saint Louis apres la celebre con∣testation des investitures qui avoit agité l'¦Empire & l'Eglise plus de cinquante ans, & pendant la quelle le droict de Regale commenca à s'introduire dans l'Eglise de France, & sur tout dans celles des pays Re∣gis par le droict coustumier, & qui sont plus voisines de Paris, le Saint Roy qui estoit un religieux observateur des Pri∣vileges Canoniques, conserva, comme disent les historiens de sa vie les Eglises de Lan∣guedoc dans leur ancienne liberté en ce point, elles y fureut encore maintenues & confirmees sous Philippe le Hardy son fils dans le Concile General de Lyon, tenu en
presence des Ambassadeurs de ce Prince, & par un decret solemnel il fut deffendu à toutes sortes de personnes d'introduire des nouuelles Regales dans les Eglises ou elles n'estoient point en usage, & ordonne aux Beneficiers Ecclesiastiques de s'y opposer & l'empescher autant qu'il seroit en leur pou∣voir. Ce decret, Sire, fut receu & autorise dans tout le Royaume, Philippes le Hardy & les Roys ses successeurs l'autoriserent par leurs Ordonnances, se contentans d'user du droict de Regale dans les Eglises & Pro∣vinces où il estoit estably par la coustume, sans l'estendre à celles qui jusques alors n'y auoient point esté suiettes. Philippes le Bel qui soustint ses droicts avec beaucoup de forces dans le differend qu'il eust avec le Pape Boniface huictiesme demeura dans les mesmes bornes, & c'est luy qui a expres∣sement reconnu & confirmé la liberté des Eglises de cette Province par ses Lettres Patentes dont l'Original est dans les Ar∣chiues de l'Eglise Metropolitaine de Nar∣bonne. Depuis ce temps là, Sire, on S'arresta tousiours à la coustume, pour juger qu'elles estoient les Eglises où la Regale avoit lieu, & enfin pour prevenir les differends qui arriveroient sur ce suiet apres qu'on eut
verifié exactement les Registres de la Chambre des Comptes, on dressa un de∣nombrement en forme d'Ordonnance de toutes les Eglises suiettes & non suiettes à ce droict, & entre celles qui n'y sont point suiettes, on met dans le premier Article les Eglises de Languedoc. Les Roys Charles six, Charles sept, Louis unze, & Louis douziesme ont gardé la mesme Regle dans leurs Ordonnances, n'ayant usé de la Regale que dans les Pro∣vinces où elle estoit establie par une an∣cienne Coustume, & le dernier auquel sa Justice, & sa bonté ont acquis le nom de Pere du peuple deffendit expressement à ses Officers de s'ingerer à saisir les fruicts des Archeveschez, eveschez & autres Bene∣fices de son Royaume oú le droict de Re∣gale n'avoit lieu sur piene d'estre punis comme sacrileges. Le Parlement de Paris pendant plus de trois cens ans la suiuy a mesme Regle en ses arrests, & c'est sur ce principe que les Au∣teurs qui ont escrit de cette matiere dont plusieurs estoient Officiers de leurs Majestez & dans les premieres charges du Parle∣ment, ont enseigné comme une Maxime constante que la Regale n'estoit point ge∣nerale dans le Royaume, & qu'il ya des Provinces, & un nombre d'Eglises particu∣lieres
qui n'y sont point suiettes, & ils met∣tent particulierement en ce Rang les Eglises de la Province de Narbonne, qui en effect sont tousiours demeurées dans leur ancien∣ne liberté en ce poinct de puis le Concile General de Lyon sans qu'on les y ait jamais troublées comme il paroist par un grand nombre de tiltres & d'actes fort antiques. Ce sont, Sire, les fondements sur les quels est estably le droict de mon Eglise, & de toutes celles de cette Province, J'ay pris la liberté de le representer sommaire∣ment à vostre Majesté. Monsieur de Marca qu'elle a honoré d'une estime & d'une bieuueillance toute particuliere les a ex∣pliquez avec estendue dans le memoire qu'il dressa en mil six cens cinquante six sur cette Matiere, & dans son celebre ouurage de la concorde de l'Eglise & de l'Empire, oú il soustient avec tant d'erudition les libertez de l'Eglise Gallicanne, & les droicts de la Couronne. J'ose asseurer vostre Majesté que ce qui dit ce sçauant prelat sur cette question, est si clair & si conuuainquant que personne ne sçauroit l'examiner avec quelque soin, & n'estre point persuadé du droict de nos Eglises: Et c'est, Sire, ce qui fait juger que ces choses n'ont point esté expliquées à vostre Majesté, elle n'a point esté suffisamment informée du fond de cette
Affaire, on luy a faict entendre, comme il paroist par les termes de sa Declaration, que le droict de la Regale est aussy ancien que la couronne qui luy est essentiellment attaché, & que de sa nature il doit estre égal & uniforme dans tout le Royaume. C'est sur ces maximes toutes contraires au tesmoignage de l'histoire, au decret d'un Concile General receû & autorise dans le Royaume, aux anciennes & novelles Ordon∣nances des Roys, aux arrests du Parlement rendus pendant plusieurs siecles, & au senti∣ment des auteurs qui ont escrit de cette Ma∣tiere, que se sont appuyez ceux des Officiers de vostre Majesté, qui ont entrepris de priuer nos Eglises de leur ancienne liberté; ça esté sur ce mesme fondement que dans l'¦instance qui a esté Jugée au Conseil de vostre Majesté ils ont obligé les Evesques & les Chapitres de cette Province de rappor∣ter les tiltres & les preuues de leur exemp∣tion, comme si c'estoit par des Privileges particuliers, par des descharges gratuites, ou par des contracts passez avec les Roys, que les Eglises pretendent n'estre point suiettes a la Regale, au lieu que c'est par une franchise naturelle, & une liberté Canonique dans la∣quelle elles ont tousiours esté Conservées. Et apres les auoir ainsy confondues par∣my les Eglises qui pretendent estre exemptes
de la Regale a Tiltre particulier, & qui sont dans les Provinces où ce droict est reconnu, ils ont crû les y pouvoir assuiet∣tir non obstant leur possession constante & immemoriale, par cette Raison que le droict de Regale est inalienable & imper∣scriptible, en quoy ils ont evidemment supposé cequi estoit en question, puis qu'il faut que ce droict subsiste & qu'il soit re∣connu auant qu'on puisse le declarer ina∣lienable & imperscriptible, & quand il s'agiroit mesme des Eglises ausquelles les Roys ont remis le droict de Regale par un privilege particulier, cette Raison ne suffi∣roit par pour les priuer d'une exemption dont elles jouissent depuis longe temps. Car s'il est de la Justice & de l'Equité de conserver aux villes & communautez les Avantages & les Privileges que les Roys leur ont accordez, combien est il plus juste & plus raisonnable de le faire à l'Esgard de l'Eglise, & sur tout à une Matiere où les Privileges des Princes ne font que la re∣mettre dans une liberté qui luy est natu∣relle. Aussy sçait-on, Sire, qu'il y a quelques Années que vostre Majesté ne voulust pas qu'on touchast à l'Exemption, de l'Eglise d'Arras qui se trouua dans ce cas là; d'oú il est aysé de juger que si elle avoit esté
suffisament esclairice, de la verité, elle se seroit encore mons portée à donner at∣teinte aux droicts des Eglises des Langue∣doc, qui sont Franches de la Regale de toute ancienneté, & qui ont esté confirmées dans leur liberté par diverses Declarations & Lettres Patentes des Roys. Mais, Sire, on n'a pas seulement surpris vostre Religion en ce qui regarde le fond de cette Affaire, on l'a faict encore dans la Maniere de la Traitter; En la portant au Conseil de vostre Majesté pour y estre re∣glée par un arrest sous pretexte des Instan∣ces particulieres d'entre les pretendus Rega∣listes, & les Titulaires des Benefices, qui auroient este euoquées du Parlement: Ce∣pendant, Sire, ce n'estoit nullement une chose à estre traittée & Reglée dans les formes Ordinaires du Conseil, il n'y avoit point là de Matiere de Procez, le Clergé n'avoit point d'autre voye que celle des Remonstrances a vostre Majesté, & pour la supplier d'empescher l'indue vexation que ses Officiers faisoient aux Eglises Libres de la Regale, & c'est, aussy celle qu'il avoit prise en portant ses Plaintes à Henry le Grand contre l'arrest du Parlement de Paris de mil six cens huit, comme d'une entre∣prise sur les Libertez de l'Eglise, & une contravention à l'Edict que sa Majesté avoit
publié deux ans auparauant, & que le Parlement avoit refusé de verifier, il a continué les mesmes Remonstrances au feu Roy de tres heureuse Memoire qui declara par son Ordonnance de mil six cens vingt, & neuf qu'il vouloit user du droict de Re∣gale ainsy que par le passé, comme il fit en∣tendre aux Deputez du Clergé par la bouche de Monsieur de Marillac garde des Sceaux, & si la mort n'eust point ar∣resté le cours de ses glorieux desseins, le Clergé esperoit d'obtenir bientost de sa Justice & de sa Pieté, une Declaration de∣cisive qui eust asseuré pour Jamais la paix des Eglises Libres de la Regale. Si ces choses, Sire, eussent este exposées à vostre Majesté, & quon luy eust faict connoistre le veritable droict de ces Egli∣ses, sa Justice & sa Bonté l'auroient sans doute portée à leur conserver une Liberté dont elles jouissent de puis leur Origine & dans laquelle elles ont esté conservées par tous les Roys ses predecesseurs, elle auroit mieux aimé suiure en ce poinct l'¦Edict d'Henry le Grand, conforme à toutes les anciennes Ordonnances, comme a faict le feu Roy Louis le Juste, que de S'appuyer sur l'arrest du Parlement rendu deux ans apres cet Edict, & qui y est entierement contraire aussy bien qu'aux anciennes Or∣donnances
& à la jurisprudence observée de pruis pres de quatre cens ans dans ce Parlement. Toutes ces Considerations, Sire, m'ont faict croire que je ne ferois rien de contraire à vos veritables intentions en ne faisant point enregistrer mon serment de fidelité, & sur ce qu'on a pretendu depuis que faute de cet enregistrement la Regale estoit ouuerte dans mon Evesché quoy qu'il soit remply il y a pres de quarante ans, j'ay esté obligé d'employer les moyens que l'Eglise me met entre les mains pour conserver autant qu'il est en moy les droicts de mon Eglise, & pour empescher les grands Troubles qu'on y vouloit causer par les Provisions en Re∣gale subreptivement obtenues, en vertu desquelles on pretendoit déposseder plu∣sieurs des principaux Beneficiers de nostre Clergé qui sont en possession passible de∣puis plusieurs années, en quoy je n'ay faict que suiure les Ordonnances de l'Eglise, & obey à un Concile General receu & auto∣risé dans le Royaume depuis plus de quatre siecles, que si d'autres Evesques n'ont pas faict la mesme chose, ce n'est pas, Sire, qu'ils n'ayent dans le fond le mesme senti∣ment de cette Affaire, & vostre Majesté me permettra de luy dire qu'ils s'en ex∣pliquent assez dans les occasions, & je sçay
mesme qu'il y en a qui ont fait des Pro∣testations par escrit qu'ils ont mises dans les Archives de leurs Dioceses pour servir à la conservation du droict de leurs Eglises. J'auoue, Sire, que je n'ay pas estimé en devoir user de la sorte, & j'ay creu que pour satisfaire à ma Conscience, je devois rendre mon Ordonnance comme estant le seul moyen qui me restoit pour deffendre la Liberté Canonique de mon Eglise & pour luy conserver à l'aduenir autant qu'il est à mon pouvoir non seulement les Re∣venus Temporels, mais aussy la Collation des Benefices, qui est un droict Spirituel & Hierarchique; Saint Paul estant Prison∣nier pour la foy de l'Evangile, & la deffen∣dant devant un Roy des Juifs, luy dit avec cette Sainte Liberté que luy donnoit la Grace Apostolique; O Roy ne croyez vous pas aux Prophetes? Je sçay que vous y croyez; quoy que je sois, Sire, un des moindres Evesques de vostre Royaume, je vous supplie de me permettre d'emprunter le Language de cet Apostre en parlant a un Roy tres Chrestien, trouvez bon, Sire, que je vous dise, vostre Majesté ne croit∣elle pas à l'Autorité de l'Eglise Assemblée à un Concile oecumenique? Je sçay qu'elle y croit, puis qu'elle met entre ses plus glorieux Tiltres, ceux de fils ainsé de l'¦Eglise
& de Protecteur des Saints Ca∣nons. Je sçay qu'elle se souvient de la promesse qu'elle a faicte à Dieu dans la Solemnité de son Sacre, de Proteger l'Eglise & ses Mi∣nistres, & de conserver aux Evesques leurs Privileges Canoniques, c'est a dire les im∣munitez Attachées à leur Caractere, & les Avantages qui leur sont attribuez par les Saints Canons, & par les Ordonnances des Roys tres Chrestiens. Je sçay de plus, Sire, que vostre Ma∣jesté a beaucoup d'amour pour la Justice, & qu'estant-tousiours preste à la Rendre au Moindre de ses Suiets, elle ne voudroit pas la blesser en une chose si importante & qui regarde la Liberté d'un grand nombre d'Eglises, en fin je sçay que vostre Majesté ne doubte point à l'Exemple de Saint Louis, de qui elle tire sa Royalle extraction, que rien n'est plus important, ny plus difficile que le choix des Ministres de l'Eglise, & que tandis qu'elle fera re∣flexion à cette verité, bien loin de vouloir estendre ses nominations au de la des an∣ciennes Bornes & des Reigles prescripttes, elle ne sçauroit ne point craindre le compte qu'elle doit rendre à Dieu de celles dont elle est desia chargée.
Pardonnez, Sire, cette Liberté à un vieux Evesque chargé depuis tant d'années du poids de l'Episcopat, qui croiroit se rendre coulpable devant Dieu s'il ne repre∣sentoit à vostre Majesté tout ce qui regarde une Affaire aussy importante que cellecy; il n'ya rien que je souhaitte d'avantage que de vous donner en toutes rencontres des preuves de ma sousmission & de mon obeissance, & j'ose esperer que si vostre Majesté faict attention à tout ce que je me suis donné l'honneur de luy representer, elle sera persuadée que je ne m'en suis point esloigné en taschant comme j'ay fait de conserver à mon Eglise son ancienne Liber∣té, c'est un dépost qui m'a esté confié & que je dois remettre à Jesus Christ le Souverain Pasteur, je ne tarderay plus gueres à luy aller rendre compte de mon administra∣tion, & entre tant d'autres choses qui me font apprehender son redoutable juge∣ment, je ne vois pas ce que je luy pourrois respondre si dans cette occasion j'abandon∣nois les Interests de son Espouse contre mes propres lumieres, & l'Obligation de ma Charge; C'est luy, Sire, qui tient les coeurs des Roys entre ses mains pour les fleschir où il luy plaist, je le prie tres instamment qu'il vous remplisse l'esprit de sagesse, de justice, & de pieté dans la decision de cette
Affaire, qu'il respande, sur vostre personne sacrée l'abondance de ses Graces & de ses Benedictions pour vous rendre un Roy ve∣ritablement selon son coeur. Ce sont, Sire, les voeux que je conti∣nuery de faire incessament pour vostre Majesté dans mes Prieres & mes Sacrifices, ne croyant point luy pouvoir donner une meilleure marque du desir tres sincere que j'ay de contribuer à sa veritable gloire, de la fidelité inviolable que j'ay a son Service, & du profond Respect avec lequel je suis SIRE, de vostre Majesté Le tres humble, tres obeissant & tres fidel suiet & serviteur, Signé Nicholas Evesque d'Alet.
IV. A Letter written by the Bishop of Alet to the French King, but deli∣vered, according to his directions, after his death, and read in Coun∣cil. SIRE, J'Employe les derniers moments de ma vie à examiner ce qui me reste à faire pour paroistre devant le Jugement de Dieu; il nous Ordonne d'aller trouver nostre frere lors que sçavons qu'il a quelque indisposi∣tion contre nous, avant que de nous pre∣senter à l'autel, c'est pourquoy estant sur le poinct d'offrir à Dieu mon dernier Sacri∣fice qui est celuy de ma vie, je me crois particulierement obligé de faire ce dernier effort pour adoucir l'esprit de vostre Ma∣jesté qui paroist indisposé envers moy de∣puis quelque temps à cause de la conduite que j'ay gardée au suiet de la Regale: J'ose bien, Sire, asseurer vostre Majesté que j'ay tousiours conservé pour Elle les
sentimens que les plus fidels suiets doivent à leur Souverain, encores que par l'Obli∣gation de mon Ministere j'aye esté engagé en quelques rencontres à ne pas deferer à tous Ordres venus de sa part. Je me suis donnée l'honeur de luy en escrire avec la liberté convenable au caractere des Eves∣ques qui ont en dépost les interests de l'¦Eglise, je luy renouvelle dans l'estat ou je me trouve presentement le tesmoignage, que ma Conscience m'a tousiours rendu de n'avoir rien faict que dans la seule veue de satisfaire au devoir de ma charge; C'est ce qui me pouroit donner confiance que Dieu ne me demendera pas compte de la peine que j'ay pû causer a vostre Majesté, je ne laisse pas neantmoins de m'acquitter enuers elle de ce dernier devoir. Je la suplie en mesme temps de me donner des Marques de sa bonté en la personne des Ecclesiastiques de ma Maison exilez par son ordre, qu'on ne peut accuser d'aucune chose que d'¦avoir obey à leur superieur legitime qu'ils regardoient en cette qualité comme celuy qui leur declaroit la volonté de Dieu; J'espere, Sire, que s'il plaist a vostre Ma∣jesté d'y faire reflexion, elle ne les laissera pas plus long temps en cet estat: Je prie Dieu de vous combler de ses Graces, & de
vous rendre un Roy selon son coeur, C'est le souhait de celuy qui est avec un tres pro∣fond respect. De vostre Majesté Le tres humble, tres obeissant & tres fidel serviteur & suiet Signé Nicholas Evesque d'Alet. A Alet ce 25 Octob. 1677.
V. The Record of the Judgment given by the Arch-bishop of Tholose, up∣on an Appeal made by Mr. Paucet, that was provided in the Right of the Regale, to be Chanoin and Arch-Deacon of the Church of Pamiers, but rejected by the Bishop of Pamiers. JOseph de Montpezat de Carbon par la misericorde Dieu, & par la Grace du Saint Siege Apostolique, Archevesque de Toloze. A tous ceux qui ces presentes Lettres verront, Salut. Sçavoir faisons que veue la Requeste à nous presentée par Maistre Pierre Paucet Prestre du Dioceze de Laon, Bachelier en Theologie, Contenant que le Clergé de France ayant presque en toutes les Assem∣bles Generalles fait des Remonstrances au Roy contre l'arrest du Parlement de Paris de l'an mil six cens huit. Et autres qui avoient Jugé que le Roy avoit droict de Regale dans toutes les Eglises du Royaume,
auroit demendé a sa Majesté qu'il luy pleust evocque à soy & à son conseil la connoissance de cette cause, ce qui auroit esté accordé par sa Majesté, laquelle auroit mesme nommé des commissaires par devant lesquels le Clergé & les Archevesques, Evesques & Chapitres des Eglises Cathe∣drales du Languedoc, Guyenne, Provence, & Dauphine, & autres auroient produict les pieces, & actes par les quels ils s'en pre∣tendoint exempter, & la cause ayant esté durant plusieurs années pendante & inde∣cise au Conseil de sa Majesté, plusieurs Procez & Contestations auroient esté meues, si bien que sa Majesté voyant que tous ces differends produisoient beaucoup de troubles dans l'Eglise, pour en arrester le cours, & les abus, auroit Ordonné que tous les Tiltres & Memoires tant generaux que particuliers contenans ladicte preten∣due exemption, seroient comuniquez à Messieurs les Advocats & Procureurs gene∣raux du Parlement de Paris pour sur iceux donner leurs advis, & en consequence le tout ayant esté examiné sa Majesté auroit dit & declaré le droict de Regale luy ap∣partenir en tous les Archevesques & Eves∣ques de son Royaume, terres & pays de son Obeissanee à la reserve seulement de ceux, qui en sont exempts à titres onereux. Vou∣lans
sa Majesté suivant les anciennes Reig∣les & loix establies pour la Regale que ceux des dicts Archevesques & Evesques qui avoient presté leur serment, & n'avoient pas obtenu des Lettres de main levée fus∣sent tenus de les obtenir, en faire Enregi∣strer dans deux mois à la Chambre des Comptes de Paris, apres lesquels & faute d'y satisfaire dans ledit temps, iceluy passé les Benefices suiets au droict de Regale dé∣pendants de leur collation à cause desdits Archeveschez & Eveschez auroient esté declaré vacants & impetrables en Regale; & quoy que cette Declaration du dixiesme feurier mil six cens soixante treize, ait esté deuement pupliée & notifiée par tout ou be∣soin a esté; Neantmoins l'Illustrissime & Reverendissime Messire François de Caulet, Evesque de Pamiers, quoy qu'il eut connois∣sance de la dicte Declaration, & qu'il eut pro∣mis au Roy d'y satisfaire, n'auroit dans le dit temps ny mesme jusquâ present fait enregi∣strer son serment de fidelité, ny obtenu les Lettres de main levée necessaires pour for∣mer la Regale, c'est pourquoy l'Archidia∣coné & un Canonicat de l'Eglise Cathe∣dralle dudit Pamiers estant venu a vacquer par le deceds du feu sieur Mascaron dernier titulaire & possesseur d'jceux, le Roy en auroit pourueu ledit Paucet comme estans
lesdits Benefices vacans en Regale, en consequence de quoy ledit Sieur Paucet se feroit Addressé par un Procureur au Cha∣pitre de ladite Eglise Cathedralle pour estre mis en possession desdits Benefices, mais ledit Chapitre auroit refusé de ce faire & fondé son refus sur une Ordonnance rendue par ledit Seigneur Evesque de Pa∣miers le vingt sept auril dernier, par la∣quelle ledit Seigneur Evesque auroit faict Inhibitions & Deffenses au Chapitre de la dicte Eglise Cathedralle & Collegialle de Nostre Dame du Camp de Receivoir au∣cun pourueu en Regale dans les Benefices a peine de suspence ipso facto contre tous ceux qui auroient appuyé ou favorisé la dicte reception & installation, & ausdits pourveus de s'y ingerer à peine d'excom∣munication ipso facto. Faisant pareillement deffenses à toutes personnes Ecclesiastiques de mettre en possession les dits Regalistes en vertu desdittes Provisions, & leur don∣ner ayde & appuy a peine aussy de suspence ipso facto. Laquelle Ordonnance est in soustenable en toute maniere, Primó, en ce qu'elle est contraire à la Declaration du Roy donnée en connoissance de cause sur les Tiltres, Memoires, Actes & Remon∣strances du Clergé & des Particuliers qui se pretendoient exempts. Secundó par ce
qu'elle est contraire au Concile de Lyon, car quoy que ledit Seigneur Evesque ait voulu fonder son Ordonnance sur ledit Concile, neant moins la Lecture d'jceluy, & la glose sur le mot de Regalia explique ce droict de Regale, & dit que ce sont nova tributa, nova vectigalia, novas collectas, mais quand le mot de Regalia se pourroit entendre du droict dont il est Question, il est certain que le Concile a eu seulement intention de prohiber les droicts de Regale nouveaux; Or il est constant que le droict de Regale mesme sur les Eglises du Lan∣guedoc, n'est pas un droict nouveau, puis qu'ii est aussy ancien que la Fondation & Dotation des dictes Eglises, & qu'il appar∣tient à la couronne de toute ancienneté, de sorte que quand les Roys Predecesseurs de sa Majesté n'en auroient pas voulu Jovir, qu'ils l'auroient negligé, & l'auroient ced∣dé, comme il a esté faict en plusieurs Egli∣ses, neant mons sa Majesté ne laisseroit pas d'Estre en pouvoir de renter dans la jouis∣sance de ce droict, d'autant que par les Maximes de France ce droict est incessible & inprescriptible, & ainsy c'est sans aucun fondement & sans aucune cause legitime que ledit Seigneur Evesque a fulminé des censures de suspension & d'excommunica∣tion par son Ordonnance, & par conse∣quent
les censures sont nulles, & de nul Effect, & ne peuvent servir qu'a souslever les suiets du Roy contre les Loix & ses Or∣donnances, & quant à ce que ledit Seig∣neur Evesque a dit en cette Ordonnance que les dicts Benefices estoient Reguliers, & que le Sieur Paucet estoit prestre secu∣lier, ledit Paucet en convient, mais on sçait que c'est un Regle qu'un prestre se∣culier peut estre pourveu d'un Benefice Regulier sons la clause cupiens Presbyter. C'est la condition que le Roy a apposé en ses Lettres de Provision, c'est aussy le dessein du supliant, & on voit tous les jours que les Abbez nomment aux places Monachales des prestres Seculiers qui ont dessein d'estre Religieux, & le Roy donne tres souvent des Abbayes Regulieres a des Seculiers à ladicte condition de faire la profession Reguliere: Pour ces causes le dict Paucet auroit de∣mendé d'estre receu appellant tant de la dicte Ordonnance du vingt sept auril dernier, que du Refus dudit Chapitre; Et d'autant qu'il est de Regle & d'usage dans l'Eglise lors que le Metropolitain voit le refus d'un Evesque suffragant & autre, & la cause du refus, il prononce sur le tout sans ovir ny appeller les Parties; & en outre veu que ladicte Ordonnance a esté publiée, notifiée, & respandue par tout le
Dioceze de Pamiers & par toute la Pro∣vince, qu'elle contient toutes les Causes, Motifs, & Raisons, dudit Seigneur Eves∣que de Pamiers, & du refus fait au supli∣ant, il nous pleust faisant droict sur la dicte Requeste & Appellation, declarer ladicte Ordonnance contraire aux Loix du Royaume, dire qu'il a esté mal & nulle∣ment Ordonné, Statué & Jugé par ledict Seigneur Evesque, & executé par ledict Chapitre, & les Censures portées par la∣dicte Ordonnance données sans Causes, nulles & de null Effect: Enjoindre audict Chapitre de recevoir, installer, & mettre en possession ledit Paucet ou son procureur des dits Benefices, luy donner le Rang, & le seance tant au choeur, qu'au dit Chapi∣tre. Declarant ledit Paucet estre prest, & avoir dessein de prendre l'habit & faire profession Reguliere suivant les Reigles de l'Eglise. Veu aussy la Declaration du Roy donnée en Interpretation d'Icella à Versail∣les le deuxieme. Auril mil six cens soix∣ante quinze, plusieurs arrests donnez en Consequence attachez à ladicte Requeste, le Brevet & Lettres de sa Majesté portant Provision des dits Archidiaconat & Canoni∣cat du dixhuictiesme Janvier mil six cens soixante dix sept, donné audit Paucet à la Charge de prendre l'habit, & faire pro∣fession
un an apres la prise de possession; l'Ordonnance dudit Seigneur Evesque dé Pamiers du vingt sept auril dernier, les Actes portans Refus dudit Chapitre de Pamiers du vingt deuxiseme Juin audit an mil six cens soixante dix sept, ouy sur le tout nostre promoteur, lequel ayant pris Communication de la ditte Requeste, & susdittes pieces auroit remonstre que la∣dicte Ordonnance estoit Notoire & Pub∣lique en toute la Province, qu'elle avoit esté distribuée par tout, & avoit porté beaucoup de Troubles dans les Conscien∣ces, & dans l'Ordre Ecclesiastique, que lè Roy ayant donné ses Declarations que personne ne pouvoit juger au contraire, estant une Maxime receue en France, que nul ne pouvoit sans attentat statuer & Or∣donner contre ses Edits, Declarations, & Or∣donnances, autrement tout ce qui auroit esté faict contre lesdictes Declarations, devoit estre sans autre forme de Procez de∣claré nul & de nul Effect, & sur ce adhe∣rans aux conclusions du Sieur Paucet, & pour Arrester le cours & l'abus de laditte Ordonnance, & le trouble qui pouroit en∣suiure, il auroit requis que dessenses fus∣sent faictes audit Seigneur Evesque de Faire de Pareilles & Semblables Ordonnances, les faire Publier & Executer & à toutes
personnes de deferer aux censures y portées & obeyr ausdictes Ordonnances; Ordon∣ner que nostre Jugement seroit leu, publié & affiché tant en cette Ville Metropolitane que dans la ville & Dioceze de Pamiers, & par tous les Eveschez de la Province, sur laquelle Requeste & Appellation dudict Sieur Paucet, ensemble sur les Conclusions de nostre Promoteur, faisant droict nous avons declaré & declarons l'Ordonnance dudit Seigneur Evesque de Pamiers du vingt sept auril mil six cens soixante dix sept contraire aux Loix du Royaume de France, troublant le repos des Consciences, & l'Ordre Ecclesiastique de la Province, & en Consequence disons, qu'il a esté mal & nullement Ordonné, Jugé & Executé, & les censures portés par ladicte Ordonnance nulles, & dè nul effect, avons faict & fai∣sons tres Expresses Inhibitions & Deffences à toutes personnes de déferer auxdictes censures, d'obeyr à la dicte Ordonnance & de l'Executer, & audit Seigneur Evesque de Pamiers de faire telles & semblables Or∣donnances, & les faire publier & executer: Avons enjoinct, & enjoignons audit Cha∣pitre de Pamiers de recevoir, installer & mettre en possession desdits Archidiaconat & Canonicat ledit Sieur Paucet sous les peines du droict, a la charge par luy de
faire les voeux, & Profession Reguliere dans le temps & en la forme prescritte par les Saints decrets de l'Eglise ainsy qu'il est porté pour les dictes Lettres de Provision, avons Ordonné & Ordonnons que nostre present Jugement sera leu, publié, & affi∣ché dans cette ville Metropolitane, dans la ville & Dioceze de Pamiers, & autres Eveschez de nostre Metropole à la dili∣gence de nostre promoteur; enjoignant au premier prestre, clerc tonsuré & autres sur ce requis de faire pour la signification & execution de nostre present Jugement, tous actes requis & necessaires. Donné a Toloze dans nostre Palais Ar∣chiepiscopal le premier jour du mois de Septembre mil six cens soixante dix sept, ainsy Signé Joseph de Montpezat Arche∣vesque de Toloze, & plus bas du mande∣ment de Mon dict Seigneur l'Archevesque. Du point Secretaire.
VI. An Instrument made by the Bishop of Pamiers, upon the former Sen∣tence. SUr le Jugement rendu par ledict Seig∣neur Archevesque de Toloze, le pre∣mier jour de Septembre dernier; L'an mil six cens soixante dix sept, le treiziesme Octobre dans la Cité de Pamiers, & Palais Episcopal de ladicte Ville. Regnant tres Chrestien Prince Louis par la Grace de Dieu Roy de France & de Navarre, devant moy Notaire Royal de la ditte Ville & les tesmoins bas nommez, a esté constitué en sa personne Monseigneur l'Illustrissime & Reverendissime Messire François estienne de Caulet Evesque de Pamiers, lequel addressant ces Parolles par cet acte a Monseigneur l'Illustrissime & Reverendissime Messire Joseph de Mont∣pezat de Carbon Archevesque de Toloze, & aux Sieurs Guillaume Cazamazon Prestre & Promoteur estably dans le Dioceze & Province de Toloze, & Pierre Paucet Prestre
du Dioceze de Laon, leur a dit & declaré qu'il n'a peu & ne doit déferer au Juge∣ment rendu par ledit Seigneur Archeves∣que le premier jour de Septembre dernier, à la requeste dudit Sieur Paucet, ledit Sieur Promoteur à luy adherent, par lequel Jugement ledit Seigneur Archevesque de∣clare l'Ordonnance dudit Seigneur Eves∣que de Pamiers du vingt sept auril aussy dernier contraire aux Loix du Royaume de France, troublant le repos des Consciences, & l'Ordre Ecclesiastique de la Province, & en Consequence dit qu'il a este mal & nul∣lement ordonné, jugé, & executé, & les censures portées par laditte Ordonnance nulles & de nul effect, faict des expresses inhibitions & deffences à toutes personnes de déferrer auxdictes censures, d'obeyr à la dicte Ordonnance & de l'Executer, & audit Seigneur Evesque de Pamiers de faire telles & semblables Ordonnances, les faire publier & executer, & enjoinct au Chapi∣tre de Pamiers de recevoir, installer, & metre en possession de l'Archidiaconat & Canonicat en leur Eglise ledit Sieur Paucet sous les peins du droict, à la charge par luy de faire les voeux & profession Regu∣liere dans le temps & dans la ferme pre∣scrittes par les Saints decrets de l'Eglise, & ainsy qu'il est perté par les dictes Lettres de
Provision: Ordonne de plus que ledit Jugement sera lêu, publié & affiché dans la ville Metropolitaine, & dans la ville & Dioceze de Pamiers, & autres Eveschez de sa Metropole, à la diligence de son promo∣teur: Auquel Jugement ledit Seigneur Evesque de Pamiers declare ne pouvoir ac∣quiescer pour estre nul & dans le fond & dans la forme. Premierement le dit Juge∣ment est nul dans la forme, primó, parce qu'il est de toute sorte de droict, mesme de droict naturel, qu'un Juge ne rende point le jugement sans avoir ouy, ou du moins sans avoir fact appeller les intercessez; ce qu'il seroit aysé de Justifier par une infi∣nité de preuves, si ce n'estoit un principe de droict evident par luy mesme. On se contente de rapporter icy le Canon 22 du premier Concile de Nicée: Caveant Ju∣dices ne absente eo cujus causa ventilatur, Sententiam proferant, quia irrita erit, & la Decretale d'Innocent quatriesme rapportén, cap. Venerabilibus de Sent. Excom. in Sext. dont voicy les termes qui sont formels pour l'espece dont il s'agit contre le Sieur Paucet, Attamen si Suffraganeus vel extra judicium pro suorum defensione Jurium, vel etiam in Judicio ex suo procedens officio in∣quirendi videlicet, vel simile quid agendo ali∣quem Excommunicet; in hoc casu convenien∣dus
est ipse Suffraganeus coram Archiepiscopo, vel ejus Officiali, qui ipsius interest defendere causam suam; Et il est inouy que Jamais un Metropole ait Jugé l'appel d'une Ordon∣nance tres importante d'un de ces Suffra∣gans par une Ordonnance sur Requeste. Le Sieur Paucet a reconnu luy mesme cette necessité d'appeller ledit Seigneur Evesque, comme il paroist par le soin qu'il a pris de chercher des pretextes pour couvrir ce def∣faut essentiel. Car il allegue que le Metro∣politain prononce sans ovir ny appeller les Parties lors qu'il voit le Refus d'un Eves∣que Suffragant, & la cause du Refus: Mais outre que les Evesques se sont souvent plaints de cet usage, qu'il auroit besoin d'estre Reformé, le Sieur Paucet confond les formes de proceder en Matiere gratieuse & volontaire avec les Matieres de Justice & contentieuses. Un Ecclesiastique qui de∣mende le Tiltre d'un Benefice, ou le visa sur des Provisions de Cour de Rome, de mende une Grace, ou l'execution d'une Grace à laquelle il ne faut pas appeller des parties, mais si l'Evesque ou le Metropoli∣tain donnoient un Jugement sur le peti∣toire d'un Benefice, on n'auroit garde de manquer d'appeller les interessez fans quoy nul ne douteroit que le Jugement ne fut nul aussy bien que le sentence d'un Juge
seculier sur le possessoire du mesme Be∣nefice, s'il avoit Manqué à cette Forma∣lité: Il est de l'essence de tout Jugement qu'il y intervienne trois personnes diffe∣rentes, le demendeur, le deffendeur & le Juge: de sorte qu'encore que le Metropo∣litain accorde quelques fois des Graces que ses Suffragans ont Refusées, on n'a Jamais veu qu'il ait donne un Jugement pour casser une Ordonnance sans appeller les Parties. Le Sieur Paucet allegue encore que l'Ordonnance dudit Seigneur Evesque de Pamiers a esté Publiée, Notifiée, & Respandue par tout le Dioceze de Pamiers, & par toute la Province, qu'elle contient toutes les Causes, Motifs, & Raisons dudit Seigneur Evesque de Pamiers n'ayant esté que signifiées aux Personnes qu'elle regar∣doit, & le Sieur Paucet ne peut pas sçavoir si ledit Seigneur Evesque avoit d'autres Raisons, comme il en avoit en effect, outre celles qu'il a exprimées dans son Ordon∣nance, ou s'il en estoit survenu de nouvel∣les, en tout cas il est inouy qu'encore qu'un deffendeur eut baille extrajudiciaire∣ment ses deffenses il deust extre exclu de les proposer devant le Juge. On dit ses Raisons, & plus clairement, & plus forte∣ment en Jugement contradictoire que quand on n'a pas de partie contredisante:
Il est aucontraire difficile de Juger par quel Motif ledit Sieur Paucet à manquè à cette formalité essentielle, sice n'est qu'il a ap∣prehendé que les deffences dudit Seigneur Evesque paroistroient si evidemment justes qu'il auroit honte de soustenir une si mau∣vaise cause qu'estoit la fienne, enfin il fal∣loit tousiours au moins sçavoir si ledit Seig∣neur Evesque vouloit foustenir son Ordon∣nance. Secondement, ledict Jugement est nul dans sa forme en ce que il declare l'Ordon∣nance dudit Seigneur Evesque de Pamiers contraire aux loix du Royaume de France, car ce n'est pas audit Seigneur Archevesque de Juger des Contraventions aux loix du Royaume; la Jurisdiction Ecclesiastique n'est establie que pour l'Observation des Canons de l'Eglise; & il n'ya point de Juge Seculier qui ne soit persuadé que cette forme de prononcer dans un Jugement Ec∣clesiastique le rend nul & abusif. A ces defauts essentiels de la forme Ju∣diciaire ledit Seigneur Evesque de Pamiers ajouste, que quand son Ordonnance n'au∣roit pas esté aussy Juste qu'elle est, les for∣mes de la bienseance avec laquelle la Dig∣nité & le Caractere Episcopal doivent estre traictez demandoit que ledit Seigneur Ar∣chevesque estant requis de casser une Or∣donnancé
d'un de ses Suffragans qui à l'honneur d'estre le plus ancien de la Pro∣vince, prit la peine de l'en faire avertir au∣paravant, & de voir avec luy s'il n'y auroit pas de mesure à prendre pour eviter cette espece de flestrissure, ou au moins pour la faire d'une maniere moins injurieuse que celle qu'on Remarque dans le Jugement dudit Seigneur Archevesque qui a non feu∣lement receu, mais encore enoncé & en∣teriné la Requeste dudit Sieur Paucet pleine de suppositions & de mespris dudit Seigneur Evesque; Car ce pretendu Ar∣chidiacre expose entr'autres choses, primó, que ledit Seigneur Evesque avoit promis au Roy de faire Enregistrer son serment de fidelité, ceque ledit Sieur Paucet ne peut avoir allegué que pour rendre odieux ledit Seigneur Evesque, en voulant faire croire au public que ledit Seigneur Evesque à Manqué de parolle à sa Majesté; cequi est d'ailleurs tres faux, le Roy n'ayant Jamais faict l'honneur audit Seigneur Evesque de luy parler sur ce suiet, & ledit Seigneur Evesque n'ayant pas seulement eu la pensée d'en parler à sa Majesté, & n'ayant Jamais donné ordre à personne de luy porter cette parolle. Secundó, ledit Sieur Paucet reproche audit Seigneur Evesque qu'il n'a pas bien
pris le sens du Concile General de Lyon, & ose soustenir que la Lecture de ce Concile & de la glose fait connoistre qu'il l'a mal entendu, mais il est aisé de reconnoistre par cette mesme Lecture, que c'est ledit Sieur Paucet quil'a luy mesme mal entendu, & qu'il devoit s'estre mieux asseuré de la verité, avant que de faire à un Evesque un reproche si injurieux. C'est ce que ledit Seigneur Evesque montrera plus clairement quand on touchera au fond du Jugement dont est Question. Tertió, il semble que ledit Sieur Paucet vueille rendre ledit Seigneur Evesque Cri∣minel d'estat, quand il avance que les Cen∣sures portées par son Ordonnance ne peu∣vent servir qu'a souslever les Suiets du Roy contre ses Loix, & ses Ordonnances, car on ne peut rien Reprocher audit Seigneur Evesque de plus essoigné de sa pensée & de sa conduitte, n'ay ayant point de Prelat dans le Royaume plus fidele que luy au Service du Roy, & au bien de l'estat, ny plus exact à porter les Suiets de sa Majesté à garder inviolablement la soumission qu'ils luy doivent, que s'il semble que dans cette occasion ledit Seigneur Evesque ne se con∣forme pas entierement aux Intentions du Roy, J'espere que sa Majesté reconnoistra que ce n'est que par la seule crainte d'offen∣ser
Dieu, se souvenant que Saint Pierre met cette crainte avant l'honneur & l'obeis∣sance qu'on doit rendre aux Roys, Deum timete, Regem honorificate, & le lien qui at∣tache ledit Seigneur Evesque au veritable Service du Roy, est d'autant plus indisso∣luble, que la flatterie & l'interest n'y ont point de part, & que la seule loy de Dieu, & l'obligation essentielle d'un Suiet envers son Prince en la personne de qui il regarde Dieu mesme, & en qui il revere les qualitez vrayement Royalles d'ont la divine bonté l'a enrichie, sont & seront tousiours les seuls Motifs de sa fidelité & de son obeis∣sance. Ledict Sieur Promoteur de Dioceze & Province de Toloze n'a pas eu plus de soin de garder les Reigles de la bienseance & de la Justice envers ledit Seigneur Evesque de Pamiers, il a exposé que son Ordon∣nance avoit porté beaucoup de trouble dans les Consciences & dans l'Ordre Eccle∣siastique, comme s'il falloit craindre le trouble que la verité & la justice causent dans les ames mal disposées: Car ledit Seig∣neur Evesque ne pretend que d'empescher qu'on ne viole les Canons de l'Eglise, & qu'on n'entre dans les Benefices par des voyes qu'elle deffend, & l'Ordonnancé qu'il à rendue, declare plustost les peines
que les violateures des Saints Canons en∣courent qu'elle n'en inflige des nouvelles, ledit Promoteur ne prend pas garde que la paix qu'il veut procurer aux ames dans cette rencontre leur sera incomparablement plus pernicieuse, que le trouble que l'¦Ordonnance audit Seigneur Evesque de Pamiers leur pourroit auoir Causé, car si ladicte Ordonnance n'est que l'execution d'un Decret d'un Concile General qui les Excommunie, & que le Jugement dudit Seigneur Archevesque de Toloze qui la casse soit nul, comme on le prouve invin∣ciblement, les personnes qui avoient en∣couru l'excommunication sont dans un estat d'autant plus malheureux que se flat∣tans sur ledit Jugement, elles ne se met∣tront pas peine d'en sortir, Dicentes pax pax, & non erat pax. Ceque ledit Promo∣teur allegue en suite, que nul ne peut sans attentat statuer & ordonner contre les Edits, Declarations, & Ordonnances, s'il estoit pris dans toute l'estendue qu'il l'a dit est une maxime capable de renverser la Re∣ligion. C'est encore une chose surprenante qu'un Officier qui par la propre nature de son employ doit procurer l'execution des saints Decrets demande à un Archevesque qui est plus obligé que tout autre à main∣tenir
dans sa Province les loix establiées dans l'Eglise, la cassation d'une Ordonnance qui n'est faite, comme il a esté dit, que pourobeyr au commandement d'un Concile General, & qu'il requiert que deffences soient faictes audit Seigneur Evesque de Pamiers de faire de pareilles & semblables Ordonnances, les faire publier & executer, ce qui est une entreprise de jurisdiction qui n'appartient point audit Seigneur Arche∣vesque, ny de faire aucun Reglement, ny des deffences generalles d'obeir aux Ordon∣nances d'un Evesque son Suffragant: Ledit Promoteur veut mesme qu'il soit deffendu à toutes personnes d'obeyr à de Semblables Ordonnances, & de déferer aux censures y portées, comme si cette deference ou obeis∣sance estoit un crime, & affin que tout le public soit instruit de cette conduitte, ou plustost affin de rendre l'insulte plus sensible, il conclud à ce qu'il soit Ordonné que le Jugement de cassation soit leu, publié & affiché tant dans la ville Metropolitaine, que dans la ville & Dioceze de Pamiers, & par tous les Eveschez de la Province, voulant que ledit Seigneur Archevesque tesmoigne par ce grand appareil qu'il entend que son jugement serve de Reglement dans toute la Province, & que tous les Suffragans s'y sou∣mettent sans avoir neantmoins este ouys,
comme si c'estoitun decret de Concile, dans lequel encore ils auroient esté Jugez, aussy a t-il faict non seulement afficher ledit Juge∣ment aux portes des Eglises, mais encore publier aux prosnes des Messes Paroissia∣les, mesme hors le Dioceze de Toloze. Et ledit Seigneur Archevesque de la Justice duquel on eust deu plustost esperer qu'il reprimeroit la hardiesse de ces deux Ecclesiastiques, flestrit luy mesme par son Jugement l'Ordonnance dudit Seigneur Evesque de Pamiers, la declarant non seu∣lement contraire aux Loix du Royaume de France, mais encore troublant le repos des Consciences, & l'Ordre Ecclesiastique de la Province, & il suit presque mot à mot les Requisitions & Conclusions de ces deux Prestres, & y commet des nullités evi∣dentes, non seulement contre la forme ainsy qu'il a esté montré, mais encore contre le fond, comme on le va faire voir. Secundó, ledit Jugement est nul dans le fond. Car primó, ledit Seigneur Evesque de Pamiers n'ayant faict par son Ordon∣nance qu'executer le Decret d'un Concile General receu & executé en France durant environ quatre siecles, ledit Seigneur Ar∣chevesque estoit incompetant pour juger de la Matiere dont il s'agissoit, parce qu'estant question d'une cause tres importante à toute
l'Eglise & s'agissant de l'execution d'un De∣cret d'un Concile General, il ne pouvoit pas empescher qu'un Evesque ne fit ce qui avoit esté Ordonné par toute l'Eglise, ny luy oster le pouvoir qu'elle luy en donnoit. Tout ce que ledit Seigneur Archevesque auroit peu faire au plus, estoit de Convo∣quer le Concile Provincial pour juger si ledit Seigneur Evesque avoit excedé le Com∣mandement du Concile, comme dans l'Or∣dre de la Justice Civile un Juge subalterne ne peut pas juger de ce que faict un Officier qui n'est que merus Executor d'un arrest de quelque cour Souveraine, sur tout quando non excedit fines mandati. Les Archeves∣ques & les Metropolitains ne sont eux mesmes que les Executeurs des Canons suivant le Language des Conciles, & n'ont aucun droict de s'ingerer dans la conduitte des Diocezes de leurs Suffragans que dans les cas du droict, & en ensuivant les formes Canoniques, & on ne peut pas dire que le∣dit Seigneur Archevesque fut Juge, au moins pour examiner si l'Ordre dudit Seig∣neur Evesque estoit conforme au Concile puisque la chose estoit assez evidente, ledit Seigneur Evesque n'ayant fait presque que transcrire le decret dudit Concile, & que la Matiere estoit trop importante pour que ledit Seigneur Archevesque en Jugeast luy
seul non seulement dans le Concile Provin∣cial, mais encore sans autre Conseil, au moins qui paroisse, Si Clericus, dit le Concile de Calcedoine, adversus suum vel alium Episcopum habeat Causam, apud audientiam Synodi Provinciae ejm conqueratur, Can. 18. Ce qui est necessaire principalement lors qu'il s'agit de l'interest de toute la Province & non pas de l'interest particulier de l'Eves∣que. Et tout cas ledit Seigneur Archeves∣que ne pouvoit pas dire qu'il avoit esté mal ordonné jugé & executé, & que les cen∣sures portées par laditte Ordonnance estoi∣ent nulles & de null effect; qu'en suppo∣sant l'une de ces trois choses, ou que le Concile de Lyon ne devoit pas estre en∣tendu de la Regale, ou qu'il n'avoit pas esté receu en France, ou que la Regale avoit desia eu lieu dans le Dioceze de Pa∣miers, où il estoit impossible de faire voir aucune de ces trois choses, non pas la pre∣miere comme il paroist par les propres ter∣mes du Concile & de la glose que le Sieur Paucet a tasché de se rendre favorable n'en rapportant que quelques parolles: Car voicy le Decret tout entier du Concile de Lyon: Generali Constitutione sanxi∣mus universos & singulos, qui Regalia Cu∣stodiunt, sive gardiam Advocationis, seu defensionis Titulum in Ecclesiis, Monasteriis,
seu quibuslibet aliis piis Locis de novo usurpare conantes, Bona Ecclesiarum, Monasteriorum, aut Locorum ipsorum vacantium occupare prae∣sumunt, quantaecunque dignitatis Honore prae∣fulgeant, Clericos etiam Ecclesiarum, Mona∣chos Monasteriorum, & personas caeteras Lo∣corum eorundem qui hoc fieri procurant, eo ipso Excommunicationis Sententiae decernimus subjacere: Illos verò qui se ut deberent talia facientibus non opponunt, de proventibus Ec∣clesiarum, seu locorum ipsorum pro tempore quo praemissa sine debità contradictione per∣miserint, aliquid percipere districtius prohi∣hemus. Qui autem ab ipsarum Ecclesiarum, caeterorumque Locorum fundatione, vel ex an∣tiqua Consuetudine jura sibi hujusmodi vin∣dicant, ab illorum abusu sic prudenter absti∣neant, & suos Ministros in eis sollicitè fa∣ciant abstinere, quod ea quae non pertinent ad Fructus sive Redditus provenientes vacationis tempore non usurpent, ne Bona caetera, quorum se asserunt habere custodiam, dilabi permittant, sed in bono statu conservent. De Elect. & Electi Potest. in Sent. Voicy maintenant ce que dit la glose sur le sens de ce Chapitre. Pro intellectu hujus Capitis praesupponendum est, secundum veriorem intellectum ipsius quid propriè iste textus appellet Regalia, quidam volebant dicere. Ces trois derniers mots font assez entendre que le glossateur n'approve
pas cette premiere interpretation, quod Rega∣lia accipiantur pro Juribus Imperialibus, de quibus in libro Feudorum Cap. quae sint Re∣galia: Ʋt si Rex donaverit Regalia Ecclesiae, & aliquis illa usurpet, ipso facto est Excom∣municatus: Alii dicunt quod Regalia accipi∣antur pro Juribus quae habet princeps in ali∣quibus Ecclesiis, videlicet quod vacante aliquâ Ecclesiâ aliquis Comes vel Dux, qui dicebat se habere Jura Regalia in ipsà Ecclesiâ occu∣pavit Custodiam Ecclesiae vacantis, & dicebat quod fructus ipsius Ecclesiae ad ipsum specta∣bant, licet non fuisset usus ipso jure, &c. Quant à l'endroit de la glose que le Sieur Paucet cite, & qui marque que par le mot de Regalia on doit entendre Nova Tributa, nova Vectigalia, novas Collectas, il y faut ad∣jouster avec l'Archidiacre d'ou cette glose a esté prise Originairement, Regalia, id est, quae capiunt Reges vacante Ecclesiâ, ut patet in Franciae Regno & Angliae, nam illic vo∣cantur Regalia, Jura Regi in quibusdam Ec∣clesiis vacantibus competentia, &c. Ce que la glose adjouste sur le mot Custo∣diam suffiroit pour entendre que ce Chapi∣tre du Concile de Lyon a parlé generale∣ment du droict des Eglises vacantes, & qu'il na seulement dessein d'empescher qu'on n'imposast de nouveaux tributs sur les Eglises qui en estoient exemptes, mais
encore qu'on n'en usurpast pas les droicts soit temporels on spirituels, comme le pa∣tronat, duquel elle dit. Quocunque ergo no∣mine censeanter usurpantes de novo tale Jus in Ecclesiis & aliis Locis piis, & Bona ip∣sorum Locorum vacantium occupantes excom∣municati sunt. Il paroist donne que suivant la glose mes∣me, le Chapitre generali Constitutione doit estre entendu droict de Regale, soit que tout le Chapitre ait esté faict pour empes∣cher l'extention de la Regale, on que la Regale ait esté exprimée par ce mot Rega∣lia, ou par ces autres Custodiam seu Guardi∣am, & que par consequent le Sieur Paucet a eu grand tort de dire que le Lecture du Concile, & de la glose font connoistre que ledit Seigneur de Pamiers l'a mal entendu sous pretexte que la glose sur le mot de Regalia met nova Tributa, nova Vectigalia, novas Collectas; Il paroist encore non seule∣ment par ces parolles du texte, de novo usurpare conantes; Mais encore par ces au∣tres dela glose, usurpantes de novo tale Jus, & encore par celles cy licet non fuisset usus ipso Jure. Et plus clairement par ces autres de la glose sur le mot de novo à quadraginta annis citra, que le Concile a eu dessein d'empescher qu'on n'estendit la Regale aux Eglises où l'on n'estoit pas en possession,
contre ce que le Sieur Paucet insinue. Et il est si veritable que ce decret du Con∣cile de Lyon doit estre entendu de la Re∣gale que plusieurs des auteurs François qui ont escrit de cette Matiere, nommément Ruffé, Rebuffé, le Maistre, & Bauny Je∣suite. Ont pris l'approbation tacite qu'ils pretendent que le Concile a donné dans ce Chapitre à la Regale à l'esgard des Eglises ou l'on estoit en possession de puis un temps immemorial, pour un des princi∣paux fondements sur lesquels ils ont tasché d'appuyer ce droict. Monsieur de Mar∣ca l'un des predecesseurs dudit Seigneur Archevesque de Toloze preuue tres solide∣ment dans son discours sur la Regale inseré dans les Memoires du Clergé tant ce pre∣mier point, sçavoir que le Concile de Lyon doit estre pris dans le sens que ledit Seig∣neur Evesque de Pamiers l'a entendu; que le second, sçavoir que ce decret du Con∣cile a esté receu & executé en France, & que nos Roys n'ont Jouy de la Regale que dans les Eglises où ils en estoient en pos∣session immemoriale, cequi est conforme à ces mots, in quibusdam Ecclesiis, in aliquibus Ecclesiis, des gloses cy dessus rapportées, & à ces autres, in aliquibus Episcopatibus de Rebuffe super Concord. de Regia ad Praela∣turas nominatione Verbo sed teneatur: Et
que c'est avec Justice que pasquier a nom∣mé flatteurs de Cour ceux qui ont voulu en∣treprendre l'estendue de la Regale sur toutes les Eglises vacantes du Royaume. Voicy donc comme Monsieur de Marca parle apres avoir rapporté ledit Chapitre generali Constitutione. En consequence de ce Concile Philippes le Bel quatriesme du nom autorisa ce droict par son Ordon∣nance de l'an mil trois cens deux, qui n'estoit auparauant fondé que sur la cou∣stume, mais il mesura tellement ses parol∣les avec les termes du Concile qu'il fonda tout son droict de Regale sur la coustume, & ne l'estendit point aux Eglises où cette coustume n'estoit point receue. Item quam ad Regalias quas nos & nostri Praede∣cessores percipere assuevimus, & habere in ali∣quibus Ecclesiis Regni nostri quando eas Vacare contingit. Et ce Prince executant le Concile & cas il adjouste que la mesme clause restrictive est mise dans l'Ordon∣nance de Philippes de Valois de l'an mil trois cens trente quatre. Dont il rapporte ces termes, Pour les Eglises de nostre Royaume esquelles nous avons droict de Regale. Et plus clairement dans celles de Louis douziese de l'an mil quatre cens quatre vingt dix neuf, qui parle en cette sorte, Deffendons à tous nos Officiers
qu'ez Archeveschez, Eveschez, Abbayes, & autres Benefices de nostre Royaume es quels n'avons droict de Regale ou de garde, ils ne se mettent dedans sur peine d'estre punis comme Sacrileges. Dans l'Edict de Henry quatriesme de mil six cens six. Dont les termes sont les suivants: N'entendons aussy jouir dudit droict de Regale si non en la forme que nous & nos predecesseurs avons faict sans entendre d'avantage au prejudice des Eglises qui en sont exemptes. Le quel Edict a esté con∣firmé par l'Ordonnance de Louis treiziesme de l'an mil six cens vingt & neuf. Arti∣cle 16. Nous entendons Jouyr du droict de Regale qui nous appartient a cause de nostre couronne ainsy que par le passé, le tout suivant l'Edict sur ce faict par nostre tres honnoré Seigneur & Pere en l'an mil six cens six, & plus particulierement dans les Lettres Patentes de Philippes le Bel de l'an mil trois cens trois. En faueur de la Province de Narbonne, c'est à dire comme l'observe Monsieur de Marca de tout le Languedoc. Nolumus quod gentes nostrae occupent Regalia Ecclesiarum vacantium Pro∣vinciae Narbonensis. Dans laquelle le Dio∣ceze de Pamiers a tousiours este compris, l'Evesque de Pamiers ayant esté Originaire∣ment Suffragant de Narbonne, & mainte∣nant de Toloze.
Le troisiesme point n'est pas moins cer∣tain, sçavoir que la Regale n'a Jamais eu lieu dans le Dioceze de Pamiers, car on n'en sçauroit faire voir aucun exemple, & quoy que suivant la Maxime du droict, ejus est qui ait, probare, la preuue doit estre faite par ceux qui voudroient soutenir qu'elle y a esté autre fois, on ne laissera pas d'alle∣guer icy en passant le Registre de la Cham∣bre des Comptes rapporté dans les Me∣moires du Clergé, & par les Docteurs Fran∣çois qui ont traitté de cette Matiere, com∣me Duffé, le Maistre & Pasquir, par lequel Registre il paroist que le Roy n'a point droict de Regale dans aucune Eglise de ce pays; & il n'est rien de plus insoustenable que ce que le Sieur Paucet dit que ce droict mesme sur les Eglises du Languedoc est aussy ancien que la fondation desdictes Eglises, & qu'il appartient à la couronne de toute ancien∣neté. Car si ce droict estoit attaché à la couronne, tous les Souverains en Jouiroient & en auroient tousiours jouys, quoy qu'il soit constant qu'il a esté inconnu durant plusieurs siecles; a la fondation, ou la dotation ne donneroit que le droict du pa∣tronat qui est bien moins onereux, & touche moins à l'autorité spirituelle de l'Eglise que la Regale.
Nos Roys ont eux mesmes reconnus le contraire de ce que le Sieur Paucet dit en leur faveur, comme on le peut inferer des Ordonnances qui viennent d'estre Rappor∣tées, & encore plus clairement du Motif de la conduitte du Roy Philippes troisiesme fils de Saint Louis Marqué par l'arrest de l'an mil deux cens soixante douze. Que Monsieur de Marca dit estre couché dans l'ancienn Registre de la Cour du Parlement en ces termes, Sabbato post ascensionem Do∣mini restituta fuerunt apud dypamias, & red∣dita per Dominum Regem procuratoribus capituli Albiensis Regalia Ecclesiae Albiensis, quae mortuo Episcopo Albiensi Senescallus car∣cassonensis ad manum Domini Regis coeperat, & sasinaverat sine Causà. Cum Dominus Rex super hos aliàs nunquam usus fuisset, prout ex aliorum, ac ipsius relatione fuit inven∣tum. Quant à ce que le Sieur Paucet expose dans sa Requeste, que le Roy a donné sa Declaration ensuitte de la demande que le Clergé avoit faict à sa Majesté d'evoquer à soy, & à son Conseil la connoissance de cette cause; Et sur la production des pieces, & actes du Clergé des Archeves∣ques, Evesques, & Chapittres des Eglises qui se pretendoient Exemptes du droict de Regale, ledit Seigneur Evesque de
Pamiers sans prejudice des autres excep∣tion qu'il pourroit alleguer, respond que ce faict ne luy peut pas estre opposé, par ce qu'il n'a j'amais produict ses Titres, ny dit ses Raisons, que les agents generaux du Clergé, ne mesme une Assemblée Generalle ne pouvoient pas compromettre au droict qui regardoit l'autorité spirituelle des Eves∣ques, & les Immunitez de l'Eglise, les de∣putez n'ayant pour cela aucune procurati∣on speciale. Secundó la Bulle expresse d'Alexandre septiesme confirmée par Lettres Patentes du Roy heureusement regnant, porte expres∣sement quae les Benefices & dignitez de l'Eglise Cathedrale de Pamiers ne seront conferez qu'a des Reguliers qui ayent fait profession dans ledit Chapitre, ensuitte d'un noviciat faict par l'Ordre de l'Eves∣que, & comme c'est un droict particulier, le Roy par son decret de Regale n'auroit pas entendu y desroger, non plus qu'a l'usage fondé en droict, que les dignitez ne doivent estre conferrées que uni de gremio & nul n'est cense de gremio capituli Regularis qu'apres qu'il a faict profession. Il estoit juste que le Seigneur Archeves∣que de Toloze eut ouy le Seigneur Evesque de Pamiers sur ces points, & sur les autres Raisons qu'il luy auroit peû alleguer avant
que de casser son Ordonnance, & peutestre qu'il auroit reconnu qu'elle ne pouvoit estrée avec Justice. Pour toutes ces Raisons & autres à de∣duire en temps & lieu, ledit Seigneur Eves∣que de Pamiers declare audit Seigneur Ar∣chevesque de Tolose, & auxdicts Sieur Pro∣moteur & Paucet, qu'il ne peut & ne doit deferer audit pretendu Jugement, & que sans approbation de la Jurisdiction dudit Seigneur Archevesque, encore que les nul∣litez dudit Jugement seient Evidentes, il proteste qu'il se pourvoira ou & pardevant qui'l appartiendra a fin de le faire declarer nul, & de tout ce qu'il peut & doit pro∣tester; de quoy ledit Seigneur Evesque de Pamiers à requis à moy notaire luy retenir acte aux fins significatoirs, ce qui a esté faict en presence de Maistre Anthoine Noué Ec∣clesiastique du Dioceze de Toloze, & Pierre Sicard Ecclesiastique du Dioceze dela Vaur habitants dudict Pamiers, signez avec ledict Seigneur Evesque & moy Mathieu Garde∣bose Notaire Royal dudict Pamiers requis soubsigné & deliuré le present acte sans au∣tre, ainsy signé François Evesque de Pa∣miers, Noué Clerc tonsuré, Sicard Clerc tonsuré, & Garde bose Notaire.
VII. A Letter of the Pope's to the French King, against his extending the Regale to all the Churches of France. Innocentius XI. CHarissime in Christo Fili noster. Jam∣pridem inaudivimus non deesse Maje∣stati Tuae Consiliarios, & Administros, qui tibi persuadere niterentur, ut usum illum antiquum custodiae fructuum vacantium Ecclesiarum, quod Regaliam vocant, ad eas quo{que} Regni tui Ecclesias extenderes, quas illi juri obnoxias nunquam fuisse, vel ex ipsis Fisci Regii Tabulariis liquidò con∣stet. Sed nos memoriâ repetentes omnem ea de re controversiam, communi olim Ec∣clesiae Catholicae consensu, & benignâ Sedis Apostolicae indulgentiâ providè sapien∣terque compositam fuisse, in Generali Con∣cilio Lugdunensi, minimè ad credendum adduci poteramus Majestatem Tuam Consi∣liis hujusmodi aures praebituram aliquando esse, multò minus admoturam operi ma∣num
invitâ Synodo, tantae apud universam Ecclesiam auctoritas, & reclamantibus constitutionibus, & exemplis Regum Ma∣jorum tuorum, qui constitutionem in ea∣dem Synodo ad praeces Regias, Regiis Le∣gatis praesentibus in ipsa Gallia, & tota Gallica gente efflagitante sancitam, per integrum quatuor fere saeculorum spatium certatim probarunt observaruntque, & prae∣cipuo in honore semper habuerunt: Nec vero-simile videbatur Majestatem Tuam, postquam tantum sibi apud Deum meriti, & apud homines gloriae, maximis pro Re∣ligione Catholica rebus gestis comparavit, ut nullius Majorum tuorum Regum claris∣simorum memoriae possit invidere, velle rem aggredi, quae nulla, vel urgente ne∣cessitate, vel equitate suadente; magnum esset quamplurimis Galliae Episcopis, eo∣rumque Clero incommodum, & justum dolorem allatura: non sine gravi Catholi∣corum omnium sensu, qui in Francorum Annalibus & in S. S. Canonum Statutis ani∣madvertunt quantùm id veteri consuetudi∣ni, & Ecclesiae libertati, ac disciplinae ratio∣nibus adversetur. Undè pleri{que} tum ve∣teres, tum recentes Galliae Scriptores, quan∣tumvis Majestati Tuae & Imperio subessent, & auctoritati magnitudinique impensiùs studerent, in eos qui praefatam Regalia
extentionem suadere ausi fuerant, tanquam in malae perditae{que} causae Patronos, favorem Aulae captantes, liberâ indignatioue invecti stylum subinde strinxerunt. Nullus verò Galliae Regum vel tentare id voluit, vel tentatum exequi sustinuit, memor à Sapi∣ente praeclarè praecipi: Ne transeamus ter∣minos, quos posuerunt Paires nostri. Illud praeterea nos hujusmodi periculi metu, cu∣raque liberabat, quod cùm Majestas tua non multis abhinc annis hujus S. Sedis libe∣ralitate aucta, ornata{que} sit, penè supra vo∣tum, indultis amplissimis, praeter ea quibus etiam Reges Majores tui, ejusdem Sedis benignitate gaudebant, nominandi ad be∣neficia Ecclesiastica; putavissemus, ipsam piissimi sapientessimi{que} olim Galliae Regis exemplo, cogitare potius de se tam gravi, periculosa{que} sarcinâ exonerandi, quàm de novis ineundis rationibus, regiae in sacros reditus auctoritatis amplificandae. Sed uti allatae ad nos fuêre bonae memoriae Nicolai Alletensis Episcopi literae, in quibus post debitas Religiosi in hanc sanctam Sedem obsequii, & filialis observantiae significa∣tiones, suas ad nos querelas, quas propè jam moriens posteà renovavit, ob Regaliae usum in Ecclesiam suam, quae ab eo libera semper fuit, nuper invectum deferebat, unâque à sententiâ Metropolitani Narbo∣nensis
appellationem; deindè verò etiam edocti sumus idem Appamiensi Ecclesiae, pariter liberae, contigisse; ac tandem vi∣dimus ipsi, Regium Majestatis Tuae Decre∣tum, quo omnes Gallici Regni Ecclesiae ejusmodi oneri jubentur assuescere; mirati vehementer sumus Constitutionum Aposto∣licarum, & Generalium Conciliorum Decre∣tis, ac tam certâ compertaque apud omnes veritate, & justitiâ, potiores fuisse illorum conatus, qui terrena potiùs & caduca, quàm caelestia & aererna respicientes, dum Maje∣statis Tuae gratiam, potentiam amplificando aucupantur, molestissimos tibi, & valde periculosos conscientiae terrores (quod De∣us avertat) in id tempus praeparant cùm in districto Dei judicio mortales omnes quo∣cumque tandem potentiae, ac dignitatis loco sint, diligentem reddere debent omnis ante∣actae vitae rationem. Nos itaque pro nostra non minùs erga aeternam, quae magnae nobis curae, & est, & esse debet Majestatis Tuae salutem, quam erga inclitum Clerum, religiosissimos Gal∣liae Praesules, imò erga universam Ecclesiam, cujus in hoc negotio proculdubio causa agitur, paternâ charitate seriò admonen∣dum Te, & vehementer hortandum, obse∣crandum{que} judicavimus, ut à tam injustis ac perniciosis consiliis animum abducas:
praefatis Alletensis, & Appamiarum, caete∣ris{que} Regni tui Ecclesiis, quae usui Regaliae huc usque obnoxiae non fuêre, suas liberta∣tes, atque immunitates sartas, tectas relin∣quas, nec eas de caetero ullo modo labefa∣ctari sinas, sed quidquid in contrarium ha∣ctenus actum tentatumve est, reparari, at{que} in pristinum statum restitui cures; neve caelestis beneficientiae fontem, quem subditae Tibi gentes pietatis inprimis, justitiaeque tuae merito (sicuti credere nos juvat) ex∣pertae huc usque sunt, secus nunc agendo, & Dei per quem regnas Ecclesiam tam gra∣viter laedendo obstruas; quiscias hujus quo∣que vitae bona, & Regnorum foelicitatem, & incrementa à divina bonitate unicè dari, expectandaque esse, sicuti innumera omni∣um gentium ac temporum exempla testan∣tur. Nos sanè hos animi nostri sensus in sinu tacitos, continere non patitur, vel nostri Pastoralis Officii ratio, cui sollicitudo in∣cumbit omnium Ecclesiarum, vel justitiae debitum, quo omnibus ad hanc sanctam Sedem ex veteri justo{que} more, quem à nul∣la humana potestate impediri fas est, recur∣rentibus, jus reddere, consilium, opem ac paternum patrocinium praestare jubemur, vel denique necessitas occurrendi scandalo quo Christiani latè populi ad tantae rei
exitum conversi afficerentur, si à Laicali potestate, Ecclesiae, earumque Antistites, & Ministris suis libertatibus atque immuni∣tatibus, earumque usu & antiquâ possessi∣one contra Generalium Conciliorum De∣creta, & veterem, inconcussamque obser∣vantiam spoliarentur, non alio pretextu, quam novae, & inauditae opinionis, nullo jure nixae, cui nonnulli posteà accesserunt, non quòd aliquid novi invenerint, quod rei veritatem tam apertam posset in dubium revocare, sed ut rem suam agerent, nihil sol∣liciti si publicam perderent. Speramus Maje∣statem Tuam, causae justitiâ & aequitate cog∣nitâ, quae patet ipsa per se, paternae cohor∣tationi, ac precibus nostris pro spectata animi tui pietate & sapientiâ, perpetuâque in hanc sanctam Sedem observantiâ auscul∣taturam, nosque curâ non minus molestâ, quâm necessariâ, inter tot alias quibus cir∣cundamur, liberaturam. Sanè si aliter suadentium consilia Majestas Tua paulò at∣tentiùs excusserit, facilè intelliget homines gratiae ac fortunis inhiantes, obtentu Regiae potestatis, suam firmare velle; neque tam esse Amplitudinis tuae cupidos, quam lau∣dis inimicos, cum Authores Tibi sint, ut qui longinquis non ita pridem expeditio∣nibus & ad omnem posteritatis memoriam illustribus, Christianae Reipublicae salutem
tuam, & Religionem amplificare tanto∣perè studuisti in alienis terris, nunc à te∣ipso quodammodo abiens, Ecclesiae liber∣tatem auctoritatemque in tuis imminutam velis. Quasi verò persuaderi tibi posse confidant aequum esse, vel fieri posse, ut nobilitetur, & crescat ex Ecclesiae ruinis imperium, quod religiosissimi fortissimi{que} Majores tui in eandem Ecclesiam studio, & pari in Apostolicam Sedem pietate in∣primis partum, tibi eorum vestigiis strenuè insistenti amplissimum reliquerunt. Tu Reges eos, Fili charissime, vel potius teip∣sum imitare, & eorum tuaque praeclara facta saepè in mentem revoca; nos quidem oblivisci non possumus praedecessores no∣stros Romanos Pontifices, qui similibus de causis graves ac diuturnas pati & aerumnas, & immanes contentionum ac periculorum procellas, in eo confisi qui mari ventisque imperat, invicto animo subire non dubita∣runt. Haec ad Majestatem tuam inviti scri∣bimus, qui in laetiori argumento versari mag∣nopere cuperemus; sed postquàm Aposto∣licae servitutis onus subeundo, divinae vo∣luntati paruimus, liberum jam nobis non est exequi nostram, quae tuae obsecundare quacumque in re vellet, sicuti in pluribus quas nobis ratio temporum, ac publicae pa∣cis studium hactenus indulgere permisit,
cognoscere potuisti. Significavimus haec ipsa Oratori Majestatis Tuae Nobili Viro Duci de Estrées, ut ad te pluribus referret, itidemque Venerabili Fratri Archiepiscopo Adrianopolis Nuntio apud te nostro, quem de tota re disserentem diligenter ac benig∣nè pro more audire velis vehementer à te petimus, ac Majestati Tuae Apostolicam Be∣nedictionem amantissimè impertimur. Datum Romae die 12 Martii, 1678. Marius Spinola.
VIII. A second Letter of the Pope's to the same effect. Innocentius XI. CHarissimo in Christo Filio nostro Sa∣lutem, & Apostolicam Benedictio∣nem. Ex literis, quibus Majestas tua ad nostras quinto Aprilis datas respondit, & ex iis, quae ad nos retulit venerabilis Frater Archiepiscopus Adrianopolitanus, eo rem adductam videmus, ut nos vel Officio no∣stro deesse retinendo Verbum in tempore salutis, vel tibi fortasse molesti esse coga∣mur: Sed dabis charissime Fili, Pastoralis Officii debito, dabis paternae solicitudini atque amori in te nostro, si te male consu∣lentum culpa, in summo aeternae salutis pe∣riculo constitutum videntes, opportune, importune & instanter obsecramus, clarâ voce clamantes, ut ex tam praecipiti loco pedem referas. Duo imprimis tibi pro veris at{que} indubitatis affirmari cognovimus ex tuis literis: Primum quidem, Regaliae jus, uti nuncupant in Ecclesias Galliae uni∣versas
Majestati tuae competere tanquam Regiae Coronae insitum & innatum: Dein∣de clarissimos Reges, Majores tuos, illud & exercuisse dum viverent, & ad te mori∣entes haereditario ordine transmisisse, qui∣bus a te creditis minime miramur, si ad ea progressus fuisti, quae talium principiorum consectanea erant. Verum tamen illa tam aliena sunt a Vero, ut nihil magis; Nemo enim sanae mentis & doctrinae ausit in du∣bium revocare, nullum saeculari potestati jus in res sacras esse, nisi quatenus Ecclesiae indulsit auctoritas: haec autem non solum Galliae Regibus non indulsit, ut Regaliam praedictam ad Ecclesias, illi oneri non assu∣etas, extenderent; sed etiam id fieri aperte vetuit in Generali Concilio Lugdunensi, quod Gallia imprimis veneratur & Sanctum habet. Reges vero, Praedecessores tuos quotquot fuere, ejusdem Concilii disposi∣tionem religiose semper, & per quatuor centum ferme annorum spatium custodi∣visse, & si quis eorum de infringenda illa cogitavit, re melius cogitatâ, ab incepto destitisse audivimus in confesso esse apud omnes scriptores praesertim Gallos; & Regia ipsa Tabularia ad oculum demonstrare. Quamobrem pati non possumus, nec de∣bemus, Majestati tuae obtrudi errorem tam manefestum, tam Conscientiae tuae,
tam Galliae Regno, tam Universae Ec∣clesiae perniciosum; semel enim admisso licere Majestati Tuae adversus Genera∣lis Concilii Lugdunensis decreta, adver∣sus Regum Majorum tuorum Exempla, adversus Rerum sacrarum Naturam & pri∣migeniam Ecclesiae Libertatem, invehere jus Regaliae in eas quo{que} Ecclesias, quae ejus∣modi oneri nunquam fuere obnoxiae, id{que} palam dissentiente & reclamante, & ine∣luctabilem Coelestis irae animadversionem multis cum lacrymis denunciante Romano Pontifice, ad quem (sicut vetus consuetudo poscebat) nonnulli Galliae Episcopi a Metropolitanorum sententiis appellarunt; Nemo non videt quae inde Catholicae Eccle∣siae defraudatio, quae sacrarum ac profana∣rum rerum Confusio, sublato quodammodo inter Potestatem spiritualem, ac soecularem Pariete medio, sit consecutura, non in Gallia solum, sed in omnibus aliis Christiani orbis Provinciis manante indies latius Ex∣empli Authoritate. Accedit ad haec, nisi Error tam absurdus ac tam certus corriga∣tur, gravis jactura & periculum Animarum in isto Regno: Illi enim quos Majestas tua vacantium Ecclesiarum fructibus augebit, in quibus Jus illud non habet, cum progressu temporis, vel monitu Sacerdotum, quibus Arcana Conscientiae suae detegunt, vel eti∣am
ipsi per se, ut in re clara & aperta vi∣derint, in quos se laqueos induxerint, & in quod perditionis Discrimen adduxerint, tot Censuris, adeoque tot Sacrilegiis ob∣stricti, tot illicité perceptis Bonis Ecclesiae, que restituere cogantur, incredibile dictu est quâ animi Perturbatione, quibus Con∣scientiae terroribus agentur, Regiam Benefi∣centiam tuam in infortunii loco habituri, quorum profecto malorum, & discriminum Culpam, nisi arceantur, Majestas tua haud dubie in districto Dei judicio sustineret. Vehementer ita{que} Majestatem tuam roga∣mus, ut pro eximia animi tui Aequitate, & Sapientia rem serio perpendas, & si innu∣meris Regni tui negotiis impediris, quo minus eam per te cognoscas, Viros aliquos non tam doctrina (quae non adeo magna requiretur ad hujus causae cognitionem) quam pietate, fide{que} praestanti consulas. Vel si placet evolvas Acta ipsa cleri Gallicani nuper impressa, que tibi rei veritatem evi∣denter aperient, quâ cognitâ minime dubi∣tamus, quin Majestas tua illico declaret nil sibi majori Curae esse quam reddi Deo quae Dei sunt, a quo tantas opes, tam splen∣didum amplum{que} Regnum, & omni Regno potiora, tot praeclara animi corporisque Bona accepisti. Longius fortasse quam pa∣titur, vel evidens causae Justitia, vel egre∣gia
Virtus tua in hoc Argumento versamur, verum non ut confundamus te hoc scribi∣mus, sed tanquam filium charissimum mo∣nemus, animo reputantes, nil prodesse ho∣mini, si universum mundum lucretur, ani∣mae vero suae detrimentum patiatur. Spera∣mus, charissime Fili, opus non fore, ut novis eximiam Religionem, Aequitatem{que} tuam precibus in hoc negotio interpellemus. Ex caetero quae est rei magnitudo & gravitas, in qua non Gallicanae solum sed totius Ec∣clesiae Dignitas, Salus{que} vertitur, ut pro A∣postolici Officii nostri munere extrema po∣tius pati omnia quam causam istam negli∣genter agere debeamus. Reliqua super hoc Argumento accipies a praefato Nuncio no∣stro, ac Tibi Apostolicam benedictionem perpetuo cum felicitatis tuae voto imper∣timur. Datum Romae apud Sanctam Mariam Majorem sub annulo Piscatoris die 21 Septemb. 1678. Pontificatus no∣stri Anno tertio. Marius Spinola.
IX. Another most vehement Letter to the same purpose, in which the Pope threatens the King with Censures. Charissimo in Christo Filio nostro Ludovico XIV Francorum Regi Christianissimo, Innocentius XI. Charissime in Christo Fili noster, BInis jam Literis fusé & luculenter osten∣dimus Majestati tuae, etiam ex concor∣di fere omnium Galliae Scriptorum Testi∣monio, & ipsius Regii Tabellarii tui Actis, quam esset Ecclesiasticae libertati injuriosum, omni juri Divino & humano contrarium, & alienum à perpetuo Majorum Tuorum More & Exemplo editum septem abhinc Annis a Te Decretum, quo Consuetudi∣nem illam custodiendi fructus Ecclesiarum vacantium, quam Regaliam nuncupant, ad eas quoque Ecclesias extendi jubes, quae ejusmodi oneri obnoxiae nunquam fuere. In quibus Literis ad Te, pro Pastoralis nostri
Officii Debito, pro paterna quam geri∣mus aeternae tuae Salutis cura efflagitavimus, ut Decretum ipsum alia{que} deinceps Acta adversus Jura & Libertates Ecclesiarum, abrogari abolerique mandares. Et sane illud est & Causae ipsius meritum, & de Re∣gia animi tui aequitate & magnitudine opi∣nio nostra, ut certa spe duceremur, Maje∣statem tuam, omnibus in locum pristinum repositis, Cor nostrum ab ulteriori tantae rei solicitudine, tot in aliis Ecclesiae Catho∣licae procuratione districtum curis, liberatu∣ram. Verum postquam plurium mensium Spatium, Longanimitate nostrâ probatâ, ab ultimis literis effluxit, nullum adhuc neque ad eas Responsum, neque ex iis Fructum vidimus, quinetiam plurimorum Literis & Sermone ad Nos pro comperto affertur om∣nia deteriori indies loco esse, & pretextu Regaliae, hujusmodi beneficiorum Colla∣tiones & Canonicas Institutiones impediri, Episcoporum Auctoritatem pessundari, Ec∣clesiasticam Disciplinam, Ordinem{que} turbari, novam deni{que} Praxim veteri Ecclesiae Praxi & Divinae Institutioni contrariam invehi à seculari Potestate; ne{que} ea clam aut timide, sed palam & manu Regiâ. Non repetimus hoc loco, ne actum agamus, quot inde Scandala & Querelae, quot in Clerum Gal∣licanum Incommoda nascantur, & quod
Ecclesiae Universae à tali Exemplo Pericu∣lum, quae Tempestas immineat, quae no∣mini & honori tuo Macula, quae Conscien∣tiae labes inuratur; satis ea enim in superio∣ribus Literis indicavimus, satis patent ipsa per se: Non tamen patitur sincera & plane paterna erga Te, Regnum{que} Tuum amplis∣simum Charitas nostra, Nos in tanta Divini Honoris injuria, in tam gravi Tuiipsius Periculo adhuc silere, sed iterum cogimur Cordis Affectu, vel in visceribus Christi rogare obsecrareque Majestatem Tuam, ut memor ejusdem Christi Verborum ad Ec∣clesiae Praepositos, qui vos audit, me audit, Nos potius qui tibi Parentis & quidem a∣mantissimi loco sumus, audire velis, vera & salutaria suadentes, quam filios diffiden∣tiae, qui terrena sapiunt, quique Consiliis in speciem utilibus, sed revera pernitiosis, inclyti Regni Tui fundamenta, in rerum Sacrarum Reverentia & in Ecclesiae Aucto∣ritate Juribus{que} tuendis posita, convellunt. Qui quidem, si ii esse vellent quos esse ipso∣rum Dignitas & Officium, Tua{que} singularis in eos Benignitas postulat, imitare potius deberent Integritatem Fidem{que} eorum, quos olim pari loco positos, memoriae proditum est, & in Cleri Gallicani Acta nuper rela∣tum, libera aliquando voce in simili Causa monuisse Reges, Predecessores Tuos, ut
meminissent quid & quâ jurisjurandi Religi∣one, ubi Regni Gubernacula suscepturi Sacro Chrismate inungerentur, polliciti Deo fuis∣sent, se videlicet ejus Gloriae omni studio in∣servituros, & pro Ecclesiae Sanctae Juribus, & Libertate asserenda paratos fore semper Sanguinem ipsum, Vitam{que} profundere; considerantes fluxam & fugacem esse Vitam, Regum praesertim, & Principum, qui ubi ad districtum Dei Judicium vocarentur, illuc accederent sine Custodibus & Comi∣tatu, sine ullis vel Regiae Dignitatis Insig∣niis, vel potentiae Praesidiis, nudi at{que} in∣ermes, reddituri omnis ante-actae vitae ratio∣nem Judici scrutatori Cordium, quem nulla res latet, apud quem non est acceptio Per∣sonarum, qui potestatem habet mittere in Gehennam, ubi potentes potenter tormen∣ta patientur. Nec in superiori soeculo defuit in Gallia Episcopus, qui in frequenti aliorum Praesu∣lum Aulae{que} Procerum Coronâ apud Heneri∣cum Regem hujus nominis Tertium, nomine Cleri Gallicani in re non absimili orans Regi dixerit, observatum fuisse nunquam in Gallia Regias Stirpes defecisse, nisi Re∣ges indebitas ad beneficia Nominationes arrogare sibi caepissent; a quibus Sanctus Ludovicus Rex Christianae humilitatis glo∣ria, quam regiae dignitatis culmine subli∣mior,
us{que} adeo abhorruisset, ut ultro Pon∣tificia Auctoritate sibi delatas rejecerit. Fuit haec quondam in Gallia, imo ad haec us{que} nostra tempora retenta est, poenes Epis∣copalem Ordinem Apostolica loquendi Li∣bertas, nihil metuens, nihil sperans nisi a Deo, ne{que} id solum per Reges licuit, sed ita Episcoporum monita semper accepta sunt, ut Episcopi ipsi & sibi meritam Lau∣dem, & causae optatum Exitum sint conse∣cuti, manserit{que} tandem inviolata at{que} in∣concussa Sanctio Oecumenici Concilii Lug∣dunensis; Adeo ut nonnulli Galliae Reges impios & Sacrilegos publico Decreto eos appellaverint, quicun{que} Ecclesias ad Rega∣liam non assuetas extendere ulla ratione tentarent: Sicut in vestris Annalibus tra∣ditum reperitur. Haec autem praesentis temporis infirmitas eo acerbior nobis acce∣dit, quod scimus Majestatem tuam nihil ducere inter Regii Animi ornamenta prae∣clarius Zelo justitiae, & divini honoris Stu∣dio, pro quo tam pia, tam salutaria Decreta nuper edidisti, ac tanta & multa cum tui nominis Laude, & bonorum laetitia in prae∣sens agis, destruendo Synagogas, Asylos{que} Haereticorum, ut Tibi non minora in Coelo statuere videaris conservatae propagataeque Religionis Trophaea, quam in terris reli∣cturum speramus devictarum gentium bar∣bararum.
Cavendum ita{que} est ne quod dextera tua, id est, quod ingenita Pietas tua aedificat, destruat sinistra, id est, calida & iniqua Consilia dicentium tenebras lucem, & lu∣cem tenebras; cum Apostolico respondea∣mus Oraculo, qui in uno delinquet esse omni∣um reum. Non defuere hâc etiam occasione in Gal∣lia quidam, nec plures deessent ex Fratri∣bus nostris Episcopis, qui gravissimam hanc & toti Franciae Regno, imo Ecclesiae Uni∣versae communem causam pari constantia & Spiritu apud Majestatem tuam agerent; sed metu quodam, ut ipsis quidem videtur, justo & ignoscendo, ut nos autem judica∣mus vano, & non solum Episcopali Officio, sed etiam Magnanimitati Aequitati{que} tuae injurioso, retenti silent, expectantes dum Humilitas nostra à filiali tua in hanc sedem sanctam observantia impetret, quod a Regia Tua Justitia Ecclesiis suis debitum poscere ipsi non audent. Ita{que} in his Literis nostris illorum omnium justum dolorem & preces agnosce, quin imo ipsius Dei voluntatem Te nostro ore alloquentis ac serio monen∣tis, ut praedictum Decretum, & quicquid ejus occasione adversus Ecclesiae libertates & jura actum gestum{que} hactenus fuit, cor∣rigi emendari{que} omnino cures: Alioquin magnopere veremur, ne aliquando subire
debeas quam tibi aliis in literis denunciavi∣mus Coelestis Irae Animadversionem. Nos sane ne{que} hoc negotium amplius per literas urgebimus, ne{que} desides erimus in adhiben∣dis remediis quae traditae nobis divinitus po∣testati conveniunt, quae{que} in tam gravi & periculoso morbo omittere sine gravissima Apostolici Muneris culpa non possumus. Ad haec enim vocati sumus, ne{que} facimus animam nostram pretiosiorem quam nos, cum probe intelligentes non forti solum, sed etiam laeto Animo subeundas tribula∣tiones propter justitiam, in quibus & in Cruce Domini nos unice gloriari oportet, Causam Dei agimus, quaerentes non quae nostra sunt, sed que Jesu Christi (cum eo propterea non nobiscum Tibi negotium erit, cum eo scilicet) adversus quem non est Sapientia, non est Consilium, non est Potentia. Nos postquam Ministerii partes plantando, & rigando, sicut ut oportet, impleverimus, expectabimus dum operi in∣crementa det Deus, a quo iterata prece flagitare non desinemus, ut verbis & hor∣tationibus hisce nostris vim & robur infun∣dat, Majestatis tuae animum ad salubriora Consilia flectendi, unde & mereri tu pos∣sis, & nos laetari, res tuas omnes secundi∣ori cursu fluere, ac subditas imperio tuo Gentes perpetuâ & optimâ pace florere,
Tibi{que} Apostolicam Benedictionem aman∣tissime impertimur. Datum Romae die 29 Decemb. 1679. Marius Spinola. X. A Letter of the Pope's to the Bishop of Pamiers, encouraging him to go on in his opposition to the Regale. Venerabili Fratri Francisco Episcopo Appamiensi Innocentius XI. VEnerabilis Frater, Salutem & Aposto∣licam Benedictionem. Praecipuae Ar∣gumentum Laetitiae attulerunt nobis literae Fraternitatis tuae, proxime nobis datae, in quibus eximium tuum de integra at{que} in∣corrupta servanda Morali Theologia, de instauranda Cleri & Regularium Ordinum Disciplina, de{que} propulsanda ab Ecclesia soecularis potestatis Injuria, Zelum Studi∣um{que} diserte declaras. Et quidem quod
ad Diocesis tuae rationes pertinet, Gratias Divinae Majestati agere non eessamus, quod in tanta rerum & temporum difficultate suscitarit sibi Sacerdotem fidelem, qui oppo∣nat se murum pro domo Israel; ne{que} dubita∣mus quin tot experimentis probata & con∣firmata Virtus tua egregio Proposito, Deo bene juvante, ad extremum constanter in∣sistat; parati omni Ope, at{que} Authoritate nostrâ tibi pro Dei honore tam strenue la∣boranti perpetuo adesse. Reliqua a dilecto filio Archipresbytero Aquensi, viro pio, at{que} industrio, qui tuas nobis Literas reddi∣dit & a quo has nostras accipies, fusius cog∣nosces, ac Fraternitati tuae Apostolicam be∣nedictionem peramanter impertimur. Datum Romae apud Sanctam Mariam Majorem sub annulo Piscatoris die 2 Augusti, 1679. Pontificatus no∣stri Anno tertio. Marius Spinola.
XI. Another Letter of the Pope's to the Bishop of Pamiers, to the same effect. Venerabili Fratri Francisco Appami∣ensi Episcopo Innocentius XI. VEnerabilis Frater Salutem & Aposto∣licam Benedictionem. Perlegimus, literas Fraternitatis tuae, in quibus afflictum Appamiensis Ecclesiae statum, & tuum propterea dolorem non ob occulos ponis, quâ de re Pastoralem Zelum & Solicitudi∣nem magnopere commendamus, & eodem tecum sensu & affectione non cessamus a Patre misericordiarum pro muneris nostri debito postulare, ut pristinam Ecclesiae isti Tranquillitatem Dignitatem{que} suppeditet, quae cum tuae, tum universae Ecclesiae ra∣tionibus expedire videbuntur. Reliqua ab eo cognosces, qui tuas nobis literas reddi∣dit, te{que} atque invictam Episcopalis robo∣ris constantiam, qua caeteris praeluces, inti∣mo charitatis affectu in domino comple∣ctentes,
Fraternitati tuae Apostolicam Be∣nedictionem peramanter impertimur. Datum Romae apud Sanctum Petrum sub annulo Piscatoris die 10 Decem∣bris 1679, Pontificatus nostri Anno quarto. Marius Spinola. XII. A Letter of the Pope's to the Arch-bishop of Tholose, reproving him for his compliance to the Orders of the Court. Venerabili Fratri Josepho Archiepis∣copo Tholosano Innocentius XI. VEnerabilis Frater, delatae sunt nuper ad nos quaerelae Monialium Ordinis Sanctae Clarae Urbanistarum in Tholosana Civitate, graviter dolentium, & dolorem suum in paternum sinum nostrum multis cum lachrymis deponentium, ut afflictis ac poene perditis rebus suis presentem opem pro Apostolici muneris debito afferamus.
Per hos enim dies ad illud Monasterium ve∣nisse Monialem quandam, magno comitatu, militum etiam cohorte stipatam, ut Abba∣tissatus perpetui possessionem invaderet, praetextu Regiae Nominationis, nulli Juri aut Consuetudini, nulli Apostolico Indulto subnixae, siquidem ad inusitatae rei specta∣culum, primo attonitas, mox collectis ani∣mis, & implorata Coelesti ope quacun{que} ratione licuit restitisse, ne immunitas Ec∣clesiae, & institutio ordinis sui Apostolica Authoritate firmata, tam inaudita, & tam perniciosi exempli injuria inferretur; sed superante vi militum cedere tandem coactas, effractis{que} foribus, ac pariete ipso, liberum multis soecularibus aditum patuisse, cum qui∣bus ingressos quo{que} milites violenter ibi & Sacrilege multa patrasse magna cum totius Civitatis indignatione & scandalo; Frater∣nitate autem tua, quo par animo erat, ut venientibus lupis pastorale pectus oppone∣res, non solum non repugnante, sed ultro eos quodammodo invitante, & Monasteri∣um, edito decreto, per vim apperiri ac re∣cludi jubente. Inhorruit ad tam indignae rei Nuncium animus noster, adeo{que} Mon∣stri similis visa est, ut quamvis aliunde∣qua{que} eadem afferrentur, vix tamen per∣suadere nobis potuissemus, Archiepiscopum Tholosanum, inspectantibus religiosissimis
Galliae Episcopis, & Gallia Universa, eo progressum fuisse, ut dignitatis & muncris sui oblitus, nullo horribilium Censurarum & Coelestis irae metu, nullâ famae reverentia tanto facinori, pro quo impediendo animam ipsam boni Pastoris exemplo ponere debu∣isset, non solum non resisteret, sed etiam suffragaretur, nisi memoria teneremus quid duobus ferme abhinc Annis, in negotio Re∣galiae, ut nuncupant, ubi de Appamiensi Ecclesia Tholosanae suffraganea agebatur, decernere ausus fueris contra manifestam Causae justitiam, contra omnes humani di∣vini{que} juris Regulas, contra ipsius Ecclesiae totius{que} Provinciae jura & libertatem, & contra morem Predecessorum tuorum, alio∣rum{que} Galliae Praesulum, qui in similibus Causis Regiae voluntati & indignationi, ne muneri suo deessent obviam fortiter eundo, & rei Causam strenue orunda laeta & salu∣taria Ecclesiis suis ab ingenita Christianissi∣morum Regum justitia & pietate retulere. Officii ita{que} nostri esse duximus, gravem ac plane acerbum eâ de re animi nostri sensum aperire, Te{que} in Domino monere ut dili∣genter consideres quo in periculo sis expe∣riendae divinae ultionis, quam facile provo∣cabunt gemitustot luctissimarum Virginum, quarum vitae Innocentia & Candor at{que} assiduus divinarum laudum concentus, de∣liciae
quodammodo sunt coelestis Sponsi, cui sacrosancto & insolubili vinculo con∣junctae fuere, nisi quam primum emendatis quae admissa sunt, Misericordiarum Patris Clementiam demereri studueris: Alioquin nos pro Vicaria Christi Domini in univer∣sam Ecclesiam potestate qua fungimur, quanquam indigni immerentesque, & pro Solicitudine quam debemus unicui{que} Christi fidelium ad paternum Patrocinium nostrum confugienti, cogamur de opportunis reme∣diis serio cogitare. Datum Romae die 18 Januarii, 1679. Marius Spinola.
XIII. A Letter of the Pope's to the Cardinal d'Estree, requiring him to interpose in the Matter of the Regale. Cardinal d'Estree, Innocentius Papa XI. DIlecte Fili noster, Salutem & Aposto∣licam Benedictionem. Probe intelligis pro tua singulari Prudentia & Eruditione, quam injusta fuerit deliberatio, ad quam improba nonnullorū Consilia Regem Chri∣stianissimum impulêre subjicendi Ordini, quem Regaliam nuncupant, Ecclesias quo∣qui ei non assuetas, quam latius serpat in∣dies, quaeque ex illa pernicies & ruina non in illud solummodo Regnum, sed in Uni∣versam Ecclesiam derivari aliquando possit; neque dubitamus quin tu ex tua praestanti Pietate & rei ipsius Gravitate, jampridem excitatus, omni ope, studio{que} adnixus fue∣ris, ut solicitudinem nostram Regis animum ad salubriora Consilia flectandi adjuvares.
Verum cum nihil adhuc profecisse nos sen∣tiamus, imo pejora semper nuncientur, op∣portune duximus antequam aliud decerna∣mus, tertias ad eundem Regem Literas dare, in quibus dolorem hac de re nostrum, & Debitum, quo Apostolici Ministerii ratio nos astringit, occurendi presenti malo & gravioribus ex illo consecuturis luculentius aperimus. Cum autem opera at{que} officia tua negotium juvare imprimis possent, tum propter Gratiam qua apud Regem merito flores, tum propter Pietatis, Doctrinae, & Prudentiae qua praestas Authoritatem, men∣tem tibi nostram significare voluimus, & mittere Exemplum literarum quas ad Re∣gem dedimus, ut ex earum sententia Maje∣statem suam alloqui potueris, & praeclaram illius ad omnem aequitatem Indolem, de∣tecto errore in viam reducere. Postulat id a te Dignitas tua, vocata in partem solici∣tudinis quam gerimus omnium Ecclesiarum. Postulat egregia nostra de virtute tua opi∣nio. Postulat optimi & clarissimi Regis erga te Liberalitas, cujus commendatione ad tam sublimem in Ecclesia honoris gra∣dum evectus fuisti, cui quidem nullam re∣pendere majorem potes grati animi vicem, quam admonendo eum maculae quae ejus gloriae inuritur, & periculi in quod salus ipsius aeterna vocatur. Postulat hanc a te
opem Laudunensis Ecclesia cui praees, quum fortasse minime in earum munero sit quae Regaliae antiquitus subsunt, ad eam tamen quoque derivatur aliarum Calamitas, cum non solum abusus Regaliae intendatur ad Ecclesias illi minime obnoxias, sed Regalia ipsa ad potestatem longe ampliorem quae Episcopalem exhaurit, & Gallicae Ecclesiae propter affinitatem illam communem om∣nibus Christiani Orbis Ecclesiis quam ex ejusdem Capitis a quo pendent origine & influxu inter se contractae adeo sunt, ut non possit una infirmari quin aliae quo{que} infir∣mentur, & unius periculum ad omnes alias pertineat; nobis vero eo magis necessaria est, hoc in negotio societas Officiorum tuo∣rum quod non habemus istic Legatum cui mandata Sedis Apostolicae exponere possi∣mus, nec quenquam qui majori Zelo & Efficacia id exequi actu possit; Dilecte Fili Apostolicam Benedictionem peramanter impertimur. Datum Romae.
XIV. Cardinal d'Estrée's Letter to the Pope, advising him to proceed more moderate∣ly; and highly extolling the French King. Beatissime Pater, SAnctitatis vestrae Literae a Pontificii Nuncii Auditore Domino Abbate Lauri mihi traditae sunt sub Quadragessimae finem Laudunum profisiscenti, & ea qua decet & debeo maximâ reverentiâ exceptae. Redux quam primum ut par erat, ad me missas Majestatem latere non passus sum, sed hoc negotium attingendi locus relictus non est. Eas scilicet legi, & inveni quod viam mihi ad tractationem omnem praecluserant. Hoc uno, Beatissime Pater, Responsū ad San∣ctitatem vestram possem comprehendere, ex quo Mandatis suis modo quo potui satisfa∣ctum fuisse ostenderem, nisi sincerum meum & efficax in Beatitudinem vestram, & Apo∣stolicam Sedem studium majus aliquid vide∣retur requirere. Quod quidem de intelli∣gentiae meae Tenuitate tam benigne sentit
Beatitudo Vestra, grave, ut opinor, non erit si quaedam oculis vestris candidissime subjiciam, speremque, re satis intellecta, & perpensis utrim{que} momentis magna quarum turbatur solicitudine, levatam iri Sanctita∣tem Vestram, nihil{que} amplius pestis & rui∣nae, quam tenera pietas vestra reformidat, suspicaturam: hanc longe magis pertimes∣cerem ex mutuis gravissimis{que} inter Sancti∣tatem Vestram & Maximum Regem offen∣sionibus, si aliquando orirentur. Equidem utrius{que} Religio hoc accidere nunquam si∣net, sed ad solam licet vanam tantum dis∣criminis cogitationem horremus. Infinita sunt, ut optime notavit Beatitudo Vestra, ingentium in me Gentem{que} meam benefi∣ciorum vincula, quibus me Regi ita debi∣tum alligatum{que} censeo, ut addictior esse non possim. Imo ad gratiarum cumulum accedit, quod ejus constanti Patrocinio, in eo honoris gradu constitutus sum, in quo parem mihi supra merita mea aliquando contigit habere Sanctitatem Vestram, eam∣que mihi, & universo Orbi in Patrem op∣tare, cum caeteris in idem consentientibus obtinere: Nihilominus praeteritorum Be∣neficiorum memoriâ, aut novorum spe non ita ducor, ut meae in Regem observantiae nimium indulgere velim, aut suae Majestati impensius obsequi, si quidem (quod ubi{que}
apud omnes in confesso est) dico nullum extitisse reliquos inter Principes & Impera∣tores, qui Majorem Potentiam, clariores, aut bellicas, aut civiles Virtutes cum puriori Re∣ligionis Zelo conjunxerit, qui fidem Chri∣stianam intactam magis & a novitatibus im∣munem voluerit; qui Sedis Apostolicae, ac Praedecessorum vestrorum constitutioni∣bus se praebuerit obsequentiorem, qui in Haeroicis Expeditionibus, profligationem Haereseos, & abolitae apud hostes suos Ca∣tholicae Religionis Instaurationem avidius sit prosecutus. Immensa sunt quae adver∣sus Calvini Sectarios apud nos praestitit, ex quo ipse Imperium administrat. Spirant adhuc tenues hujus perversae Sectae reliquiae, quibus tamen non parcit, totus est in illa radicitus convellenda. Edicta indies ad hoc unum eduntur. Ad Regni sui Ecclesi∣as doctos & pios viros eligit, illi{que} precipue debitur clero Gallicano delatus honor etiam ab exteris, ejus{que} ingens apud Beatitudinem Vestram (quod magno Decoris loco duci∣mus) Existimatio. Vacantium Ecclesiarum sibi tam olim adjudicatos reditus aut pro∣movendis Episcopis relinquit, aut partem aliquam in levamen eorum qui ab Haeresi pristinae fidei restituuntur dispensat. Hoc loco B. P. quis non deprehendat aut prae∣dicet Animi Regii Magnitudinem & Benefi∣cientiam,
qui negligit ea quae alii perfervide sectarentur Commoda, & in ipsosmet Epis∣copos, quibus Sanctitatis Vestrae favet Au∣thoritas, ejusmodi jura transfert. Hâc certe ratione si non inveniret traditum per Avos at{que} Atavos haereditarium Christianssimum nomen in Regnatrice domo, tot beneficiis sibi proprium faceret. Encomia videntur quae refero, Sanctissime Pater, sunt tamen res gestae. Haec dum Augustissimus Princeps apud se reputat, dum amoris & venerationis suae erga Sanctitatem Vestram sensus, quos illu∣strissimis documentis approbavit, animum adjicit, quâ mente Beatitudinis Vestrae mi∣naces literas considerare possit? Ingenue fateor ad has non parum me obstupuisse, si quae sentio dicere licet, & sane licet, cum Parente optimo, aequissimo & veritatis cu∣pidissimo. Dicam cum Rege rem esse Eu∣ropae potentissimo, de Fide Catholica opti∣me merito, cujus gloriam & victorias, in cisque singularem moderationem suspiciunt omnes, quo Regnum Predecessorum suorum nullus singulos Regni sui ordines subjectio∣res & devinctiores unquam habuit. Unde operae pretium esset & magis è re Aposto∣licae Sedis amanter hortari, ac suavi potius quam acri sermone, iisque verbis agere, de quibus graviter peccare crederem in Sancti∣tatem
vestram, si praeterirem silentio plu∣rimos majoris Notae me audiisse, conqueren∣tes quasi ad invasorem Ecclesiae magis spe∣ctarent, quam ad Principem quem apud Affros, Hungaros, Graecos, Battavos & in medio Galliarum conspexerant universi fi∣dem Catholicam asserentem: talemque qui suis in Religionem meritis ad Caroli Magni gloriam caeteris propius accessit, & impo∣sterum, annuente Deo, conspirante, ut spero, Beatitudine Vestrâ, magis accessurus sit; si praeconcepta semel Consilia perficiat: qui tandem eo minus aliena invadere cre∣dendus est, quod in hac ipsa re, propriis quidem Juribus & non controversis minime utatur: Sed in id negotii tantum incumbit, ut a Regiis Magistratibus alias vindicata jura conservet. In Beatitudine vestra agnoscunt omnes Gregorii Magni innocentiam, fidem, con∣stantiam, rerum humanarum summum de∣spectum, in supremo dignitatum apice humi∣litatem incredibilem, mentem capacem, a terrenis curis liberam, coelestibus{que} vere parem. Haec cum olim in summo Praesule miraretur Christianus Orbis inter tot excel∣sas dotes non minus laudavit ejus in deme∣rendis Principum animis industriam, & in urgendis quae necessaria videbantur Consi∣liis temperantiam & modum.
Ignosce praecor Candori meo, B. P. si prolixus forim, & liberius in re tanti mo∣menti locutus sim. Nihil apud piissimum Patrem veritate ac sinceritate potius esse probe intelligo. Testor Deum me pruden∣tia carnis non loqui, dum{que} allaboro ne mu∣tuus amor vobis excidat, aut pristina neces∣situdo & conjunctio frangatur, plane credo me ne{que} de Apostolica Sede, & universa Religione impensius mereri, ne{que} munere meo sanctius defungi posse: ut enim ex dis∣sentione (quae nunquam eveniet) certa pernicies, sic ex firmiori nexu ac intensiori utrius{que} Benevolentia ac Charitate, quam multa quam magna in Ecclesiam derivatura sint commoda, omnes intelligunt. Longae∣vos interim annos, felix, gloriosum & pa∣catum Regimen Sanctitati Vestrae votis om∣nibus exopto ejus pedibus advolutus. Lutetiae Parisiorum, 31 Maii, 1680.
XV. The French King's Letter to the Pope, being a Credential to the Cardinal D'¦Estrée. Tres S. Pere, LE Bref de vostre Saincteté du 29 De∣cembre 1679, Nous fut rendu le mois de Mais dernier. Et quoy que nostre respect filial envers elle nous eust porté a ne pas differer de luy faire connoistre nos intentions, Neantmoins nous avons jugé a propos de les luy expliquer par la bouche ne nostre Cousin le Cardinal D' Estrées qui partira bien tost pour se trouver aupres d'elle. Il est sibien informé du desir que Nous avons de contribuer en toutes Choses au bien, & a l'Augmentation de l'Eglise, & si persuade qu'il ne se peut rien faire de grand pour la Gloire de Dieu, & pour l'Augmen∣tation de la Religion Catholique, que dans la continuation d'une parfaitte intelligence entre vostre Sainteté & Nous, que nous ne doutons point qu'il ne la trouve aussy disposée a tout ce ques nous pouuons nous
promettre de l'affection Paternelle de vo∣stre Saincteté, laquelle nous prions Dieu, qu'il conserve longuées années pour le Re∣gime de nostre Mere Saincté Eglise. Escrit a Fontainebleu, le 28 June, 1680. XVI. The Pope's Answer to it. CHarissime in Christo Fili Noster. A Dilecto Filio nobili Viro Duce d'Estrées accepimus Majestatis tuae Literas, quibus constantem tuam in Apostolicam Sedem observantiam profiteris, & reipsa comprobas, dum mandasse te scribis dilecto Filio Nostro Cardinali d'Estrées, ut expe∣dito Itinere ad Urbem proficiscatur, tuam nobis mentem Declaraturus super Negotiis Regaliae: de quo postremis ad te Literis scripsimus, eo Affectu, quem Causae Mag∣nitudo & Gravitas, & indispensabile Apo∣stolici Muneris Debitum, Nostra{que} erga Te tuam{que} Salutem aeternam Paterna Charitas postulabant. Libenter eas Literas accepimus,
& quae Literis, idem Dux Orator tuus ad∣junxit: Libentius multo excepturi Cardi∣nalem ipsum ad nos venientem, praestante virtute, & in rebus gerendis Solertiâ virum, nobis diuturno usu plane perspectum ac probatum, quem propterea egregium fore speramus Voluntatis nostrae omnia Majesta∣ti tuae laeta ac prospera cupientis Interpre∣tem: quae sané voluntas, nulla rerum vel temporum adversitate labefactari aut re∣primi poterit, quin Majestati tuae impense suffragetur de promovendo Divino Hono∣re, & Catholica Religione amplificandâ assiduo cogitanti, de quo nos & meritas tibi laudes tribuere, & uberes Divinae Bo∣nitati gratias agere nunquam cessabimus, omni Ope, Studio, Authoritate nostrâ, ac∣curatis{que} apud Deum praecibus pio magna∣nimo{que} Majestatis tuae Proposito affuturi. Caetera ab eodem Duce d'Estrées plenius cognoscas, tibi{que} Apostolicam Benedictio∣nem amantissimé impertimur. Datum Romae, 12 Julii 1680.
XVII. A Letter of the Pope's to the Bishop of Pamiers, comforting him in his Sufferings. Venerabili Fratri Episcopo Appami∣ensi Innocentius XI. VEnerabilis Frater, Salutem & Aposto∣licam Benedictionem. Quod pluri∣morum sermone auribus nostrisdudum in∣tonat, Fraternitatis tuae ad nos Literae pla∣ne declarant, te scilicet in Tribulationibus gloriantem, & inter afflictae Valitudinis in∣commoda, inter Paupertatis & Vexationum augustias crescentem quotidie magis, in Charitate Christi magno forti{que} animo il∣lius causam agere, & paratum Deo & ho∣minibus Spectaculum exhibere. Magnum profecto ex tantae Virtutis experimentis do∣lori nostro solatium caepimus, ac pari obli∣gationis nexu obstringimur tendendi sup∣plices in Coelum Manus, ut uberes profi∣teamur Misericordiarum gratias, quod dif∣ficillimo
tempore suscitaverit sibi in isto Regno Sacerdotem fidelem qui in commu∣ni animarum consternatione & silentio qua∣si Tuba Exaltet vocem suam, & opponet se murum pro Domo Israel. Documentum illustre caeteris, quem dominus posuit, rege∣re Ecclesiam suam quam acquisivit Sangui∣ne suo; Quam praeclara, quam{que} gaudii plena res sit, dignos haberi qui pro Christi nomine Contumeliam patiantur, si contu∣melia dicenda sit, ex qua vera & solida, in hac quo{que} mortali vita oritur gloria, judi∣cio sapientium. Nos quidem quantum in nobis situm erit nullo loco deerimus Vir∣tuti tuae; quanquam etsi deessent omnes, pro explorato tamen habemus Deum causae tuae, necessitati Ecclesiae, constanti tuae in ipsum Fidei assiduis & accuratis Praecibus nostris, bonorum deni{que} omnium votis non defuturum. Statueramus efficax remedium adhibere iis quae Archiepiscopus Tholosanus contra Lugdunensis Concilii sententiam, & contra Apamiensis Ecclesiae, vel potius totius Provinciae Tholosanae jura, liberta∣tem{que} huc us{que} attentare ausus est. Sed red∣ditis Christianissimi Regis Literis, in quibus ad ultimas consulto cum filialis Obedientiae significatione respondens se injunxisse sig∣nificat dilecto nostro Cardinali D' Estrée ut expedito itinere ad Urbem, proficiscatur
Regiam nobis mentem super negotio Rega∣liae declaraturus, operae pretium duximus eidem remedio supersedere dum Cardinalis adveniat: nobis enim persuademus Regem ipsum interim curaturum ut omnia in lo∣cum pristinum reponantur, quod si secus accidat, & praefatus Archiepiscopus ab eo{que} causam habentes pergant in te, tuis{que} Ca∣nonicis aliis{que} Ecclesiae tuae beneficiatis vex∣andum praetextu Juris Metropolitici, tuae Pastoralis Sollicitudinis & expectatae Con∣stantiae partes erunt, te tuam{que} Ecclesiam adversus eorum attentata, Sacrarum Cano∣num & Apostolicarum Constitutionum ope armis{que} defendere; Ad nos autem quod pertinet, omne tibi a Pontificia Authori∣tate, & Paterna Charitate nostra Presidium pollicere debes; tibi Apostolicam Benedi∣ctionem peramanter impertimur. Datum Romae apud Sanctum Petrum sub annulo Piscatoris die 17 Julii, 1680, Pontificatus nostri Anno quar∣to. Marius Spinola.
XVIII. The Bishop of Pamier's Letter to the King's Procurer-General, complaining of the Hardships he was put to, and of the Sentence past against him in the Court of Parliament of Paris. Monsieur, ON m'a signifié un Arrest du Parlement donné à vostre Requeste, par lequel je suis assigné pour voir casser comme abu∣sives deux Ordonnances que j'ay renduës contre les fermiers & sousfermiers de la Sacristie de l'Eglise de Pamies, qui en ont pris le revenu au nom d'un Ecolier nommé de Sainte Barbe de Luzant à qui le Roy a donné en Regale certe dignité reguliere. Comme je sçay l'honneur qui est dû au premier corps de la justice du Royaume & à vous, Monsieur, qui occupez une place si importante, j'ay reçue cette signification avec toute la consideration que je dois. Mais vous agréérez que je vous represente jcy les raisons pour lesquelles je ne me sçau∣rois resoudre de deferer à cét Arrest.
1. Comment pourrois-je porter les frais d'un grand Procés, puis que l'on me reduit dans un état où j'ay assez de peine à vivre par les charitez de mes amis, ayant esté dé∣poüillé depuis 20. mois de mon revenu, sans qu'on m'ait laissé les alimens necessaires que l'on ne refuse pas mesme aux plus cri∣minels, encore que l'on sçache que je n'ay pas de Patrimoine & que je continuë toû∣jours à faire mes fonctions autant que mon áge & mes infirmitiez me le peuvent per∣mettre. 2. Quelle Justice est-ce que mon Eglise pouroit esperer du Parlement, dont nos Rois ont esté obligez de moderer l'ardeur qu'il a témoigné depuis le commencement de ce siecle pour étendre la Regale sur toutes les Eglises du Royaume, la regar∣dant comme un droit de la Couronne, & comme une grand prerogative pour luy∣mesme à cause de l'attribution qui luy a esté faite de tous les procés qui concernent cette matiere: quoy que pendant plusieurs sie∣cles leur Jurisprudence a estè contraire, & qu'il ait toûjours pris pour regle unique de ses Arrests la possession du Roy, que les Procureurs Generaux estoient obligez de prouver: Comme vous l'avez remorqué fans doute, Monsieur, par la lecture des Registres & des Livres des Autheurs qui en
ont parlé. Aussi les circonstances de l'Arrest qui m'a esté signifié marquent assez claire∣ment la disposition du Parlement à mon e∣gard. Car entr'autres il y donne une action criminelle contre deux Ecclesiastiques, qui ne subsistent que par la part que je leur donne aux charites que l'on me fait, sans qu'ils soint coupables d'autre crime que d'avoir signifié deux de mes Ordonnances, qu'ils n'avoient pas droit d'examiner non plus que les Huissiers les Arrests qu'ils sig∣nifient. 3. Comme il est certain que la Regale ne peut appartenir au Roy que par la con∣cession de l'Eglise, il est constant que c'est aussi à la mesme Eglise d'en connoistre & d'en juger, ainsi qu'elle a fait dans le Concile General de Lions; & quand le Concile n'auroit pas parlé là-dessus si clai∣rement qu'il a fait, ce seroit au Pape & non pas à un Tribunal seculier à nous en don∣ner le veritable sens. De sorte que mes Ordonnances ne sont que l'execution d'un Concile Oecumenique qui n'est pas seule∣ment contre des particuliers, mais contre toute sorte de personnes (dans quelque estat & quelque degré d'honneur qu'ils puissent estre, quantocunque dignitatis honore praefulgeant) estans visible que je n'ay pas excede l'ordre du Concile, je ne puis pas estre traduit dans
une Cour seculiere comme si j'avois abuse de mon authorité. Pour la mesme raison je n'ay pas douté que je ne pusse, & que je ne dusse mesme user des Censures contre des Laïques, & qu'ils ne fussent sujets à l'Eglise pour la matiere dont il s'agissoit, c'est à dire pour des choses spirituelles & consacrées à Dieu. Il m'a paru mesme que j'avois d'autant plus de fujet d'en user de la forte, que les revenus que l'on usurpoit n'estoient que de simples dixmes speciale∣ment affectées pour le Seminaire & autres choses requises á la celebration des Divins Offices, lesquels si Dieu n'y pourvoit, on sera contraint de cesser, pour le deffaut de ce qui est necessaire pour les celebrer avec la bien-seance convenable à leur sainteté, & que d'ailleurs aucun Regaliste n'avoit enco∣re fait aucun acte de justice pour colorer cette usurpation. 4. Pour le consentement qui peut avoir esté donné à l'execution de la Regale par d'autres Prelats dont les Eglises n'y estoient pas sujettes, cela ne doit pas estre tiré à consequence contre moy qui n'y ay eu au∣cune part: Au contraire les observations & les actes protestatoires & derogatoires qui ont precedé & qui ont suivy l'enregi∣strement de plusieurs Prelats & la resistance que le Clergé avoit toûjours faite, sont
des preuves manifestes qu'ils ont reconnu le droit de l'Eglise, & qu'ils n'y ont pas renonée absolument, ny mesme déferé bien volontairement à la declaration de sa Ma∣jesté, mais pour la seule crainte de recevoir un traitement pareil a celuy que je souffre & d'attirer sur leurs Eglises des maux qu'ils croyent encore plus considerables; outre que leur consentement ne pourroit pas suf∣fire pour faire prejudice à l'Eglise, ce que vous pouvez voir Monsieur, dans l'acte que je fis à Mr. l'Archevéque de Toulouse & que je prends la liberté de vous envoyér. Au reste en recusant la jurisdiction du Par∣lement je ne pretends pas me rendre juge en ma propre cause, mais seulement execu∣ter les Ordres de l'Eglise, comme j'ay dit, dans une matiere spirituelle, des Conciles, des Papes, des Evéques representant Dieu sur la terre; & si j'ay usé de Censures, ce n'a esté qu'apres l'autorité de plusieurs Con∣ciles Oecumeniques qui ont jugé que la matiere estoit assez importante pour y pou∣voir employer de semblables peines. Vous sçavez Monsieur, qu'un Eveque n'est pas moins obligé de défendre mesme au peril de sa vie les libertez & les immunitez de l'Eglise que les veritez de la foy, comme le prouve tres-solidement l'Auteur du Sermon que j'ay crû estre digne de vous estre pre∣senté.
La bréveté d'une Lettre ne me per∣met pas Monsieur, de m'étendre d'avantage comme je le pourrois faire, si vous le desiriez ainsi & si vos occupations importantes vous donnient le temps de lire ce que je poutrois vous marquer. Je me contente de vous conjurer que comme vostre charge vous oblige à conserver avec soin les veritables droits de la Couronne, la qualité de Chré∣tien demande aussi que vous n'en procuriez pas l'execution au prejudice de ceux de l'Eglise, & que vous ne vous priviez pas par la des benedictions du Ciel que vous bonnes oeuvres attiront sur vous & sur vo∣stre illustre famille, & que je vous souhaite de tout mon coeur estant parfaintment. Monsieur, Vostre tres-humble & tres-obeissant Serviteur François Evesque de Pamies.
XIX. The Bishop of Pamier's Letter to the Father de la Chaise, the King's Con∣fessor, representing to him the injustice of those Courses which he so much pro∣moted. Mon Cher Pere, IL y a déja long-temps que j'avois fait dessein de vous écrire; mais je croyois d'une part que cela seroit inutile, & d'ail∣leurs qu'on croiroit que je me plaindrois de vostre conduite à mon égard, plustost par le mouvement de quelqu'interest particulier ou de quelque mécontentement propre, que par un zele de justice des droits de l'Eglise; neanmoins afin que Dieu ne me reproche que j'aye omis aucun des moyens que je connois pour contribuër au bon sue∣cés de l'affaire oû je me trouve engagé par sa providence pour la liberté de son Epouse, je me suis rendu à l'avis de mes Amis qui m'ont conseillé d'hazarder cette Lettre laissant à Dieu de la faire reüssir selon le dessein de la mesme providence; certes
si j'avois quelque chagrin contre vous ou contre vostre Compagnie, j'ay trouvé as∣sez d'occasions où il sembloit que l'amour de la verité & de la justice, mesme le bien public m'obligeoient de me plaindre, & mes plaintes eussent paru justes à toutes les personnes équitables; mais il me semble que l'humilité & la Charité Chrestienne de∣mandoient que je gardasse le silence jusqu'à ce qu'une necessite indispensable m'obligeât de parler; la profession d'estre non-seule∣ment Chrêtien, mais encore Religieux vou∣droit aussi que quand bien vous ou vostre Compagnie auriez reçeu quelque mécon∣tentement de moy, vous ne vous en venge∣assiez pas aux dépens de la gloire de Dieu & des interests de son Eglise. Vous vous souvenez bien mon tres-cher Pere que lors que j'eus le bien de vous voir à Paris, vous me dites en parlant de cette troupe Eccle∣siastique qui vous faisoit la Cour pour ob∣tenir des Benefices par vostre faveur, que c'estoient des Loups beans: En quelle con∣science donc avez vous pû faire donner à ces Loups ce qui estoit destiné pour un troupe au de brebis innocentes? Vous n'avez pas mesme attendu que les Loups ouvrissent la bouche pour vous demander la proye, que vous la leur avez fait jetter, car comme les Canonicats de mon Eglise
Cathedrale obligent à la vie reguliere que Dieu m'avoit fait la grace de retablir dans mon Chapitre par l'autorité du S. Siege a∣vec celle du Roy, ceux qui ne desirent les Benefices que pour le revenu n'auroient eû garde d'en briguer, obligeant au veû de pauvreté, & à la vie commune, si vous ne les aviez prevenus, sollicitez & attirez par l'esperance de procurer la secularisation de cette Eglise. Je sçay bien que le P. Ferrier avoit eu le mesme dessein touchant cette secularisation, mais la difficulté qu'il y avoit trouvée du costé de Rome & les oppositi∣ons que les parties interessées & veritable∣ment legitimes luy avoient faites, vous de∣voient assez faire connoistre la volente de Dieu sur ce sujet. De sorte que je ne puis comprendre sur quels principes vour deviez servir d'instrument à la destruction d'un oeuvre que vos propres Confreres dont le témoignage ne vous sçauroit estre suspect en cecy, ont esté obligez d'approuver & de loüer en plusieurs rencontres à cause de la gloire que Dieu en retire & de l'edification qui en revient â l'Eglise. Je puis encore moins comprendre sur quels fondemens vous avez pû dire publiquement que Dieu seroit plus glorifié que mon Eglise fut fer∣mée? Mais mon cher Pere qu'est devenu ce profond respect, cette soumission aveugle
que vous témoigniez autrefois avoir pour ce S. Siege, que vous vouliez maintenant detruire ce qu'il a rétabli? Et s'il est vray comme quelques-uns le presument, sans fon autorite, mais mesme contre sa volonté. Car on a remarqué dans les derniers Brevers que vous avez fait donner pour des Cano∣nicats de ma Cathedrale, qu'on n'y a plus mis, comme on avoit fait au commence∣ment, la cause qui obligeoit les pourvus à prendre l'habit ou faire le Noviciat & la profession; & qu'on a trouvé mesme des expediens pour exempter ceux qui y étoi∣ent obligez par leurs Brevets. Il y a des Gens de bon sens & de vos meilleurs Amis qui attribuënt cette conduite au dessein que vous avez de secularifer mon Eglise, nonobstant mes oppositions & celles de mon Chapitre & sans aucune autorité du Pape: Est ce vous acquitter ainsi de la promesse que vous aviez faite tant pour ceux que vous aviez engagez dans ces Benefices qu'à quelques Ecclesiastiques de mon Diocese? Ne pensez pas que le public ne prenne garde que vous abusez de la creance que vous donne sans l'esprit du Roy la qualité de son Confesseur non seulement pour luy faire violer sans qu'il le connoisse, les droits de l'Eglise; mais encore pour autoriser en son nom des injustices qu'on auroit peine
à croire, si elles ne paroissoint par acte. Il est impossible, mon R. P. que vous a∣vez étudié solidement la matiere de la Re∣gale, sans que vous ayez reconnu que le Roy n'a pas ce droit dans mon Diocese non plus que dans plusieurs autres, & qu'ainsi vous causez un prejudice tres-notable à mon Eglise en persuadant à sa Majesté de se l'attribuër; que si vous n'estes pas assez instruit en cette matiere; comment pou∣vez vous contribuër à ce que nous soyons traitez en cette occasion presque avec la mesme rigueur qui si vous croyiez que nous sommes ennemis de l'Eglise & de l'Etat? Et quand il seroit aussi veritable que le Roy a ce droit, qu'il est certain qu'il ne l'a pas, pourriez vous faire traiter d'une ma∣niere si rude & par des procedez si irregu∣liers & contraires à toutes sortes des Loix, un Evéque & un Chapitre qui ne pecheroit que par un Zele peu éclairé de conserver les droits de l'Eglise & obeïr à un Concile? La briévete d'une Lettre ne me permet pas de marquer icy mille raisons qui prouvent invinciblement la justice de ma cause, ny les mauvais traitemens que nous souffrons depuis si longtemps soûs ce pretexte, outre que je vois que vous n'avez pas tant besoin d'estre instruit que d'estre bien disposé à nostre égard, ce que nul auter que Dieu
ne peut faire; car la crainte d'encouris l'indignation du Roy s'il venoit à connoistre qu'il avoit esté flatté par celuy qui avoit plus d'obligation que tout autre à luy dire les veritez necessaires à son salut & à sa ve∣ritable gloire, la repugnance à avoûër que vous avez failli, le desir que vous avez de decrediter un Evéque qui n'approuve pas toutes vos maximes parce qu'il ne les trouve pas assez conformes à celle de Jesus-Christ & de ses Saints sont des difficultez insurmontables à tout autre qu'à celuy qui est le Maistre des coeurs: Croyez moy mou tres-cher Pere, car comme jay l'honneur d'estre Evéque j'ay droit de vous donner des avis, vous avez sujet de craindre d'en∣courir non-seulement l'indignation de Dieu en violant les immunitez de son Epouse; mais encore celle du Roy qui est trop éclairé pour ne venir pas un jour à les connoistre, & trop juste pour ne pas condamner le mal où vos conseils l'auront porté contre son intention, au lieu que Dieu & le Roy vous sçauroient bon-gré que vous fissiez l'office de son Confesseur, & que vous travailiez solidement au salut de qui vous avez la con∣science en main. Ceux que vous engagez malheureusement dans les Censures vous auroient plus d'obligation, si vous leur ap∣prenniez à se rendre dignes des Benefices &
non pas à y entre contre l'ordre des S. S. Canons, & tous les Gens de bien beniroient Dieu de vous voir employer vostre credit pour le bien de l'Eglise si vous portiez sa Majesté à se contenter de joüir de la Regale aux Dioceses où ses Predecesseurs en estoi∣ent en possession du temps du Concile de Lion qui a deffendu de l'entendre. Je finis mon tres-cher Pere en vous representant qu'il seroit de vostre charité de laisser mourir en paix un pauvre Eveque que l'âge de 70. ans de vie & les travaux de 34. d'Episcopat sont juger n'estre pas loin de sa fin, & de ne souffrir pas qu'une assemblée de personnes qui se sont consacrées à Dieu & qui le servent avec beaucoup d'edification fût dissipée par des Gens qui paroissent vi∣siblement ennemis de la vie reguliere. J'es∣pere que Dieu nous fera la grace d'estre fi∣delle jusqu'à la mort, & que je ne laisseray jamais quelques traitemens que je reçoive de vostre part, d'estre M.R.P.V. François Evéque de Pamies, A Pamies le—Juin 1680.
XX. The Vicar-General of Pamier's Letter to the Pope, concerning their Sufferings for opposing the Regale. Beatissime Pater, post humilima pe∣dum oscula. SIm licet Pulvis & Cinis, ea tamen fre∣tus Benignitate, qua nos & oviculas no∣stras, tanquam bonus Pastor, Apostolicis hu∣meris gestatis & sano gremio confovetis, non verebor ad vos Dominum meum loqui, & in Sanctitatis Vestrae sinum meas & toti∣us Ecclesiae Appamiensis lachrimas infunde∣re; sed quid lachrimas maerorem{que} loquor, cum nobis potius laetandum sit, si quidem vere Christiani sumus illud{que} Pauli unicui{que} nostrum usurpandum, Repletus sum conso∣latione, superabundo gaudio in omni tribula∣tione nostra; quanta sit haec nostra Tribu∣latio, Pater Sanctissime, enarrare quis queat? Dum enim Sanctitas Vestra, pen∣dente hujuscemodi negotii tractatione, non solum poneret fulmina, sed etiam efferatos
adversariorum animos omnimodis paternae Clementiae officiis delinire conaretur, no∣bis{que} & induciarum fides & spes propediem ad futurae Pacis securitatem pollicerentur, quae repentina tempestas ingruit? Quod∣que, sede vacante, nihil innovari passi su∣mus, & nullâ ratione adduci unquam po∣tuimus, ut Anathematizatos & publicé de∣nunciatos Regalistas in Communionem no∣stram admitteremus, Bonis, Patriâ, Liber∣tate spoliamur, erramus in Solitudinibus egentes & angustiati vinculis, cathenis{que} constricti, per oppida circumducimur & Blasphemamur; extra Synagogas jaciunt nos, & ne quid Mali nostris desit, in occi∣sionem etiam mittimur. Stupenda sed vera loquor, Pater Sanctissime, extinctus enim est, sublatus{que} durissimi carceris incommo∣dis R. P. Carlat Canonicus & Prior Noster; felix, quod libertatis Ecclesiasticae prima victima cecidit. Fuerat ille Venerabilis Epis∣copi nostri in restauranda hujus nostri Ca∣pituli sanctiore disciplina adjutor & admi∣nister praecipuus; jam{que} senescebat suae no∣strae{que} saluti sedulo invigilans: Cum ecce afflictis nobis & lachrimantibus repente jussu Regis, ut ferebatur, eripitur: nulla innocentissimo seni, qui vel vultu Sancti∣moniam spirabat, habita est Reverentia, la∣boribus, morbis, & extrema  confectus
rapitur, trahitur{que} in ultimos Galliae recessus, ibi{que} in quadam Arce includitur, quae cum sit ad littus Mediterranei Maris sub pestilenti Aere posita, Seni exitio fuit. Morienti, ac tan∣tum beneficium cum lacrimis postulanti, Ec∣clesiae Sacramenta negata sunt, quod cujus Scelere factum sit nondum plane scire potui∣mus. R.P. Michaelem d'Aubarede Presbyterum virtutibus quam natalibus nobiliorem quem putabamus exilio tantū mulctatū, audivimus ductum Ladonium, ibi{que} in carcerem detru∣sum: & tam arcta Custodia inclusus con∣strictusque est, ut quid de eo factum sit poe∣nitus ignoremus, nisi quod, a non levi Auctore didicimus, multas illum initio ae∣rumnas esse perpessum, quod{que} fidem su∣perare videtur multi temporis inedia esse cruciatum. Caeteri Canonici Regulares fratres mei, a sedibus suis pulsi in variis Op∣pidis inter se & a nobis dissitis tristissimam, secundum hominem loquor, moestissimam{que} vitam agentes exulant. Ego peccator pec∣catorum{que} primus solus relictus sum, ut haec nunciarem Vobis, quanquam quis relictum intactumque putet, hominem toties pro∣scriptum publicatum{que} qui tam diligenter quaeritur, quem si quis in domum admiserit, in summo honorum, libertatis{que} periculo versatur; ad quem capiendum Gubernator ac Praeses Provinciae ingentis Mercedis pol∣licitatione
omnes & singulos adhortatur, cui vincula, triremes, & acerbiora fortasse supplicia parata funt? Sed haec mala B. P. culpae meae at{que} adeo flagitia in Caput me∣um justo Dei judicio incurrerunt, quum sodales mei, quorum consortio nec mundus nec ipsi digni sumus, non ut hostes sed ut filii, non in poenam sed in probationem & in praemium flagellentur. Sic praemimur, sic affligimur, Beatissime Pater, nec mitius habentur quicun{que} su∣specti sunt auxilio consilio{que} aut propensi∣ore Benevolentia nos prosequi. Non modo periculosa sed etiam vitiosa res est Amicitia nostra, quemadmodum multi experti sunt. In his est Albigensis Ecclesiae Theologus no∣mine du-Perrie, Vir inter Nostrates, si quis∣quam alius de Ecclesia bene meritus, Pietate, Eloquentia, Rerum Ecclesiasticarum Peri∣tia conspicuus, quem bonus quis{que} Episco∣pus non modo complectitur ut Filium, sed etiam audit ut Magistrum, reveretur ut Patrem; hunc in extremam senectutem vergentem in ultimos Burgundiae fines Man∣dato Regis ablegarunt, non alio certe Cri∣mine reum, nisi quod adversariis in suspitio∣nem venerit venerabili Episcopo nostro & nobis Concilium aliquando dedisse. Simi∣li{que} poena & ob eandem causam affectus est Presbyter alius nomine Jacobus Casabone, qui
Ecclesiam Tholosonam eximia Pietate, & Academiam singulari Doctrina cohonestat. Oboriuntur mihi lacrimae cum de nobili quodam Adolescente mentionem facio, qui quod mandatum aliquod nostrum Appami∣ensis Ecclesiae foribus appendisset, in hor∣rendas subterranei Carceris tenebras con∣jectus, ibi{que} foetore aliis{que} loci molestiis propemodum enectus est, ita ut pro magno beneficio habuerit hinc eductum ad Tribu∣nal extraordinarii Judicis magna cum ig∣nominia trahi, capitis{que} periculum adire. Plus illi nocuit unus è nostris qui Consan∣guineus ejus est quam profit habere patru∣um Insignem militia virum & rebus gestis toto orbe conspicuum. Quare profecto si quo alio Argumento intelligi potest quan∣ta sit Adversariorum acerbitas odiorumque Magnitudo, ex hoc certe colligi potest. Alios permultos omitto P. Sanctissime pro causa Dei extrema quae{que} subeuntes; sed haec quanta quanta sint, levia fortasse vide∣buntur, si conferantur cum lugendo illo Schismate quo in Ecclesia Appamiensi Tu∣nica Christi inconfutulis scinditur. Illustrissimus Archiepiscopus Tholosanus non dubitavit Presbyterum quendam mit∣tere, qui per summam vim nobis omnibus expulsis in Ecclesia sede vacante vices illius ageret, revera ut Sponsam Christi Rega∣listis,
ut vocant, conculcandam adulteran∣damque traderet. Religio magna est, & summa Pietas huic Vicario Generali partem contra Canonicas Sanctiones Authoritatem armis quibus tota Regio perstrepit asserere, Anathemate per∣culsos homines Altaribus admovere, plebem Christianam ad celebranda cum excommu∣nicatis Mysteria, & ab his suscipiendis Sa∣cramenta renuentem licet, & fidem sacra∣rum legum obtestantem immissis militibus adigere, Monachos & Sanctimoniales in obsequio remanentes ab usu Sacramento∣rum arcere, a Monasteriis suis ejicere, So∣rorem Episcopi nostri alteram Tabitham Viduam Dynastae Mirapicensis, quod nomen inter Primates Regni celebre est, quae jam multos annos erudiendis in Christiana Dis∣ciplina pauperibus puellis, cum nonnullis piissimis Virginibus quas secum habebat, summa cum humanitate vacabat Appamiis expellere; Seminarii domum qui locus Ora∣torii piis lectionibus Religioso silentio sacer fuerat, Regalistarum Clamoribus, aliis Compotationibus in multam noctem pro∣tractis foedandam relinquere: Appamiarum Praetori Provinciae Luttensis  Aquitaniae Praesidi eorum{que} Ministris Eccle∣sias ac Monasteria diripientibs, Rapinis{que} at{que} Sacrilegiis cuncta miscentibus non so∣lum
non resistere, sed omni ope, favore ad∣niti praesto esse. Tot tantis{que} flagitiis ex uno Schismate tanquam ex fonte profluentibus accessit Haeresis: Aiunt enim Homines isti Ecclesiae perduelles, ac publicis instrumen∣tis consignati, istud Regaliae non aliunde adscitum, non Ecclesiae Sanctae Sanctis bene∣ficiis partum, sed ipsis Regibus innatum, ipsorum{que} Sceptro ac Diademate naturae legibus ita esse conjunctum, ut ab iis nulla ratione divelli possit, hoc est licere Laicis quatenus Laici sunt, si modo rerum potian∣tur, praecipua Episcoporum obire munia, Canonicos qui sede vacante spiritualem Ju∣risdictionem habent efficere, Theologos ad praedicandum Dei Verbum mittere, Paro∣chis curandas Animas tradere, & alia id genus multa praestare; qui Error, Pater San∣ctissime, Henricianae Haeresi a sancta sede profligatae non modo simillimus est, sed ea multo pejor, multo pestilentior; quod enim Henriciani obscure & quasi post Am∣bages innuebant, illi palam profitentur & praedicant: Ex investituris veniebatur qui∣dem ad Haeresim & sensim nec nisi per mul∣tos gradus; ast in Regalia statim se prodit, & quae olim investituris erubescebat, os frontem{que} Meretricis assumit Haeresis. Hujus praecipui Fautores, beatissime Pa∣ter, horrens lugens{que} dictu R. R. P. P. So∣cietatis
Jesu censentur & sunt: non mentior Petro, quem scio coram se mentientes verbi sui mucrone aliquando interemisse. Hi enim privatis Colloquiis, publicis Professo∣rum Prelectionibus, Libris quo{que} in lucem editis Regnantium in rebus Ecclesiasticis evehunt & extollunt Authoritatem. Hi Sanctae Sedi honesta referentes obsequun∣tur; hi summos Pontifices, quorum summa Constantia in vendicanda Ecclesiae libertate omnium soeculorum venerationem pro∣meruit, tanquam aut plus aequo credulos, aut nimium in Conciliis praecipites, aut rei gerendae parum idoneos spernunt, Scom∣matis Dictoriis{que} proscindunt. Non habent alios Regalistae Consiliarios Patronos & Ami∣cos, per hos fit illis in Aulam aditus, horum Consilio Suasu{que} multi, quos antea Religio impediebat, fractis tandem Conscientiae re∣pagulis in beneficia Regaliae, ut mentiuntur, obnoxia impetu facto irruerunt, ut non im∣merito quispiam dixerit Regaliae parentem esse Patrem Ferrier; nutricem & Advoca∣torem P. de la Chaise; praeconem P. Maim∣bourg; Defensores & Advocatos, at{que} adeo milites, caeteros omnes Jesuitas. Quod qui∣dem mirum nullatenus videri debet, pin∣guiores enim Regaliae fructus Societas per∣cipit, cum hujusmodi beneficia ex nutu fere ac voluntate Confessarii conferantur a
Principe. Nulla re magis Societatis poten∣tia protrahitur; hoc illi familias devincit, hoc innumerabilem clientum Multitudinem conciliat. Quod pertinet ad Archiepisco∣pum Tholosanum, ut est Jesuitis in caeteris rebus addictissimus, ita in opprimendis no∣bis conjunctissimus. Hujus erga Sanctam Sedem animum nulla res magis demonstrat, quam quod nuper recepto Apostolico Brevi praestitit. Vocat illico Regium Notarium, jubet{que} scribere nefas esse sibi ullum Ponti∣ficium Rescriptum injussu Regis aut legere aut aperire, eam esse concordatorum fi∣dem, sic ferre Ecclesiae Gallicanae libertates. O miseram Libertatem omni servitute cru∣deliorem, qua durissimo Soecularium po∣testatum jugo Gentium Regina subjicitur, tot{que} habet Ergastula, quot sunt in Gallia Laicarum Jurisdictionum curiae. Ad istiusmodi calamitosam libertatem pertinet, quod nuper in Senatu Tholosano, Authore Illustrissimo Archiepiscopo factum est: Nam cautum fuit ne quis imposterum Apostolicum Breve reciperet, quod non esset prius in Consilio Regis excussum, ip∣si{que} probatum, mulcta{que} immensa dicta iis qui secus fecerint. Ego vero quod Breve miserim & obtu∣lerim hactenus Canonicis nostris, in poenam nescio quam gravissimam certe diligentissi∣me quaerimur.
Ea est, Sanctissime Pater, non Appami∣ensis modo sed totius Ecclesiae Gallicanae misera & aerumnosa Conditio. Haec ad Sanctitatem Vestram supplices manus tendit, quantum per Vincula, quibus atteritur, tendere licet. Consolamini (precor) mae∣rentem, erigite conculcatam, victam cap∣tam{que} redimite. Pereat, Pater Sanctissi∣me, spes adversariorum nostrorum, qui to∣tam vincendi fiduciam in eo collocant, quod tristissimum acerbissimum{que} luctum Chri∣stiano Orbi Universo offerre debet. Quor∣sum enim negotium istud in tam longas tam{que} affectatas moras protrahitur; sperant nimirum nec dissimulant extinctis tum A∣lectensi tum Appamiensi Praesulibus, qui duo soli conatibus eorum abversabantur, litem istam ex ipsorum voluntate sub alio summo Pontifice finem propediem habituram. Quod quidem vel cogitasse Scelus & Parri∣cidio simillimum, sed haec tam impia, tam crudelis expectatio Divinae Providentiae munere decipietur. Vivit, & vivat in multos annos Sanctitas Vestra, Ecclesiam Gallicanam non modo Regaliae compedibus liberabit, sed alia quo{que} vetustiora ejus vincula catenas{que} confringet, cujusmodi sunt, Extincta prorsus Ecclesiastica Jurisdi∣ctio, clericorum omnium pessundata digni∣tas, & ea portenta quae vocant Appellatio∣nis
abusus, quibus per summam temerita∣tem, & supra Episcopale Fastigium, & supra sanctam Sedem erigit sese soeculare Tribu∣nal. Haec sunt vota, S. Pater, non nostra duntaxat, sed omnium faere tum Clericorum tum Episcoporum totius Galliae, quorum eadem est nobiscum sententia, etiamsi prae metu longe sit dispar agendi ratio. Quod ad nos attinet, Pater Beatissime, immensas Sanctitati vestrae gratias referimus, non so∣lum quod nos causam{que} nostram paterna benignitate prosequuta sit, sed etiam quod ad nostram tenuitatem scribere indignum Apostolico Vertici minime putaverit. Quâ in re, B. Pater, omnibus summorum Apo∣stolorum vestigiis insistitis, nam & Paulus pro Onesimo fugitivo mancipio, & Discipu∣lus Domini Electae Foeminae Canonicam scripsit Epistolam. Nos ea res & honore cumulat, & solatio plurimum afficit; nam quemadmodum Machabei inter tot adversa, nullum aliud rebus suis Perfugium Fomen∣tum{que} quaerebant, habentes solatio Sanctis∣simos libros; ita nos tot Malis jactati, tot Incommodis affecti, vix tanti doloris Acer∣bitatem sentimus, habentes pro solatio Apo∣stolicas Literas. Ignoscat praecor Sanctitas Vestra, quod ad ipsam minus decenti Charta scribere non dubitaverim, istud non meae culpae sed fugae tribuendum est; vestros{que}
Apostolicos Pedes exosculari, sacra{que} ve∣stigia revereri gloriatur, Sanctitatis vestrae humillimus obsequentissimus famulus, & in Christo Filius, JOANNES CERLE, Presbyter & Vicarius Generalis. XXI. A Summons from Father Oliva, Gene∣ral of the Jesuits, to the Fathers de la Chaise and Maimbourg, to ap∣pear at Rome. REverendi in Christo Patres, Pax Christi. Vestrae amborū, Societatis nostrae, ut ip∣sius universae Ecclesiae res omninò postulant, ut quamprimùm nobis coram ipsi sistatis. Quapropter vobis mandamus Nomine Do∣mini Nostri Jesu Christi ut vi obedientiae, cujus voto Deo per manus nostras solem∣niter vos obstrinxistis & demùm sub poena peccati mortalis, ut acceptis hisce Literis, nullâ interjectâ temporis morâ, omnique
praetextu negotiorum quorumcumque sub∣lato, nullique qùam Provinciali ad quem scripsimus re communicatâ Romam expedi∣tiore itinere ad nos conveniatis, Dei vo∣luntatem audituri per verba eorum de qui∣bus Christus ipse dixit: Qui vos audit, me audit. Romae die 8 Novemb. 1680.
AN APPENDIX Containing some Curious Letters AND PAPERS.
AN APPENDIX. I. A Letter designed to have been sent to the Pope, in the Name of the Clergie of France, setting forth the Corruptions of the Jesuits Morals, and demanding an effectual Condemnation of their Do∣ctrines. Beatissime Pater, ETsi haec Epistola, exponendis Sanctitati Vestrae gravissimis Ecclesiae vulneri∣bus instituta, in tristi & luctuoso Argu∣mento tota versabitur, par est tamen ut in ejus Limine debita Deo Optimo Maximo Gratiarum Actione fungamur, & nobis∣metipsis gratulemur, quod Sanctitatem ve∣stram
in Apostolica Sede constitutam jam ha∣beamus, apud quam quaestus & gemitus no∣stros libere nec inaniter effundere possimus. Hac fiduciâ freti, B.P. de Gallicanae Ecclesiae morbis cum ipsa agere decrevimus, quorum summam, ne multis immoremur, ita bre∣viter complecti licet. Cum duabus potissimum rebus continea∣tur Christianorum Salus, Fidei Dogmatum sinceritate, & integritate Morum; varie jam inde ab Ecclesiae primordiis utraque tum Demonum fraude, tum Hominum im∣probitate tentata est; nunquam tamen vel acrius vel astutius quam novissimis istis, mi∣serrimis{que} temporibus: Nam antea solum∣modo aperte oppugnabatur Mysteriorum Fides, nec Moribus fere aliunde periculum, quam ex pravis Exemplis, non autem ex Dogmatum perversitate, at{que} ita errores fidei adversos facile declinabant quicum{que} ad Columnam Firmamentum{que} veritatis, hoc est Ecclesiae Autoritatem, firmiter ad∣haerescentes ex ejus placitis Fidem suam me∣tiebantur: nec malorum Exemplorum vim aegre frangebant, quibus curae erat ad bo∣norum vitam, & nondum hominum fallaciis obscuratam Evangelii normam attendere. Quanquam autem jam a quampluribus Sae∣culis multa se in Christianum populum Vi∣tiorum Colluvies infuderit, superioribus
tamen temporibus, trepida & male sibi conscia, formidinis aliquid & pudoris prae se ferebat; ita cum in Scelera prolaberentur multi, nulli tamen palam Scelera defende∣bant. Nunc vero, B. P. tetrior multo & per∣niciosior Lues Ecclesiam invasit, augescenti nimirum indies improborum multitudini ad∣junxit se certorum Scriptorum, ut mitissime loquamur, improvida Temeritas, quibus id demum videtur fuisse propositum, fovere hominum cupiditates, extinguere Consci∣entiae morsus, deserendi Peccati stimulos evellere, iter ad Vitia sternere, eadem Tae∣nebris quae Luci, Falsitati quae Veritati jura tribuere, Sceleribus deni{que} Formidinem, Pudorem, Infamiam, ipsum{que} Sceleris no∣men detrahere. Nec veremur, B. P. ne nos in hoc studio efferri, ac veritatis metas praetergredi judicet Sanctitas Vestra, post∣quam inspexerit adjunctam huic Epistolae earum opinionum Collectionem, quae tan∣quam purae ac securae ab istis Scriptoribus traduntur & Christianis instillantur. Co∣horrescet, sat scimus, ad infandorum Dog∣matum inauditam absurditatem Apostolica vestra Pietas, & talia Catholicis iis{que} litera∣tis in mentem venire posse vix ipsa prima fronte suis oculis credet; sed eo tamen ca∣liginis prolapsos illos ac devolutos esse mi∣nus
fortasse mirabitur, si quibus armis in∣structi, quibus ex praejudiciis imbuti ad ex∣cutiendas morum regulas accesserunt, at∣tentè cogitare dignetur. Etenim ut Sanctitati vestrae notissimum est, non ea, quam passim in quibusdam nuperis Scriptoribus animadvertere est, Le∣vitate & Temeritate morum Doctrina ab antiquis olim Patribus tradebatur, sed lon∣ge gravius, cautius & severius: Cum enim illis persuasum esset, quod est a Sancto Tho∣ma verissime & prudentissime dictum, Om∣nem Questionem in qua de peccato mortali agitur periculose determinari, quia error quo non creditur Peccatum mortale, quod est Peccatum mortale Conscientiam non ex∣cusat a toto, licet forte a tanto; nemo cum tanto periculo de moribus sententiam ferre, nec opiniones suas in vulgus spargere pre∣parabat: ita{que} illi, quos vocant Conscientiae casus, non ab aliis fere quam ab Episcopis, & plerum{que} in Provincialibus Synodis defi∣niebantur, ex quorum sensibus consilia sua moderabantur, inferiores Sacerdotes super difficultatibus gravioribus, Episcopi Sedem Apostolicam persaepe consulebant, quae con∣sultationes tot eximia nobis summorum Pontificum Responsa pepererunt. At gliscente Ingeniorum licentia cautiones istas nihil morati complures recentiores Theo∣logi
omnia audacter definire ceperunt, id{que} quo securius facerent illud imprimis amolli∣ri Periculum studuerunt, quod ex inveni∣endi veri difficultate nascitur. Eam ad rem opportunissimum ipsis visum est veritatem & falsitatem, ignorantiam at{que} cognitionem Divinae Legis pari securitate donare: quid enim, hoc pacto in definiendis morum con∣troversiis, in sequendis Theologorum re∣sponsis periculosius esse potest? Ergo ut id conficerent, tametsi omnes antiqui, Patrum vestigia sequuti, nullam primorum & im∣mutabilium legis aeternae Principiorum ig∣norantiam invincibilem esse, & a peccato quenquam excusare, unanimi consensu sta∣tuissent; Isti contrario plane Decreto fiden∣ter asseruerunt in illis aeternae & immutabi∣lis Legis principiis ejusmodi ignorantiam dari posse, quae & vinci nequeat & a Prae∣cepto legis divinae violatores eximat. Hoc Decreto semel ab ipsis stabilito & fixo, ut latius pateret illa legis divinae sine peccato violandae venia & facultas, de au∣gendo eorum numero qui veritatem invin∣cibiliter ignorant, sedulo laborarunt at{que} in eorum Classem Statum{que} retulerunt eos omnes, quibus in aliqua questione non certa veritas effulget, sed rationes tantum utrin{que} probabiles. Quamvis enim nemini eo statu posito desunt inveniendae veritatis
viae, si modo quae veritatis ignaris & sapi∣entiae indigentibus cum Scriptura, tum recta Ratio praecipit, audire non refugiat; istis tamen placuit Ignorantiam in illis invincibi∣lem agnoscere, at{que} adeo generali Decreto probabilem opinionem, tametsi falsam & ae∣ternae legi contrariam, sequentibus plenam a peccato immunitatem largiti sunt. At{que} ut va∣ga illa & promiscua, quam optabant, proba∣bilis conjectandi libertas nullis limitibus ar∣ctaretur, etiam iis qui probabilibus opinioni∣bus ita distrahantur, ut tantum alteram simul & probabiliorem & tutiorem judicent, sen∣tentiae simul & minus probabilis & minus tu∣tae sequendae, plenam veniam concesserunt. Nihil ad omnem opinandi licentiam su∣pererat, nisi ut efficerent probabilitates istas securitate donatas nusquam non facile re∣periri: quod egregie praestiterunt, tum qui ad bene agendum & citra culpam sufficere dixerunt quantumvis tenuem & dilatam probabilitatem, etiam eam quae non nisi probabiliter probabilis sit, tum qui ad con∣ciliandam opinionibus probabilitatem satis esse voluerunt quatuor, imo unius Doctoris authoritatem, quod ita certum est apud ip∣sos, ut qui Sententiae quatuor Doctorum suffragio unius probabilitatem abroget, eum tardum & hebetem dicant, imo tam repugnantia loqui contendant, quam qui
lineae Longitudinem neget, & superficiei Latitudinem; hinc si quis Episcopus ali∣quam propositionem damnet quam simul nonnullorum Doctorum esse fateatur, con∣tinuo ipsum ut Doctrinae expertem, imo veri discendi incapacem traducunt, ejus decreta contemnunt ac ludibrio habent. His Decretis Novitii instructi, illi Doctores mirum prorsus B. P. quas in morum doctri∣na strages ediderunt; quas tenebras clarissi∣mis Dei legibus offuderint; quot nova & inaudita prodiderint; quam multa omnibus retro saeculis fixa & immota convulserint! Nec id imprudentibus ipsis invitis{que} factum ultro id ipsi fatentur, agnoscunt, praedi∣cant, & quasi summum Dei in Christianos beneficium jactant: Dum videmus, aiunt, tot diversas sententias in rebus moralibus circumferri, divinam remur Providentiam fulgurare, quum ex opinionum varietate jugum Christi suavius sustinetur: melius e∣nim viatori plures vias exponi quam unam, cum recta inveniri actio possit, sive jux∣ta unam, sive juxta alteram opinionem homines operentur. Hoc vero quid aliud est nisi summum Dei beneficium dicere, quod Casuistarum industriae veritas in mul∣tis divinae legis Capitibus obscurata sit, cum cognita veritate una sit via omnibus neces∣sario insistenda, latente vero & probabili∣tatum
tenebris obtecta tot diversae nec mi∣nus securae suppetant, quot probabilitates. Quid igitur sperandum B. P. ab homi∣nibus pro luce tenebras diligentibus, nec modo veritatem non optantibus aut quae∣rentibus, sed de ejus ignoratione sibi gra∣tulantibus, eam summi beneficii loco ha∣bentibus, atque id pro totius moralis suae Theologiae Basi constituentibus; nisi ut in optatas sibi tenebras altissime devolveren∣tur, ut omnia vincerent at{que} inaudita pa∣rerent opinionum monstra. Nec spes istas seu metus potius eventus frustratus est, ubi{que} enim infoelicissimo proventu tam horrenda morum Dogmata fruticarunt, aut non ali∣unde melius intelligi possit quantum in ip∣sis illis primariis Dogmatibus veneni sit, ex quibus tam virulenti rivi defluxerunt. Hoc est illud B. P. gravissimum & luctuo∣sissimum Ecclesiae malum, quod bonos om∣nes tamdiu acerrimo dolore torquet. Haec∣cine, aiunt, est illa Doctrinae Christianae san∣ctitas & integritas, quae Philosophis os ad∣miratione defixit, quae plures ad fidem Ethnicos adduxit, quam ipse miraculorum fulgor confirmavit, haeccine Scribarum & Pharisaeorum justitiam supergressa Christia∣norum pietas; adeone rem rediisse, ut istis Doctoribus tametsi Catholicis nulli deterius corruptiusque de moribus senserint, nec
Scribae nec Pharisaei, non Philosophi non ulli Gentiles; quis enim unquam tot cavil∣lationes ad Dei Leges eludendas excogi∣tarit? Quis plus cupiditatibus indulsit; quis hominum Societati exitiosora Dogmata commentus est? Quis deni{que} veritati mi∣nus studuit? Ergo cum tantam Perniciem tantum{que} Dedecus ferre jam tacite, nec Belgica, nec Gallicana Ecclesia posset, de Casuistarum licentia reprimenda serio co∣gitare ceperunt Episcopi: Optassent qui∣dem illi noxios illos poenitus libros aboleri, quod olim in poenitentiales quosdam libel∣los erroribus refertos a Galliae Episcopis in Concilio tum Cabilonensi secundo, tum Pa∣risiensi sexto noverant constitutum; sed quin intermisso jam Provincialium Synodorum usu, separatim quis{que} grassanti se pesti op∣ponere coactus fuit, satis habuerunt singuli sibi subditum vindicare, quod ut praesta∣rent, alii istarum corruptelarum collectio∣nem a Casuistarum Apologista consarcina∣tam generali censura damnarunt; alii di∣stinctis etiam notis affecerunt certa Capita, quorum venenum praesentius populis{que} ma∣gis timendum judicabant: nec Episcoporum conatibus Romanae Ecclesiae defuit auxiliū, nam Alexander VII. Pont. Max. delatam ad se Casuistarum Apologiam Proscripsit, & quadraginta quinque Propositiones ex
variis Casuistis excerptas duabus constitu∣tionibus confixit, & quid de tota hac luxu∣riantium indies laxarum opinionum licen∣tia sentiret, luculenter orbi Christiano de∣claravit, dum magno sibi esse maerori signi∣ficavit complures opiniones doctrinam Chri∣stianam relaxantes & animarum perniciem inferentes, partim antiquatas iterum suscita∣ri, partim noviter prodere, & summam il∣lam luxuriantium ingeniorum licentiam in∣dies magis crescere, per quam in rebus ad Conscientiam pertinentibus modus opinan∣di irrepsit omnino alienus ab Evangelica Simplicitate & Sanctorum Patrum Doctri∣na, quem, si pro recta regula fideles in praxi sequerentur, ingens sequeretur Chri∣stianae vitae corruptela. Quibus verbis cum pravis illis morum decretis, ipsum quoque unde fluxerunt probabilitatis Dogma per∣stringit & damnat. Verum si libere apud Amantissimum Pa∣trem suppliciter{que} loquendum est, tametsi ex istis variorum Episcoporum Censuris, citatis{que} summi Pontificis Alexandri VII. constitutionibus adversus laxiores Casuistas, Religiosores qui{que} & Doctiores utrum{que} habent quod sequantur, non habent tamen simpliciores quo verum a falso satis in his concertationibus internoscant, nec in haec Dogmata proniores quo satis ab ipsis revo∣centur,
nec his Doctrinae flagitiis infecti quo satis fortiter coerceantur. Nam Censuras quidem Episcoporum Scriptores illi eorum∣que fautores facile contemnunt, dum in iis versantur locis quae eorum jurisdictioni non parent, at{que} ut ipsis Episcopis quasvis con∣tumelias ingerunt, ita & Decretis suis non difficile sui similes Patronos inveniunt. Nec desunt illis artes, quibus ipsam Summi Pon∣tificis censuram eludant; nam praeterquam quod Alexander VII. certas tantum Doctri∣nae labes ad specimen ex ipsorum libris col∣ligi curavit, plures intactas praetermisit, quae res ipsis gloriandi ansam praebuit, probatum Summo Pontifici fuisse quicquid ab ipso non esset expresse damnatum; ipsa quo{que} Censurae verba illorum effugiis patent & cavillationibus. Cum enim Propositiones non alia certâ & determinatâ notâ quam Scandali affectae sint, promptum erit homi∣nibus in cavillando exercitatissimis illud obtendere, falsitatis minime damnari senten∣tias; quae tantum scandalosae perhibentur, neque ab ipsis sua probabilitas abjudicari & erui ex ipsorum placitis aliter poterit, quam si contrarium transeat in Articulum Fidei; Nil enim obstare contendunt quin remoto scandalo scandalosis tot opinioni∣bus, sed nihilominus probabilibus, pro li∣bito quis{que} utatur & ex iis mores suos di∣rigat.
Quamobrem post Apostolicas illas Constitutiones nil quidquam de confidentia remiserunt, imo Decreta sua eô confi∣dentius tenere perstiterunt, quo elanguisse jam putant Episcoporum Zelum, seque a∣deo inposterum omni jam periculo defun∣ctos. Hujus ergo mali tam contumacis natura nos adduxit, ut ad Sanctitatis Vestrae praesi∣dium confugeremus, quo supremae suae Au∣thoritatis eminentia humilitatis nostrae co∣natus adjuvet, sparsam{que} per universam Ec∣clesiam pestem eâ potestate recidat, quâ universam Ecclesiam moderatur & regit; quod ut expeditius facere possit, nefando∣rum quae ab istis traduntur Dogmatum col∣lectionem simul transmisimus, non omnes quidem illorum corruptelas complexi, quod infiniti cujusdam laboris opera fuisset, sed eas demum quas Apostolica Authoritate damnari magis Ecclesiarum nostrarum ratio postulat, tum illud ostensuri, praeter eas quas Alexander VII. proscribendas censuit, innu∣meras alias in istis terris extare non minus perniciosas minus{que} detestandas. Quanquam autem tanti Pontificis exem∣plum secuti, consulto a recitandis Authorum Nominibus abstinuimus, ne quisquam isto∣rum errorum damnatione sibi injuriam pu∣tet fieri, eoqueab amplectenda varietate
retardetur; tamen ea fide in iis colligendis versati sumus, ut nihil Apostolico vestro Judicio subjiciamus, quod non ab aliquo recentiorum scriptis traditum sit, vel ab ipsis palam & aperte in Ecclesiis nostris prae∣dicatum. Haec sunt B. P. quae Sanctitati, vestrae cum plurium Episcoporum & Synodorum, presertimque Africanorum Patrum exemplo exponenda putavimus, in quo non modo nostros de Ecclesiae malis, eorumque reme∣diis, sensus poterit agnoscere, sed insuper in Apostolicam Sedem & in te privatam Re∣verentiam, ut & obsequium plenamque in ipsius Zelo, Pietate, & Charitate fiduciam, qua magis & magis indies animati, conti∣nuas pro ejus diuturna incolumitate & aeterna faelicitate, Deo Optimo Maximo preces ardentius adhibemus. Ducentae Opiniones sequuntur proscin∣dendae.
II. A Translation of the former Letter. Most Holy Father; ALtho' this Letter which is designed to open to your Holiness the most hea∣vy Wounds of the Church, is to run in a most sorrowful and lamentable strain: yet it becomes us, in the beginning of it, to offer up our humble thanks to Almighty God, and to congratulate our happiness, that your Holiness being now advanced to the Apostolick See, we may freely pour out our Complaints and Sighs before you, and not lose our labour. It is in this con∣fidence, most Holy Father, that we resolve, at this time, to lay before you the Diseases of the Gallican Church; of which we shall give you a brief summary, in as few words as can be, without insisting on too many Particulars. Since to the salvation of Christians, two things are chiefly necessary, Purity of Do∣ctrine, and Holiness of Life: Both these have been ever since the first beginnings of the Church variously assaulted, as well by the wickedness of Men, as by the craft of
Satan; but this was never done with more violence, and greater subtilty, than in these last and worst Times. In former Ages the Mysteries of our Faith were openly at∣tack'd; but as to the Morals of Christians, all the danger of corrupting these, was on∣ly from ill Examples, and not from any perverse Doctrine: And so all those who firmly adhered to the Pillar and Ground of Truth, that is, the Authority of the Church, measuring their Faith by its Decrees, did easily avoid being intangled in those Er∣rors that were contrary to the Faith. Nor was it difficult for them to overcome the force that bad Examples have in corrupting Mens Manners, when they set before their eyes the Patterns of good Men, and the Rule of the Gospel, not then darkned by the Fallacies of Men. And altho' an in∣undation of Vice has now for many Ages spread over the Christian World; yet in former Times, Vice being conscious to its self of its own deformity, did not appear without some fear and shame; so that even when many were committing Crimes, yet none did openly defend them. But now, most Holy Father, a fouler and more pernicious Plague has broken in∣to the Church; and to speak in the softest terms, the inconsiderate rashness of some
Writers, has joined its strength with the vast numbers of wicked Men that do every day increase: and those Writers seem to have set this before them as their chief de∣sign, to cherish the Lusts of Men, to quench the horrors of Conscience, to pluck out all the Stings that dispose Men to forsake their Sins, to prepare a way to Vice, to give the same advantages to Darkness and Falshood, that belong to Light and Truth; and in a word, to take away the Fear, the Shame, the Infamy, and the very Name of a Crime from the most criminal Actions. We are not afraid, most Holy Father, that your Holiness will apprehend that we are carried too far in our Zeal, or that we trans∣gress the bounds of Truth, when you have considered the Collection of Opinions which we send along with this Letter, which are both delivered and infused into the Minds of Christians by those Writers, as being not only Holy, but such as they may securely follow. We know your A∣postolical Piety will be struck with horror at the unheard of absurdity of those Im∣pious Doctrines; and at first sight you will hardly believe your own eyes, or think that they could ever enter into the minds of learned Catholicks: But you will cease to wonder at their having fallen into such
mists of Error, if you will be pleased nar∣rowly to observe how they were furnished, and with what Prejudices they were cor∣rupted, when they went to examine the Rules of Morality. It is well known to your Holiness, that the Rules of Morality were not delivered by the Ancient Fathers with that lightness and rashness that we find generally used by some Modern Wri∣ters, but they did act with much more gra∣vity, caution, and severity; for being perswaded of that which S. Thomas said, no less prudently than truly, That it is dan∣gerous to determine any Question con∣cerning mortal Sin; for the Error by which a Sin that is truly mortal, is believed not to be mortal, does not entirely dis∣charge a Man of Guilt, tho' perhaps it may lessen it. And the danger being so great, none was forward to give his Judg∣ment about Moral Matters, nor to scatter his Opinions among the Vulgar; so that those difficulties, now called Cases of Conscience, were seldom defined but by the Bishops, and for the most they determin∣ed them in Provincial Councils; and the inferior Priests governed themselves by their Decrees. In cases of greater difficul∣ty, the Bishops did often ask counsel from the Apostolick See, which has brought
forth many Consultations, and renowned Decisions, from former Popes. But to that has the license of Mens minds grown, that many later Divines, lit∣tle regarding the wariness of past Ages, have begun to define all things boldly; and that they might do this the more se∣curely, they determined, in the first place, to remove that danger which rises from the difficulty of finding out Truth. In order to this, they found it fit for their Ends, to make Truth and Falshood, the Knowledg or Ignorance of the Law of God, to be things equally good and safe. And what can be more dangerous than this Method of defining Controversies about Morality, or of following the Resolutions of such Divines? That they might esta∣blish their Maxims, they did, in opposition to all ancienter Writers, who tracing the steps of the Fathers, had unanimously esta∣blished this as a Principle, That there could be no such invincible Ignorance of the Pri∣mary and unchangeable Rule of the eter∣nal Law of Nature, as did excuse from Sin; most confidently and publickly assert, that even in those Points that belonged to that eternal and unchangeable Law, there might be such an Ignorance as could not be overcome; and did excuse Transgressors
from all obligation to obey those Divine Laws. This being once established and fixed as a ground-work, they did labour most di∣ligently, to make that License of breaking the Laws of God, without sin, as large and as comprehensive as could be, whereby they might encrease the number of those who were invincibly ignorant; and they allowed such to be of that number and rank, who had not yet found out the cer∣tainty of Truth in any Question, but were only led by Reasons which seemed proba∣ble on both sides. It is true, there is no Man in such a state that he cannot find out the Ways of Truth, if he does not refuse to hearken to those things, which both the Scriptures and right-Reason offer to those that are ignorant of the Truth, and void of Wisdom: Yet these Men thought fit to allow of an invincible Ignorance in such Men; and by an universal consent they declared, That such as followed a probable Opinion, tho' it were false, and contrary to an Eternal Law, were free of all Sin in so doing. And that the loose and promiscu∣ous liberty of following what was proba∣ble, which they so much advanced, might be restrained by no bounds; they allowed it to those who were distracted in their
thoughts, by contrary probable Opinions, yet so that one of them seemed both more probable and safer, and gave them leave to follow that side that seemed less probable, and less safe. There wanted nothing to bring in a com∣pleat Licence in Opinions, but to order the Matter so, that it were easy to find such probabilities which they had declared to be so safe, almost in every Case; and this they have done in a very singular man∣ner, both by asserting that it was enough, in order to the avoiding of sin, and doing well, if there was ever so slight and thin a ground of probability, such as made it probably probable. As also to extend this Probability to all Opinions, they said, The Authority of four Doctors, nay, and of one Doctor, was sufficient: and this passes among them as a thing so certain, that he is accounted a slow and dull Man, who, up∣on the Authority of one Man, will deny a Probability which has the judgment of four Doctors favouring it. And this they ac∣count as great an absurdity, as if a Man should say, that a Line had no length, and a Surface had no breadth. And from hence it is, that if a Bishop condemns a Proposi∣tion which he acknowledges to be taught by some Doctors, they presently reproach
him, as a Man not only ignorant, but in∣capable of true Knowledg, and both de∣spise his Decrees, and expose them to the scorn of others. It is marvellous, most Holy Father, what mischief these young Doctors, possest with those Principles, have done in the Doctrine of Morality; what Mists of Darkness they have brought upon the clearest Laws of God; what new and unheard of Doctrines they have brought forth; and how many things, that in all former Ages were fixt and unmoved, they have shaken: Nor have these things fallen out without their knowledg, or unforeseen by them, but they confess them of their own accord, they acknowledg and avow them, and boast of them, as if they were great Blessings of God to the Christian Church; for, say they, when we see so many different Opi∣nions in Moral Matters, we see therein the Providence of God appearing most re∣markably; for by that variety of Opini∣ons, the Yoke of Christ is more easily born, as it is better for a Traveller, if he knows more ways than one, since thereby means are found out to make their Actions lawful, which-soever of those different Rules Men do follow. And what does all this amount to, but to reckon it a Blessing of God, that
by the industry of those Casuists, the Truth is darkned in many Points of the Law of God; and that whereas the Truth being known, there is but one way in which all must necessarily go, that being now hid and covered with the darkness of their pro∣bable Doctrines, there are now as many different Ways, (and all these alike safe) as there are Probabilities. What is then to be hoped for, most Holy Father, from Men that love Darkness more than Light, that not only do not desire to find the Truth, or search after it, but re∣joice in their ignorance of it, reckoning that a great Blessing, and making it the Foundation of their Moral Theology, but that they should be carried headlong into that most profound Darkness which they have so much desired, that they should overcome all Obstacles, and bring forth Monsters of unheard of Opinions. Nor has the Events come short of those Hopes, or rather of those Fears; for every where, by a most unhappy fruitfulness, they have brought forth such horrid Opinions about Morality, that we can no way so well un∣derstand, as by them, how much Venom there was in those their principal Tenets, from which such poisoned Streams have flowed.
This is, most Holy Father, that most grievous and doleful Mischief in the Church, which has so long afflicted all good Persons with a most sensible sorrow. Is this, say some, that Holiness and Purity of the Christian Religion, that of old stop'd the Mouths of the Philosophers, and drew more Heathens to the belief of it, than the very Miracles themselves did? Is this the Piety of Christians, that was to exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pha∣risees? Are things now come to that, that none have treated of Morality worse and more corruptly than those Doctors, tho' they are called Catholicks; neither Scribes nor Pharisees; neither the Philosophers, nor any Heathens whatsoever, have gone be∣yond them. Who did ever invent so ma∣ny Cavils for eluding the Laws of God? Who have granted greater Indulgence to Appetite and Lust? Who did ever devise Doctrines more destructive to humane So∣ciety? And, in a word, who has studied less to preserve Truth than they have done? Since then neither the Belgick nor the Gal∣lican Churches could longer lie under such Mischiefs, and the reproach of these Do∣ctrines, the Bishops began seriously to con∣sider how they should repress the License of the Casuists. They wished that these
mischievous Books might have been de∣stroyed, which they found was done long ago by the Bishops of France, both in the second Council of Chalons, and the sixth at Paris, when they discovered some Peni∣tentiary Books full of Errors. But the use of Provincial Synods being now disconti∣nued, every one of them was forced to set himself against that growing Contagion; so they went about it singly, every one en∣deavouring to preserve those that were un∣der their care. In order to this, some of them did, by a general Censure, condemn a Collection of those Corruptions which had been gathered together, by one that undertook the vindication of the Casuists; others did more particularly censure some Heads, the Poison of which seemed more formidable, and the Danger nearer. Nor was the aid of the Roman See wanting to the endeavours of these Bishops; for Pope Alexander the 7th, did condemn the Apo∣logy of the Casuists, which had been dedi∣cated to himself, and set out two Decrees against 45 Propositions that were drawn out of several Casuists: and did openly and fully declare to the World what he thought of that License of venting loose Opinions, which did so much prevail; and expressed the great grief he took, when
he found so many Opinions that did re∣lax from the strictness of the Christian Doctrine, and were destructive to Souls, to be either revived again, or of new de∣vised, that thereby the License of wanton Wits did every day increase more and more; and that from thence a way of determin∣ing Matters of Conscience was taken up; which was totally different from the sim∣plicity of the Gospel, and the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers; and if the Faithful did follow it in their Practice as a right Rule, there must needs follow upon it a huge cor∣ruption in the Lives of Christians. In which words, as he condemns their wicked Opinions about Morality, so does he mark and condemn the Doctrine of Probability it self, from whence the others flowed. But if we may be allowed to speak free∣ly, as well as humbly, to our most loving Father; Tho' the more Religious and Learned find, both in the Censures of the several Bishops, and the fore-cited Consti∣tutions of Pope Alexander the 7th, what they ought to follow in opposition to those looser Casuists; yet those that are more sim∣ple and ignorant, are not furnished with that, by which they may sufficiently distin∣guish Truth from Falshood in these Con∣tests; and such as are inclinable to these
Opinions, find not that which may effectu∣ally preserve them; and those who are corrupted with those flagitious Doctrines, are not severely enough restrained by them. As for the Censures of Bishops, these Wri∣ters, and those who follow them, do despise them, they being in Societies that do not submit to their Jurisdiction; and as they throw all sorts of Reproaches on the Bi∣shops themselves; so it is not hard for them to find Men like themselves to patronize their Opinions. Nor are they wanting to find out Arts, by which they elude the Censure of the Pope himself. For as Alex∣ander the 7th did only gather some few of their more defiled Tenets out of their Books, as an Essay, leaving many more un∣touched; from whence they have taken occasion to boast, as if the Pope approved all but that which was expresly condemned by him; so the very words of the Decree he made, are subject to some Shifts and Ca∣vils. For these Propositions being stig∣matized with no Brand that was certain and fixed, and being only marked as scan∣dalous, it will be easy for Men that are most expert at Cavilling, to pretend, that Tenets which are only declared scanda∣lous, are not at all condemned as false; so that the Doctrine of Probability is not cen∣sured:
nor can it be quite removed any other way, than by declaring the Doctrine opposite to it, an Article of Faith; For, say they, nothing hinders but that the Scandal being removed, all these scanda∣lous Opinions, which are notwithstanding probable, may be followed by every Man at pleasure, and that he may govern his Life by them. So that they have abated nothing of their Confidence, notwithstand∣ing those Apostolical Constitutions; nay, on the contrary, they continue to maintain their Doctrines so much the more confi∣dently, because they judg the Zeal of the Bishops to have become more remiss; so that for the time to come, they reckon they are out of all danger. The consideration of this Mischief, which is of so obstinate a kind, has induced us to fly to your Holiness for aid, that the height of your supream Authority may be assisting to our poor endeavours, and that by that Power by which you preside over, and govern the whole Church, you will root out that Contagion which is spread over it all; and that you may do this the more ea∣sily, we have sent to you herewith a Col∣lection of those impious Doctrines which are taught by these Men, in which we have not taken in all their Corruptions; for that
had been a Work of infinite labour, but have only offered to you those which the state of our Church makes it necessary, that they be condemned by your Apostolical Authority: We also thought it fit to repre∣sent to you, That besides those Propositions which Pope Alexander the 7th condemned, there are a vast number of others vented in these parts, that are no less pernicious and detestable. And tho' following the Example given us by so great a Pope, we have designedly avoided the citing the Authors by Name, that so none of them may think there is any injury done them by the condemning of their Errors, and they be thereby kept back from embracing the Truth; yet we have collected them with so exact a fidelity, that we offer nothing to come under your Apostolical Judgment, but what has been either printed by some Modern Author, or has been preached by them publickly, and without disguise, in our Churches. These are the Particulars, most Holy Fa∣ther, which we thought fit to lay before your Holiness, following the Examples of many Bishops and Synods, and chiefly of the Affrican Fathers; by which you may not only gather what our sense is of the Diseases of the Church, and of the Reme∣dies
that are proper to them, but what is the Reverence and Obedience which we pay to the Apostolick See, and to your self in particular, together with that en∣tire confidence which we repose in your Zeal, Piety, and Charity, by which we are daily more and more encouraged to offer up our Prayers most earnestly to Almighty God for the long continuance of your Health here, and for your eternal Happi∣ness hereafter. II. A Circular Letter of the Agents of the Clergie of France, against their set∣ting their Hands to the Letter that was intended to be sent to the Pope. Writ∣ten in June 1677. Monsieur, L'Application continuelle qu'a le Roy pour conserver la paix & la tranquil∣lité au dedans de son Royaume pendant qu'il en estend si glorieusement les limites,
allant particulierement à ce qui regarde l'Eglise, dont il est l'illustre Protecteur, l'oblige à prevenir les maux qu'elle pou∣vroit souffrir par des divisions Dome∣stiques. Sa Majesté ayant donc esté avertis que l'on avoit composé une Lettre pour le Pape au nom de plusieurs Evesques du Royaume, dans la quelle sous pretexte de Reformation des Moeurs, quelques parti∣culiers se sont imaginé estre necessaire que l'on demanda a sa Sainteté au nom des Egli∣ses de ce Royaume, en renouvelle des an∣ciennes contestations que sa Majesté a si prudemment assoupies; Elle nous a com∣mande, Monseigneur, de vous escrire pour vous informer de qui ce passe, & vous ex∣horter au mesme temps de seconder autant qu'il vous sera possible ses intentions, & de vous dire de sa part que vous preniez bien garde de ne vous pas laisser surprendre a la fausse lueur de cette Lettre, ou d'autres Semblables qu'on pourroit vous addresser: mais de les regarder toutes comme des se∣meurs de troubles, & en un mot de n' y pas mettre votre Signature. Le Roy nous a commandé aussi de vous declarer sa volonté là dessus le plus fortement qu'il nous sera possible, apres quoy nous croyons qu'il se∣roit inutile de vous faire connoistre plus
amplement l'importance de la Matiere, comme nous ne scaurions douter, Monseig∣neur, que vous ne luy donniez des Marques de votre parfaite obeissance, en cette ren∣contre. Il ne nous veste plus qu'a vous a∣seurer de la nostre, & respectueux attache∣ment avec le quel nous sommes, Monseigneur, Votre humbles & vos obeissant Ser∣viteur les Agens generaux du Clergé de France. L'Abbe de Valbelle. L'Abbe de Grignan.
III. A Letter of Mr. Arnaud to Mr. Pom∣pone, then Secretary of State, con∣cerning their Design in writing to the Pope. June 14. 1677. J'Ay receu, Monsieur, mon tres cher Neveu, avec un profond respect ce que vous m'avez mandez de la part de sa Majesté. Ce m'a este une grande consolation d'appren∣dre par ce qu'elle a eü la bonte de vous dire qu'elle a este jusque i'cy contente de ma conduitte: J'espere que cette derniere rencontre ne luy fera pas changer de senti∣ment, & ne luy donnera pas sujet de me soupconner d'avoir voulu renouveller les Contestations, que la paix qu'elle a procuré, a l'Eglise avec tant de zele, & de sagesse, a si heureusement assoupie. Il' n'ya rien cer∣tainement dont je suis plus eloigne. Mais je vous supplie d'assurer sa Majesté que nous n'avons pas eu la moindre pensée, ni mon Amy ni moy que la Lettre dont on a fait lire une partie dans le conseil peut estre prise pour un renouvellement de ces conte∣stations,
ni qu'il y eut rien en cela qui peut dé plaire à sa Majesté: Et qu' ainsy mon Amy estant prié d'y travailler il l'a fait sans aucun scrupule; car il ne nous est pas venu dans l'esprit que sa Majesté peut trouver mauvais, que des Evesques, qui par un de∣voir indispensable de leur charactere, sont obligez de maintenir la puréte de la mo∣rale de Jesus Christ contre les erreurs qu'on enseigne dans leur Dioceses, & que les ayants censures, ont veu les Auteurs de leur mauvaises maximes s'elever contre leurs censures par des responses publiques impri∣mez sons leur nom, ayent voulu avoir re∣course au St. Siege, comme on a fait si souvent en de semblables occasions: & que pour aller à la source du mal, ils ayent dû representer à un Pape aussi Saint & aussi êclairé qu' est celuy cy, les principes generaux de ces Opinions dangerenses, A sin qu'il luy plust d'en juger. Je vous avoue que bien loing d'apprehender qu'il y eut rien en cela qui peut blesser personne, il a creu que ce seroit manquer à Dieu de refuser ce qu'on de∣mandoit de luy en cette rencontre, & c'est toute la part que mon amy & moy avons eu dans cette Affaire. Car pour ce qui est de faire signer cette Lettre a d'autres Eves∣ques, c'est de quoy nous ne nous som∣mes melez en aucune forte, mais ce qui
nous a empeché de voir que cela peut re∣nouveller des contestations, c'est que cette Lettre ne devant pas estre publié, mais seu∣lement envoyé au Pape, on n'en eut rien sceu que ce Pape n'en eut Jugé: & le juge∣ment du Pape ne peut qu' appaiser; & non pas exciter des contestations. Et il n'y a personne qui en puisse moins discovenir que ceux qui ont pretendu jusques a pre∣sent, se distinguer des autres par la profes∣sion d'une obeissance aveugle pour le Saint Siege, de sorte que ce seroit ne les croire pas sinceres, que de douter qu'ils n'euessent receu avec une entiere submission tout ce que le Pape eut determiné sur ces Points importans de la morale Christienne, en suite de cette Lettre: & aussi c'est une voye seur d'arrester les contestations qu'on a sur cela: puisqu'il n'y a pas lieu de croire que ceux qui sollicitent la St. Siege de juger de ces matieres ne fussent pas aussi dans la dis∣position de deferer a son jugement. Je doute qu'on n'ayt envoyé au Roy avec cette Lettre une liste des propositions dont on vouloit demander la condamnation au Pape: parce qu'elles ont quesque chose de si choquante & de si contraire non seule∣ment au salut des ames, mais aussi au bien des estats & a la sureté des particuliers; qu'en les voyant ou n'auroit pas peu n'en
estre point frappé, & ne pas souhaitter qu'ellessoient si solemnellement condamnees qu' aucun n'ait plus la hardese de les soute∣nir. Mais pour revenir a moy, je ne sçay si ce ne seroit point prendre trop de liberté de vous dire que sa Majesté pouroit estre encore plus satisfaite de la parfaite obeis∣sance que j'ai rendu a ses ordres, & a la passion si louable qu'elle temoigne avoir de maintenir une paix qui luy est si glorieuse, si elle estoit informée des infractions conti∣nuelles qu'on y a fait de l'autre costé, & de la patience qu'il a fallu avoir pour souffrir sans se defendre, la diffamation, & les mes∣disances publiques dont on n'a point cessé de nous dechirer; & nous traittant d'Here∣tiques & de Rebelles au St. Siege & descri∣ant tous les livres de pieté aux quels on croioit que nous avions quelque part, com∣me dangereux & suspects, quelques approu∣vez qu'ils fussent par les Evesques & par les Docteurs. Mais ce qui fait voir plus que toute chose combien la passion de nos En∣nemis est desraisonable, c'est qu' apres qu'on a toujours pris pour le plus ordinaire pretexte des calomnies qu'on a respandues contre nous, notre pretendue separation d'avec le St. Siege, quand ou a veu cette mesdi∣sance destruite par les Lettres d'un Pape dont la pieté est si generallement reconnue, & que
le Zele de sa Majesté pour la Religion a tant contribué a mettre sur le Siege de S. Pierre, on nous en fair un nouveau Crime, on a voulu faire passer le temoiguage du St. Siege en notre favour pour un esset de Cabbale, on a pretendu qu'il estoit impor∣tant de rabattre par des humilliations, & des mortifications ce triomphe qu'on sup∣posoit faussement que nous saisons de ces Marques de la bonne volente de sa Sainteté: de sorte qu'a regarder les choses humaine∣ment notre condition est bien malheureuse, puisqu'il n'y a rien qu'on ne tourne en ve∣nin contre nous. Car si on s'imagine quoi∣que sans raison, qu'on est Malcontent de nous a Rome, nous sommes des Rebelles & des Schismatiques qui ne vouloit point de Pape, & des qu'il paroit qu'on y a de la bonte pour nous, nous meritous qu'on nous rabaisse, & qu'on nous traite dure∣ment. Je sçay bien que sa Majesté est trop juste & trop equitable pour avoir ces pen∣sées: Mais il est certain qu'il y en a qui les ont, & ou a sujet de craindre qu'on ne tache de les luy inspirer. Mais nous espe∣rons neant moins que le Roy dissipera ces nuages par les lumieres de sa sagesse, & qu'a l'Example de ces grands Princes dont il pos∣sede si eminemment les qualites heroiques, qui ont mis leur plus grande gloire a ne
condamner personne sans l'entendre, il voudra bien s'abaisser jusques a nous faire sçavoir ce qui luy pouroit faire de la peine dans nôtre conduitte, comme elle a daigné faire dans cette rencontre. La maniere si bonne dont vous me te∣moignez que sa Majesté a parle de mon Amy & de moy me fait prendre cette con∣fiance. Car il paroit qu'il n'a pas regardé cette Lettre comme une chose mauvaisé en soy, ni qui fut contraire au bien de l'Eglise au de l'estat, mais seulement qu'elle a ap∣prehendé qu'elle ne fit revivre les Disputes passées. Je vous ay dit ce que j'eu pensois; mais sans prejudice a ce que d'autres plus êclairez que moy en pouront juger, il me suffit que sa Majesté soit persuadée de la sincerite des mes intentions, & de la constance inêbran∣lable de mon zele pour son service. Ce seroit peut estre manquer de respect que de sou∣haitter qu'on eut pu luy lire une si longue Lettre. Vous luy en direz ce que vous ju∣gerez à propos. Je n'ay receu votre derniere Lettre que ce matin: je n'avois pas compris jusque la que sa Majesté eust souhaitté que vous me fissies sçavoir ce qu'elle vous avoit dit, & ainsy dans la doute si elle agreeroit que je me justifiasse, je serois demeuré dans le silence, en laissant a Dieu de faire con∣noistre la droitures de mon coeur & l'extreme
eloignement que j'ay de troubler la paix de l'Eglise. Je n'ay rien a vous dire d'avantage de gens nouris dans l'obscurité d'un Cabinet ne connoissant le grand monde & ne sça∣chant guere bien faire leur Cour, mais je vous parle bonnement & sans façon, par∣ceque je remets à votre sagesse à faire de ce cy tel usage qu'il luy plaira. V. A Letter written by the Father la Chaise, to Mr. Spon, persuading him to change his Religion. Monsieur, JE crois que vous ne doutés point que je n'ay grande inclination de servir vos li∣braires de Lion; Mais l'Affaire n'estant pas de mon resort je ne puis gueres m'en me∣sler. J'en diray neanmoins un mot a Mr. le Chancelier. Je vous remercie de tout mon coeur de vôtre histoire de Geneve, ou il y a beaucoup de choses fort curieusas. J'atten∣dray avec Impatience la premiére section de vos miscellanea que vous me faites espe∣rer,
tout ce qui me vient de vous m'estant toujours fort agreeable & fort cher, a cause du merite de l'Autheur, & a cause de l'ami∣tié que je sçay qu'il a pour moy je souhaitte plus ardemment que je ne puis vous l'ex∣primer, qu'estant aussy esclairé que vous l'estes vous prófitiez, de vos propres lu∣mieres & que vous Servant des connoissan∣ces de l'antiquité pour l'avantage leplus solide que vous en puissies tirer, vous re∣pariez le malheur que vous avez eu de naistre parmi des nouveautez, & mettiés vôtre Conscience en repos, & vôtres salut en assurance. Il faut du moins que vous me pardonniez les voeux ardens que je fais souvent pour cela, & la sincerité avec l'a∣quelle vous en parle coeur a coeur & en secret l'homme du monde qui est leplus cordialement. Monsieur, Votre tres-humble & tres-obeis∣sante Serviteur, le Pere la CHAISE.
VI. Mr. Spon's Answer, giving the Rea∣sons that prevailed with him not to turn. ENtre les recherches que j'ay faites, vous ne devez pas douter, Monsieur, que je n'en ayes fait sur l'antiquité de la Reli∣gion ou Dieu ma fait naistre. Je me suis pour cela defait autant que j'ay pu des pre∣jugez que la naissance & l'education m'avoi∣ent pu inspirer pour voir si j'ai decouvrirois cette nouvaute que vous avéz trouvé de∣nous reprocher: aprés cela j'ay souvent consulté auxheures du matin & du soir que je destine aux devoirs de pieté celuy que St. Augustin appelle la beauté ancienne & nouvelle, pour apprendre de luy si nostre Religion est ancienne comme nous le croions, ou nouvelle comme vous le preten∣dés, mais plus j'ay medité sur chaque point & plus j'ay consulté les Oracles Divins, plus aussy j'ay esté convaincu quelle estoit tres ancienne, & que si elle paroissoit nouvelle, ce n'estoit qu'a ceux qui en entendent parler
sans la connoistre, comme estoit cette par∣tie de la terre qu'on appelle nouveau mon∣de a ceux qui en firent la decouverte. J'ay cru mesme qu'on pouvoit dire que nostre Religion est aussy ancienne que le monde, & que celle qui n'a pas cette anti∣quité ne peut prendre a juste titre d'estre la veritable. Car il ne faut point imaginer que Dieu qui est immutable desaprouvát le fond d'une Religion qu'il auroit luy mesme enseignée des le commencement, & qu'il en establist une autre toute diffe∣rente. Jesus Christ n'est point venu pour abolir la Loy, mais pour l'accomplir, le Christianisme n'est donne pas a proprement parler, une Religion differente du Judäisme: les Chrêtiens sont la veritable posterité d'¦Abraham: un homme fait est le mesme homme qui fut autre fois Enfant quoy qu'e∣stant en, faut il beguayast, il eust un Peda∣gogue & fust vestu selon son aage. Le Ju∣däism estoit l'Enfance de la Religion, il beguayoît & ne voioit qu'au travers d'un voile, il avoit pour Pedagogue la Loy qui le menoit au Messie & il estoit revestu de quaintité de Ceremonies qui devoient cesset lorsque le Messie qu'elles figuroient seroit venu. En fin la malediction de cette Loy, le Voile de Moyse, & les Ceremonies ay∣ans cessé par la venu du Seigneur, le fond
de la Religion est pourtant demeuré, puis∣que les Juifs estoient sauvez par le Messie qu'ils attendoient, & que les Christiens le sont par le mesme Messie qui est venu. Sur ce Fondement qui ne peut estre contesté, il ny a qu'a examiner si nous au∣ons dans notre creance, & dans notre Culte des sentiments & des pratiques qui different de ce qu'on croioit, & de ce qui se practiquoit dans l'Ancienne Eglise Judai∣que, les choses Ceremonielles & Typiques estant mise apart. Il est facile de sçavoir les Sentiments de cette Eglise par l'Ancient Testament, par les Rabins, & par ce que les Juifs d'a present ont retenu dans leur Doctrine & dans leur Culte. Nous croyons comme eux que Dieu veut estre adoré en Esprit & Verité, d'un maniere digne de luy, sans images, & sans representations qu'il a expressement def∣fendües, & sans vouloir gloser sur le Com∣mandement, nous y soumettons entiere∣ment dans notre Culte. Comme eux nous invoquons Dieu seul & non pas les Anges ny les Saints. L'invocation estant l'un des principaux actes de l'adora∣tion, Nous croions comme les Juifs, qu'il faut les imiter, & avoir leur memoire en Veneration, mais qu'il ne faut pas les ser∣vir d'un Culte Religieux.
Nous faisons comme eux nostre Service en un Language entendue de tout le Peu∣ple: persuadez que nous sommes que Dieu ne voudroit pas nous entendre, si nous ne nous entendions pas nous mesme. C'est la une partique aussi ancienne que le monde, puis qu'il ny avoit au commencement qu'un Langage pour tous les hommes. Nous croyons qu'on est obligé de se con∣fesser serieusement a Dieu de ses pechés comme faison David, & qu'en des cas ou l'on a besoin d'une instruction & d'une consola∣tion, extraordinaire on s'en doit ouvir a son Pasteur, comme sit le mesme David au Prophet Nathan, & comme le partiuuoit l'ancienne Eglise Judaique. Nous croyons aussi bien que Salomon, & tout l'ancienne Peuple de Dieu la cru, que le Mariage est honorable, entre tous: les Prestres & les Pasteurs de l'Eglise aussy bien qu'entre les Läiques, puis que nous n'apren∣ons pas que la nouuelle alliance ait aboly cette Contume aussy ancienne que le Monde. Nous croyons qu'il y a deux Sacremens dans l'Eglise Chrestienne substituez aux deux Sacremens de l'Eglise Judaique, dont les Signes ont esté changes, & non pas les choses signifiées, que le Baptesme est le Sacrament de notre entrée en l'Eglise, com∣me
l'estoit la Circoncision: & que le Eu∣charistie est celuy de nostre nouriture spiri∣tuelle comme l'estoit l'Agneau Pascal: puis qu'il est dit que les Anciennes ont mangéla mesme Viande spirituelle, ils ont este abru∣vez du mesme Bruvage, qui estoit Christ. Aussy nous croyons que l'on ne peut sans crime se priver de ces Sacramens, quoy que Dieu n'attache point sa Grace de telle sorte aux Signes, qu'il ne puisse bien nous la don∣ner sans eux, fi nous ne les auons pas negli∣ges: qu'ainsy il ne laisse pas de sauver les Enfans Fidelles morts sans le Baptesme ex∣terieur, comme les Juifs ne doutoient pas qu'il ne sauvât ceux qui mouroient parmy eux sans la Circoncision, autrement ils n'au∣roient pas attendu au huitieme jour a leur administer. Au reste nous auons aussy pour nous, l'Antiquité dans l'explication des parolles Sacramentalles par un sens Figure, car on sçait, que les Juifs en mangeant l'Agneau Paschal, disoient cecy est le passage de l'Ange destructeur: en mangeant les Herbes ameres qui l'accompagnoient, Ce sont icy les Herbes ameres que nos Peres ont mangé au Desert, & en mangeant le pain, cecy est le pain d'affliction que nos peres ont mangé au Desert: sans croire pourtant que l'Agneau fust reellement changé au passage, ou les
Herbes & le Pain, aux mesms Herbes & aux mesme Pain qui auoient esté manges par leurs Peres. Ils croioient seulement en faire une commemoration: aussy ne reconnois∣sons nous aucune Transubstantiation ou changement de Substance dans nostre Pas∣que Chrestienne, ny ayant pas plus de raison de le croire, dans l'une que dans l'autres; puisque la chose significe est la mes∣me, Jesus Christ qui devoit mourir, & Jesus Christ mort. Qu'elle nouveauté y a til dans cette Explication si ancienne & si na∣turelle, & que lou employoit particuliere∣ment dans tous les Sacremens & dans tou∣tes les Ceremonies mistiques de l'ancienne Eglise? La Circoncision qui estoit le Seau de l'Alliance de Dieu est appellée l'Alliance; l'Agneau estoit le Passage, la Pierre estoit Christ, les sept Vaches estoient les sept Années: Ces Expressions estant si comu∣nes, il ne faut pas s'estonner si elles ne sur∣prirent pas les Apostres dans l'institution de l'Eucharistie: Aussy n'ont elles point surpris les Fidelles de l'Eglise Primitive. Tertullian contra Marcion, lib. 4. chap. 49. dit, Le Pain qu'il prit & qu'il distribua a ses Apostres, il le fit son Corps, en disant, Cecy est mon Corps, c'est a dire, la Figure de mon Corps. Et S. Austin, Le Seigneur ne fit point dificulté de dire, cecy est mon Corps,
quand il donna la Figure de son Corps. S. Au∣gustin contra Adimanium, chap. 14. Nous sommes persuadez, comme l'estoient les an∣ciens Juifs, qu'il y a un Ciel pour les Bons, & un l'Enfer pour les Mechans; Mais nous nous ne croyons pas non plus qu'eux, qu'il y ayt aucun lieu entre ces deux, tel que les Limbes & le Purgatoire. Nous croyons que le Sang de Jesus Christ nous nettoye de tout peché, comme le Sang des Victimes qu'of∣froient les Juifs, les nettoyoit typiquement de tous les leurs; ainsy nou ne prions point pour les Morts, & nous n'avons point d'ex∣amples dans les Liures Canoniques que les Juifs l'ayent practiqué. Nous disons que la seule Foy nous justi∣fie, comme l'Escriture dit qu'elle justifia Abraham, a qui la Foy fut imputée a Ju∣stice: Mais nous croions que cette Foy doit toujours estre accompagnée des bon∣nez Oeuvres; & que si l'on entend par ju∣stifier declarer une Personne juste, nous sommes justifiez par les Oeuvres comme dit St. Jacques, & non par la seule Foy. Nous nous reposons au septieme Jour, & nous nous appliquons aux devoirs que la Pieté exige, selon que Dieu l'avoit ordon∣né, & que les Juifs l'ont observé: & nous n'obligeons par les Chrestiens a d'autres Fe∣stes qui ne sont pas d'institution divine:
Car les Juifs en faisoient a la verité, mais elles estoient instituées de Dieu, & pour Dieu seul, & elles appartenoient a la Loy Ceremonielle, qui a esté abolie. Nous croyons que tous les Chrestiens ont voüé a Dieu par leur Baptesme, l'esprit de Pau∣vreté, ou de renoncement au Monde, la chasteté & l'obeissance a la Loy de Dieu: mais nous sommes persuades, qu'on pour∣roit bien se passer de faire un voeu de Ce∣libat, puis que la Continence est un don de Dieu, qu'il ne s'est pas obligé d'accorder a tout le monde: qu'on pourroit aussi se passer de faire le Voeu de Pauvreté parti∣culiere, de la maniere qu'on le fait, pour estre Riche en commun; & qu'on ne deu∣roit pas non plus faire des Voeux d'Obeis∣sance a un Superieur, qui dans le fond n'est qu'un Homme, a qui sans autre Voeu nous deuons obeissance, s'il nous commande des choses conformes a la Loy de Dieu. Quelles nouueautez auons nous intro∣duittes dans tout cela? Ce que je viens de dire, & qu'un Theologion pourroit esten∣dre d'avantage, suffiroit pour persuader de l'Antiquité de nostre Religion, un esprit desinterressé & depouille de tout prejugé. Mais le desinteressement est un ouvrage de Dieu dans nos coeurs, obscurcis par leurs propres tenebres. Ce qui me fait moins ad∣mirer
qu'etant de gens qui ont de si belles lumieres parmi vous, ne forment pas le moindre soupçon de la nouveauté de leur Religion, quoy qu'il y en ayt tant de suïet, puis que s'ils y auoint fait une serieuse re∣flexion, ils auroient compris. Que dans l'Eglise Primitive le Culte des Images estoit inconnu, & qu'il ny avoir dans les Temples ny Statues ny Images, Il ne faut que sçavoir l'Histoire pour cela, & remarques les anciennes Eglises, qui n'en avoient que par dehors: Parce, disoit Mon∣sieur de Launoy Docteur de Sorbonne, qu'au∣tre fois les Soints n'estoient consideres que comme des Serviteurs, mais qu'a present estans deuenus les Maistres, on n'avoit pas voulu quils demeurassent hors de la maison: Il faut mesme que cette practique n'ayt este receüe qui bien tard. Comme vous avés beaucoup d'estime pour l'illustre Prelat de cette Ville, vous ne refuserez pas de croire un de ses Predecesseurs qui vivoit au neuf Siecle, c'est Agobar Evesque de Lion, Pour euiter dit il la Superstition, les Peres Orthodoxes ont pourveu soigneusement a ce qu'il ny eust au∣cunes Images dans les Eglises, de peur que ce qui est adoré ne soit contre les Murailles. Que dans toute l'Escriture Sainte il ny a ny commandement d'adorer ou d'invoquer les Anges ou les Saints, ny menace contre
ceux qui ne le feront pas, ny example d'au∣cun qui l'ayt fait, ou du moins qui n'en ayt esté repris quand il la volu faire, comme disoit l'Ange a St. Jean, Gardés vous de faire cela, nous sommes Serviteurs comme vous: Qu'ainsy c'est une nouveauté que Jesus Christ ny les Saints ne vous ont jamais E∣vangelisez. Que le Service en Langue inconnue ne peut tout au plus, estre plus ancien que le temps au quel le Latin vint a se corrom∣pre; & pendant plus de six Siecles le Ser∣vice se faisoit en l'Eglises Chrestiennes en Language connu a tout le Peuple. Que les Prestres, Pasteurs, ou Evesquez, & qui au commencement estoit le Nom d'une mesme Charge, auoient la liberté d'estre mariëz, que la plus part de Apostres l'estoient, que jamais ils ne l'ont defendu: que plusieurs Saints Evesques l'estoient dans la Primitive Eglise, comme un Saint Spiridion, un St. Eupsyche Evesque de Ce∣sarée, un St. Gregoire de Nice, un Sino∣dius Apollinaris Evesque de Clermont, un Novat & un St. Gregoire de Nazianze. Que la Loy de Celibat des Prestrez ne comen∣ca que depuis le Pape Sirice, sur la fin du quatre Siecle: Qu'elle n'a mesme esté re∣ceue que dans l'Eglise Latine, car les Orien∣tales, aussy anciennes que la Romaine, ne
veulent point de Prestres qu'ils ne soient marres. Que les Moynes ne sont pas fort anci∣ens, que l'on sçait l'histoire de chaque Or∣dre, & en quil temps ils ont este fon∣des. Qu'on sçait de mesme en quel temps plu∣sieurs Festes ont esté institutées, le Caresme commandé, les Ceremonies establies, & l'Authorité des Papes augmentée. Nous qui sommes Medalistes nous sçavous par ex∣emple qu'on ne leur mettoit pas ancienne∣ment la Triple Couronne sur la teste. La Medaille du Pape Adrian se contente com∣me vous sçavés de luy donner une Mitre d'Evesque; & dans les Mosäiques qui sont a Rome a St. Suzanne & ailleurs, le Pape Leon n'a pas mesme la teste couverte. Mais cela n'est pas de grande impor∣tance. Nous disons que la Communion a esté instituée par nôstre Seigneur sous les deux especes, comme l'a retenu de tout temps l'Eglise Grecque, & comme Gelase Pape mesme l'a Ordonnée sous peine de Ex∣communication; que par consequent le re∣trenchement de la Coupe est nouveau dans l'Eglise Latin; en effect la Communion sous une espece ne commença a estre gene∣rallement receue, dit Gregoire de Valence, qu'un peu auaut le Concile de Constance,
c'est a direvers la fin du 14 Siecle; & selon se sentiment de Scot, elle fut receue seul∣lement pour Article de Foy au Concile de Latran. Ou est donc votre Antiquite dans ce point? On auroit peu a douter que l'Opinion de la Transubstantion ne fust pas ancienne, veu qu'il ne se trouve dans les aneiens Dictionaires Grecs & Latins aucun mot qu' nous l'exprime, nonobstant la fe∣condité de ce deux Langues: Je n'en ay pu trouver aucune trace dans celuy de Suidas qui estoit Chrestien, & qu'a les mots employez par les Chrestiens & par les Pa∣yens; & je crois qu'on le chercheroit aussi inutilement dans les anciens Peres, ou dans les Canons des anciens Conciles. Aus∣si peu y trouve t-on celuy de Purgatoire, ou son equivalent. Si on le devoit trouver en quelqu' endroit, se seroit particuliere∣ment dans les Epitaphes des anciens Chresti∣ens. Vous estes, Monsieur, tres sçavant dans l'Antiquité, & je serois bien aise d'appren∣die de vous, do'u vient que dans les Epi∣taphes anciennes, on ne lit jamais auant le sept ou huitime Siecle, lè priez pour luy, & le requiescat, qu'on lit si souvent dans les Epitaphes modernes. Mais qu'on y lit seulement, obiit in pace, depositus in pace, quiescit in pace, abiit in somnum pacis, ac∣ceptus est apud Deum: Il est mort en paix,
il repose en paix, il dort du sommeil de la paix, il est alle a Dieu: Ou y adjoutoit lé jour de la mort, car pour moy j'infere de la qu'ils estimoient, que les fidelles en∣troient dans le sommeil de la paix, c'est a dire, dans le Ciel des qu'ils estoients morts. Je n'en au aussi jamais pu trouver, quoy que j'en aye un tres grande nombre, des six premiers Siecles, ou il soit fait mention du remede des ames, que les Epitaphes mo∣dernes souhaittent aux deffunts. En fin je n'ay jamais pu remarquer dans tous les Bas-Reliefs anciens, que j'ay veu de represen∣tations du Purgatoire, n'y de Prestres qui disent la Messe, sur un autel avec des Au∣diteurs a genoux, quoy qu'on y voye les Principaux misteres de l'Eglise. Tout cela n'est il pas bien capable de faire soupçonner, du moins a un Antiquaire, qu'il y a bien des Nouveautez dans cette Eglise qui se croit ancienne: car quand il s'agit d'Antiquité, ce n'est pas a une An∣tiquité de quatre ou cinq' cens ans qu'il s'en faut tenir, c'est a la premiere & pure Anti∣quité. Aprés tout vous ne pouvés vous vanter d'Antiquité, que dans les Points es∣sentieles dont vous convenies avec nous; & dans la plus part de vous Ceremonies copiés de celles des Payens, comme du Choul An∣tiquaire de cette Ville la auoüé, quoy qu'il
fust de votre Communion. Permettez moy d'adjouster j'cy ce qu'un de nos Ministres dit sur ce sujet; Vous avés l'Antiquité, dites vous, je l'avoue en quelque chose, & nous som∣mes nouveaux en quelque maniere. Toute l'E∣glise d'Occident estoit un Cors malade, & nous sommes gueris par la grace de Dieu; & en ce∣la nous sommes nouveaux, vous estes demeures malades, en cela vous avez l'Antiquité qui vous est dautant plus desavantageuse, que les Maladies inveterées tendent a la mort. Ou estiez vous auant Calvin; nous dit on? Nous estions, disons nous, dans une Societé semblable a celle ou estoient les veritables Juifs au temps de Jesus Christ, nous estions dans un lieu ou il ne faisoit pas trop seur. Pardonnez moy encore un mot, que je ne dis point pour faire une odieuse compa∣rison de vous avec les Arriens, Ennemis de la Divinité de Jesus Christ: Dieu me garde d'avoir une telle pensée, je ne veux point vous fascher, mais seulement m' expliquer. Vous sçavez que lors que l'Empire Romain se vit presque tout Arrien; les Arriens pre∣tendoient estre appellez Catholiques, & prenoient a injure quand on les nommoit Arriens: Et qu'au contraire ils traittoient les Orthodoxes d'Heretiques & de Schisma∣tiques, les appellant Athanasiens, l'Eusta∣chiens,
& Luciferiens, du nom des Eves∣ques Orthodoxes qui auoient temoigné de la siigueur a deffendre la Verité, auroit-on eu raison de leur dire, vous etes nouveaux: Ou estiez vous auant Athanase, auant Eu∣stachius, auant Lucifer de Callari? comme on nous dit, Ou estiées vous auant Luther, auant Calvin, auant Zuingle? Au fond quelque Eclipse dans la Foy qu'il y ayt eu dans l'Eglise Romaine, il y a tou∣jours eu des Docteurs & des Peuples en∣tiers qui ont protesté contre les Erreurs: comme les Iconolastes, le Concil de Franc∣ford, les Berengariens, Bertram, & ceux de son sentiment, les Vaudois, les Albi∣geois, & les Hussites: Il ne sert de rien pour parir ce coup, de dire qu'ils estoient Here∣tiques, puis que ce n'est pas Dieu ny l'Es∣criture Sainte qui les ont condamnez, mais l'Eglise Romaine qui estoit Juge & Partie, & qui n'est pas infallible, quoy qu'elle en puisse dire elle mesme. Ainsy l'on peut di∣re qu'il y a toujours eu des Protestants qui ont protesté, & en public dans les Societes qui estoient la plus pure partie de l'Eglise, & en particulier dans le soin mesme de l'¦Eglise Romane. M'alleguera t-on pour l'antiquité de vos Dogmes les liures qu'on a inseres dans la Biblioteque des Peres, qui sont ou mani∣festement
supposés ou fort incertaines; par example, la Messe de St. Pierre, de Saint Jacques, de St. Marc; l'Epistre Catholique de St. Barnabas: Car si les Liures sont ve∣ritablement des Apostres, d'ou vient qu'ils ne sont point adjoustés aux Liures du Nou∣veau Testament. Les Epistles de St. Ig∣nace, les Oeuvres de St. Denis l'Areopagite cité par le mesme Autheurs pour l'Invoca∣tion des Saints, le Purgatoire, la Vie mo∣nastique; quoy qu'il auoüe en un Autre endroit que c'est une chose fort incertaine si ce Liure est de St. Denis. Pour passer a quelque chose de moins serieux; Je ne doute pas, Monsieur, que comme esties curieux de Medailles, vous ne lisiés avec plaisir un exemple singulier de la prevention que les plus habiles gens d'entre vous ont de l'Antiquité de leur Religion: Vous sçavez que le Pere Veron auoit trouvé ou mis la Messe dans l'Escriture Sainte. Vos Traducteurs ne sont pas de∣puis cela tombes dans son Sentiment, ce que je vous va dire est en cor plus surprienant, Mr. de Peiresk, ce bel esprit pour qui les sçavans ont eu tant de veneration, pre∣tendoit avoir trouvé la Messe dans les Me∣dailles, ses Manuscrits sont entre mes mains, & j'ay de quoy le justifier: La Medaille mesme d'ont il s'agit n'est pas si rare qu'on
pourroit se l'imaginer, & il ny a gueres de curieux qui ne l'aye veu: Il croioit que la Medaille de Constantin, qui a pour Revers un espece d'Autel, & un rond audessus a∣vec cette Inscription, Beata Tranquillitas, fust une representation du St. Sacrement de l'Autel, & que le rond fust la Sainte Hostie. Il fait la dessus une dissertation de quatre, ou cinq Pages, & prove son Opinion par des Raisons qu'il croit incontestables; mais il se trouve par malheur qu'un petit Anti∣quaire, qui sera si vous voulez, celuy qui vous écrit, a pris garde que ce rond n'estoit autre chose que le Globe du Monde assis sur une Base, pour marquer son bonheur & sa tranquillité sous l'Empire de Con∣stantin. Cela est aisé a connoistre quand la Medaille se trouve nette: ce qui n'estoit peut estre pas arrivé a Mr. de Peiresk. Car on remarque distinctiment sur ce Globe le Zo∣diaque, & des Planettes au dessus, ce qui ne laisse aucun doute a le prendre pour le Globe du Monde. Ainsy, Monsieur, je finis en vous Pro∣testant, que par la Grace de Dieu j'ay ma Conscience fort en repos, pant Dieu tout les jours qu'il fasse connoistre sa Ve∣rité a ceux qui ne la connoisent pas, ou qui ne la connoissent qu'en partie; qu'els qu'ils puessent estre; & qu'il luy plaise
vous inspirer a tous son amour & l'amour du prochain avec lequelles on ne peut perir, & sans lesquelles on ne possedera pas celuy qui est l'Amour & la Charité mes∣me. Je vous remercie tres humblement de la bonté que vous avéz pour nos Imprimeurs, & mon remerciment auroit fait toute ma Lettre, si je n'eusse cru que jestois obligé de répondre aux sollicitations cordiales dont vous m'avez honoré par une Ouverture de mon Coeur aussy sincere que vous la pou∣viez souhaitter, vous conjurant de prendre en bonne par la franchise dont j'ay use, & de me croire inviolablement, Monsieur, D. V. R. Le tres-humble & tres-obeissant Serviteur, JACOB SPON.
VII. A Translation of the former Letter. YOu are not to doubt, Sir, but among my other Enquiries, I have made some into the Antiquity of the Religion in which it pleased God that I was born: In order to it, I have put off, as much as is possible, the Prejudices which my Birth and Education might infuse, to see if I could discover that Novelty with which you think fit to reproach us: both Morn∣ings and Evenings likewise, the hours I set apart for Religious Performances, I have frequently consulted him whom St. Austin calls the Ancient and the New Beauty, to learn from him if our Religion be Ancient, as we believe it is, or new, as you pre∣tend. But the more I have thought upon every Point, and the more I have consul∣ted the Divine Oracles, the more I am con∣vinced it is very ancient; and if it appear new, it is only to such as hear it talk'd of, without understanding it; as that part of the Earth, term'd the new World, was to those who discovered it.
I believe truly, we may say, our Religi∣on is as ancient as the World; and that the Religion which comes short of this Anti∣quity, can with no just title set up for the true one; for then that God who is un∣changeable, should condemn the grounds of a Religion which he himself had taught from the beginning; and it is not to be imagined that he should settle another quite different from it. Christ came not to abolish, but to fulfil the Law. Christia∣nity then, to speak properly, is not a Reli∣gion different from Judaism; Christians are the true Off-spring of Abraham; a Man at his full growth, is the same Person that was formerly a Child; tho' while a Child he spoke indistinctly, had a Tutor, and was clothed according to his Age; Judaism was the infancy of Religion, it spoke in∣distinctly, and saw only through a Vail; it had the Law for a Tutor to guide it to∣wards the Messias, and was clothed with many Ceremonies, which were to cease when the Messias came, of whom they were Figures. In summ, the Curse of this Law, the Vail of Moses, and the Ceremo∣nies having ceased by our Lord's coming, yet the grounds of Religion stood firm, seeing the Jews were saved by the Messias, they expected, as Christians are now by
the same Messias who is come. Having laid down this Principle, which cannot be call'd in question, the only thing to be examin'd is, If we have in our Belief, and in our Worship, Opinions and Pra∣ctices different from what was believed in the ancient Jewish Church, setting aside things Ceremonial and Typical. It is easy to know the Opinions of that Church by the Old Testament, by the Rabbins, and by what the Jews at present hold in their Do∣ctrine and in their Worship. We believe with them, that God will be worshipped in Spirit and Truth, after a manner worthy of himself, without Ima∣ges, and without Representations, which he has expresly forbidden; and we, with∣out offering to make glosses upon this Commandment, do entirely submit our selves to it in our Worship. With them we invoke God alone, and neither Angels nor Saints, invocation be∣ing one of the chief Acts of Worship. We believe with the Jews, we are to imi∣tate the Saints, and have a veneration for their memory; but that we must not pay them any Religious Worship. With them we perform our Service, in a Tongue understood by all the People; being perswaded, that God would not
hearken to us if we understood not our selves: This is a practice as ancient as the World, seeing in the beginning there was but one Language for all Mankind. We believe all Men are obliged to make a hearty confession of their sins to God as David did; and in case they have need of extraordinary instruction or comfort, they are to umbosome themselves to their Pastor, as the same David did to the Prophet Na∣than, and as the ancient Jewish Church practised. We believe, after the same manner, that Solomon, and all the ancient People of God did, That Marriage is honourable among all; Priests and Pastors of the Church, as well as among Laicks; seeing we do not learn that the New Covenant has abo∣lished this Custom, as ancient as the World. We believe there are two Sacraments in the Christian Church, in the place of the two Sacraments of the Jewish Church, the signs of which have been chang'd, but not the things signified: That Baptism is the Sacrament of our entry into the Church as Circumcision was; and that the Eucharist is that of our Spiritual Nourishment, as the Paschal Lamb was; seeing it is said, Our Fathers did all eat the same Spiritual
Meat, and did all drink the same spiritual Drink, which was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.3. We likewise believe, that no Man can, with∣out sinning, deprive himself of these Sacra∣ments, tho' God doth not limit his Grace so strictly to the Signs, but that if they are not neglected, he will grant it without them; for thus he ceases not to save the Children of the Faithful dying without Baptism; as the Jews doubted not but he saved those who died among them without Circumci∣sion; else they would not have delayed ad∣ministring it till the eighth day. Besides, we have also Antiquity for us in explaining the sacramental words in a fi∣gurative sence; for we know the Jews in eating the Paschal Lamb, said, This is the Passeover of the destroying Angel; in eating the bitter Herbs which were with it, these are the bitter Herbs which our Fa∣thers did eat in the Wilderness, without believing all this while that the Lamb was really changed into the Passeover, and the Herbs and the Bread, into the same Herbs and the same Bread, which had been eaten by their Fathers; they only believed that what they did, was by way of commemoration. Neither do we own any Transubstantia∣tion or change of substance in our Chri∣stian Passeover, there being no more rea∣son
to believe it in this than in the former, seeing the thing signified is the same Jesus Christ who then was to die, and Jesus Christ now dead. What Novelty is there in this explication so ancient and so natural, and which was particularly made use of in all the Sacraments, and mystical Ceremonies of the Ancient Church? Circumcision, that was the Seal of God's Covenant, is called the Covenant, the Lamb was the Passe∣over, the Rock was Christ, and the seven Cows were the seven Years. These Ex∣pressions being so frequent, we cannot think it strange if they surprized not the Apostles in the institution of the Eucha∣rist; so neither did they surprize the Faithful in the Primitive Church. Tertul∣lian against Marcion, lib. 4. cap. 40. says, The Bread which he took and distributed a∣mong his Apostles, he made it his Body, by saying, This is my Body, that is to say, the Figure of my Body. And St. Austin against Adimantus, chap. 12. The Lord made no difficulty to say, This is my Body, when he gave the Figure of his Body. We are per∣suaded, as the Ancient Jews were, that there is a Heaven for the Righteous, and a Hell for the Wicked; but we believe no more than they did, that there is any third Place, such as the Limbi, or Purga∣tory.
We believe the Blood of Christ cleanseth us from all Sin, as the Blood of the Sacrifices, offered by the Jews, did typically cleanse them from all theirs. So neither do we pray for the Dead, and we have no Instances in the Canonical Books, that the Jews practised it. We say, that Faith only justifies us, as the Scripture says, that it justified Abraham, to whom Faith was imputed for Righteous∣ness; but we believe this Faith ought al∣ways to be accompanied with good Works; and if by justify, we understand to declare a Person just, we are justified by Works, as St. James says, and not by Faith alone. We rest the Seventh Day, and apply our selves to the Duties that Religion requires, according as God did ordain, and the Jews observed; nor do we tie Christians to other Holy-days which are not of Divine Insti∣tution. It is true, the Jews kept such, but they were instituted by God, and for God alone, and belonged to the Ceremonial Law, which is now abolished. We believe, that all Christians have vowed to God in their Baptism, the Spirit of Poverty, or of renouncing the World, Chastity, and obe∣dience to the Law of God; but we are persuaded, the making a Vow of Chastity
ought to be forborn, seeing continence is a Gift of God, which he has not promised to bestow upon all Men: As likewise the Vow of Poverty in particular, ought to be forborn after the fashion it is made, when those that make it are yet rich in common: And that we ought not to make Vows of Obedience to a Superior, who is no more than a Man, to whom, without any Vow, we owe Obedience, if he enjoin such things as are agreeable to the Law of God. In all this, what Novelties have we in∣troduced? What I have touched, and which a Divine could enlarge further upon, might serve to satisfy any Person that were unbiassed, and freed from all prejudice, concerning the Antiquity of our Religion. But to be thus unbiassed, is the Work of God upon our Hearts, which are clouded with their own darkness. This to me makes it the less strange, that so many Men among you, of such fine parts, entertain not the least jealousie of the newness of their Religion, tho' there be so great ground for it; for if they had ever seri∣ously reflected on it, they must have per∣ceived, That the Worship of Images was not known in the Primitive Church, and that
there were neither Images nor Statues in the Churches: For proof of this, we must only search History, and observe the An∣cient Churches, which had none but upon the out-side; Because, said Monsieur de Lounoy, a Doctor of the Sorbonne, the Saints formerly were looked upon only as Ser∣vants; but having got at present to be Ma∣sters, they will not have them pay their atten∣dance at the entry; yea, this practice must have crept in but of late. As you have a great value for the illustrious Bishop of this City; so you will not refuse to give credit to one of his Predecessors, who lived in the ninth Century, and that is St. Agobar Bishop of Lyons: To shun Superstition, says he, the Ancient Fathers did carefully provide, that there should not be any Images in the Churches, fearing lest what is worshipped should appear upon the Walls. That in all the Holy Scripture, there is no commandment, either to worship or to invocate Angels or Saints; no threats against such as do it not, nor any instance of any that did it, nay, even of any who escaped a check when offering to do it: so the An∣gel said to St. John, See thou do it not, I am thy fellow Servant, Rev. 19.10. so that this is a Novelty Jesus Christ, nor his Saints, never preached to us.
That the Service in an unknown Tongue, cannot at most be ancienter than the time in which the Latin came to be cor∣rupted; That for above six Centuries the Ser∣vice in the Christian Church was performed in a Language all the People understood. That Priests, Pastors, or Bishops, which in the beginning were names of the same Office, were allowed to be married; that most of the Apostles were so, that they never forbad it; that many Holy Bishops of the Primitive Church were married, as St. Spiridion, and St. Eupsychius Bishop of Caesarea, and St. Gregory of Nice, and Saint Sinodius Apollinaris Bishop of Clermont and Novat, and St. Gregory Nazianzen. That the Law for the Celebat of Priests, began but since Pope Siricius's Time, towards the latter end of the fourth Century: That it has only been received in the Latin Church; for the Eastern Churches, which were as ancient as the Roman, will admit of no Priests who are not married. That Monks are not very ancient, that the History of every Order is known, and at what time they were founded. That it is known also when many of their Festivals were instituted, Lent en∣joined, Ceremonies established, and the Pope's Authority enlarged. We for ex∣ample,
who are Medalists, know that there was no Triple Crown put upon their Head; the Medal of Pope Adrian gives him no more, as you know, than a Bishop's Mitre; and in the Mosaick Work at St. Su∣sanna, and in other places of Rome, Pope Leo has nothing upon his head. But this is of no great moment; We must put you in mind, that the Communion was instituted by our Lord in both kinds, as the Greek Church has observed it in all Ages, and as Pope Gelasias himself ordered it, under pain of Excommunication; that conse∣quently the taking away the Cup in the La∣tin Church is a new thing. In effect, the Com∣munion in one kind began only to be gene∣rally received, says Gregory of Valencia, a lit∣tle before the Council of Constance, that is, towards the end of the 14th Century; and according to the Opinion of Scotus, it was received only for an Article of Faith in the Lateran Council. Where then is your An∣tiquity in this Point? We have reason to doubt the Opinion of Transubstantiation is not ancient, seeing in the ancient Greek and Latin Dictionaries, there is not any word to be found to express it, notwith∣standing the copiousness of these two Lan∣guages. I have not found any thing to∣wards it in that of Suidas, who was a Chri∣stian,
and who set down the words used by Christians and Pagans. And I conceive we may search for it to as little purpose in the Ancient Fathers, or in the Canons of the Ancient Councils. It will be as hard to find that of Purgatory, or any thing which answers to it; If it were to be found any where, the proper place would be in the ancient Christian Epitaphs. You are very conversant, Sir, in Antiquity, and I would fain learn of you, whence it comes, that in the ancient Epitaphs, we never read, be∣fore the seventh or eight Century, Orate pro eo, pray for him, or Requiescat, may he rest, which we meet with so frequently in modern Epitaphs; but we read only, Obiit in pace, abiit in somnum pacis, quiescit in pace, depositus in pace, acceptus est apud De∣um; he died in peace, he departed into a sleep of Peace, he rests in peace, is recon∣ciled to God; to this they added the day of his death: for from thence I infer it was their Opinion, that the faithful entred into a sleep of Peace, that is to say, into Hea∣ven as soon as dead. Nor could I ever find, tho' I have a vast number of Epitaphs of the first six Centuries, any mention made for the Remedy of Souls, which the modern ones wish to the deceased. In sum, in all the ancient Bas-Reliefs which I
have seen, I could never observe any re∣presentations of Purgatory, of Priests say∣ing Mass at an Altar, with the Hearers kneeling; tho' in such we meet with the chief Mysteries of the Church. Is not all this sufficient to make any, but especially an Antiquary, suspect there are a great many Novelties in that Church which fancies it self so ancient? For when the Question is about Antiquity, it is not an Antiquity of four or five hundred Years we must stop at, but at the Primitive and Pure Antiquity. After all you cannot brag of Antiquity, unless in those essential Points wherein you agree with us. And the greatest part of your Ceremonies were Copies of those of the Pagans, as De Choul an Antiquary of this City has own'd, tho' he was one of your Communion. Give me leave to add here, what one of our Ministers said upon this occasion; You have Antiquity, say you, I yield, in some things, and in some respect we are new: the whole Western Church was a sick Body, and we, by the Blessing of God, are cured; in this we are new: You still continue sick, in this Antiquity is on your side; which is so much the more for your disadvantage, because in∣veterate Distempers tend towards Death. Where were you before Calvin, is the
Question asked us? We were, say we, in a Society much like that the true Jews lived in in Jesus Christ's Time; in a place where we were not very safe. Allow me yet one word, which I speak not to make an odious comparison be∣twixt you and the Arrians, Enemies of the Divinity of Jesus Christ, God keep me from entertaining any such thought. I am not willing to offend you, but only to explain my self. You know, when the Roman Empire was almost all Arrian, the Arrians pretended they were to be called Catholicks, taking it as an affront to be called Arrians; And upon the other hand, they treated the Orthodox Party as Here∣ticks and Schismaticks, calling them Athana∣sians, Eustachians, and Luciferians, from the names of those Orthodox Bishops, who had shewed greatest resolution in the defence of the Truth. Had there been any Reason to upbraid them, you are new, where were you before Athanasius, before Eustachius, or Lucifer of Caillary? As we are now up∣braided by those who say, Where were you before Luther, Calvin, or Zuinglius? Upon the whole Matter, what-ever E∣clipse the Church of Rome has suffered in Matters of Faith, there always have been Doctors, and whole Nations, that have
protested against her Errors, as the Icono∣clasts, the Council of Frankford, the Be∣rengarians, Bertram, and those of his Judg∣ment, the Waldenses, the Albigenses, and the Hussites. Nor will it avail you for warding off this blow, to pretend that they were Hereticks, seeing it is not God nor the Holy Scripture that has condemned them, but only the Church of Rome, which was both Judg and Party, and which is not infalli∣ble, what-ever she her self pretends to. So that we may say there have always been Protestants, who did protest against Abuses both in Publick, in their Assemblies, which were the much purest part of the Church, and in private, within the very bosom of the Roman Church. Will any alledge for the antiquity of your Opinions, the Books that are thrust into the Bibliotheck of the Fathers, which are either manifestly false, or very uncer∣tain? For example, The Mass of St. Peter, of St. James, and of St. Mark; the Catholick Epistle of St. Barnabas; for if these Books be truly the Apostles writings, how comes it that they are not put among the Books of the new Testament? The Epistles of St. Ignatius, the Works of Dyonisius the Areopagit, quo∣ted by the same Authors for Invocation of Saints, Purgatory, and a Monastick Life;
tho' in another place he confesses it is very uncertain if Dionisius be the Author of that Book. To come to somewhat that is not so se∣rious; As you are curious in Medals, I que∣stion not, Sir, but you have with pleasure read a singular instance given, how much the ablest Men among you are possessed with the Antiquity of their Religion. You know Father Veron found, or put the Mass in the Holy Scripture. Your Translators have not since agreed to his Opinion. What I am about to tell you, is still more surprising: Monsieur Peiriskius, that gentile Wit, for whom the Learned had so much respect, pretended he had found the Mass in Medals, I have his Manuscript by me, and can make good what I say; the Medal also which gave the occasion is not so rare as one would imagine; and there are few cu∣rious Persons who have not seen it; He fancied then Constantine's Medal, which has for its Reverse a sort of Altar, and a round Figure upon it with this inscription, Beata Tranquilitas, was a representation of the Holy Sacrament of the Altar, and that the round Figure was the Holy Host: upon this he frames a discourse of four or five Pages, and proves his Opinion by Reasons which he takes to be unanswerable; but
unhappily there starts up a petty Antiqua∣ry, no other, if you please, than the Per∣son that writes to you, who has observed this round Figure to be nothing but the Globe of the World, set upon a Basis to ex∣press its happiness and tranquility under the Empire of Constantine. This will easily ap∣pear, when we find a Medal that is fair, which perhaps Monsieur Peiriskius had not the luck to meet with; for we see per∣fectly in the Globe a Zodiaque, with the Planets upon it, which leaves no place for a doubt, but it is to be taken for the Globe of the World. Thus, Sir, I conclude with a protestati∣on, that I find my Conscience, blessed be God, very much at ease, praying to God every day that he may make known the Truth to those who know it not, or who know it only in part, whoever they be; and that he will vouchsafe to inspire us all with his Love, and the Love of our Neigh∣bour, with which we cannot perish, and without which we can never enjoy him who is Love and Charity it self.
VIII. A Declaration of the French King's, that Children of the Age of seven Years, may turn from the Protestant to the Popish Religion. LOUIS par la grace de Dieu Roy de France & de Navarre; A tous ceux qui ces presentes Lettres verront; Salut. Les grands succez qu'il a pleu à Dieu de donner aux excitations spirituells & autres moyens raisonnables, que nous avons em∣ployez pour la conversion de nos Su∣jets de la Religion pretenduë Reformée: Nous conviant de seconder les mouvemens que Dieu donne à un grand nombre de nosdits Sujets, de reconnoître l'erreur dans laquelle ils sont nez, Nous aurions resolu¦de déroger à nostre Declaration du pre∣mier jour du mois de Février de l'année mil six cens soixante-neuf, par laquelle les En∣fans de la dadite Religion auroient esté en quelque façon exclus de se convertir â la Religion Catholique, Apostolique & Ro∣maine, depuis l'âge de sept ans, auquel ils
sont capables de raison & de choix dans un matiere aussi importante que celle de leur salut, jusques à l'âge de quatorze ans les masses, & douze ans pour les femelles, encore que l'Edit de Nantes & autres, don∣nez en faveur de ceux de la Religion pre∣tenduë Reformée ne contiennent aucun disposition pareille, à quoy estant necessaire de pourvoir: A CES CAUSES, & au∣tres considerations à ce nous mouvant; Nous avons dit & declaré, disons & decla∣rons par ces Presentes signées de nostre main. Voulons & nous plaist, que nosdits Sujets de la Religion Pretenduë Reformée, tant mâles que femelles, ayant atteint l'âge de sept ans, puissent & qu'il leur soit loisi∣ble d'embrasser la Religion Catholique, Apostolique & Romaine; Et qu'à cet effet ils soient receus à faire abjuration de la Re∣ligion Pretenduë Reformée, sans que leurs peres & meres ou autres parens y puissent donner aucun empêchement, sous quelque pretexte que ce soit, dérogeant à cet effet, en tant que de besoin, à nostredite Declara∣tion du premier jour de Février 1669. Voulons en outre que lesdits Enfans qui se seront convertis apres l'âge de sept ans ac∣complis, joüissent de l'effet de nostre De∣claration du quatorziéme jour d'Octo∣bre 1665. & conformément à icelle, qu'il
soit à leur choix aprés leur conversion, de retourner en la maison de leurs peres & meres, pour y estre nourris & entretenus, ou de se retirer ailleurs, & leur demander pour cet effet une pension proportionnée à leurs conditions & facultez, laquelle pension lesdits peres & meres seront tenus de payer à leurs enfans de quartier en quartier; Et en cas de refus, Voulons qu'ils y soient con∣traints par toutes voyes deuës & raisonna∣bles. Et sur ce que Nous avons esté infor∣mez que plusieurs de nos Sujets de ladite Religion pretenduë Reformée ont envoyé élever leurs Enfans dans les Pays Etrangers, dans lesquels ils peuvent prendre des maxi∣mes contraires à l'Etat & à la fidelité qu'ils nous doivent par leur naissance, Nous leur enjoignons tres-expressement de les faire revenir sans delay; à peine, à l'égard de ceux qui ont du bien en fonds, de priva∣tion de leur revenu pendant la premiere année, & de la moitié dudit revenu pen∣dant tout le temps qu'ils tiendroint leurs Enfans dans les Pays Etrangers: Et à l'égard de ceux qui n'ont aucuns biens en fonds, ils seront tenus de rappeller leurs∣dits Enfans, à peine d'amende, laquelle sera arbitrée à proportion de leurs biens & facultez: Et seront contraints au payement desdits revenus & amendes par chacun an,
jusques à ce qu'ils ayent fait revenir leur Enfans. Défendons à nos Sujects de ladite Religion pretenduë Reformée d'envoyer à l'avenir leurs Enfans dans les Pays Etran∣gers pour leur éducation avant l'âge de seize ans, sous les peines cy-dessus exprimées, sans nostre expresse permission. Si DON∣NONS EN MANDEMENT à nos amez & feaux Conseillers, les Gens tenant nostre Cour de Parlement de Paris, que ces Presentes ils ayent a faire lire, publier, registrer & executer selon leur forme & teneur, sans permettre qu'il y soit contrevenu en au∣cune sorte & maniere que ce soit. Car tel est nostre plaisir: En témoin dequoy Nous avons fait mettre nostre scel à cesdites Pre∣sentes. Donné à Versailles le dix-septiéme jour du mois de Juin, l'an de grace mil six cens quatre vingt-un. Et de nostre regne letrente neuviéme. Signé, LOVIS, & sur le reply, Par le Roy, COLBERT. Et scel∣lé du grand sceau de cire jaune. Leuës, publiés, registrées, oiiy, & ce re∣querant le Procureur General du Roy, pour estre executées selon leur forme & teneur, suivant l'Arrest dudit jour. A Paris en Parlement le 8. Juillet 1681. Signé, JACQUES.
IX. An Address made by the Protestants for recalling the former Declaration. AU ROY. SIRE, VOs Sujets de la R. P. R. remontrent tres humblement a Vôtre Majesté que la Declaration du 17 June, les plonge dans une desolation qui leur laisse a peine la liberté de se reconnoitre, ils osent pour∣tant recourir encore a Vôtre Majesté, per∣suadez questant ses fidelles Sujets l'accez a sa Justice ne seur sera pas dénié, & qu'a l'imitation de Dieu qui écoute toujours la voix de l'affligé, elle ne rejettera pas leurs Justes plaintes. Dans cette confiance, Sire, se jettant au pieds de Vôtre Majesté, ils la suplient tres humblement de considerer que cette declaration est directement con∣traire aux Edits accordez a ceux de lad. Religion & en particulier a l'Edit de Nantes sous lequel ils sont nez, & qui leur
a cetté donné comme une Loy perpetuelle & irrevocable, & que Vôtre Majesté a con∣firmée elle mésme en plusieurs manieres; Car outre qu'en general cet Edit a supposé constamment que les suplians Joüiront dans vôtre Royamé de tous les droits tant na∣turels que Civils, qui sont communs a tous vos Sujets, & qu'entre ces droits, celuy qui rend les Peres & Meres maitre de l'educa∣tion de leurs Enfans, mesme au dela de l'aage de puberté est un des plus forts & des plus sacrez; l'Articlé 18, defend ex∣pressement de tirer les Enfans des mains des Peres contre leur gré, pour les faire Baptiser ou Confirmer, l'on sçait que la Confirmation ne se donne qu'a sept ans, & si l'Edit ne permet pas de la donner aux Enfans de ceux de lad. Religion, il permet encore moins de leur faire, faire une abju∣ration formelle de lad. Religion dans la∣quelle ils sont nez. C'est dans le méme Esprit que l'Article 38 des Particuliers du méme Edit, porte en propres termes que les Peres, faisant Proffession de lad. Religion pouront pourvoir a leurs Enfans de tels Educateurs que bon leur semblera: Et en substitüer un ou plusieurs par Testament, Codicile ou autre declaration, passée pardeuant Notaire,
ou escrite ou Signée de leur main. Vôtre Majesté, Sire, est tres humble∣ment suppliée de peser la force du terme, educateur, méme apres la mort des Peres, car il montre clairement que l'Edit a re∣gardé le droit des Peres sur leurs Enfans, non seulement comme inviolable pendant leur vie, mais comme un droit qui s'etend méme apres la mort: que nul zele de Reli∣gion ou autre pretexte ne peut oster, & que bien loin d'estre limité, ce temps la se conserve durant tout le cours de l'Educa∣tion, laquelle commence a sêpt Ans, & se trouve fort restrainte quand on la termine a quatorze qui est l'aage de puberté. Dailleurs, Sire, l'Edit de Nantes n'a pas esté en cela la seule ny la premiere Loy; Car outre que c'est la un droit naturel aussi ancien que le Monde, & que c'est une max∣ime generale & Constante, il s'ensuit qu'au Cahier repondu en l'an 1571, sous le Regne de Charles 9. dans le temps le plus sa facheux pour ceux de lad. Religion, neamoins on trouvera ce droit des Peres sur leurs Enfans; qu'il fut dit sur le 24 Arti∣cle que les Peres ne seroient point empe∣chez en l'Education de leurs Enfans selon leur Religion & Conscience, & qu'apres
la mort de Peres, les Enfans seront entretenus en lad. Religion jusqu'a l'age de quatorze ans, & alors ils seroient en liberté. Mais, Sire, aucun des Roys, vos pre∣decesseurs n'a reconnu & declaré ce méme droit plus autentiquement que Vôtre Ma∣jesté, Car outre plusieurs arrests rendus en son Conseil d'Estat en 1663, & 1666, qui sont expres sur l'Article, Vôtre Declaration de 1669. porte en propres termes qu'il fait deffences a toutes personnes non seulement d'enlever les Enfans de ceux de lad. Reli∣gion auant l'aage de quatorze ans accom∣plis pour les mâles & de douze ans accom∣plis pour les femelles, Et en attendant qu'ils ayent atteint ledit aàge, que les Enfans nez d'un Pere de lad. Religion demeureront és mains de leurs Parens de lad. Religion, & tous ceux qui les retiendront contraints a les rendre: cela méme a depuis esté executé & confirmé par divers arrests, & en parti∣culier par un arrest que Monsieur l'Arche∣véque de Rheims a fait rendre au mois d'Aoust 1676. par lequel il a esté exposé qu'aucune fille ne poura estre receüe dans la maison de la propagation de la Foy a Sedan quélle n'ait atteint le dit aage de douze ans accomplis, & quélle n'ait fait pa∣roitre un veritable desir de Conversion: ce
qui presuppose en effect, qu'il ny en peut auoir de veritable auant cet aage. Que Vôtre Majesté, Sire, permette s'il luy plait, aux suplians de luy representer la difference qu'on trouvera entre sa Declara∣tion de 1669. & celle cy. La premiere laisse a la nature ses privileges, a la Conscience ses mouvements, aux loix Civiles & Canoniques leur Principes, aux Parlements leurs regles constantes & ordinaires, aux Nations Etran∣geres une exemple digne de leur imitation, a la R. C. & R. l'honneur de garder des mesures d'equité conformes a la droite rai∣son, & a la partique de l'ancienne Eglise; au lieu que sous cette Loy, la nature gemira de voir oster les Enfans de ceux a qui la na∣ture les a donnés, plus a sêpt ans qu'auant cet aage que commence proprement. l'Edu∣cation, & que les Peres entrent veritable∣ment en possession de leurs droits. La Conscience des Suplians se trouve troublée & inquietée de la maniere du monde la plus douloureuse. Car l'autho∣rité paternelle sur les Enfans pour leur Edu∣cation, est un des plus forts & des plus in∣dispensables deuoirs dont la Conscience puisse estre obligée de rendre compte a Dieu: Chaque Pere estant responsable
deuant Dieu, de tout ce que fait son En∣fant pendant le temps que la nature l'a mis comme en depos entre ses mains. Le droit Civil & Canonique parlent aussi pour les supplians. Car si les Enfans auant l'aages de puberté ne peuvent ny Tester, ny porter temoignage valable en Ju∣stice, ny faire des voeux, ny passer aucun acte de propre volonté, comment peut on vouloir qu'auant cet aage, ils soyent en droit & en liberté de faire un Choix de Religion, qui est l'ácte le plus important de la vie. Vos Parlements, Sire, qui suivant les principes communs de la raison & de l'equi∣té n'ont jamais soumis les Enfans aux peines Capitales auant l'aage de puberté, se trouvant obligés de prononcer contre cet usage de tous les Peuples & de tous les Siecles: car en rendant les Enfans capables de changer de Religion, on les rend capable a méme temps de tomber dans le crime de Ceux qu'on appelle Relaps & l'on les soumet aux peines Capitales portées par vos Ordon∣nances.
Les Nations Etrangers & Infidelles me∣mes se croiront authorisés par cet exemple a prendre les Enfans de ceux qui profes∣sent une Religion contraire a la leur. Ensin la R. C. & R. ne craindra t'élle point de reproche, quand on vera qu'elle force & admet que des conversions a sêpt ans, c'st a dire dans un áage si tendre, ou la raison n'a rien de fixe, ny le Jugement rien de reglé, & ou par consequent le chan∣gement de Religion ne sçauroit proceder que d'un mouvement aueugle: ne poura t'on pas dire quelle s'eloigne entierement de la pratique de l'Eglise Chretienne, car en∣supposant meme les supplians comme Here∣tiques, il est constant que Jamais l'Ancienne Eglise na osté les Enfans impubers de ceux qui vivoient avec elle, dans une méme So∣cieté Civile, quoy quelle les regardast com∣me Infidelles. Il est Inoüi, Sire, jusqu'a present parmy les Chretiens & dans toutes les Nations du Monde qu'on ait comme reduit & reformé la puissance des Peres sur les Enfans au dessous de sêpt ans, principalement pour la Religion.
Un des plus grands Docteurs de l'Eglise C. & R. decide ouvertement qu'on ne doibt point Baptiser les Enfans contre le gré de leur Peres, par deux Raisons, l'une, que la practique de l'Eglise ne l'a jamais ap∣prouvé, l'autre que la Justice naturelle y resiste. En effet lorsque des Roix d'Epagne & de Portugal comme Sicebut & Emanuel deux meüs d'un zele de Religion, ont voulu entreprendre quelque chose de Semblable, le Concile quatre de Tolede s'est oposé a l'action du premier, & toute le Monde a blâmé Emanuel de son Ordonnance, pour oster aux Juifs leurs Enfans males au dessous de quatorze ans. l'Evéque Osorius personage Celebre, qui en parle, dit que ce fut une action qui n'estoit fondée ni en la Loy ni en Religion, quoy quelle precedast d'une bonne intention & tendist a une bonne fin: par ce que Dieu demande des hommes un Sacri∣fice volontaire & quil ne veut pas qu'on force les Consciences: a quoy il ajoute ces Circonstances terribles, que plusieurs de ces Peres malheureux se porterent jusqu'a l'eccés de jetter les Enfans dans les puits & de se precipiter eux mémes. Qu'on ne dise point, Sire, que la De∣claration n'ordonne pas d'arracher les En∣fans
du sein des Peres, & quelle les met simplement en liberté de choisir la Religion C. & R. En premiere lieu il ne faut pas considerer la force comme faite aux Enfans, mais comme faite aux peres, a qui la nature les a donnés: c'est le raisonnement du mes∣me Docteur Thomas d'Aquin dont on vient de parler, on feroit, dit il, injustice aux Juifs, si on Baptisoit leurs Enfans contre leur gré, car on leur raviroit le droit de la puissance paternelle qu'ils ont sur leurs En∣fans: ce que, dit il, l'Eglise n'a jamais fait lors méme quelle a eu des Princes Catho∣liques comme Constantin & Theodose, qui l'auroient sans doute permis si cela n'avoit esté contraire a la droite Raison. Aussy l'edit de Nantes dans l'Art. dixhuit deffend egalement la force & l'induction qualifiant l'une & lautre d'un Enleuement & toutes les ordonnances ont puny aussy severement les Rapt de persuasion que ce∣luy de violence. En second Lieu l'aage de sêpt ans n'empe∣che pas qu'il ny ait autant de force & au∣tant de contrainte a légard des Peres, que si on rauissoit les Enfans a la mammelle: par∣ceque si le droit naturel & Civil met les Enfans en la puissance des Peres jusqu'a
l'aage de puberté, c'est la méme chose de les oster a sêpt ans, que de les oster des le Berceau, puisque le droit de la puissance paternelle se trouve egalement violé. Si l'on dit qui les Enfans a sêt ans sont capable de peché mortel, & qu'ainsy ils peuvent faire choix d'une Religion; outre qu'a parler Generalement ce principe est fort incertain, & qu'il ne seroit pas raison∣nable de juger les suplians par des maximes qu'ils ne reconnoissent pas: Qui ne voit, Sire, que la consequence n'est pas juste, & qu'il y a grande difference entre les premi∣eres Idées dn bien & du mal, que les Enfans peuvent auoir dans les Actions de la vie & le discernement des Religions, ou plutôt la determination a quiter leur Creance dans laquelle ils ont esté eleués, pour en suiure une qui leur est inconnüe, C'est a dire, un choix qui est le plus grand effort de la na∣ture, quand on cherche uniquement son salut. Les supplians ne toucheront point icy les tristes & facheuses suites de l'execution d'une Loy qui leur paroist si dure, le desespoir des Peres & Meres, la discorde inevitable entre les Peres & les Enfans, le changement de l'education naturelle qui
des mains des Peres passera en des mains Etrangeres, le libertinage des Enfans qui ne Craindront plus leurs Peres & qui au∣ront toujours un pretexte pour sy sous∣traire, l'exaction des Pensions qu'on exigera des Peres pour l'entretien de leurs En∣fans hors de leurs maisons, & audela de leurs forces, la fuite forcée de plusi∣eurs familles hors du Royaume, l'apre∣hension quauront ceux de lad. Religion d'avoir des Enfans, ne pouvant plus e∣stre les Maitres de leur Education dans leur Religion, l'allienation des Esprits & milles autres inconveniens dans la Societé Civile. Les suplians, Sire, sont convaincus avec toute la terre que rien ne peut resister a vôtre puissance mais ils scavent aussy que Vôtre Majesté ayme a temperer son Autho∣rité & son pouvoir par sa bonté & justice, a l'exemple de Dieu méme qui ne deploye jamais sa force infinie sur les Creatures, qu'il ne les regarde a méme temps des yeux de sa compassion. C'est donc, Sire, vôtre justice que les suplians implorent, & dans l'exés de leur douleurs & sans manquer au respect qu'ils doivent a Vôtre Majesté, ils osent dire qu'ils
aymeroient mieux souffrir la mort que de se voir separés de leurs Enfans dans un aáge si tendre & privés du pouvoir de les eleuer dans leur Religion selon les obliga∣tions de leur Conscience. A ces causes, Sire, plaise a Vôtre Ma∣jesté en revoquant cette nouvelle Declara∣tion, ordonner que Celle de Feb. 1669. sera executée selon sa forme & teneur, & les suplians continüeront leurs voeux & leurs prieres, pour le glorieux Regne de, Vôtre Majesté.
X. Another Address made to the French King concerning the severities used in Poictou. AU ROY. SIRE, VOs Sujets de la Religion P. R. de Poictou, remonstrent tres-humble∣ment a Vôtre Majesté qu'ils sont dans une extreme desolation, par les violences inöu∣ils qu'ils exercent contre eux a cause de leurs Religion, par les Ordres du Sieur de Marillac Intendant de la Province. Ils en ont desia porté leur plaïntes à Vôtre Ma∣jesté, qui a bien voulu temoigner que son intention n'estoit pas qu'on les forçat dans la liberté de Conscience, qui leur est ac∣cordée par ses Edits; mais comme les exces & les mauvais traittements qu'ils sou∣frent ont depuis extremement augmenté, ils sont contraints de venir encore se jetter aux pieds de Vôtre Majesté, pour implorer
sa Justice, en luy disant, qu'on agit avec eux comme avec des ennemis declarez, que leurs Biens & leurs Maisons sont aux pillage, qu'on attente a leurs personnes, & qu'on publie hautement que le Sieur Ma∣rillac le veut, qu'il commande, & que c'est pour les obliger de changer de Religion. Vos gens de Guerre, Sire, à qui la Disci∣pline est si estroittement commandée par vos Ordres, sont choisis pour estre les mi∣nistres de ces exces: Au lieu de les loger indistinctement chez tous vos Sujets, on af∣fecte de les loger uniquement chez ceux de la Religion P. R. & quand ils y sont, non contens de ruins leur Hoste, par des de∣spences excessives pour leur nouriture, non contens d'exiger des grosses contributions en Argent, de les intimider par toutes sor∣tes de moyens, a quoy ils joignent des jure∣ments & des Blasphemes espouvantables; quand ils font refus d'aller a la messe, ou d'assister au Sermon des predicateurs, on les assomme de coups de bastou, on a trainé des femmes par les cheveux & la corde au col, on a donné la torture a d'autres avec des estaux, on a lié sur des bancs des vieillards de quatre vingt Ans, on a mal traitté leurs Enfans a leurs yeux qui venoient pour les consoler: Les plus moderez de ces gens de guerre empechent
les artisans de travailler, pillent chez les laboureurs ce qui peut servir pour leur sub∣sistance, & vendent leur meubles publique∣ment: d'autre part le Sieur de Marillac donne des Ordres qui les condamnent a cinque cens leures d'amande, s'ils quittent leur maisons, & s'ils ne la garnissent de tout ce qui est necessaire pour l'en∣tretienne & la subsistance des Cavalli∣ers. Quelques uns d'entre ceux cy voy∣ans que ni les menaces, ni les coups, ni l'horreur d'une morte violente qu'ils pre∣sentent a leurs hostes incessament, l'epée nue, & le pistolet a la main, ne sont pas capables de leur faire abandonner leur Re∣ligion, les mettent dans les linceuls & les trainent dans des Eglises, & apres leur avoir jetté de l'eau benite sur leur visage pre∣tendent qu'ils sont Catholiques Romains, & que s'ils retournent a leur Religion ils se∣ront coupables du crime de relaps. Ce qu'il y a de plus estrange & dont on ne voit point d'Example dans les Siecles passes, c'est qu'il n'est pas permis a ces miserables de se plaindre: s'ils se presentent au Sieur de Marillac il leur ferme la bouche sans les entendre, ou les fait emprisonner sur le champs sans Acte de Crou, & sans aucune forme de Justice, l'on les retienne en prison sans instruire leur procés: Et pour eluder
les plaintes qu'ils en ont portées à Vôtre Majesté, Les Prevosts & les Archers sont allez dans leur Maisons pour les contraindre de se retracter: Si quesques gentils hommes enterprennent de parler au Sieur Marillac des desordres qu'on a mesme verifiez en leur presence, il respond fierement qu'il les fera mettre en lieu de sureté, de sorte que les supplians se croyoient entierement per∣dus, s'ils n'estoient persuadéz qu'un con∣duite si contraire à vos Ordres, & aux pre∣ceptes du Christianisme ne sera pas ap∣prouvés de Vôtre Majesté. Ainsi proster∣nez aux pieds de Vôtre Majesté, ils la sup∣plient avec un profond respect de les re∣garder d'un oeil favorable & d'ecouter leur plaintes, qui ne contient que des faits tres veritables, qu'ils offrent de prouver par de∣vant tels juges qu'il plaira a Vôtre Majesté de nommer, au peril de leur propres vies. C'est de la seule protection de Vôtre Ma∣jesté que les supplians peuvent attendre la fin de tant de Violences, & la tranquillité qu'ils ozent se promettre, sons le Regne du plus grand & du plus Glorieux Monarque du Monde. A ces Causes, Sire, plaise à Vôtre Majesté ordonner qu'il sera informé des faits cy dessus circonstancies & depen∣dentes par devant telles personnes qu'il plaira à Vôtre Majesté de nommer; & re∣pendant
ordonner le delogement des gens de Guerre; Ou que, si Vôtre Majesté veut qu'ils restent dans la Province, ils seront mis indistinctement chez tous vos Sujets de l'une & de l'autre Religion, le fort portant le foible, & leur enjoindre d'y vivre dans l'ordre de la discipline, & à leurs Officiers d'y tenir le main, à peine d'en respondre a leur privé nom; faire defence aux dites gens de Guerre, & a tous autres d'exercer aucunes violences contre vos Sujets de la Religion P. R. sons pretexte de les faire changer de Religion, a peine d'estre punis comme perturbateures du repos publique, & ordonner qu'on instruira incessament les proces de ceux de la Religion P. R. qu'on tienne en Prison, ou qu'on les mettera en liberté & a l'abri de votre protection: ils continueront leurs prieres a Dieu pour la Santé & Prosperité de Vôtre Majesté & de toute la Famille Royalle.
XI. The Heads of a Bull prepared by the present Pope, against a Nepotism, or the Popes enriching their Kindred with the Goods of the Church. Minuta seu praeparatio Constitutionis quam S. S. Pater Innocentius XI, facere meditatur super aliquibus moderationibus Sedis Apostolicae. Innocentius Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei, ad perpetuam rei memoriam. ANimo nostro saepe revolventes, quod Sancta Tridentina Synodus S. Patrum inhaerendo vestigiis, interdicat omnino, ne quis Ecclesiae reditibus, Consanguineos Fa∣miliaresque suos studeat augere, eosque quam maxime potest moneat, ut omnem humanum erga Fratres, Nepotes, Propin∣quosque carnis affectum (unde multorum malorum in Ecclesia seminarium extat) poe∣nitus deponant. Et haec de Episcopis dicta,
eadem Sancta Synodus non solum in qui∣buscun{que} beneficia Ecclesiastica, tam saecu∣laria quam regularia obtinentibus, pro gra∣dus sui conditione observari, sed etiam ad S. R. E. Cardinales pertinere decernit, quorum Concilio apud R. Pontificem cum universalis Ecclesiae administratio nitatur, nefas videri potest, non iis etiam virtutum insignibus ac vivendi disciplina eos fulgere, quae merito omnium in se oculos conver∣tant. Longe major sane atque vigentior ratio postulare videtur, ut ipse Romanus Pontifex, quem tanquam lucernam arden∣tem super Candelabrum in domo sua posuit Altissimus, tam salubria patrum Constituta retineat, ut caeteris Antistitibus ad illa ser∣vanda exemplo praeluceat. Haec nos inter multiplices gravissimas{que} Pastoralis muneris Curas, quas pro Christi Ecclesia ad Animarum Salutem, & opera Pietatis promovenda, quantum permittit vi∣rium nostrarum imbecillitas, quotidie susti∣nemus, serio meditati, salutarem illam disci∣plinam a Patribus constitutam, circa eos qui secundum carnem nobis sunt conjuncti, ab ipso pontificatus nostri exordio custodi∣vimus, & quantum divina bonitas nos in humanis esse voluerit (domino adjuvante) exacte custodiemus. Quae autem nobis li∣cere non patimur, ea Successoribus nostris
indicare, eandem disciplinam in hac Sancta Sede, ex qua omnes Episcopos, aliosque Ec∣clesiarum Praelatos veritatis exempla sumere par est, perpetuâ firmitate stabilire decre∣vimus; ad id etiam adducti praesentibus aerarii Pontificii Angustiis, quas Fratribus nostris satis super{que} notas at{que} perspectas esse non dubitamus. Ita{que} ad Omnipotentis Dei gloriam, Apo∣stolicae Sedis honorem, bonum{que} omnium Antistitum & Praelatorum exemplum, ac etiam Camerae Apostolicae indemnitatem per∣petuo stabilimus atque decernimus, ut nec nobis nec ulli R. Pontificum Successorum nostrorum liceat de pecuniis, locis monti∣um, vacabilium & non vacabilium, officiis venalibus illorum{que} praetio creditis, & ju∣ribus quibuscun{que} ad Sedem & Cameram Apostolicam quovismodo spectantibus, quo∣cun{que} praetextu vel colore directe vel in∣directe, seu alias quomodolibet Liberalita∣tis, Donationis, alio{que} quovis gratuito vel lucrativo Titulo in totum vel pro parte disponere ad favorem Fratrum, Nepotum, aliorum{que} Consanguineorum, & Affinium, vel familiarium nostrorum, vel cujusvis Romani Pontificis successoris nostri pro tempore viventis respective, sive etiam il∣lorum quos in locum Nepotum aliorum{que} Propinquorum per cooptationem in fami∣liam
aut aliter adlegi seu adscisci contigerit. Pariter nec nobis nec ulli Romanorum Pontificum, successorum nostrorum, licere decernimus, ut Fratres, Nepotes & Con∣sanguinei vel Affines, aut in eorum loco adlecti seu adsciti, seu familiares praedicti, Apostolica concessione Ecclesiis, Monaste∣riis, aliisve cujusvis generis vel qualitatis Beneficiis aut Pensionibus, aliisve Proven∣tibus, Fructibus, Reditibus, Obventioni∣bus, Juribus & Emolumentis Ecclesiasticis, supra cujusquam eorum merita congruam∣que pro modo dignitatis, quam in Ecclesia obtinent, sustentationem augeantur, ut ser∣vatis in omnibus moderatione ac justitiae distributivae regulis nemini relinquatur que∣rendi aut obloquendi occasio, sed Ecclesia∣stica stipendia militantibus in Ecclesia Dei aequâ lance pro uniuscujusque merito Di∣stribuantur. Si vero Fratres, Nepotes a∣liique Consanguinei & Affines, seu eorum loco adlecti sive adsciti praefati, inopia labo∣raverint, poterit R. Pontifex pro tempore existens, pro timorata sua Conscientia, illo∣rum paupertatem ex Reditibus Sedis & Ca∣merae praefatorum eodem omnino modo sublevare, quo pauperum extraneorum in∣opiae ex rebus Ecclesiasticis, quae Dei sunt, subvenire fas est, ita scilicet ut res ejusdem
Sedis & Camerae iis non donentur, nec di∣strahantur neque dissipentur illorum cau∣sa. Si autem, quod absit, modus ut supra hic congruenter salubriterque praescriptus excedatur erga Fratres, Nepotes aliosque Consanguineos, & Affines, & Familiares, possint & debeant Romani Pontifices successores, sive ad cujusquam instantiam, sive etiam motu proprio indebite parta ab iis auferre, ac donata & liberaliter concessa ad modum supradictum revocare atque re∣secare, qua in re nec odio nec gratiae locus sit, sed omnia ad normam Apostolicae redi∣gantur aequitatis, ultra alias paenas arbitrio ejusdem Pontificis. Et ut indemnitati Ca∣merae Apostolicae, quantum fieri possit, in omnibus consulatur, inhaerendo in hoc tum sensibus Collegii Cardinalium, Fratrum nostrorum, in nuperrimo Conclavi, in quo nos, divinâ opitulante gratiâ, ad summi Apostolatus apicem assumpti fuimus, tum etiam Decreto per nos in Consistorio no∣stro secreto sub die 16 Decembris 1676, facto, munus Generalis S. R. Ecclesiae, nec non stipendium, sive emolumentum Super∣intendentis status Ecclesiastici, nec non Gubernii Civitatis Beneventanae a dicta Ca∣mera persolvi solita supprimimus & abole∣mus; alia vero militaria munera, quae se∣cundum
temporis vices existimata fuerint, ut nos de praesenti existimamus, non conferan∣tur cum stipendio sive salario, estiam stabili∣mus at{que} decernimus. Ac ut omnia, ut praefatur, disposita in suo robore perpetuo maneant, volumus quod sicut omnes & sin∣guli Cardinales praesentes, hanc Constitu∣tionem, quantum in iis erit, observare, il∣lique non contravenire, nec Pontificibus contrafacientibus consentire, aut abjura∣tionem a juramento praestito in Consistorio nostro secreto petere promiserunt & jura∣runt, idem per absentes Cardinales a Con∣sistorio, & a Romana Curia, ut quando∣cunque ad eandem curiam se contulerint, ac per futuros pro tempore Cardinales, in as∣sumptione Pilei promitti ac jurari debeant, ac promissionem & juramentum in formula juramenti per eosdem Cardinales praestari soliti adjungi & inscribi debere, nec non contrafacientes poenam perjurii & perpe∣tuae infamiae juris & facti eo ipso incurrere similiter decernimus. Praeterea quod ipsi Cardinales occur∣rente Apostolicae Sedis vacatione, in Con∣clavi, quando de observanda B.M. Pii quinti, etiam Praedecessoris nostri de non infeo∣dandis, &c. ac Sixti quinti, de supradictis pecuniis in Arce Sancti Angeli repositis,
aliorumque Romanorum Pontificum si∣militer Predecessorum nostrorum Con∣stitutiones juramentum praestare solent, etiam de inviolabiliter praesenti nostra Constitutione per quemlibet eorum, qui in Romanum Pontificem electus fuerit, & postmodum idem ad summi Pontificatus apicem assumptus, post ejus assumptionem hoc ipsum promittere ac jurare debeat ad formam & tenorem praefatae Constitutionis ejusdem Sixti praedecessoris in 11. Sect. ex∣pressos ac constitutos, statuimus atque or∣dinamus. Has vero nostras literas in libel∣lum redigi, & post praedictas Pii & Sixti V. & aliorum Pontificum Predecessorum nostro∣rum Constitutiònes adjungi, ac in Quin∣terno Cancellariae Apostolicae, una cum aliis Constitutionibus Apostolicis describi, & in valvis Basilicae▪ B. Petri principis Apo∣stolorum, ac in Cancellaria nostra Aposto∣lica, & in arca campi Florae publicari, ea∣rum{que} transumptis & exemplis, etiam im∣pressis manu Notarii Publici subscriptis; & sigillo alicujus Praelati seu personae in digni∣tate Ecclesiastica constitutae munitis, ean∣dem fidem ubique haberi in judicio, & ex∣tra quae praesentibus haberet, si forent ex∣hibitae vel ostensae, volumus & jubemus. Nulli ergo omnino hominum liceat hanc
paginam nostram Stabilimenti, Decreti, Suppressionis, Abolitionis, Voluntatis, Sta∣tuti, Ordinationis ac Jussionis infringere, vel ei auso temerario contraire, siquis au∣tem hoc attentare praesumpserit, indignatio∣nem Omnipotentis Dei, ac beatorum Petri & Pauli Apostolorum ejus se noverit in∣cursurum. FINIS.
