E2134 [ocm]12206289 197404
THE PARLIAMENTS DECLARATION Concerning the Kings most Excellent Majesty. With the Kings Majesties Determination con∣cerning the PARLIAMENT. Published by His Majesties speciall Command. And Ordered to be Printed and Published. Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown August 3 , Printed for R. VVilliams, 1642.
THE PARLJAMENTS DECLARATION Concerning the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY. THe Lords and Commons assem∣bled in Parliament do Declare, that His Majesty hath profest, that he is truly sensible of the Burthens of His People, which hath begot in them, a Hope, that He will take that Course, which will be most effectuall, to ease them of their Burthens, that is, to joyn with His Parliament, in preser∣ving the Peace of the Kingdom; which
by his absence hath bin much in lange∣red, and by which hindering the volun∣tary adventures for recovery of Ireland, and disabling the Subjects to discharge the great Tax laid upon them, by which means the warre is like to be much more heavie to the Kingdom. And for his Majesties wants, the Par∣liament have bin no cause of them, wee have not diminished his just Revenue, but have much eased his publique Charge, and somwhat his private, and they shall be ready in a Parliamentry way to settle his Revenue in such an Honorable proportion, as may be an∣swerable to both, when hee shall put himself into such a posture of Govern∣ment, that His Subjects may be sure to enjoy His just protection for their laws and Liberties. Of which protection they hace smal hopes, by reason that his Majesties Court is a Sanctuary for all kind of De∣linquents,
against the Justice of Par∣liament. The consideration wherof enforceth both Houses to declare, that his Majesty has ingaged himself in a warre against the Parliament, and all those that have according to their Commands bin just and faithfull: to which end he has rai∣sed, and doth daily indeavour to raise Forces. In which Army there are divers Pa∣pists, and other persons of desperate Fortunes and condition, ready to execute any violence, or oppression. Divers other preparations of War∣like provisions are made beyond the Sea, besides great number of Gentlemen, Horses, and Arms drawn from all parts of the Kingdom, and all the Gentlemen in Yorkeshire required to bring in their Horses for His Majesties service. These things being by His Majesty begun, and a warre thus actually leavied in severall parts of the Kingdom.
The Lords and Commons do De∣clare, that they are Resolved (being bound therto by Conscience) to raise Forces for the preservation of the peace of the Kingdom, and protection of the subjects in their persons and estates, ac∣cording to law, the defence and security of Parliament, and of all those who have bin imployed for to crosse the designs and expectations of those who have drawn his Majstyy to these Courses and Counsels, in favour of the Papists at home, the Rebels in Ireland, and the for∣reign Enemies of our Religion and Peace. As touching the Adjourning of the Parliament, they being most assured of the faithfulnesse of the City and Suburbs, and for themselvs, they would quicken the vigour of the Laws, the industry of the Magistrate, the authority of Parlia∣ment, for the suppressing of tumultuous insolencies whatsoever, and for the vin∣dicating of his Majesties Honour from all insupportable, and insolent scandals,
if any such shall be found, or raised up∣on him; and therfore they think it al∣together unnecessary, to adjourn the Parliament to any other place. Likewise His Majesty doth Declare, concerning his raising of Forces, that what he hath done, is but in Order to his own defence. And his Majesty no longer desires the blessing and protection of Almigh∣ty God, upon himself and his posterity than he and they shall solemnly ob∣serve the due execurion of the Laws, in defence of Parliaments, and the just Li∣berties and Priviledges therof. These are the Differences and Di∣stractions that are hapned between his Maiesty and Parliament. God of his a∣bundant mercy, reconcile the said Dif∣ferences, and create a right understan∣ding between them, that all their coun∣sels may tend to the advancement of his Glory, the maintenance of true Re∣ligion, to suppressing of Vice and Error,
and the confirmation of a happy peace, that the King may be honoured, the Parliament obeyed, and Justice and Judg∣ment executed, to Gods Glory, and the good of his Majesty and Kingdom. Ordered that this bee printed and published. Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com FINIS VERITAS VIRESSIT VVLNERE printer's or publisher's device
