E2081 [ocm]12076416 196907
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT. SHEWING That all Brewers of Beere, Ale, Cider, or Perry, shall pay the Excise imposed by a former Ordinance of Parliament before the delivering, upon paine of forfeiting double thè value of the said Commodities. ALSO An Ordinance of both Houses, giving power to the Committee sitting at Haberdashrs-Hall, to take some speedy course for the bringing in of the Monies appoynted to be raysed for the maintainance of the Armie. Die Martis, 17. Octob. 1643. ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, that these two Ordinances bee forthwith Printed and Published. John Browne Cler. Parl. London Printed for John Wright in the Old-bailey, October 18. 1643.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. Die Martis, 17 Octob. 1643. FOr further explanati∣on of the late Ordi∣nance of both Houses of Parliament touch∣ing the Excise or new Impost, upon the se∣verall  Commodites therein mentioned: Be it Declared and Ordained, by the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, for the better enabling and encouraging of the Brewers and makers of Beere, Ale, Per∣ry, and Cider, (who are the parties that are to pay the Excise, as by the said Or∣dinance is appoynted) to make due pay∣ment thereof accordingly, That no Beére, Ale, Perry or Cider, shall be delivered out by the Brewer or maker thereof, or any for them, to any Retailer or other buyer therof, till the rate and price which is by them to be payd, for and in respect of the Excise be payd by the Brewer or first seller thereof, on paine, that as well the Retailer or buyer, as the Brewer or first seller thereof, shall forfeit for the first offence double the value of every quantity of Beére, Ale, Perry or Cider, so delive∣red out, or received by the party so offen∣ding, and for the second offence treble the value thereof, and the party so offending, to be disabled from using their said Trades or Professions, respectively for the space of one whole yeare then next en∣suing,
the said forfeitures to be levied and imployed in such manner and to such uses as by the said Ordinance is appoynted for the penalties therein mentioned; And beé it Declared and further Ordained, that the rates set upon every barrell of Beére and Ale by the said Ordinance, shall beé payd for every greater or lesser quantity, proportionably after the same rate; And be it also further Ordered and Ordained, that for all Beére of foure shillings the barrell or under the Excise, shall be payd after the rate of six pence for bar∣rell, and so after that rate for a greater or lesser quantity, under the penalties and forfeitures in and by the said Ordinance appoynted, Provided alwayes, And be it Ordained, that no Retailers of any Beere, Ale, Perry or Cider, shall take any more in the price thereof upon the  the same Commodities, then according  the usuall rates and prites appoynted by Law for the same (excepting onely the rate of the Excise) as they will answer
their contempts herein to both Houses of Parliament. And as touching new Draperies, It is Declared and Ordained, that the Excise due and payable for the same, shall be payd by the Shop-keepers who buyes the same. John Browne Cler. Parliamentorum.
Die Lunae 16. Octob. 1643. WHereas there have diverse Ordinances passed, for the raising and bringing in Moneyes for supply and support of the great affaires of the Kingdome, which by the neglect and unwillingnesse of such who are intrusted with the raising, collecting, and bringing in of the said Moneyes, to use such meanes as by the said Ordinances are appointed to bring in the said Moneyes, great considerable summes of Moneyes, are yet in Arreare, and not brought in. It is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That the Committees of Lords and Commons for Ad∣vance of Moneyes, shall have power to use all such meanes as they shall thinke fit, by distresse, or Im∣prisonment, according to the said severall and res∣pective Ordinances, to bring in the said Moneyes with all convenient speede. John Browne Cler. Parliamentorum. FINIS.
