G1180 [ocm]12056268 196665
M. S. TO A. S. WITH A Plea for Libertie of Conscience in a Church way, Against the Cavils of A. S. AND OBSERVATIONS ON HIS CONSIDERATIONS, AND ANNOTATIONS Upon the Apologeticall Narration, Humbly submitted to the judgements of all rati∣onall, and moderate men in the world; With some modest, and innocent touches on the LETTER from ZEALAND, And Mr. PARKER'S from New-England. Nec Imperiale est dicendi libertatem negare, nec Sacerdotale, quod sentias, non dicere. Ambr. Ep. 17. Licenced and Entred according to Order. London, Printed by F. N. for H. Overton. 1644.
A. S. SOME OBSERVATIONS AND ANNOTATIONS upon the Apologeticall Narration, humbly submitted to the Honorable Houses of PAR∣LIAMENT, the most Reverend and learned DIVINES of the Assembly, and all the Protestant Churches here in this Island, and abroad. M. S. IF A. S. his heart with discontent be rent in two peices (as he saith in his Epistle) to hear the in∣nocent bleatings of that wronged Lambe the Apologie; surely our hearts more justly may be rent in twenty peices to hear and see this roaring Lyon-like Reply, with his many claws of Obser∣vations, Annotations, Considerations, and Notes, renting and tearing that modest and innocent thing, and no man saying to him, Why doest thou so? Is this the use men make of pressing Sermons, and prin∣ted Considerations to stay and wait what the Assembly would do; that some preach, and others print for their own way, on the one side, whilest the other stand still to be beaten, muffled and bound up from speaking by Pen and Presse without much striving? The Apologie did but tell men with as gracious words and as much sweetnesse as a thing could speak, how farre they did recede from, and disclaim Separation and Brownisme; and how neer they did accedere cloze with the present reformed Churches, even beyond the expectation of thousands, and see how many stinging flyes are and about to alight upon this youngling newly eaned. One buzzing to the other, as one Raven inviting another, at this lambing-time of the yeer, that the
young brood, at the same minute may see the light and loose their eyes. How many Replyes in two or three weeks, appearingly have turned the world, if not the Church, upside down; most men seem∣ing to be resolved before the Arguments are solved? Beleeve it, it works more upon the spirits of the best men, then ever any thing yet that befell this Kingdom. Things before were irregular enough, but now preposterous; before resolute enough, now violent; before the body of the Kingdom, the Common-wealth, was sore sick, now the soul, the Church, to mens thinking, lies gasping. It was observed on the date of the Title, by one in a more cheerful The date of A S. his book. So some of the best A∣stronomers long since prognosti∣cated that 1640. plus minus should be∣gin Totius mundi universalis insania. The title of the book. temper, then that Answerer can willingly be at the sight of such a Book, thus; In the beginning of March (that rougb Moneth) the Sun being ecclipsed, and the Moon changed but a day or two before) A. D. 1644, part of the Astronomers criticall time of almost an universall madnesse (witnesse all the Cavaliers, and many Scholars) which hath cost our prudent and wor∣thy Parliament, and Armies of Scotland first, and then of England, much care to cure as fast as they can; There bolts forth a wilde book, swiftly running like a March-Hare, hunted through a town, causing such a shout like that among the Philistines, as if the Ark of God were taken, the Churches were surprised. Just like that Hare that running through the Army that besieged Rome oc∣casioned the Souldiers so lowdly to now her, that the Romanes thought verily that their works were stormed, and their City taken. But away. Non est con∣veniens luctibus ista loqui. The title of the book in the title page and the first page is, Some Observations, Annotations, and Generall Considerations upon the Apologeti∣call Narration, humbly submitted to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, the most reverend and learned Divines of the Assembly, and all the Protestant Churches here in this Island, and abroad. A title carrying a great breadth with it, and soaring high, as if A. S. were confident that in his book he speaks learnedly, as a Scho∣ler, truly, as an honest man, gravely, as a serious man, and lovingly as a Christian man; and that all these wayes he did make good that title, which if it be shaped to the book, and read according to the rode thereof, I speak it seriously and with a sad heart (these being no times nor things for jesting or jeering, which is the faults of A. S.) A Parlia∣ment man said A. S. jeer'd. Another gentleman said, he li∣ked not the spirit of the man, yet neither of them Inde∣pendents. may most justly be read thus: In Observations and in considerations simply committed against the Honorable Houses of Parliament, the reverend Assembly of Divines, and the Protestant Churches at home and abroad. For this one single simple A. S. now starts up by himself, peremp∣torily
to state, and determine the Questions, for the resolution whereof the Parliament thought the Assembly of Divines few enough to undertake; and therefore call'd all them together for that purpose, who are now most intent upon the pin of the contro∣versie; yet as if A. S. would take the work out of their hands, he will anticipate, and fore-judge the five Ministers as utterly erring throughout (for he sifts them corn after corn) which if true, the dispute is at an end. Go then A. S. and carrie, if you dare, your plat∣form to the Parliament, and intreat the learned Assembly to dis∣solve. But, A. S. will go his own way, and thereby he hath given great offence to the Protestant Churches, to charge them all of dissenting from the five Ministers, and awakning mens spirits into replyes, when before they were drowsing with long expectation these two yeers of a publick determination, and I wish this may be the last Reply before all things be sweetly composed. However this intends onely to take off aspersions, not to lay down assertions. We will but barely answer A. S. who hath so lasht the five Ministers, with so much sharpnesse of spirit, for telling the world how farre off they are from Brownisme and Separation, and how close they come to the more reformed Churches in Scotland and England. Many very good men have won∣dred that the five Ministers closed so much; yet A. S. is bitterly an∣grie they close no more, before the point be disputed. O it was a fault of the Cynick Phylosopher in his high shooes so to dance on the Platonick Phylosophers bed and Arras Coverlet, with boasting, that he danced on his brother Philosophers pride, as that the patient Phy∣losopher could justly reply, yea, saith he, Thou dancest on my pride with thy greater pride. How much of this is A. S. his, I say not; but sure it was the un∣seasonablest if not the most unsavourie book to multitudes of spiri∣tuall palates, as ever wise man put forth. Yet James Cranford is quoted by the Printer in the page before the Title, as approving it and the book with a Licentious approba∣tion, in these words; These judicious Observations and Annotations, &c. as being at this time necessarie and seasonable for the vindication of all Prote∣stant Churches, defending the authority of Parliaments and Synods, and pre∣vention of division amongst our selves, (though I reverence the persons of the Apologists, yet) I approve to be impressed. Mr. Cranford, if the Printer hath dealt faithfully with you, let me intreat you (and the Lord help you) to see your self, ask your con∣science,
aske your reason, aske the book it selfe, whether there be one true clause in all that you have said? Are these Observations, &c. of A. S. judicious, that are extra judi∣ciall and prejudicall to the publike peace and order, and ordinance for dispute, prejudging and adjudging them, who joyntly with the grave Assembly, A. S. acknowledgeth the Arbitratour, or Judge, if not his Judge, in the matters in question? Are they at this time necessary, when the grave Commissioners of Scotland, had with farre more prudence and soliditie then A. S. said by way of reply so much to the Apologie, Nemine reclamante, none replying till A. S. was abroad? Is there any need to bring a great printing presse, to squeese to death a poor worme trodden on before? Or to bring many leavers to break an egge, that makes small resistance? The truth is, A. S. his Observations are like a man with a Pole-axe, knocking a man on the head, to kill a fly lighting on his beard. For though he sayth, he humbly submitteth to the Protestant Churches, yet he lays about him, as if he would knock them all down unto a submission to A. S. whosoever they be that will not stoop to his book. For though he thinks that all Protestant and Christian Churches are for him rather then for the five Ministers, as he intimates in the begin∣ning of his Epistle, and therefore in all likelihood, professeth a sub∣mission to them; yet he will find many Churches in London (he would wonder if we should name how many) that will not submit to his book, and yet come to the publike Ordinance, doe not separate, but are most willing to submit to the truth, regularly discussed, cleared, and brought down to them. Yet still James Cranford stands fixed in the Licence page, in black and not blush, for asserting that A. S. his Observations, &c. are judicious and necessary. When as they are nei∣ther, unlesse preposterousnesse, abuse of good men, and the disturbance of the people, be judicious and necessary. For though the ensuing answer will prove them evill, yet they will never be proved necessary evills. They are not so much as civilly necessary, either necessitate praecepti, as commanded by Parliament, or Assembly, or necessitate medij, as use∣full to compose, but indispose the minds of men, to embrace things prejudiced with the violence of private spirits. Men will not so ea∣sily be whipt and compelld by one inferior. Againe, Are the Observations seasonable, which doe but interstre∣pere, make a noyse, whilst the Divines are disputing, drawing the people together in heaps, there taking up their parts, to defend, one against another, and pre-ingage themselves before they come to
heare what the Assembly will say? For such a book cannot come forth, but it makes a thousand dispute in a week, every one then con∣tending for his owne, when it is so irregularly and illegally taken from him. Are they for the vindication of all Protestant Churches, when as in condemning the Apologie, they condemne many, very many Churches in England, many in Holland, generally all in New-England, notwithstanding some private Letters and Manuscripts sent over, to which we shall answer afterwards. Are they for the defence of the authoritie of Parliament, in opposition to the Apologie? doth the Apo∣logie touch one hayre of the honourable heads of the Parliament? Are not the five Ministers chidden some where in print, for saying R. C. they allow more to the Civill Magistrate, then they think others principles can? Doth not A. S. snib them too for going (as he thinks in their Apolo∣gie) Pag. 4. to the civill Magistrate? Doth not A. S. in his book give a nega∣tive vote against the civill Magistrates directive power in matters of Pag. 5. Religion? I will not by Gods help wrong the A. S. in an hayre of thy head, therefore I relate not all you say, but let me say what I think, which to say will do you no harme. If the resolutions of the Divines be not digested by the reason and graces of the houses of Parliament, and so made as their own sence, for ought I know they will never be tur∣ned into a Statute. Are these Observations for the defence of the au∣thoritie of Synods, in opposition to the Apologie? What Synods? Scrip∣ture-Synods? Where doth the Apologie whimper against them? or do you mean classicall ones? If so, thats the question. And so you pro∣claime a defence of that which yet hath no existence. The question is not resolved. Lastly, Are these Observations for prevention of sad division amongst our selves. Well, Mr. Cranford, you have by this endeavoured to set Divines together by the eares More ecclesiastico, your licentiating hath in a∣bled men to give the second blow, upon which, the common Law lay∣eth the breach of the peace. And notwithstanding you licence these Annotations, yet you say you reverence the persons of the Apologists. A pinne for such complements, Love me, and love the truth. Let us measure your respect to them, whilest the advantage of the higher ground whereon it stands be removed. Away with your dare verba, your froathy words; This is the truth, so much you re∣spect them, as A. S. respects them. And so much have you spoken judiciously, truly, and seasonably, as A. S. hath spoken, and no more.
If he be cast, you will be condemned. Stand by Mr. Cranford, and heare A. S. tryed, and in him your selfe. You were not contented to say Imprimatur, Let it be printed suita∣ble to a Licencer, but you adde, I approve to be impressed. Whats this great long (I) which intimates that nothing above the length there∣of, or without the cranie of his great (C) approving it, must be prin∣ted? This makes I. C. worse then the B B. Their Chaplains might li∣cence many things, if not contrary to the orthodox doctrine and good manners. They would licence a book endeavouring to prove there was a world in the Moon, Novitatis ergo (its their own expression) though they did not beleeve the thing. But C the half Moon will licence no∣thing but what falls within the semicircle of his approbation. A. S. To the right reverend Divines, the Authors of the Apologeticall Nar∣ration. The Epistle. M. S. The Authors of the Apologeticall Narration desire more of your right, though they have lesse of your reverence. Had I written a book with so much unreverence, I would either have blotted out my title Right Reverend, or else I should never have put in that Episcopall stile, Most Reverend, and Right Reverend, seeing the Bishops are going. For to stroke in the title, and to strike in the book, is but flattery, if not grosse dissimulation. Or as to say, Art thou in health my brother, and in the meane while to strike under the fift rib. A. S. The high esteem I have ever had of your persons, &c. except onely in your particular opinions, wherein the dissent from all Protestant, yea all Chri∣stian Churches in the world. M. S. Now let the Protestant Churches (to whom you say you submit) judge whether in these words, there be not a notorious un∣truth. For wherein do the five Ministers and their Churches differ from many Churches in England, diverse in Holland, and generally all within the Patent of New-England, if you account these places Protestant? It may be you will object, Mr. Parkers Letter and some Manuseripts from New-England, and the Letter from Zealand. To Mr. Parker his Let∣ter we need say little, the Letter will answer for us, though Mr. Par∣ker little thought when he wrote it, to find an A. S. in England, or that his brother Bayly would have printed his Letter seemingly to antici∣pate the disputation of the Assembly, as if he meant to beg the que∣stion, though but with shews and shadows. 1 Mr. Parker sayth not one word for a Classicall Presbyterie, (the
main difference in hand) but for a Congregationall, that he would have in some things more managed by the Presbyters of every Con∣gregation, without putting every thing to the vote of the people of the Congregation, because some confusion hath followed upon it. Doth in necessaries abuse take away the use? There was confusion in the Church of Corinth. Or is there any mention of this in the A∣pologie, that all businesses of the Church must be put to the vote of the Congregation? 2 That in that thing onely there hath been an arguing on both fides. Mr. Parker and Mr. Noyse only are mentioned in the letter, to be on the one side, and all the other Churches on the other, against Mr. Parker and Mr. Noyse. And thirdly, Mr. Parker doth not say he won the day, but as he answered their Arguments (as he saith) so he confesseth they answered his Arguments, and the thing is left to consideration. Yea a godly man of New-England told me that the Churches of New-England did conceive that Mr. Parker had recei∣ved full satisfaction from them in that point. How ever it were all amounts but to a private letter subscribed by one man, yet Impri∣matur saith I. C. as if much to the purpose. But look but a little af∣terward to our answer to a Letter from Zealand, and you shall find the judgement of New-England in letters newly come over. To any private copies or Manuscripts from New-England: one Mr. Rutherfoard hath answered, as too much jumping with the Apo∣logie and opposite to Classicall Presbyterie. Another, if it had come forth, would have been keener against A. S. then the Apologie is. So that if the Apologie do differ from that, its onely because the Apologie more agrees with the reformed Churches of this Island. And for the third, it hath nothing at all for a Classicall Presbyterie, but some things touching the ordering of Congregationall Pres∣byteries, and all these are but private intelligencers, and mutuall advicers, not determinations or Nationall. No more then, I sup∣pose, Mr. Cranford or A. S. will account the strange Queries on the Apologie and Scotch Commissioners Reply to be the sence of New-England, though but of one man of that Countrey. As for the Letter of Zealand, I cannot tell how to speake all the truth, and not offend some, whom by my will I would not in the least displease. Sure this will not offend to tell A. S. that in Holland, if not in Zealand, are some Churches that are fully with the five Mi∣nisters, unto which some of them do relate. And to speak these things
to the Letter it selfe, being matters of fact, I hope cannot justly of∣fend. 1. That that Letter came admirably punctuall upon the ve∣ry nick after the first reply to the Apol. was out. 2. That a Scottish Knight nine or ten dayes before it was known abroad, that it was to come, said, What if yee receive a Letter from Zealand, disliking the Apologie? or to that effect. 3. That there is a Scottish Church (of which one Spang is a very busie agent) at Trevere, hard by Middle∣borough, whence the Letter came. 4. That there are in it many high passages, seeming so prejudiciall to our worghy Magistracy, that it justifies that of the Apologie, saying, That the five Mini∣sters, &c. give more to the Civill Magistrates, then the principles of some Presbyterians do. The said Letter giving so too little to the Magistracy, that the State of England, I thinke, cannot approve it here among us. Verbum sapienti sat est. More may be thought, upon evident grounds, but not spoken here. 5. Most happily by almost a miraculary pro∣vidence in this nick of time came two Letters from New-England to countermand Mr. Parkers Letter thence, and the other from Zealand. The first from Mr. Winthrop Governor of New-England, To his Reve∣rend, and very good Brother, Mr. Hugh Peters Minister of the Gospel, these deliver in London. Our late Assembly of about fourtie Elders met, wherein the way of our Churches was approved, and the Presbytery disallowed. Winthrop, Governor. Decemb. 10th. 1643. The second from another of New-England, to another Minister in Old-England, about the same time, wherein we have these passages. We have had, sayth he, a Synod lately in our Colledge, wherein sundry things were agreed on gravely, as, That the votes of the people are needfull in all ad∣missions and excommunications, at least in way of consent; all yeelding to act with their consent. 2. That those that are fit matter for a Church, though they are not alwayes able to make large and particular relations of the worke and doctrine of faith, yet must not live in the commission of any known sin, or the neglect of any known dutie. 3. That consociation of Churches in way of more generall meetings yeerly, and more private monethly or quarterly, as Consulta∣tive Synods are very comfortable and necessary for the peace and good of the Churches. 4. It was generally desired that the exercitium of the Churches power, might onely be in the Eldership in each particular Church, unlesse their times be apparent in their worke. 5. That parishes Churches in Old Eng∣land could not be right without a renewed Covenant at least, and the refusers excluded. And were not New-England so farre, the Churches of New-Eng∣land
would soon send a third, punctually to approve the Apologie, unlesse it be for their neerer complyance with them who notwithstanding have written a∣gainst them. We have been the longer in answer to this clause, because we find A. S. to be but the Text of other mens Commentary discourses; who say, That the five Ministers will oppose all the visible Christian Chur∣ches in the world. If they did, it were not such a wonder, as for one Wickliff in one age, one Husse in another, and Luther in a third to op∣pose all the world. The truth is, all Churches generally, partly by tyrannie, and partly by securitie, are grown so corrupt, that to apologize for a through Reformation seems to reprove all, and so all are readie to be offended, that are lesse reformed. We have heard of sad stories of late but true, (not teld in a corner) of the lamentable over-spreading of Popery, Atheisme, drunkennesse in some Kingdoms, and adulterie, forma∣litie, &c. in others. If we reform but in part, by halves, imitating Hen. 8. towards the Pope, cutting off the head of Prelacie, and sitting down in their chair, (similia non sunt contraria) as Mr. Davenport meeting with a Classicall Presbyterie in his way to New-England, said they were but thirteen Bishops, for one) the cry of the sin against our light and opportunitie will call back our reeling Reformation (like will hasten to like) an unblest posture will leave us unhealed of our sins; and our sins will make us become any thing. Had not the Abbeys been pulled down, the Priories since had had opportunitie to have risen. Therefore Moses grinds the Idol to powder, that it might be quite abolished. I speak all this by way of supposition, what shall upon full debate be found to be the idol, the nest of Pope∣rie, the chaire of Prelacie, the half-reformation. Thus of your charging the five Ministers with dissenting from all Protestant Churches. The expression that follows is a most grosse one. That they differ from all Christian Churches. I say grosse in two things. 1 To call them Churches, and Christian, that are not Prote∣stant (and ergo are Popish) now since the Councell of Trent, wherein they gave Christ a bill of divorce (as the learned assert) anathe∣matizing most of his maine truths. The popish (notwithstand∣ing a few Saints in secret here and there) are in a dependence on Antichrist. 2 To charge it as a crime on the five Ministers to dif∣fer from them, when as it is a sin and shame not to dissent from them. If you dissent not from them, you will never kindly dissent from the entitled Mo. R. A. BB. and Rt. Rev. BB. I observe that men
in their Replies secretly afore they are aware run to the popish marks of a Church, viz. visibilitie, succession, universalitie. ☞ A. S. You as my self, are but men, yet ye know but in part, and consequently may erre. M. S. Yet this one man thinks he hath more knowledge to his part then the other five Ministers, or else sure he would not so bold∣ly condemne them of erring, in a point which all the Assembly have not yet determined; and so peremptorily acquit himself. A. S. I thought this which is the question between you and all the Churches in the Christian world. M. S. This untruth comes thick upon us, that the Apol. differs from all the Christian world. It is intimated in the title. It is expressed in the very beginning of the Epistle, and here again, and once more in 3. pag. of the Ep. and once in Consid. 5. and how oft more in the book I do not yet know, till I find as I go. We have answered it once for all in the threshold of this Epistle. A. S. I esteemed it no lesse a part of my dutie and Christian libertie, as a man to oppose my self to five men: then for five men to oppose five hundred thousand, &c. M. S. Hear ye, O all ye men on earth, that A. S. saith it is his Christian libertie to oppose the five Ministers. But the whole scope of his book is to rebuke them upon supposition that they do oppose others, whiles they tell them wherein they agree with them. One instance follows at the heel of his Christian libertie; to which by and by. Mean while, Reader, observe how this mans words do smell popisbly (though I think the man to be a reall Protestant) as if came from Rome, intimating as if visibilitie, universalitie, and so pluralitie of voices of learned men, might be an unerring, or very certain ar∣gument. He speaks as if he had forgot or never heard of Wickliff, many yeers after him Husse, long after him Luther opposing justly the whole world, as we all religiously maintain at this day. And that one Paphnutius opposed a whole Councell (mistaken in a point) which is upon record of Historie, to his great honour to this day. A. S. Five men to oppose so many learned men, so many holy Divines, hun∣dreds, and thousands for one of you, no way inferiour to the learnedst and best among you, and not onely to particular men and Divines, but to so many, yea and those the most pure, and most reformed Churches of the world, amongst whom there have been found so many thousands who have sealed Christs truth with the losse of their goods, imprisonment of their bodies, by exile of their persons, yea with their dearest blood, and lives, who if they wrote not mira∣cles,
yet God declared his almightie power in working miracles about them, &c. M. S. Here we have in form (and I will not say how much more) a Popish argument, I will not say a mopish argument, I abhor flying on men in stead of matter. To this I will speak, and then they that will be deceived let them be deceived. First, you Doctrines & practises prove men good, not men, doctrines and practises good. dub such a num∣ber of men and people Saints, most reformed, learned no way inferiour to the learnedst, and best among the five Ministers, as if you knew perfectly all mens spirits, mens lives in all places in the world, and the five Ministers parts, &c. intus & in cute. Then secondly, as before you came, what R. Reverend and most Reverend (I desire to speake it no o∣ther way then with a Christian griefe and anger against such So∣phismes) so now you Cant to us as it were the Popish Prelaticall Letanie, and Te Deum, As if by the temptations and fastings, by the pas∣sions, by the deaths and burialls of suffering Christians; The noble armie of Martyrs praising the holy Church throughout all the world acknowledging, you would conjure us to yeeld any thing upon pluralitie of voyces, or topick arguments, that may and are turned every way, and used by all sorts good and bad for their own wayes. 1. Men living in a notorious sinne of grosse usury, unjust enclosures, monopoliting, &c. First, They will tell you of severall Ministers, &c. very holy men; and then secondly, They will tell you that those Ministers do approve of those things. 2. The Malignants now cry, that so many good Lords, so many Parliament men, most of two Kingdomes are for the King, Ergo, the King doth well, beleeve it who so will. A touch on W. R. his book, called, The grave Confu∣tation, &c. The Papists proclaime, that they have pluralitie of voyces, Mar∣tyrs, &c. Ergo, they are in the right. So the Prelacie tell us, that of Bishops were many Martyrs (to which Smectymnuus answers) by them was composed the Liturgie, and they have a thousand for one for them, (so they had formerly) and most of the learned Doctors, &c. Scholars, Divines and Lawyers were for them, therefore they were in the right. Then some of our respected brethren of the reputed godly Non-Conformists come in a title of a book thus, A most grave and modest Con∣futation of the errors of the sect commonly called (as W. R. sayth) Brownists or Seperatists (so his skill writes it for Separatists) agreed  by the joynt consent of sundry godly and learned Ministers of this Kingdomes then standing out and suffering in the cause of Inconformitie, and now publish∣ed in a time of need What now all, or the grea∣test part of them, come to our publick meetings, and the Apol. dis∣claims Separa∣tion, & Brow∣nisme? unlesse you would drive them to corners again. &c. against that pernicious evill. Published by W. R.
As if their sufferings were a seale of the just length of reformation, how far we must go, and no further. When as the most of them stood only upon the negative part, What they would not have, but only a few declared positively, of which some for a Congregational presbytery or Church-way, be it, or be it not, a pernicious evill, as W. R. calls it. God forbid, that if we have suffered for Christ, in the behalfe of any piece of truth, that therefore we should pride up our selves as having done so much; or stint our selves from proceeding further in know∣ledge, or affright our selves from suffering more, if more truths be to be contended for, as the Apostle speaks; or least of all through the sides of Brownisme or Separation, to wound the truth and Saints of Jesus Christ, just in the nick of such reproachings cast upon them that dis∣claime in words and practise all pernicious Brownisme, &c. It can∣not be forgotten that the choicest doctrines held in England, have been called pernicious heresie. And therefore it is an high peremp∣torinesse in a generall title to call all those things pernicious evils, some of which are truths. We have, and do disclaim Separation and Brownisme, properly so called. But if the Pope or the Devill Mark. 1. 24. confesse Christ, we will not therefore call that truth, a pernicious evill. I suppose all that W. R. booke sets forth in heads, and Chapters, as to be confuted, are some of those things he means are pernicious evils. As, 1. That pag. 8. Many parish-Churches are not rightly gathered, 2. That p. 11. That they Communicate in a false and idolatrous wor∣ship, as stinted prayers, Homilies, Catechismes. 3. That p. 17. They want that Discipline and order which Christ in his Testament hath appointed for the government of his Church. 4. That p. 50. That it is objected against them, that the ignorant and prophane multitude are admitted to all priviledges of the Churches. Are these (we give but a taste) pernicious evills? Then you con∣demne Smectymnuus for writing, the Parliament and Assembly for removing and about to remove these exceptions; And most presby∣terian Ministers in London for forbearing to give Communions to such multitudes. Mr. Calamy sayd, that an imposed Liturgie was idola∣trie. And our worthy brethren of Scotland justly stood up against these enormities. No wonder therefore if W. R. book abound with weaknesses & impertinencies, in stead of Confutation of such things as these. For I patronage not any false or unadvised speeches of Barrow, or &c. there used. 3. A. S. saying, That the Apologists differ from the most reformed Chur∣ches
in the world. Some of which he knows are in Holland, more in England, most in New-England, all publick Churches, if he speakes not falsly, or ignorantly; yet begging the Question, whether the Churches named, or the Classicall presbyterian are most reformed? To close our answer to this, tell us no more of your mutitudes, the Lord keepe us all from the broad way that leadeth to destruction, though many there be therein. One Phinees, one Elijah left alone in the eye of the world, two against thousands, viz. Caleb and Josuah in the truth are more to be honoured, then swarmes of swarvers (I judge none.) The time is at hand, that ten men shall take hold of one Jew Zech. 8. 23., and so on one true Christian. Godly men may be hunted out of a Kingdom, not out of the truth, meane while such a Kingdom may be without them, but nere the more without judgements. England was never quiet, but worse and worse, since it hunted away almost a little Nation of Saints to New-England, though W. R. joyning issue with A. S. will follow them, with a blotting pen in print, even to that Kingdom too. Yea and take in his way many Churches in old England, and some that are and lately were in Holland, and then have at New-England, none comes amisse that have gone an inch in refor∣mation beyond W. R. his Non-Conformitie. Like him who would strike all that were next him, who e're they were that injured him. And all this worke he cuts out for himselfe in his book he calls A Narration of some Church courses in New-England. ☞ O that all Readers that will not be wilfully blind, would by the way observe, how A. S. condemnes the Apologists, as guiltie of dis∣senting from the Churches in New-England. And W. R. condemnes them for agreeing with the Churches of New-England. So that A. S. and W. R. do not agree between themselves. But you shall have an Answer to that book of W. R. affixed at the end of this book. Meane while wee go forward with A. S. A. S. I am perswaded in my Conscience, that your opinion of Independen∣cy, &c. if it were admitted (pardon my expression till I be better instru∣cted) could not but prove the roote of all sorts of Schisme and Heresie, and con∣sequently the utter overthrow of Christs universall militant Church. M. S. If you speake cordially, as supposing indeed that you may be better instructed, it had been best for you to have stayd for the Assemblyes determination, or to have conferred with some of them you write against, before you had written and printed that despe∣rate speech, least the ink seeme letters of bloud to you at your dy∣ing pillow. I warrant you, if what one, or many say onely, would
make an argument, a multitude would say, that a coactive classicall presbytery would be the root of couched prelacy, and ecclesiasticall Tyranny. But I will not be one of them to say so. Probatum est; in New-England that which you call independency, hath not procured, but cured, or purged out heresies, schismes, formalitie, prophanenesse, more then some other Kingdoms that so hate and hitt at mis-called Indepen∣dency. A. S. You sue for a Toleration, and consequently for a Separation. M. S. So then, where Papists are tolerated, there they are Sepa∣ratists too. Its but the nown of multitude between, but that the In∣dependents in England might tolerate, and the presbyterians might be tolerated, would they then be Separatists? Who desires separati∣on? but rather union in the truth. If any hold the truth, and stum∣ble, though of weaknes, at some smaller matters (as you count them) it is your dutie to suffer them, and to beare with the weak, and not of∣fend the consciences of brethren; or Gods woe is by him pronounced against you. A. S. I may adde to all these your undervaluing of the Parliaments great favour towards you. For yee know brethren, how they notwithstanding your former separation from all other Churches, &c. invited you to be members of this Assembly, had not they given you the capacitie, yee had been altogether in∣capable. And not onely that, but they honoured one of you with the high fa∣vour of sending one of you with their Commissioners to Scotland. M. S. O abominable accusation, O sycophantising insinuation. Who art. A. S. Cujas. Can an English-man, unjesuited, or any Mini∣ster unprelatised, or any man honestised, say thus? I am distressed how to put home to this, and yet prudently. I tell thee, A. S. Thy accusation is a grosse falshood. For their respect to the Parliament, and their respect from the Parliament, let many of the choice mem∣bers of both Houses speake, they will soon prove thee a grosse—. Thy probation a sillie phantasie. Did ever any vote of the Parliament, or of the Assembly, accuse the Apologie of undervaluing the Parlia∣ments favours? None but he that hath A. S. as part of his name, would say so. For all discreet men see plainly, that as the forme and stile of the Apologie is most sweet, so the matter now in hand so much as is there intimated, is the question. Can that be an offence to the Parliament, for the five Ministers to propound that of the things they are to debate (by Ordinance of Parliament) which is to them the question, making it ready, and leaving it for debate in the As∣sembly? Yea, whether the whole draught of the Apologie be to be
condemned or commended by the Parliament, that is also a questi∣on yet unresolved, by Parliament, Assembly, and a considerable part of Citie and Kingdome. Therefore why doth one A. S. presumptu∣ously make it a crime against the Parliament? Since the thrice wor∣thy March 13. 1643. Parliament had it in debate in the house, being put on by the Letters from Middleborough in Zealand, and upon the speech of lear∣ned Mr. Seldon, and others, they resolved with a generall acclama∣tion, that the Apologie was to be left as it was found, unblamed. The God of heaven in much mercy blesse the Parliament, as for all the good they have done, so for their uprightnesse therein. The joy of the Churches is now as high as their sorrows would have been deep, had it been condemned. For it would to them have been not onely a dolefull ante, or anti, but-anticipating-presage. But blessed be our Parliament-guiding God; that as they had no hand in the Apologie, so they would have no hand against it. Therefore away A. S. Operam & oleum perdidisti (as the Starling said to the Emperour, having saluted him in vaine with ) you have lost your labour. The Parliament despise sycophantising Collogueing; (Are you as wise as that bird to see that, it said?); and on the other side they do not repent of what honour they conferred on Mr. Nye, and through For the Parlia∣ment in wis∣dome chose some Episco∣pall men to be of the Assem∣bly, to plead their owne cause if they could. Some of which since cast out them∣selves, and o∣thers were cast out. him on his brethren of the same judgement. They could not but think (what ever you dreame) but that the five Ministers were in as neere a capacitie to be of the Assembly, &c. being native English∣men, and against the Episcopacy, as either those of other Nations, or those of our owne, in judgement holding for Episcopacy; and standing for the just and lawfull authoritie of Magistracy as either. A. S. The Apol. Narration conteining (how ever you name it) a singular desire of separation from them, that so cherish you, with some unworthy nick∣names put upon them, who style you by no worse names then brethren. M. S. What ever names A. S. puts upon this his booke, as Annot. Consid. Notes sure enough (Nigro carbone notandus. Hic Niger est, hunc tu Romane caveto,) it is not candid; but holds forth A. S. his singular desire of making division, if he could, either between the Parliament and the Brethren, or between them and our deerest brethren of Scot∣land, if M. S. do rightly divine what he meanes by them. God and man hates this thy designe (O A. S.) Six things the Lord hates, yea se∣ven Prov. 6. 16. are abomination to him. A proud looke, a lying tongue, an heart that de∣viseth wicked imaginations, a false witnesse, that speaketh lyes, him that sow∣eth discord among brethren, & caetera (for I have named enough for A. S. to make his choice.) And I am informed that the worthy Commis∣sioners
of Scotland (nobly done) do utterly dislike A. S. his booke. From whom we have far more evident and effectuall symptomes of their cordiall love, then the word Brethren. Which with A. S. in his book is nothing but Complementall dissimulation; for his Epistle begins as it were with kissing, viz. Right reverend and deare Brethren. And his booke is biting. So that as he useth the word Brethren, it is much to the same sence as a parasiticall Minister being to preach an odde fellowes funerall, did use the words of that deceased mans Will, viz. In the name of God, Amen: (this storie is proper for A. S. if he hath any skill in the Law, for I cannot yet be certaine what he is:) sayth the Priest (being put to it for matter for his Trentall Panegyrick) See the devotion of this deceased brother; he begins his Will with, In the name of God, Amen. A fillie goose. For its as common for all good and bad to begin their Wills so (as A. S. knows if a Lawyer) as for A. S. to call Brethren, and to bawl forth reviling all along his book. As for the Nick-names A. S. chargeth upon the five Ministers, with which they should nick-name I know not whom, he names them not; which makes me thinke, he hath no skill in Law. He knows that Dolus latet in universalibus, or to use his own words. p. 47. Sermones generales non movent, we cannot answer to generalls; nor can he find them in the Apologie. What a Pharisee may phantasie, that will not have mens defects intimated as they stand in the crowd of all Christendom, I know not. I am sure the worthy Commissioners piously confesse their Churches may be yet further reformed; and what re∣ligious men will not sigh forth the same, touching their own native Countries? A. S. What else have yee done but erected one Assembly in the Assembly, by private authoritie against publick; taking private resolutions against pub∣lick. M. S. O grosse, yet he will follow Machiavels counsell that sayd, Calumniare audacter, aliquid adhaerebit, If men must not speak, write, or preach any thing that may relate to something in debate in the As∣sembly, then (as it was excellently spoken in Parliament,) Ministers may write and say nothing at all. Divers print and preach for the Presbyterie, yet of the Assembly. Are they all a private particular Assembly? A. S. Sundry reasons made me to suspect, that yee would say more then yee say. M. S. And what then? Did you think by this your reply to hush them? No readier way to make them or their friends to say more then either they intended, or you would willingly heare. Yet con∣fesse
one truth; That there hath been two replyes to them already, yet they have printed no reply (that we know of) for that you mean (I sup∣pose) by saying more. Else, God forbid, but they should speake, and speake in the Assembly too; though one sayd, He had much adoe to forbear moving to have one of them to be cast out of the Assembly, for pro∣pounding his reason to the question, to which he was called by order of Parlia∣ment. But for you A. S. you would make a stone speake (as they say.) If you beleeve not the Poet, Si natura negat, facit indignatio versum; yet beleeve the Scripture; Oppression would make a wise man Eccles. 7. 7. madde. But let me tell you now of one that is of your judgement for the Presbyterie, but by farre a more solid and discreet man then your self, that said, There was this good by the Apologie, that therein thc five Ministers had wrapt up themselves that they could not say more in substance of tenet then was therein expressed. Nor could they recede from that compliance with you they had therein professed. So you see you Presbyterians may differ among your selves, no wonder therefore if from the five Mi∣nisters. A. S. I love you all from my heart. M. S. Good Reader, compare this mans book with his heart. And good writer (if I do not mis-call thee) judge whether in your book you act the part of a loving Physitian, were your potion never so cordiall, in that you administer it scalding hot? though you flat∣ter till its poured down the throat. A. S. The will is but a blind facultie. M. S. Now where is your Phylosophie? Is there an unreasonable facultie in the reasonable soul, that hath no light but by participa∣tion? This is news to considerate Phylosophers, that do not take things upon trust, by tradition, of speculative untried principles. A. S. My main ayme has been, Gods glorie, and the edification of weake brethren, who may have been misled by your most learned discourse. M. S. Yet this man in his 1 Annot. pag. 4. saith, It comes very short, is weak and slender, and no way satisfactorie. The man makes nothing of contradictions, upon contradictions; for even here also is a con∣tradiction or two more. Are the five Ministers discourse most learn∣ed, and yet errour too, as you said in the beginning of your Epistle? And are they most learned, and yet lesse learned then you? But indeed (said one) he makes a great noise of learning in his booke, ratling his Sophistrie-termes, so that though he hath failed in his Divinitie, Physick, and Phylosophie, hitherto, yet he will make us know that he is a no∣table
Logician; or he will make our ears ring with unenglished Ergoes, with A genere ad speciem affirmative, with a posse ad esse valet non consequentia. Non possibile est esse, possibile est non esse, totum, totaliter, materialiter dispositive; Page of his book, 53, 54. with his modifications, assumptions, &c. and multitudes of such lum∣ber to the weak brethren. O, said one, that some body would ear∣nestly intreat him to speak seriously whether he thinks in his con∣science this to be his direct way to that end he here professeth, namely, to edifie weak brethren? Alas such things to them, if english∣ed, are but gibberish, and as charms. A. S. Esteeming that during the rest of my pilgrimage which cannot be long, having no other thing to do, I shall do well to do this. M. S. Ile tell you what one said to this. Would God he had rather no patient, then he should have no patience, then the Church should be his patient, (seeing he hath no more skill in her grief; that he had no clyent, then that he should be a treacherous Advocate; that he would rather do nothing then evill. For it is a sad thing, said he, that good men neer their end should write some sorrie peece, to be a momement of their declining in their last dayes, and of their disgrace before they are buried. As a worthy man a little afore his death wrote in defence of Ceremonies, for which formerly he had suffered. A warning to A. S. and all good men, that their good works should be more at last, and so to leave that character to the hypocrites, as one observes to live smoothly; towards his end to do sorily, and then to dye suddenly. All that I have to say to A. S. here, is onely to sign over this name S. (in foure men) as fatall to this poore England and Scotland (if Vox populi doth rightly speak it at length). The first too much con∣firmed the tyrannicall pride of the Prelates. The second carried by ill counsell to foment these bloodie warres. A. 3. viz. Doctor S. the Civilian or uncivilian Divine spake those bloodie words, viz. Better the Kingdom had run with blood, then that the King should have concluded that dishonourable peace with the Scots. So he, most wickedly. And the 4. is our A. S. here, that hath wounded thousands in this Citie in the heart, with his pen as grievously as those Scholars See Fox in his Book of Mar∣tyrs. did their Master Martyr with their penknives. A. S. His Considerations. M. S. Truly called Interogatories which A. S. puts to the five Mi∣nisters, as if he were already gotten into the Chair, &c. A. S. His first Consideration. Whether in any Ecclesiasticall or Politick Assembly of the Christian world wherein things are carried by pluralitie of voices, it be ordinarie for any inconsiderable num∣ber
thereof, to joyn in a particular combination among themselves, and therein to take particular resolutions? M. S. We have heard of some Parliaments in Europe, that the House of Peers is so constitute that if a vote passe where somes consciences amongst them cannot yeeld to, they may modestly enter in the House their dis∣sent from it. But whether this be so or not, the five Ministers did not take particular resolutions and publish them in print, to crosse the proceedings and disputes of the Assembly; or state a question yet unresolved by the Assembly, but onely told the Kingdome de facto, what they had held and practised, and therefore in the Apologie speake in the past time, with some very few and short touches upon what ground. Wherein they declare themselves to close nearer with the Assem∣bly, were they all Presbyterian (as we know the contrary) then thousands ever thought they would. And withall they do professe themselves so unwedded to their See Apol. p. 10. It is their second golden rule, by which they walked. former practises, and so far from over-weening their present judge∣ments, that upon discovery of more light, they are most willing to open their eyes upon it, and let it in. And therefore you A. S. have done very ill, to discourage them as much as in you is, from that sweetnesse of Spirit, that hath appeared in all their writings and carriages. But our main answer to this your Consideration (which makes it a grosse inconsideration, if not untruth) is this, That the Assem∣bly is not to conclude things by a pluralitie of votes, if you dare be∣leeve the Ordinance of Parliament, whose words are to conferre and treate touching Doctrine, Discipline, &c. and to deliver their opinions and ad∣vices, as shall be most agreeable to the word of God. And in case of difference Ordin. for the calling of the Assembly, pag. 4. 5. of Opinion among the said Divines, they shall present the same, together with their Reasons thereof, to the Houses of Parliament. Which words, besides confutation of your pluralitie of voyces, doe more then allow so much as is done in the Apologeticall Narration, That being but a Narration of past things. A. S. His second Consideration, Whether in taking such resolutions, they should not consequently resolve themselves to quit the Assembly, and to ap∣pear as Parties? M. S. The Antecedent was denied before on the first Consid. therefore the consequence is destroyed. And for the Consequent or Proposition it selfe, of the five Ministers quitting the Assembly, and to appeare as parties, for setting forth the Apologie; I utterly dis∣like
your motion, as striking at the worthy Commissioners of Scot∣land, as if they likewise should quitt the Assembly for replying to the Apologie. Men of a farre better spirit then you are. And though they be somewhat ingaged in a Settled Presbytery, yet carry them∣selves more sagely and moderately, then many of our owne men. An honour for them, and a shame for us. A. S. His fourth Consideration (and for the third vanisheth upon our an∣swer to first and second) whether this Apologeticall Narration was necessary, when yee found the calumnies, mis-takes, mis-apprehensions of your opinions, and mists, that had gathered about you, or were rather cast upon your persons in your absence, begin by your presence againe, and the blessing of God upon you, to scatter and vanish, without speaking a word for your selves and cause? M. S. Yea it was. For looke but to the next full period afore; and you shall find that this you repeate as touching that scattering and vanishing of mists, doth but relate to the people, and onely to some of them, viz. Those that professe or pretend the power of god∣linesse. These mens serene spirits onely, were the beames that began to scatter the mysts. And therefore the Apologists speake distinctly and punctually (and not indefinitely as you) in the words you seeme to quote; viz. they say that they found many (mark) many of those mists not all; And did but begin to scatter, as you your selfe re∣peate. The Apologists say, they did but begin to scatter. For in the apprehension of the Apologists, their motion was like the lowrings of an inconstant morning, the mists ascend, and anon descend, and by and by ascend, and turne into a Scottish-mist, as the English Pro∣verb is, That will wett an Englisle-man to the skinne. The mist went up by the hills; but (as the other Proverb is) down by the Mills, they turned into raine. What mean else those words of the Apologie; Our eares Apo. pag. 1. have been so filled with a suddain and unexpected noyse of confused exclama∣tions, in the interpretation of most reflecting on us, that awakened thereby, wee are enforced to anticipate a little that discovery of our selves, which wee otherwise resolved to have left to time. And those words of the Apologie: Whereas our silence upon all the fore-mentioned grounds, hath been by the ill interpretation of some, impu∣ted Apol. p. 27. either to our consciousnesse of the badnesse and weaknesse of our cause, or to our inabilitie to maintaine what wee assert in difference from o∣thers, &c. And those words of the Apologie; Since the change of times from Apo. p. 31. our exile, wee have indured that which to our spirits is no lesse grievous; the opposition and reproach of good men, even to the threatning of another banish∣ment.
No doubt but the Apologisers know what they say, and what they can say, if called to speake out. Besides, if the people had let them alone, should seeme some Ministers would not. O, it was an unhappie Anticipation (O, if the will of God had been to have pre∣vented it) that in the very nick, before the Assembly met, that two Books should forestall the Market, the one penned by a learned Scot, and the other by a learned English-man, that set the tongues of men so a wame. First to vomit out upon the five Ministers Tenet, and next to a∣sperse their persons, before the Assembly had made one Syllogisme, Hinc illae lachrymae. Hence the Apologie (poore meeke thing) was forced to speake; and thereupon A. S. so fiercely breathed (I had almost said brayed) out against it so many bitter words. A. S. Tells us in this his 4. Consideration, of the honour the Parlia∣ment shewed the Apologists, in calling them to be members of the Assembly which was enough to justifie their persons from all aspersions, with∣out any Apologie. M. S. To this we answer; That they and their friends will ever acknowledge the Honorable Parliaments great respect to them. And so much the more, in these times wherein great A. S. and little &c. do so labour to render them odious. But I think I should not crosse the sence of the Parliament if I should not make it an univer∣sall major proposition: That all whom the Honorable Parliament shall call to be members of the Assembly, are ipso facto vindicated, from all aspertions; and so to conclude, that all Episcopall prelati∣call men that in life and practise have been—if they should be cal∣led to be of the Assembly, were eo nomine vindicated from all asperti∣ons. I am sure de facto that some very learned men were called by the sweet indulgence of the Honorable Parliament for the common good to be Members of the grave Assembly, who since upon better knowledge of them, are by the Parliament purged out of the Assem∣bly (a good ridd, the Assembly is the better for their absence) and some are at Oxford, see how terse they be; and some in prison, see how their membership of the Assembly have vindicated them. Be sure of it, that the choice of men for the Assembly was to find men good, not to make them so. And two worthy Parliament men of a Countie may not know at first all the faults in every Town, or the lint on every black coat. And therefore since that, the worthy Par∣liament hath well brusht some. If the Parliament puts ever so much honour upon the five Mini∣sters
in calling them to the Assembly; yet since many have aspersed them, or some how laboured to make them odious to Kingdoms and Nations, and who but the order of A. S. mainly instigating. And therefore this fully answers to your last Quaere in your fourth Consideration. Whether this Apologie was necessarie after the first cloud was nere over? every night must be cleared by a new rise of the Sun. A. S. His fifth Consideration, sayth, that the five Ministers doe blame all Protestant Churches, as not having the power of godlinesse, and the profession thereof, with difference from carnall and formall Christi∣ans, advanced and held forth among them as among you, which is com∣monly thought to be particularly intended against the Scots. M. S. Sure it is no otherwise commonly thought to be particu∣larly intended against the Scots; and generally to blame all Prote∣stant Churches, then in or by your common sence deriving species, vain seemings to your phantasie, from your outward sences an evill eye ill affected. For the Apologie cals our dear brethren the Scots, the more reformed Churches. And for the words all, and among you, whereby you would present them setting themselves as an opposite member of distinction to all Protestant Churches, and blaming them all as undistinguished from carnall, and formall Christians, in comparison of them and their five Churches; the words all and you are forged and foysted in by your self, and so must go for very falshoods charged upon them. The words of the Apologie are. 1. That they and many others had but observed touching the non advance of the Apo. pag. 4. power of godlinesse, &c. among some, what themselves had generally ac∣knowledged. The five Ministers do not charge it, but repeat it as con∣fessed by themselves. 2 It is not said it was confessed, and they ob∣served there was no power of godlinesse, but it was not advanced. 3 Nor is it said it was not advanced, but not advanced as in this our Island. This Island being a common phrase, yea and your phrase too in the title of your booke, to signifie Scotland and England both. And then where is that particular intendment against Scotland; or the five Ministers laying their Churches in the ballance against other Churches? Fourthly and lastly, they speak but indefinitely in a contingent matter, and therefore can be construed but of some particulars; and therefore did not ayme at all. You know how highly they esteeme of New-England, and therefore that is not cluded from the ad∣vance
of the power of godlinesse, as in this Island of great Britaine English and Scots are included. However, as no man that is a know∣ing man either by hearsay or travell over the next Sea, will accuse Scotland as most carnall and formall (it were well for the world if in that, &c. others had not farre exceeded them) so none of us, ex∣cept Pharisees, will excuse our Nations of remisnesse in advancing the power of godlinesse in apparent view above carnalitie and for∣malitie. You see by our answer to the Apologie, that not that Apologie but your will caused you to speak that which is not by wise men once to be mentioned at this time, as if the Apologists intended to say any the least thing to grieve our brethren the Scots. A. S. His seventh Consideration (for the sixth is non-sence, unlesse wee put the interrogatorie point at Anabaptists, and so A. S. to take unto him and them, he ranks himself with all, calling them us, I say, to take to him and them the Brownists & Anabaptists to be of his partie. Reader, view his sixth Consideration, whether you can make sence of it, I cannot, nor any thing of consequence; therefore answer not unto it) his seventh Consideration, I say, in∣terrogates thus: Many are desirous to know whether this Apologeticall Narration published by you five alone, be in the name of you five alone, or of all those also, or a part of those whom ye pretend to hold your tenets: if in the name of you five onely, whether ye five can arrogate a power unto your selves to main∣tain these tenets as the constant opinion of all your Churches; having no gene∣rall confession of their faith thereabouts. If in the name of all the rest, we de∣sire you would shew your Commission from all your Churches, &c. M. S. Good Reader, do but turn about these intergotories, and put them to A. S. and put A. S. in stead of the five Ministers, and you may kill Goliah with his own sword; If five Ministers have arrogated in the Apol. one A. S. much more in his Reply. If A. S. doth not like the conversion; we answer positively. 1 Its no arrogating for any Christian upon just occasion to make his confession of faith. 2 The confession of faith in doctrine that is in all the best refor∣med Churches is theirs; For one touching pure Discipline, it was not found in Scotland whiles the tyrannie of the Bishops prevailed. Whiles things are in fieri, a wise man will not expect them in facto esse. Faith may be when confession dares not appear. A. S. is angrie with that confession of faith in the Apologie; and hath opened the mouthes of many others (as we hear) ready to bark too at it, they
do but stay their turnes, why then doth he call for more confession? 3. The godly learned Fathers, Tertullian, Justin Martyr, &c. pro∣duced no authoritie from men to Apologize for the truth; the Scrip∣ture they Apologized for bore them out. 4. The Parliament allow the five Ministers more, viz. to shew their reasons, therefore the lesse, to shew their opinion. 5. A thousand and a thousand good Christians were glad to heare how the five Ministers dissented from the riged Separation, and closed with the best reformed Churches (the sole businesse of the Apologie in effect) and thought that no good Protestants would have been sorry for them. A. S. His eight Consid. interrogates the five Ministers thus; Whether yee desire a toleration for you 5 alone in your (mark) your Religion, for all the rest? Item, if a toleration in publicke, in erecting of Churches apart? or to live quiet∣ly without troubling of the State? As for the last, appearingly yee may have it unsought. But for the rest, the Parliament is wise enough, and knoweth what is convenient for the Church of God. M. S. Friend A. S. Toleration (sayth learned Capel) is of things unlawfull. We are not friend A. S. come to that yet. To yeeld the one, or beg the other. You tell the five Ministers that to live quietly with∣out troubling the State, they may have it appear in ly unsought. Let the world judge, whether here be not a saucie jeere, both in mat∣ter and forme of speech. I would A. S. had made use of that tolera∣tion, and then he had not so intolerably troubled a Kingdome. Or else if he had no stomack at first to be quiet, if for some dayes he had but had somewhat appearingly allowed him to bite upon, some∣what appearingly to quench his thirst, he would have had a stomacke rather to eat and drinke, then bite and jeere. He is so passionate, that he doth not remember what he sayes in one page, so as it may be re∣conciled to another. Here he sayth, the Parliament is wise enough, and knoweth what is convenient for the Church of God (you may perceive his meaning by reading his Interrogatorie) yet in his Annotation upon the inscript of the Apologie, pag. 5. He supposeth that the Parliament should arrogate if it should take upon it any directive power in matters of Reli∣gion. If he hath any Scholastick quillet to reconcile this within him∣self, it is more then the common people and weak brethren he writes to know of. A. S. Hath one Consideration more; were it not that it did answer it selfe, M. S. Note. I should have been too weary of his former inconsiderate considerations to have stayd here, being eager to come to his booke.
1. He sayth, that they that ayme at separation (he means the five Ministers, though they disclaime it in their Apologie, unlesse to se∣parate as our brethren the Scots did from Prelaticall co-action) should tolerate some small pretended defects (they are but pretended) yet he sayth not approved by those from whom they desire to separate. 2. He sayth, the Church, (from which the five Ministers would separate) testifies a great desire to reforme defects, yet those defects, sayth he, are but pretended to be in it. 3. He thinks that the five Ministers should do better to stay in the Church, to reforme abuses, then by separation to let the Church pe∣rish in abuses. Now he supposeth, destroying abuses; and would have the five Ministers stay to help reforme; yet he is angry with their A∣pologie, that doth but sigh forth an intimation of need of reforma∣tion. And so angry that he would (as yee heard in his second con∣sideration, its so long since that he hath forgotten it) have the five Ministers quit the Assembly. A. S. His Annotations upon the inscription of the Apologists Narration. M. S. If I thought A. S. had any skill in Physick, I would ask him whether by Annotations, he means, as the Physitions speak, Annota∣tiones incompressas, hecticarum febrium indicia, Violent annotations are signes of an hectick feaver in his vitall parts. A. S. All Apologies suppose some accusation, which here appeares none. M. S. Not to meddle with your English, which is scarce gramma∣ticall, you are intreated to speak true. Doth not the Apologie begin and end with sad complaints? Remember our answer to your fourth Consideration. A. S. If intended for an answer to that which hath been written against your opinions, it comes very short, weake, and slender. M. S. Why then would you fight with a fly. The Mouse told the Elephant, that he would never get honour in killing a silly Mouse. Why did you bestow so much Oratorie and Logicke, to clap it and fisticuffe it? A. S. Neither is it a meer Apologeticall Narration, but also a grievous accu∣sation against all our Churches, as destitute of the power of godlinesse. M. S. This indeed is a false accusation, as wee have cleered it in our Answer to your fift Consideration. A. S. The Apologie sayth, humbly submitted, &c. So humbly submitted to the honourable Houses of Parliament, as if they submit not themselves to your de∣sires, &c. For any thing I can see, yee seem no wayes minded to submit your selves to theirs.
M. S. I am sorry your eyes should be so dim, or your selfe so to doat. All indifferent men can see in the Apologie abundance of pro∣pensitie to submit to them according to truth; farre more then there is in one A. S. to submit to five Ministers, whose holinesse you admire, and whose learning you extoll. A. S. You being Divines, ye should rather first have consulted with the Assembly of Divines, your brethren, then so ex abrupto gone to the Civill Magistrate, that arrogates not to himself any directive power in matters of Religion, this is more convenient to the spirit and power of godlinesse, that the spirit of the Prophets in such matters should be subject to the Prophets, then un∣to the spirit of the Civill Magistrate. M. S. Mark how this fellow A. S. 1 supposeth it arrogancie in the Parliament to have any directive power in matters of Religion, in case the Assembly (which God forbid) should mistake. Surely by this bold expression he would not have the Parliament judge of the reasons of the Assembly in case of dissent. Least of all doth A. S. consider that the Parliament are Members of many excellent Chur∣ches; That they laid down the Common Prayer book in their hou∣ses before some Presbyterians could see reason, to do so. That the Parliament so looked on the Assembly chosen by them, as not to take things meerly upon trust, but see with their own eyes. 2 He dreamingly supposeth that either our Assembly is like the Assembly of Scotland for breadth and strength; or else he takes them for a Church, and in the act of prophesying; which last I won∣der A. S. being a rank Presbyterian should in the least allow of, and call the five Ministers to the rule thereof. 3 A. S. supposeth that it is lesse convenient to the power of god∣linesse for the wronged five Ministers to appeal to the Civill Magi∣strate in Parliament. 4 A. S. supposeth, that because the Parliament have chosen the Assembly, that therefore some men, in some cases at least should wave the Parliament, and go to the Assembly. This is A. S. his fine intimation prompted to all scandalous and false teaching erronious Ministers, to take up and learn, in their cases relating to Religion, to wave the Parliament, and to go to the Assembly. 5 A. S. supposeth that the Assembly would be so unwise (see what a silly fellow A. S. is) as to go beyond their Ordinance, to judge one another. When as they will take upon them no such thing, not so much as to cast out, or take in one member, without the Parliament: much lesse will they judge persons that shall wrong the five Mini∣sters that are not of the Assembly.
The rest of his Annotations on the inscription are but meer paper blots, and therefore I omit them. Now to the Book. The Introduction. HAving diligently perused the cacologeticall or rough commen∣taries of A. S. upon the smooth Apologeticall Narration of the five Ministers, I find the greatest difficultie, that he is like to encounter, who by a sober Answer shall desire to make the world amends for that injurie, which that writing hath done it, is this, how to make his Answer soft enough. For the truth is, that here is much more Anger or passion, then reason, to turn away, and the wise man informs us, that it is A soft Answer, that turneth away wrath. Prov. 15. 1. If A. S. could be but redeemed out of the hand of that great jealousie, wherewith he burns over his present apprehensions in re presbyterali, though all the arguments, and strength of discourse, wherewith his judgement is supported therein, were left entire to him, he would be found in a sufficient posture himself, to do himself the right of giving satisfaction unto the world, for the wrong he hath done it, in that discourse, and to make his attonement with his own pen. Though in many cases Anger is able to do more, then reason can undo; yet in matter of argument or writing, the little finger of a mans reason, is commonly able to pull down what the loins of his passion, hath in a tumultuarie way and method built up. Any man that shall but diligently observe the endlesse varietie and multitude of keene expostulations, imperious interrogations, the importune, peremptory, and insulting charges, criminations, and aspersions, the wrigglings, wringings, wrestings, wranglings, the streinings, stretchings, stingings, struglings, the captious, crooked, and crosse-grain'd Interpretations of things, wherewith that peice is farced in an unreasonable proportion to the bulk of it, cannot lightly but conclude, that Indignation was the chief Oracle con∣sulted with, about the framing of it. But because I would willingly decline all occasions of heat and recrimination, as far as a sober and just vindication, not so much of the persons, as of the cause so evill-intreated therein, will bear, I
shall chiefly confer with A. S. about his Reals, and leave men of common civilitie to determine and judge of his personals; unlesse (possibly) somewhat in this kind shall now and then, occasionally fall in. I make no question but that the Apologists, will be well able to bear it, that the cause which they maintain, should have the pre∣heminence of their persons, in point of defence; nor are they so scan∣ted in the consciousnesse of their own worth and innocence, but that they are very well able to be out, and bear the want of so much of their reputations for a time, as the Observations and Annota∣tions of I know not who have unjustly taken from them; especially in case they shall see it bestowed by their Friends upon the accom∣modation of that honorable cause wherein they are engaged and declared. Cap. 1. Concerning the Directive power in matters Ecclesiasticall, and which concern Religion; whither, how, or in what sence, it may be concei∣ved to reside, in the civill Magistrate, Synods, or other men. A. S. pag. 5. hath this left-handed expression concerning the Civill Magistrate, that he arrogates not to himself any Directive power in matters of Religion. The Reader must do him a courtesie in finding out a very soft sence for the word arrogate; otherwise, he will be found in a misprision of a foule insinuation against the Civill Magistrate, as viz. that he arrogates, 1. (in the ordinary constru∣ction of the word) proudly assumes to himself, when he claims or exerciseth that executive, coercitive, and externall power, in and about mat∣ters of Religion, which yet A. S. himself in the very next page, know∣ing on which fide to butter his own bread, ascribes unto him. But I marvell that the man should here so cleanly wipe the civill Magi∣strate of a directive power in matters of Religion, when as but a few pages before, in his eighth Observation, he had pleaded wisedome enough in the Parliament to know what is convenient for the Church of God. If the Parliament be wise enough to know what is convenient for the Church, I know no reason why that Directive power here spoken of, should be derogated, or taken from them, especially by those, who (it is much to be feared) are much streightned in respect of a spirit of that wisdom themselves. Surely A. S. in saying that the Par∣liament is wise enough to know what is convenient for the Church, hath fieft∣ed the Synod or Assembly with a sieve of vanity, and broke the head
of the necessitie thereof; and so is guiltie of a farre higher misde∣meanour against it, then the Apologists are in any thing that they have done, or said, yea or then himself layeth to their charge; which yet is his rod of scorpions to scourge them with from place to place. Turpe est Doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum. But let us consider a little more narrowly, whether A. S. hath quitted himself like a Doctor of the Chair, in stripping the Civill Magistrate of a Directive power in matters of Religion, and putting on him in stead thereof, the purple robe of an executive, coercitive and externall power onely. pag. 6. 1. By such an umpierage and decision as this, between the Civill Magistrate, and himself with his fellow-Presbyters, hath he not made the one Judex, and the other Carnifex: the one must give the sentence, the other must do the execution? The Civill Magistrate is much beholding to the Presbyter, for giving of him a consecrated sword to fight the Presbyterian battels; and for perswading him to pull out his own eyes, upon this presumption, that he shall see better with his. I perceive Presbyterie is policie in the highest; and seeks to put the Magistrate between it self, and the envie and discontent of the people; and yet neverthelesse hopes to gain from the hand of the Magistrate such an interpretation of this practise, as thereby to be esteemed the best and faithfullest friend it hath, in all the world. This cunning of the spirit we now speak of, puts me in mind of the Ape, that took the spaniels foot to pull the chest-nut out of the fire. Surely the frame and constitution of Presbyterie, is exactly calculated for the meridian of this present world; but whither it will indifferently serve for that which is to come, totus dubito, I am in doubt all over. And indeed A. S. himself is somewhat ingenuous in acknowledging, that this Government hath little or no relation un∣to, or compliance with, the world which is to come, professing p. 13. the externall peace of the Church, to be the adequate end thereof. 2. I would gladly be informed, whether A. S. thinks it reasona∣ble, meet, or Christian, that the civill Magistrate, should immedi∣ately, hand over head, without distinction, without searching (for his own satisfaction) into the equitablenesse, and lawfulnesse of what a Presbytery or Synod shall commend unto him for execution, interesse himself in the execution of whatsoever shall be so recom∣mended and presented unto him? I presume A. S. will not arrogate unto himself, nor to his Assembly, an infallibilitie, though (in some places) I find him very loath to abate this in the reckoning (if it would be allowed;) and the truth is, that the whole fabrique
(well-nigh) of his discourse, to make it rationall, and any thing to purpose, requires such a supposition for the bottome and foundati∣on of it, as this. Yet pag. 8. he condescendeth so low, as to number himselfe amongst those, who know that they know but in part: and pag. 9. amongst those that are conscious of their owne infirmitie: which prin∣ciple if he would please to follow home, it would teach him to cast away the greatest part of his discourse with indignation, and to say unto it, get thee hence. If he grants a possibilitie of errour or unrighte∣ousnesse in the results and awards, whether of his Presbytery or As∣sembly, which are supposed to be transmitted to the Magistrate for execution; he cannot, speaking like a man, deny him a lawfulnesse of power, no nor yet a necessitie by way of dutie, to examine and judge them, whether they be lawfull or meet to be put in execution, or no. And he that hath a power to judge and to determine, what is meet to be done, or not done, executed, or not executed, in mat∣ters of Religion, may be said to have a Directive power in such things (at least in the common sence and notion of a Directive power) as well as an Executive. But 3. A. S. should befriend my intellect very much, to tell me plain∣ly and distinctly, what he means by a Directive power in matters of Re∣ligion; being (as it should seeme) a daintie morsell, which he would faine complement away from the Parliament and civill Magistrate, and snatch away from all others, for himselfe and his friends (Pres∣byteriall Ecclesiastiques) to make merry with. 1. If by a Directive power, he means a libertie or power of considering, advising, and proposing of what may be expedient to be done in matters of Reli∣gion, and for the good of the Church; I know no man but is inte∣ressed in such a power: As when the Tabernacle was to be built, every man had power to bring and offer what he had, and what his heart served him to part with for such a purpose, towards the edifi∣cation and furnishing of it. But why this libertie or power should be denied unto the Parliament or Civill Magistrate, upon whom prin∣cipally the charge lyeth to provide quietnesse and peace for the Churches within the verge of their temporall jurisdiction; reason (doubtlesse) on this side the Moone there lyeth none; and A. S. must be very Seraphicall to find any. 2. If by a Directive power, he means an authoritative power, to con∣clude, say, and set downe, what shall, must, or ought to be done, a∣gainst all contradiction, in matters of Religion, I know no subject capa∣ble of such a power, but onely he that is above all the Predicaments in Logique, or he to whom all power is given, both in Heaven and on Earth.
Certaine I am, that neither the one nor the other, can be invested with any greater power, then this. If the Presbyterians demand such a Directive power as this, let them aske the crowne, throne, and Kingdome of Christ also. 3. If by a Directive power he means, a prudentiall facultie or abili∣tie, to direct, order, or prescribe, whether unto a mans self or others, what in a way of reason, humane conjecture, or probabilitie, is best and fittest to be done, followed, or imbraced in matters of Religion, as I would not deny this power (and that in somewhat a more ex∣cellent degree) to A. S. his Presbyterie or Synod, (alwayes provided that the constituting members of either, be of a sound constitution, as well for spirituall wisdome, as for meeknesse and humilitie) so is it not by A. S. to be denied to many private members of particular Churches; daily experience teaching us, that God gives of this pru∣dentiall facultie unto many of these, by the Ephah, whereas to many Pastors it is given but by the Omer. And if this be the Directive power which he meaneth, though he seeks to allure the Parliament from the claime of it, by fastening a complementall commendation of modesty upon them, by way of exchange for it, proclaiming it unto the world, that they doe not arrogate it to themselves; yet they doe claime it, yea, and exercise, act, and make use of it, from day to day, as occasion requireth. 1. In contriving and publishing their Ordi∣nance for calling the Assembly (formerly mentioned) they exerci∣sed such a power, as wee now speake of. 2. In limiting those that were to be of the Assembly, to the subject or argument, on which it was permitted unto them to debate and treate (as appears by the Ordinance they did) they did no lesse. 3. In appointing and order∣ing them not to determine or conclude of things as they pleased by pluralitie of Votes, but to deliver their opinions and advices, as should be most agreeable to the word of God (another proviso in the Ordinance) they did the same. 4. In injoyning them, in case of difference of opinions between them, to present the same, together with the reasons thereof, unto both Houses (another member of that Ordinance) they did every whit as much. 5. In their nomination and calling such and such Mini∣sters or Divines by name, and not others, to be of the Assembly, they acted the same power. 6. In framing the temper and constitution of the Assembly, allaying it with such and such members of their own, they steer'd the same course. 7. And lastly (to omit many other par∣ticulars of like consideration) in their messages or directions sent un∣to them from time to time, how to proceed, what particulars to
wave for the present, what to fall upon, and to debate, to hasten the issue of their consultations, with the like, what doe they else but claime and exercise such a Directive power in matters of Religion, as we last distinguished? If A. S. hath any other notion of his Directive power in matters of Re∣ligion, besides these three, my soule hath not yet entred into that his secret; but waits for his opening a doore unto me by which it may. He taxeth the Apologists once and againe for generalities, and ob∣seurities in their expressions: But he that saith, a man should not steale, commits sacriledge himself. 4. Whereas harping still upon the same string, (the sound where∣of is so melodious in his own eares, how harm so ever in other mens) he chargeth the Apologists, for going against the Parliaments intention, in case they think, that they should judge of questions in debate between them and their Brethren; Surely he speaks rather as he would have it, then as he hath any ground to speake. If he had ploughed with their hey∣fer, consulted with their expressions of themselves in reference to their intentions in this kinde, he would have assoyled their riddle far otherwise. For to what purpose should they injoyne the Assem∣bly, (as we lately heard they doe in the Ordinance mentioned) in case of difference of opinions between them, to present the same, together with the reasons thereof, unto both Houses of Parliament, if they had no inten∣tion to umpire or judge between them? Have they a desire to looke upon such differences as some rare sight, or pleasant spectacle, onely to solace and delight themselves with them? And why doth the te∣nour of their delegation of power to the Assembly, run in this strain, To deliver their opinions and advices, as should be most agreeable to the word of God? Do's any man desire the opinion and advice of another in any matter that concerns him, without any intention of considering or judging of them? But A. S. is as cunning as A. C. and would faine commend his care and tendernesse over the Parliament, in the things of their ho∣nour and peace, by insinuating unto them a non-vocation from God, to doe any thing with their judgements and understandings in matters of Religion, but all things (without exception) with their hand and power, that the Assembly, whether out of their judge∣ments or affections, shall propose or dictate unto them. A. S. (I be∣leeve) is a Brother of the stronger side of the Assembly; otherwise it is every whit as much as to be feared, that he would have Arminia∣niz'd as much, if not far more then the Apologists have done. But
if the Parliament hath no calling from God, to judge of matters be∣tween the Apologists and their Brethren (the Assemblers) I would willingly know who hath? or whether it be reasonable, that the A∣pologists, matters yet remaining undecided, and unjudged between them and their Brethren, should suffer as men convicted, onely be∣cause their adversaries and accusers (the Brethren yee wot of) are more in number then they, and will needs continue adversaries to them? Our Saviours testimony concerning himselfe and in his own cause, was a thousand times more authentique and valid, then the testimony of never so many men, take the best of the whose generati∣on, is in theirs; and yet he said, If I beare witnesse of my selfe, my wit∣nesse is not true; (Joh: 5. 31.) That is, it is not formally, or in a legall interpretation, true; it is not true upon any such termes, but that you may reasonably wave it, if you apprehend that you have grounds to doe it. But (sayth he) there is another that beareth witnesse of me, &c. The testimony of a thousand men in a case which equal∣ly (or though it be with some inequalitie) concerns themselves, is of no more validitie or authoritie, then of a particular man, in a case relating onely to himselfe. Yea, a good mans conscience, in matters relating unto himselfe, is never in more danger of suffering, then in a crowd, concern'd in the same manner with him. It is the saying of one, that etiam ex timidissimis animalibus acris multitudo cogi potest; that is, you may make a feirce company of the fearfullest creatures that are, if you put enough of them together; so frequent experience sheweth, that etiam ex aequissimis hominibus iniqua multitudo cogi potest; you may make a bad assembly even of the best men. Besides A. S. himselfe affirms pag. 38. That to be both judge and partie in one cause, cannot be granted to those that have no authoritative power one over another: and that Par in Paremnon habet imperium. Therefore why should the Apologists fall in judgement by the hand of those that are parties, and but equall to them? Againe, It is his owne reason∣ing, pag. 45. If all Churches were equall (as for ought I know, or that A. S. alledgeth to the contrary, they are) there can neither be superiours nor inferiours, and consequently no obedience or disobedience. And if justice consisteth not in an Arithmeticall but Geometricall proportion (which is his own saying pag. 70. and somewhat more rationall and lesse Presby∣teriall, then most of it's fellows are) then is there no reason, that peremptorinesse of Vote, how Arithmetically so ever priviledged, but weight and worth of argument, should carry it against them. Which how it may fall, when God shall cancell or reverse the Scrip∣tures
that now are, and make a new revelation of himselfe unto the world, I know not; but whilst these stand, confident I am, that they will never so fall. But why the man should deny the Parliament a calling to judge of matters between the Apologists and their Brethren, when as every other man in the Kingdome hath a calling, yea, and somewhat more then a calling, a speciall and weightie necessitie to doe it, (though not after the same manner in respect of the consequence of their judgement) I see as little reason, as I doe for twentie and ten things more asserted by him. Would A. S. have even the meanest of men to sing obedience and submission to the Assembly without their under∣standings? Alas, they could make no melodie in their hearts unto God with such a singing. Nor would the song be either honourable or comfortable to the Assembly it selfe, if themselves and others would but please to bestow a few serious thoughts upon it. The glo∣ry of a Synod lyes not so much in the strength of their conclusions, as of their premisses: nor is it any thing worthy to be presumed, in comparison of what it is to be knowne, to be wise and upright men. Me thinks an Assembly of conscientious and learned men, should ra∣ther count it a prophanation of their conclusions and resolv's, then otherwise, to have them swallowed without chewing; to have them subscribed and consented unto onely in such a way and upon such termes, as fooles are wont to beleeve, subscribe, and consent unto all things. But 5. To make the Apologists out of love with so much as looking towards the Parliament for any reliefe from them against the se∣vere devotion of their Brethren, in case they vote contrary to them (under which hope A. S. injoyes himselfe with much contentment) he tells them, that by such a course or expectation, they will joyne themselves with the Arminians, of whom he is pleased to tell this Storie, That hoping the Civill Magistrate would have been for them, they gave this Directive or Decisive power unto him; and afterwards repented themselves when they found him against them. Leaving the truth of the Storie upon the credit of the Relator; I answer. 1. That Jesus Christ was never the more a sinner, for being num∣bred by the Jews amongst transgressors, or for being crucified between two theeves. Nor are the Apologists, or men of their judgement ever the more culpable or blame-worthy for being bound up in the same bundle of condemnation with Delinquents, by their adversa∣ries. Quis enim laudverit hostem?
2. Neither did Paul count it any disparagement to him, to preach that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, because the Devill had preach∣ed the same Doctrine before him. Nor doth A. S. himselfe thinke himselfe ever the more a Papist, because the Papists (as himselfe con∣fesseth afterwards pag. 18.) beleeve all that he beleeveth (though for my part I thinke any man as good a Protestant as himselfe, that belee∣veth as much as he) And pag. 64. in his eighteenth reasonlesse rea∣son against a toleration of men better then himselfe, he insinuates this as a choice commendation of his Presbyteriall Government, that in it their Churches are not exposed unto the calumnies of the Papists, who pretend to be nothing but one Church; meaning that a compliance with them in unitie and uniformitie, will be an exemption to them from their calumnies. 3. It is an old piece of subtiltie of the old Serpent, to oppose God in his Saints, and in his wayes, by teaching his Prophets and Agents to make paralells between, to sort and to suit Gods servants with his, and Gods wayes or workes with his, that so the foolish and in∣considerate world might be brought to thinke, that God and he are but one, and that there is little or no difference between them. How did Jannes and Jambres withstand Moses, but by doing the same things in appearance by the helpe of the Devill, which Moses did by the finger of God? By this they hardened Pharaoh and the Aegyptians with this confidence and conceit, that God was no more with Moses, then with them. A. S. paralells the Apologists with the Arminians, hoping to catch the foote of the simple in this snare, to make them thinke that they are both baptized into one and the same Spirit: you shall finde a further streine of this malignitie in him, pag. 22. Fourthly (and lastly) If the Arminians gave that power to the Ci∣vill Magistrate which they are here charged to have done, upon hope they would have been for them, they were no Antipodes to A. S. and his fraternitie, who deny this power to the Civill Magistrate, for fear they should not be for them, if they were left free to judge of their own actions. All the lineaments in the face of Presbyterie demon∣strate this to be in the heart of it; a willingnesse to conferre all, and all manner of power whatsoever upon the Civill Magistrate in mat∣ters of Religion, which they may be secured will be used to serve their turns, and not to the prejudice or disturbance of them in their way. And so A. S. after he had laboured in the very fire, and had ingag'd himself to the uttermost to prove the negative, he fals off with this glozing close at the last, (pag. 51.) that if the King and
Parliament should find [any thing contrary to what he had delivered] expedient, he had nothing to say against it. Therefore of the two, Armi∣nians are more charitably affected towards the Civill Magistrate, in casting a power upon them, out of an hope they would use it for their good, then the Presbyterians are in denying this power unto them, out of fear they will use it to their damage. 6. (and lastly, for conclusion of this first Chapter) concerning such a Directive power in matters of Religion, as A. S. (it seems) would here sequester for the honour and service of his Presbyterie, when Jesus Christ hath declared himself willing to devest himself, and make a delegation of it unto them, I shall as willingly acknow∣ledge and adore their patent, as any other. In the mean time, (God supporting me) I shall with the utmost of my power, and in the pre∣sence of all discouragements, dangers, deaths, vindicate the rights and prerogatives belonging to the crown of my great Lord and Ma∣ster: what shall become of me in so doing, ipse viderit. As for such a Directive power, which with the honour and safety of the rights of Heaven, is attributeable unto men, whose character and cognizance is this, not to be compulsorie unto men by any externall violence, whether di∣rectly or indirectly, to subscribe against their judgements and consciences to it, I can freely allow as much of it to A. S. and his Presbyteriall As∣semblies, as will stand with their peace with God, with their ho∣nour in the sight of unpartiall and intelligent men, with the peace and edification of the Churches of God: if they would have more (let them look to it) this desire of theirs will in time find them out and slay them. Cap. 2. Concerning that executive, coercitive, and externall power in mat∣ters of Religion, which A. S. ascribes unto the Civill Magistrate. pa. 6. A. S. in this sixth page, to perswade with the Parliament and Civill Magistrate, that they shall do God good service to re∣signe up their eyes patiently into the hands of his Presbyterie, feeds them with the commendations of Constantine the Great, in refusing an unjust and exorbitant power, which the Councell gave to him. Where (by the way) it is somewhat observeable, that it is a thing incident to Councels and Synods, to give unjust and exorbitant power unto Civill Magistrates. So that it stands the Parliament and Civill Magistrate in hand, before they part with their eyes upon such terms, to look
about them, and to consider twise over, what power they receive and accept of from the hand of Councels and Synods, especially in reference to matters of Religion, and the Churches or servants of Christ. It is a terrible saying of Christ, enough to make both the ears of Kings and Princes, and Parliaments, (yea, and of Synods and Assemblies too) to tingle. Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones, that beleeve in me, it were better for him that a milstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. Matt. 18. 6. It is dangerous medling with Saints in any other way then of ten∣dernesse and love, be they never so few in number, never so weak in power, or otherwise (one of these little ones, saith Christ); All the 21 reasons with 41 more put to them, whereby A. S. incites the Parlia∣ment against a toleration of the Apologists, with men of their judgement, in the sequell of his discourse; will not deliver either the King or Parliament out of the hand of that threatning, if they come under the dint of it, by offering any violence (shall I say?) yea any offence to the least of these little ones. The holy Ghost (1 Cor. 15. 24.) prophecieth of the putting down of all rule, and all authoritie and power by Christ: the reason thereof, in the words immediately follow∣ing, he sheweth to be, their enmitie unto him, for he must reign, (saith the Apostle, vers. 25.) till he hath put all his enemies under his feet. The truth is, that it is a very hard matter, even for the best of men, in places of rule, authoritie, and power, to move regularly in their own orbe, and not to mistake, or strein beyond the tenour of their commission, to intermeddle in the affairs of Christ, considering, first that they are compassed about with their own infirmities, as well as other men: secondly, in respect of their callings, they are com∣passed about with more tentations this way, then other men: third∣ly (and lastly) which is as much or more then both the former, (if they be Christian) what between the insinuations and flatteries of the baser, and the inconsiderate affections and favour of the better sort of teachers, they are taught to dash their foot against this stone, as if it were another crown of glory to them. But let us first see, what that executive, or coercive (if it be lawfull to cut A. S. a syllable shorter) power is, which the man with both hands, and an importune bountie, will needs bestow upon the Civil Magistrate. 2, by what authoritie, and upon what grounds he doth it. For the first he describes and states this power, after this manner, (pag. 6.) The Parliament pretends no Directive power in matters of Reli∣gion—nor
any executive power that is in trinsecall to the Church—but onely an executive, coercitive, and externall power, which is not in, but about the Church; and for the Church, whereby it compelleth refractory men to obey the Church. And this Authoritie belongs actually and in effect, in actu exercito (as they say) to true Christian Magistrates; but to others potentially, in actu signato; and jure in rem onely, till they become true Christians, &c. In this description, the man is to me a Barbarian (his own phrase to the Apologists) in the word, Church. I have bestowed thoughts more then a few to be partners with him in his notion of the word; but quanto plus cogito, eo minus capio. For shame A. S. out with the beame of obscuritie from your own eye, before you tiffle again to pull the moat of obscuritie out of your brothers eye. A man in rea∣son would think, that the same word, being used foure or five times (and that without the least intimation of any varietie or difference of signification) almost within the compasse of so many lines, were still meant, and to be taken in one and the same sence. If so, then ha with you. The Parliament, hy that coercitive power which you are pleased hereto bestow upon it, by way of compensation for that di∣rective power which you take from it, compelleth (say you) refractory men to obey the Church: I presume that by the Church here, you do not meane all the particular Churches and congregations in the King∣dome in the folio of their respective members, but in the decimo sexto of their Synod, or representative assembly. If you take the word in the former sence, you onely say, that the Parliament hath power to compell the refractory to obey all the particular Churches, with their severall members, in the Kingdom; which is a sence (I con∣ceive) at as much defiance with your ends, as with your and our understandings. If you take it in the latter (which I doubt not but is your beloved sence) then your meaning is, that the use and intent of that executive, coercive power in matters of Religion, which you put into the Parliaments hands, is to compell the Kingdom, in case it be refractory, or tot quot, to obey the Presbyterie, and Presbyteriall assemblies, in all their Canons, Determinations, and Decrees what∣soever, without bayl or mainprise, without mercy or compassion, whether a man finds sap, sence, savour, reason or Religion in them, or no. But yet secondly, I know not well how you should meane the Church contracted in her Grand Presbyterie or Generall Assembly neither; first, because you affirm this coercive power in the Parliament,
to be not in, but about the Church, and for the Church. And I doubt your meaning is not, that the Parliament should either onely, or chiefly work and act with this their coercive power, upon your Ecclesia∣stique Assemblies, to restrain and keep them with in compasse; though I confesse if it should move onely or chiefly in this sphere, it would be more for the Church, i. for the good and benefit of the Church in generall, then to suffer such assemblies to sit and impose oaths upon men to obey their acts, orders, and decrees, (which you tell us, glorying in your shame, pag. 42. is done in your Presbyte∣riall Government) and to punish or crush those, that shall have more conscience, then to enslave themselves unto them, in such a way. And 2. if by Church you should here meane the Church represen∣tative (as it is more commonly then properly called) in her gene∣rall Assembly, you would be a little more open, then (I conceive) will well stand with your principles in such cases. For then your meaning is plainly this, that the Parliament hath that executive, co∣ercive power, which you ascribe to it, not for the Church, i. the bene∣fit of the Saints and servants of God throughout the Kingdome, but for the benefit and behoofe of the Ecclesiastique Presbyteries and As∣semblies onely. Now however I can easily beleeve, that thus you would have it, yet I conceive it somewhat eccentricall to your other motions to professe it. And yet 3, when you immediately adde; that in vertue of this au∣thoritie, when parties pretend to be offended by the Church, or if the Church judge any thing amisse, he (the Civill Magistrate) may command the Church to revise and reexamine it's judgement, &c. You must needs meane your transcendent Church of Presbyters; otherwise you should pre∣varicate, and grant a judiciarie power to particular Congrega∣tions. 4. (And lastly) in the very next page (pag. 7.) to represent the voluntarie exile of the Apologists, with as hard-favour'd an aspect in the eyes of men as he could, his indignation against it utters it selfe in this patheticall streine over the poore Church of God in this Kingdome. And if they all had fled away, what might have become of the poore Church of God in this Kingdome? &c. Here, by the Church of God in this Kingdome, he cannot meane the Ecclesiastique Church of repre∣senting Presbyters, because if these had all fled away, there had been no Church of God (in such a sence) in this Kingdome. By the Church of God in this place, if he means any thing like a man, he must needs meane the Godly partie in the Kingdome, and that considered with∣out
their Presbyters or Pastors. And oh that he, and his coopina∣torie partie would but grant, that that executive coercive power which is in the Civill Magistrate, is for this Church; I meane for the bene∣fit and peace of this Church of God. But in the meane time you see, that his Trumpet, in the description he gives of his executive, coercive, externall power in the Magistrate, gives no distinct sound; perhaps he blew wild on purpose lest an enemy should know how to prepare to battaile against him. But is there never a blessing, of reason, or truth, in all this cluster? Come and see. In vertue of this Authoritie (saith he) when parties pretend to be offend∣ed with the Church, or the Church judge any thing amisse, he (the Civill Ma∣gistrate) may command the Church to reexamine its judgement, &c. In these few words he hath plainly plundred and undone a very considera∣ble partie of his owne beloved notions elsewhere. For, 1. What reason hath he to be so invective against the Apologists (as he is pag. 49. and 50.) for holding, that Kings or Civill Magi∣strates are above the Church, when as himselfe here professeth, that they may command the Church; especially his owne Maxime elsewhere being this, that par in parem non habet imperium; and that where there is not Superiour and Inferiour, there can be no obedience or disobedience. Non huc, non illuc exemplo nubis aquose. 2. If the Civill Magistrate hath power to command the Church to re∣vise her judgement, when shee judgeth any thing amisse, surely he hath power to examine and judge of her proceedings, whether they be re∣gular, equall, and just, or no; except you will say, that he comes to the knowledge of your irregular and undue proceedings in your Presbyteries, by immediate revelation. Suppose either the one or the other, what reason have you to deny him part and fellowship with you in that Directive power in matters of Religion, which you in∣grosse and appropriate to your selves, as wee have formerly seene? 3. If so, then your Presbyteriall Assembly or judging Church, may determine and judge amisse. And if so, 1. how dare you com∣pell or make the people under your Government to sweare obedi∣ence or subjection unto your orders, which yet by your own confes∣sion (pag. 42.) ordinarily you doe? 2. Why are you not satisfied with that subjection to your Presbyteriall Decisions, which pleadeth no exemption, but onely in the case of non-satisfaction, about the
lawfulnesse or truth of them: You give men a good foundation, a li∣bertie to beleeve that you may erre; but you will not suffer them to build upon it, to refuse you, when they thinke in their soules and consci∣ences, that you doe erre. They that will separate between such pre∣misses and such conclusions, will hardly make good Christians themselves, or suffer others so to be. And if you be but ingenuously willing to goe along with this your own principle; That you may erre, as far as it would gladly lead you, me thinks I durst undertake that the Apologists and you shall comprimize before to morrow next. 4. (And lastly) if parties may have cause to be offended, and not onely pretend to be offended (as A. S. would mince it) with the Church (as out of all question they may, if the Church may judge amisse) then have they power to judge of their actions, as well as they of theirs. No man is justifiable in his complaint or offence ta∣king, but he that hath a power to examine and judge of that, which gives the cause, or ministers the occasion of the offence. And if a sin∣gle partie, which is no Presbyter or Prophet (in your sence) hath a lawfull power to examine and judge of the acts and orders of a Presbyteriall or Propheticall Assembly, and may possibly by means of such an examination take them tardie; doe not so farre magnifie the spirits of your Prophets against the spirits of our Saints, as to thinke these good for nothing, but to sweare homage and vassalage unto them. But A. S. (surely) pleaseth himselfe highly with a parcell of di∣stinctions, which he presents us with in the prementioned Descripti∣on; and hopes (perhaps) to make an attonement with them for his confusions otherwise. First, He distinguisheth of, that executive, coercive power, wherewith he invests the Civill Magistrate, as not being, in, or intrinsecall unto the Church, but externall, and about the Church. Secondly, he distin∣guisheth, the subject capable of this power, the Civill Magistrate, in∣to truly Christian, and not truly Christian. Thirdly, upon this distincti∣on, he builds a third distinction, concerning the manner of the com∣petency of this power, to the one kind of subject and the other; tel∣ling us, that this power or authoritie, belongs actually, and in effect, in actu exercito, & jure in re to true Christian Magistrates; but to others potential∣ly, in actu signato, and jure in rem onely till they become true Christians. The man (you see) hath much adoe to finde, or come at that power, wherewith he would so faine gratifie the Civill Magistrate, in matters of Religion: He adjures three uncleane spirits of Distincti∣ons,
to tell him what, and where it is; and yet they doe but peep and mutter in their answer, and make no man the wiser by it. Heer he seeks for the coercive power of the Civill Magistrate in matters of Religion, in the same black sea of darknesse and confusion, wherein he seeks (and would make the world beleeve he finds) the Presbyterian Go∣vernment afterwards. But if the one and the other be cloz'd up in such an ammunition of rocks of distinctions, as A. S. represents them in his storie, certainly they are inaccessible to the judgements and consciences of persons of meane capacitie; and much more inacces∣sible to the judgements and consciences of more understanding and considering men. The very darknesse it selfe of the distinctions which he is necessitated to use, to make his way to come at the one and at the other, is a light sufficient to discover, that neither the one nor the other is any where to be found within the territories either of reason or of truth. But let us see the Distinctions play a little be∣fore us, for their Masters credit. For the first: The Magistrates power (saith he) viz. in matters of Re∣ligion (for so he must necessarily be understood, by the Antithesis in the former clause or member of this Distinction, where he denies a Directive power unto him, in matters of Religion) is not in, or intrinsecall to the Church, but extrinsecall and about the Church. Is it in, i. intrinsecall to matters of Religion; and but extrinsecall in respect of the Church? So then (it seems) A. S. his Presbyteriall Church, is somewhat more inward, intimate, and intrinsecall, then the Religion of this Church; otherwise, how should the power of the Magistrate penetrate into the Religion thereof, and yet not reach into, but onely unto the Church it selfe? By this distinction he hath utterly disgrac'd his Presbyteriall Government, by making the Churches under it, more internall and inward, then the Religion that is to be found in them. If the Apolo∣gists had but whispered one tittle of such a saying, though at never such a distance, it had been enough to have produced seven reasons more (at least) against their Toleration, then are yet levied or brought forth into the world. But 2, though you seeme to deale very bountifully with the Ma∣gistrate in giving him a power extrinsecall and about the Church, and to content your selfe and your compresbyters with an intrinsecall power onely; yet by somewhat that hath been lately printed, it appears, that you meane to eate at the same Table with him, which you pre∣tend to spread for him alone. For hath not the Presse very lately been delivered of this peice of Presbyterie, that the classicall Presbyte∣rie
hath the authoritative power of Citation, just as the Bishops had? And is Reformation cleered, p. 23. not such a power externall, and which is not in, but about the Chur∣ches? For if a Classis shall cite or excommunicate a member of a Church, against the judgement and consent of the Elders of that Church, let all the world judge, whether that be not an act of ex∣ternall power without the Church. If it be replied, no; because that Church did implicitly consent in yeelding their Elders for members of that Presbyterie; We reply, that if either your publick Law constreins that Church upon penal∣tie, Invitum di∣citur, quod quis vel coa∣ctus, vel per ignorantiam admittit. A∣rist. Eth. l. 3. c. 1. Kecker. Pre∣cog. Syst. Eth. against their light, to suffer their Elders to sit in the Classicall Presbyterie, then that Church doth not freely consent; or if that Church without constraint doth consent for want of light (as it must be supposed, if a Classis upon debate be found to be besides the word) this ignorant act of that Church, is an unwilling or involuntary act, and so no free consent. And so the Classis, according to A. S. his di∣stinction, is like a Magistrate, which is a Bishop without, and about that Church. But good A. S. wee know it is an easie matter to distinguish the Magistrate into such an executive, coercitive, externall power as you speake of; but wee would faine see you demonstrate him into it; and then A. S. and M. S. should be no more two, but one S. We know not how to transforme Distinctions into Demonstrations. His second Distinction, is of the subject of this power, the Magi∣strate; whom he makes two-fold, truly Christian, and not truly Chri∣stian. But 1. I would faine know by what touchstone A. S. will try his gold in this case; I meane judge of the truth of Christianitie in a Magistrate. It appears (from pag. 50. of his discourse) that he hath no mind to grant his truth of Christianitie, unto a Magistrate that is either Luthe∣ran, Anabaptist, Socinian, or Papist. Any of these misprisions in Chri∣stianitie, are as sufficient in A. S. his judgement, as in ours, to keep the sword of that power wee speake of, out of the Magistrates hand. And as for a Magistrate whose judgement shall be infected (perfected reason and truth would say) with Apologisme, or (the great hatred of his soule) independencie, I make no question, but he (in the Co∣mique terme) should be exclusissimus from this capacitie or right a∣bove all the rest. But let us go on with the man in the terms of his own addresse to the Apologists, in the same place. If he saith that by a Magistrate tru∣ly Christian, he understands an orthodox Magistrate; what if he had one
or two errours, would be yet permit him to be orthodox, and truly Christian, or not? Till A. S. here specifies, Sermones generales non movent (his own rule) For my self, untill I shall be otherwise informed by himself, I shall make use of my reason to beleeve, that by a Magistrate truly Christian, A. S. onely means a Magistrate, who in his judgement is Presbyteriall: and that this qualification of Presbyterialisme, and truth of Christianitie in a Magistrate, are against all contradictions and counter-poyseings whatsoever, termini aequipollentes in his Lo∣gique. And if this be his meaning, the King (to be sure) hath none of his power as yet, in actu exercito, and jure in re; nor hath the Parlia∣ment (at least for ought A. S. or the Kingdom knoweth) any whit more of it, then the King. And whatsoever it hath done hitherto, by any executive, coercive, externall power about the Church or Church affairs (in which kind it hath done very much) depends as touch∣ing the validitie and justifiablenesse of it, upon this supposition, that it Presbyterializeth. Whence it followeth, that he that cannot, or doth not beleeve that the Parliament is of a Classique inclination, cannot (with the leave of A. S. his distinction) judge them to have done lawfully or warrantably any thing that they have done hi∣therto, about, or for the Church. The truth is, that till A. S. will please to define, what manner of Magistrate he must be, that shall passe the test of his distinction, for truly Christian, we are constrained to suspend our bountie in confer∣ring that executive, coercive, externall power about the Church, upon any man. Nor do I make much question but that we shall have twentie Distinctions more, before we shall obtain that Definition. But of all the three Distinctions here upon the stage, the best dan∣cer is yet behind. This power, or Authoritie (saith he) belongs actually and in effect, in actu exercito, & jure in re (it's very long, me thinks, ere we hear, to whom it belongs) to true Christian Magistrates: but to others potentially, in actu signato, & jure in rem onely, untill they become truly Christian. 1 Though I have many times heard of the distinction, in actu ex∣ercito, & in actu signato, yet I never heard of any thing belonging to a person in actu exercito, but that belonged to him, and that per prius, in actu signato. He to whom the principle or power of acting doth not belong, cannot stand ingaged for the exercise or acting of such a power. 2 My soul longs for the summer fruit of a good reason from A. S. why any power about the Church, and for the Church, should not be∣long,
actually, and in effect, in actu exercito, & jure in re (and with as many other, proper, unproper, necessarie, unnecessarie, sober, ridi∣culous expressions as he pleaseth) as well to a Magistrate not yet truly Christian, as to him that is such. Hath not an Heathen or Heterodox Magistrate a lawfulnesse of power, to do presently, this day, this houre, to morrow, and so forth, toties, quoties, as much good to and for the Church or Churches of Christ within his juris∣diction or dominion, as he could have if he were truly Christian? Do acts of justice, bountie, grace towards the Churches of Christ, any whit more defile a Magistrate how farre from truly Christian soever, then acts of the same nature performed unto his other sub∣jects? The Kings and those that were in authoritie in Pauls dayes, were generally (all the Kings without exception) farre from being truly Christian; and yet was it not lawfull for them to interpose with their Authoritie or power, that the Churches of Christ in their dominions might lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godlinesse and hone∣sty? If not, then was that exhortation of his, 1 Tim. 2. 2. to be laid up in lavender for some hundreds of yeers after it was given; or else the benefit and blessing, the obtaining whereof by prayer is made the ground of the exhortation, must have been made over in the intentions of those that had so prayed, unto their posterities after many generations. A. S. may chuse which of the two he will be∣leeve: for my part I shall not be his corrivall in either. Ye have heard A. S. his Distinctions for a coercive power about the Church in a Civill Magistrate: Demonstrationes autem ubi? But where are his proofs? Quas non invenio usquam, esse puto nusquam. What I find not any where, I beleeve to be no where. I have searched, and that somewhat narrowly, throughout the whole volume of his Discourse, to find something, that with any indulgence of imagination might be conceived to look like a proof of this his opinion, and can find none, save onely that poore one of the examples of the Kings of Juda (pag. 63.) enforc'd after this manner; It is the Civill Magistrates part to take away Heresies, Superstiti∣ons, and corruptions in manners after the examples of the Kings of Juda. Wherefore then is it not his duty likewise to take away all schismes which are the high-way to (and sometimes from) Heresie, and consequently to deny Toleration, which is away to both? Reader neither you nor I, must be offended, to have a molle-hill
of proof given us for a mountain of conclusion. You must know it is the manner of the Presbyterian school, to hang great weights up∣on small wyars. For what need Dictators argue? But, 1. If it be the Magistrates part to take away Superstitions, Heresies, &c. sure it is his part also to make himself able to discern supersti∣tions and heresies, from the true worship, and truths of God. He is to serve God in such a practice, with his own understanding, and not by the Proctorage of a Presbyterie (as you tell the Apologists, pag. 48. that they must not serve God by a Proctor) and if so, you must untrusse, and deliver back again to him that Directive power in mat∣ters of Religion, which you lately took from him. 2. When the Magistrate takes away Superstition, Heresie, &c. he had need have better securitie, then a Synod can give him, to save him harmlesse, in case he should mistake, and smite the truth of God instead of Heresie, and the true worship of God, instead of Supersti∣tion. Gamaliel might have had the full vote of a Synod or Councill, for persecuting the superstition, schisme and heresie of the Apostles; but Act 5. 24. 28. 38, 39. this was not securitie enough to him; he was afraid of fighting against God, this notwithstanding. And for my part, when the Civill Ma∣gistrate shall be farre enough out of this danger of fighting against God, I have nothing to say against his fighting with superstition, he∣resie, schisme, corruptions in manners, &c. Onely my prayer for him unto God is, that he would give him a wise and understanding heart, to consider and discern, whether usurpation over the judge∣ments and consciences of the Saints of God, in matters of Religion, be not as Grand a corruption in manners as a Church or Kingdom is lightly incident unto. 3. Because the examples of the Kings of Judah for want of better arguments, are so much importun'd to speak a good word for that executive coercive power in the Civill Magistrate, with which A. S. would truk with him for that Directive power (before spoken of) let us consider with a little more freedome and ingenuitie, what they contribute thereunto. 1. We do not read that any of the good Kings of Judah, ever of∣fered any violence to the true Prophets, or people of the Lord, ex∣cept it were in passion, as 2 Chron. 16. 10. where Asa is said to have been wroth with the Seer, that admonished him, and to have put him in prison. Which fact of his I think A. S. himself will be asham'd to present either to Kings or Parliaments for imitation. Therefore whatsoever besides may be prov'd from the example of the Kings of
Judah in matters of Religion, towards the rearing up of a Presbyterie in the perfection of it's glory; certain it is, that nothing can be pro∣ved, for the persecuting, annoying, crushing, disgracing, banishing, finening the Apologists, whom himself (more then once or twice) acknowledgeth for very pious, godly, and learned men. 2. Neither did any of these Kings ever compell any man to be of the Jewish Religion; nor yet to professe the Jewish Religion against their judgements. It was permitted to persons of other Na∣tions to live amongst them, without being circumcised, yea or with∣out smarting for want of it. 3. Nor do we read, that ever they attempted any thing against any Sectaries or Schismatiques (as A. S. would call them) which yet abounded in great varietie, and numbers amongst them. We do not find, that ever they find, imprison'd, banished, put to death, either Scribes or Pharisees or Herodians, or persons of any other Sect in the profession of the Jewish Religion, that lived peaceably in their State. Idolatrie and Idolaters were (it seems) the adaequate object of their coercive power in matters of Religion. 4. Nor did they, nor were they to inflict any outward punish∣ment, upon every kind of Idolater, though of the Jewish both Na∣tion and Religion; as first, not upon covetous persons, who yet are a kind of Idolater. Ephes. 5. 5. Nor, secondly, upon those that wor∣shipped the true God of Israel, though with some violation of the second Commandment, as when they sacrificed in the high places, &c. But, first, upon such onely who apostatiz'd from the God of Israel, to serve strange gods, the gods of other Nations: And yet se∣condly, not upon such neither, simply as such, but as attempting to intice, and draw away other of the people of God unto the same Ido∣latries with them. Deut. 13. 5. 8. 9. 5. There are two reasons very considerable why the Kings of Ju∣dah might be invested by God with a larger power in matters of Religion, then Kings or Magistrates under the Gospel have any ground or warrant to claime from them. First, they were types of Christ, which no King under heaven at this day is; Secondly, not the people onely, but the very Land over which they ruled, were ty∣picall also; the one, of the spirituall Church of Christ, the other of the heavenly inheritance of that Church: both of them holy and consecrate in speciall manner unto God. If Kings and Magistrates under the Gospel can plead either these reasons, or any other of equall consideration with these, I shall not scruple an acknowledge∣ment
of an equalitie of power in them. But otherwise, to alledge the power of the Kings of Judah in matters of Religion, for an in∣vestiture of Kings and Magistrates under the Gospel, with the like, justifies the arguing of the Prelaticall School, which pleads the order of the Aaronicall Priesthood, to demonstrate the necessitie of a me∣tropoliticall sovereigntie. 6. It no where appears that any of the godly Kings of Judah, ever had, or exercised any power to suppresse, banish, imprison, trample upon, crush, or grinde the faces of any godly persons among them, were they few or many, onely because they were for a while tender in point of conscience to concurre with the major part of the Priests, Scribes or Levites in some things disputeable between them, and others in the Land. Untill A. S. shall dig such a treasure as this out of the Scriptures, he will never have sufficient wherewith to fi∣nish that tower of a magistraticall coercive power in matters of Religion, which he hath begun to build. 7. If A. S. (or any other) will needs make the Kings of Judah tri∣butaries to his opinion, concerning that coercive power we speak of in the Civill Magistrate, he must first prove, that these Kings were invested with that power which they exercised in matters of Reli∣gion, by a morall Law, and which is of perpetuall obligation and engagement upon other Nations. For such a weak man as I, will rather incline to think, that it was conferr'd upon them by a Law Politique and judiciall: and which no more concerneth or obligeth Kings and Magistrates of other Nations, then that Law mentioned in the same place with it, (and which indeed is part of it) (Deut. 13.) which injoyneth ihe slaying of the inhabitants of the idolatrous City with the edge of the sword, and the destroying of it utterly with all that is there∣in, and the cattell thereof, with the edge of the sword; and the gathering of all the spoyl thereof into the midst of the street thereof, and the burning of the City with fire, and all the spoil thereof every whit; and the making it an heap for ever, and the not building it again. I think A. S. himself doth not con∣ceive Christian Kings or Magistrates engag'd in conscience to ob∣serve all the particulars of this Law. 8. (and lastly) if you consult with those passages in the Law, where that power, which the Kings of Judah exercised about Ido∣latry and Idolaters (for they went no further; they medled not with the crushing of Sects or Schismes as we heard) you will find, that it was the generalitie or entire body of the Church or Nation of the Jews, and not their Kings, that was invested with it by God.
See Deut. 13. from the beginning to the end: and again, Deut. 7. 5. and Chap. 12. 2, 3. with many of like consideration. So that what they did in this kind, they did it, or were to have done it, in the Name, and with the consent of the body of their people. But the Grand Pillar and supporter of this Coercive power in Ma∣gistrates, is this angry and discontented argument. What? would you have all Religions, sects, and schismes tolerated in Christian Churches? Should Jews, Turks, (and Papists, especially,) be suffer∣ed in their Religions? what a confusion must this needs breed both in Church and State? Give me leave to demulce and pacifie this ar∣gument; and then we advance to a new subject. I answer by distin∣guishing. 1. If by a toleration, the argument means, either an approbation, or such a connivence which either takes no knowledge of, or how∣ever no wayes opposeth such Religions, Sects, or Schismes, as are unwarrantable, they are not to be tolerated. But, first, orthodox and able Ministers ought in the course of their publique ministery, and otherwise upon occasion, in a grave, sober, and inoffensive man∣ner, soundly from the Scriptures to evince the folly, vanitie and falshood of all such wayes. Secondly, others also that have an a∣nointing of light and knowledge from God, are bound to contri∣bute occasionally the best of their indeavours towards the same end. Thirdly, in case the Minister shall be negligent or forgetfull of his dutie in this kind, the Magistrate may and ought from time to time to admonish him, that he fulfill his ministery in that point also. Fourthly, if a person, one, two, or more, being members of a particular Church, shall be infected with any hereticall or danger∣ous opinion, and after two or three admonitions, with means of conviction used to regain him, shall continue obstinate, he ought to be cast out from amongst them by that Church. Fiftly, (and lastly) If it be an whole Church that is so corrupted and infected, the rest of the neighbour Churches (in case it hath any) ought to admonish it, and to indeavour the reclaiming of it. if it be refractory after competent admonition, and means used for the reducing of it, they may and ought to renounce communion with it: and so set a mark or brand of heresie and obstinacie in the forehead of it. But Secondly, if by a toleration, the argument means, a non-suppres∣sion of such Religions, Sects, and Schismes by a strong hand, as by fineing, imprisoning, disfranchising, banishment, death, or the like, my Answer is, that they ought to be tolerated, onely upon this sup∣position,
that the Professors or maintainers of them, be otherwise peaceable in the State, and every waies subject to the Laws, and law∣full power of the Civill Magistrate. My reasons are, First, because God hath anointed and sanctified his Word, and the ministery hereof, for the casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and for the bringing in∣to captivitie every thought unto the obedience of Christ. 2 Cor. 10. 5. The Apostle in this place, v. 4. affirms, that the weapons of his warfare (meaning the knowledge which he had of God, and of Jesus Christ in the Gospel, and his abilities of utterance and preaching) were mighty through God, for those ends and purposes. When God hath appointed a means, and that of so much efficacie and power, either to prevent an inconvenience, or to accomplish any end or effect whatsoever, for men to wave this means, and to interesse another of their own, is both to put an affront upon God, and to consult frustration and disappointment to themselves. And for mine own part, I am all thoughts made, that the true and adaequate reason why those Sects, and Schismes and wild opinions, which are lately started amongst us, gather so much strength and head, and grow so fast upon us as they do daily, is this; that we reject the wisedome and counsell of God for the opposing and suppressing of them, and have recourse to our own arm, hoping by disgracing, displacing, way-laying, impoverishing, suspending, imprisoning, and other weapons and wayes of the flesh, to ease our selves of the burthen∣somenesse and trouble of them. Besides the Scripture mentioned, there is a passage of full importance this way, Ephes. 4. 11. 12. &c. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministery, for the edifying of the body of Christ, untill we all come into the unitie of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, &c. We see here that Gods designe and desire, as well as ours, is unitie, and perfect agreement amongst the Saints, in all matters of faith and know∣ledge. But how, or by what means, or by whom hath he projected and purposed the obtaining of this his desire? mark, he doth not say, that he gave some Kings, and some Princes, and some Judges, and Justices of the peace, some Pursevants, and some Jaylors, &c. to bring us into the unitie of the faith; no, but he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, to bring this desireable end of his to passe. And if we would make more use of these agents and instruments of God, of the Apostles, Prophets, Evan∣gelists,
of Pastors and Teachers, and lesse of those other (which are our own) for the quenching of those flames of divisions and dissentions that are amongst us in matters of Religion, we might in all likeli∣hood see our desires in this behalf many yeers sooner then by any other course we are like to do. The word of God, especially in the hand of an able Minister (among other ends) is given by God on purpose for the conviction and stopping of the mouthes of gainsayers. Tit. 1. 9. 11. And therefore this will do it, when a thousand other means, not having this anointing oyl upon them, though never so plausible, and promising in the eye of humane wisedom, will rather open them yet wider, then otherwise. 2. It is the expresse order and command of God to Ministers of the Gospel, upon whom chiefly it lies, by way of office and dutie to in∣struct The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, In meeknesse in∣structing those that oppose themselves, if God perad∣venture will give them re∣pentance to the acknow∣ledgement of the truth. 2 Tim. 2. 24, 25. and convince gainsayers, and men contrary-minded to the truth, to performe these offices unto them with meeknesse; and there∣fore not to threaten them with delivering them over to the secular powers, or to incite the Civill Magistrate against them. And if it be not lawfull for the Minister to incourage or put on the Civill Magi∣strate to use any externall violence or compulsion against such, cer∣tainly it is not lawfull, much lesse any point of dutie for him to pro∣ceed in any such way against them. And if such meeknesse be to be used towards those that are professed enemies to Christian Religion in the maine (of which the Scripture in the margent evidently speak∣eth) much more is it to be shewed towards those, who it may be are as cordially affected to this Religion, as our selves, onely dissenting from us in some apices or iota's of this Religion. 3. Repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth, being (as wee see) a speciall gift of God, and no man capable of it by his owne industrie or seeking, it is very unreasonable, that the want of it, being in it selfe a judgement upon a man from God, and withall no wayes prejudi∣ciall or hurtfull unto others (at least not necessarily or unavoidably hurtfull unto any) should expose him to further punishment and mi∣sery from men. I conceive a reasonable man will thinke it very hard and unreasonable, to punish a man for not doing of that, which is onely proper and in the power of God to doe. 4. Externall compulsion in matters of Religion, is of a proper and direct tendencie, to make men twofold more the children of sin (and so of wrath) then they were before, or would be otherwise. Now that which directly tends to increase sin & iniquitie in a Land, cannot be lawfull or from God. Suppose the State-Religion, and
manner of worshipping God, which the Magistrate practiseth, and professeth, be agreeable to the truth; yet if I, having no such faith of either, but judging in my soule and conscience that both State and Magistrate, are polluted in both, should make profession of ei∣ther as the truth, I should be a notorious hypocrite and dissembler before God and men, wounding my conscience and condemning my selfe, in what I allow in this case. And yet such a profession as this, is that which the compulsive power of the Magistrate seeks to extort from me. In which case I must suffer, because I will not sin, to the ruine and destruction of my soule. If it be objected; that the intent of the Magistrates compulsion in this case, is not to extort a profession from me against my judgement and conscience, but to engage me to rectifie and reforme my judge∣ment according to the truth, and so to make profession accord∣ingly. I answer; First, that I stand already engaged by a farre greater band hereunto, viz. my peace with God, and the safety of my soule, then suffering temporally from the Civill power. Nor can it rea∣sonably be here replied to me, that many will doe more for feare of a present temporall punishment, then of the future losse of their soules; because they that will doe this, will be ready enough to comply with the Magistrate in his Religion, what ever it be, with∣out compulsion. Secondly, If the intent of the temporall compulsi∣on bent against me, be my engagement to rectifie my judgement ac∣cording to the truth, and then to professe accordingly, why is it dis∣charged upon me before it be known, whether I have not discharg∣ed such my engagements to the uttermost of my power, and yet am not able to call that truth, which the Magistrate would have me so to call? Many (saith Solomon) seeke the face of the Ruler: and who Pro. 29. 26. would not gladly second the Magistrate in his Religion, if he had his judgement and conscience in his own hand or power? 5. If the Civill Magistrate hath an actuall coercive power to sup∣presse schismes, heresies, &c. because he is truly Christian, which he had not before, then truth of Christianitie alters the propertie and tenour of Magistracie, and that for the worse, in respect of those that are in subjection to it, yea, and (possibly) in respect of the best of those that are in such subjection. Before he was truly Christian, he had (saith A. S. and Presbyterians generally) no power, to punish, fine, imprison, banish, crush any of his subjects for the exercise of their conscience towards God: but by vertue of that great mercy vouch∣safed
unto him by God, in giving him part and fellowship with the Saints in Jesus Christ, he is invested with a new power to persecute the Saints, and to make them pay dearly for having consciences better (it may be) then his owne, at least better then to comply out∣wardly, with what they cannot inwardly digest and approve. If this be the case between a Christian, and the Civill Magistrate under whom he lives, he hath small incouragement, to pray for the con∣version of such a Magistrate to the truth, in case he were for the pre∣sent Heterodox or Pagan; it being farre better for him to live under such a Magistracie, which hath no power to mis-use him for his con∣science sake, then under that which hath, yea, and is made to be∣leeve, that it ought to use it accordingly. 6. That power is very dangerous for a Magistrate to owne, in the exercise whereof, he may very easily (and commonly doth) run an hazard (at least) of fighting against God, or of plucking up that which God hath planted, or of pulling downe that, which God hath built up. But such is that power of suppressing schismes, heresies, &c. which A. S. Cum multis alijs, are very earnest to fasten upon him. Ergo. The Proposition (I conceive) is too much every mans sence and consent, to be A. S. his dissent. The Assumption I demonstrate by this reason: Because those practises and opinions in Religion, which the Magistrate is borne in hand by those, with whose eyes he sees in such cases, are schismaticall, erroneous, and contrary unto God; may very possibly be the wayes of God, and truths of God (such mens judgements of them notwithstanding.) For first, the judgements of these men are not Apostolicall or infallible. A. S. him∣selfe, who makes his demands for Presbyterian soveraigntie, as high as another, yet dares not lay claime to this crowne. Therefore it's possible for them to be in a misprision about some Question, or con∣troversiall point in Religion. Secondly, Frequent experience shews, that a minor part (yea a partie for number inconsiderable) of god∣ly persons in a Church or State, may have the mind of God and of Christ amongst them in some particulars, before the generalitie or major part of this Church, comes to be enlightened or interessed in it. For a proofe whereof ad hominem we need goe no further, then to that partie of godly persons in the Land, who stood up in Queene Elizabeths, and King James his dayes, for Presbyteriall Government, when as the farre greater part both of Magistrates and Ministers in the Kingdome, were in their judgements opposite hereunto, and wholly Episcopall. So that had that Queene, or King, or any Par∣liament
under them, gone about to suppresse that party, which yet was then look'd upon as schismaticall, factious, and erronious, they had (according to A. S. his judgement touching the judgement of those men) fought against God, and sought to pluck up that which he hath planted. Yea thirdly (and lastly) it seldome or never fals out, that any truth, which hath for a long time been under hatches, and unknown to the generalitie of Ministers and other learned men in a Church or State, hath been at the first, and on the sudden, dis∣covered by God, either unto the Generalitie, or major part of them, but unto some few onely, yea and sometimes but unto one (for a season) by, and from whom, he is pleased to propagate the light and knowledge of it unto more afterwards. If then the Magistrate should rise up to suppresse this truth, or those that hold it forth un∣to the world, because it hath few friends and many enemies a∣mongst the Masters in his Israel, and is generally look'd upon as a schismaticall and erroneous opinion, should he not (in Gamaliel's sence) fight against God? The housholder in the parable forbad the plucking up of the tares out of his field, for fear of plucking up the wheat with them. Matth. 13. 29. 7. That power which was never attributed to the Civill Magi∣strate, by any Christians, but onely by those that had very good as∣surance that it should be used for them, and on their side, is not like to be a power appertaining to them by divine right, or conferr'd upon them by God. The reason of this proposition is, because it is no wayes credible, that within the compasse of so many ages as are by-gone, no one man of that conscientious generation of Saints, which hath been wont so frequently to deny it self even unto death, should acknowledge such a power in the Civill Magistrate, as did by divine right belong unto him, onely because such an acknow∣ledgement was like to make against himself. Therefore I assume. But that coercive power in matters of Religion, for the suppressing of errours, schismes, heresies, &c. was never attributed to the Civill Magistrate by any Christian, but onely by those that were very con∣fident, See for the fur∣ther proof of the minor Pro∣position Mr. Jo. Robinsons Essayes, p. 49. 50. &c. that it would be used for their turns, and to effect their de∣sires. Ergo. A. S. himself is warie and tender above measure in con∣ferring it upon him; distinguishing once and again and the third time also upon it (as we heard) before he dares let him have it; yea and in the close doth as much (in effect) as tell him, that except he be Presbyterian right down, and will accommodate him and his partie with it, he ought not to claim it.
8. That power which in the exercise of it, directly tends to pre∣vent, hinder, or suppresse the growth and increase of the light of the knowledge of God, and Jesus Christ in a Church or State, and the Reformation of such things, whether in Doctrine or Discipline, as are unwarrantable therein, is not (questionlesse) of any Divine right or Institution. If A. S. deny this proposition, at the perill of his modestie and reputation be it. So then I assume; But such a power in the Civill Magistrate as we speak of, directly tends to all the mischief and inconvenience mentioned. Ergo. The evidence of the assumption is this; when men are obnoxious to the stroke of the Civill power, and in danger of suffering deeply from the Magistrate, for any thing that they shall hold or practise in Religion contrarie unto him, it must needs be a great tentation and discouragement upon them, from searching and inquiring into the Scriptures, after a more exact knowledge of the good and holy and perfect will of God in things; because in case he should discover any thing contrarie to what the Magistrate professeth, he must run the hazard, either of with-holding the truth he so discovers, in unrighteousnesse, and so of ha∣ving both God and his own conscience his enemie, or else of having his bones broken by the iron rod of the Civill Magistrate, for ma∣king profession of any thing contrarie to that which he professeth. 9. That power which in the use of it plainly and palpably tends to the gratification of Satan, carnall and prophane men, is not (cer∣tainly) derived from God. To prove this proposition, would be but the lighting up of a torch to see the Sun. I assume; But that power in matters of Religion, to crush schismes, heresies, &c. which is by A. S. and many others pinn'd upon the Magistrates sleeve, is a power of this tendencie and importance in the use of it. Ergo. This latter pro∣position shines clear enough with this light. First, a very great part (if not farre the greatest) of those that are like to suffer by it, are men of good conscience, and truly fearing God. This is manifest in the Apologists and men of their judgement, whom A. S. himself, over and over (though condemning himself toties quoties) acknow∣ledgeth for very pious and godly men. Nor is it like that (ordinarily) men of loose or no conscience, should delight to swim against the streams either of greatnesse or pluralitie, in matters of Religion. Now then it cannot but be conceived to be matter of solemne gra∣tification to Satan, who is a murtherer, and bloodie enemie to the Saints, to see them disgraced, crushed, troden and trampled upon, especially by those, whom God hath appointed to be their prote∣ctors,
and most of all that this grievous measure should be measured out unto them for the goodnesse of their consciences towards God. Secondly, It is the impatient and importune desire of all ignorant, loose, lukewarme, and carnall professors, to have all Religions (as they call them) all wayes, sects, opinions, and practises in Religion, wholly silenc'd, suppress'd, and abolished where they live, excepting onely that one way and practise, which shall be authoriz'd and pra∣ctised by the State. Because by this means, they hope they shall not be distracted about their Religion, nor be put upon that sore trouble of seeking it they know not where, or amongst whom; but shall have it put into their mouths by the hand of Authoritie; which they hope likewise will stand between them and harme, in case it should not prove a Religion of that puritie and goodnes, which God requireth. 10. (And lastly) That power which in the use of it, directly tends to defile and pollute the consciences of men, either by destroy∣ing the softnesse, tendernesse, and ingenuitie of them, or by disturb∣ing the lawfull peace and comfort of them, or by both, is a power from beneath, not from above. (This proposition also a conscience any whit ingenuous cannot lightly deny) But such is the coercive power in matters of Religion, wherewith A. S. would faine befriend himselfe, in the Civill Magistrate. Ergo. The truth of the Assump∣tion, appears in this consideration: when the conscience of a man hath once broke the bands and tie of it's owne light, and prostituted it selfe to the desires and pleasures of men, against the graine of it's owne judgement and inclination (whereunto it is sorely tempted and urged, when the man is threatned deep, in case he shall not com∣plie with the State in their Religion, his judgement and conscience being wholly a verse to it) one of these two great evills or miseries commonly befalls him. Either 1. God takes no more pleasure in such a conscience afterwards, but withdrawing himselfe from it, leaves it unto it selfe, whereupon, secretly (as it were) resenting the de∣parture of God from it, it falls upon a course of hardening it selfe, and by degrees contracts a boldnesse, impudence, and desperate∣nesse in sinning; as a woman by suffering a breach to be made upon her modestie or chastitie once, often becomes facile and prone to that kinde of sinning afterwards; or else 2. by reflecting upon what it hath done in such a case, and feeding night and day upon the sad thoughts of its owne act, and casting it up between God and it selfe, how grievous a fin it is, to trample upon it's owne light, for any mans sake, or upon any consideration whatsoever, it brings it selfe
into grievous agonies of perplexitie, and horrour, out of which it ne∣ver recovers afterward. Thus I have given A. S. an account of my present thoughts, touching that coercitive power in matters of Religion, which he is so im∣portune to put into the Civill Magistrates hand, with both his own; making it as strange and uncouth a matter, as a new Independencie amounts unto (pag. 60.) that any man should not give the right hand of fellowship to his conceit herein. Which yet notwithstand∣ing I shall be most willing and ready to doe, if the man will but doe me the curtesie, solidly and theologue-like, by reason and not by vote, that is, unanswerably to answer the ten arguments propound∣ed. For I professe ingenuously, there is nothing seperates between me and his judgement in the point in hand, but onely those ten rea∣sons, with their fellows; and if I were able to answer them my selfe, I would abate the condition required to the bargaine, and purchase my agreement with him by mine own labour. Cap. 3. Concerning Presbyterie, or Classique Government of Churches, whe∣ther it be founded upon the Scriptures, or what foundation it hath otherwise. IT is easie to observe (and yet well worth the observing) how A. S. his hand trembleth and shaketh in drawing the line of the descent and pedigree of his Presbyteriall Government; he knows not well where to find the source, first spring, or originall of it. He is between the Scriptures on the one hand, and the Law of nature on the other, as the Poet describes a fierce Tyger between two droves or herds of cattell. Nescit utrò potius ruat, & ruere ardet utro{que}. He knows not which he had best fall upon, but hath a great mind to fasten upon both. When he hath occasion to skirmish with the Apo∣logists upon this point, me thinks I see him traversing his ground, as if he trod upon hot irons; he treads daintily and tenderly, and shifts his steppings to and againe, of and on, as if he felt no ground under him, but that whereof he was jealous. And it seems, that for the whole familie it selfe of persons engaged in A. S. his judgement about Church-government, though they be but one, resolutely e∣nough
agreed for the Government it selfe; yet there are great divi∣sions of heart amongst them, concerning the parentage and descent of it. Some out of a desire to have it the more adored and reveren∣ced in the world, will needs have it to be of the house and lineage of Johns Baptisme, viz. from heaven, from the Scriptures; Others of them, fearing that genealogie to be so perplexed and intricate, that it is fitter to make strife and questions of, then demonstration and sa∣tisfaction, thinke it better to wave that title, and claime, and to con∣tent themselves with a Meropean, in stead of a Phoebean parentage for it; to rise no higher then the libertie or power of the Church it selfe, to seek its originall. Which cleft in the house considered, it was a very prudent spoke put into the wheele of the Apologists, by him that gave counsell (if all tales be true) at no hand to have it put to vote, whether Presbyteriall Government could be prooved from the Scriptures, or no. Such a vote as this might very possibly have prov'd of as interruptory a consequence to the builders of this Government, as the confusion of tongues sometimes did to builders of another fabricke. But A. S. is A per se A, for ought that ever yet I could heare (save onely from his own pen) in making subordination, between superiour and inferiour Ecclesiasticall Judicatories, i. (in plaine English) Presbyteriall Government, to be partim juris divini, partim naturalis aut mixti; part∣ly of divine right, partly of naturall or mixt: which yet is his Deci∣sion, pag. 27. When he affirms pag. 36. that his Presbyteriall power needs not any patterne formally, and expresly from Christ, it sufficeth that it hath one from nature; would not a man thinke that he waves the Scrip∣tures in the Question, as being compleatly furnished otherwise to make good his standing? And yet within a few lines after; he glo∣ries too in the superfluous and over-abounding contributions of the Scriptures to him: And yet (saith he) we can shew a patent for it, not onely from the Law of nature, which should suffice, but also from the Law of Grace, in the old and new Testament. In other places, he seems wholly to decline the Law of nature, as if men by their prudentialls or power in any kinde, had nothing to doe to institute or set up any power in the Church, but by expresse order and warrant from God in the Scriptures. It is onely in God (saith he, pag. 48.) who is a King in this spirituall Kingdome, a Master in this house, a Father in this familie, who can give power therein unto any man: we dare not be so bold, &c. And pag. 61. Veritie consisteth not in the middle of this or that, which yee imagine, but in a conformitie of our conceptions with their object, and due measure, which in this
matter is onely Gods word revealed in the Scriptures: and according to this rule I take Presbyterian Government rather, &c. And yet one more, p. 34. Combined Presbyteries (qua tota, sed non qua totaliter considerata, i. no man can tell how or which way) judge of points of doctrine and discipline al∣ready revealed in the holy Scriptures, and give us new Ecclesiasticall Laws of things indifferent, and so teach and rule the Churches, &c. Come A. S. let you and I conferre lovingly of these affaires before we part. 1. I wonder much that having two Nations (at least, if not more) in your own bowells, such materiall differences as have been touch∣ed, in your Presbyterian Tribe, nay, that having line against line, page against page, leafe against leafe in your owne book, you should be no more compassionate towards your Brethren the Apologists, then to be brand them with differences amongst themselves, as you doe more then once, and that with much bitternesse, pag. 69. and elsewhere. Si variâsse vocas crimen; variavimus ambo. 2. The differences that are amongst the Apologists and men of their judgement, about the way of their government, are nothing considerable in respect of yours. They differ but in their haire, and you in your heads. They differ among themselves, but as one starre differeth from another, you differ between your selves, as much as Heaven and Earth. They all as one man unanimously affirm, that their way of Government is Canonicall, and of Divine assertion; you are divided about the Authoritie of your way, some making it Canonicall, others Apocriphall, some fetching it from the starres, others, from the dust. Hinc caput at{que} illinc, humero ex utro{que} pependit. By the way, the ingenuous dissent of that partie amongst you, who cannot say that they see any lineament of Heaven in the face of your Government, being yet well-willers, and friends of affecti∣ons large enough unto it, is unto me as little lesse then a demonstra∣tion as may be, that your way is but from men, and not from God. For as the saying is, Quid non sentit amor? If there were any thing in the Scriptures, that did but look merrily, or cast a plausible glance upon your way, would not they that are so intirely devoted both in their judgements and affections to it, find it out? yea and double
and treble the sympathy and strength of it with their imaginati∣ons? As it is the propertie of love, to cover a multitude of sins or tres∣passes, that are, (Prov. 10. 12.) so is it a propertie likewise of the same affection, to discover a multitude of pleasing accommodati∣ons which are not. Besides it is somewhat more then a mote in the eye of your unitie, that in some Churches (of your Presbyteriall calculation) particular or Parochiall Senats or Consistories have power to suspend from their communion, those that be members thereof; yea also to excommunicate them, &c. This is your own bounteous acknowledgement, p. 26. I thought that such a misdemeanour as this in the State Presbyteriall, had been of Glas∣sique vindication, at the least. 3. If Presbyterian Government, needeth no formall or expresse pat∣terne from Christ, then either it hath none such from him, or this pat∣tern wheresoever it is found, is but a superfluitie or impertinencie of Scripture. But that there is nothing superfluous or impertinent in the Scriptures, is a glorie asserted unto them by the holy Ghost him∣self. 2 Tim. 3. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profit∣able, &c. Therefore by A. S. his own confession, his Government hath no formall or expresse pattern from Christ. In one sence it may be granted, that Presbyteriall Government needeth no formall, nor yet materiall, pattern from Christ, viz. in such a sence, as it may truly be said that castles in the ayre need no reparations. But, 4. If your Government needs no formall or expresse pattern from Christ, we would gladly know, whether it needs any materiall or implicite pattern from him, or what it needs from him, whether something or nothing. But if you understood, or would please but to consider the necessities of it, I verily beleeve you would confesse, that it did stand in need of that formall and expresse pattern from him, which you speak of. You see that for want of such a pattern, it drives but heavi∣ly, and is long in getting up into it's throne; It hath lost many a Prov. 13. 12. merrie day alreadie; and yet daily meets with such contestations, oppositions, contradictions, from sober, wise, learned and religious men, that it is not like to reigne but in the fire of contention, and with the sorrow and sadnesse of many such hearts, as Christ would not have made sad. And all this calamitie befals it for want of a formall and expresse pattern from Christ: And yet hath it no need hereof? Surely it is very magnanimous, and high-spirited, to be able to bear all this heavie pressure of miserie upon it, and yet professe that it stands in no need of that, which would ease it.
5. If it needs no formall or expresse pattern from Christ, we would wil∣lingly be informed, what pattern it is, which (you boast) you can shew from the Law of Grace for it in the Old and New Testament. We suppose that it stands in need of all that you can shew for it, either from the Law of Nature, or of Grace, either from the Old Testament or from the New, and much more. You tell us, you can shew pattern upon pat∣tern, but shew none. Surely you would be thought to do very nobly; Posse & nolle, nobile. You do not shew us, but onely tell us (p. 41.) that if we will, we may see it in the ordinarie practise of the Church of the Jews in the old Testament. It seems that sight you have of your Presbyteriall Government, either in this practise of the Jewish Church, or in any other passage, or part of Scripture, depends upon your wils: you are wil∣ling to see it, and therefore you see it. Otherwise, why should you tell us, that we may see it, if we will? you are happie men, who have your eyes dependant upon your wils, and so can see what you please, or have a mind to see: Nobis non licet esse tam disertis; our wils depend upon our eyes; we dare not will any thing, but what we first see, to be the will and mind of God. It is no marvell, that you cast it as a sore aspersion upon the Apologists (p. 4.) that you saw them no waies minded to submit themselves (in these matters of conscience) to the desires of the Parliament. I verily beleeve, that did their judgements de∣pend upon their wils, as it seems yours do, they would have been as freely willing to have submitted in all things, unto the desires of the Parliament, as you are. But, 6. If our wils be weak, and thereby are hindred from seeing that goodly vision of Presbyterian Government in the practise of the Jewish Church, which you see, what do you contribute or affoard us to∣wards the healing and strengthening of them? Nay, do you not ra∣ther occasion that which is weak in this kind, to be quite turned out of the way? For when you tell us (as you do p. 13.) 1. that the adaequate end of your Presbyteriall Government, is the externall peace of the Church: and 2. that the power thereof consists first in the creation, suspention, and deposition of Church officers: secondly, in determining matters of Doctrine: thirdly, in making Ecclesiasticall Laws concerning things indifferent, &c. (all which you tell us on a heap. p. 42.) you both make us very loath and unwilling to find your Government there, and withall verie confident, that there it is not to be found. For, First, was the adequate end of the Government of that Church, the externall peace of the Church? Had it nothing in designe, for the spi∣rituall good, for the edification of the members of it in knowledge,
faith, and holinesse? was the power of the high Priest given him one∣ly to keep the Church in externall peace? I thought that to provide for the externall peace of the Church, had rather appertained to the Ci∣vill Magistrate and Government, then to the Ecclesiastique; and it is the Apostle himself that thus thoughteth me, 1 Tim. 2. 2. where he injoyneth, that supplications, prayers, &c. be made for Kings and all that are in authoritie, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godlinesse and honestie. Secondly, neither do I find in the practise of that Church, any power given to the combined rulers and governors thereof, for the creation, suspension, deposition of Church-officers. I read of the de∣position of a Church-officer (and no mean one neither) by the Civill Magistrate, 1 King. 2. 27. So Solomon cast out Abiathar from being Priest unto the Lord, &c. but of any such deposition by the combined Ru∣lers of that Church, I remember not that I have read. But, 3. As for any power of Determining matters of Doctrine, this is fur∣ther out of my ken in the practise of that Church, then any thing else. I know not well what A. S. means, by his phrase of Determining mat∣ters of Doctrine; but in my notion, and in the Grammaticall and pro∣per sence of the word, Determine, the claime of such a power riseth up as a high partition-wall between me and his Government. If by a power of Determining matters of Doctrine, he means nothing else but a libertie, or abilitie of discussing and arguing such matters, and of recommending the issues and results of such discussions, unto the Churches, as consonant (in their judgements) to the truth, with a proposall of their desires unto the Churches, to consider well of them, and to imbrace them, if they can so judge and conceive of them, I have nothing to oppose against this power. But if by his power to Determine matters of Religion, he means a power of conclu∣ding or defining, what men shall be bound in conscience to receive and beleeve for truth, and shall be look'd upon as sinning, in case they doe it not, whether they see sufficient ground for what is so concluded, and obtruded upon them, or not (which I partly be∣leeve to be A. S. his sence, I am sure is the proper sence of the word) such a power is (and I thinke ever will be) the first-borne of the ab∣horrings of my soule. I confesse I cannot be over-confident that A. S. intends the residence of such a power as this, in his Presbyterian Assemblies; partly, because he speakes somewhat like a man in this behalfe elsewhere, supposing it to be safe even for a few men to dissent from all the world, in case they have very strong reasons for their dissent,
pag. 22. and requires no subjection in particular Congregations, unto the judgement of Senates or Assemblies, but according to Gods word, pag. 28. (I trust he means, so apprehended by the Congregation; without this there is no subjection according to Gods word) and againe, p. 68. acknowledgeth it as an undoubted maxime, that the Church hath no absolute power in her judgements, &c. with many savourie expressions in this kind; partly also, because I find this indulgence generally sub∣scrib'd with Presbyterian pens, That the Authoritie which Classes and Paget. Defence of Church-go∣vernment, &c. pag. 29. Synods exercise, is not absolute, nor their Decrees held to be infallible, but to be examined by the word of God, and not to be received further then they doe a∣gree herewith. And yet on the other hand I confesse, that I cannot conceive, or comprehend how A. S. his Government can hold up her head like herselfe, if this iron-mace be taken out of her hand. For my part, if this one Article of a libertie to wave Presbyteriall Injunctions and Decisions, in case of a non-liquet from the word of God, to him to whom they are tendred, will be but assented unto, and candidly kept and performed, it would be the best Mediatour I know to reconcile my thoughts and judgement to it. 4. Nor can I in the practise of the Jewish Church, find either vola or vestigium, of a power granted unto the Rulers thereof, to make Ec∣clesiasticall Laws concerning things indifferent; I rather find a prohibiti∣on serv'd upon them from making any such Laws. Yee shall put no∣thing unto the word which I command you, nor shall yee take ought there from, &c. Deut. 4. 2. So againe, Chap. 12. 32. If A. S. can but produce one example of any such Law or Constitution made by them, he shall be a benefactour to the penurie of my notions; and in consideration thereof I will bestow upon him a dashing out of this piece of his charge. 5. (And lastly,) In the practise of the Jewish Church, the Prela∣ticall Schoole sees a vision or platforme of her Government also. And A. S. by your leave, the High-Priest as well in his Authoritie, as in his robes and holy accoutrements, did farre more plausibly, sympathize with Metropoliticall State and Greatnesse, then with Presbyteriall. For my part, I am not able to discerne in all the pra∣ctise of the Jewish Church, from the one end of it unto the other, any piece, streine, or veine, of such a patterne as A. S. speaks of. Surely the vision is so condition'd, as not to be seene but upon Pres∣byterian ground. The man did wisely in granting that he had no formall or expresse patterne for his Government, either from the old, or new Testament: but he should have done more ingenuously to have ad∣ded,
no nor yet any materiall or implicit patterne neither. For if he hath any materiall patterne, it is so purely materiall, that it may contend with materia prima it selfe for the prize of invisibilitie. If he hath any implicit, it is wrapt up under so many folds and pleights of obscuri∣tie, that no seeing eye is able to pierce through to it. But doe wee not give sentence too soone? It may be his patterne from the new Testament will carry it, though that from the old refus'd to meddle with it. But where shall we seeke this? He tells us pag. 41. That we may see it in the historie of the new Testament, in the judgement gi∣ven out at the Synod (either truly or untruly so called) of Hierusalem concerning the businesse of Antiochia. What possibly we may see in length and time, is not easie to determine for the present; But I have both more hope and feare of seeing a thousand other things (which yet I cannot certainly say, that I shall see) then I have of either, ever to see Classicall proceedings demonstrated out of that passage of Scrip∣ture. Nor doth A. S. so much as put forth his little finger towards such a Demonstration, but contents himselfe (for the present) to threaten us with his own hope, of seeing the business cleerly demonstrated to us by a better hand ere long. Cleere demonstrations of any thing from the Scriptures, shall be very wellcome to us at any time; but me thinks I see such insuperable difficulties in the way, that I feare that De∣monstration will never come out cleere. Yet because I would helpe forward the Cleernesse of it, what I can, I shall make bold to propound unto him that either is, or shall be, the undertaker thereof, a few par∣ticulars, which (I humbly conceive) must be substantially prov'd, to make the Demonstration cleere, at least to me, and many others. 1. It must be prov'd, that the Apostles, in that meeting at Hieru∣salem, Act. 15. 6. sate there onely in the capacitie of ordinary Elders or Presbyters, and not as Apostles. i. that they wav'd or silenc'd the spirit of infallibilitie which was given them, and fell to worke with the weake and fallible spirits of other men. Which is, as if a man should pull out his eyes, to see with the holes. 2. It must further be prov'd, that this councell at Hierusalem had their state and set times of meeting, as weekly, monethly, yeerely, or the like, and that they did not assemble occasionally onely. For this is one of the high characters of Presbyterie, by A. S. his owne calculation. pag. 39. 3. It must yet be proov'd, that they had Authoritatem citationis, an authoritative power to cite & call before them, whom they pleas'd, within the pale of Apostolicall Jurisdiction, that is, within the com∣passe of the whole world.
4. It must also be made cleere, that the Apostles and Elders that were members of this Synod, were sent hereunto, by those particu∣lar Churches, over whom they had right to claime Jurisdiction, or intended to include in their determinations. 5. The Demonstration will never be cleere, till it be substantially prov'd, that there was none authorized to fit in that Councell, but onely Church-Officers and Ecclesiasticall men; the contrary hereof seeming (at least) very apparant, from ver. 22. & 23. 6. That likewise must not be left unprov'd, that this Councell had power, as well to make new Laws of indifferent things, as to impose things necessary upon the Churches, ver. 28. 7. The Demonstrator to make his worke cleere and clever, must proove that the Churches of Syria and Cilicia, had their Commis∣sioners or Delegates, sitting Authoritatively in this Synod, because they are included in the Determination, ver. 23. 8. It must be prov'd likewise, that Paul and Barnabas sate as Com∣missioners upon the same terms for the Church of Antioch in this Synod. 9. It must be made to appeare, either that this Synod or Coun∣cell, would have proceeded as now they did, whether they could have said, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, or no, or that or∣dinary Synods or Assemblies may lawfully proceed as they did, though they have no such assurance of a concurrence of the Holy Ghost with them, as they had. 10. And lastly, Proofe must be made, that those words in the close of the Epistle (sent from this Councell to the respective Chur∣ches) yee shall doe well, ver. 29. are fulminative, and import some such threatning or intimation as this, that if they did not submit, some further course must be taken with them. If all these particulars, shall be substantially cleered and proved, I shall freely acknowledge that there is a plausible patterne for A. S. his Government, in the new Testament, but Hic labor, hoc opus est. I shall not pre-judge any mans abilities; but for the present, I doe as much expect the fulfilling of that Poeticall Prophecie, Ʋnda dabit flammas, & dabit ignis aquas, as I doe ever to see that fifteenth of the Acts, safely deliver'd of the man-child call'd Presbyterie. Therefore A. S. must pardon us if as yet we be not able to see any
patterne at all of his Government, neither formall, nor materiall, nei∣ther explicit, nor implicit, either in the old or new Testament. Well, but yet the man hath one string to his bowe more; though Grace will not relieve him, it may be nature will. He hath (as he saith) a pattern in the Law of Nature, which will suffice. They must (I beleeve) have verie good appetites to Presbyterie, that will be suffic'd with this pattern. The Law of nature is a very vast volume, and A. S. hath not quoted either page, leaf, or section of the book, so that I know not whither to turn, or where to look for his pattern. But me thinks the man himself hath given ample testimonie to the Law of Nature, that it is no wayes guiltie of, or accessarie to his Presbyterian Government. For that which cannot be made out, to the judgements and consciences of men, without the help of such an host of schola∣stique, intricate, (if not inexplicable) distinctions, as A. S. is fain to leavie, and muster together, p. 29. 30. 31. 32. &c. before he can make either head or foot of his businesse, what other originall or descent soever it may claim, I know not, but (questionlesse) the Law of Nature will not own. The Law of nature saith with one of natures sons; Odi difficiles nugas: she meddles not with subtilties, niceties, or curiosities of distinctions. A man that is unlearned, and but of ordinarie capa∣citie, that shall read the pages last quoted, may very possibly take his odde and uncouth distinctions for names of unclean spirits, and think that the man conjur's for his Government. But will you please to hear the names of his beagles, with which he follows his game, and hunts classique Law out of those deep and dark caverns and tullians of the earth where Nature had hid it, stigiis{que} admoverat umbris. The first couple, Actus primus, senior, and Actus secundus, senior. The second couple; Actus primus junior, and Actus secundus, junior. The third, Actus primus, tertius; and Actus se∣cundus, tertius. The fourth, Actus signatus, senior, Actus exercitus, senior. The fift, Actus signatus, junior; and Actus exercitus, junior. The sixt, col∣lectivè and distributivè. The seventh, formally and materially. The eight, Totum simpliciter, and totum & totaliter. The ninth, Omne simpliciter pro omne and pro omni & omnino vel omnimodo. The tenth, Totum, tota∣liter, and totum modificatum. The eleventh, Divisim & conjunctim. The twelfth, per se, and per accidens: The thirteenth and last, Totum con∣fusum, and totum ordinatum. Can any reasonable man imagine, that that conclusion or practise, which cannot be justified or cleared to the understanding and conscience of learned, pregnant and appre∣hensive men (for these are no lettuces for illiterate lips) but by the
contributions and engagements of all these distinctions (& some o∣thers not listed) should be sufficiently conteined in the Law of nature? The Law of nature is a book for every mans reading and understand∣ing; but this volume of distinctions is scarce for any mans. If A. S. and his partie would but spare the vulgar and common sort of men (as there is neither reason, nor Religion but why they should) from putting their necks under the yoke of Classique Government, untill they can plough with these heifers, I mean till he or they have made them capable of all these distinctions, for my part I should not fear much danger or inconvenience from it, except it were the intercept∣ing or suspending of such a Government, as might be a benefit and blessing to them, whilest they are in preparing for the other. In the mean time we clearly see that all A. S. his foundations for his Presbyteriall building, fail him: neither the old Testament, nor the New, nor yet the Law of nature, will consent to bear or to support any such fabrique. Nor is all that hath been here said by way of contest with him about his Government, any whit more then a first fruits of what is further opposeable to it. Cap. 4. Concerning the form of Church Government maintained by the Apo∣logists, commonly called (nomine ad invidiam comparato) by the nick-name of Independancie; by themselves Congregationall: and whether A. S. his exceptions against it, be materiall, or of that moment that it should give place to it's Competitor. FOr the justification of this Government, in a cataskeuastique or assertive way, I shall plead nothing further (for the present) then what the Presbyterian School it self grants, conceiving that to be a ground impregnable, especially quoad homines, to found the law∣fulnesse of it upon. I shall rather addresse to my Antagonist A S. and trie whether he be any whit more dextrous at pulling down, then we lately found him at building up; it may be he is better at hiding, then at finding. But first, towards the building up of the Congregational Govern∣ment, See Master Charles Here Independency, &c. p. 2. this corner stone is given us by our Adversaries, that where there is no neighbourhood of congregations, or single Churches, whereby they may with conveniencie be aiding each to other, there a single congregation must not be denied entirenesse of jurisdiction. If we cannot upon this advantage of ground, make good this go∣vernment
against all opposition, it is very ill bestowed on us, and we deserve to be punished with that, which lifts up it self against it. But, First, if entirenesse of Government or jurisdiction be not to be denied to a single congregation when it is solitarie and without neighbours, then certainly it hath a lawfull right, title, or claime to such a Ju∣risdiction. For whatsoever doth not in a way of equitie or right belong unto any man, ought to be denied unto him. If then a single Church in this case, hath a right to an entirenesse of rule and go∣vernment within it self, I would gladly know, by what right any o∣ther Church, or churches be they never so many, can take away this right or priviledge from it. Those whom God hath put together (saith our Saviour in the case of marriage) let not man put asunder. Doubt∣lesse if a single Church, under the circumstance mentioned, hath a right to an entirenesse of Jurisdiction within it self, it hath this right con∣ferred upon it by God, or Christ himself, there being no other foun∣tain or foundation thereof imaginable. And if so, then who ever shall take away, or deny this right of Jurisdiction unto it, must shew a commission from heaven to do it, or otherwise be guiltie of putting those asunder, which God hath joyned together. Secondly, if a Church yet single, be invested with a power of Ju∣risdiction within it self, and should be cashiered of this power, by the rising up of more Churches neer unto her, then that which is in∣tended by God as a table, should become a snare unto her; she should suffer losse, and have sorrow from those, by whom she ought to be comforted. Thirdly, If a single Church should suffer losse of so considerable a priviledge, as entirenesse of Jurisdiction is, by the multiplication of Churches neer unto her, then cannot this Church pray for the propagation of the Gospel in places neer to it, but she must pray against her own comfort and peace; which is a sore temptation up∣on her, either to pray very faintly, or not to pray at all, for such a thing. If it be objected and said, that entirenesse of Jurisdiction is no be∣nefit or priviledge to a single Church, but rather an inconvenience, or a diminutive priviledge at best, and that her condition shall be improv'd, not impaired, by combining her self in point of govern∣ment with other Churches: I answer, First, that the Scripture it self makes intirenesse of government, or subjection onely unto those that are of the same societie or body, aspeciall mercie, favour, and blessing from God. And their Nobles
shall be of themselves (saith God, speaking of that great goodnesse he meant to shew unto his people after their return from Babylon) and their Governour shall proceed from the midst of them, &c. Jer. 30. 21. So it is made a character or signe of the prosperous estate of Tyre, that her wise men that were in her, (i. of her own Nation) were her pilots. Ezek. 27. 8. Secondly, subjection unto strangers, is still spoken of as matter of punishment and sorrow. Give not thine heritage to reproach, that the hea∣then should reigne over it. Joel 2. 17. The nation of the Jews were ex∣presly forbidden to set strangers to rule over them. Deut. 17. 15. If it be objected; but Pastors or Elders of neighbour Churches ought not to be looked upon as strangers, but as Brethren. I answer (in a word) though they be brethren in comparison of the unbe∣leeving partie of the world, and in respect of their spirituall descent from the same Father with them; yet have they more of the relation and consideration of strangers to them, then those that are (as it were) of the same domestique societie with them. And therefore sub∣jection to them, must needs have lesse of the blessing, and more of the curse in it, then subjection to their own. Thirdly, the grants of Government and rule within themselves unto Towns and Corporations, were ever esteemed matters of spe∣ciall grace and favour from Princes: and have sometimes been pur∣chased with great summes by the inhabitants. Fourthly and lastly, reason it self demonstrates intirenesse of Go∣vernment, to be a sweet priviledge & benefit to a particular Church. First, in case a man be questioned, he saves a proportion both of time, and labour of travaile in respect of what he must undergo, if he were to make his Answer at a Consistorie further of. Secondly, proceedings against him in his own societie, shall be regulated, ma∣naged and ordered, by his own Pastor, who is a Father unto him in the Lord, and who in all reason, and according to the course of (almost) all constant experience, is more tender, affectionate, and compassionate towards him, then the Pastors of other stocks, and those that are strangers to him. The Pharaoh that knew Joseph, dealt well by him, his kindred, and seed: but (saith the text) there arose another Pharaoh that knew not Joseph, and he evill intreated our Fathers, &c. Thirdly, he shall be tried, and sentenced by those, who know not how soon it may be their own case to be tried & sentenced by him again; which in reason cannot but teach them moderation and equitie, in whatsoever they shall act or suggest against him; where∣as,
a Consistorie of standing Judges, whose fair necks have little or no cause to fear any yoke of being judged themselves, are in farre more danger through a confident and constant use of the Scepter, of having their hand hardened, and their little finger soon made as heavie as their loins. It is a good rule which A. S. himself prompt∣eth us withall in this case, p. 10. Nunquam satis fida potentia, ubi nimia est; power seldome yeelds any good fruit, where it is too rank and luxuriant. Fourthly, it is a great incouragement and confirmation of face, to a man that is accused, and is call'd to answer for himself, especially if he be any thing tender-foreheaded and bashfull, as many of inferiour breed and education are, to answer before those, whose faces are familiar to him, and with whose persons he is well acquainted; and the contrary is a kind of oppression to such a man. Such an advantage or disadvantage as this, may easily amount to as much, as either a mans standing, or falling in his cause. A Con∣sistory of strange faces, especially the persons being all of superiour rank and qualitie to him, may be to a plain man, of as bad a con∣sequence, as the seeing of Medusas head was (among the Poets) it may turn him into a stone, and make him able to say little for him∣self; whereas if he be to make his answer at home, the knowledge and interest he hath, of and in those persons before whom he is to speak, will be a soveraigne antidote unto him against such fears, as otherwise might betray him in his cause. Fiftly, in this Govern∣ment we speak of, by the Congregation, private Christians have the opportunitie of seeing and hearing from time to time, all the carriages, debates, and judiciarie proceedings in the Church, which will be not onely matter of much satisfaction, but also as a school of wisdom and experience unto them daily; whereas, if these trans∣actions be negotiated at a remote Consistorie, the private Christian loseth his portion and interest in them. Sixtly (and lastly) Con∣clusions many times are verie offensive and hard to be digested, for want of the knowledge of the premisses, that should allay and sweeten them. Classique determinations and awards, especially when they rise high, the reasons and grounds of them being (for the most part) unknown to the generalitie of men, are of hard constru∣ction with them: whereas the issues and awards that are brought forth in a Congregation, the whole series and storie of all proceed∣ings à capite ad calcem, being known unto all, must needs be much more satisfactory, and of a farre better resentment with men. These reasons might have been inlarged with much more strength and
weight, and many others likewise added to them; but for the pre∣sent, desirous we are that brevitie should have the casting voice. Who then can lay any thing to the charge of this Government? That can I (quoth A. S. in effect. p. 38. 39. &c.) I have sixteen reasons or objections against it. Yea but A. S. your sixteen Reasons (or at least the greatest part of them, as farr as I can see) have all but one head; and if that be struck off, all those reasons are but as so many dead corpses. You alledge against the Apologists, that the remedie, in their way of Government, for the reducing of whole Congregations or Churches, in case they miscarrie or be irregular, is not sufficient, nor satisfactory. This you prove by laying pen upon paper, untill you had sixteen reasons (so called) in black and white. I shall not spend time in transcribing these your Reasons, but shall desire the Reader (though it may be some discourtesie unto you) to take your book into his hand, and to consider of them with what is repond in An∣swer to them. And first, for that defectivenesse you charge upon the Congrega∣tionall Government, for the reduction of whole Churches, under er∣rours, miscarriages, &c. I answer. First, Suppose that course or means which the Apologists insist upon, a with-drawing, and renouncing all Christian communion with such Churches, untill they repent, be not in the eye of reason or humane con∣jecture a means sufficient for such a purpose, and that not onely six∣teen but six and twentie reasons, and those more plausible then A. S. his sixteen, could be leavied against it, yet if it be a means which God hath authorized for the effecting it (as I verily beleeve it is, neither doth A. S. nor any of his, that yet I have met with, prove the contrarie) it will do the deed, and prosper, when as seven other means that are greater of flesh and more promising, will but beat the aire, and do little of what was intended and projected to have been done by them. How many reasons may we probably conceive, that the disputers of this world in Paul's time, were able to bandie against preaching, whereby to prove it foolishnesse? yet this was, and still is, and ever will be, maugre all the opposition of ten thou∣sand disputations and reasons against it, the wisdom of God, and the power of God, to save those that beleeve. The strength and power of sa∣cred Ordinances, do not lie in their natures, but in their relations or institutions. Now that a withdrawing of Christian communion from persons walking inordinately, is an ordinance, or means appoint∣ed by God, for the reducing and reclaiming of them, is evident,
2 Thes. 3. 6. with the 14. We warn you Brethren in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every brother that walketh in∣ordinately, &c. and vers. 14. If any man obey not this our saying in this let∣ter, note him, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. Clear∣ly implying, that to with-draw communion, and to deny Christian fellowship unto Christians walking inordinately, is both a means of Divine institution, and otherwise proper and commodious in it self, to reclaime and bring them to Repentance. There is the same reason of Churches in this behalf, which there is of persons; Chur∣ches being nothing else but persons embodied. Secondly, suppose there were no such sufficient or satisfactory remedy for the inconvenience mentioned in the way of the Apologists, as A. S. conceives to be in his (which yet there is, as hath in part al∣readie, and will afterwards, further appeare) yet Lawyers have a saying, that a mischief is better, then an inconvenience. A man had better run the hazard of a greater losse, then expose himself to a daily wasting and consuming of his estate. A man had better be wet through and through with a soaking showre once a yeer, then be exposed in his house to continuall droppings all the yeer long. The Delinquencie of whole Churches, (such I mean as is matter of pub∣lique scandall or offence to their neighbour Churches) is not an every dayes case, no more in the way of congregationall, then of Pres∣byteriall Government: you acknowledge the raritie of it in your Go∣vernment, and we affirm it in ours. Now then much better it is, to want a remedie against such an evill, which possibly may not fall out within an age, though it be greater when it doth fall, then it is to expose our selves to continuall droppings, I mean to those daily in∣conveniences which we lately shewed to be incident to the Classique Government. Thirdly, they that implead the Congregationall way, for being defective, as touching the matter in hand, seeme to suppose, that God hath put a sufficiencie of power into the hands of men, to reme∣die all defects, errours, and miscarriages of men whatsoever. Else why should it be made matter of so deep a charge and challenge against the way of the Apologists, that it affords not a sufficient and satisfactorie remedie either to prevent or heal all possible miscarriages in all Churches? I would willingly know, in case your Church trans∣cendent, your supreame Session of Presbyters, should miscarrie, and in your Doctrinall determinations, give us hay, stubble, and wood, in∣stead of silver, gold, and precious stones (a misprision, you know, well
neer as incident, to such Assemblies, yea and to those that are more generall and oecumenicall then so, as obstinacie in errour is to par∣ticular congregations) what remedie the poore Saints and Chur∣ches of God under you have, or can expect against such a mischief; or what remedie you now have in the way of your Government, for the recovering of your selves out of such a snare, more then what the congregationall way affordeth, for the reclaiming of par∣ticular Churches. Nay the truth is, your Government in such a case is at a greater losse in respect of any probable or hopefull remedie against such an evill (which yet is an evill of a most dangerous con∣sequence) then the other way of Government is for the reduction of particular Churches. That hath the remedie of God (as hath been shewed), though not the remedie of men, and yet that remedie of God which it hath, is appliable by men, and those known who they are, viz. the Churches of Christ neer adjoyning; but if your great Ecclesiastique bodie be tainted or infected though never so Corpora mor∣bis majora patent. Sen. dangerously, God must have mercie on you, and that in a way some∣what (at least) more then ordinarie, if ever you be healed. For that Directive power in matters of Religion, which, had you left it in other mens hands, might in this case, through the blessing of God, have healed you, being now onely in your own, hath not onely oc∣casioned that evill disease that is upon you, but also leaves you helplesse and curelesse by other men. A. S. makes the greatest part of his arguments against that way of Government which he oppo∣seth, of what iffs, I mean of loose and impertinent suppositions, and cases, that are not like to fall out, till ursa major and ursa minor meet (unto which kind of arguments every whit as much as enough hath been answered alreadie) but he shall shew himself a soveraigne Be∣nefactour indeed to the Presbyterian cause, if he can find out a reme∣die satisfactorie and sufficient against that sore evill we speak of inci∣dent to his Government in the case mentioned: which is a case both of a farre worse consequence then the obstinacie of a particular Church in some errour; and (I fear) of a far more frequent occur∣rence, then the world is willing to take notice of. Fourthly, let us ponder a little, how sufficient and satisfactorie that remedie against the evill now in consideration, is, which the Classique politie, under the protection of A. S. his pen, so much glorieth in; let us compare the two remedies, of the two corriving polities toge∣ther, as A. S. hath done, after his manner. But the Presbyteriall Government (saith he, p. 39.) is subject to none of
these inconveniences: For the collective or combined eldership having an Au∣thoritative power, all men and Churches thereof are bound by Law and Cove∣nant to submit themselves thereunto: Every man knoweth their set times of meeting, wherein sundrie matters are dispatched, and all things carried by pluralitie of voices, without any schisme or seperation. Not to be trouble∣some to the man about his Grammaticals, (wherein his pen slips oftner then Priscian will tolerate in such a piece) because in these he opposeth nothing but a mans conceit either of overmuch scholar∣ship or overmuch care, in him. Here is a remedie indeed against some inconveniences; but whe∣ther the inconveniences be not much better then the remedie, adhuc sub Judice lis est. But what are the inconveniences? The first is, that Churches being equall in authoritie, one cannot binde another to give any account, in case of offence given. Well, what is the re∣medie for this in Classique constitution? The combined Eldership having an authoritative power, all men and Churches thereof are bound by Law and Covenant to submit themselves, &c. What is another inconvenience? In case other Churches were offended in the proceedings of a particular Church, they could not judge in it; for then they should be both judge and partie in one cause, &c. Well, what is the remedie in Presbyterian politie? The combined Eldership having an authoritative power, all men and Churches, &c. What is a third inconvenience? That Congregationall Government giveth no more power or authoritie to a thousand Churches over one, then to a Tinker, yea to the Hangman over a thousand, &c. What is the Presbyte∣rian remedie for this? The combined Eldership having an Authoritative power, &c. The combined Eldership with their Authoritative power toge∣ther with a Law or Covenant whereby all men and Churches under them, are bound to submit unto them, are as bars of iron and gates of brasse to keep out all those inconveniences, irregularities, defilements, pollu∣tions, out of the Presbyterian Temple, whereunto (it seems) the Congregationall temple, for want of such stoure and tight provisi∣ons, lies open. But, First, what if your combined Eldership hath neither footing nor foundation in the Word of God? It is not the serviceablenesse of it against a thousand such inconveniences as were mentioned, that will justifie it. Sauls offering sacrifice was a means to prevent the scattering of the people from him; yet Samuel told him that he had done foolishly in it; and it cost him his Kingdom. 1 Sam. 13. 9. 13. 14. So the putting forth of Vzzah's hand to stay the Ark, was a means to keep it from being shaken; but yet the doing of it cost him his life. Peters
valour and zeal in drawing his sword, and laying about him, was a likely means of rescuing his Master; but the Lord Christ preferred the imminent danger of his life before such a rescue, and check'd the sword that was drawn for him again into the sheath. That Law and constitution in the Papacie, whereby all men, and all Churches thereof, are bound to submit their judgements in matters of Faith to the decision of the Papall Chair, is as soveraigne a remedie against all those inconveniences named, as that for which Classique Autho∣ritie is so much magnified by you; and yet it is never the lesse abho∣minable in the eyes both of God and men. The Question is not, which Government will serve most turns; but which is most agree∣able to the will and Word of God. If that of Presbyterie be defe∣ctive this way, as there is extreame cause to fear it is, this defect cannot be recompenced or redeemed by any other commendation whatsoever. Secondly, neither can we with any tolerable satisfaction inform our selves out of all your discourse, either what you mean by that Authoritative power, which you claime to your combined Eldership, nor yet how, or by what, or whose Authoritie, they come to be invested with it. As for the power, sometimes you deny it to be magisteriall, or such, which may not lawfully be declin'd, when a man cannot submit unto it without disobedience to God; otherwise, you make it so irrefrageably sacred, as if it were no lesser sin then perjurie it self, to detract it. Again, for the investiture of your Eldership with this power, whether they arrogate it unto themselves and are their own earvers, or whether the Civill State and Parliamentarie Law, or whether the free and joynt consent of those over whom this power is exercised, do conferre and derive it upon them, you inform us not, but count an ignoramus, better then a verdict. But till you do resolve us by what Authoritie or power this Authoritative power comes into the hand of your combined Eldership, we shall think it safer to stand to the hazard and damage of all the inconveniences spoken of, then to subject to it. Thirdly, if the Law of the State, be the first and most considerable band or tye upon men to submit unto the power of your combined eldership (as you seem here to imply, in saying that all men and all Churches thereof are bound by Law, &c.) then 1. you must acknow∣ledge that the root and base of your Government is potestas secularis, secular authoritie; and then how is it Ecclesiastique or spirituall? A man may as well bring a clean thing out of an unclean (in Jobs expres∣sion)
as make a spirituall extraction out of a secular root. Secondly, it will rest upon you to prove, that the Civill State hath a power to form and fashion the Government of the Churches of Christ. Yea, thirdly (and lastly) it will be demonstratively prov'd against you, that you resolve the Government of the Churches of Christ (in the last resolution of it) into the humours, wils, and pleasures of the world, yea of the vilest and most unworthie of men. But, Fourthly (and lastly) the Authoritative power of your combined El∣dership being granted unto you, we do not see how the inconveni∣ences you find in the Congregationall way, will be much better salv'd in yours. For first, what if a particular Congregation under the jurisdiction of your Eldership, reflecting upon the Oath or Co∣venant it hath taken for subjection thereunto, (as likewise upon all other ingagements that way) as unlawfull, shall peremptorily re∣fuse to stand to the awards or determinations of it, what will you do in this case? How will your combined Eldership remedie this incon∣venience? What? will you excommunicate this Church? The Apo∣logists in their way do little lesse; (and that by a power farre lesse questionable then yours) nay in your interpretation, they do everie whit as much? Or will you deliver them over Brachio seculari? to be hamper'd and taught better, then it seems you can teach them, by prisons, fines, banishment, &c. O A. S. remember you tax'd the Apo∣logists, for comporting in a very small matter (in comparison) with the Arminians (in case it had been true) and will you comply with the Papists in a matter of this high nature? Churches had need take heed how they chuse men for their guardians, that will so dispose of them, if they please them not. Besides, you know what was said in the second Chapter, touching the power of the Magistrate in this case. And what if in the Session of your combined Eldership there be no such thing as pluralitie of votes concerning the excommuni∣cation of such a Church, (as it is very possible that in such a meet∣ing the truth may find just as many friends as errour hath, and no more) is not the remedie you spake of now in the dust? Again, secondly, (to touch upon the second inconvenience men∣tioned) when your combined Eldership proceeds against a particular Church amongst you, upon offence taken, is not this Eldership as well party, as Judge? If you think you have every whit the better of it, because your eldership, though it be both party, and judge, yet hath an authoritative power, over those whom it judgeth. I answer, first, that as our Saviour told Pilate; He could have no power against him,
except it were given him from above; no more can your Eldership have over those, whom it judgeth in this case. Now how uncertain and faint the probabilities are, that they have any power over them, gi∣ven them from above, hath been formerly shewed at large. And if that power which your Eldership claimeth, and exerciseth over the Church arraigned, be not from above, then the Apologists remedie is farre better and safer, then yours. Secondly, to hold and maintain, that all those that have an Authoritative power over men, may law∣fully by vertue of such power, be both parties and judges, is to ex∣alt all manner of tyrannie, violence, and oppression by a Law. Up∣on such a supposition, men invested with Authoritie and power whether in Church or State, may be their own carvers, and serve themselves of the estates, liberties and lives, of those that are under them, how, and when, and as oft as they list. And why do you not submit to the decisive judgement of the King in all controversies depending between you and him, if that be your Doctrine? For the third inconvenience (so called) I shall be your debtour to tell me plainly and distinctly, what power more your Government giveth to a thousand Churches over one, then to a Tinker, or the Hangman, over a thousand. I do not remember where either your self or any of your partie, have calculated the proportion; but I well remember a saying in Charron; That every humane proposition hath equall authoritie, Tout proposi∣tion humaine a autant d'authorite quel'autre, si la raison n'on fait la diffe∣rence. Char∣ron de sagesse. Plus creden∣dum est asser∣tioni alicujus simplicis & non authori∣zati excellen∣ter in Scrip∣turis eruditi, quam decla∣rationi Papae. if reason make not the difference: and another of Gerson (much com∣mended by Protestant Authors, though the Author of it Pontifici∣all) The saying of a simple man and no wayes authoriz'd, if he be well seen in the Scriptures, is rather to be beleeved then the Popes own determination. But A. S. what makes you think (for I can easily guesse what makes you say) that the Government of the Apologists gives no more power to a thousand Churches over one, then to a Tinker or Hangman over a thousand? Ʋbi, quando, quibus testibus, did this Government, or any son it hath, ever make any such comparison, or so farre honour either your tin∣ker or hangman, as to make them equall in power to a thousand Chur∣ches? And yet I suppose, if a man should say, that the dust in the bal∣lance, hath as much life in it, as the Sun, it would be no disparage∣ment to this excellent and glorious creature; because the excellen∣cie of it, doth not stand in any degrees or superioritie of life above any other creature, but in the abundance of light which it hath, and the height of it's scituation, and the serviceablenesse of it to the world by means of both. In like manner if it be supposed (which, I think upon what hath been delivered, may very reasona∣bly
be supposed) that the glorie and excellencie of Churches doth not stand in any power or authoritie that one hath over an other, or many over one, but in other farre more rich, and holy, and honour∣able endowments, relations, and qualifications, it can be no preju∣dice or disparagement unto ten thousand of them, to say they have no more authoritie over one, then A. S. his tinker or hangman hath over them. Therefore if A. S. his admired piece of Church-policie hath no greater commendation, then to serve for preventing such inconveniences as this, the world needs make no great lamentation over it, though it were in the condition of Rachels children, when she Matth. 2. 18. wept for them, and would not be comforted. Some other inconveniences there are, wherein A. S. finds the Go∣vernment which he opposeth, tardie, and thinke he sets a crown of glorie upon the head of his Presbyterie, in vindicating the innocencie of it in respect of such guilt; but alas, he washeth off this guilt with blood, or with water fouler then it (as hath been shewed) and con∣demneth his Government in that wherein he mainly alloweth it. The guilt is innocencie, in respect of the purgation. There is one incon∣venience (formerly opened and insisted upon in this Chapter) verie incident to Presbyterie, the conscience whereof (me thinks) should make all the sons of that way, rather to cover and compassionate, then to complain or cry out of, any inconvenience, they either see, or rather think they see in another. Cap. 5. Whether the Apologists and men of their Judgement, may lawfully, and without danger or prejudice to the State, be tolerated: and whether A. S. his reasons to the contrarie, be of sufficient-weight; to perswade ei∣ther to the banishment, crushing, or suppressing of them in any kind. HE that hath read the precedent part of this Discourse, and doth, though but with the lowest degree of impartialitie, con∣sider what hath been argued, between the two wayes, Presbyterie and Apologisme, cannot lightly but mourn over the title of this Chapter; and think him to be a man of iron entrails, that should give occasion to such a Question as is there propounded. Suppose the opinion maintained in the latter part of the second Chapter, were wav'd, and such a coercive power in matters of Reli∣gion as A. S. contends for, allowed in the Magistrates hand, yet that any man should plead for the drawing of this sword, against
those men, who first, have such a considerable strength, if not of evidence, yet of reason, for what they practise and professe: second∣ly, have a like (if not a more) considerable strength against that way of Government which they cannot submit to. Thirdly, are by their fiercest adversaries and opposites themselves, acknowledged ten times over for very pious, godly, and learned men; fourthly, have been (at least the generalitie of them) and so continue, men of the most affectionate, and withall the most effectuall activitie and for∣wardnesse, to promote the great cause of Religion, Parliament, and Kingdom. Fiftly, are as deep in, or (if you will) as much out of their estates rateably, for the support of this cause, as any other sort of men whatsoever. Sixtly, have (many of them) such as were meet for such a service, adventur'd their persons and lives, in the face of the rage and furie of the common enemie, continuing still in the same ingagements; yea seventhly (and lastly) have (some of them) exposed themselves to more danger and harder termes from the ad∣verse partie, then ordinarie (in case they should prevail) by a pub∣lique vindication of the cause of the Parliament in print from the Scriptures, and that before any man of differing judgement from them in Church affairs, appeared in the cause upon such terms; that any man (I say) on this side of malignancie, should consult the sor∣row, trouble, disgrace, suppression, ruine of men, so holy, so harm∣lesse, of such eminent desert in the cause of Religion, State, King∣dom, me thinks should exceed the line of humanitie, and be thought some inspiration or suggestion from the great enemie of mankind. Neverthelesse, if either God, reason, the peace or safetie of the Kingdom, require the sorrows or sufferings of these men, I make no question but they will be willing to dispence with all considerations whatsoever that stand up to plead their immunitie, and will with Isaac, patiently suffer themselves to be bound, yea and to be offered up in sacrifice also, if need be. Onely their humble request and suit is, that they may not be sacrificed upon the service of the ignorance, vain surmises, needlesse jealousies, bitter suggestions, whether of a few, or of many. Better a thousand times is it, that such distempers as these, though found in millions of men, should suffer, were it ne∣ver so deep, then that the least hair of the head of one of those men should fall to the ground. One A. S. (it seems) is come forth with a band of one and twen∣tie Reasons, to attach the libertie of these men, and to seize the free∣dome of their consciences, and comforts for the use of the Presby∣terie,
though his word be, For God and his Countrey. But let us give him an unpartiall hearing of what he hath to say: if the Presby∣terie hath right either to the liberties or comforts of these men, God forbid that any man should deny them unto it. We shall take the Allegations, into consideration, in that order that himself presents them, in pa. 61. 62. 63. 64. 65. of his Discourse; desiring the Reader once more, to read the tenour of them more at large from his own pen, because I intend my Answer, with as little transcribing as may be. To the first we answer, first, that we are no wayes able to compre∣hend, why or how the toleration of the Apologists and theirs, should A. S. his first Reason against Toleration, Answered. open any doore to all sorts of erroneous opinions, any whit more then A. S. his intertaining of a sober and discreet servant to wait upon him, should open a doore to all the Kings guard to become his houshold attendants: or then an allowance of provender to his friends horse, should open a doore to all Prince Ruperts troops to rack and manger with him. (Nay secondly, we are verily perswaded (and that upon good grounds) that the granting unto the Apologists a free exercise of their ministery, will (under God) be an effectuall means both of chasing away many erroneous opinions, which are (for the present) fighting against the truth of God amongst us; as also of preventing the coming on of further supplies from Hell unto them. A. S. him∣self gives them this testimony, p. 70. that whoever knows them, knows well they want no abilities to dispute their opinion in any Assembly in Europe. Men of their abilities, being sound and orthodox in their judge∣ments withall, are carpenters prepared (as it were) on purpose by God, for the cutting down of the horns of false doctrines and opi∣nions, if they be suffered to work. Thirdly, (and lastly) if the worst should come to the worst (as the saying is) better a doore opened to all sorts of erroneous opinions, yea and to many other inconveniences greater then this, then that the guilt of any persecution or of any evill intreatings of the Saints and servants of God should cleave unto a people or State. To your second Alledgement, why no Toleration for the Apo∣logists, Answer to his second Reason we answer, first, that the very constitution of it is but super∣stitiousnesse of fear: The shadow of the mountains seem men unto you. It may breed factions and divisions between persons of whatsoever relation, &c. Iudg. 9. May (the countrey Proverbe saith) comes but once a yeer; but that may this proverb speaks of, must come so oft; but A. S. his May, may pos∣sibly not come in an age, no nor in many generations. And would
he have so many thousands of the deare children and servants of God, as do Apologize in the Land, actually and out of hand, be compelled to eat their bread in darknesse, to be filled with heavi∣nesse, and many of them (it is like) to perish by hunger, nakednesse, &c, for the honour and exaltation of his May be? Non Dea te genuit, sed duris cautibus horrens Gaucasus, hyrcanae{que} admorunt ubera tygres. The man speaks as if he had been bred of rocks, and suck'd the milk of Tygers. Doth he not deserve to be beaten with his own rod? and because his writing books, may cause many troubles and distractions a∣mongst us, not to be tolerated to have pen, ink, or paper any more? Secondly, I would know of him, whether he deemeth himself to be of an other Religion then the Apologists, because he dissents in judgement from them about Church Government. If so, he must deem himself either Arminian, Papist, Socinian, or worse; if not, then Candorem tuum A. S. in that malignant expression, whereby you would make simple people beleeve, that the father and the son, and so the husband and wife, are of different Religions, when they do not walk in the same way of Church Discipline. Thirdly, why should such a difference as this, at least a libertie thus to differ, without smarting on either side, breed factions or divi∣sions between persons in relation? Doth the wilde asse bray (saith Job) when Iob 6. 5. he hath grasse? or loweth the ox over his fodder? Surely persons are never upon better terms of advantage to agree, then when contentment is injoyed on every side. Or in case of such a difference as we speak of, if it be matter of discontent to one partie, that the other is not of the same practise with him, you may confidently beleeve that the miscarriage in this kind rests on the Presbyterian side; the spirit thereof inordinately lusting after unitie in practise, viz. whether ei∣ther there be any unitie in judgement or no, yea or whether there be any ground for it or no, on the dissenting side. You may pro∣phecie of troubles and distractions likely to arise in families and other relations, with somewhat the lesse danger of miscarrying in your predictions, if you animate or incourage those that are, or shal be of your party, to make the fray. As I have read a story of a wizard in France, who foretold the death of the Duke of Burgundie upon a certain day; and to make himself a true Prophet, when the day came, murthered him himself.
4. Suppose A. S. should have the apples given him which his soule lusteth after, and no toleration granted, would there not be as much if not more, reason to feare factions and divisions between Magi∣strate and Subject, Husband and wife, &c. as otherwise? If God should not incline the judgement, or not satisfie the conscience of the one of these parties in relation, concerning the lawfulnesse of that Government Presbyterial, which we suppose (for argument sake) to be established without a toleration of any other, would not the par∣tie aggrieved and burthened in this kinde, be (in all likelihood) worse company for the other, more troubled, more discontented, and every whit as much divided both in judgement and practise from him, yea and more divided in affection, discontentment being one of the greatest enemies that are, to love, union, and peace. Were it not a thousand times better, and more conducing unto unitie in affection and peace, rather to suffer the discontented partie to mar∣ry, then to burne, I mean, to enjoy the freedome of their conscience, rather then to be perpetually kept in an iron chaine of spirituall dis∣content. We cannot but know that relations were incumbred with such factions and divisions, as A. S. speaks of, even whilst the moun∣taine of Samaria stood, I mean, when Episcopacie reigned, when yet there was no toleration of Pluralities of Church-government (though of Church-livings there was.) 5. Nothing is more frequent in and about the Citie, then for mem∣bers of the same familie, to addresse themselves to severall Ministe∣ries from time to time, the husband to heare in one place, the wife in another, the child in a third, for their better spirituall accommo∣dations respectively, yea, and sometimes to communicate with seve∣rall Ministers, without the least breach or touch of discontentment on any side. 6. And lastly, It can hardly be expected, especially in this King∣dome, where the godly and understanding partie have so long suffe∣red, and that in extremitie, from a peremptory imposed State-go∣vernment, without any relaxation or mitigation, and have lately tasted the unexpressible sweetnesse of ease, peace, and libertie of con∣science, that they should without extreme discontent be brought back into another house of bondage, where the furnace of peremp∣torie subjection is like to be het every whit as hot, as in the other. Excellency of teaching, and that abundant light of the knowledge of God, which hath shined from the Ministery amongst us, into the hearts of many thousands, have made the conscience very soft and
tender in many. And where conscience is tender, a little violence is a great torment to it. To A. S. his third reason, to prove the intolerablenesse of a Tole∣ration, His third Rea∣son Answered. we answer, that the inward parts of it are but vanitie and falshood. For 1. It supposeth that malignant supposition we spake of, viz. that Presbyterie and Apologisme, make two differing Reli∣gions. 2. That there is no State in Christendome, where there is one onely Religion established, that will admit the publick exercise of any other; which is manifestly untrue, as is notoriously knowne in France, the Low Countries, &c. 3. And lastly, It supposeth, that Apologisme, in case it be tolerated, must needs become a Schisme in that Religion which is established in the Land. Wee conceive, that every difference in judgement, doth not make a schisme in that Religion which is pro∣fessed on both sides; we shall then find abundance of the weed grow∣ing in the Presbyterian field it selfe. I my selfe know differences not a few amongst that partie; and some not of the lightest consequence. Or if his meaning be, that the practise of it, in case of a Toleration, should become a Schisme from the Presbyterian Church or Govern∣ment, we answer, 1. That as yet we have no Presbyterian Church or Government amongst us; and so, if the toleration be granted be∣fore such a Government be established, it is apparantly , out of the reach of such an imputation for ever. 2. If it be not a schisme before, and without a toleration, I doe not apprehend what influ∣ence or aspect a Toleration should have upon it, to make it one. 3. And lastly, I conceive him to be an incompetent Judge, uncapable of knowing or determining what a scisme is, who acknowledgeth his ignorance or non-knowledge of what a Church is, which is a A. S. his profession or confession (which you will) pag. 21. And in this also we confesse our ignorance, that we know not wherein consisteth it's es∣sence or being (speaking of a Church) I cannot beleeve that he should perfectly know the nature of darknesse, that is ignorant of what be∣longs to light; nor that he should know what death is, who is igno∣rant wherein life consisteth; nor that he should know what a schisme or rent means, that knows not what belongs to the unitie and in∣tirenesse of the body. The rule among the sons of Reason, in all such cases as these, is this; Rectum est index sui & obliqui; And againe, that entia privativa cognoscuntue ex suis positivis, &c. Your fourth Reason, is rather somewhat else then a Reason; a His fourth rea∣son Answered. confession of the dimnesse or weaknesse of your sight. I cannot see (say you) how (a Toleration) can well be denied to other Sects, if it be granted to our Brethren: But
1. Doe you remember, how you quip your Brethren (as heer you call them) for a like expression us'd by them, pag. 41. If yee see no Scripture for it, yet others (you tell them) may see. So heer we tell you, that though you cannot see how a Toleration can well be denied to other Sects, if it should be granted unto your Brethren, yet others may see how very well it may. Bernardus non videt omnia. 2. It is much that you should not be able to see such a thing as this, who have such command over your eyes (as was noted formerly) as to see what you will. Is it a matter of such profound and difficult speculation, to conceive, how he that hath the keeping of a doore with lock and key and bolts to it, should let in one man that knocks, without letting in all comers? 3. Whereas you determine it to be a Question inextricable, to expound cleerly, what sects and what opinions are to be tolerated, and what not, doe you not prevaricate with your owne cause and confidence, and put the Magistrate to a stand, whether he should tolerate your opinion for Presbyterian Government, or not? Nay, doe you not put him out of all hope of ever coming to a cleere resolution of what is his dutie to doe in this kind? For what patent can you shew from Hea∣ven, why this Opinion of yours should not abide the test and triall of that Law, which heer you impose upon others? I beleeve there are very few either sects or opinions amongst us (in both which not∣withstanding we abound more then is for our comfort) that either are liable to more considerable and materiall exceptions, or that have been dealt with by an higher hand of opposition and convicti∣on, then this of yours. And why any one opinion which is in the same or greater condemnation of unsatisfactorinesse and ambigui∣tie, then others, should magnifie it selfe to rule all others with a rod of iron, and to breake them in pieces like a potters vessell, equitie or reason (for my part) I know none: and I feare A. S. himselfe is as poore in this commoditie, as I. 4. If it be so inextricable a Question, to expound cleerely, what sects and opinions are to be tolerated, and what not, how will you doe to sway your Presbyterian Scepter with judgement and equitie? How will you know what opinions donare ecclesiâ, to make free denizans of your Church, and what to disfranchise? By your own rule it is an inextri∣cable Question, cleerly to determine what opinions are to be tolerated, and what not. And if the Question be so difficult above measure, to deter∣mine what opinions are to be tolerated, and what not, it must needs be yet of a farre more difficult and weightie consideration, to resolve
what are fit to be countenanced, to be established, yea, and yet more, to be imposed, to be enforced upon the judgements and consciences of men, and what not; toleration being an act of a farre lighter impor∣tance, then either an establishment, or an enforcement. 5. And lastly, Whereas he addes (in the close of this reason) that the lesse the difference be, the greater is the schisme, and add's no more; I marvaile who he thinks will enterteine such a saying, the old Writ of Ipse dixit being out of date long agoe? yet the saying somewhat confirmes me in what I said before, viz. that the man knows not what belongs to a schisme. For doth he heer by a schisme understand any thing that is sinfull? Then he makes the lesser difference from the truth, to be a greater sin, then a greater would be. If his mean∣ing be, that the lesse materiall the ground or reason of any mans dis∣senting from a major part be, the greater is his fault or sin in dissent∣ing; We answer, that his argument proceeds, not onely à non con∣cessis, but also à non concedendis: for to dissent from a major part, though the grounds of a mans dissent be no matters of deep conse∣quence, yet if they be such wherein his judgement and conscience are not satisfied, his dissent is no sin at all, and consequently cannot be the greater sin. Gnats must not be swallowed for any mans sake, more then camels. To his fifth Reason, we answer. First, that suppose God in the Old His fift Rea∣son Answered. Testament granted no Toleration of divers Religions, or Disciplines, doth it follow from hence, that you should grant none neither? Dare you say in matters of knowledge, authoritie and power, Ero similis altis∣simo, you will be like the Highest? Remember the fall of the son of the morning. Will you set your treshold by Gods, and compare with him for excellencie of knowledge, or infallibilitie of discerning? If you could assure us after the rate of a Divine assurance, that that Religion and Discipline which you would impose on us, are in all points sound, and justifiable in the sight of God, we could much better bear the height of your indignation against a Toleration of any Discipline or opinions but your own. Secondly, though God granted no such Toleration (as you speak of) in terminis, yet he straightly prohibited all manner of violence, oppression, and hard measure among his people one towards ano∣ther; and in speciall manner charged it upon the consciences of the rich, not to take any advantage of the povertie of their Brethren, to exact upon them, enslave them, and the like. Though such Laws as these, in the letter of them, respected onely civill transactions
and dealings between men, yet the equitie and spirit of them ex∣tends to spirituals also, men being every whit as liable to violence, oppression, and hard measure from men for their conscience sake, as in any other respects or upon any other grounds whatsoever. Therefore in case there had been a minor partie in that Nation, that had been of a peculiar judgement by themselves, about the sence and meaning of such or such a Law, relating unto practise (as Laws generally do, in one kind or other) and so had dissented in this practise from the major part of their brethren in their Nation; in case this major part had taken the advantage of their brethrens weaknesse, and because they were fewer in number, should have forc'd them against the light of their judgements, to alter their practise, or if they refused, should have troden and trampled upon them, or any wayes evill intreated them, it had been as apparant a breach of the Laws, we spake of, as any oppression or violence in civill proceedings. And the truth is, that for men that are truly conscientious, civill libertie (as it is called) i. freedome from ille∣gall taxes, impositions, exactions, imprisonments, without libertie of conscience, is an accommodation of little value; yea without this, such men are not capable of much ease or benefit by the other. They are still in danger of hearing in trouble and molestation from the State, for their conscience sake. 3. Though God gave no such Toleration (as you speake of) by a Law, yet he did actually tolerate for a long time together with much patience, not onely a minor, but a major part of the Jewish Nation, in a manner the whole Nation, and that not onely in some opinions or practises, which were disputably false or sinfull, but even in such which were notoriously and unquestionably such.  (saith Paul, Act. 13. 18.) He suffered (or, tolerated) their manners in the Wildernesse fourtie yeeres; and afterwards in the land of Canaan, many and many a yeere longer, even till there was no remedie, (as the Scripture somewhere speaketh.) So then if you be willing to follow the practise and example of God (an honour whereunto you secure to pretend in this Reason) you must tolerate your Brethren, not onely in some opinions and practises, which are dialectically and topical∣ly evill, but even in those which are demonstratively such. 4. And lastly, Whereas you adde, that the New Testament requireth no lesse union among Christians, then the Old did amongst the Jews, we ac∣knowledge the truth of what you say, but the pertinencie of it to your purpose we yet desire. Though the new Testament requires union
amongst Christians, and that very ardently and pressingly, yet it doth not require him that is stronger, to cudgell him that is weaker, into the same opinion with him. If you be of a better growth and stature in knowledge then we, and comprehend such truths as we doe not yet understand, we are most willing, as farre and as fast, as meat and nourishment will doe it, to grow up unto you; onely we would not be rack'd or stretch'd to the same stature or proportion with you. We shewed in our second Chapter, what means the New Testament hath appointed and sanctified, for the effecting of the unitie amongst the Saints, which it requireth of them. For your sixth Reason (so called) we can scarce see the face of a His sixt Rea∣son answered. Reason in it. You say, that if your Brethren do assent to your Doctrine, and are resolved likewise to assent to your Discipline, which shall be established by common consent, they need no other toleration then the rest. If your meaning be, that in case they assent to your Doctrine, and are resolved to assent to your Discipline, viz. immediately and out of hand, as soon as it comes from under the hammer, and hath but the stamp of Presbyteriall Authoritie set upon it, we are clearly of your mind, and do not con∣ceive, how or why they should need any other alteration, then what others have. Onely we somewhat marvell that you should so farre forget your self, as to imply (by this your expression) that even your Presbyterian partie it self standeth in need of a toleration, as well as ours. Iam sumus ergo pares. Truth (I see) is sometimes too quick and cunning for her adversaries. But if your meaning be, that a re∣solution in your Brethren (the Apologists) to assent to your Discipline, viz. when, and assoon as they can possibly satisfie themselves touching the lawfulnesse of it, will exempt them from a necessitie of a Tole∣ration, both they (we suppose) and our selves shall be very glad to hear such tydings from your pen. We make no question but they are as throughly resolved to assent to your Discipline upon such terms, as you can desire them. That you adde, is very incongruous. It would first be discussed (say you) wherein they are resolved to dissent. First, we marvell who you mean should discusse that wherein they should be resolved to dissent: especi∣ally considering, secondly, that they do not use to take up their re∣solutions beforehand, not so much as to dissent at all, muchlesse wherein or about what they shall dissent. Thirdly, how should they resolve beforehand, wherein, or whereabout to dissent, except they could prophecie of your future thoughts and resolutions. You would further have it considered (but you tell us not here nei∣ther
by whom) whether it be of so great importance, that in consideration thereof, they dare not, in good conscience, entertain communion with you. We scarce understand your English, or meaning here; and therefore if we answer besides your mind, your words are in fault. We grant that other men of good abilities, conscience and learning, may draw up a very satisfactory resolution concerning such or such a case, or practise, about which I am scrupul'd; but it will not follow from hence, that therefore this resolution will be satisfactorie unto me, or that I with a good conscience may walk by it. Though the particular reason or reasons, one or more, upon which the Apolo∣gists shall refuse to entertain such a communion with you, as you mean (or at least should mean, if you speak any thing to purpose) should be by never so many, and upon never so much consideration, adjudged as insufficient or inconsiderable to cause any such refuse∣all in them; yet this will not impose a necessitie upon them, to joyn in communion with you, except you can make them capable of a sufficiencie of reason in such a resolution why they may with a good conscience submit unto it. To your seventh Reason, we answer, first, that though the Apolo∣gists His 7th Rea∣son Answered. should not be pressed to be actors in anything against their consciences, yet there is a necessitie lying upon them to be suiters for a toleration, (I mean, in case it will not be granted them without suing for, which would be a greater honour to your Presbyterie, then the contrarie peremptorinesse is like to be) viz. that so they may be actors of good, according to their consciences. Suppose A. S. had bread and wa∣ter, wherewith to subsist, but withall had a good summe of money due to him, and that from one that was very well able to make pay∣ment, or otherwise had an opportunitie to preferre himself to some place of profit, credit, or the like, if he would but become a suitor for it; would he think that he had no need either to require his money of him in whose hand it lies, or to sue for such preferment? The Apologists conceive there is a necessitie upon them, to save the souls of others, yea of as many as they can lawfully purchase an oppor∣tunitie to save, as well as their own. But, Secondly, we know not by what Authoritie or interest you un∣dertake to secure them, that they shall not be pressed to be actors in any thing against their consciences. It may be you are but of the ordinarie Presbyterian stature and pitch, and so your mercies though somewhat severe, yet possibly may not be very cruell: But (saith the Scripture) in those dayes there were Gyants in the earth, as well as men of the com∣mon Gen. . 4.
standart; so we fear a partie amongst you of hyper-presbyte∣rian spirits, whose spring-tydes may swell beyond your low-water marks. But, Thirdly (and lastly) we conceive this promise of yours to them, that they shall not be pressed to be actors, &c. to be broken by your self seven times over in your discourse, and by others of your partie from time to time. To consent unto your Government, is (doubt∣lesse) to act against their conscience; otherwise, they had no reason to dissent from it. And whether to threaten them with a non-tole∣ration, together with all the evils and miseries attending thereon, yea with paying for it in their purse and persons, in case they will not consent unto it (as some others of your partie have done) be not a pressing of them unto it, we leave unto men, whose judgements are not wholly swallowed up in the gulf of Presbyterian zeal, to determine. To your eight Reason, we answer, that we find very little heart His eight Rea∣son answered. or face, of Reason in it. The strength of it (whatever it is) lies in this hypotheticall proposition: If it be against the nature of the commu∣nion of Saints to live in sects apart, without communicating at the Lords table, then ought not the Apologists to be tolerated. But, &c. But good A. S. do you conceive the men would under a Toleration, live without communicating at the Lords table? I know not what com∣munion you have with their intentions or spirits, more then I: but for the present, I am no man of your beleif herein. Toleration or no Toleration, I beleeve they will communicate at the Lords table, and that other then twice a yeer. Secondly, if living in Sects apart be so offensive to your zeal over the communion of Saints, why do you not rather mediate a Toleration for them, then oppose it? If you shall suffer them to work with you, they will be so much the more free to eat and drink with you, and to exercise all manner of Christian friendship and familiaritie with you. But if you shall thrust them into holes and corners, and judge them unworthy of all part and fellowship with you in the publique ministerie of the Gospel; you impose little lesse then a necessitie upon them to live apart, and to enjoy themselves amongst themselves; and besides represent your selves unto them as no wayes desirous of com∣munion with them. Therefore in this Reason your premisses and conclusion are at utter defiance the one against the other. As for your ninth Reason, it is every whit as wilde, and wide His 9. Reason answered. from the purpose, as the former. For what if the Scripture exhorts us
ever more unto unitie, and this unitie cannot be easily procured by a Tolera∣tion of Sects, doth it therefore follow, that godly, learned and or∣thodox men, such as being encouraged though at an under-rate, are (as was formerly shewed) both able and likely to do as good service against Sects as any men, are to be barr-hoysted, quash'd, crush'd, onely because they cannot say, a vision, where other men say it? The Scripture exhorts unto many things, which are not to be procured by every thing that is lawfull, no nor yet by every thing that is otherwise necessarie and fitting to be done. Were not this a ridiculous reasoning, The Scripture exhorts to live godlily in this pre∣sent world; but this cannot be procured by eating and drinking. Therefore eating and drinking are not to be tolerated. Apagè cru∣entas nugas! Whereas you adde, that a Toleration of Sects, cannot but daily beget new Schismes and Divisions. We answer, first, that this Allegation we have answered alreadie once and again: yet secondly, we adde, that many inconveniences, sicknesses, diseases come by eating and drink∣ing, yet are these to be tolerated in the world. Thirdly, we plead for no Toleration of any Sect, (nor of any thing so called) but which may stand with the utmost that either A. S. with his pen, or his whole partie with theirs, can do against them to suppresse them. Fourthly, we have formerly prov'd, that Apologisme is neither Sect, nor Schisme, more then A. S sisme is. Fiftly (and lastly) whereas you say, that a Toleration of Sects cannot but daily beget new schisme, &c. We answer, first, that Gods toleration or long suffering towards sin∣ners, doth not onely lead all sinners to repentance, but also bring ma∣ny thereunto. And why should not mans toleration expect an ef∣fect answerable hereunto? Secondly, the disciples in the ship were as much afraid, that their deare Lord and Master had been a foule spirit, and would have sunk them in the Sea, as A. S. is afraid of a Toleration, that it must needs beget new schismes and divisions daily. But as the feared Destroyer proved the experienced Pre∣server of that ship and men; so may A. S. his feared Propagator of Schismes and Divisions, be found an experienced destroyer and dissol∣ver of them. That means of all other which hath God in it, is likest to do the deed; and God (we know) was neither in the tempest, nor in the earthquake, nor in the fire, but in the still voice. His tenth Reason, being help'd, riseth up in this form. If there was His 10 Rea∣son answered. a greater difference amongst the members as the Church of Corinth in the time of St. Paul, and yet they communicated together; and that by the Apostles
exhortation, then ought not the Apologists to be tolerated. But true is the former, therefore the latter also. We answer, first, that the fa∣brick of your Argument is built upon a false foundation or suppo∣sition, viz. that the Reason why, the Apologists refuse communion with you, (you mean I suppose, in your sacramentall actions) is, because of the latitude, weight or degree of the differences in judge∣ment between you and them: whereas the reason of their refusall in this kind, is the nature or particularity of the difference, together with your practise depending upon your opinion in opposition unto theirs, not the height, weight, or importance of either. A difference in judgement about the lawfulnesse of stinted forms of prayer, is nothing so materiall or weightie, as a difference about the nature of Faith, Justification, &c. yet the lighter difference in this case, makes persons so differing, uncapable of joyning together in com∣munion, in the use of such prayers; whereas the greater difference would not. Secondly, if there were so many and great differences amongst the members of the Church of Corinth, as you speak of, and yet Paul no waies perswaded or incouraged the predominant or major partie amongst them, either to cast out, cut off, or suppresse, the underling parties, but exhorted them unto mutuall communion, &c. why do not you con∣tent your self with the line of the same processe, and instead of dis∣gracing, quashing, crushing, trampling on, onely exhort the sects and schismes amongst you unto mutuall communion? and to the for∣bearance of Sects and Divisions; a practise which you do well to take notice of in the Apostle, but do ill to think that your own of club∣law is better. Thirdly (and lastly) nor do we know any ground or good bot∣tome you have for your assumption, wherein you affirm, that there was greater difference amongst the members of the Church of Corinth, then is between the Apologists and you. Old Ipse dixit is made to carrie this burthen alone. Your eleventh Reason is verie corpulent, but lesse active; the chief His 11 Rea∣son answered. ingredients of it being Abbots and Priors, Convents and Monasteries amongst the Papists, St. Francis, St. Dominick, and the Donatists, with whose opinion and practise, you say, the opinion of your Brethren too much symbolizeth. We answer, first, that Theologia symbolica non est ar∣gumentativa. Angels and Divels agree in something: yet this agree∣ment is no impeachment either to the holinesse or happinesse of the Angels. A. S. himself symbolizeth with Nestorius the heretique
in one propertie; of whom Vincentius Lerinencis reporteth, that to Qui ut uni haeresi suae a∣ditum patefa∣ceret, cuncta∣rum hoereseon blasphemias insectabatur. Vincent. Ler. cap. 16. make way for his own heresie [or opinion] he fell heavie upon all heresies be∣side. Secondly, whereas he affirmeth, that the opinion of his Brethren is not unlike to the Convents and Monasteries amongst the Papists; certainly the unlikenesse between them is farre greater, then that between an aple and an oyster. We cannot but wonder, how or in what respect, the man should conceive, that an inward, spirituall and notion all thing, as an opinion is, should be like a great building made of lime and stone, or a pack of idle fellows in a fat fraternity. Thirdly, whereas he insinuates an hatefull similitude between his Brethren and the Donatists, who (he tels us) separated themselves from other Chur∣ches, under pretext, that they were not so holy as their own; We answer, first, that this insinuation will not so much as in shew touch all the Apo∣logists however, because some of them (we beleeve) have no Churches of their own; and therefore they cannot pretend more holinesse in them, then in others. Secondly, that neither in substance or truth doth it touch any of them, or their opinion. For, first, they do not seperate from other Churches, but onely in such opinions and pra∣ctises wherein they cannot get leave of their consciences to joyne with them; the one half (at least) of which separation, is made even amongst their Churches themselves, one from another; one dissenting from another not onely in many opinions, but in some materiall practises (as before was touch'd, and that from A. S. his own pen, no waies partiall you may think in such a case.) Secondly, we would know, whether A. S. himself and his partie, doth not as much symbolize with the Donatists in that criticall propertie or pra∣ctise we speak of, as the Apologists. For under what pretext do they separate from the Church of Rome and from Episcopall Chur∣ches, but onely this, that they think not their Churches, to be as holy as their own. If they separate from them upon any other grounds, it were not much materiall though they held communion with them still. Yea thirdly, if they do not think their Presbyteriall Churches more holy then the Congregationall, they are farre more guiltie of Schisme and Separation, then their Brethren here spoken of. For then they are at libertie in point of conscience, to come over and joyn with them; when as the other are in bands and fetters of con∣science, and cannot passe unto them. Their Brethren would gladly come over unto them, but cannot: they can come over unto these but will not. It is the will, not the act, that makes Schisme and Separation. Fourthly, we do not see, as deep as you have laid the
charge, wherein the Apologists do any whit more symbolize with Covents, Monasteries, or Orders, amongst the Papists, then you and your friends. You tell them, that all their Churches beleeve one Doctrine together with you, and that every one of these Churches hath one Minister, as the Popish Convents a particular Abbot or Prior. We pray you, do not all your Churches beleeve one Doctrine together? and hath not every one of your Churches one Minister? Wherein then lies the difference between you and them? or wherein do they symbolize more with Convents or Monasteries, then your self? Nay, (fifthly and lastly) as if you had quite forgotten your rhomb, you tacitely couple your self with those Popish Convents, Monasteries, and Orders, in one ignoble consideration, from which you acquit your Brethren. They onely differ (say you to them) in this, that ye have no Generall, or any thing answerable thereunto, to keep you in unitie and conformitie; plainly implying, that your Presbyterians have, viz. their soveraigne Judicatory. So that if this your reason should but take place, and be held valid, it is your Presbyterian partie, not the partie Apologizing, that ought to suffer the non-toleration you speak of; it being they, not these, that are the great symbolizers, with St. Francis, and St. Dominick. To your twelfth Reason, we have given answer upon answer for∣merly; His 12. Rea∣son Answered. as first, where we considered of the examples of the Kings of Judah, and shewed how little they contribute to the claime of cocr∣cive power in the Magistrate, to take away heresies, schismes, super∣stitions, &c. Secondly, where we argued against such a power by severall demonstrations. Thirdly, where we gave an account also, how Toleration is no way either to Schisme, heresie, &c. So that there is not one apex or iota of this Reason remaining unanswered. The Logico-Divinitie of your thirteenth Reason, consisteth in this His 13. Rea∣son Answered. Enthymeme, If we have but one God, one Christ, and one Lord, one Spirit, one Faith, one Baptisme, (whereby we enter into the Church) and are one Bo∣die, we ought to have one Communion, whereby to be spiritually fed, and one Discipline to be ruled by: and if so, then ought not the Apologists to be tolerated. We answer, that neither doth your inference or conclu∣sion here at all follow from your premisses. We have all you speak of, one, one, and one; and in regard of that multiplied unitie, we ought (as you say) to have one Communion, and one Discipline; But first, not necessarily that Communion, or that Discipline, which are of Clas∣sique inspiration, no more then those which are either of Papall, or Episcopall recommendation; because though we judge these two latter spirits more sphalmaticall, erroneous and dangerous then
the first, yet we cannot think that either the Pope or Bishops, or both together, have so ing rossed the spirit of errour and fallibitie, but that they have left of that anointing more then enough to initiate all other orders, societies, and professions of men in the world. Se∣condly, though we ought to have one Communion and Discipline, yet ought we to be led into this unitie, by the hand of an Angel of light, not to be frighted into it by an evill Angel of fear and terror. Third∣ly, that dutie which lies upon all Christians, to have but one Commu∣nion and Discipline amongst them, is no dispensation unto any partie or number of them, to smite their Brethren with the fist of uncharita∣blenes, or to dismount them from their ministeriall standings in the Church, because they will not, or rather cannot, knit and joyn in the same Communion & Discipline with them. Nay, fourthly, that verie tye of dutie which lies upon all Christians to have but one and the same Communion and Discipline amongst them, carries this ingage∣ment upon them all along with it, to shew all love, to use all manner of gentlenesse and long suffering towards those that are contrarie minded to them either in the one or in the other, since love is not onely a sodering and uniting affection, but further commends the person in whom it is found, as one to whom God hath appeared, and who hath been taught by him. Therefore fifthly (and lastly) to make the ingagement that lies upon all Christians to have but one Communion and Discipline, a ground and reason why such as differ from others about these, should be evill intreated, suppressed, kept under hatches, or the like, is as if a man should plead that naturall affection which a parent ow's unto his children, for a ground and motive why he should sharply scourge them when they are sick and weak. His fourteenth Reason is of an unknown strength (at least to me) His 14 Rea∣son answered. If I were a Magistrate, I should never the more know how to prepare to battell against the Apologists or any other godly person, for the sound of this trumpet. Surely of all the rest, this Reason will never be accessarie to the undoing of these men. However, let a poore man be heard in his cause. The Reason then with all the help it is capa∣ble of, riseth up but thus. If Churches have Disciplines or Governments different in their species, then the Churches must be different in their species also. But the consequent is false, since there is but one Church: Ergo Apologisme is intolerable. They that can gather this conclusion out of the premisses, may very well hope to gather grapes of thorns, and figs of thistles. The consequent in this argument, which the Disputer
saith is false, is this, Churches must be different in their species. If the meaning of this consequent be, that there is an absolute necessitie, that Churches should differ specie one from another, the disputant is in the truth, in saying the consequent is false. Or if the meaning be, that Churches ought to differ specie one from another, the same ver∣dict may still passe upon it. But upon that supposition which is made in the Antecedent of this argument, viz. that these Churches have Disciplines or Governments different in their species, the consequent is not onely true, but necessarily true: and that upon the Disputants own ground, which is, that all collective bodies that are governed, are differen∣ced (specie) by their different governments. But be the Consequent, or be the Antecedent, or be the consequence, be any thing be nothing, or be every thing in the premisses, either true or false, why should not the Apologists be tolerated notwithstanding? Be the Sunne in Aries, or be it in Taurus, or be it in Capricorn, why should not A. S. be tolerated to write more books for the cause Presbyterian notwith∣standing? I hear that upon the applause and approbation of this by his partie, he hath since put forth his hand to another, as Herod see∣ing Act. 12. 2, 3. that his butcherie upon James, pleased the people, put forth his hand to take Peter also. But is there nothing more in the Reason then this? Truly if A. S. hides the theasure of his mind so deepe another time, digg for it who will for me. For this once I have taken paines to finde it; and have found somewhat which I concive is like to it, if not Identically it. The man (I take it) would be here conceived to reason after this manner. If the Church of Christ ought to be ruled or Governed, only with one species or kinde of government, then ought not they to be suffered, who goe about to pluralize this government, or to set up a kind of government in the Church, specifically differing from the government more generally practised and establish∣ed. Sed verum prius: ergo & posterius: and consequently the Apologists being men that would doe such a thing as this, are not to be tolera∣ted. If this be the Argument, this is the Answer. First, the consequence is lame, and halts right downe; because though the Church of Christ ought to be governed with one and the same kind of govern∣ment throughout the world, yet it no wayes followes, from hence, that therefore that government which is more generally established and practised in the world, should be that specificall Government whereby it ought to be governed. If this consequence were good, it would highly befreind the Government Pontifician, but dissolve and destroy the Government Presbyterian; because the Pontifican Go∣vernment,
is (or at least not long since was) far more Oecumenicall, and comprehensive, then the Presbyterian either is, or is like to be. Therefore in framing this consequence, the man hath given sen∣tence against himselfe and his owne beloved opinion touching Church-Discipline; and hath put a sword into the Popes hand to smite as well the Consistorian, as the Congregationall Government. And, Secondly, suppose the Government more generally practised in the world, be that very kind of Government, wherby the Churches of Christ ought to be governed, yet except this Government both as touching the lawfulnesse and necessitie of it, be sufficiently cleered to the judgments and consciences of those, from whom submission to it is required, (an honour whereunto A. S. his Government hath not yet been preferred by all his great freinds) they ought not to be scourged with his scorpions, if they demurre a while about their submission thereunto; and in the meane season, desire to live under such a Government, wherin they have double and treble satisfaction both in point of lawfulnesse and necessity, above the other. Thirdly and lastly, though unity and uniformity in Government be very fitting and necessary throughout the Churches of Christ, yet that the servants of Christ should fall foule one upon another, and the grea∣ter eate up the lesse for this uniformity sake, is no wayes necessarie; especially considering that God (as hath been formerly shewed) hath provided other means farre more gracious, honourable and proper, for the bringing of the blessednesse of this uniformitie upon his Churches in due time. So that if there be any thing in this Rea∣son, it is altogether with, and not at all against the Apologists. To your fifteenth, we answer, first, be it supposed, (which yet we His 15. Rea∣son answered. shall presently oppose) that neither Christ, nor his Apostles ever granted any toleration to divers Sects and Governments in the Church; yet did he or they ever grant a power to a major part of professors in a Kingdom or Nation, to grind the faces of their Brethren partakers of like precious faith and holinesse with them, either because they could not in all points jump with them in their judgements, or because they endea∣voured to keep a good conscience towards God, for following the ducture and guidance of their present light? If you will take with∣out asking that, which neither Christ nor his Apostles ever granted you, you may verie well bear it at the hands of your Brethren, if they humbly sue and intreat for what they never granted; especially con∣sidering that that which you take is imperious and high, tending
to the annoyance and trouble of many; whereas that which they sue for, is moderate and lowe, onely a peaceable standing amongst you, that they may be able to do good unto many. Secondly, if nei∣ther Christ nor his Apostles (as you say) ever granted any toleration to divers Sects and Governments in his Church, how come you and your Govern∣ment to be tolerated, your Government being specifically diversified from that of the Papacie (as is before observed) which is more gene∣rall and extensive then yours? If you have not a toleration for your Government, either from Christ or his Apostles, we are doubtfull from whom, or whence you have it? Thirdly, do you not by this reason build up the wals of Babylon, and strengthen the Papists in their bloodie errour, against the reformed Churches, upon which they look as schismaticall from their Mother, and in that respect think them no wayes fit to be tolerated, but to be suppressed both in their Doctrine and Government, yea and in case they will not be reduced to the principles of Rome, to be wholly extirpated and rooted out of the world? What can be spoken more to the heart of such apprehensions, and counsels and resolutions as these, then that neither Christ nor his Apostles ever granted any toleration to divers Sects and Governments in the Church? Fourthly, whereas you say, that they granted no toleration to divers Sects, do you not imply, that they did grant a toleration to some one Sect at least, if not to more. And how know you whether the Sect of Apologisme (in your improperating stile) be not that Sect, or one of those Sects, to which Christ and his Apostles (it seems) granted a toleration? Is it not (I appeal to your judgement and conscience) as like to be this as any other? Fiftly, we willingly grant your conclusion in this Reason, sensu sano; that there is no reason why the Apologists should sue for a Toleration, no nor yet properly, why they should be tolerated, (toleration in proprie∣tie of signification, as was formerly noted, being rei malae, appliable onely to that which is evill) but rather why they should be counte∣nanced and incouraged. Therefore if you think that they shall sin in suing for a toleration, you shall do well to prevent that sin in them (and perhaps shall withall prevent a greater of your own) by de∣claring them persons worthy not of a Toleration, but of incourage∣ment; or at least by procuring them a Toleration, that they may not be put upon the tentation of suing for it. But sixtly and lastly, to the main frame of your Reason: what do you think of, Sinite utrunque crescere, Let both grow together untill the harvest. Matth. 13. 30. Is not here the toleration granted, which you deny to be granted? Non
lac lacti, nec ovum ovo similius; If it be not this Toleration, certainly it is somewhat as like to it, as like may be. You know who the Hous∣holder is, that gave this order, laid this restraint upon his servants; otherwise the 37. verse will inform you. And who do you think should be meant, by the tares? You will not say, the good sons of the Church, at least so acknowledged by their Mother. You cannot say (with reason) the loose, vicious, &c. morally disordered sons of the Church, because these were sown in the field, before the Housholder sew that good seed therein (spoken of, v. 24. and 38.) whereas the tares, which must be let grow to the harvest, are expresly said to have been sown after, v. 25. And besides such wicked and vicious persons as these, at least as the danger and degree of their wickednesse may be, ought to be gathered out of the State (and then they cannot grow in the field till harvest) by the hand of the Civill Magistrate. Therefore thirdly (and lastly) you must by the tares, of necessitie understand, such in the Church, as you call Sectaries, Schismatiques, Heretiques, such as corrupt the puritie of the Doctrine of the Gospel, by erro∣neous and false opinions, or at least are look'd upon by the greater part of the respective Churches of Christ, as such. Which yet ap∣pears further, by the reason which the Housholder renders unto his servants, why he would not have them pluck'd up, but grow untill the harvest: least (saith he) whilest ye go about to gather the tares, ye pluck up the wheat also. There is no danger of hurting or plucking up the wheat, 1. the children of the Kingdom, v. 38. by punishing civill or morall misdemeanors of men; but if Magistrates or others shall be busie about plucking up Sectaries, Heretiques, &c. they will be in continuall danger of plucking up the wheat. First, because many truly pious and conscientious men, children of the Kingdom, may soon be drawn in to some unwarrantable sect and opinion: and secondly, such opinions as are sentenced by the generalitie or major part of a Church, as erronious or hereticall, and so expose those that hold them to the reproachfull names, of sectaries, schismatiques, here∣tiques, verie often fall out to be the sacred truths of God, and the persons holding them forth unto the world, the best and faithfullest of his servants. For your sixteenth Reason, it concerneth others, more then the Apologists, to answer; the frame of it being an indignabund rela∣tion His 16. Rea∣son answered. (whether true or no, caveat Lector) of what hard measure the New-Englanders offered to some that desired to sit down amongst them, because they differed a little from them in point of Discipline. The
men here charged, are of age to speak for themselves; and besides, want no abilities otherwise. I make no question, but if they had but the correcting of A. S. his Relation, they would be able to make more reason and equity of it, then without some correction or other, I am able to do. But (to leave our Brethren in New-England to their own Apologie) I would fain know of A. S. what he means to do with his storie; or how he intends to bring it under contribution to his cause. For first, he doth not onely not approve of those pro∣ceedings, which he relateth, but is very passionate and intemperate in the very relation. Delicti fies idem reprehensor, & Author? Is the man so full of the spirit of reprehension against such practises, and yet so full of the spirit of imitation also? Or what? is his desire so great, to appropriate or ingrosse the power and practise of per∣secuting for difference in Religion, to himself and his own partie, that he is not able patiently to bear the sight of either in others? If your Brethren in New-England stumbled at the stone you speak of, persecuted (as yov say) those that were approved by themselves both for their life and Doctrine, meerly because they differed a little from them in point of Discipline, you have a faire warning; take heed that you do not stumble at the same stone also. They (it's like) justified themselves in themselves, in those proceedings, though they did not so in the sight of God; but if you, having condemned them in what they did, shall neverthelesse run the same course, you will be both  and  both self-condemned, and God-condemned also, and so have no cloak nor shelter for your sin. But you think it no wayes reasonable, that the Apologists, being of the same profession (as you speak) should be suiters for a Toleration in old England. We answer, first, if you speak with reference to those proceedings immediately before reported by you, you are more of the same profession with them, then your Brethren the Apologists. These do not professe persecution meerly for a little difference in point of Discipline; the world knows who they are that do little lesse. Se∣condly, what though men of the same profession with them, miscarri∣ed for want of such light, as should have directed them in a better way; must this be a band of conscience upon them, to bowe down their backs without any more ado, and to suffer Presbyterian Great∣nesse to go over them, as the stones in the street? Nay, thirdly, they have the more reason and necessitie, in regard of such a miscarriage of
their Brethren, to sue for a Toleration here; because by that miscar∣riage of theirs, they are awakened to expect and fear yet far harder measure from you and your partie, if they do not bestir themselves by some means or other to prevent it. He that feels the smart of rods to be grievous, hath the more reason, not the lesse, to take heed of being beaten with scorpions. Fourthly (and lastly) why should you any wayes be against your Brethren suing for a Toleration, when as there lies a necessitie upon you to grant it or consent to it, unlesse you mean to steere that New-England course, which you have with so high a hand of indignation contested with, in this ve∣rie Reason. Except (haply) you have this ingenuous reach in it, for your reputations, that you would honestis precibus occurrere, pre∣vent all honest and reasonable requests with the early forwardnesse of your bountie. If I could reasonably think this to be your designe, I would seriously perswade with the Apologists to wave their suit for a Toleration, and so to gratifie you with an honourable oppor∣tunitie of doing good, before you were provoked by any mans suit or motion to it. But men that are subject to fears, are seldome sons of bountie. The bottome (it seems) of all that A. S. hath pleaded throughout his Discourse, against the Toleration of Apologisme, is a solemn fear that possesseth him of being sent he and all his partie into some Isle of Dogs, if the Congregationall men had but the upper hand over them. Omne timidum, natura querulum. But, I can hardly beleeve that the man is really afraid of what he here pretendeth; (in which case he were rather to be pitied, then roundly dealt with) first, because him∣self confesseth, that some of his Brethren hold, that all sects and opinions are to be tolerated, p. 62. So that in case these men should have the upper hand, he is assured of a partie at least among them, to secure him and his in that kind. Secondly, he confesseth again and again, that his Brethren are very pious and holy men; and therefore certainly will not be so dogged, as to send him and his into any Isle of Dogs. Thirdly, a poore Toleration is as farre from a superioritie of power, as rags are from the robe, or the dunghill from the throne. Fourth∣ly, I do not think that he knows any such Isle as he speaks of, where∣into he fears to be sent by the men of his indignation. Fiftly, and lastly, if he should be sent into some Isle of Dogs, the soyl and climate might probably agree well with him; he hath learned (it seems) to bark and bite too, against his sending thither. To conclude, for this Reason: whereas feare indeed ordinarily
makes men cruell, it is much to be feared, A. S. only pretends feare, that so he may have a colour to be cruell. To his 17th. Reason, we Answer. First that the Scripture doth not His 17. Rea∣son answered. forbid, all, nor any such Toleration, as the Apologists desire. This was sufficiently shewed before in our Answer to the fifteenth Reason. His proofe from Revel. 2. 20. holds no intelligence at all with his purpose; yea it makes sore against himselfe and his Synedrion. For first by the toleration or suffering of Iezabel, which is there charged as a finfull neglect, upon the Church of Thyatira, is not meant a civill or state Toleration, but an Ecclesiastique or Church toleration. This Church suffered false Doctrines to be taught in her very bosome, and her members to be corrupted and endangered thereby, from day to day, without laying it to heart (being a matter of that sad consequence) and without calling those to an accompt that were the sowers of such teares, broachers and spreaders of such opinions; yea without using any meanes, to have the truth soundly taught in opposition to such Doctrines. Both Pastor and people (it seemes) slept together, whilst the envious man, by his Agent and factresse Iezabel, sowed these tares in their field. Such a Toleration as this we formerly shewed to be sinfull; and the Apologists are as much against it as you; so farre are they from desiring it, or sueing for it. They desire a Toleration for themselves and their Churches in the civill state; not that the errours which spring up in their Churches, should be suffered to fret like gangrens, without being opposed by them, or be protected by the State. Secondly whereas that particular Church alone is charged by Christ, with this toleration or sufferance of Iezabell, and not any more Churches, whether neighbors or not neighbors to his, nor any combined Eldership, or state Ecclesiasticall, made of the con∣sociation of the seven Churches, much lesse any state civill, evident it is that the care and power of redressing emergeing enormites or evills in a Church in every kind, is committed by Christ to every particular Church respectively, within in it selfe. And so they that trouble the Church must (as you say) be cut off. But by whom? not by the civill magistrate (if the trouble be spirituall) nor by the combined Eldership, but by the particular Church it selfe, which is troubled by them, in case there be no remedy otherwise. Secondly when you say, that there must be no such speeches among vs, as I am of Paul, I of Apollo's &c. nor that some are Calvinians, some Independenters, some Brownists &c. and againe that we must all be Christs, we must all think and speak the same thing, otherwise men are carnall &c. (with some other good words to
like purpose) we joyn heart and hand with you in all these things, and are readie to contribute the best of our endeavours, unto yours, if ye will suffer us, to make the tabernacle of God amongst us accord∣ing to this pattern which you shew unto us. Such expressions, I am of Paul, I of Apollos, &c. together with the names of Calvinians, Indepen∣dents, Brownists, &c. are as untuneable in our eares, as in yours, &c. But, First, every man that saith, I am of Paul, or, I am of Apollos, is not to be taught by thorns and briars, (as Gedeon taught the men of Suc∣coth) to speak better, by fineing, imprisonning, unchurching, or the like; but by soundnesse of conviction, and wholesomnesse of in∣struction from the word of God. The Germans have a saying, that etiam in latrone puniendo potest peccari; A may may sin in pu∣nishing him that most of all deserves it. It is not enough for us to correspond with God in his ends, but we must keep as close to him in his means also. Secondly, whereas you say, we must all be Christs; surely there is none of those Sects you speak of, but are wil∣ling to joyn with you in being his, and in being called by his Name, rather then by any other. We fear, these unhappie sounds, of Inde∣pendents, Brownists, Anabaptists, &c. are more frequently made of your breath, then of the breath of any other sort, or sect of men amongst us. Thirdly, whereas you adde, Neither hath the Church of God a custome to be contentious; the Apostle indeed saith, 1 Cor. 11. 16. that the Churches of God have no such custome; but he doth not say, that these Churches of God had any custome, to erect a Presbyterian throne, or a combined eldership amongst them, to keep them from contenti∣ons. Fourthly, whereas you tell us, that neither permitteth the Apostle Schismes; we tell you, that we have already told you (and that once and again) both in what sence he permitteth them, and in what not, and have shewed you our concurrence with him in both. Fift∣ly (and lastly) in that you tell us, that we must not quit our mutuall meetings, as others do, and as must (you say) be done in a publique Tolera∣tion, we neither well understand the sence of your words, much lesse any purport in them to your purpose. We do not know what quit∣ting of meetings there is like to be more under a publique toleration, then is for the present. Your eighteenth Reason is so Atheologicall, and unworthie your His 18 Rea∣son answered. cause, that the very naming of it might be Answer sufficient. A tole∣ration (you say) cannot but expose your Churches unto the calumnies of Pa∣pists, who evermore object unto Protestants the innumerable number of these
Sects, whereas they pretend to be nothing but one Church. Will you redeem your self out of the hand of Popish calumnies, by symbolizing with them? will you turn Turk, that you may not suffer Turkish inso∣lencies and thraldome? Surely you forget your argument insisted upon in your eleventh Reason: There you make symbolizing with Papists, a reason against your Brethren and their Opinion, why they should not be tolerated; and here you make a defect or want in them of symbolizing with them, a reason likewise why they should not be tolerated. It seems contradictions, inconsistencies, imperti∣nences, unintelligibilities, sence, non-sence, any thing, nothing, will serve to make reasons against the poore Independenters (as you call them) why they must not be tolerated. Was not the consideration of your own, p. 14. that the Devill evermore assaults more the true Church, the true Doctrine, and true Discipline, then the corrupted Church, her corrupt∣ed Doctrine or Discipline, a farre better sanctuarie for your Churches against those Popish calumnies you speak of, then a correspondence with them, to keep you in unitie and conformitie? But this Reason we have answered formerly. Your ninteenth Reason, is very concise. In this you onely say, His 19. Rea∣son answered. that of such a Toleration follows all you formerly deduced out of Independen∣cie. And so it may without putting the world to much damage, or sorrow. When we cast up your deductions of inconveniences out of In∣dependencie, we found them counterballanced to the height with the exits from Presbytery. If you poyse your wallet wel, you wil the end that hangs at your back the heavier. But for Answer to this Reason, I refer the Reader to the former Chapter. His twentieth Reason, is somewhat of a differing strein from the His 20. Rea∣son Answered. rest. The ground and bottome of it seems to be, a desire of a plausi∣ble insinuation with the Assembly, under a pretence of jealousie over them, lest they should suffer in point of honour, in case his Bre∣thren should obtain a Toleration. But first, good A. S. why must it needs be thought, in case it should be granted unto them, that it was extorted by force of Reason, or that all the Assembly were not âble to answer your Brethren? This suggestion smels of worse blood about the heart, then all the Reasons hitherto; Fearing (it seems) that all ingage∣ments upon the Assembly in point of conscience to deny the Apolo∣gists a Toleration, might fail, and prove ineffectuall that way; he seeks here to ingage them in point of honour, by way of reserve; telling them (in effect) that howsoever their consciences might fa∣vour the Independenters in point of Toleration, yet their credits and reputations would suffer by it. Yet let the suggestion be but a
little look'd into, and it will be found to reflect no great matter of grace or commendation upon the Assembly it self. For if no favour or courtesie can be thought to come from them, but that which is ex∣torted by reason, and the deniall whereof they cannot answer, it is a signe that they are not . i. easie to be intreated, fall of mercie and good fruits, which yet the holy Ghost makes the standing characters of that wisdom which is from above. Iam. 3 17. Whereas he addes, that their opinion and demands are against all rea∣son, and that sundry of them could not deny as much, and had nothing to say, but that it was Gods Ordinance. We answer, first, that, what A. S. his standart is whereby he measures reason, we are not so well acquainted with him, as to know; but according to ours, this assertion of his opens seven times wider against all reason, then either the opinion or de∣mands of his Antagonists. First, for their opinion, we believe that somewhat more then non-sense or irrationalities, hath been argued by themselves in the Assembly for it: Is it like, that very learned men, and of abilities to dispute their opinion in any Assembly in Europe (which are A. S. owne letters of recommendation on their behalf) should rise up to defend an opinion that is contrary to all reason? And somewhat like unto reason (at least so called, amongst our vulgar apprehensi∣ons) hath bin said for it in the preceding part of this Discourse. And secondly, for their Demands; though A. S. doth not inform us what they are, or wherein that fiery contestation against all reason, which he findes in them consists, yet we suppose, he means their sueing for a Tole∣ration, that high misdemeanor, for which he hath judged them now these ten times. Was it, or is it, or would it be against all reason, for the poor Protestant Churches in France, to sue for a Toleration in the state, if it were not granted unto them without sueing? Or is it not much more agreeable to reason, that Protestant Churches should be tolerated in a Protestant State, then in a State Pontificiall; especially in such a Protestant State, of which they have so eminently deserved, as the Apologists and their Churches, and men of their judgement have done of this, as was briefly touched in the beginning of this Chap∣ter? Or is it against all reason, that those persons in the low-countries between whose judgements there is that known variety of differen∣ces in matters of Religion, and which concerne the worship of God, being not able so well to accommodate themselves for livelihood and subsistence in any other State, with the freedome of their con∣sciences, should desire a Toleration in that? Suppose those men of your judgement, of whom you speake, p. 10. who were (as you there say) condemned to death for their Discipline, ready to be executed, and were after∣wards
exiled into forraigne countries; Suppose (I say) these men had de∣sired a Toleration in their own countrey, of those who thus unrea∣sonably dealt with them, had they violated all Rules and Principles of Reason by such a desire? But the truth is, that the assertion is so notoriously against all reason, that it is scarce consistent with reason to bestow so much pen in answer to it. There is but one only suppositi∣on to make either reason or truth of it: if it be granted, it may passe for both. If the desires of some Presbyterians be All reason, and no∣thing reason but they, then both the Opinion and Demands of the Apologists, must be acknowledged to be against all Reason. But otherwise I know no principle or rule of reason at all so much as dis∣courtefied by either. Secondly, whereas you say, that sundrie of themselves could not deny it, and had nothing to say, &c. first, certain I am that some of them have absolutely denied any such confession. Secondly, the acknow∣ledgement it self looks no more like any of the rest, then a meer fi∣ction doth the Relator. I beleeve that upon inquirie it will be found a misprision of truth. For doth it not sound aloud incredibilitie, that men of sufficient abilities to dispute their opinion in any Assembly in Europe, should confesse their Opinion and Demands to be against all reason? But such stones as these are fit for A. S. his building. Thirdly, whereas you say, that they could never shew (their opinion) out of Gods Word, we answer, that they have often shewed it; but God and men (it seems) are not yet agreed to have it so generally seen, as is to be desired: but our hope is, that the agreement will be conclu∣ded between them in due time. Fourthly, and lastly, you conclude this reason, with this underta∣king, that if it (your brethens opinion we suppose you mean; though it's hard both here, and in twenty places more to know your mean∣ing cleerly) be refused, it will help to confirme the Churches and the people in truth. We desire to know in truth of what? It will indeed confirme both marvellously, in the truth of Presbyterian fastnesse to their owne cause; but in what other truth it should confirm either the one or the other, we wait for our intelligence from you to know. Your 21th and last Reason (save onely those which you say you His last Rea∣son Answered. omit) is but a slip of your nineteenth, being somewhat that follows out of Independency. But here you tell us, that the Government so cal∣led, cannot but overthrow all sort of Ecclesiasticall Government; Is Saul also among the Prophets? Haec verba loquentis ab ore, Gaudens Arripio, & sta∣pefactus numine, adoro. I joy over these words, and reverence them for what I conceive to be of God in them. Wee know who prophefied,
when he was not aware of it. Indeed, by the beauty and perfect con∣sonancy of this Government with the Word of God, it may very rea∣sonably (yea, and upon higher terms then of reason) be thought that in time, it cannot but overthrow all sort of Ecclesiasticall Government, and stand up it self in their stead. Faxit Deus, & festinet. But that which you adde in the close of this Reason, plainly sheweth, that you had no mind to prophecie, though God had, or might have by you: for here you say, that this order by necessary conse∣quence will breed all sort of disorder. No, first it will not breed the disor∣der of oppressing consciencious men, for conscience sake: nor second∣ly, of discouraging men from searching the Scriptures more narrow∣ly; nor thirdly, of having recourse unto the world for the setting up of the Government of Christs Kingdome; nor fourthly, of making men walk sundry miles for what they might have upon as good or better terms at home, besides a thousand other disorders, which the order of your Independancy, will never breed by any consequence at all, necessary, or unnecessary, being of a very soveraigne importance to prevent them. And for your premisses (in the body of your Reason) by which you would fain make the match, between the order of In∣dependancy, and all sort of disorder, they are but false brokers: The Independent Churches (as you all them) have no such custome, as for one to give intertainment or admission to any person, that hath been censured by another, without the censure first relaxed by that Church which inflicted it, or without the consent of this Church. This is their reproach, not their practice. And thus we see, that amongst A. S. his 21. Reasons, there is not one that will stand by their Master, when they are but a little put to it; there is none of them, but with a little perswasion and debate, will willingly enough consent to a Toleration for the Apologists. If the Disputant himself, with his party, were but as tractable as his Rea∣sons, then need no more words be made about the businesse. As for his after-birth of Reasons (p. 65.) since he professeth him∣self that he omits them, we shall comport with him herein, and omit them also; I hope he will think himself a debtor to us for this com∣pliance It seems that himself placeth no great confidence in them, in that he mentions them, as if he mentioned them not, and thought them not worthy to be numbred amongst his first-born. His Horsemen (you see) have bin overcome, and yeelded themselves: his Infantery knows the manner of the field, and will, no question, surrender with∣out incounter. Nor is there any thing for weight or substance in this Taile of Reasons, but what hath been broken already in the Head. FINIS.
