P25 R216883 99828600 173147
A WORD OF EXHORTATION TO OƲR SEPARATING BRETHREN of whatever denomination, especially those commonly called Anabaptists, Beseeching them to stirre up their Hearts to an upright impartiall, and unbended considering of their Wayes, in order to their giving Glory to Truth and Peace, and to Taking hold of the strength of God, in this day of our own weakness. The chief points, these four; 1. Twenty particulars, wherein our Brethren seem to have receded from Christ Crucified, or the Gospel. 2. Active obedience to Authority, in things, by God neither commanded nor forbidden; whether a Gospel duty? 3. Infant Baptisme, seeming to goe upon most short and clear grounds of Holy Scripture and sanctified reason. 4. Known set formes of Prayer, whether an help to devotion in congrega∣tions and families, much more proper and effectuall, then Prayer by the gift? OXFORD, Printed by William Hall, Anno 1663.
A word of EXHORTATION to our SEPARATING BRETHREN of whatever denomination, especially those commonly called ANABAPTISTS; Beseeching them to stirre up their Hearts to an impartiall upright, and unbended considering of their Wayes, in order to their giving Glory to Peace and Truth, and to Taking hold of the strength of God, in this day of our own weakness. BRethren, heartily beloved in the God of love, Christ Jesus: Hee, that now takes upon him, To be your monitour, is one that is peaceable in Israel; wisheth, with the Apostle, Grace, mercy and Peace may be multiplied unto you; seeks not yours, but you; acknowledges in you, and from his heart congratulates to you, these two most Christian di∣spositions, which heretofore Hee hath observed in most of you; name∣ly, first, That generally ye doe fear an Oath and all open deboshery & Profaness. Secondly, That, when lately the right Church-Order and Constitution in this Land, through the mistake of the times, was either destroyed or brought into contempt and disrepute, somewhat neere a destruction, and nothing of any worth set up in steed of it (as indeed nothing of any worth, but that it self, could be set up) Ye yet would not be contented to live at large, and out of all both reall and seeming Church Order, as many did. These dear Brethren, are two such believing qualifications, namely, strict living, and great devotion to Discipline, That would ye now, with these, conform and apply your selves (through the power of grace and mercy) to the established way of this Nation; The advantage, ye might hereby bring to the truth of the Gospel, to the peace of Christendome, and to the eternall welfare both of
your selves and of others, would be such, as no conceit can aforehand sufficiently make out and declare. To the end therefore, ye may thus (through Grace) blesse both yourselves and others, & that the God of Order may love you the Sons of Order, yet more and more; Hee I verily believe; hath stirred up my Spirit, to lay before you those convictions of the un-Evange∣licallness of your way, that to me truly seem utterly unresistable. For judge, Brethren, even the meanest of you, whether that way can possibly be the right, which seems to have all these un-Christian things, most truly charged upon it; namely, First, That ye do strike in with the Papists, in the most venomous and un-Christian point of all, namely, Their judging and condemning all other, or, their holding all other Chri∣stians besides themselves, to be in state of damnation; and, separating from them ac∣cordingly. Thus doe the Papists; thus also doe ye. But that in so thinking and doing, both of you, doe both doe and think clean contrary to Christ Crucified, or, the Gospel. Secondly, Your rejecting of the Three Creeds. Thirdly, Your uncharitable affirming all the Ministers of England, to be deceivers, Imposters, &c. Fourthly, Your counting all, or most Societies of Christians, besides your selves, to be the Revelation-Babylon: And to this purpose in your Arrowes against Babylon, making, quickly, shortly, and, the time is at hand (expressions in sundry places of that Book) to signify a Tract of time, reaching our times and even to the very end of the World; contra∣ry not onely to the Truth, but also to the Scripture use of the Word, as well, as of all otber Books and Languages beside. Fiftly, Your Urging People to judge for themselves in controverted Points; which yet by Gods Word, are left to the Rulers gather'd together in a Council, Heb. 13. 17. Com∣pared with Act. 15. Sixtly, Your slighting of Prayer and Praise and of the word distinctly read, in the As∣semblies, as a Part of Worship. Seaventhly, Your Endevouring to perswade People against all sense and Reason, That the whole Church, not onely in S. Cyprians and Tertullians, but also in Hyginus his time, was ignorant, whether the 50. or 100. years before, Infants were Baptized or no; When themselves, or their Fathers, were some of those Infants. Eightly, Your simulation, pretending to Preach onely by inspiration, when ye your selves know well enough, that ye doe it, not without much use and study and conference, and those other means and wayes, that other men take and use; And not onely by the pre∣sent Incitations, Assistances, Suggestions and Inspirations of the Spirit. Ninthly, Your making all Infants uncapable of any room in the visible Church, whilest Infants. A piece of cruelty never heard of, from the beginning of the World, till, about 200. years agoe. Tenthly, Your making no difference at all, between the Infants of believers and of Infidels. Elevently, Your making both Jewes and Gentiles to be now, (under Christ, and the Gospel in a farre worse estate, in respect of their Infants, then they were, under Moses and the Law. Twelfthly. Your allowing your selves in the violation of the 6. and 7. Commandements, by your endangering not the health onely, but Chastity also, of many, that ye dip. Thirteenth. Your making nothing of the general custome, usage & practise of Christians; clean contrary to what S. Paul does For he, in that solemne debate about being covered, or uncovered in the Publick sacred Assemblies, makes this his concluding, and, as it were, stabbing and unanswerable argument; 1 Cor. 11. 16. But if any man seem to be conten∣tious, We have no such custome, nor the Churches of God. For his meaning even in the opi∣nion of Mr. Walter Craddock, is this; if with all this, that I have said, the conten∣tious
among you will not be satified, but will in the Holy Assemblies, the Women be uncovered; and the Men covered; I have then to alleadge against them, this undeniable and unanswerable Argument, as being matter of known fact and practise, among all ci∣vil as well as Christian people; That no where is it in use for Men in the sacred Assemblies to cover themselves, and for Women to be uncovered. But most signally true is this, among Christians, There being not a Church of God any where that so does. Now to go by ones selfe, and in such things as these, to doe and practise in a clean different way from all other Christians, This sure must needs be very great Arrogance, singula∣rity and self admiration at least; to say nothing of the unchartitableness, and Impiety therunto conjoyned. This, Brethten, seems to be the true minde and meaning of S. Paul in this place: And if so it be, then Judge ye, whether your slighting of the use and Practise of Christians, be an Apostolicall and Christian thing or no. Fourteenth. Your restraining the manner of Baptizing to dipping: Whereas 1. The word signifies washing, affusion, or sprinkling, as well as dipping & immersion and dowsing over head and ears. 2. Christ hath not appointed the measure of Water, nor the manner of Washing; no more then Hee hath appointed in the Lords Supper, what quantity of Bread and Wine each must take. And as it would be but folly for any to think, that Men must needs fill themselves full of Bread and Wine, because it best signifies the fulness of Christ: so it is no better to say, We must be washed all over, because it best signifies our Buriall with Christ, &c. Fifteenth. Your teaching, that the Infants of visible Church members under the Gospel (or, That the Infants of Christians) ought to have their Baptisme deferred, till they come to Age; and, doing accordingly. For which your Doctrine and practise, there's no one word, or example in all the New Testament. Sixteenth. Your deceaving your selves & others with Arguments à Testimonio Negative, thus, We read not in all the New Testament, that the Apostles Baptized any Infants; Therefore they Baptized none. An argument no better then these; We read not in all the New Testament, that the Apostles did in their Prayers lift up their eyes to Heaven; Therefore they never did so. That they did ever make use of the Lords Prayer. There∣fore they never did use it, &c. A non dicto ad non factum, non valet consequentia. Seaventeenth. Your turning Scripture affirmatives into exclusives, thus; The Apostles Baptized Men and Women come to Age: that is, say ye, They Baptized such onely, and none else. They Baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus; that is, say ye, In the Name of the Lord Jesus onely, without mentioning Father or Holy Ghost, &c. Enarrations, no bet∣ter then these; The Apostles Ioh. 21. Did eat Fish; therefore Fish onely, and never any Flesh. The Apostles did Preach the Gospel by Word of mouth; therefore onely by Word of mouth, and did never put it into writing. Blessed are they, that have not seen, and yet have believed; therefore only such are blessed; Therefore S. Thomas, who by seeing the Wounds and Scars of the Lord Jesus after his Resurrection came to believe, was not a blessed believer, &c. Eighteenth. Your comforting up your selves with passive obedience, that is, with suf∣fering what the Law inflicts, when ye do not, what it commands. But consider, Brethren. 1. That in all the Book of God there cannot be any one believer named, nor any one Word of God noted, Warranting believers so much as to doubt or dispute, much lesse to disobey and condemne when once due Authority has interposed in things indif∣ferent. So that not onely disobedience, but also mere passive obedience, in this case, is ut∣terly un∣scripturall, that is, such as has neither precept nor practise, nor Text nor fact, to warrant it throughout the whole Bible. 2ly. That, whereas some perhaps may think to evade the force of this Observation by distinguishing about Things indifferent clothed with their Circumstances, and Things Indifferent not-clothed with their circumstances; We may sure be bold to tell them afore∣hand,
That, this distinction seemes but a mere Notion, or, a distinction without a diffe∣rence; Because One part of It appeares to be entirely wanting, There being no particular things in Common life, but are clothed with Accidents and Circumstances. And there∣fore, If the soveraigne Powers may interpose in any indifferent Things, It must be in Things indifferent, clothed with their Circumstances, There being no other things at all, in Common life, for them to interpose in. 3ly. That Circumstances, though never so many, if some where in God's word they be not certainely forbidden, can never make any Thing Indiffirent, Not Indifferent, or Unfit and Unlawfull for the Soveraigne Magistrate to interpose in, whether by Prohibition or Injunction, as Hee sees Cause. (If indeed the Unseparable Accidents and Circumstan∣ces be certainely forbidden, The Thing it selfe we acknowledge to be forbiden to; Not in and of it selfe, but because of those sinfull forbidden Adherescencies. But no such, we are competently certaine, can be noted in any part of our Constitution. And for the faulty Executions, that be, These are the faults of men, not of the lawes.) 4ly. That St. Pauls Rules about not giving offence to weak Brethren, have place on∣ly in such things as the Christian Magistrate has not interposed in, neither by Prohibition, nor Injunction; For then no Christian Magistrate had determined one way or other; Nor was there Any One then, so to doe. But now; (blessed be our God, who hath made so many Kingdomes of the world to be the Kingdomes of the Lord Jesus!) The case now is farre otherwise, as in many Soveraigneties besides, so particularly in these our Indepen∣dent Kingdomes of England, Scotland and Ireland. Adde hereunto 1. That the Case, that St. Paul speaks to directly and particularly, namely, Things offered to Idols, is now no where to be met with in the Christian world. 2. That To make Rules for Conscience by Ana∣logie or Proportions, when therein we have not the Ancient Church going before us, nei∣ther by knowne Practise, nor undoubted Canon, seemes a daring very dangerous and no∣way justifiable. 5ly. That the Word requires, not only Passive, but also Active Obedience from you, In all these Scripture-undetermin'd Matters, wherein the Magistrate by the word may in∣terpose. Now that in setling the Outward worship of God, He may and ought to put in, seemes competently certaine, as otherwise, so especially from 1 Chron. 25. vers. 1. 2. 3. and 2 Chron. 29. 30: for in the former of these places recorded we have a Plaine Order or Act from King David and his Captains, that is, his Councill of Officers; not only from King David, the man after Gods own heart, but also from sundry Ordinary men, his Commis∣sion'd Officers: (The Great and most Legal Parliment not then sitting, this extemporary Convention of Officers serv'd the turne. How much more ought a most free, full and most deliberately chosen Parliament satisfie us.) I say by this Authority an Ecclestical Order is no sooner emitted, for prophesying, that is, for praysing, with Harps, Psalteries, and Cym∣bals; But presently It is most cheerfully and universally obeyed. The like submission also we find in the other place, given to the ordinance of Hezekiah and his Princes for Common Prayer, or, in the literal words of the text, for singing praise unto the Lord, as we now are appointed to doe by our King, his Princes and Parliament, in the words of David and of Asaph the Seer: for the very next words are; And they sang prayses with gladness, in these formes, and they bowed their heads and worshipped. 6ly. That if Ye suffer never so patiently and meekly, when Ye should have obeyed Actively, sinne yet doth lye at the doore and upon the Conscience. Because Impossible it is, that corporal outward suffering should be any expiation of Inward soule-sinne. 7ly. That, If ye suffer as Busy bodies in other mens matters, then can ye not be in∣nocent; nor, by the Gospel rule, take any comfort at all in your sufferings. For, when we un∣derake to Judge the laws, which thing belongs only to the law makers, are we not Busy∣bodies in other mens matters? 8ly. That, It seemes to be the most hazardous and curious point (one of them) in
all Christianity, Passively to Obey, without being guilty of some sinne or other: Because; Thereunto these two things are found to be of Absolute necessity. 1. That, we be Ante∣cedently Innocent, that is, That We be sure, We neither doe deserve, nor have deserved our sufferings, by any our own Weakness or Wickedness. 2. That in our suffering, We sinne not against any point of Christian meekness and Patience; especially, That we speak not evill of the Power, By and under which we suffer; and, That we be so farre from grudg∣ing at our sufferings, and from desiring by any indirect meanes, To shift our selves of our Cross, that we greatly rejoyce under it. Whether thus It be, or, when It comes to tryal, be like to be with You, Brethren, in all Respects, Your selves will make the Rightest esti∣mate. 9. Adde hereunto, That in things by God in Scripture neither cleerly forbidden, nor cleerly commanded i. e. in things doubtful and Indifferent, The most conscientious and prudent Believers have ever counted The state of subjection, to be the hugely Happy state, that is, That the Supreme Magistrate and the laws should choose for them. For Hee, that hath the laws on his side, hath alwaies some thing of true religion to warrant him. And, Taking things upon trust from due Authority, or, Presumption in the behalfe of Authori∣ty is alwaies the safer: Praesumptio est pro Authoritate Imponentis. And subjects ought to judge in favour of the law: Subditi tenentur in favorem legis judicare. And many the like good Rules there are to this purpose. Nineteenth. Your Contempt of deductions from Scripture; Contrary not only to the Pra∣ctise of our Lord Himselfe, Mat. 2. 32; and of his Apostles, 2 Cor. 5. v. 14. 15. 1 Tim. 5. v. 17. 18: but also your own to; For, nothing either doe yee bring or can yee bring against In∣fant-Baptisme, It being in Scripture no where forbidden) save only certaine pretended deductions and Reasonings from Scripture words and Phrases. For instance, When 'ye say, Infants are not to be baptized, Yee draw it from Consequence, thus; Because there is no Command for it in your sense. When yee affirme the Covenant is not made with Be∣lievers and their seed now, as with Abraham; It's drawne by consequence, Because, say yee, Abraham is no natural Father to us, as to the Jews, and, Because that Covenant was a mixt Covenant, &c. When ye come to prove, Baptizing is by Plunging, ye argue by consequence, Because the word signifies it; Because they went where much water was, and went downe into the water, &c. And though yee greatly mistake in all these and ma∣ny like consequences; Yet this is full ad Homines, or, Against yourselves, who deny consequences to warrant Institutions, and yet have nothing to prove your own way, but what is by consequence from Scripture. Twentieth. Your wilfulness. Ye will not, ye say, be perswaded, that Infant-Baptisme hath any ground in Scripture, unless ye may see some Scripture in so many words affirming, That Infants were baptized, or, ought to be baptized. Is not this to say, Wee will not believe that God hath spoken any thing to this point, because, Hee hath not spoken it just as we would have had him? Or, We will not receive the sense and drift of the Scripture, because the words are not just such, as we thinke had been fittest? Or, We will not content our selves with good grounds for the Practise, because they are not just such grounds, as we would have? What is frowardness and meere wilfulness, if this be not? By the same Arti∣fice, yee may reject the Trinity, the Lord's day, and indeed every thing of faith, that is not in Scripture, in so many and such words, as yee think had been best and fittest. Upon these and other like considerations, It was, sure, That One (almost your owne) did yet, many yeares agoe, thus proclaime in print; The summe of All, writes Hee, that our Brethren have to say, though they make a great noyse in the world, is only this; That they can find in the New Testament no syllabical precept, or words of command in termes, saying, Goe, baptize Infants; Or, any full positive Example, where, it is recorded in so many words, that Infants were baptized. All that they say besides, is, to quarrel with our Argumens, and make shift to evade the strength of them; But this is the only Ar∣gument, and their All to speake on. For, however they talke of the Covenant, and Flesh∣ly
and spiritual seed, and some other matters; Yet this is their Great and most successefull Argument. And yet it's whole strength, is nothing but this false Principle, That no Consequences from Scripture are obliging, or of Divine Authority. A principle carrying in the face of it, these three intolerable Absurdities, (among sundry other.) 1. Then, No One can speak Divine Truth, but those that speak just the very expressions of Scripture. 2. Only the very letters and Syllables in the Bible should be Scripture, not the sense and meaning. 3. All Prophesyings (commonly called Preaching) All Enarrations, Opening, Ap∣plying and expounding of Scripture, should be laid aside, as Useless, if not Godless. Adde to all this; That the Way of the Church of England, which ye have left, seemes to goe upon most cleere short and certaine Grounds of Holy Scripture and sanctified Reason, such as these. 1. Infants may and ought to be entered into Covenant with God, as upon other Autho∣rities, so particularly. Deut. 29. 11. Yee stand this day All of you—Your Captaines—Your Elders—Your Little Ones, Your Wives—That thou shouldest enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God. 2. When we see the Lord Jesus himselfe counting childrens coming to Him by their be∣lieving freinds, to be Very coming unto Him; We have sure sufficient ground to believe, That He counts also their Professing the faith by their believing friends, to be Very Pro∣fessing. Physically indeed or, According to the Physical, sensible or decretive Will of God, This Professing is the act of the sureties: But in Law sense or Morally, that is, According to his Moral, Intelligible, Legislative Will, It is the Childs own Act. Just as when a Father puts his Childs life into a living, and ties him to take such or such a man for his Land-lord, and to pay him such or such a Rent; and if he doe not, to for∣feit his estate; if he doe, to enjoy it according to the Covenants: Physically, All this is the Fathers Act, but Morally and in the sense of the law, The Child is possessed of the benefit, as well as of the Burthen, as much as if he had both-known what is done, and also had done it himselfe. The Accomodation to our present businesse is so obvious, that scarce Any sure need to be holpen to doe it. For who sees not that the sureties, having Power and obligations from Deut. 29. 11. to enter the Child into Covnant with God, doe indeed so doe? Engage him to take Christ for his Land∣lord as 'twere? To enjoy and hold of him, all the Benefits of the Gospel, under the Rent of Faith and Repentance and the other Gospel. Observations? If Hee doe not pay his Rent, to forfit his living? If Hee doe, To enjoy it with surety and Highest comfort? &c. And boldly may the sureties in the Child's behalfe, protest, That it is, His desire to be baptized into the faith of Christ, because every One may and ought to be presumed not only Con∣senting to, but also desirous of, That, which is for his Good; As this his beeing entred in∣to Covenant with his God, for certaine is No small Good to every Child so enter'd; Un∣less haply we dare be so absurd and wicked to affirme, That it is better to be out of Cove∣nant with God, then in; And, To be out of the Bosome of the visible Church, then within it. &c. 3. In the Institution of Christian Baptisme some time before. Joh. 3. vers. 22. 26: and chap. 4. vers 1. 2: and in the Commission for Baptizing, Math. 28. There is nothing against Infant Baptisme; But rather, Math. 28. vers. 19. 20. Roome purposely left for it, because therein Discipling by Baptizing, that is, by Engaging into the Name of Father, Sonne and Holy Ghost that is▪ unto the true Christian Religion, is clearly set before Teaching. The words, these; Beeing gone therefore Disciple all Nations, Baptizing them into the Name of the Father and of the Sonne and of the Holy Ghost, Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have, &c. 4. The Baptizing of Growne Believers is so frequently noted in the New Testament, To shew not the Proper and adequate subject of Baptisme, but the success and Power of
the Gospel; that, notwithstanding there seem'd to be in Christian Religion so many surd and unlikely things, yet in very deed such reasonableness as well as power was in he dispensation, that so many thousands of Men and Women, come to mature years nd judgement, and some of them the greatest and most judicious Scholars of the times, did yet very readily and deliberately engage in it, in the ordinary way. 5. Whereas the main things, that ye so much vaunt of, and stand upon, are these two, your personall professing and Covenanting; both these (suppose it were lawfull for every man to choose, which way he will go, whether ours or yours every sober Christian sure would choose to have his Children doe, in our way, rather then in yours; because they may be done, if not better and sooner, yet as soone and as well, in our way as in yours. For, whereas the time, that ye would have young Ones admitted to Baptisme, is then, when they are come to be of so perfect age, as to be able understandingly to pro∣fesse, and seriously to engage; at this very point of time, our Church (according to A∣postolicall Institution and practise) hath ordered all such adult to be presented to the Bi∣shop for Confirmation, and after that to be admitted to the Holy Communion, and not before. And whether ratifying and confirming their Baptismall vow, openly before the Church, with their own mouth and of their own accord, together with all these venerable and weighty circumstances, that are or ought to be used and stood upon at the time in or∣der to their being confirmed, and admitted unto the Holy Commuion, be not like to work as much upon them, and as much to prevent unworthy receiving, as would at the same time their professing & covenanting, in order to their being admitted to Holy Baptis∣me; let any one Judge, that hath but once seen that ordinance di∣spensed Augustè, cu∣ratè, severè as the Now Bishop of Sa∣rum, hath most hap∣pily expressed the matter, in his La∣tine preface, to D. Hammonds La∣tine Treatise of Confirmation. So gravely, so seriously, & so severely as it ought to be. So that the whole question, as to this point of Covenanting and Professing, is now come to this issue; whether a Baptized Child, 15. years old, may not Covenant as heartily and truely with his God as an unbaptized Child of the same age and gifts? No man sure of ordinary Capacity, can be much to seek, which part of the Question to take. Adde hereunto, that once already it hath been sufficiently made out, and, if need be, may be again, that by this Apostolicall ordinance of Confirmation worthily admi∣nistred, every Bishop in his Diocesse, in all likelyhood, shall have really gained engag'd unto Iesus Christ more by farre in two or three moneths, then all the Preachers of the Country, put 'em all together, shall have done by their Preaching, throughout the whole year. So great encouragement is there, and so great an Obligation lies there, upon and unto all Parents, naturall as well as Ec∣clesiasticall; whatever heretofore they have done, never any more, to be slight and Per∣functory in this part of Paternall care and relation. 6. Those words in S. Paul, else your Children are unclean, but now they are Holy; seem to be direct and home for Infant Baptisme. For the true meaning of them is this sure; else your Children are or remain Un-baptized, but now they are Baptized. For, all other Interpretations are resisted by the Scope of the Apostle, or some other weighly considerations; such as this. The Holyness, that the Apostle here speaks of, is a Holyness proper to the Infants of believing Parents (of one side, at least:) But now no Holyness ir proper to such, save one∣ly the Relate Holyness, of being dedicated to God and Holyness by Baptisme: Therefore this is the Holyness here meant by the Apostle; And, Holy, here as much as Baptized, or, Dedicated to God and the Holy Christian Religion by Baptisme.
Adde hereunto, That in the Inscriptions of the Epistles, Holy, seems to be used al∣together in this power. For what other Holynes may be affirmed of all the members of a Church visible, besides this Relative, of being Dedicated to God and the Holy Christian Religion by Holy Baptisme? Rom. 1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 1. 1. Ephes. 1. 1. Phil. 1. 1. Coloss. 1. 1. Compared with Ephes. 5. 26. That he might sanctify and cleanse it, with the washing (or, by the laver) of water (in the Word, or) by the Word; that is, That he might sanctify & separate the whole Catholique Church to himself and Purify by Baptis∣me, as that comprehends. 1. The sacred Ceremony of Baptismal washing. 2. The Word, or, The Name of the Father, Son and Holy Chost, or, The true Christian Reli∣gion; Into which, through or in the power of the promises thereof, and the obligation therein laid upon Parents, so to devote their Children as well as themselves, They are in very deed Baptized and engaged; And by which, having the secret powerfull assistances of the Spirit and Grace alwayes accompaning it, They are enabled to live Holyly, that is, according to the Intention of God, in causing them to be thus sanctified and separated to himself and Purity, by the Laver of Baptisme Two Prolepses, or Anticipations. The former, this; not, but that, Holy, or Saints, in other places signifies other∣wise; But that in these places, and 1 Cor. 7. 14. This is that power, which is most agrea∣ble. The other, this; The Holyness, called foederall, or, of speciall separation to God be∣ing sifted to the bottom, is found to be nothing, but this Relative, if not formally, yet fundamentally, namely, when Children are born such, as by the Covenant of Grace, have a Right to be made visible Church-members (or, To be sanctified and separated to God and Holyness) by the Laver of Baptisme, and in due time are Actually treated, accord∣ing to this their Native morall▪right. A submonition, or Item. Though Foederall Holyness (in the Nature of the Word) may signify the Right or Ground of being Baptized, as well as the being actually Baptized; as one would say, the Relative Holyness Fundamentally, as well as the Relative Holyness formally; Yet this and not that, is that, which seems most agreable to this happy place, 1 Cor. 7. 14. Lastly, whereas ye are, many of you, against all set formes of Prayer; To all those un∣answered, and indeed un-answerable, Justifications of them, that heretofore and of late have been given out, adde but this one Consideration, so easy to every willing, though but very mean, understanding; namely. That, whereas the great Ends of Prayer Common to two or three or more, whether in Church or family, are these two, to Act and Testify our dependance on God, and our Communion of Saints (these two, believing in God with all the Heart, and perfect chari∣ty, being the things, that, for the new Covenants sake in Christ, will doe any thing with Him and his Father;) When once ye have rid your hearts of all prejudices, and, by Grace, have brought them to that evennes, equity and indifferency to both sides, that is necessa∣ry; we shall then make no question, but, upon your due and sufficient experience both of the one and of the other way, ye will your selves acknowledge, that these two great
graces, may not onely be testified, but acted also, and that God may be worshipped in Spirit and in truth (in the true sense of the Words) much more surely and effectually, when all the Company aforehand know what Prayers and praises, they are to offer up to God, and also doe fully approve of the matter of them, then, when it is, as amongst most of you, clean otherwise: as much as to say; when believers have nothing to doe, but to fix their mindes, and to draw out their devotion; Whether in all reason, they may not doe this much more certainly, having but this one thing to look to: then, when they have another care besides this, much more difficult for them, though if performed never so well, nothing neer so pleasing to Almighty God, namely, For the mouth of the Com∣pany to be, besides steady in his cogitations, fit and proper also in his expressions; and for all the Company, to see, that their understanding of, and passing judgement upon, his Elocution, doe not disturb and interrupt their Heavenly mindednesse and devotion; Whe∣ther, I say, both Speaker and Hearers, be like to answer these two cares better, then onely one of them, your selves give sentence. And indeed somewhat the more confidently doe we make you your selves the Judges in your own cause, because of this late not un-considerable providence; namely, that one there is, who, being both very able and very upright and having, till about four years since, gone on very farre in your way, has now at last, after due and long trying of yours and all wayes, given up his most deliberate Judgement, as to this Matter, in these words; If believers, writes Hee, were but once provided, and as it were, stock't with so much faith and Heavenly mindednesse, as to desire to act and exercise their own Infused graces in every Prayer and praise and Worshipping out of the word of God, as God himself, rather then to hear others to act and exercise their acquired gifts, in making Prayers and Prophesyings and Preachings upon and out of that Word; if once they would but prevail with themselves to lay a side certain vulgar errours, such as these, that in things of diffi∣culty is the greatest excellency, That sure and easy wayes of Worship, cannot be the truest and rightest wayes of Worship; that, because some casts of Men and Preachers doe require things of them, which they can very hardly, if at all, perform up to the rule, that is set them, therefore these sure doe shew the narrow and hard way of life, the most truely and uprightly of any; In one word, that hard and hazardous venerations, are the most Heavenly and Holy venerations: If people would but perswade themselves, what is truth, That these errours are as grosse as they are generall, and, being obeyed to the uttermost, as killing and pernicious, as they are plausible and catching; It would not then be long, but, by the holy and happy experience both of themselves and others, they would conclude with themselves, That, as in diet the simplest and plainest victuals is al∣wayes the most wholesome and healthy; and as in curing the body, Parabilia Remedia, as oft as we can hit on them, that is, remedies at hand and cheap and such as every one may have, are found to be the best and most effectuall: so also in cherishing the Soul, that way of publick Worship, wherein every one that will, may joyn in tongue and in gesture, outwardly (Psal. 95. 2. & 35. 28. & 63. Vers. 4. 5. 6. &c) as well as in deed and in truth, ;inwardly, Is that certes, which is like to be most acceptable to God, by how much the more suitable it is to whatsoever degrees and conditions of the People of God. To this, adde; 1. That the gift of Prayer (as they, that are most eminently endowed with it, will readily acknowledge) is not a boon dropt into the Soul from Heaven, entire∣ly, Immediatly, by extraordinary favour, and in one instant; and so one sure Argument of a mighty power of grace and of the Spirit in all those in whom it appears (as most sim∣ple people by little and little have been brought to think); But a very acquisition of In∣dustry,
time, and unwearied Practise, as Preaching is. 2ly. That the main parts of it, are these three: 1ly. Confidence; gotten by venturing, long use, successes and encourage∣ments from acquaintance and others, as well as from God. Second; The supervening presence, or, quicknings, strengthnings and secret heartnings of the Spirit; obtained by lifting up the heart aforehand for them, by resolving to goe forth in the strength of the Lord God, by teaching the greater cares for saying and doing what may be most pleasing to God and most profitable to the hearers, to drive out these lesser, concerning Applause and censure, and by despairing of any successe worth speaking of, unless He, in his still but effectuall way, doe, in the very Act, supply us, minutely, with Aides, Divine, sudain and as yet not appearing. Third part; a magazine of Scripture, expressions fot all occasions (such as, be thou our arm every morning; cause us to take hold of thy strength &c.) laid up in the memory, and, after much use, offering themselves upon occasion, especially if we have had time aforehand, by meditation to rub them up, and to range and dispose of them in our minds, as we conceive to be most decent and affe∣cting. (for so certainly, even the most able of us doe alwaies desire some time for our preparation, especially if the occasion be more solemne then ordinary, That, they that make as though they doe not so desire, doe but deceive and cheat the credulous, as well, as defile and abuse their own soules.) 3ly That one of the ablest defenders of the Way of the Directory, being pressed on every side by a most able Opponent, at last very ingeniously gave out his very best defence; This namely, That he saw no reason but Ministers should be engaged to Study for their Prayers as for their Sermons. Thereby plainly acknowledging, That they are the Leasurely products of Humane study, and not only sudaine Injections of Divine Operation. 4ly That the Spirit of Grace and Supplications Zech. 12. 10. is there signifyed to consist in looking at Him, whom we have pierced and in mourning for him, and for our sinnes, that brought him into that mournfull condition; as one would say, In Acting faith and Repentance rather then in uttering fit expressions about and of them. And so we alwaies have That about us, though we never have This; albeit our credit haply may be lesse among some men, yet our Comfort shall not, before the God of them, and of us, and of All. For so great and happy a difference is there between the spi∣rit of Prayer, and the gift of Prayer, That, As the latter very frequently is without the former, namely, in many Learned Heads and good Wits, but unsanctified: so also the former is as frequenly without the latter, in many poore unletterd, but very devout, and humble, and true believing soules. Not that we are to take no care, or to make little esteeme of the Gift; But that in Prayer the maine thing we look to and after, be not the Gift of Prayer, but the Spirit of Prayer. All the other Texts, that by some have been applied to this matter, that is, To asserting the Necessity of the Praying Gift, are found to be as unconcluding and wide from It, as this in Zecharie appears to bee. 5ly: That one great mischiefe of the late tying all Ministers in Publick, to Pray∣ing by the Spirit, or, at least to Pretending so to doe, has been this; That thereby many Godly good-meaning Christians have come to mis-perswade themselves, that All set formes of Prayer, are not only uneffectuall, but unlawfull too. And so in their respe∣ctive families, have set themselves to variety and effusions, most-what so very unhappy and unbecoming, that the end has been, the great dislike, Regrette, and Blushing not only of Friends, Children and Servants, but also of themselves too. Nay hence, that greater mischiefe also; namely, When they saw they could not worthily keep up their
Family-devotions by the Gift, have kept it up no Way at all, but have let it wholly sink; to the great dishonour of God and Religion, add to the great decay of Faith and Piety both in themselves and Housholds. 6ly That for these Minister, that in very deed have the gift in any measure, They may use, and, if they think it lawfull, shew it too, not onely in their families, but in the Congregation also, In their Prayer before Sermon. And these two open exercises of it, together with that of the closet (the most proper place of all for it) may in all reason be thought scope enough for the gift to walk in at pleasure; without encroching and growing upon those other times and places, which due authority has otherwise deter∣mined of. Especially, when now that is by most granted which is most true, that God may, if not more earnestly, yet as earnestly be sought and wrastled with, by forms as by the gift. 7ly That to be so zealous for the honour, and use of a pure Humane acquisition, as, for it, to venture upon violating a Divine command, namely, That for obedience and submission to due authority, seems a hardiness savouring as little of prudence and sound discretion, as it does of faith and true Religion. 8ly That, if a man pray never so readily and devoutly by the gift, yet to Him onely it is gift, but to all the company form, for as much tied and stinted all they seem to be by His words, as they would be, if they were the words of a Book. And hence comes it, that praying by the gift, has been most reasonably deemed to be much more fit for the closet, then for the Church, or Parlour. For, in these, to the respective companies, it ceaseth to be gift, and comes to be form; and so had as good be very form, known and acknowledged so to be. Because, in very deed, never a whit the lesse is it, what it is, for pretending to be otherwise. 9ly If any say, they find by experience, they can be much more devout and enlarged, when they hear a man praying by the gift, then in and by a form; We answer, this comes to passe generally, because great prejudice they have against the one, and greatest kindness for the other way. But let them be but upright and unbended in their opi∣nions, and then, as but now was hinted, upon and after due experience, find they will the clean contrary. To conclude, as to the whole, doe but honestly consider, thar there is no end of di∣sputing and arguing pro and con, That, if a man will set himself about it, Hee may have some thing or other, to say against any thing whatsoever; That the Itch of reasoning, has proved the very scab of Religion: And therefore, if in very deed we doe desire to keep the spark of faith a live in our hearts, one great care for all time coming will sure be rhis, to deny our selves in our boldness of questioning every thing, that we can and have a mind to; and, when that, which seems to be truth, is held out to us, presently to admit and embrace it, though never so contrary to our former, whether practises or preposse∣ssions. And now, Brethren, these 2. Things, the groundedness of the way ye are perswaded to, & the unjustifiableness of that ye are perswaded from, simply & sincerely being laid to heart; ye will, we hope, now at last be very fain upon that great Legacy of Unity & concord that our Lord so near his death, so earnestly bequeathed unto us; and also take effectuall care, That in this our dear & Native Country, That heavenly prayer of our dying Lord may not in vain be poured out upon and for us, Namely, That they may be one, even as we are one. I in them, and thou in mee, that they may be made perfect in one, [, into or in one thing
or mind, I and that the World may know, that thou hast sent mee. Even so, come Lord Je∣sus, come quickly. Dear Brethren, your most affectio∣nate and daily Servant at the throne of grace, G. P. Saturday Octob. the 4. 1662.
FINIS.
