O858C [ocm]27878697 205772
An Advertisement of several Bibles and Common-Prayer Books lately printed at the THEATRE in OXFORD, a Specimen of the Letter on which every Book is printed followeth underneath. A Church-Bible in large Folio, on this Letter following. TITUS. CHAP. II. BUt speak thou the things which become sound do∣ctrine: 2 That the aged men be sober, grave, temperate, sound in faith, in charity, in patience. A House-Bible in a smaller Folio, on this Letter following. PROVERBS. CHAP. XXIX. HE that being often reproved, hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. 2 When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoyce: but when the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn. A House-Bible in Quarto, on this Letter following. JOB. CHAP. XXXXIV. FUrthermore Elihu answered and said, 2 Hear my words, O ye wise men, and give ear unto me, ye that have knowledge. 3 For the ear trieth words, as the mouth tasteth meat. 4 Let us choose to us judgment: let us know among our selves what is good. 5 For Job hath said, I am righteous: and God hath taken away my judgment. A Common-Prayer Book for the use of Parish-Church∣es, of this Letter following, altered according to his MAJESTIES Order in Council February the 16th. 1684. That it may please thee to bless and preserve our gracious Queen MARY, CATHERINE the Queen Dowager; their Royal Highnesses, Mary Princess of Orange, and the Princess Anne of Denmark, and all the Royal Fa∣mily, &c. A Common-Prayer Book in a lesser Volume, for the use of Parish-Clerks, on this Letter following. O Lord our heavenly Father, high and mighty, King of kings, Lord of lords, the onely Ruler of princes, who dost from thy throne behold all the dwellers upon earth; Most heartily we beseech thee with thy favour to behold our most gracious Sovereign Lord KING JAMES, and so replenish him with the grace of thy holy Spirit, that he may alway incline to thy will, and walk in thy way: Endue him plenteously with heavenly gifts, grant him in health and wealth long to live, &c. A Common-Prayer Book in a Pocket-volume, for weak Eyes or Aged Persons, on this Letter following. ALmighty God, the fountain of all goodness, we humbly beseech thee to bless our gracious Queen MARY, CATHERINE the Queen Dowager; their Royal Highnesses, Mary Princess of Orange, and the Princess Anne of Denmark, and all the Royal Family: Endue them with thy holy, &c. The abovesaid several Bibles, with several other smaller Bibles and Common-Prayer Books, in all Volumes, altered according to His MAJESTIES Com∣mand in the Order of Feb. the 16th. 1684. Sold By Peter Parker at the Leg and Star over against the Royal-Exchange in Cornhil. LONDON. By Thomas Guy at the Oxford Arms on the west-side of the Royal-Exchange in Cornhil. LONDON.
