P3689 816.m.10[9] R224657 99885569 185333
A Proposal for a Subscription to Raise One Hundred Thousand Pounds, For Circulating the Credit of a Land-Bank. THIS short Experience, since the Bank of England has bee set up, has sufficiently discovered the great Advantage from it, to the Government and Trade, by Lowring the Interest on Tallies, Bills of Exchange, and Money on Goods, which seems the Business of the Bank. And on the contrary, the Prejudice from it to the Owners of Lands and Houses, doth as plainly appear; For the Cur∣rent of Money being so greatly turned into the Bank, has made it Difficult to Supply real Securities with Money; and hath thereby Raised the Interest upon them, and Sunk the Values of Lands. This ill Effect caused a general Clamour of the Landed Men of England; Which to Pacifie, An Order from the Directors of the Bank was published in the Gazett, That they would Lend Money on Land. The Reasons that might Divert them, so as to do Little in it, might probably be These: First, That the Directors being Merchants, and Traders, and not Acquainted with the Titles and Values of Land, might not be such proper Persons to deal in them. Secondly, That the Money Lent on Mortgages seems Difficult, and slow in Returning. And Lastly, The Profit seems Small. Upon the Consideration of the First, The Authors of the Settlement  the Land Bank, found it absolutely necessary, hat the Majority of the Governours should at the First Settlement be Lawyers, whose Study and Practice have made them more Acquain∣ted with the Titles and Values of Land. And therefore the Design of the Settlement is, That Ten Gentlemen of the Bar, that Subscribe, and pay down the Sum of Money in manner as hereafter is expressed, shall be Ten of the First Governours of the Bank. As to the two latter Reasons, That the Money lent on Land will be difficult and slow in Returning, and of small Profit; they must be answered by the methods in the Settlement and Experience thereupon to the contrary: By which it will appear, That Money lent on Land may be as easily and quickly Returned, as Money on Goods or Bills of Exchange. And as for the Profit of this Bank, if it be considered as Rent on Land, and that Twenty Shillings in Rent is equal to Twenty Pounds in Money; this 100000 l. Stock may perhaps at the Years end make up the Account of Profit equal to a much greater Sum in other Stocks. And besides the Profit, the Subscribers will hereby lessen the Interest of Money on Land, as much, if not more, than the Bank of England has done it on Bills of Exchange or Goods, and will raise the Value of all the Lands of England, and thereby pre∣serve many Families of the Nobility and Gentry from Ruin. The PROPOSALS are: THAT no Person Subscribe less than 100 l. nor more than 5000. of which 20 l. Per Cent. is to be paid down as soon as 30000 l. is Subscribed, and the Residue as the Governours of the Bank shall call for it; with a Rebate of Interest for the said 20 l. per Cent. till the whole 100000 l. be Subscribed. That every Person that Subscribes, shall have One Vote in Choosing the Governours, and no Person more than Ten. That the Governours are to be One and Twenty, and chosen Yearly; and that every Person that Subscribes 1000 l. is capable of being Chosen one of the Governours. There are other particulars in the Settlement, too large here to Insert; and therefore for the satisfaction of those that shall Subscribe, the whole Settlement is Transcribed in the Subscription-Book for any Gentleman to Read, if he pleaseth, before he Subscribes. The Subscription-Book lyes Open, at the Chamber over the Stamp-Office in Lincolns-Inn, and will continue there till the Subscriptions are Compleated.
