P3715c 816.m.13[46] R225171 99885902 186248
PROPOSALS, about Lights for this CITY, To the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, Court of Aldermen, and Common Council. WE do hereby propose to this City, to enlighten it with Glass Globe Lights, which shall be so made, that neither the Tin or Lead, that is used in them, shall occasion any dark Shadows whatsoever, but that the Light thereof shall be always Clear, and equally dispers'd in the Streets, both under and on each Side round about them; so that their Eight will be delightful and useful to Passengers, with∣out glaring or dazling the Eye. These Lights to be set upon Posts, or in Rings of Iron about Ten Foot high from the Pavement, and that transversly in the several Streets; that is to say, there shall be still placed a Lamp on the one Side of the Street, against the Middle of the Space where the Light of the two Lamps on the contrary Side seems to meet. We will further agree, That no House shall pay above Six Shillings a Year, and that every such Dwelling, or other House, in which Trade is car∣ryed on, and that so payeth, shall have the Benefit of the Light, reaching and shining as far in the Street or Lane, &c. where they dwell, as their Door, or Passage into it; and after the same Manner, every Street, Lane, Alley, Court, Square, Yard, or other Places, shall be enlightened, having at least one Lamp within Thirty Yards distance of each House. And that all Churches, Halls, Schools, &c. shall pay after the Rate of Eight Shillings a Year, and no more. We will also agree, That the said Lighting yearly, shall be continued from the Twentieth of September, to the Twentieth of April; and that they always be maintained only with Rape-Oil, and Cotton-Wick, and that they shall begin to be lighted at Candle-lighting, or as soon as it begins to be dark; and that they shall be kept burning clear, each Night, untill Twelve of the Clock, or so much as shall not be enlightened by the Moon; and that the Glasses shall be cleaned every Day, and the Lights snuffed every Night, as often as there shall be occasion. And it shall be agreed, That the said Lights shall yearly be of the same Dimentions and Goodness as the Pattern to be given in. And for further Encouragement to the City to give a Grant hereof, We will be obliged to pay the Lord Mayor and Commonalty, the Sum of Eight Hundred Pounds yearly, on the Twentieth of May; they obliging them∣selves, not to permit any other Publick Lights to be set up in the City, during the Time of their Grant.
