R948 [ocm]11248137 204996
Remarks upon the London Gazette, relating to the Streights- Fleet and the Battle of Landen in Flanders. THE Penner of this Intelligence has for some time written with such an unusual range of Fancy, as if his Design was rather to Entertain and Amuse, than inform his Reader. To do him Justice, he seems to be not only a Ma∣ster of Style, but of the Matter he treats about; for he makes no difficulty to con∣ceal, displace and perplex Things at Dis∣cretion. So that an ordinary Observer must be oftentimes at a loss to know how the World goes. His peculiar Talent is to lessen a Disadvantage, and make it in∣visible. It may be he appears with this Sanguine Air, because he is unwilling to put us to pain with unacceptable Truths. But how much soever he may be commen∣ded for his Temper, it would in all likely∣hood be better for us if we were plainly dealt with. To skin over a wound before it has been sufficiently probed and laid open, is the way to mortifie the Part, and often Kills instead of Curing. When a Man's Fortune is sinking, he should be made sensible of his Condition; that if he dispairs of stopping the Leak, he may quit the Bottom. The English and Con∣federates have lately received two Blows at Sea and in Flanders; which 'tis fear'd will take some time to Recover. These the Gazetteer runs over so lightly, and describes with such a handsome neglect, as if the Loss, if any, was inconsiderable. That he does not deal clearly with us in this Case, I shall endeavour to shew, by bringing the forementioned Accidents un∣der a short Review. And hee it may not be improper to acquaint the Reader that I intend to keep within the Verge of the Confederacy, and to bring no evidence against the Gazetteer, but what is either drawn from himself, or from some other Authority which he is equally obliged to acknowledge. And if I mention any French Proof, it shall be when it agrees with his own. I shall begin with the Loss of the Streights-Fleet; and here I shall, 1st. Very briefly shew the Gazetteer's Account of this Accident to be perplexed and disagreeing with it self. 2dly. That 'tis imperfect, and far short of Matter of Fact. 1. His Account is dark and inconsistent. His Business here is to let us know the For∣tune of the English. Now had he been disposed to inform us of what had passed, he would (after the List of those which escaped with the Admiral) have imme∣diately mentioned the others which gain∣ed the Ports of Spain, and distinguished the English from the rest. This Account had been easie and intelligible. But his design it seems was not to be understood. To this purpose he gives you the number of those with Admiral Rooke. Then tells you how many were missing; and at last sets down those which were got into Cadiz and St. Lucar, and intermixeth them with Dutch. Danes, &c. and with part of his latter List. And by this confused Rela∣tion, he has conveyed himself out of sight. But upon Inquiry I believe it will appear, he has lost himself as well as his Reader. Let us compare his Lists from Gazette July 17th. His first List contains those English Mer∣chants Ships which were with Admiral Rook. The number of these is sixteen, be∣ginning with the George, and ending with the Fidelity. His second List consists of those English Merchant-Men which were missing; this begins with the Shandois and end with the Mary Flower, and in all makes twenty four Ships. His third Account is of those Ships which escaped into Cadiz and St. Lucar, which though it does not reach the number of what was missing; yet it brings in nine English, seven in Cadiz and two in St. Lu∣car, which were unmentioned in his former Lists. Their names are, The Johanna and Anne, the Success com∣manded by Isaac Stoneham, and therefore dif∣rent from the Success in the missing List. whose Master was David Bishop. The Sarah and Eliz. the Sarah, Mar∣maduke Raydon; the Sarah commanded by Lawson; the John commanded by Ware; the Tetuan Merchant; Captain Cooper his Ship not named; the Malaga Factor, Cap. Newland; and therefore different from
that Ship of the same Name in his second List, which was commanded by Rich. Love. Now where a Man pretends to be particu∣lar in naming the Ships which were safe, and those which are missing. One would think the joyning these two numbers should comprehend the whole Fleet: But besides that he is far short in the summ Total, as will appear by and by. There is an unusual Accident happened to the Computation; for he has brought in nine Merchant-men, seven to Cadiz and two to St. Lucar, which were unmentioned in the former Lists. So that by his account we have nine Sail which were neither safe nor missing, neither in the Enemies Hands nor in their own, which I confess is something extraordinary. I am now in the Second Place to prove his Account far short of matter of Fact. We must go back to his former Lists. The number with Admiral Rooke is six∣teen, the List of those missing is twenty four; so that it seems the whole Fleet of English Merchant Men bound (as himself tells us Gaz. July 17.) to Smirna, Scan∣deroon, Messina, Galipoli, Alicant, Cadiz, St. Lucar, Venice, Tunis, Malaga and Le∣gorne, consisted but of Forty Sail. But this is a great mistake; for 'tis granted by all the Merchants of London (and by many of them too much felt) that the English when they fell in with the French at Lagos Bay, were about Eighty Sail Merchant-Men. This number the Gazetteer ventures to abrigde into Forty, to conceal the Loss of the rest. And here we may observe that the Fleet bound to Smirna consisted of eight Dutch and eleven English; the Dutch were all taken and destroyed at Lgos; and two of the English were then destroy∣ed, and four since at Gibraltar, making a∣bove two thirds of the value of the eleven. The Sussex worth above 50000 l. was like∣wise burnt at Lagos. The Gazetteer owns the Misfortune at Gibraltar (and that at Malaga) but as for the rest he knows not of one English-man taken except the Friend∣ship, a small Vessel of about 70 Tuns. (Gaz. July 17.) This Relation he afterwards re∣peats with more assurance. Of the English (says he) there is not one Ship taken, ei∣ther Man of War or Merchant-man, except a small Vssel called the Friendship. (Gaz. Aug. 3.) Now by this Account one would imagin all was well, but if we observe him a little closer, we shall find he is not so hardy as to affirm that none of the Eng∣lish were burnt or sunk at Lagos Bay. This he durst not say. Now if they are destroy∣ed this way, they are as much lost as if they were taken, though not with the same Advantage to the Enemy: But the Gazetteer hoped to conceal the matter by saying they were not taken. And since the Confederacy is deeply concerned in this Misfortune, I shall just mention the whole from the Dutch Prints. The Recueil Aug. 6th. informs us that the French took two Dutch Men of War, one of 66, the other of 68 Guns, and burnt a rich Pinnace and an English Man of War of 56 Guns. Be∣sides these the French took 25 Merchant-Men, and burnt 45, which in all make 74. All this was done at the Bay of Lagos. The same Intelligence (Recueil Aug. 13.) continues the Narration of this Misfor∣tune, and says, That the Sieur Coetlogon burnt 4 English Smirna Ships and 1 Dutch Man at Gibraltar, and took 7; that Count d' Estree took 4 and burnt some; so that here are 16 more lost, which added to the former number of 74 makes 90, besides those burnt by Count d' Estree. And if the Ships destroyed at Malaga are not in∣cluded, the Misfortune rises still higher. Having shewn what an untoward Ac∣count the Gazetteer has given of the Streights Fleet, I shall now proceed to the late great Battel in Flanders. Here if we enquire of the Gazette July 27. we shall find that the Enemy was beaten back in all their Attempts; And the advantage on the Confederate Side, till four in the Afternoon. This account is contradicted by a Paper Publish'd by Authority, and called, a Re∣lation of the Batle at Landen. For here we are told, that though the Enemy had been beaten at the Left; They had nevertheless kept a part of the Village of Winden, and made themselves Masters of the Hedges on the Rising-Ground, which laid the Flank of our Re∣trenchment open to them, &c. Now, this is a flat contradiction to the Gazette. For if the French kept part of the Village of Winden, and continued Possessed of a considerable Post, through which they broke into the Consederate Army, and
orced them to quit their Camp, as this Re∣lation affirms; then 'tis plain they were not Beaten back in all their Attempts as the Gazette pretends. So that we have two Relations, both Published by Order of the Court, directly clashing in their Narrative: Now he that can swallow con∣tradictions, and believe an Evidence who convicts himself, may be a good Natured Man, but I'm sure can be no Wise one. Farther, Gazette Aug. 3d. Tells us that when the Left-wing went off which stood after the Right was Routed; This Left, says the Gazette, Retreated towards Lewe, without being Attacked by the French; who had already suffered so much that they were willing to part with us. This story is not only Incredible in it self, but plainly con∣tradicted by the Relation of the Battle, &c. which was Printed but a day or two bofore this Gazette, and about a Week after the first News of the Battle; so that there was time enough for a full information? This Print makes no scruple to say, that when the Left-wing were Order'd to re∣tire to Lewe, The Enemy, whose Horse were drawn up in two Lines upon the Ri∣sing-Ground, adventur'd to Attack them in their Retreat. Now what is to be done in this case; Here are two White-Hall Pa∣pers both of them Positive and Perempto∣ry in their Stories, and yet fall foul upon each other. The Relation, &c. Frankly owns that the Confederates were Attacked in their Retreat: The Gazetteer (I sup∣pose) finding this Relation grated a little upon the Peoples Stomachs; tells us very roundly, that the French were willing to part with the Confederates, and let them retire without disturbance. Thus to please the People, the Gazetteer ventures upon a very desperate Expedient. For by con∣tradicting a Paper which stands upon the same Authority with his own, he sinks the Credit of the Court, and brings a suspicion upon what he Writes himself. Well! When two Witnesses disagree in their E∣vidence, we are sure one of them must be in the wrong; and that the Gazetteer is out, will plainly appear, if we confider that when the same Party gives a diffe∣rent Account of any Disadvantage, we may be assured that Relation which makes the Misfortune greatest has most of Truth in it. For as a Man who trades upon Re∣putation, will not Magnifie his Lesses be∣yond Reality for fear of being blown up. So a State Faction which is sunk in its pro∣per Strength, and lives only upon Art, will be sure not to make things worse then they are. So that if at any time their Me∣mories happen to fail them, or they pre∣sume upon the easiness of the Reader, or the greatness of a Misfortune makes them drop a Secret, and disorders them into cont: adictions; we are then to believe that Part of the Account which is least favour∣able to the Reporters, for no Man in his Wits will tell an untruth to his disadvan∣tage. To apply this Remark, we may conclude the Gazetteer a Mis-represen∣ter; and that the Confederates were per∣sued, as the Rlation of the Battle, &c. af∣firms. And that the Relatr gives us the Truth, though not the whole Truth, will appear farther, if we observe, 2. The condition of both Armies, when the Confederates were said to be persued. How things went, I shall describe from the London Gazette and Relation of, &c. above mentioned, which may be both drawn up by the same hand for ought I know. 'Tis certain they both come from White-Hall, and pass the Nation for In∣telligence of equal Authority. The Ga∣zette tells us in these Words: That the French broke into us (i. e. our Camp) at the Head of our Retrenchment, which our Men were no longer able to maintain: That the Enemies Numbers prevailed. — That upon this occasion we were forced to remove and change the Form of our Lines of Horse, who were thereby put into disorder. The English Horse and Guards were sent for from the Let, but before they came up, the Enemy had poured in so many Squadrons, that they had neither Time nor Ground to put themselves into regular Lines. At length when it was found impossible to remedy this disorder, and the Enemy advancing with fresh Forces; The Foot of our Left, as also the Dragoons, &c. were ordered to Retire towards Lewe: The rest of the Army Retreated towards Tirlemont. Thus far the Gazette, the Relation, &c. gives much the same Account, only some∣what plainer. Particularly, It tells us, that the French Cavlry forced the Hanover, Brandenburgh and Spanish Troops to etire;
that is they Beat them. That to remedy this Disorder, part of the Left-wing was Or∣dered to Advance, but befoye they could Form themselves, the Dutch Horse Retired, and the Right-wing were forced to pass the River, and the English were quite Encompassed. And then it follows, That the Left-wing were Order'd to Retire to Lewe, and that the Gene∣ral himself passed the Bridge at Neer-Hespen with great difficulty. And when Matters were come to this pass, when the French had Fought up to the Mouth of the Confederate Cannon, forced their Retrenchments, and broke in∣to a Fortified Camp: When they were Su∣perior in Number, Order and Success, and had Surmounted all the difficulties of the Enterprize: When the Hanover, Bran∣denbourgh, Spanish and Dutch Troops were Beaten; when the last reserve of English had neither Time nor Ground to draw up in, but were encompassed by the Enemy: In fine, when all the Nations were Broken and Routed, the Right-wing forced to fly through a River, and the Left Ordered to shift for themselves: When affairs were in this Posture, does any Person of com∣mon sense imagine the French would not push the Advantage and persue the Con∣federates. Were they too Generous to set upon an Enemy, who was in no condi∣tion to Resist? Had they no inclination to Revenge the loss of their Friends? Were they afraid of making the Victory too Absolute? And of over-loading them∣selves with Glory and Spoil? Few Men one would think, would impose such stuff as this upon the Belief of the Nation. 'Tis true the Gazette was hard set, for all the Publick Accounts having own'd that the French forced the Camp at four in the Af∣ternoon, and that the Confederates were Broken and Ruined from that time. The Gazetter was aware, that allowing a Con∣quering Army four Hours of day to Tram∣ple and Slaughter in; must needs give the People a horrid notion of the Deseat. And therefore to prevent the Impressions of Truth, he denies what had been Publicly own'd before, contradicts the Paper Pub∣lished by Authority, and that with sch wretched incredible Reasons, as can't be put upon Men without the greatest affront to their understandings. I shall go on with the Gazette to com∣pute the Loss of the Battle, which may be reduced to two Heads, the Men and the Baggage and Cannon. 1. With respect to the Men. The first Gazette of July 27th. says, 'tis certain, They have lost double the Number of Men we have. The Gazette of Aug. 3d. is still more hardy, and tells us that 'tis certain, That our Loss is not not so great as that at Steenkerk; and that the French according to their own Account had lost more than double the Number. One would think by this Re∣lation the French had Printed an Account of their Loss; but upon Enquiry we shall find no such Matter: For this very Gazette has the ill luck to tells us in the Paris Ar∣ticle of Aug. 2d. that the List of the Kil∣led and Wounded is not yet made Public. What does the Gazetteer mean then by their own Account? Why, he will inform you in another part of his Works. The Gazett, July 31st. is clear in the Point. For there a nameless Captain who came Express about his own business, who neither saw the Fight himself, nor pre∣tends to be informed by any who did. There this Gent. affirms that the Relation that was Printed at Lile (in Handers) the Sunday after the Fight, owns they have lost 16000 Men. Very well! I'm afraid this Relation will miscarry for want of a little Geography: For the Battle being fought upon the 29th. of July, N. S. the Sunday after falls upon the 2d. of Aug. At which very day the London Gazetteer has the Misfortune to tell us, that Then there was no List of the Killed or Wounded, Published at Paris. And can we imagin there should be a List Printed at Lie when there was none at Paris. Durst any Subject in Flnders Publish an Account of so great a Battle, without Authority and Instructions from the Court of France? Does any Govern∣ment, much less the French allow so wild a Liberty as this? And as for the French King's leave, it could not be sent at the time the Capt. pretends. For the London Gazette Aug. 31. says, that M. D' Artagnan Arrived at Paris upon the 31. at night N. S. with the News of the Battle. By this Ac∣count the Journey from the Camp to Pa∣ris, which we may imagine, was made with speed, cost the Express 2 Nights and 2 Days, i. e. from Wednesday at Night till
Fryday at Night, for that was the 31. Now if the Court had been at Paris, and a dis∣patch immediately sent to the Governor of Lille to Publish the News; there would remain but 1 Day and 2 Summers Nights to perform the Journey and Print the Nar∣rative; for from Friday at Night to Sunday is no longer, which makes the story impos∣sible. Thus far the London Gazette, but by that of Paris, Aug. 8. We are assured that Mr. D' Artagnan did not Arrive at the French Court, which was then at Marli till Aug. 1. which if there is any degrees in impossibilities, makes the Relation still more incomprehensible. Besides, to what purpose was this Romantic haste? To none that I know of, except to oblige the Lille Men with a favour which it seems the Parisians were not vouchsafed, and to fur∣nish out the Gazetteers Capt. for his Voy∣age to England. To proceed, the Gazette July 31. says, We are assured that our Loss does not exceed 9 or 10000 Men, including the Prisoners and Wounded. The Relation of the Battle, &c. which came out a day or two after seem; to have none of the Gazettes Assurance, but tells us, That our Forces be∣ing not yet all of them come together, we can't give a certain Account what Loss we have had. The Gazette Aug. 3. says the same thing, adding withal, this Remarkable Passage; That 'tis certain our Loss is not so great as that at Steenkerk; which according to the last Years Gazettes, did not amount to 3000 Men. Gazette Aug. 4. 1692. This is still more Mystical, therefore we must try if we can inform our selves other ways. Now, in order to the satisfying this Question. We must, 1. Know how strong the Confederates were before the Battle: How far they are, or expect to be Reinforced, and to what Number the Army will amount after the Reinforcement. These 3 things will give us a true State of the Loss. Now the Ga∣zette Aug. 3. confesses, the Army when they fought, to be about 45000; which Expression ought rather to be interpreted above the Letter then otherwise; it being the interest of the Gazetteer after a De∣feat, to diminish the Confederate Forces. However we will be fo fair as to take him at his acknowledged Number of 45000. The 2d. thing to be enquired, is the Number of the Recruits, which we may learn from the Gazette of July 27. in these words, Our Army will be speedily Reinforced with 25 Battalions, and 40 Squadrons, are with the Duke of Wittenbergh; be, which there are 30 Battalions at Leige. The Gazetteer must mean that the Battalions at Leige were to make part of the Rein∣forcement, otherwise to which purpose were they mentioned? If this were not his mean∣ing, he might as well have said, besides, the Reinforcements, which we expect from the D. of Wittenbergh; there are 30 Dutch Battalions in New Battavia in the East-Indies; which though true, would be hor∣ribly impertinent. We may observe far∣ther, that these Forces the Gazette menti∣ons at Leige, were not long since Detached thither; Ten Battalions being sent but 8 days before the Fight. (Relation of the Bat∣tle, &c.) 'Tis no wonder therefore, if they should be drawn back after so great an Ac∣cident. And if this point were not suffici∣ently proved, Mr. Dyckvelt's Letter to the States General would put it beyond Dis∣pute. This Gent. who had a Public Cha∣racted in the Dutch Army, gives his Ma∣sters a short Account of the Action in a Let∣ter of July 30, which is inserted in the Slip of Aug 4. At the end of the Letter we have these words. Our Army will be very Numerous in a short time; for besides 25 Ba∣talions and 40 Squadrons, with which the D. of Wittenberg Forced the Lines, there are morecover 30 Battalions at Leige. Taking therefore these Leige-Battali∣ons into the Reinforcement, as we Evident∣ly must; let us see what it will amount to. There are 25 and 30 Battalions, which make 55. Now reckoning 500 to a Bat∣talion which is no extraordinary computa∣tion, and the Number will be 27500 Men. Add to these the 40 Squadrons of Horse at 150 in a Squadren, and the Cavaly makes 6000; which added to the former mounts the Reinforcement to 33500. If you please we will cut off 6500 of this Num∣ber, and State the Recruits but at 27000, and then the Reckoning will be made upon a ow Foot. Having done this, let us see how Numerous the Confederates will be after the Reinforcement. For satisfaction in this Enquiry, I shall as formerly apply to the London Gazette. That of Aug. 3: Affirms tht the Confederates after the D. of Witerberg, &c. has joyned them, will have an Army of 50000 Men. Let us
cast up the whole, The Confederates were 45000 before the Fight: They have, and expect a Reinforcement of 27000, which added to the other, makes 72000. After which Reinforcement, they pretend no higher then 50000 Men. Now if we substract 50 out of 72 there remains 22, which Num∣ber contains the Loss of the Confederates. So that even by the Gazetteers Reckoning the Battle has cost the Confederates 22000 Men. This Account agrees with several Letters of good Intelligence from Flan∣ders, and with the Paris Gazette which mentions the Killed and Wounded to amount to above 20000. To this the Recuil a Dutch Print. Aug. 13. adds 1500 Prisoners, of which 200 are Officers of note. I mention the Paris Gazette, because it concurs with our Gazetteer. Besides, this Gazette is a Paper of Reputation, & is more relied on, even in the Confederacy itself than that of London. To give one instance, We may remember the last Summer, that the Paris Gazette gave us as fair an Ac∣count of their Loss at Sea, as we received at Home from Admiral Russel's Journal; as may be seen by comparing the two Papers. Now those who give a just Relation of their Misfortunes, can't in reason be suspected of Art when they Report any remarkable Suc∣cess. In such cases there is scarce any temp∣tation to strain Truth, for the naked repre∣sentation of Fact is a sufficient Advantage. Indeed great Kings scorn to Embase their public Intelligence with such uncreditable Alloy. For in soft Language, to deceive and mis-represent, to Maim and Murther Truth, are mean and inglorious Practices. I wonder any thing that pretends to be a Government, can stoop so low. But we gain'd so much by Romancing in 88, that I'm afraid we shall never leave it. Then the French League and the Impostor-Prince, & the handful of Irish, who after they were routed and disbanded, were to Massacre the whole Nation, English and Dutch Armies, and all: These ad a great many other Bull-beggers worked beyond expectation in that Annus Mirabilis. But if they think to keep the People under the same Vassa∣lage of belief, and always ready to swallow the same absurdities, I hope they may be mistaken. To return to our Gazetteer, some of whose scattered Sentences being tacked together, we see make it evident, that the Confederates have Lost above 20000 Men. However, the Gazetteer gives us to understand, that 'tis certain our Loss is not so great as that at Steenkerk. Did we then in earnest loose 20000 Men at Steen∣kerk, and could we not find in our Hearts to own above 3000? This is a discovery would never have come out, had it not been upon this occasion. In short, either our Loss was greater at Steenkerk then in the late Battle, or it was not; If it was, then we may perceive what an exact History we had of that Action the last Year, if it was not, then this Summers Gazette endeavours to impose very unfairly upon the Nation. Now tho 'tis pretty plain, the London Ga∣zties did not give us much above a third part of the Steenkerk-Misfortune, yet it was in reality far short of the present Accident. For I desire to know of the Gazetteer, whe∣ther more then one third of the Army was Engaged at Steenkerk? Did the Confede∣rates then loose their Cannon and great part of their Baggage? Was the Generals Plate taken at Steenkerk, and his Tent left the D. of Luxemburg to write his Letters in? Did the whole Army go off Routed and broken into little Bodies at Steen∣kerk; or did Mr. Harcourt come in and Defeat several Thousands in their Retreat? But after all, 'Tis certain the French have Lost double the Number we have. Gazette, Aug. 27. Pray how is this certain? Did we remain upon the Field to count the Slain? No, we were forced to retire. Have we Mustered since the Battle? We don't pretend to this neither. I suppose because Our Forces are not all of them come together. (Relation of the Battle, &c.) Have we received an Account from the French? That cannot be; for this Gazetteer (Aug. 3.) tells you, They have Published none: And the Paris Gazette says the same. How then, are We certain. No doubt by Inflinct, as we are certain of every Thing else. For I perceive the Gazetteer does not pretend to come by his knowledge the same way with other Mortals. Most People I believe would be so far from thinking the Gazet∣teers Relation Certain; that they would scarce imagin it possible. Indeed how should it? For the French were granted to be almost two to one. This gives them the Advantage of Fighting fresh Men, against those who were fatigued. Farther, they
forced the Camp, and had 3 or 4 almost unresisting hours to Slaughter in. And to compleat the Misfortune of the Confede∣rates, several Thousands of them were set upon, and Persued into a River, by a fresh Enemy. (Recueil Aug. 13.) I shall now in the Second place examin the Gazetteers Re∣lation concerning the Cannon and Bag∣gage, &c. and here the first Gaz. Jul. 27. says nothing of the matter, which is a plain confession that all was lost (and thus we must construe the Gazette in like cases.) The Gazetteer was apprehensive of this In∣ference, and therefore in his next of July 31. he brings in his Captain who secures all into a Trisle. And since he has put this Captain upon the Nation for an In∣telligencer, he must be answerable for him. Now this Gent. assures us, That we have lost none of our great Cannon, but only 7 or 8 Field Pieces. I confess this looks so like a Jest to all Men who can distinguish be∣tween a Cannon and a Pistol; that I was sometime before I could believe the Ga∣zetteer would put it upon us. I could not at first imagin he would give his Pass to such a ridiculous Story to travel the Na∣tion: I was willing for the Credit of the Gazette to suppose an Error in the Press; and that instead of we have lost none of our great Cannon, &c. it should have been said, we have saved none of out great Cannon, but 7 or 8 Field-Pieces. That this was the true Reading I thought I had reason to conclude, both from particular Relations of this Circumstance, and from the general Issue of the Battle. However considering the Gazetteers custom, I believe the Print may be much more correct then the Story. Let us examin which way the Cannon could be saved; to bring the point to a short issue. If the Artillery was saved, it must be sent off either before, in, or after the Fight. That it was not sent away be∣fore the Fight is unquestionable; for would the Confederates part with their Cannon, when the French were in sight; when they expected an immediate Attack, and design'd to keep within their Intrench∣ments? Would they unfortify their Camp, and lay themselves open to the Enemy? We may as well suppose they would send away their Pikes and Musquets as their Cannon upon such an occasion. Farther, to suppose the Artillery sent away during the Fight is as unaccountable as the former Scheme. For can we suppose they would part with their principal Defence at the time they were using it? We may as well imagin they detatch'd half their Men, and chose to Fight with the Remainder. From hence it appears, that unless the Cannon was saved in the Retreat, we must give it for lost, Now I appeal to any one of common Sence whether this was not im∣possible, when the defeat was so entire, and the flight made with such haste and precipitation? Could the Horse lodge the Artillery in their Holsters, or did the Foot run away with it under their Armes, as St. Dennis is said to carry off his Head? I desire not to be misunderstood, I am far from being pleased with the Misfortune of any Party; I lament the loss of the English, and heartily wish we might have Peace and Justice, without the Expence of an ounce of Blood; but such a Reporter as the Ga∣zetteer cannot be too much expos'd. To be short the Loss was so visible that the Dutch despairing to hide it, have frankly owned a great part of it in their Rcucil of Aug. 10. where we are told, That after the Camp was forced, the French took 60 Pieces of Cannon, and cut off 8 or 10 English Bat∣talions who were posted to Guard it. And their next Recucil Aug. 13. owns the loo∣sing of some Mortars. 'Tis now time to look after the Baggage if there is any. The Gazette Aug. 31. assures us it was all saved, being sent away the day before the Fight. Under-favour, not all sent away, for no doubt they left Ammunition to fight with; they left Provision and their Tents too, unless they intended never to eat or lodge there more. Now to put their Men, after they were fatigued with fight∣ing and embarrassed with the Wounded, upon a March of several Miles for Lodging and Refreshment, is a strain of Discipline somewhat extraordinary. I think the Ga∣zetteer is too free with the Confederates, for as he represents the matter, they seemed to despair at the approach of the Enemy, and resolved before hand to quit their Camp. But to say this is Injustice to the Confederates, who behaved themselves with Bravery and Resolution, and were far from making such an ignoble Provision as the Gazetteer's Account supposes.
This Relation, together with that of Count Tilly's taking the French Baggage, 60 Pieces of Cannon, &c. was so superla∣tively Extravagant, that I thought i had been calculated only for the Meridian of England; and that the Gazetteer would never have sent it beyond Sea in his French Translation; but upon Enquiry I find he has courage in all Languages. I suppose he might present the Allies with this Narra∣tive by way of Triumph, to shew to what degree we may be practised upon, and how far he is Master of our Understandings. But if we are thus far out of our Wits, he does unkindly to expose us in Foreign Countries, especially considering from what Qarter the Distemper began. Upon this occasion it may not be improper to observe one surprising Passage from the Relation of the Battel, &c. This Relator does not stick to affirm, That we have lost some Standards and taken as many. Taken as many! That considering the Event of the Day seems very strange; pray let us hear the Holland Prints in this Matter, for the Dutch are both well planted for Information, and without doubt inclined to do Right to their Allies and themselves; we have no reason therefore to suspect their Testimony to their own Disadvantage. Now they (Re∣ccil. Aug. 13.) are so candid as to ac∣knowledge that the Confederates had ta∣ken but 7 Standards and Colours, and lost above 80. The whole is thus, In the be∣ginning of the Day, the Confederates are said to have taken about 26 Standards, &c. (which tho far short of the number posses∣sed by the Enemy) yet even these were all regained to the 7 abovenamed. And af∣ter they were lost, to what purpose should they be mentioned? This was so mean an Equivoation that the Holland Print was ashamed to use it. However it is the only shelter to which the Eaglish Relater can pretend; and thus we have taken as many Standards as we lost! That the Dutch should have so much more Modesty then we have! Into what declensions of Honour and Conscience are we fallen! Thus I have shewn what an Excellent Account of Fact we are likely to receive from the London-Intelligencers; I have shew in what ma∣terial Points the Relation, &c. and the Ga∣zetteer clash with each other, how the lat∣ter contradicts himself and the Confede∣rate Prints abroad, how he turns Defeats into a kind of Victory, charges through Impossibilities, and even exceeds the Li∣berties of a Romance. These are blessed Memoirs to transcribe into History: Truth must be handed to Posterity in a noble Light at this rate, and the Chronicle ob∣liged for ever. And if he treats us in this manner just at home, what Discoveries may we not expect from more distant Pla∣ces? What admirable returns of News must we make from the East and West In∣dies, from Mosco and Constantinople? And can any English Man see his Country thus used without Resentment? Is it not enough to have our Ships burnt and taken to a prodigious value, to loose our Trade by Sea and our Armies by Land, without be∣ing Banter'd into the Bargain? To bear us down that all these Accidents are insigni∣ficant, is like cutting a Mans Throat, and then swearing to him he ails nothing? To imagin such wretched Stories as these will pass Muster; is to treat the Nation with the utmost Scorn and Contempt, and in effect to proclaim them Fools in Print. One would think the Gazetteer might have moved within a more moderate com∣pass: Had he only flourish'd an Advan∣tage and lessen'd a Misfortune: Had he called running away, Retiring, and broke, the loss by the Softness and Distance of his Style, this had not been so surprising; such stroaks of Breeding and Rhetoric are ex∣pected from him. arther, Had he publish'd the gaining a Penny, and concealed the loss of a Pound: Had his Expression been per∣plex'd upon occasion, and his Meaning my∣stical and two handed. This freedom might have been in some measure charg'd upon the present Service, and pleaded off by the privilege of an Heathen Oracle. But to make us believe we have no Sences; to run a Tilt at notorious Fact, and at∣tempt the extinguishing the Sun, is too much in all Conscience. I thought this Gent. had finished the Battle by his intermitting Gazette of Aug. 7. But I perceive I am mistaken, for Aug. 10. he invokes his Muse a fresh, and runs a great length of Poetry. I hope the Key I have given to interpet his flights, will make him better understood, and more ad∣mired for the future. As for the other little News-Papers, they are below Notice, I shall therefore dismiss the Argument. Aug. 1693. THE END.
