S2193 [ocm]12180338 197234
THE SEA-MANS PROTESTATION Renewed, Confirmed, and Enlarged. THE FIRST, Concerning their Ebbing and Flowing to and from the Parliament House at Westmin∣ster, the 11th of Ianuary 1642. THE LATTER, As the Cause and Matters, now stand. ORdered againe, by the Vice-Admirall, to bee published and set forth thoroughout the whole Kingdome, as a manifestation of the Seamans Loyalty to their King, and love to their Country. LONDON, Printed for H. H. 1643.
The Seamans Protestation. OVr appearance above the Bridge, being a passage the Histories of England cannot exemplifie, may cause our good intents and well meaning, in the various apprehen∣sions of most men to be misconstrued: For the speedier and more exact remedie of which, we have all resolved at length thus to declare our-selves. FIrst, as in dutie we ought, VVe Protest to our great Lord and Master (his most Ex∣cellent Maiesty) That it was an act of our owne free voluntary disposition, not all, or any of us called or invited by the Parliament or Citizens of London, but came as well to protect White-hall, had his Majesty beene there, as the Parliament house: but a tumour being spread amongst us that that great Court was in fear to be dissovled, and knowing too well the happines of this Kingdome consists in their Sessions; re∣membring the words of Arch-bishop Cranmer, a Martyr of ever blessed memory, which were; VVo be to England when there is no Parliament. We seeing and heareing the whole City to be in compleat arms, presently turned freshwater soldiers, and with as sudden expedition as we could, attended by water their progresse thither, and joyned our thunder of powder with the City Muskets, at their entrance into the House (the
Temple of our safety) to the terrour we hope of all Papists, and the Lands Enemies, who wish for nothing more then the dissolation of both houses, Whose harmony (if they proeed) will be to our perpetuall good, and their sudden Confusion. We who are alwayes abroad, can best tell no goverment upon the Earth is comparable to it; specially, for the keeping of a Crown upon a Kings head, for the procuration of the Subjects Loyalty, and unigned fidelity to their Mo∣narch, for the flourishing of Traffique and Mar∣chandizing (this Kingdoms right-hand) the con∣tinuation of all, which is, was, and necessarily must be by Parliaments. Witnesse the heavie and lamentable distracti∣ons in France, Spain, and Germanie for want of them or the like Goverment. Long therefore may they here flourish: In vain is it for us to keepe the narrow Seas, if some go the way to lose the Land. This confusion is that alone which glads the hearts of our Ene∣mies abroad, and makes them fat with laughter: while we sit and sit, but effect nothing: Yet al∣though the Conception is long, the birth will be the nobler, and that which Rome with all her curses shall not blast, we meane, the firm esta∣blishing of our Protestant Religion: in defence of which chiefly, we display our Colours on the seas, and expose each drop of bloud we have, to hourly danger; and all in behalfe of our good and most gracious King, who is himselfe the De∣fender of our Faith.
Now to the City we manifest our selves, and the occasion of our conflux, although we are a sort of people in this Commonwealth, which by the Preciser sort of you, are defined but lit∣tle different from Atheists; and therefore should breede more wonder we should stickle for Reli∣gion Be pleae to undestand although we have no Churches, we make our prayers as well as you, and the sam God you have at shore is ours at sea: whom we wil serve although not so decently as we would, being for the most part of our daies restrained from a Church, to dwell upon the seas for your better security; for be it well knowne to you, yur safety consists in ours, youre churches yea and your houses too, would quickly fall and lie in the dust, should we let passe Those who long to prey upon your lives and Fortunes. But for our Religion, King, and Country, (we do and will advance our Colours against the world: and for a Confermation to you all of our true hearts, we have all Protested in this manner. I A, B, C, DO Protest before Almighty God, to main∣tain with my dearest life and blood, the Protestant Religion as it was established in the dayes of Queen Elizabeth: To acknowledge CHARLES, by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland: To stand, for the Priviledges of Parliament. Utterly form my heart to abhor all Poperie, and Popish inno∣vations. So help me God.
NOw it may appear to you all, the main and chiefest cause of our gathering together, we who are used to tempests at sea never stood in fear of a greater then this at Land; That great vessell the Parliament house, which is so richly fraught with no lesse value then the price of a King∣dome, is fearfully shaken, and in great danger: Rome has Rocks, and Spaine hath Quick-sands, to swallow her up; Now what remaines, but that on our knees we send up our prayers to that great Pilot of Heaven and Earth, who steers the world with his Finger, that he would protect and defend her, to his owne glory and our com∣fort: so shall our King be safe and Firm in his Throne, while his Religion flourishes, and his Subjects peacefully and joyfully live smiling under his Scepter, To the Eternall disgrace and shame of those, who have and would intend to subvert our proceedings. Thus much the former Protestation Now followeth the Continuation, confirmation, and augmentation of the same. AS there are aboundance of Land Malig∣nants in and about London and elswhere; that is, malevolent or evill minded persons, to the proceeding of the most high and honourable Court of Parliament, which apears by their fre∣quent breathing and fomenting forth false and scandalous words and Languages of and against the Parliament; so we are not ignorant that there a generarion of sea-men or saylors that (not for
want of malice) are Malignants also in their ac∣tions and vapouring discourses; but what are they, for the most part? but debauched persons, drunkards, swearers &c. And Wapping as well as Westminster is not without the infection of some such men: Yea and divers women as well as men (that not for want of ignorance) are Malignants also and will take upon them ft soons to be pra∣ting and prattling against the proceedings of Parl. but best of it is, womens tongues are their best & worst weapons. And to return to sea-men, blessed be God, the major and better sort of us are not like salt that hath lost its savour, but we having learnt to feare God and obey the King, we will Protest before almightie God, our former reci∣ted protestation: and now the Kingdom is invol∣ved in a civill War, & a mighty Army of Papists (and Atheists) contrary to the Knowne Lawes of the Land are in Arms against the Parliament, if they could, to destroy the fame, and so trample the Common Laws and the Commons of Eng∣land under foot, and to make us all slaves in our Religion imunities and priviledges, It behoues us that are sea men, to bestir us and looke about us the better, and the rather because we, and who but we, are to manage the Navy of Shipps, which are and ever have beene accompted the brazen VValles of this Kingdome, against all Forraine invasion, witnesse our memorable and never to be forgotten defeating the (falfly tearmed) Invin∣cible Armado in 8 which was in the blessed, hap∣pie, and haleluyon days and raign of our Deborah, the Nurse of our English Israel, Queen Elisabeth
of immortall Memory which victory was to god alone against the potent Monarch Phillip the se∣cond King of Spaine. And verily it is a pregnant argument to us that sea-men are as ready to doe service as ever, the willing and voluntary resorting of so many of us unto the Nauy now at sea under the comand of the right honourable and most noble Robert Earl of Warwick Lord Gen. of the Sea forces for the King and Parliament, whom we beseech God pre∣serve and protect for the good of our Faerie land. And for those Arch-Pyrates that have taken upon them to come in opposition to our great Navie, to have and rob his Majesties good Sub∣jects of their shippes and goods, and for that end (as is said) they have taken Falmouth Haven in Cornwall, which with roaving and robberies they make a kind of Algier. We hope in due time we shall meete with them, and bring them to their deserved and condigne reward at Wapping Dock. In the meane time unanimously joyn with all true hearted Land-men, especially the ho∣norable City of London, to pray for the hapy pro∣ceedings of the Amies as well by land as sea that are in Armes for King and Parliame, against all our Enemyes as well domestike as fortain, and for our parts, let them nor theirs prosper, that will not say to the same with us, AMEN. FINIS.
