513 816.m.9[22] R215622 99884511 185229
By the Maior. The Order of the House of Commons to the Lord Maior, for the due observing the Sabbath day. IT is this day ordered by the House of Commons, that the Aldermen and Ci∣tizens that serve for the Citie of London, shall intimate to the Lord Major, from this House, that the Statutes, for the due observing of the Sab∣bath be put in execution. And it is further ordered that the like intimation from this House be made to the Iustices of Peace in all the Counties of England and Wales. And the Knights of the Shire of the severall Counties are to take care that Copies of this Order be accordingly sent to the Iustices of Peace in the seve∣rall Counties. FOrasmuch as the Lords Day commonly called Sunday is of late much bro∣ken and profaned by a disorderly sort of people in frequenting Taverns, Ale∣houses, and the like, and putting to sale victuall and other things, and exercising unlawfull games and pastimes, to the great dishonour of God, and reproach of Religion, whereof the House of Commons now assembled hath beene pleased to take notice, and by their order, intimation hath been given unto mee, that the Statutes for the due observing of the Sabbath be put in execution. These are therefore in his Majesties name to will and require you forthwith, upon the sight hereof, that you give strict charge and command unto all and every the Church-wardens and Constables within your Ward, that from henceforth they doe not permit or suffer any person or persons, in the time of divine service or at any other time upon the Sunday, to be drinking or playing in anie Tavern, Inne, Tobacco shop, Alehouse or other victualling house whatsoever, nor suf∣fer any Fruiterer, Milkewomen, or Hearbwomen to stand with fruit, milk, herbs, or any other victuall or wares, in any the streets, lanes, or allies within your ward, or any other wayes to put those things or any other to sale upon the Sun∣day at any time of the day or in the evening, nor to permit or suffer any per∣son or persons to use or exercise upon that day any unlawfull exercises and past∣times within your ward, and that expresse charge be given to every keeper of any Tavern, Inne, Cookshouse, Tobaccohouse, Alehouse, or any other Tipler or victualler whatsoever within your ward, that hereafter they receive not or suffer to remaine any person or persons whatsoever as their guests or customers to tip∣ple eat drinke or take Tobacco in their houses upon any Sunday, other then that Inholders may receive their ordinary guests, or travelers and such like, who come to remain for a time in their Inne for dispatch of their necessary businesse. And if any person or persons shall be found offending in the premisses that then they be brought before me the Lord Major, or some other of his Majesties Justices of Peace, to the end they may receive such punishment as to Justice shall appertain. And hereof not to fail as you will answer the contrary at your perill. This thir∣teenth of April, 1641. Mitchel.
