10882 99849469 14618
❧ A Discourse vpon Chyrurgery: Written by that famous Doctor and Knight, Signior Leonardo Phiorauanti, Bolognese. VVith a declaration of many wonder∣full matters necessary to be knowne; with most notable secrets found one by the said Authour. Translated out of Jtalian by Iohn Hester, and now newly published and augmented, for the benefite of this Country: By Richard Booth, Gent. LONDON, Printed by EDWARD ALLDE dwelling neere vnto Chirst-Church. 1626.
To the gentle Reader. HEalth, hath not vndeseruedly ob∣tained in the wisest mens opinions, the highest place amongst earthly blessings, without the which the most delightfull dainties are but vnsauery, the richest ornaments burthensome, & the whole time of our life semeth tedious: For the preseruation and restauration of which vnualuable benefit, the Lord in his wisedome and mercy hath prouided diuersity of meanes and variety of reme∣dies: as also hath endowed man with the know∣ledge of those meanes, wherby his present strength might be maintained & his ruind health repaired: in the laying open of which soueraign seueral me∣dicines to the publique eye of the world, many learned famous men haue expended many houres and much study, in so much as it may seeme to some as friuolous and fruitlesse an enterprise, as to cast water into the Ocean; notwithstanding, tra∣uelling with the same desire of many of my pre∣decessours, and recollecting into my minde that antient and approued saying of Cicero, that We are not onely borne vnto our selues, I did study and endea∣uour to find out somthing in which I might make a liuely expression of my intire loue & sincere affe∣ctiō to this my natiue Country & you my Coun∣trie-men: & in my earnest enquirie and diligent scrutiny, I could find nothing in my iudgement
more conducing to a publique benefit then publi∣shing of this compendious and briefe treatise of Chyrurgerie, first compiled by a Knight of no small fame and a Doctor of Phisicke, by name Sig∣nior Leonardo Phiorauanti; which was translated out of the Italian by Iohn Hester of Lōdon an expert Di∣stillator, and by my care newly augmented: I haue taken the paines, doe thou accept of the profite, and let thy harnest succeede my seed-time, the which must of necessity be plentifull, if thou with care perusest this booke, and putrest the precepts contained in it into practise. For howsoeuer I might be iustly branded with the ignominy of a selfe conceite & foolish Philautie, if I should com∣mend my owne care or pains, yet thus much I date cōfidētly auerre that in this little book thou maist with much ease & facility, discouer many precious preseruatiues against sicknes, as many restoratiues for health as euer hertofore thou hast vnderstood: here also be those secrets & misteries in nature dis∣closed, which for a time haue laide raked vp in the ashes of ignorance, & haue bin altogether obscu∣red & hid from the eye of knowledge: neither are these rules of Phisick & Chyrurgery bare likely∣hoods & suppositions, but such as haue bin appro∣ued & confirmed by long experience: the way that leads to health is chalked out and made plaine by the Author, thy care onely remains to walke in it: which blessed period if thou attainest vnto, as thou hast the good, so let God haue the glory, neither be altogether vnmindful of the Authors painfull care. Thine as his owne, RICHARD BOOTH.
HOW THAT OVR PHISICKE AND CHYRVRGERIE IS better, then that, the which the Ancients haue commonly vsed. I Here is no doubt, but that our new Phisicke and Chyrurgerie, is better then that, the which the Ancients haue vsed: because it helpeth the sicke with more case and spéede, and much more safer: and to shew the truth, the Ancients had neuer knowledge of our Dia Aromatico, nor of Electua∣rio Angelica, nor of our Pillole Aquilone, nor did not make our Siropo solutiuo, nor yet our Magno licore, with a number of other medicines found out by me, the which are written in the ende of this booke, with the which I haue done wonderfull cures, as thou maist read in my Thesoro de la vita humana, and truely most necessary for all professours of this Arts, because therein thou shalt stude so many goodly experiences, and it would cause the world to wonder thereat. But to turne to our pur∣pose: I say that the Ancients the which had not know∣ledge of the true Phisicke, and Chyrurgerie, as by the experience thou maist sée, I say not this to speake euill of those wise ancients Doctors, that were inuentors thereof, but I say it to say the truth, and many shall be my testimony of this truth. Because in many Coun∣tries, where our workes that are Imprinted are come, they begin to practise after our order. And this or∣der of curing, I repute it not to my science, but a worke
that God would real vnto the world, through my meanes, and to shew the truth, there hath béene none that hath found the medicines for wounds with so much ease and breuitie as I haue done. Who hath euer found the true Remedie for the Goute, for the Quartain, for Fluxez, and all sorts of Feuers, as I haue done? or what is he that euer brought the whole Art of Phisicke & Chyrurgerie into eight sinall Volumes as I haue done? What is he that euer writ of the Pestilence, and of his qualities and remedies and orders to be vsed in the same, as I haue done? And if there be any that doth not credite me, let them make ex∣perience of all that I haue said, and I promise you and sweare as I am a true Knight, they shall finde more truth then I wil write at this time, being as I haue said, a worke giuen of God, for a vniuersall benefit of all the world: and forasmuch I exhort euery one of the Profes∣sors of Phisicke and Chyrurgerie, to follow this our truth, because they are of so great experience, that it sée∣meth miraculous vnto man, as I haue same many years ages, to my great honour, and satisfaction of the people of the world. And thus doing and working, thou shalt come to know that our Phisicke and Chyrurgerie is more better and wholesome, then that which hath beene vsed of the Ancients vntill this present time. Certaine remedies, for all Captaines and Souldiers that trauell either by water or by land. THere are thrée infirmities, that offend the Soul∣diers in the Campe aboue all the rest, the which are these, Feuers Wounds, and Fluxes of the body, the which thou maist helpe in this manner following, with these medicines, that is with our Quintessence of wine, our Balsamo, Magno licore, Quintessence solutiua, and
Specie Imperiale, and the order to vse them is thus. When any of them hath a Feuer or a flux, then presently when the desease beginneth, let him blood in one of the two vaines vnder the tongue, cutting it ouerthwart, and this thou shalt doe in the euening, then the next morning take a dose of our Imperiall powder mixt with wine, & this you may doe without any dyet or straight order, that being done, giue him thrée mornings together, halfe an ounce of our Quintessence solutiue with broth. But if it be a Flux, and that the Patient is not cured, let him stand in a cold bath of salt water of the sea thrée or foure houres or more, and he shall be perfectly helped. Then as concerning wounds, as well cuts as thrusts, and as well gallings with arrowes, as hargabush shot, and other sorts, thou shalt cure them thus. The first thing that you shall doe to them, is to wash them very cleane with vrine, and then dry them well, then put therein our Quintessence of wine, and presently ioyne the parts together, and sowe or stitch them close, then put there vpon fiue or six droppes of our Balsamo, and vpon the wound lay a cloth wet in our Magno licore, as hot as hee may suffer it, and this you shall doe the first day: Then the next day follow this order: First put thereon our Quintessence, and a little of our Balsamo, and then our Magno licore very hot, and neuer change that medi∣cine, and thus doing, the wound shall heale with great spéed, and in a quarter of the time, that the com∣mon Chyrurgions is able to doe it, by the grace of God.
A short Discourse of the most excellent Do∣ctour and Knight, Master Leonardo Phiorauanti, Bolognesse, vpon Chirurgerie; With a declaration of ma∣ny things necessary to be knowne: neuer written before in this order. Whereunto is added a number of notable Secrets found out by the said Author. The Proheme. IT is to be vnderstood, that when the Al∣mghtie Creator had made the world, hee also created all manner of beasts, as well on earth as in the water, with other foules, after which saith the holy Scripture, he created man after his owne Image and similitude, and to him gaue power ouer all things created, and with the same grace and reason. Through the which he was apte to rule and haue knowledge of all through the spirit of God, as to haue knowledge of all things whereunto he gaue his minde and vnderstanding, as it is at this pre∣sent to be séene among men in the world, that haue knowledge of diuers and sundrie things, all necessarie for those that will line in the world with honour: For some vnderstand the art of husbandry, which was the first art vsed in the world, for so much as without it we cannot well liue as it is plainely séene. There are other that haue knowledge in kéeping beasts of all kinds apt or méete for mans body, as Goats, Kyne, Hogges, Hens, Géese, Horse, Mules, and such like. There are other haue knowledge in Nauigation, without the which also the world would be vnperset, as it is seene
by experience. There be other that haue knowledge in Gosmographie, whereby they knw  parts of the world whether men may trauaile. There be other that haue knowledge in the art of  they may helpe to defend their Prince and Countries, in execu∣ting of Iustice. There be other that vnderstand Astrolo∣gie, by the which they know the course of the Planets and their effects. Other vnderstand the Mathematicks, whereby they measure land and other things: Other studie Musicke, to accord voyces together, and other vnderstand Phisicke, to helpe the deseased bodies of hu∣mane creatures, and also animales of diuers and sun∣drie infirmities. There be other that vnderstand Chy∣rurgerie, to helpe all manner of fozes that happen vnto men: vpon which Chirurgerie, wee will write a briefe discourse and pleasant reason, and will leaue apart the science that is doubtfull, because there is no science in the world wherewith a man may doe good if therewith be no practise or experience, as a man may say: The which experience is master of all things, as it is plaine∣ly séene, and therefore we will give you to vnderstand which of those parts be best or most necessary in this Chirurgerie, either to helpe those that are hurt, or the science, or experience. And we will show the méers truth without any dissimulation or fraude, as I haue alwayes done in my workes which are Printed,  at this present doe intend to doe, if almightie God giue me grace, and quicken my spirits or wits in writing that which shall be to his honour, and prte to the world.
What Chyrurgerie is. CHYRVRGERIE is both a Science and practise, and to say the truth, he that will know the composition of mans body, must of necessitie haue some science, and be Anatomist, although the same Science be a thing to be learned by practise, for I haue séene ma∣ny times those which were vnlearned to be expert in the Anatomie of mans body, and those were Painters and Drawers, the which was necessarie for them to know to frame their figures accordingly: and therefore I take not that for Science but practise, for Science is onely that wherewith the cause of euery infirmitie is found out, and is of small effect to our purpose, because Chy∣rurgerie helpeth not onely the cause, but also the effect after it is knowne, and therefore I may say that Chy∣rurgerie is no other then a pure and méere practise, and that is onely necessary for the Chyrurgian to know how to stitch a wound well, to mundifie an vlcer, and to kéepe it from putrifaction, and keepe it from alteration, so that there runne no euill humoure vnto the place offended: and to know all kinde of Vnguents that are apt to heale all kinde of wounds and vicers, which thing must be knowne by practise. And likewise to make all manner of Vnguents necessary for Chyrurgerie, and for that cause I conclude most truely, that our Chyrurgerie is onely practise or experience. And that which causeth me to be∣leue it, is, that I haue alwayes seene the most part of
Chyrurgis, when they should haue any case in Chy∣rurgerie, they knew not what  the sore, but many times they proue this, and that, and so continue vntill they haue found one that is conuenient for the sore,  unto it  and therefore this is a certaine  medicines to helpe the fore, but with experience they search it. There  it be so, it is a signe that I haue said the truth, and so conclude, that Chyrurgerie is a pra∣tise to helores  bodies, and also on beasts, when occasion . What Wounds ar. VVOunds e those which in Latins is called Vul∣s, and of the vulgar, ere, and they are of tide kinds, that is, simple and compound. The simple are those that are onely in the flesh, the compound are those where are cut sinewes, veines, muscles and bones, and these are of diuers and fundre kindes. And the diffe∣rence that, is among them is, by the varietie of the place where they are wounded, and by the difference of the weapon wherewith they were hurt, for some goe right, some ouerth wart, some long, some broade, some are thrusts or stocate, that offend diuers parts of the body. The simple are of small importance, because if ye kéepe them cleane and close shut, nature will heals them with∣out any kinde of medicine. But those where veines are cut, haue néed of some or practise, with the which they may stop the blood, and in any wise not to suffer the wound remaine vpon, but to sow it vp very close, so that the veine may heale. Also those where sinewes are hurt are of great importance, and would be healed with great spéed, so that the sinewes may ionye with more case. But those where bones are hurt, at not greater im∣portance, for if the bone be separated from the other, of necessittiet it must be taken forth, before the wound be
healed. So that by this meanes euery one may know what wounds are, and their kindes. Of Vlcers, and what they are. VLcers are of sundrie kindes, and are ingendred of many causes, as hereafter I will shew. But first I will write of those kinde of Vlcers that are caused of wounds. You shall vnderstand that wounds in what part of the body soeuer they be, being impostumated, or cancrenated, they change their names, and are no more called wounds, although the originall was a wound. For when it is cancrenated, it is called Vlcera corasiu, because it goeth eating and créeping on the flesh. But when the wound is impostumated and full of matter, it is called, Vlcera putrida, that is putrified, and it is be∣cause it is filthie & stinketh. But when it is neither can∣crenated nor yet apostumated, but that through some euill disposition the wound is closed, and that there com∣meth in it euill qualities without alteration, then it is called, Vlcera sordida, because therein is euill qualitie, & it appeareth but a little, but it is euill to heale. There be other sorts of Vlcers also, the which are caused of diuers and sundry kindes of tumors, and the most euill and mischieuous, are those that are of tumors caused of the pox, for vnto those there runneth aboundance of euill hu∣mours that augment the Vlcer, and they be the worst sort, for they cannot be healed by themselues, except the body be well purged and euacuated of all humors that are offensiue. There is another kinde of Vlcer the which commeth of an Impostume, as well hot as cold, and those are more gentle and easie to be helpt, if ye know the me∣dicines that are apt to helpe and dissolue those kinde of Vlcers. These are the thrée kinds of vlcers that common∣ly happen vnto men and women through diuers causes, as it is said before, so that these are the principall causes of those maligne Vlcers.
Of Impostumes and their kindes. IMpostumes are a certeine kinde of tumor that is cal∣led in diuers manners, because they come in diuers places of the body, as those fortes of Impostumes that come in the greyne, which in Venice is called Pannoche, in Rome, Tencone, in Naples Dragonfelly, in Spaine Incordi, and the Anncient called them Buboni, and some with other names. There are other that come in all parts of the body, and when they come in all parts of the body, they cause great paine; and then they ripen and breake of themselves for the most part, and these in Naples are called Antrax, and in Rome Chicolim, in Venice Vo nasito, in Lumbardie Vn∣bungo, and in Spaine Vn nacido muiiliac. There is another kinde of Impostume, that is ingendred of a con∣fusion or broose, and is properly called Apostumato pro Amacara. In the head their grw certaine kindes of sores that are called Talp,  Topmae, the which are of small importance, for they may be healed in short time, as it is seens in childrens heads that are often trou∣bled therewith, and also in their throats, and for the most part about the . Of Fistolaes, and their kindes. ALl manner of sores that doe not cicatrize perfectly and haue communication with the inward parts, are called Fistolaes, and we tote them in Italian So∣fio or Spiracalo, as ye may see by experience, and this is perillous when a Fistolae closeth, being in the body, and specially those Fistolaes that are in the fundament, for Nature her selfe doth ingeder it for ease. But these Fistolaes that come in diuers parts of the body e troublesome, but not perillous: also all such sores as ∣ry long before they be incarnated come to Fistolaes, and many times it commeth through long curing, by ten∣ting with their tentes, the which are cause that nature
maketh a Callow and leaueth the sore so hollow, that it will neuer be filled with flesh, but so remaine hollow, as it is séene easily by experience. There be other sortes of Fistolaes in forme of a sore, and they be those sores that most commonly come in the legges, the which doe purge a long time, and are also very hard to heale, be∣cause if ye heale one of them, presently there will rise another hard by it, and that is a kinde of Fistole. There is another kinde of Fistolae that is caused of those sores that are vpon the bone, the which by his continu∣ance doe breake and consume the skinne and the bone, and these many times remaine fistolated, but who so taketh away the cause of the sore, nature it selfe will preuaile mightily and heale it, as may be seene daily by experience in these that be so troubled. The Fistolaes that come in the eyes, are called Fistola lacrimosa, and they haue some communication with the inward partes, and are euill to be healed, Because first the cause must be taken away inwardly, and then nature will heale it by it selfe, as I haue seene by experience, so that these are the kinde of Fistolaes most knowne vnto all men: and the causes of these Fistoles are two; and for my part I am fully perswaded it is so. The first, is of wounds euill healed, that remaine fistolated. The se∣cond cause I finde to be of sores caused of the poxe, and to shew a truth, yee shall cure them of the poxe, and their Fistolaes will heale of themselves without any other helpe, as it is daily to be seene. There may be many other causes the which as yet I know not, but these two are a sufficient reason, and to be considered of the profes∣sors of this Art, if they desire to come to any excellen∣cie: and therefore I will reason no more of the matter, because the science and my experience will reach no farther.
Of all sorts of scabbes. THere be diuers kindes of scabbes, but I will onely intreate of those in which I haue had most expe∣rience, and will set them forth as plaine as I can, that euery one thereby may haue profite. The first kinde of scabbe is that which is caused of Replexion of the body, by eating much meate of great nourishment, and then not to digest it, so in that cause nature to ease it selfe, sen∣deth forth that humiditie, and when it toyneth to the skinne it ingroseth and causeth an Impostums, and pas∣sing to the outward partes, it is already corrupted, & so causeth the Puules, as by experience may be séene: & this kind is a discs and at humour with great humi∣ditie. There is another kind of scabbe that is alwayes drie with rednesse, and is small, with great heat and itching, and the same in my iudgement is caused by much heate of the Lyner and adustion of blood; and may be healed eassly. There is another kinde of great scabbe, that hath a great drie crust on them and they grow bigge, and the same is of the french poxe being new taken. There is another kinde like serpigo that goeth créeping, and hath a drie trust, and hah no matter vnder it; and the same is also of the french poxe inueterated. There are also diuers other kinds, the which I will leaue at this time, because they are of small importance, and may be helpt with those medicines which are fit for the kinds aforesaid. Of Formicola and his effects. THose kinde of vlcers that are commonly called Mal∣di formica, are so called because they are a kinde of maling Vlcers and corroue that goeth creeping vpon the flesh, and maketh many holes that are lifted vp on the sides and are red, and these for the most part are cau∣sed of the poxe as may be séene by experience, and those sores are euill to be healed, because thereunto runneth aboundance of humors, the which cannot be resolued
but with inward medicines, that is, with exquisite pur∣gations that purifie the blood, and that cutteth away the euill humours that runne thereunto, and cause great al∣teration with burning. This kinde of sore commeth ma∣ny times in the head, and when it commeth in that part, it is called Tigna, or the white see, and to shewe that this is the truth, ye may sée that those medicines which heale Formicola, doth also heale the white scalle: for this is a kinde of the poxe, as by the effects ye may plainly sée, for if any should say the contrary, I would answers him againe, that this may well be, because the same infirmi∣tie may be taken in the mothers wombe, or as soone as the childe is borne it may take it of the nurse that giueth it sucke, if she be infected with that disense, so that I con∣clude it may be so. But there are a number of that kind of disease, which I let passe because I haue séene no expe∣rience of them. A discourse of wounds and other kinds of inward sores. VVOunds that are within the body, as in the sto∣macke or belly or in Testinalles, in the bladder, taines, or guts: The Milt, Luer, Lungs, Heart or other muskles or Arteres, as there be a number, I con∣fesse to know nothing therein, and I will shew you the reason: you shall vnderstand that when a wound doth offend the interiour parts, the Phisition, or Chyrurgion or great Anatomist whatsoeuer he be, cannot know all those parts offended in the body, for after the weapon is within the body, it may turne and with the point hurt other parts a farre off the wound, and offend diuers particular parts one different from the other, and there∣fore I beséech you excellent Chyrurgions, when such a case commeth, how doe you know or discerne which parts are hurt? but to say the truth, I beleeue in that case they know all alike, but what should I say of the cure of such a wound, if the Chyrurgion know not where it is, nor of what importance, but worketh by
imagination, and that nature doth preuails, and that the wound doth heale, it is by the good fortune of the Phisi∣tion: so that for wounds inwardly, I conclude no other at this time, but will leaue it to those that know more then  and hereafter I will discourse of vcers and impo∣stumes inwardly what they are, and how to cure them with our order: ye  vnderstand that there are a num∣ber of kindes of vcers and impostumes that maying gen∣der inwardly, but it eth to me so  to vnderstand, that I can determine nothing that way true, and the cause is this; that we haue seene an inftinite of Phisitions and Chyrurgious, that haue visited one impostumated or vlcerated, and the Phisition could not knowe the place, and particular of that impostume or vlcer, if that the patient dos not tell him and shew hi, and cause him to feele with his hand, and this is most true, and therefore if one cannot resolue him of outward things that he may see and feele with his hand, how can he re∣solue him when one of these accidents is within the bo∣dy, where the patient knowes not himselfe, which is grieued? Truly I would gladly know what iudgement they would giue of that matter, for because if there be any impostume or vlcer in any part of the body, the sicke shall feele great offence and paine, neuerthelesse he cannot tell where it is, nor what part is hurts, so that I conclude, if that the patient know not, much  the Phisition knoweth: and of this I haue made a large dis∣course in Caprici medicinalle, for as I haue said before, in this case I know nothing. Neuerthelesse when it shall come to his place, I will write a discourse of the order to cure the most part of Vcers and Impostumes, but touching wounds. I will promise no more then I haue said before. Also I will write excellent remedies of great exuerience, with the which all wounds, so they be not mortall, may be helpt and healed, and also the reasons conuenient in that matter.
An order to vse in healing all manner of diseases appertei∣ning vnto the Chyrurgian. VVOunds and all other sortes of sores, are of sun∣dry and diuers kindes, as is aforesaid, neuer∣thelesse the order to helpe them is not much different one from the other, if we should say onely the truth without abuse. For ye shall vnderstand that Nature is the ma∣ster of all things created, and the Phisition and Chy∣rurgion are helpers of that Nature, as the Auntient pro∣fessors of that Art haue affirmed. Than seeing this is so, what néede we to make so much aoe, hauing Nature that worketh so gently, if it be not hindered by the mi∣nister, and therefore if we will speake of wounds, I say that the minister hath thrée operations to doe, & no more, and the rest leaue to nature that worketh gently. The thrée operations that the Matter hath to dee, are these: To de;ens the wound so that there runneth no humours to it, and that it putrifie not, and to keepe it cleane, and when the minister hath done that, let Nature worke that which she will worke well, and if any desire to sée if it will be so in effect, ye may see by a dogge, for if he hath a great wound vpon his body, he healeth it without any medicine, onely with dye and keeping if cloane with his tongue, and this is most true, that those which doe helpe wounds by inchantment, doe nothing but keepe the wound cleane, and cause the patient keepe a dyet, and so nature worketh as well on man a on a dog, the re∣fore let none maruell of this authoritie of a dog, although I approue the like of a Christian. But for so much as it would be good to helpe Nature, that it might worke with more speedinesse, as Husbandmen doe and Gardeners, who because they would haue Nature to worke the better and quicker in their ground, doe cast thereon diuers sortes of dunges, &c. The which is done onely to helpe Nature to worke the quicker: and to con∣clude, I say that the Chyrurgion should doe the same in
helping of wounds. But as for vlcers of diuers sorts, it were necessary to be finde t the cause, because they come of diuers causes for when the cause is found; it will be  to  cause vlcers cannot come but by great  of nature in , as by great he  cold or by eplerinns of the body; There∣fore in this case it is necessary to purge the body: first, to ease nature which is offended, and to extinguish the se∣perflus heat or cold that is in the ▪ That ing done, the minister  helper of Nature hath th things to dos. The first, is to mortifie or ill the fore, the second to mundifie, and the third to incamete, and then Na∣ture will   in , Also impostumes are caused of diuers ac∣cidents, in the which it is also necessary to  out the cause, whereby to know what purgations are  to purge the body of the super  minister hath th things to  in that case▪ First to bring it to maturation quickly, then when it is ripe and broke to mundifie it well, and thirdly to  it, and these are the three  that are to be done in an impostume  so fol∣lowing this order, the worke shall proue well and  the right way, an hereafter I will showe in his place, the operatiōns to use in that effect with the order to help them, and also to make thy vuguents, the wing their quality and vertue, and will prous by  those things that are doubtfull, so that euery one shall be satisfied in that matter. Of Medicines to be vsed in all kinde of wounds outward with ease and brouitie. HAuing  what out ward wounds are it is also necessary to  the order how to ure them, with as much speed and ease as it is possible, and there∣fore I will begin first with simple we  that are onely in the flesh, with out offence of the
although these neede no helpe, but onely to is ye the lips close together, and if need be to stitch them close, and then let nature worke, the which in short time will heale them, but if thou by Art wilt helpe nature, thou shalt anoynt them with oyle of Frankencense once a day. But wounds where vaines are cut, have need of pre∣sent helpe, and artificiall meanes and sufficient reme∣dies to helpe it with as much speed as may be, so that the veines cut may ioyne againe together, without any great offence of the wound, and that is done in this or∣der. The first thing is to ioyne the parts close together and stitch it well, not as the common Chyrurgions dos, but as they doe vse to stitch bags, and when it is stitched close, annoint it onely vpon the wound with our Magno licore, and lay thereon a cloath wet in the same Oyle very warme, then take Hipericon, with the seed, Mille∣folli, Viticella, ana, and make thereof a powder, the which thou shalt strew vpon the wound being drest, and round about it: for this medicine doth assuttiliate the matter that runneth vnto the wound, & taketh it forth with great case & without paine of the wound, for this is the most souereigne medecine in that case, that Nature with Art may make, and hath beene proued a thousand times by experience in diuers places. But those wounds where ones and sinewes are hurt, have need of great artifice and cunning because they be of importance. But when the sinewes be onely offended, it were necessarie to stitch them presently, as I have said of these where veines are cut, but not to dresse it with Magno licore, but in steed thereof to take out Olcum benedictum, and oyle of fran∣kencense, of each alike: for those oyles doe exceedingly comfort the sinewes that are cut, and when it happeneth that a sinew hath a puncture or is cut halfe way, in that case it were necessae to cut it ouerthwart, because it shall bring no Spasmus to the wound, but if so be than that the bone be hurt, and that there be any part to
come forth: it were necessary to  the wound open, vntill the bone commeth forth, and then to incarnal  it, and this thou shalt doe with our artificiall Balme, for the same serueth for wounds and lay thereupon the Cero∣te of Gualtifredo di medi, the which healeth it with speed, and so with these orders thou maist help all the aforesaid sortes of wounds  the defensiue to use in these wounds is this. Rec. Aqua vitae made of pure wine and that will burne all away, and put therein Hipericon, Millifollie, Viticella, Betonica, and then wet a cloth to that infussion, and lay it for a defensiue round about the wound, and so thou shalt haue thine intent to the great satisfaction of the patient. Wounds in the head, are helpt as those are, where the sinewes are offended, there are also diners other sortes of wounds which are helpt with the afore∣said remedies. To helpe Vicers of all sortes. Sing that Vlcers are of diuers and sundrie kinds, it were necessarie to knew of what kinde and quality they are, so that thou waist help them in forme and or∣der conuenient, and first. I will waite of the corrosine vicers  a wound Cancrenated, mal di Formicola, and other sorth of vlcers that goe créeping vpon the flesh. The cure of those kinds of  is to apply quickly our Cau∣sticke, to mortifie the euill, the which thou shalt  thus, wet a little umbaste in our Causlicke, and therewith wash all the sore, and then leaue it so open  houres without hinding it fast, and when 24 houres are past, wash the  with strong Vineger and water; of  a like quantitie, with charge that there remaine none of the Causticke in the sore, then lay thereon butter washed, with a Cole-wort leafe vntill the asker or dead flesh fall away, then take our Cerote, Magistrle, with a little Precipitate strewed thereon, and then annoint it with Magno licore, and lay it upon the sore, for this Certe
helpeth all manner of corrosiue vlcers without any other helpe, and every plaister will serue three or foure dayes, taking them off, every 24. houres, and make them cleane, and then lay them on againe, and as for the filthie vicer that I have shewed of in his Chapter, yet shall dresse them onely with our Vnguento Magno. The which without any other helpe will heale them quickly: But ye must every foure daies touch them with Aqua for∣tis, drawne from Precipitate, the which water draweth forth the offensiue matter, and leaueth it purified and cleane, and in all other sortes of Vlcers, our Balme ar∣tificiall, our Magno licore, Oyle of Waxe and Terpen∣tine, the blacke Cerote of Gualtifredo di medi, our Cerote Magistrale with Precipitate, are able to helps, be they neuer so euill. The order to be vsed in curing Impostumes of diuers sortes. There be many sundry kinds of Impostumes that commeth to mans body, that are caused, of diners sundry accidents, and therefore must be cured by i∣vers orders and with sundrie medicines according to his kinde, because some Impostume is caused of a confu∣sion or bruse of flesh, some are certeine griefes, that Na∣ture would discharge her selfe of, and so sendeth forth that matter, some are caused of cold, other of melancho∣like humours, and other are caused of corruption of the Poxe, and these are the kindes of Impostumes that commonly come, and hereafter I will shew the order to cure them, one after another. And first of those that are caused of a confusion be∣cause it is brused flesh, for every contusion must be pu∣trified and brought to matter, therefore make a Ma∣turatiue and bring it to suppuration, and when you know there is matter, presently launce them and dresse them with this medicine as well within as without, the
which without any other helpe will heale any great con∣tusion. But you must make the Vnguent fresh every day, and with newe egges, ye shall mixe the yolke of an Egge with our Magno licore, and therewith dresss them. And as for these Impostumes that come by in∣disposition of nature, are certaine; Soryne, a word so called in Italian, by the which nature would preuaile, it were necessarie to let those haue their cures according to nature, vntill they breake of themselves, and when they are broken, dresse them within with this Vnguent. Rec. Dyle of Roses, ounc. 6. Litarge of gold in fine pouder, ounc. 2. Storax liquida ounc. 1. Lerpen∣tine, ounc. 2. yellow Waxe ounc. 3. mixe them and boyle them on the fire vntill it be blacke, and if it be too hard, put thereto more oyle of Roses, and make it in forme of an vnguent, and there with dresse those kindes of Impostumes, and lay thereon the Cerote Diapalma, and therewith will be wrought miracles. Also for these Impostumes caused of colde, ye shall vse hot medicines and atractine; the Cerote of Oxicrocij is excellent in those kinde of Impostumes, our Balme artificiall, or the water, and such like things as are temperate by na∣ture. But those Impostumes that haue their originall of the French poxe, we euill and maling, because their cause is maling, and will, and therefore their cure is with great purging, and to let the Impostume ripe of himselfe: and when ye launceit, dresse it within with our Vnguento magno, mixed thus. Rec. vnguento magno, nunc. 2 magno licore oune. 1. precipitate ounc. sem. mixe them well together, and therewith dresse the Impo∣stume, the which will heale quickly and well, and lay thereon our Cerote Magistrale, with this charge, that in all the cutes aforesaid ye purge the body well, so that the humours tunne not cuts the place offended, and use de∣fensives according to the kinds of Impostume, as oyle of Frankensance, of Terpentine; of War, of Henny,
Aqua vitae, all these are excellent de-ensiues by them∣selues, annoynting them round about the Impostume. The order to cure all manner of Pistolaes. FIstolaes as I haue said before, are of diuers kinds, and caused of diuers accidents, and so likewise they haue néed of diuers medicines: and first I will write of those fistolaes that come of wounds euill healed, and that haue made a callow, in that order that nature can∣not cicatrise and so remaine fistolated: and the cure of these kinde of fistolaes is to put therein a Rupture that doth cut and mortifie the callow, and causeth it to fall away, and then with incarnating medicines, incarnate them and cicatrise them, and this is the true cure of these fistolaes. But those kind of fistolaes that nature causeth, to ease her selfe of some accident, commonly dos come in the lower partes about the fundament, and they be very perillous, and not to be healed as they before were. But they must be with purging the body, stomacke, and head, the which is to be done thus. First purge them x. or xy. dayes with our Magistrall Sirope, then giue them our Aromatico, and drinke thereon a little white wine, then purge the head with a perfume of Mirra, and Cina∣ber, after these things be done ye shall rectifie the Lyuer with some decoction fit for that purpose, as of Lignum sanctum, or Salsa perillia, or such like that worke effect, for this medicine doth also helpe Fistola lacrimosa, that commonly come about the eyes, or eares. There be other Fistolaes in forme of a sore, which must be helpt with purging, and lay upon the sore our Cerote magistra∣le with Precipitate and annoint it with Magno licore, for with this Cerote onely may all fistolated sores be hea∣led, for it doth mundifie and afterwards cicatrise it: there be also diuers such like matters that are cured easi∣ly, if ye apply thereunto those medicines that are appro∣priate.
To helpe all manner of Scabbes. THe kindes of scabbes be many, and caused of diuers causes, and their cures are also diuers wayes. Those that are caused of replection of the body and of grose blood, the which is caused by eating aboundance of such meates as are of great nourishment, the which if thou wilt cure them, it were necessarie to purge them with our Siruppe Solutiuo. x. or xy. dayes, then giue him or her one dram of our Aromatico in the morning fasting, and drinke thereon a cup of swéete wine, then let him sweat thrée or foure times, and after minoint him with∣our Vnguento magno two or thrée times, and it will heale him of those kind of scabbes. Now to cure that kinde of scabbe that is red and small, and causeth great itching, you shall make a deco∣ction of hearbes that coole the Lyuer and purifie the blood, as Borage, Buglosse, Endiue, Mayden-haire, Liner∣wort, Harts-tongue, Agrimony, Citrach, Succory and such like hearbes, then purge with Aloes, the tuyce of Elder rootes, Iera pigra solutina, and such like as doth coole the Liuer ond blood, and then annoynt them with Vnguento di Litargitio, and therewith you shall helpe all those kinde of scabbes. There be also certaine great scabe ouer all the body, the which are very thicke, and these are a kinds of Poxe, the which may be helpt with giuing them our Pillole contra il mal Francese, the quantitie is according to the discretion of the Phisition, and these Pilles ye shall take thrée times euery third day and un∣noynt them with our Vnguento magno, and he shall be helpt. There is another kinde of scabbe that geath cree∣ping with a dry crust like unto potigine, and those are the meere Poxe inueterated, and the order to cure them is thus, giue them, our Sirop against the melancholike humour, because it purgeth the blood and cooleth the Li∣uer, and dissolueth that viscous humour that ingendreth that crust; that being done, giue them our Aromatico,
and annoint them with our Magno licore, and he shall be perfectly helpt in short space. There are other kinds of scabbes that come through great cold, and those are hea∣led onely with annointing them with oyle of Franken∣sence three or foure times. To helpe the Mal di formica. THose be certeine vlcers which goe creeping in the vpper part of the fiesh and haue many orifices or mouths, and these are caused of the Poxe being inuete∣rated, the which are cured in that order that the Poxe is, and that is thus. First, purge the body with our Ele∣ctuario Angelica, the which purgeth away grose and maligne humours, and euacuateth the stomacke of cho∣lar and fleagme, this being done, cause the patient to sweat, for that will asubtiliate the humors, and cause them to come forth, that being done, take our Cerote ma∣gistrale and strew thereon Precipitate, and then annoint it with our Magno licore, and lay it vpon the sere; and there let it lye 24. hours before ye change it then make it cleane and lay it on againe, for that Plaster may serue foure dayes, making it cleane euery 24. houres, and when the Plaster will draw no more matter, you shall vse our Voguento magno, the which will helpe it in short time. But if it doe happen that this order doe not curs them, then it would be necessary for them to be annoin∣ted with the vnction for the Poxe, and to annoint them so long till the mouth be sore, and when that signe doth appeare, annoint them no more, for he will spit or vaper at the mouth, for twelue or fifteene dayes, and as soone as he vapoureth, make a Bath and wash him welt, and wash the mouth with wine, an without all doubt it shal helpe him Goe willing: now hereafter I will write of certeine things which are vsed of common Chyrurgians, with a briefe discourse vpon them.
Of the Towe which is laid vpon wounds by common Chyrurgions. THe pledgits of Towe which is laid vpon wounds when they are first stitches, is made in this order. Rec. The white of an Egge, Salt, and Rose-water, and beate them together, and when the wound is stitched, then lay it thereon, because the blood should stint, and the wound remains shut, so that it may be helpt with more ease. Now touching this, I will show the reason why they vse it in their first cure ye shall vnder stand that euery like desireth his like, to succour him or keepe company with him, and therefore the Antient (our An∣tient professors of Arte) willed the white of an Egge to be occupied in wounds, because it is a substance of flesh like unto the other flesh, and to declare the truth, I will prone it by naturall reason, for ye shall vnderstand that the white of the Egge is that part which ingendreth the flesh, the skinne, and the fathers of the Henne, and the yolke ingendreth onely the guts and other entrailes of the animall: then séeing the white is that which ingen∣dreth the flesh onely, it is like vnto flesh, as it is said be∣fore: then the salt is a materiall which preserueth all things from putrifaction, as is séene by experience dayly, and for that consideration it was put in this composi∣tion to preserue the flesh: the Rose water by nature is cold and dry, and by his coldenesss defendeth the infla∣mation, and by his driness is repercussiue and mitiga∣teth, so that these are the reasons why the said Tow is laid vpon wounds, but I would to God that such things were vsed as by their excellent operations would helpe and heale from the beginning to the latter ending, and to leaue off such trifling orders. Of the disgestiue with the which they dresse wounds after the aforesaid Tow. AFter that the Tow is taken away from the wound they dresse it with a composition called digestiue,
because it digesteth the wound although this medicine be some what scrupulsus and against science, and the rea∣son is this, yee shall vnderstand that when a man is wounded, the place before was sound, and therefore be∣ing wounded, our true dutie is to helpe the same wound and not to digest or rotte it, as commonly all Chyrur∣gions doe, for by rotting it in that order, it is perillous, and more dangerous to be cured, as is daily séene by ex∣perience, and this no man can deny. But now I will follow our regiment in shewing what this digestiue is, the which is made thus. Rec. The youlke of two Egges, Terpentine washed ounc. 1. Oyle of Roses ounc. sem. mixe them in an Vn∣guent, and this is the digestiue wherewith they dresse it vntill the sore haue made quitter or matter enough, and then they vse to dresse it with medicines much differing from the same, but I maruell much at the diuersitie of this matter, that this digestiue being applyed to a pu∣trified vlcer, worketh diuers effects, for it healeth it di∣uinely: and moreou, ye shall vnderstand that if it be applyed vnto when they be incarnated, it will cicatrise them maruailously, for truely these are things worthis to be knowne, and he that vnderstandeth the reason I accompt him wise, for if this digestiue be laid on fresh wounds it putrifieth and rotteth them: againe being laid on a filthie sore it doth mundifie and heale, and then if it be applyed on a wound incarnated, it scicatriseth it and healeth, for this haue I done diuers and sundry times, the which is to be wondred of. Of the mundification vnguent wherewith they dresse the wounds after they are digested to mundifie them. VVHen wounds are come to digestion and that they purge, alwayes they change vnguents and they apply vnguents that haue vertue to mundifie the wound and make it cleans, so that it may be the better
incarnate, and that vnguent is called properly a mundi∣ficatiue, the which is made of Barly flower and hunny, or hunny of Roses, and oyle of Roses, and this is the mundificatiue they vse 8. or 10. dayes together for if the wound were not well mundified, it would neuer in∣carnate well, so that this vnguent is most necessary in that operation in respect of the ingredience. Of their incarnatiue where with they dresse the wound after it is mundified. VVHen that the wound is mundified, so that there∣unto commeth small quantitie of matter, than it is necessary to apply vnguents that incarnate, so that they may scicatrize with more ease, and this kinde of in∣carnatiue is in the most vse among the cōmon Chyrur∣gions, the which is made of Terpentine, Waxe, & Fran∣kenscence, and a little oyle of Roses mixt on the fire; and this is their incarnatiue. A rare secret, the which this Author did send vnto a very friend of his, being in the warres in Africa, the which helpeth all wounds, either by cut, thrust, gal∣ling with arrowes, or hargabush shotte, or otherwise. THe first thing that ye shall doe is to wash the wound very cleane with vrine & than dry it very well, then put therein our Quintessence of wine, and presently ioyne the parts close together, and stitch or sowe them well, but in any wise sowe nothing but the skinne, for otherwise it would cause great paine, then put thereon fiue or sixe droppes of our Balsamo, and vpon the wound lay a cloath wet in our Magno licore, as hot as you may suffer it, and this doe the first day, then the next follow this order, first put thereon our Quintessence and a little Balsamo, and then our Magno licore very hot, and neuer change this medicine vntill he be whole.
Of those vnguents that Cicatrize wounds. THe vnguente that cicatrize wounds after they are incarnated be of diuers kindes, although they work one effect in cicatrizing or causing a skin. The digestion that is written of before, being applyed vpon a wound incarnated, it doth cicatrize it with spéed, the like doth Diachilon and vnguentum de Tutia. The Cerote called Gratia dei, although these be sundry compositions one differing from another, yet in effect they serue all to this cicatrization as ye may sée by experience, and this they doe because they be temperate and of good qualities, and so they helpe nature to worke more quicklier, and they are called helpers of nature. But these kind of vnguents that worke by themselues, as Vnguentum Apostolorum, the Causticke, Aegypciacum, the rottery and such like vn∣guents as worke with violence, and suppresse nature, and doe that which nature cannot doe by it selfe without helpe, but all those vnguents that are not violent, neither in heat or cold, are apt to cicatrize wounds, and all sores, that are mundified and incarnated. A remedie to helpe a wound with great speede, of our inuention. WOunds of diuers and sundry sortes are very perillous of life, but to helpe them quickly be∣cause the patient may take no harme, ye shall vse this secret, wash the wound with our water of Balme, and cleanse it well, and lay thereon clothes wet in oyle of Frankencense made by distillation, and there∣with thou shalt heale any great wound in short time, as I haue proued diuers & sundry times, in sundry causes. An excellent secret to heale wounds of Gunne shot or Arrowes without any danger. IF thou wilt help the aforesaid wounds, it were neces∣sary, first to ioyne the parts close too, and wash it with our Aqua celestis, and lay thereon our Oleum Balsami, & therewith thou shalt saue the liues of many wounded persons.
A discourse vpon old wounds that are not yet healed and their soueraigne remedie. VVHen that wounds are euill healed and that they impostumate, and that the arme, or legge, or other parts where they were wounded is indurated and full of paine, thou shalt vse this secret of our inuention neuer knowne before of old nor new writers, for it is of great vertue and many times proued: first ye shall wash the wound well and make it cleane round about, then wash the wound with our Quintessence, and make it to fume, because our Quintessence doth open the pores, and asuttiliateth the matter, and causeth the humour to come forth, that being done, annoint it all ouer with our Ma∣gno licore, and thus doing, before thrée dayes end, hee shall feele great ease, and in short time he shall be helpt because this medicine taketh away the hardnesse and healeth the wound, and comforteth the place offended. To dissolue a broose in short time, when it is new done. THese are called confusions, vnto the which nature sendeth quickly great quantitie of humiditie, and in that place it causeth impostumation: But if our Chyrur∣gians would be diligent and quicke, al contusions might be helpt with great ease in short time, and therefore if thou wilt worke miracles in that cure, vse this our meanes, and it will turne to thy great honour: and the remedy is this. Rec. Liquid Vernish, pound 3. yelow Waxe, ounc. 4. common ashes, ounc. 6. Aqua vitae rectified, pounds 2. Put all the aforesaid matters in a Retort of glasse, and distill it with a gentle fire untill all the substance be come forth, the which will be oyle and water, the which ye shall separate, and kéeps them, and when occation ser∣ueth, annoint the broose therewith, and lay thereon a cloath wet in the same, for this is a miraculous medi∣cine experimented and proued by reason: for an experi∣ment
without reason is as a man without cloaths, and therefore if thou wilt know great and rare secrets neuer written before, look in my Spechio del Scientia vniuersalli, and in my Thesoro del vita humana, and therein thou shalt finde strange things, proued by reason and expe∣rience, the which bookes God willing, I meane to set forth in the English tongue to the profit of our Country. To helpe a wound quickly that is in perill of any accident. VVOunds in some parts of the body are very dan∣gerous of life, and specially where sinewes be cut or pearced, or veines or muscles hurt, or bones broke, and by an infinit of other particulars, which being open or euill healed, the patient may be in danger of life, because the winde entereth in, and they cause paines and inflamation, and therefore to ayoide all these aforesaid matters, so that the wound shall haue no detriment, vse this remedie. First ioyne the parts close together, and put therein our Quintessence, and lay thereon a cloth wet in our Balme, and binde it fast that the aire get not in, for it is very hurtfull, ye shall vnderstand that these are two of the excellentest medicines that may be found, because our Quintessence doth assutilliate the blood, and taketh it forth, and taketh away the paine, and the Balme doth warme and comfort the place offended, and will not suf∣fer any matter to runne thereunto by any meanes, for this is most true, as I haue proued diuers and sundry times, and alwayes haue had good successe. To stop the flux of the blood in wounds with great speed. VVHen there is any great flux of blood in wounds by reason of some veine that is cut, and that the Chyrurgions would stop it, it were necessary to stitch it well, but not as the common Chyrurgions do with wide stitches, but stitch very close and hard, and put therein our Quintessence, and vpon the wound strew the blood of
a man dryed in pouder, and lay vpon the blood & cloath wet in our Balme artificiall, very warme, and vpon that binde the wound with ligaments very straight, and euery day twice, wash it with our Quintessence, and round about annoint it with our Balme, and also cast thereon our secret pouder for wounds, and that doe morning and euening, euery day without opening of the wound, and in that time the wound will remaine well, and the veines will be in a manner healed, so that they will not bleede, giuing you charge, that the woun∣ded man keepe no dyet, because the vertue being weake, relaxeth the veines, and that causeth the fluxe of blood. An other remedy to stay the flux of blood in a wound. WHen there is a great flux of blood in a wound, the perfectest remedy, in to stitch it very close, then take mans blood being dryed and made in pouder, and cast it vpon the wound, and bind it some∣what straight, and so let it remains 24. houres, and when ye vnbinde it, take heed that ye remoue nothing, and cast on more dryes blood vpon the wound, annoint it round about with our Oleum Philosophorum de Ter∣pentina & Caera, and binde it vp againe other 24: houres, and then bind it gently, and annoint the wound with oyle of Frankensence, and so in short time it will be whole, giuing thée great charge that ye put in no tent or such like, and then thou shalt see miracles. Of our Cerote magno, that helpeth against all sortes of sores and wounds. THis Cerote is of great vertue, and healeth all man∣ner of fores and wounds, if it be spred on a cloath and laid thereon, and the order to make it is thus. Rec. Galbanum ounc. 1. Ammoniacum ounc. 2. Oppo∣ponax ounc. 2, Aristolochia long a ounc. 1. new Wax ounc. 18. fine Mirrha, Olibanum, Verdigrese, ana. ounc. 1. Bedel∣lium ounc. 2. Gum of Proine tr ounc. 2. Lapis hema∣tites,
ounc. 2. Terpentine, Frankensence, of each ounc. 4. oyle of Waxe ounc, 3. beat all those that are to be bea∣ten, and searce them finely, and kéepe euery one by him∣selfe, then dissolue the gummes in distilled Vineger, ac∣cording to Arte, & then vaper away the Vineger againe, and straine the gummes through a cloath, then take the Waxe with as much swéet oyle and melt them on the fire, and when they are melt, put thereunto ounc. 2. of Litarge of gold finely scarced, and stirre them conti∣nually vntill it be boyled, which you shall know by this token: put a feather therin & if it be boyled enough, if will burne straight wayes, or else let it boyle vntill it burne it, then take it from the fire & let it coole a little, & then put gums and stirre them well together, and set it on the fire againe, and it will rise with a great noyse, and therfore let it boyle vntill it fall downe againe, then take it from the fire and put thereunto all the aforesaid pouders, and stirre it vntill it be cold, and therewith thou shalt worke maruellous cures, if it be made well, according to Art. Of our Magistral Vnguent that helpeth diuers sorts of sores. THis Vnguent is appropriate for many kind of sores because it comforteth the sore and taketh away the paine, and draweth the matter from the lower parts or bottome of the sore. The which matter is cause of the paine, it kéepeth it also from accidents, giuing you charge that it be made artifitially, for otherwise it will not be of so much vertue, and this is the Vnguent. Rec. Litarge of gold, ounc. 4. oyle of Roses, pounds 2. boyle them in a copper pan so long, as if ye put a feather therein, it will burne it, then it is sodde: then put there∣to of new Waxe, ounces 6. Storax liquida, ounc. 2. common honny, ounce 3. then let it boyle a while vn∣till they be well incorporated, then take it from the fire, and put therein Olibanum, Mirrha, Mercury,
Precipitate, Oyle of Waxe, oyle of Turpentine, oyle of Frankensence, 2. ounces ana, mixe them well till they be incorporated, then put thereto pure rectified Aqua vitae, 4 ounces, and mixe them well, and then it is ended; and this is of my inuention, wherewith I haue done very strange cures. To make Oyle of Frankensence. TAke a retort of glasse, well luted, and fill it halfe full of Frankensence, and for euery pound of Franken∣sence put thereunto 3. ounces of common Ashes finely serced, then distill it in sand, and the first that commeth forth wilbe water, which will be leere, then increase the fire, and there will come forth an Oyle of the coulour of a Rubie, the which kéep close in a glasse: the first water is of meruailous vertue in diuers operations: but one miraculous experiment I will not leaue to write of, be∣cause it is a thing very necessary, and is this: For such as haue chilblanes or kybes, or chophes in the hands or féet, that commeth through colde, ye shall first perfume the parts that are sore ouer the fume of hot water, so that they may sweat, then dry them and wash them with the aforesaid water, and put on a paire of gloues, & in short time they will be whole: it helpeth also the white scall and scabs, and such like things. The Oyle serueth in many operations, and especially in all colde diseaes: if they be inwardly, giue therof euery morning one scruple to drink and if they be outward, annoynt. Also it helpeth all ma∣ner of wounds be they neuer so great. If you annoynt them therewith, and kéep them close from the Ayre: but in any wise vse no tenting to keep them open, but wet a cloth therein and lay it theron, and in short space they will be healed: Also it dissolueth a bruise in short space if you annoynt it often therewith. This Oyle serueth also for Painters to make varnish.
Of Oyle of Waxe and his effects. THis Oyle of Waxe is most excellent, for so much as it serueth for the most part against all diseases: which Oyle, Raymond Lulli doth aproue to be a more heauenly and diuine medicine then humane: It is most rare for wounds, but it is not good for common Chyrurgians, because it helpeth a great wound in x. or xij. daies at the most: but as for small wounds, it healeth them in 3. or 4. dayes, anoynting onely the wound therewith, laying on clothes wet in the same. Also this Oyle worketh mira∣cles against diuers diseases inwardly, if you giue there∣of one dram with white wine: and as for those whose haire and beard doe fall away, it is a rare thing and of great profite, The order to make it is thus. Rec. A retort of glasse well luted, and put therin what quantity of Waxe you will, so that it be not halfe full: and for euery pound of Waxe put thereunto 4. ounces of the powder of brickes, then set it in a fornace and giue it a gentle fire vntill all the substance be come forth, which Oyle will be congealed hard, the which is his perfection, for if you will distill it so many times that it congeale no more, it will be too hot and sharp, & not to be vsed with∣in the body in any wise: but the first distillation you may vse safely inwardly, and make vnctions for any kinde of disease where néed shall require, and alwayes it will be good, & doe no hurt in any wise or in any disease, and ther∣fore this oyle ought to be had in great regard of all men. To help the Tooth-ache that is caused of rotten Teeth, or that commeth of a dissenti∣on of the head. THe Téeth being rotten or corrupted, alwaies causeth great paine, and many times it commeth of a dissen∣tion from the head and such like humours, as Cattars, E∣risipella, but let it come of what cause it will, I will shew a remedy of great importance, and it is very short: ye shall take our Aqua realle, and holde it in your mouth a
good while, and then spit it out againe, and this ye shall doe for thrée dayes together euery day once, then after∣ward it were necessary to wash your mouth in like ma∣ner with our Aqua Balsami for the space of a month, and so the tooth-ache shall be taken away with ease, for this is our secret, and may be vsed in all times of the year. Against a stinking breath. THe breath may stinke through many causes, as by vlcers in the mouth, or corrupt and rotten téeth, sometime it commeth of the stomacke, and that is ill to be helpt, and therefore if thou wilt help these, thou must vse diuers remedies: and first, to help those that haue their mouthes vlcerated, you shall giue them a quantity of our Pillole aquilone, and then let them wash their mouthes with our Aqua realle, and so the vlcers shall be helpt, and the mouth shall not stinke: but when the stench commeth of rotten téeth, vse the aforesaid re∣medie or medicine that is written for the tooth-ache, the which will make the téeth as white as snowe, and will ake no more: but when the stinke commeth from the stomacke, it were necessary to purge the body with our sirop Solutiuo, sixe or seuen dayes, and then to take our Aromatico, that being done, take rectified Aqua vitae and the water of honey, and oyle of Turpentine, of each alike, mixe them well together, and euery morning drinks thereof halfe an ounce fasting, for the space of a month or there abouts. To help those that haue a great cough in the stomacke. THe Cough doth come of diuers and sundry causes, but let it come of what cause i will, it alwayes of∣fendeth the stomacke and the head, for euer when the stomacke is offended, of neceii the head is offended, because it hath communication with the stomacke, so that the stomacke is cause of the paynes in the head; and therefore it is necessary to help the stomacke first, unto
that thou shalt doe with our Pillole aquilone, the which is written in this booke folowing: and if so be you can∣not take Pilles, take our Aromatico, this being done, if there be no feuer, giue him euery morning 1. ounce of our electuary Magistrale per la tosse, and euery night anoynt his stomacke with Magno licore, and also his head & nost∣hrils, but if is happen that the aforesaid thinges help it not, then take blood of the Liuer vaine, and purge the bo∣dy with our Sirop against the melancholike humor, and so by Gods grace they shall remaine healed. To help such as cannot holde their water. THis procéedeth of two causes principally, the first is of superfluous heat of the body, through the which heat, nature doth assuttiliate too much that humid part, and continually doth send it downe into the bladder: the second cause is, that the pores are too much relaxed or o∣pened, by the which operation the vrine doth passe with∣out retention: and these are the two causes why the vrin cannot stay, and this commeth commonly to yong chil∣dren, because they are very hotte of complexion, and the order to help them is this: Giue them our Pillole Aquilone thrée times, the quan∣titie is from one dram, to one and a halfe: that being done, ye shall make them a decoction of Hisop of the mountaine, and put therin sugar, and this they shall vse x. or xij. dayes at the least, for this mundifieth the place offended, and disposeth it to solution. Then after this is done, ye shall giue him for x. dayes together halfe a dram of Masticke with a little Plantine water, for this is hot and restringeth the pores, and ingrosseth the vrine, and so the Patient shall remaine whole of that infirmity, by the vertue of the aforesaid thrée medicines, and it is a very easie cure and soueraigne for that purpose. But sometime there happeneth a flux of vrine somewhat like this, and it is not of the aforesaid causes, but of causes
much different from them, for this is in men and wo∣men of age, and this I finde to be caused of the Poxe that causeth the flux, and they void certaine threds which some call Gonorea, and the remedie thereof is onely with great purging and sweating, and then to annoint them fiue or six nights with our Vnguento magno, and kéepe them warme in bed vntill ye haue ended to annoint him, and then goe to the stowe, and hée shall be helpt of that infirmitie. To helpe those that cannot make water. THe vrine is stayed through diuers and sundry cau∣ses, and the principall are thrée, of the which one is the stone that ingendreth in the bladder, for alwayes it hangeth downe in the necke of the bladder, & stoppeth the Meati or pores that the vrine cannot passe, the which grieueth the patient meruaileufly. The other is caused of grauell or grose and viscous humours that cannot passe the pores, and so cause that retention of vrine with great paine. The third is caused of an obstruction or re∣striction of the pores or conduites, where the vrine doth passe, & so kéep the vrine within with great paine, so that these be the three chiefest causes of the retention of vrine. The cure of the first cause which is the stone, is to purge them well, and then to vse our most souerain reme∣die that is written in this booke following, the which is of great vertue to breake the stone, as I haue proued many times, but when this medicine is not able to break it, then it is necessary to cut it forth, and this is all con∣cerning the first cause. To helpe the second cause, it were necessary to vse purgations that purge the reines well, and then to giue them our Aromatico, and then to annoint the reines six dayes euery day once with Vnguento magno, and with this medicine thou shalt helpe him perfectly. To cure the third cause it were necessary to purge with aperatius things, and then to annoint his reines and vn∣der
the members and belly with our Balme artificiall, and giue him to drinke the pouder of Hogge-lice or Cen∣tum pedes, that are found vnder stones, and by the grace of God-he shall be perfectly whole. To helpe those that haue great burning of their vrine. THe burning of the vrine may come of diuers and sundry causes, but I finde foure principall, of which one is the stone in the bladder being great or small. The second cause is a certaine heate the which corrupteth the place where it passeth, and carrieth forth as it were cer∣taine long thrids the which causeth that burning. The third cause is a certaine viscousnesse the which holdeth to the bottome of the Vrinall, and it will not well breake, and this is called Gonorea. The fourth cause is certaine fluxes of vrine caused of some kinde of the Poxe, as ye may see by those that vse company with euill women and take harme, for presently this burning commeth, and therefore this showeth me plainely to be the Poxe that causeth that burning of vrine. But if thou wilt help the afore said foure causes, thou maist doe it with ease hauing the true Art of a good Phi∣sition, and the remedie of the first cause comming of the stone, is to take it forth of the bladder. The second cause is to be helpt with purging with our Siropo solutino, and then after that, to vse our oyle of Vitriole compound, taking thereof euery morning 1. ounce, and so they shall remaine helpt. The third cause is helpt with taking euery day tenne dayes a quantie of our Aromatico, and so with this onely they shall be helpt. The fourth cause is helpt with medicines appropriate for the Poxe, & to annoint them with Vnguento magno. To helpe those that haue great paine of the Goute. THe Goute is a corrupt and maligne infirmitie, and properly ingendreth of corruption, as it is plainely
seene in these that are troubled therewith, and to prroue it to be true, Nature doth shewe it well, because you may see how great the alteration is of that accident, and seing that humour is caused of a windi humu and al∣teration of the blood, as is séene by experience, I beleeue the same disposition hath his originall and beginning of the stomacke, for so much as all those that are troubled of that disease, the first signe that appeareth vnto them, is a great paine in the stomacke, 3▪ or 4. dayes or more before the griefe commeth, and then the paine increaseth exceedingly, so that by the said signe, I iudge this acci∣dent cannot proceede of other place then the stomacke, and to affirme it better, ye shall vnderstand that those which are troubled therewith, can finde no better reme∣die then to euacuate the stomacke from all corruption, and therefore if thou wilt helpe them of that accident, the first thing that ye shall doe is to giue them a quantitie of our Aromatico in the morning fasting, and drinke there∣on a little white wine, that being done, it would be ne∣cessarie to make a somentation with attles, that be well boyled in water, and then to annoint them with our Balsamo artificiato, and so for that time the Gout will be gone, and will remaine away for a long time. But if God permit me life, I will hereafter set forth the order to helpe the Gout, that it shall neuer come againe, with a certaine order to be observed in the same, found out by this Authour, and hath beene proued an in∣finite number oftimes in diuers places, and on diuers Noblemen as ye may well vnderstand in his Thesoro della vita humana. A remedie against the Pestilene, which preserueth those that vse it. THe Pestilence is a certaine corrupt humor which is cause of the euil disposition of the re, that is cor∣rupted and poysone, and it is so contagious that in 36. houres it corrupteth the body, and causeth them to dye,
and therefore if any will defend them from that infecti∣on, they may doe it by the help of God and the Phisitian with these medicines, the first thing is to confesse our sel∣ues vnto almighty God, and to pray hartily vnto him, and then as concerning Phisicall medicines, thrée things are to be vsed, which may saue the liues of many. The first thing is to euacuate the stomack, the second to sweat the third vnction. And touching the first, ye shall vse e∣uery 3. dayes our Pillole aquilone, for they euacuate the contagiousnes, and will not let it corrupt the body: the second, ye shall cause them to sweat by artificial meanes, for that euacuateth a certain matter very apt to corrupt. The third, is to annoynt all the body with our Balme artificiall for that preserueth the body, and defendeth it from the contagiousnes: so that by these thrée meanes, men & women may be preserued from that violent death. To help Pellaria, that is, a disease which causeth the haire and Beard to fall off. THe Pellaria is a certaine kind of fantasticall infirmi∣tie, which we by practise doe know the cause, which is, by vsing company of women corrupted with the pox, and by the same practise we see, that those whose haire doe fall away, doe fall into great infirmities of the poxe, although not all, yet the most part: and therefore if thou wilt help that accident, it were necessary to purge them with our Siropo Solutiuo, 8. or 10. dayes together, that being done, giue them our Aromatico, and then annoint the place where the haire is fallen away euery euening with our Balme artificiall, so that with the vse of these thrée medicines, the patient shal remaine perfectly whole of that matter, because he firope purgeth the whole body vniuersally, and the Aromatico purgeth the stomacke and the head, and the Balme comforteth and defendeth the place where the haire is falne, so that it shall fall no more, this I haue prouen an infinite number of times. Ye shall
vnderstand, that there be  other kinds of Pellaria the which will not be helpt in the aforesaid order, for the one commeth of a great feare, and the other commeth because they haue had Mal di massuca, and their heads be corrup∣ted by that meanes: and for these two I know us reme∣die, but to let nature haue his course. To help a Carnosite in the yard. THe Carnosite that cōmeth in the yerd hindreth the vrine that it cannot passe, and growes in the mouth of the bladder, and is a kind of matter ingendred in that place, the which is much like vnto an Emtode that com∣meth in the necke of the intestine about the fundament, and because it is a grosse and lcerated matter, the vrin passeth with difficultie and great burning, which is very painful vnto those that haue it: but if thou wilt help that inconuenience, if were necessary to purge the body well, and to kéep a dyet, and to drinke the decoction of Hiperi∣con made with honey, and vse to eat drie meats asmuch as is possible, and then make certaine little Waxe Can∣dles of Waxe and Frankensence, and then make this vnguent. Rec. Red Lead 1. ounce, white honey 1. ounce, but∣ter 2. ounces, white Wine as much as will suffice to in∣corporate them in a liquid forme, on a soft fire, then take ten quills (that hath blood in them) out of the wing of a yong Pigion that is fat, & therewith stirre the vnguent when it boyleth, and when one quill is dryed, take an∣other, and so change them vntill the Wine be consumed, and then it is made▪ and when thou wilt occupy it, take one of the said Candles of Waxe, and vpon the end, put of this vnguent, and put it into the yard vntill it touch the Carnosite, and this thou shalt vse day by day vutill the Candle passe without any impediment, and then the patient shall be helpt: this is most true, for  haue pro∣ued it an infinite number of times, to my great credit, and content of the patient.
To helpe the white scall. THis disease being so odious, is a corrupt humeur the which is not onely in the head as many doe thinke, but it dependeth of the inwards parts and hath communication with the head, and this humour is like the Fume, for continually it vaporeth vp, and when it can assend no more because it is hindered in the skinne, then it settleth and ingrosseth and causeth the head to breake forth in that grieuous order as is séene. But I will shew a secret to helpe it, so that it shall neuer come againe, and the order is thus. You shall giue them our Siropo solutiuo 8. or 10. dayes together, that being done giue them our Pillole Aquilone thrée times, the which pilles must be taken euery thrée dayes once, that being done, take Sinaber finely beaten, 2. ounc. Olibanum, Mirrha, ana, 1. dram, mixe them together, and deuide if in 5. parts and make thereof fiue perfumes, in fiue mor∣nings, and couer their heads with a cloath, so that it touch not the head, then let the pouder be cast on by lit∣tle and little vntill it be spent, vpon a chasing dish of coales, and so let them stand couered one houre without mouing, & this doe euery one of the times, that being done, annoint the head for the space of a month with oyle of Waxe and Terpentine, and they shall be helpt, for this is a remedy that cannot faile, for I haue proued it an infinite of times, in Palermo, in Mesina, in Naples, in Rome, and in Venice, and alwayes I haue had good suc∣cesse to my great credit, and profit of the diseased person. To helpe those Caruolli that come vpon the yarde, and their causes. THose Caruolli that come vpon the yeard, are of di∣uers kinds, as by reason and experience thou maist sée, but the most part are taken by vsing the company of leind and corrupt women, infected with the Poxe, and those are the worse kind, for they are the first originall of the Poxe, and of those Caruolli come Pannochie or
hotches, and certaine great scabbes, Dellaria, aches and tumors, and an infinite of other euill effects, and these are the first kind. There are another kind the which commonly come of their owne accord by reason of heat, and those are easie to be helpt, and are not perillous or painefull. There is another kinde, the which is as though it were scorched or burnt, the which commeth through debilitie of the yard, and hauing company with women, and these are also of small importance. The first kind are certaine Vlcers that come vpon the end, and some vpon the proper substance of the yard, and some vpon the skinne, and the order to cure them is thus. Yee shall mortifie them within and without with our Causticke, and when they are mortified, ye shall dresse them with our Magno licore, and they shall be whole quickly. But ye shall well note, that many times after they are healed afore xv. dayes doe passe, there will come a certaine alteration in the threate, so that they can scarce swallow their meat, and this alteration many times en∣dureth vij. or x. dayes, and then it resolueth by it selfe, and that is a certaine signe of Pellaria. And therefore if thou wilt anoyd that inconuenience that the haire fall not of, assone as ye féele any of the aforesaid griefes, their presently take a quantitie of our Electuario Angelica, and then take our Siropo magistrale 4. or 5. dayes, and annoint thy head x. or xij. dayes with our Magno licore, and so by these meanes thy haire shall not fall. Because our Electuario Angelica doth euacuate the stomacke and cleanseth the head, and dryeth vp the matter, the which is already altered by that disease. Al∣so our Siropo Magistrale, doth euacuate the body, and pu∣rifie the blood, and staketh the fury of the disease. Our Magno licore preserueth the haire from drying & fallg. There commeth many times, after these Caruolli are healed, certaine Impostues in the oyn, of the which
we will speake of in another booke particularly. The other kinde of Caruolli that come vpon the yard, are helpt onely by washing them with some bath that is re∣strictiue and comfortatiue. The other kinds which is like scorching or burning, are helpt by kéeping them cleane, and annointing them with a Liniment of Tutia camphorata. And thus I make an end, giuing to vnderstand to those that practise, how that they may auoyde that di∣sease called Pellaria or falling of the haire or beard, for this is one of my secrets, whereof I meane to write a great number if God permit. A discourse of those sores that come of the Poxe, and how to helpe them quickly. THe Poxe as I haue written of diuers times, being a putrified and corrupt disease, the sores comming thereof, of force must be of his nature, that is corrupt and stinking, therefore if thou wilt helpe them and take away their paine quickly, thou shalt vse thrée operations, the first is to giue them our Pillole Aquilone, and then to wash the sore with oyle of Sulphur, and then lay there∣on our Ceroe magistrale, with Precipitate, and annoint it with Magno licore, and therewith thou shalt help them quickly, because those Pilles are appropriate for that di∣sease, and the oyle of Sulphur draweth forth the filth from the center, and the Precipitate draweth forth the grosse matter, so that of force it must heale. The cure of one that had the Poxe in his head. BEing in Naples, among all other that I cured, there came vnto a me Spaniard called Il signor Diego di Menas, a man of the age of 36. yeares, of complection cho∣laricke aduste, the which had the Poxe, and in his fore∣head he had a certaine tumour the which had perished a great part of the scull, and was open, and he had beene taken in hand of diuers men, and none could doe him
good, I séeeing, that booke him in hand, and gaue him our Siropo solutiuo, 8. or 9. dayes together, afterward I gaue him our Aromatico, and then I gaue him the rootes of Cia in derection, and then perfumed him with Oliba∣num, Masticke, Mirtha, and Sinaber, & so by these meanes he was helpt of that infirmitie, but the bone remaines bare, and I laid thereon our Cerote magistrale, and so in short time, the bone did separate of his owne accord, and one day I tooke it of altogether, and was so great that it couered the fourth part of the head, than present∣ly this signor Diego went abroad, shewing what was taken from his head, as diuers can testifie. The Cure of a wound in the head, & in the hand. THere was a certaine Gentleman called Gionan Ia∣copo Veneciane, which had a great wound on the head and in one of his hands, which being taken in hand by diuers Chirurgians, was brought to a very ill case, by reason of great alteration in the wounds: the Phisitian that had him in hand, was one called Realdo polumbo cremense, who dressed his head with Wine and Oyle, and the hand with Turpentine and Oyle of Roses: then I being in cōpany tolde him that it were good to change those medicines, because in wounds of the head, those medicines were not conuenient, for the Oyle being crud putrifieth, and the Wine is repercussiue, and will not suffer the putrifaction to come forth, that the oyle ingen∣dreth, and for that reason the said medicine would not be vsed. And for the medicine for his hand, I say that the Tur∣pentine is not conuenient, for where there is offence of skin, veynes, sinewes and bones, Turpentine is not good because it is hot and putrifactiue, by meanes of the oyle, and causeth inflamation, and therfore is not to be vsed. But if thou wilt help the head and hand both, ye shall vse a kind of medicine that comforteth the place offended and that doth asstitiate the matter and incarnate, to
the which, the said Realdo answered and said, my reason was good, if I could finde remedies that will doe that ef∣fect, the which I sent for to my house, and vsed them in this order: First I put our Quintessence into his wound in the head being colde, and then a litle of our Balsamo colde, which séemed strange to Realdo, and then I layd theron our Magno licore, and vpon the cloth I layd a litle of our secret Powder, and the like I did to the hand, and so in 14. dayes the wounds were whole, to the great meruaile of a mber. A great secret particlar for the Flux, & dissenteria. THe Fluxes of the body, are no other but a distempe∣rance of Nature, and are of two kindes, the one is caused of an euill qualitie and distemperance of the liuer, and that is called Flusso epatico, The other is caused of great heat, feauer, and distemperature of Nature, and this is called Disenteria, that is, a distemperment of the gutts, and both these sortes are hard to bee helpt of the aucient Doctors, as it is well séene, by experience of those that practise, for they wil help them with repression and restrictnes, but that is not the way if we shall belieue Galen, who writeth, Fluxus Fluxum curat, which is most true, for I haue cured a thousand of the Fluxe with gi∣uing them our Aromatico, and thrée or foure dosses of our Siropo Solutiuo, therefore Galen saith true. But the Dissenteria is cured with giuing them our E∣lectuario, Angelica, and then euery day after dinner stand in a Bath of Sea-water colde, two houres at the least, and so in this order thou shalt help any crud kinde of Di∣senteria in short time, and with great ease: vse this as a meruailous secret. The Cure of one that was poysned with Arsnick. THere was a man poysned with Arsnick, giuen him in a messe of Rice pottage in an euening at supper, and as soone as it was in his stonacke he began to grone and sweat, and vomit, in such order as it was strange to sée,
and it hapned that at the same time there was a learned man in the house, who seeing this man in that case, sus∣pected him to be poysned, and so sent for me, and when I came, the poore man was almost dead, then presently I called the wife of the house and tolde her that her hus∣band would dye, and that she should haue the Lawe for poysning of him, but if that she would tell him what poy∣son she had giuen him, perhaps he might recouer him a∣gaine, with many other wordes, so to conclude, she tolde me that she had giuen him two grains of Arsnick in Rice pottage; then presently I called for a cup of Sacke and caused him to drinke, and then he vomited and went to the stoole, then I annoynted him with our Oyle of Hipe∣ricone and Scorpiones, all the body ouer, and still caused him to drinke that he might euacuate that poyson, but all his mouth and throat remained swoln, and he did spit in great aboundance, and I caused him to vse that vnguent and euery morning gaue him Triacle with wine, and euery three dayes I gaue him a quantitie of Pillule Ag∣gregatiue, and last of all, I caused him to vse Aqua vitae compound, and so in forty dayes he was perfectly whole and ridd of a terrible disease which he had vpon him be∣fore he was poysned. The Cure of an Vlcerated Leg. THere was a man of the age of 36. yeares, of complex∣ion cholerike and sanguine, who had his left Leg all vlcerated, in such manner that the Phisitions and Chy∣rurgions of the Citie would haue cut it off, but in no wise I would consent therunto, but tooke it in hand, and gaue first our Magistrall Sirop in the morning, eight or nine daies together, and in the meane time. I washed the Leg in Wine, wherein was boyled Mallowes, Consolida ma∣jore, Cardus benedictus, & Honey, and then wet clothes therein, and layd them on twice a day, then I caused him to vse a decoction of Lignum vitae and the barke with Iua artetica, Cardus benedictus, Pollipodi, Riponico, Wine,
and Sugar: and his common drinke was wine and wa∣ter, boyled on the Fesses of the same, And this he vsed 24 dayes, than I perfumd him with Cinaber thrée times and ere thrée months were past he was perfectly whole, for his disease came of the poxe, and those sores are com∣monly called Mal di formica. The Cure of the Gout on a Gentleman. IN the aforsaid yere, in the month of August, I was cal∣led to visit a noble Gentleman called Don Christofalo della roca, a man of fiue and thirtie yeares, of complexiō cholerick and sanguine, who was sore troubled with the Gout, and because it was in the beginning of August, our auncient Doctors haue forbidden to take any soluble medicine in that time, in respect of the Canicular daies. Neuertheles, I called Armellio, & Leonardo Testa, two excellent Phisitions, which gaue their counsell to take no medicine, neuertheles I proued that the Gout was extreme hot, and for that I ordayned a colde Sirope to mittigate the superfluous heat, which was made of Ly∣uerwort, Harts tongue Dates, Raisins, Figs, Sugar, and Succory water, and Aromatised it with Muske and Rose water, of the which he tooke euery day four ounces, and for the alteration of the Gout, I washed it thrée or foure times a day with our Aqua del Balsamo, because it penetrateth and openeth the pores and assuttiliateth and dryeth the humor offensiue, also I ordayned him bread of Barly, because it cooleth the blood and is of good disge∣stion, and caused him to refraine from all fatt brothes, and his drink was temperate, And to this one of the Do∣ctors did agrée, but the other would not, neuertheles the Gentleman was content with my aduise: then I began to giue him the aforesaid decoction, with our soluble Quintessence, and therwith he had euery day two or thrée stooles, and I washed the Gout three or four times a day with our Aqua Balsami, and the first day he began to feele ease, and the second he felt more, so that in seauen dayes
all his payne was taken away: then I applyed therunto our secret of secrets, for that kind of disease, which in thrée dayes deliuered him: then I caused him to vse certaine medicines to defend the Gout for comming againe, and so he continued whoe to his great satisfaction. Of the causes of the Scyatica, and how ye may help it. THe Scyatica is a disease so called, because it com∣meth in that place of the body called Sio, and is cau∣sed of an euill qualitie and grosse humors, that are stayed in that place, because they cannot passe downe, and this is sée  by experience daily, for where that paine is, there is alteration, and the cure thereof, is with Glister, Vo∣mits, Purgations and Vnctions, because the Glister doth euacuate those places next vnto it, & so easeth the humour, the vomitte cleanseth the stomacke, the purga∣tions doe euacuate the body downewards, the vnctions dissolue the winde, and so by these meanes thou maist helpe the Scyatica, as I haue done many times to my great honour, and satisfaction of the the patient. A most excellent remedie to helpe the flux of the body, with a certaine discourse thereon. IF thou wilt helpe the flux of the body, it were neces∣sary to know first from whence it procéedeth, for hee that knoweth not the cause, is lee is be credited to cure the effect, and therefore I will showe thée what the flux is, and from whence it commeth, and then I will shewe the order to cure it, also to make the medicines. The lu of the body is caused of a superfluous heae conceiued in the stomacke, the which make a continuall solution inwardly, as ye may  by experience of those that  therewith for so long as the cause  not taken away, all their  doth turne into that , the which if it be,  which I desy, that the  are  of the body, uses of hot
and corrupt humours in the stomacke, and therefore if thou wilt cure it, it were necessary to extinguish the heat and to take away the corruption, the which thou shalt doe with the rednesse of Marte Militare, written in this booke following, for that is the most souereigne remedie that can be found. But first ye shall take twelue graines of our Petra Philosophalla, with halfe an ounce of Mel Rosarum, and then take for foure mornings together one scruple of the rednesse of Marte, with halfe an ounce of sugar Rosat, and therewith thou shalt worke miracles. A discourse concerning cornes in the feete or elsewhere, with their remedies. THis callowes matter, is a certaine hot humour, of the which Nature would discharge herselfe, and when that humor is driuen forth of Nature, it goeth vn∣to the lower parts, into the end of the toes, for in that ex∣treme part of the toes, that skinne that is called Epider∣ma, is hard, and will not suffer it to passe, or exalare, and there many times it ingendreth a tumor in the skin with great hardnesse, and many times that tumor doth increase and cause such paine, that it doth not onely hin∣der their going, but hindreth them from sléepe in the night, and this kinde of tumor t called commonly Callo or Cornes in English, and I thought it good to call them Creste, because they are alwayes growing, and is of great importance among the Chyrurgions, for an infinite number of persons are troubled therewith, and there∣fore I will shew thee our secret to helpe them quickly, and with great ease, which secret was neuer knowne afore of any. First ye shall pare them with a sharpe knife vntill the bottome, and there ye shall finde a certaine thing like matter, but if ye find no matter, ye shall pare it vnto the blood doth appeare, then touch it once with oyle of sulphur, & then dresse it with our Balsamo artificia∣to, once a day vntill it be whole. Kéepe this as a secret.
Of an infirmitie of importance that commeth vpon the extremitie of the toe, vpon the nayle, THere are many men that are troubled with a cer∣taine infirmitie vnder the nayle of their great o, the which seemeth as though the nayle grw in the flesh, the which is not so, but the flesh groweth ouer the naile, and although this seemeth to be a thing of nothing, and that the Auncients haue had small consideration thereof, Neuerthelesse it is an infirmitie of great importance, and to be cosidered of, because many are troubled therewith, and specially men of authoritie, and in specially those that are troubled with the Goute: I call to remem∣brance, that in the time that I was in Naples, I cured a great number, and specially those that were of great au∣thoritie, to my great honour  profit. The first thing that I did, I cut the nayle on that part which was grieued, and tooke it away, the which was done easily and with little paine, the which thing being done, I touched it with our Causticke, and so let it remaine thrée dayes to∣gether, and then I dressed it euery day with our Magno licore vntill it was whole, the which was in short time. A discourse vpon the Hemerhodes, with the order to cure them with most excellent medicines of our inuention. THe Hemerhodes are a certaine kind of euill tumer, caused of the bleed of the veines Emorodial, and these come alwayes in the extremitie of the intestinals about the fundment, & some of them cause great paine, and some of them doe burne excessiuely, or  scald. The which commeth through the qualitie of the good and euill humors. As ye may sée by experience how that some haue such burning that they cannot rest in the night, the other haue such paine that they cannot fit, the other are so scalded that they cannot abide it, ye shall vnderstand this infirmitie is more painefull in one complection than in another, and the cure thereof is difficl. Neuerthe∣lesse
it may bee cured, and the order is this. First take our Aromatico, then take our Siropo soluti∣uo thrée or foure dayes, then take our perfume thrée or foure times on the fundament, that being done, annoint the place with our Balme artificiall, for that dryeth and taketh away the paine altogether, and so the Patient shall remaine perfect whole. There is also a great secret in the tooth of a Horse-fish if it be worne on a mans finger, to take away the He∣merhodes, the which tooth I haue knowne proues at the least 7. or 8. times, for I haue a ring made thereof and haue vsed it. A great secret to helpe those that are burst or haue the Rupture. THis is a rare secret neuer knowne afore of any man, and in specially for those that haue not béene burst long time, and that the rupture hath not yet made a callow, and the order to cure is thus: First ye shall giue them our Aromatico, euery tenne dayes once, and euery morning fasting giue them one ounce of fine Tartar beaten in pouder with water or wine to drinke, and likewise in the euening two houres afore supper giue him as much, and his bread shall he bis∣ket made of Rye, also he must weare a trusse made fit for that purpose, and vse this remedie. Rec. Rectified Aqua vitae without flegme x. ounces, Rosen of the Pine trée that is drye, Olibanum, Masticke, Sarcocolla, ana, ounc. sem. Mixe them altogether, and with this water wash the Rupture euery day, twice, and then cast thereon presently the pouder of a hearbe called Bislingua and Balsamina, ana, and then wet a cloath in the said water, and lay it thereon, and bind the trusse very hard, and kéepe thy house with as much ease as thou maist and straine not thy selfe in any wise, and thus with∣in 100. dayes thou shalt helpe any great Rupture, kee∣ping the aforesaid order.
A rare secret and diuine, to helpe those that are trou∣bled with the spleene. THe Mylte is altered and commeth hard, by reason of a superfluous humidity, the which it receiueth, by the euill disposition of the Lyuer & Lungs, and there∣fore if thou wilt helpe it, it were necessary to vse medi∣cines abstersiue and drying, and to giue them our Aro∣matico once, and then to vse this electuary, the which is of meruellous vertue, in that operation. Rec. Squamma ferri 1. ounc. Scolopendria, 1. ounce, Spignarde, Lapis lasuly, ana, 2. scruples, Sinamon, halfe an ounce, beate them fine and make thereof an electuary with purified honey, according to Act, and thereof take euery morning a spoonefull, and as much at night, two houres before supper, and annoint the place where the Mylte lyeth, with our Balsamo artificiato, and so by the grace of God and meanes of these medicines, thou shalt be helpt quickly. Another great secret to helpe the spleene with great speed. THe Mylt as is a foresad, is grieed through aboun∣dance of humiditie the which it receiueth, and there∣fore thou must onely séeke to drye that humiditie, and for that purpose, I will shew thee 2. great secrets, where∣with thou shalt worke myracles, and are of great reason and experience. The one is to be let blood vnder the tongue in one of these 2. veines: that is, on that side where the Mylte lyeth, that being done, ye shall take Mustarde and mixe it with the vrine of a boye, and lay it betweene two cloaths, and lay it on the fore place one night, and then if it be not well, vse it still vntill it be helpt, for this I haue proued an infinite of times. The cure of a certaine Spaniard called, Carabasall di Cor∣donet the which was troubled with the Poxe. THis Souldier being of the age of two land thirtie yeares, was mightily troubled with the Poxe with
extreame paines and sores, among the which he had al his thigh so eaten away as though he had beene gnawne with dogges, with most extreame paine, and the way that I cured him was thus. I gaue him 12. graines of our Petra Philosophale, with sugar Rosat, the which caused him to vomite and to euacuate downeward, of the which he found great ease, that being done, I prepa∣red him our decotion of Lignum sanctum solutiue, the which is written of hereafter, with a certaine drinke made with wine and Lignum vitae, and this he vsed fiue and twentie dayes, and then I annointed him with our Vnguento magno, and in the space of fortie dayes he was perfectly helpt to the sight of all men. The cure of the stitch in the side with retention of vrine. THere was a certaine Gentleman called, Marco di Chiuffune, of the age of sixe and thirtie yeres, the which was troubled with a terrible stitch in the side, and had proued many medicines and none did him pleasure, the which, after I tooke him in hand, I gaue him our Aromatico, and after that the paine slacked, then I cau∣sed him to annoint all those parts with the oyle of Nut∣megs, and the oyle of Egges mixt together, and so he re∣mained quite whole, for in this order I haue cured an in∣finite of persons to my greate honour. A cure of a certaine Spaniard wounded in the head in Naples. THere was a certaine Spaniard called Zamora, of the age of foure and thirtie yeares, of complection cho∣lerike and sanguine, the which was wounded in the left side of the heade, with inscision of the bone also ye shall vnderstand, that in Naples the ayre is most euill for wounds in the head, by reason that it is so subtile, and for that cause the Doctours did feare the cure, neuerthe∣lesse I dressed him with our Magno licore, and Bal∣samo artificiato, keeping the wound as close as was pos∣sible,
annointing it onely vpon the wound, and so in 14. dayes he was perfectly whole, to the great wonder of a number of Chirurgions of that Cittie. The cure of a certaine Gentleman that had Mal diformica. THere was a certaine Gentleman Neapolitan, the which was called Il signior Giouan Francisco Gaeta∣uo, of the age of 38. yeares, the which was maruellously tormented with a fore arme and a fore legge, called Mal di formica, and he was of complection cholerike and me∣lancholike, and these sores went creeping vpon the flesh, healing in one place and breaking in another, and in his arme he had nine sores, and in the legge foureteene, and this Gentleman had sought helpe the space of 2. yeares and could finde none, and had twice taken the dyet, and yet could finde no helpe, the which Gentleman I tooke in hand, and the first thing I gaue him was this, 1. ounce of Gerapigra Ganenie, with twenty graines of our Petra Philosophalle, the which prouoked both vomit and sege diuers times, that being done, I gaue him our Siropo solutiuo, x. mornings together, that being done I gaue him a medicine, with our Petra Philosophalle and Eleborus niger, the which caused him also to vomit and purge downewards, that being done I caused him to make a strope of Lignum sanctum, and the hark, Iua Aretica, and Cardus Benedictus, in the which I put sea∣uen pound of wine, and one of sugar, and then I caused him to make a drinke with water, wine and honey, to drinke continually, and that I caused him to vse fiue and twenty dayes, and then I ninted him with our Vn∣guento magnu, fiue times without fire, the which vn∣guent caused him to spit aboundance of filthy matter, and at the last it caused him to spit blood, then I caused him to make a bath the which is written in our Regi∣ment of the petilene, called he ioyfull Iowell; and I
said on the sores our Cerote magistrale, and thus within 38. dayes he was perfect whole. Certaine cures that this Authour did when hee trauelled into Afryca. IN the yeare 1550. he trauelled into Africa, & there was chosen by Il signior Don Pietro di Toledo vicere di Na∣poli, to be Phisition vnto the Camp vnder Don Gracia his son, and so in the yeare 1551. in the month of May he de∣parted from Naples with all the Army of the Emperour, Carolo quinto, D. Austria, and so hauing a prosperous wind, arriued in Barbary by a certaine old Cittie called Monasterio, and there gaue an assiege, and tooke it with∣out any remission or ransoming, and made slaues of all those that were left aliue, and it remained vtterly de∣stroyed, but not without great mortalitie of our Chri∣stian Souldiers, and beside those that were killed, there was a great number wounded the which were brought into the Gallies, and carryed to the Ile of Sicilia in a certaine Cittie called Trapano, the which say they, was builded by a great Idolater called Tarpos, and there in the Hospitall those wounded persons were left, with certaine Chyrurgions that were vnder my Iurisdiction, and with certaine medicines of my inuention, and so in short time the most part were helpt, and then the Army returned vnto Naples againe, and refreshed them with new men and victuall. And then on the 15. of Iune, we set vp sayle and sayled, and when we were in the midst of the Goulfe betweene Naples and Palermo, there hap∣ned a great misfortune, the which was thus. In the Galley of Signor Giordano Captaine generall of the Galleys of the Duke of Florence, it hapned that he being at the table with diuers Captaines and Gentle∣men, and as they were at dinner, a certaine Captaine being grieued with another, multiplyed words, and took a loafe of bread and threw it at his face, without any reuerence or respect of the said Generall signor Giordano.
That being done, the said Generall arose front the Table and tooke him by the bosome, and gaue him 5. stoades in the breast, the which pierced into the body, that he fell downe for dead, that being done, the said Generall re∣pented himselfe of his rashnes, and presently sent for me being in the Gally of Don Gracia, to come and dresse him which the Generall requested me to do with all diligence, and when I came, the poore Captaine lay as though he had bene dying, neuerthelesse I dressed him with great diligence, and the medicines which I vsed were these. First I put into the wounds, of our Quintessence, & vpon the wounds I dressed it, with our Balme artificiall, and gaue him a vomit, the which caused him to cast great quantitie of blood, and then euery morning I gaue him halfe an ounce of our Aqua Balsami, and thus within two dayes after we arriued at Palermo, the Captaine was perfect whole, to the great maruell of a number. After that, we departed from Palermo, and went to the Cittie of Trapano, where the rest of the Galleyes were, and there continued 4. dayes, and thou on Saint Iohns euen we went to an Iland called Fanignana, and there kept the feast of Saint Iohn, and then we departed with all the Army, and went on the side of Africa, and on Saint Peters day we landed in the Gardens of that Cittie, and there began to offer battle, and there remaining about 24. or 25. dayed, the Army began to be infected with a certaine kind of flux, whereof a great number dyed euery day. My Generall seeing that, called me, and asked if it were possible to finde some remedie for that flux, vnto the which I answered willingly, and said, I would de∣uise by the help of God some remedie, because it was my dutie, as well as for the health of the Souldiers of the Emperour, the which thing I did in short time through the whole Camp: as I will write hereafter in the next Chapter.
The cure of the flux wherewith I helpt the Armie of the Emperour in Africa. BEing as I haue said afore in the Campe, where they were meruailously tormented with a flux, and many dyed thereof, and could find no helpe, although they had medicines. Than I which had the experience in hand, began to laugh to my selfe, and the remedy wherewith I helpt them all was this: First I caused them to eate well, and then in the morning, I gaue them a vomit, and then euery day, after they had eaten, I caused them to go into the water of the Sea, and there to remaine 4. or 5. houres, and so doing within 4. or 5. dayes they were helpt, for I sweare as I am Knight, that if I had not bin, the whole Army had dyed of that fluxe, for of 14. or 15. thousand that were there, there was not left 2. thousand but they were infected with that fluxe or distemperance of the Liuer, caused of superfluous heat, the which heate distempereth the stomacke, & causeth that continuall flux: ye shall vnderstand that our vomit doth euacuate the sto∣macke of the putrified humor, and the salt water cooleth the heat, and restraineth the flux, so that by that meanes they were helpt. A goodly remedy found out by me, for wounds in the head. VVOunds in the head were very perrillous in that place, so that if a 100. were hurt in the head, it was not possible to recouer x. and that came through two things the which were much contrary in that Region, for the day was so hot, that it burned all things, and the night to the contrary so extreame cold, that it was intol∣lerable, and not to be credited, and so by this distempe∣rance when Craneum was vncouered that the ayre might touch it, presently they dyed without any helpe, then I séeing that, began to consider of the matter, desiring to find some meanes to help them, and so studying, it came in my memory, that the ayre was cause of their death as it was in truth.
Than presently I commanded all those Chyrurgions that were vnder my Iurisdiction, that they should not meddle with any wound in the head without my pre∣sence, the which thing was done, and as many as were wounded, the first thing that I did in stéed of cutting or lancing or discouering, according to the common order, I ioyned the parts and sowed them close and dressed them vpon the wound with our Quintessence, and with Balsamo and Magno licore, and so in short time the most part were helpt, and there dyed none so desperate as they did afore, and therefore to my Iudgement, this was a good inuention, and neuer vsed of any afore, and this or∣der of curing is very naturall, for Nature doth shewe it in hearbes, plants and stones, how that they cannot stand dis-vnited: then much more out flesh cannot stand dis-vnited, without great torment of the Patient, for vntill it be ioyned together againe, it is vnpossible to be helpt, then séeing that is true, it is most naturall for the wound to be ioyned together, and to vse those medicines that where they be applyed, will not suffer the humour to come thereunto, nor putrifie the place that is hurt, and séeing it is so, as by experience is séene, we must beléeue this to be a naturall and most wholesome remedie, so that I affirme that the ioyning of the parts of the wound in the head and other parts of the body, is most soue∣raigne and of great satisfaction to the , for they ne∣uer féele paine, nor haue no feuer nor other sort of acci∣dent, for of those I haue cured a great number with good successe. The cure of one that had his nose cut off, and set on againe. IN that time when I was in Africa, there hapned a strange case, and that was thus. A Certaine Gentleman a Spaniard that was called Il-signor Andreas Gutiero, of the age of xxix. yeares, vpon a time walked in the field, and fell at words with a
Souldier, and began to draw his weapon, the Souldier séeing that, stroke him with the left hand and cut off his nose, and it fell down in the sand, than I hapned to stand by, and tooke it vp, and pissed thereupon to wash away the sand, and stitched it on againe very close, and dres∣sed it with out Balsamo artificiato, and bound it vp, and so let it remaine viij. dayes, thinking it would haue come to matter: neuerthelesse when I did vnbind it, I found it fast conglutinated, and then I dressed it onely once more, and he was perfectly whole, so that all Naples did meruell thereat, as is well knowne, for the said S. Andrea doth liue yet, and can testifie the same. The Cure of on Arme of S. Giordano Vrsino. AT the same time, the said S. Giordano Vrsino, and S. Antamo Sauello Romano, and S. Astor Baglione, with diuers other; tooke their horses, and rid about two miles from the Camp, and there perceiued certaine Mores on horsbacke, who did assalt these gentlemen, and one More with his Launce, did thrust thorow the Arme, from the elboe through the shoulder, S. Giordano, who being sore wounded, returned to the Camp in great paine, and pre∣sently I was sent for, and when I saw it, I put therein out Quintessence, and vpon the wound I laid our Balsa∣mo and Magno licore, & bound it strait, and so left it, and in fiue daies it was whole and sound, and then went to the assault most valiantly, as many can testifie, because he was Generall of Firenze. A great chance that hapned at the assault in Africa. AT the same time, ther was a Gentleman Florentine that was with the said S. Giordano Vrsino, who was called Millematti, the which fought with his Sword and Target, and defended many shot of Caliuers & such like, at the last one pierced his Target and stroke him vpon the breast and bruised him meruolously, and yet broke no skin, and therwithall he fell to the ground for dead, and the carier of dead men, or Becamort, as they call them,
would haue buried him in a Mine, I then being present, caused him to be brought to the Tent of S. Aster Baglione and there I put our Quintessence into his mouth, and that caused the blood to liquifie and come forth at the mouth, and I laid vpon his stomacke a plaister of Ashes and Oyle, as hot as he could suffer it, and that I chan∣ged morning and euening, and alwaies I gaue him of our Quintessence to drinke, so that in short time he was holpe, and yet liueth in health: and this was one of the most strangest things that euer I salve, that a pellet of a Caliuer could not breake the flesh, and that came by cer∣taine wordes that the said Millematti did cary written v∣pon his breast, as he perswaded me afterward, for he said, In verbis, & in herbis, & in lapidibus, sunt virtutes, &c. The Cure of wounds being poysoned, and of other sorts. VVHile the warrs dured in Africa, many times the Christians were poysoned with venemous Ar∣rowes and such like, for the Mores commonly when they fight against Christians, they sticke the heads of their Arrowes in a Squill, and poyson it with the iuyce, and when those Arrow heads or other weapon goeth into the flesh of a man, it causeth so great burning, that it bring∣eth Spasmus, and so in short time they dye. And till this time there hath bene no other medicine found, but to cut away all the flesh that the weapon touched or else to cou∣terise it two or thrée times with a red hot yron, to extin∣guish the venome, but I (through the grace of God) haue found the true and perfect way to help them quickly and with great ease, and without detriment of the wounded, The remedie is this: you shall put our Quintessence into the wound, and lay thereon our Magno licore, the which are two medicines that kill the poison of the squill, and therefore if any will proue this to be true:  see the experience, take a péece of a Squilla, and scratch it with the naile, and then put thy finger into thy care, or
scratch any other place that ye may touch the flesh, and presently thou shalt féele a terrible burning, and to quench it presently take of our Quintessence, and wash the place therewith, and presently the paine will cease, and therefore vse this as a secret, for therewith I haue cu∣red a great number. A remedie found out by me against the poyson of a fish. VVHen that I caused so many sicke of the flux to goe into the sea whereby they were helpt, there was a certaine kind of fish, that as soone as they touched the flesh of a man, presently it inflamed and the poyson so increased, that in two or thrée dayes, it caused coro∣siue sores, the which caused many to dye, and many were stong with that fish, the which neuer could find helpe: I then séeing that desperate case, vpon a time visited a yong man being a Romaine, the which was hurt on the coddes and yard, with such a spasmus that it was wonderfull to behold, and hauing a glasse full of my Quintessence in my hand, I opened the sore and washed it therewith, and presently the paine ceased, then after∣ward I dressed it with an vnguent made of the fat of the fish, and so therewith he and a great number more were helpt in short time, and these are secrets of my inuention. Of the taking of Africa and his destruction. IN the yeare 1551. the 11. of September about the 9. houre the generall assault was giuen to the Citie of Africa, and in the space of 2. houres it was taken, and destroyed by the Souldiers of Carolus Quintus, Empe∣rour, whereat was flaine a great number of both parts, and there was such a number hurt, that it was to be wondered at, the which were healed with our Magno li∣core and Balsamo, and when the Cittie was taken and all ended, the Gallies remained there all September, and the fourth  of October euery man went to serue at their ports appointed, and so we turned to Naples to passe the
Winter, but yet we remained but a while, for there was occasion to goe to Siena, the which revelled against the Emperour, and so went with Don Pierro de Toledo, the which dyed after at Firenza, &c. The Cure of a great wound in the head. IN the yeare 1551. in the month of Nouember, there came vnto my house a Spaniard called Giouan Ruiz di Zamora, who had a great wound euer the eare, on the left side, that reached halfe ouer the head, with great fracture of the bone, the which I presently stitche a with diligence, and put therein our Quintessence, and vpon the wound I dressed it with Magno licore, and Balsamo, and made a gentle legature with a piece of stike, and sent him home to his lodging, and wil him to come againe the next day about the same houre, and those that were about me fell a laughing at my wordes, and said that he would dye of that wound because I let him goe forth in the ayre, to which I answered that he might safely goe forth, and so the next day he came againe, and I took off the ligament, but not the cloth, and thereon I put of our Quintessence & Balme, and in thrée daies after I touched it not, then I tooke off the ligament againe, and dressed it vpon the cloth, and let it remaine vntill the 8. day, and then I opened it and tooke away the cloth, and found the wound so healed, that you could scarfe perceiue any scarre, and many said it was vnpossible to be healed, for it would come to impostumation, neuertheles it remay∣ned perfectly whole, for 5. or 6. monthes that he remay∣ned in the Citie, in which time I cured a great number in the same order that were wounded in the head, to the great wonder of those that dwelt in Naples, for they count all wounds in the head to be mortall, because the ayre is so pestilentiall, for as soone as it toucheth the scull it corrupteth the wound. But vsing our order thou maist safely help them, so
that the wound be not mortall, for by kéeping it close shut it is preserued. A very strange thing that hapned in the aforesaid yeare. THere was a certaine yong Mariner of the age of 26. yeares, the which was called, Francisco di Giouanni Raguseo, of the Ile of Mezo, the which being in fight fell downe, and the other that fought with him cut him ouer the side and backe a handfull long, in so much that a péece of the Milt was cut ouerth wart, then he was carryed to a Chyrurgion, and he stitched him vp, then the next day I was called, and there I found the wound not well stitched, the which I ripped vp againe, and found the belly full of blood, and when I saw that, I caused diuers to make water, and therewith I washed him, and with taking forth of the blood, there came a péece of the Milts that was cut, the which I washed, and gaue it to a Mariner that stood by, and the Patrone of the ship tooke it from him and carryed it away, then I stitched him vp againe, and left a little hole or orifice beneath, where the matter might come forth, and dressed him with our Quintessence, with Balsamo, and Magno licore, and in the space of 22. dayes he was whole perfectly. The cure of a Fistolae in the lower parts. IN the yeare. 1552. in the month of March, I was brought vnto a man of the age of 40. yeares, of com∣plection cholericke and melancholicke, the which had a Fistolae in the lower parts, the which was of this na∣ture, that it had alterated the Coddes, the member, and all the parts there about, with xj. holes infistolated, at the which xj. he made water with great burning and in∣tollerable paine, and which are accidents of a feuer in manner continuall, the which Patient had béene taken in hand of diuers and none could doe him pleasure. Than the first thing that I did, I gaue him our Aromatico, that being done, I gaue him xij. dayes together our
Quint essencia solutiuo, that being one, I gaue him quantitie of our Electuario Angelica, and then he vsed one of my secrets, the which I will not write in this place, that being done I caused him to spit, with one of my con∣fections written hereafter, and so by these meanes he was perfectly whole. Of many that I cured in Naples. IN that time that I remained in the famous Cittie of Naples vntill the yeare 1555. in the month of Februa∣rie, and then I thought it good to goe to Rome, whereat this time I cured a number of persons, and haue helpt so many by the help of God, the which if I should record them it would be sufficient to fill a great volume, for there came such a number to my dore, that the people wondred thereat; and with 4. medicines compounded by me, I helpt in manner all of euery disease, and the medicines were these, one Pill made with our Petra Philosophale, Elebore negro, Olio di sulpho, Olio di melle, mixed with marchpane, and made in Pills. The second remedie was soluble Pills, made with Aloe he∣patico, Coloquintida Siena, and oyle of Vitrioll, made in paste with sugar, and common honey. The third reme∣die was an vnction, made with Sage, Rosemary, Wormewood, Rew, Muit, Nutmegs, Cloues, Ciua∣mon, Masticke, Frankense, Terpentine and Waxe with common oyle. The 4. remedie was our Quintes∣sence, and these 4. remedius, I gaue vnto those people to helpe their griefes: and I wi them that tooke these medicines to eate well and of good meates, and so always they praises these medicines, the which was not with∣out great reason, because the Pills rt euacuate the sto∣macke of all impediments, and leaueth nature ased: the second Pills euacuate the body of the corruption. The Vnction comforteth the stomacke, and helpeth digestion, and mitigateth the paine. The Quintessence comforteth the stomacke, causeth good disgestion, purifieth the blood,
and comforteth the head, so that by these aforesaid rea∣sons, ye may vnderstand that these foure remedies may helpe against all indispositions inwardly, and for cause of these remedies those people honour me like a Prophet, and alwayes haue had me in great reuerence, as long as I remained among them. A Cure of Vlcera putrida, which was in the Arme. IN the year aforesaid, and in the month of August, there came to my hand a Gentleman of the Embassadors of Portingall, that was called Il Signor Iari, being of the age of 32. yeares, of complection melancholike, who had a putrified vlcer about the left shoulder, which he had ca∣ried above 3. years, & was as big as a hād, and very déep, which could not be healed of the common Chyrurgians, nor yet be eased of his paine: than I reasoning with this Gentleman, tolde him that the cause of that sore was corrupt and putrified blood, and by that meanes the Li∣uer receiued euill qualities, and that if he would be helpt; the cause must be remoued, the which was hard to be done, because the blood must be euacuated a lit∣tle, and then the stomacke must be euacuated of moist matter that offendeth it, and hindereth digestion of the meate, and will not suffer good blood to ingender, then it will be also necessary to euacuate the body downewards, that the corruption sendeth not vp his vapors to the vp∣per parts of the body, and hinder the cure of the Vlcer, all this being done, it were necessarie to euacuate the humor betwéene the skinne and the flesh by sweat, so that all the parts of the body may remaine purified, and so by these meanes the Vlcer may easily mundifie, incar∣nate, and cicatrize, and shall be a perfect cure, to the which thing the Gentleman was willing, for he had as willingly dyed as liued, and so in the name of God I tooke him in hand, and the first thing that I gaue him was a vomit that purged the stomacke, and tooke away
great part of his paine: then I purged him with our Quintessence solutiuo, eight dayes together, that being done I made him a fomentation, that caused him to sweat well, and to spit aboundance, then I caused him te be let blood vnder the tongue, and then I annointed all the vlcer with our Causticke, the which mortified all the filthinesse therein, and then I dressed it with Magno licore, and our Cerote magistrale, & so with these remedies in short space the said Gentleman was cured, to the great meruell of the said Ambassadour, and all those that saw it: by reason of that cure came another of the same house vnto me called Il signor diego Iaimes the which was trou∣bled with a difficultie of vrine, the which troubled him mightily, the which I gaue thrée times our Petra Philo∣sophalle, and the iuyce of Elder barkes, and hee was helpt: I cured another in the same house of a feauer with our oyle of honey, and with Balsamo: The Ambassadour likewise being troubled with the Gaut, willed me to take him in hand the which I did, and cured him so that in thrée yeares after which I continued in Rome he neuer felt paine, and of these cures I helpt an infinit number in Spaine, as is well knowne to the inhabitants thereof. The cure of ethesia in the beginning. IN the yeare 1555. in the month of March, there came to my hands a young man of Millane the which was a Painter, of the age of fiue and twenty yeares, the which was fallen into a spice of etisie, and did spit much blood with a continuall feauer, the which I cured in this order. First I let him blood vnder the tongue on the right side, and after that I gaue him a quantitie of our Aroma∣tico with Plantine water, because the bléeding taketh away the superfluous blood of the brest, the which nature sendeth forth by itselfe, and the Aromatico with Plan∣tine water is cold and dry, which are most necessary for that disease, for they euacuate the stomacke, reercute
and mittigatethe alteration, those things being done, I caused him to vse our Quintessence solutiuo to euacuate the body, in respect of the putrifaction already conceiued within the intestinalles, also I caused him to vse the Quintessence of the flower of flowers, & annointed his stomacke with Magno licore, and also he vsed our Ele∣ctuarie of Althea, and so by these meanes he was helpt perfectly. The cure of a certaine man wounded in 13. places. IT hapned that a certaine man called Alessandro Ore∣fice, was wounded afore my lodging in 13. places, and there fell for deade, and then by a certaine friend, was brought into my lodging, and there I laide him vpon a table and tooke off his clothes, and sowed all those wounds which were to be sowed or stitched, and dressed him with our Quintessence, and Balsamo, and Magno licore, and our secret pouder, and so by these meanes in 15. dayes he was perfect whole. Of remedies that helpe many diseases. THere are many and sundry diseases, and they be helpt with diuers and sundry medicines, therefore I will make a note onely of those the which are most vsed. And first I will write of those remedies that helpe the feauer of all sorts, the which are these, the strope of Bur∣rage, Buglose, Endiue, Cicory, Hoppes, Fumitori, Rhabarh, Cassia, Scamony, Sine, Barly water, sirop of Sitroues, and such like. The remedies that helpe the Poxe are these, Alees, Coloquintida, Turbit, Hermodactalis, Scamony, Preci∣pitate, Oriola, Oliuella, the vnction of Mercury, Lignum sanctum, Cina, Salsa perilla, the perfume of Sinaber, a stone of hearbes, our Cerote magistrale, and such like things: those remedies that helpe the cough, are Enula campane, Garlike, Sulfure, Honey, Lapaciolle, the oyle of Sul∣fure, and such like: those remedies that helpe the scabbes are the iuyce of Aureola, Sulfure, Litarge, Aqua
realle, Roch Allome: those that are troubled with paines in the body, may vse Genciane, Nutmegs, Dictamus al∣bus, Euphorbio, those that are wounded shall vse Ter∣pentine, our Balsamo, Magno licore, Aqua Balsamo, Elixer vitae, Cerote magistrale, oyle of Hiperconie, of our inuention, and such like: Those that prouoke vrine, are the flowers of Mallowes, Alcakengi, Hogges lise, Can∣tarides, and such like, and therefore I will not trouble you further, because I haue written sufficiently in my other bookes in sundry places, and hereafter I will write of diuers and sundry medicines of our inuention, neuer found out afore of any man. Here beginneth the order to make diuers and sundrie Me∣dicines of our inuention, neuer found out before by any man. And first to make our Petra Philosophale, that hel∣peth against all manner of diseases, that hapneth vnto man or woman, or any other animall terrestriall. THere hath always béene a great questioning among the Philosophers, whether that one medicine might helpe against all diseases or no. The which I affirme, and will approue with sufficient reason, that the Petra Philosophalle made of our inuention, may helpe against all the infirmities that commeth vnto mans body, and two onely reasons I will shewe thée with breuitie: the first of them is this, that all sorts of infirmities haue their originall and beginning of the stomacke, and to know the truth ye may se manifestly, that if the body be neuer so little infirmid the stomacke is also grieued: For ye may sée how the animals terrestriall, neuer help them∣selues of other infirmity than of the stomacke, and when they will help themselues, they eat hearbes, the which causeth them to vomit, and this doth signifie that they haue no other infirmity than the aforesaid, so by the ex∣perience of the animals I approue that the infirmitie is caused of the stomacke, and this is the first reason. The
second is, that all the medicines wherein our Petra Phi∣losophalle is put, as soone as they are come into the sto∣macke, it draweth vnto it all the euill humours of the stomack, and of the whole body, and mixeth with them, and so Nature sendeth them forth by vomit or by sege, or both, and so the stomacke shall be euacuated of that mat∣ter, and the body remaine free from impediments of in∣firmities, so that by this reason I affirme that our Petra Philosophalle may helpe against all sorts of infirmities, and to knowe the truth, I haue proued it by expe∣rience, in all manner of infirmities, and alwayes haue found it to doe much good vnto all men, and hurt none vnto my knowledge, and the order to make this Petra Philosophalle, is thus: Rec. Salniter, Roch allome, Vitrioll Romane, of each two pound. First, dry the Vitriol in a earthen panne, and then beat it to pouder, and mixe it with the other mat∣ters, and put thereunto foure ounces of Sal gemme, then put it in a goord with his head, and a receiuer, well luted, and distill it in a winde furnace, so that ye may make fire with wood, and at the first make small fire, and so increase it according to Arte, and alwayes lay wet cloathes on the head and receer, and that thou shalt doe because the spirits of the water shall not fly away. Ye shall vnderstand that in the beginning of your distillation, the receiuer will waxe red like blood, and then turne white, and at the last when ye giue it strong fire, it will turne red againe, and those are the pure spi∣rits of the Aqua fortis, and then at the end, the recei∣uer will turne whit againe, and then it is ended, then let it waxe cold, and then kéepe it in a glasse close shut, to make our Petra Philosophalle. Then take Mercury, lib. 1. Quickelyme 6. ounces, Sope 4. ounces, common ashes 3. ounces, Mixe them together in a morter of stone, and put them into a
Retort, and distil it with a strong fire, vntill all the Mer∣cury become foorth into the receiuer: then take it foorth, and kéep it in a glasse, to make thy composition, the which is made thus. Rec. The water that thou madest first, & put it into a goord of glasse being well luted, and then put in thy Mer∣cury that thou diddest distill afore. After that, take Stéele in thinne plates 1. ounce, Iron also in thin plates 2. oun∣ces, Fine Golde in leaues, the waight of two French crownes, and put them altogether in the glasse, and pre∣sently set on the head, for it will begin to boyle and cause red fumes lyke bloud, the which thou shalt receiue in a receiuer, and presently set thy glasse in the Furnace and giue it fire vntill all the water be come foorth with the fume. Then let it coole, and kéepe that water close in a glasse, then breake the other glasse that stoode in the fire, and in the bottome thou shalt finde our Petra Philoso∣phalle, the which thou shalt grinde finely, and searce it in most fine powder, and then washe it well with Vineger distilled, and drye it againe, and at the last wash it with Rose-water, and drye it very well, stirring it continual∣ly ouer the fire, then kéepe it as a precious Iewell close in a Glasse. The order to vse it, I wil write héere after, in sundry places: Ye shall vnderstande that the water the which ye distilled away from the stone, will serue for the same purpose agaui: But ye must take but halfe the quanti∣tie of the afore-saide matters, and when ye haue distilled it agayne from the stone, yee shall preserue it, for an infi∣nite number of purposes as I will shew thée heere-after. To make our Balme artificiall, with the order to vse it, and wherefore it serueth. THis Balsamum hath all the vertues of the naturall Balme, although not in qualytie, yet in vertue, and the order to make it is thus.
Rec. Venice Turpentine 1. pound, Oyle of Bayes, that is perfect without mixture 4. ounces, Galbanum 3. ounces, Gum Araby 4. ounces, Olibanum, Mirra electe, Gum hede∣ra, of each 3. ounces, Lignum Aloes, Galingall, Cloues, Consolida minore, Cinamon, Nutmegs, Zedoaria, Ginger, Diptamnum album, of each 1. ounce, Muske of Leuant, Ambergres, of each one dram. Beat all those aforesayd things together, and put them into a Retort of glasse well luted and put there-to. 6, pound of Rectified Aqua vitae without fleame, and so let it stande viij. dayes, and then distil it by sand, and there will come foorth a white water mixed with oyle, and so kéepe thy fire small, vntill there come foorth a blackish Oyle, then change thy recei∣uer, and set thereto an other, and increase thy fire vntill all the spirites be come foorth, then seperate the Oyle from the black water, and kéep them by themselues, and the lyke shall ye do by the first water. The first water that is white, is called Aqua del Balsamo. and the Oyle seperated from that is called, Oleum del Balsamo. The second water that is blacke is called Balsamo artificiato, the which would be kept as a pretious Iewell. The first water is most excellent to cléere and preserue the sight of the eyes, also the face being washed therewith, it maketh it very faire, and preserueth it youthfully, it kéepeth backe age it breaketh the grauell in the reynes, and prouoketh vrine, the which is stopped through car∣nositie, it helpeth all manner of wounds, in what place of the body soeuer they be, if ye wash them with the said water, and wet therein cloutes, and lay thereon, for his operation is so strange, that it séemeth rather diuine then humane. It helpeth much against the Etisie and against all sorts of Cattarres, and Coughs. If ye wash a Sciati∣ca, therewith and lay thereon a cloath wet in the same, it taketh away the paine presently. The other water called the mother of Balme, helpeth scales in short time if ye wash them therewith, so doth it
helpe the white scall, Lepra, and all sorts of vlcers that are not corrosiue; it serueth also against a number of other infirmities, the which I will let passe at this time. The oyle of Balme doth serue for an infinite number of things, and especially for wounds in the head, where the bone and pannicle is hurt, putting it therein. It preserueth the face if ye annoint it therewith. It is most excellent against the Plurisie, giuing thereof a dram at a time with the water of Balme. The Balme artificiall is a miraculous liquor, if any haue the stitch in the side, and take two drams thereof, it presently will help him. It is also good against the cough, and cattarre, and coldnesse in the head and stomacke, and for wounds in the head. It is a most soueraigne remedy, if ye annoint all the head therewith once a day, because it pearceth into the braine, and also into the stomacke beneath. It resolueth all tumors in all parts of the body with spéed. It resolueth a Quartaine in short time if ye annoint all the body therewith, leauing no part. And to be short, I know no disease neither  nor yet cold, but this Balsamum doth good vnto, as well the hot diseases as the cold, because it cooleth the hotte, and hea∣teth the cold, and this it doth by his quality and hidden vertue, so that I haue found in this precious liquor such vertues, that I am not able to declare them all, so that euery one the which is furnished with this precious Balme may be kept from infirmities, and shall not néed to séeke the naturall Balme, with so much expences and danger of life, as hath beene many times seene. To make our Aromatico, the which helpeth against all manner of infirmities, of what qualitie soeuer they be. ARomatico Leonardo, is so called, because it is com∣pounded and made by his inuention, and is a mira∣culous medicine, that serueth against all manner of di∣seases,
of what qualitie soeuer they be, for it worketh this operatiō, that is, as soon as it ioyneth to the stomack, it draweth to it all the euill humours of the body and imbraceth them, and caryeth them forth of the body both by vomit and sege, and so leaueth nature vnburdened, the which may preuaile to his pleasure, because it hath no impediment, and by this reason I approue that our Aromatico helpeth against all diseases as is said afore, and the order to make it is thus: Rec. Fine white Sugar 4. ounc. pure Pearles, Muske, Safrane, Lignum aloes, Cinamon, ana, one scruppell, Petra Philosophale, 4. drames, mixe them to∣gether, and make thereof Losanges with Rose-water, according to Art, the which ye shall keepe in a boxe of wood close shut, and the order to vse it is thus, that when the Phisitian doth goe to visite any sicke person, and that hee will prepare him some medicine to take in∣ward, the best & most perfectest medicine that he can or∣deine is our Aromatico, because it euacuateth the stomack by vomit, and the body downeward, and his operation is such, that it doth in maner helpe any crud sort of in∣firmitie, and the quantitie is from one drame, to two drames, and may be taken in broth, in wine, in water, or mixe it with any Pils, or potion, giuing you charge, that when ye put it in any potion that ye leaue none in the bottome of the cup where ye drinke it out, because the Petra Philosophale is heauie, and will remaine in the bottome, for if that remaine it will not worke at all, gi∣uing you also charge that the said day that ye giue this medicine, that ye let the Patient drinke as much crude water as he will, and giue them little meate to eate that day, and this is the order to vse this medicine. To make our Electuario Angelico, and the order to vse it, and in what diseases. ELectuario Angelico Romano, is so called, because it was compounded of me in the Cittie of Rome, in the
time of Pope Paulo quarto, and because this compo∣sition worketh sodainely, I called it Angelico, and is most excellent against many diseases, it is good against all sortes of feauers, giuing it Peninoratiuo, and for the stitch in the side it is most rare, because it taketh away the viscocitie in the stomacke, and openeth the pores, and is good against the Goute, for if they take it euery third day once, in ten dayes they shall be helpt, it is also good against the cough, Cattar, and for the Mitt, and for those that haue the Poe, or the running Gout, and such like influences, and the order to make it is thus. Rec. Safran, Lignum alocs, Sinamon, red Corall, ana, 3. drames, Eleborus higer, without preparation, 2. ounc. Electuario de succo rosarum, Mesue, that is not too much boyled, 6. ounc. Sugar rosat, 8. ounc. Muske of Leuant 1. dram, Petra Philosophale 3. ounc. our Quin∣tessence of wine 2. ounc. purified honey as much as will suffise to make it in forme of a Lectuary, mixe them on a small fire in an arthen pan, and when it is made, kéepe it in a vessell of glasse, for any other vessell will not be good: This Electuary ye may mixe with any sollible me∣dicine, but ye must take it fasting: the quantity is from 2. drams to 4. drams. Ye shall vnderstand that this in a maner reuiueth the dead by his great vertue, as hath but séene many thousand times, in Venice and in Rome, most worthy of memory, and therefore if any Phisitian desire to get same in the world, let him vse our Electuario An∣gelica, the which worketh miracles on the earth. Of the vigitable stone of our inuention, to transinute a body of one complexion into another, and to make him sound for euer. THe way to make the vigitable stone is rare, and his vertues are infinite and without comparison, and the cures that are done therewith are so miraculous, that the world will not beléeue them, although it be
the méere truth, and the order to make it is thus. Rec. Tartar of white Wine that is thicke and shining, Turpentine that is cleare and pure: the hearbe called Aloes, that hath leaues as long as an arme, and dented on both sides, and some call it Semper viue, take of each of these one pound, and stamp them together, and put them into an vrinall with a head and receiuer, and di∣still them in a wind furnace vntill all the substance be come forth, then take the fesses out of the glasse, and grinde them with the said water, then distill them as thou didst afore, and alwayes at the last giue it a strong fire that the fesses may remains well burnt, then take out the fesses againe and grind them with the water as thou didst first, and distill it againe, and this thou shalt doe 15. or 20. times, vntill all that water be con∣sumed, and that the fesses remaine white like salt, then lay them fesses on a smooth stone in a moist place, and it will turne into water, the which kéepe in a glasse close shut, and that is the water of the vigitable stone, the which water is of so much vertue, that one scruple therof being put into 2. ounces of Iulepe of Violets, and giuen to drink to any that is infirmed or euill complexionated, in lesse then 24. dayes he shall be helpt of any grieuous disease, and this must be taken in the morning fasting when the stomacke is emptie, for then it worketh better his operation. This is an excellent remedie against the wormes, gi∣uing it in the aforesaid manner, it mundifieth the Liuer, and dryeth the humiditie of the Milt, it dissolueth the Cough and Cattarres, it prouoketh vrine where it is let, with diuers other vertues, the which I will let passe vntill another time, for if I should write them all, they would not be credited, and therefore wee Phisitions should not rest to practise in all things that séemeth to vs conuenient, and I promise thée truely that he which shall occupie this thing, shall work miracles on the earth,
and winne great faine and honour. Ye shall vnderstand that this is the stone that the Philosophers haue long sought to fixe their medicine minerall, so that making the proiection, they ioyne the medicine with mettalling bodyes, and not to goe away in fume, because this stone resisteth all great ies without consuming, and fixeth Sulfure and Orpiment, so that they shall abide the fire, and maketh them white, if ye make proiection therewith on Copper, or on Lattine, it will turne it into the white∣nesse of pure siluer, and that I haue séen with mine eyes, so that ye may sée of what importāce this vigitable stone is, the which worketh such goodly transmutations, as well in mettalling bodyes, as in humane bodyes, and therefore it is to be accounted of, because it may saue the life of many that vse it in their medicines. Our solible sirop with the order to vse it. SOlyble siropes made in decoction are very wholsome and of great facultie, and specially in the cruditie of humours, and the reason is this: because it disperseth the matter, and euacuaeth it with great ease; and without danger or trouble of the Patient, and the order to make it is thus. Rec. Sage, Rosemary, Worme-wood, Cicory, Car∣dus sanctus, Nottels, Organy, of each a handfull. Figs▪ Raisons, Dates sweet Almonds, Salgem, ana 4. ounces, Coloquintida, Aloes hepatica, Cinamon, Mirabolani citrini, ana 2. ounces, Common hony, two pound. Stampe them all grosely, and put them to infuse in sighéene pounds of faire water, then boyle it till halfe be consumed, then strayne it, and distill it by a filter, and aromatise it with two caretes of Muske and a pint of Rose-water, and then it is made, the which ye shall kéepe in a bottle of glasse close stopt, the quantitie is from soure ounces to sixe ounces. In winter you shall take it very warme. And in the
Spring and Autumne, ye shall take it but warme. In Summer ye shall take it colde, for this purgeth the grose humors of the body, and hurteth not the stomacke, ye may vse it in a feuer 4. or 5. dayes together, and it will helpe it. In cruditie of humours, as the French Poxe, Goutes, Cattares, Doglie Artetiche, and such lyke mat∣ters, where there is no accident of Feuer, ye may take it x. or .xv. dayes together, and cannot hurt by any meanes, for it purgeth most excellent, it is giuen against the Cough, against fluxe of the vrine and paynes in the head, and carnositie in the yard, for the Hemerhodes, and in summe, it is good against al diseases caused of corrupt hu∣mors, for it hath such vertue that it draweth from all parts, and euacuateth the humours intestinall, for of this Sirop I haue had great experience, in such persons as were in manner banished and had lost their taste, and presently vsing this, they came to good temperature, and I haue vsed it an infinite number of times, in persons that were vlcerated and full of sores, euil handled of for∣tune, and of the infirmitie, and finding no meanes to cure them as they should be, I gaue them this Sirop fourtéene or fiftéene dayes and then they were cured, with a num∣ber of other things, the which would be too long to writ, and therefore I would with euery one to vse this, not onely in the afore-sayd matters, but in all other diseases. Our Siropo magistrale Leonardo, the which serueth against an infinite number of diseases, and is a rare medicine. THis Sirop is solutiue and very pleasant to vse, and cannot hurt in any wise, the which is seldome séene in other medicines, and the order to make it is thus: Rec. The leaues of Sine 2. ounc. Fumitorie, May∣den-haire, Harts-tongue, Liuer-wort, Epitemum, Elle∣mo, Pollipo of the Oake, the flowers of Burrage, of Bu∣glosse, Licorice, of each 3. ounc. Colloquintida, Elleborus niger, Aloes hepatica, Mirabolani Indi, anna, 1. ounce,
Proynes 14. Sebestien 12. Tamarise 1. ounc. Stampe them grosely, and infuse them in x. pounds of Fumito∣rie water, then boyle it vntill the consumption of the third part and then straine it, and in that which is strai∣ned put these things: Sirop of Stecados 1. pound, Sa∣fron 1. scruple, Mel rosarum 6. ounc. Rectified Aqua vitae 4. ounc. Mulke 1. dram, the muflege of Marsh Mal∣lowes 4. ounc. Beniamin 1. ounc. Rose-water 3. ounc. and then it is made, the which ye shall kéepe in a tempe∣rate place, and this you must take warme; the quanti∣tie is from 2. ounces to 4. ounces, & it is a most safe me∣dicine to be vsed without kéeping of any dyet. It hel∣peth those much that haue Pellaria, scabbes, Hemerho∣des and such like diseases, and may be giuen vnto a wo∣man with child without any hanger, when she shall haue occasion to vse any. Our Sirop against the melancolicke humour, and specially where there is ventositie in the stomacke. IT were necessary for those that will make this Sirop, to be expert in the Art, for it would be made with great diligence, and the order to make it is thus: Rec. Water of Fumitorie, of Hops, of Wormewood, of Maiden-haire, of each fiue pound. Then with this wa∣ter thou shalt make a decotion with these things that follow. Rec. Polipodium of the Oake 1. pound, Sine leaues, Epitimum, ana, 4. ounc. Cordiall flowers 2. handfuls, Mayden-haire 1. handfull, Licorice, Raisons, Cinamon, of each 2. ounc. the 4. cold seeds 2. ounc. Make thereof a Decoction according to Art, and straine it, then take 4. pound of that Decoction, and put thereto the iyce of Burrage, Buglosse, of Hops, of each 2. ounc. common Honey 6. ounc. Then with white Sugar make a Sirop in good forme, and armatise it with muske and Amber, putting thereto 1. ounc. of Plyris without Muske, and then it is made. The quantitie is from 3. ounc. to 4. ounc.
in the morning warme, and fast thereon, at the least 3. or 4. houres, for this purgeth meruellously the melan∣cholike humours, and all other grosse humours, and dis∣solueth winde, and comforteth the heart, &c. Our Potion of Lignum Sanctum, the which is miraculous to dissolue crud and maligne humours, with the order to vse it, in the French Poxe, & such like diseases. BEcause the Poxe is a disease contagious, putrified and corrupt, and worketh many euill effects, as I haue written in my Caprici medicinale, therefore it were necessary to prepare most excellent and rare remedies to dissolue the same; which medicines are infinit. But in this chapter I will write one that purgeth the crud and viscous humors downewards, and doth assut∣tiliate the grosse humors, and dryeth all sorts of subtill humours that offend Nature, and sendeth them forth by sweat, it dryeth the melancholicke humour, and dissol∣ueth choller, and is most holesome for those that are trou∣bled with that disease, because it dryeth much and dissol∣ueth the disease, with many other effects, as by expe∣rience thou maist see, and the order to make it is thus: Rec. The barke of Lignum sanctum, grosely beaten 1. pound, and lay it to stéepe in xiiij. pound of faire water 24. houres, then boyle it vntill 4. pounds be consumed, then put there to, Pollypody of the Oke 2. ounces, Cicory one handfull, Aloes epatike 4. drames, and let them boyle for an houre: Then put therevnto the leaues of Syue, Epitemum, ana 1. ounce, Coloquintida 6. drames, Sugar 8. ounces, then let it boyle till halfe be boyled away, and that there remaine 7. pounds, then straine it, and put it in a glasse with 12. graines of Muske, and kéepe it very close stopt, and this is the strops the which ye shall take twice a day, that is morning and euening, then make this drinke following the which shall be the common drinke at all times, to your meate.
Rec. One pound of Lignum sanctum, Raspead, and steepe it in x. pounds of white wine that is tipe, and let it boile an houre, then put therto xv. pound of faire water and let boyle a little more, and then straine it, and kéepe it in a glasse bottle, for this is to be vsed all the day time, and the order to vse these is thus. First when any féeleth himselfe grieued with the poxe or any such like disease, he must keepe his bed at the least xx. dayes and vse to take of the first sirope or pocyon euery morning a good draft being as warme as he may suffer it, then kéeuer him well with clothes that he may sweat as much as he can, then take off the clothes by little and little, and dry him with warme clothes, and so let him repose for 2. houres, and then let him eat, and his meate must be drye, as Bis∣cote, rost-meate▪ Raysons of the Sun, Almonds, and some times a rawe Egge, and his drinke at meales, and all the day besides shall be the last made with wine & wa∣ter, then at night giue him of the first Sirope as ye did in the morning, and cause him to sweat, and then drye him, and this order thou shalt vse 20. dayes together not comming forth of thy chamber, and by the grace of God thou shalt be helpt of any such grieuous infirmity, as I haue seene the experience thereof an infinite of times, to my great honour, for it may be occupied in all comple∣xions with safety, as by the ingredience thou maist see. A most meruellous water and rare, to cause a man to auoid the grauell in vrine, and to mundifie the raines. THe grauell in the raines of the backe is caused and ingendred of great heat and drinesse in those parts, as thou maist plainely see by those which are troubled there∣with, for their raines is so hot that they cannot abide any heauy garment to lye thereon, and they alwayes make their water with great paine and burning: there∣fore if thou wilt helpe that infirmitie, it were necessary to refrigerate the raines and moisten it with good iuyce,
and take away that burning of the vrine, and so in that order the Patient shall be helpt, and this thou maist doe in short time, and with great ease with this remedie. Rec. The séed of small Lemonds, the séed of Oranges, ana, 1. pound, Saxifrage 6. pounds, Balme, Scolopendria. Pellitory of the wall, Sparagus, Crisoni, Isope, Fenell rootes, Parsely roots, ana, 6. ounc. stampe them altoge∣ther and make them in forme of a liquid vnguent with the iuyce of Lemons, then distill it in a common tinne stillitory being nted, vntil the matter remaine dry, then kéepe that water in a glasse close stopt, and when ye will occupy this water, ye must first purge the body of the crud and viscous humors, and likewise euacuate the sto∣macke of choller and flegme, that being done thou shalt take euery morning and euening 6. ounces warme, and it would be necessary for those that take it, to vse a dyet, and to refraine moist and cold meates, and vse onely dry things, and so this water shall helpe those aforesaid griefes, as I haue proued diuers times. To make the water of Lignum sanctum, most wholesome against the Poxe, with a new order. COmmonly they they vse to take the water of Lignum sanctum, against the Poxe, the which surely ie most wholesome, but it must be taken in good order and forme, and must be made with great discretion, and not as they vse it now a dayes, for they giue it some 3. or 4. times, and neuer the better, although the wood be suffi∣cient enough to helpe them, and therefore I would wish euery one that will vse this water to take it in such order as it ought to be, the which I will shew thee hereafter. Rec. Lignum sanctum rasped small 1. pound, the bark being beaten 3. ounc. infuse them in 12. pounds of faire water one night, & the next morning put therein 1. pound of honey, the which is put in, because it is apara∣tiue and warme, and helpeth to prouoke sweat, and cau∣seth
it to haue a good fast, then boyle it till halfe be consu∣med, then put thereto Cardus sanctus 4. ounces, strong wine 3. pound, then boyle it vntill a third part be consu∣med,, and then it is made, then straine it, and take forth the Candus sanctus, and put thereon 20. pound of faite water, and 1. pound of honey, and let it boyle vntill 4. pound be consumed, and straine it and keepe it in a glasse bottle, for this is the common drinke to drinke all the day long, and the order to take it is thus: first afore ye wil take this water it were necessary to take our Siropo solutiuo, 7. or 8. dayes, after that take our Electario An∣gelica sem. ounc. that being done in the name of God take this potion of Lignum sanctum in this order, take in the morning at the appearing of the day 8. ounc. very warm as ye may fur, and presently lay cloaths on him, and cause him to sweat 2. houres, and then dry him with warme cloathes, and so let him remaine 2. houres, and then giue him to eate, and his meat shall be Bisket, Rai∣sons, Almonds, and some time a little rost meat, and no other: then in the euening about the 22. houre, ye shall giue him the said sirope as ye did in the morning; neither more nor lesse, and cause him to sweat, and about the 24. houre giue him onely Bisket and Raisons, and the other common drinke that was made last, giuing you war∣ning that ye make this drinke fresh euery third day, be∣cause it shall not hurt the stomack, and euery wéeke once ye shall take a Pill of Marte millitare, and that day thou shalt eate birds flesh because of weakening, also ye shall take very great heed to one thing, and that is this, if it happen that at the beginning of this cure, there commeth a feauer or other accident vnto the Patient, that in any wise ye leaue not the cure, but follow the order, for that is a certaine signe of health, for many times I haue gi∣uen this water and vnto some in the 4. or 5. day the ea∣uer came, and tarryed many times x. or xij. dayes, and then the feauer went away with the corrupt disease, and
all for company, and so in short time they were cured, so that as I haue said afore, when that signe appeareth, and is deliuered, it is a certaine signe of health: Also I will aduise thee of another thing, and that is this, if the Pa∣tient cannot sweate, ye shall annoint him all ouer with the oyle of Quinces, the which will cause him to sweat a pace: for without sweat the cure will not be perfect, and this order thou shalt kéepe at the least fortie dayes toge∣ther withi the chamber, so that there come no ayre in, for it will hinder the cure. Our distilation for the Etesia, the which is of meruellous vertue and without comparison: with the order to vse it. HAuing written sufficiently of the qualitie of the Fe∣uer Etike and his cure, in my Caprici medicinalle, here I will writ of nothing but the order to make this precious Licore, with the order to vse it, as well for that disease as for other such like, and the order to make it is thus: Rec. A young Hen that hath not yet laid Egges, and pull her quicke, and then take forth her guts onely, and stamp her in a stone morter, and put thereto as much rum of white bread as the flesh doth weigh, and stamp them together, and put thereto a handfull of fresh sa∣bious, and as many leaues of gold as weigheth a french Crowne, then put thereto as much water of Mortella as all the aforesaid matter doth weigh, and so leaue it one night, and then distill it in an vrinall of glasse, with 3. pound of strong wine, in Balneo Marie, vntill the fesses remaine drye, and then it is ended. Then for euery pound of this distillation, put there∣unto 1. ounc. of water of Honey made according to our order, and kéep it in a glasse vnstopt that the strong sa∣uor may gOe away, and the order to vse it in the Feuer Etike I haue written in this Chapter, this serueth also for those inward causes the which are most troublesome,
and for thee that haue a burning feauer, also for women that haue a eauer in their childbirth. Our vigitable Sirop the which is miraculous and diuine. THis Sirop is one of my  secrets with the which I haue done many  many times, in  operations, on many , and haue béene so tha∣rie of it, that I ment  to set it forth in my lifetime, but yet I considering what great benefite it might be vnto the world, I thought good to set it forth that euery one might be serued according to his pleasure: and the like I will doe of many other seers of great impor∣tance, the which shall be dispearce among my bookes: and the order to make this Sitop is thus: Rec. Lignum oes, Ropontico, Eupatorio, red San∣ders of each 2. ounc. deae them and make thereof a de∣coction in good forme, and with 4. pound of this decoction make a sirop, and put thereto these things following, whiles it is hot, Sarane 1. sruple, Ginger 1. drame, Muske 2. carrets, the solution of our Petra vigitabile, 3. ounc. Cloues, , of each  sruple and a halfe, than keepe it in a glasse close shut, and this is our vigitable sirop, the which worketh miracles in diuers in∣firmities, for by his nature it purifieth the blood, mun∣difieth the Liuer, comforteth the heart, preserueth the stomacke, prouoketh vrine, dissolueth graell in the reines, it helpeth the cough, and helpeth digestion, and quieteth all the humors in the sicke person, with diuers other vertues, the which I will leaue till another time. This may  with broth, with distilled waters, or with any decoction or medicine fasting, the quantitie is from 1.  2. , and happy shall they be which shall vse it. An  helpeth the Cough with great  and ease. THe Cough  of a  humor, and cold∣nesse in the , and therefore i ye will helpe
it, it were necessary to haue a remedy that doth ripen the cattarre, and mollifie the stomacke, and the order to make it is thus: Rec. Enula campana 4. ounc. Marsh Mallowes, 12. ounc. Quinces 16. ounc. but if ye cannot get Quinces, ye may take Marmilade ready made, and boyle it in faire water with the said rootes, vntill they be dry, then stamp them in a morter, and straine them through a strainer, then take for euery pound of that matter 2. pound of white Honey, and boyle them together, but boyle them not too much, then take it from the fire, and put there∣unto for euery pound of the aforesaid matter, one scruple of Saffran, and 1. dram of Cinamon, and 2. ounces of Sulphur, and 1. scruple of Licorice, and then incorpo∣rate them well together, and aromatise it with muske and Rose-water, and this ye shall vse morning and eue∣ning, for this is of so great vertue that it is to be won∣dred at, because the Mallowes doe molifie, the Enula campana, doth warme and causeth digestion, and com∣forteth the stomacke, the Quinces are cordiall & warme, the Sulphur is a great dryer, the which destroyéth the euill humors of the body, the Saffran comforteth the heart, the Cinamon is stomacall, the Licorice is moli∣ficatiue, and digesteth the matter, so that of force this Electuary must helpe any kinde of Cough, except it come of the Poxe, for then it will doe small pleasure, as I haue proued. Electuario benedicto Leonardi, the which purgeth the body without any griefe, and is miraculous in his operation. THis Electuario benedicto, is compound of our inuen∣tion many yeares agoe, and is so called because of his meruellous operation, and the order to make it, is thus: Rec. Of a certaine kinde of fruite called of some Spina merula, of others Spini ceruino, with his berry, they make a kinde of say gréene, take of these berries when they be
ripe, and stamp them, and take thereof the iuyce, and straine it by a filter, and for euery pound of the aforesaid iuyce ye shall put therein these things, Sinamond, Sa∣frane, Cloues, , Ginger, ana, 1. dram, Sena, Alo. 3. dram, mixe them well together, and set it in the  it be dryed like a pase, and then make it liquid againe with these following. Rec. Rosewater, our Quintessence, ana, 2. ounc. for a pound, Muske 2. carrets for a pound, Mirrha 1. dram for a pound: incorporate all the aforesaid things toge∣ther, and set it in the Sunne vntill it be through drye and may be made in pounder, of the which ye shall take what quantity ye wil, and mixe it with as much Honey purified, and that is  Electuario bnedicto, the which purgeth the body without pains, and preserueth the sto∣macke, purgeth the head, and helpeth putrified feers, with diuers other things the which I will not write at this time. Ye may kéepe this mixture 6. months after it is mixt with Honey: the dose is from halfe an ounce to a whole ounce. Ye may take them in Pilles, in broth, in a Lectuarie, or in Wine, or how ye will, and alwayes they shall  his effect well. An Electuarle against the euill disposition of the Liue and Stomacke. THe  with diuers &  causes, but for the  part it is of heate: For the heate showeth some outward signe as is séene by experience, for their Face and Nose , they haue heate in their Legs, chps in the palme of their hand and séete. It ingen∣dreth Fluxes in the body, burning of Vrine, running of the Raines, and such like effects. And the order to  them is thus. Rec. Citraca, Solopendria, Eples, Euperlo, ana 3. ounces, beate them in  pwr, Lignum aloes thrée drams,  2. , Cinamon 2. , white  and a hal, mixe them and incor∣porate
them together without fire, then take thereof mor∣ning and euening 1. ounce at a time, but afore ye begin to take this electuary, ye shall take a quantitie of our Electuario Angelica, and then in short time they shall be holpe as thou maist well sée by the ingredience that goeth into this composition. Our magistrall Electuary of Sulfure the which serueth against diuers sorts of infirmities. AS the fire hath vertue to heate and drye materyall things, so hath the Sulfure vertue to warme, and to drye the humiditie and couldnesse of our bodyes, for I haue occupied it diuers and sundry times, and all wayes haue séene diuers and sundry good effects, but for the bet∣ter commoditie, and more ease to vse it, I haue com∣pounded this Electuary, the which thou maist vse with ease and benifite vnto a number, and the order to make it is thus. Rec. Very fine Sulfure that is without earth, and make it in fine powder 1. pound, Cinamon halfe an ounce, Safran one scruple, Ginger 2. drams, Muske dissolued in rose water 2. Carrets, white honey crude as much as will suffice to make it in a lectuary without fire, then keepe it in a dry place: and this ye shall vse in the mor∣ning sasting, and his quantitie is from 4 drams to 7. this dryeth vp scabs, prouoketh vrine, breaketh the stone in the raynes, it helpeth the cough, dryeth vp the watering of the eyes, causeth a good appetite, with diuers other things the which I will leaue to the experimentors. Our Electuario of Consolida magore that serueth for many diseases inwardly. THis Consolida magore, is a herbe so called, because of his effect that it doth in healing of wounds, and other places of the flesh separated, for if ye eate thereof it will helpe the rupture, and all sorts of wounds penetrating, and vlcers of the longs, it dryeth the milte and such like
effects, but because thou maist it more commodious, I have compounded an Electuary the which is excellent and rare and is made thus. Rec. The roote of Consolida magore, 1. pound, and boyle it in water vntill it be  thou stampe them in a morter and passe them through a straines, then put thereto as much white Honey as the matter weigheth, and boyle them on a small fire vntill it he come to the forme of a Lectuary, and when it is boyled put therof  these things. Rec. The shelles of Pomgarnads in fine pouder, 1. ounc. Lignum aloes 6. drams, Mirra, Masticke, Sarco∣colla, Sanguis dragonis in graine, ana, 2. drams, Sinamon 1. dram, Muske of Leuant dissolued in Rose-water 1. carret, th incorporate them well whiles it be warme: Yee shall note, that the body must be first well purged are ye take this Electuary, and ye must also kéepe a dyet that the medicine may worke the better, for this helpeth all the aforesaid diseases inwardly as is said afore: ye may vse it implaistr wife vpon wounds, and broken bones, and vse it inwardly, and so the Patient shall re∣maine helpt. With this I haue séene men of great age helpt, that were burst , and wounded from one part to the other, and also broken bones, and bruises, the which if I should  them, it would not be cre∣dited. Our impory all Electuary for the Mother. THis  for the Mother, is by Nature tempa∣rate hot, and by his heate prouoketh Menstrua and comforteth the Matrixe, and all other weake parts, of what causes so euer it be, and the order to make it is thu. Rec. Cinamon elect 1. ounce, Nutmegs, Mae, Cloues, ginger, ana 1.  Cassie ligne vj. drams, Mar∣ilad  Lignum al 4. drams, red Sands 2. drams, Aqua vitae well rectified 3. ounces, fine Muske 2 Carets, purified honey 2. pound, then make thereof a
Lectuary according to Art, the which is most excellent against the indisposition of the mother: But first ere ye begin to take this medicine, it were necessary to take a quantitie of our Pillole Aquilone, and then to take this Electuary in the morning fasting thereon, 4. or 5. houres, the quantitie is from halfe an ounce to an ounce, also that time that ye eate this Electuary, ye shall eate no euill meates, as hogges flesh, fryed meates, or baked meates, or such like as might hinder the operation of the Electua∣ry: This Electuary ye shall use at the least 40. dayes to∣gether, and so thou shalt sée meruellous effects thereof, as I haue done a thousand times in Cicilia, in Naples, and in Rome, and also in Venice, and alwayes it fell out in one order, and yet the Regions are much different one from another, and the inhabitants are contrary of com∣plexion, neuerthelesse this medicine wrought alwayes one effect in operation, as well in one place as in another, and therefore I approue it to be a most blessed medicine and of great experience. Pilles against poyson the which are of meruel∣lous vertues. THese Pilles are of such experience against poyson, as is not to be beléeued, and the order to make them is thus: Rec. Imperatrice, Bistorta, Tormentilla, Valeriana, Dittamo, bianco, Carlina, Aristologia rotunda, Genciana, Agarico electo, Salgem, of each a like quantitie, beate them in fine poder, then take the iuyce of Garlike and Oynions, as much as will make it into a paste, also put into the iuyce 1. drame of Saffrane then let the said past being mixt dry in the shadow, and then beats it into pou∣der againe, and mixe it with the aforesaid iuyce in good forme, and kéepe it in a vessell of leade vntill thou hast néede, and when thou wilt occupie it, take thereof 4. drams and make thereof Pilles with Siropo Acetoso, in good forme, the which thou shalt giue vnto him that is
poysoned, and in short time tho shalt sée miracles of that medicine: for all the aforesaid simples in manner alone is sufficient to deliuer one that were poysoned, but being mixed together it worketh greater effet. Vnguento magno Leonardo. THis Vnguento magno is so called by reason of his great vertue & operation, for it worketh so strange in some deseases, that it in manner reuineth the Patient, and the manner to make it is thus: Rec. Otegra onin. 6. unc. Oximel squilliticum halfe an ounc. mixe them together in an earthen dish vntill the Otegra ouiu, wors became like ashes, then it is ditrom, then put thereon 2. ounces of Vinegar, and wash it well vntill it remaine pure and cléere, then take Olibanum halfe an ounc. Cerusae 1. ounc. beate them fine, and mixe it in a stone morter with as much Magno licoe as will serue to incorporate them well, then put thereto the Ome∣gra ouu, and mixe them very well together, that being done, put thereto Axungi porcina 8. ounces, and mixe them all together, and then it is made, the which kéepe in a vessell well gased, for it is ill  a long time with∣out corruption, and is apt to helpe those that are lame, full of paines, and sores and swellings, paines of the eyes, the stone in the reines, and such like matters, it helpeth all manner of French Poxe, if ye annoint them therewith vntill their gumbes before, and then leave. But yee shall  that the body must first be well purged afore ye annoint them: This  all corostus bleers, and helpeth them in short times it hel∣peth all paines in the eyes, if ye put it therein, and taketh away all burning with spéed, and to be  it helpeth those diseases in most short time, to that it is to be won∣dred at.
Oyle of Hipericon, the which is most miraculous for wounds and bruises. THis oyle of Hipericon compounded by vs, is of great vertue in diuers and sundry accidents, and special∣ly in wounds, for it helpeth them without any paine, al∣though the veines, sinewes, or bones were hurt or cut, and that in very short time, it preserueth the wound from corruption, and taketh away the paine, and incar∣nateth and cicatrizeth, as by experience thou maist plain∣ly sée. It dissolueth contusions, and is most meruellous against poyson. It helpeth against any crude sort of venemous Feuer, if ye annoint all the body therewith, leauing no parte, and the order to make it is thus: Rec. The flowers, leaues and séed of Saint Iohns wor, as many as ye will, and stampe them together, and put them in a glasse, with as much strong white wine as will couer it well, then set it in the Sunne, 10. dayes together, then put thereto as much pure sallet oyle, as the hearbes and the wine doth weigh, then let it stand in the Sunne other 10. dayes, giuing you warning that ye weigh your oyle before ye mixe them, that being done, put thereunto for euery pound of oyle 2. ounces of Tur∣pentine, and 1. dram of Saffrane, of Nutmegs, Cloues, Mirrha electe, of each halfe an ounce, Frankencense 1. ounc. Viticella 2. ounces for euery pound. Stamp them altogether, and put them into a great glasse, and set it to boyle in Balneo Mariae, with a head and receiuer close shut, and to know when it is boyled enough, is that there will ascend no more vapours into the head, and that will be within 24. houres or there∣about, then take forth the glasse being yet hot, and staine it, & kéepe it in a glasse close shut as a precious Iewell, ye shall note that this oyle must alwayes be occupyed ve∣ry warme, and in any wise tent no wound but wet cloaths therin and lay it thereon, and thy cure shall pros∣per
well, for this I haue proued a thousand innes in di∣uers places. To make our Oleum benedictum the which healeth wounds diuinely. THis Oleum benedictum serueth chiefly for wounds in all parts of the body, and in specially for wounds in the head, if there were fracture of bone, and ffence of the Pannicle, and in other places where sinewes were hurt, or muscles or veines, or in any other noble place of the body: with this Oleum benedictum, and with our vi∣gitable Quintessence thou maist helpe them asely and in short time, without any danger or detriment of the wounded person, as is said afore, and the order to make it is thus: Rec. The white of Egges being hard sodden in wa∣ter, 12. ounc. cleere Turpentine 14. ounc. pure Mirthe 3. ounc. mixe them and put them into a Retort of glasse, and giue it gentle fire at the first, and then increase it ac∣cording to Art, vntill all the substance be come forth of the Retort, the which will be both water and , the which seperate, and keep the oyle by it selfe in a glae as a precious Iewell, for this worketh miracles in wounds of what sort soeuer they be, moreoue it causeth haires to grow on the head or bead, the which were  away, and that in shorte time, y onely the place annointing the place therewith, also if any haue  and reten∣tion of vrine, let him take a ter, wherein he shall put a little of this oyle and he shall be helpt, and this effect it doth because it dryeth mightily, tha  made in the secrets parts of the  inwardly, where  medicine can be applyed. A magistrall water, the which preserueth the sight a long time, and mundifieth the eyes of all spots. IF thou wilt make a water that shall haue  to preserue the sight long, and to mndie the  from all spots that are therein, if were necessary that therein
we simples that are preseruatiue, and mundificatiue, as I will shewe that hereafter. Rec. The best and strongest white wine that thou canst find 12. pounds, new bread well risen 4. pounds, Celendiue, Fenell, Cipolla squilla, ana, 4. ounc. Cloues halfe an ounce, stamp them and then distill altogether in a Goord in Balneo Mariae, vntill ye haue receiued 5. pound, the which kéepe by it selfe, for that is most excellent against paine in the eyes. Also if any drinke euery morning for a month the quantitie of 1, ounce, it will helpe him of any grieuous infirmitie. Also I neuer applyed this water to any thing; but alwayes it did great pleasure. To make oyle of Vitrioll compound, the which pre∣serueth nature in his strength. THe order to make this composition is thus: Rec. Foure pound of fine Sugar, Riopontico 1. pound, Rhabarbaro 1. ounc. the flowers of Mercury 1. pound: stamp them altogether, and make thereof a past, that being done, take pure rectified Aqua vitae without flegme 4. pound, and put them altogether in a Retort of glasse close stop'd, then set it in warme horse dunge sixe dayes, then take it forth, and distill it in Balneo Mariae, vntill there will come forth no more substance, than take forth the fesses in the Retort, and put it in a canas, and presse it forth very hard: then take Buglosse water, Fumitory water, Scabious water of each 6. ounc. and with the said waters wash well the fesses & presse it forth againe as hard as ye can, then cast them away, and di∣still that water by a filter vntill it be cleare, then mixe it with the first that was distilled by Balneo, then take the best oyle of Vitrioll that ye can get, and for euery pound of the said water, put thereunto halfe a scruple of the said oyle of Vitoll, and kéepe it in a glasse close shut. This composition I haue caused to be vsed in the Sum∣mer time, and yet continually doe vse it, whereof I
haue séene great experience, it prouoketh a good appetite vnto those that haue lost or spoiled it, it helpeth the : it dissolueth the paines of the head and téeth, with many other vertues the which I will not write at this time, it preserueth old men in their strength and , so that it hath beene a thing to be to  at, and the order to take it is thus: Ye shall take halfe an ounce in the mor∣ning fasting as it is, and fast thereon 4. houres at the least, and that day eate but little meate but let it be of good norishment, and whosoeuer followeth this order long, shall liue in perfect health of body, as I haue séene diuers and sundry times. Oleum philosophorum de  & cera. THis Oyle of Turpentine and waxe, is a most preti∣ous Balme, and his vertues are infinit, because it is made of simples in  vncorruptible, and is most miraculous for those that are corrupted or stroken with the pestilence, because it is most penitratiue, and of na∣ture drying, and comforteth all weake pas in mans body of what infirmitie they be, and the  to make it is thus: Rec. Newe yellow Wax 12. ounces,  Turpen∣tine 18. ounces, Beniamine 2. ounces, Fiue  Aqua vitae 30. ounces, common Ashes 6. ounces,  them and put them into a Keto of glasse well luted, and then distill it in a wind fornace, vntill all the sub∣stance be come forth, and in the reciuer thou shalt finde 3. things, the first is the water, the second oyle, the third steame, the which thou shalt separate one from another, and kéepe them close stopt in a glasse, the which is most excellent in time of the pestilence, as well for , as for to helpe the sores, for if ye put it in a sore or btch that is broke, presently it taketh away the paine, and be∣ing mixed with other of our medicines as I haue shewed in my regiment of the , it helpeth them with great speed. If any anoynt all his body with this Oyle
twise a moneth, it will preserue him youthfull and in health a long time, it preserueth also dead flesh or fish that is put therein from corruption, also if any be wounded in any parte of the body, let him anoynt it with this Oyle 4. or 5. times, and it shalbe whole: Also if any cannot make water, giue him 2. drams of this Oyle to drinke, and presently he shall make water, it is also good against the stitch in the side and plurisie, and wormes, and the cough and cattar, and against the pestilent feuer, and such like indisposition, if ye drinke a little therof: it hath a number of other vertues the which I will leaue vnto the experimentors. Our magno licore which is of great vertue. THis is of my inuention, and the order to make it is thus. Rec. swéete sallet Oyle xx. pound, white wine 2. pound, boyle them together vntill the wine be consumed, then put it in a vessell of stone, and put thereunto these things following. Rec. The flowers of Rosemary 3. pound, Lignū aloes, 6. ounces, Olibanum, Bedellinum, ana x. ounces, then stop it very close, and bury it in the ground 4. foote déep, and this would be buried in the begining of August, and there remaine vntill the moneth of March, then take it forth of the ground, and st it in the Sun, and put therto these matters following, Sage, Rosemary, Rew, Btony, Millyfolly, Comfery rootes, Tamaro, Viticella, ana, one handfull, Gallingall Cloues, Nutmegs, Spignard, Saf∣fane ana ounce, Sarcocolla, Sanguis Draconis in grain, Mastike ana 2. ounces, aloes epatike, Rasa di pino, ana 8. ounces, yellow Wax, Auxungia, ana 18. ounces, Colo∣phonie 1. pound, Hipercone with the seede and all 2. pound, Muske 1. dram, Mixe these all well together, and boyle them in Baleo vntill the herbes become drye and haue no more substance, then it is boyled, then take it forth and straine it, and put therunto for euery pound,
16.  and when the moneth of September commeth  thereunto 2. pound f the  of the hebe called Blsami, the which , and then it is ended, the which thou shalt kéepe in a glasse  for the  the better it is, and is of such vertue  them euery a morning  ounce of  of  a warm, the space of 40  And this i the true  that helpeth the  disease so  in the  any were , let him ioyne the parts close together, and dresse it with this Oyle very hot vpon the vpper parts, and in short time it  the white scal if ye anoynt it therewith: It helpeth  in the  the nos∣lle  when yée go to , if ye ynt the sto∣macke  of the meat, it prouoketh vrine where it is let , it preserueth the heard blacke, and is good against worms, and all thse experiments  proued of me of∣ and sundry times in the  and also in  other the which  time: Ye shall  that if  all ouer that is grie with the poe with this Oyle, it will increase his , and so by that mes ye may know whether he be . Pillole Angelica, the which euacuate the body without any impediment; and are most profitable. IT is mst necessary that all kind of ls should awel prepared and ; because they shall make no alteration in the stomacke of those that take them, and therefore  will write a kind of Pill of  ention, and  Pillole Auga Lonardo the which may  vsed in any kind of  may be
giuen to a woman with child without danger, for they dissolue the body without trouble, they purge choller and fleame, and purge partibus along, & are good against all paines, they drye vpvlcers in all parts of the body, it dissolueth the Catarrous humour, and in manner all fe∣uers, and the order to make them is thus: Rec. Colo∣quintida 4. ounc. and put it in 2. pound of pure rectified Aqua vitae without fleame, and there let it remaine 3. dayes, then straine it hard into a cleane vessell, and put therein Aloes epatike, Mirrha, Eleborus niger, ana, 1. ounc. beate in fine pouder, and mixe them like a paste, then set it in the Sunne vntill it be almost dryed: Then put thereto Safrane, Cinamon, yellow Sulfure, ana, 4. drams, and mixe them well together, & let them dry al∣together, then make it into a paste with white crude Ho∣ney, and kéepe it in a vessell of lead, for that is best, the quantitie is from one dram to 2. drams, for these are Pil∣lole preparate, that may be taken without kéeping dyet, and they doe purge all humours hanging in the body, and preserueth the body from putrifaction, and I haue séen the experience therof diuers times. Pillole Aquilone of our inuention. THese Pils are aboue all other in operation, as the Eagle is aboue all other birds, and therefore I thought good to call them Pillole Aquilone, and the order to make them is thus: Rec. Conserue of Damaske Roses made with Ho∣ney 3. ounces, Cinamon elect, 2. scruples, Petra Philo∣sophale of our inuention halfe an ounce, Sugar candie 2. ounces: mixe them and make thereof a paste with Si∣ropo acetoso, and kéeepe them in a glasse: the vertues of these Pils I will not write at this time, but onely I say they helpe against all sorts of infirmities, and hurteth none in any wise, the quantitie is from 1. dram to 2. drams in the morning fasting, but ye may not guild them in any wise, but drinke after a cup of water or
wine, to cary them downe, then léepe thereon, and that day eate little meate, and light of digestion. Our Quintessencia solutiua, the which is of meruellous operation in diuers matters. THis Quintessencia solutiua euacuateth the body with great ease and without any betriment, and it pur∣geth all parts of the body, that are troubled with grosse and viscuous humors, it desolueth swelling and taketh away the paines, it preserueth the ight, and killeth wormes, and causeth a good appetite, with many other good qualities, the which I will leaue at this time, and the order to make it is thus: Rec. Lignum aloes, Cinamon, Turbit, Aloes epatica ana, 1. ounc. Coloquintida 2. ounc. Cloues, Saran, of each 3. scruples, Muske of Leuant 1. dram, Iulep of Violets 1. pound: mixe all the aforesaid matters together in a glasse, & put thereon 2. pound of our Quintessence, & so let it stand 12. dayes and then straine it, and put it into a vessell of glasse close shut, this may be taken with broth, wine, or with what irop or potion ye will, the quantitie is from 2. drams to 4. drams, in the morning fasting without kéeping of any dyet at all, and it shall worke well without trouble at all. Our Sirope of Quintessence, the which is of meruellous vertue. THis Sirpe is of meruellous vertue as is séen daily by experience, and the order to make it is thus: Rec. Of that pure rectified Aqua vitae, whereof wée make our Quintessence 12. ounc. oyle of Sulfur, oyle of Vitrioll of each 1. dram, oyle of Tartar perfect 2. ounc. Iulep of oses 4. pound, Muske 2. carrets, Safrane 1. scruple, Einamon 1. dram: mixe them together, and kéep them in a glasse, for his vertues are innumerable and in manner reuiueth those that are halfe dead: it helpeth the euer in short time, i ye vse i. This Sirop may be
mixed with any kind of potion that is giuen to the sicke, and may be giuen alone in broth, wine or water, or in what sort ye will, the quantitie is from 2. drams to 4. drams, and therewith I haue done miracles, as thou maist read in my Thesauro de la vita humana. Pillole Magistrale, the which is good against diuers infirmities. THese Pils are of great vertue, and specially against all kind of paines comming of corrupt humours, for they purge the putrified humours, and preserue the bo∣dy from corruption, and the order to make them is thus:  Rec. Olibanum, Masticke, Mirha, Sarcocola, Aloes hepatica, Eleborus niger, Saffran, Turbit, Colloquinti∣da, q. v. stamp them finely, and for euery ounce of the aforesaid matters, put thereunto 2. carrets of Muske, and then incorporate it with honey of Roses and Aqua vitae of each alike, and this paste thou maist kéepe for sixe months in a vessell of lead, the quantitie is from 2. drams to 3. drams in the morning fasting, and drinke thereon a little wine. These Pils are most excellent to take away the paines of the Gout, and to preserue a man from it, they are also good for those that haue the French Poxe, because they euacuate the grose and viscuous humors, and maintaine the body in good temperature, and vsing them in those diseases, it preserueth the body in good tem∣perature: They are also good for women that are trou∣bled with paines of the Mother and reention of their termes, for these are aperatiue and prouoke them, and purgeth the matrice of all impediments contained there∣in, they serue against the Megram and all paines of the head, and also against all kinde of putrified feuers, as I haue seene the experience thereof sundry times. A compound Aqua vitae the which serueth against all colde diseases of the stomacke. THis Aqua vitae aromatised with simples of Leuant, is of most excellent vertue, and by the ingredience
thou maist perceiue, and the order to make it i thus: Rec. Nutmegs, Cloues▪ Gallinglls Cdamonum, Cubebes, Maces, Cinamon, Ginger Safran, Olibanum,  I ounce, beate them finely and put them in a Goord of glasse, and put thereon 6. pound of pure rectified Aqua vitae, and so let it stand 6. dayes, then distill it by sand, and there will come forth a red water, the which is most mecious against all infirmities caused of cold, it mun∣difieth all sorts of sores, and helpeth all wounds without paine: It causeth a good memory, it helpeth the cough, and maketh the heart mery, with diuers other vertues, the which I leaue to the experimenter. A compound oyle against poyson▪ the which is of a meruellous vertue. IF thou wilt helpe those that are poysoned, it were ne∣cessary to haue remedies of such vertue, that are apt to the solution of the poyson, for the poyson worketh those three effects, as is said afore in the Chapter of the effects of poyson, wherein it is written, how that it is necessary to kéepe the blood liquid, so that it congeale not in the veines, and likwise to lett or stay that water which com∣meth to the stomacke, and so lett that alteration or infla∣mation, as we may rme: and all these operations are necessary to be done with most excellent remedies, in the which there entereth part of poyson, for the Prouerbe saith, that one poyson killeth an other, and that I will approue in this Chapter, and the order to make this com∣position is thus: Rec. The oldest oyle that thou canst find 1. pound, Aloes epatica Rhabarbaro, Spico nardo, Mirrha, Tormen∣tillae, Dictanum album, Gentiana, Bistorta, Cosolida ma∣gore, Rubia i tintory, ana, halfe an ounce, Theriaca, Mi∣thridato, ana, 3. ams; quicke Scorpions to the number of 60. first put the quicke Scorpions into the oyle, and let it boyle in Balneo Marie 4. houres then put the unto
the other matters and let them boyle altogether other 4. houres, then straine it and keepe it in a vessell of glasse close shut, for truely this is a diuine oyle for that acci∣dent, in the which ye see entereth Scorpions, the which are venemous, and yet his poyson is wholesome for those that are poysoned. The like ye may seacute;e by those that are burnt with fire, for the best medicine that they can finde is to burne that place againe: Also ye may see that when great quantity of blood commeth forth of a wound, the Chyrurgian pre∣sently letteth him blood in another place to turne the same. Seeing then that these are true, it is also true that one poyson doth kill another poyson: and by this reason I approue, that if ye extinguish the poyson, it were neces∣sary to be done with his kinde, neuerthelesse it must be prepared so, that the matter be not altered, and become hurtfull vnto the poysoned person, and the order to vse this oyle against poyson is thus: When that a man is poysoned, presently annoint all his body with this oyle, and giue him thereof to drinke 2. drams with white wine venegar, morning & euening, & God willing thou shalt helpe any poyson be it neuer so strong: If ye be poysoned with Subblimate or a Diamond, this remedy will not be good because they are not poy∣sons, but are deadly minerals, the which by no meanes can be digested or their euill effect mittigated. Therefore when one is poysoned with Subblimate, his remedy is no otherwise but to make him bathes of Vinegar, and let him drinkenulk enough, and eate butter, and drinke Siero; For this is the true remedy, as for an example when that a sore is mortified with a rottory made of Sub∣blimate or Arsenicke, presently it causeth great altera∣tion, for the which there is no excellenter remedies than Vinegar, Butter and Milke: then seeing that these re∣medies are so profitable to be vsed outwardly, there is no doubt but that they will doe the same effect inwardly:
Also it would be necessary to cause them to omit euery day once at the least, to keeps the stomacke euacuated of that matter, so that it come not to the he the infected person or infect the finewes, so that the partie remaine not lame for a long time after, as is daily seene in diuers places. A meruailous Sope that helpeth those which cannot spitt but with great paine. THis composition is called Saponea nostra, because it is made of Sope, but not of that Sope which is in the Apothicartes shops in Venice, but this is a confection, the which being eat euery morning a little quantitie, it helpeth those that spitt with paine, it openeth the stomack, and breaketh that euill matter conteyned therein, and easseth it forth at the mouth with the spittle, and so lea∣ueth the patient well disposed and mercy, and the order to make it is thus: Rec. White Venice Sope, and beate it in powder 1. ounce, pure Masticke 2. drams, Sinamon, Licores, ana 1. dram, fine Sugar as much as will suffise to make it in tables according to art, the which are most strange, neuer∣thelesse meruaile not thereat for I will shew the reason, so that euery one shalbe satisfied. Yée shall vnderstand that the first ingredience, being the Sope, is made with the Lye of Soda and Calkes, the which things doe drye and mundifie all sorts or Vlere Sordide, and cooleth them: Also therein is Oyle Oli, the which is one of the most excellentest urs in the world, for this of it selfe is able to cut that matter from the sto∣macke; and to mundifie i, then in this compounde there is Masticke, which is most excellent for the stomacke, and draweth downe from the head, then the licourice; and Cinamon are aparatiue and comforteth the stomacke, so that all these being mixed together, of force it must helpe against these infirmities of the dreast, and the quantitie thereof is from 2. drams to halfe an ounce.
To make the Quintessence of Honey. THis Quintessence hath all the vertues of the Quin∣tessence of wine, and is made in this order, and is ra∣ther to be counted a diuine remedy then humaine. Rec. The purest Honey that ye can get which is not mixt with any thing 2. ound, and put it into a gowrd of glasse, with his head and receiuer close luted, and giue it first a gentle fire vntill there apear certeine white fumes in the head the which will turne into a red water by lay∣ing of clothes wet in cold water, vpon the head and recei∣uer; than kéepe in thy five according vnto arte, vntill all the substance be come forth, the which thou shalt kéepe in a glasse close stopped, and in short time it will turne into the colour of a Rubie, than distill it vij. times in Balneo Marie, and it will loose his red colour, and be of a very ple∣sant smell, and remaine in the colour of golde: and this Quintessence dissolueth golde and maketh it potable, and also all manner of Iuels that is put therein: also if you giue two or three drams to any that lye a dying, present∣ly it will recouer him againe, as the Quintessenee of wine doth: If yee wash any wound or sore therwith it will heale it quickly: It is good against the cough, cattar, and paines of the Mylt, and many other sortes of diseases, the which I will not writ at this time, for few or none will beleeue his great operation or vertue. If ye distill it 20. times with fine Siluer, it will restore the sight vnto those that are almost blinde. Moreouer I haue giuen this 46. dayes vnto one that had the Palsie, and he was helpt quickly. It helpeth also the falling sicknesse, and preserueth the body from utrifaction, so that by these meanes we may sée that it is a celestiall remedy giuen vnto vs by the al∣mightie God, and therefore I would wish some vertu∣ous men to take a little paynes in making of this preci∣ous liquor, and they shall sée such wonders thereof that the world will meruaile thereat, as I haue proued many
times, to my great honour and profile of the patient. For many times I haue giuen i the icke that no man did see me, and presently they thought I had wrought by in∣chantment, by reason of his great vertue, and therefore all men that professe Phisicke and Chirurgery, ought to be prouided of this licour and such like, for their commo∣ditie and profite of the patient. To make our Elixer vitae, or Aqua Caelestis. THis Elixer vitae is a medicine of such vertue and strength that it helpeth in manner against all disea∣ses that commeth to mans body, for those that are hot it cooleth, and those that are colde it warmeth, and that it doth by his proper qualitie and vertue, for this I haue proued a thousand times, and haue vsed it against sundry diseases, and alwayes haue had good successe, and the or∣der to make it is thus: Rec. Ginger, Zedoaria, Gallingal, Long Pepper, round Pepper, Iniper berries, Citron peeles, Orange peeles, Sage, Basill, Rosemary, Mint, Margerome, Bay berries, Penyriall, , Callamint, the flowers of Elders,  Roses and white, Spica nardi, Cobebe, Lig∣num aloes, Cardamonim, Cinamon, Calamus aromaticus, Germander, Sticados, Camepiteos, Meligette, Mace, Oliba∣num, Aloes hepatica, the séed of Mugwort of each 2. drams Figs, Raysons, Dates, Almonds, Graynes of the Pine, of each 6. ounces, Pute white Honey 1. pound, Muske of Leuant, one dram. Fine sugar 4. pound. Mixe them altogether, and infuse them in fiue pound of pure Aqua vitae without fleame, and so let it stand 8. dayes, then distill it in Balneo Mariae, vntill the fesses re∣maine day, then take that, and sercolate it in a Pelicane, in horse onge 40. dayes, then take the glass with the fesses, and distill it in sand, vntill all the substance be come foorth, the which will be red like blood, and stinketh of the fire, and is thicke, the which must bee sercolated as the first, and this is the fire part, which is of meruaylous
vertue, insomuch that it reuiueth those that are at the poynt of death, and therefore I will write of some of his vertues, which I haue prooued. The first water distilled by Balneo, béeing taken euery third day one dram, preserueth the body in prosperous state, and defendeth from many sorts of diseases. It hel∣peth all sorts of wounds, if ye wash them therewith 3. or 4. times, and is most excellent against all impediments in the eyes, if ye put therein one drop, and preserueth the sight a long time, so that ye shall not néed to weare spec∣tacles. If a young woman doth wash her face therewith oftentimes, it preserueth her a long time in that state. If ye vse to drinke this Elixer if prouoketh Venerous actes, and disposeth women to be deliuered, with diuers other vertues, the which I leaue to the experimenter. The last wat the which is red, is excellent good against the paine of the mother if it be drunke. It dissol∣ueth also the Plurisie, if ye giue thereof 2. drams and an∣noint the parts grieued therewith. It helpeth the paines of the Colicke and hardnesse of the Milt. It is also good against paines in the teeth and stin∣king breath, and many such like things. It he peth all manner of Feuers, and the reason is because it dryeth by all the euill humours that offendeth Nature as well within as without, so by this reason it is apt to help all sorts of diseases. If any were sicke and could not speake, let him take one dram of this, with one dram of the first, and presently he shall speak, most miraculous to see, for this I haue proued a thousand times to my great honor and content of the Patient, and therefore I would wish all those that professe Phisicke or Chyrurgerie to be pre∣pared of this liquor, and such like, for their owne profit, and health of their neighbours.
To make aqua Reale vel Imperiale; the which maketh the teeth white presently, incaaeth the gumbes, and causeth a good breath. THe téeth being blacke, rustie and full of filth, and the gumbes putrified or corrupt, are the worst things that may be seene in man or woman, and are also very vnwholesome, and the remedie to make the téeth white and to helpe the gumbes, is thus: Make this water, and vse it in the order as I will shew thee. Rec. Sal gemma, Roch allome, Brimstone, of each 2. pound, Borax 10. ounc. Pearles beate fine, Corall, ana, 2. ounces, pure distilled Vinegar 4. ounc. put all the aforesaid matters in a Grd with his head and receiuer, and giue it fire according to Art, and at the last there will come forth a white water like Milke, the which after it hath stood a while; will wae clere. Ye shall vnderstand that this water is aboue all other waters in the world to help cers in the mouth, and to incarnate the gumbes  brake the téeth white, and causeth a good breath in those which are troubl  the aforesaid matter. For of this water I haue  great quantitie, and hath béene caryed into  Almanie, into Poland, into Constantinople, and in diuers other Countries, as though it had beene a diuine thing, and not materiall. For truely his experience doth cause the world to won∣der at it, the vse hereof I haue written in this booke, and hereafter I will write it againe in some of my bookes where occasion shall serue to vse it in cures. A kinde of Pill most conueniene for the eyes and com∣forteth the stomacke. THose Pils which comforteth the stomacks; by forc must helpe the sight, for when the stomacke is filled with maligne humors, it distempereth those parts that are about it, and the fume that ascend vp to the head, moisteneth Nerui optici of the eyes, and by this cause the
eyes are offended, therefore it were necessary for those Pils that help the eyes also to comfort the stomacke, the which must be done by euacuating the matter hang∣ing by vomit, and the order to make these Pils, is thus: Rec. Marchpane made with Sugar and Almonds, 1. dram Petra Philosophalle 1. graine, Eleborus niger 6. grains, Diagridij 3. grains, mixe them well in a morter in forme of a pate, and make thereof 5. Pils, and those thou shalt take in the morning fasting, for they are of so much force and strength, that they helpe not onely the eyes and stomacke, but in manner all difeases, because they cleanse the stomacke and euacuate the body, the which two things are most necessary in all diseases. A discourse vpon a composition that preserueth a man or woman in health a long time. IF thou wilt make a paste that shall haue vertue to pre∣serue whole bodies and to helpe the sicke, it were ne∣cessary to looke out simples that haue vertue to doe it, and when thou hast found out those drugs that haue ver∣tue to preserue, thou maist put thy trust in them: the which I discoursing by the way of reason, and conferring it by experience, haue found out a number of drugs that are friends vnto our nature, and preserueth it, of the which I will shew thée some that are of great im∣portance, the which may be approued of reason and experience, and are these. Rec. Aloes hepatica, Olibanum, Mirrha, ana, 2. ounc. beate them in fine pouder, and make them into a paste like a salue with rectified Aqua vitae, then dry it in the Sunne, then beate it into pouder againe, and make it into a paste with our Oleo del Balsamo, and then thou shalt haue a past of most meruellous vertue, for if ye take thereof euery morning 1. dram it will preserue you in long in health, it is most excellent for those that be woun∣ded or haue any sore vpon them, because it kéepeth the
sore from putrifaction, as by the ingredience thou maist perceiue. A meruellous Water to be vsed of all Chirurgions in curing of their Patients. IT is necessary for the Chygion in the cure of wounds and sores, to helpe the body as well inwardly as outwardly, to take away the euill qualities and cor∣ruption of the humours, and to preserue it from putria∣ction, and then the sore will heale with little help and in short time, and that thou mainst doe with this Water, the which is incorruptible and of great experience, and the order to make it is thus: Rec. Of that Aqua vitae whereof we make our Quin∣tessence 10. pound, and put therein these things follow∣ing: Cinamon, Lignum aloes, red Sanders, Cardus be∣nedictus, ana, 3. ounces, Cloues, long Pepper, Callamus aromaticus, Sarane, ana, 2. ounc. Almonds, graines of the Pine, Dates, ana, 4. ounc. Melegetre 1. ounc. fine Sugar 4. pound, Muske 4. carrets: let all these stand in a long neckd glass close stopped 8. or 9. bayes, and then distill it in Balneo vntill ye  5. pounds the which keep close stopped in a glas, as aprecious Iwel: than distill the  in sand vntill the fees be dry, and that will be a red water, and it will stincke somewhat of the fire or smoake the whithal  in a glasss, for in time it will loose his stinking smell, and be most pre∣cious. The first water is of such vertue, that it hel∣peth all putrified vicers, if ye dresse them therewith. The second is also perfect, that if any man drinke euery mor∣ning 2. drams, it will so preserue him that it were vnpos∣sible he should haue  this water I haue made great experience in many  of diseases, and specially in the Pl and , &c. To make our. Causticke. ALthough I  in my Re∣gim of the Peence, ,
A ioy full Iewell: Neuerthelesse I thought good to write it in this place because euery one hath not both these books: and the order to make it is thus: Rec. Arsenicke christalline, Sal armoniacke, Sublimate, ana, boyle them being finely ground in as much strong Vinegar as t matter weigheth, vntill two third parts be consumed, and that there remaine a third: then keepe it in a glasse close shut vnto thy vse: as I will shew thee in diuers places when occasion shall serue. To make oyle of Antimony. REc. Antimoni and calcine it vntill it smoake no more, and that it be of a grayish colour, and alwayes as it cluttereth stamp it againe, then take as much common ashes as the Antimoni, finely searced and put them into a Retort we uted, and giue it fire according to Arte, till all the fumes or spirits be come forth: giuing you charge that your receiuer be very great, least all breake. This oyle is of meuellous vetue against Vlcers: If ye giue thereof 4. grains with any sirop, it helpeth the feuer pre∣sently: it helpeth Phistolaes, and to be short, it is most wholesome in diuers things: but it were necessary for the Chyrurgion to be expert in the vse thereof, and to mixe it according to his worke: And therefore hee that cannot vse it well, it were better to let it alone, because it is a pe∣rilous thing vnto the vnskilfull, and pretious vnto those that know how to vse it. A precious Liquor aboue all other. THis is the most precious Water that may be made in the world, and his vertues are such, and so many, that they cause the world to meruaile, at them. The Mirra and Aloe with Vernish and with as much of our Quin∣tessence, being mixed, the which without fire, ashes and coles, cannot be seperated, and when the Ayre, the Wa∣ter, and Earth, are seperated, ech of them shall be apte to mitigate paynes, dissolue humoures, helpe wounds, dis∣solue
so we  within the body  such like  and caused the world to wonder of his operations, and so shall euery one doe that desireth to follow the right way, and that will be a childe of arte. Thou shalt vnderstand that I would haue written this playner, but that I write it to those that haue iudgment both of the quantities and vertues: be∣cause pearles are not for swine. A secret of meruailous vertue. Rec. A new bricke forth of the kill, and breake it in small péeces like a Nut, them lay them in the fire vntill they be red hot: then take them forth and quench them in swéete fallet Oyle, then take them forth agains, and lay them in the  vntill they be red hot: then quench them againe, and this yée shall do at the least fiue times, and at the las time taken them foth, and put them into a glasse , Frankensence and Mirrha, and distill it according to arte: then seperate each lyquor by him selfe, and therwith thou shalt worke wonderfull cures, if thou knowest how to vse it and wherunto. Our secrete of marueilous vertue in act and strength. THis Vnguent is of merueilous vertue, and was ne∣uer made by any afore, neyther auncients nor of our time, the which vnguent helpeth putrified Vlcers in the leggs, so that it is to be wondred at: it worketh diuers operations, it mortifieth the euill, mudifieth, incarnateth and ciatriseth, the which thinges to the professors of the arte seemeth hard: Neuerthelesse, it is true, as I haue pro∣ued an infinite of times: and because the worlds should haue it, I haue written here the receite. Rec. Of  Mgo  of Mastike made at the Apothecaries, and  into a vessell of copper, with as much Litarge as ye shall thinke good, and so let it stand a good while on the fire, and put therto of our Cerote magistrale,  them wll together, and so of
yellow, it shall become blacke: then take it from the fire, and put therein Mercurie precipitate, and stirre them well vntill it be colde, and here with thou shalt work wonders. It would be necessary for him that will make this re∣ceite, to consider well of the ingrediences of the composi∣tions, the which are written in this booke. To rectifie and preserue the sight of those that are weake sighted. IF thou wilt rectifie and preserue the sight in those that are weake sighted, of what cause soeuer it be: thou shalt make this water, and vse it according to this recite. Rec. Fenell séede, the flowers of Rosemary, Rew, Ce∣lendine, Cardus benedictus, Stauesager, Cufrage, of each a handfull, Cinamon, Nutmegs, swéet Almonds, of each 1. ounce: stampe all these grosely, and infuse them in xxx. pound, of pure white wine, then let it stand 4. dayes, and then distill it in Balneo, vntill ye haue receiued 4. pound, the which kéepe close by it selfe, and when thou wilt oc∣cupy it, put thereof one drop into the eye, when ye goe to bed, and in the morning when ye rise. And thus vsing it, it will preerue the fight a long time. Of Lac Virginis, and the order to make it. THis Lac Virginis, is a solution of Satorne and Sal gem∣ma, the which is a thing most necessary, for the Chy∣rurgion to vse, and the order to make it is thus. Rec. Lytarge of golde as much as ye thinke good, and beate it in fine powder, thou put thereon strong distilled Vinegar and so let it remaine 2 or 3 dayes, stirring it e∣uery day, then boyle it vntill halfe be consumed, then let it repose 2 or 3 houres, and the Vineger will be cleere and of the cooler of gold, then poure it foorth into a glasse, and kéepe it, then take Sal gemma, and rayne water, ana, and dissolue it on warme ashes, and when it is dissolued, kéepe it in a glasse, and when thou wilt make Lac Virginis, take of each of these solutions alike, and mixe them together, & thou shalt sée a strange thing. For as soone as they are
mixed together, they will  to a white Vnguent like Ceruse or white lead, the which serueth in diuers causes according to the intention of the Chyrurgian. The solu∣tion at Litarge by himselfe with as much Oyle of Roses being mixed together, maketh a delycate Vnguent, & re∣riscatiue, the which ciatrizeth vlcerrs with great speed. To calcine Tutia, and to bring it into a salte. THou shalt dissolue thy Tutia in this water following. Rec. Salniter, Rh allome, Vitrioll, Sciaber, ana 1. pound eat them together, and distill them according to Arte. Then take that water, and put therin thy Tutia, and let it dissolue vpon the warme ashes, & when it is dissol∣ued, vapor away the water vntill it remaine dry, the which take foorth and put it into an earthen an vngla∣sed and calcine it with a strong ire. Then dissolue it in distilled vinegar and when it is dissolued, vapor away the vineger, and the alt will remaine in the bottome, the which serueth much for Tinture, and to make a Lini∣ment for the eyes, the which is most precious and care, for if ye mixe a little therof with Hogs grease and Cam∣phir, and then put it into the eye, it helpeth them with such spéed, that it is to be woundred at, and not without cause. For his Nature is to giue light and to heals things imperfect. The Tutia mixt with Borar and with our Vernish that wée guilde leather with, and giuen in protection vpon Venus mote, it causeth it to be in colour not much differing from Sol, of the which thou mayst make strange things, for e that knew the vertue and qualitie of , as wll in Alchimi, as u infirmities, were to . To precipitate Mar and to bring it into a red powder, cal∣led Crocus , the which serueth for diuers purposes. REc. Salniter refined Roch Allm, Vitriol Romain, ana▪  according to Art, with all  spirits, and in that water dissolue
thinne plates of Iron or stéele, and when it is dissolued, va∣por away the water, vntill it remaine drie in a red pouder, then take it forth, and calcine it in a Furnace of reuerberation 24. houres. Then kéepe it to thy vse, vntill thou knowest more thereof, for it is wonderfull in his operations, as I will shew thée hereafter. A secret of Turpentine of Cyprus. THe Turpentine of Cyprus is a kinde more finer then our Turpentine and without comparison, and of more vertue then ours is, and this the Doctors say, doth dissolue paines and preserueth the body, if it be taken inwardly: because they say, that Turpentine is an vncorruptable Gum, the which is most true. But in that Gumme there is one part thicke and grose that hindreth his operation, and hee that can seperate this grose part from the noble parts shall doe great wonders therewith: It is néedefull then with the fire and the meanes of our Quintaessence to make the separation of the Elements, the which are 4. Water, Oyle, Liquor and Earth: the Water is profitable, the Oyle is perfect, the Liquor is noble, and the Earth that remaineth is spoiled and of no substance: and with these things thou maist doe high and great cures, when they are applyed according as they ought to be, because many good and profitable things through the want of perfect application in time and place, many times doe hurt: and to shew the truth, I will shew thée an example of wine, the which is a pretious li∣quor, the which being dronke in the morning is hurtfull to ma∣ny: to eate meat betwixt meales is not good, and many such like things, that when they be not done with order doe hurt, and therefore it is necessary for those that will vnderstand that mat∣ter to be of a good intelligence, as well in making it, as in vsing or applying it to the sicke. Here endeth the Booke of Leonardo Phiorauanti vpon Chirurgerie.
HERE FOLLOWETH THE making of certaine precious waters, taken out of Iohn Vigo, Chirurgion. And first of Magistrall waters. VVAter called the mother of Balme is thus compounded. Rec. Terebentine 2. pound, of Frankensence 2. ounc. of Lignum aloes 1. ounc. of Masticke, of Cloues of Gal∣lingale, Cinamon, Nutmegs, Cubebs, ana, 1. ounc. and a halfe, of Gum elemi, 6. ounc. as much good Aqua vitae as the quantitie of all the aforesaid is, stamp he things together and put them in a Stillatory after one day, and still them with a soft fire, and the water that shall come forth is called the mo∣ther of Balme, which being mingled with as much of Aqua ce∣lestis hereafter writeen and stilled againe, shall haue meruel∣lous vertues against cold passions and also hot, and it is called the Lady of all medicines. The water, which is called water of Balme or oyle of Balme, is made as followeth: Rec. Of Terebentine 4. pound, of Frankensence, and Masticke, ana, 2. ounc. of Aloes epaticke, of Landanum, of Castorium, of Date stones, of the rootes of Di∣tanie, and of Consolida the lesse, ana, 1. ounc. still them all in a Limbecke of glasse with a soft fire. The first water shall be cléere as the water of a spring, the second water shall be yellow, and swimmeth aboue the other in the vessell: the third shall be reddish as good Safran, and when it beginneth to be red and thicke as honey, then beginneth the third water. The first water is called water of Balms: the second oyle of Balme: the third artificiall Balme, and some call it the ouercomer of Balme, for it is stron∣ger then Balme. The first burneth like a candle: the second curdeth milke: if yee put the third into a glasse of cléere water with the point of a knife one drop at once, it will goe downe to the bottome without sundring of it selfe, and when it hath beene there an houre, it will mount vp to the toppe as true
Balme doth. The first is good, the second is better, the third is best: and haue these vertues following. First if you wash your fare twice or thrice a day with it, and chiefely the nostrils, it cureth a rume descending from the braine, and clarifieth the sight: and if ye rubbe the hinder part of the head therewith, it comforteth the re∣membrance, and sharpeneth the spirits of man. Item, if yee put it into a vyll well stopped with odoriferous heathes, and leaue it sixe dayes, it will draw the vertue of the said hearbe vnto it, and so ye may make sublimed wine, putting into a glasse full of wine two or thrée drops of this water, and so the wine shall haue the co∣lour, saue ur and odor of the hearbs and spices wherewith it was mingled. Item, flesh and fish put in this water ot not, and if it be rotten it biteth away the rottennesse, and preserueth the whole part. It induceth appetite, comforteth the stomacke and consumeth flegme in the bottome of the stomacke. Ta∣ken with a little wine, it cureth a stincking breath. If ye put a Serpent or a Toade in a cloute wet therewith, they shall dye incontinently: and it hath like vertue against all venimes euen as true Balme hath. And it is like in operation to fine Triacle, & consumeth all Ape∣stumes, Vlcers, Fistulaes, swelling pustles, wounds, Hemoroydes, bruzings, &c. And it is repercussie of cold humours, decicatiue and consumptiue. Item, if ye wash the téeth with it twice or thrice, it shall heale, mundifie and strengthen them. It healeth also the Palsie and for∣tifieth the members, and it is hot aboue all things that may be found, and of so great pearcing, that if one drop be put into the hand, it will pearce through the same without hurt. Item, in swelling of the féete or of the legs and pains in the ioynts, if ye wash the said places there∣with and plaister them with a linnen cloue: it will cure all diseases comming of cold matter and rotten blood. Fi∣nally it is a singular remedy for finewes drawne toge∣ther,
if you hath them thrée or foure times therewithall. The third water which hath the colour of blood, is of such vertue, that if a Leprous man vse thereof een dayes, halfe a spoonefull euery morning, he shall be hea∣led. Item it preserueth youth, if it be received in the morning with a graine of wheate, with a spoonefull of flowers of Borage. Aqua caelestis is of two kinds, as we will declare in this present Chapter. If ye mingle with it as much of the water called mother of Balme and still it againe, ye haue the treasure of all medicines. And if ye will ye may sunder the foure elements one from another. First wee will speake of the vertues of these two waters: The first water is of such vertue, that if it be put into a fresh wound it healeth it in 24. houres, so it be not mortall: and it healeth maligne Vlcers, Cankers, Noli me tange∣re, old wounds, within the space of fifteene dayes if ye wash them with the said water euery third day; and if ye put a drop of it vpon a Carbuckle, it mortifieth the ma∣lignitie of the same shortly. Item if ye put of the said wa∣ter into the eye that hath lost his sight, so that it be not vtterly lost, it shall be recouered within three dayes or eight at the vttermost: And if a man drinke a drop of it with a little good wine, it breaketh the stone in the space of two houres, whether it be in the reines or in the blad∣der. It mollifieth hardned sinewes if ye wash them there∣with: and many other vertues it hath, which for breuitie we ouer-passe. The second water hath colour of blood, and is most precious: it preserueth the body from diseases, and com∣forteth the weake members chéefely of old men. It resto∣reth remembrance, sharpeneth the spirits, comforteth the heart, purifieth the blood, consoundeth the longs, healeth all diseases of the milte, and kéepeth the ioynts from Gouts, causeth good digestion, purgeth cold and rotten humours, healeth all Agues, and briefely it con∣serueth
and comforteth all the parts and members of mans body. This water must be vsed from the month of Nouem∣ber till the month of of Aprill, & ye must take but bls & spoonefull at once, nor oftner then once a wéeke. The manner to make it is thus: First ye must haue a vessell of glasse a cubit high or there about, and fill it with A qua vitae made of good wine, and sée that it be well stop∣ed, then couer it in horse dung, or in grapes shelles, or Doues dung, so that it be not too moist nor too hot, least the glasse breake, and yée must leaue the necke of the glasse without in the ayre: The glasse through the heats of the dung will oyle mightly, so that the water will ascend to the necke of the same, and descend againe to the bottome through the coldnesse of the ayre, and so it will come to perfection within the space of 30▪ dayes, then draw out the glasse & put the thinge following into the water, stop the mouth that it breath not out, and so leaue it eight dayes. Last of all, put the glasse in Balneo Marle with sand, a setting on a head with a receiuer well stoppsed, & make soft e, to gather the first water while it sée meth to drop downe éers, but when you see the water turne into a red colour, immediatly change the receiuer, for this is the second water, which ye shall kéepe in a glasse well stopped: the spices that enter into this water be these: Rec. Of good , of Cloues, of Nutmegs, of Ginger, Gallingale, Zedary, long Pepper & roun, of the rinds of Citon, of Spide, Lignum aloes, Cubeb, Cardomonium, Calomus , Germanr, Saint Iohns wort, Moes, white Frankensence, round Tor∣mentill, , of the pith of white Wal of Iuniperans Laurell berries, of the sée be of Magwort, of Smallage, of , of Annise, of ows of Basle, of Rosemary, of Sage aues, of Mariorum, Mint, Pennyyall, Sados, flowers of Elders, of red Roses
and white, of Ru, of Scabious, of Lunary the lesse, of Agrimony, of Centaure, of Fumitory, Pimpernell, Dandelion, of Cufrage, of Maiden-heire, of the hearbe called Caput Monachi or Endiue, of the séede of Sorell, or yellow Sanders, of Aloes epaticke, ana, 2. ounc. of Am∣brosine, of fine Reubarbe, ana, 2. ounc. of dry Figs, of Raisons, of Dates without stones, of swéet Almonds, of graines of the Pine, ana, one ounc. of Aqua vitae made of good wine, to the quantitie of them all, and foure times as much Sugar as they be all, that is to say, for one pound of ingredience foure pound of Sugar, of white Honey two pound, then put to the vnderwritten, of Gen∣tiane, of the flowers of Rosemary, of Nigella that grow∣eth in the corne, of Brionia, of the roote of the hearbe cal∣led Panis porcinus, of the séed of Wormewood 3. ounces. This water is called Aqua caelstis, but before ye still the water, ye must quench in it a hote plate of gold, of∣tentimes, & put to it Orient pearles, and so still the wa∣ter, and take héed that the pearles remaine not alone without water, for if they be set on the fire without water they will loose their colour. FINIS.
The Table of the Contents of this Booke. How that our Phsicke and Chirurgerie is better then tha which the Antiens haue commonly vsed. Page 1 Certaine Remedies for all Captaine, and Souldiers that trauell either by water or land. p. A Discourse of Chyrurgerie: being the Proheme. p. 5 What Chyurgerie is. p. 7 What wounds are. p. 8 Of Vlcers, and what they are. p. 9 Of Impostumes and their kinde. p. 10 Of stolaes and their kind s. p. 10 Of all sorts of scabbes. p. 12 Of Fo micola and his effects. p. 12 A discourse of wounds and other kinds of inward sores. p. 13 An order to vse in heeling all manner of diseases appertaining vn∣to the Chyrutgian. p. 15 Of medicines to be vsed in all kind of wounds outward, with ease and breuity. p. 16 To helpe vlcers of all sorts. p. 18 The order to be vsed in curing Impostumes of diuers sorts. p. 19 The order to cure all manner of istolaes. p. 21 To helpe all manner of scabbes. p. 22 To help: Mal di formica. p. 23 Of the Tow which islaid vpon wounds by cōmon Chirurgions. p. 24 Of the digestiue with the which they dresse wounds after the aforesaid Towe. p. 24 Of the mundificatiue vnguent wherewith they dresse the wounds after they are digested to mundifie them p. 25 Of their incaruatiue wherewith they dresse the wound after it is mundified. p. 26 A rare see et the wich this Author did send vnto a very friend of his being in the wars of Africa, the which helpeth all wounds, either by cut, thrust, galling with arrows, or hargabush shot, or otherwise. p. 26 Of those vnguent that cicatrize wounds. p. 27 A remedy to helpe a wound with great speed. of our inuention. p. 27 An excellent secret to heale wounds of Gun-shot or Arrowes, without any danger. p. 27 A discourse vpon old wounds that are not yet healed, and their souereigne remedie. p. 28
To dissolue a bruse in short time, when it is new done. p. 28 To helpe a wound quickly that is in peill of any accident. p. 29 To stop the fluxe of blood in wounds with great speed. p. 29 Another remedie to stay the fluxe of blood in a wound. p. 30 Of our Cerote magno, that helpeth against all sorts of forces and wounds. p. 30 Of our magistrall vnguent that helpeth diuers sorts of sores. p. 31 To make oyle of Frankensence. p. 32 Of oyle of Waxe and his effect. p. 33 To helpe the tooth ache that is caused of rotten teeth, or that commeth of a dissention of the head. p. 33 Against a stinking breath. p. 34 To helpe those that haue a great cough in the stomacke. p. 34 To helpe those that cannot hold their water. p. 35 To helpe those that cannot make their water. p. 36 To helpe those that haue great burning in their vrine. p. 37 To helpe those that haue great paine of the Gout. p. 37 A remedy against the pestilēce, that preserueth those that vse it. p. 38 The helpe of Pellaria, that is a disease which causeth the haire and beard to fall off. p. 39 To helpe a Carnositie in the yeard. p. 40 To helpe the white Scall. p. 41 To helpe those Caruolli that come vpon the yeard, and their causes. p. 41 A discourse of those sores that come of the Poxe, and how to helpe them quickely. p. 43 The cure of one that had the Pexe on his head. p. 43 The cure of a wound in the head and the hand. p. 44 A great secret particular for the Fluxe and Dissenteia. p. 45 The cure of one that was poysoned with Arsenicke p. 45 The cure of an vlcerate legge. p. 46 The cure of the Gout on a Gentleman. p. 47 Of the causes of the Scyatica, and how ye may helpe it. p. 48 A most excellent remedie to helpe the Fluxe of the body, with a certaine discourse thereon. p. 48 A discourse as concerning Cornes in the feete or else-where, with their remedies. p. 49 Of an infirmitie of importance, that commeth vpon the extremi∣ty of the Toe, vpon the nayle. p. 50 A discourse vpon the Hemerhodes, with the order to cure them with most excellent medecines of our inuention. p. 50 A great secret to help those that are burst or haue the rupture. p. 51 A rare secret and diuine, to helpe those that are troubled with the Spleene. p. 52
An other great secret to helpe the Spleene with great speede. p. 52 The cure of a certaine Spaniard called, Carabasall di Cordoner, the which was troubled with the Poxe. p. 52 The cure of the Stich in the side with recention of vrine. p. 53 A cure of a certaine Spaniard wounded in the head in Naples. p. 53 The cure of a certaine Gentleman, that had Mal di formica. p. 54 Certaine cures that this Authour did, when he trauelled into Africa. p. 55 The cure of the Flux, wherewith I helpt the Armie of the Empe∣rour in Africa. p. 57 A goodly remedie found out by me, for wounds in the head. p. 57 The cure of one that had his nose cut off, and set on againe. p. 58 The cure of an arme of S. Giordano Vrsino. p. 59 A great chance that hapned at the assault in Africa. p. 59 The cure of wounds being poysoned, and of other sores. p. 60 A remedy found out by me, against the poison of a fish. p. 61 Of the taking of Africa and his distruction. p. 61 The cure of a great wound on the head. p. 62 A very strange thing that hapned in the aforesaid yeare. p. 63 The cure of a Fistolae in the lower parts. p. 63 Of many that I cured in Naples. p. 64 A cure of Vlcera putrida, the which was in the arme. p. 65 The cure of Ethesia in the beginning. p. 66 The cure of a certaine man, wounded in 13. places. p. 67 Of remedies that helpe many diseases p. 67 Here beginneth the order to make diuers and sundry medicines of our inuention, neuer found out before by any man: And first to make our Petra Philosophale, that helpeth against all man∣ner of diseases that hapeneth vnto man or woman, or any other animall terrestriall. p. 68 To make our Balme artificiall, with the order to vse it, and wher∣fore it setueth. p. 70 To make our Aromatico, the which helpeth against all manner of infirmities, of what qualitie soeuer they be. p. 72 Of the vigitable stone of our inuention, to transmute a body of one complexion into another, & to make him sound for euer. p. 74 Our solible Sirop with the order to vse it. p. 76 Our Siropomagistrale Leonardo, the which serueth against an infinite number of diseases, and is a rare medicine. p. 77 Our Siropo against the melancholicke humour, and specially where there is ventositie in the stomacke. p. 78 Our Potion of Lignum sanctum, the which is miraculous to dis∣solue crud, and maligne humours, with the order to vse it in the French Poxe, and such like diseases. p. 79
A most meruellous water and rare, to cause a man to auoide the Grauell in vrine, and to mundifie the raines. p. 80 To make the water of Lignum sanctum, most wholesome against the Poxe, with a new order. p. 81 Our distillation for the Etesia, the which is of meruellous ver∣tue, and without comparison, with the order to vse it. p. 82 Our vigitable Sirop, the which is miraculous and diuine. p. 84 An Electuary that helpeth the cough, with great speed & ease. p. 84 Electuario benedicto Leonardi, the which purgeth the body with∣out any griefe, and is miraculous in his operation. p. 85 An Electuary against the euill disposition of the Liuer and Sto∣macke. p. 86 Our magistrall Electuary of Sulfure the which serueth against di∣uerssorts of infirmities. p. 87 Our Electuario of Consolida magore that serueth for many di∣seases inwardly. p. 87 Our imperiall Electuary for the Mother. p. 88 Pils against poyso, nthe which are of meruellous vertue. p. 89 Vnguento magno Leonardo. p. 90 Oyle of Hipericon, the which is most miraculous for wounds and bruises. p. 91 To make our Oleum benedictum, the which healeth wounds di∣uinely. p. 92 A magistrall water, the which preserueth the sight a long time, and mundifieth the eyes of all spots. p. 92 To make Oyle of Vitrioll compound, the which preserueth na∣ture in his strength. p. 93 Oleum Philosophorum de Termentiua & Cera. p. 94 Our magno licore the which is of great vertue. p. 95 Pilsole Angelica, the which euacuate the the body without any impediment, and are most profitable. p. 96 Pillole Aquilone of our inuention. p. 97 Our Quinessentia solutiua, the which is of meruellous opera∣tion in diuers matters. p. 98 Our Sirop of Quintessence, the which is of meruellous vertue. p. 98 Pillole magistrale, the which is good against diuers infirmities. p. 99 A compound Aqua vitae, the which serueth against all cold disea∣ses of the stomacke. p. 99 A compound oyle against poyson, the which is of a meruellous vertue. p. 100 A meruellous Sope that helpeth those which cannot spit but with great paine p. 102 To make the Quintessence of Honey. p. 103 To make our Elixer vitae, or Aqua clstis. p. 104
To make Aqua Realevel Imperiale, the which maketh the teeth white presently, incarnateth the gumbes, and causeth a good breath. p. 106 A kinde of Pill most conuenient for the eyes, and comforteth the stomacke. p. 106 A discourse vpon a composition that preserueth a man or woman in health a long time. p. 107 A meruellous water to be vsed of all Chyrurgians in curing their Patients. p. 108 To make our Causticke. p. 108 To make oyle of Antimony. p. 109 A precious Liquor aboue all other. p. 109 A secret of meruellous vertue. p. 110 Our secret of meruellous vertue in act and strength p. 110 To rectifie & preserue the sight of those that are weak sighted. p. 111 Of Lac Virginis, and the order to make it. p. 112 To calcine Tutia, and to bring it into a salte. p. 112 To precipitate Mares, and to bring it into a red pouder, called Crocus martis, the which serueth for diuers purposes, p. 112 A secret of Turpentine of Cyprus. p. 113 Of Waters; And first of Magistrall water, &c. p. 114 FINIS.
