11075 99842001 6624
THE TWO NOBLE KINSMEN: Presented at the Blackfriers by the Kings Maiesties servants, with great applause: Written by the memorable Worthies of their time. Mr. John Fletcher, and Mr. William Shakspeare. Gent. Printed at London by Tho. Cotes, for Iohn Waterson: and are to be sold at the signe of the Crowne in Pauls Church-yard. 1634.
PROLOGVE. NEw Playes, and Maydenheads, are neare a kin,Florish. Much follow'd both, for both much mony g'yn, If they stand sound, and well; And a good Play (Whose modest Sceanes blush on his marriag day, And shake to loose his honour) is like hir That after holy Tye, and first nights stir Yet still is Modestie, and still retaines More of the maid to sight, than Husbands paines; We pray our Play may be so; For I am sure It has a noble Breeder, and a pure, A learned, and a Poet never went More famous yet twixt Po and silver Trent. Chaucer (of all admir'd) the Story gives, There constant to Eternity it lives; If we let fall the Noblenesse of this, And the first sound this child beare, be a hisse, How will it shake the bones of that good man, And make him cry from under ground, O fa From me the witles chaffe of such a wrighter That blastes my Bayes, and my fam'd workes makes lighter Then Robin Hood? This is the feare we bring; For to say Trut, it wae an endlesse thing, And too ambitious to  to him; Weake as we are, and almost breathlesse swim In this deepe water.  you hold out Your helping hands, and we shall take about, And something do : You shall heare Sceanes though  Art, may yet appeare Worth two houres travell. To his nes sweet sleepe: Content to you. If this play doe not keepe, A little dull time from us, we perceave Our losses fall so thicke, we must needs leave.
The Two Noble Kinsmen. Actus Primus. Ent Hymen with a Torch burning: a Boy, in a white Robe before singing, and strewing Flowres: After Hymen, a Nimph, encompast in her Tresses, bearing a wheaten Gar∣land. Then Theseus betweene two other Nimphs with wheaten Chaplets on their heades. Then Hipolita the Bride, lead by Theseus, and another holding a Garland over her head (her Tresses likewise hanging.) After her Emilia hol∣ding up her Traine. The Song.Musike. ROses their sharpe spines being gon, Not royall in their smels alone, But in their hew. Maiden Pinckes, ofodour faint, Dazies smel-lesse, yet most quaint And sweet Time true. Prim-rose first borne, child of Ver, Merry Spring times Herbinger, With her bels dimme. Oxlips, in their Cradles growing, Mary-golds, on death beds blowing, Larkes-heeles trymme.
All deere natures children: sweete- Ly fore Bride and Bridegroomes feet Strew Flowers. Blessing their sence. Not an angle of the aire, Bird mclodious, or bird faire, Is absent hence. The Crow, the ndrous Cuckoe, nor The boding Raven, nor Clough hee Nor hattring Pie, May on our Bridehouse pearch or sing, Or with them any discord bring But from it fly. Enter 3. Queenes in Blacke, with vailes staind, with impe∣riall Crownes. The 1. Queene fals downe at the foote of Theseus; The 2. fals downe at the foote of Hypolita. The 3. before Emilia. 1. Qu. For pitties sake and true gentilities, Heare, and respect me. 2. Qu. For your Mothers sake. And as you wish your womb may thrive with faire ones, Heare and respect me, 3. Qu. Now for the love of him whom love hath markd The honour of your Bed, and for the sake Of cleere virginity, be Advocate For us, and our distresses: This good deede Shall raze you out o'th Booke of Trespasses All you are set downe there. Theseus. Sad Lady ise. Hypol. Stand up. Emil. No knees to me. What woman I may steed that is distrest, Does bind me to her. Thes. What's your request? Deliver you for all. 1. Qu. We are 3. Queenes, whose Soveraignes fel before The wrath of cruell Creon; who endured The Beakes of Ravens, Tallents of the Knights,
And pecks of Crowes, in the fowle feilds of The He will not suffer us to burne their bones, To urne their ashes, nor to take th' offnce Of mortall loathsomenes from the blest eye Of holy Phbus, but infects the windes With stench of our slaine Lords. O pitty Duke, Thou purger of the earth, draw thy feard Sword That does good turnes to'th world; give us the Bones Of our dead Kings, that we may Chappell them; And of thy boundles goodnes take some note That for our crowned heades we have no roofe, Save this which is the Lyons, and the Beares, And vault to every thing. Thes. Pray you kneele not, I was transported with your Speech, and suffer'd Your knees to wrong themselves; I have heard the fortunes Of your dead Lords, which gives me such lamenting As wakes my vengeance, and revenge for'em King Capaneus, was your Lord the day That he should marry you, at such a season, As now it is with me. I met your Groome, By Marsis Altar, you were that time faire; Not Iunos Mantle fairer then your Tresses, Nor in more bounty spread her. Your wheaten wreathe Was then nor threashd, nor blasted; Fortune at you Dimpled her Cheeke with smiles: Hercules our kinesman (Then weaker than your eies) laide by his Club, He tumbled downe upon his Nenuan hide And swore his ws thawd: O greife, and time, Fearefull consumers, you will all devoure. 1, Qu. O I hope some God, Some God hath put his mercy in your manhood Whereto heel infuse powre, and presse you forth Our undertaker. Thes. O no knees, none Widdow, Vnto the Helmeted-Belona use them, And pray for me your Souldier. Troubled I am. turnes away.
2. Qu. Honoured Hypolita Most dreaded Amazonian, that ha'st slaine The Sith-tuskd-Bore; that with thy Arme as strong As it is white, wast neere to make the male To thy Sex captive; but that this thy Lord Borne to uphold Creation, in that honour First nature stilde it in, shrunke thee into The bownd thou wast ore-flowing; at once subduing Thy force, and thy affection: Soldiresse That equally canst poize sternenes with pitty, Whom now I know hast much more power on him Then ever he had on thee, who ow'st his strength And his, Love too: who is a Servant for The Tenour of the Speech. Deere Glasse of Ladies Bid him that we whom flaming war doth scortch, Vnder the shaddow of his Sword, may coole us: Require him he advance it ore our heades; Speak't in a womans key: like such a woman As any of us three; weepe ere you faile; lend us a knee; But touch the ground for us no longer time Then a Doves motion, when the head's pluckt off: Tell him if he i'th blood cizd field, lay swolne Showing the Sun his Teeth; ginning at the Moone What you would doe. Hip. Poore Lady, say no more: I had as leife trace this good action with you As that whereto I am going, and never yet Went I so willing, way. My Lord is taken Hart deepe with your distresse: Let him consider: Ile speake anon. 3. Qu. O my petition was kneele to Emilia. Set downe in yce, which by hot greefe uncandied Melts into drops, so sorrow wanting forme Is prest with deeper matter. Emilia. Pray stand up, Your greefe is written in your checke. 3. Qu. O woe, You cannot reade it there; there through my teares,
Like wrinckled peobles in a glasse streame You may behold 'em (Lady, Lady, alacke) He that will all the Treasure know o'th earth Must know the Center too; he that will fish For my least minow, let him lead his line To catch one at my heart. O pardon me Extremity that sharpens sundry wits Makes me a Foole. Emili. Pray you say nothing, pray you, Who cannot feele, nor see the raine being in't, Knowes neither wet, nor dry, if that you were Tho ground-peece of fome Painter, I would buy you T'instruct me gainst a Capitall greefe indeed Such heart peirc'd demonstration; but alas Being a naturall Siter of our Sex Your sorrow beates so ardently upon me, That it shall make a counter reflect gainst My Brothers heart, and warme it to some pitty Though it were made of stone: pray have good comfort. Thes. Forward to'th Temple, leave not out a Iot O'th sacred Ceremony. 1. Qu. O This Celebration Will long last, and be more costly then, Your Suppliants war: Remember that your Fame Knowles in the eare, o'th world: what you doe quickly, Is not done rashly; your first thought is more. Then others laboured meditance: your premeditating More then their actions: But oh love, your actions Soone as they mooves as Asprayes doe the fish, Subdue before they touch, thinke, deere Duke thinke What beds our slaine Kings have. 2. Qu. What greifes our beds That our deere Lords have none. 3. Qu. None fit for'th dead: Those that with Cordes, Knives, drams precipitance, Weary of this worlds light, have to themselves Beene deathes most horrid Agents, humaine grace Affords them dust and shaddow. 1. Qu. But our Lords
Ly bstring fore the visitating Sunne, And were good Kings, when living. Thes. It is true. and I will give you comfort, To give your dead Lords graves: The which to doe, must make some worke with Creou; 1. Qu. And that worke presents it selfe to'th doing: Now twill take forme, the heates are gone to morrow. Then, booteles toyle must recompence it selfe, With it's owne sweat; Now he's secure, Not dreames, we stand before your puislance Wrinching our holy begging in our eyes To make petition cleere. 2. Qu. Now you may take him, Drunke with his victory. 3. Qu. And his Army full Of Bread, and sloth. Thes. Artesuis that best knowest How to draw out fit to this enterprise, The prim'st for this proceeding, and the number To carry such a businesse, forth and levy Our worthiest Instruments, whilst we despatch This grand act of our life, this daring deede OfFate in wedlocke. 1. Qu. Dowagers, take hands Let us be Widdowes to our wos, delay Commends us to a famishing hope. All. Farewell. 2. Qu. We come unseasonably: But when could greefe Cull forth as unpanged judgement can, fit'st time For best solicitation. Thes. Why good Ladies, This is a service, whereto I am going, Greater then any was; it more imports me Then all the actions that I have foregone, Or futurely can cope. 1. Qu. The more proclaiming Our suit shall be neglected, when her Armes Able to locke Iove from a Synod, shall
By warranting Moone-light corslet thee, oh whe Her twyning Cherries shall their sweetnes fall Vpon thy tastefull lips, what wilt thou thinke Of rotten Kings or blubberd Queenes, what care For what thou feelst not? what thou feelst being able To make Mars spurne his Drom. O if thou couc But one night with her, every howre in't will Take  of thee for a hundred, and Thou shalt remember nothing more, then what That Banket bids thee too. Hip. Though much unlike You should be so transported, as much sorry I should be such a Suitour; yet I thinke Did I not by th'abstayning of my joy Which breeds a deeper longing, cure their surfeit That craves a present medcine, I should plucke All Ladies scandall on me. Therefore Sir As I shall here make tryall of my prayres, Either presuming them to have some force, Or sentencing for ay their vigour dombe, Prorogue this busines, we are going about, and hang Your Sheild afore your Heart, about that necke Which is my , and which I freely lend To doe these poore Queenes service. All Queens. Oh helpe now Our Cause cries for your knee. Emil. If you grant not My Sister her petition in that force, With that Celerity, and nature which Shee makes it in: from henceforth ile not dare To aske you any thing, nor be so hardy Ever to take a Husband. Thes. Pray stand up. I am entreating of my selfe to doe That which you kneele to have me; yrithous Leade on the Bride; gt you and pray the Gods For successe, and returne; omit not any thing In the pretended Celebration: Queenes
Follow your Soldier (as before) hence you And at the banckos of Anly meete us with The forces you can raise, where we shall finde The moytie of a number, for a busines, More bigger look't; since that our Theame is haste I stamp this kisse upon thy currant lippe, Sweete keepe it as my Token; Set you forward For I will see you gone. Exunt towards the Temple. Farewell my beauteous Sister: Pyrithous Keepe the feast full, bate not an howre on't. Pirithous. Sir Ile follow you at eeles; The Feasts solempnity Shall want till your returne. Thes. Coen I charge you Boudge not from Athens; We shall be returning Ere you can end this Feast; of which I pray you Make no abatement; once more farewell all. 1. Qu. Thus do'st thou still make good the tongue o'th world. 2. Qu. And earnst a Deity equal with Mars, 3. Qu. If not above him, for Thou being but mortall mak affections bend To Godlike honours; they themselves some say Grone under such a Mastry. Thes. As we are men Thus should we doe, being sensually subdude We loose our humane tytle; good cheere Ladies. Florish. Now turne we towards your Comforts. Exeunt. Scaena 2. Enter Palamon, and Arcite. Arcite. Deere Palamon,  in love then Blood And our prime Cosen, yet unhardned in The Crimes of nature; Let us leave the Citty Thebs, and the temptings in't, before we further Sully our glosse of youth, And here to keepe in abstinence we shame As in Incontinence; for not to swim I'th aide o'th Current, were almost to sincke,
At least to frustrate striving, and to follow The common Streame, twold bring us to an Edy Where we should turne or drowne; if labour through, Our gaine but life, and weakenes. Pal. Your advice Is cride up with example: what strange ruins Since first we went to Schoole, may we perceive Walking in Thebs? Skars, and bar weedes The gaine o'th Martialist, who did propound To his bold ends, honour, and golden Ingots, Which though he won, he had not, and now flurted By peace for whom he fought, who then shall offer To Marsis so scornd Altar? I doe bleede When such I meete, and wish great  would Resume her ancient fit of Ielouzie To get the Soldier worke, that peace might purge For her repletion, and retaine anew Her chaitable heart now hard, and harshe Then strife, or war could be. Arcite, Are you not out? Meete you no ruine, but the Soldierin The Cranckes, and turnes of Thebs' you did begin As if you met decaies of many kindes: Perceive you none, that doe arowse your pitty But th'un considerd Soldier? Pa. Yes, I pitty Decaies where ere I finde them, but such most That sweating in an honourable Toyle Are paide with yce to coole'em. Arite, Tis not this I did begin to speake of: This is vertue Of no respect in Thebs I spake of Thebs' How dangerous if we will keepe our Honours, It is for our rsyding, where evry evill Hath a good cullor; where eve'ry seeming good's A certaine evill, where not to be ev Iumpe As they are, here were to be strangers, and Such things to be meete Monsters.
Pal. Tis in our power, (Vnlesse we feare that Apes can Tutor's) to Be Masters of our manners: what neede I Affect anothers gate, which is not catching Where there is faith, or to be fond upon Anothers way of speech, when by mine owne I may be reasonably conceiv'd; sav'd too, Speaking it truly; why am I bound By any generous bond to follow him Followes his Taylor, haply so long untill The follow'd, make pursuit? or let me know, Why mine owne Barbe is unblest, with him My poore Chinne too, for tis not Cizard iust To such a Favorites glasse: What Cannon is there That does command my Rapier from my hip To dangle't in my hand, or to go tip toe Before the streete be foule? Either I am The fore-horse in the Teame, or I am none That draw i'th sequent trace: these poore fleight sores, Neede not a plantin; That which tips my bosome Almost to'th heart's, Arcite. Our Vncle Creon. Pal. He, A most unbounded Tyrant, whose successes Makes heaven unfeard, and villany assured Beyond its power: there's nothing, almost puts Faith in a feavour, and deifies alone Voluble chance, who onely attributes The faculties of other Instruments To his owne Neves and act; Commands men service, And what they winne in't, boot and glory on; That feares not to do harm; good, dares not; Let The blood of mine that's sibbe to him, be suckt From me with Leeches, Let them breake and fall Off me with that corruption. Arc. Cleere spirited Cozen Lets leave his Court, that we may nothing share, Of his lowd infamy: for our milke,
Will relish of the pasture, and we must Be vile, or disobedient, not his kinesmen In blood, unlesse in quality. Pal. Nothing truer: I thinke the Ecchoes of his shames have dea'ft The eares of heav'nly Iustice: widdows cryes Descend againe into their throates; and have not: Enter Va∣leris. Due audience of the Gods: alerius Ual. The King cals for you; yet be leaden footed Till his great rage be off him. Phebus when He broke his whipflocke and exclaim dagainst The Horses of the Sun, but whisperd too The low denese of his Fury. Pal. Small windes shake him, But whats te matter? Val. Theseus (who where he threates appals,) hath sent Deadly defyance to him, and pronounces Ruine to Thebs, who is at hand to seale The promise of his wrath. Arc. Let him approach; But that we feare the Gods in him, he brings not A jot of terrour to us; Yet what man Thirds his owne worth (the case is each of ours) When that his actions dregd, with minde assurd Tis ba he goes about. Pal. Leave that unreasond. Our serices stand now for Thebs, not Creon, Yet to be neutrall to him, were dishonour; Rebellious to oppose: therefore we must With him stand to the mercy of our Fate, Who hath bounded our last minute. Arc. So we must; Ist sed this warres afoote? or it shall be On faile of some condition. Val. Tis in motion The intelligence of state came in the instant With the defier.
Pal. Lets to the king, who, were he A quarter carrier of that honour, which His Enemy come in, the blood we venture Should be as for our health, which were not spent, Rather laide out for purchase: but alas Our hands advanc'd before our hearts, what will The fall o'th stroke doe damage? Arci. Let th'event, That never erring Arbitratour, tell us When we know all our selves, and let us follow The becking of our chance. Exnnt. Scaena 3. Eter Pirithous, Hipolita, Emilia. Pir. No further. Hip. Sir farewell; repeat my wishes To our great Lord, of whose succes I dare not Make any timerous question, yet I wish him Exces, and overflow of power, and't might be To dure ill-dealing fortune; speede to him, Store never hurtes good Gouernours. Pir. Though I know His Ocean needes not my poore drops, yet they Must yeild their tribute there: My precious Maide, Those best affections, that the heavens infuse In their best temperd peices, keepe enthroand In your deare heart. Emil. Thanckes Sir; Remember me To our all royall Brother, for whose speede The great  ile solicite; and Since in our terrene State petitions are not Without giftes understood: Ile offer to her What I shall be advised she likes; our heats Are in his Army in his Tent. Hip. In's bosome: We have bin Soldiers, and wee cannot weepe When our Friends don their helmes, or put to sea, Or tell of Babe, broachd on the Launce, or womn
That have sod their Infants in (and after eate them) Tho brine, they wept at killing 'em; Then if You stay to see of us such Spinesters, we Should hold you here for e ver. Pir. Peace be to you As I pursue this war, which shall be then Beyond further requiring. Exit Pir. Emil. How his longing Followes his Friend; since his depart, his sportes Though craving seriousnes, and skill, past slightly His careles execution, where nor gaine Made him regard, or losse consider, but Playing ore busines in his hand, another Directing in his head, his minde, nurse equall To these so diffring Twyns; have you observ'd him, Since our great Lord departed? Hip. With much labour: And I did love him fort, they two have Cabind In many as dangerous, as pooe a Corner, Perill and want contending, they have skift Torrents whose roring tyranny and power I'th least of these was dreadfull, and they have Fought out together, where Deaths-selfe was lodgd, Yet fate hath brought them off: Their knot of love Tide, weau'd, intangled, with so true, so long, And with a finger of so deepe a cunning May be out worne, never undone, I thinke Theseus cannot be umpire to himselfe Cleaving his conscience into twaine, and doing Each side like Iustice, which he loves best. Emil. Doubtlesse There is a best, and reason has no manners To say it is not you: I was acquainted Once with a time, when I enjoyd a Play-fellow; You were at wars, when she the grave enrichd, Who made too proud the Bed, tooke leave o'th Moone (which then lookt pale at parting) when our count Was each a eleven.
Hip. Twas Flauia. Emil. Yes You talke of Pirithous and Theseus love; Theirs has more ground, is more maturely seasons, More buckled with strong Iudgement. and their needes The one of th' other may be said to water2. Hearses rea∣dy with Pala∣mon; and Arci∣te: the 3. Their intertangled rootes of love, but I And shee (I sigh and spoke of) were things innocent, Lou'd for we did, and like the ElementsQueenes. Theseus: and his Lordes ready. That know not what, nor why, yet doe effect Rare issues by their operance; our soules Did so to one another; what she lik'd, Was then of me approov'd, what not condemd No more arraignement, the flowre that I would plcke And put betweene my breasts, oh (then but beginning To swell about the blossome) she would long Till shee had such another, and commit it To the like innocent Cradle, where Phenix like They dide in perfume: on my head no toy But was her patterne, her affections (pretty Though happely, her careles, were, I followed For my most serious decking, had mine care Stolne some new aire, or at adventure humd on From misicall Coynadge, why it was a note Whereon her spirits would sojourne (rather dwell on) And sing it in her slumbers; This rehtsall (Which fury-innocent wots well) comes in Like old importments baftard, hs this end, That the true love tweene Mayde, and mayde, may be More then in sex individuall. Hip. Y'are ont of breath And this high speeded-pace, is but to say That you shall never (like the Maide Flavina) Love any that's calld Man. Emil. I am sure I shall not. Hip. Now alacke weake Sister, I must no more beleeve thee in this point (Though, in't I know thou dost beleeve thy selfe,)
Then I will trust a sickely appetite, That loathés even as it longs, but sure my Sister If I were ripe for your perswasion, you Have saide enough to shake me from the Arme Of the all noble Theseus, for whose fortunes, I will now in, and kneele with great assurance, That we, more then his Pirotho, possesse The high throne in his heart. Emil. I am not against your faith, Yet I continew mine. Exeunt. Cornets. Scaena 4. A Battaile strooke withi Then a Retrait: Florish. Then Enter Theseus (victor) the three  him, and all on their faces before him. 1. Qu. To thee no starre be darke. 2. Qu. Both heaven and earth Friend thee for ever. 3. Qu. All the good that may Be wishd upon thy head, I cry Amen too't. Thes. Th'imparciall Gods, who from the mounted hea∣vens View us their mortall Heard, behold who erre, And in their time chastice: goe and finde out The bones of your dead Lords, and honour them With treble Ceremonie, rather then a gap Should be in their deere rights, we would suppl'it. But those we will depute, which shall invest You in your dignities, and even each thing Our hast does leave imperfect; So adiew And heavens good eyes looke on you. what are those? Exeunt . Herald. Men of great quality, as may be judgd By their appointment; Some of Thebs have told's They are Sisters children, Nephewes to the King. Thes. By'th Helme of Mars, I saw them in the war, Like to a paire of Lions, smeard with prey, Make lanes in troopes agast. I fixt my note Constantly on them; for they were a marke
Worth a god's view: what prisoner was't that told me When I enquired their names? Herald. We leave, they'r called Arcite and Palamon, Thes. Tis ight, those, those They are not dead? Her. Nor in a state of life, had they bin taken When their last hurts were given, twas possible3. Hearses rea∣dy. They might have bin rcovered; Yet they breathe And haue the name of men. Thes. Then like men use 'em The very lees of such (millions of rates) Exceede the wine of others. all our Surgions Convent in their behoofe, our richest balmes Rather then niggard wast, their lives concerne us, Much more then Thebs is worth, rather then have 'em Fred of this plight, and in their morning state (Sound and at libcrty) I would 'em dead, But forty thousand fold, we had rather have 'em Prisoners to us, then death; Beare 'em speedily From ou kinde aire, to them unkinde, and minister What man o man may doe for our sake more, Since I have knowne frights, fury, friends, beheastes, Loves, provocations, zeale, a mistris Taske, Desire of liberty, a feavour, madues, Hath set a marke which nature could not reach too Without some imposition, sicknes in will Or wrastling strength in reason, for our Love And great Appollos mercy, all our best, Their best skill tender. Leade into the Citty, Where having bound things scatterd, we will post Florish. To Athens for our Army. Exeunt. Musicke. Scaena 5. Enter the Queenes with the Hearses of their Knightes, in a Funerall Solempuity, &c. Vrnes, and odours, bring away, Vapours, sighes, darken the day;
Our dole more deadly lookes than dying Balmes, and Gmes, and heavy cheares, vials fill'd with teares, And clamers through the wild ayre flying. Come all sad, and solempne Showes, That are qui-eyd pleasures foes; We convent nought else but woes. We convent, &c. 3. Qu. This funeral path, brings to your housholds grave: Ioy ceaze on you againe: peace sleepe with him. 2. Qu. And this to yours. 1. Qu. Yours this way: Heavenslend A thousand differing waies, to one sure end. 3. Qu. This world's a Citty full of straying Streetes, And Death's the market place, where each one meetes. Exeunt severally. Actus Secundus. Scaena 1. Enter Iailor, and Wooer. Iailor. I may depart with little, while I live, some thing I May cast to you, not much: Alas the Prison I Keepe, though it be for great ones, yet they seldome Come; Before one Salmon, you shall take a number Of Minnowes: I am given out to be better lyn'd Then it can appeare, to me report is a true Speaker: I would I were really, that I am Deliverd o be: Marry, what I have (be it what it will) I will aflure upon my daughter at The day of my death. Wooer. Sir I demaund no more then your owne offer, And I will estate your Daughter in what I Have promised,
Iailor. Wel, we will talke more of this, when the solemnity Is past; But have you a full promise of her?Enter Daughter. When that shall be seene, I tender my consent. Wooer. I have Sir; here shee comes. Iailor. Your Friend and I have chnced to name You here, upon the old busines: But no more of that. Now, so soone as the Court hurry is over, we will Have an end of it: I'h meane time looke tenderly To the two Prisoners. I can tell you they are princes. Daug. These strewings are for their Chamber; tis pitty they Are in prison, and twer pitty they should be out: I Doe thinke they have patience to make any adversity Asham'd; the prison it selfe is proud of 'em; and They have all the world in their Chamber. Iailor. They are fa'd to be a paire of absolute men. Dangh. By my troth, I think Fame but stammers 'em, they doers. Stand a greise above the reach of report. Iai. I heard them reported in the Battaile, to be the only Daugh. Nay most likely, for they are noble suffrers; I Mervaile how they would have lookd had they beene Victors, that with such a constant Nobility, enforce A freedome out of Bondage, making misery their Mirth, and affliction, a toy to jest at. Iailor. Doe they so? Daug. It seemes to me they have no more sence of their Captivity, then I of ruling Athens: they eate Well, looke merrily, discourse of many things, But nothing of their owne restraint, and disasters: Yet sometime a devided sigh, martyrd as twer I'th deliverance, will breake from one of them. When the other presently gives it so sweete a rebuke, That I could wish my selfe a Sigh to be so chid, Or at least a Sigher to be comforted. Wooer. I never saw'em. Iailor. The Duke himselfe came privately in the night, Enter PAlaon, and Arcite, above. And so did they, what the reason of it is, I
Know not: Looke yonder they are; that's Arcite lookes out. Daugh. No Sir, no, that's Palamon; Arcite is the Lower of the twaine; you may perceive a part Of him. Iai. Goe too, leave your pointing; they would not Make us their object; out of their sight. Daugh. It is a holliday to looke on them: Lord, the Diffrence of men. Exeunt, Scaena 2. Enter Palamon, and Arcite in prison. Pal. How doe you Noble Cosen? Arcite. How doe you Sir? Pal. Why strong inough to laugh at misery, And beare the chance of warre yet, we are prisoners I feare for ever Cosen. Arcite. I beleeve it, And to that destiny have patiently Laide up my houre to come. Pal. Oh Cosen Arcite, Where is Thebs now? where is our noble Country? Where are our friend, and kindreds? never more Must we behold those comforts, never see The hardy youthes strive for the Games of honour (Hung with the painted favours of their Ladies) Like tall Ships under saile: then start among'st 'em And as an Eastwind leave 'em all behinde us, Like lazy Clowdes, whilst Palamon and Arcite, Even in the wagging of a wanton leg Out-stript the peoples praises, won the Garlands, Ere they have time to wish 'em ours. O never Shall we two exercise, like Twyns of honour, Our Armes againe, and feele our fyry horses Like proud Seas under us, our good Swords, now (Better the red-eyd god of war nev'r were) Bravishd our sides, like age must run to rust, And decke the Temples of those gods that hate us,
These hands shall never draw'em out like lightning To blast whole Armies more. Arcite. No Palamon, Those hopes are Prisoners with us, here we are And here the graces of our youthes must wither Like a too-timely Spring; here age must finde us, And which is heaviest (Palamon) unmarried, The sweete embraces of a loving wife Loden with kisses, armd with thousand Cupids Shall never claspe our neckes, no issue know us, No figures of our selves shall we ev'r see, To glad our age, and like young Eagles teach'em Boldly to gaze against bright armes, and say Remember what your fathers were, and conquer. The faire-eyd Maides, shall weepe our Bauishments, And in their Songs, curse ever-blinded fortune Till shee for shame see what a wrong she has done To youth and nature; This is all our world; We shall know nothing here but one another, Heare nothing but the Clocke that tels our woes. The Vine shall grow, but we shall never see it: Sommer shall come, and with her all delights; But dead-cold winter must inhabite here still. Pal. Tis too true Arcite. To out Theban houndes, That shooke the aged Fo: rest with their ecchoes, No more now must we halloa, no more shake Our pointed Iavelyns, whilst the angry Swine Flyes like a parthian quiver from our rages, Strucke with our well-steeld Darts: All valiant uses, (The soode, and nourishment of noble mindes,) In us two here shall perish; we shall die (which is the curse of honour) lastly, Children of greife, and Ignorance. Arc. Yet Cosen, Even from the bottom of these miseries From all that fortune can inflict upon us, I see two comforts rysing, two meere blessings, If the gods please, to hold here abrave patience,
And the enjoying of our greefes together. Whilst Palamon is with me, let me perish If I thinke this our prison. Pala. Certeinly, Tis a maine goodnes Cosen, that our fortunes Were twyn'd together; tis most true, two soues Put in two noble Bodies, let'em suffer The gaule of hazard, so they grow together, Will never sincke, they must not, say they could, A willing man dies sleeping, and all's done. Arc. Shall we make worthy uses of this place That all men hate so much? Pal. How gentle Cosen? Arc. Let's thinke this prison, holy sanctuary, To keepe us from corruption of wors men, We are young and yet desire the waies of honour, That liberty and common Conversation The poyson of pure spirits; might like women Wooe us to wander from. What worthy blessing Can be but our Imaginations May make it ours? And heere being thus together, We are an endles mine to one another; We are one anothers wife, ever begotting New birthes of love; we are father, fends, acquaintance, We are in one another, Families, I am your heire, and you are mine: This place Is our Inheritance: no hard Oppressour Dare take this from us; here with a little patience We shall live long, and loving: No surfeits seeke us: The hand of war urts none here, nor the Seas Swallow their youth: wee we at liberty, A wife might part us lawfully, or busines, Quarrels consume us, Envy of  men Crave our acquaintance, I might sken Cosen, Where you should never know it, and so perish Without your noble hand to close mine eies, Or prars to the gods; a thousand chaunces Were we from hence, would seaver .
Pal. You have made me (I thanke you Cosen Arcit) almost wanton With my Captivity: what a misery It is to live abroade? and every where: Tis like a Beast me thinkes: I finde the Court here, I am sure a more content, and all those pleasures That wooe the wils of men to vanity, I see through now, and am sufficient To tell the world, tis but a gaudy shaddow, That old Time, as he passes by takes with him, What had we bin old in the Court of Creon, Where sin is Iustice, lust, and ignorance, The vertues of the great ones: Cosen Arcite, Had not the loving gods found this place for us We had died as they doe, ill old men, unwept, And had their Epitaphes, the peoples Curses, Shall I say more? Arc. I would heare you still. Ral. Ye shall. Is there record of any two that lov'd Better then we doe Arcite? Arc. Sure there cannot. Pal. I doe not thinke it possible our friendship Should ever leave us. Arc. Till our deathes it cannot Enter Emilia and her woman. And after death our spirits shall be led To those that love eternally. Speake on Sir. This garden has a world of pleasures in't. Emil. What Flowre is this? Wom. Tis calld Narcissus Madam. Emil. That was a faire Boy certaine, but a foole, To love himselfe, were there not maides enough? Arc. Pray forward. Pal. Yes. Emil. Or were they all hard hearted? Wom. They could not be to one so faire. Emil. Thou wouldst not.
Wom. I thinke I should not, Madam. Emil. That's a good wench: But take heede to your kindnes though. Wom. Why Madam? Emil. Men are mad things. Arcite. Will ye goe forward Cosen? Emil. Canst not thou work: such flowers in silke wench? Wom. Yes. Emil. e have a gowne full of 'em and of these, This is a pretty colour, wilt not doe Rarely upon a Skirt wench? Wom. Deinty Madam. Arc. Gosen, Cosen, how doe you Sir? Why Palamon? Pal. Never till now I was in prison Arcite. Arc. Why whats the matter Man? Pal. Behold, and wonder. By heaven shee is a Goddesse. Arcite. Ha. Pal. Doe reverence. She is a Goddesse Arcite. Emil. Of all Flowres. Me thinkes a Rose is best. Wom. Why gentle Madam? Emil. It is the very Embleme of a Maide. For when the west wind courts her gently How modestly she blowes, and paints the Sun, With her chaste blushes? When the North comes neere her, Rude and impatient, then, like Chastity Shee lockes her beauties in her bud againe, And leaves him to base briers. Wom. Yet good Madam, Sometimes her modesty will blow so far She fals for't: a Mayde If shee have any honour, would be loth To take example by her. Emil. Thou art wanton. Arc. She is wondrous faire. Pal. She is all the beauty extant.
Emil. The Sun grows high, lets walk in, keep these flowers, Weele see how neere Art can come neere their colours; I am wondrous merry hearted, I could laugh now. Wom. I could lie downe I am sure. Emil. And take one with you? Wom. That's as we bargaine Madam, Emil. Well, agree then. Exeunt Emilia and woman. Pal. What thinke you of this beauty? Arc. Tis a rare one. Pal. Is't but a rare one? Arc. Yes a matchles beauty. Pal. Might not a man well lose himselfe and love her? Arc. I cannot tell what you have done, I have, Beshrew mine eyes for't, now I feele my Shackles. Pal. You love her then? Arc. Who would not? Pal. And desire her? Arc. Be fore my liberty. Pal. I saw her first. Arc. That's nothing Pal. But it shall be. Arc. I saw her too. Pal. Yes, but you must not love her. Arc. I will not as you doe; to worship her; As she is heavenly, and a blessed Goddes; (I love her as a woman, to enjoy her) So both may love. Pal. You shall not love at all. Arc. Not love at all. Who shall deny me? Pal. I that first saw her; I that tooke possession First with mine eye of all those beauties In her reveald to mankinde: if thou lou'st her. Or entertain'st a hope to blast my wishes, Thou art a Traytour Arcite and a fellow False as thy Title to her: friendship, blood And all the tyes betweene us I disclaime
If thou once thinke upon her. Arc, Yes I love her, And if the lives of all my name lay on it, I must doe so, I love her with my soule, If that will lose ye, faŕewell Palamon, I say againe, I love, and in loving her maintaine I am as worthy, and as free a lover And have as just a title to her beauty As any Palamon or any living That is a mans Sonne. Pal. Have I cald thee friend? Arc. Yes, and have found me so; why are you mov'd thus? Let me deale coldly with you, am not I Part of you blood, part of your soule? you have told me That I was Palamon, and you were Arcite. Pal. Yes. Arc. Am not I liable to those affections, Those joyes, greifes, angers, feares, my friend shall suffer? Pal. Ye may be. Arc. Why then would you deale so cunningly, So strangely, so vnlike a noble kinesman To love alone? speake truely, doe you thinke me Vnworthy of her sight? Pal. No, but unjust, If thou pursue that sight. Arc. Because an other First sees the Enemy, shall I stand still And let mine honour downe, and never charge? Pal. Yes, if he be but one. Arc. But say that one Had rather combat me? Pal. Let that one say so, And use thy freedome: els if thou pursuest her, Be as that cursed man that hates his Country, A branded villaine. Arc. You are mad. Pal. I must be. Till thou art worthy, Arcite, it concernes me,
And in this madnes, if I hazard thee And take thy life, I dcale but truely. Arc. Fie Sir. You play the Childe extreamely: I will love her, I must, I ought to doe so, and I dare, And al, this justly. Pal. O that now, that now Thy false-sele and thy friend, had but this fortune To be one howre at liberty, and graspe Our good Swords in our hands, I would quickly teach thee What tw'er to filch affection from another: Thou a baser in it then a Cutpurse; Put but thy hea out of this window more, And as I have a soule, Ile naile thy life too't. Arc. I hou dar'st not foole, thou canst not, thou art feeble. Pu my head out? Ile throw my Body out, And leape the garden, when I see her next Enter Keeper. And pitch between her armes to anger thee. Pal. No more; the keeper's comming; I shall live To kcke thy braines out with my Shackles. Arc. Doe. Keeper. By your leave Gentlemen: Pala. Now honest keeper? Keeper. Lord Arcite, you must presently to'th Duke; The caus I know not yet. Arc. I am ready keeper. Keeper, Prince Palamon, I must awhile bereave you Of your faire Cosens Company. Exeunt Arcite, and Keeper. Pal. And me too, Even when you please of life; why is he sent for? It may be he shall marry her, he's goodly. And like enough the Duke hath taken notice Both of his blood and body: But his falsehood, Why should a friend be treacherous? If that Get him a wife so noble, and so faire; Let honest men ne're love againe. Once more
I would but see this faire One: Blessed Garden, And fruite, and flowers more blessed that still blossom As her brigh eies shine on ye. would I were For all the fortune of my life hereafter Yon little Tree, yon blooming Apricocke; How I would spread, and fling my wanton armes In at her window; I would bring her fruite Fit for the Gods to feed on: youth and pleasure Still as she tasted should be dobled on her, And if she be not heavenly I would make her So neere the Gods in nature, they should feare her. Enter Keeper. And then I am sure she would love me: how now keeper Wher's Arcite, Keeper, Banishd: Prince Piritbous Obtained his liberty; but never more Vpon his oth and life must he set foote Vpon this Kingdome. Pal. Hees a blessed man, He shall see Thebs againe, and call to Armes The bold yong men, that when he bids 'em charge, Fall on like fire: Arcit shall have a Fortune, If he dare make himselfe a worthy Lover, Yet in the Feild to strike a batle for her; And if he lose her then, he's a cold Coward; How bravly may he beare himselfe to win her If he be noble Arcite; thousand waies. Were I at liberty, I would doe things Of such a vertuous greatnes, that this Lady, This blushing virgine should take manhood to her And seeke to ravish me. Keeper, My Lord for you I have this charge too. Pal. To discharge my life. Keep. No, but from this place to remove your Lordship, The window are too open. Fal. Devils take 'em That are so envious to me; pre'thee kill me.
Keep. And hang for't afterward. Pal. By this good light Had I a sword I would kill thee. Keep, Why my Lord? Pal. Thou bringst such pelting scuruy news continually Thou art not worthy lif; I will not goe. Keep. Indeede yon must my Lord. Pal. May I see the garden? Keep. Noe. Pal. Then I am resolud, I will not goe. Keep I must constraine you then; and for you are dange∣rous Ile clap more yrons on you. Pal. Doe good keeper. Ile shake'em so, ye shall not slepe, Ile make ye a new Morrie, must I goe? Keep. There is no remedy. Pal. Fare well kinde window. May rude winde never hurt thee. O my Lady If ever thou hast felt what sorrow was, Dreame how I suffer. Come; now bury me. Exeunt Palamon, and Keeper. Scaena 3. Enter Arcite. Arcite. Banishd the kingdome? tis a benefit, A mercy I must thanke 'em for, but banishd The free enjoying of that face I die for, Oh twasa stud died punishment, a death Beyond Imagination: Such a vengeance That were I old and wicked, all my sins Could never pluck upon me. Palamon; Thou ha'st the Start now, thou shalt stay and see Her bright eyes breake each morning gainst thy window, And let in life into thee; thou shalt feede Vpon the sweetenes of a noble beauty, That nature nev'r exceeded, nor nev'r shall: Good gods? what happines has Palamon? Twenty to one, hee'le come to speake to her, And if she be as gentle, as she's faire,
I know she's his, he has a Tongue will tame Tempe sts, and make the wild Rockes wanton. Come what can come' The worst is death; I will not leave the Kingdome, I know mine owne, is but a heape of ruins, And no redresse there, if I goe, he has her. I am resolu'd an other shape shall make me, Or end my fortunes. Either way, I am happy: Ile see her, and be neere her, or no more. Enter. 4. Country people, & one with a garland before them. 1, My Masters, ile be there that's certaine. 2. And Ile be there. 3. And . 4. Why then have with ye Boyes; Tis but a chiing, Let the plough play to day, ile tick'lt out Of the lades tailes to morrow. 1. I am sure To have my wife as jealous as a Turkey: But that's all one, ile goe through, let her mumble. 2. Clap her aboard to morrow night, and stoa her, And all's made up againe. 3. I, doe but put a feskue in her fist, and you shall see her Take a new lesson out, and be a good wench. Doe we all hold, against the Maying? 4. Hold? what should aile us? 3. Arcas will be there. 2. And Sennois. And Rycas, and 3. better lads nev'r dancd under green Tree, And yet know what wenches: ha? But will the dainty Domine, the Schoolemaster keep touch Doe you thinke: for he do's all ye know. 3. Hee'l eate a hornebooke ere he faile: goe too, the mat∣ter's too farre driven betweene him, and the Tanners daugh∣ter, to let slip now, and she must see the Duke, and she must dance too. 4. Shall we be lusty. 2. All the Boyes in Athens blow wind i'th bch on's,
and heere ile be and there ile be, for our Towne, and here againe, and there againe: ha, Boyes, heigh for the wea∣vers. 1. This must be done i'th woods. 4. O pardon me. 2. By any meanes our thing of learning sees so: where he himselfe will  the Duke most paously in our behalfes: hees excellent i'th woods, bring him to'th plaines, his lear∣ning makes no cry: 3. Weele see the sports, then every man to's Tackle: and Sweete Companions lets rehearse by any meanes before The Ladies se us, and doe sweetly, and God knows what May come on't. 4. Content; the sports once ended, wee'l performe. Away Boyes and hold. Arc. By your leaves honest friends: pray you whither go you. 4. Whither? why, what a question's that? Arc. Yes, tis a question, to me that know not. 3. To the Games my Friend. 2. Where were you bred you know it not? Arc. Not farie Sir, Are there such Gams to day? 1. Yes marry are there: And sch as you neuer saw; The Duke himselfe Will be in person there. Arc. What pastimes are they? 2, Wrastling, and Running; Tis a pretty Fellow. 3. Thou wilt not goe along. Arc. Not yet Sir. 4. Well Sir Take your owne time, come Boyes 1. My  misgives me This fellow has a veng'ance tricke o'th hip, Marke how his Bodi's nde for't 2. Ile be hangd though If he dare venture, hang him plumb porredge, He wrastle? he rost eggs. Co lets be gon Lads. : 4.
Arc. This is an offerd oportunity I durst not wish for. Well, I could have wrestled, The best men calld it excellent, and run Swifter, then winde upon a feild of Corne (Curling the wealthy eares) never flew: Il venture, And in some poore disguze be there, who knowes Whether my browes may not be girt with garlands? And happines preferre me to a place, Where I may ever dwell in sight of her. Exit Arcire, Scaena 4. Enter Iailors Daughter alone. Daugh. Why should I love this Gentleman? Tis odds He never will affct me; I am base, My Father the meane Keeper of his Prison, And he a prince; To marry him is hopelesse; To be his whore, is witles; Out upon't; What pushes are we wenches driven to When fifteene once has found us? First I saw him, I (seeing) thought he was a goodly man; He has as much to please a woman in him, (If he please to bestow it so) as ever These eyes yet lookt on; Next, I pittled him, And so would any young wench That ever dream'd, or vow'd her Maydenhead To a yong hansom Man; Then I lov'd him, (Extreamey lov'd him) infinitely lov'd him; And yet he had a Cosen, faire as he too. But in my heart was Palamon, and there Lord, what a coyle he keepes? To heare him Sing in an evening, what a heaven it is? And yet his Songs are sad-ones; Fairer spoken, Was never Gentleman. When I come in To bring him water in a morning, first He bowes his noble body, then salutes me, thus: Faire, gentle May de, good morrow, may thy goodnes, Get thee a happy husband; Once he kist me, I lov'd my lips the better ten daies after, Would he would doe so ev'ry day; He greives much, And me as much to see his misery.
What should I doe, to make him know I love him, For I would faine enjoy him? Say I ventur'd To set him free? what saies the law then? Thus much For Law, or kindred: I will doe it, And this night, or to morrow he shall love me. Exit. Scaena 4. Enter Theseus, Hipolita, Pirithous,This short flo∣rish of Cor∣nets and Showtes With∣in. Emilia: Arcite with a Garland, &c. Thes. You have done worthily: I have not seene Since Hercules, a man of tougher synewes; What ere you are, you run the best, and wrastle, That these times can allow. Arcite. I am proud to please you. Thes. What Countrie bred you? Arcite. This; but far off, Prince. Thes. Are you a Gentleman? Arcite. My father said so; And to those gentle uses gave me life. Thes. Are you his heire? Arcite. His yongest Sir. Thes. Your Father Sure is a happy Sire then: what prooves you? Arcite. A little of all noble Quallities: I could have kept a Hawke, and well have holloa'd To a deepe crie of Dogges; I dare not praise My feat in horsemanship: yet they that knew me Would say it was my best peece: last, and greatest, I would be thought a Souldier. Thes. You are perfect. Pirith. Vpon my soule, a proper man. Emilia. He is so. Per. How doe you like him Ladie? Hip. I admire him, I have not seene so yong a man, so noble (If he say true,) of his sort. Emil. Beleeve, His mother was a wondrous handsome woman, His face me thinkes, goes that way. Hyp. But his Body
And firie minde, illustrate a brave Father. Per. Marke how his vertue, like a hidden Sun Breakes through his baser garments. Hyp. Hee's well got sure. Thes. What made you seeke this place Sir? Arc. Noble Theseus. To purchase name, and doe my ablest service To such a well-found wonder, as thy worth, Fo onely in thy Court, of all the world dwells faire-eyd honor. Per. All his words are worthy. Thes. Sir, we are much endebted to your travell, Nor shall you loose your wish: Perithous Dispose of this faire Gentleman. Perith. Thankes Theseus. What ere you are y'ar mine, and I shall give you To a most noble service, to this Lady, This bright yong Virgin; pray observe her goodnesse; You have honourd hir faire birth-day, with your vertues, And as your due y'ar hirs: kisse her faire hand Sir. Arc. Sir, y'ar a noble Giver: dearest Bewtie, Thus let me seale my vowd faith: when your Servant (Your most unworthie Creature) but offends you, Command him die, he shall. Emil. That were too cruell. If you deserve well Sir; I shall soone see't: Y'ar mine, and somewhat better than your rancke Ile use you. Per. Ile see you furnish'd, and because you say You are a horseman, I must needs intreat you This after noone to ride, but tis a rough one. Arc. I like him better (Prince) I shall not then Freeze in my Saddle. Thes. Sweet, you must be readie, And you Emilia, and you (Friend) and all To morrow by the Sun, to doe observance To flowry May, in Dians wood: waite well Sir Vpon your Mistris: Emely, I hope He shall not goe a foote.
Emil. That were a shame Sir, While I have horses: take your choice, and what You want at any time, let me but know it; If you serve faithfully, I dare assure you You'l finde a loving Miris. Are. If I doe not, Let me finde that my Father ever hated, , and blowes. Thes. Go leade the way; you have won it: It shall be so; you shall receave all dues Fit for the honour you have won; Twer wrong else, Sister, beshrew my heart, you have a Servant, That if I were a woman, would be Master, But you are wise. Florish. Emil. I hope too wise for that Sir. Exeunt omnes. Scaena 6. Enter Iaylors Daughter alone. Daughter. Let all the Dukes, and all the divells rore, He is at liberty: I have venturd for him, And out I have brought him to a little wood A mile hence, I have sent him, where a Cedar Higher than all the rest, spreads like a plane Fast by a Brooke, and there he shall keepe close, Till I provide him Fyles, and foode, for yet His yron bracelts are not off. O Love What a stout hearted child thou art! My Father Durst better have indur'd cold yron, than done it: I love him, beyond love, and beyond reason, Or wit, or safetie: I have made him know it I care not, I am desperate, If the law Finde me, and then condemne me for't; some wenches, Some honest harted Maides, will sing my Dirge. And tell to memory, my death was noble, Dying almost a Martyr: That way he takes, I purpose is my way too: Sure he cannot Be so unmanly, as to leave me here, If he doe, Maides will not so easily Trust men againe: And yet he has not thank'd m For what I have done: no not so much as kist me,
And that (me thinkes) is not so well; not scarcely Could I perswade him to become a Freeman, He made such scruples of the wrong he did To me, and to my Father. Yet I hope When he considers more, this love of mine Will take more root within him: Let him doe What he will with me, so he use me kindly, For use me so he shall, or ile proclaime him And to his face, no-man: Ile presently Provide him necessaries, and packe my cloathes up, And where there is a path of ground Ile venture So h be with me; By him, like a shadow Ile ever dwell;  bin thi houre the whoobub Will be all ore the prison: I am then Kissing the man they looke for: farewell Father; Get many more such prisoners, and such daughters, And shortly you may keepe your selfe. No to him:Cornets in sundry places. Noise and hallowing as people a May∣ing: Actus Tertius. Scaena 1. Enter Arcite alone. Arcite. The Duke has lost Hypolita; each tooke A severall land. This is a solemne Right They owe bloomd May, and the Athenians pay it To'th heart of Ceremony: O Queene Emilia Fresher then May, sweeter Then hir gold Buttons on the bowes, or all Th'en amelld knackes o'th Meade, or garden, yea (We challenge too) the bancke of any Nymph That makes the streame seeme flowers; thou o Iewell O'th wood, o'th world, hast likewise blest a pace With thy sole presence, in thy rumination That I poore man might eftsoones come betweene And chop on some cold thought, thrice blessed chance To drop on such a Mistris, expectation most giltlesse on't: tell  O Lady Fortune (Next after Emely y Sovegne) how far
I may be prowd. She takes strong note of me, Hath made me neere her; and this benteous Morne (The prim'st of all the yeare) presents me with A brace of horses, two such Steeds might well Be by a paire of Kings backt, in a Field That their crownes titles tride: Alas, alas Poore Cosen Palamon, poore prisoner, thou So litle dream'st upon my fortune, that Thou thinkst thy selfe, the happier thing, to be So neare Emilia, me thou deem'st at Thebs, And therein wretched, although free; But if Thou knew'st my Mistris breathd on me, and that I ear'd her language, livde in her eye; O Coz What passion would enclose thee. Enter Palamon as out of a Bush, with his Shackles: bonds his fist at Arcite. Palamon. Traytor kinseman, Thou shouldst perceive my passion, if these signel Of prisonment were off me, and this hand But owner of a Sword: By all othes in one I, and the iustice of my love would make thee A conf Traytor, o thou most persidious That ever gently lookd the voydes of honour. That eu'r bore gentle Token; falsest Cosen That ever blood made kin, call'st thou hir thine? Ile prove it in my Shackles, with these hands, Void of appointment, that thouly'st, and art A very theefe in love, a Chy Lord Nor worth the name of villaine: had I a Sword And these house clogges away. Arc. Deere Cosin Palamon, Pal. Cosoner Arcite, give me language, such As thou hast shewd me feate. Arc. Not ding in The circuit of my breast, any grosse stuffe To forme me like your blazon, holds me to This gentlenesse of answer; tis your passion That thus mistakes, the which to you being enemy, Cannot to me be kind: honor, and honestie
I cherish, and depend on, how so ev'r You skip them in me, and with them faire Coz Ile maintaine my proceedings; pray be pleas'd To shew in generous termes, your griefes, since that Your question's with your equall, who professes To cleare his owne way, with the minde and Sword Of a true Gentleman. Pal. That thou durst Arcite. Arc. My Coz, my Coz, you have beene well advertis'd How much I dare, y'ave seene me use my Sword Against th'advice of feare: sure of another You would not heare me doubted, but your silence Should breake out, though i'th Sanctuary. Pal. Sir, I have seene you move in such a place, which well Might justifie your manhood, you were calld A good knight and a bold; But the whole weeke's not faire If any day it rayne: Their valiant temper Men loose when they encline to trecherie, And then they fight like compelld Beares, would fly Were they not tyde. Arc. Kinsman, you might as well Speake this, and act it in your Glasse, as to His care, which now disdaines you. Pal. Come up to me, Qit me of these cold Gyves, give me a Sword Though it be rustie, and the charity Of one meale lend me; Come before me then A good Sword in thy hand, and doe but say That Emily is thine, I will forgive The trespasse thou hast done me, yea my life If then thou carry, and brave soules in shades That have dyde manly, which will seeke of me Some newes from earth, they shall get none but this That thou art brave, and noble. Arc. Be content, Againe betake you to your hawthorne house, With counsaile of the night, I will be here With wholesome viands; these impediments
Will I file off, you shall have gannents, and Perfumes to kill the nell o'th prison, after When you shall stretch your selfe, and say but Arcite I am in plight, there shall be at your choyce Both Sword, and Armour. Pal. Oh you heavens, dares any So noble beare a guilty busines! none But onely Arcite, therefore none but Arcite In this kinde is so bold. Arc. Sweete Palamon. Pal. I doe embràce you, and your offer, for Your offer doo't I onely, Sir your person Without hipocrisy I may not wish Winde hornes of Cornets. More then my Swords edge ont. Arc. You heare the Hornes; Enter your Musicke least this match between's Be crost, er met, give me your hand, farewell. Ile bring you every needfull thing: I pray you Take comfort and be strong. Pal. Pray hol your promise; And doe the deede with a bent brow, most creaine You love me not, be rough with me, and powre This oile out of your language; by this ayre I could for each word, give a Cuffe: my stomach not reconcild by reason, Arc. Plainely spoken, Yet pardon me hard language, when I spur Winde hornes. My horse, I chide him nor; content, and anger In me have but one face. Harke Sir, they call The scatterd to the Banket; you must guesse I have an office there. Pal. Sir your attendance Cannot please heaven, and I know your office Vnjustly is atcheev'd. Arc. If a good title, I am perswaded this question sicke between's,
By bleeding must be cur'd. I am a Suitour, That to your Sword you will be queath this plea, And talke of it no more. Pal. But this one word: You are going now to gaze upon my Mistris, For note you, mine she is. Arc, Nay then. Pal. Nay pray you, You talke of feeding me to breed me strength You are going now to looke upon a Sun That strengthens what it lookes on, there You have a vantage ore me, but enjoy't till I may enforce my remedy. Farewell. Exent. Scaena 2. Enter Iaylors daughter alone. Daugh. He hs mistooke; the Beake I meant, is gone After his fancy, Tis now welnigh morning, No matter, would it were perpetuall night, And darkenes Lord o'th world, Harke tis a woolfe: In me hath greife slaine feare, and but for one thing I care for nothing, and that's Palamon. I wreake not if the wolves would jaw me, so He had this File; what if I hallowd for him? I cannot hallow: ifI whoop'd; what then? If he not answeard, I should call a wolfe, And doe him but that service. I have heard Strange howles this live-long night, why may't not be They have made prey of him? he has no weapons, He cannot run, the Iengling of his Gives Might call fell things to listen, who have in them A sence to know a man unarmd, and can Smell where resistance is. Ile set it downe He's torne to peeces, they howld many together And then they feed on him: So much for that, Be bold to ring the Bell; how stand I then? All's char'd when he is gone, No, no Ilye, My Father's to be hang'd for his escape, My selfe to beg, if I prizd life so much As to deny my act, but that I would not,
Should I try death by dussons: I am mop't, Food tooke I none these two daies. Sipt some water. I have not closd mine eyes Save when my lids scowrd off their bine; alas Dissolue my life, Let not my sence unsettle Least I should drowne, or stab, or hang my selfe, O state of Nature, faile together in me, Since thy best props are warpt: So which way now? The best way is, the next way to a grave: Each errant step beside is torment. Loe The Moone is down, the Cryckets chirpe, the Schreichowl Calls in the dawne; all offices are done Save what I faile in: But the point is this An end, and that is all. Exit. Scaena 3. Enter Arcite, with Meat, Wine, and Files. Arc. I should be neere the place, hoa. Cosen Palamon. Enter Palamon. Pal. Arcite. Arc. The same: I have brought you foode and files, Come forth and feare not, her'e sno Theseus. Pal. Nor none so honest Arcite. Arc. That's no matter, Wee'l argue that hereafter: Come take courage, You shall not dye thus beastly, here Sir drinke I know you are faint, then ile talke further with you. Pal. Arcite, thou mightst now poyson me. Arc. I might. But I must feare you first: Sit downe, and good now No more of these vaine parlies; let us not Having our ancient reputation with us Make talke for Fooles, and Cowards, To your health, &c. Pal. Doe. Arc. Pray sit downe then, and let me entreate you By all the honesty and honour in you, No mention of this woman, t'will diurbe us, We shall have time enough. Pal. Well Sir, Ile pledge you. Arc. Drinke a good hearty draught, it breeds good blood man.
Doe not you feele it thaw you? Pal. Stay,  tll you after a draught or two more. Arc. Spare it not, the Duke has more Cuz: Eate now. Pal. Yes. Arc. I am glad you have so good a stomach. Pal. I am gladder I have so good meate too't. Arc. Is't not mad lodging here in the wild woods Cosen Pal. Yes, for then that have wilde Consciences. Arc. How tasts your vittails? your hunger needs no sawce I see, Pal. Not much. But if it did, yours is too : sweete Cosen: what is this? Arc. Venison. Pal. Tis a lusty meate: Giue me more wine; here Arcite to the wenches We have known in our daies. The Lord Stewards daughter. Doe you remember her? Arc. After you Cuz. Pal. She lov'd a black-haird man. Arc. She did so; well Sir. Pal. And I have heard some call him Arcite. and Arc. Out with't faith. Pal. She met him in an Arbour: What did she there Cuz? play o'th virginals? Arc. Something she did Sir. Pal. Made her groane a moneth for't; or 2. or 3. or 10. Arc. The Marshals Sister, Had her share too, as I remember Cofen, Else there be tales abroade, you'l pledge her? Pal. Yes. Arc. A prety broune wench t'is-There was a time When yong men went a hunting, and a wood, And a broade Beech: and thereby hangs a tale: heigh ho. Pal. For Emily, upon my life; Foole Away with this straind mirth; I say againe That sigh was breathd for Emily; base Cosen, Dar'st thou breake first? Arc. you are wide. Pal. By heaven and earth, ther's nothing in thee honest.
Arc, Then Ile leave you: you are a Beast now: Pal. As thou makst me, Traytour. Arc. Ther's all things needfull, files and shirts, and, per∣fumes: Ile come againe some two howres hence, and bring That that shall quiet all, Pal. A Sword and Armour. Arc. Feare me not; you are now too fowle; fare well. Cet off your Trinkets, you shall want nought; Pal. Sir ha: Arc. Ile heare no more. Exit. Pal. If he keepe touch, he dies for't. Exit. Scaena 4. Enter Iaylors daughter. Daugh. I am very cold, and all the Stars are out too, The little Stars, and all, that looke like aglets: The Sun has seene my Folly: Palamn; Alas no; hees i heaven; where am I now? Yonder's the sea, and ther's a Ship; how't tumbles And ther's a Rocke lies watching under water; Now, now, it beates upon it; now, now, now, Ther's a leak sprung, a sound one, how they cry? Vpon her before the winde, you'l loose all els: Vp with a course or two, and take about Boyes. Good night, good night, y'ar gon; I am very hungry, Would I could finde a fine  would tell me from all parts o'th world, then would I make A Carecke of a Cockle shell, and sayle By east and North East to the King of Pigmes, For he tels fortunes rarely. Now my Father Twenty to one is trust up in a trice To morrow morning, Ile say never a word. For ile cut my  coat,  above my knee,Sing. And ile clip my yellow lockes; an inch below mine eie. hey, nonny, nonny, nonny, He's buy me a white Cut, forth for to ride And ile goe seeke him, throw the world that is so wide hey nonny, nonny, nonny. O for a pricke now like a Nightingale, to put my breast
Against. I shall sleepe like a Top else. Exit. Scaena 6. Enter a Schoole master. 4. Countrymen: and Baum 2. or 3. wches, with a Taborer. Sch. Fy, fy, what tediosity, & disensanity is here among ye? have my Rudiments bin biabourd so long with ye? milkd unto ye, and by a figure even the very plumbroth & marrow of my understanding laid upon ye? and do you still cry where, and how, & wherfore? you most course freeze capacities, ye jave Iudgements, have I saide thus let be, and there let be, and then let be, and no man understand mee, proh , medius , ye are all dunces: For why here stand I. Here the Duke comes, there are you close in the Thicket; the Duke appeares, I meete him and unto him I utter learned things, and many figures, he heares, and nods, and hums, and then cries rare, and I goe forward, at length I fling my Cap up; marke there; then do you as once did Mager, and the Bore break comly out before him: like true lovers, cast your selves in a Body decently, and sweetly, by a figure trace, and turne Boyes. 1. And sweetly we will doe it Master Gerrold. 2. Draw up the Company, Where's the Taborour. 3. Why Timothy. Tab. Here my mad boyes, have at ye. Sch. But I say where's their women? 4. Here's Friz and Maudline. 2. And little Luce with the white legs, and bouncing . 1. And freekeled Nel; that never faild her Master. Sch. Wher be your Ribands maid? swym with your Bodies And carry it sweetly, and deliverly And now and then a fauour, and a frisko. Nel. Let us alone Sir. Sch. Wher's the rest o'th Musicke. 3. Dispersd as you commanded. Sch. Couple then And see what's wanting; wher's the Bavian? My friend, carry your taile without offence r scandall to the Ladies; and be sure tumble with audacity, and manhood,
And when you barke doe it with judgement. Bau. Yes Sir. Sch. Quo usque tandem. Here is a woman wanting 4. We may goe whistle: all the fat's i'th fie. Sch. We have, As learned Authours utter, washd a Tile, We have beene fatu, and laboured vainely. 2. This is that scornefull peece, that  vy hilding That gave her promise faithfully, she would be here, Cice y the Sempsters daughter: The next gloves that I give her shall be dog skin; Nay and she faile me once, you can tell Arcas She swore by wine, and bread, she would not breake. Sch. An Eele and woman, A learned Poet sayes: unles by'th taile And with thy teeth thou hold, will either faile, In manners this was false position 1. A fire ill take her; do's she flinch now? 3. What Shall we determine Sir? Sch. Nothing, Our busines is become a nullity Yea, and a woefull, and a pittious nullity. 4. Now when the credite of our Towne lay on it, Now to be frampall, now to pisse o'th nettle, Goe thy waies, ile remember thee, ile fit thee, Enter Iaylors daughter. The George alow, came from the South, from The coast of Barbary a.Daughter. And there he met with brave gallants of war By one, by two, by three, a Well haild well haild, you jolly gallants, And whither now are you bound aChare and ooles ont. O let me have your company till come to the sound a There was three fooles, fell out about an howles The one sed it was an owle The other he sed nay, The third he sedit was a hawke, and her bels wer cut away.
3. Ther's a dainty mad woman Mr. comes i'th Nick as mad as a march hare: if wee can get her daunce, wee are made againe: I warrant her, shee'l doe the rarest gambols. 1. A mad woman? we are made Boyes. Sch. And are you mad good woman? Daugh. I would be sorry else, Give me your hand. Sch. Why? Daugh. I can tell your fortune. You are a foole: rell ten, I have pozd him: Buz Friend you must eate no white bread, if you doe Your teeth will bleede extreamely, shall we dance ho? I know you, y'a a Tinker: Sirha Tinker Stop no more holes, but what you should. Sch. Dij boni. A Tinker Damzell? Daug, Or a Conjurer: raise me a devill now, and let him play Quipassa, o'th bels and bones. Sch, Goe take her, and fluently perswade her to a peace: Et opus exegi, quod nec  ira,  ignis. Strike up, and leade her in. 2, Come Lasle, lets trip it. Daugh. Ile leade: (Winde : 3. Doe, doe. Sch. Perswasively, and cunningly: away boyes, Ex. all but Schoolemaster. I heare the hornes: give me some Meditation, and marke your Cuo: Pallas inspire me. Enter Thes. Pir. Hip. Emil. Arcite: and traine. Thes. This way the Stag tooke. Sch. Stay, and edisie. Thes. What have we here? Per. Some Countrey sport, upon my life Sir. Per. Well Sir, goe forward, we will . Ladies sit downe, wee'l . Sch. Thou doughtie Duke all haile: ll haile sweet Ladies. Thes. This is a cold beginning. Sch. If you but favour; our Country pastime made is,
We are a few of those collected here That ruder Tongues distinguish villager, And to say veritie, and not to fable; We are a merry rout, or else a rable Or company, or by a figure, Choris That fore thy dignitie will dance a Morris. And I that am the rectifier of all By title Pedagogus, that let fall The Birch upon the breeches of the small ones, And humble with a  the tall ones, Doe here present this Machine, or this frae, And daintie Duke, whose doughtie disall fame From Dis to Dedal, from post to pillar Is blowne abroad; helpe me thy poore well willer, And with thy twincing eyes, looke right and straight Vpon this mighty  — of mickle waight Is — now comes in, which being glewd together Makes Morris, and the cause that we came ether. The body of our sport of no small study I first appeare, though rude, and raw, and muddy, To speake before thy noble grace, this teer: At whose great feete I offer up y penner. The next the Lord of May, and Lady bright, The Chambermaid, and Servingman by night That seeke out silt ging: Then mine Host And his fat Spowse, that welcomes to their cost The gauled Traveller, and with a beckning Informes the Tapster to inflame the reckning: Then the beast eating Clowne, and next the foole, The Bavian with long tayle, and eke long , Cummultis aliijs that make a dance, Say I, and all shall presently advance. Thes. I, I by any meas, deere Domine. Pr. Produce. Musicke Dance. , Come forth, and foot it,nocke for choole. Enter The Dance. Ladies, if we have beene erry And have pleasd thee with a derry, And a ,  a
Say the Schoolemaster's no Clowne: Duke, if we have pleasd three And have done as good Boyes should doe, Give us but a tree or twaine For a Maypole, and againe Ere another yeare run out, Wee'l make thee laugh and all this . Thes. Take 20. Dmine; how does my sweet heart. Hip. Never so pleasd Sir. Emil. Twas an excellent dance, and for a preface I never heard a better. Thes. Schoolemaster, I thanke yo, One see' all re∣warded. Per. And heer's something to paint your Pole withall. Thes. Now to our sports againe. Sch. May the Stag thou  stand long, And thy dogs be swift and strong: May they kill him withoutlets, And the Ladies ate his dowsts: Come we are all de. Winde . Dij Dea{que} omnes, ye have danc'd rarely wenches. . Scaena 7. Enter  from the . Pal. About this houre my Cosen gave his faith To visit me againe, and with him bring Two Swords, and two good Armors; if he faile He's neither man, nor Souldier; when he left I did not thinke a weeke could have restord My lost strength to me, I was growne so low, And Crest-falne with my wants: I thanke thee Arcite, Thou art yet a faire Foe; and I feele my selfe With this refreshing, able once againe To out dure danger: To delay it longer Would make the world think when it comes to hearing, That I lay fatting like a Swine, to fight And not a Souldier: Therefore this blest morning Shall be the last; and that Sword he refuses, If it but hold, I kill him with; tis Iustice: So love, and Fortune for me: O good morrow. Enter Arcite with  and Swords.
Arc. Good morrow noble kinesman, Pal. I have put you To too much paines Sir. Arc. That too much faire Cosen. Is but a debt to honour, and my duty. Pal. Would you were so in all Sir; I could wish ye As kinde a kinsman, as you force me finde A beneficiall foe, that my embraces Might thanke ye, not my blowes. Arc. I shall thinke either Well done, a noble recompence. Pal. Then I shall quit you. Arc. Defy me in these faire termes, and you show More then a Mistris to me, no more anger As you love any thing that's honourable; We were not bred to talke man, when we are arm'd And both upon our guards, then let our fury Like meeting of two tides, fly strongly from us, And then to whom the birthright of this Beauty Truely pertaines (without obbraidings, scornes, Dispisings of our persons, and such powting Fitter for Girles and Schooleboyes) will be seene And quickly, yous, or mine: wilt please you arme Sir, Or if you feele your selfe not sitting yet And furnishd with your old strength, ile stay Cosen And ev'ry day discourse you into health, As I am spard, your person I am friends with, And I could wish I had not saide I lov'd her Though I had dide; But loving such a Lady And justifying my Love, I must not fly from't. Pal. Arcite, thou art so brave an enemy That no man but thy Cosen's fit to kill thee, I am well, and lusty, choose your Armes. Arc. Choose you Sir: Pal. Wilt thou exceede in all, or do'st thou doe it To make me pare thee? Arc. If you thinke so Cosen, You are deceived, for as I am a Soldier.
I will not spare you. Pal. That's well said. Arc. You'l finde it Pal. Then as I am an honest man and love, With all the justice of affection Ile pay thee soundly: This ile take. Arc. That's mine then, Ile are you first. Pal. Do: pray thee tell me Cosen, Where gotst thou this good Armour. Arc. Tis the Dukes, And to say true, I stole it; doe I pinch you. Pal. Noe. Arc. Is't not too heavie? Pal. I have worne a lighter, But I shall make it serve. Arc. Ile buckl't close. Pal. By any meanes. Arc. You care not for a Grand guard? Pal. No, no, wee'l use no horses, I perceave You would faine be at that Fight. Arc. I am indifferent. Pal. Faith so am I: good Cosen, thrust the buckle Through far enough. Arc. I warrant you. Pal. My Caske now. Arc. Will you fight bare-armd? Pal. We shall be the nibler. Arc. But use your Gauntlets though; those are o'th least, Prethee take mine good Cosen. Pal. Thanke you Arcite. How doe I looke, am I falne much away? Arc. Faith very little; love has usd you kindly. Pal. Ile warrant thee, Ile strike home. Arc. Doe, and spare not; Ile give you cause sweet osen. Pal. Now to you Sir, Me thinkes this Armo'rs very like that, ,
Thou wor'st that day the 3. Kings fell, but lighter. Arc. That was a very good one, and that day I well remember, you out did me Cosen, I never saw such valour: when you chargd Vpon the left wing of the Enemie, I spurd hard to come up, and under me I had a right good horse. Pal. You had indeede A bright Bay I remember. Arc. Yes but all Was vainely labour'd in me, you outwent me, Nor could my wishes reach you; yet a little I did by imitation. Pal. More by vertue, You are modest Cosen. Arc. When I saw you charge first, Me thought I heard a dreadfull clap of Thunder Breake from the Troope. Pal. But still before that flew The lightning of your valour: Stay a little, Is not this peece too ? Arc. No, no, tis well. Pal. I would have nothing hurt thee but my Sword, A bruise would be dishonour. Arc. Now I am perfect. Pal. Stand off then. Arc. Take my Sword, I hold it better. Pal. I thanke ye: No, keepe it, your life lyes on it, Here's one, if it but hold, I aske no more, For all my hopes: My Cause and honour guard me. Arc. And me my love: * Is there ought else to say?They bow se∣verall wayes: then advance and stand. Pal. This onely, and no more: Thou art mine Aunts Son. And that blood we desire to shed is mutuall, In me, thine, and in thee, mine: My Sword Is in my hand, and if thou killst me The gods, and I forgive thee; If there be A place prepar'd for those that sleepe in honour, I wish his wearie soule, that falls may win it:
Fight bravely Cos, give me thy noble hand. Arc. Here Palamon: This hand shall never more Come neare thee with such friendship. Pal. I commend thee. Arc. If I fall, curse me, and say I was a coward, For none but such, dare die in these just Tryalls. Once more farewell my Cosen, Pal. Farewell Arcite. Fight. Hornes within: they stand. Arc. Loe Cosen, loe, our Folly has undon us. Pal. Why? Arc. This is the Duke, a hunting as I told you, If we be found, we are wretched, O retire For honours sake, and safely presently Into your Bush agen; Sir we shall finde Too many howres to dye in, gentle Cosen: If you be seene you perish instantly For breaking prison, and I, if you reveale me, For my contempt; Then all the world will scorne us, And say we had a noble difference, But base disposers of it. Pal. No, no, Cosen I will no more be hidden, nor put off This great adventure to a second Tryall I know your cunning, and I know your cause, He that faints now, shame take him, put thy selfe Vpon thy present guard. Arc. You are not mad? Pal. Or I will make th'advantage of this howre Mine owne, and what to come shall threaten me, I feare lesse then my fortune: know weake Cosen I love Emilia, and in that ile bury Thee, and all crosses else. Arc. Then come, what can come Thou shalt know Palamon, I dare as well Die, as discourse, or sleepe: Onely this feares me, The law will have the honour of our ends. Have at thy ife.
Pal. Looke to thine owne well Arcite. Fight againe. Hornes. Enter Theseus, Hipolita, Emilia, Prithous and traine. Theseus. What ignorant and mad malicious Traitors, Are you? That gainst the tenor of my Lawes Are making Battaile, thus like Knights appointed, Without my leave, and Officers of Armes? By Castor both shall dye. Pal. Hold thy word Theseus, We are certainly both Traitors, both despisers Of thee, and of thy goodnesse: I am Palamon That cannot love thee, he that broke thy Prison, Thinke well, what that deserves; and this is Arcite A bolder Traytor never trod thy ground A Falser neu'r seem'd friend: This is the man Was begd and banish'd, this is he contemnes thee And what thou dar'st doe; and in this disguise Against this owne Edict followes thy Sister, That fortunate bright Star, the faire Emilia Whose servant, (if there be a right in seeing, And first bequeathing of the soule to) justly I am, and which is more, dares thinke her his. This treacherie like a most trusty Lover, I call'd him now to answer; if thou bee'st As thou art spoken, great and vertuous, The true descider of all injuries, Say, Fight againe, and thou shalt see me Theseus Doe such a Iustice, thou thy selfe wilt envie, Then take my life, Ile wooe thee too't. Per. O heaven, What more then man is this! Thes. I have sworne. Arc. We seeke not Thy breath of mercy Theseus, Tis to me A thing as soone to dye, as thee to say it, And no more mov'd: where this man calls me Traitor, Let me say thus much; if in love be Treason, In service of so excellent a Beutie,
As I love most, and in that faith will perish, As I have brought my life here to confirme it, As I have serv'd her truest, worthiest, As I dare kill this Cos, that denies it, So let me be most Traitor, and ye please me: For scorning thy Edict Duke, aske that Lady Why she is faire, and why her eyes command me Stay here to love her; and if she say Traytor, I am a villaine fit to lye unburied. Pal. Thou shalt have pitty of us both, o Theseus, If unto neither thou shew mercy, stop, (As thou art just) thy noble eare against us, As thou art valiant; for thy Cosens soule Whose 12. strong labours crowne his memory, Lets die together, at one instant Duke, Onely a little let him fall before me, That I may tell my Soule he shall not have her. Thes. I grant your wish, for to say true, your Cosen Has ten times more offended, for I gave him More mercy then you found, Sir, your offenses Being no more then his: None here speake for'em For ere the Sun set, both shall sleepe for ever. Hipol. Asas the pitty, now or never Sister Speake not to be denide; That face of yours Will beare the curses else of after ages For these lost Cosens. Emil. In my face deare Sister I finde no anger to 'em; nor no ruyn, The misad venture of their owne eyes kill'em; Yet that I will be woman, and have pitty, My knees shall grow to'th ground but Ile get mercie. Helpe me deare Sister, in a deede so vertuous, The powers of all women will be with us, Moft royall Brother. Hipol. Sir by our tye of Marriage. Emil. By your owne spotlesse honour. Hip. By that faith, That faire hand, and that honest heart you gave me.
Emil. By that you would have pitty in another, By your owne vertues infiite. Hip. By valour, By all the chaste nights I have ever pleasd you. Thes. These are strange Conjurings. Per. Nay then Io in too: By all our friendship Sir, by all our dangers, By all you love most, warres; and this sweet Lady. Emil. By that you would have trembled to deny A blushing Maide. Hip. By your owne eyes: By strength In which you swore I went beyond all women, Almost all men, and yet I yeelded Theseus. Per. To crowne all this; By your most noble soule Which cannot want due mercie, I beg first. Hip. Next heare my prayers. Emil. Last let me intreate Sir. Per. For mercy. Hip. Mercy. Emil. Mercy on these Princes. Thes. Ye make my faith reelc: Say I felt Compssion to'em both, how would you place it? Emil. Vpon their lives: But with their banishments. Thes. You are a right woman Sister; you have pitty, Bt want the vnderstanding where to use it. If you desire their lives, invent a way Safer then banishment: Can these two live And hav the agony of love about 'em, And not kill one another? Every day The'yld fight about yov; howrely bring your honour In publique question with their Swords; Be wise then And here forget 'em; it concernes your credit, And my oth equally: I have said they die, Better they fall by'th law, then one another. Bow not my honor. Emil. O my noble Brother, That oth was rashly made, and in your anger, Your reason will not hold it, if such vowes Stand for expresse will, all the world must perish.
Beside, I have another oth, gainst yours Of more authority, I am sure more love, Not made in passion neither, but good heede. Thes. What is it Sister? Ber. Vrge it home brave Lady. Emil. That you would nev'r deny me any thing Fit for my modest suit, and your free granting: I tye you to your word now, if ye fall in't, Thinke how you maime your honour; (For now I am set a begging Sir, I am deafe To all but your compassion) how their lives Might breed the ruine of my name; Opinion, Shall any thing that loves me perish for me? That were a cruell wisedome, doe men proyne The straight yong Bowes that blush with thousand Blossom Because they may be rotten? O Duke Theseus The goodly Mothers that have groand for these, And all the longing Maides that ever lov'd, If your vow stand, shall curse me and my Beauty, And in their funerall songs, for these two Cosens Despise my crueltie, and cry woe worth me, Till I am nothing but the scorne of women; For heavens sake save their lives, and banish 'em. Thes. On what conditions? Emil. Sweare'em never more To make me their Contention, or to know me, To tread upon thy Duke dome, and to be Where ever they shall travel, ever strangers to one another. Pal. Ile be cut a peeces Before I take this oth, forget I love her? O all ye gods dispise me then: Thy Banishment I not mislike, so we may fairely carry Our Swords, and cause along: else never trifle, But take our lives Duke, I must love and will, And for that love, must and dare kill this Cosen On any peece the earth has. Thes. Will you Arcite Take these conditions?
Pal. H'es a villaine then. Per. These are men. Arcite. No, never Duke: Tis worse to me than begging To take my life so basely, though I thinke I never shall enjoy her, yet ile preserve The honour of affection, and dye for her, Make death a Devill. Thes. What may be done? for now I feele compassion. Per. Let it not fall agen Sir. Thes. Say Emilia If one of them were dead, as one mu, are you Content to take th'other to your husband? They cannot both enjoy you; They are Princes As goodly as your owne eyes, and as noble As ever fame yet spoke of; looke upon'em, And if you can love, end this difference, I give consent, are you content too Princes? Both. With all our soules. Thes. He that she refuses Must dye then. Both. Any death thou canst invent Duke. Pal. If I fall from that mouth, I fall with favour, And Lovers yet unborne shall blesse my ashes. Arc. If she refuse me, yet my grave will wed me, And Souldiers sing my Epitaph. Thes. Make choice then. Emil. I cannot Sir, they are both too excellent For me, a hayre shall never fall of these men. Hip. What will become of 'em? Thes. Thus I ordaine it, And by mine honor, once againe it stands, Or both shall dye. You shall both to your Countrey, And each within this moeth accompanied With three faire Knights, appeare againe in this place, In which Ile plant a Pyramid; and whether Before us that are here, can force his Cosen By fayre and knightly strength to touch the Pillar, He shall enjoy her: the other loose his head,
And all his friends; Nor shall he grudge to fall, Nor thinke he dies with interest in this Lady: Will this content yee? Pal. Yes: here Cosen Arcite I am friends againe, till that howre. Arc. I embrace ye. Thes. Are you content Sister? Emil. Yes, I must Sir, Els both miscarry. Thes. Come shake hands againe then, And take eede, as you are Gentlemen, this Quarrell Sleepe till the howre prefixt, and hold your course, Pal. We dare not faile thee Theseus. Thes. Come, Ile give ye Now usage like to Princes, and to Friends: When ye returne, who wins, Ile settle heere, Who looses, yet Ile weepe upon his Beere. Exeunt. Actus Quartus. Scaena 1. Enter Iailor, and his friend. Iailor. Heare you no more, was nothing saide of me Concerning the escape of Palamon? Good Sir remember. 1. Fr. Nothing that I heard, For I came home before the busines Was fully ended: Yet I might perceive Ere I departed, a great likelihood Of both their prdons: For Hipolita, And faire-eyd Emilie, upon their knees Begd with such hansom pitty, that the Duke Me thought stood staggering, whether e should follow His rah o'th, or the sweet compassion Of those two ; and to second them, That truely noble Prince Prithous Halfe his owne heart, set in too, that I hope All shall be well: Neither heard I one question
Of your name, or his scape. Enter 2. Friend. Iay. Pray heaven it hold so. 2. Fr: Be of good comfort man; I bring you newes, Good newes. Iay. They are welcome, 2. Fr. Palamon has cleerd you, And got your pardon, and discoverd How, and by whose meanes he escapt, which was your Daughters, Whose pardon is procurd too, and the Prisoner Not to be held ungratefull to her goodnes, Has given a summe of money to her Marriage. A large one ile assure you. Iay. Ye are a good man And ever bring good newes. 1. Fr. How was it ended? 2. Fr. Why, as it should be; they that nev'r begd But they prevaild, had their suites fairely granted, The prisoners have their lives. 1. Fr. I knew t'would be so. 2. Fr. But there be new conditions, which you'l heare of At better time. Iay. I hope they are good. 2. Fr. They are honourable, How good they'l prove, I know not. Enter Wooer. 1. Fr. T'will be knowne. Woo. Alas Sir, wher's your Daughter? Iay. Why doe you aske? Woo. O Sir when did you see her? 2. Fr. How he lookes? Iay. This morning. Woo. Was she well? was she in health? Sir, when did she sleepe? 1. Fr. These are strange Questions. Iay, I doe not thinke she was very well, for now You make me minde her, but this very day I ask'd her questions, and she answered me So farre from what she was, so childishly. So sillily, as if she were a foole,
An Inocent, and I was very angry. But what of her Sir? Woo. Nothing but my pitty; but you must know it, and as good by me As by an other that lesse loves her: Iay. Well Sir. 1. Fr. Not right? 2. Fr. Not well? — Wooer, No Sir not well. Woo. Tis too true, she is mad. 1. Fr. It cannot be. Woo. Beleeve you'l finde it so. Iay. I halfe suspected What you told me: the gods comfort her: Either this was her love to Palamon, Or feare of my miscarrying on his scape, Or both. Woo. Tis likely. Iay. But why all this haste Sir? Woo. Ile tell you quickly. As I late was angling In the great Lake that lies behind the Pallace, From the far shore, thicke set with reedes, and Sedges, As patiently I was attending sport, I heard a voyce, a shrill one, and attentive I gave my eare, when I might well perceive T'was one that sung, and by the smallnesse of it A boy or woman. I then left my angle To his owne skill, came neere, but yet perceivd not Who made the sound; the rushes, and the Reeds Had so encompast it: I laide me downe And listned to the words she song, for then Through a small glade cut by the Fiher men, I saw it was your Daughter. Iay. Pray goe on Sir? Woo. She sung much, but no sence; only I heard her Repeat this often. Palamon is gone, Is gone to'th wood to gather Mulberies, Ile finde him out to morrow. 1. Fr. Pretty soule. Woo. His shackles will betray him, hee'l be taken,
And what shall I doe then? Ile bring a eavy, A hundred blacke eyd Maides, that love as I doe With Chaplets on their heads of Daffadillies, With cherry-lips, and cheekes of Damaske Rofes, And all wee'l daunce an Antique fore the Duke, And beg his pardon; Then she talk'd of you Sir; That you must loose your head to morrow morning, And she must gather flowers to bury you, And see the house made handsome, then she sung Nothing but Willow, willow, willow, and betweene Ever was, Palamon, faire Palamon, And Palamon, was a tall yong man. The Was knee deepe where she sat; her careles Tresses, A wreake of bull-rush rounded; about her stucke Thousand fresh water flowers of severall cullors. That me thought she appeard like the faire Nimph That feedes the lake with waters, or as Iris Newly dropt downe from heaven; Rings she made Of rushes that grew by, and to 'em spoke The prettiest posies: Thus our truelove's tide, This you may loose, not me, and many a one: And then she wept, and sng againe, and sigh'd, And with the same breath smil'd, and ki her hand. 2. Fr. Alas what pitty it is? Wooer. I made in to her. She saw me, and sraight sought the stood, I sav'd her, And set her safe to land: when presently She slipt away, and to the Gity made, With such a ry, and , that  me Shee left me farre behinde her; , , I saw from farre off crosse her I knew to be your brother, where  staid, And fell, scarce to be got away: I left them with her. Enter Brother, Daughter, and others. And hether came to tell you: Here they are. Daugh. May you never more  the light, &c. Is not this a fine Song? . O a very fine one.
Daugh. I can ing twenty more. Bro. I thinke you can, Daugh. Yes truely can I, I cn sing the Broome, And Bony Robin. Are not you a tailour? Bro. Yes, Daugh. Wher's my wedding Gowne? Bro. Ile bring it to morrow. Daugh. Doe, very rarely, I must be abroad else To call the Maides, and pay the Minstrels For I must loose my Maydenhead by cocklight Twill never thive else. O faire, oh sweet, &c. Singes. Bro. You must ev'n take it patiently. Iay. Tis true, Daugh. Good'ev'n, good men, pray did you ever heare Of one yong Palamon? Iay. Yes wench we know him. Daugh. Is't not a fine yong Gentleman? Iay. Tis, Love. Bro. By no meane crosse her, she is then distemperd For worse then now she showes. 1. Fr. Yes, he's a fine man. Daugh. O, is he so? you have a Sister. 1. Fr. Yes. Daugh. But she shall never have him, tell her so, For a tricke that I know, y'had best looke to her, For if she see him once, she's gone, she's done, And undon in an howre. All the young Maydes Of our Towne are in love with him, but I laugh at'em And let 'em all alone, Is't not a wise course? 1. Fr. Yes. Daugh. There is at least two hundred now with child by him, There must befowre; ye I keepe close for all this, Close as a Cockle; and all these must be Boyes, He has the tricke on't, and at ten yeares old They must be all  for , And sing the wars of Thesem. 2. Fr. This is strange.
Daugh. As ever you heard, but say nothing. 1. Fr. No. Daugh. They come from all parts of the Dukedome to him, Ile warrant ye, he had not so few last night As twenty to dispatch, hee'l tickl't up In two howres, if his hand be in. Iay. She's lost Past all cure. Bro. Heaven forbid man. Daugh. Come hither, you are a wise man. 1. Fr. Do's she know him? 1. Fr. No, would she did. Daugh. You are mafter of a Ship? Iay. Yes. Daugh. Wher's your Cömpasse? Iay. Heere. Daugh. Set it too'th North. And now direct your conrse to'th wood, wher Palamon Lyes longing for me; For the Tackling Let me alone; Come waygh my hearts, cheerely. All. Owgh, owgh, owgh, tis up, the wind's faire, top the Bowling, out with the maine saile, wher's your Whistle Master? Bro. Lets get her in. Iay. Vp to the top Boy. Bro. Wher's the Pilot? 1. Fr. Heere, Daugh. What ken'st thou? 2. Fr. A faire wood. Daugh. Beare for it master: take about: Singes. When Cinthia with her borrowed light, &c. Exeunt. Scaena 2. Enter Emilia alone, with 2. Pictures. Emilia. Yet I may binde those wounds up, that must open And bleed to death for my sake else; Ile choose, And end their strife: Two such yong hansom men Shall never fall for me, their weeping Mothers, Following the dead cold ashes of their Sonnes Shall never curse my cruelty: Good heaven,
What a sweet face has Arcite? if wise nature With all her best endowments, all those beuties She sowes into the birthes of noble bodies, Were here a mortall woman, and had in her The coy denialls of yong Maydes, yet doubtles, She would run mad for this man: what an eye? Of what a fyry sparkle, and quick sweetnes, Has this yong Prince? Here Love himselfe sits smyling, Iust such another wanton Ganimead, Set Love a fire with, and enforcd the god Snatch up the goodly Boy, and set him by him A shining constellation: What a brow, Of what a spacious Majesty he carries? Arch'd like the great eyd Iuno's, but far sweeter, Smoother then Pelops Shoulder? Fame and honour Mc thinks from hence, as from a Promontory Pointed in heaven, should clap their wings, and sing To all the under world, the Loves, and Fights Of gods, and sueh men neere'em. Palamon, Is but his foyle, to him, a meere dull shadow, Hee's swarth, and meagre, of an eye as heavy As if he had lost his mother; a still temper, No stirring in him, no alacrity, Of all this sprightly sharpenes, not a smile; Yet these that we count errours may become him: Narcissu was a sad Boy, but a heavenly: Oh who can finde the bent of womans fancy? I am a Foole, my reason is lost in me, I have no choice, and I have ly'd so lewdly That women ought to beate me. On my knees I aske thy pardon: Palamon, thou art alone, And only beutifull, and these the eyes, These the bright lamps of beauty, that command And threaten Love, and what yong Mayd dare crosse 'em What a bold gravity, and yet inviting Has this browne manly face? O Love, this only From this howre is Complexion: Lye there Arcite, Thou art a changling to him, a meere Gipsey.
And this the noble Bodie: I am sotted, Vtterly lost: My Virgins faith has fled me. For if my brother but even now had ask'd me Whether I lov'd, I had run mad for Arcite, Now if my Sister; More for Palamon, Stand both together: Now, come aske me Brother, Alas, I know not: aske me now sweet Sister, I may goe looke; What a meere child is Pancie, That having two faire gawdes of equall sweetnesse, Cannot distinguish, but must crie for both. Enter Emil. and Gent: Emil. How now Sir? Gent. From the Noble Duke your Brother Madam, I bring you newes: The Knights are come. Emil. To end the quarrell? Gent. Yes. Emil. Would I might end first: What sinnes have I committed, chast Diana, That my unspotted youth must now be soyld With blood of Princes? and my Chastitie Be made the Altar, where the lives of Lovers, Two greater, and two better never yet Made mothers joy, must be the sacrifice To my unhappy Beautie? Enter Theseus, Hipolita, Perithous and attendants. Theseus. Bring 'em in quickly, By any meanes, I long to see'em. Your two contending Lovers are return'd, And with them their faire Knights: Now my faire Sister, You must love one of them. Emil. I had rather both, So neither for my sake should fall untimely Enter Messengers. Curtis. Thes. Who saw'em? Per. I a while. Gent. And I. Thes. From whence come you Sir? Mss. From the Knights.
Thes. Pray speake You that have seene them, what they are. Mess. I will Sir, And truly what I thinke: Six braver spirits Then these they have brought, (if we judge by the outside) I never saw, nor read of: He that stands In the fitst place with Arcite, by his seeming Should be a stout man, by his face a Prince, (His very lookes so say him) his complexion, Nearer a browne, than blacke; sterne, and yet noble, Which shewes him hardy, fearelesse, proud of dangers: The circles of his eyes show faire within him, And as a heated Lyon, so he lookes; His haire hangs long behind him, blacke and shining Like Ravens wings: his shoulders broad, and ftrong, Armd long and round, and on his Thigh a Sword Hung by a curious Bauldricke; when he frownes To seale his will with, better o'my conscience Was never Souldiers friend. Thes. Thou ha'st well describde him. Per. Yet a great deale short Me thinkes, of him that's first with Palamon. Thes. Pray speake him friend. Per. I ghesse he is a Prince too, And if it may be, greater; for his show Has all the ornament of honour in't: Hee's somewhat bigger, then the Knight he spoke of, But of a face far sweeter; His complexion Is (as a ripe grape) ruddy: he has felt Without doubt what he fights for, and so apter To make this cause his owne: In's face appeares All the faie hopes of what he undertakes, And when he's angry, then a setled valour (Not tainted with extreames) runs through his body, And guides his arme to brave things: Feare he cannot, He shewesno such soft temper, his head's yellow, Hard hayr'd, and curld, thicke twind like Ivy tops, Not to undoe with thunder: In his face
The liverie of the warlike Maide appeares, Pure red, and white, for yet no beard has bleft him. And in his rowling eyes,  victory. As if she ever ment to corect his valour: His Nose stands high, a Character of honour. His red lips, after fights, are fit for Ladies. Emil. Must these men die too? Per. When he speakes, his tongue Sounds like a Trumpet; All his lyneaments Are as a man would wish 'em, strong, and cleane, He weares a well-steeld Axe, the staffe of gold, His age some five and twenty. Mess. Ther's another, A little man, but of a tough soule, seeming As great as any: fairer promises In such a Body, yet I never look'd on. Per. O, he that's freckle fac'd? Mess The same my Lord, Are they not sweet ones? Per. Yes they are well. Mess. Me thinkes, Being so few, and well disposd, they show Great, and fine art in nature, he's white hair'd, Not wanton white, but such a manly colour Next to an aborne, tough, and nimble set, Which showes an active soule; his armes are brawny Linde with strong sine wes: To the shoulder peece, Gently they swell, like women new conceav'd, Which speakes him prone to labour, never fainting Vnder the waight of Armes; stout harted, still, But when he stirs, a Tiger; he's gray eyd, Which yeelds compassion where he conquers: sharpe To spy advantages, and where he finds 'em, He's swift to make 'em his: He do's no wrongs, Nor takes none; he's round fac'd, and when he smiles He showes a Lover, when he frownes, a Souldier: About his head he weares the winners oke, And in it stucke the favour of his Lady:
His age, some six and thirtie. In his hand He beares a charging Staffe, embost with silver. Thes. Are they all thus? Per. They are all the sonnes of honour. Thes. Now as I have a soule I long to see'em, Lady you shall see men fight now. Hip. I wish it, But not the cause my Lord; They would show Bravely about the Titles of two Kingdomes; Tis pitty Love should be so tyrannous: O my soft harted Sister, what thinke you? Weepe not, till they weepe blood; Wench it must be. Thes. You have steel'd'em with your Beautie: honord Friend, To you I give the Feild; pray order it, Fitting the persons that must use it. Per. Yes Sir. Thes. Come,  goe visit'em: I cannot stay. Their fame has fir'd me so; Till they appeare, Good Friend be royall. Per. There shall want no bravery. Emilia. Poore wench goe weepe, for whosoever wins, Looses a noble Cosen, for thy sins. Exeunt. Scaena 3. Enter Iailor, , Doctor. Doct. Her distraction is more at some time of the Moone, at other some, is it not? Iay. She is continually in a harmelesse distemper, sleepes Little, altogether without appetite, save often drinking, Dreaming of another world, and a better; and what Broken peece of matter so'ere she's about, the name Palamon lardes it, that she  ev'ry busines Enter Daughter. Withall, fyts it to every question; Looke where comes, you shall perceive her behaviour. Daugh. I have forgot it quite; The burden o'nt, was downe A downe a, and pend by no worse man, then Girald, Emilias Schoolemaster; he's as Fantasticall too, as ever he may goe upon's legs, For in the next world will Dido see Palamon, and
Then will she be out of love with . Doct. What stuff's here? pore soule. Ioy. Ev'n thus all day long. Daugh. Now for this Charme, that I told you of, you must Bring a peece of silver on the tip of your tongue, Or no feiry: then if it be your chance to come where The blessed spirits, as the'rs a sight now; we maids That have our Lyvers, perish'd, crakt to peeces with Love, we shall come there, and doe nothing all day long But picke flowers with Proserpine, then will I make Palamon a Nosegay, then let him marke me, — then. Doct. How prettily she's amisse? note her a little further. Dau. Faith ile tell you, sometime we goe to Barly breake, We of the blessed; alas, tis a sore life they have i'th Thother place, such burning, frying, boyling, hissing, Howling, chattring, cursing, oh they have shrowd Measure, take heede; if one be mad, or hang or Drowne themselves, thither they goe, Iupiter blesse Vs, and there shall we be put in a Caldron of Lead, and Vsurers grease, amongst a whole million of Cutpurses, and there boyle like a Gamon of Bacon That will never be enough. Exit. Doct. How her braine coynes? Daugh. Lords and Courtiers, that have got maids with Child, they are in this place, they shall stand in fire up to the Nav'le, and in yce up to'th hart, and there th'offending part burnes, and the deceaving part freezes; in troth a very gree∣vous punishment, as one would thinke, for such a Trifle, be∣leve me one would marry a leaprous witch, to be rid on't Ile assure you. Doct. How she continues this fancie? Tis not an engraffed Madnesse, but a most thicke, and profound mellencholly. Daugh. To heare there a proud Lady, and a proud Citty wiffe, howle together: I were a beast and il'd call it good sport: one cries, o this smoake, another this fire; One cries, o, that ever I did it behind the arras, and then howles; th'other curses a suing fellow and her garden house. . I will be true, my stars, my fate, &c. Exit. Daugh.
Iay. What thinke you of her Sir? Doct. I think she has a perturbed minde, which I cannot minister to. Iay. Alas, what then? Doct. Vnderstand you, she ever affected any man, ere She beheld Palamon? Iay. I was once Sir, in great hope, she had fixd her Liking on this gentleman my friend. Woo. I did thinke so too, and would account I had a great Pen-worth on't, to give halfe my slate, that both She and I at this present stood unfainedly on the Same tearmes. Do. That intemprat surfeit of her eye, hath distemperd the Other sences, they may returne and settle againe to Execute their preordaind faculties, but they are Now in a most extravagant vagary. This you Must doe, Confine her to a place, where the light May rather seeme to steale in, then be permitted; take Vpon you (yong Sir her friend) the name of Palamon, say you come to eate with her, and to Commune of Love; this will catch her attention, for This her minde beates upon; other objects that are Inserted tweene her minde and eye, become the prankes And friskins of her madnes; Sing to her, such greene Songs of Love, as she sayes Palamon hath sung in Prison; Come to her, stucke in as sweet flowers, as the Season is mistres of, and thereto make an addition of Som other compounded odours, which are grateful to the Sence: all this shall become Palamon, for Palamon can Sing, and Palamon is sweet, and ev'ry good thing, desire To eate with her, crave her, drinke to her, and still Among, intermingle your petition of grace and acceptance Into her favour: Learne what Maides have beene her Companions, and play-pheeres, and let them repaire to Her with Palamon in their mouthes, and appeare with Tokens, as if they suggested for him, It is a falsehoód She is in, which is with fasehoods to be combated. This may bring her to eate, to sleepe, and reduce what's Now out of square in her, into their former law, and
Regiment; I have seene it approved, how many tis I know nt, but to make the number more, I have Great hope in this. I will betweene the passages of This project, come in with my applyance: Let us Put it in execution; and hasten the successe, which doubt not Will bring forth comfort. Florish. Exeunt. Actus Quintus. Scna 1. Enter Thesius, , Hipolita, attendats. Ts. Now let'em enter, and before the gods Tender their holy prayers: Let the Temples Burne bright with sacred fires, and the Altars In hallowed clouds commend their swelling Incense To those above us: Let no due be wanting, Florish of Cornets. They have a noble worke in hand, will honour The very powers that love 'em. Enter Palamon and Arcite, and their Knights. Per. Sir they enter. Thes. You valiant and strong harted Enemies You royall German foes, that this day come To blow that nearenesse out that flames betweene ye; Lay by your anger for an houre, and dove-like Before the holy Altars of your helpers (The all feard gods) bow downe your stubborne bodies, Your ire is more than mortall; So your helpe be, And as the gods regard ye, fight with Iustice, I le leave you to your prayers, and betwixt ye I part my wishes. Per. Honour crowne the worthiest. Exit Theses, and his . Pal. The glasso is running now that cannot finish Till one of us expire: Thinke you but thus, That were there ought in me which strove to show Mine enemy in this businesse, wer't one eye Against another: Arme opprest by Arme:
I would destroy th'offender, Coz, I would Though parcell of my selfe: Then from this gather How I should tender you. Ar. I am in labour To push your name, your auncient love, our kindred Out of my memory; and i'th selfe same place To seate something I would confound: So hoyst we The sayles, that must these vessells port even where The heavenly Lymiter pleases. Pal. You speake well; Before I turne, Let me embrace thee Cosen This I shall never doe agen. Arc. One farewell. Pal. Why let it be so: Farewell Coz. Exnt Palan d his Knights. Arc. Farewell Sir; Knights, Kinsemen, Lovers, ye my Sacrifices True worshippers of Mars, whose spirit in you Expells the seedes of feare, and th'apprehension Which still is farther off it, Goe with me Before the god of our profession: There Require of him the heart of Lyons, and The breath of Tigers, yea the fearcenesse too, Yea the speed also, to goe on, I meane: Else wish we to be Snayles; you know my prize Must be drag'd out of , force and great feate Must put my Garland on, where she stickes The Queene of Flowers: our intercession then Must be to him that makes the Campe, a Cestron Brymd with the blood of men: give me your aide And bend your spirits towards him. They kneel. Thou mighty one, that with thy power hast turnd Greene Nepture into purple. Comets prewarne, whose havocke in vaste Feild Vnearthed skulls proclaime, whose breath blowes downe, The teeming Ceres foyzon, who dost plucke With hand armenypotent from forth blew clowdes, The asond Turrets, that both mak'st, and break'st
The stony girthes of Citties: me thy puple, Yongest follower of thy Dro,  this day With military skill, that to thy lawde I may advance my Streamer, and by thee, Be stil'd the Lord o'th day, give me great Mars Some token of thy pleasure. Here they fall on their faces as formerly, and there is heard langing of Armor, with a short  as the burst of a Battaile, whereupon they all rise and  to the Altar. O Great Corrector of enormous times; Shaker of ore-rank States, thou grand decider Of dustie, and old tytles, that healst with blood The earth when it is sicke, and curst the world O'th pluresie of people; I doe take Thy signes auspiciously, and in thy name To my designe; march boldly, let us go. Exeunt. Enter Palamon  his Kights, with the former obser∣vance. Pal. Our stars must glister with new fire, or be To daie extinct; our argument is love, Which if the goddesse of it grant, she gives Victory too, then blend your spirits with mine, You, whose free noblenesse doe make my cause Your personall hazard; to the goddesse Uenus Commend we our proceeding, and implore Her power unto our partie. H they kneele as formerly. Haile Soveraigne Queene , who hast power To call the feircest Tyrant from his rage; And weepe unto a Girle; that ha'st the might Even with an ey-glance, to choke Marsis Drom And turne th'allarme to whispers, that canst make A Criple florish with his Crch, and cure him Before Apollo; that may'st force the King To be his subjects vassaile, and induce Stale gravitie to daunce, the pould Bachelour Whose youth like wanton Boyes through Bonfyres Have skipt thy flame, at seaventy, thou canst catch And make him to the scorne of his hoarse throate
Abuse yong laies of love; what godlike power Hast thou not power upon? To  thou Add'st flames, hotter then his the heavenly fyres Did scortch his mortall Son, thine him; the huntresse All moyst and cold, some say began to throw Her Bow away, and sigh: take to thy grace Me thy vowd Souldier, who doe beare thy yoke As t'wer a wreath of Roses, yet is heavier Then Lead it selfe, stings more than Nettles; I have never beene foule mouthd against thy law, Nev'r reveald secret, for I knew none; would not Had I kend all that were; I never practised Vpon mans wife, nor would the Libells reade Ofliberall wits: I never at great feastes Sought to betray a Beautie, but have blush'd At simpring Sirs that did: I have beene harsh To large onfessors, and have hotly ask'd them If they had Mothers, I had one, a woman, And women t'wer they wrong'd. I knew a man Of eightie winters, this I told them, who A Lasse of foureteene brided, twas thy power To put life into dust, the aged Crampe Had screw'd his square foote round, The Gout had knit his fingers into knots, Torturing Convulsions from his globie eyes, Had almost drawne their spheeres, that what was life In him seem'd torture: this Anatomie Had by his yong faire pheare a Boy, and I Beleev'd it was his, for she swore it was, And who would not beleeve her? briefe I am To those that prate and have done; no Companion To those that boast and have not; a defyer To those that would and cannot; a Rejoycer, Yea him I doe not love, that tells close offices The fowlest way, nor names concealements in The boldest language, such a one I am, And vow that lover never yet made sigh Truer then I. O then most soft sweet goddesse
Give me  victory of this question, which Is true loves merit, and blesse me with a signe Of thy great pleasure. Here Musicks is heard, Doves are seene to flutter, they fall againe upon their faces, then on their knees. Pal. O thou that from eleven, to ninetie raign'st In mortall bosomes, whose chase is this world And we in heards thy game; I give thee thankes For this faire Token, which being layd unto Mine innocent true heart, armes in assurance They bow. My body to this businesse. Let us rise And bow bore the goddesse: Time comes on. Exeunt. Still Musicke of Records. Enter Emilia in white, her haire about her shoulders, a whea∣ten wreath: One in white holding up her traine, her haire stucke with flowers: One before her carrying a silver Hynde, in which his conveyd Incense and sweet odours, which being set upon the Altar her maides standing a loofe, she sets fire to it, then they curtsey and kneele. Emilia. O sacred, shdowie, cold and constant Queene, Abandoner of Revells, mute contemplative, Sweet, solitary, white as chaste, and pure As windefand Snow, who to thy femall knights Alow'st no more blood than will make a blush, Which is their orders robe. I heere thy Priest Am humbled fore thine Altar, O vouchsafe With that thy rare greene eye, which never yet Behed thing maculate, looke on thy virgin, And sacred silver Mistris, lend hine eare (Which  heard scurrill terme, into whose port Ne're entred wanton sound,) to my petition Seasond wih hoy feare; This is my last Of vestall office, I am  habited, But maydn harted, a husband I have poined, But doe not know him out of two, I should Choose one, and pray for his successe, but I Am guiltlesse of election of mine eyes, Were I to loose one, they are equall precious,
I could doombe neither, that which perish'd should Goe too't unsentenc'd: Therefore most modest Queene, He of the two Pretenders, that best loves me And has the truest ti in't, Let him Take off my wheaten Gerland, or else grant The fyle and qualitiel hold, I may Continue in thy Band. Here the Hynde vanishes under the Altar: and in the place ascends a Rose Tre, having one Rose upon it. See what our Generall of Ebbs and Flowes Out from the bowells of her holy Altar With sacred act advances: But one Rose, If well inspird, this Battaile shal confound Both these brave Knights, and I a virgin flowre Must grow alone unplck'd. Here is heard  sodaine twang of Instruments, and the Rose fals from the Tree. The flowre is falne, the Tree descends: O Mistris Thou here dischargest me, I shall be gather'd, I thinke so, but I know not thine owne will; Vnclaspe thy Misterie: I hope she's pleas'd, Her Signes were gratious. They curtsey and Exeunt. Scaena 2. Enter Doctor, Iaylor and Wooer, in habite of Palamon. Doct. Has this advice I told you, done any good upon her? Wooer. O very much; The maids that hept her company Have halfe perswaded her that I am Palamon; within this Halfe houre she came smiling to me, and asked me what I Would cate, and when I would kisse her: I told her Presently, and kist her twice. Doct. T was well done; twentie times had bin far better, For there the cure lies inely. Wooer. Then she told me She would watch with me to night, for well she knew What houre my fit would take me. Doct. Let her do so, And when your fit comes, fit her home,
And presently. Wooer. She would have me sing. Doctor. You did so? Wooer. No. Doct. Twas very il done then, You should observe her ev'ry way. Wooer. Alas I have no voice Sir, to confirme her that way. Doctor. That's all one, if yee make a noyse, If she intreate againe, doe any thing, Lye with her if she aske you. Iaylor. Hoa there Doctor. Doctor. Yes in the waie of cure. Iaylor But first by your leave I'th way of honestie. Doctor. That's but a nicenesse, Nev'r cast your child away for honestie; Cure her first this way, then if shoe will be honest, She has the path before her. Iaylor. Thanke yee Doctor. Doctor. Pray bring her in And let's see how shee is. Iaylor. I will, and tell her Her Falamn staies for her: But Doctor, Me thinkes you are i'th wrong still. Exit Iaylor. Doct. oe, goe: you Fathers are fine Fooles: her honesty? And we should give her physicke till we finde that: W. Why, doe you thinke she is not honest Sir? Doctor. How old is she? Wooer. She's eighteene. Doctor. She may be, But that's all one, tis nothing to our purpose, What ere her Father saies, if you perceave Her moode inclining that way that I spoke of Videlicet, the way of flesh, you have me. Wooer. Yet very well Sir. Doctor. Please her appetite And doe it home, it cures her ips facto,
The mellencholly humour that infects her. Wooer. I am of your minde Doctor. Enter Iaylor, Daughter, Maide. Docter. You'l finde it so; she comes, pray honour her. Iaylor. Come, your Love Palamon staies for you childe, And has done this long houre, to visite you. Daughter. I thanke him for his genle patience, He's a kind Gentleman, and I am much bound to him, Did you nev'r see the horse he gave me? Iaylor. Yes. Daugh. How doe you like him? Iaylor. He's a very faire one. Daugh. You never saw him dance? Iaylor. No. Daugh. I have often. He daunces very finely, very comely, And for a Iigge, come cut and long taile to him, He turnes ye like a Top. Iaylor. That's fine indeede. Daugh. Hee'l dance the Morris twenty mile an houre, And that will founder the best hobby-horse (If I have any skill) in all the parish, And gallops to the turne of Light a'love, What thinke you of this horse? Iaylor. Having these vertues I thinke he might be brought to play at Tennis. Daugh. Alas that's nothing. Iaylor. Can he write and reade too. Daugh. A very faire hand, and casts himselfe th'accounts Of all his hay and provender: That Hostler Must rise betime that cozens him; you know The Chestnut Mare the Duke has? Iaylor. Very well. Daugh. She is horribly in love with him, poore beast, But he is like his master coy and scornefull. Iaylor. What dowry has she? Daugh. Some two hundred Bottles, And twenty strike of Oas; but hee'l ne're have h
He lispes in's neighing able to entice A Millars Mare, Hl be the death of her. Doctor. What stuffe she utters? Iaylor. Make curtsie, here your love comes. Wooer. Pretty soule How doe ye? that's a fine maide, ther's a curtsie. Daugh. Yours to command ith way of honestie; How far is't now to'th end o'th world my Masters? Doctor. Why a daies Iorney wench. Daugh. Will you goe with m? Wooer. What shall we doe there wench? Daugh. Why play at stoole ball. What is there else to doe? Wooer. I am content If we shall keepe our wedding there. Daugh. Tis true For there I will assure you, we shall finde Some blind Priest for the purpose, that will venture To marry us, for here they are nice, and foolish; Besides my father must be hang'd to morrow And that would be a blot i'th Are not you Palamon? Wooer. Doe not you know me? Daugh. Yes, but you care not for me; I have nothing But this pore petticoate, and too corse Smockes. Wooer. That's all one, I will have you. Daugh. Will you surely? Wooer. Yes by this faire hand will I. Daugh. Wee'l to bed then. Wooer. Ev'n when you will. Daugh. O Sir, you would faine be nibling. Wooer. Why doe you rub my kisse off? Daugh. Tis a sweet one, And will perfume me finely against the wedding. Is not this your Cosen Arcite? Doctor. Yes sweetheart, And I am glad my Cosen Palamon
Has made so faire a choice. Daugh. Doe you thinke hee'l have me? Doctor. Yes without doubt. Daugh. Doe you thinke so too? Iaylor. Yes. Daugh. We shall have many children: Lord, how y'ar growne, My Palamon I hope will grow too finely Now he's at liberty: Alas poore Chicken He was kept downe with hard meate, and ill lodging But ile kisse him up againe. Enter a Messenger. Mess. What doe you here, you'l loose the noblest sight That ev'r was seene. Iaylor. Are they i'th Field? Mess. They are You beare a charge there too. Iaylor. Ile away straight I must ev'n leave you here. Docter. Nay wee'l goe with you, I will not loose the Fight. Iaylor. How did you like her? Doctor. Ile warrant you within these 3. or 4 daies Ile make her right againe. You must not from her But still preserve her in this way. Wooer. I will, Doc. Lets get her in. Wooer. Come sweete wee'l goe to dinner And then weele play at Cardes. Daugh. And shall we kisse too? Wooer. A hundréd times Daugh. And twenty. Wooer. I and twenty. Daugh. And then wee'l sleepe together. Doc. Take her offer. Wooer. Yes marry will we. Daugh. But you shall not hurt me. Wooer. I will not sweete. Daugh. If you doe (Love) ile cry. Florish Exet.
Seaena 3. Enter Theseus, Hipolita, Emilia, Peritbous: and some Attendants, T. Tucke: Curtis. Emil. Ile no step further. Per. Will you loose this sight? Emil. I had rather see a wren hawke at a fly Then this decision ev'ry; blow that falls Threats a brave life, each strake laments The place whereon it fals, and sounds more like A Bell, then blade: I will stay here, It is enough my hearing shall be punishd, With what shall happen, gainst the which there is No deaffing, but to heare; not taint mine eye With dread sights, it may shun. Pir. Sir, my good Lord Your Sister will no further. Thes. Oh she must. She shall see deeds of honour in their kinde, Which sometime show well pencild. Nature now Shall make, and act the Story, the beleife Both seald with eye, and eare; you must be present, You are the victours meede, the price, and garlond To crowne the Questions title. Emil. Pardon me, If I were there, I'ld winke Thes. You must be there; This Tryall is as t'wer i'th night, and you The onely star to shine. Emil. I am extinct, There is but envy in that light, which showes The one the other: darkenes which ever was The dam of horrour, who do's stand accurst Of many mortall Millions, may even now By casting her blacke mantle over both That neither could finde other, get her selfe Some part of a good name, and many a murther Set off wherto she's guilty. Hip. You must goe. Emil, In faith I will not.
Thes. Why the knights must kindle Their valour at your eye: know of this war You are the Treasure, and must needes be by To give the Service pay. Emil, Sir pardon me, The tytle of a kingdome may be tride Out of it selfe. Thes. Well, well then, at your pleasure, Those that remaine with you, could wish their office To any of their Enemies. Hip. Farewell Sister, I am like to know your husband fore your selfe By some small start of time, he whom the gods Doe of the two know best, I pray them he Be made your Lot. Exeunt Theseus, Hipolita, Perithous, &c. Emil. Arcite is gently visagd; yet his eye Is like an Engyn bent, or a sharpe weapon In a sost sheath; mercy, and manly courage Are bedfellowes in his visage: Palamon Has a most menacing aspect, his brow Is grav'd, and seemes to bury what it frownes on, Yet sometime tis not so, but alters to The quallity of his thoughts; long time his eye Will dwell upon his object. Mellencholly Becomes him nobly; So do's Arcites mirth, But Palamons sadnes is a kinde of mirth, So mingled, as if mirth did make him sad, And sadnes, merry; those darker humours that Sticke misbecomingly on others, on them Live in faire dwelling. Cornets. Trompets sound as to a charge. Harke how you spurs to spirit doe incite The Princes to their proofe, Arcite may win me, And yet may Palamon wound Arcite to The spoyling of his figure. O what pitty Enough for such a chance; if I were by I might doe hurt, for they would glance their eies
Toward my Seat, and in that motion might Omit a ward, or forfeit an offence Which crav'd that very time: it is much better (Cornets. a great cry and noice within crying a Palamon.) I am not there, oh better never born Then minister to such harme, what is the chance? Enter Servant. Ser. The Crie's a Palamon. Emil. Then he has won: Twas ever likely, He lookd all grace and successe, and he is Doubtlesse the prim'st of men: I pre'thee run And tell me how it goes. Showt, and Cornets: Crying a Palamon. Ser. Still Palamon. Emil. Run and enquire, poore Servant thou hast lost, Vpon my right side still I wore thy picture, Palamons on the le, why so, I know not, I had no end in't; else chance would have it so. Another cry, and showt within, and Cornets. On the sinister side, the heart lyes; Palamon Had the best boding chance: This burst of clamour Is sure th'end o'th Combat. Enter Servant. Ser. They saide that Palamon had Arcites body Within an inch o'th Pyramid, that the cry Was generall a Palamon: But anon, Th' Assistants made a brave redemption, and The two bold Tytlers, at this instant are Hand to hand at it. Emil. Were they metamorphisd Both into one; oh why? there were no woman Worth so composd a Man: their single share, Their noblenes peculier to the, gives The prejudice of disparity values shortnes Cornets. Cry within, Arcite, Arcite. To any Lady breathing — More exulting? Palamon still? Ser. Nay, now the sound is Arcite. Emil. I pre'thee lay attention to the Cry.
Cornets. a great shot and cry, Arcite, victory. Set both thine ares to'th busines. Ser. The cry is Arcite, and victory, harke Arcite, victory, The Combats consummation is proclaim'd By the wind Instruments. Emil. Halfe sights saw That Arcite was no babe: god's lyd, his richnes And costlines of spirit look't through him, it could No more be hid in him, then fire in flax, Then humble banckes can goe to law with waters, That drift windes, force to raging: I did thinke Good Palamon would miscarry, yet I knew not Why I did thinke so; Our reasons are not prophets When oft our fancies are: They are comming off: Alas poore Palamon. Cornets. Enter Theseus, Hipolita, Pirithous, Arcite as victor, and attendants, &c. Thes. Lo, where our Sister is in expectation, Yet quaking, and unsetled: Fairest Emily. The gods by their divine arbitrament Have given you this Knight, he is a good one As ever strooke at head: Give me your hands; Receive you her, you him, be plighted with A love that growes, as you decay; Arcite. Emily, To buy you, I have lost what's deerest to me, Save what is bought, and yet I purchase cheapely, As I doe rate your value. Thes. O loved Sister, He speakes now of as brave a Knight as ere Did spur a noble Steed: Surely the gods Would have him die a Batchelour, least his race Should shew i'th world too godlike: His behaviour So chard me, that me thought Alcides was To him a sow of lead: if I could praise Each part of him to'th all; I have spoke, your Arcut Did not loose by't; For he that was thus good
Encountred yet his Better, I have heard Two emulous Philomels, beate the care o'th night With their contentious throates, now one the higher, Anon the other, then againe the first, And by and by out breasted, that the sence Could not be judge betweene 'em: So it far'd Good space betweene these kinesmen; till heavens did Make hardly one the winner: weare the Girlond With joy that you have won: For the subdude, Give them our present Iustice, since I know Their lives but pinch'em; Let it here be done: The Sceane's not for our seeing, goe we hence, Right joyfull, with some sorrow. Arme your prize, I know you will not loose her: Hipolita I see one eye of yours conceives a teare The which it will deliver. Florish. Emi. Is this wynning? Oh all you heavenly powers where is you mercy? But that your wils have saide it must be so, And charge me live to comfort this unfriended, This miserable Prince, that cuts away A life more worthy from him, then all women; I should, and would die too. Hip. Infinite pitty That fowre such eies should be so fixd on one That two must needes be blinde fort. Thes. So it is. Exeunt. Scaena 4. Enter Palamon and his Knightes pyniond: laylor, Executioner &c. Gard. Ther's many a man alive, that hath out liv'd The love o'th people, yea i'th selfesame state Stands many a Father with his childe; some comfort We have by so considering: we expire And not without mens pitty. To live still, Have their good wishes, we prevent The loathsome misery of age, beguile The Gowt and Rheume, that in lag howres attend For grey approachers; we come towards the gods
Yong, and unwapper'd not, halting under Cryes Many and stale: that sure shall please the gods Sooner than such, to give us Nectar with 'em, For we are more cleare Spirits. My deare kinsemen. Whose lives (for this poore comfort) are laid downe, You have sould 'em too too cheape. 1. K. What ending could be Of more content? ore us the victors have Fortune, whose title is as momentary, As to us death is certaine: A graine of honour They not ore'-weigh us. 2. K. Let us bid farewell; And with our patience, anger tottring Fortune, Who at her certain'st reeles. 3. K. Come? who begins? Pal. Ev'n he that led you to this Banket, shall Taste to you all: ah ha my Friend, my Friend, Your gentle daughter gave me freedome once; You'l see't done now for ever: pray how do'es she? I heard she was not well; her kind of ill gave me some sorrow. Iaylor. Sir she's well restor'd, And to be marryed shortly. Pal. By my short life I am most glad on't; Tis the latest thing I shall be glad of, pre'thee tell her so: Commend me to her, and to peece her portion Tender her this. 1. K. Nay lets be offerers all. 2. K. Is it a maide? Pal. Verily I thinke so, A right good creature, more to me deserving Then I can quight or speake of. All K. Commend us to her. They give their purses. Iaylor. The gods requight you all, And make her thankefull. Pal. Adiew; and let my life be now as short, As my leave taking. Lies on the Blocke.
1. K. Leade couragiour Cosin. 1. 2. K. Wec'l follow cheerefully. A great noise within crying, run, save hold: Enter in hast a Messenger. Mess. Hold, hold, O hold, hold, hold. Enter Pirithous in haste. Pir. Hold hoa: It is a cursed hast you If you have done so quickly: noble Palamon, The gods will shew their glory in a life. That thou art yet to leade. Pal. Can that be, When Venus I have said is false? How doe things fare? Pir. Arise great Sir, and give the tydings That are most early sweet, and bitter. Pal. What Hath wakt us from our dreame? Pir. List then: your Cosen Mounted upon a Steed that Emily Did first bestow on him, a blacke one, owing Not a hayre  of white, which some will say Weakens his , and many will not buy His goodnesse with this note: Which superstition findes allowance: On this horse is Arcite Trotting the stones of Athens, which the Calkins Did rather tell, then trample; for the horse Would make his length a mile, if't pleasd his Rider To put pride in him: as he thus went counting The flinty pavement, dancing as t'wer to'th Musicke His owne  made; (for as they say  iron Came Musickes origen) what  Flint, Cold as old Saturne, and like him possest With fire male volent, darted a Sparke Or what feirce sulphur else, to this end , I comment ; the hot horse, hot as fire Tooke Toy at this, and fell to what disorder His power could give his will, bounds, comes on end, Forgets schoole dooing, being therein traind, And of kind mannadge, pig-like he whines
At the sharpe Rowell, which he freats at rather Then any jot obaies; seekes all foule meanes Of boystrous and rough Iadrie, to dis-seate His Lord, that kept it bravely: when nought serv'd, When neither Curb would cracke, girth breake nor diffring plunges Dis-roote his Rider whence he grew, but that He kept him tweene his legges, on his hind hoofes on end he stands That Arcites leggs being higher then his head Seem'd with strange art to hang: His victoros wreath Even then fell off his head: and presently Backeward the lade comes ore, and his full poyze Becomes the Riders loade: yet is he living. But such a vessell , that floates but for The surge that next approaches: he much desires To have some speech with you: Loe he appeares. Enter Theseus, Hipolita, Emilia, Arcita, in a chaire. Pal. O miserable end of our alliance The gods are  Arcite, if thy heart, Thy worthie, manly heart be yet unbroken; Give me thy last words, I am Palamon, One that yet loves thee dying. Arc. Take Emilia And with her, all the worlds joy: Reach thy hand, Farewell: I have told my last houre; I was false, Yet never treacherous: Forgive me Cosen: One  from faire Emilia: Tis done: Take her: I die. Pal. Thy brave soule  Elikium. . Ile close thine eyes Prince; blessed soules be with thee, Thou art a right good man, and while I live, This day I give to teares. Pal. And I to honour. Thes. In this place first you fought: ev'n very here I sundred you, acknowledge to the gods Our thankes that you are living: His part is playd, and though it were too short He did it well: your day is lengthned, and,
The blissefull dew of heaven do's arowze you. The powerfull , well hath grac'd her Altar, And given you your love: Our Master Mars Hast vouch'd his Oracle, and to Arcite gave The grace of the Contention: So the Deities Have shewd due justice: Beare this hence. Pal. O Cosen, That we should things desire, which doe cost us The losse of our desire; That nought could buy Deare love, but losse of deare love. Thes. Never Did play a subtler : The conquerd triumphes, The victor has the Losse: yet in the passage, The gods have beene most equall: Palamon, Your kinseman hath confest the right o'th Lady Did lye in you, for you first saw her, and Even then proclaimd your fancie: He restord her As your stolne Iewell, and desir'd your spirit To send him hence forgiven; The gods my justice Take from my hand, and they themselves become The Executioners: Leade your Lady off; And call your Lovers from the stage of death, Whom I adopt my Frinds. A day or two Let us looke sadly, and give grace unto The Funerall of Arcite, in whose end The visages of  weele put on And smile with Palamon; for whom an houre, But one houre since, I was as dearely sorry, As glad of Arcite: and am now as glad, As for him sorry. O you heavenly Charmers, What things you make of us? For what we lacke We laugh, for what we have, are sorry still, Are children in some kind. Let us be thankefull For that which is, and with you leave dispute That are above our question: Let's goe off, And beare us like the time: Florish. Exeunt.
EPILOGVE. I Would now aske ye how ye like the Play, But as it is with Schoole Boyes, cannot say, I am cruell fearefull: pray yet stay a while, And let me looke upon ye: No man smile? Then it goes hard I see; He that has Lov'd a yong hansome wench then, show his face: Tis strange if none be heere, and if he will Against his Conscience let him hisse, and kill Our Market: Tis in vaine, I see to stay yee, Have at the worst can come, then; Now what say ye? And yet mistake me not: I am not bold We have no such cause. If the tale we have told (For tis no other) any way content ye) (For to that honest purpose it was ment ye) We have our end; and ye shall have ere long I dare say many a better, to prolong Your old loves to us: we, and all our might, Rest at your service, Gentlemen, good night. Florish. FINIS.
