12114 99839040 3435
AN EXPOSITION ON THE WHOLE FIFTH CHAPTER OF S. IOHNS GOSPELL: ALSO NOTES ON OTHER CHOICE PLACES OF SCRIPTVRE, TAKEN BY A Reuerend Diuine, now with God, and found in his Study after his death, writ∣ten with his owne hand, viz. An Exposition on the fifth of Iohn. Notes on Ioh. 3. vers. 29. to 36. Notes on certaine verses of the first and second of Marke. Notes on Luk. 3. vers. 19, 20. Notes on Iam. 4. vers. 7. Notes on Gen. 2. vers. 9. & 7. & 23. Notes on Exod. 12. vers. 8, 11, 14, 15, 16. Notes on Psal. 30.2. An Exposition on part of the fifth and sixth Chapters of the Ephesians. LONDON, Imprinted for Iohn Bartlett, and are to be sold at the signe of the gilt Cup in the Goldsmiths Row in Cheapeside. 1630.
AN EXPOSITION VPON THE FIFT OF IOHN. IOHN 5. VER. 1, 2. After this there was a feast of the Iewes, and Iesus went vp to Ierusalem. Now there is at Ierusalem by the sheepe-market, a poole, which is called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda, hauing fiue porches. THe foure Euangelists doe write the historie of Christ, which is of 4008. whereof 3974 are brief∣ly passed ouer in his pedegree beginning at Adam, Luke 3. So that there is 24. remaining: And or these about 30. hespent in pri∣uate, the other foure in his pub∣like ministerie. This Harmonie was first diuided into sixe parts: 1. From the beginning of the Gospell to Christs bap∣tisme.
2. From his baptisme, which was his installation into his ministrie, to the first Passouer, when hee began to ma∣nifest himselfe plainly. 3. From the first Passouer to the second. 4. From the second to the third. 5. From the third to the fourth. 6. From the fourth to his ascension. This present history is the first history of the third part of the Harmonie, and of the second yeare of Christ his publicke ministery. The reason why wee doe end the first yeare with the former History of Matthews calling, and begin the second yeare with this, is Because there is no History recorded after the former, but some circumstance moueth vs to thinke it was done after this Passouer. 2. That circumstance which is set downe, Mar. 3.23. sheweth that story to be after this Passeouer: for corne was then ripe, which was about Pentecost , and therefore after the Passouer, which was about March: and that is the meaning of Luke, when he saith, Chap. 6.1. the second Sab∣bath after the first, viz. the Passeouer. But here a question may be moued concerning Mathew his entertainment of Christ, which seemes to haue beene presently after his conuersion. Answ. If we consider the circumstances, we shall finde it otherwise; for Mat. 9.18 it is said, While Christ spake these things &c. namely, while he was reasoning and di∣sputing with the Pharisees & the disciples of Iohn concer∣ning companying with Publicans, and fasting, Then came Iairus the Ruler nto him. Now he came not till a long time after this passeouer, as appeareth by Marke. 5. and Luke. 8. as we shall shew when we come to speake of it, and therfore it followeth that the feast of Mathew, vp∣on occasion whereof that dispute arose, was not till after this time. But why then is Matthew's calling and his feast both
ioyned together by the Euangelists? Ans. 1. There is no necessary connection. 2 It is because of the matter, which, concerning oe man, is also set downe together. So Iohn his imprison∣ment and beheading are put together: though hee were long time in prison before he was beheaded. This History in generall sheweth what Christ did at the Passouer in Ierusalem the second time of his comming thither: and it containeth, 1. A famous Miracle, from the beginning to he fif∣teenth verse. 2. A disputation vpon it, unto the end of the Chapter. In the Miracle are these branches. 1. The time. 2. The place. 3. The Party cured. 4. The occasion. 5. The manner of working. 6. The manife∣station of it to be a true Miracle. 7. The effects. 1. The Time is set downe indefinitely: There was a feast of the Iewes: whereupon some doubt is made what Feast it was. Some say it was the feast of Tbernacles, and some Pentecost. But to omit the answering of their rea∣sons, which themselues confesse to be but coniecturall▪ it will appeare plainely that this was the Passeouer. Iohn 2.14. there is mention made of a Passouer, after which Christ preached in Iudaea, and there e passed ouer the Feast of Tabernacles and Pentecost. For Ioh. 4, 55▪ Christ saith there were foure moneths to haruest, which was about our Whitsontide: therefore Christ spake that betweene December an Ianuary, and the feast of Tabernacles was in September: and so Whitsontide or Pentecost was past long before. Moreouer the Passeouer is called , by a propri∣ety, a eat, thirteene times in the new Testament; by the Euangelists twelue times, and once Act. 18.21. and it was the principall feast, because it was the first, and was instituted for the remembrance of the greatest benefite, and also was the most liuely type of Christ his sacrifice. Now in that Christ went to Ierusalem to celebrate his
Passeouer, we learn, That Christ was conscionable in kee∣ping all the ordinances of God, and that according to the mnner prescribed by God. He went to Ierusalem, and kept not this feast in Galilee: wherein wee ought to imi∣tate Christ. 2. The occasion in generall is laid downe, v. 6. in which we ay consider these parts. 1. The place. 2. The party cure 3. The occasion it selfe. 4. A conference that Christ had with the man. 1. The place is described, 1. By the situation of it. 2. The name. 3. The roomes of it. 4. The company. 1. Th Situation in generall is in Ierusalem, a famous City, whther all the Tribes resorted thrice in a yeare, as also the dispersed Iewes among the Gentiles, and more∣ouer many Proselites of all nations. Doct. God doth by his wisdome and prouidence so dis∣pose of his great workes, as they may be most famous: thus he sent th holy Ghost, Act. 2. when such a multitude of all nations were come vp to Ierusalem, &c. so were the Churches planed first in most famous Cities, as Co∣rinth. &c. For first, hereby Gods Name comes to be more known, & he gets the greater glory: secondly, the Church is the more edified. In Particular it i noted to be by the place of the sheepe, , some vnderstand  market, some say the sheep-gate; whch is most probable, because mention is made of such a gat nigh the Temple, Neh. 3.1. where the Seuentie translate t so, vsing the same word. How∣soeuer, it was a place where sheep were kept for sacrifice. And this sheweth the reason why there was a poole there, viz. to wash and water the sheepe that were brought thi∣ther: which was done in a pious and religious respect to the sacrifice of God, although afterwards through coue∣tousnesse it grew to such excesse, that they did sell for gain in the verie Temple. And thus should they that haue au∣thoririe be carefull to prouide such things as are fit in the Church &c. for the setting forth of the worship of God.
2 The Name: Bethesda, a house of pouring out; wher∣by it should appeare, that the poole was not of standing water, but such as came running in, in great abundance from some Spring head: but in the Syriack it is called Bethehesda, by adding , and it is a vsuall thing in transla∣ting of such words as haue  in them, into Greeke, to leaue out that letter. This signifieth a house of mercie; which name might be giuen vnto it in remembrance of this gra∣cious worke of the Lord, in giuing such vertue to this water: and this shewes the care of the people, to retaine in memorie the workes of the Lord. Thus did Abraham, for the sauing of his sonne Isaac, Gen. 22.14. and Iacob, Gen. 28.19. 3 The Roomes. Fiue Porches or Galleries, : it signifieth a spacious place to walke in. These were made for the reliefe and good of those poore people, that they might be drie from winde and weather, because they were to tarrie a great while before they could be healed; and according as the number of them did increase, so they builded mo porches. There were fiue porches. This is re∣corded as a commendable worke of charitie, for our imi∣tation, that God hauing giuen vs abundance, we should in thankfulnesse to him, and charitie to relieue them that want, bestow something on the poore. Vers. 3. In these lay a great multitude of sicke folke, of blinde, halt, and withered, waiting for the mouing of the water. Vers. 4. For an Angell went downe at a certaine season into the poole, and troubled the water: whosoeuer then first after the troubling of the water, stepped in, was made whole of whatsoe∣uer disese he . FOurthly, the companie which was there: which is described, first, by their number, secondly, their condi∣tion, thirdly, the end of their being there. 1 Their number is expressed, when it is said that there
was a great multitude: which shewes, that in those dayes they were many whom the Lord scourged, and laid his heauie hand on them; as may appeare by this, and also in that notwithstanding Christ did daily cure so manie, yet still many more resorted vnto him. This came to passe, first, because of their owne sinne, se∣condly, for the manifestation of Gods power and glorie now at the comming of Christ: thirdly, that it being a thing so common, euerie one might the better apply it to himselfe, and take notice of his owne condition. 2 Their condition: their distrsses are here said to be of foure kinds; there were, first, sicke folke, weake and feeble persons, such as were vnable to helpe themselues, and so weakned through sicknesse, that they were past or∣dinarie cure; secondly, Blinde, thirdly, Halt, fourthly, Wi∣thered. all which diseases could not be cured by ordinary meanes. This is first, to shew that this cure was miraculous, se∣condly, hereby God would pull downe the pride of the Iewes, that euen in the middest of their glorious citie, such a companie of distressed persons was to be seene, as a spe∣ctacle of their own condition; which vse we are to make of the sicke that are amongst vs: thirdly, it shewes the great goodnesse and pitty of Christ, that he would come a∣mongst them. which teacheth vs also not to cast our eyes asquint vpon poore sicke persons, but rather to goe vnto them, if we haue any meanes of helpe; like the Samaritan. 3 The end why they lay here, which was to wait for the mouing of the water: and the reason of this end is in the fourth verse, that by stepping into the water at such a time, they might be cured. Hence we learn, That they who were distessed in body, had a care to vse the meanes of recouerie. So we see when Christ did manifest himselfe to haue diuine power to cure diseases, how all such as were sick resorted vnto him; and the reason was, because they were sensible of their bodily diseases. To apply this to our spirituall diseases, this con∣demnes
vs, that we being sicke and dead in sinne, doe not yet regard the meanes of cure. The reason of their wayting, set downe vers. 4. contains the story of a great miracle; whereof there are two parts, 1. the meanes of working this cure, which was, troubled water. 2 the meanes of attaining to it, viz, the step∣ping in. In the meanes of working this cure, first, there was wa∣ter vsed. Hence, to omit the allegories of some vpon this place, why water is here vsed, in generall we may learne, That God doth vse meanes in the working of his extraor∣dinary workes. Not but that he could doe them without meanes: but it so pleaseth him to vse them, for the triall of our obedience. and it teacheth vs to bee carefull, in the vse of all meanes that God hath appointed for the effe∣cting of any thing. Secondly, it was Troubled water. Now troubled waters are not wholsome, and good for cure as cleere waters are; but this was o  Gods xaordina∣rie power, and that the cure came from him, not from the water. Hence the Doctrine is, That God can make any meanes powerfull for the effecting of that which hee will haue done; yea, though the things bee neuer so vnlikely and contrary: as wood to bring vp iron, 2. Kings 6 6. Salt to make water sweet, 2. Kings 2.21.22. Clay and spittle to cure the blinde. For the worke is only from the Lord, and not from the meanes: but God doth it to draw our minds from the meanes, to the consideration of a higher author. Where∣fore we are not to tye Gods power vnto the meanes; or in those meanes that God hath appointed, to dispute of the fitnesse and goodnesse of them, as Naaman did. To apply this to the meanes of saluation, it teacheth vs to consider the ordinance of God, and not the weaknesse of the meanes. The want of which consideration made both Iewes & Gentiles to stumble at the Gospel of Christ, and not to rape that benefit by the ministery of the Apo∣stles as otherwise they might.
3. The Cause of the troubling of the water is here ex∣pressed to bee an Angel. Some reade the text, an Angel of God; but that he was so, is plainly implyed by this diuine and good worke whereabout hee was sent. Many questi∣ons are here moued about this Angel; which seeing they are but curiosities and meere coniectures, wee will omit. In general we may learn, That God hath made these glori∣ous Angels to be his ministers for the good of men: so are they called ministring Spirits; and so we reade they were sent from time to time to the children of God to comfort, to defend them, &c. But a particular reason of the sending of an Angell here, was that they might know, that the vertue to cure came not from the goodnesse of the water, but that it was a di∣uine worke, seeing that the water could not cure till the messenger of God from Heauen was come. 2. It was for the honour and glory of God to haue such glorious messenger. 3. This was a great honour which God doth to men, in sending Angels to them; which should teach vs to respect this honour, and by way of gratefulnesse to honour him a∣gaine, by hauing our hearts filled with an holy admiration of Gods great workes, as Psal. 8. and yet take wee heed of giuing this honour due to God vnto the Angels, a sinne whereunto we are much subiect, Col. 2.18. 4. The Time when this water was troubled is indefi∣nitely set downe, [at a certaine season.] Quest. A question is made, whether the time were set and fixed when the Angel did come downe; as at euery so∣lemne Feast, or on the Sabbath day, &c. Answ. There was no set time, as appeares, first, because there were so many continually waiting for the mouing of the water; which they needed not to haue done, seeing they might haue come at the set time onely. Secondly, be∣cause there was a signe giuen of the Angels comming downe, viz. the water was troubled, which needed not, if they had knowne that hee did come downe at a certaine
howre. Thirdly, the long time of their abiding and waiting here, and the word , translated season, implies no certaine time, but is indefinitely taken here, and so vsed in many other places. The reason why this was vncertaine is, that they might wait, which thing they did. So must wee, seeing the Spirit bloweth where it listeth, attend still vpon the preaching of the Word, because if one time we find not comfort, another time we may, so that we ought to come still. The like must we doe in all things, whereof the season is kept close vnto the Lord, and vnknowne to vs. So much for the meanes of working this cure. 2. The second point, is the meanes of attaining vnto this cure; which was Stepping into the water. And this is ampli∣fied, First, by the Restraint, he onely was cured that first stepped in. Secondly, by the issue and effect of it; he was made whole, &c. The water was the meanes wherby the cure was wrought, and they that would bee cured must steppe in. Hence the Do∣ctrine is, That they that obtaine a blessing must vse the meanes: Act. 27.32. Now in temporal things al men are ready to vse the meanes of obtaining any good: but in things spirituall, wee all stum∣ble and faile. Wherefore seeing God hath appointed his Word and Sacraments the meanes for our saluation, we ought to be concionable in the vse of them. And whereas many flee vnto Predestination, that they need not vse the meanes, seeing if God haue elected them, they shall be saued; we must con∣sider, that God, who chooseth vs vnto this end, hath ordained meanes to bring vs vnto it. Neither doth this vse of the meanes withdraw our hearts from depending on the prouidence of God, but in a moderate vse of them, our hearts are more lifted vp to the consideration thereof. The Restraint stands in this, that but one was cured at once, he that went in first: not because God was able to cure no more, but first, to shew, that the vertue came not from the wa∣ter, but was in the will of God. Secondly, to cause thē to striue to goe in first. Thirdly, to shew, that this was not so much for
a corporall good as for a spirituall or to draw their mind to consider of his power and presence among them. We may here apply this to the meanes of saluation, that as there was here a strife to enter into the water: so in vs there should be a strife after the Word of God, and an endeauour to follow it, as it was in Iohns time, when the kingdome of Heauen suffered violence, But the instruction that naturally ariseth hece, is this; That meanes are not further powerfull, then God doth giue a blessing vnto them. So here, it being the will of God that but one should bee cured, he that came in after the first found no helpe, the water was but common water to him. So the Sea that was a wall to the Israelites, drowned the Aegypti∣ans. So 1. Cor. 3.7. For although God haue appointed the meanes, yet he still retaines his power ouer them. And without the will of God, the creature is neither willing, or able to doe vs good. Wherefore in the vse of the meanes, let vs pray to God for a blessing, and depend on him, not doting vpon the meanes, as Asa did on his Phisitions. Yet further, in this Restraint obserue also an extent: for although but the first were cured; yet whosoeuer this First were, and of whatsoeuer disease he were sick, he was certaine∣ly cured, which shewes. That God in bestowing of his gifts, is no respecter of per∣sons. And the reason, for that the ground of his workes is in himselfe; and from his owne goodnes, and not from any thing in man. Which may serue for an Incouragement to all to come to God. The Issue, or effect may be considered, first, in it selfe; 2. in the Extent. The former is; That he that stepped into the water was surely cured. Whence in generall ariseth this Doctrine: That a right vse of the meanes appointed by God, and vsed in that manner that God hath appointed, shall assuredly be effectuall as appeares by the example of Naaman: and the blinde man whom Christ bad goe and wash.
Reason is, because Gods honour and truth is herein ingaged hee hauing promised so much. Wherefore wee may rest on it. Obiect. But many heare the Word and reape no benefit by it. Answer. It is because they heare it not as they ought. For nor he that went into the water, but hee that went in first was cured: so they only receiue profit by the word, that heare it attentiuely and reverently, and mixing it with faith. Hebr. 4.2. Wherefore this is a rule, That if the meanes be not effectual, we faile in the vse of them. The Extent is, that they were cured of whatsoeuer disease they had. Doct. God is able to cure all disseases. Which is a matter of consolation to vs whatsoeuer our distresse bee. Now for the Manifestation of this to be a true miracle, these circumstances may be alleadged: First, that the water was troubled, and so not so fit for cure, as cleare water. Secondly, that this was wrought by an Angell comming downe from Heauen; which shewes it to be a diuine worke. 3. That the cure was restrayned only to that time; which shewes, it was not naturall, seeing nether before, nor after, it could worke the like effect. 4. that none but the first could be cured. 5. that all diseases, whatsoeuer they were, were here cured. All which shew it to be a true miracle, and also a great miracle, and also a great miracle, the like whereof we doe not read recorded, and it is wonder that there is no where mention made of it but only in this place. By it we may consider of the goodnes of God toward his people the Iewes; who were now without a Prophet, and so had continued a great while before the com∣ming of Christ, to the end, that their mindes might be the more raysed vp to looke vnto Christ. God therefore for a token, and euidence of his presence among them, that hee was yet their God, and that he had not reiected them, giueth vnto them this extraordinary miracle, and that in the City of Ierusalem, that all might the better take notice of it. 2. God wrought this great
worke for a confirmation of the true worship of him. Doct. So long as a People doe remaine the people of God, he alwaies giues some signe of his presence amongst them. Vers. 5. And a certaine man was there, which had infirmitie thir∣ty and eight yeeres. WE are now come to the 3. Part of this miracle, viz. the Party endured who is set downe indefinitely to be a certaine man. Secondly he is described his condition, that he was diseased 38. yeeres. In that he is only called a certaine man, it implies, that hee was a man of no great name or note, but that he was a poore man; as also appeares, in that he had layne here so long with∣out helpe; for if he had been a rich man, he might haue hired some to put him in. Yet Christ makes choice of this man, to shew his power on him. Which shewes the freenesse of his grace: a point often noted. Moreouer of all the company that was here, he made choice of one onely to cure him: which he did, First, because it was sufficient for him to shew what he was able to doe vpon one as well as vpon many. Secondly, that it might be an encourage∣ment to others to seeke vnto him. So that if no other but this man were here cured, it was their owne fault, in not comming vnto Christ. For we neuer read that he refused any that came vnto him for helpe and comfort. Thirdly, to shew that he was bound to none, but what he did, he did voluntarily, and so he chuseth a poore man, one that deserued least. Here we are to take notice of Gods dealing, how he be∣stoweth his fauour but vpon few, in respect of the multitude: as in the Deluge. So of many thousands that came out of Aegypt, two only entred into Canaan: of foure grounds that receiue seed, only one bringeth foorth fruit. See Math. 20.16· many come to the word, but few are cured by the ministery thereof. Neither let me here expostulate, and contend with God, for it is Gods goodnes that he hath appointed meanes, and that hee
doth make them effectuall to any. And so that may be answe∣red to them, that Christ doth, Matth. 20.15. 2. The conscien∣ces of wicked men shall tell them, that they haue not done all that which they might, and haue not vsed that ability which God gaue them to doe good. But for those on whom God sheweth fauour, who are conuerted by the word, this is, First, to magnifie the goodnesse of God, that but of a few it hath pleased him to make choice of them. Secondly, to catch them to honour God, who hath so much honoured them by a godly life, and not to be like vnto the multitude. The Condition by which this man is described, is, that hee had an infirmity 38. yeeres. &c. If the circumstances be consi∣dered, we shall say that he was of all the company one of the most miserable; First, in that it is sayd, he was diseased; that is, as the originall signifieth, the disease had so long growne vpon him, and so much infected him, that he was vnable to helpe himselfe. Secondly, in that it is sayd, he was [in] this weake∣nesse; that is, the disease had ouer-whelmed him, and wholy possessed him in all parts. Thirdly, in that he found no helpe at all to succour him. Fourthly, that to his disease there was added pouerty; and pouerty ioyned with sicknesse makes it much the more grieuous. Fifthly, The continuance of it, that he had been sicke 38. yeeres, shewes the greatnesse of his mi∣sery. Doct. Christ makes choice of the most wretched and mise∣rable to succour them: a point to be obserued in most of his miracles. Which hee doth for the magnifying of his mercy both in it selfe, for the greatnes of misery doth amplifie the greatnes of mercy. 2. And also in the apprehension of the party helped that he may the more highly prize and esteeme of it, and the more gracefully accept of it as Paul doth, 1. Tim. 1.13 Vse. To teach vs that the greatnes of our misery should be so farre from making vs doubt, and despaire of succour, as ra∣ther to minister to vs hope to be releiued of our misery, being a fit obiect for Christs mercy to work vpon. Now although this man had lien a long time in this disease, yet at length the Lord sent him helpe. Hence we learne. That
though the Lord suffer men a long time to lie in misery yet at the length he affordeth them comfort and releife. This man was sicke. 38. yeeres; the woman with the bloody issue 12. yeares; the woman bound by Satan 18. yeares: the blinde man, Ioh. 9. till he came to mans age, as Vers, 21. so the Cripple Act. 4.2. yet all cured. The captiuity was 70. yeres, yet at length they returned: 2. Chron. last. Ezr. 1. Abrahams seed in bondage 400 yeares, yet at length deliuered. So Satan hath beene let loose now 600. yeeres Reu. 20.7. yea, the Church hath almost 6000. yeeres been in continuall warfare; yet shall at length tri∣umph in heauen. The reason why God doth thus dispose of it, is; First, in regard of himselfe, that his power, and glory, and mercy may be the more manifested: as Ioh. 9.3. and 11.4. Secondly in regard of man, for the triall of his patience: for the continance of a misery doth more trie a mans patience then the Weight of it. Neuerthelesse, God doth send helpe first, to manifest his wis∣dome care and prouidence, that he doth not forsake and forget them though he haue deferred to helpe them. Secondly to minister comfort to those that haue long been in misery, when they shall see others in like case comforted. Vse, is not to be discouraged, because of the long continu∣ance of our afflictions; but that we consider, that their is some end or other, why the Lord doth deferre to help vs. And that God herein aimes at our good, as well as his owne glory that hereby he will haue our hearrs purged, our mindes weaned from the world, and desire of heauen more increased: so that the issue and fruit of our affliction shall recompence the grie∣uousnesse of it. If this man had been cured, before he had not come to that knowledge of Christ and so to remission of sins as now he did; as Vers. 14. wherefore we must wait on God with patience: Hab. 2.3. and vphold our selues, First by faith beleiuing that God doth herein deale with vs as a wise God, and a mercifull father. Secondly by Hope to strengthen our faith and to make vs looke for both present assistance in trou∣bles, and future deliuerance from them.
Vers. 6. When Iesus saw him lie, and knew that he had been now a long time in that case— THe fourth part of this miracle, is the Occasion here layd downe, consisting of two branches: First, Christs sight of his present misery. Secondly, his knowledge of his former e∣state. From the First, this Doct. ariseth, That the sight of our mi∣serie, is a motiue to stirre vp Christ to compassion toward vs. Which ought to minister vnto vs a further ground of patience and comfort in afflictions: a point heretofore often noted in Christs miracles. From the second, that Christ did only see his miserable e∣state, but did also take notice of the circumstances of it, or that he had so long continued in it, we learn; That Christ is not ig∣norant of the circumstances of our misery, the time, the kinde, manner and measure as Luk. 13.16. Exod. 3.7. This is ano∣ther ground of great comfort that howsoeuer the greatnes of our misery be vnknowne to men, yet it is all knowne to God, who doth accordingly pitty vs. Vers. 6. — hee saith vnto him, Wilt thou bee made whole? Vers. 7. The impotent man answered, Sir, I haue no man, when the water is troubled to put me into the Poole: but while I am comming, an other steppeth downe before mee. THese words containe the fifth part of this miracle, viz. the Preparation to this miracle. How Christ prepareth this man, and the rest there present, to the obseruation of the mira∣cle, it consists in a conference betweene Christ and the man. Wherein obserue, First, Christ his Question. Secondly, The mans Answere. Christs Question is, Wilt thou be made whole? a strange que∣stion, may some thinke. For did not the man come hither for
that purpose? and was Christ ignorant of that, or doth hee speake it to gall and vexe him. No, but for these reasons: 1. To shew, that it was not in this mans power to heale himselfe; that be did it not voluntarily; that he lay so long heere, but of necessity, because no man would helpe him. 2. To worke in him a desire of cure, and likewise a hope to haue some helpe of Christ. 3. To moue the partie himselfe to attend this worke that he meane to doe vpon him; as also to moue the rest of the company, and those that were present to mark it. For they would thinke: Surely he meanes to doe some thing, that hee doth aske him this question. 4. To shew indeed that he did take compassion on him, and did commiserate his estate. 5. To manifest his owne preuenting grace, in that Christ sought him, before he thought on Christ. From all these doe arise seuerall instructions: as 1. That they who by necessity, by the hand of God, are brought into miseries are especially to be pittied; and not such as for a little ease doe make themselues miserable, as doe many beggers. 2. That they who are brought to a sight of their misery, and a desire and hope of comfort, are fit to receiue ease and comfort from Christ. 3. That Christ so ordered his great workes as most may take notice of them; and so we are to attend to the workes of God, that they be not lightly ouerslipt. 4 That knowledge of our miseries workes compassion in Christ. 5. that Christ thinkes of helping them, who thinke not of seeking of succour from him. See Esay 65.1. This is to be obser∣ued of vs, because it is verefied in the conuersion of euery one of vs. As in the conuersion of Adam; God sought him, when he fled from God: so it is euer since: And this is to the end that we may giue all the praise of our conuersion to him. In the Answere of the man we note 1. The title He giues vn∣to
Christ. Secondly, the substance of his Answere. 1. Sir: A word giuen to men in occasion of speach, argu∣uing, First, a reuerence that he gaue vnto Christ. A point im∣mitable of vs, because Christianity doth not ouerthrow ciuilty, but establish it; especially, this is to bee vsed when a kindnes is offered; for this is a signe of gratefulnesse, and the contrary of Ingratitude; as of Nabal to Dauid. 2. As this shewed his reuerence, so it argueth his ignorance of Christ, that he knew him not to be Christ; if hee had, hee would haue giuen him another title like Nathaneel, Ioh. 1.49. and haue desired helpe of him rather, then shewed the reason why he was not helped before, as now he doth. Doctrine. Ignorance of Christ his Power, his Goodnes, his Nature and Offices, make vs backeward, and carelesse in see∣king those good things at his hands, which otherwise we might receiue; Ioh. 4.10. for knowledge is the ground of all other graces, and without this we neuer seeke for them. Which con∣demneth the ignorance of men, and teacheth vs to labour after this grace. 2. In the Substance of his answer consider, First, that al∣though this man had a long time lien here in great misery, yet hauing now occasion to speake of it, he murmures not against God, he is not bitter, hee enuieth not those that went in before him, but only maketh a plaine narration of the matter; which shewes his patience, otherwise then many, who if they finde no helpe will fret and fume, accuse both God and man, &c. an ex∣ample of such murmurs: see 2. King. 6.33. 2. Marke the reason that should moue him thus to declare his case vnto Christ, it was, First, because he had a desire that Christ should helpe him into the Poole. Secondly, for that hee hoped that Christ would doe so. So that all this while hee thought of no other meanes of cure, but of the Poole. Where hauing seen many euidences of Gods power in curing of other, his minde is fixed vpon it, only tying, the power of God vnto this water, and not considering that he was able to cure him by other meanes. So the Israelites, Psal. 78.20. and hence this is the fault of most, That we tie Gods power to those meanes
that he ordaines. Whereas we should account of them but as of particular euidences of Gods Power in generall, where∣by he is able to make other meanes effectuall. More distinctly this answere doth set forth vnto vs. First, the inhumanity of the Spectators and inhabitants about this place, that none would vouchsafe to helpe this poore man, so long and pittifully distressed to put him into the poole; e∣specially this being a place besides the Temple: whether the Scribes and Pharises, who made such pretence of Piety, did day∣ly resort: yet see what want of charity there was in them, which shewes their pietie was but hypocrisie. And we see that Christ doth many times taxe them of crueltie. So in the Parable of the Samaritane, Christ saith that it was the Priest and Leuite that were vnmercifull. 2. This shewes the desire both of the man himselfe, and also of all the rest; that is, to be cured by the water; and for this cause, there was a great strife among them to goe in first. The like desire and endeauour should be in vs after the spiritu∣all meanes of saluation. Vers. 16. And therefore the Iewes did persecute Iesus, and sought to slay him, because he had done these things on the Sabboth day. Vers. 17. But Iesus answered them, My Father worketh hi∣therto and I worke. THe effects that followed vpon the miracle was, 1. In re∣gard of the Iewes, who reprooued the man, because he did as Iesus bid, verse 10. 2. In regard of the man himselfe, who iustifies his action by Christs authority, verse 11. 3. In regard of Christ, who first conueies himselfe out of the way for a time, verse 13. Afterwards meeting this man in the Temple, giues him direction how to carry himselfe for the time to come, verse 14. After Christ had made himselfe knowne to the man, he goeth presently to the Iewes, and de∣clares who it was that had healed him, verse 15. Wherein he
did well, because, 1. The worke was good, viz. to publish the workes of Christ, and to manifest his glory. 2. His minde here∣in was good. 3. And the end, viz. to instruct the Iewes, who before he knew to be ignorant. In the sixteenth verse is laide downe a second effect of this miracle, in regard of the Iewes, viz. Their persecution of Christ. Whence in generall we may obserue, that malicious and wicked hypocrites will spare none. Their reproofe of the poore man might haue some pretence to shadow it, they comming with a religious pretence of the Sabbath. And because, hee hauing beene so long time sicke, might bee ignorant of what should bee done of the Sabbath. But now in that they persecute Christ also, by whose autho∣rity this man had done it; and of whose Diuine Power thy had so many euidences, it shewes plainly that the former came from malice, and not from any religious care of the Sab∣bath. Thus it is the nature of malice at length to shew it selfe like poyson in a mans body, and fire that will not long lie hid. This appeares in Papists, who although they pretend Religi∣on, yet their secret malice doth oft breake out in treasons, re∣bellions, &c. Now this as it is laid downe as a second effect, so is it also set downe as a Transition to the second part of this Chapter, and an occasion of that disputation following: more particu∣larly note here. 1. The effect which is two fold. First they did Persecute. Secondly, they sought to slay Christ. 2. The Reason of it. Here, first marke the Inference how this is brought in vpon the former. The action of the man was good and commen∣dable, viz. to Preach Christ, yet therefore did they persecute Christ. Hence the Doctrine is wicked and malicious, men may take occasion from good and commend able actions to bring to passe many mischieuous workes, as is plaine by Cain. Gen. 4.8. and 1. Iohn 3.12. and Ismael. Gen. 21.9. et Gal 4.29. because Isaack was regenerate: and thus did the Iewes against the Prophets and Christ himselfe. Reason is, because of the poysonous nature in wicked men,
which like the Spider turne the sweetest things into poyson. Vse. Not to Censure the actions of men, though some euils and mischiefes are raised thereupon by wicked men, but to consider the action whether it be good and iustifiable, and so the occasion only taken and not giuen. 1. They persecute Christ. The word is taken from Hun∣ters, that pursue the beast and suffer him not to be at rest, till he be taken. Which notably setteth forth the purpose of the Iewes, that they would bring him before the High Priest, and Rulers, and there accuse him, and condemne him. &c. The cause of all this, is their owne malice whetted on by superstiti∣on and ambition. Vse is, that we doe looke for the like, endu∣ring the Crosse, and despising the shame as Christ did. &c. 2. They sought to slay Christ: note here, first the Extent of their rage in this word Slay. Secondly the Restraint of it, in this word Sought. Doctrine 1. Persecutors of Gods Ministers are satisfied with nothing but blood, and so are they called blood suckers, and the metaphor of Hunters before vsed, fitly sheweth this. So Ier. 38.4. 1. King. 19.2. Nothing would satisfie the Iewes, but to haue Christ crucified. Reason and ground of it is as an immortall hatred and vn∣satiable desire of blood, so also a secret feare that wicked men haue, that they thinke themselues not secure, till such be taken away. Vse is therefore, alwaies to look for one trouble after another till we be dead. So though much be past, yet still to prepare for more: vntill we come to that rest, which remaineth for the children of God. Doctrine 2. From the Restraint that they onely sought, but did not effect it: we learne that. Wicked men doe not alwaies preuaile according to their desires and intents: as here these Iewes against Christ, nor Herod against Peter, as he had against Iames, nor Iezabel against Eliah, nor the Iewes that sought to kill Paul. Reason. For there is one that rules and directs all things, and hath appointed an houre, in which they shall be done: as
Iohn 7.30. cum Luke 22.53. Vse. This is a ground of great comfort and encouragement to the Godly, that God will at length restraine and bridle the enemy, howsoeuer in his wisedome for causes that he sees good he suffers them to preuaile a while: this should teach vs to trust in God, to feare him onely, and to bee constant in our profession. The Reason is set downe, because he had done these things on the Sabboth day: which the Euangelist layes downe not as if it were the true onely reason indeed, but as the reason which they pretended. Hereby shewing, First their supersti∣tion, that they stood so much vpon the outward rites, that they neglected the maine workes of the Sabboth. Where we may see the nature of superstition, that it is busied about sha∣dowes, letting goe the substance: and also the danger of it, making men eager persecutors of such as doe allow of their in∣uentions. Secondly, their Hypocrisie that they did so seuere∣ly reproue a man for shew of breaking the Sabboth; yet make no conscience themselues to persecute and to seeke to murder, and that without a cause, euen vpon the Sabboth day, as it is probable. And thus also deale the Papists. Ver. 17. Here note, First, the Generalle Christs answere. Secondly, what kinde of answere this was. First, consider to whom Chris doth make this Apologie: it was to such as were captiously and maliciously bent against him, to depraue the honour of God in this good worke done to this poore man. Neuerthelesse, in that Christ vouchsafeth an answere vnto them, we learne: Though Christ meet with wicked men. yet their malice could not make him leaue his goodnesse. Now hee answereth them here. First, in regard of God, that the Truth and worke of God might be iustified. Secondly, in re∣gard of his Disciples, and of this poore man, who now began to beleeue in him: to strengthen their faith that they should not be moued with the cauels of the aduersaries. Thirdly, and of these also, either to winne them if it might be, or to make them the more inexcusable. Vse. That this minde be also in vs, Phil. 2.5. to be good
and kinde, not only to the kinde, but to malicious and euill men. 2. Tim. 2.25. Rom. 12.21. this is a propertie of Chri∣stianitie, nature teacheth vs the other. In the Apologie it selfe, consider we, first, the meaning of the words. My Father] this is ment of the first Person, it being spoken in relation to Christ. Wherefore he saith [my] worketh] that is, he sitteth not idlely in the Heauens, but he is busied and im∣ployed in gouerning and preseruing all things. Hitherto] from the beginning of the World, continually without intermission vpon euery day, the Sabbath not excep∣ted. For this is a reason, that therefore workes may bee done vpon the Sabbath day. That which might bee obiected, Gen. 2.2. is meant only of workes of Creation. And I worke] Here is a similitude, and a likenes implied: as hee worketh continually and is blamelesse, so I hauing the same authority, doe worke and am blamelesse. Secondly, that I worke with the Father, and the Father with me; that which I doe, the Father doth; and what the Father doth, I doe. So that here are contained two grounds of his defence. 1. The Authority of himselfe. 2 The condition of the worke that he doth. From the former, the Argument is this: God the Father worketh euery day, euen on the Sabbath; and is not to be bla∣med. But I am Gods Sonne, and haue the same authoritie with him; Therefore though I worke vpon the Sabbath day, I am not to be blamed. From the second, the Argument is this: Diuine workes may be lawfully done vpon the Sabbath day: But this is a Diuine worke, wherein the Father worketh, and I with him. Ergo, it may be lawfully done on the Sabbath. We read in the Gos∣pell of diuers kindes of Apologies that Christ vseth, taken some from one thing, some from another. Here he vseth an Apolo∣gy only proper to himselfe, drawne from great and high miste∣ries which he doth partly to confirme his authority, partly to confute the conceits of his aduersaries: Because the poore man had alleadged his authority for what he did, and they ca∣uelled
against it maliciously, saying, What man is this. Christ therefore doth giue them to vnderstand, that he is no man, but God, equall with the Father, & therfore of sufficient authority to command him, and to iustifie what himselfe hath done, &c. Obserue here a great incouragement to stand to the truth, so far as it is knowne vnto, because God will still vouchsafe more illightening and confirmation dayly. So Christ doth now re∣ueale himselfe manifestly what hee was vnto this poore man who before had stood for him. 2. This may be a warning to all captious and malicious men, though they may for a while make faire glosses, yet in the end their madnes will be knowne 2. Tim. 3.9. 3. Further here note, how this answer is made of Christ to preuent an obiection that the Iewes might vrge, concerning Gods resting on the seuenth day. The summe of this apologie is, a Demonstration of the e∣quality betweene the Father and the Sonne. The branches of it are two; First, what the Father doth. Secondly, Christs like∣nes with him in that. Of the First, there are two parts. 1. A discription of the first Person, my Father. 2. A declaration of his worke· worketh. In the Description wee will shew, First, how this relation of Father is taken commonly. Secondly, how properly in regard, of Christ. For so the word my, sheweth a kind of propriety and peculiarity. It is taken commonly, 1. in reference to all creatures by vertue of creation. So God is called the Father of the Raine. Iob 38.28. 2. In reference to Angels: Iob 1.6. and that, first, in regard of the Image of God in which they were created and still remaine. Secondly, in regard of that speciall loue manifested to them, that God vouchsafeth them to be alwaies in his presence. 3. In reference to men, besides the former respect of creation. First, in a ciuill respect, in regard of their Office whatsoeuer their Quality bee. So Magistrates are called the Sonnes of God. Secondly, in a Spirituall respect; First, by vertue of Adoption God hauing taken them to be his Sonnes· Rom 8. Secondly, by
vertue of Regeneration, he hauing begotten vs againe to him∣selfe· Ioh 1·12.13. 2. It is Proper to Christ in a double respect, First, in regard of eternall generation, as he is God eternall of the same sub∣stance with the father. Heb. 1.5.6· Ioh. 3 16. Secondly, As he is Mediator, God and Man, by reason of the personall and hy∣postaticall vnion of the two Natures: Luk. 1.32·35. Vses to be made of this, are, First, That Christ being the na∣turall and true proper Sonne of God, hence it is, that we come to be the Sonnes of God. Ioh. 8.36. Ioh. 1.12. for whom Christ admits for his brethren, them will God admit for his Sonnes. 2. This is the ground of Christs Intercession; hee is Gods Sonne, and the Sonne of his loue. If God giue vs his Sonne, he will giue vs all things with him, he denies him nothing. Psal. 2. 8. Rom. 8.32· 3. Note here the honour of the Saints, that wee are vnited and made one with him, that is, the Sonne. So are the Saints called Christ 1. Cor. 12.12. 4. This sets forth the loue of God, that he did not spare his only Sonne; and also of Christ, that he would vouchsafe to bee the Sonne of man. 5. This teacheth vs our duty, viz. to kisse the Son, to adore and worship him, &c. 2. The second part was the Declaration of the worke and Prouidence of God. Doctrine. God who first made all things by his mighty Word, doth still vphold, gouerne and guide them by his wise & good prouidence: not like a Carpenter that builds a house and leaues it: or like the Ostrich, that layes her egges, and leaues them in sand to be trodden of beasts: Iob 39.36. but like a mo∣ther that brings forth a childe and nourisheth it. This proui∣dence of God is proued. First, by the names and titles giuen to God. For this cause God is caled Iehouah; noting a presence stil assistant, which name was not giuen him before the seuenth day after he had made all things; before he was called Elohim, a mighty God. Gen. 2.4.
This name is compounded of the present, preterit, and fu∣ture tence: as Reuel. 1.4 in this regard are many names giuen vnto Places; as Gen. 22.14. and 16.14. 2. By the effects of it: as in Iob the 38.39.40.41. chapters▪ all which, and the like are euident proofes of Gods proui∣dence. If any obiect: That many good things hapen vnto the wick∣ed, and many euill things vnto the godlie; and therefore shall denie the prouidence of God. I answer: First, That the ground of this, and so of all other misorders is sinne. Secondly, that the seeming good things that come to the wicked are indeed euill things and turne to their destruction. And those euill things that come to the godly are indeed good to them, and turne to their benefit. Thirdly, Many things in this world seeme to fall out crosly, to the end that we might looke for that general iudgement, when euerie thing shall bee ordered according to iustice and right. 2. If it be obiected that it doth not beseeme the Maiesty of God to haue regard to small and base things! I answer: The smallnes of such things doth not so much de∣base his care and prouidence as the infinite number of them doth magnifie his wonderfull wisdome and power in disposing of them. The vse in briefe is, First, To refute all Atheists and Epicures. Secondly, to teach vs to looke vp vnto him, to depend vpon him, to cast our selues on him, to look for a blessing from him, whatsoeuer the meanes be that we vse, &c. The Second point is, the likenes, Idenity, or Samenes, of the Sonne with the father. Christ here proues that his power and authority is one and the same with the fathers, because the ef∣fects of both are one and the same. The Doctrine in generall is, That Christ is equall with the Father. This himselfe plainely ex∣presseth vers. 19. and it is manifest in regard of the effects which are attributed to both ioyntly, as Heb. 1.2. touching the creati∣on; and to either of them; as the creation of the world to the
sonne. Ioh. 1.3. and redemption to the father. So the sending of the holy Ghost to the Father; Ioh. 14.26. and to the Sonne; Ioh. 15.26. and 16.7. this equality is plainely expressed. Ioh. 1.1. and Philip. 2.6. Vse. 1. To refute all heretickes denying him to be God. 2. It confirmes the former vses, drawen from the title, Fa∣ther; and it shewes that he is to be worshipped as God the Fa∣ther. Heb. 1.6. 3. To strengthen our faith in the maine point of religion, viz. redemption by Christ, that we may be fully perswaded of the infinity and all-sufficiency of his merites. Consider now the maine End and Scope, for which Christ alleadgeth this: he doth it, as we heard, to defend himselfe a∣gainst the Pharisees, who excepted against that worke which he had done on the Sabbath. His defence is grounded, First, on his owne authority. Secondly, on the goodnesse of the work. God worketh, saith he, euery day, on the Sabbath also, and is blamelesse. But I haue the same authority that God hath: therefore I am not to be blamed. Hence this Doctrine ariseth; First, from the proposition; that God cannot breake his Law. The Sabboth was not here violated, because in this act, God did worke with Christ. The grounds of it are, 1. God is Lord of his Law, and not tied vnto it: for he gaue it vnto his creatures, not to himselfe. 2. Gods will is the rule of goodnesse, of lawfull and vnlaw∣full. 3. The absolute perfection and goodnesse of God, that hee cannot goe against it, denying or thwarting himselfe. Some obiections are made against this, as Gen. 22. Where God commands Abraham to kill his sonne. and Exod. 12. Where the Children of Israel are bidden to borrow of the Aegyptians Iewels, &c. To these I answer: First. That these are not against the law: for the former example, there was no fact done, nor any intent and purpose of a fact to be done, but was only a triall. In the latter, the word which wee reade, borrowed, signifi∣eth
also to aske, or require. So that they asked of the Egypti∣ans these and these things; and the Aegyptians gaue them vnto the Israelites freely: and God did so extraordinarily worke vpon the hearts of the Aegyptians, that they gaue them their chiefe thinges. 2. I answer. That God is Lord of life and death, to take life from man when he will. And as he hath power; so also he hath right to doe it. Now God forbids the taking away of life, when we haue right so to doe; God therefore may command any one to be the instrument of doing this. Secondly, So also had God an absolute power ouer the goods of the Aegyptians, to to dispose of them as he pleased. Besides, consider the equity of this fact; First, equity did require, in regard of that sore bon∣dage wherein they held them, that they should make them some recompence. Secondly the Aegyptians enioyed their la∣bour; and this deserued wages. Thirdly, They reaped much good by the Israelites, who builded them cities, &c. And there∣fore it was iust and equall, that they should be rewarded. Another Obiect▪ is out of Hosea 1.2. but to this I Answer: that it was but a vision, and no fact: and the Prophet only de∣clareth vnto the people, that thus and thus was done in a visi∣on: to set forth vnto them their estate, what they were like vnto. 2. From the Inference, or conclusion, ariseth this Doctrine. That neither Christ can breake the Law of God; and that vp∣on the same grounds, as the former: so hee is said to bee the Lord of the Sabbath. Vse. 1 To shew vnto vs, that whatsoeuer Christ did in subie∣cting of himselfe to the Law, it was for our sakes. So Gal. 1.14. which is spoken in regard of a voluntary submission, as a pledge and suretie for vs. Obiect. But what if hee had broken the Law, had hee not been subiect to punishment as other men? Answ. This is a supposition of an absolute impossibility and therefore not to be made. 2. To teach vs, that what God and Christ did by the abso∣lute goodnes and perfection of their nature that we should en∣deauour
to doe, in being pliable to his law, and subiecting our selues to it, because it is agreeable to his will. Lastly, from the goodnes of the worke, that it was a Diuine worke, and so Lawfull. This Doctrine doth arise: Workes ten∣ding to the honour of God, are proper to the Sabbath. Verse 18. Therefore the Iewes sought the more to kill him, not only because he had broken the Sabbath, but sayd also, that God was his Father, making himselfe equall with God. IN this verse is layd downe a violent opposition against the former Apolagies. The branches of it are two; First, The manner of the opposition. Secondly, The Causes. In the manner, note, First, The Kinde of this Oposition; they sought to Kill him. Secondly, the Extent; the more. In the Kind, note this Doctrine, arising from it: that the aduersaries of the truth labour to suppresse the truth, not by force of argument, but by persecution. Thus did the old Iewes with the Prophets, casting them into Prison, and killing them, but yet not discoue∣ring any error in their Preachings; as 2. Chron. 24.21. So dealt Herod with Iohn Baptist; and the Iewes with the Apostle; Act. 4.16. So haue Heathen men and Heretikes alwaies done towards godly Martyrs; and so doe Papists where they get the vpper hand. Reason hereof is; First, The euidence of truth, which is such, that it cannot by soundnesse of argument bee refu∣ted. 2. Obstinasy on the aduersaries part, who will not be bea∣en downe. This shewes a difference betweene those that seeke for truth in sincerity, and such as are of a gaine-saying, and cauilling spi∣rit. The one seekes the good of their aduersaries that they might know the truth as well as themselues, which makes them to deale with all meekenes and gentlenesse; vnlesse it be towards such as are willfull, and obstinate in fundamentall points of Religion; such indeed are brought to punishment:
but yet after many warnings, admonitions, and exhortations. But the other aiming only at victory and conquest, vse all vio∣lence; and if not in deeds, yet in words; vsing all violent and and bitter words, striuing only to maintaine a cause. As we see that Papists, Lutherans, Anabaptists, &c. doe in their writings: and generally the more men swerue from the truth, the more they goe from gentlenes, growing in heat and choler, to be bit∣ter and violent. The Extent is, in these words. The more.] why? because Christ had more euidently mantained that which he did, and had now clearely manifested himselfe. Doct. The more euidence is giuen to the truth by the defen∣dors of it, the more violent opposition is made against it by the enemies thereof. When Christ had wrought that great mira∣cle of raising vp Lazarus. We see how the Iewes persecuted him; Ioh. 11.47, 48, 53. But especially, when he rose againe from the dead, how doe they bestirre themselues; by spreading abroad lies, by bribes, &c. Mat. 28.12, 13. This makes Papists more to hate Prote∣stants, then any other kindes of Religion whatsoeuer; because of that cleare light which they bring against their Idolatry. And here note a further difference betweene a meeke spirit and a contradicting spirit; the one considers the force of argument, and if it be a sure, a certaine ground they yeeld vnto it, albeit their Opinion were otherwise before; as Peter Act. 10.28. the other only labour to maintaine a cause. The Causes are twofold: partly old matter; because he had broken the Sabbath, which is not to be taken simply, but in re∣ference to their conceit, who made this a pretence. Partly new matter; because he made himselfe equall to God. Thus these aduersaries, though they haue new matter yet, they let not go their old hold. Euen as the Papists that stilbring their old threadbare arguments, besides their new deuises. The new matter that they conceit to haue against him, is, that he blasphemed: First, In that hee made God his Father, Secondly in making himselfe equall to God. But before we come to their erroneous conceits, let vs first
obserue some sound and orthodoxall points, which the Iewes gathered from the words of Christ, whereby we shall see, how they vnderstood his meaning aright. The 1. Is, That Christ did account God his own Proper Father , and not a common Father, as he is to other crea∣tures. 2. That he was equall with God. And so though they were malicious enemies of Christ yet more truly did they obserue and conceiue his meaning, then many heretickes haue done. 3. A third is this▪ That he that vniustly makes himselfe the sonne of God is worthy of death. This is a sound collection and herein they go beyond the Papists in tolerating the Pope, who maketh himselfe God, taking vnto him his Titles, Attributes, and Authority. All this serues to amplifie and aggrauate their malice, that thus perceiuing his meaning, and not being able to charge him with vntruth and collusion that he had at any time vsed, yet notwithstanding they would without any further triall, rashly accuse and condemne him of blasphemie, and seeke to slay him. Worse then Pilate, who hearing that Christ neuer sayd but truth, was afraid to meddle with Christ, when hee heard that he called himselfe the Sonne of God. Iohn 19.7.8.13. Doctrine. Malice blinds mens eyes that they cannot search into the truth: but makes them condemne at the first what∣soeuer they thinke will make against them. As doe the Pa∣pists. Vse, is to teach vs not to condemne any thing without full triall.
Vers. 19. Then answered Iesus, and sayd vnto them, Verily, ve∣rily, I say vnto you, The Sonne can doe nothing of himselfe, but what he seeth the Father doe: For whatsoeuer things he doth these also doth the Sonne likewise. IN this verse beginneth a confirmation of the former Apolo∣gy, with the Amplification of it vnto the end of the chapter. The whole Summe of all, is to shew, that Christ is the true Sonne of God, equall with the Father. We may obserue in it three parts. 1. Certaine Effects for the proofe of it, from the 19. to the 31. verse. 2. Certaine Testimonies to confirme it, from the 31. to the 40. 3. A reproofe of the Incredulity of the Iewes, from the 40. verse to the end. The Effects whereby his Deitie is proued are, First, Gene∣rally propounded. Vers. 19. Secondly, Generally Repeated verse 30. And as they are generally propounded, so are they particularly confirmed from the 21. vers to the 30. The Effects vers. 19. are laid downe, First, Negatiuely. Se∣condly, Affirmatiuely. The sonn can doe nothing without the father. And what the father doth, that doth the sonne. But be∣fore we come to handle these points, some generall instructi∣ons are to be deliuered out of the words before going. 1. In that Christ answered againe, we learne, That Christ still continues in his goodnes, though his enemies were more and more incensed and inraged against him. Vse is, as for our Imitation; so for our comfort, that if Christ be of so long patience towards his enemies, how much towards them that loue him, though they offend often against him. 2. The Preface declares, First, the truth of the matter, Verily, verily. Secondly, the authority of him that speaketh it, I say vnto you. Verily, &c.] This shewes, that it was not a matter that fell from him by chance, but that it was such a truth hee would
staid to it; a truth whereof he was sure and certaine. I say vnto you.] a speech proper to Christ, who being the Sonne of God, might auouch a thing vpon his owne authori∣ty. Furthermore, theis shewes Christs earnestnesse towards the good of these men And Secondly, that was a matter of great weight and moment. Thirdly, that he was so farre from shrinking from the truth, because of their opposition, that hee is the more earnest in standing for it. Which should teach vs to doe the like. Now come we to the meaning of the words· The Sonne] the second Person in Trinity, &c. Of himselfe] alone without his father, as separate from him, hauing no communication with him. Can doe nothing] this implies not any restraint, or inability, but an absolute necessity and impossibility that the Son should doe any thing, which the Father doth not. So that this Implies a vnion in nature, and Essence; because though both haue abili∣ty of themselues, yet neither can doe any thing without the o∣ther. Whereas in nature, things therefore cannot worke one without the other, because they haue not ability in themselues, without the helpe of one another. But what he seeth, &c.] This is spoken according to the ca∣pacity of the Iewes, it implies a taking of councell together, as Ioh. 1.18. Gen. 1.26. nor is it a word of speculation of Efficacy, implying a communication of knowledge. For whatsoeuer thinges, &c.] Here are three points 1. The Sonne doth not only nothing alone without the Father, but doth ioyntly with the Father what the Father doth. 2. That this communication is not in some things, but in all things. 3. That as the Sonne doth the same things, so he doth them after the same manner, by the same authority, to the same end &c. [, likewise.] So that here in this 19. Ve. is contained a proof of the equa∣lity of the Sonne with the Father, because the ioynt effects of both are one and the same.
The mystery and maine point here to be noted is, That Christ is true God of the same essence with the Father, and euery way equall vnto him. Because, First, he can doe no∣thing of himselfe without the Father, but as he doth all things originally from the Father, so he doth them ioyntly with him. Secondly, yea he can doe nothing: implying a necessity and impossibility. Thirdly, because he is in the bosom of the Father. Seeing [saue what he seeth] the councels of his father and com∣municating him, which none but Christ hath done. Fourthly, againe what the Father doth, that he cannot but do. Fiftly, be∣cause this concurrence is in all things. Sixthly and lastly, hee doth euery thing after the same manner with the Father. All these shew an Identity, Samenes and Equality, between Christ and God the Father. Some illustrate this by examples, as if a thing burne, and cannot chuse but burne, and burne alwaies, we say, that it is fire: so Christ, doing diuine workes, and the same with his Father, and that hee cannot but doe them, and doth them after the same manner that his Father doth, hee must needs be God. Some Hereticke haue obiected against this place, that Christ doth these things by imitation; and this they say is, meant by [seeing and shewing.] Answer. It is false, because he doth these things by the same authority and power, that the Father, hauing life and power in himselfe, as vers. 26. and because he doth them after the same manner that the Father doth. As touching the Phrases of seeing on the Sonnes part, and shewing on the Fathers part: these are spoken, First, in regard of our conceit. Secondly, to shew the distinction betweene the Persons; the Father being the Fountaine of the deity, shew∣eth; and the Sonne, the second person, is sayd to see. 3. This may be interpreted of the humane Nature of Christ. Vse. 1. Seeing Christ proues his equality with the Father, in regard of the effects common to both, we must learne to ac∣count of all things done and spoken by Christ, as done and spoken by God the Father; and so to giue credence, reuerence, and obedience accordingly to the same. 2. As to account of the doing of Christ, as done by God,
so likewise when we behold the workes of God the Father; as the frame of the World, and the things therein and doe con∣sider in them the glory and Maiesty of God; to consider also in, and by them, the glory and excellent Maiesty of Christ: and in this we goe beyond the Iewes, Turks and Heathen, who in the creatures cā behold the Maiesty, of God the Father only. 3. In the workes of redemption, which set forth the loue, mercy, and goodnes of Christ towards vs to obserue the loue and mercy of God. 4. That what Christ doth by Necessity, though not of com∣pulsion, but of nature and essence, we shuld endeuor to do, stri∣uing o do he will of God, and to doe nothing but what we haue a warrant for out of the reuealed wil of God. So like wise to be like to him in all things, viz. in kindnes, in goodnes, in ho∣nesse, and such like vertues, which are layd downe in the Word, as a rule for vs to walke by, and wherein he hath set himselfe forth as a patterne for vs to follow. For a ground of this, note that prayer of Christ, Ioh. 17.21. we are all one] not in essence, but mistically hauing the same Spirit. Wherefore wee should labour as truly to initate God as Christ though not as equal∣ly. And as Christ did his essentiall vnion by effects equall with those of his Father, so wee to shew our spirituall vnion by like effects. Verse 20. For the Father loueth the Sonne and sheweth him all things that himselfe doth,— IN these words are layd downe the Causes of the former ef∣fects; they are twofold. First, Partly the Loue of the Father Secondly, Partly that the Father doth communicate all things to the Sonne. The Father loueth the Sonne.] This is here expressed by a kind of propriety, , he loueth him alone, none like him, him in, and for himselfe, vid. Col. 1.13. Ephes. 1.6. Matth. 3.17. , a word that signifieth one, that onely, and wholly beloued.
Reason of this is not grace and fauour, but Nature, be∣cause Christ is his Sonne: as earthly men doe loue their chil∣dren, because they come from themselues, and are of their substance. vid. Pro. 8.30. Heb. 1.2. Now according to the great∣nesse of the persons louing and loued, so is the loue, viz. euery way infinite, the like whereof is not in the World to be found. So that Christ is hee in whom is the beginning of Gods loue, and on whom it doth rest, and from whom it is conueyed to all other. This, first, doth greatly amplifie the loue of God, that hee would giue the Sonne of his loue to vs: and of Christ, that being his Fathers delight, hee would come from his bo∣some for our sakes. How great a loue were it for a King to giue his onely sonne for a poore Captiue. This thing was so highly accepted of God in Abraham, that hee did not spare his onely sonne, that it was an occasion why God did sweare so to blesse his posterity: Gen. 22.16, 17. 2. This is a maine ground to strengthen our faith, in the intercession of Christ, to come vnto the Throne of Grace with confidence and boldnesse. For is Christ the Sonne of Gods loue? and will he then deny vs any thing that we shall aske in his Name? And for this cause wee ought to hold vs close to Christ, and to sticke wholly to him. Further, this loue must be considered not onely as a thing proper to Christ, but also as an euidence of Gods loue vnto vs, that we may gather from hence, that we are loued. For Christ hauing vnited vs vnto himselfe, wee may be assured, that God who so greatly loueth the Head, will also loue the Members: Ioh. 17.23. And this is meant, Matth. 3.17. God is well plea∣sed in Christ, not onely with him, but with whomsoeuer he be∣holds in him; as Ephes. 1.6. so that none are loued but in Christ, and all in Christ are loued. So much for this first Cause, simply considered in himselfe: Now we come to consider it in the reference thereof, viz. as it is to shew the ground of that power, authoritie, dignitie, excel∣lency, and equality which Christ hath with his Father. Whence we learne, that Christ did not vsurpe these things, bu God did freely and willingly bestow thm on him.
Vse. 1. Further to strengthen ou confidence in him, to re∣pose our selues vpon his redemption, mediation, &c. Secondly, it serues for the terror of those, that oppose themselues against this dignitie and equality of Christ: for they prouoke God, and are fighters against him, who hath in loue communicated these things to Christ. Thus did the Iewes, because they would haue none to be equall to God, oppose against the authoritie of Christ: and this likewise is spoken to aggranate their malice. The second Cause whereby it comes to passe, that Christ doth the same workes with his Father, is, because the Father sheweth him all things. Which is not to bee taken for a bare relation, or an instruction; or that the Father doth them only in the presence of the Sonne, as one man may doe a thing in presence of another; or that he sets them before him, as in a Mappe or Table: but for a communication that the Sonne doth participate of the Wisedome, Power, and whatsoeuer else the Father hath, together with his Essence. Secondly, that the Father doth so set forth himselfe in his Sonne, that he may be seene in him▪ and who so knoweth the Sonne, may know the Father, as Ioh. 14.9. And this is a further argument to proue the equality, because God cōmunicates all things to him. Vse. 1. It shewes vnto vs, how the vnsearchable mysteries, and depth of Gods wisedome come to our knowledge, and to be reuealed vnto vs. God hath communicated them to Christ, and Christ hath declared them to vs. See Reuel. 5.5. &c. And this shewes a reason of that phrase, that Christ is called the Word, because he hath vttered the will of his Father, and hath declared the secret Councels of God, Therefore are wee to heare him, Matth. 17.5. as the old World was to hearken vn∣to him, speaking by his Prophets, and the Iewes to himselfe when hee was on earth, and the Church afterward when hee spake by his Apostles; so are wee now to hearken to him speaking in his Ministers, who declare to vs the will of God. So much for these causes considered seuerally in themselues. Now consider them ioyntly, as, the loue of the Father is made the ground of communicating all things to the Sonne. Whence obserue, that
1. All that Christ hath from his Father, it come from loue, then how much more doth all that which is in vs come of loue. 2. According to the loue that the Father did beare vnto the Sonne, accordingly did he bestow the Spirit: Ioh. 3.34. also dignitie and honour vpon him. Vse. So likewise learne we by Grace to iudge of Gods loue towards vs, if we find that we are regenerated and sanctified, to be perswaded of Gods loue. And further, by the measure of grace, to hope for the measure of glory: for the more grace wee haue, the more God loues vs; the greater is his loue, the greater will be our glory. 3. It is a fruit and token of loue, to enuie no skill, know∣ledge, dignity, honour, &c. but to be ready to communicate all things. So saith Christ to his Disciples; You are my friends, I haue shewed you all things. And herein especially is that saying true, Among friends all things are common. And this may bee a triall for Parents if they loue their children, for Schoolemasters if they loue their scholers, and for all friends if they loue one another. Vers. 20. —and he will shew him greater workes then these, that yee may maruell. NOw we come to consider the particular euidences of this equalitie: but before we come to speake of them, wee must consider the transition from the former generall points vnto those that follow, here laid downe by Christ in these words. Which is done, first, to preuent a secret obiection which the Iewes might make: For it is so, that what the Father doth, thou doest; and what thou doest, the Father doth; can the Father then doe no more, then that which thou hast done, iz. to cure the sicke, giue sight to the blinde? &c. Christ answe∣reth; God can doe more: these are but small euidences of his almighty power, but hee will manifest vnto his Sonne greater workes, whereby it shall be declared, that hee is the Sonne of
God. Secondly, to stirre vp attention, because the things which Christ had yet done, were lightly esteemed, and opposed a∣gainst, now therefore God would shew such great workes, that their hearts should be amazed and astonished at. In this transition are two points; first, the extent of Christs power [greater workes.] Secondly, the euent of it, [they should maruell.] For the former, it hath reference to the miracles which Christ had before time done. Whence the Doctrine is, that Christs miracles which hee did, were but euidences of a farre greater, and more almighty power; as his miracles of healing the sicke, of power to cure our sinnes, of restoring sight to the blinde, of power to illighten our minds, of casting out of diuels, of his power of subduing the Diuell, and deliuering vs from his bondage, and the like. And this vse ought we to make in rea∣ding the miracles of Christ. 2. Yee should maruell. Yee, mine enemies. Doct. Such is the euidence of Christs power, that it maketh all astonished: as we may reade at the working of most of his miracles, and at his resurrection, how greatly the Iewes were astonished. And at the day of Iudgement, all such as haue op∣posed against him, shall tremble and quake. Now this asto∣nishment at the power of Christ is, that wherein we must rest, it being an argument rather of Christs power, then of our faith in him. But we must consider the end of this power, for which it was giuen him, viz. that hee hath it for our good, that hee might saue vs; and then his power will be a ground of our faith, to make vs to shroud our selues vnder him. Verse 21. For as the Father rayseth vp the dead, and quickeneth them: euen so the Sonne quickeneth whom he will. THe Particular euidences for the proofe of the equality be∣tweene Christ and God the Father, are, 1. The Power of quickening in this verse. 2. The Right and Authority of Iudging: vers. 22.
Rayseth and quickeneth.] To phrases, implying one thing, as appeares in the other cause, where but one is expressed, yet not in vaine is that of quickening added. For first, it shewes, that they were dead, and so vnable to helpe themselues. Secondly, that he rayseth them not as stocks and stones, but with the rai∣sing puts life into them; which amplifies the benefits. Some take this raising of the dead to bee meant of Christs miracles, in raising of the dead, but that is to much to restraine it only to that: wherefore hereby is implied, first, a Spirituall quickening from the death of Sinne, at our conuersion. Secondly, a corpo∣rall quickening, the raising of our bodies out of the graues at the last Day; now if we will referre the miracles of Christ vn∣to this, as euidences and proofes of what he was able to doe at the last Day. Euen so, &c.] Herein is the equality: as the Father doth raise vp the dead so doth the Sonne. Whom he will.] This is not spoken to put a difference, that the Father doth quicken some whom he will, and the Sonne others whom he will; but is added as a ioynt worke to both; not re∣strayned to the Son, but only applied to him; and this, First, because the Iewes doubted not concerning the Father, but con∣fessed that he was able to raise vp whom he would. Wherfore this shews, first, that there was no compulsiue ne∣cessity in Christ to do, as the Father doth, but a meere freewill. Secondly, as there is a vnity in Nature betweene them; so is there likewise in Will. Thirdly, that the Sonne hath a power to quicken whom he will, and whom he lets he dead in sinne. Fourthly, that this quickening is of Grace. 5. That this is a happy quickening here meant, belonging to those that he will shew grace vnto. So it is not simply to be taken for the raising from the graue, but for a raysing to life e∣uerlasting. Such a raising as we beleeue in the Creed. The point then is, that the Work of the Father and the Son in quickening, is one and the same: 1. Ioh. 5.11. Whence are two euidences to proue the equality: First, He that quickeneth the dead, is equall to God the Father in pow∣er. But Christ quickeneth the dead; Therefore, &c. Secondly,
The Sonne doth this of his freewill; so also is he equall to the Father. Consider in the words two points; first, the effect: Second∣ly, the ground of the Effect. The effect is quickening of the dead, which is here brought in, s one of those greater workes which the Father will shew vnto the Sonne, hence note, the Doct. Quickening of the dead is one of the greatest eui∣dences of diuine power: greater then that of Creation. Thus the Apostle when he would set forth the great power of God, he alleadgeth this: Rom. 4.17. Eph. 1.19.20. Rom. 1.4. a worke so great, that of naturall men it cannot be conceiued and belee∣ued: Act 17.18. yea it was hard for the Disciples to beleeue it: as Thomas. Io. 20 25. And as this Resurrection from the graue, so is our Quicke∣ning from sinne, an euidence of the power of God. And for this cause, the meanes of quickning is called, The power of God: Rom. 1.16. 1. Cor. 2.5. For we are dead in sinnes. Vse. 1. We see how needfull it is to meditate on the power of Christ, to strengthen our Faith, in regard of the Resurrecti∣on. 2. That seeing our raising from sinne, is one of the great eui∣dences of Gods almighty power, it confutes the Pelagians, that say, a man may raise himselfe: and Semipelagians that say, a man is but sicke, and being helped by a little grace, hee workes out his saluation himselfe. And lastly, all carnall Gospellers, that thinke they can turne from their sinnes when they will, and leade a spirituall life. 2. The ground of this effect, is the will of God. Hence we learne, that Doct. Christ as Mediatour hath an absolute power of life and death, to pull whom hee will out of this iawes of death, and to suffer whom he will to perish: Ioh. 10.18. Reuel. 1.18. Vse. For consolation of those that belieue in Christ, that if here we haue euidence of grace, we may be assured to bee rai∣sed vp againe to life. For if the Spirit of Christ be in vs, it will raise vs vp a the last day, as the Apostle ith. For regenerati∣on
is but the first fruits of eternall life. See Ephes. 2.4, 5, 6. Vers. 22. For the Father iudgeth no man, but hath committed all iudgement to the Sonne. IN this Verse is laid downe a second particular euidence, and proofe of the equalitie of Christ with God the Fathe: the Argument is this: Hee that hath all power, all gouernment, and all iudgement committed vnto him, is equall to the Father. But Christ hath all these, &c. Therefore he is equall to his Father. Also this is set downe as a reason of the former argument, Vers. 21. For Christ may quicken whom he will, because (as it is in this Verse) he is the supreame Lord that guides and go∣uernes all things. For the meaning of the words, note the phrases of [Iudgeth, Iudgement:] iudgings and iudgement are not to be taken (only) concerning the last Iudgement, but concerning the supreme disposition and gouernment of all things in the world: as ap∣peares by the word [all iudgement.] Iudgeth no man] That is, by himselfe alone, but in, and by the Sonne. Hath committed] That is, the Father doth communicate to the Sonne this Office, and hath taken him into his fellowship in the gouernment of the World: not that the Father doth sit idly in Heauen, but that in, and by his Son, he doth gouerne all things. The Doctrine that hence naturally ariseth, is, that Christ is the supreame Lord and Gouernour of all, Matth. 28.18. Mat. 11.27. Heb. 1.2. Which is to be vnderstood of Christ as he is Mediatour, as we shall see, Vers. 27. Obiections against this, are, first, that vsually iudgement is attributed to God. Answ. Christ here is not excluded, but it is to bee taken of the whole Trinity. Obiect. 2. out of Ioh, 8.15,
Answ. Christ here is not excluded, but it is to bee taken of the whole Trinity. 2. Obiect. out of Ioh 8.15. Answ. That is not to be exclusiuely, but that there is one that doth iudge, namely, the Father, yet he doth it in and by his Sonne. It is there spoken of the Father for the greater ter∣rour of the Iewes. 3. Obiect. out of Ioh. 8.15. where it seemes that there is a plaine contradiction. Ans. That is spoken of Christ his present action and carri∣age not of his power and right of iudging, as appeares by vers. 16. [for himselfe did teach and instruct them.] 2. It is spoken in opposition to the Pharises that were rash in censuring others. Vse, 1. It teacheth vs how to account of Christ not only as of a Sauiour from whom we looke for good, but also as a su∣preame Lord, and so to feare and reuerence and to bee afraid to displease him as Ps. 2. and not to make him a packhorse for our sinnes, because he is a Sauiour. 2. It is for our consolation, that this our Sauiour is Iudge. Who then shall lay any thing to our charge? 3. It is for terrour of those that oppose themselues against Christ. As Iewes, and Turks, and such as persecute his members: for they persecute him that is their Iudge. 4. That all men should honour the Sonne, as in the verse following. Verse 23. That all men should honour the Sonne euen as they ho∣nour the Father; he that honoreth not the Sonne honoreth not the Father which hath sent him. THis verse containes an Amplification of the former Effects by the end of them, wherein consider. 1. The end it selfe, which is a duty of Honour to be perfor∣med. 2. The manner of performing it.
3. The motiues to vrge and presseit. In the duty consider, 1. the thing it slfe, 2. the extent. The thing it selfe is honour: which is a generall word compri∣sing vnder it all those duties, which we owe to Christ, as it is vsuall to comprehend the duties of inferiours to superiour in this word Honour, as the fift Commandement. Doct. Honour is due to our Lord Christ Iesus: Psal. 2. last. For kissing was a token of subiection. Heb. 1.6. so we read that Christ was often worshipped, as by the wise men, Mat. 2. by the leper Mat. 8. and by his disciples. Reason, because Christ though he did abase himselfe, yet he still remained God and lost none of is excllency therefore we are still to honour him. Vse, That it is not sufficient to abstaine from rebellion, and from dishonouring and despiting of Christ but we must reue∣rence and honor him, for the omitting of a holy duty makes vs liable to the iudgement of God, as appeares in the last sentence of Christ. Wherfore it is not sufficient to say we are no Arrians, nor Iews to denie Christ, nor Papists to confound his offices? but where is the faith in him? how dost thou reuerence and feare him? &c. 2. Point, is the Extent, in this word (all) Doct. All of what state and condition soeuer are bound to this dutie of honouring Christ: the Angels, Psalm. and Heb. 1.6. Reason is Phil. 2.9. he hath a name aboue euery name, and so euery knee must bow to him. The manner of performing this duty is in these words (as they honor the Father) which shewes the measure of that ho∣nour which we must doe vnto the Sonne, for the  implies not only a similitude and likenes, as some Heretikes would put it off, but also an equality implying such an honour as is due to no creature but only to God. Doct. So high and great honour as is due to the father, in that measure is it due to the Sonne as appeares by many places Iude verse 25. in the salutation of Paul in his Epistles where he is ioyned with the Father, and hath the Church done in giuing
glory to the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, &c. ioyning all to∣gether. Reason of this is the equality between them, and this is also another argument (the sixt) to proue that same equality, be∣cause the same honour is giuen to Christ, that is giuen to God the Father; Esay. 42.8. Note this against Turkes, that account Christ to bee a great Prophet, and Arrians that count him to be a God, but an infe∣riour, and created God. The Motiues to vrge this dutie are in these words [He that honoureth not, &c.] Where consider, first, the Reason; secondly, the Amplification. The Reason is [He that honoureth not the Son, honoureth not the Father] which is layd downe, First, as a strong reason, be∣cause this honour is not only, in regard of a high account that he hath of his Sonne, as a King counts himselfe honoured, when his sonne is honoured, or in regard of a deare affection that he beares to him, or in regard of place and representation of the person of the Father, the King is honored when his Ambassa∣dour is honoured, but also in regard of an identity and same∣nesse, that the Father cannot bee honoured but by the Sonne. 2. It is set downe to preuent an obiection that might bee made, that this honour was derogatory to the Father. Christs answeres, Thre is no such consequence, but that the Father is honoured in this, and not dishonoured. Doct. The Father is honoured in, and by the Sonne. Phil. 2.11 Thus God is to be praised by Christ; Heb. 13.15. Eph. 5.20. so are the Prayers of the Church concluded all in the name of Christ. Vse. 1. it shewes, that many deceiue themselues in the wor∣shipping of God: for thugh all thike that God is to be ho∣noued, yet not knowing Christ, they worship not him, but their owne conceits. 2. It teacheth vs, to behold all the attributes of God in Christ. The Amplification is in these words [Who hath sent him.]
This may seeme to crosse all that hath beene formerly said. For an Embassadour is inferiour in honour to a King that sent him. Answ. The Phrase of sending doth not alwaies implie an infeiority. It is here vsed in a threefold respect; first of distinction of the Persons in the Trinity: So the second may bee sayd to bee sent of the first: and so the Holy Ghost, though he neuer aba∣sed himselfe, nor were incarnate, is yet sayd to bee sent by the Father and the Sonne: Ioh. 14.26. et 15.26. 2. Of Christs incarnation, that though he became man, yet was he Lord of Heauen and Earth, and sent from God. So it implies an honour and dignity. 3. Of the Offices of Christ, as he is Mediatour in a twofold respect; first, that no Office that Christ had, but it was appoin∣ted and ordeined of God: Luk. 1.69. God is sayd to rayse vp a saluation. Secondly, as these Offices were appointed to Christ; so was he deputed to them: Heb. 5.4, 5. This Phrase then amplifies the reason, and shewes, that this equall right of honor to him, as to the Father, is no vsurpation, but a naturall communication, and voluntary dispensati∣on. Doct. Christ vsurped not that honour, to be equall in digni∣ty to his Father: Psal. 110. 1. Act. 2.36. Vse. 1. Of comfort, that the things that Christ did, are accep∣table to the Father for vs. 2. It shewes the sinne to be the greater, in dishonouring the Sonne. 3. Here we haue a good ground why we performe diuine worship to Christ. Why doe not the Papists bring the like for worshipping of Saints.
Vers. 24. Verily, verily, I say vnto you, he that heareth my Word, and beleeueth in him that sent me, hath euerlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but hath passed from death to life. CHrist hauing in the former verse laid down the ends of the particular euidences of his Deity, proceedes againe in this verse and followeth to a further amplification of them: more powerfully, plainely, and distinctly; to vrge and presse them. The former, as we haue heard, was the Power of quickening. In the amplification whereof there are three parts. 1. Who are quickned in this verse 24. 2. By what Meanes they come to be quickened, 12. The voice of Christ, verse 25. 3. The Ground of this quickening power that is in Christ; verse 26. The second effect was the Power of Iudging: whereof wee shall speake, verse 27. and followeth. Verse 24· Touching the occasion of these words, and depen∣dance of them on the former, it may bee considered in two re∣spects: 1. Wee heard, vers. 22. that the Sonne quickeneth whom hee will: hereby implying, that euery Son of Adam is not quicke∣ned, but those only to whom he sheweth fauour. Now who they be, is here expressed in this verse, viz. such as heare his Word, and beleeue in God. 2. Verse 23. was shewed that there is an honour due to Christ; now he sheweth what it is, viz. to belieue in him, &c. Hence we learne. Doct. 1. That they only, which doe heare the Word of Christ, and doe beleeue in God the Father, doe partake of the the quickening power of Christ. For this hearing and belee∣uing, is a beginning of our quickening, and raising from death: so that from hence wee may gather an euidence, and assu∣rance, whether this quickening power of Christ doe belong to
vs, and whether we be of the number whom Christ will raye vp vnto life eternall, yea or no. Doct. 2. That the honour, which is due vnto Christ, is to hearken to him in his Word, and to beleeue in him. This is all that is required of vs: Deut. 18.15. Mat. 17.5. Ioh. 3.16. viz. to beleeue. Vse is, first, to stirre vs vp to honour Christ by this meanes: euen as subiects, if they see their King to count himselfe honou∣red by such and such things, they will endeauour to doe them. 2. To reproue them that will honour God after their owne conceits, as Saul, 1. Sa, 15.22. or after the traditions of men as Mat. 15.9. or by outward pomps and solemnities as the Pa∣pists, which are but toyes to the excellent maiesty of Christ. So much for the dependance. The words themselues containe in generall a description of such as are raised vp by Christ. The parts are, 1. A Preface, Verily, &c.] of which hath been spoken before, only here it is added to moue vs to attend vnto the matter de∣liuered as a point to bee much regarded and obser∣ued. 2. A promise wherein obserue first, the Parties to whom it is made. Secondly, the promise it selfe [hath euerlasting life, &c. The Parties are described by their actions: first, [he that hea∣reth] Secondly [and beleeneth] these actions are both of them amplified by their obiects first [my word] secondly [him that sent me. The first action, [he that heareth] which is layd downe both as a cause of the latter viz. of beleeuing, and as a meanes to at∣taine to life euerlasting. Whence we learne. Doct. That the meanes to attaine to true faith and to eter∣nal life, is the hearing of the Word. Rom. 10.14, 15, 17. Ephes. 1.13. Act. 15.7. that faith followes hearing the Word. Now eter∣nall life is a consequent of faith as Esa. 55.3. 1. Ti. 4.16. hence the word is called the word of saluation. Act. 13.26. Eph. 1.13. Rom. 1.16. yea saluation it selfe Heb· 2.3. Reason. First hearing is a cause of knowledge, now know∣ledge
and illumination are a ground of Faith. Secondly, by hea∣ring, is the Spirit conuayed vnto vs; by which Spirit, Faith is wrought in vs: by faith we are vnited to Christ; and being v∣nited to him, we haue a right and title to heauen. So the Word is called the ministery of the Spirit. 2. Cor. 3.6. Gal. 3.2. Vse. 1, For Ministers that they be faithfull, diligent, and con∣scionable in preaching of the Word: for it there bee no prea∣ching, there can be no hearing: Rom. 10.14. a point of excee∣ding great moment because idle and idoll pastors doe shut vp the kingdome of heauen against the people, and cause them to lie in sinne and incredulity, so becomming guilty of their blood: 1. Cor 9.16. 2. For the people to stirre them vp to diligence to hearken and attend vnto this Word when it is preached, &c. The obiect of hearing is here sayd, to be the Word of Christ. Whence we learne; Doct. That it is not euery word which is able to worke faith in vs, but only the Word of the Sonne of God. The Gos∣pell my Word] as opposed to the words of men, and their tra∣ditions. Ioh. 6.63. Rom. 1, 9. Ioh. 1.18, and 14.6. The law cannot doe this; for that is the letter that killeth, and it is the ministery of death: 2. Cor. 3.6.7. and much lesse then the words of men, and their traditions. Vse is to teach vs, that as we be diligent to heare, so we bee carefull to know what we heare. The second Action, is to belieue. Though hearing be a thing necessary, and a good ground-work and beginning, yet it is not sufficient, but we must further beleeue in the truth, declared by the Gospell. Doct. It is not sufficient to heare the Word onely, but Faith must be added to our hearing: Hebr. 3.2. Ephes. 1.13. Rom. 1.16. For the Word doth but onely offer grace. Now what good is it to haue a Benefice offered onely, if it be not receiued: but this is done by Faith: Act. 13.48. Vse. As before we were exhorted to heare, so here wee are directed how to heare, viz. not to content our selues with a
bare and naked hearing, or that we doe vnderstand the Prea∣cher, and know the mysteries of the Scripture, but to apply the Word and Promises to our selues. The Obiect of this action is described in these words [him that sent me] which is a description of God the Father, and implies a relation betweene the Father and the Sonne: as if he had said, In him of whom I am, who hath giuen me vnto the World, &c. Doct. God as he is the Father of Christ Iesus, is the onely obiect of our Faith; and therefore he saith not [and beleeueth in God] simply, but in him that sent me. And therefore wee must come vnto God in Christ, and doe whatsoeuer we doe in, and through him: Heb. 13.15. No creature can bee the obiect of our Faith, on which wee may rest, because it is not able to protect vs from Gods wrath. Neither is God himselfe, as he hath immediately to doe with vs, for so he is most strict in iustice, and as a consuming fire, be∣fore which we are but stubble. Onely as he is well pleased in Christ, and in him manifesteth his grace and fauour, may ap∣proach vnto him with confidence. Ʋse. It shewes the vanitie of the most part of the World, that either know not Christ, or deny him, as the Iewes; and so dare to come vnto him in great iustice. So much of the Par∣ties. The Promise is declared, first, affirmatiuely [hath euerlasting life.] Secondly, negatiuely, and shall not, &c. Doct. The fruite of that honour which we performe to Christ Iesus, is eternall life: Ioh. 10.27, 28. 1. Pet. 1.3, 4. which is not in regard of any desert of the workes, but of Gods free grace, who sets downe this reward to encourage vs, and to magnifie his owne mercy. Which shewes his fatherly tendernesse towards vs, that whereas we are bound to doe no lesse, and he might absolute∣ly command vs; yet hee rather chuseth to draw vs on by the hope of reward. Vse. To bee stirred vp to the performance of these du∣ties, both in regard of thankefulnesse to God, and in respect
of our owne good. This is now further amplified by the contrary, [and shall not come into condemnation, &c.] Which imply in effect the same things that the former; yet they are added not in vaine, but for the further confirmation and strengthening of our Faith in a matter of such weight, and for the answering of all obiections that might be brought. Wherefore this shewes a double benefit: First, we shall haue life. Secondly, we shall be deliuered from death. And further it notes a difference betweene that happinesse wherein man was first made, and that whereunto we are brought by Christ. Adam was created happy and immortall: but withall there was a possibility to fall. But we not onely haue immortalitie and life, but also such a firmenesse and stability, as we shall not come into death. [Hath passed from death to life.] Some take the meaning to be thus, that the beleeuer when he dies goeth vnto Heauen; which is a good sense, and comfortable: but rather we are to vnderstand it thus, viz. that by death is meant, the subiection of vs all to eternall condemnation. But now so soone as wee beleeue the Obligation and Band is cancelled, and wee hauing Faith, haue our acquittance, and are set free. Doct· Faith brings with it a discharge from condemnation, Rom. 8.1. Which is to be noted as a speciall comfort of our consciences against the terrour of sinne, and horrour of condemnation. Doct. 2. No middle betweene damnation and saluation: he that is freed from the one, is sure of the other. [Hath passed from death to life.] This appeares in the Parable of Lazarus and the rich Man: and in the sentence of the last Iudgement: as is plaine by reason, because there are but two sorts of peo∣ple, the one in Christ, the other out of Christ, &c. Which must note against the Papists conceits of Limbus Patrū, Limbus In∣fantum, and Purgatory: which as it is derogatory to the blood of Christ, 1. Ioh. 1.7. so is it a doctrine very vncomfortable, and that which doth adde a sting vnto death: also it is a cause of much vniustice, when Parents will giue away their lands from
their children to Monkes, &c. to sing for their soules. Now concerning the phrase, hath eternall life, and hath pas∣sed, &c. it implies the certaintie of these promises. Yet a que∣stion will be made, in what respect we may be said so soone as we beleeue to haue eternall life? Answ. It is, first in regard of hope. 2. Because we haue the beginnings, and first fruits of it, viz. we are taken into the Kingdome of grace, which is the begin∣ning of the Kingdome of glory. 3. In regard of our vnion with Christ our Head, and now glorified. Now wee being members of that body, whereof the head and principall part is raised vp, and in possession of eternall life, we may be said also, as Ephes. 2.6. Doct. The true beleeuer is, and may be sure of his eternall saluation. Which is to bee noted against our aduersaries the Papists. Secondly, as a comfort to vphold vs in time of trou∣ble. Vers. 25. Verily, verily, I say vnto you, the houre is comming, and now is, when the dead shall heare the voyce of the Sonne of God, and they that heare shall liue. IN these words is laid downe the second generall point, viz. the meanes whereby they are quickned. The parts are two. 1. A Preface, [Verily, &c.] which words are here the third time laid downe. Now we may not thinke, that Christ vsed in vaine these strong asseuerations, but that hee doth this to strengthen our Faith, to rouze vp our dulnesse, and to aggra∣uate the incredulity of those, that yet notwithstanding all this will not beleeue. 2. A Promise: wherein consider, 1. The time of accomplishing of it, [the houre commeth] viz. of Christs death, resurrection, and glorification; for then he drew all men vnto him, and then was the Gospell published abroad. Yet this houre was now begun, because that Christ
was now exhibited. Now this time is called an houre, because it is a set and certaine period which God hath appointed, and in which these things should be fulfilled. Doct. The time of the Gospell is the time of saluation: for Christ here speaketh of the time of the Gospell: 2. Cor. 6.2. 2. The parties on whom this worke is to be wrought, viz. the Dead, that is, all naturall men; especially meant of the Gentiles, who before this time were Alians from the Com∣mon-wealth of Israel, &c. Doct. The state of naturall men, is the state of dead men: Ephes. 2. there is in them by nature no iot, or dramme of spiri∣tuall life. Which note, 1. Against heretikes that haue so much magnified Nature, as the Pelagians. 2. That we may take notice of the wretchednesse, and vile∣nesse of our nature wherein we are borne. 3. To shew, that the worke of our conuersation is a pow∣erfull worke and diuine. And for this cause we are not to mar∣uell, that the shrill sound of the voyce of the Gospell doe not pierce vnto the heart of many men; for why? they are dead, 3. The meanes whereby it is wrought, viz. the voice of Christ, not onely of himselfe whilest hee was here liuing vpon the earth, but especially is it to be taken for that power, which by his Spirit he giues vnto the Word preached. And therfore though Ministers doe preach, and may be said to conuert; yet properly it is the powerfull voyce of Christ speaking in them, that worketh vpon the heart. Vers. 28. Maruell not at this: for the houre is comming, in which all that are in the graues shall heare his voyce. IN this Verse is contained, first, a Reproofe of the incredulity of the Iewes, [Maruell not]: for they tooke Christ for no other then an ordinary man, and therefore did not beleeue that which he had spoken, Vers. 26, 27. of his power and authori∣tie; but wondred much that he should say such things of him∣selfe.
There is an holy admiration without doubting, as when we admire the great workes of God, whereof yet we make no doubt: but so to wonder, as to call in question any truth of God, to thinke it impossible, because wee apprehend not the reason of it; this is a fault, and here reprooued. For hereby we doe impeach the power of God, and bring it to our owne reason. 2. A further proofe and confirmation of the point in que∣stion, viz. the power and authority of Christ. The proofe is drawne from the effect, namely, the raising vp of the Dead. So that in briefe, it containeth a description of the Resurrection: wherein obserue. 1. The Time. 2. The Parties. 3. The Cause. 1. In the Time note, first, that it is a set time and period ap∣pointed by God [the houre], which time we are with pati∣ence to waite for. Secondly, it commeth; it shall not bee pre∣uented, not ouerpassed, but shall certainely come. Which, first, is against all deniers of the Resurrection. Secondly, it is for our comfort at the time of death, as also in regard of our friends departed. And lastly, it serues to encourage vs to goe on in our Christian course: 1. Cor. 15. last verse. 2. The Parties are described. 1. By their place of abode: all that are in their graues: that is by a Synecdoche of one kind for all the rest, by what manner of death so euer they died, and howsoeuer they were consumed. This implies; That the consumption of our bodies shall not hinder the resurrection; because the ground of it is the power of Christ, in regard of which there is no diffe∣rence. This serues for an encouragement against the diuers kindes of death whereunto we may come: as it was to the Martyrs: Heb. 11.30. 2. By their generality, [All] none, no not one shall bee for∣gotten in the graue: as appeares by the Parable of the Net that gathereth of all kindes: Matth. 13.47. Which is for the
comfort of those which in this world haue been forgotten, none hath taken notice of them, these at the resurrection, Christ will not forget. Secondly, it is for the terror of the wicked, that none of them shall escape. Thirdly, it teacheth vs to prepare our selues so in this life, that wee may rise vnto ioy and glo∣ry. 3. The cause of the resurrection is the voice of Christ [heare his voice:] that is, the voice of Christ; vers. 27. they shall heare not in regard of any facultie, or ability in the dead, but of the powerfullnes of the voice of Christ, that peirceth euen to the dust, and giueth a power of hearing vnto that which had none at all. Doct. The cause of the resurrection is the almightines of the voice of Christ: 1. Thes. 4.16. Act. 17.31. Obiect. 1. Thes. 4.16. Matth. 25.31. this is attributed vnto an Archangell, &c. Answ. These places indeed shew, that there shall bee a meanes vsed, and that an externall meanes by the ministery of Angells, like as there was in the giuing of the Law, but yet the efficacy, and force of this meanes, commeth from the power of Christ: as vers. 25. it is the voice of Christ speaking in his mi∣nisters that conuerteth the heart: as 2. Cor. 13.3. Obiect. But how shall the wicked be raised vp by Christ sith they haue no right vnto him? Answ. We must consider Christ in a double respect, as a Sa∣uiour, or as a Lord; as a Redeemer, or as a Iudge. He raiseth vp the righteous by vertue of his owne resurrection, and of that vnion betweene him their Head, and they his Members: but the wicked he raiseth by te almighty power of a Iudge, to bring them vnto Iudgement. Ʋse. Here we may note a difference betweene the faith of the Iewes, and of vs, in one and the same Article of Religion; they belieue the resurrection only by the generall power of God, we by the power of Christ also. 2. This serues for a proppe to strengthen and vphold our faith, in the doctrine of the resurrection, if our reason shall dis∣pute against it: for it is most true that by naurall reason and
argument, that the body once consumed to dust, should rise a∣gaine the same. Vers. 29. And they shall come forth that haue done good vnto the resurrection of life: but they that haue done euill, vnto the resurrection of condemnation. IN this verse is declared the issue of the resurrection. In sum, it is a declaration of the last Iudgement, or, of the diuers end of the good and of the wicked. Betweene whom there is here layd a comparison; first, wherein they both agree. Secondly, wherein they differ. 1. The agreement is this: that there is a resurrection belon∣ging to both: as all lay in the graue, so all shall heare, and all shall come forth: but yet the one to life, the other to death. Doct. All that likenes and equality that is betweene the godly and the wicked before the last iudgement, shal not cause the fame end vnto both: as in the parable of the Tares, Mat. 13.30. Luk. 17.34, 35, 36. and therefore is that day called, a day of the declaration of the iust iudgement of God; Rom. 2.6. for God will then put a difference betweene the good and wicked, whatsoeuer the likenes betweene them hath been in this life. Vse. To answere the scoffes of Atheists, who because they see things fall alike to all, thinke it in vaine to serue God: as Eccles. 2.15. Iob 21.14.15. Mal. 3.14, 15. but see Psal. 37.37. Esay 3.10. 2. To taxe fond conceited men, that will desire to be buri∣ed in such a mans graue, or tombe, whom they hold for a good and holy man, that at the resurrection they may receiue some benefit by him. Which is very ridiculous, although in some ci∣uill respect it may be desired. 2. in the difference betweene them, note, first, the reward of the Righteous Scondly, the reuenge of the wicked [they that haue done good vnto the resurrection of life.] Here obserue, first, the Parties. Secondly, the Reward.
1. The Parties are such as haue done good: who are those? not such as build hospitalls, giue money to Friars and Monks, &c. as the papists thinke. But there are foure things that con∣curre to bring it to passe, that a man may doe good, 1. The Partie that doth it. The rule is: That the person himselfe must be good before the worke can be good. Tit. 1.15. Gen 4.4. God respected first Abel and then his offering. But how is the person good? In Christ the fountaine of good∣nes: Eph. 1. Wherefore our workes are then good, when they come from vs as accepted of God in Christ, with whom we are vnited. 2. The matter of the worke: It is then good, when it is squared according to the rule of goodnesse, viz. the Word of God: so that Actions framed according to Gods Will reuea∣led in his Word, are good. 3. The manner: which is the cheife, and giues beeing, to the rest. The rules are, first, that as it is good in its owne na∣ture, so it must be done of vs in that respect, that it is good; that is, in Conscience and obedience to Gods commandement, because he hath commanded vs: 1. Pet. 2.19. Rom. 13.5. Se∣condly, that in regard of our weakenes and infirmity, it bee done in humility, with deniall of our selues, and faith in Christ, to haue all the blemishes pardoned, all the defects couered; and what is wanting, to be perfected in him otherwise being done in a proud conceit of our owne worth, it is odious and abominable. 3. That it be done in vprightnes and sincerity of heart, as to God who is Iudge of it: Ier. 17.10. and fourthly, that it be done as a worke of God; that is, which God hath appointed vnto vs, either in our generall, or particular Calling. 4. The end that we must aime, first, at the glory of God. Secondly, The good of man. And from hence may we see, who they be that doe good. 2. The second thing is the Reward [of life] namely of eter∣nall life; as Dan. 12.2. Matth. 25. last verse. Let vs consider what this life is; it is, in a word, our Commu∣nion with God: that is, a coniunction of soule and body with
him. From whence arise these prerogatiues. 1. A continuall enioying of the glorious presence of God, in as glorious and full manner, as the creature is capable of. A happy thing it was for the seruants of Salomon alwaies to be∣hold his glory; 1. King. 10.8. and a great fauour for Moses to see but the backe parts of the Lord. How great then will bee the glory, when God shall in such speciall manner communi∣cate himselfe to vs: Ioh. 3.2. and be all in all vnto vs. Reu. 21.22.23. 2. A fellowship and communion with the glorious Angels and Saints. 3. An absolute perfection of soule and body, and of all the powers of both, perfect knowledge, perfect wisedome; 1. Cor. 13.12. so that all things shall be done in that manner, as they could not haue been done better. In soule, such integrity, as no defect; in body, immortality, incorruptibility, agility, and finally, a glorious body like vnto the body of Christ: 1. Cor. 15.42. 4. A full perfect and absolute contentednesse that we shall not see what more to desire: so that nothing can be added to our happinesse. 5. A full redemption from all manner of misery whatsoe∣uer, especially that misery of miseries from sinning against God. The expectation of which freedome is it, that in this life doth refresh the soule of a Christian, groaning vnder the bur∣den of sinne. 6. An admirable ioy and delight in this happinesse, which indeed giues life to all the rest: for it is better to be without honour, then to haue it with griefe and vexation. 7. That which makes vp the heape of all the rest, is the perpetuity and euerlasting continuance of them. Vse is, first, to breed in our hearts an holy admiration of the goodnesse of God, that hath prepared so great things for vs. Secondly, to stirre vp in vs a desire of it, and in desiring to vse the meanes that leade vnto it. The other part is the reuenge of wickednesse: wherein con∣sider,
1. The Parties, they that haue done euill: who, not onely open sinners, but all that commit an anomie, or transgression a∣gainst the Law; for then there is euill. All that are not accepted of God in Christ, whether Pagans and Infidels, or vnregenerate Christians, all ignorant persons, that know not the will of God. For if we draw a line without a rule, we through the peruersenesse of our nature, shall draw it awry. All superstitious persons that take their owne conceits, and mens traditions for a rule; or such as doe good things for by-respects, all proud conceited iusticiaries that doe trust to their owne perfection, all hypocrites and dissemblers, all busie-bodies that doe those things which belong not to them, all vaine-glorious persons, and haters of their brethren. For to make vse of this, consider the second point, the issue of these men in their punishment, which consisteth, first, in the pronouncing of that fearefull sentence, Goe yee, &c. Secondly, in the execution of it, the horror of which is vnconceaueable and vnutterable; for besides the priuation of happinesse, there is a fellowship with the Diuell and the damned, all horror and vglinesse, nothing good in soule or in body, no comfort, and which aggrauates the terror of all, eternall continuance of this woe. Vse is therefore, that if that which hath been said of life doe not allure vs, that this doe terrifie vs. Here are now to be answered two questions that arise from these words. Quest. 1. Whether the good which we doe, be the proper cause of saluation? Answ. No: the best good that the best can doe, is no cause of their saluation: Gal. 2.16. Ephes. 2.8, 9. Tit. 3.5. Reason. For life eternall is the free gift of God; Rom. 6. last. and if it be of Grace, it is not of work: Rom. 11.6. Eph. 2.6, 7, 8. 2. Suppose wee did all that God requires; yet we merit not, sith all is but our duty: Luk. 17.10. yea, Adam if hee had continued in his integrity, and full performance of the whole Law of God, yet had he not thereby merited Heauen, it being but his duty so to doe: then much lesse we, whose righteous∣nesse
is as a filthy clout: Esay 64.6. 3. All our workes are imperfect, and so cannot merit: for if wee our selues can finde many imperfections in the best of them, God can finde much more; Iob 9.15, 30, 31. Yet is life eternall attributed to our workes, as they are signes and eui∣dences of the soundnesse and truth of our Faith in Christ, by whom we obtaine the same. And secondly, there is a twofold reward; the one of debt, the other of fauour, called the re∣ward of inheritance. Vse. The vse of this point, is to teach vs rightly to distinguish of workes, and to know their right end, that we be neither ar∣rogant and conceited, nor yet prophane and negligent of them. Quest. 2. Whether euill workes be properly causes of con∣demnation. Answ. Yea: as meriting and deseruing it properly: for damnation is the wages of sinne. Obiect. But how can that be, seeing the punishment is grea∣ter then the sinne: the punishment infinite, and the sinne but finite. Answ. The punishment is not greater then the offence: for the offence must be weighed according to the greatnesse of the person offended: now this is God, who is infinite, and accor∣dingly his wrath infinite. Sinne therefore is infinite in measure, though not in time but the punishment is infinite, not in measure, but in continu∣ance. For the Creature is not able to beare the whole wrath of God at once (as Christ did,) and therefore it lyeth vnder the burden thereof eternally. What then is the difference betweene good and euill workes. Answ. Sinne is perfectly and fully euill: but the good workes we doe, are not perfectly good, vnlesse they were done euery way according to all things commanded, and so were fully answerable to the Law of God, which we cannot doe. In the last place, consider wee some few instructions that arise from the manner of laying downe these words. 1. [They that haue done good.] Doct. Not the abstaining
from euill, but the doing of good is that which causeth the re∣surrection vnto life. In Mat. 25. are three arguments to proue this point: first, that of the fiue foolish Virgins that wanted oyle, Vers. 3. Se∣condly, that of the vnfaithfull seruant who was punished, not because he had purloyned, or stole any thing, but for not im∣ploying of his Talent, Vers. 25 &c. 3. The tenor of the sentence: which is pronounced accor∣ding to workes done, or omitted, Vers. 35. &c. Psalm. 34.14. 1. Pet. 3.10. For herein doth the Image of God consist, that wee bee re∣newed in our mindes, and that we put on the new man, as well as put off the old. Vse. It serues for reproofe of the greater sort of men, who thinke it sufficient if they be not thus and thus, though in the meane time, as touching workes of Faith, Piety and Charity, they haue none. 2. [They that haue done good.] And Doct. The good. [they that haue done euill.] And euill that in this life is done, is a signe and euidence, either of life, or of condemnation: 2. Cor. 5.10. [In his body] whilest hee liued: Luk. 16.25. [In thy life time] for this life is but as a probation time. Vse. See Galat. 6.10. Eccles. 9.10. 2. Corinth. 6.2. Hebr. 2.13, 15. 3. Doct. Consider what it is that Christ here vrgeth as an euidence of life eternall: it is the practice of good works, not the Profession. Which serues to reprooue vaine Professors. 4. [Resurrection of life.] [Resurrection of condemnation] That there is a difference betweene the good and the wicked, we haue heard. Here we see what it is: euen the greatest contrariety that can bee: Mark. 16.16. Which must incourage vs in our Christian course, that how∣soeuer the wicked may seeme in many things to be better then we, yet there shall be a difference hereafter.
Vers. 30. I can doe nothing of mine owne selfe, as I heare, I iudge; and my iudgement is iust, because I seeke not mine owne will, but the will of the Father who hath sent me. IN this Verse is laid downe the condition of Christs iudge∣ment; to wit, that it is a iust iudgement; that hee iudgeth according to equity. This is confirmed by that communion that is betweene the Father and Him. The Argument is this: That which the Father doth, ordereth, and willeth, that is law∣full and iust. But the Father iudgeth with me, he directeth my iudgement, and consenteth thereunto. Therefore my iudge∣ment is iust. The proposition is omitted, as granted of the Iewes: the assumption and conclusion are here set downe. The assumption in three points: 1. In that he can doe nothing without his Father, [I can doe nothing of mine owne selfe.] 2. In that the Father ordereth the course of this iudge∣ment; [as I heare, I iudge.] 3. First, negatiuely, in that hee seeketh not his owne will. Secondly, affirmatiuely, in that he seeketh the will of him that sent him. The conclusion in these, [and my iudgement is iust.] So that this Verse, as it is a further proofe of the point in question; so is it likewise a conclusion by way of repetition of all the former arguments. Meaning of the words, [I can doe nothing, &c.] Namely, as Vers. 17.19. with this difference, that there he speaketh in the third, here in the first. For hauing prooued it to bee true in a third person, lest they should mistake, he doth now apply it to himselfe. Heare] see Verse 19. Iudge] see Verse 22. Iudgement] as Verse 22. Because I seeke not, &c.] Not as if Christ his will were op∣site to his Fathers; for then he should deny his will, as we doe: but this doth shew a correspondency betweene the will of the Sonne, and of the Father. As if hee had said, I seeke not mine
owne will, without the will of my Father; but in seeking of his will, I seeke mine owne. 2. Christ speaketh this according to the conceit of the Iewes, who tooke Christ but for a man, and thought that hee herein followed but his owne fancy. The parts then of this Verse are; 1. A Proposition in these words, My iudgement is iust. 2. A Confirmation of it, drawne from the communion that is betweene Christ and God the Father. This is expressed in three branches. 1. A ioynt Cooperation of both together. 2. A mutuall Communication of counsell. 3. A Correspondency of their will. The Proposition is laid in the middest, and not before the reasons, nor yet after: which Christ wisely doth. Vers. 31. If I should beare witnesse of my selfe, my witnesse were not true. WEe haue heard how in this Chapter, Christ doth proue himselfe to be God; first, by a miracle. Second∣ly, by a diuine Apology occasioned by the miracle. In which Apologie he confirmeth it by two sorts of arguments; first, by diuine effects, such as cannot be done, but by God himselfe. Se∣condly, by diuine Testimonie. This we are now come to han∣dle; and it is layd downe from the verse 31. to the end. The Testimonie is first, generally declared vers. 32. 2. Particularly set forth in foure distinct instances, the first, of Iohn Baptist. vers. 33.34.25. Secondly, of Christ his workes. vers. 36. Thirdly, of the Father; vers. 37, 38. and lasty, of the Scriptures, vers. 39, &c. But before he come to the testimonies it selfe, Christ doth first lay downe the occasion of vsing of this kind of argument; which is to preuent, and meete with a secret obiection, which the Iewes might make on this wise, viz. That those great & excellent things, which before he had spo∣ken
of himselfe, might well be suspected, and called into que∣stion; because they concerned himselfe, and himselfe did auouch them of himselfe. Now their readines to make such an obie∣ction, appeareth by Cap. 8.13. where they doe it plainly vpon the like occasion. Therefore to preuent this, Christ brings in o∣ther testimonies which might witnesse the same things of him, which himselfe had spoken. This must be noted for the reconciling of a contradiction, which seemes to be betweene this place, and chap: 8. vers. 14. For in that place Christ speaketh litterally, and according to the truth of the thing; namely, that as he was indeed God, so albeit he had no other testimonie, yet was his owne sufficient in his owne cause: but in this place he speaketh by a Rhetori∣call concession and grant, according to the conceit of the Iewes touching him, that he was but a man and no more. Now then the witnes of a man in his owne cause, although it may be true, yet is not sufficient to decide the matter. Obserue then here, first, What Christ yeelded vnto, Second∣ly, Vpon what ground. Doct. Our Lord, Christ Iesus, for the further confirmation of the truth, and satisfaction of the hearers, yeeldeth from that which he might haue stood vpon: Though hee might haue stood vpon his owne testimonie as sufficient, he being God; yet because this was not so clearely euident, vnto them, hee bringeth in other testimonies and grounds for the confirming of this truth, that were more plaine and easie to their apppre∣hension. So Mat. 17.26.27. he yeeldeth from his right, hauing other meanes to manifest himselfe to be the Sonne of God: and Mat. 26.53. hee might haue called for Legions of An∣gels. For Christ sought not himselfe and his owne glory Ioh 8.50. but the glory of God, by giuing euidence vnto the truth, and the edification of the hearers. Which shewes, first, Christ his great meekenes, euen against his aduersaries; and his great desire to bring them to the knowledge of the truth. He might hau only deliuered the truth, & being God, haue exacted cre∣dence on paine of eternal cōdemnation; but he considereth our
weakenes, and so imitateth God his Father, who not only comandeth, but bringeth with all arguments and reasons, to shew the equity of his Lawes, to the end to perswade vs to yeeld obedience. Secondly, it is for our Imitation, that as occa∣sion offereth it selfe, we be ready to yeeld from our right, and not stand to strictly on euery thing that may be iustified, if by other meanes the truth may bee the better perswaded and taught. 2. The ground vpon which he yeeldeth is, that if hee had been man, as they conceited him to be, then his owne testimo∣nie had not been sufficient. Doct. None are to iustifie themselues and their actions, and to commend the things which they doe. For if Christ, who was free from an ouerweening conceit of his owne doings, from vaine glory, and desire of applause, and whose testimo∣nie was most true, would not yet commend himselfe; how much lesse may we, who are partiall in our owne matters and subiect to the other vices? Prou. 27.2. For, first, If we commend our selues, it ministers occasion that our testimonie should be suspected; and it is hard but we shall mingle some vntruth, either in suppressing some circum∣stances which might disgrace vs, or amplifying other hyperbo∣lically which tend to our honour. 2. It sauours of a desire of vaine glory. 3. If we do things that are indeed praise-worthy, it is need∣lesse; for they will commend themselues. Vse. For reproofe of those that stand so much vpon their owne credit, that they will haue euery thing so, because they say it: as doth the Pope, who what he saies, sitting in his chaire, men are bound in conscience to beleeue: herein making himselfe like God: 2. Thes. 2.4. And as do many, who though they deliuer a thing but vpon their owne authority, yet are of∣fended if it bee called in question. So much for the occasion.
Vers. 32. There is another that beareth witnes of mee, and I know that the witnes which he beareth of me is true. WEe are now come to the point it selfe, viz. the Te∣stimonies that are alleadged. Which are first pro∣pounded in generall in this 32. verse, to be Diuine testimonies, The testimonies of God the Father himselfe for that is meant: where he saith, There is another, that is, God the Father: not Iohn, as some say; for Christ would here bring in an vndenia∣ble testimonie. But how is God another from Christ? Answ. In foure respects. First in regard of the Iewes con∣ceit, that Christ was but a man: so is God another. Secondly, in regard of his Humane Nature: for though both make one person, yet the Diuine Nature is one, and the Humane Nature another. 3. In regard of his Office, as he was Mediator betweene God and Man, so hee may bee said to bee another then God. Fourthly, in regard of his person, as he is God, being a distinct person from the Father: so is the Father , but not . The meaning then is this, as if Christ had said; You except against my testimonie, as a humane testimony; but I haue a diuine testimonie of these things, euen the testimonie of God himselfe, who by Iohn, by his owne voice, by his workes, And by his word, doth beare witnes vnto mee. The Generall then of this verse is this; That those things which Christ had deliuered, were confirmed by diuine testi∣monie. The points to be noted are, first, Who it is that beareth wit∣nes. Another, that is God. Doct. The testimonie whereby Christ doth iustifie him∣selfe and his actions, and vpon which he doth rest, is the testi∣monie of God: Ioh. 8.14, 18. For first, he would not stand vpon his owne testimonie as is before handled: and secondly, this testimonie is vncontroule∣able; as shall be shewed hereafter.
Vse. Here wee learne whereon to rest, and ground our acti∣ons, viz. vpon the testimonie of God, and his approbation: 2. Cor. 10. last. For men may deceiue through flattery, and be de∣ceiued through ignorance: but God can neither. And better it is to seeke for the appobation of the master, then of the ser∣uant. 2. The kind of Testimonie: wherein we may obserue two points. 1. The thing it selfe; It is a true testimony. 2. The manner of setting it downe. [I know, &c.] 1. Doct. The witnes which God doth giue, is an infallible certaine true witnes: for God is truth; both actiuely decla∣ring only the truth with falshod without error, and passiuely, because he cannot be deceiued he is truth in abstracto: Exod. 34.6. Psal. 31.5. Tit. 1.2. Heb. 6.18. Vse. We heard before, that we were to seeke for Gods wit∣nes and approbation of the things we do. This now is a motiue to vrge vs thereto, because his witnesse is without exception. Rom. 8.31. 2. Christ in setting downe this testimony, sheweth his as∣sured perswasion, and setled faith in it, and this from his owne experience that hee had found it so. [I know:] hereby, first, shewing that hee went vpon sure and certaine grounds in all that he did. Secondly, checking the Iewes infidelity. Doct. The witnesse of God is so effectuall and powerfull, that it worketh credence in those to whom it is giuen: Iob 16.19. Wherein stands a maine difference betweene a humane te∣stimony, and a diuine testimony. For man, though hee may giue a testimony, which for the matter is true, yet hee cannot for the effect, to assure him to whom it is giuen, that hee may certainely know that it is true. Vse. Apply we this testimony of Adoption, that they who haue it, doe know, and are assured of it: Rom. 8.15. Gal. 4.4.6. 2. Doct. Though others know not the testimony of God, yet we must not shrinke from it: as Christ doth here, Ioh.
17.25. Ioh. 6.67, 69. Mat. 26.33. a good resolution of Peter, had it not been in too much confidence and presumption of himselfe. Which holy and constant courage ought to be in vs all. So much for the Generall. Vers. 33. Yee sent vnto Iohn, and hee bare witnesse vnto the truth. WE haue heard in generall, that Christ hath diuine te∣stimony to confirme his authority, and equality with his Father. Now in particular this is exemplified, and set forth in foure branches: first, by the testimony of Iohn, in this Vrese vnto the 36. Verse. In which note, 1. The occasion thereof; Vers. 33. 2. The witnesse it selfe; Vers. 33. 3. The end of alleaging it; Vers. 34. 4. The commendation of the witnesse-bearer; Vers. 35. 1. The occasion is in these words; [Yee sent vnto Iohn.] which pointeth vnto that solemne embassage which the Iewes sent vnto Iohn: Ioh. 1.19, &c. From whence note the good guiding and ouer-ruling power of God, who disposeth of the actions of the aduersaries of his truth, to the confirmation of the same truth: for it is likely they sent not vnto Iohn with any good minde, but in hypocrisie; for so Iohn reproues them: yet doth Christ hereby confirme the truth of Iohns witnesse. Shewing hereby, first, that this witnsse came not voluntarily from Iohn, he went not vnto them to declare it, but they sent an embassage vnto him, to aske him touching those things. Se∣condly, that there was no compact betweene Iohn and Christ: for Iohn knew not Christ vntill after that time: Ioh. 1.29. 2. In the testimony it selfe note, first, the action; secondly, the obiect. 1. The action is in thse words [he bare witnesse.] This was proper to his offie vnto which he was appointed to be a
witnesse-bearer: Ioh. 1.6, 7. Luk. 1.15, 76. Obiect. Act. 10.43. it is said, all the Prophets were witnes∣ses of Christ, and the Apostles: Act. 1.8, 22. & 3.5. & 10.39, 41. how then was this proper to Iohn? Answ. In generall it is a common duty to all Ministers: but Iohn was a more speciall witnesse, for that he first pointed out Christ, and declared him before he was knowne, going imme∣diately before him, as a Herald before a King, as the Day-star befoe the Sunne. 2. The obiect is in these words [to the truth.] Vers. 35. He was a burning and a shining candle, and yee would for a season haue reioyced in his light. IN this Verse is set downe the commendation of the witnes-bearer: which Christ addeth, because hee would not insist vpon the testimony of Iohn, and lay the whole proofe vpon it. Now lest he should seeme to make light of Iohn, as one whose testimonie was nor so greatly to be regarded, he doth there∣fore here giue this high commendation of him. Whence wee see, that Christ as he doth maintaine his owne honour, so doth he not disparage the honour of Iohn, but together with his, maintaineth his authority. Contrary to the practice of ma∣ny, who enuie the credit of others, &c. Now Iohn is commen∣ded, 1. From the condition of his office: He was a candle, and therefore not hauing light from himselfe, but from another: shewing, that Ministers are no other then ordinary men, vn∣lesse they be illightned from God. And this teacheth people how to esteeme aright of Ministers, and yet not to despise them, seeing that a candle is necessary in the night. 2. From his properties: first, of burning, noting his inward zeale to the glory of God, and saluation of his people. Second∣ly, of shining, by his faithfull preaching, and godly life. A pat∣tere for all Ministers. 3. From the effect of his ministery, the people reioyced,
though the wicked and hypocrites but for a season. Here note first, the action, they reioyced; which is spoken, not so much in commendation of them, as to shew the efficacy of the ministe∣ry of Gods Word, that it workes euen vpon the obstinate. 2. The Obiect; They reioyced in the light. To shew, that if Ministers will haue the people to affect them, and to reioyce in their Ministery, they must shew forth the light of the Word, and the euidence of the Gospell in their Ministery. And so no maruell though many are not regarded, who be as candles ei∣ther not lighted, or else put vnder a bushell. Now to shew that this reioycing is spoken more, to shew the powerfull ef∣fect of the ministery of the Word, then in commendation of them, hee addes a limitation, that this their ioy was but for a season; as is the ioy of all hypocrites and wicked men: Iob. 20.5. see Mat. 13.19, 20. They reioyced in Iohn for by-respects, in hope that he would haue brought them liberty, and deliue∣red them from the Romanes, and the like: but when Iohn did plainely vnmaske their hypocrisie, and discouer their sinnes, their ioy was nipt in the head, and withered. Which hath been the practise of people from all time, first, for a while greatly to admire a Minister; but when hee tells them of their sinnes, and presseth their duties vpon them, Oh then he is too hard and too seuere, &c. and so they forsake him. Vers. 36. But I haue greater witnesse then the witnesse of Iohn: for the workes which the Father hath giuen me to finish, the same workes that I doe, beare witnesse of me, that the Father sent me. THis Verse containes the second testimony, that Christ doth alleadge, to prooue his equality with the Father; namely, the testimony of his workes. In setting downe whee∣of, first, he layes downe a commendation of it. Secondly, hee declares the nature and kind of it. 1. The commendation is taken from a comparison of vne∣qualls, in that he saith; But I haue greater witnes, then, &c. we
are to see wherein consiteth the inequality of this witnes, and the rest that follow, (for this is a transition:) and of that for∣mer witne of Iohn. It consisteth not in the truth of the witnesses, for all testifie the same things, but the inequality is in regard, first, of the per∣sons bearing witnes, that were greater then Iohn. Secondly, of the testimonies themselues that were more cleare, and euident, then the testimony of Iohn. For though Iohn being a man inspi∣red could not erre, yet the people did not, or would not so clearely see the truth of his testimonie. But these testimonies are both manifest and euident in themselues, as also to the ap∣prehension of the people. Hence note, that Doctr. In the confirmation of one and the same truth, there may bee testimonies, some greater some lesser then o∣ther. Because a testimonie hath his credit from the dignity and credit of the witnes-bearer. 2. The witnes it selfe is taken from his workes. Christs workes were diuine workes: Therefore they witnes that he was God. The Doctrine then in generall of this verse is this: Christs workes were a sure euidence of his diuine power, and that hee was God: as Ioh. 10.25. and 15.24. Ioh. 3.2. and 1.48.49. and 4.19. For man cannot doe the workes of God. Obiect. But did not the Prophets doe miracles, and diuine workes, and also the Apostles? Ans. Yea. But the difference betweene their works and the workes of Christ, standeth in foure points, first in the workes themselues. Christ made choice of such workes, as for the kind, neuer any did before as to raise one dead foure dayes and stin∣king. To giue sight to the blind: Ioh. 9.32. and the like. Second∣ly for the number neuer any did so many as Christ did: for he healed all that were brought, &c. Thirdly, Christ still as he cu∣red the body, so he cured the soule. 2. The Prophets and Apostles were restrained, and could not doe miracles when they pleased, but when God permitted
them. As appeareth in the example of Elisha: 2. King. 4.27. But Christ did worke how and when it pleased him. 3. The workes which the Prophets and Apostles did, they did neither by their owne power and authority, nor in their owne name: Act. 3.12. But Christ did his works both by the one, and in the other. 4. The miracles which the Prophets and Apostles did, were to shew, that they were sent of God and were his seruants and messengers. But there was a higher scope of Christs miracles, that they aimed at, namely to shew that he was the Sonne of God. We see then how strong an argument this is, and how well this witnesse of his workes is brought for confirmation of his Godhead. Vse is, first, that we reade not the miracles of Christ, as mat∣ters only of History, but to take them as props for the streng∣thening of our faith in Christ, whom they shew to be God, and so an al-sufficient mediator. 2. To applie this to our adoption) that we shew our selues to be the Sonnes of God, by being partaker of the diuine na∣ture, and doing the workes of God. More Particularly we are to consider 1. A description of these workes. 2. A declaration of the witnes which they beare. They are described in two clauses: 1. [Which the Father hath giuen me to finish.] Which shew∣eth, first, the ground. Secondly, the extent of these workes. 1. The ground of them is, because they were such workes, as the Father had giuen him in charge to doe: which shewes, that what Christ did, he did by authority & commission from his Father: a Doctrine heretofore noted, and it is a notable ground for the strengthening of our Faith, because God no doubt will accept of those things that Christ did for vs, they being done by his authority. And secondly, it is for our imita∣tion, that wee haue the warrant of God for the things wee doe. Now as this is a ground, so it is an end why Christ doh
these workes; as Luk. 2.49. Ioh. 6.38. and before, vers. 30. of this Chapter: Ioh. 4.34. 2. The extent is, that Christ was not onely to begin these workes, but to goe thorow with them, and finish them. Hence learne, Doct. That the worke that God hath giuen vs, is not done, till it be finished. This Christ knew, and so he fully finished the worke his Father gaue him: as Ioh. 4.34. & 17.4. & 19.30. Vse. 1. For reproofe of the opinion of the Papists, that Christ did not perfectly finish his worke, but left some things for the Saints to adde thereunto; out of Col. 1.24. 2. We must obserue, that in the worke of God, we adde vnto diligence and carefulnesse, constancy and continuance. The second clause is [which I doe.] , that [I] is ad∣ded mphatically, from whence the Doctrine is, that Doct. What Christ did, he did by his owne power. This did the people obserue in all his Miracles, how he by his owne authoritie, and in his owne Name, did cast out Diuels, forgiue sinnes, teach the people, &c. Doct. Whence we learne, that Christ is to bee acknowled∣ged, adored, worshipped, beleeued, and trusted in, as one that is absolute of himselfe to doe what he will. And thus are not Saints to be trusted vnto, who are only the instruments of God. 2. The Witnes which these workes doe beare, is expressed in these words, [That the Father sent me.] Now where Christ vrgeth this sending, as a proofe of his equality with the Father, we must vnderstand it of such a sending, as when an Equall is snt, and not an Inferior; of the sending of a Sonne, not of a Seruant or Messenger. This Phrase of being sent, is applied to Christ in three re∣spects: 1. In regard of distinction of Persons, of the Father and the Sonne. 2. In regard of Christs Incarnation, who being in Heauen in the bosome of his Father, was sent to take flesh vpon him here in earth. 3. In regard of his Office, as he is Mediatour betweene God and Man, and therevnto sent, and deputed by God.
This shewes, that Christ did not vsurpe any authority and dignity of himselfe, but had this by communication from God the Father. A point before noted. Vers. 37. And the Father himselfe, which hath sent me, beareth witnes of me. Ye haue not heard his voice at any time, neither haue yee seene his shape. Vers. 38. And his word haue you not abiding in you: for whom he hath sent, him yea beleeue not. IN these words is layd downe the third testimonie, viz. the witnesse of God the Father. Wherein obserue: 1. How Christ doth plainly lay downe the testimonie. 2. How he reproues the Iewes vnbeleife. In the former, we are to note, 1. The Party that giues this testimonie; who is described by a twofold relation to him, to whom the witnes is giuen. 1. Of Father. [The Father himselfe:] shewing that this was the first person in Trinity. 2. Of sending. Noting that Christ was come from the Fa∣ther. So that this testimony of the Father is, That Christ is his Sonne. 2. The witnesse it selfe [beareth witnesse of me.] But when, and how was this testimonie giuen? Answ. God the Father giueth testimonie to his Sonne foure waies. 1. by his Prophets; Heb. 1.1. Act. 10.43. and 3.18. 2. By inward reuelation and inspiration, when God by his Spirit assureth mens hearts, that Christ Iesus is his Sonne; as he did to Peter: Mat. 16.17. 3. By the testimonie of Christ himselfe; Ioh. 3.33. for in that Christ giueth testimonie of himselfe, God the Father also doth it. 4. In his owne person by his voice. First at his baptisme; Mat. 3.17. [and at two other times, at his transfiguration: Mat. 17.5. and Ioh. 12.28.] And this is here principally meant:
for the first, that is, the testimony of the Prophets, comes next to be handled; the second is secret: now Christ would bring such a testimony, as all might take notice of. And for the third that i the point in question to be proued. Here, then we are diligently to weigh the greatnes of this testimonie and in it to note the great goodnes of God, and the care that he hath of vs. For this being the ground of all the Articles of our Religion, viz. that Christ is the Son of God, without which there can be no comfort in beleeuing of any. God was not contented to haue declared this by his Prophets, yea or by Christ himselfe; but himselfe from Heauen in his owne person doth assure vs of the truth of this so necessary an Article of Faith, that Christ Iesus is his owne Sonne, in whom he is well pleased with vs. And therefore of all testimonies of Scripture this among the rest, and aboue all the rest is to be re∣garded as a most sure and strong prop of our Faith. And this vse Peter teacheth vs to make: when from hence hee bringeth a strong argument to confirme the truth of the Gospell. 2. Pet 1.16, 17, 18. The vse is the same that is made, Mat. 17.5. Deut. 18.15. Act. 7.37. that therefore we do heare Christ, by attendi vn∣to his Word, which he hath caused to be written for the ua∣tion of his Church. So much to the testimonie. 2. In his repoofe note, first, The fault for which he reproues them. The ground of this fault. 1. The fault is noted in these words [yee haue not heard his voice at any time neither haue yee seene his shape.] Which words may be taken, first, litterally: That they neuer heard the voice of the first person speaking by himselfe at any time, that is, at a∣ny other time, except then, and vpon that occasion when hee gaue testimonie to his Sonne. Neither yet did, or can any man behold God with carnall eyes. So that this, first, amplifies the greatnesse of this testimony, that it is a matter of great weight, sith neuer before, nor since, the like testimony hath been giuen. Secondly, it shewes what a great benefit it was, that Christ was incarnate, who is the character and ingraued forme of the Father, in whom we may see and behold him: Heb. 1.3.
2. Metaphorically, and to this sense I rather agree: and then it is a prouerbiall kind of speech taken from men, where∣by Christ doth taxe their ignorance and vnacquaintance with God. For men are knowne two wayes, by their speech, and by their shape. Now they had neither heard the voice, nor seene the shape of God, and so were without all knowledge and acquaintance with him, and so in this respect like Heathen men. All the meanes that God affoorded for the declaration of his presence among them, his voyce that hee caused to bee sounded forth by the ministery of his Prophets, by Christ, yea by himselfe extraordinarily, they regarded not, but still remai∣ned ignorant. Like vnto these Iewes, are many among vs; that notwithstanding the preaching of the Word, remaine still in their ignorance, &c. The ground of this ignorance is set downe in these words, [and his Word haue you not abiding in you.] This Christ saith to preuent an obiection which they might make, viz. That they had the Law, the Sacrifices, the Word preached in their Synagogues, &c. and therefore were not so ignorant as he bla∣med them. Wherefore Christ taxeth in them two things, that the Word was indeed preached among them, and they heard, the sound of it with their eares, but it went not vnto their hearts. Se∣condly, that if at any time it peirced to the heart, yet it did not there abide. Doct. It is not sufficient to haue the Word amongst vs, to heare it, to talke of it, and the like, vnlesse it be in our hearts, and abide there, all is worth nothing. Though Moses were read euery day in the Synagogue, it profited the Iewes nothing, be∣cause they vnderstood it not; they were not affected with it, vnlesse for a short time, they made it no rule of their life to walke by. See Luk. 11.28. Col. 3.16. This shews we haue an honest and good heart, if the Word abides with vs, and we practise it; and on the contrary side, an euill corrupt heart. Euen as it fares with a man of a good, or ill-affected stomack, that either retaines the meate, and di∣gests it, or vomits it vp againe, or turnes it into humours.
Now that the VVord may abide with vs, obserue these rules drawne out of the Parable, Luk. 8. 1. That wee vse the meanes to vnderstand, and come to knowledge of the VVord. This was the fault of the first ground, the seed therein had no entrance at all. 2. That we loue and delight in the VVord, that we make it our ioy, that we relish and affect it: for hauing knowledge, and feeling the sweetnesse of it, we shall be the more desirous of it, without wearisomnesse, without loathing. From the want of this, it is, that many men of great learning are yet car∣ried away, because their knowledge was onely in the braine, and not rooted in the heart. Like the second ground. 3. That we suffer the VVord to rule vs wholy, and not en∣tertaine our lusts, pleasures, and worldly care together with it: for these will sucke out the life of the VVord: so that it will not abide with vs long; as in the third sort of ground. 4. That we haue a care to make it a rule vnto vs, to square our life according to it, then will it abide with vs: for a good conscience is the ship wherein Faith is preserued from suffering wracke: 1. Tim. 1.19. and we see, that error in iudgement, and corruption in manners doe mutually infect one another. The confirmation of this ground is expressed in these words [for whom he hath sent, him yee beleeue not. The VVord of God did not abide in them; and why? be∣cause they did not beleeue in Christ the Sonne of God, whom he had sent. The truth of this reason appeares in two respects; 1. Because Christ, who was sent of God, was the summe and substance of the VVord of God, both of the Law, and of the Prophets; Heb. 8.1. Act. 10.43. whom principally it ai∣med to declare. Now then how is it possible that they could haue the VVord abiding in them, who did not entertaine and beleeue in Christ when he was come. 2. Because they receiued not Christ, who spake the words of God. Now if they had the Word of God abiding in them, they would haue beleeued in him, who had brought this Word vnto them. Doct. The Word abides in none that beleeue not Christ
Iesus. Which first, is against all such as know not Christ, or de∣ny him, or rely not vpon him. Secondly, it teacheth vs to lay sure hold on Christ. Thirdly, it shewes that they that despise the Word, and the Minister thereof, haue it not abiding in them. Vers. 39. Search the Scriptures: for in them yee thinke to haue eternall life, and they are they which testifie of me. THese words containes the fourth and last testimony, which Christ alleadgeth for confirmation of his diuine power and authority. Now it seemeth that Christ obserueth an order in setting downe these testimonies; first, to lay downe the lesse, and then the greater. So that indeed this testimony of the Scripture is the greatest of all the rest. Not as was be∣fore noted, that there is any difference in regard of the truth of them; but in regard of the euidence and clearenesse thereof. This the Apostle Peter shewes, 2. Pet. 1.19. where hauing al∣leadged the former testimonie of the voice of God the Father, vers. 17.18. and comming to speake of the testimony of the Scriptures, he saith [we haue a more sure word of the Prophets.] It is greater then in these respects: first, in regard of the long continuance of this witnesse, that it hath been a testimony gi∣uen of Christ from before so many ages, and so receiued by the Fathers, and approoued from time to time, as a certaine ground of Faith. 2. The very writing and recording doth adde weight vnto it, seeing that the Scriptures also are the voice of God, as wel as that which we haue before spoken of. 3. Because this testimony doth more distinctly and fully set forth Christ vnto vs, then any of the former doe; describing him in his nature, actions, offices, death and suffering the bene∣fit of it, and the meanes whereby wee come to be partakers of it. 4. This very Oracle, and also the workes of Christ, are now written and recorded, and so come vnto vs vnder the nature of
the testimonie of the Scriptur. First, then oberue the generall scope and drift of Christ in this place, which is, to make the Scripture the Iudge, whether himselfe had done and spoken well or no; vnto it therefore he referres his aduersaries, resting himselfe vpon the iudgement thereof. Hence ariseth this Doctrine, that Doct. The highest and chiefest Iudge of the mysteries of Godlinesse, matters of Faith nd Religion, is the holy Scrip∣ture: a point cleare by many places of Scripture, as Esay 8.20. Luk. 16.29, &c. 2. Tim. 3.16. and so in many places it is called a Law, Statute, Ordinance, and Iudgement; because it doth declare the Will and Councell of God, which he hath pro∣nounced and deceed. Thus Christ hath alwayes recourse vnto the Scripture, determining all questions by them; as Matth. 12.3, 5. & 22.29. and the Apostles, as Peter, Act. 2. Apollos, Act. 18. last. Reas. 1. The Scipture is the very Word and Voice of God: Now who shall be Iudge of the great mysteries of God, but God himselfe. 2. Because the Scripture is a true and perfect Rule that cannot erre, Psal. 19. It is a sufficient Iudge to decide all con∣trouersies whatsoeuer: and lastly, it is an vnpartall Iudge. Obiect. 1. Against this authority of the Scriptures, the Pa∣pists doe make many obiections, whereof wee will speake of two onely. The Scripture, say thy, is a mute Iudge, and can∣not declare which is truth. Answ. Though the Scripture cannot speake with the voice of a man, yet it doth speake as a Law doth speake, declaring what is the will and counsell of God. And cannot wee vnder∣stand the minde of a man as wel by his writing, as by hearing of him speake; and the rather, seeing we may the more pon∣der euery word. And yet the Scripture doth giue a mouth vn∣to the Scripture, if wee marke it wll; as Matth. 22.31. [what is spoken vnto you of God] how spake God vnto you, but by the Scriptures; Ioh. 7.42. [saith not, &c.] Ioh. 19.24. [which saith;] and especially that, Heb. 12.5. [which speaketh, &c.]
Because the Word written doth declare vnto vs the will of God as plainely, and as distinctly, as if God with audible voice did speake vnto vs. Yea, if he should speake, he would speake no otherwise, then that which is in the Scriptures. And so ae they said to speake vnto vs. Obiect. 2. Heretikes, say they, make the Scripture their Iudge, and how then can it be a Iudge of truth? Answ. This obiection, though commonly alleagd by hem, to weaken the authority of the Scripture; yet if we well consider it, it doth very strongly prooue the same. A conten∣tious man when he will wrong his neighbour in any matter, he will pleade the Law for his right vnto his neighbors goods, as knowing, that without the sentence of the Law hee cannot enioy them. Now this shewes, that therefore the Law is the onely Iudge that must decide this matter. So in that Heretikes themselues for to vphold their doctrine, doe relye vpon the Scriptures, as without which they must needs faile in their cause, it is a very strong proofe, that therefore the Scripture ought to be the onely Iudge to determine of all matters of con∣trouersie. Againe, though Scripture haue been alleaged by Heretikes, yet did euer Scripture determine with, and for an Heretike? Vse 1. To reprooue those vaine, opprobrious, and blsphe∣mous titles, that Papists giue vnto the Scripture of a leaden Rule, &c. Preferring the determination of Popes and Coun∣cels before the Scripture: which is to preferre man before od. 2. It teacheth vs in all doubts and matters of controuer∣sie touching Faith, Religion, and Manners, to resort vnto the Word and hereon to haue our iudgement grounded and set∣led. Not taking any thing either for article of Faith, or rule of life that is not warranted by it. So much of the generall. The words doe naturally, diuide themselues into two parts: 1. A Precept. 2. Reasons to confirme it. The Precept is in these words [Search the Scriptures.] From
whence the Doctrine arising is this, Doct. The Scriptures doe require study and diligence, for the finding out of the meaning of them, and searching out the treasures hid in them. ] Scrutamini: Though in the Originall and Latine transltion, the word be ambiguous, and may be taken in the Indicatiue moode, and the Imperatiue also; yet I rather take it i the Imperatiue, as most translations doe, for a precept and duty, then in the Indicatiue, for a commendation of them; no∣ting what they did: as if he had sayd [ye search the Scripture,] &c. yet both waies the Doctrine is sound. Search.] It is a Metaphor taken from such as search for gold and siluer Ore in the earth; who will not cast it away by whole shouell fuls, but will search, and sift, and breake euery clod to find out the gold. To this diligence in searching the Scripture, doth the Apostle exhort Timothy, 1. Tim. 4.13. and Salomon vseth the same Metaphor; Pro. 2.4. Act. 17.11. the same word. This diligence is often vrged in the old Testament by the phrase of meditating in the Word; as Iosh. 1.8. Ps. 1.2. & passim alibi. The Reasons to moue vs hereunto, besides those here men∣tioned in the text, of which wee shall speake anon, are two: 1. The little hope of getting any good by the Scriptures, without searching into them. 2. The assured hope to get much good by searching. For the former, we must know, that God is hid in the Scripture, as gold is in the earth; and so is not found out at the first sight, but after a diligent search. Cursory reading may giue knowledge of the story, and of such things as are at the first sight easie and plaine: but yet it yeeldeth little, or no profit. For these Iewes, who had the Word amongst them, heard it, and read it in their Synagogue euery Sabbah, made no profit by it, they found not the treasure hid in them; Christ Iesus, him they knew not, and therefore Christ bids yet search. Obiect. But how can this stand with this perspicuity, and plainnesse that we affirm to be in the Scripture against the Pa∣pists.
Answ. We must well vnderstand, how the Scriptures ar plaine, and how obscure. First, to carnal men they are obscure, who discerne not spirituall things: but not so to thse that are inlightened by the Spirit of God. 2. Neither is this obscurity in the Scriptures themselues, but because the god of this world hath blinded their eyes, that they cannot see. 3. In the maine grounds of saluation it is cleare and plaine: yea, in all, to those that are carefull and diligent, it is easie. For so the promise is, Prou. 2.3.4. and 14 but vnto the carelesse no∣thing is plaine. The reasons why God hath thus hidden his wisedome in his Word, may be these. First, to discouer vnto vs our ignorance, that when we see how many great mysteries wee are ignorant of, we may be humbled. Secondly, That he might make a dif∣ference betweene those that seeke him in truth, and those that contemne him, who like Hogs and Dogs regard not Pearles. Wherefore he hath also hidden them from such. Thirdly, that God might maintaine his ordinances and we might threin be helpfull one to another, by preaching, by instructing, &c. Fourthly, to make vs the more earnestly desire and long after the knowledge of his Word. Fiftly and lastly, to bring vs to the performance of this duty here prescribed, to search, and search againe, that the more we search, the more we may finde. 2. Now for our encouragement, consider the second reason, viz. that our labour shall not be lost, but much rich treasure is certainly to be found by searching. Therefore is the Law sayd to be better then gold, then much fine gold of Ophir. So excel∣lent mysteries are therein contained, as neuer entred in mans heart; yea, the Angels desire to looke into them: 1. Pet. 1.12. Such mysteries as concernes not our worldly wealth, but the saluation of our souls. In regrd of which, the mysteries of all other bookes are straw and stubble, drosse and dung. And in∣deed what learning haue other bookes, that is not in the Scrip∣tures. For dost thou delight in Truth? This Word is the Wod of Truth both for the Author, for the matter, and for the effect; giuing vs assurance, that it is the truth. Wouldest thou
haue deepenesse and profound knowledge? Wheres greater profoundnesse then in the Scripture? Wouldest thou bee an Antiquary? Here is a story from the beginning of the World. Delightest thou in the Law? Here is the ground of all lawes, whence they spring & issue. Delightst thou in Histories? Heere are all sorts admirable for pleasure and profit. Or in Chrono∣logie? No where is the like for truth, or for length of continu∣ance, euen for 4000. yeares in seueral persons, lineally descended from Adam to Christ. Now the Word (saith S. Paul to Timothy, 2. Tim. 3.16.) is profitable first, to teach; secondly, to conuince; thirdly, to correct, and to instruct. According to these properties, let vs make seuerall vses. Ʋse. 1. This then teacheth vs; first, that therefore we ought to know the ground of those things that we beleeue: we must search the Scriptures. 2. That it is necessary that the Scriptures be translated, that all may search. 3. That the Scriptures are plaine, or may be vnderstood by those that will search: else why should we search? 4. That the Scriptures are a sufficient rule and direction; and therfore Christ bids them search in the Scriptures and no where else. 2. This refutes the errors of the Papist, who haue many po∣sitions cleane contrary vnto this Doctrine: as, 1. That people are to be kept in Ignorance. 2. That the Scriptures must bee read in an vnknowne tongue. 3. That Traditions, Fathers, and Councels, must bee ioyned with the Scriptures. 3. For Correction. It serues to reproue diuers sorts of men. Some care not to reade the Scriptures, but of all bookes make lest account of it: Chronicles, Histories, Playbookes are often read; the Scriptures seldome. Some will not suffer a Bible to be in their houses, and count it a reproach to carry a Bible to Church. Some will reade at Church, and turne to places as they are quoted, but neuer at home, their businesse suffers them
not: who yet are better then many, that will bring other bookes to Church, and while the Minister is preaching, reade those. Some content themselues to haue read ouer a number of Chapters at a time, without any further search. Some read and labour to search out the true meaning of places, but all is, that they may know the occurrences of things, bee able to re∣concile places, and maintaine them against the Aduersarie, who yet faile in this duty, in that they are not cast into the mould of the Scripture, and by their search doe not finde out the hidden Pearle, Christ Iesus. 4. For Instruction: it shewes, that this is a duty belonging to all to performe, and for our Direction in searching of the Scriptures, it is necessarie. 1. That we haue the Scriptures in our houses, in our closets; that wee reade them diligently and frequently, with study and obseruation; that we attend to reading, hauing there∣unto appointed times at rising, at going to bed, that besides publike reading in the Familie, we vse priuate reading by our selues. Not to tie our selues to reade ouer three chapters a day, so to reade the whole Bible in a yeere; but that we mark what bookes are easie, what more difficult, what best retained in me∣mory, what more hardly; and according to make choice of places, and to reade those that are most needefull and profita∣ble for vs: and such bookes as are hardest, as the Epistles of Paul and the Poeticall bookes, Iob, Psalmes, &c. to read them often. 2. That we doe not reade, without calling vpon the Name of God for direction, to open our eies that we may vnderstand his will. 3. That wee reade with a minde to subiect our seluess to it. 4. That in reading, we gather no collections contrary to the Analogy of faith contained in the Creed, Commandements and Lords Prayer. 5. That in those things wee vnderstand not, wee seeke for such helpe of others as we may for the finding ou of the truth, &c.
The reasons brought to cōfirme this precept are two; the first is taken from that opinion which they had of the Scripture to whom Christ directs this exhortation. [For in them ye thinke, &c.] Herein consider, first, The Substance of the reason. Which is, that the Iewes thought in the Scripture to haue eternall life. Which is not layd downe as a false opinion but as a true and orthodoxall ground, the more also to checke them, who al∣though they had so good an opiion of the Scriptures yet did not search them. Doct. The Scriptures were written for our saluation that we might haue eternall life. Ioh. last. and last vers. For they first, declare in generall the good will of God to saue man, secondly, they shew the means whereby wee are saued. Thirdly, they wok Faith, wherby we come to be partakers of this meanes. From the Inference of this reason note first, That all that haue the Scriptures in high account doe not make true profit and benefit by them: as the Iewes here. And so did they high∣ly esteme of Moses, and yet beleeued him not. Secondly, that the good opinion that we haue of the Scriptures, ought to stire vs vp to search them; else it will be a witnesse against vs. 2. The second point to be noted, is the manner of laying it downe [yee thinke:] not haue, for they missed of it. Doct· Many looke for life and saluation, that in the euent nd issue are deceiued: Rom. 11.7. thus doe all Heretikes, Ido∣lters, &c. The reason is, because they mistake the ground; they build o a wrong foundation; they cast anchor on quicksands, that n the end swallowes them vp. Vse. Note this against such, as thinke they may bee saued in any religon, so they haue a good conceit: 1. Thes. 5.20. 2. To discouer the value hope of many that professe them∣slues Chrstians, who whatsoeuer they doe, yet will say, they eane well, and haue a good intent. The second Reason is in these words. [They are they which stfe of me.] Because the Scriptues giue witnes vnto Christ: whih in that it is added a a reason, and motiue to search  Scripturs it giues vs to vnderstand, first, That
Doct. Christ, Iesus is the maine and chiefe Treasure contai∣ned in them. Runne we through the whole Scripture, we shall finde this true, how it alwayes points at him: Luk. 1.70. Luk. 24.27. Act. 10.43. For Christ is the onely Author and meanes, whereby we at∣taine vnto life; therefore the Scripture must needs giue it vn∣to Christ, else how could life be had in the Scriptures. Vse, it shewes whither we must goe to find Christ, not to the writing of men, but to the Scriptures. Further, from the time wherein Christ did vtter this, viz. be∣fore any part of the new Testament was written, and therefore hee must needs meane the old: we may note, that Doct. Christ made knowne to the ancient Fathers before his incarnation. Which may serue to refute the opinions of those, that thinke the ancient Iewes were moued only with temporall promises and iudgement, and not with spirituall. But it was Abrahams Faith in Christ, not his hope of the Land of Canaan, that was imputed to him for righteousnesse. How can Moses be said to haue suffered the rebuke of Christ, Heb. 11.26. if he had not beleeued in him. Vers 40. But yee will not come to me that yee might haue life. NOw followes the reproofe of these Iewes. which is in ge∣nerall for their incredulity, in that they did not beleeue in him, whom the Scriptures declared. This their incredulity is generally laid downe, vers. 38. aggrauated, first, by the causes thereof: first, ignorance, vers. 37.38. Secondly, wilfulnes in this verse. Thirdly, want of loue, vers. 42. Fourthly, ambition, v 44. Secondly, by the Issue, viz. condemnation, vers 45. &c. In this verse we haue to note, first a declaration of the sinne it selfe, namely, obstinacy [yee will not come to me.] Secondly, an aggrauation of it, by the mischiefe following vpon it, namely losse of life [that yee might haue life.] Note here first the inference of this vpon the former. Wee haue heard that they thought well of the Scriptures, and loo∣ked
in them to haue eternall life, yet we see they come not v∣to Christ, in and by whom they might haue life. What is the reason of this? Surely their opinion was on a false ground, they looked for life by other meanes, then by Christ, as by their owne righteousnesse, &c. Hence note, Doct. They that are perswaded to attaine life by false meanes, will neuer be brought to seeke after the right meanes. Thus the Iewes, Esay 30. and 31. trusting to Egypt, withdrew themselues from the Lord, the onely meanes of their safety. Thus did the Scribes and Pharises, Luk. 7.30. despise the coun∣cell of God, whereas Publicans, Souldiers, Harlots, &c. came vnto Christ. Why? Because these had no other ground to trust vnto, whereby they might attaine to life. But the Phari∣ses were full of many false perswasions of attaining to it by o∣ther meanes: Mat. 21.30. Luk. 1.33. Vse is to teach vs to take heed that our soules be not posses∣sed with false perswasions. The obstinacy and wilfulnesse of the Iewes appeares herein, that neither by the preaching of Iohn, nor by the witnesse of God the Father giuen to Christ at his Baptisme, nor yet by the testimony of the Scripture, they would be mooued to beleeue in Christ. Doct. They that haue the Word preached, and yet beleeue not in Christ, are guilty of the sinne of obstinacy. They are scor∣ners, Prou. 1.22. Reade Ezek. 2. and 3. Matth. 23.37. Act. 2.27. For if a man haue eyes, and yet see not the Sunne when it shineth, shall we not thinke that he winketh of purpose. Obiect. But the case is not so in spirituall things; Faith is not in our power; wee haue not these spirituall eyes to behold Christ of our owne. How then can it bee obstinacy, if we doe not beleeue. Answ. 1. I answer, that there is no man that liues where the Gospell is preached, and yet beleeues not, but he doth faile in doing of some things that hee might doe. So that though sa∣uing Faith be not in his power, yet doth he wilfully neglect to doe many things which are in his power, whereby he might
attaine vnto Faith: as neglect of comming to the Church, of attention to the Word, of Prayer, &c. 2. Howsoeuer we haue not free will to beleeue, yet can we resist, and gainesay the truth, and distrust God from a freenesse of will, arising from the peruersenesse of our corrupt nature. So that both for wilfull neglect, and also repugnancy, and resisting of the Word, shall such be condemned as obstinate. Vse To condemne those that liue vnder the Gospell, and yet are not wrought vpon by the Gospell, whose case is worse then that of Sauages and Infidels. From the aggrauation of this fault we may learne, that Doct. 1. They that are obstinately set against Christ and is Gospell, by no promise, no reward can be moued to relent and yeeld vnto Christ, no, not for life it selfe. Such obstinacy was in Lots sonnes in law, Gen. 19.15. in the Egyptians, Exod. 9.21. Psal. 58.4, 5. Act. 13.45. For obstinacy doth so fill, and possesse the heart, that neither threats, nor promises can take any place. Vers. 41. I receiue not the praise of men. THis verse is inserted in policy to preuent an obiection that the Iewes might make. For whereas he had reproued them for not comming vnto him, they might thinke thereupon, and say; O surely this man would haue many followers, he would that men should praise and applaud him. Wherefore Christ tels them, that he seekes not, he hunts not after the praise of men; it is their saluation that he aimes at. Doct. Christ in those things that he did, did not seeke for his owne honour, reputation and glory, but to bring saluation vn∣to others: and so many times when he had done a great work, he withdrew himselfe, to take away all occasion that people should not talke of him; yea, hee forbad them to speake of him. For first, he needed not this popular applause and commen∣dation, being the Sonne of God. Secondly, his works did com∣mend
themselues. Thirdly, yea, praise followed him, where he fled from it. Fourthly, Christ did now abase himselfe, and would now shew himselfe a patterne of humility for our imi∣tation; and therefore he did not seeke to extoll himselfe, Ioh. 13.15. Mat. 20.27, 28. Vse. To set Christ before vs, and to follow him; looking to our duty to doe, because God hath laid it vpon vs, not because of applause and commendation. And this, as it is to bee done of all, so especially of Ministers that stand in Christs stead, who looke that they draw people vnto them for their good, and not for their owne praise: and so to preach, as not to preach them∣selues, but for the edification of the people. Vers. 42. But I know you, that yee haue not the loue of God in you. In this verse is expressed the second fault, for which hee re∣prooueth them, viz. their want of loue; which is the second cause of their incredulity. Here note, first, the ground of his re∣proofe. Secondly, the thing reprooued. 1. The ground, [I know you.] Whatsoeuer you pretend, I know that it is not for Gods honour and glory that you doe this &c. Doct. Christ knoweth mans heart and disposition, bee hee good, Ioh. 1.47. or bad, Ioh. 2.25. Vse, for terror, for Hypocrites and dissemblers. 2. For incouragement to those that are vpright and true-hearted. Doct. 2. Here wee may note, how Christ doth repooue hem vpon sure ground and euidence. He neuer rashly or vn∣ustly did reprooue any; and so when they were reprooued, their mouth was alwaies stopped, they had nothing to reply. Vse, For our imitation to goe vpon sure grounds, not vpon euill surmises and suspitions? 2. The fault for which they are reprooued, is want of the loue of God. A strange thing, if we consider what great shewes
these Iewes made of the loue of God. Doct. Many who seeme to stand for Gods glory, and fo his ordinances, and make great pretences of zeale to him; yet if their hearts be knowne, they will be found not to haue one true sparke of loue in them; as in Corah and his company: Numb. 16. in all Heretikes, Papists and Idolaters. It is not for loue, but for by-respects, some through enuy, some through ambition, some through couetousnesse, &c. Wherefore we are to examine our selues, with what minde we doe those things which we doe, whether out of a pure loue of God, or no. This we shall know, by considering the nature and properties of this loue. 1. Loue of God is a holy spirituall affection, whereby our hearts are so kit vnto him, that we do make him our summum bonum, chiefest good, whereon we doe rest. And it manifests it selfe by these two properties: first, a care to please him, and to continue in his fauour; that is, when we delight in his Word, and obey his will and commandements. For in his Word is declared what things are pleasing vnto him. That this is a pro∣perty of this true loue appeares, Ioh. 14.23, 24. 1. Ioh. 2.5. 2. Ioh. vers. 6. Whence followes another branch of this, name∣ly, a feare to offend him, when wee are carefull to auoide all things that doe displease him: Psal. 97.10. 2. By a loue of what and whom hee loueth: when for his sake we loue man, whom God hath made the chiefest obiect of his loue: Ioh. 3.16. And as man in generall, so especially those on whom God hath placed his speciall loue, in regenera∣ting, and begetting them againe to himselfe: 1. Ioh. 5.1. Psal. 16.3. y these properties we are to examine our selues: and here∣by it appeareth, that the Iewes had not the loue of God in them; for they delighted not in his Word, Ioh. 8.47. They kept not his Commandements, Matth. 15.8, 9. Neither loue they those whom God loued; for Christ they hated, although they knew by the testimony of Iohn Baptist, and the witnesse of God himselfe, that he was the beloued of God: so did they likewise the Prophets, Apostles, and holy men: 1. Thes. 2.15.
Vers. 43. I am come in my Fathers Name, and yee receiue me not; if another shall come in his owne Name, him will yee re∣ceiue. IN these words Christ laies downe a confirmation of the for∣mer point, namely, that these Iewes had no loue of God in them; his proofe is drawne from their affection and disposition towards himselfe, that came in the Name of God, and towards others that came not in the Name of God. Now that the strength of this proofe may appeare, obserue the meaning of the words. I am come] This is spoken of that voluntary subiection whereunto Christ did abase himselfe, to become our Mediator, our Priest, and our Prophet, to reueale his Fathers will vnto vs. In my Fathers Name] This implies three things: first, that he came with authority and commission from his Father. Se∣condly, that he came to bring a Message from his Father, to de∣clare his will. Thirdly, that he came to set forth, not his owne, but his Fathers honour and glory. Yee receiue me not,] Yee reiect my doctrine, and hate my person. If another come in his owne name,] Of his owne head, decla∣ring his owne conceites, or doctrines receiued from other men, seeking his owne praise and honour. Him yee receiue.] Such yee honour, loue, follow, and em∣bac. The Argument then is thus: They that loue God, loue those that come in Gods Name, and reiect the other that come in their owne name: But yet doe cleane contrary: Therefore yee haue not the loue of God in you. Obserue here then, first, a description of those who are the obiect, whereby our loue to God may be discerned, namely, of Ministers, who are either sent of God, or come in their owne names; that is, are either faithfull Ministers, whereof Christ
doth here set forth himselfe as a patterne. [I am come, &c.] (But of this diuers times before) or false teachers and vnfaithfull, here set downe by the example of the Pharises, of whom it is plaine, that they were not sent of God, who preached their owne Traditions, and sought onely their owne glory. Hence we learne, Doct. That it is a certaine note of a true Minister, to come in Gods Name, and of a false Minister to come in his owne name: the one hath an eye vnto God, and runnes not before he be sent; and being sent, obserues what his will is, and accor∣ding to it, doth all things for his glory: the other hath an eye onely to man, to please him, to seeke honour and preferment, &c. This difference wee see plainely betweene Michah the Prophet of the Lord, and Chenaanah, and the rest of the false Prophets: 1. King. 22.11, 12, 14. betweene Ieremiah: Ier. 42. who perswaded the people to obey the King of Babel: and Hananiah: Ier. 28.10, 11. See Ier. 23.16, 17. Vse. This is a speciall meanes to try the spirits, 1. Ioh. 4.1. whether they be of God, or no, if they seeke themselues, or the Lord. 2. It shewes that many among vs, although they haue an outward Calling, yet comes not in Gods Name, in that they aime not at the edifying of the Church by preaching, but their owne maintenance, ease and honour; or if they preach, they preach themselues to shew learning, not for instruction of the people. Secondly, obserue in this verse the peoples carriage and af∣fection towards the Ministers, either receiuing, or reiecting of them. Doct. 1. They that receiue not such as come in the Name of God, it is plaine they haue no loue of God in them: for they that loue not him that is sent, loue not him that sendeth: 1. Ioh. 5.1. Iob. 13.20. This appeareth by the different carriage of godly men, and of hypocrites from time to time towards the faithfull Ministers; as of Abab and good Iehoshaphat towards Micah: 1. King. 22.8. of the good Princes, and the hypocriti∣call
call Priests against Ieremiah: Ier. 26.11, 16. Note this, that we may examine our selues, with what mind wee haue entertained those faithfull Ministers, that God hath guen vnto vs in this land, &c. Doct. 2. They who receiue such as come in their owne name, loue not God: for there is a maine opposition betweene this, the seeking of mans selfe his honour and ease, and the seek∣ing of the Lord: Phil. 2.21. and therefore they that delight in such as seeke not the Lord, assuredly loue not God. For it is a property of true loue, to loue those whom God loueth, and hate those whom he reiecteth: Reuel. 26. Psal. 139.21, 22. Doct. 3. From the ioyning of these together, learne. That those who reiect true and faithfull Ministers of the Lord, are ready to embrace false teachers. Pharaoh hated Moses, but re∣ceiued Iannes and Iambres. Ahab hated Michaiah, but liked the false prophets. So the Iewes did flocke after Theudas and Iudas of Galilee, Act. 5.36, 37. yet they reiected Christ and his Apostles. The like they did in the last destruction of Ierusa∣lem, as Iosephus reports; and now doe they highly esteeme their Rabbins. Which commeth to passe, first, through the iust iudgement of God, who giueth them vp to the blindnesse of their heart to beleeue strong delusions: 2. Thes. 2.10, 11. Deu∣ter. 28. Secondly, through the corruption of nature, because we are naturally disposed vnto error, rather then vnto truth, into which also wee easily doe fall, if wee bee not restrained by the Spirit of God. Whence it is, that there neuer was any he∣retike, were his opinions neuer so grosse and damnable, but had many followers: 2. Pet. 2.1.2. Vse. This teacheth vs not to close our eyes against the truth, &c. Vers. 44. How can yee beleeue which receiue honour one of ano∣ther, and seeke not the honour that commeth of God alone? IN these words is laid downe a fourth fault of these obstinate Iewes, which is also another cause of their incredulitie. A
cause, thoug  down, yet indeed the greatest, being not a cause of the  beleeuing, but such a cause as implies an im∣possibility, that it was impossible for them to beleeue. And therefore he setteth it downe very emphatically by way of in∣terrogation [How can yee?] Quest. But how may it be imputed vnto them? Answ. First, generally, in regard of Nature, it is impossible for any man to beleeue, because first, by nature we relish not spirituall things, we see no fruit, or benefit by them, and so we regard them not. Secondly, by nature wee are not capable of them: 1. Cor. 2.14. 2. But in speciall, whereas Christ saith, How can yee beleeue; hee makes this their ambition to be a peculiar let and hinde∣rance to them. For whereas the doores of our hearts is natu∣rally shut vp against sauing faith, ambition is as a barre that keepes it fast from opening. The first thing then to be noted in these words, is the cause of thir vnbeliefe, viz. their ambition and desire of honour. Doct. Ambition is a maine impediment to sauing faith; Ioh. 12.43. and therefore their Faith mentioned, vers. 42. was only historicall; Ioh. 7.5. Christs kinsfolkes beleeued not in him, being loth to be ill thought of among the Pharises. For there is a direct opposition betweene Faith and ambiti∣on. Faith makes a man to be vile in his owne eyes, to see his owne wants, and so causeth him to goe out of himselfe, and seeke for helpe at God onely. But ambition makes a man to thinke highly of himselfe, to ouerweene himselfe, and be much conceited of his owne gifts, as the proud Pharises. So that he will attribute all to himselfe, and nothing to God, as did Herod, Act. 12.22, 23. Vse, To take heed of this roote of bitternesse; to striue a∣gainst ambition and vaine-glory, and for motiues to consider, 1. The doctrine before deliuered. 2. That ambition and desire of praise corrupts, putrifies and maketh odious to God, euery good thing that we take in hand, our prayers, fastings, almesdeeds, the very worship and seruice of God: Esay.
3. That in seeking praise of men, we loose the praise of God, who haue here our reward. 4. Gal. 1.10. 5. That hereby wee prouoke Gods wrath against vs: for he resisteth the proud; as did Herod, Act. 12.23. Quest. But is it simply vnlawfull to seeke the praise of men? Answ. We may not simply seeke it, to the end to be praysed of them: for men praise those things that are agreeable to their humour, and all doe not like godlinesse: but when it may tend to the honour of God, the confirmation of the good, and the re∣buke of those that oppose themselues, we may seeke it. As Paul would haue the Corinthians to thinke well of him, but it was for Christ for the professions sake, and that the aduersaries mouth might be stopped. 2. We may not seeke for it in the first place, but in his due or∣der, first seeking to be approued of God, then the approbation of men. First, doing those things, which in the vprightnesse and integrity of our conscience wee know to bee good, then if men doe like and allow of it, to receiue this as a blessing of God, if not to be contented, and not to hunt after their applause. And thus we are to labour to leaue a blessed name and memory be∣hind vs. Directions to auoide ambition: 1. In all things that wee thinke to be excellent and praise-worthy, consider whence we haue them; 1. Cor. 4.7. 2. To consider what a Sea of impiety and wickednesse is in vs, how many faults our hearts are priuy vnto; for this consi∣deration will pull downe all proud conceits. 3. To consider that of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 10. last verse, that so we be not puffed vp with any thing that may seeme glori∣ous to man, but may study to approue our selues vnto God in what he allowes. Further, note here the description of an ambitious humour, in these words (one of another) noting, that they did sooth, flat∣ter, and claw one another. Doct. Ambitious men are ready to puffe vp, and to flatter
one another· They will giue titles to others, that such titles might be giuen vnto themselues. They doe it not that others might be praised; for pride uer goes with enuy, and hatred of pride in others. But this is the way to get honour from o∣thers, by seeming to honour them. Vse. To take to our hearts in giuing of honour to other, it is not a thing vnlawfull, 1. Pet. 2.17. Rom. 12.10. so it bee not done for vndue and vniust respects, Iob 31. last verse. How inconuenient this ambition is, appeares by the conse∣quent [And seeke not the honour, &c.] Whence obserue, first, from the inference: Doct. They which seeke for popular applause and praise of men, are carelesse in seeking for the praise of God, as did the Pharises, whose whole practise was to bee seene of men, not to approue themselues to God: and so Christ compares them to whited tombes. For there is a contrariety beweene Gods will and mans will, and what pleaseth man pleaseth not him: and so if we set our selues to seeke the one, we cannot seeke the other. Ʋse. This is a further motiue to auoide ambition. Doct. 2. In that this is laid downe as a reproofe of them, that they did not seeke the praise of God, note, That true praise commeth from God: that praise which we may, and ought to seeke, and wherein we may rest, that is, that praise which is gi∣uen of God for those things which hee allowes, who knowes best what is good and praise-worthy. Obiect. But may wee not doe those things that are praised by the Saints? Answ. Yea: for they doe it being directed by the Word, and illightned by the Spirit, so that their praise is the very praise of God. But it must not bee vnderstood here of that commendations which is giuen by naturall men. Doct. 3. From hence we may also learne, that it is lawfull to seeke for praise; because it is a reward of piety and vertue: so that not the thing, but the manner of seeking it is condemned. Now in this case we must doe as men vse to doe, that seeke the praise of another, they will obserue to doe euery thing that
may be pleasing vnto him, &c. so if wee will seeke the honour of God, we must marke diligently what is his will, what is ac∣ceptable to him, and in those things we seeke to honor him by obeying his will, and then shall we be assured to receiue honour from him againe, 1. Sam. 2.30. Doct. 4. Alone] This implies, that we may not seeke praise of God and of men both together; labouring to approue our selues in some things to God, and in some things to man: for the iudgement of God and man are contrary, and we cannot satisfie both. And therefore wee must set our selues to reiect the one, and to seeke wholly the other. Vers. 45. Doe not thinke that I will accuse you to my Father: there is one that accuseth you, euen Moses in whom yee trust. AFter that our Sauiour had reprooued these Iewes for their vnbeliefe, and laid downe the causes thereof, viz. their ignorance, obstinacy, want of loue, and ambition, hee comes in the next place to the euent and issue, that will follow vpon this their incredulity; telling them (in these words) that condemnation remaines for them, they shall be accused, and so as that they shall be condemned. It is then a very seuere Com∣mination against them, wherein obserue; first, who shall ac∣cuse them; first, negatiuely, one is remooued [Think not that I.] Secondly, affirmatiuely, another is declared who it shall be, viz. Moses. Secondly, for what they shall be accused. First, in generall, from the manner of Christs proceeding, how that after hee had first soundly prooued the point in question, viz. that hee was God, and also reproued them for their incredulity; now seeing them still to remaine obstinate, and that nothing would worke vpon them, hee can no longer forbeare, but hee threatens this eauy iudgement vpon them. Hence we learne, Doct. That when men will not be moued with soundnesse of argument, or with reproofes, they must bee more roundly dealt withall, by denouncing the iudgements of God against
them. This was the practise of Christ against all obstinate men, as the Pharises, Mat. 23. Many woes denounced. Of Mo∣ses with Corah and his company. Of Iohn Baptist with the same Pharises, Mat. 3.7. Tit. 1.13. For when milder meane will not preuaile this may worke vpon them, Iud. vers. 23. Therefore as lenity and mildenesse doth become the seruant of God, so doth also seuerity beseeme him according as hee hath persons to deale withall. These cautions obserued, first, that he haue a calling to doe it: for then doth the threatnings terri∣fie: as if a child be threatned by his father, a subiect by hi Prince. Secondly, that the person be certainely found to bee obstinate. Thirdly, that it be done without passion, in a holy zeale with meekenesse. Fourthly, that it be done without re∣spect of persons to one, as well as another, sparing none. Fiftly, that it be for weighty causes, not for trifles, as Excommunicati∣on is now vsed, which makes it so lightly esteemed of. Sixtly, it must be vsed in the last place, after all other gentler meanes sought· In particular, first, consider the occasion of these words [Doe not thinke] implying that this obstinacy arose in them, because they cared not for Christ, nor estemed what he said, whom they accounted but as a meane man like vnto others; yea, worse then others, holding him for a blasphemer, prophaner of the Sabbath, &c. but as for them, they had Moses for their Patron, whom they trusted in. This their thought being not yet vt∣tered, Christ preuenteth, telling them, that euen Moses, whom they so highly magnified, should be their accuser. Of this dealing of Christ, we haue many examples, how hee doth preuent the thoughts of his hearers, so meeting with sinne at the beginning, before it breake out further. A patterne for Minisers to follow, teaching them to diue into mens hearts as farre as they can. Wich they may doe, 1. By dligent obseruing of teir owne disposition, their owne temptations, &c. and to thike the same may bee in o∣thers, &c. 2. By obseruing what hath been the quality and disposti∣on of his Hearers, what their conceits and opinions, ir excu∣ses
and pretences, &c. 3. By the Word which can search further then any other meanes. Thus shall they meet with sinne in time, and suffer no roote of bitternesse to sing vp. 2. The parties accusing. Not Cht, but Mses, [Thinke not that I.] But how may this be, doth Christ accuse ad ndemne vnbeleuers? Answ. This may be taken two wayes, either litterally, and that, first, in regard of that proper and maine end, for which Christ came into the world, viz. not to condemne and accuse sinners: for this the Law had done before, but to saue. Se∣condly, in regard of his high Office, to be a Iudge to heare and giue sentence, and not to be an Accuser. 2. Or figuratiuely; first, by way of concession; as if hee should say, Though I should hold my peace, and say nothing of you to my Father, yet should you not be acquited: for euen Moses, whom you hold for your Patron, shall accuse you. Se∣condly, by way of amplification, as if he had said, Thinke not that I alone will accuse you, there is another also that will ac∣cuse you, euen Moses. From the connection of these two, obserue, Doct. They that beleeue not Moses and his writings, shall haue Moses to be their accuser. So they that beleeue not the Prophets, haue the Prophets for their accusers. The same may be applied to the Apostles, and all faithfull Ministers of the Word: for they all bring not their owne, but the message of God, whose Word cannot goe backe in vaine, but it either breeds faith, or makes moe obstinate, it is either a sauour of life, or of death, 1. Cor. 6. Vse. It teacheth vs to be very carefull in reading of Moses, the Prophets, Apostles, &c. in hearing the Ministers of the Word, to take heed how we reade and heare, viz. so that wee apply both threatnings and promises to our selues, that we be∣leeue all doctrine of Faith, follow after all graces whereunto we haue been stirred vp, auoide all vices, from which wee haue been dehorted. Else eery Chapter and verse that wee haue read, euery Semon  struction that wee haue heard, shall
be a witnesse against vs to accuse vs. In whom yee trust.] First, note here the erroneous and here∣ticall collection of the Papists from hence; therefore, say they, the ancient Fathers beleeued in Moses, trusted in him, adored him, and called vpon him: wherefore so may we doe vnto the Saints. The vanity of this appeares, first, because these here spoken of, are such as Christ condemnes, and who had Moses to bee their accuser. So that they trusted in Moses, and Moses would accuse them for it; and what doth this make for the Papists? Secondly, by Moses is meant here Moses doctrine, and not his person; and so they are here said to trust in Moses, as before they are said to trust in the Scriptures. Thus in Exodus, they beleeued the Lord and Moses,  that is, they gaue credence to Moses. So 2. Chron. 20.20. So it is in the Vulgar. Secondly, from this obserue, that whereas it is laid downe, to shew their high account and good opinion that they had of Moses, who yet notwithstanding, should be their accuser. Doct. The high account that people haue of Ministers, shall not keepe them from being their accusers, if they beleeue, and obey not their doctrine. For it is onely faith and obedience to their doctrine that can free vs from the accusation of our Ministers: for so they shall not haue to accuse vs, but to pleade for vs; Heb. 13.8, 17. Vers. 46. For had yee beleeued Moses, yee would haue beleeued me, for he wrote of me. IN this verse is laid downe the cause why Moses would ac∣cuse them, which is their incredulity: not directly expressed, but laid downe vnder a proofe, and  the more strongly affir∣med. Now this is strange that they should not beleeue in Moses, in whom, as is said before, they trusted, whose disciples they professed themselues to be, whom they knew to be instructed of God.
To are this, we must consider, that there is a double faith▪ first,  generall faith, whereby we beleeue the Ministers of God to be his seruants sent of him, and that which they deliuer, to be te Word and truth of God. 2. A particular faith, whereby we vnderstand, and conceiue the true meaning of that which is deliuered, and accordingly apply it to our selues. Herein failed these Iewes, for they vn∣drstood not, that Moses spake of Christ, and therefore they beleeued him not. The proofe stands thus; Yee beleeue not me, therefore yee bleeue not Moses. Doct. They that beleeue not in Christ aright, beleeue not Moes▪ the Prophets, the Apostles, the Scriptures, or the Mini∣sters preaching out of the Scriptures. For all doe declare Christ. Vse· So to reade and heare all, as that we may find matter to strengthen our faith in Christ, otherwise all will bee our accu∣sers. A confirmation of this proofe is in these words [for he wrote of me.] Whence we learne, first, that Christ was made knowne euen from the beginning. Secondly, that if we beleeue not the doctrine that is deliuered, we doe not beleeue the Ministers: if we beleeue not Moses writings, we beleeue not Moses. Vers. 47. But if yee beleeue not his writings, how shall ye beleeue my words. A Further confirmation proouing their incredulity, wherein note a double comparison, first, betweene Moes and Christs pesons: secondly, betweene Moses writings and Christs words: as is hee shoul say, If yee reiect Moses, whom yee tike so well of, whose writings are recorded vnto you, no mall, yea, how can you but reiect me, whose words are only sunded in your eare, and of whom yee esteeme so meanely, an so basely, [from thir conceit.] Doct. If we will no bleeue the written Word of God, we wi not beleeue any uidec whatsoeuer. Marke Abrams
answer to the Rich man, Luk. 16.31. For the Scriptures haue been approoued from time to time to be the Word of God, and the ground of all writing, spea∣king and preaching, hauing fully declared the whole will of God. Vse 1. That wee seeke not any other meanes to breed Faith besides the Word. Secondly, that this be a strong motiue to stirre vp to haue it in high account. AN EXPOSITION VPON THE THIRD OF IOHN. Ioh. 3.29, 30. He that hath the Bride, is the Bridegroome: but the friend of the Bridegrome, which standeth and heareth him, reioyceth greatly because of the Bridegroomes voyce: This my ioy there∣fore is fulfilled. He must increase, but I must decrease. THese words are part of that testimony which Iohn gaue concerning Christ. It beginneth at the 27. verse. In it wee may obserue these foure distinct points: First, the free confession that Iohn maketh of his owne pro∣fession and gifts: vers. 27, 28. In th bserue, 1. Whece his Gifts and Callings was, viz. from Heauen. This affoords many instructions: first, that man hath nothing, nor ability, &c. of himselfe, but from aboue: which serueth to humble vs, Rom. 14. Secondly, that euery excellent thing com∣meth from Heauen, whether spirituall or temporall, Iam. 1.17.
This sheweth whether to haue recourse for a supply of our wants, and to whom to giue thankes when we haue receiued any blessings. Thirdly, that God, as he bestoweth all things on men, so he proportioneth them accordingly to euery man. This sheweth, that wee are to obserue our owne gifts and callings, and herewith to be contented. 2. What his Calling was, the declaration is partly negatiue, [I am not Christ:] Affirmatiue; [but I am sent before him.] This sheweth the integrity of Iohn, that Iohn would so abase himselfe, and acknowledge his place, not onely before stran∣gers, but also his friends, euen such as would haue attributed greater matters vnto him. That I haue said] viz. seuen times recorded by the Euange∣lists. This sheweth vs, that we must be constant in our integri∣tie. Againe, in that these witnesses so often did talke of the pre∣heminence of Iohn aboue Christ, and would not after so many sayings of Iohn be perswaded, we see how dangerous a thing it is to haue a wrong conceit fixed in our minde: wherefore we ought to labour to preuent and redresse speedily all errors in iudgement. I am not the Christ.] Why? because his disciples would haue made him the Christ. This learnes vs not to take to vs any Honour or Calling that belongs not vnto vs, as titles, and the like. But I am sent before him] that is, I am the seruant of Christ. This teacheth vs, that in no hand we be ashamed of that Cal∣ling whereunto God hath called vs, howsoeuer it may seeme base in the world. The second point is the comparison betweene himselfe and Christ, and thereby sheweth how much more excellent Christ is then himselfe, is twofold: first, in the 29. verse: secondly, in the 30. verse. First, let vs see the literall meaning. Bride. Bridegroome.] These termes are vsed for new marri∣ed persons, and in the originall not onely so, but for those that are onely contracted. And this rather is meant here, because the time of solemnization of the marriage betweene Christ and
the Church is not to be holden till the end of the World, in the Kingdome of Heauen. The friend] That is, such a one as the Bridegroome deputeth in his stead to wooe the Bride, , to bring her home, to prouide for the marriage, &c. Standeth and heareth him, and reioyceth because of the Bridegroomes voyce.] Hee reioyceth for the good end of his seruice, and that the Bridegroome doth in person performe that, which he did for him. 2. The Allegory. The Bride is the Church; the Bride∣groome is Christ; the Friend of the Bridegroome is here meant particularly Iohn, who was sent to prepare the Bride for Christ: for this was the end of his Calling. Now hee hearing that Christ is come, and himselfe speaketh to his Bride, and that the people hearken vnto him, now doth he reioyce, &c. Now the application is excellent and very fit, to conuince that enuious and ambitious conceit which possessed the disci∣ples minds, concerning the greatnesse of Iohn aboue Christ. I am not (saith Iohn) the Bridegroome, but the Friend sent to prepare, and fit the Bride for him: now how great a sinne and offence were it for vs, if being sent to woe for the Bridegroome, I should speake for my selfe, if I should take the honour due to him, vpon my selfe, and so cause the Bride to commit idolatry, and spirituall fornication with another man. Now come we to the instructions arising from the maine scope of these verses, which is to shew the great difference that is betweene the Ministers and Christ. Wee may obserue, first, the Comparison: secondly, the Inference. The Comparison sheweth, first, the place of Christ, and the place of the Church. The point is; Christ is the onely Bride∣groome and Husband of the Church, and the Church is the Spouse and Bride onely of Christ. Whence it is, that such titles of Head, Husband, Bridegroome, are giuen to Christ, onely in relation to the Church; of Wife, Loue, Spouse, to the Church onely in relation to Christ: 1. Cor. 11.3. Eph. 5.25. Mat. 9.15. Ephes. 5.23. and in the booke of the Canticles, Chap. 4.8. Eph. 5.23.
Three especiall reasons there are why a man hath the pre∣rogatiue to be a Bridegroome. 1. The gift and consent of the Parents. 2. The loue and choice of the party, that is the Bride∣groome. 3. The willing consent and liking of the Bride. 1. Ioh. 17 6, 9, 11, 23, 25. The Church, is the gift of the Fa∣ther. 2. Ephes. 5.25. Act. 20.28. Hos. 2.19, 20. The loue and choice of Christ, Ephes. 5.26. 3. Cant. 2.16. Ephes. 5.24. The good liking and willing o∣beience of the Church. This then is the prerogatiue that is due onely to Christ. Vse. This commends vnto vs the great loue of Christ in vouchsafing this honour to the Church, to debase himselfe so farre as to be her Bridegroome. Whereas indeed the best in the Church may say as Iohn, Mat. 3.11. I am not worthy to car∣ry his shooes; and as Abigaile said, when she should be Dauids wife. 1 Sam. 25.41. When Hester was taken to be Ahashuerosh his wife, though she were a poore captiue, yet was there some cause why the King loued her, viz. because she pleased him, Ester 2.9. but in the Church there is no cause why Christ should cast his loue on her, as appeares, Ezek. 16.6. 2. How carefull ought we to be in pleasing of him, and by loue to answer this his loue, to carry our selues reuerently, to subiect our selues vnto his commandements, to seeke his ho∣nour, not to carry our selues rebelliously, presumptuously, and proudly. Againe, this is matter not onely of instruction, but of triall also, whether wee are of the Church, or no. This will appeare by our carriage: for if we be proud, contemptuous of our bre∣thren, worldlings, couetous, &c. it shewes, that the Spirit of Christ is not in vs, whereby wee ae vnited vnto him, and one vnto another; if it were, then would the fruits thereof be in vs, as loue, meekenesse, &c. 3. For Consolation: first, that so Christ will performe the
duties of marriage; what are they? That he will protect and defend, and prouide for her: for he is both able, because God; and willing, because he was not constrained to take the Church for his Spouse, Gen. 20.16. Secondly, so Christ is a companion with vs in all distresses, Act. 9. though he were in Heauen, yet by vertue of this vnion he was persecuted: so Mat. 25. penult, Heb. 2.17. Thirdly, the Law of marriage requireth, that there be a communication of all the goods of the Husband with the Wife. Now Christ is rich, and full of grace, and so is the Church, Psal. 45.13. Though the Church start aside sometime, yet doth not God cast her away, Ier. 3.11. Ezek. 33.10, 11. Yea, such grace is giuen the Church, that she shall neuer fall away finally, Rom. 11.29. Ioh. 10.28. Ioh. 13.1. So that this bond is indissoluble, and neuer to be broken, which is another consolation we receiue from hence, that we are the Spouse of Christ. 4. For refutation: So the title giuen to the Pope of Rome to be Head of the Church, is most dishonourable and deroga∣tory to Christ. Hee is not so the Friend of Christ, but plaine Antichrist, arrogating that honour to him, which is due onely to Christ, 2. Cor. 11.2. our Husband. Iohns disciples would faine haue made him Pope too, but he refused it. 2. The comparison sheweth the place, and duty of the Mi∣nisters of Christ. Doct. Ministers of Christ Iesus are friends of the Bride∣groome, whom Christ vseth to call home, the bride, as Ieremy was, cap. 3.1. and Hos. chap. 2.1. Matth. 9.15. children of the Marriage-chamber. The reason why it pleaseth Christ to haue these friends, is, first, for the honour of himselfe; s it is the honour of a gat man, not to doe all by himselfe. Secondly, for the good of th Church; that the Church might more familiarly receiue the Word by the Ministery of man, which would be astonished,  she should now heare Christ speaking to her from Heauen in his Maiesty and glory. Thirdly, this is a meanes to trie the sim∣ple and pure obedience of the Church, that shee doth not so
much regard the messengers, as the message, because it is her husbands will, and so she will obey it by whomsoeuer she re∣ceiues the knowledge of it. Ʋse. This sheweth the dignity and excellency of the Mini∣sters Calling. 2. To teach Ministers to be carefull in the discharge of their duties, seeing their calling is so weighty. Now let vs see what duties belong to the Ministers, as they are the Friends of Christ. They are these: 1. To be Sutors to the Bride, 2. Cor. 5.20. to labour to win many wiues for Christ. 2. When people are wonne and conuerted, then to keepe them from starting backe, and following strange flesh: for Mi∣nisters are not onely planters, but also waterers, and Nurses to bring vp, as well as fathers to beget children vnto God; and if they continue not to the end, these lose the fruit and recom∣pence of all their former labours. 3. If by the temptations they fall, then to labour to reclaime them, Luk. 15. Christ sheweth his affection there by those Pa∣rables of the lost sheepe, and Prodigall childe, as a patterne for all Ministers to be so minded. 4. To haue a speciall care to maintaine the honour due to Christ entire vnto him, not to part stakes with him, or to wooe for themselues, as Iohn would not here, and the Apostles, Acts .12, 16. 5. To be attentiue to the Bridegroome, to heare his will, and to teach it the Church; which duty is here, vers. 29. expres∣sed: and Ezek. 3.17. 1. Ioh. 1.1. Which serues to condemne ig∣norant Ministers, and those also that hearken to the voyce of other, or deliuer their owne conceits, and such as the Papists, that talke of nothing but the voyce of the Church: Iohn saith here, heareth Him, not her, vers. 29. 6. The last is also laid downe here, namely, to reioyce where people come vnto Christ, that so Christ may speake vnto them, and they submit themselues to him. This ought to bee the ful∣nes of a Ministers ioy when he seeth this fruit and power of his ministery in winning soules to Christ: 1. Th. 2.19. Act. 11.18, 23.
Vers. 30. He must increase, but I must decrease. 31. He that commeth from aboue, is aboue all: he that is of the earth, is earthly, and speaketh of the earth: hee that commeth from heauen is aboue all: 32. And what he hath seene and heard, that he testifieth, and no man receiueth his testimony. IN the thirtieth verse is noted the second inference, inferred from the former comparison; as if hee had said, Now the Bridegroome himselfe is come, mine office of preparing the Bride is finished; therefore shall I decrease both in the ministe∣riall function: for now the people will stocke vnto him, and leaue me, as also in that credit and present account which they carry of me, because they shall now reuerence, admire, and ho∣nour Christ. This then that here is spoken of Iohns decreasing, is not meant as concerning the authority of Iohns Doctrine, or his faithful∣nesse in his Calling, which can neuer be diminished, but as long as the World stands, Iohn wil be found to haue been most faith∣full in his Office. Now to shew that this came not by his owne negligence, or by Christs pride and ambition, but onely by the will of God, he puts a must to it [I must increase, &c.] From this humiliation of Iohn wee may learne diuers good lessons, as First, this teacheth Ministers that they should not bee grie∣ued, though they grow into disgrace, and small account a∣mongst men, if so be that thereby any glory may bee got vnto Christ. Secondly, that the more men are esteemed, the lesse account is made of Christ; and contrariwise, the more account is made of Christ, the lesse will man bee esteemed; as is plaine by the example of the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 3.4. and by that holy iea∣lousie which the godly Ministers haue had, when they percei∣ued much people to flocke about them. The vse is to teach vs, to fixe our eyes on Christ and God,
and not to dote on mans worthinesse, and not so much to haue their persons in admiration, as their Callings, and especially that message which they bring from God. Thirdly, that where Christ shineth, lesser lights are obscu∣red: as at the comming of Christ, and preaching of the Gos∣pell, the Types, Ceremonies, and darke shadowes of the Law were obscured, 2. Pet. 1.19. for he is the Day-star, and the true Sonne of righteousnesse. 1. This teacheth vs to be ashamed of our ignorance in these dayes that the Gospell shineth so bright vpon vs, and yet wee will not walke in the light thereof. 2. That is but a dotage and foolish conceit of some, who collect from hence, that Iohn was borne in that time of the yeere when the dayes decrease, and Christ when they increase, and thereupon alter their Almanacks, &c. Vers. 31. He that commeth from aboue, is aboue all: he that is of the earth, is earthly, and speaketh of the earth: he that com∣meth from heauen is aboue all. THis verse containes a second comparison, to shew the ex∣cellency of Christ aboue man. He that is come from on high That is, he that is come from heauen, from God. And this is spoken in regard of the vnion of his two Natures: in regard of his diuine Nature, he is in hea∣uen, yet not locally, as there included, for he filleth all things. In regard that he took vnto him the humane Nature, he is said to come from Heauen. Is aboue al Angels and men. He that is of the earth] That is, a meere man. Is of the earth] That is, he sauoureth of the earth, speaketh of earth and carnall things. According to his condition, so is his disposition, his condition earthly, his disposition carnall, as the like, That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, Ioh. 3.6. In this comparison is shewed, first, what Christ is, first, in re∣gard of his beginning and originall.
Secondly, in regard of his excellency and preheminency. 2. What man is, first, in respect of this condition and ma∣king, [he that is of the earth.] Secondly, of his disposition, in∣ward [is of the earth,] and outward [speaketh of the earth.] First, generall instruction that is drawne from the scope of the comparison, is, That Man and Christ are as farre different, opposite and contrary as may be, as much as betweene heauen and earth: 1. Cor. 15.47. Ioh. 8.23. This Iohn acknowledged, Matth. 3.11. Ioh. 1.27. and the Centurion, Matth. 8.8. and Peter, Luk. 5.8. The ground of this difference, is the vnion of the two Na∣tures in Christ, in which respect though the Godhead is said to descend, Ephes. 4.9. yet is he neuerthelesse God, and the simili∣tude of the Humane nature doth not make him so like man, as the vnion of the Godhead doth make him vnlike. First, this sets forth the great loue of Christ to man, who in himselfe did make a vnion betweene two so different Natures for our good, and thereby reconciled heauen and earth. Secondly, against the Papists, who derogate from Christs honour, in making many Saints not onely equall, but superior to Christ, and ioyne their merits and intercession with Christ, giuing the Pope more authority then Christ; yea, making euey poore Masse-priest aboue Christ, because they are to sacrifice Christ in the Masse, now the sacrificer is aboue the sacrifice. The parts of this comparison are, first, the originall of Christ, He came from heauen; this is to be vnderstood of the person of Christ, that he had his beginning frō heauen, though according to his humane nature he came from earth, beig borne of man. Which obserue against some ancient heretikes, who hld, that Christ brought his body with him from heauen: which i con∣trary to the History of his Natiuity & incarnation, set down by the Euangelists, as also Ioh. 1.14. Gal. 4 4. 1. Tim. 3.16. and fur∣thermore, it is against a maine end of the Incarnation of Christ, which is to sanctifie and make holy our nature, our birth, our conception. Therefore though the humane nature be of mn, yet notwithstanding Iesus Christ, God and man considered in his person, is from aboue, of an heauenly off-spring.
The vse is, first to teach vs how well those prerogatiues a∣gree vto Christ, which the Scriptures do attribute vnto him, that he is the Head of the Church, the Sauiour and Redeemer of mankind, our Mediator and Intercessor, that hee will bring vs vnto eternall life, euen because he is from Heauen: and so none either can claime any of these prerogatiues. Vse 2. That so wee ought not esteeme of Christ vilely and brly as the Iewes did, by looking onely vpon his poore and meane estate, but we must remember, that he is from heauen. The second part is of Christs excellency. Aboue all] Doct. Christ is more excellnt then Man or An∣gels: the former is manifest, the latter is prooued plentifully in the first Chapter of the Hebrewes. Some will say, What need this doctrine? euery one that is but instructed in his Cate∣chisme can tell this. True, many know, but acknowledge it not aright by their practice: for if we did, then would we not car∣y our selues so proudly as many doe, but we would see our basensse and vilenesse, in respect of the dignity and excellency of Christ, and so learne to be humbled. Briefly, the vse is to teach what high esteeme wee ought to carry of Christ, how greatly to honour and reuerence him. Other vses also may bee drawne from hence: for if Christ be aboue all, then is hee able to protect and defend his Church, and to prouide all good things for vs, &c. The third part is concerning man, what hee is first, in his condition. He that is of the earth.] Doct. Man in regard of his begin∣ning is of the earth. This doctrine is well knowne, and is proo∣ued vnto vs by these Scriptures, Gen. 2.7. Gen. 18.27. Iob 33.6. Man also when hee dies, returnes to dust, now it is a sure rule, that euery thing is made of that whereinto it is resolued, as ice and snow of water. This instruction briefly ministers vnto euery one matter of humiliation, to consider our weakenesse and basenesse, which ought to be vnto vs as the blacke feet vnto Peacockes, to make vs plucke downe our stately feathers, and high minds. Secondly, in his disposition; first inward.
Is of the earth.] That is, he is wholly earthly minded, and carnally affected. This teacheth vno vs first, that man natu∣rally sauoureth of nothing but earthly things, in all the parts both of soule and body. Take an instance in his vnderstanding, and wee shall see it naturally carried vnto carnall and sensuall constructions. Hence the Iewes did expound the Prophecies of earthly things, dreaming of an earthly Kingdome of Christ, as also the Disciples did. Hence the Capernaites dreamed of a car∣nall eating of Christs flesh, Ioh. 6.52. Hence it was, that when Christ spake of doing his Fathers will, which he accounted his meate and drinke, the Disciples interpreted it of earthly food, Ioh. 4.33. So when Christ spake to the Woman of Samaria of the water of life, she vnderstood it of the water of Iacobs Well, Ioh. 4.11. So was Nicodemus his vnderstanding altogether carnall in the matter of Regeneration, though he were a great Docto. Secondly, this teacheth, whatsoeuer knowledge and other spirituall grace a man hath, hee hath it onely from the gift of God, being in himselfe vtterly deuoid of all, 1. Corin. 2.14. Ro∣man. 8.5. Secondly, in the outward disposition, which is his speech, and it may also be referred to his actions and carriage. He speaketh of the earth,] First, frō the connexion of these two together, the outward with the inward disposition, we learne, that according to a mans inward disposition and affection, so is his speech, vsually, though sometimes hypocrites may make a faire colour of words, to hide the priuy corruption of their hearts, but vsually it is so. See for proofe, Matth. 12.34, 35. Matth. 7.18, 20. for as the heart suggesteth, so the tongue vtte∣reth, for this is the hearts interpreter. Vse, Is to teach vs to iudge both of our selues and others, by our owne and their speeches; which if we find to sauour of earthly things, that our talke is nothing but of the World, and worldly wealth, we may iustly suspect our slues, that our hearts be carnall and vnregenerate. This shewes the vanity of that excuse of many, who will say, Why, whatsoeuer I say, yet I thinke no ill, I meane well, Matth. 12.37.
A second Doctrine, that man of himselfe cannot declare and deliuer any heauenly Mysteries pertaining to saluation. This point Iohn principally intended, thereby to driue the people from him vnto Christ, who onely could expound and declre vnto them all diuine knowledge of the mysteries of the King∣dome of Heauen. And so the Prophets of old, and now all the Ministers haue not in themselues the light of knowledge, but are illightened and inspired by Christ, in whom all the treasures of wisedome are hid, Ioh. 1.8. Colos. 2.3. First, this is a notable euidence of Gods loue towards vs, who hath giuen vs Christ Iesus, the Lyon of the Tribe of Iuda, to open the booke of the mysteries of the King of Heauen, and to reueale them vnto vs, without whom we should otherwise haue had no more knowledge then Sauages, and wilde people haue, Reuel. 5.5. Secondly, this is to admonish Ministers that they be not puft vp with pride, and swell against their brethren, because they haue more knowledge, but to remember that they are men as well as others, and so though they haue many helpes to get knowledge, yet it is Christ, who by his Spirit must illuminate their minds, to giue them sound vnderstanding in heauenly mat∣ters. And secondly that they ought to teach them vnto the people as the Oracles of God: 1. Pet. 4.10. Thirdly, this teacheth the people to regard the Ministers, re∣membring that they deliuer the Word of God, and not man, 1. Thes. 2.13. The last clause of this 31. verse is repeated againe, but not in vaine: for the matter was of great weight, and the preiudicate opinion of the Iewes was hard to be remoued; and so hee vr∣geth it againe vnto them. Secondly, hereby hee maketh way vnto his complaint for their vnbeliefe, that though hee came from heauen, yet they receiued not his testimony.
Vers. 31.32. He that commeth from aboue, is aboue all: hee that is of the earth, is earthly, and speaketh of the earth: hee that commeth from heauen is aboue all. 32 And what he hath seene and heard, that he testifieth, and o man receiueth his testimony. WHich words containe the complaint of Iohn for the incredulity and vnbeliefe of the Iewes. In it are two parts; first, the ground and reason of his complaint; secondly, the complaint it selfe. The reasons or arguments whereby he vrges the greatnesse of their incredulity are two; first, drawne from the excellency of Christ, [Hee that is come from heauen is aboue all.] These words, first, in that they are twice repeated, and that for the weightinesse of the matter therein contained, teach Ministers that they ought not to thinke the bare deliue∣ry of a truth, and that but once sufficient, but duely to consider the weight of the matter, and so to vrge and presse it againe and againe, that hereby as it were by many strokes, they may beat the truth thereof into the hearts of the hearers: Gal. 1.9. Secondly, they serue to aggrauate the incredulity of the Iewes. For who spake? Was it not Christ from heauen, who is ouer all? then the greater is their vnbeliefe that would not receiue his testimony. The Doctrine hence arising is, The greater the person is that deliuereth a truth vnto vs, the greater is the fault if it be lightly regarded by vs. This is pro∣ued out of the second of the Hebrewes: For the Apostle ha∣uing prooued in the first Chapter, that Christ is more excellent then the Angels, Chap. 2. vers. 2, 3. thereupon inferres, that if the Word spoken by Angels was stedfast, and euery transgres∣sion and disobedience, receiued a iust recompence o re∣ward, then how can we escape, if we neglect so great salution, preached to vs by Iesus Christ. And this in common equity; for if the King doe speake vnto v, and we lightly esteeme of i, the fault is greater, then if a meane and base person deliuered the same message vnto vs. And the husbandmen were there∣fore especially destroyed, because they regarded not the mes∣sage
which the Lord sent vnto them by his only Sonne: Mat. 21.37.38. For this contempt of the message, shewes a light esteeme of the Person that deliuers it. The vse is that which the Apostles make, Heb. 12.25. see that yee despise not him that speaketh from aboue. Where he addeth a reason drawne from a comparison betweene Moses and Christ, that if they escaped not which despised him that spake from earth, (1) Moses; much more shall not we escape that despise him that speaketh from heauen (1) Christ. That the former es∣caped not, appeareth by the example of Mirian, Numb. 12. of Nadab and Abihu, Leu. 10. of the man that gathered sticke, Numb. 14. of Corah and his companie, of the Israelites that would needs fight with the Canaanites against Moses expresse commandement, yea and of all the Israelites, who perished in the wildernesse for this cause. Now if these did not escape, how can we? But how shall we heare Christ speake, who is now in hea∣uen? Answ. Christ speaketh vnto vs by his ministers, to whom he hath first deliuered this message; Heb. 2.3, 4. and therefore Christ saith; he that heareth you heareth me. Yea, but we see no such iudgements come vpon those that contemne the Gospell. Answ. It is then because we doe a right obserue the iudge∣ment of God: for is not the punishment of the Iewes for con∣temning Christ and his Gospell, namely their vtter desolation and dispersion, farre greater then any of their Captiuities vnder the times of the Law. Doe we not see all those famous Chur∣ches of Greece for their light esteeme of the Gospell, vtterly destroyed, & now in slauery to the Turk, and is not Rome now a seruant of Antichrist; a greater plague then to be made the slaue of the Turke; 2. Thess. 2.9, 10, 11. And if there be no cor∣porall plague, then doth God send spirituall punishments, gi∣uing men vp to hardnes of heart, and reseruing them to eternall condemnation: 2. Thes. 1.7, 8, 9. Act. 28.26, 27. which plague of hardnes of heart is so much the more fearfull and grieuous by
much lesse sensible it is. The second argument is drawne from the infallible and cer∣taine truth of the Gospell that Christ hath deliuered, vers. 32. [what he hath heard and seene.] which words, first, shew the certaine truth of his doctrine for hearing and seeing are senses of learning, and such proofes are most sure. Secondly, it settes forth his manner of deliuering: for he spake it not by relation and inspiration, as the Prophets: but he saw, and heard it in hea∣uen, in the bosome of his Father, at the Counsell-table, as it were of the Trinity. The Doctrine hence arising is, That the Gospell deliuered by Christ, is a most sure and certaine truth. See Ioh. 1.1.3.2. Pet. 1.16. Luk. 1.2. and therefore Saint Iam. cap. 1.18. fitly calleth it, the Word of Truth, both in regard of the Author, and of the manner of deliuery, and also of the effect it worketh in the heart of the receiuers. Vse. 1. This serues to aggrauate the incredulity both of the Iews, & also of vs who notwithstanding these cleare euidences, cannot yet be perswaded of the truth thereof. We will beleeue a man that sayth, hee both heard and saw the thing he repor∣teth; yet the Gospell first preached by Christ, in whom there is nothing, but it makes him worthy to beleeued, after confirmed by the Apostles, who were eye-witnesses, and eare-witnesses of all that was done, cannot wee be drawne to beleeue: Ioh. 7.48. 2. This serues to strengthen our faith in the doctrine of the Gospell deliuered vnto the world; that wee beginne not to doubt, and stagger about the truth thereof, but to stand con∣stantly for the defence and vpholding of the same, and euen, if need bee, to seale vp the truth of it with our owne blood. 3. Christs faithfulnes in deliuering that only which he saw and heard; ought to teach ministers to take heed, that they de∣liuer nothing but what is sure and certaine; which they haue receiued from Christ, and is grounded vpon the Word; other∣wise they are liable to the Apostles reprehension: 1. Timo. 1.7. 4. This confutes our aduersaries, who deliuer many points
of doctrine, as necessary to saluation, which they neuer saw nor heare, whereof they haue no ground; as of Purgatory, Limbus, Transubstantiation, &c. Finally, if we will be certainely resol∣ued in points concerning our saluation, we must not relye vpon the sayings, testimonies, and opinions of men, but vpon the vn∣doubted truth of Gods Word. Now come we to the complaint it selfe. The fault hee com∣plaineth of, was, that no man receiued his testimony. Though Christ spake from Heauen, though his person was most excel∣lent, and the truth of his doctrine most certaine, yet no man did beleeue it, that is, very few, and in comparison of those other that beleeued not as nothing. From which inference wee may obserue this instruction, that no euidence will satisfie incredulous and obstinate per∣sons: so the Iewes were perswaded, the Prophets, and namely, Ieremiah, were inspired of God, Ier 42.2. yet when he had de∣liuered his message from God to them, they would not beleeue him, but gaue him the lie, and said, that Baruch did prouoke him against the people: Ier. 43.2, 3. So Pharaoh, and the E∣gyptians would not be perswaded, euen for their owne good. The Iewes, Act. 4.16. could not deny the truth of those things the Apostles had done, yet would they not beleeue. So the Pharises against their owne conscience said vnto Christ, that he cast out diuels by the Prince; and though they knew he did it by his Diuinity, yet would they not be perswaded; Mat. 12.24. Thus infidelity closeth vp the eyes of a mans reason, so that, be the proofes and euidences neuer so plaine, yet he cannot be perswaded in his heart. Vse. Not to thinke any thing the worse of the truth, though men beleeue it not: for few there are that will beleeue, Esay 53.1. Rom. 10.16. but the truth of the Gospell depends not vp∣on man, but vpon God, Rom. 3.4. Wherefore wee ought not, as many doe, to stagger and doubt of the truth, because Papists and others after so much writing and disputing, and so plaine euidence on our sides, will not yet beleeue, but still write, and euen die in defence of their errors. For what if an Heretike bee burnt at a stake, shall we thinke euer the better of his heresie, or on
the worse of Gods truth? God forbid. Let vs rather looke vp∣on the Word of God, and so ground our selues thereon, and consider withall what a man is, if God giue him ouer to the diuell, to incredulity, obstinacy, and hardnesse of heart. Receiued] They heard the Word preached, and the truth of it proued vnto them oftentimes by Christ, yet they remai∣ned incredulous and obstinate. Which first, as it serues to ag∣grauate their hardnesse of heart and vnbeliefe. Secondly, so it yeelds vnto vs this obseruation. That incredulity and obsti∣nacy against plaine euidence of truth, is not onely proper to the profane and infidels, but to many of them also that vse to heare the Word preached, to frequent Sermons, &c. as the Iewes did, Ezek. 33.31, 32. Vers. 33. He that hath receiued his testimony, hath set to his seale, that God is true. 34. For he whom God hath sent, speaketh the words of God: For God giueth not the Spirit by measure vnto him. 35. The Father loueth the Sonne, and hath giuen all things into his hand. 36. He that beleeueth on the Sonne, hath euerlasting life: and he that beleeueth not the Sonne, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him. THese verses containe a declaration of Faith, which is se downe, first, by the nature and obiect of it, [He that hath receiued his testimony.] Secondly, by the excellency of which is laid downe by the effect, [hath set to his seale that God is true.] Which is confirmed by a reason in the next words, [For he whom God hath sent speaketh the Words of God:] and this streng∣thened with another reason [For God giueth not the Spirit by measure vnto him.] The 35. verse layes downe, first, the ground of this latter reason, why God giues him the Spirit without measure, [The Father loueth the Sonne.] Secondly, a fruite of this loue, [and hath giuen all things into his hand.] Thirdly, Faith is declared by the benefit that comes by it, namely, life euerlasting, which is further amplified by the contrary of vnbe∣liefe
what hurt followes vpon, viz. the wrath of God: vers. 36. He that receiueth his testimony] Here Faith is described by the nature and obiect of it, which is the testimony of Christ, that is, the Gospell, whereof Christ is the Author. The point of doctrine hence arising is, that true faith is onely grounded vpon the Word of God, as Ioh. 17.8. That faith which relyes vpon mans word and authority, brings no honour to God, nor comfort to our owne consciences. Hath set to his seale that God is true.] Here is the excellency of faith shewed by the effect. That faith ratifieth and confir∣meth the truth of God; as Abrahams faith is said to glorifie God, Rom. 4.20. whereas vnbeliefe makes God a lier, 1. Ioh. 5.10. But how can faith seale vp the truth of God, or infideli∣ty impeach it? Indeed the truth of God doth not depend vp∣on man, but vpon the immutability of Gods will; yet Faith is said to ratifie and confirme it, first, in regard of the manifestati∣on of the truth of God to others: as among men, hee that be∣leeueth another, doth manifest to the world, that accounts him a true and trusty man. Secondly, because it assures and ascer∣taines vnto our owne hearts and consciences the truth of God. Thirdly, in regard of Gods acceptation. Infidelity doth impeach the truth of God; not that indeed an vnbeleeuing man can make God a lyer, but because he doth his vttermost endeauour as much as in him lyeth, to make him a lyer, by denying and doubting of his truth. This affoords many instructions: first, that of all other gra∣ces, Faith is the most necessary for a mans own self, because by it we apply the promises of God, and the merits of Christ vnto our consciences. Secondly, that likewise none is more excel∣lent, because it confirmes the pretious truth of God. Thirdly, that this is the most acceptable grace, because it sanctifies all o∣ther; without it, it is impossible to please God. Fourthly, this shewes the great respect that God hath to man, that hee doth accept a testimony from him. Fifthly, againe, that faith doth on our part to God, that which the Spirit doth on Gods part to vs; this assures vs of Gods truth, that seales vp the truth of God, as Christ by his Spirit is knit and vnited to vs, wee by faith to him.
Vers. 34. For he whom God hath sent, speaketh the words of God: for God giueth not the Spirit by measure vnto him. FOr he whom God hath sent, speaketh the words of God.] Here is laid downe a reason, of that which was spoken of the ex∣cellency of faith in sealing vp the truth of God, drawne frō the office of Christ. The reason stands thus: He that receiueth his testimony whom God hath sent, and who speaketh the words of God, hee sealeth that God is true: but hee that receiueth Christs testimony, receiueth his testimony, that is, sent from God, and that speaketh the words of God. Therefore he that receiueth the testimony of Christ sealeth that God is true. Or more briefly thus: Christs testimony are the words of God; therefore he that receiueth Christs testimony, sealeth that God is true. This 34. verse then containeth two parts: First, the Office of Christ, with the condition, or effect of it. Secondly, the gifts of Christ, and the quantity of them: The Office is set downe in these words [He whom God hath sent.] Which phrase of sending, is generally applyed to all the Messengers and Ministers of God from time to time, both be∣fore and after Christ, 2. Chron. 24.19. Ioh. 1.6. Ioh. 13.20. And it notes three things: First, the kind and quality of their Office, that they are Ministers and Messengers. Secondly, the warrant of their calling; God sends them. Thirdly, that they are de∣puted, and set apart to that calling. But particularly, it is here vnderstood of Christ, and in the generall, it setteth forth thus much, That Christ tooke not vnto him this Calling and Office of himselfe, but God did appoint him, as the Apostle prooues, Heb. 5.4, 5, 6. More particularly it sheweth, that Christ was sent from hea∣uen, euen from the bosome of his Father, to take flesh vpon him to declare vnto vs the secret counsell of God, and to work our redemption, as Gal. 4.4. Ioh. 10.36. But it will bee obiected, that in this respect Christ is very God, and then how can he be sent.
Answ. Yes, very well, if we consider the distinction of per∣sons; for there is no inconuenience to say, that one person may send another, as Christ is also said to send the holy Ghost. Yea but then one person shall be inferiour to another? We answer, First, that there may bee a sending among equals. Secondly, more particularly and properly we say, that Christ, first, in re∣gard of the humane nature which hee tooke into the vnity of person with the Dity. Secondly, in regard of the Office of his mediatorship, is inferior to the Father: Ioh. 14.28. Phil. 2.7. Doct. Christ was deputed of God to be his Messenger, and his Minister; a phrase much vsed in Scripture; as Esay 61.1. prooued to bee spoken of Christ by Luk. 4.18. Zach. 2.9, 11. 1. Ioh. 4.10. and Malac. 3.1. Christ is expressely called, the Messenger of the Couenant; and Rom. 15.8. a Minister. For first, none but Christ was fit to doe this, who onely knew all the secret councels of God; Ioh. 1.18. Secondly, none was able to performe the worke, but he that was both God and man. For vse of this point; first, this manifesteth Gods loue vnto vs, that when we had no meanes to come to the knowledge of his will, and to life eternall, he sent his onely Sonne to bring vs vnto both, as in the 16. verse of this Chapter. Secondly, this sheweth that great respect that he beareth to mankind, in sen∣ding so great and honourable an Embassadour vnto him. As among men, what greater honour then for a King to send his sonne in embassage to a poore man. Thirdly, it setteth forth vnto vs that great loue and respect that Christ Iesus bare to∣wards vs, in that he disdaind not to take vpon him this office to be made a Messenger of God for our good, which we are well to note, that hereby we may learne to prize Gods loue accor∣ding to the worth of it, and so to loue him againe. Fourthly, this is matter of comfort vnto vs, that those things which Christ performeth, are acceptable to God, because God himselfe ap∣pointed him to this worke. Fifthly and lastly, it is exemplary for our imitation, that if we will haue comfort in the things we take in hand, we must looke, first, that the calling be warranted of God. Secondly, that our selues be deputed, and set apart to
that Calling, 1. Cor. 7.17. That the Calling is appointed of God, we shall know if it be warranted in the Word; and that the Calling is ordained for vs, if wee find our selues mooued thereunto by the Spirit of God, and inabled with gifts to dis∣charge it. This makes against Masse-Priests, and vnsufficient Ministers, Ier. 23.21. He speaketh the words of God,] Which is the effect of his Office. The Doctrine is, That Christ being appointed a Mes∣senger of his Father, was carefull to declare the Minde, Will, and Word of his Father; as himselfe witnesseth, Ioh. 7.16. Ioh. 14.24. Ioh. 17.6, 8. and Heb. 3.2. Christ is faithfull, as Mo∣ses was: for this is a maine end why his Office was laid vpon him: Ioh. 6.38. Vse is, first, it is a further motiue to presse the point and mat∣ter in hand, that we should be attentiue vnto the Word, because Christ brought it from heauen. So that if either the Author of it, namely, God; or the messenger, that is, Christ can mooue vs, it serues to enforce that exhortation which the Apostle hath, Heb. 2.1. that we doe not let ship this Word. Secondly, it teacheth Ministers to haue a care that they bee like vnto Christ, to iustifie that they are sent of God, by spea∣king nothing but Gods Word. Which first is Gods comman∣dement, Ezek. 3.10. Ezek. 33.7. Mat. vlt. vlt. Ierem. 23.21. Se∣condly, the example of the Saints shewes it; so did the Pro∣phets alwaies speake in the Name of the Lord. And the Apo∣stle, 1. Cor. 11.23. Thirdly, this will gaine reuerence and atten∣tion vnto their Ministery, 1. Thes. 2.13. Fourthly, herein lyeth a maine difference betweene faithfull and vnfaithfull Mini∣sters. Now from the force of this reason ariseth this Doctrine, that to receiue their testimony that are sent of God, and that speake the words of God, is to seale the truth of God. Which as it is vnderstood here of Christ, so is it true of all other Ministers vp∣on that ground: Luk. 10.16. Ioh. 13.20. See Exod. 14. vlt. 2. Chron. 20.20. Act. 13.48. The reason hereof is drawne from their Office, because they are sent of God, and are Embassadors of Christ standing in his stead: 2. Cor. 5.20.
Vse. This ought to breed reuerence in mens hearts to the Ministery, because they haue not to doe herein onely with men, but with God, who is honoured when the Ministery is honoured, despised, and contemned, when it is reiected: 1. Sam. 8.7. Ezek. 20.8. Secondly, it serues to vphold Ministers against the despite of those, who contemne their Ministery, because of their infirmi∣ties and weakenesses: but man ought to consider not the per∣son, but the office. AN EXPOSITION VPON THE FIRST OF MARKE. Mark. 1.25. And Iesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him. THese words are a part of the History of our Lords dispossessing of a Diuell; of which History were foure parts: first, the place, vers. 23. Secondly, the description of the party possessed, ibid. Thirdly, the man∣ner of dispossessing of him; where first is set downe the Diuels striuing against it: secondly, how Christ resisted him. Fourthly, the effects of this Miracle: vers. 26, 27. And Iesus rebuked him] Christ hath absolute authority ouer Diuels, not onely as God, but as Mediatour: which is for our comfort; for as Mediatour he came to dissolue the workes of the Diuell. Saying.] The charge of Christ is twofold; first, Hold thy peace, or be mufled, as 1. Tim. 5.18. But why would not Christ
receiue the testimony of the Diuell. Because: First, the ground of this confession was not good; it was not loue, but a slauish feare that made him, as a slaue ready to bee beaten, giue good words to his Master. Secondly, in regard of the matter, it was in some respects true, but not in all. Thirdly, in regard of the manner, it was deceitfully vttered by him. Fourthly, in regard of his person, he was not fit to giue testi∣mony of Christ; and if he had receiued it, it might haue confir∣med that slanderous opinion of the Pharises of compacting with him. Secondly, Come out of him. Christ needs nothing to ouer∣come the Diuell but onely his bare Word: So Matth. 4. though he suffered the Diuell to doe much, yet at his Word a∣way he hies. Which shewes the difference betweene Christs casting out of Diuels, and others: He, by his owne command; they in his name: he hy his Word, they by Prayer and Fasting. Further, in regard of the party, note the goodnesse of Christ towards mankind, which as particularly he shewed to this man here, so will he to euery one of vs, in deliuering vs from the slauery of the Diuell. Vers. 26. And the vncleane spirit tare him, and cryed with a loud voyce, and came out of him. Lke addeth, He threw him in the middest, Chap. 4.35. and hurt him nothing at all. The Diuels obedience to the charge of Christ, obserue here∣in, first, the manner. secondly, the thing it selfe: thirdly, the issue. 1. The manner, first, Hee threw him in the middest. This shewes his rage and fury. Secondly, he tare him; that is, there were so sore and grieuous conuulsions in his body, as if one limme had been pulled from another. Thirdly, he cryed out with a loud voice for horror and feare of Christ. What now
should be the reason of all this violence? euen because hee was now to abandon his hold. Hence marke this point, The last conflict with Satan is commonly the sorest and greatest. This is to be obserued in all other demoniakes. Memorable is that of Christ, Ioh. 14.30. when the Diuell was now at the point to be fully ouerthrowne. First, the ground is, because he still seeketh to deuoure, and man is his pray, and so like a Lyon he roareth when the prey is pluckt out of his muth. So Pharaoh vexed the Israelites more when they were going away then before; which is to be noted to comfort and vphold vs. And secondly, in regard of others, to order our iudgements concerning them, if wee see them in any extraordinary conflict, seeing happily this may be the last. In the first of those circumstances, obserue how far the diuell may preuaile with man, if God permit him, that is, to tor∣ment his body, &c. as appeares in Iob. In the third, marke how terrible Christ is vnto the Diuell. Secondly, his obedience it selfe is noted, in that He came out: note, first, that the Diuell cannot resist Christ, because no proportion betweene the infinite power of the Creator, and that finite of the creature. Which shewes, that the power and authority which Christ hath, is not titular, but effectuall; in that he hath authoritie to command, so hee hath power to see his commands executed. Which teacheth vs to resort and trust to him. Vers. 27. And they were all amazd, insomuch that they questio∣ned among themselues, saying, What thing is this? What word is this? Luk. 4.36. What new doctrine is this? For with au∣thority commanded he the vncleane spirits, and they obey him. 28. And immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the Regions round about Galilee. IN these words are contained the effects of this miracle. First, the astonishment of those that were present. Secondly, the vse they made of it, note here, first, how they
enquired and communed of it one to another. Secondly, their particular questions. Thirdly, the reason of it. 1. Their inquiring after this matter is first noted in way of reproofe, to taxe their ignorance and negligence, that they were not acquainted with the Scriptures and Prophecies concerning Christ, that it should be he that should confound the power of Satan, nor had attended vnto the preaching of Iohn, nor vnto Christs former Sermons, wherein he had declared himselfe to be the Messias. Where we may see what followes vpon neg∣lect of the ministery of the Word, that men are euer learning, yet come not to knowledge. Neuerthelesse, in that they doe inquire, is commendable in them, and set forth for our imitati∣on, and without it we shall neuer make profit of the Word. 2. By their particular questions, we may see the fruit of due attention. First, they inquire into the nature of the Miracle, [What thing is this] for when once by diligent attention the mind hath receiued a deepe impression, it is neuer satisfied, till it hath gotten the full knowledge of the thing. Secondly, they come to consider of the principall circumstance of the miracle, viz. the meane of performance, [What word is this?] Lastly, they goe further, and apply the miracle to the right end of it, viz. the confirmation of a Doctrine, which for the high account and estimation they had of it, they called New; not in disdaine to diminish the authority of it. A thing is said to be new, when it is done in another manner then it hath vsually been. 3. The reason was; For with, &c. The Fame and report of Christ, (which is another effect of this Miracle.) First, spread abroad, namely, by the good pro∣uidence of God, that Christ and his doctrine might be the bet∣ter entertained wheresoeuer he became. Wherein Gods good∣nesse to the Church appeares, that thereby many came to reape profit by that which was done amongst a few. Wherefore our duty is to publish the workes of God: which also was com∣manded by Christ to many whom he cured. For first, this is a speciall meanes to amplifie the glory of God. Secondly, to in∣crease and edifie the Church. Thirdly, to hinder other idle and vaine rumors, when our care is to speake of the works of God.
2. In the intent, it spread abroad throughout all the Coun∣trey; teaching vs, that it is not sufficient for vs to make knowne to our familiars and next neighbours, the great workes of God, but also to strangers as occasion serues: auoiding partiality, and hindering the knowledge of Gods workes, by staying the fame thereof. Vers. 29. And forthwith when they were come out of the Syna∣gogue, they entred into the house of Simon and Andrew with Iames and Iohn. 30. But Simons wiues mother lay sicke of a Feuer, and anon they told him of her. 31. And he came and tooke her by the hand, and lift her vp, and immediately the Feuer left her, and she ministred vnto them. THis is the tenth History of the first yeere of Christs pub∣like ministery, and the fifth miracle, following immediate∣ly after the former historie and miracle of the dispossessing of the Diuell, as is cleare by Marke, Forthwith, vers. 29. and Luk. 4.38. he arose out of the Synagogue, and entred into Simons house, &c. Mat. 8.14, 15. places it otherwise: but first two are to be preferred before one. Secondly, Matthew of all other is least carefull to obserue the order of times in setting downe his sto∣ries, regarding rather the likenesse of the matter, and the place where they were; as laying downe a great many Parables to∣gether in one place, in another a great many miracles, &c. Thirdly, Matthew there vseth an indefinite proposition, which implies no immediate consequence of that, that followes on that which goes before. And generally, we must haue an eye to Luke for our order, and next to him to Marke. The Euangelists that record this History are three, Matth. 8.14, 15. Mark. 1.29. Luk. 4.35. Let vs compare the diffe∣rences of them in handling of this story, which are either in ad∣dition of circumstances, or variety of phrases. Matthew is the concisest of the rest, touching onely the sub∣stance of the story. Therefore by the way note, that i is an er∣ror
to say, that Marke is an epitome of Matthew, as first may appeare by this: secondly, because he obserues another order: thirdly, and also hath more Histories then the other. Matthew and Marke adde, this woman was laid on her bed. Secondly, that Christ touched her. Marke addes, that hee lift her vp. Thirdly, Matthew hath, that being healed, she arose. Marke and Luke first adde the transition, which Matthw hath not; and forthwith when they were come out of the Syna∣gogue, &c. Secondly, that those that were present, made the womans case knowne vnto Christ. Marke he is most large, and addes, first, that Christ made no delay, Forthwith: secondly, the house of Simon and Andrew. Lastly, Luke addes; first, that the Feuer was great. Secondly, that Christ stood ouer her, and rebuked the Feuer. Thirdly, that immediately she arose. In variety of phrases, as Peter, and Simon, sicke of a Feuer, and taken with a Feuer, &c. The summe of this History is a miraculous curing of Simons wiues mother. The parts of it are these: first, the Time. Se∣condly, the place. Thirdly, the Parties present before whom▪ Fourthly, the party cured. Fiftly, the manner of curing. Sixth∣ly, the manifestation of this to bee a Miracle. Seuenthly, the euent of it. The time was, assoone as he came forth of the Synagogue, and it hath a double relation, either to the former Miracle, or to the assembly and meeting of Gods people, vers. 22. in regard of which relation wee may note, first, that Christ counted it a proper worke of the Sabbath, to doe a worke of mercy. Se∣condly, that Christ contented not himselfe to haue performed the publike worship of God on the Sabbath, but as occasion was offered, did also other good workes. Which is for our vse, that among other duties of the Sab∣bath, to haue a speciall regard to the workes of mercy, it being a good meanes to fill our hearts with godly meditations, and our mouthes with holy conference.
Secondly, that wee content not our selues with the publike seruice of God onely, but bee carefull to spend the rest of the Sabbath after the assemblies. The place where it was wrought, was, first, a priuat house. Here obserue, that Christ was ready to manifest the gift which God had bestowed vpon him in doing good, not onely openly before many, but in priuate houses also before a few; as Ioh. 2.1. at a priuate marriage of a poore couple hee wrought his first miracle: and Matth. 9.23. because it was not a popular ap∣plause that he sought for, but doing of good to the Church, and for it he was as ready in one place as another. Howbeit, most of his miracles were publike, because hereby, first, God was most glorified: secondly, more did reape benefit: thirdly, his Ministery more credited. The vse is for vs to doe the like in doing good to all, in all places indifferently, as occasion shall serue. For to doe nothing but what many may take notice of, sauoureth of arrogancy and desire of glory, rather then zeale of Gods glory, and good of their brother. Secondly, It was the house of Simon and Andrew; where a question may be moued, how it is said to be the house of Si∣mon and Andrews both? Answ. It was either because both had right to it, or be∣cause both of them dwelt together. To that, Ioh. 1.44. I an∣swer, That their breeding might bee at Bethsaida; and yet be∣cause of their Trade of fishing, they might haue a house at Ca∣pernaum. Secondly, Peter might dwell there because of his wife. Thirdly, because Christ did dwell there to entertaine him. To that Luk. 5.11. I answer, they forsooke all, that is, all that might hinder them in following of Christ, as their calling. Se∣condly, the vse of all, but not the possession. Now this shewes the brotherly agreement betweene these two brothers; a thing highly commended in Scripture; as Psal. 133.1, 2, 3. Secondly, though they suffered nothing to hinder them in following of Christ, yet they did not fondly cast away that they had. Matthew made Christ a Feast in his owne house af∣ter
he had forsooke all: Luk. 5.28, 29. For riches are Gods blessings, and haue a good vse, wherein they are to bee imploy∣ed, if they crosse not greater matters. Secondly, we are Gods Stewards, and no Steward may cast away his Masters goods. This confutes the Anabaptists, and some ancient Philosophers, which cast their money in the Sea. The company present were the foure Disciples, vers. 29. who were companions together, Luk. 5.7. Here note, first, the care of Christ to traine them vp, because hee meant to make them Apostles; and so he made them eye-witnesses of his Miracles and Doctrine, for the further strengthening of their Faith, that they might haue the greater euidence to preach Christ vnto o∣thers. This ought to be the practice of Tutors. This did Paul with Timothy. Secondly, their care and diligence to doe him seruice in attending on him, who was their Master. Thirdly, the Disciples desire to profit by Christ. The party cured, was Simons wiues mother. Where wee may note, that Christ thought it not an vnfit thing to take a married man for his Disciple. But some obiect against this, and say, that by a wise, 1. Cor. 9.5. is meant another woman? which is both slanderous and rediculous. See Heb. 13.4. in all, marriage is honourable, and in Ministers: 1. Tim. 3.5. 1. Tim. 4.3: Secondly, in that Peter had a carefull respect of his wiues mother, we learne, that husbands and wiues should haue a pi∣ous respect of the parents each of other, as appeares in Ruth to Naomi, and Moses to Iethro. The reason of it, is the Law of marriage, Gen. 2. by which bond they are to extend their affe∣ction to the parents of one another. Secondly, this is a great meanes to breed loue and kindnesse betweene themselues, when the one seeth how much the other respecteth his friends. Secondly, her disease wherewith she was afflicted, was, first, a hot burning Feuer: secondly, a great Feuer: thirdly, she was so sicke of it, hat she was faine to lye downe: fourthly, she was healed of it. All which circumstances do amplifie the disease, shewing it to be grieuous and dangerous. Whence learne we, That there is no disease so dangerous, but Christ can cure it;
because the absolutenesse of his power is such, that with him there is no respect of greatnesse or smalnesse. Teaching vs hereby to trust perfectly vnto him in all our distresses, it being he alone that can giue to others wisedome to prescribe, and to the meanes power to effect our health and welfare. The manner of curing. Here note the occasion; Mat. 8.14. saith, Christ saw her. Marke, that they told him of her. Luke, that they intreated him for her. First, then the sight of our miseries moues Christ to succour vs; as Mark. 6.34. Ioh. 5.6. because the eyes of Christ are eyes of pitty, like to those of the Samaritan: Luk. 10. Which serues to minister comfort to vs in all miseries. See Ezek. 16.3, 4, 5, &c. And albeit that Christ doth alwaies see our miseries, yet must we put him in minde of them, that he may see how wee are affected with them our selues. 2. In that they told him, and intreated him for her: this shewes, first, their faith in Christ: secondly, their loue and pit∣ty to her. Teaching vs in like cases to giue an euidence of our faith and brotherly loue, by commending the cases of our bre∣thren to Christ. For as he is best able to helpe in all distresses, so first, it is an honour done vnto him: secondly, it is a meanes to obtaine helpe for them: thirdly, it is a sacrifice acceptable to God, and we are accepted as worshippers of him. The meanes of curing, respect partly the gesture, partly, the speech of Christ. The gesture: He came vnto her, touhed her, and lift her vp: all to shew, that this cure came of him. Christ was able to doe it without these meanes, but hee did it to giue a greater eui∣dence. And false is that collection of the Vbiquitaries vpon Mark. 5.31. that in the flesh of Christ was a vertue to heale, be∣cause the diuine qualities were transfused in the flesh. Doct. Where Christ will, any meanes are powerfull as clay to  blindnesse, Ioh. 9.6. Moses Rod to fetch water out of a Rocke, Numb. 20.9. Act. 19.12. for Christ is the Fountaine of all power and efficacy. The vse for vs i, that we be carefull and conscionable to vse all meanes warranted in the Word of God, how simple soeuer
they may seeme to vs, not opposing our conceits against this power and wisedome of God: as Naaman did, and both Iewes and Gentiles in speaking against the Gospell, the meanes of saluation. Secondly, his speech; Luke saith, hee rebuked the Feuer. Christ hath an absolute command not onely ouer reasonable and liuing creatures, but also ouer things insensible. Vers. 32. And at Euen when the Sunne did set, or, [when the Sunne was downe] they brought to him all that were diseased, and them that were possessed with Diuels. 33 And the whole City was gathered together at the doore. 34 And he healed many that were sicke of diuers diseases, and cast out many Diuels, and suffered not the Diuels to say, that they knew him. THese words containes a generall History of Christ his mi∣raculous curing of sundry persons, diuersly afflicted. It is in number the eleuenth History of the first yeere: recorded by three Euanglists; Marke here; Luk. 4.40, 41. and Matth. 8.16, 17. The differences betweene them are partly in addition. 1. Matthew addes, first, the meanes whereby these cures were wrought, his Word, vers. 16. Secondly, a Prophecy that went before of Christ was now fulfilled, vers. 17. 2. Marke addes the whole 33. verse. 3. Luke, who is the most copious, addes, first, a second meanes of cure, laying on of his hands, vers. 40. Secondly, that the Diuels came out crying. Thirdly, Christs indignation against them, rebuked them. Fourthly, he addes this clause, the Christ. Partly in variety of phrases, as Matthew; VVhen Euen was come. Marke and Luke; When the Sunne was downe, or, Euen now a setting. Marke, they brought. Luke, they all brought. Matthew hath, possessed with Diuels. Luke, diseased. Marke hath both. Matthew, Marke, that Chist cast out. Luke, that the Diuels came out; being in effect all one.
The seuerall branches of this History are, first, the Time: se∣condly, the Occasion: thirdly, the Parties cured: fourthly, the Witnesses present: fifthly, the Manner of working this miracle: sixthly, the Manifestation thereof: seuenthly, the Effect: eight∣ly, the End, viz. the accomplishment of the Prophecy. The Time; When Euening was come, viz. the Euen of the same day whereupon Christ had done so much before, as the inference shewes plainely. Doct. Christ is euer ready to doe one good after another, as occasion is offered. A thing often noted in him; as after the long Sermon, Matth. 5.6, 7. in the eight Chapter are set downe more workes which he did presently after; because he accoun∣ted of this life as of a time of worke, Ioh. 9.4. and so he did im∣proue this time. Which teacheth vs to learne the like diligence vpon the same ground of the shortnesse of life, labouring here, looking for our rest hereafter, Heb. 4.8. Secondly, It is said, the Sunne was downe, and Euening was come. Now this seemes a time of rest, and vnseasonable for such businesse. Doct. No time was vnseasonable to Christ to doe good, he conferres with Nicodemus in the night: Ioh. 3. with the wo∣man of Samaria, weary and hungry; Ioh. 4. The reason, be∣cause Christ did esteeme the doing of Gods will aboue his meat, drinke, and rest, Ioh. 4.34. and so must we doing good workes both in, and out of season, 2. Tim. 4.2. and it is a re∣proofe for those that will doe good, but it shall be onely at seasonable and fit times. Thirdly, Luke saith, [the Sunne was setting.] Marke, [When the Sunne was set.] Here seemeth to be some contradiction. Answ. The Sunne was scarce downe, and yet it was euen now downe, when as they brought their sicke vnto him; so that the Sonne was but newly set. The reason why they brought not their sicke, till the Sunne was downe, was, because the Iewes did hold the workes of mercy vnlawfull to be done on the Sabbath day, as Mat. 12.2, 10. Luk. 13.14. & 14.2. Ioh. 5.9, 10. Ioh. 9.16. therefore in re∣gard
hereof they bring them not till the Euening, their Sab∣bath then ending, as they thought. Where note we, that super∣stition makes men neglect their owne good, and the good of their friends. Christ might haue been gone away to some o∣ther place, or haue taken himselfe to his rest, and would not cure them, and other casualties might haue come betweene. For superstition blindeth the iudgement, that it cannot discerne betweene things conuenient and vnconuenient, but wholly do∣teth on the thing conceited. Wee shall auoide so dangerous a thing, if we attend to the Word, and looke that those things which we maintaine, bee grounded vpon the Word of God: Heb. 13.9. The Occasion that mooued Christ to worke these Miracles was, because there were brought vnto him fit obiects to work vpon. Hence we learne, that the charitable workes of other in bringing their sicke to Christ, gaue him occasion to heale them. Reason was, first, to shew the goodnesse of his nature, not one∣ly when the persons themselues sue vnto him, but also when o∣thers intreate for them. Secondly, to shew how he approoues the good mind of others herein, as also their Faith. More particular circumstances to be noted, are, first, the ge∣nerality; all brought their sicke. Doct. All of all sorts are ready to seeke remedies for the cure of bodily diseases: A Ruler, Ioh. 4.46. a Begger: Mark. 14.46. a Canaanitish woman, Matth. 15.22. because these outward diseases are sensible. This will be a witnesse against vs all, that are so carelesse in seeking redresse for our spirituall maladies. Secondly, the manner of bringing. Luke saith, they led them by the hand. Marke, that they brought them. Noting hereby, that such was their care for their friends, that they thought it not enough to tell them of a remedy, but they brought them to the place where it was to be had: so Mark. 6.56. The cause of it was the greatnesse of their Faith in Christ to cure all disea∣ses, and of their lou to their brethren. Vse is for our imitation, not onely in the temporall good of our friends, but in the spirituall health of their soules, by brin∣ging
them to the meanes of saluation; such especially as are vnder our authoritie. The Parties cured. Note here Two points. First, the ge∣neralitie of them Matthew and Marke, say all; Luke, euery one: and that this all, were not a few; Marke saith, that hee cured many. 2. The kindes of maladies noted to haue beene; First, in generall, diuers diseases, some dangerous, some deadly, some infectious, &c. Secondly, in particular, possessions of Diuels. Doct. First, that Christ in doing good, shewes himselfe to bee no respecter of persons: all that came were healed▪ none lost their labour; Act. 10.34. Ioh. 6.37. For the ground of Christs actions is in himselfe, and his owne goodnesse, not in any thing whatsoeuer in man. Vse. For comfort and incouragement for all, in all distres∣ses, to haue recourse vnto Christ. Secondly, for imitation that in doing of good, we respect not the person, but the occasion that God offereth. This ought Magistrates, Ministers, Phy∣sitians, Councellors, &c. to do; Iam. 2.1. Thirdly, for reproofe of those that respect Greatnesse, Friends, Money, &c. Doct. Secondly, Christ was not weary of well doing. He healed a multitude; teaching vs not to bee discouraged in comming to Christ, because we see many goe; but to consi∣der that his power and ability is not stinted, but infinite as himselfe, like a neuer dried Fountaine. Among the diseases that Christ healed, there were no doubt, some loathsome, and some infectious: heare obserue. First, Christ loathed none of them, being full of pittie, and the more grieuous the disease, the more pittifull. Which giues vs comfort and confidence to goe vnto him, though neuer so loathsome and contemptible in our owne eyes; yea, the rather because of i; and further teacheth vs to be of a like minde to∣wards others. Secondly, that Christ was not capable of in∣fection, which as it is gathered here in generall, so it expresly Matth. 8.3. prooued, by curing the Leper. For Christ was not infected with our personall diseases, being from the cor∣ruption of our nature.
Lastly, that Christ was able to cure all, it shewes him to be a sufficient and perfect Sauiour, both willing and powerfull to doe vs good. The application which the Prophet makes, in Matthew. 8.17. proues this. The witnesses present, were the whole Citie, that is, many of the people of the Citie. Per Metonim. Subiecti. And Sy∣necdoc. Totius proparte. Such phrases in Scripture are vsuall. Neither are we to search too curiously, nor condemne a man of vntruth presently, if he vse such a phrase. That so many assembled, it shewes rather the good prouidence of God, then any goodnesse in them, being by him brought to passe for his Glory, and the good of the Church, and the clearing of the innocency of Christ his Sonne, and his plaine dealing; seeing the Pharises and others counted him an impostor. But what profit these Capernaites made of these miracles may appeare; Mat. 11.23. Ioh. 6. The meanes which Christ vsed were: 1. His Word, Christ hath an absolute command ouer the Diuell. So wee are to trust in Christ, if wee feare the Diuell. And this we must doe when we see no outward meanes. For Christ can worke by his owne Word, without any meanes. 2. His laying on of his hands: not that this was any Phy∣sicall meanes, but to shew that the cure came from him. The manifestation of these miracles to be true miracles, is set forth by diuers branches. 1. From the generalitie, no disease so deadly, but Christ cured it, no spirit so strong, but Christ dispossessed him. 2. From the ti. It was done so shortly and suddenly. So miraculously. For time is required to things done by course of Nature. 3. The cure wrought so perfectly. 4. That these things were done without any naturall meanes. 5. That the Diuells came out crying, that is, vnwillingly, and flatteringly. 6. That Christ did not seeke to colour any thing, but did it in view of all. Wherefore Christ being thus able to doe mi∣racles,
he is to be trusted vnto, aboue meanes. The Effcts are two: First, in regard of the Diuell. And Secondly, in regard of Christ. Of the Diuels, that First, they came out; Secondly, they cried; Thirdly, they confessed Christ the Sonne of God. The First, sheweth their inforced obedience; The Second, that they stand in dread and awe of Christ; The Third, they had knowledge of Christ, though not by themselues, but by the Church; hearing the Prophets point at him. So that euen the Diuels many times doe profit more by the Word, then men of Christ. First, that he rebuked the Diuell; shewing his dis∣like of him, and indignation against him. Marke 2.1. And againe, he entred into Capernaum after some dayes, and it was noised that he was in the house. 2. And straight way many were gathered together, in so much as there was no roome to receiue them; no, not so much as a∣bout the doore, and he preached the Word vnto them. 3. And they come vnto him, bringing one sicke of the Palsie, which was borne of foure: 4 And when they could not come nigh him for prease, they vn∣couered the roofe where he was; and when they had broken it vp, they let downe the bed, whereon the sicke of the Palsi lay. 5. When Iesus saw their Faith, he said vnto the sicke of the Palsie, Sonne, thy sinnes be forgiuen thee. THese words and the rest vnto the 13. verse, containe the 15. History of the first yeare of Christs publicke Ministe∣ry, from the first Passeouer, Ioh. 2.13. The First, was the purging of the Temple; Ioh. 2.14. 2. His conference with Nicodemus; Ioh. 3.1. 3. The execution of his Ministery in Iudea. With Iohns testimony of him; Ioh. 3.22. 4. A bie Historie of Iohns Imprisonment; Luke 3.19. 5. His conference, with the woman of Samaria; Ioh. 4.1.
6. Iesus hauing left Iudea, and passed through Samaria; comes into Galilee, where he heales the Rulers Son, Ioh. 4.43. 7. From Galilee hee goes vnto Nazereth; his entertaine∣ment there amongst his countrimen; Luke 4.16. 8. Leauing Nazareth, he commeth to Capernaum: with his preaching there; Mat. 4.12. Luke 4.31. 9. The calling of his Disciples. 10. The dispossessing of a Diuell; Mark. 1.23. 11. The curing of Simons wiues mother; Mark. 1.29. 12. The curing of many together; Mark. 1.32. 13. Christ his peragration of Galilee; Mark. 1.39. 14. The curing of the Leaper; Mark. 1.40. 15. This present History, which as it is the 15. History: so it is the seuenth miracle recorded. The first miracle, was the turning of water into wine at Cana in Galilee; Ioh. 2.1. 2. The curing of the Rulers Sonne; Ioh. 4.43. 3. The great draught of Fishes; Luk. 5.1. 4. The dispossessing of the Diuell: Mark. 1.23. 5. Curing of Simons wiues mother; Mark. 1.29. 6. Curing of the Leaper. Mark. 1.40. 7. This Matthew chap. 9.2. Recordeth this Historie after certaine others: and therefore some thinke that this and the Story there mentioned, are two diuers Histories; but such is the agreement in the circumstances, as also for as much as it is likewise set downe before Matthew his calling to be a Disci∣ple, that it seemeth to be the same with this. [The first verse, of the ninth chapter; is to be ioyned to the ninth.] The parts of this History are; First, Christs preparation. Secondly, the manner of working it. Thirdly, the effects. The preparation hereunto in generall, is Christ his preach∣ing of the Word: He preached, saith Mark. He taught saith Luke cap. 5.17. that is, by preaching he taught them. This is set forth by diuers circumstances, wherof Marke sets downe. First, the time, after some dayes. Secondly, the place in ge∣nerall, Capernaum, is particular the house. Thirdly, the occa∣sion, the multitude comming together. Luke addes a more
particular description of the persons that came to heare Christ, cp. 4. verse, 17. Secondly, the seale of Christs Ministerie; the Power of God, &c. eodem vers. Of Christs Ministery hath beene spoken before, now come we to the Time. It is noted here indefinitely to haue beene after some daies; viz. which he had spent in the desert; Marke 1. and the last verse Luke 4.16. Either in meditation with his Hea∣uenly Father and prayer to him, or in conference with his Disciples, or other speciall Friends: hauing thus for a while retired himselfe, hee now returneth to his publike Ministe∣ry. Doct. Men of publike function hauing occasion to retire themselues for a time, from the place of their calling, for re∣creation, recouery of health, or through persecution, &c. must haue a minde and care to returne againe to their calling, as sone as they can. So Eliah withdrawing himselfe for feare of Iezabell, is commanded from God, to returne againe; 1. King. 19. So Peter lodging priuately at Ioppa; Act. 9. last: is sent for to come abroad by an Angell; Act. 10. For our Function, is that maine worke that we alwaies in∣tend; and therefore our retiring ought to bee for our helpe and not hinderance in the execution of it. Vse. Is for Ministers, that they haue a care to returne to their Flocke; as Dauid 1. Sam. 17.15. For it is their charge; Act. 20.28. 1. Pet. 5.2. Secondly, there is in their absence great danger of falling backe, and growing cold in zeale. The Diuell hauing an entrance to sow tares, and to bring in many mischiefes; Act. 20.29. as the Apostle Paul found by expe∣rience. Place, is noted in generall to bee Capernaum; of which Citie hath beene spoken before. Here note, that this is the fourth time where expresse mention is made of Christ com∣ing vnto this City. So that this was the chiefest place of his abode: and there∣fore it is called his owne Cittie; Mat. 9.1. In regard of which residence of Christ here, & his often preaching, it was that this
Citie, was lift vp vnto Heauen; in respect of the benefit they might haue reaped by his still being with them. Doct. It is a great benefit to haue a faithfull Minister, or neighbour dwelling by vs. This the Shunamite well knew; 2. King. 4.9.10. Because of Gods blessings accompanying such. Secondly, of greater meanes of comfort and instructi∣on. Thirdly, wee are after a more speciall manner partakers of their prayers; for such will not forget to pray for their Friends and Neighbours, and such as they are bound vnto. Which comdemnes the world, that of all other, are loth to haue a Minister, or a godly man dwell by them; for feare lest their prophanenesse be discouraged. And we see that the Capernaites light esteeme of Christ, his dwelling and paines taking amongst them; was it for which Christ doth afterwards condemne them to hel, though before lifted them vp to heauen. The particular place noted, is the House; viz. of Christs vsuall abode. For he dwelt in Capernaum; Matth. 4.13. & 9.1. Not of his owne inheritance, for hee had not a house of his owne, to hide his head in; Matth. 8.20. But it is like to bee that of Simons and Andrew, mentioned before; chap. 1.29.33. For these were likeliest to entertaine him: and hither the peo∣ple resorted once afore verse 33. and so found him out the easi∣er now; and Matth. 17.27. Peter payeth tribute for Christ and himselfe, as if they had dwelt both together. Here we see that Christ lets slip no opportunitie, but preach∣eth in a priuate house, hauing good occasion: which albeit he and other extraordinary persons, did vpon extraordinary times and occasions; yet we must take heed how wee draw it into imitation, in a settled Church where the libertie of pub∣like assemblies is permitted to all, to the offence of the ciuill Magistrates. Much lesse may we with Brownists and Separa∣tists, with draw our selues from the publike assemblies to goe into Woods, &c. The Occasion in generall, was the peoples concourse; where note first what moued the people to come. It is said that his comming was noised abroad; the rumour spreading from one Neighbour, to another. This is to bee noted for such places
(as many in the countrey are) where the preaching of the Word is rare; that if happily a faithfull Minister comming that way, be willing thre to bestow his paines; one Neigh∣bour doe make it knowne to another, and incourage them to come. 2. Note their readinesse, expressed two waies. First, their speedinesse [straight way,] which condemneth the slacke∣nesse of many in comming to the Church. Secondly, by their Multitude, [many,] amplified by that, that First, the House; Secondly, no not the Porch and places about the house were able to receiue them. Amongst which multitude, though some came for curiositie, some for helpe of their disease, some for other respects, yet some came to heare, and in generall, their comming was commendable, and to good effect; occa∣sioning Christ to instruct them. Doct. Readinesse in people to heare, ought to stirre vp in Ministers a desire to preach; as Act. 10.33. For this is a signe that God will giue a blessing; Secondly, that hee hath called vs to such a place. The persons that were Auditors, are discribed by Luke, to haue beene not only of the common sort: but also of the Pharises and Doctors of the Law. The Pharises were a strict Sect, differing from all other peo∣ple, in apparrell, diet, and conuersation. But two things espe∣cially are noted of them. First, that they were most exact expositors of the Law. Secondly, their strictnesse of their con∣uersation; in both which respects, Christ doth notably disco∣uer their false dealings, shewing them to be, both hereticall in their Doctrine, grounding their expositions not on the Scriptures, but the traditions of their Fathers: and also hy∣pocriticall in their conversation, doing whatsoeuer they doe, to be seene of men. The Doctors of the Law, are those that be called elsewhere Scribes, not from writing, but learning. For both Scribes and Pharises, sate in Moses Chaire, though these were a more common kinde of teachers then the Pharises. Both these sorts were in opposition against Christ, mali∣cing
and hating him. And now they came with a malicious, enuious, and captious minde to ensnare him: as may appeare by their reasoning against him in their hearts. Yet it is said, these men came from euery quarter round about, to shew how farre malice and enuie will carry men, further ordinarily then pittie. Secondly, note here that Christ ceaseth not to preach, although these captious and enuious hearers sate before his face: being he knew that his Doctrine was true, and that hee was able to defend it. Now there was neuer any congregati∣on, where were not some enuious, captious, and malicious hearers; who comming not with a minde to subiect them∣selues, to the Word, finde occasion to cauill and carpe at it, to bleare mens eyes with this pretence, as a cause why they doe not yeeld obedience vnto it. For all this Ministers must not be discouraged from preaching, but regard: First, that the Lord hath sent them. Secondly, The Talent that God hath be∣stowed vpon them, which they must imploy, if the Lord him∣selfe hinder them not. Thirdly, that there be some honest hear∣ted hearers, and their good is to be respected. Such kinde of Auditors had Ieremie, chap. 20.10. see Ezek. 2.3. &c. As an antidote against the poyson of enuious tongues, Mi∣nisters ought to regard both the matter and manner of their Doctrine, that it be such as may be iustified by the Word of God, that it be so deliuered plainely, powerfully, that it sa∣uour not of ostentation, and affectation. The Seale of Christs preaching, is the extraordinary Power of God, that is, the gift of healing; which did now manifest it selfe in an extraordinary manner. That it is called the power of the Lord, inferre no opposition, seeing Christ himselfe was the Lord. Or secondly, rather because that Christ in regard of that condition, whereunto he did subiect himselfe, in taking our nature and infirmities vpon him; he needed the assistance of the Spirit of God. Not that this power of the Spirit was not alwaies in him, but because it did not alike alwaies shew it selfe, as Marke 6.5. himselfe restraining it in regard of the condition on mens part, viz. Faith. At this time he doth manifest this diuine Power, the rater
because of his malitious aduersaries that were there present· So that it is to be noted, that the more the Word is cauilled at, the more euidence God giueth thereunto. Moses miracles the more the Sorcerers did disgrace, the more clearer they were, till they did confesse the finger of God, Exod. See Act. 4.16. Which serues to incourage honest hearers, and to confound the aduer∣saries. The second general part is the Miracle it selfe, and the work∣ing of it, wherein note, first, the kind of the disease: secondly, the occasion: thirdly, the manner of curing. Touching the kind of the disease, it was the Palsie: a disease whereby the nerues and sinewes are so loosed and dissolued, that motion and life is lost in that part which is so affected; and therefore it is called the dead Palsie, which if it bee some∣what growne, it is hardly or neuer cured; as it was with this man, who was neither able to goe, nor to sit, which shewes the greatnesse of the cure. Now though this disease be a shame to Phisitians passing their skill, yet Christ did cure it, as he is able to doe all other the most dangerous sicknesses. The occasion of working this Miracle, was partly the Faith of them that brought him, partly the Faith of himselfe, vers. 5. which Faith, though it be an inward grace, and so of mans eyes inuisible, yet Christ could see it inwardly. Notwithstanding, here he sees it also by the fruites thereof in them by their cha∣rity, diligence and labour in bringing this poore man to Christ. Secondly, in the man himselfe by his great patience, in suffering all those things they did vnto him. Of these wee will speake of more particularly; and first, of the fruits of faith in this mans Friends. Their charity and care is set downe in fiue branches; first, that they did not onely tell him of a remedy for his disease, but also did foure of them bring him vnto the place where it was to be had, vers. 3. 2. That he being not able to rise and goe along with them▪ they carry him, and not so onely, but for his greater ease, bed and all, vers. 3. 3. Hauing brought him, they leaue him not so, letting him
alone for others to bring him to Iesus, but themselues seeke all meanes to come neere vnto Christ, vers. 4. Luk. 5.17. 4. When in seeking of this meanes of accesse, they were hindred, yet doe they not cease to proceede on, not making this hinderance an excuse either for to leaue him, or to carry him backe againe. 5. Finding no ordinary meanes, they seeke vnto extraordi∣nary: first, they clime vp to the top of the house, and so draw vp the bed. Now it is to be noted, that their houses were flat on the top, as may be gathered out of Deut. 22.8. and that this house here spoken of, was open to the top without chambers, like a great Hall, and so it was fit for a great many to come to∣gether. Secondly, they vncouer the roofe, and breake it open. Thirdly, when they could not goe downe themselues, they let him downe with ropes. From these circumstances we learne many duties of charity to be performed in like cases of distresse. 1. That it is not sufficient to tell our friends of the meanes of cure, but wee must doe our best to make them partakers of such meanes. For some are vnable to helpe themselues, as this man; and some are carelesse of their owne safety, like Naaman, 2. King. 5, 12. and some it bootes but little, only to tell them of the meanes, vnlesse we help them to it our selues, and perswade them to vse it, like to Naamans seruants. To apply this to spi∣rituall cures, wee must not onely make knowne vnto others where the meanes of saluation is to be had, but also as farre as in vs lyeth, make them partakers of it. For here the reason holds true, that we are vnable, carelesse, and vnwilling to seeke vnto these meanes of our selues. This belongs to those that are set ouer others, as Masters their Seruants, Magistrates their Subiects, and Ministers also their people, to cause them to come vnto the ministery of the Word. 2. That we tender those that are weake, according to their weakenesse, supplying their wants; and therefore did these men bring the bed also. So did Iob relieue euery one accor∣ding to his want, Chap. 29.15. Gal. 6.2. Ephes. 4.2. Note here a contrary practice of a cruel wretch, namely, Saul,
who when Dauid would not spare him, but would haue him brought, bed and all, to be slaine: 1. Sam. 19.13. so that the charity of mercifull men cannot goe so farre, but the cruelty of wretches will goe as farre, or further. 3. That in good actions and indeauours which wee goe a∣bout, wee suffer not obstacles to hinder our proceeding. For no actions are without some: yea, God doth many times mi∣nister some for the triall of our faith and constancy, as Matth. 15.. &c. The diuell also through malice doth lay many blockes in our wayes, as 1. Thes. 2.18. And this is the rather to be noted, because of our pronenesse to make excuses, especi∣ally in spirituall matters, wherein wee are like the sluggard in the Prouerbs, still doubting of some danger. Herein Hester, though otherwise a good woman, failed, fearing the Kings Edict: Hest. 4.11. but Mordecay told her, that this scruple must not hinder her in so good a purpose, as the safety of the Iewes, vers. 13.14. 4. When by ordinary meanes we cannot effect our desire, then are we to vse extraordinary, as Dauid did; 1. Sam. 21, 4, 6. whose example Christ doth alleage, Matth. 12.34. So where the Word is not preached in our Parishes, we may come to others. Alwaies prouided, that though the meanes bee vn∣usuall, yet they be lawfull. Wherein Rebecca failed, in procu∣ring her sonne a blessing, by teaching him to lye. Now for a generall vse of all, if we compare our backward∣nesse, in seeking the spirituall good of our friend with the care of these, in seeking the temporall good of this man, wee cannot but be ashamed. Surely seeing there is a greater necessity of this spirituall care, then of the bodily, and that in seeking of this, we are more acceptable vnto Christ, then in the other, we ought to be stirred vp with greater care to tender the good of our brethrens soules. Secondly, we are to consider the fruites of Faith, which are in this man the patient. His patience is set forth; first, that he suffered himselfe to be brought out of his house, which a sicke man easily doth not, to bee carried among the presse, to bee drawne vp, and to bee let downe; all which could not but
worke great disquiet vnto him: yet doth hee not repine, and say, If you were in my case, you would not bee thus and thus tumbled vp and downe. But seeing that his friends desired his good, he willingly submits himselfe to them. From whence wee may learne, how to carry our selues in time of sicknesse, to bee patient, to yeeld to our friends aduice, considering that they do it for our good, and also better vnder∣stand what is fit for vs, then our selues. Now then how pati∣ently ought we to submit our selues to those, that seeke our good and conuersion, though it be with some trouble to vs in our conscience. Wee come now to consider their Faith, the ground of all these workes, expressed here, vers. 5. and Luk. 5.20. [When hee saw their Faith.] Wherein three words are to be noted; Saw. Their. Faith. Doct. Faith makes all other workes to bee acceptable to Christ. He regarded not those outward things these men did, but he saw their faith in them. The whole Chapter of the ele∣uenth to the Hebrewes, prooues, and especially vers. 6. For Faith is the roote of all sanctifying graces: by it we are vnited vnto Christ, in whom being rooted and ingrafted, wee receiue from him life and grace, which shewes it selfe forth in vs by the fruites, as a tree receiuing sap from the roote, sends it forth into fruit: so that what comes not from Faith, hath no spirituall life in it, the roote whereby it is receiued, being wanting. 2. Faith is the hand whereby we receiue the gifts of God; as Ioh. 1.12. where receiuing and beleeuing are all one. 3. Of all other graces, God by Faith is most glorified: for by it alone we come vtterly to deny our selues, and to attribute all to the goodnesse and grace of God. This shewes how farre the world is deceiued; first, Gentiles and Heathens that know not God, and so no good thing they doe can bee acceptable to him. Secondly, Papists, that thinke by workes to merit Gods fauour, which conceit doth indeed breed spirituall pride in mans heart making him most odious in Gods sight. 3. Ignorant men that thinke their good meaning and intent makes the thing acceptable before God. Let vs then labour
for Faith in all our wokes, doing them, first, because God hath commanded them: Secondly, in deniall of our selues, relying on Gods goodnesse in Christ, to haue both them and our per∣sons accepted. Saw.] Christ saw their faith by his diuine power: but here especially by those great fruits whereby it appeared. Doct. The Faith which is acceptable to Christ, is a visible Faith, which manifesteth it selfe by the fruits, such was the faith of those Worthies, Heb. 11. appearing by some notable marke or other: Iam. 2.18. For Faith if it receiue sap and grace from Christ, it will grow and bud forth; it is like fire, it cannot bee hid: and this is a marke distinguishing true faith from false: such as is that of many carnall Gospellers, who make an out∣ward profession, but their fruits are none, they remaine meere worldly and carnall still. Their.] That is, as the plurall number sheweth, of the friends of this man: but yet in that hereupon hee turneth his speech vnto the man, and saith, Thy sinnes, &c. it is plaine that by this word Their, is meant the Faith of this sicke man, as well as of his friends. Doct. The Faith, Prayer, and Charity of men are auaileable before God, not onely for themselues, but for others also. Here then let vs see how they are auaileable, how farre not. First, the Faith of one man is auaileable for another, as first, the faith of the Parents is a meanes to giue their children a right to the Couenant of God. So are they called holy, 1. Cor. 7.14. because of their beleeuing parents. Secondly, the Faith of one may be a meanes to bring another to repentance and grace. So are our prayers auaileable for the Iewes, as were theirs also for the Gentiles in times past. So may our prayers profit particular persons, by mouing God to worke Faith and repentance in them. Thirdly, to obtaine temporall blessings: as Laban for Iacobs sake, Gen. 30.27. Potiphar for Iosephs sake was blessed, Genes. 39.5. and the whole world is blessed for the Churches sake. But it is no way auaileable for the obtaining of eternall life, and enioying the free grace and mercy of God in the remission
of ones sinne, for this euery man must haue Faith of his owne, Hab. 2.4. Hereby we see how God doth respect the Faith of his chil∣dren, accepting it not onely for themselues, but for others also. And the vse for vs, is to vse this charitable meanes in the be∣halfe of our brethren, the Lord giuing vs this encouragement to come for others, as well as our selues. Wherefore it is a com∣mendable practice of friends to desire the prayers one of ano∣ther. Now in that this mans friends did not alone intreate for him, but himselfe also beleeued, so that his Faith ioyned with theirs, was effectuall for the curing of his bodily disease, and also the obtaining of remission of sinnes, we learne, that when the prayers of parties themselues are ioyned with others, then they are truly effectuall. So the Apostle desires the Romanes to striue with him by prayers to God; Rom. 15.30. Vse is for reproofe of those that thinke they are safe, if others call vpon God for them, though themselues neuer pray. This is not sufficient. Abraham prayed for Ismael, Gen. 17.18. but Ismael prayed not with him, and therefore they benefited him not, vers. 21. So did Samuel pray for Saul, 1. Sam. 15.35. but Saul was carelesse of himselfe; and therefore God bids Sa∣muel cease praying, Chap. 16.1. So Ezek. 14.14. Wee ought so as we desire to obtaine temporall, or spirituall blessings by the prayers of others, to ioyne also our prayers with theirs. All this while wee heare of no petition, this poore man is brought before Christ, and there hee lyes, none spake a word for him, nor yet himselfe for himselfe. Neuerthelesse doth Christ worke this great miracle on him. Here note, first, Christ his readinesse to grant vnto vs the de∣sires and groanes of our hearts, when he knowes them before that we doe vtter them. Dauid did but thinke to confesse, and God forgaue, Psalm. 32.5. Exod. 14.15. Neh. 2.4. Luk. 15.18, 19, 20. Vse. For comfort of them, who through feare, griefe, or trouble of minde, are not able to expresse their desire. 2. If God doe accept a desire, how much more a faithfull prayer.
Secondly, in the parties, note by their silence, that they thought it sufficient to make knowne vnto Christ this mans case, by laying him before him, without prescribing how, or when to cure him. In like manner must we wait patiently on Christ, not appointing him the time, place, or meanes of deliue∣ry. So much for the occasion of this Miracle. Vers. 5. Sonne, [man, Luk. 5.20.] [bee of good cheere, Matth. 9.2.] thy sinnes are forgiuen thee. 6. And there were certaine of the Scribes sitting there, and reasoning in their hearts. 7. Why doth this man speake such blasphemy? Who can forgiue sinnes but God onely. 8. And immediately when Iesus perceiued in his spirit, that they thus reasoned with themselues, he said vnto them, Why reason you these things in your hearts? 9. Whether it is easier to say to the sicke of the Palsie, Thy sinnes are forgiuen? or to say, Arise, and take vp thy bed, and walke. 10. But that yee may know that the Sonne of man hath authori∣tie in earth to forgiue sinnes, he said to the sicke of the Palsie, 11. I say vnto thee, Arise, and take vp thy bed, and get thee to thine owne house. IN these words is laid downe the manner of curing this sicke man: wherein note, first, the preparatiue vnto it. Secondly, the cure it selfe, Arise, take vp. The preparatiue, [thy sinnes are forgiuen thee, &c.] by rea∣son of the cauill of the Scribes is amplified by First, a most gratious consolation. Secondly, a malicious opposition against the same. Thirdly, a iudicial defense and apology for his saying against those Scribes. First, the consolation: in it obserue, first, a compellation: se∣condly, an exhortation: thirdly, an absolution. In the compellation note first in generall, the admirable gen∣tlenesse of Christ towards this man, that though this was done
in time whilest he was preaching, & so seemed to interrupt him: yet seeing his sincere and faithfull heart, he doth not reproue him, but receiueth him, with great kindenesse and compassion. Doctr. God reiecteth none, that come to him with a faithfull heart. And though he seemeth so to do Matth. 15.22. yet he doth not indeed reiect her, but for the manifestation of her faith, he trieth her, knowing in himselfe before that, for all his deniall, she would not goe away. Ʋse Is for incouragement to come to Christ. Man] Christ taketh notice of his mould and condition, and in that regard doth pittie and succour him. See Psal. 103.14. And in like may we lay forth our fraile condition as an argu∣ment to moue God to pittie. Sonne] a title of fauour and honour. Doct. Christ doth account all faithfull men his sonnes and children. Where Diues in Hell is called Sonne, it is ironically spoken, and by way of vpbraiding; Luke 16.25. as the vn∣worthy guest is called Friend; Matth. 22.12. The vse is Psal. 103.13. The exhortation is set downe by Matthew chap. 9.2. Bee of good cheere. And it is opposed to a kinde of feare and doubt, that was in this man; by reason of his sinnes: though he had Faith, yet it was not without doubting; Christ there∣fore knowing his case, applies a fit remedie for the strength∣ning of his faith. Doct. Christ doth not reiect a weake faith, which ought to be a great incouragement vnto vs, if so be that we can finde in our selues any euidence of the beginning of true Grace. The Vse Is to teach vs how to carry our selues towards those that are sicke, to applie remedies according to their wants; es∣pecially, if they be afflicted in minde, then to yeeld vnto them all the comforts we can; Prou. 18.14. The third part of Consolation is the Absolution, where we may note that Assurance of the remission of sinnes is a most soueraigne ground of comfort. For our sinnes being forgiuen, all things turne to our Good. It being sinnes alone, that makes vs miserable. Secondly, ob∣serue
the difference of Christ his manner of pronouncing abso∣lution of sinnes from that both of extraordinary Ministers; as Prophets, and Apostles, and of ordinary Ministers, ss also of Priuate Christians. Christ being God and Man, the Mediator of Mankinde, hath purchased by his death remission of sinnes: so that hee can pronounce absolution of them, in his owne Name, and not only pronounce it, but also actually giue remission of sinnes. Prophets and Apostles did pronounce it in Christs Name, &c. thhat conditionally, vpon condition of faith and repen∣tance, also they could by inspiration, know whether a mans sinnes were forgiuen or not. Ordinary Ministers, are Gods Embassadors; and in Christs stead, by vertue of this Office and Function, in which they are placed for the comfort of distressed soules; vnto whom, vpon condition of faith and repentance, they may pronounce abso∣lution. Priuate Christians can doe no more, but tell their brethren of the promises of God, and comfort them with the consola∣tions of the Scripture, but to pronounce absolution of sinnes, is not in their, but the Ministers authoritie, and commission. 3. We may here note, how Christ shewes himselfe to be a faithfull Physition, in that he strikes at the roote, and first takes away the cause of the disease, viz. his sinnes. The like course is to be vsed with sicke persons, to labour first to bring them to a sight of their sinnes, and repentance for them, and so to ap∣ply remedies for their diseases. 4. Christ obseruing the faith of this man, doth presently pronounce remission of sinnes. Where note that remission of sinnes ariseth from the free mercy of God, without any workes. 5. The mans friends came only for the curing of his bodily disease, and Christ bestowes on him a greater benefit, hee for∣giues him his sinnes. Hence wee learne that Christ doth giue greater and better things to those that come to him in Faith, then themselues doe desire. So Iacob desired but food and ap∣parrell,
and God gaue him great riches. See Psal. 21.4. Ephe. 3.20. For God hath an eye to his owne bountie, and what it becomes him to giue, and more respects our neede, then our request: and therefore sometimes denies our request, grantig vs a greater benefit another way, as to Paul. In the Opposition made against this speach of Christ, begin∣ning at the 6. verse, let vs as in the former part of this story, consider the differences that are betweene the Euangelists, in setting of it downe; and first in addition. Matthew ddes chap. 9. verse 4.  Euill things. Verse 8. Who had giuen such great power to men. Marke addes, verse 8. In his Spirit. Verse 9. This clause, whether &c. to say to the sicke of the Palsie. Verse 9. That he saith, take vp thy bed. Verse 12. We neuer saw such a thing. Luke chap. 5. addes verse 25. that he went home glorifying God. Verse 26. That the people were filled with feare. Verse 26. We haue seene strange things. 2. In varietie of phrases. As Matthew saith; [they said.] Marke, they reasoned in their hearts. Luke, they beganne to thinke or reason. In this opposition we may note these parts. 1. The parties opposing; Scribes and Pharises. 2. The manner of their opposition; in their hearts. 3. The matter they oppose; Blasphemie. 4. The ground and reason of it; who can forgiue sinnes &c. Parties opposing weare Scribes and Pharises, of whom we heard before that they were accounted learned expositors of the Law. Whence we obserue, that learning not sanctified, makes men to bee the greater enemies to the Truth, of God. The people wee see did glorifie God, it was the Scribes and Pharises, that cauilled against Christ preaching. So Ier. 26.11. Heretikes haue beene alwaies learned men. And among Pa∣pists,
the Iesuites are most learned. For learning separated from grace, puffeth vp, and maketh men selfe-conceited. So that they set all their wit and learning to disgrace, and defame others. Vse Is for Schollers, to pray God to Sanctifie their learning, vnto them. Also that the people, who from the vniuersities, doe receiue Ministers; doe pray for them, that God would sanctifie and season their learning with his Grace. Manner of opposing was that this conceit was but yet in their hearts, they vttered it not, they did not fret, fume, and depart away, disdaining to heare such blasphemie, but they sit still, and carry a smooth face, minding to watch their opportu∣nitie afterwards. Hypocrites do then deuise greatest mischiefe in their hearts, when they carry fairest faces. Ezek. 14.1, 3. & chap. 33.31. Iudas carried so fare a face, that none of the Disciples suspect∣ed him of treacherie, euery one was more affraid of himselfe; Matth. 26.22.25. Vse To teach vs to bee wise as Serpents, not to trust men vpon shew and outward appearance, when they come to heare the Word, and are attentiue vnto it. Christ did it not. Ioh. 2.24. For he saw that they had hollow hearts. Act. 9.26. The matter they lay to his charge is Blasphemie; now to Blaspheme, is to impeach the name and credit of any: and is attributed to man. 1. Cor. 4.13. Iud. verse 8. But the common vse hath more principally attributed it to God: and so it is taken in double respect. First, when some∣things derogatorie to the diuine Maiestie, is attributed to him: and then some word is added, as blasphemes God, the Name of God, &c. Reue. 16.9.11. Secondly, when some thing pro∣per to God is attributed to man, and then it is said simply, he blasphemed; Matth. 26.65. This sinne was punishable by death. This great offence they lay to his charge, the more to bring him in danger, and see how they aggrauate it as appeares by their diuers questions, set downe by the Euangelists. Doct. Malice doth make men aggrauate euery thing to the vtmost, as Korah. Numb. 16.3. the Princes conspiring against
Daniel Dan. 6.13. and Haman. Est. 3.8. Tertullus Acts 24.5.6. Vse. To teach vs that if we liue among malicious men, wee carry our selues wisely, and warily, so that wee may iustifie whatsoeuer we doe. Ground and reason of their opposition, is in these words, [who can forgiue sinnes, but God only. Where first in gene∣rall note, that nothing can be so comfortably spoken, but ma∣licious enemies will peruert it to the contrary. Christ comfor∣ted this man, by pronouncing forgiuenesse of sinnes to him; they impute this to Christ, as a matter of blasphemie: because there is such men, a satanicall spirit, which like poyson, turneth the sweetest things into venome. More particularly in the reason of this their Cauill, we may see that the ground is true and good, but their fault is in the application. It is true. 1. That, that which properly belongeth to God, cannot be attributed to man. 2. That forgiuenesse of sinnes, is proper to God. 3. That man, cannot forgiue sinnes. 4. That Christ in taking this power to him, tooke that which belonged to God. All these, the reason truly implies. Yet neuerthelesse, the conclusion which they draw from hence that Christ Blasphemeth, is false, and blasphemous. In which points, our aduersaries the Papists, goe beyond these Pharises, who attribute the power of binding the con∣science proper only to God, to mans also; who besides Christ, giues vnto the Pope, and other, power to forgiue sinnes and the like. In this reasoning of the Scribes and Pharises, we may note two faultes of them. First, that without further inquiring they did rashly accuse Christ of Blasphemie, vpon that speech; they might haue interpreted it as spoken prophetically. Se∣condly, in that they did not see that he had power and autho∣ritie, to doe that which he did. They did wilfully winke at all those euidences, and testimonies of his diuine power, which were manifested among them, and were especially knowne to
such learned men as they, the signes of his birth; his disputing with them, his miracles and the like; by which many others were conuerted. And therefore Christ bids them take heed, lest they sin against the Holy Ghost, by denying so plaine a truth. So that we see that these Scribes and Pharises, thinking to accuse Christ of Blasphemie, doe themselues Blaspheme, in denying vnto God that which doth belong vnto him; viz. pow∣er to forgiue sinnes. Doct. Slanderous accusers of Innocents, are guiltie them∣selues of the same crime, which they lay to their charge; Mat. 26.65. which is brought to passe by the seuere Iudge∣ment of God, that they may be found out in their owne wic∣kednesse, and be made the more inexcusable. So dealt the Papists in accusing our Doctrine, as a Doctrine of libertie, when none is more licentious, then their owne, &c. Doct. Secondly, from their false consequence, we may ob∣serue the Diuels Logicke, teaching men from true grounds to gather false conclusions; that by the truth of the ground, mens eyes may bee bleared: as Heretikes, and Idolaters, al∣waies haue done; alleadging Scripture alwaies for their asser∣tions. Vse, Is not therefore to dislike the Scripture, accounting it with the Papists a leaden rule; but to trie the consequences drawne from thence, and to labour that on this foundation we build Gold, not Stubble, Hay, and Straw. So much for the Opposition. Wee are now come to Christ his Apologie, where before wee handle the Defence; wee haue to consider how Christ knew of this their Cauilling. Luke saith he knew their thoughts. Matthew, that he saw them, which is more then knowing; for that he might haue done by some outward signe. Marke, that immediately as soone as they began to thinke, Iesus perceiued in his Spirit. Doct. Christ knowes the very secrets of mens hearts, bee they enemies or friends; as of his Disiples; Luke 9.47.
The Reason is here added by Marke, hee perceiued their thoughts in his Spirit, by his Diuine Power and Godhead; 1. King. 8.39. Act. 1.24. And herein is the difference be∣tweene Christ and the Prophets, who knew many times the thoughts of men, but it was by reuelation, and inspiration; 2. King. 4.27. This was another euidence against the Scribes and Phari∣ses to conuince them, that the thoughts of their hearts, should thus be knowne to Christ, no man telling him of them. Vse, First, for instruction, to haue a speciall regard of our hearts, when we come before Christ. Secondly, for Consolation in regard of enemies, that what∣soeuer they imagine against the Church, shall not hurt vs, see∣ing Christ knoweth all their deuices, and will preuent them; 2. King. 6.12. Secondly, in regard of our selues, that though men ouer∣looke vs, and regard not that seruice which wee performe to God; yea, nickename vs for it: yet Christ which knoweth the heart willl reward vs. See Matth. 6.6. In the Apologie is first a reproofe; Christ reprooues them: Why reason ye these euill things in your hearts? So that mali∣cious slanderers are to haue their faults plainely reproued. Psal. 50.21. Secondly, the Defence it selfe, where first, note in generall, in as much as Christ stands to that he hath deliuered, it being a truth, and denies it not, though his enemies had raised a slander vpon it; that, Truth is not to be denied for the cauil∣ling of men, and their opposition against it; Gal. 2.5. wherein Peter halted verse 11.12. Because Gods Truth is more pretious then Pearles, and no part of it is to be lost. Secondly, In shrinking from the truth, we feare man more then God. Thirdly, wee giue aduantage to the aduersarie, and make him bold; and also we discourage the weake brethren. Secondly, In particular we see that the Pharises and Scribes, opposed against him, that he had taken too much vpon him,
namely, a propertie of God to forgiue sinnes. Christ denieth not that hee had taken this vnto him, but saith hee tooke no more vpon him, then hee had right and authoritie to doe; namely, to forgiue sinnes in his owne Name: and that he hath this authoritie in a thing inuisible, hee proueth by a visible effect of his Diuine Power. The Pharises reasoned thus: He that is man and not God, cannot forgiue sinnes. Christ is man, and not God: therefore Christ cannot forgiue sinnes. Christ to the contrary proueth that he is God, and not man only; in that by his bare Word, hee could cure a man desperately sicke: wherefore being God, hee tooke vpon him no more then lawfully he might. The Argument standeth thus: Hee that hath an absolute power ouer diseases, he hath authoritie to forgiue sinnes. But I, saith Christ, haue an absolute command ouer diseases: there∣fore I haue authoritie to forgiue sinnnes. The Proposition, is laid downe verse 9. where both these effects, viz. forgiuenesse of sinnes, and curing of a bodily dis∣ease, are compared together, and shewed to be of like hard∣nesse and easinesse, that it is of like power and authoritie, to doe the one, as the other; wherefore if they could not deny this outward visible effect to be wrought by a Diuine Power, neither could they doubt of the other, though inuisible. And for a further strengthning of the argument, it is laid downe In∣terrogatiuely, Christ referring it euen to his aduersaries, to be Iudges, whether it were not so or no. Obiect. But here a question will be mooued, whether the curing of a bodily disease, and the forgiuenesse of sinnes, bee equall; one as hard and as easie as the other: for as much as it seemeth that sinnes of the soule are more hardly cured, then diseases of the body. Answ. First, these are compared not one with another, but in regard of humane power, because both are aboue humane straine; and neither can be done without diuine power. Se∣condly. Being compared with the Power of God, they are both alike; for in respect thereof, there is no difference of ea∣sinesse or hardnesse; 1. Sam. 14.6. 2. Chron. 14.11. Thirdly,
this is said in regard of their earthly conceit and dull vnder∣standing. For that a man but now so desperately sicke, should on a sudden be perfectly cured; this in their conceite seemed the greater worke. Fourthly, Sicknesse is a fruite of sinne, and he that can remooue the effect, can as easily remooue the cause. To say,] that is, so powerfully and effectually, to say that the thing shall be done. Doctr. Outward visible things obiected to our sences, are great meanes to helpe our vnderstanding, in conceiuing of things inuisible, and to strengthen our Faith in beleeuing of them; Rom. 1.28. Psal. 19.1. For this end did Christ worke all his miracles, that in them we might see him to bee an Almghtie Sauiour, to cure all the diseases of our soules, to loose all the workes of the Diuell, and to saue vs from death, and him that had the power there∣of. This collection is plainely expressed by Matthw, chap. 8.17. For earthly we are, and best vnderstand earthly things, by comparing whereof with spirituall things, wee come by little and little to vnderstand them; Ioh. 3.12. and for this cause did God in former times giue signes vnto his people, his Seruants and Prophets; as to Moses, Gedeon, &c. Vse, Is for vs to helpe our selues by these outward meanes. Doe we doubt of Gods Prouidence, to consider the making and preseruation of all things; of the Resurrection, that which the Apostle saith; 2. Cor. 15.36. of the manner how wee are fed by Christ, and how our sinnes are washed away by his blood, to consider those things which are set forth vnto vs in the Sacrament, &c. Next followes the Application of this argument, which is laid downe by Inuersion. The assumption. viz. [But I haue an absolute command ouer diseases] is laid downe vers. 11. by an euident proofe of a deede done. The conclusion is vers. 10. by an infallible inference from the rest, viz. That ye might know, that the Sonne of Man, hath Power to forgiue sinnes on Earth.
We will handle them in order, as the Holy Ghost hath set them downe. In them we may obserue the manner of curing this man; and first the end why. Secondly, The meanes how hee was cured: viz. the imperiall charge and command of Christ. The end was that they might know hee had power to for∣giue sinnes. Doctr. Christ had a further end in his micacles, then a bo∣dily good vnto those that were cured. A higher mysterie is contained in them, namely that in curing of our bodies hee might shew himselfe the Sauiour of our Soules, &c. as is de∣clared before. Vse, Is that we read not these miracles as bare historicall nar∣rations, but that we consider in them the Almightie power of Christ: otherwise we misse of the fruite and benefit of them, for the strengthening of our Faith in him. More particularly in this End consider we foure points. 1. Whose good and instruction it was he aimeth at. 2. The title that he giueth himselfe. 3. The ground whereupon he doth this worke. 4. The Place. 1. Christ labours to instruct those that are contrary min∣ded, his aduersaries the Scribes and Pharises that cauilled at his Preaching. He might haue rested himselfe in the approbation of his Heauenly Father, the testimonie of his owne consci∣ence, the witnesse of his Disciples that his Word and Doctrine was true, and in that former proofe of Diuine power which hee had giuen them, in discouering vnto them the thoughts of their hearts: neuerthelesse seeing them thorow blindnesse, and malice, not yet throughly instructed, hee la∣bours by further proofe to show them their error, and to bring them to knowledge of the truth. Thus he deales with them againe; Marke 3.22. &c. Conuincing them of error by many arguments: and generally wee may obserue of Christ, that neither the dulnesse of his hearers, their impious scoffing, nor their slanderous cauilling, did hinder him from striuing to instruct them further; as Nicodemus his dulnesse. The scoffe
of the woman of Samaria; Ioh. 4.11. wherein Christ follow∣ed his Father; Esay, 63.2. and the Apostle the example of Christ, in labouring to giue vnto Iewes and Gentiles, vnder∣standing and knowledge of those things, which they so much opposed against; and in this all Ministers should follow their example. 2. Tim. 2.25. where the reason of it is also set downe, If those places be obiected; Act. 18.6. & 19.9. Tit. 3.10. and that therefore those that are peruerse, may bee presently giuen ouer: those places shew rather the contrary, for by them we see that the Apostles did labour first to instruct them, and left them not, till they saw them obstinate. 2. The title is, Sonne of man: which is in Scripture taken sometime generally, and indefinitely for all the sons of Adam, mankinde, as Iob 25.6. and sometime for man corrupt, in his corrupt estate, as 1. Sam. 26.19. Gen. 6.2. Psal. More particularly it is giuen to the Prophets, and especially to Ezekiel, more then to any of the rest, to put him in minde of his infirmitie, that he should not be proud through reue∣lations. After a more peculiar manner it is attributed, and most commonly it is vsed by himselfe, when hee speaketh of himselfe, but once giuen by any other to him, namely; Act. 7.56. Mark. 2.13. And he went forth againe by the Sea side, and all the multitude resorted vnto him, and he taught them. 14. And as he passed by, hee saw Leuithe Sonne of Alpheus, sitting at the receit of custome, and he said vnto him, follow me, and he arose and followed him. THis is the sixteenth History of the first yeere of Christ his publike Ministery, and it is the last which is recorded by the Euangelists of that yeere. That it followes next vpon the History afore going, appeares in that, by all the three Euan∣gelists that record it, it is placed next after; It is recorded here and by Matthew 9.9. and by Luke 5.27.28. Matthew hath nothing but what the other haue. Marke addes the
whole, 13. verse, and secondly that he was the Sonne of Al∣pheus. Luke verse 27. expressely calleth him a Publican, which is also implied by the other. and verse 28. addes that he left all. In varietie of phrases, Matthew and Marke say, as hee passed by. Luke, as he went forth. Matthew saith, from thence. Luke after these things. Wherein is no difference. Mark and Luke call him Leui. Matthew by a knowne name cals him Mat∣thew. The summe of this Historie is, the calling of one of Christs Disciples, and in number the sixt. The first was Phi∣lip, Simon, or Peter and Andrew; Ioh. 1. and Iames, and Iohn Marke 1. The parts of this Story are first Christs preparation vnto this worke, viz. his preaching; whereof note; First, the time [againe] shewing that this was done immdiately af∣ter the former. Secondly, the place towards the Sea side; Thirdly, the occasion, the resort of the people; Fourthly, the Act it selfe, he preached vnto them the Word of God: which we will but briefely run ouer, hauing beene handled hereto∣fore in other Histories. 1. Here in generall, we see how ready Christ is to doe one good worke after another. Secondly, how ready he is still to affoord more and more meanes for the strengthning of Faith, when he seeth any beginnings thereof; hauing now seene what effect the former miracle had wrought in the hearts of the peo∣ple, how they were amazed, how they wondred, how they glorifie God for it, &c. Here vpon to confirme their faith, he doth againe preach vnto them, and performe this great worke, in forgiuing the sinnes of this Publican, as before hee had forgiuen the sinnes of the palsie man. Thus God sent an interpreter to the Eunuch, whilest hee was conscionable in the vse of such meanes, as God afforded him. And this did Christ promise to Nathaneel Ioh. 1.50. 2. The place is the Sea side, noted to shew that the place of the receite of Custome, was nigh the Sea side. Where we may note againe, that which hath beene often obserued vpon like occasion, that Christ hauing the opportunitie to preach,
maketh vse of any place, as wee may doe likewise in case of necessitie. 3. In the occasion note the readinesse of the People to heare. 4. And againe, Christs readinesse to instruct them, of both which hath beene spoken at other times; as also that Christ doth account this viz. Preaching his chiefe worke: when they would haue made him a Iudge, he refused it. And it codem∣neth the practise of many Ministers of the Word now a dayes, who busie themselues in other matters, who will bee Iustices of peace, and decide controuersies, &c. But regard Preaching least of all. In the worke it selfe, note: 1. The Occasion of this mans calling, namely Christ passing by that way, and seeing of him; which came not by chance, and fortune, but of the purpose of Christ, and the good pro∣uidence of God directing. Where note that fit occurrences of matters are euident signes of Gods prouidence, but of this heretofore. 2. He saw him: Christ saw Leui, and not Leui Christ, which shewes the preuenting grace of Christ. 2. The Partie called, who is described first by his name, that is Leui, which is an Hebrew name, and shewes that this man was a Iew. It was first giuen to Iacobs three sonnes. Gen. 29.34. where the signification of it is to be seene. This aggrauates the matter, that he being a Iew, was yet a Pub∣lican. This name of Leui, was in time worne out, and hee not commonly knowne by that name, but by his other name of Matthew, and yet Marke and Luke, writing of him now liuing doth vse this name, thereby shewing their charitie, in con∣cealing of his faults and blemishes. 2. Matthew which is likewise an Hebrew word signifying giuen; but it is also a Greeke, or a Romane name, and it might be giuen vnto him to blot out that former infamie, that he be∣ing a Iew, would yet be a Publican, and an extortioner of his owne nation: by this name he was most commonly knowne,
and yet himselfe writing of himselfe, spareth not to vse this name, regarding more the glory of God, and the good of the Church by this his conuersion, then his owne credit and repu∣tation. So Dauid doth in the title of the 51 Psalme. So Paul, 1. Tim. 1.13. but when he speaketh to the honour of himselfe, he speaketh in the third person, 2. Cor. 12. for it was not them∣selues, nor their owne honour they sought for, but the manife∣station of the grace of God. This first shewes, by what Spirit they were guided, not of flesh and blood, but by the Spirit of od, of humilitie and meekenesse. The wicked indeed may acknowledge their faults themselues, but they speake not of them with shame, as doe those men. This humble spirit in any man, is a signe and euidence of the Spirit of God. Secondly, this makes for the truth of the Story, that the Writers thereof makes such conscience of the truth, when it doth tend to glory, that withall they let not to publish their owne blemishes. Now if a man will lye, he will do it to saue his owne credit and reputation. Secondly, he is described by his Parentage; he is the sonne of Alpheus; not he that was the Father of Iames and Iudas the Apostles, Luk. 6.15, 16. but another, who whether they were of kinne, or no, it is not exprest; onely this is noted, that these two Alpheus had sonnes that were Disciples. This is no∣ted to shew the truth of the Story. Thirdly, by his Office, Luke calleth him, chap. 5. vers. 27.2 Publican, expresly. Now Publicans were certaine Officers in the Romane Empire, which did gather vp the tribute that was to be paid, and such gifts as were giuen. And because the goods of the Empire were called Publica, hence came the name of Publicans; an office in it selfe lawfull: for Iohn, when the Pub∣licans came vnto him, bid them not leaue their Calling as vn∣lawfull, but deale honestly in it; Luk. 3.13. Yet were these Publicans vile persons, and vilely accounted of; either because they were so in the estimation of the Iewes, who accounting themselues a free people, could not endure to be vnder tribute, and so hated those that were gatherers of the tribute: or else
because of their owne mis-demeanour, beeing grieuous ex-actors and oppressors of the people, for they did farme the tri∣bute of the Empire, and so did extort from the people much aboue the due for their owne gaine: as may appeare, Luk. 3.13. and by that of Zacheus, Luk. 19.8. so Matth. 5.46, 47. in∣plying thereby Publicans to be most grieuous sinners, and in the censure of the Church, Matth. 18.17. whereby it appeares, that these Publicans were notorious wicked men, and odious to the people, and much more this man being a Iew, and so op∣pressed his owne Countreymen. We haue heard before in the calling of the other Disciples, how it pleased Christ to chuse meane men to be his Disciples; and here we see he chuseth for his Disciple, a vile notorious sin∣full man, that had a brand and marke aboue the rest, which first shewes the freenesse of Gods grace; 1. Tim. 1.13. 1. Cor. 15.10. and secondly, the aboundant riches of his grace, vers. 14. of the first of Timothy, the first Chapter. 3. Christ did it to this end, that the Apostles, and other ministers of grace, should the more boldly and confidently offer grace to the most vile and wicked persons, considering that euen amongst them there was one as vile as any. Fourthly, to encourage all sorts, how wic∣ked soeuer, to yeeld vnto the grace of God offered vnto them, 1. Tim. 1.16. Vse is, first, that we should take notice of this grace of God, and obserue what a great alteration it is able to make. This man, who before was counted amongst the wicked, a most wicked person, is now esteemed among the godly a holy man: he that was of a vile calling before, is now of a most glorious calling: before a most vile Publican, because a Iew, now a a most glorious Apostle, because also an Euangelist; for but two of the Apostles were Euangelists, Iohn and Matthew: See the like, Esay 11.6, 7, 8. Secondly, that none should despaire. Thirdly, to teach vs to suppresse our censures concerning the latter end of any man. Fourthly, that we thinke not the worse of Ministers, or of their Ministery, who in time haue been wicked liuers, swagge∣rers,
and the like: for it pleaseth God euen amongst such, to call many vnto that Worke, pulling them out of the snares of the Diuell, that they may more pitty others, and apply the greater consolations vnto them. Thirdly, the place where hee was called, was the Receite of Custome, either a house whither they brought their tribute, or a table where he sate with his money-bookes of account, and such like. Doct. God calles man when he left thinkes of it. Matthew was now busie about his trade and gettings, hee little thought of Christ. So Paul is called, whilest he yet breathed out slaugh∣ters. To shew, that our conuersion comes from the grace of God, that to him all glory may be giuen. And this thing, if we apply to our owne selues, we shall find euer, that wee were conuerted when wee thought not of it; whereof this History and the rest are types, though not in re∣gard of the extraordinary manner. Fourthly, the manner of calling: it was done by the onely word of Christ, Follow me. Which although it may signifie ge∣nerally to leaue a former wicked course of life, and to turne to Christianity, and so to follow Christ: yet here it signifieth more peculiarly to be with Christ, and to attend vpon him: for thus did Christ traine vp his Disciples with him, the more to fit them to their great Calling. Note heare how powerfull the voyce of Christ is; he saith only, Follow me, and Matthew leaueth all, and goeth after him. Fifthly, his obedience, hee left all that might bee an hinde∣rance vnto him: he followes Christ without casting any doubts and difficulties how he should be prouided for, that he had be∣fore vndergone the enuie of the people, and should now incurre the displeasure and hatred of the Pharises, &c. but presently without any more adoe followes him. And this teacheth vs, when wee heare the voyce of Christ sounding in our eares, and smiting our hearts, that we doe willingly and readily obey: but of these things more hath been spoken in handling the calling of the other Disciples.
AN EXPOSITION VPON THE THIRD OF LVKE. Luk. 3.19.20. But Herod the Tetrarch, being reprooued by him for Herodian his brother Philips wife, and for all the euils which Herod had done, Addeth this aboue all, that he shut vp Iohn in prison. IN handling the harmony of the Gospell, if we compare, Matth. 4.12. and Mark. 1.14. with Ioh. 4.1, 2, 3. it will appeare, that this story of Iohn Baptists death fell out after that he had giuen that testimo∣ny of Christ, Ioh. 3. before Christ went to Galile, when by the way he talked with the woman of Samaria, Ioh. 4. And the order of matter requires it, in that he should be then taken away from his Ministery, when hee ended so good a worke, God thereby prouiding for his credit and honour. Now it is set downe by three Euangelists, Matthew, Marke, and Luke, neither of which doe record it in order of time. Luke sets it downe by anticipation, because hauing treated of Iohn in his third Chapter he would speake of all that befell him in that place, so setting downe this story before, when it should haue been handled after. Matthew and Marke set it downe by occasion of a common speech, that Iohn was raysed from the dead: Matth. 14 2, 3, 4, &c. Markae, the concisest and briefest in gathering the summes of History, is in this the longest, Chap∣ter 6. vers. 17, 18, 19, &c. All agree in the maine substance, that Herod did imprison Iohn for reproouing him for marry∣ing
his brothers wife. They differ onely in adding some cir∣cumstances: as Luke addes, first, that Herod was a Tetrarch: secondly, that Herod was rebuked of Iohn in plaine termes: thirdly, that he rebuked him of all the euils that he had done: fourthly, that hee added this yet aboue all. Matthew agrees with Marke, but addes the cause why Herod killed not Iohn, be∣cause hee feared the people. Marke addes; first, that Herod sent either Purseuants, or souldiers, or the like: secondly, that expressely Herod had married Herodias: thirdly, that Herodi∣as had a quarrell with Iohn. Fourthly, why Herodias could not haue her minde, because of Herods affection to Iohn. We will handle them all in one ioynt Text, which may be diuided into three parts: First, the cause of his imprisonment: secondly, the manner thereof: thirdly, the euent and issue intended against him. In the cause, viz. Iohns rebuking, consider, first, who rebu∣ked; Iohn. Secondly, whom; Herod. Thirdly, for what, for mar∣rying his brothers wife. The manner, shewes, first, how hee was taken; he was sent for. Secondly, how he was vsed, first, he was bound: secondly, put in prison: thirdly, there shut vp. The euent was the danger of his life; which came first, from Herod: secondly, from Herodias: and was escaped by He∣rods affection, first, towards Iohn, this hindred Herodias pur∣pose: 2. towards the people, this hindred his owne purpose. The party rebuking was Iohn, a publike Minister of the Gos∣pell sent of God, to preach Faith in the remission of repentance and conuersion from sinnes. He was both a Minister, and an extraordinary one, by vertue of which calling he had power and authority to reprooue all wheresoeuer he came. Doct. Publique Ministers of the Word, they among others are especially bound to reprooue publique offences: Ezek. 3.17. Esay 58.1. 2. Tim. 4.2. For the calling of Ministers doth require thus much at their hands, because they are Watchmen ouer mens soules, and reproofe doth belong to the cure of mens soules. Heb. 13.17. Ezek. 3.17, 18.
AN EXPOSITION VPON THE FOVRTH OF IAMES. Iames 4.7. Resist the Diuell, and he will flye from you. THese words containe a commandement, [Resist the Diuell:] and a promise, [and he will flye from you.] In the commande∣ment two things are to be marked, first, an action; secondly, the obiect of that acti∣on. The action is a Resistance, the ob∣iect, the Diuell. First, of the obiect. By the Diuell here is meant all sinnes and temptations arising ei∣their from that corruption that is in vs, and so from our selues; or else springing from external obiects, and such motions as are by the Diuell immediately suggested vnto vs. All which are termed by the name of Diuell, because he hath the chiefe hand in these matters, and is a principall agent therein. The action of resistance is that, whereby a spirituall souldier of Christ Ie∣sus doth striue and endeauour according to that measure of grace that is giuen him to auoide all sinnes whatsoeuer, and to please God in all things, not to offend him in any. This action thus explained in generall, respecting the whole course of mans life: let vs consider it therefore in a more particular regard, ac∣cording as we are to put it in practice at seuerall combats, with seuerall temptations. For the better performance of it, we are to consider three things: first, our preparation before the combate. Secondly, our behauiour in the very time of the assault. Thirdly, our de∣meanour when the fight is ended. For the first, it is needfull
that we be armed for our defence; the parts of which spirituall armour, we may see affoorded vnto vs out of the Eph. 6.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. The first peece, is to haue our loynes girt about with verity: that is, an heart firmely grounded and established in the truth, in certainty of Gods pure worship and Religion, that we be not carried about with euery blast of outside doctrine. The second, is the Brest-plate of righteousnesse; that is, a stedfast re∣solution of the heart, to be vpright, righteous, and holy before God in all things, not willng to offend him in the least: as Da∣uid saith, Psal. 40.8. I haue desired to doe thy good will, O my God; yea, thy Law is within mine heart. The next part, is to haue our feet shod with the preparation of the Gospell of peace: which is an vndaunted and ready minde to make a constant profession of the Gospell in all places, and at all times, though it bee to losse of lands, goods, liuing, yea, life: as Saint Peter wisheth vs, to put on our Sandals, and to be ready to giue an account of our Faith to euery one that shall require it of vs. The fourth is the Shield of Faith; which is a liuely and sted∣fast perswasion and assurance of the mercie of God in Iesus Christ, particularly belonging vnto vs; the force of which, is to quench all the fiery darts of the Diuell; that is, all strong, all sudden, and all dangerous temptations by him suggested. A fift, is the Helmet of saluation, which, as it is 1. Thes. 5.8. is the hope of euerlasting life, whereby our heads being couered, may be preserued from doubt and despaire. Another is the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God: the vse of which is, that we ought to labour to bee furnished with such pregnant places of Scripture, as whereby we may both defend our selues, and offend Satan, according as Christ did, Matth. 4. The last is Prayer, whereby we must intreate the ayde and assistance of Gods Spirit, to strengthen vs to the combate. Our behauiour in the combate ought to be guided by these rules: First, entertaine not with any liking the first motions to sin, but resist the primary beginning, intisements, and occasions to them, and suffer them not to haue a place of abode in heart and affection. Reas. 1. From the nature of sinne, which being not at the
first, repelled quickly gets ground of vs. By the example of Dauid, who first was idle, then looked; the temptation left him not there, but then hee lusted, and afterwards committed actuall folly: 2. Sam. 11. So Peter, first, he denied barely; se∣condly, then he sware it; thirdly, he cursed and denied: Ma. 26.70, 72, 74. Secondly, because the Diuell as he is strong, so is he subtile: giue him an Inch, and he will take an Ell. Giue him but en∣trance to set foote into your heart, and you shall hardly chuse but he will possesse it wholly. Thirdly, put not too much trust and confidence in our owne strength, but rather to be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephes. 6.10. This confident boldnesse, and reli∣ance on our owne ability, caused Peters fall, Luk. 22.33. Fourthly, we must not beleeue the Diuell, nor hearken to his perswasion and reasons; nay, nor trust him, though hee spake truth. So when the Diuell tooke on him to be a Preacher, Acts 16.16, 17, 18. Paul would not suffer him to speake, but cōman∣ded him forth. So Christ rebuked the Diuell, Luk 4.34, 35. Eue sinned by being credulous, in beleeuing the Diuell when he vttered a loud lye, Gen. 3.3, 4. Fifthly, wee must consider what profit a stout resistance doth bring viz. that the Diuell will bee the weaker, the more foiles he receiues, and we the stronger. Lastly, take heed that we compare not the pleasures of sin∣ning and yeelding to the temptation, with the paine of resi∣stance, for then soone shall wee faile: but rather compare the paine of resistance with the horrors, anguish, and perplexitie of an euill conscience, which follow the committing of any sinne, and see whether is rather to be vndergone. The burden of an euill conscience. Salomon (Prou. 18.14.) describeth, saying, The spirit of a man will sustaine his infirmity, but a wounded sirit who can beare it? After the combate ended, if thou obtaine the victory, first, giue God the glory and prayse, not ascribing it to any strength, or worthinesse in thy selfe; take heed of this pride. Secondly, auoide securitie, and thinke not when thou hast ouercome one, then thou hast vanquisht all; but know,
that one temptation, like waues, come one in the necke of ano∣ther. And therefore prouide thy selfe for a new assault. If thou be ouercome, thinke with thy selfe, that, it may bee, God hath let you fall, thereby to punish some sinne in thee. Secondly, lye not in sinne, but endeauour to renew thy selfe by repentance, knowing that it is as great, if not a greater victorie, to recouer being fallen, then to auoide a fall. Encouragements to this dutie are, first, the promise here made, that he wil flye from vs, like a coward, that seeing his ad∣uersarie buckle his armour to encounter with him, takes him to his heeles. Secondly, consider the intent of Satan in alluing vs to sinne; that it is not for our good, but for our destruction. So let vs not yeeld to his pleasures, and be drawne away by his al∣lurements. Thirdly, learne the nature of sinne, that is it such as laies vs open to the iudgements of God both here, and here∣after. Lastly, thinke of those many mercies God hath vouch∣safed; and then say with Ioseph, How can I doe this, and so sinne against my God, Gen. 39.9. One thing to bee performed in the time of combate is left out, which is this, that when the Diuell laboureth by any temp∣tation to draw vs into any vice, we should not onely withstand and resist this temptation, but also endeauour to doe the con∣trary vertue: as Ioseph being tempted to adultery, exercised himselfe to chastitie, Genes. 39. and Iob, who when Satan had done all that he could to make him curse, and blaspheme God, did not onely not doe that, but did the contrary, he blessed and praysed the Name of God, Iob 1. last verse.
AN EXPOSITION VPON THE SECOND OF GENESIS. Genes. 2.9. And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow euery tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food: the tree of life also in the midst of the Garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and euill. FIrst, some Sacraments God gaue vnto man, first, in his innocent estate, which were two; first, the Tree of Life; secondly, the Tree of Knowledge of good and Euill. Secondly, some in his corrupt estate; First, either before Christ prefiguring him: Secondly, or after Christ, as memorials of him. Thirdly, Sacraments before Christ were of two sorts: first, either such as did belong to all sorts of people. Secondly, such as were peculiarly appropriated to the Iewes. Fourthly, of the forme sort were, first, the Flood, and Noahs preseruation in it: secondly, the Rainebow. Fifthly, of the later sort there are two kinds: Sixthly, 1. Some were extraordinary, during but for once, or a short time, and answering either to Baptisme, as 1. Cor. 10. first, the Red Sea; secondly, the Cloud: or to the Lords Sup∣per, as first, the Manna; secondly, the water flowing out of the Rocke. Seuenthly, 2. some were ordinary: as first, Circumcision answering vnto our Baptisme, 1. Col. 2. secondly, the Passeouer answering to the Lords Supper.
Eightly, Sacraments after Christs comming to continue till the end of the World, are two: First, Baptisme; Secondly, the Supper of the Lord. The two Trees are described: First, by their place: first, generall, the Garden; secondly, particular, the middest of it. Secondly, by their names. Middle, though this may bee vnderstood that the Tee was in the garden, and no more; yet it is better to take it pro∣perly, that it stood in the very midst where it might alwaies be seene, and thought of by the man. Tree of lie,] some expound this allegorically: but that it is not so meant appeares, by the plantation, by the growth, by the fruits they bare, by the ends of their placing there, by the euent of the transgression. It was a Sacrament in two respects. 1. To put man in minde of his present [immortall] estate, by vertue of his creation. 2. To giue him notice of his future estate. which should be according as he vsed or abused this. The Tree of Knowledge, did assure him, that if he did trans∣gresse, he should die the death. Why it was called the Tree of Life, there is some doubt. Some said that it had vigor in it, to preserue the life in perpe∣tuitie, and immortalitie. But it seemes to be otherwise: for first immortalitie was properly giuen to man in his creation, why then should we giue it to the Tree of life? Secondly, then it must either haue kept him from sin, or haue giuē him immor∣talitie, whether he had sinned or no; both are false. And to the obiections, which may seeme to confirme that opinion, as first out of chapter 3.22. Least man should put forth his hands &c.] Wee answere that it is taken Ironically, to lay forth mans conceit plainely. 2. Why then man should be driuen out of Paradise? Aansw. First, because that he might the better know, that he was in∣deed depriued of life, being now thrust from the signe. Se∣condly, to shew that he was not worthie of the thing signifi∣ed, viz. life, because he was vnworthie of the signe. Thirdly,
to shew that the signe doth not belong to them, who haue no right and title to the thing signified. For now Adam had lost lfe eternall, whereof this was a signe. Then the safest resolu∣tion is, that this Tree, was called the Tree of life, because it was ordained of God a signe and pledge of life eternall, so long as man remained obedient. So that other tree was a signe and seale of that wofull knowledge that man should haue, if hee did transgresse: not that this tree could infuse any knowledge. Now this did seale vp eternall life in two respects. 1. In assuring him that he was now immortall by his crea∣tion, and that he should continue therein. 2. In a representation of Christ, who is life, Col. 3.4. Prou. 5. 8. Ioh. 1.4. For man in his innocent estate, should haue had neede of Christ, though not to be incarnate, yet as hee is the wisedome of the Father, and the power of God, by whom all things were created. So this was to shew that this life came not from himselfe, but from Christ. Gen. 7.23. And euery liuing substance was destroyed, which was vpon the face of the ground, both man and cattell, and the creeping things, and the foule of the Heauen; and they were destroyed from the Earth: and Noah onely remained aliue, and they that were with him in the Arke. THese words layes downe the euent of that great deluge, and containes in them two points. First, that the World and other creatures were destroyed Secondly, that Noah, and the rest of his family were preserued They are a ground of that third Sacrament before mentioned. In handling of which, we will consider three points. 1. That this is a Sacrament, which is apparent by that ap∣plication which Saint Peter mkes of; 1. Pet. 3.21. where he maketh Baptisme, and the flood, alike figures representing one thing.  is a resemblance of a thing, and  a like resemblance of the same thing [sometime.] For we are not to
vnderstand this, as a subordinate Sacrament, or as a Figure of Baptisme, for then it followes. First, that a Sacrament may be a signe of a Sacrament. Secondly, that something should bee represented to Noah, which he knew not of, for Baptisme was instituted long after. 2. What kinde of Sacrament this was; It is first, the first Sacrament which we reade recorded in Scripture, giuen to the Church, [after the fall of man.] Sacrifices there were as wee reade of Abell and Cain, which were also in a manner as Sa∣craments, because both represented Christ, and God by that meanes did vphold their faith in expectation of him. But now the Church hauing a long time waited for the accomplishment of the promises, and accounting them to bee now the further of, that they might say as it is, 1. Pet. 3 4. It stood in more need to be supported in faith and hope, and so God ordained first extraordinarie Sacraments, and then ordinary to continue till Christs comming. 2. This was an extraordinary Sacrament; such as were those that were either done but once, or did continue but a short time; as the Red Sea, Manna, &c. Now it was ex∣traordinary in two respects. First, because it was wrought by a miraculous power of God. Secondly, because it was wrought vpon an extraordinary occasion: yet neuerthelesse, though for the Act it was but once for the vse, it is continuall to the Church of God. 3. In what respect it is said to be a Sacrament; and these are; First, in generall, because it represents vnto, and assures the Church of God of their deliuerance from the wrath of God, by which all the world besides perished; Secondly, particularly; First, because it did prefigure the killing of the old man, and quickening of the new, and preseruation of it vnto life eternall. In that the wicked World perished, and righteous Noah was preserued aliue: the which thing is a∣scribed to Baptisme Rom. 6. initio. Secondly, because that as safetie was brought to Noah, by meanes of the Arke: so salua∣tion is not to be had, but only by Christ. Act. 4.12. 3. Because as the Arke could not saue Noah, vnlesse hee
were in it; so likewise must wee bee in, and of the Church: whereof the Arke was a figure, it representing Christ, not as a particular person, but as a mysticall body, ioyned with his Church. Other resemblances their might be made, as; First, that in the Arke were few, so they are but few that ioye themselues to the Church, and repose confidence in Christ. Secondly, that as of those that were in the Arke, one was a cursed Cham. So in the Church there are many Hypocrites: but those before alleaged, are the maine and principall points. The instructions that arise out of this place are; First, in ge∣nerall, to shew vnto vs, that this Hystory is analogicall; it hath not only an hystoricall, but also a mysticall and spirituall sense. Neither yet will it follow, that one place may haue two senses; for these are but two parts of one entire and full sense. Quest. But how may a man know when their is a myste∣ry, besides the hystory? Answ. This we may know; First, by a diligent obseruati∣on of the circumstances. As the Apostle doth prooue by cir∣cumstances; Heb. 4.7. that what the Prophet Dauid speaketh; Psal. 95.7. must be vnderstood of the spirituall rest. So Act. 2.29. Peter prooues Dauids speech to be meant of Christ; Se∣condly, by comparing one place with another, the Old Testa∣ment with the New: as that of the Red Sea. By 1. Cor. 10. That in Exod. 12.46. with Ioh. 19.36. thence we must learne diligently to marke the Scriptures, to obserue the circumstan∣ces, but especially those applications that the Holy Ghost maketh, because this is the surest way. 2. That God doth performe a double benefit to his chil∣dren, by temporall preseruation. First, safety from temporall danger. Secondly, assurance of deliuerance and redemption from sinne; which as it shewes the tender care of God ouer vs, so it teacheth in all temporall preseruations, to haue an eye to him, in regard of our soules, for if God be mercifull to pre∣serue our bodies, how much more our soules; and though all temporall deliuerances are not Seales and Sacraments of this yet this vse may we well make of them. But withall as Noah
did, so must we. 1. Beleeue Gods promises, and apply them to our selues. 2. And also yeeld our selues to the direction of his Word, in regard of the meanes to accomplish the same; which is a maine and principall vse of this story. 3. Hence obserue, that those things which worke destru∣ction to the wicked, are a meanes of preseruation to the God∣ly; as was the Red Sea. The Angell that went behinde the Israelites campe. Christ, the Word, the Sacraments; which is for the comfort of the faithfull, that they need not be terri∣fied with those iudgements that befall on others. For as a mer∣cy shewed to the faithfull, shall be no aduantage to the wic∣ked, so a iudgement lighting on the wicked, shall be no damage to the godly, I meane in regard of that which is indeed, viz. spirituall hurt, or spirituall blessings. AN EXPOSITION VPON THE TWELFTH OF EXODVS. Exod. 12.8. And they shall eate th flesh in that night roste with fire, and vnleauened bread, and with bitter herbes they shall eate it. RItes appertaining to the eating of the Passeouer. 1. With what it must be eaten. 2. After what manner; viz. in haste. 3. The time when it must be eaten. 4. The place where in. 1. It must be eaten with, First, vnleauened bread: Second-Swre herbes. Vnleauened bread verse 8. further vrged verse 15.16.17. the vse of it inioyned not only that night, but during the vse of that
Sacrament they must eate it seuen dayes; yet a strict penaltie laid on the non-obseruers of this ordinance verse 19. Reason, of this ceremonie was because of their hast, impli∣ed verse 34. & 39. and it was a custome, in haste to make vn∣leauened cakes; Gen. 18.6. To finde out the Ministery hereof, wee must consider that leauen is taken; First, in the good part, Matth. 13.33. for the Kingdome of Heauen; and so the opposition stands not here. Secondly, in a bad sence, for corruption in Doctrine and pra∣uitie in life and conuersation; and so in this place vnleauened bread must be taken, as signifying sincerity in conuersation and truth, in doctrine; 1. Cor. 5.8. Matth. 16.6.12. Vse, of this is to teach vs, that all that will partake of Christ aright, must be soundly instructed in the Doctrine of faith and puritie and innocencie of life; 1. Tim. 1.19. which belongs not only to Ministers but to all others as Eph. 4.15. Truth in Loue, which is the fulfilling of the Law; Col. 1.10. 2. That those that are either depraued in their iudgement, or corrupted in life and conuersation are not fit to eate of Christ as Idolaters, Heretikes; Gal. 3.1. malicious persons, &c. 3. From the metaphor of leauen, whose nature is, that a little doth season the whole lumpe. 1. Cor. 5.6. learne that we haue a speciall care to withstand euery error, &c. euery sinne, not contenting our selues that wee are not open Idolaters or notorious sinners, seeing a drop of poyson will infect a whole cup of medicinable potion, an one error or sinne, will make a breach in conscience, big enough to giue the Diuell entrance into the possession of all; so Heb. 12.15. when any roote of bit∣ternesse doth but peepe vp, wee must nip it: and not only ought we to auoid the sinnes, but also infectious persons, as Hereikes, Idolaters, prophane persons, not to be companions with them; 1. Cor. 5.13. Rom. 16.17. Sowre herbes. Heb. it is bitternesse, which some expound bitternesse and anguish of heart: but considering that here is spoken of those outward things, where with it was to bee eaten: I take it to be rather meant of some sowre herbes, or sauce as the like.
Reason, of this was that they should haue a meanes to put them in minde of that anguish and vexation they suffered in E∣gypt. Mysterie implied is two folde. 1. That the profession of Christ is ioyned with affliction; Luk. Act. 14.22. 2. Tim. 3.12. 2. That to the partaking of Christ wee must come with contrition of heart; Matth. 11.28. Luk. 7.38. Of this a double vse may be made. 1. That if wee looke to haue part in Christ, wee must not expect that all things should be sweete and pleasant; but in our professing of Christ, and inioying of him, we must looke to haue sowre sauce, to this sweet meate; lest in regard of the corruption of nature, this sweetnesse grow full sowre, and we loath it: wherefore as this must stirre vs vp to patience, so must it teach vs how to esteeme of afflictions, as of sauce to make vs rellish our meate, and to haue the more appetite to it. 2. That when we approach to Christ to reape any benefit by him, we must come with a contrite heart. Psal. 51.17. Exod. 12.11. And thus shall ye eate it: with your loynes girded, your shooes on your feete, and your staffe in your hand: and yee shall eate it in haste: it is the Lords passeouer. IN this verse is set downe in what manner the passeouer, was to be eaten, expressed in foure branches. First, your loines girded; secondly, your shooes on your feete; Thirdly, your staues in your handes; Fourthly, ye shall eate it in haste. In which in generall, we see that they imply a kindnesse to take a Iourney. The mysterie whereof is, first that there must be in vs a promptnesse and readinesse to that worke, where∣unto God shall call vs, a duty much commended vnto vs in Scripture; Psal. 57.7. & 27.8. Matthew 11.12. Luk. 16.16. Psal. 40.7. Heb. 10.7. For such a promptnesse and readinesse, is a signe of th willingnesse and cheerefulnesse of our hearts a
thing most acceptable to God; 2. Cor. 9.7. And it reprooues he backewardnesse and sluggishnesse of men, to come to the ordinance of God, to preaching on the Sabboth, to the Sacra∣ment, &c. 2. Hereb is signified that we bee ready, for our passge from the Aegypt of this world, vnro this Canaan of Heauen: for these were a type of the other; Matth. 24.42. 1. Thess. 5.6. Because we know not when our passage shall bee, as the Israelites knew not at what houre of the night they were then to depart. This reprooues, the securitie of men, that thinke lest of their departure hence, as that common and wicked speech sheweth; I thought no more of it, then of my dying day. From which, want of due preparation, it commeth that when the time of departure is at hand, men become either dead in heart, and vn∣capable of all comfort, like Naball, or like Belshazer, are fil∣led with feare, horror, and amazement, winhin and without. Dan. 7.6. Let vs bee rather like the wise Virgins, and that faithfull Seruant; Luke 12.36. alwaies attending and looking for the comming of his Master. Now come we to the particular branches. 1. Your loynes girded, which phrase is vsed in the Scripture, in a double respect. 1. For a close and fast girding of a mans apparell vnto his middle 2. For a trussing vp of his garments, vnto his girdle. The former is taken from Souldiers, that buckle their Ar∣mour together with their girdle; as God bid Iob gird vp his loines, when he would haue him stand to his defence, and an∣swere for himselfe; Iob 38.3. & 40.2. in the like sence; E∣phes. 6.14. and this sence is not here meant, for God would not that they should prepare themselues to fight with Pha∣rao. For the better vnderstanding of the latter sence, wee are to know, that in those Easterne countries, they went with long side gownes hanging downe to their legges, which were an impediment in trauelling, if they were not trussed vp. And
therefore they being now to take a long iourney, God bids them trusse vp their gownes to their girdles; in this sence are 1. King. 18.46. 2. King. 4.29. & 9.1. The mysterie is, that wee suffer not any thing to hinder vs in our course and worke that we goe about; this is not meant of such things that are vnlawfull and wicked, but of those that be lawfull, good, and as needfull as our apparrell, that if we obserue any hinderance to proceede from them in our ho∣ly course, to be carefull to remooue it, which as it is meant; Ier. 1.17. Luk. 12 35. 1. Pet. 1.13. So without a metaphor it is plainely expressed; Heb. 12.1. For it is a point of wisedome, when wee aime at any thing to remooue all impediments, or else we venture the losse of the thing we aime at. Vse, That when lawfull things doe become hinderances, as they doe many times by our immoderate vse of them, our do∣ting vpon them, or preferring of them to other better things; Luke 14.18. &c. wee doe take them away, and abridge our selues of them; 1. Cor. 7.31. 2. For reproofe of those that care not what burden they lay vpon their backes, how many offices they get, how much lands and liuings they heape vp, what pleasures, what com∣pany they follow, though in the meane time they be by these things hindred from attending vnto better duties, to the wor∣ship and seruice of God. 2. Your shooes one your feete. What! were they wont to weare no shooes on their feete. Answ. It may be when they tooke their repast, they had no shooes on, it being the custome to lie on Carpets, on which also they went. Ioh. 13.23. 2. It may be that they had shooes which they did weare at meales, and others which were for iourneyes, but there can be but a coniecture at these things. Mysterie is, that for the furtherance we may vse all lawfull helpes. And for this cause as their is a fight, so is their Armor appointed. Eph. 6. where verse 15. wee are likewise comman∣ded to haue our feete shod, with the preparation of the Gos∣pell
of peace, so that albeit the way which we must go through be rough and thorny, that is, full of afflictions, yet shod and furnished with the comforts of the Gospell, wee may goe on boldly without feare of pricking. 3. Staues in your hands.] Staues, we know, serues to helpe men in their iourney, and to rest themselues vpon when they are weary. These staues are the promises of saluation, which must su∣staine and vphold vs, as, Thy Rod and thy Staffe, they comfort me: Psal. 23.4. Doct. From hence it followeth, That we ought to bee con∣scionable in the vse of those meanes that God hath afforded vs for to helpe our infirmities, as in all things to consider the re∣ward, &c. Heb. 12.2. And it reprooues those that are bold and presumptuous of their owne strength and abilitie, and refuse the meanes appoin∣ted, whereby many times they fall away. 4. And yee shall eate it in haste.] This is the last ceremony, and it is laid downe as a reason of the former. And the reason of this reason is expressed, vers. 33. For God intending to bring that great iudgement on the Egyptians; and foreseeing how the Egyptians would thereupon deale with the Israelites, by forcing them to bee gone vpon the sudden, hee doth thus pro∣uide, that they should be all in readinesse to depart. Doct. God is carefull to prouide helpe for his people, when they are in any streights. When the World was on the sudden to be drowned, he caused Noah to make an Arke before hand to saue himself. When the Children of Israel trauailed through the Wildernesse, and were to depart from euery place on a sud∣den at the rising of the Cloud and Pillar of fire, God caused them to dwell in tents, and not to build houses. So that euery way he doth fit and prepare his people to those states that hee meanes to bring them. For he that fore-warned, is fore-armed; and troubles that come on a sudden, make men at their wits end, and cause many distractions. Vse is, to be carefull in vsing the meanes that God hath pro∣uided for our good, as because the comming of the Sonne of
man is sudden, to watch; because as death leaues vs, so iudge∣ment will find vs, and the houre thereof vncertaine, it teacheth to be alwaies prepared for death. Thus though they come on a sudden, they shall not be sudden to vs, &c. The mystery hereof is, that in this world we haue no place of abode, but must alwayes be, as still going out of it. A point manifest by the line of the Patriarkes, by the Children of Israel in the Wildernesse liuing in tents: See Heb. 11.9, 10. 2. Cor. 5. 2. Phil. 1.23. 1. Cor. 15.31. Wee must therefore make haste, and vse the things of this world in haste, because wee haue a long iourney to goe, and know not how much time wee haue thereunto. To this end let vs learne, as Psal. 90.12. and be as the Apostle, Phil. 3.13. where the metaphor is taken from runners, that looke not vnto that which they haue runne, but how farre they haue to runne yet vnto the marke. This haste is to bee made, first, for feare of hurt that may come by abiding. Thus the Angels hastened Lot out of So∣dome, lest he did partake of their punishments. So must wee haste, because of temptations of that body of death wee carry about, of snares, allurement and disgraces, &c. whereby we are drawne to forsake the Lord. Secondly, the expectation of a benefit causeth men to make haste; the benefit that commeth to vs, is freedome from sinne, eternall glory, and the enioying of all good, &c. Some adde vnto these a third right, namely, that they did eate it standing. Where of albeit there be some probability, be∣cause of the former circumstances (which neuerthelesse might be all done sitting after their vsuall manner) yet it is not expres∣ly set downe, and so no inference can be drawne from it, that threfore the best manner of gesture to eate the Lords Supper is standing. Now in generall concerning all these forenamed Rites, we may obserue this property; that some of them were onely peculiar to this Passeouer, and to no other: as first, that the Lambe should be kept foure dayes, vers. 3.6. Secondly, the li∣berty they had to chuse a Lambe, or a Kid. Thirdly, the sprink∣ling of the blood vpon the doore-posts. Fourthly, all those
next before mentioned, of eating it with their loynes girded, &c. Fifthly, the not going out of the house vntill the morning. These Rites were then commanded and vsed, in regard of the present circumstances and occasions, but were neuer in vse after∣ward. And this may appeare in that, at the second institution of the Passeouer, when it was ordained to an anniuersary rite, they are not repeated, nor yet were performed by Christ, when he did abrogate the same. And this we may obserue, that there may be rites in the first institution of ordinances, which are not of perpetuall vse. So in this Passeouer they were to keepe their houses, and to sprinkle the blood onely at this time, because at this time onely the de∣stroyer was to passe by: and likewise to eate it in such haste, because now onely they were to bee gone out of Egypt on a sudden. So in the Lords Supper, Christ vsed vnleauened bread, because at that time there was no leauened bread to be eaten: also he celebrated it at euening, because it was immediately to succeede the Passeouer, which was eaten at Euen. So hee sate at the Lords Supper, hauing sate before after the fashion of the Countrey at the Passeouer. A rule to know when such rites are occasionall, as if they be not expressed in the words of the institution of the ordinances. Seeing therefore the gesture of sitting, is neither by the Euan∣gelists, nor Saint Paul, repeating the institution, expressely set downe, wee are herein to submit our selues to the orders ap∣pointed by the Church. Vers. 14. And this day shall be vnto you for a memoriall: and you shall keepe it a Feast to the Lord, throughout your genera∣tions: you shall keepe it a Feast by an ordinance for euer. 14. Seuen dayes shall yee eate vnleauened bread, eun the first day yee shall put leauen out of your houses: for whosoeuer ea∣teth leauened bread, from the first day to the seuenth day, that soule shall be cut off from Israel. 16. And in the first day there shall be an holy Conuocation, and in the seuenth day there shall be an holy Conuocation to you▪
no manner of worke shall be done in them, saue that which eue∣ry man must eate, that onely may be done of you. COncerning the time of the celebration of the Passeouer, we are to note, first, the beginning; secondly, the continu∣ance. 1. In the beginning obserue; first, vpon what occasion it was ordained: secondly, on what time of the yeere celebra∣ted. First, the occasion was that great deliuerance from Pharaoh, and that bondage wherein the Egyptians held them; the same night that this deliuerance was to bee sent, this Passeouer was instituted. God so disposing of it, first, in regard of himselfe, to shew that this deliuerance came from him, in that euery thing came to passe according as he had before signified. Secondly, in regard of the people, to strengthen their faith and hope, that seeing all things accomplished according to this signe, they might beleeue in God, and haue their hearts enlarged to praise and trust in him. Secondly, the time of the yeere on which it was celebrated, is set downe, vers. 18. In the first moneth; that is, in the Spring time, answering in part to our March. The fourteenth day of the moneth; at the full of the Moone, after the Spring Equinocti∣all. God making choice of this time, that euen the time might stirre vp their hearts, and encourage them to hope for a deliue∣rance. Also it was a type of Christ, whose comming brought with it the Spring of grace, of knowledge and illumination, &c. Quest. Here a question may be moued, whether they were strictly bound to obserue alwaies this time, and no other. Answ. To this we answer in generall, that they were not so strictly tied vnto this time, as that vpon no occasion it might be altered. This appeares by that story which is recorded, Numb. 9. vers. 6. to 14. Out of which we may note these points; First, that God requires not impossibilities of his children, but doth dispense euen with his owne ordinances in case of ne∣cessity,
as here in case of legall vncleanenesse, by burying a dead man, God gaue them liberty to alter the time vnto another moneth. So in the wildernesse was Circumcision, because of the vncertainty of their iourneyes; and so there may be many necessary occasions to hinder a man from the Sacrament, and so I doubt not, but if a man that hath long lyen beded, should haue a feruent desire to receiue the Communion, the place might be altered, and it might be celebrated in a priuate house there being company sufficient to make a Congregation, the like may be said of Baptisme. Secondly, that it is better to forbeare for a time, then being vnprepared, to come to the Sacrament. Against this may bee obiected the example of those that came vnpared to the Passe∣ouer, 2. Chron. 30.17, 18. But wee answer, that God shewed his displeasure at this, in that he plagued them, ver. 20. although at the prayer of Hezekiah, and their own repentance, no doubt he healed them. Also they had honest hearts, and did this in ignorance, wherefore hee passed by their infirmity. Now if there might bee Legall vncleannesse without sinne: and yet those that were thus vncleane, might not come to the Passeo∣uer, much more ought wee that are indeed defiled with sinne, abstaine for a time, lest being vnprepard, we make the Sacra∣ment vnfruitfull vnto vs, and an occasion of bringing iudge∣ment vpon vs, 1. Cor. 11.28. Thirdly, that we doe not wittingly and willingly hinder our selues from the Table of the Lord. For these men were grieued, that they could not come, as appeares by their complaint to Moses, which shewes they were necessarily hindred. And vers. 13. wee see a great iudgement threatned against such as might come, and did neglect it. Wherefore it must be a matter of necessity that hinders vs, and not euery pretext that wee make vnto our selues. So like∣wise many will make themselues vnfit, by continuing in malice and anger against others, by which meanes they continue still in impenitency, and also shew their light esteeme of Gods or∣dinance. Fourthly, that if we be necessarily hindred at one time, wee
labour to make it vp at another, hereby shewing our true desire and religious care. 2. Concerning the continuance of the Passeouer, we are to note, first, how long it lasted at once for the celebration of it. Secondly, how long it lasted in the continuall succession of it from yeere to yeere. Concerning the former, it was celebrated seuen whole daies, vers. 15. to the end that it being a great ordinance, a memori∣all of a great benefit, and a type of a greater, it might haue a so∣lemne celebration. Now it was kept seuen dayes, because it was iust seuen dayes before their full deliuerance accomplish∣ed: for the first day they came out of Egypt, and the seuenth, they passed ouer the Red Sea. Here two questions may be asked: First, whether they might increase, or diminish the number of these dayes? Answ. No: they might not alter the dayes, to the end that the mystery might be alwayes had in remembrance, and be an occasion to declare vnto their children, when they should aske them the reason of them, all the circumstances of that deliue∣rance. But in the 2. Chron. 30.23. we reade that it was kept four∣teene dayes. Answ. First, they kept indeed a Festiuall seuen dayes ouer, but it was not the Passeouer. Secondly, if they did celebrate the Passeouer seuen daies longer, it was because many were vn∣cleane amongst so many people, who could not goe home and come again the next moneth, and so they thought that it might be continued other seuen dayes, so that it was extraordinary: vpon that Law, Num. 9. Quest. 2. How these seuen dayes were celebrated. Answ. 1. In generall all these seuen dayes were holy, Leu. 23.4. 2. But yet we must distinguish betweene the first and the last day, and the fiue middlemost. The fiue middle were holy in these respects: First, because that rite of eating vnleauened bread was to be continued.
Secondly, because on all those seuen dayes there were ex∣traordinary sacrifices to be offered, proper to those dayes, be∣sides the continuall morning and euening sacrifice, Leuit. 23.8. Numb. 28.23. Thirdly, because the people were to come together mor∣ning and euening to worship God, and to feast together in a holy reioycing in the Lord, 2. Chron. 30.22. Luk. 2.43. But the first and seuenth were in a peculiar manner, and more strictly holy. First, because on these dayes there was an holy Assembly, vers. 16. Leuit. 23.7, 8, Nvmb. 28.18, 25. What this holy Assembly was, see Nehem. 8.2, 3, 5, &c. Secondly, in regard that they were not to doe any seruile worke on these dayes, vers. 16. to the end they might haue the more liberty to worship God, and not to be tyred and wearied with labour on the fiue dayes. Vers. 15. For whosoeuer eateth leauened bread, from the first day vntill the seuenth, that soule shall be cut off from Israel. THe last thing to be considered, is the necessity of this Sa∣crament of the Passeouer, and so consequently of the Lords Supper, instituted in the roome thereof. That there was a necessary obseruation of it, appeares in two respects: First, because it was expressely and simply commanded of the Lord, vers. 14. Secondly, because of the penalty laid vpon those that should wilfully neglect, or contemne it, vers. 15. for although onely this particular Rite of vnleauened bread be here expres∣sed, yet by a Synecdoche wee must vnderstand it of the whole Ordinance, so that the contempt or neglect is not onely of this rite, but of the whole Ordinance, as appeares by comparing this with Numb. 9.13. That we may more distinctly see wherein this necessity con∣sists, we are to consider in generall; that a thing is then said to be necessary, without which another thing cannot bee. Now this is vsed in two respects; first, for a thing that is absolutely necessary, without which a thing cannot possibly be, so as are
the causes of things said to be necessary. Thus Christs death is absolutely necessary for our saluation. Secondly, it is taken for that which is necessary by conse∣quence, for the better effecting, and more easie performance of a thing. The Sacraments are necessary; not as causes, for then should they giue grace and saluation. But they are necessary as a meanes of saluation, and that also not simply: for so is Faith the meanes, and this commeth by hearing of the Word, but in these two respects: first, because God hath commanded them, they are his ordinances to trie our obedience; and so although we should reape no benefit by them, yet were we to obserue them. Secondly, in regard of our need, because we are carnall, and are most moued with things obiected to our senses, not so much apprehending spirituall mysteries, and therefore for the helpe of our vnderstanding, and strengthening of our Faith, God ordained the Sacraments, that so more particularly wee might apply Christ to our selues. Therefore wee must distinguish betweene the outward signes, and the thing signified. Christ is that which the Sacrament represents, now to feed on Christ, to celebrate this Passeouer (for so is he called) is ab∣solutely necessary, without which no saluation, Ioh. 6.53. But as for the Elements and other Rites, they are necessary but in part, not as causes, nor as meanes simply, without which there were no partaking of Christ, but in regard of Gods command, and our better helpe. In the Penalty obserue, first, the Extent thereof; secondly, the Persons against whom it is denounced. 1. The Extent is in these words, [that person shall be cut off from Israel.] To take this in the largest extent, it setteth forth three things: First, that those that offend against this charge, shall bee se∣parated from the communion and fellowship of the people of God, and so be accounted as Heathen men, 1. Cor. 5. last, allu∣deth hereunto. Secondly, the taking of them cleane from the face of the
earth, either ordinarily by the sword of the Magistrate: for so this cutting off is taken, Exod. 31.14, 15. or extraordinarily by the hand of God. Thirdly, a depriuation of saluation and debarring from life eternall, a cutting off from hauing fellowship with the body of Christ hereafter, because here they so little regarded the com∣munion of his members; as Psal. 69.28. 2. The persons against whom this iudgement is threatned, are plainely set downe, Numb. 9.10, 13. Where we see, that if vrgent causes did hinder any one, God in that case did dispense with him, but if when he might conueniently keepe the Passe∣ouer, and was not hindered by the prouidence of God, he did then neglect it, then was he liable to this punishment. We see therefore that the Iewes were bound in conscience to the obseruation of the Passeouer, as they also did, vers. 28. and in times succeeding, when they were growne carelesse, or had forgotten the ordinances of God, we see that godly Kings considering the great necessity of it, had great care to restore it to its former obseruation; as Iosiah and Hezekiah, 2. Chro. 30. To apply this to our selues, seeing that there is as great ne∣cessity of our Sacraments, as of these of the Iewes, as great a penalty denounced against the wilfull contemuers and negle∣cters of ours, as of theirs, we haue as great need of these helpes as they, and as great benefit redounds to vs as to them, it fol∣lowes that we are as strictly bound vnto the obseruation of the Sacraments as they were; and therefore we are not to think it a matter arbitrary, and left at our choise, but to make con∣science to come, when God by his Minister doth inuite vs. 2. Againe, as here is condemned all wilfull profanation, and contempt of the Sacraments, so likewise is reproued that super∣stitious conceit that many haue of the necessity of it, who if they be sicke, will haue the Sacrament brought to them, &c.
AN EXPOSITION VPON THE THIRTIETH PSALME. Psal. 30.2. In whose Spirit there is no guile. GVile is a spirituall deceit, whereby a man de∣ceiues himselfe before God in the matter of his saluation. The kinds of it may bee reduced to foure heads. 1. Guile, in respect of Gods fauour when a man is deceiued by a false perswasion, that he is in the fauour and loue of God. This is done three wayes: 1. By comparisons; when a man compares himselfe either with himselfe, or with grosse notorious sinners that come farre behind him in goodnes, or with ciuil righteous men. As did the Pharises, Luk. 18.11, 12. such are said to bee aliue whithout the Law. Rom. 7.9. 2. By reason of temporall blessings, which because a man doth enioy plentifully, so he straightway concludes, that he is beloued of God. 3. Lastly, which is the most fearefull, when men being pu∣nished with crosses and calamities, doe hereupon gather, that God loueth them, saying, that they haue their punishment here, and so they shall escape hereafter; though in the meane time they neuer repent of their sinnes, and leaue their wicked cour∣ses, for which end God did thus punish them. 2. Guile and deceit of the heart in respect of Sinne; this is either before or after the committing of it. Before the committing of a sinne, a mans hear deceiues and beguiles him foure wayes.
1. By perswading him, it is but a small veniall sinne; so extenuating it, as a matter not much to be stood vpon. 2. But if the sinne doe seeme great and vgly, then it labours to make him beleiue that God seeth it not, he takes no notice of it. 3. If this perswasion take no place, but that he thinke God will see it, then it suggesteth vnto him that he will not punish him for it, he will passe by it, &c. 4. If all this serue not the turne, then it perswadeth him, that repentance may easily be had for it, that he will repent for it a∣fore he dies, &c. After a sinne committed, the guile is threefold. 1. A mans corrupt heart will endeuor to bring him to a loue and liking of that sinne, and make it seeme pleasant vnto him, that he may not repent for it. Secondly, or else to cause him to defend it by colourable shiftes and excuses, that he may seeme to doe it lawfully. Thirdly, if it doe begin to gripe him, and to pricke his con∣science, then doth it labour to choke this griefe and sorrow, and so to hinder sound repentance, and that three wayes: First, by merriment, when a man thinkes it but a melancho∣ly, and so gets him among merry companions to musicke, and such like, to driue it away. Secondly, if so it leaue him not, then hee performes some short humiliation for fashion sake, without true sorrow indeed, that so hereby hee may as it were, get himselfe out of Gods hands. Thirdly, by some ceremony or other; as when some coue∣tous extortioner that gets his goods vnlawfully, and neuer thinkes of restitution, vpon his death bed, or before, will giue somewhat to build an Almes-house, and so make amends for all. This is but a ceremony as it were. 3. Guile, in respect of vertues and graces, when a man de∣ceiues himelfe with a counterfeit shew of them; as First, when he perswades himselfe to be a true worshipper of God, because he frequents the places and exercises of his ser∣uice.
Secondly, to bee a true Christian, because he performes the outward duties of Religion. Thirdly, when hee beguiles himselfe with the shadow of Faith and repentance, and all other particular graces, whereof there is no one but may be counterefited. Fourthly, guile in respect of the Word, and workes of the Spirit: for first, a man may haue, first, knowledge of the Word; secondly, assent vnto this knowledge; thirdly, a man may make profession of it; fourthly, yea, he may stand for the defence of the truth thereof, and yet may he be beguiled with a false hope of his good estate; all things being wrought in him by that wonderfull power of God, whereby hee causeth euen the wic∣ked and vngodly to giue testimony to the truth of his Word. Secondly, there may bee wrought in him, first, a kind of loue and ioy in the Word; secondly, a willingnesse to heare it; thirdly, a reformation of some sinnes and corruptions in the life and conuersation (which is done by the restraining, and not sanctifying Spirit,) as there was in Herod, Mark. 6.20. with diuers the like graces; and neuerthelesse as Herod did, he may nourish some one bosome sinne, and so be farre from the state of sound conuersion. Diuers other such deceits there are, but these are the princi∣pall: which things seeing they are so, and that the heart is de∣ceitfull aboue all things, yea, and who can know it? Let vs labour and learne, first, to suspect our hearts, and not trust them too farre, but by due examination find out the wiles and subtilties thereof. Secondly, to get vs sincere and vpright hearts. FINIS.
AN EXPOSITION OF PART OF THE FIFT AND SIXT CHAP∣TERS OF S. PAVLES EPISTLE to the Ephesians, wherein is handled all such duties as belong to house∣hold Gouernment: ALSO THE SPIRITVALL ARMOVR, OVT OF WHICH A CHRISTIAN MAY FETCH SVFFICIENT furniture against all his spirituall Enemies. LONDON, Imprinted for Iohn Bartlett, and are to be sold at the signe of the Gilt Cup in the Goldsmiths Row in Cheapeside. 1630.
EPHESIANS 5. VER. 22, 23, &c. Wiues, submit your selues vnto your husbands, as vnto the Lord. For the husband is the wiues head, euen as Christ is the head of the Church, and the same is the sauiour of his body. THe scope and drift of the Apostle in the latter end of this Epistle, is to stirre vp Christians to walke worthy of the vocation whereunto they were called, Chap. 4.1. Hee heere shewes how they should walke, viz. 1. In the practice of the duties of their generall calling of Chstanity, which are set downe in the fourth and part of the fift Chapter, vnto the 20. vrse. 2 In the performance of the duties belonging to their particular llings. 1 In generall, verse 21. hee layeth down the uty of subiection, which is a generall and common duty belonging to all callings, both infe∣riour and superiour, of Magistrates and Ministers, yea, Kigs themselues. Now this subiection must be in the feare of the Lord, which shweth first the cause of it: it ariseth from the feae of the Lord, Deut. 5.29 Eclesiastes 12.13. For this bridles our vnruly corruptions, which be other∣wise vntoward and stubbore, to yeeld rady and cherefull obedence. 2 This shewes the restraint and manner of prformance, Col. 3. Ephes 6. It must be done in the Lord. When our submission goeth against the Commandements of the Lord, no good issue commeth from it: as in Suls obeying the people, 1 Sam. 15.15, 21. and also of Aaons yeelding to the children of Israel in making the calfe, Exod. 2. for God is the highest: and againe, God is our Iud. This caution must be vnder∣stood in all particular dies tat ensue.
Now from this genrall ground, the Apostle comes to some particular functions, or callings, and the duties belonging thereunto. Hence wee learne this instruction from this, in that the Apostle stayeth not in the general duties of Christi∣anity; but from thence descendeth to the particular offices of such generall callings: that it is not sufficient to performe the generall duties of Christianity, vnlesse we practise the seuerall duties of our particular vocati∣ons, as the Apostle heerein is as carefull to set downe the one as the other, and to the Colossians the like, Chap. 4.5. And the Apostle Peter in his Epistle exhorts, and in the 2 Chap. ver. 15. of Titus, the A∣postle shewes, that this is a thing that the Ministers ought to teach the people, as is plain also in the 5 Com∣mandement, in which euery one, is ranked into cer∣taine degrees. There are 4 considerations to stirre vs vp: 1 That those seuerall places and callings wherein we are set, are appoynted of God, and that hee prescribes the duties belonging vnto them. 2 That the particular callings wherein wee are set, serue to make vp the comlinesse of the Church of God, and the beauty of the body of Christ Iesus: now wee disturbe this comely order, when we either exalt or debase our selfe too much, or liue out of our callings. 3 These are the bonds whereby wee are bound and knit one to another, and by which wee both doe much good, and reape much profit one of another, Eph. 4.16. 4 That the generall duties of Christianity cannot better be shewed, then in the practice of our particular duties of our seuerall callings. Vse. 1 That euery one doe obserue that place wherein God hath set him: herein we must haue recourse to the word, which shewes vs direction to walke in the same, Tit. .9, 10. heereby shall wee adorne the Gospell of Christ in all things.
And wee may well say without breach of charity, that they who are not carefull to performe the duties of particular callings, are no good Christians, whatsoeuer shew they make abroad: as an vnconscionable Minister in his calling, cannot possibly be a good Christian. 2 Generall doctrine is, in that the Apostle doth make choice of those callings that serue to build vp a family: all which in 3 ranks he reckoneth vp very acurately, and is very earnest, copious and large in vrging the duties of them. Hence wee learne, that the particular callings of a family are some of those that belong to Christians, and such as in which wee ought to be diligent in ober∣uing the duties of them. The reason is, because the family is the seminary of the Church and Commonwealth, & as it were the Bee∣hiue, which heere and there sendeth swarmes forth: So all men came first from the family of Adam and Eue; after the floud from the family of Noah: therefore great care is to be taken heerin, seeing in families all men are first trained vp, and ought so to be instructed, that they may be profitable members afterward of Church and Commonwealth. Therefore those that haue no other calling but onely of a family, ought not to be discomforted and troubled in conscience, as if they had no calling at all, because they haue no publike calling; but they ought to kow that such callings are warranted by the Word of God, wherein they may haue busines enough to imploy themselues, if they be conscionable in performance of it: nd the more free they are from pubike callings, the more care and diligence in gouerning and instructing their families ought they to haue. 2 For those that haue another publike calling, to tell them, that by this, they are not exempted from the calling of the family: for the duties of the one doe not crosse the other: as Iosua was a captaine of the host
of the Lord: yet what said hee? I and my house will serue the Lord, Iosh. 24.15. Ei a good man otherwise, was vnconscionable heerein: so was Dauid in bringing vp his children: and we know what issue was of both familis, 1 Tim. 3.9. , he that cannot rule and or∣der his family well, cannot rule the Common-wealth well: so a stubborne chide will neuer proue a good sub∣iect. These doctrines sere as prparatiues to the en∣suing duties in our particular vocations. Now from those general doctrines, we come to handle the duies that belong to the particular callings heere mentioned: and first, to shew the duties o belong to man and wife. Fitly doth the Apostle beginne with the married couple: 1 Because in the beginning of the world, this was the first, as Adam and Eue were married and ioy∣ned together by God, Gen. 2. before either seruants or children were any. 2 Because they are the chiefe in the familie, hauing the gouernment thereof, and so are the guides and ex∣amples to others: and if they carry themselues lewdly, their seruants and children will be ready to follow their examples. So then their fault is double. 1 In neglecting heir owne duties, and so wronging one another. 2 In giuing offence and ill example to others. Now come we to the duties belonging to them, in which we will proceed in this order: 1 to lay downe the generall duties that belong to both. 2 To lay downe the seuerall duties of their particu∣lar callings. The former are twofold, either de Necessitate, de Honestate. either such as are ab∣solutly necssary for the prseruing of the marriage knot, or such as are meete and conuenient to be done for the better preser∣uing of it, and furthrance of their mutuall helpes and comfort. Those that are absolutely necessary, are two.
1 Chastity opposed to adultery. By both which the marriage knot is bro∣ken. 2 Cohabitation opposd to de∣sertion. By both which the marriage knot is bro∣ken. Chastity is a vertue whereby we possesse our vessel in holinsse and honor, 2 Cor. 11.2. 1 Thes. 5. in a gene∣rall intent is it vnderstood of all purity. But in 1 Thes. 4.4. of the chastity of the body. It is twofold, either of single life, & this either of those that were neuer married, or such as are widdowes or widdowers. Of such, 1 Tim. 5.16. Married estates, Tit. 2.5. This note against the dotage of Papists, who thinke that chastity and marriage cannot stand together, whereas the Apostle called the marriage bed vndefiled. Now this is a mutuall duty to be performed of both. 1 Cor. 7.4. the man and the wife, neither of them haue more liberty than the other. It is also absolutely ne∣cessary, because adultery doth break the marriage bond, Pro. 2.17. Mat. 5.3. Mat. 19.9. Where the exception sheweth, that adultry breaketh this bond: so that if the man marry another, hee is not an adulterer. Reason is euident, because in adultery they make themselues one flesh with a stranger, 1 Cor. 6.16. Now this neer vnion can be but betwixt two. The vse is ther∣fore that we obserue this cousell of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7 4, 5 and of Slomon, Pro. 5.17 18, 19. Shewing here∣by, that if we haue a delight in our wiues, and comfort our slues with one another, truely to loue one another, we shall the better auoyde strange flesh: Considering also that it is a point of so great consequence, and adul∣tery such a sinne, as God himselfe will iudge and auenge. If we haue also an eye to the feare of the Lord, then wee haue Gods promis, Prou. 2.16. and 6.20, 24. and  will keepe vs as it kept Ioseph, Gen. 39.9. Cohabitation is, that the hsband and wife dwell to∣gether, enioying the mutuall hpe and comfort one
of another, 1 Pet. 3.7. 1 Cor. 7.12, 13. Where the A∣postle vseth an argument, which if it hold in those mar∣riages where one party is an Infidell, much more then where both are Christians: and this was meant, Gen. 2. vlt. in that commandement, that a man should leaue all, and cleaue to his wife: and this is the ground thereof. Reason is twofold, drawn partly from the benefits that come by Cohabitation, as, first because all marriage duties are hereby better performed, loue increased and preserued, the gifts and graces bestowed on either of them shall be better obserued, and so God shall be more praysed and glorified, their affections more neerly knit together: for absence doth alienate affectios, &c. Partly, from the hurts proceeding from the neglect thereof. 1 A neglect of the duties of marriage. 2 A hin∣derance of breeding and begetting holy seed. 3 A lying open to the snares and temptations of Satan, to many noysome lusts, and occasion of falling into adultery. Now this is absolutely necessary, 1 By consequent, because it giueth occasion to adultery, wherby marriage is broken. 2 Simply in it selfe, in the vttermost extent. If it be an obstinate, wilfull and finall desertion, it doth directly breake the bond. But will some say, How shall we know whether it be such a desertion or no? We may know it by these two signes: 1 By the open profession of the party forsaking: as if he be a Papist, &c. and o refuse obstinately to abide and dwel amongst those that are truely religious: Heereby hee manifestly procaimes, that his departing and desertion is obstinate, and that hee will neuer re∣turne againe, 1 Cor. 7.15. 2 By the continuance in this separation, as is further manifested by the comparing it with the statutes of Colledges, from which i any one absnt himselfe for such and such a time, without giung notice thereof, and without any necessity, this his separation an desertion is adiudged wilfull, and hee expuist, ipso facto. So the
Lawes of the Land haue determined vpon seuen yeeres absence. Obiect. But there is nothing for which a man may put away his wife, or shee her husband, but onely for a∣dultery, and so not for desertion. Answer. Indeed nothing doth dissolue the band by diuorce and putting away, but adultery, of which the places, Math. 5. Mat. 19. are to be vnderstood: but yet besides this, there are other causes whereby wed∣locke is dissolued: as namely death: and so also by deser∣tion: in which case vpon complaint, the Magistrate doth relieue the innocent party wronged. Quest. Whether it be simply vnlawfull or no to be absent for a time? No, if it be not in the vttermost ex∣tent: 2 If it be with mutuall consent, 2 Kings 4.22. Pro. 7.19, 20. 3 If it be for weighty affaires, either for family or other occasions by vertue of ones calling, as of Courtiers, Lawyers, Mariners, &c. 4 If it be for an ineuitable impediment and necessity, as if a man be taken captiue, or the like. But these cautions in all must be obserued, that it be a departing with griefe and sorrow, euen as if it were a pulling of one member from another. 2 That there be a returne againe so speedily as possibly they may▪ and lastly, in the time of their absence, to supply their pre∣sence by frequent intercourse of letters, sending tokens of mutuall loue, and enquiring of one anothers well∣fare, &c. From hence wee may learne, first, the erronious opinion of the Canonists, that hold that there is no∣thing that doth breake the band, neither adultery, nor desertion: yet they hold many causes of separation from bed and boord: so the band shall remaine, yet they shall haue no meanes of performance of marriage duties. 2 This condemnes them that thinke themselues ne∣uer well and merry, but in the absence one of another: as they that  abroad when their wiues are at home,
and such as send their wiues into the countrie, &c. The other common dues that are meet and coue∣nient, and indeed necssary for the well being, ad com∣fortable, good, religious, ad peacable estate of marri∣age, and btter preruing of that knot. These are two∣fold, either as they are both ioyntly to performe to o∣thers: either uch as they are mutually to performe one vnto anoher. And they are two. 1 Loue, Titus 2.4. 2 Prouident care for the good one of another. This loue is the bond of perfection, Col. 3. and it is the ground of all other good duties, and the cheerefull and ready performance of them. So that if any duties be neglectd between them, then hence may we gather the ground of it, viz. want of loue. But let vs se what kind of loue the Scripture heere requireth: it must not bee a mere naturall loue, or a worldly loue: but it is a spiritual loue, arising from obedience to Gods commandement, and a conscience of his ordinance. That loue that is for the things of this world, as for honour, riches, beauty, &c. is fading and continues not, because take away the cause, take a∣way the ffect: those worldly things decaying, the loue thereof must also needes decay; farewell it. But the spirituall loue grounded vpon the considera∣tion of Gods ordinance, is firm and constant, and lasteth alwaies, because thy considr that God hath ioyned them together; and so, because she is my wife, because he is my husband, &c. therfore they loue one another. This cōdemnes the vnnatural practice of those that can∣not affect one another, but loue any other rather then thir owne wiues and husbands, yea, because thy are their husbands or their wiues: as many will say, I could loue him, if he were not my husband, or if shee were not my wife. 2 Duty: The former doth especially respect the affe∣ction,
this the action: that they bee prouident and carefull, one for the good of another, Prou. 31.1. This good standeth in foure things. 1 In the soule. 2 In the body. 3 In the goods. 4 In the good name of one another: in which the good or ill of one another doth consist: for all together, this is a generall meanes to be vsed, namely, Faithfull and daily prayer one for an∣oher; for the meanes to obtaine any blessing of God, is prayr, Iames 5.16. This to be performed continu∣ally without ceasing: so Gen. 25. Isaac prayed for the barrennesse of his wife. And this must be done both in∣wardly by themselues in their secret prayers, and also one with another. So Isaac is said to haue prayed with or before his wife, Gen. 25. 1 For the soule: either to winne them and conuert them; or to build them vp further being conuerted: For the former, see 1 Peter 3.1. 1 Cor. 7. The reason is, because this bond is not onely, and so much for carnall respects, as indeed for the good of the soule: as for this respect, they are called the bonds of ministration. And this is not only between those where one party is an Infidell, but also if he be a prophane person and not yet called. For the latter, namely, edifying of one another, this must be done. 1 By remoouing the impediments which may hinder this spirituall edification, the great∣est of which is sinne; wherefore we must watch one o∣uer another for the auoyding of sinne. This watchfulnesse shewes it selfe a waies: 1 preuen∣ting of a sinne, if we see them purposed to commit any, as Rebecca did preuent Isaac in blessing Esau, which if according to his purpose he had done, hee had sinned. 2 In redressing of any thing that is out of ordr, as Zip∣porah dd redresse that fault of Moses child, who neglect∣ed the circūcision of his child. Here also is place for ad∣monition, whereby the faults one of another are amen∣ded, as Naamans seuant did, and Abigail also to Nabal.
This milde and gentle admoition doth especially be∣long to the husbad. 2 By vsing the meanes of difying one of anoher, for the cherishing of the graces in either of them, as by obseruing them; and by praising and wse commenda∣tions of them in one another, 1 The. 5.11. nd the good example of each other for the increasing of them. This condemnes those wiues and husbands that hinder the saluation one of another. 3 Concerning the welfare of the body and person of one another, Eph. 5.28, 29. this duty is well set down by the Apostle, that they should nourish and cherish one another in all estates and coditions. Yea, this Gn. 2.18. is the maine end of their com∣ming togeher, Prou. 17.17. A true friend is alwaies constant in his loue, alteration of stats cannot alter his affections. If this be true of friends, much more then betweene man and wife. This appeareth in Rebecca that had a tender care of her husband, so that shee knew what hee best loued, and so prouided it for him, Gen. 27.9. This serues to reprooue the vnnaturalnesse of those that grudge one another things conuenient in any sick∣nesse, &c. The husbands complaining of great charges, the wiues of their labor and paines: and so making their afflictions more hauy and grieuous; as two Oxen in the yoke, one drawing backward, as Iobs wife did, Iob 2. See Iob 19.17. Of this so let vs be perswaded, that when God laies the crosse vpon one, God layeth it vpon the other, for the tryall of their patience. 4 Concerning the good name one of another, that the good name of the one ought to bee as deare vnto the other as their owne name. Such a care had Ioseph of Maries good name, Mat. 1.19. And so Bathsheba was in the 2 Sam. 11.5. carefull for Dauids credit.
For▪ Pro. 22.1. Eccles. 7.3. A good name is bet∣ter then riches, then life, yea, then any thing else. Againe, how will this knit their hearts together, when they perceiue each other care for the credit one of another, as the contrary bringeth heart-burning, contention, iealousie, and debate betweene them? For the performance heereof, these 4 things are to be marked. 1 To haue a care to preuent an ill name: in which, we must haue respect to these 3 especiall things. 1 What the wife doth relate of the husband, or he of her. 2 What they doe heare; to take heed of their eares. 3 To take heed to their iudgements, what censure they giue of it. For the first, that they diuulge not their infirmities, 1 Pet. 4.8. but couer and hide them as Ioseph did. This condemnes those that discouer and lay open their hus∣bands and wiues imperfections; which fault is so much the greater in these two respects. 1 Because these two being so neerly linked together, doe know more by one another, than any other, and so if these blaze their imperfections abroad, it is a most foule fault. 2 Bcause of all, they are most bound to seeke the cre∣dit one of another: For the bond betweene man and wife is more neere than betweene father and sonne, as appeares, Gen. 2.24. So that if Cham were cursed for discouering his fathers fault, much more shall such a husband or wife be accursed, that lay open the infirmi∣ties one of another. 2 For our eares, that they be not open to receiue newes and tales one of another, that our eares be not ready and willing, itching to heare false rumors and surmises. Our iudgement must be very sparing or very charitable: that we suspend our iudgement, and not straightway rashly giue our censure, as Ioseph by all likelihood did of Mary:
otherwise there will be many euill surmises, iealousies, and suspitions. Or if wee giue our censure, it must be in loue: the properties whereof, the Apostle setteth down, 1 Cor. 13.7, 8. either that we intrpret it, if it be doubtfull, in the best part, or that we mitigate and extenuate it so farre as well wee may: as Abigail did mitigate to Dauid her husband Naals faults, whereas Michol did exasperate and aggrauate her husbands infirmitie, as she thought. 2 For redressing of an ill name; that if an ill report be raisd, that the wife hide it not from her husbad, but discouer it to him, that if the report be vpon iust ground, hee may be brought to rpentance; if vpon suspicion, that hee may be warned to preuent it. 3 For the procuring of a good name: that they gladly report and diuulge their good parts, as the husband of that good wife, Pro. 1, 28. and willingly to heare the good report one of another. 4 For the preseruing of a good name, they must, if they heare a good report of one another, giue notice thereof to each other, not to glory in it themselues, and to be proud of it, but to glorifie God for it. For the manifestation of this care, this must bee vsed, viz. that both reioyce and grieue mutually, for the good or ill name one of another, by which simpa∣thy and fellow feeling our loue and care of one anothers credit will plainely shew it selfe. 4 Concerning the goods of one another, that as they hue a mutuall right in the possessiō of all, so they ought mutually to be prouident for the wealth and good estate of each other, to preserue and increase it: this is a com∣mon duty; common, I say, because vsually wiues put this off to their husbands: but read Pro. 31. and we shall ee the contrary. This so on the one side reprooues vnthrifty and coue∣tous husdands, and on the other idle wiues. Now generally, if all these duties were performed,
how comfortable, peaceable, and ioyous would the band of marriage be, which wee see many by neglecting the performance thereof, to make most wearisome, and bur∣densome? so that after a while, the begin to be weary one of another, to wish the death of each other, and such other grudges, contentions and discomforts doe arise betweene them. Duties Cōmon. Absolutely necessary, Chastity. Cohabitation. Conuenient to be performed one to a∣nother. Loue, Care, both to others, as the care of the worship of God in the family, &c. Particular. The Apostle doth beginne with wiues, as hee doth in the Epistle to the Colossians, &c. And so Saint Peter. The reason of it is, because shee is the inferiour, and it is the Apostles order, to beginne alwaies with the duties of inferiour, and so is this order obserued in the 5 Commandement: But what is the reason of this? Two there are: 1 Because the inferiour is the lother to subiect him∣selfe to his place, not that that is a matter of greater difficulty to obey, than gouerne; for this thing is farre more dfficult: and so places of greater authority, and superiority, are by the wise prouidence of God orderd for such as are of greater strength, wisdome, discreti∣on, and ability: as to men, not women; to men of ripe age, and not to children, Esa. 3.4, 12. because they are
to lay downe the rule of obdience, and so may sooner, ya, ad so ougt to haue more wisdome; the other on∣ly to obserue it being laid downe. Her we may consider the great fauour of God in gi∣uing vs suc a King as we now haue, of the stronget sexe; guen to s in such a ripe age, funished with such knowledge and zeale, as neuer King since Christ had; indeed a true Defender of the faith, &c. Naturally there is in man a dsire to rule, and so they who are inferiours, are drawne vnto obedience praemio & paena, as we see penall statutes and the like are indeed most commonly for to keepe inferiours wihin their compasse, and are not so much appointed for superiors. 2 Because it will fare worse with inferiours, if there be strife, who shall beginne: for whence ariseth rage and anger in the superiour? Is it not because of the stub∣bornnesse of ineriours? Whereas the best way for in∣feriours, to mooue those that are in places of authority ouer them, is to vse them mildly and gently, and not churlishly, yea, to winne them to the performing of their owne duties, is first, to beginne with duty, and to behaue themselues obediently, and reuerently. Indeed both ought to prouoke by good example, not sty till they be prouoked, and to striue to goe before the other in performing of their duties; and this is praise-worthy: But generally, if there be any conten∣tion about beginning, the inferiour must beginne: And in the case of wiues, there be some reasons speciall why they should beginne. 1 Out of 1 Corinth. 11.9. 2 Out of 1 Tim. 2.14. Because she was first in the transgression, and so ought by her obedience recom∣pence the wrong shee hath done vnto her husband; by being first in obedience. Now let's consider why the Apostle first beginnes with wiues amongst all other degrees of inferiours: For why is the wife as loth to performe the duties of
subiection, as other sorts of inferiours are? yea surely, and the reason is, because of all inequalities, there is the last disparity in this, between man and wife. Though shee be not the head, yet she is the heart. See 1 Cor. 1.11, 12. so that there is a most neere relation: yea a com∣mon quity in many things with their husbands: and so in some things there is an equality; but yet for all this, to conclude as women do, that so there is an equa∣lity in all, is but a womans reason, &c. Againe, euen in those things wherein there is a com∣munity, yet is there an inequality, as in commanding of their children: if the father command a thing indiffe∣rent, and the mother forbid, the fathers word ought to stand. Againe, in some things there is no equality: as the husband may command the wife, but shee by no meanes her husband. Now because of this little disparity, it is; that wiues of all other inferiours, are most hardly drawne to sub∣iect themselues obediently. This serues for the praise of those wiues, that haue so farre subdued their nature, as to yeeld willing obe∣dience. 2 To reproue them that labour not against this cor∣ruption of nature, but rather increase and nourish the same by their wilfull peruersenesse. Now, from these Generalities, come we to the par∣ticular duties belonging to each of them in seuerall. And first of the Wife, contained in the 22.23, 24. ver∣ses. First, let vs set downe the meaning of the words, Wiues and Husbands, (,) Though these be general phrases and words belonging to all men and women, yet in our translation, they are restrained well vnto them only that are maried persons, which is plain by the relation between them here signified, & secod∣ly by the duties which are laid vpon thē by the Apostle. Submi, () The word being of the meane
voice, may be translated either passiuely (Be yee subiect) or actiuely, (Submit your selues.) No there is a twoold subiection. 1 Of necessity. 2 Of will. Of order, or of duty. The first is in regard of that ranke and degree of Inferiority wherein God hath placed wiues: by vertue of which Ordinance of God, they must be subiect, will they, ill they. The scond is that dutifull respect and reuerence that inferiours are to carry towards those that are in place of authority, bcause God hath set them ouer them: and this is the subiection here meant, that wiues performe vnto thir husbands. Vnto your owne usbands: (▪) which words containe two things. 1 That wiues ought to haue but one husband, 1 Cor. 7.2. 2 That this subie∣ction is to be performed to him alone, forbidding all submission to adulterers, &c. Commanding chaste and faithfull obedience vnto him. As vnto the Lord,) that is, to Christ Iesus: for this word is by a kind of excellency appropriated vnto him, and it is so expounded in the 5 verse of the next Chap. These words teach vs two things. 1 That the husband by vertue of his place, hath a kinde of fellowship with Christ. 2 That such a submission is to be performed by the wife to her husband, as shee would performe vnto Christ. That is, 1 That it be done reuerently, in feare and trembling. 2 Sincerely, in singlenesse of heart, as is said of seruants, Chap. 6.5, 6. For the husband is the wiues head.) This is meta∣phorically spoken, in allusion to a naturall body, that is, the husband, by reason of his place, is more eminent, he is to protect, to defend, and gouerne his wife. Euen as Christ is the head of the Church,) To vrge and presse the husbands authority ouer the wife, hee putteth in this similitude betwixt the husband and Christ; wherein we may consider two things. 1 That
the husband, by verue of his place, is aboe his wife. 2 That heerein there is a resemblance between him and Christ, both which ought duely to be obser∣ued, because they are strong motiues to stirre vp wiues to yeeld obedience to their husbands. And the same is the Sauiour of his body,) that is, Christ is not onely a head to rule, to giue spirituall life, sense and motion to his members, but (himselfe) and no other is also the (Sauiour) absolute and euery way perfect, (,) to protect, defend, and saue his (body) that is, the Elect, Gods children, such as God hath giuen to him. Therefore as, &c.) This conclusion inferred vpon the former ground, sheweth two things, 1 That there is as great reason that the wife should subiect her selfe to her husband, as that the Church should submit her selfe to Christ. 2 That such a subiection as the Church doth performe to Christ, such ought the wife to performe to her husband; that it be done cheerefully, readily, con∣stantly, and so in other things agreeably. Ob. Why, but will some man say, is any man to be obeyed so as Christ is obeyed. Answ. We must restraine this and such like genera∣lities to the point in question; and then wee shall see the meaning to be this, that in euery thing, which doth belong to the husband by Vertue of his place, to com∣mand, therein ought the wife to obey, euen as the Church obeyeth Christ. Like as it is said, 1 Cor. 10.23. All things are lawfull for mee, that is, all things indif∣ferent: as also. 1 Cor. 6.13. Hence wee may learne two things. 1 That the au∣thority of the husband is very ample and large. 2 That the wife must looke vnto all duties of obedience, and not onely to some, saying as some doe, I will obey my husband in these and these, but not in others. More distinctly to speake of them, we may consider in these words, two parts. 1 The duty it selfe, and this,
1 Wherein it consisteth, viz. In Subiection. 2 To whom to be performed, namely, to their owne husbands. 3 How to be performed. The manner is threefold. 1 As to the Lord. 2 As the Church to Christ. 3 In eue∣ry thing. 2 The reason of this duty, taken from the authority and place, wherein God hath placed the man. The husband is the head, which is amplified by a similitude betweene Christ and him. 1 Dutie is Subiection, which is a generall duty com∣mended in Gen. 3.16. For wee must thinke that this is not a iudgement onely, but also a commandement, as the iudgement vpon Adam, of eating his bread in the sweat of his browes, was also a commandement that he should not liue without a calling, Gen. 3.19. And from this ground, the Apostles and Prophets haue raised this doctrine of the wiues submission, that wee stand not to recite all the places seuerally. This word (subiect,) is of large extent, as the word honour is in the 5 Commandement. It implyeth two branches of duties. 1 That she acknowledge and yeeld vnto her husband by reason of his place, the preroga∣tiue of eminency, and superiority aboue her selfe. 2 That accordingly she respect him. The first that is, That she doe see and acknowledge a superiority in her husband, is not only a maine duty, but also indeed the ground of all other. For how can the wife subiect her selfe willingly, if shee neuer acknowledge any preeminency, and authority ouer her in her husband? Well may shee yeeld a forced sub∣mission, euen as a conquered King may submit himselfe to the conquerour, though hee account him not his su∣periour, but in his heart despiseth him, and seeketh op∣portunity of reuenge: but a willing and ready submis∣sion she can neuer performe. Now that wiues ought to knowledge such a superiori∣ty
in their husbands: 1 See Gen. 3.16. 2 Let them obserue the Titles God giues them in Scripture: as of Lord, Gen. 18.12. 1 Peter 3.6. Hos. 2.16. Guide, Pro. 2.17. Head, as heere, Image and glory of God, 1 Cor. 11.7. 3 Euen nature sheweth this, that women are alwaie couered in token of subiection; whereof also their long hayre is a signe, 1 Cor. 11. 4 The husband by reason of his place, represents the comely order and beauty in a naturall body, viz. That he is the head. So, &c. And also he represents the per∣son of Christ. 5 The woman was made for the man: shee was made after the man, she was made not of the mans head, but out of his side: all which shew the superiority of her husband. Wee see then, that subiection is a necessary duty to be performed by wiues: yea, of whatsoeuer state or degree shee was before her marriage, yet must she, though a Queen, &c. but married to a meane subiect, af∣ter her marriage acknowledge her selfe inferiour to him, though for her Regiment and the like she may be his superiour. Vse Is first, to teach wiues, that they be diligent to learn this duty, & for to attaine to the right knowledge, and acknowledging of their husbands prerogatiues. 2 To condemne ambitious and proud wiues, that will forsooth be not onely equall, but aboue their husbands: whence arise so many contentions in families. The second that is, Wiuely respect consists in two things. 1 Reuerence. 2 Obedience. Reuerence is either inward or outward. Inward in the heart, when the wife doth esteeme her husband in respect of his place, worthy of honour; which duty, in the last verse of this 5. Chapter is called Feare. Not slauish and seruile, but ioyned with loue, when she
grieueth if he be displeased, & reioiceth, if she can at any time giue him contentment. The married wife careth how she may please her husbad, 1 Cor. 7.34. It is such an esteeme, as the Church carrieth of Christ, who we see, Cant. 5. how shee was grieued, and could not be at rest when she had once lost him. This is layd downe vnto vs, by the example of Sarah. For if wee compare, 1 Pet. 3.6. with Gen. 18.12. wee shall finde, that that which is set downe as her word, was onely the thought of her heart. Now this duty is another ground of the good per∣formance of all other duties; without this, they will be but fained, and hypocriticall: for as the former duty serued to informe the iudgement in a right apprehensi∣on of that superiority God hath layd on husbands; so this serues to rectifie the heart and affections, that sin∣cerely and vnfainedly they may honour and reuerence them. The want of this feare and reuerence, is the cause that we see many, who of others are much regarded and ho∣nored for their good gifts, which are more eminent & openly knowne, are yet for some hidden infirmities, whereunto their wiues are most priuy, very vilely, and basely esteemed of them. For redresse whereof, wiues ought, 1 More to regard that place wherein their husbands are set, in which they doe sustaine the person of Christ, then to looke vpon their persons, to consider them as their husbands, and not as men. 2 To bee more carefull to looke vnto their better parts. 3 To interprete all things in the better part, to couer and hide their infirmities, and to labour to amend them. 4 To weigh their owne infirmities. These considerations will root out that vile esteeme many beare towards their husbands, and plant in ther
hearts an honourable respect and reuerence of them. Outward Reuerence consists in two things. 1 A reue∣rent behauiour, and carriage. 2 In reuerent speech: The reuerence is commended vnto wiues by the exam∣ple of Rebecca, Gen. 24.64, 65. and expresly comman∣ded, 1 Cor. 1.10. 1 Pet. 3.2. Now this outward carriage consists in three poynts. 1 Sober behauiour. 2 Courteous gesture. 3 Modest attyre. Sobriety, as it is a vertue especially belonging to all women, so most especially to wiues; and it is opposed to Leuity and Wantonnesse: for as this vaine and light carriage betokens a light esteeme that wiues haue of their husbands, so the other is a speciall ma∣nifestation of inward feare and reuerence. See Titus 2.4. This is not opposed to Matrimoniall familiarity: such as was betweene Isaac and Rebecca, Gen. 26.8. but such sporting ought, 1 To be in priuate, when they are alone. 2 It ought to be begun by the husband, as it is there said, that (Isaac) sported with Rebecca. 3 That in companie they doe abstaine. 2 Courtesie and obeysance: not as children and ser∣uants for euery light occasion, for heerein a difference is to be put, considering, that of all inequality, there is least disparity betweene the husband and wife. This so must be shewed when there shall be a departing one from the other for a season, or a comming home, or at the sitting downe at table, or when the wife maketh some solemn request vnto her husband: as Bathsheba did vnto Dauid, 1 King. 1.16, 31. Some may say, that Dauid was a King, and so she reuerenced him as King, & not as her husband. But I answer, 1 that though Dauid were a King, yet was she a Kings wife, and so dignified with the Titles and Honors of a Queene; and if she notwith∣standing would doe it, much more ought others. 2 That if on the contrary, Vashties stoutnesse were cen∣sured as an ill example to all wiues, Ester 1.17. Why
should not this that was well performed by Bathsheba, be a good example to others to doe the like? This is also commended vnto vs by the example of Rebecca, lighting downe from her horse to meete Isaac, Gen. 24.64. and of Abigail to Dauid. 3 Modesty, especially in apparell, which is a very sin∣gular manifestation of the inward reuerence and honor they doe carry towards their husbands: And it is, tht they be so attired, as neither by costlinesse nor curious∣nesse of fashion, they exceed the state and calling of their husbands. It is commanded to all women in gene∣rall, 1 Tim. 2.9. So is it particularly applyed to wiues, 1 Pet. 3.3. Heere are condemned those proud Dames, that will goe fine and in the fashion, though their hus∣bands goe neuer so plainely: which shewes that there is no care to honour their husbands; for euen their example should teach them otherwise. Now come we to the second branch, which is Reue∣rent Speech, which must be answerable to their carri∣age, manifesting a humble subiection in themselues, and superiority in their husbands: and it is either in Pre∣sence, to their husbands, or in Absence, to others concer∣ning their husbands. In the presence of their husbands, their speeches and words must be, 1 Few. 2 Meeke and Gentle. Fewnesse of words; that they striue not to haue all the talke, to begin and end, to take the tale out of their husbands mouth, &c. See for this silence, 1 Tim. 2.11, 12. 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. where the Apostle saith, that the woman must learne of her husband. Now, a lear∣ner must keepe silence: and silence is commanded vnto women not onely in the congregation, but also in the family. What then, must they be mute? No: silence is not opposed to speech, but to loquacity, when they must haue all the talke. This condemnes many wiues, whose tongues neuer lye still, &c. Meeknesse and Mildenesse of speech is shewed, 1 In Titles: all their compellations giuen to their husbands,
must sauour of reuerence. Sarah was well inured and accustomed to this, that euen in her heart, alone by her selfe, when shee might haue stiled her husband o∣therwise, without any disgrace to him, yet shee calleth him Lord, Gen. 18.12. Onely let Christians take heed, that they auoyde singularity heerein, as in calling their husbands Head, or Guide, &c. but let them vse such Titles of reuerence, as are vsual & proper to our toungs. I do not altogether condemne those that call their hus∣bands by their Surnames: as Master such a one, &c. But such are to be condemned, as call them by their Christen names; as Iohn, Will, Tom, &c. which indeed are, and ought to be vsed towards them onely that are inferiours. 2 Those that giue them vaine and foolish names of their owne deuising: as chicke, pigge, &c. What reuerence is there in these speeches? For the manner of speech, either in approuing, or reprouing any thing; they may not directly command their husbands, but intreate: nor reproue with chiding and anger, but gently by exhortation, auoyding vnad∣uised and rash speech: as that of Rahel to Iacob, Gen. 30.1. angerly and shrewish speech: as, Iezabel to Ahab, 1 King. 2.17. Bitter and rayling speech: as that of Zippo∣rah to Moses, Exod. 4.25. Scoffing and frumping: as Michol to Dauid, 2 Sam. 6.20. Disdainfull and reproch∣full speeches: as Iobs wife, Iob. 2.9. Shee must not giue word for word. All these are implyed by Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 3.4. vnder the name of a meeke and quiet spirit: a thing much set by of God. This therefore is to be obserued, because that wiues being the weaker vessell, are more subiect to choller, and rash vnaduised anger. 2 Because that this fault in them is double. 1 The distemper of affections in them∣selues. 2 The neglecting of their husbands place. 2 In their absence, to others concerning their hus∣bands, they ought so to speake of them, as they may shew their reuerence and honour to them, as Sarah did
alone in her heart, as the Church in the 5. of the Cant. ver. 10. highly extolleth her husband Christ, vnto those that shee meeteth. So doth Mary speake concer∣ning Ioseph: Thy father and I, putting him in the first place, Luke 2.48. Now this ought to bee obserued of women, when they meet together, because then, commonly their talk is of their husbands. So much for Reuerence. The second branch is Obedi∣ence: and this is that which tryes their religion, whe∣ther they subiect themselues to the word of God or no: for the other duties stand more in contemplation, and acknowledgement, and so may be more easily perfor∣med. This duty is layd downe in the Law of the woman, Gen. 3.16. (whereunto wee must alwaies haue an eye) which saith, Ty desire shall be subiect to thine hus∣band, and he shall rule ouer thee: therefore it followes, that shee must obey: and by the example of Sarah, 1 Pet. 3.6. And the comparison betweene the wife and the Church enforceth this. Lastly, the woman promi∣ses the same at her marriage. More particularly, let vs consider three poynts. 1 The kindes of obedience. 2 The manner of performing them. 3 The extent, how farre forth obedience is to bee yeelded. For the first, it stands in two poyntes. 1 That the wife abstaine to doe any thing of her owne head, and after her owne minde, eyther without or against the consent of her husband. 2 That she per∣forme that which he willeth her to doe. Consent of the husband is twofold, eyther expresse, or implicit. Expresse, by writing, speaking, or other signification of his minde vnto her. And this is eyther Generall, or Speciall. Generall, when without a di∣stinct restraint to this or that thing, the husband giues
hr liberty to doe what shee thinkes best: as when a Minister, or other man is occupied in some publike calling, commits vnto his wife the care, and managing of all his houshold affaires: Such a generall consent had Ioseph, of whom his Master tooke account of nothing. saue of the bread hee did eate, Gen. 39.6. And the like when hee was mad ruler of Aegypt, Gen. 41.40. The same also had the good wife, Prou. 31. In whom be∣cause the heart of her husband tusted, that is, iudged her faithfull, trust, and dilignt for the procuring of his wealth, verse 11. therefore hee commits all vnto her, she buies, she sels, shee doth all, ver. 16, &c. Particular consent is for one, or some particular acti∣ons, as Hannah had for not going with her husband at that time, 1 Sam. 1.22, 23. and Sarah against her maid Agar, Gen. 16.6. for power and authority to correct her, but for that manner she did it in. Implicit consent and by consequence. 1 By Silence, when the husband hearing and knowing of the mat∣ter, may if he will, hinder it, and yet doth not, as in the case of Vowes, Numb. 0.8, 9. 2 That which the wife gathers by the minde, former carriage, and dis∣position of her husband; as if a woman in her husbands absence, doe relieue a man in distresse and misery, whom shee knowes, if hr husband himselfe were present, would succour and relieue, and by this his good minde, shee is perswaded that he is willing shee should doe it. So Hannah, in vowing her childe vnto God, 1 Sam. 1.11. had the implicit consent of her huband, because shee knew that Elkanah being a religious man, would consecrate vnto God that childe, which hee should haue in his old age. So then, if the wife doe any thing without the ex∣presse, or implicit consent of her husband, she breakes the rule and Law of Obedience. Now against Consent, is when the husband forbid∣deth it and disclaimes it, and yet she will doe it. A
thing simply to bee condemned. This may be further amplified by some particulars: as, 1 in disposing of the goods of the family: Where∣in shee hath not liberty to doe what shee will: but these goods are two-fold, either proper, or common. Proper goods are such as the wife hath a property and right, not only in the vse, but in the possession of them; and they are either such as the husband before his mar∣riage bindes himselfe by obligation, eyther vpon his own voluntary motion, or by the perswasion of friends to giue vnto her, to be disposed at her owne minde and pleasure: or such as he husband in kindnesse after their marriage giues vnto his wife; as the rent of such a house or field, or the like. In all these it's left to the wiues liberty to doe therewith what shee pleaseth, and not what her husband would haue her. For goods that are common, which come eyther by the wife or by the husband; the property, right, and possession belongs onely to the husband, the wife hath onely the vse of them and no more. Therefore doth Ia∣cob call that riches which hee had with his wiues, his riches, Gen. 31.37. and though his wiues called their goods, our goods; yet this prooues not that it was theirs for possession, but only for vse: and againe, this is spoken not in opposition to their husband, but in oppo∣sition to Laban their fathr, that it was none of his. And hence it is, that we neuer read in Scripture, the wife cal∣led rich, but onely the husband. This is also proued by that law among the Israelites, that no inheritrix, or daughter heire might marry to one of another tribe, be∣cause then the inheritance was to goe away from the wife, to the husband: as the example of the daughters of Zelophehad, Numb. 36.6, 8. And the Law of our Land sheweth it, saying, that the woman is vnder couert ba∣ron, and therefore she may not giue, sell, buy, or borrow without her husband consent to it, for otherwise her husband may reuoke all againe.
But heere some cases of conscience are briefely to be decided: 1 Whether the wife may not relieue the poore Saints in distresse without her husbands consent? Answ. She may not, because her husbands goods are not hers to giue away. Yea, but it is to a good end. Well, but a good end cannot iustifie a bad action; and indeed children that are vnder the gouernment of their parents, may as well doe it, steale away from them, and giue it to the poore: and if good ends may serue the turne, then coozeners and fraudulent persons that get their goods by deceit, &c. may be excused, if they say they doe it to a good end: as to build an Hospitall▪ and such like. Wee must so follow Christs rule, bidding vs to giue of that which wee haue, Luke 11.41. That obiection out of Luke 8.3. is nothing: for there indeed it is said, that Ioanna Chuzas wife, ministred to Christ; but it is not said that shee did it without the consent of her husband, for then Christ would not haue suffered it. Ob. But what if the husband be a profane hard-hear∣ted mercilesse man, that will giue nothing to the poore, and shee bee pittifull and compassionate towards them? Answ. Her hands in this case also are tyed, she may not giue, no more than a sonne that being of discretion, and desirous to relieue the poore, may take away any thing of his fathers goods. Her honest heart, her griefe that shee cannot doe it, her desire and willing minde to relieue them, shall be accepted of God for the deed it selfe. But herein the husbands fault is doubled. 1. The neglect of charity in himselfe. 2 That he tyes his wifes hands, and hinders her from doing the good she desi∣reth, and so euen causes her to cry vnto God against him. Obiect. 2 What if the husband bee childish, sottish, and foolish, and haue such naturall infirmities,
that hee knows not how to dispence of his goods? Ans. In this cs,  wif coms in place of a go∣ernour, and the charg of al lis vpon her. Obiect. 3. What i h be a drunkard, a spend-thrift, and a riotous person, may shee not then lay vp some∣thing, and keepe it from him? Answ. Yes, so that shee doe it for the good of her husband, and her children, to prouide for them in time of need. Heere therefore shee must looke that her heart be vpright, ayming only at this end, & so to doe it with such a minde, as she will approue her elfe to God for it. So did Abigail take of her husbands goods, wih∣out his consent, for to appeas the wrath of Dauid, and thereby to preserue the life of hr husband and family, 1 Sam. 25.18, 19. This was a case of necessitie, and a seruant might haue done it: Iust as wee see in a great fire, a man puts downe another mans house, and carries away his goods to saue it from the fire. Heere there is a generall direction for wiues in this matter, that what a sonne, who is vnder the gouernment of his parents, may doe in this cae, in disposing of the goods of his father, the same may the wife doe in the disposing of her husbands goods, and no more. Neither lt the wife plead that shee brought maintenance with her, and therefore shee may doe what shee list; but she must consider the subiection that God hath laid vpon her, and that now her goods are not her owne, but her husbands: And though they be yoke-fellowes, yet it is in familiarity, not in authority. Now then, what vnnaturall wiues are they that steale ad purloyne from their husbands, slling away their wares and such like, for to bestow their money in gos∣ipping, in following the fashion, and fine fare, &c? Hereby they 1. breake the Commandement: 2. They ill epay their husbands labour and paines, and so reward euill for good. 3. They impouerish their husbands e∣state, it decayes they know not how: when the yeere
comes about, ther gaines are gone, and consumed as the dew before the Sunne. 4. They shew themselues to be arrant theeues, so much more worse than other, be∣cause greater trust is put in them than in other, & there∣fore the deceit is the greater: as, Prou. 28.24. 5. They are ill examples to those that are vnder them, to doe the like, and indeed commonly they vse their seruants helpe in this dealing. 2 Another particular, wherein shee must haue her husbands consent, is in intertaining of guests: if shee haue a desire to bring in guests, she must make it known to her husband, as the Shunamite, 2 King. 4.9. The rea∣son is, because wiues know not their husbands estate; and so hereby he may be burdened. Which condemnes those wiues that will feast and entertaine guests in their husbands absence. A note of a light houswife, Pro. 7.19. 2 Such as will send their meate out a dores, to their companions and gossips, yea, though it be to neuer so good company. Lastly, such as will haue it in their hus∣bands presence, but how? It must be as they list, or else the house will be too little for them. 3 Concerning children, and the disposing of them as first in giuing of the name, they cannot do it without the allowance of their husbands. Leah and Rahel gaue names to their children, Gen. 29. and 30. but it is pro∣bable they had their husbands consent, as may appeare also for that Iacob changed the name of one, when Rahel had giuen him a name without his cōsent, Gē. 35.18. So in the naming of Iohn, when his mother had giuen him the name, yet did not this satisfie them, but they would haue him name him, Luke 1.60.62, 2. For appoynting of the Calling, manner of education, marriage, &c. as Rebbeca did, Gen. 27.43. compared with 46. ver. and the beginning of the 28. Chap. and Hannah, 1 Sam. 1.22▪ and so likewise for the apparelling of the child, mainte∣nance, and giuing of portions. This condemnes those
wiues that cocker their children, and will not let them be at the husbands disposing, and to be in such places as hee sees fit for them. 4 Concerning seruants, in taking them in, putting them away, imploying them in businesse, whether they be prentizes in the shop, or other, as labouring men in the field, &c. The Shunamite asked leaue of her hus∣band to take one of her seruants with her, 2 King. 4.22. Sarah thurst not Hagar out a doores of her selfe, Gen. 21.10. Neither hath shee command ouer her husbands beasts, his horses, &c. to runne and ride whither shee list, as appeares by that example of the Shunamite, 2 Kings 4.22. This condemnes such as will haue their seruants al∣waies at cōmand, to go with them about their businesse, though their husband haue neuer so much need of them. 2 Such shrewish wiues as will change their seruants when they list, against their husbands consent. 5 Touching their owne goings abroade, that they gadde not vp and downe at their owne pleasure, 1 Tim. 5.13. A fault of a Leuites wife, Iudg. 19.2. A note of a whore, Prou. 7.11, 12. 6 Concerning vowes, that shee be not rash in bin∣ding her selfe without his consent and agreement: for this the Scripture is plaine, Numb. 30.9. Hannah in vowing her sonne to God, had the implicit consent of her husband, 1 Sam. 1.11. These duties thus warranted from the example of ho∣ly women in Scripture, are sound and strong arguments to enforce the like duties vpon all women, vnlesse wee deny the Apostles argument from the example of Sarah, 1 Peter 3.6. So much for the negatiue part of obedience; The affirmatiue or actiue part followeth, and that is twofold: in regard of his 1 Commandement, 2 Reproofe. For the former, the duty is▪ that she yeeld to do what
he willeth & requireth: which duty is laid downe in the Commandment, Gen. 3.16. and further proued by the comparison betweene the woman and the Church. Let wiues obserue first the general rule, viz. That they subiect their iudgement and will, vnto their husbands iudgement and will; obeying them in thoe things which to their owne iudgement seeme vnmeete and in∣conuenient; for many wiues will be content to doe as their husbands would haue them, in such things as themselues also thinke fit; but if any thing be required that likes not them, this they will sticke at. More par∣ticularly we may diuide it into three branches. 1 That the wife be content to dwell and abide where her husband will haue her; vnlesse it be an Idolatrous place, where shee may be drawne away to Idolatry, 1 Cor. 7.15. or where shee cannot hare the Word preached: Examples of Sarah, who went with Abra∣ham from place to place, and Rebecca, and Leah, & Rachel, Gen. 31.4. with 16. Yea, if a mans calling requires that he must soiourne here and there, and trauell vp and downe: see, 1 Cor. 9.5. So Mary went to Ierusalem with Ioseph, not be to taxed, but because shee was his wife, Luk. 2.5. the story sheweth, as Gods prouidence, so Mario obedience. Against this duty they offend, who are so addicted to some one place, eyther where they were borne, or where their friends dwell, that when their husbands calling requires, that hee dwell in some other place, they will not depart to come with him; whereby it comes to passe, that either they must so∣iourn one from the other, or the husband is constrained to leaue his calling. 2 That they come vnto their husbands when he shall send and call for them: as Iacobs wiues did, Gen. 3.4. The Scripture registreth the fault of Vashti, in not comming to Ahashuerosh, Ester 1.12. This condemnes those stubborne and proud wiues, that will not come at their husbands call; they will
not be their husbands seruants, and why should they send for them, say they, &c? 3 That whatoeur charge the husband layeth vp∣on them, they ought to prforme it. So did Ierooams wife, though a Queene, 1 Kings 14 2. and Sarah, Gen. 18.6. Now as if hey were to be drudges, and seruants to doe euery thing themselues: but to set to their owne hands in any case of eed and necessity: which con∣demnes thoe that repine and grudge against their hus∣bads commands, &c. For Reproofe, two things are to be obserued in it. 1 That sh mekely and genly take reproofe. 2 That she readiy redrsse the things reproued. The patient bearing of reproofe, is a speciall branch of a quiet and meeke spirit, 1 Pet. 3.4. For as we say, the diuell is good when hee is pleased: and peruerse natures will yeeld when they haue all things at their owne will and desire; but if whn they are crossed and checked, they then take it patiently, and submit themselues, this indeed is praise-worthy. And by this, 1 They much manifest the reuerence which they beare vnto their hus∣bands. 2 They shall learne much wisedome by the milde and patient hearing of reproofe, as Mary did, Iohn 2.4, 5. See replyed not againe roughly, but lear∣ned wisedome her selfe, and thereupon instructed the seruants what they should doe. This benefit they lose by passion, anger, and impatiency. Yea, but what if the husband be eager and bitter in his reproofe? Answ. Shee must not raile againe, giuing word for word, &c. Iacobs reproofe of Rahel, Gen. 30.2. was sharp and bitter, yet wee read not but shee tooke it meekely without railing againe. Obiect. What if it be vniust? Answ. 1 She must by any meanes, endeauor to make him see his own error. 2 If he will not heare her, but be furious and obstinate, shee must beare it patiently, and meekly euen as seruants in the like case must doe, 1 Pet. 2.19. which condemnes those wiues that are vnpatient of reproofe, &c.
The redressing of a fault must be onely when she is iustly reproued: for otherwise where no fault is, there needs no amendment. Now shee may bee reprooued either for neglect of some duty, or committing some fault: for the former, her duty is to perfome it more carefully afterwards. The latter, namely, committing of a fault, is either when it cannot be vndone or remedied, being once done; then is required her repentance and sorrow for it, with pro∣mise, purpose, and endeauour neuer to doe it againe. 2 If it may be redressed, that shee doe it speedily, as all Christians ought to doe, and specially wiues: So Ra∣hel did by her Idoles: Compare Gen. 31.19. with Gen. 35.2, 3, 4. So much for the kindes of obedience. Now come we to the generall point, viz. The Manner how this o∣bedience must be performed: where two things are propounded to the wiues consideration: 1 The place of her husband, who is to her in Christs roome and stead; and therefore shee must obey her hus∣band, as if Christ were before her. 2 Her owne place: shee is to her husband, as the Church is to Christ; and therefore as the Church o∣beyeth Christ: so must shee her husband. As vnto the Lord, ver. 22.) The wife must so subiect her selfe vnto her husband, as shee would vnto the Lord Iesus. Heereof there are 2 maine branches. 1 Negatiue: No other obedience is be performed to the husband, but such as may stand with the obedi∣ence due to Christ. 2 Affirmatiue: such obedience as shee should per∣forme to Christ, such must shee performe to her hus∣band. The former hath beene handled verse 21. nd it is a necessary duty rquired in all obedience; so special∣ly in this, beause it is the least of all other, that nohi be done contrary to it. Reasons are, first because
husband is in Christs roome, and he indeed is the pro∣per husband; and therefore his will must not be thwar∣ted and crossed. 2 Seeing many good wiues are worst vsed of their husbands, of whom shal they receiue their reward of their obedience, but of Christ? Hence arise two further considerations. 1 That if God and Christ Iesus doe command a du∣ty, and the husband will not assent that shee should per∣forme it, shee must doe it without and against his con∣sent. Prouided: 1 That shee be fully assured, that it is Gods Commandement, and that obedience to her husband in this case is contrary to it. 2 That she be not rash and hasty to say, God commands it, therefore I will doe it, but that first shee vse all gentle meanes possibly shee can to winne her husbands consent. 2 That if the Lord forbids any thing which her hus∣band commands, shee must not doe it. Onely take two caueats: 1 That she be sure God commands the contra∣ry. 2 That shee first perswade him gently and meekely to forbeare, and not to vrge, and presse it vpon her, be∣ing contrary to a higher commandement: but if all this serue not, she must obey Christ rather then him. Examples of wiues resisting their husbands, are ve∣ry sparingly set downe in Scripture. We read of Rebec∣ca, Gen. 27. and of Abigail, 1 Sam. 25. But these were extraordinary, and serue onely in the like case. Yet we may giue some examples, as if the husband forbid the wife to keepe holy the Sabbath day: if hee command her to weare garnished apparell, paint her face, to run to Stage-playes, &c. shee must not obey, because God commands the contrary. Therefore as the Church is in subiection to Christ, euen so, &c.) The affirmatiue part is, that such obedience as the Church performeth to Christ, the same must the wife vnto her husband. The manner of obedience of the Church to Christ, is manifested in fiue poynts.
1 Reuerence. 2 Sincerity. 3 Cheerefulnesse. 4 A good conscience. 5 Constancy and perse∣uerance. Reuerence. Obserue but the book of Canticles, and we shall see how reuerently the Church carrieth her selfe to Christ: so must wiues to their husbands: and though this, as is said before, be a particular duty; yet in some sort it is also a generall grace to be exercised in the per∣formance of euery duty. Sincerity: Saints will pretend no more in their outward actions, but what they intend in their hearts: the like is to be performed by wiues, 1 Because they haue to deale not onely with their husbands, who are men, and can looke but vpon the outward work, but also with Christ, who beholdeth the heart & affection. 2 When their obedience commeth from the heart, it is both acceptable to Christ, & pleasing to their husbands. Willingnesse: as the Church doth readily, and cheer∣fully obey Christ, Psalm. 110.3. so must wiues obey their husbands, as Sarah did, Gen. 18.6. whose willing∣nesse was apparant by her readinesse to doe that which Abraham did bid her: otherwise her obedience is neither acceptable to Christ, nor pleasing to her husband, nor profitable to her selfe. This cheerefulnes, as it is planted in the hart, so it must be shewed in the countenance, by her speech and actions. A good Conscience; That shee subiect her selfe for conscience sake: this the Church doth, obeying Christ because of her place, and because it is pleasing to him, though there were no other motiue in the world. So must wiues obey for conscience of Gods Cōmandement, and for that their husbands stand in the roome of Christ, and not as many doe, for by-respects, for feare, for praise, for hope that their husbands will let them haue what they desire, and such like: for heere∣by appeares a maine difference betweene religious and meere naturall women, Rom. 13.5.
Constancy. This makes all other duties perfect and  the Crowne on them; therefore wiues must not hinke it sufficient to hue done well, but they must continue to doe well still; and not as many wiues, who at the first haue beene subict and obedient to their husbands, but aferwards haue growne stubborne, and o lost the comort of their good beginning, by a badde ending, Ezek. 18.24. Such a one it seemes Michl was: Compare 1 Sam· 19.11, &c. with 2 Sam. 6.20. Obiect. But the wife will say, If my husband were to mee as Christ is to the Church, that is, a wise and religious man, then I could obey him; but otherwise I cannot. Answ. Shee must more regard his place, than his per∣son, for by vertue of his place, hee carrieth the glorious Image of Christ, though in regard of his qualities and conditions, he may beare the mage of the diuell: like as wee see other inferiours obey their superiours; but the 1 Pet. 3.1. puts all out of doubt. In euery thing, ver. 24.) The extent: which is not so generall, but that a limitation must be vnderstood: o∣therwise it will bee contrary to many other places in Scripture: as, Acts 5.29. But it is layd downe in these generall tearmes: 1 To shew the large authority of the husband. 2 Because the wife ought to obey in all things, that is, euery thing that the husband by vertue of his place may command, and not onely in some things, which shee best liketh of. So that in briefe, by this ge∣nerality, not Gods will, but the wifes will is excluded. From this ground arise two conclusions. 1 That the wife labour to bring her iudgement and will in subiection to the will and iudgement of her hus∣band: Not onely in things necessary, which are expres∣ly commanded by the Word of God, but also in things indifferent: for she must think her husband to be wiser than her selfe both for his sexe and place. 2 Though in iudgement shee cannot thinke that to
be meere which her husband commands, yet shee must yeeld in outward action in things indifferent, for peace and quet sake: Neuerthelesse, shee may perswade, and indeed the husband ought to heare her, as the Shuna∣mites husband did, 2 Kings 4.23. The reason is, 1 Because hereby is her subiection ma∣nifested, that it is for conscience, in regard of her hus∣bands place and authority: for if it be in things com∣manded, shee must doe it, whether her husband will or no. 2 For the peace and quiet of families: for from hence we see arise many contentions and brawlings, that the wife will not yeeld in such indifferent mat∣ters. Vers. 23, 24. For the husband is the wiues head, euen as Christ is the head of the Church, and the same is the Sauiour of his body. Therefore, as the Church, &c. THese words containe in briefe fiue Reasons, to vrge and presse the former duties. 1 Drawne from the husbands authority: because the husband is in the Lords stead and roome. 2 Vnder a metaphor: Bcause the husband is the wiues head. 3 Because heerein hee doth resemble Christ. 4 That by vertue of his place, hee is a sauiour of his wife. 5 The example of the Church. The first reason is a cleare point, by that generall rule, that all who haue any lawfull authority ouer other, they are as gods vnto them: as Moses is said to bee to Aaron. Hence arise two conclusions: 1 That the wife in subiecting her selfe to her husband, subiects her selfe to Christ.
2 That in refusing subiection to her husband, shee refuseth subiection to Christ: prooued by example of Christ himselfe, Mat. 11.40. Iohn 5.23. of Ministers, 2 Cor. 5.20. Luke 10.16. 1 Sam. 8.7. In thus doing, wiues shall be the wiues of Christ Ie∣sus. Now if wee consider duly this reason, we shall see how strong a motiue it is, to perswade wiues to per∣forme this duty of obedience. 2 1 Cor. 11.3. This reason sheweth, that the hus∣band is to the wife, as the head of a naturall body is to it: hee is more eminent in place, more excellent in digni∣ty; he hath power to rule and gouerne: and therefore it stands with the law of nature, that the wife doe sub∣mit her selfe, 1 Cor. 11.14. 3 For the further vrging and pressing the former rea∣son, it is added, that the husbād herein hath a fellowship and copartnership with Christ, and they are brethren in office. And though there be an infinite disparity be∣tweene Christ and the husband, yet may there be a re∣semblance where is no parity, and a similitude where there is no equality, and therefore this hinders not that fellowship: Hence two conclusions. 1 That hee is vnto his wife as Christ to the Church, and therefore subiection is as well due vnto the husband by the wife, as subiection by the Church to Christ. 2 That they that do subiect themselues to their hus∣bands, doe honour Christ: they that impeach the au∣thority of their husbands, impeach the authority of Christ: yea, the very place of the head in a naturall bo∣dy; as we see, he that impeacheth the authority of one Magistrate, impeacheth the authority of all in the same degree: See Ester 1.16. Corollary: 1 That Christ will surely maintaine the husbands authority, as Magistrates in the like case will doe one of another: Wherefore though the husband himselfe forbeare, yet may stout and rebellious wiues iustly feare the reuengement of Christ.
4 The fourth reason sheweth, that the husband hath this authority not so much for himselfe, and for his wifes good. The name of Sauiour, is properly and truely applyed to Christ, Math. 1.21. Luke 2.22. Acts 4.12. Luke 1.69. and 2.30. He is called saluation, . But heere in some sence it is applyed to the husband, in that hee is to protect his wife, to defed her from hurt and danger. to prouide for her, &c. And indeed the head is vnited to the body for this cause, not onely for the authority and soueraignety, but for the good and benefit of it: Hence wee see, 1 That the subiection of the wife, is for her owne good. 2 That they who refuse to be subiect, as they are in∣iurious to themselues, so they are vngratefull to their husbands. 5 Taken from the example of the Church, which if either example it selfe (which wee see is of great force both without and against precept) or if the warrantable example of the Church, that is, of good and perfect men, can preuaile; it ought much to mooue wiues to the performance of these duties: Hence these Corolla∣ries. 1 There is as good reason the wife should yeeld sub∣iection to her husband, as the Church to Christ. 2 That by this subiection, the wife shall haue an e∣uidence within her, that she is of the Church. Now for the generall vse of all. If these duties be re∣quired of wiues: how carefull ought parents to be to make choice of such husbands for their daughters, as be men of knowledge, wisedome, and fearing God, to whom they may willingly submit themselues? Vers. 25. Husbands, loue your wiues, euen as Christ loued the Church, and gaue himselfe for it. THis duty of Loue, is a generall duty, and com∣priseth vnder it all other duty, running thorow all
the branches of them. And it is shewed by the husband, 1 In the vsing of his authority; and this two waies. 1 By a tender respect towards his wife. 2 By a prouident care to prouide for her. Tender respect is either inward: and this, 1 In opi∣nion as touching both her Place, to account her his yokefellow. her Person, to account her in particular the best wife he could haue had, and the most fittest for him, though other may excell her in beauty, riches, or other good qualities. 2 In Affection, to delight in her onely. Or Outward, that hee carry himselfe as a mn of knowledge, 1 Pet. 3.7. And this is shewne 1 By giuing no iust offence vnto her. 2 By couering that offnce which she shall giue vnto him. That he may giue no iust offence to her, he must haue regard and respect, 1 To the duties which she performeth. 2 To those things that belong to himselfe. In the former, that duty of the husband is, 1 Kind∣ly to accept what his wife performeth. This will be a witnesse of his loue to her, and a great incouragement: otherwise it will minister griefe and tediousnesse vnto her. This is manifested first in regard of her Reuerence: That he answer her courtesie with courtesie againe; for this may well stand with his authority, neither doth it preiudice it at all. This condemnes those that Lordly ouer-looke their wiues. 2 In regard that shee will doe nothing without his consent: hee must willingly yeeld her his consent, as the Shunamites husband did, 1 Kings 4. Alwaies pro∣uided that th request be iust and lawfull. 3 In respect of her obedience: he must haue a care that hee be not rigorous to exact all that hee may.
Nor to call her to so strict examination as hee doth his seruants: Yea, his heart must trust in her, and account her faithfull, and yeeld a generall consent to her in ma∣ny poynts: as, 1 Hee must note what is most proper vnto her, and heerein giue ouer the charge vnto her for the tryall of her wisdome, and manifestation of his faithfull trust he reposeth in her: as in gouerning the house, 1 Tim. 5.14. Trimming and decking of it, prouision of victuals, education of young children, care ouer the maid-ser∣uants: Yet still interposing his authority, to moderate there where he sees excesse. 2 Another duty is, to commend and praise her where he sees her doe well, Prou. 13.28, 29. Now in respect of those things that belong to the husband to be performed to the wife: the duty is, That in all things he vse Gentlenes, Mildenesse, Amiablenes, and Familiarity: Whereunto is that bitternesse menti∣oned, Col. 3.19. opposed, where a metaphor is vsed, taken from such things as are bitter in the taste, as gall, &c. which when it is mingled with other sweet things, maketh them distastefull: So if the husband in his autho∣rity, reproofes, commands, &c. things in themselues wholesome, shall be bitter and fierce; the wife will neuer brooke nor disgest them. In particular this is shewed, 1 In his speeches of her 2 In his carriage to her. That he speak of her to others with that mildnes, that others may see hee loues her, otherwise, rayling and re∣prochfull speeches of her, will make others to brand him for an vnkinde husband, and also if it come to his wiues hearing, cause her to be offendd, oth for that hee loues her not, and also doth thus  her. To her selfe his speeches and  must sauour of gentlenesse, as doe thoe  to the Church in the Canticles: such like  be vsed
in familiarity vpon occasion, though not vsually. 2 In instruction: to doe it with meeknesse, 1 Tim. 2.25. Also that he proclaime not her ignorance to her chil∣dren and seruants, but for the publike to instruct her ra∣ther by the childrn and seuants, in Catechizing of them, as in taching children their dutie, we teach old men, though wee name them not; Reseruing particu∣lar instruction to be vsed in priuate. 3 That in bidding her do any thing, he do it rather by wishing and desiring, that such a thing were done; and by praying and intreating her, (Philem. ver. 8, 9. Gen. 12.13.) than by commanding. But yet in commanding, he must obsrue: 1 For the matter, 1 That hee command nothing which is vnlawfull, nor forbid any thing that is lawfull. 2 That hee command nothing which in her consci∣ence she cannot yeeld vnto; yea, though himselfe know it to be a thing lawfull, yt must hee wisely weigh and consider whether it be a matter of great moment and consequence: if not, to gratifie his wife, and to tarry till shee be better perswaded, and not to exact it at all. 3 That hee command nothing vnbeseeming her place, as Ahashuerosh did, therein offending, or that which shee is vnwilling to doe, or that which is idle and friuolous: for this makes her thinke, that hee hath a light steeme of her. 2 For the maner: that he do it not too frequently, but vse it as a sober graue man doth his sword; though he weare his sword, yet he drawes it but in time of need, not vpon euery light occasion like a swaggerer. Nor peremptorily, whn there is no necessity. Nor proud∣ly vpon ostentation, as many will boast what they can make their wiues doe; that they can make them light a pound of Candles at the wrong end, &c. 4 In Reproofe: that hee doe it gently with exhor∣tation,
intimating that such a thing was done amisse. For the matter of reproofe, hee must haue care, 1 That the thing he reproues her for, be alwaies iust and true, auoyding hrein two faults: 1 Ouer-much credulity, not rashly receiuing a re∣port of her. 2 uspicions, which are the seed of iealousie, the bane of marriage. 2 That it be weighty, heereby to shew how hardly hee is drawne to it: that euen necessity constrains him, because of some danger, either to her owne soule, or their estate. This also manifesteth his loue vnto her: Hence wee read, that when husbands did reproue their wiues, it was vsually for sinning against God, Gen. 30. Iob 2.9. 2 Sam. 6. Especially if the thing be priuate, for otherwise if it be a light matter, the wife will think it to be nothing but reuenge. For the manner: 1 That hee doe it sparingly and rarely, to shew that he delights not in it: 2 That he doe it not at such a time, when either himselfe or his wife are stirred vp with passion and anger: for then he is vn∣able to giue wife reproofe, and shee vnfit to receiue it. 3 In regard of her pace, that hee doe honour her be∣fore the family, reprouing her scretly. But that rule of some, that he should reprooue her for nothing whereof himselfe is guilty, is scarce sound diui∣nity: For 1 Dauid (no doubt) did well condemning that man (in the parable of Nathan) of the same crime whereof himselfe was guilty. 2 Againe, he that reproo∣ueth another for the same fault, shall, if hee haue any grace, pierce also his owne heart, and so larne happily to amend himselfe. Though he ought to labour to be free of that fault which he rproueth in anoher, because it doth othrwise greatly blunt the edge of his re∣proofe, and make them rebound backe againe: and aso it will prooue a strong witnsse against him or his condemation, Romanes 2.
So much for his Speech: Now for his carriage: It must bee answerable to his speech, but otherwise, his tongue seemes to flatter. 1 In his countenance: for this bewraies the heart, Gen. 4. and 31. viz. That it be composed to a kinde of plea∣santnesse in the presence of his wife; not austere and grane, to shew his authority, &c. For this will discon∣tent her, and be a discouragement to her. 2 In his gesture, that it be not strange: for more familiarity is to be shewed to the wife than to another, prouoking her also to familiarity: but this must not be done in publique, but in priuate, as Isaac sported with Rebecca. 3 In Actions, that they be not furious, rigorous, and tyrannous, but such as sauor of loue and kindnesse, both in absence sending tokens of loue, and in presence, by gi∣uing of gifts: as Elkanah did to Hannah, 1 Sam. 1.4. And it is a good counsell, That he giue it with his own hands, auoyding all furious and reuengefull actions, as the beating of his wife: which dealing is altogether vn∣lawfull. Which point, because it is something doubted of, wee will prooue the vnlawfulnesse of it by some reasons. 1 Because throughout the whole Scripture, it is not prescribed and commended by any one example, or pre∣cept: which argument, because some may except a∣gainst it; as not concluding, because it is negatiue, may be strengthened by these two considerations. 1 How carefull, copious, and plentifull the Scrip∣ture is, in setting downe the duties of the husband and wife, and yet this is passed by. 2 That whereas the Scripture is exact in setting downe all the parties that are to be corrected: there is no tittle of the correction of the wife by the husband. 2 The small disparity that is between the husband and the wife, doth not admit this; for of all degrees of subie∣ction this is the least, and she hath a common equity
in many things, and is a gouernour of the family as well (though not as much) as he. What then is this, but to depriue her of her authority, to make her like a child and a seruant, and to cause her to be despised of his children and seruants? 3 The neere coniunction that is btweene them for∣bids it; they are one flesh, as nigh as the body and the head. Now, what man that is his owne man, will beate, rent, teare, and deale cruelly with his owne flesh? In Scripture indeed wee read of some that did so, as the man possessed with a Legion of diuels, Marke 5.5. and the superstitions Priests of Baal, 1 King. 18.28. and as the Papists doe now adaies. And surely such as doe this, are either egregiously seduced in iudgement, if they doe it out of an opinion of the lawfulnesse of it, or if they do it of fury and anger, they haue a diuell within them. Ob. But many and wise men too will let their owne flesh to be cut and lanced, &c. Answ. True: but yet you seldome see any man haue the heart to do it himselfe, but puts it to the Physician: and so no doubt, if the wife be extremely desperate, and that there is no liuing with her, hee may vse the helpe of others, namely, of the Magistrates. 2 We say, that the comparison holds not in the end why it was made. Obiect. 2 Christ corrects his Church, and therefore the husband may his wife. Answ. Christ is considered in a twofold relation. 1 As it hath pleased him to vnite the Church vnto himselfe in marriage: and so is hee said to dye for it, to guide, gouerne, and protect it, with other such attri∣butes, all which the Scripture giueth to Christ in this respect. 2 As hee is a Supreme Lord, Master, Father, and King ouer the Church, hauing absolute rule and autho∣rity ouer vs, and by vertue of this hee doth correct vs, not as hee is a husband.
4 The little profit and good that commeth by this, sheweth the same. Now by all lawfull correction com∣meth profit, Hebr. 12.10, 11. For what hope is there that any profit should redound vnto her, seeing there is no ground to perswade her that this dealing is war∣rantable and iust, that in this he hath not authority ouer her, nor shee in subiection vnto him? Obiect. But this will make them dread and stand in awe of their husbands. Answ. But such sluish and chldish feares, and dread of the wife to th husband ought not to be; her dread must be rather of the magistrates: but such gentlenesse must be vsed, that she may obey her husband in meek∣nesse, for loue and conscience. Yea, if she strike him, he must not strike her againe: for then hee doth reuenge himselfe: But if shee be so outragious, hee must seeke helpe of the magistrate, first, ving all gentle and good meanes, as restraint of li∣berty and the like, and all long-suffering and patience, before he make her a publike example. So much of giuing no offence to her. Now the 2 point is concerning the couering of such offences as she shall giue vnto him, wherein his prudent carriage is knowne in a wise and prudent bearing with the infir∣mities of his wife. This duty as it is imposed on all, Gal. 6.2. so after a speciall manner doth it belong to the husband. 1 Because he is more bound to beare with her infir∣mities than shee with his, because hee is the stroger extraordinarily, 1 Thes. 5.14. 2 Hee is more bound to beare with his wife than with any other, because she is neerest vnto him. The Apostle Peter vseth an argument,1 Peter 3.7. to perswade hus∣bads to beare with thir wiues, because they are the weaker vssels, and yet coheires of the same grace.  how chary are we of those vessls, which are , & yet brittle, as Christal glasss & China cups, &c.
But how are they to be bone withall? Infirmties, some are naturall imperfections: And thse are Inward, as Dulnesse and Slowesse of conceit, Shortnesse of memory, &c. Outward, Lamensse, blindnsse, &c These must not giue him any offence, but cause him rather to pitty her. Other are sifull infirmities: as peeuishnesse, stubbornnesse, &c. In these he must shew his wisedome. 1 In vsing the mildest and gentlest meanes hee can, to redresse these infirmities: as Elkanah did, 1 Sam. 1.8. 2 If hee can obserue any occasion that brought her to it, he must vs the meanes to remooue it: as Abraham in casting out of Agar, Gen. 21. 3 As much as may be, in turning his eyes from it, and seeming not to se it, Pro. 19.11. Eccles. 7.21. 1 If notice be, or must be taken, then to be ready both to forgiue and forget: as it is likly that Iacobs anger did cease, Gen. 30. And in this thing will be the tryall of his wisdome, and knowledge: for it is no commendation to beare with a good wife. So much for the tender respect. The next generall point is his prouident care ouer her, which shewes it selfe, 1 In prouiding things needfull. 2 In protecting her from things hurtfull. Prouision of things necessary, is a duty belonging, of all other, to the husband, because the wife is of all o∣ther most properly his owne, and also the chiefest of his family. Now then the Apostles saying, 1 Tim. 5.8. is a strong proofe of this; and it stands with reason, because the wife, when she is married, forsakes all other, and cleaues onely to her husband: who is therefore to haue a prouident care ouer her. And furthermore, what∣soeuer meanes of maintenance shee had, being vnmarri∣ed,
it is now all in her husbands hands, so long as shee liues with him. Consider now first the extent, how farre hee is to prouide for her. This is 1 For ohers. Whatsoeuer is requisite that hee should bestow on others, he should prouide for her. 2 For her selfe: 1 In her oule, to haue a care that shee be well instructed; a duty laid vpon the husband, 1 Cor. 14.34. Ths is done, 1 In priuate, by maintaining of Gods worship, and Religion in his, daily euening and morning; doing this either himselfe, as Cornelius did, Act. 10.2. or by others: as Micah would haue his house instructed by the Leuite, Iudg. 17.10. & the Shunamites husband was willing to haue Elisha, 2 Kings 4.11. 2 In publike, to haue a care that shee be partaker of the publike ministery of the Word: as Elkanah carried vp his wife with him to Silo, 1 Sam. 1.3. 2 For her body: 1 In sickenesse to prouide all things needfull for her; as some to tend her, Physick for her and the like: And to doe this not grudingly, and re∣piningly, fretting because her sicknesse is so long, and the charges so great; but let him then shew his louing care for her, when she is least able to doe for her selfe: lest that his churlishnes proues another crosse vnto her. 2 In health to prouide for good rayment, and this not niggardly, and sparingly: as many will goe brauely themselues, and their wiues goe very meanely; yet, a∣uoyding all excesse. Neither ought hee to deale heerein with hr as a childe or seruant, but to giue her a liberall allowance, leauing it to her descretion to prouide both for her selfe and for the family, such things as belong to food and clothing, Prou. 31.15. So likewise, for such things as she should bestow vp∣on charitable vses, hee ought to prouide for her, remit∣ting vnto her the liberty, and authority to distribute, if that she be not, 1 Superstitious, 2 Vaine and light, and so likely to bestow it vpon idolatrous and other sin∣full vanities.
And it is likely, being not contrary to the Scripture, and agreeable to other rules, that Chuza did giue his wife such an allowance, whereof she ministered vnto Christ, Luke 8.3. For the manner, hee is to let the wife haue some∣thing of her owne property, for the better testimony of her faith, loue, mercy, and charity: for many will be liberall of another mans goods; and so may the wife in the common goods of the family, whereunto her husband hath right and intrest: but when they come to distribute of their owne, heere will be the tryall of their charitable minde. Now diuers meanes there are to bring this to passe; as some will giue their wiues the rent of such a house, or such a field, the vailes, that which they get by working for themselues, and such like. The continuance of the prouident care, must not be onely during his life: but also during hers, if shee out∣liue him, viz. That if hee be able, hee let her haue wherewithall to liue as well after his death, as shee did with him: at least, if after portions distributed there remaine so much, to leaue her as much as hee had with her. And wee see Christ was more liberall to his Church after his departure, than when hee liued bodi∣ly: and this will be a sure signe that he loued her, when shee shall see his care to prouide for her after his death. Moreouer, considering her weaknesse, to manage her estate; hee ought to appoynt some to haue a care of it for her: as Christ did for his mother, Iohn 19.26, 27. And for this cause did Dauid set Salomon in the King∣dome, that Bathsheba after his death might be well dealt withall, 1 King. 1.21. And as the more need is, so to be the more carefull for her, as if shee be not like to marry againe, &c. Contrary hereunto is the practice of those husbands, 1 Who by prodigality spend their estate, and so leaue their wiues worse then nought: whereas this
ought to be a motiue to them to auoyd vnnecessary expences. 2 Who by fawning and flattering get their wiues to make away their inheritance which came with them, without giuing them sufficient consideration for it, one∣ly to satisfie their owne turnes while they liue. This is both an vnkindnesse, and also a poynt of iniustice. 3 Such as vse fraudulent meanes to depriue their wiues of the thirds, by deeds of gift, or other conuey∣ances. This is a sinne, because we ought to be subiect vnto the Lawes, where they be not contrary to Gods word. And husbands should so deale with their estates, that loue, and not Law might bring vnto the wife that which is her due. 4 Such as hauing old sickely wiues, doe themselues, when they are sicke, desire the making of their wills, to settle their estate, hoping still to outliue their wiues. So much of prouiding things necessary. The next point is, that he doe protect her from things hurtfull; A duty which in the generall is prooued by the phrase of the Scripture, calling the husband the vaile of his wife: which as it implies subiection on her part, so it doth im∣ports protection on his, Gen. 20.16. 1 Cor. 11.10. And so likewise from that of spreading the wing ouer them: as Ruth, 3.9. with chap. 2.12. For which reason, also God hath giuen strength, boldnesse and wisedome, to the husband aboue the wife. It must be shewed in 1 Preuenting of danger, as in the example of Dauid, 1 Sam. 27.3. 2 In recouering them out of danger: as in another example of Dauids, 1 Sam. 30 18. This protection also must extend it selfe, according to the danger: as 1 Spirituall: of the soule; that he keepe from the house Idolatrous persons, as Iesuites, &c. and prophane and vaine persons. 2 Corporall: to preserue her from violence and hurt.
3 For her good name: to maintaine her credit against slanderous persons, being as well dead as aliue: where∣fore he must also be ready to heare her complaint. He must be further carefull to maintaine her honour and authority in the family against children and seruants, yea, though they be the children of a former wife; vn∣lesse that the cause be iust: for there are many cruell and rigorous stpdames, and in this case he must vse all gentle meanes to pacifie his wife: or if this will not serue, then to remooue the cause of this hatred, and to place the children somewhre else: for the man and woman may by no meanes dpart asunder. The reason is, because the latter wife is as true a wife as the former, and therefore the same duties belong vnto her which did vnto the former: for many times it falleth out, hat the second wife is not respected like the first; but sure∣ly if the husband thinke he cannot so loue another wo∣man as he did his former, the best way for him is to remaine a widdower. And if not against children, much lesse against seruants. Thus did Abraham defend his wife against Agar, though shee were his Concubine, Gen. 16.6. Not laughing at them, and suffering them to try Masteries, &c. For let the husband be assured, hee shall feele the smart by the discontent of the wife, when shee shall see he suffers any one to abuse her. Ephes. 5.25, 26. &c. to vers. 33. Euen as Christ loued the Church, and gaue himselfe for it. So ought men to loue their wiues as their owne bodies: he that loueth his wife, loueth himselfe. For no man euer ye hated his owne flesh, but nourisheth and cherisheth it, &c. HAuing handled the duties, wee come to the man∣ner how the husband ought to performe them.
In these words the Apostle sets it downe, propounding First, 2. patternes for him to follow. 1 Of the Church. 2 Of a mans owne selfe. Secondly, 2. rasons drawne from the examples, namely, the similitude and rlation in them, that there is great reason why the husband should loue his wife, hee being as neere to her, as Christ to the Church, and himselfe to his owne flesh. In the example of Christ, 6 Circumstances are to be obserued, in regard, 1 Of the Order, 2 Truth, 3 Qua∣lity, 4 Condition, 5 Measure, 6 Continuance of his loue to the Church. In all which we will consider of three points. 1 To shw how Christ loued the Church. 2 How wee must follow him. 3 How wee come short of our duty. 1 Order: Christ first loued the Church, and so drew her on to loue him againe; which as it is heere intima∣ted by that which the Apostle saith, that he purged and cleansed her, signifying, that before hee set his oue on her, she was polluted and vncleane: so it is plainly pro∣ued by that in 1 Iohn 4.19. and Cant. 1.2. In like manner ought husbands to beginne in loue to prouoke and to draw their wiues on: as well by their example, as instruction, especially considering that is the weaker vessell. Contrary to which, is that vntowardnes of some hus∣bands, which so little regard their wiues kindnesse, and dutifull subiection, that though they haue neuer so lo∣uing wiues, yet they will neuer loue. And this is it that makes the wiues subiection burdensome. 2 Truth: Christs loue was not only in affection and word, but also in deed and truth; which appeares by that hee gaue himselfe for the Church, and the effect, viz. the purging of the Church shewes it. Such ought the husbands loue be toward the wife: For if to loue indeed, be a duty imposed on all, towards
all, 1 Iohn 3.18. much more towards a wife, which is not onely a sister, 1 Cor. 9.5. but neerer, and darer to her husband than any other in the world besides. The practice of most is contrary vnto this, who in word will pretend great loue, but when they come to deeds, performe iust nothing. Like suters that will pro∣mise golden mountaines, &c. so are there many that will weepe with their wiues, and make great shew of kindnesse, but when it comes to cost and charges, they may doe fullill for all them. 3 Quality: Christs loue was an holy, chaste and pure soe, as appeares by the effect, that by it he purged and santified his spouse: Wherefore also, lest hee should seeme to loue more than one, hee hath vnited all by one spirit, and so made one body of all. So betweene husband and wife, though their oue ought to bee exceeding great, yet must it bee ioyned with purity, sobriety, and holinesse: as the Apostle saith, Heb. 13.14. Where he calleth the marriage bed vndefiled. Two ffects of this are, 1 That it restraines this matrimoniall loue only to their owne wiues. () 2 That it doth moderate Loue, that it turne not into lust. Contrary vnto this, is the practice not onely of Adul∣terers, which loue others besides their owne wiues, but also of such husbands, who both in words & deeds will behaue themselues towards their wiues with as much wickednes & filthines▪ as vnto strumpets, neur obser∣uing any circumstances of time, place, measure, &c. 4 Condition: Christs loue was free, nothing in th Church mooued him to loue, no benefit redounded to him by her loue; but his owne goodnesse was the cause of it: For though Christ bestowing many graces on the Spouse, doth dlight in her as in his owne worke, ye this was no motiue without him to loue her, but een his loue is the ground of his loue, Deut. 7.7, 8.
So though there be nothing in the wife to moue the husband to loue her, yet ought he therefore to loue her, because shee is his wife, and that God hath ioyned them together, endeuouring, if it be possible, by instru∣ction and example, to make her amiable as Christ did the Church. Contrary is the practice of those that loue no longer than they haue outward baites, either of beauty, riches, parentage, or honor, &c. Such loue is not of their wiues indeed, but of those outward things. 5 Measur: Christs loue is indeed out of measure: he gaue his life for the Church, Iohn 10.11. than which no loue can be greater, Ion 15.13. And he that will not spare his lfe, what will hee spare? But will some say, This seemes a hard matter, and not for our imitation, that wee should lay downe our liues for our wiues: But yet so it is, for besides that the com∣parison heere doth expresly lay it downe, Saint Iohn, 1 Iohn 3.16. saith, that we should lay downe our liues for our brethren: and then the argument holds a maiore ad maius, that if for thm, much more for our wiues: But heere some cautions are to be obserued: 1 That when it commeth to this high pitch of loue, there be an absolute necessit, that the good cannot be effected by any other meanes: as the benefit of the Church could haue beene wrought by no other meanes than by the death of Christ. 2 That the good whch wee intend for them, be of greater value, than our liues, as for the good of their soules, 2 Cor. 12.15. 3 That we do it not rashly, but haue a iust and wrrantable calling thereunto. Contrary to this is it, that many will preferre any thing before their wiues good, as the case of costs and charges, &c. 6 Cotinuce: Christs loue is constant and perpe∣tuall, without intermission: after the first bginneth to
loue, he purgeth her more & more, and neuer eaues her, till he make her a glorious Church in heauen, Ioh. 13.1. This aso must be added to the rest, that the husband doe perseuere constant in his loue: for this puts the Crowne on, and bringeth renowne to the party lo∣uing, and profit to the party loued. To this hee must haue care, 1 That it be grounded on a sure rocke and foundati∣on, namely, on the ordinance of God, because that now they are made one flesh: and not on the sand, as beauty, or riches, which will weare away, and then this loue doh faile with them. 2 That hee arme himselfe against all those things which may ouerthrow the building: and hauing once determined to doe thus and thus for her, to doe it not∣withstanding all oppositions. Contrary to this, is the loue of many, which at first is as hot as fire, afterwards as cold as Ice, or none at all, and so alwayes variable as the winde: which shewes that it was but a naturall loue. Now then, by this comparison we may see what we must aime at, and so labour to be perfect. 2 By behold∣ing how farre wee come short of our duty, wee shall finde much matter of humiliation and amendment. The 2 patterne is of a mans owne selfe. It seemes strange why this should be added; for is not the ex∣ample of Christ perfect? Yes: neuerthelesse, the Apo∣stle addes this for very good reason, because that this is most sensible, and so best perceiued: for a man that knowes not Christ, knowes how hee loues himselfe: Whrefore because some might say, that the former is a matter of impossibility; the Apostle prouideth for vs an easier pattere to folow, wherein are nor laid downe more duties than in the other▪ but the same things are vrged more sensibly, and therefre we need no to stand long vpon it: et some poynts doe more euidently appeare in this: as first, Cheerefulnesse: No man loues
himselfe repiningly, accounting it as a taske laid vp∣on him. 2 Willingnesse: euery one is willing and ready to doe any thing that may be beneficiall to his own body. 3 Tendernesse: which wee see plaine by naturall ex∣perience, how tenderly a man will handle his own flesh. So the Apostle saith, that none hateth his owne flesh: but nourisheth and cherisheth it (.) The meta∣phor is taken from birds that houer their wings ouer their young ones, or that sit vpon their egges. We see how tenderly they doe it. 4 Intirenesse: no man can dissemble with himselfe, for euery thing that a man doth, is knowne to himselfe, and hee will pretend no more but that which hee doth intend. Now according to these points ought the husband to performe his dutie towards his wife, which if nature cannot moue him to doe it, because indeed this bond is spirituall and mysticall, and not naturall, then ought ason, religion, and conscience make him to performe it. Now let vs consider these patternes, as they are mo∣tiues and reasons to stirre vp husbands to the practice of their duties; where first we see that the arguments are drawne from examples, which many times are of more force to perswade than reason: and therfore heere the Apostle maketh choyce of them. But among examples, what doe moue vs more than those of Great men? Now who is greater than Christ? Besides that, his example is also a rule of perfection. That wee may see the weight of this argument, two poynts are to be noted. 1 The great disparity that is betweene the Church and Christ, which appeareth in two branches: 1 The greatnesse of Christ, who is in Scripte compared, 1 To creatures: so hee is more excellent than
the excellentest of them all, namely, the Angels, Philip. 2.9. Ephes. 1.21. 2 To God: he is euery way equall to God, no whit inferiour vnto him, Pil. 2.6. so that hee is Eter∣nall, Infinite, Incomprehensible, and to be adored as God himselfe. 2 The basenesse and meannsse of the Church: she is but a creature, and that corrupt and defied through sinne. Yea, take euery one of vs in our selues, and wee are more odious in Gods sight, than any creature else, beside the diuels. But betweene man and woman, there is no such dif∣ference; but they are equall in respect of gifts of graces by Creation, and also by Redemption: And in regard of infirmities, both were made of the dust, both tainted with the same corruption, and subiect to the same end. The difference that is, is only outward for ciuill respects, in sexe, state and conditions, &c. And secondly, it is onely momentany, extending it selfe but to this life, Math. 22.30. Now then, if Christ, who is infinitely more excellent than the Church, haue yet chosen her to bee his spouse, and doth so loue her; this ought to be a strong argu∣ment to mooue husbands to loue their wiues, betweene whom there is so little disparity. 2 The 2 point is, the small benefit that Christ gets by the loue of the Church: If we aske what it is? We answer, It's nothing. For neither hee needeth to receiue any thing of her, being already full of the abundance of all good things, neither is she able to giue any thing of her owne, because she receiues all from him, Iob 35.7. But much comfort and profit comes to a man by his wife: Yea, and that in his innocent estate, Gen. 2.18. and therefore is it said, that he who findeth a wife, fin∣deth a good thing, Prou. 18 22. Wherefore if Christ, who stood in no ned of the Church, yet did so loue her, as to come from heauen to
dye for her, to giue her all good things, &c. Let it then bee a shame for husbands not to loue their wiues, of whom they doe receiue great helpe and comfort. Now we are the rather diligent, to marke and take heed to this example of Christ, because that it wipes a∣way all pretences that men vsually bring for their not louing of their wiues: As, 1 Some wil say that they are too great, & their wiues too meane. To such we say, 1 That after the marriage solemnized, the wife is partaker of their honour. 2 That if they looke vpon Christ, there was a greater disparity betweene him and the Church. 2 Some will say that there is nothing worth in her. But first, hee ought to loue her therefore, because she is now his wife. 2 What was there in the Church, that Christ could loue and effect? and though hee loue those graces in her, which are of his owne bestowing, yet he loued her, before he bestowed those on her. 3 Some will say, that they be so peruerse, that they de∣serue rather hatred than loue. But, 1 this ought not to stir vs vp to hatred, but rather to shew our wisedome to amend it. 2 The Church it selfe is full of corruption, rebellion, and prouocation to anger and wrath, yet Christ continues still to loue her. 4 Some will say, that she will doe mee no good, but be a burden to mee all my life. If this come through some infirmity, yet may shee doe thee good by her pa∣tience and well-bearing of this affliction. 2 If it be a wilfull peruersenes, yet this is no chari∣table censure: for loue hopes the best. 3 Let him consi∣der what good & profit the Church yeelds vnto Christ. 2 Concerning the other patternes of a mans owne selfe, this likewise is added to the former, not as a grea∣ter or stronger motiue, but as that which more sensibly and easily is perceiued of vs, than the former. Wherein the Apostle sendeth vs to the schoole of nature, (No man euer yet hated his owne flesh.) Seeing then that by the or∣dinance
of God, a mans wife is made as neere to him as his owne flesh: therefore as nature teacheth him to loue and cherish the one, so ought conscience and religi∣on teach him to loue the other: for his wife is himselfe. Therefore 1 As in his body, if one member be cu∣red, all reioyce at it: so if he be helpefull and louing to his wife, himselfe shall reape the comfort of it. 2 As likewise if any one be neglected and receiue hurt, the damage redoundeth to the head and other parts: so if the wife be not tendered and cared for, the hurt and smart will be the husbands. Therefore euery one of you, doe yee so: let euery one loue his wife euen as himselfe, and lt the wife see that shee feare her husband, vers. 33.) IN this Verse is laid down the conclusion of all, concr∣ning a briefe summe of the matter which before hee had deliuered, briefely repeating and applying it. Out of them we learne two points. 1 That euery one ought to apply that to himselfe in particular, which the Minister speaks to all in generall. (Euery one doe so) This duty Christ doth often imply in his Sermons: as, Mar. 13.37. Luk. 8.8. but more plainely in those 7 conclusions to the 7 Churches, Reuel. 2. & 3. when after a general instruction to al, he wils euery one to apply it particularly to himselfe. But they might think that what was spoken to all in generall, was spo∣ken to none. The reason is, because herein consists the profit of the Word; for who can take comfort by the promises, vnlesse that he be perswaded they belong to him? Who regardeth the iudgements and threatnings, vnlesse he in particular can tremble at them? Or who taketh profit by directon ot of the Word, but he who thinketh with himselfe, I ought to do thus and thus, &c? The vse is: That as wee haue heard the particular duty of man and wife laid downe, so euery one in that
state and condition should now make vse of them to himslfe in particuar. 1 Such as haue beene married, that examining themselues by this rule, 1 They may haue ioy and comfor of that which they shall finde themselues to haue done well. 2 To be humbled for that whrein they haue failed. 2 Such as are maried, that they may learn to amend what is amisse, and to hold on constātly in what they perform aright. 3 Such as may be married, that they may know how to perform their du∣ties according to the word of od and not be led away with the common custome and practice of the world. 2 That as we must apply, so we must know what to apply, namely, euery one his owne particular duty. (Therfore Paul biddeth euery husband to loue his wife, and euery wife to feare her husband.) For euery one is to giue an account for the neglect, or performance of his owne duty; neither shall any man be condemned for another mans fault, Ezek. 18.20. The husband shall not be blamed for his, wiues fault, nor benefited by her obe∣dience, if he neglect his own duty: as if they must needs goe both to heauen together. But if one haue a care, and the othr be carelesse of his duty, though heere the con∣iunction be neere, yet heerafter shall there be a per∣petuall separation, Luke 17.38. The want of this particuar application, is the very bane of marriage: for whilst th husband is rigorous to exact his wiues duty, & the wife looks only to that how her husband ought to oue her, & comfort her it comes to sse that neither of them regard their owne: rahr let the husband looke to his owne, and the wife to hers, that both of them, he for his loue, she for hr own obe∣dience, may receiue of God a recompence of reward. Ephes. 5. part of the 23. and 24. verses. (Christ is the head of the Church, and the same is  Sau  our of his body. The Church is in suictio  all things.)
HAuing formerly handled the maine scope of these words, namely, as an argument to enforce the duty of the wife: et vs consider them absolutely, and seue∣rally by themslues. n thm we may obserue two poynts. 1 The authority of Christ set downe, 1 Vnder a metaphor in this word Head. 2 By the bene∣fit and end of it, in that he is a Sauiour. 2 The duty of the Church, 1 Wherein it con∣sists, namely, in subiection. 2 What is the ex∣tent of it. It is in all things. Head.) This metaphor is applyed to Christ in diuers respects: but two espcially. 1 In regard of that dignity and dominion Christ hath ouer the Church. 2 In respect of that spirituall vertue and effica∣cy that the Church receiueth of Christ. For the first, see Col. 1.18. For the second, see Ephes. 4.15, 16. For both ioyntly, see Ephes. 1.22, 23. Both of these are set downe in the Text. The former, by the in∣ference, that as the husband hath authority of his wife, so Christ ouer the Church. The second, by the benefit that comes of this authority, hee is the Sauiour of the body. Instructions. In that Christ the Sonne of God, equall to , &c. is the head of the Church to whom she is vnitd: This shewes the exceding great glory of the Church, in which respect the glory of the Saints now is farre greater than was that of Adam in his innocen∣c, yea, of the Angels in heauen. Nether are the infirmities of the Church such, as that they can blemish this glory. Neuerthelesse, we se how they are here despised and contemned, Esa. 63.2. 1  4.13. The reason is, because the world seeth not  of the Church, nor prceiuth this glorious  wih Christ, 1 Ioh. 3.1, 2. This then must vpold vs against all the scoffes
and reproaches of the world, against our owne wants and infirmities, that wee be not daunted by them: for Christ suffereth vs to bee tryed by these, 1 That wee may see our owne vnworthinesse. 2 To make vs the more thankfull: for the more vnworthy wee are of a thing, the more thankfull we bee for it: As Abigail was of Dauids offer, 1 Sam. 25. and was Ester a poore captiue more thankful for her aduancement then Vashti, which is reportd to haue beene Cyrus daughter. 2 This is a ground of great comfort vnto vs, in that we ar ruled by so wise, glorious, and powerfull a go∣uernor; who wil and can deliuer vs from all danger, &c. which thing wee must consider when we are assaulted by the tmpation of the deuil and world. For Christ hath a feeling of all our wrongs and iniuries, euen as the head hath of all the hurts of the body: and for this reason hee said vnto Saul, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou mee? 3 This shewes, that this vnion of Christ with vs, is as neere as possible can be. But of this more vers. 30. 2 Doct. This further shewes the regiment of Christ ouer his Church, of what it is: That it is no Tyrannical, but such as is for our good, hee hauing alwaies a sence and fellow-feeling of our infirmities and wants. The world hee ruleth as a Iudge with a scepter of iron, Psal. 2.9. & 110.1, &c. But the Saints he gouerneth gently and mildely as a father, not crushing them vnder his feete, but exalting them, Ioh. 14.3. 3 Doct. Hence wee see, from whence wee haue all graces, namely, from Christ: as the body hath all sence, and life, and motion from the head. For this cause is Christ not onely a liuing soule, but a quickning spirit, because he giueth life vnto vs, 1 Cor. 15.45. Hence it is that he is called a Vine, Ioh. 15.1, 2. and that wee liue in him, Gal. 2.20. This must make vs depend vpon Christ, to haue re∣cors vnto him for all good things. Also this serues to
strengthen our faith, concerning our ful deliuerance not onely from temporall euill, but from death and him that hath the powr of it, Heb. 2.14. For if the head be aboue water, there is no feare of drowning; and there∣fore if Christ our head be safe, if he be risen & deliuered from the power of dath, we must be safe; if we perish, he must perish too, bcause of this vnion. And this may make vs bold to triumph against all our enemies. Further obserue who they bee that are vnited to Christ. They are the Church, viz. all the Elect of God who are called & sanctified, whether militant on earth, or triumphant in heauen. Wee may also comprehend among them, those that are not yet borne, if we respect that that shall bee, but not properly. Doct. The gifts of Gods Spirit are proper to the Elect, being called and sanctified, 1 Thes. 1.3, 4. 1 Pet. 1.4. The most precious promises are giuen to them, Rom. 11, 29. Which refutes the opinion of those that say, that iusti∣fying faith and some sauing may bee in the wicked and reprobate, aswell as in the Elect, and that there is no difference, but in the continuance. 2 It teacheth the more highly to prize the proper graces: for those things that but a few haue, are wont to bee much esteemed: Yet other and they will make so great account of common gifts. 3 This serues for triall to know whether wee bee in the Church or no, and so whether Christ bee our head. Doe wee feele in vs spirituall life and motion, namely, the graces of Gods Spirit dwelling in our hearts? It is a signe wee are vnited to our head Christ: but if we bee still dead in our sinnes, dull in our vnderstanding, &c. wee may iustly feare that wee are not in Christ. 2 If there be a mutation and change in our nature; if our con∣uersation bee heauenly, and wee partakers of the diuin quality, it is a token we are grafted into the true Oliue tree: which as they report, contrary to other stockes,
changeth  into it owne. Doct. Out  no saluation. Which is to be vnderstood of  Church, that they who are not of the numbr  who are vnited to Christ, can looke for no saluation, nd not of particular Chur∣ches; as to say, that because he is not of this or that con∣gregation, therefore hee cannot bee saued: though in the meane while it be a dangerous thing to separate himselfe from a particular Church; where he sees the plaine nots of a true Church. Here are discouered two errors. 1 Of the Papists, that exclude all from saluation that are not of the Romish Church. 2 Of the Separatists, that doe wilfully abstaine from all particular Churches. Further, this shewes that this title of Head is proper to Christ alone; as 1 who hath it alotted to him of God, Ephes. 1.22. 2 who is most eminent, high and powerfull. 3 who only hath receiued the spirit aboue measure. Then it is a presumptuous dealing of the Papists, who make the Pope to be the head of the Church. Their di∣stinction of Imperiall and ministeriall head is, but new found; for heretofore they vsed to say, that Christ took Saint Peter into the fellowship of the indiuisible vnity, so making them both one. And as false it is, as neuer hauing ground in the Scripture; but is a mere inuen∣tion of their owne braines: for they say, Christ is the Imperiall head, that is, he quickens & giues grace. The Pope is the ministeriall, that is, he gouerns: which is to separate those offices that are cōioined in Christ: & se∣condly, how doth the Pope gouern? is it by maintaining the peace of the Church▪ &c? No, but by making lawes binde to mens consciences and the like, Sauiour of his body) Consider heere, 1 The kind of the benefit, 2 The prson that bestowes it. 3 The obiect of it.
, a Sauiour. A word in Greeke, which those that are Grecians say, cannot bee fully expressed in Latin: signifying as much as a most absolute deliuerer from all danger, and all euill whatsoeuer, Mat. 1.21. , He is) he alone of and by himselfe, Act. 4.11. a body) all the Elect: implying two conclusions. 1 That all that are giuen to him of God, are saued: hee saues not a legge, or an arme only, but euery part of the body. b 2 That none but those, that are giuen to him, are saued by him. c Vse is, 1 To amplify the benefit of the head-ship, of Christ; in whom we haue true rest and securty, so that wee may trust perfectly to the grace that is brought vnto vs. 2 It is for our comfort & ioy, and to stir vs vp to praise God; as the Virgin Mary, and old Simeon did: and for this cause, the Angell said, that it was gladsome tidings, that a Sauiour was borne vnto the world a, Heb. 7.25. Ioh. 19.30. An euidence of which perfect saluation ob∣tained by him, was his Resurrection: for this cause, he is called Saluation, Luk. 2.30. Note here first the Blas∣phemie of the Iesuites, that deriue of that name of their society, from that name of Christ, which is in∣communicable. Indeede we may be well called Christi∣ans of Christ, because this name is communicable, for wee are partakers of the anointing: but no man is partaker with Christ▪ in the worke of saluation: as al∣so, Linwood a Papist saith; and secondly, the dotings of the Papists, that seeke for other Sauiors besids Christ, as the Saints, to whom may bee applyed that of Esa. 30.1, &c. and Ier. 2 13. As also another conceit of the Treasure of the Church, which what needs, if Christ alone haue purchased perfect saluation? b Rom. 5.18. As Adam is a naturall root, and all com∣ming from him; partake of his sin, and curse: so Christ being another roote, all that come from him, partake
of his righteousness to iustification, Ioh. 6.37. and verse 39. A reason is a added, cause the Elect are committed to his trust, and fidelity; and therefore if they bee lost, the losse redounds not only to the hurt of the members, bu to his owne discredit. Obiect. Ioh. 17.12. Iudas is expresly sayd to be lost. Answ. Iuas was nuer of this company: which is plaine both by th words in the place aleadged, where he is called the sonne of perdition, fore-ordained of old vnto this condemnation, as Iude speaes ver. 4. Then apply that, 1 Ioh. 2.19. This ouerthrowes that grosse errour of the Luthe∣ranes, who say, that those who are Elect, may not one∣ly wholy, but finally fall away; an opinion strange, contradictory in it selfe, to be a chosn vessell, and to bee damned, and contrary to the Scripture: it breakes in sunder that golden chaine, Rom. 8.30. Math. 24.24. Yea, the Papists confesse the absurdity of it, Bellar. de grat. & libero arbitrio, lib. 2. cap. 10. The ground of this opinion is, that they hold, that election is conditionall: which Tenent is derogatory to glory, making his will and decree changeable, whereas he is immutable in both, and also depriues euery faith∣full soule of a ground of maine comfort: which other∣wise doth rest in an holy security (opposed to feare and distrust) when once it perceiues in it selfe the certaine signes of Election. Obiect. 1 Exod. 32.32. and Rom. 9.3. Answ. These holy men rapt with loue and zeale, did onely shew what in their hearts they could wish to be done, not what could be done; it was Votum affectus, non Effectus. Obiect. Psalme 69.28. Answ. That is spoken according to the common opinion of men; now therefore Dauid desireth God to make it manifest, that they did heerein deceiue them∣selues, & others were deceiued in them, who because of
their profession and outward carriage, accounted them to be written in the Booke of Life. So in like manner, that which is spoken of Iudas, was spoken in regard of his office and Apostleship, not in regard of the eternall election of God: For in that former respect, hee might haue seemed to haue beene a chosen vessell, Act. 1.17. Vse is for comfort vnto vs, that though wee be not the principall parts of the body of Christ; an eye, or an eare; that is, not instructed with so much knowledge as others, &c. yet if wee be of the body, wee shall be saued, Gal. 3.28. c Because that satisfaction of Christ was a ransome and price: and none can be redeemed and bought, but those for whom it was paid. Against carnall Gospellers that hope still to be saued, when as yet they haue no euidence that they are of this body: for the body is guided by the head; but those by the prince that ruleth in the Ayre, Ephes. 2.2. The members of the body loue one another: but these hate and persecute the Saints. Briefely, this word body, imports two things, that is, 1 A mysticall vnion with Christ by faith. 2 And a spirituall vnion one with ano∣ther by loue, whereof they haue neither. So much concrning the authority of Christ: The next point is the subiection of the Church, ver. 24. Which subiection is due on the Churches part, in re∣gard of the place of Christ, who is her head; but much more in regard that he is so wise, & so glorious a head, so prouident and powerfull to procure her good: and againe, in that shee is so farre inferiour vnto him, and therefore meete it is that she subiect her selfe; and vn∣worthy she were of so great benefits, if she should not: as Vashty was in not obeying her husband the King. Doct. Whosoeuer is of the Catholike Church, is in∣deed subiect to Christ.
AN EXPOSITION VPON THE FOVRTH VERSE OF THE SIXT CHAP∣TER TO THE EPHESIANS. And yee fathers, prouoke not your children to wrath: but bring them vp in instruction and information of the Lord. THe duties concerning the wel-nurturing of children, are of 2 kinds. 1 Such as re∣spect temporall good: as, first, training of them vp in ciuility & good behauior: secondly, in a good calling. 2 Or such as respct spirituall good, viz. that they be trained vp in piety, which in the text, and diuers other place, ais expresly commanded of God: who also for this end ordained in the Law many meanes to stirre vp children to aske of their Parents what they meant: as of the 12 Stones, of the Passeouer, &c: commanding Parents to declare vnto their children the mystery of these things. Reasons of this are, 1 This is the best good that parents can doe for their children, by reason men exceed beasts: by ciui∣ity,
ciuill men excell sauages: but by piety, the godly man goeth beyond all other. 2 There is a necssity of this instructiō of them in the feare of the Lord; for by nature they haue no pronenesse to it, and without this nurturing they will neuer learne. 3 This belongs to the office and charge of parents, as they who best know the capacity of children, and therefore are best able to apply instruction to them, and instruction comming from them, will take more place. 4 Because children are borne of their parents in a wofull estate; and therefore as they haue beene the meanes to conuay sinne and misery vnto them, so should they labour to be a like meanes of conuaying grace. 5 This is a double band to binde them vnto their parents in loue and duty, when both nature and a reli∣gious conscience shall ioyne both together. 6 By this meanes when parents dye, they may with greater comfort and security commend their children vnto God. 7 This is lastly an especiall meanes of continuing and propagating the truth of religion and worship of God. Now come wee to some directions for the perfor∣mnce of this duty: These are 1 That they be sure, that all such principles as they instruct their children in, be grounded on the Word of God: for it must be information (of the Lord.) 2 That when they beginne to learne, they be taught to read in the holy Scriptures the booke of God: as Ti∣mothy was. Compare 2 Tim 1.5. with 3.5. for so with learning they shall sucke in Religion: and 2 there is a secret and diuine operation in the Word to worke ho∣linesse. 3 That they be daily catechized and instructed in the grounds of Religion, Deut. 6.7. where continually sig∣nifieth according to the vsuall phrase of Scripture, as the continuall sacrifice, that which is done day by day; but obseruing this caueat, hat they be not too tedi∣ous,
but deale with them as it is, Esa. 28.13. Moreouer, lt parents take occasion to raise vp the minds of their children vnto God. 4 That they take occasion especially to declare vnto their children the mysterie of all thoe ordinances that God hath instituted in his Church, of te Sabbath, Sa∣craments, &c. So the Israelites were to expound to their children the Passeouer. 5 To prouide such tutors and gouernors as are reli∣gious: so Hannah did put her sonne to good old Eli, 1 Samuel 1. 6 hat they teach them by their owne good exam∣ple: as, Iosh 1. Psalm. 101.2. This addes an edge to all the rest. It remaineth to shew the contrary aberrations o parents. 1 That they are onely and wholly carefull for the temporall good of their children, meate, drinke, ap∣parell, complementall carriage, and rich calling, and good marriage; in which they respect the good of their children no more than heathens doe. 2 Many care not in what religion they be brought vp: Such are those that haue rich and wealthy, but popish friends, to whom they will put their children to be instructed; wherein what doe they, but shew themselues most vnnaturall, giuing poyson to their children, and euen sending them to the diuell? 3 That they teach them at first prophane and vile bookes, neuer also catechize them. In which case the Papists may rise vp against vs in iudgement. 4 By ill examples they teach their children vile sinne, euen in their cadle. Come wee to the second branch, namely, the time of the performance of these duties; of which consider 1 The beginning, when it must be done, 2 The contiuance, how long. 1 For the beginning: Doct. So soone as the
childe is docible, and able to apprehend instruction, so soone must he be taught and nurtured in the feare of the Lord, Pro. 22.6.  The mouth of his way. Like as they giue children meate, as soone as they cn take it with their mouth, Pro. 13.24. betimes, in the morning, Heb. viz. of his age. Pro. 4.3. tender. Then was Salo∣mon instructed. 2 Tim. 3.15. an infant: So dealt Anna with Samuel a childe. Reasons are either priuatiue, implying an auoyding of mischiefe: as, 1 Vnlesse they be taught betimes, they will fall into many sinnes, because they are pron to sinne, Gen. 6.5. Prou. 22.15. and as soone as they haue ability, they will execute it. This is a meanes to preuent it. 2 This preuents obstinacy and peruersenesse: for within a while they will grow refractary and indoci∣ble: as Hophni and Phineas. Or positiue, of fruites and benefits ensuing, namely, a good effect of their labour: because, 1 Instruction is easily taught, there being an aptnesse and inclination in youth to learne. 2 That which is learned in youth, is longest retained, Prou. 22.6. Obiect. But to teach children, is but as to teach Par∣rots that which they vnderstand not, and so 'tis but labour lost. Answ. 1 The ground, 2 The consequence is false: for 1 a childe, so soone as it is able to conceiue any thing, vnderstands it better than any other creature else whatsoeuer. 2 Suppose they conceiue it not yet, 1 It is better that by this meanes they be kept from an euill course than let run into it. 2 This is a great meanes to helpe their vnderstan∣ding as wee see in Princes and Noble mens children, that haue good bringing vp, who vnderstand more at 12. than many others at 20. yeeres. 3 As yeeres doe increase, so will they make vse of that which they learne in youth, therefore though there
be no fruit for the present, yet it will come afterwards: as it is in owing of corne. The contrary practice of parents is, who suffer the bst yeeres of their children to be spent in vanity and waonnesse. Where note by the way, that this point of well nurturing children, doth especially belong to the mothe, as we see, 2 Tim. 1.15. compared with 2 Tim. .15. Pro. 31.1.1.8.6.20. yea, after a peculia manner to mothers when they are young, they being then most familiar & conuersant about them, in feeding▪ cothing, &c. For this cause the holy Ghost doth ex∣presse in the books of the Kings & Chronicles the mo∣thers name; because chidren do most ordinarily follow their mothers. So Salomon and Absalon, the children of one father, but of two mothers; the one bad, the other good: so it is when the father is a Protestant, the mo∣ther a Papist, the children commonly are Papists, 2 Chr. 2.1, 3. Ahaziah fell to Idolatry, by reason of his mo∣thers counsell. Which serues to stirre vp mothers to diligence in educating their children. The second branch of the time, is the Continuance. The childe must be instructed so long as the parents haue power and authority to gouerne him, which is, so long as he liueth, and they are parents, though there must be a difference put in respect of age. For children are bound to parents as long as they liue, and so must be subiect and ruled by them. So Eli rebuked Hophni and Phineas, though they were marri∣ed; and Iob had a care and command ouer his children, though they kept house. Directions: That parents doe so wisely carry them∣selues towards their children, as they still reserue in their owne hands a power to curbe and bride them, e∣uen when they are growne into yeeres. Contrary to which is their practice, which let goe the reines vnto their children, yea, put themselues in their childrens power, and stand at their courtesie. Many haue found
the mischiefe of this: as Dauid did in Absalom, Concerning the meanes of Helpe, for the perfor∣mance of this duty of education: they are two, Frequent admonition: , to put into the mind more by instruction. Due correction: , comprehending both. 1 Doct. That to instruction must bee added admo∣nition, that is, they must labour to whet these things into the hearts of their children, to make a deeper im∣pression, Deut. 6.7, 8. Eccles. 12.11. Prou. 7. Because the apprehension of children is very weake, and sickly; and therefore vnlesse that which is taught bee vrged, it will slip away. Parents therefore must obserue the incli∣nation of their children, and accordingly vrge and ex∣presse vpon them those things they haue taught them. Contrary is the practice of those, who thinke it suf∣ficient to haue told their children, what is to be done; but goe no further, complaining of great labor and paine that it is to bee still in admonishing of them. 2 Doct. Correction must bee added to Admonition: and this is either Verball, properly called Reprehension. Reall, properly called Correction. Reproofe goeth in the middle between Instruction and Correction, as a meanes to helpe the former, and pre∣uent the latter. That a father must reprooue his childe, is plaine by Pro. 15.5. For if it bee a commendation of a childe to hearken to reproofe, it is a duty of parents to reprooue: see Gen. 34.30. Gen. 49.4, 5, 6, 7. The reason is, because of the fruit that thence doth a∣rise: see Prou. 6.23.10.17.15.31. The fruite of it is life and knowledge, 15.32. & chap. 24.25. The blessing of good, that is, of God. Motiues to vse this reproofe may be, 1 It doth preuent Correction. 2 It may be performed, when the other cannot be done, as in sicknesse, infancy, and elder yeeres. Contrary to this, is the too indulgent carriage of pa∣rents towards their children: as Dauid to Adoniah, 1 King. 1.6.
Reall Correction is next: it is not sufficient to admo∣nish, but it this serue not, God hath giuen authorty to parents to correct them with stripes and blowes, accor∣ding to their age; yea, God hath guen them a charge to doe it, and therein hath made himselfe a patterne to parents, in correting His Children after admonition and reproofe, giuen by his Ministrs: and this must be done, because of the peruersenesse of children. Reasos is of it are, 1 In respect of the chide, which are 1 Priuatiue good; Correction is as purging physick, and as a salue curing and purging the corrupion of the soule, Pro. 22.15.20 30.23.13. In this respect it is said to deliuer from death, both temporall, and eternall, and▪ 23.14. from hell; and therefore parents must not in foolish affection vrge the painfulnesse of correction, but in iudgement consider the fruit thereof. 2 Positiue good: it teacheth wisedome, Prou. 29 15. But some will say, that instruction is sufficient to teach them, what is good and euill. Answ. The greatest wisedome is in the pratice, which hereby is learned, bringing them to a neerer obseruation of those things that are taught; therefore it is an error in parents, that say that children kept vnder Correction, are sots: see Prou. 13.24. 2 In respect of parents 1 Hereby they spare much paine: for this will make instruction more powerfull, though few times deliuered, than without it oftentimes inculcated. 2 This preuents shame and griefe to pa∣rents. 3 Hereby they acquit themselues of being ac∣cessary to the sinne, and so guilty of the blood of their children: as Eli was punished for not restraining his children. 4 Hereby they shall bring ease, quiet, and ioy vnto themselues, Prou. 29.17. when the childe is made so carefull, and watchfull of his duty, that the parents may bee secure of his good carriage. 5 If all these faile, yet hee hath the testimony of a cleare conscience, in the discharge of his duty.
Directions for the well and seasonable performance hereof, regard first, the matter, secondly, the manner, thirdly, the vse. 1 The matter why the childe should bee corrected: 1 The parent must be sure, that hee correct his child iustly for a fault; otherwise he will be but prouoked a∣gainst his father; for there be fathers that correct their children for their pleasures, Heb. 12.10. 2 That as he punisheth them for a fault, so they make known this fault vnto them, after the example of God, Psal. 50.21. 3 To correct especially for those faults, which they may shew out of the Word of God, to bee faults; and so shew that God is also thereby offended: for this will make them feare the more. 2 Manner. Generall rules: 1 That parents in cor∣recting, doe call vpon God, for themselues, that they may bee directed; and for their children, that they may reape benefit, because that they are subiect to passion, and the childs nature is against it. 2 That correction bee done in loue, as in all things, 1 Cor. 16.14 so espe∣cially to children, who take it as a matter of iudgement, in their parents. 3 That it be done, with a milde mind and calme affections, and to put it off, if rage and fury arise: as God doth, Ier. 10.24. Particular rules. 1 That the quality and condition of the childe bee obserued, and accordingly to measure our correction: 2 That respect bee had vnto the fault, according to the greatnesse and smalnesse of it, &c. For Prayers. 3 The vse: 1 To obserue the dealing of God towards them in correcting of them; which parents may obserue by their correcting of their children, with what pitty and compassion they doe it. 2 To obserue, that in correcting their children, they correct their owne sinnes, and that the thing for which they correct them, came by their owne occasion.
Aberrations in this point are, 1 Too much indulgence. 2 Too much seuerity. Duties of parents in regard of the riper yeeres of their children, when they are youths, are of two kinds. 1 Prouiding of its place and personall calling for the exercise of that gift, whereunto they haue beene here∣tofore trained vp: so Samuel made his sons Iudges, 1 Sam. 8.1. So Ishai had diuers sonnes, whom he placed in seuerall callings, some soldiers, some shepheards: a cal∣ling of esteeme in countries. Reasons are. 1 By this meanes they come to make vse of that ability and faculty, which they haue obtai∣ned by their parents, in training of them vp; and with∣out this they forget the same, like schollers that after long study haue no further calling. 2 Because by this meanes they come to doe more good to the Church and Common-wealth; for before, they are but in preparation, and their paines (as of pren∣tices) may in some sort bee profitable, yet they are not till afterwards counted members of the Common∣wealth properly. 3 By this meanes they come to liue of themselues and doe more good to others; whereas before, their paines and gaines were for their masters. 4 By this meanes they traine vp others, as themselues haue been trained vp before, and so there is a succession of calling, and a maintenance of Church and common∣wealth. Directions: Obserue 2 Cautions. 1 That they bee carefull to place them in such a cal∣ling as they haue beene trained vp vnto in their young yeeres. Bezaleel and Aholiab were chosen to the worke of the Tabernacle, because they were skilfull men, Ex∣od. 25. It is not fit, of a prentice to make a minister. 2 That the meanes of placing them be good, law∣full and honest, that thus entring in by those meanes
that God hath ordained and warranted, they may de∣pend vpon his blessing, as beeing thereunto called by him, 1 Cor. 7.17. What mischiefs follow vpon an vn∣conscionable entrance, all know. Aberration in two extremes: 1 Carelesnesse of those that thinke it enough to haue bestowed education vpon their children; and so account themselues discharged, saying, that they will leaue them then to depend vpon Gods prouidence. (But we must know, that God appoynts meanes, without the vse of which, we cannot looke for a blessing.) Others saying, that their children may shift for themselues: iust like brute beasts, that leaue their young ones when they are able to feede themselues. And thus by their negligence, many times their children come to be ve∣ry drones in the Common-wealth. 2 When parents are too preposterous and rash in prouiding a calling, not considering whether the place be fit or no for their children, but onely whether it be gainefull and profitable, or of credit. 3 Another is, of those that make no conscience of bringing their children into a calling, into the Ministe∣ry by Simony, &c. 2 The second duty is, concerning marriage, that they be carefull to prouide marriage for them in due and fit time; a plaine duty of parents, Ier. 29.6. and 1 Cor. 7.36, 37. in practice, Gen. 28.2, 6. and 27.46. Agar learned so much in Abrahams house, Gen. 21.21. and and so did God with the first man, Gen. 2.18. Reasons, 1 Because children must waite vpon their parents consent, and therefore they ought to prouide for them. 2 Parents stand in Gods stead, and so must bee a meanes of seeking a marriage for them. 3 Marriage is a needfull meanes to keepe their ves∣sels in holinesse; and heereby is a holy seede preser∣ued, Mal. 2.15.
Directions, 1 That children may haue a free con∣sent, and that they be not forced: After Gods example, who brought the woman that he had made, vnto Adam, to see whether he liked her or no, Gen. 2.22. & 24.57. for this is the neerest, surest, & strongest band, and ought not to be vndertaken without the parties good liking. 2 That the match be fit for them, Gen. 2.20. Fit, 1 In Religion, Deut. 7.3. 2 In age: So God made the woman perfect at the first, as Adam, not a childe. 3 In state, in some equality, else scorne and dis∣daine may arise. Aberrations in two extremes. 1 Carelesnesse in prouiding marriage, letting them passe the flowre of their age. 2 Too much rashnesse, before they know what a wife and husband meane: and a third, prouiding vn∣meet matches for them, ioyning them idiots, fooles, pa∣pists, prophane; so they be wealthy. Meanes for the better performance of those duties, are, 1 That parents haue a care to prouide a stocke and portion for their children, 2 Corinth. 12.14. Whereas some obiect, Math. 6.19. wee answer, 1 That Christ aimeth heere at couetousnesse: so as the foole laid vp riches. 2 Hee condemnes the manner, as beeing the onely thing which they doe, before and aboue the care of hea∣uenly things. 3 The measure, heaping vp without measure. Directions. 1 That this measure be not vniustly gotten, Prou. 10.2. 2 That they be not couetous, setting themselues to make themselues and their children rich. 3 That this be not a pretence for vncharitablenesse. Contrary to this is, 1 when men liue at the vttermost extent of their liuing, so that they can lay vp nothing.
2 When men liue aboue their liuing, and cast them∣selues behinde hand. 3 When any insnare their children, by causing them to be bound for them, and so breake their backes, and become their vndoers. 4 Couetousnesse, when parents lay vp indeed, but will part with nothing to their children before their death. EPHES. 6. VER. 5. Seruants, be obedient vnto them that are your masters, accor∣ding to the flesh, with feare and trembling, and singlenesse of your hearts, as vnto Christ, &c. vnto the 9th. verse. THe sūme of these words is a direction for seruants how to carry themselues towards their Masters; wherein the Apostle layes downe, first the Duties they are to performe, where wee are to note, 1 The kindes which are twofold: Obedience & Reuerence. 2 The extent, which is limited by these speeches: according to the flesh, ver. 5. as vnto Christ, ibid, as the ser∣uants of Christ, ver. 6. as to the Lord, ver. 7. 3 The manner of performance set downe, 1 Affir∣matiuely, by shewing them what graces doe adorne them in performance of these duties, ver. 5, 7. 2 Negatiuely, by shewing what vices are to bee a∣uoyded, ver. 6. 2 The motiues to stirre them vp to the carefull per∣formance of the former duties, which are partly im∣ployed, partly repressed. Before we come to handle the kindes, it is necessary to lay downe, here as formerly hath beene done, the ground and foundations of the duties, which doe con∣cerne either the opinion, or the affection of seruants. Thier opiniō, that they be perswaded concerning their masters superiority, and their owne subiection, that it
is good, lawfull and warrantable, by the Word of God. For seeing Reuerence and Obedience haue relation to authority and superiority; how can any bee yeelded, when wee are not perswaded, that they to whom wee owe this, are our superiours? Therfore did Korah & his company fall into Rebellion, because they thought that Moses had not that authority, which hee tooke vpon him, Num. 16.3. Now that seruants may bee resolued, touching the lawfulnesse of their masters authority, let them consider, 1 That it is Gods commandement, both in the old and new Testament. 2 The many di∣rections, that God giueth to masters and seruants, to carry themseleus in their places: But God giueth no di∣rections for any vnlawfull calling. 3 The example of many godly men in Scripture, who haue beene seruants. 4 That, that the Apostle, Rom. 13.1. vrgeth it as a mat∣ter of conscience, which hath alwaies relation to the Law of God commanding. Contrary to this, is the opinion of the Anabaptists, denying any subiection or superiority; their reasons for it are, 1 If, say they, there be seruants, and this a calling lawfull, they must haue either Christians or Infidels to their masters. If Infidels, who haue no part 'in Christ: what an vnfit and vnmeet thing is it for Chri∣stians to bee in subiection to such? If Christians, then are they all brethren, and why should one bro∣ther be inferiour to another? Answ. This calling of seruants and masters, being a politicall ordinance of God, appoynted to vp-hold the Church, Common-wealth and Family, not their quali∣ty, but their place is to be considered: See 1 Tim. 6.2. 2 Againe, say they, it is against nature, our Christian liberty, and those prerogatiues we are endowed with. Answ. Against nature, as nature now is, it is not, al∣though if nature had remained entire and perfect, it had beene against nature. But God hath in his admira∣ble wisedome made many things, which are punish∣ments
of sinne, to bee duties imposed on vs, as eating of our bread in the sweat of our browes, a punishment, and yet a duty. 2 Christian liberty is not hereby preiudiced, the con∣science stil remaining free, & not subiect to any but God. 3 And as for our prerogatuines, they are to be ex∣pected in the world to come, and not heere. 3 They vrge that which is said, verse 7. not seruing men:) but heere seruice to men is not simply forbidden, but such fawning and parasiticall seruice, when we who∣ly care to please men, and not God, in seruing them. In Affection, that the seruant haue an honourable ac∣count and reuerent esteeme of his master. This is called here Feare; and it is described, 1 Tim. 6.1. See 1 Pet. 2.18. which affection in a seruant, if it be wanting, he doth indeed deny his master to be a master, Mal. 1.6. The meanes to worke this feare, is to consider the place of his master, namely, that hee is in Gods stead. Signes of his feare are, 1 When the heart of the seruant desires to please his master: as Abrahams seruant did, Gen. 24. the whole chapter sheweth it. Which further sheweth it selfe by a certaine ioy and delight they haue, when they haue done any busines succesfully, and for their masters pro∣fit, as Abrahams seruant did, Gen. 44. vers. 26.27. 2 A care not to offend them: as was in Ioseph, Gen. 39.8, 9. which breeds a griefe in them, hauing done any thing offensiue: as Onesimus was, no doubt, grieued for his running away, and would not returne without a letter of mediation from Paul, his masters speciall friend. Contrary to this is, 1 Slauish feare: as was in that idle and vnprofitable seruant, Mathew 24.25, 25. 2 Despising of their masters, 2 Tim. 6.2. manifesting it selfe in two branches, 1 Into light esteeme of their ma∣sters: as Agar, of Sarah her mistris, Gn. 16.4. 2 In a vile and base esteeme of them: as when they are poore, &c. Wee are now come to the kindes of duties, and
first, of Reuerence, which is an outward manifestation of that inward affection of the heart; To be declared, 1 By speech, and that first to his master, two waies, 1 By refraining his speech in a good and commenda∣ble silence, not speaking in his presence; or being in talke, to breake it off when he commeth in presence, &c. which shewes a great honour that he beares vnto him. Contrary to this, is sawcinsse and ouer-bodnesse in prating to him as their equl▪ A great fault in seruants, who especially should be swift to heare, and slow to speake, Iames 1. Yet are there times when seruants may and ought to speake. 1 When their masters require them. 2 When it may bee behooffull for them: as when it tends to the good of their masters, as 2 King. 5.3. Or when they would perswade them to that which is good, and they are against it: as Naamans seruants, 2 King. 5.13. Or when they would more fully vnderstand their ma∣sters meaning: so did the Disciples of Christ ask him many questions: or when some scruple doth arise in the seruants minde concerning the businesse, as Gen. 24.5. Or to cleare their innocency, when their master sus∣pecteth any thing of them, 1 Sam. 24.9. &c. Contrary to this is stoutnesse, and stomackfulnesse, when they will not speake nor answer, Pro. 29.19. For the manner of their speech, note these things, 1 In titles, that they bee honorable, and beseeming their masters places. 2 That their words bee few, especially if they obserue, that their masters be vnwilling to heare of any talke, in that businesse, as Iohn the last, vers. 21, 22. 3 Their answer must be meeke, gentle, and humble, 2 King. 6.2, 3. 4 It must be seasonable, not when they are cholerick. 5 Aboue all things, their speech must be true; to which in this regard they are bound by a speciall band. Contrary to this, is, 1 Pride, scorning to reuerence their masters with fit titles. 2 Scolding, as in many
shrewish mad seruants, that will giue word for word, yea, and will haue the last word. 3 Muttering and mumbling, speaking neuer a plaine word. 4 Lying like Gehazi; shewing hereby the small respect they carry of their masters. The second thing is speech of them, which must be the same to others, as it is to their master, else the other will prooue but faw∣ning and hypocrisie. To this end, 1 Let them say no∣thing in his absence, but what they would be willing hee should heare himselfe. 2 Let them speake of him in such sort, as others may see he makes account of his master and mistris. 3 Not to speake of any thing that may discredit them. 4 To maintaine their credit a∣gainst others. Contrary to this is, 1 To discredit their masters vn∣iustly by telling vntruths. 2 By blazing abroad secrets, as many seruants doe when they meet together, and as it comes to passe when seruants are changed. 2 By their carriage, which is another euidence of that reuerence and feare which they beare vnto their masters: Yea, the most proper: for if their actions doe not agree with their words, they are but flatterers and fawners, yea, their owne words will condemne them, Luke 19.22. There are three branches, wherein this Reuerence consists. 1 In a dutifull obedience. 2 In an humble and decent behauiour, 3 In apparell. Obeisance in comming to them, going from them, receiuing an errand from them, bringing a message to them; to make obeysance, see for proofe, Gen. 27.29. bow downe to thee:) 2 King. 2.15. Behauiour: that it be modest, humble, and lowly: as standing in their masters presence, 2 King. 5.23. and 10.8. And though Salomon was a King, yet this is common to Kings with other men; and wherein some may ob∣iect, that by standing, is meant no other, but to serue
and minister, as Deut. 10.8. Wee answer, that neuer∣thelesse, the reason of this phrase shewes, that they that minister, must be ready to performe all things; stand∣ing vncouerd, as at all times, so especially in the Church, where God and his Angls are to behold their good order: also heir lookes nd countenance must be sober, and modest. Contrary to this, is the carriage of proud seruants, that scorne all courtesie towards their master, which commeth to passe when their master is poore and meane: whereby they shew plainely how little they egard Gods ordinance, and the image of God, which their master how meane soeuer doth beare. Apparell: that it be bcomming the state of their condition of subiction; for this is one end and vse of apparell, for to distinguish those of higher and more eminnt degree, from other lower and inferiour. This was that which the Queene of Sheba noted in Salomons seruants, 1 King. 10.5. euery one being suited accor∣ding to his degree. Contrary to this, is the practice of most seruants now a daies, whom by their apparell a man cannot distin∣guish from the children, no not from their masters and mistresses themselues; all their wages, and what-euer else they can get, either from their friends, or by pur∣oyning oft times, from their master, or by other meanes, it is all spent in apparell. And if the master and mistresse make conscience of going soberly, the ser∣uants will many tims go finer than they. So much for reuerence. The second generall duty is obediences, the most principall and surest euidence of their dutifull subiecti∣on, as also of their masters authority: for reuerence is performed also to others, Col. 3.22. To which is contrary, rebellion and disobedience in seruants, the greatest impeacment of the masters authority, and indeed that which doth plainely deny
his place; faults in the former may come of rudenesse, and may be borne withall, but this is intolerable. This duty doth manifest it selfe 1 In the parts. 2 In the xtent. The parts of it are partly negtiue, partly affirma∣tiue. Negatiue, that they do not any thing of their own heads, without or against their masters knowledge and consent: for seruants, during the time of their seruice, are their masters goods, and so are all their actions to be done, not for their owne, but for their masters pro∣fit; and therefore good reason that hee should haue the guidance and direction of them. Againe, the masters will must be a rule and direction of all their actions; and therefore did Abrahams seruant enquire the meaning of his master, Gen. 24.5. Therefore the cares of seruants were boared thorow, to signifie that their eare must be alwaies attentiue to their masters will. More particu∣larly, this duty is seene in these points. 1 Seruants are not to goe abroad about their owne businesse, without the consent of their master. Contra∣ry was the practice of Gehezi, going out after Naaman vnknowne to his master, 2 King. 5. 2 They may not enterprize and goe about their ma∣sters businesse, without his direction; doing that worke that likes them best, Prou. 31.15. For it is the masters duty to allot vnto seruants their worke as well as their meat. Contrary is, when seruants will be their owne choosers; s happens where there be many seruants: and also tha practice of many, who are so selfconceited, that they thinke things will neuer well succeed, vnlesse they be one after their own head. True it is, if they be more , (as it doth so happen many times) then their , the ma meekely aduise them: as Ioab did, 2 Sa 2 3. But if they will haue their own mind, they must doe i: as the Kings word preuailed with Io¦ab, ver. 4. 3 In the time of thei seruice, they are not to marry
without their masters consent. So masters did giue wiues vnto their seruants, Exod. 21.4. Contrary is the practice of those that doe take the aduantage of the law, and marry themselues, of purpose to bee free, and to defraud their masters of the rest of their time. 4 In disposing of those goods that doe belong vnto thir masters, they may not giue away any thing fo charitable vses without their consent. 5 Being hired by them, they ought not to hire them∣selues vnto any other, without their full & free consent. Iacob hauing serued out his time, did neuerthelesse tar∣ry with Laban still, hee being vnwilling to let him de∣part, Gen. 30.26, 27, 28. So farre was hee from going away without his consent. And whereas chap. 31. ver. 20. hee went away priuily, 1 hee had the charge o God to bee gone. 2 His time was out. Howbeit this practice of Iacobs is not iustifiable, neither can be allead∣ged for imitation in seruants. For seeing Iacob had Gods commandement for to goe away, and his promise for safety in his iourney, ver. 3. why could hee not haue had his departure knowne to Laban, whose wrath hee needed not to feare, God being as ready to haue deliue∣red him from the danger thereof then, as hee did af∣terwards, verse 24? Contrary is the practice of lewd seruants, who runne away from their masters, like Shimies seruants, 1 King. 2.39. and as Agar, Gen. 16.6. If their masters be cruell, they must doe as the Angell counselled Agar, verse 9. submit and humble themselues: see 1 Pet. 2.18. The affirmaiue part of obedience is, that they be willing and ready to doe whatsoeuer their master will haue them doe. This is the truest marke of hearty obedince: for the former may many times arise of fullennsse. This must be manifested, 1 In regard of the masters command; that hee hauing a power to commnd, the
seruant ought to obey, doing that which hee rquireth, readily and willingly, without pretending excuses, or enquiring a reason of what hee commands, Math. 8.9. which example belongeth to all seruants. Samuel, who was in a manner Elis sruant, when he was called by od, he supposing it had beene Eli, went vnto him a second and a third time, albeit the time were vnseason∣able, & tha Eli had at first told him, he called him not: which might haue beene an excuse not to haue come a second and a third time, 1 Sam. 2.6, &c. Abrahams seruant questions not about the difficulty of that long iourney, which he was to take by his masters cōmand, Gen. 24.4. Eliahs seruant goeth to the top of the hill seuen times, although hee saw nothing till the seuenth, 1 King. 18.24. The plow-man that hath laboured all day, doth neuerthelsse first serue his master when hee commeth home, before himselfe do eate and drink, and take his rest, Luk 17.7. All to shew that he must not be wary, nor take vaine excuses and pretences, for not do∣ing his masters command; but do it he ought although it seeme neuer so much without reason vnto him. Contrary to it, is the disobedience of seruants to their masters command; and euen then most commonly when they haue no need of them, Iob 19.61. like vn∣faithfull Zba, 2 Sam. 19.26. This is a most foule of∣fence in seruants, and of all others doth most prouoke their masters, seeing that hereby they in their hearts doe plainely deny his authority ouer them. 2 In regard of his instruction, tending first to their emporal good: as of prentizes, and such as are cōmitted vnto others, onely for this end, that they may learne their trade. For 1 The master being bound to teach them, they are likewise bound to learn and to follow his directions. 2 This is the end why they were placed with them. 3 The benefit and profit is great, for here∣by they come to liue of themselue another day, &c. Contrary is the practice of idle, dull, and heauy ser∣uants,
that regard not their masters teaching, who care not so they may weare out their yeeres, though at the end of them they haue not learned their trade: heereby shewing themselues enemies to thir masters in discre∣diting them; to themselues, by depriuing themselues of a meanes to liue heereafter; and to their place, wherein they are vnprofitable members. 2 To their spirituall good, that as it is the masters duty to instruct his seruants in the feare of God, so must they hearken vnto him. Ioshua had such seruants, else hee could not haue said, I and my house will serue the Lord, Iosh. 24.15. Such were in the family of Priscilla, and Aquila, Rom. 16.5. So Philem. verse 2. The Ru∣lers seruants beleeued vpon their masters relation, al∣though they were with him when Iesus spake the word, Iohn 4.53. The necessity of such instruction, as also the vnspeak∣able benefit that ariseth hence, should moue seruants to the performance of this duty. But wee see the contrary in almost all seruants, who of all others will not bee seruants to religious men: such as are all naturall men, who are more ready to follow the Diuell, and those that beare his I∣mage, than God, and such as carry the Image of God. And it is a common complaint, that prophane men haue better seruants, and haue their worke better performed, than godly; yea though they giue lesse wages, and worse fare; because the one sort, so as they may haue their work done, care not how they breake the Sabbath, and what other sinne they commit, which the other will not suf∣fer. So much did men preferre liberty in sinne before meate, drinke and wages, and any thing else. 3 and 4 In regard of Reproofe, and Correction, which may bee ioyned both together; reproofe being but a verball correction, and correction a reall reproofe: and herein obedience is shewed in two branches. 1 By patient bearing all reproofes and correction
whatsoeuer it bee, whether iust or vniust, milde or bit∣ter, easie or grieuous; this the Apostle Peter proues by many arguments, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20, 21. Ioseph vniust∣ly imprisoned by his master, mutters not, nor repineth, nor yet reuengeth it when afterwards he came into au∣thority, Gen. 39.20. Contrary to this, is the practice of many seruants, who being reprooued, will answer againe crosly and thwar∣tly; a thing expresly forbidden, Tit. 2.9. True it is, they may make an Apologie for themselues reuerently, and modestly, but if their masters will not heare them, si∣lence, and patience is required. 2 Of those that will not bee corrected, but if their masters come to correct them, they will take the staffe by the end. 3 Of such as fearing correction, will runne away: as Agar, Onesimus, and Shemeis seruants. 4 Of such as will giue blow for blow. 5 Of such as will seeke for reuenge, by mischieuing their masters at one time or other. 2 When they are iustly reproued and corrected, that they bee carefull to redresse, and amend that for which they were so reproued; for herein patient bearing is not sufficient, it is not praise-worthy, 1 Pet. 2.20. yea, it is but stupidity and blockishnesse. Thus did Onesimus amend, Philem. ver. 11. Contrary is the practice of those, that notwithstan∣ding all reproofe and correction, goe on still, and pro∣uoke their masters, either to adde more blowes, or in the end to turne them out of his doores. 2 part. The Extent of seruants obedience: how farre forth they ought to obey their mastrs, is imply∣ed here, when it is sayd (According to the flesh) that is, in ciuill and carnall things, and expresly layd downe, Col. 3.22. and Tit. 2.9. (In all things) which words being so generall, must haue some restraint and limitation. Be∣cause masters and mistresses are men and women, and so being, are subiect to errour. 2 Some may be Idolaters,
Popish and prophane, and so may command that which is expressely contrary to Gods Word. 3 And againe, such is the peruersnesse of many, that they oppose themselues against God the highest Master. Neuerthelesse the reason why this so generall a phrase is vsed, is to shew, 1 That whatsouer the master hath authority to command, and belongs vnto his office, in all those things seruants must obey. 2 That the ma∣sters authority is very large, such as none but Gods con∣trary command can resist. 3 That it is not sufficient to obey in such things as they please; but it must bee all things, though grieuous and irksome vnto them. Here therefore we must distinguish between things 1 Simply good. 2 Simply euill. 3 Indifferent. The 1 are simply commanded. The 2 simply forbidden. The 3 are good or euill, according to the diuers circumstan∣ces: and in these indifferent is this extent especially to bee placed. The duy then here to be learned is, that seruants must labour and indeauour to subiect their iudgements vnto their masters, to think those things meet and fit which hee commandeth. The seruant of the Leuites, Iudg. 19.11. would haue had his master lodged in Iebus, but the master thinking it otherwise meete, he was content and went with him. If their master appoint them to any worke, they ought to thinke this worke meete and fit for them. Contrary is that of those, who think themselues wi∣ser than their master: so Gehezi thought his master vn∣wise, to let Naaman depart: so did the Prophets offend, 2 King. 2.16. in vrging Elisha against his will. This is the cause of many mischiefes, as of excesse in apparell, when they think their master not wise enough to pro∣uide what is fit, &c. Now if they cannot thinke that what their master commandeth, is so fit and profitable for him, yet neuer∣thelesse, they ought to yeeld obedience; this caueat
obserued, that they may make known their mind vnto their masters, with mildnesse and reuerence. So did Iob, 2 Sam. 24.3, 4. wherein hee did not sinne. For a man that is in authority, may sinne in commanding, and yet hee that is in subiection, not sinne in obeying the command; because the thing being in it selfe lawfull, the sinne rspects the minde of him that commands, as the numbring of the people, Dauids proud minde. For hereby a seruant shewes his hearty obedience the more plainly, when hee yeeldeth radily to that which is contrary to his will. 2 This is a speciall meanes to preserue peace and loue. Contrary to this, is peremptorinesse in seruants, that will obey no further then themselues see reason. The restraint of this generality is expressed in 4 clauses: 1 As vnto Christ, vers. 5. 2 As seruants of Christ, vers. 6. 3 Doing the will of God, ibid. 4 Seruing the Lord, verse 7. All which imply in the generall; that seruants obe∣dience to their masters, must be such as may stand with their obedience to Christ. For 1 Christ is the high∣est master. 2 To him we are to giue the last account of all our actions. 3 His fauour must be preferred, and his wrath and vengeance must be feared. For more particular application of these generall grounds: 1 If the master command any thing that Christ forbids, the seruant is freed in this case, he may not obey; for this are Sauls seruants commended, 1 Sam. 22.17. and the midwiues, Exod. 1.17. and Ioseph, Gen. 39.12. And if a King is not to be obeyed in such things, much lesse a priuate man. For masters heerein goe beyond their commission, and so lose their authority, and are not to be obeyed, no more than a Constable or Sherife, &c. that goe be∣yond their office. Heere neuerthelesse, this caution is to be noted, that they be not peremptory: but 1 That they be sure that
God commands the contrary to their master. 2 That with all reuerence they shew their master his errour by the word of God, and to perswade him not to command them that which is contrary to it, before they absolute∣ly refuse to obey. Contrary to this, is men-pleasing, when as seruants care is so to please their master, that they respect not God: as Do eg, 1 Sam. 21.18. Mat. 2.16. Dan. 3.20. nei∣ther are there so wicked masters, but they shall finde such men-pleasers as will execute their will and com∣mand; but what the iudgements of God are vpon such, we may see by the example of those, Dan. 3.22. Obiect. The Apostle, Titus 2.9. willeth seruants to please their masters in all things. Answ. 1 Men must be pleased in those things that belong vnto their power to command. 2 The Apostle in that place speaketh of man, as opposed to God, in the text, as subordinate to God; there so to please men, as to displease God, heerein pleasing of them, standing in the place of God, to please God himselfe. Briefely, here is meant to please men in God, for God, and vnder God: So that so farre as seruants can approue them∣selues to God, and haue the testimonies of a good con∣science, and withall please their master, this man-plea∣sing is lawfull. 2 If masters forbid any thing that is by God expresly commanded, seruants must not therfore abstaine: So did Daniel, Dan. 6.10. Reason is, we haue a good warrant so to doe, euen of God himselfe; and if a man haue the warrant of the King, what need he feare, although an inferiour magistrate doe forbid him? Thus if seruants be commanded not to giue good weight, they must not doe it, although they may keepe the price which their master sets: so if to breake the Sabbath and the like. Onely let them be sure and certaine, that God hath forbidden that which their master hath commanded. Contrary heereunto is slauishnesse, and timorous∣nesse,
when they feare their master more than God. For the auoyding of these extremes, and the better to performe the former duties, let seruants 1 Labour to be fully instructed what is the will and commandement of God, Ephes. 5.17. 2 Let them labour to haue their mindes possessed with the true feare of God. 3 Let those seruants that be at liberty, haue a care∣full respect in chusing of their masters, that they as well regard their inward disposition, as their outward cal∣ling; for this it was that Ruth followed Naomi, because shee saw she was Religious, 1 Ruth 1.16. 4 Hauing beene brought by the prouidence of God vnder such masters as are Religious, to cleaue vnto them, and to remaine with them, Iohn 6.68. Contrary to which, is carelesnesse in seruants, that regard not to what master they binde themselues, be they worldlings, prophane, popish, &c. all is one to them; whereby they bring themselues into many straights, eyther to disobey God, or to displease their master, &c. So much for the Extent and Restraint. 3 The manner of obedience is layd downe in 4 branches. 1 With feare and trembling. 2 With singlenesse of heart. 3 With good conscience. 4 With good will. 1 Feare and trembling: the phrase is doubled, to shew the necessity of the duty: by feare is meant, all the former, and respect which seruants owe to their masters: by trembling is meant, an awe & feare to pro∣uoke their master to punish them. For as we may feare God in regard of his power, that hee is able to execute so great vengeance on vs; so may masters be feared, be∣cause God hath giuen the rod into their hand, to exe∣cute punishment on the disobedient, Rom. 13.5. Thus was Obadiah afraid to prouoke Ahab, 1 King. 18.9.
Contrary to this trembling in the defect is, 1 Too much familiarity. 2. Answering againe, murmuring and repining. 3 Carelesnesse in prouoking their master, thinking with themselues, it can bee but a beating, &c. In the excesse, slauish feare, when all things are done for feare of the rod. 2 Singlenesse of heart: that is, that the seruice which they performe, be done with an honest and vpright heart, pretending no more in outward shew, then they intend inwardly in the heart: it is called singlenesse of heart, in opposition to those phrases in Scripture of a double heart, or, a heart and a heart, as Psal. 12.2. Such an vpright heart was in Ioseph, Gen. 39.8, 9. Reason is, because seruants haue to doe not onely with their master, but also with Christ, who searcheth the heart, and by the same giueth iudgement of the action, Ier. 17.10. 2 Because honesty and vprightnesse is so acceptable vnto Christ, and hee delighteth so much in it. Contrary to this, is eye seruice, when they content themselues with the outward worke, and neuer regard their heart; such are most seruants. 2 Hypocrisie and dissimulation, when they will carry a faire face, fawne and flatter, yet care not what wrong they doe vnto their master: as Parasites. 3 Good Conscience, implyed in these speeches: 1 As vnto Christ. 2 As the seruants of Christ. 3 As doing the will of God. 4 As seruing the Lord. Whence the Doctrine is: That seruants must haue respect to the will and or∣dinance of God, obeying because of it, although there were no other reason, Rom. 13.5. 1 Pet. 2.13. This puts a maine difference betweene Christian ser∣uants, and such as are wicked and prophane. 2 In this may seruants reape true comfort, in hope of reward at Gods hands, howeuer their master doe deale with them. Contrary is that of many seruants, who although
they bee good at their worke, yet doe it not for consci∣ence sake, but for feare, for gaine, or some like by-re∣spects. 4 Good will: which respects the minde of the ser∣uant, and it is either in regard of himselfe, or of his ma∣ster: of himselfe, that his seruice bee done willingly and cheerefully: of his master, that it bee for his pro∣fit. Doct. 1 Seruants must doe seruice with willingnes and cheerefulnesse; as Christ a seruant, Phil. 2.7. did the will of his Father cheerefully and readily. Psal. 40.7, 8. Euen with as great a desire, as to his ordinary food, Iob 4.34. So did Iacob, Gen. 39.20. For the time of his seruice seemed short vnto him: which is a signe he did it cheerfully. And although the reason be there ren∣dred, because he loued Rachel; yet may these both stand together; yea, if hee had not serued cheerefully, the time would haue seemed so much the longer, because of that loue he bare Rachel. Reasons hereof are, 1 In regard of God, who loueth cheerefulnesse. 2 of our selues: because it easeth the burden of the worke. And for a motiue to stirre vs vp to readinesse, consider wee of the reward that God will giue to such as bee faithfull in their calling. Contrary is, when seruants do their businesse grudg∣ingly, heauily, and of necessity; wherein neither them∣selues can reape comfort, God not accepting of their worke, nor their masters profit, it being done for the most part vntowardly. 2 The profit of their master: to this is required, 1 Speedinesse and quicknesse, that they dispatch their bu∣sinesse so soone as they can. This was commendable in Abrahams seruant, Gen. 24.33, 54, 56. 2 King. 4.29. This speedinesse about businesse is a signe of of willing∣nesse. 2 Diligence. That they imploy all their labour and care (continually) for their masters good, Ecc. 9.10. For
this is the Talent and worke of the Lord, which hee hath giuen to seruants, viz. To be diligent in their place and seruce towards their master, then looke Ier. 48.10. This diligence was in Iacob, Gen. 31.38, 39, 40. What fruit commeth by this diligence, is often expressed in the Prou. chap. 10.4. and 12.24. &c. Contrary to this, is Sluggishnesse and Idlenesse: which in a seruant how irksome it is, see Prou. 10.26. how vnprofitable and hurtfull, Prou. 18.9. Yea, all slothfull seruants are theeues, robbing their masters of their best paines & labour, which is as due to them, as meate and drinke to seruants. Such idle seruants are those, who if they bee sent of a businesse, will haue much talke and prate about it, before it can bee done, Prou. 14.23. It is also hurtfull for themselues: for hee that is slothfull for his master, will seldome be diligent for himselfe. 3 Lastly, herein is required Faithfulnesse, a chiefe and principall dutie of seruants, and to bee referred to the whole manner of their obedience. This is implyed too here by (good will) and in that must serue their ma∣sters as (doing the will of God,) whose will it is, that e∣uery one bee faithfull in his place. And it is expressely commanded, Tit. 2.10. And the Apostle takes it for a ruled case, Heb. 3.5. implying that if he were a seruant, hee must be faithfull: for this, were those seruants that receyued the Talents, commended by Christ, Mat. 25. and thus Christ himselfe was faithfull, Hebrews 3.2. Reason of it is, because seruants are stewards, and must giue an account of their taske committed to them, as Luk. 16.2. both to their masters and to God, who will finde them out, if they bee vnfaithfull. Contrary vnto it, is fraud, deceit, vntrustinesse, thee∣uishnesse, &c. In seruants, whereby they bring vnto their master hurt and damage. But not to insist in the generall, let vs see more parti∣cularly, wherein this faithfulnesse is required: This is,
1 In regard of their masters goods, in a double re∣spect. 1 In keeping safe all such goods of their mastrs, as are committed to their charge; that through their carelesnesse and negligence nothing be lost: thus was Ioseph faithfull, that his master durst trust him with al that he had, Gen. 39. And Iacobs exampl is a worthy patterne for al seruants, Gen. 31.38, 39. Where also we see, that if any be impayred, and lost by seruants negligence, it doh indeed belong vnto them to make it good. That word which the Apostle vsth, 1 Tim. 6.20. , is a metaphor taken from seruants. or this is the end why they receiue them into their homes, and put them in trust with their goods, them∣selues being then more secure, and not looking to them so much as otherwise they would, trusting vpon thir seruants faithfulnesse. Contrary to this, is carelesnesse in seruants, and want of due circumspection, whereby many times great harme comes to their masters estates; as in not taking care to their fire and candle, not shutting their doores and windowes, suffering their clothes to be spoyld, their meate which is soared, to mould and spill, contrary to the practice of Christ, Math. 14. & 15. Iohn 6.12. And for sruants in the countrey, that leaue opn gate and gaps, letting in other mens cattel to wrong thir masters, especially in haruest time, and the like. 2 That they doe their best, and vttermost indeauo to increase thir masters estates, then they ma be the better for them, as Gen. 30.27, 29, 30. Math. 25.20, 22. This must be added to the former; for the seruant that did but oney keepe his Talent, was an vnprofitable seruant, Math. 25.26. Contrary to this, is fraud and deceit of seruants, in purloyning from their masters, or detaining from him, that which is due vnto him, Tit 2.9. whre the word vsed, , signifieth to daine any thing to ones elfe that blongs not to him, and it to put apart to his
did, Act. 5.2. wher∣s word is likwi vd. And hs fraud is not onely in appant th, as in taking mony  of heir masters purss, boxes, and counrs, &c. but in mor scret prctics also: as in puting into their account of ex∣pences, more than they ought; in lauing out of their re∣ceits, somwhat which they shoud hau put in, as did that vniust steward, Luke 16.6, 7. whom Christ com∣mndeth not for his faihfunese, but for his wisdome in proiding for himslfe; likewie, in spending more about their mastrs busiss than nedth; wn they sell a thing for more than thir mastr stth pric, to keepe that vnto themseues, which doh inde blong vnto their mastrs. Also by inuiglig awa their ma∣trs customers against thy se vp thmelues. By re∣ceiuing▪ gifts without ther masters knowledge, &c. Oict. But some sruants will say, My master holds me shor, and kepes from me my due; therefore I may helpe my sefe. Answ. A sinne in thy master cannot excuse a sinne it▪ thee. Did not Laban wrong Iacob, and deale hardly with him? Yet we see Iacob vsed no dceit to helpe him∣selfe: but wee see how God blssd him for his faith∣full seruice. 2 This faithfulnesse is required in regard of busi∣nesse committed to them, in the execution whereof they ought to be faithfull. That is, besids speedinesse and diligence, before spoken of, they must feare the Lord, that their mastrs busines may prosper vnder their hands; without whose blessings nothing succeeds well. Wherefore in seruants there is a double bond to tie them to Religion, piy, and the feare of God, both their own good, in repect of themselues, and also their masters good, which may come by a prosperous suc∣cesse of their businsse; and for this cause, they ought o pray for Gods blessing vpon their labours, as did A∣brahams seruant, Gen. 24.12. and to giue thankes for a∣ny
good successe: as that good sruant also did, vers. 2. This being a meae to mooue God to continue his bls∣sing another time. Contrary to this, is irreligion and prophanenesse in seruants, who in stead of a blessing, bring a cure vpo their mastrs family, ad therby doube their sinne, in that they not only dstroy their owne soules, but bring also damage vnto their masters. 3 In respet of thir masters councels and screts that hey conceale thm: as Iemiah did Zackih Ierem. 38.24, 27. This is a property of a faithfull heart, Prou. 11.13. Prouided, that th matter they concele, be not to th hurt of th State, the Chuch, City, and place whre they are, or any particular mn. Thus did Ionathan re∣ueale Sauls counsels vnto Dauid. Contrary to this, is a trcherous blabbing abroad of such secrts as are to be concealed, Prou. 11.13. and 2.9. which is the vsuall practice of seruants when they meet toether, still to be taking of hous-business, and what is done at home. Hither also is to be refrred the concealing of the i∣firmities of their masters; ad yet nothing more com¦mon among seruants, tha still to be talking what fault such a one hah, nd such a one, &c. 4 In regard o their fellow seruants, faithfulnesse i required of them, in being a good xample vnto them, by stirring them vp by their good consell, to be faith∣full and consciole in their seruice, and by helpig them whn the graer burdn is laid vpo them. Contry to , when on will b enticing o a¦other from that dty which they owe nto their ma∣sters▪ a may sbbo seruants, and hewish maids▪ though bu one  a houe, will perswade the rest to  aganst he mast, ad like  sheepe, in¦fet te whole stoke. Ao qaelig one with ano¦her, s Mth. 4.4  odious and abmin∣be
of all is it, when seruants shal dee one another  ad commit vncleaneness, which, besides that it is most beastly vice, doth moreouer brng dishonour, shame, griefe and vexation, and great damag vnto their mastrs, to the great aggraating of the sinne vn∣to such sruants. 5 In regard of their masters children, that when they are yong, they (especially maids who cōmonly hau that charge) look vnto them louingly & tenderly, keep them narly and cleanely, and gie them their due. And be∣cause chidren ar most in seruants company, to take heed that they len no ill of them; and when thy come to yeers, to respect them with reuerence, not esteeming of them as their equals, but as of their superiors, being the children of their masters. So did Abrahams seruant call Isaac master, Gen 24.65. Contrary to this, is when seruants are doggish and churlish to the Children. Let such take heed, lest they get such a custome by it, as that they prooue churlish to their owne also. Also sluttishnesse, and further, when by corrupt, rotten, and euill communication that com∣meth from them, they infect children, who learne of them to sweare, to sing lewd songs, and the like. So it commeth to passe, that many times a man hath his chil∣dren spoyled, euen by his seruants, who teach them so much wickednesse whilest they are young, that hardly it can be rooted out a great while after. Againe, when seruants will inueigle away the affection of children, either to marry them, as when they haue portions, &c. or to commit vncleannesse with them; whereby many times parents affection is alienated from their children, to dis-inherite them, or the like. Lastly, when they shall withdraw their portion from them and conuert it to their owne vse. 6 In regard of the masters bedfellow, his wife, or the mistresses bedfellow, her husband, that seruants doe onely not intice them, but not yeeld vnto any inticing
of their vncleannesse, as Ioseph did, Gen. 39. The contrary to which, we see many times practised, and what effects haue followd thereupon, not only the alinating of their affections one from another but also man times, boody conspiracies for the death of one a∣nothr the wife plotting with the man, for the death of her husband, and he with the maid likewise for hers. 7 In regard of their persons & bodies, that when thy are in troubl and sicknsse, they labour by all meanes to be helpful vnto them; for if they ought to do all the rest before named, much more ought they to be faithfull in this regard, to haue a care of their mastrs own body. Contrary to this, is when seruants be Iudasses to be∣tray their owne masters. 3 The third and last point is, the motiues to stirre vp seruants to performe the former duties. 1 Motiue is drawne from the place of their masters, who are in Christ stead: wherefore in obeying them, they obey Christ, and rbelling against them, they rebell against Christ. 2 From the place of seruants: because in a consciona∣ble performance of their seruice vnto their masters, they shew themselus be the seruants, ver. 7. and in this respect, though the place of seruants seeme but mane, yet indeed it is honorable. To be the seruant of the King, is an honorable place: which ought to be a comfort and incouragement of seruants, that they should not thinke themselues troden vnder foote, and made base; seeing that euen by vertue of this, that they are seruants, thy are the seruants of Christ, 1 Cor. 7.21. 3 From the ground of their subiection, the will of God, which s it serued for a direction, so it is also  motiue to stirre vp seruants to their duty, because it is the will of God in his Word. This motiue is of great moment to perswade seruants to be content with their place of subiction in which they are put, and also faith∣fully to do their duties, seeing both are the will of God.
For Gods will is the worke wherea wee ought to time, Rm. 12.2.1 Thes. 4.3. 1 Pt. 2.15. For Gods will i the ground of good; euery thing being so farre good as hee willeth it. It is also a rule, and a prfect rue, to which if wee frame our actions, wee shall be sure not to doe amisse. Lastly, it is a sufficient rue; and if we haue this warrant that God doth will it, wee need not feare any opposition. Hence  followes, 1 That therefore it is no arbitra∣y matter to do, or not to doe; but a matter of neces∣sity of Rlion, Pity and Conscience, wherein we haue to doe with od. 2 That there is no dispensation for them, and there∣fore , although mastrs do not require their duty of their seruants, as some masters are of such a nature; yet are they bound in conscience, to performe their duty. 4 The last reason is, ver. 8. drawne from the issue and euent that followes vpon their faithfull seruice, viz. the reward: the argument is drawne from Gods generall dealings with all that are faithfull in their pla∣ces; and if euery faithfull man bee rewarded, then also seruants. Doct. Seruants may be sure, that they shall not lose their reward, Col. 3.24. Thus was Iacob and Ioseph re∣warded; and those faithfull seruants, Mat 25. And this argument, though it be not of greatest force, yet it doth most preuaile with vs, wherin God shewes his loue in heping ou infirmities, that wheras he might of his absolute commnd, haue reqired obediece,  ather obsrues what we are mos moued with , and  he seeks to stirre vs vp. Now if withstanding his, seruants be disobedient, thy do both disonou, i dis∣obeying his comandmnts, and doe inry to them∣selues, in dpriuing themslues of such a blessig. This rewrd is, 1 Temporall, in this lif: for God moues the heart of their mastrs, whom th haue sr∣ued, to recompnce their paines: as of King Aashush
for Mordcas, ste 8.15. who had serued im faith∣fully. So Mat 14 47. & 25.21. In th parab o the . Or , if thir masters  hard and vnkind, od wl moue other to reward them: as Io∣seph, who had but an  recompence of his master, God moued first the aylor to dale kindl with him: and afterward the King himselfe to aduanc him highly. Or 3 it neither teir master▪  others regard th, God himselfe doth gie a secret blessing, as vnto Iacob: and this more-our, that they hauing beene themselues faithfull, God stirres vp their own seruants to be faith∣full to them. Luk. 7 38. 2 Spirituall:  all other faile, yet there is a recom∣pnce of reward, iz. an inheritance in heauen, Col. 3.24. phs. 1.18. Mat. 25.21, 23. Rom. 2.7. And this were enough, although there were no other reward, 2 Cor. 4.17. Yea, all their paines and labour are not worthy of such a reward. This sweetens all their la∣bour, and makes it seeme easie and light, as it did vnto Iacob. EPHES. 6, Vers. 9. And, yee masters, doe the same things vnto them▪ putting away thratnings: and knowe that euen your Ma∣ster also is in heaun, neither is there respect of persons with him. WE are now come to the last order in the fami∣ly, viz. of masters, which although it be last, according to the Apostles order, is in dignity the chiefe. But the Apostle first sets downe the orders of inferiori∣ty; to shew, that the duties of subiection are hardr to be prformd, then those of gouernment and autho∣rity. For the meaning of the words, it is thus: By masters, are meant all that haue authority ouer par∣ticular
prsons▪ that are attndant vto tem▪ whether they bee chiefe, or such as being vnr others, haue ser∣uants vnder them. (Them) that is, to eruant, befoe mntiond. (Doe the same things) This semeth a strang phrase. What may some sa, must mastrs ob an reuerence their seuant, &c? No, tis may be vndrstood, 1 With rrence to  duti aforegoing, namely, not vnto thos proper dutis that blong to sruants, but to those common ruls of equity, tat belong both to masrs and ruants, as to do al things in simplici∣ty of , &c. 2 Or to the vrs. immdiatly aforgoing, that being a generall ue belonging to all sorts, to doe the good thing that belongs vnto thm, in their place ad calling. 3 Without reference: and so it is meant of a mutuall, reciprocall, and proportioall duty that ought to passe betweene them; that is, in generall, that duties are to be performd of both one to the othr, aswll masters to seruants, as o seruants to masters. All these do not crosse one another, but  a com∣mon equity betweene masters and serua▪ a mutuall duty though not an equality. This is xprsed by the Apostle, Col. 4.1. And this is exprssd, to meete with a conceit of many masters, that thik inded their ser∣uants are bond to them: but tat thmlues are not tied to their seruants,  to seke the good of their seruants  gounment aswell as seruants are to seeke their mastrs by ther obedi∣ence. (Putting away threatning) not that this is simply a vic, and so forbidn: for it is lawfull, and sometim to be vsed, but the excss is obiddn. The reason of menti∣oning of this vice of mastrs rathr then any other, is, 1 Because men in authority, are exceeding giuen by nature to this vice, thinking that their authority is not
shewne, vnlesse they be rigorous. Thus are husbands forbidden to bee bitter to their wiues, ol. 3.19. And also Fathrs to prouoke their childrn, ver. 4. 2 Because Infidels ad heathen men thougt they had an absolute power ouer seruats, of life and dath; thr∣fore lest these newly conuerted to Christianity, should reaine any such conceit, hee biddeh them forbeare ri∣gour. But for the furthr meaning of the word, wee are to considr, that by theatning is mant al rigour in thoughts, countnance, lookes, word and actions: so that by forbaring of it, all excesse is forbidden: as 1 In continuance, when masters shall be too frequent in cor∣recting vpon euery occasion. 2 In measure, when the are furious, fierce and violent. 3 In execution, not al∣waies to execute punishment, if there be repentance, an hope of amndmnt. In all these, msters are to mode∣rate their threatning. Furthrmore, vnder the forbidding of this vice, th contrary vertue is commanded, viz. Gentlenesse and mildenesse. (Know yee) here followes the reason, which the A∣postle takes for a mattr graunted; therefore he saith▪ Know ye. Your master) Some copies haue both yours and thirs. Very, fitly for the senc, bu the particle , Euen, doth imply as much. The argument is drawne from the place of the masters subiection, that they haue not an ab∣solte authoity, but are vnder the authority of anothr Mastr, to whom they must giue an accompt, and there∣fore to take hed, lest if they prforme not their owne duties, the prouoke this their Master to wrath. Now He is dscribd, 1 By the place where he is: in heauen) Which implies, 1 That he is higher, than the highest, so that all are vnder him, Eccles. 5.7. Psal 33.15.  15.3. that he seeth and doth take noice o all▪  that h is an Almighty God, able to excut vennce
on all such as oppresse others, Psalm. 113.4, 5. Deut. 24.14.2. His property: that he is no accepter of persons. The Hebrew word is Face. and so signifith the Greek, . Now the face is out ward, but God doth be∣hold the heart, 1 Sam. 16.15. and by prson i Scripture is meant, the outward quality and codition of men, in regard of greatness, meannesse, superiority, or infri∣ority, &c. as Iob 34.19. which things though men re∣spect, yet God doth not. This phrase is taken from such as sit in iudgement, who must respect the cause on∣ly: for whatsoeuer is beside it, is called erson; and therfoe did the Aropagitae iudge in the darke, &c. This is noted to mete with another conceit of ma∣strs, that might thinke, that God would respect them being grea, and in place of authority, rather than their sruants who were meane and base. Hauing seene the meaning of the words, it followeth to handle them in order. The summe of them is a direction for masters, how to carry themselues towards their seruants. The parts are two: 1 The duties to be performed. 2 The reasons to vrge them. Concerning the duties, wee are to consider, 1 The ground of them, that masters doe owe a duty. (Doe the same thing.) 2 The duties themselues in their seue∣rall branches. 1 Ground. Doct. That masters doe owe a duty e∣uen to their seruants: a point cleare by the Law of God▪ as the precepts giuen vnto masters here, and in othr places doe tstifie; and by the Law of nature: for this is one of those bonds of ministration which are spoken of. Whereby we are bound as well to doe good to o∣thers, as to receiue good from them: like as the mem∣bers of the body do one to another. B the Law of nati∣ons: for wise States haue alwaies from time to time or∣dained Lawes for to curbe and restraine masters, by e∣quity: for good receiued, rquires good to bee done
againe. And lastly, by the Law of the Land. In Inden∣tures the mastr is bound to the seruant, as well as he to his master. Vse is for masters to take notice of this, That seeing in generall seruants are no more bound to thm than they to their seruants; therfore to be carefull for the performace of heir owne dutie, as they would looke for dutie from their seruants; and to consider if the failing of their seruants in their duties, arise not fom the neglect of their owne in themselus. 2 For ministrs, that they be not partiall in vrging these duties, but prsse them vpon the masters, as well as on the seruants: and the rather, ecause there are not such outward meanes to constraine masters to performe their duties, as there are for seruants. 2 The dutes may all be referred to two heads: the first whereof concerneth the choyce of seruants, the se∣cond, the good gournement of them. 1 For the choyce: the duty is, that masters be care∣full to choose such seruants as be good: such was the care of Dauid, Psalm. 101.6. And if this care be in ma∣sters, it shewes plainly that they haue a care to the good both of their family, and of Church and Common∣wealth; whereof the family is the seminary. 2 This will be a meanes, that masters shall receiue more good from their sruants: as also doe more good vnto them. 3 It shewes, that masters haue as great a care to haue their seruants about tem good, as to hue any thing else good whatsoeuer. Directions for the choyce of good seruants are these. 1 That they choose seruants that feare the Lord: as Dauid did, Psal. 101 6. for Piety and Religion is the ground of rurence, of obedience, of faithfulnesse, and al other duties. 2 Such seruants wil pray for a bles¦sing on their masters businesse. 3 And also they bring the blessing of God with them vpon the family. 2 That they choose such as be fit for that worke
wheunto they will put thm. This mood Saul to choose Dauid for hs srua, 1 Sam. 16.18. 3 To chooe  as they may  choosig of them, shwes a worke of charty;  ar pooe and hlpe∣lesse: for this wil b a moiu to mk tm to e dili∣ent and suiceable to thir mstrs, becaus they de∣ped onely vpn them, and know not what course to tak else. Now▪ athough we may be dceiued notwith∣standing all thi, yet must we not be dceiud willing∣ly, but vse circumspection, and tak tryall of them be∣fore w enter into counant with th, as Laban, with Iacob, Gen. 29.14. Contrary is the pratice of such, who choose wic∣ked and prophan, swearing and swaggering seruants, or popish, &c and so bring a curse and snare vpon their family, and a plague to infct their children, and the rst of their family: o regarding neither it, nor Church, nor Commonwealth. 2 Of such as will choose none but rich mens sonnes, that may bring a great portion with them, who indeed prooue most vnseruiceable of all other, scorning to doe ny worke, &c. whereas poore mens sonnes, knowing they must trust to their trade, will be diligent, &c. 2 Concerning their good gouernment, and au∣thority ouer them: it is seene in two points. 1 That they haue a care to maintaine and counte∣nance their authority, 1 Tim. 3.4. For that may be ap∣plyed to masters; and this is a commendatio of the Centurion, Mah. 8.9. Reason is, 1 A master by vertue his ace doth car∣ry the Image of God; threfore to maintaine his au∣thority, is to magnifie Gods Image, and o honou him; and the contrary is o defac this Image. 2 This is a spcial manes to haue more diligent ser∣uice performd b ther seruants, towards themselues. 3 As of oig ore good vnto heir seruats. Directios how this my bee performed▪ are,
1 That they carry themselues worthy of their cal∣ling, and answerable vnto it, by hauing a speciall care to their owne duties, to performe them faithfully, that so they may be a patterne and example to their seruants, 1 Tim. 4.12. For this will gaine honour to them, as it did to Ib, Iob 29.89. So Dauid saith, he will walke in integrity in the midst of his house. 2 To keepe seruants in awe and feare. That euill ser∣uant was kept in awe, though he made no good vse of it, Math. 25.25. yet is it noted for a commendation of his master. 3 What they doe, to doe it with authority and grauity: as did the Centurion, Math. 8. Tit. 2.15. Contrary is that of those, who carry themselues basely, and abiectly in their house before their seruants, being vaine, foolish, wicked, &c. This makes seruants to contemne and to despise them. This made Michol despise Dauid who in her conceit had debased himsefe, 2 S. 6.20. And heerein Daid offended in too much mourning for his sonne, 2 Sam. 19.5, &c. 2 Of such as carry themselues too remissely, praying their seruants; as Prethee doe this, &c. And if it be not done, thn patience, and do it themlues. Ths, ough towards equs it bee gentlenesse, yet in such as are in authority,  is basenesse. 3 Of such as make their seruants their fellowes, and companions to play with them, to drinke with them, and the like; whereby they become very presumptu∣ous; for all are ambitious, and, giue an Inch, they take an Ell. 4 Of such as conspire with their seruants, to deceiue their masters or mistresses of their goods: so to ride a∣broad & spend, and do other things without their pri∣uity; for hereby they make themseues slaues to their seruant, snot daring to speake of their seruants wicked∣nesse, for feare lest they discouer their owne practices. 5 When masters will suffer themselues to be ouer-ruled
in things vniust, vnmeet and vnlawfull: as Zede∣kah was by the Princes, Ierem. 38.5. Thus they lose their authority, and their seruants become their ma∣strs: a thing intolerable, Ecles. 10.7. 6 In the other extreme, when men are too imperi∣ous and rigorous, that seruants dare scarce appeare in their prsence▪ but are glad when they are from them: this was Dauis fault, when his word preuailed, 2 Sam. chap. 24. and of churlish Nabal, 1 Sam. 25.17. Much vnlike to Ib, chap. 1.13. or Naaman, 2 King. 5.13. whose seruants perswadd them. The scond point is in well managing of their authority. This consisteth in two things expressed, Col. 4.1. Masters, giue vnto your seruants that which is iust and equall. Iust, respects the place and worke of seruants, and therefore it is to be done to all. Equall, re∣spects the minde of the seruant, when he doth seruice with good will, in singlenesse of heart, in absence as in presence, &c. Here must be  equity, to loue them, to recompence them somewhat aboue that which the Law requires. This Iustice respects, 1 The soule of the seruant, 2 The bod, 3 His estate. In all thse, masters are bound by iustice to doe good vnto them. 1 Touching their soule: he duty of masters is to in∣struct their seruants in the wayes of sauation: as Abra∣ham, Gen. 18.19. Thus did Ioshua, chap. 24. and Zacheus; Therefore Christ said, Saluation is come to his house, because hee knew, that Zacheus being now conurted, would instruct his seruants. So Iohn 4.53. the seruants beeeud, though they saw not the miracle, because the Centurion instructed them in faith. So Ats 10.2. and 16.34. in this regard is there said to be a Church in the house of Aquila and Priscill▪ and of hilemon. This ought to be performed, 1 In regard of God, who commanded. 2 Of themslues: their office requirs it: for masters are as well Priests and Prophets to pry
for, and to instruct their family, as Kings to gouerne it. And further, this will be a meanes that they shall haue more faithful seruice, if they can plant Religion in the hearts of their seruants. 3 Of seruants; for if the master will doe any good for his seruant, this is the greatst good hee can doe: and so if it be truly wrought in the seruant, hee will acknowledge hee could not haue receiued a greater good. 4 Of Church and Common∣wealth; for being faithfull in the family, they wil be faithfull in the other also: and this also will make them to instruct their owne seruants another day. Diretions are, 1 That there be daily instruction, in∣formation and ctaechizing; and if this course continue, though it be but a little at a time, yet great profit and increase of knowlege will come thereby. 2 To cause them to come to the pblique mnistery of the Word, Exod. 34.23. Thus Christ came to the Temple and Synagogue with his Disciples, who were his seruants & attendants on him: So did Cornelius, Act. 10.33. We are all here, &c. And this is expresly com∣manded in the 4 Commandement: for this will streng∣then their faith, when they heare those things publike∣ly taught, which they haue learned in priuate. 3 And as to come to the Church, so also to cause them to tarry there. 4 To pray for them, that both the priuate and pub¦like meanes may be ffectuall. Contrary is, 1 The practice of most masters, whose conceit is, that they are not bound vnto this duty, but if they pay them their wages, &c. it is enough. They will obiect, Why? wee made no such couenant with them to catechize them, and the like. Answ. There is a double bond wereby they are bound vnto their seruants. 1 Of compact and couenant. And thus wages, &c. is due to seruants. 2 Of their place and office, what it is that God requireth at their hands. And thus thy haue couenanted no such thing with ser∣uants,
yet must they instruct them, because God hath commandd, and their offce rquireth it. 2 They faile heerein, who lay so much worke vpon their seruants, that they can haue no time for religious exerciss. 3 Thos that kpe their sruants from Church, and send thm hiher and thither on the Sabbath day. 4 Such as make fets in their houses on the Sabbath day. And hnce it is, that in many houss, inferiour of∣ficrs r goe to Church, but once in a yere to re∣ce. 5 Those hat re so long a dressing, &c. tha the come to Cuch in no time; their sruants also tending on thm. 6 Such as will haue their seruants attend on them to the Church, but thn thy ma goe whither they will, so they com when seruice is done, to bring them home againe. 7 Such as neuer examine them how they profit, &c. For their body. 1 In health; the duty is to allow them that which is meet for the preseruation of hath, as to aford them food: for quantity; suficient, for qua∣lity, wholsome, mans mat; as wee say, for time season∣able. 2 Apparell ncessary against heate and cold, and also decnt and comely. 3 For labour, that it be mode∣rate, not too much to opprsse them. 4 To allow them rst at those two ordinary times, the night, and on the Sabbath day. Contrary is, when masters regard not their seruants health, but care not how they vse them in all the for∣mer points. 2 In sicknesse, to prouide things needfull for them; to vse the best meanes of recouery; and if thy die, to bury them according to their place. For their estate. The 1 duty is, That masters pay vn∣to seruants their wages. Here is requird, 1 that their wages bee according to equity, sufficient for them to
prouide things necessary. 2 That it bee paid in season, at the time couenantd, yea in kindnsse, if neede bee, before-hand. 3 To pay it with the most. Contrary is, 1 When as masters vniustly detaine their seruants wages, and neuer pay them; this is a cry∣ing sinne. 2 When they oath to pay it, and long in holding it backe, that seruants must aske, and aske a∣gaine, till they bee ashamed. 3 When they alter their seruants wages, and seeke to diminish them: as Laban did toward Iacob. 2 Duty is, so to dispose of their seruants and order them, that after their time is out, they may liue of themselues: & therfre, 1 to keep them still imployed. 2 In such things, as may be profitable to them hereafter. 3 To vse inspection ouer them, to see that they performe their duty. 4 To suffer them to set vp after their time is out. Aberrations are, 1 When the master hath no car for the time, and so harbors Idle-packes in his house, that haue no imployment. 2 Such as enuy to their ser∣uants the mystery of their trade. 3 Such as will vse all means to hinder their seruants from setting vp of them∣selues, indeauouring to keepe them still seruants as long as they liue. Equity (the second point) is shewne in this, that mastrs doe distinguish and put a difference between good and bad seruants; and if they bee good indeed, to respect them accordingly, and to haue them in price and good esteme, to commend them, to recompence them, to passe by and winke at an offence; when they are go∣ing away, not to suffer them to goe away empty, but to helpe them in their setting vp and in their marri∣age. Contrary is, when masters make all alike, yea, a ser∣uant that hath beene a long time good and faithfull vn∣to them, at his going away, they will picke a quarrell against him, and so turne him away with nothing.
In regard of the power that masters haue, this is their duty, That they keepe within compsse of their powe, not to go beyond it; as not to cōmand aything vnawfull or vnmeete, in regard o te ae, sx, co∣dition, or conscience of thir seruats, or any thing that may endnger their life: for they haue no power ouer it. 3 That the master let his seruant be free in his marriage, not inforcing him to take one or other. 4 In putting him off to another master (which hee hath power to doe) that the master bee carefull to make choice of such a one as should dale with him, as him∣selfe would haue done, that this change may bee for the good of the seruant. Contrary aberrations bee: 1 When the master makes his will a rule. 2 When hee shall cause the vntimely death of his seruant, not onely by open murder, but by being an occasion to bring him within danger of the law: or by thrusting him to maintaine quarrells, or so beating of him, that death doe follow. 3 When hee shall inforce marriage vpon his seruants. 4 To passe them ouer to men vngodly and wicked, either of no calling, or of an vnlawfull calling. And knowe euen your Master also, &c. Hauing finished the duties, there comes in the next place to bee considered, the Reasons to moue masters to performe: which are layd downe in these words. The argument in generall, is drawne from that place of sub∣ection wherein masters are, and it is amplified by cir∣cumstances. 1 Implyed, viz. that the Master of ma∣sters is a common Master both to masters and seruants. (Euen your.) 2 Expressed. 1 Of the place wherein this Master is, viz. heauen. 2 Of a property belonging to him, that hee is no respecter of persons. Doct. They who are masters, haue a Master: this is notably set forth by Ioseph, Gen. 50.19.  vnder, or
in stead, Eccls. 5 8. In this respect he is called, as Deu. 10.17. 1 Tim 6.15. Reason is, because man is prone to insolency; and if hee were not vnder authority, hee would growe into∣lerable: for this cause, God retaines in his hand, a pow∣er, authority, and command ouer him. Ve.  main vse intndd by the Apostle, is, that as seuants should do their duti to their masters, which they rquire: so mastrs should doe those duties to their seruants, which God rquires at their hands. 2 This is also a ground to restraine mastrs that they doe nothing to their seruants, but what they will iusti∣fie before their great Mastr. This moued Ioseph to let goe his brethren, when he had them in hold, Gen. 42.18. and Nehemiah to deale well with the people, Neh. 5.14, 15. and Ib, chap. 31.13, 14. Wherefore masters are to thinke of this, when they exact any thing of their seruants that is not fit; when they are furious and incen∣sed against them: whn they detaine any thing from them, and oppsse thm, let them then thinke how the will iustifie this, when their greater Master shall call them to account. Doct. 2 Mastrs and seruants haue both one, and the same Master. Mal. 2.10. Iob 31.15. 1 Cor. 7.22. Whence it followes, That howsoeuer for orders sake and good of outward gouernment, there is a difference betweene masters and seruats, yet in respect of God, they are both as fellow-seruants: as appeares by comparing of Luk. 18.42. with Mt. 24.49. This serues further to curbe and bride the insolency of masters, ad it aggrauates greatly their cruelty to∣wards their seruants. The place where this Master is, is heauen; because there and from thence, hee doth manifest his glory after a spciall and peculiar manner; the reasons why it is here expressed are, 1 To shew that this Mastr is a ma∣ster of great glory, excellency and maiesty, so that there
is no proportion between him & masters here on earth, Psal. 113.4. 2. To shew that the eyes of the Lord are vpon all his seruants: as one in a high place may easily behold all things below, Psal. 11.4 ad 33.13. and the reason of this, Psal. 102.2. 3 To shew his might and power in rewarding, and rendring vengeance. Psalm. 123.1. (as an argument) Eccles. 5.8. All these may be so many motiues, to vrge and presse the duties of masters 1 If God be so gorious and excel∣lent, how then ought masters to rspct him, and the ra∣ther to be mooued to performe thir duties vnto their seruants: as we see the sruants of great men, ad Noble men, are most dutifull and rady in their seruice? 2 Let no masters deceiue themselues in this conceit, that whatsoeuer they doe to their seruants, is within their owne house, no bodie sees them, and their seruants dare not complaine: For God is in heauen, and he beholds them, Prou. 15.3. 3 God not onely sees them, but he wil take vengeance of them; and this vengeance will be heauy, as comming from God; therefore this ought to moue them to deale gently with their seruants. Doct. 3 From Gods property. This great Lord and Master is not mooued with any outward respect, but is a iust, vnchangeabe and vnpartial Iudge, Iob 34.19. for there is no passion in God, nor alteration of affe∣ction, Iob 10.4. Vse is to teach masters to shake off all vaine hopes and pretences, that God will respect them more than their seruants, because they are great, and haue friends, &c. their seruants are but base and meane, &c. 2 This is for imitation of Magistrates accordingly to carry themselues. 3 It teacheth miisters not to vrge or to keepe close matters in respect of persons, but vnparti∣ally to presse the duties of all sorts. Further, marke the inference of this reason vpon the duety: the Apostle bids them forbeare threatning, be∣cause
they haue a Master that is ouer them. Whence ob∣serue that ignorance of that place of subietion wherein we are, & of that authority vnder which we are, makes vs insolent and cruell. This appeares in Pharaoh, who was cruell to the Israelites, because hee knew not God, Exod. 5.2. and Sennaceb, 2 Kings 18.33, 34, 35. be∣cause men conceit they haue an absolute authority. This is the ground of pride in That man of sinne, 2 Thes. 2.4. Now, whereas the Apostle, in setting downe the duty of masters, bringeth such a strong reason to moue them, and yet in the duties of husbands and wiues, parents and children, doth not so: the reason is, because in husbands and parents there is a naturall loue and affection, which doth moue them; but in masters there is no such thing: and therefore hee layeth downe a thundring reason, bringing them to the Iudgement-seate of God, so to terifie them. EPHES. 6. VER. 10, 11. Finally, my brethre, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole armour of God, that yee may be able to stand against the assaults of the diuell. THe summe of these words, is an exhortation to Christian spirituall courage and fortitude. The parts are 1 An exhortation to a duty. 2 A direction shewing the meanes for the perfor∣mance of that dutie. In the exhortation, consider we the manner, and the matter. The manner is in these words, Finally, my bre∣thren. Wherein note, 1 The necessity of the matter, which the Apostle exhorts vnto: in the word (Finally)
, 2 The affection of the Apostle, (my bre∣thren.) 1 Finally.) As if the Apostle should haue said, I haue instructed you in the former part of my Epistle, in all poynts necessary to be knowne and belued, saying downe both the general duties of all, and the particu∣lar duties that belong to euery one in his calling, and particular place; yet is a remainder, euen this one thing, which I will now deliuer vnto you, without which, all that hath beene formerly deliuered, will be but vnpro∣fitable, and of no vse. Hence we learne, 1 That though we be neuer so well instructed in the generall and particular duties belonging vnto vs, yet it is necessary that we should be further exhorted to cou∣rage and constancy; a point which the Apostle ob∣serues in his Epistles, as 2 Thes. 3.13. 1 Tim. 6.12. 2 Tim. 4.5, &c. adding exhortations to the performance of duties before deliuered. Vse, which we are to make, and is heere intended by the Apostle, is that we should giue diligent heed to that which is heereafter to be deliuered, because by it, all things before will be made profitable. 2 In that the Apostle layeth downe these things in the last place, bringing them vnto the ground of hlpe, where they must seke for abilitie to performe the for∣mer duties: We may hence learne, that wee haue no fre wil to doe them of our selues: for heere the A∣postle shewes vs the meanes whereby wee are inabled to doe them: which note against the Papists. 2 Mbethren) The Apostle calleth the Ephesians in a spirituall respect; in regard of God, who had a∣dopted them all for children. Heerein note, 1 The humility of the Apostles minde. 2 The gen∣tlensse of his affection. His humility appeares, in that hee makes them all e∣quall vnto himselfe, 1 Cor. 3.1. For brethren, is a word of equality: so that although himselfe were an Apostle,
a chiefe Apostle, a planter of the Churches, a father of thousands, and in particular, a planter of this Church, and father vnto them; yea, (which is to be noted) though hee write to all sorts, euen to children and ser∣uants; yet neuerthelesse, in regard of that prerogatiue that God had giuen them to be his children, he calleth them all brethren. That this is a good collection, ap∣peares by Mat. 23.8. where Christ reproouing the ar∣rogancy of the Scribes and Pharises that tooke othr Titles, and magnified themselues aboue other, bring∣ing this reason, (yee are all brethren,) Heb. 2.11. Vse. That we take this for an example of humility, Rom. 12.16. for this humility is a vertue that com∣mends vs to God and man, making vs sociable, and keeping vs from disdaine and contempt, &c. 2 Hee labours by Loue to perswade them to these duties, though hee might haue commanded them: as Philemon vers. 8, 9. for brethren is a token of loue, and this word (my) ads an emphasis to his affection: So 1 Cor. 15.58. he calls them beloued brethre: and so Phil. 4.1. Iames 1.19. and 2 Cor. 6.13. Gal. 4.10. 1 Cor. 4 14. he calls them children, all to insinuate himselfe, the better to perswade them to those things he aimes at. Vse. For our imitation, that we doe testifie, and ma∣nifest our loue and gentlenesse, that our perswasions may haue the more force, and be the better embraced, and like sowre pilles couered with sugar, the more wil∣lingly receiued. 2 Note heere the difference of the spirit of the world, in respect of Christ: for they scorne this name of brethren. So much for the manner. The matter of the exhortation is in these words, Be strong) which is meant of a spirituall strength and courage. Doct. Valour and courage, is needfull for the perfor∣mance of all Christian duties. This was commanded to Ioshua, Iosh. 1.6. Which, that it is not meant by an out∣ward bodily courage, but of a spirituall, appeares by the
verses following, 7.8, 9. Dauid vrgeth this to Salomon, when he went about to build the Temple, 1 Chron. 28.10. This resolution was in Christ, Luke 9.51. and in Paul, Acts 21.13. Reasons. This is needfull, in regard, 1 Of our owne disposition, dulnesse and backward∣nesse to Christian duties: for w carry flesh about vs, which drawes back like a Beare comming to the stake. 2 Of the manifod oppositio against vs: for Satan is still at our elbow, ach. 3.1. 1 Thes. 2.18. Thus when Christ did addrss himselfe to my worke: as to his ministery, hee wa tempted by the diuell, Math. 4. to his passion; first Peter sought o hinder him, Math. 16.22. and then the diuel, Iohn. 14.30. All which were done in the Head, to shew what is done in the mem∣bers, 1 Pet. 5.8. Furthermore, there are reproaches, disgraces, pleasures of this world, and troubles and the like, that stand in our way. Vse. To reprooue the security of Christians, that thinke not on these things; and threfore neuer seeke for strength: whence it comes to passe, that although they know what is to be done, and assent vnto it, yet when they come to performe many things, they doe them coldly and slightly, and are quickly turned away from their Christian course for small mattrs; for a nick∣name: as of Puritane, &c. Much vnlike Dauid, 2 Sam. 6.22. Thus are they drawne sometimes to do many things, wherein their consciences condemne them. Bet∣ter it wre for such, that they had neuer giuen vp their name vnto Christ; for none that are timorous, may fight the Lords battels, Iudg. 7.3. for by thir timo∣rousnesse, they discourage others, disgrace their bre∣thren, and giue vantage to the diuell. 2 It is to teach vs to get Christian resolution, to say with our selues, This is the way, and I will walke in it. And to this end, to obserue that point of wisedome, pre∣scribed by Christ, Luk. 14.27, 28. &c. Prou. 28.1.
So much for the exhortation. The direction concerneth the meanes whereby we come to be made strog; which meanes are two-fold. 1 Such as wee are to get out of our selues, vers. 10 2 Such as wee are to get vnto our selues, vers. 11. The meanes out of our snes, are in thee words, (In th Lrd) Which shewes that the valour and courage that we haue, is hid in the Lord, and from him to bee had, 2 Cor. 3.5. Ioh. 15.3. Phil. 4 13. Col. 1.11. The reasons why God retaines all power vnto himselfe, are, 1 Partly for his owe glory, tat ee my be depen∣ded vpon, prasd, glorified, ad sought vnto. 2 Partly for our greater comfort, that wee may b the more bold and couragious; for our strength is but finite, and so might wee fall away, as did Adam and the Angels; but now the strength whereon wee re∣lye, is not in our selues, but in God: so that wee may boldly rest on this Omnipotency and Almighty power. Vse. for reproof of two sorts of men. 1 Proud Traitor that trust to themselues, and their own strength. This is a thing euen in worldly matters and outward strength intolerable: as in Goliah and Sennacheb; and wee see what was the issue of their presumption: but much more in regard of spiritual strngth, as in Peter: for such prouoke the Lord to laue tem, yea, to oppose himselfe against them: this confidence in their owne strength, being a thing derogatory to his glory. 2 Of foolish, that bing weake themselues, will seeke for helpe of weake meas: as the Israelites did of Aegypt, themselues being mpty, they seke to bro∣ken pits, and come back ashamed: as Ier. 14.3. Thus do our silly Papists, that seeke helpe of creatures, of Saints and Angels; whras all the strength that these had, was but onely sufficient for themselus. 2 For instruction. 1 That we learne to renounce and deny our selues, and for this end to labour to come to a sight of our want of help; for if wee thinke that of
our selues we are able to doe any thing, wee will neuer seeke to God: as Psl. 1 4. Wherefore we must endea∣uor to see our owne , impotency and empti∣nesse, how we are nohing in our selues: For 1 this will be a manes to bring vs to seeke for helpe. 2 It will be a meanes to obtaine helpe; for God strengthens them that are weake, &c. 2 That hauing seene our owne wakenesse, we then fie vnto God our sure Rocke, and then may we be se∣cure of victory and conquest, if wee cast all vpon him, and mae him our Champion, 1 Cor. 15.57. For our further incouragement, marke the amplification (In the power of his might.) Some take these as for a cause, and the effect, viz. might to be the cause of power, power to be meant of strength which is in vs, and might to be in the Lord: as if hee had said, In that power which yee receiue from the Lord. But 1 this is a curious distinction without ground. 2 It is the Apostles purpose here, to raise vp our minds out of our selues, to a higher power without vs, and aboue vs: Wherefore it is rather an Hebraisme, and so it is translated by some (his mighty power:) like as in the 1 chapter ver. 19. So that it addes an emphasis, shewing this power of the Lord to be a most Almigh∣ty power. Doct. That the power of God whereto wee trust, s a strong and mighty power, able to protect and de∣fend vs, as chapter 1.19. a surpassing measure of power, as himselfe is, so euer is agreeable to him, viz. infinite. Vse. It serues for our encouragement to strengthen our faith, that wee may trust securely vnto it: which is to be noted. 1 In regard of our owne weakenesse.  In regard of our enemies, who are many and mighty. 2 It answers that obiection of our aduersaries, that blame our Christian confidency, as arrogant presump∣tion. This were indeed so, if wee did relye vpon our
owne strength. Such an opinion had some of Dauids confidency, 1 Sam. 17.28, 37. Now followes the Direction concerning such means as wee are to seeke vnto our selues, expressed, ver. 11. Wherein in generall are layd down those means wher∣by wee may bee fenced, and armed against our spiritu∣all enemies. The parts are two. 1 A Direction. 2 Motiues drawne from the end. In the Direction obserue, 1 What is the meanes, viz Armour. 2 How this meanes is to bee vsed. Put it on. In the meanes note. 1 The Metaphor, (Armour.) 2 The quality of it, (of God) Concerning the Metaphor, it is taken from soldier that are among their enemies, either fighting, or look∣ing for a combat, who for feare of being wounded, will arme themselues; and being armed, they dare resist their enemies, and feare them not: so Christians, being the Lords soldiers, placed in this world, the Lords field, to fight against many enemies, that haue many weapons to wound vs, this armour is lent vnto them, wherewith they may bee fenced, &c. The parts of which armour are in briefe, the sanctifying graces of Gods holy Spirit, as wee shall see hereafter. Hence wee learne, 1 That, Doct. The life of a Christian is a warfare, 2 Tim. 2. . 1 Tim. 1.18. Christians are called soldiers, and their life, a fight and battell, 2 Tim. 4.7 Those that oppose against vs, are called enemies, Luk. 1.71, 74. Their ten∣tations are called assaults and fights, as here, and 1 Pet. 2.11. And hence is the distinction of militant and tri∣umphant Church. Now God hath thus disposed of vs. 1 That his pow∣er might bee the more manifest. 2 That he might make tryall of the grace bestowed on s. 3 To weae vs from the world, for a soldiers life is a hard life. 4 To make heauen the more welcome to vs.
Vse, is that, 2 Tim. 2.4. not to intangle our selues with the tings o th wod, o to look for case and quiet, but it ll to prpar or elus  a sight, and to ake heed of spirituall crity,  th duill o a sud∣dn doe surprize vs. We know what bfell the people of Laisi, Iug. 18. . 2 In that the graces of God are compared to mour, we lern, th th  santifying graces hat God gues v, are for our dfence and safgard; whence wee ee, 1 How needfull they ar for vs. 2 That this kind of armour is not for pride, but it is amour of proof, for  cssary defnce. The quality of this armour is, that it is armour of God: that is, made of God in heauen, precribd by God in his Word▪ giuen of God by his Spirit, and such armour as is agreeable to Gods natue. All which im¦ly nothing lse, but that it is spirituall armour. Doct. The armour wherby we are fenced, is diuine and spirituall armour, 2 Cor. 10.4. This will appeare by the description of the parts. For, 1 There is no warrant to vse any other armour. 2 No other armour will doe vs any good to defend vs, because our enemies and their weapons are spi∣rituall. Vse. 1 For reproofe of Papists, that thinke to driue away the deuill, with holy water, crosses, &c. 2 Of sottish worldlings, that feeling terrour of con∣science, thinke to driue it away with muicke, with company, with physicke, &c. 3 It teacheth vs rightly to distinguish betweene ar∣mour and armour, and to vse that which the Word of God doth set downe vnto vs. Another quality, whereby this armour is described, is in this word (whole) or Compleate, , which signifieth such an armour, as is sufficient to de∣end a man, and to arme him from top to toe, so that
hee shall not neede any more,.Hence wee learne, that Doct. The graces of Gods Spirit are sufficient for vs, to dfend vs from all dangers whatsoeuer, till hee bring vs to heauen. Hence is Scripture calld sufficient, be∣cause it doth set forth vnto vs all those graces, whereby wee are mad absolute and perfect, 2 Tim. 3.15, 16. . But many Saints haue beene foiled (as Da∣uid. Peter, &c.) the deuill hath found a hole where to wound them, and therefore it seemes they had no com∣pleate armour. Ans. This comes to passe, not through any defect in the armour, but through their owne weakenesse, and want of skill in vsing of it, or carelesnesse in not putting it on: yet that this armour is compleate, and no piece wanting for any part, appeares plainely in this: That all were not woundd in the same place, but some in one part, and some in another, according as thy did vse, or not vse their armour, for the defence of that place; but if they had beene all foiled in one part, it were a signe that there were a piece wanting for that part. For here∣by, 1 We should denie Gods prouidence, that he were not carefull to prouide all things needfull. 2 That he is wise, to know what is wanting. 3 That he is carefull of his children, ths to lea thē as a pry to their enemis Vse. To stirre vs vp to seeke after this armour: as sol∣diers that being to enter into a dangerous skirmish, will aforehand ske where they may prouide them∣selus of sure armour. 2 Hauing found it, to bee content with it, to bee bold and couragis i it: as Dauid was against Go∣liah, 1 Sam. 1.45. So much of the meanes. The Ʋse is in this, that wee must put it on: Which implyes 2 things. 1 That this amour must be put on. 2 That it must bee put on euery piece and part of it. (Put on the whole.) Hee followes the metaphor still; that wee must doe as soldiers doe, who put their armour vpon their backs,
and let it not like house-keepers in time of peace, hang by the walles and rust. So by this puting off this spiritu∣all armour, is meant a vsing and imploying of the gra∣ces, that it is not sufficient to knowe were this armour is to bee had if neede bee, and where it is layd vp, and so to discourse of it; but this puting on, is a word of action and practice. Doct. 1 Christians ought to exercise the graces of God, and to put them in triall and practice, Rom. 13.12. 1 Thes. 5.8. Cl. 3 12. viz. shew it, let others feele that thou hast the bowels of mercy, Rom. 13.14. viz. make Christ his merits, and his graces yours. Another me∣taphor is vsed to this end, 2 Tim. 1.6. (Stirre vp the gift) taken from fire which, must bee blowed, before it can burne and flame, that wee may receiue heat. Also another metaphor, Mat. 12.35. a man that hath great treasure, and let it not lie still rusting and cancring, but bring it forth to the good of himselfe and others. The reason is, Because all the good that comes vnto vs from the graces of God, is by the vse of them. So though pearles, money, &c. bee good in themselues, yet they bring no benefit to the possessor of them, if they be layd vp in the treasury and be not brought forth. Vse. That we doe not deceiue our selues, boasting that wee haue armour, and yet neuer vse any: as many will say, they haue as strong a faith as any, yet doe they not liue by sence, heaping vp together, and onely caring for the things of this world; and if crosses doe come, where is their shield then? doth not euery dart pierce them to the heart? &c. 2 To teach vs, that whatsoeuer armour wee haue, to haue it still vpon our backes. Haue wee the helmet of saluation, that is, hope of eternall life? let vs shew it, in moderating our desires of the things of this life; be∣cause wee still looke for a better, Gen. 49.18. Doct. 2 It is not sufficient for Christians to put on a piece of this armour; but all must be put on, that is, we
must haue all the needfull & sanctifying graces of Gods Spirit, Ephes. 4.15, 24. We are exhorted to put on the whole new man. Now these graces are as members of this nw man; wherefore, as in naturall bodies there is a proportionall growth of all members in the body, and if all the growth be in the head, or in the legges, &c. that man may be called a monster: so must we grow and increase in all spirituall graces together, and not in one alone; for if there be all faith, and no charity, great knowledge, and no obedience, much deuotion, but little discretion: there is some corrupt humour, that thus turneth all the nourishment to one part. Obiect. But is it possible that one man should haue all graces? Answ. Yea, it is possible, and necessary: as the Apo∣stle testifieth of the Corinthians, see 1 Cor. 5.7. For the Spirit sanctifieth a man throughout: So that as a child hath all the parts of a man, though not in that strength and bignesse: so haue the Children of God all graces, though some in greater, some in lesser measure. Reasons, why this armour is thus wholly to be put on, are 1 Because God hath made nothing in vaine; and therefore seeing hee hath made armour compleat, for to couer euery part. and hath prescribed it vnto vs, we are therefore to put it all on, because he hath made it for vs: for will not a Captaine take it in euill part, if when himselfe hath prouided armour for all his soldiers, they come neuerthelsse into the field vnarmed? 2 Our owne necessity: for if wee haue not on euery piece thereof, the diuell will quickely finde out that part which is vnarmed, and so wound vs, and ouerthrow vs. 3 So vnseparably are graces knit and linked toge∣ther, that he that hath not all, hath none. For what is faith without righteousnesse, but meere presumption? Vse is that same that Saint Peter makes, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. viz. to ioyne all graces together, &c.
Further, from the Rference of these two sorts of means, that we are as well to  for some vnto our slues, as relie vpon thoe tat ar without vs, wee learne, that Doct. It is not sufficient to looke for hepe from God, but wee our selues also must doe our indeauour in the vse of those manes  hath prescribed, and so worke out our saluation togeth with him, Psalm. 119.32. Cant. 1 4. Obiect. But how can wee thus doe our endeauour? e are dead in sinnes, &c. Ansr.  must distinguish of times and states. Before our conuersion we are dead, and haue no abili∣ty at all: But God, whn he raiseth vs vp giues vs life and ability, the will and the deed: for hee raiseth vs not like stockes and stones, as Iohn 5.21. Ephes. 2.5. 2 But wee are not able to thinke a good thought. Answer. The Apostle there speaketh of our selues, as considerd in our selues without the helpe of God: And so likewise we are not to endeauour in a proud con∣ceit of our owne strength, but wee must still acknow∣ledge that God doth all, it is his Spirit that assists vs, and giues vs strength to worke, and to be able to yeeld our selues plyable to the worke of God in vs, so to confesse that wee liue not, but Christ liues in vs. VERS. 12. For wee wrestle not against fsh and blood: but against Principalities, against Powers, and against th worldly gouernours, the Princes of the darknesse of this world, against spirituall wickedness which are in high places. IN this verse is laid downe, 1 The kind of this com∣bate, vnder the metaphor of wrestling: implying that it is a very sore combate.
2 The Parties that maintaine this sight: who are either such as defend themselues: expressed in this word (We) that is, all Christians whatsoeuer, the mini∣sters themselues not excepted: as appeares by changing of the person from (Yee) to (We,) the Apostle thereby not excepting himselfe. 2 Or such as assault. These are described, 1 Nega∣tiuely: (not against flesh, and blood:) where, by flesh and blood is vnderstood, 1 The substance of flesh and blood. 2 Those things that are as flesh and blood, that is to say, weake, fraile, and mortall. Heereby is implyed, that our spirituall enemies are more than flesh and blood, of more might and valour than all the men of the world: as by comparing the malice and power of the diuell, with that of men, may appeare. Vse. It serues to stirre vp our dulnesse, and to make vs more watchfull, hauing to doe with so mighty ene∣mies. 2 When wee haue to deale with wicked men, to consider that wee haue not onely to striue with flesh and blood, but also with the chiefe enemy the diuell, who is the principall worker, and whose instruments wicked men are: and so not to bite the stone that is cast, but to haue an eye to him that throweth it. Further, from the opposition of these two parts, (Not against flesh, &c. but, &c.) ariseth this instruction: Doct. That they who are quailed and daunted by flesh and blood, will neuer be able to stand out a∣gainst Principalities and powers. Which is to be noted against the cowardlinesse of men, that are mooued with euery temptation. For the feare of men. Wee see that Ib being not moued with those losses that hee sustained at the hands of men, did also valiantly stand out against the malice of Satan. 2 Affirmatiuely, (but against, &c.) In the expositi∣on of which words, there is some difficulty.
Principalities. Property it is the Office of a Prince, or the honour of a Prince: In briefe, it signifieth a go∣uernment, and bing appied to a Price, it addes a geat emphasis to it: So tat Principaities, is as much as, those that haue a gouernmnt. Powes) Some vndrstnd for an inferiour kinde of power: as Titus 3.1. 1 Tim. 2.2. 1 Pe. 2.14. attributing principalities to the highest and chifst, as vnto th King; and Powers, vnto infero Magistrates vnde him. From which distintion of  wods, some doe make degrees of diues; but though I wil not deny but that there is an order of  as Math. 9.34. and 25.41. which they make amg the , or the bet∣ter performance of their spand pots, ad so take vnto thmselues offices; not that the haue any assigned of God: yet in this place is meant no such mtter, for here is no comparison made betweene the diuels, what power one hath ouer another; but betweene them and vs, what power and gouernment they haue ouer vs: So that Powers here, signifieth an ability, and power which they haue to execute their gouernment. Worldly gouernours) . This amplifies th former concerning their gouernment, and also limiteth it, shewing that they haue an absolute gouernment, but are onely worldly gournours, that is, ouer the men of this world: but yet lest wee should thinke that all men are vnder this gouernment, it is addd, Of the darkenesse of this world) hat is, of th ignorant and wicked of the world, who are called darknes;e: who being blind, see not the danger whereinto they implunge themselues, by subiecting themselues to the diuell. This also shees the cause how they come to be the diuels subiects, because they are wicked, and rebell against God. Spirituall wickednesses.) Heere they are set forth, 1 By their nature, they are spirituall things, and haue the properties of spirits: as to moue from one place to ano∣ther,
in a moment without resistance, &c. 2 Their quality: they are most monstrous vile, ma∣licious wicked spirits; and therefore called spiritualls of wickdnesse, in the Originall. Whih are in high places.) The word in the Original is . It signifies Heauenly, and i traslated, chap. 1. verse 3. Heauenly tings, not Plac. But if we vnderstand it of placs: then it shewes whre the di∣uels haue th abade; namely, in the lowest heauen, in the ayre. If wee take it for Things, then it shewes the cause of our combate that it is not for erthl maters that they cntend; but for heauenly and spiritual things, such as concerne the saluation of our soues. The words then area description of the terrour of our spirituall enemies: described. 1 By their Dominion, (Prinipaliies, Gouernors:) which is amplifid 1 by that Power that they haue to execute thir gouernment: (Power) 2 By the parties that are gouerned: (The darknsse of this world) 1 Doct. Our spirituall enemies are such as haue a rule, dominion, and command. A point cleare, chap. 2. verse 2.2 Cor. 4.4. Quest. But how comes he to haue this power? whe∣ther is it of God or no? for it seemes so to be, Rom. 13.1. An. That generall ground is there restrained to the gournmnts, & vnto all lawfull gouernments ordained by God. But a for the diuell, he could indeed haue no power bu by Gods permission: and although that God doe suffer him, yet hath he no right and title vnto this dgnity. The reason then is, 1 In regard of himselfe, because hee doth tyranicaly vsurpe this power, like as doth the Pope, his chiefe instrument, 2 Tes. 2.4. Deut. 18 7. See Math. 4.9. Luke 4.6. 2 In regard of his vassals that slauishly yld vnto him, and voluntarily giue vnto him this power, o ma∣king
him their Prince, Ho. 8.4. Now, the deuill is so ambitious, that if any thing be guen, he will take it: and giue an inch▪ he will take an ell. Ve. 1 To teach vs to take heede, how wee yeeld to the deuill, or giue him one joe: for where he can get an entrance, there will hee set his throne: if wee giue him sway a little, he will bee the whole prince and ruler. 2 To stirre vs vp to subiect our selues to our Lord Christ, and to carry our selues to him, as to our Lord and King: for then will hee defend and mainaine vs, and (as Kings doe) not suffer others to beare rue ouer his owne subiects; otherwise, if wee refuse to haue him raigne ouer vs, it is just for him to giue vs ouer to these cruell and tyrannicall Lords. 2 Doct. As they haue a dominion, so they haue pow∣er to execute the same, and to keepe their vassals vnder them, chap. 2. ver. 2. The point is manifest: therefore to handle this their Power more particularly, let vs con∣sider, 1 The Ground of it. It hath pleased God thus to arme them with power. 1 In his iust iudgement for the pu∣nishment of the wicked. 2 For the tryall of his chil∣dren. 3 For the manifestation of his power, in the as∣sisting of them. 4 That the excellency of his graces, wherewith hee armeth his children, might be seene, that they are armour of proofe to defend them. 2 The Extent of it, how farre this power reacheth. To this in generall may bee answerd, That h is able to doe whatoeuer is within the compass of nature vn∣der heauen, that may bee done by naturall meanes. Hee hath no power vpon the heauens, as to alter their mo∣tion, &c. But vnder the Moone hee hath power, as 1 in the Aire, tonish it together with great violence, to cause windes and tempests: as when Iobs house was o∣erthrowne, Iob 1. In the water, to raise vp tempests: likewise, for the
drowning of ships and men, to make breaches, &c. 3 In the earth, to turne things tope-turue, houses, trees, &c. 4 On liuing creatures, to destroy them, &c. as the Swine, Mat. 8. 5 On men, to take their bodies and hurry thm vp and downe, from place to place: as hee did Christs bo∣dy▪ to smite it with diseases, to enter into it and take possession of it, to trouble the conscience, to stirre vp te humors of lust, choler, &c. Qustion. But is not his power diminished by his fall? Is he as powerfull as the good Angels? Answer. No: for we see, that when there hath beene opposition betweene the good and the euill angels, the euill haue still beene foiled, as Dan. 10. Reu. 12. So that if comparison be made between them and the good Angels, their power is somewhat abated: but if com∣parison be made betweene them and other creatures, their power still remaines so great, that wee cannot see wherein it is any whit lessened. And therefore wee are not to bee secure, as if his power were so weakned, that hee could not hurt vs since his fall; but to be stir∣red vp to watchfulnesse, and to bee strengthened in faith, seeing God hath giuen vs the good Angels to pro∣tect and defend vs. 3 The restraint of their power. In which we are to consider, 1 what they cannot doe. Quest. Whether can they goe beyond nature, or a∣gainst it? Answ. They cannot, because they are creatures, and must bee subiected vnto the order set downe by God, who is the onely Lord of nature, and only can alter it, goe aboue and beyond it. Examples in 4 points. 1 The deuill cannot do that which is simply, and pro∣perly a miracle: as to cause that flaming fire should not burne, to raise the dead: for these are against and aboue nature. And to doe these, is a property of God, where∣by
Christ did declare himslfe to be God, and likewise his Apostes to  by the pwr of God, and to . Obt. The , wrough miracles, as did , 12, 22. ad 8.. . 1  things might be done by naturall  bring serpnts and rogs from  them there. 2  were done only in shew and  and dluding tir eyes: for 1  wre deuoured of Mos  that his was a true serpent, and  that the made no resistance, but . 2 For th  blood. How coud it be, ith all the watr in gypt was ready turned into blood? and threfore i must neds be ome of the water of oshen: but vpon Goshen came none of the plagues of Egypt. 3 Concrneing the rogs. Those that Moses brought in, were gathered on heaps, so that they stanke: but no such matter is recordd of th other. So that the deuill may do wonders which may seeme trange to vs, because wee know not the cause, but not miracles. The deuill cannot directly force the will of man to yeeld to his bnt▪ as to make him sine against his will: for forced will is no wil; and  is an action of the will, else it is no sinne: Hee may by thratnings and allurements perswade the will, but hee cannot force it. 3 The diuell cannot simply sarch the heart of man, for this the Lord ascribes vnto himslfe, as a property belongng vno him onely. The diuell can giue a neere gesse at the gnerall disposition of the heart, by the acti∣ons, speeches, inclination, &c. but precisely to knowe what the thought of the heart is, hee cannot.
4 Hee cannot simply declare things to come. This also God takes as a property belonging to himselfe, and threby doth in Scripure distinguish himselfe from I∣dos and false gods: and therefore among the heathen he vsed to giue out his answer in doubtfull termes, that might bee true two waies; and if it fell out otherwise then they interpreted it, then they said they mistooke the meaning of the Oracle. 2 What they are hindred from doing, although they can, and would doe it; for they doe nothing but by ermission, and therfor we reade in Scripture, 1 Pet. 2.4. Iudg 6. Reu. 20.2 That the diuell is chained and tid vp like a bandog, that can goe no further then his linkes will let him. So Saan desird to winnow Peter, Luk. 22.31. But hee coud not. This doth make great∣ly for the comfort of the godly. So much of their powr. 2 The second thing whereby their dominion is amplified, is the partis hat are gouerned; who are de∣scribed when it is ▪ Thy are gouernours of this (World, of the darkness of this World.) 1 Doct. This rule and gouernment is onely heere, in, and ouer this word. Which is an encoragement to endure all the assaults that are made, bcau it is bt for a time; there will come a tim of rdmpion and full freedome from all. And 2 it is an encouragmēt against the houre of death. Yet all the men in the world are not vassals of the di∣uell, but only the dknee o this world▪ Such men as are blinde through ignorance, and wicked through corrup∣tion within and without, 2 Cor. 4.4. 1 Ioh. 3.8. Eph. 2.2. 2 Doct. The diuels dominion is ouer blinde and sin∣full men. The former resist him not, but doe ignorant∣ly folow him, not sing indeed what he is. The other thik, his gournmēt is pleasant, & so beleeue not what∣souer is spoken of the diull. The ignorant know not what a blessed & cōfortable thing it is, to be the Lords
subiects. The wicked, they rebell against him. Vse. For tryall whether we be vnder the gouernment of the diuell or no: which wee are, if wee oue and lye in darknesse, Iohn 3.19. 2 For direction, how we may come from vnder his power and dominion, namely, by comming forth from darknesse into light, Col. 12.13. Luk. 1.79. Acts 26.18. 3 For consolation to such as haue euidence in their owne soules, that they are light in the Lord; because they are freed from the power of the diuell. And let such carry themselues as children of the light. So much of their dominion. 2 The second thing whereby our spirituall enemies are described, is their Nature. In that they are called ; Spirituall things. Doct. The diuels, the enemies of our soules, are of a spirituall substance: for they still retaine the same substance in which they were created, that they might beare the punishment of their sinne, in the same nature that they sinned; and that they are spirituall substan∣ces and beings of themselues, appeares also by their power, their offices, their place, their punishment which they endure. Which 1 Note against those, them to be but qualities and affections rising from vs. A conceit both erroious and dangerous, extenuating the terrour that ought to be had of the diuell, and so causing security. 2 It greatly aggrauates the cunning of them, in these respects. 1 Being spirits, they are inuisible and cannot be seene by flesh and blood: and such likewise are their assaults: so that we fight against them, as blinde men against seeing; wee cannot tell where and how they strike, &c. which is a great disaduantage. 2 Being spirits, they can be in euery plac with vs, knowing our actions, and words, and gssing at our thoughts: which is a great aduantage to them: as if one
enemie should know the counsels of anothr: as 2 Kings 6.12. 3 Being spirits, there is no bodily thing that ca hindr them in their enterprizes, they can passe ouer, and thorow all things. And hence is their vnconciue∣able swiftnesse, in their passage from place to place: as swift as lightning, or as our eyesight. This grea quick∣nesse doth likewise giue them great aduantage. 4 Being spirits, they are not ubiect to fainting, wea∣risomensse, and dcay: but aer many hundred tou∣sands of exployes done, they ar stil ready for more. Whence it cōmeth that they gt so great exprience, and do assault continually without intermission. Notwithstanding these disaduantages on our part, we haue comfort in the Lord, the Spirit of spirits, who is with vs to dfend vs, who hath giuen his Spirit to o∣pen our eyes, tht we may see the sleights of the diuell, to strengthen vs that we faint not, & to be That strong man to keepe him from taking possession of vs. 3 Vse. It shewes that we must fight against him, not with earthly weapons, but with the spirituall armour of God, here prescribed. So much of their nature. 3 They are described by their quality and condi∣tion. (Wickednesse.) Doct. They are foule, wicked, and vncleane spirits: so is the diuell called, by a kinde of propriety: : That wicked one; and that in these respects: 1 Because they are the authours and beginning of sinne, Ioh. 8.44. 2 Because of their nature, which is wholy impure, not one jot of goodnesse in it. 3 In regard of their will, because they delight and ioy in wickednesse, and haue no thinking to repent, vnlesse it be, not to haue done more than they did. 4 In regard of the continuall practice of sinne in themselues, and folliciting of others alwaies vnto euill. Vse. 1 For tryall, whether the spirit of Satan be in vs▪
or no; for if wee giue our selues ouer to sinne, wee are guidd by the spirit of the diuell. 2 It ought to be a strong motue vno vs to hate all impiety, becaue herein weare like vnto the diuell. Now note wee how al ae set downe in the plural number: Prinipalities, Powes, worldy gouernours, spiri∣uall wikdnesses, to shew that they ar not a few, but many who are our enmies. Vers. 13. For this cause tk vnto you the whol amour of God, that ee may be able t resist in the euill day, and ha∣uing finished all things, to stan fs. FRom the former consideration of the greatnesse and terriblenesse of our enemies, the Apostle takes oc∣casion againe to stir vs vp to the grater watchfulnesse, and courage in withstanding these our enemies. (For this cause) that is, in regard wee haue so great enmies, so malicious, powerfull, and strong; wherefor he re∣peats againe the direction before laid downe, vers. 11. The words then containe two points, 1 A directi∣on. 2 Motiues. In the direction obserue, 1 The meanes that are to be vsed. 2 How they are to be vsed. The meanes ae expressed in these words, (the whole rmor of God,) of which hath been spoken before, vers. 11. Oely consider some reason why this is againe  they are  especially. 1 The Apostle heereby shews, that he had deliuerd this direction with good adui, not rashly, and suddenl: and therefore hee is told again and againe to say it▪ as Gal. 1.9. 2 Tha as it is a truth in it selfe, so it is behoofefull for vs, and specially to be regarded o vs, as Psal. 24.7.9. 3 Because te Apostle will knw that wee are very backward to performe this duty, and therefore hee vr∣geth it againe.
Ve 1 or Ministrs to vrge and presse vpon thei people their dutis againe and againe. 2 To rprooue people tht haue itching ares, and cannot endure repetitions, but stil long after new points. Further, from this repetiion, we may obsrue both the necessity, and sufficiency of thse manes prscribed, in that they, and tey onely ar  down bfore, and a∣gaine repeat aftr the descrpion o our enemies, verse 12. Which should mooue vs to take good hd vno them. 2 The manner of vsing the meanes, is set downe in another phrase then before. (Take vnto you) but ver. 11. (Pt on) The doctrine hence arising, is this, That Doct. The graces whereby wee are defended, are not from our selues, but from another, 1 Cor. 4.7 Iam. 1.17. Nature giues vnto brute beasts wherewith to dfend themselus, so ooe as they ar brought foorth, and so they grow vp needing no othr; but it is not so with ma: we are borne naked, and without all defence for our bodies, needing apparell, and wapons to defend vs: So are we likewse in espect of our soules, vtterly voyd of al grce power ad ability, to keepe our selues from the assaus o our enemies: see Ezek. 16.4 &c. Where∣fore we ae to get vnto vs this spirituall amour. So much for th dection. The motius are taken from the end, which is st down in two dgrees. 1 hat in the fight w may be a∣ble to rsst 2 hat after he igh, we may stand fast. In the first noe 1 th enefit, 2 the , 3 the time. 1 The befit in thse words, (that ye may be able.) Whence is cnfrmd the dorine before eliurd, that whoso hah thi armour, may, in th ght  thereof, be  of vitor. 2 The duty is in thi word,  or stand against our enemies. A wd of  of defince. Whence
Doct. 1 The Armour that is giuen vs of God, is giuen vs to dfie our Enemie boldly, and to combate with him, Iam. 4.7. 1 et. 5.9. Vse. To teach vs, that we who profsse our selues sol∣dirs o Christ, and haue taken vno vs this armour, must knowe that wee are not clled to imbrace his Word, and liue idly at ase, but to fight. Doct. 2 Seeing that we are bidden take this armour, and so resist, we learn, That without this armour it is in vaine to resist, we shall rush like horses vpon the pikes, we fight like nakd men, against men armed. Vse. As before we were taught to resist, so here we are shewed how to resist: not foolishly trusting in our owne strength, but armed with the power of God. Doct. 3 That wee giue no place to the diuell: for such is his suttlety and cruelty, that hee knowes how to take euery aduantage, and being once entered, like a fierce lion will deuoure vs. Ʋse. It reproues the folly of those that will yeeld a little, and hope well enough to recouer themselues, but sinne growes by degrees, and the diuell gets great ad∣uantage, by perswading vs to yeeld a little: and if wee sinne a little, and so lose our ground, wee shall finde it a harder matter to recouer it, being lost, then to haue kept it at the first. 3 The Time is noted in these words (In the euill day) not euill in it selfe, but in regard of those occurrences that fall out vpon that day. Some take this to bee meant of the whole course of our life: others too strictly, for the houre of our death. I rather take it in a middle sence, for a certaine time or day, namely, the day of tryall and temptation, wherein we are assaulted by the diuell, who would bring vs to the euill of sinne and of punishment; nd therefore it is called euill. Doct. Hence wee learne in generall, that there is an euill day that will come vpon vs, as Reu. 6.11. And ther∣ore the Scripture puts a must vpon it. Wee must
through many afflictions enter into the Kingdome of God. Herein also is the difference between the Church militant, and the Church triumphant. Ya, who in his owne exprience doth not finde this to be true? Vse. hat wee bee not secure, thinking no euill wll come vpon vs. A conceit not onely of the wicked, Psal. 10.6. but euen of those also that haue giuen vp their names to God: as Dauid, Psal. 30.6. Quest. But whn then is this day? Answ. God dis∣poseth of it, as of the day of death: though it will cer∣tainely come, yt wee know not when, to the end that we might alwaies watch and prpare our selues. So that wee learne, Doct. 2 That wee must prepare, and be alwaies ar∣med for an euill day. Thus Iob thought of his afflicti∣ons before they came, Iob 3.25. Thus Paul prepared for his afflictions, Acts 20.22, &c. And so doth hee warne Timothy, 1 Tim. 1.18. Vse. For reproofe of those that liue securely, thinking that all peace and quietnesse shall still last: and so like the people of Laish, Iudg. 18. are easily surprized. So much for the first degree. In the scond obserue 1 The Time. 2 The issue or benefit. The Time is expressed in these words, (hauing finished all things.) Wherein we may note, 1 the Action, 2 the Obiect, (all things.) Doct. The instruction from thence is, that the as∣saults made against vs are many: (all,) as Psal. 34.19. The Commonwealth of Israel was a type of this, which was continually exercised with afflictions in Egypt, and afterwards till they came to be in quiet in the Land of Canaan. And this is also verified in the life of Christ, his Prophets and Apostles. So then, as there is an euill day certainely to be looked for; so likewise are there many to be vndergone of vs. Wherein, 1 God doth shew his goodnesse in assisting and de∣liuering vs, and the truth of his promises, in not for∣saking vs.
2 Heereby God woud weane vs from the world, in which through ease and quiet, we too mch deight. 3 And mak vs the moe to ong after Heauen. 4 This commeth o passe, by reaon of the vnaiable mace o th diuel, who wll vse more manes than one to foyle vs, if it may be: as h did to Iob and Christ. Vse. 1 To tach vs to looke for one affliction afer nother, and trore till to prepar our selues. 2 For comort, tha we do not thinke our selues for∣saken of God, cause of mltitude of aflictions and temptaion, seing that it is our condition whilest we liue heere. Doct. 2. (Finisd.) It is not suffcient well to acquit our selues o som one of those assaults, that are brought a∣gainst vs; but we must valiantly stand against all what∣souer. Hence is the constancy of the Martyrs com∣mended, that endured al sorts of afflictions, Hebr. 11.36. and 12.4. Rasons are, 1 Because all the promises of reward made vnto vs, be annexed with th condition of con∣stancy and perseuerance to the nd, Reu. 2.7. and in all those 7 Epistles, Math. 10.22. 2 Because without continuance, all our former cou∣rage and constancy is in vaine, Gal. 3.4. 2 The benefit is in these words, (to stand fast.) . Not in the Imparatiue moode, as implying a duty, but in the Infinitiue, as noting a benefit; the issue and euen of the fight: Implying, that at length wee shall be conquerours; and as victors, stand last in the field, when our adursary is fled awa. Doct. They who doe well fight the battels of the Lord, shall be sure at length to haue the victory, 1 Cor. 10.13. Thus did Christ stand last in the field: and so did Ib, Iames 5.11. Vse. It serues for comfort and encouragement to fight valiantly; for heere is the blessed issue that will compnce all our labour and trauell.
VERS. 14. Stand therefore, &c. IN this and the verses following, is laid downe a parti∣cular exemplification of that generall direction giuen vnto vs, how to keepe our selues safe from all the as∣saults of our spirituall enemies. In which we may ob∣serue, how the Apostle laes down. 1 Duties to be per∣formed, which are twofold. 1 Stand, in this verse. 2 Pray, verse 18. 2 The meanes whereby they are performed, 1 That wee may stand. The meanes are expressed in sixe branches. 1 The girdle of verity, &c. 2 That we may pray. The meanes are, verse 18. Before wee come to the particular handling of these points, obserue here the coherence, and ioyning toge∣ther of these two duties, Stand and pray. Whereby we learne, that as on the oe side wee should not be faint-hearted, timorous, and carelesse: so on the other wee be hot proud ad insolent, trusting, and presuming on our owne strength. The first shewes that God will not helpe vs, vnlesse wee labour and endeauour to doe our best The second shewes, that we can doe nothing without the helpe of God. We must pray, so trusting to God, to his promises and mighty power: that we al∣so stand, that is, vse the meanes that hee hath pre∣scribed. Againe, we must so vse the meanes, alwaies hauing an eye vnto God: So neither tempting by neg∣lect of the meanes, nor presuming on the meanes to be carelesse in seeking helpe of God. This was notably re∣presented vnto vs, in that first battell of the Israelites with the Amalekites. Exod. 17. where Ioshua was figh∣ting, and Moses praying both together. See the like, 2 Chron. 14.10, 11.
Vse is for vs, that we doe not separate those things that God hath ioyned together. 1 The fist duty to be performed, is in this word Stand, a warre-like word, tken from the manner of standing in warre. Wee heard it vsed before, verse 13. but not in the same Mood nor Tense; and so not in the same signification. There it was in the Infinitiue: here it is in the Imparatiue: there is meant standing after the fight; heere, in the very fight. Now this word implyes 4 things. 1 Courage in this Christian warre; for timorous and faint-hearted soldiers are ready to fly away, where a man of valour will stand it out. 2 An abiding in that place and ranke wherein our Captaine Christ Iesus hath set vs, and not to straggle from it. 3 Watchfulnesse. Not to be sluggish, to lye downe and sleepe, but to stand on our feet. 4 A kinde of continuance and constancy. Not to be still putting off and on of our armour, but to keepe it on still. From whence accordingly wee are to obserue foure duties. 1 Christian soldiers must be of a valourous and cou∣ragious minde, to stand against, and to defie their ene∣mies. Such courage as Dauid had against Goliah: which how needful it is in all things, appeares, in that the Lord doth so often vrge to Ioshua, euen three times together, Ioshua 1.6, 7, 9. Reasons. 1 In regard of our enemies, who are daun∣ted with nothing more, than with courage and valour, and insult ouer vs when wee are timorous: like the Woolfe that flies away if he be resisted, but if you runne away, hee sets vpon you eagerly. 2 In regard of other, vnto whom our valour may be a great encouragement: as 2 Chron. 11 14. Vse. To be exhorted to the performance of this duty,
and for motiues to stirre vs vp to consider, 1 How in our fight the Lord is with vs, and stands by vs. This motiue was vsd to Ioshua, Iosh. 1.5.9. 2 That we fight in the name of the Lord, armed with his power, which is ingagd in our fight: this gaue Dauid tat inuincibe couag. 3 The cause of our fight that is iust, for the saluation of our soue. Now the quity or the cause is a great ncouragment to soldirs: as vnto Iphtah, Iudges 11. And contrarywise that the cause of our auersaries is most vniust, who fight against God, to dissoue his workes, to diminish his Kingdome, &c. 4 That wee fight with enemies indeed, but enemies vanquished and spoiled, Col. 2.15. Hb. 2.14. Yea, whose wapons are al blunted, the sting of afflictions, of sin, and of dath being taken away. 5 The promis of victory, and assurance of it. Then which thre cannot be a greatr incouragement. 2 That we must be carefull to abide in that place wherin our Captaine hath placed vs, 1 Cor. 7.20. Ephe. 4.1. But we ae to know, that we haue a double place or calling. 1 Generall, as wee are Christians, members of Christ, profssing his name. 2 Particuar, as we haue seuerall places in the Church. The duties thn are two. 1 That we remaine firme and stedfast in the Church▪ not forsaking our profssion, and straggling out of it; for the Church is the field, in which wee must fight, and rmaining in it, wee are vnder the protection of our Captain: but straggers from the armie haue nei∣thr protection of Capaine, nor helpe of fellow soldirs to defed, and so fall into thir nemies hands: as te Separatists. 2 That wee bee carefull to abid in tat particular place, wherein wee ae set, be we Capains. Liute∣nants o soldiers that is, Magistraes, Ministrs, Ma∣strs of familis, or the like, Rom. 1 . 4 &c.
To be stirred vp hereunto, consider wee, 1 That it is the wise Lord that hath appointed vs our seuerall places and callings. Hb. 3.2. 2 That this standing in our rankes, is the comelinesse and beauty of the armie, yea, the very strength of it; for confusion breds disturbance, and gius adantage to the enemies. Thus in the body all the membrs stand∣ing in their due place, make vp the cominesse thereof, and are ready for the mutuall hlpe one of another. 3 That thus wee shall best mnifest the graces of God giuen vnto vs, whilst we kepe euery one his own place: as  common Souldier, though hee may well mannae a Pike or a Gun, yet cannot well discharge the place o a Cataine. 4 That the Lord will seeke for vs, and reward vs in our places wher hee set vs. If hee finde vs out of our rankes, he may haply giue vs a knocke, or cashiere vs  as he did Corah, Dathan and Abiram. 3 That wee be watchfull, and stand vpon our de∣fence against these our enemies, 1 Pet 5.8. For else we may be sudenly surprized. The diull comes as a thiefe, hee sends not an herald before him with defiance, hee fights not to shew valour, but his aime is at bloud and spoile; and so hee vseth all treachery. Ʋse. Mat. 24.43. 4 We must stand alwaies armed and defenced against our enemies, nur putting off our armour; for here is the difference betwene this spirituall and carnall war∣faring. The night, truce, season of the yeere may cause a laying aside of armes for a time in this earthly warre; but there is no intermission in the spirituall fight. Ob. But this seemes a very burdensome and tedious matter. Answ. Not at all, but if we come once to haue this armour well fittd vnto vs; it is most easie and pleasant for vse. Math. 11.30. and no whit combersome, though otherwise in regard of defence it be called armour.
Vse. To reprooue those that are weary and fall away: Such neuer had this armour well fitted vnto them: as Iudas and Demas. Ver. 14. And your loynes grded about with verity. NOw followes the manner and meanes of perfor∣ming the former dutie; for which end the Apostle doth distinctly dscribe the armor of God, laying down the seueral parts and pieces of it; which are in num∣ber sixe. The first is expressed in thse words, (And your loynes girded about with verity.) But before we come to the handling of this, and the other particulars, there are three generall obseruation taken from all ioyntly cosideed, to be spoken of. The first is this: that most of these pieces are defen∣siue; bt oe offsiue, viz. the sword of the Spirit, and that but in part, bing also defensiue. 2. That heere is armour for the forepart, bu none at all for the hinder parts of a man. 3 That euery part before is couered from top to toe. Hence wee learne three instructions. 1 That Christians must more seeke to defend them∣selues, and maintaine their owne, than to annoy their enemies. Thus did Christ, when hee made himselfe our example in his first conflict with Satan: we see Sa∣tan first sts vpon him, he onely defends himselfe: and thus haue the seruants of God dealt with the instru∣ments of the diuell from time to time. This is an argu∣ment that our cause is iust. 2 That in this Christian warre and conflict, we must neuer flie away; but stand vnto it face to face. There is no hope to get good by running aa: it i dishonourable to God, and dangerous to our selues, b∣cause then wee le all opn to the weapons of the di∣uell: threfore let there be in vs the mind of Nehmia, Nehe. 6.11. for the diuell fights not for glory, as me doe, who thinke it as great a glory to put their ene∣mies
to slight, as to slay them: but it is bood that hee aimes at; wherefore let vs remember Lots wife, Luk. 17. and that hee that sets his had to the pow, and looks backe, is vnfit for the Kindome of Heaun; hee that ies, is vnwrthy to be a soldier of Christ; and thre∣fore not to flie, hoping to come againe another time, being in the meane while naked to all the darts of the diuell, who may wound vs at his pleasure. 3 Heere is complat armour for the forepart: a helmet, comprehending the beauer and gorget, to couer the head and face downe to the neck. A brestplate, con∣taining vnder it the skirts or bases, to couer all vnto the knees. The Greaues or Bootes to couer the legges vnto the sole of the foot. For th right hand a sword, for the left a shield. Lastly, a Girdle or Belt to bide all together. Whence the istruction is, that the graces of Gods Spirit, that hee bestowes vpon vs, are sufficient to defend and keepe vs safe: So that this being com∣pleat and sufficient armour, wee need not seeke further to adde any thing to it, to make vs bold and couragi∣ous. So much in generall. Now wee come distinctly to handle the parts: wherein wee will obserue this order: 1 To declare what are those graces heere meant, by the parts of the armour. 2 To shew how fitly those graces are resembled vnto the mtaphor. 3 To gather the vses and instructions arising there∣from. The first, in that order, that the Apostle hath set them downe, is the Girdle of verty, or truth. To omit other signification, there is a foure-fold truth heere meant. 1 Of Iudgement, and Opinion. 2 Of heart and affection. 3 Of words. 4 Of deeds and actions. All which are as linkes of one, and the same chaine, and must concurre, to make vp the strength and beauty of this Girdle. 1 Truth of opinion and iudgement, is that whereby
wee doe maintaine and vphold the Word of God and true Religion grounded thereon. In a word, it is sound∣nesse in Religion, in Doctrine, soundnesse in faith and blief, as 2 Peter 1.12. Ephes 4.15. 2 Truth of affection, is a kinde of inward honesty and sicerity, when we set God before our eys alwaies, and our selues in his presence: and so, though we be a∣lone, yet carry our selues that we may be accepted and approoued of him, Psal. 5.6. This was in Ioseph, when hee was tempted, and in Hezekiah, 2 King. 20.3. 3 Truth in spech, is, when the words which wee vtter, be agreeable to our minde and intention, and al∣so to the matter spoken of: for else wee tell a lye, or an vntruth. Wherefore wee must vtter that which wee know to be a truth, Ephes. 4.25. Rom. 9 1. 1 Tim. 2 7. 4 Truth in action, is, when wee deale plainely and faithfully, not hypocritically; whether we haue to doe with God in his worship, or otherwise with men: not pretending more than in truth we doe intend, 1 Iohn 3.18. Ephes. 4.24. (True holinesse.) Thus is Nathaniel commended for a plaine honest man, Iohn 1.47. All these must be lined together: and if you take a∣way any one, the Girdle breakes, and loseth his strength and comelinesse. For, though the heart be sincere, the speech true, the Actions plaine and honest; yet if the iudgement be vnsound, and we be carried away to er∣rour, superstion and Idolatry, all those faire shewes will prooue but stubble and drosse. Paul thought that hee had an honest heart, and was vnrebukeable for his conuersation, Acts 26 9. but being misse-led in iudge∣ment, what did this auaile him? He afterwards estee∣med it nothing. Againe, though we hold the truth, if we haue a double heart, full of hypocrisie and dissimulation, wee are the more odious and abominable to God, and our know∣ledge shall serue as a witnesse to condemne vs. Moreouer, if we will seem sound in heart & opinion,
yet lie in word, dissemble and deale double in our acti∣ons, what doe wee but disgrace the truth, and plainely professe our selues hypocrites? Now thse thre last, truth in heart, speech ad acti∣on, may be comprised vnder one name of Integrity or Syncrity, when our heart, word, and deede agree in one, and all inlightened and directed by the Word. So that truth in iudgement is the fountaine, these the streames. For Application to the metaphor, how fitly this grac is reembled to the girding of the loynes with a girdle or belt, we are to know, that this phrase of gird∣ng the loynes, is vsed in a double respect. 1 As it is taken from trauellers; who in the East∣erne hot parts vsed to goe in long side garments, and therefore when they iourneyed, did trusse them vp to their loynes with a girdle, as Luk 12.35. Exod. 12.11. This is not meant here. 2 As it is taken from soldiers, for the knitting and fast girding of their Armour close together about: as Iob 38.3. In this sence is it here taken. Now soldiers vse to haue a strong girdle called a belt to gird their harnesse about them, and it hath a double vse. Vse. 1 For Ornament: because the armour is ioyn∣ed together about the middle with ioynts; and there∣fore to couer those ioynts which are not so comely, they vse a broad girdle. 2 For strength. 1 For that it serues to keepe the armour close and fast together, that in the sight it fall not off, or comber him. 2 For that it doth much strengthen a man, to haue his loynes and middle fast girded about. The fit resmblance then of this grac, appeareth in regard both of that grace, comeliness, and ornament, as also that strength, which truth giuth vnto those that haue it. First, for truth of iudgement. What greatr orna∣mnt of Religion, then the sound euidence of the truth
of that which wee profess? Antiquity, vniuersality, succession, grea reuenues, &c. are nothing to this, ya, doe more dsgrac it then adorne it; for superstiti∣on, the more ancent it is, the more approuers it hath, th mor odious ad abominable. 2 Agin, for stngth. Truth in Religion is able to mantaine it selfe against all opposers; yea although a man come far behinde his aduersaries in reading and learning. 3 Furthrmore, this truth maketh vs to stand con∣stant and firme in our profssion euen to the death: as it did the Martyres. For truth in heart, what maketh a man more amiable and gracious in the acceptance of God (for God onely behodeth this) then truth in the inward parts, an honest, single, simple heart? For this cause was Dauid a man after Gods owne heart, Acts 13.22. because hee had an vpright heart, 1 King. 15.3. For this cause did Noah finde fauour with God, Gen. 6 9. Againe, what Learning, Art, or Eloquence can more grace a mans speech, then truth? Lastly no outward comelinesse, strength of body, or beauty of face can so much adorne vs, as faithfulnsse and plaine dealing in all our actions. Now, (to ioyne all these three together) for strength▪ the conscience of our vprightnesse and integrity, is a great means to vphold vs in the day of tryall. This vp∣held Iob, although his wife and his friends counted him an hypocrite, and although the hand of God was heauy vpon him. Iob. 27.5. and 31.35. This made Hezeki∣ah to call vpon God with that confidence, as 2 Kings 20.3. Vse. It teacheth vs to be carefull to follow that pre∣cept of the wise man, Prou. 3.3. To buy the truth, and not to sell it. Where, although by truth be especi∣ally meant truth of Religion, yet may it be extended to the other also It hath two branches, 1 Concerning those that haue it not, they must buy it.
2 Concerning those tha haue it. They must not sell it. So that they that want this girdle, must get it, and thy that haue it, must eepe it. First therefore  are to examine our selus, whe∣ther we e in the truth or no,  Cor. 13.5. For that may well be applyed vnto this, seeing there is no oe thing that mkes o great and maine a diffrence be∣twne the Elect and the rprobate, as this truth, it be∣ing a speciall tokn of our effetual calling. 1 Truth of Iudgment. Whether we be assured that or proession be the true Religon of God or no? The principls whrof wee must trie by the Scriptures, whih are the only touchstone to try this God, 1 Thes. 5.21. 1 Ioh. 4.1. Ioh. 5.39. Acts 17.11. 2 If vpon tryall wee finde our iudgement resolued in the tuth, then are wee to examine whether this knowledge do, like the oyntment of Aaron, Psal. 133.2. season our heart and affections. Whether our hearts be sound or no; for this is deceitfull aboue all things, ∣uen to a mans owne selfe, not only in grosse hypocrites, but in many others, who knowe not the weakenesse of their heart, because they neuer searched into the depth of it: as Peter. To this end wee are to examine especially what is our disposition, when wee are alone in priuate and haue to doe with none but God: when wee may commit sin, and keepe it close from the ees of men, then to marke what is our integrity and vprightnesse, whether like vnto that of Iosph, or no. 3 Finding the fountaine to be pure, we are to obserue what clare streames doe flow from thence in our words and actions, Luk 6.45. Whethr there be a cor∣respondency betweene them and our heart; as if we worship God, whether we doe it with our heart; if we haue holy conference, whether our heart moue vs vnto it. For our direction in this tryall; we are to consider,
1 The ground and motiue that stirres vs vp to doe any good thing, whether it be applause, as in the Phari∣ses, whether hoour and credit, or the auoiding of dis∣grace, as in Saul, 1 Sam. 15.30. or for company sake, or for respects to some particular men, as Ioash, 2 Chro. 24.2, 15, &c. or for profit and gaine: as the Shechemites, Gen. 34.23. or to auoid trouble; as the Papists that come to Church rather then pay a fine, and be put in prison: In all these there is no truth, because no respect vnto God, to doe his will, because it is his wil. 2 What is the sincerity of our hearts, whether it be in all things, Hebr. 13.18. or onely in some few; for many will do some things vpon by-respects, or because they are agrable to their humors and dispositions, as Herod; but this truth where it is, is like leauen that leaueneth the whole lumpe. 3 What are the things, in which we are most strict and secure, to keepe a good conscience in? Whether first and aboue all, in the chiefest things, or i rifles and smaller matters; which is hypocrisie, Math. 23.23. 4 The order of our actiōs, whether we first begin with our selues, before we seek to vrge the same things vpon others; not as the Scribes, that lay heauy burdens vpon others, which themselues would not touch, Mat. 23.4. Now vpon this tryall, if wee finde that in any of these respects wee want truth, then must wee buy it, that is, vse all meanes to attaine vnto it, although it be with the losse of those things which wee haue: as they that buy, must depart with some things: which is no∣tably set foorth in two parables, Mat. 13.44, 45, 46. Motiues to stirre vs vp to get it are, 1 The excellency of this treasure. This notably com∣mends the excellency of it, in that nothing makes vs more like vnto God than this, who is truth it selfe; and so nothing makes vs more amiable vnto him. Againe, it makes vs like vnto those that are like to God: as the Saints and Angels in heauen. Contrariwise, no∣thing
makes so vs like the diuell as vntruth, Iohn 8.44. The excellency of it appeares also heerein, that there is no grace (I dare sy) in the Scripture so much vrged, as this of truth. 2 The need that wee haue of it; for all other graces without it, are in vaine: they are corrupt, and putrified, if they be not seasoned with truth; therefore are wee ex∣horted to loue vnfained, to faith vnfained, &c. So that this attribute of truth doth commend euery grace, 1 Iohn 3.18. 3 The benefit that comes by hauing of it; for the least measure of grace seasoned with it, is accepted of God, Psal. 51 6. and 145.18. yea, blssednsse it sefe is promised vno it, Psal. 15.2. It folowes to shew the way, how to get this truth. 1 For truth in iudgement: wee must doe as men vse to do that would buy any thing, they will go to the place where it is to be had, and vse the meanes to get it. Now the contrary, where this pearle is to be had, is the Church, the mould wherein it is hid, is the Word of God; and the ministery thereof, is the meanes to disco∣uer and make it knowne vnto vs: there needs then but our attention and diligence to resort vnto these meanes. Siluer & Gold there needs none to get it, though this al∣so sometimes we must not spare for the obtaining of it. 2 For sincerity, let our care be to doe, as Enoch did to walke with God, to set our elues alwaies in his pre∣sence: the consideration whereof will make vs o be vp∣right, as Gen. 17.1. Now, hauing once gotten this Girdle, let it be our care and endeauour to keepe it fast, and not to loose it. Not to sel it, that is, not to exchange it for any thing whatsoeuer. To take nothing for it, because nothing is worth it: be it ease, riches, or the like. Which we are to note the more diligently, because if wee once haue this grace, the diuell will labour by all meanes to coozen vs of it: for this is that for which
onely he feareth vs; and therefore there is nothing that hee more opposeth against, by diuers suttleties and temptations, than against truth and sincerity. VER. 14. And hauing on the brestplate of righteousnesse, &c. IN these words is layd downe the second piece of this spirituall Armour, namly, the brestplate of righ∣teousnesse, which mst be ioyned with the former: as the particle (And) sheweth. For verity is, as hath beene shewed, like salt. Now righteousnesse is that which it seasons. This is the substance vpon which that doth worke, that respects only the manner of working. In handling whereof, wee will consider these poynts. 1 What this righteousnesse is. Righteousnesse is a holy quality wrought in vs by the Spirit of God, whereby we do conforme our selues to the whole Law of God. Sometime in Scripture, this word hath relation only to the duties of the second Ta∣ble, but then it hath alwaies some other word ioyned vnto it, that hath reference to God: as (holinesse,) Luk. 1.75. Eph. 4.24. or it is restrained to that signification, by the circumstances of the place, as Deu. 24.13. But when it is set alone, it doth respect the whole Law; both the duties to God, and also to men, Mat. 5.20. This is that which we call Iustice, wherby we giue vnto euery man his due. Now the Law shewes what is due from vs to God, to others, and to our selues: So that it cannot be better defined, than a conformity to the whole Law of God. Obiect. But then this is such a piece of armour, as neuer any did attaine vnto it, vnlesse it were Adam, Eccles. 7.31. Gen. 1.26. the Saints in heauen, Hebr. 22.23. and Christ Iesus himselfe, Act. 22.14. Esa. 59.17. But of others, that of the Apostle, Rom. 10.5. is true. There is none righteous, no not one. How then are we
exhorted to put on this brestplate? Answ. There is a double righteousnsse mentioned in the Scripture. 1 A Legall righteousnesse performed ac∣cording to the rule & rigor of the Law. 2 An Euange∣licall righteousnesse, in a gracious acceptance according to the limitations of the Gospell. The former is a full and perfect fulfilling of the Law, in all and euery point and degree thereof, by a mans owne selfe, Rom. 10.5. Gal. 3.10, 12. But the righteousnesse of the Gospell mitigates the seuerity therof, and sets forth vnto vs a twofold righte∣ousnes 1 Of faith, Rom. 10.6, &c. which is meant here, but in the 6 verse, where it is compared to a Shield. 2 Of a good conscience, which is that powerfull worke of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. in the regenerate, when by the endeauor to approoue themselues vnto God, by doing those things that the Law requireth, Act. 24.16 Hebr. 13.18, This is heere meant, and it con∣sisteth in two things. 1 The abstaining from euill, all things offensiue to God, and hurtfull to man. 2 The doing of good; for those two must alwaies be ioyned together, to make vp this brestplate, Psal 119.3. 2 The second point to be considered, is how fitly the grace is resembled to the metaphor. The word  heere vsed, signifieth that part of the body, wherein are contained the vitall parts, the heart, lungs, liuer, &c. which being wounded, there is no hope of life, from the necke to the midst, or to the nauell. Hence is the word also vsed for that piece of the armour that couereth this part. The vse then of of a brestplate, is to keepe the vitall parts from being mortally wounded, that a man be not stricken downe without recouery. The same vse hath righteousnsse, to keepe the soule, from being deadly wounded with the darts of the diuell, that the poyson thereof doe not pierce thorow the very heart and life of grace, and quite extinguish it. For sinne, and nothing else is that
which mortally woundeth the soule, and puls Gods wrath vpon vs. Now from this, righteousnesse pre∣serues vs, because by it we doe auoyd sinne. 3 The 3 point is, how we must put on this brestplate. There is no better way, than by the right practice of true repentance; for repentance is a change and altera∣tion of the minde, and such a change as brings foorth a reformation in our liues. Whence is both an vtter de∣testation and abiuration of all euil, and a constant resolu∣tion to enter into a new course of life, forsaking all for∣mer wickednesse. Now where this is indeed, the diuell will not easily, or not at all preuaile against vs. Other∣wise, if it be wanting, our swinish and doggish nature will still remaine; so that howsoeuer thoough some iudgement of God, or other occasion, we may for a time leaue sinne, yet shall we easily returne to it againe. 4 The fourth point is, What is the benefit and vse of this brestplate? Surely great, and much euery manner of way. 1 In regard of the comparison of it to a brestplate, because it defends our soules from being mortally wounded, and thrust thorow with sinne: Because such as haue this righteousnesse, will endeauour to auoyde all things that wound the conscience, and to doe all things that pre∣serue, cheere and comfort it. Obiect. But doe we not see, that they who haue been most circumspect and carefull, haue falne into sinne, as Dauid, and Peter, &c? How then doth this keepe vs from being wounded? Answ. It doth not keepe a man from being wounded, but from being deadly wounded: for howsoeuer they may commit sinnes that are grosse in themselues, yet in them they are not grosse sinnes, being committed through infirmity, violence of temptation, want of watchfulnesse, not with full consent and desire, &c. So that although they be wounded, yet it is not incurable at the heart.
Yea, by these wounds they grow the more strong and sound, increasing hereby in greater feare and care to please God. It keepes them not altogether from sinne, but from giuing vp themselues to sinne, that it doe not so seaze vpon them, as to soake to the hart, and sucke vp the bloud and life of grace. 2 It serues to giue vnto vs an assured euidence of our spirituall vnion with Christ; from whom wee haue this power and this grace, and so is it a token of our effectuall calling, and of our eternall election, 2 Pet. 1.10. 1 Ioh. 2.29. And by consequent, of our euerlasting saluation. Which assurance makes vs bold & confident. 3 By this wee get a good name while wee liu, and when we are gone. Also hereby are wee fenced against all that shal speake euill against vs, 1 Pet. 3.16. Them∣selues and not wee shall be ashamed, whilest wee liue blamelesse, Luk. 1.6. that is, giuing no iust occasion of blame. 4 This is a great honour and ornament vnto our Christian profession, really confirming the truth of it, when our practice is answerable to our profession. It strengthneth likewise our port, whilest by our good example wee confirme others that are our fellow-soldiers. And lastly, it allureth others to our profes∣sion. 5 Hereby wee shew our selues to be the Children of God: we imitate and honour our Captaine Iesus Christ, who went against the diuell perfetly armed with this brestplate; and giue others cause to honour and glori∣fie him, 1 Pet. 2.12. 5 The fift point to bee considered, is, The wiles that the diull vseth o dpriue vs of the most excellent piece of armour, knowing that so long as we are ther∣with armed, hee cannot pruaile: and this he doth, 1 by laboring to make i of no vse vto vs, & this by stretch∣ing and beating it out further then the metall will beare. Thus, by perswading vs to trust too much vnto
it, making our righteousnesse a meritorious cause of our saluation: as did the Pharises, and as doe the Papists, Conc. Trident. sess. 6. Can. 32. To auoid this wile, obserue, 1 That our righteousnsse is in it selfe vnperfect, nd in regard of the imperfections and pollutions of it comming from vs, no better then a filthy clout, Esa 64.6. And threfore so farr from meriting saluation, that it rather desrues damnation; and therefore the Saints haue alwaies desired pardon for their best workes, Psa. 143.2. 2 That all the righteousnesse wee performe, is but our duty: and therefoe Adam himselfe, in his integri∣ty could not merit: Christ onely did, in regard of the personall vnion, Luke 17 10. 3 This conceit of merit doth so putrifie righteous∣nesse, that it maketh it odious to God, being directly contrary to the free grace of God, and Alsufficient merit of Christ, Rom. 11. Gal. 2. 4 That it is only a way which the Lord hath appointed vs to walke, to testifie our obedience and thankefulnesse to God, that we might profit our brethren, and haue euidence and assurance of our faith, and effectuall calling. 5. In all workes of righteousnesse, let vs compare them with the rule thereof, viz. the Law, so shall wee see how imperfect they are, and how farre short they come of that which is required. This will humble vs▪ 2 By labouring to make vs lightly to regard this brestplate: and this the diuell doth diuers waies. 1 By suggesting vnto vs that it is a needlesse piece of armour, because Christ hath satisfied all, and fulfilled the whole Law for vs, and hath left nothing for vs to doe; so that if we haue faith, it is sufficient for vs. Thu did hee deceiue the Christians in the Apostles time, ta∣king occasion from that doctrine of iustification by faith alone; and so doth hee decieue many in these dayes.
To auoide this, consider, That though our righte∣ousnesse be no meritorious cause of saluation, yet it is a way wherein wee are to walke; though wee are not sa∣ued by it, yet wee cannot be saued without it, 1 Cor. 6.9. Heb. 12.14. Tit. 2.12. Ioh. 3.3. Luk. 1.75. Ephes. 2.10. 1 Thes. 4.7. Tit. 3.14. (Necessary.) 2 That God hath made nothing in vaine, and there∣fore if he haue made as well the brestplate of righteous∣nesse, as the shield of faith, wee are to vse both: Yea it is certaine, that hee that hath not the brestplate of rightousnesse, cannot hold forth the shield of faith, because hee hath no ground of any right and title to Christ▪ hauing not his Spirit, which manifesteth it by the fruits of righteousnesse, Iam. 2.21. 2 By perswading vs, that it is a combersome and toylesome matter, a great hinderance to our honour and promotion, our gaine, our ease and pleasure, &c. Thus did he deceiue Esau, who is therefore called prophane, not regarding to be of the Church: and Demas, 2 Tim. 4.10. Thus doth hee deceiue the most in these times. To auoide this, wee must consider the fruits and issue, rather then the present inconueniences. For no armour is like vnto apparell to be worne for pleasure. But if we haue an eye vnto the issue, all the troubles that we can endure, are not worthy the blssed fruits that we shall reape of it, Rom. 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17. Esa. 3.10. 3 If thus he cannot preuaile, hee will obiect vnto vs, that it can be of no vse, and stand vs in no stead at all, seeing that all our righteousnesse is but drosse and dung, Esay 64.6. Phil. 3.8. And by this meanes he bringeth many to desperation. For to auoyd this wile, we are to know that howso∣euer our righteousnesse be so indeed, if either it be compared to the Law of God and his iustice, or taken a∣lone by it selfe in opposition to Christ, yet notwithstan∣ding as it is a fruite of Gods Spirit, as comming from  heart purified by faith, as done by the adopted Child
of God vnited to Christ; as it is a way wherein to walke to heauen; thus it is a matter whereby we may reape much comfort, giuing vs an euidence that we be∣long to Christ, although it be no matter of boasting. 4 Hee hath yet a further wile, he will grant that it is needfull and of vse: but yet wee need not be too strict and carefull▪ if we haue some euidences of our faith, it is enough; the Lord will pardon, his mercy is great, &c. A subtill wile, whereby many are deciued. For to auoyd this, we must consider the nature of righteousnesse, that is, that chaine which holds vs vp from falling into hell. The linkes of this chaine are the duties of the Law: if one linke bee broken, downe wee fall into hell. Obiection. But wee sinne all. Answer. True: but the righteous sinne by reason of the frailty of the flesh, violence of temptation, &c. yet he takes no liberty to sinne, with full consent, to liue and lye in it wilfully and wittingly; and there∣fore, 1 Ioh. 3.9 hee sinneth not, that is, giueth not him∣selfe ouer to any one sinne. 2 Againe, we know not whether we shall euer turne to the Lord or no, or haue time and power to repent, if we refuse to doe it, when God calleth vs. 5 O! But be not ouer-iust, lest thou be desolate, Eccle. 7.18. Men will forsake thy company, &c. But we must knowe that in true righteousnesse wee cannot be too strict in auoyding of those things that are seene indeed, and in doing of those duties that are du∣ties indeed. But this is meant, when wee will make a righteousnesse of our owne, and make more sinnes than God euer made. No maruell then if wee be forsaken. Otherwise wee shall be sure to haue fellowship with Gods Spirit, with the good Angels, with the Saints in heauen hereafter. 6 The sixt and last point to be considered, is to giue you a view of those that want this part of spirituall ar∣mour,
and so lie naked to the diuell, and are mortally woundd of him. These are, 1 Atheists, Psal. 14.1. 2 Machiaullists, who lay this for a ground, that no man should bee of so tender conscience, as for Religion ake to be hindred in any plot. 3 Epicurs, who are wholy and onely for them∣selues, and so regard neither their duties to God nor to man: as the Iudge, Luk. 18. But what? are there such amongst vs? Yea. 1 A∣theists. Wee shall know them by those three notes set downe by Dauid, Psal. 14. Which are: 1 They feare not God, ver. 1, 2. 2 They call not vpon the Lord, ver. 4. 3 They mocke at the righteous, ver 6. Which if we ap∣ply to these times, we shall find them true in multitudes. 2 Machiauellists, for are there not amongst vs State-protestants, that make piety but a matter of policy? 3 Epicures, the notes of them set downe, Eze. 16.49. are to be found amongst vs. All these are openly and notoriously vnrighteous: there are others more priuily, as, 1 Such as liue honestly, and ciuilly, and deale truly, &c. but yet liue in ignorāce, regard not the Sabbath, in brief, make no conscience of the duties of the first table. 2 Such as will seeme pious and religious, but in their dealings are vnfaithful & vniust. If inferiors, rebellious, carelesse in their charge: if superors, &c. How can any of these be said to haue on the brestplate of righteousnes? Vse of all is, to considr the danger we are in, and to be stirred vp to vse that helpe that God hath here pro∣uided for vs; and to this end, 1 To acquaint our selues with the word of God, out of which we may learn what is true righteousnes, that we may be able to distinguish between it and counterfeit. 2 To acquaint our selues with the vse, end, beauty, be∣nefit, excellency and necessity of this piece of armour. 3 Hereupon to examine our selues of the time past,
that we may be humbld for our former failings, that so our former sinnes may not be in time to come a dart in the hand of the diuell to wound vs. 4 Vpon examination, to haue a holy resoluion to en∣ter into this way of righteousnesse, and therein to walk. VERS. 15. And your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospell of pace. WHen the diuell can pruaile by none of the for∣mer waies, then he labours in the next place to ouerthrow vs by afflictions, troubles, and persecutions, which he raiseth against vs, to hinder vs in our procee∣ding. Wherefore the Apostle, to arme vs also against this, bids vs to looke for troubles and affliction, and to prepare our selus against them with this armour heere prescribed, viz. The shooes of the preparation of the Gospell of peace. Some vnderstand this for the preaching of the Gospel, as if the Apostle did allude to Esa. 5 2.7. Rom. 10.15. And so they make the profession of the Gospell to be these shooes here meant, Psalm. 119.105. But the common and most vsuall exposition is, that heereby is vnrstood the knowledge of the Gospell of pace, that is, of our reconciliation with God. Which cōmeth neerst to the point, for hereby come we to be fenced & prepared against troubles. We are then to vn∣derstand by the preparation of the Gospell of peace, not the Gospel it self, but an effect which it works in vs. So that this preparation is that furniture, which the Gos∣pell of peace doth prescribe vnto vs, and which it doth, it doth work in vs, namely, a heart settled, and resolued to goe boldly thorow all troubles, which is to be put on as a paire of shooes. So the Siriacke renders it fitly: Put on as shooes the preparation of the Gospell of peace. In handling of this piece of armour, we will go on i
this order. First, to consider what is the spirituall grace that is meant heereby. 2 The fit comparison of it to this part of bodily armor. 3 The ground of this patience. 4 The benefit of it. 5 The wiles and subtilties the diuell vseth to depriue vs of this necessary piece of armour. 1 The grace here vnderstood, is patience: for it is the Apostles purpose to arme vs against troubles: now what so fit a grace for this, as patience, which in this regard among all other vertues of Iob, is only cōmended vnto vs, Iames 5? This is set down by this description, (The preparation of the Gospell of peace.) Preparation, or, because by it the heart of man is settled, fixed, and resolued to goe on in the way, what impediments soeuer are in it. Of the Gospel.) Because it is the Gospel that doth settle the heart: this brings good tidings, Luk. 2.10. Of what? That God hath giuen his Sonne for vs, ver. 11. that his wrath is pacified towards vs, that our sinnes are forgi∣uen vs. This is that God, which when once we know, our hearts are fully resolued to beare all things, seeing that now nothing can make vs miserable. Of peace) Both in regard of the subiect, and nature of it, in that it first made tender of peace to man, and still declareth and publisheth it. 2 And also of the effect, because the Spirit of God, by the preaching of the Gospell, pacifies the conscience tormented with sin: as was signified by the song of the Angels, Luk. 2.14. This is added, to shew the ground of true patience, viz. That it must bee grounded vpon the word of reconciliation, for then onely can the heart go on with courage and comfort in enduring all things. FINIS.
