12463 99839274 3680
THE Description of the Low countreys and of the Prouinces thereof, gathered in∣to an Epitome out of the Historie of Lodouico Guic∣chardini. Imprinted at London by Peter Short for Tho∣mas Chard. 1593.
Siciliam membrant Romanae antiquitus vrbis, Fruge laborantem restituissè penum Sic iam Cecilij merges foecunda Britanns Vbere consilij dexterioris alit Sic vigeat viuax, seros videatque nepotes Siciliam superans Ceciliana seges.
To the Right Honorable my especiall good Lord the Lord Burghley, high Treasorer of England. Knight of the most No∣ble order of the Garter, and Mai∣ster of hir Maiesties Court of Wards and Liucris. IF the Poet Horace (Right Honorable) founde fault with the multitude of Pamphletes publi∣shed in his time, when he saide, Scri∣bimus indocti doctique poemata passim: how much more woulde hee haue reproued the vain glory of these daies, of the which we may iustly say as the learned Petrach writeth of his
age. Omnes assidue libros neque vlla aetat tanta  & disserentiū copia, tanta scientium atque eloquentiū fuit in opia. The autority of which two graue authors together with mine owne opinion cō∣curring with their iudgement in this point, caused me a long time to for∣beare the publishing of this Epitome of mine. But on the other side when I considered, first that the subiect of this booke containeth matter of state and gouernment, which as saith A∣ristotle Eth. 2. Principatum tenet in omnibus artibus. Secondarilie, that I shoulde but fight vnder the shielde of another man as Homer writeth of Teucer, Iliad. 8. And thirdly; that the originall published by the author himselfe, is by the iudg∣ment of all the Politiques of this age esteemed as a pearle of pereles price.
I began to conceiue well of my tra∣uaile, and to hope that the wise and learned allowing so well of the booke at large, woulde not disallow of my paines in the abbreuiation therof. At the least thus much I am well assured of, that if I haue failed in the publi∣shing: yet haue I not erred in the apt adressing and dedication thereof, ha∣uing (with all humility) presented it to the protection of your most Hono∣rable name, being as all forraine na∣tions confesse the greatest politique of this age, and as all England with great ioye acknowledgeth, the sole piller and onely Atlas as it were vn∣der hir most excellent Maiesty of this most flourishing common wealth, & lastly in regard of mine owne parti∣cular the onely patron to whome I owe euen by discent a peculiar hande of all dewty and deuotion. Wherfore
as I hope that the world wil pardon the former fault (if it be any) in con∣sideratiō of the amends that is made thereof by the later fact: so doubt I not but that your Honorable L. ac∣cording to your accustomed clemency will accept of this my poore endeuour and protect this my attempt, with the shield of your honorable autho∣ritie and iudgement: whereby your L. shall not onely stop the mouthes of barking Mastifes, who thinke other mens reprofes their owne praise, but also thereby greatly increase the pri∣uate band of my dewtie and seruice. And thus no whit doubting but that your L. will pardon my breuitie, which I haue the rather vsed to the end my Epistle may be answerable as wel to your L. leasure as to the worke it selfe beeing but an Epitome, most humblie I take my leaue, beseeching
the Almightie to the great good of this land and the aduancement of hir Maiesties affaires, that as hee hath endued you with Nestors wisedome and eloquence, so also that hee will continue the course of your life til you haue attained to Nestors yeares, and after this life to receiue you into the eternall ioyes of his celesti∣all Paradice. Your Honors most humble and obedient, Tho. Danett.
A Table how to find readilie all the Prouinces of these low Countreys, in the same order that they be described in this Booke. All these fiue are in truth comprehended within the precincts of Brabant. 1 Lothier. fol. 22 2 Brabant fol. 22 3 Marquisat of the sa∣cred Empire, fol. 42 4 Lembourg, fol. 48 5 Malines, fol. 50 6 Guelders, fol. 52 7 Zutphen, 54 8 Ouerissel, 56 9 Frise, 57 10 Groeninghen, 59 11 Holland, 60 12 Vtrecht, fol. 71. By some mistaking of the printer Vtrecht is not set vnder the Title of a Prouince as in truth it ought to bee, whereof I thought good to admonish the Reader in this place. 13 Zelande, 73 14 Flaunders, 78 15 Artoys, 96 16 Haynault, 101 17 Luxembourg, 109 18 Namur, 112 The Bishoprick of Liege, 114. Though this bee none of the Prouinces of the Low countreys, yet because Guicciardin describeth it & Aquisgrane (for the rea∣sons alledged by himself) among them, I haue thoght it meete to place them and quote them in order as they stand.
An Epitome of Lodouico Guicciardinis description of the Low Countries. THe Authour describeth first in generall the quali∣ties of the Countrey, and of the inhabitants therof, comprehending also ther in the generall gouerne∣ment of the prince. Secondarilie in particular, the deuision of each prouince, & of euery thing worthy of memorie contained therein. These Low countreys are cōprehended with∣in the auncient Gaule, the which is deuided by Caesar into three partes: namely, Belgica, (the which is contained within the Riuers of Marne, Seine, Rhine, and the occean Sea) Celtica and Aquitanica. Farther in that part called Belgique, are these Territories subiect to K. Philip (which we now purpose to describe) cōprehended, & imbrace the one halfe thereof: yea the best, the Noblest,
number of goodlie villages (all exceeding well peopled) contained therein in suche ort, that it may bee compared with the greatest and mightiest kingdome of Christendome. The other halfe is subiect to the King of France: namely, Picardie, Champaigne, and Normandy (though these two last prouinces be not wholy in Blgica) to the Dukes of ∣raine, Cleues and Iulliers: to the Archbishops of Trues, Mentz, & Clin, and to the bishops of Cambray and Liege. Of al these three parts of Gaule, the Noblest Belgique, and that for three reasons. First, by the authoritie of Caesar, Strabo, & other appro∣ued Authors. Secondarilie, for the nobilitie and excellency of the people of the Countrey. Thirdlie, for the greatnesse and worthinesse of those thinges that haue beene inuented there, and the accidentes that there haue happened. The principall of the noble inuentions of the Belgeoys are these. Printing, first inuented at Mentz, or as some write at Harlem in Holland 2. The restoring of Musicke and the inuention of diuers musicall instruments. 3. The inuenti∣on of the Chariot vsed in the warres, called in Essedum: whereof all our Coaches and Wagons tooke their first patterne. 4. The lay∣eng
of painting with oyle, first deuised at Bruges 5. The working of glasse in colours. 6. The ma∣king of Tapistrie, Sayes, Searges, Wusteds, Rus∣sels, Friezeadoes, and diuers sorts of linnen cloth, and diuers other small trifles. 7. The names of the Windes. 8. All sorts of clocks and Dials, v∣sed in these parts, and the Maryners Compasse, (as some write) 9. Diuers sorts of Housholde stuffe, and of instruments fit to make any thinge fine and handsome. In Belgica are 320. Walled Townes, diuers of the which are verye statelye and magnificent: Namelie, Bruxelles, Andwerp, Boysleduc, Gant, Bruges, Ipre, Malines, Cambray, Arras, Tour∣nay, Mons, Maestricht, Luxembourg, Valenci∣ennes, Lasle, Calais, Bouloyn, Amiens, S. Quen∣tin, Liege, Namur, Reins, Treues, Metz, Nancy, Toul, Verdun, Strausbourg, Metz, Aix, Couloyn, Cleues, Iulliers, Niemeghe, Vtrecht, Amsterdā, Middlebourg, Leewaerden, Groinenghen, al the which are famous and goodly Cities. The grea∣test part of Paris is also in Belgique: namely, all that is on this side the riuer of Seyne. All Tytles of Honor, are in Belgica: namelie, Emperour, King, Duke, Archbishop, Marquis, &c. Farther, in Belgica are 230. Townes, hauinge priuiledge of walled Townes. And 12000. vil∣lages with Parish Churches. The principall Riuers of Belgica are the Rhin
the Mense, Seyne, Schelde. The principall forrests are, The forrest of Ar∣denne, Charbonniere, Nonneu, Eagne, Sonien. Manie mines are also in the Countrey and Quarreis of excellent good stone. In Belgica also, are three of the seuen Electors of the Empire: namely, the Archbyshoppes of Treues, Mentz, and Coloyn, and a good parte of the Contrey of the Counte Palatin. And like∣wise, seuen of the twelue peeres of France: nam∣lie, Normandy, Flaunders, Champaigne, Reins, Laon, Beauuois in Picardy, and Noion. At Aix is the Emperour sacred, and at Reins the king of France. The Emperour Charles had an intention, to e∣rect the Low Countreys into a Kingdome, but the difficulty consisted heerein, that euery of these Prouinces being gouerned by proper Lawes, prerogatiues, and peculiar ancient priui∣leges, would neuer haue yeelded to one Royal Law common to al, especially those that had the largest priuileges, for the which cause hee gaue ouer his enterprise. The Scituation of the Lowe Countreys is such as heere followeth. North. Holland and Friseland haue the Oce∣an sea. South. Luxembourg and Haault are boun∣ded with Lorraine, Champaigne and Picardy. East Gulderland is bounded with the Rhie,
and Brabant with the Meuse. West. Flanders is bounded with the Sea, and with that part of Artoys, that bordereth vppon Picardy. The whole contrey is conteined almost in one Climat & a half, namely, from the halfe of the 7. called Diaboristhenes, vnto the 8. (esteemed in∣habitable by Ptolome) named by the Moderne Cosmographers Diaripheos. The Lowe Countreys haue of Longitude 7. degrees and a halfe: namely, from 22. & a halfe, to 30. And of Latitude, iust 4. degrees: namely, from 50. to 54. the which space, allowing halfe an hower for a Clymat, maketh the artificial day to differ about three quarters of an howre. The middle of the Contrey is Andwerp, which standeth in the Longitude of 26. degrees, and 42 minuts, & in the Latitude of 51. degrees and a halfe, so that the highest that the Sun moūteth aboue the Orizon the longest day of the year as for example, The 12. day of Iune is about 63. de∣grees and a halfe, & that day it sheweth it selfe a∣boue the Orizon, or neere about it 16. houres & a halfe. But bicause the Sun entring in the mor∣ning into our Hemisphere, & at night passing in∣to the other, abideth long (as the Sphere plainely sheweth) about the said Orizon, and giueth great light to vs, though we see it not. We may say tru∣ly that the day on the said xii. of Iune is xx. hou∣res long, in such sort that a mā may easilie read a
letter al that space. On the other side, the lowe that the  ounteth aboue the Orizon, be∣ing the 10. day of December, is about 26. de∣grees and a halfe, and is seene that day aboue the Orizon, or about it 7. houres and a halfe, giuing small light to vs, either in the morning before it enter into our Hemisphere; or in the Euenyng when it entreth into the other, bicause it riseth and setteth very perpendicularly. The Countrey is seated very commodiouslie for all the Prouinces of Europe: for Northwarde it is but  or  daies iourney by Sea from Den¦marke. Southward, it confineth with France and Lorraine. Eastward, with Almayne. Westward, with England, Scotland, and Ireland. It is also commodious for Norway and Sweden: for a Ship that depard out of Holland, arriued in Norway in  and two nights. Likewise from  iourney is made in 10. daies and lesse, and out of Spayne in eight, ten, twelue, or fifteene, according to the Hauen where you embarke. The circuit of the Countrey is about the fifte par of Italie, and somewhat more: namelye, a∣bout a thousand Italian miles, or 340 Flemishe leagues. The Leagues of the Countrey are of two orts, the one Flemish, the other French. The Flemish leagues are also of diuers sorts: for in som coun∣tries they containe three Italian miles: namely,
almost throughout all Brabant, in a part of Hol∣land, In Flanders Flamengante, in Zeeland, Liege Namurs. But in the Duchy of Luxembourg they are greater, and yet greater in a great parte of Guelderland, and in Frisland they are as great as the Almayne leagues: namely, fiue or six Italian miles long and better. The French leagues con∣taine two Italian miles, and these are vsed all o∣uer Flanders, Gallicante, Artoys, and the greatest part of Haynault. In that part of Belgique that obeyeth K. Phi∣lip, there are walled Townes, 208. Townes priuiledged as walled townes 150. Villages with Parish churches, aboue 6300. Besides a great number of other villages, & ham¦lets, and Seniories infinite. Farther, there are 60. strong places with garisons and particular Go∣uernours. The Ayre within these 25. or 30. yeares is be∣come much more holsome and temperate then it was in times past: whether it bee by reason of the great increase of the Inhabitantes, or of the industrie of the people, whoe purge it sundrye waies, or of some other superiour cause, I knowe not. The Countrey though it be not very propiti∣ous for the produsing of simples, yet by industry is it made commodious enough for them, consi∣dering that neere to Andwerpe, at the village of Bourguerhaut. Peter de Couberg apothecary hath
a garden, wherein are growing aboue foure hun∣dreth sorts of strange simples. Likewise, about a League and a halfe from Bruges, in the Seniorye of Moerkercke, Charles of S. Omer a Gentleman singularly well qualified, hath a wonderfull rare Garden. The Beeues of Friseland and Holland are ve∣ry great, and waigh some of them 1600 pound, of xvi. ounces the pound, which are more than 2000 pounds Italian. Yea one was giuen (being an Oxe of Friseland) to the Earle of Hochstraet, at Malines, which waighed 2528. pounds, of the Countrey waight. The Ewes in Holland, Friseland, and some part of Flanders, bring foorth three and fower lambs at a time, and the Kyne often two Calues at once, and giue commonly in Summer viii. or x. Lots of milk in a day. A Lot is a measure som∣what greater than the halfe Quart or Flacon of Florence. The Countrey bringeth forth great quantitie of Mather, wherewith a great part of Europe is furnished. It produceth also very perfect woad but no great store: but of Flax and Hempe great aboundance. But the cōmodities that the coun∣trey yeeldeth, togither with the fruitfulnes of the Sole, is heere omitted of purpose: bicause it is largely mentioned in the particular description of euery Prouince. Fiue principall Riuers there are in the Coun∣trey,
the which discharge themselues into the Sea: namely, the Rhine, the Meuse, the Schelde Ha, Ems, besides diuers other, which shall bee described hereafter in order. The Rhine riseth out of the Mount Adula, (commonly called the Mountaine of S. Gedart,) with two fountaines. And out of the same moun∣taine rise also, the Riuers of Rosne, Tesin, & Rus. So that within the Compasse of lesse than ten I∣talian miles, you shall see (not without great ad∣miration) foure famous Riuers to arise, the which in the forme of a Crosse, take their waies and course diuerslie, toward the foure partes of the world. The two Fountaines of the Rhine, vnite them selues togither, foure leagues aboue the Cyttye of Cur in Swisserland. But at Lobie in Guelder∣land, the Rhine parteth it selfe againe into two streames, the greater of the which, namely, the left streame, taketh his course to the West, and from thenceforth is called Wael. With the which at Heruerden meeteth the Meuse, and sudden∣ly they part againe, neither riuer losing his name: and in this sort take their course apart, till they come to Louuestain, where again they ioyne, and there the Wael loseth his name, as in the de∣scription of the Meuse shall be declared more at large. The lesser branch of the Rhine: namely the right, neere to Arnem in Guelderland, diuideth it
selfe againe in twaine. The one of the which namely, that on the right hand, runneth a small space towards the East, and after towardes the North, & is called of the Latines Fossa drusiana, but of the cōmon sort New Ysel, bicause Drusus Nero, seeing no great distance to be betweene this right branch of the Rhine & the Riuer Yssel, which ariseth in Westphalia, cutte a large Fosse neere to Arnem, all the waie betweene Arnem and Daesburg, into the which he receiued parte of the water of this right branch of the Rhine, the which conueying by this Fosse to Doesburg, hee there ioyned with the Riuer Ysel, to conuey ther by the easlier the Romain armie out of the Rhin, into the Septentrionall Sea. This Fosse beeyng ioyned with Ysel, at Campen entereth into the Gulfe of Zuiderzee: And you shall vnderstande that the sayd Riuer Ysel, before it meeteth with these waters of the Rhine, is called olde Yssel, but after their meeting, they are both named Newe Yssel: bicause of the great increase of their wa∣ters. And thus the Rhine, which before that time had but two branches, is now deuided into three namely, the Wael, which wee haue already des∣cribed: this heere now described called Yssel, & the third which nowe shall be described called Leck. The right branch of the Riuer of Rhine: after the great losse of his waters receiued into Fossa Drusiana, as before is declared, pursueth his
course Westward from Arnem, till it come vnto wick: wher about the year of our Lord 860. or as others write 1170. it brake into the little Riuer Leck, and leauing his olde course which was by Vtrecht, Voerden and Leyden, into the Ocean Sea, by reason that extreame tempests had stop∣ped vp that course with sands, and also loosing euer sithence his own proper name; it hath born the name of the little riuer that it brake into, and is called Leck and neere to Grimpen entereth in∣to the Merwe, which is a name common to the Meuse and the Wael after their second coniun∣ction, namelye, after they haue made the little Ile of Bomlerwert. But you shal vnderstād that notwithstanding that the Rhine haue left his old course, yet haue the Inhabitants, with diches & chanels drawne waters into that olde course, the which retaineth the ancient name of Rhine, and passing by Vtrecht, Ʋoerden, and Leyden, ente∣reth into the Sea neere to Catwick, or rather is swallowed vp of the Sands, neere to the sayde Catwick, and the Fort Britannique, where was in times past the auncient mouthe of the Riuer of Rhine. The Meuse riseth in the mount Ʋogesus, not farre from the fountaines of the twoe noble Ri∣uers, Seine and Marne. At Heruerden, it mee∣teth with the Wael, and suddenly they disioyne againe, neyther riuer losing his name, and so a∣part each taketh his course to Louuestaine, wher
(hauing first made the little Isle of Bomler,) they ioyn togither again, & so ioyntly taking the name of Merwe, they come to Dordrecht, where (hauing made the Ile of Iselmont) the Meuse re∣sumeth his name, and with such a furie entereth the Sea, that it maintaineth his course & keepeth his water fresh a great space, not without great cōmoditie and profit to the country, for by that meanes it openeth the waie to diuers fishes, es∣peciallie to sturgeons, the which findinge in the Sea this sweete water, and being beyond mea∣sure desirous thereof, enter so farre there into, that in the ende comming into the shallowe waters, they become a pray to those that lie in waight for them. The like effect worke also the riuers, of Pau, Tibre, Rosne, Garonne, and euerie other Riuer that entereth the Sea with a violent course But the Seine, Hebre, and the Thamis, entering gentlie into the Sea, soone lose both their course and their fresh water, and therefore worke no such effect as the Meuse and the other Riuers aboue mentioned do. The Sturgeous of Meuse are so great, that some of them waigh foure hundred, and some foure hundred and twenty pound, & are twelue foote longe of Andwerp measure, which is as much as six brasses of Florence. The time that the Sturgeon is in season, be∣ginneth in Aprill, and endureth more than three monethes, these sturgeons are sent into diuers
Prouinces, especially into England. Besides sturgeons the Meuse veeldeth also great store of Salmons and Salmon trowts, Lam∣prayes, Shads,Viua dra∣co mari∣nus. Congers, Mulets, Viues and di∣uers other sorts of Fishes, all the which are leane in the Sea, but after they are entred into the fresh water, they become fatte and excellent good. The Schelde iseth in Picardy, out of the selfe∣same mountaine that the Riuers of Somme and Sombre, foure leagues beneath Andwerp, the Schelde deuideth himselfe into two branches, the one of the which turneth Westward and is cal∣led Hont, and hauing run about xii. leagues, be∣tweene Scluse and the Ile of Valachry entreth in to the Sea. The other turneth towards the north, and enuironeth the North part of Zeland, & ha∣uing receiued at Berghen the little riuer of Zoom againe, he parteth himselfe in twaine, one of the which called Vosmeer, passeth by Tolen, and a∣bout a league from thense, dischargeth it selfe nto the Merwe, and this seemeth to haue been the auncient mouth of the Riuer of Schelde. The other branch separateth the Iles of Zealand with diuers streames, but principally where the course of the Riuer is largest and deepest: It deuydeth these Iles into two principall parts: namely, East and West Zeland, through the which conueying it selfe into the Sea, it endeth his course and loo∣seth his name, betweene Scowe and Valachry, receiuing floud and Ebbe as farre as Gant,
which is aboue 30. leagues frō the mouth of the Riuer. Into this Riuer, by reason of the vicinity that it hath with the mouth of the Meuse, come out of the Sea diuers sorts of fishes: namlye, Sturgeons, Salmons, and Salmon-trouts, Lamprayes, Tur∣bots, Congers, Shads, Mulets. Viues, Soles, &c. Besides a number of other sorts of fishes that run into this Riuer out of the Sea, as well to feede as to spawne (so commodious is the water for that purpose) in such sort, that by the space of two or three moneths in the Spring and in Summer (be∣sides the great fish) such a deale of yoong frie is taken in this Riuer, that an infinite number of people relieue themselues therewith. Into this Riuer run also out of the Sea, the dog fish or Sea-calfe, and the excellent Porpeses, cal¦led in Latine Tursii, which two kindes of Fishe spawne not, but ingender as land Beastes, and bring forth their yoong perfect and accomplish∣ed. And the Dog-fish not only bringeth foorth hir yoong vpon the land, but also there suckleth them with hir owne milke, till they bee growne to some reasonable greatnesse, twelue daies as Plinie writeth. They haue heare like a Dogge, and ingender as dogs, they haue a horrible voice and their bloud is hot, and all these fishes runne out of the Sea. But the Fish that the Riuer it selfe breedeth, are Pikes, Barbels, Tench, Carpe, some waighyng
twenty pound, Gugins, Eeles, Crabs, Creuises, and diuers other small fish excellent good, and some oysters also (though in truth they com out of the Sea) wherof in times past great store were taken in this Riuer, but within this 25. or thirtie yeares, the extreame colds and Frosts, haue cau∣sed them to retire into the deapth of the Sea, pos¦sibly they may returne againe, but in the meane time, euery month that hath R. in it, Oysters are brought out of England. Haa, neere to Terrouanne, hath his fountaine, and taking his course towards the North, passeth by S. Omer, and at Grauellinghe entereth into the Sea. Ems in Latine Amasius, riseth in Westphalia, and at Emden entereth the Sea. Moselle riseth in Lorraine and at Confluens entereth the Rhine. From this Riuer of Moselle in the time of Nero the Emperour, Lucius vetus a Romaine Captaine determined to haue cut a large Channell, which at ten leagues end should haue entered the Riuer of Soane, by means wher¦of he would haue conueyed the Romain Army from the Leuant Seas into the Rhosne, thense in∣to the Soane, and so through this Channell into the Moselle, and from thense by the Rhine in∣to the Ocean Sea. But Helius Gracilis enuying this noble inuention, ouerthrew his enterprise. La Lise riseth by Lisburg in Artoys, whereof it taketh the name. At Gant it entereth into the
Schelde. The Sambre in Latine Sabis, riseth by Nou in Hainault, and not farre from Namurs entreth into the Meuse. Dele riseth in Brabant, neere to Tile, it passeth by Louuaine, and Malines, and a great league from thense, it meeteth with the riuer Kethe, at a village caled Rumpst, where both of them losing their own names, and taking the name of Ruple, two leagues thense: nany, at Rupelmonde, they enter ioyntlie into the Schelde. Seine or Sine, riseth by Soigny in Haynault, and a little from Malines entereth into Dele. Dieze riseth by Per, in the Contrey of Liege, a League from Bolduc, it entreth into the Meuse. Demere riseth by Tongres, in the Contrey of Liege, not farre from Arschot, it entereth Dele. Neth riseth by Rethi, At Rumst it ioineth with Dele, and both losing their names are called Ru∣pel, and at Rupelmonde enter into the Schelde. Rueur, riseth by Bulinghe in Liegeland, and at Ruermonde entereth Meuse. Berkel, riseth by Coes felt in Westphalia, and at Zutphen entereth Issel. Niers, riseth neere to S. Anthonies in Lieg∣land, and a little frō Genappe, entreth the Meuse. Vidre, riseth in Westphalia, and entereth Zui∣derzee. In Dutch it is called Veghte. Scarpe hath two fountaines in Artoys, one ri∣seth out of Mont S. Eloy, and the other not far
off. But being ioyned togither neere to Mor∣taigne in entereth the Schelde. Denre, in Latine Teuera, riseth by Conde in Haynault, and Denremonde entreth the Schelde. Hayne, giueth the name to the Countrey of Haynault. It riseth by Hanuiere in Haynault, & neere to Conde entreth Schelde. Chiers, riseth in Lorraine, a league beneath Iuoy, it entereth Meuse. Besides these Riuers, diuers Channelles there are in the Countrey, cut out and made na∣uigable by mans hand, the principall whereof, are at Bruxelles, at Gant, at Bruges, at Middle∣bourg. The Contrey hath not many fountaines of run∣ning water, saue in the mountayne Contreyes: but Lakes, Pooles, and Marshes many, which both fortifie the Countrey, and furnish it of Fish. A Discourse of the Sea. THe Sea may well be tear∣med, not only a neighbor but also a mēber of thes low Cōtreys, as well for ye great benefite that it brin∣geth to them: as also for the harme that it doth thē when it rageth. Wherefore a word or two must be spoken thereof.
The Sea in his furie vpon the coast of Holla and Zeeland, casteth vp great mountains of sa, verie daungerous for Shippes. The like daunger also, and for the like cause, is at the mouth of the hauens, especiallie from the mouth of the Scheld to Andwerpe. But Pilots are appointed by euery Towne, to accompanie the Ships and to set markes in euerie daungerous place. The windes that most vex and trouble the sea are the North-west, west, South-west. As touching the order of the Tide this it is. At full and new moone the spring tides are highest and the sea most furious. Farther, as soon as the Moone commeth forth from vnder our Orizon the sea beginneth to swel, and floweth towards ye east (as it were to beare the Moon companie) till she come to the line Meridian, but after she is past the line Meridian, till she come to the west, the sea abateth. Againe when the moone lea∣uing vs entereth vnder the Orizon of the Anti∣podes, the sea beginneth againe to swell, till she come to the line of the midnight; from the which the Moon returning towards our Hemisphere the sea as though the Moone released her, returneth to her place againe: so that in the space of 25 howers we haue twise floud & ebbe. At the new Moone, it is full sea, at three of the clock in the morning, and three at afternoone, & lowe water at nine in the morning, and nine at night. From the new moone till the first quarter, the
tide decreaseth, from the firste quarter till the full Moone it springeth, from the full Moone till the last quarter it nepeth, and from the last quar∣ter till the newe Moone it springeth againe. Farther the Tide because of the naturall and accidentall course of the Moone chaungeth eue∣rie daie one houre, and 10. minutes, as if to daie it be at 7. tomorrow it will be at 8. and 10. mi∣nutes. The Sea riseth at Calais in Flaunders, Zeeland and Holland, eighteene foote, but where it is pressed into a straight as at Bristow, it riseth 66. scot. At S. Malo and Mont S. Michaell in Normandie 80. foote. The deapth of the Sea is betweene Calais and Douer, 24. fathom, Euery fathom of six foote. Betweene Zeeland and England 23 Betweene Wight and Normandie. 28. And so through all the channell of England. Neere to the Iles Sorlingues or Sylly of Eng∣land, 60 And so the neerer the maine Sea the deeper.
Commodities of Fish, namely of Her∣ryngs, Cod, and Salmon, that the Sea yeeldeth to the Low Contreys. And first of Herrings. HErrings are onely in thes Septentrionall Seas, but neyther in any Riuer, nor in the Meridionall Sea, nor in the Spanish Seas. They come out of the extreamest partes of the Septentrionall Sea, and approching neere to the land in maruellous and incredible multitudes, they shewe themselues in these our Seas about Autumne (viz) in August, September, October, and mid-Nouember. But the best are taken, frō mid-September, till the end of October. And note, that the sooner the colde beginneth, the sooner come they into our Seas, and in the grea∣ter numbers. Whereby it is coniectured, that they come hither, to eschew the cold of the Gla∣ciale Sea. They spawne in these Seas, and tarry heere till the end of December. Their course is, to compasse once the Ile of Brettaine, & so to passe into the maine Occean. It seemeth that they be sent of God for mans sustenance, for their course is hard by the Sea shore, and they swimme gazing where they see
any light, fire, or humane Creatures: as it were saying; Come take me. They haue Kings among them as Bees haue, marked with a signe on their hed like a Crown, and are somwhat ruddie, especially on the head. Their kings going before them, are followed with an infinite multitude, which seem like light∣ning a farre off in the night, by reason that theyr eies are bright like fire. The Herring feedeth (contrary to the Nature of all other Fish) of water onely, and as soone as he is out of the water and feeleth the ayre, imme∣diatlie he dieth. The best Herrings are taken, from mid-Sep∣tember till the ende of October, at the which time, vpon the Coast of Scotland is the best Fish∣yng. The neerer the Herrings approch to the south, be it by reason of wearinesse, or of the nature of the water, or of the bottome of the Sea, the lea∣ner they be and the lesse fauourous. Frieseland, Holland, Zeeland, and Flaunders, send Fisher-boats to the Sea in the Herring time, commonly called Busces, to the number of 700. These boates goe thrise yearely to the Hering fishing, and bring one with another, at one time and other, euery one Lasts. 70. Which amounteth in the whole, to lasts, 49000. One Last conteyneth Barrels, 12. Euery barrell containeth herrings 900. or 1000.
euery last is worth French Crownes, So that the whole amounteth to, 490000 pound Flemisn. 1470000. crownes French. 441000. pound starling, reckoning the French Crowne at vi. s. and the Flemishe pound at xviii. shillings. The second principall Fish commodious to the Low Countreys is God, in Flemish Ca∣biliau, in French Morüe, in Latine Asel∣lus Maior, differing from Merlus called Asellus Minor. THis Fish is so great, that some of thē haue beene found of more than 50. pound waight. It is good as well fresh as salt. It is taken in the same monethes that the Her∣rings are, but most aboundantly in the Seas neer vnto vs, and principally in the Seas of Friesland, in the three Winter monthes. It is salted at al times in such aboundance, that it yeeldeth yearely to the Countrey, more than of French Crownes, 500000. Which is of starling money, 150000 li. The third principall Fish of commo∣ditieto the Low Countrey is Salmon.
SAlmon is excellent good both fresh and salt. It is taken at al times of the yeare in Holland and Zeeland, but principally in Aprill, May and Iune. So great plentie of it is salted, that it yeeldeth yeerelie to the Countrey much more than to the value of 200000. Crownes. which is of Starling money. 60000. li. These three kinds of Fish only yeeldeth yeer∣lie to the Countrey (the Salt deducted) more thā 2000000. crowns, which is 600000 li. star∣ling. The continuall riches then that groweth to the Countrey of other sorts of Fish taken all the yeer is infinite, so that it were but time lost to goe a∣bout to value it. The Forrests and Woods of the Con∣trey, are these following. FIrst the Forrest of Ardenne which in Caesars time, reached from the Banks of the Rhine to the coun∣trey of Tournesey one waie, and to Champaigne another waie, & contained in length aboue 500. miles. It is still the greatest of all Gaule, yet now it extendeth it selfe but from Theōuille to Liege, which is xxx. leagues, though not all wood, bicause of great tillage in many places. The towne of S. Hubert, is in the iust middest thereof.
Normault, is a Forrest in Haynault, begyn∣ning neere to Quesnoy, in the which are manye Coales made, for the which cause, some haue held it for part of the ancient Forrest, called La Charbonniere. But others hold, that the Forrest called de Harchie, with a village and Castell of the same name (which is the place of residence of the Lords of Barlaymont) is a part of the anci∣ent Charbonniere. Le Boys S. Aman, is likewise in Haynault, and is also called the Forrest of Rayme. It begineth in Flanders Gallicant, neere to the village of S. A∣man, whereof it beareth name, and reacheth to Valenciennes. This Forrest of Rayme, appertey∣neth to Monsieur d'Emery, by meanes whereof he is Grand veneur of Haynault, which office is annexed to this Forrest, & is the same yt the Iu∣stice of Van ayre (which were more properlie tearmed Iustice of Vennerye) is in England. Le Boys de Faigne, beginneth by Auenner in Haynault, and extendeth to Meziers in France more than xvi. Leagues. Somen in Brabant, reacheth from Bruxels to Breine, Aleud, and Breine le Chasteau, three Leagues in length. It is full of Townes, Abbeys Villages and Monasteries, whither in Summer many Gentlemen and Burgesses resort, to dis∣port themselues. This Forrest is in circuit more than seuen leagues, and containeth 8000. Ar∣pents of ground: euery Arpent containing 400.
measures, and euery measure xx. feete. Euerie yeare a 100. Arpents of this Wood is cut, which yeeldeth to the king 25000. Crownes French. Meerdael, is a pleasant Forrest neere to Lou∣uaine, full of game to hunt, and free for all men. Sauenterloo, is betweene Louuame Brux∣lles, & Viluorden, not farre from the village Za∣uenther. Grotenhout is in Brabant, a little aboue Turn∣boult, (the Queene of Hungaries place of plea∣sure) in the which Wood ariseth the little Riuer Ade, which runneth into the riuer Nethe. Marlaigne, beginneth by Namur, and rea∣cheth to Philippeville. Niepe, is the principall Wood of Flaunders, standing neere to the Riuer Liz, and within two leagues of Cassels and Bailleu, in it is a Ca∣stell very strongly seated. Nonnen, is also in Flaunders neere to Ypre: it is full of villages, and some Abbeys. Poodsberg, is in the Confines between Flaun∣ders and Haynault, neere to Montgerard: This Wood is great and of figure round. Boys Guillaume is in Artoys, neere to Renty, where halfe a Battell was fought, betweene the Emperour Charls the fifth, and Henry the secōd King of France, An. 1554. Echterwalt, is in Guelderland neere to Arnem. Septforrez is in Friselande, nere to Ouer-yssel, and are seuen greate woods nere together, giuing
the name to one of the foure estats of Friseland, which therof is called Seuenwolden. Thes woods are full of diuers sorts of beasts namelie, Hart, Fallowe-deere, Goate, Wilde-boare, Hare, Co∣nie, Grey or Badger, Brock, Field-rats and mice, Hedghogges, Woolues, Foxes, Faines. In these woods are also excellent good Dogges to hunt these wilde Beasts withall, but the English dogs are the best. Farther in these Low countreys, are also some Martres, Otters manie, and store of feschaux or putoys, the furre whereof is sent all ouer Europe. In these Lowe countrys are also a kinde of Dogges named Bracques wherof Silius Italicus maketh mention, verie excellent both in folow∣ing and recouering game being hurt. And an o∣ther excellent kinde of water Spaniels is in Hol∣land. The foule of the country is, Partridge, Fesant Turtle-doue, Quaile great plentie, Black-byrd, Thrush, Ousell, Larke, and to conclude all kind of foule that is in England both Land foule and Water foule, especiallie Water foule in Holland. In these countreys breed also Pecocks, Swans, Herons, storkes, Geese, Ducks, Poulets of Inde, Pigeons, &c. The Haukes that breede in the countrey are Eagles, Gos-haukes, Faulkon, Sparow-haukes, Merlianes, but the best come out of Norway, frō whence commeth also the noble Gerfalcon
the which notwithstanding some write to come onelie out of Candia. The Customs and manner of liuing of the People of thes Low countreys, are these that follow. FIrst, as touching the stature both of men and Women it is very beautifull, their personage verie tall, and all their members in ve∣ry good proportion, especiallie theire leggs, but theire stature is not so tall as in Caesars time, either because of theyr mixture with strangers, or of the quality of their meates and maner of liuing altred from that age. They were the first people in France or Ger∣manie, that receiued Christ. They are valiant as writeth Caesar in these words Horum omnium fortissimi sunt Belgae. They are very skilful mariners and their Hoies are excellent good to brooke the Seas, by reason wherof they dispatch their voyages sooner than any other nation. They all haue some smackering of their Grā∣mer, and euery one, yea euery husbandman can write and read. An infinite number yea of those that neuer were out of the Countreye, besides their
owne language, speake French, and manye Al∣lemaine, Italian, English, Spanish. They are skilfull in Merchandise, and excell in all Arts, namely, making of Wollen, Tapistrey, Bayes, Wusteds, Russels, Linnen, Fustian, and o∣ther Merchandises and small Mercery wares of all sorts and prises, which are sent into the whole World: Now also they make Silks and wrought Vts, after the manner of the people of the Leuant. They inuented the Arte of painting, and the making of Linnen and Wollen Cloth: yea they taught the Englishmen the Art of making Wol∣len cloathes and of Diyng, about the yeare of our Lord 1404. who till that time were vtterlie ignorant therof, and came into Flaunders where they learned it. They are naturallie Musicions, and restored Musicke to hir perfection. They are not ambitious, but they are great builders, and great Iesters: They are couetous, credulous, and easie to be abused, Beneficiorum simul & iniuriarum immemores. The Women gouerne all, both within the doores and without, and make all bargaines, which ioyned with the naturall desire that Wo∣men haue to beare rule, maketh them too too imperious and troublesome. The eldest Daughter is of the greatest repu∣tation, yet hath no larger portion than the rest.
They marrie their children into strange towns, yea and Forraine Countreys, and marry Noble with ignoble, yoong with olde, maister and ser∣uant, which is not commendable. The Gouernment of the Prince, and first of the Regent. THere is one Regent who is also Gouernor of the County of Bur∣gundie, and hath his Councell continually attending vpon him. Vnder the Empe∣rour Maximilian and Philip his Son, Georg Duke of Saxonie was Regent. Vnder Charles the fift, first Margaret his aunt, after Mary Queene of Hungarie his Sister, from the yeare 1531. till the yeare 1555. whā Charles resigned his crowne and Empire. Than his sonne Philip, nowe king of Spaine gaue the gouernement with title of Lieutenant Generall, to Emanuel Philibert Duke of Sauoy his coosin Germaine, both borne of the daugh∣ters of Emanuel King of Portugale. But in the yeare 1559. the Duke returning into his owne Countrey of Sauoye than restored to him: King Philip gaue the gouernment to his sister Marga∣ret,
wife to Octauian Farnese, Duke of Parma and Plaisance, with Prouision of 36000. crowns a yeare and other duties. Bu n the yeare 1567 was the Duke of Alua made gouernour. And in the yeare 1573. Don Louis de Requezens who died Anno 1576. To him succeeded Don Iohn base sonne to the Emperour Charls the 5. who died An. 1578. and to him succeeded the Prince of Parma, Gouernour at this present. The Regents authoritie is in generality as great as the Princes, saue that all matters of mo∣ment passe vnder the Princes name, and all of∣ficers to whom is committed the generall Go∣uernement, gouerne in the Princes name, and are placed by the Prince alone: namelie, the Chauncellor, Presedents, Coūcelors of the state, Abbats &c. Likewise all Lawes, Decrees, Sen∣tences and Negotiations, are dispatched in the Princes name. As touching the Councels it is to bee vnder∣stood, that the Councell of estate not long agon, was all one with the Priuy Councel, but now bi∣cause of the great aboundance of businesses and affaires, the burden is committed to two Coun∣cels which before was sustained by one so that the Counsel is now deuided into the Councell of Estate, and the Priuy Counsell. The Councell of State is euer resident with the Gouernour, the number of these Councellors is vncertaine, They haue a president among them.
With this Councel the Gouernour consulteth of matters appartaining to the state of the Prince and common-wealth: namely of peace & war, and of the general gouernment of the Countrey, of aduertisements that come from all places of ntelligences with forren Princes and neighbors, of cassing of Colonels and Captaines, offortifica∣tions, munitions, and prouisions of Armor, and of sending and receiuing of Ambassadors. Farther, to this Councell all matters of great difficulty are referred by the other inferiour councels. To con∣clude, this Councell hath the charge and super∣intendance of all things, concerning the gouern∣ment and defense of the Countrey as well at home as abroad. Notwithstanding if extraordi∣rie matters of importance happen, the knights of the order, & somtime some other gouernors and officers of the K. are called to assist this councell. And there are foure Secretaries attending on it. The priuie or secret Councell is also assistant to the Regent. It consisteth ordinarilie of x. or xii. Councellors being Doctors and licenciat, & Gentlemen elected for their seruice to the prince to that place. It hath a President, who is also keeper of the great Seale. It hath the charge of Iustice, Lawes, and the pollicy of the Countrey. It ouerlooketh the other prouinciall Counselles, whereof we will speake heereafter. It hath au∣thoritie to giue priuiledges, pardons, graunts to make lawes, ordinances, statutes and edicts: for
the which cause the Councellors of this Co∣cell are also called maisters of the Requests. This Councell iudgeth and determineth controuer∣sies of bounds, limits, and Confines of Coun∣treys, and likewise of the superioritie, authoritie, and soueraigntie of the Prince, and of the Noble men and others that follow the Court. To con∣clude, this Councel is the rampire of Iustice, iud∣ging of all matters without appeale. Notwith∣standing matters of great moment, it communi∣cateth with the Prince, or his Lieutenant in his absence, and likewise sometime with the Coun∣sell of Estate, if the matters of state and matters of Iustice concur togither in one. The Counsell of finances resideth at the Court, their number are these. First, three sage Seniors of the Countrey called Chiefs or Surmendus des Finances, Then a Treasurer, a Receiuer Ge∣nerall, and three other men of qualitie and ac∣quainted with matters of the receipt, called Co∣nis: Besides Scribes and other officers. This Councell hath the charge of the Princes patri∣monie and reuenews, of aydes and Subsidies or∣dinarie and extraordinarie. Of receiuers and o∣ther officers dealing with the Princes Treasure. It leuieth Imposts and taxations, giueth order for assuing forth of mines that serue for paiment of al tters, concerning aswell peace as war: name∣ly cifications, Munitions, Prouisions, expe∣ses ordinarie and extraordinarie, concerning the
maintenance of the Common wealth. It letteth to farme the Princes landes, commandeth mo∣derations and restraints contained in their ordi∣nances. To conclude, it hath the gouernment of all the Princes money, goods, and reuenues, for the which cause it may iustly be called the Prin∣ces Banke or Treasur. These Counsels aboue rehearsed alwaies fol∣low the Court. There is also the Prouost of the Court, who al∣waies followeth the Cot to do iustice vpon of∣fendors. He hath born before him a long ragged red rod, and is therefore called Vergerouge. This Officer may enter into anie Prouince in the ab∣sence of the Prouost Martiall, or of the Drossart in Brabant, and do iustice vpon offendors with∣out appeale, but not without forme of iudgemēt, yea and where the Martiall can not come out of his owne Prouince, nor the Drossart out of Bra∣bant, this Vergerouge goeth ouer all the Prouin∣ces as occasion of seruice doth require. The Councell of the Chamber of Accompts resideth at Bruxels, & is a member of the Coun∣cell of Finances. The number is one President & vii. Maisters of accompts: to this Court all Trea∣surers, Receiuers, and other Officers that manage the Kings Treasure in Brabant, and the Countries of the contribution of Brabant, and likewise in the Duchie of Luxembourg come and yeelde their accompts, and from this Court receiue their
acquittances. There are besides this, three other Chambers of Accompts, one in Flaunders, one in Guelder∣land, and one in Holland, which all yeelde their accompts to the Councell of Finances, as super∣intendent ouer them. All these foure Councels aboue rehearsed are ordinarilie resident with the Regent in the name of the Prince. But besides these, there is a particular Gouer∣nor in euerie Prouince, to whom also as to the kings Lieutenant all the affaires of that Prouince espicially matters of warre are referred, and hee for his part is obedient to the generall Regent. Likewise in most of the kings Prouinces is a particular Councel held in the kings name com∣monly called Parliament, and in Brabant and some other places Chaūcerie, ye which consisteth of vi. x. xii. or xviii. Counsellors, Doctors of the Law, or Licentiate with a President or Chaun∣cellor for their head, where also the kings Aduo∣cate and his Procurer generall are resident with Secretaries, Registers, and other officers accor∣dingly; all chosen by the Regent, and all in maner receiuing pension of the Prince. This Court dealeth in all causes ciuill and cri∣minall within that Prouince saue in Mortmaines which are referred to the Court Ecclesiasticall. To these Courts of Parliamēt resort for iustice not only the subiects but also the prince himselfe,
for whom his Aduocate & Procurer make an∣swere, and all men haue right there, euen against the prince, as of late it happened in Guelderland, that the king hauing lost a sute of great impor∣tance against the Lord of Aholt, and no Officer being found that would excecute ye sentence, the king himselfe gaue cōmandment that it shoulde effectually be executed, which was done accor∣dinglye. To these prouinciall Courts are brought all the appeales of all other inferior Courts in that Prouince. The prouinciall Courts of Malines, Haynalt, Guelders, Brabant, & Friesland, iudge difnatiuely without appeale. But they haue a for me of Reuision in Ciuill causes, which is a new examination of the processe by other Iudges, but of the same Prouince, being halfe the number of those that pronounced the sentence: but sel∣dome doth the partie anie good that demaund∣et this Reuision. Farther in this Reuision they iudge by Suffrages. They vse in al these Coues & through all the Countrie both the Ciuill Cannō & cōmō lawes, but without preiudice of the Municipall Lawes & particular Constitutions of priueleged places which are many, & also without preiudice of the Princes Decrees called Mandemens, the which (the priuileges not preiudiced) are preferred be∣fre all other Law. But these Mandemens are deliberatly aduised off by the said Courts before
they be published or receiue any authoritie, who first consider of them whether they be agreable to the reason of the common Law, that is to saie the Ciuill Law. Besides these Courts aboue mentioned, the Regent yearely sendeth out Commissioners in the kings name to receiue the accompts of the receipts & expenses in all matters that concerne the prince, of all the principall townes through the whole Countrie (which is called Faire la Seigneurie, or la nouuelle loy) and in Brabant the accompts also of Churches, Monasteries, & Hos∣pitals: For the ye prince hath a peculiar authority ouer the Cleargie to visit them, and to see whe∣ther they be well gouerned or not, and if they be not, to reforme ye abuses. And note that all offi∣cers from the highest to the lowest, aswell of the long as short robe, sweare fealtie to the prince. As touching prouision for the wars, the prince entertaineth no bands of footmen after the Itali∣an guise, but garrisons of footemen, and of some horsemen only in 26. places. Notwithstanding the Emperor Charles the v. in the yeare 1547. appointed 600. ordinarie Launces, euerie launce hauing for his retinue one man of armes, and foure light horse-men as in France he hath fiue, which amount in the whole to 3000. horse. These are deuided into 14. companies called Les bands de ordonnance, ye greatest is of 50. laun∣ces,
ye least of 30. They are deliuered to ye gouern∣ment of the noblest men of the Countrie with good prouīsiō & goodly order, so that these cō∣panies neuer die but are continuallye supplied with a number of valiant gentlemen, and souldi∣ers readie at all times to doe anye exployt they shalbe called vnto. Those that gouerned these Companies in the yeare 1566. were these following. 1. The D. of Arschot. 2. The Prince of Orenge 3. The Counted Eguemont. 4. The Marques of Bergues. 5. Conte de Horne. 6. The Conte de Azenberghe. 7. The Conte de Mansfelt. 8. The Conte de Meghem. 9. The Conte de Reux. 10. The Conte de Bossur. 11. The Conte de Hochstrat. 12. The Sr. de Brederode. 13. The Sr. de Montignie. 14. The Baron of Barlaymont. All these Captaines haue their seuerall officers. There is also a Treasurer of the wars that pay∣eth these bands, he is alwaies a man of reputati∣on, and is called Art Molckman. The king hath no armie vpon the Sea, for that were needles considering that at all times he ta∣keh vp both of his owne subiects, & of strange
nations what ships soeuer he findeth in his por when he hath need, notwithstanding an Admi∣rall there is with a small number of ships, & those verie euill appointed: but when the king taketh anie strange ships he furnisheth thē with his own munitiōs, & paieth thē honorably for their seruice. The Admirall is iudge of all Sea causes, Cap∣taine of the Sea armies, Gouernor of all Sea charges, and hath his part in all prizes taken on the Sea in time of warre. He hath a Custome called Dache of euerie tun of Marchandice that by the kings safe conduct commeth from, or goeth into the enemies Coun∣trie by Sea, to the which safe conduits of the kings, the Admirall must also giue his consent by writing, the which writing is called Attache, be∣cause it is anexed to the kings safe conduct, and without that all marchandises by Sea are confis∣cate, as also without the Attaches of the Gouer∣nors of the Countryes or Townes through the which any marchandise passeth by lande into, or out of the enemies Countrie, the saide marchan∣dise is also confiscate notwithstanding the kings safe conduct, if the gouernors safe cōduct be wan∣ing to it, which priueledge the king hath graun∣ted them to the end himselfe be not deceiued. The king hath great prouisiō for the warres of all sorts of furniture, all the which lieth at Ma∣lies, saue that which is abroad for the furniture of the stronger places & the Frontiers. Of this fur∣niture
is Captaine the great maister of the Artilli∣rie. Farther there is almost no good towne nor Castell in the Countrie, but that the townes men besides the kings furniture haue of their owne, great prouision of Artillerie & munition necessa∣rie for the warres. Certaine statutes made by the prince for the preseruation of the State. NO Subiect of the Lowe Countries may go to serue in the warres any forraine prince whosoeuer without ye expres licence of ye king. No man in time of warre may trafique with the ene∣mie without the princs licence. No horse aboue vii. foot high may be conuay∣ed out of the Countrie, nor no Mare at all with∣out licence of the prince. No grain may be conuaied out of the countrie. No prouision of warre, no armor, no gold, nor siluer may be carried out of the Countrie coyned nor vncoyned, whole nor broken, saue only for necessarie iourneing expenses. No quick siluer, no copper, no brasse maye be caried foorth, but money and fauor do all things euerie where. All merchandises are suffered to be brought in∣to the Countrie, and all coine is currant there
according to the value therof. The Sea is free for all men to fish in, Hauking, Hunting, & fishing in riuers & fresh waters ap∣pertayneth to ye prince & to noble mē & gentle∣mē in their seuerall iurisdictions & territories, but in Brabāt the king hath reserued to him selfe on∣ly these v. woods wherein none other may hunt: namely Sonien, Sauenterloo, Groetenhout, Groo∣tenheist, & Meeredale. The rest are free for e∣uerie man to hunt in, saue with nets & cordes. The reuenues of ye prince consist in demaines, wood-sale, imposts vpon marchandise going & comming by land & by Sea, certaine rents in di∣uers towns, as for example in Andwerpe ye prince hath part of all cōfiscations, he hath the mint, the publique prisons, ye waighing of marchandise, al yt which bee euer let to farme. The prince hath likewise ye measuring of graine which is farmed in Andwerp for 100000. crowns in ready coine. The princes reuenues are equall with ye king of Englands, setting aside that which the Crowne of England receiueth of the Church. The maner of assembling the states of of the Low Countries is this. THe states at ye daie appointed are som∣moned by ye princes letters to appeare ordenarily at Bruxels, partly, because ye Court ordinarily resideth there, & part∣ly because ye Brabancōs consult of no matter out of the precincts of their owne Countrie.
These Contreys send Deputies, namely, Bra∣bant, Flandres, Artoys, Hainault, Valenciennes, L'Isle Douay, Orchies, Holland, Vtrecht, Zee∣land, Namurs, Tournay, Tournesis, Malines. The other contreys, namely, Guelders, Ouer∣issel, Frise, Luxembourg, assemble each in theyr owne countrey vnder the Gouernour thereof for the Prince, and cannot be called to the generall assembly such are their priuiledges. The States of each Prouince are these. First, the Cleargie. Secondly, the Nobilitie. Thirdly, the people and the principall townes. The States assemble not altogither, but one prouince after another, to whom the President or one of the Counsell of State proposeth in the princes name that which he demaundeth, for without their consent the Prince can obtaine no∣thing that is propounded. If but one towne oppose it selfe whan al the rest haue consented, al that the others haue doon is of no effect, bicause nothing is granted by the deputies but conditionally (viz) of all the States Vnanimi consensu doe agree therevnto. There is also an agreement between the Pope and the Prince, which standeth vpon these con∣ditions following. The Prince giueth the Cleargy liuings, & the Pope confirmeth them.
No prelate or Laie person may be adiourned out of the countrey, but the Pope must send his commissioners into the countrey. The pope cannot giue a benefice, not a par∣don, nor send a bull into the countrey without the Princes Placet. The Clergie can buy no lands or immouable goods, without the expresse permission of the Prince. The Particular Description of euery Prouince of the Low countreys. THere are in the Low con∣treys xviii. titles that the Prince beareth, and xvii. Prouinces (viz) Lothier, which is a bare title of a Dutchy without lande. Brabant, Lēburg, Luxem∣burg, Guelders, which are prouinces & dutchies. Flaunders, Artoys, Hainault, Holland, Zeeland. Namur, Zutphen, which are Prouinces & Earl∣dōs. The Marquisat of the sacred Empire Fris∣land, Malines, Ʋtrecht, Ouer-issel, Greninghā, which are Prouinces and Seniories. Note that the Countie of Burgundie, is not de∣scribed in this discourse, belike because it  so farre vp in the high countreys, neere to Suitxr∣land
and Sauioe. Now followeth the particular description of euery one of thes Prouinces, and first of Lothier or Lothrie. THis is a bare Title, for the lande re∣maineth in Lorraine: yet the Duke of Brabant yetayneth the name also, because Barbant was a part of the ancient Lorrame, and was called base Lorraine. And yet at this day, there is a court of causes ci∣uill and criminall, at Genappe in Brabant Wallon, called La Court de Lorraine. But all the Coun∣trey at this day is comprehended in Brabant Wallon. Brabant. Brabant is bounded North with the Meuse, which seuereth it from Guelderland & Holland, South, with Haynault, Namurs, Liege. East, with the Meuse, which seuereth it from another part of Guelderland. West, with the Schelde, which seuereth it from Flaunders and the princi∣palitie of Alost. The aire is very wholsome and good, through all the contrey, & the soile fruitfull, saue in Kēp∣land, which being naturallie vnfruitfull, is made fruitefull by keeping of Cattell and soiling the ground. The length of Brabant from South to North,
(viz.) from Gemblours to S. Ghertrudenberg, is 22 Leagues. The breadth from East to West, (viz) from Helmont to Berghes, 20 Leagues. The circuit 80. Leagues. Note heere, that when you read of any leagues, you must account the length of them according to the vse of the countrey that is described. The principall Riuers of Brabant, are ye Meus and the Schelde. The principall Forrests of the countrey, are Sonien, Zauenterloo, Grotenhout, Grotenheist, Meerdale. Townes walled there, are 26. whereof Lou∣uain, Bruxelles, Andwerpe, Bosleduc, are the 4. principall, and being ioyned togither make one of the three Estates of Brabant. Farther, Tilmōd, Leeuwe and Niuelle, are named among the Ca∣pitall townes, notwithstanding that they be but small. The rest of the walled townes are Arsh∣cot, Berghe, Meghen, Breda, Diest, Maestricht, which are all beautified with Titles of Honour. After follow, Steenberg, Lire, Viluorden, Gem∣blours, Ioudoigne, Hannut, Lāden, Hau or Halē Sichenen, Herētales, Eindouen, Helmont, Graue. The dignities in Brabant are these: The Mar∣quisat of th Empire, The Dutchie of Arschot, The Marquisat of Berghen, The Counties of Hochstraet and of Meghen, The Seniories of Breda, Diest, Grimberghen. The state of M∣stricht
and the Seniory of Rauastain (though this be a member apart) besides Baronies xix. com∣prehending Grimberghen for two. Small townes in Brabant though vnwalled, yet market townes, faire built, and inioying the priuiledges of walled townes, and some of them adorned with titles of Honor are xviii. described heereafter by them selues. Villages with parish churches (diuers of them hauing also titles of Honor) there are 700. the principal whereof are hereafter described. Farther the Dutchy of Lembourg, the State of Walkenburg, the Earledome of Dalem and the state of Rode-le-duc with all their appendances, lands and iurisdictions, resort to the Chancery of Brabant. The three estates of Brabant consist of the cler∣gie, the Nobilitie, and the foure capitall townes. The Duke of Brabant is ancient protector and aduocate of the countrey of Liege, and was wont to be so also (as it is saide) of the noble Citty of Aix or Aquisgrane, which is now vnder the tu∣tele of the Duke of Cleues and Iulliers. Now fol∣loweth the descriptiō of the foure capital towns, namly, Louuain, Bruxelles, Andwerp & Bosleduc. Louuain. Louuain, is so called of Louen which is a dutch worde, and signifieth to praise or Honour, because the Idol Mars was there honoured. It standeth by the riuer of Dele, the aire there is so
temperate, that Vines growe both within and without the towne. The greatnes of Louuain is foure miles com∣passe within the wals and six without. The buil∣dings are beautifull, The Temples, Monasteries, the church of S. Peter, and the publike Pallace are very sumptuouslie built. The figure of Lou∣uain is round. The towne is nothing close built, by meanes whereof, there are within it many goodly Gar∣deins, valleis, moūtains, medows, vines & springs Louuain is one of the foure towns of the Mar∣quesate of the sacred Empire. The Vniuersity was founded by Iohn the iiii. of that name, Duke of Brabant, in the year 1426 In it are aboue xx. colleges, the principall where∣of are fiue, Lilium, Castrum, Porcus, Falco, rilingue. Louuain is the principall and mother of all the townes of Brabant, and maketh the firste mem∣ber of the third estate of that Prouince. Louuain is the first towne that receiueth and giueth Oath to the Prince. It was sometime an Earledome, and commanded ouer the greatest part of Brabant. Vnder the iurisdiction of Louuain are these: townes following: Tilmont, Leeuwe, Gemblours, Diest, Halen, Sichenen Ioudoigne, Hanut, Lan∣den, &c. In the Low contreys are onely two Vniue∣ties,
one heere at Louuain, and the other at Do∣ay, lately erected by king Philip. Bruxelles. Bruxelles, standeth vpon the little Riuer Sinne, ouuain and it are of one greatnesse. There are two walles about Bruxelles, between the which towards the East, the court is resident. It is seated for all commodities, both of plea∣sure and profit, no towne in the world better. There is a goodly chanell made by Art from Bruxelles into the Riuer of Dele, and thence in∣to the Schelde. There are also fiue notable scluses for the backwater. The charge of this channell and seluses amounted to 500000 crownes. In Bruxelles are seuen gates, seuen churches, seuen noble houses, and seuen escheins of the Towne. Bruxelles is also one of the foure towns of the Marquesat of the sacred Empire. The buildings of Bruxelles are very sumptu∣ous. There are in Bruxelles 52. Occupations deui∣ded into nine members, called the nine nations. In Bruxelles is made great store of Armor, and excellent Arras clothes of all sorts, both of silke and also of gold and siluer. Vnder the iurisdiction of Bruxelles, are Niuelle and Ʋiluorden. Bruxelles is not a Vicountie (though it be so
taken) but there is a certaine dignitie in of that name, as is also in Andwerp, and other Townes, hauing only belonging certeine ancient preheminences,  and pre∣rogatiues but no lande, and he that now is Vis∣coūt of Bruxelles, is Charles Hannart Sr of Liod kerke, who hath onely certeine preheminences in the towne, but no other iurisdiction: such as the Boregraue hath in Andwerp, who is the selfe same officer there, that the Viscount is at Brux∣elles. This office seemeth to be much like the of∣fice of our Sherifs in England, whoe are also cal∣led Vicicomites. The Chancerie of Brabant is ordinarilie resi∣dent at Bruxelles, to the which resort the Dut∣chy of Lembourg, the states of Walkenbourg, Da∣lem and other Seniories beyond the Meuse. At Bruelles is also resident, the Court Feu∣dale of Brabant. There is also held the spiritual court of the Bi∣shop of Cambray, because the Brabancons may not be called out of their owne countrey, to an∣swer any matter whatsoeuer. The Bishop of Liege hath also a court there, bicause part of Brabant is in his dioces. Bruxelles, is also the ordinary place of residēce of the kings court. This towne is the second capitall towne of Brabant, and maketh the second member of the third estate thereof. Their principall welth con∣sisteth
in their lands and reuenewes. Three leagues from Bruxelles is the Abbey of Afflighem, the Abbat whereof is the first, and hath the first suffrage of al the twelue abbeyes of the States of Brabant. In this Abbey is one of the principall Libra∣ries of Brabant, wherof there are 4. more, name∣ly, at Tongherloo, Gemblours, Grunendale, and at the priory of the seuen fountaines. Andwerp. Andwerp standeth in a goodly plaine, the Ri∣uer of Schelde parting it from Flandres. The Riuer before the towne is broad 600. Flemish elles & better, deepe 22. elles, the tide riseth ordinarilie xii. foote. Note that euery Flemish elle maketh three quarters of an English yard. Andwerp hath beene thrice walled. The Sea is by land xiii. leagues from the town, by water xvii. leagues. There are about it ten bulwarks, and 7. gates built of goodly stone. The wals are fortified with large ditches, which with engines that they haue, may be filled with water at all times. The circuit of Andwerp is about foure Italian miles. There are eight principall chanels within the towne, the greatest whereof ioyning to the Pal∣lace of the Easterlings, is of receipt for 100. great ships, all these chanels are cut out of the Riuer.
There are in the towne of Briges aboue 74. Streetes 212. the greatest part being large, and very euen and straight built. The Burse of Andwerp tooke the name of the Burse of Bruges, which was so called because it was neer to the house of the familie of la as appeareth by their armes yet remaining vpon the said house, being three purses. This name of Burse hath gained so great credit in the worlde, that all places where Marchants are to assemble togither, are called Burse: yea the Exchange in England retaineth yet that name, notwithst the alteration made by the Queene. There are in Andwerp but fiue parish churches, the principall wherof is our Lady church, being a very goodly one. The rest of the Authors dis∣course in this place, is only of orders and societies belonging to ye church, a matter vnnecessarie for vs to rehearse. Heere also the Author runneth out into a long discourse of the order of the golde fleese, rehersing all the knightes that haue bin of that order, a thing not necessarie for vs to spend time in: notwithstanding wee will heere for the better satisfaction of the Readers, rehearse all the principall or∣ders of Knighthood in Christendome.
1. The Annunciade, which is the most anci∣ent, was instituted by Ame the xi. Earle of Sauoy about the yeere of our Lord. 1342. 2. The garter by K. Edward the iii, An. 1350. 3. The golden fleese, by Philip Duke of Bur∣gundie, Anno. 1429. 4. S. Michaell by Lewis the xi. An. 1470. 5. S. Stephen by Cosmus Duke of Florence. Anno 1561. 6. The Holie ghost, by Henry the third king of France, Anno. There are in Andwerp 13500 houses, & place appointed for 1500 more. Houses are deerer let in Andwerp than in anie other place in Christendome, Lisbonne in Por∣tugale excepted. It is forbidden to builde or repaire any house of wood, or to make any wall lesse than a foote thicke aboue the ground. Many goodly buildings there are in Andwerp, as well priuate as publike, but the publike espe∣ciallie are very sumptuous, namely, the place where Arras is solde, the Butchery, the Waigh-house, the English house, many sumptuous ware houses built for the English men, the newe lod∣ging for the discharging of Marchandise that commeth to the towne by lande, but the Ester∣lings lodging passeth all these in greatnesse and magnificense, yet is that as farre surmounted by the towne-house, the building whereof, costal∣most
100000. crownes. Andwerp is an imperiall towne, and Metropo∣litane of the Marquisat of the Empire, yet paie nothing to the Emperour. It is maruelouslie wel furnished both out of their owne countrey and out of forren countreyes, of all kinde of victual and dainties, both for the necessary vse of man, and also for wantonnesse. In Andwerp is such a dignitie as is aboue men∣tioned in Bruxelles, which in dutch is called Bore graue, and in other languages Viscount. This dignitie is now in the Prince of Orenge, by ex∣change made by his auncetors of Nassau with the Duke of Cleues, who held it as lord of Diest: It is an office of honor but of small commoditie. Andwerp is the third capitall towne of Bra∣bant, and maketh the third member of the third estate thereof. Vnder the Iurisdiction thereof are comprehē∣ded, Berghen, Breda, Lire, Herentals, Steenberg∣hen, and diuers other townes and villages, part of the which in ciuill causes, resort rather to And∣werp than to the Chancerie of Brabant. The causes of the great wealth that And∣werp is growne to, are three. THe first the two Martes that are in Andwerp, the one whereof, begyn∣neth 15. daies before Whitsontide, and is therof called La foire de P∣tecoste, The other is called La foire de S. .
or de S. Bauon, bicause it beginneth the Second sunday after our Lady day in August, which is of equall distance from either of the saide Feastes. Each of these Martes endure six weekes, all the which time, no man is subiect to any arrest for debt: the paiments of these Marts are the 10. of August and the 10 of Nouember. The paimēts also of the two faires that were wont to be made at Berghes, namely, of the cold faire, & of Easter faire, are now made at Andwerp, the one on the x. of February, and the other the x. of May. There are also at Andwerp besides these Marts, two great Horse faires: the one at Whitsontide, the other at our Lady day in September, & like∣wise two of Leather and skins of all sorts, which follow immediatly after the horse faires. The second cause of the wealth of Andwerp is this. In the year 1503. the Portugales began to bring spices out of their Indias, and from Calicut into Portugale, & frō thence to Andwerp, which before that time were wont to be broght by the ed sea to Barnt & thense to Alexandria, & so to Venice, which (before the Portugals voiage into the Indias) furnished all Christendome ofspices. But the king of Portugale, hauing partly by loue, partly by force, drawne all the traffique of spices in Calicut and the Iles adiacent thervnto into his owne hands, and hauing brought them to Lis∣bonne, sent his factor with spice to Andwerp, by which meanes it drewe all Nations thyther
to buy spices of the said Factor. Thus by this occasion beginning to be greatly frequeted: Afterward in the yeare 1516. diuers Mar∣chants strangers, Spaniards and Italians, depa∣ted from Bruges to go and dwell at Andwerp, & after them others, and so by little and little all strangers (a few excepted) left Bruges and went to Andwerp, with no lesse commodity to this dit∣tie, than discommodity to that. The third cause of the wealth of Andwerp, was the course that Monsieur de Longueuale & Mar∣tin van Rossem made with a mightie armie, An. 1542. into the Low countreys, meaning indēed to haue spoiled Andwerp: by occasion whereof the Cittizens of Audwerp to auoid the like peryll herafter, haue since ye time maruelously fortified their towne, for the safetie both of it & of al Mar∣chants traffiking to it: so that it is now free from al danger and thought impregnable. By mean whereof, a great multitude of Noblemen and Gentlemen come to dwell in the towne. Farther because the Suburbs were at that time , and that restraint hath beene made sithens, to build within 3500. feet of the towne wall; a great number of wealthy men that before dwelt without the towne, haue byn since and daily are constrained to build and dwell within the town, by meanes whereof sithens that time is increased by 3000 houses. The charge of the Cittizens of
the strangers in the towne, at the entry of K. Phi∣lip as prince, amoūted to aboue 130000. crowns The prouision for the poore in Andwerp, a∣mounteth yearely to more than 30000. ducats, by meanes whereof, none beg in the towne, saue at certaine feasts, and certaine houres. Besides this prouision aboue rehearsed, they nourish in the town to a certaine age 8000, poor children of both sexes, & teach them good occu∣pations. The Reuenews of Andwerp are these. THe assise of wine yearely 60000 Ducats. The assise of beere yearly 80000 Ducats. They receiue also an impost of corne, and of all clouen footed beasts, seruing for mans sustenance, the which is paid by the poule. Likewise the reuenew of the towne consisteth in the sale of certaine small offices, and of letters of freedome: for you shall vnderstand that who so will exercise any occupation in the town, must haue letters from the towne-house to license him so to doo. Lastlie the towne receiueth a good reuenew of houses and lands, which they let to farme, so that the whole reuenewes of the towne with the im∣posts of wine and beere are esteemed 250000. Crownes.
The towne paieth nothing to the ordinarie, but sometime aideth him with money and sometime granteth him imposts extraord∣rie to gratifie him with. The Princes reuenewes in Andwerp. THough the town of And¦werp it selfe paie nothing to the prince: yet hath the king an impost vpon wine, beee, and beastes sold there for mans suste∣nance, besides the aboue mentioned impost of the town vpō these things. Farther the K. as Duke of Brabant, hath an im∣post leuied vpon such marchandizes as go & by Sea to the town, the which is called the of Brabant, farmed yearely for 20000 ducats. Againe the king as earle of Zeeland, hath the like impost vpon all Marchandizes going and comming by Sea to Andwerp, called the toule of Zeeland, farmed likewise yearely at 20000. ducats or better. This toule was wont to be paid in Zeeland, but now for ease of the Marchants, this and al o∣ther leuied vpon any Marchandizes going and cōming by sea to the town, is paid in Andwerp. Notwithstanding the toule leuied by the prince vpon any Marchandizes going & comming by
and is still payd in Zeeland & not in Andwerp. More than these small toules neither Prince, nor towne can leuie anie thing vpon any mar∣chandizes comming to the hauen by Sea, or go∣ing out of the towne by Land. The prince receiueth farther in Andwerpe part of all confiscations, hee hath also by inheritaunce the profit of the Mint, and of the common Gaile, which he letteth to farme both in Andwerpe and through the whole Countrie of Brabant. The pollicie of Andwerpe in the ad∣ministration of Iustice Criminall. IN causes Criminall the pri∣soner is allowed his Aduocate whome himselfe will make choise off, yeathough he lacke money. If ye case be not hai∣nous, ye prisoner is bailed, & if there be no ground of the accusation, the Officer that followeth the processe answereth ye charges. If ye case be haynous the Mark graue desirerh to haue the prisoner put on the Racke, whereto though ye Iudges agree, yet can nothing be done before ye Bourgeoisie being enformed of the fact agree also thereto, & thē is the partie disfranchi∣sed before he be put to the Racke, otherwise he cannot be racked. The Mark graue cannot Racke him but in the
presence of twoo of the Escheuins not him longer thereon than pleaseth them. After the prisoner hath sentence passed vpon him (which cannot bee done before the Iudges be all agreed) hee must within 24. houres be executed at the Princes charge. But here is to bee noted, that before the Sen∣tence be pronounced, the Marckgraue maye compound with the Prisoner (if the case bee no haynous) for money, of the which, twoo partes come to the Prince, and the third to the Marck∣graite. The bodies of those that be executed are not buried vnlesse it be obtayned by speciall grace, or for money. All their goods are confiscated. Churches and Cloysters are Sanctuaries for prisoners, except the case be haynous. Pollicie in iustice Ciuill. NO Citizen nor stranger dwellinge in Andwerpe may be arested for debt, nor his goods seased be∣fore hee haue bin conuen∣ted before the magistrate. The order of cōuenting them before the magistrate is this. The debter is warned by a Serieant to come before the Ma∣gistrate, and there he is examined of the debt. If
the Creditor prooue the debt, the debter hath a short daie giuen him to paie it, and in the meane time men are appoynted to looke to his house that nothing be conuayed awaie. After x. or xii. daies expired and the debt not payd, an Inuen∣torie is taken of the goods, which are forthwith sould, and if they will not answere the debt, the debtors landes are sould, and if they all suffice not, then his bodie is apprehended, but till it be found that he hath no meanes to paye the debt, the bodie of a Citizen maie not bee seazed on. The like order is vsed to a straunger dwelling in Andwerpe, but if he haue no dwelling there he may be arested at all times, notwithstanding at three daies end he may be bailed. Likewise a Citizen or Inhabitāt of Andwerpe can not arest the bodie or goods of an other Citizen, vnlesse hee be a Vagabond, or a Spend∣thrift. Ifa Citizen of Andwerpe be bankerout, the wife is first answered her Dowrie, and if shee be dead, then is it answered to her children, who re∣present the place of their mother, next to her is ye Prince answered, then the Towne, & lastly the Creditors equally. The Sonnes & Daughters inherite after their Father equally, saue in Landes of noble Tenure, called Fiefs, of the which the principall house to∣gether with two parts of the land descendeth to the eldest Sonne, the other thirde part is equallie
deuided among the other sonnes, but the haue nothing to do with the Fiefs. A Bastarde legittimated by the Prince maye dispose of all that he hath, and if he make no will his next of kinne succeed him, otherwise if hee be not legittimated, all that he hath commeth to the prince by the Lawe de Aubeine. Yet a Bastarde legittimated shall haue no par∣tage with his bretheren & sisters, but that onlye which his Father giueth him. A Bastard of a woman, maide, or widowe, not being begootten by a maried man, nor a religi∣ous man shall haue his Partage, and inherit from his mother with his bretheren & sisters as fully as if he had bin borne in lawfull matrimony. No Land may be bought or morgaged, but by writings made before one of the Escheuins at the least, and one Secretarie of the towne, who enroule it in the publique Registers, where all men may see it. And after fiften or sixten mo∣neths expired, no man may quarrell it. Their Mariages. WHen a man marieth his daughter and giueth her money to her do∣wer, that barreth her not from her Fathers Inheritaunce. But when the Landes and goods (the where with the Daughters meddle not ex∣cepted)
are deuided equally among the childrē the summe giuen in mariage is abated. In all townes saue Andwerpe the Husbande s bounde to his Wiues debt, and the Women to heir Husbandes. But in Andwerpe excepte the Woman trade Marchandize shee is not bound to the Husbandes debtes, but the man is bound to the Wiues debtes, whether they were due before the Mariage or after: And the reason is because noe Woman after shee is Married (settinge those aside that trade Marchan∣dise) can binde her selfe, but by her Husbandes leaue. If a Citizen marrie out of Andwerpe without leaue of the Bourgue-mayster hee looseth his freedome. If a man and his wife continue together 50. yeares, at the ende of 50. yeares they celebrate with great ioy their marriage a newe: so doe the Priests also if they liue 50. yeares after they haue song their first Masse. A Citizen married, if he bid out of the Ban∣lieu of Andwerpe but six Weekes without leaue of the Bourgue-mayster looseth his freedome, but a Citizen vnmarried maye goe whither him listeth, and tarrie as long as pleaseth him with∣out anie leaue asking. If a Citizen goe to dwell out of the towne of Andwerp with his wife & childrē he loseth his freedome vnlesse hee declare himselfe to bee of
the Citizens without, for you must vnderstande that there are two sorts of Citizens, those within, and those without, the which all enioy the selfe same priuileges. But he that declareth himselfe a Burgesse without (so that hee dwell not out of the quarter of Andwerpe, or the Marquisate of the Empire) is bound to take his oath to ye towne once a yeare, and to paie halfe a Crowne to the publique Treasurie, & so he may enioy his free∣dome and priuileges without any preiudice. A Citizen or one borne in the Countrie (this reacheth not to straungers which are made free) yt hath remayned one yeare out of Andwerp, if he depart to goe to dwell in anie other Towne of Brahant must paie to the publique Treasurie 5. in the hundreth of al his immoueable goods, & if he go to dwell out of Brahant hee payeth 10. in ye hundred, vnlesse he go to dwell in some place priuileged from these paines, as Lire, Bergh, Bre∣da, Middlebourg in Zelande, and such other Townes. No straunger may exercise anie Art in And∣werpe before he be made free. There are not in Andwerp aboue 15000. able men for the warres, reckening betweene the age of 18. and 60. because the number of Women, Churchmen, and Children is exceeding great there.
A briefe rehearsall of all the nota∣ble thinges in Andwerpe. 1. THe Towne walles and Bulwarks with diuers secret Issues in & out of the towne. 2. The Gates of the towne be∣ing seuen. 3. The Bridges, which are sixe. 4. The Castell a rare peece of worke, but now rased. 5. The new towne. 6. The Hauen. 7. The towre of our Ladie Church. 8. The new Burse. 9. The Mint. 10. The Haules of occupations. 11. The Bucherie and Fish-market. 12. The town-house. 13. The Esterlings-house. 14. The English and Portugall houses. 15. The Glas-house. 16. Plantine the Printers shop, where there is daylye spent in printing 150. Crownes. The noble houses in Andwerp. FIrst you must vnderstande that the Nobilitie here cannot exercise mar∣chaundise, as in Italie they doe, for that the Nobilitie here dwell in
Castels oade and but few in the townes, n∣withstanding in Andwerpe are as manie nob houses resident as suffice for the gouernment of the Towne. The names of the which here fol∣loweth. 1. Lyre. 2. Berchem. 3. Imerfell, which is issued out of the house of Lyre. 4. Vrsel. 5. Schoonhouen descended of the house of Arschot. 6. Werne. 7. Halm . 8. Roccox. 9. Sterck. 10. Stralen. 11. Schetz. 12. Ʋander-heyden. A notable discourse of the trafique & Commerce of Andwerpe with strang and forren Nations. IN Andwerpe are 7. strange nations that trafique there. French who in time of peace onlye come thither. Alemās, Danes, & Ostr∣lings together, Italis Spaniardes, English, Portu∣gales. Of the which these 6. Nations last rehear∣sed make aboue the number of 1000. Mar∣chantes. There are more Spaniards in Andwerpe tha of anie other Nation, because diuers of them married & dwell there.
Anthonie one of the Fouguers of Ausburge di∣ed not long sithence, and left by his testament to his Heires aboue 6. millions of Crownes. A discourse of the Exchaunge. THe places where the Ex∣change rūneth are for Ita∣lie, Roome, Venis, Milan, Florence, Genes. For Alle∣maine, Ausbourg, Noren∣berg, Franck forde. For Spaine, Medinadel Cam∣po at 2. Faires, Villano at 1. Faire, Medina de Rio Secco at one Faire, Bor∣gos, Calice, Seuille, Lisbonne. For Fraunce, Lyons, Paris, Rouen. For England, London. For Burgundie, Besanzon. The Exchaunge consisteth in giuing or recei∣uing in one place, as for example in Andwerp, as much money as amounteth to a Crowne, a Du∣cat, or an Angell, to receiue or deliuer in Italie, or in an other Prouince as much in valewe, which is a goodlie commoditie for traffique. But rich Marchants moued with desire of vn∣satiable gaine, hauing gathered together greate Masses of money, doe either by giuing foorth to interest when there is need of money, or ta∣king vp when there is no need, make money ei∣ther scarse or plentifull at there owne pleasure &
to their owne gaine particular, but to the preidice of the common-wealth. A rehearsall of such Marchandice as commeth out of dyuers Coun∣treys to Andwerpe and is sent into those Countries from Andwerp, & first of Italie. Roome. NO thinge is brought from Roome to Andwerpe there is sent from And∣werpe thither Cloath of diuers sortes, Sarges or Sayes, Wosteds; Demi∣wosteds or Russels, Lien cloth, Arras and Tapistrie. Ancona. From Ancona come Chamlets watered and vnwatred, Grograins, Spice, Druggs, Silkes, Co∣ton, Felts, Tapistrie, Spanish leather, Indian color, Wrought Veluets & Sattin of diuers sorts. To Ancona are sent store of English Cloathes & Carisies, Flemish cloathes especially cloathes of Armentiers, being mingled of 4. colors, Sar∣ges, Wosteds, Linen cloth, Arras clothes, but not great store, and of Cuchenille (which comme out of Spaine) great quantitie.
Bouloigne. From Bouloigne come Sattins & Veluets, Silke twisted and rawe, Cloth of Gold & Siluer, Caps, Gold, Purle, Cipres for bandes To Bouloigne are sent Sarges, Russels, Tapistrie, Linen, Small Mercerie wares, & some cloth. Venis. From Venis come Spices, as Cloues, Sinamon, Nutmegs, Ginger, Drugs also, as Rubarbe, Aloe, Cassia, Agaric, Dragons bloode, Momie, Seene∣leaues, Coliquintida, Scamonee, Tutie, Methre∣dat, Triakle. From Venis come also excellent Sa∣tins, Silke rawe and wrought, Chamlets, Gro∣graines, Wrought Veluets, Tapistrie of Turkie, Samis excellent good which is a kind of silke like to Satin, excellēt Scarlets, Cottō, Comin, Ebenus, mercerie wares of silk, Indiā color called Azure & diuers other colors to paint & to die withal. To Venis are sent Iewels, pearles, English cloth & woll, Low countrie cloths of diuers sorts, Saies, Wosteds, Russels, Linen cloth, Tapistrie, Cuche∣nille great quantitie, diuers small wares, furniture for houses, Sugars, & somtime some Peper. Naples. From the Realme of Naples come Satins, Silke wrought & rawe, fine Furres, Saffron of A∣quila, Manna excellent good. Thither are sent Cloths of the Low countries, &
english cloathes, infinite linnen cloth, Sayes, wosteds, Russels, Arras, & many works of metall. Sicile. Out of Sicile come Galls, Commin, Oringes, Cotton, Silkes, Wines, namely Malmsey & such like. Thither are sent clothes both wollen & linnen, Sayes; Arras, manye workes of metall. Milan Thence commeth gould & siluer thred, Satins, cloth of gould of diuers sortes, Fustiā, Skarletts, stamels & other fine clothes, ryse, armors excel∣lent good, diuers sorts of small wares, Parmesan cheese. Thither is sent peper, iewels, sugar, muske & other odors, English & Flemish clothes, Saies of all sorts, wosteds, Russels, infinit quantitie of Lin∣nen cloth, Tapistrie, Cochenelle, English & Spa∣nish wolles. Florence. Thence commeth cloth of gold & siluer frized & vnfrized, Satins wrought with golde called Brocatz, and other Satins rich & good, gold and siluer thred, Rashes verie good & durable, Satin called Capitons, fine Furres of Marterns & Faines and diuers other fine & curious workes. Thither goe Sales, Russels, Linen clothes and Flaxe, English rugges, Frizes & wolles, notwith∣standing that the greatest part come by Sea out of England itselfe.
Genes, Thence come Veluets and Satins, the best that are made, & diuers other kindes of silkes, Corall, Mithridate, Triakle, all verie excellent good. Thither go English & Flemish clothes, Saies, Russels, Linen cloth, Arras, diuers small wares, all kind of houshold stuffe. Mantoua. Thence come Satins, silke wrought & rawe, Caps great store, & diuers other marchandizes. Thither are sent such wares of these Countries as before are rehearsed. Luques. Thence come clothes of golde & siluer some∣time, but of silkes of diuers forts great quantitie though verie thinne and selender. Thither is sent as before is rehearsed. The like & diuers other sorts of marchandizes also come out of diuers other townes of Italie, namely Cremona, Verōna, Bressa, Vicenza, Mo∣dena. Farther out Italie are brought by Sea, diuers other marchandizes, as Alums of Ciuita Vecchia, Oyles of Pouille, Genes, and Pisa, Gaules, diuers sorts of Gūmes, Cotten, Commin, Seene leaues, Irias called of the Florentines Diaggiuolo, Brim∣stone, Orpigment.
And thither is caried by Sea, Tinne, Lead, Mad∣der, Brasill, waxe, Leather, Flax, Sope, poudered , and diuers sortes of fine and verie beautifull wood to worke in, & somtime corne, as wheate, Rie, Beanes, & other Lenton corne called of the Italian Legummi. And thus much of Italie. Allmaigne. Thence commeth Siluer in Bullion or Lingots, quick-siluer, Copper fined & vnfined an infinite quatitie, wolles of Hassia very fine, & good glasse Fustians great store, Oade, Madder, Saffron, & diuers things for Diers, Saltpeter, small wares great quātitie, houshold stuffe of all forts excellēt faire & finely wrought, of all sorts of mettals and Armor a wōderful quantitie, & likewise Rhenish wines to a great value. Thither are st Iewels, preious stones, Pearles, Spice, Drugs, Saffon, Sugars, English & Flemish cloathes great store, Saies, Wosteds, Russels, Ta∣pistie, great quantitie of Linnen cloth and other Marchandize of all sorts. Denmarcke, Osterland, Liuonie, Norwaie, Swe∣den, Poland, & other Septētrionall prouinces. Thence commeth Wheate, Rie, Copper, Latin, Brasse, Saltpeter, Oade, Vitriol, Copresse, Mad∣der, excellent Wolles of Austria, Flaxe, Home, Waxe, Brimstone, pich Sope ashes, excellent fine Fures of all forts, Leather & Skinnes of all sorts of Beasts, especially Buffe & Beare Skinnes to be vsed in ye warres, yea diuers sorts of Fish Skinnes,
ikewise Timber for ships, wood excellēt faire & fit for all kind of works, Waineschot, Dealebord, Beere, poudered flesh, fish poudered & dried with the smoake, the sunne, the wind, yea & with the cold, besides diuers other marchandizes too long to rehearse, but especiallie great quantitie of yelow Amber & to great value. Thither are sent Spices, Drugs, Saffron, Sugar, Salt, great store of English & Flemish cloathes, Saies, Wosteds, Russels, Fustians, Linen cloath, Precious stones, Silkes, Cloth of gold, Chamlets, Grograins, Tapistrie, Sacks of Spaine, and other wines, Alume, Brasill, small wares, & all mouea∣bles of houshold A discourse of Amber which cōmeth out of the Septentrionall Prouinces aboue rehearsed. Amber is a ioyce not of a tree, but of a stone which groweth like Corall in a Mountaine in the Northe Sea cleane couered with water and shunned by all Mariners at the least three Leagues for feare of wracke. The mountaine is reasonable large, and about 50. English yardes high, and when anie tempest ariseth in the North sea especiallie in September and December this
Liquour by ye violence of the Sea is rent from rocke & cast into diuers Hauens, & vpon diuerse Sea coastes both neere & far frō this rich rocke where the people gather it, to the great commo∣ditie of diuers princes, namely the king of Swedē, the Duke of Pomerania, but especially the Duke of Prussia in whose Countrye the most of it is taken vp. The people of the Countrie when the Sea rageth most, all naked leape into the Sea, vpony which first appeareth great store of weed, & after ye Amber, which being takē out of ye water hardeneth like to Corall, neither is this Amber founde else where, but in those Seas onlye. Besides the beautie thereof it hath manye Vertues, it burneth like Piche, it draweth to it not onlye Strawes and such light thinges, but also Iron like to the Adamant. It is ex∣cellent good against all Agewes, especiallye the quarterne, to stop bloude both aboue & beneath, against the plague and all kind of poyson, the dropsie, falling-sicknes, stone, cho∣lique, headach, weaknes of the stomake, and the yellow iaundies. And thus much of this pretious Gomm or stone. Fraunce by Sea. Thence is brought salt of Brouages, Oade of Tolouse, Canuas & such like Cloathes of Brtaigne & Normandie, wines white & cla∣ret, oyles, saffron graines of Prouince Melage.
or Melassi, Turpentine, Pitch, writing paper, Glasses, Prunes, Brasill, France by land. Thence are brought diuers works finely guil∣ded, fine wollen clothes of Paris and Rouen, sta∣mels of Touars, Bourats of Champaigne, Thred, yarne and hempe of Lions, Verdegris of Mont∣pellier, and diuers other Marchandizes beeing small wares. Thither are sent Iewels, pretious stones, pearls, siluer in bullion or masse, quick-siluer, Lead, Tin, Vermilion, Copper, Brasse, Lattin wrought and vnwrought, Azure to dye with, Cuchenille, Brimstone, Salt-peter, Vitriol and Coperes, Chamblets, Grograines, Turky-works, English cloathes, Frises, Cottons, great store of Flemish cloathes frised and vnfrised, fine linnen cloth, Sayes and Sarges of all sortes, Wosteds, Russels, Tapistrie, wools of Austrich, Leather, Furs, wax, Mader, Hops, Sope, poudred flesh and poudred fish great plenty. England. Thence come Cloathes and carsayes of all sorts, and of them great aboundance, both fine and course, Frises, fine wooll, excellent Saffron, but no great quantity, Tinne, Lead, Sheep skins, Cony skins, and diuers sorts offine furres, lether, Beere, Cheese and other victuals, and Malmesie brought out of Candia into England.
Thither are sent Iewels, Pearles and pretiou stones, siluer vnwrought, Quick-siluer, Cloathes of gold and siluer, Silks, gold and siluer thread, Chamlets, Grograines, Turky-workes, Spices, Drugs, Suger, Cotten, Comin, Gaules, Linnen cloathes of all sorts fine and course, Sayes, Rus∣sels, Tapistrie, Madder, Hops, Glasse, poudered fish, all sorts of small wares, as well of mettall as of other stuffe, Armor, all kinde of munition for the warres, and implements of house. Scotland. Thence are brought Sheep skins, Cony skins, diuers other fine furres of diuers small beasts, es∣peciallie martres, the best that may be founde, Leather, wooll, cloathes but euil wrought, pearl faire and great, but not comparable neyther in beautie nor price to the Orientall pearle. Thither are sent Spices, Madder, Sugar, some Silks, Chamlets of all sorts, Sarges of all kinds, linnen, and some small wares. But the thinges sent thither are to no great value: partly because the Scots are poore, and partly because they fur∣nish themselues out of England and France. Ireland. Thence are brought rawe and drie hides, di∣uers sorts of Beasts namely, Oxen, Kyne, sheep, fine Furs, some cloathes but of small value, and certaine other grosse wares, but of small prise.
Thither are sent such wares as are caried into Scotland, but for the most part they are furni∣shed out of England. Spaine. Thence come pretious stones, Pearles verie good, but inferiour to the Orientall Pearles and stones, gold, siluer, Cuchenille, Salsaparille, guai∣acum wood, Saffron, Drugs, Graines, Scarlet, raw silke, Silks of all sorts, especially Velue & Tafitaes of Toledo, Salt, Aluin of Mazzeron, Orille of Canaria, which is an herbe to die with, caled of the Florentines Raspe, fine wooll, Iron, Leather, wines of diuerse sorts, Oiles of all sorts, both for meate and for draperie, Vineger, Hony. Melassi, gummes of Arabia, Sope, Fruites of all sorts, both fresh and dried, as Orenges, Limons, cit ons, pomgrannets, Oliues, Melons, Capers, Dates, Figs, Raisons, Almondes, &c, Caarie wines, Canarie Sugars. Thither are sent, Quick-siluer, copper, brasse, and Lattin wrought and vnwrought, Tin, Lead, loathes both Flemish and English, Sayes, Wu∣steds, Russels, Grogranes, Tapistrie, linnen cloth of all sortes, chamlets, Flax, Thread, waxe, pitch, Mader, Sope, Brimstone, and sometime wheate and Rie, poudered flesh and fish, butter, cheese, all wares made of mettall, silkes, siluer plate, things wrought and siluerd ouer, Armor, all mu∣ition for the wars, all kind of houshold stuffe, all things made with hand of Artificers, for the Spa∣Spaniards
euen of base condition hate to to the death. Portugale. Thence come pretious stones and pearles O∣rientall perfect good, fine gold beaten in masse, Spices, drugs, amber, musk, Cyuet, Elephantes tooth, Rubarb, Aloes, Azure or Indiā colour cal∣led of the Portugales Anil, Cotton, the roote of China, Sugars of S. Thomas Ile, Brasill, Male∣guette and other drugs that come out of Quyne, sugars and wines of Madera, salt, wine, Oade, oyle, graine, being the grain of the hearb wher∣with they dye skarlet, called thereof Crimosin in graine, Orcil-le called Raspe, being an herbe to die with & diuers other simples, and good fruits greene, drye and preserued. Thither is sent siluer in masse, quick-siluer, ver∣million, copper, brasse, Lattin wrought and vn∣wrought, Lead, Tinne, Armor, Artillerie and al munition for the wars, gold and siluer thred, and such other Marchandises as are sent into Spaine. Barbarie. Thence are brought sugers, Anil, Azur, o∣therwise called Indian colour to dye with, gums, Colloquintida, leather, furres, fethers of all sorts. Thither are sent cloth, both wollen and linnen, sayes, small wares both of mettall and of al other things.
A briefe abstract of the valew of the principall Marchandies brought yearely to Andwerp and the Low countreys, out of each of these Prouinces aboue rehearsed. Italie, 000000 Crownes. The cloth of gold, Silks, gold & sil∣uer thread or wier, Chamlets, Gro∣graines, silke wrought & vnwrought setting aside the other marchandize brought out of Italy to Andwerpe, a∣mount yeerely to 3. millions of Crownes Alemain 2100000 Crownes. Fustians, 600000, Crownes. Renish wine 40000, tunnes of sixe Almes of Andwerp to the tune, eue∣ry Alme containing 3. barrels of Flo∣rence, and euery tunne prised at 36. Crownes amounteth to 1. Millian and a halfe of Crownes. Denmarke. Osterlande. Liuonie, Norway. Sweden. Poland, & the other prouin∣ 1680000. Crownes. Send yearely into Holland, 60000. Lasts of graine, especially Rie: eue∣ry last prised at 40. florens, euery flo∣ren at 56. grosse, which amounteth to 560000 pounds Flemish, which
each pound esteemed at 3. Crow amount to 1. million and six hundred and four score thou∣sand Crownes. France 1480000 Crownes. Sendeth yearly 40000 tuns of wine, of the aboue mentioned measure, each tunne valewed at 25. Crowns, which amounteth to 1. Million of Crowns. Oade or pastell for Diars 40000. bales, which esteemed at vii. crowns and a halfe the bale, amount to 300000. Crownes. Salt of Brouages sixe thousande hun∣dreds, euery hundred containing a hundred tunne, prised between 225. and 230. Liures of the countrey for the tunne more or lesse, according to the cleannesse or foulenesse of the salt, which sixe thousande hundreds prised at 30. Crownes the hundred amount to 180000. crowns.
Spaine, 625000. Crownes. Was wont to send yearely to Bruges 40000 sacks of wooll, but because the Spaniards themselues, of late make great store of clothes at home, they send not so much nowe, so that in the yeare 1560. they sent but 25000 sacks, which at 25. crowns the sack, amount to 625000. Crownes. But the wines yt come out of Spaine are of much greater prise than the Wools. England, 550000 Crownes. Sendeth yearelye 1200. Sarplers of wools which amounteth to more than 250000. Crownes. Cloathes, Carseys, and other small cloathes reduced to whole cloathes, amount yearely to more thā 200000 clothes, which esteemed one cloath with another, at the least at twentie & fiue Crownes the cloth, amoun∣teth to 5. Millions of Crownes. Which treasure of cloth and wooll together with that that the English men receiue besides for a nūber of other good things that they bring out of England, they imploy heere in the Lowe
countreys vpon such Marchandise as I haue be∣fore rehearsed which they carrie home with th into England. So that the traffique betweene England and the Low countreys, of that which is reciproq∣ly bought & sold betweene these two Nations, amounteth yearly to aboue twelue Millions of crownes, in such sort that hardlye can they liue the one nation without the other. Of Scotland, Ireland, & Barbary, no mention is made, because that which they bring or carrie away is of no great moment. Heere is to be noted, that Marchants to auod the hazzard of too great losse, assure one another at a certaine price (whereof they agree among themselues) of a good part of their Marchandi∣zes that passe by Sea, to the end that if they mis∣carrie, all the losse fall not vpon one man, which is both a wise and an honest course. Heere is also to be noted, that the whole grosse sum of all the marchandize brought into the Low countreys by all the Nations here aboue rehearsed, amounteth to xiiii. millions, one hundred and thirty fiue thou∣sand crownes. Whereof England alone bringeth to the valew of fiue millions and two hundred & fifty thousand crowns, which is more than a third part of the whole by 807500. crowns.
Bolduc. Bolduc signifieth as much as Bois-le-duc, be∣se in times past, there was a pleasant Wood in that place, appertaining to the Duke of Bra∣ant. The Towne standeth vppon the little riuer of Dese but 2. leagues from ye Meuse. It is a great towne, strong, well peopled, rich and wel built. The Cathedrall Church is dedicated to S. Iohn, which is a very goodly one, and hath the good∣liest Diall that may be seene. The people are very warike. There are made yearelie in the towne, aboue twentie thousand cloathes, worth two hundred thousand crownes. The water there is excellent good to white lnnen cloth, excellent good kniues and pins are made there. This is the fourth principal towne of Brbant, and maketh the fourth member or quarter in the assemblie of the states. Vnder the iurisdiction thereof ae foure coun∣teys, called the foure members, namely. Kempenlande. Peelande. Maeslande. The straight of Osterwick In the which Contreys are contayned these townes. Helmont. Emdouen. Meghen. Rauestein. Graue, and diuers other villages.
Now follow the three small capitall town of Braban, and first Tilmont standeth vpon the little Riuer , the towne is decaied, for before the decay ther∣of, it was the fourth towne of Brabant, but now Bolduc is come in place thereof. Leewe standeth vpon the little brooke Cheaf. It is strong and well furnished of all thinges ne∣cessarie for the warres, because it serueth for frontier towne against the countrey of Liege. In this towne is the goodly priorie of S. Augustine, the prior whereof is one of the twelue prels of Brabant. Farther in this towne is excellent good beere brewed. Niuelle. In this towne are excellent fine li∣nen cloathes made. The soile about it is very fruitfull and full of quarreyes of excellent good stone. This is one of the foure townes of ye mar∣quisat of the sacred Empire. In this Towne is buried Pepin the first sonne of Carloman. In this towne also is the famous nunrie con∣sisting of 42. Nuns all of noble race, the which Nunnes in the morning are apparelled in religious attire, and at after dinner in their secu∣lar garments like Ladies. They may go abroa to feastes and banquets, and may marrie if they thinke good. They haue an Abbesse ouer them who hath iurisdiction spirituall and temporall ouer the towne and countrey about it. The three townes last described, are the three small
capitall Townes of Brabant. Nowe followe the cignities that are in Brabant and first. The Marquisat of the sacred Empire. SOme write this Marqui∣sat to haue beene erected by Iustinian, some by the children of Constantinus Magnus. But Paulus Aemilius most truly wri∣teth, that it was erected by the Emperour Ottho the second, Anno. 973. for the dowrie of his Aunt Gerberge mother to Lothaire king of France, and that it comprehē∣deth these foure Townes, Niuelle, Louuain, Bruxelles and Andwerp, which last is the Me∣tropolitane towne of this Marquisat. The Dutchie of Arschot. THe towne of Arschot standeth vp∣on the little riuer Demere. It was first a baronie, then a Marquisat, and lastly the Emperour Charles e∣rected it into a Dutchie. It appertaineth to the house of Croy, which came out of Fraunce into these countreys. The gentlemen & nobles of Brabant are tied to the king & the K. to them reciproquely as the lord and tenant holding in Fief, with the which
conditions they are vnder his protection and serue him in his warres. But other wise they liue in freedome, and gouerne their territories accor∣ding to the lawes and Customes thereof, which they cannot alter though the prince would per∣mit them, without the consent of their Vassales and subiects. The Marquisat of Bergh. BErghe commonlye called Ber∣hen vp Loom, erected the Emperor 1533. It is seated vpon and vpon the little riuer of Loom, the which a∣sg not farre off passeth through the town, and but halfe a league thence runeth into the Scheld, The town is hard by the Sea in the extream well part of Brabant. It hath a reasonable good . The Marquis is of great reuenewes, he is go∣uernour of Haynault and Grandveneur of Bra∣bant, his brother is Bishop of Liege, and milian his coosin Bishop and Duke  of The Countie of Hoochstrat▪ HOochstrat was erected into Earledome by Charles the It is not enuironed with anye wall. The Earle thereof hath a goodly Castell vpon the the Riuer of Mercke, where
he is ordinarilie resident. Hee hath vnder him manie Villages, and a large Seniorie, & a good∣ly state. He is of the Noble house of Lalain. He hath also a very goodly librarie. A League from Hoochstrat is the goodlye Village of Loenhont, where the great Mathema∣tian Iohannes studius was borne. The County of Meghen. MEghen standeth vppon the Riuer of Meuze. It is an auncient Earldome, and hath Seniorie and Iurisdiction. The Earles name is Charles of Bri∣eu Gouernour of Guelderland. The Baronie of Breda. THis Towne standeth vp∣pon the Riuer Mercke, three leagues frō Hooch∣strat. It is a good and a plesant towne, and in it is a sump∣tuous Castell with a dou∣ble Ditch full of water. The Reuene wes thereof are very great, for it hath vnder it many great Bourgs and rich Villa∣ges, & to it are annexed the towne and territorie of Steenbergh, the Franchise of Rosondale & the Seniorie of Osterhout. This towne is the place of residence of the Prince of Orenge Earle of Nassau.
How the principaut of Orenge came to the house of Nassau, a discourse somewhat out of the Description of the Low countreys. THE principalitie of Orēge lieth between Prouince and Daul∣phine. The cheefe Towne is named O∣renge, seuen leagues from Auignion the Popes towne. This prince-dome is so noble and auncient that it acknowledgeth no other soueraigne but God alone. The said prince-dome was long in the noble house of Chalons one of the foure principal hou∣ses of the French Countie, & came to the house of Nassau by the marriage of Henry of Nassau, (vncle to William late prince of Orenge) with the heire of Chalons.
The Petegree of the Prince of Orenge, shewing how Orenge came to the house of Nassau. Orenge Iohn prince of Orenge of the house of Cha∣lons. Iohn Englebert of Nassau did great seruices to the Empe∣ror Maximi∣lian. Nassau. Iohn of Nassau brother and heire of Engle∣bert. Philibert of Chalons prince of Orenge slain before Florēce 1530. Sister and heire of Philibert. Henry of Nas∣sau married the heire of Orenge. William of Nassau. Rene succeded his vncle Philibert in the principaute of Orenge by his last testament, who dy∣ing gaue Orenge to William of Nas∣sau his cosine ge∣maine. Lodonic of Nassau. William late prince of Orenge by his cosine Renes testa∣ment. Slaine sud∣denly with a pistoll 1584.
The reuenewes of William late Prince of Orenge. FIrst he helde the princi∣paultie of Orenge, ma∣ny Seniories in Burgun¦die, many Seniories in France, The County of Nassau in Allemaine, In the Low countreys, the Baronies of Breda and Deist, togither with the towns of Sichenen, Steen berghe and Graue. Farther he was gouernour of Holland, , and Zeeland. The Baronie of Diest. Diest standeth vppon the riuer Dmere. It is a good towne and hath a large territorie and iuris∣diction. Many cloathes are made in it. Farther in the towne are two colledges of Canons, and this was the birth place of Nicholas Cleonard. Diest is an ancient baronie, and the lord ther∣of by an ancient priuiledge and custome, is Bork∣grau of Andwerpe. This baronie is nowe the Prince of Orenges whose ancestors of Nassau hadde it in exchange for Hensberg, of the Duke of Cleues. Neere to this towne is the commaunderie of Bechenmort, which appertaineth to the crossed knights Teutons. Farther in this countrey gro∣weth
reasonable good wine. The Baronie of Grimberghen. This is an ancient Baronie, and hath a large territorie and Iurisdiction, and many villages vn∣der it. This baronie descendeth euer to the yon∣gest sonne, as do also all the landes in the Terri∣torie thereof. This Baronie is nowe deuided into twaine, one part being the prince of Orenges, the other appertaining to the house of Glimes, which bea∣reth the Title of Grimberghen, notwithstanding since this partage, it is accompted twoo Baro∣nies. Mastricht Is in Latine called Traiectum Mosae or Tra∣iectum superius, for a difference of Virecht in Holland, called Traiectum inferius. The towne standeth vpon the Meuze. It hath a goodlye Bridge of stone built ouer the Riuer. It is a goodly towne and a faire, foure Leagues from Liege. There are in it twoe Colleges of Cannons, in one of the which the Duke of Brabant is a Cannon. This towne was sometime a bishoppricke, but after the See was trāslated to Liege, for what cause is set downe in the Description of Liege. In this towne is also a goodly house, appertai∣ning to the commaunders Teutons.
This towne hath twoe Lordes, namely Duke of Brahant and the Bishopp of Liege their Seniorie not being destinguished but only in this sort. The children are alwaies subiect to y Prince that their mother was subiecte to, without any regard of the fathers subiection. And if a strasn∣ger come into the town he must declare which of the Princes subiectes he wilbe. And he shal be receiued and maintained accordyngly. Yet is Duke of Brahant Soueraine of the Town, so onelye coyneth monie and graunt p∣dons o offendors. Halfe a league from Mastricht is a hill the vpper part whereof aboundeth with all sortes of grayne and frutes: yet within it is a quarrey of ve∣rie good though soft stone. Nowe folowe the walled Townes in Br∣bant that haue no title of honor, and first. Steenberghe. Steenberghe is now decaied but was some∣time a towne of greate power and importance with a goodly hauen. It standeth vppon the Sa and belongeth to the Prince of Orenge. Lire. Standethe vppon the little riuer Nethe. It verie strongue towne bothe by nature and by arte. In this towne is a fayer of Oxen euerie weeke from Midsommer till Saint Martins day in No∣uember, there are nowe manie clothes, and
diuers small wares made in the Towne. viluorden. Standeth vppon the riuer Sinne vppon the which riuer Bruxelles also standeth. The towne is stronge by nature: And in it is a Castell being agaile of prisoners whome onely the Prince and his Councell may iudge. In this Castell are also kept the priuileges gi∣uen to the people by their Prince, and to the Prince by the Popes, Emperours, and other great Princes, and likewise the contracts and transac∣tions passed betwene the Duke and other Lords and potentats. Gemblours. The Abbot hereof hath the first place in the general estats of the contrey among the nobles, and the last place among the prelats, because Gemblours was sometime a Countie, and the Abbot is both temporall and spirituall lord of the Towne. In this Abbye is a famous librarie of bookes neuer printed as yet. Ioudoigne Here they say the Dukes of Brabant weare wont to bring vp their children. Hannut. Was somtime a Countie called Dabor where∣of a measure in the towne yet beareth the name. Landen. This is the auncientest towne of Brabant.
It appealeth to Bolduc, from whence notwith∣standing it is much farther distant than from Lo∣uam or Tilmont. Neere to this towne is the village of Hougar∣d where excellent good Beere is made. Halen. Standeth vppon the litle riuer of Geete neere to Liege. Sichenen. Standeth vpō the riuer Demere. It is the prince of Oringes towne. Herentals. Standeth vpon the riuer Nethe. Eindouen. Standeth vppon the brooke Dommele. It is the principall Towne of the Countrie called Campigne or Kempenlande. It is the Countie of Burens towne. Helmont. Standeth vpon the riuer Ade, in this towne is a faire Castell, the Lorde whereof, and also of the Towne is of the noble house of Cortenback, who is also Borgraue or Viscounte of Weren & Duisbourg. Graue. Standeth on the Meuze. It is nowe the prince of Oringes Towne boughte of the kinges Demaines, but with consent of the states, other∣wise the sale were voyde, because the Duke of Brabant without his estates can alien none of his Demaines.
Market townes called frāke, though not walled, yet enioying the priuilege of walled townes are these 18. following. OSterwick where very many Clothes are made, Oirschot Tournhout, a place of plea∣sure and hunting where the queene of Hungarie vsed much to solace her selfe, & here also manye Cloathes are made. Hochstraet which is described before among ye dignities of Brabant. Duffele which is a baronie of great reuenewes & iurisdiction. Walem where is a fayre bridge and manye Cloathes made. Merchten, Asche, Weren which is a Viscountie and a place where the Dukes of Brabant vsed much to solace themselues, and at this place are three Dukes of Brabant buried, and here also are Games helde euerie yeare be∣tweene Louuain and Bruxelles. Duisbourg, which is a Viscountie. Ouerische, Hulpenwdure, where is a rich Priorie and yearelye a solempne Procession. Briene Alleu which tooke the name of Brennus, one League from this Brienne nere to the Lordship of Clabeck are found Diamants called Diamants of Clabeck, of colour and fi∣gure so like a Diamant that they are forbidden
to be set in golde, but so wonderfull softe, th they serue onely to deceiue the worlde with the outward shew, notwithstanding of late, better are found not far from the village called Hng Genappe, where in an ancient castell is kept the court called Lothier, which in some cases iud∣geth without appeale. Heere resided Lewy the eleuenth king of France during the time of his fathers displeasure which continued death. Ghele, Arendonc, Dormal. Diuers Villages of name in Brabant. SAint oidenroy, the Dean wher¦of is one of tho richest Pre∣lats in Brabant. Bochstell is a Baronie. Roosendale a good∣lie village. Huckele, Heer was sometime a court of Iu∣stice, which notwithstanding that it be transla∣ted to Bruxelles is yet called Banc de Huckele. Lillo is a goodlye Seniorie appertaining to the Lord Paule Ʋan dale, a man of great wealth. Grimberghen is described before amonge the dignities of Brabant. Gaesbck is a noble re and hath vnder it 17. Villages. Rue  also a baonie. Leefdale is the ancientest bare of
Brabant. Wesemale is the Baronie of Gasper Schetz thereby Marshall of Brabant. Perues s a great baronie, so mightie that in times past the Baron thereof alone hath maintained warr against the Bishoppe of Liege. It apperteineth now to the Lord of Merode, who is also Baron of Duffele and lord of Walom, &c. Waelhein is a village as great as a Towne, with a Castell and so large a Territorie that it beareth the Title of a Countie. Cantecroy hath a faire and a strong Castell and great Iurisdiction, and commaun∣deth ouer eight villages, King Philip hath ere∣cted it into an Earledome, and it appertaineth to the Cardinall of Granuelle. Rosselar is a ba∣ronie of such reputation, that the Baron thereof is great Chamberlaine of Brabant. Mol is a faire village. Santhouen is one of the ancientest courts of Iustice in Brabant. Putte, here is held another court of Iustice called the Court of Bef∣fere. Rumpst is an auncient and noble Seniorie and of goodlie iurisdiction. Bierbeeck, Cranē∣donc, Cuick, Boutersem, Iauce, Sombref, are all goodlie baronies. Goseli is a faire village like a towne. Hiluerenbeeck is also a faire Village. Welwick is tied with a long streate to Besoien in Holland, so that these twoe Villages seeme a great Towne, Heere twise euerye yeare are ex∣cellent faiers of horsses, Postell standeth in the middest of the Desert Countreye of Kempen∣lande, Heere is a rich and sumptuous Hospitall
bound to receiue all passengers & wayfare cording to their degree. The Seniorie of Rauestein. THe Seniorie of Rauestein is com∣prehended in Brabat but is: ∣ber seperated from it, and is ther∣fore here described particularlye by it selfe. The towne of Raueste∣in standeth vpon the left side of the riuer of Ma∣ze. It is a good litle towne, & hath high & meane iurisdiction. In it is a good Castell, but the walles of the Towne are ruinous, for they were beaten downe by composition when the warres ended betweene the Emperour Charles the 5. and the Duke of Cleues. The Towne is the Duke of Cleues, who houldeth it of the Duke of Brabant. The Duchie of Lembourg. LEmbourg standeth vpon the of Wester beyonde the Meuin Leagues from Axla Chappell, & of it the whole Doe hie beareth name, halfe a League from Lem∣bourg is a mine of the stone called of Plin. lib. 34 Cap. 10. Lapis aerosus or Cadmia in english Co∣pres, which being incorporated with brasse ma∣keth Latin, and increaseth the brasse by one part, Plinie writeth thus of it: Lapit rosus id mlum aeris habens & ex quo fuso fit .
In this countrey is also much iron and some Lead. It was erected into a Dutchy by the Em∣perour Frederic barbarossa, An. 1172. & was an∣nexed to the Dutchy of Lorraine. But after the death of Henry the last Duke of Lembourgh, who died without heires males: Iohn the first of that name Duke of Brabant succeeded him. Anno, 1293. hauing both bought Lembourg, and also conquered it from the Earle of Guelders, whoe had vsurped it: since the which time it hath re∣mained vnder the Duke of Brabant. Of the Dukes of Lembourg and Lorraine are the kinges of Portugale descended. Walckembourg, Dalem, Rhode∣le-Duc and Carpen. WAlkembourg, called in French Fauquemont, is a reasonable towne, hauing a large territo∣rie and Iurisdiction. It is two litle leagues from Maestricht. It was conquered by Iohn the third, Duke of Brabant, frō Rainot lord of Wale∣kembourg. Dalem is a little towne with a Castell. It is e∣rected into an Earledome, and hath territory & iurisdiction beyond the riuer of Maze. It was conquered by Henry the seconde of that name Duke of Brabant.
Rhode-le-duck, is a little ancient towne with an olde castel halfe a league from Walkembourg, This is the fourth Seniorie beyond the Maze, that hath soueraigne iurisdiction, but yet subiect to the appeale of the Chancerie of Brabant. Carpen, is betweene Gulic and Colyn. It is a village as great as a little towne, with a col∣legiall church, and hath market and faire, and neere vnto it is a strong castell, so that altogether make a good Seniorie. It hath a gouernor apart with a good garrison for defence of the place. As well the Dutchie of Lembourg as the other States aboue mentioned, beyond the Riuer of Maze, consist of three members (viz) 1. Pre∣lates. 2. Nobles and Gentlemen. 3. High Iusti∣ces and seats of iudgement. In Brabant is a grand veneur, who hath charge of the kings game of hunting, and a Gruyer, who hath charge of Hawking and fishing, and of wa∣ters and forrests for the king. The most important priuileges of Brabant. THe Emperour Charls the fourth, Anno. 1349. graunted that no Brabander or any borne in any of the Countreys aboue descri∣bed being members of Brabant, should be arrested in person in a∣ny part of the Empire, or his goods seazed.
Seuen principall priuileges granted to the Brabanders by their owne Princes. 1.THat the Prince may giue nothing to the Cleargie, without the con∣sent of the capitall townes of that quarter where the goods or lāds lie. 2. The prince can pursue none of his Sub∣iects nor strangers inhabiting in this countrey, in any cause ciuill or criminall, but by ordinarie course of Iustice franke and free, where the de∣fendant may haue his aduocate, and opeulie be∣fore all the people, iustifie and defend his cause. 3 The Prince can leuie no subsides nor make any innouation, without the consent of the states of the Countrey. 4 The Prince may place no stranger in any office, saue in the Chancerie of Brabant he maie place two strangers, being of the Flemish lan∣guage: also the Chancellor may be a straunger if he be of the Flemishe language, and haue sometime held Seniorie, Domaine, or Baronie i Brabant. 5 Euerye Brabander or subiect to the Duke of Brabant, may dispose of his lands or goods at his owne pleasure, without licence of the prince, and hath power to hunt or hauke at his plea∣sure,
saue in the fiue royall woods before menti∣oned. 6. When the Prince will assemble the E∣states he must come into Brabant, for the Bra∣banters are forbidden by their Lawes, to delibe∣rate out of their owne countrey of any matter. 7. If the Prince by violence & wrong break any of these graces and priuilege, the Braban∣ters after their due protestations and  ati∣ons made, are absolued from their oath of obe∣dience, and may choose a new Duke where they thinke good. The Seniorie of Malines. MAlines, standeth vpon the Riuer of Dele, which eb∣beth & floweth to ye towne and a league aboue it. The riuer passeth through the Towne, & maketh a num∣ber of small Ilandes in the towne, both to the great ornament & commo∣ditie thereof. It standeth in the hart of Brabant, equally di∣stant four leagues space from Louuain, Bruxelles and Andwerp,. But it is a Segniorie apart, for the which cause many Women at the time of their child-birth leaue Malines, and go to be deliuer¦red
in Brabant, to the end their children may en∣ioy the priuileges of Brabant. It is a goodly strong towne, the rather bicause i may be drowned almost on all sides. There are in it seuen parish churches. At Malines are a great number of Coryers, there are also manye excellent good cloathes made, excellent good Linnen, painted workes excellent good, Artillerie of Brasse great plenty, Bels and many other things of mettall, Barkes & ships of all sorts. At Malines is the storehouse of all the Princes munition and furniture for the warres. At Malines also resideth the kings great coū∣cell, instituted by Charles the last Duke of Bur∣gundie, who aboue all his subiects loued them of Malines. To the great councell of Malines resort the appeales of all the countrey of Malines, of Flan∣ders, Artoys, Holland, Middlebourg in Zeeland, Namur, Luzembourg, Valenciennes, and diuers others little townes besides west Fricsland, & the seniory of Ʋtrecht. At Malines is a Monasterie of Nunnes, like to that of Niuelle, in the which are 1500. and som∣time 1600. Nunnes, the which are gouerned by foure chosen among themselues, and passe the time in honest exercises, and may at their plea∣sure leaue their Cloyster and marrye hus∣bands.
Malines, was first belonging to the Noble familie of the Bertholds, which failing, it fell one halfe to the Bishoppe of Liege, the other to the Earle of Guelders, who in the yeare 1333, solde it to Lewis of Neuers Earle of Flaunders. Two Leagues from Malines, and in the Seniorie thereof, is the Village called Heyst, set on a high hill, and hauing seuen boroughs about and at the foote of the Hill, all appertaining to the said Village, which is a goodly Seniorie, and enioyeth the same customes, rights and Priuiled∣ges, that the towne of Malines doth. The Countie of Horne. HOrne, is Fief Imperiall (that is to say a noble te∣nure of the Empire) but mediate not immediate, for it is held of the ancient Countye of Lotz in the territorie of Liege: Not∣withstanding because it is so neere adioyning to Brabant, and because the Earle thereof for other Seniories which hee holdeth is king Philips sub∣iect, and hath put himselfe vnder his safeguarde and protection: I haue thought good here to de∣scribe
it. Horne is a Castell neere to the Meuse, not farre from Ruermonde, the which is erected into a countie, and hath vnder it a goodlye Seniorie and iurisdiction, wherevnto the Castell giueth name. In this Seniorie is Wiert, a towne beautified with a goodly castell and a Seniorie apart, where the Earle of Horne keepeth his residence. The Earles of Horne are descended of the house of Mommorencie in France. GVELDRES. GVeldres is bounded North with Frieseland, and the Zuiderzee, South with ye Meuse (which seue∣reth it from Brabant) and with Guelder land, East with the Rhine and Cleueland, the Rhine deuiding the countrey into two partes (though vnequall.) West, with Holland, and the bishop-rick of Vtrecht. The countrey is flat, hauing few hilles in it, but many pleasant and commodious woods, es∣pecially that called Echterwalt. Likewise both of corne and cattell it is very fruitfull. Gueldres comprehendeth vnder it the countye
of Zutphen and other Seniories. It hath 22. wal∣led towns, wher¦of the Capitall namly, those which make the 4. quarters of ye countrey, are Nimegue. Ruermonde. Zutphen. Arnem. The which 4. Townes are sci∣tuate vpon four diuers riuers, & are in foure di∣uers Dyoce∣ses. The other walled townes are these: Hatten, Elburch. Harderwick, Wagheninghen, Tiel, Bo∣mel, Bronchorst, Doesburg, Doetecum Tsheeren∣berg, Lochem, Grol, Brederuoerde, Ghelder, which giueth the name to the whole countrey, Stralen, Venloo, Wachtendonck, Erkelens. Townes vnwalled in part or altogither, yet in∣ioyeng the priuiledges of walled townes, are Keppel. Burg, Ghent, Batemburg, Montfort, Echt, with diuers others that hereafter shall bee described as occasion serueth. There are in it aboue 300. villages hauing pa∣rish churches. The Estates of this Dutchie consist of three members, (viz) Barons, Nobles, and the foure Capitall townes, without anye mention of the Cleargie, who notwithstanding in most Prouin∣ces of these Low countries, haue their place al∣lowed them among the States.
Nimegue beareth the title of a kingdome and is called the foote of the Empire, because Charles the great made it one of the three sieges of the Empire in those Countries. The 2. and most respected he established at Aix la Chapel∣le, and the 3. at Theonuile. It standeth vpon that braunch of ye Rhine that is called Whael, where it is large and deepe. It is a faire towne stronge mightie, rich and well peopled, giuen now to marchaundize and studie, but heretofore onlye to armes. It hath a verie fayre and an ancient Castell with so good∣lie a prospect, that from it you may beholde all the Countrie rounde about it. It is a Viscountie, and Fief of the Empire, and a free towne, and stampeth money as other Im∣periall townes do, and the appeales of this towne go not to ye Chauncerie of Guelders, but straight o Aix la Chapelle. The subiection and seruice that it oweth to ye Empire is onlie this, that once in a yeare ye towne must send to Aix la Chapelle a man of purpose with a gloue full of peper, which is there onlye Tenure. King Philip as Duke of Gueldres hath his iurisdiction and soueraigntie in the towne, & stampeth money there with his owne armes, as in the other townes vnder his obedience. The towne is in the Dioces of Colyn, it is the first Capitall towne of the whole Duchie, and
chiefe of the first quarter vnder the thereof are Tiel, which is a strong towne, Bo also a strong place, & Ghent, to it resort besides towns aboue mētioned, ye viscountie of Nie∣hen, Bomelwert, the Townes of high and loe Batauie, (commonlye called Betenue) and all the Countrie yt lyeth betwene the two Riuers of Whael and Meuze. It was a concluded about the time of the se∣conde Printing of this Booke, that a Channell should be cut from Niemeghen, to, within a quar∣ter of a League of Arnem, that is from to one streame of the riuer Rhine to the other, which will bee twoo Leagues longe, and to the great benefite of both these Townes, and of all the Countrie adiacent. Ruermonde. Ruermonde standeth vppon the verie poie of the Riuer Ruer, where it and Maze meete, it is called Ruermonde of the sayde Riuer Ruer, and Monde which signifieth the mouth of anie thing. It is a beautifull, well peopled, and a stronge Citie, both by nature and art, the Countrie about it is verie frutefull, the Towne is latelie erected into a Bishopricke. It is the second Capitall towne of Guelderland, and chiefe of the second quarter. Vnder the iurisdictiō thereof are these towne following, Venloo which is a stronge Towne
Guelder, Stralen, Wachtendonck, and Erkelens which are all walled townes, Montfort, Echt, and Niewerstat which are Boroughs builte like Townes, and farther Kessell, Midler, and Crie∣beeck. Both it and all the Quarter belonging it, is vnder the Iurisdiction of the Bishop of Liege. A League from Ruer-monde is the goodlye Village Kessel with a stronge Castell in it, of the which Village the countrie about beareth name, nd is called the Countrie of Kessel, and is of the kings demaines. Zutphen. s so named, because it is low and standeth in a Fen, it is situate vppon that braunch of the Rhine, that is called Issel, and through it run∣neth the Riuer Berkel, which there dischargeth it selfe into Issel. The Towne is well builte as well for priuate houses, as publique places. Zutphen is a Countie, and the King amonge his other Titles beareth the name of Earle of Zutphen. It is the third principall towne of Guelderland, & chiefe of the thirde quarter. Vnder the Iurisdiction thereof are Doesbourg, Doetecum, Lochem, Grol, Brederuoerde, and Bronkhurst, al walled Townes (notwithstanding Bronkhorst houldeth it selfe for a Countie a∣part) vnder the Iurisdiction of Zutphen is
also comprehended the Towne and Countie of Tsheerenbergus. Zutphen is vnder the Dioces of Munster. Arnem. Standeth vppon the Rhine halfe a League be∣neath ye place where it deuideth it selfe into two streames, the one whereof is called Leck, and the other Issell. The towne is well built, faire and large, it is the chiefe towne of the fourth quarter of ye Duchie of Guelders, and likewise of the state and Senio∣rie of Veluwe. This Countrie of Veluwe is litle, but exceeding frutefull, and especially abounding with Fish, be∣cause it is compassed about with Zuiderze, Rhine, and Isell. It aboundeth also with all kind of Veneson. Vnder the iurisdiction of Arnem are Wage∣ninghen, Hattem which is a strong towne, Har∣derwikce and Elbourg all townes walled, with di∣uers Villages. Arnem is of the Dioces of Ʋtricht, in this Towne is resident the Gouernor of the Countrie of Guelders, the Chauncerie & Counsel of Guel∣ders, and Zutphen, and also the Chamber of Ac∣compts, and it was wont to be the Ancient resi∣dence of the Dukes of Guelders. The other walled townes are these following, first Hattem. Which standeth vpon Isell, and is a great and
a stronge towne. Elbourg. Standeth vpon Zuiderzee. Harderwick. Standeth also vpon Zuiderzee, this towne An. 103. was burned to the grounde, but since hath been reedefied, & is now verie strong & fayre. Wagheninghen. Standeth vpon the Rhine. Tiell. Standeth vpon Whaal, it is a strong towne and ath iurisdiction ouer the Countrie called Tiel∣rwerdt. Bomell. Standeth vpon Whaal, it is a fayre and a strong place, and the principall towne of the Isle Bom∣newert (now called the estate of Bommelwert) n the which are manie faire villages, and among the rest Rossem, the Countrie of the valiant Cap∣taine Martin Van Rossem. Brouchorst. Standeth vpon Issell: it is a Countie, and hath a particular Gouernour that cōmandeth ouer it. Dosbourg. Standeth at the entrie of Fossa Brusa into the Riuer Issel, it is a good Towne and well peopled. Doetecum. Standeth vpon the olde Issel. Iserenberghe. It is a Countie, & a good towne, hauing iustice
and Seniorie. Locchem. Standeth vpon Berkel. Groel, Bredernoerde, Guelder. giueth ye name to the whole Cour of Guelder. Straelem, Verloo standeth vpō ye Meuze, it is a good & strong towne, & in it the Duke of Cleues yeelded himselfe to the Emperor Charles ye 5. An. 1543. Wachtendonck. Standeth vppon the Riuer Niers. Erkelens. Is a reasonable good towne, & these abo mētioned are al ye walled townes in Guelderld. The Townes vnwalled, first. Keppel & Bourke. Stande both vppon the olde Issel. Ghendt. Standeth neere to the Whaal. Battembourg. Standeth vpon ye Meuze, this is a place of antiquitie, for the people of the Countrie affi that this was the first Castell that was built by Batton, of whom Holland was in times past cal∣led Battauia, this place appertaineth to Wi∣am of Bronkhorst, a Lord of great Nobilitie. Montfort. Is a stronge Castell and a place of some im∣portance.
Echt of this Village the pleasant wood Echter∣lt beareth name. Culembourg. Is a good Towne standing vpon the Leck, & a Fief of Guelders, yet is it doubted whether it be within the Countrie of Guelders, or not, it was erected into a Coūtie by king Philip because i hath a great iurisdiction and Seniorie. Buren. Is neither Fief nor within the Countrie of Guelders, but a Countrie apart, though enuiro∣ned round about with Guelderland. It is an Earl∣dome, & hath in it a strong castell, & vnder ye iu∣risdictiō therof is a great countrie, & many villa∣ges, it standeth neere to the rier Linghe, it apper∣aineth to ye prince of Orenge in ye right of his first wife, being daughter & heire to ye valliant Maxi∣milian de Eghmont Earle of Buren, who died in ye yeare 1549. The heire of this place is Philip Williā ye princ of Orenges son by ye Ladie aboue mentioned, who is now prisoner in Spaine. Ouerissel. Is bounded on the north with West Frise, and Groninghē. South with the Countrie of Zuphen, East with Westphalia, West, with the Zuiderzee, and the Riuer Issel. It is deuided into three iurisdictions, namelye Isselandt, Drent, & Tuent▪ The countrie is verie plaine & without hils, ve∣rie frutefull & abounding with graine. The riuer Vidre called in Duch Vecht Passeth
through it. It hath 8. walled townes namely, Swol, Cāpen, Vellenhoue, Steenwick, Hasselt, ∣marse, Oldezeel. It hath of other Townes of importaunce though vnwalled, yet enioying goodly priuilege▪ namely, Meppel, Theelmuyden, Coeuorden, H∣demberghe, Omme, Almeloe, Goer, Diepneh, Delden, and Euscede. There are in it aboue 100. Villages. The states of this Countrie consist of two mē∣bers, the first the officers of the prince & the No∣bilitie, and the second the three Capitall tow, but because Deuenter is the chiefe of the whole Prouince, wee will first speake thereof. Deuenter. Standeth vppon the Riuer Issel, it is a vee strong and a well fortified place, large, faire, built, and well peopled. It is chiefe and Metropo∣litane of the whole Countrye. Swol. Standeth vpon a litle Riuer that runneth the Vidre, it is a verie strong towne fortefied a double dich and strong rampers, so that if an feare of warre or other accident happen in the Countrie, the Gouernour and the Counsell resi∣ding ordinarilye in Ʋullenhoue, retire themselue to Swol. Campen. Standeth at the enterance of Issel into the
Zuiderzee, and is comprehended in the countrie of Ouerissel, though in truth it stand on the other side of the riuer, it is a very faire & a large towne, & in it Albertus Pighius was borne. Vollēhoue standeth vpō ye Zuiderzee, it is a good towne & verie well serued with all sorts of victu∣als, for the which cause the counsell & parlament of the countrie, & likewise the Gouernour reside ordinarilye there, & if anie feare of daunger arise, then they all retire to Swol. The other Townes and Villages are not wor∣thy the mentioning, saue only Ghelmuydē which standeth vpon the verie mouth of the Vidre, and hath in it a strong Castell wherein there is al∣waies a good Garrison for the King. This Countrie of Ouerissil appertayned in times past to the Bishop of Vtrecht, but in the yeare 1527. Henrie of Bauiere Bishop of V∣trecht yeelded it vp into the handes of the Em∣perour Charles▪ for the same reasons that moued him to yeelde vp his temporall Seniorie of V∣trecht, and in the yeare 1549. king Philip was receiued as their future prince, and beareth the Title of Ouerissel. FRISE. FRise was sometime a kingdome & reached from the mouth of the Rhine to Denmarke, but that part which wee here describe is West-Frise
being in subiection to king Philip, the ther towardes the riuer Visurgis is called East-Frise, which we purpose not to describe, because it is not subiect to the king, notwitstanding possesseth also therein beyond the Riuer of the towne of Linghen, & certaine other as hereafter shalbe declared. West-Frise hath North and West the Sea, South-Zuiderzee and the Countrie of O∣issel, East East-Friseland. Vnder the Seniorie thereof are manie Isles nee adioyning vnto it, the principall whereof, e Schelinck, and Ameland, in the which are diuers Villages. Riuers there are none in the Countrie, saue on∣lie Ems and Lauwers, but Issel & Ʋidre are ve∣rie neere adioyning to it. Farther, there are great Channels, & of them great number throughout the Countrie, which are made aswel for transportatiō, as also to dreyn & voyde the waters,  otherwise would be too too aboundant, &  ow al the Land. This is a marish  at, & full of waters, the Riuer of Ems  from Westphalia. Small store of  it, for all the World is like our Fen , for they haue grea numbers of Cattell in the Countrie, and Turfe their Fewell which is digged in the Fennes, a which they call Veenn as wee in Englande them Fenns.
Wines there are none of the countrie grouth, the greatest part also of the countrie wanteth woode, but in steede thereof they burne Turfe, which they call Torf or Turf as wee do, wherof they digg so great aboundance, that they serue not only for ye prouisiō of their owne countrie, but also are solde abroade into other Countries to a great summe of money. The poore people of Frise burne for their fewell Cow dounge dried with the sunne. There is a place in Friselande along by Zui∣derzee called Iokermeer which is nowe a Lake, but was somtime a place of Turfe, but sire by chaunce taking into the Turfe consumed all the earth apt for Turfe, and the water then entering into the emptie place hath euer since made a Lake thereof. In this Countrie of Frise is great plentie of Beeues both great and excellent sweete, yea the best in Europe, setting the Englishe Beeues a∣side. Manie of their Keene bring twoo Calues at a caluing, & their sheepe two or three Lambes at a fall, yea somtime foure. There is also great plentie of good horses in this Countrie apt for the warres. This Countrie is deuided into three principall Estats or Counties, viz. the Countie of Ostergoe, the Countie of Westergoe, and the Countie of the seuen Forrestes, so named, because there are in
this Countrie so manye Forests neere adioy together. Groeninghen is a member a part, seuered from the rest of the bodie of Friseland, and therefo shalbe described by it selfe. All these three Estates or Counties aboue tioned being ioyned together, containe walle townes, & other enioying ye priuileges of wll townes being rampared with trenches & to the number of eleuen, namely Leeward Doccum, Franicker, Bolswaerde, Sneck▪ Ilst, Slot, Harlinghen, where is a Castell, & therein a Gar∣rison, Workum, Hindelopen, Staueren. There are in this Countrie of west Friseland comprehending Groeninghen in Friseland villa∣ges 490. diuers of the which because of their wealth and greatnes haue obtained goodlie pri∣uileges of the prince. The States of Friselande consist of Prelat Nobles, & Adherents. Leewarden is seated twoo Leagues from Docum, it is a good and a great Towne, and a strong Castell is in it. It is the Capitall towne of the whole Count viz. of all the three Counties aboue mentioned. In it are resident the Counsell & Chaunce of Friselande, from the which no appeale lieth. Doccum was the Countrie of Gem-frst▪ Francker is a good towne where manie e∣men make there aboad, the other townes e no
greatly worthy the writing of. The Isle of Schellinck. THis is an Ilande in the which are some villages abounding with excellēt good pastures, greate plentie of Cattell and excellēt good fish, especialle Dog-fish, the taking wherof is verie strange and ridiculous, for you shall vnderstand that the Ilande men dis∣guise themselues like Beasts, and in that attire go to the Sea side at such times as they knowe that these fishes will come foorth of the Sea to take the ayre for their recreation vpon the shore, then these disguised men fall a dauncing and leaping, with the which sport the fishes being greatly de∣lighted are by that meanes drawne far from the Sea, while in the meane time nets are pitched betweene the Sea and them, which being done, the dauncers throwe off there disguised appa∣rell and discouer themselues, wherewith the fishes being astonished, flie towards the Sea and are taken in the nets. GROENINGHEN. GRoeninghē is a state apart, but so anexed to Friseland that some houlde it as a member therof. The Citie is verye rich, Great, and verie fayre built, it is vnder the Dioces
of the Bishop of Munster. It hath a greate and a large iurisdiction both within the towne and without, it iudgeth with∣out appeale in causes both Ciuill and criminall. In causes Ciuill the king hath his Lieuetenant there, but in causes oriminall the Towne is Soue∣raine, and graunteth pardons as Soueraignes do▪ all that the Towne payeth to the Prince for all duties is but 12000. Floreins Carolus, that is 6000. Crownes. Through this Towne passe diuers Riuer, and in it are also diuers Chanels, some made by nature & some by Art which maketh the towne verie strong. This towne with the Magistrates thereof, is the principall towne of the first member of the state of Groeninghen. The second member is the Regiō called Om∣me Lands, which consisteth of Prelats, Nobles, & Confederats. In Groeninghē, RodolphusAgricola was borne. The king hath of Groeninghē a title apart. The Countrie was somtime vnder the Bishops of V∣trecht, by whose negligence in defending them they submitted themselues to the Dukes of Guelders, and after in the yeare 153▪ to the Emperour Charles the 5. but with reseruation of all their priuileges & liberties. The king hath besides this Countrie of West-Friseland which is altogether vnder his subiecti∣on,
in East Friseland a quarter of a League be∣yond the Riuer of Ems the towne of Linghen a∣boue mentioned, where ther is a great Fortresse and a strong Garrison, hee hath also Soueraintie ouer diuers Fiefs beyond the Riuers of Ems and Visurgis, namely the States of Ieuerem, Essens, Vittemont, & diuers others. Hee hath also some preheminence ouer the Countie of Emden, which is a good litle Towne standing vpon the sea, & one of the goodliest ha∣uens in Europe. Also the king as Lord of the Low Countries is Viceregent and Vicar of the Empire ouer all the Countrie of Friseland euen to Dietmarshe, which is in the Confines of Denmarke, the whiche dignitie Maximilian the Emperour bought of his Father the Emperour Frederic for him & his heires for euer. The Frisons hate no vice more than adulterie, which was the cause that their priests had cence to marrie. The Frisons haue in times past beene greate Souldiers, but nowe are become Marchantes, Mariners, & Fishers, whereby they gaine ordina∣lie great summes of money. They are also great defenders of their libertie, they were first brought vnder ye subiectiō of ye Ro∣manes by Drusus Germanicus, thē they liued vn∣der ye French, whose yoke after they had shaked off, they created a magistrat among thēselues, sō∣time
the le of Duke, & they were subdued by than Carolus Calus erecting Holl Earledome, gaue this countrey or the greatest part thereof to the Earle of Holland, against, wh the Frisons often rebelled, but in the ende they fell with the saide county of Holland to the hous of Burgundy, and so to the house of Austrich. HOLLAND. HOlland is as much to say, as a hollowe lande, the very foundation of it standeth vppon water, so that if you goe or ride, the ground will tremble vn∣derneath you. Holland is bounded North and west with the Sea, South with Meuse and Brabant, East with Zuderzee and Guelderland. Through it runne many armes of the Rhine & Meuse, besides a number of channels made by Art, almost betweene euery village of moment. It hath in it a number of Iles made by the Sea, the Rhine and the Meuse, and those of diuers names, yet al comprehended vnder the name of Holland. The ground lieth so low, that they are forced to fense it with dikes and rampars, aswel against the Sea, as against all the riuers almost & where the Seaebbes and fowes, so that iny
places you shall see the Sea farre aboue the land, et repulsed by these banks. The countrey hath in it few trees, because the ground is so waterish and soft, that it is not able to beare the waight of a tree, and yet lesse quan∣titie of fruit & graine for the same reason is grow∣ing in it. But they are furnished with wonderfull plenty of graine, as well from the Easterlings, as also out of Denmarke, in such sort, that they haue not onlie sufficient for their owne prouision, but also to impart liberally to other countreys. Wine they haue none of their owne growth, and yet receiue such plentie of Rhenish wine out of Allemaine, that they consume more than is drunke in the countrey where it groweth. Likewise Flaxe there is none growing in the countrey: yet is more linnen cloth made there, than in any other countrey of the world. Theyr Flax is brought them out of Flaunders, Liege and Osterland. Woll likewise, they haue none of their owne breede, yet make infinite numbers of cloathes. Their wooll commeth to them out of England, Scotland and Spaine. Lastly, they haue no timber at all growing, and yet spende more timber in building of ships and fensing their dikes and rampires, than any other countrey dooth. Their timber commeth to them out of Osterland. Their principall home commodities consist in
breeding and feeding of horses, beeues and in their fat pastures and medowes, and likew in turfs, whereof they sell an infinite quantity in∣to other countreys. Their horses are very strong but heauy, not∣withstanding now their race is much amended, partly by Genets that they get out of Spaine, & partly by breeding their colts in Friseland, be∣cause the Friseland pastures make them strōger, fairer and lighter than their owne, notwithstan∣ding that the Friseland horse be in none of these respects comparable to the Hollander, which is a strange wonder. The butter and cheese made in a year in Hol∣land, amounteth to as much as the spice that is yearely brought into the Low countries out of Portugale, which is aboue a million of crownes. Fiue villages in Holland, namely, Assendelt, Oostsane, Westsane, Cromeine & Cromenierdk▪ yeeld as much butter and cheese yearely, as a∣mounteth to the valew of the Rhenish wine that is yearely brought to Dordrecht, which is a mar∣uelous quantitie, for there is the Staple of the Rhenish wine. The turfe growing in Holland that is yearelie sold out of the Countrey, amounteth to a mar∣uellous masse of money: for the kinges custome thereof that is receiued in Goude onely, ariseth yearely to three thousand ducats, notwithstan∣ding that the custome of euery measure of tue
be very small, consider than what it groweth to that passeth elsewhere out of the countrey, and is consumed in the countrey. But of all other commodities that they haue, their fishing together with their Nauigation, yeeldeth them a maruellous gaine, for they haue aboue eight hundreth good shippes, betweene two hundreth and seuen hundreth tunne, and a∣boue 600. boates called Busts to Fish with, being between 100. & 200. Tunne and vpwards. Holland is not aboue 60. Leagues in circuit, and where it is broadest a man may ride ouer it in sixe howers, yet are there in it xxix. Walled townes, namely, Dordrecht. Haerlem, Delft, Leyden, Goude, Amsterdam, (which are the sixe Capitall townes of the Prouince) Einchusen, Horne, Alkemar, Purmerenden, Eedam, Moni∣chedam, Wesp, Naerden, Woerden, Oudewater, Schoonhouen, Helstein, Vianen, Leerdam, Aspe∣ren, Hueckelem, Gorichom, Workum, Huesden, Rotterdam, Schiedam, S. Gertrudenberg, Seuen∣berghen. Ouer and aboue these, there are diuers little townes, (viz.) Medemblick, Beuerwick▪ Muiden. Niuport, Ʋlaerdinghen, Grauisande, which in times past were all walled, and enioy yet the pri∣uileges of walled townes, notwithstanding that now they be vnwalled. There are besides in Holland aboue 400. villa∣ges, some of the which setting wals aside, may be
accounted faire townes, and enioy the priuileges of walled townes, namely, the Bourg la Hy, &c. Holland hath vnder the iurisdiction thereof di∣uers Iles: the principall whereof are Veland, Texele, Wringham so named of an hearb called Wir, where with they maintaine their dikes, Vr and Ens, wherein are some villages, and farther the Iles of Voorn, Goerode, Somersdick, called al∣so Vooru, Corendick, Pierschille. The states of Holland are compounded of the body of the Nobilitie and the six capital townes▪ but we wil now come to the particular descripti∣on of all the townes, &c. Dordrecht standeth on the Merune, which is a riuer compounded of the Rhine, the Muse, and the Linge. Dordrecht before the yeare 1421. was firm land and ioyned to Brabant, but that yeare the Sea drowned 72. good villages, and rent, Dodrecht from the firme land and made it an Ile, o fower waies there are how newe Iles are mad 1. An earthquake in the Sea, often casteth vppe much ground, which in time becommeth habi∣table. 2. Great riuers at their entrie into the Sea, often traine with them great quantitie of sande, which in time becōmeth an Ile. 3. Some∣time the Sea leaueth a place which groweth to an Iland, and is made habitable. 4. Sometime by force of the Sea, a peece of ground is rent frō
the continent, and is made an Iland, as Sicile from Italie, Cyprus from Syria, Euboea from Boeotia, & this towne of Dordrecht from the firme lande of Brbant. Dordrecht is the Staple of Rhenish wine, and likewise of graine which commeth thither out of Guelderland, Cleues, and Iulliers. It is a great, rich, mightie, faire, & a well peo∣pled towne. A Staple is a French word, deriued of Stabulū, and is a place appointed for Marchants to bring their goods vnto, and there to staie with them a certaine space, before they may carrie them to any other place, which time being expired, and the goods there vnbought, they may then carry them whether they thinke good. Arras is the Staple of wines brought out of France into the Low countreys by land. Middlebourg in Zeeland, is the Staple of Frēch, Spanish, Portugalysh, & wines of other Prouin∣ces brought into the Low countreys by Sea, in such sort, that all marchants and marriners brin∣ging any of those wines, must of necessity cōe to Middlebourg, and there discharge their wines and pay all duties, before they canne passe with their wines to any other place. At Dordrecht, all marchants comming down the Rhine or Meuse with any marchandise whatsoeuer, must land and there discharge their marchandize into the towne ships, or compoūd
with the towne for it, and pay all other before they can depart. Haerlem. In Haerlem are yearely made a∣boue 12000. cloathes. Haerlem is a towne very well built, and beau∣tified with goodly medowes both wthin and without, but especially with a most pleasant or∣rest, and enuironed with many goodly villages, castels and fortresses, and is seated in a most some aire. It is the greatest towne in al Holland, & second in dignitie among the 6 capital towns. At Haerlem printing was first inuented, and after brought to perfection at Mentz, for the which cause, some attribute the firste inuention thereof to that towne and not to this. ¶Heere the Author entereth into a discourse of Sea-men and Sea-women beeing fishes, yet proportioned in all parts like man and wom, whereof one being a female, was taken vppe at Haerlem, An. 1403. and the other being a ma, in Friesland, but within this 50. yeares, both the which liued many yeares, and fell to eate as we doo, and were brought to iuilitie, and taught to doo many workes and seruices: as for example the woman to spin, but they remained alwa dumbe. Which strange accidents, though im∣pertinent to our discourse of the Low yet thought I goo briefly to touch, caue Guicirdin himselfe discourse as also because the like is writtē by
approued authors. Delft, is a goodly large town wel built thrugh∣ot, with broad and pleasant streetes, and beau∣tified with sumptuous and stately churches. At Delft are made great quantity of Cloathes, and excellent good beere is there brewed. About this towne and in the towne, are great umbers of Storks, the which in a fire that hap∣pened in the towne 1536. shewed a wonderfull affection to their yoong ones: first in seeking to saue them from the fire, and afterwards in dieng with them when they perceiued that they could not saue them. This is one of the six capital townes of Holland. In this town was borne that monstrous here∣ike, Dauid George. Neere to Delft is a noble monasterye of la∣dies called Conincksfeelde, whoe before they be entred into professiō may marry at their plesure. The monastery hath iurisdiction both temporal and spirituall. Leyden is one of the six capital townes of Hol∣land▪ & chiefe of Rhineland. It hath vnder it 49. borougs & villages, the most part wherof once a week, bring all their good victuals to sell in the town, which causeth it to abound with all things arising of the earth. It hath also great plenty of fish, both sea fish and fresh water fish, and of water foule, beyond all measure. In Leyden is a castell said to be built by Hen∣gist,
returning from the conquest of and therein is a notable well, whereof the anci∣ent family of Wasenar taketh name. This towne is scituate in a flat and low coun∣trey full of ditches and chanels, and is beawtified with pleasant medowes, gardeines, arbors and walks round about it. Within it are inclosed 31. Ilands, from one of the which to the other, men goe by boates, and ouer and aboue these, there are nine or ten other Ilands, from the one of the which to the other, bridges are built to passe ouer, so that in this towne are 145. briges, wherof 104. are of stone and the rest of wood. In this towne are yearly made aboue 12000. cloathes. The women are excellent faire, and the ayre passing wholsome. But a little league from Leyden, is the famous Abbey of Reinsbourg, consisting of Nunnes al of Noble houses, the Abbesse whereof hath iuris∣diction spirituall and temporall, and the Abbey is endowed with so great reuenewes, that euerie daie aboue two thousand persons come thither to receiue reliefe. Another such like Abbey of Ladies is also neer to Leyden called Terlee. In all these Monasteries of Ladies and gentle∣women, they may till they be entred into pro∣fession, come forth and marrie, and
they liue there many yeares before they professe themselues, obseruing notwithstanding in the meane time their rules and orders very dewlie, soberly and religiously. Goude, is also one of the six capitall townes of Holland. It standeth vpon the riuer Issel, not the Issel aboue described▪ but another different from that: for this Issel ariseth at Isselstein in Holland, and passing by Montfort, Oudewater, & Goude at Isselmonde entereth into the Leck, holding his course continually from his rising to his fall, be∣tweene the old Rhine that commeth frō Ʋtrecht and the saide riuer of Leck, and being as it were hemmed in betweene these two riuers. Goude is a strong, rich, and a well fortified towne. Amsterdam, standeth vpon the goulph Te. It is one of the goodliest hauens in the world, for you shall haue sometimes at one instant 500. saile of ships riding in the port. The towne is so riche, that though a fleete of 300. saile, laden with all kinde of Marchandize ariue there, the Citizens within fiue of sixe daies will buy vp all their wares, so that the leete may returne home. In this towne are built yearely many ships, and aboue 12000. cloathes made. Amsterdam is built vpon piles vnder the groūd as Venice is, so that the buildinges of the townes are more chargeable vnder the grounde than a∣boue,
notwithstanding that the houses aboue the ground be very sumptuous and faire. This towne is very strong and helde imprena∣ble, by reason that it may be enuironed at plea∣sure with water, and is almost in all pointes like vnto Venice, and little inferior to it in any, and may iustlie be called the Venice of these parts. This is the sixt Capitall towne of Holland, but in wealth the first: for next to Andwerp, it is the greatest towne of traffique in all these parts. Einchuysen standeth vpon the very point of ye gulph Zuiderzee that fronteth Friseland, from whence it is distant not aboue two leagues. It is a good towne, and in it are many ships built. Hoorn standeth also vpon the Zuiderzee. It is a faire, rich, and a reasonable great towne, and hath a good hauen, and is of so great strength by reason of the multitude of channels round a∣bout it, that it seemeth almost imprenable. In this towne there is kept yeare lie in May, a marte of butter and Cheese, whereof there is so great quantitie brought vnto this faire, that it is almost incredible, for it furnisheth not one∣lie the Countreys, but also Spaine and Portu∣gale. Alcmair is a very rich towne, by reason that the countrey round about it, yeeldeth more plē∣tie of butter and cheese, than any other place in Holland whatsoeuer.
Purmerenden, is a towne with a good Castell appertaining to the Counte de Eghemont. Edam standeth neere the Zuiderzee. This towne is famous for the great number of shippes of all burdens that are builte in it, and the inau∣merable multitude of excellēt good cheefes that are made in the countrey round about it. Monickedam, Wesp, These are two good little townes, with great store of good medowes and pastures about them for feeding of cattell, and likewise great aboundance of fish. Naerden. Woerden hath a strong castell, this town apper∣teineth to the Duke of Brumswick. Owdewater standeth vpon the Issel. Neere to this towne and Woerden, is great plenty of hemp growing, of the which almoste all the Cables, cordes and nets, that the Fishermen and Marri∣ners of Holland & Zeeland vse are made, by the which marchandize, many both of this Towne and of Woerden, grow very rich. Schoonhouen standeth vpon the Leck. It is a faire Towne and a commodious Hauen, and heere is so great aboundance and plenty of Sal∣mons taken, that the Staple of Salmons is kepte heere. Iselstein appertaineth to Philip sonne to the prince of Orenge, as heire to Maximilian Earle of Buren, about this towne is great controuer∣sie whether it appertaine to Hollande or to
the Seniorie of Vercht. Vianen. Though Vianen be saide to be a Se∣niorie apart, yet is it inclosed within Hollande. It standeth vppon the Riuer Leck. It apper∣teineth to the Lorde of Brederoede, whoe pre∣tendeth that it oweth no Superioritie to the king. Leardam standeth vpon the Riuer Linge. It apperteineth to the Counte de Buren. Asperen standeth also vpon the riuer Linge, which passeth through it with a pleasāt murmu∣ring course. This towne was sacked by Charles Duke of Gueldres, An. 1516. Hueclelen standeth likewise vpon the Linge, heere is an ancient Castell, saide to bee built by Hercules the Germane. Gorichom standeth vpon the Whaal, where it meeteth with the Linge, It is a good towne & hath in it a strong Castell. From the church stee∣ple of this towne, you may behold xxii. Walled Townes vnder the kinges subiection, and an in∣finite number of villages, which is a most plea∣sant sight to behold. Euery day there is a Mar∣ket in this towne of butter, cheese, and other vi∣ctuals, of an incredible quantitie brought into this hauen, and from thense transported to And∣werp and to other places, which causeth the In∣habitants of this towne to become very rich, the rather, for that they themselues are Marchants, Marriners and Pilottes, for the conueighing of
their Marchandizes to other places. Neere to Gorichom, is the place where men hold opinion that Hercules the Germane planted his campe, for the which cause all the countrey thereabout, is called Hercules countrey, in Dutch Dat landt van Arckell. Workum standeth vppon the Waal. It apper∣teineth to the Counte de Horne. Huesden. In this towne is a faire Castell, and manye villages are vnder the iurisdiction there∣of. In this Countrey is digged great plentie of Turfs. Roterdam standeth vpon the Channell Rotter, neere to the Meuse. It is a strong, a faire, and a populous towne. This was the place of Natiui∣ty, of the renowmed Erasmus Roterodamus. In this towne were burnt aboue nine hundred hou∣ses at the time that the Auther was writing this booke, but all repaired and new built againe in one yeare. S. Gertruidenberghe standeth vpō the Meruue, it is the prince of Orenges towne. The Hollan∣ders and Brabanders are in controuersie, to whi∣ther countrey this town belongeth. In this town are taken great store of shads, sometime 18000. in a day, which are sent abroad into diuers parts of the world in great numbers, both freshe and salt. Heere are also taken great plenty of Stur∣geons and Salmons. As farre as this towne the
Hollanders vsed to atted vpō their prince going into Haynault as Earle thereof, and heere they were accustomed to receiue him when he came out of Haynault into Holland. Seuenberghen standeth vpon the Meruu. It is a good towne and appertaineth to the Earle of Aremberg. Townes vnwalled in Holland, yet enioving the priuiledges of walled townes. MEdemblick standeth vpon the North sea of Holland, and in the best countrey of Holland for feeding of cat∣tell. It hath in it a good & a strong castell. Beuerwick. Muyden standeth by the gulph of Zuiderzee, vpon the little riuer of Weight. It is a good town, with a strong castell on the contrary side of the riuer and a bridge to passe ouer the riuer from the castell to the towne. Nieuport. Vlaerdinghen standeth neere to the mouth of the Meus. It is one of the ancientest townes in Holland. Grauesande standeth also vpon the mouth of the Meus. It is an ancient town, & was some∣time not onely walled, but also a stately towne
and the place of residence of the ordinary coun∣sell of Holland, till William king of Romaines re∣moued it to Haghen. About this town is the best corne countrey in Holland, and heere also be the excellent braue sand cheeses made. The principall villages of Holland. HAghon or la Haye, stan∣deth neer to the west sea. It is the fairest, the richest and the greatest village of Europe, containing twoe thousand houses, and a∣mong them diuers verye sumptuous, especiallie the beautifull and large royall pallace, built like a castell, and enuironed with strong and large ditches, founded by Willi∣am king of Romaines, who here also caused the counsell to reside, which before was resident at Grauesand. This coūcel hath appeal to Maliues. In this pallace is also a colledge of Cannons, with a very beautifull chappell in it. At Haghen is also resident the kings chamber of accounts for Holland, Vtrecht, Zeeland, Frise and Ouer-issel. Farther in the Pallace aboue mentioned, is the kings librarie, being a very goodly one, gathered by Iohn Harie Cannon of Haghon, and giuen
by him to the emperour Charls the fift. The Inhabitants of Haghen, will by no means wall their village, accounting it more honour to inhabite the fairest and mightiest village of Eu∣rope, than a citty which being walled should be surpassed of many. But this their glorie cost them ful deere: for by reason that Haghen was vnwal∣led, Martin van Roseeth miserably spoiled and sacked the towne. At La Haie is a goodlye wood, replenished with all kind of Venison, & beautified with ma∣ny antiquities and medals grauen in fine marble, and worthy to be remembred. Halfe a league from Haghen, is the Abbey of Losdune, in the which is the toomb of Margaret Countesse of Hnnenberg, and sister to William king of Romains, with an Epitaph theron, wher∣in is mentioned, that the said Countesse brought forth as many children at one burthen, as there be daies in the yeare. Schaghen, is scituate in the vttermost North part of Holland. It is a faire and a large village with a goodly Castell. Iselmont standeth vpō the mouth of ye Mor. It apperteineth to the lord of Merode, it is a good village with a faire Castell. Eghemont standeth neere the west Sea. It is a braue village with a goodly monastery, and ap∣pertaineth to the Earle of Eghemont, who hereof beareth his title.
Brederode is a castell, wherof the noble family of Brederode beareth name. Three noble houses there are in Holland most famous. Wassenar the ancient, Brederode the Noble, Eghemōt the rich. Walckembourg is a small borough, yet an earl∣dome. Heere euery September is a notable faire of horses. This place appertaineth to the Earle of Linge as Lord of Wassenar. Catwiick standeth on the Sea, where the anci∣ent mouth of the Rhine that came from Vtrecht was wont to enter into the Sea. It was built by the Catti a people of Allemaine, and hath beene in times past a statelie town, but now hardlie the reliques thereof remaine. The fort called Britannia was built by the Ro∣mains, namely, by the Emperour Caligula, to passe from thence their forces into England. But after the ruine of the Romaine Empire, it was swallowed vp by the sea, and so remained coue∣red with water many yeares, in such sort, that no memoriall remained thereof. Notwithstanding by the departing of the Sea, in the yeares 1520. 1552. and 1562. It was discouered many daies together, and many goodlie stones taken vp out of the ruines therof, and carried to la Haye to the lord of Wassenars house: there was also bricks ta∣ken vp, as faire and as sound as when the foun∣dation was first laied. Petten standeth in the extremity of the North part of Holland vpon the downes, which are hils
of sande that defende Holland on that side from the Sea, & neere to this villige where the down falle is begun a rampar vppon the charge of the Countrie to defende it from the rage thereof, on that coast, which rampar is called Hontbosc, & is daylie verie painefully wrought vpon because if the Sea should peirce the sayd rampar, it is f∣red that the greatest part of Holland should bee swallowed vp, notwithstāding Nicholas Nicho∣lai hauing recouered a great Countrie vpon that Coast from the Sea, and fortified it with wonder∣full stronge rampars & dikes: the sayde rampar Houtbose is now not thought so necessarie, nei∣ther is so chargeable as before: it was, besids that, the Countrie that the sayde Nicholas hath reco∣uered is, so frutefull that for one quarter of graine sowed there they reape a hūdred, which so much the more recommendeth the fayde Nicholas in∣uention and industrie. The Isles that be of the Iu∣risdiction of Holland. Voorn. IN the Isle Voorn is the Briel which is a good stronge towne, & the first that reuoulted from the Spaniard in ye yeare 1572 and after it Ʋlissinghe and Einchusen.
In the Isle of Ʋoorn is also the towne cal∣led Gerulit, which hath diuers villages vnder the Iurisdiction there of, though the towne it selfe be but small. The Soyle of this Iland is verie fat & frutfull, & bringeth forth great aboundaunce of diuers sorts of graine, & likewise of the hearbe called Hellem like to broome, the great rootes wherof is ye principall strength of the Sea bankes & dikes of Holland, & Zeland, which otherwise being very sandie would easilie be borne awaie with ye winde. Goerede the 2. Iland, In it is a towne of ye same name, being reasonable faire and great. Somersdeiick the 3. Iland called also Voorn, be∣cause it lyeth directlie against Holland, for Voorn signifieth as much as before, or in olde Englishe beuorne. In it are diuers villages, but the principall is Somersdiick whereof the whole Iland taketh name, the which was sometime a Towne of great account, & this onlye village among al the rest of the Ile is vnder ye iurisdiction of Zeland. Gorendiick the 4. & Pierschelle the 5. Isle. The Soyle of these two Islandes is excellent good, and diuerse villages are in them, but no o∣ther thing worthy of memorie. All these Isles are called Voorn, & be in deede Zeelandish Islells, and were in times past vnder the iurisdiction of Zeland, but about 50. yeares passed for a certaine sūme of money yt was to be
deuided betweene the Earles of Hollande and Zelande, the Inhabitants of thes Isles by accord submitted themselues to the iurisdiction of Hol∣land, and haue so remayned euer since. This Countrie of Holland is wonderfully peo∣pled, and the people are tall, well proportioned, cheerfull and valiant, and verie curteous & euill, their townes are well built, their houses wonder∣fully well furnished, & their furniture exceeding fine and neete aboue all Countries in the world. Their shops, buildings, shipps, dikes, rampars, chanels, deuises to maintaine their bankes, and to preserue the medowes and pastures by passing the water from one channell into another, and so into the Sea, and all other workes that they take in hand are so exquisitely and skilfully done that it is wonderfull to behould them, yea a man may there learne a thousand things very worthy to be knowne, that hee shall not see all his life time in anye other place. The women of Holland are verie faire, wise, paynfull, and so practised in affaires of the world, that they occupie thēselues in most part of mens excercises, especially in marchandize. The Gentlemen of the Countrie being no∣thing so many now as vnder their naturall Earles they were (because since that time they haue gi∣uen themselues to trafique) liue vpon their reue∣newes, & diuers of them professe Letters, the rest of the common people liue by marchandize, by
nourishing sheepe and cattell, by shipping, and fishing, out of the which they draw great wealth, so that this litle prouince is wonderfull rich, and no one foote of it but bringeth foorth somthing, insomuch that euen the verie Downes being no∣thing but sande hilles, breed great aboundance of Conies, and the verie sea rockes great store of eggs and infinit numbers of foule, the which are soulde into diuers Countries, but especiallye to Andwerpe both rawe & baked, fresh and salt, yea and that with soe great commoditie to the sel∣lers, that diuers Gentlemen haue established the greatest part of there reuenewes in ye gaine that a∣riseth of the sale of these foules. To conclude, considering the great wealth that groweth to this Countrie by cheese, butter, flesh, fish, foule, chickens, eggs, cattell, linen cloth, wol∣len cloth, turfe, and shipping, it may be called the Treasure house of all good thinges. The prince of Orenge William of Nassau was in his life time Gouernour and Lieuetenant of Holland, Zeland, & Vtrecht, for the king. Vtrecht hath North, West, and South Holland, East, Guelderland, this Countrie is a neighboure neere adioyning to Holland, yet a state apart, cō∣tayning ye Vtrecht Citie it selfe & 4. other walled townes namly Wick at Duerstede, Rhenen, A∣mersfort, & Montfort. Vnder the iurisdiction thereof are aboue 70. Villages.
The Countrie is verie frutefull & much than Holland, and therefore better for graine. This Towne was first called Antonina of one of the Anthonies of Roome, but Dagobert King of France gaue it the name of Traiectum, be∣cause there was at that time the common Fee ouer the Rhine. It standeth vppon the ancient streame of the Rhine, which before it brake into the Riuer of Leck had his course this way into the Sea. This town is seated in a countrie so miraculous∣ly well inhabited, that in one daye you may goe from Vtrecht to 50. walled townes standing from thence in equall distaunce, and all vnder the King of Spaines obedience. Farther, you may departe out of Vtrecht in the morning and dine at whether you will of 26. walled townes, and returne againe to supper at Vtrecht in your owne house. In this Towne the Emperour Charles built a goodly & a strong Castell called Vredenbourg, (that is to say) the Castell of peace. The Towne is large, mightie and very state∣lye and sumptuouslie Built, and ful of goodly cel∣lars and Caues, vaulted with wonderfull art and skill. There are in it manie goodlie Churches, of the which 5. are the principall, being all Colleg Churches of Cannons. In Vtrecht are also two Commaunderies.
Churches, and houses verie statelie and magnifi∣cent & goodly possessions in diuers parts of these Low countries, wherwith they entertaine a great & honourable estate. In Ʋtrecht also are two famous Monasteries of Noble women and Ladies called Damoyselles, such as before in diuers places we haue described and without the towne are three other Monaste∣ries of the same nature, besides manie Abbies, & houses of Religion of sundrie professions. In Vtrecht is likwise a court iuridicial whither all the appeales of this Countrie are brought. In this Towne is an Episcopall Sea founded by Dagobert king of France, yt which also was once in Archchiepiscopall Sea, but the towne being ruinated by the Normās the Archiepiscopallyte was translated to Colin. The state of this Citie consisteth of ye 5. Colle∣gial churches, of ye Nobles who are chosen by the Prince, and of the Syndiques, and Deputies of the 5. townes of this Prouince. Townes of the iurisdiction of Vtrecht, wherof the first is Weck at Duersteede Which is a towne well built standing vppon the Leck with a good Castell in it. Rhenen standeth also vpon ye Leck, about this towne is excellēt good ground for turfe, & neere to it is a village called Venēdale, built within these 25. yeares for the commoditie of making turfe the which village daylie greatly increaseth.
Amesfort standeth vpon the litle riuer of In the yeare 1534. this Towne was taken by Martin van Rossem, it is a faire towne and well peopled. Montfort standeth vpon ye Issel, it is apleasant place and a strong, hauing beene in times past a Frontier towne against the Hollanders. Vtrecht was not longe since as well an Earle∣dome, as a Bishopricke, so that the Bishopp had as well the temporall as the spirituall sword, which was often cause of great warres between the Bishops of the place, and the Earles of Hol∣land. Farther, in times past ye state of Vtrecht was so mightie that it was able to put 40000. men into the feelde, and it was thus gouerned by the Bishops of the place 900. yeares & better, but of late yeares Henrie of Bauiere Bishop of Vtrecht being extremelie distressed with warres both by the Gueldroys and by the rebellion of his ow people, who receiued Martin Ʋan Rossem to the towne, alienated all the temporalties of his Bishopricke to the Emperour Charles the 5. in the yeare 1527. and in the yeare 1528. the Imperialists by one of the factions of Ʋtreh were receiued into the Towne, and the yeare all the states of the Countrie confirmed the Bishops alienatiō madeto the Emperour, as did also afterwarde Pope Clement the 7. Vtrecht with the Countrie is a Fief of the ∣pire, for the which cause the Emper Charles
was also inuested into this countrie by ye Empire. ZELAND. Is as much to saie, as a Lande wonne out of the Sea, vnder the which name are contayned 15. or 16. Islandes, the which being vnited toge∣ther make one bodie, & haue ye title of a Countie▪ Zeland is seuered southward from Flanders with the left arme of the Schelde called Hont, Eastwarde from Brabant with the right arme of the sayd riuer, which retayneth the ancient name of Schelde, North it is seuered from Holland with the Goulph of the Sea called Flacke, West it hath the Sea toward England. The principall Isles of Zelande are 7. which are diuided by an Arme of the Schelde neere to the entraunce thereof into the Sea into two parts (viz.) Orientall and Occidentall. The Orientall Isles are Schouwe, Duelandt & Tolen. The Occi∣dentall are Walkeren, Zuidbeuelandt, Northeue∣landt, Wolfersduck. Towards the Sea these Isles are defended with hilles of sande called the Downes throwne vp by the surges of the Sea. Towards the the South they be defended with rampars & bankes made & painefully & charge∣ablie maintained by the countrie to the height of ten flemish elles, and large at the bottome 25. flemish els, these rampars are made of the hard∣est clay that may be gottē, within they are thick built with woode & stone, and couered without
wrought. Zeland is a verie fruefull Coutrie, & pure and bright coe, Coriander, & the Baie tree with the , which groweth not in anie other the Low Countries. I bringeth foorth dance of excellent good Madd where great part of Europe is furnisheth and more than  other prouince of Countries, by reason that the sea water both the coldnes of the aire and of the the Winter, and the heate thereof in the . In Zelande is also great store of arfe, but forbid∣den to be digged neere the Sea Coast, because the ouhnes of that kinde of earth is a greate strength to the Sea bankes against the rage ther∣of. In Zeland is also great aboundance of excelle good pasturage for cattell, & no lesse plentie of fi. Farther in this Countrie are 8. walled tow (viz) Middlebourg, Sirice, Canfere Vlissing Tolle S. Martins ducke, Romer suale, are also diuers other small places of not walled, and 102. villages. The states of this  consist of & one , the Townes.
The Descriptiō of the Iles, & first of Schouwe, the principall of the Oriental Iles, called in Latin Saldia. THis Ile is much diminished by the violence of the Sea, yet hath it at this present 7. Leagues in circuit. It was in times past so neere adioy∣ning to Northeuelādt, that ye Inhabitāts mought com∣mon together from the one shore to ye other, but now they are greatly distant a sunder. This Ile contayneth these townes following: Sirixzee this is the ancient towne of all Zeland. It had somtime a verie commodious Hauen and wel frequēted with marchants though now cho∣ked vp with beach throwne in by the sea to the great decaie of the towne, yet notwithstanding ye towne is walled & reasonable faire, & is ye second in degree among the townes of Zeland. The whole Trafique of the towne is now salte and mather, whereof there is great aboundaunce in this Ile of Schouwe. Neere to this towne a few yeares past were ta∣ker certaine monstrous fishes like wilde boares, but twise as great & more horrible to behould, part of ye which fishes were carried to Andwerp
and there soulde & found verie good meat. such like Monstrous Fishes are often taken the Coast of Hollande and Zelande, but they are cōmonlie better for Oyle, thā for anie other vse, notwithstanding how profitable soeuer they bee that waie: yet do they the Countrie much more harme than good, because they chace, deuour, & fraie away with their horrible and hideous shape the other ordinarie fishes of the sSeas. In this towne was borne the famous phisition & philosopher Leuinus Lēnius, who hath writen di∣uers learned workes. Browershauē is but a fisher towne, notwithstā∣ding in this Isle of Schouwe are diuers Castels and villages appertaining to diuers gentlemen. The second Orientall Isle. Duuelandt hath the name of the greate abou dance of Doues that breed therein, this Isle hath 4. Leagues of circuit, but because it is subiect to the innundations of the sea, there is neuer a good town in it, butmany villages & gentlemēs farmes. This Isle was surrounded by the Sea in the yeare 1530. with great losse both of Catell nd men, but by the diligence & industrie of of Burgundie father to Maximilian Lord of Beueres in Flaunders it was recouered gine though with excessiue charge. The third Orientall Isle. Tolen the which is now ioyned with that parte of this Isle that S. Martins Diick standeth in, is
seuered from it only by a little channell halfe full of water. In times past it is thought they were 2. Isles though now they be but one. In this Isle are these 2. litle walled townes following, the first: Tolen which giueth ye name to the whole Isle, & is so called beause the Earles Towle was wont to bepayde there. The secondwalled Towne of this Isle is, S. Martins Diick which is a verie litle towne, notwithstanding in this Ile are many good y vil∣lages. The other small Ilands lying towards the East, are not worth the mentioning being in a man∣ner all disinhabited. The Occidentall Isles whereof the first is Walckeren called in Latine Valachria. THis is the principall of all the Iles of Zelande not for the greatnes thereof (for it is but 10. Leagues in cir∣cuit) but for the strength, suretie of seate, frutefulnes of soyle, number of people and great wealth that it possesseth. In this Iland are these townes following. Middlebourg so named, because it standeth in the middest of the Isle, it is a verie stronge
towne well fortified and well walled & the streetes large, and the houses, churches, and monasteries verie faire built. In the goodlie Abbie of S. Nicholas in this town lyeth buried Williā king of Romanes; Earle of Holland and Zeland with Isabellee his wife. In this Abbie is also a goodlie Librarie. The Abbot of this place is the only prelate that alone at the Assemblie of the States representeth all the Cleargie of Zeland. The Staple of French, Spanish, & Portugale ines comming by Sea into the low Countries is helde at Middlebourg, besides that, it is a great Towne of trafique of all kind of March∣dize. And it is the principall Towne of all Z∣lande. This towne standeth not vpon the Sea, but vpō two channels which discharge thēselues into the sea neer to Ramue, one of ye which viz. ye old cha∣nell because of ye narrownes & crookednes of serueth to no great vse, but the new one lately cut, is straighte a line, large & dee such sort that a ship of a 100. tunne maye from the port of Ramie euen vp to the of Middelbourg by this new channell. Ʋr or Cafer is the set this Isle of Waloker standing vpon the coast. To this towne repaire all the chants. It is a Marquisae, & the Marq alone representeth in the assemblie of the states
all the Nobilitie of Zeland. In this towne is a goodly Arsenale, where the kings artilerie, and al other furniture for his warrs by sea is kept. Ʋlussinghē is ye third walled town of Walckeren. It was walled 40. yeares agone by the aboue na∣med Adolphus de Burgundie. It is the key of the sea of these Low countries, because all ships that goe vp to Andwerp must of necessitie passe by this towne. The villages of Walkeren Sautland, Westcapelle this village enioyeth the priuileges of a walled towne, because in times past it was a good town, & the best hauen of Walkeren but a∣bout 100. yeares past it was drowned by the sea. Dōbourg neere to it is ye royal pallace of Westho∣uē with a garden therin belonging to the Abbot of Middlebourg. All these 3. villages stand vpon ye sandhils of ye west & northwest sea towards Cāfer Rameken betweene Vlissinghē & Ramue is the point called Rameken towardes the southwest, vpon the which standeth the forte of Zeerbourg built by Charles the Emperor to assure the ente∣raunce into the riuer on that side. Ramue or Armuyden, this is the laste towne of the State of the Isle of Walkeren. It is a Vil∣lage vnwalled, but the goodlyest Hauen not of the Lowe Countries only but of all Christen∣dome: For all ships yt come into Flanders repaire to this port in such sort that you shal somtime see
there 400 or 500. faile of ship all partes of ye world, built there. Sudbourg is a village betweene & Vlussihe where  Emperour stayed a long time for inde to carrie him his iourney into Spain. A great number also of goodlie villages are in this  of Walcn, which for reuitie . The second Occident all Isle. Zuidbeueland so named, because before it was rampared with bankes & dikes it tre if the fondation thereof had not be one . It is the greatest of all the Isls of Zeland. It in times past 20. Leagues in circuit, but now by the inundations of the Sea and of the riuer it is di∣minished by the halfe. In times past there were in this Isle townes, the principall whereof was Borsul. But this towne withal the countrie about led the Seniorie of Borsule, was swallowed vp by the sea in the yeare 153. The second walled Town. Romersual is now the principall of all ye of , it is seated vpon the towardes : but in the same year the ind  seuered it from made it an Islande by it selfe, soe that it is nowe forced to defende it selfe both  ex∣treme dilig and chge from the  all
rage of the Sea. In this towne the Earle of Zee∣land taketh his oath at his entrāce into the state. The third walled towne of this Ile is Goes or Tergoes. This towne standeth vppon the North coast. It is the only town of all the three walled towns of Zuidebeuelandt, that is remained whole and safe from the inundations of the Sea. It is a good little towne and enioyeth very good priuiledges profitable for it selfe. In this Iland are also many good villages and Seniories, and among the rest Barland, which is the countrey of Adriane surnamed Barlandus, that hath written the Historie of Braant, and di∣uers other small volumes. In this Ile are many goodly woods and plea∣sant thickets, full of foule and wilde beastes, to hauke and hunt. The third occident all Ile is Northeueland. THis Ile in times paste was the para∣dice of Zeeland, but the Sea Anno. 1532. in the generall deluge (as it were) of this countrey of Zeeland, swallowed it cleane vp, so that nowe nothing of the town named Chortcheen (which was a pro∣per walled towne in this Iland) remaineth, but onely the church steeple which is yet to be seen, as are also the speeres of the churches of diuers
other vill the rabouts swallowed vp by the Sea. True it is that in diuers parts of Ile, the earth cast vp by the sea riseth aboue the water, so that there is good hope in time to re∣couer the whole or the greatest part thereof a∣gaine. The fourth and last occiden∣tall Ile is. Wolferiick, which is the smallest of all the oc∣cidentall Iles, hauing only two villages in it, but great aboundance of pasture for cattell. The gouernment of Zeeland. ZEeland is gouerned by gouernours, named R∣maisters, who be the ki lieutenants in these Ilands and haue all the authority vnder him. One resideth in Middle for ye Ilāds, & the other in Sirix for the  Ilands. The Zeelanders trade is fishing▪ , gra∣sing & Tillage. They also refine  salt, only refine it making it white as snow, but with sea water &  of fire grtly increase it, the Spanish salt forty  in a hundrth, The Portugale salt thirty fiue, and the Frenche tenty fiue. In the which trade of life
thousand persons employ their times, because of the great commoditie arising thereof. And it is aboue 400 yeares past, since this Art began first to be practized there. Thus much of Zeeland. And now wee will enter into the description of the noble prouince of Flanders. FLANDERS. IT is very vncertain wher∣of Flanders first tooke that name. Flanders in Caesars time at ye least the greatest part thereof was inhabited by the people called Mo∣rini (which name the Ro∣maines gaue thē, because they dwelt in moores or low grounds) and it was almost nothing but Forrest, woods and bushes. It was erected into a county by Charles, sur∣named Le Chauue, who gaue it to Baldouin bras de fer together with his daughter Iudith, in the yeare of our Lord 877. It is held of the Crowne of France. Flanders in times past was bounded with the Sea, and the riuers of Somme and Schelde, and comprehended 7. principall townes, namelye: Arras, Gaunt, Bruges, Ypre, S. Omer, Lisle, Do∣uay, but by marriages often made betweene the
houses of France and Flanders, the boundes are altred, and diuers Seniories dismembred from it, whereof the Earledome of Artoys was first ere∣cted. So that it is now bounded North with the occean Sea, & that branche of ye Schelde that is called Hont. South with Artoys, Hainault and Vermandols. East with the ancient Shelde and a peece of Hainault. West, partly with the occe∣an Sea towards England, and partly with the ri∣uer Aa, and that part of Artoys that bordereth vpon Calais and Boloigne. The length of Flanders from Andwerp to the newe Fosse is 33. leagues, the breadth from N to Grauelinghe 30 leagues. The aire is very wholsome, especially South∣ward, the countrey flat, the  fruitfull, but es∣pecially towardes the Sea and towards France. The countrey breedeth great store of cattell, especiallie goodly horses and mares, very apt for the warres, and of as great agilitie (though of much greater bone) as the bastarde Gennet of Spaine. Flanders hath diuers Riuers running through it, namely, Schelde, Lis, Tender, and many other small streames, the rest is supplied by Channels made by hand to receiue in the Sea. In this countrey are also many forrestes, the principall whereof are Npe and Nonnen. Mountaine of moment there is none in the cooutrey, but pleasant hils many, especiallie in
Flanders Gallicane. In Flanders are 28. walled townes, whereof the three Capitall are Gaunt, Bruges, Hypre, the rest are Lisle, Douay, Tournay, Courtray, Oude∣naade, Alost, Hulst, Taermonde, Bieruliet, Nieu∣port, Scluse, Dunckerck, Grauelinge, Bourbourg, Damme, Dixmude, Vuerne, Ardembourg, Ni∣noue, Berghe de S. Winoc, Montgerarde or Grā∣mont, Cassel, Deinse, Orchies, Lannoy: all the which are faire townes and of good importance. Townes vnwalled though in times paste wal∣led, and euen at this present rich, well peopled, faire built, and therefore enioying the priuiled∣ges of walled townes, there are aboue thirty: the principall wherof, are Ostende (though this town since the beginning of the present troubles, bee fortified with rampars and diches) Oudembourg, Messine, Belle, Poperinghe, Toroue, Ostbourg, Axsele, Middlebourg, Loo, Weruick, Blanch∣berghe, Houcke, Rossellar, Tielt, Ghistelle, Eeclo, Lombartzide, Steechen, Honscot, Munchereede, Mardycke, Meenen, Hallewin, Wastene, Steeg∣hers, Merghen, Haesbrouck, Armentiers. Farther in Flanders are 1154. villages, manye of the which are as great, rich, and populous, as any in all Europe, and some of them honoured with titles of dignity. There are farther in it many Castels, fortresses, Seniories, and noble mens and gentlemens hou∣ses, very beautifull to behold.
There are 48. Abbeys and Nunis, and an finite number of pri, Caonit all collged, & dispersed through the whole ince in such sort, that the Spaniards at their first comming into the countrey, seeing such a mul∣titude of townes, villages, monasteries and buil∣dings, said that all Flanders was but one Cittie. There be fiue ancient Viscounties, namelye, Gnt, Hypre, Werne, Bergh de S. Winoc, and Haerlebeck. There are also in this Prouince three principa∣lities, Steenhuise, Gaure, Espinoy. In it are also foure principall ports of the Sea, Sclse, Nieuport, Duncerck, Ostende. In times past there were in it 31. courts of Iu∣stice, hauing preheminence of Bailiwickes o Prouosships, called in French Chastelenies, the which are as it were principall courtes, hauing authority euery one apart by it selfe ouer ye whol countrey of Fladers. There are likewise in it foure principall Baro∣nies, bearing their name of foure of the anci∣test Seniories in the countrey, which all giue the for their Armes, but with diuers banne, namely Pamele, Cisoin, Heine, Boulaer. There be now 18. other Baronies, but erected than the other foure: yet neyther the no the other 4. are verye ncient as it shoul ise not manye yeares since (as Flemings themselues affirme) there was no Ba∣ron
in Flanders, but the Earle himselfe alone. In this countrey are also xii. Peeres, after the imitation of the Crowne of France. Officers of Honour vnder the Earle of Flan∣ders are these following: one Constable, twoe Marshals, a great Veneur, a Chancellor, a cham∣berlaine, foure Receiuers, besides diuers other ministers and officers of the Prince, whoe all by reason of their degrees and offices, haue Senio∣ries of inheritance in Flanders annexed to those estates and offices. The States of Flanders consist of 4. members: (viz) Prelats, Nobles, Townes and Chasteleines. But the Citties of Gant, Bruges, Hypre and L Franc, are called the foure members of the body of estate, because they haue the principal autho∣ritie, and because very seldome all the 4. estates aboue mentioned, meet at the publique assem∣blies, because the rest haue no voice there. This countrey is deuided into 3. partes though of quantitie vnequall, namely, Flanders Flamād or Flamingante, so named because in it the Fle∣mish language is vsed, and this is the principall part of the countrey and the most respected. The second is Flanders Gallicane, so called, because the wallon language which is a bastard French is their mothertoong. And the thirde is Flanders Imperial, so named because many yeares it was vnder the obedience of the Empire.
Flandres Flamingant. THis countrey is boūded North with the Sea, South with the Riuer Li and Flanders Gallicane, East with Schelde and Flanders Imperiall, well with the new Fosse and with Artoys. The Soile of this countrey is all sande and ught for wheat, but bringeth forth plentie rie, Oates, beanes, peason, fiches, boucoy, and of Flax and hempe great aboundance, and veie good fruit and of diuers sorts. In this part of Flanders are the three Capitall townes (viz) Gaunt, Bruges, Hypre, & likewise the 4▪ members of Flanders (viz) these 3. town last mentioned, and le Franc, which being ioyd with them maketh the fourth. In it are also the 4. ports of the Sea, the Senio∣r of Brghe de S. Winoc, and many townes wal∣led and vnwalled, but let vs begin with the prin∣cipall towne, which is: GAVNT. THe founder of this Citie, is said to be Iulius Caesr, not onely by the voice of the people, but also by the Historiographers, ye write thereof. It is built about 4. leagues
from the Sea vpon three riuers. Schelde, Lis and Lieue, besides the which, there are a number of brooks and fine springs and fountains that come into the Cittie, some by naturall course, some by Art, all the which at their issue out of the towne being receiued into great ditches made by hand passe into the sea through the Nieuvaert, to the great commodity of nauigation. This Nieu∣vaert is a great channell lately repaired anew & augmented and carried with infinite paines and charges by the space of 4. great leagues into the sea of Zeeland, neere to the goulph called Sasse. Farther, of late they haue opened a certaine little Iland which before stopped the course of their ships, so that through this channell called Nieuvart, not onely the waters aboue mentio∣ned haue passage, but also a reasonable boate may passe from the Sea euen to Gaunt with ine∣stimable profit to the towne and countrey ad∣ioyning to it. Gaunt is very strong both by Nature and Art, and very beautifull, and one of the greatest Cit∣ties in christendome. It hath maruellous great suburbs, the wals within are seuen miles in Cir∣cuit, and without more than x miles, but it hath many wast places within it. There is a citadelle builte by the Emperou Charles, where the abbey of S. Baon was. The buildings of Gaunt are very statelye and magnificall.
Within the walles of Gaunt are 26. by the riuers and chanels aboue mentioned passe through the towne. There are 98. great bridges, and an inf number of small, vnder the which great boates passe laden with victuals and marchandize. There are six principal water milles, and abou 100. wind milles, and of hand and horsse milles a infinite number. Churches great and small, monasteries, hospi∣tals, and other places of Deuotion there are in Gaunt 55. among the which are the houses of the foure orders of Friers. In Gaunt are many goodly libraries, and it is deuided into seuen parishes. Gaunt is a Viscountie, and it is the first mēber of Flanders. In Gaunt are diuers schooles for the bringing vp of poore children vpon the townes charge. There is in Gaunt an ordinarie Count of gouerned by the gentlemen and the great Bay∣life of the towne. Gaunt was the place of the Natiui of the Emperor Charles the fifth. In Gaunt are 52. mysteries or occupations, and ouer and aboue these of Weauers containing 27. ges, so that it is not only one of the of the town, but for their great number & one of the three estates therof, the greatest thing
yt they weaue being Linnen cloth fine & course, whereof as well in this Towne as in diuers other places of Flanders, so great aboundance is made that it is accounted among the principall riches of the Countrey, the rather because the Stuffe whereof they make their linnen groweth in the Countrey it selfe. Farther, this mystery of Wea∣uers not onely in this towne but also throughout the whole Countrey of Flanders, hath the grea∣test estimation aboue all other occupations, by reason of the linnen and wollen cloathes, Sar∣ges, Tapistrie, Fustian, Bucheram, wosted, and such other stuffe made in this Prouince. At Gaunt resideth the ordinary Councel and Court of Flanders, established there Ann. 1409 by Iohn Duke of Burgundie and Earle of Flan∣ders, but appeales lie from this Court to Ma∣lines. In Gaunt is also residente the Chamber of the Fiefs of Flanders called La Court Legiti∣me. Foure Leagues from Gaunt are nowe in our time, discouered ancient ruines of walles, Cel∣lers, and deepe Welles, with manye medailes of ancient Emperours, and idols of brasse found there, where should seeme to haue been in times past some ancient towne or fortresse of the Ro∣maines.
BRVGES. BRuges is so named of the multitude of goodly brid∣ges about the towne as some write, or rather of a bridge called Brugstock, which stood neere to this place betweene Gden∣bourg▪ and Ardembourg, which were townes of great traffique standing vppon the Sea, but de∣stroied by the Darles and Normans, of the ru∣in whereof about 800. yeares sithence, the ca∣stell of Bruges was built. Bruges standeth in a goodly plaine leagues from the Sea. There is no riuer that naturallie commeth to it, but a great channell there is made by Art cal∣led Reye, so large and deepe, and such plenty of waters drawne out of the bowels of the earth, & brookes about the towne by ditches deriued to∣gether into it, that it seemeth a great, large, deep and naturall riuer. It is deuided into ches, which being lgable passe through parts of the towne, and at their issue towne being al vnited togither, passe to and from thence to Scluse, where this waters dischargeth it selfe into the Sea. But because this riuer could not be mainta∣ned
in deapth sufficient to beare shippes of great burthen which was the thing that the citty prin∣cipallie desired, they haue not longe since with infinite charge and maruellous industrie begun another channell neer to the former, but in place more conuenient, and so deepe and large, that at full Sea a ship of foure hundred muids that is one hundred Tunne, may passe from the Sea vp to the very towne. At the mouth of the which channell, they haue made an engine like that at Damme, to stay the fresh water from passing in∣to the Sea, and to hold out the sea from passing any more water into the channell than is conue∣nient. At full Sea, when the sea is as high with∣out this engine (made to open and shut like a gate) as the fresh water is within, than opē they the gate with instruments made for that purpose and receiue the shippes into the channell, and when they be entered, shut out the sea againe. Neither can the rage of the sea hurt this gate, be∣cause the height of the fresh water within back∣eth it, and so fortifieth it, that no force can moue it or shake it. Bruges is a rich, faire, and a mightie towne, the circuit of the Walles within is foure Italian miles and a quarter. The towne is wonderfullie peopled, and the buildings passing sumptuous, the streetes large and straight, and it hath in it manye goodlye places, especiallie the market place, from the which the sixe principall streetes
passe straight to the sixe principall gates of the towne, which is a very pleasant and delightfull sight to behold. Bruges was first walled by Baldwin surnamed Le Chauue An. 890. In this towne are aboue threescore churches, the principall whereof is 8. Donat, where there is a College of Canons, the hed wherof is called the Prouost of S. Donat, whose charge is to as∣semble the Cleargie of the Colledge, hee is also president of the spirituall court, and chauncellor by inheritance of Flanders. In this Church of S. Donat is buried Lodoui∣cus Viues. Bruges is deuided into sixe quarters, and nine parishes, comprehending in the number S. Croix and S. Katherines, which are without the town but yet part of their parish within the towne. In one place in Bruges, namely in the Castell, is Iustice doone vpon malefactors in the name of six Lords, and sentence pronounced by sixe di∣uers magistrates, and sometime execution done in one daye in diuers partes of the Castell in the name of euery one of these Lords. The Lordes are these: 1. The bodie of the towne. 2. The Franc. 3. The court Feudale. 4. The Prouest of S. Donat. 5. The Lord of Ziszeel. 6. The Lord of Mandaesche. At Bruges is a goodly place called the lodging of the water, wherein is a wonderfull engine tur∣ned
with a horsse, drawing vp water and disper∣sing it by pipes into the towne, a wonderfull and a pleasant thing to behold. Bruges is the second member of Flanders, & in times past hadde the same course of traffique that Andwerpe hath nowe, which it lost Anno. 1516. as in the description of Andwerp is alrea∣dy shewed. Notwithstanding the staple of Spanish wools is still at Bruges, and after the losse of Calais An. 1558. the staple of English wools was also tran∣slated thither. Besides the traffique of marchandize, ther are in Bruges a great number of Artisans of diuerse occupations, especially suche as make Fustians, Sarges, sargets or Sayes, Boucherams, Wollen cloth, Tapistrie, & now also they begin to work great aboundance of silkes there. There are in Bruges 68. mysteries or compa∣nies of occupations, the principall and most an∣cient of the which are, the Butchers, Fishmon∣gers, Brokers, and marriners. In Bruges An. 1478. was borne Philip sonne to Maximilian the Emperor, and father to the Em∣peror Charles the fifth. The Cittizens of Bruges are courteous, ciuill, and great politikes in all matters, but especiallie in the due administration of Iustice. The women are faire, gratious, very ciuill, and no lesse sober in their behauiour.
In Bruges most commonly is ailife of Flaunders, who exerciseth the same of∣fice there, that the Drossart dooth in Brab, but his dignitie, power, and authoritie, far sur∣mounteth the Drossarts. In Bruges resideth also the magnificall co, called du Frano which we will now describe. The Chamber or court called du Franc. THe Court called le Fran is so named, because freed it selfe from the seni∣orie of Bruges. This magistrate, Court, and Seniorie is of such po∣wer and authoritie, that it maketh the fourth mem∣ber of Flaunders. It was instituted vpon this occasi In tim past nt, Bruges, and Hypre, made the estate of Flaunders. But because Bruges ∣ming of their great power, preinence wealth, grew so proud and insolent, that made hed not onely against Gaunt and Hyp but also against all the States yea euen against the prince himselfe. Vppon a time when ctuals were verie scarse & deere in the town, the
villages subiect to the town (being almost infinit in number) relieued the Citie both with victuals and money, but with this condition that in causes of iustice they should appeare from thencefoorth before the Chastelaine whoe then in name of the Earle resided within the Castell of Bruges, & not before the Senate and ordinarie Iustice of the towne. The villages hauing obtayned this priuilege, and their heads that had the administration of iustice, increasing daylie for their due admini∣string of iustice, in number, credit, & reputation, they obtayned of Philip of Elsace Earle of Flaun∣ders Iurisdiction and a Court of Iustice apart by themselues and to bee held in their owne name, which the Earle the rather graunted thereby to abate the Brugians insolencie and pride. This priuilege being obtayned, these Villages foorthwith by permission of the prince, erected a Court of iustice of great authoritie, contayninge 27. Escheuins chosen out of the bodie of their owne Nobilitie, and who hould their offices du∣ring life. Farther, they established yearelye foure Bourguemaysters, three chosen out of the 27. Escheuins, & the 4. of the people of their own iu∣risdiction, and with thē a Baylife as a Prouost of iustice, and this Court the sayd Philip of Elsace ordayned to bee held in the Castell of Bruges (though now they may hold it where they thinke good themselues within the precincts of their
owne iurisdictio) and that the Gouernour of the Castel for the prince should president for the fayed Court. But in the yeare 1224. Ine Countesse of Fla∣ders (hauing bought of Iohn Lord of Neke the dignitie of Chastelaine of Bruges, and presidence of this Court) set the Franconats in absolute libe∣tie, and gaue to their Escheuins the whole gouer ment of the Seniori without Bruges, leauing to the towne of Bruges the administration of iustice only within the Towne. Againe An. 1436. the good Duke philipp made them the 4. member of Flaunders, saue that in time of warre they march vnder the Banner of Bruges. These Franconats commaunde over a greate Countrie 7. Leagues rounde about Bruges, and ouer an infinite number of Vassals and villages, but as well they as the Citie of Bruges appeale to the prouinciall Counsell resident in Gaunt. Hipre. Taketh name of the brooke Hipre running through the middest of the towne. It is strongly seated & hardly may be be seiged: it is also greatly fortefied by art, and made almost inexpugnable. It is a faire and a reasonable rich towne & well built, notwithstanding that most of the houses be of timber and of small appearance without. In this towne are such a multitude of leaden
pipes to conuaie the water from the riuer, and the Chanels in the Towne almost into euerie priuate house of the towne, that it is commonly sayde in Flaunders that the foundation of Hipre is all Leade. The Hall appoynted for the sale of Cloathes in Hipre is a building verie ancient and worthy of as great admiratiō as anie is in al ye Low Countries. This is a reasonable towne of trafique, because of the great quantitie of Cloathes, Sarges, Sayes, and such like stuffe made there, the Mart wherof in the towne is in Lent. Besides the ordinarie Iustice of the towne house of Hipre, there is a Court called the Hall of Hipre vnder the iurisdiction whereof are 7. Chastelle∣nies, one of the which alone namely Cassell hath vnder it 24. Virescales, that is Courts of iustice depending of it. Hipre is the third member of Flaunders & hath the title of a Viscountie, and the Lord of Ogines is nowe Viscountie thereof. The Iurisdiction and Seniorie of this towne is verye great, and extendeth ouer the Coun∣trie round about it, which is the best and the frut∣fullest parte of all Flaunders Flamingante. The people of this towne are of verie ciuile and quiet conuersation:
The 4. principall Ports of whereof the first is SCluse which was a rich Towne, but the tentiō that it had with vndid it, so that ende it became subiect Bruges who bought the prince, & now it and fauour it greatlye, because it is one of the goodlyest Hauens in Europe, and is of receipt 500. shipps. The Towne is strong being double and may be made a place impreble. It hath to it a strong Castell but seuered from the Towne, which was the prison of the Duke of Buillon, the Admirall of Fraunce Chastillon taken in the warres, and in this Castell is a garrison for the king. Ouer against Scluse is the litle Ile called where manie a battel in times past hath been fought, and which sometime was as great as now it is, and had in it a faire towne and Borowes and Villages verie rich, hath but one village of the same  the Ile it selfe is. This was the birth place of George Cassader. ostende, this towne is not walled (but since
these last troubles diched and trenched) yet is it reasonable great and populous and the port rea∣sonable good. Neere to this towne somtime are Whales ta∣ken, as for example 8. An. 1404. but not so great as those that are taken in the spanish Seas or in the North Sea towardes Moscouia, yet were some of thse 74. foote of length. In this hauen was also taken An. 1426. a Sea∣hogge twise as great as a land hogg, but of shape bodie and tast, soe like o a Lande hogg that hee was sould for flesh to the Buchers of Tournay. Nieuport, this is a good litle towne with a Ca∣stell of reasonable force, the Hauen is good and well frequented. A League and a halfe from this Towne is the faire and famous Abbie of S. Ber∣nard built vpon the Downes, which hath an ex∣cellent Librarie in it of all sorts of Bookes, and of all Languages. The 4. principall port of Flaunders is Dunckercke, this towne was sacked & burnt by Mounsiour de Termes An. 1558. but is now re∣payred againe and well forrefied. It is the inheritaunce of the Duke of Vendosme now king of France & Nauarre, as are also Gra∣uelinghe, Bourbourg, and diuers other places in Flaunders, and Enghien in Haynault, all the which are come to the house of Bourbon by
, and the which the of peace enioyeth, but in time of King of Spaine (who is Lorde those places)  the frutes compence the Lordes of the Low whose Landes during the warres are Fraunce namelie ye prince of Orenge the Arshcott, the Earle of Eghemont, and . In this Countrie of Flaunders Flaming also Bieruliet, which is a Towne and an where salting of Herrings was firste inuented & where also the inuentor thereof named Willi in the yeare 1397. died, the of this town is reasonable good & commodi The Seniorie and Viscountie of Berghe of S. Winoc. THis Town is so named of goodlie riche Abbie vpon a Hill together the towne, to the S. Winoc an english holy life. The Viscountie & with a nūber of good villages vnder it. about it is verie fruteful, in this town cloathes &  number of Sarges the
finest in all Flanders. This Towne was also acked & destroyed by the French An. 1558. but is now reedefied much fairer & gallanter than before, but I will proceed in the description of ye residew of the walled townes of Flanders flamnigante, & will first begin with Damme. By this Towne passeth the ancient chanel that commeth from Bruges, & here dischargeth it selfe into the Sea. Damme was somtime a hauen towne by reason that the sea flowed hard to the walles thereof & made it mightie & rich, but si∣thence that hauing been often destroied by the Normans & also by thē of Bruges it is at this pre∣sent in very poore estate, & is exposed to the dis∣cretiō & will of them of Bruges. Here in Maie is yearelye a goodlie Fayer of horses kept. Dixmude is a pretie fine litle towne, in ye which euerie yeare in Iulie is a goodly Faire of horses, as also of all other sorts of marchandize. Werne is a good fayre towne and hath the title of a Viscountie. Bourbourg is a fine and a strong litle towne ap∣pertaining to Henrie of Bourbon king of France, & Nauarre. Grauelinghe standeth vpō the riuer of Aa nere to the Sea. In times past it was a place famous be∣cause of the cōmodious hauen therof, but the Normās often destroy it. Notwithstanding since ye recouerie of Calais by the French it is made the strongest forte of the
low are made and  by the and the fift and by the prince the other part. This towne appertaineth also to the of France. Neere to  was the betweene the French and the 1558. in the which the Earle of the French, and tooke Prisoner de Termes their leader. Cassel was sometime a mightye and towne. It is now in reasonable good estate, and hath dts markes of great antiquity, but very small towne▪ I this towne is yearly a fayre, in the moneths of Ianuarie and August. standeth vpon the Lis. It is a strong ancient little Towne. Courtray standeth also vpon the Lis, when passeth through the middest thereof. It is one of the ancientest townes in Flanders; and is now a good towne and well built, and hath a Castell. It is also now fortified and made . In this towne is made great and of cloathes, napkins, and such like stuffe. Neere to this to  were the and the Earle of the yeare 1301. for the which
was called the sepulchre of the French. Oudenarde standeth vppon the Schelde, it is a fayre towne, of good trafique and strong. In it is made great store of Tapistrie, & infinite quātitie of Linen. In this towne was Margaret Duchesse of Parma base sister to the king of Spaine borne. Oudenarde is ioyned by a bridge to Pamele a litle towne, but one of the 4. ancient Baronies of the Beares of Flaunders, the Baron whereof is Philip of Locquinghen by the title of his mother Anne Vander Gracht Heire of the Noble House of Ioigny. Ardembourg called in times past Rodembourg, was sometime the principall Towne of that part of this prouince that is properly called Flaunders. It is nowe a good litle Towne, the Church is one of ye fayrest in Flaunders, euery yeare in Iune here is a Mart of horses helde. These be all the walled townes that were in Flanders flamingante in the yeare 1560. Now we come to those vnwalled. Oestbourg. Middlebourg was somtime walled, as ye ruines of ye walles yet declare & it is yet enuironed with trenches, bankes, and rampars. This place ap∣pertayneth in the right of his wife to Mounsir de Ognies Viscount of Hipre, and great Baylife of Bruges & du Franc. Muncherede, Blancheberghe, Honcke, Oudembourg. At Oudembourg yearely in Ianua∣rie is a mart of horses & of other marchandizes.
Ghistelle is a good litle towne & a noble for Ghistelle and Hallewine are twoe of the most auncientest Houses in Flaunders. In this Towne are made Cloathes, Sarges and such like thinges. Lombartzide. Torout. At Torout yearelye in Iune and Iulie is a Horse mart. The Towne now appertayneth to the Duke of Cleues. Loo was somtime a walled towne & famous. It hath yet one gate and a pane of a wall verie aun∣cient. It is reasonably well inhabited & builte, though a verie small towne. Honschot is a good & a fine litle towne, in it are manie Sarges made and those excellent good, the which are sould abroad into all partes of ye world to the number yearely of 100000. peeces. Mardicke was somtime a rich & famous town but now on lie a fewe scattered houses. Poperinghe is a litle but a verie good Towne with excellent fayre Churches, and a mart of all marchandizes in Aprill. In this towne are clothes & other marchandizes of diuers sorts made. The towne was burnt by casualtie of fire An. 1563. & the like fire happened there the selfe same daie 50. yeares before. Belle in French Bailleul is a verie fine litle town wher a great number of cloaths are made, & eue∣ry yeare in September there is a Faire held heof Cloathes and other marchandize. This was
natiue Countrie of Iacobus Meyer the Historio∣grapher of Flaunders. Messine is a litle towne, yet manie cloathes are made in it. The Towne is rich, and in it is a Nun∣rie verie fayre and riche, the Abbesse whereof hath Iurisdiction both temporall and spirituall, as haue the Ladies of Mouth and of Niuelle, and therefore shee is called the Ladie of Messi∣ne, but the Nunnes being entered into Religion here cannot come out and marrie as maye the Nunnes of Niuelle. Comines standeth vpon the riuer of Lis, where is a fayre Castell and a goodlye and a rare Libra∣rie gathered by George Lorde of Hallewyn and Comines. This was the Countrie, race and Fami∣lie of Philip de Comines Lord of Argnton whoe wrote the storie of his time with great iudgement wisdome and sinceritie, for the which cause great accompt is made of his woorke, and the Authoures of this age doe often aledge him with great honour. Wervick standeth vppon the Lis, it is nowe a thing of small moment, saue that there is a good∣lye faire Church in it. In this place was borne Martin Chastelin, whoe notwithstanding that hee were borne blinde, yet maketh all sortes of Tooles and instruments of Musicke, and playeth well on them, and all this of himselfe without a∣nie Mayster or Instructor, a thinge verye miracu∣lous.
Merim standeth vpō the Lis. It is a good town well diched, & with a drawe bridge, & is now of late made a verie strong▪ Fort and well furnished of all prouisions belonging to a Towne of warre. In this towne are made a great number of Cloa∣thes soulde into diuers partes of Europe, but especiallie into Spaine. Excellent good Beere is also brued here which is soulde almost into all partes of Flaunders. The Capons of this Towne are farre greater and fatter than those of Bruges, that is to saye twise as great as com∣mon Capons. Hallewin is a litle towne but verie ancient, & where great store of cloath is also made. Wasten in French Warnetton standeth vpō the Lis here are also many clothes made, this town is a Chastelenie, & hath iurisdiction ouer a large Countrie, & manie goodly villages. Steeghers, Marghem. Haesbrouck is a reasonable good litle towne where Linen cloath is sould by retaile at the mar∣ket, for great quantitie of linen is made therea∣bouts. Roussellar in French Roullers the towne is rea∣sonable good, & in it is a weeklye market where are soulde by retaile all sorts of marchandize, but especially Linen cloath. This town appertayneth to the Duke of Cleues, as doth also Torout & the noble village of Winendale, & diuers other lande whereunto he hath succeeded as heire to Philip
Lord of Rauestein. Tiel is a proper litle towne where is made wol∣len & Linen cloath, & Buckeram. Eeclo is a litle, but a fine & a rich towne with a weeklye Market, whither repaire great store of Marchanchts as well to buie as to sell Linen Cloathes. Steken is a good towne and a great thorowe Faire, necre to this Towne is the rich Abbie of Baudelo. Harlebeeck standeth vpon the Lis. It is a good∣lie & a pleasant place, & the ancientest towne of all Flaunders. The towne is a Viscountie and in it is a College of Cannons. This was the place of Natiuitie of Lideric of Engheram &c. Andacker of Harlebeeck the first Lords, Gouernours, and For∣resters of Flaunders, for so were they called be∣fore this Countrie was erected into a Countie by the king of Fraunce. FLANDERS GALLICANT. Hath on the north Flaunders Flamingante, on the south ye countrie of Cambresy, east ye Schelde, west Lis and the Earldome of Artoys. This Countrie is verie small but the soile ther∣of verie good, fatt, and frutefull of all things espe∣cially of wheate, it produceth also mather and ex¦cellent good oade, though no great quantitie, but of goodly pastures for Cattell great plentie
are in it. The states of this Countrie consist of 4. mem∣bers which they call high Iusticers. In this parte of Flanders are contayned the fayre Townes of Le Isle, Douay, and Orchies. The mightie Seniorie of Tournay, and the coun∣trie of Tournesy, with diuers other places worthy of memorie. We will first describe the principall Townes, and than of the rest that which is wor∣thiest to be obserued. L' Isle in latin Insula. Is so called, because in times past the coun∣trie about it was nothing but pondes, pooles, and Marishes, though now by industrie dried vp and made firme Land. Round about the walles of the Towne and of the Castell passeth a small brooke, which ri∣seth at Lens, and at the village of Deullesmont en¦tereth into the Lis. In this towne was borne the Earle of Flaun∣ders called Baldouin de l' Isle, whose father Bal∣douin le Barbu built the towne An. 1007. & the Sonne walled it An. 1066. In this towne the said Baldouin de l' Isle builte the Church of S. Peter, and gaue it Landes to maintaine a certaine nūber of Canons, of ye which number hee appoynted the Bishops of Caray & Terouenne to be. There is now at L' Isle a good strong Castell and the ruines are yet there to be seene of the an∣cient
Castell called Bucq, which was the manor & first place where the auncient Gardians of this Countrie for the king of Fraunce called Foresti∣ers, vsed to reside. It is a verie good and a rich towne, well builte and well inhabited by manye Gentlemen, but in greater number by marchants of great trade, and by very cunning artificers the which woorke di∣uers sortes of marchandize, especiallye Sarges, woasteds and Grograines after the maner of the East Countries in such sorte that it is accounted the best towne of trafique next to Andwerp and Amsterdam in all the Low Countries. At l' Isle resideth the chamber of Accompts of Flaunders being like to that of Bruxelles, but this of l' Isle hath farre greater authoritie and prehe∣minence, for to it resort not only Flaunders, but also Artoys, Haynault, Ʋalenciennes, Tour∣nay, Tournesis, Namur & the Seniorie of Ma∣lines, so did also the Frenche Countie till a Chamber of Accompts was erected there. In this Chamber of Accompts are kept the Records and Priuileges graunted to the Countrie by the Prince. L' Isle is a Chastelaine & hath vnder it a good∣lie iurisdiction and Seniorie, and it is the principal towne of Flaunders Gallicane. Douay. The secōd town of this countrie is Douay which standeth vppon the riuer Scarpe. It is a good and
a strong towne hauing many fountaines, & faire (though ancient) buildings, and a great number of churches. Gaguin that wrote the French historye was borne in this towne. At Douay is a staple of corne, brought thither out of diuers countreys, whereof as also of diuers other marchandizes there is great Traffique in this towne. Douay is a Chastelenie, hauing iurisdiction ouer a good Countrey, and a great number of villages. At Douay was an Vniuersitie erected, like to that of Louuain, at the same time that the author was writing this description of the Lowe coun∣treys. Orchies is a good pleasant town, in the which many Sarges and such like stuffe is made. This is the third towne that maketh the estate of Flanders Gallicant. Lannoy is a strong place where are made ma∣ny peeces of Linnen and Veluet. Of this towne the Noble house of Lannoy ta∣keth name, to the which ye towne together with the whole iurisdiction was wont to appertaine, but by marriages this inheritance is nowe fallen to the Lord of Buren, the prince of Orenges son. Of this house was Charles of Lannoy, Generall of the Arm Imperiall at the battell of Pay where the French king was taken.
Espinoy is a faire and famous village, hauinge the title of a Principaute, the prince whereof is at this present, Charles of Melun Connestable of Flanders. Armentiers. This is so mighty and rich a vil∣lage and so well peopled, that it is priuiledged as a walled towne. In this towne are made yearelye in time of peace, aboue 25000 peeces of cloth, especiallie of mingled cloathes of sovvre colours, which are sent into Italie and from thence to Constantino∣ple. In this towne is also faire yearely of excellent good Cheeses, by reason that the Staple of chee∣ses is held heere. The tovvne appertaineth to the Earle of Eghemont. Betweene Armentiers and Steegheers is the excellent, fruitfull, and pleasant little Countrey called La Loue, hauing in it foure great villages, the chiefe wherof is Leuentis, being priuiledged as a vvalled towne. This countrey of Loue is al∣so a Prouostship, exempted from all subsidies & paiments to the Prince whatsoeuer. It was once granted by the Earle of Flanders to the Pope, but since I know not how, it is returned to the Earle againe. Tournay standeth vpon the Shelde which run∣neth through it. It is a faire, great, rich, mightie, and a strong towne with a strong fort. The hou∣ses are fine and comely built, the monasteryes,
churches and Conuents, very statelye and mag∣nificent. It is a great towne of traffique and replenish∣ed with an infinite number of Artisans, makers of Sarges and other Mercerie stuffe, so that in all there are 72. companies. Tournay is a very ancient Bishoprick. In the wars that happened An. 1213. betweene Fer∣dinand Earle of Flanders, and Philip August K. of France, the Earle reconquered the town from the French, and they againe from him. But in the yeare 1513. it was taken by Henry the eighth K. of England, to whom they paide 100000 Du∣cats for their ransome. King Henry builte the Castle and Fort that is now in the Towne. But in the yeare 1518. the saide king deliuered the Towne ouer againe to the Frenche for money▪ from whom afterwards the Emperour Charles conquered it and restored it to the body of Flan∣ders, in such estate as it was before the warres. Yet notwithstanding it is a member apart, and is called the state and Seniorie of Tournesis, ha∣uing a goodlye iurisdiction ouer the Countrey round about it. Their states consist of three mē∣bers (viz) the Cleargie, the Nobilitie, and foure high Iusticers. They sweare fidelitie to the king of Spaine, and he to them. In the yeare 1549. His oath is to maintaine all their priuileges and immunities, lawes, Franchises, liberties, rightes, and customes, &c.
Mortaigne standeth in the Contrey of Tour∣nesis, and vpon the riuer of Schelde. It was once a towne of great importance, but ruinated by the warres. Now it is a village, and not longe since had a fort for the defence thereof, but the Emperour Charles when he recouered the town of Tournay razed the Fort. The Towne apper∣taineth to Philip Ʋander Gracht lorde of Mes∣sine, heere also the Schelde and also the Scarpe meet. S. Amond is also in the countrey of Tourne∣sis. It is a goodly village standing vppon the Scarpe with gates and ditches like a towne. In this village is one of the richest Abbeyes in Flan∣ders, the Abbot whereof is lorde both spirituall and temporall of the towne and of the countrey round about it. Flanders Imperiall. FLanders Imperiall is so na∣med, because it was longe vnder the obedience of the Empire. The countrey is very small, beeing contained be∣tweene the Riuers of Schelde and Dender, all along vpon the frontiers of Bra∣bant. This little prouince was somtime called Bracāt of a castel of that name destroyed by Baldouin le
Debonnaire. It is now called the Countie of A∣lost of the principall towne thereof, It is also cal∣led Seigneurie, because all Flanders was in times past deuided into Comte, Seigneurie, and Do∣maine or Propre. The Comte was subiect to the Crowne of France and is already described: The Seigneurie was vnder the obedience of the Em∣pire, and the Domaine or Propre appertained to the Earle of Flaunders, and was held in soue∣raignty of him alone. To the Seigneurie besides the county of Alost appertained the foure offices, the countreye of Waes, and a certaine Territory and some villages beyond the Schelde, called Oucrschelde. But we will first describe the Seigneurie and the prin∣cipall towne thereof named Alost. Alost standeth vpon the Dender or Denre. It is a good and a very strong towne, and there is yearely in it a great fayre of hops, to the great benefit of the whole countrey. Vnder the Seigneurie or countie of Alost is al∣so contained the good towne of Ninoue, which notwithstanding hath iurisdiction apart. Alost hath vnder it 170 villages, and the Iu∣risdiction and bounds thereof extend to the wals of Gaunt, to the gates of Oudenarde, and within a league of Tenremonde. To this County of Alost is also annexed the little countrey of Waes, and diuers villages togi∣ther with the foure offices, which are four towns
so tearmed, one of the which is walled & three vnwalled, the names whereof here follow: Hulst which is walled, and is the principall of the foure, Axsele which is not walled altogether. Bouchout. Assenede. The which foure townes haue di∣uers villages vnder their iurisdiction, and bicause they are neere the Sea, reine bay salt as they do in Zeeland. Vnder this countrey of Alost are also two prin∣cipautes, namelye Steenhuyse, which is a verye good village hauing a particular lord by it selfe, and the great Bourg of Gaure with a strong ca∣stell in it, whereof the Earle of Eghemont taketh his firste title of Prince of Gaure. Farther vnder the County of Alost are diuers baronies, namely Lickercke, Sotteghem, and many other. This state of Alost and the foure offices was conquered by Baldouin le Debonnaire in ye reign of the Emperour Henry the fourth. The propre or Domaine of the coun∣tie of Flanders. THe propre or Domaine of Flaun∣ders, containeth the Townes of Tenremonde, Montgherard and Bornhem, with many villages. Tenremonde standeth vppon
the mouth of the riuer Denre, where it entereth into the Schelde. The town is very rich & strong both by nature and by Art. In this towne is made great plenty of Fustian and weekely a great market is here of Flax, whi∣ther infinite numbers of people resort. A like market of Flax is also weekelye helde in the Countrey of Waes, at the good village of S. Nicholas. And in troth almost through al the Lowe Countreys there is a market graunted to euery Towne for the benefite thereof, to some of one particular marchandize, and to some of al in generall. Tenremonde with the iurisdiction thereof is a Seniorie apart, but incorporated into the Earle∣dome of Flanders, by the marriage of Lewis of Malain with Margaret of Brabant. Montgherard in Frenche Grandmont stan∣deth vpon the Denre. It is a prettie, fine, & a ple∣sant towne. Bornhem is a good village with a good Ca∣stell, and a pretty countreye and diuers bourgs subiect to it, in such sort that the countrey about it is intituled the countrey of Bornhem. Rupelmonde standeth vppon the mouth of the riuer Rupel, where it entereth into the Schelde. It is an ancient Castell often mentioned in the hystories of Flanders, because in times paste it was a place of great importāce, but now known onely because in it are kept for the Prince, the
originalls of the priuiledges of the Earledome of Flanders, and because it is a Gayle for certaine Prisoners. Besides the Castle there is a faire and a great village, which was the place of the Na∣tiuity of Gerardus Mercator the excellent Cos∣mographer. Through all Flanders saue in the Gallicant, the Flemish toong is their mother language. The soyle through all Flanders Imperiall is excellent good and fruitful, but especiallie it pro∣duceth great plentie of excellent good madder. Flanders is the mightiest Countie in Christen∣dome, as Milan is the mightiest Dutchye, and France the mightiest realme. ARTOYS. IN Caesars time the people of this countrey were na∣med Atrebates, of the prin cipall towne Atrabatum, now called Arras. Artoys is bordered North, with the riuer Lis, and the new Fosse, which separateth it frō Flan∣ders. South with Dourlans, which is the fronti∣er of Picardie. East with Flaunders Gallicante, and the countrey of Cambresis, West towardes Monstrueil vpon the Sea, it bordereth again vp∣on Picardie.
The soyle of Atoys is wholsome, the countrey but onelye  rather of industrie in the people, who fort plant Vines, because their countrey front France, and by that meanes is subicet to the spoile of the wars, th through the either of the ayre or of the ground. The corne of this countrey furnisheth a great part of Flanders Flanngente, a part of especially the Citty of Andwerpe, (the countrey about the which beareth no corne but Ri) and the countrey of Maes. In Artoys are twolue walled townes, compe∣hending therein Renty, which in truth is rather a Fort than a towne. There are also in it 854. vil∣lages, but some of them ruinated by the warres. Artoys hath likewise in with diuers Abbeyes,  and . The principall townes are these, Betune, Aire, Bapaumas. The lesser town Hedinsfort, Renty, S. Pol, Perus, Basset, Lens. Be sides these are to be of the strong Fortes of Hesdin and . The States of Artoys consist of mely Prelat, Chapters of and the  hunder the particular description of the , beg∣ning
with Arras. Arras standeth within a bow shot of the Scarp It is a very great towne, but deuied into twoe parts, each part hauing a seuerall wall, the one named the citty and appertaineth to the Bishop, the other the towne & appertaineth to ye prince. The Citty is very little, but faire and maruel∣lous strongly fortified. In it is the sumptuous ca∣thedrall church of the virgin Mary, in the which is a goodly and a rare librarie. The Bishoppe of Arras is Lorde spirituall and temporall thereof, and giueth Lawes and Iud∣ges to the people of the Cittie, but yet euer ac∣knowledging the Earle for his Soueraigne, for the Earle nameth the Bishop, and the Pope con∣firmeth him. The reuenew of the Bishoprick of Arras is foure, fiue or six, thousand Crownes, according as the yeare is plentifull or scarse of raine. The towne is verye large, and so wonderfull strong both by nature and Art, that it is accoun∣ted imprenable. The streetes are faire & broad, and the market place the goodliest that may be seene. In the towne is also the Abbey of S. Vast, the reuenewes whereof are to the yearely value of 20000. Ducats. Farther in the towne, are a great number of goodly Cellers and Vautes, verie artificially vau∣ted and paued, to withdrawe their families into,
if a siege happen to come before the towne. In Arras resideth the chamber of the Coun∣cell of Artoys, which appealeth to Malines. In Arras are made diuers sorts of Marchan∣dice, especially sarges excellent good & famous through all Europe. Arras was the metropolitane towne of all Flanders, but after Artoys was erected into a county and seuered from the rest of Flaunders, it remained chiefe of Artoys as nowe it is, ha∣ing vnder it manye Fiefs, and a great iurisdicti∣on. S. Omer is so named of S. Omer, whoe firste built the church in the Towne of that name, and through his holy life drewe so many people thi∣ther, that the towne was built by them. One of his companions was S. Bertin, whoe built the excellent beautifull church in S. Omer of that name, and the Abbey which is a veye goodly building, and of as great reuenewes as a∣ny Abbey in all Flaunders, S. Omer is a frontier towne against Frauce, & standeth vpon the riuer Aa. It is a verie stronge Towne and well peopled, and hath the Title of a hastelenie, and a Countreye of very great importance vnder it, and iurisdiction ouer many Villages. Neere to S. Omer is a goodly lake of Freshe water, in the which are many little andes (yet not so little but that you may put a good number
of Cattell to feede in many of them) the which are moueable, and may be drawne with a coard fastened to the bushes that growe in them which way you will, and vnder them greater aboun∣dance of Fishes harbour both Winter and Sum∣mer, to defend themselues from the Weather, a thinge which is no lesse true, than it is wonder∣full. Vpon this lake besides diuers other goodlye buildings, standeth the Abbey of Clermaretz, being a very large and an excellent faire house. Betune Is a good and a strong towne, where is made great plentie of excellent good cheese, solde both in the Low countreyes and in other regions abroad. This towne with the Seniorie and iurisdiction thereof, together with Tenremond aboue descri∣bed, fell to Guy of Dampiere Earle of Flanders, by the right of his wife Mawd, daughter & heire to Daniell Lord of these places. Aire standeth vpon the Lis. It is a good and a strong towne, with a Castle of great antiquity. The houses in this towne are very well and or∣derly built. Bapaulme is a little but a strong towne, be∣cause it cannot be besieged for want of fresh wa ter, which is not to be had within three Leagues thereof. It hath also a very strong Castell, and a large countrey and a goodly iurisdiction vnder it.
Renty is but a castell with a good village stan∣ding vpon a little brook. It is a very strong place, in the rescue wherof, the Emperor & the fought a battell An. 1554. and the French were forced to leuie their siege. Renty is a Marquisat, and the Marquis thereof is William of Crony brother to the Duke of Arschot. Hesdinfert is builte of the ruines of Hesdin which stood vpon the riuer Canche four leagues from S. Pol. Hesdin was a good towne with a strong castell, and a large territorie and iurisdi∣ction, and it was the place of residence of the an∣cient Earles of Flanders and Artoys, but it was not fortified after the manner of these daies, & therefore vnable to abide a batterie, so that it was often taken in these late wars, nowe by the Imperials, now by the French. But in the year 1553. the Duke of Sauoy generall of the Empe∣rours Army tooke it, and by the Emperors com∣mandment razed it, and withall the village ad∣ioyning to it, and in place therof built this town of Hesdinfert, which is maruelously well vppon the Caehe a little league farther into France then Hesdin was, for to the town of His∣dinfert commeth also another little riuer called Blangis, of a Village therby of that name, where it ariseth, and which there runneth into ye Cāth. So that Hesdinfert is one of the strongest most defenceable places of all the Loe treys, and hauing succeeded into the Seniori
priuiledges, and Franchises of olde Hesdin, and farther hauing obtained diuers other of the Prince, it is now become a very fayre towne and well peopled, and leauing the newe name of Hesdinfert retaineth and holdeth the auncient name of Hesdin. S. Pol hath of long time beene honored with the title of an Earledome, and hath a goodlye Seniorie and iurisdiction ouer a large Countrey and a great reuenew. This place appertayneth to Madame de Touteuille, but both the kings of France and Spaine pretend title of soueraignty to it. Perne is vnder the iurisdiction of the Earldom of S. Pol, and is a place of good importance. Lilliers is a reasonable passable towne. Bassee. Lens is but a little towne, yet hath a large ter∣ritory and iurisdiction. It was destroied by the French An. 1557. but is now built and repayred againe. Terrouenne is now destroyed, but was some∣time the principall towne of the people called by Caesar Morini. It was held for a fort imprena∣ble, notwithstanding the Imperials tooke it by force from the French An. 1553. and razed it by the Emperors commandment. But by the treaty of peace concluded between France & Spaine, An. 1558. it was being thus destroyed, restored to the French againe, but with conditiō no more
to wall it nor fortifieit. The Bishoprick of T∣rouanne was deuided into three parts, one halfe went to Boloin, the other halfe was deuided be∣tweene two new Bishops erected in Flaunders, one at Hypre for the Flemings Flamingants, and the other at S. Omer, for the Gallicants. Neerer to Terouenne, Ayre, and S. Omer, is a great chanell called the new Fosse or dike, made as some hold opinion by mens hands, in the time of Baldouin le Debonnaire, to stop the courses of the Enimies. Others say that it was made for a boundarie betweene Flanders and Artoys. But in truth this channell beeing of a great lengthe though narrow, seemeth rather to haue been an arme or gulph of the Sea, though now it bee al∣most landed vp with earth thrughout. And some are of opinion, that in times paste the Sea came thither, though now it be 8. leagues from it, for ankers and cables are manye times taken vppe there, which maketh their opinion the more pro∣bable. The Description of the villages of Artoys. THe villages of Artoys that be of any importance are those that haue priuilege of market & faire, which are these following. A∣uennes le Comte, Aschi∣court,
S. Venant, Courriers, Blangys, Ligny, Au∣chy, Pas, all the which stand vpon the Frontier of France. The Artessans speake grosse French, but of all other people most hate the French, they are now altogither become souldiers of Marchants, and are valiant men both on horsseback & on foote. Artoys was in the first beginning incorpora∣ted with the body of Flanders as a member ther∣of, and so continued till the time of Philip of El∣sace, who marriyng his neece Isabelle with Phi∣lip yongest sonne of Lewis the seuenh kinge of France: gaue with hic in marriage all west Flan∣ders (viz) from the newe Fosse (where is the first entrance into Artoys) euen to Picardie. Which grant made by the Earle alone without his E∣states, bred many bloudy warres betweene the Flemings and the Frenche. But Anno. 1198. Philip August king of France, gaue all this coun∣trey of Artoys to Louis his son, Father to K. saint Louis, and erected it into an Earledome. And Anno 1382. it was againe vnited to the bodie of Flanders, by the succession of Louis of Malain to his mother Margaret of France after it had de beene seuered from it 184. yeares. But Anno. 1477. Lewis the eleuenth king of France seazed this Countrey into his handes, after the death of Charls duke of Burgundie: yet notwithstanding it was restored againe to duke Philip, sonne to the Emperor Maximilian by king Charles the 8.
An. 1493. euer since the which time in  re∣mained vnder the obedience of the house of An∣strich. Cambray. Standeth vpon the Schelde, which runneth through the middest thereof. It is a great, a goodly, and a mightie Towne, hauing in it a faire and a strong castell, builte by Charles the fift. The priuate buildinges of this towne are very fuire, but the publike much say∣rer, namely the churches and monasteries, but especially our Lady church is a most ancient and a most wonderfull sumptuous temple, being the cathedrall and Episcopall church of the towne. The Dioces and iurisdiction of the Bishop is verye great, and extendeth it selfe ouer manye countreys. The towne is rich, full of people, and of good Marchants & Artisans, which work diuers good marchādises, especiallie great quantitie of excel∣lent fine linnen cloth, cōmonly called Cambrick. Cambray is a Chastelenie and hath vnder it a goodly Seniorie and iurisdiction called Cambre∣sis, in the which are diuers villages and places of importance, and among the reste the castell of Cambresy six leagues from the citty, in the which the peace betweene the chiefe princes of Chri∣stendome was concluded An. 1559. The bishop of Cambray is Lord both spiritual and temporall, and hath the title of a Duke and is a Prince of the Empire.
This Cittie was first comprehended in Hai∣nault, but afterwards the Emperours of Alle∣maine made it a free Imperiall cittie, and lastlye the Emperour Henrie the 5. ordained the Earle of Flanders to be protector of Cambray, ye which preheminence was after confirmed to all the Earles of Flanders, by the Emperour Frederick An. 1164. yet notwithstanding the Frenche pre∣tend title to it, and often haue helde it and vali∣antlie defended it. But in the time of Maximiliā, the Citizens being euill intreated by the French, chased them out of the towne. Lewis the xi. thē reigning in France, and receiued in the Imperi∣als, yet notwithstanding the towne is Neuter & liueth according to their owne lawes. This towne is a place destinated as it were, because it is neutrall to treaties of peace. In this towne Charles the fift An. 1543. built a citadelle, pretending that he did it for the de∣fense of the town against the enimie, but in truth it was for the assurance of his owne estate. Yet notwithstanding this citadelle, hee left the Citi∣zens in their ancient estate, liberty and freedom. HAYNAVLT. HAynault is so named of the riuer Hayne, which runneth through the countrey. It is bordered North with Bra∣bant and Flanders. South with
Champaigne & Fieadie, East with the  of Namur, & part of the countrie of Liege, west with ye Salde & part of Flanders Gallicae. It is 20. Leagues long and 16. broade, ayre is wholesome and the soyle excellent good by reason that the Countrie is watered with ma∣ny riuers, namely the Schelde, the Sambre, the Te der, and manie other small streames. There are al∣so in it manie lakes, marishes, pondes, pooles, cleere fountaies and goodly woods and pleasant Forrests, the principall whereof are the Forrests of Normault and S. Amande which alreadie are described. Haynault aboundeth with sweete medowes & pastures for all kind of cattell, with good frutes and profitable trees, but especiallye with greate plentie of good Corne. In diuers partes also ther∣of are manie Mines of good iron, and of reasona∣ble good lead, and excellent quarries of stone for all kinde of building, yea of touchestone. Greate store there is also of excellent white Lime to fur∣nish not only themselues, but also many of their Neighboures about them, and likewise of Sea∣coale, but the Coale is not so sweete as that of Liege. In Haynault are 24. walled townes, namelye Montz, Valenciennes (though this be accompted a Seniorie apart) Bouchain, Quesnoy, Connat, Lan∣dresy, Anesnes, Chimay, Mariembourg, Phillipps, Ville, Beaount, Maberge, Bous,
Segny, Braine le comte, Eughien, Halle, Lessme, Cheure, Ath, S. Guislein, Leuze. Farther, there are in it better thā 950. villages with manie Castels & Seniories, among the which vil∣lages a good number are great & faire, hauing honourable titles annexed to them, namely Pe∣quicourt, Fontayne, Laling, Montigny, Antoing, Bies, Brifueil, Ligne, Bossu, Barlomont, Telaiō, Es∣chochinne, Trelon, Sorlechasteau, Barbanzon, Ai∣meries, & diuers other, so manie in number that it were too long to rehease them all. In Haynault are also many goodlye digni∣ties, namelye one Principaute, 10. Earledomes, 12. Pecredomes, 22. Baronies, 26. Abbies, one Lord Marshall, one Lorde Steward, one Grand∣uenuer, one Lord Chamberlaine, & other officers of the prince, which descend by inheritance to di∣uers principall Lords of the prouince. The States of Haynault consist of fiue mem∣bers, namelie the 12. Peers, the Prelats, Colleges, or Chapters of the Cleargie, the Nobilitie, the or∣dinarie Officers of the Countrie, & the Commo∣naltie of the townes. But now let vs proceed to ye description of the townes, & first of Montz. Montz. Hath the litle riuer Trulle running through it, the which at the issue therof our of Montz falleth into the riuer Hayne. This is a verie strong towne both by nature and Arte, and maye bee enuironed with water at
pleasure. The wll thereof is verie strong, besides that it is fortefied with 3. large and deepe & with an auncient Castell. The towne is great and fayre, & beautified with sumptuous buildings both priuate and pub∣lique, & with goodly fountaines cleere as Cristal. It is a rich towne & replenished with marchants, and artisans that exercise diuers artes, especiallye making of Sarges of diuers sorts. Montz, is a Chastelenie, and ye Chastelaine thereof is Charles Philip of Crouy, Marques of Hauretz, Brother to the Duke of Arschot. In Montz resideth the Counsell royall of all the Countrie (saue of ye Seniorie of Valenciennes) from the which no appeale lyeth. The Baylife of Haynault is the princes Lieute∣uant both in causes ciuile and criminall, & with∣out his preasence no definatiue sentence maye be giuen. In this towne is the noble order or chapter of Canonesses of the Abbie of S. Waltrude being in all respectes like to that of Niuelle, for they must bee Gentle women of Noble houses, in the mor∣ning they are apparalled in white like Nunnes, but at after dinner they are attayred like Gentle∣women, they maie marrie if it please them, their Abbesse hath spirituall and temporall iurisdiction both within Montz and in the Countrie rounde about it, and putteth with herowne handes the Earle of Haynault in possession of the Countrie &
receaueth his oath at his enteraunce into the state, for the Earle is secular Abbot, protector, and de∣fender of this noble order, and of all that apper∣taineth vnto it, & houldeth diuers Landes in Fief of the Abbesse. Montz is the principall towne of Haynault and was erected by Charlemaine into an Earle∣dome apart in such sort that the Earles of Hy∣nault were long time called Earles of Montz, but in the ende they returned againe to the auncient title of Earles of Haynault. Valenciennes. Standeth vppon the Schelde and the litle riuer Rouelle, the which besides that they make manye goodly and strong Iles in the towne, passe almost vnder euerie particular mans house to the greate beautie and commoditie of the towne. The seate of this towne is soe strong (besides the fortification by art) that it may at pleasure be drowned with water on one side, and is so defen∣ded by hilles on the other side that it can hardly be beseaged without two Campes, and is there∣fore held for a towne imprenable, especially by a straunger. In the towne there is a storehouse where great prouision of munition and Artillerie for the defence of the towne is kept. It is a verie goodlie, large, & a beautifull towne as well in priuate buildings as in publique, name∣ly Churches, Monasteries, &c. especially our La∣die Church is passing fayre being builte after the
with three Arches, & with goodlye Filers of mar∣ble and Porphyre. S. Iohns Church is also a very godly building. The Conuent of S. Frauncis in Valenciennes the Sepulchre of the Earles of Haynault. At the Iacobins is the Tombe of Iohn of nephew to Baldouin Earle of Flaunders & Emperour of Constantinople, being a rare peece of woorke. In this towne is also a Pallace sometime called the Imperiall Hall, and now the Earles Hal, being a building of great antiquitie and of excellent worke manship, here the Earles of Haynault and Lordes of Valencienes were wont to reside, but this pallace with some part of the towne next ad∣ioyning to it is exempted from the iurisdiction of the towne, & appertayneth to ye rest of Haynault as a member thereof. But the towne-house called La Halle farre passeth all these buildings aboue mentioned in statelines & magnificencie, being all of square stone curiously wrought, and of such greatnes and representation of antiquititie, that it alone were a sufficient  to the whole towne. But for a farther beautie to this place, on the left side their of  excellent building and of a great height in the which there is a clocke and dial shewing not only the houres of the day and night, but also the course of the  & of all
planets, & likewise of the moneths and seasons of the yeare, and diuers other conclusions worthie to be vnderstood. Vnder this Clocke-house and so vnder co∣uert is the corne market being great & large, and aboue in the hall is a place to sell woll, & another to sell cloth. There are besids in it sense scholes, & places for all ye publique courts, magistrates & of∣ficers of the town, & the gaile & cōmon prison, so yt in one building you may see as it were compact together all offices secuing for the commoditie & necessarie vse of a towne. In this towne are also diuers Monasteries, hospi∣tals and other places of Religion endewed with goodly reuenewes. There is also in it a goodlye College, and manie schooles to bring vp youth in good learning, and houses for the education of Orphelins and poore children, where they bee taught diuers arts & occupations. This towne was the place of natiuitie of Henry ye 7. Emperor, & D. of Luxēbourg of Marie heire of these lowe Countries, wife to the Emperour Maximilian, and of Froisart the great Histo∣riographer. In this towne are made clothes, wosteds, linen as fine as anie Cambrick, changeable taffitas and almost all sortes of mercerie ware, and all other things necessarie for a towne. Valenciennes is a Chastelenie of a great iuris∣diction, aud with larger priuileges & Franchises
any  of the Low Here is the stapl of French Wines holde that bee brought out of Fraunce into Hynault. The states of this towne and Seniorie consist of the Prelats, Nobilitie, and Commonalties of the townes. This towne also was wont to haue a particu∣lar Earle apart by it selfe, & euen now it is, and of long time hath been a Seniorie apart, and is go∣uerned by Lawes different from all the rest of Haynault, as are also all the townes thereunto be∣lgng, namely , Quesny, Coud, besids 132. villages, and all their appeales goe straite to the great Counsell of Malnes, but in matters this town and Countrie are subiecte to the Bishop of Cmbray. A League from Valencinnes is the fayre and rich Abbie of  where is a rare and exqui∣s Librarie of all Sciences and faculties, betwee &  is ye village called about ye which is digged excellēt whit ston for building, called white stone of A∣uesnes, the which is as faire as white marbell, and to be wrought, for the which cause ma∣ny goodly  are made thereof both plaine and gauen, but because it is harme by raine, wind, and froste, the haue found a wae to fortefie it and all such violences with
other mixtiōs which make it verie hard, durable, & strong. Bouchain standeth vppon the Schelde, the Towne is strong and the Castell almost imprena∣ble. It is the principall towne of the Countie of Osternand, so named of the Ostrogoths to whom the sayd Countie was assigned for an habitation, & the which was wont to be the state of ye Earle of Haynaults eldest sonne. Quesnoy is a strong towne, in the which are made Wosteds, & great store of linen, by meanes whereof there is good trafique of marchandize in the Towne. This place was wont to be the do∣wer of the Earle of Haynaults wife, as Bins was after this countrie fell to the Dukes of Burgundie. Conde standeth vpon the Schelde. It is a good li∣tle towne, the one halfe sometimes appertayning to the Earle of Rockendorf, & the other halfe to the Duke of Mont pensier, who soulde both this and Leuze for his ransome, being taken prisoner at the battell of S. Quentins. The towne nowe appertaineth to the Earle of Lalaings widow wife to the Earle of Māsfeld & shall descend to her sonne Hughe of Lalaing. Landrecy standeth vpon the Sambre, the place is litle, but strong, & the more famous for the re∣sistance that it made A. 1543. to the siege of the Emperor Charles, the next yeare after the which by the treatie of Crespy it was deliuered by the French to the Duke of Arschot who was owner
of it, & who afterwards exchaunged it with the Emperour for other lands. Auesnes standeth vpon the riuer Hipre. It is a good & a stronge towne hauing the title of an Earledome, this place also king philip had by ex∣chaunge of the Duke of Arschot. Chimay standeth in a Forrest vpon the litle ri∣uer Blanche. It is well builte with a faire pallace for ye prince, a goodly garden and a Labyrinthe. It hath the Title of a principallitie, and the Duke of Arschot is Prince thereof, this towne was often afflicted and razed in these late wars, but nowe is fayrer and stronger than euer be∣fore. Mariembourg was built by Marie Queene of Hungarie sister to the Emperour Charles An. 1542. soone after Longueual & Martin Van Rossem were passed with the French armie to∣wards the towne of Luxembourg. This towne standeth betweene the riuers of Blanche & Nere or Noire. It is a verie stronge towne with 4. strong bulwarks, it was yeelded to the French through cowardise or treason of ye Captaine An. 1554. but restored to king Phi∣lip by the last treatie of peace An. 1559. Philippeuille was builded by king Philip An. 1555. to bridle Mariembourg helde then by the French, and so fortefied that it is held nowe for a place imprenable. Beaumont is a fine litle Towne standing vp∣on
the knappe of a goodlie hill wherof it beareth name. It appertayneth to the Duke of Arschot, & was wont to be the partage of the second son of Haynault, wherefore it was erected into an Earledome, & of late the Duke of Arschot hath ordinarilie resided here. Maubeuge standeth vpon the Sambre which passeth throughe it. It is a good Towne of mar∣chandize, and in it is held a market euerye Sater∣daie of wollen yarne whereof Sarges and Demi∣wosteds are made, which is there a marchandize of great trafique & importance. In this towne is a noble house of Nunnes, such as are described before to bee at Niuelle and Mōtz, the Abbesse whereof hath the gouern∣ment both spirituall & temporall, ciuile & crimi∣nall as wel of the towne as of ye countrie about it. This Nunrie hath a priuilege yearely to coine a certaine summe of small money called Mites, made of Leade with the image of S. Algond (the Foundresse of this Nunrie) stamped vpon them, 12. of the which make a flemish denier or groat, & this money is currant through Haynault euen to Bruxels, & no man may refuse to take it. Bauays Ʋallone is a verie small towne. It is sayde by some to bee the Towne that Caesar na∣med Belgium, which Guicciardin by reasons pro¦ueth to haue been the name of a particular town as well as of the whole Countrie, but Beau∣uays in Piccardie called by name of Bellouacum
to haue been Belgiū & not this Bauais. This town was often destroyed in the late warres, but is nowe repayred fayrer than euer it was before. This name of Ʋallone is added to it for a diffe∣rence from the other Bauuays that is in Picar∣die. Bins commonlye called Binche standeth vp∣on a Braunch of the Riuer Hayne. It was the Paradise of the Ladie Marie queene of Hungarie, to whom it was giuen by her brother the Empe∣rour Charles, but in the yeare 1554. the French king burned the towne, and vtterly destroyed all the Queene of Hungaries pleasures therein, in despite of Solembray a place of pleasure of the said Kinges and other places in Picardie which most cruellye shee had burned before. The sayde King burned likewise another place of pleasure thereby called Marimont built also by the sayd Queene of Hungarie like a Castell with exquisite delightes and excessiue charges. Notwithstan∣ding Bins as touching the particular buildings of the same Towne is nowe likewise reedefied againe. Reux was erected into a Countie by the Em∣perour Charles. It is a litle towne but a verie plea∣sant one, & hath a good iurisdiction, & manye vil∣lages vnder it, & standeth in a frutefull soyle. The Earle thereof is of the house of Crouy. Soigny standeth vpon the litle Riuer Seine, nere to this towne is the Forrest of Soigny before de∣scribed.
The towne & confines thereof are subiect to the iurisdiction of the College of S. Ʋincent be∣ing a College of Cannons within the towne, this place is particularlie destinated to the breeding of excellēt good Musitions. Breine le Comte was built by the ancient Cap∣taine Brennus, as appeareth by an old Towre yet remayning of the buildings of the said Brennus, as the people of the Countrie report. Enghien is a good litle towne wherein greate store of Tapistrie of all sortes and prises is made. Here was the Constable of France Mommorency helde prisoner a certaine space. The towne apper∣tayneth to Henrie the 4. now king of Fraunce & Nauarre, and Duke of Vendosme. Halle standeth vppon the Seine which run∣neth through it. This is a place of great pilgre∣mage, and here died An. 1404. Philip the hardie Duke of Burg undie. Lessnie, through  passeth the Denre and here is great plentie of linen made. Cheure standeth vppon the litle riuer named Hunell. It is a pleasant litle towne belonging to William of Crouy marques of Renty. Ath, through it runneth the Denre. It is a li∣tle but a verie fayre, pleasant, and a rich Towne by reason that great plentie of Linen is made in it, and because the Staple of Linen made in all the Countrie rounde about it is helde here, soe that yearelye there is soulde in this Towne Lin∣nen
Cloath to the vale we of better than 200000 Crownes, by meanes whereof all the cloathes made thereaboutes are called the Cloathes of Ath. S. Guislem taketh ye name of the Abbie within the towne, the Abbot whereof is Lord spirituall & emporall of the towne, and this is the chiefe and principall Abbie of all Haynault, through this towne runneth the riuer Hayne. Leuse, This towne was burnt a few yeares past in the laste warres, but it is nowe repayred againe. It was somtime the towne of Gerarde of Roussillon so famous in the Histories. It nowe apprtayneth to Florent of Mommorency Lord of Montigny in Osteruant, by purchase from the Duke of Montpensier. The description of the principall vil∣lages of Haynault. PEquicourt is parcell of the possessions of the Abbie of Anchim. It was before the warres a walled town but is now vnwalled & in poore estate, yet enioyeth the priuileges of a walled towne. Fontaine, It is doubtfull whether this towne be in Haynault or of the bishopricke of Liege. It is a
litle towne within a litle League of the Sambray. Lalaing standeth vpon the Scarpe. It is a goodlie village with a castle and a large Iuris∣diction, and hath ye title of an Earldome wher∣of the Earles of Lalaing and Hocstrat, beare their name. Montigny Is a fine Village with a castle & a Seniorie and is erected into a Baronie, and appertaineth to Florent of Mommorency, Bro∣ther to the Countye of Horne. Antoin standeth vpon the Schelde. It is a faire borough with a goodlie & a statelie castle, here the Princes of Espinoy ordinarlye reside. It is sayde to haue beene builte by M. Antonius Triumuir. Bie appertayneth to the Seneschal of Haynault. It hath a maruelous strong castell, it now apper∣tayneth to Hughe of Melun by marriage with one of the daughters of Peter of Werehin, to whō this town is descended with ye said seneschalship, the other daughter married the Earle of Bossut. Briffeul hath a great & an auncient Castel, the Countrie houldeth opinion that it is thus named of Ianus bifrons, though the name be here cor∣rupted & altered. Neere to the towne is a great valley with many villages called the vale of Brif∣feul, this place appertaineth to the Lord of Mo∣reaulme who ordinarily resideth at a goodly large Castell that he hath at the village of Hasurheure betweene the Sambray & the Muze.
Ligns is a goodly, Village and in with a faire Castle, appertaining to Philip arl of Fauckenbergh and lorde of Wassenar in Hol∣land. Bssu is a good village with the goodliest Ca∣stell in all the Low countreys. It hath also the ∣tle of an Earledome, giuen it by Charls the Em∣perour. The Earle thereof is named Maximilia of Henninlietart. Barlemont is a great village vpon the Sanbr, hauing a Castle, and the title first of a barony, & than erected into an Earledome by king Philip. Glaion is a goodly village with a strong Ca∣stell. It hath the title of a baronie and appertai∣neh to Philip Stauele. Trasegnie is a good village with a goodly ca∣stell, very famous for the antiquity of the lordes therof, whose race hath commanded and conti∣nued ther aboue 600. yeares. Escochinne is a great village with two castels, one appertaining to the Earle of Lalaing, the o∣ther to Monsieur de Bioures, descended of the noble familie of Rubempre, about this village is digged a goodly gray stone to build with, where with the whole countrey is furnished. Terlon is a faire village, with a goodly Castall and a strong, newly ree dified and fortified since the last wars, wherein it was often destroyed. It appertaineth to Lewys of Bloys maister of the Artilery to the king.
Sorle Chasteau is the most important Village in Haynault, with a maruellous strong & an an∣cient castle. It now appertaineth to the Marquis of Berghe, by marriage with the daughter and heire of Monsieur de Molembais. Barbanzon standeth neer a wood full of yughe trees. It is a rich village with a goodly Castell and the title of a baronie. In this towne (as also in diuers places of Haynault) are manye Glasses made, much fairer than those of Rouen, Lorrain, or Hesse. This place now appertaineth in ye right of his wife, to Iohn de Lignes Earle of Arēbergh. Aimeries standeth vppon the Sambre. It is a great village with a goodly castell, and an anci∣ent and a noble Seniorie. It was sometime par∣cell of the possessions of the Earle of Flaunders, but was giuen in marriage with Iolande daugh∣ter of Robert Earle of Flanders, to Rene Earle of Bar, of whom descended Rene of Aniou, whoe gaue it to his Chancellor Roulin, whose race yet possesseth it, and is lorde also of Raime & graund Veneur of Haynault. Touin and Couines, These twoe townes are in Haynault, but because they appertaine to the Bishoprick of Liege, no mention is made of them heere. Valencourt is also in Haynault, but vnder the Seniorie of the Countye of Namur, wherefore mention is made of it there. Haynault aboundeth in Nobility and good
both  and footmen, they corrupt French named wallon. LVXEMBOVRG. LVxembourg was erected into a Dutchie as it is thought by the Emperor Henry the feuenth Earle of Luxembourg. It beareth the name of the principall town ther∣of. It is bounded North with the Countrey of Liege and Namur. South with Lorraine. East with the Moselle and the Bishoprick of Treues. West with part of the Moselle, and part of ye for∣rest of Ardenne. This countrey is repleuished with mountains and forrests, and embraceth the greatest part of the forrest of Ardenne. It is deuided into two parts, the one called fa∣mne, which is fruitfull of corne and of all good things, and hath in it Rome Mines, & diuers sorts of goodlye stone, among the which are those whereof excellent good lime is made. It yeel∣deth also some wine. The other part of the con∣trey is called Ardenne which is barren, and produceth no corne saue a little Rie & Lent come, but of al sorts of venison, as Hart, Hinde, Goate, Hare, Cony, and also fowle wonderfull especiallie one kind of fowle called to our Quailes but much sweeter. This fowle is
of diuers colours, and hath red eies and feete, the flesh passing white and delicate. There are also in this part of the countrey wilde hens of two sorts, one as great as Turky cocks, called Limoges, the other of the greatnesse of our common hennes called Bruiers, of both the which sortes is won∣derful aboundance wilde in the woods & feelds. This countrey being a frontier against France, hath often beene miserably afflicted in the wars, and diuers townes yea the principall it selfe often sacked and destroied. By this Countreye runne many riuers especiallie the Moselle. This Dutchie containeth in circuit about 70. leagues, and in it are 20 walled townes, namelie, Luxembourg, the principall of the whole coun∣trey, Arlon, Rodemarck, Theonuille, Grauemakre, Coningmakre, Dickrich, Vireton, Esteruerck, Vā∣dalen, Bastonae, Mommedi, Neufchasteau, Dan∣uillers, Maruil, Laroche en Ardenne, Durby. S. Ʋite, Marche Salme. Other townes there are sometime Walled, but now vnwalled, either by the fury of the wars, or by treaty of peace, as Iuois, Chini, Laferte. Also diuers castels there are very ancient and noble, like to little townes, as S. Iohn & Mandreschet, hauing both of them the title of Earldoms. Like∣wise Bidburg, Sauuachi, Pambrug, Clearueau, & Hoffalis, are al very good castels. There are likwise in this dutchy 1169. villages, diuers of the which are faire and great, namelie,
La Rochtte, Auio, and S. towne of debate, because many times  with the Liegeoys hath beene about it. In this Dutchie are vii. Earledomes, many b∣mnies, and other Seniories infinite. The states of this countrey consist of 3. mem∣bers (viz) Prelats, Nobles and Townes. The Citty of Luxembourg. THrough it passeth the riuer Elz. It is called Luxembourg because it was de dicated to the sunne as it were Lucis Burgum. So Arlon was dedicated to the Moone and is so called Quasi ara Lunae, because Diana was worshipped there. Iuois one letter being ans∣posed, beareth the name of Iupiter. Mars in fa∣menne of the god Mars, and Merourt (a good village standing betweene Chasteau de soy and Bastoigne) of Mercury. So Theonuille is as it were Pantheon, because it was dedicated to all the Gods, a word compounded of Greek & French. Besides diuers other places in this countrey bea∣ing their names though verye corruptlie of the Pagan gods or planets. Luxembourg is large and very strongly seated yet but reasonably built, because in the  it hath often beene destroied, in such sort citizens being very poore by reason of the wa
haue not onely beene careles in repairing it, but many of them haue also cleane abandoned it. In the conuent of the order of S. Frauncis in this towne, lieth buried Iohn King of Boheme, (sonne to the Emperour Henry the 7. and father to Charles the fourth, slain at the battaile of Cre∣cy by the English. An. 1348. In Luxembourg vesideth the councell of the whole prouince, which appealeth to Malines. In the saide councell they plead both in dutch and French, bicause some of the countrey vse the Dutch toong, as Luxembourg it selfe, Arlon, Rodemarck, Theonuille, and diuers other towns, and some the French, as Iuois, Monmedi, Mar∣uil, Danuilliers, but let vs proceed to the other townes. Arn is desolated by the wars, but now they begin to repaire it againe. Rodemarck is a good little town with a strong Castell. Theonuille standeth vpon the Moselle, hauing a goodly bridge ouer the riuer. The common opinion is that Charles the great established this towne for one of the three seates of the Empire in these parts. This towne is maruellous strong, yet was it taken by the French, vnder the leading of Francis Duke of Guyze An. 1558. and at the assault therof was Peter Strozzi, one of the foure Marshals of France slaine, but it was by the last treaty restored to king Philip againe.
and Conink both vpon the Moselle. Dickrick, Vierton, Echternach, Nihil. Vandalen or Ʋlanden, hath the title of an Earle∣dome. Bastonack is a good little towne and is com∣monly called Paris en Ardenne, because in it is helde a market of cattell and graine and all o∣ther victuals, whither all the countrey resorteth, which greatlie enricheth this place. In diuers vil∣lages about this towne, is the blasphemous Spa∣nish, or rather he athonish custome of women, in be wailing their dead husbands vsed, who follow them to the church with miserable cries, how∣lings, and lamentations, beating, tormenting, tearing and scratching themselues, by the waye as they go most shamefully with their . True it is that the women here are much more modest than the Spanish women, for these are silent whē they come into the church, but the Spanish wo∣men are most out of order in the church, to the great trouble of the whole companie. Mommed standeth vpon a high hill, at the foote where of runneth the riuer Chiers. It is strong towne yet often taken in the last wars by the French, but by the last treatie restored againe to the king of Spaine. Neufchastel is a strong towne now, but ney∣ther so strong nor so great as in times past. Danuilliers. This towne was sacked by the
Duke of Orleans, Anno. 1542. and againe by Henry the second king of France An. 1552. but it was restored to king Philip by the last treatie, and is now fairer and stronger than euer before. Maruil standeth vppon the Chiers, the one halfe of this towne is kinge Philippes, and the other halfe the Duke of Lorraines, for the which cause it is called Ʋille commune. La Roche en Ardenne and Durby are both e∣rected into Earledomes. S. Vite is a little but a very pleasant and a fine towne. Salme is a proper rich towne, erected also in∣to an Earledome. Marche, Marses or Mars, was heeretofore dedicated to Mars. But now let vs speak a word or two of these townes that are destroied or dis∣figured by the warres, whereof the pryncipall is Iuoy. Iuoy which standeth vpon the Chiers. It was sometime a good towne and a strong, but hath often beene sacked in these last wars, especially by Henry king of France An. 1552. It was resto∣red to king Philip An. 1558. by the last treatye, but with condition that it shoulde no more bee walled nor fortified. Chiny hath beene so often spoiled in the wars that it remaineth yet vnwalled, notwithstand∣ing now they begin to repaire it againe. It is an Earldome and hath large Seniorie and iurisdicti∣on
ouer diuers townes. Laferte standeth vpon the Chiers. It is also vnwalled and part of the castell ruinated. No prouince in all the Low countreys is so re∣plenished with Nobilitie as this dutchy of Lux∣embourg, who also gouerne their subiects & Te∣nants like Pesants of France, or rather like slaues, contrarie to the liberty of the rest of the Prouin∣ces of these low countreys. Otherwise the No∣bilitie of this dutchy are full of all vertue, truthe, faith to their prince, constancy, curtesie, hospita∣litie and loue one to another, and often frequent togither and very frankly and liberallie entertain one another in their Castels and houses of plea∣sure. And aboue all other people hate lawe and lawyers, and end their controuersies among thē slues without processe. The chiefe exercise of the Nobility is Armes and hunting. This was the first title that the Emperour Charles bare at his christening. The Earledome of Namur. NAmur is bounded with Brahant, Haynault, Luxembourg & Liege. The countrey is verye small yet a∣bounding with all graces & riches, it is replenished with people, and those very industrious, true, and faithfull to their prince. The Nobility is valiant, flourisheth in all militarie discipline, and is giuen to all exercises
fit for their degree. The aire is very holsome, & the countrey is watered with many Riuers and brookes especially the Meuse and the Sambre, which besides the commoditie of portage, fur∣nish the countrey with great plenty of excellent good fish. Namur is a countrey replenished with woods and Forrests, the greatest whereof is called Mar∣laigne, abounding ye a crawling as it were with all kinde of Venison and soule. The Vallies are very fruitefull of all sortes of corne and graine, the hils full of goodly woods, excellent cleere fountaines, rich mines of Iron, and some of Leade, quarreyes of fine stone to build with, and of Marble of all sorts & colours, as black, Tawnye, porphire or Iasper, which is red straked with white, blew marble but myn∣gled with white which perfecteth the beawtye. Besides diuers other sorts of fine stone to builde with, and lime to make cement, and seacoale to burne as in Haynault, and in Liege, wherevnto I adde great quantitie of Saltpeter made in this countrey of Namur, but especially the forges of Iron in this little Prouince are so innumerable, that the whole countrey seemeth to be Vulcans forge, all the which things put togither, do not onely keepe the people from idlenesse by their continuall trauell and exercise, but also more enrich them than the beste tilled and fruitfullest feelds that may be found.
In the countrie of Namur at this daye are foure walled townes (viz) Namur the princi∣pall towne, & which giueth name to the whole countrey, Bouines, Charlemont & Valencourt. There are farther in it 182. Villages, and ma∣ny goodly and rich Abbeyes. The states of this countrey are compounded of the cleargie, the nobilitie, and the heades of the good towns, but now we will come to the particular description of the places of this Seni∣orie. The Citty of Namur Standeth betweene two hils vpon the Meuse, and through it passeth the Sambre which there entereth into the Meuse. It is a faire and a rich towne with a strong ca∣stle, and about it are 7. hermitages. It hath beene an Earledome with a goodlye seniorie and a large iurisdiction of long time. Here resideth the councell of the Countrey which appealeth to Malines, & of late Namur hath obtained a bishop, whos cathedral church is the church of S. Albin. The Ncians are very good souldiers, & verie affectionate to their prince, they speake French which is their mother toong. In ye towne are some artificers but not manye, and likewise few marchants, but great store of nobilitie, some descended of great princes though the moste part by bastardie. Betweene Namur and Hoy is the rich vil∣lage
of Audenne, in the which is a nunrie of la∣dies like to that of Niuelle. Suche another like Nunrie is also but two leages from Namur, at a village called Monstier vpon the Sambre, at both the which Nunries are daily great almes bestowed vpon the poore. Bouines standeth vpon the Meuse, this hath beene heeretofore a towne of good importāce, but it hath often beene sacked, and lastlye by Henry the second king of France, An. 1554. but is now repaired againe and fortified. Charlemont is a Towne of wonderfull force, and of exquisite fortification though but small. It was built by Charles the fift to make head a∣gainst the French, after they had taken Mariem bourg which was in the yeare 1555. Ʋalencourt standeth in a goodly fruitefull countrey, and is a good little towne, the princi∣pall villages of this countrey are, Daue which is a goodlie village with a strong Castell standing vpon the Meuse. It hath also a great iurisdiction and is honoured with the ti∣tle of a Viscountie. Farther among the villa∣ges of this countrey are diuers because of their beautie and greatnesse, worthy to bee mentio∣ned, namely Floren, Ʋascie, & Sanson. These before described are all the low coun∣trey Prouinces subiect to the kinge of Spayne. Notwithstanding because the bishoppricke of Liege and the towne of Aquisgrane, are not
onely neighbours and friends, but also  co∣tinual and indissolubleamitie with these fe Lowe countreys, wee will speake a wor or them. The Bishoprick of Liege. THis Countrey is borde∣red North and west with Brabant, East with the Mouse & Namur, south with Luxembourg. The aire is very whol∣some, the countrey plea∣sant, and abounding with all kinde of graine & fruites, in such sort, that through the whole coū∣trey wine groweth, though small & of no great quantitie. But as touching fleshe, fish, and foule of all sorts there is great aboundance and that of cast excellent good. Mines there are also of iron reasonable store and some of lead and vaines of Brnstone, ye and a fewe of Golde and that excellent good, quarreyes also there are of excellent ston Alblaster mingled with black, and of all of Marble as before is described in sides wonderfull great plentie of Seacole digged wonderfull deepe, time euen vnderneath the very  the Mouze, and that in such aboundance, that the
countrey within the compasse of a league about Liege, not onely furnisheth the Towne, but sel∣leth also forth abroad yearely though at verye small prices, to the valewe of 100000. ducats. The coale of this countrey is much sweeter and casteth a farre greater heat than the coal of Hay nault or Namur, as doth also the Turffe of this Countrey (which is vsed in some places therof) farre surmount the turfe of Flanders & Brabant. For the which cause the Liegeoys vaunt and that most truely, that they haue in their countrey 3. things passing all other countreyes (viz) bread better than bread, iron harder than iron, & fire hotter than fire. This coale is kindled with wa∣ter and quenched with oyle, and the strong sa∣uour thereof is taken awaie by casting salt into the fire. In this Countrey is also made great aboun∣dance of Saltpeter. To conclude this countrey is so pleasantly seated, the aire so holsome, the soile so fruitfull of all thinges seruing for the vse and delight of man, wherevnto also may be ad∣ded the great libertie that the people liue in there, that it is called the Paradise of preests. In such sort that Iohn Mandeuille an English gē∣tleman and a famous Doctor of Physicke, after his long trauaile round about the worlde, chose this for the Paradise of all the world, where hee would both liue and end his life, as also hee did in the yeare 1372.
Vnder the Bishoprick of Lieg is contained a goodly & large estate, seniorie and iurisdicti∣on, of Townes, castelles, bourgs and villages, namely the Dutchie of Buillon, the Marquisate of Francymont, & the counties of Lotz & Has∣bain, There are also vnder it manye baronies, the principall whereof are 52. and manye riche Abbyes To conclude, there are vnder the iurisdiction of the Bishop (besides the halfe of Maestricht) 24. walled townes, namely Liege the principall and metropolitane towne, Buillon, Francimont, Lootz, Borckworm, Tongres, Hoey, Asselt, Di∣nant, Masetck, Stochem, Bilsen, S. Truiden, Tu∣in, Viset, Varem, Beringhe, Herck, Bree, Per, Ha∣mont, Siney, Fosse, Couines. There are moreouer vnder the Bishoppe, 1800. Villages with parishe churches, besides Hamlets, baronies and castels of noble men a great number. But nowe to the particular des∣cription, and first of the Metropolitane Cittie it selfe, and than of the rest. The Cittie of Liege. LIege standeth in a pleasant Valley vpon the Meuse, being enuironed with hilles on all sides, the Mus entereth into it with two branches, and maketh many pleasant Iles within the town all the which are inhabited. The iuers that passe through this Cittie, are
first the Meuse, than the little riuer called Liege or Leige, whereof it is thought the towne taketh name, and lastly three little brookes, Vte, Vese, and Ambluar, all 3. abounding with excellent good fish, but especially Vte hath one sort of ex∣cellēt delicate fish aboue al the rest, called Vtins Farther in this town are many cleere springs and fountaines, and that in such abundance that some houses are furnished with two or three. This cittie is very great and large, compre∣hending hils, vallies, riuers, & many vine groūds, so that the Lorde of Argenton compareth it in greatnesse to Rouen, accounting it to compre∣hend in circuit foure Italian miles. The buildinges of this towne are verie fayre, being all of stone, but aboue all the rest the By∣shoppes pallace is very stately and sumptuous, though vnfinished as yet. But in number of churches, and beauty and ri∣ches of those churches, in monasteries and con∣uents this towne passeth al the townes, either of France or of high and low Allemaine. For there are in it 8. collegial churches of canons, yt which canons are very rich & of great reputatiō, espe∣cially those of S. Lambert the patron of ye town, who ioyne with the Bishop in the gouernment of the state, & in the which church none can be admitted a canon, except he be a gentlemā or a doctor or licenciate, & the canons of this church may giue ouer their place and goe furthe and
marrie till they haue taken the order of Pries hood. In this church of S. Lambert, among diuc other rich Iewels and reliques, is to be seene a great image of S. George on horsse backe all of pure gold, which Charles Duke of Burgundie gaue for amendes of his hard handeling of this Cittie, when he tooke it by force. There are in this towne foure rich Abbeyes, hauing euerie one a goodly librarie, the princi∣pall whereof is the Abbey of S. Laurence. There are three Nuries, and all the foure orders of Fri, some of the which haue two Conuente. There are 32. parish churches, and so many o∣ther churches, monasteries and hospitals, with∣in and without the towne that the churches are accounted in all aboue 100. Farther, there are 32. companies in this City which haue so great authoritie in the gouerne∣ment of the state, that without their consent, no∣thing can be concluded nor agreed on. The cittie is replenished with people, but those very idle, yet fierce and naturallie incli∣ned to armes. This towne hath also produced many learned men. The Liegeoys language is Frenche, but verie corrupt. This cittie is Imperial, but their tenure is onlie furnish the Emperour of a fewe menne in his
wars against the Turke. The Bishop is lord spirituall and temporall both of the towne and countrey, but the people haue so large priuileges, that they liue almost in perfect libertie and freedome. Their appeales spiritual goe to Colin, who is their primate, and from thence to Rome. Their temporal appeales to the Imperial chamber at Spire. This cittie flourished more in times past than now it doth, for Hubert Thomas writeth that at one time were studentes heere, nine kings chil∣dren, 24 Dukes children, 29 Earles children, besides a number of Barons and Gentlemens children: the greatest part of the which weare Cannons of the rich Colledge of S. Lambert a∣boue mentioned. This cittie was first destroied by the Danes and Normans, and lastlye by Charles Duke of Burgundie, An. 1468. yet now it is reedified a∣gaine and much inlarged. Buillon is a good castell standing wonderfull artificiallie vpon the point of a hill, with a great bourg vnder it, which somtime was a fair town. The castle is large and well fortified, & so strong both by art and nature, that it was helde for im∣prenable: notwithstanding it hath beene taken foure times, and lastly by the French, An. 1552. This castle hath the title of a Dutchie, & hath vnder it a great countrey and a large iurisdictiō.
It was the inheritance of the valiant Godfrey, who did so many worthie exploites againste the Turks, and was the first Christian king of Ieru∣salem, after the Christians last conquest thereof. He sold this dutchie to the bishoppe of Liege, to furnish him when he tooke his iourney into the holy land, so that the dutchie is now the bishop of Lieges, yet the Lorde of Sedan as heyre of the house of La Marche pretendeth Title to it, but by the laste treatie, Anno 1559. it was restored to the bishop of Liege, but without preiudice of the saide Lord of Sedans claime therevnto. Francimont is a Marquisat, hauing Iustice & Seniorie. It was somtime a walled towne, now but a Village, yet hath it a strong fort, bulte by Erard Cardinall and Bishop of Liege. Neere to this place is a Village called Thou, where are manie leaden mynes of verie good mettall, and quarries of excellent blacke marbell, such as is described in Namur. Lootz in Dutch Borchloon, is a countie with a large territorie and iurisdiction vnder it, and was a countie in Charlemaines time, bearing the title of the County of Diostein, of some earle that had possessed it being of that name. It was giuen to Oger the Dane so famous in Ariosto. It is now but a prettie little towne. Borckworm standeth vpon the Iecker. It is a prettie towne well peopled, and the pryncipall towne of the Countie of Hasbain.
Tongres standeth also vpon the Iecker which at Maestricht entereth into the Mauze. Out of this towne issued the ancestors of Charlemain It was the first town that receiued Christian re∣ligion 101. yeares after Christs death. This town was sometime great and mighty, and the Me∣tropolitane of all the townes that the people of Germanie called Tongres conquered in these partes. It was also an Episcopall sea, but the sea was first transported to Maestricht and after to Liege. This citty was destroied by Attila K. of the Huns, who also destroied in it 100. chur∣ches, so large and faire was the cittie than: but now it is a very small towne not worthy to bee mentioned, saue onlie for the ruines, which mak shew of the ancient magnificence thereof. At Tongres is a maruellous causie, heretofore all paued with goodly stone, as also yet it is in many places, and raised vp of wonderful heighte betweene two walls, & reacheth from this town to Paris, which is aboue 200. Italian miles. The thing is so wonderfull and seemeth so far aboue the power of man, that the people of the coun∣trey haue deuised that the Deuil built it in three daies and three nights, but in truth it was some ancient worke of the Romains, who throughout their empire emploied their subiects in such buil dings, to keep them from idlenes which is the mother of sedition and ciuill war. At Tongres is also a church somtime dedicated to Hercules wher his statue is yet to see, which is
argument of the great antiquity of this town. In this towne is also weekly a goodly market, whither many horses come to be sold, wel out of Allai as out of these low con∣eyes. Hubert Thomas wteth that the Sea came somtime to this tow, but Guicciardin by ma∣ny strong reasons disproueth his opinion as im∣possible to be true. Eight Leagues from Tongres and fiue from Lege, is the village of Spa, within halfe a league where of is the fountaine, so famous through the world for the vorues that it hath to  the ter∣tion ague, the dropsie, the stone, the exulcerati∣on of the longues, the Sciatique, and all diseases of the stomach and liuer. Plinie. lib. 31. cap. 2. writeth this fountaine to haue beene at Tongres belike bicause the magnificence of Tongres be∣ing than a statelye towne and the head of that quarter, gaue the name to the whole countrey that was subiect to it: for Tungriciuitas as Pli∣i tearmeth it, is the name aswel of the whole countrey as of the towne. This village of Spa is in a faire wood, being part of the Forrest of Ar∣dannes. The foutaine most commended (for there are diuers in the countrey of Lieg and the Marquisat of Francimnt, of diuers properties) is called La fotaine d Saueni, ye water wher∣of tasteth of iron, belike because all the earth through the which the water psseth, i full o
Iron mines. In Iuly the water is of most vertue, because that is the hottest time of the yeare, and in the greatest heat the water is of moste effica∣ye. Hoey was sometime a famous citty. It bea∣reth the name of a surious riuer that heere run∣neth into the Meuse. The Meuse passeth tho∣rough the midst of the towne, and parteth it in twaine, hauing built ouer it a wonderful good∣ly bridge. The towne is now in reasonable good estate, hauing a strong fortresse built in it, by the aboue named Erarde Cardinall of Liege. The countrey about it aboundeth with iron myne and cattell. Hasselt standeth vpon the riuer Demere. It is a reasonable good towne and well built. Neere to this is the faire Village of Curighen, where the aboue named Cardinall hath built a stately pallace, whither the Bishop with his traine go∣eth often to solace and refresh himselfe, so plea∣sant and delectable is the place. Dinan standeth vpon the Meuze. It was once a famos towne and of good traffique, but Charles the last Duke of Burgundie vtterlie de∣stroied it, and being repaired againe, Henry the second king of France, An. 1554. took it again, and sacked it and destroied the Castell. Yet now it is reedified and the Castell also, for it is seated in a very good countrey, abounding with black Marble and mines of iron, and quarreyes
of other goodlie stone to build with, so that the Marchants of the towne are veryrich and trade abroad in the world euen into England. Maeseick is a reasonable good towne stand∣ing vpon the Meuze. A league from this town is the faire place and Nunrie of Thoren, into the which none can be receiued but noble mennes daughters and gentlemens of noble and aunci∣ent houses, like to the Nunrie of Montz. These Nuns may marrie al saue the Abbesse, who hath iurisdiction both spiritual and temporall ouer a great countrey and is vnder the protection of the Empire. This monasterie hath a goodly reue∣new, & such preheminence that it coyneth mo∣ney both of siluer and gold. Stockem is a proper little towne standing vp∣on the Meuse, repaired by the foresaid Cardinal De la March Bishop of Liege. Bilsen Is a verie little towne, a quarter of a league from the which is a village in the Terri∣torie of Liege, standing vpon the Demer called Munster Bilsen, where is such a numic of Gen∣tlewomen that may marrie, as hath often beene described before, and the Abbesse thereof ha∣uing such iurisdiction, as is before said of the ab∣besse of Thoren. This monasterie is verie faire & large, & the church of wonderfull architecture. In this conuent is a whole Vnicornes horne, said to be brought thither by a Nunne of the place, daughter to a Duke of Brittaine. The horne is 6.
foot and a halfe long. Neer to this place is lately marked out a cha∣nel, to ioyne the Demere and the Meuze toge∣ther at a place called Smermase, somewhat be∣neath Maestricht. This channel shallbee twoe leagues in length, by the which with singular ease and commoditie botes may passe from the Meuze into the Demer, from thence into the Dele, and so into the Rupel, than into the Scheld and so into the sea. S. Truden or Centron is a faire towne, theyr language is Flemish though they be subiect to the bishop of Liege. In this towne is the abbey of S. Truden, whereof the towne taketh name, which is a verie rich abbey, the Abbot beeyng Lord of one halfe of the towne, and the Bishop of the other. Neere to this towne is also the no∣ble and rich commanderie of Bernsem. Tuin or Touin standeth in Haynault, but is subiect to the bishop of Liege. It is a reasonable good towne, neere to the which in the iurisdic∣tion of Leige, are two goodlie and rich abbeys, namely Asue and Lobbe. Viset, Ʋarem, Beringhem, Herck, Bree, Per, Hamont, Siney, Fosse, Couines, are all reasonable townes and of some account. Description of the Villages. Florene was sometime a prettie towne but destroied by the French in the last wars, and re∣maineth still in that estate.
Cerey is now a goodly foresse, by the said Cardinall de la Mche. is thought to haut beene the principal towne in  paste of the people , though now but a village. In this place are of very good bmstoe. Hstal or Heristel. Of this village Pepin the tooke his surname, and in this place and another heere to it called Ipili, are goodlie stateli pallaces to be seene, whither ths prin∣c and Charles the great often resorted to solace themselues, because the Countreye out is the holmst, the fruitstest and the pleasantest, for ayre, riuers, wood, hils, val∣lyes, Vines, Fruite, Veison, Fish, Foule, and all kind of princelie sports that may be seene. This Bishoprick of Lege was first erected by Hubert sonne to Betnde Duke of Aquicain, who being at Rome was made by the Pope bi∣shop of Mestrich in place of saint Lambert, whom his people of Maestricht had matyred . 710. But hee being come to Mstricht so much detested the people for the foresaid mur∣ther, that he transported his Episcopal Sea to Lge, and there built the church of S. Lmbert and the Colledge afore mentioned, an all this with the Pope Constantins consent, Anno. 713. and heere at Liege he died and was a  numbred 57. Bishop of Liege.
The Bishop is chosen by the chapter of saint Lambert, confirmed by the people, and lastlie approued by the Pope. He is not only a bishop, but also a prince of the Empire. Duke of Buillon Marques of Francimont, and earle of Lootz and Hasbain. The reuenewes of this Bishoprick are aboue 30000. ducats, besides the beneuolence of his subiects (which is a great matter if he vse them well) and his spirituall iurisdiction and an infi∣nite number of Prebends, benifices and offices which he bestoweth at his pleasure. A Discourse of the great difference be∣tweene the Countrey and people of Liege, and the Countrey and Citizens of Aix, notwithstanding that they be but six Leagues distant, and both vn∣der one climat. LIege is subiect, Aix ly∣ueth in libertie, but both vnder the protection of the Empire. At Liege they speake Frenche, at Aix dutch. The Liegeois are pleasaunt and com∣panable, they of Aix melancholie and vnsocia∣ble. To conclude they differ in euery pointe as much as the Frenche and the Dutch which is
verie much. Yea the verie aire and soile the same difference though they be both vnder one climat. For it is summer at Liege when it is Winter at Aix, fruites and corne are ripe at Liege whan they be very vnripe at Aix: yea of∣tentimes such difference there is of the season & disposition of the aire that it is Ice and snowe at Aix when no such thing is seene at Liege. Description of Aix in La∣tine Aquisgranum. AIx is scituated betweene the Dutchies of Brabant, Limbourg, Iulliers, and the bishoprick of Liege. The Citizens of Aix holde Charlemaine for their founder. The saide Charlemaine ordained Aix to be the chief seat of the Empire and realme of France on this side the mountaines, and that the kinge of Ro∣maines should receiue the on crowne at Aix, of the Archbishop of Colin whoe is metropoli∣tane thereof, the siluer Crowne at Millan, and the Impriall crowne of Gold at Rome. At this towne of Aix died Charlemaine, an. 813. and lieth buried in our Lady church. Ai is a good town and the countrey abou very fuitfull and pleasant, but the buildinges
of the towne are nothinge answereable to the fame of the place, saue the hot bathes which are verie faire built, and verie wholsome for ma∣nie diseases. Aix is an imperiall towne, but paieth small tribute to the Empire, otherwise liueth in free∣dome and hath the Duke of Cleues for protec∣tor, next neighbour and perpetual confederate. All the rest of the Authors discourse of Aix concerneth the translation of the Empire to the Germaines, and the forme of the election and coronation of the Emperour, which because it is impertinent to this discourse of the Low con∣treys and may be read more at large in other good Authors, I passe ouer in silence. FINIS.
Corrections of Faults escaped. in the printing. Read fol. 6, pa. 1, lin. 14. come. fol. 7. pa. 2. li, 8. 16. 27. and . 1. li. 4. Mormault, fol. 12. pa. 2. li, 1. rampar. so. 16 monies. fol. 16, pa. 2. li. 27. Aremberghe. fol. 19 pa. 1. li. 5. Lieunant and other officers. fol. 19. pa. . li. 24. vse. fol. 25. pa. 2. li. 11. Baru. fo. 27. pa. 1. li. 22. also. fol. 30. pa. 1. line. 8. our of▪ fol. 35. page. 1. li. 22. Guyne, fo. 38. pa. 2. li. 10. Hulpen. , fol. 47. pag. 1. lie. 21. Gheelmuyden. fol. 56. pag. 2. li. 7. Iselstein, so. 64. pa. 1. line. 19. Grauesand, fo. 68. pa. 1. li. 5. . fo. 69. pa. 1. li. 15. weare, fol. 69, pa, 1. li. 26, Vtrecht the fol. 1. pa, 1. li, 26. Dulande. fo. 73, pa. 1. li. 18. auncientest. fo. 74, pa. 1. li. 14. of, fo. 95, pa, 2. li. 3. Nele, fo. 95, pa, 2. li. 5. many cloathes. fol, 87. pa. 2. vlt. Montz, fol. 90. pa, 1. li. 7. Menin. fol. . pag. . li. 1. Arebatm. fo. 96. pa. 1. li, 19. Artesians, fol. 100 pa. 1. li. 4. Mormault. fo, 101. pa. 2. li. 12. Conde, fol. 10. pag. 2. li. 28. Maubeuge, fo. 101. pa. 2. li. 30. Bauais, fo. 101, page. 2, vlt Signy, fo, 102, pa. 1. li. 1. Lalaign, fo. 102, pa, 1. li. 7. Glaion, fol▪ 12. pa. 1. li. 8. and immediatly after that read Trasegnie, quit left out. many reasons, fol. 106.  1, 27, Folēmbray, fol. 106. pa, 2, li, 14. Lassine, fo. 107, p. 1. li. 20. Mommedy, fo. 111. p, 1. l. 14▪
