13262 99853998 19403
A HISTORICALL Relation Of the Famous Siege of the Busse, And the surPrising of Wesell. Together With the Articles, and points of Composition graunted by his Excellencie the Prince of Orange to those of the Towne. And A Supposition of the state, and order of their garrison marching out of the City. and some other additions here∣vnto annexed. Written by H.H. quarter-master to my lord Gene∣ral Vere his Regiment. Printed at Delph in Holland Anno. 1630.
To His honoured friends, The Deputy, Minister, Treasurers, Assistants, and Generality, of the right Worshipfull Com∣pany of Marchant Adven∣turers residing in Delph. RIght worthy and much respected, The last Aprill, when I went out of the Towne to the Army, I was engaged by promise to three of my friends among you; As occasions offred, to aduertize you now and then, of our proceedings before y• Busse, which according to my weake ability, I did performe. But seeing the most part of you were eye witnesses at the siege, Saw our workes, and approaches, went to the very point, and into the galleryes, and sent some Cannon bulletts into the Towne, before it was giuen ouer, and since saw that glorious day (which made amends for your ill nights lodging) when the Enemies garrison marched out of it: And that hauing now more leasure for the refreshing of your memories, I haue recol∣lected the parts of my letters then written to you, into a whole and briefe discourse Touching the siege of the Busse, and the surprising of Wesell. I confesse it is a graue story, & a braue subiect, for a farr more eloquent pen then mine, to worke vpon, but considering my employment in his siege and that truth & bluntnesse best beseemes a souldier, I haue ventered vpon It to breake the yee vnto another. Such as it is, It comes vnto you from a souldier as a small retribution in acknowledgment, of that great loue and omfort he hath found amonge you, and not to shewe him selfe an vngrateful man beseeching you to accept of it with as free a hart, as he Presēts it vnto you: & to pardon what therein is amisse. Thus praying the Almightie to enrich you with all his blessings both Spirituall and Tempo∣rall I recommend you to his grace, and protection, and rest. Yours, to doe you a accepable service. Henry Hexham,
A Briefe relation of the siege of the Busse And the surprizing of Wesell. AFter the happy Victory, obteyned by that wise and valiant Generall Peter Heyne, ouer the Spanish siluer fleete, and the safe reume, of the West Indian ships into the Netherlands▪ the Lords the States Centrall, and the Prince of Orange, marking wisely herein the goodne and prouidence of God, that, that Neruus belli, which th king of Spayne would haue imployed against them, was now brought into the bowels of their country, tooke courage, re∣solued for the field, and prepaations being mad and sen before, his Excel. to amuze the Enemy, appointed our Rende¦vous at Skinck-scoc the 26 of Aprill 1629. where th companies being, come, expected further order from ye Prince▪ On Tewsday then the 24 of Aprill 1629, according to th new stile, his Excel. Sr Harry Veyne, his Maiesties extrao¦dinary Lord Ambassadour, my Lord Generall Vere▪ wit diuers other Lords and cōmanders, set forward from ye  that night lodg'd at Verceht: the next at Arhm, whence  sent monsieur Wyts, Sariant maior General to Skincks-sco with this order, that the shipping should ack about, and fa downe y• streame to Nemegen. The wagons being mustered  distributed to y• companie, the 2: y• Prince & hit traine, depa¦ted from Arham to Nemegen, & gaue command, that the co¦panies should be drawne off from shipboard, and march alon by the towne side to Mucker-heath, where the Army qua¦red that night, vnder the heauens canopy, by the same token rayned almost all that night. On the morrow being the  his Exel ga order that
the creeke of the day, at the first beating of his drumme the souldiers should put on their armes, at the second beating of a march, they should draw forth and be readi to mach. Monsieur Percivall the quarter master Generall with the quarter masters of euery Regiment, and the captaine of the pioniers went before to prepare the way, by which the army should march, and so made a way thorow closies and ditches tll they came to the Mae dyke, and then the army marcht along the dyke, till they came a musket shot beneath y• Graue, where they found a bridge layed ready ouer the Maze, and there passed ouer the bridge 56 troopes of Horse, and 286 companies of foote, whereof many were double, wch marcht to the way y• goes to the Busse, where the three Brigadoes of the Army, the Avant guard, the Battaile, and the Reere, were quartred that night in a right line vpon the Heath, which made a goodly shew, with the but ends of their pikes sticking in the ground, in their ranckes and iles, and our Horse sodg'd on the right hand of the Heath, at two villages called Reeke, and Schayck neere vnto them. On munday morning the last of Aprill, the Army began to moue againe, at the breake of day, and that night marcht to a Village called Hejwicke, where there was a castle, which the enemie held, some two houres going frō the Busse, whether the quarter Masters riding before to quarter the Army, they lay pelting at them, and some straglers; out of the loope holes of the Castle: but his Exellencie sent them word by the Gen∣telman, which dwelt in the Castle, that they should not play y• fooles too long in holding it out; for if they did, & that they did force him to bring ordinance before it, hee would beate it about their eares, and that they were to expect no quarter, He summoned them once more by his Trumpetter: yet for all that they held it out stil, till they saw the Avantgard of our armie, come marching towards them, and then they yeilded, and cryd peccaui, and sould to our souldiers, bread, butte, bear cheese, bacon, hens, and ducks, which was a good refreshmt to them. Count Ernest comming vp turnd them out, and put some 60 of our irelockes into it, and so the Armie was lodgd that night in the fields, and meddowes by the riuer side al∣led the Aye. The next day being May-day, the Armie marcht through a village called Gemonde, where they passed a bridg ouer the Dummell, and the Armie being marcht to the Heath his Ex¦ellencie made a halt, and broke his fast in a pesants house and hauing broke his fast, tooke with him a thousand horse, and went to viewe the ground at Vucht, where y• Armie should
be quartered, the enemie not forgetting now nd then, to send vs some Cannon bullets from the towne, nd scnes. After his Exellencie had well viewed the ground, and found out the convenientest places for vs to quarter in: he gae or∣der to the quarter master generall, to giue to euerie quarte master his ground, and lodg'd himselfe in a Gentelmans hous at Vucht, called Heyms-house, and my Lord generall Ver, was lodg'd in a house next vnto him. Then the armie wa par∣ted, & were quartered thus, the gardes, the English, the French the walloones, and the Lord of Diedens Regiment, consisting of 13 4 companies of foote (besides horse) with his Exci a Vuct. The Scotch, the frizons, and some dutch Regiment consisting of 50 companies with Count Ernest at Flinton. Count William of Nassawe Gouernour of Huysden with 35 companies at Orten, The Lord of Breadroods with 6 com∣panies vpon the side of the Petlar sconce. And Count Solmo with the Lord of Hemers company and others at Engln for the safety of our shipping. And on the 11th of May Mon∣sieur Pincen came with 23 companies which attended the Riuer, and tooke vp his quarter at Deuteren by Grubbing∣donks Koy, and so in this manner the Busse was girt about On wensday the second of May, all the quarters beeing layd out, and euerie Regiment and company hauing their ground giuen them, his Excie that afternoone sent for the Commi Martin, and all the quartermasters, and there in his chamber makes a calculation himselfe, how many spades, pickaxes, & showels the Commis had in the quarter, which fell to be 31 to euery single company, 64 to a double▪ giuing with all ex∣presse charge to the quarter masters, that the next mornin betime they should begin to entrench their quarters, which was done with such expedition, that the same night the trench was made vp, and his Excie towards euening riding long the line, to view the worke gaue thanks to the Captaines, quarter-masters, and souldiers for their diligence therein. The quarters then being defensible, as so many Bees to their hiues, so each souldier brings somthing to the making vp of his hutt. This being done his Excie. rides about to view the ground for his out line. The line of Circumvallation wt  it Angells, was nigh 30 English miles in circuit. Wee may take it thus, from the right side of the Damme, where the Dummell was stopt, it ran along by Generall Cicill quarter and so to Coronell Harewoods, from thence to the Walloons along the heath to the Milciort, and so downe to the stone gallowes, then along from the Vchter heath, to Derers. om thence to the Busse floote, and so along the men of
to Engelen, from Engelen to Creui-ceur, and from thence on the other side of the Dieff, downe to Oten to Count Willi∣am quarter, from thnce to  to Count Ernest quarter and thn along by the Nu cloistes, the little will, & Cou-water, to the Lord of Broadroode quarter, and so to the V∣froues sconce, from thence to Beskell scone, and so to the Dame, where it met againe. It was admirable to see the vigllancie, and carefulne of the Prince▪ for there was not a patch of ground, by which the Enem might haue relieued the Towne, but it was most strong¦ly fortiied.  sconces, horne-works, halfe-moones, redoubts and trauerses, as likewise the inner line against the Towne which for breuity sake I refer you to the Carde. But that wch was most remarkeable, and which Grobbingdonk leat drea∣ied of, & which he ingeniously confest vnto Lord of Hemes as he marcht out of the Towne, whereof the one was the passing of the Hollands dyke by the spade ouer the drowned nd by his Koy. and so along to the Busse floore, wrought all by pesants which brought Earth and brush in boatte, and in diuers places made this dyke, which was drowned with water higher then to a mans middle: y• other, the stopping of the Dummel, which ouerflow'd and fed the monace round about the Busse, which water was articifially carried and convayed round about our quarters, by two ditches ouer the Heath,  one beeing 26 foote broad, and the other 36 foote ouer and 8 or ten foote deepe in diuers places, wch discharged it selfe into the dround land by Vleeme, and into the Busse floore. But before his Excellencie could make this Hollands dike gardable, vppon the fourth of May in the night, there ipt into the towne 600 souldiers from Breda, which came by Vsee to Deuteren (where mos. Piceus quarter was afterward) and from thence wading vp to the arme pices by the kerre sconce, got into the toune by Saint Iohne Pore. But on the 11 of May monsieur Pineen tooke vp his quarter by Grob∣bindonekes koye, and so stopt this passage for comming thee wave any more. The ou lie then beeing finished, and a liour workes made vp and defencible which lasted well nigh three weekes or a month, his Excellencie then began his approaches, euerie na∣tion striuing for his honour, as in Agamemuons armie before Troye. The first night ground was broken and two Redoubts made in the way as ye goe from Vucht to the little sconce. the next night we advanced a stone east further, and made two other Redoubts with a crauerse betweene them, there wee and the french shooke hands, and parted  with th
thelittle scnce, they with the Wallones and the lord of Diedens Regiment for y• geat, till we met againe at the ∣tel Sconce▪ yet notwithstanding hauing broken ground some 200 pces further, his Excellencie caused a fiue of communi∣cation to bee made betwixt v and them, and a batterie in the midst of it, that vppon any occasion wee might sond one another. This breaking of ground continewed with comman∣ded men at 10. fts. a night, till wee got within halfe  shot of both sconces, and alwaies as we got ground by wind∣dings and turnings: so wee made gardes, batteries, traverse, and blinds, for the safeguard and defence of our men. And fo the Approaches Capt: Iohn de Bosch, & M Humfrey wee appointed Inginers for the English, Mont. Percival and his sonne for the French. The commanded men then being dischargd, & that itbegn to grow hot, by reason of the enemies often shooting, the worke masters oke on the approaches, & apt forward by degr for al the enemies shooting both with ordinance & smal shot, & stil making guards, batteries, & blinds for the security of our men, till wee come to the water, which falls out of the Dum∣mell into y• moate o y• , making it a little Iland, before wee could come to the moate it selfe, and as wee advanced▪ so we drew forward our ordinance, which playedvpon bh y• the Sconces, til we come to the laying ouer of our first gallery. The French likewise aduanced their workes euertae ma∣king guards, batteries, and blinds, till they got to the moate of the Horne-worke without the great sconce, where they also began to lay ouer their first gallery. The Lord of Breadroode made likewise approaches, vpon the Petla sconce ouer the morrace, which was very deepe fil∣ling it vp with arth and brush, till he got within two or three rode of the counterscarfe of the Petlar sconce. Count Ernest on Hinton side did tho like, by advancing his approaches, and made his first battery of sie halfe Canon, almost within musker shot of the Towne, still making guards, batteries, and blinds, as he go grounde, till became to the moate of their horne-worke, without the halfe-moone on that side, and likewise til he was ready to put ouer his first gallery. On his side was made a great battery of seauen whole Ca∣non and some halfe, which played into the Towne, & vpon th kirt of the Towne, betweene the Ortener and Hit r Port. From this great battery, ran a line downe to the great earth gallery, which was wrought ouer the morrace  or 8 foote deepe, with blinds and traverses, fild vp with Earth, sod, & , till is was brought within ten poules of the wll on that
side of the Towne. And from this great battery ran a line of Cōmunication downe to Count Williams two batteries vpon the Ortener dike, which short likewise into the Towne, and vpon that Port. There was likewise approaches made on Monfieur Pincens side, towards St Iohns Port, to keepe the ennemy in, and to make some Crosse batteries to play vpon the Towne, Vuch∣ter Port, and halfe-moone, but by reason of the deepth of the morrace he could not approach farre, and thus much for the approaches in generall. When wee were fast, Count Harry of the Berke, musters vp his forces, giues them a moneths pay, and at length marchth with his army consisting of some 7000 horse and 20000 foote, and came and quartered at Sprang, Walwick, Druine, and oone. And on the 27 of Iune, he marches from Vleeme to Cromford and Helford, within an English mile and a halfe of our out line, and shewing himselfe our ordinance bids him wel¦come, and lets fly at his men, as they marched towards their quarters, and being quattered in these two villages, buzzes vp and downe, to spy out all advantages, where he might best re∣lieue the Towne. And to amze v the more, on the 28 he mar∣ches with the grosse of his Army back againe towards Vleeme, and while his designe lay another way giues an alarum in the night by Engel, and on monfieur Pincens side, and in the in¦terim sent a matter of 4000 horse, and foote, with 800 fire∣lockes, each hauing a leather bag of powder, to put them into the Towne, betweene the Petla Sconce, and Count Ernests quarter, and brought along with them spades, fagots and plancks, to fall vpon a horne-worke of ours not farre from Coudewater: but being discouered by our men in the night, which stood ready to receiue them, the alarum being giuen, they were beaten off, some of them, drowned, and others being shott and wounded, retreated, and left some of their powder bags behind them. This failing, hee had another designe by the helpe of two treacherous pesants, for the cutting of our Damme. The same night these pesants as their guides, brought his men along the little dike, which runnes from the Damme to Baxil by y• bores houses: but they in the night discouering general Cicills tent which wee newly set vp, their hearts misgaue them, and they faied that they had mistaken their waye, and so retreated without attempting it, part of a company onely hauing the guard at that point vpon y• dike, while the rest of the com∣panies were drawne to the line vpon the Heath, they might astly haue effected it. Our mon in the morning discouering
them, as they marched toward Count Harrys quarters, thetwo halfe Canons which lay vpon Generall Cicills battery let flye at them, and flew some of them. But to preuent this, the next day his Excie caused abundnce of palisadoes to be driuen into the dyke, and made a battery, where they should haue come on, of two pieces of ordinance, and from thence to Berkell sconce, chayned boates together ouer the water before the damme for the defence of it. Count Harry of the Berke being then quartered at Buxill, Cromford, and Helford, within an English mile and a halfe of our out line, wee beganne to come into action, and made the nights our dayes, and the dayes our nights, expecting still his comming, which continued 23 nights together till he left vs. The companies of all Nations, beset the line of Circumvalla∣tion, some 200 paces distant one from another, round about the Army, and the horse standing behinde them in battaile ready to receiue him. His Excie and the king of Bohemia  their traine euery night about midnight going the Grand Round, to answere all alarums. The same night that he inten∣ded to put in these firelockes, and their powder bags into the Towne, and to haue cut the damme, and haue let in a sea of water vp on vs, which was round about our trenches, retur∣ning from Vleeme with the grosse of his Army, he discouered himselfe betimes in the morning, assoone as it was light, by the downes, and had layd an ambuscado of muketeirs, in a ditch by trees, & behinde the downes he made a halt with his horse and foote, and sends out first some 10 or 13 horse to entertaine as kirmish with our horse, which had the out guard. The trumpets sounds a charge, and our Canons roares from al the batteries vpon the line, and sent bullets toward their batt¦lions, and among their horse that skirmisht. The skirmish betweene our horse and theirs encreased, and as the Enemy sent out more horse from behind the ills, so wee did the like from the fort, whereon his Excie stood with the king of Bo∣hemia. At last there came two or three troope of horse to skirmish and change bullets on with another, and still our or∣dinance giuing fire among them, our horse charging them toward the foure of the downes, they fayned a retreate to draw on our horse within their Ambuscado. And monsieur Maune a French Captaine of a troope of horse, charging home his horse from the Ambuscado was slayne vnder him. The Enemy falls out againe with more horse, and takes this French Captaine Monsieur Maune prisoner. The Duke of Bul∣lon seing him thus engaged, chargeth with  troope or two more to reseu him, and while two of the myes me
were a disputing whose prisoner he should be, our horse char¦ges them againe driues them to a reree, & they not hauing time to carry their prisoner away, to end the dispute pistols him, and so the Dake brought off his body. This skirmish continuing a while after betweene our horse and their Ca Harry marched away with his troops to his quarters, and his Excie with a perspectiue glasse, saw his Army and told their collours. and when they were mrcht away his Excie gaue order that wee should be drawne off, and march to our quar∣ter to our rest. Count Harry remouing his quarters from Cromford, & Helford, to Bxill, the English then beset the line from the damme to the Vffrowe sonce, and from thence to the Lord of Bedroods quarter. And Count Harry at the last seing it was impossible for him to relieue the Towne, lea∣uing vs, th companies were eased of this extraordinary dutye He marcht towards the Graue, and his ordinance being gra∣ueld & sunck into the ground, made a halt for a day or two to get them off, which made vs imagine he would haue re¦turned back againe to vs. But at length he passed the mae by Muker, and made as though he marched away, and had nothing to say to Nemegen, but bethinking himselfe wel, stole backe in the night with some of his forces to surprize it. The Burgers and souldiers hauing intelligence of his comming pro∣uided for him, and were in a readinesse vpon the wall to wel∣come him, and the alarum being silently taken, they gaue fire from the wall among his troopes, and if a Cannonier could haue but found the key of a pouder house not farre from his halfe canon, where they should haue, fale on, they had payd him bette, howsoeuer they carryed off a waggon full of dead bodyes, and hurt men, and in the morning found many armes which they had left behind, as Mr Pilgrime the seruice master of Nemegen told mee, who was then present with his musket vpon the wall. The Enemies Policie was now by way of diuersion, to raise vs from the siege of the Busse, and to that end sent the Gouer∣nour of Ling, and Dulcken which was the gouernur of Groll with certaine muskettiers and firelockes before, to y• Isell to gaine a passage, while Count Harry passes y• Rhyne at Wesell, and meetes with the Emperours forces. The gouernour by the helpe of a ferry mans sonne (who for his reward they after¦ward made Captayne) got ouer the Isell at Isellort Captaine Dabbs and a Scotch Captaine marcht as fast as they could to stop & hinder the enemies passage by sloopes ouer the Isell, but cam to late notwithstanding he got vp as many of his men as he could, and figh brauely with the Enemy, in which
sight, hee himselfe, and diuers of his company were flaine. The enemie being come ouer the Ysel falls to worke as fast as they could, to maintaine, and make good their passage, till more forces came vp to them. Count Harry hauing the newes off it, sent with all expedition the Emperours forces horse, & foot to them. Arhm was then in a pittiful feare, and diuers of th best sort sled out of the towne, which gaue discouragement to their fellow Burges, and caused thoe a great disorder. Newes came to the Prince, that the enemie was passed ouer the Isl at Yselot into the yellowe, he presently sent forces out of our Armie at seuerall times, as first the lord of Didns Rgiet with diuers English, french, and scotch companies. afterward count Ernest, Coronel Harewood, Lieutenant Coronel Pag∣nam or the English. and Coronell Hanteriue for the French. Count Ernest comming to Arnham and finding it much distra∣cted, caused his drums to bte a proclamation, that those Bur∣gers which were fled & had abandoned the towne should vpō penalty of confiscating their goods and lands returne backe a∣gaine into the Towne. Then he guards and besets the Brow from Arnham to Skincksennce, and so to Nimogen ouer which Coronell Harwood, and Lieutenant Cronell Pagnam com∣manded. And from Arnham downe the Riuer to Rhyme and wagener ouer whom Coronel Hauteriue & Sr Iohn Ver com∣manded. The Enemy after they had howne themselues be∣fore Arnham vpon the hills, and made some incursions into y• velowe, they tooke in a sconce of ours betweene Dosbarow and Zurphin, on the valow side by Spankeron, which a seriant with small reputation vpon the first summons gaue ouer. The Enemy finding this plae more Connient remoued his ridge and quarter from Iselor & came thither, because it was a higher ground, and better for his Army to lodge in, and there layd ouer his bridge, & droue in piles of ake before it to secure it from breaking or burning, and both on the velow side, and the county side at the d thereof made strong force, and entrenchments with seun points to defend it. And being thus get into the ground and fortified, the Bae of Mount Cu¦uly who commanded the Crawa, accompanied with Count Harry of the Berks soone marh thorow the fear by a nar∣row passage to Areford, and those of the Towne after a Cannon shot or two from the gallowe hill giues it oer vn∣worthily, whereas if they had held it but two or three dayes  the Pence had st to them, or I hangr had de the ene∣my to forsake them, they had done better and gayned more re∣puation. Amerchard now being taken, there was likewise a  in Vtrecht,  of the ight of sme of
their chiefe men and Burgers. The Papists began in diuers places to put vp their heads and expected a day. The Lords the States generall themselues to giue encouragement to those of Vtrecht in this perplexed time, and to preuent further disor∣ders, were fayne to remoue their councill from the Hagh to Vtrecht. And General Morgan in this distresse, came happily out of Denmarke, & put in forces into Campen, Swoll, Deuen∣ter and Zutphen▪ The states began to fortifie Vtrecht, and ran a trench along the riuer side that goes from Vtrecht to the Fare. To be short, the Enemy being master of Amersford many mens hearts began to faile them, and they hung downe their heads like bulrushes, you may likewise imagine, what heauy newes this was in our Army, and how bobbard the papists grew herevpon, witnes two, y• one who had giuen out, that his Excel. was risen from the Busse, That the Enemy had beaten vp the Lord of Breadroods quarter, and had releiued ye owne, for which report, he might very well haue had his braine knockt out, and his house plundred by the popularity if th magistrates had not wisely preuented it. The other after his geering māer said to some of our Religion. Oh hee geel zynnude Geux hate broeck. His Excel. was much importuned by some to raise his siege, to hinder the Enemies further incursions into the heart of their country, which he would by noe meanes heare off: notwithstanding cald a coancill of warre vpon it, and tooke ye advise of his chiefs & Coronells. His Excel-know¦ing fullwell what an infinite charge this siege had cost the land, & that his honour, & all ours lay at y• stake vpon it, and so re∣solued to continew his siege, and to rest vpon the prouidence of God for the Euene? Whiles the Enemy was thus a domi∣nering in Amersford, firing, plundring, and rauaging the velow & had intended another expedition for Hatton, Swoll, Cam∣pen and chose parts: Nowes comes from heauen that Wesell was taken, his dashes all, & breakes the necke of all their de∣signes. The Lord shuts a doore behind him, puts a hooke in his nostrill, and fetches him back with a whirre. The Emperours men & Crawats, who had left their goods & riches in Wesell, sweares by en hondert duysent tonnen van gettapte duyvelen & thought ye there had bene iugling betwene y• Prince of Orange, & Count Harry his Cossin. The post which brought the first newes of it to them, was beaten, and threatned to be hanged for his labour. And they made as much hast as they could to be iogging from Amersford. The newes comming to our army it was so strange that the Prince himselfe scarcely beleeued it, but at last breakes out into admiration, as it was reported, & said, if it be so, it was meerely the worke of God, and not mans.
And to vs it was as a dreame, we could hardly giue credit vnto it, till it was thorowly seconded, and confirmed. If it please you I wil relate vnto you, how, & in what manner it was surprised. First, as a preamble therevnto yee haue heard, how that the Enemy against oath, & promise had shut vp th greate Church in Wesel, against those of our religion, and for ooth to coulor this as comonly they doe, they gaue the child another name: it was he Emperours doings verif they would pay a round summe of mony, they would open the church doores, and they should haue the liberty of their conscience and free excercise of their religion againe. This was onely a trick to exhaust mony from them, for they vse to keepe faith no longer with Hereticks, then till they find their advantages, according to the maxime of the Councill of Trent. But the righteous God, who is the reuenger of such persidiousnesse: as he heard the sighs and groines of the children of Israel, vn∣der the Tyranny of Pharaoh: so heard hee also the Sobbs & prayers of his afflicted seruants in this Towne, and sent them a sudden deliuerance in an vnexpected time, by the helpe of two or three weake instruments (for hee can helpe with a few as well as with a multitude) rom the spanish yoake, who had be∣reft them of their spirituall Manna. To this end a speciall oc∣casion then presented it selfe by reason of a new Bulwarke wch was a making on the East side of the Towne, and lay open, & was onely shut in with a palisadoe which might easily be bea∣sen downe, as the Euent hereafter shewed. The vndertakers of this enterprise were Peeter Mulder, Richard Mulder his brother, and Iohn Rotleer, all three Burgers of Wesell, men of a meane Condition, but of a good spirit and resolution, to performe that which they had vndertaken. This Peeter Mul∣der diuers times faining to learne to swim, had pild the depth of the moate on that side, and spying out all opetunities made a great Iron hammer, to beate downe the aboue said palisado. The time and place then beeing dessigned on the 18th of Au∣gust 1629, hee went out of Wesell at one port some three dowres before the shutting of the gates, and an Foure after his brother followed him and went out at another ort and Iohn Rotler a little before the shutting of the ports went out as a third port, least any thing should be discouerd, and to bring them newes if al were wl in y• tone, & meeting all three together in the darke at the place apointed, sel al three done vpon their knees and implored the aide of the Lord of Hosts, to giue them wisedome, strength, and courage, to performe y• which they had vndertaken for the deliuerance of their felow  and brethren, patiently attending the comming of
Lord of Dioden ouernor of Earick who reun Prince had the commad for the managing of this designe, About mid∣ni came vnto  from  a matter of sixteene hundreth foote (some makeiers others firlockes and halfe pi) and eight roops of horse. Before they went on, the Lord of Dioden to doe  man wong made them drawe Bl∣lets, who should first fall on▪ the first bllt then fel to captaine  Hgen. The second to the Drsad of Braort. The third to Mounsieur Die. the fourth to Mosieur Market. And the fifth to Monsieur Lawik each captaine hauing 150 men vn¦der his command. Peter Mulde▪ & hi two comrades goes on couragiously before them as a forelorne hope, giuing cou∣rage to the souldiers, whose hearts began a little to misgiue them, Eie car troop cme thiher, and that the Lord of Died▪ had ordered the busiesse thus, it began to be light, and they did imagine that it was not practickable. The Ene∣my likewise, seing the day bro, and that it began to be very fight, drew off these by-wat  from that place, and betooke themselues to their . But God who is the disposer of all warlike attmpts, and giues courage to men, at last our men felvon the bulwarke abousaid, and Pter Mulder (as is sayd going before breakes downe the palissdo with his hammer, and makes an nanc, the officers, and souldiers seconded him baely, and enters the towne on sunday morning the 19 of August 1629 a little before sunne sing, after the gard was deiue off. And cutting of y• two gards nets adioyning to that place bare vp stiffe towardes the mrket place. The alrum was so suddaine, that the enemie men running too and againe to answere it, knew not our men from their owne. Captaine , who was the first that entred mets with some resist∣ance vnder the Gonangen pt, (or prisoners gatehouse) and there had thr encounters with the enemie, hau but  with him, leauing the rs to keepe open the enrance, and to gard the corners of the streetes that the emie might gath  head to cut of his second behinde him. In the Inctim, Peter Mulder ran in al hast to Vulcan the smith one of his ac∣quaintance, and knockt him vp, and cald to him, y• downe wa Geax, the smith being much amazed at such a sudaine newe opened his shpp dore, and they taking his men, and the gre∣tst  hee had, ran apace vnto the Brunish port broke of the lockes, barres, and boults theof, and opend the gate▪ but comming to the draw bridg was shrondly pssegd a good while, before  a could get downe the chaines of that bridge▪ but at the last (O the admirable prouidence of God  bullet from the bulwarke which flankerd
bridge, as Peter Mulder himselfe reported to his master at Am¦sterdam, and shott the chaine assunder, downe goes the bridge the horse which stood before the port enters, the trumpets sound tantara, they scowre the streets, and drawes vp in bataile into the market place de cap en pied, with their pistols in their hands, The Spaniards fled out of the Towne to the sconces, our foote followes the horse, besetts the wall, and possesses all their guards, breakes downe their bridge, which lay ouer the Rhyne, and which draue downe the streame towards Rees, & sets fire on some sloopes and punts, which were o the other side of the water. The Sconces comming in vpon composition. And the brunt being ouer, the souldiers fell a plundring, gott into the Spaniards shops: the officers houses, and the bitterest Papists and Iewes houses, Ransacks the cloisters, breakes downe the Images in the churches, and got an incredible boo∣y. As Count Harry of the Berk his plate, and chiefest bag∣gage. Monsieur Count Cuculies mony and goods, The ri∣ches of diuers Coronells, horse and foote Captaines, which ye Emperours men and Crawats had gott in the Germane warrs, and left there behind them for safety in their expedition into ye velow, To conclude y• foote deuided the spoyle, & the horsemen shated bags and barrells of rix-dolers by the hattfulls. But that which was most remarkeable (O iust God!) that church, which they had bolted vp against those of the Religion, that very Sunday was made a prison for their officers and souldirs till on the morrow they were sent prisoners to Anham, and the officers stood good for the ansom of 1042 souldiers, who the next day were sett ouer the water with their wiues and children. There was six companies of Spaniards, and eight o∣thers of seuerall nations in the Towne, besides some horse. Three of the Enemies Captaines were slaine, and about 70 souldiers, and we lost but nine in all. The names of the priso∣ners taken were these, Francisco Lozano Gouernour, The chiefe kerteritz, Baron de liques, Captaine la Crous, Captaine Burgos, Captaine Ventos, The chiefe Bour, and Captaine Bour, Captaine Nieuborow, Captaine la Court, Captaine Darimont, Captaine, Cruyt, Captaine Velasco, Cap∣taine Bourri, Captaine Perry Reformado, Galleron, Sariant Maior of the Towne, Captaine la Nove, Caro a horse Captaine,, Rottelly yu Auditor, L' Espi cho Phisitian of the Hospital of Rhie berke, En¦igne Callart, Leiutenant Bitelle, Ensigne Keteritz, Ensigne Cha∣rles de Roye, Annihall Semouetly, Sariant Maior reformado, Hu∣bart Wollart, Commissary of the musters, Frdinando wickell another Commissary of the musters, Christian Bollard, Com∣missarie of ye victuals, Anthony Nimpha Alpheres o Ensigne
reformado Ierome de Dire, likewise commissarie of the victual Ian de Sadino Afrus reormado, Ian de contese do Alferus refrma∣do, Francisco Pelo, prouisional Marshal, Fyl Bour Ensigne, Pe¦dro de Vanercie lieutenante and officiall of the masor Domo Lucas Ancie Ingineur, Matthew Tys, leiutenant to the horse troope of Captaine Strory, Henry Couet, Ensigne Charles Wattle leiutenant reformado. Benedid Iacob, leiuetennt to Vlsos company Athony Bele. Ensigne Ncholas Alphen. Commissa∣ry ouer the victualls, Chapientier likewise commissary ouer the victualls, Gabriell Souely. marshall of a Regiment, and Balta∣zar Morret Ensigne. Besides all those prisoners, many smal bar∣rels of pistols and Kix-dollors which was or the payment off their Armie six and forty peces of ordinance vpon the wall, & two without carrages lying in the market place, and two in y• magasine, two morters, Armes as Corselets, pikes, muskets and firelockes, for to arme fiue thousand men, a thousand ba∣rels of powder, besides all this, greate store of meale, abundāce of Corno, and other victuals and provision for their Armie. In fine this Towne was sedes belli the magasin for theyr warr, which the Lord thus deliuered into our hands. O Lord I can∣not call to minde this thy glorious worke, or drawe my pen from paper, but I must render thankes vnto thee, & sing forth thy prayses with the rest of thy people. Thou yt lookest downe from heauen, and hast heard the prayers of thy people: yea euen of that Towne, which was a refuge to vs in the dayes of persecution, witnesse a Dutchesse of England▪ wee may well ing with thy holy Prophets, Wee haue a string Citie, saluatio will GOD appoint for wlls & Bulwarkes. Open ye the gates that the King of glory may enter in. Let vs thefore put our trust in the LORD, for euer, for in the LORD Iehouah is euerlasting strength. He hath donne marvelous things and his Right hand hath gt him the victorie. Yea, the LORD made that Church which was shut vp against his faithfull ones in this Towne, to bee a prison for their enemies for the breach of their promise. Therefore blessed be the LORD GOD of Israel, from euer∣latig, to euerlasting. Amen. Amen. Hauing made this digression and Wesell being Geux, I re∣turne againe to our aproaches at the Busie, before wee came to the laying ouer of our first Gallery, there the Captaine of his Excelencies gard got a dangerous shot in the forhead, that he lost his Eye, Captaine Omkas a worthy Inginer shewing his bodie to open, was snapt of and slaine with a firelock, and Captaine Clarke shot thorow both his legs, & hauing brought ouer our gallerie wee could not come to the moate of the lit∣tle Sconce before wee had beaten the enemie out of two tra∣verses
and a point which came out of the Counterscharfein the forme of a halfe moone on our right hand next the Dum∣mel, at the entrance of our Gallerie ouer this first water on y• left hand wee had a batterie vpon which Coronell Harwood was shot thorow his hat, my Lord of Oxford standing by. The gallerie beeing ouer wee began to sapp, and made a mine into the enemies first traverse, that night which St Iacob Ashly commanded in the trenches desirous of honour, he was apointed with some 60 pikes and musketeirs to fall on after ye mine was sprung, and Captaine Gouldwell as Eldest Captaine to second him, with more men. Before the mine was blowne vp he gaue the Enemie an alarum to draw them on towards our mine, and the mine being sprung fel on with his men and beate the enemie to a retreate out of part of their trauerse our men and the enemie giuing fire brauely one at another a good while, but our men lying opento the bulwarke of the little Sconce, and their other traverse, were faine to retreate againe into the mouth of our Gallerie. This mine tooke not wel, but sprang rather backward then forward, and did more hurt to our owne men then to the enemies, casting a greate deale of earth vpon Sr Iacob Ashly cinging him and brusing him, very shroudly vpon his arme, As likewise Monsieur Neal his Ex∣elencies Inginer, broke his legge, and buryed some of our souldiers vnder the Earth which was blowne vp, and so came off with the losse of some men. yet from this earth which was cast vp out of the enemies trauerse, wee began to sap forward which the enemy seeing at last they quitted it, and so wee b∣came masters of it, and getting a litle more elbowe roome, wee aduanced forward to the moate of the litle sconce, making gardes batteries and blindes, till we came to the very brinke of it, where we began to put ouer our second gallerie towards the point of the Bulwarke on the left hand of the sconce, ha∣uing then made three or foure batteries for the safegarde of our men and gallerie, wee battered the point of the Bulwarke o, where our gallerie was a putting ouer, that wee made it al∣most mountable. And now and then casting some granadoes into ye sconces, that we made their hutts, sparrs, and dust, flie about their eares. Vpon the 8 of Iuly in the night the enemy Sallid out of y• great Sconce, vpō the French, but were soone bten in agane and a Lieutenant of the enemies, which commanded was takē prisoner, and a Gent. of quality, and some 30 of them slaine and hurt. The next day being the ninth of Iuly, Mons. Chartilus ō∣pany hauing the gard in the french aproaches, fell vppon the
horn-worke without the great Sconce, but the enemy not disputing it long quitted it, and retired to their Counterscarfe where on the right hand, they cut it of, & made a smal travese in it, whence they gaue fire with their musketiers and firelocks vpon them, but the fench hauing put their gallerie ouer the moate of the countrscarfe they came to the mate of y• great sconce, where they put ouer their second gallerie, into  false braye, on the left hand of their gallery the enemie b cut of their false bray▪ to hinder the workmen, and miners by giuing fire from a small traverse, vpon them. On the 17th of Iuly about tn of the clock the brush and agotts, were layd from the end of our second gallery, oer the moate of the litle Sconce. And the french did the like o∣uer the moate of the great Sconce. Our souldiers puld downe he pallissadoes vnder the foote of the Bulwarke of the litle Sconce, and the same night began to make a mine into The Bulwarke. The french that night before the Lord of Diedens Regiment relieued them, had about with the enemie vpon the smal trauerse, which they had cut off in their false-braye be∣fore they drew off, and being relieued, the 18th of Iuly about three of the clock in the morning the enemie quitted their great Sconce, out of feare of being cut off, because wee were gott ouer the moate of the litle Sconce, and began to mie in∣to the Bulwarke thereof, leauing wine, victuals, beare, a boy and a dog behind them. The next night then being y• 19th Co∣ronel Harewood commanding, the enemie likewise quitted not only the little Sconce, but also a trauerse out of the moate of the great sconce next the towne, which they mought very wel haue disputed, and thus the Great and litle Sconces, with the travers were taken in, vpon the points whereof, his Excellēcie with all expedition caused batteries to be made, which playd into the owne, vpon the Tenaille, Vuchterport, and the halfe moone without it. From this traverse on the other side of the moate o the lit∣tle Sconce, wee began a new Sap towardes another Traverse which they had vpon th dike betweene that and th Tenaile but th enemy seeing wee approached nere vnto it, quitted it, and retreated to the Tenaile it selfe. my Lord General Vees company of Schoonhouen with the rest of the companye wch had the gard with them, hauing sapt to the moate of the Te∣naile, entertained a fight with the enemie a litle before they were relieued, and gaue fire brauely vpon the Tenaile, while two floate bridges were layd ouer vnto it & some musket bas∣ket set vp, & that they began a mine in the Tenaille. Our mi∣ners found much dificultie in making this mine, because the
foundation therof was layd with willow Trees, and rootes, A∣crosse one another, howsoeuer they puld out some of the tree and made a mine into it. That night the French relieued the English, (For the Sconces being ours wee then ran one line, & euery nation relieued one another) and the next day the mine being ready, the pouder chamberd, and the traine layd to it: the French to wit, mo'ns. Chattilloes company, and the rest hauing there the gard, for their honour would fall on, to see if they could take in the Tenaile, and beate the enemy out of it, wel then about eleuen of the clocke the mine being sprung the French Captaines, voluntiers & diuers other Gentlemen of great quality, (though the mine made no great entrance, fell on valliantly, but the enemie hauing drawne some men out of the Towne maintayned it soutly, and finding no meanes to eter i, were driuen to retreat back againe, into our workes, with the losse of some 30 voluntiers Gent. and souldiers slaine and hurt, and so the enemie maintayned still their Tenaile. The last day that the french had y• gard, The Duke of Can∣dale commanding, the french desirous of a reuenge, had a se∣cond bout with them, a little before they were relieued to see if they could carry the Tenaile. Towardes euening then a¦nother mine being made and sprung, they fell on againe, & came to the push of the pike vpon ye right Corner of it, and set vp some musket baskets, ye enemy layd about them, & thrasht me of them with yron flailes, and maintayne it stifly. They gaue fire brauely one vpon another a good while; for the space o hale an houre, but at last the French were faine to fall off againe, onely this aduantage was gotten during the fight, that they turn'd vp the Earth so vpon the right corner of it, that they lodgd two or three musketiers almost in the top of it, frō whnce a sapp afterwards was begun, to see if wee could cut o the left corner, & so become masters of the Tenaile. The French that night being relieued by the walloens and sapping forward from the corner aboue sayd, the enemy mar∣king it, quitted that night their Tenaile to the walloens and re∣treated to their halfe moone. vpon ye Tenaile his Excell. made a great battery of nine halfe cannon, which beate vpon both the bulwarkes, the port, and their halfe moone, without it. A∣bout this time a riuer which runs from the Busse to Crevicoeur and so into the maze was stopt with a dame ouer it, that noe water should come out of the maze, when it was high, too seede the morrace, and the moate of the towne. And heate his Excel. by an admirable Stratagem, caused 34 mathematicall mills to bee set vpon the browe of this riuer drawne with hor∣ses, which drew vp abundance of water from belowe, sucking it vp with funnells and casting it vp dismist it selfe vpon the
mills which cast out abundance of water when the winde blew stiffe and thus the water by these mills was drayned out of the dround land and the moate, by certaine ditches and convay∣ances to them. On the tenth of August Grubbindunck in the night, sent out two souldiers with leters from himselfe, & others in the towne to the Infanta and their freinds at Brussells each of them ha∣uing a paire of doues, which should be cast vp, and flye into the towne with her answeres back againe, with expresse order from the Gouernour of al Schouts, and Burgomasters of the villages in Brabant, to furnish them with horse and Convoy to Brussells, but their harts failyng them and fearing to be taken by our men, in passing the line and watches, the one Soul∣dier being more wilng then the oher drew out his knife and threatned to cut the others throte, if he would not goe along with him to th Prince, and so calling to our Centinels, The gard receiued them in, and the officer that commaunded in the morning brought th to his Excel. (The contents off these letters were as it is reported) That, hee could not hold out the Towne aboue three weekes, and that the Burgers for the saving of their goods, and liues, and shunning of danger would force him to a composition, and therefore required re∣leife within that time, or els the Towne would be lost, of all which the Prince made good vse. To goe on then the Tenaile being ours wee began a new sapp, from the right point therof, towardes the enemies halfe moone, without the Vuchter port, running our aproaches by oblique lines, windings and turnings, till wee came to the ve∣ry brinke of the moate, where the dummel fals into it making the moate and it aboue 300 foot ouer, and euer as wee gott ground, so we advanced our ordinance, made batteries gards, and blinds, for the safegard of our men. There began the first entrance of our gallerie into the moate to bee put ouer into the bullwarke on the right hand of the port. On both sides the entrance of our long gallery, there were made for y• defence of it, two batteries of two halfe Cannon a peece, wch beate vpon the bricke foundation of the bulwarke and like∣wise flankard our Gallerie on both sides. The ordinance like∣wise which were planted vpon the Tenaile. playd vppon the Bullwarkes on each side the Port, to dismount their ordināce which shot vpon the end of our Gallerie and of our workmē but the enemies ordinance were so suncke that wee could not come at them, till they made other batteries, yet our Ordi∣nance from thence did so batter and shatter ye Brickie linings of the Bulwarke, on the right hand of the Port, that it was
made almost mountable before the Earth brush and blind were layd ouer the moate from the end of our gallerie to the Bulwarke it selfe. From vnder this Tenaile was also a planke bridg layd ouer the Dummell, and a blind made to get into the Vuchter eynt or Bleake field. In this patch of ground were made blinds and batteries to dismount the enemies Odinances, which playd vpon our Gallerie and workemen, from the Bulwarke on the left hand of the Port, & a peece which they had sunk in their halfe moone. In this field also wee began to lay our secōd Gallery ouer to the right face o the Bulwarke but the enemies Ordinance from the bulwarke on the farther side of the Port ackt thorow and thorow it 8 or ten times and shott some of the posts thereof assunder, at the entrance of It into the moate: yet at the last our baterie in that field put them to silence, & an English Captaine an excellent Cannonier whose name I haue forgot, dismounted their halfe Cannon. That day my Lord of Oxford had the gard, by shooting iust into the Port bole, after this our men wrought more safely in both the Galleries. At the Entrance off our second Gallerie was likewise made a gard for the defence of It. Our long Gallerie being got some 30 or 40 ioynts or posts ouer the Dummell and the moate, each ioynt being about 3 foot distant one from another, (And that it was counted a good night and dayes worke to fill vp the moate and set vp three or foure of them) The gards, batteries, and blinds being made higher an more defencible for our men: On the left hand of that blind which ran to the entrance of our long Ga∣llerie into the moate, wee begun a sapp forwards towards the enemies halfe moone without the Port, making still Gards, & batteries for our Cannon and morters, till we came to the ve∣y counter Scharfe of the halfe moone, and so wee beate the enemy out of It into ther halfe moone, by the same token Sar¦ant Coxe of my Lord veres company of Sehconhouer who fel on with the men was soundly thrasht with an yron flave for his labour, the counter scharfe being taken in, a bridge was layd ouer the ditch of the halfe moone to get a mine into the foundation thereof. In this sap, Captaine Clarke made a lof∣ty gard, which was a very good defence for our men, especi∣ally to offend the enemy, when they peept, or shott ouer out of their halfe moone, vpon our sappers and workemen. On the 15th of August in the nigt the enemy had a Stra∣tagem in his head to cut our Trench by the little mile, and Codewater, & so to haue let in the water vpon our aproa∣ches. to put this into execution, Grubbingdonk sent out of
the Towne some hundered and fifty fire locks, with Spades, which stole in the night, betweene ye Petlar Sconce & Count Ernests quarter thorow the inward line, where it was not i∣nished, and came to the little windmill by our out line, And there hauing layd an ambuscado of some of their firelocks in a ditch, and behind some bushes fell to worke apace, to cut our Trench some 30 foote broad betweene the hornework & the Redoubts vpon the line, not farr from that place where Count Harry of the Berks men would haue attempted It bee∣fore, but part of Captaine Broogs company hauing the gard in a Redoubt next vnto them gaue ire, and the Alarum being giuen, our horse which had the Gard in a house not farr from thence came vp to charge them, and giuing fire likewise from that Redoubt, they left their worke and retreated backe to their Ambuscado, leauing some spads and a paire of old shoes behind them, and as they retreated gaue fire vpon our horse men, and slew a corporall and hurt too or three more besides. But by reason of the morace & the ditche, our horses could not come to charge them, neither durst out foote fall out of their gards, and so they retreated back againe into the Towne some to English mile from the place where they fell a cutting▪ Surely If they had stavd but one halfe quarter of an houre lon¦ger or cut the gap not so broad, they had effected the busines they came for, because the water was not passing three yn∣ches lower then the top of the Trench, and so should haue let in an Invndation of water vpon vs. On Satterday at night the 18th of August my Leiutenant Coronell Sr Edward Vere had the commaund in the Tren∣ches, and on sunday his Excel. who often times ventered his person very much, came downe to the Gallery, to se the ap∣proaches a little beefore my Lieutenant Coronel was relieued. Hee went to shew the Prince the Workes & the sapp. whiles the companyes being relieued were drawne off as farr a the little Sconce, my Lieutenant Coronel hauing shown his Excel. thesap, and taking his leaue of him, walking of with Sr Tho. Conway being a tall man, came that vnhappy shott thorow the blind and shot him behind in his head, that It perisht his braynes, That night being brought vp into his Hut in ye quar∣ter, He cald vpon the LORD, that he was his shield, his buck¦ler, and defence, and besought the LORD in mercy to pardon his sinns in Christ, & that he desired none in Heauen or Earth but Christ and his righteousnesse, and so vttered many com∣fortable sentences sauouring of a gracious resolution, and with in foure dayes after It pleased GOD, to call him to his mercy, and so wee lost our Lieutenant Coronel, whose extraordinary valour
Sufficiencie, and compleat abilities for a commander, a he were well knowne vnto vs: so was his losse exceedingly lamen∣ted by his Excel. and the chiefes of our Army. My Lord Generall Vere, my Lord of Oxford, many Cap∣taines, officers, voluntaries, and Gentlemen of quallity, who had bin at his funerall in Bōmell▪ returning home, that night our Regiment had the gard in the approaches, and a ciuill wor∣thy Gentleman of my Lords company of Dort, one Master Mullinax, that bare my Lieutenant Coronels sword before his Corps that day, going to see the sappe was the first that night wch followed him the way of all flesh. My Lord Ge∣nerall Vere bestird himselfe, had all his officers and Gentle∣men and souldiers about him in a readines, that vpon the first occasion, If the enemy had either Sallied out vppon our sappers and workemen, or If they should haue attempted the firing of our Gallerie, they might haue beate them in againe, Captaine Rockwood of my Lords Regiment, as Eldest Cap∣taine executed my Lords commands with valour and discre∣tion, had his granado men at hand, and plac'd diuers muske∣tiers vpon al flankes to play vpon the enemy & to keepe them vnder, for shooting vppon the end of out Gallene, and our workemen, and now and then sent them some Cannon bullets which shott vpon the top of their bulwarke, and vpon their halfe moone, too keepe thm vnder, sometimes shooting A granado into the Towne and throwing hand granadoes amōg them, into their halfe-moone. Towards midnight the Enemy likewise did cast hand granadoes vpon our blind, next vnto their halfe-moone, and set fire on it, which brake out into a great flame, but the vigilency of my Lord Genrall Vere was such, fearing that the fie might take further, he gaue order that some souldiers should take shouels, and spades from the workemen, and cast earth and water vpon it, which caused it to sake, and had two or three granado men in a readinesse there wch payd them with their owne coine: but sure it was good that the wind blew South West, for had the winde bin Northwest, and had blowne stiff, as it did, it had not onely endangered the firing of all our blinds, but also our gallery, wch would haue hindred our approaches, and cast vs a great deale behind hand. And so this night and the day following our gallery, and workes were well advanced. This day Sir Harry Hungate got a marke of honour by a bullet which shot him thorow his buffe Ierkin, and gaed vpon his flesh. Before our Regimt had the watch againe in the Approaches the gallery was wel advanced, and they gott about three posts night and day. It was then my Lord of Oxfords turne to
Command who was made our Lieutenant Coronell in Sir Edward Veres place deceased. The bridg being lad ouer the ditch of the enemyes halfe moone wee began to sapp, and logd in the left Corner of It▪ and made a mine into It, wee found It verie hard mining into It, because of the tre that laye a crosse in It. This euening there was discouered an engine vpon a floate from the furthest part of their halfe moone by the moate, which wee presuposed they had prepared for the firing of our Gallerie▪ to prevent this my Lord of Oxford got a sloope, which was brought about towards our Gallerie, that on a suddaine tenn or twelue resolut souldiers wt short swords and pistolls might chopp into It, to inder the enemy from fastning any re worke vpon our Gllerie, which the enemy perceiuing left It vnattempted. His Lord gaue order likewise that our musketiers from all flnkes should contineualy be playing, and our Ordinance shooting vpon the top of they Bulwarke and their halfe moone to keepe the enemy from Peeping ouer, and giuing fire vpon our workemen. This night though it was moone light the brush and faggots were lyd ouer to the left hand of the Bulwarke from the end of our second Gallerie in the Bleach field, and thanks be to God but one man short in laying them ouer, as the Captaine of the Carpenter can witnesse, and an other souldie of Captaine Skippons short which stood Cencinell in our long Gallerie. My Lord Crauen whose worth was knowne to vs, & boun∣ty to my Lord of Wibleons compny, this night and the day following watched with my Lord of Oxford, the next night with my Lord Cicills company, and the third night wt Generall Morgans Regiment. my Lord of Doncaster and my Lord Fielding two noble spakes trayled pikes vnder my Lord of Wimbletous compan & went downe to the approaches vpon any service that was to bee done, and exposed their boies both to danger and sicknes. My Lord of Oxford an houre be∣fore he was resiened had  with the enemy vppon th left coner of their haf moone, and my Lord Veres muske∣tiers of Dort, comming vp almost to the topp of the halfe moone gaue fire in the teeth of the enemy▪ and came to the push of pike thorow the blinds, this startl'd them, & made them throwe stones to vs and cast hand granados among-our men. but his Lord caused a souldier of Captaine Roock∣woods company to cast 14 hand Granadoes among them▪ in to their halfe moone, which made them giue back and Cry Guarda, Guarda, The Granados being burst, they Came vpp againe to the top of the halfe moone, with as much hast as possible might be to giue fire vpō our men▪ but my Lord cau¦sed
musketiers to be drawne to the top of our gards especi∣ally that of Captaine Clarke which was high they gaue fire apace vpon them, fetcht some of them off which shewed their heads, and bodies, this peece of service being ended my Lord of Oyford being Relieued drew away to our quarters. On Count Ernests side the 19 of August the brush, and plancks were laed ouer to their Horne-worke, and a mine made into it. This mine being sprung, the Scotch, and the Dutches fell on couragiously, and they and the Enemy gaue fire apae one at another for three quarters of an houre, our ordinance play¦ing from all batteries, as fast as they could charge, and dis∣charge. In this time the Enemy endured three assaults, with the losse of many men, as he Burgers afterward reported who were present vpon the walls, but the Enemy gaue fire so from y• wall of the Towne, and out of the greathalfe-moone, that our men not carryig it were driuen for that time to retreate into the mouth of their gallery, and workes, yet this advantage they got, they set vp some musket baskets, and lodged some men vpon the right corner of their horne-worke, from whēce they began a sap, and made blinds toward their halfe-moone which after another mine was sprung, caused the Enemy on y• 21 of August to quit it wholly to them, & so retired into their halfe-moone. In this sight, were flayne, Captaine Ramsey, and two dayes after a Dutch captaine, called captaine Hatton who carryed themselues very worthyly. On the 23 of August wee had a generall thanksgiuing, and a Triumph thorow out the whole army, in acknowledgment of the great goodnesse of God, for the taking in of Wesell. The triumph was made in this manner following, first the musketteirs were drawne off from all out guards (sauing the approaches) and out of our quarters, and placed along the inner line next the Towne, some sixe foote distance one from another. The pikes were drawne to the out line and out-guards, and the rest stood by diuisions in the quarters, eury one of them hauing a wispe of strawe vpon the head of his pike, to be set on fire, when the signall should be giuen. The volley of musketteirs should begin at Crevi-coeur, where the Princesse lay, and so to Engelen, from thence along the men of warre, and the Redoubts by the Busle sloote, to Monsieur Pincens quarter, so to the French line, the approaches, ad then to vs, from thence to the Lord of Breadroods quarter, and so along to Count Ernests quarter, and so to Count Willi∣ams quarter where it ended. Betwixt euery volley, the canō which lay vpon the Batteryes of the out line, those which were drawne out of our quarters to the heath by the stone
gallowes, and those which were in all the approaches should be shot off. The signall was this, about ten a clocke in the night, when a granado was shot into the Towne, then the first volley should beginne, and the wisps of straw vpon the heads of the pikes, should be set on fire, All which was done accordingly and made a braue show. The volly met with a stop at the first, but when it came to the French line, to the approaches, to vs, to the lord of Breadoods, to Count Ernest quarter, and Count Williams quarter it ran well. Betweene the vollyes, there were aboue 30 peeces of ordinance from Crevi-coeur, and roun about our army disarged, those of the Towne acknowledged afterward, that shooting at once with so many ordinance out of our approaches in o towne did much amaze them. And then they began to beleeue indeed that Wesell was Geux, though the gouernour by all means laboured to conceale it from them, and thus much touching our Triumph for Wesell. On the first of September Monsier Stakenbrock, Liuete∣nant Generall of the horse, The Dke of Bouill n, with ten troopes of horse, three hundred firelockes, and diuers English, and french muskettiers taken out of diuers companies, an three halfe French canon toward euening were drawne ou of our quarters, and marcht that night to a small towne and castle in Brabant called , some six houres going from the Busse, where some 400 of the Enemies Ward-gellers, or as we terme them fresh water souldiers, taken on by those of Flanders, who lay lurking there, to se if in the night they could haue cut our Trench, vpon the out line, and let in the water vpon vs which stood wihout our entrenchment. But his Excellency hauing intelligence of them prepared this Ca∣misado for them, they hauing advertisement by some pesants their freinds, of our men comming, stole away in the night, and trusted rather to their heeles then to their armes. Yet they were not gone so farre, but the Duke of ouillon with his horse fetches them vp, and round them in a morrace, and by a ditch, and charging them, slew about 70 of them. The rest cryed out for quarter, and because they were such souldiers, the Duke was in a quandary, whether he should giue them quarter or not, but at last with much entreaty, he graunted them quarter, & tooke 160 of them prisoners, and brought them the next day to our quarters. In the Castle they left behind them, foure petars made of oken planckes, some fiue ynches thicke, and the chamber or briche, lined with Iron. These should haue bin charged with powder and stones, to haue bin discharged out of their sloopes vpon our
Trench, and so hauing made a rupture in our liue, haue let in a sea of water to haue drowned, and ouerflowne all our ap∣proaches, these engines were brought likewise in karr to his Excel. house in our quarters. On the fifth of September, the Trench, & fagots being layd from the end of our long gallery to the very foundation of the bulwarke: the miners began a mine thorow the brickes into it. but by reason the Enemy had sunck a peece from the end of their halfe-moone, which shot iust into the mouth of the mine, it was hot being there, which made the miners schy, ye more because two o the miners were slayne, which had ta∣ken it on, in the very muth of the mine, and could not be brought off, this assed fie aves till a blind was made from the end of our gallery to the bulwarke, and then there was found three souldiers of my Lord Generall Veres company of Schoonhoven, to wit Iohn Scott, William Lee, and especially Richard Pristman, who was skillfull on digging, and vnder∣propping of Colepits in Enland, vndertooke it, & perform'd it well, and this commendations one may giue them, that it tooke the best effect of any mine, which was euer sprung be∣fore the busse. Well then on the tenth of September being munday, betime in the morning, Sr Iacob Ashly Lieutant Coronell to Ge∣nerall Morgans Regiment, had the command that night in the Approaches. And with much a doe a mine was made in the Enemies halfe moone bfore the Porr, ere the mine was sprūg he sent a Satit with sixe uskettiers to the top of the halfe-moone, to giue the Enemy an alrum, to bring them on to∣wards our mine, and then for feare of endangering our owne men, he was to retreate back againe, all which was done ac∣cordingly. The mine then being blowne vp, tooke but little effect, for the reasons aboue aid, and made no great entrance into their halfe moone. After this Sr Simon Harecourts En∣signe was commanded to fall vp with some 30 musketeirs to y• top of the halfe-moone, and to giue fire among the Enemy, which he did. The Enemy stood it out a good while thinking to draw on our men to two of their owne mines which were to be sprung. Now the Eemies two mines being blowne vp, Sr Iacob Ashly fell vp, and gaue order to Sr Simon Harebourt to fall into the Enemies halfe-moone with 50 muskettiers; and pikes more, with his Ensigne, and the 30 abouesaid. The Ene¦my disputing it a good while but at last Sr Symon and his men beate them vp to their entrance into their halfe moone by the moate side, and there changed bullets one with another, and came to push of pike, and after they had mayntained that
place a pretty while, he droue them from thence alongth moate side to a traverse, which was cast vp some 60 paces from the said entrance into the halfe-moone, where following them closse, and giuing fire vpon them, at last they bid him fare∣well, and retreated into the Towne by Saint Iohns Port. This being done he himselfe with his men made a stand at the entrance into the halfe moone, where the Enemy stood it out till it began to be light, and till our men were lodged in the top of the halfe-moone, in those places which might most offen the Enemy, This was the first worke, which was carried by force of Armes, and really disputed. In this sight Sr Simon Harecourt was fiue times thrust, and shot thorow his cloa∣thes, and yet it pleased God he came of well, and with honor. After our men had taken in the halfe moone, his Eycel. came downe into the gallery, and gaue extraordinary thanks to Sir Iacob Ashly, Sir Simon Harecourte, & the rest of the officers and souldiers, which had carried themselues so well, and re∣warded some of the souldiers with mony. And thus the Ene∣my on our de was shut vp into the Towne. The same night came on Sir Harry Harbourd, Lieutenant Coronell to Coronell Harewood, & relieved Sir Iacb Ashly He brought with him for the reliefe, my Lord Generall Veres company of Schoonhoven, Sr Harry Harbourds owne compa∣ny, Captaine Gouldwells, Captaine Abrihalls, and Captaine Nelsons, The gallery being got ouer 91 posts, from the end ofit, the brush, & planckes, and a blind was layd to the bul∣warke, and the mine being ready, the powder was chamberd and the traine layed to it: His Excel. as mercifull as valiant (to try what the Enemy would doe) gaue order to S Harry Harbourd, that on Tewsday morning after the mine was sprūg in the Bulwarke. Our men should fall on, and though they should possesse the Bulwarke, and be masters of it: yet they should retire into the gallery. The mine then being blowne vp tooke good effect, and cast vp a great deale of Earth & stones into the ayre, and shattred some two rodds of our gallery in peeces, and made a breach mountable. After this Sir Harry gaue order that Captaine Abrihalls Sariant (who was slayne going on) should fall vp to the breach with his musketteirs, that Captaine Nelsons Lieutenant should likewise do the like with 30 men more to second the Sariant. And Captaine Gouldwell as eldest Captaine to second them with the pikes from the end of our gallery, all which was done accordingly our men falling vp to the breach, gaue fire in the very teeth of the Enemy, our musketteirs giuing fire from all guards, and flanckes, and our ordinance thundring from all batteries, did
so amaze and startle them, that they quitted the Bulwarke, & retreated, where it was cut off to the skirt of the wall by the Vucht pot. This being done our men stayed a pretty while vpon the breach, till they had discharged all their bandeliers and till that Sr Harry caused them (according to his Excel. commad) to recreate againe into the gallery. In this fight was shot thorow hs thigh, a valiant and a worthy gentleman, one Mr Browne of Coronell Harwoods company, who some three weekes aftr dyed in the Busse. Our men being drawne off, the Enemy came againe to the breach, and cast vp a little defence of Earth, wch the mine had blowne vp, and brush vp∣on it, but our two halfe Canon. which lay vpon the right side of our entrance into the gallery, beate the Earth and brush, which they cast vp, abot their Eares, and shore of the heads of the souldiers pikes, which stood there for the defence of their workemen, this made a terrible larum in the Towne, so that the Bells rang, the women and children cryed, the Bur∣gers and the popish priests by flockes ran to the Gouernour, & told him, tha (aut unc aut runquam) it was time o lissen to a seasonable, and an honorbe composition, for the safe∣guard of their lues, and goods, wee on the oher side expected a day, and thought to haue ansakt their baggs, and meete out veluets, and satins by the pikes length, but the Gouer∣nour giuing way to their request, taking hould of this occasion strikes his sayle, and came with the Bishop, Abbot, and diuers officers to the paraet of the Vuchter pot, there beate a parley: and so our war ceased. And the Hostages being re∣ceiued and deliuered on both side, hey beganne to paley, & commissioners being sent our, concluded thee articles of com¦position following, that the Towne should be giuen into his Excel. hand on mnday the 17 of September 1629. new stile. Oh yt we cold therefore honor our God for this victory with a holy life, and conversation, and that the consideration of this his great goodnesse towards vs might lead vs to repentance. It is true O Lord (as the pape said) that in this siege, thoú hast commanded the foure Elements, ire water, Earth, and Ayre to fight & worke for vs. Thou art the God of the faithfull from Euerlasting to everlsting, Thy mighty and outstretched arme hath led vs, thy guidance hath traced vs out the way Thy prouidence hath ouer-shadowed vs, and thy mercifull protection hath preserued vs thorow many dangers O blessed is the man that maketh thee his safe retreate, O Lord this yere thou hast crownd our general  an Absolute victory, and hast sent him, his chiefes, and vs home with honour, and there fore not vnto vs O Lord, not vnto vs, but vnto thy name gie glory for thy mercy and thy trueth sake. Amen.
ARTICLES Graunted by his Excie my Lord the Prince of Orrange, to the Gouernour of the Busse, & the Captaines, Officers and Soul∣dirs theren. 1 That the Gouernour of the Busse, with all the officers of warre, and souldiers of what quality, or condition soeuer they be; aswell Horsemen, as foot, none excepted: yea though they haue abandoned the seruice of my lords the states, and giuen themselues into that of the King of Spaines, shal goe out of he towne without any disturbance, or molesta∣tion with their armes and baggage; The horse by the Sound of the trumpet, their Cornets displayed, arm'd Compleate, and their pistolles in their hands: The foote beating their drummes, their Coullers flying, their matches lighted at both ends, bullet in mouth, and in rancke and forme, as they vse to march in battaile, with their goods. and the safety of their liues to the towne of Diest. 2 They shall carry with them sixe peeces of Ordinance, and two morters at the choise of the Gouernour, with all their traine, equi page, and munition of warre, sufficient to dis∣charge euery one a dussen short. 3 They shalbe furnished with horse; waggons, and their Con∣ductours sufficient to draw the ordinance and morters with all their trayne and Munition vnto the towne of Diest. 4 All munitions of warre and of victualls appertaining to the King of Spaine, shalbe deliuered by such as his Excie shall appoint to this effect, sauing those victualls which were soul before the 12th of this moneth, when wee began to treate, which shall remaine sould, without search or making inqui∣y after any man that hath made any sail of them. 5 All officers and souldiers aswell sick as hurt in the Gest ouse or in any other place shall remaine there till they haue recouered their healths, and are able to goe away, giuing them safe Conuoy and commodity to bring them their Armes and baggage to the towne of Diest or Breda.
6 A Sufficien number of waggons and horse which the Go∣uernour shall require, aswell for his pertcular seruice, as for the oiicers & souldiers to carry their goods and Baggage to Diēst is graunted them, comprehending therein all thee Armes: yea the souldiers of the garrison of the Towne, absent sicke, dead, hurt or fled, and that the said waggons shall in oe case be visited. 7 Those which will desire to carry their goods and baggage to Anwerpe shall haue boates without any charge to them, to bring them thither thorow Holland, freed from all manner of taxes, toles, or impositions permitting them men to looke vnto theie goods and baggage, which shall not be visited nor stay∣ed in any place, vnder an pretence whatsoeuer, but shall passe to Antwerpe without disbarking themselues. 8 The Gouernour, Chiefs, officers military, Iudges, souldiers, and all others receiuing paye from the King of Spaine, aswel Clergy men as Laye-men none excepted, as also the widdowes and children, which haue in the said Towne any houses, In∣heritances, Rents, either vpon the states of Brabant in these quarters, or the Towne, or vpon houses or particular grounds, other goods moueable or immoueable, shall haue the space & time of two yeeres after the igning of this Treatie, to trans∣port them, to sell them, to morgage them at their wills, or o∣therwise, to dispose of their goods, and during the said time shall enioy their Rents, hyres of houses, fruites and goods got or to be gotten of what nature and condition soeuer they be. 9 That the officers an souldiers of what charge or condition soeuer they be, may leaue their wiues & children in the town & during this terme of two yeeres may dispose of their goods moueable and immoueable situated in the said Towne, or els where none excepted, without any confiscation or prize to be made of them. 10 That the officers and souldiers, leauing their charg and seruice within the time of two yeeres, may freely returne into the said Towne, and enioy this Treatie as other Burgers and Inhabi∣tnts doe, prouided that first they giue notice thereof to his Excie or the Gouernour of the said Towne. 11 Noe officers or souldiers goods or baggage shallbe arrested here for any debts whether he goes out with the garrison, or
being sick or hurt, or at his going out when he is recouered. 12 The prisoners aswell on the one side s on the other, of what Condition soeuer they be, shalbe sett at liberty without pay∣ing of ransome, but onely for their dyer according to the tax∣ation of the place. 13 That all the boote made by those of the Towne aswell before as during the siege, shal not be restord back by them, but shll remaine with them, 14 After the Articles of this Composition are signed, time shall be giuen to the Gouernour of the Busse to send an expresse messenger to the serenissime Infanta of Spaine, with safe Con∣duct and assurance, to giue her aduice of what is past, and it is to e vnderstood that the Gouernour may doe that the same day as the articles are signed. 15 The Conditions being concluded, two dayes at the est shall be giuen to the Gouernour, and souldiers to prepe them∣selues for their departure. 16 The time limited being expired the said Gouernour and offi∣cers doe promise to depart the garison, to wit on Mnday next be time in the morning which wilbe the 17th of this pre∣sent moneth of September. 17 Yet to be vnderstood that during the time of thse two dayes noe mn in the towne may come into the Armie, nor those of the Armie goe into the Towne, and that for the avoydig of disorder, but euery one in the meane while to keepe them∣selues in the trenches and fortifications, wihut making of any approach or act of hostilitie, in assurance whereof hostages shalbe giuen on both sides. 18 That before the garrison depart sufficient Hostages shalbe giuen on his Exe•e behalfe, who shall march with the garrison Armes and baggage to Diest, and a counter change for them by the Gouernour, which shall remaine in the Army, till his Ezeios hostages and waggons be returned, and assoone as they are come back his Excie will send their hostages with safe conduct and assurance vnto the Towne of Diest. 19 The Officers, Captaines and others comprised in the first
Article of this Treatie, hauing any armes, boates, oopes or o∣ther preparations of ware, belonging particularly to them¦selues, may sell or transport them, without any enquiry to be made about those which shal buy or carry them away. 20 There shalbe noe restitution made of any horses, marchan∣dises, wares or any other goods sold or held for bootie, nor noe man called in question about that. 21 Those of the garrison of Breda being in the Towne, aswel offi∣cers as perticular souldiers may returne to Breda with the safe¦ty of their liues and goods, as likewise shalbe giuen to them a sufficient number of horse and waggons and a hostage to-carry them and their goods thether in all assurance, according to the tennor of the first Article as comprehended therein. Giuen at the Camp before Busse the 14th of September 1629 and was signed P Henry de Nassaw. A de Grobindonck. And beneath written. By his Ezeles order  Iuniu And sealed with his Ezeles seale of Armes.
POINTS Agreed on by his xcilenc the Prince of Orange, and the Deputies of the high and mightie Lords the Sates Generall of the vnited prouinces, to the Ecclesiastickes, Magistracy, and Burgeses off the City of the Bsse. 1 First that all offences, iniuries, and acts of hotillity, commit∣ted hapned, and effectuated betweene this Towne, and those of the vnited prouinces, aswell from the beginning of these in restine troubles, Commotions, and warres, as likewise du∣ring this siege, in what places, and in what manner soeuer, either in generall, or in perticular, aswell within, as without, are, and shall remayne pardoned, and forgot, and held as if they had neuer hapned, so that at no time any mention, mo∣lestation, pretence, suite or inquisition in law within or with∣out, for the causes aboue said shall be made, prosecuted, or layd to the charge of the liuing or heires of the dead, or also to any goods belonging to them. 2 That the inhabitants of this owne shall carry themselues con∣formable to the edicts of this land, enioying the liberty of con∣science, as they vsually doe ouer all. And that all Eclesiasticall and clergie men, shal depart the Towne within the space of two moneths, behauing themselues in the meane while accor∣ding to the Edicts of the land, and may ake and carry along with them their moueables, Images, Pictures, and Church ornaments. 3 The said Eclesiastickes shall enioy during their life the reu∣ues and fruites of their goods, in such places where they pay contribution, yet it is to be vnderstood, that the Eclesiasticall and pastorall goods shall fall to the high and mighty lords the states generall, who shall haue the disposing of them, aswell for the profit of the Towne as otherwise. 4 That the Nunns, and other Eclesiasticall woemen, may abide in the Towne, and shalbe maintained during their liues out of the reuenues of their cloisters yet remayning in the disposi∣tion of the high and mighty lords the states generall, whether
they shalbe accommodated in their cloisters, or prouided with other dwellings. 5 That also all the inhabitants of this towne, aswel Eclesiasticks, Nuns, as secular persons fled or otherwise, whosoeuer they bee, bearing office in the oath, gouernment, and seruice of his maiestie as souldiers or others, The states of Brabant be∣longing to this towne or not, their liues and goods shalbe pre∣serued, aswell in generall as particular, if they contrary not the precedent Article. 6 Also that this towne with the inhabitants and burgers thereof, aswell the clergic as laye men shalbe receiued and vsed in all gentlenesse and benignity by the lords. the states Generall, henceforward to liue in all friendship and Concordance with the other vnited prouinces and Towne to trade and traffique one with another according to their ancient liberty as is fitting 7 That the high and mighty lords the states general & his Excie the prince of Orrange, shall vse & excecise in the said towne, liberty, tertitories, & iurisdiction thereof, for so much as they are annexed to the towne, the same right and iurisdiction as the Dukes and Duchesses of Babant hitherto hae had, and to treate with this towne so and in like manner at the capitall townes of Brabant are vsed to doe. 8 That this towne, Burgesses and inhabitants thereof, shall re∣taine wchin the liberty of the said towne, all their rights Cu∣stoms, freedomes, exemptions, and all other priuiledges, as∣well generall as particular which they haue enioye and pos∣sssed a long time before the wartes, aswell by water as by land within and with out the towne, as in Brabant, Golder∣ad, Holland, Zealand, vpon the Ryhne, and other prouinces places and riuers, aswell taxes, toles of imber, Ingebo, the staple as oxen, and others none excepted, forasmuch as con∣cernes their lawfull possession. 9 That the ruling and gouernm of the towne, aswell for the Administration of iustice, as in politique affaices shall continue with the magistrates, and the three members of the Towne, and that not other persons shalbe promoted therevnto, or chosen, but such as are atifs of the said towne, or which haue receiued holy baptisme there, or such others as the high and mighty lords the states generall shall thinke good to na∣turallize and qualifie therevnto: Sauing that for this time the
Gouernment both in iustice and pollicie, aswell in chiefe as subordinate Magistrates shalbe absolute appointed and con∣stiued by his Excie & the deputyes of the high and mighty lords the states generall. 10 That the towne shall hold in their owne gouernment and dis∣position, all their inhabitantes, right of impositions, Fisheries wayes, corne measure, and monethly monyes, and all their rightes and reuenues in the same manner, and as they haue hitherto enioyed the disposition and ordering of them, pro∣uided that they haue right therevnto, and without preiudicing the other members of the vnited prouinces. 11 Those of the towne shall keepe still the residue of their victu∣als, materials and other their common goods sould for the benefit, and the easing of the towne of charge, and preserued at the disposition of the abouesaid three members, except the Ordinance, armes and other munitions kept for the Towne, which may not be sould. 12 That all Confraternities, Artilleries, gilds, and occupations, being at this present in the towne, shall remaine in esse and keepe their ncient charters, ordinances, & priuilidges toge∣ther with all their goods ready or vnready, and to this end in time to come the may be ordered by the said confraternities, occupations, gids, or sold or bought by them, and so to be gouerned by the marshalls, headmen, and Rulers thereof for the common good, and to dispose of them according to their pleasures. 13 That in the County of Holland, and other vnited prouinces the tree Armes of this towne shall not be stamped or counter¦feited, neither any the markes belonging to the gilds, or occu∣pations of this towne, as the Cutlars, the point-makers, and other hand crafts men, but that euery one shall keept, and vse heir owne propper marke, and that of the townes where the workemanship  made. And that all gilds, and manifactures as also the Dyers & the new yeerely fayres procured during these troubles in the maioury of this cyty shall cease, vnlesse those of the maioury being heard therevpon touching their anuall faires, otherwise shalbe disposed of in all equity, by the high and mighty lords the states generall. 14 The Inhaitants of the Busse, and those in the country sitting vnder contribution haue graunted them, and shalbe entreated
as the other good inhabitants of the vnited prouinces, aswell wthin the towne as dwellers in the plaine country. 15 And for that which concernes the Rents, and lawfull debts, made by the three members of the cyty or their deputies, also ordeined by the magistrate, or accepted to be payed, as∣well during this siege as before whether they are enrowled or sealed or not, the magistrate of the towne, shall deliuer ouer a pertinent state, that the high & mighty lords afterward may in all eqity dispose thereof. 16 And for the payment of them, and all other charges of the Towne, the present accises, impositions and other meanes of the towne in future time shal take their vsuall course, which may be increased or diminished by the three members: yet so as they doe not preiudice to the meanes which is raysed for the common weale. 17 That all acts, resolutions, decrees & ordinances made by the three members or magistracie, forasmuch as they doe not contradict the state or good of the vnited prouinces, also the sentences giuen in power of Iudicature by the Shriefes, as likewise all euiction of goods duely solemnized, situated, with in or without this towne shall remaine in their force, & vi∣gour, yet so as that it be no preiudice of the interessed parties. neither vppon the right of appeal, or reformation, if that belongs vnto them. 18 That those which are at this present in the Magistracie, or haue bin heretofore, shall not be molested, nor troubled, be∣cause of the Acts and Ordinances, graunted by them for the distribution or payment of any mony for the Towne, or other prouisions made, neither shall also the receiuers be called to an account for any mony that they haue payed and receiued, not that the Accounts of the abouesaid receiuers, and other depu∣ties of this towne shalbe subiect to any search or revision. As likewise all the Accounts giuen vp by the receiuers of the Demaines, states of Brabant, receiuers of licences, Conuoyes, and fortifications, shall continue as they are without any in∣quiry made after them. 19 That the gouernment of the table of the holy ghost, the great hospitall, the fabrick of churches, orphane houses, lasories, nd igs, mad men, and other foundations of hospitalls for men and women, and the authorisation of the Ouerseers, and
directours of them' shalbe conferred and giuen by the thr members in conformity and according to the priuiledges of the city and as they haue bene excercised heretofore. 20 That also the owners of winde-mills, & oyle-mills within this towne and the freedome thereof during this fiege, or which by former warres haue bin broken off, or shot downe, or o∣therwise demolished, may build them vp againe in the same places, without suing any new warrants for them, or to paye any other rights, then those which they haue vsed to pay here¦tofore, except the seruice of the Land should otherwise re∣quire it. 21 That euery Layeman of what condition soeuer he be, being in the oath and seruice of his Matie of Spaine, whether of the towne or not, he shalbe freely permitted, after the surrendring to depart out of it with his family & goods, and to this ende may send for waggons, karres, boates or shipping out of Bra∣bant, Holland, and other Newtrall townes, without any of their persons, goods, or the conductours of them, either go∣ing or comming shalbe hindred, molested, or troubled by the souldiers or fiscals, or any other, and that without requiring any other pasport or consent but this. 22 Moreouer the burgers departed out of the towne, and such as are desirous to dwell in the towne, as likewise those which haue bin in the seruice, oath, military of his matle or not, and the heey belonging to them, shall haue three yeeres liberty ensuing that they may in all places, aswell in the towne, liber∣ty, and maioury thereof, sell, transport, change, barter their goods, as they thinke good and fitting, or to haue them recei∣ued or administrated by such as shall seeme best to them, and comming to dye within or without the towne, during the same time, by will or without making of will, in such a case their goods shall fall to their instituted inheritours, or to the next of their kindred. 23 And those in the meane time, and during the aforesaid three yeeres which will goe into the prouinces and tounes, belon∣ging to & vnder the obedience of his Matie about their perti∣cular affaires may freely doe the same foure times a yeere with the former, knowledge of the gouernour of whome they shalbe bound to require a pasport, which he shall giue them, vnlesse he hath some iust reasons to the contrary: And at  end of these three yeeres may make their abode in this towne
or in other places where they pay contribution, where they shall enioy the same liberty, for to goe, to passe and to traffique euery where, for the enioying of the effect of this present treaty. 24 That noe other gouernour shalbe appointed or made ver the Towne, nor his substitute, but one of the house of Nassawe, or some other Netherlandish lords or vassals. 25 That the garrisons shall not enioy any exemption or freedome of imposition from the meanes of the towne, but shall help to beare the accise, as other inhabitants doe. 26 That all persons absent, their wiues and children, aswell clergy as lay-men fled, shalbe included, and comprehended in this treatie. 27 That all sicke and hurt, at this present in the great Hospitall or other houses, either souldiers or others may abide therein, till they are thoroughly recouered, or afterward to stay or to depart, as it pleaseth them, & to that end shalbe assisted wt waggons, or carrs to carry away their baggage without any impeachment. 28 All these Articles are approued, agreed vnto y his Excie & the Deputies of the high & mighty lords the states General, & accepted on by the Ecclesiastickes, magistrate and Burgers of the said towne, in power of their letters of Atturney, in witnes whereof wee haue signed herevnto at Vucht in the Campe before the Busse the 14th of September 1629. And was signed. F. Henry de Nassaw. Fr, Michael Bishop of the Buse. F. Iohannes moore Abbot o Berne. Iohannes Hermanus Deacon of the Busse. R. van Voorne. R. van Greeneven. Blooff vande sloote. Henry Sumoes. Peeter Huberts Herialthuvel. The Ratification.
The states generall Of the vnited-prouinces, hauing heard the Report of their deputies, afte the fight, lecture, and examination of the points and articles aboue named, haue with ripe deliberation appro∣ued and ratified the same, as their highnes and mightines doe approue and ratified them by these, promising to keepe & ob∣serue them, and cause them to be kept and obserueds accor∣ding to the tenour and forme of them. Giuen in the Campe before the Busse he 14th of September 1629. And was signed Hen. Ter Cuylen. Vt supra. and vnderneath was writte. By the order of the high & mighty lord the states gene∣rall. signed. Corne- Musch And sealed with the seale of their highnesses and mightigesses
A Supposition touching he state of the enemies gar∣risson which marched out of the Busse on munday the 17th September 1629 New stile. FIrst in the morning there marched out before the wagons some 50 horsemen and as many firelockes, and musketiers. Of wagons and carts there went out about a thousand, where∣of two thirdes had sicke and hurt souldiers in them, the others sound men, which carried thier Clergie, woemen, children & souldiers to looke to their baggage and goods, of these there were at the least 450 hurt, and sicke men, and s many able men, with those that sate vpon the wagons, for some times 20 of them marched before the diuisions of the wagons, & some times fiue or six of them went a foote, without armes by the wagons side▪ it was thought that Grubbin douck in pollicie let soe many men Goe out without armes, and vpon the wag∣ons to make vs beeleeue he had but a weake Garrison. About 11 of the clock came the Iesuies and Priests, rvding vppon wagons and other monkes and friers Going a foote, His Exellencie being Gone to dinner with the King & Quene of Bohemia and the rest of the Lords and ladies, which stood vppon the batterie in two of his tents. In ye meane while came Grobindonck the Gouernours wife in her coach▪ who newly was come out of childbed accompanyed with her daughter Abbey-mounts wife, Captaine of a horse troope, and hir child lying vppon the nurse lapp in the forepart of the coach, Ge∣nerall Morgan and some other courts her and made hir stay before His Exellencies Tent til he with his traine returned frō dinner his Excelencie comming salued hir, and had some sma discourse with her and taking his leaue of hir, shee went hi¦way, Towards euening came the Gouernour himselfe marching in the mid'st of his troopes hee staid long because his Cannon was Grauel'd and sunke into the Ground, that he could not drawe them away; The night drawing on his Exellencie sent him word by the Sariant Maior Generall, that he would send them after him on ye morrow or els send them to Antwepe by shipping, He had ordered his men by three divisions, The first were the walloones, consisting of foure coulours, being some 350 pikes, firelockes and musketiers. The second fiue companie
of Burgonians, hauing in their Coulores, the picture of a wo∣man hulding a child in her armes, and about some 400 men. Then came the third and great diuision of high Dutches, mat∣ching, with 13 coullours, in the midst of their pikes, contay∣ning a matter of 750 men. They marched in their double o∣pen order at 12 foote distance betweene their rancks, as their manner is, and had mingled many firelocks in the rancks of  muskettiers. These three diuisions were a matter of some 1500 foote, with their officers. The Gouernour matcht out in the midst of them, etweene the Burgonians, and the high Duches vpon a white horse, and a russet Cassock and hose, with a red crosse vpon the left lap of his cassock. And passing by the Queen of Bohemia as she sate in her coach, he saluted her, & had some small speech with her, and so followed his troop, After the foote were past, came thee troopes of horse, which brought vp the Reere. The first was about 60 in number. The second seuenty. The third and last soe 0, all well moun¦ted, well armed, proper men▪ with red scarses about them. The number then of able men marching out in their seuerall diuisions, and ranckes, being 12 coullours in all, and those that wnt out with the wagons before, may be supposed to bea∣out. — 2000 The first troope of horse which marcht out before  wagon: and the thre troops which brought vp the Reere, to be a matter off. — 300 Of sicke, and hurt men, which went out with the wagons, & those which were left behind in the ge-houses, and in th Towne, some 700 In all 3000 It was credibly reported by some of the best Burgers in the Towne, that during the siege, there were slayne offices, and souldiers, about 1500 men. They had with them according to the Articles of Composi∣tion, three whole, and three halfe Canon, with two morters, and thus much touching the stae, and ordering of their ga∣rison marching out. It rests now to speake of some things in the Towne. First there was a marriner which climed vp to he top of the weather cocke of Saint Iohns Church, and set vpon it an O∣range Tawny flag, his Excel. Coulours, for a memoriall that the Towne was Geu. There was found about the walle, some 5 a peees of Ordi∣nance, whereof two or three of them were halfe Canon, the rest brasse and Iron peeces. In the crosse brethrens Cloister, There was an Image of
Christ, and the Virgin Mary, & the Bishop whose name was Gisbartus Masius kneeled betweene them, laying the one hand vpon the wounds of Christ: & the other on the pape of the virgin Mary, holding vp this latine verse in his hand. Positus in modio, quo vt vertam vescio, bin pase ab vulore. hi lactor ab vbere. Thus plac'd in mid'st, to turne I knowe not where, for heere is wounds, which yeild mee foode, and there I'm nurst from dug by hir, with milkie Cheere. But a plaine Hollander in the time of Truce, to put him out of doubt, takes a coale and wright vnder it. Ocharm Sot hert u lot God, that is, O poore Sot turne the to thy God. In this cloister a while before the Towne was giuen ouer, there was a moncke in the chancill, sitting in one of the seats of the quire, and reading in one of their masse-bookes about 12 of the clocke in the night, wee short a granado into the Towne, which fell iust into the seate where he sate, more him, his seate, and booke in peeces, that scarcely they could find a mammock left of him, onely leauing the tincture of his blood vpon the wall, for a memoriall, which is to bee seeme yet to this day. Ouer S• Iohns port was written in golden letters this latine verse. Hanc portam, uesquo tuos, arasque, foresque, Custodi dilecte Deo Paome Iohanne. Take this Gate, Alters, Doores, thy Citizens. (Iohn) lou'd of OD our patron in defence. But Siluer Sr Iohn, who had a mouth & spke not, eyes and sawe not, and cares and heard not, and hands & felt not, &c. with other their images were coffin'd vp, and carryed away vpon wagons, but could not help them. Ouer the gate of another cloister, was written this in latine Has n vadovia, nisi dica ue mia. Do not Presume to goe this way, Vnlesse thou doe (Haile, MARY) say. There was a strange shot hapned in this siege. As in Ostend there was a Canon bullet of the Enemies shot from the downe battery, iust into the mouth of one of our canons, wch lay vpon the West bulwarke charged, these two bullets strikig together, gave fire to the loose cornes of powder, which were not driuen home, our Canon went of, and sent the enemy their owne bullet and ours backe to them againe: So before the Busse a souldier presenting his muster, to giue fire vpon the enemy: the Enemy being quicker then he, shot first at him, and shot iust into the bore of his musket, part of the lead beating out at the Tutch-hole, and so by the proui∣dence of God this souldier escaped a scoring.
A List Of our Noble men, Vollunteirs, and Gentlemen of our Nation, which bor armes & trayled pkes at the See of the Busse, vnder the foure En¦glish Coronels companies, & irst of thse which were vn¦der my Lord Generall Vere his first com∣pany Coronell of Dort. My Lord Haughton. Sr Walter Erle Sr Roger Bartu. Sr Henry Hungate. Sariant Maior Groue. Captaine Thelwall. Captaine Wyborowe. Lieutenaunt Price. Lieutenant Pomroy. Lieutenant Canson. Leutenant Deemae. Lieutenant Kettleby. Ensigne Luttrell. Ensigne Hammon. Ensigne Weynd. Ensigne Holman. Ensigne Grimes. Ensigne Goldwel. Ensigne Hudson. Mr: Winwood Mr: Gifford. Mr: Bvron. Mr: Thvne. Mr: Brigman. Mr: Fariefax. Mr: Hotham. Mr: Stone. Mr: Pellard. Mr: Bruster. Mr: Knevet. Mr: Langford. Mr: Wayeman. Mr: Absley. Mr: Rolt. Mr: Knasborow. Mr: Caue. Mr: Williams. Mr: Powel. Mr: Homer. Mr: Veyne. Mr: Wright. Mr: Basset. Mr: Berry. Mr: Prat. Mr: Bonnington Mr: Bradshaw. Mr: Greene. Mr: Langdon. Mr: Hooe. Mr: Ansell. Mr: Hungerford. Mr: Crewell. Mr: Wilmore. Mr: Cullum. Mr: Eslex. Mr: Mildmay. Mr: Polley. Mr: Maddocks. Mr▪ Humfreys. Mr: Ellis. Mr: Banberie. Mr: Garling.
Of my Lord Generall Vere his second Company of Schoonhoven. Captaine Franscisco de Valrey. Captaine Strasly. Lieutenant Turnour. Ensigne Quarles. Cornet Harbart. Mr Wrengham. Mr Bammham. Mr Weldon. Mr Norman. Mr Sprye. Mr Skipon. Mr Coope. Mr Haecourt. Mr Maycote. Mr White. Mr Hearle. Mr Inglot. Mr Browne. Mr Copley. Mr Brimingham. Mr Rolt. Mr Guyn. Mr Chiwood. Mr Knightly. Mr Sanderson. Mr Hmn. Mr Sedgwick. Mr Wiington. Mr Lee. Mr Throgmorton. Mr Nancy. Mr King. Mr Williams. Mr Black. Volunteirs of my Lord Gene∣rall Cicils company Vicount of Wimbleton, Ieames Lord of Doncaster. Boswell Lord Feelding. William Lord Cra. Sr: Thomas Glemma Captaine Henry Tyllie. Captaine Butler. Caiptaine Lucan. Sariant maior Boules. Lieutenant Freeman. Lieutenant Caswell. Mr: Cicill. Mr. Whitepole. Mr: Clyford. Mr: Tate. Mr: Butler. Mr: Symons. Mr: Itby. Mr: Cheyney. Mr: Broadbank. Mr: Courtney Mr. Downes. Mr: Footeman. Mr: Flood. Mr: Iohn Tate. Mr: Bois. Mr: Sucking. Mr: Flemming. Mr: Rice Powell. Mr: Haughton. Mr: Hipsley. Mr: Appleyard. Mr: Ridloy, Mr: Vackell. Mr: Solwin. Mr: Danniel. Mr: Colpher. Mr: Smith. Mr: Legg. Mr: Moynes. Voluntets & Gentlemen o General Morgans company Sr: Thomas Bland. Sr: Shefeld Clapham Sr: Iohn Gofling. Mr: Fowler. Mr: Mumford.
Mr Io: Wither. Mr William Withers. Mr Isaack Absley. Mr Henry Absley. Mr Morgan, Mr Tiffin. Mr Elcott, Mr Garuis. Mr Reade. Mr Andrewes. Mr Booth. Mr Merrick. Mr Martin. Mr Aldam. Mr Woley. Mr Iohn Ashley. Mr Williams. Mr Turner. Mr Warret Mrs Gavis Wood Mr. Marshall. Voluntiers and Gent. off Coronell Harwoods company, Captaine Perkins. Captaine Boules. Captaine Lowe. Leiutenant Smith. Lieutenant Gamish. Ensigne Dolman, Ensigne Morison Ensigne Hering. Ensigne Byron. Mr. Snelling Mr Browne. Gentlemen of quality. Mr Crots Mr Goger. Mr Saint Iohn Mr Bareford, Mr Digby. Mr Mosse. Mr Gilby. Mr Lehunt, Mr Waller. Mr Ieffrys. Mr Fleetewood. Mr Killegry. Mr Lambart. Mr Knightly. Lr Bagshot. Mr Yonge. Mr Flemming. Mr Fith. Mr Boulton. Mr Stewtly. Mr Kekwich. Mr Bendish. Mr Roe. Mr Rassell. Mr Carter. Volunteirs and genlemen of Sr Edward Vees ompany deceased. Lieu. Harewood. Lieu. Turbot. Mr Marshan. Mr Mandoe. Mr Galope. Of Captaine Iohn Cromwels company. Mr Harry Cromwel. Mr Rochester Karre. Officers, and souldiers slayne before the Busse. Of French. The Baron of Courtemer, and 8 captaines more.. Of the Dutch Coronel Pama, Monsieur Grene, Captaine Omkaes, and Captaine Haton. Of English. Sir Edward Vere Lieut Colonell, Capt. Roes lieut. & Cap. Byrouet. Of Scotch. Captaine Ramsev, lieut. Huns, my lord of Buckcloughs Ensigne Of all nations according to the list giuen vp, about, 1600
