17031 99855769 21271
¶ This is the Royall Cyte of Thebes.
¶ Here begynneth the prologue of the Storye of Thebes. THan bryght phebus passedPhebus in Aryete was the Ram Myd of Aprell & in to the Bo le cam And Satourne olde. withSaturnus in Virgine his frosty face In Virgyne. taken had his place Melencolyke. and slouth of mocyo And was also. in thopposycyon Of Lucyna the mone. moyste and paleJupiter in capitecācri That many shoure. fro heuen made auale whan Aurora. was in the morow red And Jupyter. in the Crabbes hed Hath take his paleys. and his mansyon The lusty tyme. and Joly fresshe season whan that Flora. the noble myghty quene The soyll hath clad. in newe tender grene with her floures. craftely meynte Branche & bough. with red & whyte depeynte Fleyng the baume. on hylles and on vales The tyme in soth. whan Canterbury tales Complet and tolde. at many sondry stage Of estates. in the pylgrymage Eueryche man. lyke to his degree Some of desporte. some of moralyte
Some of knyghthode. loue and gentyllesse And some also. of parfyte holynesse And some also. in sothe of Rybaudrye To make laughter. in the companye Eche admytted. for none wolde other greue Lyke as the Loke. the Myller and the ReueThe Loke Myller & ye Reue Aquyte hemselfe. shortly to conclude Boystously in her termes rude whan they hadden. well dronken of the bolle And eke also. with his pylled nolle The Pardoner. beerdles all his chynPardoner Glaly eyes. and face of Lherubyn Tellyng a tale. to angre with the Frere As openly. the story can you lere worde by worde. with euery circūstaunce Echone I wryte. and put in remembraunce By hym that was. yf I shall not fayneLhawer Floure of Poees. thorugh out of all Bretayne whiche sothly had. moost of excellence In Rethoryke. and in eloquence Rede his makyng. who lyst the trouthe fynde whiche neuer shall. appallen in my mynde But alwaye fresshe. ben in myn memorye To whome be yeue. pryse honour and glorye Of well sayeng. fyrste in oure langage Lhyfe regystrer. in this pylgrymage All that was olde. forgetyng nought at all Fayned tales. nor thyng hystoryall
with many prouerbes. dyuerse and vncouthe By rehersayle. of his sugred mouth Of eche thynge. kepynge in substaunce The sentence hole. withoute varyaunce Voydynge the chaff. sothly for to sayn Enlumynynge. the trew pyked grayn By crafty wrytyng. of his sawes swete Fro the tyme. that they dyde mete Fyrste the pylgrymes. sothly euerychon Atte the Tabard. assembled one by oon And fro Sothwerke. sothly for to seyeAtte the a bard in sou thwerke To Lanterbury. rydynge on her weye Tellyng a tale. as I reherse can Lych as the hoost. assygned euery man Noon soo hardy. his byddynge dysobeyeThe Oost And this whyle. that the pylgrymes leye Atte Lanterbury. well logged one and alle I not in soth. what I may it calle Hap or fortune. in conclusyon That me befelle. to entre in to the toun The holy Saynt playnly to vysyte After my sykenesse. vowes to acquyte In a Lope of blake. and not of greneThe discri uynge of ye monke &c. On a palfray. Sclender. longe and lene with Rusty brydell. made not for the Sale My man toforne. with a voyde male That of fortune. toke myne ynne anoon where the pylgrimes. were logged euerychon
The same tyme. her gouernour the Oost Scondynge in halle. full of wynde and boost Lyche to a man. wounder sterne and fers whiche spake to me. and sayd anone dan persThe wor∣dis of ye ost to ye monke Dan domynyk. dan Godfray or Llement Ye be welcome. newly in to kent Though your brydell. haue nother boos ne bell Besechynge you. that ye wyll tell Fyrste of youre name. and what coūtre withoute more. shortly that ye be That loke so pale. all deuoyde of blode Vpon youre hede. a wonder thredbare hode well arrayed. for to ryde late I answerde my name. was LydgateLydgate monke of Burye Monke of Burye. nye fyfty yere of age Lome to this towne. to do my pylgrymage As I haue hyght. I haue there of noo shame Dan Johan qd he. well brouke ye your nameThe wor∣dis of ye ost Though ye be sooll. byth right glad and lyght Prayeng you to suppe. with vs this nyght And ye shall haue made. at your deuys A grete poddynge. or a rounde hagys A fraunche moyse. a tanse or a Froyse To ben a monke. sclender is your coyse ye haue ben syke. I dare myne hede assure Or lette fede. in a faynt pasture Lyfte vp your hede. be glad take noo sorowe And ye shold home ryde. with vs to morowe
Pars prima ¶ Here begynneth the Story of the de∣struccyon of the Lyte of Thebes SIrs quod I. syth of your curtesye I entred am. in to your cōpanye And admytted. a tale for to telle By hym that hath. power to compelle I mene oure Ost. gouernour & guyde Of you echone rydynge. here besyde Though that my wytt. bareyn be & dulle I wyll reherse. a story wounderfulle Towchynge the Syege of destruccyon Of worthy Thebes. the myghty royall toun Bylte and begonne. of olde antyquyte Vpon the tyme. of worthy Josue By dylygence. of kynge Amphyon Lheef cause fyrste. of his foundacyon For whiche his fame. whiche neuer shall awaye In honour floureth. yet vnto this daye And in story remembred. is and preysed But how the walles. were on heyght reysed It is wonder. and meruayle for to here But yf ye lyste. I shall you platly lere The maner hole platly in sentence Vnder supporte. of your pacyence As wryte myn auctour. & Bochas bothe two Rede her bookes. and ye shall fynde it so
Eueryche conclude. lyche as his fantasye And thus full ofte. gendred is enuye In folkes hertes. of soleynce and pryde For suche as lyste not. ones to loke asyde To rewarde hem. whan they lowe loue And agayne kynde. it is oute of doute That ony hede. by recorde of the wyseHow ye pou¦re peple su∣pportē & be ren vp ye sta¦te of a kg Sholde the fote of dysdayne despyse whiche bereth hym vp. who soo can take hede And susteyneth. in his moost nede As his pyler. and his suppoayle For fynally. ne were the porayle Her berer vp. and supportacyon Fare well lordshyp. and denomynacyon Thorugh oute the londe. of euery hygh estate wherfore me semeth. more is fortunate Of Marcurye. the swete sugred harpe Than Mars swerde. whettyd kene and sharpe More accepted. with aspectes good Than is this god. with his lokes woodNota What the goodlihede of a prynce auaileth to wyne ye her is of his pe¦ple For humble speche. with glad contenaūce Maye a prynce. shortly auaūce Among his people. hertes for to wynne Of Inwarde loue. whiche wyll not twyne Than golde. rychesse. pryde or tyrannye Other dysdayne. daungere or surquedye Or of lordes. clerkes can reporte But that loue. her crowne doo supporte
The fyne is not. in conclusyonEnsample of kyng ā∣phyon I take recorde. of kyng Amphyon That bylte Thebes. by his eloquence More than of pryde. or of vyolence Noble and ryche. that lyke was nowhere none And thus the walles. made of lyme and stone were reysed fyrste. by syngynges of this kyng Lyke as poetes feynen. in her wrytyng But sothly yet. some exposytoursHow after thopynyon of som auc tours Cad m{us} bylded fyrst ye cyte of Thebes Groundyng hem. vpon olde auctours Sayen that Cadmus. the famous olde man Full longe afore. the Cytee fyrste began And the grounde. of byldyng sette And the bondes. by compas oute mette with thong oute kerue of a bolys syde whiche enuyron. stretche myght wyde To gette in londe. a full large spaceHow the cō tre of boece toke fyrste his name of a bolys∣kyn & aftir callid The bes How kyng cadm{us} was exyled oute of Thebes by the {pro}wesse of kyng Amphyon where vpon to bylde. a dwellyng place And called was. the soyle thus getten yn whylom Boece. of the bolys skyn The name after. in to Thebes tourned But Cadmus. hath not there longe soiourned Lyke in story. as it is compyled For shortly. he fro thennes was exyled Neuer after. for to dwell in the town By the knyghthode. of this Amphyon whiche vp perfourmeth. ryche for the nones The Cytee Thebes. of myghty square stones
As I you tolde. a lyte here to forne And Cadmus thus. his kyngdom hath lorne Sceptre and crowne. and his power royall Now haue I tolde. vnto you grounde of all That ye well knowe. by Informacyon Clerely the pyth. and thexposycyon Of this mater. as clerkes can you tell It were but vayne. lenger for to dwell To tarye you on this mater Syth my tale. whiche that ye shall here Vpon oure waye. wyll laste a longe whyle The space in sothe. as I suppose of an myle And now ye knowe. fyrste how Amphyon Bylte and began this Cyte and this town Regnyng there. longe after as I rede Of hym nomore. for I wyll procedeHow the ly e of aphy on by ducet was cōey e vnto k¦ge Layus To my purpos. that I fyrste began Not tellyng here. how the lyne ran Fro kyng to kyng. by successyon Conueyeng doun. by the stoke of Amphyon Ceryously by lyne. all the dyscente But leue all this. playnly of entente To telle forth. in bokes as I rede How Layus. by processe gan succede To bere the crowne. in this myghty londe Holdyng the scepture. of Thebes in his hondekyng Lay{us} & ocasta his wyfe Manly and wyse. duryng all his lyfe And Jocasta. called was his wyfe
Full womanly. the story sayth certeyn For a tyme. though she were bareyn Tyll layus. in full humble wyse To haue a childe. dyde sacrefyce Fyrste to Appollo. in his chare soo bryghte And Jubyter. that hath soo grete a myghte Besechynge hem. with deuoute reuerence To graunte oonly. through her influence That his request. executed maye be And specyally. to goddesses thre He besoughte. Pallas and Juno And Dyane. for to helpe also That he be not defrauded. of his boone And his prayer accepted. was full soone That fynally. thorugh his rytes olde Euen lyke. as his herte wolde The quene Jocasta. hath anone conceyued whiche whan the kynge. fully hath perceyued He made in haste. hym lyste not to abyde Thorugh his kyngdome. messengers ryde Fro coost to coost. the story can deuyse For dyuyners. and philosophers wyse For suche as werne. famous physycyens And well experte. Astronomyens To come in haste. vnto his presence To fynde oute. shortly in sentence By crafte oonly. of calculacyonHow the as¦tronomyēs & the phylo¦sophers of thebes cal∣ked out the fayt of edip¦pus The childes fate. and dysposycyon
And therupon. to yeue a Jugemente The rote I take. atte ascendente Trewly sought oute. by mynute and degree The selfe houre. of his natyuytee Not for yet. the heuenly mansyons Clerely serched. by smale fraccyons Fyrste by secondes. teers. and eke quartes On angrym stones. and on whyte cartes I preued oute. by dylygente laboure In tables correcte. deuoyde of all erroure Justly sought. and founde oute of bothe two The yeres collecte. and expanse also Consydred eke. by good inspeccyon Euery houre. and constellacyon And eche aspecte. and loke eke dyuers whiche were good. and whiche also peruers where they were towarde. or at debate Happy welfull▪ or infortunate And fynally. in conclusyonNota the cursed cōstella cōn & indisosi cōn of heuē in ye naty te of edipp{us} Nota How ye face of edyppus dysposed yt he shold sle his owne fader They founde Saturne. in the Scorpyon Heuy chered. malencolyke and lothe And wood Mars furyous and wrothe Holdynge his septure. in the Caprycorne The same houre. whan this childe was borne Venus dyrecte. and contraryous And depressyd in Marcuryus hous That the dome. and Jugemente fynall Of thees clerkes. to speke in specyall
By fatall sorte. that may not be withdrawe That with his swerde. his fader shall be slawe There maye no man. helpe it nor excuse On whiche thynge. the kynge gan sore muse And caste he wolde. on that other syde Agayne her dome. for hymselfe prouyde Shape awaye. and remedye toforn Byddyng the quene. whan the childe were born withoute mercy. or moderly pyte That he be dede. it maye none other be And in all haste. lyke as he hath sente She obeyed. his commaundemente with wofull herte. and pyteous loke And face pale. her yonge sone she toke Tendre and grene. bothe of flesshe and bones To certayne men. ordeyned for the nones Fro poynte to poynte. in all maner thynge To execute. the byddynge of the kynge They durste not. delaye it nor abyde But to a foreste. that stode ferre besyde They toke her waye. and fast gan hem spede The kynges wyll. to perfourme in dede Hauynge therof. passynge heuynesse But whan that. they behelde the fayrenesse Of the childe. and excellente beaute In her herte. they hadde grete pyte And playnly caste. amonge hem was no stryfe That the childe. sholde haue his lyfe
And anone. full hyghe vpon a tree In a place. that noo man myghte see They henge hym vp. the story can reherse But fyrste his fete. thorugh they gan to perse And on bowes tender. towgh and smale They knette hym vp this noo tale Hym to preserue. fro bestes wylde and rage And after that. taken her vyage Towarde Thebes. in all the haste they maye But of fortune. thylken same daye with her houndes. serchynge vp and down The hunters wente. of kynge polybon Through the foreste. game for to fynde Some aforne. and some come behynde And gan serche. and seke wounder sore Amonge the hylles. and the holtes hore And as the reenge. the trenches by and byhow the hū¦ters of kyn¦ge polybon fonde ye chil¦de in ye fores¦te & present hym vnto the kynge They harde a noyse. and a pyteous cry Of this childe. hangynge on this tree And all atrones. drowe it for to see And lefte not. tyll they haue hym founde And toke hym downe. and his feet vnbounde And bare hym home. vnto polybon Lrynge of Archadye. the famous regyon And whan that he. fyrste the chylde gan see Of his woundes. he hadde grete pytee To beholde. his tender fete blede And called hym. Edyppus as I rede
whiche is to seyn. platly this noo phage Bored the fete. as in that langage And fyrste the kynge. in his royall halle Made his men. a nouryce for to calle This yonge childe. to fuster and to kepe with her mylke. that he nought wepe And his leches. he charged eke also Tyll he were hoole. her deuoure for to do Fully in purpose. for the childe was fayre After his daye. to make hym his heyre For cause oonly. who soo taketh hede Sone hadde he none. by lyne to succede And where that he hadde. a wyfe or none I fynde not. and therfore let it gone But by processe. of dayes and of yeres This Edyppus. amonge his playeng feres was in his porte. passynge full of pryde That none. with hym myghte in peas abyde I herte he. was soo inly surquidous Malencolyke. and contraryous Full of despyte. and hygh dysdayne That no wyght durst. shortly hym with sayne Tyll on a daye. he gan with one debate To whome he hadde. specyally grete hate whiche of rancoure. and of hasty tene As he that myghte. his pryde not sustene Gan vpon hym. truely abrayde And vnto hym. felly thus he sayde
wherto quod he▪ arte thou soo proude of porte Lontrarye euer also in oure dysporte Frowarde and felle. lastynge euer mone As thou were lorde. of vs euerychone And presumeste. fully in worchynge Lyke as thou were sone vnto the kynge And descended. of his royall blood But where soo be. thou be wrothe or wood Thou arte nothynge. and thou lyste take hede Apperteynynge. vnto his kynrede But in a foreste. founden and vnknowe whan thou were yonge. the▪ fore bere the lowe And vtterly. remembre yf the lyste Thy byrthe and blood. are both twoo vnwyste This is the fyne. shortly of my tale wherwith Edyppus. gan to waxe pale And chaunge also. chere and coūtenance And gan a poynte. in his remembrance worde by worde. and feyned righte noughte And felly to muse. in his owne thoughte And caste he wolde. withoute more taryenge The trouthe enquere. of Polybon the kynge And whan he sawe. oportune space And the kynge. in syker place He hym besoughte. lowly on his knee To his requeste. benygnely to see And that he wolde. playnly and not spare Of his byrthe. the trewe trouthe declare
And make hym sure. of this thynge anone Yf he were his verray sone or none And Polybon. oonly of gentylnesse whan he behelde. the grete heuynesse Of Edyppus. and the wofull payne He gan dyssymule. and in maner fayne Lyke as he hadde be. verrely his heyre But more and more. he falleth in dyspeyre And downe on knees. efte ayen gan falle Hym coniurynge. by the goodes alle To telle trouthe. and noo thynge to hyde Affermynge eke he wolde not abyde Lenger with hym. but ryden and enquere Tyll tyme he maye. the verray sothe here In ony parte. of happe or of fortune And for that he. was soo importune In his desyre. the kynge withoute abode Leryously▪ tolde how it stode In a foreste fyrste. how he was founde Vpon a tree. by the feet I bounde And how he caste. in conclusyon To make hym kynge. of that regyon After his daye. shortely for to telle But Edyppus. wyll noo lenger dwelle But to ke leue. and in haste gan ryde To a temple. faste there besyde Of appollo. in story as it is tolde whoos statu. stode in a chare of golde
On wheles foure. burned bryghte and shene And within. a spyryte full vnclene By fraude oonly. and false collusyon And answere gafe. to euery questyon Bryngynge the people. in full grete erroure Suche as to hym. dyden false honoure By ryghtes vsed. in the olde dawes After custome. of paganymes lawes And Edyppus. with full humble chere To Appollo. made his prayere Besechynge hym. on his knees bowe By some sygne. that he myghte knowe Thorugh euydence. shortly comprehendeth Of what kynrede. he was descendeth And whan Edyppus. by grete deuocyon Fynysshed hathe. fully his oryson He founde anone. wymmen Inuysyble with a voyse. dredfull and horryble Bade hym in haste. taken his vyage Towarde Thebes. wherof his lynage He heren shall. and be certefyed And on his waye. anone he hathe hym hyed By hasty Journaye. & so his horse constreyned Daye by daye. tyll he hathe atteyned Vnto a castell. Pylotes I called Ryche and stronge. and well aboute walled Adiacente. by syght of the countree And perteynente. to Thebes the cytee
Lrynge Layus. beynge there presente For to holde. a manere tornemente with his knyghtes. yonge and curyous And other folke. that were desyrous To preue hemselfe. shortely for to telle who by force. other myghte excelle Or gette a name. thorugh his hye prowesse Eche of hem. dyde his besynesse On horse backe. and also eke on fote All be that some founde all vnsote Rather applye. of werre than of pees where Edyppus. putte hymselfe in prees As he that was ay redy to debate Enforsynge hym. to entren in atte gate Maugre all tho. that hym wolde lette And in the prees. of auenture how he metteHow edyp∣pus slough his fad a a castell Lrynge Layus. and cruelly hym slowe Though the story. wrytte not the maner howe Ne noo wyghte. can of all the companye By noo sygne. verely espye By whos hande. that the kynge was slawe For Edyppus in haste gan. hym withdrawe And kepte hym coye. of entencyon Grete was the noyse. and the pyteous soun In the castell. for slaughter of the kynge Dooll and complaynte. sorow and wepynge But for they see. heuynesse and thoughte Agaynste dethe. vayleth lytell or noughte
They ordeyne. with Rytes full royall For the feste. called funerall And lyke the custome. of the dayes olde The cors they brente. in to asshes colde And in a vessell. rounde made as a balle They closed hem. in golde and in metalle And after that dyde hyr besy cure An Thebes. to make a sepulture And rychely. hem lyste noo lenger lette The asshen dyde they. enclose and shette Of this mater. there is noo more to seyne But to Edyppus. I wyll tourne ayene whiche hym enhasteth ay fro daye to daye Towerde Thebes. in all that euer he maye Brennynge in herte. hote as ony fyre The fyne to knowe. of his fatall desyre But for that he fayled. of a guyde Oute of his waye. he wente fer besyde Thorugh a wyloe. and a waste countreeHow edyp∣p{us} went by ye hylle whe¦re ye mōstre lay yt called was spynx By a montayne that stode vpon the see where that monstres. of many dyuerse kynde were conuersante. in story as I fynde Amonge whiche. sothly there was one Soo Inly cruell. that noo man durste gone For drede of dethe. forthe by that passage This monstre. was soo mortall in his rageThe des cōn of yt fou le monstre whiche hadde also. by descrypcyon Body and feet. of a fers lyon
And lyke a mayde. in sothe was hede and face Fell of his his loke. and cruell to manace And odyous. of contenaunce and of syghte And as I rede. Spynx this monstre hyghte worse than Tygre. Dragon or Serpente And I suppose. by enchauntemente He was ordeyned. on the hylle to abyde To slewe all tho. that passeden besyde And specyally. all that dyde fayle To expowne. his mysty dyuynayle His probleme eke. in wordes playne and bare withoute a mysse. openly declare Or with the lyfe. he myghte not escape This is berray sothe. platly and noo Jape And yf that he. by declaracyon Gaaf there vpon. clere exposycyon He sholde in haste. there was none other meane Slee this monstre. for all his cruell teane There may of mercy. be none other graunte But for all this. Edyppus ignoraunte This dredfull hylle. standynge on a Roche Or he was ware. full nye gan aproche More perlous platly. then he wende And sodeynly the monstre gan descende To stoppen his waye. and letten his passage Thus abraydynge. with a fell corage I haue in herte. Inly grete dysporte That fortune hathe broughte the. to my sorte
To make a preste. yf thou mayste endure The fatall ende of this auenture Sette atte a fyne. sothely by dayes olde And by and by. all the caas hym tolde Chargynge hym. to be well ware and wyse Gette the palme. and bere awaye the pryse Thouchynge this thyng. set atwene vs twey with lyfe or deth. whiche we shall dareyn And this monstre. with a despytous chere His probleme. gan thus. as ye shall here There is a beest. merueylous to seeOf the pro¦bleme that spynx putt to edyppus The whiche in sothe. atte his natyuytee Is of his myghte. soo tender and soo grene That he maye not. hymselfe sustene Vpon his fete. though he hadde it sworne But yf that he be. of his moder borne And afterwarde. by processe of age On foure feet. he maketh his passage After one. thre. yf I shall not fayne And alderlaste. he gooth vpryghte ontwayne Dyuerse of porte. and wonderfull of cheres Tyll by lengthe. of many sondry yeres Naturelly. he gooth ayen on three And syth on foure. it may none other bee And fynally. this is the trouth playne He retorneth. kyndely agayne To the mater. whiche that he came fro Loo here is. all my probleme doo
Muse here vpon. withouten werre or strye It to declare. or elles lese thy lyfe And whan Edyppus. gan this thynge aduerte well assured. in his manly herte Gan in his wytte. serchen vp and downe And of prudence. caste in his reasone By grete auyse. what this thynge maye be Seenge also. that he maye not fle And how there was. counseyll none nor rede But telle trouth. or elles to be dede And by full goode delyberacyon Thus he answered. in conclusyon Thou Spynx quod he. fals and fraudulente Thou fowle monstre. thou dragon yu serpente That in this hylle. lyche as I conceyue Lyeste in a whayte. folkes to deceyue But truste well. for all thy sleyghty wytte Thy false fraude. shall anone by quyte Me lyste not now. whysper nether rowne But thy probleme. anone I shall expowne Soo openly. thou shalte not goo ther fro Loo thus it is. take good hede ther to Thylke beste. thou spake of her beforneHow edyp∣pus expow ned ye {pro}ble∣me yt spynx put to hym Is euery man. in this worlde borne whiche maye not gon. his lymmes be soo softe But as his moder. beryth hym a lofte In her armes. whan he dooth crye or wepe And after that. he gynneth for to crepe
On foure fete. in his tender youthe By experyence. as it is ofte couthe A forne I rekened. his handes bothe two And by processe. thou mayste consyder also with his twoo fete. for all thy felle tene He hath a staff. hymselfe to sustene And than he gooth. shortly vpon three And alderlaste. as it muste nedes be Voydynge his staff. he walketh vpon tweyne Tyll it soo be. thorugh age he atteyne That luste of youthe. wasted be and spente Than in his honde. he taketh a potente And on thre fete. thus he gooth agayne And I dare afferme. yu mayst it not withsayne And soone after. thorugh his vnweldy myght By influence. of natures ryght By experyence. as euery man maye knowe Lyche a childe. on foure. he repeth alowe And for he maye. here noo whyle soiourne To erthe agayne. he muste in haste retourne whiche he come fro. he maye it not renue For in this worlde. noman maye eschewe This verraye sothe. shortly and noo doughte whan the whele of kynde. comyth aboughte And naturelly. hath his cours ronne By cyrcuyte. as dooth the shene sonne That man and childe. of hye and lowe estate It gayneth not. to make more debate
His tyme sette. that he muste fyne whan Antropos. of malyce dooth vntwyne His lyues hred. by Cloto fyrste compowned Loo here thy probleme. fully is expowned Atte oure metynge. as I toke on honde To the lawe. that thou muste nedes stonde And in all haste. of myne hondes deye But of reason. thou can it ought with seye And soo this spynx. a wapyd and amate Stode dysamayed. and dysconsolate with chere done caste. muyte pale and dede And Edyppus. anone smote of the hede Of this fende. stynkynge and vnswte And the countree. sette holy in quyete wherby he hathe. suche a pryse I wonne That his fame. is euery coste yronne Thorugh all the londe. yt he the monstre hathe slawe And lyne righte. to Thebes he gan drawe well receyued. for his worthynesse For his manhode. and his righte prouesse And for they see. he was a semely knyghte well fauoured. in euery mannys syghte And sawe also. Thebes the myghty towne Not oonly they. but all the regyone werne destytute. of a gouernoure Avens her foon. hauynge noo socoure Hem to defende. but the quene allone Amonge hemselfe. makynge full grete mone
For there was none. as bookes specyfye The Septure or crowne. for to occupye For whiche the lordes. all by one assente▪ within the towne. sette a parlyamente Shortly concludynge. yf it myghte bene Prudently to treate. with the quene Namely they that. helde hemselfe moost sage To condyscende by waye of maryage She to be Joyned. to this manly knyght Passynge prudente. and famous eke of myght Moost lykely man. as they can dyscexne The worthy Cyte. to kepen and gouerne And thorugh counseyll. of the lordes alle To her desyre. playnly she is falle And corded. withoute more taryeng That of Thebes. Edyppus shall be kyng By full assente. was none that sayd naye And tyme sette. agayne a certayne daye Amonge hemselfe. and fynaly dyuysed The weddynge was in Thebes solempnysed Full ryally. with nedes moost vnthryne Oonly for he is. moder toke tho wyne Vn yst of bothe. he was of her blode And Ignoraunte. shortly how it stode That he tofore. hadde his fader slawe For whiche this weddyng. was agayn the lawe And toore god. is nother fayre ne good Nor acceptable. blood to touche blood
whiche cause hathe be. of grete confusy In many londe. and many Regyon Grounde and rote. of vnhap and meschaunce The fyne concludynge. alwaye in vengaunce As men haue seen. by clere experyence And holy wryte. recordeth in sentence How herodes. falsly in his lyfe Vyolence. toke his brothers wyfe For she was fayre. and pleasaunte to his syght And kepte her styll. by force thorugh his myght All be to her. tytle hadde he noon And for her sake. the holy man saynt Johon For his trouthe. in pryson loste his hede Therfore I rede. euery man take hede where soo he be. prynce lorde or kynge That he be ware. to eschewe suche weddynge Or that the swerde. of vengaunce of manace Leste he lese happe. fortune and grace Takynge ensample. in all maner thynge Of Edyppus. in Thebes crowned kynge All be that he wroughte of ignoraūce Full derke and blynde. of his wofull chaūce And yf vnwyste. he of Innocence As ye haue herde. fylle in suche offence For whiche he was punysshed and brought low what ar they worthy that her errour know And fro the knotte. lyste not to abstene Of suche sponsayle. to god and man vnclene
I can not seen. nomore therof deuyse Demeth youre selfe. that prudente ben & wyse And Edyppus. haue amonge in mynde Of whom the weddyng. lyke as ye may fynde Vnhappy was. and passynge odyous Infortuned. and vngracyous I am wery. and therof more to wryte The hatfull processe. also to endyte I passe ouer. fully of entente For Imynens. was not there presente Nor Lucyna. lyste not therto shyne Ne there was none. of the musys nyne Of oure accorde. for to make melodye For they songe not. by heuenly Armonye Nother Clyo. nor Calyope One of the sustren. in nombre thryes thre And they dyde. whan Phylogye Ascended vp hye. aboue the skye To be wedded. this lady vertuous Vnto her lorde. the god Marcuryus As Marcyan I named. de Capelle In his booke of weddynge. can you telle There concludynge. in this maryage The Poete. that whylom was soo sage That this lady. called Sapyence I wedded was. vnto Eloquence As it sat well. by heuenly purueaunce Hem to be Joyned. by knotte of alyaunce
But bothe twoo. sothly of entente Atte weddynge. in Thebes were assente That caused after. grete aduersyte For fynall ende. of that solempnyte was sorowe. and woo and destruccyon Vter ruyne. of this royall toun There may noo man. helpe it ne socoure For a tyme in Joye. though they floure But atte weddynge. platly for to telleThe infor¦tunat follr yt were atte edipp{us} wed¦dyng. Cer∣ber{us} herebz Noye with her iii dou∣ghters dre∣de fraude Trecherye treson poū¦te Indygen¦ce nede de∣the & cruell Mars was Cerberus cheef porter of helle And herebus. fader to hatrede was there presente. with his hole kynrede His wyfe also. with her browes blake And her doughter. sorowe for to make Hydous chered. and vggely for to see Megera. and Thesyphonee Allecto eke. with laboure and enuye Drede and Fraude. and false Trecherye Treson Pouerte. Indygence and Nede And cruell Dethe. in his rente wede wretchednesse. complaynte and eke rage Ferfull pale. derkenes croked age Cruell Mars. as ony tygre wood Brennynge yre. of vnkynde blood Fraternall hate. depe sette the rote Saaf oonly dethe. that there nas noo bote Assured othes. atte fyne vntreweAll thise vn¦thryfty peo¦ple were at ye weddyng of Edypp{us} & Jocasta Alle these folke. were atte this weddynge newe
To make the towne. desolate and bare As the story. after shall declare But ay in Thebes. with his walles stronge Edyppus regnyth. many daye and longe And as myne auctoure wryte. in wordes playne By Jocasta. he hadde sones twayne Ethyocles. and also Polymyte And in bookys. as soundry clerkes wryte Doughters twoo. full goodly on to see Of the whiche. one hyghte Antygonce And that other. called was I meyne Off hir beaute. inly souereyne Edyppus ay deuoyde. of werre and stryfe with Jocasta. ladde a mery lyfe Tyll fortune. or his iniquyte Hadde enuye. of his prosperyte For whan he shone. moost riche in his renoune Fro her whele. she plonged hym adoune Oute of his Joye. in to sondayne woo As she is wonte. frowardly to doo And namely hem. that setten her affyaunce On erthly truste. in her varyaunce For whan this kynge. passyng of grete myghte Sate with the quene. vpon a certeyne nyghte Casuelly whan his folke echone Oute of his chambre. sodeynly were gone Or he was ware. Jocasta gan beholde The carectes of his woundes olde
Vpon his feet. enprented woundes depe Tournynge her face. brast oute for to wepe Soo secretly. he myghte it not aspye And she anone. felle in to a fantasye Ay on this thynge. musynge more and more And in her bedde. gan to sygh sore And whan the kynge. conceyued her dystresse He gan enquere. of her heuynesse Fully the cause. and occasyon For he wolde wyte. in conclusyon what her eyleth. and why she ferde soo My lord quod she. withoute wordes moo Parcelle cause. of this sodeyne rage Is for I in my tender age Hadde a lorde. I named Layus Lrynge of this towne. a man right vertuous By whome I hadde a sone. wonder fayre Lykely to haue ben his. successour and heyre But by cause. his dyuynours tolde Atte his byrthe. sothly that he sholde Yf he haue lyfe. by fatall destenye Slee his fader. it myghte none other be For whiche the kynge. his face to eschue Badde me in haste. as hym thoughte due To slee the childe. and haue therof noo routhe And I anone badde. withoute slouthe To certayne men. vpon payne of Jugemente To excecute. the commaundemente
Of the kynge. as I gaaf hem in charge And forthe they gone. to a foreste large Adiacente to this countree Percen they his feet. and hangynge on a tree Not perfourmynge. the execucyon On hym they. hadde suche compassyon Lefte hym there. and home resorte agayne Beynge in doubte. and in none certayne Atte her repayre. as they tolde alle Of this childe. what afterwarde is befalle Saaf they sayde. hunters haue hym founde whiche lad hym forthe. and his feet vnbounde But to what coste. they coude not declare whiche percell is of. myne euell fare Grounde and cause. of myne heuy chere Consydered eke. the woundes that appere Vpon youre feet. and wote not what they mene And one thynge is. ay atte myne herte grene My lorde alas. but of newe date Lrynge Layus. slayne was but late Atte a castell. nye by this countree Vpon youre comynge. in to this Cytee Alle this I wayed. and rekened in to one Makynge myne herte. heuy as ony stone Soo that I can counseyle. none ne rede And with yt worde. the kynge lyfte vp his hede And abarayed. with sharpe syghes smerte And all this thynge. by ordre gan aduerte
Ceryously. by good aduysemente And by sygnes. clere and euydente Conceyueth well. and sore gan repente It was hymselfe. that Jocasta mente And whan ye quene. in maner sawe hym playne By her goddes. she gan hym to constrayne To shewen oute. the cause of his affraye And it expowne. and make noo delaye Croppe and rote. shortly why that he Entred fyrste. in to that countre Fro when he came. and fro what regyo But he her putte in delusyon As he hadde done it. for the nones Tyll atte laste. he brake oute attones Vnto the quene. and gan a processe make Fyrste how he was. in the foreste take wounded the feet. and soo forthe euery thynge Of his serchynge. how Polybon the kynge And hole the cause. why he hym forsoke And in what wyse. he the waye toke Towarde Thebes. as Appollo badde And of fortune. how he was ladde where that Spynx. kepte the mountayne And how that he slowe▪ also in certayne Lrynge Layus atte castell gate Towardes nyghte. whan it was full late And to Thebes. than he gan hym spede To fynde oute. the stok of his kynrede
whiche vnto hym. gan wexe couthe For by processe. of his grene youthe He founde oute well. by rekenynge of his lyfe That she was bothe. his moder and his wyfe Soo that all nyght. and suyng on the morowe Atte twene hem twoo. gan a newe sorowe whiche vnto me. were tedyous to telle For therupon. yf I sholde dwelle A longe space. it wolde occupyeTragedia senecede E¦dyppo rege thebax But ye maye reden. in a Tragedye Of morall Senek. and fully his endynge His dooll. his myscheef and his compleynynge How with sorowe. and vnweldy age This Edyppus. fylle in to dotage Loste his wytte. and his worldely delyte And how his sones. hadde hym in dyspyte And of dysdayne. toke of hym noo kepe And bookes sayen. his eyen oute he wepte And as myne auctour. lyketh to deuyse As his sones. rebuke hym and despyse Vpon a daye. in a certayne place Oute of his hede. his eyen he gan oute race And caste at hem. he gan none other bote And of malyce. they tradde hem vnder fote Fully deuoyde. bothe of loue and drede And whan Edypp{us}. for myscheef was th{us} dede withinne a pytte. made in the erthe lowe Of cruelte. his sones haue hym throwe
werre than serpente. or ony tygre wood Of cursed stok. cometh vnkynde blood As in story. ye maye reden here to forne All by the Rose. growe oute of a thorne Thus of Edyppus. whan he was blynd & olde The wretched ende. I haue yon playnly tolde For whiche shortly. to man and childe I rede To be well ware. and take hedeNota How euery man ought of dewte to do reuerēce to fad{er} & mo¦der. or ellis the wylfull vengaunce therof Of kyndly righte. and conscyence To doo honoure. and due Reuerence To fader and moder. of what estate they be Or certaynly ellis. they sholde neuer thee For whoo that is. not to hem debonayre In speche in porte. for to treate hem fayre Hem to obeye. in honeste and drede And to cherysshe. of what they hadde nede I dare afferme. exceptynge none estate That he shall fyrste. be infortunate In all his werke. bothe in see and londe And of what thynge. he taketh on honde Fortune frowarde. and to hym contrayre waste of his good. playnly and appayre Fynde plente. of contek warre and stryfe Vnhappy ende. and shortyenes of lyfe And graceles of. what he hathe to do Hatrede of god. and of man also Therfore noo man. be here of recheles But make youre myrroure. of Ethyocles
And his brother. called Polymyte whiche in suche thynge. gretely weve to wyte As ye shall here. of hem how it fylle And whan we be descended doune this hylle And I passed here. the lowe vale I shall begynne. the remenante of my tale ¶ Explicit prima pars istius Codicilli. ¶ Inmediate sequitur se∣cunda pars eiusdem. PAssyd ye thorpe. of boughton on the blee By my childern. I gan anone to see Thrugh ye sonne. yt full clere gan shyne Of the clok. that it drowe to nyne And sawe also. the syluer dropes shene Of the dewe. lyche perles on the grene Vapoured vp. in to the ayre a lofte whan zepherus. with his blowynge softe The weder made lusty. smothe and fayre And righte attempred. was the holsome ayre The same houre. all the hole route Of the pylgrymes. rydynge Rounde aboute In my tale. whan I gan procede Rehersynge forthe. as it was in dede
whan Edyppus. buryed was and graue How his sones. the kyngdome for to haue Amonge hemselfe. by full of mortall hate For the crowne. gonne to debate whiche of hem. Justely shall succede And the septure. of the towne possede Aduertynge not. nother to righte ne wronge But eche of hem. to make her partye stronge And his quarell. proudly to sustene From whoos hertes. was deuoyded clene Of bretherhode. the faythfull alyaunce False couetyse. soo made hem at dystaunce Fully worchynge. in to destruccyon And ruyne of this noble town Soo hote brente. the hatred enuye of bothe twoo. thorugh pompous surquedye That neyther wolde. playnly in a poynte Other forborne. they stode in suche desioynte How as they hadde. of byrthe be foreyns Tyll of the towne. the noble Cytezeyns Lmyghtes barons. with many worthy lorde Shope awaye to make hem of accorde And to sette hem. in quyete and in pes But for his parte. this Ethyocles Alledge gan. that he was fyrste borne For whiche of reason. he oughte goo to forne In the cytee. to be crowned kyngeThe cōtra¦uercy of the twoo bre∣theren Sythe by lawe. there was noo lettynge
For vnto hym. longeth the herysage By descende. and by tytle of age But Polymyte. of full hye dysdayne All openly. gan replye agayne And for his parte. sayde in specyall Reason was none. that he sholde haue all Regalye. and domynacyon And the lorshyppe. hole of the toun And he righte noughte. oute of the Cyte Lyue in exyle. and in pouerte Full concludynge. withoute fere or drede Rather than it suffre. he wyll be dede And thus alas. thorugh her enuyous stryfe Atte ende eueryche loste his lyfe Atte grete myscheef. as ye shall after here But thylke tyme. the lordes all I fere Full besely dyde. her dylygence By grete auyse. of full hyghe prudence To setten hem in quyete and in reste Coūseylynge hem. playnly for the beste To leue her stryfe. of wysdome and reason A condescende. to some conclusyon whiche to bothe myghte. moost auayle That fynally thorugh. her gouernayle The lordes all. beynge tho presente They haue hem broughte. to be of one assente Of one herte. as brother vnto brother Eueryche of hem. to regoen after otherThe cōuen cyon of the twoo bre∣theren
yere by yere as it come aboute Soo that the towne. shall absente hym oute Fully that yere. and hymselfe guye By his manhode. and his chyualrye Haunte hymselfe. in dedes marcyall whyle his brother. in his see royall Holdeth his septure. the Cytee to gouerne And whan the yere. his cours hath ronne yerne And is come oute. he shall haue repeyre To regne in Thebes. lyke as lorde and heyre Therto receyue. fully his dygnyte whyle that the other. voydeth the Cyte Pacyently takynge. his aduenture Tyll he agayne. his honoure maye recure Thus entrechange. euery yere they shall That one ascendeth. that other hath a fall They muste obeye. of herte and take it wele Lyche as the tourne. resorteth of the whele For this was. hole the composycyonThe wor∣des of the composicy∣on By twene the brethern. and conuencyon Full knytte vp. by grete auysemente Therfore the goddes. by othe of sacramente Neuer after to grutche. ne to varye But accomplysshen. shortly and not tarye Lyche as ye accorde. enrolled in the towne Fro poynte to poynte. made mencyone But alder fyrste. by reason of his age Ethyocles. hadde thauantage
To regne aforne. to were a crowne Polymyte hastynge hym oute of towne Durynge that yere. it maye none other bee Whyle his brother. sate in his royall see Full rychely. vpon fortunes whele And rode hym forthe. armed bryghte in stele This Polymyte. sothly as I rede Hymselfe allone. on a Royall stede Withoute guyde. all the longe daye Beynge aferde. to kepe the hyghe waye In his herte. hauynge suspecyon To his brother. of malyce and treson Lest he pursued. through his fals vnkynd blood To haue hym dede. for couetyse of good That he allone. myghte haue possessyone Durynge his lyfe. fully of the towne For whiche in haste. hauynge noo felawe Polymyte asyde gan hym drawe By a foreste. Joynynge to the see Linowyng right nought. ye syght of the coūtree Full of hylles. and of hye mountayns Craggy roches. and but few playns Wounder dredfull. and lothsome of passage And therwith all. full of bestes rage Holdynge his waye. of herte noo thynge lyghte Mate and wery. tyll it drowe to nyghte And all the daye. beholdynge enuyrone He neyther sawe. castell towre ne towne
The whiche thynge. greuyd hym full sore And sodeynly. the see began to rore Wynde and tempeste. hydously to aryse The reyne doune bete. in full grysly wyse That man and beste. therof was adradde And nye for fere. gan to waxe madde As it semed. by the wofull sowns And Tygres Beres. Bores and Lyons Whiche for refute. hemselfe for to saue Eueryche in haste. drowe vnto his caue But Polymyte. in this tempeste huge Alas the whyle. he fyndeth noo refuge Nor hym to shronde. sawe noo where no socour Tyll it was passed. almoost mydnyghte hour The cloude voyde. in heuen dyde appere A large space. that the sterres clere Soo that this knyghte. oute of a foreste largeHow Poly myte came in to ye lon∣de of Arge Gan approchen. to the londe of Arge Seenge a paleys myghty of byldynge Of whiche Adrastus. called was the kynge A manly man. riche and wounder sage And ronne was. somdele in to age Borne of the yle. that called is Clyson And whylom sone. of the kynge Chalon And for his wytte. in story as is couthe He chosen was. in his tender youthe Of all Arge. to be crowned kynge Chyfe of all grece. by recorde of wrytynge
Nor by dyscente. ne successyon But all oonly. of free eleccyon Beholde of Arge. the septure in his honde As moost worthy. of all Grekes londe Loued and drad. for wysdome and Justyce And as the story playnly can deuyse This worthy kynge. hadde doughtres two Passynge fayre. and righte good also It were to longe. her beaute to dyscryue And the eldeste. called was ArgyueArgyue dei phyle & A∣drastus Deiphyle. I named the seconde And Adrastus. lyche as it is fonde This worthy kynge. hadde sone none To succede. after he be gone For whiche he was durynge. all his lyfe Tryste in herte. and passynge pensyfe But hole his truste. and his hope stode By alyaunce. of some worthy blode Brought in by meane. of his doughters twayn That he shall be. relessed of his payn Thorugh recomforte. of some hye maryage And sothly yet. full hye in his corage He troubled was. by occasyonThe dre∣me of adra¦stus of a bo¦re & of a ly∣on Of a sweuen. and a vysyon Shewed to hym. vpon a certeyne nyghte For as hym thoughte. in his inwarde syghte Whyle he slepte. by clere inspeccyon A wylde bore. and a ferce lyon
Possede shall. the bestes in her rage His doughters twoo. by bonde of maryage In shorte tyme. within a certayne daye whiche broughte his herte. in full grete affraye But thynge in southe. that destyne hathe sha{per}e Here in this worlde. full harde it is tescape Eke merueylous. a man teschue his fate And Polymyte. of whome I spake late With the tempeste. bete and all bereyned By grace oonly. the cytee hathe atteyned Where Adrastus. full statly of degree Thylke tyme. helde his Royall see The trouble nyghte. myrke and full obscure Hathe broughte this knyght. oonly by auenture Through the cytee. enclosed with a wall Vnto the paleys. chyffe and pryncypall Where as the kynge. in his chambre alofte Laye in his bedde. and slepte wounder softe Eke all his folke. hadde her chambres cake Lyke as fortune. peraunter hadde shape The selfe tyme. by cause it was soo late And casuelly. noo porter atte gate As it hadde be righte. for the nones And in a porche. bylte of square stones Full myghtly. enarched enuyrowne Where the domes. and the plees of the towne Were execute. and lawes of the kynge And there this knyght. without more taryenge
wery and mate. fro his stede a lyght Hangynge the reyn. in all the haste he myght Vpon his arme. surer hym to kepe And layde hym doune. and gan anone to slepe As hym semed. that tyme for the beste And whyle he laye. thus for to reste Of auenture. there come a knyghte rydynge The worthyest. in the worlde lyuynge Curteys lowly. and righte vertuous As sayth my auctour. called Tydyus Eureus in armes. and manly in werkynge Of his byrthe. sone vnto the kynge Of Calydonye. a londe of grete renowne And he alas. oute of that regyowne Eyled was. for he his brother slow As Scace of Thebes. wryte the maner how All be that he to hym. noo malyce mente For on a daye. as they on hoūtynge wente In a foreste. for herte and for hynde Soo as he stode. vnder a grene lynde And casuelly. lette his arowe slyppe He slow his brother. called menalyppe Thrugh mortall sorte. his honde was begyled For whiche he was. banysshed and exyled As the lawe. narowe sette his charge And for this caas. he came fyrste to Arge In to the porche. where Polymyte slepe Of auenture. or he toke ony kepe
The same nyghte. hydously besaen with the tempeste. of thonder wynde and rayn And fylle also. anoye and grete domage Thrugh the foreste. holdynge his passage As Polymyte. hadde done beforne In perell ofte lykely. to be lorne with bestes rage. sette on euery syde Tyll of grace. withoute ony guyde He rode thrugh Arge. the grete myghty towne Streyte to the paleys. and the chefe doūgone Lyche as I tolde. where Polymyte laye And atte his comynge. made a grete afraye For he was blynd. thorugh derknesse of ye nyght And hym to guyde. he founde noo lyght whan he came in. of pryket ne of torche Tyll he vnwarly. entred the porche And wolde haue taken there. his herbygage But Polymyte. sterte vp in a rage Sodeynly awaked. as I rede with the nyghynge. of his proude stede And fyrste of all. whan that he behelde A knyghte armyd. vpon his breste a shelde And gan the maner. of his araye aduerte Of verraye yre. vpon his horse he sterte And cruelly. gan tydynge enquere whennes he came. or what he dyde there And badde in haste. his answere to deuyse And Tydeus. in full humble wyse
Answered agayne. of verray gentylnesse And sayde in sothe. that of hygh dystresse Of the tempeste. and the derke nyghte He dryuen was. lyke an arrante knyghte Of nede oonly. and of necessyte And hye constreynte. of his aduersyte Take lodgynge. where soo that he myghte And in that courte. therfore he a lyghte withoute more. thynkynge none outerage Nor to noo wyghte. menynge noo domage Than Polymyte. of malyce and hye pryde Tolde hym shortly. he sholde not abyde Noo lenger there. though he hadde it sworne For I quod he. toke it vp beforne And wyll it kepe. durynge all this nyghte I say the platly. maugre all thy myghte Quod Tydeus. that is noo curtesye Me to deuoyde. but rather vylonye Yf ye take hede. that seme a gentyll knyghte And I suppose. ye haue noo tytle of ryghte To this lodgynge. by waye of herytage More than haue I. for all youre felle rage And parde. yet shall it be noo dysese Tyll to morow. that doo me ese Of gentylesse. oonly by youre leue To suffre me. it shall lytyll greue But ay the more. Tydeus spake fayre Polymyte. was frowarde and contrayre
And shortly sayd. it geyneth not to stryue That of force. he shall deuoyde blyue Or vtterly bytwene hem bothe twoo This thynge to trye. he must haue a doo And Tydeus seeng noo better mene Full lyke a knyght. in stele armed clene withoute abode. faste gam hym spede wounder lyghtly. for to take his stede And thus. these knyghtes pompous and elate For lytyll cause. fellen atte debate And as they ranne togyder on horse bakeHow Ty∣deus & Po∣lymyte stro fe for her lodgyng Eueryche on other. fyrste her spere brake And after that. full surquydous of pryde with sharpe swerdes. they togyder ryde Full yrously. these myghty champyons In her furye. lyke Tygres or Lyons As they hurtle. that all the paleys shoke And kyng Adrastus. oute of slepe woke And made in haste. his chamberleyns call And thrugh the courte. his worthy knyghtis all Commaundyng hem. to descende and se And reporte what it myght be This wounder noyse. in his courte be nyght And whā they sawe. two strange knyght fyght In plates bryght. and in thyk mayle withoute Juge. they hadde grete meruayle And dysamayed. of this vncouthe thyng As they founde. tolde they to the kyng
And Adrastus. for derkenesse of the nygh Fro his chambre. with many torches lyght In to the courte. is descended downe All his mayne. stondynge enuyrowne Of these knyghtes. hauyng full grete wounder And of manhode. he putte hem fyrst asounder Hem commaundyng. lyke a gentyll kyng To leue her stryte. and cesen of her fyghtyng And entred in. with a knyghtly loke And fyrst from hem. her swerdes both he toke Affermyng eke. as to his fantasye It was a rage. and a grete folye Soo wylfully. her lyues to in parte withoute Juge. her quarell to departe And specyally. in the derke nyght whan neyther of other. myght haue a syght Chargyng hem. on payne of her lyfe To desure and stynten of of her stryfe And Tydeus. in all the haste he myght Full humbly. fro his stede a lyght And right mekely. with chere and contenaūce Putte hym hole in the gouernaūce Of Adrastus. in all maner thyng And Polymyte. made eke noo taryeng To a lyght also. and wolde it not withseye The kynges byddyng. lowly to obeye Soo as hym ought. with due reuerence And as they stode. both in his presence
He gan enquere. fyrste of her estate The cause also. why they where atte debate Of her countrees sothly. and her age He asked eke. touchyng her lynage By dyscente of what. stok they were borne And Tydeus. his answere gaaf toforne Tolde playnly. made noo lesyng How that he was. sone to the kyng Of Calydonye. and rightfull heyre therto And of thexyle. the soth he tolde also As ye haue herde. in the story radde And Polymyte. with chere and face sadde Vnto the kyng. touchyng his countree Sayde he was borne. in Thebes the Cytee And Jocasta. the grete famons quene His moder was. withouten ony wene But of his fader. whylom kyng and lorde For verraye shame. he spake not a worde Oonly for he. yf I sholde not fayne His fader was. and brother bothe twayne The whiche in south. he was full lothe to telle And eke the kyng. wolde hym not compelle Of gentyllesse. but badde withoute blame Of his byrthe. for to haue noo shame For hole the caas. and maner euery dele Touchyng his kyn. ye groūde he knew full well Lyche as it was. by full clere reporte Enforsyng hym. for to doo comforte
with all his myght. and his besy payne This manly kyng. to these knyghtes twayne And to hem sayd. aforne hym as they stode He wyst well. that of worthy blode They were descended. touchyng her kynrede And made his offycers. in haste to lede The strange knyghtes beynge atte debate Thrugh his paleys. to chambres of estate Eche by hymselfe. for to take his ease And euery thyng in south yt myght hem please was offred hem. lyche to her estates And whan they weren. dyseuered of her plates Cusshewes grenes. and her sabatous Her harneys voyded. and her habargous Twayn mantels. vnto hem were brought Fret with perle. and ryche stones wrought Of clothe of golde. and veluett cremesyne Full rychely furred. with armyne To wrappe hem in. agayn the colde morowe After the rage. of her nyghtes sorowe To take her reste. tyll the sonne aryse And than the kyng. in full prudente wyse Fyrste of all. was nothyng recheles The knyghtes hertes. to etten in pees That euer after. I dare aferme it well Eche was to other. as trewe as ony stele Durynge her lyfe. bothe in werke and dede Vnder a knotte. bounden of bretherhede
And Adrastus. the worthy kyng famous A feste made. riche and plenteuous To these knyghtis. & hymself there at presente And after mete. full goodly he hath sente This noble kyng. for his doughters dere Of gentyllesse. for to make hem chere To the knyghtes. Icome fro soo fer And lyke in sothe. as Lucyfer the ster Gladdeth the morow. atte his vprysyng Soo the ladyes. atte her incomyng with the stremes. of her eyen clere Goodly apporte. and womanly manere Contenaunce. and excellent fayrenesse To all the courte. broughten in gladnesse For the fresshenesse. of her heuenly cheres Soo agreable was. to the strangers Atte her entre. that in specyall Hem thought it lyke. a thynge celestyall Enhastyng hem. in full knyghtly wyse Agaynst hem. goodly to aryse And as they mette. with humble contenaunce Full connyngly. dyde her obseruaunce Hem conueyeng to her syttyng place But sothly. I haue leyser none ne space To reherse. and putte in remembraunce Hole the maner. of her dalyaunce I were to longe. for you to abyde But well I wote. that the god Cupyde
By influence. of his myghty honde And the feruence. of his fyry bronde Her metyng fyrste. fortuned hath soo well That his arowe. of golde and not of stele I perced haue the. knyghtes hertes twayne Thrugh the breeste. with suche a lusty payne That there abode. sharpe as spere or launce Depe I fyxed. the poynte of remembraunce whiche maye not lyghtly. rased ben a waye And thus in Joye. they dryuen forth the waye In play and reuell. for the knyghtes sake And towardes nyght. they her chambres toke Atte due tyme. as her fader badde And on her way. the knyghtes haue hem ladde Reuerently. vp by many a steyre Takyng leue. gan anone repayre To her lodgyng. in a full statly toure Assygned to hem. by the herberyoure And after spyces. playnly and the wyne In cuppes grete. wrought of golde fyne withoute taryeng. to bedde streyte they gone Touchyng her rest. where they slepte or none Demeth ye louers. that in suche maner thyng By experyence. haue fully knowlechyng For it is not. declared in my boke But as I fynde. the kyng all nyght woke Thought full in herte. the story specyfyes Musyng sore. and full of fantasyes
Fyrste aduertyng. the grete worthynesse Of these knyghtes. and the semlynesse Her lusty youthe. her force and her manhode And how they weren comen. of Royall blode All this he gan to reuolue aboute Ay in his herte. hauyng a maner doubte Bytwene twoo. hangyng in a balaunce whether he sholde maken alyaunce Bytwene his doughters. & the knyghtis twayn For one thyng. ay his herte gan constrayn The remembraunce of his auysyon Of whiche. therfore I made mensyon Touchyng the lyon. and the wylde bore It nedeth not. to reherse it more Castyng alwaye. in his fantasye what it myght. clerely sygnyfye This derke dreme. this was hydde and close But on the morowe. Adrastus vp arose And to the temple. the right waye he toke And gan praye deuoutly on his boke To the goddes. his dreme to specyfye And they hym badde. homewarde for to hye And to beholde. in the knyghtes sheldes The fell bestes. peynted of the feldes whiche shall to hym. by clere inspeccyon Full playnly. make declaracyon Of his dreme. that he had in the nyght And Adrastus. enhasted hym full ryght
In her sheldes. hangynge vpon hokes The bestes rage. with her mortall hokes And to purpose. lyke as wryte Bochas Polymyte. full strayte enbraced was In the hyde of a fers lyon And Tydeus. abouen his haberyon Agypon hadde. dous sharpe and hore wrought of the brystles. of a wylde bore The whiche bestes. as the story leres were wrought and bete. vpon her baners Dysplayed brode. whan they sholde fyght wherof the kynge. whan he hadde a syght Atte his repayre. in herte was full gladde with a face full demure and sadde with his lordes. that he aboute hym hadde To the temple. he these knyghtes ladde And whan they hadde. with all circumstaūces Of rytes olde. done her obseruaūces Home to the courte. they resorte agayn And in a hall. riche and well besayn This worthy kyng. of herte lyberall Made a feste. solempne and Royall whiche in deyntes. suerly dyde excelle But it were veyn. euery cours to telle Her strange sewes. and her sotyltees Ne how they. sat lyke to her degrees Fer lak of tyme. I lette it ouerslyde And after mete. Adrastus toke asyde▪
The knyghtes twoo. and lyke a prudente man In secrete wyse. thus his tale he gan SIrs quod he. I doughte it noughtVerba Re∣gis Adras∣tus ad Po∣limitem et Tydeū That it is fresshe. & grene ay in your tho∣ught How that fyrst. by goodis ordynaūce And after nexte. thrugh fates purueaūce And by workynge. of fortus honde How yt ye werne. fyrst brought in to this londe Bothe tweyne. but now this laste nyghte Of wos comynge. I am full gladde & lyghte Fyrste in my selfe. shortly to expresse whan I consyder. and see the lyklynesse Of youre persones. with the circumstaunces And hole the maner. of your gouernaunces Seeynge full well. wherto sholde I fayne ye lykely be. here after to attayne The grete estate. of habondaunce of good Thrugh youre byrthe. and your Royall blood ye maye not fayle. but ye haue wronge For ye are bothe manly. and ryghte stronge And for to sette. youre hertes at more reste My purpose is. I hope for the beste Soo that in you. be noo varyaunce To make a knot. and by alyaunce A twixe you and my doughters two yf youre hertes. accorden wyll therto And for. I am fully in dyspeyre To succede. for to haue an heyre
Therfore ye shall haue. possessyon Durynge my lyfe. of halfe this regyon Forth with in honde. and hole after my daye There is noman. that therto shall saye naye And sothly after. whan I am graue Eche of you. shall his parte haue Of this kyngdome. as I haue prouyded This to seen. it shall be deuyded Bytwene you twoo. eueryche to be crowned youre purpartyes. by equyte compowned Soo egally. in euery mannys syghte That eche of you. reioyse shall his ryghte And by youre wytte. ye shall the londe amende And of manhode. knyghtly it defende Agayne oure enemyes. and oure mortall foon And for the dayes. passed ben and goon Of my desyres. and my lusty youthe I am full sette. for to make couthe That ye sholde haue. lyke myne opynyon The gouernaunce of this regyon To this entente. me semyth for the beste ye to gouerne. and I to lyue in reste Fully to fulfylle. the luste of my pleysurs Hunte and hawke. in woodes and ryuers whan soo euer. therto I shall haue pleasance And for to haue. none other attendance Vnto nothynge. but vnto myne ease For whiche shortly. yf it agree and please
That I haue sayde. to you that ben soo wyse And ben accordynge. vnto youre auyse Delayeth not. but in wordes playn what you semyth. yeue answere agayn ANd whan Adrastus. had his tale fynedResponsia a Polimite et tideo ad Regem Adrastu Tydeus with hede. full lowe enclyned As he that was. a verry gentyll knyghte with all his power. and his full myghte Full humbly. thanked the kynge Touchynge his profre. of soo hygh a thynge And for his parte. sayd he wolde assente Fully of herte. neuer to repente To all that euer. the kynge hath sayde And Polymyte. was also well apayde In the story. as it is comprehended And soo they be bothe. condescended The kynges wyll. to fulfylle in dede Fro poynte to poynte. and therupon procede where so euer. that they wynne or lese And Tydeus made. his brother chese Of gentyllesse. and of curtesye whiche was moost. to his fantasye Of the sustren. for to haue to wyue And he in south. chosen hadde Argyue That eldest was. full womanly to se And Tdeus. toke than Deyphyle Of her beaute. moost souerayn excellente And Adrastus. thrugh out his londe hath sente
For his lordes. and his baronage To be presente. atte maryage Of the knyghtes. and make noo lettynge And they echone. come atte his byddynge In goodly wyse. meke and full benygne Agayne the daye. that he dyde assygne And thyder come. full many lusty knyghte Full well beseen. and many lady bryghte Fro euery coste. and many fresshe squyre The story it sayth. and many comynere To beholde. the grete Royalte And the maner. of this solempnyte But to telle. all the circumstaunces Of Justes. reuell. and of dyuerse daunces The festes riche. and the gyftes grete The pryue syghes. and the feruente hete Of loues folke. brennynge as the glede And deuyses. of many sondry wede The touches stole. and the amerous lokes By stoyll crafte. layde doune lyne and hokes The Jelous folke. to trayssen and begyle In theyr a wayte. with many sondry wyle All this in southe. descryuen I ne can But well I wote. the newe fame ran This meane whyle. with full swyfte passage Vnto Thebes. of this maryage And by reporte trewe. and not I fayned The sowne therof. the eres hathe attayned
Myne auctour wryte. of Ethyocles Touchyng the honoure. and the grete encres Of Polymyte. hyghly magnyfyed And how that he. newly was allyed with Adrastus. in the londe of Arge The whiche thyng. gretly he gan to charge Dredyng inly. that this maryage Shall after tourne. in to his damage Sore musyng. and castyng vp and downe The grete power. and the hye renowne Of Adrastus. the whiche of Grekes londe Hadde all the power. sudgett to his honde Leste that he for Polymyte sake wolde vpon hym. a newe werre make But yf that he. lyke to the conuencyon Atte the tyme sette. delyuerd the toun To his brother. by bonde of bothe I sworne By couenauntes. assured here byforne Yf ye remember. late as I you tolde whiche he was not. in purpos for to holde But from his hest. casted for to arye And therupon lyste noo lenger to tarye Lyche his desyre. to shape remedyes And fyrste he sente. for his next allyes In whome he hadde. moost affyaunce For his lordes. that hadde gouernaunce Of his kyngdome. to come to hym anone And whan they were presente euerychone
He sayd playnly. wenyng for the beste That his herte. shall neuer lyen in reste But in sorowe. and in a maner drede Tyll his brother. vtterly be dede That he in Thebes. in his Royall sete Myghte allone. regne in quyete He mente hymselfe. shortly and none other Unperturbed. of Polymyte his brother And atte this counseyll. dyucrse of entente I fynde wrytte thre folkes were presente Some in sothe. that feythfull were and trewe And some also. that changen can of newe And other eke. that bytwene twayne Couertly coude vnder coloure fayne THe fyrste sayd. aboue all thyngThe com∣mēdacyon of trouth Trouth sholde longe to a kyng Of his worde. not be varyable But playne and hole. as a contre stable For trouth fyrste. withoute ony wene Is chyfe pyler. that many a kyng sustene In Joye and honour. for to lede his lyfeNota How trou∣the is pre∣ferred v ye book of es∣dre aforne kyngis wȳ mē & wyne For trouth whylom had a prerogatyfe As of Esdre. the book can specyfye Recorde I take. of prudente Neemye That worthy kyng. for all her grete pryde with all her power. and domynacyon Hauyng rewarde. in comparyson The trouthes myght. trouthes worthynesse
For as Esdre. playnly dooth expresse who taketh hede. in the same place The influence sothly. and the grace Of trouth allone. this olde Neemye Gate hym lycence to redefye The walles newe. of JherusalemSalamon Trouth & mercy p̄ser uen a kyng fro all ad∣uersyte Chaūgene doublinesse sholde not be in a kyn¦ge whiche trouth is. tresoure. cheef of euery realme For Salamon wrytte. how that thynges tweyn Trouth and mercy. lynked in a cheyn Preserue a kyng. lyke to his degree Fro all myscheef. and aduersytee Alas therfore. that ony doublenesse Varyaunce. or vnsykernesse Chaunge of worde. or mutabylytee Fraude or deceyte. other instabylyte Sholde in a kyng. haue domynacyon To causen after. his destruccyon Of kynges rede the story done by rowe And seen how many. haue ben ouerthrowe Thrugh her falshede. fro fortunes whele For vnto god. it pleseth neuer a dele A kyng to be double of entente For it maye happe. that the worlde is blente Full ofte syth by sleyth of her werkyng But this is the trouth. god seeth euery thyng Right as it is. for there maye be noo cloude Toforne his syght. trouth for to shroude It may be clypsed. and derked by dyscente
By false engyne lyeng in a wayte As a serpente. for to vndermyne But atte laste. it wyll clerely shyne who that sayth nay. she we his bryght beames For it is in sothe. of kyngdomes & of reames Is berer vp. and conseruatryce Fro all myscheef. and southfaste medyatryce To god aboue. who soo lyste to see To kepe a kyng. in prosperytee On euery syde. as I affermely dare For whiche kyngis. and lordes be well ware youre behestes. Justly for to holde And thynke how Thebes. with his wall olde Destroyed was. platly this noo less For the doublenesse. of Ethyocles whiche his people. after sore abought Donly for he not by counseyll wrought Of hem that were. bothe trewe and wyse Hym lyste not worche. after her deuyse But lefte trouth. and sette his fantasye To be gouerned. by false flaterye That had hym thynke. how he was a knyght And to shelde of force. more than of ryght Duryng his lyfe. lordshyp of the towne And not for to lese. his possessyon For noo bonde. ne hestes made aforne But late his brother. blowen in a horne where that hym lyste. or pypen in a rede
This was the counseyll. platly and the rede Of suche that lyste not. to sayen the southe But falsly flater. with her wordes smothe And whan they had. hole her tale fayned Ethyocles. fully was enclyned who soo euer there atte. lawghe or wepe Lyke her counseyll. pessessyon to kepe who that saye nay. or grutche there agayne Hym to contrarye. he thought it was but vayne BVt in this whyle. hath the shene sonneHow the ye re was co∣men oute yt Ethyocles regned in Thebes The. xii. sygnes. rounde aboute ronne Syth Ethyocle. by Juste rekenyng In Thebes was crowned lorde and kyng Holdyng the septure. and the dyademe That by reason. as wolde seme The tyme was full complete and the space Of couenaunt. he sholde voyde his place And Polymyte eke. his Journey make Towarde Thebes. possessyon to take Of due tytle. but yf he hadde wronge whiche thought in soth▪ ye yere was woūd longe Of his exyle. or it come aboute And for he hadde in herte. a maner doute Leste in his brother. there were falshede fonde To acquyte hymselfe. lyke as he was bonde To Adrastus. he gan declare his herte Besechynge hym. this mater to aduerte And therupon. to yeue his counseyll sone
Touchyng his right. what was beste to done where it was. beste to gone or to abyde Or lyke a knyght. manfully to ryde Hymselfe allone. and make noo message For the chalange. of his rightfull herytage within Thebes. eyther by peas or stryfe And therupon. to yeoparde his lyfe Thus was he sette. for all his fers brother But Adrastus sothly. thought a nother Better was to sende. than hymselfe to goon Leste he were trapped. among his mortall foon Hauyng his brother. suspecte in the case That by fraude. or by some falase He wolde werke. to his destruccyon Yf he were hardy. to entren in to the towne For whiche he badde hym. prudently take hede Full concludyng. how it was more spede That some other. be to Thebes sente To apperceyue. fully the entente Of Ethyocle. outewarde by some sygne And where that he his crowne wyll resygne For tylke yere. lyke as he made his othe And whan he knew. how his purpos goth Therupon to werke and procede Thus Adrastus. wysely gan hym rede And whyle they treate. vpon this materTydeus to¦ke vpon hȳ to do ye mes¦sage of his brother Po¦lymyte Tydeus with a manly chere Sayd vtterly. for his brothers sake
This message. he wolde vndertake with hole tempryse. of the embassyate were it wylfull. or infortunate He wyll not spare. what soo that bytyde But Adrastus. on that other syde And Polymyte. in conclusyon weren contrarye. to that opynyon And sayd sothly. as hem thought ryght Syth that he was. soo well aproued knyght And descended. of soo worthy blood That they nolde. for none erthly good For all Thebes. with the rygalye Put his body. in suche yeopardye BUt all this thynge. auayled hē right nouzt For he wold forth. how dere yt it be bought Takyng leue. fyrste of all the states And armed hym. in mayle and sure plates And shope hym forth. vpon his Journey who made sorowe. but DeyphyleThe soro∣we of Dey¦phyle whā tyde{us} went vnto The∣bes with bytter teeres. dewed all her face Full ofte syth. swownyng in the place Tryste and mornyng. in her blake wede whan she sawe. that he toke his stede Soo inwardly. gan encreace her mone Seeng her lorde. soo ryde forth allone Vpon his waye. this worthy Tydeus And in all haste. the story telleth vs He spede hym soo. makyng noo delayes
That in space. of a fewe dayes The hye towres of Thebes he gan see And entred is in to the Lytee wysely enqueryng. where the paleys stode And lyke a knyght. thyder streyte he rode Marked full well. in many mannes syght Lyche Mars hymselfe. in stele armed bryght Tyll he atteyned hath. the cheef dongyon where as the kyng. helde his mansyon And thrugh the paleys with a knyghtly loke In to the halle. the right waye he toke Fro his stede. whan he lyght down Not aferde. but hardy as a lyon where as the kyng. with lordes a grete route In the halle. syttyng rounde aboute He entred in moost manfull of corage To execute. the fyne of this message And as hym thought. conuenyente and due Full connyngly. he gan the kyng salue Requyryng hym of kyngly excellence In goodly wyse. to yeue hym audyence And not dysdayne. neyther in porte ne chere Syth he was. come as a messagere From Polymyte. his owne brother dere Gynnyng his tale thus. as ye shall here QVod he vnto youre worthynesseHow wyse¦ly & howe knyghtely tyde{us} dyde his messa∣ge My purpos is. bryfly to expresse Theffecte oonly as in sentemente
Of the message. why that I am sente It were in vayne. longe processe for to make But of my mater. the verraye grounde to take In eschuynge. of prolixyte And voyde awaye. all superfluyte Syth yourselfe. best ought to vnderstonde The cause fully. that we haue on honde And eke conceyue. thentente of my menyng Of rightwysnesse. longyng to a kyng Fyrste consydred. yf that ye take hede whan Edyppus. the olde kyng was dede How yourselfe. and youre brother blyue For the crowne. contagyously gan stryue As mortall foon. by full grete hatred whiche of you twoo. fyrste sholde succede Tyll that ye weren. by meanes recouncyled The to regne. and he to be exyled Out of this towne. for a yeres space And than agayne. resorte to his place To regne as kyng. and ye to voyde oute Soo as your tourne. by processe come aboute Eueryche of you. pacyently to endure The enterchaungyng. of his aduenture who were putte oute. or stode in his estate Therupon to make noo debate Lyche the conuenaunte. and conuencyon Enrolled vp. by lordes of this towne whiche of reason maye. not be denyed
And sythe ye haue. a yere I occupyed Polymyte. requyreth you of ryghtThe reque¦ste yt tydeus made in ye name of po¦limyte vnd ye tytle of ye cōuencyon To acquyte you. lyche a trewe knyght In eschewyng. of mortall werre and stryte Syth ye haue hadde. a prorogatyfe As eldest brother. for to regne a forne And thynheth eke. how that ye are sworne youre othe to kepe. and make noo taryeng Hole aduertyng. lyke a prudente kyng That trouth is more in comparyson Than all the tresoure. of youre regyon More acceptable. bothe to god and man Than all ryches. that ye reken can wherfore in haste. and let there be noo slouthe Ouyteth youre selfe. Justly of your trouthe Vnto your brother. auoydyng this cyte And lette hym regne. in his royalte The crowne of Thebes. a yere to occupye Than wyll all Grece. preyse and magnyfye youre hye renowne. and maye saye none other But ye haue you. Justly to your brother This is hole theffecte. of all that I wyll sayen Answere expectante. what ye lyste sende ayen WHan Tydeus hadde tolde his tale Ethyocles. tryste and wonder pale His conreyte fyrste. in maner had refrayned Dyssymelyng. vnder coloure fayned Shewyng a chere. in maner debonayre
To his entente. wounderly contrarye Inwarde in herte. wood and furyous Tournyng his face. towarde Tydeus But he gan abrayde. and atte laste outbrake And euen thus. to hym he spakeI haue gret meruaylle qd tyde{us} The āswe re of ethyo cles I haue grete meruayle. quod he in my thought Of the message. whiche thou hast I brought That my brother. as thou haste expowned Desyreth soo in Thebes. to be crowned Hauyng rewarde. to the habondaunce The grete plente. and the suffysaunce That he hath now. with the kyng of Arge That me semeth. that he sholde lytell charge To haue lordshyp. or domynacyon In the bondes. of this lytell towne Syth he regneth. soo fresshely in his floures Surmountyng. all his predecessoures By newe encrease. thorugh fortunes myght wherof in herte. I am right glad and lyght Full trustyng. yf I hadde nede To his helpe. that withoute drede Lyke a brother. than I sholde hym fynde To mewarde. faythfully trewe and kynde Supposyng. playnly euermore Of this regne. he sette but lytyll store Nor caste hym not. for soo shorte a whyle As for a yere. his brother to exyle To lyue in pouerte. and grete dystresse
He wyll not suffre it of his grete noblesse It were noo token of noo brotherhede But a sygne rather of hatrede To interrupte. of my possessyon Of this lytyll poore regyon All that he spake. whoo that coude aduerte Of verray scorne. roted in his herte As it semeth. the story can you teche By the surplus. sothly of his speche He myght not. hym noo lenger refrayne But platly sayd. as tweyne vs twayne I mene thus Polymyte and me There is noo bonde. nother suerte Nor fayth I made. that maye hym auayle As he claymeth. to haue the gouernayle Of this Lytee. nother yere ne daye For I shall lette hym sothly yf I maye That he shall not. by tytle of noo bonde Reioyse in Thebes. halfe a fote of londe Lete hym kepe. all that he hath wonne For I purpose. as I haue begonne To regne in Thebes. hensforthe all my lyfe Maugre all hem that there agayne stryfe And in despyte. of his frendes all Or the counseyll. that hym lyste call Lete hym be sure. and know this right well His manassyng. I drede neuer a dele And sykerly. as to myne auyse
It sheweth well. that thou were not wyse But supprysyng. with a maner rage To take on the. this surquydous message And presume. to done soo hye offence Soo boldly to speke in my presence But all I fere. auayle shall ryght nought For the tydynges. that thou, haste brought Shall vnto hym. be but dysencrees He better were. to hauen in pees Than of folye. and presumpcyon Agaynst me. to seke occasyon For whyle I leue. and therto here myne honde As I sayd erste. he wynneth here noo londe For fynally. I doo the to vnderstonde whyle the walle. of this towne maye stonde That they shall fyrste. be bete down full lowe And all the toures. to the erthe I throwe Or he in Thebes. haue ony thyng to doo Loo here is all. retourne and saye hym soo Whan Tydeus sawe. the feruente yre Of the kyng. with anger sette a fyre Full of dyspyte. and malencolye Conceyuyng eke. the grete felonye In his apporte. lyke as he were wood This worthy knyght. a lytyll whyle stood Sadde and demure. or he wolde ought seyn But atte laste. thus he spake ageyn Lerteys quod he. I conceyue of neweThe kny∣ghtely an∣swere of ty¦deus ayen to ye kyng
Aboute the. thy counseyll is vntrewe I dare it sayn. and vowen atte leste Nor thou arte. faythfull of thy beheste Stable of thy worde. that yu hast sayd toforne Bt dysceyuable. and falsly eke forsworne And eke periure. of thyne assured othe But where soo be. that thou be leff or lothe I say the shortly. holde it for noo fage All shall tourne. vnto thy domage Truste it well. and in full cruell wyse All Grekes londe. shall vpon the ryse To ben auenged. and manly to the redresse The grete vntrouth. and the hye falfnesse whiche that yu haste. agayn thy brother wrought It shall full dere. after this be bought And verrayly in dede. as thou shalte lere Lryng Adrastus. wyll medell in this mater And all the lordes. aboute hym enuyron That bounde ben. to his subgeccyon Prynces Dukes. and many a noble knyght In susteynyng. of thy brothers ryght Shall vpon a daye. with spere and shelde Agayns the be gadred. in a felde Lrnyghtly to proue. all by one assente That thou arte fals. and double of entente Of thy promyse. atteynt and eke outrayed And leue me well. it shall not be delayed But in all the haste. execute in dede
Lyke thy deserte. thou shalte haue thy mede For god aboue. of his ryghtwysnesse Suche open wronge. shall in haste redresse And of his myght. all suche conclusyon Refourme agayne. and all extorsyon For this the tyne. falshede shall not auayle Agayne trouth. to holde batayle wronge is croked. bothe halte and lame And here anone. in my brothers name As I that am his next allye In his quarell. I shortly the defye Fully auysed. with all my hole entente And the lordes. that ben there presente I you requyre. of your worthynesse To saye trouth. and to bere wytnesse whan tyme cometh. Justly to recorde How youre kyng. falsly can dyscorde From his heste. of false varyaunce And thynke how ye. of fayth and lygaunce Arne bonde echone. ye maye not goo therfro For to obeye. and seruen bothe twoo This next yere. now anone folowyng As to youre lorde. and youre trewe kyng Polymyte. though he be now absente By Juste accorde. made in perlemente At youre deuyse. whiche sytten here arowe Engrosed vp as it is right well knowe And enrolled. oonly for wytnesse
In youre regestres. to voyden all falnesse That none of you. varye maye of newe For that I saye. but yf he be vntrewe For whiche I rede. youre selfe to acquyte Lette noo yme lenger you respyte But attones. withoute more taryeng Of manly force. fetteth home youre kyng Manger his foon. lyke as ye are bounde And lette in you. noo slouth be founde To putte hym Justly in possessyon This my counseyll. in conclusyon As Tydeus had his message sayde Lyke to the charge. yt was on hym layde As he that lyste. noo lenger there soiourne Fro the kyng. he gan his face tourne Not astonyed. nor in his herte aferde But full proudly. leyd his honde on his swerde And in despyte. whoo that was leff or lothfow tyde{us} manly de∣parted frō the kyng A sterne paas. thorugh the hall he goeth Thorught out ye courte. & manly toke his stede And oute of Thebes. faste gan hym spede Enhastyng hym. tylle he was att large And spede hym forth. toward the lond of Arge Thus leue I hym. ryde forth a whyle whyle that I retourne agayne my style Vnto the kyng. that in the hall stode And amonge his lordes furyous and wode In his herte wrothe. and euyll apayed
Of the wordes. that Tydeus had sayde Specyally hauyng. remembraunce On the proude. dyspytous dyffyaunce whyles that he satte. in his royall see Vpon whiche. he wyll auenged bee Full cruelly. what euer that befalle And in his yre. he gan to hym calle Chyfe constable. of his chyualrye Chargyng hym faste for to hye with all the worthy chose. of his housholde whiche as he knew. most manfull & most bolde In all haste. Tydeus to sue Toforn. or he oute of his londe renue Vpon payne of lyffe. and lesyng of her hede withoute mercy. anone that he be dede And of knyghtes. fyfty were in nombre Myne auctour sayth. vnwarly hym tencombre Armed echone. in mayle and thyk stele And therwith all I horsed wounder wele Atte a posterne. forth they gan to rydeHow false∣ly ethiocles layd a bus∣shemete in ye valey to haue slayn Tydeus By agayne path. that laye oute asyde Secretly. that noo man hem aspye Oonly of treason. and felonye They haste hem forth all the longe daye Of cruell malyce. for to stop his waye Thorugh a foreste. all of one assente Full cowardly. to laye a busshemente Vnder an hylle. at a strayte passage
To falle on hym. at more auantage The same waye. that Tydeus gan drawe Ate thylk mounte. where Spyx was slawe He nothyng ware in his opynyon Of this compassed. conspyracyon But Innocente. and lyke a gentyll knyght Rode ay forth. tyll it drew to nyght Sole by hymselfe. withoute companye Hauyng noo man to wyse hym or to guye But atte laste. lyftyng vp his hede Towarde eue and gan take hede In mynde of his waye. right as ony lyne Thought he sawe ayen the mone shyne Sheldes fresshe. and plates bourned bryght The whiche enuyron. casten a grete lyght Ymagynyng. in his fantasye There was treason. and conspyracye Wrought by the kyng. his Journey for to lette And of all that. he nothyng sette But well assured. in his manly herteHow tyde{us} outerayed fyfty kny∣ghtes yt lay in a wayte for to slee hym Lyste not ones. asyde to dyuerte But kepte his waye. his shelde vpon his breste And caste his spere. manly in his reste And the fyrste platly. that he mette Thorugh the body. proudly he hym smette That he fell dede. chyfe mayster of hem all And than attones. they vpon hym falle On euery parte. by compas enuyrown
But Tydeus. thorugh his hye renown his blody swerde. let aboute hym glyde Sleeth and kylled. vpon euery syde In his yre. and in his mortall tene That meruayle was. he myght so susteyne Ayen hem all. in euery halfe be sette But his swerde. was soo sharpe I whette That his foon. founde full vnswette But he alas. was lyght on feete By force grounded. in full grete dystresse But of knyghthode. and of grete prowesse Vp he rose. maugre all his foon And as they come. he slewe hem one by one Lyke a lyon rampant in his rage And on this hylle. he fonde a narowe passage whiche that he toke. of full hye prudence And lyche a bore. standyng at his defence As his foo men. proudly hym assayle Vpon the playne. he made her blood to rayle All enuyron. that the soyle waxe rede Now here now there. as they fyllen dede That laye here one. & there laye twoo or three Soo mercyles. in his fers crueltee Thylke daye he was. vpon hem founde And attones. his enmyes to confounde where as he stode. this myghty campyowne Besyde he sawe. with water tourned downe An huge stone. large longe and square
And sodaynly. or that they were ware As it had layen there for the nones Vpon his foon. he rolled it attones That ten of hem. wenten vnto wrake And the remenaunte. amased drowe a bake For one by one. they wente to myschance And fynally he brought to outrance Hem euerychone. Tydeus as blyue That none but one. left of hem a lyue Hemselfe I hurte. and I wounded kene Thorugh his harneys. bledyng on the grene The slayne knyghtis. in compas roūde aboute In the vale. slayne all the route whiche pyteously. agayne the mone gape For none of theym. shortly myght escape But dede echone. as they it haue deserued Saaf one excepte. the whiche was reserued By Tydeus. of this entencyon To the kyng to make relacyon How his knyghtes. haue on her Journey sped Eueryche of hem. his lyfe lefte for awed And atte metyng. how they haue hem borne To tellen. all he sured was and sworne To Tydeus full. lowly on his knee By whiche ensample. openly ye may see Agayne trouthe. falshede hath noo myghtHow trou∣the with ly¦tell multy∣tude hathe euer in the fyne vycto∣rye of fals∣hede Fye on quarels. not grounded vpon ryght withoute whiche. maye be noo vyctorye
Therfore eche man. haue this in memorye That grete power. shortly to conclude Plente of good. nor moche multytude Sleyght or engeny. force or folonye Arn to feble. to holde champartye Agayne trouth. who that lyst take hede For atte ende. falshede maye not spede To endure longe. the sholde fynde it this Recorde I take. of worthy Tydeus whiche with his honde. thrugh tronyes excellen¦ce Fyfty knyghtes slewe. in his defence But one excepte. as I late tolde Sworne & assured. and his honde vpholde The kyng to enfourme. how they were attaynt And Tydeus of bledyng. wounder faynt Meat and wery. and in grete dystresse And ouerlayd. of verray feblynesse But as he myght. hymselfe to sustene He toke his horse. standyng on the grene worthed vp. and forth he gan to ryde An easy pace. with his woundes wyde And shortly yet. in his opynyon He was alwaye. aferde of treason But anguysshous. and full of besy payne He rode hym forth. tyll he dyde attayne In to the bondes. of Lygurgus londeHow tyde{us} all for woū¦ded come in to Lygur¦gus londe A worthy kyng. and manly of his honde And he full pale. oonly for lacke of blode
Tydeus sawe. where a castell stode Stronge and myghty. bylte vpon a roche Towarde whome. faste he gan approche Conueyed thyder. by clerenesse of the stone That by nyght. agayn the mone shone On the towres. with crestes maryall And Joynyng. all moost to the wall Was a gardayne. lytyll oute besyde In to whome. Tydeus gan to ryde Of auenture. by a gate small And there he founde. for to reken all A lusty Erber. vnto his deuyse Swete and fresshe. lyche a paradyse Verray heuenly. of inspeccyon And fyrste of all. he lyghted a doun The goodly place. whan that he behelde And from his nek. auoyded hath his shelde Drawe his brydell. fro his horse hede Lete hym goon. and take noo maner hede Thrugh the gardayn. that enclosed was Hym to pasture. on the grene gras And Tydeus. more heuy than is lede Vpon the herbes. grene whyte and rede As hym thought. that tyme for the beste He layde hym downe. for to take his reste Of werynesse. desyrous to slepe And none awayte. his body for to kepe And with dremes. grutched euer amonge
There he laye. tyll the larke songe with notes newe. hye vpon in the hayre The glad morowe. rody and ryght fayre Phebus also. castyng vp his bemes The hye hylles. gylte with his stremes The syluer dewe. vpon the herbes rounde There Tydeus laye. vpon the grounde Atte the vpryste. of the shene sonne And stoundmele. his grene woundes ronne Rounde aboute. that the soyll depeynte Of the grene. with rede meynte And euery morow. for holsumnesse of the heyreHow lygur¦g{us} dought fonde tide{us} slepyng in the erber al forwoūded Lygurgus doughter. made her repayre Of custome. ay among the floures newe In the gardayne. of many dyuerse hewe Suche Joye had. for to take hede On her stalkes. for to see hem sprede In the alayes walkyng to and fro And whan she had. a lytyll whyle go Her selfe allone. castyng vp her syght She behelde. where an armed knyght Laye to reste hym. on the herbes colde And hym besyde. she gan eke beholde His myghty stede. walkyug here and there And she anone. fell in a maner fere Specyally. whan she sawe the blode Sprad all the grene. aboute there she stode But at laste. she caught hardynesse
And womanly. gan her for to dresse Toward this knyght. hauyng a maner of dre∣de And gan grete doute. lest yt he were dede And of her wyll. soothly it was cheef That she thought. for to make a preef How that it stode. of this man full ofte And forth she gooth. & touched hym full softe There as he laye. with her hondes smale And with a face dedely. bleyke and pale Lyche as a man. dawed in a swone Vp he sterte. and his swerde he drowe Not fully oute. but put it vp agayne▪ Anone as he hath the lady sayne Besechyng her. oonly of her grace To haue pyte vpon his trespace And rewe on hym. of her womanhede For of afraye. he was falle in drede Leste he had. assayled be of newe Of the Thebans. preued full vntrewe For dred of whiche he was soo recheles Full humbly yeldyng hym to the pees Truste in hymselfe. he passed had his boundes And whan that she sawe his mortall woundes She had routhe. of verraye gentellesse Of his dysease. and of his dystresse And bad he sholde. noo thyng be dysmayedHowe wo∣manly yt la¦dy acquy∣teth her to tyde{us} in his dysease Nor in herte sorowfull. nor afrayed Dyscomforte hym. in noo maner thyng
For I quod she. am doughter to the kyng Called Lygurge. that gretly me delyte Euery morowe. this gardayne to vysyte It is to me. soo passyngly dysporte wherfore quod she. byth of good comforte For noo wyght here. touchyng your vyage Shall hynder you. ne doo you noo domage And yf ye lyste. of all youre aduenture The playne trouthe. to me dyscure I wyll in south. doo my besynesse To refourme. your greuous heuynesse with all my myght. and myne hole dylygence That I hope. of youre grete offence ye shall haue helpe. in youre aduersyte And as ferforthe. as it lyeth in me Trusteth right well. ye shall noo faute fynde And whan he sawe. that he was kynge Soo womanly. soo goodly and soo benygne In all her porte. by many dyuerse sygne He vnto her. by order wolde not spare His aduentures. fully to declare In thebes fyrste. touchyng his message And all the hylle. of the wood rage Of his woundes. and hurtes sore It were but vayn. to reherse it more By and by. he tolde her euery dele The whiche in soth. she lyked neuer a dele But had reuthe and compassyon
Of his myschyfe. wrought by false treason Byddyng in haste. that he sholde her sue And womanly. as her thought due To a chambre she lad hym vp a lofteHow tyde{us} was refes∣shed in the castell of ye lady Full well besayn. there in a bed right softe Rychely abouten apparayled with clothe of golde. all the flore I rayed Of the same. bothe in length and brede And fyrste this lady. of her womanhede Her wymmen bad. as goodly as she can To be attendaunte. on this wounded man And whan he was vnarmed to his sherte She made fyrste. wasshe his woundes smerte And serche hem well. with dyuerse instrumentis And made fette. sondry oynementis And leches eke. the beste that she coude fynde Full craftely. to staunchen hem and to bynde And euery thyng that maye doo hem ease To swage his payne. or his woo to pease was in the courte. and in the castell sought And by her byddyng. to the chambre brought And for his sake. she hath after sente For suche deyntes. as were conuenyente Moost nutrytyfe. by physykes lore Hem that were syke. or wounded to restore Makyng her wymmen. eke to taken kepe And wayte on hym. a nyghtes whan he slepe And be well ware. that noo thyng a sterte
That was or myght. be lusty to his herte And with all this. she prayed hym to abyde Tyll he were strong. and myghty for to ryde In the castell. to playe hym and dysporte And at leyser. home agayne resorte whan he myght. bywelde hym at his large But all for nought. he wyll home to Arge Toke his leue. on the next daye withoute abode. to haste hym on his waye Lowly thankyng. vnto her goodnesse Of her fredome. & of her bounteous largenesse So wommanly. that her lyst take hede Hym to refresshe. in his grete nede Behotyng her. with all his full myght He wolde be her seruaunte. and her knyght whyle he lyueth. of what she wolde hem chargeHow tyde{us} repayreth home to Ar¦ge alle for∣woūded & sore I hurte And forth he rode. tyll he come to Arge In full grete haste. & wolde noo where dwelle But what sholde I rehersen other telle Of his repayre. the costes or the playns The craggy roches. or the hye mountayns Or all the maner. of his home comyng Of the metyng, or of the welcomyng Nor the Joye that Adrastus made Nor how his susre. ne his wyfe were glad Nor how that they. where to sholde I wryte Embrased hym. in her armes wyte Nor the gaderyng. aboute hym ne the prece
Nor the sorowe. that Polymyte Made in hymself. to see hym soo sore wounded His greuous hurtes. his sorowes eke vnsounded His dedely loke. and his face pale Of all this. to gynne a newe tale It were in south a maner ydelnesse Nor how hymselfe. in ordre dyde expresse Fyrste how that he. in Thebes hath hym borne Nor how the kyng. falsly was forsworne Nor of the awayte. nor treason that he sette whan fyfty knyghtes. on the waye hym mette As he haue herde. all the maner howe withoute whiche. my tale is longe ynowe But Adrastus. made men to seche In euery coste. for many dyuerse leche To come in haste. and make noo taryeng Vpon a payne. by byddyng of the kyng To done her crafte. that he were recured And of his force. in euery parte assured And they echone. soo her connynges shewe That in space. of dayes fewe He was all hole made. of his sykenesse Tho was there Joye. th was there gladnesse Thorugh the courte. and thorugh all the town For euery man. hath suche opynyon In Tydeus. for his gentyllesse For his manhode. and his lowlynesse That he was holde. the moost famous knyght
And beste beloued. in euery mannes syght Thorugh oute Grece. in euery regyon But now muste I make. a dygressyon To telle shortly. as in sentemente Of thylke knyght. that Tydeus hath sente In to Thebes. oonly to declare The grete myschyfe. and the euyll fare Vnto the kyng. how it is befall The open trouthe. of his knyghtes all How Tydeus hath slayne hym euerychone Than saaf hymselfe. there escaped none That were reserued. fro shedyng of his blode The kyng to telle. playnly how it stode And whan he had. rehersed euery poynte Ethyocles stode. in suche dysioynte Of hatfull yre. that he waxe nye wodeHow ethyo¦cles was as toned whā he herde ye deth of his knyghtes And in his tene. and in his fell mode Of cruell malyce. to the knyght he spake And felly sayde. that it was for lake Oonly of manhode. thorugh her cowardyse That they were slayne. in soo mortall wyse And hanged be he. hye by the nek That of your deth. or of your slaughter rek Or you complayne. other one or all Of the myscheef. that is you befall I doo noo force. that none of you asterte But fye vpon. youre false coward herte That one knyght. thrugh his hye renoune
Hāth brought you. all in confusyon Full graceles. and full vnhappy to Naye quod this knyght. it is not so It is thyne vnhap. playnly and not oures That soo many. worthy werryoures whiche all her lyfe. neuer had shame Excepte this quarell. taken in thyne name That grounded was. and roted in falnesse This was cause. in verray sykernesse Of oure vnhappe. I wote well and none other And the vntrouthe. done vnto thy brother And that thou were. soo openly forsworne A percell cause. why that we were forlorne was false brekyng. of thyne assured othe And tho the kyng. all moost mad for wrothe In purpose was. for to slee this knyght Oonly for he sayde vnto hym ryght The whiche myles alas. both at eue & morowe Supprysed was. with a dedely sorowe Renewed ay in his remembraunce with the pyteous. and vnhappy chaunce Of the myscheef. and mysauenture Touchyng the deth. and the dyscomfyture Of his fers. and of hymselfe also That the shamfaste. importable wo Soo fratte on hym. with suche a mortall stryfe That he was wery. of his owne lyfe Hence a swerde. and a syde sterte
And roffe hymselfe. euen to the herte The kyng hymselfe. beyng tho presente That the romoure. and the noyse is wente Thrugh oute all Thebes. and the wood rage By suche as weren. Joyned by lynage To the knyghtes. slayne atte hyll That all attones. of one herte and wyll They wolde haue rysen. thrugh out all the cyte Vpon the kyng. auenged for to be whiche of her dethe. was cheef occasyon But the barons. and the lordes of the town Full besy weren. this rumoue to dyscease Of hye prudence. to stynten and appease In quyete. euery thyng to sette And after that the bodyes home they fette Of the knyghtes. lyke as ye haue herde A forne I slayne. with the blody swerde Of Tydeus. full sharpe whette and grounde And in the felde. soo as they hem founde Oonly of loue. and of affeccyon Solempnely. they brought hem to the town And lyke the maner of her rightes olde They were fyrste brente. in to asshes colde Eueryche I buryed. lyche to his degree Loo here kalendes of aduersytee Sorowe vpon sorowe. and destruccyon Fyrste of the kyng. and all the regyon For lacke oonly. lyke as I you tolde
That behestes. truely were not holde Fyrste grounde and rote. of this ruyne As the story. clerely shall determyne And myne tale herafter. shall you lere If you lyste. the remenaunte for to here ¶ Explicit pars Secunda. ¶ Sequitur pars Tercia. O Cruell Mars. full of malencolye And of thy kynde. hote combust & drye As the spercles. shewen fro soo fer By the stremes. of the rede ster In thy spere. as it aboute gothe what was cause. that thou were soo wrothe with hem of Thebes. thrugh whos feruent yre The Cytee brente. and was sette a fyre As bookes olde. well reherse konne Of cruell hate. roted and begonne And engendred. the story maketh mynde Oonly of blood. corrupte and vnkynde By infeccyon. called orygynall Causyng a stryfe. dredfull and mortall Of whiche the myscheef. thrugh all Grece ran And kyng Adrastus. alder fyrste began That hath hym caste. a conqueste for to make Vpon Thebes. for Polymytes sake
In knyghtly wyse. there to preue his myght Of full entente. to recure his ryght And fyrste of all. he sette a parlyamente And hath his lettres. and messengers sente Thrugh out Grece. to many soundry kynges Hem to enhaste. and make noo lettynges And rounde aboute. as made is mencyon He sente also. to many Regyon For prynces dukes. lordes and barons To taken vp. in cytees and in townes And chesen out. the moost lyklyeste And suche that waren preued for the beste And of manhode. and sende hem vp echone And in her honde. receyue her paye anone with Adrastus. to Thebes for to rydeThe grete purueaūce of kyng A∣drastus to∣warde ye cy¦te of thebes And the lordes. that with hym abyde In housholde styll haue her leue take To ryden home. her retenu to make In theyr countrees. as they were of degree To stuffen hem. and to take vp mayne And make hem strong. with knyght & squyres with speres bowes. and with arblastres In all the haste possyble. that they maye And to retourne. in her beste araye Atte terme sette. full manly to be sayen To forne Arge. moustren in a playn And as I rede. full worthy of degreThe kyn∣ges & pryn¦ces that co¦me with a∣drastus Thyder came fyrste. Prothonolope
The whiche was. by recorde of wrytyng Of Archada. sone to the kyng And full prudente. fonde in werre and peas There come also. the kyng Cylmythenes And as I fynde. full famous of renoun Thyder come eke. the kyng Epymedon And passyng all. of knyghthode and of name And excellyng. by worthynesse of fame The noble kyng. called Campaneus Come eke to Arge. the story telleth vs Proued right well. and had ryden fer And thyder come. the kyng Melleager Lryng Genor eke. that helde his royall sete Myne auctoure sayth. in the londe of Crete Lryng Laerys. and the kyng of Pyrrus And eke the kyng. called Tortalanus And renomed in many regyon There come the kyng. I named Polemon Ofte assayed and I founde. a manly knyght That with hym brought. in stele armed bryght Full many worthy. oute of his countree And Tydeus. moost knyghtly for to see That manly man. that noble werryoure As he that was. of worthynesse floure Mayster and myrrour. by prouesse of his honde Hath sente also. in to the myghty londe Of Calydonye. wherof he was heyre That is a kyngdome. bothe riche and feyre
Chargyng his counseyll. and his offycers also In all the haste. that it may be do To seken oute the beste werryours Of famous knyghtes. and proued saudyours Thrugh all the lond. & leyd on hem this charge withoute abode. for to come to Arge And they obey shall. his byddyng Enhastyng hem. and made noo lettyng But sped hem faste. vpon her Journeye And from Thebes. the myghty strong Cyte Come downe knygh. with many a nother mā Mauger the kyng. to helpe what they can Consydred fyrste. his falshede and treason I mened oonly. of trouth and of reason Polymytes. as they were sworne of yore To his crowne. Justely to restore And whan they wern. at large out of the towne In to Arge they be descended downe And lyke her othe. and theyre assuraunce As they weren bounde. oonly of lygaunce To hym they came. in full lowly wyse Redy to done. what hym lyste to deuyse And whan he had. her trouth full conceyued He hath to grace. goodly hem receyued Assygnyng hem. her place myd the ooste Assembled there. fro many dyuerse coste That fynally. in this companye I gadred was. the floure of chyualrye
I chosen oute. of all Grekes londe The moost knyghtly. & manfull of her honde That I trowe. sythe the worlde began There was not seen. soo many manly man Soo well horsed. with spere and with shelde Togyder assembled. sooth in a felde There men myght see. many strange gyses Of armyng newe. and vncouthe deuyse Euery man after his fantasye That yf I sholde. in order specyfye Euery pees longyng to armure And therupon. doo my besy cure It were in south. almoost a dayes werke And the termes. ben also to derke To reherse hem clerely. and to ryme I passe ouer. oonly for lacke of tyme And telle I wolde. forth of her lodgyng How Adrastus. the noble worthy kyng Hath euery lorde. lyke to his degree Receyueth well. within his cytee And there they had. lyke to her pleasaunce Of what nedeth. fulsome habondaunce For man and horse. plente of vytayle Commaundyng. that noo thyng ne fayle That all these noble werreours Bothe hye and lowe. and pooer saudyours I serued were. of that they had nede For Adrastus. prudently toke hedewhat vay∣leth a kyng to pay his peple truly her soude
Full lyke a kyng. touchyng her terme daye That they to forne. were serued of her paye He was soo free. hym lyste▪ nothyng restrayne And noo man. had cause to complayne Hunger. thurste. nor Indygence And in a prynce. it is full grece offenceNota As clerkes sayn. and a grece repree To suffre his people. lyuen at myschefe It is full heuy. and greuous in her thought If he habonde. and they haue ryght nought He maye not both. possede good and herte He to be riche. and seen his people smerte He maye the body. of poore well constreyne But her herte. hath a full longe reyne Mauger his myght. to louen at large There maye noo kyng. on hertes sette a charge Nor hem cohercen. from her lybertee Men seen full ofte. how that thought is free For whiche eche prynce. lorde and gouernoure And specyally. euery conqueroure Lete hym beware. for all his noblesse That bounte fredome. plente and largesse By one accorde. that they his brydell lede Leste of his people. whan he hath moost nede He be defrauded. whan he is but allone Than is to late. for to make his moneNota Howe loue auaylethe more a kyn¦ge thā gold or grete ry∣chesse But in his courte. lete hym fyrste deuyse To exyle scarshede and couetyse
Than is he lykly. with fredome yf he gynne Loue of his people. euermore to wynne To regne longe. in honoure and contune Ay to encrease. by fauoure of fortune And his enmyes. manly to oppresse For loue is more. than golde or grete richesse Golde fayleth ofte. loue wyll abyde For lyste or deth. by a lordes syde And the tresoure. shortly of a kyng Standeth in loue. aboue all thyng Fare well lordshyp. bothe morowe and eue Specyally. whan loue taketh his leue And who so lyste. a myrrour for to make Of kyndly fredome. lete hym ensample take Of Adrastus. the manly kyng famous Soo lyberall. soo bounteous Unto his people. at all tyme founde Whiche made hym strong. his fomen to confoū¦de And loue oonly. his enmyes to werreye All grece. made his byddyng to obeye Of one accorde. knyghtly by his syde All attones. to Thebes for to ryde For tauenge. syth they were soo strong The grete Iniurye. and the Importable wrong Done to his sone. and to his next allye As ye to forne. haue harde me specyfye But whyle Grekes. areste a whyle in pes I wyll resorte to EthyoclesNota
with Inne Thebes. warly hath aspyed By his frendes. as he was certefyed Of the Grekes. hole the ordynaunce Her purpos eke. and her purueaunce And therof had in herte. a maner drede And fyrste he toke. his counseyll and his rede Of the lordes. and of the barons of the town And of the wysest. of his regyon How he myght. maken resystence Manly to standen. at defence To be strong. that there were noo doubteHow ethyo cles made him strong ayen the co¦myng of ye Grekes And in tho contrees. adiacente aboute And eke▪ also. in foreyn regyons He hath withholde. all the champyons And therupon. he sente oute his aspyes And his frendes. and his next allyes And all the worthy. dwellyng enuyrowne Yonge fresshe and lusty. he gadred in to towne Maskowede his walles. and his hye toures And stuffed hem. with many sadyoures Rounde aboute. he sette many gonnes Grete and smale. and some large as tonnes And in his hasty. passyng feruente hete He spente his tresoure. and gaf yeftes grete Unto knyghtes. and worthy men of name And euermore. to encrease his fame He yafe to lordes. Jewels many folde Clothes of veluette. of damaske and of golde
To gete hym hertes. sothly as I rede To helpe hym now. in this grete nede And prudently purueyed hym to fome Of flesshe and fysshe. and of wyne and corne Sette his Capyteyns. erly and late with full styfe stronge. at euery gate He made also. by werkmen that were trewe Barbycans. and bolwerkes newe Barres chaynes. and dyches wounder depe Makyng his vowe. the Cytee for to kepe whyle he lyueth. despyte of all his foon And by his goddes. of metall and of stoon Full ofte he swore. bothe of herte and thought That it shall fyrste. full dere ben a bought And many a man. with pollax & swerd & knyfe To forne this towne. fyrste shall lese his lyfe And there shall eke. many sydes blede Or his brother. peasybly possede The towne in peas. lyke as Grekes wene But atte ende. the trouth shall be sene Lete hym beware. and well to forne prouyde For Adrastus. on that other syde For his parte. was not neclygente But on a daye. helde a parlyamente All his lordes. syttyng enuyron To dryue shortly. a playne conclusyon And vp thappoynte. the fyne of her entente But some thought. full expedyente.
Of they procede. to werke by thauyse Of one that was. full prudente and right wyse And circumspecte. in his werkes all A worthy bysshop. in to age fall And called was sothly by his nameHow ye bys∣shop āphio rax was sēt for to come to ye grekes Amphyorax. of whome the grete fame Thrugh all the londe. both est and south Among Grekes. passyngly was couth A man in sothe. of olde antyquyte And moost excepted. of auctoryte Fyrste by reason. of his hye estate And eke. for he was soo fortunate In his werkes. and was also secree with the goddes. knowyng her pryuetee By graunte. of whome as bokes specyfye He had a spyryte. of trewe prophecye And coude a forne. full openly dyuyne Thynges begonne. how they sholde fyne And eke by crafte. of calculacyon Gyue a dome. of euery questyon And had in Magyk. grete experyence And fynde coude. by heuenly Influence And by meanyng. of hye sterres A fynall dome. of contek and of werres And wyst well. as his goddes toldeAnd wyste well ye trew {pro}phecye of bisshop am¦phyorax That yf Grekes. forth her Journey holde It tourne sholde. platly this noo phage To grete myschyfe. and to grete domage
Of hem echone. and in especyall The moost parte. of the blode royall Thrugh all Grece. it maye not be withdrawe In this vyage. shortly shall be slawe And yf hymselfe. with the Grekes wente who that euer wepte. hym or by mente This was the fyne. and maye not be socoured Of the erthe. he sholde be deuoured Quyke as he was. he knew none other in sertey¦ne And for he saw. there was non̄ other geyne To saue his lyfe. nor noo bet defence Than vtterly. to withdrawen his presence Prayeng his wyfe. for hym to prouyde If he were sought. that she wolde hym hyde And womanly. for to kepe hym close And of trouth. councelen his purpose For all his truste. touchyng his greuaunce was fully sette. in her preuyaunce I hope to god. that he nede not drede Of noo decerte. in her womanhede She was soo trewe. as wȳmen ben euerychone And also close. and muet as a stone That she ne wolde. as the mater stode Dyscuren hym. for noo wordly gode But fynally. the Grekes of entente In all his drede. haue for the bysshop sente Though it was long. or they myght hym fynde For cause his wyfe. was to hym soo kynde
That full suerly. hath locked vp his cors But for she had. a maner remors In her selfe. greuyng her conscyenceHow yt wyt of amphyo rax of con∣science to sa ue her othe discured hir husbonde Dredyng to falle. in full grete offence Leste her soule. were in perell lorne whan she by othe. compelled was a sworne There requyryng. yf she coude telle where her lorde. the bysshop sholde dwelle whiche to dyscure. her herte was full lothe Tyll tyme she ganne. remembren on her othe And coude a trouthe of custome not denye And had also grete conscyence to lye wounder heuy. with a sorowfull face Mauger her luste. taught hem to the place where as he was. shytte vp in a toure All allone. hauyng noo socoure They fell on hym. or that he was ware And sette hym vp. in a full riche chare A grete fole he was. to yeoparde his lyfe For to dyscure. his counseyll to his wyfe And yet she was. full sory for his sake Specyally whan she sawe hym take But I hope. that her heuynesse Gan a swage. full sone by processe In shorte tyme. whan that he was gone There is no tempeste. that may lest euer in one But this bysshop. by verray force and myght Unto Grekes. conueyed was full ryght
This hore graye. in his chare syttyng And they full glad. were of his comyng Hauyng a truste. and full opynyon And thorugh cause. and occasyon Of his wysdome. and his sapyence And by vertue. of his hye presence They sholde eschewe. all aduersytee Possyble to falle. as in her Journee And as the storye. fully hath deuysed Full circumspecte. and right well aduysed He hath pronounced. in the parlyamente To forne the lordes. and the presydente His clere conceyte. in verray sykernesse Not entryked with noo doublenesse Her dysmole dayes. and her fatall houres Her aduentures. and her sharpe shoures The frowarde sorte. and the vnhappy stoūdes The complayntes. of her dedely woūdes The wofull wrath. and the contrauerse Of fell Mars. and his cruelte And how by meane. of his gery mode There shalbe shed. all the worthy blode Of the Grekes. it maye not be eschewed If her purpose. be execute and sewed There is noo more. this shall be the fyne The hye noblesse. shall drawe to declyne Of Grekes blood. in myschyfe sorow and wo And with all this. I myselfe also
As my fate. hath to forne dysposed Depe in the grounde. I shall be enclosed And locked vp. in the derke vale Of cruell deth. loo this was the tale That the bysshop to Adrastus tolde Hym counseylyng. his purpos to withholde In eschewyng. of more myscheef and sorowe For all his goodes. he take vnto borowe Yf the Thebans. and the Grekes mete The fyne therof. shall be vnswete That all Grece. after shall it rewe warnyng hym. yf they the myscheef knewe That shall folowe. that noo man maye lette They wolde abstene. a sege for to ette Unto Thebes. and her purpos leue with whos wordes. the lordes gan hem greue And there in had. but full smale delyte And euery chone. of herely hye despyte They abrayde. and sayd he was vntrewe A contryuer. of prophecyes newe And eke also. for his long berde And olde dottarde. a cowarde and a ferde And of rancoure. gan to defye Bothe his calkyng. and his astronomye And sayd shortly. they toke therof none hede Ne wyll no thyng. gouerne hem after his rede This was the clamoure. & noyse in euery coste Of hye and lowe. thorugh oute all the hoste
And specyally of the saudyours And of lordes. regnyng in floures And of the states. effectuelly I mene whiche of age. were but tender and grene That haue not had. by Martys Influence Of the werre. grete experyence Here yf ye lyste. ye maye consyder and see Of conceytes. full grete dyuersytee How that youthe. noo peryll caste a forne Tyll the myschyfe. sodeynly be borne Where as age prouydeth euery thyng Or he begynne. to casten the endyng youthe is gouerned by a large reyneHow age & youthe ben of dyuerse opynyons To renne forth. and can not hym refrayne But of hede. sette on all attones As he that hurtlyth. agayn the harde stones Broseth hymselfe. vnwarly and parbraketh But age experte. noo thyng vndertaketh But to forne. of good dyscrecyon Make a due examynacyon How it wyll tourne. other to bad or good But youthe as faste. as stered is the blood Take empryses. of hasty wylfulnesse Joye at gynnyng. the ende is wretchednesse The olde prudente. in all his gouernaunce Full longe a forne. maketh purueaunce But youthe alas. by counseyll wyll not werke For whiche full ofte. he stombleth in the derke
Thus selde is seen. the trouth to termyne That age and youthe. drawe by one lyne And where that folye hath denomynacyon wysdome is putte in to subieccyon Lyke as this bysshop. with all his hye prudence For cause. he myght haue none audyence All his wysdome. and his prophecyeHow ye wys¦dom with∣out suppor tacōn auay leth lytyll or nought Of the Grekes. was holden but folye For though Plato. and wyse Socrates Morall Senek. and Dyogenes Albumazar. and prudente Tholome And Tullyus. that had soueraynte whylom in Rome. as of eloquence Though all these. shorly in sentence were a lyue. moost connyng and experte And noo man. lyste her counseyll to aduerte Nor of her sawes. for to taken hede what myght auayle. and it come to nede For where prudence. can fynde noo socoure And prouydence. hath noo fauoure Fare well wysdome. fare well dyscrecyon For lacke oonly. of supportacyon For vnsupported. with his lockes hore Amphyorax. syghen gan full sore with hede enclyned. and many euyll thought whan yt he sawe. his counseyll stonde for nought For vtterly. the Grekes as I tolde Haue fully caste. her Journey for to holde
Made hem redy. and gonnen to hosteye Towarde Thebes. the Cytee to werrey And forth with hem. Amphyorax they carye And in Grece. wyll noo lenger tarye Sytte in his chare. with a doolfull herte whan he wyst. he myght not asterte Of his fate. his dysposycyon And hostyng. in to the regyon Of Lygurgus. Grekes gan approche A sondy londe. with many a craggy roche But all the waye. sothly that they gone For horse nor man. water was there none Soo drye was the vales. and the playnes For all that yere. they hadden had noo reynes But full grete drought. as made is mencyonThe grete myscheef yt grekes had of ye defaut of water And all the londe. serchyng enuyron They nother fonde. well ne ryuere Hem to refresshe. ne water that was clere But they alas. noo refute ne conne Soo importable. was the shene sonne Soo hote on hem. in feldes where they lay That for myscheef. man and horse gan dey Gapyng full drye. vpward in to south And some putten. her swerdes in her mouth And spere hedes. in story as it is tolde Taswage her thurste. with the yron colde And of his lyfe. full many one dyspayred In this myscheef. and home agayne repayred
Tyll on a daye. worthy Tydeus And with hym eke. the kyng Campanous Of purpos rode. thorugh oute the countree If they myght. ony water see From coste to coste. bothe fer and nere Tyll of fortune. they entred an herbere with trees shadowed. for the sonne shene Full of herbes. and of floures grene wonder holsome. both of syght and hayre There Inne a lady. that passyngly was fayre Syttyng as tho. vnder a laure tre And in her armes. a lytyll childe had she Full gracyous. of loke and of vysage And was also. wounder tender of age Sone of the kyng. borne to succede Called Lygurgus. in story as I rede whoos hertly Joye. and worldly eke dysporte All his myrthe. pleasance and comforte was in this childe. of excellente fayrenesse And this lady. myrroure of semlynesse All sodeynly. as she caste vp her syght And on his stede. sawe an armed knyght Gretely abasshed. gan anone renue But Tydeus. after gan to sue And sayd. syster byth nothyng dysmayed In youre selfe. dyspleased nor affrayed For we are come. oonly to this placeHow tyde{us} cōplayneth to the lady in the erber for water you to beseche. of mercy and of grace
Vs to socoure. in oure grete nede Declaryng you. how it stonde in dede Here faste by. all moost at honde The worthyest. of all Grekes londe Lrynges prynces. ben lodgyng in the felde And many other. with pollax spere and shelde whiche in myscheef. parell and grete drede For want of water. ben lykly to be dede For there was none. of hye ne lowe degree In all oure Dost. now passed dayes three That dranke. alas excepte none estate Oure vyage. is soo Infortunate Prayeng you. of womanly pyte Benygnely. and gracyously for to see How of grece. all the chyualrye Of her lyues. stant in ieopardye That ye wolde of womanhede tell If ye knowe. ryuer spryng or well Specyally nowe. in all oure care Of gentyllesse. vnto vs declare Loo here is all. yf ye lyste to here That ye wyll seyn. myn owne syster dere And whan this lady Inly vertuousHow the la¦dy taughte tydeus to ye well The complaynte herde. of worthy Tydeus Of verray pyte. changeth chere and hewe And in her herte. vpon her woo gan rewe And full goodely. seeng his dystresse Sayde vnto hym. in all his heuynesse
Certes quod she. yf I were at large Touchyng this childe. of whom I haue charge I sholde in haste. of all that dooth you greue To my power. helpen to releue Oonly of reuthe. and compassyon And leue all other occupacyon Conueye you. and be youre trewe gyde To a ryuer. but lytyll here besyde But I dare not. soo moche me assure This lytyll childe. to putte in auenture I am soo ferfull. from it to departe But for youre sake. that I in parte My lyfe my dethe. of trewe affeccyon To prouyde. for youre sauacyon Toke the childe. and leyde it in her lappe And richely in clothes. gan it wrappe And couched it among the herbes soote And leyde aboute. many holsom roote And floures eke. bothe blewe and rede And supprysed. with a maner drede With Tydeus forth anone she wente As she in trouth. that noo treason mente And in her waye. wolde she neuer dwell Tyll she hym brought. to a right fayre well And to a ryuer. of water right habonde But who was glad. and who was tho Joconde But Tydeus seeng the ryuer whiche in all the haste. sente his messenger
To Adrastns. and bade hym not abyde But downe descende. to the ryuer syde with all thoost. recure for to haue Atte this ryuer. her lyues for to saue And this enhaste. hem makyng none abode All attones. to the ryuer rode For to drynke. they had soo grete luste Of appetyte. for to stanche her thruste And some dronke. and foūde it dyde them good And some were soo feruente and soo wood Upon the water. that in sykernesse Thrugh vndyscrete. and hasty gredynesse Oute of mesure. the water soo they drynke That they fyll dede. euen vpon the brynke And some naked. in to the ryuer ronne Oonly for hete. of the somer sonne To bathen hem. the water was soo colde And some also. as I haue you tolde I mene tho. that prudente weren and wyse The water dranke. in mesurable wyse That of the thurste. they haue toforne endured They were refresshed. fully and recured And Grekes than. of hye and lowe degree For hye profyte. and grete commodytee Compas the ryuer. crystallyn of syght Of one accorde. there her tentes pyght To reste hem. there in relees of her payne Oonly the space. of a daye or twayne
And whyles Grekes. vpon the ryuer laye This Tydeus. vpon the same daye Full knyghtly. hath doo his dylygence This yonge lady. with grete reuerence To Adrastus. goodly to presente Atte whoos comyng. the kyng hymselfe wente Agaynst her. she fallyng downe on her knees All the states. presente and degrees Of grekes londe. absente was not one And in his armes. toke her vp anone Thankyng her. and of her besynesse Of her laboure. and her kyndnesse Behotyng her. lyke as he was holde If ony thyng. playnly that she wolde That he maye done. she sholde it redy fynde And Grekes all. the story maketh mynde Of the states. beyng tho presente Thanked her. with all her hole entente For the refresshyng. done to many a Greke And for her parte. they behyght her eke with her bodyes. and goodes bothe twoo what her lyste. commaunde hem for to doo To be redy platly. and not fayle And here myne auctour. maketh rehersall That this lady. soo fayre vpon to see Of whome the name. was Isyphyle To Adrastus tolde. as ye maye rede Lynealy the stok of her kynrede
Whylom how she a kynges doughter was Rehersyng hym. hole all the caas Fyrste why that she. oute of her countree wente Shortly. for she nolde not assente To execute. a conspyracyon Made by the wymmen. of that regyon A thyng contrarye. and ayenste all ryght That eche of hem. vpon a certayn nyght By one accorde. shall warly take kepe Fader broder. and husbondes in her slepe with knyues sharpe. and rasours kene Lrytte her throtes. in that mortall tene Vnto this fyne. as Bochas tell can In all that londe. be not founde a man But slayn echone. to this conclusyon That wymmen myght haue domynacyon In that kyngdome. to regne at lyberte And on noo parte. interrupted be But for this lady. passyng debonayre To this morder. was froward and contrarye Lrepte her fader. that he was not slawe But fro the dethe. preserued and wythdrawe For whiche alas. she fled the countree And of a pyrat. taken in the see To kyng Lygurgus. broughten in all drede And for her trouthe. and her womanhede To her he toke his yong childe to kepe whiche in the herber. alone lefte to slepe
whan Tydeus. she brought to welle And by Jason. some bokes telleJason That this lady. had sones two whan that he. and Hercules alsoHercules Towarde Colchos. by her countree cam For tacomplysshe. the conquest of the Ram But who that lyste. by and by for to see The story hole. of this IsyphyleIsyphyle Her faders name. of whiche also I wente Though some seyn. he named was Toante And some bokes. Vermes eke hym call But to knowe. the auentures all Of this lady. Isyphyle the fayre Soo faythfull ay. and Inly debonayre Loke on the boke. that Johan Bochas made whylom of wymmen. with Rothorykes glad And dyrecte. by full souerayne style To fayre Jane. the quene of Secyle Rede there the Rubrysshe of Isyphyle Of her trouth. and of her hye bountye Full craftely compyled. for her sake And whan that she. hath her leue take Of Adrastus. homewarde in her waye Tydeus. gan her to conueye To the gardeyn. tyll she is repayred But now alas. my mater dysepeyred Of all Joye. and of all welfulnesse And destytute. of myrthe and all gladnesse
For now of woo. gynneth the sharpe shoures For this lady founde. among the floures Her lytyll childe. tourned vp the faceHowe the childe was slayn with a serpent Slayne of a serpente. in the selfe place Her tayle burled. with scales syluer shene The venyin. was soo persyng and soo kene Soo perylous. eke the mortall vyolence Caused alas. thorugh her long absence She was to slowe. homewarde for to hye But now can she. but wepe wayle and crye Now can she not. but syghen and complayne And wofully. wryng her hondes twayne Dedely of loke. pale of face and chere And gan to rende. her gylte tresses clere And ofte sythe. gan she saye alas I wofull wretche. vnhappy in this caas what shall I doo. or wheder shall I tourne For this the fyne. yf I there soiourne I wote right well. I maye not escape The pyteous fate. that is for me shape Socoure is none. nor there maye be noo rede Lyche my decerte. but that I mote be dede For thorugh my slouth. and my neclygence I haue alas. done soo grece offence That my gylte. I maye not excuse Shall to the kyng. of treason me accuse Thorugh my defaute. and slouth bothe two His sone is dede. and his heyre also
whiche he loueth. more than all his gode For tresoure. none soo nye his herte stode Nor was soo depe. graue in his corage That he is lykly. to falle in a rage whan it is soo. myne odyous offence Reported be. vnto his audyence Soo Importable. shall be his heuynesse And well wote I. in verray sothfastnesse That whan the kyng. hath this espyed To myne excuse. it maye not be denyed I doubte it not. there geyneth noo pyte with oute respyte. he wyll auenged be On me alas. I haue deserued That fro the deth. I maye not be preserued Nother by bylle. ne supplycacyon For the rage. of my transgressyon Requyreth deth. and none other mede And thus alas. quakyng in her drede None other helpe. ne remedye an But dreynte in sorowe. to the Grekes ran Of hertly woo. face and chere desteyned And her chekes. with wepyng all bereyned In her affraye. dystracte and furyous To forne all. she come to Tydeus And fyll on knees. & gan her complaynt make Tolde playnly. that for Grekes sake She mote be dede. and shortly in substance Rehersyng hym. the grete of her greuance
Fyrste how by traynes. of false serpente The childe was slayne. whyle she was absente In what dysioynte. and perell that she stode And whan that he. her myschyfe vnderstode Vnto her. full knyghtly he behyght To helpe and further. all that euer he myght Her pyteous wo. to stynten and appeale And for to fynde. vnto her dysease Hasty comforte. he wente a full grete pase To Adrastus. and tolde hym all the caas Of this vnhappy. wofull aduenture Besechyng hym. to done his besy cure As he was bounde. of equyte and ryght And aduerten. and to haue a syght How she quyte her. to Grekes here to forne whan they were lykly. for to haue be lorne The socour voyde. of her womanhede Of whiche he muste. of knyghthode take hede To remedyen this vnhappy thyng And Adrastus. lyke a worthy kyng Taquyte hymselfe. the story maketh mynde To this lady. wyll not to be founde vnkynde Nother for coste. nor for noo trauayle But besy was. in all that myght auayle To her socoure. consydered all thynges And by thauyse. of all the worthy kynges Of Grekes londe. they ben accorded thus Prynces dukes. and worthy Tydeus
To holde her waye. and all attones ryde To Lygurgus. dwellyng there besyde Of one entente. yf they maye purchace In ony wyse. for to gete grace For this lady. called Isyphyle They wolde assaye. yf it myght be And to his paleys. full royall bylte of stone The worthy Grekes. cam rydyng euerychone Euery lorde. full fresshely on his stede And Lygurgus. example of manlyhede Anone as he knewe. of her comyng Taquyte hymselfe. lyche a gentyll kyng Agayn hem wente. to mete hem on the waye Full well beseen. and in full good araye Receyuyng hym. with a full kyngly chere And to Adrastus sayde. as ye shall here Cosyn quod he. and gan hym to enbrace ye be welcome. to youre owne place Thankyng hertely. to your hye noblesse That soo goodly. of youre gentyllesse Towardes me. ye lyste you taquyte youre selfe daye. youre Cosyn to vysyte In this castell. to make youre lodgyng That neuer yet. I was soo glad of thyng And all my lyfe. and there to here my trouthe And euermore. there shall be noo slouthe That the chambres. and the large toures Shall be delyuered. to your herberyours
That euery lorde. as is of degree Vnto his lodgyng. assygned shall be Youre offycers. lete hemselfe deuyse If the housyng. maye largely suffyse To you and youres. stretchen and attayne That none estate. haue cause to complayne And all youre hoost. lodged here besyde whiche in tentes. vpon you abyde Lete hem fette. by myne auctoryte Vytayle you here in my cyte And all that maye. hem socoure or saue And at a worde. all that euer I haue Is full and hole. at youre commaundemente Quod Adrastus. that is not oure ententeHow adras¦t{us} & all the stat of gre∣kes prayed lygurg{us} for the lyfe of Isyphyle Nor in noo partye. cause of oure comyng For we come. all for a nother thyng A certeyn gyfte. of you to requyre Benygnely. yf ye lyste to here whiche maye Grekes. passyngly auayle Of youre request. that ye not ne fayle whiche we dare not openly expresse withoute that ye wolde of gentyllesse youre graunte a forne. conferme an ratyfye Than were we bolde. it to specyfye Quod Lygurgus. what thyng euer it be Nought excepted. by oonly thynges thre The fyrste thyng is it. toucheth not my lyfe My yong sone playnly. ne my wyfe
Take all my good. or what ye lyste prouyde Of my tresoure. and sette these thre a syde All the surplus. I counte not at a myte Than Adrastus. astoned was a lyte whan Lygurgus in conclusyon Of his sone. dyde make excepcyon And whyles they thus entreaten I fere There come forth one. with a woofull chere Of face. of loke pale and noo thyng rede A lowde cryeth. the kynges sone is dede Alas the whyle. that whylom was soo fayre After Lygurgus borne. for to ben hayre The whiche alas. hath yolden vp the brethe As a serpente. stongen vnto the dethe And with his wounde. newe fresshe and grene In therber. lyeth that pyte is to sene And hath soo layen. all moost all this daye That whan Lygurgus harde this affraye And wyste his childe was dede. & had no moo Lytyll wounder. though that he were woo For sodeynly. the Importable smerteThe soro∣we ye kyng ligurg{us} ma¦de for ye de∣the of his child & ye la¦mētacōn of the quene Ran anone. and hente hym by the herte That for constreyne. of his dedely peyne Thorugh oute he felte. koruen euery veyne The rage gan myne. in hym soo depe That he can not. but sygh sobbe and wepe And with the noyse. and lamentacyon The quene destraught. is descended doun
And whan she knew. groūde of all this sorowe It nede her noo teres for to borowe But twenty tyme. by vpon a rowe A swoune she fell. vnto the grounde lowe And stounde mele. for this hye myschaūce Styll as stone. she lyggeth in a traūce And whan it. in to the courte was brought Therfore Lygurgus alas. I wyte hym nought Vpon the cors. with a mortall face He fell attones. and gan it to embrace Sore to grype. and agayn vp sterte That whan Adrastus. gan this aduerte Of kyngly reuthe. and compassyon From his eyen. there teres fell doun Eke kynges dukes. that aboute stode O only of pyte. that is in gentyll blode Noo power had the water to restrayne That on her chekes. downe gan to reyne But all a daye. wolde not suffyse All her sorowes. in order to deuyse Fyrste of the kyng. and of the quene also To tellen all. I sholde neuer haue do Nought in the space. all moost of an houre But whan the stormes. and sharpshoures Of her wepyng. was somewhat ouer gone The lytyll cors. was grauen vnder stone And Adrastus. in the same tyde Lygurgus toke. alyte oute asyde
And full wysely. with his prudente speche The quene presente. gan hym for to teche That soo to sorowe. auayle maye right noughtAgayns de the may be no recure To morder hymselfe. with his owne thought Syth los of deth. noman maye recure Though he in woo. perpetuelly endure All helpeth not. whan the soule is go And oure lyfe here. who taketh hede therto Is but an exyle. and a pylgrymage Full of tourmente. and of bytter rage Lyche a see. rennyng to and fro Suyng an ebbe. whan the flode is do Lytyll space. abydyng at full Of whoos soiourne. the ope yeueth noo bull Nor kyng is. nor duke no Emperoure That may hym shroude. agayn yt fatall shoure Of cruell deth. whan hym lyste manasse To marke a man. with his mortall mace That geyneth not. to his sauacyon Nother franchyse. ne proteccyon And lytyll or nought. maye helpe in this caas Saue conduyte. or supersydeas For in this worlde. who loketh a ryght Is none soo grete. of power ne of myght None soo riche. shortly ne none soo holde That he muste dye. other yong or olde And who in youthe passeth this passage He is escaped. all the wood rage
All sorow and trouble. of this presente lyfe Replenysshed. with contek warre and stryfe whiche selde or neuer. stonde in suerte wherfore beste is. as semeth vnto me Noo man grutche. but of hye prudence The sonde of god. take in pacyence And ye that be soo manly to youre lyfe to drowne. in tournement and in wo For losse of thyng. that ye lyste to see whiche in noo wyse. recured may be Is grete foly. and vndyscrecyon And thus Adrastus. hath conueyed doun The substance hole. of that he wolde saye Tyll that he fonde. a tyme for to praye Conuenyente. for Isyphyle Besechyng hym. for to haue pyte Of that she hath. his hyghnesse Not wylfully. but reklesnesse Fyrste that he wolde. his domes to deuyde Mercy preferre. and sette right asyde Atte requeste and prayer. of hem all Of this vnhap. and myscheef that is befall By hasty rygoure. and not to vengaunce But thyng a forne. in his purueaunce who to wretches. dooth mercy in her drede Shall mercy fynde. whan he hath moost nede And syth he hath. power myght and space Lete hym take this lady to his grace
For lacke of ruthe. that she nought dye But tho the quene. gan ayen replye And platly sayde. as in this mater Auayleth not. request nor prayer Pyte mercy. noo remyssyon But yf it be. by this condycyon But yf the serpente. cause of all this sorowe Though his laboure. leye his hede to borowe This is fynall. and vtter recompense To fynde grace. for her grete offence Or shortly shede. blode for blode And whan the Grekes. her answer vnderstode All of one accorde. in her beste wyse Toke on hem. this auentures empryse For loue oonly of Isyphyle And gan to ryde. enuyron the countre By hylles vales. roches and eke caues In dyches darke. and in olde graues By euery coste. serchyng vp and downe Tyllat laste. full famous of renowne The worthy knyght. ParthonolopeHow par∣thonolope sawe fyrste this serpēt was the fyrste. that happed to se This hydeous serpente. by a ryuer syde Grete and horryble. stern and full of pryde Vnder a roche. by a banke lowe And in all haste. he hent a sturdy bowe And there in sette. an arowe fyled kene And thrugh the body. spotted blewe and grene
Full myghtely. he made it for to glyde And rente oute a swerde. hangyng by his syde Smote of his hede. and anone it hente And therwith all. gan the quene presente Where thorugh. her sorow parcell gan a swage And thus of prowesse. and of hye corage This manly man. Parthonolope Hath reconsyled. fayre Isyphyle Vnto grace. fully of the quene Her yre auoyed. and her olde tene And by Adrastus. medyacyon Lryng Lygurgus. graunted a pardon To this lady. that from all daunger fre She was restored. to her lyberte In her paleys. all her lyfe to dwell Though Johan Bochas. the contrarye tell For this auctoure. affyrmed oute of drede That whā this childe. was by the serpent dede She durste not. for her grete offence Neuer after come in presence Of Lygurgus. but of intencyon Fled anone oute. of that regyon Ate herte she toke. the childes dethe soo sore what fell of her. I fynde can noo more Than ye haue herde. me a fore specyfye And the kyngdome. but kookes lyeNota De Ligur∣g{us} rege reg¦ni tracee Of Lygurgus. was I called trace And as I rede. in a nother place
He was the same myghty champyon To Athenes. that cam with palamon Agaynst his brother. that called was Arcyte Lad in his chare. with .iiii. boles whyte Vpon his hede. a wreth of golde full fyne And I fynde eke. how Bachus god of wyneBachus de¦us vinū with this kyng. was whylom at debate Oonly for he. pompous and elate Destruccyon dyde. to his vynes And for he fyrste. allaye sette on wynes Meynte water. where they were to strong And this Bachus. for the grete wrong Brake his lymmes. and dreynte hym in the see Of Lygurgus. ye gete noo more of me But the trouth. yf ye lyste verryfyeNotādū de xii arbori{us} in libro bo¦chacii de ge¦neologya deo{rum} Rede of goddes. the geneologye Lyneally. her kynrede by degrees Ibraūched oute. vpon twelue trees Made by Bochas. Decertaldo called Amonge poetes. in Itayle stalled Next Frauncys. petrarke suyng in certayn Vnto Grekes. I wyll retourne agayn To telle forth. shortly yf I canne Of her Journey. that they haue begonne How Adrastus. hath his leue take Of Lygurgus. with his browes blake And departyng. with saynt Johan to borowe Made his wardes. on the next morowe
Soo well beseen. soo myghty and soo stronge wonder erly. whan the larke songe with a trompette. warned euery man To be redy. in all the haste they can For to renne. and noo lenger lettyng make And soo they haue. the ryght waye take Towarde Thebes. the Grekes euerychone That suche a nombre. gadered in to one Of worthy knyghtes. neuer a forne was sayne whan they in fere. moustren in a playne And they ne stynte. by none occasyon Tyll they become. euen a forne the town And pyght her tentes. proudely as I rede Vnder the walles. in a grene mede And whan the Thebans. weren besette aboute The manly knyghtes. wolde a yssued oute And haue scarmesshed. in her lusty pryde with her fomen. on that other syde But by byddyng of Ethyocles All thylke nyght. they kepte hemselfe in pees By cause oonly. that it was soo late with grete awayte. set at euery gate Men of armes. all the nyght wakyng On the walles. by byddyng of the kyng Leste there were. treynes or treason And on the coures. and in the chyfe dongon He sette vp men. to make mortall souns with brasen hornes. and lowde claryons
Of full entente. the watches for to kepe In his warde. that noo man ne slepe And Grekes proudly. all the long nyght Lryndly fyres. and made full grete lyght Set vp lodgyng. vpon euery syde Lyke as they solde. euer there abyde Compas the towne. there was noo voyde space But all besette. her fomen to manace And whyles they. a forne the Cytee layethe forraye yt the Gre∣kes made in ye coūtre aboute the bes On euery coste. they sente oute the forraye Brente townes. thorpes and vyllages with grete Rauyne. makyng her pyllages Spoyle and robbe. and brought home vytayle And all maner sortes of bestayle Shepe and neet. and in her cruell rage with houndes slowe. all that was sauage Herte and hynde. both buk and do The blak bore. and the wylde Roo The fatte swyne. and the tusshy bore Caryeng all home. for the Grekes store whete and wyne. for her auauntage Hay and otes. foder and forage with this kalendes. as hem thynk due Grekes gan the Thebans to salue Mynystryng hem. occasyons fell The sege sette. shortly for to tell Of full entente. in her hatfull pryde For lyfe or deth. there vpon to abyde
Who soo euer therwith be agreued Tyll they fully. her purpos haue acheued There maye therof. be maked noo reles And of this. full ware Ethyocles Gan in partye. gretely meruayle whan that he sawe. the grete apparayle Of the Grekes. the Cytee rounde aboute And in hymselfe. had a maner doubte None atte poynte. what was beste to doo For thylke tyme. it stode with hym soo That to some. abydyng in the town He had in herte. grete suspeccyon Leste towarde hym. they were vnstable And to his brother. in partye fauorable For in the Cytee. there was varyaunceThe vary¦ance in the bes yt cytee among hē selfe whiche vnto hym. was a grete meschaunce For in his nede. shortly he ne wyste Vpon whome. that he myght tryste For they were not all of one entente For whiche he hath. for his councell sente All his lordes. and the olde quene whiche as he dempte. were pure and clene Hole of one herte. and not varyable Of olde experte. and alwaye founde stable Requyryng hym. by cause they were wyse All openly. to tellen her auyse where it where. bet playnly in her syght with his brother. to treaten or to fyght
And some gafe. a full blonte sentence whiche had of werre. none experyence Sayde it was beste. and not be aferde To trye his right. manly with his swerde And some also. that were more prudente Spake vnto hym. by good aduysemente And lyste not spare. but theyre conceyte tolde How it was beste. his couenante for to holde And to perfourme. his heste made to forne To his brother. lyche as he was sworne Soo yt his sworde. the wors to make hym spede Be not founde varyaunte. fro noo dede For none hatred. rancoure nother prydeNota The wor∣des of ye que¦ne Jocasta vnto ethyo¦cles ye kyng And tho the quene. toke hym oute a syde Tolde hym playnly. it was vnsyttyng Suche doublenesse. to fynde in a kyng And sayd hym eke. all though he were strong To his brother. how he dyde wrong As all the towne. wyll recorde in dede And bere wytnesse. yf it came to nede wherfore lete vs shape a nother mene In this mater. whyle that it is grene Or this quarell. gonne of volunte Tourne in the fyne. of more aduersyte For yf it be. darreyned by batayle who trusteth moost. maye lykely fayle And it is foly. by shote aduysementeHow pery∣lous it is to be goūned by Marces in ony qua¦rell To put a stryfe. in Martis Jugemente
For harde it is. whan a Juge is wood To treate a forne hym. withoute losse of blood And yf we putte it hole in Marte That with the swerde. his lawes dooth coarte Than may it hap. where ye be glad or lothe Thou and thy brother. shall repente bothe And many a nother. that is here presente Of youre trespace. that ben Innocente And many thousand. in caas shall complayne For the debate. oonly of you twayne And for youre stryfe. shalte fynde full vnswote And for thou arte. gynnyng grounde and rote Of this Iniurye. and this grete vnryght To the goddes. that here of haue a syght Thou shalte a countes. and a rekenyng make For all tho. that perysshen for thy sake And now the cause. dryuen is soo ferre Sodeyn peas. or hasty warre Muste folowe anone. for the fatall chaunce Of lyfe and deth. dependeth in balaunce And noo man maye by noo crafte restrayne That vpon one. platly of these twayne The sorte mote falle. lyke as it dooth torne whos that euer. laughe or morne And thou arte dryue. soo narowe to the stake That thou mayste not. mo delayes make But fyghte or treate. this quarell for to fyne Be none engyne. thou canste it not declyne
An hasty casse. as folke seyn that ben wyse Redresse requyreth. by full shorte auyse For to treate longe. now auayleth nought For to the poynte. sothly thou arte brought Eyther to kepe. thy possessyon Or in all haste. deuoyde oute of this town where thou therwith. be wroth or well apayde Now note well. all that I haue sayde And by my councell. wysly condescende wrong wrought. of olde newly to amende The tyme is come. it wyll be none other wherfore in haste. treate well with thy brother And ageyn hym. make none resystence But to thy lordes. fully yeue credence By whoos counceyll. syth they be soo sage Lete Polymyte. reioyse his herytage And that shall tourne. moost to thyne aueyll Loo here is hole. the fyne of oure counceyll And shortly tho. for verray yre wroth Though he therto. frowarde was or loth Accorded is. heryng all the pres If he algate. treate shall for pees It muste be. by this condycyon That he wolde haue. the domynacyon Fyrste in chyfe to hymselfe reserued As hym thought. he had it well deserued And saue to hym. hole the soueraynte And vnder hym. in Thebes the Cyte
He to graunte. with a right good chere Polymyte. to regne for a yere Than auoyde. and not resorte agayne For more to cleyme. was not but in vayne Thus wolde he done. oonly for her sake And other wyse. he wolde none ende make with the Grekes. what fortune euer falle And fynally. among his lordes all There was not one. of hye ne lowe estate That wolde gone on bassate Oute of the towne. nother for bette ne worse Tyll Jocasta. made sadell her horse And caste her selfe. to gone for this treate To make an ende. yf it wolde be And this was done. the morowe right by tyme Vpon the houre. whan it drowe to pryme And with her went. her yong doughters tweyne Antygone. and the fayre Imeyne Of her meyne. full many one aboute At gate she was conueyed oute And of purpos. she made fyrste her wente On horse bak. to the kyng Adrastus tente He and his lordes. beyng all I fere And they resceyue her. with right glad chere Suyng her. lyke to her degre On euery halfe. full grete humanyte Polymyte rysyng. fro his place And humbely. his moder gan embrace
ryssed her. and than Antygone And Imeyne. excellente of beaute And for that they were passyngly fayre Grete was the pres. concours and repayre Of the ladyes. for to haue a syght And Jocasta. procedeth anone ryght To Adrastus. her mater to purpose And gan to hym. openly dysclose Thentente and wyll. of Ethyocles And by what mene. he desyreth pees To hym reserued. as she can specyfye The honour and hole. and the regalye with the septure. & crowne fro hym not deuyded But hole to hym. as he hath prouyded And Polymyte. vnder this condycyon Vnder hym to regnen. in the town As a subgette. by suffraūce of his brother But the Grekes. thoughten all a nother And specyally. worthy TydeusThe āswe¦re of tyde{us} to ye quene Playnly affermyng. it sholde not be thus For he wyll haue noo condycyons But sette a syde. all excepcyons Noo thyng reserued. as in specyall But hole the lordshyp. regaly and all Polymyte. it fully to possede In Thebes crowned. verrayly in dede As ryghtfull kyng. put in possessyon Lyche the couenantes. and conuencyon
Imade of olde. assured and essealed whiche shall not now. of newe be repleted But stabyll and hole. in his strengthe stonde And lete hym soo. platly vnderstonde And fyrste yt he. deuoyde hym out of the towne And delyuer. the septure and the crowne To his brother. and make there of noo more And shortly ellys. it shall be bought full sore Or this mater. brought be to an ende For Grekes is there none. yt shall hens wende Or that oure right. whiche is vs denyed with lyfe or deth. dereyned be and tryed we ne wyll. erst fro this towne rennewe And yf hym lyste. all this to eschewe And all myschyfe. stynten and appease To eyther parte. he maye doo grete ease Thus I mene. for his auauntage Delyuer vp hole. the trewe herytage To his brother. for a yere to endure And Grekes shall hym. fully assure By what bounde. that hym lyste deuyse The yere complete. in oure best wyse To hym delyuer. ayen possessyon withoute stryfe. or contradyccyon And to his fyne. Justly holde vs to And yf it falle. that he wolde not so Lete hym not wayte. but oonly after warre The houre is come. we wyll it not deferre
oo here is all. and thus ye maye reporte To hym agayn. whan that ye resorte Fro whiche a poynte. we caste vs not to varye And yet to hym. Amphyorax contrarye Full playnly sayde in conclusyon This fyne shall cause a destruccyon Of hem echone. yf it forth procede To be perfourmed. and executed in dede But thylke tyme. for all his eloquence He had in soth. but lytyll euydence For where soo euer. it mente good or yll Kyng Adrastus. bad hym to be styll And tho Jocasta. as wysdome dyd her teche Humble of her porte. with full softe speche Gan seke meanes. in her fantasye If she myght. the yre modefye Of the Grekes. to make hem to enclyne In ony wyse. her rancoure for to fyne She dyde her deuoyre. and her besy cure But tho befell. a wounder aduenture Cause and grounde. of grete confusyon Grekes perturbyng. and eke the town And it telle. maye not me asterte For whiche a while. my style I mote dyuerte And shortly telle. by descrypcyon Of a Tyger. dwellyng in the town whiche from a kyngdome. besyden adiacente Oute of Egypte. was to Thebes sente
Whiche beste. by recorde of scrypture Is moost swyfte. as of his nature And of his kynde. also moost sauage And moost cruell. whan he is in his rage And as clerkes. maken mensyon He of body. resembleth to a lyon And lyke a greyhoūde. the mosell and the hede And of eyen. as ony fyre rede Eke of his skynne. wryten as I fynde Lyche a panter. conuersaunte in ynde With all maner. hues and colours And is full ofte desceyued with myrrours By fraude of hunters. and false apparence Shewed in glas. withoute exystence Whan his kyndles. arn by sleyght Itake And he desceyued. maye noo rescuse make And lyke a lambe. was this Tyger tame Ayen kynde. myne auctour wryte the same And this beste. merueylous to se Was sente. to Imeyne and antygone Whiche vnto hem. dyde grete comforte And coude playe. and make grete dysporte Lyke a whelpe. that is but yonge of age And to wyght. dyde noo domage Noo more in south. than dooth a lytyll hounde And it was worth. many a hoūdred pounde Vnto the kyng. for ay in his greuaūce There was no thyng. dyde hym more plesaūce
That for no tresoure. it myght not be bought For whan that he was. in pensyfe or in thought It put hym oute. of his heuynesse And thylke tyme. the story dyde expresse That Jocasta. treated for a pes This tame Tyger. in partye rekles Oute of the gates. in syght of many a man In to the felde. wyldly oute ran And casuelly. rennyng to and fro In and oute. as dooth a tame Ro Grekes wenyng. that were yong of age That this Tyger. had be sauage And cruelly besectyng all the place Rounde abounte. gan hym to enchase Tyll he was dede. and slayn in the felde The deth of whome. whan that they behelde The proude Thebans. whiche on ye walles stode They ronne downe. full furyous and wode Wenyng he had. ben slayn of despyte Takyng her hors. withoute more respyte Fully in purpos. with Grekes for to fyght The Tygers deth. tauenge yf they myght And oute they rode. withoute gouernayll And full proudely. Grekes gan assayll And of hatred. and hye dysdayne Fyll vpon hem. that haue the Tyger slayne And cruelly quyten hem her mede That many Greke. in the grene mede
By the force. and the grete myght Of her fomen. laye slayne in the syght The Tygres dethe. soo dere they a bought Soo mortally. the Thebans on hem wrought That all the Ooste. in the felde lyggyng Was astoned. of this sodeyn thyng And in this whyle. of rancoure reckles Oute of Thebes. rode Ethyocles And with hym the worthy kyng Tremoure Of his honde a noble werryoure That made Grekes. to forsake her place And to her tentes. gan hem enchace And myd the felde. as they togyder mette On horse bake. with speres sharpe whette Of veray hate. and enuyous pryde Full many one. was dede on euery syde The whiche thyng. whan Tydeus espyethThe grete māhode of worthy ty∣deus Wood as a lyon. to hors bak hyeth As he that was. neuer a dele aferde But ran on hym. and mette hem in the berde And maugre hem. in his crueltee He made hem fiee. home to her Lytee Hem pursuyng. of full dedely hate That many one. laye slayn at gate Gapyng vpryghtes. with her woundes wyde That vtterly. they durste not abyde There for the swerde. of this Tydeus He was on hem. soo passyng furyous
Soo many Theban. he rofe to the herte That whan Jocasta. the slaughter gan aduerte Polymyte. she gan praye full fayre To make Grekes. home agayne repayre And that they wolde stenten to assayle For thylke daye. and seasen her batayle Atte whoos requeste. playnly and prayer And at reuerence. of his moder dere Polymyte. hyr herte to comforte Grekes made. home ageyn resorte And Tydeus to stynten. of his chace And they of Thebes. hastyng a grete pace Full tryste and heuy. ben entred in to the town And for the Tygre. in conclusyon As ye haue herde. fyrste began this stryfe That many Theban. that daye loste his lyfe And reculees. haue yolden vp the breth In thauengyng. of the Tygre is deth And all this whyle. duely as she ought The quene Jocasta. humbly besought Lryng Adrastus. oonly of his grace Some mene waye. wysly to purchace To make a peas. a twene the brethern tweyne And the treate. soo prudently ordeyne On eyther partye. that noo blood be shad And this Adrastrus. wyse and ryght sad For Grekes partye. answere gaue anone That other ende. shortly gete she none
Lyche as the lordes. fully ben aduysed That Tydeus. hath to forne deuysed And whan she sawe. it maye none other be She leue toke. and home to the Cyte She is repeyred. hauyng to her gyde Polymyte rydyng by her syde And Tydeus. lad Antygone And of Archadye. Prothonolope The worthy kyng. dyde his besy peyne To be attendaunte. vpon fayre Imeyne Whos herte she hath. to her seruyce lured And he agayne. hath prtrayed and fygured Myd of his breste. that lyghtly maye not passe Hole the fetures. of her fresshely face Hym thought she was. soo fayre a creature And though that he. durste not hym dyscure Yet in his herte. as ferforth as he can He hath auowed. to be hyr trewe man Uwyste to her. playnly and vnknowe How he was marked. with Cupydys bowe with his arowe. sodeynly werreyed And to the yate. the ladyes conueyed Ben entred in. for it drewe to eue Grekes of hem. takyng tho her leue Though some of hem. were lothe to departe yet of wysdom. they durste not inparte Under a conduyte. to entren in to the town Leste it tourned. to her confusyon
Though some bokes. the contrarye sayn But myn auctoure. is platly there agayn And fermeth. in his oppynyon That Tydeus. of hye dyscrecyon Of wylfulnesse. nor of folye Ne wolde as tho. putte in partye Nother hymselfe. ne none of his feres And the ladyes. with heuenly there Angelyke. of loke and contenaunce Lyche as it is putte. in remembraunce Atte her entryng. fro Grekes in to the town Polymyte. of grete affeccyon The quene besought. thylke nyght not fyne For to assaye. yf she myght enclyne Ethyocles. of conscyence and ryght To kepe couenaunte. as he hath behyght Full yere ago. with the superlusage Leste the contrarye. tourne to domage Fyrste on hymselfe. & syth on many other moo And thus from Thebes. the Grekes ben a goo To her tentes. and reste hem all the nyght And Lucyna the mone. shone full bryght within Thebes. on the chyfe dongon whan Jocasta. made relacyon Unto the kyng. and tolde hym all the gyse How that the Grekes. vtterly despyse His profer made. by false collusyon Only excepte. the conuencyon
Of olde engrosed. by grete purueaunce That is enrolled. and put in remembraunce Upon whiche. fynally they wyll reste Hym conseylyng. her though for the beste To conferme hym. to that he was bounde Leste in the fyne. falsnesse hym confounde But all her counseyll. he sette at noo pryce He dempte hymselfe. soo prudente and soo wyse For he was wylfull. and he was Indurate And in his herte. of malyce obstynate And vtterly aduysed. in his thought within Thebes. his brother gette right nought And in his erroure. thus I lete hym dwell And of Grekes. forth I wyll you tell whiche all that nyght. kepte hemselfe close And on the morowe. whan tytan vp a rose They armed hem. and gan hem redy make And of assente. haue the felde Itake with the Thebans. that day oute of doughte For to fyghten. yf they yssue oute And Adrastus. in full trysty wyse In the felde. his wardes gan deuyse As he that was. of all deceytes ware And rychely armed in his chare Amphyorax come. with his menye Full renomed. of antyquyte And well experte. by cause he was olde And whyle that Grekes. as I haue you tolde
were besyeste. her wardes to ordeyne Myd of the felde. befell a caas sodeyne Full vnhappy. lothsome and odyble And lyche a thyng. that were Inuysyble This olde bysshop. with chare & horse certeynHow bys∣shop āphio¦rax sodeyn¦ly fell dow¦ne in to hell Dysapered. and noo more was seyn Oonly of fate. whiche noo man can expelle The erthe openeth. and he fyll downe to helle with all his folke. that vpon hym abode And sodeynly. the grounde that he on stode Closed agayn. and togyder shytte That neuer after. Grekes with hym mette And thus the deuell. for his olde outrages Lyche is deserte. payde hym his wages For he full lowe. is descended dewn In to the darke. and black rogyon where that Pluto. is crowned and Istalled with his quene. Proserpyna called with whome this bysshop. hath made his man∣syon Perpetuelly. as for his guerdon Loo here the mede of ydolatrye Of ryghtes olde. and of false mammentrye Loo what auaylen Incantacyons Of exorsysmes. and coniurysons what stode hym stede. his nygramancye Calculacyon. or Astronomye what vayled hym. the heuenly mansyons Dyuerse aspectes. or constellacyons
The ende is not. but sorowe and myschaunce Of hem that setten. her vtter affyaunce In suche werkes. superstycyous Or truste on hem. he is vngracyous Recorde I take. shortly for to telle Of this bysshop. sonken downe to helle whoos wofull ende. aboute in euery coste Suche a rumor. hath made in the oste That the noyse. of this vncouth thyng Is I ronne. and I come to the kynge How this vengaūce. is vnwardly falle And he anone. made a trompette calle All his people. oute of the felde agayne And euerychone. assembled on a playne Tofore the kyng. and also rounde aboute Euery man of his lyfe in doubte Full pyteously. gan to froune and loure Leste that the grounde. hem all wolde deuoure And swalue hem. in his darke kaue And they ne can. noo recure hem to saue For neyther force. ne manhode may hem auayle In suche myschyfe. the value of a mayle For he that was wyseste. coude moost To serche and seke. thorugh oute all the oost Amphyorax. whan he leste wende To helle is sonken. and can not hym defende To hym the tyme. vnknowen and vnwyste In whom whylom. was all the Grekes tryste
Her hole comforte. and her affyaunce But all attones. for this sodeyn chaunce And this myschyfe. they gan hem all dyspeyre Home to Grece. that they wyll repeyre This was the purpos. of hem euerychoon And on the walles. of Thebes lay her foon Reioysyng hem. of this vnhappy eure wenyng therby. gretly to recure And on her towres. as they loken oute They on Grekes. enuyously gan shoute And of despyte. and grete enuyte Bad hem foles. gone ho to her contre Syth they haue lost. her comforte & her socoure Her fals prophete. and her dyuynoure where thrugh. her parte gretly is appeyred And in this wyse. Grekes dysespeyred Dempte playnly. by tokens euydent This case falle. by so enchantement By wytchecrafte. or by false sorcerye Agaynste whiche. maye be noo remedye Trysty defence. helpe nor socoure And whan Adrastus. herde this clautoure He besy was. agayns this perturbance To prouyde. some maner cheuysance And to hym calleth. suche counsell as he wyste For lyfe or deth. that he myght truste Requyryng hem. but in wordes fewe In this myschyfe. her mocyon to shewe
And declare by good auysemente what to Grekes. were moost expedyente To remedyen. and make noo delaye The vncouthe noyse. and the grete affraye That Grekes made. with clamour Importune And nowe and nowe euer. in one contune And they yt weren. moost manly & moost wyse Shortly sayd. it were a grete cowardyse The empryse. that they haue vndertake For drede of dethe. soo sodeynly forsake It were to hem. a perpetuell shame And oure hyndryng. vnto Grekes name And better it were. to euery werryoure Manly to deye. with worshyp and honoure Than lyke a cowarde. with the lyfe endure For ous shamed. harde is to recure His name ayen. of what estate he be And syth Grekes. of olde antyquyte As of knyghthode. who soo lyste take hede Ben soo famous. and soo renomede If now of newe. the shynyng of her fame Eclypsed were. with ony spot of blame It were a thyng. vncouth for to here Of whoos renon. the bemes yet ben clere Thrugh all ye world. where as they haue passed And ben nor yet. dyrked ne defaced By noo reporte. neyther on see ne on londe Thyng to forsake. that they toke on honde
And by ensample. of oure progenytours That whylom weren. soo manly conquerours To forne that we. in to Grece wende Of thyng begon. lete vs make an ende And parte not. nor seuere fro this town Tyll it be brought. to destruccyon walles toures. crested and embatayled And for werre. strongly apparayled Be fyrste downe. bete that noo thyng be seen But all togyder. to the erthe pleyn Be lowe layde. or that we resorte That afterwarde. men maye of vs reporte That we began. knyghtly we haue achened Vpon oure foon. with worshyp vnrepreued This was the counsell. shortly and thauyse Of the Grekes. that manly were and wyse That none aforn. were marked with no blame And specyally. suche as drede shame And fully caste. what fortune euery tyde On her purpos. to the ende abyde That on noo parte. her honour not appall And this counsell. Grekes one and all Ben condescended. for more happy spede In stede of hym. that was soo late dede Amphyorax. buryed depe in helle That coude whylom. to the Grekes telle Of thynges hyde. how it shall falle a forne In stede of whome. now they haue hym lorne
They casten hym. wysly to purchase Some prudente man. to occupye his place That in suche thyng. myght hem moost auayle Thorugh storye. of his dyuynayle By crafte of sorte. or of prophecye If ony suche. they conden oute espye And among all. her purpos to attayneHow Gre¦kes chosen hem a new dyuynoure in ye stede of āphyorax ye bysshop As I fynde. they haue chosen twayne Moost renomed. of hem euery chone And Menolyppus. called was that one And Tardynyus. eke that other hyght And for he had. moost fauoure in her syght This Tardynyus. was chosen and preferred And her choys. Grekes haue not arred For whylom. her lerned is empryse Of his mayster. Amphyorax the wyse And was dyscyplyne. vnder his doctryne And of entente. that he shall termyne Vnto Grekes. thynges that shall fall And as bysshop. mytred in his stall Done for hym. in many vncouth wyse In the Temple. to goddes sacryfyse And thus confermed. and stalled in his see And fell dayes. stode in his degree After his mayster. with full grete honoure Of Grekes chose. to be successoure And all this tyme. in story as it is tolde Full grete myschyfe. of hunger thrust and colde
And of Thebans. as they yssuen oute Laye many one slayn in the route On eyther parte. of fortune as they mette Her mortall swerdes. were soo sharpe whette And Tydeus. among hem of the town Fro daye to daye. playeth the lyon Soo cruelly. where soo that he rode That Thebans none. a forne his face abode He made hem. thrugh his hye renon Soo grete slaughter. and occasyon That as the deth. fro his swerde they fled And who came next. leyde his hede to wed He quyte hymselfe. soo lyke a manly knyght That where he wente. he put hem to the flyght And maugre hem. in his crueltee He drofe hem home. in to theyr Lytee Hem pursuyng. proudly to the gate That vnto hym. they bare soo dedely hate That they hem caste. by slyght or some engyne To bryng hym. vnwarely to his fyne And leyde awayte. for hym daye and nyght But o alas. this noble manly knyght Vpon a daye. as he gan home enchase And mortaly made. hem to lese her place And sued hem. almoost to the town That cause was. of his destruccyon For one alas. that on the walles stode Whiche all that daye. vpon hym abode
With a quarell. sharp heded for his sake Marked hym. with a bowe of brake Soo cruelly makyng. none aresteHow pyte∣ously wor∣thy tydeus was slayn wt a quarel Tyll it was passed. bothe back and breste Where thorugh alas. there was none other rede Nor lechecrafte. that he mote be dede There maye therof. be made noo delayes And yet was he. holden in his dayes The beste knyght. and the moost manly man As myne auctoure. well reherse can But for all that. was there noo defence Agayn the stroke. of dethes vyolence And Bochas wryte. or he was fully dede He was by Grekes. presented with the hede Of hym that gaue his laste fatall wounde And he was called. lyke as it is founde Menolyppus. I can not other telleHow he yt slow tyde{us} called was menolipp{us} But thylke daye. Thebans waxe soo felle Vpon Grekes. that vnder her Lyte The manly kyng. Parthonolope Islayn was. euen a forne the gates And there also. armed bryght in plates The famous kyng. called ypomedon The same daye. as made is mencyon On horse back. manly as he faught Atte brygge. euen vpon the draught Besette with pres. casuelly was drowned And thus fortune. hath on Grekes frouned
On euery syde. thylke vnhappy daye But all the maner. tellen I ne maye Of her fyghtyng. nor her slaughter in sothe More to declare. than myn auctour dothe But thylke daye. I fynde as ye maye seen Whan phebus. passed was merydyen And fro the south. westwarde gan hem drawe His gylte tresses. to bathen in the wawe The Theban kyng. fell Ethyocles Rote of vnreste. and causer of vnhappes The slaughter of Grekes. whan yt he behelde Armed in stele. he come oute in to the felde Full desyrous. in that sodeyn hete Polymyte. atte good leyser to mete Syngulerly. with hym to haue a doo For in this worlde. he hated noo man soo He satte soo nye. emprented in his herte Whoos comyng oute. his brother gan aduerte Vpon his stede. in the opposyte And had agaynwarde. also grete delyte To meten hym. yf fortune assente Thenuyous fyre. soo her hertes brente With hate cankred. of vnkynde blode And lyke twoo Tygres. in her rage wode With speres sharpe. grounde for the nones Soo as they ran. and mette bothe attones Polymyte. thrugh plates mayle and shelde Rofe hym thrugh out. & smote hym in to ye felde
But whan he sawe. the stremes of his blood Rayle aboute. in maner of a lood All sodeynly. of compassyon Fro his courser. he a lyght down And bretherly. with a pyteous face To saue his lyfe. gan hym to vnbrace And fro his wounde. of newe affeccyon Full besy was. to pull oute the tronchon Of loue oonly. handlyng hym ryght softe But o alas. whyle he lay a lofte Full yrously. Ethyocles the fell Of all this sorowe. verray sours and well with a dagger. in all his paynes smerteHow eue∣ryche of ye theban bre¦thern slow other to f∣ren the cyte His brother smote. vnwardly to the herte whiche all her lyfe. had be soo wrothe And thus the Thebans were slayne bathe Atte entre. euen a forne the towne But Grekes tho ben aayled downe Oute of the felde. the worthy knyghtes all And in Thebes londe. as ony shall The Cytee arose. whan her kyng was dde And to the gates. armed fote and hede Out of the towne. come many proude Theban And some of hem. vpon the walles ran And gan to shoute. that pyte was to here And they withoute. of her lyfe in where withoute comforte. or consolacyon Dysespyred. ronne home to the town
And Grekes folowen after atte back That many one. that daye gooth to wrack And as her fomen. proudly hem assayle Full many grekes. thrugh plates & thrugh mayle was shet thrugh. oute pressyng at walles And beten of. whiche with grete roūde balles That here laye one. and a nother yonder And the noyse. more hydeous than thonder Of gonne shotte. and arblastes he So londroute rong. that many worthy Greke There loste his lyfe. they were on hem soo fell And at the gates. shortly for to tell Atte Grekes pres. to entren the Cytee They of Thebes. in her crueltee with hem mette. full furyous and woe And mortally. as they agayn hem stode Men myght see. speres shyner a sonder That to beholde it was a verray wonder How they feyne. with daggers & with swerdes Thorugh the vyser. hauyng at berdes Persyng also. thrugh the rounde mayles Rente oute peces. of her auantayles That nought auayleth. the myghty gestran Thrugh breste & neck. yt the myghty speres ran Her wepenes were. soo sharpe grounde & whette In there armure. that there were noo lette For there laye one. troden vnder fote And yonder one. persed to the herte rode
Here lyet one dede. and there a nother lame This was the playe. and the mortall game Attwene Thebans. and the Grekes proude That the swonnes. and the cryes loude Of hem that laye. and yolden vp the goste was herde full fer. aboute in many coste And atte gates. and saylyng of the wallHowe alle the gentyll blood of ye lond of gre¦es & of the bes ye Cyte destroyed was vpon a daye I slayne was. all the blood Royall Both of the towne. and of Grekes londe And all the worthy. knyhtes of her honde And of lordes. I shall not fayne On grekes syde. a lyue were but twayne Lryng Adrastus. and Campaneus That daye to hem. was soo vngracyous And for tytan. westred was soo lowe That noman myght. vnnethes other knowe Tho of the towne shette her gates faste with arres rounde made. for to laste In whiche noo wyght. kerue maye ne hewe And Adrastus. with a Grekes fewe Repeyred is home. vnto his tente And all that nyght. he hasted and spente For his vnhap. in sorowe complaynyng And they in Thebes. the next daye suyng Her deuoyre dyde. and her besy cure To ordeyne. and make a sepulture For her kyng. Islayne in the felde And offred vp. his baner and his shelde
It were a deth. to ony man a lyuewarde he bes And yf I sholde. by and by dyscryue Theyre tender wepyng. and her wofull bale Her complayntes. with taces dede and pale Therof I myght. make a newe tale All moost. a daye you to occupye And as myn auctoure. clerely dooth certefye Through oute Grece. fro all the Regyons Oute of Cytees. and Royall towns Come all the ladyes. and wymmen of estate Full heuy chered. and dysconsolate To this assemble. to forn as I you tolde I purpose fully. her Journey for to holde Towarde Thebes. these sorowfull creatures There to bewayle. her wofull auentures Taquyte hemselfe. of trouth in womanhede To her lordes. whiche in the felde laye dede And as the story. lyketh to declare All this Journey. they wente on fote bare Lyke as they had gone. on pylgrymage In token of mornyng. barbed the vysage wympled echone. and in burnette wedes Not in chares. drawen forth with stedes Nor on palfrays. blake neyther whyte The sely wymmen. coude hem not delyte To holde her waye. but bare fote they wente Soo faythfully. euerychone they mente Thorugh heuynesse. defaced of her hewe
And as I fynde. they were all trewe Now was not that a wonder for to see Soo many trewe. oute of oo coūtree Attones gadred. in a companye And feythfull all. bokes can not lye Bothe in her porte. and Inwarde in menyng Vnto my dome. it was an vncouthe thyng Among a thousande wymmen or twayne To fynden one. that coude in herte fayne It was a meruayle. not ofte seen a forne For selde in feldes. groweth ony corne But yf some wede. spryng vp there among Men allaye wynes. whan they be to strong But her trouth. was meynt with none allayes They were soo trewe. fonde at all assayes And they ne stynte. vpon her Journee Tyll that they come. there as they wolde be where Adrastus wryten. as I fynde Laye in his tente. all of coloure ynde Gretly meruayled. whan that he behelde The nombre of hem. sprad thrugh all the felde Clad all in blacke. and bare fote euerychone Oute of his tente. he dressed hym anone Vpon his honde. the kyng Campaneus Full tryste in herte. and face ryght pyteous Agayn the wymmen forth. they wente I fere And to beholde. the wofull chere The wofull cryes. also whan they mette
The sorowfull syghes. in her brestes shette The teres newe. dystyllyng on her faces And the swounyng. in many sondry places Whan they her lordes. alyue not ne founde But in the felde. thrugh gyrte with many woū¦de Laye starke vpryght. playnly to endyte with dedely eyen. tourned vp the whyte who made sorowe. or felte her herte ryue For her lorde. but the fayre Argyue who can now wepe. but Deyphyle Tydeus for she. ne myght fele whoos constrayntes. were soo kene That Adrastus. myght not sustene To beholde the ladyes. soo complayne wysshyng her herte. parted were on twayne But yet alas. bothe eue and morowehow cursed Creon wyl not suffre ye bodyes ney¦ther to be buryed ne to be brent▪ A thyng there was. that doubled all her sorowe That olde Creon. fader of felonye Ne wolde suffre. thorugh his tyrannye The dede bodyes. be buryed neyther I brente But with bestes. and houndes to be rente He made hem all. vpon an hepe be layde wherof the wymmen. tryste and euyll apayde For verray dooll. it was no wonder Her hertes felte. all moost reyne a sonder And as my mayster. lyste to endyte All clad in black. with her wymples whyte with grete honoure. and due reuerence
In the Temple. of the goddesse Clemence They abode the space. of forty nyght Tyll Theseus. the noble worthy knyght Duke of Athenys. with his chyualrye Repeyred home. out of Femynye And with hym ladde. full fayre vpon the sene Thorugh his manhode. Ipolyta the quene And her suster. called Emelye And whan these wymmen. gan fyrste espye This worthy duke. as he came rydyng ryng Adrastus. hem all conueyeng The wymmen brought. to his presence whiche hym besought. to yeue hem audyence And all attones. swounyng in the place Full humbly. prayed hym of grace To rewe on hem. her harmes to redresse But yf ye lyste. to see the gentylnesse Of Theseus. how he hath hym borneHow the fy¦nall destruc¦cion of the∣bes is com¦pendiously rehersed in the knyght tale yf ye remembre. ye haue herde it to fore well rehersed. at Depforde in the vale In the begynnyng. of the knygtes tale Fyrste how that he. whan he herde hem speke For verray reuthe. felte his herte breke And her sorowes. whan he gan aduerte Fro his courser. downe anone he sterte Hem comfortyng. in full good entente And in his armes. he hem all vp hente The knyghtes tale. reherseth euery dele
Fro poynte to poynte. yf ye loke wele And how this duke. withoute more abode The same daye. towarde Thebes rode Full lyke in sothe. a worthy conqueroure And in his Oste. of chyualrye the floure And fynally. to speken of this thyng with olde Creon. that was of Thebes kyng How yt he faught. & flow hym lyke a knyght And all his oost. put vnto flyght yet as some auctours make mencyon Or Theseus entred. in to the town wymmen fyrste. with pykeys and with malles with grete laboure. bete downe the walles And in her wrytyng. also as they sayn Campaneus. was on the walles slayn with caste of stone. he was soo ouerlade For whome Adrastus. suche sorow made That no man myght. hym relees of his payne And Jocasta. with her doughters twayne Full wofully. opressed of her cheres To Athenes. were sente as prysoners what fell of hem. can I not seyn But Theseus. myne auctoure wryte certeyn Oute of the felde. or he from Thebes wente He bette hit downe. and the houses brente The people slowe. for all her cryeng loude Made the walles. and her towres proude Rounde aboute. euen vpon a rowe
with the soyle. to be layde full lowe That nought was lefte. but the soyle all bare And to the wymmen. in relees of her care The bones of her lordes. that were slayneThe bones of her lor∣des were de lyuered to the ladyes by duke the seus▪ This worthy duke. restored hath agayne And what sholde I. than lenger dwell The olde rytes. by and by to tell Nor the obsequyes. in order to deuyse Nor to declare. the maner and the gyse How the bodyes. were to asshes brente Nor of the gomes. in the flamme spente To make the ayer swetter of reles As frankensence. myrre and aloes Nor how the wymmen. rounde aboute stode Some with mylke. and some also with blode And some of hem. with vrnes made of golde whan the asshes. fully were made colde To enclosen hem. of grete affeccyon And bere hem home. in to her regyon And how that other. full dedely of her loke For loue oonly. of the bones toke Hem to kepe. for a remembrance That to reherse euery obseruance That was done. in the fyres bryght The wake playes. duryng all the nyght Nor of the wrastlyng. to tell poynt by poynt Of hem that weren. naked and enoynt How eueryche other. lugge gan and shake
Nor how the wymmen. haue theyr leue take Of Theseus. with full grete humblesse Thankyng hym. of his worthynesse That hym lyste. on her woo to rewe And how that he. his fredome gan renewe with the wymmen. of his hye larges I parted hath eke. of his rychesse And how this duke. Thebes eke forsoke And to Athenes. the ryght waye toke with laurer crowned. in sygne of vyctorye And the palme. of conquest and glorye Dyde his honoure. duely to Marte And how the wȳmen. wepte whan they departe with kyng Adrastus. home ayen to ArgeHow ye kyn¦ge Adrast{us} with the la¦dyes repey∣red ayen ho¦me to Arge To tell all. it were to grete a charge And eke also. as ye sholde vnderstonde Atte gynnyng. I toke noo more on honde By my promyse. and in conclusyon But to reherse. the destruccyon Of myghty Thebes. shortly and noo more And thus Adrastus. with his lockes hore Styll abode. in Arge his Cyte Vnto his ende. ye gete noo more of me Saaf as myn auctoure. lyketh to compyle After that. he lyued but a whyle For he was olde. or the sege began And thought and sorowe. soo vpon hym ran The whiche in sothe. shorted hath his dayes
And tyme sette. deth maketh noo delayes And all his Joye. passed was and gone For of his lordes. a lyue was not one But slayn at Thebes. ye knowen all the cas And what this kyng. in Arge buryed was Full royally. with grete solempnytee It was accompted. in bokes ye maye see Foure hundred yere. as made is mencyonFoure hun¦dred yere to forn the fū¦dacōn of ro¦me was the¦bes fynaly destroyed To forne the byldyng. and foundacyon Of grece Rome. soo Royally and soo large Whan the ladyes. departed fro Arge To her coūtrees. full tryste and desolate Loo here the fyne. of conteke and debate Loo here the myght. of Mars the myghty sterre Loo what it is. to gynne a werre How it concludeth. ensample ye maye see Fyrste of Grekes. and next of the Lytee For eyther parte. hath mater to complayne And in her stryfe. ye maye see thynges twayne The worthy blood. of all Grece spylte And Thebes eke. of Amphyon fyrste bylte Withoute recure. brought in to ruyne And with the soyle. made playn as a lyne To wyldernesse tourned. and deserte And Grkes eke. falle in to pouerte Both of her men. and also of her good For fynally. all the gentyll blood Was shad oute there. her woūdes were soo wyde
To lose fynall. vnto eyther syde For in the werre. is none excepcyon Of hye estate. nor lowe condycyon But as fortune. and fate bothe I fere Lyste to dyspose. with her double chere And Bellona. the goddesse in her chare A forne prouydeth. therfore eche man beware Vnauysed. a werre to begynne For noo man wote. who shall lese or wynne And harde it is. whan eyther parte leseth And doubteles. neyther of hem cheseth That they muste. in all suche mortall rage Maugre her lyste. folowe grete domage It maye not be. by mannes myght restrayned And werre in soth. was neuer fyrste ordeyned But for synne. folkes to chastyse And as the byble. truly can deuyseNota How yt wer¦re fyrst be∣gan in he∣uen by pry¦de & surque dye of prou¦de Lucyfer Hye in heuen. of pryde and surquedye Lucyfer. fader of enuye The olde serpente. he Leuyathan Was the fyrste. that euer wrre began Whan Mycaell. the heuenly champyon With his fers. vaynquysshed the dragon And to helle. caste hem downe full lowe The whiche serpente. hath the bockell sowe Through all eth. of enuye and debate That vnnethes. is there none estate Withoute stryfe. can lyue in charyte
For euery man. of hye and lowe degre Enuyeth now. that other sholde thryue And groūde and cause. why that men so scryue Is couetyse. and false ambycyon That eueryche. wolde haue domynacyon Ouer other. and trede hym vnder fote Whiche of all sorowe. gynnyng is and rote And cryste recordeth. rede the boke & ye maye se For lack of loue. what myschyfe there shall be For oo people. as he dooth deuyseSurget gens con¦tra gentē Luce xxi Agayn another. of hate shall aryse And after tellyth. what dyuysyons There shall be. at wene regyons Eueryche besyde other to expresse And all suche stryfe. as he bereth wytnesse Lralendes ben. I take his worde to borowe And a gynnyng. of myschyfe and of sorowe Men haue it founde. by experyence But the venym. and the vyolence Of stryfe of werre. of contek and debate That maketh londes. bare and desolate Shall be proscrypte. and voyded oute of place And Martys swerde. shall noo more manace Nor his spere. greuous to sustene Shall now noo more. whetted be soo kene Nor he noo more. shall his hauberk shake But loue and peas. in hertes shall awake And charyte bothe. in lengthe and brede
Of newe shall. her bryght bemes sprede Through grace oonly. in dyuers nacyons For to reforme. atwene Regyons Peas and quyete. concorde and vnyte And he that is both. one and two and thre Eke thre in one. and souerayn lorde of pease Whiche in this exyle. for oure sake these For loue oonly. oure troubles to termyne For to be borne. of a pure virgyne And lete vs praye to hym that is moost good That for mankynde. shed his herte blood Thrugh besechyng. of that heuenly quene Wyfe and moder. and a mayde clene To sende vs peas. here in this lyfe presente And of oure synnes. parfyte amendmente And Joye eternall. whan we hens wende Of my tale. thus I make an ende AMEN ¶ Here now endeth as ye maye see The destruccyon of Thebes the Lytee
