18474 99848394 13484
AN ANSVVER TO THE IEVVISH PART OF Mr SELDEN'S HISTORY OF TITHES. By STEPHEN NETTLES, B. of Divinity. PROV. 3.9, & 10. 9.  10. 9. Honour the Lord with thy riches, and with the first fruits of all thine encrease. 10. So shall thy barnes be filled with abundance, and thy presses shall burst with new wine. seal of the University of Oxford AC: OX AT OXFORD, Printed by IOHN LICHFIELD, & WILLIAM TVRNER, Printers to the famous Vniuersity. 1625.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL DOCTOR PRIDEAVX, Rector of Exceter Colledge, His MAIESTIE'S Profes∣sour in Divinity, and Vice-Chancellour of the Vni∣versity of Oxford. Reuerend and worthy Sir, THE combination of zeale and learning wherewith God hath honourd You, the loue You beare to the He∣brew studies, and the cause handled in this litle tract, together with the mani∣fold
fauours You haue pleased to vouch∣safe me (being as yet vnknowne vnto You) haue beene the Allectiues to this small remembrance; whereby coveting to shew my thankefulnesse, I first offer vnto you the first fruits of these my poore indeauours. And albeit comming now to write in this manner, after the diuers treatises of tithes already ex∣tant, I know it is but litle that can either be performed, or expected from me in this subiect: yet as the Iewes in gathering their fruits in Haruest, beside their ob∣lations and tithes, had also their  Levit. 19.9. Deut. 24.19, 20. i. the corner of the field, the glea∣ning, and the forgotten sheafe, which were assigned to the vse and benefit of the poore: so in some respect may I judge these scattered, slender, and poore
Collections to be much of the like nature; and therefore desiring to cast my mite into the treasury of the Church, I pre∣sent them vnto You; in hope that as You haue already afforded them Your fauou∣rable Construction, so You will please al∣so to assist them, so farre as truth re∣quires, with your willing and able prote∣ction. And thus beseeching the Almighty to blesse You and Your worthy labours to his glory, and the good of the Church, I take my leaue, and rest Your Worships in all Christian duty to be commanded STEPHEN NETTLES. Lexden, May 4. 1625.
THE PRAEFACE. WHereas diuers Trea∣tises haue bin publi∣shed heeretofore in way of answer to the Booke intituled The History of Tithes; it may be, after this long silence, it will now seeme strange, and be thought a worke al∣together vnseasonable and superflu∣ous, either to write or speake any more of that subiect. Notwithstan∣ding because the Historian himselfe and many others, led rather with af∣fection, then judgement, doe still much magnifie among the rest, the
Iewish part of that History, (as though some hidden matters of im∣portance were involued therein) I hope it shall not be offensiue to any, (sith this passage as yet hath not bin scanned) if I as another witnes in the same cause, endeauour only to bring in some evidence not yet ex∣plained, that may helpe to vnfold & cleare sundrie doubts and questions in this kind. For albeit the Author of the History in the Praeface there∣of, offring it to the triall of the most censorious examination, with a challenge against all opponents in his poëticall phrase; Si falsa est, accingere contra, &c. doth thereby insinuate that he hath written nothing but infallible truth: And though also the authoritie of
the Iewish Writers against the di∣vine right of the Church in Tithes, be alleaged with much confidence and ostentation, and receiued also with great applause, and more then ordinary approbation: yet let praeju∣dice and partiality with other sini∣ster respects be laid aside, and I make no doubt but there will appeare as much defect and errour, euen in this part of the History, as in any other whatsoeuer; and that the writings of the Iewes, though we depend not on them (because in many things they are vaine and fabulous) yet take them as they are, being tru∣ly related, will afford more grounds of proofe for the diuine right of Tithes, then either hath as yet from them, or can bee shewed against it.
I did wish & expect that a more able workeman would haue vndertaken this taske; and therefore these papers of mine, which long since haue bin viewed and censured, were neither at the first intended, nor after haste∣ned to the Presse. But seeing in all this time I heare of no other dis∣course of this nature, either perfor∣med or promised, I haue at length yeelded to the desire and perswasion of such as might command me to publish this; the rather, because not long after the first appearing of the History, I did in a publike Sermon take exception against diuerse parts thereof, which being distastefull to some hearers, I thought it did con∣cerne me for better satisfaction, as∣well to the Eye as to the Eare, to ju∣stifie
with my pen, what I avouch∣ed in the Pulpit; and the same, toge∣ther with other obseruations, to pre∣sent to open view: the intendment whereof ayming at nothing else but manifestation and confirmation of truth, I am not carefull, neither doe I thinke it needfull, for this attempt to make any long apology. Hauing therefore thus much praemised in way of Praeface, I now passe for∣ward vnto our purpose.
AN ANSVVER TO THE IEVVISH PART OF Mr SELDEN his History of Tithes. SECT. 1. THere are two things for which this History being duely exa∣mined doth discouer it selfe worthy to be taxed: The first is the wresting of holy Scrip∣tures against their true sense: The other, the boasting of Iewish Rabbines without any soundnesse or shew of reason: for the Author (as it seemeth) bearing no good affection either to Priest, or payment of Tithes, when he would draw a text of Scripture to his pur∣pose, he doth vsually garnish and set it forth with the expositions of the Iewes, and that in generall termes, as though he had them all at his fingers ends, and all of them were on his side, when as notwithstanding it will appeare that sometimes none rightly vnder∣stood, sometimes insteed of all, only one is cited; as on that Text, Levit. 27.30. Also all the tithe of the land, both of the seed of the ground, and of the fruit of the trees is the Lords, it is holy to the Lord. The Hi∣story saith, cap. 2. pag. 13. The Iewes apply this Scrip∣ture to the second Tithe. The Iewes are here propoū∣ded
in generall, yet there is none quoted but Salomoh Iarchi.Cap. 2. pag. 16. So on Deut. 26.12.  he saith this place of the yeare of tithing is interpreted by the common glosse of the Iewes, by the yeare of one Tithe, &c: and yet none is cited but Salomoh Iarchi; not∣withstanding when Salomoh Iarchi speaks any thing that may seeme to make for the diuine right of ti∣thing, then his testimony is curtol'd & contradicted, as is plaine in the very beginning of the History, Gen. 14.20. And Abraham gaue him tithe of all, that is (saith he)  of all that he had, as the ordina∣ry glosse of Salomoh Iarchi there interprets. But here he leaues out these words,  i. be∣cause he was the Priest, the whole sentēce being thus, , that is; And Abraham gaue him tithe of all that he had, because he was the Priest; which later clause containes a reason why Abraham payde the Tithes to Melchisedek, namely because he was the Priest, implying thereby both a right in Melchisedek to receiue them, and a duty in Abraham to pay them; and so saith R. Bechai on that text:  i. According to the opinion of our Ancestors he was a Priest indeed, and therefore Abraham gaue him the Tithe. This is also further confirmed by the like testi∣mony of Ramban, Deut. 14.18.
i. And hee was the Priest of the most high God. To shew that Abraham would not giue the Tithe to the Priest of strange gods, but because he knew him that he was the Priest of the most high God, therefore hee gaue him the tithe, for the honor of God. And hereby was signified to Abraham, that there should be the house of God, and thither his posterity should bring the tithe & the therumahs or oblations, and that there they blesse the Lord. Of what credit this Ramban is, Mercer on Genesis, in the beginning, pag. 3. tells vs in these wordes. R. Mose Ben Nachman, quem Ramban per Nun in fi∣ne appellant, qui & Moses Gerundensis, cum alius R. Mose ben Maimon, qui Rambam per Mem in fine vo∣catur, sit; qui R. Moses Aegyptius dicitur; vter{que} vir insignis. etsi Iudaei vt & caeteri sint cum iudicio le∣gendi. Now this Testimony of Ramban implyes in it these things, 1 That Abraham was to pay tithe to some one Priest or other. 2 That not onely the Priests of the true God, but also the Priests of strange gods among the Gentiles, did in those times receiue Tithes. 3 That Abraham payde the Tithes to the ho∣nour of God. 4 That this payment was a president and type of the future payment of his posterity. 5 That the payment of Tithes was annexed to the place of God's worship. Aben Ezra on this Text, and also on Gen. 28. ver. 22. writes in a manner to the same effect: and on
Gen. 35.1. he saith of Iacob: i. And in Bethel he performed his vow and gaue the Tithe of his substance for the honour of God to him that was in that generation for to receiue it; That is, to the Priest; for in the Apostles language, Heb. 7. a Priest and a receiuer of Tithes are aequipollents. In∣steed of saying, Men that die are Priests, he saith, Men that die receiue Tithes. Insteed of saying, He that liues is a Priest, he saith, He that liues takes tithes: as if in his iudgment Tithes and Priesthood were in∣separable: And therefore the Emphasis of the phrase he vseth, Heb. 7.6. ; that Melchi∣sedek tithed Abraham, shewes both that he had au∣thority to take Tithes, and seemes also to subiect A∣braham to a necessity of being tithed, which is the same that Iarchi meanes in the testimony before ci∣ted; saying that Abraham payde him tithe of all that he had, because he was the Priest. I haue the rather in∣sisted vpon this, that the Historian hath left out and excluded the Priest from receiuing Tithes, because it seemes he doth it of set purpose; for otherwise to what end doth he set downe those words in the be∣ginning (And gaue him tithe of all) in that vncer∣taine manner, not following any translation, but lea∣uing it doubtfull who should here be the giuer? or for what cause doth he tell vs afterward. That were it not for the holy exposition in that Epistle to the He∣brewes the relation in Genesis might as well bee vn∣derstood that on the other side, Melchisedek as a boun∣teous
Ancestor had giuen to Abraham the tenth part of his estate, the text indeed being both in the Hebrew and Septuagints so, that no name immediatly prece∣ding the mention of the gift, it sufficiently thence ap∣peares not who was the giuer. &c. This supposition is somewhat strange, to which I may answere both for the thing suposed, and the consequent thereof, that if it were  lse, we might with him conceiue it to be true;  Apostle doth assure vs that it is false; to what end therefore is it related? for though he goe about to iustifie this as∣sertion in his Review, pag. 450. by the authority of Fa∣thers, & acknowledge no fault at al to be in it: yet how can this satisfie? is it not a fault to call in question, or make a doubt of that which the holy Scripture hath put out of doubt? is it not a fault to oppose the ima∣gination of mans braine against the determination of God's truth? As for the testimony of S. Hierome, writing not his owne, but the Iewes opinion, and other Fathers here alleadged, it hath already bin sufficiently answe∣red by others, and therefore both in this and many things else, my labour as it hath bin prevented, so it may very well bee spared, for I come but to gleane after others reaping. Neither will I here recite the expositions of the Iewes against this conceit, who generally vnderstand the Text according to the true interpretation thereof in the Epistle to the Hebrewes. But suppose for argument sake that the holy Apostle had not fully cleared this truth; yet that which the Historian would hereupon inferre, will not follow,
viz: That Melchisedek as a bounteous Ancestor, had given to Abraham the tenth part of his estate, or as a portion to one of his posterity, (as hee speakes in his Review) but that he gaue the tenth or tithe to Abra∣ham, as a duty still belonging to the Priest; for in that sense doe those Iewes take it, which were the first au∣thors of this fancie, that Melchisedek payd tithe to Abraham, for they write, that the Priesthood was translated from Melchisedek to Abraham, because that Melchisedek vsed a preposterous order in his blessing, in that he first blessed Abraham, and after blessed God, as it were preferring the seruant before the Master: as R. Bechai and Chaskuni and others re∣late on Gen. 14.20. And to this they apply that in Psal. 110.4. Thou art a Priest for euer. That is, because of the word that Melchisedek did speake, as Rabbi Chimki there interprets it, and Iarchi concerning Abraham, which also they haue from the Talmud in Massech. Nedarim cap. 3. fol. 32. But this is not generally receiued: for Aben-Ezra on Gen. 14: reiects it, saying, That Melchisedek spake as was fitting, and did well in that he blessed Abraham; first because he volunta∣rily offered himselfe to saue those that were led cap∣tiue; and afterward he said: and blessed be God that did helpe him, and gaue his enemies into his hand: & therefore he interprets those words in the Psalme,
i. according to the order or custome: or else saith that the letter Caph is here wanting; i. Thou art a Priest for euer. i. because thou art as Melchisedek was; & of him it is written, Gen. 14.18. & he was a Priest of the most high God: which agrees with the Syriacke translatiō,  i. after the similitude of Melchisedek: as also with the Epistle, , according to the order of Melchisedek: and in the Arabique,  like Melchisedek. So then howsoeuer some interpreters may differ, and make needlesse scruples & doubts in their glosses on the Text, yet take it which way you will, this one thing appeares to be the generall cōsent of the Iewes, that the Tithes still followed the Priesthood. If any say, the Priesthood is now abolished, and therefore also the Tithes; the answer is easie & com∣mon, that this is true for the Leviticall Priesthood, & the Leviticall payment of Tithe. But the Priesthood after the order of Melchisedek, is not abolished, nor the Tithes to the same belonging, as the Apostle shewes, Heb. 7.8. And here men that die receiue tithes. but there he receiueth them, of whom it is witnessed, that he liueth. Besides, the Iewes themselues acknowledge, that he which is a Priest after the order of Melchisedek, hath right to take Tithes, as Melchisedek did: for so are the expresse wordes of Aben-Ezra on Psal. 110.4. The Lord sware, &c.
i. Thou art a Priest. Euery Priest is a Minister: and so it is said, 2 Samuel. 8.18. and the sonnes of Dauid were Priests, that is, to serue the Lord: And beholde the meaning is, that Israel shall fight, and thou shalt take the tithe, as Melchisedek tooke it of Abraham. I am not ignorant that the Iewes diuersly expoū∣ding this Psalme, sonne of Abraham, soone of Dauid, sonne of Messiah, teach that the word  is taken not only for a Priest, but also for a Prince. But Aben-Ezra here contradicts this; for though, as he confes∣seth Esay 43.28. the Priests are called  i. the Rulers or Princes of the Sanctuary; yet he deny∣eth that  doth any-where signifie a Prince, as on Gen. 14.18. and 41.45, &c. And very plainly on that Text, Esay 61.6. But yee shall be named the Priests of the Lord, and men shall say vnto you, the ministers of our God. He thus writeth, i. I haue heretofore affirmed, that euery Priest is al∣wayes taken for a Minister, as here it is witnessed, the Priests the Ministers of our God. And so doth he in this text interpret the word Priest, & not Prince, & saith; that this Priest shall take tithe as Melchisedek did: Now the reason why the Iewes thus constantly chal∣lenge the Tithe as due to the Priest, is; for that they hold the Tithe to be God's part, and allotted by him vnto the Priest, so doth Ramban expressely teach on Gen. 14.
i. Abraham would not take to himselfe so much as a threed or shoo-latchet, but he did separate God's part to giue it to the Priest. And so Esay 5.8, Woe vnto them that ioyne house to house, &c. Iarchi saith, i. Ye rob God of his part in tithes. So also he expoūds that of Malach. 3.8. The tithes and offerings whereof ye spoyle the Priests & Levites.  that is, the spoyling of me. And in the Talmud Baba Kamah, cap. 7. fol. 69. it is said,  i. the tenth or tithe is god's riches: which agrees with that text of Levit. 27.30. All the tithe of the land, &c. is the Lord's, it is holy to the Lord. Nay the Iewes goe further in this kind, and teach that the Tithe is so the Lords, as that a man hath no right to the nine parts, till he hath giuen God the tenth, as R. Bechai testifi∣eth on Deut. 14.23. i. The tithe of thy corne and of thy wine. If thou pay the tithe▪ it is thy corne; if not, it is my corne. If thou pay the tithe, it is thy wine; if not, it is my wine: for it is said Hose. 2.9. Therefore I will returne, and take away my corne in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof. That God chose the tenth for his part, Aben-Ezra on Deut. 14. takes vpon him to render a reason for it, which hee draweth from the perfection of number, ten in simple numbers being the highest we can arise
vnto, without iteration of numbers vnder it, being as he tearmes it, i. The beginning of the second Combination, and the end of the first, whereupon all other numbers doe de∣pend. But I will not stand vpon such nice argumenta∣tions, the certainty of the truth & the equity thereof being otherwise cleered. Abarbinell on Levit. 27.30. teacheth, that the tenth part is consecrate to God in regard of his prouidence and blessing of the fruits of the earth. And to this purpose R. Bechai on Deut. 14.22. writes thus;  i. Thou shalt giue the tithe of all the increase, &c. &c. i. It is the fashion of the world, if a man haue ground, he puts it out to halfes, or for a third or fourth part, but it is not so with the Almighty; for he casseth the windes, raiseth the Cloudes, sends downe raine, disper∣seth the deaw, makes fat the fruits of the Earth, and yet requires but one part of ten; therefore Moses ad∣monisheth Israel diligently to pay the Tithe. And hence it was, that euen before the Law, they held the payment of Tithes not to be a voluntary ob∣lation, but a necessary duty, and worke of iustice and righteousnesse; and therefore Ramban on Gen. 14. saith, that the King of Sodom did intreat Abraham to
giue him the persons. i. after he saw the bounty of his heart, and his righte∣ousnes, in that he gaue the tithe. By these and such like speeches, together with their reasons be∣fore-mentioned, the Iewes ordinarily declare the Tithe to be God's part, and to be payd to the Priest by a perpetuall right. And the force of these reasons stands good, not only for the time vnder the Law, but also for the time both before and after the Law; for Malach. 3.6. God changeth not, neither is his arme shortned, or his goodnes to his creatures in blessing the fruits of the Earth diminished. In this therefore the Iewes speake no otherwise concerning Tithes, then the auncient Fathers of the Church and Councills haue spoken in former times: Among the rest Concilium Lateranense primum, cap. 54. saith thus: Cùm non sit in homine quod semen serenti respōdeat, quoniam iuxta verbum Apostoli, 1 Cor. 3.7. Ne{que} qui plantat est aliquid, ne{que} qui rigat, sed qui incrementū dat Deus: ipsum quidem de mortificato semine pluri∣mum fructum afferente, nimis avarè in decimis qui∣dam defrandare nituntur, &c. And againe in the same place; Cùm autem in signū vniuersalis dominij quasi quodam titulo speciali sibi dominus decimas re∣servaverit; nos &c. thereupon they decree there, ut decimae ante tributa solvantur. So also Concil. Tri∣bur. cap. 13. speakes in right of Tithes. Quid si diceret dominus, nempe meus es homo, mea est terra quam co∣lis,
mea semina quae spargis, &c. and in the end giues these reasons for the payment of them: Decimae offe∣rendae sunt à populo, ut hàc ratione Deus placatus, lar∣giùs praestet quae necessaria sunt, & ut ministri Eccle∣siae exinde relevati, liberiores fiant ad spiritualis offi∣cij expletionem, &c. And this selfe-same reason is v∣sed by R. Chaskin on Numb. 18.20. But I returne againe to the History, where wee may obserue, that as the testimony of Iarchi was be∣fore mangled and maymed, by leauing out a princi∣pall part of it; so in the next words his meaning is restrained and perverted; for whereas Iarchi writes, that Abraham gaue Melchisedek tithe of all that he had, because he was the Priest; Here now the Histori∣an saith; But it is hard to conceiue it of any other, all that he had, then all the substance, or all the spoyles that he had by that expedition. And yet on the other side more hard and harsh is the conceit of those, that to spoyle the Church of Tithes, doe teach, that Abra∣ham payd nothing else but only tithe of spoyles. It is the aduise of Salomon, Prov. 20.18. Establish the thoughts by counsell, and by counsell make warre. And it is not to be thought that the Patriarch Abraham wanted this wisdome, or that he would vndertake a busines of such consequence and importance in any rash or vnadvised manner, but with prouident care & due praeparation. For Luke 14.31. What King going to make warre against another King, sitteth not downe first, and taketh counsell whether he be able, &c. Nay R. Levi Ben Gershon in his Collections from Iudg. 3. doth propound Abraham for a patterne and an ex∣ample
of warinesse and policy in this kind; teaching that as it is meet to make warre by counsell, so much more when his enemies are too strong for him, as A∣braham did when he went to battell against the foure Kings,  for he diuided himselfe against them by night, that they might not perceiue him. He therefore that was thus carefull and circumspect in his actions, and able also to pursue the enemy with 318 persons, train'd vp in his own house, did no doubt in like sort furnish them euery way, & tooke with him sufficient & necessary prouision for that warre, which either was all spent before Melchi∣sedek met him, or else why should he not pay tithes of that, being his own goods, aswell as of the spoiles, vnlesse he had tithed them before, when as the Text saith, he gaue him tithe of all, especially considering his answer to the King of Sodome, ver. 23. and his pra∣ctise in the buriall of Sarah, Gen. 23.13. together with the like practise of Dauid in the 2. of Sam. 24.24. That his prouision was so slender, that all was spent before he met Melchisedek, it is not likely; for it appeares by the circumstances of the Text, that Abraham very speedily preuail'd, and considering the distance of place betwixt Hebron in the land of Iu∣dah, and Damascus out of the land, he obtained the victory (as the Iewes write) in an extraordinary and miraculous manner: so saith Ramban on Gen. 14.15. And therefore ver. 20. Melchisedek said vnto him; Blessed be the most high God, which hath deliuered thine enemies into thy hand. Againe, hauing speedi∣ly vanquisht the enemies, he needed not waste much
of his own substance; for he was now otherwise pro∣uided, hauing to sustaine his soldiers with the spoiles that he had taken, and so he did as it is the Text ver. 24. saue only that which the yong men had eaten. And this practise vpon like occasion was vsuall, as Aben-Ezra signifies on Numb. 31.32. And the booty being the rest of the prey which the men of war had caught was sixe hundred thousand, and seuenty thousand, and fiue thousand sheep. i. the rest of the prey besides that which they had ea∣ten: for therefore it is called the rest, saith he. Abra∣ham then being furnished with the spoyles, might here well spare his own goods: for certainly in this case the equity of the Apostles rule stands in force: Who goeth a warfare any time at his own cost? 1 Cor. 9.7. And therefore the Targum attributed to Iona∣than Ben Vziel, if it be of any credit, he gaue him tithe  of all that he brought bach again, may comprehend all that Abraham brought backe againe, aswell of his owne goods, as of the spoyles. And the Targum of Onkelus doth restraine nothing, but speakes full as large as the Text, saying; i. And he gaue him a tenth part of all. But let vs goe on with thhe History. And to free it from doubt, the holy Author of the Epistle to the Hebrewes first vsing the Text of Gene∣sis in these words,  the tithe of all, after a few words interposed, explaines it by , the tithe of the spoyles, as if he had
said, , the tithe of all the spoyles. This manner of expounding the Text, cannot stand; for besides the vnsit connection, or rather con∣vulsion of two seuerall texts, to make a new sense a∣gainst the intendment of the Apostle, and iudgment of all interpreters, his conclusion is not sound: for A∣braham did not pay the tithe of all the spoiles; but on∣ly of his owne part of the spoyles: The young men had eaten part of them, before Abraham came to Melchisedek, as I lately mentioned. And if Abraham paide tithe of all the spoyles, then he payde of that which was not his own, which to doe were iniustice; for Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre, which were confederate with him, Gen. 14.13. and went with him to warre, had also their share and part in the spoyles. ver. 24. And hence it is that Iarchi on this text, touching the parting of the spoyle, saith; that Dauid learned of Abraham, when he said 1 Sam. 30.24. As his part is that goeth downe to battell, so shall his part be that tarryeth by the stuffe, they shall part alike. And there∣fore it is further said in that place as he wel obserueth, i. And it was so from that day and before. And he made it a statute and an ordinance; but it is not said from that day forward, because it was already made a statute in the dayes of Abraham. Therefore it is t ue that Abraham payde tithe of all, & also of the spoiles, but not , of all the spoyles; but
generally as Iarchi saith it,  of all things that he had. Some are so farre from thinking that Abraham payde tithe of all the spoyles, as that on the contrary they hold, that he payde no tithe of the spoyles at all, because he said to the King of Sodome, that he would not take so much as a threed or shoo-latchet of all that was his. But Ramban answeres this, in the testimony before cited, where he saith, &c. i. Abraham would not take to himselfe so much as a shoo-latchet, but he did separate God's part, to giue it to the Priest. But it will be said, by what right did A∣braham giue the tenth as God's part out of other mens goods? To this R. Abuhab makes answer, explai∣ning the exposition of Ramban in these wordes, &c. i. It may seeme at the first view, that Abraham's in∣tent and will was to take all the substance to himselfe; and this is that which the Scripture testifieth, that he gaue the tithe, euen as a man giues the tithe of his goods. And so it is said, the King of Sodome came forth to meet him, that is to say, in respect of his substance; & when he saw that he did not giue it him, nor consent thereto, he intreated him, saying, giue me the persons. But our Rabbine is not cleare or resolute in his expo∣sition; for behold Abraham said, I will not take of all that is thine so much as a threed or shoo-latchet, &c. for
so according to this exposition he should pay tithe of that which was not his owne; to this therfore our Rabbine saith, that certainly by right it was his, but by reason of his great kindnesse and exceeding bounty, he would not take any thing, for Abraham trusted in his God, that he would giue him substance, and riches, and honor, and therefore would take nothing from him, lest he should say that he made Abraham rich. The drift therefore of this answer is in effect to shew that Abraham gaue tithe of the spoyles, and yet of his own goods, for that the spoyles were his owne gotten in iust warre, and giuen without any wrong to the King of Sodome; and whereas Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre retain'd to themselues their part of the spoyles, it shewes that Abraham's giuing of his part, was of his owne voluntary curtesie, and not of any necessity. By this therefore that hath bin al∣leadged, it is euident, according to the opinion of the Iewes, that Abraham dayde tithe of the spoiles, yet they doe not teach, that he payde tithe only of the spoyles, but the contrary; for R. Chaskuni saith on Gen. 14: That the bread and wine which Melchise∣dek brought forth, was  that is, such things as were not tithed, i. To the end that Abraham might set apart the tithe thereof. Therefore in his iudgment something else was then tithed beside spoyles: on those words in Gen. 25, 27. and Esau was a cunning hunter, Iarchi hath this glosse,
i. He was cunning to deceiue and beguile his father with his words, asking him, father how doe they tithe salt? how doe they tithe straw or chaffe, that his father might thinke that he did accurately study the com∣mandements of the Law. R. Bechai doth also relate this on the same Text. Now these & such like glosses, though in themselues idle and fabulous, yet they make this one thing plaine, that in those times they held tithes due to be payde, and that they were also payde of other things besides spoyles. Aben-Ezra on Gen. 28.22. expounds the words of Iacob, of all that thou shalt giue me will I giue the tenth to thee.  i. of all the goods that thou shalt giue me will I giue the tenth to thee. And why may we not likewise thinke that his grandfather Abraham payde tithe also of all the goods that God did giue him? either now at this meeting of Melchi∣sedek, or else at other times: when as the Apostle makes the tithing here to countervail the tithing in the Law? Some say here of Iacob, as R. Bechai on Numb. 18. notes from Pirke R. Eliezer, that  i. he gaue also the tenth of his sonnes as holy to the Lord: which beginning with Beniamin, and so numbring them backward, they take to be Levi, euen as in tirhing their sheep, that which goeth last into the Coat, comes first out; and so saith Abarbinel on Levit. 27.30. But this is re∣iected hy Aben-Ezra on Gen. 28.22. saying,
i. That Levi should be the tenth, it is a figuratiue ex∣position, and not according to the letter; for it is not in the Law, that a man should giue the tenth of his sonnes, but the tenth of bullocks, and of sheep, and of in∣crease. Where he takes this for granted, that such tithes were to be payde by the Patriarches before the Law, as were vsually payde afterward in the time of the Law, otherwise his reason were nothing. In like manner may we say that Abraham payde not onely the tenth of spoyles, for it is not in the Law that a man should giue only the tenth of spoyles, but the tenth of bullocks, and of sheep, and of increase. Again the same Rabbine on Levit. 27. making mention of Abrahams tithing, and Iacob's tithing; which relation to the manner of tithing vnder the Law, giues vs to vnderstand, that in his conceit both for the things ti∣thed, as also for the yearely payment of them, the or∣der and practise was alike. But what should I speake of the Rabbines? doth not the Apostle himself in the Epistle to the Hebrews, comparing Abraham's paying of tithe with the pay∣ment to Levi vnder the Law, implye that the pay∣ment was alike in both? for when he saith, Heb. 7.9. Levi also which receiueth tithes, payde tithes in A∣braham. Shall we imagine that Levi receiued tithes of diuerse things according to the Law, but payde tithes in Abraham only of the spoyles? Or that Mel∣chisedek Priest of the most high God, to whom the Iewes say Tithes were payde, because he was the Priest, was confined and stinted perpetually to take
tithe of nothing else but only spoyles? How will that agree with the scope of the Apostle in that place, who to proue the excellency of Melchisedek's Priesthood, among other reasons draweth one principall argu∣ment, amplified with diuerse circumstances à iure de∣cimandi, from the right of tithing. His right therfore in tithing must no way be lesse, but rather greater then Levi's was; which being proued only by the practise of Abraham's tithing; the Apostle doubtlesse doth here intend, that such Tithes at the least as Levi receiued, such also he payde in Abraham. But Levi did not receiue Tithes only of the spoiles; therefore he did not pay Tithes only of the spoiles. Nay I adde further, that Levi did not receiue any Tithe of the spoyles, or any part of the spoyles at all; for so the Iewes teach from these Texts of Scripture, Deut. 18.1. The Priests of the Levites, & all the Tribe of Levi, shall haue no part nor inheritance with Israel; that is, saith Iarchi,  i. They shal haue no part in the spoyle, nor inheritance in the land. Likewise Numb. 18.20. And the Lord said vnto Aa∣ron, thou shalt haue no inheritance in their land, nei∣ther shalt thou haue any part among them: where a∣gaine is the same glosse of Iarchi,  i. They shall haue no part euen in the spoyle. And this is also confirmed by Ramban, and by R. Bechai on the same Text. i. Our Doctors teach. In their land thou shalt haue no
inheritance at the time of the diuision of the land, & thou shalt haue no part among them in the spoyle. I am thy part or portion, thou shalt feed at my Table. And whereas Numb. 31.28.29. a tribute was taken of the prey, one of fiue hundred from the souldiers part, and one of fifty from the peoples, which was giuen to Elea∣zar and to the Leuites; Ramban in way of explanati∣on, answereth that doubt in these words, &c. i. This tribute was offered, because the spoyle came by the executing of God's vengeance vpon a land that was not theirs, Numb. 25.17. but in the land of Sihon and Og, they gaue not to the Priests and Leuites any thing thereof, for they were admonished to the contra∣ry, where it is said, i. Thou shalt haue no part among them, no not in the spoyle. And R. Bechai doth likewise confirme this wri∣ting on the same Text. How then can Abraham's paying of Tithe be compared with that of the Law, if Abraham payde nothing but tithe of spoyles, and in the Law they payde no tithe of spoyles at all? Or to what end is it said; Levi that receiued tithes, payde tithes in Abraham, except he payd in Abraham some such tithes as he did receiue? and if so, then somthing else beside spoyles, for Levi receiued no tithe of spoyles, if we may beleeue the Iewes. Againe, when the Apostle saith, ver. 8. Here men that die receiue tithes, but here he receiueth them of whom it is witnessed, that he liueth: he speakes in the plurall number , which being in the
same manner without change of number applyed to Melchisedek, may seeme to include more then only tithe of spoyles; for making mention of them in ver. 4. he doth not speake in the plurall number, but only in the singular, . But how shall the Priesthood of Melchisedek bee proued greater then Levi's in regard of the right of tithing, if Melchisedek receiue tithe but once, and of one person, and that only of spoyles, & that also by curtesie, when as Levi receiued them often, and of many persons, & of all things prescribed in the Law, & that by diuine authority; for ver. 5. they had a cō∣mandement to take Tithes. Surely this wil not argue a superiority, but rather an inferiority in Melchise∣dek's Priesthood in regard of tithing, which is con∣trary to the drift of the Apostle. Therefore I rather thinke whereas it is said in Heb. 7.2. first that Abra∣ham gaue tithe of all things, and after gaue also the tithe of the spoyles, ver. 4. That the Apostle here in∣folds an other argument to proue the greatnesse of Melchisedek's Priesthood aboue the Leviticall, be∣cause Abraham did not onely pay to Melchisedek tithe of all things aswell as they did in the Law to Le∣vi, but also gaue the tithe of the spoyles, which the Iewes say was not giuen in the Law. And some in∣ducement for this may be gathered from the words of the Text it selfe; for in the first place it is said in the Greek, ver. 2. , he diuided the tithe; and after ver. 4. , he gaue euen of the spoyles; and so an∣swerable to these are the Syriaque words, first  i. he diuided; then  he gaue: as though his latter
had bin more free, & more then was in vse in the Le∣viticall Law, for no doubt but the Apostle (brought vp at Gamaliel's feet) was well acquainted with the manner & practise of the Iewes in the payment of their Tithes. But howsoeuer they teach, that no Tithe or part of spoyles was giuen to Leui, yet Aben-Ezra on Psal. 110.4. in the testimony before cited, doth plainely shew, that the Tithe of spoyles is to be giuen to him that is a Priest after the order of Melchisedek; for of him he saith, Israel shall fight, and thou shalt receiue the tithe as Melchisedek did of Abraham. Now the Tithe taken after the fighting of a battell, what is it else but the Tithe of spoyles, except by a Synecdo∣che we vnderstand by fighting; not only the action of souldiers in time of warre, but also the exercise of other Arts and vocations in time of peace. To con∣clude therefore, the Apostle proueth Melchisedek to be greater then Leui from the right of tithing, not only in regard of the persons that payde tithe vnto him, to wit, Abraham & Levi, & the continuance of the payment, he receiuing thē of whō it is witnessed, that he liueth; but also in respect of the things them∣selues, whereof tithes were pay'd, that is, of all things; yea euen of the spoyles, vnder which both personall and praediall Tithes may be comprehended, The Syriaque & Arabique translations of the New Testament agree with this. And the testimonies al∣leadged for Abraham's tithing of spoyles, doe none of them shew that he payde tithe only of the spoiles, but that he did pay the tithe of spoiles, which we doe
not deny. And if the tithe of spoyles was God's part, as the Iewes themselues doe teach, in Abraham's ti∣thing; then much more the Tithe of other goods, which in many things are obtain'd, not by the labour & industry of man, but only by the gracious proui∣dence & blessing of God. All this while I haue mo∣ued no quaestion (as some doe) about the interpreta∣tion of the word , which properly signifies the chief parts or top of the heap; but I take it as it is here translated, spoyles; neither will I contend about the Syriaque translation, which hath Tithes and first fruits. And yet the word  rendred first fruits, Heb. 7.4. is of a more large extent; for in Heb. 7.3, it is expounded the beginning, i. Hauing neither beginning of dayes. And in Luke 15.22. the chiefe or best,  i. Bring forth the best robe: which may well accord with the vulgar Latine in rhis, place; Decimas dedit de praecipuis. But for the Arabique word  to rest raine it here, as the Historian doth, to signifie Almes, must needes be a penurious & vn∣proper exposition, the same being expressed in the best Arabique Lexicons by the Latine words aug∣mentum, incrementū, thesaurus, corbona, perfectura, perfectus, but neuer cleemosyna. There is indeed an other word somewhat like this, springing from the same root, which is  explained by  righteousnesse, which also sometimes by a Synecdo∣che signifieth Almes, as being parts of righteousnes. And so in Math 6.4. the Arabique  com∣ming
from the Hebrew is translated almes, as also the Hebrew terme it selfe is sometimes vsed, as Bechai shews on Deut. 26.  i. He that giues almes to the poore, giues almes to the Lord. But the proper word which the Arabiques vse for Almes, is  expressed in Math. 6.1.2. &c. and is deriued from the Hebrew Radix  misereri, whereas the other comes of  mundare, vel mundum esse. But neither of these words are found in this Text, but the other that is not expressed by the same Characters, which if in a borrowed sig∣nification it be at any time either in the Alcoran, or elsewhere taken for Almes, yet it is altogether vn∣proper and vnfit to vse any such exposition in this place, as it is vnfit that a gift which is presented to a Prince, should be called by the name of Almes. For how can we thinke that Melchisedek the King of Sa∣lem, and Priest of the most high God was a receiuer of Almes, but rather a giuer, it being a more blessed thing to giue, then to receiue: Acts 20.35. And so much the Text it selfe, Gen. 14. together with the ex∣positions of the Iewes doth import; where it is said that Melchisedek brought forth bread and wine to re∣fresh Abraham's wearyed souldiers. There Iarchi thus glosseth,  i. So they vse to doe to thē that return'd weary from the warre. Wherefore to shut vp this point, one thing we may note by the way, that if the Arabique translati∣on here alleadged, may stand for sufficient authority, whereas the Historian makes it doubtful who should be the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrewes, stiling
him in ambiguous and generall tearmes, The holy Author, but naming none: The Arabique puts this quaestion out of doubt; for it doth not only in the Title and inscription thereof call it the Epistle of St Paul, but doth expresse it to be in number the four∣tenth of his Epistles, as it is stiled in the beginning thereof. And so also doth the Syriaque Translation without any scruple ascribe it plainly to St Paul. SECT. 2. THe next passage of Tithes is in Iacob's vow, Gen. 28.22. This stone which I haue set vp as a pillar shall be God's house, and all that thou shalt giue me, I will tithe, and giue the tenth to thee. This vow, if we read the beginning of it in ver. 20. seemes to be vttered conditionally, if God will bee with me, and keepe me in this iourney, &c. But R. Be∣chai, and also Ramban doe otherwise expound it, and say expresly  That it is no condition, as Iarchi would haue it; for Iacob did not doubt of God's promises which he made vnto him, ver. 15. But saith Ramban, the Scripture speakes in this manner concerning things to come, as Gen. 28.15.  I will not forsake thee vntill I haue performed that that I haue promised thee. and so Numb. 36.4.  not if, but when the Iubily commeth. And Pagnine sheweth that the particle  is not alwayes to be taken as a note of a condition, and interpreted, si, if; but saith
he, sunt qui ad  reducant, quia pro verò & cer∣tè sumitur interdum, & est particula certò aliquid statuens. And Dauid Chimki giues examples for this in radice  as Numb. 1.30.  id est,  that is, certainely the Lord will make a new thing. So Prov. 3.34.  id est  Surely he scor∣neth the scorners, as the last translation hath it. And in the same sense the word is vsed in Iob 22.20. &c. and elsewhere. Whereas therefore Abulensis and o∣thers argue, that Tithes belong not to the Law of na∣ture, or morall Law, because things morall are not to be vowed with condition but absolutely, the ground of that obiection is cleane taken away by this inter∣pretation of the Text. For the Iewes teach that the vow of Iacob was not a conditionall, but an absolute vow. It followes in the History Which, Iosephus sayes, vpon his returne being after 20 yeares, he perfor∣med, offering the tithe of all his substance, or , the tithe of all that he had gotten. Iose∣phus doth not only say this, but also Iarchi on Gen. 28. i. So he did at his returne when he said vnto him A∣rise, goe to Bethel, Gen. 35.1. And Aben-Ezra like∣wise on the same cap. 35.1. confirmes this saying, i. In Bethel he performed his vow, and gaue the tithe of his substance to the honour of God. But that this was done after 20 yeares, neither doth Iosephus, or any o∣ther
Iew affirme. And if the computation of the yeares of the life of Iacob, set down by Iarchi on Gen. 28. be true, it was aboue 20, yea aboue 30 yeares be∣fore he performed this vow; for he continued twen∣ty yeares with Laban; as appeares Gen. 31.38. and 14 yeares (saith Iarchi) according to the opinion of their Doctors, he liued priuatly in the house of He∣ber, after he had receiued the blessing, and before he went to Laban. And this they maintaine especially to make vp the full summe of 130 yeares of Iacob's age, when he came before Pharaoh, Gen. 47.9. Mercer al∣so on Gen. 26.34. makes mention of this; but it being a matter of small moment, I let it passe, and looke a∣gaine to the History. Into whose hands he gaue the tithes, appeares not; but the chiefest Priest of that time was his father I∣saac: for before Aaron, the Iewes said the Priesthood was wholly annexed to the first-borne of families, which agrees well with the sanctifying of the first-borne commanded in Aegypt, Exod. 13. It is euident by the testimony of Ramban on Gen. 26.5. that the Patriarches were liberall in giuing their Tithes to the Priests of the Lord. i. as to Shem and Heber and their disciples, as hee there saith. And among the Disciples of Shem & He∣ber they account Iacob for one. And therefore on those words, Gen. 25.27. Iacob was a plaine man, and dwelt intents, Iarchi here glosseth, and Bechai and others.  i. the tent of Shem, and the tent of Heber. And on
Gen. 37.3. Israel loued Ioseph more then all his sonnes,  because he begate him in his old age. The Targum of Onkelus expresseth it thus;  i. for he was a wise and vnderstanding childe; interpreting the words of the excellency of his apprehension and capacity; for o∣therwise he begate also Beniamin in his old age after Ioseph; and hence it is that the Iewes say here as Iar∣chi,  i. That Iacob committed to Ioseph whatsoeuer him∣selfe had learned of Shem and Heber: and as Ramban saith, i. He deliuered to him the wisdome and mysteries of the Law, and found him wise and capable of them▪ as though he had bin of ripe age. But now Shem and Heber being dead, as appeares by computation of time, to whom Iacob gaue his Tithe; or whether Isaac were the chiefest Priest of that time, it is altogether vncertaine. Aben-Ezra on Gen. 35.1. saith, that Iacob gaue his Tithe,  i. to him that was in that generation fit to receiue it, but who that should be, he leaues doubtfull. Mercer on ver. 15. saith, Dederit autem ipsi Heber aut eius filijs, vel potius consecrârit in usus sacros, &c. But the Histori∣an saith, As Abraham gaue Tithes to Shem, being the el∣dest auncestor of the house; so it may be thought that Iacob payde his vow into the hands of Isaac, the chiefe of the family then liuing, as a first-borne, and a Priest
also. I deny not but this may be thought so, but I cannot conceiue how it can be certainly thought or taken for a truth: for all hold hat Iacob at his returne performed his vow at Bethel, a great while before he came to his father Isaac at Hebron, Gen. 35.27. so Io∣sephus, Aben Ezra, Iarchi, & Ramban agree. Again after the performance of his vow, many things hap∣pened to him by the way before he came to his fa∣ther, as namely the death of Deborah, the birth of Ben∣iamin, the death of Rachel, the sinne of Reuben; and therefore on ver. 22. Iarchi saith, i. All these things happened to him whilst as yet he was not come to Isaac at Hebron: Neither is there any likelyhood that Isaac should meet Iacob at Bethel, & there receiue his Tithes; for Isaac was old and blind, Gen. 27.1. & Esau gaped for his death, ver. 41. before Iacob's first departure from him to goe to Laban. And hence it is that the Iewes speaking of the death of De∣borah, Rebecca's nurse, and the mourning for her, say that it had relation to Rebecca her selfe, for whom Ia∣cob especially mourned, and that therefore the place was called  the oake of mourning and la∣mentation; but say they, as Ramban relates it, there is no mention made of her death, because she was bu∣ried priuatly, without that funerall solemnity that o∣thers had; for Iacob was not there, and Esau hated her, and would not come thither, and Isaac he was blind, and went not out of dores. Now if Isaac be¦cause of blindnes could not goe out to the buriall of
his wife, much lesse could he goe to meet his sonne Iacob at Bethel, to take of him the Tithes. Where then, or how can it be thought that Iacob payde his vow into the hands of his father Isaac? And for that he saith. Before Aaron the Iewes say the Priesthood was wholly annext to the first-borne of families, which a∣grees well with the sanctifying of the first-borne com∣manded in Aegypt. True it is that the Iewes in diuers places affirme that the Priesthood followed the birth-right, vntill such time as they sinned in worshipping ths golden calfe; but after that, the Priesthood, say they, was giuen to Levi, because among the rest only the Tribe of Levi was free from that transgression, which they gather, though weakely, from these words, Exod. 32.26. where Moses said, Who pertaineth to the Lord? let him come downe to mee. And all the sonnes of Levi gathered themselues vnto him. And this they also record on diuers Texts, as Iarchi shew∣eth on Deut. 8.16. Exod. 32.26. Deut. 10.9. Malach. 2.6. And Chimki on 1 Kings 12, 31. But Ramban writing on Numb. 16. touching the rebellion of Corah, seemes to be of another minde in this point, for these are his words,
i. Now all this that I haue spoken concerning the first borne, is according to the tradition of our Doctors, which say that the seruice belonged to the first-borne; but according to the literall exposition, at the first all Israell were fit for the seruice of the sacrifices: for so was alwayes the custome in the high places of particu∣lar or priuate persons; but Aaron was chosen for the seruice of the Tabernacle and Sanctuary, and against this election did Corah contend, and would haue re∣stored the seruice to all Israell; for (saith he) all the con∣gregation is holy euery one of them, as Numb. 16.3. Againe this that Ramban writes concerning the Priesthood, is confirmed by the like testimony of R. Bechai on Exod. 12.1. pag. 79. grounded vpon the tradition of their Doctors. i. whilst that Aaron was not chosen, all Israel were fit for the Priesthood; after that Aaron was chosen, all Is∣rael were excepted. Therefore by these authorities of the Iewes, that cannot be altogether true, which is affirmed here, that before Aaron, the Priesthood was wholly annext to the first-borne of families. Neither doth this agree so well with the sanctifying of the first-borne, commanded in Aegypt, Exod. 13.2. for the sanctifying there commanded, was not only of the first-borne of man, but of beast, and that in respect of the death of the first-borne in Aegypt, both of man & beast, Exod. 12.29. Againe it appeares not in this rela∣tion to what first-borne the Priesthood did belong; whether to the first-borne of the father or mother, or
both: for this distinction is to be obserued, as R. Bechai writes on Exod. 13.2. & 11.5. with reference to Psal. 78.51. the one being called  the begin∣ning of strēgth: the other  that first openeth the womb▪ Reuben was first borne to Iacob, but Ioseph to Rachel; & after Reubens sin, the birthright was giuen to Ioseph, the Kingdome to Iudah, but the Priesthood to Levi, as Bechai speakes on Gen. 49.3. and 28.21. But now the sanctifying of the first-borne comman∣ded in Aegypt is expresly restrain'd to the first-borne of the mother; the first that openeth the wombe, as being best knowne, saith Bechai, and hauing speciall relation to the sanctified first-borne of the blessed vir∣gine, the expectation & glory of all first-borne, Luke 2.7. Moreouer the name of first-borne in Scripture is not only properly, but also figuratiuely taken, and so it is said, Exod. 4.22. Israel is my sonne, euen my first borne: which is thus expounded in the Talmud Mas∣sech, cap. 2. fol. 31. Giuing a reason of the loue wherewith he loued them, he saith: Israel is my sonne, my first-borne. And so in Ier. 31.9. Ephraim is my first-borne. Chimki there giues tbe same interpretation, and so doth the Tar∣gum of Ionathan in that place: Sometime the name of first-borne is ascribed to men in Scripture in re∣gard of dignity and honour, Psal. 89.27. also I will make him my first-borne higher then the Kings of the earth.  He calls him first-borne (saith Chimki) because the
first-borne hath dignity ouer the other sonnes; which was that priuiledge of birth-right, as R. Bechai thinks, that Esau sold to Iacob, Gen. 25.31. And so the Patri∣arches and Fathers of the auncient Church, are in re∣spect of honour tearmed the Congregation of the first-borne, Heb. 12.23. And further on Exod. 13.2. R. Bechai saith, that whereas the Lord smote all the first borne in the land of Egypt, Exod. 12.29. i. That it is extended to the eldest in the family, if no first-borne were there, for he is also called a first borne. And in this sense the Patriarches and heads of fami∣lies, whether first-borne or not, might be accounted insteed of Priests in their generation, and were also Prophets and Kings, as Chimki sheweth on Psal. 105.15. Touch not mine anointed, &c. But properly Priests they were not; for no man takes this honour to himselfe, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron, Heb. 5.4. and we find but two orders of Priesthood in Scripture; the one after Melchisedek, the other after Aaron. The Priesthood of Aaron was not yet insti∣tuted, & none but only Christ is said to be a Priest for euer after the order of Melchisedek; and to this pur∣pose in the Talmud in Massech Nedarim, cap. 3. fol. 32. they write thus concerning Melchisedek Priest of the most high God,  i. he was a Priest, but his seed no Priest. To conclude therefore it is lest altogether vncertaine in this passage of the history, either what order of Priesthood it was that belonged to the first-borne, or what manner of first-borne
it was to which the Priesthood was annexed. And yet he proceedes further in this kinde, saying: And Noah, Abraham, and Iob, and the like, are ac∣counted by this right, Priests of that time. For proofe of this, Origen lib. 1. in Iob, is cited in the margent. But Origen doth not there say, that these were Priests by that right of primo-geniture, but thus: Erant nihilo∣minus etiam eâ tempestate sacerdotes, necdum adhuc à lege ordinati, sed naturali sapientiâ hoc requirente ac perficiente, ita sacerdotio functus est Noah, &c: and againe speaking there of Iob's sacrificing for his sons & daughters, he doth not thence inferre that he was a Priest, but proues out of Iob 12.19. that there were Priests in his time, and then concludes doubtfully thus: Siue ergo memorati sacerdotes, siue ipse per seip∣sum Iob offerebat hostias pro illis secundùm numerum illorum. But the Iewes they doe not teach that Iob was a Priest, but that he was a Iudge; for so Aben-Ezra in the conclusion of his Commentary on Iob, at the end of the booke directly expresseth, prouing it from cap. 22. ver. 9. of that book compared with cap. 29.13.14.15.16. his words are these. i. His companions said vnto him, thou hast sent wi∣dowes away empty: And this is a signe that he was a Iudge, and therefore he answers, I was a father to the poore, and I caused the widowes heart to sing for ioy. Furthermore to proue Iacob's Priesthood gained by the sale of the birth-right from Esau, the Historian
saith, that Expresse mention is of his exercising this holy function in sacrifices during his fathers life, and for this alleadgeth Gen. 31.54. But he hath mistaken and mis-applyed this Text, if his owne author Rabbi Iarchi may be beleeued; for Iarchi doth not thinke that Iacob did here offer a sacrifice, neither doth he interpret the Text in that sense, but saith; i. That he slew cattell to make a feast for his brethren and friends that came with Laban. And so often the word  doth signifie aswel mactare, as sacrificare; to slay, as to sacrifice. Neither could he with a good conscience invite them to his sacrifice, that were out of the couenant, being (as they were) of another re∣ligion, as that iudicious Diuine Mr Perkins answers our aduersaries, alledging and interpreting this Text against their arguments for the sacrifice of the Masse, in his Reformed Catholicke. Againe, all those that offered sacrifices were not Priests, as appeares by Samuel, 1 Sam. 7.9. For R. Levi Ben Gershom writing on that Text, saith plainly;  that Samuel was no Priest: and so S. Austin retract. lib. 2. cap. 43. & Chim∣ki here sheweth that Iosuah did sacrifice in Gilgal, Io∣suah 8.30. and Eliah in Carmel, 1 Kings 18. and so did Balaam, Numb. 23. Iarchi speaks of this, and R. Bechai on Numb. 18.7. and Deut. 2.8. who saith, that before the Tabernacle was set vp, the high places were per∣mitted, & euery man that would, offered sacrifice on the top of his house, but after the erecting of the Ta∣bernacle,
they were prohibited so long as the hoste continued in the wildernesse, as in Levit. 17.3.. Af∣terward when they passed ouer Iordan for the space of 14 yeares, whilst they were imployed in subduing and diuiding the land, the vse of the high places was then lawfull, which being appointed by the direction of a Prophet, a stranger that was no Priest, might of∣fer sacrifice in them. But when they come to Ierusa∣lem, the inheritance mentioned, Deut. 12.9. then were they no longer lawfull. Therefore the Kings of Iudah are blamed, when they destroy'd not the high places. And touching the sacrifices of the Patriarchs, one thing here may be remembred, which in the first Tome of Councells, in the second Epistle of Anacle∣tus, is recorded in these words; Initium sacerdotij Aaron fuit, licet Melchisedec prior obtulerit sacrifi∣cium, & post eum Abraham, Isaae, & Iacob, sed hi spon∣tanea voluntate, non sacerdotali autoritate ista fece∣runt. Which sheweth, that in the iudgment of the ancients, though the Patriarches did offer sacrifice; yet that was no sufficient argument to proue them to be Priests. And if Cain and Abel were therefore both of them to be accounted Priests, because both of them did offer sacrifice, then was not the Priesthood before Aaron, wholly annexed to the first-borne of families; for Abel was no first-borne, and yet the sa∣crifice of Abel was accepted, and not the sacrifice of Cain. But our author hath not yet done with this Treatise of the Priesthood, he presseth it further, say∣ing, Whence obserue by the way, that both Abraham and Iacob, according to the right of that time, must be
Priests also, when they payde these tithes. I maruaile what he intends to make of this obser∣uation, it may be would hence conclude that Priests should therefore pay tithes now aswell as other men, or else none to be payde at all. I answere there∣fore to this, obserue also by the way, that first here is very slender euidence, brought either to proue that there was any such right of Priesthood, as he speakes of at that time, or that Abraham and Iacob were Priests by th t right (as hath already bin shewed;) for as for Abraham, though he saith that he was a first-borne, but proues it not; and saith also that the forme of offering his sonne Isaac iustifies him to be a Priest; Yet the Iewes account him a Priest in the offering of his sonne, no otherwise then as I shewed before by that fiction of theirs in translating the Priesthood from Melchisedek to Abraham, and so R. Chaskuni te∣stifieth on Gen. 22.2. and offer him there for a burnt offering, &c. i. He said in the presence of the Lord of the world, can there be a sacrifice without a Priest? to which he an∣swered, I haue appointed thee already to be a Priest, as it is said, the Lord swore, and will not repent, &c. Psal. 110. And for Iacob's Priesthood, Baal Haturim on Gen. 28. writes thus,
i. To put on garments is twice in the Masoreth here, viz: Gen. 28.20. and in Leuit. 21.10. which teacheth that Iacob was the high Priest, as it is in Bereshith Rabbah. The blessed Almighty said to Michael, Thou hast made Iacob my high Priest to haue a blemish, Le∣vit. 21.18. for he halts vpon his thigh, as sure as thou liuest, thou must be faine to be the high Priest aboue in his roome: this is it that he saith; & will giue me bread to eat, and cloathes to put on, that he will confirme to me the Priesthood which I haue bought of Esau. These words though strange in the literall sense, yet may be in some sort admitted in a figuratiue and spirituall application; for Iacob and all the Priests on earth were lame, and had all of them some one ble∣mish or other to stayne them; and therefote Heb. 7.27. The high Priests of the Law were dayly to offer vp sacrifice, first for their own sinnes, and then for the sinnes of the people. But our Michael that fights a∣gainst the Dragon, Rev. 12.7. Dan. 12.1. Our high Priest which is most perfect is aboue, and makes inter∣cession for vs: for such an high Priest it became vs to haue, which is holy, harmelesse, vndefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then the Heauens, Heb. 7.26. But gtant that Abraham and Iacob were after a sort Priests, as our author would haue them, at that time when they payde their Tithes, and so al∣so in that respect types of Christ that was in their
loynes, and is the true high Priest, and the first-borne of euery creature, Coloss. 1.15. Yet in the action it self of paying tithes, they did nor represent Christ, but the Church and people of God that pay Tithes to Christ, represented in Melchisedek. And this is noted by Bucanus de peccato, quaest. 19. Cùm Levi dicatur de∣cimatus in Abraham, quia fuit in lumbis Abrahae, Heb. 7.9. quomodò non etiam Christus in Adam peccasse dicitur? Resp. Quia non est communi more ratione seminali de semine viri natus, sed de spiritu sancto conceptus, ideo à peccato originali, eius{que} reatu liber, & exemptus extitit: Sicut nec in Abrahae lumbis deci∣matus fuit, sed in Melchisedechi persona repraesenta∣tus, ut aeternus sacerdos non decimas dans, sed accipi∣ens. Christ did not pay Tithes in the loynes of A∣braham, as Levi did, but was represented in the per∣son of Melchisedek as an eternall Priest, not giuing, but receiuing Tithes. Therefore in this relation be∣twixt Priest and people, Christ in the person of Mel∣chisedek stands for the Priest, and Abraham for the people. And to this purpose S. Augustine on Iohn 3. writes thus: Abraham, Isaac, & Iacob, tres patres, & populus unus: tres patres in quibus figurabatur popu∣lus. And after, In populo Iudaeorum figuratus est popu∣lus Christianorum. And therefore say the Iewes; A∣braham was first called Abram pater Syriae: and after the promise, Abraham pater multarum gentium, as Iarchi writes on Gen. 17. and Bechai on Deut. 26. fol. 30. And in the Talmud in Massech Beracoth cap. 1. fol. 13. he is called  i. father of all the world, both Iewes and Gentiles that belieue. There∣fore
Abraham in paying Tithes to Melchisedek, was herein a Type and patterne to all his posterity: for Ramban on Gen. 36.43. saith expresly, i. The actions of the Patriarches, and the accidents that hapned to them had relation to their seed. And the same author and Bechai also on Gen. 12. doe ex∣emplifie this in diuers particulars. And on Gen. 14. they make the foure Kings there named to signifie the foure Monarches of the world. And speaking there also of Abraham's tithing, he confirmes this saying, &c. i. And this was a signe to Abraham, that there should be the house of God, and thither his seed should bring the tithes, & there they should blesse the Lord. Which is in like manner verified in the example of Iacob, that vowed Tithes, whereof saith Mercer on Gen. 28.22. Et hoc tam pro se quàm pro posteris suis vovet. Hee vowed not only for himselfe, but for his posterity. A∣greeing herein with R Bechai, and Chaskuni, saying, That Iacob's vow was a patterne for future generati∣ons. No other expresse mention is of Tithes before Moses his time, vnlesse with the Iewes you dreame that the Leviticall Law was written before the Cre∣ation. And yet by his leaue the Iewes alledge ano∣ther text before Moses time; from whence they teach, that as Abraham and Iacob, so also Isaac payeth tithes, Gen. 26.12. Afterward Isaac sowed in that land, and found in the same yeare an hundreth measures, or an
hundreth fold by estimation. Whereupon saith Iarchi i. Our Doctours say that this measuring was for the Tithes. And Ramban likewise on the same place con∣firmes it, saying, i. They write concerning the hundreth measures, that the measuring thereof was for the Tithes: and there he addeth further; That the Patriarches were liberall in giuing their Tithes to the Priests of the Lord, as to Shem and Heber, and their Disciples. If any thinke this collection of theirs, hath not sufficient ground or warrant from the Text, though this be granted, yet hereby appeares that the tradition of their aunce∣stors and their opinion concurres in this, that all the Patriarches in their time, did duly pay their tithes to the Priests. Againe, the booke of Iob is supposed to haue bin written before Moses time; and the Iewes in the Talmud in Baba Bathra, cap. 1. fol. 15. among o∣ther opinions, say that Iob liued in the time of Iacob: Aben-Ezra and Iarchi on Iob 1. say, he descended of the sonnes of Nachor, Abraham's brother; and so saith Chaskuni on Gen. 25. Origen in the beginning of his Commentary on Iob saith, that Moses was the Interpreter of the booke of Iob, out of Syriacke into Hebrew; and the Iewes in effect say as much; as R. Levi Ben Gershon in his praeface to the booke of Iob: and Aben-Ezra on Iob 2. And generally by most he is held to be more ancient then Moses. Now the Iewes interpret diuers sentences in his booke, to be vnderstood of Tithes, Iob 31.38. If my land cry against
me, or the furrowes thereof complaine together. i. that I haue not brought out my Tithes, as was meet, saith Iarchi. So Iob 24.19. Drought & heat cōsume the snow waters. The Chalde Paraphrase explains it thus, i. Because they haue neglected the setting forth of the Tithe in the appointed time thereof, in the heat of summer, therefore the waters of the raine and snow are restrained fromt them. And so they expound this text in the Talmud Massech Shabath, cap. 2. fol. 32 i. Through the sinne of omission of oblations & tithes, the heauens are shut vp, and restrained from sending downe deawe and raine; and men runne about to seeke their food, and find it not: as it is said Iob 24.19. Drought and heat, &c. But on the contrary if they duly pay their Tithes, they are blessed, as in Malachi 3. Bring all the Tithes, &c. And thus far the Talmud. By this therefore it is apparent in the iudgment of these Writers, that it was no rare thing, but com∣mon and vsuall both among Iewes and Gentiles to pay Tithes, & that also before Moses time. As for the dreame of the Iewes, that the Leviticall Law was written before the Creation, Dauid Chimki saith it is a dreame to them that know not the true interpretati∣on of it, which he explaineth on Esai 22.11. saying, &c.
i. Our Doctours say that seuen things were created be∣fore the world was created, and they are these; Para∣dise, and the Law, and the righteous, and Israel, and the Throne of Glory, and Ierusalem, and Messiah the sonne of Dauid. But the meaning of this tradition is not (saith he) as the common sort of learners vnder∣stand it, but that they were in potentia to be created, or in intention before the world was created, because these things are the perfection or end of the creation of the world. And Iarchi here saith, i. Before he created the World, Ierusalem and the San∣ctuary came into his thought. And Mercer on Gen. 1. takes it in the same sense, saying. Saue in part Rabbi Eliezer Hagadol. 1. Magni qui magnae est apud illos autoritatis parte 3, afferunt septem ante orbem condi∣tum creata, 1. meo iudicio quae in mente divina essent ab aeterno; nam ante mundi exordium alioqui crea∣tum nihil esse potuit propriè loquendo. Inter ea Mes∣siam commemorant. Moses Ben Maimon in Pirke Avoth, cap. 6. fol. 12. speakes to this point. i. The Law is one of God's possessions, Prov. 8.22. The Lord hath possessed me in the beginning of his way, be∣cause the creation thereof was before the World; for when it came into his thought to create the World, he said it shall be established by reason of the Law. And
R. Bechai writes also of this on Deut. 34. fol. 243. Ther∣fore by the Law written before the Creation, they meane, written in the Tables of God's diuine know∣ledge, and of his eternall purpose and decree. Aben-Ezrah on Esai. 41.13. feare not, I will helpe thee,  saith. i. The praeterperfect tense is put here for the future, and the reason is, because all decrees that are to come, are with God accounted as if they were. And againe because time past, and time to come, are only in respect of the Creatures, and not in respect of the Creator, who is actus purus. And hence it is that R. Bechai on Levit. 12. page 141. saith, that man was the first of Gods Creatures in intention, but the last in creation. But I wil not spend too many words about a dream, and yet a man would thinke that a grand Rabbi, who so earnestly vrgeth the authority of these Writers a∣gainst vs in other places, should know the true mea∣ning of his own masters, and acquaint vs aswell with their interpretations, as with their dreames. But grant that the Iewes, and these that are their followers, doe oftentimes tell vs many dreames, yet this one thing they teach plainly without dreaming, that though the Law was not written before Moses time, yet the Patriarches knew the Law, and kept it, and taught it their Children also before Moses time, as Ramban de∣clareth on Gen. 26.5. and Bechai on Gen. 48.22.
&c. i. It seemes to me according to the iudgment of our Doctors, that our father Abraham learned the whole Law by the holy Spirit, & exercised himselfe therein, and also taught it his children. And so he speakes in the same place of Iacob, not much dissonant from that which Calvin writes concerning his vow of worshipping God, and paying Tithes, saying; Non quod suo arbitrio Deum coluerit, nam directio spiri∣tus vice legis scriptae fuit. And therefore hence it may be thought that the Patriarchs payde tithes either by the knowledge of the Law according to the will of God, or else by the direction of the spirit of God, which was insteed of a Law vnto them. SECT. 3. TOuching Cain and Abel's sacrifice, mentioned in the passage following, and the diuers expo∣sitions of that text, Gen. 4, 7. The writings of the Iewes, if it were needfull, might afford matter e∣nough of discourse, which I will but point at. Moses Ben Maimon in More Hanebucim writes, that the end for which sacrifices were commanded, did tend especially to the rooting out of Idolatry; for whereas the Gentiles worshipped beasts, as the Chal∣deans and Aegyptians bullocks and sheep, with refe∣rence to the Celestiall Signes, Aries, and Taurus, &c. therefore (saith he) God commanded these to be
slaine in sacrifice. And because the Signe Aries is in his chiefest strength in the month Nisan, (which takes part of our March, and part of Aprill) therefore as Ramban notes on Exod. 12. in the Passeouer they were inioyned to kill a Lambe, and to cat it, to shew that the Israelites came not out of Aegypt by the power of the Signe, but by the decree of the highest, and that the Aegyptians God was not able to helpe them when he was in his greatest force. But Ramban and Bechai both of them on Levit. 1.2. confute this opinion of Maimon concerning sacrifices, affirming that before there was either Chaldean or Egyptian, sacrifices were offered; as by Cain, and Abel, and No∣ah, and also by Adam at the first, as Chimki relates on Psal. 69.31. This shall please the Lord better then a yong bullocke that hath hornes and hoofes: That is, (say the Iewes) better then the Bullocke that Adam offered, that had hornes before hoofes, as it is in Mas∣sech Cholin, cap. 3. fol. 60. In which respect Ramban on Gen. 22.9. obserueth that where it is written, Abra∣ham builded an Altar there. i. It is expressed with the article notificatiue  that Altar, meaning that he pointed at the Altar whereon Adam, and Cain, and Abel, and Noah did sacrifice. And therefore they said, that in the sacrifices there is contained a hidden and secret mysterie, hid∣den indeed to them that haue the vaile vpon their hearts, 2 Cor. 3.15: but revealed to vs. For all sacri∣fices had relation to Christ. And the Commande∣ment of sacrificing was giuen to the Fathers; first that
it might be the common exercise of piety, whilst they did professe themselues to be God's people, and that all things that they had, they receiued from him. And 2ly that they might be admonished, that they stood in need of some expiation to reconcile them to God. The sacrifice of expiation is fully accomplished and ended in Christ. The other which is the sacrifice of thanksgiuing, doth still continue. And the Iewes themselues confesse this, as Ramban on Levit. 23. and Chimki on Ier, 33.11. i. All sacrifices shall cease, but the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiuing shall neuer cease. But I will speake no more of sacrifice, lest I digresse too farre from Tithes. Onely thus much the learned haue obserue from the sacrifice of Cain & Abel, that they acknow∣ledged hereby that God from the beginning had a right in euery mans goods. And this right afterward by the practise of the Patriarches was declared to be Tithes. SECT. 4. THe next Section containes nothing but a re∣lation of fables and fopperies. For as for Ca∣balistique and doting curiosities, or identity of numbers in seuerall words, as in  and , first fruits and Tithes, or such like; for my part I list not spend time or paper in the reciall of them, we need not seeke such proofes for the right of
Tithes, the euidence of Scripture is sufficient. And if any be delighted with the reading of these toyes, Sa∣lomoh Iarchi in diuers of his Commentaries, and Baal Haturim vpon the Pentateuch, can quickly furnish him with store of such stuffe. But because the Author of the History among o∣ther things doth here againe make mention of Abra∣ham his successe, with his company of 318, together with Arithmeticall and nice speculations taken from thence, euen among Christians, as Clemens Alexan. Stromat. 5. Let him giue me leaue by the way to put him in mind, that hee needed not for this matter to haue gone any further then his owne R. Iarchi so of∣ten recited by him, who I am sure touching this num∣ber of 318, hath left vpon record as vaine and frivo∣lous a fancie as any the History speaks of; for he saith, that none went with Abraham to warre against the foure Kings, but only Eliezer, and why? because for∣sooth the letters contained in his name amount to the number of 318  as though all the rest of Abraham's soldiers had bin nothing else but meere cyphares. But R. Bechai calls this conceit a riddle; and Aben-Ezra on the same Text, viz. Gen. 14. condemnes it. saying, i. The number of the letters of Eliezer is but a figura-true glosse, for the Scripture speakes not by any such Arithmetical respect, for so whosoeuer will, may turne
any names either to good or bad, but the word is to be taken according to the literall sense. Notwithstan∣ding if we leaue the conceit of number; and consider the true signification of the name, we may referre it to a better vse: for Eliezer signifieth the helpe of God. And therefore Moses called one of his sonnes  Eliezer, for the God of my Fathers was my help (saith he) and deliuered me from the sword of Pharaoh, Exod. 18.4. In like manner Abraham also might call his seruant Eliezer, for the God of Abra∣ham was his helpe, & deliuered him from the sword of his enemies. And therefore Melchisedek in this re∣spect praised God, and said; Blessed be the most high God, which hath deliuered thine enemies into thy hand. CAP. 2. Exod. 23.19. Levit 23.10. Numb. 15.20.THe yearely increase being either fruits of the ground or cattell: In the Law of fruits of the ground, first the first of the forwardest were offered to the Priest in eares of wheat and Barly, figgs, grapes, oliues, pomgranates and dates. And of these se∣uen only the first fruits In Talmud in Seder Heraim Massechet Bic∣curim, at{que} inde recetio es e∣rum Iurisperiti. were payde in what quanti∣ty the owner would. Touching first fruits, the History here doth avouch three things: 1 That the first of the forwardest were offered to the Priest in eares of wheat and barly, figs, grapes, oliues, pomgranates, and dates.
2 That of these seuen onely the first fruites were payde. 3 That they were payde in what quantity the ow∣ner would. But of these three assertions there is not one of them sufficiently proued, and as I take it, being exa∣mined by holy Scripture, not one of them true. For first that the first fruits were offered in eares of wheat and barly, &c. The places of Scripture quoted in the margent doe not shew it, that which commeth nee∣rest, is Levit. 23.10. When yee be come into the land which I giue vnto you, and reape the haruest thereof, then yee shall bring a sheafe of the first fruits of your haruest vnto the Priest. The word here translated sheafe, is in the originall , which Iarchi taketh to be , the tenth part of an E∣phah , they did measure it with an Omer, Exod. 16.18. and ver. 36. the Omer is the tenth part of the Ephah: which Aben-Ezra on Leuit. 5. saith was  i. One mans meat for one day, as Exod. 16.18. But this Text doth not proue that the first fruits were of∣fered in eares of wheat and barlye, &c. but an Omer, that is, a sheafe, or the tenth part of an Ephah. And hence it is that Baal Haturim on Exod. 16.36. saith, i. The Omer is annexed to the chapter of Manna, to signifie that they should eat Manna vntill they had offered the Omer: that is, after they came into the
land, and did reap the haruest thereof. Again Exod. 34.22. Thou shalt also obserue the feast of weekes in the time of the first fruites of wheat haruest. Iarchi ex∣pounds the Text thus: i. The first fruits of wheat haruest, in which thou art to bring two loaues of wheat; first fruits, that is, the first meat offring that comes of new wheat to the Sanctuary, for the meat-offering of the Omer that is brought in the Passeouer that is of barly, as in Levit. 23.10. & 17. and so Bechai. And Aben-Ezrah on Ne∣hem. 10.35. doth second this: i. And to bring the first fruits of our land, as an Omer and two loaues. By these authorities it appeares that in the feast of the Passeouer they offered an Omer or sheafe of the first fruites of barly; and in the feast of Pentecost they presented for the first fruits of their wheat-haruest, two loaues of fine flowre of wheat ba∣ken with leauen: But all this while no mention here of first-fruits in eares of wheat and barly, &c. As for that Text Levit. 2.14. where there is mention of eares of corne dryed by the fire, Aben-Ezra sheweth there that it is meant of a free-will offering, saying;
i. That which is due is the first of the first fruites, Exod. 34.26: not the first fruites in generall, and if a man bring a meat offering of the first fruits, he shall bring it as a free-will offering. And the text imports as much, for it is said,  If you offer a meat-offering, &c. Consider now what is taught in these testimo∣nies before alleadged, and then with one labour wee may easily descrye the falsehood of two of the fore∣named assertions; for here we see that an Omer or tenth part of an Ephah was offered for first fruites of barly, and two loaues of fine flower, for the first fruits of wheat. And therefore the first fruits thereof were not payde in eares of barly or eares of wheat, &c. ac∣cording to Scripture. Againe an Omer of barly, and two loaues of wheat, determine in these particulars a set quantity of first fruits. And therefore the first fruits were not payde in what quantity the owner would. Beside (as our Historian doth afterward re∣late from Scaliger) that not Moses, but the Iewes pre∣scribed what should be the quantity of the therumah or heaue offering; so it seemeth also by their wri∣tings, that they appointed what should be the deter∣minate quantity of the first fruits, as may be gathered by the glosse of Baal Haturim on Deut. 26.2. i. The letters of the word translated basket, containe in number 60, to signifie that of first fruits they should pay a sixtieth part. And herein he agrees with R. Simeon on Massech Bicurim, cap. 3. fol. 85. Againe the same author on Numb. 15.21. saith,
i. The verse beginnes with Mem, and endes with Mem, to shew that a gift of a good eye is a fourtieth part. For the Hebrew letter Mem in number stands for fourty. I goe not about to iustifie these Cabalisti∣call collections from the Text, but only by them to shew that the Iewes had among them a set quantity for their first fruits, aswell as for their Therumahs, as these glosses doe import, flat against the History. Now as before we haue declared for wheat and barly, that the first fruits of them was not payde in eares of wheat and barly; so for the other things specified in the history, figges, grapes, oliues, pom∣granates▪ and dates, we doe not read in the Scrip∣ture, that the first fruits of these are prescribed or expressed in particular; but the fruits of corne, wine, and oyle, Deut. 18.4. And so 2 Chronic. 31.5. The children of Israel brought abundance of first fruits of corne, wine, and oyle, &c. And Ramban on Deut. 14. as also on Exod. 22. teacheth concerning grapes & oliues, that the tithe of them was not due by the Law vntill such time as they yeelded wine & oyle; and so likewise may wee coniecture for the first fruits of them. Or if the first fruits were payde both of grapes and oliues, (as the History saith) and of wine and oyle too (as the Scripture sheweth) then the first fruits were not payde only of those seuen things which are before described. And this is the last of those three assertions; against which I tooke
exception. It was indeed propounded in the se∣cond place, but blame me not though I binde not my selfe too strictly to order, in following a confu∣sed History, that hath in it as little truth, as order. The two former points I haue passed ouer briefly: But this that he saith; That of these seuen onely, wheat, barly, figges, &c. the first fruits were payd, it requires a litle larger explication. All the proof that is brought for it, is quoted in the margent, viz: Tal∣mud in Seder Heraim, Massechetb Biccurim, at{que} inde recentiores eorum iurisperiti. It is an easier taske for a man to quote the Talmud, then to reade or vnderstand it; and easier to read and vnderstand it, then to iustifie or defend it. And therefore as the Historian himselfe in his preface pag. 3. speaking of the diuine right of Tithes, saith well, that the holy Text must be the sole tryall of it; so say we likewise concerning first fruits; that what is spoken of them, not the Iewish Talmud, but the holy Text must bee the tryall of it; for as the Iewes themselues teach, the Talmud is but the exposition of the Text, so saith Aben-Ezra on Exod. 19.7. i. and proposed to them. That is the Law by tradition which is the exposition of the Law in writing. Ther∣fore here we desire to know quid scriptum est? what Text of Scripture he hath for his warrant, Scrip∣ture he sheweth none, either because he would not, or else could not finde any to serue his turne. Not∣withstanding for better satisfaction to the Reader
herein, I must confesse that the Iewish Commenta∣tors vpon the Scripture, as Iarchi on Exod. 23.19. & 34.26. And on Deut. 26.2. Aben-Ezra on Nehem. 0. and Chimki on 2 Chron. 31. doe all of them al∣leadge a place of Scripture on which this their as∣sertion is grounded, and that is, Deut. 8.8. A land of wheat and barly, and of vineyards, and figge-trees, and pomegranates, a land of oyle oliue, and hony. Here are seuen kinds of fruits, for which the land of Cana∣an is commended, and of which onely the Iewes say the first fruits were payde. If any obiect that Dates are here wanting, which were reckoned in the former number; for this we must know that the word  which is translated hony, the Iewes in this place interpret Dates; as Iarchi sheweth on Exod. 34.26. and Deut. 26.2. and 2 Chron. 31. And Chimki to make this more plaine on 2 Chron. 31.5. saith, that by hony here they vnderstand Dates, and addes this reason, because (saith he) they brought neither first fruits nor oblations of hony, hauing re∣ference (as it may seeme) to that in Leuit. 2.11. All the meat offerings which ye shall offer vnto the Lord. shall be made without leauen, for yee shall neither burne leauen, nor hony in any offering of the Lord made by fire. Not leauen; nor hony, saith Baal Hatu∣rim on this text, because euill concupiscence is re∣sembled to these, seeming at the first to be sweet as honey, and after sowre as leauen. And Ramban here concurring with Moses Ben Maimon in Moreh Ha∣nebucim, saith it was a custome among Idolaters to offer all their meat offerings with leauen, and to mixe
hony in all their sacrifices; and therefore they are for∣bidden to be offered to God, as on the contrary, salt was required, because by them it was loathed: and so saith he; The pillar which was allowed in the dayes of the Patriarches, because afterwards it was abused by idolaters, therefore God hated it: as Deut. 16.22. Da∣uid de Pomis in his Dictionary in the word  and Ramban on Levit. 23.17: write that in as much as sacrifices were offered to obtaine the fauour of God, and appease his wrath; therefore they did not bring them of such things that were onely sowre, as leauen, which had relation to iudgment, nor of things which were altogether sweet, as hony, signifying mer∣cy, but of a mixt quality, as it is said in the Creation of the world, that he mixed mercy and iudgment toge∣ther, and created it. But against this which by Chimki and the rest is here alleadged, it is to be considered, that though the text saith, Leuit. 2.11. Ye shall neither burne lea∣uen, nor hony in any offering of the Lord made by fire; Yet in the next verse it followes: In the oblation of the first fruits ye shall offer them: and so it is plaine, Leuit. 23.17. and Chimki himselfe on Amos 4.5.  condemnes the Idolaters not for offering a sacrifice of thanksgiuing with leauen, but for burning it vpon the altar against the Law Furthermore the text before rehearsed, viz: Deut. 8.8. and the intendment thereof being principally to amplifie and set forth the Commendation of the Land for the fruitfulnesse of the same; there is no reason why we should restraine the signification, or
alter the proper sense of the words, but rather giue euery word his largest extent, and then can not  which properly signifies hony, be limited or restrained to signifie Dates, especially when the Iewes themselues vnder this word, comprehend the fatnesse and sweetnesse of all kind of fruits; so saith Iarchi on Levit. 2.11. i. All sweetnesse of fruit is called hony. To the same purpose also speakes Ramban on Exod. 3.8. Ralbag on Iob. 20.17. Chimki on Psal. 81.16. and Deut. 32.13. And Aben Ezra on Numb. 16.13.14. and Bechai on Deut. 6.24. And so also by the like reason, hony in this Text may better be extended to all other sweet and pleasant fruites, then be contracted and stinted only to Dates. And yet Aben-Ezra on Levit. 2.11. reporteth, i. That many of them say, the exposition of Debash is Dates, and so euery-where a land flowing with milke and hony▪ and they haue (saith he) a resemblance of a reason for it in the booke of Ezra. Whereby as I take it, he meanes the booke of Chronicles which were ga∣thered by Ezra, as the Iewes write, after their returne from Babylon. And in 2 Chron. 31.5. they interpret  not hony, but  dates. So Chimki and Iarchi note on that Text. And our last translati∣on interpreting the word in the Text, hony, writes in the margent, dates. But though it were to be so vn∣derstood
in this place, yet there is no probability or shew of reason why it should be thus expounded in that Text, Deut. 8. or where it is found in many o∣ther Texts beside. We may aswell beleeue that to be true which Baal Haturim writes of their pomegra∣nates, as this that they affirme of Dates; for he on Numb. 13.34. compared with Esai 40.22. saith, that one of the Giants of the sonnes of Anak hauing eaten a pomegranate, did cast away the pill thereof, and after∣ward all the twelue spyes that were sent to search the land, went into it to sit there and shade themselues from the heat of the Sunne. And to make this good, that the roome might seeme big enough, and the men litle enough, R. Iarchi seconds him with the like glosse on that text, ver. 34. i. So we were in their sight, we heard them say one to another, there are pismires in the Vineyards like men: that is, the spyes heard the Gyants say so concerning them. These and such like are the expositions and glosses of some of those grand Rabbies, on whose testimo∣ny the History of Tithes is principally grounded. But now suppose that Dates were to be vnderstood in that text, as the Iewes would haue it, doth it there∣fore follow, because seuen kindes of fruits are there named; that onely of those seuen and no more, the first fruits should be payde? so they teach also by the like warrant, that there are iust seuen habitations, or seuen seuerall vaults of hell; must we therefore needes
beleeue it to be true? Chimki relates this on 2 Sam. 18.33. & 19.4. where Dauid mourning for the death of Absolom ingeminates those words  my sonne, my sonne, eight times; with seuen of them he raised him vp (saith he) out of the seuen vaults or mansions of Hell, and with the eight he brought him into Paradise. Iarchi also mentions this on Esai 20.23. and Baal Haturim on Deut. 15.8. from Massecheth Sutah, cap. 1. fol, 10. and Kimchi on 2 Kings 23.10. But before I leaue this point, there is yet one other thing to be considered; for what if more then seuen kinde of fruits be soūd to be contained in the foresaid text, shall not the Law of first fruits take hold of them? R. Bechai on this text. Deut. 8.8. fol. 209.2. & fol. 212.1. saith expresly, that the land is here commended for ten things, adding three to the former seuen; for saith he, Rye, oates, and spelt, or beare corne, are compre∣hended vnder wheat and barly, which are named as the principall; and no reason to the contrary, but that of these they were to pay first fruits aswell as of the other, & therfore they were not payed only of se∣uen kindes. It is written 2 Chron. 31.5. The children of Israel brought abundance of first fruits of corne, wine, and oyle, and hony, and of all the increase of the field. Now vnder Corne the Iewes containe fiue se∣uerall specie's; so saith Chimki in Miclol in the word , and Ramban on Deut. 14. i Corne in the holy tongue signifies fiue known kinds; which are the same that Bechai expresseth before, &
therefore being vnder this word comprehended, no question but of these the first fruits are also here re∣quired. Againe, the Iewes themselues vnderstanding this text to be spoken of  first fruits pro∣perly, as Chimki here expounds it, when as in their former Catalogue of seuen, among the rest they say, that the first fruits were payed of grapes, and oliues, (as I mentioned before) and here the Text saith, that they were payde of wine and oyle, (which in propriety of speech are none of the seuen before specified) we can not choose, but must needes con∣clude, that the first fruits were payed of more com∣modities then only seuen. Nay the Text is very di∣rect, that they brought first fruits of all the increase of the field, ver. 5. And to this agrees the generall current of the Scripture, Deut. 26.2. Then shalt thou take of the first of all the fruit of the earth, and bring it: and so Nehemiah. 10.35. & ver. 37. And to bring the first fruits of our land, and the first of all the fruits of all trees, &c. yeare by yeare into the house of the Lord. The only reason that I can meet with, why the Iewes presented but these seuen kindes for first fruits is related by R. Bechai on Deut. 26. to be, be∣cause they held these to be the most choise and vse∣full for the nourishment of man, which being ad∣mitted to be true, yet this doth not suffice to exclude the rest which are in Scripture comprehended as well as these. So also they teach, that that part of Ca∣naan which was the inheritance of the fiue Nations mentioned in Scripture, Exod. 13.5. namely the Ca∣naanite,
the Hittite, the Amorite, the Hiuite, the Ie∣busite, because it was a land that flowed with milke and hony, therefore they payde the first fruits onely from thence: but the land of the other two Nations, the Perezites, and the Gergesites, was not subiect to the payment of first fruits, because it was not a land that flowed with milke and hony; so Ramban notes on Deut. 18.1. And in Massecheth Bicurim, cap. 1. to the same purpose R. Iosi saith, i. They vse not to bring first fruits from beyond Ior∣dan, because it was not a land that flowed with milke and hony. But against this, Moses Ben Maimon in his Commentary on that place, saith; that though it were not a land that flowed with milke and hony, yet saith he, the Lord gaue it vnto vs, so that we may truly say, Deut. 26.10.  which thou hast giuen me: and therefore he there declares herein his owne iudgement, and concludes contra∣ry to the opinion of R. Iosi. Last of all for the seuen kindes of first fruits so often mentioned, the Doctors likewise differ in the Talmud Massech Bicurim, cap. 3. fol. 86. &c. R. Simeon the sonne of Nanas, saith, they set forth the first fruits of more then seuen kindes; which opinion without all doubt is most consonant to the rules & precepts of the Scripture; for whereas God gaue vnto Aaron, and his sonnes, the first ripe fruits of all
that was in their land, Numb. 18.13. what reason is there that they should be depriued of their right, & haue the first fruits but only of seuen kindes? But it may be, though the Scripture fauour not this cō∣ceit, yet the Historian thinkes it sufficient that it is so related in the Talmud. I confesse some things in the Talmud may truly be reported to haue bin done: but this doth not proue that the Talmud doth there∣fore rightly teach what should be done; and again, as that worthy Knight Sr Iames Sempill hath answe∣red, Though the relation of the fact were true for pra∣ctise in their times, yet might it much degenerate from the former ages. But how shall we certainly know what was done, or what was the Iewish manner & custome in pay∣ment of the first fruits, for herein the History failes vs, except wee can learne it by the bare marginall mentioning of the Talmud. Therefore to make this more plaine, I haue thought good here to translate as neare as I can verbatim, that which R. Bechai deli∣uers concerning first fruits, in his Commentary on Deut. 26. which for the most part he hath transcribed from the Talmud, and set downe in manner follow∣ing. When they brought vp the first fruits to Ierusalem, the men of the cities neare adioyning, assembled alto∣gether. that they should not solitarily goe vp alone, as it is said, In the multitude of the people is the honour of the King, Prov: 14.28. And they lodged in the street of the city, and went not into houses because of the ta∣bernacles of pollution: And in the morning the guide
or gouernour said; Arise, let vs goe vp to Sion to the Lord our God. And a Bullocke for a peace-offering went before them, hauing his hornes couered with gold and an oliue garland vpon his head. Also a flute, an instrument of musicke sounded before them, Esai 30.29: vntill they came neare to Ierusalem, and they went forward all the way reading Psal. 122. I was glad when they said vnto me, wee will goe vnto the house of the Lord. Notwithstanding they did not continue their progresse all the day, but only at two set times in the day. When they approached neare to Ie∣rusalem, they sent messengers before them to giue no∣tice to the Citicens of Ierusalem, and they the meane while set forth and beautified their first fruits. Af∣terward the Prince and the Rulers, the chiefe Priests and the Treasurers came forth from Ierusalem to meet them, according to the number of them that came vp, so proportionably was the number of them that went out to meet them: If there were many that came vp, many went out; if few, then few. And as they entred all of them into the gates of Ierusalem, they be∣gan to read Psal. 122.2. Our feete shall stand in thy gatcs O Ierusalem. And all the Tradesmen of Ierusa∣lem stood vp before them, and saluted them, saying; Brethren, men of such or such a place, yee are welcome. So they walked in the midst of Ierusalem, and the in∣strument still sounded before them, till they came to the hill of the House. When they came to the hill of the House, euery man bare his basket vpon his shoulder, and said Psal. 150. Praise the Lord, praise God in his Sanctuary, &c: vntill those words, Let euery thing
that hath breath praise the Lord, Halleluiah. Thus they continued till they came to the Court. When they came to the Court, the Leuites sang that Psalmee, I will magnifie thee O Lord, for thou hast exalted me, and hast not made my foes to reioyce ouer mee. Psal. 30. They adde also in the Talmud, that the rich men brought their first fruits in baskets of siluer & gold, that is (saith Maimon) couered with siluer & gold; and the poore in baskets made of willow roddes, and both the baskets and the first fruits were giuen to the Priests, as it is said, Deut. 26.4. Then the Priest shall take the basket out of thine hand. Now besides the former seuen kinds of first fruits before rehearsed, the Iewes further teach, that there are seuen other things requisite in the offering of first fruites, for which they seeme to haue more probable ground from the Scripture, and they are these; 1 The bringing of them vp to the place ap∣pointed. 2 The vessell wherein they were brought. 3 The reading of the Text. 4 An offering or oblation. 5 Their reioycing in singing. 6 The shaking of them to and fro. 7 Their lodging in Ierusalem. 1 The bringing of them vp to the place appointed, for it was necessary that they should bring them vp to the House of the Sanctuary, as it is written Deut. 26.2. And thou shalt goe to the place which the Lord thy
God shall choose, &c. 2 The Vessell as it is said ver. 2. And thou shalt put it in a basket. It is also a precept of speciall choyse to bring euery kind in a basket by it selfe, but if they brought them in one basket, they were to be carefull that they should not confusedly be mixed together, but barly in the lowest place, and wheat vpon that, and dates about that, and pomgranates aboue them, and figges aboue them all, and something was to be put be∣tweene euery species, to seuer them one from another, as leaues, or such like. And outwardly they compassed the figges with bunches of grapes. They brought like∣wise in their hands turtle doues, and young pigeons; for it is said, and thou shalt reioyce in euery good thing, ver. 11. and for this reioycing, flesh was requi∣site. They hanged also on the sides of their baskets turtle doues, and yong pigeons, to set forth & adorne their first fruits: Those that were on their baskets they offered for burnt sacrifice, and those that were in their hands they gaue to the Priests of that ward, to∣gether with the first fruits, which they diuided a∣mong themselues as other holy things. 3 The reading, as it is said, ver. 5. And thou shalt an∣swere and say, &c. that is, he read the Text from those words, ver. 5. A Syrian was my father, &c. vntil those ver. 10. And now loe, I haue brought the first fruits of the land which thou O Lord hast giuen me. And this answering was praise and thanksgiuing, with lifting vp of voyce, and that in the holy tongue, as it is writ∣ten Deut. 31.21.  i. this song shall answere them: and so it is here ver. 5. thou shalt
answere and say Deut 26.5. 4 The oblation was a peace-offering. 5 A song was required, for it is said; And thou shalt reioyce in euery good thing, ver. 11. and for this, sing∣ing was necessary, as it is Psal. 33.3. i. Sing chearefully with a loud voyce: for so the Leuites did read with singing, when they brought ihe first fruits after that they came into the Court. 6 The shaking of them to and fro, as it is written Deut. 26.10. & Numb. 14.9.  And thou shalt set it before the Lord thy God, when as the Priest put his hand vnder the hand of the owners, & shaked it, and this is that is said ver. 4. Then the Priest shall take the basket out of thine hand, that is to say, to shake it to and fro. 7 Lodging, that albeit he brought his first fruits, and offered his peace-offrings, and performed all his duty that day, yet it was not lawfull for him to depart the same day out of Ierusalem, but that he should lodge there, as it is said, Deut. 16.7.  And thou shalt returne on the morrow, and goe vnto thy Tents. And so they teach, all returning whereby thou returnest from the Sanctuary, after thou art come thi∣ther, shall not be but on the morrow. Thus farre R. Be∣chai touching the manner of the Iewes in paying their first fruits, as is described in their Talmud. And among other questions touching first fruits, he adds further, that it is disputed among them, whe∣ther a stranger were to pay them, or not; some say hee might not, because he could not vse the words of the
protestation, Deut, 26.3.  I am come into the Country which the Lord sware vnto our fathers to giue vs. But the more generall and common opini∣on was, that he might both bring the first fruits, and likewise vse the protestation, because Abraham is re∣puted also the father of strangers, as it is said Gen. 17.5. I haue made thee a father of many Nations. And it may be (saith he) that this is pointed at in the text, where it is said, ver. 11. thou and the Leuite, and the stranger that is among you. Lastly for the end of the oblation of first fruits, he affirmeth that it tended to the honour of God, the dig∣nity of the Priest, and the great benefit of Israel. 1 The honour of God, in that they came to make prayer and supplication before him in that great and holy Tem∣ple for the multiplying of his benefites, and acknow∣ledging that all blessings proceeded only from him. 2 The dignity of the Priest, in that the Israelite wea∣ried and turmoyled himselfe all the way to feed him with the first of his fruits, and most choyce of them. 3. The great benefite of Israel, in that by the due ob∣seruation of this precept, the fruits were increased, & the food of the world blessed. And so much for first fruits. CAP. 3. NExt, the Therumah or heaue offering, or first fruites of Corne, Wine, Oyle, Flecce, and the like, were also giuen to the Priests. Deut. 18.4. I doe not well vnderstand in what sense these
words, the therumah or heaue offring, or first fruits, can properly be spoken in this place; for hereby hee seemes to confound the first fruits & the therumahs, as if they were all one, which according to the tra∣dition and history of the Iewes, are manifestly di∣stinguished, as appeares in the seuerall Tractates or Massecheths in the Talmud both of  first fruits, and  heaue offerings. And the place quoted in the margent, viz: Deut. 18.4. speakes directly of first fruits, and not therumahs or heaue offerings, howsoeuer some of the Iewes doe other∣wise expound it. For the first fruits were either  or  Numb. 18.12.13. and the word vsed there in Deut. 18.4. is  which properly signifies first fruits; yea the first of the first fruits. But it being not determined by Moses of what quantity this heaue offering should be, the Iewes anciently assest it to be enough at the fiftieth part,Sal. Iarchi ad dict. locum caeteri Jurisp. & D. Hieronymus ad zech. cap. 45 & Cassianus col∣lat. 21. cap. 3. but so that no necessity was that euery one should pay so much, he that payde a sixtieth part was discharged, and many of the better devotion offred a fortieth. The fiftieth part they call  i. that is, an indifferent or competent therumah or heaue offering, which they named also  that is, the great heaue offering. The fourtieth they stile  that is, a Therumah of a faire eye,Hanc loquendi formulam babes apud D. Matthae∣um cap. 20.15. or liberally giuē. And the sixtieth  that is, a Therumah of an ill eye, or a niggards gift. If he meane that only  that is, the indifferent heaue offering, is called
the great heaue offering, as his words seeme to import, then doth he much mistake his Rabbines; for neither doth Scaliger, whose steppes he follow∣eth, nor the Iewes, so vnderstand it; but whether it be an indifferent therumah or heaue offering, or a the∣rumah of a faire eye, or a therumah of an ill eye, it is still called therumah gedolah,  the great heaue-offering, to make a difference betweene it and , the heaue offering of the Tithe, or decimae decimarum, which were giuen to Aaron the high Priest. R. Chaskuni on Deut. 18. shewes the reason why it is called the great heaue of∣fering, saying, &c. i. The first heaue offering is called the great heaue of∣fering, because it is great in quantity, aboue the quan∣tity of the first Tithe, and the heaue offering of the Tithe, forasmuch as that after it is offered, being a fif∣tieth part, they were to take the fourty nine parts that remaine, and make thereof fifty againe, that they might thence haue fiue parts for the first Tithe, &c. Further howsoeuer some stile the fourtieth part , a Therumah of a faire eye, or li∣berally giuen; yet in the Talmud in Massech Ter∣moth, cap. 4. fol. 51.  They of the Col∣ledge of Shamai hold, that a thirtieth part is the The∣rumah of a good eye: and R. Bechai on Deut. 26.15. hath this notation  i. two of an hundred. The note in the margent, hanc loquendi
formulam habes apud D. Matthaeum, cap. 20.15. seemes to insinuate, that St Matthew borrowed this forme of speech from the Iewish Rabbines, but it is an idle conceit to thinke so; for it is a phrase more ancient and vsuall in the holy Scripture, as Prov. 22.9. he that hath a good eye, he shall be blessed: and Prov. 23.6. Eat thou not the bread of him that hath an euill eye: and so Deut. 15.9. &c. These set quantities of the Theru∣mah gedolah for the fourtieth, fiftieth, sixtieth part, Baal Haturim gathers cabalistically from the words in Exod. 25.2.  i. That they take an offering for me of euery man whose heart giueth it freely, &c. i. The word  translated (for me) ariseth in number to fourty, signifying that the gift of a good eye is a four∣tieth part.  ariseth to fifty; that is, an indifferent offering of a fiftieth part,  i. of euery man. The two first letters of the words arise to 60, that is, the gift of an euill eye is a sixtieth part. And yet this Text is not vnderstood of the Therumah gedolah, or great heaue offering, which was taken of the fruits of the earth, and giuen to the Priests; but of the volun∣tary gifts or offerings for the making of the Taber∣nacle. Whereby it may be thought that they held the same proportion, not onely in this, but also in other Therumahs, for there were diuerr sorts of them, as Bechai on Exod. 25.1. & 30.11. and also Ramban on
Deut. 12.6. doth intimate, saying; i. For whatsoeuer a man doth offer vp vnto the Lord of all that he hath, either for sacrifices, or for repairing of the Temple, (as it is said Exod. 25. that they receiue an offering for me) or for the Priests the ministers of the Lord, all these are called Therumahs, according as it is written of the tribute, Numb. 31.28.29. And shalt giue it to Eleazar the high Priest as an heaue of∣fering to the Lord, and it shall be absolutely common or free in his hand. It followes in the History, But you may obserue too, that this which they called a niggards gift, was not beneath the quantity of the Therumah appointed in Ezech. 45.13.11. where the words are, This is the Therumah that ye shall offer, the sixt part of an Ephah of an Omer of wheat, and ye shall giue the sixt part of an Ephah of an Omer of barly. It is the same as if he had said, ye shall offer a Therumah of the sixtieth part, of euery Omer, for an Ephah, being the same measure with a bath, (that is neere our com∣mon bushell) was the tenth part of an Omer, therfore the sixt part of an Ephah the sixtieth of an Omer. This text of Ezechiel, quoted by Iarchi on Numb. 18.4. and here alleadged by the Historian, is vnfitly applyed to proue the quantity of the Therumah ge∣dolah, as Dauid Chimki here euidently declareth with very sufficient reasons, which are by him thus expressed:
&c. I wonder at Iarchi his exposition, for since that the Therumah by the Law hath no quantity, but one grain or corne of wheat, frees the whole heap, to what end should Ezechiel come to teach the Therumah of an euill eye, or. niggards gift? he should haue taught ra∣ther the indifferent Therumah, which is a fiftieth part: And againe, why doth he mention the wheat and barly aboue by themselues, and the oyle aboue by it selfe for a tenth part, he should haue said, corne, wine, and oyle; as it is written in the Law, When as therefore the Ephah is the same measure with the Bath, and the sixt part of an Ephah of an Omer of wheat and barly is offered, and not the sixt, but a tenth part of a Bath of oyle, 'as it is ver. 14: it fol∣loweth that the Therumah of oyle was not so much as a sixtieth part, but was only an hundreth part of an Omer or Cor, differing from the quantities of the Therumah before-mentioned. And therefore Chimki concludes, that this Text is not meant of the Therumah gedolah, or great heaue offering of the fruits giuen to the Priest, but of the heaue offering which they should offer,  for the dedication of the House or Temple, that should be afterward in time to come, and not of the first or second Temple. Now that which is vnderstood onely of practise
for time to come, can not be a praecedent or warrant for the practise of times past; and therfore this Text makes nothing to the purpose for which it is allea∣ged. It is true that there are many things very difficult and hard to be vnderstood in this Prophe∣cy of Ezechiel, and especially in those Chapters that are written of the Temple, as St Hierome obserueth on cap. 45. and the Iewes themselues confesse that there are many things here expressed which they conceiue not, but say that Eliah when he comes shal expound them, as R. Chimki notes on Ezech. 40.13. & 42.5. & 45.18. Yet in this the best Interpreters, both Iewes and Christians, doe all agree, that the things here spoken of, can not be applyed to the time either of the first or second Temple; but to the time of the Messiah, and the House that he should build, and so teacheth St Hierom on Ezech 40. and Chimki on Ezech. 43.11, &c. But I returne to recall that which was before affirmed in the History in these termes: For an Ephah being the same measure with a Bath, that is, neare our common Bushell, was the tenth part of an Omer; therefore the sixt part of an Ephah, the sixtieth of an Omer. Here it must be remembred by the way, that there is some difference betwixt the Ephah and the Bath; for the Ephah is a measure only of things that are dry, as wheat, & barly, &c. and the Bath of things that are liquid and moist, as oyle, and the like; so Chimki sheweth on Ezech. 45.11. and Iarchi, and so doth St Hierom on the same Text, where he also
notes how the Septuagint Translation in expressing these measures, differs from the Hebrew Text; and it is likewise to be noted, that whereas here an E∣phah is said to be the tenth part of an Omer, and in Exod. 16.36. an Omer the tenth part of an Ephah, though they sound alike, yet they are differing mea∣sures, & differing words also, for Omer in one place beginnes with the Hebrew letter  Ain, and in the other with the Hebrew letter  Cheth. Further∣more that Ephah should in measure (as the Histori∣an saith) be neare our common Bushell, it is a mat∣ter somewhat questionable. St Hierom on Ezech. 45.1. saith, that an Ephah is tres modij, which is vsually taken to be three bushels; for these are there his words: Decima pars Cori in his quae modio mensurantur, appellatur Ephah, i. tres modij, & decima pars Cori in speciebus liquidis voca∣tur batus, sive vadus, ut eiusdem mensurae sit Ephah & Batus. But how the true measure of the Ephah was accounted among the Iewes, we may easily cō∣iecture by that which Salomoh Iarchi speakes con∣cerning this on Exod. 29.40. i. A tenth part of fine flowre, that is, the tenth part of an Ephah; 43 egges and the fift part of an egge. And this he explaines more at large on Exod. 16.36. The Omer is the tenth part of the Ephah:
i. Our Ephah containes three Seahs, a Seah containes sixe Cabines, a Cab foure Lugimes. a log sixe egges, so that the tenth part of an Ephah is found to be three & fourty egges and the fift part of an egge, and this was the quantity for the cake and for the meat offering. R. Bechai agrees herein with Iarchi, and so doth Da∣uid Chimki in his Miclol the second part, in radici∣bus, where he expresseth the seuerall quantity of these measures agreeable to this relation. He there∣fore that can tell how many egges will fill a Bushell, may hence quickly be resolued, how neare the Iew∣ish Ephah comes to the English Bushel. I haue done with the Therumahs, I come now to the Tithes; for in this order they succeed in the History, where it is said, After the Therumah offered to the Priests (euery kind being giuen in season) out of the rest were taken the Tithes, which are best diuided into the first and second Tithe. Concerning this diuision whether it be the best or no, after the due scanning of it, let others iudge: the meane while we may here take notice, that as the Historian makes but two sorts of Tithes, so on the other side there are some that make three, and some foure, taken from Deut. 14. and Numb. 18. 1 The first is the Leuites Tithe, or Tithe inheri∣tance, Deut. 14.22. and Numb. 18.21. 2 The second is the Tithe for feasts, which were to be eaten yearely at Hierusalem, as in Deut. 14.23. 3 The third the Tithe of the third yeare for the poore, Deut. 14.28.29.
4 The fourth the tenth part of the Tithe, or the Lords heaue offering, which the Leuites were to giue to Aaron the high Priest, Numb. 18.26.28. But the Iewes vsually confound this last with the first Tithe, calling it  the heaue offe∣ring of the Tithe: And for this cause where it is said Deut. 14.24. The Tithes of the children of Israel, which they shall offer as an offering to the Lord, &c. Salomoh Iarchi saith, i. The Scripture calleth it an offering, vntill he sepa∣rate from it the oblations or offerings of the Tithe: that is, decimas decimarum, the Tenth of the Tithe, for vntill that was giuen to the Priest, the Leuites had no power to dispose of their owne Tithes. And hereby Iarchi answeres an obiection of those that from this place would conclude the Tithes to be a meere ceremoniall offering, in as much as he shew∣eth that they are called an offering only in regard of the Tithe, or the offering that was taken out of them for the high Priest. Now for these seuerall sorts of Tithes before rec∣koned, as the Iewes confound the first and fourth, so other Writers in the rest doe the like, some making the first and second to be one and the same; some the first and the third, one. Which last opinion the Author of the History, maintaineth in the Sections following, and saith, that the two first yeares after the Sabbaticall, the second Tithe was payed at Ierusalem, and in the third yeare it ceased: but after the first
Tithe payed, they payed that yeare the poore mans Tithe insteed of the second, as Iarchi speakes on Deut. 26.12. And Ben Maimon in Misuah Torah part. 3. de decima secunda, cap. 1. But for proofe of this assertion, first of all he brings no testimony from the holy Scriptures: 2ly he hath not (as is pretended) the generall consent of the Iewes; for besides the authority of Tobit cap. 1. ver. 7 Iosephus Archaeol. 4.7. alleadged by himselfe: Treme∣lius also, and Iunius on Deut. 14.28. doe call this poore mans tithe, the third tithe. And so likewise Aben Ezra that was not ignorant of the Iewish pra∣ctise in tithing, doth in the same place tearme this poore mans tithe  the third tithe; and saith further: i. And he shall not bring forth this yeare the second tithe, and some say he shall bring forth all those three tithes: which indeed is most probable, though he leaue it altogether vncertaine and doubtfull. But among other things here alleadged, I mar∣uaile why the Septuagints translation on Deut. 26.12. is so farre pressed, , &c. Where to proue that the poore mans Tithe is expresly cal∣led the second Tithe, this Translation is so much insi∣sisted vpon, as the originall Text it selfe is called in question, for here saith the Author, Doubtlesse they there insteed of  shenath hamaigsher, that is, the yeare of tithing (as the Text is) found in
their Hebrew Copies  shenith ha∣maigsher, which they take for the second Tithe, know∣ing that in truth that place meant no other. Doubtlesse I can conceiue of this to be nothing else but a meere fiction, and such a one that neither Iew nor Christian ought once to admit against the holy Scriptures: For first hereby as he makes the Septuagints Translation more authenticall then the Hebrew Text, implying therewithall that the same hath bin corrupted and changed, (and yet no cor∣ruption euer once noted before in this place) so al∣so that which he surmiseth is against reason, for the second doth alwayes presuppose a first; but how shall it be thought that the Scripture should here in expresse termes mention a second Tithe, when as it doth no where expresly mention a first? for though the ground of these distinctions be in Scripture, viz: Tithes for the Priest, Tithes for the Leuite, Tithes for the feasts, and Tithes for the poore; yet by these termes of  and  first Tithe, and second Tithe; or which shall be the first, or which the second; there neither is, nor euer was any such matter in Scripture: These indeed are no∣tions deuised by the Rabbines for distinction sake, but shall we therefore bring them into the Text, and make Text of them? whether shall the Rabbines fol∣low the Text, or the Text follow the Rabbines? Surely this is nothing else but to make new Scrip∣ture, and when that is done, because the foresaid  and  can not agree in gender, (the word being no where so construed) therfore also
to make, as he doth in that place, a new Grammer, that the new Scripture may haue good constructi∣on. And yet after all this, consider it who will, no Scripture, no Masoreth, no Targum, no Grammer, no Rabbin, no reason, either doth or can iustifie it. And for the Septuagint Translation, why may we not interpret , alteram or poste∣riorem decimam, an other Tithe, or the later Tithe, as well as decimam secundam, the second tithe; the word being often elsewhere vsed in that sense, as the Greek Lexicons teach, res aliqua  esse dicitur quae ei postponitur: and againe, Quum verò dicitur temporis ratione, exponitur etiam posterior, veletiam iteratus, ut . And so may it be taken also in this place: Or if it be interpreted the second tithe, must it needes be the second in the same order and manner as he would haue it? as though the Septuagints that were so ancient, inten∣ded hereby to establish this new deuise, invented on∣ly by Rabbines of later times. Doe not the best expo∣sitions disagree, in setting down precisely the num∣ber and order of the Tithes? St Hierome on Ezech. 45. reckons vp foure sorts of tithes, and makes that first which the people payde to the Leuites, and that rhe second which the Leuites thence payde to the Priests, of which he saith, Et haec est quae appellatur , wherein he differs from the Rabbines, and all their followers, and yet knew better then they what Scripture taught concerning first or second tithes. But it is not enough for our Historian thus to
corrupt the text, to fortifie his owne fancies, but he goes on, and dallies yet further with this Scripture, saying, This place of the yeare of Tithing,Sal. Iarchi ad dict. loc. Deut. is interpreted by the common glosse of the Iewes, by the yeare of one Tithe, as if the Text had bin  that is, the yeare of one Tithe, or of paying onely one Tithe. First insteed of the common glosse of the Iewes, he cites onely in the margent the proper glosse of Sal. Iarchi, against whom I oppose Aben Ezra, who doth not interpret the yeare of tithing by the yeare of one tithe, or of paying onely one tithe, but thus;  i. The yeare of ti∣thing, that is, the poore mans tithe, meaning the yeare of paying the poore mans tithe, which was not payd in other yeares; and this is answereable to that he said before, that some held that all the three tithes were this yeare brought forth, and therefore most probably it is termed the yeare of tithing, because a new accrue of tithes came this yeare aboue the rest; and so Bechai on Deut. 26.12. R Chaskuni on Deut. 14.28. hath these words,  Thou shalt bring forth all the tithes: i. It concernes thee to bring forth the first tithe, the second tithe, the poore mans tithe; setting downe the three distinct tithes by three distinct and seuerall names. And therefore that cannot be true which the Historian teacheth, that the second tithe, and the poore mans
tithe are substantially the same, and fitly goe vnder one name; for that which was giuen insteed of the second tithe, cannot properly be said to be the same: But, say the Iewes (as he noteth) in the third & sixt yeares, the poore mans tithe was giuen  insteed of the second tithe; and therefore can no more fitly be said to be the same, then Iohn may be said to be Peter, because he sits in the same chaire wherein Peter sate yesterday. Furthermore Iarchi and Bechai on Deut. 14.28. and Deut. 26.12. speake to this effect: i. If a man delay or put off the payment of his Tithes the first and second yeare after the Sabbaticall, then of necessity, he must bring them forth of his house the third yeare. So that in this case, all the three tithes by Iarchi his confession, being brought forth this third yeare, they must needes be accounted three se∣uerall kindes of Tithes; and therefore the poore mans tithe was not alwayes payde insteed of the se∣cond tithe, nor one and the same in substance with the second tithe. And a maine difference is noted be∣twixt them in the Talmud in Seder Teharoth Mas∣sech Iadim cap. 4, fol. 157. Where the expositor at∣tributes these words to R. Eliezer. i. The second tithe is holy, but the poore mans tithe common or prophane: For the one might only be ea∣ten at Ierusalem, but the other in any place; the one
belonged to the housholder, the other to the poore. And though regularly they teach, that the poore mans tithe was payed only the third and sixt yeares, yet in the place before-named, they deliuer it as a tradition of Moses from Sinai, that Babel, Aegypt, Ammon, and Moab, payed the poore mans tithe in the seuenth yeare, and Ramban in his preface to Se∣der Heraim, saith as much of the second tithe, that the same was also payed in these places the seuenth yeare. I would be loath to stand too long vpon this point, and yet I thinke it not amisse to consider in what manner he goes about to prooue it from the text before cited: First he takes the Septuagint tran∣slation for a full and perfect confirmation of his opi∣nion, that the poore mans tithe is one and the same with the second tithe, and therefore to make that good, he saith; Doubtlesse they read in their Hebrew Copies  the second tithe, insteed of  the yeare of tithing. Afterward he alleadgeth againe the same Text, with the inter∣pretation of the Iewes, and then makes an other rea∣ding of it, and supposeth in effect that they did not read as before  the second tithe; but with alteration & addition  i. The yeare of one tithe: thus making text to be text, or no text, as please himselfe; and yet (which is more strange) he concludes, that this exposition of Iarchi and the Iewes, in substance exactly agrees also with the meaning of the Septuagint. But I pray you marke this substantiall and exact
agreement. The Septuagint interprets the text to be vnderstood onely of one tithe. Iarchi interprets it not only of one, but of two Tithes. The Septua∣gint in his conceit, vnderstands there only the se∣cond Tithe: Iarchi not the second, but the first Tithe, and the poore mans Tithe properly. Againe, the Septuagint giues the second Tithe, so named, ioyntly to the Leuite, stranger, fatherlesse, & widow. And this testimony of Iarchi is by him iterated & repeated three times at least for failing. First on Deut. 26.12.  And hast giuen to the Leuite,  i. That which belongs to him, namely the first Tithe i. To the stranger, the fatherlesse, and the widow, this is the poore mans Tithe. So likewise on ver. 13.  i. And I haue giuen it to the Leuites, that is, the first Tithe, and to the stranger, the fatherlesse, and the widow,  i. This is the poore mans Tithe. And so it is also expounded in the Talmud Maigshar She∣ni, cap. 5. fol. 71. And in like manner on Deut. 14.29. Iarchi thus expoundeth the Text: Then the Leuite shall come, and shall take the first Tithe; and the stranger, the fatherlesse, and the widow the poore mans Tithe, still making two distinct & se∣uerall Tithe: still making two distinct and seuerall Tithes, where the Author of the History makes but one, and yet he cites this Rabbine, as yeelding testi∣mony for him, whereof that which he affirmes, is most direct against him. I haue not done yet with the
testimonies of Iarchi; for if we marke them well, they will serue besides the former slippes, to discouer the falshood of three other conclusions deliuered in this Section, which as yet I haue not touched: 1 The first is, that the Leuites at the Temple had an interest and share in the second Tithes for their feasts and loue dayes. pag. 15. 2ly That the Leuites in the Country were enter∣tained with this poore mans Tithe, or Tithe of the third yeare. ibid. 3ly That the first Tithe was payed to the Leuites at Ierusalem. pag. 13. As the Historian doth shew neither Scripture, nor reason, nor Rabbines for the proofe of these asserti∣ons, so on the other side the only authority of Iarchi in the places before cited, is sufficient to disproue them all: For Iarchi seemes to be confident in this, that the Leuites still held themselues to the first tithe, and could not claime any thing due to them, either in the second Tithe at Ierusalem, or in the poore mans Tithe in the Country. For although in the former Text, the Leuites, stranger, fatherlesse, & widow are ioyntly named together, yet he doth di∣stinguish them in taking the tithes; and therefore he confines the Leuite to the first tithe, and the stranger, fatherlesse, and widow, to the poore mans tithe. And this is likewise confirmed by other Iewes, writing on the same text, as R. Chaskuni on Deut. 14.28.
i. He sheweth here that the first Tithe was for the Leuite, and the second to be eaten by the housholder at Ierusalem: And in the 3d yeare the Leuite had the first tithe, and the stranger, fatherlesse, and widow, the poore mans tithe. R. Bechai saith as much, shew∣ing that the first tithe was only assigned to the Le∣uite, and not the second a poore mans tithe. Where∣as therefore the Historian saith, that Euery third yeare the Leuites at the Temple mist their second tithe for their feasts and loue dayes, the same being charitably and by diuine ordinance spent at home in the gates of the husbandman: This is nothing else but a fallacy, let him first proue, that the Leuites at the Temple had a right to the second tithe for feasts, and then shew how they lost it, for otherwise how can they be said to misse or loose that which they neuer had. I deny not but the Leuites might be invited by the husbandman to the feasts that were made of the second tithe; and to that purpose also St Ierom speakes on Ezech. 45. but this doth not argue, that therfore the Leuites had a right therein: neither was the same that is the second tithe, charitably, and by diuine ordinance spent at home in the gates of the husbandman, as the History here teacheth; That the tithe for the feasts, which the Iewes call the second Tithe, should yearely be eaten at Ierusalem; the Scripture sheweth it to be inioined by diuine ordinance: But that this tithe should cease the third yeare, and the poore mans Tithe be payed insteed of it, or the same be spent at home in the gates of the husbandman; it is a meere Iewish
dreame, and no diuine ordinance, neither can it bee verified by any diuine euidence: Againe the words that he vseth afterward to this purpose, are of no va∣lidity; for saith he, As the Leuites ministring in their course at the Temple, were to haue part in the feasts made of the second, so were the Leuites, and the poore in the coun∣trey entertained with this of the third yeare. As the one is true, so I grant is the other: but as yet no proofe appeares either for the one, or the o∣ther, but the contrary. For Iarchi on Deut. 14.29. & also on other texts of Scripture before cited, agree∣ing herein with the rest of the Iewes, teacheth ex∣presly, that in the third yeare the Leuite tooke the first tithe; and stranger, fatherlesse, and widow, the poore mans tithe, excluding him from hauing any part with them in their tithe. Neither needed Levi to begge for a part among the poore, being alwayes sufficiently furnished and maintained with his owne portion; for though the Iewes some of them hold, that in the 3d and 6t yeares, there was a cessation of the second tithe for feasts, yet they all absolutely de∣termine in the Talmud Rosh Hashanah, cap. 1. fol. 12. that the first tithe, or Leuites tithe neuer ceased; both because it is said in Deut. 14.29. The Leuite shal come and take his tithe, as Iarchi explaines it, and also be∣cause the first tithe is their inheritance, Numb. 18.26 And therefore, say they, as an inheritance ceaseth not, so also the first tithe ceaseth not, or hath no end. And though regularly in the seuenth yeare there was no payment of tithes, because no gathering in of fruits,
yet a compensation and supply thereof was made in the sixth yeare, by the blessing and large encrease of the sruits for three yeares, and so by consequent, the large encrease of the tithes, Leuit. 25.21. 3 Now for the third assertion, that the first tithe was payed to the Leuites of Ierusalem, and so the first tithe of the third yeare: Doe but consider the text with the exposition of Iarchi, and then iudge of the truth of it. Deut. 14.28. At the end of three yeares thou shalt bring forth all the tithes of thine encrease of the same yeare, and lay it vp within thy gates, ver. 29. Then the Leuite shall come, and shall take the first tithe, saith Iarchi. If the Leuite shall come and take the first tithe of those that were laide vp within the gates in the Country, then war not the first tithe alwayes brought vp and payed to the Leuites at Ierusalem. But Iarchi here affirmes the first, therefore the second will follow. A∣gaine for that other text, Deut. 26.12. It is euident that it speakes of the tithe that was to be giuen to the Leuite, stranger, fatherlesse, and widow that were within the gates in the Country, and here they were to eat it, as is manifest in the Text. Now Iarchi saith here, that the Leuite tooke the first Tithe, and the fa∣therlesse, stranger, &c. the poore mans Tithe. The Historian therefore forgets himselfe when he saith that Iarchi So expounds it, that he takes the mention of the Leuites there, to designe out the first tithe of that third yeare payed at Ierusalem. For the Text speakes not of the Leuites at Ieru∣salem,
but of the Leuites within the gates in the Countrey, where they did both receiue and eat their Tithes, for they were not confined only to Ierusalem to eat there, but it was lawfull for them to eate their Tithe in all places, Numb. 18.31. And for further confirmation of this point, that the Leuites took the first Tithe in the Country, and not only at Ierusa∣lem I will adde to these testimonies of Iarchi, the testimony also of Aben-Ezra on Deut. 14.27. And the Leuite that is within thy gates shalt thou not for∣sake, &c. i. It seemes that he speakes of the first Tithe, for ha∣uing before made mention of the second Tithe, hee saith, thou maist not thinke that thou shalt scape free with the second Tithe alone. And the meaning of that he saith, which is within thy gates, is because he must giue the first tithe to him, that is, to the Leuite within his gates, and he may not say, it shall remaine with me, or I will bring it to another Leuite, or I haue giuen it already. By which it appe r th, that the first Tithe was giuen to the Leuites within the gates, or as it is in the Targum, the Leuites in the Cities or Townes abroad in the Countrey: And a pregnant place for this is that of Nehem: 10.37 that the Leuites might haue the Tithes in all the Cities of our trauell: Iarchi expounds it thus:
i. Which take their Tithes in all the Cities of Israel. So on Gen. 49.7. I will diuide them in Iacob, & scat∣ter them in Israel: Iarchi here to touching the disper∣sion of Leui, hath this glosse, i. The Tribe of Leui he made to haue recourse to the Garners or Barnes for oblations and Tithes, appoin∣ting him his dispersion in way of honour. And it seemes with reason, that where they performed their seruice, there also they should receiue their wages. But saith Aben Ezra and R. Chaskuni on Deut. 18.6. i. He makes mention of the Leuites, because they also teach the Law in the gates: as it is testified in the 2d booke of Chron. 17.8, 9. And they taught in Iudah, & had the booke of the Law of the Lord with them, and went about through all the cities of Iudah, & taught the people. On which words Iarchi saith, i. For it appertaines to the Priests and Leuites to teach and instruct, as it is written in Deut. 24.8. and doe according to all that the Priests the Leuites shall teach you: and agreeable to this is that we read in Act. 15.21. and in 2 Chron. 31.4. to giue a part to the Priests and Leuites, that they might be incouraged in
the Law of the Lord. But it will be obiected that it is said Deut. 12.5.6. ye shall bring thither your burnt offerings and your sacrifices, and your Tithes. To which, the exposition of Iarchi on that place may afford an answer, for he interprets  your tithes to be i. The Tithe of Cattell, and the second tithe to be ea∣ten within the wall at Ierusalem. And not to be meant of the first Tithe, as also R. Abuhab there ex∣plaines it. Againe concerning that text, 2 Chron. 31.5.6.11.12. It doth not proue that the first tithe was vsually brought vp to Ierusalem, for that which is here expressed was an extraordinary practise at that time by the Commandement of King Ezechiah, (as Chimki sheweth) And then they did so exceed in bringing vp all sorts of Tithes and oblations, as that they brought also the Tithes of the fruits of trees & herbes, that were not due by the Law (as Chimki here declareth) according to the tradition of their ancients, and their exposition of the Law, and on ver. 6. he saith, i. That euen of the holy things which they did conse∣crate, they brought of them the Tithes, albeit they were altogether free from tithing. And as at this time there was an extraordinary quantity of Tithes brought in, so Chimki on ver. 10. doth note that there was an extraordinary concurse and multitude
of Priests and Leuites assembled together from all places, insomuch that on ver. 17. he saith, they were appointed to serue before their vsuall time, that they might bee made acquainted with the manner of di∣uine worship, for now they had forgot all through the long omiss on of the seruice of God's House in the dayes of the wicked Kings. And therefore the Leuites are taken here from 20 yeares old, whereas according to the Law, Numb. 4.23.30. they were ap∣pointed from 30 yeares and aboue, to the seruice of bearing of burthens; & from 25 yeares to the ser∣uice of the Tabernacle, as Aben Ezra and Ramban teach on Numb. 8.24. All which serueth to shew that the tithing here was extraordinary, and therefore this no cleare place (as is pretended) to proue that the first Tithe was ordinarily payed to the Leuies at Ierusalem. In the Talmud in Massech Bicurim cap. 2. fol. 84. it is said, i. There are some things incident to tithe and first fruits, which are not incident to the Therumahs: for the Tithe and first fruits, were to be brought vp to the place of God's worship, &c. But this Moses Ben Mai∣mon in that place, and Iarchi, interpret of the second Tithe, as he did before on Deut. 12. signifying there∣by that it was not vsuall to bring vp the first Tithe to Ierusalem: If happily the Priests and Leuites that ministred in their courses at Ierusalem, did in the time of their seruice receiue there their Tithes, as some of the Iewes in their writings seem to avouch;
yet they that ministred abroad, and taught in the gates and cities in the country, out of all doubt re∣ceiued and spent their Tithes also in the Countrey. Ramban on Deut. 12.6. doth discusse this point at large: Dauid Chimki also toucheth it on Malach. 3.10. and Iarchi on Nehem. 10.37. & 12.44. the porti∣ons of the Law for the Priests and Leuites. i. The Priests tooke that which was fitting for them, and the Leuites that which was fitting or meet for them, whilst they stood and ministred there before the Lord with praises and thanksgiuings. But as for those Leuites that serued in the gates and cities abroad in the Country, Ramban on Deut. 12. the place before named, is very direct and plaine, that they did re∣ceiue and spend their Tithes in the Country, & that in these words, i. And the Leuite that is within thy gates shall eat there within thy gates, that which is meet for him, ac∣cording as it is said concerning them, Numb. 8.31. and ye shall eat it in all places. And agreeable to this is the iudgment of Calvin on Deut. 14. where he dis∣putes the question, An consentaneum fuerit decimas uno in loco solui, and giues his reasons, & concludes thus, Dubium igitur mihi non est, quin Levitae in suis qui{que} regionibus decimas collegerint. There is yet one
other Text which may seeme to crosse this that hath bin said, and that is Malach. 3.10. bring all the tithes into the store-house. I must confesse the Iewes ge∣nerally here vnder tithes, doe among the rest vnder∣stand and include the first Tithe: But this (say they) was the decree or constitution of Ezra, (whom they also with St Hierome, take to be Malachi himselfe) that the Tithes here spoken of, should be brought vp to the storehouse. And therefore in the Talmud in Massecheth Maccoth. cap. 3. fol. 23. Rabbi Ioshuah Ben Levi makes mention of this, saying; i. Three things they did in the lower house on earth, to which they gaue consent in the vpper-house in Heauen, That is, the convocation or celebration in Esther, the giuing of salutation in the Name of Iehouah, and the bringing vp of the Tithe. The celebration in Esther, as it is written Esther 9.27. The Iewes also ordained and promised for them, and for their seed, &c. i. They ordained or confirmed aboue, what they pro∣mised or vndertooke below. 2 The giuing of Salutation, Ruth 2.4. And be∣hold Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said vnto the reapers,  the Lord be with you: and Iudg. 6.12. The Angell said to Gideon  the Lord be with thee thou valiant man.
3 The bringing in of the Tithe, as it is written Malach. 3.10. Bring all the tithes into the store-house, &c. Where by the store-house they vnder∣stand the Chambers of the House of God, prepared by Ezra for the receiuing of the fruits and tithes, as in Nehem. 10.37.38. And in Massecheth Iebamoth, cap. . fol. 86. they said that Ezra the Scribe did punish the Leuites, be∣cause they came not vp with him from Babel to Ie∣rusalem, Ezra 8.15. And therefore he commanded to bring all the Tithes into the Chambers of the House of God; and so the Priests and Leuites were made equall in the first Tithe, for which they alledge Nehem. 10.38. And the Priest the sonne of Aaron shal be with the Leuites when the Leuites take tithes. And in like manner as the Commentator there notes, Ezechiah did prepare chambers to bring in thither all the Tithes that those Leuites which had worshipped Idoles, should not be partakers of them 2 Chron. 31.11. Ezech. 44.10. Moses Ben Maimon in his explanation of Massech. Megnashar Sheni, cap. 5. fol. 72. towards the end, makes mention of this pu∣nishment of the Leuites inflicted by Ezra, and saith, that Iochanan the high Priest did abrogate the vse of the Confession, commanded in the payment of Tithes, Deut. 26.13. &c. I haue brought the hallowed thing out of mine house, &c. because at that time they could not truly say those words, according to all thy commandements which thou hast commanded me; for God had commanded them to giue the first Tithe vnto the Leuites, and they then gaue it onely
to the Priests, and that as he there speakes, i. By the decree of the counsell or consistory of Ezrah, because that when he came vp, the Leuites came not vp with him (as I said before) Ezrah, 8.15. And therefore he punished them, commanding that the Tithes should not be giuen to them, but to the Priests. And this matter is recorded in diuers other places of the Talmud, as in Iebanoth cap. 2. fol. 86. Ce∣thuboth cap 2. fol.. 26. And also in Massech Cholin, cap. 10. fol. 131. where diuers questions and doubts are moued concerning this punishment of the Le∣uites, and whether at this time only the Priests, or else both Priests and Leuites tooke the first Tithe; for though the Leuites might for a while be suspen∣ded from their right of tithing, or haue their porti¦on therein somewhat diminished, yet that they were not altogether depriued of it, but still had a part in the first Tithe, they argue from that which is written in Nehem. 13.10.11.12. Notwithstanding whatsoe∣uer other differences there are among them, yet herein they all agree, that at this time the Priests had a right and interest in the first Tithe, which plainly o∣uerthroweth an other position, boldly deliuered by our Historian, and that also without any proofe, when he saith pag. 13. that The Priests receiued no tithes of the husbandmen, only the Leuites receiued tithes from them, and payed their tithe to the Priests. And so also in his Review, pag. 454. If we may giue credit to that which the great Do∣ctors
of the Iewes haue deliuered in the Talmud, & their later Comments, which the Historian else∣where saith, are testimonies beyond exception for the practise or Historicall part, then it is most cer∣taine, by the common opinion of them all, that the Priests did receiue Tithes, yea the first Tithe which was payde by the husbandman; but all the question is, whether the inferiour Leuites did at this time re∣ceiue any, or no: for the reason why Iochanan the high Priest did not permit the confession of the pay∣ment of Tithe, prescribed Deut. 26.13. was (say they) because all was then giuen to the Priests, and none to the Leuites, whereas indeed in the generall grant of the tenth to the children of Levi for an inheri∣tance for their seruice which they serue in the Ta∣bernacle of the Congregation, Numb. 18.21. the whole Tribe, both Priests and Leuites are included. And therefore setting aside this conceit of the Le∣uites punishment by Ezra, as hauing no sufficient ground in Scripture. They yeeld an other reason why the first Tithe belongs vnto the Priests, to wit, because the Priests are comprehended vnder the name of Leuites, to whom the grant was made; for saith Aben Ezra on Leuit. 16. i. Euery Priest is a Leuite, but euery Leuite is not a Priest. And hence it is, that in Massecheth Iebanoth cap. 9, fol. 86. Ioshuah Ben Levi mentioning that text Numb. 18.26. Speake also vnto the Leuites, &c. doth vnder the name of Leuites vnderstand also Priests, and saith there that
i. In foure and twenty places the Priests are called Le∣uites; and one of them is Ezech. 44.15. But the Priests of the Leuites, the sonnes of Zadok, &c. this is againe repeated in Massech Becoroth, cap. 1. fol. 4. And Dauid Chimki also speakes of it in his Com∣mentary on 2 Chron. 5.4, And in Massech Cholin, cap. 10. fol. 131. The expositor in that Tractate, doth expresse it fully, and apply it thus; i. Forasmuch as in foure and twenty places, the Priests are called Leuites, therefore though in the first Tithe the Leuites are nominated, yet the Priests are therein also contained. Moreouer in Massech Chethuboth, cap. 2. fol. 26. R. Simeon Ben Eliezer writes expresly for the first Tithe. that the Priest had a right in it, saying, i. As the Therumah or heaue-offering is the possessi∣on of the Priesthood, so also the first Tithe is the pos∣session of the Priesthood. Those words in Gen. 49.7. I will diuide them in Iacob, & scatter them in Israel, are spoken of the whole tribe of Leui & Iarchi here saith, that their scattering was for the receiuing of the Tithes, as also for the teaching of the people, Deut. 33 10. And in Deut. 33.11. blesse O Lord this substance, &c the blessing hath reference to the whole Tribe, both Priests and Leuites, and there Aben Ezra takes his
substance to be  first fruites and Tithes, and so also doth R. Bechai. Againe Deut. 18.1. The Priests and the Leuites, and all the Tribe of Leui, &c. Iarchi interprets his inheritance to bee  i. oblations and tithes; and the Text speakes plainly of the whole Tribe of Leui, and therefore the whole Tribe is interessed in the Tithe; and not only the inferiour Leuites. R. Bechai, and the Targum in this place agree with Iarchi in the same interpretation. Besides, it appeares by practise, that the Priests re∣ceiued Tithes as well as the Leuites, so much doth Chimki intimate on Malach. 3.10. And it is cleare in Tobit 1.7. The first tenth part I gaue to the Priests the sonnes of Aaron which ministred in Ierusalem. Which well agreeth with the testimony of Iosephus, Antiquit. lib. 4. cap. 4. where he saith, , He commanded the people to pay the tenth of their yearely increase vnto the Leuites and the Priests. And this is plainly confirmed & taught by the Apostle, Heb. 7.5. For verily they which are the children of Leui, which receiue the office of the Priesthood, haue a commandement to take according to the Law tithes of the people, &c. Which Text by Lyra (who was skilfull in the ancient affaires of the Iewes) is explained thus: Levitae generaliter recipi∣ebant decimas à reliquo populo; Inter Levitas autem illi qui erant maiores illius tribus, videlicet sacerdo∣tes summi filij Aaron, non solùm accipiebant decimam cum Levitis à populo, sed etiam de parte Levitarum
recipiebant quae vocabatur decima decimae, Numb. 18. And therefore by all this it is very euident, that the Priests receiued Tithes of the people, and not onely the inferiour Leuites, as the History teacheth. SECT. 5. AFter the Historians discourse concerning the diuision of Tithes among the Iewes, he pro∣pounds an example borrowed from Scaliger, whereby the order of the payment of the first fruits and heaue offerings, and the first tithe, and the se∣cond tithe, may better appeare; and then hauing summed vp his account, he concludes that the hus∣bandman yearely thus payed more then a sixt part of his increase; beside first fruits, almost a fift. But here notwithstanding these which are rehearsed, there are some other things left out, which should also by right be taken into the reckoning; for beside the first fruits and Therumahs, and first and second tithe, there was  Leuit. 19.9. & Deut. 24.19.20. the corner of the field, the gleaning, & the forgotten sheafe, which were taken out of the fruits of the husbandman: and though they were exemp∣ted from tithing, yet not only the poore, but also the Leuites had a share in them; for so saith Iarchi on Deut. 14.27. And the Leuite that is within thy gates shalt thou not forsake, for he hath neither part nor in∣heritance with thee,
i. They shall haue no part with thee, except gleaning, that which is forgotten, and the corner of the field; & that which is common; for he also hath a part with thee in these, as well as thou, and they are not subiect to tithing. Moses Ben Maimon doth likewise con∣firme this in his Commentary on Massech Theru∣moth, cap. 1. fol. 48. Dauid de pomis in his Dictiona∣ry in the word , where he briefly sheweth the order of tithing among the Iewes, doth there particularly expresse these things in the first place: & concerning the standing corne which was to be left at the end or corner of the field; which is called  (whereof there is a speciall Massecheth or Tractate in the Talmud) he saith that it hath no quantity prae∣scribed in the Law, but according to the appoint∣ment of their Doctors  a sixtieth part was required. But Baal Haturim on Leuit. 19.9. saith, that they were to leaue out  a fourtieth part. And in Massech Peah cap. 1. fol. 2. they say it was to be giuen proportionably accor∣ding to the number of the poore, and the quantity of the field. To these we may also adde the 24. gifts of the Priesthood, omitted in this History; but often mentioned by the Iewes, as we shall after heare; which being considered and valued together with the rest, that which the husbandman payed out of his fruits, will amount to a greater fumme then what the History speakes of.
And if it was not thought too much to giue all this beside Tithes in the time of the Law, why shall it be thought too much to giue onely Tithes in the time of the Gospell? vnlesse we thinke it fitting that the spirituall sonnes of the Church should liue in all plenty, and the spirituall Fathers goe a begging: not considering what the Apostle saith Galat. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the word, make him that taught him, partaker of all his goods. And that we may yet further see in what manner the Priests in the Law were partakers of the peo∣ples goods, I will here relate one thing more, that R. Bechai hath on Numb. 18.14. in these words, i. Our Doctours of happy memory, in their discourses propound an example of a certaine woman that had a sheep, which when she went to sheare, the Priest came to her, that she should giue him the first of the fleece, Deut. 18.4. And when she brought forth the firstborne the Priest tooke that, Numb. 18.15. Now she seeing the case stand thus, killed it: then came the Priest, and tooke the gifts, Deut. 18.3. Afterward she said, this flesh shall be a thing separate from the common vse, then he tooke all, Numb. 18.14. In the beginning of this second Chapter of the History, the Author in his Dichotomie saith, that the yearely increase is either fruits of the ground, or cat∣tell:
I haue already spoken so much as I inten∣ded of the first, and should now come to the other; but before I enter vpon that, considering that among other texts of holy Scripture, wrested & mis∣interpreted in this treatise, we meet here with a crosse exposition of that text, Leuit. 27.30. cited in pag. 13. of this Chapter: I thinke it not amisse in a word or two to try the soundnes of it; the rather be∣cause this Scripture hath vsually beene alleadged by iudicious and learned Diuines, as a principal ground for the establishing of the diuine right in tithes. But the Historian intending heere (as it seemes) to de∣priue vs of the benefit of this text, and the true sense thereof, doth therefore slylie bring it in by way of a Parenthesis, and sayes that the Iewes apply it to the second Tithe, which Tithe was meerely Leviticall, & is finished, and so by consequent he doth insinuate, that all haue erred who haue otherwise interpreted or vnderstood this text: and therefore no hope here any longer of any hold or warrant for the Tithes we challenge: But for answer to this, though the Iewes be oftentimes idle and ridiculous in their interpreta∣tions, and being enemies to Christianity, giue vs cause to trust them no further then we see them; yet to let these exceptions passe, first I avouch, that the chiefest and best learned of the Iewes, doe not ex∣pound this text to be meant of the second tithe; and because the Iewes in generall are heere named, and yet none but one only is cited, therefore that the truth may the better appeare, I will oppose one of greater authority against him; Aben Ezra a Iew,
(often heretofore mentioned) and one of speciall credit among them, and therefore vsually stiled with an epithete, Aben Ezra , Aben Ezra the wise man, he is plaine of an other opinion touching this Text; his words are these on Leuit. 27.30. i. He that hath an heart to vnderstand the secret of the world, shall also know the secret of the firstborne, and the tenth: And behold Abraham gaue tithe, and fo also our father Iacob, and I will further reueale part of the mysterie when I speake of the second tithe, by the helpe of him that is first, or one, and hath no se∣cond. 1 By which words it is euident first that he spea∣king of Abraham and Iacobs tithing, taketh such Tithes to be meant here as Abraham & Iacob payed before the Law. 2ly Whereas he saith, he will reueale part of the mystery, when he comes to speake of the second Tithe, he doth manifestly acknowledge, that this place is not meant of the second Tithe; & therefore when he comes to the proper place thereof in his Commentary vpon Deut. 14.23. he doth there per∣forme that which he did here promise. His mysticall reason there expressed, is taken from the perfection of number, which I haue touched before, and the drift of his speach tendeth to signifie in effect, that
as God is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last; so the beginning and the end, the prime and the perfection, the first and the tenth must bee consecrate to him. And in this re∣spect Philo Iudaeus saith, . i. de congressu quaerendae eruditionis gratia. pag. 342. , there is some nere∣nesse (as it were) and affinity betweene God and the tenth. And to like purpose writes Abarbinel on this Text of Leviticus. But I let passe these curious spe∣culations and subtilties about number, ne fortè cùm de numero multum loquamur, mensuram & pondus negligere iudicemur: as St Austin speakes in the like case, de civit. Dei lib. 11. cap. 31. neither doe I intend to dispute the question, but only to free the Text from false interpretation, and therefore I haue here produced this Rabbines Testimony, a Iew against a Iew, a better against a worse▪ I might likewise here alleadge the authority of Lyra and others, that in this agree with Aben Ezra, and among the rest Abarbinel is very plaine, that both first and second Tithe is comprehended in this Text, saying, i. The Tithe of the corne of the ground, that is, the first tithe, and the second tithe: and he addes also a rea∣son, to shew that these are holy to the Lord, as ari∣sing from his prouidence.  and his blessing of the increase of the earth, which hath refe∣rence aswell to the first, as to the second tithe.
But I come now to heare the aduerse party, and to consider briefly the forme and reason of his testi∣mony, Levit. 27.30. All the Tithe of the land, both of the seed of the ground, and of the fruit of the trees is the Lords, it is holy to the Lord. i. The Scripture speakes of the second Tithe, saith Sa∣lomoh Iarchi in this place. It is the sentence & rule of Hilary, (obserued by that Reuerend Father of the Church, whose learned labour for the clearing of the truth in the question of tithes, hath now long beene extant) That he who readeth Scripture as he ought, must not bring a sense to the words, but fetch the sense from the words, and not compell the Scrip∣ture to speake as he in preiudice conceiueth. But R. Iarchi goes directly against this rule; for he hauing a preiudiciall conceit that this Text must be inter∣preted of the second Tithe, he therefore restraines all the particulars therein contained, to his own pur∣pose. And because in Deut. 14.23. the place of the se∣cond Tithe, it is said, Thou shalt eat before the Lord thy God the Tithe of thy corne, of thy wine, & of thine oyle: therefore from thence hee expounds these in Leuit. 27.30. i. Of the seed of the ground, that is, corne; of the fruit of the trees, that is, wine and oyle. As though there were no seed of the ground but corne, and no fruit of the trees but wine and oyle; what is this else but contrary to the former rule, to bring a sense to the
words, and not to take a sense from the words? A∣gaine, to restraine this Text onely to the second Tithe, is without any sufficient warrant, considering that not only the second, but also the first tithe is the Lords, and holy to the Lord, as Abarbinel here saith, because it proceeds frō his blessing of the earth as a reserued portion to himselfe. That it is the Lords, appeareth Numb. 18 21. For behold I haue giuen the children of Levi all the tenth in Israel for an inheri∣tance; He giues that here which in a peculiar man∣ner was his owne to giue. And therefore well saith Calvin touching this on Leuit. 27.30. His verbis o∣stendit Deus se decimas Leuitis assignando, proprio iure cedere, quae sunt quasi regale vectigal, at{que} ita querimonias omnes compescit, quia alioqui obstrepere poterant aliae tribus ultra modum se gravari. And that the first tithe is the Lords, Iarchi himselfe eui∣dently sheweth on Malach. 3.8. Wherein haue we spoi∣led thee? In tithes and offerings: where saith Iarchi, i. The tithes and offerings which ye take from the Priests and Leuites, that is the spoyling of me. Which words are meant not of the second, but of the first tithe, which only belonged to the Priests & Leuites, and in defrauding them hereof, God himselfe is said to be spoyled. And so in Esay 5.8. Woe to them that ioyne house to house, &c. Iarchi hath the like saying, i. Ye rob God of his part in tithes. Beside, as the first
tithe is the Lords, so also it is holy to the Lord, Deut. 26.13. I haue brought the hallowed thing out of my house, and also haue giuen it to the Leuites, &c. The Targum here saith,  i. I haue brought the holy Tithe out of my house, i. And also haue giuen it to the Leuites, that is, the first Tithe (saith Iarchi) & so he doth here interpret the words in ver. 12. of the Leuites Tithe, or first Tithe. And this is likewise confirmed by Aben Ezra on Numb. 18.29: and againe by Iarchi on Nehem. 12.47. And they gaue the holy things vnto the Le∣uites; which Iarchi thus expoundeth, And they gaue the Tithe to the Leuites: whereby he implyeth, that the first Tithe, or Leuites Tithe, is ho∣ly. And to conclude, if that be true which the Hi∣storian saith; of the increase of their cattell, one Tithe only was payed, and that to the Leuites; then it fol∣loweth that the first tithe, or Leuites tithe, is holy to the Lord; for it is said Leuit. 27.32. Euery tithe of Bullock, and of Sheepe of all that goeth vnder the rod, the tenth shall be holy to the Lord. If then the first tithe be the Lords, and holy to the Lord, why shall it be excluded out of this text? And if this verse be vnderstood of the first tithe, as the History teacheth, why shall not also the verses immediatly going be∣fore, be vnderstood in like manner of the first tithe? To this that hath bin said, one thing more may be added, that whereas Iarchi touching the redeeming of the tithe, by adding the first part thereto, as in Le∣uit.
27.31. saith, that this redeeming was i. That it may be free to be eaten in euery place. First the adding of the first part is not prescribed at all in that text, which they make to be the ground of the second tithe, viz: Deut. 14.23. Neither was the se∣cond tithe to be eaten in all places, for that was pro∣per only to the first tithe, as Deut. 18.31. In regard whereof Ramban confutes Iarchi his exposition of those words in Deut. 26.4. nor giuen ought thereof for the dead, &c. to be meant of the second tithe, & therefore hath this glosse, i. To make a coffin and winding sheet for the dead. Ramban here shewes that this exposition is not sound, for saith he, &c. It is declared in the Scripture, that they might not prophane the second tithe out of Ierusalem, but only, if the way were too farre, it was to be made in money, and that money to be laid out at Ierusalem for some thing fit to be eaten there, oxe and sheep, &c. Deut. 14 26. and therefore not to make a coffin or winding sheet for the dead: and so much doth Chimki also note on Esay 62.9. But for this redeeming of the Tithe, by adding the fift part thereto, I take that to be agreeable to the truth, which the iudicious interpreter Caluin touching this point, hath deliuered on Leuit. 27, 30. in these words,
Quòd verò ubi pecunia redimuntur decimae, quin∣tam partem aestimationi vult superaddi, non eò tendit, ut Levitae ex alieno damno lucrum faciant, sed quia astutè aliquam vtilitatem captabant agrorum domi∣ni, frumentum in pecuniam mutando, fraudibus occur∣ritur, ne quid ex captiosâ permutatione Levitis dece∣dat. Eadem ratione animalia iubet qualiacun{que} erunt decimari, nec pecuniâ redimi patitur, quoniam si li∣bera fuisset electio, nullum unquam animal pingue aut vegetum venisset ad Levitas. Ergo hâc lege re∣medium avaritiae & sordibus fuit adhibitum. Where we see also that Calvin doth manifestly interpret this Text of the first Tithe, or Leuites tithe, as the most or best interpreters doe, so that here wee haue both Iewes and Christians against the foresaid History. Wherefore though we loose the Tithes, yet let vs not loose the Text, let vs not loose the Truth; for if this dealing with Scripture may cur∣rently passe, Abraham payed Tithe of all; that is, only of the spoyles: All the Tithe of the land is the Lords; that is, only the second Tithe:  the yeare of tithing, that is,  the second Tithe, or the yeare of paying onely one Tithe: I say, if this course may be allowed, as Tithes are made no Tithes by wicked customes and pre∣scriptions, so Scripture shall be made no Scripture by corrupt glosses, and false expositions: and yet these matters are set forth with such a goodly out∣ward shew, as though forsooth they might admit no contradiction; for thus saith the Author, Many of no small name grosly slip in reckoning and
diuiding these kindes of their Tithes, but this here deliuered, is from the holy Text, and the Iewish Law∣yers. What wee receiue rightly deduced from the Text we willingly embrace, but as for the Iewi h Lawyers they iarre among themselues, they trust not one another, and therefore we haue no reason to trust them, or depend vpon their testimony; but to follow the Apostles rule, 1 Thessal. 5.21. , Trye all things, and keepe that which is good. But because wee stand so much vpon the Iewish Lawyers, I would faine know how they and the Christian Lawyer can be reconci∣led in that which is deliuered in the next Section concerning Cattell, which is the second part of his diuision, and is thus expressed. SECT. 6. OF their cattel the firstborne were theExod. 13.2. Lords, payed to the Priest, of cleane beasts in kind; of vncleane in money, with a fift part added Of the increase of them one Tithe only was payed, & that to the Leuites: Euery Tithe of Bullocke, and of sheepe of all that goeth vnder the rod, the tenth shall be holy to the Lord, saith holyLevit. 27.26. & 32 Writ. Thence at the tithing they vsed to shut the Lambes (for example) in a sheep-coat, where the straitnesse of the doore might permit but one at once to come out: Then opening the doore, either gently to hunt them out, or by placing the Ewes bleating neere them with∣out,
so to cause them runne forth one by one, while a seruant standing at the doore with a rod coloured with oker, solemnly told to the tenth, which with his rod he mark'd, so they vnderstand going vnder the rod. That so mark'd, what euer it were, male, or female, worst, or best, was the Tithe, and might not be chan∣ged. First here to omit what maybe obiected touching the first-borne of cleane beasts from Deut. 14.23: whereas he saith, that the first of those that were vn∣cleane were payed to the Priest in money, with a fift part added, though he pretend Text of Scripture, and stand much vpon the Iewish Lawyers; yet I take it, this cannot be iustified either by any text of Scrip∣ture, or by any Iewish Lawyer: First, for Scripture it is plaine, that the first foale of the Asse, which was an vncleane beast, was not to be payed to the Priest in money, but was to be redeemed with a Lambe, Exod. 13.13. & 34.20. Againe the Iewes teach, that no first-borne of any vncleane beast was payed at all, but only of the Asse: Euen Salomoh Iarchi his owne man avoucheth this in his Commentary vpon the Texts before cited, Exod. 13.13. & 34.20. And euery first-borne of an Asse thou shalt redeeme with a Lambe, i. The first of the Asse, but not the first of any other vncleane beast. To this also agreeth Aben Ezra and Chaskuni writing on the same Texts, and so doth Abarbinel on Levit. 27.27.
Rabbi Ioseph Karo in his  i. tractate of the firstling of the asse, hath these words, &c. i. The first-borne of the vncleane beast was in vse in all places, and at all times, but it was not in vse saue only of Asses, which were to be redeemed with a Lambe. R. Bechai on Exod. 13.13. testifyeth the same thing, saying; &c. i. And euery first foale of an Asse, only the Asse, and not the first of horses or camels. And the reason here∣of (saith he) as their Doctors teach, is, because the Aegyptians are compared to Asses, as it is said Ezech. 23.2. Whose flesh is as the flesh of Asses. And againe, because the Israelites brought vp many Asses with them loaden with gold and siluer, and the Treasures of Aegypt. And therefore it is commanded that the first of the Asse should be redeemed, and not of other beasts, because the slaying of the first-borne, was the first-borne of the Aegyptians. R. Moses Ben Maimon in the Talmud in Masse∣cheth Becoroth, i. the Treatise of the first-borne, con∣firmes this there, in his exposition of the Mishuaioth cap. 1. saying, i. It is said to Aaron: And the first-borne of the vn∣cleane beast shalt thou redeeme; he meaneth the first-borne of the Asse, because he tooke not the first of a∣ny
vncleane beast, but only the Asse. Where we see that Maimon expounds that place, concerning the vncleane beast, Numb. 18.15. to be vnderstood only of the asse. And as for that we read in Levit. 27.27. which is spoken of the dedication of vnclean beasts, it is not meant of the first-borne, for that was the Lords already, as ver. 26. But of such beasts as were vncleane, and had blemishes, & were vnfit for sacri∣fice, and therefore were giuen as a vow or dedi∣cation  for the repairing of the Temple, and not payed as a duty to the Priest, as the first-borne was; for so doth Iarchi and Ramban, and other Iewes expound that Text. Where then, or how shall it be proued that the first-borne of vncleane beasts were payed to the Priest in money, with a fift part added? In the next words he saith, Of the increase of them (that is) of their cattell, one Tithe only was payed, and that to the Leuites. Here I will not in his owne Phrase proclaime that a man of no small name doth grosly slip; but I dare boldly say in plaine English, that he hath deli∣uered in these words a grosse falshood according to the doctrine and practise of the Iewes, which he takes vpon him to relate: For they doe not teach that only one Tithe of their cattell was payed, or that it was payed either vnto the Leuites, or Priests at all; but contrary, That it was of the nature of the peace offerings, and to be eaten by the owners thē∣selues at Ierusalem. And for proofe hereof, before I goe any further,
I appeale first to his owne witnesse, Salomoh Iarchi vpon this very Text cited by himselfe, viz. Leuit. 27.32. And euery Tithe of Bullocke and of sheep of all that goeth vnder the rod, the tenth shall be holy to the Lord. Which Iarchi thus interpreteth. i. Shall be holy to offer the blood and combustible parts thereof vpon the altar, and the flesh shall be eaten by the owners: for behold it is not reckoned among the gifts of the Priesthood, neither doe we finde that it should be giuen to the Priests. It seemes strange that the Historian should so confidently alleadge the testimony of this Rabbine against vs in ver. 30. of this Chap, applying that Text to be meant onely of the second Tithe; and here on this ver. 32. the next but one after, either not to read him, or not to vnderstand him, or not to respect him, when as he writes so direct against this Histo∣ry And yet I wil spare to impute this to ignorance or lazines, or impudent boldnes, or the like; though he spare not without cause to lay load on others in this kind, not remembring that of the Poêt. Iliad. 20. . But bee it what it what it will, sure I am that beside Iarchi his Testimony in this place, with whom R. Bechai and Abarbinel on the same Text concurre in a manner word for word, both he and other Rabbines on di∣uers texts of Scripture; and also in the Talmud doe
plainly shew against this History, that the Tithe of beasts is a distinct and seuerall Tithe by it selfe, diffe∣ring from the Priests and Leuites Tithe, Deut. 12.6. Ye shall bring thither your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and your Tithes. Where Iarchi expounds  your Tithes, to be i. The Tithe of beasts, and the second Tithe to be eaten within the wall at Ierusalem. And Rabbi Abuhab commenting vpon Iarchi in the same place, saith, i. Iarchi speakes this, because that if he should inter∣pret it, of the first Tithe, he was to giue that vnto the Leuite. Where he makes a manifest difference be∣twixt the Leuites Tithe, and the Tithe of beasts; and and so doth Ramban on the same Text at large: like∣wise on Amos 4.4. Come to Bethell, and transgresse to Gilgal, and multiply transgressions, and bring your sacrifices in the morning, and your Tithes after three yeares. It is in the originall  And your Tithes after three dayes. The Iewes therefore giue a double exposition of these words, either that  doth signifie yeares, as sometimes it is taken in Scripture, as Leuit. 25.29.  within a yeare may he re∣deeme it: and so this Text of Amos hath reference to that in Deut. 14.28. At the end of three yeare th u shalt bring forth all the Tithes, &c. Or else it is taken in his proper signification for dayes; and in this sense
they vnderstand here by Tithes, the Tithe of beasts, which Idolaters did offer contrary to the Law; for so are Iarchi his words; i. The Law saith concerning the lesse holy things, Le∣vit. 7.18. & 19.6.7. It shall be eaten the day ye offer it, or on the morrow, but idolaters say, after three dayes eat the Tithe of your cattell, or else the idolatrous Priests teach them so; as he further sheweth in this place, &c. In like manner Dauid Chimki on the same Text, accordeth with Iarchi in this interpreta∣tion, saying; i. After three dayes your Tithes: i. The Tithe of beasts, which is of the lesse holy things; and the Law saith concerning the lesse holy things; It shall be eaten the day ye offer it, or on the morrow: but they eat it after three dayes. For the better clearing of these testimonies, wee must here note by the way, that the Iewes make two sorts of holy things, the one they call  the most holy: the other  the lesse holy. Iarchi grounds this distinction on Leuit. 21.22. The bread of his God, euen of the most holy, and of the holy shall he eate. The same distinction is commonly vsed by other Rabbines, as Aben Ezra on Numb. 18.9. And by Ramban on Leuit. 19.5. and Baal Haturim
on Deut. 12.11. & so also in the Talmud as in Masse∣cheth Gnorlah, cap. 2. fol. 81. and Chiduschin cap. 2. fol. 52. &c. The most holy things were such as onely the Priests were to eat of, as Iarchi sheweth on Numb. 18.10. and so Aben Ezra on Deut. 12.27. The lesse holy the people also might eat, as Aben Ezra signifies on Leuit. 7.15. and Deut. 12.27. and Iarchi on Levit. 10, 14. Among the first sort of these holy things they number the meat offering, the trespasse offering, the sinne offering, the first-borne, the shoul∣der, the brest, &c. as appeares by Aben Ezra on Numb. 18.9. and Deut. 12.27. Among the second they reckon the peace-offerings, Leuit. 7.15. So doth Aben Ezra on this Text: and Ramban likewise testifieth the same thing on Leuit. 19.5. And when ye shall offer a peace-offering vnto the Lord, ye shall offer it freely: i. He speakes this of the peace-offrings which were the lesse holy things, and were to be eaten by the ow∣ners themselues, &c. And to this second sort of ho∣ly things, the Iewes likewise doe referre the Tithe of Cattell, as is euident by Iarchi and Chimki, and o∣thers in the places before cited. And Ramban further confirmes it on Numb. 5.10. And euery mans hal∣lowed things shall be his,
i. The Scripture drawes all holy things, & giues them to the Priests, & doth not reserue of them but only the offering of thanksgiuing, & the peace-offrings, & the Passeouer, & the tithe of beasts, & the 2d Tithe, & the planting of the 4th yeare, that they should belong to the owners. Dauid de pomis in his dictionary in the word  shewing the diuers kinds of sacrifices among the Iewes, doth in all things agree with vs, in this that hath beene said concerning the Tithe of beasts, and so doth Moses Ben Maimon in the Talmud in Massecheth Becoroth, cap. 9. fol. 25. Mishneh in Meg∣nashar Seni cap. 1. i. Wee haue heretofore oftentimes mentioned that for the Tithe of beasts they offer the fat and the blood thereof, and the owners doe eat it in Ierusalem: that is, doe eat the flesh thereof, as Iarchi before expres∣sed: Now the reason why the Iewes doe after this manner conceiue and teach concerding this Tithe, is related both by R. Bechai, and also by Iarchi on Le∣vit. 27.33. to be, because (say they) it is not reckoned among the 24 gifts of the Priesthood (for that is the number that they make of them) according as I finde them set downe both by R. Bechai, and R. Chas∣koni on Numb. 18. in this order. So Iarchi on Gen. 29.34. and in the Talmud in Massech Cholin 133. fol. 2 pag.
i. The twenty foure gifts of the Priesthood were giuen to the Priests, twelue in Ierusalem, and twelue in the borders. The twelue that were giuen in Ierusalem are these, the sinne offering, the trespasse offering, the peace offerings of the Congregation, the skinnes of the holy things, the shew bread, the two loaues, the Omer or sheafe, the remainder of the meat offerings, the resi∣due of the log, or pint of oyle, for the leaper, the oblati∣on of the thanksgiuing, the oblation of the peace offe∣ring, the oblation of the Ramme of the Nazarite. And these following are the twelue that were giuen in the borders. The great heaue offering, the heaue of∣fering or oblation of the tithe, the cake, the first fruits, the first of the fleece, the shoulder, the two cheekes and the maw, the first borne of man, the first borne of the cleane beast, the firstling of the asse, the dedications or vowes, the field of possession, the robbery of the stran∣ger, Leuit. 6.5. Numb. 5.7.8. These are the foure and twenty gifts that belonged to the Priesthood. And among these there is no mention of the first-borne of any vncleane beast, but only the Asse, and no mention at all of the tithe of cattell. What sound∣nesse there is in this their doctrine and interpretati∣on
of Scriptures, I leaue that to others, but what their opinion is touching the point here propoun∣ded, their writings (as hath bin shewed) doe suffici∣ently declare. And therefore by all this it is very ma∣nifest, that our Historian hath set downe a false rela∣tion of the Tithe of cattell, as it was in vse among the Iewes. And whereas he goeth on in his History for the manner of tithing their cattell, and tells vs a tale of the streitnes of a doore for Lambes to goe through, & the Ewes bleating neere them without, and a seruant standing with a rod coloured with oker to marke the tenth, &c. Albeit happily some such custome might at some times be obserued in certaine places among the Iewes of later ages, & that not onely for Lambs, but a so for calfes, as Iarchi there notes: yet to make the Text Leuit. 27.32. to be the ground and warrant of this practise; or that Moses intended hereby to teach them that particular manner of marking the tenth, I thinke it carries but small shew of probabili∣ty; for though the Historian say, So they vnderstand going vnder the rod: Yet certaine it is, that the chiefest and best learned of the Iewes doe not so vn∣derstand it. Aben Ezra expoundeth  vnder the rod, to be  The shepheard or heard-mans rod; which was not a rod coloured with oker, but such a one as Dauid in Psal. 23.4. al∣ludes vnto, where comparing God to a sheepheard, and himselfe to a sheepe, he saith ver. 4. thy rod & thy staffe they comfort me. On which words Chimki hath this glosse;
i. For the shepheard feeds his sheep with the rod which he hath in his hand, and leanes vpon it when he stan∣deth. And it seemes also that he numbred his sheep with it, as Chimki on Ier. 33.13. and Baal Haturim on Numb. 1.2. doth intimate. And this is more fully ex∣plained in Ezech 20.37. And I will cause you to passe vnder the rod, &c: The same phrase is here vsed with that in Leuit. 27.32. as Chimki doth obserue, in∣terpreting the words of the Text in this manner: i. I will cause you to passe vnder the rod, according as it is said, of all that goeth vnder the rod, Leuit 27. that is to say, as he that telletth his sheep holds a rod in his hand, & telleth thē one by one, & the tenth brings out for the Tithe, so will I number you, & the sinner shall perish, &c. Where it is euident that R. Chimki explaines that Text of Leuit. by this of Ezech. & this also by that, but makes no mention of any such rod coloured with oker, as the History speakes of, either there to marke beasts, or here to marke men; neither doth the Text implye any such consequence. And indeed in the Talmud in Massecheth Becoroth cap. 9 where this is first spoken of, the Iewes doe not teach, that they did marke the tenth with a rod coloured with oker, but they numbred not only their sheepe, but also other cattell with a rod one by one till they
came to the tenth, and the tenth that came forth  they mark'd with a red colour; for so doth Maimon in that place, and Dauid de pomis in his Dictionary expound  to be  i. a knowne name of a red co∣lour: yet so that this was no such constant custome, but that it might be & was also changed. And there∣fore in some cases (as there they doe declare) they did neither tell or marke the tenth in this manner, but tooke indifferently as might be, ten out of an hundred, and tithed also by guesse and coniecture, and therefore there they write thus: i. The Tithe of beasts is annexed to the Tithe of corne, whereas therefore the tithe of corne is taken by guesse and coniecture, so also the tithe of beasts is taken by guesse and coniecture. Now what this guesse & con∣iecture is, they doe also there explaine in the Com∣mentary vpon the Talmud in these tearmes, i. Whereas the Tithe of corne is one part of ten, so also the Tithe of beasts is one often, without going vnder the rod, but only that ten are before him, and he takes one of them: More may be alleadged from the same pla e to this purpose, but it being a point of small moment, this which hath beene said already, may be sufficient. It may be the fauourers of tbis Histo∣ry
will esteeme these to be but sleight obiections, propounded onely by a polyanthean predicant a¦gainst the learned and peremptory conclusions of a grand polymathist and predominant Philologer: And yet as sleight as they are, they cut in pieces the one halfe of his Iewish History. For his Dichotomy is, that the yearely increase is either fruits of the ground, or ca tell, hauing done with the fruits of the ground so far forth as Scaliger gaue him direction, he comes in the next place to tithe of cattell; & here Scaliger leaues him; and therefore he writes at ran∣dome on his owne head, contrary to the writings of all the Iewes; and for the vsuall manner of the tithing of their cattell he tells vs scarce a word of truth. And yet forsooth in his Preface pag. 6. he professeth that to supply the want of a full and faithfull collection of the historicall part, was the end and purpose why this was composed, which might remaine as a furnished armory for such as inquire about this Ecclesiasticall revenue. See now what a faithfull collection, and what a furnisht armory he hath here left vs. If any obiect, that this practise of the Iewes in tithing their cattell, may bee questioned as not agreeable to precept and rules of Scripture; for this I answer, that so the grea∣test part of this History may in that regard iustly be suspected. But the question is not now what is a∣greeable or disagreeable to Scriptu e; but what was in truth the practise and manner of the Iewish ti∣thing; for that is it the Historian vndertakes to teach vs: and if ye aske, where shall this be found, or how
shall it appeare? he tells vs in his Review, pag. 453. that what the Iewish Lawyers and Doctours in the Talmud and later Comments haue deliuered, are testi∣monies beyond exceptin for the practise or historicall part;: And if they be so, then I am sure the Iewish Lawyers doe herein put the Christian Lawyer to his geofayle beyond all exception; for they mani∣festly crosse and contradict this that he hath taught vs, as hath beene before demonstrated. Notwithstan∣ding if we leaue the Iewish Writers, and follow the rule of the holy Scriptures, I take it to be an vn∣doubted truth, that the Tithe of cattell was to be payed to the Leuite, which though it be not plaine in that Text which is quoted, Leuit. 27.32. yet adde rhereunto Numb. 18.21. and then it is fully cleared, But consider yet a little further what our Author hath deliuered in this 5 Section of his 2. Chap. con∣cerning cattell and the first-borne thereof, and the manner of tithing them, together with the rod to marke them, and then iudge if he hath not here brought his owne Rabbi Iarchi with a rod to ierke himselfe; for here is a Tithe that Iarchi and the rest of the Iewes doe shew the Historian hath fowly mi∣staken, and it is neither  nor , first or second Tithe. And therefore that diuision of his which he makes the ground of his discourse, and labours so much to iustifie, though he accompt it to be the best, will in conclusion proue starke naught; for this Tithe of cattell can not be reduced either to the first or second Tithe: not the first, for that was gi∣uen to the Leuites, and was by the Iewes esteemed
to be  for common vse or prophane, as Ram∣ban saith on Deut. 14. and might bee eaten in any place, Numb. 18.31. But this (say the Iewes) was not giuen either to Priest or Leuite, but was alwayes accounted  holy, and might be eaten no-where but at Ierusalem, as hath beene proued before, both by Iarchi and Bechai on Leuit. 27. and other of the Iewes. Againe, it is not the second Tithe, for that was Deut. 14.23: the Tithe of corne, wine and oyle, and not the Tithe of beasts, that also might be changed into money if the way were long, and the place of God's worship far off, Deut. 14.24.25. But the Tithe of beasts might not be changed, Leuit. 27.33. And if they bought cattell, oxe, or sheep, with the money to be eaten at Ierusalem, Deut. 14.26. yet that was not the tenth, nor to be accounted the Tithe of the cat∣tell, but still the second Tithe; and therefore the Iewes doe ordinarily distinguish them in their wri∣tings, calling the one  the tithe of beasts; and the other  the second tithe. So that if there were no other exception to be taken against his best diuision, but only this, this were suffi∣cient to proue it naught, and therefore also by con∣sequent a great part of his Iewish treatise that stands vpon this rotten foundation, can not be found. But if this will not serue the turne to discouer the weakenes of the History, beside the former Tithe mistaken, there is yet an other Tithe among the Iewes, that the compiler of the History hath neue so much as once spoken of, and it comes not within the
compasse of his diuision of first and second tithe, neither was it for the Priest or Leuite, or for the feasts, or for the poore, but of an other quality diffe∣ring from these, & that is  the kings Tithe. Baal Haturim on Deut. 8.1. speaking of the cohaerence betwixt this and the precedent Chap. that treateth of the King, hath there these words: &c.  &c. i. The Priests of the Leuites shall haue no part, &c. this Chapter is annexed to the Chapter of the king, because the king he is anointed by the high Priest, and he pre∣ferres the king in the first place, because he is greater then the other, &c. And againe whereas the Priest & Leuite doe take Tithe, so also shall the king, he shall take the tenth of your sheepe, as 1. Samuel 8.17. Whe∣ther this manner of collection be warrantable from the Text, or not, I stand not to examine; it sufficeth to shew here by this authority, what was the iudg∣ment of the Iewes touching the kings tithe, viz: that he might take a tenth as well as the Priest or Leuite, but yet could not take the Priest's or Leuite's Tithe, for the right of the one in taking Tithes, did not a∣bridge the right of the other: And rhis point is iudi∣ciously ohserued by that worthy religious Knight Sr Iames Sempill, in his Booke of Sacriledge for the Gospell, chap. 8. sect. 3. And so much also is implyed in this estimony, & in other writings of the Iewes, answereable hereunto. For albeit Calvin on Numb.
18, 20. doth say, vetustissimum fuisse morem, ut reges decimarent colligitur ex 1 Sam. 8.15. that it is colle∣cted from the 1 Samuel 8. that it was a most ancient custome that kings should take Tithe; yet whether that Scripture doth describe a iust king or a tyrant, the Iewes teach, that the tithe there spoken of, is not the Leuites Tithe, but an other Tithe after the Le∣uites Tithe; for so are the expresse words of Chimki on that Text, 1 Samuel 8.15. & he will take the tenth of your seed, &c. i. He shall take the tithe of the fields & vineyards, or of the fruits after the tithe of the Leuites: It is true indeed that there is a controuersie among the Rab∣bines (as Chimki here notes) concerning  ius regni, the right of the kingdome in the things here mentioned: Rabbi Iudah saith, that this Text is written only to terrifie them, and discourage them from their enterprise in choosing a king: and so is Ralbag his opinion in that place. Rabbi Iosi saith, that whatsoeuer is spokē in this chapter of the king, the king hath power and right therein, and so say o∣thers also, as appeares in the Talmud Sanhedrim cap. 2. fol. 20. where they discusse this matter at large. And hence it is that they expoūd the word  ver. 11. translated the manner of the king, to be  ius, the right of the king, or the kings due, according as the same word is vsed in Deut. 18.3. i. This shall be the Priests duty from the people: and
the Childe Paraphrase of Ionathan accords with it:  i. This shall be the king's Law. And as touching that in ver. 14. He will take your fields and your vineyards, &c: Chimki further there declareth, that their Doctors teach, that he might not take the fields and vineyards themselues, but the fruits, if his seruants stood in need of them, when they went to warre. And the reason hereof is, (saith he) because it is not said, he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your best oliue-yards to him∣selfe, but he will giue them to his seruants, that is, to his warriours that are with him; for otherwise all are his seruants. Not that he might take to himselfe the bo∣dy of the fields and vineyards; for if so, then Ahab might haue taken Naboth's vineyard by the right of the kingdome, and Iesebel had not needed to haue v∣sed all those lewd practises, and the shedding of inno∣cent blood. Thus farre Chimki in this place. And writing againe of the same subiect, 1 Kings 21. he confirmes his former exposition, and adds an other reason, why the text is to be vnderstood, not of the fields themselues▪ but of the fruits, saying; And an other reason is for that he saith; Your fields, your vine-yards, and your oliue-yards; but doth not say, your houses, to signifie that he speakes of the fruits, and not of the body or substance of the ground. But as for the tithe, according to the opinion of their Doctours, his words are euident on 1 Samuel 8.14.
i. But the tithe of increase, and of the fruits, and of the sheep, that is his due at all times, whensoeuer he plea∣seth; for euen Salomon the king of Israel tooke it. So that by these authorities it is apparent, the Iewes held, that the King had a right to take tithe, and that this was different from the Priests and Leuites tithe, which point our Historian hath altogether concea∣led; and yet here is a more ancient and better right of tithing ascribed to the King, then that which he records, pag: 13. to be deriued from the Pope. Wherefore considering the manyfold defects, and falshood of this History, me thinkes, these speaches might very well haue bin spared, whereby he pre∣tends, that no Christian before himselfe, euer taught what was considerable in the generall payment of tithe among the Iewes, no not Scaliger though he vn∣dertooke it, and others without his help, slothfully and ignorantly talke of a third tithe, and a fourth tithe, and indeed they know not what tithe, &c. What needed all this, except he had either mani∣festly confuted those that haue heretofore written of this argument, (which he can neuer doe) or had made a better diuision, or Treatise of tithes, then they, which as yet he hath not done, seeing that in this History first  the poore mans tithe, which Aben Ezra, and others on Deut. 14. call  the third tithe, is absurdly con∣founded with the second, the tithe of Cattell, con∣trary
to the tradition of the Iewes grosly mistaken, and the Kings tithe either slothfully, or ignorantly o∣mitted. Insomuch that the great Doctours of the Iewes, and their later Comments, (which he saith are testimonies beyond exception for the practise or Historicall part) being truly examined, do plainly testifie against him, that what he hath written of their manner of tithing, hath beene rightly heretofore ter∣med Historia fallax, a false and imperfect History. Indeed I must confesse, that whether we respect the beginning, midle, or end of the booke, (besides what he owes to Scaliger) it is for two things very consi∣derable; The first is assentation in pleasing the multitude that are loath to pay tithes: 2 The other is ostenta∣tion in pleasing himselfe with his owne praise: In both which respects, this worke is so sufficiently per∣formed, as that, I thinke, there needes nothing more to be added; or if there be, I make no doubt but it shall be answered. This short Treatise touching the tithe of cattell among the Iewes, hauing some yeares past bin per∣vsed by diuers Readers, was at length returned a∣gaine into my hands, together with a censure there∣of, written by an vncertaine author, which though it nothing fauour this Worke, but rather hindred the publishing of it, which at that time was by some ex∣pected; yet because it may giue some light for the better manifestation of the truth, I haue thought good to insert it in this place. The tenor thereof is this.
There be two maine points in controversie be∣tweene the Author and Mr Selden. 1 WHether the first-borne of other vncleane cattell, aswell as of Asses, were not to be re∣deemed by paying a Lambe vnto the Priest? It is true, the Scripture nameth onely the asse, Exod. 13.13. & 34.20. because those were most com∣mon in that country: but I take it, that vncler that one he comprehendeth by a Synecdoche all other beasts vncleane for sacrifice; whereunto I am led both by the tenth commandement, Thou shalt not covet thy neighbours house, his oxe, nor his asse; where vnder the asse, all other of that kinde are compre∣hended; and by that which is written in Numb. 18.15. The first-borne of the vncleane beast thou shalt re∣deeme▪ which is generall, and not, as some Hebrew Writers doe, to be restrained to the asse onely. Also Leuit. 27.27. doth strongly confirme it, if it be of any vncleane beast, he shall redeeme it, and giue the fift part more thereunto; which to be meant of the first-borne, the verse going before doth evince, howsoe∣uer Iarchi and Ramban, and other Iewes expound that text. 2 Whether the tithe were to be payde to the Leuite of the increase of cattell. That tithe was to be payde of cattell to the Le∣uite, the next seemeth plaine, Leuit. 27.32. of bullocks, and of sheep, the tenth shalbe holy to the Lord. Where those words, holy to the Lord, are not to be taken as
the Rabbines would haue it, of wholy to offer vpon the altar, but holy in regard they were the Lord's portion, and by him bestowed vpon the Leuites, as is apparent by the 30th verse before. But touching that which is spoken of passing vn∣der the rod, I agree with the author, who well com∣pareth these two texts, Levit. 27.32. and Ezech. 20.37. And the marking with a red oaker I hold to be but a Rabbinicall conceit. So as if the question be in these two points of the right of tithing, according to the rules and precepts of the Scripture, I hold the truth to be with Mr Sel∣den: but if of the exposition of the Rabbines, it seem∣eth to be against him. Touching the King's tithe, which Mr Selden is taxed for not speaking of it, he may (as I thinke) be well excused; because howsoeuer you will iudge of that kinde of tithe, it was nothing pertinent to his purpose, who writeth onely of Tithes due to the Church. In his Review pag. 456. he doth admonish those that argue for Tithes from the Mosaicall Lawes of tithing, to examine which of the two kindes are due, why not the second aswell as the first. And to consider how the payment of the Tithes, from the Laity to the Priests of the Gospel, succeeds to the payment from the Leuites, to the sonnes of Aaron: and I thinke also, if something had not hin∣dred, he would also haue added, and how the pay∣ment of the tithe of cattell to the Priests of the Go∣spell, succeedes to the none-payment of them to the
Priests of the Law; but (saith he) these considerati∣ons can only be, where knowledge of fact preceedes; belike then his knowledge of fact here failed him, and therefore he also failed vs: and yet for all this, we giue no more credit to the Iewes herein, than we doe to his History: for though their writings mani∣fest vnto vs this knowledge of fact, yet can they not proue this fact to be according to knowledge, or a∣greeable to truth and euidence of Scripture. 1 For first, that the tithe of cattell should be holy, to be offered vpon the altar as a peace-offering, and not to be giuen to the Priest in such sort as the Iewish Rabbines teach, there is no text of Scripture to war∣rant it; neither doe they alledge any but only this of Leuit. 27.32. which some of themselues confesse, as Ramban on Deut. 14. that it doth not prescribe either to whom the tithe should be payde, or in what man∣ner it should be imployd; but only declareth, that it is holy to the Lord. Now then to appoint a sacrifice, or any thing to be done in the worship of God, of which, sacrifices were a part, without the will and Word of God, what is it else but , will-worship, so often condemned in Scripture. And whereas it was not lawfull for any man, either to change or redeeme the tithe of his cattell, how could it bee lawfull for him to eat it, as they did the peace-offerings, without speciall commaun∣dement from God, neither could all the flesh thereof be eaten by the owners, as the Iewes seeme to affirme; for Deut. 18.3. the shoulder, the two cheekes and the maw of euery sacrifice, was due
to the Priest (say the Iewes) as a reward of Phinees his zeale: the shoulder in respect of his hand, as it is said Numb. 25.7. he tooke a speare in his hand: the cheeke with the tongue therein included in regard of his prayer, Psal. 106.30. then stood vp Phi∣nees, and prayde. The maw, with reference to that action of his, Numb. 25.8. he thrust them both tho∣rough, to wit, tbe man of Israel, and the woman tho∣rough her belly; or as Aben Ezra hath it: the shoulder for his killing of the heaue-offerings, the cheekes and the tongue for his blessing, and the maw for his searching of the suspect vice. Or as Ramban i. Because these are the first, or chiefe and principall members, and therefore were giuen for the honour of the Almighty vnto his Ministers. 2 Furthermore, whereas in the wildernesse, all beasts that were eaten, were offered for peace-offe∣rings, Levit. 17. Ramban in the exposition of that Text, Deut. 12.20. saith; When the Lord your God shall enlarge your border, and ye shall not all abide a∣bout the tabernacle, as ye doe at this day in the wilder∣nes; then shall common flesh be permitted vnto you▪ for it is impossible that ye should all goe from places far di∣stant, vnto the place that God shall choose; and that ye should offer for peace-offrings whatsoeuer ye should eate. In like manner also may I say in this case, that it is impossible, at least-wyse improbable, that besides the multitude of other sacrifices, euery tithe of bullocke,
and of sheepe, and other cattell, should all from the furthest parts, yea from all the parts of Ganaan, be brought vp to Ierusalem, and be offered and eaten there by the husbandmen, as the Rabbines teach; e∣specially when as the Lord himselfe, to prevent this and the like trouble and inconveniency, hath appoin∣ted for the second tithe, Deut. 14.25. that if the way were too long for them, and the place of God's worship far off, they might change it into money, and therewith buy things to be eaten at Ierusalem, which was not granted for the tithe of cattell; for the Law commands, that that should not be changed. 3 Againe, the Iewes teach from Leuit. 17.4. that whil'st the Israelites were in the wildernes, (at which time also this precept was giuen concerning the tithe) all flesh was holy, and that they were neither to kill or eat any beast, but such as were offered for peace-offrings, till such time as they came into Ca∣naan, where they had more liberty granted, Deut. 12.20. Why then should the Tithe at that time parti∣cularly be said to be holy to the Lord, in respect of sacrifice; when as other beasts, if not all, were in this regard holy, aswell as the tenth, vnlesse some further matter were signified thereby. 4 Moreouer it is said concerning the tithe of cat∣tell, Leuit. 27.35. he shall not looke if it be good, or bad, neither shall he change it. In the same sense as it is also said, ver. 10. He shall not alter it, nor change it, a good for a bad, nor a bad for a good; for why (saith Be∣chai on this place) the Law pointing at man's cor∣ruption, if it should permit him to change a good
one for a bad one, he would in time also giue a bad one insteed of a good one, and say that it is a good one; and therefore (saith he) to prevent this fraud, the Law doth punish him, and saith, that if he change beast for beast, then both this and that which was changed for it shall be holy: and in this sense doth Calvin also vnderstand this Text. Now this that is spoken of a good or bad one, Iarchi doth interpret to be  i. Such a beast as is either perfect, or hath a blemish. And certainly such a beast as hath a blemish, because it could not be changed, might happen to be the tenth, for so the Text presupposeth. But no beast ha∣uing a blemish, might be offered for a peace-offering, Leuit. 3. and so much also doth Iarchi on this Text acknowledge. Therefore in this case it is plaine, that the tenth of cattell could not be offered vpon the Altar. I demaund then, how was it to be disposed of? for here for this the Iewes are at strife among them∣selues. R. Bechai speaking to this point, of such beasts as were vnfit for sacrifice, saith; i. All such as these goe not into the Coat to be tithed, because they are not fit for sacrifice. But this will not agree with the Text, that presupposeth the tenth beast may be good, or may be bad, that is, haue a ble∣mish, and so vnfit for sacrifice. Iarchi he saith thus:
i. That if it had a blemish it might not be offered, but was to be eaten according to the Law of the tithe. But what Law, or what tithe doth the Rabbine here meane? not the tithe of the beast; for the Law was in their conceit, that that should be offered vpon the Altar. Nor the second Tithe, for the Text it selfe is against it; for that might be changed, and turned in∣to money, to be bestowed at Ierusalem, if the iourney were long, but the Tithe of beasts might not be chan∣ged. Neither can it be meant of the poore man's Tithe, for that was only the Tithe of the third yeare, and to be eaten in the gates in the Countrey, and not at Ierusalem. It remaines therefore that it was to be eaten according to the Law of the first Tithe, which was the Leuites Tithe, and without any offering, might be eaten in any place, Numb. 18.31. and in this sense I haue agreed with the Rabbine. And question∣lesse Aben-Ezra in his interpretation of the Text, is on our side against the cōmon opinion of the Iewes; for whereas some of them interpret the 30 verse of the second tithe, which was to be eaten by the house∣holder at Ierusalem: and the 32 verse of the Tithe of beasts to be offred for a peace-offering, he here in∣tends no such matter, but saith plainly, i. And behold he shall giue the first-borne, and the tenth in cattell, and the seed of the ground which is the increase, the first fruits, and the tithe. And so also speaking of Iacob's vow, Gen. 28.22: saith,
i. It is not in the Law, that a man should giue the tithe of his sonnes, but the tithe of bullocks, and of sheepe, and increase. In which places, he mentioning the Tithe of Cattell with the fruits of the earth, and con∣founding them here together, doth plainly imply, that he takes them to be holy all alike, and in the same manner to be giuen and disposed of. For when he saith, he shall giue the first-borne and the tenth in Cattell, and seede of the ground, &c. to whom thinke we, in his iudgment shall he giue the tenth, but to the Priest, who also had the first-borne, and the first fruits here mentioned; for if we should expound the Text, as some of the Iewes doe of the second Tithe, that was not giuen to any, but the owner tooke it himselfe, and did eat it at Ierusalem, as he did also the Tithe of cattell after the offering of the blood, and combustible parts thereof. Againe, the same Au∣thor writing vpon this Text of Leuit. saith further, &c. i. And behold Abraham gaue tithe, and also Iacob our father, &c. To what end should he vse these words, applying them to this Text, except he thought that such Tithes were here meant, as Abra∣ham and Iacob payde before the Law, and that they were also to be payde in such manner, as they for∣merly payde them, which was in those times to the Priest, as is plaine in Abraham, Gen. 13. for he gaue Melchisedek tithe of all, say the Iewes, because he was the Priest; so the glosse of Iarchi
because he was the Priest, as the glosse of the Iewes hath it; and so in this place of Leuit. here is a decla∣ration of God's right in tithes, that they are holy to him, and afterward in Numb. 18. he sheweth, that he giues them generally to the Leuites, vnder which name of Leuites, the Priests are also comprehended. For we haue formerly shewed, that euery Priest is a Leuite, though euery Leuite be not a Priest. The Answer to the Censure. THe two maine points in controversie between the Author and Mr Selden, are not rightly propounded for, I. The question is not whether the first-borne of other vncleane cattell as well as of asses, were not to be redeemed by paying a Lambe vnto the Priest; for Mr Selden in his History makes no mention at all of the Asse; but the question is, whether the first-borne of vncleane beastes were payde to the Priest in money, with a fift part added: for this affirmatiuely is M. Selden's position, set downe without any proofe, against which the Author thus reasoneth. 1 The first-borne of the Asse, which was an vn∣cleane beast, was not to be payd to the Priest in money, but was to be redeemed with a Lambe. Exod 15.13. & 34.20. 2 The Iewes teach, that no first-borne of any vncleane beast was payde at all, but only of the Asse, which is evidently prooved by their testimonies at large:
Whereas therefore the Moderator heere between Mr Selden and the Author, holdeth, that vnder the name of the Asse are comprehended by a Synech∣doche all other beasts, vncleane for sacrifice, giuing his reasons to confirme it; admit without any further examination, that this were true, it nothing helps Mr Selden, but more strongly opposeth his assertion: for if not only the first-borne of the Asse was to be re∣deemed with a Lambe, but also the first of all other vncleane beastes, then was not the first-borne of vn∣cleane beastes paide to the Priest in money with a fift part added. II. The other question likewise is not so, as it is here by the Moderator expressed. viz. whether tithe were to be paide to the Levite of the increase of Cattell, But whether it were paide vnto him in the Iewish manner of tithing, not what is required in regarde of precept, but what was performed in regard of practise: for this is that which the Historian profes∣seth to teach by the very title of his booke; calling it, the History of tithes, that is, the practise of payment of them. And so in this second chap. his inscription is in the beginning; How among the Iewes, tithes were paide, or thought due. Now it is evidently proued by such writings of the Iewes (as he himselfe saith) are testimonies beyond exception, for the practise or Historicall part, that their practise for the tithing of Cattell, is contrary to that which he hath deliuered. If it be said, that the expositions of the Iewes, and their practise here is not agreeable to Scripture, as the Moderator seemes to determine; To this I an∣swere;
that the same thing likewise may be said of di∣vers other pointes taught in his History, and vrged from the authority of the Iewes, concerning first fruits, Therumahs, and tithes, which cannot be ius∣tified by Scripture, as I haue before declared. If therefore now, leaving his former hold, he will disclaime and forsake his Rabbines (for they here forsake him) and cleaue only to the Scripture for the right of tithing, omitting the Iewish practise▪ then I make no doubt but we shall quickly shake hands: for though the tithe of Cattell was not paide to the Levite according to the practise of the Iewes, yet I hold with the Moderator that it ought to be paide vnto him, according to the precepts of the Scripture, and yet that text of Scripture, Levit. 27 32. which they alledge, doth not prooue it, neither is it ap∣parent by the 30 verse, which Mr Selden for an other purpose in his History, pag. 13. following Scaliger and some of the Iewes, doth apply only to the se∣cond tithe, contrary to the iudgment of this Mode∣rator, and contrary also to the true meaning of the Scripture, as hath been shewed already. True it is, that in that text of Levit. 27. there is expressed a declaration of God's right in tithes, and that the tithes are his reserved portion; but the donation of them to the Levits, is else-where confirmed, as in Numb. 18.21. For behold I haue giuen the Children of Levi all the tenth in Israel for an inheritance, &c. from whence I cōclude, that if all the tenth were giuē to Levi, then no doubt but the tenth of their Cattell, as well as any other: and whatsoeuer the Iewes write
to the contrary, it is but frivolous; for albeit the tithe of Cattell (as they argue) be not expresly named in the number of the 24 giftes belonging to the Priest∣hood, (which also may be avouched of many other particulars) yet without any exception, it is plainly comprehended vnder the generall grant of the tithes to Levi, which to any reasonable iudgment, is sufficient. Touching the Kings tithe, if it were so that Mr Selden did only write of tithes due to the Church; he might well enough be excused, for not speaking of it; but the second tithe, wherof he discourseth at large, and likewise the poore mans tithe, are not properly such tithes as are due to the Church, but rather to the Common-wealth, for they belonged to the householder, and to the poore. Againe, whereas in his History pag. 13. He speakes of tithes in this kingdome paide to the Crown; it had not been much out of his way to haue pointed at such tithes as in the Kingdome of the Iewes were paide also to the Crowne. And lastly, where he boasteth in his Review, pag. 452. and saith, Hitherto could I neuer see any Christian that hath fully taught what was conside∣rable in the generall payment of tithes among the Iewes &c: since he would haue vs to expect more from him in this kinde then any other Christian be∣fore him, we are not much to be blamed for putting him in mind of omitting the Kings tithe, for that is also comprehended vnder the generall payment of tithes among the Iewes.
I proceed now to the 7: Section, wherein to omit other passages, that is left somwhat obscure and defectiue that is writen of those kinde of goods which they called , whereof (saith the Au∣thor) a speciall Massecheth or Treatise is in the Tal∣mud in the Seder Zeraim. Dauid de pomis doth interpret  to be fructus de quibus an sint datae decimae ignoratur, Such fruit as is vnknowne whether the tithe were taken thereof or no. But Moses Ben Maimon in his Com∣mentary on Massecheth demai cap. 1. giues a larger exposition of it, saying, i. That which is doubtfull and vncertaine whether they haue brought forth from the same, the giftes that belong to God or no. Where vnder the word, gifts are comprehended diuers other things beside tithes. And although the Historian saith, that no first tithe or poore mans tithe was paid of any such things; yet the Iewes teach, that they did vsually giue these things to the poore for their reliefe and sustenance▪ as Baal Haturim doth signifie on Deut. 15.8. i. And shalt lend him sufficient for his neede which he hath, the beginning of the wordes containe Demai, that is, such goods as is vnknowne whether the gifts due vnto God, and tithes, were paide thereof or no; to intimate that they did vse to feede the poore with
these things. And this is againe more fully expressed by Moses Ben Maimon in his Preface to Seder Ze∣raim fol. 3. where he shewes the reason of the order of the Treatises in Seder Zeraim, and saith, that in treating of the seede of the ground, they beginne with Massecheth Peah, i. the Treatise of the corner of the field, after Massecheth Beracoth, the Treatise of blessings, because what gifts soeuer a man was bound to giue of the seed of the ground, they were not due till after they were reaped in haruest: but the standing corne was due for the corner of the field whil'st yet it was vpon the ground, and therefore they began first to speake of that: and in the next place saith he, after Massecheth Peah, followes Massecheth Demai. i. Because the poore haue a right therein, euen as they haue in the corner of the field, and so they say they feed the poore with Demai. i. vncertaine, whe∣ther tithed or vntithed fruits. What other things are contained in this Section, and likewise in the rest, which I haue willingly omit∣ted, I refer the reader for further satisfaction there∣in, to the answere of M. Mountague confining my selfe as neere as I can in this taske, only to the wri∣tings and monuments of the Iewes, and so I passe to the next Section.
SECT. 7. 7 THat tithing ofLuke 11.42. , euery herbe which is spoken of in the Gospel, and obserued by the Scribes and Pharises, was neuer commanded in Scripture, nor by their Canon-law requisite, accor∣ding to the opinion of their Doctors, who restraine the payment of tithes to thatDeut. 26.12. , that is, thy increase spoken of by Moses; and comprehend not herbes vnder that name. To say that the tithing of euery herbe which is spoken of in the Gospel, &c: was neuer commanded in Scripture, is an assertion somewhat too bold, and peremptory, considering that the rules in Scripture touching payment of Tithe, are deliuered in such generall termes, as doe comprehend both herbes, and many other particulars vnder them, as Levit. 27.30. Numb. 18. 2 Chron. 31.5. &c. And as for the Iewes Canon law, it is neither Canon, nor law to vs, except it agree with the Canon of the Scripture: neither are we to depend vpon the opinion of their Doctors, which in many things is most vncertaine; for it is well knowne, their Doctors oftentimes differ in opinion. But how shall we be assured that they restraine the payment of tithes to  increase, and where doth it appeare, or by what reason, that they doe not comprehend herbes vnder that name? For all this there is no euidence brought in, but only
his bare word, and we haue no cause to trust him on his word, because we haue found him faulty already in other passages of this History. In the beginning of his second Chap. he giues this word increase, a large extent, containing therein both fruits of the ground, and Cattell: But here it is restrained, and must not comprehend herbes; but wherefore not herbes, or what else it doth comprehend, we are yet to seeke. Dauid Chimki in his Miclol, tells vs, that  increase, is i. A name that comprehendeth all fruit that is for meat; and if so, why not herbes? And it is called te∣buah (saith he) because it is of the yeare ensuing, for that of the yeare past is called Abur. And Ramban on Exod, 22.29. saith, i. The fruit of the field, and of the vineyard is called tebuah, because they bring it into the houses, being de∣riued from a word that signifies to bring or carry in. R. Bechai on Deut. 8.8. saith, that  containes these fiue kindes, wheat, barly, rye, oates, and spelt, or beare-corne, as hath beene mentioned before. But R. Chaskuni on Deut. 14.22. speakes more largely, and saith, that here also merchandise is comprehended as lyable to tithing, And so the Commentor vpon the Talmud Tag∣nanith, cap. 1. fol. 9.
makes it to containe Vsury and Merchandise, and e∣uery thing whereby a man gaineth. Which commeth litle or nothing short of the practise of the Pharisee, when he said Luke 18.12. I pay tithe of all that I pos∣sesse. But how can we be resolued, that the Iewes re∣straine the payment of tithe onely to tebuah in that sense which he intendeth; when as in their writings they vsually make mention of the tithing of Mam∣mon, which generally signifies all kind of goods, or riches whatsoeuer. And therefore Abuhab speaking of Abraham's tithing, Gen. 14.20. saith, i. That he gaue tithe as a man titheth his Mammon or his goods. And so saith Aben Ezra concerning Iacob's vow, I will giue the tenth to thee: Gen. 28. i. Of all the Mammon or goods that thou shalt giue me. And so the same author on Gen. 35.1. saith of him, that he performed his vow,  and payde the tithe of his substance or goods. And therefore that which is noted by the Historian in his Review, pag. 455. That at this day, Qui religiosiores sunt iuter Iudaeos loco decimarum eleemosynam pen∣dunt. De omnibus lucris decem aureos de centum, cen∣tum de mille: though he call it almes, as he did also (before) Abraham's payment to Melchisedek, in the Syriak translation, yet ten out of an hundred, and an hundred out of a thousand, is in nature a true kinde
of tithing, and keepes the iust proportion therein re∣quired, and agrees also with their rules and expositi∣ons formerly deliuered. But let vs see what followes in the History. They deliuer indeed that by tradition from their fathers, all things growing out of the earth, and fit for man's meat, are titheable,Ramban part. 3. tract. de Termoth cap. 2. & Mikotsi in praecept. 145. which their Lawyers thus regularly expresse. That is, euery thing that is kept as man's meat, and hath his growth from the earth, must pay the heaue-offering, and likewise tithe. Where they make such herbes as are man's meate, tithable, but all such as are not man's meate they dis∣charge of tithes. These later words are not consonant to that which is taught in the Iewish History, and the rule here expressed in Hebrew Characters, for which he citeth Ramban and Mikotsi, is perverted, and plainly differs from that which is deliuered in the Talmud. For in the beginning of Massech. Meaishroth, i. the Treatise of the Tithes, where this is recorded, it is not said,  Euery thing that is kept as mans meat, &c. but thus, i. Whatsoeuer is fit for meat, and that which is kept, and hath his growth from the earth, must pay tithe; and meat here being mentioned in generall, though some expositors doe restraine it, containes not onely
man's meat, but also meat for Cattell: as Iarchi shewes in  i. Siliqua in Massech: Meaishroth cap. 2. And the Commentor vpon Maimon speakes of diuers kindes of graine that were tithed, which ordi∣narily were accounted meat for cattell, albeit in time of dearth they were vsed also for man's meate: as vetches or tares, and such like. Againe, that which is kept, comprehends some∣thing else beside meat, as is euidently declared in the 3. Chap. of this Massech: fol. 63. where it is said, i. Orygan, hyssop, and sweet margerom, which are in the court or garner, if they be kept, are subiect to ti∣thing: and yet these are not properly man's meat: and Ramban in his Commentary in this place saith; it is the manner of these herbes to grow in gardens, and other places without any sowing of them, and (saith he) here it is said, if they be kept, , that is to say, in a place purpose∣ly appointed for the keeping of them, they are liable to tithing: and how much doth this differ from the ti∣thing of mynt and annise, and other herbes obserued by the Scribes and Pharises, and yet we see the tithe of these things are required by their Canon Law, and not repugnant to the opinion of their Doctors. But it is further added in the words following. And out of that rule also they except whatsoe∣uer was gleaned either out ofLeuit. 19 9. & 10. eares of corne, or grapes, or had out of the corners of the field left in Haruest.
He meanes that these are also free from tithing, where one thing more must be reckoned among the rest, that is here omitted, and that is , which signifieth such fruit as is common: It is mentioned with the rest in the Commentaries on the Text, and also in the Talmud, as in Massech: Termoth, cap. 1, fol. 48: and Iarchi hereby vnderstands the fruit of such trees as grow in deserts and woods, which are not in the possession of any one man, as are small nuts, and such like, of which Iarchi and Ramban discourse in their Commentaries on Massech. Demai cap. 1. And the reason why these are not tithed, is not expressed by our Historian. But Iarchi on Deut. 14.2. saith, it is because the Leuite hath a share in these, as well as o∣thers haue; and therefore (saith he) they are not sub∣iect to tithing; which is likewise confirmed by Moses Ben Maimon in Termoth cap. 1. fol. 48. But it seemes (saith the History) that for this pay∣ment of herbes, the Pharises were of the truer side. Our Sauiour likes well their payment, and expresly sayes, they ought not omit it, which admonition of his was to them, while yet the Mosaicall Lawes mere not all ex∣pired by the Consummatum est. Albeit this History makes a difference betwixt the Iewish Lawyers and the Pharises, as if they were of two severall sides, for the matter and maner of ti∣thing, yet no such difference appears in the due scan∣ning of them: for doth not the tithing of Hyssop and sweete Marierom before mentioned, and the like to these prescribed in the Talmud, reach as far as the Pharises practise in tithing of Mynt and Annise,
and other herbs; notwithstanding let the Talmudists and Pharises agree or disagree as they will, the admonition of our Sauiour, though somwhat too sleightly here alledged, doth fully decide the con∣troversie: for he approuing and iustifyng the Pha∣rises payment, doth herein teach vs how to iudge aright, without any further question. And though this admonition was giuen while yet the Mosaicall Lawes were not all expired by the Consummatum est, yet after those Lawes were ex∣pired it is not to be supposed that then all tithes ceased, or were to be consumed by the Consum∣matum est; for it is evident that the payment of tithes hath been duly obserued in the Church of God both before and also after the Mosaicall Lawes. 8 After the second temple destroyed, and dispersi∣on of the Iewes, their Law of first fruites, Therumahs, and tithes with them ceased: for their Doctors deter∣mine that regularly no inhabitants but of the land of Israel w re to pay any although also among them be a wise exception for the lands of Seuaor, Moab, Am∣mon, and Aegypt, because the first is neere their land of Israel, and many Israelits went thither and dwelt there, and the other three are round adioyning to their land of Israel. Whatsoeuer was ceremoniall and typicall in the Leviticall Law, we acknowledge that it was abroga∣ted by our Sauiour Christ, not after, but before the destruction of the second Temple, and before the dispersion of the Iewes: But yet the Iewes them∣selues doe not hold that their Law of first fruits,
Therumahs, & tithes, with them ceased, but only that the practise of the paiment of these, according to the Law, ceased; because they were dispersed & wanted meanes, hauing not wherewithall to pay them; for o∣therwise they generally maintain their law to be per∣petual & vnchangeable; so doth Chimki plead against the Christians of his time, as appeares by his obiecti∣ons & answers to this purpose, set down at the end of his com. on the Psal. & on Mal. 3.4. his words are these i. Hence yee see that the Law shall neuer be changed, but as it was giuen to Moses, so shall it remaine for euer, And so much also saith R. Bechai on Levit 27. fol. 161. And though the second Temple was des∣troyed, yet, without doubt, as the Historian himselfe noteth out of Galatinus in his Review pag. 455. Most of them haue long since expected a third Temple, otherwise why were they so carefull to haue their lawes and speciall cases of first fruits and tithing so copiously deliuered, in fiue whole Massecheth, of their Talmud or body of their ciuill and Canon Law; which was many yeres after the destruction of the se∣cond Temple made for the direction of the dispersed of their Nation? and so they expound those Chap∣ters in Ezech. literally of a third Temple that they expect; although they are forced to confesse, and that according to the letter, that there shall be an altera∣tion in divers particulars, differing from that which was before in the Law, as Iarchi declareth on Ezech. 41.5. first touching the Chambers of the Temple:
againe Chimki on Ezech 41.22. notes an alteration in respect of the altar of wood, which is there called a table. and on Ezech. 25. & 4.18. & 22. he saith, there shall be an alteration or innovation in the or∣der of sacrifices, and on Ezech. 44.17. he obserueth a change in the Priests garments; and in the feastes Ezech, 45.25. and diuers other things there ex∣pressed. And yet notwithstanding all this, they are constant in opinion that the Law of Moses shall still continue without any change thereof: and therefore though the practise for payment of first fruits, The∣rumahs and tithes with them ceased, yet the law of these ceased not, but in their iudgment is still of force, even as it was also before the payment of these was in vse. For the Law was giuen to Moses in mount Sinai: but their Doctors teach that they were not bound to pay the Therumahs and the tithes, vn∣til they did possesse and inhabite the land, which was long after, as Ramban testifieth on Numb. 15. But they deliuer, that who so of them tooke the pro∣fits of land amongst the Cutheans or Samaritans their old enemies (or else-where in Aram; and so it seemes by consequent in any other land, sauing which they except) was not to pay any: touching which point many speciall cases are put byIn Iad. Chaze∣ka tract. de the∣rumh T. 1. & Mikotsi in prae∣cept. 133. Rabbi Ben Maimon. This is cleane contrary to that which they teach in the Talmud: for Aram is Syria, whence it is that the Iewes say, that Abraham was first called  i. Pater Syriae; and after the promise , Pa∣ter multarum gentium, as Iarchi notes on Gen. 17. Now of Syria they say plainly in Massech: Megnaish∣roth,
cap. 5. fol. 64. that, he that hath land there of his owne, must pay tithe of that land: or if he buy the fruits there of an other mans land, before the time of tithing, he must likewise answere the tithe, but not after: & so doe Maimon & Iarchi in their Commentaries there explaine the rules, directly against that which is here deliuered. The Historian therefore (as it seemes) perceiuing this errour, in his Review pag. 455. goes about to a∣mend his bill, and to distinguish, and say; That of them that take the profits of land among the Samaritans, or in Aram, that is, Syria, must be vnderstood of a Iew dwelling among them, and tilling the land there; for regularly if the fruits of lands in Syria were taken by a Iew, residing still in his owne Countrey, he was to pay tithe of them. Massech: Demai cap. 6. & Meashar Perek 5.5. But how doth he proue that this must be vnder∣stood of a Iew dwelling among them, and tilling the land there? for no such distinction, limitation, or ex∣ception appeares in the Talmud, or in the Commen∣taries thereof. And if a Iew dwelling in his owne Countrey, and possessing land in Syria, was to pay the tithe of that land, why should he not also pay the tithe thereof, if he himselfe dwelt vpon the same land, considering that both the person, and also the place here specified, are both subiect to the Law of tithing by the rules and precepts of the Iewes? The History tells vs a little before, that the Israelites dwel∣ling in Senaar, Moab, Ammon, and Aegypt, were to pay tithes there: Senaar, that is, Babylon so called,
saith Rabbi Saadiah, on Dan. 1.2. i. Because they that perished in the deluge, were cast downe thither. And Moab hath his denomination, quasi  of the father, saith Aben-Ezra, and Be∣chai on Gen. 19.37. because these two, Moab and Am∣mon, came by the incest of their father. Now if the Is∣raelites dwelling in these lands, were to pay tithes, why not also in Syria, which had more affinity with Canaan, and the Lawes thereof, then the rest had? for as Maimon teacheth in his explication of Massech: Demai, cap. 6. fol. 18, Syria which was subdued by Dauid, was reputed as the land of Israel, in respect of diuers lawes to which it was subiect. And among other, they relate in Sedar Teharoth, Massech: Iadim cap, 4. fol. 157. that the seuenth yeare, the yeare of rest, commanded Leuit. 25.1. and Deut. 15.1. was not obserued but on∣ly in Canaan and Syria, for so are the words of the Commentor there, In which yeare though no tithes were payable by the Law, yet in this place they deliuer it as a traditi∣on of Moses from Sinai, that Babel, Aegypt, Am∣mon, and Moab, which were out of the Holy Land, did pay the poore mans tithe in the seuenth yeare. And Moses Ben Maimon in his Preface to Sedar Ze∣raim, saith also, that Ammon and Moab by the like tradition, payde likewise the second tithe in the se∣uenth
yeare; for these are there his wordes, fol. 2. pag. 2. Therefore here the poore mans tithe, was not gi∣uen insteed of the second tithe, nor one and the same with the second tithe, as the Historian hath before taught vs: for here they were giuen as two seuerall kindes of tithes in one and the same yeare, as the tra∣ditions here testifie. But of this I haue spoken enough already▪ and therefore I passe it ouer, and proceede againe in the History. At this day by their Law they pay none, those that liue in their land of Israel for want of their Priest∣hood and Temple, those that liue dispersed in other Countreyes both for that reason, as also for the other, which restraine the payment of them to Canaan, and herein they all agree. True it is, that the Leviticall Priesthood and Tem∣ple is abolished by the spirituall and euerlasting Priesthood of Christ, who is a Priest for euer, after the order of Melchisedek; Though therefore at this day by their Law they pay no tithes, yet they them∣selues acknowledge (as hath bin shewed before) that he which is a Priest after the order of Melchisedek, must take tithes as Melchisedek did; for so saith Aben Ezra on Psal. 110. And these are the Tithes that we plead for, as continuing still due to be payde. Further where he saith, that they restraine the pay∣ment of them to Canaan, that cannot be vnderstood, but only of the Leuiticall payment, and yet the ex∣ceptions
formerly alledged of Aegypt, Ammon, Moab, Syria, and the like, doe crosse this. Besides, I haue before declared by the authority and testimony of the Iewes, that tithes were payde in the time of Iob in the land of Vz, which was no part of Canaan. But the great Ioseph Scaliger sayes, He ask't some of them, whether if they might againe build their Temple (as after the Captivity they did) their Lawes of sacrifices, first fruits, and tithes, would be then re∣viv'd; and their answer was, that to build it againe, were to no purpose, because they had no lawfull Priest∣hood there, being not one of them that can proue him∣selfe a Leuite, though many pretend to bee so, and some beare also the office of a kinde of Priesthood a∣mongst them. The answer of these Iewes to Scaliger, cannot well accord with that which their Doctors teach: for it is euident by their writings, as hath before bin proued, that they expect the building of a third Temple, and the reviving of their Lawes; for though they haue no lawfull Priesthood, not one of them being able to proue himselfe a Leuite; yet they teach, that they ex∣pect the comming of Eliah, and that he at his com∣ming will reduce euery one to his owne Tribe, as Chimki sheweth on Ezech. 47.23. In these termes, i. Hereafter when Israel comes out of captivity, the Tribes shall be knowne, although they are now mixt
together, and know not any man his owne Tribe; Eliah shall come, and by distinguishing of families, shall refer euery man to his owne Tribe. And of the comming of Eliah, on Leuit. 26.42. Then will I remember my couenant with Iacob, Iarchi hath this glosse. i. Iacob in fiue places is written full, and Elihu in fiue places defectiue, wanting the letter Vau: for Iacob took a letter from Eliah's name, for a pawne or pledge, that hee should come and publish the redemption of his sonnes. And this, Iohn the Baptist hath already per∣formed, who was that Eliah that was to come, Math. 11.14. Luke 1.17. Marke 9.13. But now for the building againe of the Temple, and that future state of happines which the Iewes dreame of, there are many different opinions among themselues; Elias in Thisbi writes, that some of them by  The world to come, vnderstand the world of soules which beginnes presently after death: and some thereby, the time and dayes of the Messiah, and some after the generall resurrection of the dead. Moses Ben Maimon, in his commentary on Sanhedrin cap. 18. fol. 0. speakes of this, more at large on these words, i. All Israel haue a part in the world to come: where he relates 5 seuerall opinions, most of thē much like the late treatise of the Calling of the Iewes, dreaming es∣pecially of an earthly happines, & temporal kingdom
in this world: But in the end after the recitall of them he reiects them all, and saith: That as the blind man cannot iudge of colours, nor the deafe of soundes, nor fishes knowe the element of fire, because their liuing is in the water which is the contrary: so the ioy of the spirituall world is not knowne in this corporall world, in respect of the excellency, whereof the Pro∣phet Dauid saith, Psal. 31.19. O how great is thy good∣nes which thou hast laide vp for them that feare thee! And so say the Doctors. i In the world to come there is neither eating, nor drinking, nor washing, nor ointing &c: But the righteous sit with their Crownes on their heads, and are sustained by the brightnes of the divine presence; & so in effect, he concludes there against the former opinions, that the true blessednes of the world to come consists in beatifica visione Dei. And likewise for the building of the Temple, which they often speake of, some of their owne writings shew, that it must not be a materiall, but a spirituall Temple; so much doth R. Bechai intimate on Gen. 28.17. which place he applyes to the three Temples: The third whereof he would haue to be signified in these words, And this is the gate of heaven; where he saith. i. And therfore here he mentions heaven, because it shal
be the worke of heaven, and not the building of man, as the former were; in which he makes mention of a place, and house. Moses also points at this in the blessing of Beniamin, as the Iewes write on Deut, 33.12: and on Ier. 7.4. The same thing likewise is observed by Bechai, on Exod 27.20. That they bring vnto thee pure oile oliue beaten for the light that the Lampes may alwaies burne,  Heere saith Bechai, The first house stood 4 hundred and ten yeares, & the 2 foure hundred and twenty, ac∣cording to the number conteined in the Word,  beaten, to signifie that the two first Sanctuaries should be beaten downe & destroyed: But the 3d house which comes not vnder number, because the time thereof is not limited, is signified by the worde ; For the light, to which they apply that in Esa 60, 1. Arise, shine, for thy light is come: and Psal. 27.1. The Lord is my light and my salvation, and Psal, 118.27. The Lord is mighty and hath giuen vs light. In which texts they vnderstand a promise made of the returne of the divine presence to the third house, which was wanting in the second, for so the Iewes teach, that fiue things were wanting in the second Temple, that were in the first, viz: The Arke, the Vrim and Thummim, fire from heaven, the di∣vine presence, and the spirit of prophecie, as Iarchi and Chimki shew on Hagg. 1.8. and so it is recorded in the Talmud, in Massech. Ioma cap. 1. fol. 21. But this defect is supplyed in the 3 house: and because (saith Bechai) there is no time limited for the standing of it, it being to continue for euer, therefore
it is said (that the lampes may alwaies burne) to sig∣nifie, that the excellency thereof shal last for euer, and the light thereof shall neuer cease. Whatsoeuer therefore these Iewes answered Sca∣liger, touching the building of the Temple; it ap∣peares by the writings of their chiefest Doctors, that their third Temple must not be an earthly masse, or materiall building of timber or stone, but a spirituall, heavenly, and everlasting Temple. That which followes in the History, touching the high-Priesthood of the Iewes, when they liued heere in England, is taken out of the records of Richard the first and King Iohn, which testifie a grant thereof, made and confirmed by letters patents; Iacobo Iudao de Londonijs presbytero Iudaeorum &c. But this being not at this time within the compasse of my walke, I meddle not with it; yet by occasion it puts me in mind that in the Bombergi Bible on Gen. 18. there is mention of one  i. Rabbi Moses of London, who is cited there as a Cōmentor on the text, which also shewes that they liued heere in former times; but when this was, or by what meanes they had their maintenance when they liued here, that is not so evident: I easily think with the Hi∣storian, that they receiued neither Therumahs nor first fruits, nor tithes, as not belonging to them; for it was not requisite that tithes heere should be paide Presbyteris Iudaeorum: It sufficeth if without respect either of Iewes or Iewish fables, they be paide in due manner as they ought Presbyteris Christia∣norum.
Hitherto following this Historian, we haue bin travailing in the land of Canaan, and are now vpon the suddaine brought into England, for multitude & variety of blessings, a second Canaan, where I thinke it good to rest, without any further rangeing; for as touching the newes that he relates about the pay∣ment of tithes in forreine countryes, Greece, Italy, France, Spaine, & the like, it skills not much whether it be true or false, for it concernes vs especially in this case to enquire not factum, but ius, not what was done, but what ought to be done, & yet even in this kinde they that haue traced the History in those parts, haue therein discovered divers wandrings and aberrations: But for my part I had rather stay where I am, and take things as they are reported, then goe so far to make triall: only for a farewell looking back againe to the places where we haue been, a word or two also of the Iewish part of his Review, and so an end. In his Review p. 450. he remembreth two adiuncts that belong to the story of Abrahams tithing, that is, who Melchisedek was, and where the place of his Kingdome of Salem was. For the first he is generally reputed to be Shem by the common consent of the Iewes: but whether Shem or Iapheth were the eldest sonne of Noah, to whome the Priest-hood should belong, that is not so easily determined. For whereas he saith, that the Rabbins and divers other of the learned, will haue it, that Iapheth was the elder brother, and for this wri∣teth in the margent, Eam esse Rabbinorum sententiam
not at D. Chimki.  Yet the same Chimki on 1. Chro. 1. contrariam sententiam tenet, saying that Iapheth was greater in dignity, but yonger in yeares. But Aben-Ezra on Gen. 10.21. applies the same speech to Shem: and Iarchi there sayth, that it is not knowne whether Shem or Iapheth were the elder. R. Chaskuni on Gen. 9.25. saith, that Iapheth was the eldest, Cham the second, and Shem the third. But in the Tal∣mud Sanhedrin cap. 8. fol. 69. with reference to Gen. 5.32. they say these wordes: i. Shem was a yeere elder then Cham, and Cham a yeere elder then Iapheth, so Shem is found to be two yeares elder then Iapheth. For this therefore the Iewes agree not among themselues, and it being a question more intricate & disputable, then pertinent or pro∣fitable, I passe it ouer, and come to the other ad∣iunct concerning the place. For the place of his Kingdome, Salem, it is taken (saith the Author) by St Hierom (as he learned from some Iewes) and from him by St Ambrose, Eucherius, Primasius, and others, that this Salem is that which seated on this side of Iordan, is some 80 miles distant from the plaine of Mamre, where Abraham liued and retaynes it's name in the Story of IohnsIoh 3 23. baptisme. That St. Hierom learned this from the Iewes how can it be thought credible? for they generally hold that by Salem heere is meant Ierusalem, where Abra∣ham gaue the tithes; and so saith the Targum plainly both on Gen. 14. & also on Psal. 76.2. where David
Chimki writes thus. &c: Heere Chimki from Midras Tillim, relates a con∣ceit of the Iewes touching this place, expressing it in such manner as if two Godfathers did striue for the name of it, Shem called it Salem, Abraham, Iereh, Gen. 22.14. Therefore to end the strife, and please both parties, God caused it to be called neither simply Sa∣lem as Shem did; nor Iereh as Abraham; but cōpound of both in one word Ierusalem. Iereh signifies vision; & Salem, peace; for in the true Ierusalem there is true vision, and true peace. And that this place was first called Salem, and afterward Ierusalem, Iosephus plainly testifieth antiq. 1.11. saying, . They called Salem after∣ward Ierusalem. It is also called in Gen. 22.2. Mori∣ah, as the Iewes teach, where Salomon after built the Temple, 2. Chron. 3.1. Therefore saith Baal Haturim. i. That the land of Moriah by identity of number is the same with Ierusalem. In Iosuah 18.28. & 15.63. it is called Iebusi: as also in Iudg. 19.10. & 1.21. And in Ezech. 48.35.  The Lord is there. Rab. Levi Ben Gershom and Chimki, on Iosuah 10.1. write, that all the Kings of Ierusalem both in the time of Melchisedek, and in the dayes of Iosuah, were called by the name either of Melchisedek, or Adoni∣sedek Kings, or Lords of righteousnes, as the name of the Kings of Egypt was Pharaoh: and they are so
called, saith Chimki, i. Because of Ierusalem which is the place of righteous∣nes. And saith Ramban on Gen. 14. i. This place doth iustifie or make righteous the in∣habitants thereof, as it said Esai. 1.21.  i. Righteousnes lodged in it, 2. Pet. 3.13. compared with Ier. 23.6. & 33.16. And heere (say the Iewes) was the place where Abraham paid his tithes: whereby it appeares that the tithes were paid both to the Priests of God before the Law, and also were annexed to the place of Gods worship, as Aben-Ezra sheweth on Gen. 28, 22. writing thus. i. This shall be the house of God, the place appointed for my prayer, and to bring thither the tithes of all the goods that thou shalt giue me. In like manner Ramban both on Gen. 14. and also on this text doth assigne the tithes to the place of God's worship, thus ex∣pounding the text: &c:  i. When I returne to my fathers house I will serue the only true God in the chosen land, in the place of this stone which shall be to me the house of God, and thi∣ther will I bring the tithe. Againe the same Author writing on Gen. 31.13. doth in like wordes further confirme this, that the tithes were to be brought to the house of God, the place appointed for his wor∣ship. And thus much briefely for the two adiuncts of person and place before mentioned. There is yet on grand quaere, as it seemes, in the
opinion of the Historian, which in his Review Pag. 455. he moues in this manner. Now, me thinks, he that argues for tithes from the Mosaicall Lawes of tithing had need more especially then any I haue yet seene hath neuer done, examine which of the two kindes are due in the Evangelicall Priest-hood, why not the second as well as the first. To this I answere, first that we challenge not tithes principally by vertue of the Mosaicall Lawes of tithing, neither do I thinke that he hath seene any purposely arguing for tithes, that doth fetch his chiefest reasons thence; But as the learned haue taught who haue handled this subiect, we claime them thus; As due to God by reservation, from the beginning, as following Christs Priest-hood, as the only certainty mentioned in Scripture, as also con∣secrated to God by consent of Churches, and Edicts of Princes; as agreeing with the vse and practise of the Church in all times. But as for the Mosaicall Lawes and mandate of God concerning Levi, we make it not the ground of our title to tithes. And where he would haue vs examine which of the two kinds are due in the Evangelicall Priesthood, why not the second as well as the first; This hath beene fully answered by them that haue writtē of this argument, and haue made a more perfect division of tithes, then this of first and second: but because (as it seemes) the Iewes are in more credit with him then others, he may for this point haue also satisfaction from them: In the Talmud Rosh Hashanah cap. 1. fol. 12. on that text Deut. 14.26. which I haue giuen you
for your inheritance; they write thus. i. The Scripture ioyneth the first tithe to inheritance, to shew that as an inheritance ceaseth not, or hath no end, so the first tithe ceaseth not, or hath no end; and this is there twice repeated in the same page, which can by no meanes agree with the second tithe, for that ceased. Therefore the first tithe or tithe inheri∣tance, which was sometimes assigned to Levi for his service in the tabernacle, is now due in the Evange∣licall Priest-hood. But he would haue vs consider also how the pai∣ment of tithes from the Laity, to the Priests of the Gospell, succeeds to the paiment from the Levites, to the sonnes of Aaron: But these considerations can only be, where the knowledge of fact praeceedes: for without exact distinction of their several tithes, any argument drawne from them, may soone be found a grosse fallacy, that may both deceiue him which makes it, and those whom hee teaches: Let the ingenuous Reader thinke of it. And let the ingenuous Reader also thinke of this, that he which grounds a disputation or an His∣tory vpon false principles, must needes deceiue him∣selfe, and those whom hee teaches, and make vp his conclusion with grosse fallacies: for as the Philoso∣pher sayth well, Physic: li. 1. cap. 2. ; One absurdity being granted, others will follow. But he hath heere forgotten the Iewish proverb,  i. vpbraid not thy companion with the blemish that is in thy self:
Turpe est Doctori cùm culpa redarguit ipsum. And indeed to speake plain, what is it else but a meere fal∣lacie, by way of insinuatiō, to teach that the payment of tithes from the Laity, to the Priestes of the Gos∣pell, succeds to the payment from the Levites to the sons of Aaron. Is there not heerein a manifest dis∣parity betwixt the Leuites and the Laity? The Laity were alwaies to pay tithes, & by no right to receiue them; but the Leuites were alwaies to receiue them: For albeit out of the tithes that they did receiue, they were to pay a tenth to Aaron the high Priest, in ac∣knowledgment of superiority: yet this payment was meerely ceremoniall, and therefore it is called as Iarchi notes on Num. 18. . i. The oblation or heaue offering of the tithe, tyed only to the high Priest in person, and to Ierusalem for place: But the payment of the Laity to the Priests of the Gospell, is not ceremoniall. Againe there is no proper succession of the Gospell to the Law, in regard of Priest-hood, for the Priest-hood of the Gospell is directly included in the Priest-hood of Melchisedek, which was before the Priest-hood of Aaron: & therfore St. Hierom in his questions on Gen. calls the one, the Priest-hood of the vncircum∣cised Church, and the other, the Priest hood of the circumcised Synagogue. And whereas Melchisedek being vncircumcised, blessed Abraham, that after was circumcised, and in him Levi and Aaron, of whom came the priest-hood; therefore hee con∣cludes thus; Ex quo colligi vult Sacerdotium habentis praeputium benedixisse circumciso Sacerdotio Synago∣gae:
And so by consequent in this respect, he makes the Evangelicall Priest-hood not to succeed but to be before the Legall. It is further also to be conside∣red, that the whole Tribe of Levi is interessed in the tithe and not only the inferior Levites, as hath before beene proued; for though they are divided, as Ram∣ban notes on Gen. 17. i. Into two families, the Sacerdotall office apart by it selfe, and the Leviticall apart by it selfe, yet it is but one Tribe, and one Prince over them, and that was Aaron. And to this whole Tribe were the tithes gi∣uen, and therefore St. Hierom on Malach. 3. vnder the name of Levi comprehends the whole Priest-hood, saying, In filijs Levi, totam intellige Sacerdo∣talem dignitatem. Therefore the whole Priest-hood was partaker of the tithe, and not only the inferiour Levites, though they might sometimes be the ser∣uile receiuers of them, as the Gibeonites also in re∣gard of their office were subiect to the Levites, who are therefore called Nethinim 1. Chron. 9.2. as Aben-Ezra and Iarchi shew on Ezra. 2.43. Because they were assigned to servile offices in the Temple, and giuen to the vse and service of the Levites. Last of all we haue formerly proued in this Treatise that the first tithe or Levites tithe, was giuen to the sonnes of Aaron, that is, to the Priests, and namely in the time of Ezra, and that by the generall consent and testimony of the Iewes, neither was that consti∣tution
euer after reversed. I demaund then to whom the Levites did pay their decimas decimarum, when as the first tithe it selfe out of the which they were taken, was then gi∣uen immediatly to the Priests? We read indeed Num. 18.28. that the Levites were commanded to giue the tenth of their tithe, the Lords heaue offering to Aaron the Priest. But concerning the sense and meaning of this text, the Iewes dispute and differ in the Talmud Sanhedrin, cap. 11. fol. 90. Rabbi Iocha∣nan argues from hence the certainty of the resurrec∣tion, and because Aaron did not liue to enter into the land of Israel, and receiue the heaue offering, therfore (saith he) this teacheth, that he shall liue heareafter, and receiue it after the resurrection. Rabbi Ismael, he saith: i The heaue offering was giuen to Aaron to signifie, that as he was partaker, so also his sonns were parta∣kers of it, after him; Now the sonnes of Aaron were high Priests as well as Priests. Therfore where it is added; But these considerations can only be, where the knowledge of fact preceedes: What certaine knowledge of fact heerein hath he shewed vs, or how can there be any such certainty found among the Iewes, when as the greatest of their Doctors differ in iudgment for the exposition of this text, which is the ground of the fact heere menti∣oned; some of them appropriating the heaue offe∣ring of the tithe personally to Aaron himselfe, some
to his sons successors, in the high Priest-hood, and some to the inferior Priests. Therfore in these matters, we haue from them much variety, but litle certainty; yet still more proofe for the divine right of tithes, then either hath, or can be shewed to the contrary: For since the Iewes teach vs, (as hath beene declared) that the tithe is God's part, allotted and paide euer to the Priest, and that the Patriarkes Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, and the rest paide tithes before the Law, and that they were also paide in the time of Iob, and that the Priest after the order of Melchisedek hath right to take tithes, and that the first tithe or tithe inheritance must neuer cease; By these and such like conclusions, I take it, they af∣foorde more arguments for confirmation of the di∣vine right of tithes, then either hath as yet from them, or can be shewed against it. The last of his Hebrew sentences, wherein also I will ioyne with him, and conclude, is set downe to∣ward the end of the 2d chap. of his Review; that is; That among their Aphorismes both diuine and mo∣rall, they tell vs, that as the Masoreth is the defence of the Law, so  Meigh∣sheroth seag Leaighsher, that is, tithes payd, are the de∣fence of riches; for which he quoteth in the margent Pirke Auoth cap. 3. And in the same place, such an other sentence presently followes, which if this Author had well observed, I perswade my selfe, his History had neuer come to light, and that is,  i. silence is the hedge or defence of wisdome. But it is
well yet, that now in the end not consonant to his former discourse, he acknowledgeth this that is spo∣ken of tithes, to be a divine and morall Aphorisme: and surely not only this, but also many other such like morall and divine Aphorismes, are vttered by the Iewes, both in their Comments on the holy text, and also in the Talmud, which promise a blessing to them that duely pay their tithes, and a curse to those that doe withhold them. That worthy learned Divine Master Hooker in his fift booke of Ecclesiasticall policy fol: 428. allead∣ging this, that the Iewes were accustomed to name their tithes, the hedge of their riches, hath there a further observation saying, that an hedge doth onely fence and preserue that which is contained, whereas their tithes and offerings did more, because they pro∣cured increase of the heape, out of which they were taken; And for this he citeth Malach. 3. Bring yee all the tithes into the store-house, that there may be meat in my house, (deale truly, defraud not God of his due but bring all,) and prooue if I will not open vnto you the windowes of heaven, and powre downe vpon you an vnmesurable blessing. On which wordes Rab∣bi Bechai writing on Deut. 26. saith: Although it be vnlawfull to proue or tempt the Lord; for a man must not say I will performe such a commandement, to the end I may prosper in riches, for it is writen Deut. 6.16. yee shall not tempt the Lord your God &c: yet saith he heere, and the Iewes also in Massech Tagna∣nith cap. 1. fol. 9. There is an exception for paiment of tithes and workes of mercy in this text of Malach.
3. and that other Proverb. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy substance &c, where Iarchi and Ralbag vnder∣stand it to be spoken of tithes, and Bechai also workes of charity to the poore; and for proofe of a blessing to the performance of these precepts, Ralbag applieth that in 2. Chron. 31.10. Since the peo∣ple began to bring the offering into the house of the Lord, we haue eaten, and haue beene satisfied, and there is left in abundance, for the Lord hath blessed his people, and this abundance that is left: so on Deut 14.22. they write thus, i. Pay tithes that thou maist be rich, pay tithes that thou come not to poverty. This is recorded by Ram∣ban, and Bechai, and others, and in divers places in the Talmud, as Massech Sabuth cap. 16. fol. 119. Tag∣nanith cap. 1. fol. 9. on Num. 5.10. Iarchi thus glos∣seth, i. The man that giues to the Priest the giftes that are fit for him, he shall haue riches in abundance: and so it is in Massech Beracoth, fol. 63. And Baal Ha∣turim on Deut. 12.19. Take heed thou forsake not the Levite: he ioynes to that ver. 20. i. When God shall enlarge thy border, and to signifie that a mans gift doth enlarge him, Prov. 18.16. Mea∣ning a gift to the Priest. Deut. 16.4. And thou shalt reioyce in thy feast, thou, and thy sonne, and thy daugh∣ter, and thy maide, and the Leuite, and the stranger,
and the fatherlesse, and the widow, that are within thy gates. Here saith Iarchi, and Bechai on Gen. 37.1. The Leuite, the stranger, the fatherlesse, and the wi∣dow,  i. foure that belong to me, answerable to foure that belong to thee: Thy sonne, thy daughter, thy man, thy maides If thou comfort those that are mine, I will comfort those that are thine. Deut. 26.11. And thou shalt re∣ioyce in euery good thing which the Lord thy God hath giuen thee. To this is annexed (saith Baal Haturim) when thou hast made an end of tithing, ver. 12. i. For by reason of the due payment of tithes, thou shalt reioyce in euery good thing, according as they say, pay tithes that thou may'st prosper. And to this purpose the same Author on Leuit. 4.14. & Iarchi on Numb. 5.12. haue other speeches borrowed from the Tal∣mud, Massech: Beracoth, cap. 9. fol. 63. all which tend to shew, that a blessing belongs to those that duly pay their tithes. But it will be said, what is all this to vs? these things were spoken to the Iewes, and of their times. Ans. Yes, they pertaine to vs also, for God is no changeling: as they shew vs how he would blesse his owne people, if they did maintaine his Priests and Leuites as he appointed; so seeing God respecteth his Ministers now no lesse then in those times, they doe also signifie, that he will blesse vs too, if we doe
maintaine them as he hath appointed, the one is a seruice and sacrifice no lesse acceptable vnto him, then the other, as our Apostle also sheweth most ex∣cellently in Philip. 4.10.11. and 18.19, &c. Againe on the other side, many are the punishments recorded by the Iewes, which follow the contempt & neglect of payment of tithes. Therfore saith Iarchi on Numb. 5.10, &c:  He that de∣taines the tithe, so that it is not giuen in the due sea∣son thereof, in the end his land shall yeeld him but the tithe of that it vsed to yeeld, agreeable with that sen∣tence of St Austin De tempore, sermo 219. Si tu deci∣mam non dederis, tu ad decimam revoceris. And to this effect they haue an History related by the Com∣mentor on the Talmud in Massech: Tagnanith, cap. 1. fol. 9. and also by R. Bechai on Deut. 14. Of a certaine rich man that had land, which yearely bare him a thousand measures of corne, whereof he duly payde an hundred for the tithe: At his death he giues this land to his sonne, with a charge to doe the like in tithing, as he had done before him, which he did the first yeare after his fathers death, for the land brought forth a thousand measures, as before, and he gaue an hundreth thereof for the tithe. But the second yeare he hauing an euill eye, began to thinke with himselfe, that the tithe was a great matter, and therefore he forbade the lay∣ing out of it. The next yeare after, the increase of that field was much diminished, and it afforded but an hundred measures in all, in regard whereof he was ex∣ceedingly grieued and discontented: His neighbours therefore hearing of this, came vnto him, cloathed in
white rayment, to make merry with him, and to com∣fort him, to whom he said, It seemes to me that you so∣lace your selues, and reioyce at my losse. But they an∣swered him, should we be grieued for thee, that hast brought all this euill vpon thy selfe? Wherefore then didst thou not set forth thy tithe duly as thou shouldst haue done? Consider how that when the land came first into thy hand; thou wast the husbandman, or ma∣ster and owner thereof, and God Almighty the Priest; for the Tithe was his part to dispose of: But now for∣asmuch as thou hast not set forth his part vnto him, God he is become the housholder, and owner of the ground, and thou the Priest; for thy field doth not yeeld as it yeelded before, a thousand measures, but he hath set apart for thee an hundreth measures. And this is that which is written, Numb. 5.10. And euery mans hallowed things shall be his; that is to say, when he diuideth not as he ought, hee shall haue nothing himselfe, but the holy things that is, the tithe. And for this cause our wisemen affirme, he that witholdes his tithe, in the end it will come to passe, that he him∣selfe shall haue nothing but the tithe: as it is written Esai 5.10. For ten acres of vines shall yeeld one bath, and the seed of an Homer shall yeeld an Ephah: that is the tithe: For an Ephah is the tenth part of an Ho∣mer, as R. Chimki and Iarchi declare on this text. And thus farre also the Commentor on the Talmud. Againe Esai 5.8. Woe vnto them that ioyne house to house, & lay field to field, till there be no place that ye may be placed by your selues in the midst of the earth: Iarchi his glosse here is this:
&c:  As thogh they thought that neither God hath any part in the land, nor the poore; his part in the tithes they spoyle, and rob the poore of their land, that they alone may dwell therein. And after he shewes the punish∣ment hereof, That by reason of famine, their houses and land shall be left desolate, as in ver. 9. Likewise Amos 4.6. And therefore haue I giuen you cleanenesse of teeth in all your cities, and scarcenes of bread in all your places. Chimki here writes thus: As yee haue depriued my house of offerings and tithes, so haue I depriued you of bread and flesh in all your cities and places where you dwell.  requiting like for like. And hence it is also that in Massecheth Sabath cap. 2. fol. 32. they say, that through omission of paying Tithes, the heauens are restrain'd from sending downe dew and raine in due season, to which they apply that in Iob 24.19. And Iarchi wri∣ting on Deut. 14.21.22. compar'd with 2 King. 19.26. makes this the cause, that the corne is blasted before it be growne vp: and Bechai, that the forraine enemy doth invade an dspoyle the land, &c: And though the Iewes payde not their Tithe in the fields, but on∣ly after the fruits were carried into their barnes; as it is said Deut. 26.13. I haue brought the hallowed thing out of mine house, &c: Yet Aben-Ezra and Chaskuni there teach, that it was a prophanation & contempt, to dispose of any part thereof till the tithe was paid. And Maimon on Massec: Demai, c. 1. fol. 11. saith, that he that doth so, is guilty of death by the hand of heauē. In Exod. 13.13. and 34.20. where it is said concerning
the first-borne of the Asse, if thou redeeme him not, thou shalt breake his necke. Salomoh Iarchi hath this conclusion: i. He that spoiles the Priests goods, his owne goods also shall be spoyled.) The inference stands thus; If the ow∣ner will not redeeme his Asse, by paying the Priest a lambe, then the Priest shall loose the lamb, which is his due, & then also the owner shall loose his Asse, which is more; for it is said he shall breake his necke. In like manner the Countreyman sometimes ar∣gues in an humor, and sayes, rather then I'le pay so much tithe, my ground shall lye fallow, or I'le spend in Law ten times the worth of it: If this be done, then the Priest must needs come short of the tithe, which is his due, and then also the Countreyman shall come short of the fruits and profits which are more: So that referring this case to that of the first-borne of an Asse, we may conclude with Iarchi, He that spoyles the Priests goods, doth also spoile his owne goods. But the Scripture sayth, Deut. 25.4. Thou shalt not muzzle the oxe that treadeth out the corne. And againe Deut. 22.10. Thou shalt not plowe with an Oxe and an Asse, the cleane, and vncleane, toge∣ther. For why, saith Bavl Haturim on that place, when the Asse lookes vpon the Oxe, and sees him chew the cud, he frets and repines at him, (as many doe at the Priests maintenance,) because he thinkes that he alwayes feeds, when he doth but only chew the cud. Malach. 3.8. Will a man spoile his goods;
yet haue yee spoiled me; but yee say, wherein haue wee spoyled thee; In tithes and offerings yee are cursed with a curse, for yee haue spoyled me, euen this whole nation. Heere (saith Iarchi) The tithes and offerings wherof ye spoile the Priests & Levites,  i. That is the spoyling of me. And Chimki on those words, This whole nation, saith: It seemeth that for other transgressions before named, they were not all equall in them, but for the matter of tithes and offe∣rings they were all alike culpable, and therefore he saith (this whole nation.) Whereby it appeares, that sacriledge is a generall and bewitching sin, a fact of euill conscience, and of perilous and pernicious con∣sequence. It robs God, it robs man, the living, the dead, them that are yet vnborne. The living, pastor and People, the Pastor of his portion, the People of the food of their soules; The dead, patrons, founders, and benefactors, of their honor and honorable me∣mories, who haue in their times over and be de tithes, out of the bounty and zeale of their heartes, giuen many great and rich endowments to the Church, and dedicated them to sacred vses; yea they rob them that are yet vnborne, to wit posterity and succeeding ages, which haue a right in these things; Nam dicata religioni iuris divini sunt non humani. But what speake I of posterity, which as yet are not come? or of the dead which are now gone? and can doe neither good, nor hurt; for a li∣ving dog is better then a dead Lion: yet as Iosephs brethren, when their father was dead, came vnto
him, and intreated him first, in their fathers name, & after said vnto him, Gen. 50.17. We pray thee for∣giue the trespasse of the servants of thy fathers God, meaning (as Iarchi notes) that if he would not for∣giue them for their fathers sake, who was now dead, yet he should consider that his fathers God lived for euer, and they were his servants, and therefore to be respected: so though our fore-fathers, honourable founders, and benefactors are dead, and we forget them, yet the God of our fathers still liues, able to right his own, & his servants wrongs. Salomon saith, Prov. 20.25. It is a snare for a man to devoure that which is sanctified, and after the vowes to enquire. On which words that worthy Knight Sr Henry Spel∣man in his booke de non temerandis Ecclesijs, very well obserues, that a snare hath three properties 1. to catch sodenly 2. to hold surely, & 3 to destroy certain∣ly, as he shewes in the example of Vzzah, Vzziah, 2, Chron. 26.19. Ieroboam, 1. Kings 13.4. Corah, & others. R. Levi Ben Gershom on Iosuah, 7. speaking of the sin of Achan, who is also called Achar 1. Chron. 2.7. because he troubled Israel, teacheth this lesson; That in euery congregation assembled together, one ought to hinder another from sinning against God: for somtimes a whole company is punished for the sinne of one private person, for Achan (saith he) transgressed in the accursed thing, and wrath came vpon the whole congregation; And for this cause the law commands Levit. 19.17. Thou shalt plainly rebuke thy neighbour, and suffer him not to sinne.
In 2 Samuel 1.9. Saul being in distresse when he desired the Amalekite to slay him, saith:  i. Anguish is come vpon me. Thereby Chimki vnderstandeth the horror and punishment of his sin, for murthering the Priests of Nob, 1 Samuel 22.18.  i. That did weare the broydered coate, Exod. 18.4. And in this sense also R. Bechai, takes it on Levit. 14. fol. 143. And hence it is that the Iewes faigne, that for his fact done to Amalek when he spared Agag and the best sheep, &c: 1. Samuel. 15.9. A voyce sounded from heaven and said vnto him, be not thou iust overmuch. Eccles. 7.16. so for this of Nob the citty of the Priests which he smote with the edge of the sword, both child and suckling 1. Samuel 22.19. it was said likewise, be not thou wicked ouermuch, Eccles: 7.17. If it be overmuch wickednesse, occidere Presbyteros, to slay the Lords Priests, as Saul did heere, and Dioclesian in his time, Niceph. lib. 7. cap. 3. Then much more occidere Presbyterium, to slay the Priest-hood, by taking away the maintenance, as Iulian did. Theod. Lib. 3. cap. 6. & Niceph. Lib. 10. cap. 5. And in this sinne of Saul, Doeg also that was the instrument, was insnared, and therefore the Iewes obserue heere, 1 Samuel. 22.18. that for  his name is written by contraction  a fish; for he was taken in the net as a fish; for when the Sergeants that were commanded, would not moue their hand to fall vpon the Priests of the Lord, then the King faid to Doeg, turne thou and fall vpon the Priests, as who should say, thou hast accused them, doe thou
slay them: so doth Chimki paraphrase on this place. Rabbi Saadiah Geon on Dan. 5.1. saith of Baltashar. That his name signifieth a searcher of treasure; for he prophaned the treasure and holy vessels of the Sanctu∣ary; and to him and to his company, Chimki applies that in Ier. 51.39. I will make them drunken, that they may reioyce, and sleepe a perpetuall sleep, and not wake, saith the Lord Where, saith he, other drunkards sleep in their drunkenesse and after wake againe; but these that made themselues merry in drin∣king and carowzing in the vessells of the Sanctuary, they slept a perpetuall sleepe, and neuer waked any more: for they dyed in the midst of their drunkenesse, as it is written Dan. 5.30. The same night was Bal∣tashar the King of the Chaldeans slaine. It is reported in the Talmud Massech: Ioma, cap. 7. fol. 69. that Alexander the great being sollicited & perswaded by the Samaritans to spoyle the Temple of Ierusalem, when he came thither, and saw Simeon the high Priest, who being cloathed with the Priests garments, came forth to meet him, he presently ligh∣ted downe from his chariot, and prostrating himselfe to the earth, embraced him with all humble and sub∣missiue reuerence, and being demanded the reason, he answered, i. The similitude of this mans forme gets the victory before me in the time of my warre: that is, as R. Bechai expounds it on Exod. 31.
i. That it was an Angell that appeared vnto him in the likenes of the Priest. Whereby it came to passe, that Alexander desisting from his purpose, did not onely fauour the Iewes, and spare their Temple, but also gaue the Samaritans their enemies into their hands, whom they with diuers kinds of torments did put to death, and made a festiuall day for a remem∣brance, that they which sought the ruine and de∣struction of God's house, were themselues brought to vtter desolation. How detestable the sin of sacriledge is, it will the better appeare, if together with the punishment wee consider the manifold pernicious consequents there∣of, as namely, the decay of learning, the ruine of Re∣ligion, and stopping the mouth of the Gospell, the bane of hospitality, the desolation of the poore, the dilapidation of Churches, the contempt of the mini∣stery of the Church, and neglect of all goodnes, &c: For if the honos be taken away, the onus will soone fall to the ground, if the oyle be withdrawne, the lampe of the Sanctuary will soone be quenched. And as the Iewes write in their morall and dtuine Apho∣rismes, If there be no meale there is no law; no law, no law, no meale: as it is in Pirke Auoth cap. 3. ol. 8. and Baal Haturim on Deut. 32.1. At such time as the Taber∣nacle was built, though men were so liberall in their voluntary contribution, that Moses was faine to stay
them, Exod. 36.6. Yet as Baal Haturim notes, he gaue especiall commandement to bring oyle for the light, that the lampes might alwayes burne, Exod. 27.20. & Leuit. 24.2. because (saith he) this was a dayly and continuall charge, and required a common purse. And whereas mens affections are mutable, and of∣tentimes their devotion soone cold, therefore also the portion of the Priests and Leuites was not left to the will of the people, but God himselfe by his Law prouided for them. And when the people failed in this duty, God's Vice-gerents here on earth stirred them vp to obedience; whence it was that good E∣zechiah, 2 Chron. 31.4. commanded the people that dwelt in Ierusalem to giue a part to the Priests and Leuites, that they might be incouraged in the Law of the Lord; that is, saith Iarchi on this place,  with more alacrity, that whilst their mainte∣nance was duly prouided for thē, they might cheare∣fully, without distraction, labour in the Law of God; for the Law (saith he) was giuen to those that did eat Manna, and next vnto them are they that doe eat the Therumah: that is, as Baal Haturim expresseth it, and R. Bechai on Exod. 16.16. & 25.2. He that establisheth the law, God Almighty prouides him his food without toyle, as those that did eat Man∣na. R, Chaskuni also speakes to this purpose on Num. 18.20. I might be copious in this kind, but I hasten to an end. It is written Prov. 28.24. He that robbeth his father and mother, and saith, it is no transgression,
is the companion of a man that destroyeth. The Iewes as Iarchi here, and Ramban on Leuit. 19.32. from Tal∣mud Sanhedrim, cap. 11. fol. 102: doe expound this text thus: He that robs God his father, & the Church his mother, is the companion of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat; that made Israel to sinne. For as Ieroboam made of the basest of the people to bee the Priests, 1 Kings 12.31. & 13.33. So these by taking away the tithes and revenues of the Church would make the Priests to be the basest of the people. And as Ierobo∣am by those meanes, saith R. Levi Ben Gersham on that text, i. Did draw the hearts of the common people, in that he freed them from the ordinary paiment of tithes to the Levites &c. So also the sacrilegious Politicians of our age, may happily by the like practise, win fa∣vour with the people, as Ieroboam did. But cursed is that policy that fights against piety? for what saith the Scripture; 1. Kings. 13.34. This thing turned to sinne vnto the house of Ieroboam, euen to root it out and destroy it from the face of the earth. But on the other side, those that haue been gratious patrons & benefactors, noursing fathers, and noursing mothers of the Church, carefull of religion and the mainte∣nance thereof, God hath ever multiplied his bles∣sings vpon them and their posterity, as it is evident
in divers of the good Kings of Israel: among others, to instance only in one, it is the observation of the Iewes concerning David, that when he had sinned in numbring the people, God said to the prophet, Goe and tell David, 2. Samuel. 24.12. & 1. Chron. 21.10. giuing him no other title but only David, as Chimki heere notes: But when he had a purpose in his heart to build an house for the Lord, then he said, goe and tell my servant David, 2. Samuel. 7.5. & 1. Chro. 17.4. shewing what accompt he makes of such, and how acceptable they are to him, when they seeke his glory and his Churches good. And for this cause though David intending to build an house for the Lord, could not effect it, yet as Iarchi shewes on 1. Chron. 17.10. God accepting his indevour for the deed it selfe, did therefore blesse him and his seed after him, and built vp his house for euer, according to the promise Psal. 99.4.36. His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sunne before me. 37 It shall be established for ever as the moone, & as a faith∣full witnesse in heaven. This in type was first perfor∣med in the flourishing Kingdome of Salomon the sonne of Dauid, of whom saith Iarchi on 1. Chron. 29.23. As the moone is at the full in the fifteenth day of the month, so was Davids throne in Salomon, that was the fifteenth generation from Abraham, but af∣ter was diminished and obscured like the moone vnto the dayes of Zedechiah whose light was made darknes, who had his eyes put out, and was after brought to Ba∣bel, 2 Kings 25.7. But in truth this was fully verified in the eternall Kingdome of Christ the true sonne
of David, who also in the dayes of his flesh, follo∣wing and exceeding the example of David, testified his fervent loue and zeale to the house and Temple of God: when he was twelue yeares old, he was found in the Temple in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing them and asking them questions. Luk. 2.46. He taught daily in the Temple Luk. 19.47. He cast out those that bought and sold in the Temple, and said to them, It is written, my house shall be called the house of prayer, but yee haue made it a denne of theeues. Math. 21.12.13. Esa. 56.7. Ier. 7.11. And for the tithes he said, these things yee ought to haue done, and not to haue left the other vndone. Luk. 11.42. Math. 23.23. And lastly teaching vs our duty to God, and Cae∣sar, hath commended vnto vs that sacred admoni∣tion. Mark. 12.17. Giue to Caesar the things that are Caesars, and to God the things that are Gods. Agreea∣ble to which precept of our Sauiour, the Iewes also, (that I may end as I began) haue a sentence among their divine and morall Aphorismes, which is thus expressed in Pirke Aboth cap. 3. Giue vnto him of that which is his, for both thou & all that thou hast are his: So it is said by David; for all things come of thee, and of thine owne hand haue wee given thee, Chron. 29.14. For who hath first giuen to him, saith St. Paul, Rom. 11.35. And therefore with praise and thanksgiuing to God the Author and
giuer of all blessings, let vs heere conclude, and shut vp all with the words of the Apostle, Rom. 11.36. . For of him, & through him, and for him are all things, to him be glory for ever. Amen.
Let the absence of the Author from the Presse, and the diffi∣culty of the character of the written Copie, excuse these faults to the curteous Reader, which are thus to be corrected. PAge 8. line 10, for sonne 3, reade some 3. p. 9. l. 1. for  r. . p. 11. l. 2. for , r. . p. 93. l 20. for , r. . p. 17. l. 19. for dayde, r. payde. p. 19. l. 15. for which, r. with. p. 24. l. 21. for , r. . p. 27. l. 23. for , r. . p. 27. l. 28, for  r. . p. 31. l. 20. for Deut. 8.16. r. Numb. 8.16. p. 33. l. 19. for Massech. cap. 2. r. Massech, Shabath cap 2. p. 36. l. 28. for Deut. 2.8. r. Deut. 12.8. p. 41. l. 30. for payeth, r. payde. p. 43. l. 2. for , r. . p. 45: l. 5. for Aben Ezrah, r. Aben Ezra. p. 46. l. 2. for , r. . p. 52. l. 16. for , r. . p. 55. l. 10. for Heraim, r. Zeraim. p. 73. for aboue, r. alone. p. 77. l. 21. for the tithe, r. the tenth of the tithe. p. 84. l. 30. for whereof, r. whereas. p. 92. l. 19. for , r. . p. 96. l. 5. for Ezrah 8, r. Ezra 8. p. 96. l. 9. for Iebamoth cap. 2. r. Iebamoth cap. 9. p. 77. l. 27. omittuntur haec verba; and some the second and third tithe one: Sequitur, which last opinion. Et haec omittuntur p. 84. l. 8: Iarchi giues not jointly the se∣cond tithe to the Leuite stranger, &c: but expresly and seuerally the first tithe to the Leuite, and the poore mans tithe to the stranger, fatherlesse, and widow: Sequitur And this testimony, &c: p. 98. l. 12. for , r. . p. 102. l. 2. for , r.  p. 102. l. 14. for , r. . p. 102. l. 14. for , r. . p. 102. l. 15. for , r. . p. 105. l. 29. for , r. . p. 107. l. 14. for quae, r. quia. p. 107, l. 30. for , r. . p. 108. l. 31. for the first part, r. the fift part. p. 109. l. 4. for first part, r. fift part. p. 113. l. 1. for , r. . p. 113. l. 11. for , r. . p. 120. l. 6. for , r. . p. 120. l. 8. for , r. . p. 122. l. 13. , r. . p. 125. l. 7. for Geofayle, r. Ieofayle. p. 133. l. 1. for wholly, r. holy. p. 135. l. 12. for vice, r. wife, Numb. 5.12. p. 144. l. 15. for , r. . p. 140. l. 9. The Answer to the cen∣sure should immediatly follow the censure in page 133. line 20. p. 148. l. 30. for Syriacke, r. Arabique. p. 150. l. 2. for  r.  p. 151. l. 6 for Termoth, r. Therumoth. p. 159. l. 25. for cap. 18. fol. 90. r. cap. 10. fol. 17. p. 164. l. 1. for  r. in radic. . p. 166. l. 22. for  r.  p. 167. l. 5. for neuer, r. neere. p. 170. l. 7. for Gen. 17. r. Numb. 17. p. 174. l. 20. for Deut. 16.4. r. Deut. 16.14. p. 179. l. 31. for Goods, r. Gods. p. 182. l. 7. for Exod. 18.4. r. Exod. 28.4.
