20170 99846063 11001
A WELCH BAYTE to spare Prouender. Or, A looking backe vpon the Times past. Written Dialogue wise. This booke is diuided into three parts, The first, a briefe discourse of Englands Securitie while her late Maiestie was liuing, with the maner of her proceeding in Gouernment, especially towards the Papists and Puritanes of England, whereof a Letter written late before her death, speci∣fies, as followeth in this first part. The second, A description of the Distractions during her Maiesties sickenesse with the composing of them. The third, Of the Aptnesse of the English and the Scotte to incorporate and become one entire Monarchie: with the meanes of preseruing their vnion euerlastingly, added there∣vnto. Printed at London by Valentine Simmes. 1603.
❧ A Prelude vppon the name of Henry VVriothesly Earle of South-hampton. Euer WHoso beholds this Leafe, therein shall reede, A faithfull subiects name, he shall indeede: The grey-eyde morne in noontide clowdes may steepe, But traytor and his name shall neuer meete. Neuer.
To the right Honorable Henry Wri∣othesly Earle of South-hampton Baron of Tichfield: and of the No∣ble Order of the Garter. LEt golden artists practice quaint imposture, And study to a semblance of perfection, Let Leopers sweate to shew the world their moisture, We study not to Patrones for direction: Unlesse the Honor that my lines shall owe Can both protect vs, and approoue them too. And such is thine, whose beames of Patronage Doe heate alike in Iudgement, and in blood Both, with pure fires deriu'd from parentage, Preserued in the Arke of Fortunes flood, When Neptune, and the sea gods did abette, With Cynthia in her fullest veines aspect. Thou wholesome Honour, Chaste Nobilitie, Be in protection mine, as Generous, Without distent through all thy auncestrie: It was thy wont, Thou canst not erre in vs: And for the Test sufficeth me to know: Thy Iudgement best deserues my lines to owe. Your Lordshippes In all the nerues of my ability, Tho: Powell.
¶ A Welch Bayte to spare Prouender. Englands Securitie. Question. SIr, whereas at our last parting at Rich∣mond house very early, and in the very same morning wherein the late Maie∣stie of England made progression through Tudyrs royall name, before a∣ny Successor yet apparent or proclay∣med, you, excusing your selfe with the times distraction, the feare of erupti∣on, your duty and security to repaire at such times to your owne home, (thinking nothing Disaster that you suffer vnder your owne starre, no stroake too violent for your natiue coun∣try) promised after that confused Matachime, recouered into his wonted harmony, such as crownes this day, with full con∣sent, to describe vnto mee the Distractions precedent to her death, which did informe each estate so plentifully, as might supply euen all the vses of obseruation. I desire you to be so feeling of these times felicitie, Vbi quid censeat, &c. as shall suffice for the liberty of your speech, and the freedome of your promise. Answ. Good Sir, I confesse to haue libertie of modest speaking, whereby is offered an expedition from my promise is the chiefest felicitie in my wishes, and to proportion out the broken numbers of those latter times with our mutuall com∣ments and collections might somewhat confirme vs towards futurity: It onely detaines mee before I enter into the discourse thereof to be so curious ouer your expectation, for you seeme
prepared vnto me as to challenge conditions of your gentlenes and humanity, both of hearing and censuring me, as one forced to be diuided into so many and such the formes of this subiect for the lifer description thereof, as may with a little helpe of wit be fashioned and fitted with some peculiar, the like behauiour, though much dissonant from my meaning, without giuing the Character, or presuming your wit. For betweene the height of my soules contemplation, and the earth of my affe∣ctions, there is a Commonweale so populous, of whatsoeuer condition, that in describing all men, I discourse but my selfe vnto you. Qu. Before you begin, I would desire you first to set forth that Tranquille Estate of England as it lay most soft, in her most securitie (her Maiestie yet liuing, and in health.) That first, Taking your height from thence, euen, from the Ouer∣flow of her Fulnesse, you may the easier make seeme how great the distant was into the Distractions. Next, By the degrees of her sickenes measureth the times farthest out of measure. And lastly, shew how sodainly and solidely it was againe composed What transposition and how many frets, how much vicissitude, one month begets: Be admonished by the way to vse those meanes which may ex∣empt your stile from seeming serious, giue it a free and plea∣sing laxation, but not so diffuse as if your flashes of mirth were cut out of the whole dresser cloth of ranke wit? An. To describe that Securitie proceeding partly of the fulnesse of such a gouernment, as was one reformed in all the defects of those best squarde, and conformed by religions principles, and especially of the bounty of prouidence, whole blessings, for a perfect gouernment in it selfe to containe, it is as impossible as for a full vessell, his owne moysture vnder a vio∣lent showre that falls farre off: I must first shew wherein her Fulnesse did ouerflow and molifie: And then, into what. It did ouerflow and suffer Excrescence. First, In Religions vses. Secondly, In vses of temporall blessings. Of both which the Extent was into Softnesse, & Singularity. Softnesse and Singularity being either of Fashion or Custome. It was Softnesse of Fashion in such (I leaue chambering and
such like to the office of a Diuine to speake of) as had the se∣curitie to be fashionable in all their actions, and to liue x vs viuendi, of which sort of people are all sectaries of , blinde zeale, and example deriued from auncestors and grand∣fathers, with such like whatsoeuer. The goodnesse of the day was to these like Lybian wormes in digestion; it gaue to such drowsinesse all their faculties, that they could doe nothing but what the fashion of their liuing offered vnto them: and it was for fashion that Sir William R R was wont in those dayes to send his man euery morning to know how such a great namelesse Ladyshippe tooke her rest after the last nights neates-tongue pic, &c. It was Softnesse of Custome in such as held no law to cere∣mony, no liberty to custome: and this was your country re∣ueller, your onely Lord of Whitson ale: with a heigh ho come ouer the dale, come ouer the dale heigh ho. It was into Singularitie with others, of which kinde there be two sorts, Paradox, and Morall affectation. Paradox was one that for ambition of a Singularity in Reli∣gion and artes, would altogether oppose himselfe against the most receiued authority. Or rather for distinctions sake be∣twixt such, as who though they differ from the true positions: yet it is not è regione: let me call it Affectation: and that only Ambition where the Singularitie is fetcht from extreames, the farthest of which is Atheisme. Qu. Is it possible there should be such presumption in man, as to impugne his owne bosome faith, and all for biti∣on of a Singularitie, can it be that a Singularitie should be so deerely gained and farre-fetcht? An. Yes; and boast that wit for it to, asmuch as Laco the ly∣ing trauailer does his discouery of the new found land, with all the miraculous stones and plants he left behinde him there: For, for mine owne parte I doe belieue there is no other A∣theist but of conscious ambition. I come to the Morall affectation ofthose dayes which was either the oppsite of Fashion or Custome. Your opposite of Fashion was either he that vsed to dedi∣cate the affected prety and fantasticke of euery new  to
the iudgement of some new Mistris. Or your Affectation of a neglected fashion and hauiour, and this was your onely shal∣low malecontent of the age. Now your Anticustome was one that would neuer go directly and by president, where his owne wit or countenance could come by ambages: and therefore me thinkes this should be he that was the first inuenter of Monopoly, because the first that euer went out of custome. Me thinkes this should be he that deuised your first Impropriation of Ecclesiasticall liuings: Quest. Why should he not be the first Proteus of offices and occupations? Answ. No doubt Sir but hee was: For I can tell you I knewe him liue in the Court, doe hir Maiestie the seruice of a whole man there, and yet he was a parson in halfe a dozen places more at least, he was a baylife in one shape, and a steward in an other, now, an Honorable, and by and by a housesweeper, I meane him that had no substitute therein for sauing of the fee, and to the rest I reserue Eugé & Bellé. But Proteus was no body to an other Anticustome in my remembrance: What thinke you of the old Ubiquitarie Lycus? But I perceiue you are rather chewing vppon the times fulnesse that it should come to this, and notwithstand∣ing to haue wholesome gouernment. Qu. Sir, I ratifie your reasons before cited, for a kinde of necessitie to be acknowledged in them. I onely expect to be hastened, nowe you are at the height of Englands Securitie, to heare the manner of dieting it from the first Ouerflowe of her Perfections fulnes, while it is ga∣thering new blood for new infection, desiring you to resume at hir cleere Gouernments proceeding betweene Softnes and Singularitie. Ans. With Softnes in Religion, because there was no such intention in it as might attaint it finaly, the mildest meanes of recouerie were thought most competible, and so applied in discretion to reduce it by gentle meanes, rather then giue the wholesome blood issue at incisions. But into Singularitie more obseruation enquired, prosecu∣ting it in wisdom frō the first schisme to the extreamest heresie.
Qu. Of hit particular proceeding towards these by exam∣ple of the Papists and Puritanes, I pray enlarge your propose∣ments, the rather to giue satisfaction to the question had of the sinceritie and constancie of the Inquisition into them. Ans. Because I hope I can not goe beyond my duty and authoritie with their satisfaction, I will intertaine their doubts with the sufficient answere of a letter written to that effect late before hir Maiesties death: As followeth. A letter to a French Gentleman touching the proceedings in England in Ecclesasticall causes translated out of French by T. T. SIr, wheras you desire to be aduertized touching the pro∣ceedings here in Ecclesiasticall causes, because you note in them some inconstancie and variation, as if we enclined sometimes to one side, and sometimes to an other, and as if that clemency and lenity were not vsed of late that was vsed in the beginning, all which you imputed to your owne superficiall vnderstanding of the affaires of this state, hauing notwith∣standing hir Maiesties doings in singular reuerence, as the reall pledges which shee hath giuen vnto the world of hir sinceritie in religion, and of hir wisdome in gouernment well meriteth, I am glad of the occasion to imparte the little I knowe in that matter vnto you, both for your owne satisfacti∣on, and to the end you may make vse therof towards any that shall not be so modestly, nor so reasonably minded, as you are. I finde therfore hir Maiesties proceedings to haue bin grounded vpon two principles. The one: That consciences are not to be forced, but to be wonne and reduced by the force of Truth with the ayde of time, and the vse of all good meanes of instruction and perswasion: The other, That causes of conscience, when they exceede their boundes, and grow to be matter of faction, loose their nature, and that soueraigne Princes ought distinctly to punish the practise in contempt, though coloured with the pretence of conscience and religion. According to these principles her Maiestie, at her comming to the Crowne vtterly disliking of the tyranny of Rome, which had vsed by terrour and rigour to seeke
commaundement of mens faiths and consciences, though as a prince of great wisdome & magnanimitie she suffred but the exercise of one religion, yet hir proceedings towards the Pa∣pists was with great lenitie, expecting the good effects which time might worke in them. And therfore hir Maiestie reuiued not the lawes made in the 28. and 35. of hir fathers raigne, wherby the oath of Su∣premacie might haue bin offered at the Kings pleasure to any subiect though hee kept his conscience neuer so modestly to himselfe, & the Refusall to take the same oath without farther circumstances, was made treason: But contrariwise, hir Ma∣iestie not liking to make windowes into mens harts and secret thoughts, except the aboundance of them did ouerflowe into ouerte and expresse acts or affirmations, tempered hir lawe so as it restraineth only manifest disobedience in impugning and impeaching aduisedly and malitiously hir Maiesties su∣preame power and maintaining and extolling a forraigne iurisdiction: And as for the oath, It was altered by hir Ma∣iestie into a more gratefull forme▪ the harshnes of the name, and appellation of Supreame head was remoued, & the penalty of the refusall therof turned onely into a disablement to take any promotion, or to exercise any charge; and yet that with li∣bertie of being reuested therin, if any man shall accept thereof during his life. But after, when Pius Quintus had excommunicated hir Maiestie, and the Bull of excommunication was published in London, wherby hir Maiestie was in sorte proscribed and that theruppon, as vppon a principall motiue or preparatiue fol∣lowed the rebellion in the North: yet because the ill hu∣mors of the realme were by that rebellion partly purged, and that she feared at that time no forraigne inuasion, and much lesse the attempt of any within the realme not backed by some potent succoure from without, she contented hirselfe to make a lawe against that speciall case of bringing in, or pub∣lishing of Bulls, or the like instruments: whereunto was added, a prohibition, vppon paine, not of treason, but of an inferior degree of punishment against the bringing in of the Agnus Dei, halowed bread, and such other merchandize of Rome,
as are well knowne not to be any essentiall partes of the Ro∣mane religion▪ but onely to be vsed in practie as loue-tokens to inchaunt and bewitch the peoples affections from their al∣legeance to their naturall soueraigne. In all other points hir Maiestie continued hir former lenitie. But when about the twentieth yeare of hir raigne shee had discouered in the King of Spaine an intention to inuade hir do∣minions, and that a principall point of the plotte was to pre∣pare a partie with in the realme that might adhere to the for∣reiner, and that the Seminaries began to blossome and to send forth dayly priests and professed men, who should, by vow taken at shrift, reconcile her subiects from their obedi∣ence, yea and binde many of them to attempt against her Ma∣iesties sacred person, and that by the poyson which they spred, the humors of most Papists were altered, and that they were no more Papists in conscience and of Softenes, but Papists in faction; then were there newe lawes made for the punishment of such as should submitte them selues to such reconcilements or renuntiations of obedience▪ And because it was a treason carried in the clowdes and in wonderfull se∣crecie, and came seldome to light, and that there was no pre∣sumption thereof so great as the recusancie to come to di∣uine seruice: Because it was sette downe by their decrees. That, To come to Church before reconcilement,   schisme: But; To come to Church after , was abso∣lutely hereticall and damnable. Therefore there were added Lawes containing punish∣ment pecuniarie against such Recusants, not to enforce consci∣ences, but to infeeble and impouerish the meanes of those of whom it rested indifferent and ambiguous, whether they were reconciled, or no. And when not withstanding all this prouision, this poyson was dispersed so secretly, as that there was no meanes to stay it but by restraining the Merchants that brought it in. Then lastly, was there added a Lawe whereby such sediti∣ous priests of the new erection were exiled; and those that were at that  within the land shipped ouer, and so com∣manded to keepe hence vpon paine of treason.
This hath beene the proceeding, though intermingled, not only with sundrie examples of hir Maiesties grace towards such as in hir wisdome she knewe to be Papists in Conscience, and not in Faction and Sigularitie; but also with an ordina∣rie mitigation towards the offenders in the highest degree conuicted by lawe: If they would but protest▪ that if in case this realme should be inuaded with a forreine armie by the Popes authoritie, for the Catholique cause, (as they terme it) they would take part with hir Maiestie, and not adhere to hir enemies. For the other part which haue bin offensiue to the State, though in other degree, which name themselues Reformers, and we commonly call Puritanes; this hath bin the proceeding towards them. A great while when they inueighed against such abuses in the Church, as, Pluralities, Nonresidence, & the like; their zeale was not condemned, only their violence was somtimes cen∣sured. When they refused the vse of some ceremonies and rites, as superstitious, they were tollerated with much coni∣uence, and gentlenes: Yea, when they called in question the Superioritie of Bishops, and pretended to bring a Democracie into the church; Yet, their Propositions were heard, con∣sidered, and by contrarie writing, debated, and discussed. Yet all this while, it was perceiued that their course was dan∣gerous, and very popular: as, because Papistrie was odious, therefore it was euer in their mouthes, that they sought to purge the Church from the reliques of Papistrie, a thing ac∣ceptable to the people, who loue euer to run from one ex∣treame, to an other. Because multitude of Rogues▪ and Pouertie were an eye∣soare, and dislike to euerie man, therefore they put it into the peoples head: That, if Discipline were planted, there should be no vagabonds, nor beggers (a thing very plausible.) and in like manner, they promised the people many other impos∣sible wonders of their Discipline. Besides, they opened the people a way to gouernment by their Consistorie, and Praesbyterie (a thing though in conse∣quēce no lesse praeiudiciall to the liberties of priuate men, then
to the soueraignty of Princes, yet in first shew very popular. Neuerthelesse all this (except it were in some few that ente∣red into extreame contempts) was borne, because they preten∣ded but in dutifull maner to make propositions and to leaue it to the prouidence of God, and the authoritie of the Magi∣strate. But now of late yeares, when there issued from them as it were a Colonie of those that affirmed the consent of the Ma∣gistrate was not to be attended, when vnder pretence of a confession, to auoide slaunders and imputations, they com∣bined themselues by classes and subscriptions, when they des∣cended into that vile & base meanes of defacing the gouern∣ment of the Church by rediculous Pasquls. When they be∣ganne to make many subiects in doubt to take an oath, which is one of the fundamentall parts of Iustice in this Land and in all places. When they beganne both to vaunt of the strength and number of their partizans, and followers, and to vse com∣munications that their cause would preuaile, though with vp∣roare and violence. Then it appeared to be no more zeale, no more conscience, but meere faction and diuision: And therefore though the State was compelled to hold somewhat a harder hand to restraine them then before; yet it was with as great moderation as the peace of the Church and State could permitte. And therefore Sir (to conclude) consider vprightly of these matters, and you shall see her Maiestie is no temporizer in religion; she buildes not religion vpon policie, but policie vp∣on religion; It is not the successe abroade, nor the change of seruants here at home can alter her, onely as the things them∣selues alter, so she applieth hir religious wisdome to correspond vnto them, still retaining the two rules before mentioned, in dealing tenderly with consciences, & yet in discouering Facti∣on from Conscience, & Softnes from Singularitie. Farewell. Your louing friend T. P.
THe other kinde of Softnesse in mortall behauiour, be∣cause it had no such eagernesse in it, as might it time vn∣quallifie the generall temperament, was measured aduisedly by his owne length and breadth: It had ceremony of an im∣plicite law and custome of a modest liberty. Singularity in Artes, because it needed no other penance but the world to haue knowledge of it, to be the signe of a too soone mellowed wit, to be as soone rotten, was therefore li∣med with no other circumuention. Ambition in Artes, such as tended to induce the heresie of religion, suffered vnder the same letter of the law with it: it was onely the modesty of the law-giuer not to prohibite that which her charitie denied her to suspect, as an ambition so in∣finite and beyond extreames, as is Atheisme, which in the most presumption broake but out in positions of Philoso∣phie, and that for disputations cause, or so. Your Singularity of Fashion, was such an vncertaine fel∣low, that no law, nor good opinion could euer take hold of him. Next, your Malecontent exprest, had leaue to walke the great conduite court of the world, till hee wanted breath to giue curses their significant found, vnlesse it chanced the wan∣tons to wash out the face-making flie stingde giddinesse be∣fore his cew. Lastly, as I cannot excuse Singularity of custome better then by ascribing it to the iniquitie of the times past so. I will not wish it worse then to be so reformed in times to come, that Proteus may haue but one certaine shape, and plumpe Lya one Ivie bush. Euen here at the habite of Anticustome, thus farre crept in vpon seeming good and lawfull inducements, was the most ex∣tensure of Security, her Maiestie euen now in health, and euen now shee sickened when her fulnesse had all these fortunate moles vpon it, when, Softnesse had safety to liue out of vse. when, Religion had time to be factious. when, Artes had straines of affectation. and when, Wit was ambitious of Singularity.
All which are the manifest signes of a full and fortunate Weale. Quest. I belieue you haue omitted one and the chiefe kinde of a habite of Security: Inoculate Security: that which neuer lookes behinde him: neuer studies to futuritie, vnlesse you implide it in Softnesse of Custome? Ans. I did so, as it was improuidence of requisite, and no otherwise: But it seemes you meane Security Inoculate to the succession, which is as farre from being Softnesse in duty, that it is rather the qualitie of  in the heart of obedience, whereby a man is so securely and wholy dedicated to the pre∣sent scepter, that he lend no part of this dutie to the next suc∣cession. For the greatest duty which wee owe to succession, next prayer, is, to instruct, ourselues modestly in his title, for our confirmation and assurance, that our liues, laide downe in his cause, and, when his time shall require, are a sacrifice: and the bloud otherwise, spent otherwise: The next is, if God haue endued him with singular gifts, to set them before vs for our comfort. And whatsoeuer is more then this is super∣arrogation of workes, which oftentimes want their faith. I speake not this, to accuse any such, but to excuse the most. Or rather, it seemes you cast out this baite, to catch an vn∣aduised answere, à contrarie, as if you would tendetly leade me to say, that among a people of fufill and insinuating behauior there all wayes hath beene, and euer will be, transposition of duty, while there is possibility of change. I thinke I may speake it generally, reseruing safely my faith of the present excepted state. All imminence of change, or age suspected, Yeelds cold affectious, awefulnesse neglected, And euery scepters yeares weares out his gold: But this of Iames wrought out of purest mold. To whose cleere radiance being so diuine, All subiects eyes looke forward,  behinde, And wish we may enioy those beames of his, While Time hath when to be, or Being is. Your last question hath discontinued me longer from Eng∣lands
most softe of Securitie, thn I purposed. But I hope all is well till wee come euer heere where hir Maiestie sicke∣ned. The Distractions during hir Maiesties sicknes. THe first newes the  had of hir sicknesse came from  by one Oliuer Sharke a sculler & was deliuered with other certain pr∣uat accordingly▪ Before this newes was stale came a taile of fresh sammon to countermand it with other certaine newes of a something nothing, and a priest that was neither dead nor aliue, but sus∣pended betwixt both. But the meate that this newes carried in the mouth of it, hauing taken winde in the seasoning was solde two dayes after at the Bridge-house in Southwarke for little or nothing. The appetite of the vulgar was not so queasie but it would rather call againe for the first dish, than turne gordge to the tainte of the latter; and now againe hir Maiesties sickenesse was altogether in their priuate cuppes: for as yet it was but priuate, and that onely in the Citie till anon after, Tweedle the Tabrer chanc'd to carry it piping hote into the Country, and what marvellous Distractions it wrought in both, I shall briefely discourse vnto you. Yet the newes past but betwixt neighbours and familiars, onely for intertainement of time and exercise of secrecie, or so. The first newes only prepared them to belieue the second af∣firmations, whereof the next tidings presently possest them: for indeede, the vulgare faith is all possession; and now there wanted nothing to transport and distract them, but the many differing circumstances of the oft repeated newes. Quest. And could that be wanting in a world so ambitious of innouation? Were there none that would lend a hand to vnhinge the stalenesse of it with the important circumstances that should attend this sicknes?
Ans. were either such as to whom their present discontentment, either the hope of Reuenge or Aduancement made it seeme stale. These only laboured to draw the vulgar into distraction knowing them to be of such facilitie therin, that they would dissolue againe in the feare of eruption. And now, when this third dayes asseueration to the former with all the circumstan∣ces that midnights aduise could adde vnto i had full effect in them, they were distracted. The poorer sorte, lest their securitie and fashion of living should be disturbed by the eruption. The richer sorte, lest the eruption should bring a generall embargo of trafique abroad▪ and domestical credits or debts depending in other mens hands at . Quest. Then, if their distractions could reserue to feare and that feare recouer some parte of it selfe into the studie of preuention. Let me knowe how farre it could reach his meanes at such a time, or whether by striuing to be freed it was not more engaged? Ans. Of these two the first onely was lost in the act of study. The other being loath to out-steppe the sure and slow modestie of his discretion embraced onely the next meanes which offered themselues to his aduise: That was to proceede lawfully while time yet serued in quest of debts at home, and to dispatch an expeditious summons to factors abroad. This intendment of lawefull quest put hope of reuenge vp∣on creditors, for at such a time a man shall finde none so great an enimie as his debitor, to a farther taske, for his owne securi∣tie, which would not be better preserued than by abating the edge of iustice with a constant report of her Maiesties death. This was presently snacht of maney. The more beleeued, by how much the more was the nicenes had of it: And the rather, because the voyce of hir sickenesse had now depended among them three or foure dayes at least. For it is not the intention or remission of a thing already granted, but the degrees of time, wherein it depends per∣swades the vulgar beliefe in extreames. This opinion of the commons, especially those of the Citie, was as, the next dayes busines gaue occasion, in Guildhall, in sollide sentence
re-enforced and had, no doubt, giuen way to the  in a reuerence of the speaker but for suggestion of Desire of inno∣uation, who still tooke vp their parts of facilitie as they lay for his vse and imployments, of which none was so fitte in this place as his suspition ouer greatnesse and nobilitie vppon some superficiall surmizes, which turned his speech into a greater argument of their former presumption, so that here I may well say with the poet. —Agitatas vrere & vidi nullo conte mari. The which our English Ouid hath thus translated, The more I waue this brand of fire about, The more it burnes, fire let alone goes out. And though it were in their presumption already, to be∣leeue the reporte of her death, yet feare, and the habite of obe∣dience vnder a long establisht and ciuill gouernment com∣maunded their humilitie, not to publish it; till when, the infe∣rior officer of iustice, though hee made some scruple (as was craftily put vnto him) to do the most that the vertue of his of∣fice would beare, yet he would still be foyling at transgression, as occasion serued, and till then the creditor durst be so valiant as to acknowledge, yea and to challenge his debtor. My selfe knew a Mercer of the spirit in those dayes to send his wife with the booke to a right Honourable, whose chance it being to ouertake me vpon my way, bespake me for one of his followers, that had serued him seauen yeares to know his   the order, to dispose her, where she might accost his   most conueniently, excepting onely his bed∣cher, for to haue audience there, her author sayes is a note of  great popularitie; to auoide which, it is his custome to be attended in the drawing chamber, which mee thinkes should be a note more then woman-modesty would beare: and of this, too much for the valour of the creditor, while she was dead in their whisperings. Hitherto the vulgar descerning no alteration in the me∣thod of the world, such as vses to followe the death of princes, and no breath vsed to mainteine the fire of beliefe by the sus∣pected endeuor of suppressing it, grew to be so remisse in the
delay, that his whilome impatience became a thing like a rea∣sonable creature, so like, that shortly the commaundement of certaine the  phisitions to be sent to Court, made them once more affable, so affable, that he could haue endured the discourse of the measure of hir diet, the manner of hir rest, or the nature of hir sicknes with some few breathings betwixt: whereby it appeares hetherto, yea vnto the end: The habite of a ciuil gouernment had his challenge in them entire, and that hetherto the disease of stalenesse lay soft in his owne bo∣some. Qu. Me thinkes a Habite at such a time as this was, could not so wholy retaine them, without the better and much more then ordinary inuigilance of office? Ans. Sir, I make Habite of obedience, the nature of his tenure, and the present circumstances of the time, his conditi∣ons with the gouernment; So that, these times being so in∣certaine and quicke in their circumstances, that they could not be measured with conditions, I thinke I may without detra∣ction from office attribute the continence of them to Habite, of obedience chiefly. Once more laying aparte all surmises, it was in cleere eloquence (prouided it were from the mouth of their owne Oratour) and in gentle meanes, though not to giue their affections peace, yet to compresse them from breaking out into looser speaking, which is alwayes the certaine Mes∣sage of mutinie. Quest. As if the priuate example of punishment had, were not rather to be vsed at such times, then gentle meanes to the vulgar, in whom admiration and feare of Iustice haue such simpathie and relatiue suffering. An. It were in composed times; but not here: for knowe. This vulgar's like a skaine of many threds Running into a rownd and looser liste, It rauels, and it opens ere ye wiste. Plucke at the single threds with violence, It puckers to a knotty consequence: When with a gentle shaking of the The hardest knots vnt wine themselues againe. Yea the very rage of humilitie, though it be most violent,
and dangerous: Yet it is sooner alliciated by ceremony than compelled by vertue of office. Th'extreamest vassallage enlarg'd acquires The most insatiate and licentious head Whose giddinesse like to a drunken man Is sooner pacified than chastized. It would be pacified in the present fury, and afterwards in his time chastizement would be taken of the first and chiefe commencers therof: But in this place they could not be so loose of obedience for the reasons before going. Anon: For all this, I know not vpon what admonition of circumstances, there chancing certaine munition to be carried through the Citty to the Court, and other carriages retriued from thence to the Towre; the vulgar began to finde fault with his owne flexibilitie of beliefe, vowing no longer to suffer his eares to be taken vp with any other perswasion but that of her death, nor to deferre any farther his instance ta∣king from the Court, but to be presently appointed vpon his double guardes. And here Distraction had his ancient cogni∣sance of Bilbo: passant, and Lanthorne and candlelight pen∣dant. And euen here it rusht into the suspition of apparant succession approaching. Quest. Then, the out-breaking was not till now? because nothing could diuide them so much as the question thereof? Answ. Nor yet: for it was a question, not in faith; but in workes; or rather ceremony of knowledge thereof had, to which it had beene so long enawde, that it was in their dispo∣sition, and nature to feare to speake it before the very Aiax in the painted cloth. It was no violent sweat in their affections to attend the prouidence of God, the goodnesse of the houre, and the due consent of the Nobilitie. These former signes of Eruption to be suspected, at least did here dead, the quicknes of all sale and commerce. So that the trades man and the man of science mercenable gaue that time to hearing & retailing of newes which belongd hereto∣fore to the care of his charge. Why? there was such pursuite after newes, that whole houses stood as naked as Newington buttes, and no body to giue a man a reasonable answere at
doore but my True and Naturall Bilbo: which I could haue best allowed, if it had beene at a Constables doore, for it must needes be there most safe: because the stockes neuer stand farre off: And both together are like a cuppe of good wine at the Counter gate in the Powltry where a good fellow dares not come to commend it, or rather like a prouost Marshall at a Misers feast, where beggers dare not attend it. Ouer the common application of these saide signes, came his degrees of time, which by this, brought Suspition into Ex∣pectation of change; after which Discontentment thirsted, Prisons yawnde, the skirts of the Suburbs longde, and Hope of Reuenge did inuocate, yet all was spe macra (as Persuis speakes) for still Iustice was foyling as occasion serude. Occasion serude this day the next before her death, to put into safe custodie your onely honest Dicke termde Captaine, for making fencers breakefasts as hee was passing vpon his way to take instruction from some Coopers boy where the Citties prouision was stored, or such like businesse of importe, I gesse for caution to such as it concernes to be more carefull, whom they imploy in the lodging thereof. Notwithstanding, my Captaines late mischance this very same day, such as had smoakte out the memory of them in Bankeside tappehouses and Bartholmew boothes, were seene a∣broad at high noone; all, in expectation of executions or im∣ployments at least. Quest. You shall doe well to make the description of the day somewhat more cinct then the subiect ministers vnto you, and to close it vp with the setting of the fairest star in the far∣thest West: Euen with the Eues euening to her death▪ In which, if there be familiaritie betwixt Heauens & Mortalitie, I should especially looke for manifestation therof by such signes whose reasons stand without the mystery of your Philosophie? Answ. Besides, that I am so farre from being scrupulous therein, that onely excepting against some absurdities founded vpon it, I repute it a necessary instrument of prouidence I as∣sure you that such signes of promotion to come from the North, askt the astonishment of this frailtie, and these Organs affixt vnto them.
This night, I know not by what vnknowne familiarity; a∣mazement vsurpt vpon all sences, and more then wonted weight sate vpon all eyes. This night, the trauailer as aduised vpon some gaine-giuing, reposde himselfe before his houre, and the watchman, whom the businesse of the night had tooke vp, seemed to walke his round in some vnfrequented place, so full of sollitude was that night, labouring of that consummati∣on, whereof this next morning was deliuered: when euery starre hastened to be quencht in his owne dew. Her liues familiar starre did shoote and fall, The fairest one the heauens were grac't withall. Quest. What could now obsist (her death being granted) why, betweene it and the Succession proclaymed, Humilitie should not put off his habite of awefulnesse, and like a full eyde faulcon take impatience of handing? Why should not this in∣termission complaine her old agreemences? Or rather, why should it not actuate whatsoeuer the former times had tooke to hart? Answ. Because the newes thereof had the same wing with the best expedition of publishing the Succession. Or say, the present ruines of Maiestie, detaining yet the Pieres conscript in the spectacle, had giuen the speaking message of her death the first statte, and preoccupation of eares, yet it being long since registred in the vulgar faith, could not now with all his comment of circumstances take off the foreskinne which had euen ouergrowne the memory of her: for his faith was long since made so yeelding vnto it, that no new force, or concussi∣on of lowde reporte, but onely lenitiue meanes could giue quickenes to the griefe of it, being so much stupefied & blun∣ted with depending, as the sense of his expectation of change with vse, now nothing but euident romage, and the inuersion of the generall methode could be violent in their affections; so much their feare was ouerlaide with delay. For take notice, that this vulgar is not to be preparde to any thing by any, but by Kingly power: It is an extemporall creature, and certaine in nothing but his habite. While Englands Maiestie was very early this morning a∣bout to be transposed, did discontentment fretting vppon
protraction resolue at length, because the Sere of the Commons according to the ayres subtiltie would not take to be deliberately kindled into rage to lift vp his burthen vppon his owne shoulders, and to set the first hand that should euen dislocate this stale world locallie; so eagerly it distasted him, promising to him selfe an assurance of buyng backe their du∣ties by the offered prey into which his facinorous example should not faile to engage them; When to secure themselues for that offence, No treason is too darke to be commenc't. And now as the hand of Discontentment was vp-lifted, when Reuenge lookt big vpon his creditor, and the rich man feared to carry his throate about him. The blessednesse of the houre, admonisht by signes from heauen, and consciences on earth to proclaime King Iames of England the first, composde as sodainely, as sollidly euen all the Distractions of our scaene: At which did Discontentment giue this desperate farewell to all his hopes. The Newes is good thus, and good otherwise: What needes he feare to fall ne'r hopes to rise? Quest. Sir now you haue digested the fractions of those dayes remotion so compendiously as these few, the appertment words and the patience of your hearer could beare, I desire you before you speake of the Scottish Englishing which I take to be the maine drift of your exercise, to offer by the way at her exequies, who was sometimes the Fire, the Numbers, the Genius, the any thing, Eliza of poesie, the same, sometimes. Musa potens musis, dijs dea dia deabus, Angelica Angelicis, Nimpha{que} chorà Choris. Answ. Because I would haue you thinke you cannot doe me more acceptable imposition, you shall receiue it at once in these few lines following. The Offering. LIttle wonder thou shouldst die, Though thy meanes were great in flying: Greatnesse shall I tell thee why, Longest lifed is longest dying,
And if both at once began, Who would wonder at thee than? Nothing strange to be sufficed, After Kingdomes left behinde thee, And so much by thee demized With this little to confine thee, For thy story ne're makes mention, Appetence had more Intention, Tell thou to others that their ends must haue, For all their Kingdomes but one little graue. Uixit atqúe moritura Eliza. Quest. IS this all she shall haue? Why I expected a vollume of your Melpomene bound vp in the very vampe of hir buskine with prety passionate speeches in a new streine, and an inuocation that should haue drawne drie the very hoofes of your flying horse in Friday-streete; as thus. Admetus dairie maide come feede thy Neame, Come bring Apollo curds and clowted creame. But indeede, indeede, this is all in all, for true griefe would not be commended for action, it is so much in suffering: It would be ceremonious, not affected? Answ. At least Sir I am sure, there is no more sinceritie in these few lines, then I am able to quote vppon a masse of her flatterers: For who would beleeue it? That hee which was wont to set a worlds distinction betwixt her and mortahtie, should now come after, and say she went the way of all flesh? Or, is it possible? That the same Anti-Corbulo that hath so often prayed, he might neuer liue to see that day should be so good to his Phisition now? I see the reason of it, the quench't fire made the old wife giue o're her tale; and there she lost it.
The Scottish Englishing. Question. NOw you haue broght me to the restitution of the times harmony, I thinke it not amis to close vp your discourse with the Scot∣tish Englishing, or the vniting of both Na∣tions, that first, implying his Maiesties pre∣rogatiue therein, in his title deriued from Henry the third: you come briefly to the discussing of the inherence vppon these two questions. The first, whether there be an aptnesse in these two to be reconciled and made one? The second, whether be∣ing now made one, there may be meanes vsed to preserue that consent and vnitie euerlastingly? The first question is onely of their mutuall accommodation thereunto? The second que∣stion is onely of secondary meanes, whether there be such as might vphold in all & like contentment, the Liberties, Repu∣tations, and Benefit of both? Besides that I confesse, we ought in duty to obserue his Maiesties decrees whatsoeuer, prouided in that behalfe without farther studie to our satisfaction. Of these two in the second place, and at the first sight somewhat be spoken wih a breath soaring in a midle region, neither deprest to the earth of your selfe extraduced, neither ascending to paint the face of the times best fauorites auro oua∣to with flattery? Answ. In the first place that I may onely differ in mine authoritie from the rest of my countrie men, giue mee leaue to deriue his Maiestie by the history of the Royall house of England, written in Italian by Petruccius Vbaldine Cyttadine of Florence for the indifferencie of his Nation, and the reuerence of his testimony, who liued lately among vs, translated by his owne Manuscript, and briefly abridged, as concerning our purpose onely, as followeth. The deuision of the Koyall house of England had his originall from the sonnes of Henry the third, Edward and Edmund: It hath beene supposed by some that Ed∣mund
was the elder, and being crooked, Edward was preferred the easier before him, which suggestion Henry the fourth vsed to colour his vsurpation of the Crowne vpon Richard the se∣cond. This faction after it burst out, caused bloody warres in England, either house prosecuting the other to the destruction of them both; the possession of the Crowne remaining to ei∣ther according to their force, the fortune and fauor of the time. This controuersie after God had made vse therein to mani∣fest his iust punishment of Edward the fourth in his children, for his cruelty towards Henry the sixt, and Edward his sonne, together with some periuries that the histories impose vpon him and his vnnaturall dealing towards his brother Clarence, was by the plotte of Morton Bishop of Elie taken away in the performance of that oath which he tooke of Henry of Richmond of the house of Lancaster, to marry with Elizabeth the sole heire of the contrary house, after the tyrant Richard slaine in battaile. Of this Henry the seauenth came Henry the eight with his sisters, the eldest of which being named Margaret, King Hen∣ry the seauenth in his spirit of prophecie, wherein he had a pe∣culiar potencie (as the history of his dying makes mention) and in his prouidence of reducing the two Kingdomes of England and Scotland into one entire Monarchie, as his owne hand wri∣ting left behinde him can sufficiently testifie, did match with the Scepter of Scotland, from whence both by father and mo∣ther after the issue of Henry the eight, now extinct is deriued King Iames of both Kingdomes the immediate successor: who for the constancie of his fauours, his inappetence of new pur∣chase, and his care of husbanding the meanes of all his Domi∣nions for their owne good and preseruation, is liuely modeled by his grandfather Henry the seauenth, whose example Vbaldine commendeth to his successours for the best forme of admini∣string the Commonwealth abroad, and the houshold at home: In his dayes the Nobilitie wonted not to procure accesse through inferiour aduocation, nor the Fabij to haue their cause solicited by Vinius bondman, or Nimphidius verlottes, the Commons were yet inuited to contributions, but came freely, nor the Exchequer was euer better stored with the pro∣per
reuenew, and the exhibition of those offices which be∣longing thereunto, were confer'd vpon the ministers which should execuse them with his owne immediate hand, the neg∣lect whereof hath beene the cause of all the abuses of office in this land, when his patent must come through so many aduo∣cating hands. Quest. Now you haue sufficiently implide in the title his prerogatiue of vniting these two Kingdomes, warranted and instanced both out of holy writ, and traditionall reporte of Scepters long since translated with their whole tribes and fa∣milies, I desire you to come to the question of their aptnesse thereunto in the second place? Answ. To prooue an Aptnesse in the Scot to incorporate with the English, let me tell you what kinde of Aptnesse is re∣quired in this place. For Aptnesse of agreeing is either in Sub∣stance or Beautie. And because there is a generall Aptnesse, or an Aptnesse in Substance, euen in the Scithian to incorporate with any the most ciuill nation, that is, hauing in his reasonable soule matter malleable therunto, without farther immoration vpon it, I lay the present proofe in Aptnesse of the Beautie of their Maners, Lawes, and Language. Of which the Beautie is to be tried and examined by these his two Trialls, Delight and Similitude. That his maners haue complacence & similitude of Beauty with ours of the English in religious maners it appeares. It be∣ing only conformable with the English. Both which the other world remooued aparte makes seeme one Cittie vpon a hill. In conuersation he delights vs the more by how much the liuelier he onely expresseth our endeuors, and our principles whereby there is discerned a mutuall Aptnesse, and inclinati∣on in both, owing our duties to the same Scepter to become one entire, and vndistinct Monarchie. Of Lawes, (Law ye fir) Iustine sayes there is no difference so long as they agree in the fundamentall parts, being executed Per eos Legis peritos qui sunt honesti, studiosi iustitia, non anari, &c. It is some thing in latine, which I can not translate into English I assure you sir.
Of Language because the difference is but this, that the English is like a Denshire carsie after fulling set out with all the arte of draperie to giue it grace and glosse. And the Scottish vnstarcht with inkehorne, stage suiting conscisenesse It can not choose but delight the English Orator for firm∣nesse and soliditie, hauing much cleanenesse and puritie in the written letter, The Poet for descant vppon the first eliments of his naturall phrasing; and both for very Aptnes and consimilitie of sentence. Now for the preseruing of this vnion the secondarie meanes which occurre are either, Free meanes, or Obligatory and lesse free. The free meanes are these, Election and Confidence. First by Election we shine in humanitie to select his strange∣nesse into fellowship of exercising and businessing: wherein; by desiring him well we shall duly erogate the like from him. The next is to be confident in onr election when wee excercise or businesse with him, in freenesse of spirite apertly; not curiously with obseruing into him: wherby we shall chal∣lenge to discouer in his generous expansure (I speak of their gentry chiefly) much cause of delight in our choice, by the plentifull accommodation of his parts in conuerse. I call these Free meanes because they proceed only of libe∣berall education & nobilitie in nature, which are by these two signes to be distinguished from such soules as are conditions, slaues. The Obligatorie or lesser liberall meanes, next vnder the Lawes, are in Conditions of Commercement, Seales of marriage, and Bonds of duty. First, in Commercement, when our thrift is implied and promised to ourbusinesse with him (as no dubt but it carrieth such profite with it as shall vphold the benefite of either in all and like contentment. Secondly in Marriage, which being now sealed betwixt the sons and daughters, of either is obligatory in nature after con∣summation, and before in Couenant for the most part. If o∣therwise, it is a free meanes: Howsoeuer, it makes no lesse alike the liberties and reputations of either than Election and Con∣fidence
in the st converse that may be. Wherefore I commend it to both hauing such pregnant aptnes vpon their complexions and in then dispositions there∣vnto for the best meanes of incorporating and preseruing this vnion euerlastingly. Lastly, in Duty, and to this we are whipt & led by the Ani∣mall motion of like for like, in Liberties in Reputations, and in Benefite: where there is no difference (if so please his Ma∣iestie) of Franchisement; none of Heraldry, nor yet of Marte; both being within the same Ocean both one Monarchie, and one Citty vpon a hill, without confusion of Manners, Lawes or Language. Of this vnion, and consent: to conclude with this small taste of the Times felicitie, I thinke it no giddie Rapture in mee to diuine. May both swell in one maine, and neither fall: That Sea will stretch to Romes high Capitall. FINIS.
To the vnparaleld blesst disposition The Lady Elizabeth Bridges. THat thou art faire, because thou would'st not know it, My Verse shall be no flattering glasse to show it. Th' art free from conflicts with the blood of sense: Experience too, bids that doubt space expence. Then, where is't I am deteined? Chaste , selfe owning beauteous, Be benign as we are dueteous; Reede our Line, and Loue vnfeined. T. P. To the noble Gentleman, Sir Thomas Kneuet. THis would thy Mistris once bespeake thy merite, Not with any breath of liver: Had I a child that challeng'd to inherite More then Scepter holds togither. Euen such blesst issue might aswell be▪seeme Brought vp by Kneuet, as borne of a Queene. And thus, vnto thy Censure now speake I, (Humbler affectation suiting.) The fayrest issue of our nurserie, Ift deserue that names reputing, Thinkes greater fame than this cannot succeede it, The wisest Kneuet doth vouchsafe to reed it. T. P.
To the Right Worshipfull Sir Edward Dyer. THis which I bring thee is no Ilias Writ in Veratrum drunken giddinesse: Yet in the stufffings of our legends masse, It is not to conceite in most recesse, Nor honours it with the most humble knee, Though it's vnsinewed to fall vnder thee. T. P.
