23135 99852980 18337
A GEOGRAPHI∣CALL AND AN∣thologicall description of all the Empires and Kingdomes, both of Continent and Ilands in this ter∣restriall Globe. Relating their scituations, manners, Cu∣stomes, Prouinces, and Go∣uernements. Arsiam naturam superat, nam pendere Terra, Quam facit haec facit hic pictor habere pedes. printer's device of Thomas Creede, featuring a griffon seated on a stone or book, resting on a ball or globe with wings (McKerrow 339) LONDON Printed by T. C. for Simon VVaterson, dwelling at the Signe of the Crowne in Paules Church∣yard. 1607.
In insequeus Geographium opus Decastichon. QƲid perigrinandi prodest tot adire labores. Dum quod vbi{que} petis possis habere domi? Quae mare, quae tellus, quae tanta pericula monstrant, Haec vno obtatu parvula charta docet. Non hîc Scylla vorax, aut formidanda Caribdis. Temperat has placidas mitior auster aquas. Hic tu cum cernernas polyphemon in antro. Non aper hic fertat dente vel vnque Leo. Ergo quid vlterius satagis? Habet omnia habentem Qui mundum, mundus quod tenet, ille tenet. Io: Prideaux. FLevit Alexander cum plures audijt orbes, Tu potius plures non Iore flere potes. Ille dolens vnum quod non superaverit, omnes Armis desperat viuere posse suis. Tam bene tu veterem cum iam descripseris orbem Nunc cupias alium posse videre novum. Ne doleas: nam si non primus sufficit orbis Quo tua se saturet Musa, secundus erit. Interea Safforte tuum (quo pinxeris orbem) Stabit forte (vetus dum cadet orbis) opus. Casparus Tomannus.
NOn capiunt muscas, nec sepe minutis, Ingentes animi rebus adesse solent. Audaces fortuna invat, timor arguit autem, Degeneres animos: hoc tua caepta sonant, Cui genus antiqnum iuvenis, quem terra nec vndae, Nee vasti spatium terruit oceani. Quae tu tam dextre pinxisti cuncta: referre Et genus, & proaves vt videare tuos. Ergo age, iam notus, si nox tibi sufficit orbis, Ignotos adeas inipiger Antipodes. Iohannes Glanuillae.
TO THE RIGHT Honourable, admired of men, and myrrour of women, the Lady Elizabeth Russel Dowager, my worthy Lady and Mistresse. RIght Honourable, It may seeme strange to your learned censure, to finde him the Author of a booke, which so lately was your vn∣worthy Page: But the seedes then sowne were such, and their manuring sithens of that qualitie, that the ground had been too barren, if no fruit had followed. Little (God knowes) it is, and that very vntimely, vnable to endure the least blast of our moderne Critickes; were it not fauourably sheltered by your Hono∣rable Patronage; whose rare learning & vertues, the world rather honoureth, then imitateth; my selfe am fitter to admire, then expresse. The very conceit whereof, heartened mee to circuit the whole earth, in it to finde something to present
your Honour. Si natura nigat facit indignatio versū Sat. 1. Meere chafing, made Iuuenall a Po∣et, and me a Geographer: an ardent contention to acknowledge my dutie which sufficiently to performe, I esteeme my selfe too vnworthy, and the whole world too little. The thing herein I aime at, is your benigne acceptance, in confidēce whereof, I haue presumed so farre; which secon∣ding in this your manifold former fauours, my hopes are attained, and my selfe bound, Your Honours in all seruice and dutie to be commaunded. Rob. Stafforde.
To the Reader. COurteous Reader (for so I suppose thee to be, vntil I find thee contrary) thou art little beholding to me for this Geographical dis∣course, as containing little in it worth thy perusing, and that which it is, thou hast a∣gainst my will. Hardly I thinke I shall satis∣fie thee, who neuer in this kinde could satis∣fie my selfe: yet thus farre importunity hath forced mee, and whatsoeuer thou findest, is more then my selfe intended, or thou couldest of me expect. A poore Suruey here thou hast, not of my trauels but reading: If sometime therefore errone∣ous, I patronize it not, but relate it. So far thou mayest beleeue me, that what my selfe beleeue not, I inuented not, but tooke out of others. The Methode I had from my Tutor, and so far forth the rest, that I account it but the gleanings of his plentifull Haruest. The rather to be allowed (as I take it) because it admit∣teth without maime the cancelling of a fiction, and the inter∣serting of any notable thing omitted. If thy profit by it coun∣teruaile my paines, thou hast somewhat: if otherwise, the brief∣nesse of it cannot loose thee much time. They which haue no leisure to seeke farther, may take this for an insight: others may fetch a great deale more from thē of whom I had this, to whose riper iudgements I trust my youth may excuse mee, when the worke cannot. As for the Punies of mine owne ranke, Carpere vel noli nostra vel ede tua: Martial. Shall serue for a counterblast. And so I commend this descrip∣tion of the world, to the world: and thy selfe and it to the Crea∣tor of both. Not determining to trouble thee any more for ought I know, and therefore rest, Thine as thou vsest me, R. Staff.
To the Author. WHen Caesar sitting in Imperiall Robe, was Soueraign Lord of th' earth cōmanding Rome, He sent to measure this terrestriall Globe, To see how much was left to ouercome. Belike his Kingdomes Vice-Royes were too slacke, In due performance of this weighty taske, Or he some good Geographers did lacke, That might in briefe resolue what he did aske. Whilst he intended all the world to gaine, He in the Senate house was stabd to death. A little Vrne his ashes did containe, Whose mind was not content with halfe the earth: Hadst thou (deare friend) liu'd in this Monarkes dayes, And rendred vp this booke vnto his hands, He would haue crown'd thee with tryumphall Bayes, Or made thee ruler of some forreine lands: For this small booke (yet great in worth) doth show All that which mighty Caesar crau'd to know. In idem opus Carmen Encomiasticon. VT Microcosmus Homo est simulachrum Regis Olympi, Sic Maiore minor pulchrior orbe foret. Factus erat Magnus Mundi ratione Minoris, Scire licet patulo quicquid in orbe latet. O Tu qui externas ignarus tendis ad Oras, Hunc discas librum mira legenao loqui. Hic mores hominum graphicè depingit, & Ʋrbes, Et quicquia magnum sub lone Caesar habet. Hîc, campos, stuutos, montes, Capitolia turres, Structa{que} Mygdonio marmore tecta, legas. Hîc fractos Regum tumulos, stratos{que} Colossos, Rupta{que} Montiuagae Templa Sacrata Deae. Hîc, vbi Troia fuit, magnae & Carthaginis arces, Quae{que} erat armipotens Roma vetusta scias, Terra Arabum foelix, vbi Phaenix nascitur vnus, Plus foelix, multos terra Britanna tulit. Haec multos parit ingento, Gento{que} potentes, Parua sed eximij: Insula culta viris. Inter quos semper meus est memoranous amicus, Qui dulce, & nobis vtile texit opus. Tho. Rogers.
A GEOGRAPHI∣CALL AND ANTHOLO∣gicall description of the whole World. CHAP. I. DE GEOGRAPHIA. 1 GEographie is an Imitation of the pic∣ture Definition. of the whole earth, with those thinges which are annexed there∣vnto. Ptolm. Lib. 1. Cap. 1. Therefore it comprehendeth vn∣der it Chorographie, the description of a Region, Hydrographie, the discription of waters, Topographie, the description of a place, and the like. 2 The Subiect of Geographie, is this Terrestriall Subiect. Globe, composed of earth and water, so far forth as the parts of it, haue a diuerse scituation, as well in re∣spect of the heauens, as one towards another. Magi∣nus. pag. 3. 3 Concerning the Terrestriall Globe in respect of the Heauens, two things are dilligently to be ob∣serued, Longitude and Latitude of places. 4 The Longitude of a place, is a distance inter∣cepted betweene the first Meridian, which passeth Longitude. through the Canarie Ilands, and the Meridian of the
place, which Longitude is alwayes to be measured from West vnto East in the degrees of the Aequator. The reason is, because all Meridiās cut the Aequator. 5 The Latitude of a place, is a distance intercep∣ted Latitude. betweene the Aequator, and any place North or South from it, which to finde out, turne the place in the Globe, vntill it come directly vnder the brazen Meridian, then numbring in the brazen Meridian, how many degrees be betwixt the Aequator and the place, it shewes the Latitude directly. Therefore the Longitude and Latitude beeing knowne of a place, it is easie to finde it in any globe; and on the contrarie, if you see the place first in the globe, by turning it vnder the brazen meridian, both the Longitude and Latitude is knowne. 6 Concerning the Terrestriall Globe, in regard of his partes one vnto the other, it is diuided into Sea, and Land. 7 The Sea or Ocean, is a huge water compassing about this whole Vniuerse, whose partes passing by Sea. many particular places; are called by sundrie & par∣ticular names, as Mare Britanicum, à Britania, Mare Mediterraneum: quia mediūinter duas terras, africae & Europae. Mare Atlanticum of the great moūtain Atlas. 8 In the Sea, are to bee considered three things: Creekes, Straights, and Hauens. 9 A Creeke is a place where the Sea doth runne Sinus. any where into the bosome of the earth: And such are Sinus Arabicus, or the redde Sea: Sinus Persicus, or Mare Balserum, Sinus Adriaticus, or the Gulfe of Venice. 10 Fretum, is a narrowe straight, or Arme of the Sea, passing betwixt two Lands, so called a Fremitu. Fretum.
Whereof the chiefe are, Fretum Gaditaneum, or the straights of Gibraltar, Fretum Magellanicum, or the straights of Magellane: Fretum Nassouicum, or the North Straights. 11 A Hauen is a litle Creeke or entrance into the Portes. maine Ocean, where shippes are alwayes rested and harbored. 12 The Earth, as may be seene in all Geographi∣call Earth. Maps and tables, is described and paynted forth with huge Mountaines, great Woods, faire Riuers, and many famous Cities: the circuit of it, is 21600. miles, and (as some write,) if a footman had a path∣way round about the World, hee might goe it in 900. dayes. Magiuus. 13 In the Earth are to be considered & obserued, two things, the Ilands, and the Continent. 14 An Iland, (quasi, eye of land,) is compast round Iland. about with the Sea, as Britania, Hybernia, Sardinia, &c: Of the Latins it is called Insula, quasi in Salo. 15 A Continent is a great quantitie of land not di∣uided Continent. by waters, where many Kingdomes and Em∣pires are lincked and ioyned together. As Spaine, France, Germany. &c. 16 In both Ilands and Continent, three things are to be noted: Istmus, Peninsula, & Promontorium. 17 An Istmus or Chersonesus is a narrow or straight Istmus. land between two Seas. Of which, the most famous are Istmus Corinthiacus, and Istmus Cymbricus, both in Europe. 18 Peninsula (quasi pene Insula) is a part of the con∣tinent, euery where inuironed with the Sea, vnlesse Penin∣sula. it be where it is tyed vnto the firme land, with a little
Istmus. The most farre fam'de of which are, whole Africa, Scandia, Taurica Chersonesus, Pelloponesus or Morea, and Peruana in America. 19 A Promontorie, is a high Mountaine, which Promōtory bendeth it selfe into the Sea, the extreame or end of which, is called a Cape. Of which, the most known are the Cape of good Hope, in Africa: the Cape of Saint Vincent, in Portugall: the Cape Comari in Asia: and the Cape de la Victoria, in America. CHAP. II. Of the vnknowne parts of the Earth. 1 HEtherto haue I set downe the ge∣nerall affections of the Terrestriall globe. Now therefore will I des∣cend vnto particulars, and onely, & particularly speake of the earth, because Hydrographie doth rather belong vnto the art of Nauigation. 2 The partes of the Earth are either vnknowne, or knowne. 3 The vnknowne partes which lye in obscuritie, are eyther in the North vnder the Articke Pole, or in the South, vnder the Antarticke Pole. 4 The vnknowne Land which lyeth vnder the Artick Pole, is separated euery where (as it is thought) from the other partes of the World, with the North Sea, which breaking in by 19. Inletts, & 4. Staights,
is supped vp, & ingulft into the bowells of the earth, vnder the blacke Rocke, which lyeth directly vnder the Pole, being in compasse 33. Leucars. Iames Cnoyen in the booke of his trauells, maketh mention of a certaine Priest of Noruegia, which had by tradition from a Frier of Oxford, that by the help of his magicke, and taking the fittest opportunitie of time, hee vndertooke to trauell into those parts, and was directly vnder the Pole, where he descryed all these things. Mercator. 5 Not far distant from the blacke Rocke are sci∣tuated foure Ilands of reasonable bignesse, the Sea running betweene euerie one of them, and making them equall in quantitie one vnto the other. In one of the which Ilands beeing opposite vnto Biarmia, are found Pigmies or little men, not aboue 4. foote in height. Magin. 6 The vnknowne Land, which lyeth vnder the Antarticke Pole, is thought to be greater then all the earth besides. 7 In it are descried some fewe Prouinces, as No∣na Guynea, Terra del Fuego Psittacorum Regio, Lucach, Reach, and Maletur. All which together, are called Magelane. Of these Countryes nothing can be certainely spoken, only that in the land del Fuego there is much smoke, in Psittacorum regione, there are great Parrets, in Beach, Golde: in Maletur Spices. 8 The Inhabitants of these Regions which haue bene seene (beeing very fewe) goe naked, and are most barbarous people. Mercator.
CHAP. III. Of the knowne parts of the Earth. THe vnknowne parts of the World haue beene obscurely spoken of. Now followeth the description of the knowne parts, which are soure in number, Europe, Asia, Africa, and America. OF EVROPE. 1 EVrope (called by Plinie the fairest of all other Na∣tions,) is on the South, separated (from Africa) Boundes. with the Straights of Gibraltar, and the Mediterr anean Sea, on the West (from America,) with the rowling waues of the Atlanticke Ocean, and on the East (from Asia,) with the Egaean Sea, Hellespont, Propontus, Thra∣cius, Bospherus, Pontus Euxinus, Bospherus Cimirius, Maeotis Palus, Tanais fluuium, & so drawing vp a line vnto the riuer Duina, which runneth along vnto the Port of Saint Nicholas, disburdning it selfe into Si∣nus Granuicus, or the North Sea. 2 The forme of Europe is like vnto a Dragon, the Simititude head being Spaine, & the wings Denmarke and Italy. 3 In Longitude it is 3800. miles, reaching from Longitude the Cape of Saint Vincent in Portugal, vnto Constanti∣nople in Thracia. Magin. Orteli. 4 In Latitude, it cōtaineth 1200. miles, stretching Latitude. it selfe from the Archipelago or Egaean Sea, vnto Ma∣re Congelatum, or the Frozen Ocean.
5 The people or inhabitants of it, doth farre sur∣passe Inhabitāts the residue of the other parts, in Religiō, Lear∣ning, Artes, valor and ciuilitie. And are all Christi∣ans, vnles it be towards the northeren part of Scan∣dia, or those which are vnder the Tyrannicall go∣uernment of the Turke. Magin. 6. In Europe are to be considered two thinges: First, the Kingdomes and Empires which are con∣tained within the Continent, and then the Ilands. 7 First therefore of the Continent, in which are Diuision. contained 16. Kingdomes, Spaine, France, Germanie, Belgia, Dania, Italie, Illyria, Hungarie, Polonia, Prussia, the Turkish Empire in Europe, Transiluania, Lituania, Liuonia, Scandia, Moscouia, or Russia. OF SPAINE. 1 SPaine is in euery place enuironed with the Sea, Boundes. vnles it be towards the north-east part, where it is ioyned vnto France, distinguished only by the high Pyrinean mountains. It cōtaines in circuit, 1890. miles. 2 This land is very fertill, enricht with all kindes Qualitie. of wine, Sugar, all sortes of fruites, graines, oyles, mettalls, especially of Golde and Siluer. 3 The inhabitants of it are verie ceremonious, su∣perstitious, Inhabitāts proude, hypocrites, laborious, addicted more then any other Nation vnto Melancholy, and descen∣ded of the Gothes, Saracens, and Iewes. 4 This kingdome is diuided into many Prouin∣ces, whereof the chiefe are first, Portugal, famous for Prouinces. Nauigation, in which the chiefe citie is Lisbone: the second is Granado, or Andalucia, in which are the best horses: the chiefe citie in it is Siuill, from whence
come our excellent ciuill Oranges: in this Prouince is also Cadiz or Cales, that was once surprised by Eng∣lishmen: the third Prouince is Casteile, in which is that great citie Tolledo, the Byshoprick wherof com∣meth neere in reuenues vnto the Popedome: the fourth is Nauarre, in which stands the city Bilbao, frō whence we haue so many excellent tride blades: the fift & last is Galicia, in which standeth S. Iago: where Saint Iames is much reuerenced. Ortel. 5 The chiefe riuers of these prouinces are foure, Riuers. Tagus, in which is found much golden Sande: Gua∣diana or Ana, which runneth into a Cauerne or hole of the earth, for a great space, and riseth vp againe. Guadalquiuir, vppon whose bancks stand Siuill. And the last is Duerus. Merula. 6 In times past this was diuided into 12. King∣domes, Gouerne∣ment. but nowe it is onely one entire Gouerne∣ment, subiected vnto one King: who is called, King of Spaine. OF FRANCE. 1 FRance is limited on the West, with Mare Aquitani∣cum, Boundes. & the Pyrineā Mountains: on the North, with the English Sea: on the South, with Mare Mediterra∣neum: on the East, with Germanie: & on the South∣east, with the Alpes. Magin. 2 This country is extraordinary fruitfull, aboun∣ding Qualitie. almost in euery thing, especially in Corne, Wine, and Salt, which causeth that saying, that France hath three Loadstones to draw riches from forraine Na∣tions, Corne caried into Spaine, Wines trāsported into England & Flanders, and Salte, wherewith the whole kingdom & bordering Nations are plētifully stored.
3 The Inhabitants of this Land are in the first onset Inhabitāts. of any thing very vehement, but at the length as slowe and dull. In their words only verball, in their deeds cau∣telous: from whence it is said; that the Frenchman sings not as hee prickes, pronounceth not as he writes, speakes not as hee thinkes. 4 The Prouinces of this Region are manie, among which, three of them haue free Princes. The first is Lor∣reine, Prouinces. in which the chiefe cittie is Nancie: the second is Burgundie, whose Metrapollitane and chiefe cittie is Bi∣sançon, lying vpon the riuer Doux; the third is Subaudia, or Sauoye, whose chiefest citie is Geneua, scituated vpon a faire & pleasant Lake, and in which they haue a law, that if any offender flie for refuge thither, the law doth as wel take holde on him there, as in the place where hee com∣mitted the crime. 5 The other prouinces are many, among which the chief are eight. First, the Prouince of Normandie, whose Metrapolitane citie is Roan, famous for trafficke, in manie forraine countries: the second is Britanie, whose chiefe citie is Brest: the third is Burges or Berrie, whose chiefe citie is called Burges, which (as Iohn Calmenus affirmes) hath an Vniuersitie in it, worthy to be intituled: The Ho∣nour of all learning, & store house of learned men. The fourth is Aquitanie, in which stands Tolouse, that beautifull, best peopled, and most ancientest citie of France, next vnto Paris: the fift is Picardie, in which the chiefe citie is Ami∣ens: the sixt is Poictou, in which is the citie Poictiers: the seuenth is Languedocke: and the eight is Aniou: Ma∣ny others there are, which to rehearse, would be too te∣dious, and therefore I omit them. 6 The Riuers of note in these Prouinces, are foure. Riuers. The first is Sequana or Seine, which runneth through the
fairest and Metrapolitane Citie of France, called Paris, or Lutetia, (quasi in luto sita.) The secōd is Loyre, vpon whose shores stand Angiers & Orleance, two famous cities. The 3. is Rhodanus or Rhosne: the 4. & last of any note is Garōne 7 Two things are reported of this Countrey, very strāge. The one is, that the King cureth a certain wenne, Wonders. which riseth in a mans neck, with the touch of his hand, saying these words: Sanet te Deus, tangit te Rex. The o∣ther is, that ther is a certain oyle in the church of Rheims, which as they report, was sent from Heauen: and the Kings being annointed with it euery Coronation day, it doth neuer decrease. Hondius in Tabulis. 8 This Kindome is gouerned by a Monarchicall go∣uernement, subiected vnto one sole King, who is called Gouernment the king of France, and his eldest sonne is tituled the Dol∣phine of France. From this countrie is excluded by the Salick lawe, any woman, that shee cannot raigne and be Queene. OF GERMANIE. 1 GErmany, is distinguished on the west from France, by Boundes. part of the riuer Rheine, and a line, which is drawen vp directly frō Strasburg vnto Cales: on the South, from Italie, with the Alpes: on the South-east, with Istria, and Illyrica: and on the East with Hungarie, Polonia, and the riuer Vistula. Magin. 2 This countrie is inricht with all sortes of Mines, as Qualitie. well of Salt, as of Mettalls. It hath also great abundance of corne, wine, saffron, fruits, hote bathes, & sweete fountaines. 3 The Inhabitants of this Empire are generallie very tall, goodly, warlike, and faithfull men, little addicted vn∣to Inhabitants. venerie, but much affecting drunkēnes, that welspring of Impietie, from whence bubbleth out this saying of them, that Germanus potat quantum potest: & Germanorum
viuere, est bibere. They are also for their inuentions in Inuentions. arts Mechanicall most excellent, and farre surpassing a∣nie other Nation: for from them came the inuention of Gunnes, inuented of one Bertholdus Swart, in the yeare 1378. by them was also inuented Printing, in the yeare of our Lord, 1440. by one Ihon Gutemberg, but (as Ramus affirmes,) by one Iohn Fust, who printed Tullies Offices, which was the first booke that euer was printed. 4 In the middle of Germany is scituated Bohemia, a ve∣ry Bohemia. pleasant kingdom, compast about with a wood called Sylua Hyrcinia: the chiefe citie of it is Prage, in which the Emperour doth keepe his Court. 5 There are also in this great & large Dominion ma∣ny Prouinces. Prouinces, among which, the especiall, first Saxonie, whose Metrapolitane citie is Witteberg, lying vppon the Riuer Albis: the second is Brandēbourg: in which stands Franckford, scituated vppon the Riuer Odera: in which there is an Vniuersitie, erected by Marques Ioachim, in the yeare, 1506. The third is Pomerania, the chiefe Citie of which is Stetim. The fourth is Bauaria, whose best cittie is Munchen. The fift is Slesia, in which is scituated the city Bressel. The sixt is Franconia, whose most noted Citie is Franckford, founded vppon the riuer Moenum, in which Martes. place is alwayes the Election of the Emperour, and the famous Martes for bookes. The seuenth is Austria, the Metrapolitan of which, is that famous Vienna, seated vp∣on the riuer Danubius, esteemed to be one one of the fai∣rest Citties in Germanie. The eight and last, worthy to Heluetia. be preferred before all the rest, is Switzerland or Heluetia, which is diuided into 13. Cantones or chiefe cities with their Apendices, the gouernment of them beeing onely popular: for although the members seeme to be separa∣ted, yet liue they as one bodie, firmly knit & vnited, eue∣rie
one hauing his particular Magistrate and Councell. 6 The most famous Riuers of these Prouinces are sixe. First is the great Danubius, which doth receiue into Riuers. it 60. Nauigable Riuers, before it is disburdened into Pontus Euxinus: the second is Rhene, from whence com∣meth the best Rhenish wine, & vpon whose banke is sci∣tuated the citie Strasburge or Argentine, in which ther is a towre of 578. Geometricall paces high, counted the eight Miracle of the world: the third is Amasus: the fourth is Moenus: the fift is Odera: and the sixt is Albis. 7 The Emperours do not succeed, but are alwaies cho∣sen by these 6. Electors: the Arch-byshops of Ments, Triers, & Colen: the Countie Palatine of Rhene: the Duke of Saxo∣nie, & the Marquesse of Brandeburge. If these cānot agree, then doth the King of Bohemia decide the controuersie. 8 Concerning the Gouernment of this Empire, it hath manie free Princes, which is the reason that the Emperour by some is called a King of Kings. Gouernment OF BELGIA. 1 BElgia, (or the Lowe Countreyes,) is limited on the Boundes. East, with Germanie: on the South, with France: on the West, with the mayne Ocean: & on the North, with Denmarke and part of the great Sea. It contayneth in circuit 1000. Italian miles. 2 This Countrie doeth most excell in all manner of Linnen, and fine Stuffes: and about Frisea, Gelderland, Qualitie. and Holland, they haue Oxen of such an incredible big∣nesse, which if they were ballanced, would weigh aboue 2000. poundes, for there was seene in Antwerpe, a Bull, whose bodie did exceede 3200. weight. Magin. Ortel. In this Countrie there is also great abundance of Butter, Cheese, Herring, and Salmon, and especially in Holland.
3 The Inhabitāts are very goodly & propermen, ha∣uing Inhabitants. generally well proportionated legs. They are great drinkers, not proud nor enuious, but vnmindfull both of benefits done vnto them, & of iniuries offered. They are excellent Musitians, & in Mechanicall arts most expert. Prouinces. 4 The prouinces of Belgia are 17. in which are cōtained 4. Dukedomes, 7. Earldomes, 5. Barondries, & 1. Marqueship. 5 The 4. Dukedomes are first, Brabant, in which the 1. Brabant. chiefe citie is Antwerp, fortified with 10. royall Bulwarks, and hauing within it a Towne-house, whose circuite is 4812. paces. There is also in this Prouince an Vniuersi∣tie called Louaine. Ortel. 6 The second Dukedom is Liege or Luicke, called by 2. Liege. some the Paradise of Priests: the chiefe city is Liege, from whence the Dukedome taketh his name. 7 The third is Lutzenburge, in which is the great Fo∣rest 3. Lutzen∣burge. of Ardenna, which was in the time of Caesar 500. miles in lēgth, at this day only 90. the chief city is Lutzēburg. or. 8 The 4. and last Dukedome is Gelderland, noted 4. Gelderlād. chiefly for the excellent pasture groundes, which are in it, the chiefe citie is Nimmegen. Ortel. 9 The 7. Earledoms or Counties, are first Flanders, in 1. Flandres. which the chiefe city is Gaunt, there are also many strong Port towns in it, as Newport, Dūkerk, Ostend, & Slewis. Ort. 10 The second is Artois, the chiefe citie of which is 2. Artois. Arras, from whence commeth the best cloth of Arras. 11 The third is Hainolt, whose fairest city is Mons, in which there is a Capitall of Religious women, that was 3. Hainolt. erected by Vadruda, Dutches of Lorraine. 12 The 4. is Holland, very poore of it self, vnles it be in pasture grounds, in which they nourish so many Cattell 4. Holland. that it doth excell other parts in Butter and cheese. They are also so strong at Sea, that they are able to make 800.
great ships, and twice so many small. The chiefe citie is Amsterdam, so famous for Trafficke, that there may be seen in her Port somtimes, 500. great ships at once. Ortel. 13 The fift is Zealand (quasi Sea and Land,) in which 5. Zealand. countrie or Countie there is found no fresh water. In it is also very little wood. The chiefe citie is Middelborough, in the Iland of Walcheren. 14 The sixt is Zutphen, of which very little or no∣thing 6. Zutphen. can be spoken. 15 The 7. and last Countie is Namur, verie plentifull 7. Namur. of Woods and Deare, the chiefe citie is Namur. 16 The 5. Barondries or Lordships are first, Friezland, Ʋltrect. the noted cities whereof are Leuorden and Embden. 17 The secōd is Vltrect, whose chiefest city is Vtreck. 17 The third is Mechlin: the fourth is Ouerissel: the fift and last Lordship is Groining. 18 The 17. Prouince is, the Marquiset of the holie Empire, in which nothing is famous. 19 The most noted Riuers of these Prouinces are three, the first of which is Rhene, mentioned before in Riuers. Germanie: the next it Schald, which washeth the bancks of Antwerpe: the last is Meuse, vpon whose shore is sci∣tuated Luicke. 20 This Country (famous for wars) is in part gouer∣ned Gouernmēt. by manie, whom they call States of the lowe Countries. But the Arche-duke of Austria wageth warre continuallie with them, to bring it vnder his Dominion, claiming and laying Title vnto it. OF DENMARKE. DEnmarke is enuironed round with the maine Oce∣an, Limites. vnlesse it be on the South, where it is ioyned vn∣to Germanie.
2 This Kingdome doth abound in goodly Horses, Qualitie. and in such store of cattell, that there are yearely carried into Germanie 50000. Oxen. There is also such infinite a∣bundance of herring, (neare vnto the Ile Scania) that the ships are scarce able by maine strength of Owers to rowe out of the Harbour, the fish lying so thicke, that their quantitie is supposed to surpasse the water it selfe. Ortel. Inhabitāts. 3 The Inhabitāts of this country are very valiāt both at land and Sea, in their Religion they are all Lutherans. 4 The Prouinces of this Kingdome are almost all Prouinces. Ilands, amōg which, the chiefe are first, Sealand, in which is Coppenhagen, the chiefe seate of the King, and an Vni∣uersitie, in it is also Roschilt, where the Kings are still in∣toombed. The second is Loilant, in which there growe so many Hazell-nuts, that shippes are loaded there with them. The third is Fimera, in which Ticho Brahe built a Castle by Arte, to the wonder of euery body that hath e∣uer seene it. In the Continent are containd two other Prouinces, Iugtland, and Holsten, in which is Meldrope, the inhabitants of which are so riche, that they couer their houses with copper. Magin. 5 In this Countrie is also a straight Sea, passing be∣tweene some of the Ilands, called the Sound: which by Sound. reason of the Imposts and Customs of the Ships which passe that way, yeeldeth great gaine and profite vnto the King. 6 The Gouernment of this Kingdome is vnder one Gouernmēt. sole Prince, who is called the King of Denmarke. OF ITALIE. ITalie, (called by Merula a Terrestriall Paradice: The Boundes. Phoenix of this Massie round, the earths riche Orna∣ment, the Garden of the Muses,) is garded on the East,
with the Adriaticke Seas on the South, with Mare Medi∣terraneum: on the West, with the Terrhene or Ocean: and on the North, with the Alpes, which separateth it from Germanie, it is like vnto a mans legge, reaching in length from Augusta Pretoria, vnto Otranto, which is 1010. miles, and is in breadth, in the brodest place, 420. miles. 2 To set downe the fruitfulnes of this riche Region, it may be as well declared in a line as in a leafe, for there Qualitie. is of all things such plentie, as there is not of any thing any scarcitie. 3 The people of this Nation are verie graue, frugall, wittie, excelling both in vertue and vices, which are in Inhabitants. lust, monstrous: in hate, implacable: & in their conuer∣sation most deceitfull: which had rather bestowe any thing vpon others, then vpon themselues: do more ofte∣ner blaspheme then sweare. And will rather kill a man, then giue him a disgracefull tearme or word. 4 This Kingdome is diuided into many Prouinces, whereof the chiefe and most famous are fiue. Prouinces. 5 The first is the Kingdome of Naples, which is grea∣ter then any of the rest, full of Nobilitie, and aboun∣ding Naples. with all things necessary for mans vse. The chiefe citie of it is Naples, lying vpon the Terrhenean Sea. 6 The second is the Romane Territorie, a Prouince richly furnished with all prouisions, in which is scitua∣ted Roma. the Cittie of Rome, once called the Empresse of the world, as well for the beautie and Magnificence of the Citie, as for the Learning and fortitude of the Citizens: but now it is much ruinated: true Religion and vertue cleane decayed. The Gouernour of it beeing the Pope, that proud prelate, persecutor of all true pietie, and zea∣lous professours. 7 The third Prouince is Lumbardie, comprehending Lumbardie.
vnder it is the Dukedom of Millaine, which doth excell for beautie all the rest, hauing in it many faire Riuers & pleasant Lakes: the chiefe Citie of which, is Millaine: whose buildings are to be admired for their extraordi∣narie sumptuousnes. In this Prouince is also the great Lake de Como, which is 60. miles in lēgth, & vpon whose bankes stands the citie Como, in fashion like vnto a Crab, whose two feete couet the water. In this Citie the two Plinies had their beginning, whose Fame by reason of their great learning, shall neuer haue ending. Ortelius. 8 The fourth Prouince is Tuscanie, little inferior vnto Tuscanie. the rest in any thing, the chiefe Citie of which is Flo∣rence, whose inhabitants (since the time of Macheuill, which was their Recorder,) are most politicke and subtill, amounting vnto the number of 80. thousand persons. 9 The fift and last, is the Signorie of Venice, a free Ʋenice. State, and the most famous of any in Christendome, go∣uerned by a Prince of great Maiestie: yet both hee and his authorite subiected vnto the Lawes. This Citie with the Apendices vnto it, is the richest & best prouided with munition, of any Citie in Italie, as is confest in this particular cēsure of each Prouince, before spoken: that Naples excells for Nobilite: Rome for Cler∣gie: Millaine for beautie, Florence for policie: but Ve∣nice for riches. 10 There is is another prouince (somewhat famous) called Verona, in which is the mountaine Baldo, where all professors of Phisicke doe resort, to gather diuerse sortes of pretious Hearbes. And in which there is a citie called Negarino, wherin is a stone in forme like vnto a womans dugge, which doth continually distill a water, whose vertuous operation causeth a womans Milke to returne into her brests when she hath lost it.
11 The chiefest riuers of these prouinces, are first Pa∣dus, neer vnto which stands Patauine that noble Vniuer∣sitie: Riuers. the next is Athesis, adioyning vnto which is Trent, where a Councell was helde vnder Paul the third, in the yeare 1546. the next is Tiber, that runneth through the Citie of Rome, which when it doth ouerflowe the banks, doth betoken some ill fortune which shall befall the Ci∣tie: the last is the riuer Poe, neere vnto which stands Cre∣mona, a Citie of great note. 12 In this Italie, which was in time past, one intier Go∣uernement, Gouernment are nowe many absolute States, and Prince∣domes, by the great Pollicie of the Pope, who thought it the best way to make himselfe great, by weakening the Empire. OF ILLIRIA. ILliria is limited on the West, with the Adriaticke Sea: on the North, with the riuer Sauus: & on the East, with Limits. the riuer Drinus. No certaine limits can be giuen of this countrie: For all Geographers that write, doe disagree about it. 2 The people of this land as (Liuie affirmes,) are verie Inhabitants. proude and outragious. 3 The chiefe Prouinces are three, whereof the first is Prouinces. Zara or Sebenine, whose chiefest citie is Zara, where (as Cornelius Sheppers doth report) is a Church called S. Iohn de Maluatia, which was built by a companie of Mari∣ners that were in a dangerous tempest, and made a vowe that if they escaped, they would build a church vnto the honour of S. Ihon de Maluatia, whose morter should be tempered with Malmesie. 4 The next prouince is Dalmatia, in which the chiefe citie is Ragusus or Epidaura, where S. Ierosme was borne.
5 The third and last is Histria, which is vnder the Ve∣netians. Many other Prouines there are, whereof some Gouernment are subiect vnto the Turke, others vnder the Dominion of Hungarie. OF HVNGARIE. HVngarie is bounded on the South, with the riuer Sa∣uus: Limites. on the East with the riuer Tibiscus: on the north, with Polonia and Russia: and on the west, with Austria. 2 This country doth exceede any other for plenty of Qualitie. corne, which thrice in a yeare is there reapt, the ground being so fertill that it doth almost growe without tilling. There are also such infinit store of Oxen, that there doth yearely passe through Vienna into other cuntries, 80000. besides there are such a great number of Deere, Phesant, and Partridge, that it is lawfull for any man to hauke and hunt at his pleasure. There is great plentie of gold, and wines, which will suddenly make a man drunke by rea∣son of the Sulpherie waters, neere vnto which the grape is gathered. 3 The people & inhabitants of this Nation, are gene∣rally Inhabitants. very strong, warlike, vnkinde, and of rude behaui∣our, giuen little vnto the knowledge of Mechanick arts. They haue an order in their Countrie, that no man may weare a Feather; vnlesse he hath killed a Turke: and they neuer reuenge particular iniuries one against the other a∣ny more, then with words, vnles the disgracefull tear me of cowardise be obiected vnto them: whereof the char∣ged is neuer freed, vntill he hath proued himselfe in sin∣gle combate with a Turke. The Sonnes inherit equally after their Fathers death. In marrying their daughters, they giue them onely a new garment, and nothing else. 4 The chiefe citie of this kingdome is Buda, possessed Citie.
now by the Turke, neere vnto which, is the fielde Zebuli∣ensis, wherein is a riuer that conuerts wood into a stone, & the water it selfe being taken out turneth into a stone. 5 The Prouinces which are most mentioned in this realme are onely two: the one is the countie of Zoliense, Prouinces. wherein there is a certaine gaping of the earth, the stin∣king vapors of which, doth kill all the birdes that flie o∣uer it. The other is the Iland Komora (in Danubius,) the land of which is so fertill, that the grasse of it doth ex∣ceede in length the height of a man. Magin. 7 The chiefe Riuers are Danubius, Tibiscus, Drauus, and Sauus, all which haue great plentie of fish, especially Riuers. of Salmon and Sturgeon. 7 This Kingdome of Hungarie was once gouerned by Gouernment Spirituall men, but now it is vnder the Emperor of Ger∣manie, and the Turke, who haue it betwixt them. OF POLONIA. 1 POlonia is limited on the West, with Germanie: on the Limits. East, with the riuer Boristines, or Neiper: on the north, with Mare Balticum, and parte of Moscouia: and on the South, with Hungarie. 2 This kingdome chiefly abound in Hunnie, Waxe, Qualitie. Fish, Mines of Copper, Iron, Brimstone, and in such great store of Horse, that it is thought the Polanders are a∣ble vppon any necessitie, to raise 100. thousand. In this countrie there is no wine: but in steede thereof, they haue an excellent kinde of Methegline. 3 The Inhabitants are generally braue souldiers, ex∣cellently well furnished with weapons, and most impa∣tient, Inhabitants. if iniuries be offered them: they are very proude, thinking exceeding well of their owne worth, making
great account of anie one that will flatter them, louing braue attire and delicious meates. 4 In this Kingdome are tollerated all sorts of Religi∣ons: Religion. and Colledges of all sectes, and factions: which causeth this saying, that if any one hath lost his religion, let him goe into Poland, and hee shall finde it. 5 The Kings seate and Metrapolitane Citie is Craco∣uia, Citie. in which is an Vniuersitie, seated vpon the banke of the riuer Vistula. 6 The most noted Prouinces, are first Podolia: the land of which is so fertill, that of one Sowing, they haue Prouinces. three Haruests, and in their meadowes the grasse doeth growe so much in three dayes, that if an Oxe goe in it, his hornes cannot be seene. 7 The next is Sammagitia, in which the people liue in cottages with their cattell and labouring Beasts, some of them sacrificing vnto a certaine Diuell, called by them Siemiennicke. 8 The next is Nigra Russia, in which there is great plentie of Waxe and Hunnie. 9 The last is Massouia, in which the chiefe citie is Massouia, wherein is made the best Methegline. 10 The chiefe and onely Riuer of this Countrey, is Riuers. Vistula. 11 This kingdome of Poland is gouerned by one sole Gouernment. King, who doth not succeed, but is alwayes elected by, the Nobilitie of the Land. OF PRVSSIA. 1 PRussia is compassed on the West, with the riuer Vistu∣la: on the East, with Lituania: on the South, with Po∣lonia: Limits. and on the North, with Mare Balticum, & Liuonia.
2 This countrie is most famous for Amber, which is found on their Sea shore, scarce any where else to be Qualitie. seene. It is also well stored with a kinde of leather, which wee call Spruce leather. 3 The Inhabitants of this place are much of the same Nature as the Polonians are. Inhabitants. 4 The chiefe Citie is Dantzike, seated vpon the riuer Vistula. Citie. 5 The Gouernment of this countie is vnder a Duke, who doth subiect his power and himselfe vnto the King Gouernment. of Poland. Of the Turks kingdome in Europe. VNder the Turcian Empire in Europe, is comprehen∣ded all that lyeth between the borders of Epidaurus Limites. and Tanais, betweene Buda and Constantinople, and be∣tweene the Euxine Sea & the bankes of Sauus: in which territory are comprehended many puissant kingdomes. 2 The Turkes are great Souldiers, patient in labour, sparing in their foode, slaues vnto their Lord, great ob∣seruers Inhabitāts. of their lawes, and for the rest very inconstant. In the Lent they abstaine frō meat in the day times, but take it out freely in the night. They acknowledge Christ not as the Sonne of God, but as a great Prophet. They detest Images, & wil not be called Turks; but Musulmani, which is as much as beleeuers of the truth. Their priuate hou∣ses are most base & vile, whereas their publike places are stately. They vse no tables, but eate their meate on the ground, sitting after the fashion of Tailors vpon a stall, & when they pisse, they doe it with bended knees. Magi. 3 There are comprehended vnder this vaste gouern∣ment such an infinit companie of people, and so well or∣dered & broght vp, that one noteth these three things of
them, which breed a terror vnto the whole world. The first, is their multitudes of men vnconquerable: the next, their Millitarie discipline vncorrupted: the last, Corne and prouision for store infinite. 4 The Prouinces or rather Kingdomes of this great Prouinces. Empire, are diuided into two parts: Into Dacia vetus, vnder which is comprehended Bosnia, Seruia, Bulgaria, Valachia, and Moldauia: and into Grecia, contained in which, are Epirus, Macedonia, Thracia, Achaia, and Pe∣loponesus. 5 In Dacia vetus little is extraordinarie notable, and Dacia. therefore I omit the description. 6 Grecia is limited on the West, with the Adriaticke Grecia. Sea: on the South, with the Mediterranean: on the East, with the Archipelago and Thracian Sea. 7 The Inhabitants of it are now very base, altogether Inhabitanit. ignorant of artes, liuing and going in their apparell after the Turkish manner. 8 The Prouinces as are before set down, are first Epi∣rus, Epirus. in which Scanderbege liued, made famous by his wor∣thy acts, hee being called the scourge of the Turkes. 9 The next is Macedonia, for euer famosed, by the Macedonia. means of him neuer to be forgotten, Alexander the great, who raigned there, being conquerour of the world: In this Prouince is Stagira, the countrie of Aristotle: and Olympus, that high topt Mountaine, aspiring aboue the middle region of the aire. 10 The next is Romania or Thracia, a verie barren Thracia. place, in which stands the great Cittie of Constantinople, wherein the Turke doth alwayes keepe his Court, this Citie is very populous, containing in it (as some write) 700000. soules. 11 The fourth prouince is Achaia, famous for the Achaia.
most learned Vniuersitie, which was in it, called Athens, once the nurse of all the wittie and best Poets, the Mother and bringer vp of all eloquent and heart-winning Rheto∣ricians: and in generall, it was the very heart and soule of humane Artes and learning. In this Prouince is also Per∣nassus, and Hellicon, consecrated to the Muses, by all an∣cient Poets. 12 The fist and last is Peloponesus or Morea, in whose Peloponesus. Istmus or entrance, stands that once goodly city Corinth: which many bookes doe much mention. Further in the prouince, stands Lacedemon, not inferior vnto any of the rest in antiquitie. 13 This Grecia (as is before saide) is vnder the Turke, Gouernment who for money suffers all religions there. OF TRANSILVANIA. TRansiluania (so called, by reason of the great Woods Limits. which compasse it) is limited on the west, with Hun∣garie: and part of the Riuer Tibiscus: on the North, with Poland, and the great mountaine Carpothus: on the East, with Moldauia: & on the South, with Valachia Cisalpina. 2 The fruitfulnes of this kingdome is very much, ha∣uing Qualitie. horses whose manes sweepe the earth: & Falchons, two of which will kill an Eagle or Swanne. There is also great store of Mines, and in some riuers are found lumps of Gold, which weigh a pound weight. 3 The Inhabitants of this country are very stubborn, slothfull, and vntractable, following the religion of the Inhabitants. Greek church, reading from the right hand vnto the left, and swearing alwayes by Iupiter and Venus, according vnto the olde manner of the Ethnicks. 4 The chiefe citie (where the King holdeth his resi∣dence) is Alha Guilia.
5 In this Kingdome is the Prouince of Zeckland, go∣uerned Prouinces. after the order of the Heluetians. 6 The chiefe riuers are Saluata and Rockle, both which Riuers. are disburdened into Danubins. 7 This Transiluania is gouerned by a Christian Gouernment Prince, who once paid tribute vnto the Turke, but now doth warre against him. OF LITVANIA. 1 LItuania is bounded on the West with Polonia, on Limits. the South with Podolia, on the East with Muscouia, and on the North with Liuonia. 2 There is little to be spoken of this Countrey, onely Qualitie. that in it there is great store of Pitch, and Timber planks, whereof they build many Ships. 3 The inhabitants of it, liue after the maner of the Polo∣nians. Inhabitants 4 The Metropolitan Citie, where the Prince doth Cities. keepe his Court, is Vilna, 5 This Kingdome is gouerned by a Duke, but subiect Gouernment vnto the king of Poland. OF LIVONIA. 1 LIuonia is limited on the West, with Mare Balticum, Limits. or Sinus Venedicus, on the East with the riuer Narua the lake Bribas, & part of Moscouia, on the South with Li∣tuania & Prussia: and on the North with Sinus Finicus. 2 The inhabitants of this country are for the most part Inhabitants. al Christians: and the women do think so wel of them∣selues, that in comparison of their owne beauties they discommend all others. 3 The riches of it are chiefly corne & horses, they haue Qualitie. also in their woods wilde beastes, of an extraordinarie strength.
4 The chiefe cities are first Riga, seated vpon the riuer Duina: the next is Riualia, neare vnto the Baltick Sea: the last is Derpt. 5 The notedst riuers are two, the one is the riuer Ein∣becke, which (at the very mouth, where it doth disburden Riuers. it selfe into the Sea,) doth fall such a heigth, that it roa∣reth, making the horriblest & horridest noise, that it dea∣feneth the eares of the inhabitants neare adioyning, like to those which dwell neare vnto the Cataracts of Nile: the other riuer is Duina. 6 This Kingdome is a distract gouernement, subiect vnto many Princes, as the King of Poland, Denmark, Swe∣cia, Gouernment and the Emperour of Moscouia. OF SCANDIA. 1 SCandia is a Peninsula, (that is, almost an Iland,) inui∣ronned Limites. on the North, with the frozen Ocean: on the East, with Mare Balticum, Sinus Finicus, and Sinus Bodi∣cus: on the South, with Sinus Codanus: and on the West, with the vast Ocean. 2 This great coūtry in the North part is very barren: but towards the South, there is great store of corne, Salt, Qualitie. Horses, and Mines, both of Siluer, Iron, and Lead. 3 The inhabitants of it are very strong, peruerse, vn∣learned, Inhabitants. & much addicted vnto Sorceries & witchcrafts. 4 This Scandia is diuided into two great Kingdoms, Diuision. Noruegia and Swetia. OF NORVEGIA OR NORWAY. 5 NOruegia is bounded on the West, North, & South, Limits. with the maine Ocean, and on the East, with the Dofrine mountaines. 6 The Inhabitants of this Kingdom are simple men, Inhabitants.
giuen much vnto Hospitalitie, and abhorring Theeue∣rie or any such courses. 7 The chief riches of this coūtrie are Cables, Mastes, Qualitie, and such like furniture for Shipping, there is also great store of dried fish, which they eate in steede of bread. 8 The Metropolitane Citie is Nidrosio, there is ano∣ther Citie. Citie called Bergen, one of the great Marte Townes of Christendome. 9 This kingdom is subiect vnto the crowne of Den∣marke. Gouernment. OF SWEVIA OR SWEDEN. 10 SWeuia is limited on the West, with the Dofrine Moun∣taines, Limites. and on the other parts with the Sea, vnles it be where it is ioyned vnto Moscouia, by a little Istmus. 11 This Kingdome is so fertill and fruitefull, that it is Qualitie. by some tearmed a most heauenly Land, abounding in so much prouision, that it is a hard thing to see a begger amongst them: They digge pure Siluer out of the earth, & they haue great store of Wolues, which passing ouer a straite in the Sea, are with the extremity of cold blinded. 12 The Inhabitants of this Region, are agreeable Inhabitāts. much in disposition & quality vnto the Noruegians: they liue very long, for it is no maruel with them to see one an hundred and fortie yeares of age. 13 The chiefe Citie is Stockholme or Holoia, in which Citie. the King doth alwayes keepe his Court. 14 The Prouinces of most note, are first, Goteland (qua∣si Prouinces. Good land) the next is Finneland (quasi Fineland) in both which, is plenty almost of all things: the other prouinces are Bodia, Scrikfinnia & Biarmia, the inhabitants of which, are much addicted vnto withcraft. 15 This Kingdome of Sweuia is subiect onely vnto one Gouernment. King, whom they call the Duke of Sweuia.
OF RVSSIA, OR MOSCOVIA. 1 RVssia is part in Europe, and part in Asia, limited on Limits. the West with Liuonia, and Scandia, on the North with Mare Glaciale, or the Frozen Ocean, on the east with the Riuer Oby, the Lake of Kataio and Tartarie, and on the South with Lituania. 2 The riches of this Empire wherein it chiefly excels Qualitie. are most rich Furres, (as Sables, Martins, white Foxe, & such like.) It hath also in it much corne, fruits, and cattel. The ayre in these parts is so cold in the Winter, and the frosts so great, that if a man cast vp water into the ayre, it wil freeze before it fall downe, & many times it is so ve∣hement, that if any man go abroad, he shal be almost sti∣fled through the condensating of his breath. 3 The inhabitants of this Countrey are very barbo∣rous, Inhabitants. perfidious, contentious, and most prone vnto any contumelious behauiour: They are altogether ignorant and vnlearned, which is the occasion that they say, God and their Emperour knoweth all things. The baser sort of people do alwayes breake the Sabboth, saying, that it is onely for Gentlemen to celebrate that day. They are also very superstitious, hauing many foolish ceremonies, & absurd solemnities, as the consecrating of riuers once in a yere, the burying of their dead with a paire of shooes on their feet, and a staffe in one hand, signifying a great iourney which they haue to goe: & a letter in the other vnto S. Nicholas, for their readier admission into heauē. 4 The chiefe and most noted places of this mightie Region, are first Mosco, the Metropolitan citie, in which the Emperour doth continually keep his Court: The next is Pernia, in which they eate the flesh of Stagges in stead of bread: And the last is Rhezan, in which there is
such plenty of graine, that the eares of corne do grow so thicke together, that no horse can beate it downe, nor Larke or Quaile passe through it. 5 The most famous riuers, are first Duina, (quasi twag∣na) Riuers. called so of two riuers which meet together. The next is Boristines, or Neiper, and the last is Tanais. 6 This large Empire is onely subiect to the Emperor Gouernment of it. CHAP. IIII. Of the European Ilands. 1 HItherto haue I wandred al about the great continent of Europe, now fol∣the Ilands belonging thereunto. 2 The European Ilands are diui∣ded into three parts: into those which are in the Westerne Ocean, into those which are in the Mediter∣ranean Sea, and into those which are contained within the Archipellago, or Mare Aegaeum. 3 The chiefe Ilands which are contained in the west Ocean, are seuen, Grocland, Groinland, Island, Freesland, Ireland, Great Britaine, and the Azores. 4 Grocland is an Iland which few Geographers men∣tion, Grocland. and therfore no certaintie can be spoken of it. 5 Groinland (quasi Greeneland) is a Country wherein Groinland.
there are great store of Cattell, which causeth Butter and Cheese to be very plentifull in it: the inhabitants are for the most part witches, dwelling in Caues and Dennes. OF ISLAND. 6 ISland is an Iland very barrē of graine, hauing no Trees Island. in it, vnlesse it be Byrch and Iuniper: From this Iland, commeth the best Ling, called of vs Island Ling. In this countrie is also a mountaine called Heckleforte, alwayes vomiting forth flames of fire: the inhabitants of which, doe conceit thereof, a most peeuish and erroneous opi∣nion that it is Purgatorie. This Iland (as Ortelius affirms) is vnder the king of Denmarke, but others make it subiect vnto the Swedian Crowne. OF FRISLAND. 7 FRislande doth abound with very great store of fish, and Frisland, was wont by reason of the oftē sayling thither of En∣glish, to be called the westerne England: this Iland is vnder the crowne of Denmarke. OF IRELAND. 8 IReland is a verie watrish countrey, and full of boggs, yet Ireland. seated in a most temperate and pleasant ayre, admitting no venemous thing in it, it doth most abounde in horses and cattell. The inhabitants of this Kingdome are for the most part very beautifull, actiue, & somewhat super∣stitious, affecting nothing so much as slothfulnes. Magi. The chiefe citie is Dubline, wherin there is an vniuersity. The most noted things of this Ile, are first the Lake Er∣no, now famous for her past infamie, in which you may see the toppes of houses and churches. The next is the Lake of Armach, into which if a long Staffe be thrust
downe vnto the bottome, that parte which is in the wa∣ter, will turne into a whetstone, and that part which is in the mudde into Iron. Magin. The Hybrides belong vnto this Iland, beeing in num∣ber 44. the inhabitants of which are called Redshankes. This Region belongeth vnto the Crowne of England, by whom it is kept in good subiection. OF GREAT BRITTANIE. 9 BRIttaine is diuided into 2. partes, England & Scotland. Brittaine. England is separated from Scotland, by the Riuer Tweede, and the Riuer Solway. This rich Diamond set in the ring of the world, nurce of the most valiant, wise, and victorious men, doth al∣most with all things flourish: But especiallie with such things as this verse that followeth, sheweth. Anglia Mons, Pons, Fons, Ecclesia, Foemina, Laua. This part of the Ile was cōmonly in the time of King HENRY the third, Puteus inexhaustus, a well that neuer would be drawne drie: & is now tearmed by the French, a Paradise for wiues, a Purgatorie for Seruants, and a Hell for Horses. Scotland lyeth in the North part of this Iland: the In∣habitants of which are very warlike. The chiefe Citie is Edenbourge, neere vnto which is a fountaine that carieth an oyle, which being not takē off, doth not increase: being taken off, doth not diminish. Many other strange things there are in this place, as in Lenox there is a Lake called Loumond, wherein fishes liue without finnes: and in which the waues are some∣times most boistrous in the calmest weather, most milde in the most tempestuous weather: In this Lake there is
also a fruitfull Iland which floteth vp and downe vpon the water. In the Prouince of Coile there is a stone not a∣boue 13. foot in height, which if a Canon be shot off on the one side, he which is on the other cannot heare it. The Apendices which belong vnto both England & Scotland, are first the Orcades, being in number 30. the in∣habitants of which are great drinkers, but no drunkards. The next is the Ile of Man, wherein is the mountaine Schesil, vpon whose top if any one stand, he may discerne both England, Scotland, and Ireland. Many other little I∣lands there are, all which with the rest are subiect vnto the most mightie and puissant King of Great Brittainie. INSVLAE AZORES. 10 THe Azores, or Canary Ilands, are seuen, frō whence Azores. commeth great store of Woade, and Canarie Wines. 1 The chiefe and most renowned Ilands in all olde writers of the Medeterranean Sea, are nine: Insulae Balia∣res, Corsica, Sardinia, Scicilie, Malta, Corsyra, Ischia, Za∣zinthus, and Candia. INSVLAE BALIORES. 2 INsulae Baliores are diuided into Maiorica, in which Rai∣mundus Insula Bali∣ores. Lullius that excellent Scholler liued, and into Minorica. The inhabitants of both which, are very strong and expert slingers. CORSICA. 3 COrsica is an Iland which doth produce Horses of a Corsica. fierce nature, and Hounds of a wonderfull bignes.
The Inhabitants of this Ile are verie rude and vnciuill. SARDINIA. 4 SArdinia (famous for the occasion of that great warre Sardinia. betwixt Carthage and Rome) is now subiected vnto the King of Spaine. The chiefe and Metropolitane citie is Cagliarie, seated vpon a high mountaine. In this Countrey there is a beast called Mufiono, of whose skinne is made a Leather called Cordiuan, or as we tearme it, Spanish Leather. There is also an hearbe, which if any one eate, it will enforce him to laugh till hee dye, from whence commeth the Prouerbe, Risus Sardonichus. DE SCICILIA. 5 SCicilie is a land whose inhabitants are very good sol∣diers, Scicilie. desirous much of honour, and wherein is, and haue beene many excellent Schollers, such as were Eu∣clide, Archimedes, Diodorus Siculus, and many others. This Countrey is very fertill and fruitfull, abounding so much in corne, that it was once called Horeum Roma∣rorum, the Store-house of the Romans. In this Ile is also the Mountaine Aetna, at whose top there are (as it were) two furnaces with tunnels, out of which ascend continually flames of fire, throwing out sometimes such store of ashes, and peeces of stones, that it doth greatly indaunger the Townes for many myles there about. This is the mountaine where the Poet fai∣neth to bee the shop of Vulcan, where the Cyclops did frame Thunder-boults for Iupiter. This is the mountain into whose vast gaping mouth Empedocles did cast him∣selfe. And this is the mountaine where some of the ir∣religious,
Hereticall, and besotted Papists imagine to be Purgatorie. The chiefe citie of this Ile is now Palermo, before time Siracusa, in which liued Archimedes, that fa∣mous Engine maker of the world, who, as it is written of him, would by burning Glasses set Shippes on fire sayling in the Sea. Belonging to this are other, called the Vulcanian Ilands. This Scicilie is now subiect vnto the King of Spayne. MALTA. 6 MAlta is most famous for the farre-famed order of Malta. the Knights of Ierusalem, who haue oftentimes re∣pelled and put to flight great armies of the Turkes, which haue besieged it. This is the Countrey where Saint Paule beeing cast vp after his shipwracke, had a Viper hanging on his hand, and did him no hurt. The chiefe Citie is Malta, wherein the Women are beautifull, but hate company, neuer going abroad vnlesse they be co∣uered. CORCYCA. 7 COrcyca is an Iland flourishing with Wine, and Oyle. In it is also great store of Wilde fowle, Corcyca. and Beastes, wherewith the inhabitants doe very much (with pleasure and pastime in chasing them) recreate themselues. The chiefe Citie in it, is called Corfu, wherein both men and women are excellent Swim∣mers. This Ile is subiect vnto the Seigniorie of Venice, who doth defend it very well from the Turke.
ISCHIA. 8 ISchia (the chiefe of 18. Ilands lying in the Gulfe of Ischia. Naples, begirt round with rockes and high moun∣taines) hath in it great store of Hares, Conies, and other wilde beasts. The chiefe Citie is Ischia, which in the yeare 1301. was like to be burned with a fire, that did runne along in the earth, by reason of the vaines of Brimstone. In this Ile it is also reported that there is a Fountaine neere vn∣to the Promontory of Saint Angel, which is so hotte, that it will in a short time boyle any flesh or fish that is put into it. ZAZINTHVS. 9 ZAzinthus is a land where English Merchants doe Zazinthus. very much trafficke, for the extraordinary store of Currants which are there. In this Ile the inhabitants do speake Greeke, and are subiect vnto the Venetians. CANDIA. 10 CAndie is an Iland famosed by the intricate Labo∣borinth Creete. which was in it, built by Dedalus: and which Theseus entred, and killed the Minataurs, which were kept in it, by the helpe of Ariadne, who gaue him a bottome of threed to guide him. In this Ile there is very much Suger-Candie, & Mus∣cadine, in such plentie, that there is yearely transported into other countries 12000. Buts. The Inhabitants of this place doe not affect labour, neuer vsing any manfull exercise, but giuen vnto ma∣ny vices, especially lying: of which the Prouerbe, Cretense Mendarium, & Cretisandum est cum Cretensibus.
And Epiminides the heathen Poet noteth of them, that they are alwayes great lyers, dull beasts, and slow bellies. The chiefe citie of it is Candie, inhabited much with the Venetians. Of the Ilands in the Aegean Sea. 1 THe Ilands in the Aegean Sea, are all subiect vnto the tyrannicall Turke, and are diuided either into the Cyclades, which are fiftie in number, lying towards the South; or into the Sporades, which are very many, lying towards the North. 2 Of the Cyclades little can be spoken, only that in the Cyclades. Iland Delos stood the famous Oracle of Apollo, by so ma∣ny writers made mention of: And that in Ithaca valiant Vlisses was borne. SPORADES. 3 THe Sporades are many, whereof the chiefe are first, Sporades. Euboia, at whose bankes the Sea doth ebbe & flow seuen times in a day: which Aristotle on a time viewing, and being not able to giue a naturall reason for it, despe∣rately threw himself into it. The next is Sciros, the coun∣trey of Achilles. Then Chios, the Countrey of the great Physitian Hypocrates. And the last of any note is Pathmos, the Iland where Saint Iohn liued in banishment, and in which there is a dead hand, the nailes of it still growing, which as the Grecians say, was the hand of Saint Iohn: But the Turkes affirme it to be the hand of one of their Prophets.
CHAP. V. Of Africa. HItherto haue I remained within the cō∣fines of Europe, now succeedeth A∣frica. 1 Africa, (so called in Greeke of a Bounds. & phrica, a place without coldnesse) is limited on the West with the Atlanticke Ocean, on the North with Mare Medi∣terraneum, and on the South with the Aethyopicke waues, and on the East with the Red Sea. 2 This great part of the world, is for the most part Qualitie. full of Desarts, very dry and sandy, hauing few Riuers, which is a great occasion that some parts are not habita∣ble. It is also full of all strange beastes, as Elephants, Li∣ons, Leopards, Hyppopotomos, Crocadiles, and such like: which caused this saying of Plinie, Africa aliquid semper opportat Noui. 3 The inhabitants of it, are generally very blacke, of Inhabitāts. countenance rude, barbarous, and of vnciuil behauiour, addicted to all sorts of religion, of Gentiles, Iewes, Turkes, Christians, and such like. 4 The famous Riuers of this part, are first, Nilus, which Riuers. springeth out of the Mountaines of the Moone, as Ptol∣lomie affirmes: but (as Heroditus sayes) out of a Lake cal∣led Strabo. The other riuers are Niger, Fluuius, Senega, Cambra, Naire, Cuama, and Spiritus sancti. There is ano∣ther Mountaine in Africa, called the Mountaine Atlas, from whence (as Hondius writeth in his Mappes) most of the Riuers haue their beginning.
The chiefe parts of Africa are seuen: Barbarie, vn∣der Diuision. which is comprehended Mauritania, Tingitana, and Caesariensis, Ptolamt: Numedia, or Benedulgerid: Libia, or Sarra: Terra Nigritarum: Aethtopia superior, or the king∣dome of the Abisines: Aethiopia inferior, and Aegypt. OF BARBARIE. 1 BArbarie is enuironed on the West with the Atlan∣lanticke Bounds. Sea, on the North with Mare Mediterra∣neum, on the South with the great Mountaine Atlas, and on the East with Aegypt. 2 This Region doth abound with Oranges, Dates, Qualitis. Oliues, Figges, and a certain kind of Goate, whose haire doth make a stuffe as fine as silke. 3 The inhabitants of this countrey are very faithfull Inhabitants. in their promises, ambitious, greedy of wealth, and most iealous of their wiues. 4 The chiefe Prouinces of this great kingdome, are Prouinces. Morocco, Fez, Tremisen, Tunis, & Barca Marmarica. 5 Morocco, wherin the chiefe citie is Morocco, the peo∣ple of which doth alwaies keepe their beards shaued be∣fore they be married. There is also in this Prouince the mountaine Halemo, in which there is so much gold, that the inhabitants are at continuall strife for it. 6 The next Prouince is Fez, the chiefe & Metropoli∣tan citie of which, is called Fez, beeing of a wonderfull greatnes, hauing in it 700. churches, one among the rest being of a mile & halfe in compasse. In this citie are also two Colledges, wherein liue many Schollers. 7 The next prouince is Tremisen, whose Metropolitan citie is Tremisen, in it is also Algera, a great receptacle for Pirats. 8 The next is Tunis, in which is Bona, where S. Agu∣stine
was Bishop, and Hippo where he was borne. The chiefe and Metropolitan city is Tunis, not farre from the ruines of old Carthage. 9 The last Prouince is Barca Marmarica, full of great sandy places, and in which Ilands is the Temple of Iupi∣ter Hammon. 10 This Kingdome of Barbarie, is a distracted gouern∣ment, Gouernment Fez and Morocco being vnder the Xeriffe, and the other Prouinces vnder the Turkes. OF NVMIDIA. 1 NVmidia is bounded on the West with Mare Atlanti∣cum, Bounds. on the North with the Mountaine Atlas, on the East with Aegypt, and on the South with the Desarts of Libia. 2 This countrey hath in it great plenty of Dates, and Qualitie. the ayre is so holesome, that it admitteth neither Poxe nor Plague in it, but cureth any one that hath it. 3 The inhabitants are oftentimes blinded, by reason Inhabitants. of the vnreasonable store of sand which is there, much of it being carried and blowed with the winde. They are also much addicted vnto Poetry. 4 The gouernment of this Region, is not vnder any Gouernment sole King, but subiect vnto many free Gouernors. Of Libia, or Sarra. 1 LIbia is limited on the West with Gualata, on the East Bounds. with Gaoga, on the North with Numidia, and on the South with the kingdome of the Negroes. 2 The inhabitants of this countrey are base minded, Inhabitants ill nurturde, and great theeues: they liue not subiect vn∣to any lawes. In this place were two of the Sybils, who prophesied of the comming of Christ.
3 This kingdome is ful of Desarts, of which the chief are Zanaga, Zueziga, Tarsa, Lempia, and Berdoa. Of the Kingdome of the Nigers. 1 THe Kingdome of the Nigers is bounded on the Bounds. West with the Atlanticke Sea, on the East with the Kingdome of the Abissines, on the South with Manicon∣go, and on the North with Libia. 2 The inhabitants of this Countrey are most barba∣rous Inhabitants. people, Gentiles, and free from the Plague or Poxe. 3 In this great and large kingdome there are twentie Prouinces. fiue Prouinces, among which these things are chiefly to be noted. First is the Riuer Niger, which with a great in∣vndation encreasing from the 15. of Iune, vntill 40. daies after, doth ouerflow a great part of the land: and in the like time it doth decrease againe. The next is the king∣dome of Canaga, wherein the King hath no certaine re∣uenewes, but onely what his Nobles giue him. The next is Tombutum, where the king doth entertain a great company of learned men, and where inhabitants doe spend their time in dauncing and singing. The last is Bor∣naum, where the people haue neither proper names, children, nor wiues. 4 This great Kingdome of the Nigers is gouerned by foure Kings: the King of Tombutum, Bornum, Goaga, and Gouernment the King of Gualatum. Of the Kingdome of the Abissines. 1 THe Kingdome of the Abissines is limited on the North with Aegypt, on the South with the Moun∣taines Bounds. of the Moone, on the East with the Red Sea, and on the West with Manicongo, and the Kingdome of the Ni∣gers.
2 This countrey is chiefly inricht with Oranges, Le∣mons, Qualitie. and Citrens, which grow of themselues. There is also great store of Barley, Suger, and Hony. 3 The inhabitants of this Nation, are generally vn∣learned, Inhabitants. base, idle: the better sort of them attyring them∣selues in the skinnes of Lions, Tigres, and Linces. They feare a Smith as much as a Diuell: and at meate neuer vse a table, cloth, nor napkin. They alwayes (in any matter) sweare by the life of the King, whome they neuer see but thrise in a yeare, which is on Christmas, Easter, and Ho∣ly-Rood day. They neuer baptise their children before the fortieth day, and also circumcise both men and wo∣men. 4 This great Kingdome is gouerned by Prester Iohn, Gouernment who hath vnder him 70. Kings; and whose colour is white, his subiects being all blacke. He draweth his pe∣digree from Melecke, the sonne of Salamon, and Queene of the South. Of Ethiopia inferiour. 1 EThiopia inferior, is euery where begirt with the Sea, Bounds. vnlesse it be towards the North, where it is boun∣ded from Ethiopia superior, with the Mountaines of the Moone. 2 The inhabitants of this Country are very Sauage, Inhabitāts. cruell, and for the most part great Idolaters, so much cō∣temning Christianitie, that in the Prouince of Douos, no man can marry vntill he hath killed twelue Christians. 3 The Prouinces of this Region, are vnder fiue free Prouinces & Gouernment. Kngs: The king of Zanzibar, Monomotapa, Manicongo, Ai∣ana, and Carfraria: of all which little can be spoken, on∣ly that in the Monomotapa, there are Amozons, which are more valiant then the men, and that the King thereof
doth keepe for his guard 200. Mastiffe dogges. OF AEGYPT. 1 EGypt is limited on the West with Barbarie, on the Bounds. South with Aethiopia superior, on the East with the Red Sea, or Sinus Arabicus, and on the North with Mare Mediterraneum. 2 As concerning the fruitfulnesse of this Countrey, Qualitie. these two verses which follow, shall and doe sufficiently make it knowne. Terra suis contenta bonis, non Indiga Mercis aut Iouis. In solo tanta est fiducia Nilo.Lucan. 3 The inhabitants of this Kingdome are very actiue, Inhabitants. liberall, giuen vnto feasting, somewhat superstitious, ma∣ny of them Christians, but the greater part Mahumetās. 4 The chiefe cities are two, the first is Caire, once cal∣led Cities. Memphis, neere vnto which stands the Piramides of Aegypt, one of the seuen wonders of the worlde. The o∣ther is Alexandria, which was built by Alexander the Great, and wherein was the most famous Library of the world. This was the place also, where Ptolomie tooke all his obseruations. 5 In this Kingdome was inuented Astronomie, Phy∣sicke, Inuentions. and writing on paper: It was called Papirus, of the thing which it was made of, and in Latine Charta, of the place where it was inuented. Hond. 6 The gouernment of this once famous Region, was heretofore vnder Kings, whom they commonly called Gouernment Pharoes: but now belongeth to the trueth abhorring Turke.
CHAP. VI. Of the chiefe Ilands in Africa. THus much of the continent of Africa: now will I knit vnto it the description of the I∣lands. 1 The Ilands of Africa are diuided in∣to Diuision. two parts: into those which are in the Atlanticke Sea, and into those which are in the Aethiopicke Ocean. 2 Those Ilands which are in the Atlantick Sea of note, are onely the Canarie Ilands, the Gorgades, and the Iland of S. Thomas. 3 The Canarie, or Fortunate Ilands, are 7. of which the Canarie. chiefe is Madera, wherein there is great store of Suger, and Canary Wine. There is another, which is called Ta∣nariffa, wherein is a mountaine so high, that the inhabi∣tants haue all their fresh water from a cloude that drop∣peth there very fast, hanging about a tree. 4 The Gorgades are nine, all which are full of Goates, Gorgades. and subiect vnto the King of Spaine. 5 The Iland of Saint Thomas, lyeth directly vnder the Aequator, it is very plentifull of Suger, and a place vnto which the Portugals do much resort. Of the Ilands in the Aethiopicke Sea. 1 THe Ilands of the Aethiopicke Ocean, are but two of Diuision. any fame: Magdagascar, and Zocotara. 2 Magdagascar, or the Iland of S. Iames, is a countrey Magda∣gascar. whose inhabitants are very cruell and barbarous,
and in which there are great store of Elephants. 3 Zocotara is an Iland, in which the people are all Zocotara. Christians, and dwell in Caues, and great holes. CHAP. VII. Of Asia. HItherto haue I scorcht my selfe in the heate of Africa, now therefore of the temperate Continent of Asia. 1 Asia is in euery place begirt with the Sea, vnlesse it be towards the We∣sterne Limits. parts, where it is limited from Europe with the Riuer Tanais, and a line directly drawne vp vnto the Port of Saint Nicholas. And from Africa with that Istmus, betwixt the Arabick Gulfe, and the Mediterranean Sea. 2 This part of the world is farre more famous then a∣ny other: For here was the place where the Monarkes of the Medes, Persians, Babilonians, & Assirians flourished. Here was the place in which all the actes and monu∣ments of the olde Testament, and almost in the new, were accomplished. And here was, and is, the place where the Myracles of our Sauiour were done, for euer to be celebrated. 3 The fruitfulnesse of this great Continent is very Qualitie. much, for it doth containe within it, almost plentie of e∣uery thing. 4 The inhabitants of it, are generally very wittie, for Inhabitants. from hence sprang all the Sciences which the Greekes haue learned of the Hebrewes.
5 The chiefe Riuers of Asia, are Iaxartes, Euphrates, Ti∣gris, Riuers Indus, and Ganges. 6 Two other things there are in this part worthy to be noted: First, is the Mountaine Taurus, which diuides whole Asia into two parts, being in length 5625. miles, & in breadth 375. Next, is Mare Caspium, a Sea which hath no entercourse with any part of the Ocean. 7 This Asia is diuided into sixe great Gouernements, Diuision. into that of Moscouia in Asia, which I haue before descri∣bed: Into Turcia Asiana, Tartarie, Persia, India, & China. OF TVRCIA ASIANA. 1 VNder the Turkes Empire in Asia, are comprehen∣ded Diuision. Natolia, or Asia minor: Turcomania, Syria, or Palestina: and Arabia. OF NATOLIA. 2 NAtolia, or Asia minor, is limited on the West with Limits. the Archipelago, on the South with the Mediterra∣nean Sea, on the East with the Riuer Euphrates, and on the North with Pontus Euxinus. 3 This Countrey is very fruitfull and temperat, but Qualitie. by reason of the Turkes tyranny, it lyeth very waste, and not inhabited. For in it may be seene the ruines of 4000. Townes and Cities. 4 The inhabitants are most idle, lazy, and in religion Inhabitants. Mahumetans. Once they were all Christians, for with them were the seuen churches, which S. Iohn in his Apo∣chalips did write vnto. 5 The chiefe Prouinces of Natolia are 8, Pontus, & Bi∣thinia: Asia propria, or Sarrum: Licia, Pamphilia, Galatia, Prouinces. Cappadocia, and Cylicia. 6 In Pontus and Bithinia, there are two famous cities, Pontus & Bithinia.
the one called Nice, where the first generall Councell was held: the other Chalcedō, where the fourth was held. These Prouinces were once gouerned by Mithridates, who was the first finder out of Metridate. 7 In Asia Propria, or Sarcum, there are many things Asia propria worthy the obseruation: as first, Phrigia maior, of which Midas was King: next Phrigia minor, wherein are to be seene the ruines of olde Troy, and in which stands Perga∣mus, where Gallen, that famous Physitian was borne. In this country also liued Gordius, who knit the knot, which for the intricatenesse therof was called Nodus Gordianus. The next is Lidia, in which liued rich King Craessus. The next is Ionia, wherein stands that famous citie Ephesus, most renowned for the great Temple of Diana, which was in it, accounted to bee one of the wonders of the world. This is also one of the seuen Cities which Saint Iohn in the Reuelation wrote vnto, and vnto which Saint Paule did direct one of his Epistles. In this Pro∣uince is also Smirna, an other of the seuen Cities, and in which Policarpus (that was Bishoppe there) liued, who sometimes had beene Scholler vnto Saint Iohn the E∣uangelist. The next, is Halicarnassus, wherein Dionisius and Heroditus, those famous Historiographers liued. The last of any fame, is the riuer Meandrus, which hath 600. turnings. 8 In Licia little is to be noted, onely that there stand Licia. some ruines of the Temple of Apollo, and that S. Nicholas liued there. 9 In Pamphilia stands the Citie of Seleucia, built Pamphilia. by Seleucus, one of the foure great successours of Alex∣ander. 10 In Galatia were the people vnto whome Saint Galatia. Paule writ one of his Epistles: And this also is one of
the Prouinces, where the Iewes were dispersed. 11 In Capadocia is that flourishing Citie of Trepi∣zond, Capadocia. which in times past was a Citie Imperi∣all. 12 In Cilicia is the Citie Tarsus, where S. Paule was Cilicia. borne, & vnto which Ionas fled, when hee was comman∣ded to goe vnto Niniuie. 13 The last Prouince is Armenia minor, in which there Armenia the lesse. is great store of Oyle, and excellent Wine. OF TVRCOMANIA. 14 TVrcomania, or Armenia maior, is bounded on the Limites. West with the Riuer Euphrates, and Pontus Euxi∣nus, on the South with Mesopotamia, on the East with Media, and Mare Caspium, and on the North with part of Tartaria. 15 The inhabitants of this Region, are great rob∣bers, Inhabitants liuing after the manner of the basest sort of Tartars, that is, vnder tents, going from one place vnto another in companies. 16 The chiefe Prouinces are two, the first is Georgia, Prouinces. seated on the bankes of the Caspian Sea, wherein the in∣habitants do chiefly worship Saint George: The other is Colchus, from whence Iason did setch the Golden Fleece. 17 In this Turcomania, the thing which is most fa∣mous, is, that the Arke of Noe did first rest it selfe vpon the Mountaines of Armenia, now called Nohae montes. Of Syria, or Palestina. 18 SYria, Palestine, or the Holy land, is limited on the Limits. West with Mare Mediterraneum: on the South
with Arabia, on the East with Mesopotamia, and on the North with the mountaine Libanus. This countrey is in compasse 200. miles. 19 The inhabitants of it were once so many, that it did Inhabitants. containe in it 30. Kings: and when Dauid did command the people to be numbred, there were found 1300000. fighting men. But at this time there are very few, & those Christians of euery sect, and Saracens. 20 The fruitfulnesse of this Kingdome doth chiefly Qualitie. consist of Wines, whose Grapes do grow in such aboun∣dance, that they are gathered thrice in a yeare: They haue also great store of Apples, and Lemons. 21 The Prouinces which this Region is diuided in∣to, Prouinces. are foure, Gallilie, Samaria, Iudaea, and Idumea. 22 Gallily is diuided into the higher and lower. In the Gallilie. higher is Phinicia, vnder which is comprehended Tire & Sidon. In the lower is Nazareth, where Christ was borne: and in it is also the Mountaine Tabor, where our Sauiour was transfigured. 23 In the Prouince of Samaria, stood that great city of Samaria. Samaria, the ruines of which are yet to be seene: and not farre from thence the citie Sichar, where Christ desired water of a certaine woman. 24 In the Prouince of Iudaea stood the once famous Iudaea. Citie of the world, called Ierusalem, where the Sepulchre of Christ is to be seene: and not farre from thence stood Bethlaem, where he was borne. There is also in this Pro∣uince, an hearbe called Bachara, whose colour is like vnto a flame, and in the euening shineth like vnto a Sunne-beame, which if any one come to plucke it vp, it wil wag from him, vntill the vrine of a woman bee sprinkled on it. Iosephus de Bello Iudaico, Lib. 7. 25 The chiefe Riuers and Lakes of these Prouinces, Riue
are foure. The first is Iordan, which springeth out of the Mountaine Libanus, so called of Ior and Dan, two riuers which meete together. The second is the Lake of Galli∣lie. The third is the Lake of Genazareth, or Tiberia, fa∣mous for our Sauiours sailing in it. The fourth and last, is Mare Mortuum, or the Dead Sea, into which Iordan is disburdened. At the top of this Lake swimmeth Pitch and Brimstone, from whence reaketh such a stinking mist, that it killeth all the birds that flye ouer it, and ma∣keth the Apples that grow by it, being faire in shew, very rotten. Moreouer, the water is of that nature, that if an Oxe were throwne in with his feete bound, hee will not sinke. Iosephus Solinus, 48. Chap. OF ARABIA. 26 ARabia is encompast on the West with the Red Sea, Limites. on the South with the maine Ocean, on the East with Sinus Persicus, and on the North with Syria, and Mesopotamia. 27 It is diuided into three parts, into Arabia Deserta, Diuision. Petrosa, and Foelix. 28 In Arabia Deserta nothing is worth the obseruing, but that it was the place where God did keepe the chil∣dren of Israell for the space of 40. yeares, feeding them with Manna from heauen. 29 Of Arabia Petrosa, little can be spoken, onely that there stands the Mountaine Sinay, where God gaue the Tables of the Law vnto Moses. 30 Arabia Foelix, is one of the most fruitfullest Coun∣tries in the world, hauing in it Franchincense, mirrhe, & most pretious Balmes, which are in no other places to be found. 31 The chiefe Citie is Mediua, where Mahumet was
intombed in an yron Coffin, which being carried into a Temple, the roofe whereof was made of Adamant, is at∣tracted vnto the toppe of the Vault, and there hangeth, being supported by nothing. 32 The inhabitants of this Region, are superstitious, Inhabitants and in all their doings very vnconstant. They are in their Religion Mahometans. And as we reckon our time frō the yeare of our Lord, so they from the time of Mahomet, whose comming they haue long expected: saying, there were three great Prophets, Moses, Christ, and Mahomet. And as the Doctrine of Moses was bettered by Christ, so was the Doctrine of Christ mended by Mahomet. Thus much concerning the Turkes Dominions in Asia. OF TARTARIA. 1 TArtarie is limited on the North with the Scithian Limites. Sea, on the East with the East Ocean, on the South with the Indies, and the Wall of China, and on the West with Moscouia, and Sarmatia. 2 The inhabitants of this Countrey are of a meane Inuentions. stature, large in the shoulders, broad in the face, ha∣uing flat Noses, and long Beardes. They marrie as many wiues as they will, liuing abroad in Tents made of the skinnes of Beastes: thinking it a great vnhappi∣nesse, if they remaine in one place longer then the pa∣stures haue meate for their Cattell. They eate the raw flesh of Horses, onely a little scorcht in the Sunne, not respecting how they were killed, or what disea∣ses they died of. When they thirst, they let their Horses blood, and then sucke till they bee satisfied. They cannot abide Hogges flesh. And for their Religi∣on,
they are both Pagans and Saracens. 3 The chiefe Prouinces of Tartarie are fiue, Tartaria Prouinces. minor, Tartaria Asiatica, Tartaria Antiqua, Zagathay, or Scithia intra Imaum montem, Cathaia, or Scithia extra Ima∣um montem. 4 In Tartarie the lesse, is Horda Precopensium, which liue in the fieldes about Pontus Euxinus, Meotis Palus, and about Taurica Chersonesus. These are all subiect vnto the Turke. 5 In Tartaria Asiatica, lying betweene the Ri∣uer Tanays, and the Caspian Sea, are many Hordes, a∣mongst the which the cheife are Horda Astinchanen∣sis, and Casanensis, both beeing subiect vnto the Mos∣couite. 6 In Tartaria Antiqua, are the Kingdomes of Gogge, and Magogge, from whence the Tartares first had their beginning, and from whence came King Tabor. 7 In Zargathay, or Scithia intra Imaum montem, is Samarchand, lying betweene the Riuer Iaxartes and Oxus, where Tamburline liued, that went into the field against Baiazeth the Turke, with seuen hundred thou∣sand Tartares. The chiefe and Metropolitane Citie of it is Richend, a place of great Trafficke. 8 In Cathayo, or Scithia extra Imaum montem, is the Citie of Cambalowe, the chiefe seate of the Great Cham, beeing in compasse twenty foure miles. In this part also is the mountaine Altay, where they intombe alwayes the bodie of their Great Cham, which whyle they carrie the dead corpes vnto the Moun∣tayne, they kill all they meete, and bid them goe
and serue their Maister in another world. 9 This part of Tartarie or Carthayo extra Imaum mon∣tem, Gouernment is gouerned onely by one, who is called the Great Cham, whose word stands for a lawe, and is titled of his subiects, Filius Dei, Vmbra Dei, & Anima Dei. OF PERSIA. 1 PErsia is limited on the West with Sinus Persicus, on Limits. the North with Mare Caspium, and the riuer Oxus, on the South with the maine Ocean, and on the East with Indus Fluius. 2 This mightie Region hath in it great store of met∣tals Qualitie. and pretious stones, as much flourishing in faire Ri∣uers and Lakes, as poore in fruits, hauing no trees but onely Palmes. 3 The inhabitants of this Kingdome are very cour∣teous, Inhabitants. affecting hospitalitie, addicted much vnto Poetry and Physicke, and among whom Nobilitie is highly e∣steemed. They are of Religion for the most part Mahu∣metans, Religion. but such as the Turkes call Scismatickes. 4 The Prouinces of this great Gouernement are six∣teene, Prouinces. Mesopotamia, Assiria, Chaldaea, Susiana, Farsus, Ger∣mania, Parthia, Hyrcania, Gedrosia, Drangiana, Aria, Margi∣ana, Aracosia, Parapomissus, and Brachana. 5 Mesopotamia, quasi mesos potamos, lieth betweene the Mesopotam. riuer Tigris and Euphrates, in which, some thinke, stood the terrestiall Paradise, and that from hence came the wise men, which brought presents vnto Christ, beeing guided by a starre. This countrey is now subiect vnto the Turke. 6 Assiria is very famous for the great Citie Niniuie, Assiria. which stood in it, vnto which Ionas was commanded by God to go and preach. This is also subiect vnto the Turk.
7 Chaldaea is renowned for that great citie of Babylon, Chaldaea. one of the seuen wonders of the world, & from whence came the confusion of tongues. Here was that famous Erithea, the fift Sybil, that prophesied of the comming of Christ. 8 Of the other Prouinces nothing I finde worth the noting, and the refore omit them. 9 The chiefe and Metropolitane Citie, is Persepolis, seated vpon the Riuer Bindimire. 10 This Kingdome of Persia is gouerned by one, Gouernment whom they call the Sophy. Of the East Indies. 1 INdia Orientalis, or the East Indies, is bounded on the Limits. West with the riuer Indus, on the North with the Mountaine Taurus, on the East with China, and on the South with the maine Ocean. 2 This country doth exceed any other in fruit, which is Qualitie. gathered there twise in a yere. There are also such a huge kind of Mastiffe Dogges, that for strength they are able to contend with Lions. There are great store of Ele∣phants, white Apes, Camels, Dragons, and an innume∣rable company of Serpents, which are as big as any man, the inhabitants eating them as commonly as we do any meate. 3 The inhabitants are a mixt sort of people, beeing Inhabitāti. Persians, Scithians, Arabians, Hebrewes, & some Chri∣stians. They are commonly ingenious, much inclined vnto all Sciences. They adore one sole God, which they paint with three heads, but cannot giue a reason for it. 4 India is diuided into two parts, India infra Gangem, and India extra Gangem.
De India within Ganges. 5 INdia intra Gangem, is inuironed on the West with the Limits. riuer Indus, on the South with the maine Ocean, on East with Sinus Bengala, and the Riuer Ganges, and on the North with part of the Mountaine Taurus. 6 This part is diuided into fortie seuen Kingdoms, Prouinces. among which there are onely fiue of any note, Cambaia, Decan, Malabar, Narsinga, and Delly. 7 In the Kingdome of Cambaia, the people are so Cambaia. ceremonious and superstitious, that they will not eate any thing that hath had life in it. They are great Ido∣laters, liuing in due obseruance of their King, who is a most valiant Prince. The chiefe Citie is Cam∣baia, wherein if any one dye, they presently burne his body, that it may dissolue into his proper elements. Hon∣dius in tabulis. 8 Decan is a Kingdome made famous by the Portu∣galls, Decan. which lye continually in the great Citie of Goa. Not farre from this citie is a place, which if the hornes of any Beast bee cast, they will take roote and grow vp out of the ground. Hugo a Linschotten in cap. 61. of the description of the Indies. 9 In Malabar stands the Citie Calicute, the inhabi∣tants Malabar. of which doe worshippe the Diuell: the King of it is titled by his subiects Samori, which signifieth God on earth. They are very skilfull Souldiours, vsing when they goe vnto Warre, to tye vnto the hilts of their Swordes Shingles of Copper, or Siluer, the sound whereof in steed of Trumpets and Drummes, encoura∣geth them vnto fight. By the lawe of their Countrey they may not marry, but are allowed women in com∣mon.
10 Narsinga, is a land fruitfull in euery thing, vnlesse Narsinga. it bee Horses. The chiefe Citie in it is Bisnagar, in which the people when they dye are burned: and if they were marryed, their wiues doe come and leape into the fire, willing to dye with them. 11 The last is the Kingdome of Delly; in which the Delly. chiefe and Metropolitane Citie is Delly, where the great Mogor doth alwayes keepe his Court. 12 The gouernment of all these Kingdomes are vn∣der Gouernment the great Mogor, vnlesse it be Narsinga, and Calicute, which haue free Princes. Of India without Ganges. 13 INdia extra Gangem, is limited on the West with Si∣nus Limits. Bengala, and the Riuer Ganges, on the South with the maine Sea, on the East with part of China, and the East Sea, and on the North with part of the Moun∣taine Taurus. 14 The chiefe Prouinces of this part of the Indies are Prouinces. three, Pegu, Siam, and Chauchin china. 15 In Pegu there are most beautifull Parrats, and great Pegu. store of ciuet Cats. The chiefe city is Pegu. 16 In Siam there are many Schooles, the inhabitants Siam. whereof are great Idolaters, worshipping the higher Ele∣ments: And when any one dyeth with them, they will not bury them in the earth, but hang them vp in the aire, rather wishing the Birdes which are heauenly, to eate them, then the worms which are earthly to touch them. In this Prouince is also Comboia, the people of which do thinke themselues and all other men to bee of the same nature that brute beasts are. Hondius.
17 In Chauchinchina, there is great store of gold, siluer, and Purceline, of which the Purceline dishes are made. Chauchin∣china. The inhabitants in many places of this countrey, are An∣thropophagi, or men eaters. 18 This part of the Indies was once gouerned by the King of Paga, and Siam, but now is brought in subiecti∣on Gouernment vnto one sole King, who is King of Barma, keeping his Court in the Citie of Odia, in which are contained 200000. Citizens. OF CHINA. 1 CHina is bounded on the West with India, and the ri∣uer Cautan, on the South with Chauchinchina, on Limits. the East with the East Ocean, and on the North with a wall of 600. miles in length, which defends it from the inuasion of the Tartares. 2 This Kingdome is not onely held to bee the chiefe of all Asia, but of al the world, being so fertil, that it doth Qualitie. both yeeld what is fitting for humane life, and whatsoe∣uer the delicate and effeminate appetite of man may lust after. 3 The inhabitants of it are very witty, politicke, great Inhabitants. Mathematicians, conceiuing so well of themselues, that they are accustomed to say, that themselues haue two eies, the people of Europe one, & the residue of the other Nations none. 4 Vnder this great kingdome are comprehended 15. Prouinces, the least of which exceeds in largenesse the greatest in Europe, and in them are contained 70. Kinges, which are all subiect vnto the King of China. The inha∣bitants are so many also, that they exceede the number of 70000000. And the cities and townes stand so thicke, that the whole kingdome seemeth as one mighty citie.
5 The chiefe thinges which are to bee obserued, in these Prouinces, are first, that there are some of the inha∣bitants which dwell in houses vpon the Sea, buying, sel∣ling, and keeping market as they doe in any towne. And in many plaines they haue houses running vpon wheels, with sayles at the top of them, that when they will go vn∣to any place, they tarry onely for a winde to driue them. There is also in this Kingdome the great City of Quin∣zay, whose circuit is 100. miles, hauing in it 1600000. in∣habitants, and 12000. stone bridges, among which there are some so high, that a great Shippe with top-saile may passe vnder them. In the middle of this Citie, there is a Lake thirtie miles in compasse, in which there are two goodly Ilands. Some put this Citie in Tartarie, some in China, others in the confines of both: but wheresoeuer it is, it is much ruinated since the time of Paulus Venetius, who maketh a full description of it. 6 This great kingdome is gouerned by one sole king, Gouernment who is called of his subiects the Lord of the world, & the sonne of the shining Sunne. CHAP. VIII. Of the Ilands in Asia. THus farre haue I rashly run ouer the Con∣tinent of Asia: now therefore will I linke vnto it the description of the Ilands be∣longing thereunto. 1 The Asian Ilands are diuided into those in the Mediterranean Sea, and those which are in the Indian Ocean.
Of the Ilands in the Mediterranean Sea. 2 THe chiefe Ilands in the Mediterranean Sea, are on∣ly Diuision. two, Rodes, and Cyprus. 3 The Iland Rodes is very famous for many things, Rodes. but chiefly for three: The first is, that the Sunne was ne∣uer so maskt with a cloud, but that once in a day shee did shine vpon this Iland. The second is, that the great piller of the Sunne offered by the Gentiles vnto Iupiter, stood in this Ile, made in the forme of a mighty huge man. The third & last is, that the order of the Knights of the Rodes was held in this place. 13 The Iland Cyprus is very fuitfull, but little fa∣mous. Cyprus. De Insulis In Mari Indico. 5 THe chiefe Ilands in the Indian Ocean, are Ormus, Diuision. Zeilan, Samatra, Aureae Iusulae, Borneo, Iaua Maior, Iaua Minor, Iapan, the Molucco, and the Philippian I∣lands. 6 Ormus is of it selfe a kingdome, and commaundeth Ormus. most part of the Persian gulfe: it is exceeding barren, but the Citie Ormus (in which the Portugals doe hold a strong Castle) is so faire and full of trade, that they say there, if the world were a ring, Ormus ought to bee the stone thereof. 7 The Ile Zeilan is seated in Sinus Bengala, in which Zeilan. there are Fieldes whose grasse continually groweth, and Trees that are laden with fruit all the yeare long. Inso∣much that some did thinke, that this was the place where Paradise stood. This Iland is subiect vnto the Mogor, notwithstanding the Portugalls doe hold a strong Castle in it.
8 The Iland Samatra lyeth directly vnder the Ae∣quator, Samatra. hauing in it a Fountaine which sendeth foorth water, that if it bee put into fire, doth not quench it, but makes it burne more vehemently. In it is also a Mountaine which sendeth foorth continuall flames of fire. The inhabitants of this Iland are Anthropo∣phagi. 9 In Iaua Maior, the inhabitants are excellent Sea∣men, Iaua Maior great Pirats, which acknowledge Mahumet, and liue vpon Cats and Mise. Yet this Iland for the extraor∣dinarie fruitfulnesse of it, was called by Scaliger, the Com∣pendium of the world. 10 In Iaua Minor little is worth the noting, onely that Iaua Minor it doth flourish with Spices. 11 In the Iland Iapan, the inhabitants are very super∣stitious, Iapan. and great Idolaters, washing their children so soone as they bee borne in Riuers. They will neuer al∣so come into the roomes where they dine or eate any thing, with their shooes on their feete, but keepe the places (as they tearme it) hallowed. This Iland hath very much golde in it, insomuch that Paule Venetus doth affirme, that in his time the Kings Palace was couered with gold. 12 The Moluccoe Ilands are famous for the great Moluccoes plenty of spices which are in them. There is also in these Isles a Bird, called Monicodiata, which hath no feete, continually flying without intermission. The female of this Bird doth lay her egges when shee breedes in a hole which is in the backe of the Male, like vnto a nest, & these are neuer taken before they dye and fall vpon the earth. The inhabitants of these Ilands go naked, and are great Idolaters.
13 The Philippian Ilands lye North of the Moluccoes, Philippians the ayre being very temperate, bringeth forth all kind of Spices. CHAP. IX. De America, siue India Orientali. HAuing discourst of three parts of the world, Europe, Africa, and Asia, I will now venter on the last & greatest part, which is America. 1 America is inuironed on the East with the maine Ocean, on the South Limits. with the Straights of Magelane, on the West with Mare Del Zur, or Pacificum, and on the north with the vnknowne Land. 2 This part of the world, was first discried by Christopher Columbus, in the yeare 1492. and then after that made better knowne by Americus Vesputius, of whome it is cal∣led vnto this day America. 3 The fruitfulnesse of this soyle is to be admired, for Qualitie. in it are wonderfull store of Spices, Birdes, and Fishes. There is also gold in such plenty, that the Spaniards haue reported they haue digged in some places more Golde then earth. The chiefest want in this part are Horses, of which they haue few or none, and which was the occa∣sion, that when the Spaniards brought Horses in the battell against them, they fell down astonished, thinking that when the horses neighed, they had spoken vnto them. 4 The inhabitants of this mighty Territory, are most Inhabitants. barbarous, being in some places men eaters, they are al∣together ignorant and vnlearned, which was the cheiefe
cause that they conceited themselues, when any one of the Spaniards did read a letter, the Diuel told him the cō∣tents. They are ignorant of the vse of yron, and estimate glasse aboue gold. To conclude, they are excellent run∣ners, and swimmers. 5 This fourth part of the world, is chiefly vnder the Gouernment King of Spaine, and is diuided first into two parts, Mexica∣na, and Peruana, afterwards subdiuided as followeth. DE MEXICANA. 1 MExicana is limited on the east with Mare Del Nor∣te, Limits. on the West with Mare Del Zur, on the South with an Istmus, betwixt Peruana and it, and on the North with the vnknowne land. 2 In this part of America are many Prouinces, the Prouinces. chief of which are Quiuira, Mexicana, Nicaragua, Iucatan, Florida, Virginia, Norumbega, Noua Francia, Terra Cortea∣lis, and Estotiland. 3 The Prouince of Quiuira extendeth it selfe vnto Si∣nus Quiuira. Califormia, being a most dry and barren ground. 4 The Prouince of Mexicana was first found out by Mexicana. Ferdinando Cortesius, in the yeare 1518. There are in this place many Riuers, in which breede great store of Cro∣cadiles, whose bodies the inhabitants doe eate. There are also many mines of golde. And there is a mountaine called Popochampeche, which doth continually vomit forth flames of fire. The chiefe and Metropolitane citie of this Prouince, or of whole America, is Mexico, in which the Prorex for Spaine doth lie, and in which there is both money coyned, and bookes printed. 5 The next is Nicaragua, wherin is a great lake which Nicaragua. hath no entercourse with the Sea, and yet doth ebbe & flow as the Sea doth. The people in this place are more
manlike then others, both in behauiour and shape. 6 In Iucatan Chersonesus, the chiefe citie is Guatimala, Iucatan. where another Vice-Roy for Spaine doth lye. The inha∣bitants of this Countrey did adore the Crosse before Cortez comming. 7 Terra Florida (so called of the French, who first Terra Flo∣rida. founded it) hath in it many Prouinces, whereof Panuca is one, in which the people are very warlike, but butche∣rously minded, killing all the captiues they take, and ea∣ting them. Furthermore, they neuer marry vntil they be 40. yeares of age, and liue most vpon Serpents & worms. There is another place in this Prouince, called Alberdo∣sia, wherin the women let their children sucke vntil they be 12. yeares of age. 8 Virginia (so nominated of our late Queene) was first Ʋirginia. found out by Sir Walter Rawleigh, who gaue it that name. Of this Countrey what may be spoken more at large, see the discourse of Master Harriot, and Master Hackant. 9 Norumbega (so called of certaine fishes which are Norumbega. in it of that name.) The chiefe Citie of it is Norum∣bega. 10 Noua Frauncia lyeth neere vnto that great Sinus of Noua Fran∣cia. Saint Laurence. It was discouered and taken first of the French men, vnder Frauncis the first of France. The in∣habitants of this Prouince haue little boats made of lea∣ther, which they vse to fish in, & when they haue done to take them vp at their backe, and carry them away. 11 Terra Cortealis, is little famous, vnlesse it be for a ri∣uer Terra Cor∣tealis. there, which is called the three brothers. 12 Estotiland was first found out by Anthony Zenus a Estotiland. Venetian, neere vnto which lyeth Fretum Dauis, where they haue sought oftentimes for a passage vnto the Mo∣luccoes & China, but it could not be effected. Not far from
this lyeth Newfound-land, frō whence commeth most of our fish. And in the North part lyeth a land, called by Sir Frauncis Drake, Noua Albion, of which nothing can bee certainely spoken. 13 Thus farre of the Prouinces of Mexicana, now followeth the description of Peruana. De Peruana. PEruana is in euery place inuironed with the Sea, vn∣lesse Limits. it be towards the North, where it is ioyned vn∣to Mexicana, by a little Istmus. 2 This part of America doth chiefly flourish with gold, Qualitie. pretious stones, Spices, Suger, & strange hearbs, among which is that hearbe Tobaco, which is so much, and idely vsed amongst vs. 3 The inhabitants of this place are generally cruell, Inuentions. rude, barbarous, and men eaters, not vnlike vnto those of Mexicana: They go naked, and if they take any man cap∣tiue, they slice his body out into collops, and broile it vp∣on the coales, making mery so long as that indures them. They are towards the South part mighty great men, be∣ing all Idolaters, worshipping the Diuell, or some mon∣strous mishapen Idole. 4 The chiefe Riuer of this Southerne part of Ameri∣ca, Riuers. are three, the Riuer Amazon, Maragon, and the golden Riuer Rio, or de la Plate, in which there is found much gold and siluer. 5 This Peruana is diuided into foure great Prouinces Diuision. or Kingdomes, Castella Aurea, Peru, Chile, and Brasile: In each of which the King of Spaine hath his Agents. 6 Castella Aurea, doth comprehend in it the whole Ist∣mus, Castella Aurea. which doth linke and tye the two parts of America together. In it are the two famous Ports or Hauens, in
which the Spanish Ships are either laden for Spaine, or disburdened for America. The one called Theomina, or Nombre de Dios, the other Panamais. 7 Peru is limited on the North with Castella Aurea, on Peru. the West with Mare Pacificum, or the calme Sea, on the South with Chile, and on the East with a Mediterranean vnknowne. This place was found out by Frauncis Piza∣rus, in the yeare 1525. 8 The inhabitants of this Region are great Idolaters, Inhabitants. worshipping in some places blacke filthy sheepe, in other places Serpents. They are also such great men of per∣son, that the Spaniards haue found teeth of them that were three fingers in breadth, and foure in length. 9 The fruitfulnesse of this countrey doth chiefly ex∣cell Qualitie. in the hearbe Tobaco, and Cocam, which if it be put in∣to any mans mouth, it quencheth his thirst. And there is a certaine Beast, that when hee runneth away hath a bag hanging downe vnder his belly, into which his young ones conuey themselues. There is also such plenty of Gold, that the inhabitants care not for it, and when the Spaniards came thither first, they shooed their Horses with it. In this Prouince are the three riuers before men∣tioned in the generall description of Peruana. 10 The chiefe citie of this Kingdome is Michaelia, Citie. in which lyeth a Protex for Spaine. 11 Chile doth flourish in many things, but that which Chile. is of greatest note, there is a Riuer which in the day time doth runne, and in the night standeth still: the reason is, because this riuer lyeth vnder Mountaines, on which snow falling, in the day is dissolued, in the night congea∣led. The chiefe and Metropolitan City of this Prouince, is the citie of Saint Iames, in which lyeth another Protex for Spaine.
12 Brasile is extended from the riuer Maragon, vnto Brasile. the straights of Mageian. 13 The inhabitants of this large Prouince, are sine Fi∣de, Inhabitants Lege, & Rege: that is, without faith, law, or King. They are also such excellēt swimmers, that they can tary vnder water for the space of an houre. They are very great dis∣semblers, shedding teares (which they haue alwayes in readinesse) when any of their friends come vnto them. 14 The fruitfulnesse of this Countrey lyeth much in Qualitie. Sugar, and a wood called Brasile, which is transported from thence into many parts of Europe. In this Country is also that Beast, called Pigritia, which in fifteene dayes will be going as farre as one can throw a stone. Here are also many strange Hearbes, whereof two are of most note. The first is the hearbe Copaibas, of which the excel∣lent Balsomum is made, that cureth all greene wounds. The other is an hearbe, which of the Portugals is called Sentida, of Lincotanus Sentiens, and of others Viua, whose qualitie is, that if any one throw any thing vnto it, or touch it, it will shut his leaues, and will not open them vntill the partie which did displease it be departed Here are also neere vnto the Sea-shore, Fishes which will flye like vnto birds. And to conclude, here are trees of that bignesse, that there are as many families dwelling in one of the limbs of them, as are in some Parishes of England. Magin.
CAP. X. De America Insulis. THus farre of the continent and Kings con∣tained in America: Now onely remaines the description of some few and particu-Ilands, and then I haue finished what in fine I wished. 1 The Ilands of America are diuided into those which Diuision. are in Mari Del Nort, and those in Mari del Zur. 2 The knowne Ilands in Mari Del Nort, are fiue, Hi∣spaniola, Iamaica, Cuba, Caribum, and Cimbubon. 3 In the Iland Hispaniola there are many mynes of Hispaniola. Golde. The chiefe Citie in it, is Saint Dominicke, in which the Archbishop therof doth continually lye. This was the Iland which Columbus did first finde out. 4 In Iamaica, or the Iland of Saint Iames, little is to be Iamaica. obserued, onely that in it there is a Citie called Siuill, in which there is a faire Abby. 5 In the Iland Cuba, the Metropolitan Citie is Haua∣na, Cuba. so called, because it is the Hauen where all the Ships doe succour themselues, which come from Spaine vnto Peru, or the contrary. 6 In the Iland Caribum, the inhabitants are all An∣thropophagi: Caribum. And from hence is brought that woade which is called Guaicum, or Lignum Sanctum. 7 In the Iland Cimbubon, there is a Tree very fa∣mous Cimbubon. for his leaues, which when they fall vnto the earth, doe creepe, hauing on either side thinges like
vnto two feete, besides, if one offer to touch or come neere vnto them, they will moue, and offer to run away. Guilandinus reporteth it, and Scaliger in his 112. exercise against Cardanus. De Insulis in Mari Del Zur. 1 IN Mari Del Zur, there are onely three Ilands which Haccari. are knowne, called Hacari, in which are great store of Golde. Quem nos depictum vix recte aspeximus orbem, Solius verbi fabrica sola fuit. Illi igitur terrae qui fundamenta locauit, Sit soli nostro gloria sola Deo. FINIS.
THE TABLE. A 1 AFrica. 2 America. 3 Asia. 4 Arabia. 5 Abissinorum Regio. 6 Armenia. 7 Azores Insulae. B 1 Barbaria. 2 Brasilia. 3 Baliares Insulae. 4 Belgia. 5 Britania Magna. C 1 China. 2 Corsica. 3 Candia. 4 Cyprus 5 Chile. D 1 Dania. 2 Dacia Vetus. E 1 Europea. 2 Egypt. 3 Ethiopia Inferior. 4 Estotilandia. F 1 Frislandia Insulae. 2 Florida. G 1 Gallia. 2 Germania. Grecia. Groinlandia. Groclandia. H 1 Hispania. 2 Hungaria. 3 Hibernia. I 1 Italia. 2 Illiria. 3 India. 4 Islandia. 5 Insulae in Mari Atlant. 6 Insulae in Mar. Egeo. 7 Insulae in Mar. Ethiopico. 8 Insulae in Mar. Indico. 9 Insulae in Mar. Del Nort. 10 Insulae in Mar. Del Zur. 11 Ischia. L 1 Lituania. 2 Liuonia. 3 Libia. M 1 Moscouia. 2 Mexicana. 3 Malta. N 1 Nigretarum Regio. 2 Numidia. 3 Noruegia. 4 Natolia. O 1 Ormus. P 1 Polonia. 2 Prussia. 3 Persia. 4 Peruana. 5 Peru.
6 Palestina. R 1 Rodes. S 1 Scandia. 2 Scicilia. 3 Sardinia. 4 Sweuia. T 1 Tartaria. 2 Transiluania. 3 Turcicurh Imperium Eu∣ropeum. 4 Turcia Asiana. 5 Terra Borealis Incog∣nita. 6 Terra Australis Incog∣nita. V 1 Virginia. 2 Venice. Z 1 Zazinthus. 2 Zeilan. FINIS.
A Table of the chiefe Cities contained in the whole world, with their Longitudes and Latitudes anne∣xed thereunto. A     lōg. lōg. lat. lat.     D. M. D. M. 1 ALexandria in Egypt. 60 30 30 0 2 Amsterdam in Belgia. 27 34 52 40 3 Antuerpe in Belgia. 24 30 51 48 4 Angiers in Fraunce. 18 10 47 25 5 Argentine in Germany. 27 50 48 44 6 Athens in Greece. 52 45 37 15 B 1 Belgia in Chaldea. 83 10 33 50 2 Bethlem in Iudea. 65 45 31 50 3 Bengala in Indies. 0 0 23 0 4 Bisancon in Fraunce. 20 30 46 30 5 Bourges in Fraunce. 22 10 46 20 6 Buda in Hugarie. 42 0 47 0 C 1 Caliz in Spaine. 5 10 37 0 2 Calicute in Indies. 112 0 17 0 3 Coimbra in Portugall. 11 25 40 0 4 Constantinople in Greece. 56 0 43 5 5 Colen in Germany. 30 30 51 0 6 Copenhagen in Denmarke. 34 30 56 50 7 Compostella in Spaine. 6 0 20 0 8 Corinth in Greece. 51 15 36 55 9 Cracouia in Polonia. 42 40 50 12 D 1 Damascus in Iudea. 69 0 33 0 2 Doway in Belgia. 25 0 50 30 E 1 Edenburge in Scotland. 19 0 58 0 2 Ephesus in Natolia. 57 40 37 40
F. 1 Florence in Italy. 34 0 43 40 2 Frankfort ad Maenū in Germany 30 0 50 30 3 Frankfort ad oder. Germany. 34 0 52 30 G 1 Geneua in Sauoy. 28 0 45 45 2 Goa in Indies. 0 0 17 0 3 Granado in Spaine. 17 15 37 30 I 1 Ierusalem in Iudea. 66 0 31 40 2 Ingolstad. 32 10 48 40 L 1 Lacedemon in Natolia. 50 15 35 30 2 Leiden in Belgia. 27 20 52 10 3 Lisbon in Portugal. 21 20 38 50 4 Louaine in stelgia. 23 0 51 0 5 London in England. 20 0 52 30 6 Lutesia in Fraunce. 23 20 48 0 7 Lions in Fraunce. 25 40 44 30 M 1 Ments in Germany. 27 30 50 30 2 Mexico in America. 0 0 20 0 3 Millaine in Italy. 33 0 44 20 4 Moscouia in Russia. 0 0 61 0 N 1 Naples in Italy, 39 30 41 0 Nice in Natolia. 57 0 41 40 3 Niniuie in Asiria. 38 0 36 4 4 Nidrosia in Noruegia. 89 45 60 50 O 1 Orleance in Fraunce. 22 0 47 10 2 Ormus in the Ile Ormus. 92 0 19 0 3 Oxford in England. 15 0 51 30 P 1 Paris in Fraunce. 32 0 48 10 2 Padua in Italy. 36 10 44 45 3 Pauia in Italy. 33 5 44 0
4 Poicters in Fraunce. 39 15 50 10 5 Prage in Bohemia. 19 10 46 10 R 1 Rome in Italy. 38 0 41 20 2 Rodes in the Ile Rodes. 58 0 35 0 3 Riga in Lyuonia. 53 45 59 0 S 1 Siuill in Spaine. 14 20 37 30 2 Siracusa in Scicilie, 40 30 37 30 3 Sienna in Italy. 36 15 42 20 4 Stockholme in Sweuia. 47 0 60 30 5 Saint Iago in Spaine. 10 50 43 5 T 1 Tarsus in Natolia. 66 14 38 56 2 Tolledo in Spaine. 16 40 40 10 3 Tollouse in Fraunce. 20 30 43 5 4 Triers in Germany. 0 0 49 50 V 1 Valentia in Spaine. 21 10 39 55 2 Venice in Italy. 37 0 44 50 3 Vienna in Austria. 31 45 48 20 W 1 Witteberge in Germany. 0 0 51 20 2 Witsberge in Germany. 0 0 50 0 FINIS.
