24921 99854547 19973
A NEW, AND MERRIE Prognostication: Deuised, After the final fashion Made and written for this present yeare, By foure witty Doctors as shall appeare, Spendall, Whball and Doctor Dews With them Will Sommer takes his place, They haue consulted all in deede, To solace them, that this shall reede. AT LONDON Printed by Edward All-de, and are to be sold by Iohn Tapp at his Shop at Saint Magnus Corner▪ 1623
A Prognostication. OF Hoball, Spendall, Will Sommer, and Dews-ace, I studying in my sicknesse space: Did peruse their skill made of Astronomie, Of which hereafter followeth the certaintie. As well of euery season this yeare, As all other likelies that are like to appeare. In reading of this memorie, Omit to iudge the certaintie. Herein we haue nothing resited, But as by learned proofe vnited. Deuised is this merrie Toy, Euen for to make some merry ioy. Reporting what shall hap this yeere, Not often wont so to appeare. Except some strange Astronomie, Like this may hap as diuersly.
The Author to the Reader. A True and perfect Prognostication, For the yeere of Christes incarnation. Sixteene hundred twenty and three so true, The old yeere is gone when there commeth a new. Made by foure Doctors of great reputation, Which altogether haue had consultation: In prouing their cunning of very great skill, To tell you of Planets both good and ill. And to shew of the signes as neere as they can, Of dearth and of plenty, of newes, and what than? Yet peraduenture, ere the yeare come about, Some of them may chaunce, without any doubt. The first and principallest Maister of all, Is named the learned Sir Doctor Hoball. The second of them, where so euer he came, Was Sir Iohn Spendall so called by name. The third hath to name, good Doctor Dews-ace, The excellentest Doctor that euer was. The fourth and last, is Will Summer in deede, A very good man, and proued at neede.
The Preface. BEcause it becommeth not Daucocke fooles. Newly start vp in Choplogicke Schooles, To take vpon them, the Knowledge mysticall, Of our high Science Astrologicall. And to Prognosticate this and that, As though they sate, in God Almighties lap: We commit the matter, to some other man, That is better learned, then we by Saint Anne. To such as in Astronomy haue good skill, For naturall fooles, will be fooles still: But all things be heere declared and tolde, To heare it againe, you may be bolde. It is written behinde secundam Lucam, In the torne leafe, Capitulo nusquam, Therefore what I say on warrantise, You shall finde all true, or otherwise. This worke haue we, with good deliberation, Studied the rather for mans recreation: Therefore I will tell you, of this Prognostication, How and in what manner, he takes his operation. This Prognostication, vprightly said, Is to deeme thinges, before they be made: By Constellation and Astrouomy, Of Planets and Starres fixt in the sky.
Because therein we know our part, As very studious in that goodly Art: Secret with God, familiar aboue, And to our Brethren of very perfect loue. We haue compast this Prognostication, That doth extend to euery other Nation: Yet wish wee good and euer shall, Vnto this Real me and in especiall, The natiue Countrey and breeder of our blood, Doth cause vs still to wish it more good: But certainely this is sure for euer, Which shall last, three dayes after neuer. Yet is it not Euangely▪ nor Bible, Nor other thing impossible: And when you haue the matter examined, If yee beleeue it not, yee shall not be damned, W. W.
Concerning the Eclipse. PErusing the olde and auncient Doctors, I speake neither of Pedlers nor Proctors: This yeare shall be a kinde of Eclips, Because the Carters doe occupy Whips. Yet an aspect there shalbe that men shall sure dye, The Deafe shall not heare, nor the Blinde see: But when it shall bee in all or in part, If I can tell, I beshrew my heart. Albeit in some place it may be totall, For they that are starke blinde shall not see at all. Yet for all that by Albumazare: My Lord Maiors Horse is not Iohn Cookes Mare. But, what is Iohn Cookes Mare e're the warse, If yee take vp her tayle and kisse her ( - ) This Aspect I tell you doth signifie plaine That the 9.th of Aprill it may chance to raine: And therefore Shrouetide doth also show, That by the colde of the ayre it is like to Snow. So that many shall wish and also desire, To warme them if they could get any Fire. For Aries and Taurus haue hurt their knees, With the push of their Hornes, in the midst of the Skies. And Virgo waxt wanton for ioy of Gemini, Swearing and staring, that she incontinently, Will married be to the man in the Moone: Without delay, the next day after-noone.
Then Sagitarius, with his bowe bent: Thought in his anger, to make some shent, Drew foorth a shaft, and shor so neere the marke, That he gaue the end of February such a yarke, So that he was glad, to leape ouer one, For else if he had stood, thousands had bin gone, And thus by the discord and disdaine, That is among them, we fiude it plaine. Whereby we note, many great wonders, That may hap this yeare, by tempest and Thunders▪ Yet shall not fiers be great this yeare: By reason that Billets and Coles be so deare. Notwithstanding, I intend as neere as I can: To tell you of thinges that shall hap now and than, Which surely yet, ere the yeare haue his race, Yee shall see some of them hap and take place. By this yee may see, the change of the Moone: Shall change before, after, or iust at Noone. As for other Coniunctions they shall bee, Euen when it pleaseth the Trinitie. Of the foure Quarters of the Yeare. NOW if we may be so bolde with the Carters, This yeare doubtlesse shall haue foure Quarters. Prime time, Sommer, Haruest, and Winter, And thereto hath granted Master Iohn Spinter. We finde by the calculation of the Sphaere: That you shall haue foure Termes this yeare. Two in Winter, and two in Sommer, Wherein many honest men haue great comber. If our diuination seeme not worth a straw: Then aske our Masters, the men at the Law. Which had rather heare of Westminster Hall: Then to reade the Pistles of Saint Paul.
These Quarters in deed, shall make such variety: Some Drunken men, wot not where they be. As for the Weather, it shall be mutable, And Womens mindes much variable. Winter colde, and Sommer hot: Sometimes it shall raine, and sometimes not. Sometimes Snowe, except great maruaile: Sometimes Mist, and sometimes Haile. Yea, and the Planets shall cause such weather, That it shall shine, and raine altogether: But where, and when, and how it shall be, In what part and Coast of each Countrey: By Taurus and Pisces, I finde it perfectly, When it comes you shall know as well as I. Of the Spring. YEt in some part of the Spring season, Folkes will make pottage, as I thinke with Peason Whereupon Virgo, as Clerkes doe finde: Shall be much giuen, to Thunder and winde. One reason is, which Doctors doe marke well, Milke shall not be so deare as Muskadell. Venus shall haue so strong a regiment, That some shall need to be shriuen in Lent. Notwithstanding I feele, some Doctors doe vary Vpon this Text, Nihil argent marie. How if that Aprill had hapt in May, Ostlers should make but small bottles of Hay. Also it had beene a hot yeare for Bees, For then had the Moone been like a greene Cheese. Of Sommer. AFter the Spring-time Sommer comes in, And long before Winter it doth begin.
This yeare they say it will begin in Iune, Then shall they goe barefoot, that doe lack shoone. Be it moyst or dry, it proceeds of the ayre, But if it be not soule it shall be faire. In Sommer the Sunne such heate shall giue, That none may take vp water with a Siue. Yet if the Moone keepe her course aright: The Sunne with vs shall not shine at midnight. For Mars is rough, and Venus is milde, And therefore an olde Knaue is no Childe. When the Sunne and Moone are in Coniunction, Hard hearted folkes shall want compunction. But when the Sunne is in opposition, Many shall be full of bad condition, Diuers of the Planets are inclined to heate, Men shall not be colde as long as they sweate. For diuers Planets raigneth in this place and that, Which I would tell you, if I knew where or what. And though Cancer be crooked, yet as I weene, In most parts Sommer shall be greene. But considering the heate, some will not shrinke, To spend the most part of their thrist in drinke, For Cancer and Leo by my Calculation, Be great signes of inebriation. Of Haruest. SVch as play good husbands in the Prime, I trust shall haue Corne in Haruest time. There shall be more Corne I put you out of doubt, Vnthresht, and growing the Fields throughout: Then all the Bakers in London haue In their possession, so God me saue. There shall be such plenty, thankes be to God, Of Corne and Straw full many a lode: That all the men which be liuing this day, (In London) shall not eate it I say.
But if Palme Sunday should fall in Haruest, Then were a blacke Sheepe a perilous beast. Therefore Aquarius must take some paine: Still in the Firmament to remaine. For if it should chance the Skies to fall, We should haue Larkes, the Diuell and all. Wherefore both by reason and by Law: A sore scabd tayle, is shrewd to claw. And by Libra I finde, that about Haruest: The Sunnes going downe, shall be in the West. And as you may say, on Ptolomeus mouth: That the North Pole, is not in the S outh, And by Mars it appeareth, I may tell you: That an Ape is no Owle, nor an Oxe a Cow. So when the Cat is gone, the Mouse may goe play: And if they did not well, I pray God we may. Of Winter. WHen Sommer and Autumne are both gone, Then will the Winter be heere anon: So doe I thinke, yee are like to finde, In this Winter some rayne, some snow, and some winde. For such is the coniecture of Doctors olde, How that naked people, are like to be a colde: But Ptolome of all men, hath good opinion, That rosted Mutton is good meate with an Onion. Yet as Libra and Scorpio doth passe, All-Hallowtide shall be after Michaelmasse. Well nigh fiue weekes master Iohn Spooner, Hath made it sure, it shall be no sooner. So when Scorpio hath once begun, It may fortune to Snow, ere the Winter be don. And when Sol is entred into Capricorne, I doubt not, but some Children shall be borne, Most maruailously, with guts in their wombes, And most of them all, shall haue two thumbes:
For if the Sextile proceed & reliqua, Then take heed of seque altra, But say Prolomeus what him lust, You shall finde it true, durt is no dust. How be it, all may not haue their wills, For the Moone is higher then Maluerne hills▪ Yet by reason of the strong effect, Of Saturne and Mars, in their trine Aspect. Many a blast shall blow, of full sower winde, For both men and women haue holes behinde: How be it, that is not so great a matter, For men when they pisse, must needs make water. So that to conclude, of the whole yeare, There be foure Quarters in the fallow Deere. As Michaelmas, Christmas, and our Lady in Lent, And welcome home at Midsommer. A yeare well spent. Of the twelue Monthes. AS Astronomers doe conclude and say, In the reckoning the Night with the Day: Though there were xij. Months in the yeare before. Yet this yeare shall haue twice sixe, no more. And euery Month containeth foure Weekes, Because in Lent they make pottage with Leekes. By the house of Saturne which I haue cast, I tolde you before, that yesterday is past. And whether it chance to shine or to raine, It is too late to call yesterday againe. This yeare shall be some mystes in the Skyes, And Raisins sometimes shall be in Minc'd Pyes, Also come it late or come it soone: Euery Month once shall change the Moone. By Mars and Mercury sometime I finde, That there must be great store of winde: For men and women when they haue well dinde, Shall haue no power to holde fast behinde.
The blast shall be boysterous, bigge and outragious: Whereby the ayre must needes be contagious, And except God worke by his great grace, The winde shall not alway stand still in one place. Sometimes the blasts shall be pretie and soft: And sometimes of force they shall come aloft. But if the blasts breake out beyond the brinke, The clouds cannot be cleansed but the ayre must stinke. But some at me might haue great wonder, Why I declare nothing of thunder. Of Haile, of Fire, of Lightning and Cloudes, Of great tempest and raging flouds. Ye shall perceiue and vnderstand: That it may hap to Thunder in the lowe land. Such claps, that he that by the way goes, Shall be constrained to stop his nose. And in some places, shall be such Haile, That the Colliers horse may lacke his taile. Some Doctors thinke, great fires shall not be, And I am of that opinion truly. My reason is, that fewell and Cole, Is not so lightly giuen by dole. Yet the weather may hap to be so warme, That a good fire cannot doe any harme. Yet the fire may be so hote in some house, That some shall be burnt with a Winchester Goose. As touching Lightning, who will wish worse, Of all mischiefes then an emptie Purse. Which where it dwelleth, is so light of thought, That he that lacketh money shall goe for nought: And touching tempests, it shall not be behinde, The Weather-cocke of Paules, had his nose in the winde. Marriners and Wherrie-men, that rowe on the Thames, Shall not be able to saue them from the Sunne beames. Theeues shall not be angrie, when the Dogge barkes: If the Element fall, we shall lacke no Larkes: Such shall be the tempest in many places, That men for debt, dare not shew their faces.
By Venus and Virgo, it appeareth plaine, That enuious persons, shall be full of disdaine: Great trees shall fall downe out of doubt, If they be hewen downe, or pluckt vp by the roote. Corne shall not be reaped, but where it is sowne, Hay is no Hay, except it be mowne: Flowers on the earth, and fruit on the trees, Geese, Capons, Duckes, Hennes nor Bees. The tempest this yeere, may chaunce not bite▪ If wiues keepe their Chickens from the Kite: But now the nature, of each moneth to showe, In a generall rule, here shall ye know. Sometime perchance the winde shall blow. Sometime it shall be calme and still, I trow: Sometime the Sunne shine, raine, haile and snow, And sometime in the Ayre, perchance a rainbowe. Sometime a cloud or mist, sometime cleare aire, Sometime foule weather, and sometime faire: In euery moneth of the yeare throughout, One or other of these, shall happen out of doubt. Sauing I gather, by one signe or other, Little Snow or none shall fall at Midsommer: Sauing also this yeere Capricorne, Biddeth some folkes to beware the horne: For if Mars and Taurus in one circle meete, The Moone may hap to shine in Watling streete. Then the Cocke crew, and then it was day, The Bullock broke loose, and the rope ranne away. Of dearth and scarcity. BY the operation of them before said, The diligent working of the starres well wayed: This yeere shall be plenty, and good cheape of Flies, Of trifles for women, of gaudes and of lyes. Also great plenty of hunger and colde, Nakednesse, wearinesse, small thrift of olde:
Harbourlesse, Idlenesse, Pride and Nicenesse, Shall be seene in many, that vse much precisenesse. Little worke, losse of time, scoffing and mocking: Plenty of quarrelling, and of Gamesters flocking; Purse-picking, robbing, murther and hanging: Debt and slow payment, pledging and selling: Little trust, ill will, vsurie and pilling: With dispossessing, briberie and polling, Shall raigne this yeare in euery quarter: He shall know more, that comes hereafter, Also by the enticement, and working of Sathan, This yeare shall be scarcenesse, deny this who can, The want of good liuing, grace and mercy, Of loue and true faith, of peace and of pitty. Of friendship, of ioy, of truth and of concords: Of neighbourhood, wealth of good works in Landlords: Of visiting the sicke, the prisoner and lame, The blinde, deafe and dumb, and the Lepers by name: Of fatherlesse and strangers, small hospitality, Of almes, of good counsell, of iustice and equality: Of newnesse of life, and reconciliation, Of holinesse, forgiuing, and restauration: Of righteousnesse, and the true seruing of God, I doubt all vertues, and these are all odd. Money with many, this yeare shall be dainty, But they shall lack nothing, that haue great plenty. Therefore who so hath spent their thrift in waste, By the course of stars, they shall haue leaue to fast. For Iupiter shewes in the ascendent, That nought is left, when all is spent: Yet is not that much against Ptolomea, That there shall be store of water in the Sea. And I finde by Ptolomeus Almegests, That many loue well to goe to good feasts: But such as can get, neither bread nor meate, Shall be full hungry, when they would faine eate. Yet some through hunger, shall not looke so pale, But others shall looke as red with good Ale:
Now because rich men haue store of money, Gall is not all thing so sweet as Honey. Good sayings and doings shall be deere, For charity is laid vp, till another yeere: And if it be true, that I haue heard tolde, Malice is feruent, and charity colde. But there shall be plenty, I dare well say, Of showers in Aprill, and flowers in May: Yet Libra in her Equilibri pendent, Sheweth, that for default of Argent, Many will be slacke to pay their rent, Wherefore of their Landlords they shall be shent: Some-where there shall be so hote rost, That such as come late, must kisse the post. And some-wher e shall be such plenty of Fish, That some shall be faine to licke the dish: Priests of their Tithes, shall be loath to want, And Latine among them, shall be very scant. For scarce one among tenne on a cluster, Shall be able to conster their Pater noster. Such as haue enough, shall haue more still, And such as nought haue, shall want their will. As for Corne and victuall, I put no doubt, Shall be plenty and good, all England throughout: Except the great Snudges cause a dearth, For neuer was there fairer seene on earth. And because that Fishmongers pare their Fish, Ye shall haue of Gubbins a plentifull dish. Fruit enough scant, ye shall haue this yeare, That is to say, Plums, Apples and Peare. Walnuts, small Nuts of all sorts, Because Boyes will haue them, for their comforts: Corne shall be scant, if that it lacke price, And Cattell shall be deare, if the Market arise. Because greedinesse with many doth grudge, Neuer ruled with reason, like a couetous Saudge: Not caring if thousands doe perish with paine, So all things proceede, to his owne priuate gaine.
Beefe, Mutton, Veale, Capon, and Coney, This yeare get ye none, except ye haue money: All other things shall be at the same price, Except onely Cats, Rats and Mice. Ye shall haue plenty of Brawne and of Sowce, For euery good Taylor shall kill a great Lowse. Though Monkes and Friers be not in Cloysters, Yet may there be at Belingsgate plenty of Oysters. In Lent shall be larges of red Herrings and Sprats, But without money ye get neither Caps nor Hats. So shall be Mackrels and Playse, if the winde serue, Soone set and sharpe teeth, both they quickly carue: This yeare shall youth loue Apples and Peares, So shall some loue to goe together by the eares: Which is by reason, the Doctors strongly admit, That fooles this yeare shall haue but little wit: Yet fooles haue good fortune, I cannot denie, Though they haue no more wit then they occupie, And though Quailes this yeare be very dainty, Yet it is to be thought, we shall haue Woodcocks plenty: And rifer then either Capon or Goose, For some shall haue Woodcocks at home in their house. Wherefore I say some shall want, and some haue, And all because some will spend, and some will saue. But he that hath all thing, nothing shall lacke, And he that hath nothing, shall goe to wracke: In the heat of Sommer, many shall thinke, That Claret wine with Borage, is a cup of good drinke. Reapers and Rakers, of Corne and of Hay, Shall haue but little to doe, betweene this and May: In Haruest poore men may chance to lacke Sithes, But this yeare Priests must haue plenty of Tithes. Of the Complexions. OF Complexions truly to speake, Some be strong, and some be weake:
Some be in a meane, betweene them both, Some to doe well, are very loth. Some men that shall be brought vp in Schooles, Shall in conclusion be starke fooles: For Saturne, Mercurie, Sol and Venus, Iupiter, Pisces, and Aquarius: Declare by seuerall constellations, That naughty knaues will vse naughty fashions: If any of the starres breake their olde rate, Then God giue you good morrow at Algate. If cholloricke this yeere will not be irefull, Hasty, ambicious, and desirefull: Then shall the complexion Melancholick, Neuer be disposed to be frantick. Nor the Sanguine lusty, ioyous and pleasant, But the Phlegmatick, actiue, fresh and pregnant: This yeare through celestiall influence, A good halfe groat shall be worth two pence. One thing there is that maketh me sad, All cunning Cutpurses shall be starke mad: This yeare their Science shall sore decay, And all their liberties taken away. For where they were wont to be burnt in the hand, Being taken now, they must be hang'd. Fooles this yeare shall not be wise, But yet faire Maydens will be nice: Wiues to their husbands shall be obedient, In all things that doe themselues content. Nor will giue them an ill word without doubt, At least-wise if their tongues be cut out: Otherwise of the matter I take no charge, For Ptolomie speaketh of starres at large. Of sicknesse and diseases. THis yeare, such as be sicke in deede, Of good Physitians shall haue neede:
Therefore of all aspects, let folkes take heede, For many shall drinke, more then they shall bleede, And some through Mercurie without doubt, Shall lye in Newgate, that would faine be out. And most part of folkes shall haue such qualmes, That very few shall lust to giue any almes: Some shall wish to haue againe that they haue spent, Few this yeare with pouerty will be content: Yet this disease is like to raigne so sore, That Beggers shall goe from dore to dore: Some wanting money, shall both ban and curse, That the deuill hath roome to dance in their purse: Such as can the Cardes and Dice well handle, When their money is lost, may hold the Candle. Some shall be driuen through ache in their heads, To lye on Benches, for lacke of beds. This Sommer ensuing shall raigne such a disease, That many shall not sleepe in their beds for Fleas. Many shall be sicke, and brought so bare, They shall grope in their purses, and finde nothing there: Some doe beleeue that in one moneth or other, One man will not stick to deceiue his brother. Such a common disease in Towne and Citie, Shall raigne this yeare, the more is the pitie: That some shall be brought solowe and downe, They shall not be able to change a crowne. Other shall sing such a wofull note, They shall not be able to change a groat: Yet shall some of them be out-craked, But for their cloathes they might goe naked. For many that dwell in a poore Cottage, For lacke of meate, would eate good Pottage: And all is by reason that this yeare, All things shall be cheape, but money shall be deare. Butchers shall haue great paine and griefe, Because they cannot sell dearer their Biefe: Which makes many for lack of brawne and mustard, To abhorre the eating of Tart and Custard.
Some say it is by reason of the Moone, Many shall sup their Pottage, for lacke of a spoone, Others say, because the signes be in such heat, The people would fare well, if they could get meat. Some shall say truth, and some shall goe by gesse: And other some shall goe to bed supperlesse. After their first sleepe, they shall be striken with hunger, They would refuse neither Capon or Cunger. Some ere they be wise, will needes be wed, And some wiues shall leade their Mates drunke to bed: Other some shall be so sore agast, They shall be faine for lacke of meate to fast. Some shall fast, and some shall pray, And some surely cannot tell what to say. Some shall be vp, and some shall be downe, Some shall dwell in the Countrey, and some in the Towne. Some shall haue an horrible colde, That with other mens wiues they will be bolde. This yeare shall be many builders, So shall some father, other mens childers: In some place there shall be some folke, That with their wiues kindnesse their shoulders shall smoke, Remedie none, but patience perforce, The gray Mare sometime is the better Horse, As for the Frensie, Pockes, Iaunders and Piles, Many shall haue sore Kibes in their heeles: Little money, lesse meate, nakednesse and such, Is thought by the Doctors, shall raigne too much. The Gout, the Grauell, and the greene sicknesse, The Morphew, the Measels, and other madnesse: As aches and Agues, and all other disease, Shall raigne no more, then God doth please, This yeare in Rome shall be great mone, That Monkes and Friers, in England shall be none: And the Papists they shall sigh and grone, That Gogmagog their Grandsire thus is gone. Soules in Purgatorie shall meruaile much, Why Pardons doe not better keepe touch:
They shall feare least Lobcock their Pope be dead, For lacke of his Bulles, vnder Waxe and Lead. Iesu Christi Amen Aue Italia de malo pena, Papa noster qui es in Roma, Malo diciter tuum nomen. Some wiues with Agues shall shake so sore, That their husbands are like to smart therefore: And some wiues for the Eclipse that last was, Will make their husbands heads ring to Masse. Schollers also shall haue sheepe-biters lookes, With taking surfeit at their bookes: Maydens also if they chance to doe ill, Will say it was against their will. But Venus will neuer let them alone, Vntill she haue brought them in case to grone: Therefore Libra (when women looke sickly) Must way the matter somewhat likely. For Aries, Taurus, and Capricorne, Wil make them cry alas, that euer they were borne. Likewise through small wit, and feeble braine, This yeare strange and wilde sicknesse shall raigne. Among the people that is phrenzie, This disease shall be in the head perdie: Another sicknesse goeth therewith among, Called quicke Palsie, that visiteth the tongue: And the property of this Palsie is such, It maketh the tongue to shake and wagge much. To babble, to prattle, to flout, and such like, The body thereby is made hanging ripe: As farre as I vnderstand by this Art, It shall raigne in women for the most part. Many that ouer-night haue drunke ouer deepe, Shall be so dry after their first sleepe: That in the morning as soone as they be vp, They will get betweene the wall and the cup. Some shall haue so great a desire, That they shall be cold for lacke of fire.
Some in their Kitchin shall haue such smoke, That their eyes shall water of their Wiues stroke: As for other sicknes, that God doth send, When it pleaseth him, shall both begin and end. Of Peace and Warre. COncerning Peace, yee shall vnderstand, It shall be kept, by Sea and by Land: Betweene those bodies, that now be dead And them yet aliue, shall striue for no bread. Also it shall rayne this yeare I doe trust With all quiet people, whose liuing is iust. As touching Warres, contention and strife, This yeare indeed shall be very rife. The greatest Combate that is like to be, Is betwixt the Flesh and the Spirit truely: This battaile so sore, shall be fought indeed, That hard it will be, to know who shall speed. Another there is, much like to the same, Betwixt the vngodly, in liuing past shame: This battaile and strife, shall rise by three, By Enuy, Iealousie, and ill Husbandry. These be the Captaines, that shall cause the fighting Brawling, quarrelling, scratching and biting: But in the end, by Sathan the Deuill, Women shall haue the victory with the foule euill. Of Inundations and Floods. YEE shall vnderstand, by Couetous deuise, Water shall breake their bounds and arise Into many Ale-fats, and Beere-fats indeed, Besides Tunnes and Tubs, and Barrels for need. And into Milke-pots, Creame-pots, and other, Wine-pots nor pottage-pots, shall escape neither,
Except good Conscience put in his foote, We may curse Couetous, to the heart roote. We are like to haue, this yeare for a truth, Small drinke and watry, which is great ruth: Thin Milke, thin Creame, and thin pottage thereto, If all Bookes agree, as some other doe. The rayne in like manner, shall keepe him aloft, The winde is not able, to bid him soft: So that there shall raine, in very great routs, Many Beggers, and Bawdes, Sluts, Slouins, and Louts, Whoores, Thieues and sluggerds, proude Parrats and pyes, With a sort of fine shrewes, or else the booke lyes. Beside the twenty fiue orders of Knaues, Rogues and Ruffians, and paliardly slaues. Of them that be borne vnder the Planets. BVt now to treate of the Planets seauen, I finde not by them, what is done in Heauen: The most that I know, of them in this case, Is, that they neuer stand still in one place. But vnder them many mad thinges be wrought, And God aboue knowes, euery mans thought. By Aquarius I finde this yeere, Brewers shall put too much liquor in their Beere: And Vintners also will not swerue in fine, For mingling and mixing, water 'mongst Wine: Couetous men shall be in such a fury, That he that lacketh money, can not be merry. Which shall engender, such a burning heate, That many shall couet thinges, they cannot get: Vsurers shall be in such a rage, That olde people shall dote for age. Therefore when the Sunne is in Capricorne, Then shall not the Euentide be the Morne: But when into Aries, entred is the Moone, Then iust at midday, shall be high Noone:
Whereby it appeareth, as a plaine matter, Most men thinkes, wine is better then water: But the foure windes neuer agreed worse, For except each body shut well his Purse. One shall not afore blowe such a blast, But another behinde shall blowe out as fast: Thus Touche la maine & fait a bon chere, When ye are gone, then are ye not here. Now that ye may know them in especiall, We will speake of them in generall. Of the Saturnistes. VVHere Saturnus is chiefe dominator, No foole this yeare shall be a good Orator. Mercurie combust, sheweth a cause why: A foole he was borne, and a foole he shall dye. It should seeme also by Ptolomeus text: Such as dye this yeare, shall not dye the next. For the Coniunction of Luna and Sol, Will make in England many a drunken noll. If Venus to Mercurie make her aspect, Many sicke folke will be infect. That people shall dote for age that be olde, And such as be burned, shall not die for colde: But whether the people doe better or worse, Saturne I suppose, will keepe his owne course. And he would men should rather ride then goe, But I say hastie men shall neuer want woe: For if that all men did vse for to ride, It should greatly hinder Graues-end tide. If the Sunne be vp. men shall see it shine, In all quarters, except they be blinde:
And although that Cloudes doe couer his beates, Yet may Oyster-boates come vpon Thames. Of the Iouistes. BEcause of Iupiter, it doth appeare, That each man would gladly prosper this yeare: But Saturne and Pisces declareth againe, That some shall attempt, many things in vaine. Church-men shall prosper and haue good lucke, Because they are willing to goe to their booke, Whose good deuotion shall be so seruent, They shall haue no power, to refuse preferment. Bishops and Prelates shall doe very well, If they take paines to preach the Gospell. And if they truly declare the letter, I trust they shall prosper much the better, As for Archdeacon, Prouost and Deane: Will take fat Benefices rather then leane. But as for other Priests euery one, Will take three Benefices rather then none. Sauing that Aries putteth out of doubt, That such as can get none, must goe without. And after they haue this life once forsake, They will no more worldly promotion take. Iudges, and Lawyers, and other Officers, Shall doe as they haue done other yeeres: Except they feede them with gold and groates, The men of Law shall haue sore throates. And their tongues I warrant you, shall be lame, Wherefore Libra must your matter frame.
Of the Marcialists. MARS is the God of battaile and strife: That doth he feele, that hath a curst wife. Therefore good Warriers that to the field doe goe, Shall giue or take blowes, if they come thereto. They shall not shrinke for winde and raine, But for the Princes cause gladly take paine, To doe their King and Countrey good, They will be ready to spend their heart blood. Schollers with their Maisters will make many a fray But the Boyes will beare the stripes away. I finde by the aspect of Mars and Virgo, Some Dames shall worke their Maydens woe. For Sol and Luna shall shine so bright, That they shall finde faults both day and night. And Saturne in his sircle sheweth plaine, That Maydes ere they mend one fault will make twaine, Great death of Innocents Mars doth intend, That neuer did speake ill word or offend. Which is to declare without long preambles, I doe remit you to the Shambles.
Of the Solistes. ALL matters that are wrought vnder the Sunne, Shall end the better if they be well begun. For the Sunne this yeare by Gods might and grace Shall shine and giue light in many a place. The day shall be longer, if men be in heale: In Sommer, then in Winter by a great deale. Yet Albumazar saith full like a Clarke, When the Sunne is gone downe, it will be darke. The blinde men this yeare by helpe of the Moone, Shall see as well at midnight as at noone. Kings, Princes, and Lords of might, This yeare shall see the Sunne giue light. Except the Cloudes couer his beames, Or else it shall shine in all Christian Realmes. Of the Children of Venus. VEnus in the Eclips declareth newes: That few honest women shall dwell in the Stewes. Therefore who this yeare loueth in hast, May hap to repent, ere the yeare be past. For Venus and Sol are inclined to heate: So Stockfish is not toothsome except it be beate.
Crafty men this yeare shall be very subtill, And so shall many women be fraile and brittle. Louers shall burne in heate for Larkes, But one thing shall happen whosoeuer markes. That men in many places if they hit rightly, Shall fall in fauour with some women quickly. And women shall loue more then their bellies will hold, But hot loue this yeare will be soone cold. The children of Venus shall prosper but little, Because that Lazars shall be in the Spittle. Some children of Venus shall burne in such loue, For euery hand they will haue a fit Gloue. Some will loue more then a thousand fold, And some if they might haue more they would. Yet some by Venus promoted shall bee, To haue a roome at three cranes in the Vintree. And because some folke loue so hot, Fooles bolts this yeare will be soone shot. Of the Marcurialistes. MErcurie is patron of buyers and sellers: Pillers, Bribers, lyers and Tale-tellers. Some shall be no gladder, tales to beare: Then other shall be to giue them care. But such as can vse the same thing well: Shall surely to Heauen if they scape Hell. Aduocates, Orators, Proctors and Scribes, Shall be sore tempted to take bribes. Albeit the Eclipse past declareth plaine, Where ye suspect them of one they will take twaine. Physitians this yeare great cures shall haue, And such shall escape as pleaseth God to saue.
Surgeons, Poticaries, and other such: Shall gaine by selling little for much. For some of them will sell for a pound, That cost them nought but taking from the ground. Men shall sell wares at sundry prices: And some Grocers I thinke shall sell Spices. Mercers shall vtter Sattin, and other silke, Bucause the Wiues of I slington sell Milke. And because therewith they make Furmenty. Lice with Beggers shall not be dainty. And because they make their Cheese with Curdes, Women this yeare will be full of wordes: Painters this yeare (if they lift) may goe play, Women can paint and make themselues gay. Caruers, Goldsmithes, Taylers and Glasiers, Broderers, Painters, Writers and deuisers: By force of Mercury in the last Eclipsall, Shall this yeare be very fantasticall. Aduocates, as Sergeants at the Law, Shall say nothing for loue nor for awe. Except they be waged for Siluer and Golde, They will for sake neither new nor olde. In each other Science I dare well say, Many will be doing speed as they may. Of the Lunatistes. BEcause the Moone is moyst and colde, They that dye young, shall neuer be olde. Some men this yeare, shall sayle into Spaine And some perchance, neuer returne againe. The Eclips in this case, puts out of doubt: That some fresh beggers will play banckrout.
They that spend great sommes shalbe at great cost: And Neptune shall cause some Ships to be lost. As touching the Eclips past we cannot see, How an Owle should a Nightingale be. Therefore we will not our braines breake, Of thinges we know not any more to speake. For though our learning be not small, Yet we Prognosticators know not all. Wherefore with vs no rare thing it is, Now and then to lye and say amisse. I finde by the Moone and the seauen Starres, That Porters in London shall lacke no Carres. They that be Lunaticke shall be in a mad case, And they that be vnthrifty shall sure want grace. In nights by Moonshine men shall goe aright, If they lacke not their limbes, nor their eye-sight. Martiners shall be lucky to sayle into all-Lands, If their Ships chance not, to sticke in the sands. The Moone as no maruaile shall seeme very greene, To them that the Moone before hath not seene. Some shall goe drunke to bed, before the Moone be vp, And some shall not loue to drinke of a dry Cup. Messengers wits shall be so farre spent, They sometimes shall forget wherfore they be sent. If mad-men this yeare be as mad as Hartes, Then mad-men shall surely play mad-mens partes. To declare any further the Eclips of the Moone, We can doe no more then we haue done. The fashions of vs Prognosticators euer was, To speake of some things that neuer come to passe, Therefore when you shall our falshood espy, Doe no more but giue vs a little leaue to lye. Of Earthquakes and Thunder. THis yeare because some vnthrifts lacke grace, A meruailous thing is a wonderous case.
If Venus doe raigne, except great wonder, Some Maydes will be afraid of Thunder. For if such a toy come in their heads, They will lye on the ground for lacke of beds. Also now and then, for Mars and Venus sake, In some Countries may happen an Earthquake. This yeare shall befall a wonderous case, Saint Stephens day shall fall in Christmas. And except the greater hast be made, Newyeares day shall keepe his olde trade. Then shall rich men haue presents and guifts: Where the poore shall be put to their olde shifts. Wherefore this yeare take heed to your Bees, For Peares and Apples shall growe on Trees. The Moone when it hath made a course, Shall change ere Forty dayes ye passe. Or else we shall be all the worse, That are already in an euill case: If your intent be spirituall, Begin to flatter and lye apace. The Court of Rome I haue heard say, Is not corrupt with Simony: But if that men list to assay; There is nothing too deare for money. Of Benefices shall fall this yeare, In many places and not to be solde: But I am sure they shall be deare, And changed for no worse then golde. Certaine Bishops in commandement, Shall counsaile Priests to leaue their sinne: Men shall maruaile what they ment, And say that they did first begin. Pheachers of Gods Lawes, Shall rebuke our negligence: We shall say they be Dawes, What auailes such audience? These fat Monckes, and rich Abbies, Men shall make of them great wonder:
But when good House-keeping decayes, How many men shall sterue for hunger? Fryers and Nunnes shall ioyne in one, It is no maruaile what I say: For it is hard to liue alone, If they can finde another way. Of Abstinence we must speake a little, And of Obedience (Nihil:) For Chastity hath lost her stile, And Vertue driuen to exile. Now of the Temporall I say, A Stella Cometa shall raigne: And cause them wander euery day, And know not how to ease the paine. Mars menaceth great debate, If Venus bring this geere to passe: I haue not seene such sodaine hate, Where so much loue before time was. There is like to be maruailes, Who liues shall see the same: But if you aske, I know not yet, It is good to be out of blame. Poore folke that haue nothing, God shall giue them leaue to fast: As I finde by writing, Because they haue spent much in wast. Physitions great Cures shall haue, And wisely looke them vpon: For golde and siluer they will men saue, But very few shall scape or none. Pothicaries shall be very rich, By Sirrups, Oyles, and Confections: And cause poore men to pay too much, For that, that shall cause infections. All Handy-crafts I tell you sure, Shall counterfeit, and marre it cleane: That was before good to endure, Shall now be scantly worth a Beane.
May dens shall be very nice, But secretly if I shall speake: The greater part shall all be vice, It is a purpose hard to breake. VViues shall be obedient, As any VVaspe I dare well say: And neuer easie to content, Except their tongues be cut away. And because some on the Sea haue had losse, This yeare shall be Sermons at Pauls Crosse. And if it happen the Curlue to be a Quaile, Then shall the greene Mare haue a blew taile. Many great workes shall be taken in hand, In Italy and each other land. And women therein shall take great paine, As much for pleasure as for gaine. Yea many gorgious and gallant Girles, And lusty women set with Pearles. Shall put their body in a readinesse, To labour in vile businesse, They shall desire aboue all things, That they might be mens vnderlings. But because men cut their meate with kniues, Some shall haue much a-doe to rule their wiues. For Saturne and Venus such course haue taken, That most part of women shall be shrew shaken, Yet for that good Housewiues doe spin Flax, Many this yeare shall shite worse then wax. And because the singing men deuide their notes, Many a good Horse shall be fed with Oates. And what though a Noble be woorth xx groates, Yet euery man shall not haue two coates. Black cloath this yeare shall be so deere, Throughout all England, as shall appeare, That as you walke through euery streete, You shall be sure not to meete Two women cloathed in a gowne, Of colour black, or colour browne,
Although sicke folkes heads doe ake, Yet you shall see few dead men quake. Some shall be sick neuer the latter, VVith biles and botches, and there riseth the matter. But whose eyes will serue him to looke so hie, In a cleare night, shall see starres in the skie. Of Kings and Princes. VVHat Kings and Princes shall doe this yeare, By processe of things, it shall appeare: If we could tell, it were much meruaile, For with none of them, we are of counsaile. But our assured trust and confidence is, That nothing in this Realme shall be amis: VVhat else they shall doe this yeare, we cannot tell, For in Gods secrets, we were neuer seene so well. This Realme we trust, shall prosper and flourish, As well as wit can deuise, our hearts to nourish: In hope hereof, all true English men, VVith whole heart and minde, hereto say Amen▪ To declare any further of their inclination, The nature, quality and operation: That the planets, signes, vertues, and of the Element, Are most inclined to this yeare present. VVe are not able further to say, But we beseech all men, feruently to pray: That all things may abound in the Common-wealth, And at our last ending, euerlasting health.
A Song. Kyrieeleyson sing wee, now merrily euery one, that honest mirth, is more worth, Then Siluer, Golde, or precious Stone, taking thought who list, for I will take none. ALL yee which be heere▪ Vnto vs now draw neere: Drinke good Wine Ale, and Beere, Care not though Mault be deere. Learne this lesson at me first, He that drinketh well shall neuer dye for thirst. Kyrieeleyson sing we, &c. He that will not be glad, We count him worse then mad: As long liueth a merry lad, As he that will be sad. A light heart is the best Iewell, As Holy writ doth plainely tell. He is a Churle by kinde, That loueth no mirth to finde: And Death shall stop his winde, For all his subtill minde. Marke well and you shall see, That a Churle by kinde will neuer be free. Beggers loue brawling, And wretches loue wrawling:
Cowards loue lawling, And grutchers still hawling. But they that loue their honesty, Will spend their money neighbourly. Therfore fill Glasse and Cup, And drinke them friendly vp: Drinke not a Niggards sup, Care not for worldly mucke. For this is true and euer shall, The longest liuer shall haue all. Therefore we count him wise, That will not make it nice: As soone as he doth rise, To take his Ale with Spice. As Ginger is wholsome and good, So good liquor nourisheth the blood. Once againe fill the Pot, And drinke we at the Let: And he that maketh the shot, Without a full good Pot. Be he neuer so deare a friend, Let him pay for all and there an end. FINIS.
