5152 99856891 22533
THere bee many that speake much of Iesus Christ, and beare a faire shew of his holines and vertue: but none are able to conceiue (much lesse to declare) the sweete comforts of his heauenly grace, sauing such as hold faith in a good conscience, without hypocrisie, pride, and couetousnes, and be reformed in their liues with charitie, peace, and vnitie. THE HEARTIE CONFESSION OF A CHRISTIAN, Deuised for his owne comfort, written for his remembrance, and now published for the vse of M. H. and others his faithfull and priuate friends onely. 1 Cor. 3. 18. Let no man deceiue himselfe, if any man seeme to be wise amongst you in this world, let him be (as) a foole: that he may be (come) wise▪ 19. For the wisedome of this world is foolishnes before God, &c. The argument of the song. 1. COR. 1. 30. But you are of him in Christ Iesus, who was made vnto vs wisedome from God, yea, and righteousnes, & holines, and redemption. 31. That, as it is written, he that boasteth, or reioyceth, let him boast, and reioyce in the Lord. A spirituall song of thankes-giuing, with praier vnto God, containing the full effect of true religion in a Christian. The forespeech with the drift and sub∣stance of the Song. THe somme of all the comforts, which I finde In holy writ to ease my troubled minde: Is this, that GodThe vniting of two natures in the person of Christ, who is our Emmanuell, that is, God with vs, very man as wee are sinne excepted. my nature did vnite Vnto his Godhead full of grace, and might? Iu Christ who standeth betweene God and me For euer more my Sauiour to be. Ruling me, as myThe annexing of three offi∣ces in the persō of Chist, name∣ly of Prophet, Priest, & King, who is our full and perfect Sa∣uiour. Prophet, Priest, and King, On me bestowing euery needefull thing. Not onely for my present consolation, But also for my eternall saluation. I will therefore sing of his wondrous praise For his exceeding loue to me alwaies. The Song. Doctrine by way of example. 1. WHere I by natureAgainst our birth sinne, com∣monly called originall sinne. through my parents fal, Am so distemper'd in my members all, And bent to ill (which beareth in me full sway) As from all goodnes drawes me guite away And thus in sin originall am drown'd: Christ is myThe proper remedie is, the v∣niting of two natures in Christ by his incarnation vpon earth. perfect innocencie sound: Him, as that brazen snake, if I adore, In me shalbe no sicknes nor no sore. Application of the Doctrine praier wise. O Christ forgiue my naturall infection, Which to thy law will not be in subiection, And so prouoketh me to dayly strife, Whilest I am nousled in this noysome life, And grant me thyThat is diuine substance, ma∣iestie, or godlines: as, Mat. 5. 48. Ioh. 13. 15. and 17. 20. 21. 22. 1. Cor. 11. 1. Ephe. 5. 1. Colos. 1. 10. 1. Thes. 2. 12. Heb. 1. 3. 1. Pet. 1. 15. 2. Pet. 1. 4. &c. pure nature to expresse, Henceforth in my behauiour, more or lesse, Til flesh and blood by death thou shalt subdue, My state in heau'n for euer to renue. Doctrine. 2.Against all our other sinnes, commonly called actual sinnes, the proper remedie is the an∣nexing of three offices in Christ by his heauenly dispensation. And first of his Prophecie. Where through myAgainst our ignorāce, which is the mother of all sinne and mischiefe. folly, & mine own igno∣rance, I know not how Gods glorie to aduance, Nor to dispose my selfe in any sort For others helpe, nor for mine owne comfort: And thus am blinde, and no truth I can see; Christ is mostThe proper remedie is his wisdome, which is the roote of all grace, and welfare. perfect wisedome vnto mee: Him, as that faithfull guide, if I attend, I shall not neede any way to offend. Application. O Christ forgiue my iudgement darke & weake, Which causeth me thy blessed Lawes to breake, And so prouoketh me to daily strife, Whilst I do wander in this wau'ring life, And grant me thy deepe knowledge to expresse Henceforth in my behauiour more or lesse, Till flesh and blood by death thou shalt subdue, My state in heau'n for euer to renue. Doctrine. 3.Further of his Priesthoode. Where IAgainst our vnholines, and breach of the first table. vngodly am, and superstitious, Vnreuerent, profane, and irreligious, Leading my life after a worldly fashion Against the rule of my heauenly vocation, And thus am set in an ilfauor'd case; Christ is myThe proper remedie, is his ho¦lines. perfect holines, and grace: Him, as that holy of holies, if I frequent, My blottes, and blemishes shall soone be spent. Application. O Christ forgiue my foule and vgly vice, Which dooth my soule, and body both disguise, And so prouoketh me to dayly strife, Whilest I am foiled in this filthie life. And graunt me thy faire beautie to expresse, Henceforth in my behauiour more or lesse, Till flesh and blood by death thou shalt subdue, My state in heauen for euer to renue. Doctrine. 4.Moreouer of his Priesthoode. Where I amAgainst our vnrighteousnes, and breach of the second table. toyl'd with care of earthly pelfe, And doe not loue my neighbour, as my selfe: But hurt his state, life, bed, goods, and good name In thought, word, deede, and lusting for the same, And so am filled full of all iniquitie: Christ is myThe proper remedie, is  righteousnes. perfect righteousnes, and equitie: Him, as that vpright iudge, if I obay, I cannot hurt my neighbour any way. Application. O Christ, forgiue my violence and treacherie, Which makes me offer others mickle iniurie, And so prouoketh me to dayly strife, Whilst I am carking in this carefull life. And grant me thy high iustice to expresse Henceforth in my behauiour more or lesse, Till flesh and blond, by death thou shalt subdue. My state in heauen for euer to renue. Doctrine. 5.Lastly of his kingdo . Where I amAgainst our bondage & ¦sirie, which is the iust pun¦ment of all our sinnes. bond-slaue to al kinde of misery, Solde vnder sin, and subiect to all infamy, Falling downe headlong to vtter destruction, By naturall, and actuall corruption, And thus am feeble, fraile, and transitorie; Christ myThe proper remedie, is hi ¦demption and glorie, wh the due rewarde of his e¦ding mercie towards vs. redemption is, and perfect glorie: Him, as that Lord of hoasts, if I doe serue, From force of foes he will me sure preserue. Application. O Christ forgiue my wretched imperfection, Which pulleth me from thine happie protection, And so prouoketh me to daily strife, Whilst I doe warrefare in this wearie life, And grant me thyNamely by relieuing of the needy, after thy Royall exam∣ple, according to the power of thy grace in me. Io. 13. 14. 15. Rom. 12. 16. Ephe. 5. 21. Phi 2 5. 6. 7. &c. 1. Pet. 1. 17. 18. 19. Ephe. 4. 7. 8. Iam. 2. 8. &c. free ransome to expresse Henceforth in my behauiour more or lesse, Till flesh and blood, by death thou shalt subdue, My state in heauen for euer to renue. Amen. FINIS. AT LONDON Printed by Thomas Orwin, for Christo∣pher Hunt. 1593.
