5353 99853796 19193
THE TRVMPET OF APOLLO: Sounding out the sweete blast of Recouerie, in diuers dangerous and despe∣rate diseases. Experientia mater Medicinae. printer's or publisher's device Printed at London by P. Short, dwelling on Breadstreet hill at the signe of the Starre, 1602.
To the curteous and well dispo∣sed Reader. HAuing at the length as well out of mine owne manifold labours, charge and ex∣perience, as also out of the learned and industrious practises of sundrie my well affected friends vnto the chimical and spagirical arte, obtained many rare and excellent medicines for the health of mans body, whereof I haue here guen some taste, reseruing a further satisfaction for those who vpon iust occasion shall at any time hereafter require the same. I haue now presumed out of the fulnesse of my affection towards my na∣turall and well deseruing place and countrey, to present and offer the best and most approoued re∣medies, which by my 17. yeeres practise, I haue gotten either out of mine own workehouse, or from other mens Laboritories, which haue spent some time in Pellicanes, circling glasses and furnesses both calcining and reuerbaratorie, &c. and such like as well as my selfe. Hoping, that those Gen∣tlemen, who in great kindnesse haue conferred both their receipts and cures vpon me, will not be offended though I shall rashly publish the
names of some of their patients togither with mine owne, which they had happily purposed to reserue onely for their priuate remembrances. I am heere also to craue pardon of the patients them∣selues, whose names (for the better credit of the medicines, and comfort of others that shall hap∣pen to fall into the like diseases) I haue aduentu∣red to disclose: My offence herein I hope will be the more tolerable, because my ende and scope is charitable, ayming principally at the health of man, without the which no honour, no wealth nor any other worldly pleasure can giue any true con∣tentment. Herein I haue also had a speciall and honest care not to nominate any, whose infirmitie might worke either disgrace or reproch to the pa∣tient; neither can I iustly be taxed with a vaine-glorious & vaunting humor in blazing out these cures by a Printers proclamation, saying in all Christian humilitie, I challenge no part of the glorie to my selfe, but acknowledge as I ought, that omnis salus à Domino: and likewise for that in cases either of death or torment vnto men as these are, I thinke there can be no meanes so generall or so sudden, but they will come farre short of their desires, that haue cause to vse them. Neither am I singular in this course, for men of great iudgment▪ and learning haue heretofore also made publike obseruation of their cures,
and diuers of mine owne countreymen haue long since commended their speciall labours in this kinde to the world: As that painfull practizer I. Hester, who Printed a large Catalogue of his oyles and waters, vnder many strange and stately names: and Giles that anncient Chimist, who hauing blowne away his wealth in the smoake of Alchimie, did yet at the length light vpon a Bal∣samum which remaineth to be solde at this day, commended for many rare & excellent vses. The credit of Moyses diet-drinke lasted a long time, and was generally vsed in the scab of Venus. And an other auncient and skilful distiller of my name doth at this present make great profit of that his excellent aqua bezoartica, with the which I dare boldly compare (be it spoken without offence) my aqua comfortans stomachū for the strengthning of any weake stomacke. Neither can I forget that full and foule-mouthed physitian D. Burcot who solde his generall purging drinke so many yeeres togither for 10. groats the quart beshite the bot∣tle (for so he vsually pronoūced the word beside.) These and many more instances in this kinde I could produce, to prooue my selfe to be no Author of nouelties. But what need I so much to insist vpon examples, seeing the medicines thēselues are such as were first deriued from the sacred closet of nature, and are now long since ratified and confir∣med
with that sure and autentique seale of expe∣rience. We see that Indian weede Tabacco, hath now found out both learned & honorable patrons, being first made known by publike impression, and afterward by continuall practise euen vntill this daie: and without all respect of age, sex, comple∣xion, method or other circumstance. And why should not English simples truely and chimically prepared by English Artists haue also their free allowance, and be made familiar with English bo: dies? I rest then gentle Reader in the expectation of thy fauour, whose infirmities I pitie, and whose recouerie I desire and hope to performe. I will sell nothing, but that which I dare and will take my selfe in the same disease, for which it is commen∣ded. And for thy better safetie and satisfaction, I haue here contained my selfe wholy within ani∣mal and vegetable medicines, wherewith I will at all times (God willing) bereadie to furnish thee▪ at reasonable rates, out of my shop in Sheere lane neere Temple barre, faithfully and workmanlie drawne without all sophistication or adustion. Thine in all christian loue, IOHN CLARKE.
PLAGVE. A Notable defensatiue Cake a∣gainst the plague, being first practised in Millain vpon a generall infection there, about the yeere 1579. by M. D. Siring, and after brought ouer and practized in England in the great yeere of visitation An. 1593. by N. Romero Gentleman, commended and graced by Rodulphus the Emperour, with many honourable termes of fauour vnder the great seale of the Empire. I Am bold to front my Pam∣phlet with this defensatiue, be∣cause I vnderstand by many se∣cret informatiōs of my friends, that diuers Physitians and those of great
reading and iudgment (whose graue cen∣sures I doe greatly reuerence) doe expect a fearefull and generall infection of the plague this sommer, by reason of the vn∣naturall and intemperate season of the spring, which hath already shewed both his deadly and daungerous effects in the bodies and liues of many thousands of her Maiesties subiects: which if it shall please God the great Gouernor both of heauen and earth, in his vnspeakeable mercies to turne away from vs, I hope it will prooue a strong motiue to stirre vs vp to a general & christian thankfulnes. If othewise, so that our sins do call for vengeance & visi∣tation from heauen, I haue thought good in my tender loue and affection towards my natiue countrey to publish this preser∣uatiue, which in fiue weekes space (by the great blessing of God) did cleare that fa∣mous Citie of Millain being so grieuous∣ly infected, as that in some one weeke there died three thousand persons. And the citizens in their great loue and thank∣fulnesse
towardes D. Siring bestowed a gratuitie of fiftie thousand crownes vpon him. Obseruations in this Medicine. IT is made in the forme of a little round cake or tablet, and the dose is two drams. It is most properly giuen to such as are free and not possessed with the sicke∣nesse, although abiding in visited hou∣ses. It is an excellent and easie purge, be∣ing wrought vp with many cordials and antidotes. If these cakes be kept betweene papers in a close box and neere some fire, they will last good for seuen or eight mo∣neths. Two drammes is a good dose or pro∣portion for all such persons as are sixteene yeeres of age, and vpward to fiftie or six∣tie; so as they bee strong of body: but
weake men of fiftie fiue, or sixtie; or chil∣dren betweene eight and sixteene must take only the halfe proportion. The cake may be eaten, and a cup of burnt wine drunke after it, or els dissol∣ued in white wine. The said Romero hath also giuen the same with good successe in many bur∣ning feauers. The practise of the aforesaid defensatiue in the latter end of the Plague, An. 1593. in London. THere were dispersed abroade within London and Middlesex, great numbers of these defensa∣tiue cakes vnto persons whose names are not here remembred. It pleased the right Honourable Lords and others of her Maiesties priuie coun∣sell to haue fiue and fortie of these cakes. Doctor Fletcher that learned Prelate
then Byshop of Worcester bought to the number of fiftie of these cakes and dispersed them in the then visited houses of the said Citie, and it pleased God to preserue all the inhabitants of them from the infection, as he himselfe reported at the counsell table. The right honourable Sir Iohn Pucke∣ring knight, then L. Keeper of the great seale of England, appointed certaine of these cakes to be conueyed to the towne of S. Albons by Ma. Belfield, for the clec∣ring of the infected houses against the terme, which was then kept there. Mast. Richard young Iustice of peace in Middlesex and one of her Maiesties customers, deliuered abroad many hun∣dreths of them, and made one especiall triall in the parish of S. Marie Abchurch where he himselfe dwelled, vpon nine vi∣sited houses in which there aboade three and thirty persons, which trial gaue great contentment vnto the Lords of the coun∣sell, who sent for the true note vnto him
to be fully informed thereof. And ther∣upon Sr Romero should haue proceeded to a general triall in one of the greatest Wardes in London, by her Maiesties pleasure signified in the letters of the right honorable the LL. of her Maiesties priuy Counsell, and directed to the chiefe Ma∣gistrate of this honorable Citie, in whose hands vpon what reason the stay was made, I doe heere forbeare to vtter, because I would haue the dead to rest in peace: on∣ly it shall suffice, that himselfe by the opi∣nion of diuers (scorning and disgracing the medicine) died within three weekes after, either of the plague it selfe or of a burning feauer his Cousin German, as I haue been credibly enformed. Thomas Bland of the patish of Alhal∣lowes-barking, had defensatiues for him∣selfe, his wife and one seruant. 10. Smith of the parish of Creechurch, had for himselfe, his wife and foure ser∣uants. Frauncis Bradborne of Saint Swithins
parish, had for himselfe, his wife and two seruants. Mast. Merick preacher in crooked lane had for himselfe, his wife and two chil∣dren. The daughter of goodman Hawes be∣ing infected and taking it, escaped. Mast. Iarfield preacher at Saint Marie Abchurch going vsually amongst the in∣fected of his parish and others, and ha∣uing taken this medicine togither with his wife and maide, were all (thanks be to God) preserued. The maide▪seruaunt of one Mopsey Flax-wife, hauing the plague vpon her, was cured by one of these defensa∣tiues. Iohn Webster a Purse-maker dwelling at the entrance into Gutterlane, he and his man both tooke the same. Mister Eare a maker of gold lace in Gutterlane, he and his wife had each of them a defensatiue. Mistris Hunt a victualer in Gutterlane,
she and both her maides tooke of this de∣fensatiue. A Seruaunt of Master Deacons the Queenes Sergeant Plummer, hauing an extreame burning feauer, was cured with this medicine. A dutch Goldsmith dwelling amongst the feather dressers in the Black-friers took one of these defensatiues. A Ruby-cutter lying at the Dolphin in Gutterlane, hauing the plague vpon him tooke one of these and was cured. Goodwife Russell an hearbe-wife in Cheapside, hauing buried her husband of the plague, she & her maid were both preserued by taking this defensatiue. Mast. Heywood a Copper-smith tooke one of these cakes. The wife of Rowland that excellent Artisan dwelling in Southworke, tooke one of these defensatiues. A French gentleman being Cousin to Monsieur de la Now lying neere the Ex∣change, tooke one of them.
Sr Romero that brought the receipt from Millain, being then bedfellow with Doct. Siring, tooke the same twise him∣selfe. Mast. Crauen a Draper in Watling∣streete, and now a graue and well repu∣ted Alderman of this Citie, bought one of these cakes. A seruant of Mast. Cordals in Milke∣streete tooke one of these defensatiues. Mistris Bradshaw an auncient gentle∣woman and a Cousin of hers then dwel∣ling with her, tooke of these cakes, shee beeing then at her house at Stebon∣eath. Mast. Gamedge, a man much troubled with the gowte, and dwelling in Saint Tantlins parish, tooke one of these cakes to cleare his body of bad humors, and commended the working thereof great∣lie. Mast. Colfe th'apothecarie dwelling at the Artichoke in Cornhill solde diuers of these cakes: so likewise did one other of
the same facultie being a man of speciall note amongst them, whom I forbeare to name at this time. Mast. Moulton secondarie of the coun∣ter in Woodstreet, bought two of these defensatiues. Mast. Shepham of the parish of Saint Thomas th'aposte bought two cakes. Mast. Richard Wilbraham Esquire, and late common Serieant of this honoura∣ble Citie, though preserued by this de∣fensatiue Ann. 93. from the contagion; yet by a violent feauer this last yeere, to the vnspeakeable losse of this Citie, to the incredible griefe of his friend and lo∣uing spouse (though to his owne immortall glorie and comfort) was in the flower of his age, and in the highest hope of his aduancement taken from vs to his euer∣lasting peace and rest. Mast. Chambers a merchant of good account bought two of these cakes. Mast. Swaynes man bought one of them.
Mast. William Nichols a draper in Wat∣ling streete bought two of these defen∣satiues. Mast. Culuerwel citizen and mercer of London, had 30. of these cakes for him∣selfe and his friends. Mast. Linford a draper in Walting∣streete, a man greatly beloued whilest he liued, and as greatly lamented now he is dead, had one of these defensatiues. Mast. T. G. had foure of these defen∣satiues. A seruant of Mast. Archers had one of these defensatiues. Ma. Paumer of Woodstreet had three of them. Mast. Dauenant in Bowlane had foure of these cakes. Henry Ienkes a seruant at Bishops hall tooke one of these cakes. Mast. Susans the Barbarie merchant had one of these defensatiues. Mast. Scales dwelling at Dowgate had one of these cakes.
Mistris Duttons man of Woodford, had one of them. Mast. Albanie a Draper in Watling streete, had one of these cakes. The Author heereof and his men tooke of these cakes, and were all pre∣serued. Iohn Ailswoorth of Redding Clothier, tooke one of these cakes. Mast. Vrie Babington had two of these cakes. Mast. Edwin Babington his brother had also two of them. Mast. Haruie a Grocer, had for him selfe and nine others. Peter Peerson Clothwoorker, had one of these cakes. Mast. Filkins a Scriuener, had two of them. Susan Perches beeing sicke of the plague, tooke one of these defensatiues, and recouered. Iohn Dauison of S. Michaels, took one of them being infected, and it helped him.
The wife of Garret Iames in S. Micha∣els parish, had one of them. Iohn Iackson in S. Michaels, had one of them. Iohn Stokeley and his wife of the parish of S. Michaels, either of them had one of these cakes. William Haruie in S. Michaels parish, had one of these cakes. George Goodall Cooke, had one of them. Mast. Elcoks maide at the Faulkon in Cheape side, tooke one of them. An Vpholsters man at the Stockes be∣ing sicke, tooke one of them and was pre∣sently well. Mast. Cotton a merchant dwelling in Colman streete, tooke one of these cakes. Mast. Heyward a Merchant, tooke one of them. Master Atmore a Pewterer (and if I be not deceiued) the most exqui∣site workeman of his trade, had one of
these cakes. Mast. Streete had one of these cakes. Mast. Gardner had four of these cakes. Mast. Bland had three of these cakes. Mast. Philippus of the custome house, for himselfe and his family bought fiue of these defensatiues. Giuen to the Bishops man of Wor∣cester two. Smith, M. Richard Youngs man tooke one of these cakes. M. Saundersons men had two of these cakes. Mast. Shaw a Cooper, had for him∣selfe and his family three of these cakes. Mast. Collet dwelling at Hackney had foure of them. Mast. Chune dwelling with M. Hacket a Draper in Candlewick-streete had two of them. Mast. Thorpe the Vintner dwelling at the Miter on Breadstreet hill had foure of these cakes. Ma. Westwraies the Grocers maid dwel∣ling
neere the Stockes had one of these cakes. Mast. Greenham preacher of Christ∣church had for himselfe and his family three of these cakes. Iohn Blackstone constable of Abchurch parish had one of these cakes. Mast. William Marsh of the parish of great Alhallowes hadde one of these cakes. Richard Parnam of Sherborne lane had one of these cakes. A Ropeseller neere the custom-house had three of these cakes. Mast. Smart the sword-bearer had one of them. Mast. Iohn Ellis Esquier had one for his man. A Baker dwelling without Algate bars himselfe infected, took one of these cakes and was preserued. Mast. Henricke the Gunmaker without Algate had for himselfe and his family six of these cakes.
A linnen Draper dwelling ouer a∣gainst the Dukes place neere Algate, had for himselfe and his wife two of these cakes. Mast. Kilwell a Diamond-cutter, ha∣uing buried his wife and two children of the plague, was preserued by taking one of these defensatiues. A browne Bakers wife without the barres beyond Algate, being deadly sick of a burning feauer, and keeping her bed three weekes, was cured with one of these cakes. Hauns van Streete a Diamond-cutter in a little alley in Woodstreete hauing buried a daughter of the plague, he a his wife tooke this defensatiue. Mast. Lawe a Scriuener in Gutter-lane, hee and his maide tooke of these cakes. Iohn Todde a Taylor in Gutter-lane, hauing buried foure of the plague, the next day he and his wife tooke this me∣dicine, he had afterwards three other of
them for his friends. A Golde wier-drawer at the Cocke in Gutter-lane, hee and his wife being both sicke of an extreame burning fea∣uer, tooke of these cakes and were soone helped. Mistris Rundell a Golde wier-drawers wife in Kerry-lane, hauing a plague sore vpon her, was preserued by one of these defensatiues. Iudith Hatfield dwelling with her mo∣ther in Dees alley in Gutter-lane, hauing a plague sore, was preserued by this me∣dicine. See some cures of Agues performed with this medicine in the title of Agues following.
AGƲES. HAuing found by manifold expe∣rience the singular and eflectuall vse of diuers, both delicate and extraordinarie Medicines for the rooting out of Agues of all sorts (although in burning feauers I haue no pleasure to practise, because they prooue oftentimes deadly and alwaies verie dangerous, and therfore I leaue them wholy to the graue and professed Doctors) I haue thought i conuenient to offer my poore skill also i this kinde, which if any man shall at any time contradict (because I am no gradu∣ate in Physicke, though happily I haue been as bolde with natures Cabinet and the forge of Vulcan as some of them) I will at all times be ready to redouble any rea∣sonable summe that shall be deliuered, vpon the faile of any cure in any one pa∣tient which I shall vndertake, not but that I may sometimes misse in some strange
bodies and strangely possessed with these furious Fiends (for then I should be more then a man, cuius est aliquando errare) but that hauing found already that my faith∣full medicines haue hitherto scarcely de∣ceiued me in the twentith patient (I durst not write thus boldly of my cures if the statute of 34. Henry 8. were not my war∣rant for Agues) I hold it no great aduen∣ture, where the oddes is so apparant on my side, to make this offer in defence of my medicine to all such as shall either ig∣norantly or maliciously oppose them∣selues against it. And here leauing the multiplicitie of Agues to the seuerall writers that haue so curiously defined and determined of them, I will contain my selfe within those few names and number of Agues one∣ly, which are most vsually knowne to the common sort of people, viz: a Quotidi∣an, a Tertian, a double Tertian, a Quar∣tane, or a double Quartane. For the rest I referre all men to my Auncients and
Signiors in Physicke, who are better ac∣quainted with their names and cures, then my selfe. These medicines, because they are costly and hard to be gotten, are reserued only for such as make some good valua∣tion of their health. The most of my medicines are giuen in small dose, viz: halfe a dram or there∣about in powder to be swallowed in wine, beere, ale, or some appropriate liquor which shall be disclosed vpon the deliue∣rie of the medicine. In all these cures I doe neither vse cli∣ster, bloudletting, vomit, nor purge, hap∣pily in some deepe rooted Agues, a lar∣ger sweat will be prouoked then in others by this medicine. Neither the taste, nor the smell, nor the working (in my experience) hath bin any way offensiue to the patient, they are all either vegetable or animal medicines, and not minerall, although for my part I thinke as well and much better of mine∣rall
then of any or all the rest being true∣ly and philosophically prepared, and hope to be a meanes one day for the pub∣lishing of some of them to the generall good of this land, and the credit of our English Physicke: that Master Bostocks obtestation to almightie God long since written, may at the length receiue some answere from the clowdes, if God shall thinke it good to bestow such a heauenly fauour vpon vs. The patient retaineth his full strength during this cure, which seldome or neuer falleth out in ordinarie cures. THE PRACTISE. THe late Lord treasurers Barber (who as I take it doth make the Gregorians for bald heads an in∣uention proceeding from a sharpe and quicke spirit) was cured of an extreame Tertian very strangely and very suddenly, by one of these medicines about seuen or eight yeeres past.
Ann. 1593. Nurse Pace dwelling in Whitecrosse∣streete was cured of a Tertian by one of these medicines, and within fourteene daies after, shee fell into the like againe by relapse, and was recured at the first ta∣king. Mast. Robert Albanie of Lincolnes Inne was cured of a Tertian at the first taking. The wife of Ma. Nichols a Draper in Walting-streete was cured of a Tertian at the first taking. Goodwife Harsley dwelling at Bishops haul tooke one of the defensatiue Cakes and was cured of an extreame Tertian  the second taking. Robert Betterton a seruant dwelling at Lewsham was cured of a Tertian at once taking. Iohn Dawley the Millers man dwelling at Lewsham was cured of a Tertian. Reynold Rowse a Clothworkers sonne in Trinitie lane of the age of ten yeeres, was cured of a Quotidian by one of
these medicines. Mast. Thorpe a Vintner dwelling at the signe of the Miter on Bredstreete hill was cured of an extreame Tertian, whereof some fits held him 24. houres. William Brooke of Bromley in Kent a Colemaker, was cured of a Quartane at the first taking. Iohn Glouer a painter dwelling in Grub∣streete cured of a terrible Tertian; hee tooke the medicine but twise. Elizabeth Rogers dwelling on the bank∣side hauing a double Quotidian, was cu∣red with one of the defensatiue cakes. Mast. Filkins a skilfull Scriuener and an honest man, hauing had two fits of a Tertian, tooke a defensatiue cake and was helped. Mistris Lee dwelling with Mistris Brett her mother at Edmonton, hauing had a double Quartane a long time, was cured with one of the defensatiue cakes. William Brooke aforesaid possessed of a Quartane by relapse, was cured at the second
taking of the medicine. Ioane Gwin a poore widow possessed of a Quartane, was cured thereof by one of these medicines. A Gentlewoman dwelling at Bishops hall, was cured of a Tertian at the first fit, and afterward she was also cured of a se∣cond Tertian. Ann. 1594. Mast. Prescot a Goldsmith dwelling at the spread Eagle in Cheapeside, cured of a Tertian at the first taking. Samuel Sheafe M.Albanies man in wat∣ling streete, cured of a Tertian at the first taking. Mistris Norman the midwife dwellin in Bow-lane, was cured of a Tertian. Mistris Gore a merchants wife of good account dwelling in Bow-lane, being great with childe, and hauing a Tertian Ague, was cured by one of these medi∣cines. Ioane, sometimes seruant with the Au∣thor hereof, but then dwelling at Brain∣ford, was cured of a Tertian.
Mast. Susans a Barbarie merchaunt, then lying at his house at Bishops hall, was cured of a violent Tertian. Mast. Iohnes of Radcliff being a Ma∣ster of a shippe, was also cured of a Ter∣tian at the request of the said Master Su∣sans. I cured Nurse Price of two seuerall Tertians, she then being nurse to one of my children. Anne Mason (Mast. Pemmerton the elders maid being a Gold-smith) was cu∣red of a Tertian. Mast. Brooke dwelling within Lud∣gate, hauing had diuers violent fits of a Tertian before, was cured very strangely with one medicine. A Cutlers boy in Holborne, was cu∣red in the same manner of a Tertian. Mistris Wamslow a merchants wife was cured of a Tertian. T. G. Esquier was cured of a Tertian in a most easie manner. Ieffrey Norman the midwifes son was
cured of two Tertians at two seuerall times. Chappels wife the Ioyner a most ex∣cellent workman dwelling in woodstreet, was cured of a Tertian. Ma. Barnes the Mercers wife in cheap∣side, was by her owne confession cured of an ancient and inueterate Tertian; and after walking abroad a farre off from her house at Battersey in an extreame colde euening, she fell into it againe: at which time vpon some good respect, I forbare to cure her the second time. I cured Mistris Shaw a Coopers wife in Saint Iames parish of a violent Ter¦tian. An. 1600. I cured a Courtiers wife a Gentleman of good place of a Tertian, in so strange a manner, as I neither had nor deserued any thankes, and yet shee was helped at the first fit hauing been long before most terribly vexed with a Tertian. An. 1601. In Iune or Iuly last, I▪ gaue a redde powder in a cuppe of wine to a Car∣penter
that wrought at Teddington with a most deere and worshipfull friend of mine, hauing had a long and violent Quartane, whereby vpon his ill day hee was not able to worke, and yet was able to performe his labour well at his next fit. I doubt not, but that a second medi∣cine would haue made a perfect cure; which I did forbeare to send, because I heard no more from him. In September last I cured nurse We∣therleis father in law dwelling at Hiegate, of a long and extreame Tertian with my red powder at twise taking. In Ianuarie 1601. I cured a knights son of an old Quartane with my Mummia at once taking, he had only a small fit or two after. In Februarie I cured Edmond Sawer, seruant with a worshipfull neighbour of mine of a Tertian. I cured the same person againe of an other Tertian in March after, at the first taking.
See diuers agues cured with my defen∣satiue cakes ante Tit. of Plague disper∣sedly. A generall purgatiue and opener of obstructions both of the Spleane and Liuer, with the rare and approued vses thereof. IF you would roote out any dis∣ease therewith, then vse no other drinke to your meales nor be∣tweene meales, but such as is mixed with this opener according to such direction as shall be giuen. A quart or three pints euerie day a the most is a reasonable portion of th compound drinke for the patient to take▪ during his cure, the drinke it selfe where∣with it is mixed is only beere or ale which is strengthned thereby. Holde halfe a spoonfull of this medi∣cine a prettie while in your mouth in a morning fasting, and then spit it out, to dissolue a great stopping in the head ari∣sing
of colde, it worketh from the braine and stomacke more kindly in my opinion then Tabacco. It is a verie likely medicine to helpe deafenesse, arising vpon obstructions in the head. It is a present remedy against a surfet vpon any excessiue eating, to take halfe a spoonfull of the opener simple without mixture. The compounde drinke cureth any dropsie that is not inueterate, and so like∣wise of the French pocks being taken ten or twelue daies, or rather till the humour be spent, especially concluding the cure with a strong bath made of the decoction  Guaicum. It is also exceeding good against the Palsie being an obstruction of the Nerues (as diuers learned Physitians doe holde) whereby the spirits cannot haue their free passage. It also cureth the yel∣low iaunders, it disporseth all winde and all diseases arising vpon colde Rheuma∣tique
causes, it comforteth the braine, and in a fewe daies it procureth a good sto∣macke to him that refuseth his meate, and causeth a kindly and naturall rest. It agreeth with all complexions, as often experience can witnesse, only I find the cholericke man the vnfittest patient of all the rest. It neuer leaueth working till it haue rooted out the cause of the disease (if it be curable) so as you take the same long enough. It worketh only vpon superflu∣ous humors, not spending or wasting the balsame of life, or humidum radicale at all, as ordinarie purges doe. And if in foure, fiue or six daies taking, it happen to giue tenne, twentie, thirtie, or fortie stooles in a patient that hath a full body, and wel replenished with grosse humors; he shall finde himselfe no weaker at the last stoole, then he was at the first, so as he leaue before inflammation or pricking in the fundament. If the patient hauing some extreame
disease finde himselfe heauie or melan∣cholique (but sicke it will not make him) the first, second, or third day, let him not dismay himselfe, for this is rather a good signe of comfort that the medicine now is in contention with the disease, seeking to vanquish the same. A small and slender diet is best during all the cure, if the disease be olde and roo∣ted, wherein, butter, milke, pottage, broth, salt, and all fattie meates would be for∣borne, and the most nourishing meates, & such as be of lightest digestion would be vsed: let the patient during his cure keepe himselfe out of the ayre, hauing a e in his chamber, according to the sea∣son of the yeere; and let him be carefull that he take no colde, nor vse Venerie (as he loueth his life) either during the cure, or in one moneth after hee is in good health. This compound drinke is an excel∣lent remedie against the greene sicke∣nesse.
According to the strength and weake∣nesse of your patient or of his disease, make your drinke stronger or weaker, and giue more or lesse quantitie accordingly: for here discretion must guide you. There is not any one of the com∣mon or ordinarie purgatiues vsed in this opener. This medicine being taken a fewe daies at the spring and fall of one yeere in a young gowte, or for two or three yeeres togither in an olde and inueterate gowte, will either make a perfect cure thereof, or bring the same to bee a ve∣rie easie and tollerable gowte vnto  patient. This compounde beere or ale taken some reasonable time doth cure an vlce∣ration in the stomack. Where there is also occasion of Sur∣gery offred, there first take away the cause of the disease inwardly with this medi∣cine, and then the Surgeon shal after find an easie cure.
In the pocks annoint the Nodes and other sores with the simple extract. This opener cureth any green wound beyond the naturall Balsamum, it is also excellent for a bruse. You may giue this opener in Endiue or fumitorie water, or some other coole distilled water in hot bodies. For accurtation in a long disease after 14. or 20. daies if the patient be not per∣fectly cured, let him vse a strong bath of the decoction of Guaicum twise a day, & before he go into the bath, let him take a warme draught of this opener mixed with beere or ale, then let him go into the bath that he may sweate. During all the time wherein you take this mixed drinke, warme your bed when you go into it, and your cloathes when you put them on. This extract purgeth very gently and without any conuulsions, and without leauing any drought in the body after, as ordinarie purges most commonly doc.
If you take foure draughts of a stron∣ger mixture in the day time besides meal∣drinke, viz. at six in the morning one, and at nine another, and the third at three in the afternoone, and the fourth going to bed, it will commonly prepare the bo∣dy the first day, and purge sufficiently the second day. This is a good course for all such as cannot spare any longer time a∣bout their Physicke. But otherwise if a man doe onely take it at meales with a mornings draught something stronger, whereby it may onely giue two stooles e∣uerie day after the first day, or if that pro¦portiou will not procure two stooles eue¦rie day, then if the patient doe also at bed time take an other draught of the stron¦ger mixture, by this meanes in longer time, according to the deepe rooting of the disease, he shall cleere his body of all obstructions, and procure vnto himselfe a good stomacke in a most delicate and easie manner, without any offence vnto his body, either during the cure, or after:
and if the patient please, he may onely take so little thereof and that in his meale drinks, as that after he findeth himselfe to haue sufficiently purged to his owne de∣sire, it may serue to keep his body soluble as long as he listeth, and finde no incon∣uenience euen vntill all the superfluous humors that offend him, be wholy rooted out and extirpated. To ease the raging paine of the goute, take the simple extract vnwarmed, lay it on gently with your hand vpon the place grieued, & warming your hand at a cha∣ingdish of coals placed by your foote or hand, which paineth you, work it in gently by little & little til you haue spent a spoon∣ful or two vpon it, one quarter of an houre at the least, the longer the better; & in the end driue it with your hand till it be in a manner stiffe like vernish, then lay on a linnen cloth, least it happen to sticke to your hose or gloue, lappe the member warme, and go into a warmed bed, and so it hath been often prooued to giue ease in
lesse time then one houre, and the patient hath slept well all the night after. You may leaue the cloth on til it will come off easily: note the paine is easiest to remoue vpon the first approch, before you haue vexed the humour, and therefore good to haue some of this alwaies ready be∣fore hand. If the patient be troubled with the run∣ning of the raines, first stay them by some apte medicine, before you giue this com∣pound drinke by way of diet. This simple extract healeth any itch or scabbes applied outwardly and rubbed well in, but if the skinne be broke or the flesh rawe, it will smart for a while, but healeth the sore speedily, & at a few dres∣sings: qre of Serpigo, tetter, ringworme, &c. to be cured with the same. This medicine will neuer decay, onely you must keepe your glasses well stop∣ped, that the spirits thereof doe not eua∣porate. This is an excellent medicine to pre∣uent
the gowte, sciatica, iaunders, green∣sicknes and all diseases arising of rhumes, superfluous humors or obstructions, and so I haue both vsed it my selfe, and per∣swaded diuers of my deerest friends to take it. It will also cure the same speedily being taken before they be deepely roo∣ted, and howsoeuer they be rooted it will greatly qualifie and ease them, and if it procure a perfect cure take it for an ad∣uantage. This medicine is not yet of so aunci∣ent a date as to yeeld many patients, and some of those which haue found benefit hereof, I know are veire vnwilling to be amed, but the medicine is so safe both for sound and sicke men to take; as that the exposer or seller thereof will at all times bee willing either to begin or to pledge a health thereof vnto his patient.
EIES. HAuing my selfe beene often trou∣bled with a thin filme growing ouer mine eie, and sometimes e∣uen ready to couer or clowd my sight; at the lenght I happened vpon a kinde gen∣tleman, who by earnest entreatie did first, bestow an excellent water vpon me for the cure of mine infirmitie which did then exceedingly grieue me, and after∣ward gaue me the receipt thereof, which had been most carefully kept as a sacre relique within the possession of one na for a long time. With this water I haue helped diuets hauing filmes or skinnes, and white specks in the eie, whose names I did not ob∣serue. It tickleth a little, but it smarteth not being dropped into the eie: and there∣fore the youngest childe may well endure the same.
It lasteth good a moneth or six weekes after it is made. THE STONE. THis medicine was obtained at the hands of a Iewe being the Popes Physitian in the time of King Henry the 8. who curing an Italian in Rome, being then a companion with an English knight there imploied in the ser∣uice of his prince of his deadly pain and torment, by reason of great abundance of grauell in his kidneis; did for his cure and he receipt of his medicine, receiue a ule of the knight, which with his costly rappings and other rich furniture was e∣steemed woorth seuen hundreth pounds: from this knight by mesne degrees it came at the length into the possession of the publisher hereof.
THE PRACTISE. ONe Ioane an hearbwife dwelling in Chatterhouse lane, and kee∣ping her standing commonly o∣uer against the Starre in Cheapeside on the market daies, was helped with this medicine. Mistris Wentwoorth dwelling in the whitefriers, hauing taken this medicine twise did voide either a bone or a stone like a bone and sharpe pointed, being al∣so of such greatnesse, as that in mans rea∣son it seemed impossible that she should haue expelled the same at so narrowe a passage, the bone is yet to be seene. Goodwife Reynolds dwelling in the Church lane in Saint Martins hath two stones as yet to be seene that came from a childe being of the age of three yeeres, who had not made water in foure daies before. Diuers other persons, but of better ac∣count
haue also found ease by this me∣dicine, whose names for feare of giuing offence vnto them I doe willingly sup∣presse, and haue thought it more con∣uenient to giue a priuate testimonie of them to such as desire for their own good to be better satisfied, then by publique impression to make thē generally known to all men. Strangurie. THere is also good proofe to be made of cures performed with this drinke, but because it is such a disease, as no man of good sort would willingly either haue or be knowne to haue, I doe therefore referre my experi∣ence herein to priuate satisfaction.
For the Hicocke or deadly yexing. I Haue also a most soueraigne water to helpe the same, and that presently, & can shew good proofe thereof. Sundrie other drinkes and waters of rare vse and vertue, which the said I. Clarke will deli∣uer at reasonable prices to such as haue cause to vse them. AN excellent Aqua vita to bee drunke vpon a surfet. 2. A drinke whereof one spoon∣full at a time doth ease an olde cough that tickleth in the throate. 3. A notable diet-drinke to roote out a∣nye ache arising of any Rheumatique cause, or of the French disease, often prooued. 4. A most singular Gargarisme to purge the head speedily of all superfluous hu∣mours,
often prooued. 5. An assured remedy both for the yel∣low and blacke iaunders. 6. D. Steuens water. 7. Aqua mirabilis. 8. The water of life. 9. The Electuarie of life. 10. Aqua Calestis. 11. Aqua imperialis. 12. Aqua confortans stomachum▪ whereof some late experiences doe here ensxe. MAster Robens a Gentleman of Lincolnes Inne, hauing an ex∣ceeding weake stomacke, was helped therewith: a verie late cure. Mast. Forest a Gentleman lying in Sa∣lisburie Court, not being able to digest any meate which hee did eate in three moneths before, at the first taking of this water, was able to digest a piece of pow∣dred beefe to his dinner: a very late cure also.
Mast. Monke a Gentleman of the tem∣ple alwaies casting vp whatsoeuer he did eate, was perfectly cured at the second taking of this medicine. This was per∣formed in the last Sommers vacation, be∣ing the most auncient of al the cures here remembred. Mast. Nye an Attourney dwelling neer Croydon, hauing surfeited vpon a piece of raw beefe was presently eased with this water: a late cure. Mast. Streets wife in Holborne, hauing her stomack very vnapt to digest hir meat, found a perfect remedy with this water▪ late cure. Iohn Winningtons wife dwelling ouer against the house of the publisher hereof, being giuen to a continuall casting had her stomack perfectly strengthened with this water: a verie late cure. 13. Spirit of wine perfectly rectified. 14. Cinnamom water. 15. Rosa Solis. 16. Aqua vitae.
17. Aqua rubea. 18. An approoued water to be held in the mouth, and to procure a flux of Rheume. 19. An excellent Fucus for Bewtie called a Pigeon water. 20. A notable water for a stinking breath. 21. A Water to helpe the Mor∣phew. 22. A water to whiten and fasten the teeth. 23. An assured remedy for the run∣ning of the Raines. 24. An excellent and approoued re∣medy for the collique. 25. A present remedy for the Mo∣ther. 26. An excellent water for rheuma∣tique or gummed eies.
OINTMENTS. AN approoued ointment to take away haire from any place spee∣dily, and without paine. 28. An assured ointment to cure a red face that is full of heat and pimples, with∣out paine or smarting. I Haue here also thought it not imper∣tinent to the subiect which I haue in hand, after many references to set downe some true and approoued receipts, which euerie man according to his owne infr∣mitie may safely vse or apply vnto him∣selfe, if he haue iust cause. Approoued remedies for the tooth-ache, if the tooth be hollow. POwder, a little of sal Armoniake, and according to the bignesse of the hole, apply your remedy in a small ragge of lawne bound about with a
threed, and dip the same in a little strong Aqua vitae, or rather spirit of wine; or if the paine be verie extreame, in a little of the oyle of Vitrioll, then cut away all the superfluous lawne and threed: and ha∣uing put the same into the tooth, close it vp with linte, and commonly it giueth ease in halfe an houre. Some doe vse to stoppe the tooth with linte dipped in the oyle of Origanum, or oyle of Thime. The hollow tooth being stopped with Pellitorie of Spaine first bruised, doeth often times leaue aking. Also a good quantitie of featherfew bruised and ap∣plied behinde the eare, hath often been ound a good remedie. A little Lauda∣num put into a hallow tooth, doth some∣times helpe. Also take Henbane seede, and boyle it in Wine-vinegar, then take the syrrup of white Poppy and mingle it with the vinegar and gargle both first warmed toward the tooth that aketh. This is an excellent and approoued re∣medie. I haue set downe diuers receipts
that the patient might haue choice, if one or two should happen to faile him. Approoued remedies for Cornes. FIrst pare the corne very low, then take the fat of a rabbets kidney, apply it to the corne, binding a fine cloth about it, renue the same eue∣rie night, and at a few dressings it will so supple the same, that you may easily pluck it vp by the roote. sapius probatum. The soft roe of a red herring incorpo∣rated with the pulpe of figges in equall proportion, and spread vpon leather, and then applied to cornes, irst we pared, wil helpe them at a fewe dre∣sings: an excellent and approoued re∣ceipt. Mix the powder of calcined or burnt Allom with red wax, pare the cornes and apply it: often prooued. Fasting spittle mixed with powdred chalke and applied to a corne, and then
leauing it two daies, and pilling off what you can with your nailes euery time be∣fore you vse fresh chalke and spittle, will soone roote them out. Some doe labour to digge the corne vppe by the roote, and then they droppe one droppe of the oyle of Sulphur in the hole to preuent it for growing a∣gaine, but this is a painfull way. Diuers excellent vomits with their singular vses. INfuse vpon Elleborus albus Bri∣onie rootes and Panis porcinus some spirit of wine for two daies, then distill the spirit ouer, then reinfuse and distill againe, reiterate this woorke three times; then take a few drops there∣of, put them into a cup of wine or other drinke, or dippe a feather therein, and stir the wine therewith, and it wil giue an ex∣cellent vomit. Take this vomit two daies togither, each morning, if you feele your
selfe ill at ease, or finde any great reple∣tion in your stomacke. This being vsed once euerie moneth or in six weekes will keepe a mans body in a perfect state of health. As it was assured Mast. Rich of Lee by a most graue and learned Physiti∣an, who for many curtesies conferred vp∣on him, during his aboade at his house, gaue him the receipt as a great testimony of his loue and requitall. This, Mast. Rich by his owne confession continually vsed the space of thirtie yeeres after, and euen till his dying day without feeling any touch of disease. I haue also found by often experience in my selfe, that a vomit taken once in a moneth or six weekes hath preuented di∣uers infirmities in my selfe, and to be an excellent meanes to cleere an ague, being taken vpon the first approch thereof. But this vomit which I meane is very pleasant and worketh very easily, and without a∣ny violence, and for mine owne opinion, I am verily perswaded that if it were ge∣nerally
vsed, it would saue 20000. pounds a yeere in Tabacco, and performe all or most of the effects which Tabacco doth, and that in a more easie and familiar man∣ner, especially in such bodies who by na∣ture haue any facilitie in casting with smal prouocation; for it cleareth the head and stomacke exceedingly of all superfluous, rhumatique, cold and vndigested matter; it is made in this manner. Make an ale quart of posset ale, clarifie the same, and put therein a small handfull of fresh Camomill, let it boyle therein a fewe walmes, deuide the same into three parts; drinke one third thereof fasting at two seuerall draughts, and after a little pawse, force your selfe with your singer or a feather to cast: then take the second part doing as before, and deuiding it into two draughts; and after this, take the third part likewise. So shall you both cast vp all your posset drinke, and cleare as well your head as stomacke of a great deale of phlegme and crude humours,
which you shall easily perceiue to lie in the bottome of the bason by the stub∣bed end of a broomesticke folded there∣in, which will bring vppe the phlegme roping there at in great aboundance. Diuers excellent and approoued waies for the staying of bloud. I Haue often stayed bleeding at the nose by receiuing a fewe droppes of the bloud in a linnen cloth and burning the cloth, the reason whereof I leaue to better Philosophers then my selfe. Drie a little of the parties bloud in a fireshouell ouer the fire, blowe it vp with a quill into the parties nostrils, this sel∣dome or neuer faileth. Some blowe vp bole Armoniake in the same manner. The dried bloud of the partie doth also stay the extreame bleeding of a wound, when all other remedies haue failed. The drie mosse gathered from an A∣shen tree or billet, and powdred, doth
presently without all faile stay the blee∣ding at the nose, or of any wound; this one remedy hath saued the liues of ma∣nie. It is an ordinarie meanes to stay blee∣ding by letting of bloud, as it is to stay a great loosenesse by some apte purga∣tiue. IOhn Clarke the publisher hereof will also be ready at all times to drawe any other waters, oyles, spirits, extracts, salts, tinctures, &c. both faithfully and accor∣ding to Arte for all such persons as shall at any time vpon reasonable warning re∣quire the same. His dwelling is in the middest of Sheere-lane hard by Temple barre leading into Lincolns Inne fields. FINIS.
1602. printer's or publisher's device AT LONDON, Printed by Peter Short, dwel∣ling on Bred-streete hill neere to the end of old Fish-streete, at the signe of the Starre.
