6061 S121236 99856421 21970
A VVEDDING-RING, FITTED TO THE FINGER OF EVERY PAIRE THAT HAVE OR SHALL MEETE IN THE FEARE OF GOD: OR, THAT DIVINE CIRCLE OF HEAVENLY LOVE, WHEREIN man and wife should walke all their dayes. THE POSIE WHEREOF IS AN expression of A good Husbands Kindnesse towards his vertuous wife, with her retaliacion of like affection. Woodcut printer's device showing an old man standing beside an olive tree; above him, on a scroll, the motto 'Noli altum sapere' (McKerrow, 310). LONDON, Printed by ELIZ. ALLDE for EDWARD BLOVNT. 1632.
To my worthy and much honou∣red friends, M aster William Hackwill Es∣quire, one of his Maiesties Iustices of Peace for the Countie of Buckingham, with his truely ver∣tuous and religious Bedfellow, Mistris Elizabeth Hackwill, the dew of Heauen, and fatnesse of the Earth, Grace and Peace bee multiplied in Iesus Christ. WOrshipfull, and right dearely be∣loued: I haue often sought oppor∣tunitie to salute you ioyntly; ac∣knowledging my selfe your deb∣tor many wayes, & which is more; vnable to satisfie any: it was the griefe of Darius, that he should die indebted to his friend, which de∣parting he bewayled, as his last, not his least mis-hap, hauing receiued a courtesie, hee should not liue to requite it. if such an ac∣knowledgement
may not goe in part of pay∣ment, I might despaire; hauing receiued ma∣ny from you, both while J liued neere you, as since my remouall at your motion, into these parts (distance of place hath not stopt the current of affection, nor absence begot obli∣uion) and yet find my selfe able to doe no more: onely this is my comfort, Good-will hath not beene wanting; if abilitie answered desire, you should find me as readie to pay, as to confesse: J would not faigne a debt; to en∣crease it, the propertie of insinuating flatte∣rie; neither would I denie it, where it is due, the guise of seruile basenesse; iudging it bet∣ter thus to publish my owne pouertie, then to be censured as vngratefull, or of my friends forgetfull. Preaching at the Marriage of Mr. Iohn Berrie.Occasion lately directed my meditations vpon this subiect: wherein the mutuall hap∣pinesse of your choyce, did often present it selfe vnto my thoughts; the matter and man∣ner of handling; (If the testimonie of an experienst friend
may be thought impartiall) applying it selfe most fully & fitly to you both; that I could not forbeare to impart it as a messenger of thank∣fulnesse, no worke of worth; except you bee pleased by acceptation, to make it worth per∣using: here you may read your selues, and be stir'd vp to blesse God, the maker of Marriages, for his good prouidence in your meeting; here you may see that Wedding-ring, which you both put on, in conceit and resolution, at the Marriage-day; that Di∣uine Circle or heauenly round of heartie re∣flecting-loue, wherein you doe, and all mar∣ried persons should moue during life; to ac∣count of their owne vertuous mates, as ex∣celling others; am I deceiued? or experience hath taught mee what I haue written: no more: neither may I speake; what I haue seene and obserued, of your happinesse in this kind: liue long more happy; it is law∣full to pray, as Ioab for Dauid:2. Sam. 24.3. The Lord your God adde vnto it an hundred-fold, that your eyes may see it: the Lord increase
your content daily, and double the portion of the sauing graces of his Spirit vpon you both: otherwise I cannot steed you; prayers you shall not want, while I re∣maine. From my studie in Barstaple, Ianuary 1. 1630. W. CROMPTON.
A VVEDDING-RING: FITTED TO THE FINGER of euery Paire, that haue or shall meete in the feare of God. PROVERBS 31.29. Many-daughters haue done vertuously, but thou ex∣cellest them all. FRom the tenth verse of this Chapter to the end thereof, (Reuerend, right Worshipfull and all dearely beloued,) you haue, and at leasure may read, an Artificiall Wed∣ding-song; or a diuine Hymn, describing and commending Marriage with vertuous women: pen'd or appoin∣ted, as may be probably conceiued, to be said or sung at Solemne meetings; especially vpon such occasions; euery verse begins with a letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, in order from the beginning to the end: composed much after the maner of those
Pshalmes of degrees with Rhethoricall gradations:Psal 110.121.122.123.124.125, &c. partly they might be more sweetly vttered; either in parts by many, or altogether by one, to the greater content of the speaker, profit of the hea∣rer, and delight of both; partly the matter there∣in contained, might be with more case remem∣bred, and longer retained. In it selfe, it is a Prophesie, containing much good counsell, therefore called, (if I mistake not) The Crowne of Solomon:Cant 3.11. good Counsell to a King, respectiuely, about the choyce of a wife, is as his Crowne, or the Crowne of his Crowne, for the consolation of all true hearted subiects and preseruation of the publike-weale. Goe forth, O ye Daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon, with the Crowne, wherewith his mother crowned him, in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladnesse of his heart: that Crowne I take to be this Prophesie; wherein, as out of a sparkling Diamond, you may see the refle∣cting image of true beauty, and read both the worke and worth of a good woman: and fitly may it he called a Crowne: euery wife thus quali∣fied, is a Crowne to her husband, saith Solomon elsewhere;Prou. 12 4. her vertues & graces are as so many Rubies or glittering Pearles of great price, which doe well become and adorne a Crowne: Goe forth therefore, O ye Daughters of Zion, and be∣hold Solomon with his Crowne, whereon we find this Posie ingrauen as with a pen of iron, in let∣ters
of gold, neuer to be forgotten. The price of a vertuous woman is farre aboue Rubies. Take notice first of her fidelity:Verses 11,  the heart of her husband doth safely trust in her; free from those boisterous stormes of iealousie, and distra∣cting cares about house-hold affaires, whereby others are tost day and night, he rests himselfe in quiet repose, like a shippe at Anchor in the calme harbour, knowing his wife will answere her trust, being neuer idle, nor ill imployed. Secondly, of her industry, shee seeketh wooll,Verse 13. and flaxe, and worketh willingly; delayes not, till materialls inuite her, but sends & seekes; her thoughts preuent occasion; her hands and eyes contend with time, she doth those things freely, which others may doe, constrained through feare or necessity. Thirdly, of her vigilancy,Verse 15. she rises while it is yet night; diligence expels drowsinesse, and tea∣ches good wiues to remoue darknesse by an artifi∣ciall Sunne, that the goodnesse of God in the ap∣proaching-light, may be opportunely met (not meritoriously matcht) with some good worke of theirs: weakenesse I know tyes many, but sloth more, too long in bed; lazie humours are best purged by early rising. Fourthly, of her charity: she stretcheth forth her hands to the poore and needy;Verse 20. like some pleasant riuer she feeds and clothes the neigh∣bouring
valleies, which through the heat of cruel∣ty, or the cold of pouerty, were ready to pine away; hungry bellies and naked armes are the subiect of her meditation, it is not enough others know her to be good, except they feele it; help∣full compassion is a marke of true deuotion while she feeds or clothes her body with rich dainties, she is obserued to sigh and say, What abundance doe I enioy, when many a good soule wants neces∣saries? her fulnesse yeelds no satisfaction, vnlesse it ouerslow by communication. Fiftly, of her prouidence in gouerning her lit∣tle Kingdome;Verse 21.22, 23, 24. like a well-ordered Army, euery one furnisht, hath his place of employment as∣signed; Lawes enacted; houres of examination appointed; & lest she should erre in iudgement, she lookes well to the wayes of her house-hold, her eyes are in euery corner: children learning, ser∣uants labouring, all obedient to the becke of her hand and eye, such soueraignety shines in the face of vertue: she giues maidens a portion; their la∣uish singers may not be their owne carners, who care as little in the spending, as they did in get∣ting their Masters estate; she clothes her family with scarlet, the lasting-weed of deserued honour; implying what shee is, and deserues to haue: makes her selfe carpets of tapestry; the furniture of her house and table is the fruit of her hands, made, not bought; ornaments in a Family are commendable Emblemes of pious industry, as more vsefull things; God allowing not onely to
sustaine, but to delight Nature: she keepes her husband euer in that decent fashion of attyre, which becomes his age and calling, so that he is specially noted when he sits in the gates, amongst the chiefe of the Land: no paines about him is grieuous to her, for whose sake all the rest are chearefully vndertaken. Sixthly, of her wisedome and discretion;Verse 26. in speech she openeth her mouth with wisdome, her words are few, seasonable and weighty: attire, not curious nor carelesse, but such as the time allowes in modest & graue Matrons: strength and honour are her clothing: & for behauiour; in her tongue is the law of kindnesse, she prouokes none to euill thoughts by lightnes; neither sends any from her discontented, through sowre, sullen, and heauy sadnes; her carriage is so sweetly tempered with modesty and humility, that at once she cheares the vertuous and curbs the vicious-minded. Lastly, her piety, she feares the Lord,Verse 30. which is a corner stone in this building, the foundation of all; what good she doth, is in obedience vnto God▪ and will be constant in doing, till the Lord leaue commanding:Vide The la∣sting Iewell. but of this I haue spoken enough already, vpon another occasion, in ex∣plaining the two last verses of this Chapter. Who hath or can finde such a vertuous woman? her selfe is portion enough, she passes her waight in gold: her dwelling is a representation of hea∣uen; O happy man, and therefore happy, because husband to such a wife, who brings ioyfull con∣tent
to his heart, delight to his eyes, glory to his head, and helpes him keepe a continuall feast. Adam might haue had a garden, no Paradise with∣out Eue; man is imperfect without a wife, vnhap∣py without a good one; what the heauens haue bin thought to be aboue him, and his soule with∣in him, that a vertuous wife is indeed about him, like well-tuned Virginals, her life is perfect Mu∣sicke: no harsh sounds, nor iarring strings on her brest: if she intreat, it is with humility; if she complaine, it is with teares; if she chide, it is with smiles: how can she displease, whose harme∣lesse thoughts are still intent to please? he hath put off nature, that finds no content in such a Turtle; not to acknowledge such a helper, argues want of grace: let him seeke her that wants one, let him mourne that hath lost one, let him praise her that enioyes one; so much is implyed in the Text. Her husband also he praises her, saying, Many daughters haue done vertuously, but thou excel∣lest them all. The words are a conclusiue branch of the Pro∣phesie; a speech of praise deliuered in the person of an experienst husband, and grounded vpon obseruation: Deuiding themselues into A Commendation, and A Comparison.
Commendation of vertuous daughters, with their number: Many daughters haue done ver∣tuously. Comparison, wherein one so qualified is prefer∣red to all, But thou excellest them all. Daughters carry their duty in their name: A radicae.  A disicare. the word in the Originall springs from a root, which signifies, A building, or to build; and may yeeld vs a twofold instruction. First, that euery vertuous daughter is a buil∣ding: and therefore in the creation of woman, it is said, that the Lord built her of the ribbe; as men vse to doe stately houses, faire, strong,Gen. 2.22. and well-seated, for their delight and profit; without which they cannot well be. VVhat Tisaphernes Lieu∣tenant to the Persian King spake once of Alcybia∣des, comparing him to a faire house of pleasure,Plul. in vit. Aleybiades. See the Pro∣phets prayer Psal. 144.12 is truely verified of a vertuous daughter; she is a building both delightfull and fruitfull. Compa∣red for statelinesse and profit, to a Merchants ship, Prov. 31.14. Now in all buildings, we may ob∣serue cost, comelinesse, and vse; no lesse in ver∣tuous daughters; comely they are to the eye, many wayes beneficiall, and they want no cost, will spare none, or else none should be spared for their good: they are the Lords building,Psa. 122.3. like Ie∣rusalem, a house that is compact together at vni∣ty in it selfe: not like the dropping house,Pro. 19.13.27.15. men∣tioned in the Prouerbes, but like our Sauiours house built vpon a rocke;Math. 7, 24 which proues a con∣stant
defence for the owner, against the boistrous winds of violent assaults, and the scorching Sun∣shine of alluring temptations, for outward stru∣cture of seuerall parts in order, for inward furni∣ture, gifts and graces of the mind, admirable: obserue and see, the foundation, turrets, win∣dowes, doores, inner-chambers, all hanged with rich iewels of intellectuall vertues, and diuine graces, and you will say, This onely deserues the name of None such: no building to the sight so pleasant, none for vse so profitable, as this li∣uing,Spirabile Coe∣lum. Bodin. li. 1. c. 4. mouing, speaking Tabernacle: I might stay you ouer-long in the Entry; should I stand to vnuaile the whole Fabricke: you may admire the rest by what you see a farre off, I dare but point to it, and passe away: excellency in any workemanship, calles for an exact or no descrip∣tion; lest fruitlesse haste should eclipse the praise and glory of the Workeman. Secondly, euery vertuous daughter is, and must be a builder; we haue seene what she is, idle she may not be, her name implies such a∣ction, as tends to perfection: a builder she is, first, to her decayed parents, by vpholding the credit of an ancient family, by renewing and con∣tinuing their name, and nature with posterity, & by repairing the breach, age hath made in the ruinous houses of their bodies, with a timely sup∣ply of all their wants;Pro. 23.22. a vertuous daughter makes old parents begin to liue young againe, partly by feeling present comforts, and partly by fee∣ding
vpon hopes of future happinesse. Secondly, she is a builder together with her husband, as copartner, yoke-fellow,Gen. 2.18. and helpe meete for him, in the worke committed to their trust; if one should build, and the other pull downe, we might expect a Babel, no prospe∣rous building; but Solomon tels vs,Pro. 14.1. euery wise woman builds her house, the foolish onely plucke it downe with their hands; and that was the rea∣son his building in the later end, went so backe∣wardly-forward,1. Kin. 1.3, 4, 7, 8. hauing so many vicious daugh∣ters about him: a good woman raises vp the ruines of decayed places, studying how to pre∣serue her husbands credit and good name, both in regard of God and men; when the contrary, makes the stateliest turrets stoup, through pride,O domus anti∣qua quam dispa∣ri domino domi∣naris? ryot and idlenesse, dismantling ancient monu∣ments of strength, to bury her husbands honour in the rubbish thereof: the dwelling of one is like the pleasant spring, euen in the middest of Win∣ter, fresh, gay, and pleasant: the house of the other, like stormy VVinter, in the middle of May, torne, ragged, and ill-fauoured:Pro. 24.30, 31. I went by the field of the slothfull, and loe, it was all growne ouer with thornes, and nettles, and the stone wall thereof was broken downe. Thirdly, she is a builder in regard of her chil∣dren, instrumentally to giue them being,Education of children is the founda∣tion of the Common∣weale. and well-being, both for conception, birth, and edu∣cation, by her industrious care, tender infants at first, like vnto the creeping Iuy on the wall,
come to be tall and goodly Cedars in Libanon, pro∣fitable pieces to vnderprop a declining state; whosoeuer knowes, hath seene or heard of this la∣bour, what it is to beare and bring vp children, will say, that she is a painefull builder: her nau∣seous pangs before, & sleepelesse nights after the birth, when variety of change cannot alter, nor giue content to her tearelesse cryer; one while she sits and sings, to deceiue or flatter the tedi∣ousnesse of time, with counterfeited mirth; anon she sighs and weepes, (the burden of her song,) and sings againe,Gen. 3.16. as if variety did ease, though not remoue her griefe; all which doe sufficiently tell vs, her building in this kind, is multiplyed sorrow. Fourthly, she is a builder to her selfe, of a good name,Eccles. 7.1. which is a rare monument, better then precious oynment, rather to be sought then great riches,Pro. 22.1. no shining titles of fading glory so famous, no glittering trophies of ancient Wor∣thies so durable, as this building: a vertuous daughter cannot be obscured, no more then a City built on a hill, Fame borrowing the tongues of strangers to publish her desert: euery action speakes of her, and euen while she sleepes, the building goes forward. Fiftly, she is a builder in regard of her neigh∣bours, either by confection of salues, distillation of waters, or preparation of other necessaries for their reliefe, supply, and succour in time of need: a vortuous daughter is a true neighbour,
euery one neere her is the better for her; Inno∣cency beares such sway in her, and is so power∣fully preualent, that she cannot thinke of an in∣iury with delight, either to doe it to another, or to reuenge it, done to her selfe by others; nei∣ther will her habituall goodnesse suffer her to be a carelesse helper; when Satan hath sowne the seeds of strife and discord, and stird vp men by diuision, to weaken themselues with their owne, hands, she sleeps not, till those tares be pluckt vp, and peace and loue replanted in their affections. Sixtly, she is a builder, in regard of the Church and Common-weale, though she may not pu∣blikely be seene, in her retiring roomes, she helps forward the building by prayers, teares, aduice, and the labour of her hands: like the wise hearted-women vnder the Law, who are commended by the Lord himselfe, as builders,Exod. 35.25. euery one prepa∣ring & bringing something towards the finishing of the Tabernacle: let not women be discouraged, because they are not called to publike offices, ver∣tuous daughters want not imployment,Familia pru∣denter instituta ciuitatis imago, Bodin, l. 1. c. 2. neither are they excluded, (as some vnwisely-ambitious, haue repiningly-murmured,) from this honou∣rable seruice; by their priuate diligence in pious, exercises, the Magistrate rules, the Minister tea∣ches, the husband-man labours,Right orde∣ring of a Fa∣mily, is a branch of re∣gal discipline. the Physician cures, the Lawyer pleades, and the Souldier fights the better: let them not thinke themselues therefore contemned, or that they can doe no∣thing, because they doe not euery thing, God
hath wisely disposed of his creatures into seuerall rankes, as an expert Captaine doth his Army, allotting euery one such and so many talents, as his place required; be content with your portion, the lot is fallen out vnto you in a good ground. And so you see the subiect of this commenda∣tion, A daughter. She is a delectable building, onely let her be mindefull, that she weary not her Lord, with ouer much needlesse reparation; she must auoid fantastike fashions, curious gawdinesse, with all vaine superficiall trimmings; such printed paper-houses pleases children onely, but cannot with∣stand a storme, and are iustly derided by euery vnderstanding passenger. She is a conscionable builder, let her remem∣ber, she be not idle, nor slugglish in her labour, but like the spinning-Spider, or the gathering-Bee, let her daily bring some hony to the hiue: & in this common lation of a daughter, we haue three things commended to our obseruation. First, the necessity and benefit of History, to record the vertuous deeds of such daughters: the phrase here vsed implies so much; presupposing a Catalogue of names, laid before the Pen man of this Prophesie, (Many daughters:) History vnto memory, is as a good wife vnto her hus∣band, a helpe meet for him; in regard of truth, both the mother, and nurce thereof, if the dis∣poser be a man experienst in the affaires he treates of, iudicious and impartiall: it is a faithfull
trusty Councellour of state, by whose aduice and direction a Common-weale may be framed, go∣uerned, reformed and preserued; an Army orde∣red, enemies vanquisht, victory obtained: wee read of Lucius Lucullus appointed Captaine Gene∣rall ouer the Romane Forces against Mithridates, hauing no experience or knowledge in warre,Praesat. vit. Plutarch. more then he had gotten by reading History, and yet proued a discreet & valiant Commander, van∣quishing at that time, two of the greatest Easterne Princes. It is and may be the directour of mea∣nest men in any of their actions; wherein they may see without danger, how others haue beha∣ued themselues vpon seuerall occasions, and what hath followed: speculatiue experience yeelds the cheapest wisedome. It is a punisher of vice, presenting aged folly, greene and fresh to posterity, not suf∣fering sinne to dye, much lesse to bee bu∣ried in obliuion: the name of the wicked shall rot, saith Solomon, that is,Prou. 10.7. the euill sauour of their filthy life, shall be conueyed through Hi∣story to generations vnborne: it is a delusion of Satan, to thinke otherwise, sinne cannot be con∣cealed: venter not on sinne, vpon a presumption of secrecie; birds of the ayre shall cary the voyce,Eccle. 10.20. and that which hath wings, shall tell the matter: many pennes are imployed this way, silently to obserue and note humane passages, that secret workes of darkenesse, contriued in closest cor∣ners, may be publisht hereafter on the house top;
men blinded with the glistering out-sides of Sa∣tans Iesuits pleasure and profit, cannot see into priuate Studies, (the vnwilling prisons of rich Re∣cords,) nor thinke of that which will disgrace them in the ages to come. It is a rewarder of vertue, the proper end of History, to reserue worthy deeds, for imitation; a good worke, though it dye in doing, is a re∣ward to it selfe, yet that some dull natures might be stirred vp the more, and all benefited by seeing gracious steps before them: this onely is exemp∣ted by a firme Dec ee from the stroake of death, to liue in History, vertues preseruatiue, a∣gainst the deuouring graue, encouraging many to doe well, that they may heare well; to doe wor∣thily in Ephratah,Math. 4 11. Math. 6.2. that they may be famous in Bethlehem; Trumpets are for glozing votaries, who study rather to seeme, then to be good; let them hunt after applause, who know they deserue not to haue it brought home vnto them: be silently constant in good courses, commit your wayes vnto the Lord,Psa. 37.5. trust in him, and he shall bring it to passe; retired vertue yet neuer lost her praise. But to returne: the History here meant, espe∣cially is Gods owne Booke, wherein we find the names of many vertuous daughters; as of Sarah, De∣borah,1. Pet. 3.6. Iudges 5. 1. Sam. 1.25.3. Hannah, Abigail, Ester, Iudith, Mary, Mar∣tha, Lydia, &c. That of our Sauiour is most remark∣able, enioyning the vse of History, to preserue the memory of a good woman,Math. 26.13. Verily I say vnto you, wheresoeuer this Gospell shall be preacht thorowout all
the world, there also shall this that she hath done, be spo∣ken of, for a memoriall of her: Hence it is that hu∣mane Histories in imitation of diuine, haue beene so carefull to present these iewels to posterity, lest any vertuous daughter should be forgotten: one∣ly this I find, men generally too sparing in praise of good women: seeing the Lord hath done it, men may proceed from a certainty of the lawful∣nesse, to a necessity, his relatiue actions are for example, and so haue a binding power, saying to vs as our Sauiour did to the man in the Gospell,Luke 10.37. Goe and doe likewise: it is a custome as commenda∣ble as ancient, at funerals, to mention those ver∣tues most eminent in the parties deceased; whoso∣euer buries vertue in silence, or slubbers ouer worth in any by a carelesse stile, commits a three∣fold iniury; one against God the Donor, whose praise and glory is hindered; another against the persons in whom it was, robd thereby of some part of their right; and a third against all surui∣uing followers, who should be encouraged by such iustice, to wrestle with vice that so at last, they might goe home adorned with this Crowne of honour▪ let none enuy the dead; by negli∣gence to enroule good women amongst this num∣ber of many. Secondly we haue here the manner how he commends her, not before he had giuen others their due praise: detraction from others, is no so∣lid ground, for the commendation of our owne; we may not steale from our neighbours, to enrich
our selues, or those we loue, with goods or good name, nor dispraise others, to augment our owne praise: it was an iniurious practice of the proud Pharise,Luke 18.14. I am not as other men are, extortioners, vniust, adulterers, nor as this Publican: building his owne perfection vpon the weakenesse of his brother; concluding himselfe (proudly) good, be∣cause not so sensibly bad; sound, because not so apprehensiuely sicke as others: it is a cold kind of praise, that is drawne from the vices of any, a de∣ceitfull demonstration, taken from the worser part: The relation of imperfections, is meat to feed malice onely, sitter it is to bewaile them in secret, then to publsh them with delight for any end; ta∣ble-talke in any places,Quisquis amat dictis abscutum, rodere vitam. Hanc men∣sam indignam nouerit esse sibi. Aug. is too much faulty this way; it were good Catoes rule might be obser∣ued; either good of men absent, or nothing at all: so in matters of commendation keepe this method, obserue and see amongst the multitude if many be religious, vertuous, industrious, giue them first their due, then may you preferre your owne: good order obserued in doing, beautisies the action, and commends the workeman. Thirdly, we haue here the matter of his com∣mendation: it is not said, Many daughters haue beene beautifull;Prou. 31.30.11, 4, 23.5.14. fauour is deceitfull, and beauty is vanity: nor, Many daughters haue beene rich: house and riches are the inheritance of Fathers, which profit not in the day of wrath, but make themselues wings, and fly away as an Egle: nei∣ther is it said here, that many daughters haue
beene, and are borne of high parentage,Qui genus la∣ctat suum, alie∣na laudat Sen. it may be a benefit, no praise vnto women to come of great kinred; a good old stocke may nourish a fruitlesse branch, a Noble family yeeld and im∣pious progeny; the commendation runnes not of riches, beauty, or birth, (though these be com∣mendable in their place and ranke,) but of ver∣tue. Many daughters haue done vertuously. Teaching vs this lesson, That vertue onely wins women true praise, and wiues deserued commen∣dation: we find Sarah commended for obedience, Rebekah, for wisedome, Rahel, for plyant loue, sweetly-winning, and firmely-holding affability towards her husband; Abigail,1. Sam. 25.3. Ruth. 3.11. for a good vn∣derstanding, and Ruth, for vertue in generall: the Spirit of God moues the hard question, not of a rich or beautifull, but, Who can find a vertuous woman? Men may easily find faire women wan∣tons, rich women proud, and surely, great wo∣men idle and impious, more then comly or law∣full; more difficult to find a vertuous woman,Iob 28.15, 16, 17, 19. chaste, humble, obedient, discreet, fearing God; whose sweet composure of her selfe in all places and company, stirs vp in the beholders an admi∣ring affection; let him say, and thinke he is rich enough, her prize is farre aboue Rubies, no pin∣ching pouerty could euer lodge with such a Pearle: let him say, and thinke,Prou. 18.22, 19, 14. he hath found fauour with God, a prudent wife is from the
Lord, who must be prayed vnto before, and dai∣ly praised after: vertue is amiable, wheresoeuer found, but most of all in women; the weakenesse of their sexe, addes a kind of strength and luster to their graces: vertue from beauty, euen in men is most attractiue, but in women, we find it hath a power strangely coactiue, causing not onely the good, but the worst of men to honour it: vertue hath had this priuiledge in all ages; beauty may please the eye for a time, as an obiect ouer-de∣lightfull to vnregenerate nature, but by the pre∣sence of any of deaths messengers, it is put to slight, not daring to receiue a thought of death, much lesse the sight; riches may serue to gild o∣uer many imperfections in women, and make them seeme louely, which neuer were, while pas∣sion guides reason, and the sensuall appetite vsurps authority to sway the will, against the voyce of iudgement: the flesh will be satisfied with either of these, the mind fully contented with neither: both are momentary & mutable, in∣sufficient to make women honorable; that is ver∣tues prerogatiue Royall: honour is a vertue, and will be imployed about nothing but vertue; nor stick to any thing but what is immortall, free from change, as vertue is; were there ten thousand ages, attended with as many diseases, which should come tumbling like Iobs messengers, one in the necke of another, yet vertue like some im∣pregnable Castle, would still flourish, out-facing the stormes of age, sicknesse, death, and the
graue: the more vertue suffers, the brighter it is,Ʋirescit vulne∣re virtus. the longer it liues, the younger it growes, in∣creasing by the communication, the oftner seene and vsed, the lesse feared to be lost; theeues can∣not steale, nor time deface it: who can find a ver∣tuous woman? Lest any hasty to answere, should be mistaken, either in estimation of themselues, affection to, or commendation of others, let vs enquire what it is to doe vertuously. It is no ordinary act of common ciuility, (as many in their conceits are mistaken,) but an ha∣bituall practice of something more then morali∣ty: none can doe vertuously, without a habit of vertue; one action yeelds no denomination; and whosoeuer hath the habit of any one in deed and in truth,Augu. Epi. 29. Hieron. Aqui. 1.2. q. 65. art. 1. must of necessity haue the rest in some degree; vertues, (excepting the intellectuall one∣ly, which haue no such dependance nor connexi∣on among themselues,) are linkt as in a chaine to∣gether; if you be owners of one, the rest will fol∣low. To this practice of vertue, there are three sorts of vertues requisite: all hauing, and keeping both their place and time, in a vertuous daughter, the eminency of some aboue others, breakes not the harmony: the first are intellectuall, and those ei∣ther speculatiue, as knowledge to discerne, wise∣dome to direct, and vnderstanding to chuse, ac∣cording to both: or practicall, as prudence which is actiue in electing, and Art, which is operatiue
in performing the election, according to the rules of vertue. The second sort are vertues mo∣rall, such are Prouidence, or skill to giue good and wholesome counsell, when occasion is offe∣red, to order all her affaires by the rule of right reason, to their proper ends, for the benefit of humane societies: Iustice, by an vpright diuision, to giue to euery one their owne portion: Tempe∣rance, consisting in a discret limitation of passion and affection, about words, dyet, apparell, and pleasure, that the fleshy part ouer-sway not rea∣son: Fortitude and well-guided magnanimity, not against, but in defence of her husband, his person, goods, and good name, boldly to resist all euill motions and temptations, with a constant opposition of carnall lusts, which fight against the soule. The third sort, are vertues Theologicall, such are those precious graces of Faith to apprehend, Hope, to hold fast, and Loue to glew her to the mysticall body of Christ; So that an vnderstan∣ding, sober, godly woman, is the vertuous daugh∣ter here meant; to be iudicious, industrious, reli∣gious, in act & exercise, is to doe vertuously; ma∣ny daughters haue been so, many haue done so, and this is matter of commendation. Men may esteeme thus of vertuous daughters in generall; it is not sufficient in a husband, with∣out some speciall application: his owne, if she striue to doe her best, and be in any tolerable measure so qualified, must be preferd in his con∣ceit,
as most vertuous and best for him; such di∣rection we haue from the comparison, which is my second part, and comes in the next place to be discust; Though many daughters haue done vertuously, yet Thou excellest them all. A Commendation, it is something beyond com∣parison; to excell any, yeelds matter of praise al∣wayes; to excell and passe all, affords matter of admiration; which shewes the power of true af∣fection, to change in respect of it selfe, the na∣ture of things, and to produce effects aboue rea∣son: a hearty Louer can neuer be a sound Gram∣marian; Grammarians acknowledge and make vse of three degrees of comparison; a true Louer admits no positiue, all his comparisons are su∣perlatiue; he thinkes none so vertuous, none so sit for him, as his owne portion; and it is better, seeing the case thus stands, that all Grammarians should be angry with vs, then one God offended by vs: whose will it is, as we see here, that one should be preferred to all. Thou excellest all:A good wo∣man must be singular in good. De∣liuered not absolutely, in regard of any one here meant, and pointed out in the Text, (though some might coniecturally appropriate it, to Bath∣sheba, or to the blessed Virgin Mary,) neither is it to be vnderstood, as meant, or spoken of any, out of pride, vaine glory, flattery or a boasting humour, (it is vnlawfull for men so to praise or preferre their owne,) but respectiuely, with di∣uers limitations and so applyable to any: as first, in regard of qualification, such a one answering
the description prefixt,Videa ver. 10. ad finem. is preferd to all that doe not, and are not so. Secondly, in regard of the husbands speciall notice and knowledge, many haue done ver∣tuously, but thou in my iudgement and appre∣hension excellest. Thirdly, in respect of his affection and liking, amongst many, none appeare to him so vertuous. Fourthly, in respect of his contentation with the endowments of his yokefellow, he is best pleased with her endeauours. Fiftly, in regard of his resolution, vpon the former grounds, forsaking all, to cleaue vnto her, aboue all others; whosoeuer meets with a vertuous Daughter, thus qualified, is bound in conscience to thinke and say, To me thou excellest all. Aradicè  Scandere. Asicadere.The word signifies to ascend by climbing: as men in the field of warre doe aspire after honour, so women in the calme schoole of vertue, doe striue to goe higher, degree by degree, step after step; yeelding vs many lessons worth our obser∣uation. First, that euery vertuous Daughter is humbly high-minded and holily-ambitious after the best things; climbing to ascend, that they may excell in euery good worke: the Apostle doth elegantly expresse it of himselfe, which I may here apply vnto them;Psal. 3.13.14. they count not themselues to haue apprehended, but this one thing they doe, for∣getting those things which are behind, and rea∣ching
forth vnto those things which are before; they presse towards the marke, for the price of the high calling of God, in Christ Iesus: it is the property of a disposition basely seruill, alwayes to looke downewards, and to thinke it selfe high enough, before there be any beginning to ascend; whence it comes to passe, that many conclude they can doe nothing, because they dare not pa∣tiently thinke of the difficulty of doing; iudging sinfull sluggishnesse, to be contented humility; when noble spirits aspire daily after high and dif∣ficult things inossensiuely. Secondly, that the way of vertue is the way to honour and preferment, in the loue of God,Prou. 11.16. and opinion of good men: in Rome there was no com∣ming to the Temple of honour, but by, and tho∣row the Temple of vertue: though it be narrow, yet it is an infaillible way: whosoeuer climbes in by the windowes, as into the Church,Iohn 10.1. so vnto honour, is a theefe and a robber; by treading vpon the pins of an vnlawfull ladder, men and women may ascend, not excell; either by the mist of deserued censure, they are couered, and so not regarded, or else through the suddainesse of a shamefull fall, they haue no leisure to embrace their seeming happines; when vertue aduancing any, like the radiant Sunne expels all cloudes, and makes them shine in the fulnesse of strength; obserue and see, whether such as went in any o∣ther path, did euer finally prosper? When wo∣men rise by falling, men by fawning and flattery,
paying money, in stead of practising vertue, the higher they goe, the rarther will their infamy fly abroad; onely vertue leades to true honour. Thirdly, that vertuous daughters hauing once begun, neuer leaue good and godly courses, till they haue perfected their vertues by action: she that lookes backe, is not sit for the Kingdome of heauen; remember Lots wife: it is a miserable thing to haue beene happy; when that may be verified of them which the Apostle speakes of his Galatians, Yee did run well: yee were vertuous, chaste,Gal. 5.7. sober, religious: But, &c. Goodnesse is discerned and commended by continuance; ei∣ther resolue to goe on, or begin not; climbing is painefull, yet men vsually desist not; till they at∣taine the top, and end of their desires; especially if their aime be at such fruits, flowres, & showes, as are in this eminent Garden of vertue; good wo∣men are no lesse valiant, with vnwearied patience, to vndergoe the heat of the day, knowing they shall not be depriued of their hope; their labour cannot be vaine in the Lord:1. Cor. 15. vlt. Reu. 2.10. perseuerance vnto death, brings a Crowne of life. Fourthly, that such vertuous women must not want encouragement by commendation: giue them the fruit of their hands, let their owne works praise them in the gates; Many daughters haue done vertuously, &c. There was a feast ordained and kept in Rome,Plut. vit, Rom. called, Matronalia, in honour of those women, which procured a peace betweene the Sabines and the Romanes; with diuers priuiledges
annexed vnto it, as to giue them place in all pu∣blike assemblies, to speake no dishonest words, nor doe any vnseemely thing before them; it is a sin to be silent in their praise, that deserue it, pro∣uided it be done iustly, seasonably, & discreetly: I would not wish men to dawbe ouer rotten posts with deceitfull colours, to burden vicious wo∣men (their owne wiues,) with vndeserued prai∣ses; nothing more foolish and ridiculous: I would not haue men make their wiues, though good and vertuous, the ordinary subiect of their talke, in all places and company; no custome more vn∣seemely, if not dangerous; but when conuenient occasion is offered, to speake the truth of them, for the glory of God, manifestation of their com∣fort, and excitation of others, by such good exam∣ple. Fiftly, that vnderstanding husbands, are best pleased with the vertuous actions of their owne partners: many haue done vertuously, but thou to me, in my eye and iudgement excellest all; A duty I confesse, easier to thinke, and speake of, then to performe: an impure, adulterous heart, thinkes directly the contrary, that any mans wise his better thn is owne; Satan casts ma∣ny rubs in the way, shewing men through a de∣ceitfull glasse, and saying, See, and obserue in such a one, handsomnesse, beauty, wit, diligence, farre excelling thine; enioy her at least in desire; and preuailing passion, yeelding to this tempta∣tion, blinds iudgement; so that many there are,
who haue and doe deeme their owne choise worst of all, nothing pleases, that passes from them, no, not when it is the same, which they approue and admire in others: therefore the vnderstanding must be conuinc't, the heart seasoned with grace, the eye emptied of adultery, and the mind freed from the restlesse motion, and perturbation fol∣lowing desire of change, before any can say truly of his owne vertuous second, Thou excellest all. Take Solomons counsell;Pro. 5.15, 16, 17, 19. drinke waters out of thine owne Cisterne, and running waters out of thine owne Well, let thy Fountaine be blessed, and reioyce with the wise of thy youth; let her be as the louing Hind, and pleasant Roe; let her brest satisfie thee at all times, and be thou rauisht alwayes with her loue; giue affection leaue here to extend her selfe something beyond truth, ei∣ther there is no way to erre, or no danger in er∣ring this way. To wind vp both, the Commendation, and Comparison on one bottome; I shall conclude all with the time, in certaine specialties, by way of application. The whole may serue to informe vs, first, that men should be experienst, able to discerne good from euill, vertuous from vicious women, be∣fore they make choyse of a wife, that men so soon as they are married, should be able to commend good wines, is exprest in the Text▪ that they should be as able to condemne the euill and vi∣cious, is necessarily implyed; none can commend
a good one, but he that knowes a bad; and can discerne thorow the vaile of hypocrisie & maske of dissimulation, lest one be mistaken for the other, vertue vnderualewed, and vice approued; such euents are common, where experience is wan∣ting: hence it is, many marry they know not what, and may amend their choice, they know not when: When Cesar was to passe Rubicon against Pompey, he left the land with this resolution, as I remember, That a man could be vndone but once; As it is in the gouernment of a Common weale, or in the ordering of an Army, a Commander can erre but once, (which is a miserable happi∣nesse,) ouerthrow and ruine following so close, he cannot haue leisure to be twice faulty. So of∣tentimes it fals out in the choyce of a wife, men haue not leaue to change often, one blest or crost, euer so, during life: it is a practice dangerous & intolerable in a well-gouerned State, to force an vnion betweene young yeeres; where there is no actuall power to chuse, nor iudgement to dis∣cerne; common reason tels vs, we should be long in doing that, which can but once be done, lest after we vainely wish it were to doe againe: bead∣uised, it is a long bargaine; rash aduentures yeeld little gaine. Secondly, we are further informed, that ver∣tue is the chiefest flowre in A good wiues garden: for this she is commended, preferd for this; riches,
beauty, parentage, fauour, and proportion grow in lower rankes, and serue to adorne the bor∣ders; the heart is vertues place; which showes it selfe to be aliue,Math. 7.16. by the present fruits of vertuous actions; none haue chosen well, who haue pre∣ferd any thing to this, in their choyce: looke first on beauty, and you buy a Picture; looke first on riches, and you make a purchase; looke first on parentage, & you match with a multitude at one time; but looke first on vertue, and it is a marriage indeed, two made one by a mysticall vnion, re∣presenting that betweene Christ and his Church:Ephes. 5.26, 27, 28. the Law may tye two together, that meet vpon sinister ends, vertue onely vnites them; therefore this is most excellent and praise-worthy; all other flowres dye in Winter, this flourishes most in old age; others droupe vnder the stormy blasts of hoary Autumne, while this enioyes a perpetuall Spring. Thirdly, we are hence informed that wiues should therefore striue to excell one another in vertue chiefly:Plut. vit Lyeur. Licurgus made the Lacedemonians equall in liuings and riches: his reason was, that they might striue to excell one another in vertue onely: I seeke not such a Law, supposing equa∣lity of desire this way, may well stand with ine∣quality of condition: the excellency of riches and pouerty consisting in this ability, through a ver∣tuous disposition, to make a right vse of either: we see many contend for superiority in place, who
shall stand, sit, and goe before; we may obserue women striue with their neighbours, who shall excell in decking and trimming their bodies, adorning and setting forth their houses, follow∣ing new fashions, and out-stripping one another in excessiue feasting: euident signes of great light∣nesse, to wrestle about, or deeme themselues the better, for any of these trifles: emulation onely in the race of vertue, is worth commendation; Couet earnestly after the best things,1. Cor. 12. vlt. saith the Apostle, Who shall be most rich in grace; most zealous and forward in good duties; who shall excell most in the vertues of humility, tempe∣rance, chastity, modesty, prouidence, chari∣ty, &c. such couetousnesse is commendable, such contention the issue of sinlesse-ambition: let all care giue place to this, all strife be turned into this, how you may excell one another in vertue, so shall loue regaine her ancient soueraignety a∣mongst neighbous, in spight of enuy. Fourthly, we may hence learne, that married persons should conster the actions one of another in the best sence; to say, and thinke, (if it be true in any tolerable manner,) their owne choyce ex∣cels all others: and that first, in token of their sub∣mission to Gods disposition, who ordaines meet matches, allotting to euery body his owne ribbe: secondly, to manifest their contentation with their portion, when they can say heartily, their lot is fallen out vnto them in a good ground:
thirdly, for a testimony of the truth of their af∣fection each to other; it is one property of loue, to couer a multitude of infirmities, and some∣times to iudge that excellent, which is but weake∣ly good; wiues passing by their husbands faults, husbands pardoning their wiues failings, that so a good opinion may be still kept warme in the lap of mutuall affection. First, the husband must thus thinke of his wife, and seasonably expresse it, for a comfort to her against all her paines and trouble in child-birth, and family affaires, as also to encourage her con∣tinuance. Though many daughters haue beene vertuous, yet none so sit for me, thou excellest all. And to that end it is required she be, first, reli∣gious, a profest seruant of Christ, going and draw∣ing others with her in the way to heauen; for how can such be said to excell amongst men, who are so farre from this spirituall exercise, of climbing Iacobs Ladder, that they neuer yet lookt vp to∣wards heauen, with any settled purpose to goe thither? vnder this I comprize piety, charity, & sobriety, in words, food rayment, pleasure, &c. secondly, that she be ossicious, a builder together with her husband; readie and willing, both in regard of earth and heauen, body and soule; vnder this, she is enioyned to be louing, obe∣dient, helpfull in all good things, to the vt∣termost of her power; Let such a husband so
inricht, remember to be thankefull vnto God, who hath done more for him then parents, his purse, or all the world could doe; good ser∣uants are a blessing, good children a greater, but a good wife best of all. Some may reply here, and demand, How can we say, as you teach, without sinne, when we see and feele the contrary? I answere, first, it may be so, many daughters haue beene vicious,Dub. pag. 243. impost. yours worst of all; naturally women are waue∣ring, weake, vnwise, sight, credulous, newes, louers, giuen to lies: Many haue beene and are irreligious, enemies to profession in the powet thereof; Many are giuen to pride, idle∣nesse, wantonnesse, drunkennesse; witnesse those conceited conditionall Lawes, attributed to Zaleucus the Locrian, restraining women, that none should be attended with more then one maid in the street, except when she was drunke; that none should goe out of the City in the night, except she went to commit adultery, and that none should weare gold or embrodred appa∣rell, except when she purposed to manifest her∣selfe to be a common strumpet. Many are giuen to lying, swearing, cursing, brawling, and fighting, like deuils incarnate, (such ribbes are Satans shaftes, taken from the sides, to be shot against the heart of man to vexe him, and to be as rottennesse in his bones) and yours it may be for want of grace, are worst
of all: of such neuer thinke nor say, that they excell in vertue, it is no part of the Doctrine here taught, but the contrary; women must doe things praise-worthy, that will be praised. Secondly, blame your owne choyce; beauty, or riches was the Starre that ledde you, how could you escape shippe-wracke? you sought not for a vertuous mate, no maruell if you found her not: but she was once better: take heede then; some vntoward behauiour in you, may occasion those vnruly passions in her: a wife is like a shippe, well steered, she goes smooth, if otherwayes, she be guided by an vn-skilfull hand, she turnes and tumbles would make one sicke to see her: how-euer, know it is a burden laid on you by the Lord, to chastise your former folly, trye your patience, or to exercise your skill. Thirdly, suppose many failings in your wiues, yet if there be a will to doe well, (a wise man may easily discerne betweene habituall wicked∣nesse, and intermissiue frailties,) deale with them as you would God should deale with you, Accept the will For the deed: Suffering, is the way to victory; to yeeld vnto them in some things, is a meanes to
make them more obedient in all. Secondly, the wife must haue the same conceit of her husband, else the Ring goes not round. Though many sonnes haue done vertuously, thou to me excellest them all: and to that end, hee must bee, first, iudicious, a man of vnderstanding, able to manage the affaires of his generall, and particular calling;1. Pet. 3.7. vnder this I containe wisedome, knowledge, experience, sobriety, Christian care, to pro∣uide for his charge, &c. want of discretion acci∣dentally begets contempt.2. Tim. 5.8. Secondly, he must be courteous in his beha∣uiour towards her, (a churlish Nabal can hard∣ly be brought within the compasse of this round,) good words, and lookes, giue women great content, especially from those they loue: I would not haue men so soft and sillie, as to be displeased with nothing, neither to be so hot, and hasty, as to bee angry with euery thing; there is a golden meane: and vnder this I place patience, bounty, familiarity, like that of Isaak with Rebekiah,Gen. 26.8. encouragement in good and defence of her person, and name against all others: Let such a wife so enricht, remember to pay the debt shee owes vnto God, of praise and thankes; is not such a hus∣band better vnto her then ten sons?1. Sam. 1.8. But alas, I am so matcht as neuer woman was, many husbands haue beene vicious,
mine worst of all? I answere, First, it may be so in your conceit onely, want of affection with desire of change, may mislead iudgement: Secondly, say it be so indeed, hee runnes a∣broad, frequents Tauernes and Ale-houses, mis-pends his time and meanes in gaming, &c. take-heede you bee no cause thereof; Many are so light-heeled, and nimble-tongued, their husbands haue no delight to stay within. Third∣ly, how-euer it be, prayers and teares will proue your best weapons, with a patient ex∣pectation of his reformation, knowing it to be the iust hand of God, for your youth∣full wantonnesse and neglect of his seruice: the best counsell I know to giue you, is, Please him, and Pray for him. Lastly, be you all aduised; if married, to examine your condition for a perfect vnion is attended with this opinion; if vnmarried, resolue to match with none, except you bee thus perswaded of them: resist Satans sugge∣stions, all carnall motions, whereby many vntoward marriages are made amongst vs, that you may weare out this conceit each of other as your Wedding-ring. The benefits following, which may moue
you to put it on, are many. First, all harsh conceits are hereby preuented or remoued, what is done or spoken, shall be well taken; one weyghing still the workes of the other, in the ballance of good-will, either finds none, or freely pardons the want of weight. Secondly, no strife can be raised betweene you, which is not soone appeased; passion and suspition may preuaile so farre, as to dar∣ken, but shall neuer liue so long, as to put out the eye of affection: their iarres are attended with words, (loue offended cannot long be si∣lent,) words beget lookes, and lookes are followed with smiles, so the storme is layd. Thirdly, good example is giuen, to chil∣dren, seruants, neighbours, and to the Church of God: O, how pleasant a thing is it, to see man and wife to spend their dayes in perfect amity? one bearing, the other forbearing, both studying to giue content: so that other may see that happinesse which they cannot attaine, and be driuen to admiration, though not to imitation. Fourthly, hearty loue shall be maintained and encreased daily, so that you will neuer desire to change, hearts nor hands, with any other; the longer you liue, the more louing you will be, such vertue there is in this Wedding-ring: pray you may find it; endeauour to weare it, resolue to liue and dye with it, that men may after fixe it as
an Epitaph on your tombes, to be seene and read of all with iust applause. I end with prayer for you both: the Lord guide you with his Spirit, season your hearts with his grace, and make you truly vertuous, that as Isaak and Rebekah, Iacob and Rahel, you may build vp the house of your fathers, liue peaceably, and dye comfortably; that so this which hath beene spoken for you on the day of your meeting, may be verified of you, after the day of your parting. Many sons and daughters haue done vertuous∣ly, but you haue endeauoured to excell them all. To God the Father, God the Sonne, and God the holy Ghost, be giuen all honour and glory, now and for euer. Soli Deo gloria. FINIS.
