6425 S761 22355970 25448
DAY'S DYALL OR, HIS TWELVE HOWRES THAT IS, TWELVE SEVERALL LECTVRES BY WAY OF CATECHISME, AS they were delivered by him in the Chappel of ORIELL COLLEDGE in Ox∣ford, in the yeeres of our Lord God 1612, and 1613. IOH. 11.9. Are there not twelue howres in the DAY? Cyp. de Orat. Domin. Quomodo Solei, & Dies non est, cui Sol & Dies Christus est. AT OXFORD, Printed by Ioseph Barnes. 1614.
TO THEIR PARENTS HOPEFVLL, and fairest Braunches, the. Eurip. Iphig. in Taur. Pillars of their severall Families, the GENTLEMEN COMMONERS of Oriell Colledge, Fellow-Commoners, and the rest: as also to the POORE SCHOLLERS of that House, Proficiency in both Lear∣nings, Secular, and Celestiall. GEntlemen, and you the rest, no lesse beloved in the Lord. That most memorableIoh. 21.15. saying of our Saviour , Feed my Lambes: or as it is doubled in the Vulgar, Pasce agnos meos, Pasce agnos meos: Feed my Lambs, Feed my Lambes, spoken personally to S. Peter, but in him to all vs, who haue to doe with the Flocke of Christ: hath made me a many times to bethinke my selfe how I for my part might best performe it to you that are those very Lambs, & in some sort belon∣ging to me. It is now some two yeares since, when oppor∣tunitie was offered me never better. For being chosen by your Superiours to be your Catechisme Reader for a year, a many of you may remember, how I performed that Taske in Twelue Lectures. Since which time, considering with my selfe the slender benefit that might accrew to some of you, by hearing only those my Lectures without some farther helpe, I thought it fit by way of Printing to
present them to all and every of you, and so much the ra∣ther for that the Eye is a surer Friend vnto the Memory, then the Eare can possibly be, & you knowe whoseHorat. de Ar∣t Po say∣ing it was, Segnius irritant animos demissa per aurem Quam quae sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus: & quae Ipse sibi tradit spectator. Besides, that Speech (especially my Speech) hath not the benefit that Printing hath, of quoting Authors at large, a principall part of these my Lectures, which I could not then in a many respects deliver vnto you so exactly. But my cheefest Motiue of all of committing these vnto the Presse, is the continuall flowing vnto vs of such as you are, some going, others comming and every Yeare some New ones, who since they are to belong to me in respect of my Pastorall charge, faine would I shew my loue vnto my Saviour, by feeding those New ones in this sort. A way perhaps some what chargeable, but God that hath giuen abilitie to compasse this, hath giuen a will too (in humili∣tie be it spoken) to contemne a world of Wealth towards the furtherance of a Soule. Concerning these my Lectures thē, loe they offer themselues vnto you, that which comes vnto you so slightly, let it not be as slightly but regarded. One SchioppiusGasp. Schiop∣pii Alexipharm. cont. Plessaum. tels vs of late, of Paul the fift now Pope, how little hee answered his expectation in a matter not much vnlike herevnto. If that Gift, saith he, were bestowed vpon his Fatherhood indeed, perhaps he no more attentiuely, or curiously obserued it, then hee did an excellent Booke of a certaine Divine, which I my selfe brought vnto him, to the end and purpose to bring the Author of it in favour with him.Non modò ab eo non lectum, sed ne{que} certò loco, vbi reperi∣ri, mihi{que} resti∣tui pesset, positii fuisse comperi. Schiop. Ib. p. 76. Col. 1. For after a few daies I repairing vnto him againe, & asking of him how he liked the Booke, I found that hee had not onely not read it, as I expected, but could not tell where in the world he had laid it. Indeed the Pope of Rome hath other gates matters then Bookes in his head, and therefore Schioppius there addeth
Virg. Aen. l. 6Tu regere Imperio Populos Romane memento Paul the fift who is a Romane by birth, should remember he was to Rule. True: and me thinkes Schioppius should haue added withall, that hee should remember to forget that which our Saviour said about Ruling: Reges Gentium dominantur eorum. Ʋos autem non fic, Luk. 22.25. But how soever they (it seemes) are not altogether of our Saviours minde, & therefore Schioppius commends the Pope, how∣soever he neglected that Book: yet you, Beloued, should you doe the like, are not sure of such an Homer as Schiop∣pius is, and therefore is it best for you not to followe the Popes example. Martha, Martha,Luk. 10.41. saith our Savior, thou carest, and art troubled about many things. But one thing is needfull. It were happy perhaps for his Holines, if he were but troubled as Martha was, but you, if you please, may be the Maries. That One thing so needfull, loe here in these Lectures. Concerning my Methode therein I goe not (I con∣fesse) the beaten way, and it may seeme (I graunt) aboue the pitch of Catechising; what hath beene here delivered by me, but presupposing you grounded before in the or∣dinary course of Catecisme; I meane Mr Dr Nowels, best approved of in our Church, I thought it my best way to acquaint you in this sort with matters of this weight, es∣pecially reading as I did in a Colledge, and to Youths such as you are. Such they are as you, whome our Ad∣versaries like wyly Foxes goe about to inveigle with a shew of all Antiquity: you shall haue somewhat here in store out of Antiquity it selfe, to confront that Bragge of theirs, as also to teach you to hold your owne. And now Beloved what shall I more say? You see my care towards you, my loue, and what not?1. Cor. 3.22. Whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, even al are yours, & yee Christs, and Christ Gods. Courage then, Dearely Beloved, and va∣liantly march on, who haue so many Helpes towards the saving of your Soules. And aboue all remember the Earth
and the Soile you now tread vpon is not vulgar or ordina∣ry, but such for all the world, as the ancient Fathers of the Church did tread on in their daies. That whichMidden dorp de Acad l. 2. p. 95. Edit. 1583. Vid. Cent. 4. Magdeb c. 7. p. 510. Nicome∣dia was to LACTANTIVS,Mid. Ib. p. 142 Carthage to TERTVLLIAN,Mid. l. 3. p. 455 Mil∣lan to S. AMBROSE,Mid. Ib. Millan andMid. l. 2. p. 142 Carthage to S. AVSTEN,Mid. ib. p. 203 Constantinople to DAMASCEN,Mid. ib. p. 88. Antioch, andMid. ib p 183 Vid. Naz. M∣nd. Athens to NAZIANZEN,Mid. ib. p. 88. Antioch,B. Iuels De∣fence of the A∣pology. p. 430. Athens, andMid. l 2 p. 202 Constantinople to S. CHRYSOSTOME,Mid. Ib. p. 88. Antioch, andMid. ib. p. 102 Alexandria to S. IEROME,Mid. ib. p. 88. Antioch,Mid. Ib. p. 102 Alexandria, &Mid Ib. p. 92. Caesarea to Origen,Mid Ib. p. 88. Antioch,Mid. Ib. p. 102 Alexandria, andMid. ib. p. 183 Vid. Naz. Mo∣nod. Athens to S. BASILL,B. Iuels De∣fence of the A∣pol. p. 430. A∣thens andMid. ib. p. 102 Alexandria to S. GREGORY, that for all the world is Oxford vnto you. Those were the places in their daies, where their Mindes had the first tincture of SecularVt ii qui com∣bibi purpuram volunt sufficiunt prius lanam medicamentis quibusdam: sic literis talibus{que} doctrinis ante excoli animos, & ad sapientiam concipiendam imbui & praeparari decet. Cicero. Vid. Lips. Var. Lect. l. 2. c. 10 p. 45. Learning, that so they might be the more ready for that deeper die of Divinity. Thus NazianzenNaz. Monod in vit. Basil. Mag. tels vs of S. Ba∣sill (brought vp as I said before in those famous Vniversi∣ties, Antioch, Alexandria, and Athens) how expert he was in Grammar, in Rhetoricke, in Naturall, and Moral Philo∣sophy, in Astrology, Geometry, Arithmetike, Arts & Sci∣ences for the which our Vniversitie hath beene so famous heretofore, as it hath caused them to shew their Bountie therein, who were themselues brought vp in other places. When Caius of Cambridge didCaius de Antiq. l. 1. p, 152. Edit. 1574. of my FATHERS Printing twit vs in the teeth with some of our Founders here in Oxford that had beene themselues Cambridge Men, as Richard Fox the Founder of Corpus Christi Colledge, Thomas Rotheram the Foūder of Lincolne Colledge, and William Smyth the Founder of Brasennose: At vnde precor (Examen iudicii Cantabrigiensis cuiusdam quise Londinensem dicit nuper de Origine vtrius{que} Academiae lati Cui praefigitur ad ciusdem Prohemium Apologia. Exam. 20. A Booke not yet printed, but of M. Keyes own hand-writing, & in the cu¦stody of our learned Antiquary M. Thomas Allen, and copied forth by my kinde and loving Friend M Myles Windsor a true Lover of our Mother the Vniversitie. saith our worthy Key againe, who fully answered that Booke) tam singularis erga nos a∣nimi
affectus? ac multo quā in vestrā Academiā maior, nisi quod magis hîc arriderēt illis omnia, Doctrina, Mores, Iu∣ventutis educatio, Instituta, Pietatis cultus, Ritus, Consuetu∣dines, , & Externae Ceremoniae, ipsa{que} demum Oxo∣niensis Nominis celebritas, vt alia multa non commemorem, quàm apud vos, quos alioqui vel ipsius naturae impulsu haud dubiè praetulissent. Surely Beloved the great renowne of the Name of Oxford hath raised vp three Worthies I meane a BODLEY, a BENNET, and a WADHAM, to do more then they did. Though what do I speake of three on∣ly? His excellent MAIESTIE now Regnant, his Reve∣rend CLEARGIE, his Honourable NOBILITIE, and GENTRIE of the Land, do al concurre even in our daies, to the ennobling of this Place, and shall not we to that great Renowne our Oxford hath had in former Ages ioine Doctrine, and Manners, and Breeding vp of youth, & keeping of Statutes, and Religion, and Rites, and Customes, & Discipline, & outward Ceremonies, &c? Shall the whole world (in a manner) concur to do vs good, and we be wā∣ting to our selues? Shall God himselfe be at a Non plus for being ofm ability (as it were) to do more vnto vs,What could I haue done any more to my Vineyard that I haue not done vnto it. Esa. 5 4. and wee bring forth wilde grapes? But it is not Beloved vnto you, that these lines of mine doe appertaine, only I am afraid, least you for whom these paines, & much more hath been taken, should be carryed hereafter an other way, whē you are of riper yeeres, with the streame of the world. At what time thinke on him yet, who hath bin painefull for you as you see, & more truely tendereth your Salvation, then a∣ny Popish Priest or Iesuite whatsoever. He that accounts himselfe a true Debter to you, whether you be of the Richer, or Poorer sort, IOHN DAY From my Study in that Colledge whereof your selues are all Members. Octob. 17. 1614.
THE SEVERALL ARGVMENTS, with the severall Texts of Scripture, of every se∣verall Lecture in this Booke. 1 The Preamble. Psal. 34.11. Pag. 1. 2 Of Gods Essence Exod. 3.14. p. 23. 3 Of the Trinitie. 1. Ioh. 5.7. p. 39. 4 Of the Attributes of God. Exod. 34.6. p. 59. 5 Of Gods Workes. Act. 17.24. p. 79. 6 Of the Church, and how distinguished from Paganisme, Iudaisme, Turcisme, and Papisme. Act. 2.42. p. 101. 7 Of the Articles of Beleefe, commonly called, The Apo∣stles Creed Mark. 16.16. p. 127. 8 Of our Church's Tenets, against the Church of Rome wherein are comprized the fortie Articles of 62. where vnto Beneficed men, and Graduates in Oxford doe vsu∣ally subscribe. Act. 24.14. p. 157. 9 Of the ten Commandements. Mat. 22.37. p. 211. 10 Of Prayer. Mat. 6.9. p. 251. 11 Of Fasting. Mark. 2.19. p. 281. 12 Of Almes. Ephes. 2.10. p. 305. My Lord of London on Ionas Lect. 40. p. 551. Other men as they list. Let them esteeme the light of An∣tiquitie no better worth then to be hid vnder a Bushell, & quite supprest, that they may set their owne vpon a Can∣dlesticke, and cause it to blaze to the view of the whole House: Ego verò illos veneror, et tantis nominibus semper as∣surgo:Senec. Epist. l. 8. ep. 65. but for mine own part I haue them in great reve∣rence, and honour the very Names of the Fathers.
THE PREAMBLE.Lect. 1. De∣cemb. 17. 1612. I am come this first time a Mour∣ner hither: I trust I shall returne from hence, when at length frō hence I shall returne, full of ioy and ghostly comfort. They are the words of the ProphetPsal. 126.7. Da∣vid, He that now goeth on his way weeping, and heareth forth good seed, shall doubtlesse come againe with ioy, and bring his sheaues with him. When first I was contented to be put to this task, I little thought it should haue beene so long ere I shoulde haue saide somewhat at the leat. It was in truth my chiefe desire to haue beene a frequent spea∣ker vnto you, & therefore was I the more willing to be easily intreated to these paines. But I no sooner bethought me of putting my selfe to the paines in∣deed, when that heaviest newes was brought me of the greatest losse I ever had. True it is, it was our Sa∣viours answere to him that asked leaue to bury his fa∣ther: Follow me, and let the dead bury their dead, Mar. 8.22. But he spake it of Parents dead in soule, qui fide sunt destituti, saithPellican in Mat. 8 So S. Austen, Certè mortuos sepulcu¦ri non sun cor∣pore mortui, quia si hec essēt, mortua corpora sepeltri non pos∣sent Tamen mortuos eos vo∣cat, vbris in∣tus in anima? Aug de verb: Dom. Ser. 18. p. 51. Pellian, quae vita est animae such as as were destitute of faith which is the life of the soule: of Christiā Parents, & to Christian Children he would
haue said no doubt as Toby did, Toby, 4.3. My son, after that I am dead bury me, and despise not thy Mother, but honour her all the daies of thy life, and doe that which shall please her, and anger her not. Remember my son how many dangers shee sustained when thou wast in her wombe. And when shee dyeth bury her by me in the same graue. And indeed to say the truth, Est aliquod humanis affectibus in calamitate solatium, saith that excellentErasm Vid. Christ. Op. Tom. 5. p. 604. Hollander, assedisse morituro, excepisse voces vitimas, dedisse novis∣simum osculum, dixisse vale aeternum, clausisse morientis oculos, praestitisse funeris supremum officium: It is some kinde of comfort to vs to haue borne our friend company in his sicknes, to haue beene partaker of his last words, to haue givē him our last farewell, to haue cloased vp his eies, and to haue performed the last office of following him to his graue. But I was bereaved of all these. It was not my hap to performe vnto her this last office of follow∣ing her to her graue, nor of cloasing vp her eies, nor of taking my last farewell, nor of being partaker of her last words, no not to be asmuch as present with her in her sicknes. When Ioseph saw that his father laid his right hand vpon the head of Ephraim who was the yonger Brother, and his left hand on Manasses who was the elder, it displeased him saith theGen. 48.17. Scripture, and hee would haue removed his Fathers hands. Would God I might haue enioyed but her left hand only, her least blessing at that time had beene enough, so shoulde I haue meditated oh my God, all the daies of my life after, of all thy blessings bestowed on me, andEccles. 3.10. esta∣blished by that hand. These things while I pondered
with my selfe, and could in no wise be comforted, no not with that of the Prophet David, When my Father and Mother forsake me, Psal. 27.12. behold in the necke of this, an other griefe, an other sorrow.PRINCE HENRY. The death of him, even his death whereof whosoever heard that was a true lover of Religion, and of the Gospell a∣mongst vs, his two eares did1. Sam. 3 11. tingle. Dead he is, alas he is dead, the Lord hathIer. Lam. 2.1. darkned the daughter of Syon, and cast downe from heaven vnto the earth the beauty of Israel. And which is most remarkeable, and should cause all and every of vs to lay it throughly to our harts, even then, and at that time, when not ma∣ny yeares before hee had bestowed on this our Israel the greatest blessing that ever was. I say then and at that time, to shew vnto vs, at{que} vtinam daretur in vni∣us speciem Concionis tota Anglia contracta, oratione hac vti, & Britannici in generis audientia collocari, to alter a little the words ofArnab. adver. Gent. l. 1. p. 139 Arnobius, would God all England might now heare me, evē this whole Ile of great Britaine, to shew vnto vs, I say, that if we of this Kingdome go on, as wee haue done pretily well since that time, inRom. 13.13. gluttony and drunkennesse, in chambering and wanton∣nesse, in strife and envying, in Popery and Impiety (& in∣deed what not?) he both can, and will turne, our feasts into mourning, & all our songs into lamentation, Amos, 8.10. But to returne vnto my purpose. Clavus clavū pellit, maior minorē. As one naile driues out an other, the greater the lesse: even so did this, my former sorrow. It made me call to minde those excellent words of Esdras, who when a woman ap∣peared
vnto him weeping for her sonne, and would not be comforted, because he was not: Thou foolish woman aboue all other (2. Esd. 10.6. saith he) seest thou not our heaui∣nesse, and what commeth vnto vs? For Syon our Mother is all wofull, and is soare afflicted, and mourneth extreame∣ly. Seeing we be all now in heauinesse and make our moane (for we be all sorrowfull) art thou sorry for one sonne? His conclusionV. 15. there is: Now therefore withhold thy sor∣row in thy selfe, and beare constantly that which commeth vnto thee. For if thou allowest Gods purpose, and receiuest his counsaile in time, thou shalt be commended therein. Goe thy way then into the citie to thine husband. Thus far Esdras. My former sorrow thus abated then, and hauing in this sort recovered my selfe (if yet I may be said to haue recouered my selfe, who am often hereafter to meditate not onely of my private losse, but of our publike calamitie too) what remaineth, but I now resume my first and formost resolution of speaking vnto you in this kind, that so long at the least as this shall happen of speaking in this kind here vnto you, my thoughts may bee somewhat setled, and not al∣waies intentiue on HER, for losse of whom I cannot but see a sea of crosses to my selfe, or not alwaies in∣tentiue on HIM, for losse of whom I well may feare a world of crosses to our Kingdome. Come we then to the matter in hand, and first by way of Preamble, let mee this first time entreat vnto you of certain words of the Prophet David's, as they are written in his foure and thirtieth Psalme, the ele∣venth
verse of that Psalme. The words are these: Come yee children and harken vnto mee, I will teach you the feare of the Lord. In which words for my better proceeding, let mee obserue vnto you these foure points. First an Invita∣tion, Come: Secondly, the parties invited, yee children: Thirdly, the duty to be performed on their parts, har∣ken vnto me: Fourthly, and lastly the dutie on his part who did invite them, I will teach you the feare of the Lord. I wil be very briefe in all foure; & first in the in∣vitation Come, which is (you see) but a word, & ther∣fore but a word shal you see to be said of it, Come. Memorable is that in S. Lukes Gospell of one that made a great supper, & bade many, and sent his Ser∣vant at supper time to say to them that were bidden, e Come: for all things are now ready.Luk 14.17. You are not igno∣rant of the excuses were made by a many of them at that time, nor in how little steed those excuses then stood them, nor of the iust anger of the Master of the house conceaued therevpon. I, saith he, say vnto you, that none of those men which were bidden shall tast of my supper. As if he had said: they should not haue a bit of it to saue their liues, no not to saue their souls. So that in this one onely word, Come, is comprehen∣ded all this: First, God himselfe inviting vs: Secondly, inviting vs by his servants: Thirdly, no excuse to serue the turne: Fourthly, his indignation and wrath, if so be we come not: Fiftly and lastly, if we come, his wel∣comming all and every of vs. And thus you see how
briefly I haue entreated of this first word, Come. I will not bee much longer in the two next, the Parties invited, Children: and which applies it to your selues, ye: ye Children. I know Children may be taken in this place for all inferiors of what age soever, and the children here meant were no doubt the Children of Israel. I, an old man may be a childe, Puer centū annorū was Esaies phrase, Esa, 65.20: &, The honorable age is not that which is of long time, neither that which is measured by the number of yeeres, but wisdome is the gray haire, and an vndefiled life the old age, Wisd. 4.9. Howbeit spea∣king now to you, and it being your age I only aime at at this time, I am to instance only in your selues, & to tell you that you are the children here meant, you are the Parties invited hither. It is good for a mā, saithIer. Lament. 3 27. Ie∣remy, that he beare the yoake in his youth. What? wil you say, so soone?Terent. Heau. Act. 2 Sc. 1. Ilico nasci senes, ne{que} illarum affines esse rerum, quas fert Adolescentia? I, Beloved evē so soone, and therefore that old proverbe, Pueros Angelicos in Satanam verti vbi cōsenuerint: young Saints, old Divels: ego (saith a goodErasm Coll. Pietas pueril. Author) ab Authore Sathana natū arbitror: I am of opinion it was devised by the Diuel him∣selfe. Sure I am it is contrary to that of Salomon: Teach a childe in the trade of his way,Prov. 22.6. and when he is old hee shall not depart frō it. What? should we not begin betimes? And why was Circumcision then cōmanded the eight day, and the sacrament of Baptisme permitted on any day, be we never, never so young, that as Hercules in his cradle,Senec Herc. Fur. Act. 2. Monstra superavit prius quam nosse posset, so wee might at the Font even vanquish the Divell,
before wee knowe so much as the name of a Divell what it meaneth. Should we not even in our youth be instructed in the Scriptures? And why was Timo∣thy thē permitted to know those Scriptures of a child? Continue thou saith the2. Tim 3.14. Apostle, in the things which thou hast learned, and art perswaded thereof, knowing of whom thou hast learned them. And that thou hast knowne the holy Scriptures of a childe. How came Origen after∣wardes being a childe to learne them to? Iam tum etiā saithEuseb hist. Eccles. l. 6. c. 2. p. 72. Eusebius, haud modica doctrinae fidei argumenta praeiecerat, in divinis scriptis adhuc puer exercitatus. E∣ven then in his tender age he shewed no small tokens of the doctrine of faith, being but a childe as he was, and exerci∣sed in holy writ. How came our Saviour before them both being but twelue yeares old, to be found in the Temple amidst the DoctorsLuk 2.46. hearing them, & asking them questions? Samuel was but young when as he was cōsecrated to the Lord: when his mother had weaned him, saith the1. Sam. 1.24. Scripture, shee tooke him with her, and brought the childe to Eli. And she said, oh my Lord as thy soule liueth, my Lord, I am the woman that stood with thee here praying vnto the Lord. I praid for this childe, & the Lord hath given me my desire which I asked of him. There¦fore also I haue given him vnto the Lord: as long as hee li∣veth, he shall be given vnto the Lord. And he worshipped the Lord there. Howbeit these wil some man say, were destinated afterwards to be Teachers themselues, and therfore no marvaile if so be they began betimes. Go we then vnto the other Sex that is vtterly bard from publique1. Tim. 2.12. teaching, & were not infants of that sort
brought vp in the Scriptures too? I will content my selfe at this time only with a couple of them, Paula the daughter of Laeta, and Pacatula the daughter of Gaudentium, both of them young, both of them Vir∣gins, and concerning both with the counsaile of Ie∣rome for the bringing of them vp. First concerning Paula writing to her Mother Laeta:Hieron. ad Laetam de Instit Filiae. Reddat, x saith he, tibi pensum quotidiè de scripturarum floribus carptum: Enioyne her as a daily taske to gather you some flowers e∣very day out of the garden of holy Scriptures. And again a little after, Progemmis & serico, saith he, divinos codi∣ces amet: Insteed of preticus stones and silkes, teach her to loue the holy Scriptures. And againe after that, shew∣ing what order she shoulde obserue in reading those Scriptures: First, saith he, let her learne the Psalter, then the Proverbs, thē Ecclesiastes, then Iob, then the Gospels, then the Acts of the Apostles, then the Epistles. After these the fiue bookes of Moses, the books of Kings, of Chro∣nicles, of Esdras, of Hester; Last of all let her learne the Canticles. And writing to Gaudētium concerning her daughter Pacatula,Hieron. ad Gaudent de In∣fantulae educat. Cum autem virgunculam rudem & edentulam septimus aetatis annus exceperit, discat memoriter Psalterium, & vs{que} ad annos pubertatis li∣bros Solomonis, Evangelia, Apostolos & Prophetas sui cordis thesaurum faciat. When she comes, saith St Ierome, to be seven yeares of age let her learne the Psalter by hart, and till shee bee twelue, let her make the treasure of her heart, the books of Solomon, the Evangelists, the Apostles, and the Prophets. It had beene strange in those daies to haue heard Christians, I, and learned Christians,
either of the one sex or the other, to profess they wereIllic. trepida∣verunt timore vbi non erat ti∣mor, Ps. 14.9. afraid to read the Scriptures, to say, that Ignorance was the Mother of devotion, that it was not fit for girles and boyes to be medling therewith: nay maxi-mè pueris,Chrysost in E∣phes. Hom. 21. saith S. Chrysostom; est enim plurimum in∣sipientiae in illa aetate. It is most necessarie, saith S. Chry∣sostom, for worldly men to knowe those things which are to be taught out of the Scriptures, but especially for childrē for so much as that age is most repleat with lacke of wis∣dome and discretion. And againe a little after: Let vs bring them vp, saith he, in instruction, and information of the Lord. Let vs giue them example our selues, facien∣tes eos à primaeva aetate Scripturarum lectioni vacare, causing them from their young and tender yeares to apply themselues to the reading of the Scriptures. But I haue beene longer in this second point then I purposed to haue beene: I come vnto the third, namely the duty to be performed on their parts, Come yee children and harken vnto me. [And harken.] For is it enough to come? nay, for when wee are come, we may fairely fall asleep. Who so telleth a foole of wisdome,Ecclus. 22.10. saith the wisdome of Iesus the sonne of Sy∣rach, is as a man which speaketh to one that is asleepe: when he hath told his tale, he saith what is the matter? We may sleepe and fall, as didAct. 20.9. Eutychus from the third loft, & be taken vp for dead. We may come and be no wi∣ser then we were before we came, like them in the Acts of the Apostles,Act. 19.32. the more part knewe not where∣fore they were come together. We may come as theGen. 19.11. So∣domites did to Lots doore, haue our eies perhaps
broadwaking, and yet secundum quid, in regard of the matter in hand, be as blind as Beetles too. It is not e∣nough you see to come then, but you must come & harken. Come yee children and harken. Here then wee are all and every of vs to bid Philosophy adue. The Eye in this case as excellent a sense as it is, yet it is not the most excellent, the Eare is farre to bee preferred before it. Plus, saithLact. Instit. l. 3. c. 9. Lactantius, est in auribus quàm in oculis situm, quoniam & doctrina, & sapientia percipi auribus solis potest, oculis solis non potest. There is more in the eares of man, saith he, then there is in his eyes, for that learning and wisdome may bee obtained by the eares only, by the only eye it is impossible. Thus, saith a worthyD. Hackwell Vanitie of the eyes, c. 21. p. 101 Divine, doe wee iudge by the hearing only of the temper of mettals, the soundnesse of timber, the emptinesse of ves∣sels, the deepnesse of waters. And wee haue heard, saith he, of many blind men who haue become famous for wisdome and learning, but of deafe men we haue not heard of any. I, Faith it selfe, as speakes the Apostle, is not that by hearing? How shall they call on him,Rom. 10.14. saith he, in whom they haue not beleeued? and how shall they beleeue in him of whom they haue not heard? & how shall they heare with∣out a Preacher? his conclusionV. 17. there is, then faith is by hearing, as if he had said, No Eare, no Faith: no hearing, no beleeuing. Adde herevnto the commoditie that Hearing hath aboue all other senses whatsoever. For how many things must we see, & what bookes must we read, before we shall attaine to the knowledge of that which wee may learne by hearing one Lecture. We receaue and vnderstand in halfe an houre, that
which our Master or Tutor who teacheth vs, hath not prepared perhaps for vs but in a long time & sea∣son. This Woolsey the Cardinall made good vse of, in regard of his private good, for whereas the rest of the Councell in those daies called oft vpō K. Harry to acquaint himselfe with matters of state by resorting to the Councell Table, and affourding his presence at their deliberations: he would advise him to follow his pleasures, and let Councell matters alone to him, assuring him that at night he should haue as much of him in one quarter of an houre as if he had been pre∣sent all day at those tedious and wearisome consulta∣tions. By this tricke, saith myB. Godw. his Catal. of Bish. pag. 487. Author, he won himselfe such autority with the King, as he did even what he listed a long time after. But to returne vnto my purpose. As we are to come and harken to, so is there dan∣ger also in hearing. For as our Saiuour said in S. MarksMark. 4.24. Gospel: Take heed what you heare, and as S. LukeLuk. 8.18. re∣lateth it, Take heed how ye heare: so must we take espe∣ciall heed not only what, and how, but also whom we heare. For as the ApostlePhilip. 3.18. saith to the Philippians, Many walke who are the enemies of the crosse of Christ, whose end is damnation, and so forth: so may it be said now a daies that Many talke who are the enemies of the crosse of Christ, whose end is damnation, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is to their shame, which minde earth∣ly things. And the same Apostle in an other place, MoreoverAct. 20.30. saith he, of your owne selues shall men arise speaking perverse things to draw disciples after thē. And S. Peter to this purpose: These are wels without water
2 Pet. 2.18.saith he, and clowdes carryed about with a tempest, to whom the blacke darknesse is reserved for ever. For in speaking swelling words of vanity, they beguile with wan∣tonnes through the lusts of the flesh, them that were cleane escaped from them which are wrapped in errour. And would you thē know whom to harken to? It follow∣eth, Come ye children and harken vnto me. Venite filij, au∣dite me. Me your Prince, Me your Prophet, for he was in truth a very mixture of both. In the one hand as it were his Sword, in the other the Word, suppose a Book, & in both this Motto, Haec docet, Haec terret, This hand teacheth, This terrifies. For asAug. Ep. 48. S. Austen like a Father, Si terrerentur & non docerentur, improba quasi dominatio videretur; If those that erre should be terrified only & not be taught, it might seeme a kinde of Tyrany: so the same Father in the selfe same period but like a Iudge, sed rur∣sus si docerentur & nō terrerentur, vetustate consuetudi∣nis obdurarentur, & ad capessendā viam salutis pigrius moverentur; but againe if they should be taught and not terrified to, custome would harden them, and make them pace but slowly to the way of eternall life. Howbeit this is an argument that befits not our Meridian. I speake not now to Magistrates; I speake only vnto you, and therefore come vnto the last point namely the duety on his part who doth invite here, & what the Parties invited might expect at his hands, Come ye children & harken vnto me, I will teach you the feare of the Lord. [I will teach you the feare of the Lord.] Concerning Feare, in holy Scripture it is taken di∣verse and sundry waies. It is taken first of all for the
thing or danger feared, as Prov. 1.26, I will laugh at your destruction, and mocke when your feare commeth. It is according vnto that, Psalm. 2.4, He that dwelleth in heaven shall laugh them to scorne: the Lord shal haue them in derisiō. Which is not, Beloved, to be so vnderstood as if the Lord were made of our mettal, petulanti sple∣ne, as speakes thePers. Sat. 1. Poet, set (as we say) on a merry pin: God forbid wee shoulde ever thinke so basely of our God, but for the Prophet would intimate to vs (as Calvin obserues on that place) that when the whole world is vp against him, he needeth no munitions, no for∣tifications or rampires against them, but can as easily and instantly bridle them, as a man is said to laugh who laughs by nature. Secondly, Feare is takē for the Person which is feared, as Gen. 31.42. Except the God of my Father, the God of Abraham, and the feare of Isaac had beene with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty. They are Iacobs words to Laban alluding, as Tremellius thinkes, to Gen. 27.33, when as Isaac his father was stricken with a marveilous great feare whereby God as it were bri∣dled him, least hee should recall againe the blessing he gaue. Thirdly Feare is taken for a free voluntary reve∣rēce, which Inferiors shew to their Superiors, making them carefull to obey & fearefull to offend, as Rom. 13.7, Tribute to whom ye owe tribute, custome to whom custome, feare to whom feare. And that fear there spokē of is fearefulnesse to offend, not formidine poenae (as speakes the Poet) because of punishmēt insuing, but vir∣tutis amore, for loue of goodnes. You know whose saying it was, Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore:Horat. Epist. l. 1. ad Quintiū.
Tu nihil admittes in te, formidine poenae. Fourthly Feare is taken for an holy affection of the hart awing vs & making vs loath to displease God by sinne in respect of his gracious goodnes and mercies, and for a loue we beare to righteousnes, as Psa. 130.4. There is mercy with thee, therefore shalt thou be feared. Now this is that Alpha and Omega, that beginning & end of wisdome so much spoken of in the Scriptures. The beginning, as Psalm. 111.10. The feare of the Lord is the beginning of wisdome: The end, as Eccles. 12.13. Let vs heare the end of all, Feare God, and keepe his commaun∣dements. Very excellent things throughout the Scrip∣tures are spoken of this Feare. As Psal. 25.11. What mā is he that feareth the Lorde, him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose: and Psal. 145.19, He will fulfill the de∣sire of them that feare him: and Psalme, 115, 13, He shall blesse them that feare the Lord both small and great. I but lentum est dabit, dat saith theSenec. Herc. Furens Act. 3. sc. Vtrumne vi sui. Poet: it may seeme to long a comming, He will do it: why then he doth it in the present tence, and therefore, Psal. 33.17. The eie of the Lord is vpon them that feare him, and Psal. 103, 11. Looke how high the heaven is in comparison of the earth: so great is his mercy also towards them that feare him: and in the 13. verse of that Psalme, Like as a father pitieth his owne children, even so is the Lord mercifull to thē that feare him: and againe in the 17. verse, The merciful good¦nes of the Lord endureth for ever and ever vpon thē that feare him: and in the 9. verse of this Psalme, They that feare him lacke nothing. Si hoc quo{que} est lentū: if this may seeme to slacke to, for it is but even a doing, why thē
lo he hath done it already, and that in the praeterper∣fect tence perfitly past, He hath given meate vnto them that feare him, Psal. 111.5. I omit Psal. 112.1. and Psal. 128.1. and Psal. 147.11. and Prov. 19.23. & Tob. 1.21. all decyphering vnto vs the benefit of this Feare, and I will say with the sonne of Syrach, The feare of the Lord is a pleasant garden of blessing, and there is nothing so beautifull as it is, Ecclus. 40.27. I haue reckoned vnto you foure waies how Feare is to be taken. There is a fift, and a sixt way to, of both which in a word. Fiftly then Feare is taken for a ter∣ror in the hart of the wicked dreading God as a Iudge, and fearing to offend him only in regarde of punish∣ment that may insue. Of this the Apostle S. Iohn spea∣keth. 1. Ioh. 4.18. Feare saith he, hath painefulnes, or as it is in our new Translation, Feare hath torment. And I say only in regard of punishment, for that the Godly in regard of punishment may bee fearefull to offend, but not in regard of punishment onely. In this caseAug. Tom. 9. in 1. epist. Ioan. p. 436. St Austen compares Feare to the bristle which is on the shoomakers thred, quando aliquid suitur, saith he, seta prius intrat, sed nisi exeat non succedit linum: when soever the shoomaker seweth a shooe the bristle first enters but vnlesse it goe out againe the threed can in no wise en∣ter, so the feare of Gods vengance first goeth before, and then brings in after it the long threed of Gods mercies. Sixtly and lastly Feare is taken for the whole worship of God as Esay 29.13. for that which God himselfe there said, Their feare towards mee was taught by the precepts of men: our Saviour interpreteth in
S. Mathewes Gospel by the name of worship: In vain saith hee, they worship me teaching for doctrines mens precepts. Mat. 15.9. And thus may Feare be takē here in this place, Come yee children and harken vnto mee, I will teach you the feare of the Lord: that is, affoord mee but your presence, come and harken vnto mee dili∣gently, & I will teach you how to worship the God of heaven. I wil instruct you aright in his service, least taking your selues without good instructiō, or to the right hand, or to the left, Gentilisme, or Superstition; Virg. Aentid. lib. 3.Dextrum Scylla latus, laevum implacata Charybdis Obsidet, The Scylla of Superstition being on one side, the Cha∣rybdis of Gentilisme on the other; you vtterly misca∣ry in this life, & cōsequently also in the life to come. Come yee children and harken vnto mee, I will teach you the feare of the Lord. The application is soone made. Such an invitati∣on as was that, loe herein every respect. The Parties invited are your selues. The dutie on your parts to be performed, you are not ignorant what it is, if so bee you did but harkē to this one word Harken. The dis∣proportion is in my selfe. I am not I confesse the J, here spoken of in this place. I may say as he inAmbros. de Paenitent. l. 2. c. 10. pag. 220. St Ambrose in another case, Ego non sum ego:Ambros. de Paenitent. l. 2. c. 10. pag. 220. I am not I. I am nor Prince, nor Prophet, no nor yet the son of a Prophet, as Amos spake of himselfe, Amos, 7.14. and yet by the grace of God I am that I am,1. Cor. 15.10 & that God that against my expectation hath called mee to this
taske, and made me not vnwilling to accept of it, wil I hope direct me therein; and to vse Q. Elizabeths words of blessed memory,Slow Chronic. edit. 1601. pag. 1076. I trust God who hath hi∣therto preserued, and led me by the hand, will not now of his goodnesse suffer me to goe alone. And yet as speaks the c Apostle, that I may boast my selfe a little,2. Cor. 11.16 as the Teacher here in this place was Prince, and Prophet both, and had in that respect two strings (as it were) to his bow: so am not J without two strings neither, even bound vnto you in a double bond to tender the welfare of your soules; the one in regard of a particu∣lar calling of late by your Superiors to this place; the other of being before, and stil remaining your Pastor. Both command, both constraine me, & I submit my selfe to both, and say withAug. Tom. 10. Ser. 16. p. 49. St Austen, Domino iuben∣te loquor, quo terrēte non taceo: The Lord commands me, and therefore I speake, he threatens if I speake not, and therefore I dare not hold my peace. Jf so be in my whole cariage, or managing hereof in any particular, any like Michol shall be ready to mislike at what may seeme amisse, the answere that David gaue shall be as ready:2. Sam. 6.21. It is before the Lord; & vilior fiam plusquam factus sum, & ero humilis in ocu∣lis meis; I will yet be more vile then thus, and will be low in my owne sight. Totum enim decet quicquid defer∣tur Religioni, vt nullum obsequium quod proficiat ad cul∣tum & observantiam Christi erubescamus. All, saith St Ambrose, is decent that is giuen vnto Religion,Ambr. de Poe∣nit. l 2 c. 6. pag. 213. nor are we to blush at any office performed on Christs be∣halfe.
If any on the contrary thinke these paines of mine vnfitting for you that are but Youthes, and that they might better here be spared, and be be∣stowed elswhere, I will oppose to him the wordes of St Ierom which he wrote to Laeta concerning Paula her daughter whom I mentioned before, Ipse si Paulam miseris,Hier. ad Laetā de Instit. filiae. saith he, & Magistrum & Nutritiū spondeo. Gestabo humeris, balbutientia senex verba for∣mabo, multò gloriosior mundi Philosopho, qui non Regem Macedonum Babylonio periturum veneno, sed ancillam et sponsam Christi erudiam, Regnis coelestibus offerendam. If saith S. Ierome, you send me your daughter Paula, I vow vnto you to be her Master, and Foster-father both. I will beare her in my armes, and as old as I am, I will teach her e∣ven to speake. And herein my glory shalbe greater thē was Aristotles that great Philosopher of the world, who shall instruct not a king of Macedon shortly after to be made a∣way by some Babylonish poison, but a handmaide & spowse of Christ destinated hereafter for the kingdome of heaven. If he so said but of one only, and she of the female sex to, what may I of so many of you as heare mee this day, who as you are a many indeede, and of the more honourable & noble Sex, so who knoweth whether there areIoh. 1.26, 27 among you, whose sho-latchets an other day I may be vnworthy to vnloose. And so much the rather should my care bee over you now in this kinde, for there is even now a daies a Scilla, and a Charibdis to. You shall no sooner settle your selues to be truely re∣ligious indeed, but who so ready at hand as or Popery
on the one side, or Puritanisme on the other. When wise king Salomon had given that good coūsaile, Pro. 4, 25. Let thine eies behold the right, and let thine eie lids direct the way before thee. Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy waies be ordered aright: he immediatly addeth withall: Turne not to the right hand, nor to the left, but remooue thy foot from evill. GregoryNaz. orat. 26. pag. 446. Nazianzen makes a question here why king Salomon having spoken of Right before, should so soone giue vs counsaile not to turne to the right hand: and his solution there is, that in the former place king Solomon meant that which was Right in very deed, but in the latter that which did but appeare to be right, but yet notwithstanding was not so. Popery in this age having so much beene beatē as it hath, nothing now vnto a many seemes so right, as that which is most opposite and contrary therevn∣to. But we ought not to turne to this right hand nei∣ther, no more then to the left. Ovid. Met. l. 2Altius egressus coelestia tecta cremabis, Inferius terras: medio tutissimus ibis. Popery aimes at a celestiall Hierarchy, I will ascend a∣boue the height of the clowds, & wil be like the most High, Esay, 14.14. That which we call Puritanisme, at a po∣pularity or parity, saying to Moses & to Aaron, yee take to much vpon you, seeing all the Congregation is holy, eve∣ry one of them, and the Lord is among them: wherefore thē lift yee your selues aboue the congregation of the Lord, Numb. 16.3. Inter vtrum{que} tene.
A meane betwixt both doth wel so it be a true mean and this is that my selfe shall aime at, to haue you in∣structed in hereafter, Come yee Children and hearken vnto me, I will teach you the feare of the Lord. And here had I thought to haue ended for this first time, howbeit before we part it shal not be amisse to make you acquainted with my manner of method I meane to obserue vnto you, that viewing as it were in one Card the severall coasts we are to arriue at, we may when we are to set forth, launch out with much alacrity in hope of enriching our soules with aboun∣dance and store of treasure. Being to teach you then the Feare of the Lord, and that Feare being here taken for the whole worshippe of God: I shal intreate God willing of all that worshippe throughout my whole yeere. First and formost then forasmuch as Divinity intreateth chiefly of two points, of God, & of the Church. I also will entreat of God and of the Church. Concerning God I shall shew vnto you first his Essence, then his Attributes, then his Workes. Concerning the Church I shall also shew, first what the Church is, secondly what shee is to Beleeue, thirdly what to Practise. In shewing you what shee is I shall distinguish her first frō Paganisme, & Iudaisme, the two grand Religions of the old world: secondly from Turcisme, and Papisme, the two smoakingEsay 7.4. fire∣brands of this world. In her Beleefe I shall discourse, first of the Articles of our Faith cōmonly called, the A∣postles Creed: secondly of all those Tenets which our
own Church holdeth against the rebellious Church of Rome. In her Practise I shall discourse, first of the Ten Commandements; secondly of Praier; thirdly of Fa∣sting; fourthly of Almes. Thus you see what I haue proposed: God I hope hath dispos'd it to, wherefore to end with the words of my Text, Come ye childrē & harken vnto me, I will teach you the feare of the Lord. The same Lord so blesse vs and the seed that hath been sowne, that with you of the poorer sort theMa. 13.22. cares of this world, with you of the wealthier the deceit∣fulnesse of your riches, with either of you of either sort the lusts of other things, grow not vp like thornes and choake it.
GODS ESSENCE.Lect. 2. Ian. 21. 1612. I MAY seeme to haue kept a good decorum in being so long a com∣ming hither since my former being in this place, considering the mat∣ter I am to speake of. I am at this time to speake of GOD, and you knowe the story ofTully de Na∣tur. Deor. lib. 1. Symonides, when he was to speake of that ar∣gument. He still doubled and tre∣bled the time that was giuen him to pawse vpon it. True it is he was a Heathen, and had not the way to finde him out as afterwards Christians had, I meane the bene∣fit of his Word; but did Christians afterwards so find him as that they could perfectly knowe him indeed? Let vs heare themselues speake. Dei natura,Naz. Orat. 34 pag. 538. saith Nazianzen, nullis quidem verbis explicari potest: animo autem at{que} in∣tellectu comprehends multò minus potest. The nature of God cannot be explicated by any maner of words whatsoever: much lesse can it be comprised or in our thoughts, or vn∣derstanding. And againe in the sameIb. pag. 548. Oration, Quid tan∣dem Deus natura sua & essentia sit, nec hominum quisquam vnquam invenit, nec invenire potest. What God is in na∣ture & essence neither did any mā ever find, neither possi∣bly can he find. And againe a little after: In hac mortali vita quic quid ad nos vs{que} perting it, aliud nihil est, quàm ex∣iguus quidam riuulus ac velut parvus magnae lucis radius. Whatsoever concerning God hapneth to be knowne of
vs in this mortall life we here lead, is but a river in respect of a sea, and a little beame of that great light. And there∣foreAug de Verb. Dom Ser. 38. So Tertullian, Maior est mente ipsa nec cogitari possit quātus sit; quia si poterit tagitari, mente humana minor fit oportet qua concipi possit. Tertul. de Trin. pag. 494. S. Austen, Quid mirum si non comprehendis? si enim comprehendis non est Deus. What marvaile is it if thou canst not comprehend God, for if so be thou couldst, then were not he God. SoArnob. adues. Gen. l. 8. Arnobius, Magnitudinem Dei qui se putat nosse, minuit. He that thinks he knows Gods great¦nes, doth diminish the greatnes of God. If any man think, saith the1. Cor. 8.2. Apostle, that he knoweth any thing (how much more this thing?) he knoweth nothing yet, as he ought to knowe. The thoughts of mortall men, saith theWisd. 10.13. Corpus à prima creatione homi∣nibus non idcir∣co datum est vt Deo cognoscen do sit impedime to P. Martyr Loc. Com. cap. 1. l. 4 §. 19, Author of the booke of Wisdome, are fearefull, and our forecasts are vncertaine, because a corruptible body is heavy to the soule, and the earthly mansion keepeth downe the minde that is full of cares. What? and shall we here then set down our selues and rest vs? nay, shall we dispaire of going farther? For that we know nothing as we ought to knowe, that is, we can know nothing, shal we endeavour therefore to know no more then we yet doe; and pitching vp our pillars with Hercules, say as he did in another case, Non vltra, Now no farther? God forbid. Nay the same Apostle that said even now, that he knewe nothing as he ought to knowe. And in an∣other place, that he knewe but in part, & prophesied in part, and that he saw but through a glasse darkly:Natal. Comes Mytholil. 3. c. 19 p. 274. Vi de∣und. l. 7, c. 1. p. 689. prayed yet for theEph. 3.17. Ephesians that being rooted and grounded in loue they might be able to cōprehēd with all Saints, what is the bredth, and length, and depth, and height; and to knowe the loue of Christ which passeth knowledge,1. Cor. 13.9 that they might be filled with all fulnes of God. Here then must be our endeavours evē to know what may be known, but yet to haue stil before our eies that good caveat giuen byProv. 25.27. vulg. Solomon; Qui scrutator est maiestatis opprimetur à gloria, He that pryes too farre into the maiestie of God shall be overwhelmed with his glory. Est in Deo,Hilar. de Trin. l. 1. p 29. saith S. Hilary, quod percipi potest: est planè si modò quod potest velis. Sicut enim est in Sole quod vi∣deas, si hoc velis videre quod possis, amittas autem quod pote∣videre,
dum quod non potes niteris: ita & in rebus Dei habes quod intelligas, si intelligere quod potes velis: caeterùm si vl∣tra quàm potes speres, id quo{que} quod potuisti posse non poteris. There is, saith he, in God that which may be perceaued by vs: doubtlesse there is if so be thou endeavour that which may be. For as there is in the sun that which may be seene, if thou wilt see what thou maist, but thou loo∣sest even what thou maist see, if thou endeauour to see more then thou maist: right so in matters cōcerning God, somewhat thou hast that thou maist vnderstand, if thou wilt vnderstand what thou maist, but if thou hopest be∣yond thy abilitie, then that which thou wert able once to doe, now thou canst not doe. And indeed this similitude of the Sunne is brought by divers, as namely byRadium quo{que} solarem non pos∣sumus apertè cognoscere, & ta men propter hoc cū ipsum maxi∣mè admiramur. Ita etiam de Dei cognitione. Chr. in Ps. 138. Edit. Paris. 1556. p. 1023. S. Chry∣sostome,Si tanta cla∣ritas est Solis vt oculis in eū cor∣poralibus nō va∣leamus intēdere quanta est illius claritas qui fe∣cit Solem Greg. in Psa. Poenitent. p 148. col 2. St Gregory,Ne{que} hoc Lumi nare magnum (Solem loquor istum quē quoti∣diè vides) vidi∣sti tamen aliquā do sicuti est, sed tantum sicut illuminat, verbi causa aerem, montem, parietem. Bernard. sup Cantic. Ser. 31. p. 147. Col. 1. St Bernard, andSi ad Solis aspectum oculorum nostrorum acies hebescit, ne orbem ipsum obtutus in∣spicial obviorum sibi superatus fulgore radiorum hoc idem mentis acies patitur in cogitatione om∣ni de Deo, & quanto ad considerandum Deum plus intenditur, tanto magis ipsa cogitationis sua luce coecatur. Tertul. de Trin. p 494. Tertullian. But I stay too long from that parcell of Scripture which I haue chosen concerning GOD, and whereof God willing at this time I purpose to intreat. It is written in the booke of Exodus, Exod. 3.14. The words are these: And God answered Moses, I am that I am. Also he said, Thus shalt thou say vnto the children of Isra∣el, I am hath sent me vnto you. Which words depending wholy vpon the premisses that went before, which premises were a kind of Dialogue betweene God and Moses, we will first seeke out the occa∣sion of them, and that was this. After some backwardnesse on Moses part about the embassage the Lord of heaven did purpose to imploy him in, concerning the freeing the children of Israel frō Egypt
the house of bondage, as it is in the eleventh verse of this Chapter, Who am I that I should goe vnto Pharaoh, & that I should bring the children of Israel out of Egypt? And the Lord replying as it is in the twelfe verse, Certainely I will be with thee, and this shall be a token vnto thee that I haue sent thee, and so forth: I, saith Moses, but when I shall come vnto the children of Israel, and shall say vnto them, the God of your Fathers hath sent me vnto you: If they say vnto me, what is his name? what shall I say vnto them? The answer to this question is the words of this my Text, wherein the Lord (you see) vouchsafeth to shew to Moses what he is. And God answered Moses, I am that I am. Also he said, Thus shalt thou say vnto the children of Israel, I am hath sent me vnto you. True it is, it is in the originall, I will be that I will be in the future, & not I am that I am in the pre∣sent tence, wherevpon some haue beene of opinion,Illyr. Clau. Script. de nomi∣ne Iehova Tract 6. p. 615 Vid. Zanch de Na∣tura Deil. 1. c. 14. p. 48. col. 1. Il∣lyricus by name, that his comming in the flesh was here signifyed, and the redemption of his people by his death and passion, howbeit forasmuch as the Hebrewes vse the future tence for the present, as that which noteth a conti∣nuance, and perpetuitie of time, hence it is that that con∣ceit may well be dispelled hence, and the word translated as here it is, howsoever Illyricus find fault with it, Ego sum qui sum, I am in the present tence. Now for these words, I am, how aptly and significant∣ly they expresse the nature of God we shall the better cō∣ceiue if so be we cōsider, first how they are added to those notions that Moses had before of God: secondly, if so be we marke their sense and meaning. The notions are twofold: the first, from God himselfe: the second, Moses his illation and inference therevpon. That which was frō God himselfe was that in the 6 verse of this Chapter, God styleth himselfe in Moses his hea∣ring, The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob. Abraham, and Isaac, and Iacob three but sylly men to speake of, and yet was not God asham'd of them to be
called their God as it is in the Epistle to theHeb. 11.6. Hebrewes. Let me instance even in Isaac of whom what haue we in the booke of Genesis that God should name himselfe his God.See Mr Bun∣nies Head Cor∣ner stone l. 1. c. 5 §. 5. p. 65. He liued some hundred & foureskore yeares, & yet are there scarse six severall points remarkable that are re∣corded of him: as first when he was to be sacrificed how he knew so wel (& yet it seemeth then he was someFunccius makes him 26. Func. Chron. ad Annum mundi 2074. thir∣ty yeares of age) what appertained to the service of God that himselfe espyed what was wanting therein: secondly, he went out on an evening toGen. 24.63. meditate, or to pray in theParsons makes him but a child at this time: I, a little child, & yet he was at that time vpon forty yeares of age, Vid. Mt Bunnies brief Answ. vnto the idle and frivo∣lous quarrels of R.P. against the late edition of the Resolution p. 152. field, perhaps he did it vsually, but that is more then the Text averres: thirdly, he openly built an altar & worship∣ped the Lord: fourthly, though he were much enclined to Esau at the first, yet when he saw that God had turned that to Iacob which he himselfe meant to Esau, he would not then alter the same: fiftly, he gaue speciall charge vn∣to Iacob as touching the choice of his wife, and then did he blesse him too. Behold the principall and totall summe of some hundred and foureskore yeares. Nor is it likely he did performe much more then these related, conside∣ring the diligence of Moses in reporting matters of him that are of lesse moment and consequence then these. But this it is that may comfort vs as many of vs as now are, or shal be hereafter of the holy Ministery, that albeit we can by no meanes shew such fruits as a many doe in the Ser∣vice of our God (and indeed all haue not all talents,Virg Egl. 8. Non omnia possumus omnes) yet if we endeavour to doe what we can, and to doe syncerely what we doe, it is at true in this case as it is in Almes:1. Cor. 8.12 If there be first a willing minde, it is accepted according to that a man hath, & not according to that he hath not. He that accepted ofExod. 25.4 Goats haire in the building of the Tabernacle, caused St Iudes one Epi∣stle to be no lesse accepted of for the building of his Church, then fourteene of the Apostle St Pauls. Obadiah in the old Testament was as Canonicall as Esay, Aggey as Ieremy, and yet Obadiah hath but one Chapter, Esay three
score and six, Aggey hath but two, Ieremy fiftie and two. But to returne vnto my purpose. The second notion is Moses his illatiō & inference vpō the style which God here gaue himselfe of being the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Iacob, namely that therevpō Moses tearmes him The Lord; as in the words immediatly following, and in the seaventh verse of this Chapter, Then the Lord said. It is in the originall Iehovah, and translated in the former translation of the Bible, as also in the last the Lord, for so did the Septuagint translate it to, asZanch. de nat Dei, seu de diuin Attrib. l. 1. c. 17 Zanchi∣us observeth. True it isIllyr. Clau. script. tract. de Rat cognosc. sac. Lit. Tract. 1. p. 45. Vid Ib. De nomine Iehova Tract. 6. p. 622. Illyricus mislikes it, and saith that it doth obscure the nature of his name indeede, howbeit since the Apostles themselues, asCalvin. Instit. l. 1. c. 13. §. 20. Calvin doth obserue translated Iehova by this name too, their example in this case may be sufficient warrant for this Translation. Now whereas in our last Translation it is alwaies set downe in capitall letters and those only fowre: that I take it, is or to shew that it is a word in the originall consisting of fowre letters commonly called , or in imitation of the German Translatiō which hath the word Heyr in such capitall letters, asIllyr. Clau. sc. tract. de Rat. cognosc. sac. Lit. Tract. 1. p. 45. Illyricus shewes vnto vs. It may be they had an other meaning too, namely that whereas Zanchius doth wittily obserue that al Nations in a manner do write the name of God with fowre letters, and maketh instance in the Hebrewes, the Romanes, the Spaniards, the Italians, the French, the Germans, the English (for so heeSupposing by like that we wrot God with a double D. as the Germanes did Gort with a double T. takes it) the Chaldaeans, the Syrians, the Arabians, the Aethiopi∣ans, the Aegyptians, the Assyrians, the Persians, the Magi, the Dalmatians, or Illyrici, the Turkes and the New found world, esteeming it not to be done without the singular & especial providence of God himselfe; as if he had meant to shew to all Nations that he was not the God of the Iewes only, but of al the world besids: forasmuch as Zanchius (I say) observeth this, & we indeed do not so write it, it may be perhaps they would haue the wordOnly for oft I haue observed Esay. 30.15. Lord is in smal tters. LORD to supply that defect, least in this case it might be said of vs as was
spoken in another, Virg. Ecl. 1.Et penitus toto divisos orbe Britannos. But to returne to my purpose againe. LORD is a name of relation, & you know in what pre∣dicament it is: Omnia quae ad aliquid sunt reciprocantur, ve∣lut servus, Domini servus, vicissim{que}. Dominus, servi Domi∣nus esse dicitur. This word Lord doth intimate to vs, that there is a mutuall consequence, or a kinde of dependance betweene God and vs. Sieur non potest esse Servus, saith S.Aug. de Trin. l. 5. c. 16. Vid. Damasc. Orth. Fid. l. 1. . 12. & Zanch. vbi sup. c. 10. p. 28. col.  Austen, qui non habet Dominum, sic nec Dominus qui non habet Servum. As he cannot be a Servant that hath not a Lord: so cannot he be a Lord that hath not a servant. How¦beit here we are to note that our relation vnto God is re∣all, Gods relation vnto vs is duntaxàt rationis, nominall only, and intentionall. Not that there is any change at all in him, the change is in our selues. Before the mountaines saithPsal. 90.2. David, were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world were made thou art God from everlasting and worlde without end. He that would see more in this case, I referre him to Zāchius in his first booke De Natura Dei, the thir∣teenth chapter; where handling this question, seeing God is eternall and immutable and nothing chaunceth to him a new: whether there bee any names, which so belong vnto him in time, that they could not belong vnto him from everlasting: his answere is, That those names which betoken a relatiō be∣tweene God & his Creatures as the name of Creator, of Lord, of Saviour, of Redeemer, and the like, are so spoken of God in time and not from everlasting, that notwithstanding no newe thing hapneth vnto him, neither is there hereby in him anie change at all. And thus much of these two notions which you see content not Moses concerning the knowledge of God, namely that he is the God of Abraham, of Isaac, & of Iacob, and that he stiles him here the Lord, so that he is ignorant of him still, wherefore now of that which is ad∣ded, I am, that I am: And, I am hath sēt me vnto you. Wher∣in first I shall consider the addition it selfe, secondly the
meaning of the words. Concerning the addition it is more then vsually hath beene granted in like cases. When Manoah in the booke of Iudges asked the Angell of his name, the Angell saide vnto him, why askest thou thus after my name which is se∣cret? Iudg. 13.18. So likewise Iacob when he had wrestled with the Angel in Genesis, saying, Tell me I pray thee thy name: the Angels reply was, wherefore now doest thou aske my name? And it followeth there in that place, And he blessed him there, Gen. 32.29. Hic Angelus saithCalv. Inst. l. 1. c. 13. §. 10. Calvin speaking of the former, Iehova fuit. Et iste Iehova fuit, speaking of the latter, & of this latter he there prooveth it partly by Hosea, Hosea, 12.5, partly by the words of Iacob Gen. 32.30. So Agur in SalomonsProv. 30.4. Proverbs, what is hisEx quo effec¦tum est, vt nec nomen Dei pro∣prium possit edi∣ci, quoniam non possit nec conci∣pi Idenim no∣mine continuetur quicquid etiam ex naturae su conditione cm¦prehenditur No men enim signi∣ficantia est eius rei quae compre∣hendi pouit ex nomine. At quā do id de quo a∣gitur tale est, vti condignè nec ip∣sis intellectibus colligatur: quo∣modo appellati∣onis dignè voca∣bulo pronuncia∣bitur. Tertul. de Trin. p. 496. name, and what is his sonnes name if thou canst tell? If thus then it were said to Iacob, thus to Manoah, as also by A∣gur long after, howe much more might the Lorde in this place haue thus spoaken vnto Moses, especially the Lord in some sort having declared himselfe vnto him before. Nor was Moses now at this time a Puny in Religion. They are special great testimonies which the Apostle to the He∣brewes giues him. By faith, saith theHeb. 11.24. Apostle, Moses when he was come to age refused to be called the sonne of Pharaos daughter, and chose rather to suffer adversity with the peo∣ple of God, then to enioy the pleasures of sinnes for a season, e∣steeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches thē the treasures of Egypt: for he had respect vnto the recompence of the re∣ward. By faith he forsooke Egypt, and feared not the fiercenes of the king: for he endured as he that saw him which is invisi∣ble. Now if Moses did all this, and all before this time, as no doubt indeed but hee did it all, how might the Lord haue here answered him as did our Saviour S. Phillip, Ioh. 14.9. I haue beene so long time with you, and hast thou not known me Phillip? Right so in this place: I haue bin so long known vnto thee, & dost thou now Moses aske my name? Thou when thou wert come to age didst refuse to be cal∣led
the sonne of Pharoes daughter: thou didst choose ra∣ther to suffer adversity with the people of thy God, then to enioy the pleasures of sinnes for a season: thou didst e∣steeme the rebuke of Christ greater riches then the trea∣sures of Egypt: thou hadst respect vnto the recompence of the reward: thou didst forsake Egypt, & didst not feare the fiercenesse of the king: thou didst endure as he that saw me which am invisible, & doest thou not yet know my name? But it pleased the Lord of heavē not to deale with Moses in this sort. He rather satisfieth his desire, and addeth vnto that which he had said of himselfe before, & so I come vn∣to the meaning of that which he now saith, I am that I am, I am hath sent me vnto you. And God answered Moses, I am that I am. Also he said, Thus shalt thou say vnto the children of Israel, I am hath sent me vnto you. This other name he giues himselfe is (as I told you) in the Hebrew Eheie, andM Bunny his Head Cor∣ner stone 1. c. 6. §. 3. p. 115. signifieth two points, first as ever being of himselfe: secondly being he of whom all others haue their being. I know thereZanch. de Na∣tur. Dei. l. 1. c 14 are that suppose there is signified hereby his two essentiall Attributes, Eternity & Immutability, but forasmuch as that opinion concerneth the future tence only, and we here read it in the present, I will at this time intreate of these pointes only of being of himselfe and being vnto others: of those his other Attri∣butes God willing at some other time. First then for his ever being of himselfe, or his own ab∣solute manner of being, it is that which the Scriptures de∣clare vnto vs, I, the very Heathen. The Scriptures they tell vs that before the mountaines were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world were made, he was God from everla∣sting, and world without end: so David as I told you before, Psalme 19.2, or rather Moses who hath his name in the forefront of that Psalme. And againe in an otherPsal. 102.24 place: O my God, take me not away in the midst of mine age: as for thy yeeres they endure throughout all generations. Thou Lord in the beginning hast laid the foundatiō of the earth: & the hea∣vens
are the worke of thy hands. They shall perish but then shalt endure: they all shall waxe old as doth a garmen; and as a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed: but thou art the same; and thy yeares shall not fayle. So like∣wise the Prophet Esay, or rather the Lord in the Prophet: Before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be af∣ter me. I, even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no Sa∣viour, yea before the day was, I am, Esay. 43.13. This the Heathen perceaued also, and thereforeVid. Zanch. de Nat. Dei seu de Divin. Attr. l. 1. c. 13. p 38. col 2 Plato he cals him , that which is: and in his Timaeus reprehendeth those which attribute vnto him or the future, or the preter∣perfect tense, forasmuch as neither of those tenses did seeme to agree with him, but the present tense onely. Hence it was that vpon the doores of the Temple of Del∣phos the inscription was in capitall letters E I: veram, saithut. Moral. Part. 1. de E I apud Delphos. Plutarch, certam, solam{que} soli convenientem ei appel∣lationem qua esse dicitur tribuentes; giuing him thereby a true, a certaine, and an only appellation of being and ex∣isting alone. Now that of him also all other things haue their being what more pregnant proofe, then the words of David in another of his Psalmes: The eyes of all,Ps. 145.15. saith he, wait vpon thee O Lord, and thou giuest them their meat in due season. Thou openest thy hand, and fillest all things living with plen∣teousnesse, And againe in anotherPsal. 104.24 place, O Lord, how ma∣nifold are thy workes, in wisdome hast thou made them al, the earth is full of thy riches: so is the great and wide sea also, wherein are things creeping innumerable both small & great beasts. There go the ships, and there is that Leviathan, whō thou hast made to take his pastime therein. These wait all vp∣on thee, that thou maist giue them meat in due season. When thou giuest it them they gather it, and when thou openest thy hand they are filled with good. When thou hidest thy face they are troubled: when thou takest away their breath they die, & are turned againe to their dust. So the Apostle to theRom. 11.36. Ro∣mans, Of him, and through him, and for him are all things; to
him be glory for ever, Amen. Goe we vnto particulars, & in the eight & thirtieth Chapter of the Booke of Iob; doth not the Lord instance in a many of them as in the Earth, the Sea, the Light, & Darknesse, Snowe, Hayle, Raine, Dew, Yce and so forth? And in the nine and thirtith Chapter of the same Booke doth he not instance likewise in the wild Goats, the Hynds, the wild Asse, the Vnicorne, the Peacock, the Ostridge, the Horse, the Hawke, the Eagle? And in the fortith Chapter in Behemoth, that is the Elephant as some suppose and in the one and fortith Chapter in Leviathan that is the Crocodile asBeza in Ioh. Praef. in c. 38. p 231. Beza is of opinion? If all this con∣tent vs not for there is not in all these Chapters any men∣tion at all of Man, goe we then to the Acts of the Apo∣stles and shall we not there finde that in him we liue and mooue, and haue our being, Act. 17.28? Go we from thence to the Booke of the Psalmes, & shall we not there find the very maner of making and framing vs? I will giue thankes vnto thee, saithPsal. 139.11. David, for I am fearefully and wonderfully made: marvellous are thy workes, and that my soule knoweth right well. My bones are not hid from thee: though I be made secretly, and fashioned beneath in the earth. Thine eyes did see my substance yet being vnperfect, and in thy booke were all my members written, which day by day were fashioned: when as yet there was none of them. My bones, saith he, are not hid from thee: though I be made secretly, & fashio∣ned: it is in the originall Ruccamthi, accordingly where∣vnto it is in our new Translatiō, when I was made in secret and curiously wrought, of Racam, he wrought with a nee∣dle, as if every of vs had beene wrought in tissue, or in im∣brodered worke by a cunning and expert hand. Returne we at length to the Booke of Iob againe, and there shall we find it deliuered to vs in country tearmes: Hast thou not powred me out as milke, saithIob. 10.10. Iob, and turned me to curds like cheese? What then? and are country folke onely made after this sort, Gentle and Noblemen after that o∣ther? those like milke, these like tissue? nay those and these
both like to milke and like to tissue, God, saith the Apostle that made the world, and all things that are therein hath made of one blood all mankind, Act. 17.26. We see then the name here giuen vnto God, we see it given vnto him by himselfe, we see the meaning of it too, namely how it sig∣nifieth an absolute being of himselfe, & a cause of being vnto others. I wil end this point with that ofDamas. Orth. Fid. l. 1. c. 12. Damascen: borrowed it seemes fromNaz Orat. 38. p. 615. Gregory Naziazen Ʋide∣tur principalius omnium de Deo dictorum nominum es∣se, Qui est. Totum enim in se ipso comprehendens habet ipsum ESSE: veluti quoddam pelagus substantiae infinitum & inter∣minum. It seemeth this name, I am, is the chiefest and most principall of all the names of God. For this very worde TO BE hath in it all whatsoever is comprehended in it selfe as it were a substantial Ocean infinite & boundles. Having thus then seene the principall name of God , as Damascen speaketh, we might now hope out of the premises to goe a great way farther, & to make a definition of God, and so to knowe his very essence: but all Divines will tell vs that that is impossible. He had need saithM. Cartwr. Catech. p. 3. one, to haue the art and Logicke of God himselfe, that should giue a perfect definition of him. And, Definiri non po∣test, saithFayi Enchirid Thes. 1. §. 8 p. 1. another, cum sit superior omni genere & differē∣tia: It is impossible he should be defined, since he cannot be comprised vnder those two tearmes of Logicke, Genus and Differentia. And, As fish, saith Naz. orat. 34. p. 538. Nazianzen, that swim in the water, they see nor Sun, nor starres, but only a shad∣dow of them: right so doe men behold but as it were a shaddow of God. Dum sumus in hoc corpore, saith the2. Cor. 5.6. Apostle, pe∣regrinamur à Domino: whilest we are in this body, we are strangers from God: now Strangers in another countrey are ignorant for the most part of what is there done. Hence that of Cleophas to ourLuk. 24.18. Saviour; Art thou onely a stranger in Ierusalem, and hast not knowne the things which are come to passe therein in these dayes? And indeed as S.Aug. de Trin. l. 1. c. 1. Austen tels vs, Quo intellectu Deum capit homo, qui ipsum
intellectum suum quo eum vult capere nondum capit: with what vnderstanding can Man possibly conceaue God, who cannot conceaue his own vnderstanding. Howbeit, for there is to be had some knowledge of God, and the Lord himselfe saith in the ProphetIer. 9.24. Ieremy, Let him that glorieth glory in this, that he vnderstandeth & knoweth me, let vs endeavour to define him, yet so as we alwaies haue that ofArnob. in Ps. 91. Arnobius before our eies, De Deo loqui etiam vera, quia periculosissimum est, timeamus: Let vs feare to speake even that which is true concerning God, for that there is danger even in that. GOD then is anPerkins on the Creed. p 27. ESSENCE SPIRITVALL, SIM∣PLE, JNFINITE, MOST HOLY. I say an ESSENCE to shew (as I shewed you before) that he is a thing abso∣lutely subsisting in himselfe & by himselfe, not receiving his being from any other. I say SPIRITVALL to shewe that he is not any kinde of Body, nor hath the parts of a Body and therefore the Scripture when it assighneth such parts vnto him, as the eie, the hand, the feet, and so forth, The eie of the Lord is vpon them that feare him, Psa. 33.18. The Lord vpholdeth a good man with his hand, Psal. 37.24. I will glorifie the place of my feete, Esay 60.13. It is but for our capacities sake who otherwise are not able to cōceiue his watchfulnesse over vs meant by his Eie: his providence meant by his hand: his readinesse to helpe vs meant by his feete. It followeth that he is SIMPLE, not simple as wee take Simple in our vsual phrase of speech when as we say a simple man, a simple body, and so forth, but Simple that is notVid. Zanch. de Nat. Dei, seu de Divin. Attrib. 2. c. 2. p. 78. col. 1. compounded of severall parts, nor of matter nor of forme, nor of subiect, nor of accident, as every other crea∣ture is. Againe, Angels and the Soules of men they I grant are simple to, and they are, as God is, simple essences, but it is but in respect, as namely of the Elements. Even so the Elements are simple to, but only in respect of those things which are compounded of them: the simplicity that is in God that is most absolutely simple. It followeth that he is
INFINITE.Vid. Zanc. Ib. p. 77. Col. 1. Infinite in time, infinite in place. Infinite in time, for he is without beginning, and without end: Infi∣nite in place, for he is every where, and in every place. The Prophet David speaking of the former of them, O my GodPs. 102.24. vid. Ps. 90.2. saith he, take me not away in the midst of mine age, as for thy yeeres they endure throughout al generations. Thou Lord in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the worke of thy hands. They shall perish but thou shalt endure, they all shall waxe old as doth a garment; and as a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shalbe changed: but thou art the same and thy yeeres shall not faile. And spea∣king of the other, whitherPsal. 139.6. saith he, shall I goe from thy spi∣rit: or whither shall I go from thy presence? If I clime vp into heaven thou art there: if I go downe to hell, thou art there al∣so. If I take the wings of the morning, and remaine in the vt∣termost parts of the Sea: euē there also shal thy hand lead me, & thy right hand shall hold me. So the Lord himselfe in the ProphetIer. 23.24. Ieremy, Can any hide himselfe in secret places that I shall not see him saith the Lord? Doe not I fill heaven and earth? I will conclude this point with that which a late Writer hath, concerning this word Infinite, Try it whē yu willTreatise of the Nature of God. p. 80. saith he, and Infinitenes you shall finde to be the right Philosophers stone which turneth all mettals into gold, and that one dram of it being put not only to an Angell, or to an whl Element, but evē to the least fly in the world, or the least moat in the sun is of force to make it true & very God. How∣beit it can in truth Beloved no more be added or put vnto the hugest Elephant that is, then it can be vnto a fly: no more to the world it selfe, then but to a moate in the Sun. It is peculiar and proper to God alone, he only is infinite, God is an infinite essence. It followeth in the last place that he is MOST HOLY, and hence it is that the Prophet Esay doth treble this word Holy as Esay, 6.1. I saw the Lord saith he sitting vpon an high throane, & lifted vp. The Seraphims stood vpon it. And one cryed to an other and said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hoasts: the whole world is full
of his glory. A passage that as S. Ambrose did borrow of that Prophet, so we in our Church Service haue borrow∣ed of S. Ambrose. You know what we daily say through∣out the yeere: To thee all Angels cry alowd, the heavens and all the powers therein. To thee Cherubim & Seraphim conti∣nually do cry, Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabaoth, Heaven and Earth are full of the maiesty of thy glory. And hence it seemeth hath come the custome of singing or saying Psalmes, and other partes of common prayer, wherein the People and Minister answere one an other by course. But for this I shall referre you to those most excellent lines of Mr Hooker in his fift booke of Ecclesiasticall Politie, the nine and thirtieth section. I returne vnto my purpose. God is Most Holy two manner of waies. First for that he is Most Holy in himselfe: secondly for he maketh others Holy, and causeth them so to bee. Of the former Moses speaketh, Exod. 15.11. Who is like vnto thee O Lord among the Gods? who is like thee so glorious in holynesse? Of the lat∣ter the Lord himselfe, Exod. 31.13. Keepe yee my Sabbaths for it is a signe betweene me and you in your generations, that you may know that I the Lord doe sanctifie you: that is, doe make you Holy. I will conclude all this concerning the definition with that ofCypsiue Russ. in Symb. Apo. p. 358. S. Cyprian, or rather Ruffinus vpon the Creed, Deū cum audis saith he substantiam intellige, sine initio, sine fine, simplicem sine vlla admixtione, invisibilē, incorporeā, ineffa∣bilem, inaestimabilem, in qua nihil adiunctum, nihil creatū sit. Sine authore est enim ille qui author est omniū. Whē as thou hearest God named vnto thee vnderstand thou a substāce without beginning, without end, simple without com∣mixtiō, invisible, without body, vnspeakable, inestimable, wherevnto nothing is added, wherein nothing is created. For he hath no Creator who is himselfe the Creator of al. And thus haue you heard in some sot of the Essence of God, good God how fr frō that which he is in very ded. You haue heard his definition. I know others define him
otherwise. God saithM, Cartw. Ca∣tec. p. 3. one, is a spirit, which hath his being of himselfe. He is the center saith anFai Enchir. Thes. 1. §. 15. p. 2. other, from which all things issue, and wherevnto they returne againe. Quid est Deus saith aSenec. Nat. Quaest. l. 1. Praes. third? Quod vides totum et quod nō vides to∣tum: God is all we see, and all we see not. But when al that can be possibly, hath beene spoken, that ofAug. de Temp. Ser. 190. So Tertul. Quid de eo condignè di∣cas, qui est subli∣mitate omni sublimior, & al∣titudine omni altior, & profū∣do omni profun∣dior, & omni lu∣ce lucidior, & omni claritate clarior, omni splendore splen¦didior, omni ro∣hore robustior, omni virtute viritior, omni pulchritudine pulchrior, veri∣tate omni veri∣or, & fortitudi∣ne omni fortier, & maiestate omni maior, & omni potentia potentior, & omnibus divitiis ditior, omni prudentis prudentior, & omni benignitate benignior, omni bonitate melior, omni iustitia iustior, omni cle∣mentia clementior. Minora enim sint necesse est omnium genera virtutum, co ipso qui virtutum omniam & Deus & parens est. Tertul. de Trin. pag. 494. S. Austen may well serue as a conclusion: Certè hoc est Deus quod & cum dicitur non potest dici, cum aestimatur non potest aestimari, cū comparatur non potest comparari, cum definitur ipsa definiti∣one crescit: quia coelum manu sua cooperit, pugno omnem mū∣di ambitum claudit, quem totum omnia nesciunt & metuendo sciunt. Doubtlesse God is that entity which when it is spo∣ken of, cannot be spoken: when it is esteemed, cannot suffi∣ciently be esteemed of, when it is compared, is beyond cō∣parison, when it is defined, our grows the limits of a defini∣tion, for that hee covereth heaven it selfe with his hand, compriseth the compasse of the whole worlde within his fist, whom al things know not, & yet by fearing him know him to. And thus much of Gods Essence namely what God is, how the same God is in Persons inseparably, and without confusion, distinguished into the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, three Persons and one God, if the same God so will at my next returne to this place. In the meame time HE s blesse vs, and the seed that hath beene sowne, &c.
THE TRINITIE.Lecture 3. March. 18. 1612. IF much against your expectation, and my owne intent and purpose too, I haue fayled you now these many weekes in performance of this exercise, imagine the cause to be not so much in my selfe (who cannot yet excuse my selfe wholy and altogether) as in divers & sun∣dry lets occasioned by others. A∣mong the rest suppose one to be (and indeed so it was) the death of that great MECAENAS,Sr THONAS BODLEY, who died Ian. 28. 1612. Stylo Ec∣cles. Angl. then whom we of this place could hardly haue had a greater losse. If ever there might be iust cause of silēce to these Exercises, what greater cause then that, when he that gaue new tongues both to Divines, and Physitians, and Lawyers, & the Arts, himselfe lies speechlesse now, and bereaued of his life. I may vse concerning him the words ofAug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 33. p. 178. S. Austen, Disce∣dente anima qui ambulabat iacet, loquebatur tacet, oculi lu∣cem non capiunt, aures nulla voce patescunt, omnia membro∣rum officia conquieverunt, non est qui moverat gressus ad ambulandum, manus ad operandum, sensus ad percipiendum. And againe a little after: Discessit qui non videtur, reman∣sit quod cum dolore videatur. The soule, saith S. Austen, de∣parting from him, he that walked lies along, he that tal∣ked holds his tōgue; his eies receaue no light, his eares no sound, all his members fayle in performance of their seve∣rall duties. He that moued his feete to walke, his handes,
those blessed hands of his continually to worke, his sen∣ces to perceaue, is not. He which is not seene is gone, that remaineth behind which may be seene indeed, but with griefe and sorrow. What then, and shall we still grieue? shall we lament and sorrow still? Nay let vs harken ra∣ther to the same S. Austen, who vpon like occasion of losse of friends, Lacrymas istas,Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 32. pag 277. saith he, citò reprimat fi∣dei gaudium quâ credimus Fideles quando moriuntur paulu∣lùm à nobis abire, & ad meliora transire. Let the ioy of faith represse these teares of ours, by which faith we beleeue that the Faithful when they die step from vs apart indeed, but to be possessed of a better place. That which every day we say as a parcell of our Grace, it being a passage of one of thePs. 111.6. vulg. Psalmes, let vs call to mind this day. In memoria ae∣terna erit iustus. Ab auditu malo non timebit. Dispersit, de∣dit pauperibus. Iustitia eius manet in saeculum saeculi. The Righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. He will not be afraid for any evill tidings. He hath dispersed abroad and giuen to the poore. His righteousnes remai∣neth for ever. Now what saithAug. de Verb. Apost. Ser. 33. pag. 278. S. Austen is this Auditus malus, these evill tydings here spoken of, Ab auditu malo non timebit; but when it is said to them on the left hād, Ito in ignem aeternum, Depart from me yee cursed into everla∣sting fire? Ab hoc auditu malo iustus non timebit; Erit enim ad dexteram, and so forth. The Righteous shall not be a∣fraid of those ill tydings: for he shall be on the right hand among them to whom it is said. Come yee blessed of my Father, inherit yee the kingdome prepared for you. And thus shall it be (I nothing doubt) with that Right Hono∣rable KNIGHT I now speake of, of whom to haue said nothing at all had beene liable to a kinde of Ingratitude, to say more then hath beene spoken might prooue preiu∣dicial to that time, which is allotted me to speake of God to whom himselfe is now gone. To come at length then to the matter in hand. It was a worthy saying ofBernard de Consid l. 5. p. 260. Col. 4. S. Bernard, Solus est Deus
qui frustra nunquā quaeri potest, nec cum quidem inveniri nō potest. God it is, and God alone, that can never be sought in vaine, no not then whē it is impossible to find him out. Iustin Martyr giues the reason; Quamvis natura divina,Iustin Mart. de Trinit. graecè p. 177. lat. p. 198 saith he, sit incomprehensibilis, non debemus tamen in totū ab ea quaerenda desistere, & per ignaviam vitam consumere: sed pro sua quis{que} portione acceptae à Domino scientiae strenuè rem examinet, certus non quidem exactè se percepturum, profecturum tamen aliquantum per huiusmodi contemplati∣onem accedendo ad illum propiùs. Howsoever, saith he, the divine nature be incomprehēsible, yet ought we not who∣ly to desist from the searching out of the same, consuming our liues in sloath and idlenesse. Wherefore let every one, according to that portion of knowledge he hath obtai∣ned of the Lord, industriously endeavour to seeke it, assu∣ring himselfe he shall not exactly and perfectly find it out, howbeit that he shal profit notwithstanding thereby, for∣asmuch as by this meanes he shall more neerely approach vnto him. Experience whereof we had at my last supply∣ing this place, when not finding out what God was, we heard notwithstanding of his Name, we heard also of his Nature. The Name was such as he gaue himselfe. Concer∣ning his Nature we defin'd him to he, An essence spiritual, Simple, Infinite, Most Holy, & every of these tearmes were explicated vnto you. It remaineth now to be declared cō∣cerning the farther knowledge of this his Essence, how the same God is in Persons inseparably, and without con∣fusion distinguished into the Father, Sonne, & Holy Ghost, whereof God willing at this time. And to this purpose haue I made choise of a passage of one of the Epistles of S. Iohn, namely the seaventh verse of the fifth Chapter of of the first of his Epistles. The words are these; There are three which beare record in heaven, the Fa∣ther, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three
are one. And there are three which beare record in the earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood, and these three agree in one. For the better considering of which wordes let vs first obserue the scope of the Apostle in this place: secondly the words themselues and consequence therevpon. TheZanch. de Trib. Eloh. l. 1. c. 1. p. 4. Col. 2. vid. Ib. p. 3. Col. 2. scope of the Apostle in this place was to prooue, that IESVS was the true Sonne of God, and the same Christ, & Messias of whome the Prophets foretold long before, and therefore he vpon whom alone our faith and the faith of every one ought to relie. For whereas others did deny that Iesus was that Christ, our Apostle here in this place stifly maintaineth that he is, to the ende the Faithfull might knowe that they had eternall life, & that they might beleeue in his name, as it is in the thirteenth verse of this Chapter. All which he prooueth by two ma∣ner of witnesses, six in al, namely by witnesses in Heaven, and witnesses in Earth. The witnesses in heaven are three, the Father, the Sonne, & Holy Ghost: the witnesses in Earth are three too, the Spirit, the Water, and the Bloud. First concerning the Fathers witnesse that appeared at two severall times, vnto both which it is likely the Apo∣stle alludes in this place. The first was at our Saviors Bap∣tisme when as the Father spake these words,Mat. 3.17. This is my be∣loued Sonne in whom I am well pleased: The second at his Transfiguration, when as the same words were spoken a∣gaine, but with this addition, , heare him.Mat. 17.5. This is my beloued Sonne in whom I am well pleased: heare him. Where by the way we are to note why the Father in both places should say of this his Sonne IN WHOM I AM WEL PLEASED. We may say in this case as Pharaoh's cheefe Butler did in another,Gen. 41.9. I cal to mind my faults this day. Right so these words may put vs in mind of the iniqui¦ty of Mākind that hath bin in former ages. You shal read in the Book of n Genesis that it was so great, that it repē∣ted
the Lord that he had made Man in the earth, and how he was sorry in his heart; you shall read in the Booke ofGen. 6.6. Psalmes how the wrath of the Lord was so farre kindled against his People;Psal. 106.39. as that he abhorred his owne inheri∣tance: but these words here in this place are like the Oliue leafe that Noah's Doue had pluckt.Gen. 8.11. Noah knew by that, that the waters were abated from of the earth; and we by these that the wrath of God is abated towardes vs and all Mankind. God2. Cor. 5.19. saith S. Paul, was in Christ, and reconciled the world to himselfe, not imputing their sinnes vnto them. And thus much of the first witnesse. The second witnesse was the Sonne, and his witnesse appeared throughout the whole course of his life, partly in preaching, partly in working miracles, confirming his preaching thereby. I, but some will say, if the Sonne beare witnesse of him∣selfe what kinde of witnesse is that? This was obiected to him by the Pharisees:Ioh 8.13. Thou bearest record of thy selfe, thy record is not true. It is as if they had said, Thou bearest re∣cord of thy selfe, therefore thy recorde is not true. I, our Saviour himselfe of himselfe,Ioh. 5.31. If I should beare witnesse of my selfe, my witnesse were not true. True it is, he so faith, but he speaketh there in that place according to the opinion of his Adversaries, as if he should haue said:Musc. in hunc locum. You suppose I seeke not the glory of God, but my owne, & to be a boaster of my owne praises rather then a pub∣lisher of the truth of God; and so of my selfe to speake thus, & thus, without the sufficient testimony of others besides. Indeed were I such an one, you might worthyly suspect me, & all that I haue ever spoken: but you are deceived, it is not so, there is one that testifieth of me, and so forth. So that our Saviour as I said speaketh there according to the opinion of his Ad∣versaries, for otherwise he saith of himselfe, and said it to the Pharisees that did obiect it against him:Ioh. 8.14. Though I beare record of my selfe, yet my record is true; for I know whence I came, and whither I go. And againe, a littleVers. 18. after,
I am one that beare witnesse of my selfe. One, because such an one, and such an one; for the lawe of trueth was in his mouth, & there was no iniquity sound in his lips, Malach. 2.6. I proceede. The Holy Ghost is the third witnesse, and his witnesse appeared both before his death, & after. Before his death at his Baptisme, whē as he descēded on him like aMat. 3.16. Doue: after his death, and resurrection, and ascension into hea∣ven, when as he descended on his Apostles in the shape of fieryAct. 2.3. tongues. Wherevpon S. Gregory hath this good note, In columba super Christum,Greg in E∣vang Hom. 30. fol. 120. col 3. saith he, apparere debut Spiritus qui non veniebat vt peccata iam per zelum percute∣ret, sed adhuc per mansuetudinem toleraret: at contra super Discipulos in igne debuit Spiritus Sanctus demonstrari, vt hi qui erant simpliciter homines at{que} ideo peccatores, eos contra semetipsos spiritalis feruor accenderet, & peccata quibus Deus per mansuetudinem parceret, ipsi in se per poenitentiam punirent. It was convenient that the holy Spirit should ap∣peare vpon Christ in the likenesse of a Doue, forasmuch as he came not then at that time to punish sin through zeale, but through meekenes to beare with it: but vpon the A∣postles it was cōvenient that cōtrarywise the Holy Ghost should bee shewed vpon the Disciples in Fyre, that they which were simply men and consequently sinners, a spiri∣tuall heat should inflame themselues against themselues, and those sins which God forgaue through the bounty of his mercy, they through repentance should punish in thē∣selues. S. Austen hath an other not much vnlike: Audivi∣mus columbam super Dominum,Aug. in Evan. Ioan. Tract. 6, p. 34. saith he, has linguas divi∣sas super discipulos congregatos: ibi simplicitas, hic feruor o∣stenditur. And againe a little after, Ne spiritus sanctificati dolum habeant, in columba demonstratum est: ne simplicitas frigida remaneat, in igne demonstratum est. We haue heard, faith S. Austen, that a Doue descended vpon our Lord, & cloven Tongues vpon the Disciples gathered togither: in the Doue simplicity, in the Tongues fervency and vehe∣mency
are vnderstood. The one sheweth that they that are sanctified by the Spirit should be without guile: the other that want of guile should not haue a numbnes of spirit in it. But thus much of the heavenly witnesses; come we now to the terrestriall, the witnesses in earth. The witnesses in earth are three too, the Spirit, & Water, and Bloud; which three what they are, severall men are of severall mindes. An opinion there is that is indeede very probable, how by Spirit is vnderstood The knowledge of God the Father, by the testimony of the holy Ghost, whereof the Apostle to the Romanes, Rom. 8.6, as also to the Co∣rinthiās, 1. Cor. 1.30. Secōdly that by Water is vnderstood our Regeneration, the types whereof in the Law were the legall purifyings, the accomplishment thereof in the Gos∣pell the Sacrament of Baptisme. Thirdly, that by Bloud is vnderstood the Righteousnes of Christ, which by his bloud is purchased for vs, consisting in two points, First in the remission of our sins, Secondly in the imputation of Christ his Righteousnes. Howbeit I for my part shall rather com∣mend vnto you the opinion ofZanch. de trib. Eloh. l. 1. . 1. p. 4. col. 2. Zanchius for this point, namely that these three witnesses in earth are as it were three kindes of Prophesies foreshewed and fulfilled in our Saviour Christ Iesus, as first that he was a Prophet, secondly a Priest, thirdly a Prince. His teaching vs as a Prophet the Scrip∣tures very often compare vnto Water, as Deut. 32.6. Esay, 11.9. Ezech. 47.1. Iob. 29.22. Amos 7.16. His comming as a Priest may be compared vnto Bloud by reason of his death and passion. So Esay prophesied of him, Esay, 53.5. and David when as he said, They pierced my hands and my feet, Psal. 22.17. Lastly his comming as a King with pow∣er and Maiesty vanquishing his enemies and triumphing over them, that is intimated by the Spirit. Hence that of the Apostle in his epistle to Timothy,1. Tim. 3.16. Iustificatus est in spiritu, Iustified in the Spirit, that is, by his power and ver∣tue, wherby he wrought miracles, wherby he rose againe, whereby hee vanquished his enemies, and overcame the
world. So S. Peter,1. Pet. 3.18. Christ, saith he, was quickned in the spi∣rit, by the which also he went and preached vnto the spirits that are in prison. So our Saviour of himselfe, if I,Mal. 12.28. saith he, cast out Divels by the spirit of God, then is the kingdome of God come vnto you. So that the Apostles words in this my Text may thus be resolved: He who first came vnto vs as a Prophet by Water, that is, the doctrine of the Gospel, & spreads the same over the world: secōdly he that came as a high Priest by Bloud, who came indeed by his owne bloud, for he dyed such a death as was foretold he should die, and that for other folkes sinnes: thirdly he who came as a Prince by his Spirit, that is, by his power in working miracles, in rising againe from the dead, and in vanquishing of his Enemies, he no doubt is the true Messias: but so came our Saviour Christ; and therefore was Christ the true Messias. And this was the Apostles scope.Virg. Aeneid. l. 1. Huc cursus fuit. Hither it was he meant to saile, & here indeede hee did arriue with as prosperous a gale of winde as heart could wish. And thus much of the scope of the Apostle in this place, come we now to the words thē∣selues, and consequence therevpon. There are three which beare record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holie Ghost, and these three are one. And there are three which beare record in the earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Bloud, and these three agree in one. First concerning the FATHER, we are first of all to cō∣sider that the name Father in holy Scripture isM Perk. on the Creed p. 44. ascribed either to God indefinitely, and so by consequence to all the Persons in Trinity: or particularly to the first Person a∣lone. As it is ascribed to God indefinitely, and by conse∣quence to all three Persons, God is a Father properly and principally; earthly Parents are but images and resemblā∣ces of him, and therefore our Saviour Christ,Mat. 23.9. Call no man your Father vpon the earth: for there is but one, your Father which is in heaven. Now God is tearmed a Father both in respect of Nature, as also of Grace. Of Nature because he created, and governeth all things, wherevpon he is called,
Heb. 12.9. The Father of spirits, and Adam is called,Luk. 3 38. The son of God. Of Grace, for that we are all of vs regenerate by him & ac∣cepted to be his Sonnes by adoption through the merits of our Saviour Christ. And in this respect the second Per∣son aswel as the first, is called aEsay. 9.6. Father, and said to haueEsay. 8.18. & 53.10. Seed, or Children. But when the name Father is particu∣larly given to the first Person alone, it is because he is a Father by nature to the second Person, begetting him of his owne substance before al worlds, Ex vtero ante Luci∣ferum genui te, as it is in thePs. 109.21 Vulgar, though it be in our english Vulgar: The dew of thy birth is of the womb of the morning, or as it is translated in ourPs. 110.3. New, from the wombe of the morning, thou hast the dew of thy youth.Aug. in Ps. 106 Quid est ex vtero, saith S. Austen? what is meant here by the womb? Ex secreto, ex occulto: de meipso, de substantia mea, hoc est ex v∣tero. In secret, in hidden wise: of my selfe, of my substance, that is from the wombe,Esay. 53.8. quia generationem eius quis enar∣rabit? For who shall declare his generation? Secondly concerning the WORD, we are first of all to note who it is, is meant therby: secondly why & wherefore he is so called, who is indeed, therby meant. By the Word is meant in this place not the Scripture asIlla interpre∣tatio nomine Pa¦tris intelligi De∣um, nomine  Doctrinam, seu Scripturam sanctam: Spiri∣tus autem, San∣cti nomine, ipsa Christi miracu∣la, &c: coacta est nec cum Aposto∣li verbus coha∣ret. Zanch, de Trib. Eloh. l. 8. c. 4 p. 306. C. 1. some woulde haue it, but our Saviour Christ Iesus, the second Person in Trinity, the only begotten Son of God, who as he is stiled by S. Iohn according to his humane Nature by the name of the Lamb, as Ioh. 1.29. and againe, Ioh. 1.36, Beholde the lamb of God, and oftentimes in the Revelation; so ac∣cording to his divine Nature is he styled by the name of the Word, as in the first words of his Gospell no lesse then three times in one period: In the beginning was the word, & the word was with God, and that word was God. Now our Saviour Christ is called the WORDBarth. Trahe∣ron. vpon Iohn c. 1. B. 8. b. partly for he is the i∣mage of his Father, representing all that is in the Father; partly for he floweth and issueth from him; partly for he is conceptus, the conception (if I may so speake) of the minde of God; partly for he is Gods vertue and power whereby
God vttereth himselfe; partly for he is Gods wisedome whereby he once made and nowe governeth the whole world & all therein. GregoryGreg. Naz. Orat. 36 p 590 Vid. Zanch. de Trib. Eloh. l. 6. c. 2. p. 240. Nazianzen alleageth three similitudes between the Sonne of God, and the Speech of man in regard whereof our Saviour Christ may be called the WORD. His wordes be these: Verbum ita se habet ad Patrem, vt sermo ad mentem, non modo propter generationem passionis omnis expertem, verùm etiam propter coniunctionem ipsius cum Patre, vim{que} enunci∣atricem. So is the word vnto the Father as speech is to the minde, not only in regard of generation which is without all passion whatsoever, but in regard also of his coniuncti∣on which he hath with the Father, and power pronuncia∣tiue. As if he had said: Three similitudes there are between the Sonne of God and the Speech of man in regard wher∣of he may be called by the name of the WORD. First for that our Speech which is the conception of our minde, is begotten by the minde & that without any passion or of that which doth beget, or of that which is begotten; so is the Sonne, of God the Father. Secondly as our conception remainethQuodcun{que} cogitaveris, ser∣mo est; quod∣cun{que} senseris, ratio est: loqua∣ris illud in ani∣mo, necesse est: & dum loqueris coniocutorem pateris sermonē in quo inest haec ipsa ratio, qua cū co cogitans lo∣quaris, per quē loquens cogitas &c: Tertull. ad∣vers. Praxeam. p. 317. alwaies in the minde, and with the minde, of which it is begottē, insomuch that though it be sent forth or pronounced, yet never ceaseth to be with the same; so is the Sonne with the Father, and indeed inseparable from him. Thirdly as by our Speech pronounced, the counsel of our minde, as also our will is manifested to the world, so is the Father, and the Father's wil declared by the Sonne. So that we are not here in this place to take the WORD for so∣nus percussionis, as speaksTertull. de Trin. p. 515. Tertulliā, aut tonus coactae de vis∣ceribus vocis, for a word sounded or pronounced which vanisheth in an instāt: our Savior Christ is no such Word, but he is an essential Person subsisting & abyding in God. And here it may be thought asBarth. Trahe∣ron vpon S. Iohn c. 1. p. 8. 8 a. some are of opinion that the Apostle here in this place hath reference to the first Chapter of Genesis, where it is not said simply by Moses that God made all of naught, but that he spake, & so made
all things; that is, he made all things by his word. So the Prophet David,Ps. 148.4. He spake the word, and they were made, he commanded and they were created, speaking of the Hea∣vens: and in another place of the Earth, He spake, saith he,Ps. 33.9. and it was done, he commanded and it stoodfast. Thirdly concerning the HOLY GHOST it is asmuch as if the Apostle had here said, the Holy Spirit, & then see∣ing the Father, and the Sonne are Holy both, and both are Spirits, a question might be asked how this title Holy Spi∣rit comes so peculiarly to be appropriated onely to the third Person. The answer is herevnto that the Father, and the Sonne are in respect of theirM. Perkins on the Creed p 565 natures as well to be tearmed Holy indeed, as is the third Person in Trinity, the Holy Ghost. Howbeit the third Person is called Holy, for that besides the holinesse of nature, his office is to sancti∣fie the Church of God, to whom it agreeth in speciall ma∣ner, and after a peculiar sort so to doe. For where the Fa∣ther sanctifieth by the Sonne, and by the Holy Ghost; the Sonne from the Father, and by the Holy Ghost; the Holy Ghost sanctifieth from the Father and from the Sonne by himselfe immediatly, and in this respect is the third Per∣son tearmed Holy. Again, he is tearmed a Spirit not onely because his nature is spirituall (for in that respect both the Father, and the Sonne are Spirits too) but because he is spired or breathed from the Father and the Sonne in that he proceedeth from both, howsoever theVid Zanch. de trib Eloh. l. 7. c. 8 Greekes at this day mainly erre in this point. But thus much of the words, now of the consequence therevpon. The Consequence therevpon is this, that howsoever there is but One God as appeareth by these wordes, And these three are one: yet is there a Trinitie in this One in re∣gard they are Three to, according to the selfe same words. For if it may be said, and said truely, These three are one, then may it be as truely said, and so it is of all true Christi∣ans, This one is three. It remaineth then to be declared how they are one, how three, according to that of Atha∣nasius
in our Church Liturgy, The Catholike faith is this, that we worship one God in Trinitie, and Trinitie in Vnitie: neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the substance. That God is One we haue many places in holy Scripture for proofe thereof, as Deut. 4.35, Ʋnto thee, saith Moses, it was shewed that thou mightest knowe, that the Lord he is God, and that there is none but he alone. Deut. 6.4, Heare O Israel, the Lord our God is Lord only: or as it is in our new Translation, The Lord our God is ONE Lord. Deut. 32.39, Behold now for I, I am he, and there is no Gods with me. Ma∣lachy 2.10, Haue we not all ONE Father? hath not ONE God made vs? Esay, 45.5, I am the Lord, and there is no other, there is no God besides me. And againe V. 18, I am the Lord and there is no other. And againe V. 22, I am God & there is no other. 1. Cor. 8.4, We knowe, saith the Apostle, that an Idol is nothing in the world, and that there is none other God but ONE. For though there be that are called Gods whether in heaven or in earth (as there be many Gods, and many Lords) yet vnto vs there is but ONE God, which is the Father of whō are all things, and we in him: and ONE Lord Iesus Christ by whom are all things and we by him. I omit for the Old Testa∣ment, Ios. 2.11. Ps. 18.32. 1. Sam. 2.2. 1. King. 8.23. 2. King. 5.15. 1. Chron. 17.20. Ier. 37.16. and 41.4. and 44.6. and 45.5. and 46.9. and 48.12. And for the New Testament, Mat. 4.10. Rom. 3.30. Ephes. 4.6. 1. Tim. 2.5. I omit the Fathers, Greeke and Latine, cited by Zanchius for this point: Ignatius, Iustin Martyr, Clemens Alexādrinus, Ter∣tullian, Arnobius, Minutius Foelix, Cyprian, Lactantius, Eusebius of Caesarea, and St Austen. I omit the Poets, and Philosophers cited by him too, Orpheus, Homer, Sophocles, Pythagoras, Plato, Aeschylus, Philemon, Euripides, Menā∣der. I omit also his severall Reasons, you shall finde them with the premises in his first Booke de Tribus Elohim throughout the third Chapter, and I hasten to the TRI∣NITIE. The Lord our God,M. Hooker Ec∣cles. Pol. l. 5. §. 51. p. 106. saith Reverend Hooker, is but one
God. In which indivisible Ʋnitie notwithstanding, we adore the FATHER as being altogether of himselfe, we glorifie that consubstātiall Word which is the SONNE, we blesse & mag∣nifie that coessentiall Spirit eternally proceeding from both, which is the HOLY GHOST. Now that in this Vnity of one God, there is this Trinitie comprehended, of Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, the places in holy Scripture are no lesse frequent then the former to proue it, howsoever the word Trinitie it selfe be not there to be found at all. But we say of that as speakes S. Austen of the word Persons that the Church doth vse to signifie the same:Aug. de Trin. l. 7. c. 4. Licuit lo∣quendi & disputandi necessitate tres Personas dicere, non quia Scriptura dicit, sed quia Scriptura non contradicit. Lawfull it is for vs through a necessitie of speaking, and disputing, to cal them three Persons, not for the Scripture so speakes, but for it contradicts not them that so speake. Indeed as the selfe same AustenDictum est à nostris Graecis vna essētia, tret substantiae: à La∣tinis autem vna essentia vel sub∣stantia, tres per∣sonae. Aug. Ib. Aliter enim Graeci accipiunt substantiam quā Latini. Lombard 1. Sent. dist. 23. cap. Qua neces∣sitate. obserues in that place, the Graecians called this Deity, one Essence, three Substan∣ces: the Latines, one Essence or Substance, three Persons, which name of Persons we hold to this day. And there∣fore before we come to muster vp such places as declare vnto vs these Persons, let vs first of all define what a Per∣son is. St Thomas out of Boetius defines it thus:Th. Aquin. 1. Part. Sum. Theol. qu. 29. Art. 1. Persona est rationalis naturae individua substantia: A person is an indi∣vidual substance of a reasonable nature. Tertullian as Cal∣vin quotes him, defines it thus:Tertul. advers. Praxeam, citāte Calvino, Instit. l. 1. c: 3 §. 6. Persona est quaedā in Deo dispositio vel oeconomia quae de essentiae vnitate nihil mutet: A person is a certaine disposition or distribution in God, which yet changeth nothing of the vnity of the essence. Zanchius thus:Zanch. de Trib. Eloh. l. 1. c. 2. Persona est substantia individua, intelli∣gens, volens, incommunicabilis. A person is an individuall substance, that hath intelligence, and will, and cannot be communicated with any other. Calvin thus:Cal. Inst. l. 1. c. 13. §. 6. Personam vo∣co subsistentiam in Dei essentia quae ad alios relata proprie∣tate incommunicabili distinguitur. I call a Person saith he,
a subsistence in the essence of God, which having relation to the other is distinguished from them by an vncommu∣nicable propriety. It mattereth not much which we take of all these, only the two last are somewhat larger thē the former. Howbeit this we must cary in minde, that we are not to take a Person here as the Person of a man is taken, it is St Austens note herevpon. Personas in Patre, et Filio, & Spiritu SanctoAug. de Temp. Ser. 189 p. 725. Vid. Aug. de Trin. l. 7. c. 4. saith he, non dico quasi personas hominū, personam Patris dico quia Pater est, & Filij quia Filius est, & Spiritus Sancti quia Spiritus Sanctus est. Concerning the Persons in the Trinity, the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, I call them not Persons in that sense, as if I shoulde say the Persons of men: but I cal the Person of the Father, because he is the Father, the Person of the Sonne because he is the Sonne, the Person of the Holy Ghost because he is the Holy Ghost. So that there are three Persons, but one Godhead, according vnto that of Athanasius in our Church Service: There is one Person of the Father, an other of the Sonne, and an other of the Holy Ghost. But the God∣head of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost is all one: the glory equall, the maiesty coeternall. We haue seene what a Person is, it remaineth that we muster vp the places which in holy Scripture declare vnto vs, that the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, are three such Persons. And first that the Father is such a Substance subsisting by himselfe, a many are perswaded who will not acknow∣ledge so much or in the Sonne, or Holy Ghost. De Patre ne∣mo inficiatur, saithZanch. de trib. Eloh. l. 1. c. 4. p. 14. col. 1. Zanchius, No mā makes doubt of the Father. Concerning the Sonne then, and Holy Ghost, let vs see what the Scriptures say both Old and New. First then concerning the Sonne, king Salomon himselfe intitles him by the name of Wisdome. He to whome the Lord had given a wise and an vnderstanding heart, so that there was1. King. 3.12 none like vnto him before him, neither after him should arise the like, he acknowledgeth this Wisdome: and Prov. 8.11, brings him in speaking thus, By me kings
raigne, and Princes decree iustice, and ver. 22. of that Chap∣ter, The Lord saith he, hathThis is the word which the Septuagint mis∣taking in the O∣riginall, transla∣ted creavitne & so Ecclus in imitation of the Ecclus. 24.12. Qui creavit me, and v. 14. Ab initio & ante saecula crata sum. Wherof see more in D Rain. Lectures, Pre∣lect. 75. p. 883. possessed me in the beginning of his way: I was before his workes of old: & concluding at the length, ver. 33. of that Chapter, Blessed is the man saith he, that heareth me, watching dayly at my gates, and giving at∣tendance at the posts of my dores. For he that findeth me fin∣deth life, and shal obtaine favour of the Lord. But he that sin∣neth against me hurteth his owne soule: and all that hate me loue death. By wisdomeLovater in hunc locū Vid. eundem in cap. 1. p. 9. saith Lavater, some vnderstand the knowledge of God which we haue by his word; and indeed the word of God it selfe. Veteres Theologi ipsum Christum intel∣ligunt, saith he, But as for the ancient Fathers they vnder∣stand our Saviour Christ. And indeed he of God is made vnto vs1. Cor. 1.30. Wisedome, & Righteousnes, and Sanctification, & Redemption, as speakes the Apostle to the Corinthians. I o∣mit sundry other places brought by Zanchius concerning the Godhead of the Sonne, out of Genesis, Exodus, Num∣bers, Iosua, Iudges, the bookes of Samuel, the Psalmes, the Proverbs, the booke of Iob, the greater Prophets, the lesser, some fifty six in al, and I come vnto the New Testament. By him saith theColoss. 1.16 Apostle in his Epistle to the Colossi∣ans, were all things created which are in heaven and which are in earth, things visible and invisible: whether they bee Thrones, or Dominiōs, or Principalities, or Powers, al things were created by him and for him, and he is before all things, & in him all things consist. Nowe if all things consist in him, shall not he himselfe much more consist?Esay 66.9. Shall I cause to travaile and not bring forth? shall I cause to bring forth, and shall be barrē saith the Lord? You know the old ruleIauel Epit in. l 1. de Gen et cor. Tom, 1. p. 236. col. 2. Prop∣ter quod vnumquod{que}, & illud magis: so the cause be effici∣ent, & vnivocall. So the Apostle to the Hebrewes, Heb. 1.10. when he had said before in the eight verse of that Chapter, But vnto the Sonne he saith, O God, thy Throne is for ever and ever &c: he alleageth also this testimony out of the hundred and second Psalme, the fiue and twentith verse, and applies it to our Saviour, Thou Lord, in the be∣ginning
hast established the earth, and the heavens are the workes of thine hands. So Heb. 13.8. Iesus Christ yesterday saith he, and to day, the same also is for ever. Yesterday that is from the beginning of the world: To day, that is, for this time present: For ever, that is, to the end of the world. The meaning is, that the same Christ that saveth the Faithfull now at this time, and reconciles them to his Father, & re∣nues them by his Spirit, and now governes them, did so from the beginning of the world with all the faithful that ever were, and so shall do to the worlds end. ThusIoh. 8.58. him∣selfe of himselfe, Verily, verily I say vnto you, before Abra∣ham was, I am. And praying an other time to his Father: And nowIoh. 17 5. saith he, glorifie me thou Father with thine ovvne selfe, with the glory which I had with thee before the worlde was. Concerning the Holy Ghost that he also is a Person sub∣sisting by himselfe, witnesse that very verse of the word of God,Iuuenal. sat. 10. voluitur à primoqui proximus, which is the se∣cond in nomber. The earthGen. 1.2. saith Moses, was without forme, and void, and darknesse was vpon the deepe, and the Spirit of God mooved vpon the Waters. What? as the Ships do there moue, or as there is that Leviathan who takes his pastime therein, Psal. 104.26? No but cherishing & sustaining thē, vt foventur pulli ab incubantibus matribus, as young ones by their dams, soTremel. in Gen. 1.2. Tremellius on that place. What neede I here produce a clowd of Scriptures to this purpose, as how he appeared, how he descended, how he rested on our Savi∣our in the likenes of a Doue, vpon the Apostles in the simi∣litude of fiery Tongues: how to one he giues the worde of wisdome, to an other the word of knowledge, to an other faith, to an other the gifts of healing, to an other the ope∣ration of great workes, to an other prophesie: to an other the discerning of spirits, to an other diversity of tongues, to an other the interpretation of tongues, & which is most remarkeable, how he worketh all these things distributing to every man severally as he will. I say most remarkeable
for that I told you before out of Zanchius, a Person was an individuall substance that hath intelligence, and will. Thus is Iudgement also attributed to him, Act. 15.28. Knowledge: 1. Cor. 2.11. Hearing, & speaking, and foreshewing things to come, Ioh. 16.13. Rule & Dominion over the faithfull, Act. 13.2. Annointing and sending, Esay 61.1. Lastly the crea∣ting of the humane nature in Christ, Luk. 1.35. But these you will say, are severall Scriptures for the several Persons in severall. I graunt they are so, yet as these Scriptures are in severall, so there want not others to, that comprehend them all in generall, I will instance in a few. When as God the Father said inGen. 1.26. Genesis, Let vs make man in our image according to our likenes: Quomodo vnicus & singularisTertull. adver∣sus Praxeam. p. 320. saith Tertullian, pluraliter loquitur? Being one only, and singular, how comes he to speake in the plu∣rall nomber? Shall we say as did the Iews that he spake vn∣to the Angels? But Man was not made to the image or likenesse of Angels, but to the image & likenesse of God. Thus GodGen. 1.27. saith Moses, created the man in his image: & he repeates it againe, In the image of God created he him, hee created them male and female. So likewise not long after: Behold,Gen. 3.22. saith God, the man is become as one of vs. Fallit aut luditTertull. loc. citato. saith Tertullian, vt cum vnus, & solus, & singularis esset, numerosè loqueretur: were he one only, and sole, and singular, should he thus speake plurally, he should either deceiue vs, or delude vs. It may be thought our Saviour al∣so alluded herevnto, who when he had said to Nicodemus,Ioh. 3.11. Ʋerily, verily, I say vnto thee, speaking in the singular, he immediatly annexeth withall that which followeth in the plural, We speake that we know, and testifie that we haue seen: but yee receaue not our witnes. WhereSee M. Math. Saunders Sem. on the Consr betweene Christ and Nico. Se. 10. p. 239. passing on the sud∣daine from I, to [wee] and so to [our] what did he but inti∣mate to Nicodemus in teaching our Regeneration, that he was One of that plurall of whom Moses spake in the Cre∣ation. But to returne vnto my purpose. Another Scripture that comprehendeth all three Per∣sons
in generall is that of the Prophet Esay, Esay, 6.3. where hauing beheld in great glory and maiestie God the Father, and hearing the Seraphims singing, Holy, holy, ho∣ly, is the Lord of hoasts; the whole world is full of his glory: he afterwards heard this message,Esay, 6.9. Goe and say vnto this Peo∣ple; yee shall heare indeed but yee shall not vnderstand, ye shall plainely see and not perceaue. Now to whom doth S. Iohn apply these wordes, doth he not apply them to God the Sonne, Ioh. 12.41? and to whom doth S. Paul apply them, doth he not apply them to the Holy Ghost, Act. 28.25? So it is, it is even so, & I conclude with Athanasius as we vsu∣ally say it in his Creed, The Vnitie in Trinitie, & the Trini∣tie in Vnitie is to be worshipped. He therefore that will be sa∣ued must thus thinke of the Trinitie. And thus much of the Trinitie and by consequence of the Trinitie in Vnitie, namely that these three Persons; Fa∣ther, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, are so truely & really distinct each one from other, that each and every of them subsist∣eth by himselfe, so that the Father is not the Sonne, nei∣ther is he the Holy Ghost: the Sonne is not the Holy Ghost, nor yet the Father: the Holy Ghost is neither the Father, neither is he the Sonne, & yet is every of them True God, & yet all of them together butVid. Zanch. de trib. Eloh. l. 8. c. 1. One God onely. If this be too too hard, and intricate to be vnderstood, the marvell is not great, we might wel expostulate with our selues, & complaine of our dulnesse in this point, if ever mortal wit could haue possibly comprehended it. It isSphinx Theo∣logica, Philoso∣phica, ex hist. de August. c. 2 p. 40 storied of S. Austen how he on a time endeavoured to sound it. He walkt abroad to that purpose, and came at length to a ri∣ver side, musing with himselfe and labouring to conceaue it. At length not farre off a little child appeared vnto him very busie on the Bank. He had made forsooth a little hole and with a spoone which he had in his hand, was lading of the water into the foresaid little hole. S. Austen drewe presently neere him, and demaunded of the child what it was he meant to doe. Father, quoth he, my purpose is to vn∣lade
this whole river into this little hole you here see. Why quoth S. Austen, that's impossible, thou wilt never be able to doe that: no more will you, quoth the Child, be ever able to bring that to passe which you are about, and with that the Child vanished. This story of S. Austen whether it were true, yea or no, I for my part cānot affirme. The rather for that neither S. Austen himselfe, nor Possidonius, or Possi∣dius (asRaynold. Thes. edit. vlt. Epist. ad Archiepisc. some call him) that wrote his life, doe either of them make mentiō of it. Howbeit the thing it selfe name∣ly that it is as impossible for vs to cōceaue the blessed Trinity, as with a spoon to vnlade a riuer, or to vnlade it into so little a hole, sure I am that that's a truth. For if so be it be true your AristotleArist. Metap. l. 2. c. 1. saith, that as the eies of Bats are in respect of the Sunne so our vnderstanding is to those things which are , most manifest by nature: what is it vnto this point that is of difficult things the most diffi∣cult, the very riddle of riddles, and (if I may so speake) the Sphynx of Divinitie. Divers & sundry I grant are theVid. Zanch. de trib. Eloh l. 8. c. 6. p. 313. Si∣militudes which the ancient Fathers, & new Writers vse in their Books to expresse it in some sort: as first from the similitude of the Sunne and his Beames, so Iustin Martyr, Tertullian, Cyprian, and Lactantius: From the similitude of the Fountaine, Floud, and River, so Tertullian againe, and Cyprian, and Lactantius: from the similitude of the Roote, and Stem, and Bough of a tree, so Tertullian againe: from the Minde, Conceit, and Memory, so Tertullian & Cyprian: from the Vnderstanding, Memory, and Will, so S. Austen: from the three faculties of the Soule, Rational, Irascible, & Concupiscible, so others: from the Deity, Soule, and Body of Christ, so Zanchius himselfe. I say to expresse it in some sort, for that to explicate the thing it selfe, that they al ac∣knowledge to be impossible, onely they endeavour to shew that it is not impossible, nor absurd, that there should be Three Persons, whereof every one should be God, and yet not Three Gods, but one God only. Our du∣ty in this case when ever we meditate herevpon, & haue
cause to think on this Trinity, is to say with Gregory Naz Orat. in Sanct Bap. Orat 40 p 668. Na∣zianzen, and to doe as he did: I no sooner thinke of One, saith he, but immediatly I am surrounded with the brightnes of all Three, and when I meditate on all Three, I am pre∣sently brought to One againe. I conclude with that ofAug de Temp. Ser. 189 p. 725 Au∣stē, Multa sunt quae dici possunt, sed sufficiat Fidelibus paua de mysterio. Trinitatis audisse. A many things might be spo∣kē, but let it suffice the Faithful to heare but a few things concerning the mystery of the Trinitie. And so much the rather, for it followeth in that place; In die iudicij non dam∣nor, quia dicam nescivi naturam Creatoris mei: si autem ali∣quid temere dixero, temeritas poenam habet, ignorantia ve∣niam promeretur. In the day of iudgement I shall not be damned, if so be I shuld say, I knew not the nature of my Creator: but if so be I speake of it rashly, rashnesse deser∣veth punishment, ignorance pardon. And thus much of the Essence of GOD, next of all God willing of that I pro∣posed next, namely his Attributes. In the meane time God so blesse vs, and the seed that hath beene sowne, &c.
GODS ATTRIBVTES.Lecture 4. April. 15. 1613. THE Arrow, they say, that is lng in the Bow, doth neuer light wel. And yet saithM Aschams Schoole of Shoo∣ting. l. 1. fol. 30. Toxophilus the worthy School-maister of Shooting some∣times to holde a shafte at the head, doth more good with the feare of it, then if so be were it shot, it should do with the stroake of it. The Arrow I haue brought with me now, and intend at this time to shoot among you, as also an other that is to second it (but they are like1. Sam. 20.20. Ionathans Arrowes to warne, not to harme) haue beenSunt ali qui qum fructus quia nmis pro∣perè, minùs pre∣sperè oriuntur. Bernard. Srm. de S Benedict. p. 26. Col. 3. long I confesse in the Bow, and I fully purposed the last Tearme to haue quit my selfe of the same; that so having done with the Attributes of God, as also with his Works, I might now haue discour∣sed at this time of that which is next to follow them, The Church. But what in one respect, and what in an other, what in regard of one let, & what of an other, I could thē at that time go no farther thē to the Blessed Trinity; Gods Attributes, and his Workes, I was faine to deferre till this time. Now then of his Attributes: of his Workes God wil∣ling hereafter, when I shall the next time come thus vnto you. Howbeit before we begin to set forward on our iour∣ney, we are first of al to learne, what Attributes are: second∣ly their severall sorts Vocantur AttributaZanch. de At∣trib. l. 2. c. 1. p. 1. saith Zanchius, quia ea sibi attribuit Deus nostrâ causa. Hence it is they are
called Attributes for that God doeth attribute them vnto himselfe in regard of vs, and for our sakes, namely that by them we the better might conceiue what he is. Now At∣tributes are of two sorts: Some so proper and peculiar vnto God, that they can by no meanes be communicated with the Creatures, as Simplicity, Eternity, Immensity, &c: Some other there are that howsoever simply and as they are in God they cannot bee communicated vnto vs, as Highest Wisdome, Chiefest Goodnesse, Greatest Power, &c: yet in part and by way of similitude and resemblance they may. I o∣mit the former as having aimed at them in some sort in the definition I gaue of God, and I come vnto the latter, & the Text I haue chosen to this purpose is the Speech of God himselfe, as it is related to vs by Moses, Exodus, the foure and thirtith, the 6, and 7, verses. So the Lord passed before his face, and cryed, The Lord, the Lord, strong, mercifull, and gracious, slow to anger, and aboundant in goodnesse and truth: re∣serving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity; and transgression, and sin, and not making the wic∣ked innocent, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers vpon the children, & vpon childrens children vn∣to the third and fourth generation. Concerning which words, let vs first of all see the occasiō of them: then the words themselues. The occasion of them was this. Moses in theExod. 33.18 chapter before had requested of the Lord that he would shewe vnto him his Face: that is, that he would declare vnto him fully, & perfitly, his glory & his maiesty. The Lords answer vnto him was, that he could not gratify him therein by reasō that the performance of such a request would proue his distruction,V. 20. for there shal no man see me, and liue, saith he,Ovid. Met. l. 3 Corpus mortale tumultus
haud feret aethereos. Furthermore he said, Thou canst not see my face: for there shal no mā see me, & liue. Which least Mo∣ses might haue taken to hart, & not haue thought himselfe so deeply in Gods books as in very deed he was, the Lord immediatly yeeldeth somwhat to him, somwhat of his re∣quest. Thou shalt seeExod. 33.23 saith he, my back parts: but my face shall not be seene. The kind of similitude there vsed is taken from mē whom if we see behind only, & only their backs towards vs, we knowe them to be men indeed, but whe∣ther such or such a mā, such or such a frend, that we know not. So that the Lord in these his words promised the knowledge of himselfe indeed, but an imperfect kind of knowledge, and he confirmd it with this signe: BeholdExod. 33.23 saith he, there is a place by me, and thou shalt stand vpon the rock: and whyle my glory passeth by, I will put thee in a cleft of the rock, and will cover thee with my hand whylst I passe by. So that the word also of Passing by, doth signifie noe lesse. For as on those whom we see as they passe only, we cānot fasten or fix our eies, vnlesse they stand to vs face to face as did St. Peter to the Creeple, Act. 3.4. or Elisha vnto Hazael 2 King. 8.11. noe more could Moses here in this place; no though the Lord had stood still, how much more when he was in transitu, and only passed by. But thus much of the occasion, now concerning the words themselues. Soe the Lord passed before his face and cried, The Lord, the Lord, strong, mercifull, and gratious; slowe to anger, and aboundant in goodnes and truth, and so forth. In which words as we haue a beadrol of the Attributs, and Properties of God, so may we reduce thē all into three severall Heads: Gods Power, Gods Goodnes, and the Iustice of God. The Power of God is explicated herein one worde: his Goodnes in seaven: his Iustice in twaine. Strong, there's his Power: Merciful & Gracious, Slow to anger, & Aboun∣dant in goodnesse, and truth, Reserving mercy for thousands, Forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin, ther's his Goodnes. And not making the wicked innocent, visiting the iniquity
of the Fathers vpon the Children, and vpon Childrens Chil∣dren vnto the third and fourth generation; there's his Iustice. And to these three severall heads may not only these At∣tributes here specified be reduced, but all his other what∣soever, I meane the Attributes of the later sort, as wee shall see hereafter in the handling of them. First then to begin with his Power, explicated here in one word, and that is Strong: So the Lord passed before his face, & cryed, The Lord the Lord, El, that is, Strong. Deus fortis, saith Tremellius; though the Vulgar omits Fortis, and our new Translatiō too: but our old Trāslation hath it, & it being backt therein by Tremellius, we wil the rather not refuse it. The Lord is Fortis then, Strong. He isIob 9 4. saith Iob, mighty in strength. Who is the king of glory? saith thePs. 24 8. Psalmist, It is the Lord strong and mighty, even the Lord mighty in battell. Nor is he Frtis, Strong only in the positiue degree of Strēgth, but Fortior Strōger. The waues of the Sea are mightyPs. 93.5. Tremel. saih the Psalmist and rage horribly; magnificentior est in alto Iehova, but yet the Lord that dwel∣leth on high is mightier. Doe we provoke the Lorde to anger1. Cor. 10.22 saith the Apostle, are wee stronger then he? Nay but the weakenesse of God is stronger then men, 1. Cor. 1.25. Nor is he Fortior, Stronger, but Fortissimus in the Superlatiue; for so himselfe of himselfe, Ego sum fortissimus Dus patris tui, though it be not so englished, Gen. 46.3. Hence that of Moses vnto him, Deut. 3.24. Domine Deus tu coepisti saith he, ostendere servo tuo magnitudinem tuam, manum{que} fortis∣simam &c. O Lord God thou hast begunne to shew to thy Ser∣vant thy greatnesse, and thy mighty hand: for where is there a God in heaven, or in earth, that can doe like thy workes, & like thy power? Now as his Power is exceeding great, so is it especially towards them that beleeue, and therfore was it S. Pauls prayer in behalfe of theEphes. 1.19. Ephesians, That the eyes of their vnderstanding might be lightned, that they might knowe among other things, what was the exceeding greatnesse of his power towards them that did beleeue. In A∣rithmeticke,
saith a worthyM Gossens Trumpet of war p. D. 3. b. Divine, set one against ten, ten against an hundred, an hundred against a thousand, a thousand against ten thousand, although there be great odes, yet is there some comparison, but if you could set down an infinite number, then there could be no compa∣rison at all, because the one is finite, the other infinite: so is it, saith he, betweene the power of God and Man; I, be∣tweene the power of God and all things else. Set all the Princes of the Earth in opposition against God, set all the world besides and they are nothing vnto him: The Earth,Ps. 104.32. saith David, shall tremble but at the very look of him: if He but touch the Hills they shall smoake. To this his Atribute of Power may be referred his Om∣nipotency which is said to be two manner of waies:M Perkins on the Creed p. 57. First because he is able to do whatsoever he will, secondly be∣cause he is able to do indeed more then he will. Of the first the Prophet David: As for our GodPs. 115.3. & Ps 135.6. saith he, he is in hea∣ven, he hath done whatsoever pleased him. AndTertul. adver. Praxeam, p. 320. Tertullian to this purpose, Dei posse velle est: & non posse nolle, quod au∣tem voluit, & potuit, & ostendit. The power of God is to will, and not to be powerfull to do a thing, not to be wil∣ling to it, howbeit what he would, that was he powerfull to do, & also did it. Of the other S, Iohn Baptist, GodMat. 3.9. saith he, is able of these stones to raise vp children vnto Abraham. So likewise our Saviour to S. Peter, when S. Peter had drawne his sword, and thought by his manhood to haue defended him, and freed him from the rout (a piece of ser∣vice that a world of Souldiers could not haue perfourmed at that time) Put vp thy sword,Mat. 26.32. saith our Saviour, into his place, for all that take the sword shall perish with the sword. Either thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he will giue me moe then twelue legions of Angels? SoTertul. vbi supra. Ter∣tullian againe, Potuit ita salvus sim, Deus pennis hominem ad volandum instruxisse, quod & milvis praestitit, non tamen quia potuit, statim & fecit. God could, saith he, haue giuen to man feathers to fly withall, as he hath giuen vnto the
kite, but though he could haue done it, yet he did it not. Here might I take occasiō to speak of our Adversaries ar∣gument cōcerning Gods Omnipotencie which they vse a∣bout the Sacrament, but for I haue far to goe, and we may haue occasion some other time to speake more plentifully of that, I shal at this time onely commend vnto you those three excellent Theorems of a worthy Writer in our age concerning an Argument drawne from Gods Omnipo∣tency. The first is this: We ought not to argue in Divinitie from the Omnipotency of God, vnlesse the will of God goe be∣fore, plainely manifested vnto vs by his word. The second is this: We ought not to argue in Divinitie from the Omnipotē∣cy of God to confirme that thing the contrary whereof is ex∣tant in his word. The third is this: We ought not to argue in Divinitie from the Omnipotency of God to confirme that point that containes in it a contradiction. Whosoever will see more hereof, and how these three Theorems are con∣firmed, I referre him toAnton. Sadee∣lis Opera Theol. pag. 272. edit. 1593. Sadeels Treatise De Sacramenta∣li maducatione corporis Christi, the third Chapter of that Booke. But thus much of the Power of God, the first of the Attributes here mentioned, or rather the first Head. The second Head wherevnto these Attributes may be referred, was (as I told you) The Goodnesse of God, & that in these seaven, Mercifull, and Gratious, Slowe to anger, & Aboundant in goodnesse & truth, Reserving mercy for thou∣sands, Forgiuing iniquitie, transgression, and sinne. And of every of these in their several order, and first of his Mercy: [Mercifull] It is in the Original Racum: Nomen, saithZanch. de At∣trib. l. 1. c. 18. Vid. Bart. Sche∣raei Itinerarium in Psalter. Davi d Hebraeum Numero Radi∣cum 1018 Zanchius, à visceribus deductum, a name first fetcht from the bowels within. It is such a kind of affection as Parents are fraught withall when they heare of, or see their Children in any extremity. Such was the loue and affection of the true Mother towards her Child, whē King Salomon had com∣manded that it should be divided in twaine. Her compassi∣on,1. Kin. 3.26. saith the Scripture, was kindled towards her Sonne. It is
in our new Translatiō, Her bowels yearned vpō her Son. By this thē the Lord doth signifie that he is of such a nature, that though he scourge vs for our sinnes, yet doth he pity vs too as a Father his children. It is an excellent passage of David, Ps. 103.8. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy: long suffering and of great goodnesse. He will not alwaies be chiding: neither keepeth he his anger for ever. He hath not dealt with vs after our sinnes: nor rewarded vs according to our wickednesse. For looke how high the heaven is in compa∣rison of the earth: so great is his mercy also towardes them that feare him. Look how wide also the East is from the West, so farre hath he set our sinnes from vs. Yea like as a Father pitieth his owne children: even so is the Lord mercifull to thē that feare him. So S. Austen to this purpose, Filio quem di∣ligit trasci potest pater,Aug. Hom, 5. p. 288. saith he irascitur & amat potest di∣ciodit & amat non potest dici. A Father may be angry with his Sonne whom he loueth: that he is angry & loues him too, may well be said, that he hates him & loues him too, that by no meanes may be said. And as the same S. Austen inAug. Hom. 27. p. 331. another place, In quibuscun{que} peccatis non perdit visce∣ra pia mater Ecclesia, Our deare Mother the Church loo∣seth not her bowels towards vs in regard of any sinnes we doe commit, so we repent vs of the same; no more doth God aboue, the Husband of the Church, and the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, 2. Cor. 1.3. It follow∣eth, And Gracious. That is,Zanch. vbi supra. saith Zanchius, ad gratificandum paratus, rea∣dy to pleasure, or conferre a benefit vpon vs. Praised be the Lord dayly,Ps. 68.19. saith David, even the God which helpeth vs, & powreth his benefits vpon vs. It is in our new Translation, who dayly loadeth vs with benefits. The Scriptures are ful of proofes concerning this point, and that of our Saviour is most remarkable, how he maketh hisMat. 5.45. Sunne to ariseImbres etiam & soles suos per∣aequante Deo iustis & iniu∣stis. Tertul. de Anima c. 27. p. 567. on the evill and on the good, and sendeth rayne on the iust and on the vniust. All things,Eccles. 9.2. saith the Preacher, come alike to all: and the same condition is to the iust, and to the wicked, to the
good, and to the pure, and to the polluted, and to him that sa∣crificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not: as is the good, so is the sinner, he that sweareth, as he that feareth an oath. True it is, it will not be so hereafter, it is thus onely here in this world, & therefore S. Austen, Placuit divinae providentiae,Aug de Civ. Dei l. 1. c. 8. p. 7. So in another place, Permixta ista temporalia Deus esse voluit quia si Bonis so∣lis ea daret, pu∣tarent & Mali propter haec co∣lendum Deum. Rursus si ea solis Malis daret, ti∣merent Boni in∣firmi converti, ne ista illis fortè de essent. Aug. in Ps. 66 p. 472. saith he, praeparare in posterum bona iustis, quibus non fru∣entur iniusti, & mala impijs, quibus non excruciabuntur bo∣ni. Ista verò temporalia bona & mala vtris{que} voluit esse com∣munia, vt nec bona cupidius appetantur, quae mali quo{que} habe∣re cernūtur, nec mala turpiter evitentur, quibus & boni ple∣rum{que} afficiuntur. It hath pleased the divine Providence to prepare for hereafter such good things for good men, as the wicked shall not partake of, and such bad things for the wicked as the good shall not be tormented with. As for these temporall good things & bad things both, those would he haue common both to the bad and to the good, that even these good things should not be sought eager∣ly after, which we see the wicked to enioy too, nor these bad things basely avoided, wherein good men common∣ly haue a share. It followeth, Slow to anger. Ʋbi notandum,Zanch. vbi supra. saith Zanchius, Deum non dicere se esse sine ira, quasi nunquam peccatis irascatur, sed tantùm se tar∣dum esse ad iram. Irascitur ergò: sed ne{que} citò, ne{que} facile, ne{que} temerè. It is to be noted, saith Zanchius, that God doth not say that he is altogether without anger, as if he were never angry with sinne at all, but only that he is Slowe to anger. Angry then he is, our God is angry, but nor quick∣ly, nor easily, nor rashly, or vnadvisedly. Some, saithLact. de Ira Dei. l. 1. c. 1. La∣ctantius, are of opinion that God cannot be angry, because so divine a Nature is to be gentle, benigne, & gracious on∣ly, Quorum error, saith he, quia maximus est, & ad everten∣dum vitae humanae statum spectat, coarguendus est à nobis. Whose error for it is so great an one, & toucheth the ve∣ry overthrowe of the whole state of humane life, is there∣fore to be confuted by vs, & so he confutes it indeed in a whole Treatise to that purpose. Howbeit here we are to
knowe that Anger in God is not as it is in vs a suddaine perturbation, or an affection of the Soule, Nam Dei Natu∣ra,Ambr. in Ep. ad Rom. c. 2. saith S. Ambrose, ab ijs passionibus immunis est. For the nature of God is free from such kinde of passions. And a∣gaine inAmb. in Ps. 37 another place, Deus passioni non patet vt irasca∣tur, cum sit impassibilis: sed quia vindicat, videtur irasci. God lies not open to the passion of anger, forasmuch as he is not touched with any perturbation, but in that he doth punish, he seemes to be angry. So ThomasAquin. 1a 2ae, qu. 47. Ar. 1. ad 1m. Aquinas, Ira non dicitur in Deo secundum passionem animi, sed secundum iudicium iustitiae, prout vult vindictam facere de peccato. Anger is not said to be in God according to the passion of the mind, but according to iudgement, and to iustice, whereby he wills that sinne should be punished. To this his Attribute of Slownes to anger may be referred his Patience, when as he spares & beares with Sinners to the end they should repent. The Lord2. Pet. 3.9. saith S. Peter, is not slacke concerning his promise (as some count slackenesse) but is patient towardes vs, and would haue no man to perish, but would all men to come to repentance. Agreeable where∣vnto is that of the Angell vnto Esdras,2. Ed. 8.59. God would not that man should perish: but they after that they were created, haue defiled the name of him that made them, and are vnthankeful vnto him which prepared life for them. This it is the Apostle to the Romanes cals the. Rō. 2.4 Riches of his Patience: Despisest thou saith he, the riches of his bountifulnes, and patience, & long sufferance, not knowing that the bountifulnesse of God leadeth thee to repentāce? And wel may he tearme it Riches, for as S. Austen speaking of Riches, Ecce vndi{que} lucra con∣fluuntAug. de Temp Ser. 50. p. 484. saith he, & more fontium nummi currunt: behold gaines flow in on every side, and mony like flowds of wa∣ter abounds continually: right so his Patience to, Horat. Ep. l. 1. ad Lollium.Labitur, & labetur in omne volubilis aevum, flowe it will for ever and ever, and they are but Ru∣stickes in Divinity, that dreame of the drynesse of it. True it is,Ps. 7.13. If a man will not turne, hee will whet his
sword: he hath bent his bow, and made it readie. Hee hath prepared for him the instruments of death: he ordei∣neth his arrowes against the Persecutors. And yet even in this, may we see the Patience of God to. For as there is mē∣tion here made of twoVid. B. Pil. kingt or Nehem c. 4. p. 61, sorts of weapons that in the bat∣tailes of old time did the greatest hurt to the Enemy, The Sword, and the Bow, the Sword when he was at hand, the Bow when he was farre of, as if God should vse them both; yet see in this his Anger how he forbeares a long time. He first threatens, and warnes, & that divers, & sundry times. Then takes he a time to prepare himselfe to battell. It as∣keth no doubt sometime to whet his Sword which is (as it were) rusty and blunt, to ordaine his Arrowes, or to make them ready, which are all (as it were) out of order or sealed vp among hisDeut. 32. v. 23. & 34. treasures, & yet somtime to whē so he hath done, he perhaps puts them vp again, or not smiting at al, or in wrath remēbring mercy: For in my wrath I smote thee saith the Lord, but in my mercy I had compassion on thee, Esay 60.10. I will end this of Patience, with an excellēt passage of S. Cyprians which he hath to this purpose. What maner of Patience is it for qualityQualis verò in Deo & quan∣ta patiētia quòd in contumeliam suae maiestatis & honoris instituta ab hominibus prophana tem∣pla, & terrena figmenta, & sa∣cra sacrilega pa∣tientissimè susti∣nens, super bo∣nes & malos ae∣qualiter facit diem nasci & lumen sol boriri, & cum imbribus terram rigat, nemo à beneficiis eius excluditur, quo minus iu∣stis similiter & iniusts indiscretas pluvias largiatur. Videmus inseparabi aequalitate patientiae nocentibus & noxiis, religiosis & impiis, gratias agentibus & ingratis Dei nutu tempora obse∣qui, elementa famulari, spirare ventos fontes fluere, grandeere copias messium, fructus mitescere vinearum, exvberare pomis arbusta, nemora frondescere, prata florere Et cū crebris imò continuis exacerbatur offensis Deus, indignationem suam temperal, & praestituum semel retributionis diem patienter expectat. Cum{que} habeat in potestute vindictam, mavult ù tenere patientiam, sustinen scilicet clementer & differens, vt, fi fieri potest, multùm malicia protracta aliquando mutetur, & homo in errorum & scelerum contagione volutatus vel serò ad Dominum convertatur. Cyp. de Bo∣ Patient. p. 97. Edit. Basil. 1530. saith he, & how great in quantity is that which is in God, who paciētly suffereth prophane Tē∣ples of the Heathē, worldly inventions & execrable sacrilege to be committed by men in cōtempt of his Maiesty & Honor, and yet notwithstanding causeth the day to shew forth, & the Sun to shine as well on the evill as the good. He watereth the ground with showers, and excludeth no man from his benefits,
but bestoweth his raigne in due season, to the profit and com∣modity aswell of the Ʋniust as the Iust. Wee see againe with what an vnseperable equality of Gods patiēce the times obey, the Elements serue, the Corn aboūdantly doth grow, the fruits of the Vine do ripe in season, the Trees abound with apples, the Woods spring, & the Meddows flowrish as wel to the vse of the sinfull as of the vertuous, as well to the wicked as to them that feare God, and aswell to the vnthankefull as to the giver of thankes. And whereas God is provoked with our many, or ra∣ther continuall offences, yet doth he temper his indignati∣on, and taryeth patiently for the Day that is appointed for every mans reward. And whereas vengeance is in his own po∣wer, yet doth he not vse it, but rather keepeth long patience; mercifully forbearing & deferring to the intent that mā wal∣lowing in the contagion and errour of sin, may, if any remedie will serue, through delay of his displeasure, chāge at some time or other, and at length be converted vnto God. Thus far S. Cyprian, and a great deale farther to this purpose, but I ha∣sten to the other Attribute, And abundant in goodnesse. [In goodnesse.] Like asArist. Moral. ad Eudm. l. 7. Aristotle distinguisheth Bonum, namely into that which is simpliciter bonum, and that which is Alicui tantùm, aut Aliquibus: Good simply, and in it selfe, and Good to some one, or vnto many: so may wee distinguish the Goodnes of God, namely so farre forth as he is Good sim∣ply, & in himselfe, or Good vnto others. He is Good, simply and in himselfe, nay Goodnesse it selfe in the abstract, for that he is of that perfectiō, that sufficiency in himselfe, as that there is nothing wanting in him, nothing at all to be desired. He is in this respect not only Summum Bonum, the chiefe Good, but indeed the only Good, according to that of our Saviour,Luk 18.19. why callest thou me good? none is good saue one, even God. Hoc sensuZanch. de At∣trib. l 4. c. 1. p. 409. Col. 1. saith Zanchius, etiam Chri∣stus quâ homo non est bonus: In this sense Christ as he is man is not good. A speech that might make vs startle, the rather for he said a littleZanch. Ib. p. 404. Col. 1. before, Etiam Diabolum quatenus res.
est cre ata, & varijs donis ernata, dicimus esse bonum. We say the Divell himselfe is good as he is a thing created, and a∣dorned with sundry gifts. But those are Zanchius wordes, Hoc sensu etiam Christus quâ homō non est bonus, but he ad∣deth immediatly after, Ac proinde & ipse quatenus Deus, solus est bonus: And therefore he againe as he is God, is on∣ly good. The reason saith he, is, because as he is man he is fi∣nite, and whatsoever good he hath, he hath it from God, and consequently from his Deity. And though he hath it saith he, most perfectly in respect of other things created: yet hath he it imperfectly in respect of God. But to returne where I left. It is cheefly in regard of the other Goodnes that God is na∣med Good here, namely as he is Good not in himselfe, but vnto others. Evē as we say A good Prince, not if he be good to himselfe only, or doe no man any wrong, or liue retired∣ly, and so forth. But if he be gentle, courteous, debonayre, liberall, a Protector of others, in a word such an one as vn∣der whom we may liue in peae and plenty, in goodnes & all godlines, according to that ofSi iusti impe∣rant, si inter lin∣guas sublimiter honorantium, & obsequia ni∣mis humiliter salutantium nō extolluntur, sed se homines esse meminerunt: si suam potestatem ad Dei cultum maximè dilatā∣dum, miestati eius famulam faciunt. Si Deū timent. diligunt, colunt; si plus a∣mant illud reg∣num, vbi non ti∣ment habere cō∣sortes: si tardius vindicant, facilè ignoscunt: si eandem vindictam pro necessitate regendae tuendae{que} Reip. non pro sa∣tur andis inimicitiarum odiis exerunt: si eandem veniam non ad impunitatem iniquitatis, sed ad spem correctionis indulgent: si quod asperè coguntur plerum{que} decernere, misericordiae lenitate, & beneficiorum largitate compensan: si luxuria tantò eis est castigatior, quantò posset esse liberiorsi malunt cupiditatibus pravis, quàm quibuslibet Gentibus imperare. Et si haec omnia faciunt, non propter ardoem inanis gloriae, sed propter charitatem faelicitatis aeternaetsi pro suis peccatis, humi∣litatis, & miserationis, & orationis sacrificum, Deo suo vero immolare non negligunt. Aug de Ciu Dei. l. 5. c 24. And englished for the most part most excellently by M. Hooker. Eccles. Pol. l. 5. §. 76. p. 226. St. Austen, If they haue vertuously raigned, if honour hath not filled their harts with pride, if the exercise of their power hath bene service and at∣tendaunce vpon the Maiesty of the most High, and so as fol∣loweth in that place. God is Good then in himselfe, Good al∣so vnto others, I, so Good that it is the Burthen (as it were) of the hundred and seaventh Psalme, or like that Carmē a∣maebaeum inVirg. Egl. 8. Ʋirgil, Incipe Maenalios mecum mea tibia versus, or, Ducite ab vrbe domum mea carmina ducite Daphnim,
It beingVers. 8. & 15. & 21. & 31. foure seuerall times repeated there, O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodnes, and declare the wonders that he doth for the childrē of men. It followeth, And truth. [Aboundant in goodnes, and trueth] As he is in Goodnes, so in Trueth, Aboundant in both, & truely aboundant in Trueth, for that God is TruethZanch. de At∣trib. l. 3. c. 3. p. 282. Col. 1. three manner of waies. Trueth in himselfe: Trueth in his workes: Trueth in his wordes. Howbeit Trueth here in this place is taken the last way, and so accommodated vnto words, as those words of God are Promises whether for temporall things, or things eternall. They are thy promisesPromissa tua sunt, & quis fal∣li timeat cum promittit Veri∣tas. Aug. Confes. l. 12. c. 1. saith St. Austen, and who will feare to be deceived when Trueth it selfe doth promise. Now God being Trueth it selfe, Logicke will helpe to informe vs what Trueth is in the abstract. Omnis creaturaFulgent. de Fid. Orthod. p. 596. saith Fulgentius, quoniam opus est veritatis, est quidem creatura vera non tamen est veritas. Sola autem na∣turaliter est veritas, quae naturaliter est vera Divinitas. E∣very creature saith he, forasmuch as it is the work of truth, is in truth a true creature, howbeit it is not Trueth. That a∣lone naturally is truth and verity, that naturally is true Di∣vinity. God then being Truth in the abstract, it will neces∣sarily follow therevpon that no falsehood whatsoever can take hold of his word. For canVid. Zanch. de Attrib. l. 3. c. 3. p. 283. Col. 1. whitenes it selfe be black? or Knowledge it selfe be ignorant? A thing that is white indeed may be black, & a man of knowledge may be igno∣rant, I, the most of that we know (knew we more then who knowes most) is but the least of that we know not, how∣beit Knowledge it selfe cannot be ignorāt, neither White∣nesse it selfe can ever be blacke. Right so it is in this case. God is Trueth it selfe, God is not as manNum. 23.19. saith Balaam, that he should lie: hath he said, and shall he not do it? And hath hee spoken, and shall he not accomplish it? Or if according to thePlutarch. de Auditione. Spartan fashion we would heare the same in effect out of a better mans mouth then Balaā was, It is vnpossible saith the Apostle, that God should lie, Heb. 6.18. Besides, God is aboundant in trueth, that is, in keeping promises, by reason
he is Omnipotent, wherevponIn Dei promis sit nulla est fal∣sitas, quia in fa∣ciendis nulla omnipotenti est difficultas. Ful∣git. de Prae dist. l. 1 p 24 Fulgentius againe, There is no falshood at all in the promises of God, because in the perfor∣mance of them there is no difficulty at all to him that is Omni∣potent. It followeth, Reserving mercy for thousands. Of Mercy we spake before, we are now also to speak of Mercy againe. The truth is, there are almost none of all Gods Attributes, but hath Mercy as an ingredient. With∣out questionTreatise of the nature of God. c. 4. § 5. p. 107. saith one, if any humane affection may be truely said to be in God, it is this of Pitty, or Mercy, the which of all other is most excellent, and commendable, proper to gentle, no∣ble, and royall mindes; as nothing on the contrary is so base & savage, as is vnmercifulnesse and cruelty. But what is this Reserving? Who are these Thousands here thus specified? First concerning Thousands we reade in theRev. 7.5. Revelation: Of the Tribe of Iuda were sealed twelue thousand. Of the Tribe of Ruben were sealed twelue thousand. Of the Tribe of God were sealed twelue thousand, & so of al the Tribes of the Children of Israell (Dan only excepted for cases best knowne to God and to S. Iohn) but are they the Thousands only here meant in this place? No, for it followeth there: After these things I beheld, & so a great multitude which no man could number of all Nations, and kinreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throane, and before the Lamb, cloa∣thed with long white roabes, and palmes in their hands. So thē they are the Elect that may be meant by these Thousands. I but who (will you say) are the Elect? It is I confesse a hard question. I may say as Elias said to Elisha,2. Kin. 2.10. Rem difficilē po∣stulasti: Thou hast asked an hard thing: howbeit I describe them thus.Vid Zanch. de Attrib. l. 4. c. 4. p. 461. Col. 2. Such as feare the Lord, Psal. 103.13. Such as put their trust in God, Psal. 32.11. Such as call vpon him, Psal. 86.5. Such as are his Servants, Deut. 32.36. Such as loue him, and keepe his commandements, Exod. 20.6. For of Such, & Such is it said, how he shal repent towards thē; how he shewes his mercy vnto them: how he is merciful vn∣to them al: how he is good, and gracious, and of great mer∣cy. Go, and do thou likewise,Luk. 10.37. saith our Saviour in an other
case, so I in this, feare the Lord, put your trust in him, call vpon him, be his Servants, loue him and keepe his commā∣dements, and you shall be of these Elect. But now concer∣ning the word Reserving: [Reserving mercy for thousands.] It is as if he had said, he doth treasure it vp for vs in stoare, and when he sees his time we shal haue it in aboun∣dance. Perhaps he tries vs here byHeb. 11.36. mockings, & scourgings yea moreover by bonds, and prisonment. It may be he suffers vs to, to wander vp and downe in sheepe skins, & in goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented. I, to wander in wil∣dernesses, and mountaines, and dens, & caues of the earth. But what saith the Scripture of those many Thousands even now spoken of, and of that great multitude which no man could number of all nations, and kinreds, and people, &c? These are theyRev. 7.14. saith the Angell there, which came out of great tribulation, and haue washed their long roabs, & haue made their long roabes white in the bloud of the Lambe. And againe, a littleV. 16. after, They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, nether shal the Sun light on them, neither any heate. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall governe them, and shall lead them vnto the liuely fountaine of waters, and God shall wipe away all teares from their eies. Reserving mercy for thousands. It followeth, Forgiving ini∣quity, and transgression, and sinne. When so much Mercy goes before, no marvaile if For∣giuenesse of so much iniquity, and transgression, and sinne doth follow after. They are both of them indeed insepara∣ble companions, Mercy and Forgiuenesse: and no more can they be one without the other, then Fyer can be without heate, the Sunne without his beames. Now to them that do repent (who only are meant here in this place) what Sin so great either in quantity or quality (and all areZanch. de At∣trib. l. 1. c. 18. p. 58. Col. 1. compri∣sed in these three, Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin) but God forgiues it vnto vs freely, and remembers it no more? What faultQuid gravius peccatori aegro quàm Medici interfectio? quid gravius potest aeger facere, quàm si Medicū suum occidat? cum hoc dimit∣titur quid non dimittitur? Aug in Ps. 45. p. 287 saith S. Austen, more grievous to be committed by a Sinner the Patient, thē the murthering of his Physition? What
greater offence can the sicke-man make, then if so be he should slaughter him? Whē such a sin as this, so great an offence is for given, what is it, that is not, that cānot be forgivē? He al∣ludes to that of S. Peter, who telling the Iewes how they crucified and slew Iesus of Nazareth, a man approued of God among them with great workes, and wonders, & signes, and so forth: yet said vnto them notwithstanding,Act. 2.38. A∣mend your liues, & be baptized every one of you in the name of Iesus Christ for the remission of sinnes; and yee shal receiue the gift of the Holy Ghost. And thus much of the Goodnesse of God, the second Fountaine, or Head I told you of. Now concerning his Iustice, which I tolde you was the third Head, and comprehending these twaine: And not making the wicked innocent, visiting the iniquitie of the Fathers vp∣on the children, and vpon childrens children, vnto the third and fourth generation. First of the former [And not making the wicked innocent.] He that iustifieth the wicked,Prov. v. 17.15. saith Solomon, & he that condemneth the iust, even they both are abomination to the Lord. If the Lord speake thus of Magistrates (for of Magi∣strats he there speaketh) who represent him more especi∣ally then other sorts and states of men whatsoever, well may he say in this place cōcerning the wicked as he doth, especially being to giue them example by himselfe. Be∣sides that it followeth well here, And not making the wic∣ked innocent, in regard of the premises that went before. For least vpon the hearing thus of sins forgiuen, the wic∣ked should sooth vp themselues, that theirs should be forgiven too, and as it is inDeut. 29.19. Deuteronomy, he should blesse himselfe in his heart, saying, I shall haue peace, although I walke according to the stubbornnesse of my owne heart, thus adding drunkennesse vnto thirst: there is a Supersedeas for all such, The Lord,Deut. 29.20. saith Moses, will not be mercifull vnto him, and likewise another here in this place, And not ma∣king the wicked innocent. I, but who are the wicked here meant in this place? and as we asked, & answered before
who are the Elect, so let vs aske and answer now, who are the wicked. No man describes them better then doth the Prophet David, and the Apostle S. Paul out of him, from top to toe. He tels vs of their Throats, he tels vs of their Tongues, he tels vs of their Lips, he tels of their Mouths, their Eyes, their Feete. Their THROAT,Rom. 3.13. saith S. Paul, is an open Sepulchre, they haue vsed their TONGVE to de∣ceit: the poyson of Aspes is vnder their LIPS, whose MOVTH is full of cursing and bitternesse. Their FEET are swift to shed blood. Destruction and calamitie are in their waies. And the way of peace they haue not known. The feare of God is not before their EIES. I wil conclude this point of not making the wicked innocent, with that of the Prophet David, Ps. 11.6. The Lord alloweth the righteous: but the vngodly, and him that delighteth in wickednesse, doth his soule abhorre. Vpon the vngodly he shall raine snares, fire and brimstone, storme and tempest: this shall be their portion to drinke. And so I come to the latter Attribute, and conse∣quently to the last of al: Visiting the iniquity of the Fathers vpon the children, & vpon childrens children, vnto the third and fourth generation. I may say of this later Attribute as speaks the Poet in an other case, Qui venit hic fluctus, fluctus supereminet omnes;Ovid. Trist. l. 1. Eleg. 2. and indeed of al the waues that went before, none is com∣parable vnto this. Begin we with the word it selfe Visiting, and how harshly doth it sound not to the worst sort of people, Schollers. Scholasticus estPlin. 2. Epist. l. 2 Ep. 3. saith Pliny, quo genere hominum nihil aut simplicius, aut syncerius, aut melius: Isaeus saith Pliny is a Scholler, then which kind of men none more honest in their dealing, none more syncere, none better. And yet euen amōg such should a Visitatiō be had, how would every mā blush therat, that in any wise respecteth the cre∣dit of his College. And yet you know whoDiog. Laere. l. 6. in Diegene. said it, Mag∣ni fures paruum ducunt, The Iudge may be worse, then the Felon that stands at bar. It is not so with God & vs. Come
we to the matter that is visited, and that is iniquity. Si ini∣quitates observaueris DominePs 130.3. saith David, Domine quis sustinebit? If thou Lord wilt be extreāe to mark what is done amisse: oh Lord who may abide it? But this is not all nether, for come we to the māner here, and it seems not our owne Iniquitie, but the Iniquity of the Fathers vpon the childrē, I, and vpon childrens children, even vnto the third & fourth generation. See Beloued, the greatest affliction that can in this world happen to man. Many an one there is no doubt that is reachles of himselfe; come rack, come rope, the words wereVid. D. Fulck against the De∣fence of the Cen∣sure. p. 138. Campians, he cares not, he feares not, he will do it though he die for it a thousand deaths: but whē he sees his children in hazard, & that his posterity shall rue his fault, Virg. Aeneid. l. 3Et nati natorum, et qui nascentur ab illis, that is, as here is said, His children, and his childrens chil∣dren vnto the third and fourth generation, then will he be mooved to remorse, that had not many daies before a world of wickednes in his heart. Let me instance in that dishonourable knight Sr Everard Digby, one of those hel∣lish Powder-rowt, who combining himselfe with that cursed crew and most desperate Catelines of our age, what little reckning did he make of the whole State of this our Land. Of his most excellent MAIESTIE, a king not to be paraleld in the world, his Gracious Consort our Sove∣raigne QVEENE, the worthy Successor of Queene Elza∣beth, that worthy PRINCE too too worthy to liue any longer amongst vs, his HIGHNES that now liues, and graunt oh God, he may liueDan. 3.9. even for ever, the Reverende PRELATES, the worthy NOBLES, the whole KING∣DOME it selfe, when as they were all of them designed to a perpetuall destruction. Did he not hope, and those his Complices, to see our2. Esd. 10.21 Sanctuary laid wast, our Altar bro∣ken downe, our Temple destroyed: our Psalterion to faint, our Song to cease, our Myrth to vanish away, & the light of our Candlesticke to be quenched, and the Arke of our Covenant taken away, and our Holy Things defiled, and
the Name that is called vpon over vs, altogither dishono∣red, and our Children put to shame, and our Priests burnt, and our Levites carryed into captivity, & our Virgins de∣filed, & our Wiues ravished, and our Righteous men spoi∣led, and our Children destroied, & our young mē brought into bondage, and our strong men become weake: And which is the greatest of al, Syon the seale to loose her wor∣ship, and to be delivered into the hands of them that hate vs? And yetThe procee∣d ngs against the late Tray∣ters. p. L. 3. b. HE in the perill of his private and domesti∣call estate, how did he presently put on the bowels of Na∣ture, and Compassion, making petition forsooth for his Sonne, that he (with his Maiesties leaue) might haue the benefit of an Entaile, and so to succeed him in his Lands. Non me fugitTully Epist. ad Brutum. Ep. 12. saith Tully, quàm sit acerbum Parentū sec∣lora Filiorum poenis lui. Sed hoc praeclarè legibus compara∣tum est, vt charitas liberorum amiciores Parentes Reip. red∣deret. I am not ignorant how hard it is that Children should be punished for their Fathers treasonable facts. But full well did the Lawes provide it shoulde be so, that the loue which Parents did beare vnto their Children, might make those Parents more respectiue to the Com∣mon-weale. Now if so be the loue of Children, and feare of their miscarrying, might indeere thē so farre to the loue of the Common-weale which coulde but kill their bodies only, asMat 10.28. speakes our Saviour, how ought they to feare him which is able to destroy themselues, their Children, and Childrens Children, vnto the third and fourth gene∣ration, both Soules and Bodies in hell. Oh but thou wilt say: what? & shall I be punished then for that which was my Fathers fault?Gen. 18 25 Shall not the Iudge of al the world do right? Or shal we renue that ancient Pro∣verbe againe,Ezech. 18.2 The Fathers haue eaten sower grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge? Virg. Aen. l. 1Tantaene animis coelestibus irae? Nay Beloved, mistake me not. Virg. Aen. l. 6Nullae hîc insidiae tales: absiste moueri:
Nec vim VERBA ferunt. For it is not to bee so vnderstood, that if the Parents bee wicked, & the Children be godly, he wil punish the Chil∣dren for the Fathers sake: no, God forbid. But if so be the Childe follow a wicked Fathers steps, and his Childe his, and so along, then will he showre downe plagues on that house, and root out that Family from the Earth; there shal not be one left that maketh water against a wal. Thus was it prophesied of Ieroboam: Beholde1. Kin. 14.10 saith the Lord, I will bring evill vpon the house of Ieroboam, and will cut of from Ieroboam him that pisseth against the wall, as well him that is shut vp, as him that is left in Israel, and will sweepe awaie the remnant of the house of Ieroboam, as a man sweepeth awaie dung, till it be all gone. But thus much of the Attributes, or Properties of God, my next care is to be, to intreate of his workes; wherefore of his Workes Godwilling the nexte time. In the meane time HE so blesse vs, and the seede that hath beene sowne, &c.
GODS VVORKES.Lecture 5. April. 22. 1613. FOrasmuch as there is no end of the Greatnesse of GodQuia magni∣tudinis Dei non est finis, & cum qum non capi∣mus laudare de∣bemus: tanquam deficientes in e∣ius magnitudine vt reficiamur e∣ius bonitate, ad Opera respicia∣mus, & de Ope∣ribus laudemus operantem, de conditis condito∣rem, de creatu∣ra creatorem. Aug. in Ps 144. saith S. Austen, and we ought to praise him whome we for our parts cannot conceiue: for we are vtterly deficient in his Greatnes, to the ende that we may be refre∣shed by his Goodnesse, let vs view and consider his Workes, and in regard of thse his Workes, let vs praise him the Worke-man, in regard of those things made, let vs praise him the Maker, in regard of the Creature, let vs praise him the Creator. Having formerly declared to you, First the Essence of God whereby to know him, secondly his Attri∣butes, or his Properties, & in both of them comming too too short of conceiving his Greatnes indeed, what remai∣neth in the last place, but that wee nowe come vnto his WORKES: that so refreshed with his Goodnesse, and ta∣king a view of those his Workes, we not only praise the Workeman, and Maker, and Creator of them, as speakes S. Austen, but fully finish also, and make an end of that one point of Divinity proposed in the beginning, and in my first Division, concerning GOD. To this end and pur∣pose haue I chosen at this time, a passage of the Apostle S. Pauls, who in the 17. Chapter of the Acts, the 24, 25, 26, and 27 verses, speaketh on this wise.
God that made the world, and all things that are therein, seeing that he is Lord of Heaven, & Earth, dwelleth not in Temples made with hands. Neither is worshipped with mens hands as though he nee∣ded any thing, seeing he giveth to al life, & breath and all things. And hath made of one bloud all man∣kinde, to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath assigned the times which were ordained before, and the bounds of their habitatiō, that they should seeke the Lord if so be they might haue groped after him, and found him, though doubtlesse he be not far from every one of vs. I shall not need to acquaint you here with the occasion of these words, that would now be to little purpose, and as little suteable at this time to the matter I haue in hand. I come to the words thēselues which first intreate of Gods Workes: secondly of the Powerfulnesse of those Workes to make vs to seeke after God. Now the Workes of God are named here, partly in generall; partly in particular. Those which are in general are the World, and All things that are therein: that which is in particular; is the Creation of Man. Of both in their severall order, and first of the Workes of God here named in generall: God that made the World and all things that are therein, &c. Great is the commendation thatMatrob. Sa∣turn. l. 5. c. 1. p. 506. Macrobius giues vn∣to Ʋirgil for a certaine hemistichium of his. Vis audire saith he, illum tanta brevitate dicētem, vt arcta∣rimagis & contrahi brevitas ipsa non possit? —Et campos vbi Troia fuit. Ecce paucissimis verbis maximam civitatem hausit, & ab∣sorpsit: non reliquit illi nec ruinam. Speaking immediatly a∣gaine of the same Poet, & how he handled the selfe same matter in an other place, after a most copious kind of mā∣ner,
when as he had rehearsed some nine of his verses to that purpose, Venit summa dies, & ineluctabile fatum Dardaniae, and so forth; (where yet it is in Virgil, & ineluctabile tempus) Quis sons, saith he, quis torrens, quod mare tot fluctibus, quot hic verbis invndavit? He praised him before for his Brevity, for that in those words, —Et Campos vbi Troia fuit, Brevitie it selfe could not haue beene comprised more briefly. He swallowed vp, saith Macrobius, in the fewest words that could be, the greatest City that ever was: he left it not so much as any rubbish to be seen. Which Virgil, saith he, in another place speaking againe of the selfe same City passeth both Fountaines, and Rivers, and Seas in plenty of wordes. That which Moses saith in so many wordes in the first Chapter of Genesis (& Moses as. Theo∣doret. Ad Graec. Infid. Ser. 2. p. 29. speakes Theodoret was the Ocean of Divinitie) our Apostle guided here by the selfe same Spirit that Moses was, compriseth in these few: The world and all things that are therein. Looke we backe vnto Moses, and consider his words of the creation, and Quis fons, quis torrens, quod mare tot fluctibus, quot hic ver∣bis in vndavit? what Fountaine, what River, nay what Sea can abound with so many waues, as Moses there doth with words? But come we againe vnto the Apostle here, and consider we these wordes; The worlde, and all things that are therein, and Quàm multa, quàm paucis, as TullyTull. Epist. Fam. l. 11. p. 24. speakes, in how few wordes, how many divers and sun∣dry things may we see contained! As the creation of the light; the creation of Heaven; the creation of the Earth; the Sea, Hearbes, and Trees; the creation of the Sunne & Moone, and Starres; the creation of Whales, and Fishes, & fethered Foule; the creation of the Beasts of the Earth, and Cattle, and every creeping thing of the Earth, as also of Adam and Eue, from whom our selues first came. In a word nothing now whatsoever within the whole com∣passe
of this world, but was created then at that time, if not in the Individuum, yet doubtlesse in the Species of it. Excellent and most eloquent is that passage of Tertullian to this purpose, I will english it as ISic censeo. Ve¦nere propria, quasi{que} nativo cuius{que} linguae decore foveri sententias quas∣dam, subnixas{que} certis, vt ita di∣cam, idiotismi fulluris sustine∣vi: quam in aliā quasi Coloniam si deducas: iidē sanè sint cives: gratiam pristinae commendationis non retinebunt. Card. Exercit. 294. p. 871. may. The rule of Trueth,Regula exigit veritatis vt pri∣mò omnium credamus in Deum Patrem & Dominum omnipotentem, id est, rerum omnium perfectissinum conditorem, qui Coelum alta sublimitate suspenderit, terram deiecta mole solidave∣rit, maria soluto liquore diffuderit, & haec omnia propriis & condignis instrumentis & ornala & plena digesserit. Nam & in solidamento coeli luciferos Solis ortus excitavit, Lunae candentem globū ad solatium noctis incrementis orbis implevit, Astrorum etiam variis radiis fulgoribus{que} micantis lucis noctem accendit & haec omnia legitimis meatibus circumire totum mundi ambitum voluit, humano generi dies, menses, annos, signa, tempora, vtilitates{que} factura. In terris quo{que} altissimos mō∣tes in verlicem sustulit, valles in ima dieci, campas aequaliter stravit, animalium greges ad vari∣as hominum servitutes vtiliter instituit. Sylvarum quo{que} robora humanis vsibus profutura solida∣vit, fruges in cibum elicuit, fontium or a reseravit, & lapsuris fluminibus infudit. Postea vt ipsis quo{que} delicias procuraret oculis, variis florum coloribus ad voluptatem sectantium cuncta vestiuit. In ipso quo{que} Mari, quamvis esset, & magnitudine & vtilitate mirabile, multimoda animalia, nuac mediocris, nunc vasti corporis finxit, ingenium artificis de institutionis varietate testantia. Quibus non contentus ne fortè fremitus & cursus aquarum cum dispendio possessoris humani ali∣enum occuparet elementum, fines littoribus inclusit: quo cum fremens fluctus & ex alto sinu spu∣mans vnda venisset, rursum in setediret, nec terminos concesses excederet, servans iura praescripta: vt divinas leges tantò magis homo custodiret, quantò illas etiam elementa servassent. Post quae ho∣minem quo{que} mundo praeposuit, & quidem ad imaginem Dei factum: cui mentem & rationem in∣didit, & prudentiam vt Deum posset imitari: cuius etsi corporis terrena primordia, colestis ame & divini halitus inspirata substantia. Tertul. de Trin. p. 493. saith he, exacteth at our hands, that first of all we beleeue in God the Father and Lord Omnipotent, that is, the most absolute Maker, and Creatour of all things, who hath builded the Heavens on high, and fixed the Earth beneath, and bespred the Sea with moysture, and hath trimmed, and dressed every of these with all such necessaries as are behoo∣full for them. For first concerning Heaven, he hath caused therein the bright-some rising of the Sunne, the shining globe of the Moone he hath filled with augmentation to lighten the night withall, as also with the many beames, and brightnesse of the Starres, all which he would that with orderly procee∣dings they should compasse the whole world, making for the benefit of mankind both daies, and moneths, and yeares, and signes, and times, and commodities. Secondly concerning the Earth, he hath made therein the Hills, and Mountaines of
an excessiue height, the Vallyes and Dales he hath depressed as low, the Meddowes and Pastures he hath smoothly spread in carpet wise, he hath ordained the heards of Cattle for the sundry services of men. He hath made stable, sure, & strong, the bodies of Oak and Timber, for the service of Man too, he hath brought Corn out of the earth, and made it fit for meat, he hath vnclosed the heads of Fountaines, and powred forth the same into the glyding Rivers. Afterwards that he might procure delight vnto the eie, he hath cloathed the Earth with sundry kinds of flowers. Thirdly concerning the Sea, howsoe∣ver it was exceeding admirable both for quantity and vtility, yet hath he formed and framed therein divers & sundry kinds of Beasts, some of lesse, some of a greater Bulcke, all testify∣ing vnto vs the wisdome of their Maker in respect of the va∣rietie of their making. Wherewith not yet contenting him∣selfe, least happely the ruffling and raging thereof should to the hurt and losse of Man the owner, incroach on the other E∣lement, he hath appointed bownds vnto the shoare, wherevnto when the roaring stoods, and boysterous waues are once come, they should backe againe with heaue and hoe, neither should they exceed the limits granted vnto them, but keepe them∣selues within their set bowndes, all to teach Man to obserue Gods Lawes, seeing the Elements themselues are so obedient therevnto. After all these things rehearsed he hath placed Man over the world, made in trueth at first to the similitude of God: to whom he hath given a mind, and reason, and wis∣dome, that he might imitate the same God. Whose Body how∣soever it had an earthly beginning, yet was a substance inspi∣red into him of a divine and heavenly breathing. Thus for Tertullian. Whose wordes since I cannot giue them the true perfection they should haue, you may finde them in the Author himselfe, and they are very well worth your looking over. But to come vnto my purpose. All these things thus specified as they could haue been made in a moment, so is it not amisse for vs to consider in what space of time they were made. Moses informes vs of
Six Birth-daies that all these Things had, and indeed they were no lesse that went to the dispatching and finishing of them. In the first of them was made Materia prima: The Prime Mother of all things being, as also Light and Darknesse. In the second, the Heavens, those coelestiall Orbs aboue. In the third, he brought the Sea into his own peculiar compasse, and making the Dry Land to appeare, he caused it to bring forth both Hearbs, and Plants, and Trees. In the fourth, he made the Sun, the Moone, and the Starres in the Firmament. In the fift, he made the Fishes of the Sea, the Fowles, and every creeping thing. In the sixt he made the Beasts of the field, and all Cattle; & at length he made Man.Musc. Loc. Comm. cap. de Creat. p. 12, Musculus hath concluded all this in foure onely verses which he would haue young men to haue by heart. The verses are these: PRIMA Dies lucē; Coelum ALTERA; TERTIA Terram; Sydera QVARTA; SEQVENS Piscem habet et Volucrem: SEXTA Animal quodvis, Hominem{que} ex pulvere terrae Protulit: at SABATHVM septima lux tenuit. They may in homely wise be englished thus. FIRST Day had light: the SECOND Heaven: the THIRD the Earths round bowle: The FOVRTH the Sun, and Moone, and Starres: the FIFT both Fish, and Fowle: The SIXT bruit Beasts, and Cattel eke, and brought forth Man withall, SEAVENTH Day had rest, and that it is, which we the Sabboth call. Here if a doubt arise concerning the Angels, why Moses in describing the creation of all other Creatures omitted them: I for my part am of Zanchius his opinion, that Mo∣ses hath not omitted them altogither, but hath compre∣hended them, though in secret wise, in the first wordes of his Booke. For where he said,Gen. 1.1.  In the beginning God crea∣ted the Heaven, and the Earth, In nomine coelorum, Sham∣maijm,
Zanc. de Oper. Dei. l. 1. c. 2. p. 13. Col. 2. saith he, Angelos comprehendi non dubito, quorum sedes coelum est supremum. I nothing doubt but vnder the name of Heavē the Angels are comprehended, whose seate is the highest Heaven. Whosoever desireth to see more hereof, & on what day it is probable, that they were created, and why Moses speakes not of them in as direct tearmes, and as roundly, as he doth of Things visible, I re∣ferre you vnto Zanchius, as also to aM. Salkeld his Treatise of An∣gels. c. 3. p. 16. Treatise of Angels set forth not long agoe. To returne then where I left. Having thus much spoken in generall of the Creation of the World, and all things therein contained, it will fur∣ther our knowledge herein; if so be we do consider, First, of what he made this world; Secondly, how he made it. Of what this world was made is intimated vnto vs in the He∣brew word, Bara signifying, Creavit. Now for the Latine word Creavit, how soever sometimes it is truely spoken of many things as Men, & other Creatures, which are borne by propagation: asLiv. Decad. 1. l. 1. Livy speaking of Sylvius the son of Ascanius, Is, saith he, Aeneam Sylvium creat: is deinde La∣tinum Sylvium: Sylvius begot Aeneas Sylvius, and Aene∣as Sylvius, Latinus Sylvius: yet proprijssimeZanch. de O∣per. l. 1. c. 2. p. 9. Col. 1. saith Zanchi∣us, & simpliciter tum aliquid dicitur creari, cum ex nihilo a∣liquid fit, simply and most properly that is said to be crea∣ted, when something is made of nothing. Now this parti∣cle Ex, Ex nihilo, Of nothing, as the sameZanch. Ib. c. 3 p. 31. Col. 2. Zanchius well observeth, sometimes signifies the material cause, whereof somewhat is made, sometimes order only, as when we saie, Ex mane fit dies, & ex die meridies: of the morning day is made, & of the day Noone-tide: that is, after the morning comes the day, & after the day hath begun, Noone-tide. So likewise in this place, All things are made of nothing: that is, whē as nothing at all was at first, afterwards what∣soever was, the same was made. This I confesse was gib∣berish to Aristotle, who doated on Nature so much: but as one said in theVirg. Egl. 1. Poet, Quid facerem? ne{que} servitio me exire licebat,
Nec tam praesentes alibi cognoscere Divos, What would you haue me do? Neither could I put of my service wherewith at first I was so fettered, nor once sup∣pose that there were elsewhere so favourable Gods: right so in this case was it with Aristotle, sworne-man he was to Nature, neither ever dreamt he of the true God. Where in let vs see yet how he himselfe, and the crew of Philoso∣phers that followed his steps, stumbled (as it were) at strawes & leapt over blocks: how many Argoes eies they had abroad, and were at home as blinde as Beetles. The Intelligences, and Soules of Men they could not be igno∣rant how they were made, without praevious, or prece∣dent matter at all, for even by their owne confession they are immateriall, they are not logd and clogd with Matter. Now God that could this do, and doth it dayly even by their confession (I meane concerning the Soules of men) could not he at first haue made this World, and all things therein contained without any helpe of Matter at al? was the Lords hand soEsay. 50.21 shortned? Or had he then forsooth no power? Doth he asmuch in a manner now, and could he not doe it at the first? Indeede could God haue done no more then Nature, it had beene somewhat they had saide: for true it is in Nature, Ex nihilo nihil fit: of nothing naught is made. Art doth imitate Nature, wherfore as Na∣ture must needs haue somewhat to worke on, so of neces∣sity must Art to, and therfore the Potters artTheod. Div. Decret. epit. l. 5. p. 985. Col. 1. saith Theo∣doret, that requires clay: the art of building stones & brick: the Carpenters and Shipwrights, wood and tymber: the art of Weaving, woole: of Tanning & Currying, hides & skinnes: of Painting, colours. But it is not so with God, he calleth those things which be not, as though they were, Rom. 4.17, And through faith, saith the Apostle, we vnderstād that the world was ordained by the word of God, so that the things which we see are not made of things which did appeare, Heb. 11.3. I conclude this point with that of Musculus; if so beMusc. Loc. Com. Cap. de Creat, p. 11. saith Musculus, it be demanded whence God created al things, our
answer is, that he created some things of nothing, some things of the earth, some things of the water, & some things of flesh. He created of nothing the Heaven, the Earth, and Sea. Of the earth he created Adam our first Parent, and Beasts, and Plants, and Hearbes of every kinde. Of the waters he created Fishes, and Fowles of the aire. Of flesh he made Eue the first Mother of mankinde. All which notwithstanding (asVrfin. Catech. Angl. edit. 1611 p. 311. one obserues) were either immediatly, or mediatly made of Nothing, forasmuch as the prime matter of all at the first had a beginning from Nothing. And thus much of the first point, namely of what he made this world: I now come to the Second, namely how he made it. How God did make the World we need no better In∣structor thē that excellent Singer of Israel David the Pro∣phet, who shewes vs in a many places that the World was made by the Word. As Psal. 33.6. By the word saith he, of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the hoasts of them by the breath of his mouth: and againe in the 9 verse, For he spake, and it was done: he commanded and it stood fast: And Psal. 148.5, For he spake the word, and they were made, hee commanded, and they were created. For the better procee∣ding wherein we are to obserueVrsin. Ib. 9. 310. fiue kinds of operations. The first of things which worke according to the qualitie and force of their owne nature, not being guided by any proper vnderstanding or will of their owne. Such is the operation of Fier, Water, Hearbs & precious Stones. The second is of those which follow Nature in working to, but not without some proper appetite, or desire of their own, though the rule of reason be wanting. Of this sort are the operations & actions of bruit Beasts. The third is of Men, and Divels, who also worke according to the qualitie of their nature, namely by reason, deliberation, & freely, but corruptly. The fourth is of good Angels who likewise as Men worke by reason and will, but not corruptly. The fift is the highest, and supreame kinde of working, which ac∣cording to the nature of the first Agent floweth from an
vnderstanding, and will, and that most pure, most perfect, and most right, neither is it subiect to the pleasure, & dis∣posing of any higher cause. And therfore this Agent, who is indeed God himselfe, is most wise, most good, most free and most infinite, who hath no need of any deliberation to go before, but without motion, at his becke and com∣mandement only, worketh and guideth all things, both what he will, and as he will.Ps. 148.5. He spake the word, and they were made, he commandeded, and they were created. Howbeit here we are to knowe that the Word of God is taken in the Scriptures, generally & specially. Generally, and so it is taken either for every thing, as Luk. 1.37: or for the do∣ctrine of God, as Ioh. 8.47: or for things that haue beene done, as Luk. 1.2. Specially, and so is it taken or for the promise of God, as Ephes. 5.26: or Gods decree, as Esay 45.23: or for the commandement of God, as Deut. 4.2: or for condemnation, sentence, and iudgement, as Esay, 28. 14: or for the Sonne of God the second Person in Trinitie as Ioh. 1.1: or lastly for his beck only as Heb. 1.3, Bearing vp all things by his mightie word, and so it is in this place. By the word of the Lord,Ps. 33.6. saith David, were the heavens made, and all the hoasts of them by the breath of his mouth. And thus much of the second point, and consequently of the Workes of God, that are named here in generall: now of that One that is named here in particular, and that is Man. And hath made of one blood all man-kind to dwell on al the face of the Earth, and hath assigned the times, that were ordained before, and the bownds of their habitation. Being to speake, Beloued, of MAN, I may say as did Ti∣berius the Emperour, when he wrote to the Senate of Rome.Tacit. Anal. l. 6. p. 189. Quid scribam vobis P.C. aut quomodo scribam, aut quid omninò non scribam hoc tempore, Dij me Deae{que} peius perdant, quā perire quotidiè sentio, si scio. What it is I should write vnto you Fathers of the Senate, or how I should write vnto you, or what at this time I should not write, the Gods and Goddesses more afflict me, then I feele my
selfe to be every houre, if I for my part, can now tel. Right so, Beloved, set the execration aside, or this of Tiberius, or that of Iezabels, The Gods doe so to me, and more also, 1. King. 19.2. and what to say, or not to say, to speake or write of Man, I for my part knowe not. Shall I tel you of the excellency, & nobility of his Birth, how God wrought him with his own handes (as you heard notLect. 3. p. 33. long agoe out ofIob. 10.9. Iob, and out ofPs. 139.14. & Ps. 119.73. David) how he isIavel. Epit. in lib. Metaph. Tract. 1. c. 1. Tom. 1. p. 357. Col. 1. Vid. Co∣nimb. in 2. de Coelo, q. 2. Art. 2 p. 184. So Picol. Copula & by∣menaeus mortal. & aeternor. Pi∣colom. Ethic. l. 2. c. 32. p. 174. A∣gaine, Mortali∣um finis, perma∣nentium & flux ilium copula Mundi{que} Epil∣gus. Piccl. Ib. c. 39. p. 184. Nexus Dei, & Mundi, as some cal him, as others, Horizon inter corpo∣rea & incorporea; A fastning or knitting together of God and the World: The Horizon between corporeal things, and things incorporeall? In a word how he is placed here in this world by God that made him, to be thePs. 8.6. So Tertui. Omnia famula sunt hominis, omnia subiecta, omnia mancipata. Tertul. de Anima. c. 15. p. 552. Monarch of the same? That were the next way,Terent. Eunuch. Act. 2. Sc. 2. ex stulto insanum facere: with pride and selfe conceit, to set him quite be∣sides himselfe. Shall I withPrincipium iure tribuitur Homin, cuius causa vide∣tur cuncta alia genuisse Natura magna & saeva mercede contra tanta sua munera: vt non sit sa∣tis aestimare, Parens melior homini, an tristior Noverca fuerit. Ante omnia vnum animantium cunc∣torum, alienis velat operibus: caeteris varia tegumenta tribuit, testas, cortices, ceria, spinas, villos, setas, pilos, plumam, pennas, squamas, vellera. Truncos etiam arbores{que} cortice, interdum gemino, à frigoribus & calore tutata est. Hominem tātùm nudum & in nuda humo, natali die abiicit ad va∣gitus statim & ploratum, nullum{que} tot animalium aliud ad lachrymas, & has protinus vitae prin∣cipio. At Hercule rifus praecox ille & celerrimus, ante quadragesimum diem nulli datur Abhoc lu∣cis rudimento, quae ne feras quidem inter nos genitas, vincula accipiunt, & omnium membrorum nexus: ita{que} feliciter natus iacet, manibus pedibus{que} devinctis, flens, animal caeteris imperaturum: & à suppliciis vitam auspicatur, vnam tantum ob culpam quia natum est. Heu dementiam ab iis initiis existimantium ad superbiam se genitos. Prima roboris spes, primum{que} temporis munus Qua∣drupedi similem facit. Quando homini incessus? quando vox? quando firmum cibis os?? quamdiu palpitans vertex, summae inter cuncta animalia imbecillitatis indicium? Iam morbi, tot{que} medicinae contra mala excogitatae, & hae quo{que} subinde novitatibus victae. Caetera sentire naturam suam, alia pernicitatem vsurpare, alia praepetes volatus, alia vires, alia nare: Hominem scire nihil sinc doc∣trina, non fari, non ingredi, non vefci: breviter{que} non aliud naturae sponte quàm flerc. Plin. Natur. Hist. l. 7. Prooem. p. 105. Pliny then tell you of his mi∣series, and how of all other living Creatures, Nature hath brought him forth altogether naked, & afterwards when he is cloathed, cloathing him yet with the bountie, and riches of others? how to all the rest she hath given suffici∣ent
to clad them according to their kind, as Shels, Hides, Shag, Bristles, Haire, Feathers, Quils, Scales, and Wool? I how the very truncks, and stems of Trees, and Plants, want not their Barke and rind, yea and sometimes double too, to defend them against the iniuries both of heat and cold: Man only poore wretch, how even vpon his birth∣day she hath laid him naked on the Earth, there to pule and cry from the very first houre that he is borne, so that no creature whatsoever is subiect to shed teares, & weepe like him? Shall I tel you how when he is borne, he is imme∣diatly fast bound, hauing no part or member at libertie, a thing, (as Pliny notes) not practised on the young whelps of the wildest Beast that is? Shall I tell you how long it is ere he can afterwards goe alone? how long it is before he can prattle and speake, feed himselfe, and chew his meate? how long the mould and crowne of his Head continues to beat and pant before his braine be well setled, the vn∣doubted marke, and token, saith Pliny, that bewrayeth his exceeding great weaknesse aboue all other Creatures whatsoever? Shall I tell you of his infirmities & sicknesses that seaze vpon his feeble Body, besides the new diseases that happen vnto him continually, able to check and fru∣strate all provision of Physicke, and skill of the most ex∣pert Galen that is? shall I tell you how among all other Creatures there is not one, but by a secret instinct of na∣ture knoweth his owne good, & whereto he is made able: some make vse of the swiftnesse of their feet, some of their wings, some are strong of limme, others apt to swimme, Man only knoweth nothing vnlesse he be taught, he can neither speake, nor goe, nor eat, otherwise then he is trai∣ned to it, and to be short how naturally he is apt & good at nothing but to pule and cry? Surely this were even e∣nough to make vs bid defiance to Nature, and vnder that pretence to blaspheme even God himselfe. Whether then shall we turne our selues? To which of these two waies shall we betake vs? we will venter on the former, and so
much the rather on that, for that if in consideration of our Excellency we be puft vp too too farre, we are like to haue day by day Monitors enough to put vs in minde of our Mortalitie. He that said of our Betters, I haue said yee are Gods: and yee all are children of the most highest,Psal. 86.1. said with one & the selfe same breath: but yee shall die like men. Concerning our Creation thē it appertaineth to consi∣der:Vid M. Bun∣nies Corner Ston l. 1. c. 1. § 6. p. 7. First of the making of our Bodies, & then how they are endued with a living Soule. Cōcerning our Bodies we are to note theVid. Cyril. Ca∣tech. 4. Edit. Pa∣ris. 1608. p. 88. & Catech. 9. p. 195. wonderfull composition, and connexion thereof, the iust proportion, conveniency, and beautie of every part. This it was that caused Galen to write that ex∣cellent Booke De Ʋsu Partium, wherin he describes with admirable cunning, the knitting together, the proportio∣nable agreement, the beautie & vse of every member, and among others hath this passage: Admire not,Galen. de Vsu Part. l. 3. c. 10. saith he, the Suns beautie, nor the beautie of the Moone: nor that the multitude of the Stars are so wel digested in such good order. Nor let their greatnesse, or beautifulnesse, or restles motion, or compasse, & circuits, that they continually vse, strike thee with admiration, as if those things which are here below in comparison of them should seeme but small and base to be ac∣counted of, and to want indeed their lustre and excellency. For thou shalt find that even in these things (he meaneth the se∣verall Parts of Man) the wisdome, & vertues, & providence of the Creator doth shew and declare it selfe, and that the workemans art and cunning is as much in these, as in any of those whatsoever. The more wicked and absurd were the Manichees of old (with whō another day this veryMat 12.42. Hea∣then shall rise in iudgement and condemne them) who held that the BodyAlfons. de Ca∣str. advers. haer. l. 4. p. 269. of Man was evil by Nature, and that the Divell was the Maker of it. Nor shall they be quit of al their punishment who held this Heresie but by halfes, I meane the Paterniani, and Ʋenustiani, who said as much of the lower parts, as did the Manichees of all. I cannot now stand about them, onely I will say with S. Austen:
Caro igitur o∣pus Dei est. Cum formatur, opus Dei est: cum con¦ditur, opus Dei est: cum pro∣dicitur, Dei o∣pus est: cum re∣generatur, opus Dei est: cum sig∣natur, opus Dei est: cum curatur, opus Dei est. Quid debet Di∣abolo totiens o∣pus Dei? Aug. de Verb. Apost. ser. 26. p. 260. So Tertull. Corpus istud Platonica sententia carcer [ qu. ] ceterùm Aposto∣lica, Dei Tem∣plum cùm in Christo est. Ter∣tul. de Anima c. 30. p 573. Vid. Davids Dsire. Ser, 4. p. 19. & Ser. 2. p. 91. The flesh when it is formed, it is the worke of God: when it is made, it is Gods worke: when it is brought forth it is God's worke too: when it is regenerated it is Gods worke: when it is signed, it is Gods worke: when it is healed, it is Gods worke. What trowe we hath the Divel to doe at all, with that which is so oftentimes & so many waies Gods work. But thus much of the Body, now as touching the Soule. As touching the Soule we are to note two principall points. First and formost whence it is, then the Nature or Excellency of it. Whence it is we are so much the rather to make enquiry, for thatVid. M Bu∣nies Corner stone l. 1 c. 1. §. 6. p. 9 Diverse by such like∣lyhoods as they haue conceived, haue taken the Soule to be nothing els in effect but only some Elementary Concre∣tion, and so consequently both to follow the temperature of the Body, and to be but Mortal also. Whereas in trueth as it was first of all breathed into Adam, so is it (though not in that maner) into al & every of vs that come of him, that being most true whichIn medio ho∣minis (alluding to that of Za∣charie Zach. 12. 1. Spiritum ho∣minis in mdio eius fingit, according to Vatablus) creando infunditur, & infundendo creatur, Zanch. de Oper. Part. 3. l. 2. c. 5. Thes. 3. p. 559. Col. 2. Tertullian, and Gregory Nyssen, cited by Colerus. Quaest. Theol. & Philosoph. Num. Anima sit ex traduce. p. 5. Zanchius hath, that the Soule in the midst of man is infused by creating, and by infusing is created. So that we haue not our Soules Ex traduce, by Propagation as we haue our Bodies, though there are I confesse great men and some of the s Fathers to, that hold this opinion. Concerning the state of the SouleHieron. Epist. ad Marcel. & Anaps. saith S. Ie∣rome writing to Marcellinus, and Anapsychias, I remem∣ber your question very well, nay indeed the Churches questiō, WHETHER it came from Heaven, as Pythagoras the Philoso∣pher, and all the Platonists, & Origen thinkes: or, WHETHER it be of the proper & peculiar substāce of God, as the Stoicks, the Manichees, and the hereticall Priscillianists of Spaine suppose: or, WHETHER they are reserved in Gods treasure made a long time before they came, or descended, into the Bo∣dy, as some Ecclesiastical Persons foolishly are perswaded: or,
WHETHER dayly they are made by God, and so sent into the Bodies, according to that in the Gospell, My Father worketh hitherto, and I worke: or, WHETHER it be ex traduce, as Ter∣tullian, Apollinarius, and the greatest part of the West are of opinion, that as the Body is borne of the Body, so the Soule should be borne of the Soule, & be of like condition, as are the Soules of bruit Beasts. Wherevpon S. Ierome: What my opi∣nion is I remēber I haue delivered in my works against Ruffi∣nus. Now his opinion there was this. When Ruffinus had said that he for his part held nothing positiuely, and defi∣nitiuely in this Question, but left the truth therof to God himselfe, and to whomsoever he would reveale it: What!Per tanta sa∣cula tibi nullus videtur dignus fuisse, cui de hac quaestione Domi∣nus revelavit? Non Patriar∣cha, non Pro∣pheta, non Apo∣stolus, non Mar∣tyr? Ne tibi qui∣dem quando in carceribus, & exiliis moraba∣ris, huiusmodi sacramenta pa∣tuerunt? Domi∣nus in Evange∣lio: Pater inquit revelavi nomen tuum hominibus Qui Patrem re∣velavit, de ani∣marum statu ta∣cuit? & miraris si contra te Fra∣trum scandala concitentur, cū id nscire te iu∣res quod Christi Eccesiae se nosse fateantur? Hie∣ron. advers. Ruf. Apol. 2. saith S. Ierome, throughout so many ages seemes no man worthy in your eies, to whome the Lorde hath revealed the truth of this Question? Not any of the Patriarks? nor of the Prophets? nor of the Apostles? nor of Martyrs? Why, man, were not these mysteries made most apparant to you your selfe when you were in prison, and in exile? FatherIoh. 17.6. saith our Sa∣viour in the Gospel, I haue revealed thy name vnto men. He that revealed the Father, was he silent in this case cōcerning the state of Soules? And now Sir do you marvaile, if you giue scandale to the Bretheren, when as you protest you knowe not that which all the Churches of Christ professe they know? But thus much of the former point whence the Soule is. Concerning the Nature, or Excellencie of it as it partly appeareth hereby in that it is made by God himselfe: so is it evident by the effects also, which it worketh in the Bo∣dy. For where before the comming thereof the Body in some sort is like those Idols of which the PsalmistPs. 115.5. spea∣keth: They haue mouthes and speake not: eies haue they and see not: they haue eares, and heare not: noses haue they and smell not: they haue hands and handle not: feet haue they and walke not: neither speake they through their throat: theAnima moues corpus, & cona∣tus eius extrin∣secus foris po ēt. Ab illa est enim impingi & pedea in incessum, & manus in contactum, & oculos in conspectum, & linguam in offalum, velut sigilla∣rio motus superficiem intus agitantem. Tertull. de Anima. c. 2. p 528. Soule doth no sooner come, but the Body hath a power
to performe all this, and therefore in tract of time it spea∣keth, it sees, it heares, it smels, it handles, it walkes, it per∣formes, what not? And thereforeTull. Som. Scip. Tully in this respect ve∣ry truely, Mens cuius{que} is est quis{que}: The Mind or Soule of Man is all in all. By reason of this it is that hee hath the knowledge of numbring, a point peculiar to himselfe: that he vnderstandeth not things in particular only, but in a generality and vniversality: that he inventeth and dispo∣seth Arts, discerneth Vice from Vertue, things honest frō dishonest, and rules (as it were the world) both Land and Sea. By reason of this it is that though he hath not as bruit Beasts either Feathers, or Wings to fly with, or Swiftnes or Nimblenes of foot, or Finnes whereby to swim, or extraor∣dinary Strength, &c: yet hath he that whichFrench. Acad. Part. 2. c. 73. p. 407. Vid. Lact. de Opific. Dei. c. 2. & 3. Senica de Benefic. l. 2. c. 29. recompen∣ceth and makes amends for all these. For though he hath not Feathers to fly with, and mount aloft as Birds doe, yet how many meanes hath he to ascend, and descend, to goe and come, even when and whither he wil? If he want him∣selfe the Swiftnesse & Footemanship of Beasts, yet how ma∣ny Beasts are there with whose swiftnes he may help him∣selfe? Though he hath not Finnes whereby to swim, and so to passe along the Seas, yet hath he Boats & Ships to helpe himselfe, and by reason of those helps, how is he con∣versant in that Element? As for Strength which he may seeme to want to beare burthens a farre of, we dayly see how that is recompenced by the service of Beasts vnto his vse. So that whatsoever he wants in himselfe, he hath dominion yet over such as haue it, he is Lord Paramount (as it were) of the World, and al therein are at his service. I will not here speake of ourVid. Calv. Inst. l. 2. c. 15. §. 3. Creatiō in the image of God: that is, of the integrity that Man had when as he was in∣dued with a right vnderstanding, when he had his affecti∣on framed according vnto reason, and al his senses gover∣ned in good, and seemely order, and when in Excellent gifts he did truely resemble the excellency of his Creator. Alas we may now say, Fuimus Troes, we were when time
was: Virg. Aen. l. 2.Fuit Ilium, & ingens Gloria Teuerorum: Paradice, and Calice, were once ours. But now, now wee may say asTull. de Senect. Milo did: At hi iam mortui sunt: our armes are not our owne: and adde what followeth there to, Non verò tam isti, quàm tu ipse, nugator. Triflers as we are, nay Traitors to God aboue, not our Armes so much, that is our Bodies, as Soules & Bodies both. O Adam2. Esd. 7.48. saith Esdras, VVhat hast thou done? For in that that thou hast sinned, thou art not fallen alone, but the fall also redoūdeth to vs that come of thee. True it is, there are some reliques in vs of that Image wherevnto we were formerly created, but whether they are in respect of our Bodies onely, or only of our Soules, or in respect of both, Body and Soule both togi∣ther, I will not now dispute the case, I referre you vntoZanch. de O∣per. Dei. Part. 3. l. 3. c. 1. p. 609. 610 &c. Omnis Anima eous{que} in Adam censetur, donec in Christo recenseatur. Ter¦tul. de Anima. c. 22. p 559. Zanchius, who is likely to resolue you in this point no mā better. Nor will I here describe vnto you that excellent consort and apt proportion which is betweene the Hea∣vens aboue, and the Body and Soule of Man: what cor∣respondence there is betweene Man and the Sunne in the Firmament: betweene Man againe, and the Moone: Man and the other Planets: Man and the Stars: Man and those celestiall Orbes that are aboue, it is done already to my hand by an excellent Plutarch in this kindeHarm. coelest. corp. & human. per Anton. Mi∣zald. Monlucia∣rum. Edit 1550 Antonius Mizaldus by way of Dialogue. I will end this point of the Nature & Excellency of the Soule with that of S. Ber∣nard:Bernard. super Cantic. Ser. 83. p. 184. Col. 3. Quid non tutè audeat apud Deum cuius se insignem cernit imagine, illustrem similitudine novit? Quid inquam vereatur de maiestate, cui de origine fiducia datur? What may not the Soule safely dare to do with God, by reason of whose image shee is so beautifull, whose similitude makes her so glorious? What need shee to feare that Ma∣iesty, who by reason of her birth may haue such confi∣dence? It is that in effect which the Apostle hath to the Hebrews,Heb. 4.16. Let vs go boldly to the throne of grace, that wee may receiue mercy, and finde grace to helpe in time of neede.
And thus much of the Works of God as here they are na∣med in generall, and one of them in particular. Now of the Powerfulnesse of these his Works to make vs to seeke after God: That they should seek the Lord if so be they might haue groaped after him, and found him, though doubtlesse hee be not farre from every one of vs. As it stood with good congruity in the building of Ba∣bel that their tongues should be confounded, and they should not vnderstand one another, and so perforce be e∣very of them driven to leaue of their intended worke: so was it necessary in building the Church that the Builders thereof should so speake as that they should not only vn∣derstand one an other, but be vnderstood by their Hea∣rers to. This it was that was the cause of the first myracle that was wrought by our Saviours Apostles after the As∣cention, of whome it was said by their Hearers, who wereFerus in Act. c. 2. some of them of Asia, some of Africke, some of Europe the knowne parts of the world at that time, Behold, saie they, are not all these which speake of Galile? How heare we every man our own language wherein we were borne?Act. 2.7. Parthi∣ans, and Medes, and Elamites, & the inhabitants of Mesopo∣tamia, and of Iudaea, and of Cappadocia, of Pontus, & Asia, & of Phrygia, and Pamphylia, of Egypt, and of the parts of Li∣bya, which is beside Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, & Iewes, and Proselites,Except I know the power of the voice, I shall be vnto him that speaketh a Bar∣barian, and he that speaketh shall be a Bar∣barian vnto me. 1. Cor. 14 11. Barbarus hîc e∣gosum quia non intelligor ollis. Ovid, Trist. l. 5. leg. 10. Cretes, and Arabians: we heard them speake in our owne tongues the wonderfull workes of God. Indeede as it is noted by aCalv. in Ps. 19 worthy Writer, & experience shewes the same, the difference of tongues is the cause that mutu∣all communication betwixt diverse Nations doth vtterlie cease. And though one be most eloquent in his owne lan∣guage, yet if he come among Strangers he must be faine to be mute & hold his peace, or if so be he wil needs speak, every one that is by, will account him but barbarous. Nay had he the knowledge saith Calvin of all the tongues in the World, yet could he not speake at once to two sundry kindes of Men, as to a Greeke, and a Romane to, but as
soone as he turned his speech or to the one, or to the o∣ther, the one or other should not conceiue him. Well fare a language then that goeth throughout the whole world. That not Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the Inhabitants of Mesopotamia only, in a word not those of Asia, and Africke, and Europe, can know and vnderstād, but those of America to: nor only the learned and pro∣found, but he also that cannot a letter of the Booke, even he that saith, as it is in Esay, I cannot read, Esay 29.12. And would you know what language that is? It is the lāguage of the Heavens: It is the language of the Day and Night. And yet I am deceaued too, for as I take it, it is no lan∣guage No, but it is a voice then, it is a sound, they are cer∣taine words; of which we may much better say, then did the Pythagoraeans of Heavens harmony,Tull Som. Scip. Quis est, qui cō∣plet aures meas tantus & tam dulcis son us? witnes the Pro∣phet David, who speaking of those heavenly Creatures (whereby he meant no doubt the rest of the Creatures too) The Heavens, saith he, declare the glory of God: & the Firmament sheweth his handy Workes. One day telleth ano∣ther: and one night certifieth another. There is neither speech nor language: but their voices are heard among them. Their sound is gone out into all lands: and their words into the ends of the world. In the beautie of Heaven and Earth,In pulchritu∣dine coeli & ter∣rae quaedam sunt paginae ad omni∣um oculos sem∣per patentes, & Autorem suum nunquam tacē∣tes, quarum pro∣testatio doctri∣nam, imitatur magistrorum & eloquia Scriptu∣rarum. Ambros. Epist. l. 10. Ep. 84. p. 263. saith S. Ambrose, there are as it were Leaues and Pages that alwaies lie open to every mans eye, and never are silent of their Au∣thor, the open protestation and declaring whereof imitates the teaching of a Master, & speech of holy Scripture. Hence it was that S. Anthony gaue that excellent answere to a Philosopher, who demanded of him how he could possi∣bly spend his time in the Wildernesse, seeing he was desti∣tute of Bookes: Meus liber O Philosophe,Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 18. p. 294. saith he, est Na∣tura rerum à Deo conditarum: quae quotiescun{que} animo lubi∣tum sit meo, libros ipsius Dei ad legendum suppeditat. O Phi∣losopher, saith St Anthony, my Booke is the Nature of all things created by God, which when I please I can pervse,
and read, notwithstanding that I want the sacred Vo∣lumes of God. That, Beloued, is a Booke indeed wherein all things are wrote in Capital letters, insomuch that who so readeth it, may not only run, asHab. 2 2. speaks the Prophet but do many things else besides. This is the Book that taught the Heathens (to the shame ofConcerning this point, & of Atheists, see more in that Re∣verend Prelate on Ionas. Lect. 4 p. 61. & French Academy. Part. 2. c. 98. Atheists be it spoken) that there was a God at least. Who when concerning the Heavens they perceiued such aequabilitie of motion, such turning & trolling of them, such distinction, such vtility, beautie, order, both of the Sunne, the Moone, the Starres, & what not? What did they but gather thence that what was done, was not done by chance, but that there was a Supreame Power that did dispose and order all. As if one,Vt si quis in Domum aliquā, aut in gymnasi∣um, aut in ferum venerit, cum videat omnium rerum rationē, modum, discipli∣nam, non possit ea sine causa fie∣ri iudicare: sed esse aliquem in∣telligat, qui prae∣sit & cui parea∣tur. Multò ma∣gis in tantis motibus, tantis{que} vicissitudinibus tam multarum rerum at{que} tau∣tarum ordi∣nibus, in quibus nihil vnquam immensa, & infinita vetustas mentita sit, statuat necesse est, ab aliqua mente tantos Naturae motus gubernari. Tull. de Nat. Deor. l. 2. saith Balbus in Tully, should come into some house, or into a Schoole, or into a Faire or Market place, and seeing the or∣der of all things there, the whole maner and discipline, he can∣not suppose that any thing there is done without cause, but he well vnderstandeth there is some One who doth command and is obeyed. Much more in so great motions, in so interchange∣able courses, such orders of so many severall things, & things so great, that haue never fayled for so long a time, he must needs determine with himselfe that so many motions of Na∣ture are not altogether masterlesse, but that they are gover∣ned, guyded, and ruled by some Intelligence. Loe the Power∣fulnesse of Gods workes to make vs to seeke after God. And so much the rather when we shall consider with our selues his admirable Workmāship, as isVt Creatorem non in Coelo tantùm miramur, & Terra, Sole, Oceane, Elephantis, Camelis, Equis, Bubus, Pardis, Visis, Le∣onibus, sed in minutis quo{que} animalibus, Formica, Culice, Muscis, Vermiculis, & istiosmodi genere, quorum magis scimus corpora, quàm nomina, candem{que} in tunctis veneramur solertiam: ita mens Christo dedita, aequè & in maioribus & in minoribus intenta est, sciens etiam pro ocioso verbo red∣dendam esse rationem. Hier. ad Heliod. Epitaph. Nepoliani. noted by S. Hie∣rom, not onely in those greater workes the Heavens and Earth, Sunne and Sea, Camels and Elephants, & so forth,
but in the least kind of Creature that is, the Gnat, the Fly, the Flea, and such like, Tantus Artifex in modicis,Tertul. de A∣nima. c. 4. p. 531 saith Tertullian, quantus & in maximis: As skilfull in working these least littles, as in the hugest things that are. Nay Pliny doth admire him more in little things then in great, in a whole Chapter to that purpose, only he misnames him & calls him Nature, but you shall haue his words at large. In bodies of any bignesse,In magnis cor∣poribus, aut cer∣tè maioribus, facilis officina sequaci materia fuit. In his tam parvis, at{que} tam nullis, quae ra∣tio, quanta vis, quàm inextri∣cabili perfec∣tio? Vbi tot sen∣sus collocavit in Culice? & sunt alia dictu mino∣ra. Sed vbi vi∣sum in eo prae∣tendit? vbi gu∣statum applica∣vit? vbi odora∣tum inseruit? v∣bi verò trucu∣lentam illam & portione maximam vocē ingeneravit? qua subtilitate pennas adnex∣uit: praelongavit pedum crura? disposuit ieiunā caucam, vti al∣vum? avidum sanguinis, & po∣tissimùm humani, sitim accendit? Telum verò perfodiendo tergori, quo spiculavit ingenio? At{que} vt in capaci, cum cerni non possit exilitas, ita reciproca geminavit arte, vt sodiendo acuminatum pa∣riter, sorbondo{que}. Fistulosum esset. Quos teredini ad perforanda robera cum sona teste dentes af∣fixit? potissimum{que} è ligno cibatum fecit? Sed turrigeros Elephantorum miramur humeros, Tauro∣rum{que} colla, & truces in sublime iactvs, Tigrium rapinas, Leonum iubas, cùm rerum Natura nus∣quam magis, quàm in minimis tota sit. Plin. Hist. l. 11. c. 2. saith he, or at least wise in those of the greater sort, Nature had no hard peece of worke to pro∣create, forme, and bring all parts to perfection, by reason that the matter whereof they be wrought, is pliable and will follow as she would haue it. But in these so little bodies (nay prickes and speckes rather then bodies indeed) how can one compre∣hend the reason, the power, and the inexplicable perfection that Nature hath therein shewed? How hath she bestowed all the fiue Senses in a Gnat? & yet some there be lesse Creatures then they. But I say where hath she made the seat of the eies to see before it? where hath she set and disposed the tast? where hath she placed and inserted the Instrument and Organ of Smelling? and aboue all, where hath she dissposed that dread∣full and terrible noyse that it maketh, that wonderfull great sound I say in proportion of so little a body? Can there be de∣vised a thing more finely and cunningly wrought then the wings set to her body? Marke what long shanked legs aboue ordinary she hath given vnto them; see how she hath set that hungry hollow concavitie instead of a belly: and hath made the same so thirstie and greedy after blood, and mans especial∣ly. Come to the weapon that it hath to pricke, pierce, & enter through the skin; how arteficially hath she pointed and sharp∣ned it? And being so litle as it is (as hardly the finenes thereof
cannot be seene) yet as if it were of bignesse and capacity an∣swerable framed it she hath most cunningly for a twofold vse: to wit, most sharpe pointed, to pricke and enter: and withall, hollow like a pipe for to suck in & conveigh the blood through it. Come to the Wood-worme, what maner of teeth hath Na∣ture given it, to bore holes and eat into the very heart of hard Oke? who heareth any sound that she maketh whiles she is at her worke? and yet in wood and timber, is in a manner all her feeding. We make a wonder at the monstrous & mighty shoul∣ders of Elephants, able to carry turrets vpon them. We mar∣vaile at the strong and stiffe necks of Buls, & to see how ter∣rible they will take vp things & tosse them aloft into the aire with their hornes. We keepe a wondring at the ravening of Tygres, and the shag manes of Lions: and yet in comparison of these Insecta, that is, Creatures that haue no flesh, nor bloud, nor sinew, there is nothing wherein Nature and her whole power is more seene, neither sheweth she her might more then in the least Creatures of all. And thus, Beloued, haue you heard concerning the WORKES of God. You haue heard of the Powerfulnesse of those Workes to make vs to seeke after God. It is no small comfort that the Apostle giues vs here in this place that doubtlesse he is not far from every one of vs. I wil ende with that ofEsay. 55.6. Esay, Seeke yee the Lord while he may be found call yee vpō him while he is neer. For whosoever asketh, saith our Saviour, receiueth: and he that seeketh findeth, Mat. 7.8. But forasmach as there is no seeking of him (as I mean seeking now at this time) much lesse calling vpon him as he is neere vnto vs, vnlesse we be of the Church of God my next care & paines shall be to entreat Godwilling of the Church. In the meane time, God so blesse vs, and the seed that hath beene sowne, &c.
THE CHVRCH.Lecture 6. April. 29.1613. I am come at this time according to promise to speake of the Church of God, and it is no little ioy vnto me, that I am come so soone vnto you to speake thereof. Had the distance beene so great betweene my last being here, and this time, (as it hath beene many times heretofore vpon none of the least and lightest causes) it might happyly haue given occasion to some to thinke, especially had they beene popishly affected, such as I hope none are here, that I made so long delay, & took so large a respite, in regard of a bad cause which I was to vndertake, or for I meant to fall to a Non-suit. But thanks be vnto God that hath given vs so soone this opportuni∣ty, me of speaking, you of hearing, & concerning you, that I cannot say as did the Author of that Treatise, De arbore scientiae boni & mali, in S. Austens 9 Tome,Debitum cure solvee sermone sed pristinos meos non inve∣nio creditores. Aug. Tom. 9. p. 813. I for my parte am carefull to pay the debt of my speech, but I want my olde Creditors, and therefore now Beloved, of the CHVRCH. But soft, did I name the Church? Do I intend moreover to speake of it? And are we not all of vs then like1. Sam. 25.37 Nabal, or like to Niobe in theOvid. Met. l. 6 Poet, Nec flecti cervix, nec brachia reddere motus, Nec pes vt ire queat, sit & intra vt viscera saxum? that is, our hearts to die within vs, and we to become like to stones. Audito nomine Ecclesiae, hostis expalluitCamp. Rat. 3. saith Campian, & he spake it even of vs whom he tooke for the
Churches enemies. Imò erubuit Campiane,Whitak. in Camp. Rat. 3. saith Whita∣ker: They whome you meane, were not wanne, as you say, but it makes them rather blush, when they see so chast and holy a Matron so impiously, and insolently abused by you. Indeede they are strange Woers.Quid tibi Pi∣sandrum, Poly∣bum{que} Medon∣ta{que} dirum, Eu∣rymachi{que} avi∣das, Antinoi{que} manas, At{que} ali∣os referam? O∣vid. Epist. Pene∣lope Vlyssi. Eurymachus, Pisander, Antinous Medon, Polybus, and the rest of that whole crew of Pene∣lopes woers were not halfe so boisterous. But I say with her Husband in theSenec. Troas, Act. 3. Sc. Ma∣tris quidem. Poet: —Non vacat vanis diem Conterere verbis, anchoras Classis legit. I will not stand woding it with our Adversaries, Time, & Tide, tarry no man. I come vnto my Text. And the Lord added to the Church from day to day, such as should be saved. The words are the words of S. Luke, in the second chapter of the Acts, and part of the 47 verse. For the better vnder∣standing whereof we will first of all speake of the Premis∣ses: then of the words themselues. The Acts of the ApostlesActus Aposto∣lorum nudam quidem viden∣tur sonare hi∣storiam, & nas∣centis Ecclesiae infantiam tex∣ere: sed si nove∣rimus Scriptorē eorum Lucam esse Medicum cuius laus est in Evangelio, a∣nimadverteri∣mus pariter om∣nia verba illius animae languen∣tis esse medici∣nam. Hier. Prol Galeat. ad Pau∣lin. saith S. Ierome, do seeme to shew vnto vs a bare & naked history, & to declare the Chur∣ches infancie, but if so be we shall take notice once that the Writer thereof was Luke the Physition whose praise is in the Gospell, we shall finde that all his words are physicke and me∣dicine to a sicke and feeble Soule. Indeed of all other we are most beholding to S. Luke for this his History of the in∣fancie and propagation of the Church. That our Saviour would build his Church, the Evangelist S. Matthew tels vs, and he tels it in our Saviours words, who when S. Peter had confessed that he was Christ the Sonne of God: Bles∣sedMat. 16.17 saith our Saviour, art thou Simon the sonne of Ionas, for flesh and bloud hath not revealed it vnto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven. And I say also vnto thee that thou art Peter, & vpon this rocke will I build my Church, & the gates of Hell shal not overcome it, S. MarkeMark. 16.20 tels vs, how after the
Lords ascention into Heaven, the Apostles went forth & preached every where. And how the Lord wrought with them, and confirmed the word with signes that followed. But this is all, nor doth he so much as name the Church. No, nor S. Iohn neither in his Gospel, only he tels vsIoh. 21.15. there how our Saviour bade Simon Peter three severall times feed his Lambs, & his Sheepe, not a word how he fed them afterwards, or how the Stock did increase. True it is in his Revelation he discourseth of the Church at large. But of that Booke we may say as S, Ierome didHier. vbi su∣pra. Tot habet Sacra∣menta, quot verba. It hath as many misteries, as words. And S, Denys to like effect, The matterEuseb. Hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 24. saith he, of this Booke is farre more profound thē my wit can reach vnto, & I doubt not but almost in every sentence of it, there lyeth hiddē a cer∣taine sense exceeding mysticall and marveilous. S. Luke the Evangelist deales more plainely, who though in his for∣mer Treatise he doth not so much as name the Church, yet in this later he doth, and for three and twenty yeeres togi∣ther declares vnto vs how it began, how it increased, how it continued in the World. In the first chapter of all then ha∣ving declared to Theophylus, and in him to all vs, partlie a recapitulation of what he had intreated of before, & that by shewing generally the Subiect of his former Booke, namely our Saviours , his Deedes, and his Doctrine, and that in the first verse, more speciallie his Conversing with his Disciples, and Ascention into Hea∣ven, and that from the second to the eleaventh verse: part∣ly a Narration of the state of the primitiue Church as then it stood at that time, and a pretty good while after that, in the rest of that first chapter, and part of this second I haue in hand: he comes at length to shew the fruit of a certaine Speech S. Peter made vpon an occasion that was offered him by some of the Iewes. Now the fruit and effect was, partly Speciall, partly Generall. The speciall fruit thereof was partly in the Iewes that dwelt in Ierusalem: partly in their Adversaries that saw the wonders and signes that
were done by the Apostles. The generall fruit thereof was partly the community of such things as the Faithful enioi∣ed one with an other, as it is in the fowre and fortith, and fiue and fortith verses: partly the praises of God, & favour with the People as it is in the sixe and fortith verse: partlie Gods adding daily vnto thē such as he purposed at length to saue, as it is in the seaven and fortith verse. And of this seaven and fortith verse now at this time, & of these three points therein handled: namely Gods Addition to the Church: Gods dayly Additon to it: and Salvation of such as should be added: And the Lord added to the Church frō day to day such as should be saved. [And the Lord added to the Church.] Being to speake of this addition, and augmentation of the Church of God, (I meane the Visible Church, for of the ChurchVid. M. Hoo∣ker Eccles. Pol. l. 3 §. 1. p. 126. mysticall we haue now at this time no cause to speake.) We are first of all to define what the Church of God is. Concerning the true definition, and right descrip∣tion of the Church, much hath beene said by a many, and diverse and sundry are the Volumes that yet are extant to this purpose. It was well observed by theEccles. 12.12 Preacher that there is no end in making many bookes, and much reading is a wearinesse of the flesh. Doubtlesse in making bookes of this argument, there hath beene no end as yet, and a reading over but of some of them, what a wearines would it proue to your tender yeeres? I, if you please, will saue you some labour, and as Laelius said to Cato, in behalfe of himselfe & his friend Scipio, both of them young in yeeres, Cato some fowrescore and fowre,Quartum an∣num ago & oc togesimum, Tul. de Senect. Volumus sanè, nisi molestū est, Ca∣to, tanquam aliquā viam longam confeceris, qua nobis quo{que} ingrediendum sit, istuc quo pervenisti, videre quale sit. We would faine know of you ô Cato as of one that hath made that long iourny, which we also are to goe, what it is you are now come to, and hold concerning this point. I for my part haue read somewhat indeed, but when I haue often∣times called to minde the best of that which I haue read
either in Protestants or Papists concerning this point, I must needes say I never met with more iudicious lines a∣bout the Church, then those which our worthy Hooker hath left to all Posteritie. You shall haue them in ful mea∣sure: and howsoever they may seeme long, yet remember that ofMartial. E∣pig. l. 2. Ep. 77. Martial, Non sunt longa, quibus nihil est quod demere possis; Where there is not an idle word, that in no wise can be long. And ioyne vnto it that ofAug. Retract. l. 1. p. in Prolog. Austen, Absit vt multi∣loquium deputetur, quando necessaria dicuntur, quantâlibet sermonum multitudine, ac prolixitate dicantur. God forbid that that should be accounted too too many words, whē necessarie things are spoken, be the speech it selfe never so long. CHVRCH then,M. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. §. 68. p. 184. saith Reverend Hooker, is a word which Art hath devised thereby to sever and distinguish that societie of Men which professeth the true Religion, from the rest which professe it not. There haue beene in the world from the very first foundation thereof but three Religions: PAGA∣NISME, which lived in the blindnesse of corrupt, and depra∣ved nature; IVDAISME embracing the Law which refor∣med Heathenish impietie, and taught Salvation to be looked for through one whom God in the last daies would send & ex∣alt to be Lord of all; Finally CHRISTIAN BELEEFE which yeeldeth obedience to the Gospell of Iesus Christ, and acknowledgeth him the Saviour whom God did promise. See∣ing then that the Church is a name which Art hath given to Professors of true Religion; as they which will define a Man are to passe by those qualities wherein one Man doth excell another, and to take only those essentiall properties, whereby a Man doth differ from Creatures of other kindes; so he that will teach what the Church is, shall never rightly performe the worke whereabout he goeth, till in matter of Religion he touch that difference which severeth the Churches Religion from theirs who are not the Church. Religion being therefore a matter partly of contemplation, partly of action, we must de∣fine
the Church which is a religious Societie by such differē∣ces as doe properly explaine the essence of such things, that is to say, by the obiect, or matter whereabout the contemplati∣ons and actions of the Church are properly conversant. For so all knowledges, and all Vertues are defined. Wherevpon be∣cause the only obiect which separateth ours from other Reli∣gions is IESVS CHRIST, in whom none but the Church doth beleeue, and whome none but the Church doth worship, we finde that accordingly the Apostles doe every where dis∣tinguish hereby the Church from Infidels, and from Iewes, ac∣counting them which call vpon the name of our Lord Iesus Christ to be his Church. If we goe lower we shall but adde vn∣to this, certaine casuall and variable accidents, which are not properly of the being, but make only for the happier and bet∣ter being of the Church of God, either indeed, or in Mens o∣pinions, and conceits. Thus for that worthy Hooker, and no whit farther then victorious Trueth marching before, himselfe like a faithfull Souldier step by step followed af∣ter. So that these things thus considered, we may without more adoe define the Church in this wise:Vid. M. Hoo∣kers Learned Discourse of Iu∣stification, and Workes, &c. p. 13. A COM∣MVNITIE OF MEN SANCTIFIED THROVGH THE PROFES∣SION OF THAT TRVETH, WHICH GOD HATH TAVGHT THE WORLD BY HIS SONNE CHRIST IESVS. First where∣as I say A communitie of Men, I exclude not Women from the Church. No more then doth that Creed which imme∣diatly followes the Gospell, and is called Epinicium byIn Epinicio quod post Aria∣nos prostigatos canere coepit Ec∣clesia, lumen de lumine, Deum verum de Deo∣verò, &c. Eras. in 1. Cor. 7. p. 423. Erasmus, that is, a song of Triumph in regard of Victory over the Arrians) when speaking of our Saviour, it saith, Who for vs Men, and for our Salvation, came downe from Heaven. It being a ruled case in theGal. 3.28. Apostle that there is neither Iews, nor Graecian: there is neither Bond nor Free: there is nether Male nor Female: for yee are all one in Christ Iesus. Secondly, by Sanctification, I meane with M. Hooker a separation from others not professing as they doe. O∣therwise (as he observeth) true Holinesse, that is, Sanctifi∣cation doth not consist in professing, but in obeying the
trueth of Christ. Thirdly & lastly, that Trueth which God hath taught the world by his Sonne Christ Iesus, I mean that Faith which the world hath beene taught, whether by Christ himselfe at the first, or his Apostle after him. Con∣cerning which Faith Tertullian speaking in a certaine Treatise, Regula,Tertullian. de Virg. Veland. p. 385. saith he, illius vna omninò est, sola immo∣bilis & irreformabilis. The rule is one alone, only immo∣uable and not to be framed anew. What Rule that is, he sheweth in that place by rehearsing the Articles of Be∣leefe. Which Beleefe as you shall knowe hereafter is the Epitome of all that which the Church is to beleeue: & the Epitome againe of that Beleefe is that of the Apostle St. Paul:1. Tim. 3.16. God is manifested in the flesh, iustified in the Spirit, seene of Angels, preached vnto the Gentiles, beleeued on in the world, and receaued vp in Glory. So that the Church as I defin'd it before is, A communitie of Men sanctified, that is, separated, from all other whatsoever, through the profes∣sion of this trueth. And this definition as it is Logicall, and according vnto rules of an Art but meane, so may it be compared very fitly to the Iaw-bone of that silly Beast, wherewith there were made byIudg. 15.16. Sampson such heapes vp∣on heapes. For if we must thus define a Church by that which a Church essentially is, and not by those qualities wherein one Church may excell another, what meane the Papists in general, the Iesuits in particular, the greatVid. D. Dr Prideaux Ca∣stigat. Andreae Eudaemon Io∣hannis. c. 5. §. 6. p. 139. Lo∣gicians of the world, and None-such of our daies, to for∣get themselues so farre in defining of the Church. Let me instance in Cardinal Bellarmine, who amongst Iesuites beares the bell. Ecclesia,Bell. de Eccl. Militant. l 3. c. 2. saith he, est caetus hominum eius∣dem Christianae fidei professione, & eorundem Sacramentorū communione colligatus, sub regimine legitimorum Pastorum, ac praecipite vnius Christi in terris Vicarij Romani Pontifi∣cis. The Church is a Communitie of Men tyed together by the profession of the same Christian Faith, and partici∣pation of the selfe same Sacraments, vnder the governe∣ment of their lawfull Pastours, and specially of the onely
Vicar of Christ on the Earth, the Bishop of Rome. Which Definition puts me in minde of that merriment in theHorat. Art. Poet. Poet, Humano capiti cervicem Pictor equinam Iungere si velit, & varias inducere plumas, Ʋndi{que} collatis membris, vt turpiter atrum Definat in piscem mulier formosa supernè: Spectatum admissi risum teneatis Amici? which till some one of you english better, the rest in the meane time may content themselues with this: If to a Womans head, an Horses maine A Painter would annexe: and then againe Decke every limbe with Feathers to and fro, And lowest parts like Fish themselues should show, My Friends, were you minded to this sight, Could you refraine? would you not laugh outright? Now such a Picture as that should be, such a Definition this is. It puts me in minde of NabuchadnezzarsDan. 2.32. Image, whose Head was of Gold: his Breast and his Armes of Sil∣ver, his Belly and his Thighes of Brasse, his Legs of yron, & his Feet were part of yron, and part of Clay. A community of Men, ther's the Gold: Tyed togither by the profession of the same Christian Faith, ther's the Silver: And participa∣tion of the selfe same Sacraments, ther's the Brasse; and as Bellarmine vnderstandeth Sacraments it is Brasse indeed, or rather Copper: Ʋnder the government of their lawfull Pastors, their's the yron: And specially of the only Vicar of Christ on the earth the Bishop of Rome, their's party per pale, part of yron and part of clay. It puts me in minde of that of theEccles. 10.1 Preacher, Dead flyes cause to stincke, and pu∣trifie the ointment of the Apothecary: so doth a litle folly him that is in estimation for wisdome and for glory. Surely this is not a little folly in him that is in such estimation for wise∣dome
and for glory to make vs such a Definition. What? No more Church there, where the Bishop of Rome is no more? Must we participate of your Sacraments, your Pa∣stors, your Pope, or shall we not else be of the Church? In∣deedIob. 12.2. saith Iob to his three friends, because that yee are the people only, wisdome must die with you. Because you for∣sooth are the only Catholickes, the Pope the only Ʋicar of Christ, the Church must die with you. I will not say Belo∣ved, asVer. 3. followeth: But we haue vnderstanding as well as they, and are not inferiour vnto them. Comparisons be odi∣ous. But as Campian comes vpon vs, when we speak of the mysticall Body of Christ, which is his Church too:Camp. Rat. 3. Quae Scripturae, quae sensa, qui Patres hoc penicillo depingunt Ec∣clesiam? So let vs be bold to aske of Bellarmine, what Scriptures? what sense of Scriptures, which of the Fathers trow we describe the Church in this sort? The Church is tearmed by the witnesse of Iesuits themselues, doubtlesse ofSenserat in Scripturis tum Propheticis, tū Apostolicis, v∣bi{que} honorificam Ecclesiae fieri mentionem: vo' cari civitatem sanctam, fructi feram vineam, montem excel∣sum, directam viam, columbā vnicam &c. Camp. Rat. 3. Campian, A fruitful, vinyard, a high Hill, a direct Path, the only Doue. What? & was that Vineyard then, that Hill, that Path, that Doue, when all that was first spoken, vnder the government of the Bishop of Rome, when as himselfe was not extant then, and yet the Church then was? After∣wards when there was the East Church, as also the West, and the Easterne Churches for causes best knowne vnto themselues, did separate themselues from the West Church & refused the Bishop of Romes iurisdiction, came so many millions of Souls presently, & so great a part of the whole world, not to be so much as of the Church?Paulum Apo∣stolum proferā, quem quoties∣cun{que} lego, vide∣or mihi nō ver∣ba audire, sed tonitrua. Hie∣ron. adversus Iovin. Apol. You O Roma∣nists that heare S. Paule asking the question to the Ro∣manes, nay thundring it out vnto themRom. 14.4. Tu quis es qui iu∣dicas alienum servum? Who art thou that iudgest an other mans Servant? Dare you not iudge only, but condemne, I, & damne to the pit of hell, so many millions of Gods Ser∣vants, and all for they are not vnder the regiment, & rule of the Bishop of Rome? q Tantanè vos generis tenuit fiducia vestri?
I am coelum terram{que}, DEI sine numine, venti Miscere, & tantas audetis tollere moles? Dare you oh you Romanists? dare you do thus, and thus? But what do I speake to them that heare not, or care not what is spoken? I returne vnto your selues. Bellarmine you see is at a point to acknowledge no Church at all, to be a Church vnlesse forsooth it be vnder the Regiment of the Bishop of Rome. Even so isVid. Sadeel. Oper. edit. 1593 p. 504, Col. 1. Turrian, and so are others, and therefore frame they their Definiti∣on of the Church accordingly. More like a Scholler yet Sr Thomas More, who howsoever he loved the Pope and his Supremacy no man better, (Greater loue then this, hath no manIoh. 15.13. saith our Saviour, when any man bestoweth his life for his friend) yet never brought either of thē into the Chur∣ches definition, whether because he would not entangle the matter with two questions at once, asSr. Th. Moore against Tyndal. l. 5. oper. Aug. p. 615. he himselfe would make vs beleeue: or which is more likely in very deed (though he himselfe say not so much) for he saw such a definition so disagreeable to the Church when it was e∣qually governed by fowre Patriarkes. He thenTr Th. Moore Dial. l. 1 c. 21. Oper. Aug. pag. 148. defines it thus: Gods Church is a Congregation of People gathered into his Faith. And Faith saith he, is the first substantiall diffe∣rence discerning christian men from heathen, as Reason is the difference dividing Man from all kinde of bruit Beasts. Mark I pray you, The first substantiall difference, and, As Reason. And why not the only substantiall difference then, if as Reason, and so should there need no more seconds to the essence of the Church, then there doth to Reason, his own instance there given, towards the definition of a Man? But thus farre yet were not much amisse, and as it is, it is farre beyond the definition of Bellarmine. But here's the spight againe that Sr Thomas like a rightBeing very Englishmen, ne∣ver ceasing pid∣ling about their bow and shafts, when they be well, but either with shorting & pyking their Bowes, or else with new fea∣thering, peecing and heading their shafts, can never haue done, vntil they be stark naugh. Asch. Schoole of Shooting. l. 2. p. 41. b. Englishman not let∣ting it alone while it is well, will bee still tampering more and more with it, till at length he marre all. For had he meant by Faith the Twelue Articles of the Creed onlie which are indeed the Summe of Faith, and as S. Austen
Fidei Catho∣licae fundamen∣tum super quod aedificium sur∣rexit Ecclesiae constructū ma∣nibus Apastolo∣rum & Prophe∣taum. Aug. de Symb. ad Catac. Tom. 9. p. 770. speakes: The foundation of the Catholicke Faith wherevp∣on the Churches frame doth arise, built by the hands of the Apostles, & also of the Prophets: we might indifferent well agree with him, & the question were neere at an end. But when he is still pidling with it, and tels vs how he meanes by Faith, that we should forsooth beleeue thatMoore. Ib. p. 665. Matri∣mony is a Sacrament, that the Sacrament of the Altar is the very body of Christ, that Priests may not wed Nunnes, or to speake in his owne merry phrase thatMoore. Ib. p. 619. Fryar Tucke may not marrie Maide Marian: who sees not the good pale of milke he gaue vs even now, turn'd downe againe with his heeles. I perceiue that of Ieremie is too too true,Ier. 13.23. Can the blacke More change his skin? Or the Leopard his spots? St Thomas hath only his Teeth white, all is els as blacke as coale. Now then having seene what the Church is by our owne definition given, and that our owne definition is by all likelyhood so much the better, for that that of our Ad∣versaries is so bad, let vs now come vnto those three points I told you of at first: the first and formost whereof was, of Gods addition to the Church. And the Lord ad∣ded to the Church. How the World stood affected at that time, was inti∣mated vnto you before, when I told you from Mr Hoo∣ker, of Pagnanisme, and Iudaisme, and Christian Religion. Indeed the two former Paganisme, & Iudaisme, were whē time was the two graund Religions of the world; Paga∣nisme which liued in the blindnes of corrupt, & depraved nature: Iudaisme embracing the law which reformed hea∣thenish impiety, and taught salvation to be looked for through the Messias that was to come. Howbeit when at the length the Messias indeede was come, and God hadGal. 4.4. sent forth his Sonne made of a Woman, and made vnder the law that hee might redeeme them which were vnder the law, and they despised him when he came,Ioh. 1.11. He came vnto his owne, and his owne received him not, then as there was long warre2. Sam. 3.1. saith the Scripture, betweene the house
of Saul, and the house of David, but David waxed stron∣ger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker: right so was it in this case, though not by dint of Sword, as that was, yet by vertue of the Word, which is liuelyHeb 4.12. saith the Apostle, & mightie in operation, and shper indeede then any. Sword, and entreth through even vnto the dividing asunder of the Soule and the spirit, and of the ioints, and the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts, and th intents of the heart. So the Apostle to the2. Cor. 10.4 Corinthians, The weapons of our war∣fare are not carnall, but mighty through God to cast dovvne holds, casting downe the imaginations, and everie high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivitie every thought to the obedience of Christ. And thus were many of the Iewes brought into this captivity, and a many more of the Gentiles, Senec. Troas Act. 4. Sc. Qui∣cun{que} hymen.Quos singulos hic casus excelso magis Solio reponit: profuit multis capi. who had they not thus beene captivated, had never beene truely free. It was our Saviours ownIoh. 8.36. saying, If the Sonne shall make you free, yee shall be free indeed: and you knowe it is a passage in one of our dayly Prayers,Communion Booke Collect for Peace. whose service is perfect freedome. But to returne vnto my purpose. First concerning the Iewes, how they were to be added to the Church, divers & sundry are the testimonies, which the Prophets haue to that purpose, I will content my selfe with some few. First the ProphetEsay. 44.1. Esay, Heare ô Iacob my servant, and Israel whom I haue chosen. Thus saith the Lord that made thee, and framed thee from the wombe; he will help thee. Feare not O Iacob my Servant, and thou righteous whō I haue chosen. For I will powre water vpon the thirstie, and stoods vpon the dry ground: I will powre my Spirit vpon thy seed, and my blessing vpon thy Buds. And they shall growe as among the grasse, and as the Willowes by the rivers of waters. One shall say I am the Lords: another shall be called by the name of Iacob: and another shall subscribe with his hand vn∣to the Lord, and name himselfe by the name of Israel. And a∣gaine
in anotherEsay, 46.3. place, Heare yee me O house of Iacob, & all that remaine of the house of Israel, which are borne of me from the wombe, and brought vp of me from the birth. There∣fore vnto old age I the same, even I will beare you vnto the hoary haires: I haue made you, and I will also beare you, and I will cary you, and I will deliver you. And againe in a thirdEsay. 51.22. place: Thus saith the Lord God, even God that pleadeth the cause of his people; Behold I haue taken out of thy hand the cup of trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my wrath: thou shalt drinke it no more. So also the Prophet Ioel:Ioel. 2.23. Be glad yee children of Sion, and reioyce in the Lord your God; for he hath giuen you the rayne of righteousnesse, and he will cause to come downe for you the rayne, even the first rayne, and the la∣ter rayne in the first moneth. And the Barnes shall be full of wheat, and the Presses shall abound with wine, and oyle. And againe a littleV. 27. after: Yee shall also know, that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the Lord your God, and none o∣ther, and my people shall never be ashamed. And afterward will I powre out my spirit vpon all flesh: and your Sonnes, and your Daughters shall prophesie, your olde men shall dreame dreames, and your young men shall see visions. And also vpon the Servants, and vpon the Maids in those daies wil I powre my Spirit. All which and that which followeth there to haue beene spoken of the Iewes, witnesse S. Peter in this Chapter, at the nine & thirtieth verse. I omit sundry other places throughout the Prophets cōcerning this purpose; such as are willing to see more, I referre them toImprinted 1612. p. 72. and 159. and 195. Vrba∣nus Regius, of Christ his Sermon going to Emaus. Secondly concerning the Gentiles (for so the Iewes call'd all the world except thēselues) the Prophesies were as many, or rather a many more then were concerning the Iewes. The Prophet Esay hath not a Chapter almost, but it entreareth more or lesse of the vocation of the Gentils: as the 2, the 9, the 11, the 18, the 42, the 45, & a many be∣sides. I will content my selfe with a place or two. For what need we endeavour,Nec enim o∣portet, quod so∣let dici, vniuer∣sum ebibere ma∣re, eum quive. In discere quo∣niam aqua eius falsa est. Irenaeus advers Haer. l. 2 c. 34. saith Irenaeus, to drink vp the whole
Sea to see whether the water thereof be salt or no seeing a very fewe drops will serue the turne. First then the Pro∣phet EsayEsay, 54.1. saith, Reioyce O barren that didst not beare: breake forth into ioy, and reioyce thou that didst not trauaile with child: for the desolate hath moe children, thn the mar∣ried wife, saith the Lord. Enlarge the place of thy tents, & let them spread out their curtaines of thy habitations: spare not, stretch out thy cords, and make fast thy stakes. For thou shalt encrease on the right hand and on the left, and thy seed shall possesse the Gentils, and dwell in the desolate Cities. And a∣gaine in anotherEsay 42.6 place, Is it a small thing saith the Lord, that thou shouldst be my Servant to raise vp the Tribes of Ia∣cob, and to restore the desolations of Israel: I will also giue thee for a light of the Gentils, that thou maist be my salvati∣on vnto the end of the world. This it was that our Saviour himselfe said in theIoh. 10.16. Gospell of S. Iohn, Other sheep I haue also which are not of this fold: them also must I bring, and they shal heare my voice; & there shal be one sheepfold, & one Shepheard. Whervpon the Apostle to the Ephesians, spea∣king of the Ephesians when as they had beene Gentils, Yee were,Ephes. 2.12. saith he, at that time without Christ, and were a∣liens from the Common-wealth of Israel, & were strangers from the covenant of promise, and had no hope, & were with∣out God in the world. But now in Christ Iesus yee which once were farre of, are made neere by the blood of Christ. For he is our peace which hath made of both one, and hath broken the stop of theIn osculum re∣cipit vtrum{que} parietem de di∣verso venientē Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 13. p. 216. partition wall, in abrogating through his flesh the hatred, that is the law of Commandements which standeth in ordinances for to make of twaine one new man in himselfe, so making peace. His conclusionEphes. 2.19. there is, Now therefore you are no more strangers and forrainers, but Citizens with the Saints, and of the houshold of God, & are built vpon the foun∣dation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Iesus Christ himselfe being the chiefe corner stone, in whom all the building cou∣pled together groweth vnto an holy Temple in the Lord. And of this ranke we are, English, Irish, Dutch, Danes, French,
Italians, & whatsoever Nations else haue put on this robe of Christianitie. Of a truth,Act. 10.34. saith S. Peter, I perceaue that God is no accepter of Persons, but in every Nation, he that feareth him and worketh righteousnesse is accepted with him. The Court of Heaven,Et de Hiero∣solymis, & de Britannia ae∣qualiter patet aula coelestis. Hieron. ad Pau∣linum de institu∣tione Monachi. saith S. Ierome, lies as open to Great Britaine, as it doth vnto Ierusalem. And againe a little before. The Earth is the Lordes,Domini est terra & pleni∣tudo eius. Post∣quam siccato Iudaeae vellere, vniversus orbis coelesti rore per∣susus est, & multi de Orien∣te & Occiden∣te venientes, re∣cubuerunt in si∣nu Abrahae: de∣siit notus esse tantùm in Iu∣daea Deus, & in Israel magnum nomen eius: sed in omnem terrā exiuit sonus A∣postolorum, & in fines orbis terrae verba e∣rum. Hier. vbi supra. saith he, and all that therein is. After that the fleece of Iu∣ry being dry, the whole world besides was wet with heavenly dew, and many comming from East and West, & rested in Abrahams bosome, the Lord left to be knowne in Iury only, and to haue his name great in Israel, but the sound of the Apostles went out into all lands, and their words into the ends of the world. Such as are desirous to see more concerning the Vocatiō of the Gentils, I referre them againe to Vrbanus Regius his excellentPrinted long agoe, & againe reprinted, 1612 See it more es∣pecially, p. 115. b. & p. 128. b. & p. 159. b. Treatise to this purpose englished by Mr Hilton sometime Schoole-Master at St Anthonies. And thus much of the first point, of Gods Addition to the Church: I now come to the se∣cond, and third, Gods dayly addition to it, and the Salvati∣on of such as should be added therevnto. I shall be verie briefe in both, and all for I haue already beene so long a∣bout the First. And the Lord added to the Church from daie to day, such as should saved. [From daie to daie] Our Saviour that said in S. Iohn'sIoh. 6 44. Gospell, of God his Father, No man can come to me, except the Father, which hath sent me, draw him,Ioh. 12.32. saith in the same Gospell of him∣selfe, I, if I were lift vp from the earth, will draw all men vnto me. What this lifting vp was, he had shewed long before. As Moses,Ioh. 3.14. saith he, lift vp the Serpent in the wildernes, so must the Sonne of man be lift vp, that whosoever beleeveth in him should not perish, but haue eternal life. That our Saviour thus had beene lifted vp, that is vpon the Crosse, and after∣wards lifted higher, that is, into heaven, when as S. Luke wrote these words, the Apostle S. Peter declareth partly in the fowre and twentieth, partly in the three & thirtieth
verses of this very chapter we haue in hand. It remained now that like a load-stone he should draw the world vn∣to him, and in very deed he so did. His populous inheri∣tance by that drawing was promised vnto himVid. M. Fen∣tons answer to Alab. Motiues Mot. 4. p. 20. Psal. 2.8, discovered by Daniel to replenish the Earth, Dan. 2.44. survayed by Esay from the East to the West, Esay 49.12: possessed by the Apostles frō Ierusalem to the worlds end, as the effect hath declared. For, Virg. Aen. l. 1.Quae regio in terris horum non plena laboris? What Region? what Coast? what quarter of the World? nay what nooke did not ring of their labours? It was our Saviours commission to them, Go yee into all the world, and preach the Gospel to everie creature, Mark. 16.15, and as∣much in effect by S. Paule was acknowledged to haue bin done, I thanke my God, saith he, through Iesus Christ, be∣cause your faith is published throughout the whole worlde; Rom. 1.8. Where by the way, Beloved, we are to note, that al that hath beene spoken concerning Adding to the Church, is not so to be taken, as if the Church should at once, in a∣ny one age, enioy these large Dominions, no not in th most flourishing age, but only in succession of times. Not at once like the DelugeVid. M. Fen∣ton vbi supra. saith a worthy Divine of our daies, covering the face of the Earth, but as the water∣flowds in course, winning ground in one place, and loosing it in an other, dryed vp at Ierusalem, and Samaria, before it haue watred the ends of the earth: though in some ages full bancke, in some at a lower ebbe, specially when it is pestered with he∣resies, and schismes, prophesied to come in the later daies. But thus much briefly of the second point. I come vnto the third, namely the Salvation of such as should be added to the Church. And the Lord added to the Church from daie to day such as should be saved. [Such as should be saved] It was even Balaam's desire, that Balaam of whom St Peter2. Pet. 2.15. tels vs, how he loved the wages of vnrighteousnes, & our Saviour in theRev. 2.14. Revelation that he taught Baalac
to put a stumbling blocke before the children of Israel, that they should eate of things sacrificed vnto Idols, and commit fornication: it was I say even Balaams desire, that he might be saved in the life to come. Let me die the death of the righteousMoriatur ani∣ma mea morte iustorum, & fi∣ant novissima mea borum si∣milia. Num. 23.10. saith he; and let my last end be like his. Vn∣willing he was to liue the life of the Righteous, yet would he faine haue died their deaths. He knew belike the effect of that which the PreacherEccles. 11.3. said, If the tree do fall towarde the South, or toward the North, in the place that the tree fal∣leth there it shal be. Indeed the desire of immortality,M. Hookers Learned Dis∣course of Iusti∣fication, works &c. p. 30. saith Reverend Hooker, and of the knowledge of that whereby it may be obtained, is so naturall vnto all men, that even they who are not perswaded that they shall, do notwith∣standing wish that they might know a way how to see no end of life. And because naturall meanes are not able still to resist the force of Death; there is no People in the earth so savage, which hath not devised some supernaturall helpe, or other to fly vnto for aide and succour in extremi∣ties against the enemies of their liues. A longing therfore to be saved, saith he, without vnderstanding the true waie how, hath bin the cause of al the superstitiōs in the world. We, Beloved, as we may long with others, so which a ma∣ny others haue not, we may (if so be we will) haue our lon∣ging saved. How? By being ioined to the Church of God, and by harkning vnto such as truely shew vs the way of Salvation. Concerning whom we need not now the testi∣mony of a Damsel possest with a spirit of Divination, who yet spake the truth, Act. 16.17, These men are the Servants of the most high God, which shewe vnto vs the way of salva∣tion: but we haue the testimony of S. Luke himselfe, who, as I noted vnto you out of Ierom, howsoever he seemes to write a bare and naked history, yet so sets downe his words, as that they are Physicke & medicine to a sicke and feeble Soule. Now among al his words to that purpose, these no doubt of salvation by being added to the Church, are not the least to be accounted of: for this doubtlesse as it is the way, so
there is no other way but this. And therefore we say not withNo habentes pro Nave Ec∣clesiam, pro Gu∣bernaculis Cru∣cem, pro Guber∣natore Christū, pro Prora Pa∣trem, pro Vents, Spiritum San¦ctum, pro Velo gratiam, pro Nautis Aposto∣los, pro Navi∣gantibus Pro∣phetas, pro Ma¦ri vetus Testa∣mentum & no∣vum commit∣tamus nos Pela∣gi profundo ad perquirendam in Scripturis di∣vinis margari∣tam latentem. Chrys. Tom. 3. Hom. de Cruce Dominica Edit. Bas. 1547. p. 837. Edit. Pa∣ris. 1556. p 757 S. Chrysostome only that the Church is a Ship, whose Tackle is the Crosse; whose Maister, our Saviour; whose Foredecke, God the Father; the Gale of Winde, the Holie Ghost; Grace, the Sailes; the Apostles, the Marriners; the Prophets, the Fraught; the Old and New Testament, the sea wherein it sailes: but a little more fully with one of ourM. Gossen his Trumpet of Warre. p. F. owne, that shee is a Man of warre, and in this World a ve∣ry sea of troubles, vnder saile. Whose Maister is Christ; whose Mast, his Crosse; whose sailes, his Sanctimony; whose Tackle, Patience, & Perseverance; whose Cast Peeces, the Prophets, Apostles, and Preachers; the sound of whō hath beene heardRom 10.18. over all the whole world; whose Mariners be the Angels singing their Celeusmata,Luk. 2.14. Glory bee to God in the high heavens, and peace in earth, and towards men good wil, whose Faught is, as the Soules of iust Men, of Women, and Children; so the rich Gifts, & Donations bestowed vpon Churches, and Colledges, bound vp in bags that shall neverLuk. 12.33. perish, or wax old; whose Rudder, is Charity, for all the motions, and actions of the Church are1. Cor. 13.1. wrought in loue; whose Anchor, isHeb. 6.19. Hope; whose Flag in the top of her is Faith, and the word written in it, PREMIMVR NON OPPRIMIMVR, that is,2, Cor. 4.8. we are cast downe, but we perish not. We say againe it is the Arke of Noah, and all without this Arke what is it else,Humfred. in Camp. Rat. 3. p. 208. saith a good old Doctor and sometimes a worthy President of one of our Colledges, nifi pontus, & aer, imo aeris, & lucis, & vitae privatio, Water and Ayre, nay a depriving of vs quite both of ayre, & light, and life it selfe. Howbeit here we are to note with ReverendM. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. §. 68. p. 185. Hooker, that howsoever the privilege of the Visible Church of God, is to be here∣in like the Arke of Noah, that for anything we knowe to the contrary, all without it are lost Sheepe, yet in this was the Arke of Noah privileged aboue the Church, that whereas none of the which were in the one could perish, numbers in the other are cast away, because to eternall
life our profession is not enough. Many things exclude from the kingdome of God, although from the Church they separate not. And thus, Beloued, haue you heard of the Church. You haue heard of Gods adding to it, of his adding to it daily, and of the Salvation of such as are added therevnto. MyLect. 1. p. 29. promise was when I shew'd you my Method, which I meant to obserue, how when I came to speake of the Church, and to shew what that was, I would distinguish her first from Paganisme, and Iudaisme, the two grand Re∣ligions of the old world: secondly from Turcisme and Pa∣pisme, the two smoaking firebrands of this world. It is re∣quisite I now performe it, and though it be a labour of many Leaues, yet shall you see I wil absolue it not in over many Lines. First then concerning Paganisme, you are to know that the word Pagans properly signifieth Country People, and therefore,Pers. in Satyr. Prol. said Persius of himselfe, —Ipse semipaganus Ad sacra vatum carmen affero nostrum. Semipaganus,Ioan. Britan. in Pers. p. 326. Vid. Ioan. Bap∣tist. Ib. p. 329. saith an Interpreter, that is, Semirusticus, & rudis Poeta. And Pagans, saith he, comes of Pagus a Vil∣lage: Pagus from the Greeke word , that signifieth Springs, or Fountaines by reason that about such Springs Villages commonly were first placed. You knowe how necessary water is where any dwelling is to be. And we read of the Daughter of Caleb, how when she came vnto her Father, Giue me a blessing,Iosh 15.19. Iudg. 1.15. saith she, for thou hast giuen me the South Country: giue me also Springs of water. But to returne vnto my purpose. Pagans properly signifying Country People, when Reli∣gion first of all tooke place in Cities, Paganus in commonVid. M. Hoo∣ker. Eccles. Pol. l. 5 §. 80. p. 250 speech, came to be vsed for Infidels, and Vnbeleeuers, such as are vsually called the Heathen. Now the Religion of the Heathen was to worship their Gods in Stocks and in Stones, and therefore the Prophet David, As for the
Images of the Heathen,Ps. 135.15. saith he, they are but Silver and Gold, the workes of mens hands. They haue mouthes, & speak not: eyes haue they, but they see not. They haue eares, and yet they heare not: neither is there any breath in their mouthes. They that make them are like vnto thē, & so are al they that put their trust in them. Had you taken vpon you to tell thē thereof, and what stupiditie it had beene, reasonable crea∣tures as they were, to fall down before vnreasonable, nay to worship such base stuffe, Stocks and Stones, their an∣swer would haue beene as S. Austen, and Arnobius relate it to vs:Non ego illum lapidem colo, nec illud simu∣lachrum quod est sine sensu: nō enim Propheta vester potuit nôsse, quia ocu∣los habent & nō vident, & ego nescio, quia il∣lud simulachrū, nec animam ha∣bet, nec videt oculis, nec audit auribus. Nō er∣go illud colo, sed adoro quod vi∣deo, & servio ei quem nō video. Quis est iste? Numē quoddā, inquit, inisibi∣le quod praesidet illi simulachro. Aug. in Ps 96. p. 748. I worship not that stone, neither that same Image that is without sense: for neither could your Prophet knowe, that they haue eyes, and see not, and I my selfe be ignorant that that Image hath no soule, nor sees with the eyes, nor heares with the eares. Wherefore I doe not worship that, but I adore what I see, and serue him whom I see not. And who, will you say, is that? A certaine invisible Power, that hath the tuition of that Image. And againe in anotherVidentur sibi purgatioris esse religionis qui dicunt, nec si∣mulachrum, nec daemonium colo, sed per effigiem corporalem eius rei signum intutor, quam colere debeo. Aug. in Ps. 113. p. 898. place: They seeme to be of a more refin'd Religion which say, I worship ne∣ther the Image, nor the Spirit, good, or bad, but by a corporall shape and similitude I behold the signe of that which I ought, and am bound to worshippe. SoNe{que} nos aera, ne{que} auri arenti{que} materias, ne{que} alias quibus signa confiunt, eas esse per se Deos, & religiosa deenimus numina: sed eos in his colimus, eos{que} eneramu, quos dedicatio infert sacra, & fabrilibus effici inhabitare si∣mulachris. Arnob. advers. Gentes. l. 6. p 199. Arnobius: Neither doe we worship Brasse, nor the matter of Gold or Silver, neither any other matter, wherewith images are made, doe we esteeme thē by themselues to be either Gods, or religious Oracles, but in these things we worship and reverence those, whom a sacred consecration hath thither brought, & made as it were to in∣habit thse images of the workeman. Now Lactantius tell vs in the Churches behalfe, that she hath no Images: Non est dubium,Lactant. Divin. Instit. l. 2 c 19. saith he, quin religio nulla sit, vbicun{que} simula∣chrum est. Doubtlesse there in that place is no Religion at all where ever there is an image. And Arnobius or Minu∣tius
Felix rather, to the selfe same purpose: Quod simula∣chrum,Arnob. aduer. Gent. l. 8. p. 229 saith he, Deo fingam, cum, si rectè existimes, sit Dei homo ipse simulachrum? What image shall I make to re∣present God thereby, since if we take it aright, Man him∣selfe is God's Image? Paganisme and the Church then no better agree then Fire and Water, Heat and Cold, when they are both of them in extremitie. They were the Apo∣stle S. Pauls2. Cor. 6.15. questions, What concord hath Christ with Be∣lial? or what part hath the beleeuer with the Infidel? & what agreement hath the Temple of God with Idols? Iudaisme comes somwhat neerer, thē doth Paganisme, to the Church, in regard of that it hath beene. For if we re∣spect the time past, of every Forrest of the earth, and of all the trees thereof it was the only2. Esd. 5.23. Vineyard, and of all the lands of the world the only Pit, & of al the flowres of the ground, the only Lilly, and of all the depths of the sea, the only River, and of all builded Cities, the only Sion, and of all the sowles, the only Doue, and of all the cattle, the only Sheepe, and among all the multitude of people, the onely People: & yet now at this time, this Ʋineyard, it is destroi∣ed, this Pit is filled vp, this Lilly is faded, this River is dri∣ed, this Sion decayed, this Doue, this Sheepe, this People slaughtered, & they that are now left, they areVirg. Aen. l. 1 Reliquiae Danaum: the reliques and remnant of a People, whome God in time may call; it is the Apostle S. PaulsRom. 11.23 Spero. In the meane time it may be said of them as Iacob said of Ru∣ben:Gen. 49.3. Ruben mine eldest Sonne, thou art my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power. Thou wast light as water: thou shalt not be excellent, because thou wentest vp to thy Father's bed: thē didst thou defile my bed, thy dignitie is gone. I, as the case now standeth, we are to haue so little corespōdence with them for all they are our elderExod. 4.22. Brethren, that the Apo∣stle S. PaulGal. 5.2. tels vs plainely, that if so be we be circumci∣sed (a point they glory in, nothing more) Christ shall pro∣fit vs nothing.
Turcisme is a mingle-mangle of Iudaisme, and Heresie. Mahumet their great Prophet wasAct. & Mon. p. 736. Col. 2. borne in Arabia. His Father was a Syrian, or a Persian, his Mother an Ismaelite, which Ismaelites being a people of Arabia, were called then Agarens: which tearme Mahumet afterwards turned to the name of Saracēs. It is thought that Sergius a Nesto∣rian was a great doer with Mahumet in contriving of his Alcoran. At length this kingdome of the Saracens began to beAct. & Mon. p. 124 Col. 2. & p. 737. Col. 1. conquered by the Turkes. Which Turkes after they had overcome them, and made their power large and mightie both in Asia and Europe, began to divide their Kingdomes and Countries amongst themselues. But whē they could not agree, but with deadly war contended for the bounds of those kingdomes and Dominions, in the meane time foure of the principall Families conquering and subduing all the rest, parted the whole Empire a∣mongst themselues. And yet they also not so contented, fell to such cruell hatred, contention, warre, & slaughter, that there was no ende thereof, vntill the remnant of the ancient Turkes was vtterly rooted out. So that there are few now remaining which are Turkes indeed by birth & blood, but the state of their great Empire is vpholden by the strength and power of Souldiers, which haue beene Christians, and now are turned to Mahumets Religion. It would aske a long time to tel you of those points that are contained in their Alcoran, but it is needlesse now at this time; and therefore whosoever will see more of them, as also of their Religion, I refer them to M. Purchas hisM. Purchas Pilgrim. l. 3. c. 10.11.12.13 and 14. Pil∣grimage, who tells of their opinions, their religious pla∣ces, their Monasteries, their Liturgy and Circumcision, their Sepulchers, Funerall rites, & Opinions touching the dead, their religious Votaries, & their Saints, their Priests and Hierarchie. There were of the PopishW. Raynolds, W. G fford, Both Williams, and yet none of those hundred & ten Knights, all Williams, & alone Table, at Henry the Duke of Normandye's Feast in France. Montaignes Es∣saies. l. 1. c. 46. Catholikes, Sonnes of Zer∣viah, Simeon and Levi, Brethren in evill, the instruments ofGen. 49.5. crueltie are in their habitations, whose fingers were
Psal. 57.5.speares, and arrowes, & their pennes sharp swordes, that would make these Turkes and vs in a maner all one; and therfore fram'd a Book whose Title forsooth was, Calvi∣no-Turcismus, but they got nothing by that bargaine. For a worthyM.D. Sutcliff. Hector of ours hauing answered that Booke, e∣very Chapter of it, every Leafe, prefixed another therevn∣to, and to giue them an Oliver for a Rowland, or rather (as speakes ourMat. 7.2. Saviour) with what measure they meated, to measure to them againe, he on the contrary called his Tre∣atise, Turco-Papismus, which for ought wee can heare of, goes vnanswered to this day. But now of Papisme. I call Papisme all that filthinesse and corruption of Do∣ctrine, which the Church of Rome, vnder the authority of the Bishop of Rome their Pope, and other factious Heads among them, hath gathered together these many yeares, and now maintaines at this day against the Ancient, A∣postolicall, and truely Catholike Church of Christ. The kingdome of heaven,Mat. 13.24. saith our Saviour, is like vnto a man which sowed good seed in his field. But while men slept, there came his enemy and sowed tares among the wheat. Doubtles these Tares haue beene sowne as in a many Christiā Chur∣ches, so especially in the Church of Rome; which are now growne to that head, that they haue overtopt al the other seed, & seem to beare the sway alone. For nether doth that Church now teach the Faith purely: or administer the Sa∣craments sincerely, or Pray religiously, & aboue al, is Ido∣latrous. For First concerning the Faith of Christ, how im∣purely do they teach it?Vid. D. Ram. Thes. Angl. p. 729. Planting Superstition insteed of Religion; Pride insteed of Modestie; Doubting insteed of Trusting; a Pharisaical Vanitie insteed of Christian Pietie, that is (in a word) Vnfaithfulnesse insteed of Faith. Con∣cerning the Sacraments, how haue they been increased by thē in number, impaired in vertue, depraved with errours, polluted with ceremonies? Concerning Prayers, how ir∣religiously, like Parrats & Popiniayes do they pray? pray∣ing likewise for the Dead who neede not their Prayers?
and to be delivered out of Purgatory who in truth were never there. But praying vnto Creatures, yea to dombe creatures, as oyle, stones, crosses, images, that is most Ido∣latrous. They that in Ieremy,Ier. 2.27. said to a Tree, Thou art my Father, & to a stone, Thou hast begotten me, were I am halfe perswaded more righteous thē these. And yet while I thus speake of them, I deny them not vtterly to be aVid. M Hoo∣kers learned Discourse of Iu∣stific. Works &c p. 45. Heretiks haue iustly beene hated as branches cut of frō the Body of the true Vine, yet onely so farre forth cut of, as their Heresies haue exten∣ded. M. Hoo∣ker Eccl. Pol. l. . §. 68. p. 185 Heretikes are not vtterly cut of from the Visible Church of Christ. If the Fathers doe any where, as oftentimes they doe, make the true Visible Church of Christ, & Heretical companies opposite, they are to be con∣strued, as separating Heretikes not altogether from the company of Beleevers, but from the fellowship of sound Beleevers, Hooker Ib. l. 3 § 1. p. 130. That which separa∣teh vtterly, that which cutteth of cleane frō the Visible Church of Christ, is plaine Apostasie, direct denial, vtter reiectiō of the whole Christiā Faith. Hooker l. 5. § 68. p. 186. Church: I graunt the Church of Rome to bee a member of the Church, though not a sound one. I suppose, saithAcne mihi longis rationibus disputandum sits Pauli auctoricate contentos esse de∣cet, qui Antichristū in Templo Dei sessurum pronuntiat. Quanquam & hoc raionibus satis vali∣dis me probasse puto, Ecclesiam licet semiruptam, imo si lubet diruptam ac deformem, aliquam ta∣men manre in Papatu. Calvin. Lelio Zozino Italo Ep. 104. Calvin, that in the Papacie some Church remaineth, a Church cra∣zed, or if you will, broken quite in peeces, forlorne, mishapen, yet some Church. His reason is, Antichrist must fit in the Temple of God. I deny her not the name of a Church, saithSi de Christi officio, & quarenda in Christo salute agatur, quo tanquam iugulo corpori caput, Ecclesiae Christus coniungitur: sic meri∣tis Hominum & Sāctorum, indulgentiarum sord bus, & infinitis blasphemiarum machinis pars haec doctrinae labefactata est, vtiam à tenui filo vita Ecclesiae penderet, eo{que} mox abrumpendo (quae su∣it Antichristi in agendo sedulitas) nisi tempori Dominus qui eum compescerent, Servos suos emisis∣set. Quamdiu vel tenne illud filum reliquum manes, Ecclesiae nomen non denegamus, vt nec eī qui morbo contabescit, nomen hominis quamdiu vivit. Mornaeus Tract. de Ecclesia. cap. 2. pag. 43 Vid. Ibid. p. 22. Mornay Lord of Plessie, no more then to a Man the name of a man, as long as he liueth, what sicknesse soever he hath: His reason is, Salvation in Iesus Christ which is the Necke which ioyneth the Head with the Body, Iesus Christ with the Church, is made so feeble, and weake, by Merits of men, by Merits of Saints, by Pardons, and such other wickednesse, that the life of the Church holdeth by a very little threed. So that the life of the Church holdeth then. Zanchius hath
these words: I acknowledge the Church of Rome, even at this present daie for a Church of Christ; such a Church as Isra∣el was vnder Ieroboam, yet a Church. His reason is this: Every man seeth saith he, except he willingly hoodwinke him∣selfe, that as alwaies so now, the Church of Rome holdeth firmely & stedfastly the Doctrine of truth concerning Christ, and baptizeth in the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost, cōfesseth & avoucheth Christ for the only redee∣mer of the world, & the Iudge that shall sit vpon quicke and dead, receiving true beleevers into endlesse ioy, faithlesse and godlesse men being cast with Satan & his Angels into flames vnquenchable. I speake not this, Beloved, to court the Church of Rome, or to play the prancke of that vniust Ste∣ward of whom our Saviour tels the story. Who when his Master gaue him warning to giue vp his accounts & Ste∣wardship, What shall I do?Nescio que singulari Dei be¦neficio, hoc ad∣huc boni in Ro∣mana Ecclesia servari nemo non videt, nisi qui videre non vult: quod i∣mirùm sicut sē∣per, fic nunc eti∣am constan & firma in vera de Deo d{que} per∣sona Domini no¦stri Iesu Christi doctrina persi∣stit: & baptizat in nomine Pa∣tris, et Filii, et Spiritus Sācti: Christum{que} ag∣noscit & praedi∣cat pro vnico mundi Redemp∣tore, futuro{que} vivorū & mor∣tuorum iudice: qui veros fideles secum in aeternā vitam receptu∣rus, incredulos autem & impi∣os in aeternum ignem cum Di∣abolo & Ange∣lis eius, eiectu∣rus sit: quae cau∣sa est, cur Ecclesiam hanc, pro Ecclesia Christi etiamnum agnoscā: sed quali? qualis & ab Osea ali∣is{que} Prophetis, Ecclesia Israelis sub Ieroboamo & deinceps fu sse describitur: nunquam enim resi∣put à suis fornicationibus. At{que} haec de Ecclesia Romana. Zanch. de Relig. Christiana. Epist. ad V∣lyssem Martinengum Comitem Barchensem Oper. Tom. 8. p. Vv. ii. post. pag 451. saith he: I cannot dig & to begge I am ashamed I know what I will do, that when I am put out of the Stewardship, they may receiue me into their houses. So if Religiō should alter. I would glose with Papists betimes by holding thē of the Church: no God forbid I should once haue as much as a thought that way, but only to meete with the Harry Hot-spurs of our Age who by their vntem∣perate zeale in not holding what they should, haue caused perhaps a many to doe otherwise then they woulde, haue done, even vtterly to forsake our Church, which being but of yesterdaies growth in respect of the Church of Rome, suppose that if so be they be a Church, wee by no meanes may be, vnlesse we be as they are. I, for my part would instill other gates Learning into you, and teach you to know the true difference which is betwixt them both. If once we giue Priest or Iesuit that advantage against vs, to hold them no Church at all, that is that theyLuk. 16.4.
would haue fulfaine,Tusc. Quest. l. 1. Quia diserti esse possent, si contra ista dicerent. Here are they in for a yeere and a day. Virg. Aen. l. 2.Hoc Ithacus velit, & magno mercentur Atridae. They had rather then all the Shooes in their shoppe, we would all of vs hold this Tenet. I will end with that excel∣lentM. Hooker Eccles. Pol. li. 3. § 1. p. 130. passage of Reverend Hooker, worthy to be written in letters of Gold: So farre as lawfully we may, we haue held, and do hold fellowship with them. For even as the Apostle doth say of Israel, that they are in one respect ene∣mies, but in another, beloved of God: In like sort with Rome we dare not communicate concerning sundry her grosse and grievous abominations, yet touching those maine parts of Christian Trueth wherein they constantly still persist, we gladlyI acknow∣ledge the Ro∣man Church to be our Mo∣ther Church, although de∣filed with some infirmi∣ties, as the Iewes were when they crucified Christ. His excellent MA∣IESTIE in his Speech in the vpper House of the Parli∣ament. March 19. 1603. acknowledge thē to be of the Fami∣lie of Iesus Christ, & our harty prayer vnto God Almigh∣ty is, that being conioyned so far forth with them, they may at the length (if it be his will) so yeeld to frame & reforme themselues, that no distraction remaine in any thing, but that we may all with one Heart, & one Mouth glorifie God the Father of our Lord, and Saviour, whose Church we are. The same God so blesse vs, and the seed that hath beene sowen, &c.
THE CREED.Lecture 7. May, 6. 1613. WHenas I acquainted you, Beloved, at the first with my maner of Me∣thod I meant to obserue in this my intended course of Catechisme, I told you, that being to teach you the Feare of the Lord, that is, the worship of God, I would intreate of all that worship in the residue of my yeare. Now for that the whole Corps of Divinity compriseth principally two points, God and the Church, I told you I would intreate also of God, and of the Church. What hath beene said already con∣cerning God, you haue heard in divers & sundry Lectures, as also in the last of all concerning the other point, the Church. Wherein being to shew vnto you, First, what the Church is; secondly, what shee is to Beleeue; thirdly, what to Practise: and in my last Lecture having declared what the Church is, it remaineth that I now shew vnto you, what shee is chiefly to Beleeue. The Text I haue chosen to this purpose is in the six∣teenth chapter of St Marke's Gospell, the fifteenth and sixteenth verses. The words are these. And he said vnto them, Go yee into all the world, and preach the Gospell to every creature. He that shall beleeue, and be baptized, shalbe saved: but he that will not beleeue, shalbe damned.
In which words is comprehended the Iustification of the Apostle's Ministry; in theirs, of all such Pastors as should succeed them to the worlds end, and consequently of our selues. So that first of all we haue in these words the effici∣ent cause, & Author of it, who is our Saviour Iesus Christ. And he said vnto them. Secondly, the parts of that their Mi∣nistery, as also of our owne, and they are two, Doctrine & Administration of Sacraments: Goe yee into all the world, and preach the Gospell to every Creature: there's the Do∣ctrine. He that shall beleeue, and be Baptized; vnder which asAnalysis Typi¦cae Mosis Pfla∣cheri S. Theol. Doct. p. 452. some are of opinion, the other Sacrament is compre∣hended by way of Synecdoche, there's the Administration of Sacraments. Thirdly, we haue the Effect here, and that is two-fold, Salvation, and Damnation. The one to Belee∣vers: He that shall beleeue, and be baptized, shalbe saved: the other to Vnbeleevers, But he that wil not beleeue, shalbe dā∣ned. In the Doctrine I note two points: First who they are that are to be taught: Secondly what. The Parties to be taught, Every creature, not Bruit Beasts to whom St Frā∣cis is said to haue preached as it is in hisD. Fulcks a∣gainst the De∣fence of the Cē∣sure p. 262. Legend, but Iew and Gentile, Bond and Free, and therefore a repealing of that which he said vnto them before, Mat. 10.5, Go not in∣to the way of the Gentiles, and into the cities of the Samari∣tanes enter yee not. Paul and BarnabasAct. 13.46. giue the reason, It was necessary that the word of God should first haue been spo∣ken vnto you: but seeing you put it from you, and iudge your selues vnworthy of everlasting life, loe we turne to the Gen∣tiles. That which is to be taught, is Evangeliū the Gospel, which St MatthewMat. 28.20. relateth in these words, Teaching thē to obserue all things, whatsoever I haue commanded you. I will not now meddle either with the Efficient cause, or with the Effect, nor yet with the Persons that are to be taught; my intent and purpose is to speak of the Doctrine only they were to reach. And he said vnto them, Go yee into all the world, and preach the Gospell, &c. The word Gospell in the Originall is : and
Evangelium,Illyr. Clau. Script. Verbo Evangelium. saith Illyricus, is a Greeke word, and signi∣fies with them either a reward given to him that bringeth glad or good tydings, or a Sacrifice to the Gods in regard of those good tydings: or it signifies sometimes the good tydings it selfe. In the first signification Homer. Odyss. ξ Homer vseth it. in the secondO suaves Epi∣stolas tuas vno tempore mihi datas duas, qui∣bus  quae reddam ne∣scio, deberi qui∣dem planè fate∣or. Cic. ad Artic. l. 2. Ep. 12. Tully, and. Isocr. Areop. Isocrates: in the thirdPlut. in Pomp. Plu∣tarch, andAristoph. Plut. Aristophanes. Now of this last signification it is that it comes to be spoken,Beza Annol. in Mat. 1 v. 1. saith Beza, of that true Doctrine of Salvation, which was not invented by Men, but was brought vnto vs from Heaven. And the first that vsed this word was the Angell in S. Lukes Gospell, that appeared to the Shepheards vpō the birth of our Saviour Christ. Behold,Luk. 2.10. saith the Angell, , I bring you tydings of great ioy: & indeed great was the ioy, that was annexed to such tydings. She,Quae peperit & Mater & virgo est, quem peperit & in∣sans & verbum est. Meitò Coeli loquuti sunt, Angeli gratula∣ti, Pastores lae∣tati, Magi imi∣tati, Reges tur∣bati, arvuli coronati. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 5. p. 402. saith S. Austen, that bore, was a Mother, and a Virgin both: he that was borne, was both an Infant, and the Word. Wherefore it was not without cause that the Heavēs spake, the Angels reioyced, the Shepheards were glad, the wise men iourni∣ed, Kings were troubled, Children crowned. Now the Angel though there in that place delivered his message in this sort,Luk. 2.10. Behold, I bring you tydings of great ioy, that shall be to all the People, that is, that vnto you is borne this day in the City of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord: yet he implyed no doubt withall, (and so much the rather for he cals him a Saviour) al those parcels and particulars concerning the Salvation of Mankind. All which particulars it pleased, (some say, the twelue Apostles) doubtlesse Antiquity to reduce to twelue Heads, that which we commonly cal the Apostles Creed, whether the Apostles indeed themselues were the Au∣thors of it at first, asArbitror illam duodecim Artifium operatione conslatam Duodecim enim Apostolorum symbolo fides sancta concepta est, qui velt perin Artifices in vnum convenientes, clavem suo consilio conslaverunt. Ambros. Ser. 38. p. 326. Vid. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 115 & 181. some are of opinion, or for itVid. Calv. Instit. l. 2. c. 16. §. 18. sum∣marily
containeth therein that which they deliuered or by word of mouth, or else by writing. It mattereth not much whether of these two waies we now take: howbeit it containeth the Gospells Epitome indeed, and the Gos∣pell is that Doctrine which our Saviour commandeth here in this my Text, that it should be preached to every Creature; it shall be my whole care at this time to entreat of the same vnto you, and briefly as my maner is, to expli∣cate vnto you each particular. First then of the Creed in generall: secondly of every part and Article thereof. Concerning the Creed in generall itVid D. Rain. Thes. Angl. p. 710. containeth two Parts: One of them instructeth our Faith touching God; the other touching the People of God, that is, the Church. Touching God it teacheth vs to beleeue in him who is one God in nature, distinct in three Persons; the Father, the Creator; the Sonne, the Redeemer; the Holy Ghost, the Sanctifier. Touching the People of God it teacheth vs to beleeue, that they are a Church, Holy & Catholike, which hath Communion of the Saints, to whom their Sinnes are forgiuen, whose Bodies shall be raised vp from death, and being ioyned with their Soules shall liue everlastingly. I am not ignorant how others frame their Division other∣wise. Card. Bellarmine among the rest; The first part of the Creed,Bellar. Christ. Doct. Transla∣ted out of Ital. by Ric. Haddock p. 58. saith he, belongeth vnto God: the second vnto the Church the Spowse of God. And as in God we beleeue, saith he, one Divinitie and three Persons: so in the Church we be∣leeue that there is one only Church, and that it hath three principall graces; the first in the Soule, which is remission of sinnes, another in the Body which shall be the Resurrection of the Flesh, and the third in the Soule & Body together, which shal be life eternal. A Division I much dislike not. Howbe∣it, seeing the Communion of Saints is a prerogatiue of the Church, & the Cardinall in this Division of his hath quite and cleane left it out, I for my part like the former rather, others like as they please. Thus much then of the Creed in generall, come we now to every part and parcell of it
in particular. And first of the first word Credo. Credo, I be∣leeue. It is an vsuall custome in some of our Colledges (per∣haps in all) that when the Party chosen into it comes first to be admitted, or to a Probationers place, or to a Fel∣lowes, he is asked by the Party admitting him, who is the Governour or his Substitute, before the rest of the Fel∣lowes present, Quid petis? What is it, that you intreat at our hands? And his answer pesently is, if to be a Probati∣oner, Eleemosynam huius Domus: but if to be a Fellow, Domus huius Perpetuitatem. Some suchSo S. Peter (as it may be thought) allu∣ding to the Questions in Baptisme. 1. Pet. 3.21 saith, The baptisme which saveth vs is not (as legall purifica∣tions were) a cleansing of the flesh frō outward im∣purity, but , an interrogatiue trial of a good consci∣ence towards God Mr Hoo∣ker Ecclesiast. Polit. lib. 5. §. 63 p. 152. ceremony there was in the Primitiue Church of old when any one was cō∣verted or from Gentilisme or Iudaisme to the faith of Christ Iesus, & was to be baptised. ,Cyril. Catech. Mystag 2. p. 519 vid. M. Perkins on the Creed p. 7 saith S. Cyril, Every of them was demanded, whether he beleeued in the name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost. Wherevpō they eft-soones made, saith he, , a saving confession: meaning that forthwith they repeated this, or the like Creed. So that hereby we may perceiue in what forme this Creed was pēned, name∣ly in the forme of an Answer to a Question. The Priest, or Minister askt the question in the face of the Congregati∣on, and the Partie to be baptized made answere by the Creed. Now concerning the word it selfe, Credo, I beleeue, it is as much as if he had said, that I am fully perswaded, that these things I am now saying vnto you, are true beyond all comparison, I; so true that there is no evidence in the world comparable vnto them. The greatest assurance ge∣nerally with all men,M Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 2. § 7. p. 117. saith Reverend Hooker, is that which we haue by plaine aspect, and intuitiue beholding. Where we cannot attaine vnto this, there what appeareth to be true by strong and invincible demonstration, such as wherin it is not by any way possible to be deceiued, therevnto the minde doth necessarily assent, neither is it in the choice thereof to doe o∣therwise. And in case both these doe fayle, then which way
greatest probabilitie leadeth, thether doth the minde ever∣more incline. Now Scripture, saith he, with Christian men being receiued as the word of God, that for which we haue probable, yea that which we haue necessary reasō for, yea that which we see with our eyes, is not thought so sure, as that which the Scripture of God teacheth; because we hold that his speech revealeth there what himselfe seeth, & therefore the strongest proofe of all, and the most necessary assented vn∣to by vs (which doe thus receiue the Scripture) is the Scrip∣ture it selfe. Thus farre he. So that now we see the force of this word Credo, I beleeue. For all the sequels that followe after, being grounded on those Scriptures, which we assu∣redly beleeue to be the finger (as it were) of God, and O∣racles from him partly spoken by himselfe,Vid. M. Hoo∣ker Eccles. Pol. l. 3. §. 8. p. 146. Reasōs to proue the Scriptures to be of God. vid Calv. Inst. l. 1. c. 7. § 4. & 5. partly dicta∣ted vnto them who delivered them from him, hence it is concerning these points, that every of vs faith Credo, I be∣leeue. I, but some will say, why say we not in the plurall num∣ber, Credimus, we beleeue? like as we say in the Lords Prai∣er Pater noster, our Father, and Panem nostrum, our bread, and Da nobis, Giue vs &c. The cause is twofold:M Perk on the Creed, p. 24. partly for in the Primitiue Church this Creed was made to be an answer (as I told you) to a question demanded of every one in particular that was to be baptized: partly for that howsoever we are to pray one for another, & therefore to vse the plurall number, yet when we come to yeares (and so were they come who were commonly baptized in those times) we must haue a particular Faith of our owne, according to that ofHab. 2.4. Habacuk, Iustus in fide suae vivet. The iust shall liue by his faith. And as the Prophet saith Fide suâ, so saith our Saviour Fides tua, Thy faith hath made thee whole, Mat. 9.22. But thus much of the first word Credo, I beleeue, which therefore I haue beene the longer in, and handled it apart, for it is particularly to be applyed to every Article here following. And so I now come vnto those Articles, the first and formost wherof is,
I BELEEVE IN GOD THE FATHER ALMIGHTY, MAKER OF HEAVEN AND EARTH. There are that make two Articles of this, which is the first, and say that St Peter, he should say, I beleeue in God the Father Almighty, and St Iohn, he should adde, Maker of Heaven, and Earth. But I rather follow them that make it but one only, and so I purpose now to intreare of it at this time. First then where it is said, I beleeue in God the Father: Deus estAug. de Temp. Ser. 119. saith St Austen, & Pater est, Deus potestate, pa∣ter bonitate. God he is, & Father both, God in power, Fa∣ther in goodnesse. Of God the Father I haue spoken be∣fore, as also his Omnipotency expressed here by the word Almighty, and of his making Heaven and Earth, & there∣fore will I shew you now what it is to beleeue in him. To beleeue in this God is thus much in effect.M. Perk. on the Creed. p. 298. First to know and acknowledge him as he hath reveal'd himselfe in his word: Secondly, in particular to beleeue him to be my God: Thirdly, from my heart to put all my affiance in him. Concerning the phrase of speech here vsed Credo in Deū, I beleeue in God; I know it to be S. Austens note therevp∣on, Credere Deo, and Credere Deum, & Credere in Deum, and of a great deale of difference betwixt them: but I am loath to commende it to you, the rather for that the He∣brew as also the Greek do seeme to take it away. For how¦soever these phrases I beleeue in God, I beleeue in Iesus Christ, I beleeue in the Holy Ghost, be most effectuall and cary with them great force, yet are they not soVid. B. Iewe Def. of the Apol. Part. 2. c. 1. Di∣vis. 1. p. 90.  peculiar and speciall to God alone; nor so precisely vsed as some do imagine. And therefore is it said, Exod. 14.31. accor∣ding to the Hebrew, The People beleeved in the Lord & in his servant Moses: and God himselfe said vnto Moses ac∣cording to the Hebrew to, Exod. 19.9. Lo I come vnto thee in a thicke clowde, that the people may heare, whiles I talke with thee: and that they may also beleeue in thee for ever. SoBasil. de Spiri∣tu Sanct. c. 14. St Basil, : They
were baptized in Moses and beleeved in him. And Arius the great hereticke, and Euzoius inSocrat. hist. l. 1. c. 19. ex versi∣one Ioan. Iacob. Grynaei. Socrates his Story (herein it should seeme according to the custome of those times) Credimus in vnam Catholicā Ecclesiam Dei, ab vna orbis terrarumora ad alteram vs{que} se porrigentem. We be∣leeue in one Catholicke Church of God spreading it selfe from one end of the world vnto the other. But thus much of the first Article. The second is this: AND IN IESVS CHRIST HIS ONLY SONNE OVR LORD. IesusAug. de Temp Ser. 181. saith St Austen, signifies a Saviour, and he is cal∣led also Christ of the Greeke word Chrisma, because that as Kings in the old time had sacred oile powred on them, so our Lord Iesus Christ, was filled and replenished with the infusion of the Holy Ghost. Indeed concerning his former name the Angell gaue it vnto him, and he giues that very reason: Thou shalt call his Name IesusMat. 1.21. saith he, for he shall saue his people from their sinnes. And concerning the name Christ, it is true that St IohnIoh. 3.34. saith, that God gaue him not the Spi∣rit by measure, and therefore of his fulnesse haue all we recei∣ved, and grace for grace, Ioh. 1.16. But why is he called his Sonne here, I, & his only Sonne? And why is he called Lord, I, and our Lord? First he is call'd his Sonne for he is of the Father alone: not made, nor created, but begotten, I, and begotten of his FatherChristi nati∣vitas genuina illa & prima, ac deitatis ipsi∣us propria, si∣lentio colatur Imò magis co∣gitationibus no∣stris imperemus ne illa inquirāt, ne{que} curiosè seru tentur. Vbi e¦nim non tempus non seculum in tercessit, non modus excogi∣tatus est, non spectator adsuit, non est qui e∣narret, quomodo imaginetur me∣us ipsa? Quo∣modo verò lin∣gua ipsa mentis intelligentiae in∣serniet? Sed & Pater erat & Filius na est. Ne dixeris quando? sed prae∣tereas hanc quaestionem. Ne inquisier is Quomodo? Impossibilis enim est respensio. Nam Quando, temporale est. Quomodo autem lapsum inducit ad corperales modos, Basil Hom. sine Conc in sanctā Christi Nativ. p. 246. before all worlds. He is thereforeAug. de Temp. Ser. 181. saith St Austen, his only Sonne, because he hath no compa∣rison, nor similitude with any creature. Men indeed are cal∣led the Sonnes of God by grace, he alone is his Sonne begotten by nature: sine foemineo partuAug. de Temp. Ser. 12. p. 414. saith the same St Austen, vnicus Patri, sine virili complexu vnicus Matri. The only Sonne of his Father, as not borne by humane birth, the on∣ly Sonne of his Mother, as not needing man's helpe. He is therefore called Lord, for that he is as St IohnRev. 17.14. stiles him, Lord of Lords, and king of kings, and he is therefore called
our Lord, for that we & al the chosen whē we wereMr Perk. on the Creed p. 204. bond staues vnder Hell, Death and Condemnation, he paid the ransome of our redemption, & freed vs from the bondage of Sin & Sathan. Not with corruptible things, as1. Pet. 1.18. speakes St Peter, as silver and gold, but with his precious bloud, as of a Lambe vndefiled; and without spot. Thus the foure Beasts, and the foure and twenty Elders in the Revelation of St Iohn, Thou art worthy,Rev. 5.9. say they, to take the booke, and to o∣pen the seales thereof, because thou wast killed, and hast redee∣med vs to God by thy bloud, out of every kinred, and tongue, and people, and nation, and hast made vs vnto our God Kings and Priests, & we shall raigne on the earth. Tu Domine; Do∣mine,Aug in Psal. 139. p. 1107. saith St Austen, id est, tu verissimè Domine, non qua∣les Domini homines, non quales Domini qui emunt saccello, sed qualis Dominus qui emit sanguine. Lord, Lord, saith St Austen that is most truely Lord, not such a Lord as Men are, not such a Lord as buyes his Vassall by the peny, but such a Lord as payes downe right his most precious bloud for him. It followeth: WHICH WAS CONCEIVED BY THE HOLY GHOST, BORNE OF THE VIRGIN MARY. The third Article: and it compriseth the Incarnation of our Saviour, & that Incarnation is here expressed by two sundry and severall parts:Vid Mr Per∣kins on the Creed. p. 220. First his Conception, Secondly his Birth. The Conception of Christ is here set down with his efficient cause the Holy Ghost; even as the Angell said to Ioseph, Ioseph the Sonne of David,Mat 1.20. saith he, feare not to take Mary for thy wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. Which Conception St Austen makes more plaine vnto vs by this Similitude. As a wormeSicut vermis calefaciente sole de puro lime formatur: sic Spiritu Sancto illustrante & sanctificante cor Virginis, caro Christi de sla carne Vir∣gins nulla se∣mentina carnis origine operan∣te concepta est. Vnde severmi comparans per Psalmistam di∣cit (Ps. 22.6) Ego sum Vermis & non Homo, id est, non con∣ceptus more hu∣mano. Aug. De Temp. Ser. 181. saith he, through the heat of the sunne is formed and made of mud and slime alone: so the holy Ghost illightning and sanctifying the heart of the Virgin, the flesh of Christ was cōceived of the flesh alone of the Virgin without any worke or overture of Flesh by way of seed. Whervpon cōparing himselfe to a worme, I am a worme saith he, and no man, that is, not conceived af∣ter the manner of men. But of the Conception we may saie
as did St Bernard:Bernard. super Missus est. Hom 4. p. 8. Col. 2. Nec potest doceri, nisi à donante; nec po∣test addisci, nisi à suscipiente. Neither can it possibly be taught but by the Spirit himselfe, that so gaue himselfe, neither possibly be learnt, but by the Party that did re∣ceiue him. I come vnto his Birth, concerning which we are first to note the Birth it selfe, hen his Mother recorded here, Borne of the Ʋirgin Mary. The Birth of our Saviour Christ to thē that haue Chri∣an Hearts is the comfort of all comforts, and the sweetest balme and confection that ever was. BeholdLuk 2.10 saith the An∣gel, I bring you tidings of great ioy, that shalbe to all the Peo∣ple, that is, that vnto you is borne this day in the City of Da∣vid, a Saviour which is Christ the Lord. And there est∣soones ioined with that Angel an Army (as it were) of o∣ther Angels (for they areV. 13. stiled, Heavenly Souldiers) prai∣sing God, and saying, Glorie be to God in the high Heavens, and peace in earth, and towards men goodwill. And indeede according to this sacred hymne, how were all these things fulfilled? For by reason of this his Birth, First, what Glory was given to God, nor only then at that time, but after, and ever since? Secondly, what multiplicitie of Peace in earth? Peace with God, Peace with Angels, Peace with our selues, I meane in our consciences, Peace with our E∣nemies, and in a word, Peace with all the Creatures of the world besides. And indeed it was convenient such Peace should be, since this our Melchisedec was then borne, King of Salem, that isHeb 7.2. King of Peace. Thirdly, what great Good will was towards men, seeing God by this his Son's Birth wasVid. Lect. 3. p. 42. and 49. reconciled so vnto vs? But I come to the Mo∣ther of Christ. The Mother of Christ is here described by her Qualitie and by her Name. By her Qualitie, for shee was a Virgin. Ne{que} sit incredibileAug de Temp Ser. 181. saith St Austen, quod ipse natus de Vir∣gine, qui Adam de Ʋirgineo pulvere, & primam mulierem potuit de costa formare. Let it not seeme incredibile to thee that he should be borne of a Virgin, who formerly was a∣ble
to frame and fashion Adam out of the Virgin dust of the Earth, and the first woman that ever was, but only of a rib. Quantulus est qui natus estAug. Hom. 32 p. 340. saith the same St Austen in an other place, sed quantus est qui de Virgine natus est? Seemes he litle vnto thee when he was, or because he was borne? I, but consider how great he was, that was borne of a Virgin. The name of the Mother of Christ is added here in this place, partly to shew that he came of the linage of David, & therefore that he was the Messias, that was pro∣phecied of before: partly that as her selfe prophesied al A∣ges shouldLuk. 1.48. call her BLESSED so her Name should be regi∣stred in that Briefe, which was to haue passage over all the world. I am loath to goe besides my way, but it shall not be much amisse to relate vnto you one story concer∣ning this Name. It isMontaigne his Essayes l. 1. c. 46 reported that at Poitiers in France, our Ladies Church there had this beginning. A licentious young Gallant hauing his dwelling house in that very place, whereas the Church now standeth, caused on a night a Damsell to be brought him, with whō he thought to doe, Quod Templo dicere non est, that that is not to be spoken in this place. He was no sooner about to wrap himselfe (in illos recessus cloacarum, it is ScaligersScaliger in Card. Exercit. 299. Num. 2. p. 891. phrase of that high Delight) but by chance asking her name, and hearing it to be Mary, was so suddainely strucke with an awfull respect to the sacred name of the VIRGIN MARY, that he not only immediatly put her away from him, but reformed the remainder of his life ever after. It had beene well we might haue heard of Her reformation too, that we might haue said, asOvid. Met. l. 8 Ovid did, Illa vetus, dominis etiam casa parva duobus Vertitur in Templum. But howsoever that was, the report was, that in conside∣ration of this miracle, there was first erected a Chappell in the place where His House then stood, consecra∣ted to that holy Name, and afrerwardes the faire great Church which yet continueth to this day. But I come to
the fourth Article: SVFFERED VNDER PONTI∣VS PILATE, WAS CRVCIFIED, DEAD, AND BVRIED. The mention of Pilate here,Mentio Pila∣ti ad temporis significationem, non ad personae illius pertinet dignitatē. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 181. saith S. Austen, is to signifie the time when as our Saviour suffered, it is no honour vnto him at al. And therefore the poore simple man, of whom it isM. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. § 71. p. 200. reported, that he was fully perswaded, that if Pontius Pilate had not beene a Saint, the Apostles would never haue suffered his name to stand in the Creed, was by all likelyhood one of that ranke of whom Mr WhiteM. Whites way to the true Church. Epist. to the Reader. Creezum zuum, &c. p. c. 2. tels vs in his Way to the Church. But to returne vnto my purpose. We haue in these foure wordes, Suffered, Crucified, Dead, and Buried, the estate of our Saviours humiliation: namely that condition of his in which he abased himselfe even to the death of the Crosse: that by that meanes he might performe the office of a Priest in making satisfacti∣on for vs to the Iustice of his Father. All this is confirmed by our Saviour himselfe; as first his sufferings, O fooles,Luk. 24.25. saith he, and slowe of heart, to beleeue all that the Prophets haue spoken! ought not Christ to haue suffered these things, & to enter into his glory? Secondly his Crucifying, As Moses,Ioh. 3.14. saith he, lift vp the Serpent in the wildernesse, so must the Sonne of man be lift vp. And againe in anotherIoh. 12.32. place, I, if I were lift vp frō the earth, wil draw al mē vnto me. And the Evangelist thereV. 33. addeth, Now this said he, signifying what death he should die. Thirdly, his Death, Tristis,Mat. 26.38. saith he, est anima mea vs{que} ad mortem. My soule is very heavy, even vnto the death. Fourthly his Buriall: Let her alone,Mark. 14.8. saith he, why trouble yee her? she hath wrought a good worke on me, she hath done that she could: she came aforehand to annoint my body to the burying. What? will you say? and did our Sa∣viour then, did he suffer such extremities? was he Crucifi∣ed? did he Die? was he at length Buried? He that was God did he suffer? nay could he suffer? could he be Crucified? could he Die, and be Buried? yes, but not as God. S. Austen doth explicate it by this similitude. A man,
Sicut homo, verbi gratia, Philosophus non vti{que} nisi secun∣dum animam dicitur, nec ideo tamen absurdè, sed congruentis∣sima, & vsita∣tissima loquuti∣one dicimus Phi¦losophum caesum Philosophum mortuum, Phi¦losophum sepul∣tum, cum totum secundum carnē accidat, non se∣cundum illud quod est Philo∣sophus; ita Chri∣stus Deus, Dei filius, Dominus gloriae, & si quie huiusmodi secū∣dum verbū di∣citur; & tamen rectè dicitur Deus crucifixus, cum hoc cum se∣cundum carnē passum esse, non secundum illud quo Dominus gloriae est, non habeatur incer∣tum. Aug. Epist. 10 p. 295. saith he, is not called a Philosopher, but with corespondence to his soule, and yet we say most vsually a Philosopher is bea∣ten, a Philosopher is dead, a Philosopher is buried, when as al this happens to him in regard of his Body onely, not as he is a Philosopher: so Christ who is God is called the Sonne of God and the Lord of glory, and by some other titles besides such as belong vnto him as he is the Word, and yet we truely say that God is crucified, whē it is certaine he so was according to the flesh, not as he is Lord of glory. It followeth, HE DESCENDED INTO HELL, THE THIRD DAY HE ROSE AGAINE FROM THE DEAD. I am not ignorant that this particle, He descended into Hell, is annexed by Some to the Article that went before, as if it were part of the estate of our Saviours humiliation. AndVrsin. Caetec. Angl. Edit. 1611. p. 509. they make this Hell to be the vnspeakeable distres∣ses, torments, and terrors of his soule, into which he was plunged both before, and then especially when he hanged on the Crosse, & much even in these late daies hath beene written of this argument to and fro. I must needs say that in this point, I differ from them who were dearer to me in their life time then ever Plato was to Aristotle. True it is that all that which those Articles haue concerning this point wherevnto we do allThe Articles agreed vpō by the Archbishops & Bishops in the yeare 1562. & confirmed againe 1571. subscribe, is only this: As Christ dyed for vs, and was buryed, so also it is to be beleeved that he went downe into Hell. But forasmuch as by the wor∣thy Prelates of our Church that point is a little more ex∣planed vnto vs, I would wish you to take them for your Pilots in this case. I wil shew you their words briefly, you may haue recourse vnto them when you please. As Christ in his body, saith ReverendM. Eius ad infe∣ros descensus quam habet sententiam? A. Quòd Christus, vt corpore in terrae viscera, ita anima à cor∣pore separata ad inferos descēdit, parite{que} mortis tius vis ad motuos inferos{que} adeo ipsos vs{que} eo per∣manavit, vt & animae incredulorum tristissimae, ipsorum{que} incredulitati maximè debitae condemna∣tionis sensum perciperent, ipse{que} Satanas inferorum princeps tyrannidis suae, & tenebrarum potentiā omnem afflictam, profligatā, & ruina opppressam esse animadverteret: è contraria verò parte mor∣tui, qui vivi Christo confidebant, redemptionis suae opus iam perfectum esse perspicerent, eius{que} vim & effectum sē tientes, dulcissi∣mo perpetuo{que} solatio frueren∣tur. Alex. Now el. Christ. Pietat prima Institutio edit. 1386. Vid. M D. Field of the Church l 5. c 19. pag. 72. where he shews the endes of Christs descent moe perspicu∣ously, namely, to fasten condem∣natiō to the Di∣vell & his An∣gels, to triumph over the Princi∣palities of dark∣nesse: to secure vs from being surprised by thē, & to prevent our comming thither. Nowel, descended into the bow∣els
of the earth which was his Graue, so in his Soule severed from the Body, he descended into Hell. The ends of Christs descent he maketh to be three. And withall saith he, (that is, togither with his Soule) the vertue & force of his Death so pierced to the dead, and even to Hell it selfe; that first the soules of the vnbeleeving felt their most painefull and iust damnatiō for infidelity: Secondly, Sathan himselfe the Prince of Hell, felt that all the power of his tyranny and darknesse was weakned, vanquished, and falne to ruine: Thirdly, the dead, who while they liued, beleeued in Christ, vnderstood that the worke of their redemptiō was now finished, and perceived the effect and strength there∣of, with most sweet and assured comfort. Here is as much saith that worthyB. Bilsons Sur∣vey of Christs sufferings for Mans redemp∣tion. p. 677. PRELATE of ours, who wrote so much in defence of this Article, as I desire, grant this, saith he to his Adversary, and I vrge you no farther. Now that Christ after death descended into Hell, is a point that all the Fa∣thers so taught with one breath, that St Austen is bold to say,Aug. Ep. 99. Quis nisi infidelis negaverit fuisse apud inferos Chri∣stum? Who but an Infidel wil deny that Christ was in Hel? That a many of the ancient Creeds wanted this particle, is no iust exceptiō against it, for they want also divers other of the Articles besides, that are in the Apostles Creed. I might instance in theVid. B. Bilson of the full re¦dempt. of Man∣kind. p. 415. Councell of Nice, the Councell of Constantinople, the Councell of Ephesus, but I hasten to that which followeth here, our Saviours Resurrection. Concerning his Resurrection I say, as did St Austen,Si credidisti de Christo quod de∣decoris est, crede quod gloriae est. Si credidisti quod mortis est, crede quod vitae est. Aug de Temp. Ser. 181. If concerning Christ thou hast beleeved that which is a re∣proach vnto him, in any wise beleeue that which appertaineth to his glory. If thou hast beleeved that that doth concerne his Death, beleeue that also that doth concerne his life. Indeede this is a point proper and peculiar to vs Christians. That he Suffered, and was Crucified, and Dead, and Buried, the Iewes will beleeue so much.Mat. 28.12. They gathered them togither with the Elders, and tooke counsell and gaue large mony vnto
the Souldiers, saying, say his Disciples came by night, & stole him away while we slept. But that the third day he roase a∣gaine, or that he roase againe at all, nor Iew, nor Gentile, nor any will beleeue, that is not first become a Christian. Besides that vpon this point al our Religion doth depend. For if so be Christ1. Cor. 15.14 saith the Apostle, be not risen, then is our preaching vaine, and your faith is also vaine. And we are found also false witnesses of God. Grievous consequences no doubt, and yet the Apostle goeth on. If ChristV. 17. saith he be not raised, your faith is vaine: ye are yet in your sins. And so they which are asleepe in Christ are perished. More grie∣vous consequences then the former. They concerned the living only, these the living and the Dead. But will you see the Superlatiue, that that toucheth vs that are liuing nee∣rest of al?V. 19. If in this life only we haue hope in Christ, we are of all mē the most miserable. You know what Tully saith in his Paradoxes concerning Fooles, Omnes stultos insanire, and Stultos omnes, servos. Surely it were happy with vs Christi∣ans that we were such Fooles, but if Christ were not risen we should be worse far, Franticke fooles, & Slaues should be farre aboue vs, we, poore we, should be of all men the most miserable. But they were our Saviours owne words,Ioh. 2.19. Destroy this Temple, and in three daies I will raise it vp a∣gaine. They destroied it, & according to promise he raisd it vp againe in three daies, and did withall what after fol∣loweth: HE ASCENDED INTO HEAVEN, AND SITTETH AT THE RIGHT HAND OF GOD THE FATHER AL∣MIGHTIE. It is the sixt Article, and specifieth farther to vs our Sa∣viours exaltation into glory. He ascended into HeavenAug. de Tēp. Ser. 181. saith St Austen, that is, the condition of our nature which he tooke by being borne of a woman, he placed aboue the Hea∣vens at the right hand of God his Father. The causes of his Ascending were diverse: as first of all to leadEphes. 4.8. captivity captiue that is Sin, & Sathan, and Death, and the1. Cor. 15.55 Graue. These they were that captivated vs, these they are that are
led Captiues by our Saviour. Secondly, to giueEphes. 4.8. 1. Cor. 12.29. gifts and graces vnto men, the gift of prophesying, the gift of tea∣ching, the gift of doing miracles, the gift of healing. Third¦ly, to prepare a place for all that should beleeue in him.Ioh. 14.2. In my Fathers house are many dwelling places: if it were not so I would haue told you, I go to prepare a place for you. Fourthly, to send the Comforter downe vnto his Church.Ioh. 16.7. It is ex∣pedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away the Com∣forter will not come vnto you, but if I depart, I, will send him vnto you. Lastly, toHeb. 9.24. appeare in the sight of God for vs, I, to intercede for vs. WhoRom. 8.34. saith the Apostle, shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that iustifieth. Who shall cōdemne? It is Christ which is dead. Yea or rather which is risen againe, who is also at the right hand of God, and ma∣keth request also for vs. So the Apostle St Iohn,1. Ioh. 2.1. We haue an Advocate with the Father Iesus Christ, the Iust: & how he offers there our Praiers to God he shewes in his Reve∣lation, Rev. 8.3. Then saith St Iohn, another Angel came, & stood before the Altar, having a golden censer, and much o∣dours was givē vnto him that he should offer with the praiers of all Saints vpon the golden altar, which is before the throne. Now that this Angel was our Saviour, Mr D. Rainolds proveth at large, in his 62. Lecture, p. 695. Concerning his sitting at Gods right hand you are to re∣member what you haue heardVid. Lect. 2. p. 35. before concerning such Parts of a Body, as the Scriptures assigne to God. Tertulli∣an hath an excellent passage to this purpose: which ma∣kethEx hoc loco Tertulliani luce meridianâ cla∣rius est non fe∣cisse Deum cor∣poreum, quem illi (benigniùs tamen) errorem impingit D. Au∣gustinus c. 86. l 1. de Haeresib. B. Rhenanus in hunc locū Ter∣tul. some to wonder, why St Austen should lay to his charge that errour of making God to be corporeall. His words be these: Efficaciae divinae per membra monstrantur and so forth.Efficaciae di∣vinae per mem∣bra monstran∣tur: non habilus Dei, nec corpo∣ralia lineamen∣ta ponuntur. Nā & cum Oculi describuntur, quod omnia vi∣deant exprimi∣tur: & quando Auris, quòd om¦nes audiat, pro∣ponitur. Et cum Digitus significantia quaedam voluntatis aperitur; et cum Nares, precum quasiodorum perceptio ostenditur; et cum Manus, quòd creaturae sit omnis autor probatur. Et quando Brachium, quòd nulla natura contra robur ipsius repugnare possit, edicitur. Et quando Pedes, quodimpleat omnia, nec sit quicquam vbi non sit Deus, explicatur. Ne{que} enim sunt ei aut membra, aut membrorum offi∣cia necessaria, ad cuius solum etiam tacitum arbitrium & serviunt & adsunt omnia, Cur enim re∣quirat Oculos, qui Lux est? aut cur quaerat Pedes, qui vbi{que} est? aut cur ingredi velit, cum non sit quo extrase progre∣di possit? aut cur Manus expetat, cuius ad omnia instituenda ar∣tifex est & si∣lexs voluntas? nec Auribus e∣get, qui etiam tacitas novit voluntates. Aut propter quam causam linguam quaerat, cui co∣gitare iussisse est? &c. Tertul. de Trin. p. 497. Vid. Eund. ad∣vers. Marcion. l. 2 p. 157. Divine vertue, strength and efficacie are de∣clared
to vs by these Members, not the feature & fashion of God, nor yet his corporeall lineaments. For when his EIES are described, it is meant that he seeth all: when his EARE, that he heareth all. When his FINGER, the meaning of his will is manifested to vs: by his NOSTRILS is meant the receiving of our praiers as of so many sweet smels. By his HANDS that he is the Maker of every creature whatso∣ever. By his ARME, that no strength can possibly withstād his Power. By his FEET, that he filleth all things, and that there is no place where this Divine Maiesty is not. Much more he hath to that purpose which I here omit for brevities sake. So that concerning Gods Right Hand here the Truth indeed is that God is a Spirit, & hath nor Right hand nor left. Behold my hands and my feetLuk. 24.39. saith our Sa∣viour, for it is I my selfe: handle me and see, for a Spirit hath not flesh and bones, as yee see me haue. The words then are metaphoricall, and are taken from Kings and earthly Po∣tentates whose vsuall custome is to place such on their right hands as they purpose extraordinarily to advance. So did king Solomon his Mother, 1. King. 2.19. and David prophecying of the Church, Kings DaughtersPs. 45.10. saith he, were among thy honourable women: vpon thy right hand did stand the Queene in a vesture of gold wrought about with di∣verse colours. The meaning then of these words, And sit∣teth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty is: that our Saviour Christ God and Man after his Ascension into heavē, is advanced to such an estate, as that he hath there∣in fulnesse both of glory, and power, and Maiesty, and au∣thority in the presence of God his Father, & of all the holy Angels and Saints in Heaven. It followeth: FROM THENCE HE SHALL COME TO IVDGE THE QVICKE AND THE DEAD. The last point in this Creed that we are to beleeue cō∣cerning our Saviour: and it is as touching the last Iudge∣ment. And it is thus much in effect: that Christ shall come in the clowds of heaven with exceeding great glory, and vnspeakable Maiestie waited on and accompanied with
Legions of holy Angels. And at the horrible sound, and dreadfull blast of Trumpet, all the dead that haue lived frō the creation of the world to that day, shal rise againe with their Soules and Bodies whole and perfect, and shall ap∣peare before his Throne, to be iudged, every one for him∣selfe, to giue account of their life, which shal be examined by the righteous and severe Iudge according to truth. All this,Totum hoc quod vocatur humanū genus, omnis ista Mas∣sa mortalitatis, ventura est ad libram, appen∣dentur ibi opera hominum. Aug. in Ps. 72. p. 548 saith S. Austen, which we call Mankind, this whole Masse of Mortalitie, must hereafter come to triall, it must come vnto the Balance, there the workes of Men shall be weighed every of them. And whereas there were in his time such as St Peter speakes of, 2. Pet. 3.4. Where is the promise of his comming? (God grant they be not in ours) he endea∣vours in a many his Sermons to beat this point of Beleefe into them, the effect whereof is this: Of all theDe omnibus rebus quae in Scripturis di∣vinis promissa sunt, vna tan∣tūmodo reman∣sit. Deus autem qui nobis in tā∣tis rebus verum dixit, in vna nes fallit? &c. Aug. de verb. Dom. Ser. 20. p. 62. Vid Eund De verb. Dom. Ser. 31. p 84, & de Temp. Ser. 109. p 600. & De Temp Ser. 245. p. 810. promises that God hath made vs in holy Scripture, one only is be∣hind, and God that hath beene so faithfull in all the rest, wil he faile vs in this one? I cānot relate the rest vnto you, I haue farre to goe. Howbeit before I goe from this point concerning Iudgement to come, a question here ariseth about the Quicke and Dead. For since it is appointed vn∣to men that they shall once dye (asHeb. 9.27. speakes the Apostle) and after that commeth Iudgement, how comes it to be said in the Creed here, that Some shal be Quick, that is, aliue? The same Apostle in1. Cor. 15.51 1. Thess. 4.17. other places resolues vs of this doubt, who teacheth, that they which then shall remaine aliue, shal suddainely be changed and made a new; so that the corruption of their Bodies being taken away, & mor∣talitie remoued, they shall put on immortalitie. Now to them this change shal be insteed of death, inasmuch as the ending of a corrupt nature shall be the beginning of a na∣ture that shall be incorruptible. It followeth, I BELEEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST. Of the Holy Ghost I haue spokenVid. Lect. 3. p. 49. and 54. before, and how he is the third Person in Trinitie, and why he is called Holy Ghost, that is, Holy Spirit, seeing the Father and the Son
are Holy both, and both of them are Spirits. That which cōcerning this third Person is thus briefly delivered here, was more largely declared afterwardes to the whole Church of God in the Creed of Athanasius, as also in an∣other Creed in the Synod ofVid. M. Hoo∣ker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. §. 42. p. 86. Constantinople, and which in the Booke of Common Prayer followeth immediatly the Gospell. The particulars concerning the Holy Spirit in Athanasius his Creed are these: First that there is one Person of the Father, another of the Sonne, and another of the Holy Ghost; but the Godhead of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost is all one, the glory equall, the Maiestie coeternall. Secondly, that such as the Father is, such is the Sonne, and such is the Holy Ghost, namely vncreate, incomprehensible, and eternall, & yet not three eternalls, but one, not three incomprehensibles, but one, not three vncreated, but one. Thirdly that as the Father, & the Sonne are both Almightie, both God, both Lord; so likewise the Holy Ghost, & yet not three Almighties but one, nor three Gods but one, nor three Lordes but one. Fourthly that the Holy Ghost is of the Father, and of the Sonne, neither made, nor created, nor begotten, but pro∣ceeding. Lastly, that there is one Holy Ghost, not three Holy Ghosts, and that in this Trinitie none is afore, or af∣ter other, none is greater or lesser then another; but the whole three Persons be coeternall together and coequal. That which was declared in the Councel of Constantino∣ple was this: I beleeue in the Holy Ghost, the Lord & giver of life, who proceedeth from the Father and the Sonne, who with the Father and the Sonne together is worshipped & glo∣rified, who spake by the Prophets. And thus much of the first part of the Creed instructing our Faith concerning GOD. Now as touching the other Part concerning the PEOPLE OF GOD, that is, his CHVRCH; the first whereof is this, THE HOLY CATHOLIKE CHVRCH. When I spake vnto you the last time of the Visible Church of Christ,Lect. 6. p. 104. I told you that of his Mysticall Church
we had then no cause to speake.Irenaeus advers. haer. l. 4. c. 18. & l. 5. c. 13. Clem. Strom. l. 7 Greg. Moral. l. 28. c. 9. Ambros. in Ep. ad Ephes. c. 3. Bernard. in Cant. Ser. 78. Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 11. c. 1. & l. 15. c. 1. & de Catech. Rud. c. 20. & de Bap∣tism. cont. Do∣nat. l. 5. c. 27. No more indeed we had, for we were then to speake of the Visible only, such as the Christians in those times, and we in these are to ioyne our selues vnto. Howbeit now we are to speake of the Church Mysticall or Invisible, forasmuch as the Holy Catholike Church here mentioned, is that Mysticall Body of Christ. The Church then in this sense is taken for the whole com∣pany of Gods Elect, and that by the testimony of these six Fathers Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, St Gregory, St Ambrose, St Bernard, and St Austen. I spare to quote their words; you shal see them, with much more to this purpose in D. RainoldsD Rainoldi sex Thes. de Script. & Eccles. Thes. 4. §. 25. p. 117. Edit. 1602. Theses concerning the Church. In this re∣spect it is tearmed of vs, a Body Mysticall. A Body, because it containeth a huge multitude not from Abel to Zacha∣rias only, Mat. 23.35. but from Abel to the last man that ever shall be saved. Mysticall, for that the mystery of their coniunction is remooued altogether from sense; for albeit their naturall Persons be visible to the world, yet discerne we not whereby they are infallibly of that Body. And this is the Catholike Church here meant in this place. Where∣vnto since the Mother Church of Rome, like the Mother Frog in theHorat. Serm. l. 2. Sal. 3. Poet, that she may be as big as She, puffes vp her selfe so much, Horat. Serm. l. 2. Sal. 3.Quantanè! num tandem, se inflans, sic magna fuisset, Maior dimidio, num tanto! cum magis, atque Se magis inflaret: would, some of her litle Frog-lings would put her in mind of that which followeth, —Non si te ruperis, inquit, Par eris. For to say the very Truth the name Catholicke (as they meane it) doth not appertaine to this, or that Church, but to the Church Ʋniversall, continued through all Nations, Ages, and Provinces, from Adam vnto vs and our Posteri∣ty: as theCatech. Trid. in expos. Symb. Vid. D. Raynol, Thes. p. 30. Edit 1602. Councell of Trent in their Catechisme, and theAndrad. De∣fens. Fid. Trid. l. 2. Pet. à Soto cont. Confess. Wirtenb. c. de Eccles. Al there cited by M. Dr Rayn. in his Thes. in Engl. p. 673. Expounders of the Councell Andradius, & Petrus à Soto
(such is the force of Trueth) do plainely confesse. But thus much of the CHVRCH. Come we now to those Preroga∣tiues, which this Church partly hath, partly is to haue hereafter, and they in this Creed are namedVid. D. Rain. Thes. p. 131. Edit. 1602. Fowre, two in this life, and two in the life to come. The Communi∣on of Saints, The forgiuenesse of sinnes, there's the former two: The Resurrection of the Body, and The life everlasting, there's the two later. First of the two former which make the Tenth Article, THE COMMVNION OF SAINTS, THE FOR∣GIVENES OF SINNES. [The Communion of Saints] The word Saints so oftē vsed throughout the New Te∣stament, as well for the living as the Dead, as Rom. 1.7. To all you that be at Rome beloved of God, called to be Saints: & 1. Cor. 1.2. Vnto the Church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Iesus, Saints by calling: & Philip. 1.1. To al the Saints of Christ Iesus which are at Phi∣lippi, &c: wil intimate sufficiently to vs, what Communion of Saints here is meant. For since a Communion doth signi∣fie to vs that fellowship, concord, part, & agreement, whē diverse ioine and partake togither in one thing, as, 2. Cor. 6.14, What fellowship hath righteousnesse with vnrighteous∣nes? and what communion hath light with darknes? and what concord hath Christ with Belial? Or what part hath the be∣leever with the Infidel? and what agreement hath the Temple of God with Idols? Forasmuch I say as Communion here sig∣nifieth this fellowship, this concord, this partaking, this agreement, and God hath had thē that worship him pure∣ly and sincerely, tum doctrinâ, tum moribus, in al Countries & places, & in al Times & Ages, what doth it signifie but that these All, though so much severed in time and place, in regard they are knit togither to one and the selfe same Body, whereof Christ is the Head, haue both Communion with Christ the Head, as also with one an other. Of their Cōmunion with Christ, the Apostle St Paul tels vs, 1. Cor. 1.30. and againe to the Ephesians, Ephes. 5.30. Of their Communion with one an other, as also with Christ the
Head, the Apostle St Iohn, 1. Ioh. 1.4. That which was from the beginning, saith he, which we haue heard, which we haue seene with our eies, which we haue looked vpon, and our hands haue handled of the word of life; that I say, which we haue seene and heard, declare we vnto you, that ye may also haue fellowship with vs, & that our fellowship also may be with the Father, & with his Sonne Iesus Christ. So that it may seeme by these places & the like (as touching one an other) that they all of them haue a communion in Spirit, a communiō in Faith, a communion in Sacraments, a communion in Prayers, a communion in Loue, a communion in Concord, a communion in Vnity with one an other, not perhaps in that perfection while here they liue in this world (as were indeed to be wished) howbeit that which is now wanting shal doubles hereafter be supplyed. Paul & Barnabas that were soAct. 15.39. stirred, that they departed asunder, are now good Friends in Heaven, where wel they may wonder at one an other for their former falling out. But I come to the secōd Prerogatiue. The second Prerogatiue I told you of, was the Forgiue∣nesse of sins, & this as it is the Churches in generall, so is it each ones in particular that doth belong to this Church. Vbi peccatum. Chrys. ad Pop Antioch Hom. 5. saith St Chrysostome, ibi procella: where sin is, there's a storme. And therfore Hesiodus correcteth Pla∣toes speech, who said that Punishment doth succeed sin, & followeth it at heeles, he affirmes that Punishment is rather borne at the selfe same instant. And indeed S. Austen hath an excellēt saying that matcheth both speeches togither;Montaignes Essaies. l. 2. c. 5, Peccatum quod inultum videturAug. Tom. 4. de Continent. p. 995. saith he, habet pedissequā poenam suam, vt nemo de admisso nisi aut amaritudine doleat, aut coecitate non doleat. Sinne which seemes vnpunished hath a punishment that waits vpon it, so that there is no man that doth commit sinne but he weeps bitterly for it, and thats a punishment, or he cares not, & that's his blind∣nesse, and thats a greater punishment. But most significant is that of God himselfe vnto Cain, If thou doe wellGen. 4.7. saith
he, shalt thou not be accepted and if thou doest not well, sinne lyeth at the doore. PeccatumTreel. in buns locum. saith Tremellius, id est, poenae peccati, sinne, that is, the punishment of sin: & if that lie so neere as at our very doores, you know how oftētimes in a day it is like to haue vs by the throat. And doubtlesse so it would, were it not for Forgiuenes here. Not a day goes o∣ver our head but every minute thereof we sinne, & yet as∣king forgiuenes, and not asking it, we are oftentimes for∣given to. There is one remission of sinnesRemissio pec∣catorum vna est quae semel datur in sancto baptismate, ali quae quamdi vivimus hic datur in Domi∣nica Oratione Aug. Hom. 4. p. 362. saith St Austen, that is given vs at once in holy Baptisme: there is an other that as long as we liue here is given vs in the Lords Praier; meaning when as we say it either at home or elsewhere. MergimurAug. Confess. l. 13. c. 7. p. 156. saith he, & emergimus. We are many times plunged over head and eares, and yet we get out againe. And whensoever we are broken and bruised, and we are full of soares for sinne, our heavenly Physition is omnipo∣tent, he can so cunningly cure vs, as that he will not leaue a skarre behinde. They areMedicus no∣ster omnipotens est, & sic consu∣cvit plagas no∣stras curare vt nec cicatricum vestigium post ipsius medica∣mina remancat. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 1. p. 388. St Austens owne words. I should here discourse vnto you how the Father, Sonne, & Holy Ghost do worke this forgiuenes in vs, sometimes im∣mediatly by themselues, sometimes by the Service & Mini∣stery of Man; as first of the Apostles, and afterwards of all such as haue beene their Successors ever since, but it is e∣nough our SaviourIoh. 20.23. said, whosoever's sins yee remit, they are remitted vnto them, andMat. 28.20. lo, I am with you alway, vn∣till the end of the world. But I come to the eleaventh Ar∣ticle, The resurrection of the Body, that whichIn nulla re sic contradicitur fidei Christianae, quàm in resur∣rectione carnis. Aug. in Ps. 88. p. 678. S. Austen tells vs is most contradicted of al others, THE RESVRREC∣TION OF THE BODY. The same day,Mat. 22 23. saith St Mathew, the Sadduces came to our Saviour which say that there is no resurrection. And Tertullian speaking of some of the Heretikes of his time Saturnus, Basilides, Valentinus and the like, Nunc,Tertul. de Re∣surrect. p. 2. saith he, ad alios Sadducaeos praeparamur, partiarios sententiae illo∣rum. Ita dimidiam agnoscunt resurrectionem, solius scilicet Animae, aspernati carnem, sicut & ipsum Dominum carnis.
We are now in these daies to make head against other Sadduces, that are copartners with the former. For they graunt the Resurrection by halfes, namely the resurrecti∣on of the Soule alone, despysing the Flesh, as they doe in very deed even him that is Lord therof. Howbeit we that are true Christians must not thus misbeleeue. We must be∣leeue of the Body also, as well as of the Soule; & so much the rather for the Apostle S. Paul hath such excellent pas∣sages concerning that. To him that saith, How are the dead raysed vp? and with what body come they forth? O foole,1. Cor. 15.36 saith he, that which thou sowest is not quickned ex∣cept it dye. And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shal be, but bare corne as it falleth, of wheat, or some other graine. But God giveth it a body at his pleasure, even to every seed his owne body. So also is the resurrection of the dead,V. 42. saith he. The body is sowne in corruption, and is raised in incorruption. It is sowne in dishonour, and is raised in glo∣ry: it is sowne in weaknesse, and is raised in power. It is sowne a naturall body, and is raysed a spirituall body. AndV. 53. againe, This corruptible, must put on incorruption: and this mortall must put on immortalitie. So when this corruptible hath put on incorruption, and this mortall hath put on immortalitie, then shall be brought to passe the saying that is writtē, Death is swallowed vp into victory. So that our very Bodies (you see) shall rise againe, & therefore was it said in theVrsin. Catech. Angl. Edit. 1611 p. 628. Afri∣can Churches, Resurrectionem huius carnis, I beleeue the resurrection of this flesh, that is, a recollecting and gathe∣ring of the same matter, whereof our body was first com∣posed, and which after our death was scattered, and seve∣red into all the Elements: Nec in bestias, saithTertul. de A∣nim c. 15 p. 552 Tertullian, sed in sua corpora revertentibus animabus, Our Soules re∣turning not into the Bodies of Beasts, as some were of o∣pinion, but into their own Bodies. St Ambrose giues the reason, why the Bodies should thus rise. For this,Haec est series & causa iustitiae vt quoniā Cor∣poris, Animi{que} communis est actus, quae Ani∣mus cogitavit corpus afficit, v∣trum{que} in iudi∣cium veniat, v∣trum{que} aut paenae dedatur, aut gloriae reserve∣tur. Ambros. ser. 3. de Fide Resurrect. p. 44. saith he, is the order and cause of Iustice, that because the actions of the Body and Soule are common to both, the Body executing
that which the Soule decreed, both of them should likewise come vnto iudgement, both of them be either delivered vp to perpetuall punishment, or both reserved to eternall glory. And so I come to that glory, AND LYFE EVERLASTING. This Article,Vrsin. Catech Angl. edit. 1611 p. 633. saith Ʋrsinus is placed last, partly for it is fulfilled perfectly after the rest: partly for it is the effect of all the other that went before. For in no wise must we forget that parcell of my Text, He that shall beleeue, and be baptized shall be saued. Now what this Life everlasting is may iustly seeme vnexplicable, seeing not only the Pro∣phetEsay. 64.4. Esay, but the Apostle1. Cor. 2.9. St Paul also after him deter∣minately set downe, that they are the Things which Eye hath not seene, neither Eare hath heard, neither came into mans Heart: andQuid quaeris vt ascendat in linguam, quod in cor non ascē∣dit. Aug. in Ps. 85. p. 650. S. Austens inference is therevpon, And how shoulde it then come into the tongue of man, that could never as yet come into the heart of mā. Howbeit since we cannot possibly knowe what it is in very deed, let vs goe by analogie and proportion, and first consider what Life is, as Philosophers intreat of it. Life in Creatures pos∣sessed with liuing Soules, is properly the being of living Creatures. Now life is taken both for the first act, that is for the very living, and being: as also for the second act, that is, for the operation of a living thing. So that we may define it to be, An aptitude of a living thing to worke the operations proper and peculiar therevnto, which is the opera∣tions also themselues, by reason of the vnion of the Body with the Soule. Now the life that we haue here hath divers and sundry tearmes: when we are Infants,In infantiae speratur pueri∣tia & in pueri∣tia speratur a∣dolescentia, & in adolescentiae speratur inven∣tus, & in inven∣tute speratur gravitas, & in gravitate spera∣tur senectus, se∣nectus autem aliam aetatem quam speret nō habet. Aug. Ep. 110. saith St Austen, we hope to come to Childs estate, when we are Children, to be Striplings, when we are Striplings, to be young Men, when we are young Men, to be ripe in yeares, when we are ripe in yeares, to be old: but old age hath no age to hope for after. When once we come to be too ripe, you knowe what followes. It is not so in Life here spoken of: this hath no such commaes, or colons, or periods. Why? for it is Everlasting. Now Everlasting is taken three manner of
waies: First for that which hath neither beginning nor ending, so God is everlasting: Secondly that which hath no beginning and yet hath an ending, so the Decree of God: Thirdly that which hath a beginning, but never shal haue end, and such are the Soules of Men. And in this third sense it is, that Life is called here Everlasting, that is, a Life that hath a beginning indeed, but that shall never afterwards haue end. And this is that endlesse life so often promised in holy Scripture, not as was promised by the Poet, who when he hadVirg. Aen. l. 6 said in one place, His ego nec metas rerum, nec tempora pono, Imperium sine fine dedi, Virg. Georg. l. 2. saith in another notwithstanding, — Res Romanae, peritura{que} Regna. Peritura veritate non tacuitAug. de Verb. Dom. Ser. 29. pag. 80. saith St Austen, semper man∣sura adulatione promisit: he told them their Empire should perish when he told them the truth, but when he told thē it should ever last, he did but flatter them: no the Scrip∣tures are still constant and hold an even course, & are like those heavenly Orbes aboue that never alter or chaunge their course, but runne continually their wonted rounds. Nay they asPs. 102.26. saith the Prophet shall perish too, they all shall waxe old as doth a garment, and as a vesture shal God change thē, and they shalbe changed, but the word of the Lord1. Pet. 1.25. saith St Peter, that endureth for ever; and this is that word vpon which here in this place Everlasting Life is grounded. And thus, Beloved, haue you heard the whole expositiō of that Creed, which is asAmbr. Ser. 38. p. 326. vt supra, p. 129. in marg. speaks St Ambrose, the key of our Christian Faith. Of this Creed it is that St Austen spea∣king, Symbolum didicistisAug. de Tēp. Serm. 135. saith he, vbi est regula fidei ve∣strae brevis, & grandis: brevis numero verborum, grandis pō∣dere sententiarum. You haue learnt your Creed, wherein is the rule of your faith, little & large: little in regard of the small number of the words, large in regard of the weight of matter therein contained. Of this Creed Tertullian speaking as you heard the last time, Regula quidem
fideiTertul. de Virg Veland. p 385. saith he, vna omninò est, sola immobilis, & irreforma∣bilis. The rule of Faith, is one alone, only immoueable, and not to be framed anew. Of this Creed in effect Irenaeus speaking before them all, The Church Irenaeus advers. Haer. l. 1. c. 2. p. 34. Col. 2. saith he, though scattered through the world vnto the vtmost borders of the earth, hath from the Apostles, and their Disciples received this Truth, that is, Beleefe. The parts of which Beleefe he also having recited, This fatih,. Irenaeus advers. Haer. l. 1. c. 3. p. 39. Col. 2. saith he, the Church being spread farre and wide preserveth, as if one house did containe them all; these things it equally embraceth, as though it had even one Soule, one Hart, & no more; it publisheth, teacheth, and delivereth these things with vniforme consent, as if God had giuen it but one onely tongue wherewith to speake. And. againe a little after. He which amongst the Guides of the Church, is best able to speake, vttereth no more then this, & lesse then this the most simple doth not vtter when he makes profession of his Faith. Not to beleeue all and every point of this Creed, is asmuch as our Soules are worth, there is such a connexion betweene all and every part: Ita res rem sequitur, asLact. Divin Inst l. 1. c. 16. speakes Lactantius in another case, so one Article, one particle is ioyned with another, as marre one, and marre all. An example whereof we haue in Cassianus, who defending the Incarnation of the Sonne of God a∣gainst Nestorius; If thou do'st,Cassian. de Incarnat. Dom. l. 6. c. 16. saith he, deny our Lord Iesus Christ; in denying the Son thou canst not choose but deny the Father: for according to the voice of the Father himselfe, He that hath not the Sonne, hath not the Father. Wherefore de¦nying him which is begotten, thou denyest him which doth be∣get. Againe, denying the Sonne of God to haue beene borne in the flesh, how canst thou beleeue him to haue suffered? Belee∣uing not his passion, what remaineth, but that thou deny his
Resurrection? Wherevpon it followeth, that thou also deny his Ascension into Heaven, the Apostle affirming, that he which ascended, did first descend. So that as much as lyeth in thee, our Lord Iesus Christ hath neither risen from the depth, nor is ascended into Heaven, nor sitteth at the right hand of God the Father, nether shall he come at the day of the finall accoūt, which is looked for, nor shall iudge the quicke and dead. Ne∣storius confessed all the Articles of the Creed, but his opi∣nion did imply the denyal of every part of his Confession. By this you see how each Article is linckt with one ano∣ther. And therefore as the same Cassianus speaketh in the selfe same Booke, This,Haec ratio Ec∣clesiastici Sa∣cramenti & Catholicae fidei est, vt qui partē divini sacramē∣ti negat, partem non valeat con∣fiteri. Ita enim sibi connexa & concorporata sunt omnia, vt aliud sine alio stare non possit, & qui vnum ex omnibus de∣negaverit, alia ei omnia credi∣disse non profit. Cass. de Incarn. l. 6. saith he, is the State of Christian Faith, that he that denies one part therof cannot possibly hold the other. For all, saith he, are so annexed, and so incorporated to one another, that one without the other cannot possibly con∣sist, and he that shall deny one of all (his meaning is, if he ob∣stinately stand in denyall of it) it shall not profit him a whit to beleeue all the rest. What remaineth thē but concerning this Creed we take every of vs speciall care, and follow St Austens advise and Counsell: Quotidie dicite,Aug Hom. 42 p. 364. saith he, quando surgitis, quando vos collocatis ad somnum. Say it e∣very day when as you rise, and also when you goe to bed. AndCommemora Fidem tuam, inspicete fit tan∣quam speculum tibi Symbolum tuum. Sint divitiae tuae, sint quotidiana ista quodommodo indumenta mentis tuae. Aug. Ib. againe a little after, Make rehearsall of thy Faith, consider thy selfe throughly: let thy Creed be thy looking glasse. Nay let it rather be thy treasure, let it be the day∣ly apparell of thy mind. And againe in another place: Write it in your heart,In cordescribite, & quotidiè dicite apud vos, antequam dormiatis, antequam proce∣datis vestro Symbolo vos munite. Aug. Tom. 9. de Symb. ad Catech c. 1. p. 752. saith he, & every day say it to your selues before you sleepe, before you walke abroad, see that you arme your selues with your Creed. But as you say it, Beloued, dai∣ly, and arme your selues with it, so your care must be withall to knowe the meaning of it too: otherwise Cardi∣nall Ascanius had a Popiniay that could repeat it (they say) by roat, & that (not as a many Papists do at this day,
Creezum zuum Patrum onitentem, and so forth: whereof see more inM. Whites way to the true Church. Epist. to the Reader. p. c. 2. Mr White) but articulatissimè, saith myCael. Rhod. l. 3. c. 32. Au∣thor, continuatis perpetuò verbis, perinde ac vir peritus: treatably, and distinctly from point to point, as an expert and skilfull man could possibly haue done. I will end all this with that goodConstit. and Can. Eccles. Aw. 1603. Can. 18. Constitution of our Church cōcer∣ning the standing at it, and saying it audibly with the Mi∣nister, as also the Confession, and the Lordes Prayer, fol∣lowing that. And indeed if it be true which St Austen hath, that this our Creed is both Tunica and Lorîca too, a Coat, and also a Harnesse; what better ceremony and gesture to testifie our Christian resolution, then by Stan∣ding at the saying of that, for the least iot whereof (if need be) we are to spend our dearest blood. And thus, Beloued, haue you heard of the Articles of our Faith, commonly called, the Apostles Creed. The next point IThe Preamble Lect. 1. p. 20. promised you to handle, was all those Tenets which our owne Church holdeth against the rebellious Church of Rome, whereof I had thought the next Thurs∣day to haue discoursed vnto you at large. But forasmuch as that will be the Ascention day, and is therefore to call to minde elsewhere, that particular meditation of our Sa∣viours Ascending into Heaven, and the Causes of his As∣cending thither, partly to lead Captivitie captiue, partly to giue Gifts and Graces vnto men, partly to prepare a place for all that should beleeue in him, partly to send downe his Holy Spirit: partly to appeare in the sight of God, and there to intercede for vs as you haue heard this day, I shall deferre this my next labour vntill the next Tearme. In the meane time, God so blesse vs, and the seed that hath beene sowne, &c.
OVR CHVRCH'S TENETS against the Church of Rome.Lecture 8. Iune, 6. 1614. THey were the words ofHieron. Tom. 2. Epist. ad Pā∣mach. adver. er∣rores Ioannis Hierosolym. p. 162. St Ierome, Nolo in suspicione haereseos quenquā esse patientem; I would haue no Mā Patient in the crime of Heresie. Patient, as I take it saith Reverend Hooker, wee should be alwaies,Mr Hookers learned Dis∣course of Iustifi∣cation, workes, &c. p. 67. though the crime of Heresie were intended; but silent in a thing of so great consequence I could not, Be∣loved, I durst not be, especially the loue that I beare to the truth of Christ Iesus being hereby somewhat cald in question. Thus spake that worthy Man of himselfe by reason of an Adversary, who had somtimes beene hisPsal. 55.15. familiar friend, and afterwards kickt vp the heele against him. Who so readeth the Bookes of our Adversaries which they pester the world so much with, shall hardly finde a page where there is not somewhat at least against vs con∣cerning Heresie, & how we are Heretikes, no men worse. Let vs see what Bristow saith, one for all, and —Virg. Aeneid. lib. 2. Crimine ab vno Disce omnes: by the length of his foot, take we a scantling of all the rest. Our Protestants and PuritansBrist. Motiues Motiu. 4. saith he, for this their vn∣mercifull opinion (about infants) are not Catholickes, they are contrary to the Apostle, they condemne the Vniversall Church of God, they are to be detested as corrupters of our
Faith, as Heretikes, as Pelagians: and indeed s worse then Pelagians. And a little after, O vnmercifull and cruell He∣retiques! —Virg. Aeneid. l. 6. Ne saevi magne Sacerdos. Or if he likeGretzer. de iure & more prohibendi lib. maios l. 2. c. 7. Gretzers words better, Placiae, Papista, pla∣cidè. Proue but by one example of old Heresies most vn∣doubted, proue most plainely that we are Heretikes, No∣mina, aut frontem exporrige, vt Calumniatorum nota inura∣tur. I cannot now stand to disproue the two examples al∣leaged by him, neither need I in very deed; it is done al∣ready to my hand by one of the worthies of our Church, he that answer'd such aRastel, Feck∣nā, Allen, Hes∣kins, Riston, Ho∣sius, Sanders, Bristow, Staple∣ton, Martial, Frarin, Defēce of the Censure, & the Rhemish Testament. Po∣pulus superan∣tur ab vno. rabble of them,Doctor Fulkes Retētiue against Bristowes Mo∣tiues, p. 15. and p. 101. Doctour Fulke. But you see in the mean time how spightfully they speak, nay how spightfully they wright of vs, & yet Bristow was No-body to Weston, & others, that came after, nor Weston vnto those that now come after him. But it is not their words that cā affright vs, no they shall not make vs loose so much as Patience. Silent indeed in a thing of so great consequence, we cannot, Beloued, we dare not be, & there¦fore now of those heresies which they lay so mainly to our charge. The Text I haue chosen to this purpose is a parcell of the words of the Apostle St. Paule, as they are related vnto vs by St. Luke, Act. 24, 14. The words are these. But this I confesse vnto thee, that after the way which they call Heresie, so worship I the God of my Fathers, beleeving all things which are written in the Law, and the Prophets. In which words we see first of all a grievous crime laid to the charge of the Apostle St Paule: Secondly, the Apostles Apologie or Defence for the same. The crime laid to the Apostles charge was Heresie: & Heresie indeed is a crime so hainous, that vnlesse it may be seeneIuel. Apol. p. 18. saith our worthy Iuel, vnlesse it may be felt, and in a manner may be holden
with hands and fingers, it ought not lightly to be iudged, or beleeved, when it is laid to the charge of any Christian. For Heresie as he saith, is a forsaking of Salvation, a renoū∣cing of Gods grace, a departure from the body and spirit of Christ. So St Austen, Let a memberContingit vs in corpore hu∣mano, imò de corpore aliquod praecidatur mē∣brum, Manus, Digitus, Pes, nunquid praeci∣sum sequitur A∣nima? Cum in corpore esset vi∣vebat, praecisum amittit vitam. Sic & homo Christianus Ca∣tholicus est dum in corpore vi∣vit, praecisus Hae∣reticus factus est, membrum amputatum non sequitur Spiri∣tus. Aug. Tom. 10. de Temp. Ser, 186. p. 722. saith he, be cut and parted from the Body, be it the Hand, or Finger, or Foote, whē it is cut of, doth the Soule follow that part that is cut of? When it was in the Body it lived indeed, but being cut of it looseth his life. Right so a Christian is a Catholicke, while he is in the Body, but being once out, & made an Heretike, he is as a mē∣ber cleane cut of, the Spirit doth not follow him. Howbeit the Heresie here laid to the Apostles charge in this place, was indeed no Heresie. He was accused by Tertullus that he was of the Sect, or the Heresie of the Nazarites (for how∣soever before this time the Disciples were called Christi∣ans, Act. 11.26. Yet were they called also Nazarites of Ie∣sus of Nazareth) but he was accused by Tertullus, that he was of the Sect or Heresie of the Nazarites, CertainelyAct. 24.5. saith Tertullus, we haue found this man a pestilent fellow, & a moover of seditiō among all the Iews throughout the world, and a chiefe maintainer of the Sect of the Nazarites. Now the Apostle St Paule here in this place doth not only not deny this point of his Accusation, but freely cōfesseth that if so be that were Heresie, then was he an Heretike indeed, but yet he worshipped (heAct. 24.14. said) the true God, and beleeved all that was written in the Law and the Prophets, which was the word of God, and therefore did he put it to their own consciences, whether he were an Heretike, or no. An excellent patterne of our selues, who are accused as he was, and may excuse our selues as he did. Only they haue vs not now (God be thanked) as Tertullus had Paule before a Tribunal Seat. Those daies are past & gone, their power and might is much abated, though their hatred & malice be never a whit. But, Benè estHieron. Tom. 2. Apol. advers. Ruffin. l. 2 p. 223. saith St Ierome, quòd malicia non habet tantas vires, quantos conatus. Perierat in∣nocentia, si semper nequitiae iuncta esset potentia. It is well
that Malice hath not so much might as it hath spight. In∣nocency were vndone, if wickednes & powrefulnes were stil in one Predicament.Senec. Troas. Act. 1. se. Qui∣cun{que} Troia iam vetus est malum: Eigh∣ty eight is an old soare. They haue given vs of late occasiō to say with Israel in thePsal. 124.1. Psalme, If the Lord himselfe had not been on our side (now may Israel say) if the Lord himselfe had not beene on our side, when Romish Catholicke rose vp against vs, they had swallowed vs vp quicke; when they were so wrathfully displeased at vs. And that whichV. 5. followeth a little after; But praised be the Lord, which hath not given vs over for a pray vnto their teeth. Our Soule is escaped, evē as a bird out of the snare of the fowler: the snare was broken, and we were delivered. But to come vnto my purpose. To shew that we may excuse our selues as the Apostle here did, I hold it my best way to rehearse all those Points we are accused of by thē, & to confirme them very briefly, both by the Scriptures, and by Fathers. Which that it may the better be brought about, I can thinke of no better course then to rehearse here before you all those Tenets which our Mother the Church of England holdeth con∣cerning Doctrine and Discipline. I meane those Articles concluded in aArticles, wher vpon it was a∣greed by the Archbishops & Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Cler∣gy. In the Con∣vocation holden at London in the yeare of our Lord God. 1562 Synod of hers in the yeere 62, wherevnto we al of vs subscribe at the taking of our Degrees. And by this meanes shal you reape a double benefit: First you shal heare what you are to subscribe vnto, and not go blinde∣fold to worke, as too too many haue done heretofore, and haue afterwards beene aProv. 10.1. heavinesse to our Mother the Church by kicking the heele against her: Secondly, you shall haue somewhat also in store against the Dictates of our Adversaries, who imploy so much paines to inveigle such as you are, & to make them theirVt faciatis v∣num Proselytū. Mat. 23.15. Proselites. I know to performe all this will be somewhat aboue your capaci∣ties, especially now at this time being so young as you are, a many of you; howbeit as our SaviourIoh. 13.7. said to St Peter when he washed his Feete, What I do thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know it hereafter: right so say I in this case,
that which by tendernesse of yeares you cannot now so well skil of, you shal Godwilling hereafter, if in the mean time you lay vp all these sayings in your hearts, as did the Blessed Virgin our Saviours, Luk. 2.51. Our Saviours Pa∣rents,Luk. 2.50. saith S. Luke, vnderstood not the word that he spake vnto them, and yet,V. 51. saith he immediatly after, his Mother kept all those sayings in her heart. As touching the order I shall obserue, forasmuch as the Articles are many (some thirty or fortie of them in all) & some there are about which there is little or no difference at all betweene our Adversaries and our selues: those a∣bout which there is none at all, or at least wise very little, those will I barely read vnto you, the Rest about which there is, I will first read them, then proue them both by Scriptures, and by Fathers. I shall be at this time some∣what long, but your patience may be the greater, partly for I haue not yet been over tedious vnto you at any time, partly for I shall hereafter be the breefer in those points that are hereafter to be handled. I come to the first Article. The first of those Articles is of Faith in the holy Trini∣tie, and there is about that Article no difference at all be∣tweene vs. The Article is this. There is but one liuing and true God, everlasting, without body, parts, or passions; of infinite power, wisdome, and goodnesse; the maker and preserver of all things, both visible and invisible. And in vnitie of this Godhead, there be three Persons, of one sub∣stance, power, and authoritie, the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost.  The second is of the word of God, which was made very Man, and about that we agree too. The Article is this. The Sonne which is the Word of the Fa∣ther, begotten from everlasting of the Father, the very, & eternall God, of one substance with the Father, tooke Mans Nature in the wombe of the blessed Virgin, of her sub∣stance: so that two whole and perfect Natures, that is to
say, the Godhead and Manhood were ioyned in one Person, never to be divided, whereof is one Christ, very God, and very Man: who suffered, was crucified, dead, and buried, to reconcile his Father to vs, and to be a sacrifice, not onely for Originall guilt, but also for all actuall sinnes of Men.  The third is of our Saviours going downe into Hell, and therein also we agree. The Article is this. As Christ died for vs and was buried: so also it is to be beleeued, that he went downe into Hell.  The fourth is of the Resurrection of our Saviour, and in that we agree too. The Article is this. Christ did truely arise againe from death, and tooke againe his body, with flesh, bone, and all things ap∣pertaining to the perfection of Mans nature: wherewith he ascended into Heaven, and there sitteth vntill he re∣returne to iudge all men at the last day.  The fift is of the Holy Ghost, and in that also we agree. The Article is this. The Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father, & the Sonne, is of one substance, maiestie, and glory, with the Father & the Sonne, very, and eternall God. Hetherto haue we and our Adversaries gone hand in hand, no whit varying each from other, but now loe begins the breach, and first in the sixt Article. It is of the sufficiēcie of the Holy Scriptures to Salvati∣on, & the Article is this. Holy Scripture containeth all things necessary for salvation: so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proued thereby, is not to be requi∣red of any man, that it should be beleeued as an Article of the Faith, or be thought requisite and necessary to sal∣vation. In the name of the Holy Scriptures we doe vnder∣stand those Canonicall Bookes of the Old and New Testa∣ment, of whose authoritie was never any doubt in the Church. The names and number of them are these:
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numeri, Deuteronomium Iosue, Iudges, Ruth, The 1. Booke of Samuel, The 2. Booke of Samuel, The 1. Booke of Kings, The 2. Booke of Kings, The 1. Booke of Chronicles, The 2. Booke of Chronicles, The 1. Booke of Esdras, The 2. Booke of Esdras, The Booke of Hester, The Booke of Iob, The Psalmes, The Proverbs, Ec∣clesiastes, or the Preacher, Cantica, or Songs of Solomon. The 4 greater Prophets, The 12. lesse Prophets. And the other Bookes (as Hierome saith) the Church doth read for example of life, and instruction of manners: but yet doth it not apply them to establish any doctrine. Such are these following. The third book of Esdras. The fourth of Esdras. The booke of Tobias. The booke of Iudith. The rest of the books of Hester. The booke of Wisdome. Iesus the sonne of Syrach. Baruch the Prophet. The Song of the three Chil∣dren. The story of Susanna. Of Bell and the Dragon. The Prayer of Manasses. The 1 Book of Maccabees. The 2 Book of Maccabees. All the Books of the New Testament, as they are commonly receiued, we doe receiue and account them Canonicall. So that we haue in this Article two points to proue. First, that the holy Scripture containeth all things necessarie (to be knowne and beleeued) for the Salvation of man. Secondly, that all the Bookes in the volume of the Bible are not Canonicall, as for example, Toby, Iudith, Wisdome, the Sonne of Syrach, the Machabees, &c. For the former we haue both Scriptures and Fathers. Scriptures, as Deut. 4.2, Yee shall put nothing to the Word, which I command you, neither shall yee take ought there from. And Deut. 12.32, Whatsoever I command yee take heed you doe it: thou shalt put nothing thereto, nor take ought there∣from. So Ioshua, 1.7, Be thou strong & of a most valiant cou∣rage, that thou maist obserue and doe according to all the law which Moses my servant hath commanded thee: thou shalt
not turne away from it, to the right hand, nor to the left. I o∣mit the Prophet David, in whom there are not many more Psalmes then there are testimonies of the sufficiencie of the Law (chiefly the 19,Roffensis himselfe that wrote against Luther, cals the Holy Scripture Conclave quoddam om¦nium verita∣tum And again veritatū om∣nium Pelagus Aflert. Luther. confutatio, Art. 37. and the 119) which Law delive∣red to the Israelites whatsoever was necessary to their sal∣vation. I omit also that of the Apostle S. Paul, 2. Tim. 3.16 The whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God, & is pro∣fitable to teach, to improue, to correct, and to instruct in righ∣teousnesse, that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect vnto all good workes. I come to the Fathers. First Tertullian: Adoro,Tertul. advers Hermog. p. 123. Edit. Par. 1545 saith he, Scripturae plenitudinē. And againe a little after: Scriptum esse doceat Hermogenis officina. Si non est scriptum, timeat vae illud adijcientibus, aut detrahentibus destinatum. I adore, saith he of himselfe, the fulnesse of the Scripture. Let Hermogenes Schoole shewe that it is written. If so be it be not written, then let him feare that curse appointed for them, which adde or take a∣way. And this was the place of Tertullian against Hermo∣genes, that so puzzeld Campian at the first (Campian that great Goliah that chalenged all and every of vs from the highest to the lowest) that he did notA doubty chal¦lenger he was, and an hot shot, that knewe no better what Bookes the Fa∣thers had writ∣ten. See more of his whole carri∣age in that Dis∣putaton in D. Fulle Against the Defence of the Censure. Ep. to the Reader. p. 34. thinke there was a∣ny such Booke in all Tertullian. And yet see the boldnesse of the Iesuite, hee had no sooner denied there was such a Booke, but when he saw he was deceiued, he tooke pre∣sently vpon him toConference at the Tower. The 4 daies Confer. p. C c. 2. b. discourse of the Argument of it. But I proceede. CredimusHierom. Tom. 2. advers. Hel∣vid. p. 13. Edit. Basil. 1537. saith St Ierome, quia legimus, nō cre∣dimus quia non legimus. He in the Controversie which hee had with Helvidius turnes the reason in and out. We be∣leeue it because we read it, and because we read it not, therefore we beleeue it not. So St Basil, Manifesta est e∣lapsio à fideBasil. Ser. de Confess. Fid. p. 438. Edit. Basil. 1540. saith he, & superbiae crimen, aut reprobare quid ex his quae scripta sunt, aut superinducere quid ex non scrip∣tis. He affirmeth it to be a manifest revolting frō the Faith, & a spice of pride, either to disallow any thing that is writ¦ten, or to bring in any thing that is not written. And more over concerning the Authority of Scriptures, that they
should be the Iudge of controversies in religion, there is, saith D. Humfrey, a most excellent place in Chrysostom,Humfred. in Camp. Rat. 5. p. 507. quē nullus locus cummunis Iesuitarum, nulla Topica, Logi∣ca, Philosophica, Theologica, possunt demoliri. No common place books of the Iesuits, none of their Topicks, Logick, Philosophy, Theology, could possibly demolish. They vsed saith he, the Sword not of Hercules, but of the Printer, & left it out quite and cleane. I take it he meanes aTunc cum vī∣deritis abomi∣nationem deso∣lationis stantem in loco sancto, id est, cum vide∣ritis haeresim impiam, quae est exercitus Anti∣christi flantem in locis sanctis Ecclesiae, in illo tempore qui in Iudaea sunt fu∣giant ad montes id est, qui sunt in Christianitate conferant se ad Scripturas. And a little after Montes autem sunt Scripturae Apostolorum aut Propheta∣rum, &c. And again a little after: Quare iubet in hoc tē∣pore omnes Christianos con∣ferre se ad Scrip∣turas? Quia in tempore hoc ex quo obtinuit Haeresii illas Ecclesias, nulla probatio potest esse verae Christianitatis, ne{que} refugium potest esse Christianorum aliud, volentium cognoscere fidei verita∣tem, nisi Scripturae divinae, &c. Chrys. Tom. 2, Op. impers. in Mat. Homil. 49. Edit. Basil. 1547. p. 1088. place in Opere Imperf. in Mat. Hom. 49. you shal find it in S. Chry∣sostom in his 2. Tome. I returne vnto my purpose. And be∣fore we haue done with this point, there is a maine obiec∣tion to be answered concerning the Premisses. For it hath oftentimes beene demaunded, how the Bookes of holy Scripture containe in them all necessary things, when of things necessary the very chiefest is to know what Bookes we are bound to esteeme holy, which point is confest im∣possible for the Scriture it selfe to teach. Wherevnto it may be answered, that albeit Scripture do professe to con∣taine in it ll things which are necessary vnto Salvation, yet the meaning cannot be simply of al things that are ne∣cessary but all things that are necessary in some certaine kinde or forme; as all things that are necessary, and either could not at all, or could not easily be known by the light of natural discourse: all things which are necessary to be knowne that we may be saved, but knowne with presup∣posal of knowledge concerning certain Principles, wher∣of it receiveth vs already perswaded, and then instructeth vs in all the residue that are necessary. In the number of these Principles one is the sacred Authority of Scripture. See more hereof in Reverend MrM. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 1. §. 14. p. 86. and l. 3. §. 8. p. 146. Hooker. I come to the second point concerning Bookes Canonicall. That they only are Canonical which our Church accep∣teth
of; and that the rest are Apocrypha, it is sufficient to haue the testimony of Antiquity only, & so haue we. First the Councel of Laodicea, which framing the catalogue of Bookes Canonicall,Non oportet libros quisunt extra canonem legere (in Eccle¦si) nisi solo ca∣nonics novi & vitris Testa¦menti. Quae au∣tem oporteat le∣gi, & in autho¦ritatem recipi haec sunt. Gen. Ex. Levit. Nu. Deut. Ies. Naue Iudicum, Ruth. Reg. lib. quatu∣or. Paralip. libri duo, Esdre, lib. Psalm. numero 150. Proverb. Solom. Eccles. Cantic. Cāticor. Iob. Hester. Du∣od. Proph. Libri id est Ose & A∣mos, Ioel, Abdias, Ionas, Micheas, Nahum, Abacu, Sophonias, Aggaeus. Zach. Malach. Esai. Ier. Ezech. Dan Novi Test. id est, Evang. sec. Mat. sec. Marc. sec. Luc sec. Ioan. Act Apost. Ca∣nonicae Epist. 7. Iacobi vna, Petriduae, 1a & 2a. Ioannis tres 1a 2a & 3a. Iude vna, Epistolae Apost. Pauli numero 14. Ad Rom. ad Cor. 1a & 2a ad Gal. ad Ephes. ad Philippenses vna, a Colos. vna. ad Thess. duae 1a & 2a. ad Timoth. duae 1a & 2a. ad Titū, ad Philem. ad Heb. Conc. Laod. Ao. D. 364. vel 368. Can. 59 sive vlt. p. 227. Edit. Clon per Petrum Quentel omitteth these in controversie be∣twixt our Adversaries and vs. Secondly, the testimonie of Melito the Bishop of Sardia of whom you shall read inMeliton Gnesim fratri salutem &c In Orientem reversus, & eo loco constitutus vbi ista sunt & praedicata & gesta veteris instrument ilibros diligenter cognitos in ordinem subieci, & ad te misi: quorum haec sunt nomina. Quin{que} libri Mosis, Gen Ex Levit. Nu. Deut. Deinde Iesus Nave, Iudices, Ruth, Regum. quatuor libri, Paralip. duo Ps. David. Proverb Sol. Sapientia. Eccles. Cantic. Canticor. Iob. Prophetae Esaias, Ieremias. Duod. Prophet. lib. vnus. Daniel. Ezechiel. Esd. Euseb. Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 25. ex vers. Grynaei Basil. 1587. Where for Sapientia is named, and thereby it seemeth that the Booke of Wisd. is made Canonicall, Vid. D. Rainolds Lectures Praelect. 14. p. 116. how that is to be vnderstood, namely that the Proverbs are called  per excellē∣tiam. Eusebius. Thirdly the testimony ofHorum libros lege duos at{que} viginti, nihil{que} cum Apocryphis habeto commune, Vid. Locū S Cyril. Catech. 4. p 99. Edit. Paris 1608. St Cyril. Who so is desirous to see more, I referre him to those excellent Le∣ctures sometimes read here in Oxford, and lately set forth byPraelectiones D Rainoldi De Libris Apocryphis, In nobili Oppenheimio sumptibus Viduae Levini Hulsii & Henrici Laurentii, Ao 1611. Vid. Praelect. 34, 35, 36. Strangers to as great a commendation vnto them, as a reproach vnto our selues. But thus much of the sixt Ar∣ticle. In the seaventh we ioine hands againe, there is I con∣fesse some little difference; but the Article is this; The Old Testament is not contrary to the New. For both in the old and new Testament everlasting life is offered to Mankind by Christ, who is the only mediatour betweene God and Man, being both God and Man. Wherefore they are not to be heard which faine that the old Fathers did looke only for transitory promises. Although the Law given from
God by Moses, as touching Ceremonies and Rites, doe not binde Christian men; nor the Ciuill Precepts thereof ought of necessity to be received in any Common wealth: yet not∣withstanding no Christian man whatsoever is free from the obedience of the Cōmādements which are called Moral. Now when it is said in this Article, that They are not to be heard which faine that the old Fathers did looke only for trā∣sitory promises (meaning the Fathers of the old Testament) true it is, that our Popish writers haue run vpō that string, and by name the Fathers of the Councell of Trent, allea∣ging St Austen for that point (they might haue doneChrys. Tom. 1. Hom. de Fide Annae p. 490. E∣dit. Paris. 1556 St Chrysostome too) but forasmuch as it is none of the Cōtro∣versies in question now adaies, I will referre you only to Mr D. RainoldsD. Rain. Prae∣lect. 7. p. 78. and Prael. 11. p. 98. Lectures, where he handleth this point.  I come to the eight Article wherein we ioine hands to, af∣ter a sort. The Article is this: The three Creedes, Ni∣cene Creed, Athnasius Creed, and that which is common∣ly called the Apostles Creed ought throughly to be recei∣ved, & beleeved. For they may be proved by most certaine warrants of holy Scripture. I say after a sort, for that our Adversaries it may be, suppose there are some points in those Creedes that are proved rather by Tradition, but I will not now stand on this point. I come to our greater fallings out, & that is in the 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, & 14. Article.  The 9, is of Original, or Birth Sinne, & the Article is this: Original sin standeth not in the following of Adam (as the Pelagians do vainly talke) but it is the fault and corrupti∣on of the nature of every man, that naturally is ingendred of the off-spring of Adam, whereby man is very farre gone from originall righteousnes, and is of his owne nature en∣clined to evill, so that the flesh lusteth alwaies contrary to the spirit, & therfore in every person borne in this world, it deserveth Gods wrath and damnation. And this infe∣ction
of nature doth remaine, yea in them that are regene∣rated, whereby the lust of the flesh, called in Greeke , which some do expound the wisdome, some sensuali∣ty, some the affection, some the desire of the flesh, is not sub∣iect to the law of God. And although there is no condem∣nation for them that beleeue and are baptized, yet the A∣postle doth confesse that Concupiscence and lust hath of it selfe the Nature of sin. Here then in this Article we are to confirme two Points. First that Originall Sin remaines in Gods deare Children: Secondly, that Concupiscence e∣ven in the Regenerate is Sin. Proue one, and proue both. That Concupiscence, and the corrupt inclination of Nature even in the Childrē of God is verily and properly Sin, is thus proved by the word of God. First St Paule so cals it, Rom. 7.17, Now then it is no more I that do it, but the sinne that dwelleth in me. And againe, v. 20, Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that doe it, but the sin that dwelleth in me. Nay he calleth it Sinne six severall times in that Chapter: he had called it so in the sixt Chapter no lesse then fiue times; and in the Chapter next to this, that is in the eight, Three times. We dare not say as theConc. Trid. Sess. 5 Num. 5. Councell of Trent did, Hanc Concupiscentiam, quam aliquando Apostolus pec∣catum appellat, Sancta Synodus declarat Ecclesiam Catholi∣cam nunquam intellexisse peccatum appellari, quòd verè & proprie in renatis peccatum sit, sed quia ex peccato est, & ad peccatum inclinat: This Concupiscence which the Apostle sometime calleth sinne, this Holy Synod declares that the Catholicke Church never vnderstoode it to be called sin, for that truely and properly it was sin in the Regenerate. No we take the Apostle at his word, and whatsoever their Catholicke Church hath thought in this point, the Ca∣tholicke Fathers not only thought, but taught also other∣wise. Witnesse St Ambrose, whom St AustenAmbros. apud August. Tom. 7. Contra Iulian. l. 2. p. 661 Edit. Basil 1528. citeth: Mul∣ta in nobis operatur peccatum: nobis reluctantibus redivivae
plerum{que} voluptates resurgunt. This sin (original) worketh many things in vs: even against our wils a many times pleasures revived arise within vs. Witnesse St Cyprian whō St AustenCyp. apud Au∣gust. Ib. p. 666. citeth to, Ne quisquam sibi de puro & immacu∣lato pectore blandiatur. Si nemo esse sine peccato potest, quis∣quis se inculpatum esse dixerit, aut superbus, aut stultus est. Let no man sooth vp himselfe that he hath a pure and im∣maculate heart. And for because no man can possibly be without sinne, he who saith he is, is or prowd, or foolish. Witnesse S. Austen himselfe, Sicut coecitas cordis,Aug. Tom. 7. Cont. Iulian. l. 5 c. 3. p. 725. saith he, & peccatum est, & poena peccati est, & causa peccati: ita concupiscentia carnis adversus quam bonus concupiscit spi∣ritus, & peccatum est, & poena peccati est, & causa peccati est. As blindnesse of the heart is both sinne it selfe, and the punishment of Sinne, and the cause of Sin: so is Concupi∣scence of the Flesh against the which the good Spirit lu∣steth. Briefly where the Fathers say that Concupiscence is not Sin, their meaning is, saith a worthyAnion. Sade∣elis Ad Artic. 39. p 466. Ope∣ra Theol. Edit. 1593. Writer, for that through Gods Grace it is not imputed vnto vs. Whosoe∣ver is desirous to see more, I referre him to M. Dr Whita∣kers De Peccato Originali, l. 3. the 6, & 7 Chapters. I come to the tenth Article, which is of Freewill.  The Article is this: The condition of Man after the fall of Adam is such that he cānot turne & prepare himselfe by his own naturall strength, and good works, to Faith & calling vp∣on God; wherefore we haue no power to doe good Workes pleasant, and acceptable to God, without the Grace of God preventing vs, that we may haue a good will, and working with vs, when we haue that good will. The point in this Article to be avouched against our Adversaries is this: Man cannot doe any worke that good is, and godly, not being as yet regenerate. A truth approved both by the Scriptures, and the Fathers. The Scriptures, as 1. Cor. 2.14, The natu∣rall man perceiueth not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishnesse vnto him: nether can he knowe them, be∣cause
they are spiritually discerned. And 2. Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient of our selues, to think any thing as of our selues: but our sufficiencie is of God. So our Saviour Christ, Ioh. 15.5. Without me can yee doe nothing. And Iohn 6.44, No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me drawe him. The Fathers: as first St Ambrose: Reparabilem & sana∣bilem esse de natura est,Ambr. Tom. 2 de vocat. Gent. l. 2. c. 2. p 28. Edit. Bas. 1538 reparatum autem & sanatum esse de gratia est. To be fit to be repaired, and to be healed is of Nature, but to be repaired, and healed, that is of Grace. And againe inAmbr. Tom. 3 Epist. l. 10. ep. 84. p. 270. another place, In omnibus bonis opulentiae tuae & Gratiam Donatoris, & ius proprietatis agnoscas. In all thy spirituall ritches acknowledge the Grace of him that gaue it thee, & the right of proprietie from him. And yet againe in a thirdAmbr. Tom. 2 de vocat. Gent. l. 1. c. 2. p 5. place, Voluntas nihil in suis habet vi∣ribus nisi periculi facilitatem. Quoniam voluntas mutabilis quae non ab incommutabili voluntate regitur, tanto citiùs propinquat iniquitati, quanto acriùs intenditur actioni. Will hath nothing in her own power, but a facilitie to miscary. For mutable wil which is not rectified by that immutable Will aboue, is so much the neerer to Iniquitie, the more intent she is to doe ought.Fulgent. de Praedest. p. 15. Edit. Bas. 1587 So Fulgentius: Dat Deus cor novum vt in iustificationibus etus ambulemus, quod perti∣net ad bonae voluntatis initium. Dat etiam vt iudicia eius ob∣servemus & faciamus, quod pertinet ad bonae operationis ef∣fectum. ƲndeFortè cog∣noscimus. cognoscimur Dei esse, vt bonum facere veli∣mus, & vt bonum facere valeamus. God giues vs a new heart to the end we should walke in his Statutes, and that belongeth to the beginning of a good will. It is his gift also, that we obserue and doe his Statutes, & that belongs to the effect of good working. Wherefore we acknow∣ledge it to be Gods peculiar, that both we be willing to doe that which good is, and able also to performe it. Last∣ly S. Austen: Quae voluntas?Aug Tom. 10 de verb. Apost. Ser. 13. p. 214. Edit. Bas. 1529 saith he, quod liberum arbitri∣um? nisi ille regat cadis, nisi regat iaces. What will? what Freewill doest thou prattle of vnto me? Vnlesse God doe governe it thou fallest downe right: vnlesse he governe it,
there thou lyest without recovery. And againe inAug. To. 1. Re∣tract. l. 1. c. 15. p. 16 Edit. Ba∣sil. 1529. ano∣ther place, In tantum libera est, quia in tantum liberata est. The will is so farre forth free, for she is freed so farre forth by the mercy of God. In a word, where S. Austen in other places seemeth to defēd the Freedome of wil, it was for be∣cause hauing to do with the Manichees, who held that Mē were of evill will by creation of the evill God, he held indeed Freedome of will, but yetV. D. Fulke on the Rhem. Test. in Mat. 25.34. Freedome of will frō coaction by nature, not frō the thraldome of Sin through the first mans fall. The eleventh article is of the Iustifica∣tion of Man.  The Article is this. We are accounted righ∣teous before God, only for the merit of our Lord and Savi∣our Iesus Christ by faith, and not for our owne workes or deservings. Wherefore that we are iustified by Faith Only is a most wholsome doctrine, and very full of comfort, as more largely is expressed in the Homily of Iustification. In which Article we are to make good against our Adver∣saries two severall Propositions: First that only for Christ his merit we are accoūted righteous before God: Second∣ly that we are iustified by Faith Only. Both these in a ma∣ner are one, and therefore that only for Christ his merit we are accounted righteous before God, and that we are iustified by Faith Only, witnesse that of the Apostle S. Iohn 1. Iohn. 1.7. The blood of Iesus Christ cleanseth vs from all Sinne. That of the Apostle S. Paule, Rom. 5.19. As by one mans disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obediēce of one shall many also be made rigbteous. That of the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.30. Yee are of him in Iesus Christ who of God is made vnto vs Wisdome and Righteousnesse, and San∣ctification, and Redemption. I, but this tearme ONLY,You haue it not in all the word of God that Faith only doth iustifie, saith Campiā This Propositiō, Faith only doth iustifie is not to be found in all the word of God Cōference in the Tower p. D. d. 3. b. though S. Paul say, man is iustified by Faith, yet he ne∣ver said by faith only. Rhem in Iam. 1.24. say our Adversaries, where is that in all the Scripture? where? where is it? and where is this tearme Merit? where is Trā∣subtantiation? where is Masse? —Senec. Troas Act. 3 Sc. Quid moesia. Vbi Hector? Vbi cuncti Phryges? Vbi Priamus? Vnum quaeris; ego quaero omnia. Howbeit as there is in Scripture that which they imagine
proues all this: both Merit, and Masse, and Transubstanti∣ation, and the like, not named there in particular, so we are assured there is in Scripture that which proveth Faith Faith. For what meane there those many Negatiues,Rom. 9.11. Gal. 2.16. Tit. 3.5. Not by workes:Rom. 11 6. Ephes. 2.9. Not of workes;2 Tim. 1.9. Not according to workes;Rom 4.6. VVithout workes;Rom. 4 13. Not through the law:Rom. 3.20. Not by the workes of the law,Rom 3.21. VVithout the law:Gal 2.16. Not but by Faith: is he not purblinde as St Petere speaketh () & cannot see a far of, that sees not in those Negatiues, Only Faith?2. Pet. 1 9. Faith Only? Did not the Fathers therein perceiue as much before vs? Doe they not therevpon vse those very words of Sola Fides in Latine, and  in Greeke? & that which was also equivalent to them asTantùm. vt credant. Amb. Tom. 5. in Epist. ad Rom c. 4 p. 186. Edit. Basil. 1538. Num est & hic quippiam alla∣turus? Fidem duntaxat. The∣ophyl. in Ep. ad Rom. c. 4 p. 7 Edit. Colō. 1528 Totum. creduli∣tas sola donauit (Abrahamo) Aug. Tom. 10. de Temp Ser. 68. p. 516. Edit. Basil. 1529. De remissione peccatorum suf∣ficere deberet sola credulitas. Cyp. in Symb. Apost. p. 379. Edit. Basil. 1530. Fidem tantùm pro∣desse, & tantum nos posse quātum credimuss. Cyp. ad Quirinū, l. 3. c. 42. p. 305. Edit. Basil. 1530. ; Chrys. in Epist. ad Titum. . fol. 99. b. Edit. Veronae. 1529. . Oecum. in Ep. ad Rom. p 270. Edit. Veronae. 1532. Tantùm cre∣dere, sola credulitas, Fides tantùm, &c? Search and see, or to saue you a labor let me be the Searcher for you. I haue else where proclaimed it long since, I will now make it good vnto you, that vnles it be one Case only (which my poore reading perhaps hath not light vpō as yet) otherwise there is no one Case in Sola Fides but some of the Fathers haue vsed it, more then once in thir writings. As first in the NominatiueFides sola iustificat. Hilar. in Mat. Can. 8. p. 352. & Can. 21. p. 406. Edit. Basil. 1535. Wherevpon faith Erasmus, Addit Hilarius, Fides enim sola iustificat, atqui haec est vox tot clamoribus hoc saeculo lapidata, quae in Hi∣lario reverēter auditur. Erasm. de Ratione Concion. l. 3. St Hilary,Sola fides posita est ad salutem. Ambr. Tom. 5. in. Epist. ad Rom. c. 9. p. 216. Edit. Basil. 1538. St Ambrose,Si Gentes fides sola non salvat, nec nos. In 2. ad Gal. p. 346. Col. 2. And In 3. ad Gal. p. 347. he hath fiue times Sola Fides, though be say in that Chapter too, Non iustificat sola fides, meaning a dead faith. Hier. Tom 9. Edit. Basil. 1537. St Ierom,Quia sola fides Christi mundat, non credentes in Christum soluti sunt ab emunda∣tione. Aug. Tom. 8. in. Ps. 88. Conc. 2. p. 987. Edit. Basil. 1529. St Au∣sten andAb hoc peccato quod originaliter carnalis nativitas trahit, neminem facultas naturalis, neminem litera sanctae legis, sed sola fides e∣ripit Iesu Christi. Fulgent. de Incarnat. c. 16, p 746. Edit. Basil. 1587. Fulgentius: In the Genitiue,. Chrys. in 2. ad Ephes Ser 5. p 145. And again, , In 1. ad Tim. c. 1. . p. 8. b. Edit Veronae 1529. St Chrysostom,. Theodor. ad Graec. Infid. Ser. 7. p 107. Col. 1. Edit. Commelin. 1592. Theodoret, andDicit (Aposto∣lus) sufficere solius fidei iustificationem. Orig. in. 3. ad Rom. p. 504. Oper. Part. 2. Edit. Bas. 1571. Origen: In the Datiue,, Chrys. in 3. ad Gal. p. 95 Edit. Veronae. 1529. St Chrysostom againe, and. Basil. de Humil p. 388. Edit. Basil. 1532. S. Basil. In the Accusatiue,Impius per solam fidem iustificatur apud Deum. In 4. ad Rom. p. 186. And againe, Solam fidem gratiae Dei posceret ad Salutem, Ib. And againe, Cum sciant Abraham per solam fidem iustificatum. And a little after, Hi er∣go haeredes sunt promissionis Abrahae qui illi succedunt suscipientes fidem in qua benedictus & iu∣stificatus est Abrahā. Ib. in 3. ad Gal. p, 329. And againe, vt veniens qui promissus erat Abrahae fidem solam ab iis posceret, quā habuit Abraham vt & malorū suorū veniā & iustificationem me∣rerentur. Ibid. p. 331. Ambros. Tom. 5. Edit. Basil. 1538. S. Ambrose,Rectè dici posset ad solam fidem perti∣nere Dei mandata, si non mortua, sed viva illa intelligatur fides. Aug. Tom. 4. de Fid. & Oper. c. 22. p. 54. Edit. Basil. 1528. St Austen,Quid à nobis exigit, quid praestari fibi à nobis iubet, nisi solam tan∣tummodò fidem, castitatem, humilitatem &c. Salvian. de Provident. l. 7. p. 241. Edit. Par. 1594 Salvianus,Nos dicimus, illi per fidem solam ad indulgentiam attingunt. Arnob. in Ps. 106. p. 92. Edit. Par. 1580. Arnobius,Nunc planè demonstrat fidem ipsam vel solam iustificandi in se habere virtutem. The∣ophyl. in 3 ad Gal. p. 77. Edit. Colon. 1528. Theophilact, &Solam iustificatus per fidem pacem habebit ad Deū, Super Cantic. Ser. 22. Fol. 137 Col. 4. And againe, Innuens: solam interdum fidem sufficere ad sa∣lutem, & sine ipsa sufficere nihil. Bernar. Epist. 77. fol. 205. Col. 4 Edit. Paris. 1547. S. Ber∣nard: In the AblatiueHoc cō∣stitutum est à Deo, vt qui credit in Christum salvus sit sine opere sola fide gratis accipiens remissi∣onem peccatorum, In 1. Cor. 1 p. 239 And againe, Sola fide iustificati sunt dono Dei. In 3 ad Rom. p. 184. And againe, Sola fide iustificentur apud Deum. in 4. ad Rom. p. 186. Ambr Tom. 5. Edit. Basil. 1538. St Ambrose againe,Evangelium per quod Gentes sola fide salvantur, in 2. ad Gal. pag. 345. Col. 2. And againe, Non ex operibus legis, sed sola fide sicut Gentes vitam in Christo invenisse te nosti, Ib. p. 346: Col. 2. Againe vpon that of the Apostle, In fide vivò filii Dei] In sola fide; quia ni∣hil debeo legi antiquae. p. 347. Col. 1. And againe, In sola fide spes collocatur animarum, In 6. ad. Gal p. 53. Col. 2. Hier. Tom. 9. Edit. Basil. 1537. St Ierome,Praecogniti quod non fuerant credituri ea fide qua sola possent à peccatorum obligatione liberari. Aug Tom. 9. in Evang. Ioan. Tract. 42. p. 216 Edit. Basil 1529. St Austen andSalus sola fide quaeritur. Paulin. apud Augustinum Tom. 2. ep. 58. p. 186 Edit. Basil 1528. Paulinus. Shall I giue you a taste in every
Case? Fides Sola iustificat, so St Hilary: Sufficit solius fidei iustificatio, so Origen: Qui soli fidei innititur benedictus est, so St Chrysostome: Impius per solam fidem iustificatur, so St Ambrose: There wants indeed the Vocatiue: but, Gen∣tes Sola Fide salvantur, so St Ierome. Now where our Ad∣versaries would shift of these & the like places with aRhem. in Iam. 1.24. Vid. D. Fulke against them. di∣stinction
of a first and second Iustification, we may meete them at that turne with that of St Gregory: Nudum me in fideGreg. Moral. l 2. c. 40. p. 11. Col. 1. Edit. Par. 1551. saith he, prima gratia genuit, nudum eadem gratia in assumptione salvabit. He speaketh in the person of a temp∣ted Soule, as if such an one should say: The first Grace be∣got me in faith when I was but naked (in good workes) and the same Grace shall saue me hereafter, whenas I shall be but naked (in them) nether. Besides that they speak not on∣ly of the first conversion of a man, but of iustification vnto salvation of every faithfull man according to the example of Abraham, and David, who both had good works, yet were not iustified by them before God, but by their faith only. But of this see more in D. Fulkes Reioinder to Bri∣stowes Reply, p. 206. and 207, as also against the Rhemish Testament on Iames 1.24. I will conclude this point with that ofCalvin, in Act Synod. Trid. Sext. Sess. An∣tid. Tract. The∣ol. p. 336. Col. 2. Calvin: Fides Sola est quae iustificat; sides tamen quae iustificat non est sola. Vt solis calor solus est, qui terram cale∣faciat: non tamen idem in sole solus est, quia coniunctus cum splendore. It is faith alone that iustifies, and yet that Faith that iustifies is not alone. Like as it is the heat a∣lone of the Sun that heateth the earth, yet is not that heate in the sunne alone, forasmuch as it hath brightnes ioined with it. I come to the 12, 13, and 14, Articles concer∣ning Good Workes.  The 12 is this: Albeit that good Workes, which are the fruits of Faith, and follow after iusti∣fication, cannot put away our sinnes, and indure the seve∣rity of Gods iudgement, yet are they pleasing and accepta∣ble to God in Christ, and do spring out necessarily of a true & liuely Faith, in so much that by them a liuely faith may be as evidētly known as a tree discerned by the fruit.  The 13 is this: Workes done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his spirit, are not pleasant to God, foras∣much as they spring not of faith in Iesu Christ, neither do they make men meete to receiue grace (or as the Schoole-Authors
say) deserue grace of cōgruity: yea rather for that they are not done as God hath willed & commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they haue the nature of sinne.  The 14 this: Voluntary Workes besides, over & aboue Gods commandements, which they call works of Superero∣gation, cannot be taught without arrogancy and impiety. For by them men do declare that they do not only render vnto God as much as they are bound to do, but that they do more for his sake, then of bounden duty is required: where∣as Christ saith plainely, when yee haue done all that are commaunded to you, say we be vnprofitable servants. Now from these three Articles arise three maine Questi∣ons. First from the 12 Article, whether our good Workes can put away our sinnes, and indure the severity of Gods strict iudgement. Secondly, from the 13 Article, whether Good Workes being done before Iustification can please God, and deserue grace of congruity, and haue not rather the nature of Sinne. Thirdly, from the 14 Article, whether Workes of Supererogation can be taught without arro∣gancy and impiety. But that Good Workes cannot put a∣way our Sinnes, & in no wise indure the severity of Gods iudgement: & that before iustification they cannot please God, and deserue grace of congruity, but rather haue the nature of Sinne: and that workes of Supererogation can∣not be taught without arrogancie and impiety, is evident in effect by that which hath beene already said cōcerning Workes, and Faith Only. I come to the 15, 16, 17, and 18, Article wherein our agreement is much greater. The 15, Article, is of our Saviours being alone without sinne.  The Articles is this: Christ in the truth of our nature was made like vnto vs in all things (sin only except) from which he was clearely voide, both in his flesh, and in his spirit. He came to be a Lambe without spot, who by a sacrifice of him∣selfe
once made should take away the sinnes of the world: & sinne (as St Iohn saith) was not in him. But all we the rest, (although baptized, and borne againe in Christ) yet offend in many things, and if we say we haue no sin, we deceiue our selues, & the truth is not in vs.  The 16 Article is of Sin after Baptisme, the words are these: Not every dead∣ly sinne willingly committed after Baptisme, is sin against the Holy Ghost, and vnpardonable. Wherefore the graunt of repentance is not to be denied to such as fall into sin af∣ter Baptisme. After we haue received the holy Ghost, we may depart from grace giuen, and fall into sinne, & by the grace of God (we may) arise againe, and amend our liues. And therfore they are to be condemned, which say they can no more sinne as long as they liue here, or deny the place of forgiuenesse to such as truely repent. The 17 Article is of Predestination, and Election. The Article is this:  Predestination to life, is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the foundations of the world were laid) hee hath constantly decreed by his counsell, secret to vs, to deli∣ver from curse and damnation, those whom he hath chosen in Christ out of mankinde, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation, as vessels made to honour. Where∣fore they which be indued with so excellent a benefit of God, be called according to Gods purpose by his Spirit wor∣king in due season: they through grace obey the calling, they be iustified freely, they be made sonnes of God by adop∣tion; they be made like the Image of his only begotten Son Iesus Christ; they walke religiously in good workes, and at length by Gods mercy, they attaine to everlasting felicity. As the godly consideration of Predestination and our Ele∣ction
in Christ, is ful of sweet, pleasant, and vnspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such as feele in themselues the working of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying the workes of the flesh, and their earthly members, and drawing vp their minde to high and heavenly things, aswell because it doth greatly establish and confirme their faith of eternall salvation to be enioyed through Christ, as because it doth fervently kindle their loue towards God: so, for curious and carnall persons, lacking the spirit of Christ, to haue continually before their eies the sentence of Gods Predesti∣nation, is a most dangerous downefall, whereby the Divell doth thrust them either into desperation, or into retchles∣nesse of most vncleane living, no lesse perillous then despe∣ration. Furthermore, we must receiue Gods promises in such wise, as they be generally set forth to vs in holy Scrip∣ture: and in our doings, that will of God is to be followed, which we haue expresly declared vnto vs in the Word of God. The 18 Article is of obtaining eternal salvation, onely by the name of Christ. The Article is this:  They also are to be had accursed, that presume to say, that every man shall be saved by the law or sect which he pro∣fesseth, so that he be diligent to frame his life according to that law, and the light of nature. For holy Scripture doth set out vnto vs onely the name of Iesus Christ, whereby mē must be saved. Now in al these we haue in some sort, gone (as it were) togither, we are now againe to part and that at the Church Style, for the 19. Article is this.  The vi∣sible Church of Christ, is a Congregation of faithfull men, in the which the pure word of God is preached, and the Sa∣craments be duly administred, according to Christs ordi∣nance, in all those things that of necessitie, are requisite to
the same. As the Church of Ierusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch haue erred: so also the Church of Rome hath erred, not only in their living and maner of ceremonies, but also in matters of Faith. Here I confesse should much be spoken aswel for our selues, as against our Adversaries, howbeit since of the Visible Church I haue spoken so muchLect. 6. p. 106 already, as also of the Church of Rome, how it hath and dothIbid. p. 123. erre, I will referre you concerning this Article to that which hath beene already spoken, and I come vnto the next, which is of the Authoritie of the Church.  The Church hach power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and au∣thoritie in controversies of Faith: and yet it is not lawfull for the Church to ordaine any thing that is contrary to Gods word written, neither may it so expound one place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to another. Wherefore al∣though the Church be a witnesse and a keeper of holy writ; yet as it ought not to decree any thing against the same, so besides the same, ought it not to enforce any thing to be beleeued for necessitie of salvation. Of this also should much be spoken, but forasmuch as I haue spoken before, & that vpon the 6. Article of the Sufficiency of holy Scrip∣ture, it shall be needlesse to proue at this time, that the Church may enforce any thing to be beleeued that is ei∣ther cōtrary, or besides the word of God, that is the Scrip∣tures. Of the power the Church hath to decree Rites and Ceremonies, see Reverend M. Hooker in his third Book of Ecclesiasticall Politie, the 9. Section. I come to the 21. Article, Of the authoritie of generall Councells: the Arti∣cle is this.  Generall Councells may not be gathered toge∣ther without the commandement and will of Princes. And when they be gathered together (forasmuch as they be an assembly of men, where of all be not governed with the spi∣rit and word of God) they may erre, & sometime haue er∣red,
even in things pertaining vnto God. Wherefore things ordained by them as necessarie to salvation, haue neither strength nor authoritie, vnlesse it may be decla∣red, that they may be taken out of holy Scripture. That Princes as supreame Governours within their owne Ter∣ritories and Dominions may commaund all sorts of men to meet together, either to the implanting of Truth where it is not: or to the suppressing of Errors, Idolatry or Super∣stition where it is, witnes the Councels that were holdē in the time of the Mosaical Government by David, Solomō, Asa, Ezekiah, Iosiah, &c. as also the General and National Councels that haue bin held by Christiā Emperors, Kings and Princes. Generall: as the Nicene by Constantine the great, the Councell of Constantinople by Theodosius the elder, the Councell of Ephesus by Theodosius the youn∣ger, the Councell of Calcedon by Martian. And to goe a little out of my way, these were those foure Councels that inVid M Hoo∣ker Ecclesiast. Pol. l 5 §. 54. p. 116. foure only words, , that is, Truely, Perfectly, Indivisibly, Distinctly: the first against the Arrians, the second against the Apollinari∣ans, the third against Nestorians, the fourth against Euty∣chians, taught vs how to comprise by way of abridgment whatsoever Antiquitie hath handled at large, either in de∣claration of Christian Beleefe, or in refutation of those foure Heresies. Of these also it was, that S. Gregory gaue that testimony, how he honoured them all Foure, & that which was next vnto them too, as he did the FoureSicut Sancti Evangelii qua∣tuor libros, sic quatuor Conci∣lia suscipere & venerarime fa∣teor, &c. Quin∣tum qu{que} Con∣cilium pariter veneror &c. Greg. Epist. l. 1 ep. 24. p. 156. Col. 1. Edit. Paris. 1551. Gos∣pels: meaning as it is likely, and as M.D. WhitakerWhitaker. in Camp. Rat. 4. ob∣serves, that which was decreed and concluded in those Councells out of Gods word against those Hereticks. I proceed. Besides these Generall Councels there haue beene Na∣tionall and Provinciall too, called by those Princes who had the government in those Parts, as the Councell at Frankford, Rhemes, Moguntia &c. by Charles the Great:
at Paris and Orleans by Childebert, and at other places by other Princes. That the ancient Fathers were of opini∣on that so it was to be, witnesse first of all S. Ierome, Syno∣dus,Hieron. Tom. 2. Advers. Ruf∣fin. Apol. 2. p. 221. Edit. Basil. 1537. saith he, à qua excommunicatus est (Hilarius) in qua vrbe fuit? Dic Episcoporum vocabula. Doce qui eo anno Cō∣sules fuerint, qui Imperator hanc Synodum iusserit congre∣gari. He would needs knowe of Ruffinus, amongst a many other questions, what Emperour had caused that Synode to be called, wherein Hilarius was supposed to haue been excommunicated. Such another witnesse might beChrys. Tom. 5. Epist 1. ad In∣nocent. p. 971. Edit. Bas. 1547 S. Chrysostome, such anotherConc. Tom. 1. in Conc. Aqui leiens p. 331. b. Edit Colon. 1538. S. Ambrose, but I produce not their testimonies for brevities sake. That Councels haue erred, we haue the experience of it in some of them, and the testimonies of the Fathers be∣sides. The experience we haue of it in some of them is in that they haue concluded things contradictory, as the Councell of Laodicea,Vid. D. Rain. Thes. Angl. Thes 2 p. 699. Vid. Whitak de Conc qu. 6. c. 3. p. 287 and the third Councell of Carthage a∣bout the Canon of the Scripture. The Councell of Nice & the Councell of Lateran, about the Iurisdiction of the Bi∣shop of Rome. The Councell of Constance, and the Councell of Florence, about the Popes subiection to generall Councels. —Lucan. l. 1. Infestis obvia signis Signa, pares Aquilas, & pila minantia pilis. The testimonies of the Fathers are many, I will instance only in a few. First in Gregory Nazianzen, who being re∣quested to come to a Councell vtterly refused, and gaue this. Naz ep. 42. ad Procop. p. 814. Edit. Par. 1609 reason, he for his part had never seene any good end of such meetings. Secondly in St Ierome, Spiritus SanctiHieron. Tom. 9 in Ep. ad Gal. citatur à Whi∣takero l. de Cōc. qu. 6 c. 3. p. 328 & in Duraeum. l. 4. p 292. saith he, doctrina est, quae Canonicis literis prodita est; con∣tra quam si quid statuant Concilia, nefas duco. It is the do∣ctrine of the holy Ghost, which is delivered vnto vs in the Canonicall Scriptures, against which if so be Councels should in any wise decree, I should hold it a wicked act. Thirdly, in St Austen, who speaking of Coūcels, Quis nes∣ciatAug. Tom. 7. de Bapt. contra Donat. l. 2. c. 3. p. 261. Edit. Ba∣sil. 1528. saith he, & ipsa Concilia, quae per singulas Regiones vel
Provincias fiunt, plenariorum Conciliorum authoritati, quae fiunt ex vniverso Orbe Christiano sine vllis ambagibus cede∣re, ipsa{que} plenaria saepè priora posterioribus emendars? It was a point that no man was ignorant of in his daies, how that National & Provincial gaue place to Generall Councels, and that the Generall Councels themselues were often∣times amended by them that came after. I come to the 22. Article, which is of Purgatory. The Article is this:  The Romish doctrine cōcerning Purgatory, Pardons, wor∣shipping and adoration aswell of Images, as of Reliques, & also Invocation of Saints, is a fond thing, vainely inven∣ted, and grounded vpon no warranty of Scripture, but ra∣ther repugnant to the word of God. First concerning the point that Purgatory, Pardons, worshipping and adorati∣on of Images and of Reliques, & Invocation of Saints are grounded on no Scripture-warrant hath been manifested, by the examining of those Scriptures where vpon our Ad∣versaries haue grounded them. I will instance in Purgato∣ry. The chiefest placesl brought for that, is Malachy 3, 2. 1. Cor. 3.10. Mat. 5.25. alleaged by Cardinali Allen,Allen. of Purg. l. 1. c. 6. &c. 10 and with which they keepe a great pudderPurgatories Triumph over Hell, by I.R. c. 3. now of late, Mat. 12.32. First concerning those two places that of Malachy and that of the Apostle to the Corinthians, it may be she∣wed by the plaine circumstances of the places themselues, and also by the iudgement of the ancient Fathers that nei∣ther of them both appertaineth any whit to Purgatory. See more in Mr D. Fulke hisD. Fulk An∣swer to Allens Booke of Purga∣tory, c. 6. p. 101 Answere to Cardinal Al∣len. Concerning that of Mat. 5.25. Thou shalt not come out thence, till thou hast paid the vtmost farthing. The meaning of ChristD. Fulk, Ib. c. 10. p. 135. saith D. Fulke is plaine, that he shal never come out, no more then that wicked Servant, which was cast in prison vntill he should pay the whole debt, which was ten thousands talents, Mat. 18.34. Concerning that of Saint Matthew againe, Mat. 12.32, St Marke as the sameD. Fulke a∣gainst the Rhe∣mish Test. in Mat. 12.32. Dr Fulke observeth in an other place is a sure Interpreter of
those words shewing Mark. 3.29. that he shall never haue forgiuenesse, but is culpable of eternall damnation. But of this place of Scripture you shall read much more in those excellentD. Ray. Prael. de lib. Apocryph Praelect. 171. 172, 173, 174, 175, &c. Lectures of D. Raynolds. I referre you vnto him. I need not here produce the Fathers concerning the point here mentioned in this Article, seeing the Article speakes here of Scripture only: howbeit that you may see, we haue of the ancient Fathers even in these points too, first concerning Purgatory, and Pardons, you shall heare what St Hilarie saith, Confessio peccatorumHilar. in Ps. 51. p 466. Edit. Basil. 1535. saith he, non nisi in huius seculi tempore est, dum voluntati suae vnusquis{que} permissus est, & per vitae licentiam habet confessionis arbitri∣um. Decedentibus nam{que} de vita, simul & de iure decidimus voluntatis. Tunc enim ex merito praeteritae voluntatis lex iā constituta, aut quietis aut poenae excedentium ex corpore sus∣cipit voluntatem. It is in effect that which theEccles. 11.3. Preacher hath, If the tree do fall towards the South, or towarde the North, in the place that the tree falleth there it shall be. So St Ierome, DocemurHieron. Tom. 5. in 6. ad Gal p. 199 Col. 1. Edt. Bas. 1537 So S. Austen, Donec sumus in hac vita, quan tacun{que} nobis acciderint pec∣cata, possibile est omnia ablui per poenitentiam. Cū autem abducti fuerimus ab hoc saeculo, ibi iam etiam si pae∣netebit nos; val. de enim nos poe∣nitebit, sed nul∣la erit vtilitas paenitentiae &c. Aug. Tom. 10. De Temp. Ser. 181 p 712 E¦dit. Basil. 1529. saith he, dum in praesenti seculo sumus sive orationibus, sive consilijs invicem posse nos coadiuvari. Cum autem ante tribunal Christi venerimus, non Iob, nō Da∣niel, nec Noe rogare posse pro quoquam; sed vnumquem{que} por∣tare onus suum. We are taught whilest we are in this world that we may be holpen by each others Praiers, or each o∣thers Counsailes. But when we shal once come before the Tribunal Seat of Christ, neither Iob, nor Daniel, nor Noe can possibly intercede for any, but every one must beare his owne burden. For worshipping and adoration of Ima∣ges, I told youLect. 6. p. 120 before whatLact. Divin. Instit. l. 2. c. 19. p. 144. Edit. Lugd. 1541. Lactantius said, Non est du∣bium quin Religio nulla sit vbicun{que} simulachrum est. Reli∣gion and Images agree togither, as Dagon and the Arke did, 1. Sam. 5.4. For worshipping and adoration of Reliques, as the Crosse, &c: we say withArnob. adver. Gent. l. 8. pag. 228. Ed. Paris. 1580 Arnobius, or Minutius Fe∣lix rather, Cruces nec colimus, nec optamus: vos planè qui lig∣neos Deos consecratis, cruces ligneas vt Deorum vestrorum partes forsitan adoratis. True it is he spake to the Gentiles,
but may not the like be said to Papists now? Or suppose some Papists should say these words of Arnobius to the Gentiles, might not the Gentiles intreat Horace to make reply to the Papists againe, Horat. Serm. l. 2 Sat. 3.O maior tandem parcas in sane minori? It is too too much they offend in this kind, specially a∣bout the Crosse, which (a body would tremble to relate it, they not to write it) is to be worshipped (Ergo Crux Christi est ado∣randa adoratio∣ne latriae. Th. Aquin. Sum. Part. 3. qu. 25. Art. 4. say they) with the selfsame honour that is due to God himselfe. For wher∣as Thomas in oneCrucem illam vt quandam Christi rem per contactum, ibi (in 30 sentē∣tiarum) hyper∣duliâ, hîc latriâ adorandam di∣cit. Hoc enim patet non esse revocationem dicti, quòd crux illa vt quaedam Christi res, est venernda: sed magnificationē illius, dum ab hyperdulia ad latriani ascen∣ditur. Thomae à Vio Caiet. Comment. in il∣lum locum Th Aquin. place (I can not Saint him now) had gi∣ven Hyperdulia to it, a dish aboue Commons, yet not cō∣tent herewith (such is the greedy appetite of the Change∣lings of the Church of Rome) in an other place he giues it Latria, & soInsomuch that Greg. de Valentia holdeth, as may well be con∣cluded by his words, that some kind of Idolatrie is lawfull, and that S. Peter insinu∣ated so much. His words be these. B. Petrum insinuavisse cultum aliquem simulachrorum (nempe sacrarum imaginum) rectum esse, quum fideles nominatim ab illicitis idolorum cultibus de∣terrere voluit, Greg. Valent. de Idololat. l. 2 c. 7. Now the words of S. Peter are, 1. Pet. 4.3. ; Valentia goeth on, Quid enim attinebat ita determinatè cultos simu∣lachrorum illicitos notare si omninò nullos simulachrorum cultus licitos esse censuisset. So that by his reckoning S. Peter might haue said  as well as . Vid. D Rain de Romanae Eccles. Idololat. l. 2. c 9 §. 9 p. 587. a many after him. This being taught in their Schooles by their great Rabbyes that then lived, imagine how the cōmon Fry went to their Idolatry as to their din∣ners. There needed not NebuchadnezzarsDan. 3.10. Decree that every one that should heare the sound of the Cornet, Trū∣pet, Harp, &c: should fall down and worship, this woulde they do without bidding to the great infamy of Christian Religion. But now concerning the last point, Invocation of Saints; wherein we say withAug. Tom. 9 Me∣ditat. c. 5 p 476. Edit. Basil. 1529. St Austen, Quem alium di∣rigam intercessorem tibi nescio, nisi hunc qui est propitiatio pro peccatis nostris. And againe in an otherAug. Tom. 8. in. Ps. 64 p 455. Edit. Basil. 152. place, Ipse Sa∣cerdos est qui nunc ingressus in interiora veli, solus ibi ex his qui carnem gestaverunt interpellat pro nobis. If Nisi hunc, & solus exclude all other, then can this Doctrine of our Ad∣versaries
by no meanes be admitted. I come to the 23, Ar∣ticle which is, Of ministring in the Congregation; wherein we agree somewhat better. The Article is this:  It is not lawful for any man to take vpon him the office of publique preaching, or ministring the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be lawfully called and sent to exe∣cute the same. And those we ought to iudge lawfully cal∣led, and sent, which be chosen, and called to this worke by men who haue publique authority given vnto them in the Congregation, to call, and send Ministers into the Lordes Vineyard. I would we might but as well agree in the next Article vnto this, which is of speaking in the Congregatiō in such a tongue as the People vnderstandeth. The Article is this:  It is a thing plainely repugnant to the worde of God, & the custome of the Primitiue Church, to haue pub∣lique praier in the Church, or to minister the Sacraments in a tongue not vnderstanded of the People. Now that it is first of all repugnant to the word of God we may hence gather, for that it crosseth a whole Chapter of the Apostle St Pauls to the Corinthians. It1. Cor. 14 6 profiteth not, it isV. 9. spo∣ken in the aire, that is, it is not vnderstood, he that spea∣keth is aV. 11. Barbarian, the vnderstanding is withoutV. 14. fruit, itV. 17. edifies not, itV. 19. instructs not, it giues occasion to some to say that we that vse it areV. 23. out of our wits. Concerning the custome of the Primitiue Church let vs heare what the Fathers say for their times. First Origen: Germanè Chri∣stiani,Origen. cont. Cels. l 8. p. 799. Edit. Bas. 1571. saith he, ne vsitatis quidem in sacra Scriptura Dei no∣minibus vtuntur inter precandum, sed Graeci, Graecis, Roma∣ni, Romanis, singuli{que} precantur propriâ linguâ, Deum{que} ce∣lebrant pro viribus: & omnium linguarum Dominus omni∣bus linguis precantes exaudit, tam variè loquentes haud se∣cus quàm consonos (vt ita dicam) & vnius vocis homines in∣telligens, Non est enim Deus maximus vnus eorum qui cer∣tā aliquam linguam sortiti sunt sive Graecam, siue Barbarā,
ceterum ignari, nec solliciti de alienae linguae hominibus. The Graecians name God in the Greeke tongue, the Romanes in the Latine, and all severall Nations pray vnto God, & praise him in their own naturall and mother tongue. For he that is the Lord of all tongues, heareth men praying in all tongues, no otherwise then if it were one voice pro∣noūced by divers tongues For God that ruleth the whole world, is not as some one man, that hath gottē the Greek or Latine tongue and knoweth none besides. So S. Ie∣rom: Nunc passionem Christi,Hieron. Tom. 1 ad Heliodor. Epitaph. Nepot. p. 22. Edit. Bas. 1537. saith he, & Resurrectionem eius, cunctorum Gentium & voces & literae sonant. Taceo de Hebraeis, Graecis, & Latinis, quas Nationes suae Crucis ti∣tulo Dominus dedicavit. And againe a little after,Bessisunt in Thracia iuxta Strymonē am∣nem, ad dextrū accolentes latu Solin. c. 15. Bes∣sis etiam finiti∣mas Getis ostē∣dit Ovidius. Vi∣vere quàm mi∣serum est inter Bessos{que} Getas{que} Illum qui popu∣li sem per in ore fui. Ovid. Trist. l. 4. Eleg. 1. Bessorū feritas, & pellitorum turba populorum, qui mortuorum quō∣dam inferijs homines immolabant, stridorem suum in dulce Christi fregerunt melos & totius mundi vna vox est Christus. Now both the tongues and Bookes of all Nations doe found out Christ his Passion and Resurrection. I omit the Iewes, and Greekes, & Romans, which Nations the Lord hath dedicated to himselfe in the title of his Crosse. The savage nature of the Bessi, and People that for their wild∣nesse goe clad in skins, who sometimes made Sacrifices of the Bodyes of Men, haue turned their barbarous speech into the sweet harmony of Christ, and Christ is now be∣come the voice of the whole world. How S. AustenAug. Tom. 8. in Ps. 18 Expo∣sit. 2. p. 61. Edit Basil. 1529. re∣sembleth those that vnderstand not what they say or sing at time of Divine Service to Parrats, and Pyes, and Crows, and such like, I haue shewedDavids desire to goe to Church Ser. 1. p. 48. elsewhere. Now though Publike Prayer and Sacraments be onely specified in this Article, yet are the Scriptures also meant, forasmuch as publike Prayer (meant here in this place) is never without them. True it is they are heard in some places and aboue the capacitie of the common People, but our Adversaries will be never able to answere that one passage ofAug. Tom. 8. de Doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 9 p. 17. Edit. Bas. 1528 S. Au∣sten: In his quae apertè in Scriptura posita sunt inveniuntur illa omnia, quae continent fidem, mores{que} vivendi. All such
things as concerne our Faith, and Manners for life, are there found plaine enough. And therefore, saith he in an∣otherAug. Tom. 10 De verb. Apost. Ser. 1. p. 169. Edit. Bas. 1529 place, Sancta & divina eloquia Fratres iugiter imò quotidiè nobis salubriter recitantur, vt animae nostrae pascā∣tur, in futuro autem seculo aeternis epulis saginentur. Bre∣thren, saith S. Austen, the Holy & Divine Scriptures are continually, I, every day rehearsed vnto vs wholsomely, and profitably, to the end our soules should be nourished thereby,Coimus. and should be made fat with everlasting Feasts in the world to come.Tertul. in A∣pologet. c. 39. p. 709 Edit. Paris. 1580. So Tertullian, Cogimur, n saith he, ad literarum divinarum commemorationem, si quidpraesen∣tium temporum qualitas aut praemonere cogit, aut recognos∣cere. Certè fidem sanctis vocibus pascimus, spem erigimus, fi∣duciam figimus. We meet together to heare the rehearsall of holy Scriptures. If the state of the present time do force vs to forewarne any thing, or call any thing to remem∣brance of that which already we haue heard. Verily we feed our Faith with those holy words, we confirme our hope, we assure our confidence & trust. The more I won∣der at some of our own coat, who so causelesly complaine of the wast and desolation of so many distressed Soules, who in so many places of this our Land and Country, say they, I vse their owneNomen quae∣tis? cui bon? wordes, haue beene, and are dayly either pined away and consumed to the bone, for lacke of Gods sustenance, the bread of life, the word of God, the only preservatiue of the Soule: when God he knowet t is not the want of that that makes them so to pine (if so be they doe pine and consume away) as not attending to it when it is read vnto them, or refusing to heare it if it be not preached, and that as they take Preaching too, or not reading it at home themselues, or not hearing others read it that can. Benefits, our Martyrs when time was, would haue beene glad to haue enioyed: but we wax wā∣ton now,Iuvenal. Sat. 6. and must haue our fansies pleased. Nunc patimur longae pacis mala! But of this I haue spokenConc. ad Cler. p. 5. elsewhere al∣though in another Dialect. I come to the 25 Article which
is of the Sacraments. The Article is this:  Sacraments ordained of Christ be not only badges or tokens of Christiā mens profession: but rather they be certaine sure witnes∣ses and effectuall signes of Grace & Gods good will towards vs, by the which he doth worke invisibly in vs, and doth not only quicken, but also strengthen, and confirme our faith in him. There are two Sacraments ordained by Christ our Lord in the Gospell, that is to say, Baptisme, and the Supper of the Lord. Those fiue commōly called Sacra∣ments, that is to say Confirmatiō, Penance, Orders, Matri∣mony, & extreame Vnctiō, are not to be coūted for Sacra∣ments of the Gospell, being such as haue growne partly of the corrupt following of the Apostles, partly are states of life allowed in the Scriptures; but yet haue not like nature of Sacraments with Baptisme and the Lords supper, for that they haue not any visible signe or ceremo∣ny ordeined of God. The Sacramēts were not ordained of Christ to be gazed vpon, or to be carried about, but that we should duly vse them. And in such only, as worthily receiue the same, they haue a wholesome effect or operatiō: but they that receiue them vnworthyly, purchase to them∣selues damnation, as St Paule saith. That these fiue are Sa∣craments it lyeth on our Adversaries to proue, ProbatioL. cum de Le∣ge. ff. de proba: & glos. Ibid. saith the Civill law, incumbit affirmanti; which if so be they could haue proved, they would (I doubt not) haue proved long ere this. They that so much boast of Antiqui∣ty as they doe, and that the Fathers are as verily theirs asAd Patres si quando licebit accedere, confe∣ctum est praeliū Tam sunt nostri quàm Gregori∣us ipse Decimus tertius, fiüorum Ecclesiae Pater amantissimus. Camp. Rat. 5. Gregory the thirteenth was, sometimes Bishop of Rome, me thinks in all this while they should haue queld vs with one Father that saith there are seaven Sacraments. In the meane time till they do it, let them consult with these Fa∣thers whom we produce, but for two. First St Austen: Sa∣cramentis
is numero paucissimisAug. Tom. 2. Ep. 118. p. 359. Edit. Bas. 1528 saith he, observatione facilli∣mis, significatione praestantissimis societatē novi Populi Chri∣stus colligavit. Christ hath gathered togither a whole soci∣ety & fellowship of a new kinde of People by Sacraments most few in number, most easie to be observed, and most excellent for signification. Now if they be the fewest in number, what more few then two? Or if they will say that Paucissima might be the phrase of Antiquity for Seaven, & I remember indeed that Possidius, or Possidonius in St Au∣stens lifeSibi iussrat Psalmos Davi∣dices qui sunt paucissimi de poe¦nitentia scribi Posid. in vita Aug c. 31. pag. 609. Oper. Aug. Tom. 1 cals the Penitentiall Psalmes Paucissimi, which were no lesse then seaven, and St Austen himselfe saith im∣mediatly after the former words alleaged, Et si quid aliud in Scripturis canonicis commendatur; yet in diverse places he speakes of the Sacraments but as of two. As for exam∣ple.Aug. Tom. 8. in Psal. 103. Conc. 4. p. 834 And Tom 9. in Evang. Ioan. Tract. 15. p. 9. Edit. Bas. 1529 De latere Crucifixi percusso Sacramenta Ecclesiae pro∣fluxerunt. Now out of our Saviours side when he was cru∣cified we know there issued nothing but u Bloud & Water. And againe in an other place,Aug. Tom. 9. de Cataclys. c. 4. p. 675. Edit. Bas 1529. Continuò exivit. Sanguis et Aqua, quae sunt Matris Ecclesiae gemina Sacramenta. Forth with came there forth Bloud & Water which are the two Sacraments of our Mother the Church.Aug. Tom. 3. de Doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 9 p. 35. Edit. Bas. 1528 And in his Booke de Doctrina Christiaena he names no more. SoCyp Epist. l 2. ep. 1. ad Steph. p 42. . Edit. Bas. 1530. S. Cypriā: Tunc demum planè sanctificari & esse Filij Dei possunt si v∣tro{que} Sacramento nascantur. Then may they be throughly sanctified, & become the Children of God, if they be new borne by both the Sacraments. I omitIustin Martyr Apol. 2. Iustin Martyr,Tertul. cont. Marcion. l. 1. & 4. Tertullian,Ambros. de Sacram. St Ambrose,Cyril. in My∣stagogicis. Cyrillus Alexandrinus and o∣thers, who having occasion to treat of Sacraments speake only but of two, Baptisme, and the Supper. Concerning the gazing on the Sacraments here speci∣fied, and carrying them about, let our Adversaries call to minde how well they agree with the Fathers in this Pra∣ctise. First Origen: Dominus panemOrigen in Le¦vit. c 7. Hom. 5. p. 129. Edit. Basil. 1537. saith he, quem Disci∣pulis dabat, & dicebat eis, Accipite & manducate, non distu∣lit, nec servari iussit in crastinū. The bread which our Lord gaue vnto his Disciples he prolonged not to giue it, he
commanded it not to be kept against the next day. ThenHier. Tom. 9. in 1. Cor. 11. p. 316. Col. 2. E∣dit. Basil. 1537. St Ierome: Post communionem quaecū{que} eis de sacrificijs su∣perfuissent, illic in Ecclesia communem coenam comedentes pariter consumebant. After the Communion whatsoever was left of the sacrifices, even there in the Church they all eate togither as they did eate their common Supper. Then ClemēsClem. Rom. ep. 2. Oper. p. 360. Edit. Colon. 1570. Romanus, Tanta in altario holocausta offerantur, quanta populo sufficere debeant. Quòd si remanserint, in cra∣stinum non reserventur, sed cum timore & tremore Clerico∣rum diligentia consumātur. Let so many Hostes be offered on the Altar as may suffice for the People that are present. If any remaine as over-plus let them in no wise be reser∣ved till the morrow, but with feare and trembling let thē be eaten by Cleargy men. EvagriusEvagrius Hist. Ecclesiast. l. 4. c 35. p. 622 Edit. Bas. 1587. tels vs that it was the old custome, that if any Fragmēts did remaine the lit∣tle childrē that went to Schoole were called to the eating of them. I come to the 26. Article which is of the vnwor∣thinesse of the Ministers how it hindreth not the effect of the Sacraments, wherein both sides do agree. The Article is this:  Although in the visible Church the evill be e∣ver mingled with the good, and sometime the evill haue chiefe authority in the ministration of the Word and Sa∣craments: yet forasmuch as they doe not the same in their owne name, but in Christs, and do minister by his commis∣sion & authority, we may vse their ministery, both in hea∣ring the Word of God, and in receiuing of the Sacraments. Neither is the effect of Christs ordinance taken away by their wickednes, nor the grace of Gods gifts diminished frō such, as by saith, & rightly do receiue the Sacraments mi∣nistred vnto them, which be effectuall because of Christs institution and promise, although they be ministred by e∣vill men. Neverthelesse, it appertaineth to the disci∣pline of the Church, that inquiry be made of evill Mini∣sters
& that they be accused by those that haue knowledge of their offences: & finally being found guilty, by iust iudg∣mēt be deposed. We agree also in the 27 Article which is of Baptisme. The Article is this:  Baptisme is not only a signe of profession, and marke of difference, whereby Christian mē are discerned from others that be not Christ∣ned: but it is also a signe of regeneration or new birth, whereby, as by an instrument, they that receiue Baptisme rightly, are grafted into the Church; the promises of the forgiuenes of sinne, and of our adoption to be the Sonnes of God, by the Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and sealed; faith is confirmed, and grace increased by vertue of Praier vnto God. The Baptisme of young Children, is in any wise to be retained in the Church, as most agreeable with the institution of Christ. The 28 Article which is, Of the Sup∣per of the Lord doth set vs at oddes, nothing more. Cui non mirum id, monstri{que} simile videaturIo. Foxii Syllogist in Epi. Hertator. saith Reverend Fox, ex ea re, quae vna omnium maximè ad concordiàm com∣parata sit, tantum discordiae incendium conflari potuisse? To whom may it not seeme strange even to admiration, that out of that Matter which most especially was provided for peace and vnity, such burning flames should be caused betwixt one Christian and an other, But come we to the Article.  The Supper of the Lord is not only a signe of the loue that Christians ought to haue among themselues one to an other: but rather it is a Sacrament of our redēp∣tion by Christs death. In so much that to such as rightly, worthily, and with faith receiue the same, the bread which we breake is a partaking of the Body of Christ, and like∣wise the Cup of Blessing, is a partaking of the bloud of Christ. Transubstantiatiō (or the change of the substāce of bread and wine) in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be pro¦ved
by holy writ: but it is repugnant to the plaine words of Scripture, overthroweth the nature of a Sacrament, and hath given occasion to many superstitions. The body of Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper only after an heavenly and spirituall manner. And the meane whereby the Body of Christ is received & eaten in the Sup∣per, is Faith. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was not by Christs ordinance reserued, carried about, lifted vp, or worshipped. First for the worde Transubstantiation which signifieth a passing or turning of one substance in∣to an other, they themselues do thinke that it is intolera∣ble to say that the substance of bread is changed into the substance of Christs Body, and therefore their Schoole∣men hold that the Bread departeth and getteth it selfe a∣way and that then in place therof, succeedeth Christs Bo∣dy. Which kinde of changeVid. B. Iuell Defence of the Artic. Ar. 8. p. 397. say we cannot be tear∣med Transubstantiatio, but rather Cessio, Successio, Annihi∣latio, or Substitutio. But as cōcerning the point it selfe, that it cannot be proved by holy writ, nay that it is repugnant therevnto, and overthroweth the nature of a Sacrament is that that is here affirmed, and our Adversaries themselues haue made good. For neither haue they proved it by holy writ, nor haue they disproved such Proofes as haue shew∣ed how repugnant it is to the plaine words of Scripture, & overthroweth in very trueth the nature of a Sacrament. They are excellent Treatises, that Sadeel hathSadeel de Spirituali man∣ducat. Corp. Christi. Item. de Sacrament. mā∣ducat. Corp. Christi Oper. Theol. p. 216. & p. 251. made to this purpose, by reason of my haste I will referre you vnto them. And least in the meane time you should thinke for that the Scriptures are here named only, our Adversaries by all likelyhood haue some reliefe yet out of the Fathers, I will acquaint you with what I haue read e∣ven concerning the Fathers in this point, and for ought I haue read in our Adversaries Bookes (who are not alto∣gither tonguetyed when they can take any advantage) goes vncontrolled as it is there set downe, & a many more
passages to that purpose. Bring vs but one FatherThe true Dif∣ferēce between Christian subie∣ction and vn∣christian Rebel∣lion. Part. 4. saith our worthy Bilson, for 800 yeeres, that ever taught your Transubstantiation, and we will count it Catholicke. You may wrest saith he, and misvse 500 places of the Fathers, as your Friends before you haue done in this point, and your selues in other questions haue shewed the like activity. But that the substance of the bread vanisheth by consecration, and the sub∣stance of Christ's Body really succeedeth vnder the same di∣mensions and accidents of Bread and wine, and entreth our mouthes locally comprised within those formes: for this saith he, you shall never shew vs any one Father Greeke or Latine within the cōpasse of 800 yeers after Christ. Here wold they needs haue come with their Replyes. I.R. should haue here triumphed. I wisse it is good reason our Saviours Triumph should haue bin before Purgatories Triumph at the least. But nay, nay. Purgatory hath stood them more in steed them ever did our Saviour. The Children of this world areLuk. 16.8. not to learne wisdome of the Children, no not of light. I goe on. That the Body of Christ is given, takē, and eaten in the Supper, only after an heavenly and spirituall manner; and that the Meanes thereof is Faith, witnesse that of, &c. Athanas. Tom. 1. in illud. Qui∣cun{que} dixerit verbum p. 771. Edit. Comme∣lian. 1601. Atha∣nasius: How few men would his Body haue sufficed, that this should be the food of the whole world? Yea therefore doth he warne them of his ascension into heaven, that he might drawe them from thinking on his Body, and they thereby learne, that the flesh which he spake of, was celestiall meate from aboue, & spirituall nourishment to be given by him, &c. That ofCyp de Coen. Dom. p. 447. Edit. Bas. 1530 St Cyprian: Eating & drinking be referred to one & the selfe∣same end, with the which as the substance of our Bodies is in∣creased and preserved, so the life of the Spirit is maintained with his proper nourishmēt. What food is to the flesh that faith is to the Soule: what meate is to the Body, that the Word is to the Spirit, working everlastingly with a more excellent ver∣tue that, which bodyly meates doe for a time & only for a sea∣son. That of Ambrose who approaching to the sacred Cō∣munion
which theyAmbr. Tom. 5 in Orat. 1. prae∣par. ad Miss. p. 660. Edit. Paris 1586. intitle a Prayer preparing to Masse, amongst other things speaketh thus to our Saviour him∣selfe: Thou Lord saidst with thine holy and blessed mouth, the bread which I will giue, is my flesh (given) for the life of the world. He that eateth me shall liue through me, hee abideth in me, and I in him. I am the living bread which came down from heaven, if any eate of this bread he shall liue for ever. Most delightfull Bread! heale thou the taste of my heart, that I may feele the sweetnes of thy loue. Let mine heart eate thee, and with thy pleasant rellish let the bowels of my soule be repleni∣shed. Angels eate thee with full mouth, let Man that is a Pil∣grim (on earth) eate thee as his weakenes will suffer him, that he faint not in the way, having this provision for his iournie. Holy bread living bread beautifull bread! which camest from heaven, and givest life to the world, come into my heart, and clense me from all filth of flesh and spirit. Enter into my soule, heale and sanctifie me within and without. An other point in this Article is as concerning the Re∣serving of it, and Carying it about, but of that we haue spoken before in the 25 Article. Concerning the Lifting of it vp, & Worshipping it, I shall not need to speak much. The Idolatry hath beene too too great that hath been oc∣casioned thereby. True it is S. AustenAug. Tom. 8. in Ps. 98. p 760 Edit. Bas. 1529 saith, Nemo illam carnem manducat, nisi prius adoraverit, No man eateth that flesh of Christ vnlesse he first adore it; but he meanes not the corporall creature: no more doth S. Ambrose nei∣ther, whoAmbr. Tom. 2 de Spir. Sanct. l 3. c. 12. p. 195 Edit. Bas. 1538. Vid. B. Bilson vbi supra. saith in a certaine place, Carnem Christi hodie in mysterijs adoramus. We adore the flesh of Christ in the mysteries. I come to the 29 Article wherein we say of the wicked that they do not eate the Body of Christ in the vse of the Lords Supper, contrary vnto our Adversaries. The Article is this:  The wicked and such as be voide of a liuely faith, although they do carnally & visibly presse with their teeth (as St Augustine saith) the Sacrament of the Body and Bloud of Christ: yet in no wise are they parta∣kers
of Christ, but rather to their condemnation doe eate and drinke the signe or Sacrament of so great a thing. A truth, that in very deed dependeth on the premisses, that were made good in the former Article. For if so be the Bo∣dy of Christ be taken and eaten in the Supper, only after an heavenly and spirituall maner, and the meanes thereof is Faith, what haue the wicked there to doe without their wedding garment? What fellowship2. Cor. 6.14 saith the Apostle, hath righteousnes with vnrighteousnes? And what communion hath light with darknes? And what concord hath Christ with Belial? Or what part hath the beleever with the infidell? The iudgement of the Fathers is correspōdent herevnto. NoneVna est do∣mus Ecclesiae, in qua Agnus edi∣tur, nullus ei communicat, quem Israelitici nominis genero∣sitas non com∣mendat. Cypr. de Coena domini p. 448. Edit. Ba∣sil. 1530. saith St Cypriā, is partaker of this Lamb, that is not a right Israelite. MultaOrigen. Oper. Part. 2. in Mat. c. 15 p. 27. Edit Basil. 1571. saith Origen, de ipso Verbo dici possent, quod factum est caro, verus{que} cibus, quē qui comederit, omni∣no vivet in aeternum, quem nullus malus potest edere. Many things might be spoken of the Word, as that it was made Flesh and true meate, which whosoever eateth of, without all doubt shall liue for ever, which no wicked person can eate of. And St Ierome making instance in Heretikes, Isti multas immolant hostiasHieron. Tom. 6. In Osee c. 8. p. 37. Col. 2. Edit. Basil. 1537. saith he, & comedunt carnes ea∣rum, vnam Christi hostiā deserētes, nec comedentes eius car∣nem, cuius caro cibus credentium est. So that Hereticks you see by S. Ierom's testimony doe not eate this flesh. Why? for it is the food of the faithful? I come to the 30. Article, of Receiuing in both kinds, and we disagree in that too. The Article is this: The Cup of the Lord is not to be de∣nied to the Lay People. For both the parts of the Lord's Sa∣crament by Christs ordinance and commandment ought to be ministred to all Christian men alike. A truth so evi∣dent to the eie of him that hath but lookt on S. Paule in his Epistle to the Corinthians, that vnlesse they frame an Index Expurgatorius for him, they are quite vndone in this point too. Yee cannot,1. Cor. 10.21 saith he, drinke the Cup of the
Lord and the Cup of the Divels. Againe,1. Cor. 11.26 As often as yee shall eat this Bread, and drinke this Cup, yee shew the Lords death till he come. Me thinks our Adversaries here should say asAct. 26.24. Festus once did, Paul thou art besides thy selfe; much learning doth make thee mad: or else with the Fryer in theGeorg. Bu. chanani Fran∣ciscan. Poet, S. PAVL.Tarsensis fuge scripta senis, fuge toxica nostri Ordinis. O primis vtinam periisset in annis, Aut mansisset adhuc hostis, licet ante renatus Vivifica quàm Lympha esset, tam multa dedisset Funera grassat us ferro, ingenti{que} procella Afflixisset adhuc tenerum pietatis ovile: Plus tamen adscriptus nobis, plus factus amicus Obfuit. This Frier you must vnderstand was an old Seniour, and gaue certaine Precepts to a Novice. Among the rest this was one: Fly Novice, fly, the Man that TARSVS bred, Nor doe his Bookes, or Writings read: oh dread The bane of vs Franciscans. Ah that he Had perished even in his Infancy, Or had remaind a Foe vnto vs yet, And never with Font-water had beene wet. For had he of the Flocke made havocke still, And not haue left till now their blood to spill, Yet being Christian now, and now come to vs, Behold the harme is more, which he doth doe vs. But I come from verse to prose, and now I am to prooue vnto you, that as the Scriptures so the Fathers are for the Communion in both kinds. First S. Cyprian. How doe we prepare,Quomodo do∣cem{us} aut provo∣camus eos in cō∣fessione nominis sanguinem suii fundre, si eis militaturis Chri¦sti sanguinem denegamus? Aut quomodo ad Martyrii po∣culum idoncos facimus, si non eos ad bibendū prius in Ecclesia poculum Domi∣ni iure commu∣nicationis ad mittimus, Cyp. Epist. Lib. 1 Ep. 2. p. 4. Edit. Ba∣sil. 1530. saith he (the People) for the Cup of Martyrdome, if we doe not first admit them in the Church to drinke the Lords Cup by right of Communion? Then S. Austen: Not on∣ly no man is forbidden,A cuius sacri∣ficii sanguine in alimentum su∣mendo, non s∣lùm nemo probi¦betur, sed ad bi∣bendum potiùs omnes exhortā∣tur qui volunt habere vitam. Aug. Tom. 4. Quaest. super Levit. l. 3 c. 57. p. 155. Edit. Basil. 1528. saith he, but rather all men that seek
for life are encouraged to drinke. So. Chrys in 2. ad. Cor. Hom. 18 p. 59. b. Edit. Veronae. 1529. S. Chysostome: One body is proposed to all, and one cup. And againe in another place, while thou beholdest with thine eies,. Chrys. de Sacerd l. 3. p. 77. Edit. August v. 1599 saith he, our Lord sacrificed, the Priest intent to that sacrifice, and pow∣ring forth his Prayers, the People all about besprinkled and made red with that most precious blood; doest thou think thou art amongst mortall creatures, and that thou hast thy being on earth? The word he there vseth is ; made red like crimson, or skarlet; wherevnto he compareth most ele∣gantly, their drinking of the Cup. Iustin Martyr,. Iustin. in Tryph p. 112. Edit. Pa∣ris. 1551. he cals it the Christians Dry, and Wet Nourishment, that they might, saith he, be admonished thereby what God the Sonne of God hath suffered for thē. Infinite are the places,B Bilson vbi supra. saith that worthy Prelat I spake of evē now, which might be brought to make faith, that for a thousād yeeres in the Church of God, the People were not deprived of the Lords Cup. I come to the 31 Article, wherin we differ most of al: the Article is this; The offring of Christ once made, is that perfect redempti∣on, propitiation, and satisfaction for all the sinnes of the whole world, both originall and actuall, & there is no other satisfaction for sinne, but that alone. Wherefore the sacri∣fices of Masses, in the which it was commonly said that the Priests did offer Christ for the quicke & the dead, to haue remission of paine or guilt, were blasphemous fables, and dangerous deceipts. We are now come to the Diana of our Popish Ephesians, whose magnificence of al our Adver∣saries is so much worshipped.Act. 19.27. And surely were St Paule a∣liue now in these daies, & should speake as he wrote when time was, of Christ his Offering once made, the shout was not so great in Asia against him concerning the Diana of the Ephesians, as it would be here in Europ concerning the Diana of the Romanes. For what trow you would they say concerning these & the like passages?Heb. 7.27. Such a high Priest it became vs to haue which is holy, harmelesse, vndefiled, se∣parate
from sinners, & made higher then the heavens: which needed not dayly as those high Priests to offer vp sacrifice first for his owne sinnes, and then for the Peoples for that did he ONCE when he offered vp himselfe. Againe,Heb. 9.12. By his owne bloud entred he in ONCE vnto the holy place, and obtained eternall redemption for vs. Againe,Heb. 9.26. Not that he should offer himselfe often, &c: for then must he haue often suffered since the foundation of the world, but now in the end of the worlde hath he appeared ONCE to put away sinne, by the sacrifice of himselfe. Againe,Heb. 9.28. As it is appointed vnto men that they shal once die, and after that cōmeth the iudgement, so Christ was ONCE offered to take away the sinnes of many. Againe,Heb. 10.10. By the which will we are sanctified, evē by the offring of the Body of Iesus Christ ONCE made. Againe,V. 12. This man after he had offered ONE SACRIFICE for sinnes, sitteth for ever at the right hand of God, and from henceforth tarryeth, till his ene∣mies be made his foot-stoole.V. 14. For with ONE OFFERING hath he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified. What would they say of all this? Would they not wish as did the Fryer, Primis perijsset in annis, aut māsisset adhuc hostis, that he had died in the Cradle, or had beene still an Enemy vn∣to Christians? Indeed there is good reason they should take it to heart; for if so be our Saviour Christ did but once enter vnto the Holy place and obtained eternall redemp∣tion, if he hath appeared but Once to put away sinne, by the sacrifice of himselfe, if but with one offering he hath consecrated for ever them that are sanctified; then offered he not for sins any Sacrifice in his Supper, much lesse did he institute any such Sacrifice to be reiterated, & this, Be∣loved, is that that cuts the heart-strings of Popery. That the Fathers speake as we do is manifest by their writings. FirstAug. Tom 3. De Trin. l. 4. Co. 13. p. 217. Edit. Bas. 1528 St Austen: Iesus Christus morte sua quippe vno veris∣simo sacrificio pro nobis oblato, quicquid culparum erat, vnde nos Principatus & Potestates ad luenda supplicia iure deti∣nebant purgavit, abolevit, extinxit, &c: what sinnes soever we committed, by reason whereof Principalities & Pow∣ers
had vs in subiection, our Saviour Christ Iesus by his death, namely by one most true sacrifice offered for vs, hath purged, abolished, & quite extinguished. So S. Chry∣sostome: There is now. Chrys. in Epist ad Heb. Hom. 13 p. 15. Edit. Ve¦ronae, 1529. saith he, no other sacrifice. It is one only that hath purged vs. Nothing now after that, but Fyer and Hell. SoTheophyl. in 8 ad Heb. p. 154. b Ed. Colō. 1528. Theophylact: Hic verò hostiam taliter obtu∣lit, & tam fuit illa rei ingentis effectrix, vt vel temporis mo∣mento, per se terrarum orbem purgaverit. And againe a little after, Nec saepè pro alijs sed semel obtulit. Quia cum virtute is praestet & pietate, vel vnica & sola oblatione satis potuit cun∣cta perficere. Our Saviour offred such a sacrifice and of so great vaue, as that in a momēt of time it purged the whole world (of the faithful,) and he forasmuch as he was of such vertue & power, well might he performe as much by one alone and sole sacrifice. I butRhem. in 1. Cor. 10.21. Vid D. Fulke against them. say our Adversaries the Fa∣thers call the Masse a Sacrifice. The Masse? Why they doe not so much as name it. St Ambrose hath the word once, and so haue two Provinciall Councels in Africa. Leo hath it twice, which is all (saith our worthyB. Bilson. vbi. supra. Prelate) they can finde in 600 yeeres. True it is they speake of Sacrifices in∣deed, but they are as like that Sacrifice, as York is foule Sut∣ton to speake in a Northerne Proverb. SacrificamusTertul. ad Scap. p. 448 E∣dit. Paris. 1580 saith Tertullian, sed quomodo Deus praecepit, pura prece. We sa∣crifice for the safety of the Emperour, both to our God & his God: but as the selfe same God commands vs too, only by meere praier. He would haue laught outright to haue read in our Adversaries bookes, that a poore woman was as much boūd to procure a Mass to be said for her Hen, as a king for his kingdome. Which Cardinall Allen perhaps foresawe too, and thereforeCoram Deo nō est magis ridi∣culum vt pan∣percula procu∣vet sacrificium pro Gallina, quàm Rex pro Imperio: cum Christiani à minimo ad maximum dicere debeant; Pro omnibus quae retribuisti mihi Calicem salutaris accipiam & nomen Dei invocabo. Alan. de Sacrific. Eucharist. l. 2. c. 33. p. 623. sets it down, Coram Deo non est magis ridiculum: it was not so with God, with men he knew it was impossible. But to returne vnto my purpose. As Ter∣tullian,
so Iustin Martyr, Supplications. Iustin. Mar∣tyr. in Tryph. p. 112 Edit. Par. 1551. saith he; and gi∣ving of thankes, I grant are the only perfect Sacrifices, and such as are acceptable vnto God. And Christians, they haue learned to make only such sacrifices, GodNaz Orat:. 15 p. 225. Edit. Parif. 1609. saith Nazianzen requireth at our hands the alone & only sacrifice of praise, & a contrite heart, and a new Creature in Christ, which nevv Creature the Scripture doth call a new man. Andchrys. Hom de Spiritu Sancte Tom. 3 p. 885. Edit. Bas. 1547 St Chry∣sostome to this purpose, Quod tuum altarium? mens tua spi∣ritualis? Quod spirituale tuum sacrificium? omnis bona opera∣tio. Quod templum tuum? mundū Cor. So that he makes the Minde, the Altar, every good Worke a Sacrifice, the Heart of Man, the Tēple. I, but the Fathers say that Christ is here sacrified, & that he is offered here. Be it so, & they say with∣all that Christ is Crucified also here. But doe they meane may we thinke, really Crucified? No doubtles, & therefore thinke they not, or Sacrificed, or Offered. They knew the force of the Apostles consequence, Then must he haue oftē suffered. Heb. 9.26. I come to the 32 Article, which is of the Mariage of Priests, wherein we might hope of some good match to be made, but that they are o ready to forbid the banes. The Article is this: Bishops, Priests, and Dea∣cons, are not commanded by God's law either to vow the e∣state of single life, or to abstaine from mariage. Therfore it is lawfull also for them, as for all other Christian men to mary at their owne discretion, as they shall iudge the same to serue better to godlynesse. The best is, it is not enough to forbid the banes only, but it must be on a lawful cause. Which seeing they cannot alleage, and yet still forbid the banes, we will do as Agesilaus did in an other case, who being to passe by a neighbour Country with a troope of Souldiers which he had, and asking leaue of the Gover∣nour thereof to that purpose, when answere was returned that he would advise vpon it, Deliberet sanèPlut. in Age∣silao. & Apoph∣thegm. Lacon. saith A∣gesilaus, nos interim progrediemur. well then, let him ad∣vise, we in the mean time will go forward: right so say we
in this case, let them deny the banes, we will marry not∣withstanding, I meane so many of vs as want, that which hundreds of them haue not, The gift of Continencie. Nei∣ther shall we this doe either against Scriptures, or the Fathers. That Priests were married in the old Testament is a case as cleere as the Sun; I, they had precepts givē vn∣to them concerning the choice of their wiues.Levit. 21.13 He should take a maide vnto his wife. But a widdow, or a divorced wo∣man, or a polluted, or an harlot, these he should not marry. Concerning the New Testament the Apostle St Paule so speakes of the Cleargy,1. Tim 3.2. Bishops,Tit. 1.6. Elders, and1. Tim 3.12 Deacons, as if his meaning had been that they might be married. I, the Apostles themselues (asOmnes Apo∣stoli exceptis Io∣anne & Paulo vxores habu∣runt, Ambros. Tom. 5. in 2. Cor. 11. p. 310. So that I say all the Apo∣stles, meaning the 12. Apo∣stles: of which 12 Paule was none. And yet there are that say St Paule had a wife too, as Ignatius, & Cle∣mens. For Cle∣mens, see Eu∣seb. Hist. Eccl. l 3. c. 27. Edit. Basil. 1587. Concerning Ignatius, D. Martin in his Treatise of Priests vnlawfull Mariages c. 1 p. z 3. b. saith he hath seen Manuscripts to the contrary, and maketh instance in one in Magdalen Colledge Library. But concerning this see more in D. Poynets Defence of Priests mariages. p. 118 For I take it to be D. Poynets, and not as D, Coosens doth (Part. 2. p. 109.) to be D. Parkers, sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury. some thinke) were al of them married, Iohn the Evangelist only excepted. If you would see more concerning this, I referre you toSocrat. Hist. Eccls. l. 8. c. 8. Edit. Basil. 1587. Socrates, andSozom Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 22 Edit. Basil. 1587. Sozomen concerning Paphnutius, how being himselfe an vnmarried man, stood mainely yet in the defence of the Clergie that was maried. I referre you to theSynodus 6. Constant. c. 13. l. 8 c. 19. Ex Gratian, Dist. 31. c Quoniam p. 153. Edit. Lugd. 1584 Vid. Acts and Monum. p. 1153 Col. 1. Sixt Councell of Constance that by no meanes would haue those marriages dissolved. To that ofHier. advers. Iovin. l. 1. p. 40. Edit. Bas. 1537. S. Ierome, Eliguntur Ma∣riti in Sacerdotium, non nego: quia non sunt tanti virgines, quanti necessarij sunt Sacerdotes. Maried men I grant are chosen into the Priesthood. True! for Priests indeed are farre more necessary then Virgins. Lastly to your owne Mantuan, who writing of S. Hilarie one of the Fathers of the Church,Bapt. Mant. Fast. l. 1. Op. Tom. 2. p. 252. Ed t 1576 hath concerning him these verses: Non nocuit tibi progenies, non obstitit vxor Legitimo coniuncta thoro, non horruit illa
Tempestate Deus thalamos, cunabula, taedas. Sola erat in pretio, quae nunc incognita, virtus Sordet, & attrito vivit cumplebe cucullo. To thee, good Bishop, Children were no let, Nor wife that lay with thee in lawfull bed, That thou thereby thy Function shouldst forget, And Flocke of thine should be but scarsly fed. No, God himselfe at those times did not blame Or Bed or Cradle, or the Nuptiall Flame. Yet was that Vertue then in high esteeme, Which we a chast and honest life doe call, A vertue seldome now, or never seene, But with the Church-men then was all in all. Its rag'd and torne even as poore Creatures be; They are in thred-bare Garments so is she. SoProsper lib. Epigram p 210 b. & there is in the margent., Videtur esse carmen Pau∣lini, postea Nolani Epis∣copi ad vxo∣rē. Oper. Edit. Duaeci. 1577. St Prosper, Agè iam precor mearum Comes irremota rerum. Trepidam, brevem{que} vitam Domino Deo dicemus. But I come to the 33 Article wherein we agree somwhat better. The Article is this: That person which by open denuntiation of the church, is rightly cut off frō the vni∣tie of the Church, & excōmunicated, ought to be taken of the whole multitude of the faithful as an Heathen & Pub∣licā, vntill he be openly reconciled by penance, & receaved nto the Church by a Iudge that hath authority thereto. We agree also in the next which is of the Traditions of the Church; at least wise the difference is not great. The Article is this:  It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places one, or vtterly like, for at all times they haue beene divers, and may be changed accor∣ding
to the diversitie of Countries, Times, and Mens ma∣ners, so that nothing be ordained against Gods word. Whosoever through his private iudgement, willingly and purposely doth openly breake the Traditions and Ceremo∣nies of the Church, which be not repugnant to the word of God, and be ordained and approved by common authority, ought to be rebuked openly (that others may feare to do the like) as he that offendeth against the common order of the Church, and hurteth the authoritie of the Magistrate, & woundeth the consciences of the weake Brethren. Every particular or National Church hath authority to ordaine, change, and abolish ceremonies or rites of the church or∣dained only by mans authoritie, so that all things be done to edifying. In the next to this which is of Homilies I cō∣fesse we agree not, especially concerning the Matter of them. The Article is this:  The second booke of Homilies the severall titles whereof we haue ioyned vnder this Ar∣ticle, doth containe a godly and wholsome doctrine, and ne∣cessarie for these times, as doth the former Booke of Homi∣lies, which were set forth in the time of Edward the Sixt: and therefore we iudge them to be read in Churches by the Ministers diligently and distinctly, that they may be vn∣derstanded of the People. Then followe the Names of the Homilies. 1 Of the right vse of the Church. 2. A∣gainst perill of Idolatry. 3, Of the repairing and keeping cleane of Churches. 4, Of good workes, first of fasting. 5, A∣gainst gluttony and drunkennesse. 6. Against excesse ef apparell. 7, Of Prayer. 8, Of the place and time of Prayer. 9, That common Prayers and Sacraments ought to be mi∣nistred in a knowne tongue. 10, Of the reverent estimati∣on of Gods word. 11, Of almes doing. 12, Of the Nativitie
of Christ. 13, Of the passion of Christ. 14, Of the Resurrec∣tion of Christ. 15, Of the worthy receauing of the Sacra∣ment of the body and blood of Christ. 16, Of the gifts of the Holy Ghost. 17, Of the Rogation daies. 18, Of the state of Matrimony. 19, Of Repentance. 20, Against Idlenesse. 21, Against rebellion. But of the Matter of these Homilies so far forth as it toucheth our Adversaries, I haue partly spoken heretofore, partly I shall speake hereafter vpon divers & sundry opportunities, that shall be offered: wher∣fore I omit it now for this time,M. Mason of the Consecrat. of the Bishops in the Church of England, as also of the Ordinati∣ons of Priests & Deacons. Con∣cerning which Booke I. R. in his Purgatories Triumph o∣ver Hel. p. 141 hath this pas∣sage. I dare not vrge M. Mason too far, least he bring me the next time he writeth, as au∣thenticall Re∣cords for the cō∣secration of Crā∣mers heart in Lambeth Chap∣pell, as he hath printed now at last, when such are dead as might controle them, which their importunitie could never obtaine in their life, for the ordinations of his Bishops in the same place. Thus are they ne∣ver pleased, nor full, nor fasting. But I trust by that time M. Mason hath done with him, Habebit poenam noxium caput, to speake in Livies phrase, or rather in S. Ieroms, Os barbarum, & procax & in convitia semper armatum. and come to the 36 Arti∣cle, which is of the Consecration of Bishops, and Mini∣sters. The Article is this: The booke of consecration of Archbishops, and Bishops, & ordaining of Priests & Dea∣cons, lately set forth in the time of Edward the sixt, & cō∣firmed at the same time by authoritie of Parliament, doth contain all things necessary to such consecration & ordai∣ning, neither hath it any thing, that of it selfe is supersti∣tious or vngodly. And therfore whosoever are cōsecrated or ordered according to the Rites of that book, since the se∣cond yeare of the forenamed King Edward, vnto this time or hereafter shall be consecrated or ordered according to the same Rites, we decree all such to be rightly, orderly, and lawfully consecrated, and ordered. And in this Article is there much to say, but I haue lately beene prevented by a painefull and skilfull u workman in the house of God, the Church, to whose labours I referre you. And I referre you the rather to him for he was sometimes of this House, though afterwards ful worthily he were chosen into ano∣ther.
I come to the 37 Article, which is of the Civill Magi∣strates.  The Article is this: The Queenes Maiestie hath the chiefe power in this Realme of England, & other Her Dominions, vnto whom the chiefe governement of all e∣states of this Realme; whether they be Ecclesiasticall or Ci∣vill, in all causes doth appertaine, and is not, nor ought to be subiect to any forraine Iurisdiction. Where we attri∣bute to the Queenes Maiestie the chiefe governement, by which titles we vnderstand the minds of some slanderous folkes to be offended; we giue not to our Princes the mini∣string either of Gods word, or of the Sacraments, the which thing the Iniūctions also lately set forth by Elizabeth our Queene, doth most plainely testifie: but that only preroga∣tiue which we see to haue beene giuen alwaies to all godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God himselfe, that is, that they should rule all estates and degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiasticall or Tempo∣rall, and restraine with the Civill sword the stubborne and evill doers. The Bishop of Rome hath no Iurisdiction in this Realme of England. The Lawes of the Realme may punish Christian men with death, for heinous and grievous offences. It is lawfull for Christian men, at the commandement of the Magistrate, to weare weapons, and serue in the warres. This concerneth the Suprema∣cy of his Maiestie now Regnant (howsoever according to those times these Articles were framed in, Queene ELI∣ZABETH be here named.) And reason good that as his Ma∣iestie defendeth our Rites, so we also for our parts should every of vs endeavour to defend his Right & Title. True it is, he is able himselfe to doe that, no man better, and we haue seene to our great ioy, even in this kind, —Virg. Aeneid. l. 11. Quantus
In clypeum assurgat, quo turbine torqueat hastam. but yet for our Adversaries be many, even like the Ara∣mites1. Kin. 20.27 filling whole Countries, reason we should all and every of vs put to our helping hand. But to come to the point in hand. That we giue no more in this Article to the Prince that is over vs then is given him by Gods word, and confirmed by the Fathers, I shal briefly now proue both by the Word, and by the Fathers. First concerning the Word, the Apo∣stle St Peter, by whom they claime, disclaiming (it should seeme) all such Superiority, Submit your selues1. Pet. 2.13. saith he, vnto al maner ordināce of man for the Lords sake, whether it be vnto the king as vnto the superiour, or vnto Governours as vnto them that are sent of him. So the Apostle St Paule, Let every souleRom. 13.1. saith he, be subiect vnto the higher powers. And that yee may know of what Powers he speaketh there in that place, PrincesV. 3. saith he, are not to be feared for good workes but for evill. So our Saviour Christ himselfe, when Pilate was vp with his authority over him, Knowest thou not that I haue power to crucifie thee, and haue power to loose thee? Thou couldest haue no power at al against meIoh. 19.11. saith our Saviour, except it were given thee from aboue. And indeede that the chiefe government of al estates of a Realme whe∣ther they be Ecclesiastical, or Civil do appertaine to King∣ly authority; witnes that of the Prophets, who so often & so earnestly commanded the Kings in their time (from the mouth of the Lord) to cut downe the groues and high pla∣ces, to breake downe the Idols, and Images whereby Ido∣latry was committed, and commended such as did it, and threatned such as did it not. So that a Christian Prince in∣deed as our worthy IuellIewell Apol. p. 160 observeth hath the charge of both Tables committed to him by God, to the end he may vnderstand, that not Temporall matters only, but also Re∣ligious and Ecclesiasticall Causes pertaine to his office. Thus Theodosius the Emperour did not only sit among the Bishops, but alsoSocrat. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 10. Sozom. l. 7. c. 12 ordred the whole arguing of the cause, and tare in peeces the Heretikes bookes, and allowed for
good the iudgement of the Catholikes. In the Councel of Chalcedon a CivileVidetur nobis iustum esse, eidē poenae Dioscorū R. Episcopum Alexand, & Iuvenalē Rev. Episc. Hicrosol. &c. Concil. Chlced. Act. 1. p. 831. Vid. E¦vagriū. l. 2. c. 4. Magistrate condemned for Here∣tikes, by the sentence of his owne mouth, Dioscorus, Iuve∣nalis, and Thalssius being Bishops, and gaue iudgement to put them down from their dignities in the Church. But I come to the Fathers. Colimus Imperatorem sicTertul. ad S de Perseq. ta 448. Edit. Pt. 1580. saith Tertullian, quomodo & nobis licet, & ipsi expedit, vt hominem à Deo secundum: & quicquid est à Deo consecutum, solo Deo minorem. And a∣gaine in an otherTertul. Apolo∣get. c. 30. p 703. Edit. eiusd. place, Sentiunt eum Deum esse solum in caius solius potestate sunt, à quo sunt secundi, post quem primi ane omnes & super omnes Deos. The meaning is, it is onlie God who is aboue Princes, Princes are after him, & then before all others. SoOptat. cont. Parmen. l. 3. Optatus, Super Imperatorem non est nisi solus Deus qui fecit Imperatorem. The Emperour hath none aboue him, but God that made him. And Chrys ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 2 p. 33. Edit. Lond. 1590. St Chryso∣stome to this purpose, Parem vllum super terram non habet. The Emperour hath no Peere on earth, much lesse a supe∣rior. They had littleVid B. Bilson vbi sup. Part. 3. p 69. Edit. Lond. 1586 Arithmetike in those daies to cast that a Priest should be seaven & forty times greater then a Prince, by reason of the Sun and Moone in the firmament. I wil end this point of the Supremacie with the subscrip∣tiō of a Priest,D. Rayn. Conf. c. 10. Divis 1. p. 674 At the beginning of which Conference there is a letter of M Harts to iustifie M. D. Raynolds true dealing with him. Both set forth in M. Harts life time least some wrangling I.R might say: He hath printed now at last, when such are dead as might controle him. Mr Hart by name with whō our D. Rai∣nolds had that famous cōferēce. Who whē he had thought that wee meant to giue as much to the Prince by the title of the Supremacie, as they did to the Pope, and saw by Mr Nowels Bookes that we gaue her no more, then doth St Austen, who saith that kings do serue God in this, as kings, if in their owne Realme they commande good things, and for∣bid evill; not only concerning the civill state of men, but theIn hoc Reges sicut eis divinitus praecipitur Deo serviunt in quantum Reges sunt, si in suo Reg no bona iubeant, mala prohibnt, non solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verumetiam quae ad divinam religionem. Aug. Tom. 7. cont. Crescon. Grammat. l. 3. c. 50. p. 185. Edit Bas. 1528.
Religion of God also, thus much he subscrib'd vnto. Vpon which Confessiō if you please you may make these sequē∣ces: First what is the right and interest of Princes in mat∣ters Ecclesiasticall: Secondly, that by a Priests confession we gaue no more to Queene Elizabeth then was indeede due vnto her: Thirdly, that you need not travaile over sea for this knowledge either to Rome, or Rhemes, or Doway or so forth, you may as well learne it here at home. But to returne to the matter in hand. That the Bishop of Rome hath no Iurisdiction within this Realme is a sequence of the Premisses, and therefore may he do well to stoope to Thrasoes proffers in the Poet,Terent. Eu∣nuch. Act. 5. Scen. 9. Vt haereat in parte aliqua tandem apud Thaidem, to play at small games in our king∣dome, rather then wholy to sit out. Now, throwing at all as he doth there is great good hope on our side, feare on theirs, that he shall at length loose all. I come to the 38 & 39 Articles: the one of Christian mens goods which are not common: the other of a christian mans oath, wherein we a∣gree. The 38 Article is this:  The riches and goods of Christians are not common, as touching the right, title, and possession of the same, as certaine Anabaptists doe falsly boast. Notwithstanding every man ought of such things as he possesseth, liberally to giue Almes to the poore, according to his ability. The 39 Article is this:  As we confesse that vaine & rash swearing is forbidden Chri∣stian men by our Lord Iesus Christ, and Iames his Apostle: so we iudge that Christian Religion doth not prohibite, but that a man may sweare when the Magistrate requireth, in a cause of faith and charity, so it be done according to the Prophets teaching, in iustice, iudgement, and truth.  The 40 Article is the Ratification of all the Articles going before, namely that being agreed vpon in the yeere 62, they were confirmed againe some nine yeares after in the yeere 71.
And thus, Beloved, haue you heard at length the chiefe points of that Doctrine which our Mother the Church of England doth hold at this day. And now as IacobGen. 31.36. saide to Laban, What haue I trespassed? What haue I offended, that thou hast pursued after me? Seeing thou hast searched all my stuffe, what haste thou found of all thy houshold stuffe? Put it here before my brethren, and thy Brethren, that they may iudge betweene vs both: so let vs say vnto our Adversaries what haue we trespassed? What haue we offended? That they pursue vs so hotly, and at everie third word call vs Heretikes. Now that all our stuffe is thus searched, what Heresie is it they therein finde? Doe we say the Scriptures are sufficient to Salvation; that the Apochrypha are not Canonicall; that Originall Sinne remaineth in them that are regenerated; that Man hath not free-will; that we are iustified by faith only; that good workes cannot put away sinne and indure the severity of Gods iudgement; & done before Iustification that they cannot please God, and de∣serue grace of congruity; and that workes of Supereroga∣tion cannot be taught without impiety? Doe we say that any particular Church may erre; and Generall Councels to; that the doctrine of Purgatory, Pardons, Worshipping of Images, &c: is repugnant to the word of God; as also publike Service in a Tonge not vnderstood that there are but two Sacramēts only, Baptisme & the Supper; that there is no Transubstantiatiō in the Sacrament, that is, a pasing or turning of one substance into an other; that the wicked eate not the Body of Christ; that the Cup is to be admini∣stred to the People? Do we say that the Mass is no Sacrifice; that Ministers may marry; that who are consecrated and ordered Bishops and Ministers according to our Rites are lawfully consecrated, & lawfully ordered; that the Prince is Supreame Governour, and the Pope hath nothing to doe in this our whole Land, nor Church, nor Common∣weale? Alas what is there in all this that may not evident∣ly be proved, both bySee more hereof in M. Rogers of these Articles. Scriptures and by Fathers? Some∣what
you haue heard out of either of them concerning these severall points already. MuchSee Mr. Ro∣gers vpon these Articles. Prin∣ted by Iohn Le∣gat. 1607. more might haue bin brought, but my purpose was to giue a tast only, that whē you shall come to riper yeares, you in reading of the Fa∣thers may say as the Psalmist did in another case,Ps. 47.9. vulg Sicut audivimus, sic vidimus, Like as we haue heard, so haue we seene, Psalm. 48.7. It was a worthy speech of one of ourB. Bilsons sur∣vey of Christs sufferings for Mans Redemp∣tion. p. 415. Prelats: I do no where refuse the faith professed & preached in the Primitiue Church of Christ by the learned and ancient Pastors, and Guiders thereof. I openly confesse to God, & this Realme, I should never sleepe quietly, if I saw my selfe to be of another faith then they were. Thus he: and imagine for Oxford, for he was an Oxford man, one more shall you haue for Cambridge, and then no more. This I dare avow,D. Fulke a∣gainst Staple∣tons Fortresse, p. 25. saith D. Fulke, that what Article of Doctrine soever we doe affirme, the same hath beene affirmed of the godly Fathers of the Primitiue Church, whatsoever we deny, the same can∣not be proved to haue beene vniversally affirmed and recea∣ued of all the godly Fathers by the space of 600 yeeres toge∣ther. And what remaineth but I now conclude not onely with the words of my Text, But this we confesse vnto them that after the way which they cal Heresie, so worshippe we the God of our Fathers, beleeving all things which are written in the Law, & the Prophets: but beleeving al things also that were written by the Evangelists, and the Apostles, & not refusing that Faith that was professed & preached in the Pri∣mitiue Church of Christ by the learned and ancient Fathers the Pastours and Guiders thereof. The God of Heaven so blesse vs, and the seed that hath beene sowne, &c.
THE TEN COMMANDEMENTS IT was an excellent speech ofArnob. adver. Gent. l. 8. p 231 Ar∣nobius, or rather of Minutius Felix,Lecture 9. Iunij, 10. 1613. Nos non habitu sapientiam, sed men∣te praeferimus: non eloquimur magna, sed vivimus. We Christians make no shew of wisdome by our exteri∣or outward habite, but by the ha∣bite of our minde; our words are not so lofty as our liues. And Ter∣tullian speaking of the Christians how vertuously they li∣ved in his daies, hath many lines to this purpose: I at this time will only english them, & indeed I would they were englished by English men as they should be. He writing to the Heathens, It isDe vestris sē∣per aestuat car∣cer; de vestris semper metalla suspirant; de ve∣stris semper be∣stiae saginantur; de vestris sem∣per munerarii noxiorum gre∣ges pascuntur. Nemo illic Christianus nisi planè tantùm Christianus, aut si & aliud, iam non Christianus. Si de Pudicitia provocemur, lego partem sententiae Atticae in Socratem corruptorem Adolescentium pronunciatam. Sexum nec soemineum mutat Christianus. Novi & Phrynem meretricem Diogenis supera recubantis ardorem subantem. Audio & quendam Spensippum de Platonis schola in adulte∣rio periisse. Christianus vxori suae soli masculus nascitur. Democritus excoecando semetipsum quòd mulieres sine cōcupiscentia aspicere non posset, & doleret si non esset potitus, incontinentiam emen∣datione profitetur. At Christianus salvis oculis foeminam videt, animo adversus libidinem coecus est. Si de Probitate defendam, eccè lutulentis pedibus Diogenes superbos Platonis thoros alia superbia deculcat; Christianus nec in pauperem superbit. Si de Modestia certem, eccè Pythagoras apud Thu∣rios, Zenon apud Pryenense tyrannidem affectant; Christianus verò nec aedilitatem. Si de Aequa∣nimitate congrediar Lycurgus  optavit, quod Leges eius Lacones emendassent; Christi∣anus etiam damnatus gratias agit. Se de Fide comparem, Anaxagoras depositum hostibus denega∣vit; Christianus etiam extra fidelis vocatur. Si de Simplicitate consistam, Aristoteles familiarem su∣um Hermiam turpiter loco excedere fecit; Christianus nec inimicum suum laedit. Idem Aristoteles tam turpiter Alexandro regendo potius adulatur quàm Plato à Dionysio ventris gratia vnditatur Aristippus in purpura sub magna gravitatis superficie nepotatur, & Hippias dum civitati insidias disponit, occiditur; hoc pro suis omni atrocitate dissipatis nemo vnquam tenavit Chistianus. Sed di∣cet aliqus etiam de nostris excedere quosdamà regula disciplinae, de sinunt tum Christiani haberi penes nos. Tertul. Apologel. c. 44 & 45. p 713. 714. 715. saith he, with men of your sort that
the Prisons are so replenished; yours they are that for their misdeeds are condemned to the mines; it is with yours that your wilde beasts fat thēselues; yours they are that your beau∣tifull Citizens do feed their droues withall procured for that purpose. No Christian to be seene in those places, as he is a Christian only: or if so be he be somewhat else, then is he no Christian. And comparing a little after their Philosophers and Christians togither, If, saith he, the chalenge be made concerning CHASTITIE, I could tell you what even your So∣crates in part was condemned for; I could tell you of Phrynes the harlot of Diogenes, & of one Speusippus a Scholler of Pla∣toes; as for a Christian he shewes himselfe to be male only vnto ...his wife. Your Democritus he forsooth put out his two eies, & all for he could not looke on a woman, but hee must needs lust after her: a Christian lookes on women with safety of eie-sight enough, and concerning lust, it is not his eie, it is his hart that is blind only, If I should speake of CIVILITIE, I could tell you of Diogenes, that trampled Platoes pride vnder foot, but with a greater pride of his own; a Christian is not prowd, no not to∣wards the very poore. If so be I should speake of MODESTIE, e∣ven Pythagoras with the Thurians, Zeno with the Pryenians affected a kinde of Tyranny: a Christian seekes not after the meanest office that is. If so be I should speake of PATIENCE, Lycurgus wished to the Lacedemonians an evill end, for be∣cause they altered his lawes: a Christian though he be con∣demned, will notwithstanding giue thankes for it. If I should speake of FIDELITY, Anaxagoras refused to giue the Enemy his Depositum, that which was giuen vnto him in keeping, no Enemy can blame a Christian for such kinde of dealing. If I should speake of PLAINENES and SIMPLICITY, I could tel you how Aristotle vsed his friend Hermias: a Christian will not harme, no not his enemy. The selfesame Aristotle as basely flattered Alexander, as Plato did Dionysius, or Aristippus playd the gurmandizer, Hippias the Traitour: this a Christi∣an will never adventure vpon, no though it were to the good of a many besides. But some perhaps will say that there are even
of Ours to, that sometimes tread awry: nay but then they are none of ours, but are vtterly discarded by vs. Behold, Belo∣ved, what a goldē age there was of Christians at that time! how vertuous they were! how religious! what discipline towards such as gaue occasion of offence! Their scope was obedience, ours is skill; their endeavour was reforma∣tion of life, our vertue nothing but to heare gladly the re∣proofe of vice; they in the practise of their religion weari∣ed chiefly their knees and hands, we especially our eares and tongues: In a word, we are growne, saithM Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. . § 81. p. 265. Reverend Hooker, as in a many things els so in this to a kind of intē∣perancy, which (only Sermons excepted) hath almost brought all other duties of Religion out of tast. The consideration hereof, Dearely Beloved, did cause me at the first, whē I pondered with my selfe what kind of Lectures to read vnto you, to make such a Division of thē that as some should be for knowledg, & illightning of the mind, so others againe should be for life & conversation. This it was that made me make that divisiō at theLect. 1. p. 20. first of what the Church was to Beleeue, & what to Practise. Do∣ing & Teaching was our Saviours method, Act. 1.1. ours shall not be contrary to it, if Teaching be first, & then Do∣ing. Having told you thē hertofore what the Church is to Beleeue, and by consequence every of you who are of that Church: come we now vnto her Practise which being first of all to obserue the Commandements, secondly to Pray, thirdly to Fast, fourthly to giue Almes: of everie of these in their severall order, and in as many severall Lectures, and first of the ten Commandements. The Text I haue chosen to this purpose is out of St Matthewes Gospell. Mat. 22. the 37, 38, 39, and 40 verses. The words be these: Iesus said to him: Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soule, & with all thy minde. This is the first and the great Commande∣ment.
And the second is like vnto this, Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe, On these two commaundements hangeth the whole Law and the Prophets. The words you see are an answere, and the answere is to a guestion, which a certaine Pharisee here made. This Pha∣risee it should seeme was of the humour of some in our daies whose questioning with their Minister is not so much to learne, as to try what he can doe, and if he be∣stirre not himselfe the better, to expose him to the scorne and contempt of standers by. A sawcy & malepert kinde ofSheep Ram. pant. Questionists, who having so many Quaerees for o∣thers, haue not one only for themselues, whether the dis∣grace so wittingly and willingly offered to the Servant, redound to the Master or not. But to returne vnto my Pharisee. He was, saith the Text, An expounder of the Law, and setting vpon our Saviour in his own proper element, the law, he thought now to shew himselfe such an one therein as that the world should take notice of him that he was the man that put Iesus to a Non plus. Pers. Satyr. 1.Nam pulchrum est digito monstrari, & dicier hic est. It is not vnlikely but that he studied the Case long before, and all the Obs, and all the Sols, that might haue beene made to that purpose. As if so he had said with him∣selfe. What? will he saie the first Commandement is grea∣test of all, Thou shalt haue no other Gods but me? Why but the second is as great as that: Thou shalt make no graven i∣mage. And as great as is the second, is the third by all like∣lyhood of not taking Gods name in vain. And the fourth cō∣cerning the Sabboth may seeme to be greatest of all: for besides that our memories are specially charged with that Commādement, Remember thou keep holy the Sabboth day, how was there one but for gathering thereon a few sticks even stoned to death by Gods owneNum. 15.36. expresse com∣mandement.
But what would he say then vnto the fift, cō∣cerning the honouring of our Parents, which is the first Commaundement with promise? So likewise of the rest, there being not one amongst them all, but in one respect or other seeming to haue more peculiarly some prehemi∣nence aboue the rest. But whatsoever it was that vrged him to vrge our Saviour in this wise, whether Haughtines or Pride vpon the talent of learning God had given him, or Fnvy that our Saviour should so much speak of the law as he did; Virg. Aen. l. 1Non illi imperium pelagi: saevum{que} tridentem, Sed mihi sorte datum; or else with Envy in the Poet indeed, Ovid. Met. l. 2Vix{que} tenens lachrymas, quia nil lachrimabile cernit. Our Saviours answere here vnto him was a good effect of a bad cause: for had not the Pharisee here been so vicious, we had wanted perhaps this good Instruction of Epitomi∣zing thus the ten Commandements, nor haue known the first and great Commandement, of loving God aboue all, & how the second is like vnto it, of loving our Neighbours as our selues. Howbeit before we come to this Epitomizing of our Saviours, it will not be amisse to take a view of each one of them in particular, that so having considered them one by one, we may make the true benefit of an Epitome indeed, which is not therfore made vs, to saue vs a labour in reading the larger Volumes, (that would proue the bane of true Learning) but when we haue read them over, to call to our mindes what we haue read, and to treasure vp the summe thereof more firmely in our memories. Two severall places there are in holy writ that contain therein these Commandements at large, Exodus, 20.1. & Deut. 5.6. In the booke of Exodus they were first giuen, in Deuteronomy they were repeated againe. The reason was for that they being dead to whom the Law was given in Mount Sinai (and of that Exodus maketh mention) Moses repeateth the Law againe more particularly in Deutero∣nomy
exhorting and perswading them to obserue & keepe the same. But first of these ten Commandements in gene∣rall, then of every of them in particular. Iesus said to him: thou shalt loue the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soule, and with all thy mind, and so forth. The opinion was wondrous great the Romans had of those Lawes of theirs, which they called the 12 Tables. Tully was so transported with the loue he bare vnto thē, that having occasion to entreat of them, Fremant omnes licet,Tully de Orat. l. 1. saith he, dicam quod sentio, Bibliothecas meherculè omnium Philosophorum, vnus mihi videtur duodecim Tabularum libellus, si quis Legum fontes & capita vide∣rit, & autoritatis pondere, & vtilitatis vbertate supera∣re. Let others take it as they list, I for my part will shew you my opinion, namely that that one little Booke of the twelue Tables (if so be a man would faine see the fountaines of Lawes, whence they spring, and the chiefest heads of all and every of them) seemes to surpasse all the Bookes that all the Phylosophers ever wrote, partly in re∣spect of the authoritie which it hath, partly in respect of the profit and vtilitie which it bringeth. Now if so be you would faine knowe what is become of that Booke, wee must returne it with a writ of, Non est inventus: It is not indeed to be found, onely some Fragments still remaine, which rather shew vnto the world that there was indeed such a Booke, then that the Booke that was, was such. But whatsoever the opinion of that Booke was, & the wordes of Tully how true soever, it was nothing comparable to two Tables the Scripture speakes of, so farre beyond those Twelue, as the Sun and Moone beyond the Stars. As Tully spake in their commendation, so S. Austen in the o∣thers, Quae disputationes,Aug. Tom. 2. Epist. 3. p. 9. saith he, quae literae quorumlibet Philosophorum, quae leges quarumlibet Civitatum duobus Praeceptis ex quibus Christus dicit totam Legem, Prophe∣tas{que} pendere vllo modo sint comparandae? Hîc Physica, Ethi∣ca, Logica, Politica. What disputations, saith St Austen,
what learning of any Philosophers whatsoever, what Lawes of any Cities are in any wise to be compared to those two Commandements, on which our Saviour saith the whole Law and the Prophets doe hang. In those two are comprised the Physicks, the Ethicks, Logicke, and the Politicks. Physicks, forasmuch as all the causes of naturall things are in God the Creatour: Ethickes for that a good and an honest life is not otherwise framed then whē those things are loved which are to be loved; God & our Neig∣bour: Logicke for that the truth and light of a reasonable soule is God only: Politicks for that a city is not governed or kept vnlesse the cheefe good be beloved, that is God himselfe, & in him every of vs loue each other syncerely, & for his sake. I should be very loath to make them equal, for I remember that ofHieron. adv. Iovin. l. 1. Ierom, Quando minora maioribus coaequantur, Inferioris cōparatio superioris iniuria est: when lesser things are equald to those that are greater, wrong is done vno the better part: and therefore let vs now see the oddes betweene them both. First concerning the 12 Tables call we to mind the first maker of them, and it was man, mortall man: the Commandements were first writtē by theExod. 32, 16 & 31.18. Deut. 9 10. finger of God himselfe. Secondly, consider the scope of them, and it was but to bind the outward man, I meane the outward actions of those men as were subiect to the same: here the inward man is bound too, But I say vnto you, saith our Saviour, that whosoever looketh on a wo∣man to lust after her, hath committed adultery with her al∣ready in his heart. Mat. 5.29. Thirdly, If we consider the ex∣tent of those 12 Tables, they were but for one meridiā, & befitting only a popular state: no Nation vnder Heaven, whom these Commandements may not fit. For why spould God,Cur etenim Deus Vniversi∣tatis conditor, mundi totius gubernator, ho∣minis Plasma∣tor, vniversarū gentium Sator, Legem per Moy∣sen vni populo dedsse credatur & non omnibus gentibus attri∣buisse dicatur? Tertul. adver. Iudaeos. p 99. saith Tertullian, the maker and governour of this whole world, framer of Man, and Creatour of all the Nati∣ons in the world, be thought to giue by Moses a Law to one People, and not be said rather to haue given it to al the world. Lastly, If we consider the perfection of those, we shal find
that at the first there were in all but 10 Tables, afterwards Two were added to make them vp iust Twelue: these were but Tenne at first, and so haue continued ever since, ad∣mitting in them no alteration of that perfection they first had. True it is, asIn lege Adae datâ, omnia Praecepta con∣dita recognosci∣mus, quae pestea pullulaverunt data per Moy∣sen. Tertul adv. Iudaeo  Tertulliā observeth they were al of thē comprised in that one Precept giuen to Adam, Gen. 2.17. about the forbidden fruit, and therefore he cals that Law, Primordialē Legem, & saith that it was Quasi matrix om∣nium Praeceptorum Dei, The first originall law that ever was, & as it were the womb of the ten Commandements, howbeit afterwards whē they were brought forth & once came to be tenne in number; the number afterwards still held, howsoever the Tables that held thē were but two. No controversie at all then about the number of them, nor of the two Tables that did containe them; a contro∣versie there is which they are that are in whither Table, & how they are to be divided. Some there are that in respect they are all of them but Tenne, divide them into equall parts, placing five of them in the first Table, and fiue in the second, so Iosephus & Philo Iudaeus: others make but three in the first Table, and seaven in the second, so S. Austen, and Clemens Alexandrinus in part, for he maketh three in the first, but then in the second he hath but six: but the most vsuall division is of Foure in the first Table, and Six in the second, and this is the division of all the Fathers be∣sides. Our Antipodes of Rome that so much boast of the Fathers, and how they are theirs thicke and threefold, in their Division of the Commandements leaue all the Fa∣thersVid D. Rain. Confer. with M, Hart c. 2. Di∣vis. 2 p. 75. quite and cleane, and follow S. Austen only. Vnder colour of whome they conceale the second Commande∣ment from the People, and omit it in their Prayer Books, as also in their Catechismes, and then to salue the matter least thereby we should haue no more then nine Commā∣dements they cut theFlatly oppo∣site to holy Scrip¦ture. For house and Wife the two members that should in our Adversa∣ries iudgement make two seve∣rall Comman∣dements, are placed. Deut. 5.21, Wife and House, so that the former mē∣ber Exod. 20, 17 is the latter, Deut. 5.21. & the latter Deut. 5.21. is the for∣mer Ex, 20.17. and so by their reckoning the 9 Commādement should be the 10 and the 10 the 9. or indeed we should not knew which is ninth, or which is tēth Vid. M. Bunnies Head corner Stone. l. 1. c. 7. § 4. p. 135. Tenth into twaine. But to returne vnto my purpose.
There being in the first Table then Foure Commande∣ments, in the second Table Six, they are specified to be these. The first of having no other Gods, but the Lord: the second of having no Images: the third of not taking his name in vaine: the fourth, of keeping the Sabboth. And these in the first Table, the reason of the connexion of all which foure, seemeth this. The first teacheth Gods inward worship: the second his outward: the third the reverent vse of both: the fourth the principall time when both are to be done. Those six in the second Table are specified to be these. The first, is of honouring our Parents: the second, of not killing: the third, of not committing adultery: the fourth, of not stealing: the fift, of not bearing false witnes: the sixt and last, of not coveting. The reason of this con∣nexion seemes to be this. In the first which is the fift Com¦mandement, we are taught speciall duties, and those mu∣tuall, as of the Superiour to the Inferiour, and of the In∣feriour to the Superiour againe, and that vnder the Pre∣cept of Honouring Father and Mother. In the other fiue are contained generall duties, and first because life is the ground of al the rest, therefore in the first of them, which is the sixt Commandement, order is taken to preserue that Thou shalt not kill. Secondly because as life must be preser∣ved, so we ought to liue an honest life, therefore in the se∣cond of them which is the seaventh Commandement, or∣der is taken for that, Thou shalt not commit Adulterie. Thirdly because an honest life must be honestly maintai∣ned, & we must content our selues with what God giues vs, be it little, be it much, in the third which is the eight Commandement, we haue a precept concerning that, Thou shalt not steale. Fourthly for it is not enough to pos∣sesse our goods in such good sort, but we must haue a care of our good names too, in the fourth, which is the ninth Commandement, we are forbidden To bear false witnesse. Lastly, for the heart of Man is the fountaine of all vices, there comming from thence as speakes our Saviour, Mat.
15.19. Evill Thoughts, Murthers, Adulteries, & so forth; and when we see many Pipes and Conduits infected we goe to the Fountaine, for that from thence the infection comes, and we endeavour to take order for that hence it is that in the fift, which is the tenth Commandment, we are forbidden the first motions and inticements vnto sin, howsoever the Heart consent not. And thus much of the Commandements in generall, come we now to each par∣ticular, and that as briefly as I may, not forgetting that of. Greg. Naz. Orat. in Sanct. Bapt. Orat. 40. p. 637. Nazianzen, that Excesse of speech is as great an enymie, & as obnoxious to the eare, as superfluitie of meat is to the sto∣mach. Besides that holding you so long the last time I will now indeavour to make you amends. To come thē to the matter in hand. The first Cōmandement is in these words: Exod. 20.1. Deut. 5.7.Then God spake all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God, which hath brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt haue no other Gods before me. In which words I note first of all two several Prefaces: Secondly the Precept it selfe. The one of those two Prefaces is that which Moses made concerning God: the other is that which God made concerning himselfe. That which Moses made concerning God is in these words, Then God spake all these words, saying. Then? when?Exod. 19.1 when the Israe∣lites were come to the wildernesse of Sinay,V. 14. when they were sanctified, and as Moses commanded them, had wa∣shed their cloathes,V. 15. when they were ready on the thirde day & came not at their wiues,V. 16. when it was earely in the morning, and there were thunders, and lightnings, and a thicke clowd vpon Sinai, and the sound of the Trumpet exceeding lovd.V. 18. When mount Sinai was all on smoake, because the Lord came downe in fier, & the mount trem∣bled exceedingly, & the sound of the Trumpet blew long,
and waxed lowder and lowder. WhenV. 25. Moses was gone downe from the mountZanch. de Re∣dempt. l. 1. c. 12 p. 214. least it should haue beene thought to haue beene his voice. In a word, when the sight that appeared was so terrible, that even Moses himselfe said, , ISo our New Translat. Heb. 12.21. exceedingly feare, & quake. Then God spake all these words, saying. And indeed if we re∣spect the nature of the Law, ful well was al this as Harbin∣gers vnto it. For what doth the law but accuse and terri∣fie, Make vs subiect vnto sin, subiect vnto Death, subiect to the wrath of God, and when we once are in that plight, what do we see in the whole world, but Thūders, & Light∣nings, and Clowds, and sounds of Trumpet as it were sum∣moning vs to Iudgment; Before vs, all the world as it were on a light fire, Aboue vs, an angry Iudge, About vs, Sathā and his Complices, Beneath vs, Hell and Damnation, With in vs, a worme of conscience, that howsoever we die,Esay. 66.24. Mark 9.44. & v. 46. & v. 48. ne∣ver dieth. It followeth, God spake all these words, saying. God in his own person, attended vpon with millions of glorious Angels, spake, in a distinct voice and sound of words, that the People both heard and vnderstood them. The People were at that time sixe hundred thousand men, besides women and children, and well might it be, asZanch. vbi supra. Zā∣chius observeth, that God himselfe spake, for what human voice had beene possible to haue pierced even the twen∣tith part of so many severall eares? In this respect it isVid. M.D. Boys his Expo∣sition of all the principall Scrip¦tures in our Li∣turgy p. 86. thought that St Stephen doth call thē ,Act. 7.38. liuely Oracles, in as much as they were vttered by the liuely voice of God himselfe. I come to the other Preface, that which God made concerning himselfe, I am the Lorde thy God which hath brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. In which Preface he yeeldes them two sortes of Argu∣ments to proue that both he on his part might giue them a law, and that they on their parts were bound to keep it. The first argument is taken from his essence, & his great∣nes, and goodnes towards them, I am the Lord thy God:
the second from a peculiar benefit, and a principall favour done vnto them, which hath brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Concerning his Essence, and Greatnesse, and Goodnesse, the words are in the O∣riginall Iehova Eloheka. Of the former namely Iehova I haue spokenLect. 2, p. 28. before, a word or two of the latter, Elo∣him. ElohimElohim est no∣men potentiae & fortitudinis, magnarum{que} virium, eo{que} op∣timè convenit Deo, & quidem soli, propriè. Zanch, de Div. Attrib. l. 1. c. 12 p. 33., saith Zāchius, is a name of power and strength, and of great puissance, and therefore is most agreeable vnto God, and properly to him alone. It is a word of the plural nū∣ber, and oftentimes so vsed throughout the holy Scrip∣tures, in the singular very seldome, all to signifie thereby three Persons in the Godhead. Being a word, saith he, of the plurall number, it is sometimes in construction ioined with a verbe of the plurall, sometimes with an adiectiue of the plurall though the verbe be in the singular, sometimes with a verbe of the singular. In all these three kindes there isZanc. Ib. p. 34. saith he, to be noted a plurality of Persons, though it be not so apparant in this last kinde, as in the two former. Besides as he saith in an otherNunquam dixit in sacris literis se esse v∣num Elohim, si∣cut semper ait se esse Iehovam vnum. Zanch. de Redempt. l. 1 c. 12. p. 215. place, God never cals him selfe One Elohim, as he ever cals himselfe One Iehova, to shew no doubt in himselfe a plurality, not of Essence, or of essentiall Attributes, but of Persons. And thus much briefly of the word. The second argument taken from that peculiar benefit of his done vnto them, was concerning the land of Egypt out of which he brought them, when as they had beene in bondage there the space of 400 yeeres. —Virg. Aen. l. 1 longa est iniuria, longae Ambages: sed summa sequar fastigia rerum. So it was that Ioseph the sonne of Iacob after diverse and sundry afflictions came in Egypt to greatGen 41.44. honor. Where being a great dearth and in al the Countries round about, and especially in Canaan, where Iosephs Father and Bre∣thren lived, heGen. 45.10. Act. 7.14. sent for them & their families to soiourne with him in Egypt some threescore and fifteene soules. It
pleased the Lord afterwardes in tract of time to multiplie them exceedingly, in so much that they grew to many thousands. Which the kings of Egypt that came after per∣ceiving, and howExod. 1.18. obnoxious it woulde bee vnto them to haue such a People in their bosome, and to growe vp still amongst them, they endeavoured to keepe them vnder, and set Taske-masters over them, afterwardes they tooke order toExod. 1.22. slay all their male children. In time of this massacre was Moses borne, & not only es∣caped miraculously, but as miraculously was heExod. 2.10. brought vp vnder the nose of one of those Tyrants. From whom at length flying vpon occasion of a murther he had commit∣ted vpon one of his Subiects in behalfe of one of his Bre∣thren, after some forty yeeres after that, he returned to E∣gypt againe with a message from the Lord concerning the deliverance of his People.Exod. 5.1. Pharaoh was loath to heare on that eare, but afterwards when he saw so many miracles wrought concerningExod. 7.1. Bloud and8.6. Frogs, and8.16. Lyce, and8.24. Flyes, and9.3. Moraine, and9.10. Blisters, and9.23. Thunder, and10.13. Grashoppers, and10.22. Darknesse, and12.29. losse even of his owne First-borne, then lo he granted leaue, who yet afterwards repenting himselfe, and pursuing them with all his People hoping to haue recovered them, and to haue had them in the slavery he had them before, he vtterlyExod. 14.28. perished in the Sea, as he was pursuing them amaine. And this was the house of Bondage here spokē of in this place, from which the Lord having thus delivered them by meanes of so ma∣ny strange miracles, no mervaile though he vse it as a spe∣cial argument in this place, why he on his part might giue them a Law, and they on their parts were bound to keepe it. So that this his benefit and favour to them is here remēbred in this place, partly for it was a late benefit, the sweetnes whereof was yet in their mouthes: partly for it was so great a benefit, and to be remembred of all poste∣rity: partly for it was a type of the deliverance of all the E∣lect from the Egypt of this world. In all and every of these
respects itZanch de Re∣dempt. l. 1. c. 12 p. 217 Col. 1. agreed to the Children of Israell; in this last respect it agrees to Christians, who are now theGal. 6.16. Israel of God. For if so be the Lord himselfeIer. 16.14. said, The daies come, that it shall no more be said, The Lord liveth, which brought vp the childrē of Israel out of the land of Egypt, but, the Lord liveth, that brought vp the children of Israel from the land of the North, &c: how much more may it well beMat. 8.11. said, Vi∣vit Dominus, The Lord liveth, that shall bring all and eve∣ry of vs from East and West, North and South, to sit with Abraham, and Isaac, and Iacob in the kingdome of heaven. But I come to the Precept it selfe, Thou shalt haue no other Gods before me. First whereas it is here said, Thou shalt haue no other Gods, the truth is there is no other God besides to be had. For who is God,Psal 18.31. saith the Psalmist, but the Lord? or who hath any strength except our God? So likewise the Prophet Esay, I am the Lord, and there is no other, Esay 45.5. and a∣gaine, I am the Lord, and there is no other, Esay, 45.18, and yet againe the third time, I am God, and there is no other, Esay, 45.22. Howbeit seeing mans nature is such as that he will frame to himselfe other Gods, partly in opinion, partly in practise, hence it is that here it is said, Thou shalt haue no other. So that the Emphasis is in Thou: Thou, whe∣ther thou art an Israelite, or Thou, whether a Christian, Thou shalt haue no other Gods. Though there be,1. Cor. 8.5. saith the Apostle S. Paule, that are called Gods, whether in Hea∣ven, or in Earth, (as there be many Gods, and many Lords) yet vnto vs there is but one God, which is the Father of whom are all things, and we in him: and one Lord Iesus Christ, by whom are all things and we by him. Secondly where he saith Before me, or as it is in Deuteronomy, Deut. 5.7, Before my face, Indignitatem auget,Calvin Inst. l. 2. c. 8. §. 16. saith Calvin, it shewes the augmentation of the haynousnesse of the cryme, if so be we betake vs to other Gods, like as if an vnchast woman, saith he, by bringing in an adulterer openly before her Husbands eyes, should the more vex his mind. That of
Assuerus is famous concerning Haman, who when he was falne vpon the bed whereon Ester sate: whatEster, 7.8, saith the king, will he force the Queen also before me in the house? and then was there no way with him but one. So the Lord here in this place the more to fray vs from falling frō him, giues vs warning that we can doe nothing in that kinde, but that he himselfe is a witnesse of it, He that planted the eare,Ps. 94.9. saith the Psalmist, shall he not heare? or he that made the eye, shall he not see? Quantascun{que} tenebras factis tuis su∣perstruxeris, Deus lumen est,Tertul. de Poe∣nit p. 379. saith Tertullian. It is that in effect which DavidPs. 139.10. saith, If I say, Peradventure the dark∣nesse shall cover me: then shall my night be turned to day. Yea the darknesse is no darknesse with thee, but the night is as cleere as the day: the darknesse and light to to thee are both alike. I might seeme to haue sufficiently entreated of this Commandement considering the brevity I haue propo∣sed to my selfe, howbeit there is one thing yet that I must necessarily tel you of, before I part from it, and it serueth not onely for this Commandement, but for all the other that follow after. It is aSemper in ne∣gativis memi∣nerimus affir∣mativa conti∣neri. Strigel. Loc Theol. Part 2. c. 4. p. 26. ruled case, That all the Comman∣dements if they be Negatiue, then by way of Synecdoche they comprehend in them an Affirmatiue too, if so be they be Affir∣matiue, then by the selfe same figure they comprehēd a Nega∣tiue too. This being then a negatiue Precept, and compre∣hending in it an affirmatiue, the affirmatiue therein com∣prehended is this: We ought to retaine the Lord, as our owne & only God. Not as Masters retaine their Servants to haue or to discard as it falls out a many times at their pleasure, and as TertullianTertul. in A∣pologet. c 5 p. 669. writes merily of the Heathens, Nisi ho∣mini Deus placuerit Deus non erit. Homo iam Deo propiti∣us esse debebit. Vnlesse God please Man the better, he shall be God no longer Man must now be friendly and favou∣rable to God. Noe but that perpetually we haue him as our owne, not giving away elsewhere what is proper and peculiar to him. Now the things we owe to God, though
they be indeed innumerable, yet as Calvin welCalvin. Instit. l. 2 c. 8. § 16. obserues may be reduced to foure heads, Adoration, Affiance, In∣vocation, and Giving of Thanks. But I come to the secondExod. 20.4, Deut. 5.8. Commandement. Thou shalt make thee no graven Image, neither any similitude of things that are in heaven aboue, nei∣ther that are the in earth beneath, nor that are in the waters vnder the earth. Thou shalt not bow downe to thē, neither serue them, for I am the Lord thy God a iealous God, visiting the iniquitie of the Fathers vpō the Childrē, vpon the third generatiō, and vpon the fourth of them that hate me: & shew∣ing mercy vnto thousands to them that loue me & keepe my Commandements. There are in this second Commandement three espe∣ciall and principal parts. First, the Precept it selfe: Second∣ly a menacing of those that worship him otherwise thē he will: Thirdly, a promise vnto such as worship him aright. The Precept consisteth of two points: First, that Images should in no wise be made, namely to worship God with∣all: Secondly, they should not be adored, or served by vs. Concerning the former point of Images not to be made, I therefore adde, to worship God withall, for that Sanders in his Treatise of worshipping of Images, hath a whole Chapter, the contents whereof is, That the word of God forbiddeth not generally the making of all kinde of Ima∣ges, and in what sense Images are forbidden to be made: wherevnto you shall haue the Answer of that worthy He∣ctor of ours D. Fulke. That the word of God,M. D. Fulkes Cenfu. of Sand. Treatise of the worship of Ima∣ges. p. 596. saith he, for∣biddeth not the making of all Images generally, it is a matter out of Controversie with vs, although the Iewes and Maho∣metists thinke the contrary. But seeing making of Images is
by the second Cōmandement expresly forbiddē, we may cleerly perceiue, what Images are forbidden to be made, if we consi∣der that this is a Precept of the first Table, which concerneth Religion. Therefore by it we are forbidden to make our selues any maner of Images for any vse of Religion. Now that Ima∣ges ought not to be made to worshippe God withall, we haue divers and sundry Scriptures, as Deut. 4.15. Esay, 40 18. Act. 17.29, Rom. 1.23. I spare to cite the wordes, you may turne vnto them at your leasure. The second point relyeth on that which hath beene said cōcerning the former, for if Images may not be made to any vse of Religion, much lesse may they be worship∣ed. But of Images I haue spokenLect. 8. in Ar∣tic. 22. p. 181. before, only now let me briefly shew that there is in trueth no difference between an Image and an Idoll, if so be the Image be once worship∣ped. First, Idolum by their own Vulgar isVulg. Exod. 34.15 Levit. 26.30. Num. 23.21 where it being in the Vul¦gar, Non est Idolum in Ia∣cob nec vide∣tur Simula. chrum in Is∣rael. The Do∣way Bible set forth 1609. translateth thus There is no I∣dol in Iacob, neither is there simula∣chre to bee seene in Isra∣el. Ha, ha, he. I pray you re∣member the verse before, p. 108. Spectatū admissi, &c. My freinds were you admitted to this sight, Could you refraine? would you not laugh outright? called Simula∣chrum, and Simulachrum signifies as much as Imago, an I∣mage. So Tully, Statuae & Imagines,Tull. pro Archia Poeta. saith he, non animorū simulachra sunt, sed corporum. SoArnobcont. Gent. l. 8. Arnobius, as you haue heard before, Quod simulachrum Deo fingam, cùm si rectè existimes, sit Dei homo ipse simulachrum. Of this, see more in M.D. FulksD. Fulks Defence against Martins Discovery, c. 1. na. 5. p 7, 8, 9, &c. Defence of the Translation of our Bibles. Secondly, they are both borrowed, the one frō the Greeke, the other from the Latine, and therefore in their own Di∣alect signifying both of thē one thing, it is probable that even in the English tongue they may be both of them so applyed. Thirdly, you shall find it inAn old manuscript in my own keeping. The beginning whereof is, In the name of the Fadir &c. Some call it Christianorum Speculum. old english, that the first woe that ever came to the Children of Israel after that they were comen out of Egypt was for the worshipping of an Image. Fourthly, & lastly, Bellarmine himselfe brings no∣thing to the contrary, but that oftentimes the name of an Idol is attributed to true Images, whereof see more in D.
Raynolds in hisD Rayn. de Rom. Eccles. I∣dololat. l. 2. c. 3. p. 361 Besides that our Adver∣saries thēselues vse the word Images in their Dway Bibe vpō Nūb. 31.16. in mar∣gin: Images of Beelphegor. And those I trowe were I∣dols. Doway Bible p. 386, Edit. 1609. Booke de Idololatria. And thus much of the first part namely of the Precept. Concerning the Menacing of those that worship him otherwise then he would; which he calleth here, An ha∣ting of him, he shewes that he is a Iealous God, and how he Ʋisites the iniquitie of the Fathers vpon the Children, vpon their third and fourth generation, but of this haue I spokenLect. 4. p. 75. heretofore, only for the word Iealous here let me obserue that Ielousy, asZanch. de Re¦demp. l. 1. c. 14. p. 338. Col. 2. Zanchius tels vs, is first an affectiō of a Lo∣ver who cannot indure any Rivall. Secondly that affection of his wherby he is so mooued for wrongs offered him as that he cannot but be revenged. They are Solomons own wordes, Ielousie is the rage of a man: therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance, Prov. 6.34 Now both those significations, saith Zanchius, agree to the Lord our God. First God, he is the Husband of the Church, and will be worshipped by her only, and as by the Church in general, so by every member of it in particular. Secondly, we see the punishment here, as also the promise vnto such as worship him aright, but of both these I haue spokenLect, 4. p. 64. & 72. before, and therefore come I to the thirdExod. 20, 7. Deut 5.11. Commandement. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine: for the Lord will not hold him guiltlesse, that taketh his name in vaine. As in the former, so in this there is a Precept, and a me∣nacing to. The Precept is in these words: Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine: the menacing in these; for the Lord wil not hold him guiltlesse. In the Precept I obserue first what the Name of Lord is, secondly, what it is to take that Name in vaine. We shall be too too scant in our measure if intreating now of the Name of God we af∣ford him no other name then we haue given himLect. 2. p. 26. hereto∣fore. You may remember what those Names were, but they are not the only Names here intimated in this place.
Here then is meant by the Name of God not only his Ti∣tles and Properties, but his Ordinances, his Workes, and his whole outward worship wherby God is made knowne vn∣to vs, as men are by their names. Now by In vaine here in this place is meant all abuse of them, the which is done two waies, or in our workes, or in our words. Our Workes; as when the Name of God is blasphemed among the Gē∣tiles (or for we liue not now among Gentiles, among our Adversaries the Papists) through vs, Rom. 2.24. Our Words, as when we talke, of God, as also of his Word, irre∣verently and vnworthily, without any devotion in the world, or else when on every light occasion no perfect period passeth our mouthes but it hath a volly of oathes in triumph of what is spoken. Horat. Epod. Od. 7.Quò quò scelesti ruitis? aut our dexteris Aptantur enses conditi? And indeed such oathes are Swords, nay worse thē swords and that to a mans owne selfe. A sword doth not pierce so deepe, Chrys. ad Pop Antioch. Hom. 15. saith St Chrysostom, as the nature of an oath doth, neither doth it giue so deadly a blow.Virg. Aeneid. lib 4. And as one saith he, that hath the halter about his necke, & is going out of the gates of the City to be executed, is as a dead man already even before he come to the place of execution, in such a case saith S. Chrysostom, is the Swearer, as if he had said, he hath his deaths wound about him, —Haeret lateri let halis arundo. well he may hold out for a spurt, but it is not likely to bee long, What is your life? saithIam. 4.14. S. Iames, It is even a vapour that appeareth for a little time, and afterward vanisheth a∣way. Of all Sinnes this is a Sinne that doth most impeach our reputation. For Oathes are ordained where need is, that Truth should not perish, & Debates should be at an end. So the Apostle to the Hebrews, An oath for confirma∣tionHeb. 6.16. saith he, is among men an end of all strife. But he that sweares at every word, declareth plainely that no credit is to be given to any of his words and therefore he ioines to
every word an Oath as a surety of the truth thereof. Like as if a man would offer a great substantiall Surety when he would borrow but a Penny doth he not plainely shew to him of whom he would borrow it, that he is of small cre∣dit himselfe that would for so small a matter offer so great a Surety? But what doe I speak of credit with men, you see what followeth here in this place concerning the mena∣cing, The Lord will not hold him guiltlesse, that taketh his name in vaine. You see the arrow stickes in him still. —Virg. Aeneid. lib. 7. Acta{que} multo Per{que} vterum sonitu, per{que} ilia venit arundo. Now if the Lord wil not hold him guiltles, he hath scarse∣ly the benefit of that Superscription to be set vpon his dore, which infected Houses haue in a well governed Cit∣ty, Lord haue mercy vpon vs. They were the Lords owne words to the Prophet Zachary, who when he said vnto him, what seest thou? And he answered, I see a flying booke: the length thereof is twenty cubites, and the breadth thereof ten cubits: ThisZach. 5.2. saith the Lord, is the curse that goeth forth over the whole earth: for every one that stealeth shall be cut of, as well on this side as on that: and every one that sweareth shalbe cut of, as well on this side as on that. In any wise we that are Schollers let vs beware of this Booke, of all the Bookes in the world let not this be the Schollers Booke. Were I to speake now to Tradesmen I would wish them they would not make it their Shop-booke neither, but I come to the fourthExod. 20.8. Deut. 5.12. Commandement. Remember the Sabboth day to keepe it holy. Sixe daies shalt thou labour and doe all thy worke. But the seaventh day is the Sabboth of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not doe any worke, thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy man Servant, nor thy Maid, nor thy Beast, nor thy Straunger that is within thy gates. For in sixe daies the Lord made the Heaven
and the Earth, the Sea and all that in them is, and rested the seaventh day: therefore the Lord blessed the Sabboth day, and hallowed it. Betweene which Commandement & the former three that went before, we may obserue three speciallVid. Zanch. de Redempt. li. 1. c. 19. p. 594. col. 2. differen∣ces. First they were Negatiue only, this Negatiue in part, in part Affirmatiue. Secondly, in the former, there he shew∣ed vs not his owne example, here he doth. Thirdly, in the former three, there was no such note of special remēbrāce, in this there is. All to intimate vnto vs that God had a spe∣cial liking to this Commandement, & therfore so careful∣lie chargeth vs with it. But I come to the Precept it selfe wherein I obserue foure points. First the explicatiō of this word Sabboth: Secondly, what it is to keepe it holy, Remē∣ber the Sabboth day to keepe it holy. Thirdly, the Parties concerning whom this Commandement is given, Whereof comes ELISA∣BETH Requies Dei, of El and Sabboth, Vid. Barthol. Sche∣raei Itinerar. num. 1075. the Ma∣ster himselfe and Mistresse, Sonne and Daughter, man Ser∣vant, and maid Servant, Beast, & Stranger. Fourthly, Gods owne example of sanctifying the same, For in sixe daies the Lord made the Heaven, and the Earth, &c. Concerning the explication of this word Sabboth, it is an Hebrew word, and signifieth Rest. And sometimes is it taken by the waie of Synecdoche for a whole weeke, as Luk. 24.1, , The first day of the weeke, and Luk. 18.12, , I fast twice in the weeke, but here in this place it signifies a Day of rest, appointed to be kept holy to the Lord, and to be spent in his service. This among the Iewes was the seaventh day being reckned from the Cre∣ation: weThat of 7 daies, one is to be conse∣crated to the Lord, that is moral & per∣petuall but that this one day was the 7, that was cere∣moniall and therefore ab∣rogated by the Church. Vid. Zanch. de Redempt. l. 1. c. 19. p. 593. col. 1. Christians make it the next vnto it in remem∣brance of our Saviours Resurrection. And this observatiō of the Lords Day hath testimony of holy Scripture, as 1. Cor. 16.2. Act. 20.7. Revel. 1.10. See more hereof in D. Fulkes Answere to the Rhemists Testament, vpon this last quotation of the Apocalyps. Cōcerning the second point of keeping it holy, it is to apply it to such vses as it was or∣dained
for at first, namely to rest from our weekly labours all that day, and to giue our selues wholy to the Service of God. And yet allow we to be done three kindes of works, Opera pietatis, The workes of Piety, Opera Charitatis, The Workes of Charity, and Opera Necessitatis, The Workes of Necessity. Of these three you may see more in Mr D. WilletsD. VVillet Synops. Pa∣pismi. The 9. generall Cont. qu. 8. p. 430. Edit. 1610. Synopsis. I am perswaded I may yet go a little far∣ther, even as he doth. Namely that whereas some are vtter∣ly against any Recreation at al on that day. I feare me they are as farre out in one extreame, as the Profaners of the Sabboth are in an other. To recreate our selues so far forth as we shall be the fitter for divine exercises that we are to perfourme at Church whether at Morning or Evening Prayer, or hearing of Sermons if there be any, is no where forbidden by the word. And I am perswaded no one thing hath caused the People to be so farre out of square from keeping the Sabboth as they should, as the vnreasonable exactions of such who will permit thē no refreshings. But I come to a worse Tenet. In regard it is here said, Sixe daies shalt thou labour, and doe all thy worke, there are that are of opiniō that we should haue no Holy daies at all, & which is worse then opinion, you shall haue them put it in prac∣tise. I would it were not in this Citie, which by reason of somuch Preaching & Preachers on the one side, & so ma∣ny kindes of Magistrates, and Governours on the other, should be an example to all other that hath much fewer of both sorts. But I come not to complaine. What Zan∣chius hath said of our Holy Daies I haue told youDavids De∣sire Scr. 2. p. 103. else∣where, namely how they are comprehended in this fourth Precept vnder the name of the Sabboth. They are his very words,Zanch. de Re∣dempt. l. 1. c. 10. p. 597. Col. 1. Quatenus Praeceptum hoc ad nos quo{que} pertinct, quia ex parte morale ac naturale est, concludimus, nobis quo∣{que} mandari, vt nostros dies festos sanctificemus. So far forth as this fourth Precept belongs to vs Christians, in regard it is partly moral and natural, we conclude, that we there∣in in are commaunded to sanctifie our Holy Daies, which
though they happē to vs at other times, then did the Iew∣ish Sabboths and their Feasts, nomine tamen Sabbathi, no∣bis his significatur, quòd in nostris Festis debeamus & nos Sab∣bathi , hoc est, quiescere ab illis operibus à quibus & Iudaei quiescere iubebantur: yet is it signified vnto vs in the name of the Sabboth here, that we in our Holy Daies ought to rest from those workes from which the Iewes were com∣manded to rest. As for that it is here said, Six daies shalt thou labour, and doe all thy works: this,Archb. Whyt∣gifts Defence of the Answ. to the Admonit. Trac. 10. c. 1. Divis. 4 p. 541. saith a worthy Pre∣late of our Church, is no Commandement, but a significati∣on, that so many daies they might labour. See more in that worthy Prelate, as also inZanch de Re∣dempt. l. 1. c. 19 p. 603. Col. 1. Zanchius. As touching the Parties concerning whom this Com∣mandement is given, it is in effect that which Ioshua onceIosh. 24.15. said, I, and my house, will serue the Lord. Adigere quis{que} Paterfamiliâs potest, saith Zanchius, & debet suos domesti∣cos ad externum cultum. The Master of a Familie (and con∣sequently the Magistrate too, for he also is vnderstood, saithZanch. Ib p. 601. Col. 2. Zanchius) may and must compel those of his hous∣hold to the outward performance hereof. Besides that he taketh care even for1. Cor. 9.9. Oxen here, and teacheth vs to be those righteous men thatProv. 12.10. regard the life of their beast. But his own example is that which ought to mooue vs nothing more. We to prophane that which God himselfe hath sāctified? we to dare to work on that day, on which, for gathering a few sticks an Israelite wasNum. 15.36. stoned to death by Gods own determinatiō? nay to worke on that day on which the Lord himselfe would not worke? no nor raine so much asExod. 16.27. & V. 29. Manna on it? What? is not God the same God stil? is he not as Iust as ever? is his arme so shortned, that it cannot even now adaies strike home? But I had ra∣ther vse those golden interrogations of Leo the Empe∣rour, who whenCod l. 3. tit. 12. l. 3. Constantine had with over great facility licensed Sundaies labours in Country Villages, reversed that, and made another in these words:Leo Constit. 54. Vid. Mr Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. § 71. p. 202. We ordaine accor∣cording to the true meaning of the Holy Ghost, and of the A∣postles
thereby directed, that on the sacred day wherein our own integritie was restored, all doe rest and surcease labour, that neither Husbandman, nor other on that day put their hands to forbidden workes. For if the Iewes did so much reve∣rence their Sabboth which was but a shadow of ours, are not we which in habit the light and truth of grace bound to honour that day which the Lord himselfe hath honoured, and hath therein delivered vs both from dishonour, & from death? Are we not bound to keepe it singular and inviolable, well conten∣ting our selues with so liberall a grant of the rest, and not in∣croaching vpon that one, which God hath chosen to his honor? Were it not retchlesse neglect of Religon to make that very day common, and to thinke we may doe with it as with the rest? But thus much of the fourth Commandement, and conse∣quently of the first Table: come we now vnto the second Table, and therein to the first Commandement which is in number the fift; Exod. 20.12. Deut. 5.16.Honour thy Father, & thy Mother, that thy daies may be prolonged vpon the land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee. In which Commandement we haue first of all the Pre∣cept it selfe, then the Reason of it. The Precept is concer∣ning Parents, and the Honour to be done vnto them; and therefore first who these Parents are, next what this Ho∣nour is here specified. By Father & Mother are meant first of all our Naturall Parents, concerning whome in ho∣ly Scripture there are diverse and sundry passages. As Exod 21.15, He that smiteth his Father, or his Mother shal die the death. And Exod. 21.17, He that curseth his Father or his Mother shall dy the death. So Prov. 20.20, He that curseth his Father or his Mother his light shall be put out in obscure darknes. And Prov. 30.17, The eie that mocketh his Father, and despiseth the instruction of his Mother, let the Ravens of the valley picke it out, and the young Eagles eat it:
or as it is in our New Translation, The Ravens of the val∣ley shall picke it out, and the young Eagles shall eate it. Now cōcerning the word Cursing in both the places that went before we are to note that it is in the Hebrew Kallel which though it be rendred Cursing, yet properly signifieth Vili∣fying, and Contemning, and so may it be taken in those pla∣ces, asLavater in Prov. 20.20. p. 212 Vid. Barth. Scheraei Itinerar. num. 964. Lavater obserues. A point I note the rather, for that some perhaps will not sticke to vilifie and contemne their Parents, who would be loath to curse thē outright, but there is no difference in this case, either in vilifying, or cursing them. The Text in the Originall aimes at both. But the greatest impiety of all is to lay violent hands on them; and to bereaue them of their liues, with which kind of Parricides how the Romanes dealt by sowing them in a Sacke with an Ape, a Dogge, a Cocke, and a Viper, & so threw them into the Sea,Iustin. Instit. l. 4. Iustinian, andTul. pro Rosc. Amerin. Tully, and others will tell you. Besides our Naturall Parents our Superiours are vnderstood to, whether it be the Magistrat, or the Mi∣nister. The one, for he rules and protects vs, and indeed is a nurcing Father, Esay 49, 23, the other, for he instructeth vs, and begets vs through the Gospell, 1. Cor. 4.15. But I come to the Honour here. The Honour here specified in this place compriseth in it threeCalvin. Instit. l 2. c. 8 § 36. points, Reverence, Obedience, and Gratitude: or as it is observed by theEcclus. 3.9. Sonne of Syrach in Deed, and in Word, and in all Patience. But of these points I shall haue occasion to speak else, only now let me say vnto you that this Precept of Honouring our Parents must alwaies be with that Proviso of the ApostleEphes. 6.1. St Paules, , In the Lord. Otherwise we may say as did our Saviour in a certaine case, who is my Mother? and who are my Brethren? Mat, 12.48. Honora Patrem tuumHieron. ad Furiam. de Vi∣dui servand. saith St Ierome, sed si te à vero Patre non separat. Tam diu scito sanguinis copulā, quàm diu ille suum noverit creatorem. And they are memo∣rable words he hath in an otherHieron. ad Heliod. de vita Eremitic. place; Licet parvulus ex collo pendeat nepos, licet sparso crine & scissis vestibus, vbe∣ra
quibus te nutrierat mater ostendat, licet in limine pater ia∣ceat, per calcatum perge patrem, ficcis oculis ad vexillū cru∣cis evola. Solum pietatis genus est in hac re esse crudelem. So that this excepted of obeying God rather thē our Parents if they both command cōtrary things, it is a speciall good notePlutarch. de Fraterno Amo∣re. Plutarch giues vs; Matri & Patri non ita se dare, vt semper ea dicas at{que} aga quibus laetentur, etiam si molestiā praeterea nullam afferas; impium iniustum{que} habetur; not so to behaue our selues to our Parents, as that we alwaies speak and do those things that should reioice them to see, though otherwise we should not anger them, yet evē this were bad enough & a spice of impiety. But I come to the Reason of the Precept: That thy daies may be prolonged vpō the Land, which the Lord thy God giveth thee. It was the ApostleEphes. 6.2. St Paules observation herevpon that this Commandement of Honouring our Parents was the first Commandement with promise. True it is that in the second Commandement Mercy was promised vnto thou∣sands, but that was in generall to those that loved him & kept his Commandements: the firstZanch. in Eph. c. 6. p. 487. col. 2 particular Comman∣dement that had a particular promise annexed therevnto, that is this, cōcerning Parents. What? And was the Land of Canaan then meant only here in this place? Virg. Aen. l. 1Hic pietatis honos? sic nos in sceptra reponis? No doubtlesse not that only, and therefore the Apostle St Paule heEphes. 6.3 relateth the words thus: That it may be wel with thee, and that thou mayst liue long on earth. I, but this will some say is not alwaies fulfilled neither. Be it, it is not al∣waies, yet is it for the most part: & when ever it is not ful∣filled according to the letter, it is never but fulfilled by way of commutation. For if so be insteed of this transitory life, God giue them an eternall life in the heavens, it is as if insteed of a penny thou hast promised a pooreman, thou shouldst open thy purse, & giue him a whole pound. Now as this Promise is here made to such as honour their Pa∣rents, so to such as honour them not, there is intimated a
Curse. You heard what was said even now of dying the death, and of his light to be put out in obscure darknes, and of the Ravens of the valley and yong Eagles how they shall pick out and eate vp his eies. But I come to theExod. 20.13 Deut. 5.17. sixt Com∣mandeemnt: Thou shalt not kill. We are now come to that Commandement that shews Gods entire loue towards Man, nothing more. Man as you haue heard was his Image, GodGen. 1.27. saith Moses, created the man in his image; in the image of God created he him: hee created them male & female. Now as if so be a man should deface his Prince his image, he were worthy of severe pu∣nishment, for that it touched in some sort the Prince him∣selfe, and therefore our Saviour Christ of the penny that had Caesars Image and Superscription, Giue,Mat 22.21. saith he, to Caesar the things which are Caesars: so of how much punish∣ment should he be worthy that defaceth Gods image; for so is every man, high and low, rich and poore, one with an other. They were our Saviours owne words to him that had his sword drawne (a body would haue thought in as good a cause as the world could haue afforded) Put vp thy sword into his place: for all that take the sword shall perish with the sword, Mat. 26.52. a signe he came not to breake but to fulfil that Law which said, Bloud defileth the land: & the land cannot be cleansed of the bloud that is shed ther∣in, but by the bloud of him that shed it, Numb. 35.33. I, Cain himselfe as wicked as he wasGen. 4.15. had yet a marke set vpon him that none should kill him, and if so be any should doe it wittingly & willingly, Doubtlesse, saith God, whosoever slayeth Cain, he shall be punished seavenfold. Howbeit this Commaundement aimes not at all at the Magistrates Sword, nor at lawful Wars that are made in defence of our Country. You may remember what you hard out of the 37. Article ofLect. 8. p. 204. late. The laws of the Realme
may punish Christian mē with death, for hainous & grievous offences. And againe, It is lawfull for Christian men, at the commandement of the Magistrate, to weare weapons, and serue in the warres. So that it aimes not at the Magistrate, or at any kinde of lawfull warfare, at private quarrels in∣deed it doth, as also at all those circumstances that are de∣pendant therevpon, as Anger, Hatred, Envy, &c: and es∣pecially at those Chalenges hand to hand in the field. Virg. Aen. l. 6Ne pueri, ne tanta animis assuescite bella: Neu patriae validas in viscera vertite vires. You know what followeth: Tu{que} prior, tu parce, genus qui ducis Olympo, Proijce tela manu, Servus meus. Ioh. 18 11. Peter put vp thy sword into the sheath. Oh but thou must stand vpō thy manhood? A Gods name, when thy Prince, or Country cals for it: otherwise remember thou art to stand on thy Christiā duty too. How many lawes did Mo∣ses make for the Nation of the Iewes, and yet not one of them all for challenging to the field, who yet stood on their reputation no men more! Nay he that made it a Law that if the head of an axe fly off and slay his neighbour neere vnto him, with whom he had no quarrell, if the pursuer should take his Person, before he came to the City of refuge, it was lawfull to kill him, Deut. 19.6, what would he haue thought of these Gallants, who thrust themselues into this streight, either to slay, or to be slaine. It is memorable that Busbequius writeth of the Turkish Bassaes, how they tooke vp a Turkish Captaine that had made such a chal∣lenge to one of his fellowes for wronging him. VVhat?Tun' Commi∣litoni tuo singu∣lare certamen denūciare ausus es? Deerant quippe Christia∣ni, in quos pug∣nares. Vivit v¦ter{que} vestrúm pane nostri Im∣peratoris: nihil omnius inter¦vos de vita de∣cernere paraba∣tis. Quo iure? quonam exem∣plo? An ignora¦batis vtercun{que} vestrū cecidisset Imperatoris dā∣no casurum? Anger. Busbe∣quius. Legat. Turc. Epist. 3. p 83. b Edit. Paris. 1595. saith he, & didst thou dare to denounce the combat against thy fellow souldier? Are there no Christians now to fight with all? you both of you liue by the bread of our Emperour: and yet notwithstanding both forsooth must needs oe hazzard each others life. I, but by what right? I, but by what example? Didst thou not knowe that whether soever of you had beene slaine in that quarrell, our Soveraigne had had the losse? he had lost a
man? Which as soone as they had said, saith my Author, they cōmanded him to prison, whence after many months obtaining with much adoe his libertie againe, he never could recover his reputation after. That which followeth is too true: Apud nos, saith he, multi hoste publico nunquam conspecto, quod in ciuem aut contubernalem strinxerunt fer∣rum, clari & memorabiles habentur. A many with vs Chri∣stians, are counted gallant & braue men for drawing their Swords not against a publike enemie, whom they never so much as saw, but only against their own Countryman, and perhaps their Companion too. And this forsooth is Valour. Howbeit true Valour is that which is ioyned with Virtue, and there is no Virtue at all, but what is grounded on Gods Booke. The onely Duell approved there, is be∣tweene the Old man, and the New, the Flesh and the Spirit. Hîc certemus,Pet. Martyr. Loc. Com. Class. 4. Loc. 18. saith an excellent writer, let vs here fight our bellies full. Nor is it a Duel for an howre, a month, or a yeare, but for all our whole life time. We haue God, & An∣gels, and Men for the Spectators: the Word of God for the Sword; Faith the Shield the Divel our Adversarie. Strēgth we haue from Christ, and shall haue at the length assured VictoryRom. 16.20. The God of peace shall tread Sathan vnder your feet shortly. But I will end this point of Duels with that excellent passage of S. Bernard:Si in volunta∣te alterum occi∣dendi, te potius occidi cōtigerit, moreris homi ci∣da. Quòd si prae∣vales, & volun∣tate superandi vel vindicandi fortè occidis ho∣minem, vivis Homicida. Non autem expedit siue mortuo, siuo vivo, siue victo∣ri. fiue victo, esse Homicidam. In∣felix victoria, quâ superans hominem, suc∣cumbis vitio. Bernard. ad Milites Templi Ser c. 1. fol. 100 Col. 1. If in fighting thou haue a mind to kill another man, and then art slaine thy selfe, thou di∣est a Murtherer: If thou prevaile and kill the other, thē thou livest a Murtherer. But whether thou liue or die, conquer, or be conquered, it is not good to be a Murtherer. Here, Be∣loued, might I take occasion to speake of that admirable issuing forth of the blood after it is setled in the Body, if he that slewe it appeare in pesence within some certaine houres, some say seaven. But I referre you to HieronymusHieron. Mag. Miscel. l. 3 c. 5. Magius, who among some score of witnesses to this pur∣pose hathLucret. l. 4. Lucretius,Hom Iliad 17 Homer,Ficin de Im∣mort. l 16. c. 5. Ficinus,Lang. Ep. 40. Langius,Lemnius de occultis nat. mi∣rac. l. 2 c. 7. Lē∣nius, and others: as also to Coelius Rhodiginus, whoCoel. Rhodig. Lct. Antiq l. 3. c. 12. p. 106. as∣saies to giue the reason of it. I come to theExod. 20.14 Det 5.18. seaventh Commandement,
Thou shalt not commit adultery. As Murther in the former Commādement may be cō∣mitted by vnadvised Anger only, and therefore our Savi∣our Christ, I,Mat 5, 22. saith he, say vnto you, whosoever is angry with his Brother vnadvisedly, shall be culpable of iudgement; much more by Hatred only, and therefore the Apostle S. Iohn,1. Ioh. 3.15. whosoever hateth his Brother is a manslayer (mea∣ning any one Christian whatsoever, for we are all of vs Brethren) so may Adultery in this Commandement, by a lusting looke onely, and therefore our Saviour againe, I,Mat. 5.28. saith he, say vnto you, that whosoever looketh on a woman, to lust after her, hath committed adultery with her already in his heart. I, and such Adultery as may cast him into hel fire, and therefore it followeth immediatly,V. 29. Wherefore if thy right eye cause thee to offend, plucke it out, and cast it from thee: for better it is for thee that one of thy members perish, then that thy whole body should be cast into hell. Whatsoe∣ver it is,Quicquid est quod significat oculus, sine du∣bio tale est, quod vehementer di∣ligitur. Quod autem additum est Dexter, for∣tasse ad augen∣dam vim dilec∣tionis valet. Aug. Tom. 4. de Ser. Domini in Monte, l. 1. p. 794. saith S. Austen, that signifieth an Eye here, with∣out all doubt it is such a thing as is dearely beloued of vs. And it may be the Right Eye is specified too in this place, to shewe that it is such a thing as is more then dearely be∣loved by vs.Nicelaus de Lyra in hunc lo∣cum p. 111. Lyra comes a little more neere the point. Whereas it is said here in this place Plucke it out, it is not so to be vnderstood, that man to avoid concupiscence should depriue himselfe of any member that God hath gi∣ven him: for that is not the way to heale Concupiscence whose vigour is within. Now because, saith he, a more ef∣fectuall remedy may be had another way, namely by the Wil repressing the vnlawful acts of the members, therfore is the plucking out here metaphorically vnderstood. For as the Eye being once pluckt out, it can by no meanes ac∣tually see; so cōsequently he plucks out his eye exceeding wel, who willingly represseth it from every vnlawfull act of seeing. But to come vnto my purpose. This being their danger who in respect of actuall adul∣tery
are a great way of, in what a miserable plight are they whose concupiscence breakes forth into act, act into cu∣stome, custome into carelesnes, who assemble themselues by companies in theErat fama (de Domitiano) quasi Concubi∣nas ipse divelle∣ret, nataret{que} inter vulgatis∣simas meretri∣ces. Suet. in Domitian. c. 22. harlots houses, asErat fama (de Domitiano) quasi Concubi∣nas ipse divelle∣ret, nataret{que} inter vulgatis∣simas meretri∣ces. Suet. in Domitian. c. 22. speaks the Prophet Ieremy, and rise vp in the morning like fed horses: and neigh after their neighbours wiues. In a word, who make a cove∣nant with herProv. 6.27. whose feet go downe to death, and her steppes take hold of hell. O quanta iniquitasAug Tom. 9. de honest. muli∣er. c. 3. p. 1052. & Tom. 10. de Temp. Ser. 250. p. 818. saith St Austen, ô quā∣ta perversitas,Ier. 5.7. vt animam quam Christus suo sacro redemit sanguine, luxuriosus quis{que} propter vnius momenti delectati∣onem libidinis, Diabolo inimico suo vendat ac traedat. O how great iniustice is it, what overthwartnesse in the highest degree to make sale, and deliver vp that Soule to thy ad∣versary the Divell, and all for a spurt of pleasure, which cost our Saviour Christ the dearest bloud he had. But I am not now to preach to such, I am only to giue you war∣ning, that in any wise your tender yeeres beware of such sales. Quid mihi & voluptatiHieron. ad Eustech. de cu∣stod. virginita∣tis. saith S. Ierome, quae brevi pe∣rit: what haue I to do with pleasure which is gone in a mo¦ment. Memorable is that which the same S. Ierome hath concerning Hilarion. The DivellCernebat se vinci à puero, & prius ab eo calcatum suiss quàm per aetatē calcore potuisses Hieron de vi∣ta S. Hilarion. saith he, that boasted once how he would ascendEsay, 14.14. aboue the height of the clowds, and he would be like the most High, perceived himselfe to bee overcome of a childe; and to be spurned and trampled by him, even before he was of age to trample on him. As for that vn∣cleanenes which the Apostle cals,Iud. v. 7. straunge Flesh, ,Quam Dae∣mones videntes oculos claudunt Aug, Tom. 10. ad Fratres in Eremo Ser. 47. p 986. and at the sight whereof the Divels themselues (as one speaketh) close vp their eies, I trust there is no such i∣niquity either in Iacob, or in Israel. I come to theExod. 20.15 Deut. 5 19. eight Commandement, Thou shalt not steale. Of stealth there are manyCalv. Instit. l. 2. c. 8. §. 45. kindes. There is one by way of violence when by force and threats we take licentiously other mens goods. An other is by way of deceipt whereas
we convey them away guilefully. A third is when we ob∣taine them by colour of law, having indeed no right vnto them. A fourth by way of flattery, when we diue into mē, to make our selues Maisters of what they haue. In a word all crafty meanes whatsoever, whereby we possesse our selues of what is an other mans, is stealth in this Commā∣dement. To steale apples, or peares, or plumbs, &c: is per∣haps but a sport to many, who laugh full merily at it whē they haue done. But see how seriously S. Austen confest the like prancke of his, both to God & the world. O LordFurtum cer∣tè punit lex tua Domine, & lex scripta in cordi∣bus hominum quam ne ipsa quidem delet i∣niquitas. Et ego furtum facere volui & seci, nulla compulsus egestate nec pe∣nuria, sed fasti∣dio iustitiae, & sagina iniquita∣tis. Abor erat Pirus in vicinia vineae nostrae po∣mis onusta, nec forma nec sapo∣re illecebrosis. Ad hanc excu∣tiendam at{que} as∣portandam, ne∣quissimi adoles∣centuli perrexi∣mus nocte intē∣pesta, & abstu∣limus inde one∣ra ingentia. Ec∣ce cor meum, Deus meus, ecce cor meum, quód miseratus es in imo abyssi. Aug. Tom. 1. Confess. l. 2. c 4 p. 56. saith he, thy law doth punish theft, and that law which is written in the hearts of men, which iniquity it selfe can in no wise disanull. I also was willing ynough, and indeed did steale, compelled by no occasion of want, nor of penury that I had, but a loathing I had of goodnes, and I was puft vp with iniquity. There was a Peare tree hard by our vineyard full of goodly peares to see to, and of an indifferent good tast. A many cracks of vs went thither on a night to gather and cary away, and we had every of vs good store indeed. Behold my heart, my God, behold my heart, whereof thou hast had some pity even in the bottome of Hell. I come to theExod. 20.16 Deut. 5.20. ninth Commaunde∣ment. Thou shalt not beare false witnesse against thy neighbour. It is the first Cōmaundement wherein our Neighbour is mentioned, but not not the first wherein he hath beene intimated. The truth is, al this second Table is concerning our Neighbour. The, fift that we should honour him; the sixt, that we should not kil him; the sevēth, that we should not voluptuously abuse ether him, or his; the eight, that we should not steale from him; and this ninth, that we should not witnes against him falsly or perfidiously. If you would knowe who is our neighbour,Luk. 10.29. it was a question was askt our Saviour, & he immediatly put to the asker such a pre∣ty
kind of case, as that the asker of the question didV. 37. an∣swere it himselfe. Hence it is that S. Austin saith, not as it is in the proverb,Terent And. Act. 4 Sc. 1. Proximus sum egomet mihi, butAug. Tom. 8. in Ps. 118. Conc. 8. p 922. Omnis homo omni homini proximus, Al men are neighbours to one an other: & againe in an otherAug. de Tem. Ser. 221. p. 771 place, Proximus omnis ho∣mo; Proximus tuus ille est qui tecum natus est ex Adam e E∣va. Every man is thy neighbour. He is thy neighbour that is borne as thou art, of Adam and Eue. Though there is I confesse a Specially too;Gal. 6.10. Specially they of the howshold of faith. That which here then is commanded vs, is first that we defame and slander no man; secondly, that we giue no eare to such as are fraught with that vice: thirdly, that we giue no cause of such ill speeches to go of vs. Concerning the first, though Witnessing be here named in special, and witnessing is properly then, when as wee are cald to giue testimony; yet that is but one point only of all the braun∣ches hereSemper eo re∣currendum est, ex singulis viti∣orum generibus speciem vnam paradigmatis loco proponi ad quam ceterae referantur: eam autem potissim deligi, in qua vi∣tii turpitudo maximè emine∣at. Calv. Inst. l 2. c. 8. § 47. meant, as you hard before of Murther, Adulte∣rie, and of Stealth. And as touching defaming and slande∣ring our Neighbour, mirū est,Calv. Ib. saith Calvin, quàm supinâ securitate passim in hac re peccetur, vt rarissimi reperiantur qui non hoc morbo notabiliter laborent: adeò venenatâ quadā dulcedine oblectamur in alienis malis tum inquirendis, tum detegendis. It is strange to see how securely men in everie place offēd herein, insomuch that there are very few to be found at all that are not notoriously sicke of this disease, so much are we all delighted with a kind of poysoned sweetnesse in searching out and disclosing the evills of o∣ther men. But as the tale-bearer, so the tale-hearer is in fault top: the one is the Theefe, the other the Receaver. V∣no in momento,Bernard. in Cant. Ser. 24. So S. Ierom, Nemo invito auditori liben∣ter refert. Dis∣cat detractor, dum te videt nō libenter audire non facile de∣trahere. Hierō Tom. 2. ad Ne∣potian, de vita Cleriorum. And againe, Detractor cum tristem faciem viderit audientis, imò ne audientis quidem, sed obturantis aures suas, ne audiat iudicium sangui∣nis, ilico conticescit, pallet vultus, haerent labia, saliua siccatur. Idem. ad Rustic Monach. de viven∣di forma. saith S. Bernard, multitudinis audientium dum aures inficit, animas interficit. At one and the selfe same time while he is muttering in the eare, he is murthe∣ring the soule. S. Austen would none of that; and therfore about hisPossid. de vita August. c. 22. Table (for they are commonly at great mens
Tables that haue such a flux of tongue) had these two ver¦ses, Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere vitam: Hanc mensam indignam noverit esse sibi. In english thus: would God in England: Who so the partie absent hence, By Tales seekes to disgrace: Let him arise from this my Board, Such Guests haue here no place. But to come againe to prose. We are not altogether scotfree our selues, if so be we giue iust occasion of such reports to be made of vs. And therefore was itHieron. Tom. 2. ad Celant. S. Ieroms counsaile, Ne ex nobis scintilla procedat per quam adversus nos sinistrae famae flamma confletur. That the sparkle should not fly from our selues, that should cause such a flame of an evill, report against vs. In vaine, saith he, are we angry with those our Slanderers, if we minister fuel to their fire. But I come to the tenth and last Commandement that which containes a Fire indeed, I meane for it doth forbid that Fire of Concupiscence that is in all, and every of vs. Exod. 20.17 Deut. 5.21.Thou shalt not covet thy neighbours house, nei∣ther shalt thou covet thy neighbours wife, nor his man servant, nor his maid, nor his oxe, nor his asse, neither any thing that is thy neighbours. The former Precepts they condemned the setled thought to doe mischiefe: this Precept condemneth even the first inclination and motion to Sinne, though a man consent not. I,Rom. 7.7. saith the Apostle, knewe not sinne, but by the Law: for I had not knowne lust, except the Law had said, thou shalt not lust. So that God commandeth here in this place a mar¦vellous fervency of Loue to our Neighbours, which in no wise he would haue tainted with the least concupiscence
that is. The slightest provocations that are, are vtterly a∣gainst this Commandement. We shal not need to say with1. Sam. 14.43 Ionathan, I tasted a little hony, and lo I must die: this is much lesse. If so be we doe but wish to tast of hony, or whatsoever else belongeth to our Neighbour, though we tast it not indeed, if we but wish to haue it, we are dead by the Law, there is a handwriting against vs. You knoweMartial. Epig l. 4 Epig. 18. whose verses they were, Quid non saeva sibi voluit fortuna licere? Aut vbi mors non est, si iugulat is aquae? But what is it the Law of God rather doth not take fast hold of, and where is not Death included in it, when but a Thought shal stifle vs? So that we shall not say with David neither, The waters are come in, even vnto my soule.Ps. 69.1. I sticke in the deepe mire where no ground is: I am come into deepe waters so that the floods runne over me, no, the Law you see takes hold of our thoughts, and Quomodo aures nostrae ad voces nostras,Aug. Tom. 8. in Ps. 148. p. 1188. & Tom. 10 Hom. 16. p. 308. saith S. Austen, sic aures Dei ad cogita∣ones nostras. As our owne Eares are to our words, so are Gods Eares to our thoughts. Here a question ariseth betwixt vs and our Adversaries whether it be possible to keep these Commandements or no. Our Adversaries say it is, but without Scriptures, with∣out Fathers. First concerning Scriptures, Gal. 3.21. If there had beene a Law given which could haue given life, surely righteousnesse should haue beene by the Law. Rom. 8.3, It was impossible to the Law (namely to iustifie and saue vs) in asmuch as it was weake because of the flesh. And 1. Cor. 13.9, We knowe in part, and we prophecie in part. Concerning the Fathers, first S. AustenAug. Tom. 8. in Ps. 40 p. 249 saith, Quis illam implet? Who it it that doth fulfill it? SoHieron. Tom. 2 ad Ctesiphons. advers. Pelag. p. 254. S. Ierom, Facilia dicis Dei esse man∣data, & tamen nullum proferre potes qui vniversa compleve∣rit. You say; saith S. Ierom to Ctesiphon, that Gods Com∣mandements are easie, and yet can you instance in no one that hath fulfilled all of them. Againe,Hieron. Tom. 2. advers. Pe∣lag. l. 3. p. 303. Multis testimonijs supra didicisti Legem nullum potuisse complere. Thou hast
had already many testimonies to teach thee, that no man could ever fulfill the Law. And againe in aHier. Tom. 2. Advers. Iov in. l. 1. p 30. third place, Quam implere nullus potuit, which no man could fulfill. So S. Bernard,Bernard. in Cantic. Scr. 50. fol. 159. col. 3. Non latuit Praeceptorem praecepti pondus hemi∣num excedere vires. The giver of the Commandement was not ignorant how the weight of the Commandement far exceeded the strength of men. True it is, we may in one sense fulfill them too, & thereforeAug. Retract l. 1. c 19. p. 20. S. Austen, Omnia mā∣data facta deputantur, quando quicquid non fit ignoscitur. God accounteth all these Commandements performed by vs, when a he forgiues vs what we performe not. And againe in another place,Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 3. p. 259. Cancellos tibi fecit Lex vt non in∣ventendo quà exires, ad gratiam convolares. The Law hath made rayles and barres about thee, that no waies finding how to get out, thou shouldst fly to Gods mercy. Much more might be said herein; but I referre you to our wor∣thyD. Abbots De∣fence of the Re∣formed Catho∣like Part 2. p. 550. vs{que} ad p. 573. Professour, who hath said so much already against a Doctour of our Adversaries, as also to Mr Fox in his good Fryday Sermon at Paules Crosse, both in English and in Latine. And thus, Beloued, as briefly as possibly I could, haue I now runne over at length these ten Commandements.Ioan. Foxius de Christe cru∣cis. Par. 2. p 55 It is true, much more might haue beene spoken of every one of them, so might there haue beene of our Churches Tenets, so of the Articles of our Faith; but my proiect is, to referre you to the heads onely, partly for I am to com∣prise much matter in few houres, partly for I haue not ma∣ny houres to speake in this kind more vnto you. There are of the Interpreters that resemble these Com∣mādements vnto your ten Predicaments: so Peter Mar∣tyr in divers places; The ten CommandementsP. Martyr. Loc. Com. Class. 2. Loc. 10. § 14 & Class. 2. Loc. 14. § 3. saith he, are in respect of Vertue and Vice, as are the ten Predicaments in respect of all things that haue a being. For as there is nothing, saith he, but may reduced to some one Predicament or other, so is there no Vertue, no Vice at al, but may be reduced to some Commandement. If question be made of Drunkennes (for
of Drunkennes some make question) Drunkennes asAquin. 2 2 ae qu. 150. Art. 1 in corp. A∣quinas tels vs is contained vnder Gula, Gluttony, as the Species vnder Genus, and therefore to be referred to that Commandement that Gluttony is. Now for Gluttony heeAquin. Ib. qu. 148. Art. 2. ad 1m. tels vs, that by a kinde of reduction it is opposed to that Commandement, which is of Sanctifying of the Sabboth in regard it doth avert vs from the end we are to tend vn∣to. Now as it is reducible to that Commandement, so may it be besides vnto the Rest, so farre forth as it is the cause of such severall vices as are condemned in such Comman∣dements. As it makes vs then forget God, so may it be re∣duced to the first Cōmandement: as it makes vs to sweare and state, so vnto the third: as to forget our Superiours, so vnto the fift: as to raile and revile our neighbours, so vnto the sixt and ninth: as to behaue our selues lasciviously so to the seaventh and tenth. But thus much of the ten Com∣mandements in generall, and of every of them in particu∣lar. Come we now to our Saviours Epitome of them, wher∣of but in a word. Iesus said vnto him: Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soule, and with all thy mind. This is the first and the great Commandement. And the second is like vnto this. Thou shalt loue thy neigh∣bour as thy selfe. On these two Commandements hangeth the whole Law and the Prophets. That Tenne are reduced to two, it is because the foure Commandements that are in the first Table are reduced to One, and the Six Commandements in the second Ta∣ble reduced to an Other. First concerning the Foure. That Foure may be reduced to One, it must be done by such a meanes, as all the Foure are capable of, & also that One. By that which hath beene said it doth appeare that the soule (as it were) of the foure Commandements, that are in the first Table, is the Loue of God, I meane that loue wherewith we ought to loue him. So that if we loue him is we ought, that is with all our heart, with all our soule, and with all our minde, then shal we haue no other Gods but
him, and this is an inward worship, & this is the first Com∣mandement. If we loue him as we ought, that is, with all our heart, with all our soule, and with al our minde, then as we worship him inwardly in our heart, so shall we doe it outwardly in our actions, and not impart it vnto Images, and this is the second Commandement. If we loue him as we ought, that is, with all our heart, with all our soule, and withall our minde, then will we reverently vse these two worships, the inward, and the outward, and this is the third Commandement. Lastly, if we loue God as we ought, that is, with all our heart, with all our soule, & with all our mind, then shall we haue speciall desire to keep his Sabboths, and this is the fourth Commandement. So that the Loue of God being all in all, you see what cause our Saviour had to reduce all Foure to One. The selfe same cause he had to reduce the oher Six in∣to an Other, for as the Loue of God in the first Table was al in all, so in the second, the loue of our Neighbour. Where∣vpon the Apostle S. Paule, Owe nothingRom. 13.8. saith he, to any mā but to Loue one an other: for he that loveth an other hath fulfilled the law. For this, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not kil, Thou shalt not steale, Thou shalt not beare false witnes, Thou shalt not covet: and if there be any other commandement, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, evē in this, Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe. Nor wan∣ted our Saviour the very words of Scripture it selfe to countenance this Division. For where he said, Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soule, & with all thy minde, it is with a little alteration set cleerely downe, Deut. 6.5. & the other, Thou shalt loue thy Neigh∣bour as thy selfe, that is set downe without any alteration, even in as many sillables, Levit. 19.18. The only observation I will giue you now, and so an end, is concerning the Loue of our Neighbours thus graced by our Saviour. You see in what account it is with God, & therefore in what it is to be with Men. Did he giue but
ten Commandements in all? No lesse then sixe of thē con∣cerne our Neighbour. Did he afterwards contract them into two? The one of them was our Neighbours. Was the first concerning God? the second concern'd our Neigh∣bour Was the first Commandement great? Nihil secundum long inquat à primo,Tertul. de Pu∣dicitia p. 630. saith Tertullian, Nihil tam proximū primo quàm secuudum. The second was like vnto it. Did the Law and the Prophets depend vpon the one? so they doe on the other too. Quomodo noluit, saithAug. Tom. 9. in epist. Ioan. Tract. 10. p 444 S. Austen, te dividere per multas paginas? In his duobus praeceptis Lex pendet & Prophetae. See how our Saviour was loath thou shouldst weay thy flesh with many Bookes. He giues thee the summe of all: On these two Commandements hang the whole Law and the Prophets. Nay, shall I goe a little farther? Said our Saviour that this second Commande∣ment was like vnto the former? Let vs be tryed by the A∣postle S. Paul, in whose eies they were so like, that though he takes not one for another, yet he takes one of them for both. Loue,Rom. 13.10. saith he, doth not evill to his neighbour, there∣fore is loue the fulfilling of the Law. And againe in another place, least it might be thought he had mistaken himselfe, All the Law,Gal. 5.14. saith he, is fulfilled in one word which is this, Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe. And yet againe in a third place,Gal. 6.2. Beare yee one anothers burden, and so fulfill the law of Christ. I, our Saviour Christ himselfe,Mat. 7.12. Vid. Aug. Tom. 3. de Trin. l. 8. c. 7. whatsoe∣ver yee would that men should doe to you, even so doe yee to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets. And thus much of the first point the Church is to practise, & consequent∣ly our selues; not that we are able to fulfill them as we ought in very deed, but to doe our best indeavours. And hence it is that in our Church Service, as ReverendM Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. § 39 p. 77. Hoo∣ker obserueth, when the Minister lifteth vp his voice like a Trumpet to proclaime these Lawes vnto the People, they adioyne though not as Israel did, by way of genera∣litie a cheerefull promise,Exod. 19.8.24 3. Deut 5.27.26.17. Iosh. 24.16: All that the Lord hath commā- we will doe, yet that which God doth no lesse approoue,
that which savoureth more of meeknesse, that which te∣stifieth rather a feeling knowledge of our common imbe∣cillitie, vnto the severall branches there of, severall, lowly, and humble requests for grace at the mercifull hands of God to performe the thing which is commanded. And thus much of the first point, which the Church as ILect. 1. p. 21. obser∣ved, is to practise. The second is PRAYER, and of Prayer God willing at my next returne. In the meane time God so blesse vs, & the seed that hath beene sowne, &c.
PRAIER.Lecture 10. Iunij, 17. 1613. BEing at this time to speake vnto you of the second of those foure Points which the Church (I told you) was to practise, and conse∣quently your selues, namely PRAI∣ER; me thinks in this my long voi∣age through so many several Seas, as hitherto I haue sail'd, I am now come to such a place, as S. Luke cals in theAct. 27.8. Acts, , The faire havens. Prayer, saith ReverendM. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. §. 23. p 53. Hooker, are thoseHos. 14.3. calues of mens lips, those most gracious and sweetRev. 5.8. odours, those rich presents & gifts, which beingAct. 10.4. carried vp into heaven, do best testifie our dutifull affection, and are for the purchasing of all favour at the hands of God the most vndouted meanes we can vse. And againe a little after, The knowledge is small, saith he, which we haue on earth concerning things that are done in heaven. Notwithstanding thus much we know even of Saynts in hea∣ven that they pray. And therefore Prayer being a work com∣mon to the Church as wel Triumphant as Militant, a work common vnto Men with Angels, what should we think but that so much of our liues is celestial and divine, as we spend in the excercise of Prayer. I may say concerning Prayer as speakes the Apostle cōcerning Faith: By Faith AbelHeb. 11.4 saith he, offered vnto God a greater sacrifice then Cain:V. 5. by Faith as Enoch taken away that he should not see death:V. 7. by Faith Noe being warned of God of the things which were as yet not
seene, mooued with reverence prepared the Ark, & so forth. So may I say, Beloued, of Prayer, & so indeed was it long agoe said by one that was not solùm carne mihi, as speakesAug. de verb. Dom. Ser. 26. pag. 72. St Austen, sed etiam religione germanus, my owne FathersMy deare and worthy Brother Mr. Richard Day now with God. Sonne. By praierIn his Pre∣face to the Book of Christian Prayers. saith he, Hanna was of a barren woman made1. Sam. 1.27 fruitfull: David2. Sam 12.13 Psal. 51.17. obtained forgiuenesse for his man∣slaughter & whoredome: Elias1. Kin. 18.42. caused great plenty of raine: Ezechias2. Kin. 19.15 overcame Senacherib: TobyToby. 8.5. prospered: Susan∣na wasDan. 13 42. delivered from death. By Prayer, Queene HesterEsther. 14.3. delivered her selfe, and her people: Ionas wasIonas. 2.2. delivered out of the Whales belly: the Ninivites from thatIonas. 3.8. destructi∣on, that was intended against them. By PrayerLuk. 17.13. Leapers were cleansed, theLuk. 18 38. blinde restored to sight, theMat. 8.6. palsie cured, many obtained health for theirMat 9.18. daughters,Luk 9 38. sonnes, &Mat 8.13. ser∣vants. By Prayer theAct. 3.3. lame man was restored to limmes, theMark. 7.32. deafe to heare, theMat. 9.32. dumbe to speake: remission of sinnes wasMat. 18 27. Mat. 11.28. obtained, the Holy GhostIoh 14 16. Act. 2.4. purchased both for the Apostles and all the Faithfull. And now Beloved what shall I more say? I wil only say withChrys. Tom 5. De incomprehē∣sib. Dei natura Hom. 5. p. 1195 S. Chrysostome: The force of Prai∣er hath extinguished the force of fire; it hath stopped the mouthes of Lyons, it hath appeased warres, ended battailes, driven away tempests, expelled Divels. It hath opened the doores of Heaven, broken in sunder the bands of death, rid vs of diseases, smothered our offences, it hath strengthned Cities that by Earth quakes were ready to fall, it hath averted from vs plagues that were comming downe from heaven, plots and practises of wicked men, in a word all what ever Hell and Sa∣than could devise. Of Praier then at this time, and the Text I haue chosen to this purpose, is that golden Stampe of Praier which hath the Image & Superscription of our Sa∣viour himselfe. You shall haue it in St Matthewes Gospel, the 6. chapter, the 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13. verses. The wordes are these. After this manner therefore pray yee. Our Father which art in heauen hallowed be thy name. Thy
kingdome come. Thy will be done even in earth, as it is in heaven. Giue vs this day our dayly bread. And forgiue vs our debts, as we also forgiue our debters. And lead vs not into temptation, but deliver vs frō evill: for thine is the kingdome, and the power, and the glory, for ever, Amen. Which words as here they lie, are parcell of that Sermon which our Saviour made vpon the Mount. Now among all the Sermons our Saviour made & so many severall In∣structions as he gaue, his Sermon on the Mount was the most famous of all the rest, partly in respect of the length of it, partly of the Matter contained in it. The length ther∣of taketh vp no lesse then three whole Chapters, the fift, the sixt, and the Seaventh: so that as Aristophanes thought of Archilochus Poems, orMihi tu? quis minus? cui vt Aristophani Archilochi Iambus, sic Epi∣stola longissima quae{que} optima videtur. Tul. ad Attic. l. 16. ep. 11. Longissima quae{que} Ciceronis Oratio doctiori∣bus maximè placet, quod de Orationibus Demosthenis ei∣dem Tullio vi∣sum est. Ioan. Passeratii O∣rat. & Praefat. p. 81. Tully of Atticus his Epistles, or of Demosthenes his Orations, or learned men of Tullies, that the longest were the best; right so may we say of our Saviours Sermons, and of this in particular, for that of all the Sermons he ever made, we haue nothing so many pas∣sages as we haue of this. Concerning the matter contai∣ned in it S. Austen is of opinion that if a man consider it well he shall finde therein concerning Manners, An ab∣solute and perfect way whereby a Christian life ought to be led. Nor speake I thisAug. Tom. 4. De Serm. Dom. in Monte l. 1. saith he, at all adventures, and rashly, but I gather as much from our Saviours owne words. Who concludeth so his Sermon, as if he meant it should be such a perfect rule for vs. For at the end thereof he saith, whosoever then heareth of me these words and doth the same, I will liken him to a wise mā which hath builded his house on a rocke &c. Seeing then he said not whosoever heareth my words, but who¦soever heareth these my words, I trow he sufficiently intima∣teth that those very words spoken on the mount, do so perfect∣ly instruct them who will lead their liues thereafter, that well they may bee likened to him that builded his house vpon a Rocke.
Now this sixt Chapter wherein we are, being a parcell of that Sermon, it containeth in it from the first to the 18. verse these three points, Almes, and Prayer, and Fasting, three most necessary duties of every Christian. Beginning in the fift verse to speake of Prayer, he tels vs of two sorts of Praying, that we must in any wise eschew, An hypocri∣ticall kinde, and An heathnish kinde, both as bad as bad may be. Our Saviour here deales, as did an expertB Iewels Ser∣mons at the Court. p. 104. Musiti∣an, of whom Apollonius spake vnto an Emperour. The Emperour pretending a reformation of the Empire which before his time Tiberius, Caligula, Nero, and others, had spoiled and defaced and asking Apollonius what order he were best to take: Sir, saith he, you must do as the cunning Musitian did who sent his Schollers to a rude Minstrell, but with this Item, whatsoever you see him doe, see that you avoide it. He is vnlearned & his manner of fingring naught: see therefore that in playing you for your parts do the contra∣ry. Even so our Saviour here for Praying; When thou prayestMat. 6.5. saith he, be not as the Hypocrites: for they loue to stand and pray in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streetes, be∣cause they would be seene of men. Also when yee prayV. 7. saith he, vse no vaine repetitions as the Heathen; for they thinke to be heard for their much babling. Be ye not like them therfore: for your Father knoweth whereof yee haue need before ye aske of him. Now for it was not sufficient in this case to tell thē what they should not doe, without enforming them also what to doe: hee delivereth a forme of Praier, which be∣cause himselfe taught it, is therefore called, The Lords Prayer. This Prayer he taught his Disciples, at two sun∣dry and severall times. Once in this his Sermon which he made vpon the Mount: an other time when one of his DisciplesLuk. 11.1. said vnto him, Master teach vs to pray, as Iohn also taught his Disciples. So that as Iohn's Disciples had received of their Master a forme of Praier amongst them∣selues which none but themselues did vse, so that by it as by aVid. M. Hoo∣ker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. §. 35. p. 72. marke of speciall difference they were known from
others: the Apostles it should seeme hauing taken speciall notice thereof, therevpon they request our Saviour to teach them to pray, as Iohn the Baptist had taught his. It should seeme they had forgotten what our Saviour had taught in this place; & indeed it is to true whichAug. Tom. 4. de Consens. E∣vang. l. 3. c. 13. p. 352, S. Austen hath, Fluitat humana memoria per varias cogitationes, nec in cuiusquam potestate est, quid & quando veniat in mentem. Mans memory by reason of divers and sundry thoughts doth floate vp and downe, neither is it in any mans pow∣er, to call to mind what, and when he list. Memory, saith a wittyMountaignee Essaies l. 2. c. 17 French man, the more I distrust it, the more it trou∣bleth me. It serues me best of all by chance, and I must careles∣ly sue vnto her, for if I once vrge her, she is amazed, and if she once begin to waver, the more I sound her, the more intan∣gled, and intricate she proueth: she will wait vpon me, when she list, not when I please. But to returne vnto my purpose. By reason that our Saviour taught his Disciples this Prayer, hence it is thatPraemissa le∣gitima & ordi∣naria Oratione quasi fundamē∣to. Tertul. de Orat. p. 659. Tertullian, andMoneo vos Charissimi, vt precem legiti∣mam Patri, & Deo offerendam ante discatis. Aug. Tom. 10. de Temp. Ser. 126. p. 626. S. Austen both tearme it, Orationem legitimam: the Prayer which Christs owne Law hath tied his Church to vse, in the same pre∣script forme of words; wherewith he himselfe did deliuer it. And therefore what part of the world soever we fall in∣to, if Christian Religion haue beene there receiued, the or∣dinary vse of this very prayer hath with equall continu∣ance accompanied the same as one of the principall, and most materiall duties of honour done vnto our Saviour Christ Iesus. S. AustenVerba quae Dominus noster Iesus Christus in Oratione docu∣it, forma est de∣sideriorum. Non tibi licet petere aliud, quàm ibi riptum est. Aug. Tom 10. Tract. in Orat Domin. Againe, Quamlibet alia verba dicamus nihil liud dicimus quàm quod in ista Dominica Oratione positum est, si recte & congruenter oramus, nd againe a little after, si per omnia Precationū verba discurras, quantū existimo, nihil in∣enies, quod non ista Dominica contineat & concludat Oratio. Aug. Tom. 2. Epist. 121. c. 12. calls it Formam Desideriorum, the Mold and Patterne of all such Petitions as we are at a∣ny time to make, and shewes that we are at any hand to keep within this compasse. Should I discourse at this time of the excellency of this Prayer, I should hold you too too long, especially should I declare vnto you the Digni∣tie
of it, the Brevitie, the Perfection, the Order, the Effica∣cie and Force, as also the Necessitie of it: but I will content my selfe at this time with that of S. Cyprian.Quae vera magis apud Pa∣trem precatio, quàm quae à Fi∣lio; qui est veri∣tas, de eius ore prolata est? vt a liter orare quā decuit non igno∣rantia sola sil, sed & culpa, quando ipse po∣suerit & dixe∣rit, Reiicitis mādatū Dei, vt traditionem ve¦stram statuatis. Oremus ita{que}, Fratres dilectis simi, sicut Ma¦gister Deus do∣cuit. Amica & familiaris Ora∣tio est Deum de suo rogare, ad aures eius ascē∣dere Christi ora∣tionem. Agnos cat Pater Filii sui verba, cum precē facimus. Qui habitat in∣tus in pectore, ipse sit & in vo¦ce. Et cū ipsum habeamus apud Patram Advo∣catum pro pec∣catis nostris, quando peccatores pro delictis nostris petimus, Advocati nostri verba premamus. Nā cum dicat, quia quodcun{que} petieritis à Patre in nomine meo dabit vobis: quantò efficaciùs impe tramus quod petimus in Christi nomine si petamus ipsius Oratione. Cyp. Ser. 6. de orat. Domin p. 230. What Pray∣er to be accounted with the Father more truely a Prayer, saith he, then that which is spoken by the mouth of the Son, who is truth it selfe. Insomuch, that to pray otherwise then he hath taught, is not ignorance only, but a fault, seeing he him∣selfe hath set downe and said, yee lay the Commandement of God apart, that you may obserue your own Traditions. Let vs pray therfore, Beloued Brethren; saith he, as our Master hath taught vs. It is a friendly and a familiar kinde of Praying to aske God with his own, to haue Christ his Prayer to ascend in∣to his eares. When ever we Pray let the Father acknowledge the wordes of his own Son. Christ who is in our hearts let him be in our Tongues too. And seeing we haue an Advocate with the Father for our Sinnes, when we who haue sinned goe to seeke for pardon, let vs alleage vnto God the selfe same words which our Advocate hath taught vs. For sith his pro∣mise is our plaine warrant, that what we aske in his name we shall receaue, how much rather shall we receaue; if not only his name doe coūtenance, but also his speech present our requests? And so I come to the words themselues, Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy name, &c. Divers & sundry are the Moulds into which this Prai∣er is cast by Interpretets of both ages, Old and New, as al∣so of both sides, Protestants, and Papists. It is not my pur∣pose to alleage them al, that would aske a long time, only will I bring you that which best befits the wordes as here they lie. First the Accesse, or entrance to Prayer common∣ly called the Exordium, and that in these words, Our Fa∣ther which art in Heaven: Secondly the Prayer it selfe con∣sisting, some say in Six, some, in Seauen Petitions, al comes
to one reckoning. Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdome come. Thy wil be done evē in earth as it is in heaven. Giue vs this day, our dayly bread. And forgiue vs our debts, as we forgiue our debters. And lead vs not into temptation, but deliver vs frō evill. Lastly the Conclusion, & that is in these words: For thine is the kingdōe, & the power, & the glory, for ever, Amen. Of every of these in their several or∣der, and first of the Accesse or Entrance, commonly called the Exordium. OVR FATHER WHICH ART IN HEAVEN. Inchoari oratio debet à Dei laudeAmb. Tom. 4 de Sacram. l. 6. c. 5. p. 384. saith S. Ambrose, vt roges omnipotentem Deum cui possibilia sunt omnia, qui ha∣bet voluntatem praestandi. Our Praiers are to begin with the praises of God, that so wee may seeme to aske God omnipotent with whom all things are possible, & besides who hath a will to graunt vs our Requests: In these words are both, his Will, and his Power. His will in these, Our Father, his Power in the next vnto them, which art in hea∣ven. Concerning the word Father, Tertullian saith it is a name of Power to. Appellatio istaTertull. de O∣rat. p. 657. saith he, & pietatis & potestatis est. It is a name both of Piety, that is of natural & loving affection, such as Parents beare to Children, & also of Power. Dicendo Patrem saith he, Deum quo{que} cognomi∣namus. In calling him Father, we imply he is God to, in that we put our affiance in him. Thus God. Cy∣ril Hierosol. Catech. 7. p. 169 saith S. Cyrill, vouchsafeth by his vnspeakeable clemencie to be called the Father of men: he which is in heaven, to be the Father of them which are vpon the earth: he which made al times to be Father of them which liue in time: he which holdeth the earth in his fist, to be Father of them which walke as Grashoppers vpon the earth. But doe we notMentimur Iovem? Iunonis odio crede. L Y. Quid violas Io∣vem? Mertale coelo non potest iungi genus. Se∣nec. Hrc Fur. Act. 2 Scen. Non vetera. mentiri Io∣vem? Is God our Father indeed? Valerius Maximus hath a whole Chapter of those that being but basely borne would make the worlde beleeue that they came of high Parentage. And heValer. Max. l. 9. c. 16. cals it, Impudentiae genus, nec ferendum vllo modo: a kind of impudencie, & in no wise to be borne withall. And surely we Christians should proue such kind
of Creatures should we say we are Gods, & God not our Father. But the Apostle S. Paule wil avouch this Petigree, namely he is our Father, first by Creation, then by Adopti∣on. By Creation, for we are his Generation, Act. 17.29. And Deut. 32.6, Is not he thy Father, that hath bought thee? hee hath made thee, and proportioned thee. So the Prophet Esay, Doubtlesse thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorāt of vs, & Israel know vs not, yet thou O Lord, art our Father, and our Redeemer, Esay, 63.16. SoAug. de verb. Dom. Ser. 28. p. 76. S. Austen, Nobis omni∣bus in commune est Pater, quia nos creavit, he is a Father to vs all in generall, for that he did create vs. By Adoption; so the Apostle S. Paule to the Romans, As manyRom. 8.14. saith he, as are led by the spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.V, 15. For yee haue not received the spirit of bondage to feare againe: but ye haue received the spirit of adoption, wherby we cry Ab∣ba Father.V. 16. The same spirit beareth witnesse with our spirit, that we are the Children of God. Now if you would knowe what adoptiō is, the Civilians wil tell you, that it isVid P. Mar∣tyr Loc Com. Class. 3 Loc. 3. Ac∣tus legitimus imitans naturā, repertus ad illorum solatiū qui liberos non habent. A lawfull act in imitation of Nature, found out for their comfort who haue no childrē of their owne. True it is God himselfe was not destitute of a Son, for he had a Beloved Sonne in whom he was wel pleased, as you haue heardLect. 7. p. 134. heretofore, howbeit for in all the na∣ture of man hee had yet no children at all, thence it was that he adopted his Elect vnto himselfe. Cum haberet vni∣cum,Aug. in Epist. Ioan. Tract. 8. p. 434. saith S. Austen, noluit illum esse vnum: sed, vt fratres haberet, adoptavit illi, qui cum illo possiderent vitam aeternā. When he had his only Sonne, he would not haue him to be alone: but he adopted Brethren vnto him, who should enioy with him eternall life. Now whereas we say, Father in this Prayer, we are to imply withall both The Sonne, & Holy Ghost. The reason is, for that the name of Father, a also the name of God, when it is opposed to all Creature (as Father is here in this place) then is it taken not perso¦nally, but essentially. In Patre Filius invocaturTertul de O∣rat p. 657. saith Ter∣tullian:
ego enim,Ioh. 10.30. inquit, & Pater vnum sumus. When we pray vnto the Father, we pray to the Son too, for the Son hath said, I & my Father are one. And thus much of these first two words, Our Father, here in this Prayer: only an Instruction from either of them, & then to the words that follow. First for the word Our, Our Father, here in this place, the Instruction I gather is, that it was our Saviours minde that we should not in our Prayers haue respect vnto our selues only, but to all and every of our Brethren. And therefore all is here in the plurall number, as Our Father, and Giue vs, and Our bread, and Forgiue vs, and Our Sins, and so forth. Let every one pray,Vnusquis{que} o∣ret Dominum non pro se tantū sed & pro om∣nibus fratribus, sicut Dominus Iesus orare nos docuit, vbi non singulis privatā precem manda∣vit, sed commu∣ni & concordi prece orare pro omnibus iussit. Cyp. Epist. l. 4. ep. 4. pag. 124. And againe, Ante omia pacis doctor at{que} vni∣tatis magister singulatim nolis it, & privatim precem sieri, vt quis cum preca∣tur prose tantū precetur. Id. de Orat. Domin. p. 231. saith S. Cyprian, not for himselfe only, but for all his Brethren, as the Lord Iesus hath taught vs to pray, when he gaue not in particular to every one of his Disciples a private Prayer, but commanded them to pray for all with one mind and one assent, in a Prayer that is common to al. And thereforeAd magnum genus pertinere coepistis. Sub isto Patre fratres sunt Dominus & Servus, sub isto Patre fratres sunt Imperator & miles, sub isto Patre fratres sunt dives & pauper. Omnes Christia∣ni fideles diversos in terra habent Patres, alii nobiles, alii ignobiles, vnum verò Patrem invocant qui est in coelis. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 135. p. 641. S. Austen, You that are to say, Our Father which art in heauen, are to appertaine to a great kinred. The Master and the Man, the Generall and the Soul∣dier, the Rich man and the poore are all Brethren vnder this Father. Nay all faithfull Christians, saith he, though they haue diuers Fathers on earth, some noble, some base, yet doe they all of them call vpon one Father, when they speake to him that is in heauen. It is true, we may sometimes say, My, in particular too, and therefore the prodigall Child, I wil rise and go to my Father, Luk. 15.18. & the benefit that is com∣mon to all, we may vse as peculiar to our selues, so did the Apostle S. Paul, so the Prophets, as S. Chrysostom hathChrys. in Gen. Hom. 34. obserued. S. Bernard giues the reason. In creatione,Bern. in Ps. Qui habitat. Ser. 2. p. 674. saith he, in redemptione, caeteris{que} omnibus beneficijs est Deus om∣nium:
sed in tentationibus suis tanquam proprium eum ha∣bent singuli electorum. In regard of creation, redemption, & such like benefits he is the God of all: but in temptations, every of the Elect haue him as proper & peculiar to them∣selues. But thus much of the first Instruction from the word, Our, here in this place. The Instruction I gather from the word, Father, is this: the great prerogatiue we Christians haue, aboue the Isra∣elites that were of olde, in that we may come with such boldnesse to him, as to cal him Father. The Israelits, I con∣fesse were his Children, nay he calls them his First-borne, Exod. 4.22. and yet for all thisNusquam in∣venitur praecep∣tum populo Is∣rael, vt diceret Paternoster, aut oraret Pa∣trem Deum. Aug. de Serm. Dom. in Monte. l. 2. which of them all when they came to pray vnto him vsed this style of Father, as we doe? Now how potent the very name of Father is to extort a benefit from a Father, were he averse & backward from giving it, witnesse Esaus importunity, who though he ob∣tainedHeb. 12.17. not the blessing indeed, yet a blessing he had, such as it was, Gen. 27.39. This little word, Father,Luth. in epist. ad Gal. c. 4. saith Lu∣ther, conceaued effectually in the heart, passeth all the elo∣quence of Demosthenes, and Tully, and the greatest Orators that ever were. Our Saviour seemes to acknowledge as∣much. What man is there among you,Mat. 7.9. saith he, which if his Sonne aske him bread, would giue him a stone? or if he aske fish; will he giue him a serpent? If yee then which are evill can giue to your children good gifts, how much more shall your Fa∣ther which is in heaven, giue good things to them that aske him. But I come to that that followeth, which art in Hea∣ven. True it is, God is every where, & yet asAug Epist. 57. p. 177. S. Austen no∣teth, Non dicimus, Pater noster qui es vbi{que}, cum & hoc ve∣rum sit, sed Pater noster qui es in coelis. We say not, though it be true too, Our Father which art every where, but, Our Father which art in heaven. And therefore king Solomon, Heare thou in the place of thine habitation, saith he, even in Heauen, 1. King. 8.30. So that we must, as S. Cyprian teach∣eth vs,Cyp. cont. De∣metrian. p. 147. Illuc intueri, illuc oculos nostros erigere, in supernis
Deum quaerere, non ante ineptae simulachra, & figmenta ter∣rena captivum corpu incurvare. Look vp to those heavens aboue, thither erect and cast our eyes, there in that place seeke our God, not prostrate our captiue Bodies before the fopperies either of Idols or of Images. There areVid. Calv. In∣stit. l 3. c. 20. §. 40. who take these wordes which art in heaven, as if they signified Gods Maiestie and Power, Heaven the place thereof be∣ing put for the things themselues, & then the meaning is, Our Father which art in heauen, that is, whic rt of infi∣nite greatnesse, and height, and power, and immortalitie. But I like the former interpretation better, so that we doe not Palos terminales figere Deo, asTurtull. de Ie∣iunio. p. 650. speakes Tertullian in∣close him wholy within the circle of heaven. Behold,1. King 8.27. saith Solomon, the heavens, and the heauens of heauens are not a∣ble to containe thee, how much more vnable is this house that I haue built. And howsoever S. Austen say in oneAug. in Psal. 145. p. 1162. place, Absens est Pater noster ad quem clamamus, Pater noster qui es in coelis. Ideo Ecclesia vidua quasi absente sponso, absente viro. That Father of ours is absent from vs, to whō we cry, our Father which art in heaven. And therefore the Church is as a Widdow, her Lord, and Husband thus absent: yet saith he in anotherAug. de Temp. Ser. 140. p 649 place, Absentia Domini non est absens. Habeto fidem & tecum est quem non vides. The absence of the Lord is no absence at all. Haue but faith, and he whom thou seest not, is notwithstanding with thee. Thus much of the Exordium: now concerning the Prayer which whe∣ther it consisteth of sixe, or rather ofTres petitio∣nes superiores aeternae sunt. Quaetuer sequē∣tes ad islam vi∣tam pertinent. Aug. Hom. 42. p. 364. So that hereby wee may shape an answere vnto such as com∣plaine of our Church Prai∣ers, more thē a third part (say they) spent in pray∣ing for, and praying a∣gainst the cō∣modities, and incommodi∣ties of this life. Vid. M. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5 § 35. p. 71. seaven Petitions, the first of them is this, HALLOWED BE THY NAME. To be Hallowed is to be sanctified, & it is a metaphor ta∣ken frō things dedicated to God, or to the Tēple. And our desire here is (the Imperatiue being put for the Optatiue as also in the other Petitions) that Gods Name, that is, his Attributes, his Workes, his Word, his Sacraments, where∣by he is knowne to his Church as men are by their names, that all these (I say) be put apart from all prophane abuses vnto the right vse prescribed in the thirde Commaunde∣mēt,
where it was said that the Lord would not hold him guiltlesse that taketh his name in vaine. So that wee wishCalv. Inst. l. 3. c. 20. § 41. that honour to be given to God which he is most wor∣thy of, that men never speak, or thinke of him but with ex∣ceeding great reverence, that God would not only deliver that holy Name of his from all contempt and dishonour, but subdue all mankinde to the worthy esteeming of it. Which is not saith S. Austen so to be vnderstood, as if we desired this of God for his own sake, not for ours. IntelligeAug. Tom. 10. Tract. in Orat. Domini. saith he, & pro te rogas. Hoc enim rogas, vt quod semper san∣ctum est in se sanctificetur in te. Thou prayest herein for thy selfe to. For this it is thou praiest for, that that Name, which is alwaies holy in it selfe, should bee hallowed in thee. A∣gaine, this request which we make of hallowing the Name of GodAug. Tom. 4. de Serm. Dom. in Monte. l. 2. saith he, is not so made by vs as if the Name of God were not holy already, but the meaning is that it should be hallowed by men. And againe a little after, Et hoc est quod nunc agitur saith he, dum Evāgelium adhuc vs{que} quá{que} per diversas gen∣tes innotescendo, commendat vnius Dei nomen per admini∣strationem filij eius. And this it is which is now performed throughout the whole world, while the Gospell by becō∣ming to be known every where among so many Nations, commendeth this name of our God vnto vs, through the administration of his Sonne. I come to theTertullian makes it the third. Tertul. de Orat. p. 658. second Petiti∣on. THY KINGDOME COME. Gods kingdome is twofold: First that Administration whereby he governeth all things even the Divels them∣selues: secondly, that Administration of his Sonne Christ Iesus the head of the Church in which he frameth men by his word and spirit to the subiection of the same word; & so is the kingdome of God here taken in this place. And so taken here in this place, this kingdome is twofold too. First, the kingdome of Grace: Secondly, the kingdome of Glory. The kingdome of grace is that wherin those only, liue that are subiect to Christ, are obedient to his lawes, & are continually taught in his word by his holy Spirit. And
of this kingdome the Apostle S. Paule speaking, The king∣dome of GodRom. 14.17. saith he, is not meate and drinke, but rigteous∣nes, and peace, and ioy in the Holy Ghost. And, Tunc venit regnum DeiAug. de verb. Dom: Serm. 28. p 76. saith S. Austen, quando est is gratiam eius con∣sequuti: Ipse enim ait, Regnum Dei intra vos est. Thē comes the kingdome of God vnto you, when yee haue obtained his grace. And therfore he himselfeLuk. 17.21. saith, The kingdome of God is within you. The kingdome of Glory is that which is the blessed state of all Gods People that partly are already in heaven, partly shalbe hereafter when God shalbe all in all. The former is an entrance and preparatiō to this latter: this latter is the end and consummation of the former. If so be we would participate of the kingdome of Glory, we must first of all be Subiects in the kingdome of Grace. But that is to be while here we are in this world: Behold now2. Cor. 6.2. saith the Apostle S. Paule, the accepted time, behold now the day of Salvation. Now in this Petition wee aime at three points. First that this kingdome of Grace be not hindred by many spars and lets that it hath what with the World, the Flesh, & the Divell. Secondly, that he quic∣ken his comming vnto iudgement; for so the Saints them∣selues pray, I meane the Church Triumphant, Rev. 6.10. & so the Church Militant too, Rev. 22.20. Thirdly, that hee would come to each and every of vs in particular, & sum∣mon vs to him by Death, not in respect of Crosses and ca∣lamities he sends vs at any time, that were pusillanimitie, and want of courage in vs, but to be freed from this body of Sinne, not to be constrained, asPs. 120 4. speakes the Psalmist, to dwell with Mesech, and to haue our habitation among the Tents of Cedar, to desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ, asPhilip. 1.22 speakes the Apostle to the Philippians. The Instruction I gather hence is, not to play the hypo∣crites with God, namely to make this petition and yet to be full loath to see that day. Optas vt veniatAug. in Ps. 97. p. 756. saith S. Au∣sten, quem times ne veniat? corrige te, vt non ores contra te. Doest thou desire him to come, whom thou fearest least he
should come. Why then amend thy selfe, least thou prayest against thy selfe. So likewise in another place, Perversum estAug. in Psal. 147 p. 1172. saith he, & nescio vtrùm verum, quem diligis, timere ne veniat; orare, veniat regnum tuum, et timere ne exaudiaxis. This is perverse dealing, and far from sincerity to feare his cōming whō thou saist thou lovest: to pray that his king∣dome come, and yet to feare thou shouldst be heard. But they are most excellent comforts, which S. Austen hath in that place, Vnde autem timor, saith he, quia Iudex ventu∣rus est? nunquid iniustus? nunquid malevolus? nunquid invi∣dus? &c. Nihil horum. Quis ergo venturus est? quare nō gau∣des? quis venturus est iudicare te, nisi qui venit iudicari prop∣ter te. And why art thou afraid saith S. Austen, for he shall come as a Iudge? Why is he an vniust Iudge? Is he a malitious Iudge? Is he envious and spightfull? No, not a whit. And who then shall come to iudge thee? Why doest thou not ioy therevpon? Who shall come to iudge thee, but he who when time was, came himselfe to be iudged for thee. He spake not as Papists doe,Vid. Foxium de Christo gratis iustificante. l. 3. p. 338. Canisius by name, that the expectatiō of that day is not terrible only to Sin∣ners, but also to the Saints: no he spake as our Saviour ra∣ther, When these things begin to come to passe, then looke, vp, and lift vp your heads; for your redemption draweth neere, Luk. 21.28. I come to the third Petition: THY WILL BE DONE IN EARTH AS IT IS IN HEAVEN. We haue here in this Petition two severall points to be considered: First, the will of God that it is to be done; Se∣condly, the maner of doing it. First concerning the will of God,Calv. Instit. l. 3. c. 20. §. 43. his secret will is not here meant whereby he gover∣neth all things, and directeth them to their ends, but his other will, his will revealed, namely that wherevnto our willing obedience ought to answer. Like as our Savi∣our said in hisMat. 26.39 agony, O my Father if it be possible, let this cup passe from me, neverthelesse not as I will, but as thou wilt. And againe,V. 42. O my Father if this cup cannot passe away from me, but that I must drinke it, thy will be done. And againe the
V. 44. third time, O my Father if this cup cannot passe away from me but that I must drinke it, thy will be done, for he said theV. 44. same words againe. He that taught vs to say, Mat. 6.10. Thy will be done: you see how in his own case, Mat. 26.42, he puts it in practise. Ipse erat,Tertul. de O∣rat. p. 658. saith Tertullian, voluntas & potestas Patris, & tamen ad demonstrationem sufferentiae debitae, voluntati se patris tradidit. He himselfe was the wil and power of his Father, and yet to make demonstration of his patience that was due, he yeelded himselfe to his Fathers will. Now concerning this will of God as there are divers and sundry particulars commended vnto vs in holy writ, so may they be reduced to three Heads. First to beleeue in Christ, so the ApostleIoh. 3.23. S. Iohn, This is then his Commandement that we beleeue in the name of his Son Iesus Christ. The second is our Sanctification of Body & Soule, and of this the Apostle to the1. Thess 4 3. Thessalonians, This is the will of God even your sanctification, and that you should ab∣staine from fornication, that every one of you should knowe, how to possesse his vessell in holinesse, and honour, and not in the lust of concupiscence even as the Gentiles that knowe not God. That no man oppresse or defraud his Brother in any mat∣ter: for the Lord is avenger of all such things. The third is our bearing afflictions in this life, whatsoever God shall send vs, & of this, the same Apostle in the same Epistle to the1. Thess. 5.18. Thessalonians: In all things giue thankes, for this is the will of God in Christ Iesus towards you. And thus much of the will of God, that it is to be done. Concerning the maner of doing that will of his, it is here set downe by way of Similitude, Sicut in coelo, & in terra, In earth as it is in heaven. Sicut,Aug. in Epist. Ioan. Tract. 4. p. 412. saith S. Austen, non semper ad parilitatē & aequalitatem refertur. This word Si∣cut [As] doth not alwaies intimate vnto vs a paritie or equalitie in each respect. He maketh instance in that of our Saviour,Ioh. 17.23. Dilexisti eos sicut & me dilexisti: Thou hast loued them, as thou hast loued me. It is true, the Apostles were beloved of God, and as the Sonne himselfe was be∣loued,
but not in that degree of loue, for all that Sicut there. Right so the Sicut here in this place, his will is to be done by vs here in earth as it is in heauen, namely by those Angelicall Creatures there, willingly, speedely, & faith∣fully, in regard whereof they are said to be winged, but is it the meaning of our Prayer here, that we also should per∣forme the same in the same degree of perfection? No thats impossible while here we are in this life: it is sufficient for vs if we come aloofe off, or if we march with them hand in hand as it were, yet to be but like Asanius of whom theVirg Aen. l. 2 Poet, — Sequitur{que} Patrem non passibus aequis, halfe a dozen of whose steps made but one of his Fathers. And thus much of the three Petitions that principally concerne Gods glory: now of those three, or foure rather that haue reference especially to our owne good: the first whereof is this, and it is the fourth Petition; GIVE VS THIS DAY OVR DAILY BREAD. Our Rhemists that with much adoe were brought at length to be willing to translate the New Testament in∣to English, whē they came to this place translated it thus: Give vs to day our supersubstantiall bread. Now Supersub∣stantial is as wel vnderstood of them, for whom they tran∣slated that Testament, as if it had beene plaine gibberish. Doubtlesse this, Beloued, was not the way whereby the People should beRhem. 1. Pet. 2.5. Superedified, to vse another of their words: and little haue theyRhem. Philip. 4 10. Reflourished to care for them to vse a phrase of theirs: and least of all will it helpe them,Rhem Ephes. 6.12. Against the Rectors of the world of this darknes, Against the spirituals of wickednes in the celestials, smile not at them they are their own phrases, and now forsooth Canonical. But to come to the matter in hand. The word in the Vid. D Fulk a∣gainst the Rhe∣mish Testament in Mat. 6.11. Originall is ambiguous, and vpon the ambiguity of the Greeke word many of the Fathers referre this Petition to spirituall Food especially; among which the Lordes Supper is a part, as the Preaching of
Gods word also is an other part, noted by the Fathers to be desired in this Petition. And therforeAmb. Tom. 4. de Sacram. lib. 6. c. 5. 384. saith S. Ambrose Haec postulatio maxima est eorum quae postulantur. This is the chiefest Petition of all. HowbeitLuk. 11.3. S. Luke, as D. FulkeD. Fulke vbi supra. noteth is the best Interpreter of the Greeke word, who sheweth that it signifieth Bread sufficient for every day: , saith S. Luke, . In which place our Rhemists themselues translate it, Dayly. But now concerning the word Bread. Bread in the Hebrew Dialect is taken for that sustenāce whereby the life of man is maintained and signifies as Su∣stenance, that is, Meat and Drink, so Apparell, Health, Li∣bertie Peace, &c. Like as whē the Lord said to Adam,Gen. 3.19. In the sweat of thy face, shalt thou eate bread till thou return to the earth, his meaning was hee should earne his living by the sweat of his brows. Now Bread in this kinde as it hath here in this place, so ought it to haue three speciall pro∣perties. First, it must be given vs: Secondly, it must be our owne: Thirdly, it must be Dayly. Giuen vs, for that as a worthyB. Andrewes of the Combat betweene Christ and Satan. Ser. 7. p. 91. Prelate obserues out of Brentius many haue Pa∣nem quotidianū, that cannot come by Da nobis: they come not to it by Gods gift. No they come to it either as1. Kin. 21.19. Ahab came to Naboths vinyard, that is, by force: or as2. Sam. 16 4 Ziba came to Mephiboseths lands, that is by fraud. Secondly, it must be our owne, that is, such as we obtaine by the cal∣ling that we haue. In regard whereof it was the Apostles2. Thes. 3.10 Precept, that if any would not worke, he should not eat, and besides that they should worke with quietnesse, and eate theirV. 12. owne bread. Thirdly, it must be Dayly, that is, such as teacheth vs to rest on his Fatherly goodnes from day to day, like as Manna taught the Israelites, Exod. 16.19. Meritò adiecit, Da nobis hodiè, saithTertul. de O∣rat. p. 658. Tertullian, vt qui praemiserat, Nolite de crastino cogitare quid edatis. He fitly annexed this Petition here, Giue vs this day: who had said vnto them but a little before, Bee not carefull for the morrow what you shall eate, or what you shall drinke. Not but
that there ought to be a godly care with every Christian of laying vp sometimes more, somtimes lesse, as God hath blessed vs with abundance, but we ought to take heede of a distrusting care, that is, when we rely too too much vpon the meanes, & vtterly forget him whoPs. 145 16. openeth his hand and filleth all things living with plenteousnes. Now the greatest Prince and Potentate that is, is bound to beg this bread, which if so be he hath not in this sort; and so by rea∣son of this blessing it prooue vnto him the Staffe of bread, Esay 3.1. It will proue but the Bread of carefulnesse, Psal. 127.3. I come to the fift Petition. AND FORGIVE VS OVR DEBTS, AS WE ALSO FORGIVE OVR DEBTERS. That by Debts here, Sinnes are meant; first our owne word Trespasses which we continually vse insteed there∣of, doth sufficiently confirme, secondly the Evangelist S. Luke who vseth the very word , Sinnes, Luk. 11.4. Now Sins are called Debts in respect of the great resem∣blance that is betwixt Debts and them. For evē as a Debt doth binde a man either to make satisfaction, or els to go to Prison till he pay the vtmost farthing, Mat. 5.26. so is it with vs in respect of Sin which bindeth vs or by our selues or by some other to satisfie Gods iustice which is to be sa∣tisfied to the vtmost mite, Luk. 12.59. Now Forgiuenesse serues for both, both for Debt and Sinne. And hence it is we aske it here, and no doubt as we do aske it, so we as ve∣rily obtaine it to, if we faithfully aske the same. Qui orare nos pro debitis & peccatis docuitCyp. de Orat. Domin p. 238. saith S. Cyprian, paternā misericordiam promisit, & veniam secuturā. He that taught vs to pray for these our debts and sinnes, promised his fa∣therly mercy, and pardon to ensue. But why do we here say, As we also forgiue our debters. As we also? Why We? or what kinde of consequence doth it seeme to be, that though we forgiue others that are Mē as we are, yet God should forgiue vs who are in respect of him but wormes, and not men. The consequence seemeth to be this. Seeing we, that haue but a drop of mercy in re∣spect
of thee, forgiue others, thou who art the fountaine of mercy, do thou forgiue vs. And therefore S. Luke sets it thus downe: For even we forgiue every man that is indebted to vs. I, but how then if we do not forgiue? If we doe not forgiue, no not to die for it? How if we say we do forgiue, but we will never forget it? How if we proclaime that the Party offending vs may well come into our Pater Noster; but he shal never come into our Creed?Quid agemus nos in die iudi∣cii super quorū iram non vnius diei, sed tantorū annorum Sol te¦stis occubuit. Hier. Tom. 2. Ad Castorinam Materteram. How if the Sunne not of one Day only, but of whole Twelue months goe downe vpon our wrath? Si dicis, facAug. in Evang Ioan Tract. 7. p. 45. saith S. Austen, quid enim facturus es, quo iturus es, si mentitus fueris in precibus? If you say you do forgiue, by all meanes do forgiue then, for what canst thou possibly do, whether wilt thou go for succour, if in thy praiers thou tellest a lie. I come to the sixt Petition: AND LEAD VS NOT INTO TEMPTATION. First here is a good sequence, & very fitly doth this Pe∣tition follow the former, to teach vs that as we must bee carefull to pray for pardon of sinnes past, so by all meanes we must endeavour to prevent sinnes to come. But now concerning the words, Lead vs not into temptation, that is, saithId est, ne nes∣patiaris induci ab eo vti{que} qui tentat. Ceterum absit vt Domi∣nus tentare vi∣deatur, quasi aut ignoret fidē cuius{que}, aut de∣iicere sit consē∣tiens. Diaboli est & infirmitas & malitia, Ter∣tul de Orat. p. 659. Tertullian, suffer vs not to be led by him who indeede doth tempt vs. Be it far saith he, from vs to thinke that the Lord doth tempt, as if he knew not any mās faith, or were consenting to his overthrow: that is, the iniquity and ma∣lice of Sathan himselfe.Dictum est ne no inducas in tentationem, quod intelligitur ne nos inferri deserendo permittas. Aug. ep 89 p. 257. S. Austen expounds it thus? Lead vs not into temptation, that is suffer vs not by forsaking vs to be led there into And indeedeCypr. de Orat. Dom. pag 239. S. Cyprian hath it in these words, Ne patiaris nos induci in tentationem; suffer vs not to be led into temptation. SoAmbros. Tom. 4. de Sacram. Serm. 6. cap. 5 pag 384. S. Ambrose, andChrys. Tom 5. Hom. de Orat. Dominic. If that be S. Chrysostomes. For To. 2. Mat. in Hom. 20. he hath, Ne nos inducas. Saint Chrysostome to, grounding no doubt on that ofIam. 1.13. S. Iames, Let no man say when he is tempted I am tempted of God: for God cannot bee tempted with evill, neither tempteth he any
man. Howbeit seeing here it is said vnto no other but God himselfe, Lead vs not into temptation: and the Scriptures beare witnesse of Christ himselfe that he wasMat. 4.1. led aside of the Spirit to be tempted of the Divel, which Spirit doubtles was the good Spirit, Luk. 4.1. this same Suffer vs not rea∣cheth not hoame to that which is intimated here indeed, & therefore say we to God himselfe, : Do not thou oh Lord lead vs into temptation, as being an action of God himselfe. Why but the Apostle S. Iames saith, that God tempteth no man, . True, as the Author of evill, but as a righteous Iudge he doth. Witnesse S. Austen who after a long Disputatiō against Inlian the Pelagian bringeth this Petition, as an argument to proue the same. What is thatQuid est autē quod quotidie dicimus, Ne nos inferas in ten¦tationem, nisi vt non tradamur concupiscentiis nostris? Tradit ergo Deus in passiones igno∣miniae, vt siant quae non conve∣niunt, sed ipse convenienter tradit, & fiunt eadem peccata & peccatorum supplicia praete∣ritorum, & sup∣pliciorum meri∣ta futurorum. Sicut tradidit Achab in Pseu∣do-prophetarum mendacium: sicut tradidit Roboam in falsum consilium. Facit haec miris & ineffabilibus modis, qui novit iusta iudicia sua, non solùm in corporibus hominum, sed & in ipsis cordibus operari. Aug. Tom. 7 cont. Iulian. Pelag l. 5. c. 3. saith S. Austen, which we say dayly, lead vs not into temptation, but that we be not delivered to our owne concupiscences? And againe a little after, Therefore God delivereth into ignominious passi∣ons, that those things may be done, which are not convenient, but he delivereth conveniently, and the same sinnes are made both punishments of sinnes past, and deserts of punishments to come. As he delivered Achab into the lie of the false Pro∣phets, as hee delivered Roboam into false counsaile. These things he doth by marveilous and vnspeakeable meanes who knoweth how to worke his iudgments, not only in mens bodies, but in their very hearts. Who so will see more hereof, & as much indeed as need be spoken, I referre him to those ex∣cellent Lectures, the 18, and 19, vpon Ionas, delivered by him that worthyly now is one of theMy Lod of London, who truely makes the garment of holinesse honourable, Ecclus. 50.11. worthyest of our Cleargy. Our conclusion may be this. As the Romanes in the Conspiracy which was made against Caesar, if there were in it any thing worthy of renowne, that they refer∣redPlutarch. in Cas. wholly vnto Brutus, but al the cruel and violent acts
those they imputed vnto Cassius: so Temptation so farre forth as it is good for vs (and good it is sometimes, Bonū mihi,Ps. 118.71. vulg. Ps. 119.71. saith David, quia humiliasti me: It is good for me that I haue beene afflicted) the Lord himselfe workes it: as there is any evill in it, Cassius the Divel, and his Compli∣ces, I come to the seauenth and last Petition, though there be that make it but an Appendix unto this, BVT DELIVER VS FROM EVILL. He that seeketh,Qui vult li∣berari à malo, testatur quia in malo est. Aug. Hom. 42. saith S. Austen, to be delivered from e∣vill, is a witnesse against himselfe that he is in evill. I, and a∣gainst our Roman Catholikes too, that thinke that men may be so holy, as that they may merit even for others. But this is not that I aime at now. Now at this time I am to tell you of the many evils that surround vs, while here we are in this world. In this world,In hac Terra tentatio est, in hac terra peri∣culosè naviga∣tur, in hac terra per rimas fra∣gilitatum subin∣trat aliquid quod debeat sē∣tinari. Aug. Tom. 10. Tract. in Orat. Domi∣nic. saith S. Austen, there is tentation, there is in this world a dangerous navigation, som∣what there is while we are in this world, that alwaies enters into vs by the leakes of our infirmities, which is stil to be pum∣ped out. I, but their are but generalities. will you haue thē specified in particular? S. Cyprian doth it, no man better. If Avarice,Si Avaritia prostrata est, ex∣urgit Libido: si Libido cōpressa est, succedit Am¦bitio: si Ambitio contempta est, Ira exasperat, instat Superbia, Violentia invi∣tat, Invidia cō∣cordiam rum∣pit, amicitiam Zelus abscindit. Cyp. de Mortal. p. 207, saith he, be overthrowne, Lust presently start∣eth vp: if Lust be suppressed, Ambition followes after: if Am∣bition be disgraced, Wrath inflames vs, Pride puffes vs vp, Drunkennesse allures vs, Envie breakes concord, and Hatred cuts off Friendship. And thus, Beloved, haue we to do with such an adversarie, as was Hannibal to the Romanes,Liv. Dec. 3. l 7. Seu vicit ferociter instat victis: seu victus est, instaurat cum vic∣toribus certamen. Whether he vanquish, or is vanquished, nothing but blowes to be looked for. Ad debellandos Dei servos,Cyp. de zelo & livore p. 190. saith S. Cypriā, inquietus semper, & sēper infestus: o∣ver busie & never but making of roads to vāquish & over∣come the servants of Go. And He it is as the most think, that is the Evill here meant. It is in the Original , &  poti¦us de Persona quàm de re dicitur. Beza Annot in Mat. 6.13. saith Beza, is spoken of the Person rather
then of the thing, howbeit it is al one whether of both we take it to be. The Divell indeed is the enemy that lyeth in wait for our life: but Sinne is the weapon wherewith he continually warres against vs. And thus much of the Prai∣er it selfe, come we now to the Conclusion, which partlie alleageth the Reason of making al these Requests to God, and that in these words, For thine is the kingdome, and the power, and the glory for ever: partly assureth vs that al shal be as we haue formerly requested & that in the word, A∣men. FOR THINE IS THE KINGDOME, AND THE POW∣ER, AND THE GLORIE, FOR EVER, AMEN. I loue Erasmus wel, and am perswaded he wel deserues as much of all that loue true learning, but in my opinion he was much to blame toErasm. Annot. in Mat. 6. p. 33. Edu. Bas. 1527 say of this Conclusion that they that added this vnto the Lords Praier did Divinae Preca∣tioni suas nugas assuere, to so heavēly a prayer did sow pat∣ches of their owne. I am sorry that in this point his great Learning, & great Iudgement were yet no better matches. And yet can I hardly be of Mr Cartwrights minde on the other side, that saith these words wereM. Cart∣wrights An∣swere to the Preface of the Rhemish Testa∣ment. p. 154. borrowed frō the Prophet David out of the Booke of Chronicles: for if he suppose they came frō thence, for that the Prophet1. Chr. 29.11 there saith, Thine O Lord is greatnesse, and power, and glorie and victory and praise: for all that is in heaven, and in earth, is thine: thine is the kingdome O Lord, and thou excellest as head over all, as being an abridgement of them: he may cause another to thinke that our Saviours words, Mat. 12 30. He that is not with me is against me, and he that gathe∣reth not with me scattereth: And Mark, 9.40. Whosoever is not against vs is on our part, came from a like speech of Cae∣sars set downe byCic. Orat. pro & Ligario. Tully, Nos, omnes adversarios putare, nisi qui nobiscum essent: te, omnes, qui contra te non essent, tuos. But howsoever that be, the words are not to be neg∣lected, cheefely for that though they want in some Greek Copies, and those of the most ancient stamp, nor are ex∣pounded by divers of the Fathers that expound of pur∣pose
this Prayer vnto vs, yet other Greeke Copies haue them, and theVid. D. Fulke against the Pre¦face of the Rhe∣mish Test. §. 38. Hebrew, & Syriack too; and therefore now concerning the words. Quomodo coepit à laudibus Dei [Oratio]Amb. Tom. 4 de Sacram. l. 6. c. 5. p 384. saith S. Am∣brose, sic debet in Dei laude desinere. As in our Prayers we must begin with the Praises of God, so must we end with them too. The Prayers here given are threefold. Funiculus triplex,Eccles. 4.12 saith the Preacher, difficilè rumpitur. A threefold cord is not easily broken. Here is Kingdome, and Power, & Glory, all given vnto God, and twisted here together to great good purpose. First concerning Kingdome here, it is his royal Governement over all the world, and every par∣ticular therein, the haires of our heads not excepted, nor so much as a pile of grasse. Concerning his Power, it is that Omnipotencie of his, whereby he doth execute and admi∣nister whatsoever belongeth to that Government. Con∣cerning his Glory, it is that exceeding Prayse which re∣doundeth vnto him, by reason of such administration. And all three are for ever, his Kingdome for ever, his Power for ever, and for ever his Glory too. Aeternitas,Aug. Tom. 8. in Psal. 145. p. 1162. saith S. Au∣sten, in verbo, quatuor syllabis constat, in se sine fine est. Eter∣nitie in respect of the word consisteth onely of foure sylla∣bles (Ever, consisteth but of two) but in it selfe it is end∣lesse. A countefeit whereof we haue in this life,Vicissitudine temporum sibi succedentium, dum Luna mi∣nuitur & rur∣sus impletur, dum sol omni anno locum suū repetit, dum Ver, vel Aestas. vel Autumnus, vel Hyems, sic transit, vt rede∣at, aeternitatis quaedam imita∣tio est. Aug. in Ps. 9. p. 39. saith the same S. Austen in another place, When as the Moone wai∣neth and waxeth againe, when the Sun every yeare recove∣reth his wonted place, when Spring, or Summer, or Autum, or Winter, so passe and goe on, that at length they returne a∣gaine. What? and is his the Kingdome then, and that for e∣ver? Of whom then should we aske these things that be∣long vnto that Kingdome, but only of God? Besides, that as S. ChrysostomeChrysost in Mat. Hom. 20. noteth, it shewes that our Adversary the Divell is subiect to the same God, howsoever God so permitting him he seeme to resist him all he can. Is his the Power, and that for ever too? Then was it a foolish decree of kingDan. 6.7. Darius, that none should aske a Petition for thir∣tie
daies but only of him, seeing it is God that is power∣full only to grant all requests made vnto him, and conse∣quently these. Lastly, is his the Glory, and that for ever? It is for his Glory that we craue these things,1. Sam. 4.21. which Glory (should but one miscarry, one only of all his Elect that thus pray) how should it be darkned and obscured, how might we say thereof as Phineas his wifeProinde à quo petam vt acci∣piam? apud quē quaeram vt in∣veniam? ad quē pulsabo vt ape∣riatur mihi? quis habet petenti dare, nisi cuius omnia Scuius sū etiam ipse qui peto. Tertul. advers. Marci∣on. l. 4. p. 217.  said when she was in travaile, Ichadob, where is the Glory? The glory is not departed so much from Israel, as it is in truth from the God of Israel. I wil end this point with that of Tertullian, who after a short cōvictiō of Marcion the Heretike out of every of the former Petitions, hath at the length this pas∣sage, & as it is likely by reason of this Conclusion. There∣fore of whom shall I aske that I may receaue? At whom shall I seeke, that I may find? At whom shall I knocke, that it may be opened vnto me? who hath to giue to him that asketh, but he whos are all things, whose also I am that aske. The word Amen, is anOb sui empha¦sin singularem retinetur haec vocula Amen in omniū Chri∣stianorum lin∣guis invariata: praebens simul luculentum ar∣gumentum pri∣maevitati He∣braicae. Barth Schaer. Iin. in Ps. David num. 53. Vid. Aug Epist. 178 & de Doctr. Christ. l 2. c. 10. & 11. & in E∣vang. Ioan. Tract. 41. Hebrew word, & derived from a word that signifieth Trueth, and hath this signification here: that the premisses are certaine and out of doubt, and wherevnto we doe assent, and beleeue that so they shall be, trusting to the truth of the promises of God. S. IeromeHier. in Mat. c. 6 p 21. calls it Signaculum Orationis Dominicae, The seale of the Lords Prayer, and so it may be called of al our other Prai∣ers besides. This indeed is the Peoples word, howsoever now adaies it be poasted over to the Clarke, who because whē the People are absent, is to supply that defect, is per∣mitted by them even when they are present too to say it, and that alone. That it was and is the Peoples word, wit∣nesse that of the Apostle S. Paul, 1. Cor. 14.16. as also that whole Chapter of Deut. where it is said twelue sundry times, as it is in our new Translation, And all the Peo∣ple shall say Amen. It was at that time when a many Curses wereDeut. 27.15. pronounced by the Levites in the hearing of the People, as Cursed be the man that shall make any carved or molten image, andV. 16. cursed be he that curseth his Father and
his Mother, andV. 17. cursed be he that remoueth his neighbours marke, and so forth. Now if they were bound to say Amen to those Curses, and that by the precept of God himselfe; how willingly should they now at the end of every Pray∣er which cōtaineth so many blessings, be alwaies ready to say it, and that in a decent lowd voice. I omit the custome of the Primitiue Church in this case related vnto vs by so many of the Fathers,Iustin Mar∣tyr Apol. 2. Iustin Martyr,Tertul. despe∣ctaculis c. 25. Tertullian,Aug. epist. 106 S. Au∣sten, andHieron. Praef. ad. Lib. 2. Com∣ment. in epist. ad Gal. S. Ierome, for that I hasten to an end. Thus, Beloued, haue you had in briefe my short medita∣tions of this Prayer. You haue heard of the Exordium of it: You haue heard of the Prayer it selfe: You haue heard of the Conclusion. Elegant is that , that Re∣capitulation, and summaryHonor in Pa∣tre, fides, testi∣monium in No∣mine, oblatio obsequii in Vo∣luntate, com∣memoratio spei in Regno, pe∣titio vitae in Pane, exomolo∣gesis debitorum in Depreca∣tione, sollici∣tudo tentationū in Postulatio∣ne turelae, Tertull. de O∣rat p. 659. briefe, which Tertullian hath vpon this Prayer, but speaking of it in general, Compendijs paucorum verborum saith he, quot attinguntur edicta Pro∣phetarum, Evangeliorum, Apostolorum, Sermones Domi∣ni, Parabolae, Exempla, Praecepta, quot simul expunguntur officia Dei. Within the small compasse of a few wordes how many passages are coucht vp togither of the Pro∣phets, the Evangelists, the Apostles? How many of our Sa∣viours Sermons, Parables, Examples, and Precepts? How many Titles and honors of God are there set downe? SoCyp. de Orat. Dominic. p. 239 And againe, Qualia sunt O∣rationis Domi∣nicae sacramenta, quàm multa, quàm magna, breviter insermone collecta, sed in virtute spirituali∣ter copiosa! vt nihil omnino praetermissum sit, quod non in precibus at{que} orationibus nostris coelestis doctrinae compendio comprehendatur. Cyp Ib. p. 232. S. Cyprian, Praeceptorum suorum fecit Iesus grande com∣pendium, vt in disciplina coelesti discentium memoria non la∣boraret, sed quod esset simplici fidei necessarium velociter dis∣ceret. Our Saviour hath made a speciall briefe of all his Precepts, that the memories of such as are brought vp in his Schoole should not be clogd with them, but easily & quickly learne whatsoever was requisite to the simplicity of their faith. SoAug: de Temp. Ser. 170. p. 692. S. Austen, Docuit te pauca verba quae qui∣vis idiota potest tenere & dicere. He hath taught thee a few words which the simplest that is may haue by roate, and
repeate it againe. There are that call this PrayerDurand. Ra∣tional. divin. Offi. l. 5. c. 5. §. 17. The salt of all of our Prayers, which we make to God aboue, & indeede not vnfitly. For as Tully giues a precept concerning Rhe∣torick, that,Tul. de. Orat. l. 1. Libandus est ex omni genere vrbanitatis face∣tiarum quidam lepos, quo tanquam sale perspergatur omnis oratio: we must gather and picke out here and there pretty and witty sayings, wherewith our speech is to be sprinck∣led as it were with salt, to make it the more toothsome: right so in the Congregation are all our Prayers besprin∣kled with this Prayer, & therefore is it vsed in our Church Service, First in the front of our Prayers, immediatly after the Confession, Secondly, after the Beliefe, Thirdly, at the end of the Letany. In the frontM. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. § 35 p. 72. saith Reverend Hooker, as a Guid, in the end of some principall limmes, or parts of our prayers, as a complement which fully perfecteth whatsoever may be defectiue in the rest. And here should I make an end, but that I hold it very requisite having shewed you Quid, what to pray, to put you a little in minde Quales, after what sort you should come to Gods house to pray. I will effect it in a few lines. The Author is Apocryphal, the words notwithstanding may be Canonicall, which Iesus the Sonne of Syrach hath Ecclesiasticus, 18.23. Before thou prayest saith he, prepare thy selfe, and be not as one that tempteth the Lord. I say the words may be Canonicall, for that the selfe same words in effect are indeed in Canonicall Scripture. Take heed to thy footEccles. 4.17 saith Ecclesiastes, when thou entrest into the house of God, and be more neere to heare, then to giue the sacrifice of fooles. Alas Beloved, who is it now a daies that esteemes of the Church as of the House of God? What difference do we make betwixt it & the poorest Cottage that is? where must our Childrē play but forsooth in the Church, or that which is all one in effect, the Churchyard. We may well blush to speake it, but it is in vaine to hide it, it is too too manifest to our faces, those monuments, thoseAmongst the rest, that con∣cerning King Alfred with al the Customes of the Vniver∣sitie very faire∣ly set forth in glasse, and Pen∣tameter verses vnder every of them, at the West end of S. Maries Vid. M. Twine An∣tiq. Acad. Ox∣en. Apol. p. 202. glorious monuments that haue stood in our Windowes vncrackt,
vntouched, faire and seemely to see to, for hundreds of yeeres togither, haue even in our memory beene pelted downe by little Brats in their playes and pastimes, to the eie-soare, nay heart-soare of as many as truely loue Gods House. Alas how were Children brought vp heretofore in ages gone & past, had they no pastimes? No recreations? Yes doubtlesse, & places to recreate thēselues in, though the Church or Church-yard by all likelyhood were none. But what will you say meanes this? What is this vnto my purpose? I was to tell you now, after what sort you should come to Gods house to pray. True it is I was so, and so I do, and therefore made instance in this Example to put you in minde how reverently you shoulde esteeme of the Church. It was Iacobs saying whē it seemeth he had some∣what forgot himselfe,Gen. 28.16. Surely the Lord is in this place, and I was not aware. And presently after, How fearefull is this place! This is no other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven. Beloved, we haue as great cause to say as much of Gods Churches: and shall weWe come (a many of vs) a∣bout the middle of Service, if not at the later end, we there set with our hats on al a great part of it: but Service is no sooner ended but we clap on our hats in∣deed, which should it, be in a Chamber of Pre¦sence, might make vs to for∣feit our heads. Offer it now vnto thy Prince: will he be cōtent with thee, or accept thy Person, sath the Lord of hosts. Malac. 1.9. go into them, or go out, or behaue our selues therein, as rudely and vnci∣villy as if they were but our Fathers Barnes? I dare avow that that Popish extremity of Superstition, is farre better then this Extremity of Profanenesse on our side, & though a reverend regard of place adde nothing to Praier it selfe, yet is it a help no doubt to them that pray, in regard wher∣of Churches especially haue beene deputed to that vse. Hence those many religious Solemnities in erecting them at first, in making of them publique, and delivering them as it were into Gods owne possession, all to intimate vnto vs in solemne manner the holy and religious vses, it is in∣tended they should be put vnto. WhenVid Euseb. de Vita Constant. l. 4 c. 41. 43, 44. 45. Constantine the Emperour had finished an House for the service of God at Ierusalem, the dedication he iudged a matter not vnwor∣thy, about the solemne performance whereof, the greatest part of the Bishops in Christendome should meete togi∣ther. The like is recorded byAthanas. A∣polog. ad Con∣stantium. Athanasius concerning a
Bishop of Alexandria in a worke of the like devout mag∣nificence. It will not be long or ever our owne eies (God∣willing) shall beholde the like in aWadham Colledge Chappell which was shortly after cō∣secrated, name∣ly Iune 29. be∣ing S. Peters day. neighbour Colledge, the yoūgest Daughter of our Mother the Vniversity. God forbid it should be said of that Dedication, as was said of those Luds seculares, that were but once in an age:Pol. Virg. de Inventor. rerū l. 8. c. 1. Venite ad Ludos, quos nemo mortalium vidit, ne{que} visurus est; come see those Plaies that never man saw, nor ever shall see a∣gaine: so, come and see that Dedication of a Chappell that never here was seene in our memorie before, nor ever shal be seene againe. God I say forbid! but if this were the cu∣stome of Antiquity to consecrate these places, and we by practise approue the same, let vs accordingly acknow∣ledge their worth, and not behaue our selues therein as if they were in truth no better then base Houels. There is an other sort of commers to Church not so bad I confesse as these, and yet in this respectOportet vt quando psallitur ab omnib{us} psal∣latur: & cū o∣ratur, vt ab om∣nibus oretur: cum{que} Lectio le∣gitur, facto si∣lentio, aeque au diatur à cunctis Isidor. de Eccl. Offic. c. 10. bad ynough, who in time of Divine Service will be there with their Books indeed, but not with Church-bookes. Some Pamphlet or other they bring, to passe away the time, and there are they toti in illis, as deepely in, as deepe may be. The Apostles speech in an other case affords vs words vnto thē in this:1. Cor. 11.22 Haue yee not houses to eate and drinke in? despise yee the Church of God? So, haue they not Studies to apply those Bookes in? Despise they the Church of God? Is this to haue as Cle∣mens AlexandrinusClem. Alex. Strom. l. 7. speakes, vnam vocem, & vnam men∣tem, one voice, one minde? Or as S.Bas. in epist. ad Cleric. Neocaesar Basil, vnum os, & vnū cor, one mouth, one heart? Or as the ProphetIer. 32.39. Ieremy, Cor vnum, & viam vnam, one heart, and one way? But I will end with that ofQuando sla∣mus ad oratio∣nem. Fratres di¦lectissimi, vigila¦re & incumbe∣re ad preces to∣to corde debe mus. Cogitatio omnis secularis & carnales abscedat, nec quicquam tunc animus quam id solùm co∣gitet quod precatur. Ideo & Sacerdos ante orationem praefatione praemissa, parat fratrum mentes dicendo, Sursum corda, vt dum respondet plebs, Habemus ad Dominum, admoneatur nihil aliud se, quàm Dominum cogitare debere. Claudatur contra Adversarium pectus, & soli Deo pateat, nec ad se hostem Dei, tempore orationis adire patiatur: obrepit enim frequenter & penetrat, & subti∣liter fallens prece nostras à Deo avocat, vt aliud habeamus in corde, aliud in voce, cum intentione syncera Dominum debeat non vocis sonus, sed animus & sensus orare. Quae autem segnitia est alie∣nari & capi in∣eptis cogitatio∣nibus & pro∣phanis, cum Do∣minum depreca∣ris, quasi sit ali∣ud, quod magis debeas cogitare quàm quod cum Deo loquaris: Quomodo te au diri à Deo po∣stulas, cum te ipse non audias Vis esse Deum memorem tui cum rogas, cum tu ipse memor tui non sis▪ Cyp de Orat. Domi∣nic. p. 241. S. Cyprian: When we prepare saith he,
our selues to prayer, wee must with all our hearts apply our selues to the prayers then made in the Church. Every secular and carnall thought ought then to be abandoned, & our mind fixed only on that which is said by the Minister. Hence it is the Minister saith, Lift vp your heartes, and the Peo∣ple answere againe, Wee lift them vp vnto the Lord. So that let our Heart be close shut against our Adversary, but wide open vnto God, nor let it suffer in time of Prayer the Enimy of God to come but neer it. S. Cyprian goeth on, ele∣gantly, & excellently, but I made promise but of a little, wherefore but thus much of Praier, the second of those points that the Church is to practise. The third is FAS∣TING, and of Fasting I had thought to haue intreated the next Thursday, but for then wee are to celebrate else∣where the Nativity of him who came neither eating nor drinking, Mat. 11.18. that is in the way of Righteousnes, Mat. 21.32. whose Disciples fasted oft, Mat. 9.19. It is I am perswaded Gods good providence whose wisdome so comelyWisd. 8.1. ordereth all things, that first (as it were) we should see the Party who is so memorable for Fasting, thereby to season vs the better for the better receit of that Doctrine. Of Fasting then if God be willing the Thursday after that. In the meane time HE so blesse vs and the seed that hath bin sowne, &c.
FASTING.Lecture 11. Iuly, 1. 1613. I Am come at this time to speake of FASTING, an Argument seldome spoken of, and as seldome practi∣sed by a many. For how many are there in this Kingdome to whome throughout the whole yeare no meale comes amisse, Fasting Daies, & Flesh Daies are all one with thē, vnlesse perhaps (which is oftē too) the Fasting Daies proue more fleshly, then the Flesh Daies thēselues. It is true we shew our selues that we are no Pa∣pists herein (and yet by your leaue some Papists will licke their fingers with vs now & then) but in avoiding that ex∣tremitie, do we not run into another? what if they forsa∣king Flesh on these daies, glut themselues with Fish more powerfull then any Flesh to the furtherance of that which is not at this time to be spoken; shall we therefore on the same daies glut our selues asmuch with Flesh and all for we will be opposite? what if a many of them, it may be, ab∣staine even from Fish too, and yet haue their divers & sun∣dry sweetInsuper etiam famam abstinē∣tiae in delitiis quaerimus. Hi∣eron Tom. 2. ad Nepot. Confections more powerfull then Flesh or Fish, and of warmer operations; shall we therfore gurmandize, and say we fast as they doe? What if they put merit in Fa∣sting, and so proue erroneous; shall we therefore be pro∣phane and wholly irreligious? Nay, God forbid. We haue not so learned Christ: you knowe whose saying it was, —Non ego AvarumHor. Ser. l. 1.
Cum veto te fieri, vappam iubeo, ac Nebulonem. There is a difference, saith our EnglishThe difference between staring and stark blind; The wise man at all times to follow can find. Heywoods Dialogue of Pro¦verbs. Part, 2. p. H. 4. b. Proverb, betweene staring, and starke blind. What? we not to fast at all? nay to be Enemies to Fasting? we not to practise that, the praises whereof are so frequent, & the effect said to be so potent, throughout the whole Scriptures, and Fathers of the Church? Goe we to the maner of the Church at all times, & hath it not alwaies beene that at the first institution, or vndertaking of any great & weightie affaires, there hath beene, as a worthyB. Andrewes of the Combat between Christ and Satan. Ser. 2. p. 14 b. Prelate obserueth, extraordinary Fa∣sting? So Moses, saith he, when he entred into his calling, at the receaving of the Law,Deut. 9.9. fasted fortie daies. So Elias at the restoring of the same Law, did the1. Kin. 19.18. like. So like∣wise when they went about the reedifying of the Temple: And there at the River by Ahana,Ezra. 8.21. saith Ezra, I proclai∣med a fast, that we might humble our selues before our God, and seeke of him a right way for vs, and for our children, and for all our substance. So likewise in the new Testament, as at the Separation of Paul & Barnabas, Act. 13.3. at the or∣daining of Elders, Act. 14.23. and in a dangerous voyage by Sea, Act. 27.9. Come we to the Fathers, and when as they endeavour to speake of Fasting, they can hardly satis∣fy themselues with the severall appellations they giue vn∣to it. Fasting,Chrys. Tom. 5. Ser. de Itiun. saith S. Chrysostome, is an imitating, or fol∣lowing the very Angels in heaven so farre forth as we are able, a contempt of things present, a Schoole of Prayer, a su∣stenance of the Soule, a Bridle to the Body. What is Fasting,Ambr. Tom. 4. de Helia & Ie∣iun. c. 3. p. 289. saith S. Ambrose, but an heavenly substance and represen∣tation. Fasting is a refreshing of the Soule, the food of the minde. Fasting is the life of Angels. Fasting is the Death of offences, the razing out of sinne, the remedy of Salvation, the roote of Grace, it is the Foundation of Chastitie. And againe a little after, Fasting,Ib. c. 8. p. 292. saith he, is the Schoolemaster of Con∣tinency, the doctrine of Virginitie, the humilitie of the minde, a chastizing of the Flesh, a forme of Sobrietie, a rule of vertue, a purifying of the Soule, the bountie of commisera∣tion,
the doctrine of Lenitie, the allurement of Charitie, the glory of old men, the preserver of young. Of Fasting then at this time: and the Text I haue chosen to this purpose is a saying of our Saviours in the second Chapter of S. Marks Gospell, the 19. and 20. verses. The words are these: And Iesus said vnto them, can the Children of the Mariage chamber fast, whiles the Bridegroome is with them? As long as they haue the Bridegroome with them, they cannot fast. But the daies will come when the Bridegroome shall be taken from them, & then shall they fast in those daies. In which words we are to consider. First the occasion of them, then the wordes themselues. The occasion of these wordes is intimated vnto vs in the verse going before. The Disciples of Iohn, saith Saint Marke, and the Pharisees did fast, and came and said vnto him, why doe the Disciples of Iohn, and of the Pharisees fast, and thy Disciples fast not? S. MatheweMat. 9.14. saith the Disciples of Iohn, did come and aske the question. S. LukeLuk. 5 30. saith it was the question of theSo it may seeme by cō∣paring the 30 and 33 verses together: but S. Austen was of opinion that S. Luke did mean the Guests in that place. Aug. de Consens. Evang. l. 2. c. 27. Scribes and Pharisees. So that belike all came, the Disciples of Iohn were here ioyned with Scribes and Pharisees. Not Saule among the1. Sam. 10.11 Prophets, but the Prophets among Saules; Brutus with Cassius, and Cassius with Brutus, and both against Caesar. Iohn the Baptist was a man of whom our Saviour gaue that great testimonie;Mat. 11.11. Ʋerily I say vnto you, among them which are begotten of women, arose there not a greater then Iohn Baptist. The Scribes and Pharisees were the greatest enimies that ever our Saviour had, and yet see how these old Foxes could wind themselues into that Brood, & cause them here to ioine with them in way of opposition to our Saviour. They could not be ignorant how their Master Iohn condemned the Pharisees, no man more, how he
Mat. 3.7. inveighed against them most bitterly, tearming them Generatiō of Vipers, as being vnworthy the name of Men, and yet forsooth who but they here with Scribes & Pha∣risees. A lesson to teach vs with whom we vse to consort our selues, for it is not for nothing that SolomonProv. 22.24. coun∣sailes vs to make no friendship with an angry man, nor to goe with the furious man, and the reason he giues is this, Least thouNovi ego hoc saeculum mori∣bus quibus sit. Malus bonum malum esse vult vt sit sui similis Plaus. Trinum. Act. 2. Sc. Quo illic. learne, saith he, his waies, & receaue destructiō to thy soule. That God was mercifull to the Soules of these Disciples of Iohn I doubt not, but see how they learnt the waies of these angry, and furious men. First they learne to find fault with him of whom their Master himselfe hadIoh. 1.29. said, Ecce Agnus Dei; Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sinnes of the world, that Lambe of God, that Sonne of the Father that taketh away the sins of the world, & was to haue mercy even on them: they are now offended at him, they are offended with his Followers, they make themselues inmates with those who were Trai∣tours to his Person, Nolumus hunc regnare super nos. We will not haue this man to raigne over vs, Luk. 19.14. Iuv. Satyr. 1.Omne in praecipiti vitium stetit. They rest not here, they runne headlong yet farther, they fall to boasting of themselues. We the Disciples of Iohn, and of the Pharisees fast, nay as it is inMat. 9.14. S. Matthews Gos∣pell, we and the Pharisees fast oft. It was an excellent say∣ing ofAug ep. 56. p. 170. S. Austen, Vitia catera in peccatis, superbia verò e∣tiam in rectè factis timenda est, ne illa quae laudabiliter facta sunt, ipsius laudis cupiditate amittantur. All other vices are to be taken heed of in the sinnes that we commit, but we are to beware of Pride evē in the good things that we do, least we should loose the benefit of those things that are laudably done by a desire to be praised for them. And might not our Saviour now haue said as Caesar did to Bru∣tus that stabd him with others,Suet. Tranq. in Iulio c. 82. ? What & Bru∣tus too? What? Iohns Disciples so brutish? Might he not haue said as the Prophet Hosea did,Hos. 4.15. Though thou Israell
play the harlot, yet let not Iuda sin? Might he not haue saide as once he did,Mat. 6.17. When thou fastest annoint thy head & wash thy face, that thou seeme not vnto men to fast, much lesse boast of it so vntimely? But let vs see what our Saviour said. And Iesus said vnto them; Can the children of the mar∣riage chamber fast, whiles the Bridegroome is with them? As long as they haue the Bridegroome with them they cānot fast. But the daies will come when the Bridegroome shall bee taken from them, and then shall they fast in those daies. He puts thē in minde of a certain speech which they had heard of their Master before. For when they had come vnto their Master long before this and said vnto him, Rabbi he that was with thee beyond Iordan to whō thou barest witnes, behold he bap∣tizeth & all men come to him: his answere vnto them was,Ioh 3.27. A man can receiue nothing, except it bee given him from heaven. Yee your selues are my witnesses, that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am sent before him. He that hath the Bride is the Bridegroome. So that he who a litle before saw Nathaniel vnder the figtree before that Philip called him, Ioh. 1.48. saw no doubt al this, and heard all this commu∣nication betweene Iohn and his Disciples. To this then it is likely he alludeth here in this place, hence it is he here saith, Can the Children of the marriage chamber fast whiles the Bridegroome is with them? as long as they haue the Bride∣groome with them they cannot fast. But the daies will come when the Bridegroome shalbe taken from them, and then shall they fast in those daies. Which words containe in them a double answer to the former question. First an answere by way of interrogati∣on with an affirmatiue annexed, and that in these words, Can the Children of the marriage chamber fast whiles the Bridegroome is with them? As long as they haue the Bride∣groome with them they cannot fast. Secondly, an other an∣swer by way of affirmation only, how indeed they should fast afterwards: But the daies wil come whē the Bridegroome shall be taken from them, & then shall they fast in those daies.
So that our Saviour here in this place stops not (as else∣where) two gaps with one bush, but one gappe with two bushes, to make the sence somewhat stronger, according vnto that, a good measure, pressed downe, shaken together and running over, Luk. 6.38. It is inVid. Aug. de Consens. Evang. l. 2. c. 27. S. Lukes Gospell, Can yee make the children of the wedding chamber to fast, Luk. 5.34. and Mat. 9.15, Can the children of the marriage chamber mourne, so that the Simile here vsed is borrowed primarily from the solemnity of mariage. As if our Saviour had thus said:Eccles, 3.1. To all things there is an appointed time, and a time to every purpose vnder the heaven.V. 4. A time to weepe, & a time to laugh, a time to mourne, and a time to daunce. A time to embrace, and a time to be farre from embracing. A time of warre, and a time of peace. Now the time that is most suit∣able to the time of laughing and of dauncing, to the time of embracing, & of peace, what is it vnder heaven, if it be not mariage time, when after so much loue and liking of both Parties, the Bridegroome, and the Bride, so manyInstitutum est vt iam pactae sponsae non tra∣dantur statim, ne vileus habe∣at Maritus da∣tam, quam non suspiraverit sponsus dilatam Aug. Confess. l. 8 c. 3. Vbi{que} maius gaudium, molestia maior praecedit. Ib. sighes on either side for wāting each other, so many staies and lets and prolongings of the time, both at length en∣ioy each other, to the great reioicing of their friends, who striue to shew that ioy of theirs some in one kinde, some in an other. But what will you say is this to the question here proposed? Much every maner of way. Our Saviour Christ Iesus here was this Bridegroome. He had newly mar∣ried (as it were) his Church vnto him. It was the cause of his comming from heaven to solemnize this mariage. They were as you heard before S. Iohn the Baptists owne words:Ioh. 3.28. He that hath the Bride is the Bridegroome: but the friend of the Bridegroome which standeth and heareth him, reioiceth greatly because of the Bridegroomes voice. This my ioy therefore is fulfilled, Now as our Saviour was the Bride∣groome, so his Apostles were the mariage Guests, for so by anCalv. in hunc locum. Hebrew phrase, The children of the mariage cham∣ber here signifie. They thē enioying his corporal presence what should they but reioice, I, & reioice greatly because
of the Bridegroomes voice, as Iohn the Baptist spake. And thus at this time did the Apostles, as our Saviour far'd, so fared they, and how then could Feasting & Fasting agree togither. So that Cannot here in this place, As long as they haue the Bridegroome with them they cannot fast, is takē for that asGreg. Naz O∣rat. 36. p. 583. Edit. Par. 1609. Nazianzene noteth, which is not convenient not agreeable vnto reason, nor is not fitting so to doe. And thus much of the first Answere. The second answere (which I told you was by way of affirmation only) was that there was indeede a time to come when these his Disciples should fast. When there should be mourning, and weeping, & great lamentation, like asMat. 2.18. Rachel wept for her children, and would not be com∣forted because they were not. For the time was after∣wards to come, and that within a few yeares, when this their Bridegroome should be taken from them, & then in∣deede were they to make many an hungry meale God wot. He was to be taken as a Thiefe with swords & with staues, Mat. 26.55. He was to be taken from Prison and iudgement, Esay 53.8. He was to be taken out of life, even as a sheepe is brought to the slaughter, Esay, 53.7. he was to be taken from the Crosse, and put into a new Tombe, Mat. 27.60. he was (as they thought) to be taken frō thēce too, They haue taken away the Lord out of the Sepulcher, & we know not where they haue laid him, Ioh. 20.2. Lastly, he was to be taken vp on high, for a clowd tooke him out of their sight, Act. 1.9. The Bridegroome then so many waies to be taken away from them, imagine, Beloved, in what a taking these his Disciples might be, and how prone they should be to fast, that were to surfet afterwardes of so ma∣ny severall sorrows. You haue seene the occasion of these words, as also the words themselues. It remaineth that out of the same I now obserue vnto you such points as may be gathered therevpon, and those are three. First a Necessity of Fasting, and that in these words, And then shall they fast. Secondly, who they are vpon whom this ne∣cessity
is here laid, and that in these words, The children of the mariage chamber: Thirdly, the time when, and that in these, The daies will come when the Bridegroome shalbe ta∣ken from from them, and then shall they fast in those daies. Of every of these in their order, & first of the Necessity of Fa∣sting. And then shall they fast. Before we come to shew the Necessity of Fasting it will will not be amisse to consider first what Fasting is, FastingChemnit. Ex am. Conc. Trid. Part. 4 p. 90. Col. 2. saith a good Writer, est castingatio corporis, & humilia∣tio animi per abstinentiam cibi & abdicationem deliciarum seu delectationum, quibus corpori & sensibus aliâs benè solet fieri. Fasting is a chastisement of the Body, and a humilia∣tion of the mind through abstinence of meat and abando∣ning of pleasures wherof the Body at other times is made partaker. Or thus, Ieiunium est abstinentia cibi, & abdi∣catio delectationum corporis ad tempus talis, quâ & corpus castigetur, & animus humilietur; an abstinence from meate and such a forsaking for a time of all our pleasures, as that the Body is thereby chastned, & our minds & soules hum∣bled. For the better conceauing whereof we are to knowe that whereas every Man consisteth of two parts, the Body and the Soule, and this Body, and this Soule are too too ma∣ny times like Simeon and Levi,Gen. 49.5. Brethren in evill, going about to overthrowe themselues, and to worke their own bane: and whereas all this harme proceedeth cheefely frō thePrius semina∣tur homo, postea concipitur in vtero, & ibi caro formatur, deinde pos dies 47. creatur ani∣ma & corpori infūditur Aug. ad Fratres in Eremo. Ser. 25 p. 943. elder of these twain, the Body, which hath this advan∣tage of the Soule, that as it selfe shall be affected, so shall the Soules operations be: hence it is, that to bring them both into a ghostly kinde of temper, and to make them hold a true pace, we bereaue the Body of that vsuall food which formerly we gaue vnto it. Famous was the saying of Hilarion to this purpose, who living solitarily in the Wildernesse, and feeling those sparkles arising that vse to set the Soule a fire: what saith he vnto his Flesh, and darest thou begin to kicke?Hieron de vi∣ta Hilarion. Ego Aselle faciam vt non calcitres. Asse as thou art I will hamper thee well enough. Nec te
hordeo alam, sed paleis. Fame te conficiam & siti: gravi one∣rabo pondere, per aestus indagabo & frigora, vt cibum potiùs quàm lasciviam cogites. I shall not hereafter feed thee with provēder, but only with cahffe. I will make thee even pine away with hunger and thirst. I will driue thee through heat and cold, so that thou shalt haue little lust to thinke on any thing, but of meat. But as there is in this case to be an abstinence of meat, so there is to be besides an abando∣ning of all such pleasures as we are at other times to par∣take of. And therefore the Prophet Ioel in an extraordina∣ry case of Fasting, such as a Publike Fast is whereof you shall heare anon, Blowe the Trumpet,Ioel. 2.15. saith he, in Syon, san∣ctifie the congregation: gather the Elders: assemble the chil∣dren, and those that sucke the breasts: let the Bridegroome goe forth of his chamber, & the Bride out of her Bridecham∣ber. Behold, Beloved, even the Bridegroome, who was by Moses law priviledged no lesse then for a tweluemonth, that he should not go aDeut. 24.5. warfare, neither be charged with any busines, but he should be free at home, & reioyce with his wife, & priviledged by our Saviour here in this place; yet had he no priviledge in a case extraordinarie, and no marvaile, for nor Childrē, nor Babes that suckt the breasts were it seemes exempted either. So the Apostle to the Co∣rinthians speaking to maried couples,1. Cor. 7.5. Defraud not one another, saith he, except it be with consent for a time, that you may giue your selues to fasting, and prayer. What, and is this wild fire of our Flesh the only cause of Fasting then? No not so neither. Much harme,M Hooker. Eccles Pol. l 5. §. 72 p. 205. saith Reverend Hooker, hath growne to the Church of God, through a false imagina∣tion that Fasting standeth men in no steed for any spirituall respect, but only to take downe the franknesse of nature, & to tame the wildnesse of the flesh. Wherevpon the world being bold to surfeit, doth now blush to fast, supposing that men whē they fast doe rather bewray a disease, then exercise a vertue. I much wonder, saith he, what they who are thus perswaded, doe thinke, what conceit they haue concerning the Fasts of
the Patriarkes, the Prophets, the Apostles, our Lord Iesus Christ himselfe. Some other causes there were in these then, and may be in vs likewise, which may mooue vs to fast. There are that alleage other causes, why we also ought to fast, as first that we may be the better disposed to Prayer and Meditation: Secondly, that it should be a testi∣mony of our humiliation before God, when vpon extra∣ordinary causes we acknowledge our own guiltines. And indeed when we call to minde our many weaknesses in praying, whose conscience will not checke him, and con∣trol him for the same? Let me instance every in the Fathers, who acknowledging as much of themselues, are sufficient witnesses vnto vs of the generall deluge of this Sin. While we intend,Dum ad au∣res tuas voce cerdis intendi∣mus, nescio vn∣de irruentibus nugatoriis cogni∣tationibus res tanta praecidi∣tur. Aug. Conf. l. 10. c. 35. p. 130. saith S. Austen, to pray vnto thee with the voice of our heart, we are cut off I knowe not how, with a many idle cogitations that rush in vpon vs. So S. Ierome. I come,Ad orationem assisto; non ora∣rem, si nō crede∣rem, sed si verè crederem, illud cor quo Deus videtur mun∣darem, manibus tanderē pectus, genas lachrymis rigarem, corpo∣re inborrescerē, ere pallerem, ia∣terem ad Domi¦ni mei pedes, e∣os{que} fletu perfū∣derem, crine ter gerem, haererem certè trunco crucis, nec prius amitterem, quā misericordiam impetrarem. Nunc verò cre∣betrimè in ora∣tione mea, aut per porticus de∣ambulo, aut de faenore computo, aut abductus turpi cogitatione, etiam quae dictu erubescenda sunt, gero. Hieron. Advers. Luciferian. Dial. saith he, to pray, I should not pray at al vnlesse I did beleeue, but if I did beleeue indeed, then should I cleanse that heart wherewith God is seene, I should knocke my breast with my hands, water my cheekes with teares, I should feele an horror over all my body, I should be as pale as ashes, I should kneele at the feet of my Lord, and wash them with my teares, and wipe them with the haires of my head, doubtlesse I should hold fast the beame of his Crosse, and in no wise part from it vntill I had obtained mercy. Howbeit now most often times in the Pray∣ers that I make, or my wits are a woolgathering, or my minde is on my halfe-peny, or quite transported with foule and fil∣thy thoughts, I doe those things that are shamefull to be spo∣ken. Thus S. Ierom, if not of himselfe, yet in the person of Orthodoxus, a true beleeuer, to shew that even true Belee∣vers may thus be distracted in their prayers. So S. Bernard: Haue mercy vpon me O God,Miserere mei Deus quoniam ihi plus pecco, vbi peccata mea emenda∣re debeo. In Monasterio nam{que} saepè dum oro, non attendo quod dico. Oro quidem ore, sed mente fe∣ris vagante, orationis fructu privor. Corpore sum interius, sed corde exterius: & ideo perdo quod dico. Idcirco magnam iniuriam Deo facio cum illum precor vt meam precem exaudiat∣quam ego qui fundo nō audio. Deprecor illum vt mihi in. ēdat. ego verò nec mihi nec illi in∣tendo sed quod deterius est, im∣munda & inv∣titon in corde versando, faeto∣rem horribilem eius aspectibus ingero. Bern. Meditat. Aliâs lib. de anima. c. 8. p. 297. col 4. saith he, for where I ought to
amend my faults, there am I faultie more and more. For often times in my Monastery while I am a praying, I attend not to what I say. I pray indeed with my mouth, but my mind wan∣dring abroad, I am deprived of the fruit of prayer. My body is within indeed but my heart is without, and therefore I loose the words that I speake. And againe a little after, Wherefore I doe great iniury to God, when I pray him to heare my pray∣er, wherevnto my selfe doe not harken while I powre it forth vnto him. I make request vnto him to attend vnto me, and I for my part neither attend my selfe nor him, nay wich is farre worse, by casting to and fro vnclean & vnprofitable thoughts in my heart, I present vnto his presence an intollerable stinch. Now if the Belweathers of the flocke of Christ thus spake of themselues, at least wise of such Beleeuers as they thē∣selues were, what may we say in like case, whose conscien∣ces will put vs in mind of more then this comes to. We are never better affected vnto God,M Hookers learned dis∣course of Iustif. Workes, &c. p. 10. saith Reverend Hooker, then when we pray; yet when we pray, how are our affecti∣ons many timesNos experi∣mento continue cernimus & sé∣timus hanc eua∣gationis necessi∣tatem. Gerson de Orat. & eius valere. Oper. Part. 3. fol. 41 Col. 3. And he tels a little before of the Country fel∣low that was to say his Pa∣ter noster for an Asse and quite lost hm by reason of the Saddle. distracted! How little reverence doe we shew vnto the grande maiestie of God, vnto whom we speake! How little remorse of our owne miseries! How little taste of the sweet influence of his tender mercies do we feele! Are we not, saith he, as vnwilling many times to begin, and as glad to make an end; as if in saying Cal vpō me, he had set vs a very burden some taske? All this and more then this our Flesh continually worketh, that traiterous Flesh of ours, and therefore you see how necessary it is we should subdue it as by other meanes, so especiallie by Fasting. You see what Fasting is. You haue scene withal the Ne∣cessity of it. For if our Flesh be thus wilde and not to be tamed but by Fasting: if Fasting better disposeth vs to Prayer and Meditation: if Fasting be a speciall testimonie of humbling our selues before God, what remaineth but as the Apostle S. Paule said of Preaching,1. Cor. 9.16. Necessity is laid vpon me, and wo is vnto me if I preach not the Gospell, so we say of Fasting in time of the Gospell; Necessity is laid vpō
vs and wo is vnto vs if we fast not. Woe vnto our Bodies for they are as so many Serpents proffering forbiddē fruit vnto our Soules: woe vnto our Soules for they are as so many Eues tempted, and tempting others. Woe to vs Bo∣dies and Soules, which shall not be cast out of Eden onelie, where shall be setGen. 3.24. Cherubims & the blade of a Sword sha∣kē to keep the way of the tree of life, but both shal be cast out into vtter darknes where isMat. 8.12. weeping & gnashing of teeth. I come to the second point: who they are that are to fast, and that in these words; The children of the marriage chamber. And Iesus said vnto them, Can the children of the marriage chāber fast, whiles the Bridegroome is with them? You heard before who they were that were meant by these Children here. And it is true the Apostles indeede were primarily meant, they were the Parties here oppug∣ned, and they were the Parties here in this place defended by our Saviour. Howbeit as somethings were spoken to, and of the Apostles in particular, wherein no body els was to beare a part: some things wherein their Successors only and the Cleargy should haue a share: some things wherein all Christians should share as well as they: so this among other things appertained to al Christiās especially al such as to whom or Age, or weaknes gaue no exemption. For as for such our Adversaries themselues will not deny but they are to be exempted indeed. And therefore Bellar∣mine hath some certaine Classes, ranckes and orders of mē of this kinde. In the first heBell de bon. Oper. in partic. l 2. c. 10. placeth Oldmen and Chil∣dren, sicke folkes, & women with childe, All such as in the opiniō of Physitians cānot fast without danger of bodily health, & all such poore folkes as go from dore to dore. In the second Preachers, & Lecturers, & Confessors, and such as attend on sicke folkes, & any other who cānot possibly fast & satisfie withal the duty they owe vnto the Church. In the third all such as having a laborious kinde of trade haue their spirits exhausted by it, he maketh instaunce in Masons, Smithes, Carpenters and the like. And indeede
reason good, for if Iacob said well to Esau,Gen. 33.13. My Lord I∣cb knoweth that the children are tender, and the Ewes, and kine with young vnder my hand; and if they should overdriue them one day, all the flocke would die; and therefore woulde he driue softly according to the pace of the Cattell, and as the Children should be able to endure: how much more should the Church haue care and compassion in this spiri∣tuall driving of hers, least whose Soules she seekes to saue, shee should cause their Bodies to be destroyed. But where was this care or compassiō when time was in this Mother Church of Rome, if so be shee be a Mother that hath no Quorsum su∣perbum Matris illa vendicet Nomen sibi, quae Matre dig∣nü nil agit, So∣phocl. Trachin Mother-hood in her at al or towards womē with Child, or towardes them that kept them: did they notVid Acts and Mon. concer¦ning Frebarns wife, p. 1184. and concerning two yong girles Lucy Wily & Agnes Wily, who kept their Mother in child bed: p 1048. handle them most barbarously, and profanely vse that nourish∣ment which was to be foode vnto them? I wonder what these Fellowes would haue done with that peece of pow∣dred Porke which Spiridion, cum iam instaret Quadragesi∣ma, even in the beginning of Lent didSozom. Hist. l. 1. c. 11. p. 436 set before his Guest willing him to eat thereof, & began vnto him him∣selfe. But I hasten to the Time, for that the Time it selfe ha∣stens. The daies wil come when the Bridegroome shal be taken from them and then shall they fast in those daies. How the Bridegroome was taken from them & by how many maner of waies, I haue told you evē now, & so is he consequently taken from vs too, till he come at length for good & all Whom the heavenAct. 3.21. saith S. Peter, must containe vntill the time that all things be restored: andAug Ep. 57. p. 176. S. Austen to this purpose, Noli ita{que} dubitare ibi nunc esse hominem Chri∣stū Iesum, vnde venturus est, nec aliunde quàm inde vēturus est ad vivos mortuos{que} iudicandos. Doubt thou not there∣fore that Christ Iesus as he is man is there (in heavē) from whence he shal come, & frō no place but thence to iudge both quick & dead. But he may be said to be absent from vs two manner of waies besides. First from any of vs in particular when he layeth any crosse or calamity vpon vs, & therefore the ProphetPs. 22.1. David, My God, my God (looke
vpon me) why haste thou forsaken me: and art so farre from my health, and from the words of my complaint? Secondly, frō vs all in generall when vpon a whole Citty or vpon a Na∣tion he sendeth some generall calamities, & therefore the Prophet DavidPs. 74.1. againe, O God, wherefore art thou absent from vs so long, why is thy wrath so hote against the sheepe of thy pasture? According to these two circūstances Fastings were commonly in holy Scriptures, & now in time of the Gospell ought our Fasts also to be. So that Fastings in ho∣ly Scripture were either of mens owne free and voluntary accord as their particular devotion did moue them there∣vnto, or els they were publiquely enioined in their Syna∣gogues, and required at the hands of all. Concerning pri∣vate Fasts in holy Scriptures there was an ancient practise among the Iewes of fasting voluntarily and in privat, whē as there was no day set, but the Party that fasted chose a∣ny time according to season and opportunity. And it was concerning those that our Saviour gaue those precepts, Mat. 6.16. Where he taught them also the māner of Fa∣sting, and proposed vnto thē a reward. Now private FastsP. Martyr loc. Cont. Class. 3. Loc. 10 §. 8. saith Peter Martyr are then to be vndertaken whē some proper and peculiar calamity afflicteth vs at home, or if no such betide vs, then must wee so doe for others. Thus did David the Prophet in generall, Psal. 35.12. & particular∣ly for Abner, 2. Sam. 3.35. When they were sicke, saith he, I put on sackcloath, and humbled my soule with fasting: and a∣gaine concerning Abner, So do God to me, saith he, and more also, if I tast bread, or ought else til the Sunne be downe. Concerning their publique Fasts, required at the hands of all, they were either Ordinary or Extraordinary. Ordinary Fasts, such as were either yeerly, or monthly, or weekely, ob∣served by them. Extraordinary, or vpon occasion of some imminent danger, or some publike calamity that had o∣vertaken them already, or vpon the vndertaking of some great & weighty affaires. Imminent danger as that of Ni∣niveh (though the Ninivites were not Israelites) Ion. 3.7.
Publique calamity, as that of the Israelites against the Ben∣iamites, Iudg. 20.26. Vndertaking of weighty affaires, as Re∣edifying of the Temple, Esd. 8.21. Inimitation of al this we haue also our Fasts too, Ordi∣dinary, and Extraordinary. Our Ordinary Fasts are such as are to be observed either yeerly, or weekly. The yearely Fast is Lent, and Ember daies. Ember daies so called as if you should say Temper-daies, of Quatuor Temporū (according to theVid. Bristew Motiues Mt: 32, Dutch, the root of our English) & are to be fasted foure severall times a yeere. The weekely Fast is to be ob∣served on Wednesdaies, and Frydaies, and Saterdaies. Con∣cerning Frydaies, and Saterdaies, how first they were kept by the Church but yeerely, and that immediatly before Easter, how afterwardes they came to be weekely: bow the Churches that observed not Saterday, had Wednesday in∣steed thereof, it would aske a long time to tell you, and therefore I referre you toM. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l 51 § 72. p. 208. Reverend Mr Hooker for this point. Concerning Wednesday, it is a day enioined vs by QVEENE ELIZABETH of blessed memory aswel as the two other, & therefore when that frantickePius, 5. Pope in his furi∣ous Bull against her, among many grosse and palpable vn∣trueths had set downe this for one that shee had abolish∣ed Ciborum delectū, al choice of meates: out worthy Iewell thus answered it;B. Iewels view of a seditious Bull p. 12. Ope∣ra Angl. Edit. 1611. What one fish day is changed through the whole yeere? What Lenten, Ember, Saterday, Fryday, or other vsuall Fasting day? Our LawEliz. Anno 5. c 5. saith, it shall not bee lawfull to any person or persons within this Realme to eate any flesh vpō any daies now vsually observed as fish daies. Nay besides those daies which our Forefathers kept, wee haue appointed that Wednesday in every weeke throughout the yeare, be kept fish day, and that no manner of person shall eate any flesh on the same day, whereby wee haue made nigh fifty fish daies more, then haue beene observed heretofore by the lawes & customes of this Realme. What? and doth this please them? No nor this neither. StapletonStapl. Promp. Morale in Dom. 1. Quadrages. p. 370. cals it, Novum ieiunium, Politicū, minimè Philosophicum, & minùs religiosum, a new kind of
Fast, a Politike fast, such a Fast as is not so much as Philo∣sophical, and no waies religious, or Ecclesiasticall. Weston heWesten de tri∣pl. hom. offic. l. 2 c. 7 p, 92. tels vs that Iciunij quartae feriae, concerning. Wednes∣day fast, post Ignatium mentionem fecit antiquissimus Ec∣clesiastes Clemens Alexandrinus: that two of the most an∣cient, Ignatius and Clemens Alexandrinus, doe mention it both. Thus wil they haue it sometimes to be new, somtimes to be old, sometimes Politicke, sometimes Ecclesiasticall. It were a skilfull Cooke that knewe their dyet. But thus much of ordinary Fasts. The Fasts that are Extraordinarie, are either vpon occa∣sion (as I said) of some imminent danger, or some publike calamitie that hath already overtaken vs, or vpon the vn∣dertaking of some great and weightie affaires. And the difference betweene the Ordinarie, and the Extraordina∣ry Fasts is this, that in the Ordinary Fasts we neede but a∣bate only the quantitie and kind of dyet (& therefore the Law doth ratherVid. D. Abboss. Answer. to D. Bish. Epistle to the King p. 65. call them Fish daies then Fasting daies) but in the Extraordinary, we ought to depriue our selues wholly of al food during the time that our Fasts continue. And of these Extraordinary Fasts should much be spoken, especially how they should not beMy Lord of London on Io¦nas Lect 35. p. 473. practised but by war∣rant from the Magistrate, and how the peeuish overhasti∣nesse of some haue by preventing the Magistrates decree, done in trueth more harme then good: onely this I will now say, that by how much these generll Fasts are the seldomer practised of vs, by so much should we keepe the Ordinary ones, and specially our private Fasts much more often. For never to seeke after God,M Hooker Eccles. Pol. l 5. § 72. p. 205. saith Reverend Hoo∣ker, sauing only when either the crib, or the whip doth con∣straine, were brutish servilitie: and a great derogation to the worth of that which is most predominant in man, if sometime it had not a kind of voluntary accesse to God, & of conference as it were with God, all inferiour considerations laid aside. Which kind of fasting from all meat and drinke, or what may be insteed thereof, or in our particular fasts, or extra∣ordinary
is not so to be taken neither, as if the Lord, asNon quod De∣us vniversitatis creator & Do∣minus, intestino∣rum nostiorum rugitu, & inani∣tate ventris, pulmonis{que} dele∣ctetus ardore, sed quod aliter pudicitia tuta esse non possit. Hieron Tom. 1 ad Eustoch. de custodia Virgin p. 137. speakes S. Ierome, were delighted with the croaking of our bellies, and emptinesse thereof, & parching heat of our lungs: but that we ioyne with this abstinence, an abstinence frō vices too, or else the other abstinence is nothing worth. A peccatis nostris,Aug. de Temp Ser. 182. p. 695 saith S. Austen, principaliter ieiune∣mus, ne ieiuniaFortè, Nostra. vestra sicut Iudaerum ieiunia à Deo respu∣antur. Quale est enim vt à cibis quos Dominus creavit, ne∣scio quis impostor abstineat, & peccatorum saginâ pingues∣cat. Let vs principally fast from our Sinnes, least our Fasts as the Iews fasts should be reiected of the Lord. For what a kind of Fast is that, that some Impostor should abstaine from meats that God hath created, & should fat himselfe with sinne. And how the Fasts of the Iewes were reiected of the Lord, the Prophet Esay will tell vs from the Lords own mouth, who when the People said vnto him, where∣fore haue we fasted and thou seest it not? we haue punish∣ed our selues, and thou regardest it not,Esay. 58.3. Behold, saith the Lord, in the day of your fast, you will seeke your will, and re∣quire all your debts.V. 4. Behold, you fast to strife and debate, & to smite with the fist of wickednesse: you shall not fast as you do to day, to make your voice to be heard aboue.V. 5. Is it such a fast that I haue chosen, that a man should afflict his Soule for a day, and to bow downe his head as a Bul-rush, and to ly downe in sackcloath and ashes? Wilt thou call this a fasting, or an ac∣ceptable day to the Lord?V. 6. Is not this the fasting that I haue chosen, to loose the bands of wickednesse, to take off the heavie burdens, and to let the oppressed goe free, and that yee breake every yoake.V. 7. Is it not to deale thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poore that wander, vnto thine house? when thou seest the naked that thou cover him, & hide not thy selfe frō thine owne flesh? The Prophet Esay goeth on, but I mustVid Chrys. Ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 71, cui ti∣tulus, Nihil prodeste eiu∣nium si reli∣qua desint me¦rita. Tem. 5. p. 446. content my selfe with this, for that I haue yet farre to goe. You haue seene, Beloued, concerning Fasting, First, the necessitie of it: Secondly, the Parties who they are that are
to fast: Thirdly, the time, and withall the maner of Fasting how it is, namely for a certaine time to abstaine from all meat and drinke, or what may be insteed thereof, as also from vices too, and besides to be doing good. Now the Popish kind of Fasting (whereof they so much boast, and contemne vs ten times more then ever theLuk. 18.11. Pharisee did the Publican for not observing of the same) how little cor∣respondence it hath with true Fasting indeed, is evident by the premisses. For may that be called a Fast, when they fast from the flesh of Birds and Beasts, & feed on the flesh of Fish? I speake no otherwise then doth the Apostle Saint Paul, All flesh,1. Cor. 15.39 saith he, is not the same flesh, but there is one flesh of Men, another flesh of Beasts, another of Fi∣shes, and another of Birds. I speake no otherwise then Mo∣ses doth, who speaking of Fish, calls it Flesh too, for when the Lord had promised Flesh vnto the People, Six hundred thousand footmen are there of the People,Num. 11.22 saith Moses, a∣mong whom I am: & thou saist that I will giue them flesh that they may eat a month long. Shall the Sheepe and the Beeues be slaine for them to find them? either shall all the Fish of the Sea be gathered together for them to suffise them? I speak no otherwise thē the Lord himselfe doth, who hauing spokē of Fish that haue nor Finnes, nor scales: They,Levit. 11.11 faith the Lord, shall be an abomination vnto you, yee shall not eate of their flesh, but shall abhorre their carkesse. Now as ourIoh. 10 35. Sa∣viour reasoned in another case, If he called them Gods, vn∣to whom the word of God was giuen, and the Scripture cannot be broken, say yee of him whom the Father hath sanctified and sent into the world, thou blasphemest because I said I am the Sonne of God? So if the Apostle S. Paule, if Moses, if the Lord himselfe call Fish by the very name of Flesh, and the Scripture cannot be broken, say they of him who eateth Fish, that he abstaineth from eating Flesh? or that he eat∣eth no Flesh at all, who eateth nothing but Fish? That which the Spirit of God in the holy Scriptures hath thus ioyned (as it were) together, will they presume to put a∣sunder,
especially in such a case as concerneth (as they say) no lesse then Life and Death, Salvation and Damnation? But be it they were distinguished, and it were meritorious to feed on Fish, and damnable to feed on Flesh, yet may that be called a Fast when they feed not on Fish onely (moreThe fast of Fish is much more delicate and exquisite thē that of flesh. Montaign. Es∣saies l. 1. c. 49. powerfull a many times then Flesh is to the works of the Flesh) but they poure downe their throats withall so much of that Blood, which IacobGen 49.11. calls the Blood of the grape? My meaning is when they fast not from Wine. Vinū,Ephes. 5.18. saith the Apostle S. Paule, in quo est luxuria, wine where∣in is excesse. Nec mirum,Hieron ad Furiam p. 81. saith S Ierome, hoc figulum sen∣sisse de vasculo quod ipse fabricatus est, cum etiam Comicus cuius finis est humanos mores nosse at{que} describere, dixerit, si∣ne Cerere & Libero friget Venus. Nor is it any marvell that the Potter should so speake of the vessell which he him∣selfe framed, when as the Comical Poet, whose ende it is to knowe and shew the maners of men, said that Ʋenus was but key-cold without the company of Ceres, and Bac∣chus, the one the Goddesse of Corne, the other the God of Wine. Wine, saith the sameHieron. ad Eustoch. de cu∣stod. Virgin. p. 137. S. Ierome, that is no better then Venome; Prima arma Daemonum. Incendium volupta∣tis. The Divels cheefe weapon, and inflamation of plea∣sure? Quid oleum flammae adijcimus, saith he, quid ardenti corpusculo fomenta ignium ministramus? Why doe we by drinking of wine adde oyle vnto the flame, saith he, why doe we yeeld that fuell to our Bodies already burning? And indeed it is a cleere case, how the ancient Fathers in their Fasts abstained from wine too. Qui nos abstinemus à vino,Aug. de Temp Ser. 64. p. 511. saith S. Austen, quo moderatè vti licet, imprimis pec∣cata fugiamus, quae omninò nunquam licent. Againe, Cessent lavacra,Aug. de Temp Ser 65 p. 512. saith he, vina, vel carnes, non quòd creaturam Dei iudicemus esse damnandam, sed qui toto anno nobis viximus, saltem vel paucos dies vivamus & Domino. SoChrys Tom. 5. de Ieiun. Ser. 1. p. 815. S. Chryso∣stome, Quae tibi subtracta sunt? Vinum, phlegmatis immun∣dicia, capitis dolor, respirandi difficultas. SoClem. Rom. Cōstit. Apost. l. 5 c. 17. Clemens Ro∣manus,Cyrillus Hie∣ros. Catech. 4. p. 92. Edit. Paris. 1608. Cyrillus Hierosolimitanus,Origen in Iob. l. 3. p. 431. Origen, andBasil. de Ieiun. Hom. 1. p. 237. . Basil.
But what doe I reckon vp by peece-meale the many So∣lecismes of their Fasts. Consider we the Fasts of the Ma∣nichees of old; consider we what was spoken against them by the Orthodox Christians that then liued: and see if in the one we haue not the true patterne of Popish Fasts, and of Protestants arguments and reasons against them in the other. Our thrice-worthyM.D. Abbots against D. B sh. Epistle to the King. p 34. Professour hath thus obser∣ved it. The Montanists appointedHorum em poa obsevan¦tes & dies & menses & annos Galaticamur planè, si Iudai carum ceremo niarum, fi lega∣lium solennita∣tum observan∣tes sumus, illas enim Apostolus dedocet cem∣pescent veteris Testamenti in Christo sepulti perseverantiam & novi sistens, Tertul. de Ie∣iun. p. 650. certaine and standing daies for fasting and forbearing of certaine meats: so doe the Papists. The Mōtanists did not take any creature or meat to beQuo ille non ex institutione, sed ex devotio∣ne abstinebat. Tertul. Ib. p. 648. Abstinen∣tes ab eis quae nō reiicimus sed differimus. Tertul Ib. p. 651 Sciebat quosdam castigatores & interdictores victus incusare qui ex fastidio, non qui ex officio abstinerent. Tertul. Ib. vncleane, but did only by way of devotion as they preten∣ded forbeare at certaine times: and the Papists also doe the same. The Montanists being vrged with the place of S. Paule to Timothy of them that command to abstain from meats, an∣swered that that place touchedPraedamnans haereticus perpetuam ab∣stinentiam praecepturos ad destruenda & despicienda pera Creatoris-quales apud Marcionem, a∣pud Tatianum, non apud Paracletum, Tertul. Ibid. Marcion and Tatianus, and such other who condemned the creatures as evill & vncleane not them who did not reiect the creatures, but only forbeare the vse of them at some times: the same answer giue theRhem. Annot. in. 1. Tim. 4.3. Pa∣pists. The Montanists tooke their very fastings to be a ser∣vice and worship of God: so doe theBell. de bonis Oper. in partic. l. 2. c. 8. Papists. The Monta∣nists thought that their fastings didNos hoc prius affirmare debemus, quod occulie subrui pericli∣tatur quantum valeat apud Deum inanitas istat & ante omni, vnde ratio ipsa precsserit oc mo∣do promerendi Deum. Tertul. Ib. p. 645. Delicta quae ieiuniis elimentur. Ib. p. 650. merit at Gods hands: that it was a satisfaction for sin, an expiation of sin: that emp∣tinesse of belly did much availe with God, and made God to dwell with man: the same effects doe the Papists teach of their superstitious Fasts. Were there so many correspondences betweene Martial the Poet, and Maximus? No doubt∣lesse, and yet you knowe howMartial. Epig. l. 2. Epig. 18. oftentimes he said, I am sumus ergo pares. There is now no difference betweene vs.
Our worthy Professour goeth on. Looke what arguments, saith he, the Papists vse for their fastings, the very same Ter¦tulliā vsed for the Montanists. Look what cavils & calum∣niations the Papists vse against vs of Feasting insteed of Fa∣sting, of Epicurisme, & papering the belly, the same Tertulliā being a Montanist vsed against the doctrine of the Church of Rome that then was, whereas neither that Church then, nor we now do reiect that true fasting which the Scripture teach∣eth, but only those opinions of Fasting which the Montanists first devised, & the Papists haue receaved against the Scrip∣ture; namely, to forbeare continually by way of religion such and such daies from such & such meats with a mind therein, and by their very forbearance to doe a worship to God, to sa∣tisfie for sinne, to merit and purchase the forgiuenesse thereof and to deserue eternall life. But what doe I mention our own Writers that find such fault with their Fastings? Are we the only men that doe it? Are there not even of them∣selues that shew as well as we, how they swarue therein from all Antiquitie? nay, that finde fault with it as well as we? Marke and obserue their wordes, you shall see what the force of Trueth is by our Adversaries them∣selues. Quid enim dicerent? quò evaderent, as speakesAug. de Verb. Apost. Ser. 22. p. 253. S. Austen, inclusi retibus veritatis? For what indeede should they else say? how should they possibly escape entangled as they are in the Nets of Trueth. First Maldo∣nate a Iesuite hath of Fasting these words. Quod attinet ad ciborum delectūMaldonat. in Summula qu. 23. Art. 2. p. 341. Edit. Col. 1604. saith he, sempere in Ieiunio obseruatum est vt ab illis cibis abstineretur, qui maximè finem ieiunij im∣pdire poterant. Id autem mutatum est, mutatis temporibus saepe. Nam verum & perfectum ieiunium, & quasi exemplar omnium fuit illud, quod ipso nomine declaratur, Nihil come∣dere, vt latino verbo significatur. Nam propriè esse ieiunum est nihil prorsus edere. Ad hunc modum perfectissimos ieiu∣natores legimus ieiunasse. Cōcerning the choise of meats in Fasting it hath bin alwaies obserued to abstaine frō those meates, which cheefly might hinder the end of Fasting.
But that with the often change of times is chaunged now a dayes. For a true and perfect Fast, & as it were a patterne of all other, is that Fast which is signified by the name it selfe, that is, to eat nothing at all, as appeares by the latine word for properly to be Fasting is to eat iust nothing. He maketh instance there in that place in the fast of Moses, of Elias, of our Sauiour, of S. Paule, & those other that fasted with him the space of fourteene dayes, Act. 27.33. You shall haue coupled with Maldonate an other Iesuite too, Azorius by name, he of Fasting hath these words: Certè,Azor. Instit. Moral. l. 7 c. 10 §. Certè p. 563. Col. 1. Edit. Co∣lon. 1602. saith he, negari non potest consueta veterum Christianorum ieiunia, carnium esu & vini potis caruisse: at verò in more po∣situm est, vt in diebus ieiuniorum piscibus, herbis, legumini∣bus, & fructibus, & vino similiter vtamur. Certainly it can∣not be denied but that the vsual Fasts of the aunciēt Chri∣stians was to want the Vse of eating of Flesh, and drinking of Wine; howbeit now in these dayes it is with vs an vsuall custome both with Fish, and Hearbs, and Pulse, and Fruit, to haue the vse of wine too. What? of VVyne would some body say? wyne wherin is excesse as you heard before from the Apostle S. Paule? wyne, as bad as venome? the Divells cheefe weapon, and inflamation to voluptuousnes, as you heard from S. Ierom? wyne as you hard from S. Chrysostōe the fylth and matter of flegme, the cause of head-ach, & of difficulty of fetching brath? Oh yes! Omnes communi con∣sensu testantur, id quod solum in potum, nō in cibum sumitur, cuiusmodi vinum etiam est, ieiunium minimè relaxare. They are al agreede vpon it, that that which is taken for drinke only, not for meate, such as wine is, doth not preiudice a mans fast. Good newes for Drinkers, who care but little for Meat, so they be not bard the Spicket. But let vs heare him answere one obiection more.Azor. vbi sup. Colum. 2. At vinum inquies, etiam ipsum nutrit, you wil say that wine nourisheth. Likely i∣nough: and what wil Azorius say to that? Verum est sayth he, nutrire quidem aliquantulum: sed non sumitur precipuè ad nutriendum, sed ad sitim leuandam, & ideo non in cibum,
sed in potum adhibetur. Indeede saith Azorius, true it is, it nourisheth a little, but wine is not chiefly taken in regard of that, but to quench the thirst, and therfore is it vsed not for meate, but for drinke. A worshipfull wise conclusion, Vinum nō in cibum sed in potum adhibetur, wine is not vsed for meate, but for drinke. But if wine may be drunke for al it nourish a little, & there is no breaking of the Fast: why should a little Flesh bee so capitall an offence that it may be, will not nourish much more? Or why did not all agree vpon this in those primitiue times of the Church when Wine so strictly was forbidden? But I hasten to my thirde witnesse, him whom when you shal once heare to speake, you would suppose he were some Protestant, should I not name the man vnto you. But Ferus is the man, he reckons vp no lesse then eightFerus Exord, in Ionam Proph inter Opusc, v∣ria p. 178. Edit. Lugd. 1567. abuses which are in their Fastings. First, saith he, for that Fasting is too much streightned by some amongst vs, and is made exceeding difficult & bur∣densome to the Poore. Secondly, for that by Fasting the Consciences are more bound thē they ought to be. Third∣ly, for that herevpon they make mortall sin too too easie. Fourthly, for that the Rich being dispensed withall, the Poore are left in the bryars. Fiftly, in that a many of them (I might haue englished it, the most, Ferus his word is, Ple∣ri{que}) but in that a many of them put their hope of Salvatiō in Fasting, prefer it before the Commandements of God, and account it a greater Sin not to fast, then to cōmitDeni{que} non ie∣iunare maius peccatum aesti∣mant, quàm a∣dulterari, aut inebriari. Mark this for that one S. R. in his Answer to Bels challēge insinuates, that no Ca∣tholike doth so, & skores it vp for Bels fourescore & sixteenth vn∣truth, and in his Epistle to the Reader hee tearmeth it a Slaunder. Thus we slāder them with mat∣ters of Truth. a∣dultery, or to be drunken. Sixtly, for that we iudge too too rashly of those that fast not. Seavēthly, for that we b∣staine only from Flesh, and seeke a greater pleasure both in Fish and also in Wine. Eightly, that we fast from Flesh, but not from the vices of the Flesh. Nay we in our Fasts, saith he,Imò in ieiunio nostro non mi∣nùs adultera∣mur, fernica∣mur, inebria∣mur, foeneca∣mu proximos oppiraimus, bsphemamus &c. quàm aliis temporibus. The same S. R. in his Answer to Bell. p 410. in the Margent produceth M. Fox his Testimony, that PROTESTANTS ARE SO ILL THAT THEY CANNOT BE WORE IF THEY WOVLD, which is likely enough to bee true of some that goe vnder that name, who with these Romane Catholikes are like another day to be bound vp in bundles and to bee throwne into hell fire Mat. 13.30. So say our Rhemists. Looke whe∣ther your mē be more ver¦tuous, your women more chast, your childrē more obedient, your servants more trustie, your maides more modest, your friends more faithfull, your Laity more iust in dea∣ling, your Cleargy more devout in praying: whether there be more religion, feare of God, faith, and conscience in all states now, then of old, when there was not to much reading, chatting, and iangling of Gods word, but much more syncere dea∣ling, doing and keeping the same. The Rhemists in the Preface to their Testament §. 18. Whervnto M. Cartwright in effect thus answereth The trial of the cause by the outward Fruits receaueth many exceptions. First as foure sorts of grounds sowne by the seed of the Gospell, there is but one fruitfull; wherefore to preiudice the Fruit that the good ground yeeldeth, by the barrennes and vnprofitablenesse of the other three sorts, is not equall nor vpright iudgement. Secondly the fault may be in the negligence of some of the Governours of the Church. Now, to lay that fault vp∣on the Religion, which cleaueth vnto the Governours, is likewise an vnequall and vnveniudge∣ment. Thirdly, though Sinne reigned in Popery, yet it appeared not, the candle of knowledge clean put out, The bright shining of the Gospell makes it now appeare more vgly. M. Cartwright in his Answer to the Preface of the Rhemish Test. p. 53, 54, 55, &c. commit no lesse adultery, fornication, drunkennesse, vsu∣ry,
we oppresse our neighbours no lesse, and blaspheme God as much as we do at other times. Virg. Aeneid. l 2.Apparet domus intus & atria longa patescunt. Me thinkes they shoulde now boast no more of their Fa∣sting: much lesse twit vs in the teeth for our intemperan∣cy. Doubtlesse then thus to be, we cannot be worse if we would, and were we the worst that ever were, we shoulde hardly deserue this report. But thus much of Fasting the third of those foure points the Church is to practise, and consequently our selues: the fourth is ALMES, & of Almes Godwilling at my next returne, my next, and last. In the meane time God so blesse vs, and the seed that hath beene sowne, &c.
ALMES.Lecture 12. Novemb. 18 1613. MOses, great Moses, so famous throughout the world both with Iew & Gentile, Grecian and Bar∣barian, when after much adoe hee was perswaded by the mouth of God himselfe to go vnto Pharaoh, that hee might bring the Israelites out of Egypt, hee tooke his wife & his sonnesExod. 4.20. saith the Scripture, & put thē on an Asse, & returned toward the land of Egypt. Howbeit as he was by the way in the InneV. 24. saith the selfe same Scripture againe, occurrit ei Dominus, & volebat oc∣cidere eum: the Lord met him, and would haue killed him. A strange kinde of accident, and if I mistake not, one of the strangest in Gods booke. The Lord was the Author of that his iourney: he perswaded him vnto it diverse and sundry waies; it was a message he sent him about of singu∣lar great importance, and yet for all this: As he was by the way in the Inne saith the Scripture, the Lord met him, and would haue killed him. Ne{que} tamen causa exprimiturCalv. in hunt lecum. saith Calvin, cur Deum sibi-tam infestum senserit and yet the cause is not set downe there why God was so angry with him, only by the Text we may coniecture for he had not circumcised his Sonne. O the iudgements and iustice of God against Sinne even in his Servants, ifLuk. 23.31. they do these things to a greene tree, what shall be done to the dry? The time is come1. Pet. 4.17. saith S. Peter, that iudgement must beginne at
the house of God. If it first begin at vs, what shall the end be of them which obey not the Gospell of God? And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the vngodly, and the sinner ap∣peare? It fared with me the last Tearme, Dearely Beloved in our Saviour, as it did with Moses at that time, who ha∣ving such a message concerning you, as Moses had con∣cerning the Israelites, about a spirituall delivery of you from an Enemy spiritual, was in like danger as Moses was of losse of temporall life. The difference betwixt vs was, that the danger of the losse of his life was at the verie be∣ginning of his message, mine at the latter end. I had but one only Lecture to make you, when as my many & ma∣nifold sins caused that great God aboue to read himselfe a Lecture vnto me concerning another world. And as the ApostlePhilip. 2.27. speakes of Epaphroditus, No doubt he was sicke very neere vnto death, but God had mercy on him: so may I say concerning my selfe, sicke I was, and by all likelihood asCorpus penè iacebat exani∣me, & anhelos artus mors vi∣cina quatiebat. Hieron. ad Marcellam de aegrotat. Blesillae. neere vnto Death, but God that had mercy on him, had mercy on me too: hePsal. 103.4 saued my life from destruction, and crowned me with mercy, and louing kindnesse. For my owne part my resolution wasBern. Ser. in Festo S. Martin p. 64 Col. 3, that of S. Martin, sicke (it should seeme) of the same disease that I was, Domine si adhuc Populo tuo sum necessarius, non recuso laborem, and I added therevnto, sin autem, non sepulchrum. O Lord, if so be yet thou wilt imploy me still among thy People, I am content to take the paines, if not, to betake my selfe to my sepulchre, or my graue. But it seemes the Lord had yet somwhat else to imploy me in, wherefore so graciously he hauing now lengthened the thred of my life, what remai∣neth but I now arise & minister vnto him, as did S. Peters Mother, Mat. 8.15. To come then to the matter in hand. It is a good definition, or description rather which A∣thanasius doth giue vs of a Christian man. A Christian,. Atha∣nas Tom. 2. Tract. de Desi∣nit. p 59. Edit. Conunclin. 1601 saith Athanasius, is a true and a reasonable house of Christ, builded vp by good workes, as also by a right beleefe. Now S.
Austen speaking of Faith, he tels vs how it is our First∣borne, and goes before Workes. All our good workes,Primogenita cordis nostri Fi∣des est, nemo e∣nim benè opera∣tur, nisi Fides praecesserit. Om∣nia opera tua bona filii tui sunt spirituales sed inter istos ti∣bi primogenita Fides est. Aug. Tom. 9. de Con∣venient. Decem Praecep & decē Plagar. c. 10. p. 785. & Tom. 10. de Temp. Ser. 95 p. 566. saith he, are our spirituall Children, but the eldest of them is Faith. This it was that caused me to make that Division at the first (as I haue told youLect. 9. p. 213 heretofore) of what it was the Church was first of all to beleeue, and secondly what to practise. Concerning her Beleefe you haue heard alrea∣dy, as also concerning three points of those foure she is to practise. The fourth is Almes, and of Almes God willing at this time, and the Text I haue chosen to this purpose is a passage of the Apostle S. Paules, in his Epistle to the E∣phesians, the second Chapter, the tenth verse. The wordes are these, For we are his workemanship, created in Christ Ie∣sus vnto good workes, which God hath ordained that we should walke in them. I omit the coherence here in this verse with that which went before, nor doe I purpose now to tell you who these Ephesians were. I come to the wordes themselues, out of which I obserue vnto you foure especiall and principall points: First a Creation of vs: Secondly, in whom: Thirdly, vnto what: Fourthly, our correspondence therevnto. First of the first and formost, namely our Creation. Our Creation here spoken of, is not that Creation whereof I haue told youLect. 2. p. 33. & Lect. 5. p. 91 heretofore concerning the ma∣king of our Bodies, and enduing them with a liuely Soule, as you haue heard heretofore out of Iob, & out of David, no, that is common to vs with the very wicked & repro∣bate, but this Creation here spoken of, is proper and pecu∣liar to the Godly. And would you knowe what that is? Our Regeneration, our new Birth, that which our Saviour spake of to Nicodemus,Ioh. 3.3. Ʋerily, verily, I say vnto thee, ex∣cept a man be borne againe, he cannot see the kingdome of God. We see it by experience the Tree that beareth Crabs,
& wild and sowre fruit, by graffing and inoculating, bea∣reth that which is sweet and pleasant. So is it with man∣kind. In our first birth we are but like crab stocks, but be∣ing new graffed by regeneration, we are cleane altered & changed. Nor in this case doth it availe vs that we are, be∣gotten by faithfull Parents, forasmuch as they beget vs, asAug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 14. p. 222. speakes S. Austen, Non vnde regenerati, sed vnde generati sunt, as they themselues were borne at first, not as they were afterwards born anew. Even as of winnowed corne, saith he, when it is sowne in the ground, an huske growes vp with the corne, & yet without the huske was the corne first sowne. I but in whom is this Creation? In our Saviour Christ Iesus. A party not vnknowne vnto you. I haue told youLect. 7. p. 134 heretofore of these two Names of his, Christ & Iesus. He is the Party we are grafted into, wee are now Flesh of his Flesh and Bone of his Bones. No vnion in the world more neere then betweene our Saviour and our selues. They are his owne words.Ioh. 15.5. I am the vine yee are the branches, which vnlesse himselfe had spoken, not any one of vs but might haue said, —Virg. Aen. l. 1. Haud equidem tali me dignor honore. They are his Apostles words also,2. Cor. 11.2. I haue prepared you for one husband, to present you as a pure Virgin to Christ: it is in effect the same which the Servants of David said to Abi∣gail,M. Hooker Eccl Pol. l. 5. §. 56. p. 124. David sent vs to thee to take thee to his wife; where∣vnto we may answer againe with Abigayls humble com∣plement,1. Sam 25.41 Behold, let thy handmaide be a Servant to wash the feet of the Servants of my Lord. Christ therfore both as God and as man, is that true Adam whose Eues wee are, that true vine whereof our selues both spiritually & cor∣porally are truest Branches. The mixture of his bodily sub∣stance with ours y saith Reverend Hooker, is a thing which the anciēt FathersNostra quippe & ipsius con iunctio nec mis∣cet personas, nec vnit sub∣stantias, sed af∣fectus consociat & confaederat volūtates. Cyp. de caena Dom. disclaim. Yet the mixture of his Flesh with ours theyIren. advers. haer. l. 4. c. 34. speak of, to signifie what our very Bodies through mysticall coniunction receiue from that vital ef∣ficacie
which we know to be in his, and from bodyly mix∣tures they borrow diverseCyril. in Ioh. l. 10. c. 13. Similitudes rather to declare the truth, then the manner of coherence betweene his sa∣cred, and the sanctified Bodies of Saints. The third point to be observed, is to what we are thus created, and it is said to Good Workes. Wherevnto in the fourth place our correspondence ought to bee, by being prompt and ready therein; intimated here in this place by the Metaphor of Walking. For as nothing is more vsuall in health then walking is, nothing more willingly wee doe performe if we be in health indeed, nothing that confir∣meth more our health vnto vs then moderate walking doth, right so Good Workes they are the very way we are e∣very of vs to walke in, & then is it a very pregnant proofe that we haue our spiritual health indeed, when as wee are prompt to performe Good Workes vpon any occasion offe∣red to vs. Concerning Good Workes they are many and manifold, even all our good Actions whatsoever, as well those in∣ward Actions of the Minde and Will, as those outward of the Body. And therefore our Saviour Christ, hee cals Be∣leefe a worke, Ioh. 6.29. and the law of God, which is cal∣led The law of Workes, Rom. 3.27. commaundeth not onlie outward Works, but inward Operations too. These Geod VVorkes the Apostle calleth the fruit of the Spirit, and heGal, 5.22. reckons thē vp to be these, Loue, ioy, peace, long-suffering, gentlenesse, goodnesse, faith, meekenesse, temperancie, among all which Goodnesse is that, which I chiefly aime at at this time. Now Goodnes when it is referred to God, as it doth oftentimes signifie his gracious kindnesse whereby he is beneficiall to his creatures; so being referred vnto men, it signifieth that quality whereby men after Gods example become beneficiall and helpefull to others. ThusRuth. 2.20. Naomi of Booz in Ruth, Blessed saith shee, be he of the Lord: for he ceaseth not to do good to the living, and to the dead. To the li∣ving & to the dead, that isQuomodo mortuos? Cum adhuc supersti∣tes essent Elime¦lech et Filij eius beneficia in eos contulit, postea vero ipsis mor∣tuis, propter co∣rum memoriam viduis ipsorum, quibuscu{que} in rebus potuit gratificatus est. Hoc est pietatē vel misericordi∣am facere erga mortues Lava∣ter in Ruth. c. 2. p 59. b. saith Lavater, to my Husband,
and Children when as they were aliue, and now they are dead, to vs their widdowes for their sakes. So the Apostle to the Galathians, Let vs not be wearyGal. 6.9. saith he, of well do∣ing, for in due season we shall reape, if we faint not. While we haue therefore time, let vs do good vnto all men, but speciallie vnto them which are of the houshold of faith. Now as there are many waies of doing good, and there¦fore Chremes in theTerent. Heaut Act 1. Sc. 1. Poet to his neighbour Menedemus, Aut consolando, aut consilio, aut re iuvero: he would helpe him or with cōfort, or with coūsaile, or if neede were with his Purse: so is there no one way throughout the Scrip∣tures so often beatē into our memories, as is the relieving by Almes. Hence so many gentle invitations to it, as Esay 58.10. If thou poure out thy soule to the hungry, and refresh the troubled soule: then shall thy light spring out in the dark∣nes, and thy darknes shall be as the noone day. And the Lorde shall guide thee continually, and satisfie thy soule in drought, and make fat thy bones, and thou shalt be like a watred gardē and like a spring of water, whose waters shall not faile. And Prov. 19.17. He that hath mercy on the pooreDeo igitur fae∣neratus es, ipsū reposce: sed non tibi in praesenti cuncta restituet Verū hoc quo{que} tuo commodo facit. And a little after, Hic quidem red dit ex parte, maximum autē tibi in futuro thesaurum re∣servat. Chrys. in Mat. Hom. 15 lendeth vnto the Lord, and the Lord will recompence him that which hee hath given. And Psa. 41.1. Blessed saith David, is he that cō∣sidereth the poore and needy, the Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble. Wherevpon S. Ambrose, Who is itQuis est qui intelligit? qui compatitur ei, qui advertit cō∣sortem esse na∣turae, qui cog∣noscit quod & divitem & pau perem fecit Do¦minus, qui scit quod sanctificet fructus suos, si de his delibet a∣liquam paupe∣ribus portionem Ambros. Tom. 4 De Naboth. Israelita. c. 8. p. 280. saith he, that considereth the poore? Hee that hath compassion on him, he that observeth him to be of the selfe same nature with him∣selfe, he that remembreth, how the Lord made both the rich man and the poore, he that knowes that God sanctifies the rest of his fruits, if he part with any of it to the poore. A manie more are the places of Scripture that are to this purpose. Howbeit for all men are not of one mould, but as some are led by faire meanes, others must be compeld by threats and menaces; hence are there in the selfe same Scriptures as many menaces on the other side. As Esay 32.5, A nig∣gard shall no more be called liberall, nor the churle rich. And Prov. 21.13, He that stoppeth his eare at the crying of the
poore, he shall also cry and not be heard. And Psal. 140.12, Sure I am that the Lord will avenge the poore, & mainetaine the cause of the helplesse. And concerning that menacing in the Proverbes howe hee that stoppeth his eares at the poore mans cry, shall cry himselfe and not be heard: wee may remember the experience of it in Dives and Lazarus. S. Austen speaking of that Rich man, Desideravit guttam,Aug. Hom. 7. p. 291. saith he, qui non dedit micam: he that would not part with a crumme of bread to poore Lazarus, craved of Abraham but a drop of water, & by no meanes could obtaine it. But among all the threatnings in the Scripture, none in my o∣pinion more powerfull to perswade vs, then when our Sa∣viour declaring to vs an Hypotypôsis of the last Iudgemēt, plainely sheweth that the not giving of Almes vnto the poore makes vs, howsoever otherwise faultlesse perhaps, & without crime, vncapable of Gods kingdome. Besides that he flatly shewes vs how we play the Niggards with himselfe to.Mat. 25.41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire,V. 42. for I was an hungred, and yee gaue me no meate. I thir∣sted, and yee gaue me no drinke.V. 43. I was a stranger, and ye lod∣ged me not. I was naked, and yee cloathed me not, sicke and in prison, and yee visited me not. And when they shall answere againe,V 44. Lord when saw we thee an hungred, or a thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sicke, or in prison, and did not minister vnto thee? The reply vnto them shall bee such as they shall be never able to answere vnto, though from this very time to that, they did but study this one case,V. 45. Verily I say vnto you, in as much as yee did it not to one of the least of these, yee did it not to me. This, Beloved, would be wel marked, and I know not whether in all the Scriptures there is such a key againe as this for the opening of our Cofers. Me thinkes vpon the hearing hereof we should every of vs say, as Saul did when as he was vnhorst by our Saviour in his way to Damascus, Lord, what wilt thou that I doe? Act. 9.6. Nay, we know already what he would haue vs do: me thinkes vpon the hearing hereof we should say with Zacheus ra∣ther,
Behold Lord the halfe of my goods I giue to the poore, Luk. 19.8. Nether let it seeme strange vnto you, that I said vnto you evē now, that the not giving Almes to the Poore makes vs vncapable of Gods kingdome, howsoever o∣therwise we may be faultles, and perhaps without crime: it was S. Austens observation, who vpon that of our Savi∣ours, There was a certaine rich man, Luk. 16.19. Our Savi∣our said r saith S, Austen,Aug. Hom. 7. p. 291. he was a rich man, he said not he was a slaunderer, he said not how he was an oppressour of the poore, a deceiver, an imbeasler of other mens goods, an vndoer of the fatherlesse, a wronger of the widow: quod ergo eius crimen, nisi iacens ante ianuam vlcerosus, & non adiutus: and what was then his fault, but for that the poore man lay at his doores, void of helpe, full of soares. His observation is the like vpon another relation of our Saviours, concerning another Rich man, whose grounde brought forth so plentifully, that store was a sore vnto him, and therefore be thought himselfe of building & pul∣ling downe, and altering, and changing, Horat. Epist. l. 1. ad Maecen.Diruit, aedificat, mutat quadrata rotundis, What, saith S. Austen, did he in all this seeke to haue that which was another mans? No,Aug Hom. 7. p. 290. Vid. Hom. 48. p. 375 saith he, we read not there of any wrong offered to any man, hee remooued not the meere stones, he spoyled not the poore, he circumvented not the simple, only he bethought himselfe how & where to lay vp his store, and, Audite, saith he, quid audierit qui tenaciter servabat sua: Harken to that which himselfe heard, for being such an hold-fast of his owne:Luk 12.20. Oh foole this night will they fetch away thy soule from thee: thē whose shall those things be which thou hast provided? It is true, it is very true, it was Davids saying long before,Ps. 39.7. Man walk∣eth in a vaine-shadow, and disquieteth himselfe in vaine: he heapeth vp riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them. We see the dayly experience of it, and yet Fooles as we are, we cannot beware by other mens harmes. This man left so much, this man so much, to his Widowe, or to his Heire.
Comes mee one calamitie, or another, some one or other Crosse & sweepes it cleane away. There is more then one Swallow, to this Sommer. S. Austen goeth on. What? & did God befoole him then? Non sic dicit Deus, Stulte, quomodo dicit homo: tale in quenquam Dei verbum iuditium est. God, saith S. Austen, doth not so befoole vs, as one man befools another, such a word from the mouth of God is no lesse then condemnation, for will he giue, saith he, to Fooles the kingdome of heaven? no the fiue foolish Virgins can tell you so much, who when they rapped at the doores and would full faine haue entered in, the answer they had was this,Mat. 25.12. Verily I say vnto you I knowe you not. These things, thus Beloued, let vs now consider with our selues the causes wee are so much called vpon to per∣forme good workes in this kind, & distributing of Almes. The causes are many and manifold, but we may reduce them to three heades, The glory of God, The profit of our Neighbour, The good of our own selues. First, concerning Gods glory, we are to tender that Glo∣ry of his, as the apple of our eyes, nay we are to tender it much more. You may read in the second of Samuel, what befell king David for neglecting that Glory of his, The Lord,2. Sam. 12.13 saith Nathan, hath put away thy sin, thou shalt not dy. Howbeit because by this deed thou hast caused the enemies of the Lord to blaspheame, the child that is borne vnto thee shal surely die. David ful faine would haue had the Childes life, he besought the Lord for him, he fasted, he went in, & lay all night vpō the earth, but the Lord by no meanes would be entreated. No, Them that honour me,1. Sam. 2.30. saith the Lord, I will honour, and they that despise me shall be despised. Now that Almes is an honour and Glory to God, witnes ma∣ny places in holy Scripture. First king Solomon.Prov. 14.31 He that oppresseth the poore, reproueth him that made him: but he ho∣noureth him, that hath mercy on the poore. Secondly, our Sa∣viour who wasMat. 12.42. greater then Solomon, Let your light, saith he, so shine before mē that they may see your good works,Mat. 5.16.
and glorifie your Father which is in heaven. So the Apostle S. Peter, who learnt it no doubt of his Master, Haue your conversation,1. Pet. 2.12. saith he, honest among the Gentiles, that they may by your good workes which they shall see glorifie God in the day of the visitation. True it is, we liue not now among Gentiles, and the Heathen, no but among them that are as bad Neighbours, who howsoever they will be never brought to afford vs a good word, except we be as they are, yet are we to take especiall heed, that we giue them no iust cause of complaint against vs. The second motiue to Good Workes, is the Profit of our Neighbour, we being born not for our selues, but each one for each other. The very Heathē perceived thus much, and therefore Tully from the mouth of the Stoicks, Quae in terris,Tull. Offic. l. 1 saith he, gignuntur, ad vsum hominum omnia cre∣ari, homines autem hominum causa esse generatos, vt ipsi in∣ter se alij alijs prodesse possint. All things whatsoever grow, saith he, grow vp for the vse of men, but men are born for one anothers vse, to the end & purpose to help each other. Who it is that is our Neighbour I haue told youLect. 10. pag. 243. hereto∣fore. Neighbours wee are by our SavioursLuk. 10.37. relation, though we never saw one another before. It is enough if we see them once, & if we loue them not whom wee haue so seene, you knowe whoseIoh. 4.20. conclusion it is, , how can he loue God, whom he hath not seene? Ah but some will say to bestowe a little Almes, what profit is that vnto our Neighbour, especially vnto such as go from doore to doore, if you will needs haue them to be our Neighbours too. You know what PlautusPlaut. Tri∣nummus Act. 2. Sc. Quo illic. saith De Mē∣dico malè meretur qui ei dat quod edat, aut quod bibat. Nam & illud quod dat perdit, & illi producit vitam ad miseriam. He that giues to a Beggar any thing at all to eat or drink, the Beggar is but little beholding to him. For it is but lost what he so bestowes, and prolongeth besides the Beggars miserie. I knowe it very well, and remember withall the saying ofLactant. In∣stit. l. 6. c. 11. Lactantius therevpon, that it is detestanda sen∣tentia,
a speech to be detested, as in very deed it is: At enim Poet a fortasse pro persona, saith he, locutus. It may be the Poet there spake according to the Person that spake it, and indeed so he did, and kept therein a right Decorum. It was the saying of one Philto there, an olde Penny-father, who spake as he thought himselfe, or as he was sure what others thought But we haue too too many testimonies of Scripture to out-coūtenance those words: I wil alleage only one. Whosoever,1. Ioh. 3.17. saith S. Iohn, hath this worlds good, and seeth his Brother haue need, and shutteth vp his compas∣sion from him, how dwelleth the loue of God in him? I come to the third motiue, The good of our selues. And now me thinks Avarice her selfe (were she here in her own person) would arrigere aures, giue diligent heed to what in this case should be spoken. Though I feare not GodLuk. 18.4. saith the vnrighteous Iudge nor reverence mā, yet be¦cause this widow troubleth me, I will do her right, least at the last shee come and make me weary. So Avarice herselfe me thinks should now say, though I tēder not much the Glory of God, much lesse the Profit of my Neighbor, yet seeing my owne Good is interessed herein, I will now be beneficiall, I wil now be liberall of my Almes. What? & is the giving of Almes thē, so good & gainefull to our selues? Yes: & bet∣ter then cōmon gaine. S. Austen speaking of cōmon gain, Vbi lucrumAug. de Tem Ser, 215. p. 763 saith he, ibi & damnum, lucrum in arca, damnū in conscientia: where there is gaine, there is dammage too, gaine in the Chest, and dammage in the Brest; but it is not so with this gaine. Well then, how gainful is it?Vid. Vrsin. Catech. Ang. p. 873. Edit. Lond 1611. First by Almes as it were by the effects we make our Calling & Electiō sure. It is the Apostle S. Peters observation. 2. Pet. 1.10. Secondly, our faith as it makes it selfe knowne there∣by, and discovereth it selfe to the world, so is it exercised and made more powerfull, that it may the better be able to resist, whenas the Enemy shall approach vs. Thirdly, for they are the way, wherein we are every of vs to walk as is evident by my Text. I, they are our Lords High way. If
once we learne this way (I wisse it is not so much beaten, as we should purposely avoide it) and betake our selues to by-paths, its ods but we miscarry horse and man. Fourthly they giue a testimony of our resemblance with our Savi∣our. Virg. Aen. l. 3.Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat. He was whē he lived here on earth Eies to the blinde, Feet to the lame, & a Father to the Poore, even as Iob also was, Iob. 2.15. Fiftly, they are to be done, that therby we may escape both temporall and eternall punishments. They wereMat. 3.10. S. Iohn the Baptists words & seconded by ourMat. 7.19. Sa∣viour, Every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit, is hew∣en downe and cast into the fire. Sixtly, and lastly they are to be done that we may obtaine at Gods hands Rewardes of both sorts to, temporall and eternall. For we deny not, as our Adversaries would beare the world in hand we doe, that workes are necessary to Salvation, we deny indeede the Merit of them, but the Necessity of thē in no wise. But of this see more, in Mr D. Raynolds thirdD. Reyn. Prae∣lect 3. p 42. 43. 44 45 &c. Lecture where he brings a world of Witnesses of our side, Calvin, Beza, Bucer, Hyperius, Zanchius, Vrsinus, Luther, and the Con∣fessions of Helvetia, Bohemia, French, English, Belgia, Sue∣via, Saxony, &c: all to proue that Protestants hould the Necessity of Workes vnto Salvation. And thus haue you heard of Good Workes. You haue hard of the multiplicity of them, you haue heard of Almes: you haue heard how the Scripture inviteth vs towards the do∣ing of the same, how it menaceth vs if we doe them not, what speciall motiues there are for performance of the same. There are now to be handled certaine Questions cō∣cerning this matter of Almes, which when I haue vnfol∣ded to you, in as briefe a manner as I may, I wil then com∣mit you to him whose Workemanshippe you are. The first is about the Merit of them. The second about the Doers of them. The third to whom to be done. The fourth when & how. The fift and last whether Protestants haue beene so
backeward in them as our Adversaries giue out. Of everie of these in their severall order, and first concerning Me∣rit. It cannot be denyed but the name of Merit is plentifull with the Fathers. No one word more vsuall with thē then Merere, and Meritum, which a many of our Adversaries when they light on, score vp presently for their Merit. Howbeit Merit in theSome of our Adversa∣ries confesse asmuch, as Vega, Non me fugit vsurpari apud Patres no∣men Meriti, v∣bi nulla est ratio Meriti ne{que} de Congruo ne{que} de Condign. Vega de Iustif. l. 8. c. 8 p. 189. Fathers, & Merit which our Ad∣versaries meane haue as much affinity with one an other, as Phillip the Apostle had, with Phillip king of Macedō, or Phillip king of Spaine. They haue indeed one name, and so had the Apostle, and both those Phillips; but come to the nature of Merit, and we shall see the difference betweene them both, in one & the selfe same period. Witnesse Saint Austen, who in a certain Sermon of his: Nos verò charis∣simiAug. de Temp Ser 138. p. 646 saith he, qui nullis praecedentibus meritis de Inferni carcere, & de tenebris aeternae noctis meruimus liberari. And againe in anAug de Temp Ser. 252. p. 821 other place, Nullis praecedentibus meritis per gratiam Dei merumus fieri templum Dei. Now if Merui∣mus in both these places be to be vnderstoode popishly, how comes it that he saith in both places, and that in one & the selfesame period, Nullis praecedentibus meritis: Nul∣lis praecedentibus meritis. Meruimus, & yet, Nullis meritis: and againe, Meruimus, and Nullis meritis, how may that be? How? But by taking Meruimus in both places, as Saint Austen meant in both, namely for obtaining, or finding the favour to obtaine, and so the Sentence runnes most cleerely: As for vs deare Bretheren who without any Me∣rits going before, haue found the favour to be delivered from the Prison of Hell and eternall darknesse, let vs endeavour to liue, &c: as followeth in that place. I, some of our owne friends haue vsed the word Merit in this very sense. Wee teachDocemus bo∣na opera divini∣tus praecepta ne∣cessariò facien∣da esse, & me∣reri gratuita Dei clementia sua quaedam si∣ve corporalia, sive spiritualia praemia. Har∣monia Conf. p. 147. Edit. Ge¦nevae 1612. Vid M Hookers learned Dis∣course of Iustif. Works, &c. p. 27 say they of Wittenberg, that good Works comman∣ded of God are necessarily to be done, & that through the free mercy of God they merit their own either corporal or spiriu∣all rewardes. So likewise they of t Auspurge, Obedience to∣wards
the law pleaseth God, and is accounted a kinde of Iu∣stice, and meriteth rewardes. Againe,Harm Confes. Ib. p. 41. Paenitentia meruit vt Deus sententiam de delenda Ninive mutaret. Repentance deserved that God should alter his purpose, touching the destruction of Niniveh. And againe in a third place as it is in the English Harmony of Confessions, These exercisesThe Harmo∣ny of Confess. in English, Sect. 16, p. 495. Prin∣ted by Thomas Thomas 1586. say they, when as they are referred vnto that end, that we may haue our bodies fit for spirituall things, and to do our du∣ties, according to a mans calling, &c: they are good and god∣ly, andIn the latin Edition be∣fore mentio∣ned it is only thus: Sunt in piis bona opera vt testatur Da∣nielis exemplū Harm. Conf. p. 47. But the english no doubt follow¦ed another Edition that was set forth with Sections a many years before. meritorious workes, as the example of Daniel doth testifie. What? was it their meaning, that workes by their owne worthynesse did merit at all? No they vtterly dis∣claime that, but vsing the word as the Fathers did, and the Fathers vsing it as the ancient Romanes had done before them, they meant that Rewardes were gotten and obtained by Obedience, and Repentance did obtaine, that God did alter his purpose touching Ninivehs destruction, &c. This being laid as a Foundation we shall the more easi∣ly now go forward as litle preiudiced by the Fathers who vse the word Merit in their writings so much. For as it was a silly reason of Campians, that therefore S. Austen was against vs in the Questiō of Freewill because forsooth he had writtenSininè placa∣biles Augustino qui de Libero Arbitrio libros tres. Camp. Rat 5. Libros tres de libero Arbitrio, three books of Freewill, whereas S. Austen in all those Bookes ne∣ver toucheth our Tenet, and the Freedome of Wil, which S. Austen toucheth, weVid. Lect. 8. p 169. 170. 171. deny not: so is their reasoning a∣gain as silly, who vpō the word Merit in the Fathers nick vp still our owne Deserts, when as the Fathers were as far from that conceipt, as the East is from the West. Witnesse their owne words. First Origen: For asmuch as al mēQuia omnes conclusi sunt sub peccato, nunc iam non in meritis, sed in misericordia Dei salus humana consistit. Origen. in ep. ad Rom. l. 9. c. 12 p. 601 Edit Basil. 1571. saith he, are shut vp, and closed about with sin, the salvation of Mā standeth not in mans merits, but in the mercy of God. So S. Ierome:Si nostra consideremus merita de∣sperandum est. Hieron. Tom. 5 in Esay c, 64. l. 17 p 241. Col. 2. If we consider our owne merits, we must needes dis∣paire
no remedy. And againe in an otherTunc iusti su∣mus quando nos peccatores fate∣mur, & iustitia nostra non ex proprio merito sed ex Dei con∣sistit misericor∣dia. Hieron. Tom. 2. advers. Pelag. l. 1. p. 265 place, Then are we righteous, when we acknowledge our selues to be sin∣ners, and our righteousnesse consisteth not vpon any our owne merits, but the mercy of God. AndHaec hominis summa est Iusti∣tia quicquid po∣tuerit habere virtutis, nō suū putare esse, sed Domini qui lar∣git{us} est, Hier. Ib presently after, This is mans cheefest righteousnesse to esteeme whatsoever vertue he hath to be none of his owne, but the Lords who gaue it to him. So S. Basil, Everlasting rest,. Ba∣sil. in Ps. 114. p. 224 Edit. Bas. 1532. saith he, is reserved for them who haue in this life fought a good fight: not for the me∣rits of those their deeds, but because of the most bountifull fa∣vour of God, wherein they put their trust. And againe in an∣other place, This,. Basil. de Humil. p 388. Edit Basil. 1532 saith he, is our full and perfect reioycing in God, when we acknowledge that we are void of any our own righteousnesse, and are iustified by Faith alone. SoExaltari merebitur, sed in tua Iustitia. Auferat de medio iustitiam suam & humilietur, veniet Dei iustitia & exaltabitur. Aug in Ps 88. Conc. 1. p 674. S. Austen, The People shall merit to be exalted, but it shalbe in thy righ∣teousnesse. Let them take away their own Righteousnesse and be humbled, and then shall come the righteousnesse of God, & they shall be exalted. And againe in anotherDa veniam Apostole, propria tua non novi nisi mala, da veniam Apostole: dicimus qua tu docuisti. Audio consitentem, non invenio ingratum, Prorsus tua à te tibi parata non novimus nisi mala. Cum ergo Deus coronat meritatua, nihil coronat nisi dona sua. Aug. Tom. 1. Hom. 14 p. 305. place, Pardon me O Apostle, I knowe nothing of thine owne, but that which is bad only. Pardon me O Apostle, bold I am to say as much, for that thou thy selfe hast taught me to say no lesse. I heare thee confesse it, I finde thee not vngratefull, & therefore God when he crowneth thy Merits, he crowneth naught else but only his own Gifts. And as here he speaketh in particular of crowning the Apostles Merits, so speakes he in anotherAug. Tom. 2. Epist. 105. p. 301. place in generall, Cum Deus coronat merita nostra, nihil aliud coronat quàm munera sua. Whē as God doth crown our merits, he crowneth nothing but his owne gifts. I, St. Bernard himselfe, as lately as he wrote, is not , he will pay his share to this reckoning. Concerning life e∣verlasting,
Iam verò de aterna vita sci∣mus quia non sunt condignae passicues buius temporis ad fu∣turam gleriam, nec si vnus om∣nes sustineat. ne{que} enim talia sunt hominum merita, vt prop∣ter eavita aeter¦na deveatur ex∣iure, aut Dus iniuriam aliquā faceret nisi eam donaret. Nam vt taceam quod Merita omnia dona Dei sunt, & ita homo ma¦gis propter ipsa Deo debitor est, quam Deus ho∣mini: quid sunt Merita omnia ad tantā gloriā? Bern. in Annū ciat. B. Mar. Ser 1. p. 27. Col. 2. saith he, we know that the afflictions of this pre∣sent time, are not worthy of the glory which shalbe shewed vn∣to vs, no, though one man alone should beare them all and eve∣ry one. For the Merits of men are not such as that everlasting life should be due vnto thē of right, or that God should wrong vs, if so be he bestowed it not on vs. For to omit saith he, that all Merits are the gifts of God, and Man in respect thereof is more a debter vnto God, then God is vnto man, what are all merits whatsoeuer, if they be compared with that great glory. To conclude,Deni{que} quis melior est Pro∣pheta cui Domi∣nus ipse tam in signe testimoni∣monium perhibet, dicens, Virum inveni secundum cor meum? Veruntamen & ipse necesse habuit dicere de deo, Non intres iniud cium cum servo tuo Domine. Nemo ita{que} se seducat, quia si benè cogitare voluerit, inveniet proculdubio quod nec cum decem millibus possit occurree ei qui cum viginli millibus venit ad se. Bernard Ib. saith he, who is better then that Prophet of whom the Lord gaue so great a testimony of being a man ac∣cording to his heart? And yet was he even forced to say, En∣ter not into iudgement with thy servant O Lord. Let no man therefore deceaue himselfe: for if he will cast vp his accounts accordingly, doubtlesse he shall find that he shall not bee able with ten thousand to meete him that comes against him with twentie thousand. And againe in anotherMeum proinde meritum miseratio Domini N̄ pla∣ne sum meriti inops quamdiu ille miserationum non fuerit. Quod simisericordiae Domini multae, multis nihilominus ego in meritis sum. Quid enim si multorum sim mii conscius delctorum. Ne∣pe vbi abundavit delictum superabundavit & gratia Bern. super Cantic. Ser. 61 Fol. 167 Col 4. place, Wherefore my Merit is the mercy of the Lord. I am not altogether voide of Merit, as long as he is not void of mercy. Now if his mer∣cies are many, then am I rich in Merits. For what though my sins are many too, the Apostle S. Paul tels me, that where sinne abounded, that Grace abounded much more. From the Fathers let vs come to our Adversaries them∣selues; and will not themselues avouch as much concer∣ning no affiance in our Merits? True it is, when they set at ease, they vainely tickle their own hearts with a wanton conceit of I knowe not what proportion betweene their Merits and Rewards which in the traunce (as Reverend HookerM Hookers learned Discourse of Iustificat. Workes, &c p. 28. speaketh) of their high speculations they dream
that God hath measured, waighed, and laid vp (as it were) in Bundles for them: but when once the houre of death approcheth, and they heare thēselues summoned to stand at the barre of that Iudge, whose brightnesse causeth the eyes of Angels themselues to dazle: oh how doe these their imaginations then vanish? how doe they hide the face for shame? To name Merits then, saith he, is to lay their Soules vpon the Racke, the memory of their own deedes is loathsome to them. No staffe to leane on then, but only on CHRIST IESVS, his Blood, his Death, his Merits, the only note they then can sing. Wherefore, as S. AustenAug. de verb. Dom. Ser. 5. p. 15. speaketh in another case, Ego nudos interrogo, non inter∣rogo in vestibus quales sitis, sed quales nati fueritis: I de∣mande the question of you as you were born naked at the first, not as you are apparelled now at this time: so likewise say I in this, Ego morituros interrogo, Let vs aske them cō∣cerning Merit when they are on their Death-beds, and then if they can so speake, as now they doe in their brave∣ry, Vicerint: it shall bee theirs. Sure I am it isVid. Fox in Oser. l. 2. p. 77. b storyed of S. Bernard (as good and vertuous a man as any of that side is like to be) that when he foresaw the ende of his life to approach, and that hee was then summoned to ap∣peare before the iudgement Seat of God, how hee be∣gan to expresse a wonderfull fearefulnesse, and to be ve∣ry much dismayed in his mind: whom as his friends stan∣ding about him would haue recomforted, and encoura∣ged to cheere himselfe with the confidence of the good life he had lead: Indeed, saith he, I perceaue, I may seeme to be in such estimation among you: but I feare me least the iudgement of God is farre vnlike the iudgement of men. But what neede we take so long a Day as to see what they will say on their Death-beds, we shall heare some of them confesse it somewhat sooner, even while they are a∣liue, and liue-like. First, Waldensis that great Champion of theirs, and the Bellarmine of his time: Quid dignum facimusWaldens. cont. Wiclef. Citatur à Vega Opusc. de Meritis Q. 4 p. 782. saith he, vt participes coelestibus fieri inveniamur? Apostolo
dicente, Existimo quod non sunt condignae passiones huius tē∣poris ad futuram gloriam, quae revelabitur in nobis. Reputo igitur saniorem Theologum, fideliorem Catholicum & Scrip∣turis Sanctis magis concordem, qui tale meritum simpliciter abnegat. What worthy thing do we, that we may be found in the fellowship of the heavēly Spirits, seeing that the A∣postle saith, I iudge that the afflictions of this time are not worthy of that glory that shall be revealed in vs. Where∣fore I take him to be the sounder Divine, the faithfuller Ca∣tholike, and more agreeable to the Holy Scriptures, that vtterly denyeth all such kind of Merit.Bell. de Iustif. l. 5. c. 7. Prop. 3. So Bellarmine him∣selfe, Propter incertitudinem propriae iustitiae & periculum inanis gloriae tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola Dei mi∣sericordia & benignitate reponere. By reason of the vncer∣taintie of our owne righteousnesse, and the daunger of vaine glory, it is our safest way to repose our whole trust in the only mercy & goodnesse of God. So Cardinal Poole to match another Cardinal with Cardinal Bellarmine, who hauing read over Osorius his Bookes de Iustitia dedicated vnto him, Non potest, non potest,Vid. Fox. in Oser. l. 2. p. 67. b & p. 58. b. saith he, nec Gratiae divi∣nae nimium vnquam tribus, nec humanis viribus demi: It cā∣not be, it can by no meanes be, that we should or ascribe to much to the mercy of God towardes vs, or abase our own strength too much. Famous is that of Albertus Pighi∣us, a great Champion of theirs, who reading Calvins In∣stitutions with a mind to haue confuted it,Vid. D. D. Raynol. de Rom. Eccles. Idololat. in Admonit. ad Lect. p. 596. became him∣selfe of Calvins minde in the point of Iustification & con∣sequently of Merit. But thus much of the first Question, I come vnto the second, Who they are that are to doe Good Workes, especially Almes. Concerning Almes, a body would thinke that every Christian were to doe them that were of any abilitie. But Cardinall Bellarmine saith no, and therefore makes excep∣tion of Wiues, and Children, and Servants, and Monkes: All these, saith he, non debent, nec possunt eleemosynas facere, nisi vel in extrema pauperum necessitate, vel ex consensu ta∣cito,
uel expresso superiorum, vel in certis alijs caesibus. Nei∣ther ought they, neither may they giue Almes, except in some extreame necessity of the poore, or except they haue the silent, or expresse consent of their superiour; or in some certaine other cases. A straunge kinde of passage mee thinkes, that you must all of you goe to your Cases be∣fore you can giue an Almes. For by Children he meanes not Infantes, but such as you your selues are. Filij is his worde, and hee meanes thereby all those that are (as he there speaketh) Sub potestate Parentum, vnder the winges of their Parentes. First then concerning Wiues ought not they to doe Almesdeedes of whome Solomon speaking in the Person of a vertuous woman, Shee stretch∣eth out her hand to the poore,Prov. 31.20 saith he, and putteth forth her hands to the needy? Suppose shee bee matched with some Nabal, or let vs instance in her who was matched with a Nabal indeed, might not Abigail haue done what shee did, 1. Sam, 25.18. without the silent and expresse consent of that Churle, her Superior. Belike Bellarmine had he bin her Servant would vpon her commaundement in the 19. verse of that Chapter, haue gone to his Master first to haue knowne his Worships pleasure, & so his Master and he, in the 34. verse of that Chapter, had vndergone one fortune. But come wee vnto Childrens such as are even of your owne age, and may not such giue Almes neither, of whom S. Iohn writing to a certain Lady, suppose their La∣dy Mother, I reioiced greatly2. Ioh. 1.4. saith he, that I found of thy Children walking in truth, as we haue received a commande∣ment of the Father? Or did they walke in that Truth with∣out giving to the Poore? Surely that had been Talking not Walking: and there are too too many such Talkers indeede whose Tongues are flippant when you but speake of the Gospell, but come to the Practise of it, and specially by way of Almes, and then God giue you good night. Come we lastly vnto Servants. (For as for their Monkes we will not speake of them, only let them take speciall heed they
be not on that hand, to whom our Saviour shall say an o∣ther day,Mat 25.42. yee gaue me no meate, yee gaue me no drinke, yee lodged me not, &c:) but come we vnto Servants, and may not they giue Almes neither? What? Servāts, who are not now as Servants, butPhilem. v. 16 aboue Servants, even as Bretheren beloved, and the Lords Freemen, as1. Cor. 7.22. speakes the Apostle S. Paul? What not Servants, such as SalomonProv. 17.2. speakes of, A discreet Servant shall haue rule over a lewd Sonne, and he shall devide the heritage among the bretheren? Not Servants, such as Abrahams Servant was who had theGen. 24.2. rule over al that he had? But this is Bellarmines Supersedeas for them, & for Children, and for Wiues: this comes not from the Court of Heaven, but the Scriptures being wrote for such, as wel as for any other, and commending vnto vs so oftentimes this duty of Almes, whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken to Bellarmine rather, then to them, even they may iudge who cānot discerne between their right hand, and theirIonas, 4.11. left. I come to the third Question, To whom wee are to giue. This may easilie be stated with that of S. Austen, Bre∣therēErgo fratres ad hanc max∣mè exhortamur vos charitatem non solum in vos ipsos, sed in eos etiam qui foris sunt, siue adhut Pagani, nondum credē∣tes in Christo, si∣ve divisi à nobis nobiscum caput confitentes, & à corpore sepa∣rati. Aug. in Ps 32. saith he, we exhort you vnto charity, not only towards one an other, but towards those also that are without, whether as yet they are Pagans still, not beleeving in our Saviour, or whether by heresie they are devided from vs, acknowledging indeed the Head with vs, but separated from the Body. And againe in an otherAug. Hom 39 p. 357. place, Date ergò omnibus Dilectissimi Fratres, date praecipuè ad Domesticos fidei, date omnibus, ne eui nō dederitis ipse sit Christus, cuive dederitis ipse est Chri∣stus. Wherefore Beloved Bretheren saith S. Austen, giue vnto all, though especially vnto those of the houshold of Faith: giue vnto all, least he to whom thou hast not given should be Christ, and to whom thou hast given, he perhaps be Christ. What? will you say, and must we giue then to them that are of an evill life, of a bad conversation, &c? I, Beloved, even to them to, if so be occasion be offered. For leaving their evill to be punished either by the hand of
God, or by the Magistrate who is the Minister of God, we are to cast our eie only vpon his misery. Your Aristotle wil teach you so much, who being reproved for giving an Almes to one that was vnworthy,Diog. Laert. in Aristot. answered that he gaue it, Non Homini, sed Humanitati, meaning that we ought to shew our selues Men, in doing one for an other. I come to the fourth Question: When, and how we are to giue. Seeing al things are done in timeM. Hooker Eccl. Pol l. 5. §. 71 p. 197. saith Reverend Hoo∣ker, & many offices are not possible at one & the selfesame time to be discharged, duties of al sorts must haue necessa∣rily their severall successions and seasons, in which respect saith he, the Schoolemen haue well and soundly determi∣ned that Gods affirmatiue Lawes and Precepts, the Laws that enioine any actual duty, as Praier, Almes, and the like do bind vs Ad semper velle, but not Ad sēper agere, we are tied to iterate & resume them when need is, howbeit not to continue them without any intermissiō. Much lesse are we bound to giue away all our goods at once, and so to make our selues poore. Oh but say our Adversaries they were our SavioursMat. 19.21. owne words: If thou wilt be perfit, goe sell that thou hast, and giue it to the poore, and thou shalt haue treasure in Heaven, and come and follow me. It is true so hee said, but to whom did he so say? He said it to a young man that boasted he had observed all the commandements frō his youth. He said it vnto him that put such confidence in his Actions, that because he kept from his youth the letter of the Law, he thought himselfe peerelesse. He said it vnto him that thought nothing was wanting now, , what do I yet lacke? But said our Saviour thus toIoh. 3.2. Nicode∣mus, that came vnto him by night? Or did he thus say vntoLuk. 10.38. Martha, that received him into her house? Or said he not vnto Zacheus when he gaue butLuk. 19.8. halfe his goods vnto the poore, This day is salvation come vnto this house, foras∣much as he is also become the Sonne of Abraham? It was not then our Saviours meaning that all should do, as he bad the young man do, namely sell all, and so follow him. Yes
say our Adversaries, if they will be perfite. Perfit? why, Per∣fection is required of everie Christian, & commaunded vs throughout the Scriptures. Our Saviour himselfeMat. 5.48. saith, You shall therefore be perfit, as your Father which is in heavē is perfit. And the Apostle to the Corinthians,2. Cor. 13.9. This also we wish for, even your perfection. And againe a littleV. 11. after, Fi∣nally Bretheren, fare yee well, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one minde: & in his Epistle to theColoss. 4.12 Colossians, Epaphras saith he, the servant of Christ which is one of you saluteth you and alwaies striveth for you in prayers, that ye may stand per∣fect, & full in all the will of God. And the Apostle to the He∣brewes, Therefore leaving the doctrine of the beginning of ChristHeb. 6.1. saith he, Let vs be led forward vnto perfection. So the Lord himselfe to Abraham, as it is in our new Transla∣tion, I am the Almighty GodGen. 17.1. saith he, walke before me, and be thou perfect. Now how should Abraham, how should the Hebrewes, how should the Colossians, the Corinthians, al Christians haue beene perfect, had not Perfection been, without giving all vnto the Poore? But be it our Saviour meant not so to the young man onlie, but to all in gene∣rall, as indeed in an other place hee speaketh in the plu∣ral number, Sel that you haueLuk. 12.33. saith he, & giue almes: make ye bags which wax not old, a treasure that can never faile in heaven, where no Theefe commeth, neither Moth corrupteth: was it his meaning that we should in a trice stripour selues of all we had, & not to haue had wherwith at other times to giue vnto the Poore? No our Saviour had no such mea∣ning, except the times were extraordinary; and then may we do, nay we must doe, as those Possessors of Lands did, Act. 4.34. who sold them, and brought the price of the things that were sold, and laid it downe at the Apostles feet, and Ananias, and Sapphyra for iugling in that case were blasted by S. Peters breath, Act. 5.5. Charge thē that are rich in this world1. Tim. 6.17. saith the Apostle vnto Timothy. What? to vncase themselues of al they had, & to giue it to the Poore? No, but that they be not high minded, (the posi∣tiue
degree of Hardnesse for a Rich man, oh how hard a thing is it?) & that they trust not in vncertaine riches (thats the comparatiue degree, that's a point somewhat harder) but will you see the superlatiue, that which indeed is har∣dest of all? That they do good, & be rich in good workes, and ready to distribute and communicate. These three points if the Rich shall keepe, then may they be rich indeed, riches shalbe a blessing to them. They shalbe the true Abrahams in this world, and Lazarus shalbe in their bosomes, a sure & certaine signe, that both the one, and the other shall an other dayLuk. 13.29. sit at table with Abraham, & Isaac, & Iacob, in the kingdome of God. I come to the fift and last Question, Whether Protestants haue beene so backeward in giving of Almes, as our Adversaries giue out. A Question wherein I confesse our Adversaries haue a∣gainst vs great advantage. I say it againe: It is a Question, wherein our Adversaries haue against vs great advantage. And yet mistake me not. The advantage they haue is this: that either we must praise our selues, or loose the cause we haue in hād. We may say as S. Ierom did in an otherHieron. ad∣vers. Iovin. l. 1 case, Periclitamur responsionis verecundiâ, & quasi inter duos Scopulos & quasdam Necessitatis et Pudicitiae  hinc at{que} inde, vel pudoris, vel causae, naufragium sustinemus. Si ad proposita respondeamus, pudore suffundimur. Si pudor impetrârit silentium, quasi de loco videbimur cedere, & Ad∣versario feriendi occasionem dare. We may say as didDan. 13.22. Su∣sanna, I am in trouble on every side: for if I doe this thing it is death vnto me: and if I do it not, I connot escape your handes. Wee may say as Iob2. Sam. 24, 3. said vnto king David, The Lord thy God increase thy people an hundred fold mo then they be, and that the eies of my Lord the king may see it: but why doth my Lord the king desire this thing? So the Lord of heaven increase our Workes an hundred fold more then they be, & that our eies & the eies of our Adversaries may see it, but why should I goe about to number them here in this place. Others I confesse haue done it, who may in
this case, say as did the2. Cor. 12.11 Apostle, I was a foole to boast my selfe: yee haue compelled me: indeed they are points not to be boasted of, howbeit seeing our Adversaries lay it so hotly to our charge, I will referre you vntoM. D. Willets Synops. Contr. 19. Quaest. 2. p. 960. Edit. 1600 them which haue done it already to our hand, especially vnto him who being sometimes of thisIACOBS WIL, or a Sermon preached before his Maiestie at S. Albons 1612. by M. Westerman now Dr of Di∣vinitie. House, discoursed so learnedly, so religiously of IACOBS WELL. Only thus much let me say of this Question, that if Wiues, and Children, and Servants neither ought in Popish Religion, nor can but in certaine cases giue and bestowe Almes, wee haue by so much the start of them, by how much every of these with vs are both taught another lesson, and practise it a many of them accordingly. I will end with that ofAug. de Temp Ser. 227. p. 779 S. Austen: Rogo vos Fratres vt ista recipiantur in animis vestris, & ita proficiat peregrinis, vt ante tribunal aeterni Iudicis, & mihi pro be∣nigna admonitione venia, & vobis pro Eleemosynarum largi∣tate aeterna gloria tribuatur. I beseech you Bretheren to ponder with your selues what I haue said, in your hearts, and let it profit the poore so far forth, that before the Tri∣bunal Seat of that eternall Iudge, both I may obtaine par∣don of my sinnes, by reason of this my fruitfull admoniti∣on, and vnto your selues by reason of the bountie of your Almes, eternall glory may be giuen. And thus, Beloued, haue I now at length absolued that taske wherevnto I betooke my selfe at first. You haue heard of those two cheefe points of Divinitie GOD & his CHVRCH. Concerning GOD, you haue heard: First of his Essence, then of his Attributes, then of his Workes: Con∣cerning the CHVRCH you haue also heard: First, what that is, Secondly, what she is to Beleeue, Thirdly what to Practise. In shewing you what she was, you saw her di∣stinguished: First, from Paganisme, and Iudaisme, the two grand Religions of the olde world: Secondly, from Tur∣cisme, and Papisme, the two smoaking fire-brands of this world. In her Beleefe you haue heard: First, of the Articles of our Faith commonly called the Apostles Creed: Se∣condly,
of all those Tenets which our own Church holdeth against the rebellious Church of Rome. In her Practise you haue heard: First of the ten commandemēts: Secondly, of Prayer? Thirdly of Fasting, & now at this time of Almes. All this as at first I proposed, so God you see hath disposed it too, and so, Beloved, haue I now taught you the Feare of the Lord, according to my first Text wherewith I began vnto you by way of Preamble,Psal. 34.11. Come yee Children & har∣ken vnto mee, I will teach you the feare of the Lord. I will ende with that of the Apostle,Rom. 16.25. S. Paul: To him now that is of power to establish you according to my Gospell, and preach∣ing of Iesus Christ, by the revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began: but now is opened and published among all Nations by the Scriptures of the Pro∣phets, at the commandement of the everlasting God for the o∣bedience of faith, to God I say only wise, be praise through Ie∣sus Christ for ever AMEN. FINIS.
TO THE READER. GEntle Reader: so many white Pages falling out, iust occasion is offered me of a few more lines then I made account of. I haue wrought thou seest Twelue Houres and the Day is spent, I must borrow a little (as it were) of the Night to make these particulars known vnto thee. First, whereas in all my Lectures I follow our Former Translation, not our Last, it is not for I mislike the Last, or preferre the other before it. But the trueth is owing vnto the Former, as much as mine owne Salvation, in regard it first taught me to knowe what I knowe, I for my part can∣not so easily be weaned from it,Sicut defuncta corpora Necessa∣riorum officiis deducenda quo∣dammodo ad se∣pulturam, non autem deferen∣da continuò. Aug. ep. 19. And againe, Pstea taquam cum honore se pulta sunt. Aug Ib. & therefore account it my bounden dutie to follow it with honour to the Graue. Secondly, where in the Psalmes I leaue that Translation too, and follow that vsuall one in the Service Booke, It is, for it is the same which we read cōtinually in the Church: the passages whereof comming better to minde by reason of that reading: they are more familiar to vs the Ministers as also to you the People. Thirdly, where I say in oneLect. 11. p. 288 place that The Body hath this advantage of the Soule, that as it selfe shall be affected, so shall the Soules operations be: I had reference in very deed to a Treatise of Galen to that purpose. But since I haue cal∣led to mind a Note of M. Bunnies,Quod animi mores corporis temperaturam sequantur. Ga∣len. Oper. Clas. 1. p 317. Edit. Venet. 1565. who obserues, that, The Soule doth not follow, but rather doth vse such Temperature as the Body hath. See that Note in his Book of Christian Exercise appertaining to Resolution. Fourthly, whereas in the Eight Lecture, Pag. 170, 171, 172. &c. I speake of Sola Fides, I omitted the common ob∣iection out of S. Iames: Yee see then how that of Workes a man is iustified,The Resolution p. 171. Edit. Lond. 1585. Iam. 2.24. and not of Faith only, which therefore I did omit, partly for it was so common: partly for I had said so much of Sola Fides before. Howbeit now since there is so much roome, I will acquaint you with three Answers.
First of all Calvin saith that S. Iames speaketh of the Decla∣ration of Righteousnesse, and not of the imputation.Certē de Iusti∣tiae declaratione non autem im∣putatione ipsum (Iacobum) loqui apparet Calvin. Instit. l. 3. c. 17. §. 12 M. Hoo∣ker thus: Finding that Iustification is spoken of by S. Paule without implying Sanctification, when he proueth that a man is iustified by Faith without Workes: finding likewise that Iu∣stification doth sometimes imply Sanctification also with it: I suppose nothing to be more sound, thē so to interpret S. Iames, as speaking not in that sence, but in this. M. Fox thus: There hath bin a long contentiō,M. Hookers Learned Dis∣course of Iustifi∣cation, Workes, &c. p. 25. & much adoe in the Church how to ioine and reconcile S. Paule, and S. Iames togither. When all is said, there is none can ioine these two togither better, then your selues, to whom we preach. And how is that? Ioine the liuely Faith of S. Paule, with the Good Workes of S. Iames,M. Fox his Ser∣mon of Christ crucified. p. 68. Printed by my FATHER. & bring both these into one Life, and then hast thou reconciled them both, and so shalt thou be sure to be iustified, both before God by S. Pauls Faith, and before Man by S. Iames Workes. And a little after, In cause of Iustication, and peace of Con∣science Faith standeth alone, and doth all. Fiftly, whereas so oftentimes I quote the very Pages of the Fathers, Greeke & Latine, it is for they are for the most part in our owne Colledge Library, & most commonly of such Editions as are specified in the Eight Lecture, & I haue of purpose forborne to interpret the Greek a many times, to whet our Youth the better towardes the finding out of the meaning of it. Sixtly and lastly, some Oversights would be amended, especially these: Pag. 33. in the margent, the Hebrew in some Copies should be . Pag. 44. lin. 21. read thus: but contrarywise it was convenient that the Holy Ghost should be shewed vpon the Disciples in Fire. Pag. 108. lin. 15. read thus: My Friends were you admitted to this sight. Pag. 172. lin. 3. read thus: that which proveth Only Faith. Some more there are besides which we must indure as well as we may having this for our cōfort, that nor Service Booke, nor Bi∣ble it selfe scape altogither free frō faults Typographicall. —Omnes haec vna manetVox if you pleafe. Nox Queis calcanda semel via Praeli.
