6992 99851331 16602
The Preface to the Reader. GENTLE READER, WE may see with deepe considerati∣ons the mercifull woorke of the Lorde from tyme to tyme, shew∣ing vnto vs many strange Signes and tokens, forewarning vs vnto repētāce: But such is the corrup∣tiō and hardnes of this our age, that we cōtemne and neclect all tokens in the Heauens, by respe∣cting our owne securitie for the tyme present, and yet if any man would recken the course of this life past, hee shoulde see in himselfe greate cause to tremble at these things: And also if wee doe consider what great route of euils doth beset vs, and how many hath bene destroyed, or what hurtes hath bene by Lightnings, Earthquakes, Ground-openings, Fluddes, Tempestes of the Sea, great Windes, Infections, Ayre, Warres, Mortalities, Plagues, straunge disseases and such like, which things, Commets doth commonly Prognosticate to ensue. I suppose that the remembraunce of such daungers, should make vs not to be altogether careles of these tokens, threatning vnto vs calamities for our vnthankefulnes, and therfore who∣soeuer doth make light accoumpt of Earthquakes and gleaming Starres: and is not moued with the sight there∣of with the feare of Gods heauy displeasure: the same people doe also as lightly and as little regard their owne consciences and amendment of life. And now let vs beare in mynde the fourth Starre, that was seene in Calabria, which signifieth great alteration this yeere. 1587. and
that the world will not long indure, God make vs all rea∣dy against the day of the Lorde. This Starre Maister Iohn Doleta, a learned Astronomer doth write, and with hym also doe agree, in wryting all the learned men in Grecia, Alexandria, Spaine, and Italy, That is to say, in the yere a∣foresayd, the Sunne shalbe couered with a Dragon, in the Morning from fiue a Clocke vntill nine, and will shewe forth as fire, and in this yere is thought to be great Fluds, Windes; Tempestes and Earthquakes. I pray God defend and keepe vs from the same, and giue vs grace to repent, and beare in mynde the fearfull signes and tokens. For as before the destruction of the first World, like signes and tokens appeared, & yet they would not turne from their wickednesse, and so were drowned in the Flood. And as before the destructions of Sodome and Gomorra, appeared like wonders, but they would not call to God for mercy, and so were cōsumed with Fire and Brimstone. And that goodly Citie Ierusalem, for their abhomination was made desolate, and not one stone left vppon an other. Yet now let all these signes and tokens cause speedie repen∣taunce, and amendment of life, and then no doubt the wrath of God, which is now kindled against thee, will be turned to his wonted mercie: and thē possesse that place of felicitie, which is prepared for all those that feare and tremble at the threatning of our GOD: to which place of perfect rest, I beseech God to graunt his Spirit of liuely repentaunce, in the harts of all true beleeuers. Amen.
¶Straunge Newes out of Calabria: Prognosticated in the yere 1586. vpon the yere 87. and what shall happen in the said yere: Pray∣ing the Lord to be mercifull vnto vs. The Interpretation of the fourth Starre which was seene in Calabria: being written for a warning vnto all faith∣full Christians, as followeth. BE it knowne vnto all men, that in ye yere 87. whē as the Moone is in the watrie signe, the world is like to bee in great daunger: For a learned man, named mai∣ster Iohn Doleta, who is very well seene in Astronomie, doth write, and with him also doth agree in writing the chiefest men in Grecia, Alexandria, Spayne, and Italie: that is to say, that in the foresayd yere, the Sunne shall be co∣uered with the Dragon, in the morning frō fiue a clocke vntill nine, and will appeare like fire: therfore it is not good that any man doe behold the same: for by the beholding thereof you may lose your sight. SEcondly, there shall come a marueilous great water Flood vpon our Lady day in Lent, be∣ing
vpon the 25. day of March, and by reason of the fearfulnesse thereof many people may dye. THirdly, there shall arise a marueilous great winde, and for great feare thereof many peo∣ple shall bee consumed, or distraughted of their wittes. FOurthly, the same yeere, vpon the 12. daye of Maye, will arise an other wonderfull great water Flood, and so great as no man hath sene, since Noyes Flood, and will continue three daies and three nights, and many Citties & Townes which standeth vpon sandy ground will bee in great daunger. FIftly, Infidels and Hereticks through great feare and dread, will flye and gather together, and a great parte of Christindome, shall be in daunger to be ouerthrowne, which God defend. SIxtly, in the said yeere, after the great waters be past. vpon S. Margarets day, being in the Dog daies, will be a great and fearfull Death: for the Pestilence wilbe in such force that it is to be fea∣red that fewe places in Christendome, will bee free: which the Lorde defende and preserue vs from the same. SEauently, there will be throughout the world great change, and alteration in Religion, and
wonderfull straunge newes vnto all people as conserning the same. EIghtly, the Turke with his God Mahomet shal lose his Scepter, and a great change and alteratiō; in his Regement, through hunger and warres, so that the most parte of them will ra∣ther seeke for reliefe by the Christians then at his hands. NInthly, there will also arise great Earth∣quakes, and the fruite of Trees will be very straunge to be seene, and hollowe within. LAstly, vpon S. Bartholmewe day wilbe great mo∣uings of the earth, both on Hils and Vallies, so that for feare thereof, fewe people wil remaine alyue, God bee mercifull vnto vs. Therefore it behooueth all good Christians, for to call ear∣nestly vnto almightie God in heartie prayer, to tourne all these Plagues from vs, which hee through his wrath will laye vppon vs for our wicked liuing. He which hath no misfortune in the yeere 85. And in Anno. 86. Doth remaine aliue. He being in 87. vnhurt and vnslaine, And in 88. Aliue doth remaine. And liuing vntill the yere 89. He may then speake of a ioyfull tyme.
