7512 99836094 341
THE CVRE OF ALL SORTS OF FEVERS, Both generall, and particular, with their Definition, Kindes, Differences, Causes, Signes, Prognostication, and manner of Cure, with a prespecta∣tion, their Intentions Curative, with their Symptoms, and divers other things herein very necessa∣rie to be judiciously observed in every FEVER. Lately compiled by ED. EDVVARDS Doctor in Physick. Ann. Dom. 1637. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, and are to be sold by William Sheeres, at his shop in Bedford-street over against the New-Exchange. 1638.
To the friendly Reader. FOr as much as perfect knowledge in any faculty is the Mother of perfection there∣in, a vertue worthy commendations of all wise men, discovering the Ignorant; for Ignorance is the shame, disgrace, and o∣verthrow of noble Arts and Sciences to such as professe them, being ignorant. Example, a thing much to be la∣mented of all people, because it concerneth all, to be∣hold how the thrice worthy and needfull faculties of Physick and Chirurgerie are abused, which farre exceed all other faculties, Divine precept excepted, for there is as much difference betweene this and all other Fa∣culties, as betweene the body and the garment: if we cannot forbeare the builders of houses, much lesse the Repayrers of our sick, sore, and decayed bodies. If we build an house, we seek not to a Taylor, or a Weaver to do it, but to one skilfull in that Profession: if so, why do we seek to the Ignorant for health, which know not what Health is, nor how to preserve it, and being ab∣sent, know not which way to help it? but we should not prize our health at so low a rate, being so precious a
jewell: For what joy have they in this life, which lye in extreame paines, miserie, and torment for want of health, who do not prize health before wealth, but now behold the intolerable abuse with an inundant deluge of over-whelming make-shifts or smoothing syco∣phants, fit to be unmasked, and repressed, worthy pu∣niishment, being a rabble of idle droans swarming in all places of the Kingdome, practising Physick and Chyrurgerie, making it a fanctuarie of idlenesse to the dishonour of God, and great hurt to the people, decei∣ving the vulgar sort; they being unable to distinguish the learned and expert from the ignorant Impostor, which lyeth lurking, watching a fit opportunity to seaze on some prey to maintaine a wicked and idle life: and not onely those male-kinde, of caterpillars, but also we have now a huge swarme of petticoat Physitians and Chyrurgians, being tatling gossips, who being frequent among sicke folks, and hearing the advice and counsell of the learned and expert physitian prescribing many fit things to his Patient, as diet, and also the making of julips, barley-water, broths, jellies, almund-milk, cul∣laces, and divers things necessarie for to comfort the sicke Patient. Hereupon these audacious gossips will give syrups, senae, Rubarb, Cassia, Manna, Aloes, &c. and not onely clysters, but also strong purges, and vo∣mits, and those no more fit for the disease, but by chance, than its possible for a Shoe-maker to make shoes fit for every mans foot upon one Last: If these learned faculties were so easily attained, as these idle wretches account them, surely they may well know, that men would never bestow so long time and great charges in studie, and learning to attaine the deepe knowledge
herein, which they do for Gods glory, and their Coun∣tries good. How then dare this godlesse crue, offer to minister medicines from so slender a ground-worke? some of these get medicines by relation of others, or by reading many medicines in books which please their palates; having no ground to shew why this or that medicine is fit, but imagination onely, able to yeeld no reason how or why it should do good? I grieve to thinke that people should be so sottish to neglect the counsell and good advice of the wise, learned, expert, and skilfull Artists (that have searched out the very se∣crets of nature, to do good) to hearken to the subtle sy∣rene-songs of Sycophants, whose eyes are as sharpe as Lynx, who is said to see an hundred miles: so are many of these as sharp set for gaines, and some for applause: how unworthy soever, these wretches swarme in every Towne and Village, and hereby they leave the counsell of the learned and expert, to follow and aske counsell of an Asse, which know not with what, nor how to per∣forme any cure, but by great chance, as the blinde man shot the Crow; but if it happen a cure to be performed under their hands that brings no small applause of the vulgar, what a miracle there is done, truly I am also of that minde, indeed that it is a miracle that it had that successe, they being so unable to yeeld any reason how it came so to passe, which the learned and expert Artist can do: also these idle rabble will warrant to cure any thing they undertake to finger money be it never so un∣possible to be done: it is the office of God, and not of man to warrant any, but its very frequent with these make-shifts and idle crue, to do all: the expert do not so, but use that which is fit, and leave the successe to the
divine power, using his painfull diligence and industrie advisedly, and skilfully. I do not here taxe nor ranke among this rabble of Idlers, those charitable and well-disposed people, which in the absence of the learned or expert Physitian or Chirurgion, do give some comfortable things, whose vertues or helps they know by experience to do good in the like case, to comfort a friend or a neighbour till better help may be had, or in charitie to help the poore that have not wherewith to pay for their cure, leaving all other to the learned and expert in those worthy fa∣culties, who know best how to deale with them rightly: and commonly these charitable people have this care, if they see their medicines prevaile not, they advise them that be able speedily to seeke better helpe, knowing that delayes breed danger. But the above-said wicked crue will never give them over so long as they can finger any undeserved reward, holding them on with false promises for money, and then leave them miserably to their fortunes when their money is gone: or left uncurable, which peradventure alone might at the first, or by the skilfull Artist have beene prevented, a thing sooner to be lamented then redressed. Also I know many of those well-disposed charitable people above-said chiefly in Chirurgerie (wherein the eye must direct the hand) do performe many very despe∣rate and dangerous cures by their experience, when many that make great shew with their painted sheath come short in their performance, that should shew better fruits: the cause I know not, whether neglect, ignorance or arrogancy shortē Gods blessing, not taking him along with them. God bids us begin with him first, and then
what he hath promised to such, I need not to relate▪ Scripture saith, God hideth things from the wise and prudent, & openeth them to babes & sucklings: I accuse none, but let us all examine our selves fully, and in what we finde our selves defective, first seek to God for his grace and assistance, and then carefully with full resolu∣tion, and diligence in our selves, seek to amend what we finde amisse in us, that God may blesse our endeavours, to his owne glory, the patients good, and our comforts. And thus praying to God that the well-doers may be protected, and that rabble of idle Syeophants and Im∣postors may be abolished, to Gods glory, and my Coun∣tries good, I do here abruptly cease. Vale in Christo.
The summe of this Booke consisteth in these 6. particulars following. 1 First, what a Fever is. 2 Secondl he number of Fevers be 1 generally, iii. 2 particularly 20. 3 Thirdly, an Explication or Exposition of all Fevers. 4 Fourthly, of Fevers by Inflammation of the spirits one∣ly without putrifaction of humours. 5 Fifthly, of Fever putrida, of putri∣faction of humours both 1 simple, 2 compound. 6 Sixthly, of Fever Hectick, of unnaturall heat kindled in the solid parts of the body, the iii. kindes.
A Discourse of all sorts of Fevers. First what a Fever is. A Fever is an unnaturall heat kindled either of the 1 Spirits, 1 Being inflamed without putrefaction of matter. 2 Causing either Diaria 1 Simplex lasting 24. houres. 2 Plurimum i. dier. lasting Some dayes. 2 Humours causing a prefixed or rotten Fe∣ver, they rot either 1 In the vessels, and that three wayes, for either 1 All the humours rot equally, as in Syno∣nochus putrida. 2 Humours rot; and that either, 1 Equall. 2 Inequall. 3 One humor alone causing a Fever con∣tinuall according to the na∣ture of the humour putrified. 2 In the vessels causing an intermitting fever according to the nature of the humour putrified in the missen∣teries, &c. 3 In and without the vessels, both causing a compound fe∣ver both intermitting, and continuall. 3 Solid parts of the body, causing a Fever Hectick.
The number of Fevers are generally two. e two i. the 1 Generall be three capitall Fevers, from which the particulars are de∣rived. i. 1 Diaria, 2 Putrida, 3 Hectica. 2 Particular be 20. i. as, 1 Diaria, ii. kinds, 2 Febris putrida, in generall 3 Synochus putrida 4 Synochides 5 Causon 6 Causonydes 7 Synoche, a continuall fever, iii. kinds. 8 Semitertiana, iii. sorts, 9 Epyola 10 Lyparia 11 Emphisoda 12 Erratica 13 Tetrach 14 Eucretica 15 Febris intermittens, in generall.
16 Cotidiana 17 Tertiana 1 vera, divers sorts as follows in their pro∣per Chapters. 2 notha, divers sorts as follows in their pro∣per Chapters. 18 Quartana 19 Pestilentia, under which are comprehended the 1 plague, 2 spotted fever, 3 sweating sicknesse, 4 maligne fevers. 20 Hectick Fever iii. kindes, i. 1 ros, 2 cambium, 3 glutin.
very necessarie note to be observed of the three generall or capitall Fevers, with their derivations or branches as followeth. r 1 Diaria, sprung of an unnaturall heat kindled in the spirits, 1 without putrefaction, 2 hurting the actions, 3 by vapours that rise either from the 1 bloud inflamed, 2 humours, 3 aliment, 4 excrements. 4 From these most commonly proceed all other fevers. 2 Putrida, whereof some be 1 simple and 1 continuall, as the fever 1 causon, continuall is of matter pu∣trified within the veines. 2 tertian, continuall is of matter pu∣trified within the veines. 3 cotidian, continuall is of matter pu∣trified within the veines. 4 quartane, continuall is of matter pu∣trified within the veines. 2 intermit∣ting, i. 1 quotidian, &c. of matter putrified with∣out the veines. 2 tertian, &c. of matter putrified with∣out the veines. 3 quartane, &c. of matter putrified with∣out the veines. 4 epiola, &c. of matter putrified with∣out the veines. 2 com∣pound and 1 continuall as, 1 Synochus putrida, 2 Synochides, 3 causonides, 4 lyparia, 5 semitertiana, 6 pestilentia, and its species. 2 intermit∣ting, as, 1 tertiana notha, 2 emphysoda, 3 tetrath, 4 erratic▪ &c.
3 Hectica, of ii. sorts, i. the 1 generall be ii. i. 1 simple, an unnaturall heat in the fleshy parts kindled without putrefaction. 2 compound either 1 with 1 distillation, 2 tabes. 2 joyned with a putrified fever, &c. 2 particular, be∣ing of some named 1 iii. as 1 ros, 2 cambium, 3 gluten. 2 but ii. as 1 Hectica febris 2 Marasmus.
An Explication or Exposition of all Fevers. Definition, &c. 1 an unnaturall heat kindled either in the 1 spirits, hurting the action. 2 humors, hurting the action. 3 solid parts hurting the action. 2 some∣times 1 a disease, 2 an accident of some other disease. Kinds are gene∣rally ii. i. the 1 generall, being iii. capitall Fevers as afore∣said. 2 particular, i. the 20. aforesaid, whereof some be 1 simple, 2 compound. Differences are in the 1 kindes, 2 causes, 3 signes, 4 prognostication, 5 times of the disease, fits. 6 place wherein the matter is contained, 7 symptoms, 8 cure. Causes are either, 1 generall, being iii. i. either 1 primitive, 2 antecedent, 3 conjunct. 2 particular, being iii. i. either 1 distempter, of spirits, humors, or excrements. 2 ill mixture, of spirits, humors, or excrements. 3 putrifaction of spirits, humors, or excrements. Signes be according to the 1 kindes, 2 causes, 3 place wherein the matter is contained, &c.
6 Prognostication, some be 1 simple and easie to know, 2 compound and hard to know, 3 dangerous, 4 not dangerous. 7 Cure, in which consider the prospectation, wherein con∣sider the 1 fever, Herein observe every particular very well, what the offensive matter is, and how to remove it. 2 kinde, Herein observe every particular very well, what the offensive matter is, and how to remove it. 3 difference, Herein observe every particular very well, what the offensive matter is, and how to remove it. 4 cause, Herein observe every particular very well, what the offensive matter is, and how to remove it. 5 signes, Herein observe every particular very well, what the offensive matter is, and how to remove it. 6 prognostication, Herein observe every particular very well, what the offensive matter is, and how to remove it. 7 cure, Herein observe every particular very well, what the offensive matter is, and how to remove it. Intentions curative, Consider the fever, first what it is, rottennesse, with the abundance of it, obstruction, perspiration let. And pro∣ceed in the cure thus: 1 first empty the abundance, 2 open the obstructions, 3 free the perspiration, 4 cleanse the rottennesse, 5 quench the fever, 6 reject the accidents.
Of the Fever Diaria, or Ephemera. 1 Definition, its a fever of unnaturall heat kindled in the spirits. 1 or ayrie part of the bloud or humors by ryot, &c. hurting the action. 2 without putrefaction. 2 Kindes are ii. i. Diaria, 1 simplex, 2 plurimum dierum. 3 Difference, the 1 first lasteth but 24. houres, 2 the second lasteth 2, 3, 4. dayes or more without putrefaction. 4 Causes are divers, as 1 primitive, whose distemper heateth, i. e. inflameth the spirits. 2 antecedent, whose distemper heateth, i. e. inflameth the spirits. 3 conjunct, whose distemper heateth, i. e. inflameth the spirits. 4 by the abuse of the 6. thing not naturall. 5 Signes are a fever, 1 easie and gentle in the first kinde, 2 hotter and stronger in the second kinde, as appeareth in the 1 fever, 2 accidents. 6 Prognosti∣cation, 1 in hot and dry comple∣xions they soone turn either into 1 acute rotten fevers, 2 Hectica. 2 If it continue long they turn either into 1 acute rotten fevers, 2 Hectica. 3 the 1 first if well used is cured in 24. houres, 2 second lasteth moe daies. 4 both sorts if ill handled or delayed, is the originall of divers dangerous fevers.
7 Cure, in it consider the 1 prespecta∣tion, in it consider, the cause 1 precedent being from out ward meanes. 2 conjunct, i. inflamation of the spirits. use good order in the 6. things not naturall, this fever if simple need no purging: eschue 1 fasting, &c. it makes it of more force presently. 2 watching, &c. it makes it of more force presently. the cure must be divers accor∣ding to the 1 disease, 2 accidents. use nothing herein to coole above the first degree. intentions curative, use, diet, 1 fit, S. A. 2 to attenuate, 3 meats of good juyce: bazes to open the pores if need be. 3 herein 1 no coole thing above the first degree according to the tem∣per of the body. 2 things 1 differing according to the cause of the distemper and acci∣dents. to helpe the cruditie of the stomack, in it con∣sider if the wombe be costive or loose. particular remedies▪ S. A. according to the particular cause, as after shall appeare.
Of the fever Diaria, plurimum dierum. e 1 Definition, its a continuall fever 1 inflaming the spirits above 24. houres, 2 of 2. 3. or 4. dayes or moe without pu∣trefaction, hurting the action. 2 Kindes are ii. i. Diaria 1 simplex, 2 plurimum dierum. 3 Differences 1 in their kinds is in their 1 time of continuance, 2 increase of accidents. 2 from all other fevers is in 1 cause, 2 matter, 3 accidents, 4 cure. 5 so long as this is free from putrefaction or Hectica. 4 Cause is, 1 often riot or abuse of the 6. things not naturall. 2 inflamation by excesse, heat kindling the thinne parts of the bloud, yet without putrefaction. 3 vapours retained, the pores and passages being stopt up▪ 5 Signes are, 1 body 1 inflamed and puft up with vapours, 2 full and pineth not away suddenly, 3 in a continuall hot fit, 4 with urine not much altered. 2 divers according to the particular causes and accidents. 6 Prognostic. 1 they are most subject to this that 1 riot much, and disorder themselves. 2 have full bodies and nar∣row pores, unapt to breath out vapours. 2 small danger in it selfe onely, 3 danger if chiefly turning into other fevers, 4 the distemper, signes, and accidents are according to the obstruction, as that is either 1 greater, 2 lesser.
7 Cure, in it con∣sider the 1 perspectation in it, consider well the 1 cause, 2 greatnesse of the obstruction, 3 if bleeding have beene omitted, do it at any time, saith the learned. 4 bleeding and drinking of cold water is the best cure. 5 great abstinence after surfeit of meat is good, if caused by surfeit of meat, bleed not before the 2. or 3. day. 6 best method to cure it. intentions curative, 1 bleed plentifully at first, if nothing forbid it. 2 use medicines to scoure and cleanse that heat least, 3 bathe 1 if need bee to open the pores of the utter skin. 2 but first anoint the body with warme sweet oyle of Camomile, &c. with moderate frication to o∣pen the pores. 4 after a bath, 1 open the inward obstructi¦ons, by drinking decocti∣ons fit, &c. that heat least. 2 then coole the heat of the fever. S. A.
Of the Fever Putrida in generall. 1 Definition Febris putrida is any rotten fever of humour putrified sometimes 1 within the veines or vessels. without the veines or vessels. 2 both within and without, as appeareth in their proper chap∣ters. 2 Kindes are general∣ly ii. i. 1 simple, 2 compound. 3 Differences are according to the 1 cause, 2 matter offending, 3 place wherein the matter is contained, 4 fits, for some be 1 continuall, 2 intermitting, and be either 1 typick, 2 erratick. 3 both continuall, and intermitting. 4 Cause is 1 ever unkinde heat, and unnaturall, kindled in the putri∣fied humours. 2 as is further shewed particularly, in their proper Chap∣ters. 5 Signes 1 generall, are 1 grilling cold, or shivering, 2 fits intermitting at the first in all. 3 anguish by thick smoaks or vapours, 4 accidents in the state be much. 5 feeblenesse, 6 the fever abideth not in one state. 2 particular are, 1 divers, as are shewed in their particular chapters following. 2 some be 1 continuall, 2 intermitting, 3 called typhodes, i. the sweat∣ing sicknesse, &c. 6 Prognostic. 1 most of these rotten fevers of matter putrified within the vessels be dangerous, as is shewed in their proper chapters. 2 the Sweating sicknesse killeth many of all de∣grees.
7 Cure, con∣sider in it the 1 prespecta∣tion, in it consider the 1 putrifaction, if it come ei∣ther of 1 one onely humor alone. 2 moe humors, and that ei∣ther, 1 equall, 2 inequal. 2 Fever, 1 whether it be either, 1 a disease, 2 an accident. 2 if mingled with fevers of its own nature, or otherwise. 3 cure how to begin, and so to proceed the right way, as in their particular Chap∣ters. S. A. 4 Intentions curative, and follow the best method. S. A. 2 intentions curative, use, 1 fit diet. S. A. 2 prepare the matter, 3 evacuation. S. A. 4 coroborate the parts weakened, 5 correct the accidents. S. A. 6 In all things the fittest according to the 1 kinde of the Fever. 2 nature of the Fever. 3 time of the Fever.
Of Fever Synochus putrida. Definition, its a continuall Rotten Fever without great mutation from the beginning to the end. Kinds are ii. i. 1 Synochus putrida, being divided into these three kinds, i. 1 augmastica, 2 epamastica, 3 peramastica. 2 Synochides. 3 Difference 1 Synochus putrida is, 1 when all the 4. hu∣mors putrifie with∣in the veins, 1 ad justitiam, 2 non ad pondus. 2 divided into iii. particular sorts. i. 1 Augmastica wasteth no more hot vapours, then it ingendreth, & so stands at a stay. 2 Epamastica doth ingē∣der more hot vapours then it wasteth, and so increaseth higher. 3 Peramastica wasteth more hot vapors then it ingendereth, and so the fever decreaseth. 2 Synochides, herein bloud and choler both putrifie within the veins. 4 Cause is when unkind heat doth putrifie the whole masse of bloud ad ju∣stitiam, as the 4. humors putrifie as above-said. we abuse the 6. things not naturall in riot and excesse.
5 signes 1 Astimal hot fever without rest with excesse boyling heat of the bloud. 2 are partly according to the different kindes. 3 the 1 Augmastick stands ever at one stay in shew from the beginning to the end, ut vinum Inopis, as dark wine. 2 Epamastica ever increaseth. 3 Peramastica, ever diminisheth▪ 4 same fever hapneth Chiefly in bo∣dies, 1 grosse and full, 2 sanguine, 3 of Bacchus crue. Seldome in bodies leane, old, or cold temperatures, 6 Prognostic. the ii. first particulars few escape death, third or last kinde all escape if they disorder not themselves. if the humour be much putrified, to draw much bloud its dangerous. 7 Cure, in it consider the 1 perspectation, in it consider the 1 fever, 2 kinds, 3 differences, 4 cause, 5 signes, 6 prognostic. 7 manner of cure which must bee according to the 1 kinde, 2 differences, 3 cause, 4 time of the dis∣ease, 5 accidents, &c. 2 Intentions curative, 1 empty the abundance, 2 open the obstructions, 3 free the perspiration, 4 cure the rottennesse, 5 correct the accidents, 6 quench the fever.
Of the compound hot continuall Fever Synochides. 1 Definition, its a continuall hot burning rotten Fever, without rest or intermission. 2 Kindes are as above-said in Synochus putrida. 3 Difference, 1 its hotter, 2 accidents more vehement then in Synochus putrida. 3 its composed partly of Fever 1 causon, 2 Synochus. 4 its not so hot and vehement as the Fever 1 causon, 2 causonides. 4 Cause is ii. parts bloud, or most bloud, and lesse choler putrified within the veins and arteries. i. part choler, or most bloud, and lesse choler putrified within the veins and arteries. 5 Signes 1 are partly as in Fever Synochus, but sharper. Causon, but milder. 2 it do participate betweene Synochus and Causon, but neerer to Synochus putrida. 3 are a continuall hot burning fever without rest or in∣termission. 4 are headach sharp. 5 are thirst great, 6 are watch and ill rest, 7 are urine high and thick. 6. Prognostic. its very dangerous, and most of them dye.
7 Cure, in it consider the 1 prespecta∣tion, in it consider the 1 Fever rightly. 2 humors, and 1 their quantities, how un∣equall they be. 2 provide for both. S. A. 3 difficulty in discerning perfectly these com∣pound fevers the one from the other, else you shall ever erre in the cure. 4 cure in this fever must incline most to the cure of Synochus putrida, and lesse to cau∣son, both in preparing, purging, and cor∣recting the accidents. 5 best method, and use all. S. A. trust not wholly to the urine, but examine the par∣tie, and symptoms exactly. 2 intentions curative, 1 use dyet cooling inclining to drinesse. 2 evacuate by 1 clyster, S. A. 2 bleeding, S. A. 3 purge senitive, S. A. 4 sweats, &c. S. A. 3 corroborate the weake parts, as you finde in those ii. Fevers above-said. 4 correct the ac∣cidents, as you finde in those ii. Fevers above-said.
Of the Fever Causon, the hottest burning fever continuall. e 1 Definition, its the hottest continuall restlesse burning Fever above all other. 2 Kindes are ii. i. 1 Vera, the true Causon Fever. 2 Non vera, i. the Fever Causonides following. 3 Differences, the fever 1 Causon 1 proceeds of one onely humor, i. yellow choler simply, 2 is more vehement in the fever and ac∣cidents then all other fevers. 2 Causonides is 1 compound of ii. humours, see the Chapter. 2 milder in the fever and accidents then Causon. 4 Cause is 1 yellow choler putrified within the veins and arteries neere 1 heart, 2 lungs, 3 liver, 4 stomack, &c. 2 not the heat of bloud, but the burning of choler. 5 Signes are 1 a continuall hot sharp burning fever without rest. 2 tongue hot, dry, and black. 3 thirst extreame. 4 breath hot, and sharp. 5 watch continuall, and alienation of minde. 6 Prognostic, few of these escape with life, but death attacheth them.
7 Cure, consider the 1 prespecta∣tion, in it consider 1 well 1 whether it bee an exquisite Causon or no. 2 the time of the disease. 3 in the beginning, and increase of all cholericke fe∣vers eschew all 1 cooling binding things. 2 both inward & outward. 3 rubarb, 4 absinth, &c. 4 the accidents if their violence re∣quire present help. 2 if you let bloud, 1 do it in cruditie, not after con∣coction appeareth. 2 draw not above 4. or 5. ounces, except cause require it. 3 before to take a right and perfect method, and performe it effectually. S. A. 2 intentions curative, consider, 1 whether, the disease and the complexion do agree, or be contrary to each other. use 1 diet cold and moist in all, as in a pure tertian. 2 evacuation by 1 clyster to coole and void excrements. 2 bleeding, Basilica. S. A. purging choler, as in a pure tertian. 3 corroborate and nourish the breast after bleeding with things that cool, dry little, and fortifie. stomack after bleeding with things that cool, dry little, and fortifie. 4 correct the accidents as in other hot fevers. quench the heat of the Fever. S. A.
Of the compound fever Causonides. e 1 Definition, its a continuall hot burning putrified Fever. 2 Kindes are before set down with Fever Causon. 3 Differences are before declared. 4 Cause is, 1 choler ii. parts, and bloud i. part, putrified within the veins and arteries. 2 its compounded of Fever 1 Causon most. 2 Synochus putrida least. 5 Signes are partly as in Fever 1 Causon, but not so vehement, but milder. 2 Synochides, but more sharp. 3 tertian continuall, but without shew of inter∣mission. 6 Prognostic. its very dangerous, and killeth many. few escape death.
7 Cure, in which consider the 1 prespectation, 1 diligently seeke to know the kinde perfectly of this mixt Fever: for where the kinde is unknowne, the cure is unknown. 2 herein be more signes of Fever Can∣son then of Synochus, yet signes of both. 3 Herein follow the cure of both wari∣ly, but chiefly of Causon. 2 intentions curative, 1 both in the 1 disease, must wisely bee gathered out of the afore-said Fevers. 2 accidents. must wisely bee gathered out of the afore-said Fevers. 2 are chiefly to bee taken both in the Fever and accidents, as in those fevers from which it deriveth.
Of Febris continualis, i. a hot burning Fever with evident shew of intermission. 1 Definition, its a continuall hot burning Fever, yet with some shew of intermission, i. a shew of shaking betweene the fits. 2 Kindes are iii. i. the continuall 1 quotidian, 2 tertian, 3 quartane. 3 Differences the 1 first seemes to have an ex∣traordinary fit every day. 2 second seemes to have an ex∣traordinary fit every other day. 3 third seemes to have an ex∣traordinary fit every third day. 4 Causes, if 1 flegme putrifie alone within the veins, it causeth a con∣tinuall Fever quotidian, 2 choler putrifie alone within the veins, it causeth a con∣tinuall Fever tertian, 3 melancholy putrifie alone within the veins, it causeth a con∣tinuall Fever quartane. 5 Signes, 1 none of these slake wholly betweene the fits. 2 there is a shew of an extraordinary fit either once every day. other day. third day. are both in the Fever and accidents much like to divers other hot fevers herein related. 6 Prognostic. 1 it is 1 dangerous, 2 Typhodes, i. burning and perillous. 2 bodies of bad juyce often get these by obstructi∣ons. 3 these are rotten fevers, therefore remove the rotten∣nesse.
7 Cure, in it consider the 1 prespecta∣tion, in which consider, 1 well which of the iii. sorts it is. 2 the greater the obstruction, the greater the Fever. 3 how to deale with every of these in par∣ticular. 4 begin the cure, and so to pro∣ceed. S. A. 5 where the disease and cause thereof is un∣known, there the cure is also unknown. 2 intentions curative, are, 1 partly as in other fevers. 2 first empty the abun∣dance of obstructive matter by 1 clyster, 2 bleeding, 3 purging, 4 sweat, 5 urine, &c. S. A. 3 open the obstructions 1 present with 1 frication, 2 things that 1 scoure with least heat. 2 clense with least heat. 2 which be ei∣ther 1 univer∣sall, and is of ii. sorts either in the 1 pores of the ut∣ter skin. 2 veins either in 1 quātity 2 quality. 2 particular, either in the 1 gall. 2 liver. 3 mesenteries. &c. 4 free the perspiration. 5 cure the rottennesse. 6 quench the fever.
Of the Semitertiana or Hemitritian Fevers. 1 Definition 1 Semitertian or Hemitriteos, a halfetertian. 2 its 1 a compound hot burning Fever. 2 both intermitting, and continuall. 2 Kindes are generally iii. i. the 1 lesse Hemitritian fever. 2 middle Hemitritian fever. 3 great Hemitritian fever. 3 Difference is ii. fold: 1 according to the matter putrified within and with∣out the veins and arteries. 2 in the quantitie of the humors, 1 either 1 equall, 2 inequall. 2 exceeding more or lesse. 4 Causes ge∣nerall, are ii. i. the 1 first is in 3. sorts, i. when 1 fleme do putri∣fie within the vessels and choler with∣out 2 choler do putri∣fie within the vessels and flegme with∣out 3 melan∣choly do putri∣fie within the vessels and choler with∣out 2 second is ever the mixture of ii. fevers of cō∣trary qualities i. the 1 one makes the continual feve∣rish fit 2 other makes the intermit∣ting feve∣rish fit 5 Signes of the 1 first are much like the continuall quotidian fever. 2 second have stronger heat the other day. 3 third is worst of all in 1 heat every third day. 2 accidents every third day. 6 Prognostic. 1 these are deadly, and seldome cured. 2 the 1 first is hard to cure, & soone causeth lytargy, 2 second is worse to cure, and few escape, and soone causeth Frensie. 3 third is mortall, incurable, and soone turns to death. 3 by example of these, learne to cure all other com∣pound fevers.
7 Cure, in it con∣sider the 1 prespecta∣tion, con∣sider in the 1 generall, these 5. things, i. the 1 Kindes, which of the 3. sorts it is. 2 matter whereof it cometh. 3 manner of the fits, and place of the matter. 4 signes are chiefly to be regard∣ed, the better to judge the di∣versity of the iii. sorts. 5 accidents, see more of it in their proper places. 2 particulars in the cure to 1 empty the abundance. 2 open the obstructions, 3 free the perspiration, 4 remove the rottennesse, 5 quench the fever. 2 intentions curative, 1 first emp∣ty by clyster, prepare and purge. S. A. by vomit, laxes, sweat, urine, &c. 2 secondly corroborate the stomack. 3 correct the accidents. 4 open and coole the liver, 5 mixe things rightly against the offensive hu∣mours. S. A.
Of the fever Epiola. he 1 Definition Epiola, is a continuall fever with ii. contrary distempers at one time sensibly felt, that is extreame 1 heat. 2 cold. 2 Kindes are after some writers ii. i. 1 Epiola. 2 lyparia. 3 Differences are gene∣rally in the 1 humours offending. 2 manner of the affects. 4 causes of 1 Epiola is glassie flegme some 1 putrified, 2 not putrified. 2 liparia is of glassie flegme mixt with choler. 5 Signes in 1 Epiola the 1 inner parts be burning hot, sensibly felt. 2 utter parts be chilling cold, sensibly felt. 2 Liparia the 1 inner parts be coldish, sensibly felt. 2 utter parts be hot and burning, sensibly felt. 6 Prognostic. the 1 first is hard to dissolve, and most of them dye. 2 second, most of them escape.
7 Cure, in it consider the 1 perspecta∣tion, in which con∣sider the 1 kindes, 2 differences, 3 causes, 4 signes, 5 prognostication, 6 best method for the cure. 7 partie must 1 not bleed in this fever. 2 use things to 1 heat, 2 make thinne, 3 cut and divide. 2 intentions curative be 4. i. 1 diet to 1 heat, 2 dry, 3 attenuate and make thinne. 2 digest the matter. S. A. 3 purge the cold grosse glassie flegme. 4 correct the accidents, which be 1 thirst, 2 belly-ach, 3 tenasmus, &c.
Of the Fever Lyparia. he 1 Definition, its a compound hot burning Fever with intermission. 2 Kindes, are before declared in Epiola. 3 Differences, are before declared in Epiola. 4 Cause is, 1 choler corrupt under the skinne. 2 also glassie flegme crude within the body. 5 Signes, are also shewed in the Chapter of Epiola. 6 Prognostic. are also shewed in the Chapter of Epiola.
7 Cure, in which consider the 1 perspectation, in it consider the 1 humours whether 1 inflamed or corrupted. 2 one be inflamed, and the other crude. 3 both bee corrupted and rotten. 2 equalitie of the humours. 3 inequalitie of the humours. 2 Intentions curative, these must be either as in the 1 bastard tertian. 2 middle Hemiter∣tian fever. ☞ These compound humours in Fevers must bee care∣fully considered, and so advisedly dealt with in the cure of them.
Of the fever Emphysoda a hot burning fever. 1 Definition, its an hot compound burning Fever, with intermission by fits. 2 Kinds are ii. i. 1 Liparia aforesaid. 2 Emphysoda, of choler and flegme, but not glassie flegme. 3 Difference 1 from Lyparia is in that the flegme is glassie, in this its not so. 2 in some the choler and flegme be 1 equall, observe it well. 2 unequall, observe it well. 3 is not much from other compound fe∣vers of that nature either in the 1 matter, 2 cause, 3 accident, 4 cure. 4 cause is either 1 choler vehemently about the liver or gall mixt with un∣naturall flegme. 2 putrefaction of choler and flegme in the stomacke, or li∣ver, or in both. 3 of obstruction of the gall. 5 Signes are 1 vehement heat by fits, the 1 hands and feet are cold. 2 whole body inflamed inwards. 2 wheales about the mouth. 3 scabs about the mouth. 4 blisters in the mouth. 6 Prognostic. its very 1 troublesome, yet many escape. 2 dangerous, yet many escape.
7 Cure, in which con∣sider the 1 perspecta∣tion, in it consider 1 well 1 cause of the matter offen∣sive. 2 equalitie of the matter offen∣sive. 3 inequalitie of the matter offen∣sive. 4 kindes of the matter offen∣sive. 5 nature of the matter offen∣sive. 2 how it agreeth with any other fever, and so proceed in the cure. 2 intentions curative, 1 bleed in this fever safely, if cause require it. 2 use 1 diet to coole and moisten. S. A. 2 prepare and purge with such as cool and compresse. 3 take your Indications curative from other fevers that agreeth most with this fever. 4 correct the accidents as in other fevers of this nature.
Of Fever Erratick, i. a wandring uncertaine Fever. e 1 Definitio Febris, i. Erretica, a wandring or unstable fever. 2 Kindes are ii. i. the 1 generall be ii. 1 simple, 2 compound. 2 particular be 1 pthisis, 2 Erratic, 3 planetica. 3 Differences are in the 1 kindes, 2 matter offending either 3 manner of the fits. 1 simple of one onely fever. 2 compound or mixt with 2. or 3. fevers. 3 equall, 4 inequall. 5 crude and raw. 6 putrified, or but inflamed. 4 place wherein the matter is contained. 5 Physica Febris, is any intermitting fever, that return∣eth at any uncertaine time. 6 Erretica Febris, is of divers fevers mixt together with uncertaine fits often in a day, &c. 7 Planetica Febris, erreth as the Planets do, &c. 4 Cause is either 1 bloud thick and grosse which do obstruct. 2 unnaturall, 1 choler, that do offend. 2 flegme, that do offend. 3 melancholy, that do offend. 5 Signes are fits 1 unconstant, 2 at uncertaine times. 3 according to the number of humours offending unmixt. fevers offending unmixt. 6 Prognostic. if many humours be inflamed with choler, they be fil∣thy, and villanous pernitious fevers.
7 Cure, in which consider the 1 perspecta∣tion, in it consider 1 kindes, 2 differences, 3 matter what it is, whether 1 equall, 2 inequall, 3 compound, 4 simple, 5 the fits be 1 frequent, or be 2 slow. 3 how often they af∣flict. 4 fever whether it be either a disease of it selfe, an accident. The best way to cure it. 2 intention curative, in it con∣sider 1 to vary in al accor∣ding to the 1 manner of the fever. 2 particulars herein re∣quired. S. A. 2 diet must vary accor∣ding to the 1 disease, 2 cause of the dis∣ease. 3 time of the dis∣ease. 4 complexion, 5 age, &c. cannot otherwise be here described, but according to the admonition set downe in other fevers of like nature. 3 matter whether it be either 1 simple if 1 bloud 1 inflamed, do as in fever Di∣aria bleed, &c. 2 putrified, do as in Syno∣chus putrida. 2 choler, flegme, or melancholy, do as in fevers of that kinde. 2 compound, consider the humors, if 1 equall or inequall, 2 crude inflamed or putrid, 3 you observe this order in all compound fevers, you do well.
Of the fever Tetrath. e 1 Definition, its a fever that may vex every part of the body either 1 universall, 2 particular. 2 kindes are ii. the 1 universall, 2 particular. 3 Differences are 1 ii. fold, accor∣ding to the 1 place of the mo∣tion either 1 generall, 2 particular. 2 matter which is either 1 putrified, 2 not putrified. 2 divers in the cure which must be in all according to the variety of the 1 matter, 2 place, 3 symptoms. 4 Cause is some∣times of unna∣turall 1 flegme either 1 sowre and cold. 2 adust, and turned into melancholy. 2 melancholy being the dregs of all the natu∣rall humors adust, 1 chiefly 1 flegme, 2 melancholy 2 putrified in the place moved. 5 Signes are 1 gaping, 2 shaking, and quivering of the place ill affected. 3 an Intermitting Fever with great vexation oft times by fits. 4 if the matter be 1 not putrified, it seldome causeth a Fever. 2 putri∣fied its 1 either 1 universall in all the parts. 2 particular, in one part onely. 2 then ever with a Fever. 5 paine of the splene. 6 in some there is pe∣rillous accidents, as 1 swounding, 2 hycket, 3 convulsions, &c. 4 a fit once in 5. 6. or 7. dayes with shaking. 6 Prognostic. this is 1 hard to cure, yet curable for the most part. 2 caused ei∣ther of 1 a quartaine, 2 black jaundies, 3 the scurbutus, trembling, and il splene.
7 Cure, in it consider the 1 perspecta∣tion, in it consider the 1 kinde, 1 universall, or not 2 particular, or not 3 putrified, or not 4 with 1 a quartaine or not 2 black jaundies or not 3 scorbutus or not 2 difference, 1 universall, or not 2 particular, or not 3 putrified, or not 4 with 1 a quartaine or not 2 black jaundies or not 3 scorbutus or not 3 causes, 1 universall, or not 2 particular, or not 3 putrified, or not 4 with 1 a quartaine or not 2 black jaundies or not 3 scorbutus or not 4 manner whether it be 1 universall, or not 2 particular, or not 3 putrified, or not 4 with 1 a quartaine or not 2 black jaundies or not 3 scorbutus or not 5 best method to follow. 2 intentions curative, 1 diet must be 1 in qualitie contrary to the of∣fensive matter. 2 as in the cure of 1 melancholy. 2 quartaine. &c. 3 cutting, and dividing, and concocting. 2 prepare the matter, and purge as in 1 melancholy, 2 quartaine. 3 bleed if cause require it. S. A. 4 corroborate the 1 heart, 2 stomack, 3 splene. 5 represse the accidents. S. A.
Of the Fever Encretica. e 1 Definition Encreticus morbus & bene terminalis, it may be taken for any fever diminishing. 2 Kinds are 1 divers according to the fever. 2 any fever 1 decreasing, 2 without danger. 3 Differences are according to the 1 fever, 2 causes, 3 symptoms, &c. 4 Causes are taken from the 1 varietie of the fever. 2 kinde of the fever. 3 time of the fever. 5 Signes are 1 according to the kinde of the fever. cause of the fever. time of the fever. symptoms of the fever. decrease of the fever. 2 urine with sediment or Ipostasies Rubea. 6 Prognostic. 1 easie to escape and recover. 2 this is every fever decreasing to health, except they overthrow themselves by disorder.
7 Cure, in which consider the 1 perspecta∣tion, in which consider the 1 kinde of the fever. 2 difference of the fever. 3 cause of the fever. 4 manner, if fit to use medicine 1 or no 2 and 1 wherefore. 2 what is re∣quired. 5 intentions 1 if any be required. 2 and what must be done. 6 best method if need require any. 2 intentions curative, be 8. i. 1 diet. S. A. 2 evacuate the abun∣dance if need bee ei∣ther by 1 clyster, 2 bleeding in some, 3 in some not so. 4 by vomit, 5 purge, 6 sweat, 7 urine, &c. 3 open the obstructions, 4 free the perspiration, 5 cure and resist the rot∣tennesse. 6 corroborate the parts weakened with fit cordials, &c. S. A. 7 quench the fever. 8 represse or prevent accidents if need be. ☞ matter well that you have to do, and do it as in other Fevers and symptoms of like nature.
Of the Fever Pestilence. The 1 Definition, its 1 a continuall hot burning infective fever. 2 a kinde of a venemous putrified fever. 2 Kindes are iii. i. 1 Pestilentia, 2 Epidimia, 3 Vndimia. 3 Differences the 1 first infecteth man and beast onely by evill ayre. 2 second infecteth man and beast onely by evill ayre. 3 third bringeth forth a pestilent botch, &c. 4 Causes, the 1 first is Gods hand to punish sinne. 2 second is venemous ayre. 3 third is generally these ii. i. 1 corrupt ayre. 2 bad hu∣mours 1 of corrupt dyet. 2 fit to joyne with the infected ayre. 5 Signes in the 1 beginning, are 1 shivering cold, 2 back-ach, 3 wormes, 4 heavinesse, 5 drowsinesse. 2 increase be 1 more as 1 a burning fever, 2 head-ach, very heavy, and sleepy, 3 lack of sleep, 4 countenance changed, 5 sloth. 6 urine 1 thick, and stinking com∣monly. 2 in some differ but little from a healthy body. 2 chiefly a tumour either in the emunctories, as 1 behinde the eares, 2 under the arme-pits, 3 about the groyne.
6 Prognostic. 1 death for the most part. 2 if nature be strong, and puts out the botch, &c. in some Emunctorie, &c. as above-said, such escape often. 7 Cure, in it consider the 1 prespecta∣tion, in it consider, 1 first submit thee to God, acknowledge thy sinnes with hearty repentance. 2 then flie betimes, flie farre, returne late and slowly, the cure do con∣sist in these iii. points, i. order, diet, physick helps. 2 intentions curative, be 4. i. 1 diet, 2 evacuati∣on by clyster, bleeding in some, in some not, purges, sweat, &c. good antidotes. 3 corroborate with fit cordials. S. A. 4 represse the accidents, &c.
Of Intermitting fevers in generall. he 1 Definition, its a Fever having a fit ei∣ther 1 every 1 day, 2 other day, 3 third day. 2 often in one day. 3 once in many dayes. 2 Kindes are generally ii. i. the generall be ii. i. 1 vera. 2 mendosa. 2 particular be divers. 3 Difference is in the 1 kindes some be 1 simple, 2 compound. 2 matter offending, 3 place offended or obstructed, greatnesse or smallnesse of the obstruction. time of the fit being either typick, erratick. 4 Cause is either choler obstructing the miserayacts. &c. flegme obstructing the miserayacts. &c. melancholy obstructing the miserayacts. &c. mixt humours obstructing the miserayacts. &c. 5 Signes, 1 are according to their causes, as in their proper Chapters is shewed. 6 Prognostic. few of these are dangerous simply in themselves, but by accident, as in their proper chapters doth appeare.
7 Cure, in it consider the 1 perspectation, wherein con∣sider the 1 kindes, 2 differences, 3 causes, 4 signes, 5 manner and times of the fits, 6 accidents, and how to remove them, 7 best method for the cure. 2 intentions curative are general∣ly ii. i. the 1 generall, be 5. i. 1 void the abundance of ob∣structive matter, &c. S. A. 2 open the obstructions, 3 free the perspirations, 4 expell and prevent the rot∣tennesse, 5 quench the Fever. 2 particular as in their proper Chapters, in which 1 use fit dyet, prepare the matter. S. A. evacuate the matter. S. A. corroborate the parts wea∣kened. correct the accidents, do all in each particular. S. A.
Of the Intermitting cotidian Fever. he 1 Definition its a fever or common ague, with a fit once in 24. houres every day. 2 Kindes are ii. i. the 1 continuall before spoken of, 2 intermitting cotidian. 3 Differences are in the 1 kindes, 2 manner of the fits either typick, erratick. 3 place in which the matter is contained. &c. 4 Causes, the 1 continuall is flegme putrified within the veins, 2 intermitting is flegme putrified in the mesenteries. 5 Signes, the 1 first never ceaseth till it end either by 1 health, 2 death. 2 second hath a fit 1 once in a day, 2 first cold, and after burning hot. 6 Prognostic. the 1 continuall cotidian is dangerous, and killeth many. 2 intermitting is seldome dangerous. often of long continuance.
7 Cure, in it con∣sider the 1 perspecta∣tion, in it consider whether the 1 flegme be 1 sweet and easie to turn into bloud, there bleed to open the obstructions. 2 salt, purge it. S. A. 3 sowre, there bleed not. 4 glassi, there bleed not. 2 partie must bleed or no. 3 method generall be best. 2 intentions curative, be 6. i. 1 diet as in oedema. 2 secondly, give a clyster. S. A. 3 thirdly, prepare the matter. 4 fourthly, purge the flegme, S. A. by 1 vomit, 2 stoole. 5 corroborate the parts weakened. 6 correct the accidents.
Of the intermitting tertian fever. The 1 Definition, this tertiana febris intermittence is here taken for a com∣mon agur, having a fit every other day. 2 Kindes are divers, 1 generally ii. i. the 1 continuall tertian afore spoken of. 2 intermitting as 1 vera, 2 mendosa. 2 others which here I omit. 3 Differences are the continuall, is choler putrified in the veins. Intermitting tertiana 1 Vera is choler putrified in the mis∣senteries. 2 Mendosa is choler and flegme putrified in the mis∣senteries. 4 Causes are generally according to each kinde, &c. 5 Signes are 1 proper to each fever and causes. in the 1 continuall, a continuall fit without intermission. 2 Vera a fit of 12. houres each other day, first with shaking cold, and after very bur∣ning hot. 3 Mendosa a fit of 16. or 18. houres, first with very cold shivering, and af∣ter ends with burning heat. 6 Prognostic. the 1 first is dangerous, and do kill many. 2 ii. last not dangerous of themselves, except with some other disease.
7 Cure, in it consider the 1 perspecta∣tion, in it consider the 1 kindes, 2 differences, 3 causes and humors whether 1 simple, 2 compound, 3 equall, if com∣pound, or 4 inequall if com∣pound. 4 Signes, 5 Prognostic. 6 iii. deadly enemies to all agues, i. 1 fasting, 2 bleeding, 3 purging. S. A. 7 intentions curative 8 way to begin the cure, and so to proceed me∣thodically. S. A. 2 intentions curative, must be 1 in all things accor∣ding to 1 fever, 2 humour, 3 accidents. 2 varie herein, in all things according to the matter and place wherein it is contained.
Of the bastard tertian fever. The 1 Definition, this mendosa or bastard tertian fever intermitting. 2 Kindes are as aforesaid in the former Chapter. 1 Vera, the true simple, tertian fever. 2 Mendosa, i. the bastard compound tertian fever. 3 Differences are in the 1 kindes. 2 humours, the 1 first is simply of choler putrified in the missenteries, the fit not above 12. houres. 2 second is compound of choler and flegme, the fit commonly 16. or 18. houres. 4 Causes are in the 1 exquisite tertian, of pure red or yellow choler, putrified in the mis∣senteries. 2 bastard tertian is choler, & flegme, mixt in one, putrified in the mis∣senteries. 5 Signes the 1 first have a fit of 1 9. or 12. houres every other day. 2 second have a fit of 2 16. or 18. houres every other day. ☞ fits are first very cold, and after burning hot. 6 Prognostic. 1 these be not 1 reckoned among great diseases. 2 dangerous in themselves. 2 the bastard tertian is worse to remove then the ex∣quisite.
7 Cure, in it consider the 1 perspectation, wherein con∣sider the 1 kindes, 2 differences, 3 causes, 4 signes, 5 prognostic. 6 best method to cure it. 2 intentions curative, be 8. i. 1 diet inclining to heat that do 1 attenuate, 2 make thinne, 3 insise, &c. 2 prepare choler and flegme both. S. A. 3 purge choler and flegme both. S. A. 4 open the obstructions, 5 free the perspiration, 6 remove and resist putrifaction, 7 corroborate the parts weakened, 8 correct the accidents.
Of the Intermitting quartaine fever. The 1 Definition, its an intermitting Ague or Fever, called of the vulgar, the third dayes ague, or quartaine fever. 2 Kindes be 1 generally, ii. i. the 1 continuall quartaine fevers. 2 intermitting quartaine fevers. 2 particular be divers, as many authors declare. 3 Differences are in the 1 kindes, 2 matter being either of 1 naturall melancholy. 2 unnaturall melancholy. 3 manner of the fits, the 1 first is continuall, 2 second, have a fit every third day. 4 place the first is contained in the veines, second is contained in the messenteries. 5 cure which must be according to the fever. 4 Causes be gene∣rally 4. i. the 1 first 2 second is melancholy putrified 1 within the veins, 2 in the messenteries. 3 third is unnaturall melancholy putrified in the messenteries 4 fourth is atrabilis putrified in the messenteries 5 Signes the 1 first have a continuall fit, but worse every third day. 2 second, i. intermitting quartaine have a fit of 24. houres, and then ii. dayes free betweene every fit. 3 other have a moving according to the matter dul or sharp, Fit commeth ever with grilling cold, and ends in bur∣ning heat. 6 Prognostic. this fever with the black jaundies, they hardly escape. some have it 1,2,3,4,5,6, or 7. yeares.
7 Cure, in it consider the 1 perspecta∣tion, in it consider the 1 kind of the 1 fever. 2 melancholy, what sort it is. 2 difference, 3 cause, 4 best method, and follow it. S. A. 5 give no medicine till 7. fits be past. 2 intentions curative, be these 6. 1 diet hot and moyst, 2 bleed if need require, S. A. 3 prepare S. A. 4 purge S. A. 5 corroborate the parts weakened. 6 correct the ac∣cidents being these 8. i. 1 heart faint, 2 bowels weake, 3 obstructions, 4 perspiration let, 5 shivering grilling cold, 6 head-ach, 7 thirst, 8 trembling cold.
Of Fever Hectica. The 1 Definition, it is 1 properly a consumption of all the body universally. 2 some∣times 1 a disease of it selfe, 2 an accident of another disease, 3 simple of it selfe. 4 compound with tabes, &c. 2 Kindes are iii. 1 ros, 2 cambium, 3 glutin. 3 Differences i. 1 ros, consumeth the dewie moysture. 2 cambium consumeth the naturall moysture. 3 glutin consumeth the radicall moysture. 4 Causes, its 1 oft from some other disease as from 1 some 1 other fever. 2 passion of the minde. 2 tabes, &c. 2 an unnaturall heat kindied in the solid parts of the body. 3 default of the assimulative vertue. 5 Signes, 1 they feele no paine. 2 its either with, or without a fever or ague. 3 in 1 ros the heat increaseth after meat, and hard to dis∣cerne. 2 cambiū the heat increaseth and felt to increase more. 3 glutin the heat increaseth most of all. 4 the eyes wax hollow, and the flesh consumeth. 6 Progno∣stic. the 1 first kind is hard to know and easie to cure. 2 second kind is easie to know and hard to cure. 3 third kind is uncurable called marasmus. Hectic with tabes confirmed it uncurable for the most part.
7 Cure, the 1 perspecta∣tion, con∣sider 1 the kinde, and whether it be a disease of it selfe, or an accident, with tabes. 2 if curable or no, and the reason how, and why it may, or may not be. 3 help the first quickly, that it fall not into the second. 4 neither 1 purge nor bleed in a simple hectic, 2 use hot things, 3 Venus sports do most destroy them. 2 intentions curative are 1 in the ii. first kindes 1 use diet cold and moist. S. A. 2 neither purge nor bleed. 2 in Marasmus if you do any thing use 1 diet in all things hot and moist. 2 clysters often of good broth to nourish. 3 restoratives. 3 corroborate the parts weakned. 4 correct the accidents which be most com∣monly these 9. i. 1 sweat, 2 syncope, 3 costivenesse, 4 loosenesse, 5 thirst, 6 kidneis hot, 7 apostume, 8 dropsie, 9 Atrophia, &c.
Of the spotted Fever. e 1 Definition, Febris petechialis is a maligne fever with spots like flea∣bitings. 2 Kindes are ii. i. 1 simple of one onely humour. 2 compound of 2. or 3. humours mixt. 3 Differen∣ces are in the 1 kindes, 2 humour or humours offending, 3 cause, 4 signes, 5 quantitie, 1 budding forth according to the 1 strength of nature. 2 weaknesse of nature. 2 some be 1 greater, 2 lesser, 3 put out according to the 1 thick∣nesse of the mat∣ter, 2 thin∣nesse, of the skin. 4 Cause is some∣times 1 bloud, putrified within the veines either 1 simple, 2 mixt. 2 choler, putrified within the veines either 1 simple, 2 mixt. 3 melancholy, putrified within the veines either 1 simple, 2 mixt. 4 all the humors putrified within the veines either 1 simple, 2 mixt. Its ever a malignevenemous matter mixt with the bloud and humours. 5 Signes are 1 head pained. 2 heart pained. 3 a sluggish fever in some 1 sharp, according to the matter of∣fending. 2 dull, according to the matter of∣fending. 4 spots if red bloud abound, if yellow or greenish choler, if blackish obloish melancholy or choler adust. like flea-bitings appearing in all parts of the body, the backe chiefly. 6 Prognostic. spots 1 red is best of bloud, 2 yellow or green shew 1 a maligne fever of great danger, 2 putrefaction of ill condition. 3 black or blewish is worst, 4 these are all very dangerous, and do infect, and kill many.
7 Cure, 1 perspecta∣tion, con∣sider the 1 kinde, 2 differences, 3 causes, 4 signes, 5 spots, if 1 any ap∣peare, neither bleed nor purge' use diaphoreticks to ex∣pell the venome, open the pore of the skin to breathe vapours. The colour sheweth the humor of∣fending. they 1 lie hid, or be long, or they appeare. 2 be ei∣ther 1 well coloured, so judge of it. 2 ill coloured, so judge of it. 2 the matter abound ei∣ther in 1 quantity, so differ the cure 2 qualitie, so differ the cure 6 cure, deale with it as in other maligne fevers of like nature. 2 intentions curative, 1 note that the cure 1 is chiefly to cure the malignitie, 2 do differ as the malignity do differ 2 if the urine be thick and troubly, then 1 bleeding is hurtfull & weakeneth the strength, and 2 purging is hurtfull & weakeneth the strength 3 bleed before the fourth day, or not at all. 4 if a lask happen stop it not, 1 except it exceed, give nature leave. 2 meddle not with natures of∣fice. 5 meane time, 1 remove the cause of the malignitie, 2 use fit antidotes and cordials to ex∣pell the malignitie. 6 do all in this and in other 1 maligne fevers. S. A. 2 pestilent fevers. S. A. 3 infectious fevers. S. A. FINIS.
Methodicum istum de Febribus tractatum quantum per mporis angustiam mihi concessam licuit percurri. In eo ulta proba ac rara deprehendi. Sicut nolo multus esse in bjiciendo autoris encomio: utpote cujus eruditio, diligentia  praxi medicinae, atque mores integri satis nota sunt eis, ibus ille innotuit: It a non possum non existimare libri hu∣ Lectionem utilem futuram eis, qui in Febrium curatione am operam locant. Alexander Read medicinae Doctor, acsocius Collegii Medici Londinensis. Imprimatur Tho. Weekes R. P. Episc. Lond. Cap. Domest.
