8031 99847564 12602
By the Queene. WHere by occasion of certayne arrestes made in the lowe Countreys of the kyng of Spayne, in the yere of our Lorde 1568. by order of the Duke of Alua Lieutenaunt and Captayne generall in the sayde lowe Countreys, the Queenes Maiesties subiectes with all theyr goodes, shyppes, marchaun∣dizes and monies were there taken, deteyned, and seased, and the lyke after that was executed in Spayne and other the sayde kynges Countreys. For remedy wherof, the Queenes Maiestie at the instaunce of her marchauntes and subiectes whom the same dyd concerne, dyd vse such meanes in staying of the goodes and marchaundizes of the subiectes of the sayde kyng within her dominions, as by the treatise of peace and entercourse betwixt the predecessours of her Maiestie, and the saide kyng was lawful, and as had ben before tymes vsed: and sence that tyme also her Maiestie of late vpon motion made to her by sundry marchauntes straungers, pretendyng interest in some part of the goodes here stayed, hath ben pleased to admit a communication and treatie to be had aswell here in this Realme, as on the other side of the seas, for the behoofe of the marchauntes of both partes, to the intent there myght be a release, deliuerie, and restitution or recompence of and for all maner persons arrested, with their goodes, shippes, marchaundizes and monies, and thereby some further occasion geuen to reuiue the former freendly entercourse of marchauntes on all partes, accordyng to their mutuall desire: the discontinuaunce whereof was neither intended nor occasioned by her Maiestie. Here vpon it hath seemed meete to her Maiestie, there∣in folowyng the lyke order as in the sayde kynges name by deliberation of the saide Duke of Alua in the said lowe countreyes, hath ben published about the beginnyng of this moneth, that some certayne knowledge shoulde be had of the losse and damage of her Maiesties subiectes by reason of the foresaid arrestes, so as their indempnities myght be prouided for. And therfore her Maiestie wylleth and commaundeth that all and euery her subiectes, or others inhabi∣tauntes within her Realmes & dominions, that wyll or desire to haue deliuerie and restitution of their goodes, or any other thinges deteyned and arrested in any her Maiesties countreyes, shall within one mo∣neth after the publication hereof in any shire of this Realme, present or sende into the handes of the princi∣pall officers of any one of these cities and townes folowyng, that is to say, London, Southampton, Bristoll, Chester, Newcastle, Hull, and Ipswiche, as they shall finde it most conuenient, a certayne and particular declaration of the persons, shippes, goodes, marchaundizes, debtes or money, which hath ben taken or sea∣sed by reason of the saide arrestes in any of the sayde kynges countreys and dominions. And after the same shalbe so deliuered to the foresayde principall officers of any of the foresayde Cities or Townes: Her Maiestie further wylleth and commaundeth that to all the sayde declarations filed together, the common seale of the sayde Cities and Townes shalbe affixed: and after then, immediatly sent and deliuered to the court of the admiraltie in the saide Citie of London, there to remayne to be consydered as her Maiestie shall further or∣der for the benefite of her subiectes. Gyuen at her Maiesties manor of Otelande the last day of Iune. 1570. in the twelfth yere of her Maie∣sties raigne. God saue the Queene. ❧ Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyarde by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maiestie. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.
