A371 R4926 13482790 99705
AN ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE TWO HOUSES of PARLIAMENT now assembled in England and Scotland, AND THE WHIGGS DECLARATION in Scotland. Together with Argile's DECLARATION at large, as it was published by him and his Accomplices. Friday May 22. THE first thing the two Houses did was to resolve to return their most Humble and Hearty Thanks to His Majesty for his most gracious Speech and Declaration. And the House of Commons taking into consideration that part of His Majesties Speech which relates to the Revenue, Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, That the Revenue which was granted to the late King, be setled on his present Majesty for his Life, and that a Bill should be brought in for that purpose.
In the Afternoon the two Houses attended His Majesty in a Body in the Banquetting House at Whitehall to return their Thanks to His Majesty. This day the House of Lords resolved to make the following Address to His Majesty, His Majesty having graciously imparted to this House, That he is informed that the late Earl of Argile attainted of Treason, with divers other Rebels, are Landed in Scotland, and are in Actual Rebellion. It is ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That this House do wait upon His Majesty at Five a Clock this afternoon in the Banquetting House at White∣hall, to give his Majesty their humble thanks for having imparted the same to this House; And do humbly offer to assist his Majesty with their Lives and Fortunes against the said Rebels and all other his Eneies whatsoever. The House of Commons likewise after Reading of Argiles Declaration mentioned in his Majesties Speech. Resolved, Ne∣mine Contradicente, That this House will stand by and assist his Ma∣jesty with their Lives and Fortunes against Archibald Campbel the pretended Earl of Argil and his Aderents, and all Rebels and Traytors, and all others whatsoever that shall assist him or any of them. And that this House will in a body attend his Majesty with this Vote. And this afternoon the two Houses accordingly attended his Majesty severally in the Banquetting House with the said Addres∣ses and Votes. The Bill for settling the Revenue on his Majesty for his Life, was this day Read the first time; and is to be Read again on Momday next. Edinbugh, May 9. Yesterday there passed two Acts in Parlia∣ment; The one declaring, That whereas the obstinacy of the Fana∣tical party, notwithstanding all the Laws formerly made against them, do pesevere to keep their House and Field Conventicles, which are the Nurseries and Rendevouzes of Rebellion. Therefore
his Majesty with consent of his Estates in Parliament, doth Statute and Ordain that all such as shall hereafter Preach at such Fanatical House or Field Conventicles, as also such as shall be present as Hear∣ers at Field Conventicles, shall be punished by Death, and Confisca∣tion of their Goods. The other declaring, That the giving or taking the National Covenant as explained in the Year 1638, or of the League and Cove∣nant, so commonly called, or writing in defence thereof, or owning of them as lawful or obligatory on themselves or others, shall infer the Crime and Pains of Treason. Edinburgh, May 13 This day the Parliament passed the following Act. An Act and Offer of a new Supply to His Majesty. THE Estates of Parliament calling to mind the many great Blessings they have and do enjoy under the protection of the Royal Government / and especially by the many deliverances from the Rebellious Insut∣rections and desgns of Phanatical Traitors / from whom they could expect no less than confusion in Religion / Oppression in their Estates / and Cruelty against their Persons and Familes; And that the Terror of His Majesties Forces hath been very instrumental for procuring our present Security: But considering that not only these Enemies continue their inveterate hatred a∣gainst King and People / but that their frequent disappointments have height∣ned their malice to despair; And that the present Forces may be too few to un∣dergo all the Fatigue which His Majesties Service / or the protection of the Country doth require; And to demonstrate to all Seditious men that this Na∣tion is resolved to bestow all they have in the Kings Service / rather than to be exposed to the least of their Insults: Do therefore for themselves & the Nation represented by them / make a hearty and dutiful offer to His Majesty of Two hundred & 16 thousand pounds yearly / payable at two Terms / viz. Whitsonday and Mertimas each year / beginning at Whitsonday next 1685. and so forth termly / and that over and besides the five Months Cesse already imposed on this Kingdom by the third Act of Parliament 1681. whereby there will be four Months Cesse payable at each Term hereafter / beginning at Whitsonday next 1685. And as a farther Evidence of their entire affection to the Sacrd Person of his present Majesty / they humbly and heartily offer a continuation and prorogation of the said four Months Cesse termly from the said Term of Whitsonday 1685, incluve / during all the Terms of His Majesties life time / which God Almighty long preserve / that being the greatest of our ely wishes / as it is the chief of our Temporal Felicity and Glory.
Edinburgh, May 18. The late Earl of Argile, and with him some other Rebels having in Holland made provision of Arms and Ammunition, set Sail from the Vlye on Saturday the 2d Instant in thre small Ships. On the 5th he appeared before Orkney, where having sent his Secretary and Chirurgeon on shore, they were immediately seized by the Inhabitants of that Island, and are sending hither with all diligence to the Privy Council. From thence he Sailed for the West Coast of Scotland, and arrived the 13th Instant at Danstafnage in Lorne (a ruinous Castle which formerly did belong to himself) and put a Garrison therein. The Highlanders, and all His Majesties Forces on the Confines of that Country, are marching with all possible dili∣gence for suppressing these Rebels; Who have emitted two Trai∣terous Declarations, whereof the first (a long one) is intitled thus: [The Declaration and Apologie of the Protestant People, that is, of the Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses and Commons of all sorts, now in Arms within the Kingdom of Scotland, with the Concurrence of the True and Faithful Pastors, and of several Gentlemen of the English Nation joined with them in the same Cause, &c] By which they impudently and irreligiously set forth the great advantages the Protestant Religion both at home and abroad, had by the Success of the Horrid Rebellion against King Charles the First, which Suc∣cess they now impiously ascribe to the Blessing of God upon the Good∣ness of their Cause: They cry up the Loyalty of the Scotch Covenan∣ters, who after they had delivered up the Father to be barbarously and inhumanly Murdered by their Brethren in England, had yet admitted of the Son to Reign upon certain terms & Conditions (ab∣solutely inconsistent with Monarchy) by which they pretend to prove that all that was done by his Late Majesty since his Hap∣py Restauration, was Ʋngrate, Illegal, Arbitrary and Tyrannical; And that all the Oaths imposed by Law since the rescinding of the Solemn League and Covenant have been Perjury, and the Government it self a continued Apostacy. And they accuse the Parliaments of both Kingdoms for rescinding the pernicious Laws made during the Rebellion, and those of Scotland in particular, for making of Laws by which Protestant Blood (as they pretend)
is shed, whereof they give for instance the late Marquis of Argile Condemned in Parliament; and also for turning out the Noncon formists Ministers. They accuse the Government of putting men to death contrary to Law; and desolating the Churches, changing the Ordinances of God to the Inventions of Men; conniving at Pa∣pists; keeping up of Standing Forces, which they call the Bane of Civil Government. They declare against the Kings Supremacy; And all the Wars against the States General of the United Pro∣vinces. The Execution of those Miscreants, who make it their Profession and Practice to Murder Loyal Subjects upon the pre∣tence of Religion; and the Torture of Spence and Carstares, by whom was made so great a discovery of the late horrid Conspira∣cy; as also the Forfeiture of the late Earl of Argile. They like∣wise declare against the Enquiries that were made into the Rebel∣lion at Bothwel Bridge by the late Circuit Courts, all which (so necessary for the peace and quiet of these Kingdoms) they call Tyranny and Popery twisted together. They declare against his present Majesty, (whom they call James Duke of York) his Ascen∣tion to the Throne, as being Excluded from it by the Commons of England. They declare likewise against the present House of Commons as Packed and Caballed and returned by Fraud and Inju∣stice. For all which pretended reasons they declare that they totally throw off all Bonds of Subjection, and do take up Arms a∣gainst his present Majesty (whom they still call James Duke of York) and all his Accomplices, siling them the most unnatural and wicked Enemies; for those pretended ends. First The re∣storing and setling what they call the Protestant Religion. Second∣ly, The Suppression and perpetual Exclusion of Popery, and its bi-Root and Spring, Prelacy. Thirdly, The restoring of all who hav been Sufferers upon the account of adherence to their Partly, for the pulling down of this present Government, and setting up another suit∣able to their designs; And they declare that they never will enter into any Capitulation, Treaty, or Conditions with the King; but on the contrary prosecute the War wit  reality, constancy and vigor, until they shall attain their ends; and that they will assist and main∣tain one another, especially their Brethren in England and Ireland,
who shall pursue the same ends. And lastly, they promise Indem∣nity to those who have been formerly their Enemies, upon their sincere repentance, joyning with them and vigorously assisting them against a Persecuting Tyrant and an Apostate Party, for so they call His Majesty and his loyal Subjects, ending their Decla∣ration with great Promises of Assistance from God to their Par∣ty, and of Confusion to their Enemies. This being the substance of their long and Canting Declaration, the other lesser is here set down at length. The Declaration of Archibald Earl of Argile, Lord Kintyre, Cow all, Campbel, and Lorn, Heritable Sheriff and Lieutenant of the Shires of Argile and Turbett, and Heritable Justice Gene∣ral of the said Shires, and of the West Isles, and others; with his Order to his Vassals and others in the said Shires, and under his Jurisdicton, to concur for Defence of their Religion, Lives and Liberties. I Shall not mention my Case published in Print in Latine and in Dutch, and more largely in English, nor mean I to repeat the printed Declaration emitted by several Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others of both Nations now in Arms; but because the Suf∣ferings of me and my Family are therein mentioned, I have thought it fit for me to declare for my self; That as I go to Arms with those who have appointed me to conduct them, for no pri∣vate nor personal end, and only for those contained in the said Declaration, which I have concerted with them, and approve of; so I do claim no Interest, but what I had before the pretended Forfeiture of my Family, and have sufficient right to. And that I do freely, (and as a Christian) forgive all personal Injuries against my Person or Family to all that shall not oppose, but join and concur with us in our present Undertaking, for the ends mentioned in the said Declaration. And hereby I oblige me never to pursue them in Judgment, nor out of Judgement; And I do further declare, That obtaining the peaceable and quiet Pos∣session of what belonged to my Father and my self before our
pretended Forfeitures, I shall satisfie all Debts due by my Fa∣ther and my self, as any Heir or Debitor can be obliged. And as my Faithfulness to his late Majesty and his Govern∣ment, hath sufficiently appeared to all unbiassed persons void of Malice; so I do with Grief acknowledge my former too much complying with and conniving at the methods that have been taken to bring us to the sad condition we are now in, though God knows never concurring in the design. I have now with Gods Strength suffered patiently my unjust Sentence and Banishment three years and a half, and have never offered to make any Uproar or Defence by Arms, to disturb the Peace upon my private concern; But the King being now dead, and the Duke of York having taken off his Mask, and having a∣bandoned and invaded our Religion and Liberties, resolving to enter into the Government, and exercise it contrary to Law, I thinkit not only Just, but my Duty to God and my Country, to use my outmost endeavors to oppose and repress his Usurpations and Tyranny. And therefore being assisted and furnished very nobly by seve∣ral good Protestants, and invited and accompanied by several of both Nations to lead them, I resolve, as God shall enable me, to use their assistance of all kinds, towards the ends exprest in the said Declaration. And I do hereby earnestly invite and obteste all honest Prote∣stants, and particularly all my Friends and Blood Relations, to concur with us in the said Declaration; And as I have written se∣veral Letters, so having no other way fully to intimate my mind otherwise, I do hereby require all my Vassals any where, and all within my several Jurisdictions, with their Fencible Men within their Command, to go to Arms, and to join and concur with us according to the said Declarations, as they will be answerable at their peril; And that they obey the particular Orders they shall receive from me from time to time. Dublin, Printed by Joseph Ray, for John Bentley, 1685.
