A3975 R35289 15202863 103239
SOME REMARKS UPON THE LIFE Of that Painful Servant of God Mr. Nathanael Heywood, Minister of the Gospel of Christ at Ormeskirk in Lancashire. Who Died in the 44th Year of his Age. Dedicated to the Right Honourable HUGH Lord Willoughby, by Sir H. Ashhurst, Bart. LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockerill at the Three Legs in the Poultry, over-against Stocks-Market. MDCXCV.
TO The Right Honourable HUGH Lord Willoughby, Baron of PARHAM. My LORD, I Take the boldness to Dedicate to Your Lordship some Me∣moirs of the Life of an Excellent Person, who was Your Country-man, and
one for whom Your Lord∣ship had a just esteem. It is not to recommend to Your Lordship any Party of men among us, but plain Christi∣anity in Legible and Lively Characters; and to remove a Common Objection against the most Excellent Precepts of our Blessed Saviour, that they are hard Sayings, and impracticable things. Here, in a very plain manner, is pre∣sented to Your view a Mi∣nister of Jesus Christ, who had no other Design in the World, but that of doing good to Mankind, and is now partaking of the Eternal Joy of his Lord and Master, to
whom he was so entirely de∣voted. It is Your Lordship's Qua∣lity, and Ancient and Noble Extraction that sets You a∣bove the common Level of Mankind, and draws the Eyes of the World upon You; but there is somewhat greater, Your Exemplary Piety and Zeal for our Holy Religion (in such a dege∣nerate and licentious Age) and the Countenance you give to Serious Piety, where∣ever you find it among all the different Parties that we are so unhappily broken into, that makes you the Orna∣ment
of Your Country, and highly esteemed by Wise and Good Men, and obliges me to be with all imagina∣ble respect, My LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble and Faithful Servant, H. ASHHURST.
THE PREFACE. THE great God is greatly seen in the smallest things; a poor Sparrow lighting on the earth, and a minute Hair of mens Heads, are concerned by the Omnipotent Providence: How much more doth the Glo∣rious Jehovah order the Affairs of the Chil∣dren of Men, and most of all the Concerns of his Church, which is the Sanctum Sanctorum, the inmost Circle of Divine Providence: It is congruous to the Church's state in this world to be Militant; a Lilly among Thorns: Her Husband was a Man of Sorrows, and it becomes not his Bride to be a Wife of Pleasures: If the Head was Non opor∣tet membra deliciari sub capite spinis coro∣nato. crown'd with Thorns, the Members must not think much to be conformable: If they do these things to the green tree, what will they do to the dry? Nay, 'tis ne∣cessary
and salutiferous for this Body to be purged: This Herb grows best when most trodden down: These Vessels are brightest, when most scoured: There is great need God's Children should be in Heaviness, to poise their spirits, and prevent Wantonness. The Vine must be lopt, or it will grow wild: Corn-bearing Fields must be broken up: Afflictions never do the Church hurt; but Prosperity often rots it, and rocks it asleep, to its great Prejudice, if not its ut∣ter Subversion: Ministers usually stand in the Front, and are put upon the hottest Service; the Fire is continually burning on the Brazen Altar: The Priests of old must first enter Jordan, and be the last standing Josh. 3. 8,—17. in the midst thereof: Satan's Malice is most at them, and God usually furnisheth them with more Magnanimity than others. He that still governs the World with Infinite Wisdom, hath appointed to the sons of men their peculiar Office, Station, and Employ∣ment in the world, and qualifies them with Gifts proportionably; manageth their Work for them, prospereth their Undertakings, accepteth their faithful Service, and will give them abundant Recompence: Yea, their Work is their Wages; it comes with Meat in its Mouth. A Gracious Heaven
is the Preludium of a Glorious Heaven; yea, there's much of Glory upon a suffering Minister or Christian: When they are load∣ed with Dirt and Obloquy, even then the Spirit of Glory and of God resteth on them. 1 Pet. 4. 16. It's no diminution, but a manifestation of God's Glory, when it shines through the Glass of Creatures; yea, the less of the Creatures Worth is discovered, the more of God is illustrated. We have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of 2 Cor. 4. 7. the Power may be of God, and not of us. King Solomon must have a Thousand, if Vine-dressers and Fruit-keepers have their Song 8. 12. Two hundred. Let Ministers be invisible, so Christ be Illustrious: As Precious Mr. Wadsworth said, So God's Work be done, I am content to be withdrawn out of sight. So some interpret that Text, John 3. 29. as though the Friend of the Bridegrrom will not be seen in the Treaty, but he stands behind the Curtain, and hears the Bridegroom's Voice, and the Bride's Consent, and greatly rejoiceth, because the Match is likely to go on: But the more Nothing a Minister is in his own eyes, the more doth God magnify him: As the Wife shines in the Beams of her Husband's Ho∣nour or Riches, so also doth God in some
sense shine in his Servants Gifts and Graces. Our Thoughts must go beyond the Gift, to the Giver. A clear transparent Glass set in the Sun, renders the Sun most illustrious, the Chrystal is scarce visible, the Sun is all; yet to our eyes the radiant Sun-beams are more beautiful by the Reflection through the Glass, than shining directly upon us; but the Glass gives not splendor to the Sun, but receives all from it; thus is Christ all in all: And as these Glasses are quickly broken, and rendred useless, so are Ministers, but the Sun remains in its motion, and shines still; for the Sun depends not on the Glass, but the Glass on the Sun; yea, God some∣times thinks fit to break the Glass we are admiring, that our eyes may be intent upon the Sun of Righteousness, and behold all Beauties in him, who is the Lord our Righ∣teousness. God in Wisdom hath thought fit to cause an Eclypse in the Firmament of his Church in these Nations, by hiding ma∣ny Lights under a Bushel, about Thirty Years; and also translated most of them into an Upper Region, where they shine brightest in their proper Orb, tho to us they disappear: The breaking of the Shell is the brightning of the Pearl; they were never so bright below as they are now above; once
they saw through a glass darkly, now 1 Cor. 13. 12. 2 Cor. 3. 18. face to face; and laying aside this Glass, with open face immediately they be∣hold the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory. These Blessed Souls, now with God, are subject neither to the black Mists of Hu∣man Ignorance, nor to foggy Vapours of Sinful Defects, nor do they feel or fear the bespattering Dirt of Opprobrious Scorns, of black-mouth'd Slanderers, but are receiv'd up into Heaven by this Cloud of Death, that hath hid them out of our sight, and hindred our Converse with them; yet they have dropt the Mantle of good Examples, which still we have; and observant Eyes, and diligent Pens have drawn some Re∣nowned Patriots in lively Colours, in which we may behold much of God's Image in the face of their conversings amongst men, and Conversations both in their Personal and Publick Capacities: This is a petty Resur∣rection; and much good service is done to succeeding Ages hereby; by which they being dead, yet speak; yea, spiritual life is transfused to Readers, through the Lines and Leaves transmitted to them: Blessed be God for these famous Heroes: If the Jews mentioned such Brave Men dead, with
Notes of Remark, [as Rabbi Hillel of Blessed Memory], Why should not the memory of the just be blessed? Cer∣tainly Prov. 10. 7. there's a vast difference in the ears of Protestants, betwixt Blessed Bradford and Bloody Bonner. Men usually say, when they have inter∣red the Corps of their dead Relations, and left them in the Dust, that they have done their last Office to them, or for them: But I judge that to be a gross mistake, for there are several Offices to which we are bound on their behalf. 1. We ought to lament their Death as a sad loss for the Church of God, (I speak of pious and useful Persons) Gen. 50. 10. decent Funeral Solemnities were kept a con∣siderable time in Scripture. 2. Observing and complying with the Commands and the Gen. 50. 16. Deut. 34. 10. Counsels of the Dead, so Joseph's Brethren. 3. Giving the Dead deserved Commenda∣tion. 4. Vindication of their Reputation according to truth. 5. Monuments erected for a Memorial, as Jacob over Rachel's Gen. 35. 20. 2 Sam. 1. 17. 1 Kings 3. 6. Acts 9. 34. Grave. 6. Funeral Elegies, as David o∣ver Saul and Jonathan. 7. Owning our Father's God and Covenant; so Solomon. 8. Manifesting Demonstrations of dead Per∣son's Charity and Piety, as the Widows for Dorcas. 9. An exact imitation of their
praise-worthy Acts. 10. Communion with Heb. 6. 12. Heb. 12. 22. dead Saints, believing that there are such rejoycing in their Glory, hoping in a short time to be with them, thinking of them, studying Conformity to them, that we may do God's Will on Earth, as it's done in Heaven. 11. Yea, something is also due from us to the surviving Relations of our pious dead Friends, as David shewed kind∣ness 2 Sam. 9. 2. to Jonathan's seed. All this (and pos∣sibly more) without the imputation of Saint∣worship, may surviving Christians do, when their gracious Friends and Relations disappear in this Lower World; only let us not admire them, but God in them; so saith the Text, 2 Thes. 1. 10. When he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe. Mark it, Gods holiest Saints must not be admired, but God in them: Our Admira∣tion must not respect Men simply, but be terminated upon God through them: Crea∣ture-worship is very natural to us, especial∣ly if we see more than ordinary excellency in the Creature, or receive some singular Be∣nefit thereby. The great Apostle John was twice guilty of Angel-adoration, and was twice admonished against it. But doubtless it is a good Work, and no despicable Office of
surviving Friends to commemorate the imi∣table Acts of dead Ministers or Christians of considerable Magnitude and Figure in the Church. This is my Apology for writing this Hi∣story, knowing how acceptable it will be to Christian Friends, Natural Relations, and to the Church of God; indeed he was ami∣able to all, and very imitable in the Passa∣ges of his Life, and Circumstances that re∣late to his Death; what was praise-worthy in him, let God have the Glory of it; what is defective in the Copy or Tran∣scriber, let Charity draw a Curtain over both. I do find that the Servants of God have been very careful and critical in Writing the Lives of Eminent Men, as Camera∣rius wrote the Life of Luther, Junius of Ursin, Beza of Calvin, Antonius Jaius of Beza, Josias Simlerus of Peter Mar∣tyr, Dr. Humphry of Bp. Jewell, &c. Melchior Adamus hath summed them up together, and Mr. Samuel Clark hath made many Collections; neither the Person described, nor the Scribe answering these men of God, it doth make me blush to ap∣pear in this Undertaking, especially in this so Critical Age; but this I dare say, The Sub∣ject
or Person treated of, was full of good Works, and he that treats thereon is full of Good-Will. Nor have I related all that might have been writ, and that he himself writ, judg∣ing it not convenient, because it might be of∣fensive: Take this in good part, live up to it, pray for the weak Transcriber, and beg hard that God would raise up many Ma∣sters in Israel, to make up this and other Vacancies made of late by the Death of E∣minent Ministers, which seems to be a sad Omen and dreadful Prognostick of some de∣solating Judgment approaching; for our Defence is departing from us; the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel are ascending in a Fiery Chariot; Stakes are taken out of the Hedge, that Wild Beasts may enter; Pil∣lars are removed; the House totters; we have lost much good Blood; Jacob's Face looks pale: May our dear Lord once at last restore his Ministers to their Publick Em∣ployments, pour out a Spirit of Prayer, cause an universal casting of melted Sinners into the Mould of the Gospel, and revive a Work of Reformation, that the promise may be performed in Isaiah 29. 22, 23. Thus saith the Lord, who redeemed Abraham, concerning the house of Ja∣cob:
Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale. But when he seeth his children, the work of mine hands in the midst of him they shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the holy one of Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel. Amen. So be it. March 29. 1694.
A SHORT Historical Account OF THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mr. Nathanael Heywood, &c. Mr. Nathanael Heywood was Born in Little Leaver in the Parish of Bol∣ton le-Moors in Lan∣cashire, descended of godly and useful Parents (Richard and Alice Heywood); he was baptized in the Parish-Church, Septemb. 16. 1633. During his Infancy he was exceed∣ing weak and sickly, much affli∣cted
with Fits of Convulsion, and was frequently under the sentence of Death, in the apprehension of all Spectators: His tender-hearted Pa∣rents often gave him up for gone; but God, who quickneth the dead, rai∣sed him from the gates of the grave, that by him he might raise sinners from Damnable Death to Spiritual Life. Notwithstanding those violent Fits did so weaken his Spirits, that in his younger days he was not judged fit to be trained up for the Ministry; and therefore his Parents did frequently take him from School, and set him to learn to Write and cast Accompts, in or∣der to sending him to London for an Apprentice. But he recruiting as to natural strength, and they being encouraged by his extraordi∣nary capacity for Learning, kept him still at School, having the ad∣vantage of a learned and diligent Master near at hand, who encou∣raged them much to breed him a
Scholar; especially observing his inclinations that way: At last they resolved upon it; and when he had passed those juvenile Studies, at School, making good proficiency (notwithstanding his frequent in∣terruptions), he was judged ready for the University at fourteen years of Age; whither he went, and was admitted, May 4. 1648. in Trinity Colledge in Cambridge; he was well approved of for School-learning, and fell close to his studies, performed the usual Exercises with applause: He was of pregnant Na∣tural Parts, of a quick Apprehension, solid Judgment, tenacious Memory; which seldom meet in one Person; he was fit to manage what he un∣dertook with great agility and faci∣lity: So that he profited in Acade∣mical learning beyond his equals. As for Religion, as yet his heart was not seasoned with a Principle of Saving Grace; though he was Religiously Educated, complying
with holy Exercises, loved God's People, and was not tainted with gross scandals; yet he had not dis∣cerned the Evil of Sin, the Ma∣lignity of Nature, the Necessity of Christ, till he was providentially brought under the Ministry of Mr. Hammond, Fellow of Magda∣len Colledge, Preacher at St. Gyles's by whose plain and powerful preaching, his heart was smitten with a sound Conviction, which cost him many sad thoughts of heart, as well as tears, but ended at last in a sound Conversion, and sin∣cere Covenanting with God, and centring his Soul by Faith on Jesus Christ. Then he associated with serious Christians, and walked ex∣emplarily; howbeit, he complain∣ed of his backslidings, which he repented of, and his Soul was heal∣ed. When he had taken his Degree, he went to London, and there heard Mr. Peter Sterry; and was much taken with his Parts, and manner of preaching.
When he came down into the Countrey, his Father judged it con∣venient to dispose of him under the Tuition of some Reverend Minister, by whose care and example he might be prepared for further ser∣vice. And it pleased God in his providence to fix him in the Fami∣ly of that solid judicious Divine, Mr. Edward Gee, Parson of Eccle∣ston; where he continued about two years, studying hard, beha∣ved himself orderly, and profited much: So that he often blessed God for the good he met with in that family. And indeed he was mould∣ed and modelled into the method, manners, and practices of that Ho∣ly and Eminent man of God; whose excellent treatises of Prayer and Government, speak his real worth: A man of great Learning, Ortho∣doxness, and exact Holiness; a most substantial Scriptural Preacher, Son to that famous Mr. Gee, mentioned by Historians in the fall at Black∣friars.
Whilst Mr. Heywood lived in Mr. Gee's Family, God directed his thoughts to a young Gentlewoman in the neighbourhood, Mrs. Eliza∣beth Parre, near to Dr. Parre, Bishop of the Isle of Man; whom in convenient time he Married, and she became a pious, prudent, pro∣vident Wife to him; by whom he had several Children, Six whereof are yet living, Two Sons, and Four Daughters; his elder Son succeeds in his Father's place, as Pastour to that people, in their new-erected Meeting-place; a young man of pregnant Parts, and exemplary Piety. When Mr. Heywood was Married, it pleased God to give him a Call to a people in Yorkshire; for he had a great desire to be employed in his Lord's work; and that very day that an Invitation came to him, he told the Messenger he had been spending most of it in Fasting and Prayer; wherein he found his
heart much enlarged, and looked upon that Call as an Answer of Prayer; and thereupon freely em∣braced it, and in convenient season took a journey. The place to which he was called was Illingworth Chappel, in the Viccaridge of Halifax in Yorkshire. When he had preached a day or two with them, the people laid hold of him, and engaged him to settle with them, which he did; and continued three or four years, and was an instrument of much good in that place, having a full Auditory, and some seals of his Ministry. But the Devil envying the success of the Gospel, raised up some potent Adversaries against him, who maligned and opposed him for his faithfulness in plain ad∣monitions. Some meetings there was about his continuance; one said to him, Mr. Heywood, You have raised differences and disturbances since you came: He answered, I
have not sought the peace of the place, but the good of it. Which he ruminated upon, and could not tell what to make of that expressi∣on; not remembring, that the prin∣cipal design of the Gospel, and its Publishers, is the good of Souls; but the accidental fruit of it, is dissention, through the corruption of mens hearts, according to what our Blessed Lord expressed, Think Mat. 10. 34, 35. not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword. In this controversie about his stay, or removal, an earnest re∣quest was sent to him by the people of Orms-Church, to come to them; he hearkened to them, having se∣veral discouragements at Illing∣worth, not here fit to be named; not∣withstanding some cordial Friends in that Congregation stuck close to him, and challenged an interest in him; both sides using more than ordinary arguments and importu∣nity, did exceedingly puzzle him,
and set him upon the rack of su∣spence: He earnestly sought to God about it, he begged the advice and prayers of Friends, and at last was counselled to refer the business to several Ministers indifferently cho∣sen by both sides, to hear what could be said, understand circum∣stances, and give their judgments in this weighty case, to which of these places his way was most clear; indeed a third put in vigorously for him, viz. Thornton in Bradford Pa∣rish; but the controversie was chief∣ly betwixt those two, Ormskirk and Illingworth; Ministers met about this concern at Wigan in Lancashire, in January 1656. and two or three of the Inhabitants of those three forementioned places; much de∣bate there was, and some hard words passed; the business was dif¦ficult, and cost many hours di∣scourse, both in the day and in the evening; and upon a serious view of the reasons on all hands, at last
the Ministers concluded that his way was clear to leave Yorkshire and betake himself to Ormskirk which being a great Parish, and a considerable Market-Town, and the people vacant, and very impor∣tunate, they judged that he might do God and his Church more ser∣vice in that great place: And in∣deed his own inclinations carried him most that way, upon some pe∣culiar reasons: He removed with his Family thither in the Spring, 1657. where he was entertained with much respect, and great solem∣nity: And there he laboured faith∣fully and diligently in the course of his publick Ministry, private In∣struction, visiting the Sick, till August 24, 1662. that black Dooms∣day, wherein so many were senten∣ced and struck dead in Law as to any publick Service. The Annual Incomes of this Vicaridge were very small, not amounting to above 30 l. a year;
yet there was an Augmentation added of 50 l. a year by Queen Elizabeth, upon an Itinerant Prea∣cher, which had been long fixed upon the Minister of that place. There were four of them in Lan∣cashire, this was one; and 200 l. per An. was paid out of the Reve∣nues to those four; this was paid by several Trustees at the Audit. At the return of King Charles II. one Mr. Stanninghaugh, Parson of Augham, worth 140 l. a year, about two Miles from Ormskirk, rode up to London, and by the help of Friends surreptitiously obtained this 50 l. a year to be setled upon himself; which gave occasion to some persons to reflect upon a Ser∣mon Mr. Heywood preached at Orms∣kirk, upon a day of Thanksgiving for the King's Restoration, upon 2 Sam. 19. 30. And Mephibosheth said unto the king, Yea, let him take all, forasmuch as my lord the king is come again in peace unto his own
house. Which was indeed an ex¦cellent Discourse, greatly approved and highly applauded by all, espe¦cially the Gentry, who earnestly sollicited him to print it, but he re¦fused; not out of disloyalty, but modesty; not because he durst not own his Sovereign, but he was not willing to be much taken notice of in the world. Mr. Heywood digested this disin∣genuous carriage of his Neighbour and pretended Friend, with great aequanimity and calmness; and it proved a Worm to the one, and at Blessing to the other: for though this Mr. Stanninghaugh's Parsonage was 148 l. a year, and his Tene∣ment was 30 l. a year, and this 50 l. yearly, and he had no Child, yet he left nothing at his death but Debt, and his Wife in a poor con∣dition. But it pleased God from that time to bless Mr. Heywood's small Incomes incredibly; and 'tis next
to a Miracle to consider what great things he did, when shortly after he was turn'd out of all, he paid some Debts, and maintained his numerous Family in a good deco∣rum; for he had nine Children, whereof six are yet living; took a Lease for Three Lives of, an House and Land, paid 60 l. built a good part of it; paid 30 l. for buying but a Lease elsewhere; maintained his two Sons at School at Holland, which cost him 14 l. a year; sent one to Mr. Frankland, to be educa∣ted in University-learning; besides many sore Sicknesses in his Family. Yet such was the blessing of God, that he waded through all, with∣out contracting any Debt, but ra∣ther increasing his Estate out of his small Incomes: This Holy Man was very sensible of this strange Providence, and often expressed it with admiring thankfulness. In the year 1662, Aug. 24. that fatal day struck him civilly dead
with the rest of his Brethren; how beit he continu'd his publick Preach¦ing in the Church after that day without disturbance, till the place was filled up with a new Vicar, on Mr. Ashworth a Schoolmaster, who lived six or eight Miles from thence taught his School, rode thither or Saturday, and back on Monday morn¦ing; was absent all the week for several years: so that Mr. Heywood still seemed to have the sole charge of that Town and Parish, visiting the Sick, instructing them, praying with them, preaching privately to them as occasion was offered. He was abundant in the work of the Lord, not only in his own Parish, but at Wigan, Warrington, Lever∣pool, Preston, Eccleston, and upon a call in more remote places. But in his own Parish, and a∣mongst his old Hearers, he was in Labours more abundant; he usually preach'd twice on a Lords day, some∣times several times in Week-days, or∣dering
his Labours in several parts of the Parish, both in the day and night: Yea, in times of great dan∣ger he hath preach'd at one house the beginning of the night, and then gone two Miles a-foot over Mosses, and preach'd toward morn∣ing to another Company at another house. Nor was he scant and short in his Sermons, but usually very long, two hours at least, often three; yea, sometimes he would have con∣tinued four or five hours praying and preaching, his heart was so fully set upon his Master's work, that he forgot his own strength, and his Hearers patience. Nor did he tediously dream over his work, but was full of zeal, vigour, ten∣derness and affection, often strain∣ing his voice beyond what his natu∣ral strength could well bear, which occasioned torturing and mortal Diseases; like a Candle, he spent himself to give others light.
Neither was he [vox & prae¦terea nihil] a meer voice, and no more; like some Preachers, that like Thunder give a loud crack without a distinct sound or signifi¦cancy; no, his Sermons were stuf¦fed with solid Divinity, Scripture Arguments, alluring Similies, heart melting Passages. He was an ex¦cellent Text man, producing solid Interpretations. An experienc'd Casuist, resolving Cases of Con¦science with great satisfaction. A clear Disputant, stating Contro¦versies solidly and substantially answering Objections learnedly and distinctly, and proving the Truth demonstratively. He was a pathe¦tical Preacher, driving the Nail home, in close Convictions of Con¦science, warm Exhortations to Conversion, or to particular Du¦ties, plain and undeniable Directi¦ons, still laying open, and obvia¦ting Satan's wiles, the deceits of a bad heart, and insnaring insinua¦tions
of a wicked world; rifling the Conscience by a thorough Ex∣amination; comforting God's Chil∣dren with sweet Gospel-Promises. This, this indeed was his Master-piece, and main Scope in his Preach∣ing, to lay open the Beauties and Excellencies of the Blessed Jesus, and Sinners great necessity of him; displaying in lively colours the love of God in sending his Son, the love of Christ in the unparallel'd work of Redemption; the Offices, Pur∣chases and Undertakings of the Son of God; unfolding the Cove∣nant of Grace, the Operations of the Spirit; in applying the Merits of Christ, &c. The truth of this appears in two excellent Discour∣ses, printed since his Death, tran∣scribed out of his own Notes, as he preached them the same year he died: The one called [Christ the Best Gift] which was grounded on John 4. 10. The other entitu∣led [Christ the Best Master] ground∣ed
upon John 13. 13. Two exce¦lent Treatises, Bound up together Printed after his death; for he would never be persuaded to pub¦lish any thing; though, doubtless they would have been more Acu¦rate, if he had imagined they should have seen the light: But such as they are, they have proved very acceptable and profitable to the Church of God: Many have read them with pleasure; and some good Divines have quoted passages out of them. His labours in the Ministry were so exceedingly welcome, that the loss of him in publick work was greatly bewailed by the whole Town and Parish; he was beloved of all, good and bad. A poor ig¦norant man came to him when he was turned out, saying, Ah! Mr Heywood, we would gladly have you Preach again in the Church. Yes, said he, I would as gladly Preach as you desire it, if I could
do it with a safe Conscience in Con∣forming: The man replied, Oh Sir! many a man now-a-days makes a great gash in his Consci∣ence, cannot you make a little nick in yours? That was a remarkable passage which fell out at Ormskirk, on July 30, 1662. which Mr. Heywood thus describes in a Letter to a Friend; About four a Clock that day in the Afternoon, was a dreadful Thun∣der and Lightning for a long time together; and in the Town of Ormskirk, and about it, fell a great shower of Hail in a terrible Tem∣pest; Hailstones were as big as or∣dinary Apples, some say Nine In∣ches compass; one Stone that I took up was above Four Inches, af∣ter it had thawed in my hand; the Hail broke all our Glass Windows Westward, we have not one quar∣ril whole on our backside; so it is with most of the houses in and a∣bout the Town; it hath cut off all
the Ears of our standing Corn, so that most Fields that were full of excellent Barley, and other Grain, are not worth Reaping: It hath shaken the Apple-trees, and in some places bruised the Apples in pieces; the Hail cut Boughs from Trees; and some say there are strange Apparitions in the Air (of which I shall give you a further ac∣count.) All, especially the igno∣rant, were much terrified, think∣ing it had been the day of Judg∣ment; certainly it was a sad sign and effect of God's heavy displea∣sure with us; and I wish it be not a presage of more abiding Judg∣ments. They tell me, that my small share of loss will amount to 10 l. at least; in half an hour all this hurt was done. The Lord sanctify this sudden stroke to me and my poor people. Mr. Clark in his Exam∣ples hath this Story, and mentions Mr. Heywood his attestation of it, which yet I thought fit to relate
here; partly because this is fuller than he relates it; partly to shew how observant this holy man was of the remarkable Providences of God. It was his observation, That this natural storm was a sad pre∣sage of a moral storm on Ministers and Churches, which fell the very month after, that rooted up so ma∣ny useful fruit-bearing trees, marred so much good fruit, and shattered the glass by which the light of sa∣ving-truth is conveyed into the house of God. This good man was so endeared to this People, that he was resolved never to part from them till death made the di∣vorce; of whom thus he writes: I have a loving, though poor, do∣cible, though ignorant People; they flock in very great numbers to the Ordinances, and I have hopes of doing some good (it may be al∣ready begun) amongst them: I had some motion to Conform, but I will not change upon any account
whatsoever; let me have your prayers, help me for this poor peo∣ple, which I love as my own Child, and long after in the bowels of Christ. He had frequent distempers up∣on his body, which much promoted God's work upon his heart: In the year 1667. he had a violent distem∣per, which in a fortnights time brought his body very low; and by that time he was recovered, his dear Wife fell into a sad languish∣ing disease, which threatned death; besides grievous afflictions in her Spirit, and sad apprehensions of death for above a month together; a Swelling in her Throat, which increased to a hard Tumour in the hollow of her Throat, which ine∣vitably, in the eye of Reason, threatned Death; but beyond all expectation, God did graciously remove that, and raised her up a∣gain in mercy to the Family. In the year 1670. his Son Nathanael
was strangely taken with Convul∣sion Fits, which tortured and di∣storted his Face, Limbs, every part of his Body in a prodigious man∣ner; but God also at last raised him up upon the Prayers of his People. But these Providences found him work for, and quickned his Spirit in Prayer. In October 1671. Mr. Heywood fell into a malignant Feaver, which (as his two Doctors, Dr. Fife, and Dr. Grundy said) had seized the Nerves, and Spirits, and Brain; he was not in extremity of pain, be∣cause (as the Physitians said) the disease lay not so much in the Blood: Upon the 13th. day, after he begun, he was judged to be a gone man; Dr. Fife (a boysterous man, and Justice of the Peace, in the Fild-countrey near Garstand) called for a Candle, and bade him open his mouth, which when he had looked into, he swore a great Oath, and said, his Tongue is as
black as a Thrash; call the Mistress of the house, said he, let him set all things in order, and make his Will for he's a gone man; these words astonished his Family; but his own and only surviving Sister, being present, and hearing these confident Expressions, gathered encourage∣ment, and thought within herself, This is but a man, and may be de∣ceived; God is God, and can con∣fute him. Thus Dr. Fife left him as hopeless, and said, it was in vain to give him any thing: But before he came to his own house, at Hough∣ton Tower, a Feaver seized violent∣ly upon the Doctor himself, and in a few days made an end of him; so he never returned home alive But from that very day Mr. Heywood began to amend, the Feaver abate∣ing. It is likely that was a Crisis, when the disease was at its height; for it was a dreadful day and night, he had all the symptoms of death upon him; but God had mercy up∣on
him, as upon sick Epaphroditus; Phil. 2. 27. God had much work for him to do: But he continued under weakness and some disorder in his Head; for he could not be persuaded that he was at home, confidently affirming he was at Bickerstaff, where indeed he was immediately before he be∣gun his distemper, to visit Sir Ed∣ward Stanly, who was begun in a Feaver, and died shortly after; Mr. Heywood would needs be helped to the Window to see the Funeral pass by to the Church. This sore sickness was in the year 1671. and the King's Licenses came out in the year following 1672. and indeed hitherto he had very little or no disturbance in his preaching-work, God was prepa∣ring him both for service and suffer∣ing. This sickness preceded ser∣vice; God laid the foundation low, designing to build high; and often God thinks fit to lay the fairest co∣lours upon a sable bottom; so God
passed the sentence of death upon him immediately before this petty resurrection; for in the Spring fol∣lowing came out the Liberty to Preach; Mr. Heywood cordially embraced it, and had two Chappels Licensed, viz. Bickerstaff, adjoin∣ing to Lady Stanly's house, two Miles South from Ormskirk; the other was Scaresbrick, two Miles North from the Parish-Church, both in Ormskirk Parish; these he supplied constantly, preaching at the one Chappel one day, at the other the next Lord's day; of which he thus writes: I bless God my Congregation is numerous and attentive; Oh! that they were as fruitful! my Family is healthful, Oh! that they were more holy! He continued two years in these two Chappels; but about April 9, 1674. he thus writes: I have had more trouble and opposition in my Ministerial employment these four Months last past, than ever I had
in all my life, yet am not taken off to this day; Archers have sorely griev'd us and shot at us 34 Arrows (I mean Warrants) but our Bow abides in strength, by the hands of the Mighty God of Jacob; Officers have come Eighteen Lord's days together, but have not as yet scat∣tered us,—how easy is it for God to save us while we serve him, if we could believe? I am encou∣raged to hope that some good is done, or may be done, by my poor labours in this season, and 'tis no ill sign when Satan rageth so violently against us: God can work without, or against means, and can work by improbable means to accomplish great ends. I was never more in∣wardly born up under storms, nor strengthened against difficulties in all my life; it may be my time is but short, and my work near an end; Oh! that I may live and die in God's work and way, and be faithful unto death! Dear Brother,
let my condition have a deeper im∣pression on your heart than ordina∣ry: Two Warrants (one for 20 l. the other for 40 l.) have been out against me these Seven Weeks, but we keep our doors fast Barred, and the Officers are very Civil to us,—Oh! that I could see you! I have no Horse, but go all my Jour∣neys on foot. November 13, 1674. He thus writes: I bless God my Liberty (notwithstanding all my troubles) is not wholly lost, but sometimes disturbed; we meet in fear, yet we meet in both Chappels: No Warrant is sent for a Month or more, and my Auditory increaseth again; Oh! that I had an heart to improve late experiences and pre∣sent opportunities, and do my duty, leaving the issue to him that judgeth righteously! But his excessive Pains (though refreshing to his Spirit) yet were wasting to his Body; for about
that time thus he writes: I am still at work in both Chappels,—but I am much cast down with pains and weakness of Body, having overgone my strength, and wasted my self in these intervals of Liberty God hath given us: But I have no reason to repent any thing I could ever do for so good a Master; Oh! that I had done more, and better! About the same time he Writes thus: Some assaults Satan hath made upon me with a right-hand Temp∣tation; the whole Parish of Aughton have been importunate with me, to put my self into a capacity for their Parsonage (worth Seven or Eightscore Pond per Annum); the Bishop (i. e. Dr. Wilkins) promi∣seth favour to me in it; but God did not leave me so much as to have any serious thoughts to yeild to that Temptation,—I do preach still, but not so constantly, nor in so full a Congregration as
formerly. Dear Brother, I beseech you for the Lord's sake, and for the love of the Spirit, strive together with me, in your Prayers to God for me, you know for what, &c. At last after many struglings, threatnings, affrightings, peoples withdrawings and rallying again, a stratagem was contrived to knock all dead at a blow; some Deputy-Lieutenants sent some Soldiers to take Mr. Heywood in the Pulpit; and though it was known, yet they met in Bickerstaff Chappel; Lady Stanly came out of her Gallery, and placed herself near the Pulpit∣door, hoping to over-aw their Spi∣rits, and obstruct their designs; the Soldiers stood without, while Mr. Heywood was at prayer; but when he had prayed, they rushed in, and required him to come down, and go along with them; he mild∣ly desired the favour of them, that they would give him leave to preach, and he would go along
with them; but they rudely run towards the Pulpit; the Lady would have stopp'd them, but they pressed forward, opened the Pulpit door, got hold of his Coat and tore it, and in a sort pull'd him out, and took him away with them straight to Holland; nor could the Lady's mediation prevail to procure him a little refreshment; only in the road he grew saint, and desired them to call with him at an Ale∣house, which they did, and the Landlady (though he had no ac∣quaintance with her) was exceed∣ing kind to him, and said, he should have any thing she had in the house; but those Rogues, said she, shall not have a morsel that took him; so they carried him away to an Alehouse in Holland, where he lodged that night; and from whence thus writ to his Wife: —I am very well, I bless God, and never in greater honour,
or so highly advanced in all my life; I was pulled out of the Pul∣pit with a Pistol lifted up at my head, and a God-dam-me in mine ears, but the man repents his rash∣ness, and wishes he had let me preach, for he never heard a better prayer, &c. But be not troubled, God hath shewed me more mercy than I can be thankful for: Oh! help me to praise him! Oh! what cause have we to rejoice in suffering upon this account! God will have Glory, and his Church the benefit, &c. but I fear it must be an Impri∣sonment, or promise not to preach, which is my very life,— But God in his gracious Provi∣dence did also scatter this cloud; for the day after, when it was noised abroad that Mr. Heywood was taken, abundance of People, and many considerable Gentlemen, and some that were no friends to his Cause, yet out of respect to his Person, mediated for him; yea, several of
good report, and intimate with the Justices, offered to be Bound for his appearance, and to give any security that should be required. The Justices then tendred him the Oxford Oath; he was in a strait, for if he peremptorily refused it, they had some advantage against him; he told them that persons must swear in judgment, and there∣fore he desired some time to consider of it, which was consented to: And seeing such an appearance of per∣sons of all ranks for him, they gave him respite; and liberty to go home till the next Quarter-Sessions, which was to be at Wigan a Month after; but they bound him to ap∣pear at the Sessions. Thus he was delivered out of that snare, and went home, and writ a Letter that day, dated Jan. 28. 1674.—Pray help me to praise God, and remember a poor sufferer for the Gospel in your prayers: People do so throng in to
see me, now I am come home again, that I have not time to write fully to you, but commit you to God and his protection, that you may long enjoy, and fruitfully improve that sweet Liberty in God's Vine∣yard, which, I doubt, I have lost; and indeed so it proved. The Sessions at Wigan came on, he attended there according to his Bonds; several Justices appeared for him, and his friends came to see the issue, and to mediate for him: Old Lady Stanly came herself, and her Husband, Mr. Henry Hoghton (a Justice of Peace); yea, Mr. Chri∣stopher Banister of Bank, and several others, spoke much on his behalf; another Justice then upon the Bench said, If Mr. Heywood was sent to Lancaster Goal, he should be as comfortably maintained, and as honourably released as ever any Pri∣soner was; some of his Adversaries seeing which way the Court incli∣ned, slunk away in a discontent,
took Horse and rid home; so the snare was again broken, and Mr. Heywood was dismissed to the joy of his Friends, vexation of his Ene∣mies, and amazement of all that heard of it. Other snares were laid to entrap him upon the Five-Mile Act, but no body could be brought to swear that he lived in the Town, though Mr. Heywood was usually at home, and conversed openly in the Town, he was so generally beloved. A Warrant was issued out to distrain upon Mr. Heywood's goods for 20 l. but the Officers said the doors were shut, and they had no orders to break them; yet they might have taken advantage if they had been severe, but indeed they were generally very favourable: It's true, the doors were kept fast for half a year toge∣ther, till things wore off, and they never got a pennyworth of his goods, which was looked upon as a wonderful strange Providence;
for Children and others were fre∣quently passing and repassing through the out-doors, foreside and backside. God took him off his work by mens rigour, and obstru∣cted his former diligence by his own immediate hand upon his bo∣dy, much what at the same time; and thus he writes, May 7. 1675.—I am glad your precious Liberty is continued; I have nothing to do now at home, but am much abroad, which is an heavy burthen to me; pray conti∣nue, increase your fervent prayers for me; Riding is very painful to me. Jan. 1. 1675/6. he writes thus: I am now very busie, blessed be God, and these holy days (so called) when others play, I work, having preach'd oftener hereabouts in a few days, than I did in the whole year; I was lately at Chester (be∣ing compelled thither by the impor∣tunity of friends) where I preached
thrice, and had great encourage∣ment; God hath much people (I believe) in that place; they would persuade me to live with them, but I am resolved to stick here yet, where Providence hath so eminent∣ly setled me, preserved, and pro∣vided for me,—My Lads seem to be inclin'd to the Ministry.—Who knows but God may be fitting Instruments for his work in the next Age! for my part I can see no reason to look for any thing but Judgments in this. He was always a zealous im∣pugner of, and a notable Champion against Papists, of whom there be great store in those parts. When Mr. Heywood hath been sent for to visit sick Persons, (in which work he was constant, careful, and some∣times successful) Popish Friends, or Neighbours would often pro∣cure some Popish Priest, or one of their Religion, to come also to them; and if they had but the
least pretence to give it out that the Party died in their Faith, they would wonderfully insult over the Protestants. One Person dying, with whom Mr. Heywood took a∣bundance of pains, and a Popish Priest also frequented that house, who was so vexed that he could not prevail with the Party, that he writ some Quaeries for Mr. Heywood to answer; which he did so acutely and solidly, that the Ignorant Priest was netled and puzzled, and sent to one of their more learned Advo∣cates to vindicate their desperate and falling Cause; he made a large Rejoynder, with abundance of Quotations out of the Ancients. To which Mr. Heywood made a learned and sufficient Reply; only was lame because he had not by him the Authors Quoted; there∣fore sent the Papers to Mr. Illing∣worth (an excellent Scholar, and at that time much conversant in the Colledge Library at Manchester)
who took abundance of pains to search and read over some large Volumes to satisfie and solve a Quotation which referred not to Book, Chapter, or Page; how∣ever, they joining together, that work was incomparably done, wor∣thy of an Impression; but to this day they heard no more of that Gentleman (for so the Popish Priests are called) though he had often to do with them. Another passage he writ in a Letter, dated June 12. 1675. to this purpose: I do just nothing al∣most, either publickly or privately; it's much worse with me, than be∣fore the Indulgence; yet God hath of late employed me another way (not so delightful and according to my genius, as Preaching): A Gentle∣woman inclined to Marry a Popish Gentleman, would not Marry till she had satisfaction that it was Lawful from some Divine; and pitch'd on me to resolve the case,
which I did very freely and plainly to her once or twice; I never dealt so plainly with any person in my life, and yet she took all well; whereas she fell out with her near∣est Relations and best Friends for speaking but a little against it. She would needs have my Reasons in writing, and having got them in a large dissuasive Letter, she shew∣ed it to the Gentleman, and he car∣ried it to a Priest; and twelve days after the Letter, brought me a long and subtle Answer; to which I made a large and (I think) sa∣tisfactory Reply. In the mean time we endeavoured to divert her to other Matches, but all in vain, her affections were too strong for her judgment, though she seem'd to approve and consent to my Reply, yet went on with the Gentleman, and was just at Marriage; so that I could expect no other fruits of my labour in it, but my own satisfacti∣on that I had done my duty, leaving
the event to God; God appear'd in the Mount. One Mr. D. (an hope∣ful young Gentleman, of Religious Parents in Cheshire) coming very accidentally to A. and finding this L. there, was struck with Love, Courted her, and Married her in eight days time. Such a Providence must not pass without particular notice, and special praise to God. The young Gentleman came thither also for a diversion, upon the like occasion; yet knowing nothing of her, but designing another place, was turned by a Minister in his company to take a night's lodging at A. This is the talk and wonder of the whole Countrey, the shame and confusion of the Papists (who had a design upon that Family, and were confident it was their own) the joy of all good Protestants, and of all Friends to that Worshipful Family. I want and crave your help to give due Praise to God
for answering Prayers so wonder∣fully. Another thing which greatly ex∣asperated the Popish Party, was a sharp and mettle Sermon Mr. Hey∣wood preach'd upon November 5. 1673. at Scaresbrick Chappel, up∣on Revel. 18. 4. a very learned ju∣dicious Discourse against the Pa∣pists; which (together with the forementioned provocations) did so offend them, that (though they could not take full revenge on him themselves, yet) prevailed with some Justices to Prosecute him. And this is thought to be the true reason of all that unparallel'd rage of some against Mr. Heywood; whereas several others in the same circumstances as culpable, were let alone to enjoy their Meetings quietly. In the midst of these imploy∣ments and oppositions, God was pleased to lay a very afflictive di∣stemper upon his Body, which for
a long time was judged to be the Stone or Gravel; certainly it was exceeding acute and painful; yet it is disputable whether his loss of Go∣spel-Liberties, or his violent Bodily Distemper, was the greater Afflicti∣on to him. His Riding about Six or Seven Miles in the year 1675. ren∣dered his pain in making Water scarce tolerable; thus he writes: I have now this last ill fit discovered more of the cause of it than ever before: I am very confident it is not the Stone, but Flegm, or a Salt Humour, or both, that stops the Urine, &c.—It's not properly the Strangury (saith he in another) but a Coagulation of Humours through overmuch Acidity, that sharpens, and sometimes stops my Urine,—Want of Health and Liberty (believe me) are two sore evils; I hope you will parti∣cularly help me with your Prayers for direction as to Health, but more especially as to restoration of Liber∣ty
in my beloved work; the loss of which is a greater grief, than the want of Health and Ease. In ano∣ther Letter, dated July 15. 1676. he saith: I have endured extreame pain and torment a Month together, all which time (excepting two or three days) I never make Water (and that I was forced to do very often) but the last drop came out with so much difficulty, and ex∣cessive pain (about the neck of the Bladder) that it made me roar and tremble, and had so shrunk my Flesh, and weakened my Body, that I did apprehend Death to be approaching: The good Lord fit and prepare me for it, and account me worthy to find Mercy in that time of need,—My pain was occasioned by the great heat, and preaching that hot weather oftener and longer than I was well able,—I am sure I have greatest rea∣son to submit to his holy Will, yea, and be thankful also, that though
he hath afflicted me very sore, yet he hath not given me over to death; whereas I hear of many that are dead of late of my distemper (Bi∣shop Wilkins, Cousin John Cromp∣ton, and several hereabouts, with∣in these two months). I beg your prayers, that if God spare my Life, he would also give Health and Li∣berty to improve it in his service, more publickly and fruitfully; or if it be death (which will be less unwelcome, because of my re∣straints, pangs, and troubles in this world, only my Wife and Children make the thoughts of it burthen∣some) may God be glorified, I hope it will be my advantage,—I wish neither you nor any faithful Minister, that minds and loves his work, may ever know what I have felt in the want of People and Work: Other Afflictions are light, compared to a dumb Mouth, and si∣lent Sabbaths, &c.
Yet notwithstanding all this Af∣fliction, he had a wonderful great desire, once again, if it were the Will of God, to visit his friends in Yorkshire; and God was pleased to grant his request; for he gave him some mitigation of his Pain, which was an encouragement to under∣take that Journey; so himself, his Wife, and his Two Sons, Travel∣led into Yorkshire, April 20. 1677. there he preach'd the Sermons that are since Printed; and another most excellent and pathetical Sermon up∣on Rom. 5. 8. From thence he sent his Eldest Son to be trained up in Academical Learning, with Mr. Frankland at Natland in Westmor∣land. But Oh! what affectionate parting was there! as if they must never see one another's faces again; (and indeed so it proved) they could not speak to each other for weeping and sobbing; he desired another to pray, for he could not refrain: In that Journey he was
carried out beyond himself in pray∣ing, preaching, discoursing, to the admiration and edification of all his ancient Friends in those Parts, though he had frequent returns of his wonted Pain: He was as a man coming down from Heaven to tell what's done there; or as one ripe for Heaven, too big for Earth, upon the wing to take his flight into those Mansions above, as indeed it proved. After he had done his work in those Parts which he designed, he left Yorkshire on May 1. 1677. but could reach that day but Ten Miles; the next morning he went to Ratch∣dal; he was forcibly detained by the importunity of Christian Friends, and preached there that evening, tho greatly to his prejudice as to Health; the day following he reach∣ed Bolton; yet, saith he, with great difficulty and hard hewing, they got home on Friday night; and it would have been great inconveni∣ence
to have staid one day longer, upon several necessary accounts, which he mentions. Thus God carried him abroad in Mercy, and brought him seasonably back to his own house in safety. How much he was satisfied with this Journey (though his pains were extreme several days after his return home), his Letter, May 14. 1677. doth testifie: The great Mer∣cy (saith he) in my late Journey to you, comforts with you, and safe return home (where we found all well), I hope I shall never forget: pray help me to be thankful for them.—I do heartily thank you for all your Pulpit, Table, House, and Countrey-kindness,—I am sorry and ashamed I made no better improvement of them, not know∣ing that ever I shall enjoy such op∣portunities again, of doing my self and others good in your parts; but an indisposed Body and a bad heart, marr Duties and waste Mercies.
His distemper still continued and prevailed upon him all that Sum∣mer; in a Letter dated September 20. 1677. he saith:—I am far from being well; and as the Church once complained, she forgat pro∣sperity; so I health, and am ready sometimes to add (as She) my strength and my hope is perished from the Lord. This day Five Weeks I came from the Exercise at Toxtoth-Park, where I had preached twice, and oftener then I was well able a little before: Since that day I never came on Horse-back, nor preached but once near home; but all this time God hath been preach∣ing to me with a terrible thundring Voice; Oh! that I could hear the Rod, and who hath appointed it! So sharp, and so long a fit of Pain, I never had since this distemper be∣gun.—God alone knows what may be the issue of it; but for my part, though I find it no easy mat∣ter to look death in the face, and to
conquer the difficulties that precede and attend it; yet I have no great reason to love life, or to desire my long stay in this wicked weary world; my pained days and weari∣some nights, make thoughts of death and grave less terrible, and apprehensions of Rest with Christ most welcome and pleasant. But I feel natural inclinations working towards life, and to loving them∣selves with the fair glass of doing God more and better Service in his Church. I am best resolved, and most at Anchor, when I can (but oh! how seldom! how coldly! do I) say, The Will of the Lord be done. Dear Brother, Pray for me, (as I would do for my self) that to me to live may be Christ and to die gain. Yesterday for some hours I was in extreme torment, but am much easier, I bless God, to day; but my pain is not in the same manner as formerly, but liker an Ul∣cer in the Bladder, which makes
my disease more dangerous, as well as painful,—it is the Lord's mercy I am not utterly consumed, that I can sit thus long to write to you, which many times, I cannot, but I am now weary with it. The last Letter (so far as I can find) was by him dated Octob. 23. 1677. which I shall mostly transcribe: My dear Brother, this evening I received yours, for which I thank you; it breathes nothing but love and comfort to me; Oh! how sweet! how seasonable! love in you, Oh! how tender! Especially I thank you for your prayers, and the prayers of others by your means; I account them a precious treasure, and the surest and speediest remedy in all troubles. Oh! pray again, who knows but that may prevail when nothing else can! I have been sensibly better since that day of your tears and groans. But who am I that any should be con∣cerned
for me? A poor, weak, useless wretch, nothing, and less than nothing. I have been long, in regard of work, in God's Vineyard, a withered branch, a dry stick, and now my body is withered like the grass, my skin parched, my moisture dried up through extre∣mity of pain, which hath continu∣ed nine or ten weeks, day and night. About a Month ago, friends seeing death in my face and looks, they prevailed with me to send for Dr. Grundy, who found me in a languishing condition, yet not with∣out some hope: He told me, my distemper was not the Stone, nor Ulcer in the Bladder (which I feared because of my sharp pains and soreness) but a Dysuria; my Blood was vitiated, my moisture sowre, and there wanted due sepa∣ration of the Serum from the Blood; that it would require much time and patience to bring the Body to a good state, &c. For since I have
been taking one sort or other of Physick; and am now taking a Di∣et-drink for the Scurvey, which, I think, hath done me most good, but still my pain continues, though not altogether so acute, as at the first, but I have very weary restless nights; many times I am constrain∣ed to get up and walk two or three hours, but God supports, his word comforts in all, and over all, his ways are mercy and truth, it is his mercy that I am not consumed; yea, 'tis mercy and faithfulness that I am afflicted, I have reason to say I could not have been without; nay, I would not have been with∣out this trial for an earthly king∣dom, if God please to spare my life, and restore strength, I hope others will find that I have gained consi∣derably by this Sea-adventure,—I am your indebted and endeared Brother, N. Heywood. His distempers growing thus up∣on him, gradually wore away and
weaken'd his body, and took out the pins and pluck'd down the stakes of his frail tabernacle; he wore away insensibly, his friends seeing he had strength to walk, did not ap∣prehend his end so near, as indeed it proved On Thursday, Decemb. 13. 1677. they perceived him to alter, and grow something worse than he had been, not so much in the violence of pain, as in the de∣cay of Spirits, and falling into drowziness and slumbering; that very day, he said, with tears run∣ing down his face, that he could willingly die if it were the next hour, but for the good of the Church, and his poor Wife and Children, and with them he could be content to live, were it in Pri∣son. That night being ready to go to Bed, he sate down in his Chair, and looking up towards Heaven, moved his eyes very much, his Wife asked him, How he did? but he could not answer, as she supposed; but
soon after he said he would go to Bed; being got to Bed, he fell in∣to the like Trance, and lay for a while speechless; being better, he looked about him, and saw them weeping, and said, if you knew Christ better, this carnal affection would cease, and natural would be sanctified, and run in a spiritual channel: Oh! learn to know Christ more! for my own part, I have preached Christ all my Life, and I bless God with good success: It's common with many now-a-days to have base and low thoughts of Christ, and his imputed righteous∣ness, but if I had twenty lives to live, I would spend them all in that work. On Friday, a Kinsman that was come from London visited him, but he was so weak and listless, that he was very unfit for converse; and indeed at the best he was sparing in discourse; he used to speak little, but what he spake was very
pithy, pertinent, and sententi∣ous. On Saturday night, Mr. Starky, a Reverend and Godly Minister, vi∣sited him; he asked him, Whether it was any trouble to him that he did not Conform? He answered, No, it's a great comfort to me; this he spake with much chearful∣ness, adding some more words to evidence his satisfaction in what he had done and suffered: Mr. Starky asked him, What Promises he could now rely upon, or what Scripture-passages supported him? He an∣swered, For to me to live is Christ, Phil. 1. 21. and to die gain. Christ hath loved me, and given himself for me. He Gal. 2. 20. was frequently repeating those words, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly,—. About four hours before he died, being asked how he did? he an∣swered, very well.—His last words that he was heard to utter, were, Come away, Lord, come, come,—
and so he breathed out his blessed Soul; on the Lord's-day morning, Dec. 6. 1677. about nine a Clock; so God made the day of his hard and sore labour, the day of his entrance into his Eternal Rest. And 'tis worthy observation, that God hath drawn off many eminent Ministers, and choice Christians from the stage of this World, near or upon that day: This Holy day of heavenly Rest hath commenced upon them the everlasting day of Rest in Heaven. Christ's Resurre∣ction-day hath been their Ascen∣tion day: They parted with this jarring Musick on Earth, to be join∣ed to that coelestial Choire above. This our Brother often made melo∣dy in his heart (though he was not very tunable in his voice below;) now the high Praises of God are sounded by him, and at the Great day Soul and Body shall make a me∣lodious Consort in that Blessed Har∣mony.
And now this Holy, Learned, In∣dustrious Man of God is advanced above guilt, corruption, tempta∣tion and persecution, pains of Body, fears of Spirit, disturbances in God's Worship, Imprisonments, Confis∣cations, Banishments: Oh what a blessed State have they above taken possession of! happy Souls, that are safely lodged in the Arms of their Dear Redeemer! It were worth the while to stand still and take a view of the Spirits made per∣fect Heb. 12. 23. in the other World. Let us only glance a little on their privative and positive Happi∣ness from Rev. 22. 3, 4, 5. 1. There shall be no more curse, [i. e. no more fruits of God's displeasure upon man for Adam's sin, nor causeless Curse by mens unjust Censures.] 2. But the throne of God, and the lamb shall be in it; [this is the Bea∣tifical Vision, that looks Souls out of sin and suffering, and who dare presume to arrest the King's Favou∣rites
in his presence? 3. And his servants shall serve him, [whether Devils or Men will or no, these blessed Attendants on the King of Glory, shall never be interrupted in their chearful Service.] 4. And 1 Cor. 13. 12. 1 John 3. 2. they shall see his face; [i. e. they shall not behold him in a glass dark∣ly, as now they see God in Ordi∣nances, but then face to face; yea, they shall see him as he is, (which is a riddle to us here below) imme∣diately, though not comprehen∣sively.] 5. And his name shall be in their fore-heads; [i. e. They shall openly profess whose they are, and to whom they belong, as distin∣guisht palpably from wicked men, and Hypocrites: They shall no more sculk in Corners, or be thrust out of publick Places, but shall openly avouch their Master.] 6 And there shall be no night there; [i. e. no works of darkness to la∣ment, or contest with; no Beasts of prey to creep forth and worry
the Saints; no secret Plots against them, no ignorance amongst Chri∣stian Societies to create Differences, Jealousies and Animosities.] 7. They need no candle, neither light of the sun; [no need of Ordinances, as here below they are used, and use∣ful; Preachers shall study or preach no more; People need not hear Sermons, neither Preachers or Peo∣ple shall stand in need of Seals, the Substance is present, Shadows flee away.] 8. The Lord God giveth them light; [their injoyment of God is immediate, uninterrupted and satisfying; in his light they see light; as the Object will be clearer to be seen, so their Eyes will be perfectly irradiated to behold him] 9. And they shall reign for ever and ever; [though his Servants shall serve him, yet it shall be no trou∣blesome bondage or slavery, but a liberty and dominion; they shall sit with Christ in his Throne as Assessors, judge the World, and (it Rev. 3. 2.
may be) judge their Judges; ap∣proving the righteous Sentence of 1 Cor. 6. 2. their Royal Master the Blessed Jesus, King of kings, and Lord of lords.] And if all this be meant of some glorious state of the Church on Earth (as some will needs have it) yet that's but a faint resemblance of this more happy State in Heaven: And further, for the duration of it, 'tis added: 10. And they shall reign for ever and ever; [Earthly Mo∣narchs are but short-liv'd King∣doms, have their periods, but Kings are of less continuance; of Christ's Kingdom there is no end, and his Subjects reign runs paralel with the Life of God, and Line of Eternity.] Oh blessed Souls, oh happy Saints, that shall for ever be with the Lord! And here we leave the Soul of our dear Brother, singing triumphantly the Song of Moses, and of the Lamb, in the height of Zion; whilst we poor Mortals are glad if we can sing but the Song of degrees.
As for the solemn interment of that Case and Cabinet, once the Receptacle, now the Relict of that precious Pearl; it was judged meet that Solemnity should be put off till Wednesday, Dec. 19. 1677. that di∣stant Friends might have seasonable notice; and that day Mr. Starky, a Non-conformist Minister, preached an excellent Sermon in the Parish-Church at Ormes-kirk (no man for∣bidding him; nay all that were any way concerned, consenting) upon Col. 3. 4. When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory. There was a vast confluence of all sorts of peo∣ple at his Funeral, great lamenta∣tion, and many signal demonstra∣tions of universal love and respect, which he had from all the Country; his Body was laid in the Chancel, and Burying-place, which belongs to the Ancient Family of Stanlies of Bickerstaff, Knights and Baronets; it was with their free consent and
desire. The Reverend Minister that preached, after he had acutely, learnedly, and profitably handled his Text, gave a short, but full Ac∣count of him, in his several Capa∣cities, as Minister, Husband, Fa∣ther, Friend, and especially God∣wards, as a Christian: And as the Eccho's of the Hearers gave testi∣mony to the truth of what was spo∣ken, so to their sad resentment of their irreparable loss. All the Town, in their several Capacities, doing him honour in their pe∣culiar way: Mr. Constable (the chiefest Officer in the Town, of considerable Authority) carried the Staff (like a Mace) before the Corps, and the rest walked in their due and decent order. Now although this was insigni∣ficant to the Dead, and not edify∣ing much to the Living, yet de∣cent Burials have always amongst civilized Nations been accounted the duty of the Living, and an ho∣nour
to the Dead: And there is a special remembrance of this in Scripture; for it's said of Hezekiah, that all Judah, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, did him honour at his death: On the contrary, it is re∣corded 2 Chron. 32. 33. as a perpetual Infamy of Je∣horam (the bad Son of good Jeho∣shaphat 2 Chron. 21. 20.) that he departed without being desir'd; and of another bad Son of a good King, (Jehoiakin, the Son of Josiah) that they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my bro∣ther,—but he shall be buried with Jer. 22. 18, 19. the burial of an Ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the Gates of Jerusa∣lem. But this Good man honoured God whilst living, and God ho∣noured him at his death; and ad∣vanced his Soul to better, and Eter∣nal Honour. Mr. Heywood went to his Grave in peace, after all his tumultuous Tossings upon the tempestuous Sea of this World; he dyed in the 44th year of his Age, and about two
Months above, having lived long in a little time; and I find several choice men taken out of the world about that Age. So among the German Divines, Strigelius dyed Vid. vit. in Metch. Ad. 44 years of Age, and 6 months; Flinschpach 44. Simlerus dyed in the 45th year; so we find Erpenius dyed at 40 years of age; Mr. Ro∣bert Rollock dyed in the 43d year of his age; the Famous Dr. Whi∣taker in his 47th. But to men∣tion no more, our Famous Mr. Wil∣liam Perkins lived but 44 years, being cut off by a violent Fit of the Stone. And indeed we have frequently observed, that laborious Ministers are short-liv'd; some are of weak Constitutions, and spend their Lungs with speaking; or by a se∣dentary life contract Diseases, or are fretted with the untowardness of their people; or God in judg∣ment takes them away as a punish∣ment to a wicked world: How∣ever,
like a Candle they spend themselves to give light to others. Many gracious young men are very zealous, and make hast with their Work, and get it quickly dispatcht off their hands, and go to bed be∣times: And God is not willing to be without their company too long. Oh how many brave promising Plants have been pluckt up of late years, that were heavy laden with choice Fruits; whilst some old wi∣thered Trees, barren and fruitless, still stand cumbering the ground! But the Soveraign Jehovah knows what is fittest, and doth all things well. A little while before Mr. Hey∣wood dyed, he said to a Friend, I think this turning out of our Licen∣sed Places will cost Mr. Yates and me our Lives. Oh this goes hea∣vily! our casting out of our great Places was not so much as casting us out of our little Places: And indeed Mr. Yates of Warrington dyed shortly after.
Having thus nakedly given a brief account of Mr. Heywood's Birth, Life, Imployment and Death, and what is worthy a re∣mark therein; I shall select some few Characters of him, comforta∣ble to, and imitable by his survi∣ving Brethren, Friends and Hearers; for the Memory of the Just is bles∣sed; and possibly Generations yet to come may reap benefit by what they find recorded of him. And I dare appeal to the God of Truth, that searcheth hearts, that the de∣scription I shall give of him is true, which I have by personal know∣ledge, or credible Testimony. 1. As to his Proportion, Physi∣ognomy, and Constitution, which is the Case, Shell, and Outside, that was comely enough, no part lacking, crooked, or deformed; tall, and straight, blackish curled Hair; not fat, nor very lean, yet fatter in his Body than he seemed
by his Face; of an healthful Con∣stitution mostly after he was past his Childhood; which might have continued long, had not the Vessel been crackt by impetuous dashings, inflamed with the love of God, and zeal for Souls, which haled the Carcase faster than Nature could keep pace; and this over-driving took off the Chariot-wheels; for all agreed, that his excessive pains laid the foundation of these Diseases, that at last wasted his Spirits: He was an excellent Footman, and could walk both fast and far, and in his last Distemper walked much, and found most ease therein; tho when he went beyond his strength, it cost him dear. In his best health he was an extraordinary Sweater, especially in his preaching; his sweat hath dropt at his Hair-ends, wet his Band all over; Letters wet in his Pocket through Linings, as if put in water; and it may be that sweating was some advantage to
him; but when he could not take that pains to sweat, and thereby evaporate those acid Humors, they might settle, and gather into those acute Diseases: Yet want of leisure∣ly cooling might prejudice him. Once old Mr. Woods and he preacht an Exercise in a Chappel in an hot Summer-day, the number of peo∣ple was too many to come with∣in hearing; Mr. Haywood having preacht first, Mr. Woods withdrew the Army, or Assembly, from that strong-hold wherein they were coopt, into the Champaign of a fair large Field, where that Ex∣cellent, Solid, Laborious Man of God preacht under a shady Tree; Mr. Haywood sitting in a Chair, got an extream Cold, which cost him dear afterward. 2. As to his natural Constitu∣tion and Disposition, he was natu∣rally Cholerick, being of a san∣guine Compexion; but such was the predominancy of Grace, that it
did very little appear in him, being regulated and rectified with that sweet corrective of Gods Fear, which turned his natural Constitu∣tion into a Spiritual Channel, and put a due by as into it, to move God∣wards: He was much transported in the affection of love, where Rea∣son dictated a discovery of the love∣liness of the Object, both in Spiri∣tuals and Naturals. In his younger days he was judged to be inclined to Melancholy, sitting sometimes silent, and poring upon something; and so he was in his last Distemper: Yet at some times he was very chearful, and facetious, putting off harmless Jests with much ad∣vantage for his own and his Friends diversion; and this, (with recre∣ating himself with his Children) was all the recreation that he used for many years. He was indeed won∣derful witty and ingenious, when he slacked the strings a little, and applied himself that way, which
was very rarely; his mind being ordinarily intent upon more neces∣sary business in his Study, or Soul concerns. 3. As to his Entrance into the Ministry, and his Judgment in Ec∣clesiastical Points, he was (accord∣ing to his Education) a strict Pres∣byterian, as they are called, avoid∣ing both the extremes of Prelatical Tyranny on the one hand, and Congregational. Democracy on the other. Upon his first setling at Ormiskirk he presently applied himself to the Ministers of that Classe in that Division where God had cast his Lot; and after proba∣tion and approbation of his Mini∣sterial Abilities, Learning, and fit∣ness for that Place, consent of the People expressed—he was so∣lemnly set apart by Fasting and Prayer, and imposition of Hands, to the work of the Ministry, in a Publick Congregation, to the great satisfaction of all that were concern∣ed.
The Reverend grave Ministers that laid hands on him, were Mr. Thomas Johnson, Parson of Halsal; Mr. Thompson, Parson of Sefton; Mr. Edward Gee, Parson of Eccleston; Mr. Bell of Highton; all Worthy, Eminent Men; and some others. 4. As to his Ministerial Labours, I shall add little to what hath been said: He willingly did spend, and was spent in the Service of his Lord and Master; he prayed and wept, preached and sweat in publick and private, in season and out of season; he constantly preached twice a day, catechised, exhorting, admo∣nishing with all long-suffering: He was much in spending days in so∣lemn Fasting and Prayer with Christian Friends in his Parish, and elsewhere. He loved and delighted in the Communion of Saints; so that those few Christians in those parts lamentably bewail the loss of him as their Pastor and Leader,
their prompter to, and prop in those spiritual Exercises. His heart was set to do good unto all, but his delight was in God's Children. He refused not to come and visit the poorest and wickedest, that either sent for him, or that he judged would make him welcome, or where he had any hopes of doing good. He was diligent in visiting the sick, and took great pains with the ignorant, procuring Catechisms for them that were willing to learn, instructing them, and using inge∣nious artifices to bring them into a love of Religion, and engaging young people to learn. 5. He was exceeding meek and patient, not only in bearing his bo∣dily pains with an invincible spirit; but enduring the affronts, reproach∣es, and various indignities that were offered him, with an heroick chearfulness; yea, he gloried in them as the afflictions of Christ, notwithstanding all the foremen∣tioned
oppositions; yet his Spirit was so sweetly calmed, that none ever heard him revile or speak evil of the Instruments, but many have heard him pity and pray for them; it's true, his Spirit was sometimes so disturbed, that he would dream of them, and mention them in his sleep; but still he bore a compas∣sionate heart towards them, and would often bewail their condition; though some of the Townsmen, and others, thought some Prosecu∣tions were malicious and unreason∣able, not fit to be named; yet he freely forgave all, as an offence a∣gainst himself, and affectionately prayed for their repentance and par∣don of their sin against God; oft saying, If this or that be the worst they can do, we shall shift well enough: He had in some consider∣able degree, learned that hard les∣son our Lord teacheth, Mat. 5. 44. But I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and perse∣cute you. This, this, is a great height of true Christianity, to do good, and hear evil, bear our Cross, and follow Christ with pa∣tience and self-denial. 6. He was very faithful to his Friends, and look'd upon the bond of friendship as sacred, and not to be violated, whether in the business of counselling, and keeping secrets, or preserving, and performing the trust reposed in him, and this was not small, nor from persons incon∣siderable, and this upon several ac∣counts, putting himself to much cost, many troubles, and some in∣conveniences, rather than seem by negligence to falsify his word, or in any respect to fail of his duty; as many instances might manifest. It was Conscience of his duty God∣wards, that awed his spirit in those cases wherein no mortal could de∣tect or punish him for neglect. He
was marvellous obliging in his de∣portment; very taking in his di∣scourse, with such as he could be free with; instructing the igno∣rant, indulging the impotent; by words or carriage manifesting his dislike of sin, but encouraging any that discovered any sparks of true Piety, however they might differ from him in some things; for he was of a Catholick Spirit. 7. He was very humble and self-denying, which was the brave ornament of all his other graces and eminent qualifications; this in∣deed was his Master-piece, he had always very mean thoughts of him∣self, and his own undertakings, disgusting others commendations of him; which indeed were to him instar fulminis, like a thunderbolt, as that German Divine said of mens praises; yea, he would even cover his face with shame, and modestly blush when any spoke well of him; his maxim was rather to be, than
seem good; not affecting triumphs (as Pompey did) but approving his heart to God; being more pleased with God's gracious acceptance, and the conscience of his own inte∣grity, than affecting the favour of great ones, or the applause of the vulgar; tho there was scare any had such general approbation, or flocking after them; yet his Spirit was not elated, or lifted up there∣with: In him was verified that ob∣servation, That honour is like a shadow, which being pursued, it flies away; and the more a man flies from it, the more it follows him. He could never be persuaded to Print any of his labours, though he was often solicited thereto; for he judged nothing that he did worth exposing to publick view; he so far disliked the humour of ostentation, that he abstained from doing that which might have been profitable to the Church. Though his Sermons were elaborate and
acurate, yet very pathetical, which he desired to be conveyed only to the ears and hearts of his hearers: Yea, his modesty lock'd up his lips in company, unless he had a just call to speak; and he spake with great judgment, and as much hu∣mility and submission to better judgments, but always with great advantage to his hearers. He was mild in his censure, and spake well of others mean and well-meaning undertakings; he commended all that in any thing were praise-wor∣thy, and envied them not that honour that was due to them. 8. He was much and mighty in Prayer; he had an excellent gift in confessing sin, petitioning for mer∣cy, and thankfulness to God for mercies received. He did with pat and proper Scripture-expressi∣ons, wrestle with God in Prayer: Oh! how frequently and fervently did he pour out his Soul to the Lord with sighs and groans, strong cries
and tears! He had a large measure of the Spirit of Adoption, and was usually large, and much enlarged in that duty, especially upon extra∣ordinary occasions; Though he had long used to go to God alone; yet in his last sickness he was more abundant in Closet-Prayer: His Wife and Children coming to him, have often found him upon his knees: And the Lord gave in many signal impressions upon his Spirit, and remarkable returns of his prayers. Many years ago, when his Wife was dangerously sick at Godley in Yorkshire, nigh to death, he told her she must not die at that time; she demanded of him, Why he thought so? He answered, because my heart is much enlarged in prayer to beg for thy life; ac∣cordingly God raised her up at that time. And he hath oft taken no∣tice of the frame of his Spirit in prayer for several sick persons; and hath taken his measures from his
straitness, or his enlargedness, and it hath often proved suitable to his presages. 9. He had a great measure of Faith, both as to Soul-concerns, and temporal affairs. As to the former, God had helped in Soul-troubles to trust God in the way of a promise, and at last buoyed up his Faith into a Plerophery or full Assurance. As to the latter, he was trained up in the life of Faith many years; a Wife, and nine small Children, being turned out of all, having nothing before-hand, and knew not in an ordinary rational way, where his subsistence must a∣rise; this put his Faith hard to it: yet committing his all into God's hands, he was strangely supplied, as if he had been fed by Ravens, or as Israel in the Wilderness: O man! great was thy faith! O Lord! great was thy bounty! It's true, he was often afraid of discontent and mur∣muring; but pluck'd up his spirit,
saying to his Wife, Let us pray and wait on God, he never failed us yet, come let us trust him; this he spake with great alacrity; and he oft took notice, that at a pinch God sent in seasonable supply by un∣expected means; help came in so strangely, that he resolved to set down punctually what he received, and of whom. He said once to a Friend, I cannot but wonder how God sends in Money just as I need it, he drops it into my hand by Six∣pences and Shillings most seasona∣bly; and the review of these ex∣periments much strengthens my Faith, and engageth me to thank∣fulness: This course he had taken for above twelve years, and advi∣sed his Friend to the same course. From his multiplied experiments he gathered great encouragements; he often wondered at the unac∣countable provision God made for him and his.
10. He was of a loving, peace∣able frame, much addicted to peace, both in Sacreds and Civils: He was not willing to fall out with any, and it was strange if any fell out with him, for he gave not any just occasion at any time. Testimonies and instances might be produced wherein he complied to the utmost extent of what he judged lawful, to avoid giving any offence, and sometimes receded from his right, for peace sake. It is true he was a man of contention, as the Prophet Jeremiah was, but it was his grief, and made him cry, Wo is me! and besides, it was rather passively than actively that he was so; men contended with him, rather than he with them, and it was in the matters of his God and Conscience; and he was resolved rather to obey and please God than men: In this he was as a sturdy Oak, in o∣ther
matters a bending Ozier. If any time he was angry at others, yet anger did not ferment into malice, or long rest in his bo∣some; he sought reconciliation with them; and if any had taken of∣fence at him, he sought to win them by loving means and methods of kindness; yea, he was not only a peace-keeper, but a peace-maker to his power, reconciling Neigh∣bours that were at distance; not by sitting with them in the Ale∣house (as the manner of some is) but by Christian Advice, Counsel, Prayers, healing differences in God's way. He preached an excellent Sermon upon mutual Love from Ephes. 5. 2. an excellent duty from an excellent pattern, excellently managed, discovering a savoury spirit, full of gentleness, sobriety, moderation; he sought to calm mens minds, and lay the wind of passion, that the word might take place; for the fruit of righteousness
is sown in peace of them that make peace. James 3. 18. 11. But tho he was of a peace∣able spirit to condescend to any thing lawful for peace sake, yet not so facile, flexible, and wire-drawn as to recede an hairs breadth from truth, or well fixed principles; he was [Magnes & Adamas] an at∣tractive Loadstone, yet an inflecti∣ble Adamant in the cause of God. He well understood his own latitude, and as he would not groundless∣ly withdraw by wanton curiosity, so he would not be led aside into sin to please a friend, or prostitute his Conscience to mens fancy: Others might perhaps judge it a needless preciseness, perverseness, or obsti∣nacy; but he could not turn his sails to their wind, or dance after their pipes, though he had manifold temptations on all hands from great and small; but he was of blessed Paul's mind and practice, Gal. 2. 5. To whom we gave place by subjection,
no not for an hour; that the truth of the Gospel might continue with you. And if he died not a Martyr for, yet a Confessor of, and Witness to, the truths that concern Christs Kingly Office over his Church, to appoint what Laws, Orders, Offi∣cers, Ordinances, he pleaseth, as one of his last Sermons abundantly doth demonstrate: He was Faith∣ful unto death, and now receives a Crown life. It might be said of this man of God, as was said of Eras∣mus Sarcerius, [Lucebat in hoc viro Melch Ad. Vit. Sarc. p. 326. commemorabilis gravitas & constan∣tia, non minas, non exilia, non ul∣lam ullius hominis potentiam aut vim pertimescebat: Pene dixerim, solem facilius de cursa dimoveri potuisse, quam Erasmum à veritatis profes∣sione]. 12. He made great proficiency daily both in Learning, Grace, and Holiness; having laid a low foun∣dation, he built a stately visible su∣perstructure: It might be said of
him, as the Apostle of the Thessalo∣nians, That his faith did grow exceed∣ing, 2 Thes. 1. 3. and his love to christians abound∣ed. The Pearl grew too big for the shell; his head soared above the Clouds, and his heart mounted Heavenwards. And as he grew in Faith, Love, Meekness, Zeal for God, Endearedness to Souls; so above all, in Humility, Self-denial, and Contempt of the World; as he travelled up and down to do good, so he travelled in birth over poor necessitous sinners. Possibly some may think Mr. Heywood took too much upon him, and was too sedu∣lous in his indefatigable pains, both in the face of danger, and to the hazard of his health; but as to the one, Calvin's Apology was his, [Would you have me found idle when my Lord cometh?] As to the form∣er, his Answer and Actings were justifiable by a like instance in the life of Olevian, who asked them, Whether he must suspend, or su∣percede
his Preaching at that time for fear of danger? Or, Whether they desired to hear him as former∣ly? The People all with hands lifted up, and loud voices cryed out [Imo hoc, imo hoc, & per Deum Melch Ad. Vit. Olev. p. 600. te oramus, ut pergas concionari] We beseech thee to Preach. Thus the necessities and importunity of the People extorted work from this poor man; His heart was upon it, and being engaged, he regarded not any carnal arguments from flesh and blood, or self-preservation. The last Sermon he preached at a Friends house in the Parish, was as a Swan-like Song, pithy, and sen∣tentious, ardent and affectionate; that as before he exceeded others, so then he exceeded himself; as if he knew before hand that it was the last. Thus his last was more than his first; and the nearer the center, the quicker was his motion: He was so full of matter, as if he were at a loss for time to do the remaind∣er
of his work in, that he might dispatch it all and be at Rest. 13. He was very Charitable to the Poor, and such as were in real Necessity. And though his small Revenue, and constant Charge, did somewhat bind his hands, yet could not restrain his Spirit; he drew out his Soul to the Hungry. And indeed 2 Cor. 8. 12. true Charity is seated rather in a large heart than liberal hand; the Imprimis of a willing mind finds acceptance, when the Items of Alms run but shallow. And to his pow∣er, v. 3. many will bear him record; yea, beyond his power he was will∣ing; freely welcoming objects of pitty, stirring up his hearers to free Contributions, especially in the behalf of Godly Poor, where∣by the bowels of many were re∣freshed by this Brother. And hence it was that he that sowed 2 Cor. 9. 6. bountifully, did then (and much more doth now) reap bounti∣fully; For the liberal soul shall be Prov. 11. 25.
made fat; and he that watereth, shall be watered also himself. 14. He was a great admirer, and a profound Preacher of the glorious Gospel-design, especially in the giving of Christ. And in∣deed this he made his [] the main scope of all his preaching. It's true, he did oft preach Law and Terror to awaken mens Con∣sciences, and drive them out of themselves to Christ. He did often press duty in a circumspect, exact, and holy walking; and urged a spiritual, and diligent worshipping of God: But still demonstrating, that Christ is the end of the Law Rom. 10. 4. for righteousness to every one that believeth. It was his proper ge∣nius, and most suitable to his Evan∣gelical Spirit to know and preach nothing but a crucified and glorified Redeemer. He much inlarged him∣self 1 Cor. 2. 2. upon the Gospel-way of the ju∣stification of a Sinner, by the im∣putation of Christ's perfect Righ∣teousness
by faith: His working thoughts run still upon this Theam, sleeping and waking; so that once (many years ago) he was heard in his Dream to say [there are vast heaps of Free-grace]: His heart was greatly inamour'd with the love of God in sending Christ; as appeared to the content, profit, and wonder of many, by a Sermon he preached the same year he died upon Rom. 5. 8. This was the pro∣per Element in which he moved: And few dived that depth into that Eph. 3. 19. unfathomable Ocean of this Love that passeth knowledge, as he did. 15. He was a zealous Defender of Truth, and Impugner of Errors; he did strenuously contend for the Jude 3. faith once delivered to the saints: He much delighted in the form of wholesome words, and loved not new-coin'd phrases, which are apt to amuse mens minds, and instil into them poisonous Principles: He lo∣ved and used sound speech that can∣not
be condemned, as well as sound and orthodox Truth; standing at an equal distance from Arminians on one hand, and Antinomians on the o∣ther. He had a strange sagacity in discerning Persons, Things and Doctrines, that swerved from, or suited not the Scripture dialect. He kept close to the Analogy of Faith; yet was not against profici∣ency, or a modest improvement of knowledge: Yea, he had well stu∣died the Arminian Controversy, and told some Friends, That if the Lord should recover him, and lengthen out his Life, he had a design to write something upon that Subject, which might, per∣haps, have given further light into that Controversie. For as his Ge∣nius led him that way, so he had the advantage of many years inti∣mate converse with that Ancient and Learned Divine Mr. Tho. John∣son, Parson of Halsall, a man of vast Parts, and unwearied Studies,
and a non such Person in those points; but told Mr. Heywood (his intimate Friend) that it much re∣pented him, that he had spent so much time in reading Books, and studying Controversies, that might have been more profitably impro∣ved in conversing with, and instru∣cting his ignorant and carnal Neigh∣bours. Let Ministers think of this, for one Soul won to God by perso∣nal Conference, will tend more to God's Glory, and a Minister's Com∣fort, than a thousand Notions got by reading: Howbeit, a due mix∣ture of a contemplative, and active Life, must needs be the best. 16. He was good in his Relative Condition. He was an obedient Child, an exceeding kind Husband, an indulgent tender-hearted Father, an affectionate Master, a faithful Friend: He maintained a Paternal awe, authority, gravity, mixed with Fatherly Bowels of gentleness and lenity, and both with incredible
prudence, that they had not occa∣sion either to slight him, or be dis∣couraged by him. He instructed them with faithfulness; admonish∣ed them with tenderness; prayed for them with faith and fervency, and walkt before them with an holy exemplariness and sincerity. As God had made him a Nathanael, God∣wards; so a Joshuah, resolving that Josh. 24. 15. he and his house should serve the Lord. It's a true Maxim, That he who is not relatively good, is not really good: But he stood square for every Duty in every Relation: He kept his Children much at home, being very jealous lest they should meet with temptations abroad, which occasioned many Cares and Prayers about their disposal. 17. He had attained to a consi∣derable measure of Assurance: Tho Isa. 50. 10. he had walked in darkness, and saw no light in his first Convictions; yet staying himself on the Lord, his God at last shined upon his Soul
with the light of his countenance, and he walked many days with the Candle of God shining upon his head through much darkness. How Job 29. 3. frequently in Prayer did he express his joy and gratitude for the ever∣lasting consolation and good hopes through grace of his own salvation! But the infinitely wise God, after many sweet days he had enjoyed, thought fit to withdraw his wonted Incomes, and left him under some doubts and dissatisfaction. For a∣bout two months before he died, one Lord's day, as he and his Family sate together, he told his Wife with tears in his eyes, that he had great troubles concerning his Spiritual State, and some doubts about his Condition, desiring her to pray for him: Yet the Lord dispelled those dark Clouds, and in due time did sweetly shine into his Soul with the sense of his Love. Thus God is a free Agent, and doth not always in∣tail comfort upon sincerity; but
sometimes the best of God's Chil∣dren suffer Eclipses; but such sad days tend to self-searching and deeper humiliation; and such sha∣kings tend to better settlement: Yea such discouragements are often attended with more inlargement; such blots in a Christian's Evidences produce more clearing them up: However, God hereby hath more glory, and Heaven will be sweeter. 18. He had a strong persuasion of God's care of his numerous Family, both in point of Education and Pro∣vision. As God had graciously lookt after them in his life-time, so he had conceived great hopes of their sup∣ply after his decease. It's true, he had some temptations, and sad thoughts of heart concerning them; but at last Faith got the victory over Unbelief, and having left his sad Widow with her better Husband, and his fatherless Children with their heavenly Father, he was quiet, and these thoughts did not hinder
his hearty welcome of his dearest Lord, when he summoned him by death. And therefore after he had by faith and prayer devolved the care of them upon the Lord, he freely acquiesced in his good Provi∣dence about himself and them. On Tuesday before he died, getting into his Bed, his Wind being very short, his Wife broke out into sore weep∣ing; to whom he said, Be not trou∣bled, God will provide necessaries for thee and thy Posterity for ever: Which brings to mind the passage of Bucer, who dying, stretched out three Fingers, with his eyes lift up to Heaven, saying, [Ille, ille regit & moderatur omnia;] He, he alone, rules and governs all things: And the Event hath abundantly answered this good man's Prediction, and Expectation. 19. It is very considerable that he had his desire in a leisurely lin∣gring death: He had often expres∣sed his willingness (if that were
God's will) that death might come on gradually, and not surprize him; yea he prayed that he might be long in his sickness, and also that he might be sensible till the last; the Lord did condescend to him in both these: He had been long habitual∣ly prepared, but he desired to be actually ready: For it is an impor∣tant concern to dye, and go into ano∣ther world, a world of Spirits. This good man had frequent warnings, and continued strong in his Intelle∣ctuals all the time of his illness. Up∣on Friday night his Brother-in-law coming to him, asked him if he had made his Will; he answered, no; he desired to have his Son Nathanael at home, when he did that: But he perceiving that he was weakning apace, and that his time would not be long, being urged again, he wil∣lingly consented, and sent for a Clerk, and dispatcht that worldly concern that night; then he was in perfect composedness of mind, being
but one night besides that till his death. 20. As he was highly qualified with Personal Disposition, Christian Graces, and Ministerial Abilities, so God gave him favour in the sight of all with whom he conversed: It's true, he had Adversaries, but it was for the matters of his God, wherein his Principles carried him to practices different from them; yet even those commended him for his Parts and Preaching: Yea at death, some that had been bitter Enemies to him, were well recon∣ciled to him. One instance was ve∣ry remarkable; one Mr. Brownlow, an old Gentleman that lived in the Town, who had conceived a bitter grudge against Mr. Heywood, after King Charles's Return, because he would not read the Common-Prayer; but upon his Death-bed he sent for Mr. Heywood, intreated him to go to prayer with him; and when Mr. A. the Vicar would have come
to read Common Prayer, he would not suffer him; but would not part with Mr. Heywood while he lived. Thus I have given a brief Narra∣tive of what was memorable in this holy man of God, and imitable by us: I may say to every one, Go thou and do likewise. Let Christians pray that God would send forth many such Labourers into his Har∣vest, succeed their Labours, and learn to improve such Soul-helps, that they may give a good account of these rich Talents at last. A Letter sent by Mr. Nathanael Hey∣wood to a Christian Friend, upon the death of his godly Wife, May 1. 1675. Dear Friend, I Received yours of Jan. 30. long since, and had answered it much sooner, but that I had some purposes, and was not without hopes, of doing it, not by writing, but by coming to you at your appointed time in March last; but being prevented of that, and now having such pains of body, through my old distemper, as makes me very uncapable of riding far, that I am not certain to see you this Summer, though I intend and shall endeavour it; I can forbear writing no longer, nor further delay that which
I account my duty, till I come over, I give you hearty thanks for your loving and godly Letter; whereby I was much refreshed in those my late troubles, which indeed were many and heavy; yet in such a Cause, and for such a Master, did I suffer, that I must needs say they were light and easy: Oh! that God may have the glory, and others be encouraged! As suffer∣ings for Christ did abound, so consolations a∣bounded by Christ. Let the world know that suffering for Christ is the very Element wherein Christ's Love liveth and exerciseth it self, and his choicest Cordials are reserved for such a time. I was in great measure a stranger to the comforts and sweetness of Christianity, till I was singled out to bear the Cross; but am now well satisfied that that which I suffered for, and still do suffer, is Christ's Truth; because he was pleased to seal my sufferings with the sweet sense, and ex∣perience of unspeakable joy and peace; and I know he will not put his seal to a blank-paper, nor will he be a witness to a lye. Had not some great Persons interposed by their Interest and Authority, I had certainly gone to Prison at that time, when I was taken by Soldiers; and at the Sessions shortly after, had not God raised up other Friends (some of them Justices) to frustrate the purpose and design of my cruel Enemies, who would have sent me Six Months to Prison the Sessions before, for living within Five Miles of this Town; yea, would have Convicted me among Recusants for not coming to this Church; but it pleased God, by a special Providence, to prevent that also. But alas! all these troubles are nothing to that I am now Mourning under, the loss of publick Liberty; a closed Mouth, dumb and silent Sabbaths; to
be cast out of the Vineyard as a dry and wither∣ed Branch, and to be laid aside as a broken Ves∣sel, in whom there is no pleasure, is a sore bur∣then, I know not how to bear; my heart bleeds under it, as a sting and edge added to my other troubles and afflictions. This exercise of my Ministry, next to Christ, is dearer to me than any thing in the world: It was my Heaven, till I come home, even to spend this life in gathering Souls to Christ: But I must lay even that down at Christ's feet, and be dumb and silent before the Lord, because he has done it, who can do no wrong, and whose judgments are past find∣ing out: I am sure I have reason to conclude with the Prophet, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him. Dear Brother; I hear that it hath pleased God to remove from you the desire of your eyes, and my dear Friend: I am heartily sorry for that sore breach in your Family, and desire to suffer with you in the loss of your loving and good Wife, now gone before (according to the method and or∣der he hath appointed, whose Understanding is infinite) whither you are shortly to follow: He that made yesterday to go before this day, and the former Generation in birth and life to have been before this Generation, and hath made some Flowers grow, so to die and wither in May, and others in June, cannot be challenged in the order he observes with us, that one must bury another. You know who said, I was dumb and opened not my mouth, because thou, Lord, didst it. All things are Ordered in Wisdom and Judgment by your Father; at whose feet your own Soul and your Heaven lyeth, and so the days of your Wife. You had her as long as
your Lease lasted, and seeing her Term was come, and your Lease run out, you can no more justly quarrel with the great Sovereign for taking his own at his just Term-day, than a poor Farmer can complain that his Master takes a portion of his own Land to himself when his Lease is expired: And is not he an ill debtor who payeth that which he hath borrowed with a grudg? Certainly the long loan of such a good Wife, an Heir of Grace, and Member of Christ (as I verily believe) deserveth more thanks, at the Creditors hands, than that you should grieve and murmur when he craveth but his own. I believe you would judge them to be but unthankful Neighbours who would pay you a sum of Money after this manner. I know you would be sorry either to be, or to be esteemed any thing like an Atheist; and yet not I, but the Apostle (1 Thes. 4. 13.) thinks those to be hopeless Atheists, who Mourn excessively for the Dead. But this is not a challenge on my part; some jealousie I have, lest you be over∣much grieved for the loss of such a meet-Help; but you have reason to rejoyce, that when a part of you is on Earth, another part of you is Glorified in Heaven, sleeping in the Bosom of the Almighty: Fellow her, but envy her not. For indeed it is self-love in us that maketh us Mourn for them that die in the Lord; because for them we cannot Mourn, since they are ne∣ver happy till they be dead, therefore we Mourn for our own private respect. Take heed then, that in pretending your affection in Mourning for your Wife, you act out of self-affection; consider what the Lord is doing in it; she is plucked out of the fire, and resteth from her Labours; and the Lord in that is trying you,
and casting you into the fire, beholding your Faith and Patience, and delighting to see you in the burning Bush and not consumed; but sending Satan away frustrate of his design. The Lord is laying in the two scales of the Ballance, your making Conscience of Submission to his Gracious Will; and in the other, your affecti∣on to your Wife: Which of the two will you then chuse to satisfy? I wish you may come out of the Lord's School wiser and more expe∣rienced in the ways of God. It's our happiness that when Christ openeth a Vein, he taketh no∣thing but ill Blood from his sick Patients; and when he puts them into the furnace of Afflicti∣on (and stands by the melting of the Mettal) he takes away the tin and lead, and scum that remained in nature. But it is a sad thing when the rod is cursed, that never fruit shall grow on it; and except Christ's dew fall down his Sum∣mer Sunshine, and his Grace follow Afflictions, to make them to bring forth fruit unto God, they are so bewithered to us, that our evil ground (rank and fat enough for Briars) cast∣eth up a crop of noysome Weeds. I am per∣suaded your Losses, Cares, Sicknesses, &c. are but Summer-showres that will wet your Gar∣ments for an hour or two, and the Sun of the New Jerusalem shall quickly dry your wet Coat, especially since the rain of affliction can∣not stain the Image of God, nor cause Grace to cast it's Colour. Oh! learn heavenly Wisdom, Self-denial, and Mortification, by this sad loss. I know it is not for nothing (except you deny God to be Wise in all that he doth) that you have lost one in the Earth: It may be there hath been too little of your heart and love in Heaven; and therefore the jealousie of Christ
hath done this; it's a mercy that he contendeth with you, and your Lovers; it may be he hath either been out of his place, or in a place infe∣riour to his worth. O let Christ have the room of your Wife; she hath now no need of you, or your Love; she enjoyeth as much of the love of Christ, as her heart can be capable of. I know it is a dear bought experience to teach you to undervalue the Creature; yet it is not too dear if Christ think so. Let me entreat you to consider one thing more (which hath help∣ed me in such like cases more than once) and I have done: You are hasting after your Wife, and shall shortly be with her; it's but a little while, a few days longer, and you must follow her into Eternity. By her Death take occasion to love the world less, out of which she is taken, and Heaven more, whither she is gone before you, and where you shall for ever enjoy her, and be with Christ, which is best of all. If the place she hath left were any other but a prison of Sin, and the home she is gone to were any other but a Palace of Glory, your Grief would be the more rational. But, I hope, your Faith of the Resurrection of the dead in Christ to Glory and Immortality, will lead you to dry up your Tears, and suspend your longing for her, till the Morning of that Day, when the Arch-Angel shall descend with a shout to ga∣ther all his Prisoners out of their Graves up to himself in Heaven.—Dear love to, and fer∣vent prayers for you and your Children. I am, Your most Affectionate and Sympathysing Friend, Nath. Heywood. FINIS.
