A411 12881578 94942
AN ACCOUNT OF THE TREATY BETWEEN His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher Captain General and Go∣vernour in Chief of the Province of New-York, &c. AND THE INDIANS OF THE Five Nations, VIZ. The Mohaques, Oneydes, Onnondages, Cajonges and Sennekes, at Albany, beginning the 15th of August, 1694. Printed & Sold by William Bradford, Printer to Their Majesties, King William and Queen Mary, at the Sign of the Bible in New-York, 1694.
Lisenced, David Iamison, Cl. Concilij.
THE ANSWER OF The Five Nations, VIZ. The Mahaques, Oneydes, Onnondages, Cajouges and Senekes, TO THE QUESTION Put to Them in May last By His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General and Governour in Chief of the Province of New-York, Province of Pennsilvania, Country of New-Castle, and the Territories and Tracts of Land depending thereon in America, and Vice-Admiral of the same; Their Majesties Lieutenant and Commander in Chief of the Militia, and of the Forces by Sea and Land within Their Majesties Collony of Connecticut, and of all the Forts and Places of Strength within the same. Given at Albany the 15th day of August, 1694.
PRESENT His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, &c. Coll. Andrew Hamilton, Governour of East and West-Jarsey. Of Their Majesties Council for the Province of New-York. Coll. Stephen Cortland, Coll. Nicholas Bayard, Coll William Smith, Chidley Brooke, Esq. Major Peter Schuyler, Commissioners from the Massachusets Bay in New-England. Coll. John Pincheon, Samuell Sewell, Esq. Major Penn Townesend, Commissioners from Connecticut Collony. Coll. John Allyn, Capt. Caleb Stanley, The Sachims or Indian Kings. Mohaques, Rode, Sinnonquiresse, Onnuchwarranore, Tosoquatho, Tassorandese, Oneydes. Adogounwa, Caraquarie, Sohorochjondie, Onnondages. Sadekanacktie, Dekanissore, Canadgegai, Carachkindie, Tagorasuitho, Odaniende, Orondisachti, Cayouge
Sorichnowanne, Dekaeijow, Tanerisso, Cadgisso, Senekes, Rasadste, Radondaresax, Ostewatte, Ohawadege, Tehondaissen, Carachquinno, A Queen. The Foot Guards were drawn up before the place of Au∣dience, and a Troop of Dragoons on the Right Hand. The Sachims, by a Messenger, acquaint his Excellency, that they are ready to wait upon his Excellency, and give their Answer to that Question proposed to them the 7th of May last. His Excellency sent word, he was reàdy. The Sachims, attended by their other Indians, came in order, two and two, Rode, the first Sachim of the Mo∣haques being Leader, singing aloud as they marched. Songs of Joy and Peace. Then the Indians took their places upon Planks laid upon the Ground, Rode wàlking round them, and singing, until all were set down. Dekanissore rose up, and desired liberty from his Ex∣cellency to sing a Song or two of Peace before they begin their Discourse. Which was granted. Then he took his place. Rode rose up, addressing his Discourse to the Sachims of the five Nations, told them what great Reason they had to rejoyce to see their Brother Caijenquirago with so many that were of the Covenant Chain attending him, to
consûlt of Matters relating to the publick Good. After which the whole Company of Indians sung two or three Songs of Joy and Peace. Then Sadekanacktie, the Speaker, rose up, and first turning to the Indians, repeated how long the five Nations had been in Amity with the Inhabitants of the Province of New-York, and the Subjects of the Crown of England In America; with a Narrative of the many Acts of Friendship happening mutually from time to time, and how the Covenant Chain was first madē. Then turning to his Excellency, said, Brother Cajenquirago, You expected to see us here, and we the Sachims of the five Nations are come accor∣dingly to speak to you. Brother Caijenquirago, You appointed us to meet you here in one hundred Days, to give you our answer, Who will be for you, and who against you? This is the hun∣dredth Day, and we are come with the Representatives of the five Nations to give an unanimous Answer. This Spring we gave you an account, that we had sent Messengers to Canada to treat with the French; for which ill management you gave us a Rebuke, but withal you did receive us again into your Favour, and imbraced us, pro∣mising not to break the Covenant Chain so long as you had Blood in your Veins, and gave a Belt of Wampum in Confirmation of it. Brother Caijenquirago, You see that the Number of our People are much diminished; some of them have been out a Hunting lately, and have caught a small matter, we do present your Excellency with some part of what we have got. Then gave some Beaver and Peltry.
Brother Caijenquirago, I shall be brief in what I have to to say. In the days of Old, when the Christians came first into this River, we made a Covenant with them, first with the Bark of a Tree, afterwards it was renewed with a twisted Withe; but in process of time, left that should decay and rot, the Covenant was fastened with a Chain of Iron, which ever since has been called the Covenant Chain, and the end of it was made fast at Onnondage, which is the centre of the five Natïons. And therefore it was concluded, That whoever should violate or molest that Chain, or any part of it, the parties linked in the Chain should unanimously fall upon such, and distroy them; they should certainly dye the Death. Since the time that the Governors have been here from the great King of ENGLAND, we have made a general and more firm Covenant, which has grown stronger and stronger from time to time; and our Neigh∣bours seeing the advantage thereof, came and put in their Hands into the same Chain, particularly they of New-England, Connecticut, New-Jarsey, Pennsilvania, Mary∣land and Virginia. But since that time that all our Neighbours have put in their Hands into the Covenant Chain, we have had great struggling and trouble from the common Enemy, the French; Our Brother Caijen∣quirago's Wrist, and ours, are tyred, and stiff with holding fast the Chain alone, whilst the rest of our Neighbours sit still and smoake it. Thae Greese is melted from our Flesh, and drops ûpon our Neighbours, who are grown fat, and live at ease, while we become lean: They flourish, and we decrease.
Then naming all the English Plantations, said, Brethren, we are envied by our Enemies round about, and particulàrly by the French, who are very unconstant; and if the French or any other Enemy fall upon us, let us all joyn together, and take up the Hatchet in our hands, and then we shall be strong enough to destroy our Enemies, and live in Peace afterwards. Brother Caijenquirago, and the rest of the Brethren that are in covenant with us, It has been an antient Custom to renew the Covenant Chain, and to make it clean and bright, that it may shine like Silver. And we promise, That it shall be on our parts so strong and in∣violable, that the Thunder it self shall not break it. Brother Cajenquirago, and the rest of our Brethren, We have, in the time that the Governours of this Pro∣vince were called Corlaer, planted here in this plâce a Tree of Peace and Wellfair, whose Roots and Branches extend themselves as far as New-England, Connecticut, New-Jarsey, Pennsilvania, Maryland and Virginia, and whoever touches that Tree, which now we make green and sapid, or any of the Roots of it, we must not only be sensible, to feel and resent it, but rise up, and unanimously fall upon them that make that breach, to distroy them. We must àcquaint you, That it has been an antient Custom among the five Nations to keep their Meeting at Onnondage, which we are resolved to continue there, and if upon Occasion àny be sent for from hence, to be present at our General Meeting, we desire that they may come up. Brother Caijenquirago, We have been disobedient to
your Commands, in going to Canada to treat with the French. We thought, because our Brethren of New-England had treated with the Enemy, the French, to the Eastward, we might go and see whether there was any Peace concluded, or Treaty made to our prejudice; our jealousie arising by reason of the French telling us, that Chavaleer Deaux was sent back to Canada by them of New-England (whom we saw in Canada, giving us a pieced of Money, as a Token that he was freed by the English) and therefore they told us, it was in vain for us to war against them, for the English will set them at liberty again, as soon às they are taken. Brother Caijenquirago, We pray that your Excellency may order that Powder, Lead, Guns, and other Ammu∣nition may be sold cheaper; and since Arnout is coming with some of the far Nations, it will be requisite that such Goods may be sold cheap, for their encouragement, that they may be thereby the easier induced to come and live among us. Brethren of New-England, Connecticut, the Jarseys, Pennsilvania, Maryland and Virginia, Hearken to what we now say, We have renewed the Covenant Chain with you all: We always depended much upon New-England to be the chief of them that put their hand into the Cove∣nant Chain; we put more than ordinary confidence in your Integrity and readiness to assist us in the common De∣fence; and that you may see we are not forgetful of your Engagements, here is your Token of your being in the Covenant Chain, which (being a Salmon painted upon a blank Paper) you sent us; look upon it, Brother Caijen∣quirago: And we present to you, our Brother Coijequi∣rago,
a belt of Wampum, às a token whereby we acknow∣ledge you to be the Head of Covenant Chain, and that we desire you to give notice to all the Governments, that we have renewed the Covenant Chain with them, and desire their assistance against the common Enemy; which we pray you to put them in mind of. Brother Caijenquirago, We have said what we design to say to Night, and shall speàk to morrow concerning what has been transacted at Canada, by our People, and what Tokens we hàve from the far Nations of Twichtwichs and Dionondades, to whom the Belts of Wampum were sent. And we follow your custom in giving our Present altogether. So gave a parcel of Beaver and Pèltry. At a Meeting at Albany the 16th Day of August, 1694. PRESENT His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, &c. Coll. Andrew Hamilton, Governour of East and West-Jarsey. Of Their Maiesties Council for the Province of New-York. Coll. Stephen Cortland, Coll. Nicholas Bayard, Coll William Smith, Chidley Brooke, Esq Major Peter Schuyler, Commissioners from the Massachusets Bay in New-England. Coll. John Pincheon, Samuell Sewell, Esq Major Penn Townesend, Commissioners from Connecticut Collony. Coll. John Allyn, Capt. Caleb Stanley, The Sachims or Indian Kings.
Dekanissore (one of the Sachims of Onnondage) rose up, and said, Brother Caijenquirago, We, the five Nations of Indians Westward, viz. the Mohaques, Oneydes, Onnondages, Cajouges and Senekes, did conclude to send Messengers in the Spring to treat with the Governour of Canada; and I Dekanissore having been one of their Agents, am now come to relate what hath passed between him and me at Quebeck; therefore we pray our Brother Caijenquirago and our Brethren and Neighbours of New-England, Con∣necticut, New-Jarsey, Pennsilvania, Maryland and Virginia, to heaken what we shall say. Since the Governor of Canada has so often sent for us to come to Canada, to treat with him, we went thither, and told him that we were come to speak of Peace; then made these following Propositions to him, saying, Father, If we do not conclude a Peace now, it will lie at your door, and not oûrs; for we have already taken the Hatchet out of the Hands of the River Indians, (whom we invited to the War) in order to make Peace. But we must tell you, that you are an ill man, for you have given the Hatchet into the Hands of the Dowa∣ganhaes to hurt and distroy us: you are unconstant, and not to be trusted. We have had War so long together, which was begun by your means, but we never hated the House of Ockquese our Son (a Gentleman who lives in Mont Real) let him come that toylsome Journey to our Castle at Onnondage if he please, he shall be wellcome. Father, We are now speaking of Peace, and I must
speak a word to your Praying Indians of the first Castle (call'd Cachannage.) You Praying Indians of Canada, you know our customs and methods of acting better than your Gover∣nour, therefore we desire you to make him acquainted therewith, and be assistant in the prosecution of this good work of Peace that we are about. And you Praying Indians of the second Castle (call'd Cannasdage) you are worse than the French themselves, you deserted from us, and sided with our Enemies to distroy us; we tell you now to assist and give your help∣ing hand in the prosecution of this good Work of Peace that we are now about with your Governour. Father, You have almost eàt us up, all our best men are distroyed in this bloody War, but we forget all that is past, we threw the Hatchet in the River at Cajohage, where there was a great current, but you found it again, and betrayed our People at Cadaracqui, after that you sent for us to fetch Home our Prisoners, whom you re∣stored. Then the Hatchet was thrown into the sky, but you held your hand at a string that was fastened to the Helve of the Hatchet, and pulled it down again, ànd fell upon our People; whereupon we took an opportunity to fall upon you at the Island of Mount Real, where we distroyed many of your People and Houses. Notwithstanding all that hath passed, we wipe away and cover all the Blood that has been shed on both sides, during this War. Onondio, We have had Wars together a long time, we give you now a Cordial or Drink to drive away all ill Thoughts, and to purge your heart, that it may be clean,
and restored to its former state, and that all ill Thoughts may be vomited out. Onondio, We will admit of no settlement at Cadarac∣qui; you have had your fires there twice, which we have quenched, and therefore will not consent to any rebuild∣ing Cadaracqui. We clear the River that you may have a clear Passage throw it, and come freely to Onnondage. Onondio, We make the Sun clear, and dissipate all Clouds and Darkness, that the Light may appear without any interruption. Onondio, During this War we have taken Prisoners from one another; we delivered over ours to the Families that lost their People in the War, according to our Custom, who may deliver them, if they please, they are none of ours; and your People may do the same. Here are two Prisoners which we have brought along with us, whom we deliver unto you. Then related the Discourse the Governour of Canada made to him. After I had made an end of speaking, the Governour of Canada told me, he would not make Peace with Caijenquirago. Whereupon I answered, These words do not please me, you shall kéep Peace with him. Onondio said, I must fight against Cajenquirago, I am not Master to make Peace, that belongs to my Master the King of France that lives over the great Water. I replyed, I do not like this Discourse, if you should fight him now, and not stay till I get Home, all the Country will esteem me a Traytor, and that I have be∣trayed my Country; I cannot meddle to treat with you. This Discoûrse lasted between the Governour of Canada
and me three days; but I convinced the Governour of Canada at last, who said, I will not make war with Caijen∣quirago this Summer, but wait to hear what he will say. The Governour of Canada insisted three days to have two Hostages left, which I denyed, but they agreeing themselves freely to tarry, were left there; one is an Onnondage, the other a Seneke. As soon as the two Hostages agreed to tarry, the Gover∣nour of Cânada said, I accept of the Peace as you offer it. Son, Bring all the Prisoners home that you have taken from me, and your Prisoners shall have their liberty to go home, if they please. Children, I erect my Fire again at Cadaracqui, and plànt there a Tree of Peace. Then laid down a Belt of Wampum. And desired that Caijenquirago would send a Wise Man to speak to him, who should have free pro∣tection, as is customary among Christians. Children of the five Nations, If Cajenquirago should imploy you to do any thing for him with me, don't accept of the service, let him send people of his own, there are eighty days appointed me for an answer. Then laid down the Governour of Canada his Belt of Wampum to Caijenquirago. The Sachims of the Dionondades were at Canada, and said to me, Let this which you have said of Peace be from your Heart; we fear it is but Words, and not Real, do not let us feel the smart of the Hatchet any longer. Then they laid down a Belt of Wampum, which I show unto your Excellency, laying it down. The second Castle of praying Indians, said, Brethren, Our Father Onondie has told you to bring Home all the
Prisoners taken from hence by the five Nations, do not fail to do it. Then gave two Belts of Wampum. Brother Caijenquirago, What I havae now said, is con∣tained in the Paper which the Governour of Canàda gave me, which paper I deliver to your Excellency, and tell you withal, that I brought Letters to the Jesuite Milet at Oneyde, who was to inform us what is in the paper. His Excellency said then, Brethren, I reject this Belt of Wampum sent by the Governour of Canada, and will give you my Reasons for it, upon a Conference with the Sachims, or when I make my Reply to the whole five Nations. At a Meeting at Albany the 17th Day of August, 1694. Present His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, and those who were at the Meeting yesterday. SAdekanacktie song a long Song of Peace, and said, I shall now relate what hath passed between the Do∣wagànhaes, the Dionondades, and us, to whom we sent some Belts of Peace. They said, You had some prisoners of the Dionondades in your Castles, whom you sent Home to their Country with the Belts of Wampum from Caijenquirago and You
to speak of Peace, fearing to bring the Belts your selves, the War was so hot. And after you had sent the said Prisoners back, some of your People being out hunting, two were taken prisoners by the Dionondades, and brought to their Castles, but were civilly used, and not like prisoners. The Dionondades said to the two Prisoners that were brought thither, We are glad that we have an opportunity to speak to you face to face, the Sun has been so propitious to us to send us Home our prisoners. Then gave a few strings of Wampum. We are glad of this occasion to speak to you here. We have been drunk and distracted in waring one against the other. We give you now a Cordial and Potion to settle your heart, that there may be no more War between us. They gave a Belt of Wampum. We are glad to see you here, and that you tell us, that your Doors are open as far as Caijenquirago's House at New-York, that we may freely see through thither. They gave this belt of VVampum. Brethren, VVe are thankful that you have prepared a Room for us at Onondage, where we may speak freely to one another: Our whole Country is free for you to come and treat with us; we make room for you accor∣dingly. Then gave a Belt of VVampum. Brethren, VVe are glad that you invite us to your Country, q̄uite even to the House of Caijenquirago: All our River is rejoyced at it; be not afraid to come hither, you shall be freely admitted, without any molestation. Then gave another belt of VVampum. Brethren, VVe are thankful for your putting us in mind of what we have transacted formerly, That if any Mis∣chief
happened between us, we are to meet, and compose Differences. VVe are now met together to put a period to all our Mis-understandings, which is a matter of great Rejoycing to all our River. Then gave a belt of black Wampum. Brethren, Hearken to us, All the Nations between Us and New-York, we rent the Clouds asunder, and drive all Darkness out of the Sky, that the Sun of Peace may shine clear and bright over us all, without interruption. Then gave a stone Tobacco pipe, representing the Sun, of the breadth of the Seal of the Province. Brethren, We put the Hatchet into the Hands of the Kichtages, Twichtwiches and Odsirages, to war against the five Nations, but now we will go in three days to those Nations, and take the Hatchet out of their hand, (Then took hold of the middle of a stone Tobacco-pipe in form of a Hatchet) You Senekes are stupid Crea∣tures, we warn you in the mean time not to go hunting far from your Castles, that you be not hurt by the said Nations, and then accuse us. Then gave the Tobacco-pipe. I have done what passed between our two Indians and the Dionondades. Now I apply my self to your Ex∣cellency. Brother Caijenquirago, We desire the said far Indians may be admitted to come no further than the Senekes Country; for if they should come quite down so far as this place, they will see what à poor mean condition we are in, and be Spyes, and so discover our Nakedness; for these Indians are Allyes of the Governour of Canada.
His Excellency said, Brethren, Your Discourse has been very long, and consists of many Heads; it will require some time for my consideration. I will give you Notice when you shall attend for my Answer. A Conference held at a private House in Albany the 20th of August, 1694. Between his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, &c. and the Sachims of the five Nations. In the Presence of Coll. Andrew Hamilton, Governor of the Jarseys. The Council of the Province of New-York. And the Commissioners from Boston and Connecticut. Sadekanacktie, Speaker of the Indians. His Excellency said, I Do very well approve of what you said the first day, in renewing the Covenant Chain, which shall always be kept inviolably by me and all the English Plantations. Is Peace firmly concluded? Sadekanacktie, We have made Peace, provided you opprove of it;
and the reason of our going to Canada was to found the Governour of Canada's mind, because we had no body but Caijenquirago's People that went out to war with us agâinst the French, and it is impossible for us to be any longer the Barrier between the English and French. We have now brought our Enemies Answer, which is laid at Ca∣ijenquirago's feet, and refer the whole matter to your pru∣dent management. His Excellency, Why do you say you have made Peace, provided I approve of it? You know you have sent Sachims to Canada, contrary to your promise, and my express com∣mand; you have made a Peace without any proviso, you have delivered Hostages, and released Prisoners, and de∣clare that you are weary of the War, and not able to hold it longer, so that there is nothing left for me, but either to acquiese with what you have done, or to make war upon you. But since you have renewed the Covenant Chain, and while you preserve that inviolable, I shall (to use your own Expression) tye up my Hatchet from hurt∣ing you. I can make no Peace with the Governour of Cânada. Sadekanacktie, Why do you doubt our integrity and fidelity in keep∣ing the Covenant Chain firm▪ and inviolable with all our Brethren that àre linked therein? The least Member can∣not be touched, but the whole Body must feel and be sen∣sible; if therefore an Enemy hurt the least part of the Covenant Chain, we will joyn to distroy that Enemy; for we are one Head, one Flesh, and one Blood.
His Excellency, I shall also maintain the Peace with all those Nations of Indians which you have entered into Allyance with, upon your Engagement that they commit no acts of Ho∣stility against any of their Majesties Subjects. Sadekanacktie, We thought that our Treaty with the French would have had no success, because yoûr Excellency rejected the belt of Wampum which the Governour of Canada sent to your Excellency, to desire a Messenger may be sent thither; and since the Governour of Canada forbids us to bring any Message from you to him, we think it will be requisite that you should send some body to a neutral place, where there may be a Conference between the two Governments. His Excellency, I say again, what I said before, I cannot treat of Peace with the Governour of Canada, nor receive any Message from him, and therefore I did reject this belt of Wampum, as I do renounce any correspondence with him; the Go∣vernour of Canada hath put this fallacy upon you to bring this belt unto me, which he knew I could not receive. I find by what the Governour of Canada says, he intends to rebuild Cadaracqui. Sadekanacktie, We have told the Governour of Canada already; that he shall not rebuild Cadaracqui, and if we come to dis∣course him again, shàll tell him plainly, that we will not suffer it. His Excellency, You will do very well to hinder him from building that
Fort, or any other near the Lake; if you suffer it, 'twill be a breàch of the Covenant Chain, and bring a Slàvery upon your selves and Posterity. I am bound to make war, and prevent any Incroachment upon this Province; it is your Duty to give me notice, so soon as you héar of their motion that way, that I may bring Forces to obstruct them; and I expect that you shall joyn your Forces with me, otherwise all your pretences to the Renewal of the Co∣venant Chain are fallacious. Sadekanacktie, We are glad you renew that to us, we shall never suffer that place to be built, it has been Omnious to us, our people having been betrayed there. His Excellency, I have often càutioned you from giving credit to the Jesuit Milet, who has alwayes betrayed you, therefore you must suffer none of that Tribe of Jesuites to come into your Càstles. I hàve formerly warned you of this, and now you see the evil of it. It is not for your Honour, that you who are the antientest and most War-like Nations of Indians upon this Continent, should creep so low, as to go and ask a Peace from the Governour of Canada; I expect that the French Indians should likewise come and creep to me, and ask Peace, as you have basely done to the Governour of Canada. Sadekanacktie, Since you cannot send Messengers to Canada, we desire that you would write to the Governour of Canada, and also to the great King, your Master; and we desire the Governour of Canada write to his Master, That there may be Peace concluded in these parts.
His Excellency, Let me first see the French Indians come down and desire Peace of me, as you have gone to Count Frontimac, and then I will consider what may be proper for me to do. Sadekanacktie, You say, we have stoopt so low to the French for Peace, but before ever we went thither, they had sent two Mes∣sengers for us to our Castles. His Excellency, The French paper you brought from Canada, sayes, you bowed low to Count Frontimac, and stoopt as if he were your soveraign Prince, and made show of your Re∣pentance for all what you have done against him. Sadekanackti, The Governour of Canada need not to reflect upon us with his Writing, for how often has he sent Belts of Wampum to us by all Occasions, to make Peace with him? His Excellency, But he makes you his Children, and so you are liable to his correction, when he pleaseth; Sadekanacktie, It is only a Name that we have given him, because he calleth us Children, not that we own him as our Father. His Excellency, But I expect an Answer from you, that the French Indians should come to me, and desire to bury the Hatchet, as you have gone to Canada to do the like; it is for your Honour that you make them do it.
Sadekanacktie, The Praying Indians of Canada said to Dekânissore, whaen he was there, That they would hold the Peace fast which their Father, the Governour of Canada, had made with the five Nations, yea, as firm as they do the Christian Faith; and that sundry of them were ready to come hither a fighting, but were stopt upon Dekanissore's coming thither, and our Indian Prisoners, that were taken by the French and Indians, were set at liberty. How shall we behave our selves? If we do not go to Canada there will be no confirmation of the Peace; and if they come to us in our Country, and ask what our Gover∣nour says to the matter, What shall we say? His Excellency, It is possible they may keep the Peace with you, but if any of them commit the léast Outrage upon any of their Majesties Subjects in the Covenant Chain, you must be accountable for it; for the only Reason why I acquiese with this Peace you have made, contrary to my command and your own Engagements, is, because I am unwilling to make war against you, or spill your Blood; I rather chûse to forgive what is past, and advise you for the fu∣ture, that you may not be brought into Slàvery, which is by keeping a strict and vigilent Eye upon the deceitful French, and their Indians, as when they were in War with you. Sadekanacktie, We thank you for your caution about the French, and desire you and the Neighbouring Collonies may take care of this place, that it may be fortified, least they should surprize it.
His Excellency, It shall be done. The Garrison shall be secured against all the force of Canada. The Eastern Indians have fallen upon New-England, notwithstanding the Peace so lately made with that Collony, who are part of the Covenant Chain, and have spilt much Blood; you must therefore consider of a way to make them bury their Hatchet, and not to war upon our Brethren of New-England. Afternoon the same day. The Sachims came together to give an Answer to the Proposal concerning the Eastern Indians. Sadekanacktie Speaker. Sadekanacktie, We cannot send to the Eastern Indians, having no Men fit for that purpose, but being now bound to Canada, will tell the Governour of Canada to charge these Eastern Indians to lay down their Hatchet; for if we go first to the Eastern Indians, they can do nothing without the Governour of Canàda, and that would but prolong time, therefore it will be best to do it directly by the Governour of Canada. His Excellency, You must not think that ever Count Frontimac will cause the Eastern Indians make Peace, you must there∣fore think of some other way to oblige them to lày down the Hatchet; for the Governour of Canada must not be depended upon: You will always find him unconstant, as hitherto.
Sadekanacktie, We desire to know whether we shall speak to the far Indians, the Dionondades at Canada, if we shall see them there, (which we expect) since they are the Governour of Canada's Indians, or that we pursue the method we have begun, and speak to them in their own Country? His Excellency, Though you have Peace with the French and their Indians, you must not expect that it will be lasting, if the French Indians should continue to do Mischief to the Brethren of New-England. As for Peace with the far Indians, I leave you to your own Methods, with this cau∣tion, that you be not rocked a sleep by it. Sadekanacktie, We desire that Goods may be sold cheap when those far Indians come; then this place will be desirable, like a fair Maid that has many Lovers, so all people will flock hither; also, that those Indians that come with Arnout, may be civilly entertained, then they will settle amongst us. His Excellency, I doubt not but they will find content in the Rate of Goods. The Peace made sometime à go between the Indians to the Eastward and New-England, did no ways hurt the Covenant Chain; for those Indians were at that time in Peace with you of the five Nations. And as for what you say of Chavaleer Deaux, it is nothing but French fallacy, he was not set at liberty by the people of New-Englaâd, (as I am informed) but broke Prison, and was pursued.
Sadekanacktie, When we come to our Country, we will consult what to do about the far Indians; and when we come to Canada we will speak to the Praying Indians to come hither and make Peace with your Excellency; we wish we had one that could write all what hath passed, but will, never the less, bring an account to your Excellency of all what occurs. His Excellency, It behoves you to be upon your guard, notwithstand∣ing the Peace, to keep your Gates shut at Night, and good Scouts out, and if there be any party, either French or Indians approaching, forth-with give me an account, ând frequently correspond with me. I will strengthen this Garrison, and secure it from all attempts of the Enemy. As for your meeting at Onnondage, I am not against it, neither did I ever oppose your consulting of your own private Affairs, yet I cannot send up any to your Meeting at Onnondage, to consult of those Affairs which concern the whole Covenant Chain, wherein so many Provinces are included, whereof you own me to be the Head. I always expect to be Personally present on such Occasions. I will renew the Covenant Chain to morrow, and give you some Presents from their Majesties of Great Brittain. Sadekanacktie, We are obliged to your Excellency for your good Advice, not to be too secure, but to keep watch and look out, which we promise to do; and if we see any
Troops of French and Indians, we have but one Eye and one Ear, whatever we see and hear, your Excellency shall see and hear forth-with, we will immediately acquaint your Excellency. And since it is probable that there may be some amongst us that wiil give the French an account of all, we desire that your Excellency in your publick Discourse to morrow will pass it by. His Excellency, The Senekes of late have sent a Belt of Wampum to the Indians of Delaware River, requiring them to take ûp the Hatchet of War, and fight along with them, which frightened those peaceable Indians, that live among a peaceable People, who are no Warriours. And since they are in my Government of Pennsilvania, I charge the Senekes not to frighten them, but to let them alone. Sadekanacktie, We know nothing of any such Belt sent by us, pro∣bably those Indians that are fled from us, and live upon the Snsquahannah River may have sent such a Message. His Excellency, I injoyn you, in renewing the Peace with those Indians, to let them know, that they must not disturb the Dela∣ware Indians, nor the Inhabitants of the Province of Pennsilvania. Sadekanacktie, We think we have discoursed of all matters, and those things we made no Response to, must be taken for granted. We desire that your Excellency will begin early to morrow to speak, and give such Presents as you will be∣stow
upon us; for we will send a Post to the Senekes Country to prepare all things for our Journey and Nego∣tiation with the far Indians and Canada. At a Meeting at Albany, the 22th Day of August, 1694. Present, His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, &e. Coll. Andrew Hamilton, Governor of the Jarseys. The Council of New-York, Commissioners from Boston and Connecticut, The Sachims and Indians of the five Nations. His Excellency, BRETHREN, I Am now to repeat in publick part of what passed in my private Conference yesterday with your Sachims. I do approve of what you said to me, in renewing the Covenant Chain; I shall alwayes inviolably preserve it on my part, but must declare my dislike to your proceedings towards the Peace, and do appeal to the wisest of your Sachims, whether you have not broke it on your parts; but since you confess your error, and say you are weary of the War, and solemnly engage to be stestfast to the Covenant Chain, I am unwilling to pursue you with
Rigour, but rather acquiese, though at the same time you must allow we have alwayes made your Quarrels our own, and espoused the War you had against the French of Canada, in friendship to you, when the Crowns of England and France were in perfect Peace. Brethren, The Reasons for my rejecting the Belt pre∣tended to be sent by the the Governour of Canada, I hàve given already to the Sachims: I shall only say here, I cannot make peace with him. But as it is to your shame and dis-honour, who are the Antientest ànd most War-like Nations of Indians, to have bowed so low to the Governour of Canada, and ask his Peace, as from a Father, so you ought to do your selves that Justice ànd Honour, to cause the Praying Indians of Canada to come and ask me to bury my Hatchet against them. Dekanissore did well and prudently to tell the Governor of Canada, That you will not admit him to rebuild Cadaracqui (which is his intention) If you suffer the French once to settle a Garrison there, or near the Lake (be their pretences never so plausible) they will bring you ànd your Posterity into perpetual Bondage and Slavery. Brethren, You must unite your force and oppose this Design; I shall be ready to defeat it, if you will give me timely Notice, ànd your Assistance. I do not pretend to hinder your antient custom of Meeting at Onnondage, to consult of your own Affairs, only when Peace and War is treated of, I am obliged
to be present, and expect these Treaties shall be held at Albany, where the Covenant Chain had its first Birth. Brethren, That Peace which New-England some time a go made with the Eastérn Indians, did no wayes hurt the Covenant Chain, for these Indians were then in Peace with the five Nations. These Indians have lately taken up the Hatchet again, and shed much Blood in that Province, who are Mem∣bers of the Covenant Chain, you must therefore consider of a way speedily to snatch the Hatchet out of their hands, that all the Covenant Chain may enjoy Peace. Chavaleer Deaux was not (as you alledge) set at liberty by the People of New-England, but made his escape to Canada. I shall take care that the far Indians, to come with Arnout, be civilly treated, and have their Majesties Protection. Brethren, You hàvē made a Peace which cannot last, if you suffer the French or any of their Indians to com∣mit the least Outrage or Act of Hostility against any of the Subjects of my great Master and Mistriss, the King and Queen of England, I must take up Arms for their Defence. I have a few words of Advice to give you. You are going to Canada, yoû must not trust too many of your Sachims there, it is too great a stock to venture at once.
You must not, during their absence, suffer your Young Men to depart from your Castles. Yon must not hearken to the Counsel of the Jesuite Milet, nor suffer any of that Tribe to live amongst you. And you must look out, and bé sure give me timely Notice of the French approaching to rebuild Cada∣racqui, or marching against any of their Majesties Pro∣vinces, that I may move with force to repel them. And now, Brethren, I do hereby renew the Covenant Chain, in the Names of their Majesties of Great Britain, on behalf of their Subjects of New-Englaâd, Connecti∣cut, New-York, East and West-Jarsey, Pennsilvania, Maryland and Virginia, and all other their Majesties Dominions on this Main of America; and I lay down this Belt of Wampum as a Seal. Brethren, You have declared me the Head of the Co∣venant Chain; I do declare that I will inviolably defend and preserve it, to the outmost drop of my Blood, while you on your parts perform your agreement. And in the Name of their Majesties, the great King and Queen of England, and for their Majesties Subjects of New-Eng∣land, Connecticut, New-York, East and West-Jarsey, Pennsilvania, Maryland and Virginia, lay down these Presents.
The Address of the River Indians, to his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, &c. at Albany, August the 18th, 1694. PRESENT His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, &c. Coll. Andrew Hamilton, Governour of East and West-Jarsey. Of Their Majesties Council for the Province of New-York. Coll. Stephen Cortland, Coll. Nicholas Bayard, Coll William Smith, Chidley Brooke, Esq Major Peter Schuyler, A Sachim Speaker. Father, IN the time of Old, we River Indians were a strong Nation, but are much decayed by the War, and are now become a weak mean People, as you see we are, in∣somuch that we dare not shake Hand with your Excellency, Then gave two Beaver Skins. Father, We are come hither as your Children, accor∣ding to our Duty; we have been Obedient to all your Commands, which Major Schuyler can witness, and
shall continue to be Obedient, and firm to the Govern∣ment; We never have been ordered out upon occasion of any incursions of the Enemy, but we were always ready. Then gave some more Beaver. His Excellency Answered, I do accept of the Testimony of your Obedience kindly, as if your Presents were a Thousand times more: you shall not want the Protection of this Government, which shall be able to secure you from any force that can be brought against you. I shall, before I go, give some Testimony of that Respect my great Màster and Mistriss, the King and Queen, bear to them that aré Obedient Subjects.
The Answer which his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, &c. gave to the River Indians at Albany, August the 22th, 1694. Present, His Excellency Benjamín Fletcher, &c. Coll. Addrew Hamilton, Governour of the Jarseys. Of Their Majesties Council for the Province of New-York. Coll. Stephen Cortland, Coll. Nicholas Bayard, Coll. William Smith, Chidley Brooke, Esq Major Peter Schuyler, The River Indians, His Excellency, I Am informed, that one of your People this last Winter was accidentally killed by the Slea of a Christian, which drove over him upon the Ice unàwares. I give this bundle of Wampum to wipe off that Blood. Children, I have heard a good Character of you, that you have behaved your selves like obedient Children and good Subjects to the great King and Queen of England: I charge you to keep a good VVatch abroad, that you be able to advertise me of any approach of the Enemy;
and if you find any skulking Parties, you are to distroy them. And further, you are to obey such Orders and Commands as you shall receive from time to time from the Commander in chief of this Garrison of Albany, in my absence. I hear, that when you go a hunting, before you come Home to your Castles, you slip aside into New-England, ànd there get drunk, and squander away all what you have got, then come home poor to your Families, and become a burthen to your Neighbours, let me hear no more of this. I renew the Covenant Chain with you, and promise you all Protection from this Government, I hope you will behave your selves so as to deserve it, and be good Souldiers, and keep firm to the Covenant Chain. And in the Name of their Majesties of Great Britain, I lay down these Presents.
A Conference had between his Excellency Benjamin Fltcher, &c. and the Mahikanders or lower River Indians, and Showanno's or far Indians, at Kingstone in the County of Ʋlster, the 28th of August, 1694. PRESENT His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, &c. Coll. Andrew Hamilton, Governour of East and West-Jarsey. Of their Majesties Council for the Province of New-York. Coll. Stephen Courtland, Coll. Nicholas Bayard, Coll. William Smith, Chidley Brook, Esq William Nicoll, Esq Mahikanders and far Indians. The Sachim of the Mahikinders Speaker. FATHER; YOU are Governour of this Province of New-York, some of your Christian People, that undertook this tedious Journey with us, last Year, are killed by the way
by oûr Enemies, for which we are very sorry; some also of the Mahikanders and far Indians are likewise killed. I now wipe off your Tears for thàt Blood. Then gave two or three Beavers. Father, We have had great sorrow for the loss of these Men which were killed, which is now wiped off. We have had great difficulty to bring the Showannoes and far Indians to see your Excellency, and desire shelter under your Wings, which will wipe off all the sorrow from us. We desire your Protection. Then gave a few more Beaver. Father, We expected a great Hunting, but have got little more than Blows from an Enemy that pursued us, and with a small share of what we have got, we are come to renew the Covenant Chain of Peace with you, and desire we may be as one Heart, one Blood and one Soul with the English, the Mohaques, River Indians, and all the Indians of this Government. Then gave a few more Beaver. His Excellency, Children, I am sorrowful for the loss of the Christians and Indians of either Nation; you are as wellcome to me as Children to a Father. I shall alwayes protect you, while you behave your selvés well, and take you and the far Indians into the Covenant Chain, and be as tender of you as a Father of his Children.
Children, If you had come to me earlier, before I came from New-York or Albany, I had been better able to signifie my Affection to you, than now, I am upon my Return from my Journey, having disposed of the Presents I had provided for the present time. I give you this bundle of White Wampum as a Token that I receive you into the Covenant Chain, for the Province of New-York, and all their Majesties Governments in America. And you must look upon all these as your Friends and Brethren. Children, I do not question but you remember, that when you were last year at Albany, Major Schuyler was kind to you, and let you have things needful to fit you out for this Journey; I therefore expect, that now you will take care to re-pay him. Children, If hereafter you are set upon, or interrupt∣ed in your Hunting, by any Enemy, so soon as you can give me notice of it, I shall be ready to come and assist you with Men and Arms, to repell àny Force that shall endeavour your hurt. The Sachim, Father, Being this time so harrassed with an Enemy, in our Journey, we were interrupted from Hunting, we are not now able to pay Major Schuyler, but we
expect three hundred far Indians to follow, and come up quickly after us, and when they come, we intend to repày him honestly, for what he supplyed us. His Excellency, It is well, I will order some Presents for you at Albany. I bid you Farewell. FINIS.
