B1540 R16276 12159677 55266
A Testimony of Truth AGAINST All the Sowers of Dissention, Strife and Discord, amongst the People of God, by what Practice, or under what Pre∣tence soever. Being intended principally for Wales, yet else-where to be disposed by Friends, as in the Counsel of the Lord they shall be directed; that wheresoever any have made use of my Name upon such an account, it may be ordered to do its service. Also its desired, that all they whom it chiefly concerns, into whose hands it may come, that they would read it through with Pati∣ence and Moderation, and judge of it in the righteous Judgment of Truth. Didst thou not sow good Seed in thy field? from whence then hath it Tares? He said unto them, An Enemy hath done this, Mat. 13.27, 28. And the Lord God said unto the Serpent, because thou hast done this, thou art cursed above all Cattel, and above every Beast of the field. Gen. 3.14. Here you may see who is the Father of all the Sowers of evil Seeds. London, Printed in the Year, 1667.
A Testimony of Truth AGAINST All the Sowers of Dissention, Strife and Discord, amongst the People of God, by what Practice, or under what Pre∣tence soever, &c. My dear Friends, WHereas I understand (by a Letter from Wales, which came to my hand) that some bad People in those parts (who are led by a contrary spirit, of prejudice and en∣mity, into marks and distinctions of Separation, from the faithful Friends and People of God, in pursuance of J. P's Law, and Curse, by keeping on the Hat in Prayer, and the like, in opposition to the pure Truth, and them that live and walk in it) have lately made use of my name, as if they had some encourage∣ment or strength through me, to carry on a design of Division, Se∣paration, and Opposition, against the faithful People and Servants of the Lord. The which being mentioned (or as it were laid to my charge) more then once, I could do no less (in the behalf of the Truth, and my own Innocency herein) but bear a faithful and publick Testimony against all such things, expressions or practices whatsoever, tending to division amongst the Lords People, and also against that unruly spirit from whence any such fruits and effects proceed, as having no Unity with it. For the Lord knoweth (and I
doubt not but many hundreds can testify) that I am not a man of strife, or one causing division or discord among the People of God, but on the contrary, greatly delighting in Peace and Unity. And for this cause do I labour and travel in soul and body, that true Love, Mercy and Peace, may daily increase and abound in, among them, that the Dominion of the righteous Seed all may witness, (that have any true breathings begotten in them after the living God, and the knowledge of his Salvation) whose Garment is with∣out Seam or Rent from the top to the bottom. For I can truly say in the uprightness of my heart, That I have no greater Joy, than to see and feel my Unity in the pure Truth and unfaigned Love of God, with them that walk therein, and that Strife and Discord is an Abomination to me. Therefore, far be it from me (for ever) to Joyn hands with such, or any way encourage them that delight to sow discord among brethren, by any such practice (as before mentioned) or under any pretence whatsoever; but I do deny, and testifie against all whomsoever, or wheresoever, that shall at any time mention me, or make use of my Name upon such an account. For the Lord knows (who searcheth my heart) That it is the Innocent Seed (in whom guile was never found, which hath long suffered, and been oppres∣sed under the bondage of corruption) that my Soul daily travels for, that it might be raised up into dominion, over all the contrary to reign, whose right alone it is, and for the refreshing and strength∣ning thereof in the least babe; and not at all to encourage or strengthen that in any, which doth it oppress. For I know right well, the Lord hath determined (and already begun) to break the Op∣pressour of his Seed in pieces, in the particular and in the general. And he that gathereth not with Christ the Seed, (and to him who is the Life and the Truth) scattereth abroad, from the Truth and from the Life, and so from the Unity of it, which is kept in the Bond of Peace. And therefore I further testify, that if at any time, either from my Words, Declaration or Writing, any have so wrested or taken them, as to strengthen the wrong part (in which lodgeth the pre∣judice) as to oppose (or make a party against) the Truth, and them that walk in it (as I perceive some have done) that such a thing was not at all the intent of them, nor in the thoughts of my
heart, as the Lord knoweth: Though I do acknowledge, that about five years ago, in the Prison at Newgate, I did speak some words unseasonable, as in the behalf of J. P. and unadvised, not so clearly understanding the difference between Friends and him, (who kept many things from our knowledge, in tenderness to Truth, and in hope to have recovered him out of the Snares of the Enemy) which words I spake in reply, and (indeed, at that in∣stant) in opposition to some words of J. B. but I soon after saw I had not done well, in so doing, and I consented to the Judgment of the Lord in my heart against them, and that hasty inconsiderate part from whence they did proceed, though it was as in a kind of tenderness to him, upon the account of his Sufferings, which I (and many more) did judge had been very great. But J. B's. words are fulfilled, That he had made a Division amongst the Lords people or to that effect; and time, and the effects hath made it manifest; which hath been so great and wide, through him, among them that profess the same Truth, and the burthen thereof felt so heavy, through the stumbling of so many people; that I have said in my heart, in the true and living sence of the presence of the Lord, That it had been good for him (and many more) that he had hever been born; and this I write not in the least tincture of prejudice, or enmity against any person whatsoever, but in the true Love and Life of God, who is blessed for ever: Though I am sensible, that some may say, (as I once thought) that this is a hard saying, con∣cerning one that suffered so much, and bore such a Testimony up∣on the account of Truth, and especially from thee, who hast been tender toward him, and never appeared in such a sharp manner as this against him, and his practises before, to speak so of him (now he is dead and gone, and cannot answer for himself) as Christ did of Judas, which betrayed him, and went and hanged himself. As in Answer to this, I never did delight to upbraid any man, or to lay open the nakednes of any, if with safety, in a clear conscience, I could possibly cover it; but rather (if I may so speak) have been too favourable in that respect; but the Lord knoweth my end and aim in all things (to whom I do appeal.) And as for that which is dead, I have little to say, one way or other; I look not at the per∣son of any, either dead or living, in that respect; though I know there are vessels of Honour, and of Dishonour, which are different;
but its that which lives in them makes the difference. And Judas (people may say) is dead, and Cain, and Nimrod, and Esau; and why do we mention them now they are dead and gone, and rake them up out of their Graves, as I. P. said; foreseeing by the Wit∣ness of God what would follow, though he was gone from it: And I testifie, in the Fear, holy Power, Name and Authority of the Lord, that Judas, nor Cain, never did so much hurt and mis∣chief amongst the Lords people, as he hath done, as to the divert∣ting of the minds of many from the Truth, and laying stumbling∣blocks in the way of others, which would have been easily gather∣ed into the Love of the Truth, and Fellowship of his Children. And Judas had part of the Ministy, and eat in the same Dish with the Disciples, who were the true Ministers of Christ, and yet he lifted up his heel against them; as he hath done, in a greater mea∣sure: And as for his Sufferings, I leave it, as not worth mention∣ing, in comparison of the unrighteousness which hath proceeded from him, and the wickedness which was in his heart: for I can produce a Letter of his, which I lately found by accident (which I never saw before) which I do believe, that Judas (nor his bre∣thren, before mentioned) did ever write the like, which is Abo∣minable, and a shame to mention; yea, the very Heathen (that know not God) would blush to hear it; against which (at the read∣ing and consideration of the ground, and effects it would produce, if such a thing should be received, as a Principle among people) the dreadfull power, and holy zeal of the Lord, did arise in my heart, beyond expression, even against the Root that bore it, as an unclean depth of Atheism, and Ranterism, as ever I heard of in all my dayes; the which had I formerly known that such a thing would have proceeded from him, I could have done no less then have bon a publick testimony against him long ago: But however, its not to late to obey the motion of the Pure God, when he doth require it, for the Truths sake, and the sakes of some, who have ignorantly followed him in that character of division before menti∣oned, who may happily loath, and detest it, and testifie against him, and it, in their heart and practice, when they shall hear, con∣sider, and believe these things concerning the Author of it; who gave it forth as a Law, under the penalty of a curse. Though some there are, so far given up to the spirit of Enmity, that it will
be very hard (if ever) for them to come into the one holy peace∣able Spirit of Truth, and Love unfeigned, in which the Saints Fellowship is, (and ever was) which, if they repent not in time, will perish for ever in their gainsaying. And therefore I exhort all, who have any tenderness in them to∣wards God and his Truth, to beware of letting in Prejudice, or Enmity against any, or to slight such as God hath blessed with his Everlasting spiritual Blessings; but rather look well to their own goings, and keep clean hands, and shut their eyes from seeing of evil, that they may dwell with the Everlasting Burnings; for there is a Ge∣neration, that would be plucking out (or at least espying) a Mote in their brothers Eye, even while there remains a Beam in their own; and such the Son of God calls Hypocrites, whose hearts assuredly Fearfulness will surprise in a Day of Tryal. And therfore, I say again, in the Love and Fear of the Lord, take heed of entertain∣ing the least thought of that Root of Bitterness, which will defile, and hath defiled many, but judge it out, in its first appearance; for it tends first to seperate from the feeling and enjoyment of the blessed presence of the Lord, by which the Soul is refreshed, and nourished, and has dominion over its Enemies; and so from that Life in which the Saints Unity stands; and so from having Fellow∣ship with them; and so professing the same Truth, without the en∣joyment of it, and acceptance with it, makes such, like Cain, who envied his Brother; and therefore said John, Let us love one another, not as Cain, who slew his Brother; here he mentions Cain, in that day, upon such an occasion, as an example, knowing that a little prejudice would eat like a Canker; and said James, What a great matter a little fire kindleth? and will yet kindle, if it be not quenched, by the Water of the Life of the Lamb, which was slain from the Foundation of the World, (that lies in wickedness) in which Life is our Fellowship, which gives us dominion over all the Beasts of the Field, and Raging Waves of the Sea, which cast up mire and dirt, and cannot rest: But in Christ, the Everlasting Seed, all the upright in heart have Peace, which God, by his migh∣ty Hand and Arm is exalting over all, that Truth and Righteous∣ness may have the Dominion, and Kingdom in the hearts of peo∣ple, that he may Reign whose Right it is, and all the contrary be subdued and trodden under foot for ever, and every imagination,
that would rise in opposition against him, be confounded; and every Weapon that is formed, and every Tongue that riseth up against him, may be destroyed for ever, that his Government may be from Sea to Sea, and the knowledge of his Glory cover the Earth: This is the work which the Lord hath begun, and he will accomplish it, and bring it to pass, that Everlasting Praises, Ho∣nour, and Glory, may be given to his Great and Glorious Name, over all, for ever and ever, for he is worthy. So this short Testimony in the Truth, and for its sake, was on me to give forth, and to clear my own Innocency, that the Truth may appear, to the satisfaction of all faithfull Friends, and tender People, where any such Report shall come, concerning me, in this Particular; and also to discourage that part or spirit in any, that lusteth to Envy and Prejudice, against the Truth, and them that walk in it. This 7th moneth, 1667. William Bailey. THE END.
