B1681 10776051 45814
A NEVV LIGHT-HOUSE AT MILFORD FOR The Great Pilots of England, for their safety, as well to avoyd the unremov∣able Rock Eliot from their doore, HERE. As to beware of the Bishop and his Clerks, neer their Harbour THERE. Printed for the AUTHOR. 1650.
To every Individual Member of Englands Supream Authority. Honoured Sir, IF I had thought it possible and convenient for one of my strength and distance to have made a particular account of the ensuing RETURNE to every Member of your great Assembly, I would have sent it with their names to their lodgings, because it doth as neerly concerne them as their rest and safety there; but finding that Taske too great, and my acquaintance so little with any, but a few of them, I am bold to single but some Gentlemen, who doe either know me, or that have ever spoken a word in favour of a businesse so just, or that have been abused to a beliefe of the contrary, or in whom I have observed by some oculr experience, that they will countenance an honest cause, though it be weake, and smitten to the ground. That they will plead for it in formâ pauperis, and that will lend their abilities of grace and nature, to extricate and free the simplicity thereof from all the winding intricacies of subtle adversaries, and the powerfull secret knittings together of crafty men. I am importunately bold to intreat you, Honoured Sirs, for the Commonwealth of Englands sake, and for the oppressed Commons sake, against all Eliotizing monopolizers, and against such as doe ingrosse great friends, and good causes, to make sale of both againe, that you would offer to Mr. Speaker these my humble observations, and a few of my ma∣ny sad experiences, together with the summe of my SLOW RETURNE, following next unto this my Addresse to you. As also the mixture of my fears and sgs there∣upon; That, Recriminations among fellow servants, when they be loud, do claime to be taken notice of by such Honourable Courts, and persons, as doe prize their Honour at any good rate, for when such attendants do throw foule aspersions upon each other, and in their Masters presence in the Pallace, or if it be cast abroad at their doores, or in the Ly, some unseemly spots of those Aspersions doe usually fall upon the Parliament Robes of their Masters, both in the evill eye, and by the byting tongue of such beholders as doe maligne (and to others it can be no pleasing sight) and that doe wish ill to the weale of that FAMILY; especially if that FAMILY be politicall and great, not Oeconomicall and lesse, or if that Family be a COMMONWEALTH as yours is, not a Kingdome as yours was, there will be many evill eyes indeed, that will fountaine out into streames f laughing and rejoycing teares at such a sight, to observe so grosse and publicke a discovery of crosse humours and dangerous diseases in your body politique, your New Common∣wealth; diseases that be so dangerously intricate, and contrary to each other, that what doth heale a lesse distemper, is the heightning of a greater danger, if greater heed be not taken by MEN of greatest skill. There be notes taken, Honoured Sirs, by such as doe constantly pay you, and the Commonwealths REPRESENTATIVE, greatest Tribute of duty and of sincere love to
their just proceedings, and by my selfe also who have a full note book, and who have gi∣ven up my life as freely, and is as neerely bound up with yours in the publique adven∣tures (let Mr. Eliot libell) as any one man in England; and from those notes thus taken, I doe observe unto you (and I know the wisdome of the STATE doe more then strongly suspect it) that the Parliament have now a more mixed number of witers then ever they had; some foolishly thinking that the COMMONWEALTH is dying, and therefore do catch what they can (that's Mr. Eliots case;) it is thought he would not have made such a simple bargaine else, in buying and selling 10000l. worth of sus∣pected Debenters so easily, if he were not of that dangerous opinion, having so much money, and having had so good trading. Others know, fse enough, if they be outed of their present imployment, yet they have learning and knowledge to give new intelligence to new visitors and inquisitors, when times should alter; and they know too where, to be entertained, though for the when, they are to seek. Sir, I do beseech you to inquire whether Mr. Eliot did ever make a motion against Judge Jenkins he hath made many against those that were judged, and to be judged to death by this Judge I do undertake Mr. Eliot may have ample testimony of his good affe∣ction to the State from the Parliaments greatest enemies in Wares, and from some that be fled into France too; for Sir, hath he turned so oft for nothing? And hath he been their Solicitor Generall for nothing? And hath he brought them off from their malignity for a bare Fee. Indeed Gentlemen, he is not such a fool neither. He doth not move  nothing; a collop will not serve his turne, though he libels that it may serve the  of others. Sir, This pit is deep, and there be very few (as have wives and children) that dare go thus far after him. I dare goe thus far, and I would undertake to bring it before the Sun (but that I cannot be at the charge) that Mr. Eliots good affection to the State is (no simple, but) a very mixt and a compounded good affection to the State, and that it hath in it, more of revenge upon the Parliaments friends for beating him, and his friends, when he was an active enemy to them, then it hath of intirenesse to the Parlia∣ment, by whose power he was beaten; Revolters, or not Revolters, the case is all one with him; such as would not stir from their loyalty, by the first part of his cunning, shall starve for their loyalty in the height of his practice. And Sir, I can point you out the prbatum est, or else let me be a libeller too, and be punished for one, and let him escape, and be rewarded for all the good affection of us both. And Sir, there be other spectators that will be at your door too, let your Wisdome doe what it can to prevent them; and those have kindred, and friends, and businesse to doe there; and they can read, Print, and spy out the differences between us, before any of YOU have leasure to read thus far; these will speak loud enough what they see, and will speake worst of the best, and ill of all, and of your GREAT ASSEMBLY too worst of all, when they get them out of the Lobby, and they will have the boldnesses to doe it in Mr. Eliots company too. O how will the game please your enemies, to see your wounded friends (be they sound or rotten, it matters not) bleeding in the Presse one against another! their names putrifying in Print! their estates wasting by delayes in judgement! and no Physitian or Chyrurgion provided to stench their wounds bleeding▪ nor yet to wash away the blood tainting, nor yet to squeeze out the corruption spreading and anoying; no, nor yet any Judge in readinesse to punish the offender in foure or five yeares attending at their doors, O how many bleeding Patients have swooned and sunke there, when but a touch would
have cured them of their evill! doth not the strong man rejoyce in his strength, that he is so  to oppresse? And will he not turne Atheist in one halfe turning more (if he be not there already) seeing he can thrive so by turning, and falshood? Must not the weakest to the wall, and dye of his wounds? Alas, Honoured Sir, who shall pay for the cure of truth and loyalty thus wounded by treachery and falshood? Truly Sir, there are not a couple of such poor undone friendlesse wretches in the Commonwealth of England as these be, viz. The truth of things, and loyalty of persons. And what, Sir, if truth (as it is very bold) should be so daring as to strike out the teeth, and slit the nose, and put out the very eyes of falshood by the weapon of a true discovery. Indeed, Sir, Falshood is rich (speaking truth would make it dye a begger, that it knows false enough) and by the helpe of Truths Apes (glozing, and faining, and counterfeiting) it hath gotten mary friends, good men! great men! and doth it not know the way to get Ars to put in Arti∣ficiall eyes, the likenesse of a nose, and another row or rows of counterfeit teeth, and these they find will serve their turne for a time, though truth and its discovery are resolute, not to give over untill these counterfeit Mock-truths be knocked off again, and for ever, or the will lye by it for ever, untill judgement relieve her, and send falshood to its owne place, to the lower Gate-house, to the lowest of all dark houses and Gate-houses. In the mean time, I would to God, there were a standing Committee to inquire speedily into things, whether they were naturall or artificiall, it would not be a peny charge to the Commonwealth, to put the saddle upon the right horse. Sir, by all these hintings upon Mr. Eliots name, your Wisdome will soon finde, that there is such an unmannerly contest, as formerly there hath been between Mr. Eliot and others; so now there is such another between that Squire and my selfe, a Minister in Hampshire, Mr. Eliot remembers the place in his late Legend. I was bold not long since to wish well, that some truth of this Squires great falshood to the Commonwealth might be taken notice of by the STATE (and it seems the man took cognizance of it in the same libell) because truly Sir, I doe know him and his wayes (I wish I had but the tith of his acquaintance, and credit to be beleeved in behalfe of the State, though I had never a sheafe of tythe more in the Country, nor yet a peny for it; yet I comfort my selfe with this still, that many precious truths have beene brought to light by men of no credit, obscured men at first. Sir, Indeed, I do know the ma, as well as (if not better then) any man in England, not excepting the woman that gave him suck; I have endured hard travel, and have been at some cost to trace him. Hee againe for my complaints of him, libels against me, but it is to be understood, it is upon the plea of se defendendo. Felons when they be pursued, doe the same thing, though they make not the same plea: Honest men, who will adventure to catch them for the Collop of 10 li. given them by the State out of the Commonwealths Treasury, are upon their perill upon that oft-bloody plea of se defendendo made and done upon the prosecutor by the felon; by this and no other instinct (for Mr. Eliot was quiet enough before, neare five years together) This Gentleman doth now take up as much dirt as he can hold in both hands, and throws it at me; that I might runne in the other sid of the hedge, because hee hath taken the high wayes, where is dirt enough, and when he hath stood with whips and wands (like some notable great, rich, crafty begger) these five years, whipping none but such as whipped him most when he was a Rebel against the State, and of the Array to keep Tyranny on foot still, and his dirt he keeps to throw on me, and such as my selfe, because he could not have me quartered by the judgement of Judge Jenkins, and Judge Turner, when the Earle of Carbery, (it was the spight of him and others▪) snatched me away from their cruel, civil,
to his mild military power, being then Commander in cheife for his late Majesty. (In∣deed the Earl told me in his garden at Golden grove that he was Maligned much, for fa∣voring me so much, and could do it no longer for the cry that was against me, where∣in Mr. Eliot made not the least noyse) so that it may bee taken for a made circumstance, (if it be admitted for a proofe) that Mr. Eliots good affection to the State, (the Lord free them from many more such good affections, as his will appeare to bee, when the deepes be discovered) was not good affection, God knoweth, but REVENGE on those that served the State, and had good affection before him, as appears by the destruction he still workes upon those that could never be driven by all his strong breaths, and Ropes, and Gies, unto Revolt, by an unheard▪ of Treachery, and by many powerfull Impulsives. But revolters are served in their kind (did I plead for, or justifie them? for shame ) but they have answered the Law you have for it, ONE was shot, M. Eliot knowes it. I am sorry he was principled no better. I did once suffer wrong by that man (Mr. Eliot knows it) but it was upon Mr. Eliots Law-brothers report to wrong me of what mony I had layd out, cheifly by his letter. I with Mr. Eliot were better swayed by better ends then the shot man was. I feare it much. O ye depths, be you disco∣vered! And bring ye, out of your treasures Mr Eliots constant good affection to the State! And all his cordiall ends for their honour! ye must render these things at last, if ye do it not now, O ye depths! Sir, I did say, Mr. Eliot did throw dirt upon me with both hands, yet this I must say also of his Printed boldnesse, that it had many blushing and cleansing Parentheses in it: He doth a little hold down his head in these expressions of his, HE DID HEAR SAY, and FOR OUGHT IT DID APPEAR, and HE IS CONFIDENT &c. that these and these things were true of Beech. (For I have seen his legend since the penning of that which followeth next. I could give you sir, a true Pedigrea, how that the REPORTS he speakes of were Maggots of his own, and his uncertain Ally brothers blowings, in their severall and changeable postures, between the late King and the present Praliament. And for what cause their breath became so strong, I can tell too, as little to their credit as any thing that can be spoken of unthankfulnesse, and unworthiness, and unfaithfulnesse: (on∣ly I shall say little of the dead) and I need not go to Wales to prove it neither, it will be proved betweene Westminster and Lambeth, besides the Hands and Testimonies, I have to shew that will passe the approbation of any Court or Committee, as an abster∣sive from his dirt. That of my conjunction with Sir John Pennington will appear non-sense. And then againe, Mr. Armiger Warner (the States trusty Messenger) calls Mr. Eliot Knave, because he hath the originall Warrants in his hands, which Mr. Eliot calls counterfeits, and that Beech imployed Mr Warner. And for the other libelling bu∣sinesse, in such a message at the Committee for complaints, Mr. Eliot did not thinke (when he libelled) how filthily that will smell against him, when I should be provided to stir it. This I affirm at present, He went out of that Committee as red (neare the matter) as the Scarlet cloake which he had then upon him, Scarlet, that was most un∣suitable for his discovered unworthinesse. Sir, I am bold without any Ifs, or Ands, and without any ambiguous or shifting Parentheses; and I doe hereby accuse Mr▪ Eliot (in this Bill) of as much falsehood to the State, as 8 or 10000li. and their honour amounts unto. And I do know, that his longer stay at the Parliament door, is as dangerous to particular men, as the ill successe of al good friends and causes (within his reach, and within the precincts of his unlimited Agency) comes unto, if it be so, that these good men, and causes, do not strike saile
to his courtesie, nor yet prove Pander to his falsehood. He hath a very blasting breath, and will be worse then a North East wind would be to the multiplying of f, and growth of Plants, both to them, and to their causes, if they will be stubborn and not submit to him. Alderman Devereux Wyat doth know it, with a witnesse poor gentleman. Sir, This is a Truth so well known to multitudes, that I could prove it as clear as the day, but that I am crippled, and am forced to lay down. And indeed, there will bee no need of me to prove it, if you would enquire after it. And if you would be so wor∣thy, as (in behalfe of the State and Commonwealth,) to command Captaine Grundy at his lodging at Mr. Rayments in Gardiners law, if hee bee not marched with his Company to serve the State. Or for Captaine Wyat in the Marshalsees, or at the poor widdow Hopkins house near the Blew Boare in Tuttle street, undone by quarter∣ing the old Captaine, whilst he waited here. I blush to speake how much above the greatest part of a 1000li. it hath been my cost and detriment, since I was so light-head∣ed as to contend with this Goliah. Friends and Enemies do know I am sober, and do speake within compasse. I doubt men that do regard their families, and will not wound their consciences, and names, by neglecting their charges, will not easily be perswaded to tell the State of their wrongs and dishonours, men do begin to know they may buy repemtance at a cheaper rate and stay at home. Sir, I for my part do finde it a very dirty imployment, and the charge (though great) is nothing to the dirtiness of the imployment, to men that desire to keep their Garments cleane. Especially if they be men (as they say) of my cloath and order. Mr. Eliot hath a huge advantage, he can say so much truth, in effect, but it is to cover the falsities of his libell, that a Minister should be no striker, hee presumes, he may strike, whom, and when, and where he pleases. Sir, the least speeks and Atomes of such businesses upon me, hee knowes, are like the droppings of hot lime upon my cloak, making me unfit for any Company. And sir, I am perswaded you may easily beleeve (as you know, or shall come to know of my condition, and in what ranke it pleased the Parliament, to st me by their Honorable Committee for Plundered Ministers, that not one man of a thousand would be hired for a greater summe (then the quantity of the Collop which Mr. Eliot pleasantly talks of in his libell) to be made so dirty as his own or a hired pen and pate hath made me all along; if your wisdome should not have cast it off, nor would I have done it, sir, but that life is sweet, And I would seriously indeavour to preserve yours, and mine, from a violent drowning, during the little moment of my naturall life; I doe know my life to be deeply indangered in the bottom of your safety, and I do see M. Eliot boring hard, with his shaddowed light in the bottome of the Vessell: I do note how he doth cleave out the strong Oake of your Justice (and it is that which must keep the State from sinking) by the most firme and spiny wedges of their own limbs and Members; And I doe find that he doth shake hands with Parliament haters, as much as any one man in England, so near them, and more then is possible, for any professed hater of them to do, for feare of be∣ing sequestered. And I do apprehend the danger to be the greater by how much the more credit, hee hath obtained of a well affected man, among so many of you. Sir, I doe winde up my desires in this Clew: Be pleased to move that Capt. Wyat be sent for to his poor lodging, I have named the place: And move that he may have speedy audience: And move that he may have a suit of Cloaths, and some refreshing victuall after his weakning imprisonment: And if it stand with the wisdome of the Parliament to put a Commission into his hand for a Command at Sea: I doe undertake, (and he hath
undertaken enough) that he will be the same still; he will be faithfull to his trust, and ke an hundred imes, before he yeeld once: Mr. Eliot knoweth it, and so doth Judge Jenkins: For when those Dons came upon a Spanish designe, with a halfe Moon to the River of Milford, the gallant old Captaine would not strike Saile to them, but he would be, and was one of the fiery ships that did helpe, scatter, and sinke these Welch Spaniards, thouh he consumed himselfe and his esate in the work. And doth not Don Eliot know, that though he himself took in his Spanish, and set up English Colours: And albeit he the smman had obtained the Command and good opinion of a well-affected man, would the ol blade strike to him? no, he did scorne it, though he sanke twice by him, once at VVestminster, and after that into the Marshalsces, because albeit he saw, that the man had the face of John Eliot Esquire, yet he plainly discovered the bloody heart, and cruell hands of Don Eliot the Spaniard. Your bold but loyall servant, VVilliam Beech. For my credit to be beleeved, I am bold to enter into these few degrees of comparison with Mr. Eliot. 1 MR. Eliot is upon record at VVestminster to have altered his opinion and practise to∣wards the Publike foure times, though there happened more alterations; He doth charge me but with one turning to Sir John Pennington, which I have to shew, is a Peace of Non-sense. 2 Mr. Eliot is an Array-Committee man, and Commissione, and a Soliciter against the State, I am a Minister, therefore must be no striker, thats his advantage, he may strike me, he thinks, but I may not strike him. 3 Mr. Eliots estate is said to be worth about 120 li. per annum in the Country, besides his practice in the City, the bounty of the Parliament had made my yearly means equall with his, if I had husbanded it so well as he. 4 Mr. Eliot was put into the Gatehouse lately for wronging the Commonwealth 10000 li. in unlawfull debenters. I have suffered imprisonments too, but they were my wrongs and troubles for the Commonwealth. 5 When Mr. Eliot speaks or Prints his good affection to the State, he doth it to shift of his malignity, and fashood and to weaken the Parliaments friends, and to divide them, and to scatter them, for which he thinks he may live to have thanks; but my good wishes that way have been still published, not of revenge, but of good will, and to unite the Parlia∣ments friends, and to encourage the Souldiers over to Ireland; witnesse, THE PLOT FROM EDOM, and LONDONS BLOWING UP BY LONDONERS. VV. B.
To the Right Honourable William Lenthall Esq Speaker, &c. For the Right Honorable the Parliament of England, in behalfe of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND. Being a slow Returne made by William Beech Minister, now absent, and in the Country, Unto a loose and lying Pamphlet, set forth by Squire Eliot still present in the City.This was sent to London by Mr. Fifield April 15 1650, but was not Printed be∣fore Iune 3. Mr. Eliot much beholding to mis∣carriages and delayes. BLAZED By the said Mr. Eliot to blemish the Testimony of such as have any knowledge, to give light of his Falsehood to the State that have intrusted him, being (yet) upon an old designe of near 5 years practice to wrong the Parliament and the Commonwealth of 8 or 10000l. more, which is as truly theirs, as their Mace. WHerein the Accountant conceives he may not so far encou∣rage the falsehood as (he heareth, but cannot see i) is con∣tained in Mr. Eliots scandalous Legend, as to ho∣nour it with repetition (the standing loyalty of the Gentlem (libelled against) being so eminently beyond the strength of Mr. Eliots breath to blast, by the test of his own hand writing, if it were worth any thing, by theA short Answer to a long Legend Testimony of the present Commissioners of Pembrookshire, and above all these, the known clearnesse of the Truth) but is bold to disprove as much of it as doth reflect on himself, or that comes within this abstract, of the many Testimonies given of him, and of his doings, and sufferings for the State of England, during all the fixe times of Mr. Eliots turning to and fro, which will serve as much for discoverie of Mr. Eliots falsehood, as for Bee∣ches Vindication. It is certified by the Subscribers who have good report in this greatUnstained Testi∣mony. Assembly, to be men stedfast, and sincere, Honorers of your just Power, and by such as will depose upon oath what they doe subscribe unto, as being either fellow-sufferers, eye-witnesses, or otherwise very competent to testifie what they subscribe unto. That this Accountant, did at the first appearing of friends for theBeech a travel∣ler at his owne charge for the Parliament Parliament in Pembrookeshire, go at his own charge (for ought they could ever hear or can imagine) from Milford to Bristoll, to Col. Nat: Fines, Sir William Waller, the late Earl of Essex, and from Bristoll did post up and down, for halfe a year (or thereabout) to Redding, London, back a∣gaine
to Bristoll, to London again, and then back again in great hazzard, as they heard and understood by letters, and good reports from time to time, to procure the aid of Ships, Men, and Ammunition, to put the saidHis good successe County and Harbor of Milford in a posture to serve the Parliament, That the said place became accordingly very serviceable to the State, that this Accountant did move first at the intreaty of some of the well affected Gentry there, and having with him a message from Cap. Devereux Wy∣at, an Alderman of Tenby, now prisoner for debt in the Marshallsces ForC. Devereux Wyat a forgot∣ten friend of the Parliaments. Beech apprehen∣ded, and indicted of High Treason for the Parlia∣ment. His Escape. His losses at Muncton Nangle. Beeches flight by Sea. Taken Prisoner againe by the e∣nemy. Exchanged by M. G. Brown. Beeches family doe suffer for Beeches loyalty to the Parliament which, Mr. Beech was apprehended (by warrant from Judge Jenkins) and indicted of high Treason (as they heard) at S. Dogmarls, and they do well know that he was sent prisoner from place to place, Haverfordwest, Ten∣by, Carmarthen, and that he had, they beleive, suffered the Execution, of a horrid death, if he had not escaped out of their hands, (when one Mr. Freeman escaped) about the time of a defeat given the enemy by the Parliaments forces there, That M. Beeches said services, and imprisonments occasioned thereby, continued near two yeares, and that he lost, they beleeve three yeares profit, save only a very little, one of those years, worth in times of peace 150l. per annum, at Muncton, and his augmentation at Nangle the two last yeares, as they are credibly informed, that when Gerrard had scattered the Parliaments forces there, in the year 1645, Mr. Beech was forced to flye, with his owne, and divers other distressed fa∣milies by Sea to London, That he hath served your Honours since, at the Seidges of Basing and Denington, and was 7 weeks prisoner, at Walling∣ford, as they heard also, untill he was exchanged by Maj. Gen. Browne, That he hath given divers publick Testimonies of his loyalty to the Parli∣ament ever since, That he hath sustained several arrests and imprisonments in London, and at Westminster to their knowledge, and as it appears to them, in relation to his said services, and troubles, and debts occasion∣ed thereby, and during his attendance here, which hath brought many sad inconveniencies upon himselfe, and, they beleive, distresse upon his family. Mr. Beech had Commission and imployment from his Excellency the late Earle of Essex, and I have heard very much from persons worthy of credit, of his great sufferings for that imployment. Tho: Cosen, Secretary (then) to the said Earle. The sum of this Certificate he hath with him, aboundantly testified in severall parcells, and hee would offer Mr. Eliots oath of his certaine knowledge in all the particulars, but he waves it, as uncertain, and stain∣ed, and nothing worth. Cap. Ralph Grundy, and Cap. Devereux Wyat have escaped the tongueCap. Grundy, Cap. Wyat. of Mr. Eliot the best of any (though they have felt the utmost of his hands) he doth confesse, even in his LEGEND, that they do both deserve something, and that they did love the PARLIAMENT a little, but, he is of opinion, they have been rewarded enough (seeing they escaped hanging and quartering before) and only that they do favour Revolters, he suspects, because they doe not favour his wayes. This being a large Testimony from an Enemy, whom they did helpe to beat when he was an Arch Cabby, they having subscribed their names, and affixed their
Seales long since to this Testimoniall. Raphe Grundy, his fellow prisoner. Devereux Wyat his fellow sufferer. The substance of other Testimonies signed by Cap. Robert Moulton, and Cap.Milford haven. C. Ro. Moulton Admirall. C. Rich. Swan∣ley Admirall. Richard Swanley the successive Admiralls of a Squadron of Ships on the River of Milford in the year, 1644, and 1645. Wherein Cap. Moulton certifieth the credible report he hath heard of Mr. Beeches sufferings, and imprisonments by the enemy: And Cap, Swanley doth not onely testifie the same, but also how that Mr Beech (having escaped imprisonment under the enemy) did come aboard the Leopard (with one Mr. Freeman a Minister, and others) desiring the protection of the Parliaments ships, and Capt. Swanley gave order for their passage accordingly in the ship Lewis. From aboard the Lyon,The Lyon. The Leopard, An hundred hands more. Withered hands laid by. Winchester. From aboard the Leopard. Your Accountant Beech doth offer an hundred hands more, if need be, to certifie this known Truth, and he hath more hands, and good hands at present, but they are such as Mr. Eliot hath either blown upon, or that are withered by Revolt since, and that too, by strange and incredible ways and causes. Civitas Winton, We the Subscribers do certifie that we have seen from time to time, near 5 years together, diverse publick Testimonies of M. Beeches very good affection to the Parliament, and unto this present Government, and we have heard very much, from persons to be beleived, of his services at the siedges of Basing, and Dennington Castle, and of his imprisonment at Wallingford for the same. Given under our hands this 28 of March, 1650.The Mayor Other Magi∣strates, &c. The Ministers. Large accounts contracted. John Baggs. Iohn Woodman, Iohn Brayne, Humphy Ellis, Tho, Lambard. Edmond Riggs Mayor, Tho. Musprat, Ro. Mason, Your Accountant having drawn up this short account of his long suffer∣ings, had also prepared Ten other particulars to send after this by the Post, entituled, The PRESUMPTIONS upon which M. Eliot doth GROUND his Printed LIBELS, and Painted FALSITIES, but that he was un∣willingDirty Servants. Malignants sport. The Parliament slow to hear just complaints, at∣tested, bewailed. Good causes blown up by new friends, old ene∣mies. to gratifie so many evill eyes that would soon have sight there∣of, when they come to Mr. Eliots hands, who would laugh to see your Honous attended upon by such dirty Wayters. The sad experience that this Accountant hath had of Mr. Eliots cunning, and his admirable suc∣cesse at every Turning, and the slow proceeds of Iustice, hath inforced him to a Resolve of Silence, who hath sadly found that he shall bee more eased, and better able to expresse the Falsehood of this man, by short Interjections, then by long Orations: O, how many good friends and Causes (he is bold to speake truth) have been blown up by Mr. Eliots digging under both, and by his LYING so long at your DOOR, it is high time (with submission to your wisdom be it spoken) to dismisse him of his Attendance. He hath blown up as many men, as ever came yet in the way of his Violence and Falsehood, or that ever were so bold as to Complain of him. He begins to fal upon your Honorable Commit.
for the Army, &c. taxing them of injustice, and their Registers of despe∣rateMr. Eliot in the Gate-house, Bayled out. Bilot provided for all changes, an incomparable Doctor. designes to ruine a wel affected man, because he was committed by that Honourable Power of yows (as is said) to the Gate-house, for some foule practices. He is observed to be very vigilant in skinning over the sore before the corruption be out, but there is good hope your Ho∣nours will prove better State Ars then so; the Cunning Man hath a salve for every sore, to skin it over at least, and is provided for all changes, as well for great friends as good rayment, if the face of affairs should change oftner then it hath done. Your Accountant is quite tired, and not well in health (indeed he isEliot (yet) cun∣ning, strong, Beech weake, sick) and he is able no longer to countermine the cunning of Mr. Eliot, he hath a strong arme, and a subtile head, there is a spring in his purse, and it comes secretly through the veines of a red earth; his friends be not few, and those he hath, be no flnchers, there is no visi∣ble prosecutor of his falshood of this kinde, but such as are almost as weake in the arme as himselfe. He is therefore lef unto your wise∣dome, that may finde him; and to his owne wit, that may taile him;Eliot left to his owne wit, and to providence. and to providence that will foyle him. In the interim, your wisdome will not blame his feare, when spying the denger, and Eliot a boaring, and himselfe in the bottome, he complaines to the Pilots, and cry out to Him that steers (in cheife) at the Helme, Lord Have Mercy Upon Us. Queries sent Mr. Eliot for his knowledgeQueries for M. Eliot at the highest Court. to examine him upon, at or before the first sitting of the High Court of Justice in Excelsis. The Parliament of Saints glorified. Requiring his answer better then by spinning out loose and lying Pamphlets and Papers. Saints Love No Lyes. Mr. Eliots Conscience upon Interrogatory. 1 COnscience! dost not thou know the truth of all the fore-mentio∣nedBeech a prisoner. Tho. Wyats house the head quarters of the enemy. Eliot no well∣affected man. Certificates concerning Beech, and did not thine eyes behold him a Prisoner to the enemy at Haverfordwest, and at the house of Tho. Wyat, Mayor of Denby, (the Head-quarters of the Enemy.) And was thy Master Eliot a well-affected man then? And was he never Com∣missioner of Array? And was it not once the honour of thy neighbour Eliot to be thought the best friend that ever the late King had, for acti∣on, in the whole Association there? speake out, feare not, he is thine enemy too as well as Beeches. 2 Doth not thy Neighbour Eliot hate this Querest since the yeareEliot a bloody Cavalier. 1644. when thou knowest he laid so hard at his life, to Judge Jenkins
&c. and for such treasonable practises (so termed then by him) as are mentioned in the testimonies above specified? and had he no hand inEliot notable to frame Articles. framing, nor giving instructions for drawing up the 19 Articles of high treason against Beech for the same? neither to the Judges, nor to the Clerke that drew them, when he was Commissioner of Array, or a little before, minde him of it; aske, had he no good will to see the bloody execution of this Beech? 3 Conscience! aske thy master, if he doth not know that Beech dothBeech under Judgement of the Law to Mr. Ro. Lort. Elict a subtile Tempter, presu∣med by visible circumstances. Col. Poyer. lye under Judgement for a Debt, and that execution must follow of course, the first of the next terme, upon the action of a Gentleman that calls thy master, Unckle Eliot? and speake, was he not thy masters Bed-fellow at Westminster when the Suit (of Lort, contra Beech) be∣gan? and was it not dost thinke, for Eliots sake? nor yet by Eliots in∣stigation, it being so contrary to the former temper of the same Gen∣tleman, who was more friendly to him in his behalfe unto the Enemy, when Eliot sought his life. And didt thou not heare that the Debt be∣came due for a More, &c. used, and spent by Col. Poyer in the Parlia∣ments service. 4 Conscience! dost not know how much thy master Eliot was asha∣medOriginals. before the Honourable Committee for Examinations neare five yeares since, when Mr. Whittaker was present? and in the discovery of the same falsities, that he is bold since to cast abroad in print; and wert thou not then evinced of some unworthy passages, that made thy Neighbours Long—bold visage to blush then, though it hath lost the good behaviour of blushing ever since? And would not he have been the counterfeit begger? and was not Beech the giver twenty pound cut of his owne purse? 5 Conscience! hast thou ever heard that this Querist hath besoughtTruths confi∣dence in her Trustees. Eliot excellent to speak for him∣selfe, witnesse all, &c. Eliot suspected, committed, &c. Mr. Eliots worme. Mountebanke Certificates. The Sun clouded ecclipsed by great Mr. Eliot. He is a great Licenser. Elict neare the Parliament. the favour of one Member of this great Court towards himselfe, untill there might be a faire hearing, but hath his neighbour Eliot neglected one houre? or left one member (or how many hath he left) unmo∣lested, and unattempted to beleeve him to be an honest man still, though they begin (very many of those Honourable Gentlemen) to suspect him strongly? or else, it is thought they would not have com∣mitted thy master Eliot to the Gate-house, if they did beleeve he had not abused the Common-wealth, and the honour of the Parliament. 6 Conscience! dost thou not stirre his thoughts in the night (when he is out of company) that there are many horrid Guilts chargeable upon his subtilty to bring about any evill thing by imposture, and mis∣representation? and by such Mountebank Certificates as he can get and subscribe unto (as Commissioner himselfe) with the smooth name of John Eliot, subscribed in a linking Italian? Can any truth be beleeved in any Court by his good will, where he hath any reputation? if it be as cleare as the Sun, hath he not the darknesse to cloud it, if not licensed by him? Hath not falshood got a great patron of him? Dost beleeve, that the most inveterate malignity (forreigne or domestiek) had ever such a friend in England so neare the Parliament as Mr. Eliot is known to be? Cry aloud, O the non-sence of your good affections to the
Parliament, Sir! People are afraid of it, because by subtilty and daily temptings you hinder their growth, and you cling about the soundest Oakes of England. Sir, you will eat up their strength (their honour and safety) if you should be suffered to grow about them long? Con∣scienceEliot, like Iy. Caines Dogge. fall upon him, be thou Caines Dogge, not to teare him in pei∣ces, but only drive him out of the Lobby, and save the House, and smite him upon his face to repentance. Conscience, prethee tell him,Conscience, save thy cruel Master. this Querie is made, not to his cunning to excuse him, but to thee Con∣science, to condemne him. If thou be faithfull, thou wilt build thine own ruined house, and thy Mr. Eliots too; honest Conscience, be a friend to both, Beech doth intreat thee. Conscience! tell thy master Eliot, that he is false, as well to the State; as he is spightfull to Beech (but to the State most false, that hadMr Eliot the States Prodigal, to bring downe their Noble to nine pence. Eliot a quiblr. Two great Wit∣nesses. honoured him so much) because he would bring downe their Noble to nine-pence, their 8000. li. to 500. li. and that in print. Conscience! tell him of the well-affected Legacies, bid him look upon the Will of Thomas Wyat explained; suffer him not to quibble againe, and say, it is a whelp of Beeches malice; say, thou knowest the birth of that truth, and that it is no whelpe, but it is Truth, and minde him that the City of Bristol, and the Towne of Tenby, are witnesses to the true birth and being of it. Conscience! shake him by the shoulder, minde him of Beeches ac∣counts,Beeches ac∣counts stated, not Registred. In VVales, Tho. Williams, She∣riffe, at Hiver∣fordwest. Jo. Sounder, Tenby Bayl, Tho. Phillips Mayor, Carm. John Maner. Wallingf. Col∣lins, Marshall Wilton, old Abraham, Westm. Bayliffe Rogers, VVood∣str. 1 Norman, 2 North. Eliot another Alexander. Unconquerable. Interjections. so that he undervalue it not to nothing. Reckon to him, so much service in England (first) so desperate, so dangerous, so chargeable, so many troubles, imprisonments, losses, for that service; so many yeares in Wales before, in Eliots Array ship, so many yeares in England since, in his Committee-ship; Debts before his flight, and scandalous Debts since his flight, and these much more scandalous; his imprisonment at Walling ford, one touch in Winchester, one at Westminster, two Shakes by Bayliffes within three doores of Woodstreet Counter, such a wel-affected enemy as Mr. Eliot, such an Alexander in the Lobby; Eliot a man so Be-freinded, that he will be brought off, right, or wrong. Eliot so be-ene∣mied, that they will take their money againe, though he robbed upon the Common High-way; enemies that will let him goe gallant still: VVhat mortall power can throw this Man? Great men either will not, or cannot doe it? What can Beech doe against this man? Conscience! shake him againe; tell him from Beech, O! how ma∣ny sad occurrences (since Beeches contest with your VVorships falshood) must Beech interre, and bury in the vast pit of interjections? Your strong breath, your dirty Pen, your false Tongue, your Fore-head, your Friends, your diligence to tempt, your dexterity in tempting, your credit to be beleeved, your slipperinesse to get off, your Mony to compound, your hired White Pate, your Privie Signet, Black Pate, unfathomable deceit! these, at Mr. Eliots quarters; Then, Beeches debts! Imprisonments! scandal for that! greife of freinds for that! joy of enemies for that! oft Non-Residence from a neglected Flock! oft Non-presence with a dejected family! poverty upon plenty! opening evil mouthes! stopping good mouths! woundings within! woundings without! And was not Mr. Eliots Fals∣hood
a tempter to it? And would not Mr. Eliots malice be (now) an Accuser for it? And will the man be so devillish, as to be an accuser and a tempter both? If a man might presume any thing from the Italian Cha∣racterM. Eliots nature, in his name. of Mr. Eliots hand-writing, there is that cruelty and cunning both discernable in his Name, the cruelty of his nature in the cunning of his name (Eliot) A winding Serpent, linking up the Italian letter (T) First, creeping up temptingly, then hissing forth terribly. Now Conscience, say, is not thy Master a spitefull Accountant toBeech not gree∣dy by Mr. Eliots testimony. Eliot no well wisher to Beech. A Collop is but 5l out of M. Eli∣ots starved flitch of 500l. Ruines within, seen by the walls without. Beech a lose 400l. by Eliots falsehood. A Collop of 200l. more cut out of Beech by the same art. Many more col∣lops cut out of Beech in Engl. & Wales by E∣liot, & his Co-Arrayists. Beeches, Now or never. Eliot envious that Beech should have any other season but win∣ter. C. Wyat the States Postmast. Beech their Post Dn. Eliot the Spaniard. His circuit, Eliots payment rugged coyn. Consciences sera nimis, &c. tell the world in Print, that Beech is greedy? and yet that a Collop of the concealed estate will serve his Turn? what would a collop be out of Mr. Eliots thin Flitch? It would exceed the proportion of a collop, if it should be above 5l. of the 500l. that this avoucher, falsely speaks of, and it is sure, he doth wish it neither thick nor large, nor wholesome for Beeches sake: let him know, that a collop (according to his deceit∣full proportion) will not repaire a fourth part of the Walls that be fallen downe in Beeches Ruines (much lesse for all other debts and delapidations that hee knowes of, false enough) that so by any meanes the State might see what a servant they had got∣ten of him. Beech would tell this false Avoucher, if hee thought hee would not be too merry, at the conceit, that his best friends do mani∣fest unto him (very condoleingly) how he hath lost, in the space of 3 or 4 yeares (since this contest) 3 or 400l. at least, in underletting the pro∣fits, that the bounty of the Parliament had bestowed upon him, besides the rich improvement he might have made, as well as others, of such bounty. That he hath expended besides that dis-advantage, 200li. (and a rich purse) in a multiplyed journed, to discover these dark wayes of Mr. Eliots, that so he might no longer undermine their justice, and therein their safety) who had dealt so wel with him, and whose Power (next unto Gods) did preserve his life from a cruell death, when Elyot would have destroyed that life, as he hath done, ever since, the livelihood of that life, as well in England since, as in Wales before. Conscience! say, O the unfathomeable cruelty of my Master, acted up∣on Beech. Aske him, why should not the man hope to have his Ruins and Debts repaired, and made up now that friends are Judges? Why will my neighbour be so envious now? now that he is a well affected man, as he saith, and Beech is so too, as he saith? And now that there is but a few of the kind? And now, that John Eliot is a friend. And Don Eliot is no accuser of Beech to Iekings the Iudge? Cruell man! to hinder Beech such a precious season. Aske, was not old Wyat the States Post∣master, and Beech their Post, and both on their own perill, and cost, when he was a Spaniard? Ask him if Beech shall be paid, at his riding the next Welch Circuit, and bid him speak out, what shall be his pay? and what the coyn of his payment then? shall it be kindnesse or cruelty? would it be cruelly, and cruelty? Don Eliot the Spaniard then? as it is Io. Eliot the Squire now? would it not be so? Conscience! for Gods sake let not such a notable peece of deep deceit be covered still, but out with it, it will be thy bane else, and thou wilt rue it with thy Master, in a place where repentance cannot be had for teares.
All Conscience! Conscience! lay it home to thy Master Eliot,Consciences sea∣son and her sera nimis. &c. NOW or never for his good, or thou must doe i for ever to his greife, and thine too, Is not the sum of Beeches sufferings to be pittyed? Is not his unhappinesse every way (in the world) great? Is he not a madman indeed (as Mr. Eliot libells) to part with two good flitches for one un∣certainTwo birds fast, let go, for one in hope. Madnesse. Eliots legend. True divinity in a seeming madnes A libel cannot quite . Great men, good natures aused. VVaters of Con∣tradiction and teares. Mr. G. F. R. D. R. M. The unremovea∣ble Rock. Eliot. M. Eliot privy to an Execution a¦gainst Beech. M Eliots addi∣tion of disgrace. collop? two birds in the hand fast, for one bird in the bush hopping? Is he not mad (as to this enterprize) to perswade such a shaver as Mr. Eliot to procure him this collop? to catch him this Bird? hath a Rayling letter that Rethoricke? Is not his Legend of words against Beech? a Legend of lyes to patch up Mr. Eliot? Conscience, tell thy ma∣ster, there is some Divinity in this worke, sure, the reward of a collop, could not induce him to be so dirty, and say that Beech hath his sensus communis, though Mr. Eliot hopes he hath not; a Libell cannot deprive him of it. All Mr. Eliots great Friends shall not do it, they would not do it neither, if they knew the truth of it, and the truth of Eliots false∣hood. Tell him, Beech hath no warming incouragements from without, but all the colding waters of Contradiction that can be invented, cast on him to quench his Resolves against Eliot, Dearest Wife, his loving father, his kindest friends, do, every day cast water upon him, Water of tears, water of intreaties, water of their councells, that he would not desperate∣ly cast himselfe away, upon the unremoveable ROCK Eliot, nor dash his dear children any longer upon this MAN. Mr. Eliots Executions, and Bayliffes, and THREATS to throw more dirt and dirt upon him still, can no whit affright this man. Sure, say, there is divinity in the thing: His threatened Addition of Disgrace cannot stirre Beech to fear the least thing. Conscience, query this matter to thy Master (and Beech hath done with thee) Aske him of his designe and of his meaning, in that Threat. He will provide an Addition of Disgrace to any that shall speak any thing that's il of his dear falsehood. Is it not, that he wil scrible more Libells, and then to the Presse, and then scatter more of his lyes in Print? Is not that his aime? but tell him, alas! there is no life in a printed lie, Men do suspect the truth of Printed things because of such wretched au∣thours.No life in a printed lye. Cleane sheets. Tell him Beech doth intend not to strive much longer in this dir∣ty kind of weapon, any otherwise then to wipe off his bispatterings: He hath given this order to the Printer, that some sheets be reserved from this impression, and kept cleane from other uses for that purpose, un∣till Mr. Eliot throw more dirt. The sheets are intended as an hedge onlyEliot in the High wayes. between Beech and him, now that Eliot hath so long possessed the High Wayes, and Beech is forced to the other side of the Hedge, in the Coun∣try, this sheet is to wipe off these Aspersion. And Mr. Eliot may know the sheet when he seeth it by this Title. AN ABSTERSIVE FOR Mr. ELIOTS DIRT, UNTIL THEAn Abstersive. UNCERTAIN DAY OF A CERTAIN TRYALL.
The last VVill and Testament of Thomas Wyat, late of Tenby in the County of Pembrook Mercer, deceased. EXPLAINEDExplained. To the right Honourable the Parlia∣ment of England, for the Common-wealth of England, by Captain Devereux Wyat, elder Brother to the Testator. Wherein is explained (also) Master Eliots falshood to the State, as much as 8. or 10000. li. amounts to, and their Honour. I Thomas Wyat, late Mayor of Tenby, having neer∣lyThe Testater a great Royalist. Protected by P. Ru∣pert. Hath a good memory. escaped the Rebels of Pembrookshire, being forced to fly from thence, for my loyalty to his sacred Majesty; and now enjoying the protection of his Highnesse Prince Rupert in Bristol, though sick in body yet of perfect memory; That the Kings Majesty is strong in the West, and the Parliament weake in the Field, that my elder brother Devereux Wyat is in actuall Armes against his Majesty, and stands a declared Traytor and Re∣bellC. Devereux Wyat a proclaimed traytor at Oxford. Much losse by much loyalty. A crime not to have been treacherous. 1500. li. offered as a reward of treachery, refused. Col. D. Gwyn. Loyalty stript. at Oxford for the same, whom I had in my former Wills made Executor of my whole estate▪ but he hath since made himself uncapable thereof by his said Rebellion, and did stubbornly refuse (to the ruine of himselfe and his nine Children) to yeeld up his rebellious trust of the said Towne when he had command thereof by the Rebels, and might have done it as well as I had adventured before him, and might have had 1500 li. to repaire his losses by the Dunkirk Pyrats, which I did offer him by the mediation of Col. David Gwyn of Hawksbery in the County of Carmarthen, but he would not doe it. I doe therefore exclude the said Rebell Devereux my elder Bro∣ther from enjoying any share or part of my Estate, giving him 5. li. to cut him off, &c. And I doe hereby revoke all formerChildren suffer for their fathers loyalty▪ Loyalty called, obsti∣nate rebellion. Wills, which (in the time of my sicknesses before the Warre) I had made in favour of him, and his many Children, making him Executor, if I had dyed before he had Rebelled thus obstinately.
And for as much as Richard Wyat my younger Brother, hathRich. Wyat in arms against the Parliam. maintaines the war against them. The Parliament called, the Rebels at Westminster. Rich. Wyat a coun∣sellor. Weighty considera∣tions. His prudence. His amodexterity. He payes a Fine. He is become a wel∣affected man. . He is cunning. He is a dangerous Iformer against . C. Wyat very angry with his Brother, for his Brothers treache∣ry to the Parliaments Cause. C. Wyat put out of his Executorship of 8 or 10000. li for serving the State. The estate wholly personall. Carried out of South∣wales to Bristol, when the Testater fled. A gallant peice of service at Milford, 1644. The Testator provi∣dent to keep his mony, goods, &c. The Testator sickly feires imprisonment. The Rogues increase The Testators guilt granted. Tenby stormed, and took by force. visited me in my sicknesse, and did stoutly Garison and maintaine the Church and Steeple of Tenby against the Parliaments Forces there, in his owne person; and did also offer, before the whole Towne assembled, five pounds, as a test of his loyalty to his King, to begin a benevolence, for the better carrying on of the warre against the Rebels at Wistmonste, and was also of my chiefe counsell to be∣tray (as the Rebels call it) the Kings Towne to him; for these and divers other considerations, as also for his Great Prudence, (though the Rebell Devereux will call it slinesse, and subtilty, and treachery) that he hath wrought his (present) peace with the Parliaments Forces, by Sea, and Land, and hath paid a summe of money, (or Fine) which he intends shall goe under the notion of Loane-money to the State, and shall purchase him the name of a wel-affected man thereby, and hath gotten a hand or two to certifie so much against a wet day, by which his said Prudence, he hath ob∣tained double Tickets to passe between (and unto) both the said Garrisons, the Rebels Garrison at Tenby, and the Kings Garrison at Bristol (while Devereux like a mad, fiery, peevish old man was fighting for the Rebels) by which, the said Richard my Execu∣tor became very comfortable unto me in my sicknesse, and was also so provident for himselfe, and so faithfull to me, as to Informe me how the Rebell Devereux (our elder Brother, and to whom I in∣tended so much good) did threaten what strange things he would do, or cause to be do  me, if ever I returned; and calls my loyalty treachery, because he doth alledge, I did swear, and undertake to him, and to other the Parliaments Commanders there, that I would keepe the Towne for the use of the said Rebels, which I did not, upon better consideration, though I had sworn to doe it. I Doe therefore Nominate And Appoint the said Richard Wyat to be the sole Executor of my whole estate, worth, as I beleeve, at the time of my slight 8. or 10000. li. which being wholly personall, and in mony, wares, goods, debts due by Bond, Bill, upon Book, which I made a shift to send, and bring with mee by Sea to Bristol from the prevayling power of the said Rebels there, soone after they had most audaciously taken the Kings Fort at the Pill, and had made many of the Kings good Subjects there their Prisoners in the yeare 1644. And because I did feare the Rebels would either take me Priso∣ner, and seize upon my mony, goods, &c. for my pretended offence, or else force me to flight in a time of greater danger; I did rather chuse for my liberties sake, to fly before the Seidge, and so pre∣serve my estate too, because I found my body declining; and I dread to think of their Ship (which the Rebels call, The Rogues Increase) wherein they put their Prisoners, and which would soone have made an end of me in respect of my infirmities if they should have taken me in the Towne (given up by me) which soone after my flight they stormed and tooke, together with
seven or eight hundred men, which I received in to serve the King, as aforesaid.Richard Wyat, William Bowen, kind visitors, In∣formers. A metamorphosis, Quadrata rotundis. The Testator seque∣sterd before his death A strange peice of Justice. The Testator wil be a turn coate no more. Array-Committe∣men adjured to be kind to Malignants. Their new power ex∣ercised for Malig∣nants. The Testators wel∣affected Legacies. P. Ruperts a great Legacy of 2500. li. The Parliaments e∣state shattered among Malignants. And whereas I am given to understand, by my said Executor, and my servant William Bowen, (who have been both with me oft times in my sicknesse) that Thomas Bowen Esq (my singu∣lar great Debtor) and the Brothers in Law and kindred of the said Thomas Bowen (who were lately Commissioners of Array, most of them, and who perswaded me first to deliver up the Kings Town to himself) are now become (many of them) of the Com∣mittee for the Parliament there, and have Sequestred me (some of them) for the pretended Crime which they made me guilty of, (if it were a Crime) and did engage their estates before the whole Towne, to save me harmlesse from, if I would freely deliver it up to the King; I doe professe, that I doe still to the last of my life, re∣taine my unstained loyalty to his Majesty, and I doe desire the said Thomas Bowen, and John Eliot Esquires, their Brothers and Kindred (and I doe adjure them by their Vowes made unto me for my Indempnity from that fact) to preserve my estate by their new Power for my said new Executor, he allowing and paying these ensuing Legacies, and Bequests to themselves, their friends, and kin∣red, and to the wel-affected Gentlemen here named. Imprimis, To Prince Rupert 2500. li. which Mr. Eliot saith in his legend the Prince had of Thomas Wyat, but it is false, his High∣nesse had but a Collop of it, and that also for his Protection there, & it was to be paid him againe when the King came to his Crowne. Item, to I. W. a wel-affected man of the same Garrison, a sum. Item, to W. W. a sum, of the same Garrison, and to M. M. of the same Garrison, another sum. Item, to A. B. C. D. E. F. wel-affected men and women to theMr. Eliots will∣affected men. ruine of the Parliament, of the same Garrison, and elsewhere, great sums, as appeares more at large by the originall Will. And I doe appoint John Eliot, and Thomas Bowen Esquires, andJo. Eliot and other Commissioners of Ar∣ray best over-seers. The Testators bounty to them. the other Gentlemen, mentioned in a Schedule with my said Execu∣tor (late Commissioners of Array, as is said, now wel-affected Com∣mittee men) to be Over-seers of this my Will; and it is my desire that the said Over-seers should keepe in their hands for ever, so much of the said Debts which they doe owe me by specialty, and upon my Shop-looke, and remaining in the known hands of theirThey were in his bookes before his decease. His bounty modera∣ted and limited. nearest kindred, friends, unckles, &c to the value aforesaid (which they doe duly owe unto me for wares they had at my shop, and for monies lent them) according to the discretion of my said Execu∣tor, and the need he shall have of their assistance, to preserve the estate for him, and from the Rebell Devereux. I doe also (and in speciall) discharge John Eliot of NorbethJo. Eliot an especi∣all Legattee. His worke is to so∣licite. Esquire, and his Son John Eliot (my friends and neighbours, but especially the eldest) of all debts, dues, demands, judge∣ments, executions, extents, &c. to solicite, and to retaine counsell for my said Executor in the City, while he gathers up the money ow∣ing
me in the Country; and it is my desire that my said Executor should allow any sum or sums of money, as he shall thinke fit to Mr. Eliot, or any other, provided that he, and they, doe stoutly,His augmentation. Another task enjoy∣ned him. He must use his wits and friends to main∣taine falshood. and confidently engage all his and their friends, and reputation at a∣ny time (if the Rebels should ever over-come the Royall Party) and effectually perswade that I my selfe, and my said Executor were wel-affected men, and provided that he and they doe so imploy their wits, that neither the State, nor any friend of theirs may have any part of my estate of the value aforesaid. I doe acknowledge, that upon some conflict of minde upon my bedThe Testators con∣flict. Thoughts of his bro∣ther Devereux, makes his bowels yearne. Malignants doe har∣den him. Devereux Wyat a notorious rebel again. Fresh thoughts of his age, humanity, many children, his losse by Pirats. of sicknesse, and some yearning of my bowels towards the many children of my brother Devereux, I did rashly joyne him in the Executorship with my said brother Richard, few dayes since, before my servant Margaret Moody, but since I have received counsell by such as love me, and the Kings friends, not to mention the Rebell Devereux, lest it should bring a blemish upon my Will, and a forfei∣ture of the estate, the Rebell Devereux being so notorious for his Rebellion every where; I doe therefore charge Richard Wyat my Executor to be good however, to the old age, and to the humanity of our said elder brother, and to his many children, in respect of his great losses at Sea, lately by Dunkirk Pirats, before remembred, he, my said Executor having a good estate of his owne besides, and but one Daughter to provide for. The Oath of Margaret Moody servant toDevereux Wyat joynt Executor with Richard Wyat. Thomas Wyat deceased. MArgaret Moody coming newly to Tenby (the Par∣liamentsThe Oath of the Te∣stators servant Maid. Garrison) from Bristol (the Kings Quar∣ters) being duly sworn before the Governour of Tenby,She was not hired to sweare. among other things whereupon she was examined, de∣poseth that Thomas Wyat, her Master, dyed in Bristol last Sunday was fortnight, and that he left Devereux Wyat, and Richard Wyat joynt Executors. Margaret Moody.
This Explanation being the naturall sence of the Testators Will, without the least wresting thereof, or addition thereto, but only what may serve to enlighten it, and to give forth the plaine meaning of the dying man. THe explainer Devereux Wyat further manifesteth: That the said uniust Will, according to this expla∣nation,There is no wel∣affectednesse in co∣zening the State. The Testator se∣questred by his Debtors. Array-Committee men, and Mr. Eliot, (concealers and debtors) be nota∣ble shifters. The Testators per∣sonall estate carried out of South-wales, not capable of par∣don by the welch mulct. A plain proof, how the Testator was sequestred. This estate is the Parliaments, Mr. Eliot can no longer hide it. Array Committee∣men the grand concealers of the Common-wealth. hath béen faithfully, yet treacherously, carried on, néere five yeares together by Mr. Eliot, and by the con∣cealers of the Committee there, who did sequester the delin∣quent Testator in his life time, as is said; and the evasion whereby Mr. Eliot (the Agent-Leiger in the City) and the concealing-debtors of the said Committée (resident in the Country) would shift of this sequestration, is this, that Thomas Wyats said personall estate was conveyed to Bristol, when the Concealers there did sequester him in Tenby, and they could not reach it; howbeit, it is known to all the town of Tenby, that the concealing Committée there did summon your Explainer Devereux Wyat and his Wife, Richard Wyat (the pretended Executor) and William Bowen, late Ap∣prentise to Thomas Wyat the delinquent deceased, and divers others, and did put them all to their Oathes, to discover what part of Thomas Wyats estate was in their hands, and where they knew any to be, and did declare it was all seque∣stred for the use of the State, and did charge all the Depo∣nents to kéep the same, and be accountable to the State for it, though there was nothing left behind him when he fled to Bristoll but bed-steds, chaires, chests, stooles, &c. save only certaine great debts owing him, which one of the Deponents his Apprentise William Bowen aforesaid, that kept the shop∣booke, did (upon Oath also) discover to be in their owne hands who did sequester his Master, and among their nearest friends and kindred to the value of néere 2000. li. and in the possession of others that were then in Armes against the Parliament, which they could not come at neither, nor would they, it appeares, if they could, that they might preserve it (ac∣cordingThey be best over∣seers of Malig∣nants Wills. to the malignant will and desire of the delinquent Testator) for the pretended Executor Richard Wyat, a de∣linquent too as aforesaid; because they might presume he would not dare to demand any of the great sums in their own hands, being of the Committee; nor would he, they mightThey lose nothing by it. think (being a delinquent to their knowledge, and practise also) stand much upon those sums owing by their nearest
kindred, so he might have their favourable protection to en∣ioyThey wil be favou∣rable to birds of their own feather. The glew knit∣ting them together is, their common hatred of the first Round-heads. the rest quietly; and that which doth knit them all the closer together is this, that they were all alike equally ene∣mies to the State, when the Explainer did forget his owne case and benefit, and safety, to serve you. Now for as much as the truth of this explanation is cléer∣ly manifest by the testimony of two great Witnesses, the City of Bristoll, and the Towne of Tenby, and that the substance of the whole is (and hath béen) a yeare since proved by four Witnesses, at your Honourable Committée for advance, and how the Common-wealth was thus wronged; and for that Mr. Eliot hath confessed enough in his printed papers, andIt hath been pro∣ved by four Witnes∣ses to be so. Master Eliot hath confessed it in print, that he is false, plainly. Mr. Eliots contra∣dictions He doth affirme things were and were not, in the same printed paper.  Hall. He doubles. He is caught, and cryes, quarter. Libels to discover his owne falshood, corrupt ends, and his ill-will to the honour of your iust procéedings, and hath put his name John Eliot to many printed Copies, presented to the Members of this honourabe Assembly. That this Mr. Eliot himselfe a Committée-man, did solicite, and retaine counsell against the State, that this cause of Richard Wyat, and his owne was, and was not, good; he acknowledgeth in the same printed paper; That Richard Wyat was his neigh∣bour, and an honest man, and a well-affected man, and so was Thomas Wyat (his Creditor) deceased. This goes for cur∣rant thrée yeares together, but when it was proved at your said honourable Committée about 14. months since, that nei∣ther of them were wel-affected, nor yet Mr. Eliot honest, but all were proved delinquents; then Mr. Eliot grants that in∣déed, 'tis true, they were not so honest and so wel-affected as they should be, nor himselfe neither, but that they had all of them néed of a purge, and therefore craves pardon by theBut doubles still. welch Mulct newly come forth, for himselfe first, and then shews a bill or two under the Over-séers hands in the Coun∣try what they had given Richard Wyat to purge out the ma∣lignity of the two great estates, his owne and his deceased Brothers, which was the Parliaments long before; and they doe in their said Bill acknowledge that they did (notThe Purge. Phisitians and Pa∣tient both purge together, yet both unsound still. give, but) take 32. li. to cure Richard Wyat in question of his malignity for both estates; for his owne, and for that which was not his, nor in their power to compound for, and thereby to make him and themselves sound too from all their, and their friends scores, howbeit the pretended Executor, and his Agent, Mr. Eliot, and the Over-séers themselves are as un∣sound as ever they were, as to this distemper. The estate is the Parliaments, (and so should they have been in point of trust) and these men willnever be sound, nor at ease, nor yet will ever Justice be satisfied untill they be (all of them)The Armes of England. Justice the best Doctor. cleansed of every part and parcell of Thomas Wyats estate, and untill the Armes of England be stamped upon it; it will gnaw, and paine them at the very bottome of their belly and
stomack, and there is no Cure in England for it without aBoth must take a deep vomit, agency, and Executor. The State of Eng∣land the most able and conscientious Phisitian. Good hopes of the young Doctors of Haberdashers Hall. Mountebanks can∣not cure Malig. déep vomit. Things are like to go justly at Haberdashers Hal, if the Parliament should not finde leasure to make it a Chan∣cery businesse (for their faithful Devereux Wyats sake) and if the Agency depend upon some Scottish Mountebank to cure them, Montrolle may furnish them with some High landers, but let them take héed, these may undertake the Cure, but they will pick their purses, and doe no good for them nei∣ther. The Explainer would take no notice of Mr. Eliots foule falsities in his Libelious shéet, touching himselfe and his friends that have béen faithfull, and yet are so (faithfull to the publicke, and friendly to him) and will be so found when his rottennesse is throughly discovered; itMr Eliot an impu∣dent Libeller. Rottennes search∣ed, discovers and preserves soundns, else both are alike, if rottennesse be left uncut. C. VVyats Deben∣ter blowed upon by Eliot. Though as sound as an Oake, yet burnt to ashes by Eliots falshood, and quite consumed (a yeare since) in this busines for the Se. Malignity will have vnt out of the wel∣affectd man. Old Remembran∣ces. Mr Eliots spight that C. Wyat is shot-free, and can∣not revolt. is his shift to talke and print Lyes only, the Explainer doth pray your Honours to note what Mr. Eliot Libelleth of his Debenter; he faith, it is not stated aright, and that it is (like his owne false ones,) unsound; and that his service was not so considerable, and he undertakes to tell you what a great summe this Explainer had for his De∣benter (although what ever he received for it,) there is thrée times more then that wasted in prosecuting this déep falshood of his, and about this discovery for the Common-Wealth; (blush if you can Mr. Eliot:) And how satis∣factory that summe received (he is ashamed to say how little he was forced to take) might be for all he had done and suf∣fered, he doth acknowledge something of his doings and sufferings, and how the Explainer was but Captaine of the Traine Band, and therefore not capable of the pay of a Souldier by the Ordinance, &c. He doth beseech you, to note the spirit from whence it procéeds, it is a spirit of Malignity, because the Explai∣ner was one of them that did help to beat him by your power for his wretched Malignity (once,) hee remembers it more then twice, and hath paid the Explainer home for it, who hath béen twice a prisoner upon this account, and once in the Marshalsees, almost starved to death, till your Act of Grace did releive him within these few dayes. It is his spight too, that all his guiles and subtile wayes could not drive him to revolt with wretched Revolters, and so that he might have him shot to death, (a punishment due to Revolters) He is angry that your Explainer is (almost) the only Officer of that County now attending on you, that served you from the beginning without Revolt, and thatC. Wyat never ser∣ved but onemaster. never served but one Master which was, and is your iust Authority. He doth beseech you to looke upon this little patterne ofA little patterne of a great peice of falshood. the large peice of Mr. Eliots falshood; the false man pawnes his ragged reputation, that your Explainer was no other
but Captaine of the Traine Band of the Towne; and yet indeed, the Explainer hath by him a Commission derivedC. Wyat a Field Captaine as well as of the Traine. He did keep Tenby, and in it 39 Sea∣men, and 180 Land men a long time. The State not charged by it one penny. Mr. Eliot still greived. from the late Earle of Essex (almost worne out by age and oft looking upon) to be a Field Captaine; by which Com∣mission, and power from the Ma. Generall there, he did kéep the Towne of Tenby for your Honours, and did main∣taine and keep thirty nine Sea-men thrée moneths to manage the Ordnance, and the number of 180. men (the List of whose names he hath also with him) thrée yeares together, who did accordingly Garrison and keep the Towne safe for you, for which he never put the State to a penny charge, nor yet any of his men; but (to content his Souldiers at all times) he gave money out of his owne purse, pawned his plate, and made other hard shifts to please them; who did their duty, and were contenied, as Mr, Eliot (to his griefe then, and also now) well knew, and doth know. But what are words? Mr. Eliot will finde words too; He will to his old shift, and deny, and Libell againe; for ifMr. Eliot hath words and shifts. Truth would make himswel, and burst. His body used to falshood from a false meaning. Truth will make him poore againe when cleared up. he should confesse one materiall truth for Truths sake (un∣lesse it were to make a Bawd of it) it would be his bane, he is so used to falsheed that he cannot live without it. Indeed Sirs, falsheed doth feed him with the best, and falsheed doth cloath him with the finest; one dram of Truth would send him packing, and make him as naked to the eyes of all ho∣nest men, as if he had no shift at all to cover him, it would turne him out of the Lobby to the Gate-house againe, or in the fayrest way to the Country as he came, his Candle out, and his darke Lanthorne brought to light: Now this your Explainer doth humbly bend both his weake knees to your Henours, this fouth year, and nineth time of his kneeling before you in Print. First, He bends one of them, by way of thanks for that Hono∣rableOne Knee bent in thanks. Act of your mercy towards poor Prisoners, by which you have begun to snatch him from the oppression of Mr. Eliot, and freed him from a starving Imprisonment and from his GROANE IN THE MARSHALSEES which Mr. Eliot laughs at in his LIBELL, by which he hath now the liberty that he may chuse his place to dye in. Next he bends his other weake knee in supplication to yourThe other knee bent inpetition. Iustice, beseeching you that the BUSINES between Mr. Eliot, and himself: and the matter touching the concealed Estate of Tho∣mas VVyat deceased (so much petitioned about) may be exami¦ned. And because hee feares the delay of a report. in respect of the many great affaires now pressing on you, and his own inabili∣ty to continue long, unperished, without some just releife. Hun∣ger being no lesse sharpe near the Blew (wila) Boare in Tuttle-street at Westminster, then it was a Rasor near the White (fell) Lyon at the Marshalsees in Southwarke. He prayeth that your Honours would refer the Examination of the businesse, touching this your concealed Estate, to the
Committee at Haberdashers hall, or Goldsmiths hall (if it standReference to the Committee at Haber∣dashers hall or Gold∣smiths hall. C. Wyat the lawfull Executor. He offers 500li. to compound for that which had now been his own, if he had ha∣ted the State. with your Wisdome so to do, or else to excuse him, because hee hath no Councell to direct him what to doe, or to take any o∣ther Course, as your Wisdome shall direct you) and that you would impower either of your said Committees to admit of him (the lawfull Executor, if he had unlawfully fought against you) to Compound for this Estate for 500li. (and the rather (some∣thing) for the MOTIVES underneath) which sum Mr. Eliot saith in Print also, he did heare Richard VVat (the Usurper or pretended Executor) say, it was worth no more then 500li. clear∣ly. Or else if your Honours will Admit him to Composition, he will be faithfull to you, and pay a third part of the whole Estate (that shall be cleared unto him) for any publick imploy∣ment. He doth not desire to Compound for it, unlesse he shallHe hates Hugger-Mugger, hee would have things proved. Mr. Eliot a false ac∣countant. clearly prove, (First) Thomas Wyat the Delinquent Testatours Wil to be true, according to the EXPLANATION, for the Mat∣ter of it: And Mr. Eliot very false unto you in the concealing of it, and in undervaluing the Estate to 500li (it is because he suspects it may be yours) though there is cause of feare and doubt that there is a great deale of subtilty and intricacy in the shifting of itThe Testators estate in Hucksters handling away, because the Delinquent Testatour left it in the Kings Gar∣rison where he dyed, with ill affected brothers and Cousens, &c. And where the Parliaments Friends had but few that did wish them well, or that will give them intelligence of the mystery▪ Besides the disadvantage your Honours will meet with of a Ma∣lignant Executour, and so many Array Committee-men, Over∣seers,It is in a consumption and Concealers of this falsehood, and Confiding men too. This your Estate Right Honourable must needs be in aSic inconsumptum Titii, &c. Non perit ut possit, &c. deep Consumption, when the Talons of so many greedy Vulters have fastened on it 5 years together, sure, it hath not the renewing property of Titius Liver, to fill up againe as it is consumed. It is hoped that your Honors wil imploy your skill, and take it again from these Vulters undigested, or else make it up again by sli∣sing some collops from the Livers of those Vulters, and Connatura∣lize it with the consumed Liver of Titius, your Estate wil be preser∣ved if your Honors do put forth such timely skil, or else you wil find but one Lob, or little Lump of all that large Liver, and but one thin Collop of that whole estate, as Mr. Eliot well knoweth. He Prayeth, Therefore that the Whole Agency (the OverseersA remedy to recover it of its consumption. and Agent both, Mr. Eliot and the Agency may be accountable to the Commonwealth for what shall appeare to be Conveyed away from any possibility of recovering, if Richard Wyat, the pretended Executour should doe, as he said hee would doe, before two Witnesses here at Westminster (who are ready to prove it upon oath) that rather then the State should have any part of it,Cap. Wyats humble suite for 50li. to fetch in 500li. of composi∣tion mony. he would sell all he had and flye into France. And in the intrim, The Explayner doth beseech you to let him have 50li. to buy him Food and Cloathes, and to follow this businesse for the Commonwealth, and hee doth hereby promise, to repay that 50li. and ten times as much more, in Composition
money for the service of the Commonwealth again, because hee knoweth the case to be so cleare (if there should be an hundred Clouds for one Sun) if your Honours wou'd but Refer it to an ef∣fectuall way of Discovery. He doth assure you, that to his owne cleare and certain knowledge, your Businesse can no more miscarry then the Sun can be always buried in a Grave of Clouds, and dark∣ness,His assurance of the cause. Iustice a Phoenix wil come out of ashes. before Doomesday, if men will be just, or if not, Iustice will come out of the Ashes of Injustice. It is sure enough Justice is a Phoenix, a Rare Bird, there will be alwayes one of that kind, MEN cannot hinder it, and just men will not go about to stop the current. The Explainers humble PERSWASIVES for a Composition. 1 THat it is hoped your Court is wise, and just, as it is Great, and Honourable. 2 That the Estate in question had (now) been his own in possession, (for a grea∣ter part then will easily be found out) if he had hated you, but, now, it is clearly at your dispose. 3 That he hath served you faithfully without one Stagger or Turne, neither could Mr. Eliots Treachery, or his subtill wiles tempt him to revolt. 4 That he refused 1500li. of his own brothers ready mony, and would not betray your Towne of Tenby, betrusted with him, for love nor mony, 5 That the Delinquent Testatour (his younger brother) dyed without Wife or child, and he, himselfe, and his nine children are next in blood, and order of discent, or, at least, have an equallity of right to injo, their part of the Estate. 6 He is 700li. in debt more then he is worth, by Services, Losses, Burnings, Spoilings, and Layings out for your sakes. 7 He hath lost his Executorship of this great estate (as well as the 1500li.) for not be∣traying your Town. 8 He hath nine motherlesse children that are spoyled, scattered and unbred for their fathers Loyalty. 9 He hath lost 1700li. by Dankirk Pirates, commanded by one Bowden Sneacock, in the year 1640. 10 He could obtain no Justice of the late Kings councell against the Spanyard, for this depredacion, though he had wasted a yeare, and a halfe, and had spent 150li. in pro∣secution, by meanes of some Spanish minded Lords and Bishops in English Courts. 11 That he hath as little Justice done him (now) at the Admiralty, as he had (of the King, Councell before them, and) of their Predecessors in that Office, though he hath beene at the like expence of time and money, and although he hath had reference upon reference from the COUNCELL OF STATE to them. They give under their hands (now) that his case is sad, and that the Spanyard hath wronged him, but for right, they Turne him backe againe to the COUNCELL OF STATE, and so he is like to be posted off till Doomes Day, Besides he hath no mony. 12 He maintained 39 Seamen at his own charge 3 months, and 180 land Souldiers 3 years in your service, beyond the rate of an ordinary Captaine, cost not the State one penny yet the men were all contented. (Mr. Eliot for shame!) 13 He is aged. 14 He hath not a penny to buy him bread, and is very ragged in Woollen and Linnen. 15 That all this is true, and as true it is, as it is true that the Parliament of England, do sit at Westminster, and as generally known it is in the City of Bristol, and at the Town of Tenby (according to the proportion of such a businesse) as that there is a Parliament in England. DEVEREUX WYAT.
The Accountant must now contract his desires which he had more enlargedly provided, and doth humbly lay them before this great Assembly in these Branches. 1 THat their Honours would referre the discovery of the Wyats Case, according to Capt. Wyats Petition, mentioned in the close of his younger brother Thomas Wyats Will explained for the Common-wealth, and for his releife from under a great Wrong. 2 That their Honours would take up the Parsonage of Crawly into the hands of their Honourable power for plundered Ministers. 3 That he himselfe may be Stipendary, and the profits taken up by some honest me as shall be presented to them, and that provision may be made for his wife and many children after his decease, which he hath cause to beleeve, may be soone, because of his owne knowledge of the perishing estate of some of his vitalls within, though his heart be sound to the flourishing condition of the Common-wealth of England without. 4 That the Farmers may enjoy what they have paid for (before hand) till Sept. next, (being that time of yeare he was setled there, stript and in debt) to discharge fifths, Assesments, &c. before hand, and which he did receive of them in money about this, smitten-downe, true discoverie, &c. 5 That some thoughts may lead their Honours to enable him to pay his debts, that he doth lye under, for his posting up and downe, and many other troubles for them, from the beginning of the Warres till the present time of his great affliction, and for Mr. Eliots Cousens execution. 6 That Mr. Eliot may be restrained from all his ill practices and libellings, and that he may be dealt with according to Justice, and that they would regard their owne honour and safety therein, and that they would so much as suspect him only, if it stand not with their wisdome to punish his great falshood. 7 That their wisdome might be seene in composing the unhappy differences in the County of Pembrooke, betweene two eminent Families there, whose divisions were very intricate and lamentable, and it is feared are such yet; and that the Coun∣ty of Pembrooke may be thought upon for her Virgine love to their proceedings, and because the late defilement there amongst some of them, was done by rape upon her, her haire tyed to the Stake, and great violence executed: And he shall pray, &c. William Beech.
