B1801 R4336 12311562 59387
THE LEGACY OF A DYING MOTHER To Her Mourning CHILDREN, Being the EXPERIENCES OF Mrs. Susanna Bell, Who Died MARCH 13. 1672 With an EPISTLE DEDICATORY BY THOMAS BROOKS Minister of the Gospel. LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by John Hancock Senior and Junior at the three Bibles in Popes-Head Alley in Cornhill. 1673.
To his Honoured Friends, Mr. T.B. I.B. S.B. I T. Mer∣chants, and to their Wives, and to the rest of the Children of Mrs. Susanna Bell deceased; The Au∣thor wisheth all Grace, Mercy and Peace. Honoured Friends, MY Design in this Epistle is not to Complement you, but to benefit you; 'tis not to tickle your ears, but to better your hearts; nor 'tis not to blazon her name or fame to the World, whose Hea∣ven-born-soul s now at rest with God, and who is swallowed up in those ranscendent Enjoyments of that other World, which are above the comprehensions of my minde, and te Expressions and Praises of my Pen; but 'tis to a lure and draw you to a imitation of what was prise-worthy
in her. Shall I hint at a few things? First, imitate her in that sincerity and plain-heartedness which was transparent in her. Sincerity is not a single grace, but the Source of all graces, and the In∣terlineary that must run through every grace, for what is faith if it be not unfin∣ed? and what is love i it be not without dissimulation? and what is Repentance if it be not in truth? Sincerity is the soul of all grace, 'tis the grace of all our gra∣ces; what advantage is it to have the breast-Plate of Righteousness, the Shield of Faith,Eph. 6.13, 14, 15, 16, 17 7 Joh 1.4 the Helmet of Hope, if they be but painted things; it is the Girdle of Sin∣cerity that makes all the other parts of our Armour useful; Was she not a true Na∣thaniel, a Person in whom there was no guile, I mean, no allowed hypocrisie: and was not this that which carried her through the pangs of death with a great d al of comfort,Isa. 38.3, 2. 2 Cor. 1.12. as it had done Hezekah, Paul, and other Saints before. A sincere Christian is like the Violet which grows low, and hides it self and its own sweet∣ness, as much as may be, with its own leaves: Or like Bruts staffe, gold with∣in and thorn without: Or like the Ark, gold within and Goats-hair without. The very Heathen loved a candid and sincere
spirit; as he that wished, That there was a Glass-window in his breast, that all the World might see what was in his heart. But Secondly, imitate her in that Humility,1 Pet. 5.5 which was a grace she was cloathed withal: I ever found her low and little in her own eyes; much in debasing her self upon all occasions, looking upon her self as below the least of mercies with Jacob, and as dust and ashes,Gen. 32.10. Gen. 18.27. Ps. 22.6. Eph. 3.8 with Abraham; and as a poor worm, with Da∣vid; and less then the least of all Saints, with Paul. And commonly, the more high in spiritual worth, the more humble in heart; God delights to pour in grace into humble souls, as men pour in li∣quor into empty vessels. Humility makes a Person Peaceable among Bre∣thren, fruitfl in well-doing, cheerful in suffering, and constant in holy walking. Humility makes a man pre∣cious in the eyes of God; who is little in his own account is always great in Gods esteem. It is well ob∣served by some, That those brave crea∣tures the Eagle and the Lion were not offered in sacrifice unto God; but the poor Lambs and Doves were;
to note, that God regards not your brave, high, lofty spirits; but poor, meek and contemptible spirits. Humility is a rare grace. Many (saith Augustine) can more easily give all they have to the poor, then themselves become poor in spirit; be low in your own eyes, and be content to be low in the eyes of others; and think not of your selves above what is meet, as ever you would write after your Mothers Co∣py;Mat. 18.10. and affect more to be amongst Gods little ones, then the great ones of this world. Be humble Christians; as ever you would be holy be humble; Humility is of the essence of the new creature: He is not a Christian that is not humble. The more grace the more humble; those that have been most high in spiritual worth, have always been most humble in heart. Ignatius could say of himself, Non sum digns dici minimus, I am not worthy to be called the least. Lord, I am Hell, but thou art Heaven, said blessed Hooper; I am a most hypocritical wretch, not wor∣thy that the earth should bare me, said ho∣ly Bradford. I have no other name, saith Luther then Sinner; Sinner is my name, S nner is my sir-name: This is the name by which I shall be always known; I have sinned, I do sin, I shall sin infintum.
Ruth was the Daughter of the King of Moab, if we may give credit to the gene∣ral opinion of the Rabbines, or if that be not so probable, yet she was one that we may well suppose to have been one of good quality in her own countrey, as be∣ing Wife of Mahlon, the elder brother of the Family of the Prince Naasson, yet she accounts her self scarce equal to one of the Maid-servants in the house of Baz.Ruth 2.13. So Abigail the wit of the time, 1 Sam. 25.41. So El zabeth, though she was the elder and the better woman for out∣ward quality,Luke 1.43. yet how confounded was she with Mary s visit, as being too great a weight of honour for her to bear. So Mary, Lke 1 38. If I were asked, said Austin, what is the readiest way to attain true happiness, I would answer, the first, the second, the third thing is Humility. Humility doth not only entitle to happi∣ness, but to the highest degree of happi∣ness. Mat. 18.4. Humility is that Jacobs Ladder which reaches from Earth to Hea∣ven. Thirdly, imitate her in her charity and mercy towards suffering, needy, and want∣ing ones; how seldom did you find her ear or hand shut against charitable motions; she knew that those that did good to the
poor and needy for Christs-sake, God would do good to them for the Poors sake, most sure for his Sons sake. She knew, that he who promised They should have that asked, had first commanded such to give unto them that asked; she knew that unmercifulness is a sin which least becomes, and worse beseems one that had so largely tasted of the mercies of God, as she had done both in New and Old England She was much made up of pity and mercy to the poor, the bellies of the hungry, and the back of the naked, did often pro∣claim her pity and charity. Many Mi∣nisters, Widows and fatherless ones, have tasted, not only of her husbands bounty, but of hers also Vain persons when they give, they will cause their kindness to run in a visible channel,Mat. 6.1, 2. they will sound a Trumpet to be seen of men: but was she not a secret and hidden Re∣liever of Gods distressed ones? Did she not refresh the bowels of many with her hid treasures? Will you all learn to write after this Copy? Of Midus it is Fabled, That whatever he torched he trned into Gol; 'tis most sure, That whatever the Hand of Charity toucheth, it turneth it into Gold, be
it but a Cup of cold water, nay,Mat. 10.42. in∣to Heaven it self; cold water ha∣ving not fuel to heat it, cold water which costs not the charge of fire to warm it. Salvian saith, that Christ is Mendicorum maximus, the greatest Beggar in the world, as one that shareth in all his Saints necessities,Heb. 6.10 and will never forget the charitable person, the merciful person. Cicero could say, That to be rich is not to possess much but to use much; And Seneca could rebuke them that so stu∣died to increase their wealth, that they forgot to use it. I have read of one Euagrius a rich man, that lying up∣on his Death-bed, being importuned by Synesius a pious Bishop, to give som∣thing to charitable uses, he yielded at last to give three hundred Pounds, but first took Bond of the Bishop that is should be repayed him in another world before he had been one day dead. He is said to have appeared to the Bishop, delivering in the Bond can∣celled, as thereby acknowledging what was promised was made good, ac∣cording to that promise, Matth. 19.29 And every one that hath forsaken houses, &c.
Fourthly, imitate her in keeping off from the sins and pollutions of the day wherein you live; was she not one of Gods mourning ones for the abominations of the time?Ezek. 9.4, 6. Jer. 9.1, 2. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8 Psal. 119.53.136.158. did not mens abomi∣nation in worship and practice vex, grieve, and wound her poor soul? was it not her great work to live by no Rule, to walk by no Rule, to worship God by no Rule, but by that which she dared to die by, and to stand by in the great day of our Lord Jesus? she knew,John 4.23, 24. Phil 3.3, 2. that worshipping of God in spi∣rit and in truth was the great worship, the only worship that God stood upon she did not, she durst not worship God ac∣cording to the Customes of the World, or the Traditions of the Elders, or the Examples of great men; she knew that that Worship that is not according to the Word, is 1. Worshipping of devils and not God. Those that depart from the true Worship of God, and set upon false worship forbidden by God, do not serve God by it but the devil,Re. 9.2. 2 Chron. 11.15. Amos 5.25, 26. 1 Cor. 10.20. 1 Tim. 4.1. Ezek. 8.3. what boast∣ing soever they make, as you may evidently see, by comparing the Scriptures in
the Margent together. She knew 2. That that worship that is not according to the Word is an Image of Idolatry, which of all sins is most provoking to a holy, jea∣lous God. The Devil, saith Synesius, is as glad to be worshipped in an Idol, as he was by Israel in a Calf,Exod. 32 4. there being no∣thing that provokes God to destroy poor sinners more then this. The learned Jews have a saying, That no punishment ever happened to them in which there was not an ounce of the golden Calf; grounding it on Exod. 32.34. Nevertheless, I will remember to visit this sin upon them. The Egyptians worshipped a pide Bull, and whereas some thought it strange, that when one died they should have another of the same colour. Austin thinks, that the devil, to keep them in idolatry, might do with their Cowes, as Jacob did with the Ewes, present to them when they conceived the likeness of such a Bull. Certainly Satan will use all the Art he can to keep poor sinners in ways of false worship, it being the most compendious way that can be to engage God to destroy them. She knew 3. That that worship that is not according to the Word, hath destroyed the most flourishing Churches and Nations, witness the Church and Na∣tion
of the Jews,See Hos. 8.5, 6.7. Rev. 9.20 Ezek. 10.2. 2 Chron. 7.20. the seven Churches of Asia, and the whole Eastern parts of the Empire. She knew 4. That that wor∣ship that is not according to the Word is a cursed worship. It is the observati∣on of one well skill'd in the Jewish Learning, that there is only one verse in the Prophecy of the Prophet Jeremy, which is written in the Chaldee tongue, all the rest being in Hebrew, and that is Jer. 10.11. So shalt thou say, Cursed be the gods who made neither Heaven nor Earth;Weems Christ. Synag. and this so done by the Holy Ghost on purpose, that the Jews when they were in captivity, and solicited by the Chaldeans to worship false gods, might be able to an∣swer them in their own language, Cursed be your gods, we will not worship them, for they made neither Heaven nor Earth; That God that made Heaven and Earth, is only to be worshipped according to his own Word; for he will own no wor∣ship but what he will accept of, no wor∣ship but that; he will bless no worship but that, nor he will reward no worship but that; Your glorified Mother kept close to instituted worship when she had health and strength; in this it will be your wisdom to write after her air Copy. But
Fifthly, imitate her in justifying of the Lord under the sharpest, bitterest, and most afflictive Providences and ispen∣sations; how often have I heard her to justifie the Lord,Joll 13.26. even whilst he has been a writing bitter things against her; when Gall and Wormwood hath been put into her Cup, hath she not said with Ezra,Ezra 9.13. Neh 9.33. God hath punished us less then our iniqui∣ties deserve; and with Nehemiah, How∣beit, thou art just in all that is brought up∣on us, for thou hast done right, but we have done wickedly; and with ob,Job 1.21 The Lord gives, and the Lord takes, and bles∣sed be the Name of the Lord. And with Daniel,Dan. 9.14. The Lord our God is righteous in all his works which he doth You know what afflictive Providences she has been under, both in respect of her person, and in the loss of her husband, and in those variety of weaknesses that at∣tended her body, and in the great losses that some of you have met with in this world: Besides several other exercises; yet how has she commonly been taken up in blessing of God, and in justifying of God, and also in admiring the goodnesse of God, that it has been no worse with her;
and here I am satisfied she would not have exchanged her gains by afflictions for all the gains of this world. Stars shine brightest in the darkest night; Torches are better for the beating; Grapes come not to the proof till they come to the Press. Spices smell sweetest when poun∣ded: Young Trees root the faster for shaking; Vines are the better for bleed∣ing: Gold looks the brighter for scour∣ing: Glow-wormes glister best in the dark: Juniper smells sweetest in the fire: Pomander becomes most fragrant for chafing: The Palm-tree proves the better for pressing. Camomil, the more you tread it, the more you spread it: such is the condition of all Gods children, they are the most triumphant when most distressed; most glorious when most af∣flicted, as their conflicts so their con∣quests, as their tribulations so their tri∣umphs. Gods people are true Salaman∣ders, that live best in the Furnace of af∣flictions, so that heavy afflictions are the best Benefactors to heavenly affections: when afflictions hang heaviest, then cor∣ruptions hangs loosest. And grace that is hid in Nature, as sweet-water in Rose-leaves, is then most fragrant when the fire of affliction is put under to distil it out. But
Sixthly, imitate her in the standing, bent and course of her life and conversa∣tion.Vna actio non deno∣minat. No man is to judge of the sound∣ness or sincerity of his spirit by some par∣ticular acts, but by the constant frame and bent of his spirit, and by his general conversation in this world; if particular actions might determine whether a man had grace or no grace, whether he were in Christ or not in Christ, whether he were a Saint or no Saint, whether he were sincere or unsound, we should ma∣ny times conclude, that those have no grace who indeed have, and that they were not in Christ who indeed are, and that they are no Saints who indeed are; and that they are not sincere, who cer∣tainly are true Nathaniels: the best Saints on this side Heaven have had their extravagant motions, and have very foully and sadly miscarried as to particular actions, (even then when the constant course and bent of their spirits, and main of their conversations have been God-wards, and Christ-wards, and Holiness-wards, and Heaven-wards, &c.) witness Davids Murther and Adultery, Noah's Drunkenness, Lots Incest, Joseph's swear∣ing, Job's cursing, Jonah s vexing, Pe∣ter's denying, and Thoas his not believ∣ing;
such twinklings do and will accom∣pany the highest and fairest stars. As he that foots it best may be sometimes sound all along, and the neatest person may sometimes slip into a slough. He that cannot endure to see a spot upon his clothes, may yet sometimes fall into a Quagmire. So the holiest and exactest Christians may sometimes be surprized with many infirmities and unevennesses, and sad miscarriages. Certainly, parti∣cular sinnings are compatible with a gra∣cious frame, though none are with a glori∣fied condition. Our best estate on earth is mixt, and not absolute. Glory anni∣hilates all sinful practices, but grace only weakens them. The most sincere Chri∣stian is but an imperfect Christian, and hath daily cause to mourn over his infir∣mities, as well as he has cause to bless God for his graces and mercies. Look as every particular stain doth not blemish the universal fineness of the Cloth. So neither doth this or that particular Fact disprove and deny the general bent of a persons heart or life Particulars may not decide the estate either way; 'tis true, a man by a particular sinning is denomi∣nated guilty, but by no one particular can a mans estate be challenged either to be
good or bad. He that shall judge of a Christians estate, by particular acts, though very bad, will certainly condemn the Ge∣neration of the Righteous; we must al∣ways distinguish betwixt some single good actions, and a series of good actions; its not this or that particular good action, but a continued course of holy actions that denominates a person holy. Certainly, as there is no man so holy, but sometimes he falls into this or that particular sin; so there is no man so wicked, but he falls in with this or that particular duty: as you may see in Pharaoh, Balaan, Saul, the Ninevites, Felix, Herod, Judas, yea, and the very Scribes and Pharisees. Now look as every sin which a godly man falls into (through infirmity) doth not presently denominate him ungodly, so neither will a few good actions done by a wicked man prove him godly. 'Tis what the course and tenour of the life is, that must be most diligently and wisely observed, for every man is as his course is; if his course be holy, the man is so; if his course be wick∣ed, the man is so. There is a Maxim in Logick, viz. That no general Rule can be established upon a particular instance; and there is another Maxime in Logick, viz. That no particular instance can overthrow
a general Rule. We are never to make a judgement of our estates and conditions by some particular actions, whether they are good or evil; but we are still to make a judgement of our estates and conditions by the general frame, bent and dispositi∣on of our hearts, and by the constant te∣nour of our lives. Now I dare appeal to you and all others, that have observed the constant tenour of her life and conversa∣tion, whether it has not been such as be∣comes the Gospel,Phil. 1.27. Tit. 2.10 Gen. 6.9. and as hath adorned the Doctrine of God our Saviour (hu∣mane infirmities excepted) And O that this might be the mercy of all her chil∣dren, to walk with God as she hath done, and then I should not doubt but that they would all mee in Heaven at last. But Seventhly, imitate her in her love to the Saints, to all the Saints, in whom she could discern aliquid Christi, any thing of Christ. Did she not love, delight and take pleasure to see the graces of the holy Spirit sparkling and shining in the hearts,1 John 3.10, 14. lives and lips of the Saints, secretly wish∣ing in her self that her soul were but in so noble a case. Were there any men in all the world, that were so precious, so lovely, so comely, so excellent, and so honourable in her account in her eye,
those that had the Image of God, of Christ,Ps. 15.1.4. Ps. 16.3. 1 John 5.1 of grace, of holiness, most clearly, most fairly, and most fully stampt upon them. Did she not love Saints as Saints? Was it not the Image of God that drew out her affection to the people of God? Many, like the Bohemian Curr, can fawn upon a good suit; but grace was lovely in her eye, though cloath'd with Raggs. Many love godly men as they are Politicians, or potent, or learn∣ed, or of a sweet nature, or affable, or related, or as they have been kind to them; but all this is but natural love;1 Joh 3.9 Ps. 45.13 but to love them because they are spiritually lovely, because of the seed of God in them, because they are all glorious with∣in, is to love them as becometh Saints; it is to love them at a higher and nobler rate then any hypocrite in the world can reach to. Did she not set the highest price, and the greatest value and esteem upon those that were gracious? had she not an honour in her heart for them that feared the Lord? Did she not value persons according to their worth for another world, and not according to their worldly Greatness or Grandeur?Pro. 12.26. Pro. 28.6. Did she not preferr a holy Job upon the dunghil,
before a wicked Ahab upon the Throne?Luke 16. did she not set a higher price upon a gra∣cious Lazarus, though cloathed with Rags and full of sores, then upon a rich and wretched Dives, though he were cloath∣ed gloriously, and fared sumptuously eve∣ry day? was not her love to the Saints u∣niversal? to one Christian as well as an∣other, to all as well as any, to poor Laza∣rus as well as to rich Abraham,Phil. 1.21. 1 Pet. 2.17. to a de∣spised Job as well as to an admired Da∣vid, to an afflicted Joseph as well as to a raised Jacob, to a despised disciple as well as to an exalted Apostle? did she not love to see the Image and Picture of her hea∣venly Father, though hung in never so poor a frame, and in never so mean a cottage; without peradventure, he that loves one Saint for the Image of God that is stampt upon him, he cannot but fall in love with every Saint that bears the lovely Image of the Father upon him And O that this might be all your mercy to write after this Copy that she has set before you. But Eighthly, imitate her in her constancy in the ways of God, with a notwithstand∣ing all the hazards, stormes, dangers and troubles that has attended those ways, e∣specially in these latter days of Apostacy, wherein God had cast her lot. She was
not a Reed shaken with every wind; she was unchangeable in changeable times; whatever stormes beat upon the ways of God, or the people of God, she remain∣ed fixt,Psal. 44. Ps 119.112. firm and immoveable in the ways of the Lord; and doubtless such souls as are truly good, they will be good in the worst of times, and in the worst of places, and amongst the worst of persons; Prin∣ciples of grace and holiness,1 John 3.9. Hos. 6.4. they are last∣ing, yea, everlasting; they are not like the Morning-cloud, nor the early dew. Let times, and places, and persons be what they will, a sincere Christian will not dis∣honour his God, nor change his Master, nor quit his ways, nor blemish his Pro∣fession, nor wound his conscience to sleep in a whole skin, or to preserve his safety, or to secure his liberty; and was it not thus with her in the most trying times? An upright man is a right man. So  Jashar is rendred by the Septuagint, Judg. 17.6.Gen. 6.9, Rev. 14.4. Rev. 3.4. Job 17.9. He is one that won't be bowed or bent by the sinful customes or examples of the times and places where he lives. Let the times be never so dangerous, licen∣tious, superstitious, idolatrous and erro∣neous, yet a sincere plain-hearted Chri∣stian will keep his ground, and hold on in his way, as might be made evident by
a cloud of witnesses.Heb. 12.1. Ps 125.1, 2. The Lawrel keeps its freshness and greenness in the Winter-season; a sincere Christian is semper i∣dem; let the wind, and the world, and the times turn which way they will, a sin∣cere soul for the main wil still be the same. He will be like Mount Sion which cannot be removed; he will stand his ground and hold his own under all chan∣ges; he is like the Philosophers good man (Tetra-gones) four-square, cast him where you will, like a Dye he falls always square and sure; so st a plain-hearted Christian where you will into what com∣pany you will, and into what condition you will, yet still he will fall sure and square for God and godliness; let the times be never so sad, nor never so bad, yet a plain-hearted Christian will still keep close to God and his ways, and will rather let all go then let his God go, or his Religion go, or his Integrity go, or Ordinances go. Lapidaries tell us of the Chelydonian stone, that it will retain its vertue and lustre no longer then it is enclosed in Gold; a fit Emblem of an unsound heart, who is only good while he is enclosed in golden prosperity, safety and felicity. An un∣sound Christian, like green Timber, shrinks when the Sun of Persecution
shines hot upon him; the heat of fiery trials cools the courage of unsound, Chri∣stians; but a sincere plain-hearted Christi∣an is like a massie vessel of Gold, that keeps its own shape and figure at all times, in all places, and in all companies: when one of the Ancient Martyrs was greatly threatned by his Persecutors he replied. There is nothing (saith he) of things vi∣sible, nothing of things invisible, that I fear; I will stand to my Profession of the Name of Christ, and contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the Saints, come on't what will, in these evil days wherein multitudes have turned aside into crooked paths. She kept close and constant to the ways of the Lord, so long as her natural strength lasted. And O that all you her children would make it your business in this as well as in other things to write after your Mothers Copy; remem∣bring, that if you are not faithful unto death, you shall never receive a Crown of life, Rev. 2.10. And that if you do not continue to the end (that is, in well-doing) you shall never be saved, Matth. 24.13. But Ninthly, Imitate her in her high valua∣tions of Jesus Christ, what low and little
things were her own graces,Phil. 3.8, 9, 10. Mat. 13.44. duties, ser∣vices and mercies, when she cast her eye upon Christ, when she fell into discourses of Christ. Christ was her (Summum bo∣num) chiefest good. What was all the world to a sight of Christ, to a day, yea, to an houres communion with Christ. They are no believers that don't value Jesus Christ above all the world,1 Pet. 2.7 and all things in the world; for unto every one that believes he is precious; most preci∣ous, only precious, and for ever preci∣ous. They value him 1 Above their lusts, Gal. 5.24. They can pluck out right eyes for Christ, and cut off right hands for Christ. 2. They value him a∣bove the world. Witness David, Psal. 73.25. and Daniel, Dan. 6. and the dis∣ciples, Matth. 19.27. and Moses, Heb. 11.25, 26. and the primitive Christians and the Martyrs of a later date 3. They value him above their lives, Rev. 12.11. They loved not their lives unto the death, So Paul, Acts 20.22, 23, 24. Acts 21.13. So the Martyrs. 4. They value him a∣bove all their Relations: If all the World were a lump of Gold (said the Dutch Mar∣tyr) and in my hands to dispose of, I would give it to live all my days with my Wife and Children in a Prison, but Christ and
his Truth is dearer to me then all. You have thousands of such instances upon re∣cord. 5. They value him above their goods, Heb. 10.34 Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your Goods. So has many thousands since under sharp persecutions. 6 They value him above all natural, spi∣ritual and acquired excellencies, Phil 3.7, 8. In all my serious Discourses with her about our Lord Jesus Christ, she would still set the Crown upon Christs head. She would lay her self low, very low, that he alone might be exalted. The thoughts of Christ was precious to her, the Dis∣courses of Christ were precious to her, the Image of Christ was precious to her, the Ordinances of Christ were precious to her, the Discoveries of Christ were precious to her, the day of Christ was precious to her, the Offices of Christ were precious to her, and the Rebukes of Christ (whilst she enjoyed his Presence under them) was precious to her; but above all, the Per∣son of Christ was most precious to her; In her eye he was the chiefest of ten thou∣sand, fairer then the children of men,Cant. 5.10 Psal. 45.1. Phil. 3.7, 8. and all the riches, honours, pleasures and de∣lights of this world were but dung in com∣parison of him. O at what a rate has the Saints of old prized our Lord Iesus.
Mallem (said one) ruere cum Christo, quam regnare cum Caesare, Luther had ra∣ther fall with Christ then stand with Caesar. The same Author elsewhere saith, that he had rather be (Christianus Rstics then Ethnicus Alexander,) a Christian-Clown then a Pagan-Emperour. Theodosius the Emperour preferred the Title of Mem∣brum Ecclesiae before that of Capt Im∣perii; professing that he had rather be a Saint and no King, then a King and no Saint. And godly Constantine rejoyced more in being the servt of Christ, then in being the Emperour of the World. Bernard saith, That he had rather be in his Chimney-Corner with Christ, then in Heaven without him. It was an excellent Answer of one of the Martyrs when he was offered riches and honours if he would recant, said, Do but offer me somewhat that is better then my Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall see what I will say to you. It was a sweet Prayer of one, Make thy Son dear, very dear, exceeding dear, only dear and precious, or not at all. Another good man cried out, I had rather have one Christ then a thousand worlds. I have read of Johannes Mollius, That whenso∣ever he spake of the Name of Jesus, his eyes dropt tears: And of another Reve∣rend
Divine, who being in a deep muse after some discourse that passed of dear Jesus, and tears trickling down his cheeks before he was aware, and being asked the reason of it, he confessed ingenuously, It was because he could not draw his dull heart to prize Jesus Christ at that rate he should and fain would Christ lay near your Mothers heart, and O that he may lie near all your hearts, that so you may be safe and saved for ever. But Tenthly, Imitate her in the casting a Mantle of love over the infirmities and weaknesses of poor, weak, miscarrying Christians, in the burying of Christians weaknesses under their graces; much I know of this, but some know much more. She was not for blazoning of others weak∣nesses, whether they were nearer to her, or more remote from her. She commonly carried a Mantle of love about her to cast over other mens sins; she seemed to live under the Power of that Word, Pro. 10.12. Love covereth all sins; and that 1 Pet. 9.8. Charity shall cover the multi∣tude of sins. By covering must be meant, 1. A favourable Construction of all things, which in right reason might well be construed. 2. A passing by smaller infirmities and private offences.
3. Such a covering as might cure also, for love is wise. Love hath a large Mantle, and covers all sins, that is all private sins, and all such sins as may be concealed with a good conscience, both towards God and towards men. Again, it must be under∣stood, not of our own transgressions committed against God, but of other mens sins and transgressions committed a∣gainst us Love is not suspicious but in∣terprets all things in the best sense.Pro. 17.9 Love will not publish private in∣juries to the dishonour or shame of the party offend∣ing Prov. 12.16.To observe and take notice of other mens faults, but not of our own, is the easiest thing in the World, said Tha∣les. A prudent man covereth shame. It is recorded to Vespasians honour, That he was more ready to conceal the vices then the vertues of his friends, Such commonly are best acquainted with other mens infirmities, who are least ob∣servant of their own iniquities and irregu∣larities. The nature of man is very apt, saith Seneca, (Vtimur perspicillis magis quam speculis) to use Spectacles to behold other mens faults, rather then Looking-Glasses to behold their own. Erasmus speaks of one who collected all the lame and defective verses in Homers Works,
but passed over all that was excellent. The Donatists of old were more glad to finde a fault then to see it amended; and to pro∣claim it then to cover it; to carp at it then to cure it. If I should finde a Bi∣shop committing adultery (saith Constan∣tine the Great) I would cover that foul Fact with mine Imperial Robe, rather then it should come abroad to the scandal of the weak, and the scorn of the wicked. Seneca unmasking the face of their corrupt State, hath this notable passage, The News from Rome take thus, the Walls are ruined, the Temples are not visited, the Priests are fled, the Treasuries rob'd, old men are dead, young men are mad, Vices are Lords over all: The Dictator blames the Con∣sul, the Consul checks the Censor, the Censor chides the Praetor, the Praetor falls foul upon the Aedile, and he casts all the fault upon the Quaestor, and because no man will acknowlede himself in fault we have no hopes of better times. How applicable this is to our present times I shall leave others to judge; but by the whole you see that all sorts and ranks of men, are more apt to observe and quarrel at other mens faults, then with their own. Observable is that of our blessed Saviour, Luke 7.37. There was a woman in the
City which was a sinner: No wonder, what woman is not? we may guess both who the woman was, and what the sin was, and which City it was: but he nei∣ther names the City, nor the sin, nor the sinner. Seeing her Reformation, he con∣sults her Reputation. O that you would all labour to write after this Copy; When Alexander was painted, the Painter laid his finger on his wart, and Apelles cover∣ed Venus mole with her finger, that it might not be spied. As you stand in a near relation one to another, so I could wish that you would lay your fingers upon one anothers warts and moles, and not blazon one anothers humane frailties and infirmities to the world, but love and live as brethren and sisters, who are never without a mantle of love to cover infirmities, I say, not enormities: to co∣ver weaknesses, I say, not wickedness: to cover from the world, I say, not from God, nor from one another. But Eleventhly, Imitate her in her earnest desires and endeavors, that others, espe∣cially that her nearest and dearest Rela∣tions might taste that the Lord is graci∣ous, that they might all be holy and hap∣py, gracious and glorious; that they might all have changed hearts, renewed
natures, and sanctified souls: That they might all be born again, adorned with grace, filled with the spirit, and fit∣ted for Heaven. You know, that up∣on her dying bed, she desired me, that when she was asleep in Jesus, that I would, for the advantage of the living, especially for your sakes (ho lay nearest her heart) preach on that Psal. 34.8. O taste and see that the Lord is good.1 Thes. 4.14. The three Sermons that I preached on Psal. 37.8. I have been desired to Print, but could not answer Friends expectations in that, because I had not the Notes by me, of what I said upon that Text. Which ac∣cordingly I did, once and again. Now what was her design in this, but that every one of you might share with her in the same favour, love, spirit, grace, me∣rit, righteousness and goodness, that her soul had long tast∣ed of. There is not a soul that ever have had any saving taste of the Lord, and of his goodness, but is mighty desirous that others should taste of the same grace and goodness. O taste and see that the Lord is good. As if David should have said, I for my part have seen, tasted, and experi∣enced much of God and his goodness, and never more then in my greatest streights.
I am loth to eat these heavenly viands, and soul-ravishing morsels of contentment alone. Come hither all you that fear God,Ps. 66.16. the words are without a Copula∣tive in the Hebrew, venite, audite. Calv. Come, Hearkn. Like that Gen. 19.14. It not only imports an In∣vitation, but the affe∣ction also of him that speaks. and I will tell you what God hath done for my soul. Come, O come poor souls, taste and see with me how good the Lord is; how comfortable the embra∣ces of Christ are, and how sweet communion with Heaven is. We cannot advantage others, more then by declaring and commu∣nicating unto them our soul-secrets, our sol-Experiments. All the Saints own it as their duty to glorifie God in their Generation, and wherein can they bring more glory to God then in helping souls to Heaven? and how can they finde out a readier way to effect this great business, then by telling them what God has done for their souls; then by making a faithful Narrative of their own conditions, by nature and by grace; when and how the goodness of the Lord was made known unto them upon a saving ac∣count. O tell poor wounded sinners what methods of mercy the Lord used to the
healing up of your wounds, and to the quieting of your consciences; that so they may be encouraged to a serious use of all Gospel-means, and to a hope of the same grace and goodness of the Lord towards them.Heb. 12.14. See my Treatise on this Text. Acts 26.29. Lke 5.29. O labour more and more to con∣vince others by your experiences, that grace is the only way to glory; and that without holinesse no man shall see the Lord; Paul had tasted that the Lord was good, and he wish'd, that both Agrippa and all that heard him were altogether such as be was, except his bonds. As soon as Mat∣thew had tasted that the Lord was good; he called together an huge multitude of Publicans and others to meet at his house. As soon as Philip had tasted of the sweet∣ness of communion with Christ,John 1.45, 46. he runs to Nathaniel to invite him to Christ, say∣ing, Come and see No sooner had the Woman of Samaria tasted of Christs li∣ving waters, but she leaves her water-pot,John 4.28. and posts into the City to call out her friends and neighbours to see and taste how good dear Jesus was. So those young Converts, Zech. 8.21. And the inhabitants of one City shall go to another,Vide Pemble in loc. Isa. 2.2, 3, 4. saying, let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts I will go alse. Mic. 4.2. And many Na∣tions
shall come and say, Come and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, and to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for the Law shall go forth of Zion, and the Word of the Lord from Hierusalem. These blessed Converts would not come alone, but draw others along in company with them to worship the Lord, which is lively expressed in a Mimesis or imitation of the encourage∣ments and invitations they should use one to another, I will go also: every one was as forward for himself, as zealous for another. O blessed frame of spirit! O my friends, it is the nature of true grace to be diffusive and communicative; Grace can t be conceal'd; they that have tasted of divine sweetness cannot chuse but speak of it to others, their hearts like bottles of new wine, would be ready to burst if they had not vent. Grace is like fire in the bones, they that have it cannot hide it. All the faculties of the sul, and all the members of the body, will still be a tel∣ling of others, that there is a treasure of grace in the soul. The blind men that were cured were charged to be silent, but they could not hold their peace. So here, Lilmor behammed, We therefore learn that
we may teach, is a Proverb among the Rabbins. And I do therefore lay in and lay up (saith the Heathen) that I may draw forth again, and lay out for the good of many And shall not grace do as much as nature, shall not grace do more then nature? Well friends, this I shall only say, that the frequent counsels tha your glorified Mother have given you to taste of divine goodness, and the expe∣riences that she has communicated to you of her taste of divine goodness, both in her health and sickness, both in her living and dying, will certainly either be for you, or else be a dreadful witness against you, in the great day of our Lord Jesus. O remember not only these experiences of hers, that are now presented to your eyes; but those other experiences of hers as to her inward man that has often sounded in your ears. But Lastly, labour to imitate her in her com∣fortable passage out of this world. Those words were more worth then a world which she uttered a little before she fell a∣sleep in the Lord, viz. Lord, take my a∣king head, and lay it in thy bosome. How often did she express her longings to be with Christ, that she might sin nor sorrow no more; her outward man was full of pain,
weakness and trouble, yet how was her inward man refresh'd and quieted in a way of believing, accord∣ing to that blessed Word,In all my visits of her, my hardest task was still to work her into a willingness to stay in this world, till all her doing and her suf∣fering wrk was over. Isa. 26.3. Thou wilt keep him in per∣fect Peace. The He∣brew runs  Shalom, Shalom, Peace, Peace: whose mind is stayed on thee: because he trusteth in thee. Never did the espoused Maid long more for the Marriage-day, nor the Appren∣tice for his freedom, nor the Captive for his Ransom, nor the condemned man for his Pardon, nor the Traveller for his Inne, nor the Marriner for his Haven, nor the sick man for his health, nor the wounded man for his cure, nor the hungry man for his bread,Phil 1.23. nor the naked for clothes, then she did long to die and to be with Christ, which for her was best of all. How often were those words in her mouth.Rev. 22.20. Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. The face of none is so comely to the Saints eye, the voice of none so lovely to his ears, the taste of none so pleasant in his mouth as Jesus Christ The Name of Jesus hath a thousand treasures of joy and comfort in it, saith Chrysostome, and
is therefore used by Paul five hundred times, as some have reckoned, The Name of a Saviour (saith one) is Honey in the Mouth, Musick in the Ear,Bernard and a Jubilee in the heart: And how often was that blessed word in her mouth, Remember, O Lord I beseech thee, how I have walked be∣fore thee in truth, and with a perfect heart,Isa. 38.3 and have done that which is good in thy sight; a serious sense of her uprightness in the main of her walking with God, did yield her more then a little sweetness and comfort when she was upon her bed of Pain; one of the last speeches of a dying upright Christian was this, Satan may as well plck God out of Heaven,John 10.28, 29, 30. 2 Tim. 2.12. as plck my soul out of his keeping. She knew him in whom she had believed, and was perswaded that he was able to keep that which she had committed to him a∣gainst that day. A child that hath any precious Jewel given him, cannot better secure it, then by putting it into his fa∣thers hands to keep; so neither can we better provide for our souls safety then by committing them to God: Keep that which I have committed: that is, eithr my precious soul, which I have com∣mitted to his care and custody to bring it forth glorious at that day of his appearing,
or my eternal life, happiness and crown of glory, which I have as it were deposited w th him by faith and hope; and thus it was with her. The Apostle saith, he committed to Gods Custody a Pawn or Pledge, but about this Pawn or Pledge Interpreters differ; One saith It is his soul; Another saith, It is himelf; And a third saith, It is his works: And a fourth saith, It is his sfferings: And a fifth saith, It is his salvation. In short, he committd to God his soul, himself, his doings, his sufferings, to be rewarded with life and salvation; and so did she who is now at rest in the Lord. Lord (saith Austin) I will die that I may enjoy thee. I w ll not live, but I will die, I desire to die that I may see Christ, and re∣fuse to live that I may live with Christ. The broken Rings, Contracts and Espou∣sals, contents not the true Lover, but he longs for the Marriage-day, and so did she, who has now exchang'd a sick bed for a Royal Throne, and the company of poor Mortals, for the Presence of God, Christ, Angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect. It was well said of one, So far as we tremble at death, so far we want love; its sad when the Con∣tact is made between Christ and a Chri∣stian;
to see a Christian afraid of the making up of the Marriage: But your deceased Relation was no such Christian; I know nothing in this world, that her heart was so much set upon, as the com∣pleating of the Marriage between Christ and her soul. My eye is upon that text, Isa. 57.1. The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart, and  men are taken away, none considering that the righteous are taken away from the evil to come. I have read of one Philo a Jew, and of another, that when they came to any City or Town, and heard of the death of any godly man, though never so poor, they would both of them mourn exceedingly, because of the great loss that place had by the death of that godly man; and because it was a warning-Piece from God of evil approaching: but ah, how many famous godly Ministers, and how many chie Christians hath the Lord of Hosts taken away from us, and yet who lays it to heart. There is no greater Prognostick of an approaching storm, thn Gods calling home so many Wor∣thies (of whom this world was not worthy) as he has lately done. Now O that God would beautifie all your souls with all these 12 Jewels, with which your Mother wa adorned in life and
Sir, you having signified to me, that it was your Mothers minde, and your de∣sires, that her following Experiences should be printed. I did think it might be somewhat seasonable to put you all in minde of such things as I had (among ma∣ny others) observed, and which should be all your ambition to imitate, as you would give up your accounts at last with joy, and be happy with her for ever in that other world. Considering, that these Experiences may fall into other hands besides your own. I thought it meet to let such Read∣ers know, that these were taen from her by one of you, when she was in a very weakly condition, and had little more strength then to speak; and they are but some of those that lay most warm upon her heart at that time. God began to work upon her in the Morning of her days; and had there been a Collection of all her most close, inward, spiritual Experiences, they would have been great∣ly multiplied beyond what is now pre∣sented to the Readers eye; but that was a Task too hard for her under those va∣riety of weaknesses that she was every ay contending with. The Experienees f old disciples commonly rise high, but
the Ingenious Reader may easily discern by the twelve Iewels with which she was adorned, that she was a woman both of choice and great Experiences. Astin ob∣serves on Psal. 16.2. Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will delare what he hath done for my soul: He doth not call them (saith he) to acquaint them with speculations, how wide the Earth is, and how far the Heavens are streteh'd out, or what the number of the stars are, or what is the course of the Sun; But come and I will tell you the wonders of his grace, the faithfulness of his promises, and the riches of his mer∣cy to my soul. Now all Ministers and Christians that had any inward acquain∣ance with her soul-concernments, they do very well know, that she was most taken up with the wonders of Gods free, rich, and sovereign grace, and with the sweet∣ness, the fulness, the freeness, the riches and the faihfulness of his Promises, and with the riches of his mercy in Christ to her soul. To draw to a close, it is observable, that even the holy Apostles in their Ca∣nonical Epistles, have spent some good part of their holy lines in the ample Com∣mendations of those eminent Saints to
to whom they wrote, as Paul in h to Philemon, and John in that of  to an Honourable Lady: and th other to a meaner person, viz. Gai and that they went not behind th door (as we say) to whisper; but  on the House-top did proclaim t Religious and pious practices of tho more choice Christians to the miati¦on of others. And further, when consider that which the Apostle speak¦eth of, Demetrius a rare and no ordinary Testimony;3 Ep. of John 12. Demetris ha a good report of all men, and of t Truth it self; and we also bear Re¦cord, and we know that our Record  true: And yet further, when I con¦sider what is Recorded of Hezekia Thus did Hezekiah throughout all J¦dah,1 Chro. 31.20, 21. and wrought what was good, an right, and true before his God An in every work that he began in th service of the House of God, an in the Law and Commandments, h did it with all his heart and pro¦pered. And when I consider wh high commendations the Apostle b¦stows upon the Churches of Ma¦donia, 2 Cor. 8.1. to the eleven
verse; And upon the Church of Thes∣alonia, 1 Thessal. 1.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. And also 2 Thessal. 1., 4 5 And when I consider, that t was the Holy Ghost who writ ead Epitaph,2 Chron. 24.16. They buried him n the City of avid among the Kings, ecause he had done good in Israel, oth towars God and towards his hose. It is said also of osiah, in his Commendations by the same Spi∣rit, Like unto him there was no King,2 King. 23.25. Moses and Morda, Sarah, Debo∣rah, Esther, E abeth and others, after their deaths have had their due praises. When I consider of these things I am very well satisfied in what I have said concerning this de∣ceased Sister and friend. I do no ways doubt, but that we may vry safely say good of such, when dead, whose ordinary course and practice it was to do good while they lived; but in this censorious Age, No soon∣er is dst cast upon some Christi∣ans head, but there are those that will do what they can to throw dirt in their faces: Agustine doth very fitly compare these to Dives his dog,
they lay licking and sucking Lazarus his sores, but his sounder parts they never medled with. To trample upon the Repu∣tation, and stain the glory of them that die in the Lord, argues such Persons to be a kin to Fleas, who bite most when men are asleep. It was one of Solons Laws, that none should dare to speak evil of the dead. And Plutarch tells us, that that was high∣ly commended and duly observed: But is it so now? This I am sure, that it well becomes Christians not to dare to speak evil (if they could) of those who for the main have lived holily, and died graci∣ously, as this deceased friend hath done. Let this satisfie us, that she is above the Praises and envies of men. 'Tis the good, the profit, the advantage of all your souls, and theirs into whose hands this little Piece may fall, that has drawn me out to write so large an Epistle. If I had had only the dead in my eye, a few lines should have serv'd the turn. I doubt not but that you will kindly accept of my endeavours to be serviceable to your im∣mortal souls, and who can tell what fruit may grow upon this Tree? I shall im∣prove all the interest I have in Heaven, that both the Epistle and your glorifi∣ed Mothers Experiences may be blest, to
the furtherance of the internal and eter∣nal welfare of all your souls. The good∣will of him that dwelt in the Bush, rest up∣on you and yours. So I Rest Honoured friends, Your Souls Servant THO, BROOKS.
A TRUE RELATION OF Some of the EXPERIENCES of Mrs. SUSANNA BELL, taken from her own Mouth by a near Relation of hers, a little before her death. Left as a LEGACY to her Mourning Children. IT pleased the Lord to order it so, that in my young days I was cast into a Fa∣mily that feared the Lord. And go∣ing to hear Mr. White, preaching from those words, Prov. 15.15 But he that is of a merry heart hath a continual Feast. From thse words he did shew, how happy a thing a good conscience was, and what a sad thing it was with Judas to have a bad conscience; and what a blessed thing it was to have a good conscience. From that
of Hezekiah, Isa. 38.3. And he said, Re∣member, now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which i good in thy sight. This Sermon God made useful to me; and after this, it pleased the Lord to order it so, that I changed my condition, and the Lord provided for me a good Husband, one that feared him. And some troubles being here, many of the people of God went for New England, and among them my Husband desired to go, but I and my friends were very a verse un∣to it. I having one childe, and being big with another, thought it to be very diffi∣cult to cross the Seas with two small chil∣dren, some of my Neighbors advising me to the contrary, living so well as I did. But I told them that what the Lord would have me to do, that I would willingly do; and then it pleased the Lord to bring that Scripture to my mind, Eph. 5.22. Wives submit your selves unto your own Hus∣bands, as unto the Lord. And then my heart was brought off to a quiet submis∣sion.
But after this, I being well delivered, and the Child well; It pleased the Lord soon after to take my Child to himself: Now upon this, so far as it pleased the Lord to help a poor wretch, I begged ear∣nestly of him, to know why he took a∣way my Child, and it was given in to me, that it was because I would not go to New England. Upon this the Lord took away all fears from my pirit, and then I told my Husband I was willing to go with him. For the Lord had made my way clear to me against any that should oppose. And then my husband went presently up∣on the work to fit to go. And the Lord was plased to carry us as upon Eagles wings, according to that Deut. 32 10, 11. We were eight weeks in our passage, and saw nothing but the Heavens and Waters. I knew that the Lord was a great God upon the shore: But when I was upon the Sea, I did then see more of his glorious power then ever I had done before, according to that of the Psalmist, Psal. 107.23, 24. And when the Lord was pleased to bring us in safety on shore, his people gave us
the best entertainment they could, and then I thought I could never be thankful enough to the Lord for his goodness in preserving us upon the Sea, I being big with Childe, and my Husband-sick almost all the Voy∣age. After this my Husband would have gone by water hiher into the Countrey. But I told him, the Lord having been so good in bringing us saf ashore amongst his people, I was not willing to go again to Sea. And it was a good Providence of God we did not; for most of them that went were undone by t. The first Sermon that I heard after I came ashore was out of Ier. 2.13. For my people have committed two evils; They have forsaken me the Fountain of living waters, and hewed them out Cisterns; broken Cisterns that can hold no water. Now the Minister did shew, that whatever we did build on short of Christ, would prove but a broken Cistern; and by that Sermon the Lord was pleased to shake my founda∣tion: but I being a poor ignorant creature, thought if I could but get into the fellow∣ship of the People of God, that that would quiet my spirit, and answer all my Objecti∣ons;
And I did accordingly attempt to joyn with the Church, but they were very faith∣ful to the Lord, and my soul, and asked me what Promise the Lord had made home in Power upon me. And I answered them, Jer. 31.3. Yea, I have loved thee with an ever∣lasting love, therefore with loving kindness I have drawn thee. But they told me that that was a general Promise; that I must look to get some particular Promise made home in Power upon me, and perswaded me to wait a little longer ro see what God would fur∣ther do for my poor soul, which accordingly I did. And going to hear Mr. Cotton, who did preach out of Rev. 2.28. To him that o∣ver cometh I will give the Morning-star; from which words he did observe, that that Star was Christ. And this he came to shew, how a soul might know whether it had an inter∣est in Christ or no, and that was by the Lords giving out such precious Promises as these to the poor soul, viz. That God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. and that John 16.2. And your joy shall no man take from you. And Isa. 54.22. I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy
transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins: and that Isa. 43.5. which Promises afterwards God made sweet to my soul. After this I went to hear Mr. Shepherd, and he was preach∣ing out of the Parable of the ten Virgins; Matth. 25.1, 13, In his discourse he shewed that all were Professors, but the foolish had nothing, but Lamps without oyle, a Pro∣fession without grace in their hearts: but that the wise had got grace in their hearts, and so were ready prepared to meet the Bridegroom when he came. Now, by that discourse of his the Lord was pleased to convince me that I was a foolish Virgin, and that I made a Profession, but wanted the oyle of grace in my heart, and by this means I was brought into a very sad condition▪ For I did not experimentally know what it was to have oyle in my Lamp, grace in my heart, nor what it was to have union with Christ, that being a mystery to me: And then I did think my self guilty of breaking all the Commandments of God except the sixth. For I thought I had neither desired, wished or endeavoured any mans death. But then the Lord shewed me, that if I were
saved by Christ, my sins had murdered him, according to that Acts 3.15. chap. 4.0. And th  greatly aggravate my sin the more unto m. Now one of my Neighbors ob∣serving that I was in a distressed condition, told me that she had been a hearing, and that the Ministe she heard was a shewng, that the Lord had more glory in the salvati∣on then in the damnation of sinners. For in their salvation, his Mercy and his Justice were both glorified, but in their destructi∣on only his Justice was glorified. Hearing of this, the Lord was pleased to draw out my heart to plead with him. That if he might receive more glory in my salvation then in my destruction, that then his Mercy might be manifested to me. For I thought, although I had many worldly comforts, yet I had no interest in Christ, and that if I should die presently, Hell would be my por∣tion; and in this sad and sore distress, the Lord was pleased to imprint that Scripture upon my mind, Job 10.2. I will say unto God do not condemn me, shew me wherefore thou con∣tendest with me? Job 40.2. Shall he that con∣tendeth with the Almighty, instruct him? he
that reproveth God, let him answer it; and that word of the Apostle, Rom. 9.0, 21 Ny, but thou, O man, who art thou that repliest against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that form∣ed it, Why hast thou made me thus? Hath not the Potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honour, and another unto dishonour. After this, it pleased God, that Mr. Elliott, and some other of the people of God, seeing me in this sad condition, tod me the Church would have me come in to be a Member with them; but I did reply, that all Church-fellowship would do me no good. Then Mr. Elliott asked me, What would do me good? and I told him, No∣thing but an interest in Christ. His Answer was, That I was already in the pangs of the Nw Birth; and he did believe it would not be long before the Lord spoke peace to my poor soul. After that, reading a book of Dr. Prestons, where he did shew, that when the Lord joyned himself to a believer, he did first comprehend the soul, and then enabling the soul by faith to apprehend him. Which double Act of faith I then knew not. About fourteen days after, considering what a distressed con∣dition
I was in, I was bemoaning my self be∣fore the Lord; and the Lord was pleased to bring that Scripture to my remembrance in John 16. I will give you that joy, that no man taketh from you. And then I thought with my self that it was Christ that I did want, and not joy. But the Lord brought that Scri∣pture to me, that Christ was tidings of great joy, Luke 2.10, 11. And I thought how could this be to such a poor wretch as I was, and the Lord was pleased to bring that Scripture to my mind, That he looked not as man looked, 1 Sam. 16 7. And that he was God and not man, Hos. 11.9. And by this means he took awy all my fears. And then the Lord did help me to discern that this was a mystery indeed, and did so quiet my heart, that all the World seemed as nothing unto me. For I never heard such a voice before, blessed be his Name. And then the people of God would have me come into fellowship with them, And soon after I was admitted a Babe in Christ among them: Afterwards being
to hear Mr. Cotton, on 1 Pet. 2.2. As new∣born Babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that you may grow thereby. And from thence he shewed, that if it were a living Babe it would cry out for nourishment, and that that soul that did once really taste of Christ was never satisfied, but would still be crying out for more and more of Christ; when such a soul came to any Ordinance, as Hearing, Prayer, the Lords Supper, and did get no∣thing of Christ, they were all as lost Or∣dinances to it. It so fell out, that the next Lords day was the day of sitting down at the Lords Table. And the Lord did put it into my thoughts, that if we received nothing but a piece of bread and a sip of wine, it would be but a poor empty thing, and so the Lord did help me to beg, that if what he had been pleased to speak to my soul before were a true manifstation of himself, that he would be pleased to speak again unto my soul, For a three∣fold cord is not easily broken, Eccles. 4.12.
Being at the Ordinance, the bread and wine coming about, I was thus sighing un∣to the Lord; what shall I have nothing but a bit of bread and a sip of wine this day? And the Lord was pleased to bring that Scripture to my minde, John 6.55. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink in∣deed. And so the Lord was pleased to give something more of himself to my poor soul at that time. After this, a sad Providence attended one of my Neighbors, I was full of fears that her condition might be mine. But the Lord brought that Scripture to my mind, Jer. 29.11. For I know the thoughts that I think towards you, saith the Lord, thoughts of Peace and not of evil, to give you an expected end. And thereby the Lrd stayd my heart in trusting upon himself, and giving me a safe delivery. And being up again, I went to hear Mr. Cotton, and he was shewing what Assuranc was and how happy that soul was that coul say as Job did, Job 19 25. And with David Psal. 9 For ever Lord thy Word is setled in the Heavens; and so the Lord was pased to shew me what a mercy I had that had Assurance. Then I went to speak to
Mr. Cotton, to ask him what he thought of th work of God upon my poor soul. And  old me, that he was satisfied that it was  real work of God. And he did councel me to walk humbly and thankfully, and to take heed of grieving that Spirit of God by which I was sealed up to the day of Redem∣ption, and to walk humbly towards those that God had not revealed so much of him∣self to as he had to me. And then the Lord was pleased by his Providence to call my Husband to come for England, and he did tell me, that he should so order business that I should have less of the world to trouble me; I was glad to hear it from him, and de∣sired him to go. And then the Lord was pleased to help me to consider whether I had not got a better Husband; and the Lord did quiet my heart in himself, my soul being e∣spoused to him, 2 Cor. 11.2. After he was gone from me, we did hear of a War broke forth in England, and friends told me my Husband would be in danger of his life if taken. I told thm the best I knew, and the worst I knew; and that if God should take my Husband out of the world, I should have
a Husband in Heaven, which was best of all. And Mr. John Elliott did visit me in his  fence, and asked me how the Lord did b up my heart in my Husbands absence: And I did tell him, that the Lord was as well able to bring him to me in safety, as he did to car∣ry him out. And he answered me, I believe the Lord will say unto thee as he did to the Canaanitish woman, Matth. 15.28. Be it un∣to thee according to thy saith. And the Lord was pleased to keep me and all that I had, and to preserve him, and to bring him home in safety unto me. And then in stead of ha∣ving less of the world which I desired, the Lord did cast in more of it. After this, my Husband told me, That he must go again to England, and I was very unwilling to it; but he told me, if he did not the Name of God would suffer. To prevent which, I consent∣ed, and it pleased God to bring him home in safety to me. And in a few years af∣ter he brought me over to England and God shewed much of his goodness to me. At my coming ashore he brought that Scripture to my Remembrance Deut. 33.
26, 27. There is none like unto thee, O God of Jeshurun, who rideth upon the Hea∣ven in thy Help, and in his Excellency on the Sky, the Eternal God is thy Refuge, and under∣neath are the everlasting armes. After it had pleased God to bring me back to my Native Countrey. I was much troubled that there was no bet∣ter observation of the Lords day, it be∣ing our Practice in New-England to be∣gin it at Sunne-set the Evening before, as it is Recorded in Genesis, That the E∣vening and the Morning was the first day; and that Scripture was brought to my Me∣mory, Prov. 14.10. The heart knows its own bitternesse, but no man intermeddles with its joy: Many trials the Lord hath been pleased to exercise me with, but in the midst of all God hath made that Word sweet to my soul, Isa. 54.10. For the Mountains shall depart and the Hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my Peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee.
It pleased the Lord after a year or two to exercise me with much weakness; but then he made that Word sweet unto me, Isa 50.8. He is near that justifies me, who will cotend with me. And that word, Job 15.11. Are the consolations of God small unto thee? After these things, when I was in a very great strait, up∣on the apprehension of some publick dan∣gers that seem'd to threaten us, the Lord was pleased to bring to my mind that Scripture, Zach. 9.12. Turn to your strong Holds you Pri∣soners of Hope. And since in the midst of my many bodily infirmities God hath made that word sweet to my soul, Psal. 116.7 Return un∣to thy rest. O my soul, for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee. And that word, Psal. 23.4. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art wth me, thy rod and thy staffe they comfort me. I still remain as a prisonr of hope, waiting for a fruition of that happiness which the Lord Jesus Christ hath prepared for me. For I know he that hath the Son hath life, 1 Iohn 5.12. And if the Son make us free, then are we free indeed, John 8.36. And blessed is that people that knows the joyful found, they
shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy coun∣tenance. I finde the Lord esus very free in the tenders of his love to poor sinners. And that love hath in a great measure been ma∣nifestd to my poor soul. After this it plea∣sed the Lord to visit one of my Daughters with a great sickness, upon which my heart was drawn out to sek the Lord on her be∣half, then that Scripture was brought to my mind, Iohn 11.21. Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my Brother had not died. But I know that now whatever thou wilt ask of God, God will give it to thee. Jesus saith unto her, thy Brother shall rise again. Martha saith unto him, I know that he shall rise again at the last day. Jesus saith unto her, I am the Resurrection and the Life, and he that be∣lieves in me shall never die. And it pleased the Lord to give me her life as an Answer of Prayer. It pleased the Lord after this to vi∣sit this Land with the Pestilence, a severe stroak of his, that swept away many thou∣sands; and under that sad Providence of his the Lord did help me to rely alone upon him∣self, from that Scripture, Psal. 91.7. A thou∣sand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at
thy rght hand, but it shall not come nigh thee. And according to my saith, it pleased the Lord to preserve both my self and all my Relations from that sad stroke, though some of them were often in the midst of danger, blessed be his Name The next year after rhe Lord did again (for our sins) visit us, and that by a dreadful fire, which reduced to ashes many thousand houses, and yet his love was then manifested to me in the preserva∣tion of my habitation, when many better than my self were burnt out. Therefore un∣to my God shall I, (who am less then the least of all his mercies) render that praise which is due unto his Name. Since that, whilst I was upon a languish∣ing bed, and Death even knocking at the door, it pleased the Lord once again to a∣larme me in that weak condition by a dread∣ful fire which brake out very near us, and at that time it pleased my good God to sup∣port and strengthen my spirit with that Scripture, Isa. 43.2. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow, thee: when thou walkest through the fire thou shalt
not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. And that Scripture, Isa 54.5 For thy Maker is thy Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Is∣rael, the God of the whole Earth shall he be cal∣led. And this second time also the Lord was gratiously pleased to preserve me and my House from that amazing stroke which did so much threaten us; And O that all these new and old Experiences might be high obligations upon me and mine to holiness and fruitfulness all our days. Whilst I remained in New-England there hapned a great Earthquake which did shake all in the house, and my son being by me, ask∣ed me what it was, I told him, our Neigh∣bours were all amazed at it, and knew not but that the world might then be at an end; and did run up and down very much af∣frighted at it; but I sate still, and did think with my self what a Christ was worth to my poor soul at that time. And then God made these Scriptures sweet refreshings, sup∣porting and quieting my soul. Psal. 18.46. The Lord liveth, and blessed be my Rock, and let the God of my Salvation be ex∣alted.
Heb. 11.13. These all died in faith not ha∣ving received the Promises but having seen them afar off, and were perswadd of them, and embraced them, and confessed they were stran∣gers and pilgrims on the earth. Rev. 7.9. After this I beheld, and lo a great multitude, which no man could number, of all Nations, and Kindred, and People, and Tongues, stood before the Throne and before the Lamb, cloathed with white Robes and Palmes in their hands, ver. 14. And he said to me, these are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their Robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. FINIS. Bridges Remains, being Eight Sermons; viz 1 Of Mans Blessednesse, &c. By Mr. Bridges Preacher of the Word of God at Yarmouth. A Discourse of Christs Coming. By Theophilus Cale. The Nature and Principles of Love, as the End of the Commandment, declar'd in some of the last Sermons of Mr. Joseph Caryl, with an Epistle of Dr. Owen D.D. All to be sold by John Hancock Sen. and Jun. at the Three Bibles in Cornhill.
