b3094 11956973 51535
A Heavenly DIURNALL Glory be to God on High, Peace on Earth, Good will towards Men. It was good news, is, and ever will be. OR, The long expected returne of the many publike and private Humiliations of the people of God. All which will by his blessing ere long, be turned into dayes of great praise and thgiving: and prove a fatall scourge to such Trai∣terous blasphemous Tongues as Aulicus, &c. By I. B. London printed 1644.
To all unfained Lovers of Truth and Peace thorowout the world. WHereas on Fryday last, being the 6. of Septemb. 1644. there was preferred to the Common Counsell of London a Petition by severall well affected persons, who in re∣ference to a late Order of the House of Commons upon the City Petition for Pro∣vision of just Debts, had severall meetings to consi∣der of Propositions for advance of Moneys, and ha∣ving finished the same, being not at all different in substance from those in a late printed Paper, did present the same to the said Common Counsell, hum∣bly praying them (if approved) to represent the same to the Honourable House of Commons for such allow∣ance therein as should be thought meet, which Pro∣positions were referred to the consideration of a Committee of six Aldermen and twelve Common∣ers. Now to the end all scruples may, as neere as the Author can, be cleared, and the businesse which by
judgement of many wise men is conceived to tend so much to raise for the Parliament upon the publike faiths credit so considerable great sums of Money, beyond beleefe of many; and not onely so, but much to conduce to the glory of God, the peace, wel∣fare, and safety of these bleeding dying Kingdoms, may be hastned and furthered by those in Authority whom it doth or shall concerne. The Author is im∣boldned to put the ensuing Objections and Answers in print, without composing them in any better form, as well for expedition sake, as also because they should not differ from what he had formerly delivered to severall persons in writing; not doubting, though it be a transgression, it will be esteemed, as he profes∣seth, a well affected one. Notwithstanding, for his proceedings in a busnesse generally reputed and esteemed to be of so great good and importance to the publike, the Author hath been most unjustly termed a Malignant, nay, the head of all Malignants about Town. God forgive them, for he accounts it a very great blessing rebus sic stantibus to be so honoured. Certaine Objections made concerning Propositions for just Debts, which were answered unto as fol∣loweth, or to the like effect. IT is conceived never to be the intent of the Parlia∣ment, that honest mens Debts owing by Delinquents should goe towards payment of publike faith. If provision be not first made for payment of just
Debts, many Delinquents, whose Estates are now offe∣red to sale, being justly indebted more then they are worth, it will be the honest mens Estates that unavoid∣ably must pay such publike Faith, and so cause a great heart burning (if not prevented.) If Lands be sold at a full value, there is no question but the Creditors being satisfied their just Debts, there will be a good remainder, not onely to pay just Debts, but also the publike faith, and such Damages as they have done to the Kingdome. If Land be sold at 8. and 6. yeers purchase, with such allowance of publike Faith as is propounded, the pub∣like Faith (if compounded for at a low rate) will not onely be dishonoured, but also be a great weakning to future Parliaments that may have the like use of it, when after ages shall know there was so much losse (as in this way will be) to them that lent it; neither in this way will there (save onely some particular persons) be fully satisfied the publike Faith. The Malignants, so estee∣med, of whom most is bought and desired to be bought, being conceived to have but little confidence in the Par∣liament, will sell it for little or nothing, and by what they so receive they are thereby the more enabled to dis-serve the Parliament if opportunity serve. The Reasons wherefore no more provision is made for the poore man, who is not so well able to secure his Debt is: THat rich men may not seeme poore, and so take ad∣vantage of such a clause, and thereby the State should be disappointed for the present supply of Moneys, which in this way will be speedily raised. But God forbid that the poore man, bringing in what he is able, should not be allowed Justice, which is his birth-right, as well as others.
It is conceived that the well-affected having spent their Lives and Estates for the preservation of their Lives, Religion, Liberties, and Estates, might expect as much as is petitioned for, without bringing in 10. in the 100. But this they onely doe that the state should not (being necessitated for the preservation of the Kingdom, sell that for 50. li. which is worth 100. And rather then they should doe so, it being known (not to be long dura∣ble] honest men will strip themselves to their shirts to supply their occasions. This will discover all Malignants that have lent any Moneys to wage Warre against the Parliament; for first, they must bring in their Moneys, and then be put over to the Committee to prove the justnesse of their Debts, wherein if he shall be found guilty, he shall not onely forseit the Moneys brought in for security, but also be liable to such other fines and punishments as the Parlia∣ment shall thinke fit. Lands being (as they will be in this way) advanced to double the value at which they are now offered to sale, there will be as much left to pay publike Faith as now is, nay far more, where there is cleare estates; for the Creditors desire to take them at a full value, and so they will produce double as much money. And therefore if the offer which is made of 20 or 30 per cent. to secure publike Faith be hearkned to, it will much advance the businesse, if it be not conceived a weakning of the pub∣like Faiths credit, to give so much, nay any thing to se∣cure it, being the noblest and greatest security that can he given, and no wayes thought desperate as Delinquents are by the strict Letter of the Law. But how well affected some may be esteemed that offer 20 or 30 in the hundred to secure the publike Faith, that perhaps was bought at 60 in the hundred profit, and so offer the Parliament in plain English a Pig of their owne Sow. I know not, but certaine I
am that none but such who have gotten by purchasing of publike Faith as aforesaid, will so undervalue its credit, & therefore the well affected offer 10 in 100 more upon it. It is not desired any man should be allowed more, nor any other of his Debts then what he may recover by Law if these distractions had not beene, and therefore he is turned over to the Committee, who are to judge of it, and allow so much thereof as they shall thinke fitting and just. Also it is to be considered, that this way suits with the late City Petition for provision of just Debts out of De∣linquents estates, and will unite London and the associa∣ted Counties, and raise in probability as much Money as the whole publike Faith lent already comes to, the State first and last being allowed 20 per cent. which is the fifth part; and there is owing, as is conceived, five mil∣lions at least, if not ten. The Question being, which shall be first paid, Iust Debts, or Publike Faith. Resolved as neere as I can, with reference to better judgements, That just Debts should be first paid, for these reasons: 1 BEcause it is the well affecteds estate, and not the Delinquents, and the Parliament, (as it is con∣ceived) only intended to satisfie the publique faith with what was the States owne, not with what was the well affecteds. Objection. But all is forfeited to the State, and Delinquents estates are not by the fundamentall law lyable to pay their Debts. Answer. Therefore the City pleads equity to the Parliament, as may appeare by the Reasons annexed to the City Petition, which are as followeth:
The City Reasons, wherefore honest and well affected mens Debts should be made good out of their Delinquent Debtors Estates, so far forth as they will pay the same. BEcause in confidence they should be made good in case the Parliament prevailed, they have answerably to such Debts which they alwayes accounted good estate, given, lent, and sub∣scribed great sums of money for the Parliaments service. 2. That proportionably to their estates, as well in Delinquents hands as others, they alwayes were and still are estimated and valued, and accordingly assessed for the fifty Subsidies and other Assessements for the Parliaments service. 3. That according to their estates, as well in Delinquents hands as others, they have adjudged themselves and been adjud∣ged to pay their twentieth part. 4. That divers Merchants who have great sums known to be so owing, and not able to beare the losse of it, their credits, which ie the life of trade, will be impaired, if not wholy lost; and divers who have all or the greatest part of their estates so owing, both them∣selves, wives and children will be vtterly undone. 5. That they who have beene alwayes very active and forward to and beyond their estates to bring Delinquents to condigne pu∣nishment may not be made sufferers with them, as of necessitie they must if provision be not made as aforesaid, their estates be∣ing involved in the Delinquents. 6. That many for their extraordinary zeale and forwardnes to advance the Parliaments cause, especially such as have taken upon them publike services, have rendred themselves so notorious to the contrary partie, that many of their Debtors would not, and others durst not pay them one penny of their Debts, which other∣wise might have been secured. 7. That if Debts so owing be not provided for, all in generall, especially the Citizens of London, to whom most is owing, will be much discouraged and dis-inabled to serve the Parliaments occasions as formerly they have done, and still desire to doe.
Objection. But how then shall the publique faith be paid? Answer. We therefore after this 10. l. in the hundred, that Land may not be as yet sold at so low rates, but these∣questrations may be continued for the States use, till the Kingdome be more setled, and then we desire our debts may be assured us at a full value which may be double that they are now offered to sale, and by that meanes there will be enough to pay both. Objection. But how shall the State be supplied with monyes? Objection. Let them be but pleased to make tryall of the pro∣positions, which by judgement of wise men will advance more then sale of Lands, and if it doth not prove so within the 28. dayes tryall, then let them proceed to sale of Lands either in the way propounded, or other∣wise, provision being onely made for such honest men as shall bring in their monyes within the time, and then all claimourous mouthes will be stopt. Secondly. By the excise and divers other wayes, the State may take order for satisfying of the publique faith when the Kingdome is setled; in the meane time, the overplusses of Delinquents estates may goe towards satisfaction thereof, and doubtlesse many of them will have great overplusses. Aud which is most of all considerable. This will unite the affections of all to the Parlia∣ment; whereas the not allowing just debts, there being
as conceived ten millions of money owing by Delin∣quents to the wel-affected, may dis-unite their affections (which God prevent.) Nay, Whereas the paying of the publike faith is so much stood upon. Our desire is that it may be put to tryall. And we will produce of honest and wel-affected men ten to one, nay an hundred to one, that have lent ten to one upon the publique faith, and not desire (as they ne∣ver expected) payment thereof till the Kingdome be set∣led: And therefore we offer ten in the hundred more upon the publique faith, which we will also stay for; provided our just debts be secured. So the great question is, Whether the Parliament to secure wel-affected debts (it being some of their whole estates, and in hopes whereof, they have lent great summes of money to the Parliament) will accept of three or soure hundred thousand pounds, nay more there can be beleeved upon the publike faiths security, or not. But that which doth most induce the wel-affected to lend 10. l. in the hundred more upon publike faith is, that the wel-affected Nobility, Gentry, and Comonal∣ty of the Kingdome, nay the Parliament and City be not undone: For if these Lands now offered to sale, be∣ing the Creame, will produce but eight and six yeates purchase with such allowance of publike faith; which if it be not, doubtlesse may be, and carried so closely too, by severall wayes as may be thought inscrutable, or not to be discovered: What will the other Lands remote and in the Kings quarters yeeld next time the State
wants moneys, and so are necessitated to sell more? Doubtlesse at last they will fall to an Irish purchase, and so the wel-affected having spent themselves al∣ready for the service of the Parliament, the great rich men generally, though many of them, as is the Author, unjustly termed Malignants, who have great purses, as the Author hath not, (yet contented with what he hath) may ingrosse all the Lands of the Kingdome into their owne hands: In the feare of God let it be seriously and speedily considered of, not fearing they will doe any wrong, but that if they would they mightand accordingly judge of them who are willing to discover and make knowne such a gap for that purpose. Now the better to advance moneys upon the pro∣positions in hand, it is desired a Declaration may be forthwith published, that it shall be lawfull for every man bringing 10. l. in the hundred to have his debt tried in this new Court of Judicature, and upon due proofe recover judgement against any debtors or debtors estate, whom he supposeth to be with the King, or otherwise absents himselfe, and shall not re∣paire to his dwelling, now or hereafter within the Parliaments quarters, within a certaine time to be limitted, or otherwise shew good cause for his ab∣sence; because men will be fearful that the bringing in of their 10. l. in the hundred may make their debtors Delinquents; whereas the thing armed at is, that the Subject may be righted by his debtors estate, not be∣ing able to reach his person by law. God who is the God of peace, and Jesus Christ who is the Prince of peaces, send us peace and truth, and
which is the hearty prayer of the Author, and which he professeth in the presence of the Omnicient God to be the onely thing he aymes at, and for prosecuti∣on whereof he is by some particular persons (igno∣rantly, as in charity he conceives, but certainly most unjustly termed a Malignant, his heart being right towards God, his Royall Majesty, Parliament and Country; and therefore heartily desires, that this ill tare of devision may be speedily rooted out, and that no man henceforward may dare to call a man a Malignant; which name is much destructive to trade (it being a weakning to many honest mens credit) unlesse he can prove that he hath, or shall have a head, hand, or purse against the Parliament, or that shall hereafter disobey. Parliamentary commands; for as the Author conceives the Devill is the grant Ma∣lignant, and all those who are now in Armes and ma∣liciously bent against their God, King, Parlia∣liament, and Country, are his reall Children; but the Author in judgement of charity must needs have better thoughts of many of them, whose weak judge∣ments have been wrought upon through the conning Prelaticall, Jesuiticall, Diabolicall insinuations of those blood-thirsty, Jesuiticall, Prelaticall Papists, and Irish Rebels; God be mercifull to their soules, (if they belong to him) but certainly he will plague their bodies and estates for this their Rebellion and Roguery; whereas the other so wrought upon as a∣foresaid, the Author humbly desires should upon their timely submission be as freely forgiven their great Trespasses, as we doe expect God should freely forgive us our Trespasses.
Further more. Whereas the Authour doth confidently beleeve that the Almighty God hath honoured this God-ear∣ing Parliament to lay the foundation of that Spiri∣tuall Temple of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ: He doth also as truly beleeve, that God (how farre the Spirituall Temple, exceeds the materiall, which was but a type and shadow) will in these our dayes (if we could but fully beleeve in him who is the Eternall, Almighty Lord of Heaven and Earth; the onely wise God, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords) soone plant the Gospell of Jesus Christ in the darke places of England and the two other united King∣domes; and so erect his Temple, by the Spirituall Sword; that which many think onely possible to be done by the Temporall; and I am afraid many are guilty of this abhorrid Achan. Gods blessing goeth along with his Ordinances to convert soules; the fi∣ery Ordinance which so much thunders now amongst us is onely to chastise the bodies of the above menti∣oned Malignants now in Armes, as aforesaid. If therefore a Treasury were erected for the peo∣ple to bring in moneys freely for the building of this Spirituall Temple, as was in the dayes of old for the Materiall: God, whose name is Jehovah; God that changeth nor, that hath the command of all mens hearts, would so powerfully worke upon them, that his glory might be knowne amongst the Sonnes of men in these latter times, that the Author doth verily beleeve he would so move the hearts of people to this holy and heavenly worke that they should so freely cast in, that it should be said, as in old times,
forbeare, there is more then enough. The Author hath some reason more then super∣naturall to beleeve so; because he knowes that eve∣ry true Protestant, who desires to serve God in the wayes of his Fore-fathers since Reformation, and is willing to be reformed by Authority in all Tempo∣rals, as immediately from the Parliament, who are their Heads. But in spirituals, as immediately from that reverend Assembly of Divines, whom the Au∣thor conceives to be the most compudent judges in Divine things, and are onely to hand such Spirituals to the Parliament for Confirmation (if approved.) And because such a true Protestant as aforesaid will not willingly submit to the malignant humour of e∣very giddy unsetled braine, is thereupon presently ter∣med a Malignant, when God he knowes such a Malig∣nant wil give ten in the hundred for Peace and Truth, and none will refuse (if able) being allowed the Pub∣lique Faith for what shall be so flung into the said Treasury. Whereas some men being not so well min∣ded, may offer to give (as too evidently appeares) three times as much for bloudy warre to serve their owne turnes, not respecting the glory of God, nor the Crowne and dignity of his Majesties sacred Person (as he is Gods annointed) nor of his great Councell the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, nor the welfare of their own native Coun∣try, much lesse of the other two Kingdomes, one whereof by a former, but of late by a more speciall providence so strongly linked together; all which are now lamentably bleeding, and if not speedily stopt by God who is the onely wise Chyrurgion, and is onely
able to stoppe this  bleed to de; I me to ru, dstruc, , dppulation, and so at last o foraigne nion, whic God in mercy for  Names ske, nd his Son Christ Jesus sake, the Saviour of us all, timely pre∣vent, as doubtlesse he will. Besides, another Motive is, That by this meanes all Assesments, &c. and pro∣ceedings for non-pament thereof (which were caused through our sinnes, because we were so backward To helpe the Lord against the mighty, which was Meros curse) may according as the issue of this businesse shal prove, upon triall thereof, be speedily taken off, which will mightily indeare the affections of the People to King and Parliament. Let evill councellours be removed from the Throne, and it shall be established in righteousnesse. Dearly beloved in our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, If any thing be not as it should be, attribute it to the weaknes and inability of the Penner, who goes by the name of the Author, but not to the Author of the Penner; I leave every man to judge that knowes the Penner and his disabilities in such things, to judge who that Author is that set him on worke. And the Penner humbly prayes you wil accept of (as our most Mercifull and Heavenly Father doth) the will for the deed, being limited unto two houres time for the ex∣pediting hereof. This businesse (as he conceives) ad∣mitting of no long delayes, which hath bin, and still is too great a fault amongst us, for the old Proverbe of late hath (oft times) proved too true, When the Steed
is stolne, then we shut the stable doore; and these after games to a cunning skilfull Gamster seldome proves good: b a word to the wise is sufficient. Finally my Brethren, let us trust in the Lord our God, who is the Lord of hosts, and who for bis unspeakable Glory, and our comforts (be it knowne unto you) blessed be his great Name. The Authour doth very beleeve that rather then these true Malignants afore named, whom he hath en∣devoured (but not fully able) to set forth in their pro∣per bloudy colour shall go unpunished for this their rebellion, blasphemy, &c. but especially for the blood of Gods Saints, which they have so cruelly and un∣mercifully spilt, without any other cause (save onely in opposition and malignity against God and good∣nesse, that very God (Miracles being ceased) who will be seene in the ordinary wayes of his providence; Yet being unlimited, I say againe, rather then such Wretches shall goe unpunished, He will fend an An∣gell from Heaven to destroy them, or cause the earth of a sudden, unexpectedly to swallow them up, as he did Corah, Dathan and Abiram, who spake the same language to Moses and Aaron as these Wretches now doe to the Parliament, nay more, for these say in their hearts, We will not that Jesus Christ shall reigne o∣ver us, and so undeniably the Devill must, who they need not feare but sooner or later will pay them their wages for this their falacious good service, if not timely repented of, which God grant them so to doe (if they belong to him.) If wicked Achans be but removed, and the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church setled, God will be soone seene in the Mount.
