B4251 12116426 54321
: OR, EVERLASTING Fire no Fancy. BEING AN ANSWER TO A LATE PESTILENT PAMPHLET, ENTITULED [The Foundations of Hell-Torments shaken and removed] wherein the Author hath laboured to prove, that there is no Everlasting Punishment for any Man (though finally wicked and impenitent) after this Life. His Considerations Considered, and his Cavils Confuted; Together with a Practical Improvement of the Point, and the Way to escape the Damnation of Hell.— By JO. BRANDON, late of Oriel Colledge (Oxon) now a Minister of the Church of England. Quos mala praesentia non corrigunt, ad sequentia perducunt.Gregor. Dialog. JOB xi. 3.Should thy lies make Men hold their peace? and when thou mockest, shall no Man make thee ashamed? LONDON, Printed for Henry Brome at the Gun in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1678.
Hic Liber (cui Titulus ) IMPRIMATUR, GEO. HOOPER Rmo Dno Dno Gilb. Arch. Cant. a Sacris Domestic. June 7. 1677.
To the Right Honourable HENRY EARL of STARLIN. RIGHT HONOURABLE, THough I may easily apprehend that some will not be wanting, who will look upon these Lines with an evil Eye, and argue from worse Principles than those of Logick, that I am proud and presumptuous in making use of Your Name in this sort; yet upon mature de∣liberation, I have adventured so to do, resolving rather to run the hazard of their hardest cen∣sures, than to neglect so fit an opportunity of te∣stifying to the World my Humble Respects to Your Honour, and my grateful thoughts of Your manifold favours towards Me and Mine. To see some Men live, as if Hell and its
Everlasting Sorrows were but Scarecrows, and Melancholy Fancies, and (then) to see others hardening them in their Infidel impieties, by making them believe that it is so indeed; (And that they have gotten the knowledge of this De∣vilish Doctrine, by praying to the God of Hea∣ven, as my Author pretends very smoothly in his Preface) This (my Lord) is sufficient to provoke a patient and peaceable spirit; The displeasure of my Heart against his Execrable Book, hath now engaged my Pen against it; And (with the Poetical liberty) I may truly say—Si natura negat, facit indignatio Li∣brum. Certainly, it is great pity that a Book of this kind I deal with, should pass one Year to an end, without a full and formal Confutation; And I was almost ready to Write a Satyr against my many Betters, (that have a great deal more Learning, and a little more leisure than my self) for suffering it to go so long without Controul.
Well, I have now (through Providence) finished that Work which they should have done long before: For a Pamphlet of this nature must needs be as worthy of a severe Reproof, as those Pieces that have been licensed by his Ho∣liness at Rome, which they have so often, and so excellently opposed; For 'tis worse to believe Hell a Dream, than to believe Purgatory to be a Real thing. And now (Right Honourable) besides my Obligations to You, it may seem in other respects very proper to present You with a Dis∣course of this sort; because the Reality of Hell thus Proved, Defended and Applied, may by God's help make You still more and more care∣ful of that great Work, which I perswade my self Your Honour is truly careful of already, viz. To lead Others in the way to Heaven, by Your good Example.
The Lord Jesus multiply his choicest bles∣sings upon Your Self, Your Virtuous Lady, and the rest of Your Family, granting You height of Honour, and length of Days, the real com∣forts of his Holy Ordinances, and the Eternal Felicities of his Father's House. So praying, resteth Your Honours in all Duty and Humble Observance, JOHN BRANDON.
TO THE READER. CHristian Reader, It was the Apostle's predicti∣on, that in the latter dayes perillous times should come;2 Tim 3.1. which I think, hath been more than suffici∣ently verified in this last Age: And no wonder, since so many perillous Books have been published (year by year) to pervert the Faith, and corrupt the man∣ners of the Christian world. Of which I might name a great many; but there is scarce any for the bigness of it, more eminet in this kind, than this of Mr. R. which I have undertaken (by God's assistance) to Ex∣amine and Confute. For though many could wish that there were no Hell, nor Everlasting punishment for the Wicked and Impenitent, yet there be few or none that have said so, with so much confidence as my Author hath done. I Confess (to give the Devil his due) some of the Socinian Worthies have suggested something of this Nature,Vid. Calov. So∣cin. proflig. de Morte aeterna. and sometimes have pretended a Reason or two for it. But none of them (that I know of) did ever speak it so roundly, or take so much pains to
prove it as he hath done. —Rejoyce (in sin) O ye unrighteous, and be glad all ye that are hollow in heart, Triumph and boast O ye Enemy of Holiness, and let your hearts be hardened against the fear of evil; come now and take your fill of what you most love, and walk (securely) in the ways of your own hearts; go oft to the Ale-house, and seldom to Gods house; let Cards be more with you than Bibles, and be wiser (now) than to mind that Melancholy thing which Precise fools call by the name of Religion and the Fear of God; in short, set a Cup on your Table, and a Whore on your Knees, and sing aloud your basest Epithalamiums, and profanest Songs that you have, yea, let them delight your honest Souls day by day; for what though these things are known in Hea∣ven, and offend (most grievously) your glorious Lord; yet the matter is not much as to any great danger therein; for your Preachers sad Doctrines are but de∣ceits and Delusions: you need not to fear any Ever∣lasting Damnation, however you live or however you die. For this good Gentleman hath given you many Infallible proofs, that there is no such thing to be feared. (see the latter part of his Book.) But yet, Take heed sinners, and do not bless your selves overmuch in your iniquities, for what if this Learned man should be mistaken, and his Infallible Proofs should prove to be nothing but fair shews and real Deceits, what a case would you then be in, if you
should die as you have lived? And that they are such, and no better, I for my part do verily believe: And if thou canst doubt of it (Christian Reader) be pleased to compare his Proofs and my Answers together. But, say some, what need I have troubled my self to Confute him, since there are many others that can do it better? To which I reply, as the Learned Amesius,(in Coron. ad Col. Hagiens.) (in praefat. ad Ecclesias Belgicas) Licet hanc provinciam ab aliis potius quam à me, capessendam esse judicem, à me tamen po∣tius quam à nemine, viz. That though I grant it were fit∣ter  for many others to do than for such a one as I, yet it is better it should be done by me, than by none. Mistake me not, Reader, I speak not this,A Digression of Mr. Chewney his Book. in any measure to undervalue that piece which Mr. N. Chew∣ney hath opposed unto it. But let these particulars be considered in the case. 1. That it is very small, and 2. so general that there is need enough of another Book to that purpose, for it is not a fourth part of his subtilties which he hath engaged with therein (and I think I may say, it is scarce a tenth part.) And the Reason why He did not Confute his false Glosses and fair pretences more particularly, is; as he tells us in his Epistle to the Reader, because he thought them to be very Obvious to every Judicious eye (to use his own words in that place.) But with due respect to his Name and Works, he might easily have considered, that a Pamphlet of this nature, was not designed to
deceive the Judicious, but rather the ignorant and unstable. And if it do but so, and so harden such persons in their sinful courses, Satan will not think that he hath sowed his Tares in vain. Secondly, What if others can do it better than I, yet it will be nevertheless lawful for me to do it as I can. Must I resolve to lay down my Ministry, and to Preach no more, because I cannot Preach so well as they that can Preach better? No sure, no reason for it. Doubtless I may (and must) do my Lord and Master what Service I can, though I cannot do what others can. Thirdly, Others can do it better (thou saist, and I do not gainsay it) But I rather look what men will do, than what they can do. If they can save us from Drowning (when we are fallen into the Ri∣ver) yet if they will not do it, we are never the more beholding to them. And if they can, 'tis their own fault that they did not, or at least it was not mine, for I did not hinder them from so doing. Fourthly, If thou thinkest I have done amiss in it, do but shew me my Error (in a Sober and Christian way) and I shall (I hope) be thankful for it, and shall be ready to retract any thing therein, which thou canst prove to be unsound or unseasonable.
Fifthly, If yet thou will not be in Charity with my poor Scribble, but art resolved to be offended at it; Then, Reader, thou mayst be offended still: Behold it lies at thy mercy, and (if thou canst not otherwise content thy self) Thou maist take thy Pen and write against it. If thou let it alone, I am sure it will do thee no hurt, if thou Readest it (though only to ca∣vil at it) It is possible it may do thee some good. And if it doth, give God the Praise, and the Author thy Prayers, who is, Thy Servant for the Sake of Jesus, J. B. Wargrave (Berks) July 20. 1676.
The PRINTER thought fit to insert Dr. Gregory's Approbation of the Work in his Letter to the Author, as followeth. Worthy Sir, I Have, though too hastily, read over Your Book; for which You deserve many Thanks from him, who is your Adversary; and do hereby receive them from me, who am a friend to you, and every man else who is of your Complexion; I mean, a Lover of Virtue, and a defender of Truth. It is my Opinion, that you have much obliged both Your Antagonist, and Your Reader; Your Anta∣gonist, by convincing him of his Error; Your Reader, if already Orthodox, by confirming him in a great Article of his Faith. Me∣thinks the Cavils of that Pamphlet, wherewith you deal, are so weak and fond; so clearly Confuted by those strong Arguments which you have produced from Scriptures and Reason; that if the Author of that worthless Scroll shall not, upon his serious per∣usal of Your Book, subscribe to that Truth, which therein you have asserted; 'tis much to be feared, that his obstinate perseverance in so foul an Error, against such clear Convictions, will ere long bring him to that place, which he now denieth, and make him sensible by sad experience, that there is indeed an Hell. Who this Person is, I cannot tell; perhaps a Sceptick, perhaps a downright Atheist, and probably a man of a lewd and vicious Conversation; for, the Truth is, such persons are most concerned to believe, and, were it possible, to prove, that there is no Hell, who have no ground to expect any share in Heaven. But whosoever your Opponent may be, I have so much Charity for his Immortal Soul, as to wish that he may reap that Advantage from your Book, which therein you design him; that he may timely see his gross mistake, and renounce his Heresie; lest hereafter he be forced to confess an Eternity of Torments, when it will be too late to escape them. So Prayeth, Your Neighbor, Friend, and Brother , F. Gregory. Hambleton Mar. 28. 1677.
To the Doubting READER. REader, dost Doubt, whether an Hell there be? Doubt on till Dooms-day come; then shalt thou see What now thou'lt not believe. Then shall quick sense Soon give the Lye to Doubting-Diffidence. A Fancy now, Hell-fire thou dost account, Whose sharpest pains, in thine esteem, amount Unto no more, than if with Launce thou cut Some callous, senseless piece of Flesh. I but, When the great God that made thee, shall thee call To stand before his dreadful Tribunal, And Curse thee straightway to a real Hell, What wilt thou think 'tis then? if thou can'st tell: I'l tell thee what, in short, if so I may Fore-speak the thoughtful Language of that Day. 'Tis Hell indeed! 'tis Hell! Hell now I see; Yea, feel the pains of Hell! which could I flee, How happy I? But now, Woe! (woe's me) woe! Fancy 'tis not, but Sense, that makes it so.
—A Fancy this? This scorching Fire! —A Fancy this? This wrathful Ire! —A Fancy this? This fearful Pain! —Fancy all this? Which shall remain, —From Age to Age, still to endure? —Oh! Hell! —A Fancy 'tis not sure. Could I but live on Earth, as heretofore, I'de never dare to call it Fancy more. —But live like one forc'd to believe, —'Tis Hell, from whence there's no reprieve. Thus when hell Flames have wrought in thee a Faith, Forcing assent to what this Author saith; Then wilt thou say, oh, that I had been wise, To credit this, and not Fool-like despise What now I find and feel! For now I see, 'Twas ill to Doubt, whether an Hell there be. S. N.
To the READER without Doubt. DOubt Thou dost not Reader, (go to;) 'tis well: To doubt, and doubting drop down into Hell, How dreadful is't! Far better 'tis to fear An evil look'd for, and in Time prepare Against the worst may come; worse 'twill not be Because Thou dost believe Eternitie Of Torment after Death: Nay rather This Will prove a Mean, leading to future Bliss. This will Thee move all Times to mind the way Thou goest in, and fear going astray. More careful this will make Thee to avoid All evil; and still keep Thee well employ'd. This will Thee cause to shun the Paths of sin And mind the End, when ought Thou dost begin. Nought wilt Thou do, God's Justice to incense, If Hell Thou dost believe sin's Recompence. What? for some short-liv'd sinful pleasure shall I incur the Pains of Death perpetual? What? for some short-breath'd perishing delight, Shall I forgo the Beatifick sight Which Heav'n affords? and this of loss entwine With pains of Sense? No, Hell shall ne'er be mine, On such unequal Terms. Though sin entice, I'l never buy it at so dear a Price. Most true it is, thy Faith should work by Love: The Love of God and Man should chiefly move Thee to decline, what ever may offend An Holy God; yet may the fearful end Sin leads to, sometimes thought on, move Thee more Than all the charmes of Love could, heretofore. Live thinking oft then on the Pains of Hell, Which none escape, but Those that here live Well. S. N.
Acrosticks upon the Name of the Author, J. B. JOHN is his Name, in Hebrew Jochanan; Which signifies, at least, a Pious man. On whom his God his Grace hath multiplied, More than on multitudes of men beside. His upright Life, and painful Labours give Most signal proofs of this, where he doth live. No one can justly spot the Coat he wears; Nor, through his fault, blaspheme the Name he bears. BRANDON I add, that you assur'd may be, The Author's him I mean, and none but he. Right such an one as John, describ'd: 'Tis he, Who is, what this his Name notes him to be. A Man though young in Years, yet old in Grace; Whose Gifts among the Elder may take place. Nor doth't become the Gravest to despise His Youth, whose Actions speak him gravely wise.
Doubtless, God's Church is happy in such Youth. Skilful to strike Gaths with the stone of Truth. On whom whoso shall cast Dirt of contempt, Let such see how themselves may be exempt. Nought have I more to add, his (Christ'n) name is John, A name (of Grace) annext to Natures name, Brandon. Ad Authorem Hexastichon. PRosâ sic Prologi vice, carmina qualia feci,Si Naturae negat, facit Indignatio versum, Qualemcun{que} potest: quales ego vel Cluvienus. Juv. Sat. 1. Num. 15. Quae tua, si statuunt, Nomina; Parce mihi. Parcas quòd, Primùm, proso sermone, Rogatus Scribere, causatus; (dans Tibi signa Rei.) Exìn, quòd lusi Numeris, super horrifera Re, Haud benè compositis; Nec tibi digna tuli. Sum tamen— Proximus tibi amicus, & Amicus tuus fidelissimus, S. N.
THE TABLE. THe Epistle, giving an Account of the Author's Writing. CHAP. I. SECT. I. The Introduction, with some Reflections upon the Author of the opposed Pamphlet. pag. 1. CHAP. I. SECT. II. An endless state of punishment (for the wicked) in another World, proved; and those Proofs vindicated from the Exceptions of Mr. Richardson, and his Brethren the Socinians. p. 3. CHAP. I. SECT. III. Other Texts of Scripture urged, and Arguments grounded on Scripture. p. 12. CHAP. II. SECT. I. A Tast of Mr. Richardson's Grapes in the beginning of his Gar∣den; or a Discovery of his gross Sophistry, and grievous Im∣pertinencies in the former Pages of his Discourse. p. 23. CHAP. II. SECT. II. Mr. R. his Observations upon [Hell-fire, the Damnation of Hell, the rich Man and Lazarus, Tophet, the Worm that never dyeth,] observed and censured. p. 26. CHAP. II. SECT. III. Mr. R.'s Inventions upon the Parable of the Tares, of the word [Cursed] of Eternal Damnation, of the word [Fire] with a Query of the Corporiety of Hell-fire. p. 29. CHAP. II. SECT. IV. His pleasant Game, or a view of that pretty sport, that he makes with the various Opinions of learned Men, about the place where Hell is fixed. p. 34.
CHAP. II. SECT. V. His admirable Combate with Mr. Ed. Leigh upon the Point, and his causless Triumph over him: being a Vindication of the said Mr. L. his arguments. p. 38. CHAP. III. SECT. I. Mr. R.'s Attempt to remove (as he calls) the main Pillars of Hell-Torments. p. 46. CHAP. III. SECT. II. The strong Man armed, and his strength tried, or Mr. Richard∣son's deep considerations considered. p. 61. CHAP. III. SECT. III. Mr. Richardson's Richest Learning discovered, or his many In∣fallible Proofs disproved. p. 70. CHAP. III. SECT. IV. The remaining part of his Proofs (from the 7th. to the last, be∣ing the 20th.) carefully examined. p. 89. CHAP. IV. SECT. I. The Uses of the Point, by way of Information in several parti∣culars. p. 113. CHAP. IV. SECT. II. A discovery of the madness of wicked Men in following their sins, &c. And their extreme misery hereafter that dye such here. p. 116. CHAP. IV. SECT. III. An humble and serious Exhortation to the Gentry, and others. (which concludes, with some questions to the damners and sinkers.) p. 132. CHAP. IV. SECT. III. A Continuation, or a word to the better sort of Gentry, viz. the Religious. p. 140. CHAP. IV. SECT. IV. Particular directions for the escaping of Hell-torments, being six in number, with a caution to all, and a consolatory conclusion to the servants of God. p. 145.
The Authors distance from the Press has occasio∣ned these ERRATA'S, which the Reader is de∣sired to Correct. PAge 2. Line 23. add [most probably.] p. 16. l. 31. for Bond read [Land.] p. 38. l. 21. for Instance, r. [Sense.] p. 51. l. 7. for in∣novation, r. [invention.] p. 66. l. 3. add [Almost.] p. 99. l. 1. leave out [for.] p. 120. l. 31. for strange, r. [strong.] p. 134. l. 31. for selves, r. [souls.] p. 138. l. 7. leave out the word [Two.] p. 142. l. 32. for furious, r. [Serious.]
: OR, Everlasting Fire NO FANCY. CHAP. I. SECT. I. The Introduction, with some Reflexions upon the Author of the opposed Pamphlet. THAT the way of the wicked deceiveth them,Prov. 12.26. is one of the Sacred Oracles of that God who cannot lye nor be deceived; It fills them with Sorrow when they look for Joy, and is as the Gall of Asps within them, even then when it is sweet to their Mouths, and pleasing to their corrupt affections.Job 20.14. Mr. Caryl. (See the late Expositor in his Notes upon the place.) But, O how bitter will it be to them hereafter, when all the sweetness of it is past, and ends in those sorrows that never end! when their continued Rebellions against the King of Heaven have laid them under perpetual punishment, and bound them in everlasting Chains of Darkness and Damnation.
But (say some) we hope there is no such danger, for that Doctrine hath been suspected of late, yea Mr. R. hath professedly opposed it: His Light hath discovered the rotten Foundations upon which it is built, and hath proved all those black and dismal Imaginations concern∣ing it, to be no better than the effects of Atra Bilis, and to have no ground at all in the Scriptures. What he hath done (in this particular) is too well known in the World, and how well he hath done it, is my Business to discover in this Book. And I trust, Good Reader, that thou wilt perceive by that which fol∣lows, that he hath not done it well, nor indeed any better than the So∣cinian hath proved that there is no Trinity, or than the Atheist hath proved that there is no God. The Method observed.And now I shall proceed () in this following Method. 1. To lay down some Arguments to prove the Everlasting Punishment of the wicked (that live and dye such.) 2. To examine the said Book, in all the principal parts and passages of it, (for it will not be worth while to speak of all he hath written, there being very many Impertinencies in it.) 3. To improve the Doctrine in a practical way, for Instruction, Exhortation, &c. But before I speak of either of these, it may seem needful to say some∣thing of the Author of this precious Piece, which I am to deal with. 1. Who the Author was.If any Man should ask me who it was, I would answer, It was (O Grande nomen!) Mr. S. Richardson, even that admired Resolute Richard∣son, whom the good Men of his Party did boast of so greatly, and sup∣posed to be a fit Match for the London-Ministers, viz. indefinitely, (for any of them, or for All of them to deal with) See the Author in the MarginMr. J. Col∣lings, Vindic. Ministerii. my Preface to the Reader. (sub finem.). And therefore some may imagine I have been too venturous, to engage (voluntarily) with so great a Champion as He: But yet Reader, I am not discouraged; I hope to come off clear, and to pass without hurt through all the Pikes of his Arguments and Subtilties; for God and his Truth are greater and stronger than Mr. R. and his Falla∣cies. — But to return to that which I was speaking of; I say it was He whom the World is so much beholding to for the Book I am op∣posing. For I have seen his Name prefixed to it, though it be not set in that Edition of it which I have, (and perhaps it might be as good policy to conceal his Name in the second Edition, as it was to mention it in the former. 2. What he was.But though it may be easily gained what his Name was, yet it may be more difficult to discover what Himself was. I remember the old say∣ing, Noscitur ex socio, &c. A dark Fellow is to be expounded by his Companions.
It might be questioned whether Mr. R. were himself of any Religion, for all Religions have a Hell in their Creed, and yet he hath none in his; wherefore his Opinion concludes him of the doubtful gender in point of Religion, so that we must be forced (as was said) to expound him by his Companions. And if you would know who they were, and what Perswasion they were of, you may fitly consult the Anabaptists Confes∣sion of Faith, Printed Anno Dom. 1644. which thatDr. Featly. Light of our Church (now fixt in a Higher Orb) was sometimes pleased to pass some Animadversions upon, I mean in his Book, called The Dippers dipt: Where he tells you, (and you may safely take his word for it) That the said Confession was subscribed by Paul Hobson, Thomas Gunne, and others of the same stamp, and amongst the rest, by S. Richardson, (to whom I would wish, if he be living, saving Mercy and a sound Mind.) And thus much by way of Introduction to my following Discourse. The first particular whereof is now to be presented to thy serious thoughts, and favourable censure. CHAP. I. SECT. II. An endless state of Punishment for the Wicked and Impenitent, proved: and the Proofs thereof vindicated from the Ex∣ceptions of Mr. R. and his Brethren. THE fittest Method of procedure in my present Design seems to be that which is mentioned, viz. To prove the truth of the Do∣ctrine contended for, (before I meddle with the main Body of Mr. R. his Sophistical Argumentations) namely that abovesaid. And herein I do not undertake to convince the Atheist, or drive him out of his Resolved Infidelity; but rather to confirm the Christian in the Belief of this Doctrine, which he hath been so often put in mind of by his Teachers. And the first Argument that I would propose,Scripture-Testi∣mony the stron∣gest Argument. is the Testimony of God in Scripture; and that is indeed the strongest of all Arguments, and the most convincing to the Soul and Conscience. As the learned have sufficiently evinced, (Vid. Crakanthorp. Logic. de Argum. à Testi∣monio,
& Logicos passim de Testimonio Disputantes) for Truth is Essen∣tial to the True God,Item Scheibl. Topic. cap. 31. sect. 50. Titus 1.2. He cannot lye. A Man may be a Man though he be not true in his word, but God could not be a God if he were not so:Keckerm. Log. lib. 3. cap. 13. for God to be false in his Word, implies a manifest con∣tradiction. And there is nothing more natural to a Man in his right Wits, than to conceive his Maker to be True in all that he saith, or revealeth. Wherefore if we have the Testimony of God for it in his written Word, we may safely build upon it. I say, His written Word, for that's the Testimony that we are to enquire of, Esay 8.20. — And as for those inward Impulses, Revela∣tions,A digression of Revelations & Enthusiastick impressions, &c. and Suggestions of the Spirit, which some have sufficiently boast∣ed of, and more than sufficiently trusted to, as to Divine Testimonies, they have often proved to be the Delusions of the lying Spirit, and the false lights which the Prince of Darkness hath set up in the blinded hearts of those that shut their eyes against the light of that Word, which is able to save our Souls; having them so dreadfully dazelled with the glory of the light within them, (as they use to speak:) whose Enthu∣siastick Errors have been examined by many worthy Men.Spanhem. Syn∣tag. Theol. Beckman Ex∣ercitat. in Ap∣pendice, &c. And their vanity hath been shewed by famous (or infamous) instances in Mr. Sam. Cleark His Mirror, Cap. 27. Exampl. 17. Concerning the horrid De∣lusions which a Gentleman in Warwick-shire fell into, after he looked to be taught by Revelations and Inspirations, and had refused to hear any conformable Minister preach, &c. As also of one Mr. Gilpin in the same Chapter: The sum of which History I have briefly set down in my Caution against Quakerisme.Near the end. I say, if we have the Testimony of God in his written Word, for the Doctrine I assert, then we may be bold to believe it, and must believe it, though Mr. R. and his Companions in Infidelity should write never so many Books against it. Reader, if thou dost not believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God, (or knowest but little reason why thou should'st believe so) then I would advise thee to read those that may confute thy unbelief, or con∣firm thy faith in that particular, as Bishop Ward's Sermon against Anti-scripturists, Dr. Stillingfleet's Orig. Sacr. and the truly Honourable Sir Charles Woolsley his Grounds and Reasons of Scripture-Belief,Dr. Allestry his Sermon of the Authority of the Scriptures. Mr. Baxt. Rest, part. 2. cap. 4. with these in the Margin. But if thou dost believe it to be so, I trust thou wilt believe the Do∣ctrine I plead for: For, the Scripture testifies of it, in words as plain as can be desired, viz. — in Matth. 25. last verse, and many other places.
To begin with that, Matth. 25. last verse. These (the ungodly that shall be set on Christ's left hand,Matth. 25.46. in the former verses) shall go away into Everlasting Punishment. What can ever be spoken more plain, or more plainly to our pur∣pose than this is, They shall go away into Everlasting Punishment,1. Ʋrged. there∣fore they shall be punished everlastingly: For if one were to tell us, such or such are to be imprisoned perpetually; How could he express it more clearly than by saying, That they must go into perpetual Im∣prisonment? And these words are the words of Him who was (and is) the Son of the Father, and most perfectly acquainted with his Counsels, Purposes, Truths and Ways, and had no need to fright the wicked World with such a sad Doctrine, if it were not a Truth. This is that Marpesian Rock which Mr. Richardson was not able to fasten his Teeth in, yet nevertheless,2 Vindicated from Mr. R.'s Exceptions. He hath snapt at it Five Times together, p. 18, &c. where he hath several glosses upon the word [everlasting] which, as by Him applyed, are worthy to be had in ever∣lasting detestation. 1. He tells us, That the Fire of Tophet is so called,His first Ex∣ception. because it did burn Day and Night. — But here our Lord speaks not of the Fire of Tophet,Removed. but of the Ever∣lasting Punishment of the Wicked. And let Him shew us where any pu∣nishment is call'd Everlasting Punishment, because it lasted for some days and nights. Job his Pains were doubtless Day and Night, yea for a considerable time too, yet 'tis not said he suffered Everlasting Pains. The Psalmist said, God's hand was heavy upon him Day and Night;Psal. 32.4. yet it is no where said, that he was under Everlasting Affliction. The word Ever, and Everlasting,His second Ex∣ception, p. 19. are used to note a Limited Time; as in Exodus 40.15. We read of an Everlasting Priesthood; yet that Priesthood did not last for ever in the largest sense, but only till the Son of God was come in the Flesh.— This is the substance of that which he saith in the greatest part of the 19. Page of his Book. Removed. And it is easily removed out of the way. Let us put it into a form of Arguing, and it will be exactly thus: [The word Everlasting in some places is used to signifie but a limited time, therefore it must sig∣nifie
just the same, when 'tis spoken of the Punishment of the wicked, in Matth. 25. last verse.] Now were not this a pitiful way of reasoning, and most apparently inconsequent? See a parallel case in the word [save.] To save, some∣times signifies only to be a means of Salvation, and an Instrument in God's hand, of bringing Men into the way of Salvation, as when Mi∣nisters are said to save them that hear them.1 Tim. 4.16. Shall we therefore say, that Christ is but an Instrumental means of Salvation? God forbid: for He is the Author of Eternal Salvation.Heb. 5.9. Phil. 3.20. And The Saviour (by way of Emphasis.) 2. Though in some places of the Old Testament the word Everlast∣ing doth signifie a limited Time, yet Mr. R. doth not shew us any place in the New Testament where it is so taken; much less can he shew any Texts therein, that call a Temporal Punishment an Everlasting Punish∣ment, or any thing like it. 3. Those things which were called Everlasting, and yet lasted but for a time, were such as were not capable of an absolute and proper Ever∣lastingness. The Priesthood, in Exodus 40. was not capable of perpe∣tuity, being Typical of the Priesthood of Christ, (that great High-Priest,Heb. 4.14. as the Apostle calls him) who was appointed to put an end to all former priesthood and Sacrifice, by offering up Himself once for All. But the Wicked shall be capable of Everlasting Punishment, (proper∣ly so called) for their very Bodies shall be raised Incorruptible:1 Cor. 15.52. In 1 Cor. 15. The Trumpet shall sound, and the Dead, i. e. All the Dead, shall be raised incorruptible. 4. It must needs be meant of an endless Punishment: for I find it is the same word , (used in Matth. 25.46.) that is used by St. Paul,2 Cor. 4.18. where he speaks of things Eternal in contradistinction to [Things Temporal] in 2 Cor. The things that are seen are temporal, but the things that are not seen are eternal.: Yea, it is the same word in the Original, which is used by our Lord to express the Eternity of the Saints Happi∣ness.Matth. 25.46.—These shall go away into Everlasting Punishment, and the Righte∣ous into Life Eternal. So that if the Punishment of the wicked (that continue such) be not an endless Punishment, we may be at a great doubt whether the Happiness of the Saints shall be endless happiness, or not; since the same word (as was said) is used of both of them. And now having Answered his first and chiefest Exceptions against this Proof, we shall not fear to Examine those which follow, and third∣ly thus:
R. — Fire may be said to be Everlasting,His third Ex∣ception, p. 19. when it doth not go out till the Combustible Matter is consumed. (and then he adds) —The Fire that destroyed Sodom, is called Eternal Fire, because it went not out till the City was consumed. Jud. 7. Answered. This is his third gloss upon the word Everlasting, in the latter part of the 19. Page. And first, A Fire may be called Everlasting (by his Logick) when it goeth not out till the Combustible Matter is consu∣med.— It seems then, if Mr. Richardson should be pleased to roast his Cat,His absurdity shewed in ano∣ther case. to make a Breakfast for those (worse than) Antichristian Priests, that fright the World so needlesly by their Doctrine of Everlasting Punishments for the Wicked; he might then bespeak them thus: [Behold Sirs, and see; for here is an Everlasting Fire.] And if the poor ignorant Men should ask him how that can be true, since the Fire will be out in a little time; He could answer them, That it may be called Everlasting, because it will last till the Faggots are consumed; but if he should tell them so, his speech would seem as Ridiculous unto them, as his Book is Odi∣ous unto me. And in case He should suffer them to be familiar with him, 'tis pos∣sible they might tell him, that at this rate of Arguing, his own Beard might be called an Everlasting Beard; for it is capable of growing whiles the nourishing matter lasteth, i. e. whiles there is any consider∣able moisture remaining in his Pericranium. And what Spirit (I would demand) hath moved him to make use of that Sacred Text of S. Jude, to justifie such a piece of Learning by?Jud. 7. opened. I find not any Expositors of Note, that Interpret that Eternal fire there mentioned, of That fire that consumed the Cities (nor is there any shew of Reason why it should be so called, so far as I can appre∣hend; and if the reason were, as Mr. R. would have it, because it went not out while the Combustible matter lasted, why might we not call the flame of a Farthing Candle, an Everlasting fire, since it will last till the wiek is spent?) but rather do they interpret it of the Everlasting Wrath and Vengeance of God,Dr. Willet on Jude. Mr. Baxter Saints Rest, Part 2. cap. 10. which is fitly compared to fire in various re∣spects, which I need not now insist on: Dr. Willet makes it a proof of their Everlasting punishment, and Mr. Baxter makes it an Argument of the present Punishments of the wicked (in Soul) immediately after death, in opposition to those that imagine their Misery to be put off till the Day of Judgment.
And if Mr. R. should Interpret the Everlasting punishment after the same manner, of a punishment that shall last as long as the wicked shall endure; He will overthrow his whole design, for they shall endure for ever, and see corruption no more, after they are once raised from the grave,1 Cor. 15.52. in the Text aforesaid. Fourthly, R. —What if the Fire were Everlasting, yet it will not follow that That which is cast into it is Everlasting;His fourth Ex∣ception, p. 20. to which he adds [The wicked are compared in Scripture to Chaffe and Stubble, which will not be long in consuming.] The Text under consideration speaks not of Everlasting Fire, but of Everlasting Punishment. And if it should be granted, that there may be an Everlasting fire, and no person everlastingly burning in it; yet he doth not imagine there can be an everlasting punishment for the wicked, and yet no wicked man to be punished with it for ever. 2. If it were not for contradicting such a man as Mr. R. why might we not say, that it will follow, that the persons cast into that fire, shall be there for everlasting, because the Fire it self is everlasting? for without the supposal of their continual burning in that everlasting fire, I say without that, the word everlasting (which flames with more terror than the fire it self, and makes it most exceedingly intolerable) should stand in effect for a Cypher, and become a meer Bug-bear to fright fools withal; for if a wicked man be soon consumed after he is cast into Hell fire, then the everlastingness of it afterwards will be as no∣thing unto him (he being upon that supposal past its fury.) 3. And if Mr. R. had been so minded, why might not he have preached glad tydings to the devils themselves? for he might bespeak them thus — Rejoyce, O ye unclean Spirits, or at least, Despair not; for who knows but your punishments may be ended in time; for what though Christ tells us of Everlasting fire prepared for you, yet it will not follow that ye shall suffer everlastingly in it—Yet (however his Book hath pleased them, as being so dangerous to the Souls of men) I am confident they would take little comfort in such a comfortable preach∣ment as this. And if his work should not prove to be done well (in what he taught us in this Exception) we must excuse him the better, because he hath endeavoured to mend it, by offering this following Observandum, viz. That,
R.—the wicked are compared in Scripture to Chaffe and Stubble, which are not long in consuming, in any fire that they fall into. So then, that's the proposition,Mr. R. his ex∣cellent Compa∣rison examined. from which his Reader (he hopes) is wise enough to draw the conclusion; that therefore the wicked shall not be always burning in Hell-fire, because they are compared to Stubble, which will not burn long before it be consumed. And at this rate, it might as well be concluded, that they shall not suffer in it so much as one minutes time: for a great deal of Stub∣ble, if cast into a violent fire, may be consumed in less than a minute. Yet if my Author should say the word Everlasting may mean no more than a minutes time, we shall know (in some measure) what answer to give him in that case. And I would fain know, how this Comparative Argument will hold; for Comparisons (as they say) non currunt quatuor pedibus, i. e. do not hold in all respects, but in some only.Psal. 22.6. David compares himself to a Worm, yet we will not say therefore, that he had no bones in his body, nor no reason in his Soul, because a Worm hath not. So the Scrip∣ture saith, the Saints are as Christ himself was in this world [as He was, so are we in this world:] yet it follows not that the Saints are here without any sin, because Christ was so. 'Tis enough that they are as he was in other respects, namely, subject to scorn and contempt, and manifold troubles and temptations. So the wicked are as Chaffe and Stubble in some respects, that is fitted for vengeance, and not able to resist it when it comes upon them, as Stubble is fit for fire, and can∣not resist its violence, or the like. R.—'Tis to be noted that the Scripture sometimes useth such words as do exceed their signification:Nahum 3.9. His fifth Excep∣tion, p. 20. as in Nahum 'tis said, That the Æthiopian Army was infinite: that is, very great. But first, At this rate it would follow, that the Everlasting Punish∣ments of the Wicked after the Day of Judgment must be Punishments of very long continuance: for doubtless Everlasting is as proper to sig∣nifie very long, as Infinite is to signifie very great. Yet this will not suit with the Theologie of Mr. R. his Masters or Brethren, as may be shewed in time and place; nor doth it well agree with that Opinion
which he would promote by his Comparison, of the quick dispatch which the Stubble receives from the fire it's cast into. Secondly, he saith well, that it is sometimes so, for therein he gives us to understand, that it is not always so, and by consequence, that there is no necessity of expounding it so in the words of our Saviour, in Matth. 25. ult. M. 25.46.And that the word Everlasting, in that Text, doth not mean only a punishment of long continuance, but an endless state in Punishment, This I say hath been Evidenced before, by such Considerations as Mr. Richardson and his Angels will never be able to Answer. See my 4. Answer to his second Exception (in this same Section.) Thus we have seen my Authors Glosses upon the word Everlasting and their unserviceableness to his Design, so that we may now law∣fully write over them the words of the Wise man, (Eccles. 1.2.) Vanity of Vanities, All is Vanity. The Socinians gloss, removed.And now I cannot conceive any other Exception against this proof that is worthy to be considered, unless it be that of Mr. R. his Bre∣thren (whom he calls the Protestants of Poland) I mean the Socini∣ans, who would have us think the Everlasting Punishment that the Wicked are in danger of, to be the Total Abolishment of their Na∣tures to all Eternity (or in one word,Osterod. com∣pend. Relig. in Polonia flo∣rentis.— Valent. Smal∣cius disp. de Baptism. Everlasting Annihilation) Thus the Authors in the Margin. Their Arguments for it I shall not trouble my English Reader with, the Learned may see them in their Opposites, Calovius in Socin. profligat. q. De Morte aeternâ; Stegman. Photin. Refut. disput. 56. quaest. 4. and many others, who have sufficiently An∣swered them. The Author's Arguments a∣gainst the Soci∣nian Interpre∣tat. of the word. [Punish∣ment.]I shall content my self to urge my Arguments against them (herein) which as they are not at all the better for being mine, so I hope they are never a whit the worse, for Truth is the same when spoken by the meanest.—And first thus, 1. The word , here used, is the same which is used of the Life, or happiness of the Righteous. And since it signifies a positive state in the one, how can it be questioned whether it signifies the like in the other? (so that if the Everlasting Life do note a Being in Hap∣piness; it is easie to infer that Everlasting Punishment doth note, in like sort, a Being in Misery) and not an Abolishing of their Beings. Nor do I find that word used as an Epithete to any thing but that which is positive (in sense at least if not in sound.) And if it might be good sense to say—A man may be Annihilated for ever; yet I am apt to doubt whether it be so, to say, that He may
suffer an Everlasting Annihilation— for Everlastingness doth imply a lastingness (as a thousand includes a hundred) and by consequence,Partit. Me∣taph. l. 2. Sect. 13. quaest 3.2. a subject lasting, which in this case is not found (Duratio est perma∣nentia Rei in esse, as the Learned Martinius most truly.) 2. They shall go away into this Everlasting Punishment: [to go away] into it, implies a positive state, yea, and their going away, viz. from Christ, and his Glorious Presence, will be none of the smallest parts of their Punishment; and therefore is mentioned first—Depart from me into, &c. Matth. 25.41. The Holy Father of old,S. Chrysost. in Matth. Homil. 24. who had as little need of these mens Learning, as of their Religion, did con∣fidently affirm it to be the greatest Punishment of all. But it would be little Punishment to them (or rather none) to depart from Christ, if at the same time they should depart from themselves too, and be turned into nothing. 3. This Punishment here spoken of (Matth. 25.) is the saddest of all that ever the Enemies of God endured, for there will be the Day of Wrath,Matt. 12.36. wherein God will render them the full wages of their Iniquities, not abating them so much as for Idle words; and therefore it is called in Scripture, The Terrible day of the Lord (to the wicked though not to the Saints) but it would not be the greatest Punishment if it were but the turning them to nothing. This I say would not be the saddest Punishment unto them, but rather a securing them from all Punishment; for when they have no being at all, they cannot be under any sorrow, nor be sensible of any Punishment. 4. If the Wicked at Judgment should be turned into nothing, and have their Natures abolished, that Punishment (if it might be so cal∣led) would be no other than the inanimate and unreasonable creatures shall undergo; for they shall then remain no longer (the Universal flames will soon consume the creatures in and upon the face of the Earth.) And can any men think the Punishment of the wicked and impenitent, who are compared toMatth. 7.6. Acts 20.29. Psal. 22.12. Dogs and Swine, and Wolves and wild Bulls in Scripture, yea who are called Enemies of God, and Chil∣dren of the DevilPsal. 37.20. Psal. 92.9. John 8.44. (and have served him to their Makers dishonour, all their days on Earth) I say, can any men perswade themselves, that these wretched mischievous ones shall be in no worse condition (for Misery) than the pretty Birds, and harmless Lambs, and the rest, that did all the work for which they were made, and never transgrest their Makers Law? surely if they can, we may justly bespeak them in the words of the Apostle, Gal. 3.1. O foolish men, who hath bewitched you.—
And thus I have vindicated that Sacred Text of our Saviour from the false glosses, and fallacious Exceptions of Mr. R. and his Compa∣nions. And so the Argument it self [They shall go away into Ever∣lasting Punishment, therefore they shall be for ever in Punishment] is sound and firm, and the subtilties of a Thousand hells shall never be able to Answer it. And now it will be time to put an end to this (Second) Section. CHAP. I. SECT. III. Other Texts of Scripture Urged, and Arguments grounded on Scripture. 2 Thess. 1.9. urged and cleared.THe next place of Scripture that I shall name for the confirmation of the Point is, 2 Thessal. 1.9. where he tells us that they who obey not the Gospel of Christ, shall be punished with everlasting De∣struction. They shall be punished with that Punishment which the Apostle calls by the name of Destruction; and that Destruction he tells us is an everlasting Destruction, therefore it must needs follow, that they shall be under punishment Everlastingly.— If Mr. R. should say any thing to the word Everlasting, we may find some satisfaction in the foregoing Section, where it hath been largely discoursed of. If he Cavil about the word [Destruction] and pretend it is meant of the Destruction of their Beings (by turning them into nothing) then we may see something to the contrary, in the three latter parts of the last Section (in Answer to the Socinians;) To which I shall now add these Three particulars. Destruction in that Text is not Annihilation. [, &c.]1. That this Everlasting Destruction is such as comes unto them in a way of Vengeance, as in the 8. Verse, To take vengeance on those (or as 'tis in the Grek, to give vengeance to those) that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. And can he be said to give vengeance to them, when he takes away their very Beings, and so maketh them uncapable of receiving any pu∣nishment at all? Surely not. The lawful Magistrate, under Christ, is ap∣pointed to act the part of a Revenger upon them that do evil.Rom. 13.4. And that vengeance which (according to God's Ordinance) he inflicts upon
Malefactors, is commonly such as they are very sensible of. And shall not ungodly sinners feel their punishment, (to the purpose, as we say) when the Supream Law-giver shall set himself purposely, to execute wrath, and render vengeance to them? yea doubtless they shall. For when He will execute vengeance upon them,Ezek. 25.17. they shall then know that He is the Lord, as the Prophet speaks. But 'tis plain they could not do so, if his vengeance did consist in taking away their Being. (that which is not, cannot know any thing.) 2. Destruction is not used in Scripture (in reference to Men) to signifie any such thing, as the Total abolishment of their Natures. Let any of my Author's Opinion disprove this by any Text whatsoever. Indeed 'tis said of the old World, that the Flood came,Matth. 24.39. and took them all away; but 'tis [omnes only, not totos] it took away All those Persons, viz. out of the Land of the Living: But it did not take away the whole Natures. Their Souls are living still. And God will be so far from destroying the Souls of the wicked, (as to their Nature and Being) as that he will quicken and raise their Bodies, which Death and Worms had destroyed formerly.Acts 24.15. There shall be a Resurrection of the just and the unjust, saith St. Paul in the Acts. And they shall be raised for good and all, as we say, so as to see corruption no more for ever.1 Cor. 15.52. 3. That [to destroy] signifies (in respect of the wicked) a state of real Misery and Torment; as when it is said,Matth. 10.28. that God is able to destroy Body and Soul in Hell: that is, to fill them with perfect Misery: And if it were meant of destroying their Beings, then that dreadful word [Hell] which is added as an aggravation of the destruction, would signifie just nothing in point of Terror: for if a Man be turned into nothing, it is all one whether it be in the one or the other. (for nothing is no nearer to something, in Heaven than in Hell.) And thus also the word is used very often in our own Language: As when we say of Oppressors, that they have destroyed whole Families, we do not mean that they have turned them into nothing, but that they have brought them into a calamitous condition. And this, I hope, may be enough for that Text, and I think it is not too much. A third place I shall offer,Matth. 25.41. urged for it. (to prove the everlastingness of the Pu∣nishment of the wicked) is Matth. 25.41. He shall say unto them on his left hand, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. 1. They must depart, (viz. really, by changing place:) as Christ is departed, or gone into Heaven; in 1 Pet. 3.1 Pet. 3. ult. last vers. where it is the
same Greek Verb that is used in both places;. and so supposeth the con∣tinuance of their Being. 2. They must depart (not into Nothing, or such a state, if I might so call it, as the World was in before its Creation, but) into Fire. 3. And this Fire (of what sort soever it be, God knoweth) is an ever∣lasting Fire, (in the same sense, as the Life and Happiness of the Righte∣ous is everlasting Life, in 46. verse) yea, it is that everlasting Fire which the Devils shall be for everlasting punished with,v. 41. as in the Text it self; and therefore certainly is everlasting, in the saddest sense, or without end. And if any Man shall say, they may be cast into this everlasting Fire, but not suffer everlastingly in it; he had need have no less than Mr. Ri∣chardson's Learning to enable him to give a good Account of his speech. And he that can conceive any such thing as probable, may (by the same degree of acuteness) perswade himself,2 Pet. 1.11. that the Saints may go into the everlasting kingdom of Christ, and yet possibly not dwell everlastingly in it. (which yet they will hardly question in the least measure, while they have so many faithful promises of a Happy Eternity.1 Thess. 4.17. Rev. 22.5, &c.) A fourth Text of Scripture, which may conveniently be urged, for [the everlastingness of the punishment of the wicked] is Daniel 12.2.Daniel 12.2. urged and o∣pened. Many that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. But before I come to speak of that which most directly concerns my present purpose,Many] how understood. it will not be amiss to explain the word [many] for some have gathered from thence, that there shall be no general Resur∣rection. The weakness of which Opinion (to speak no worse of it) I might shew from a great many places. These two, for brevity sake, I shall content my self with: Jo. 5.28, 29. The hour is coming, wherein All that are in the Grave shall hear his Voice,Jo. 5.29. and come forth, &c. So then, there are none excepted. And in the 24. chap. of the Acts, it was the Apostles belief,Acts 24.15. That there shall be a Resurrection of the just and the un∣just: that is, of all and every one of them: for if the just there do mean All the just; the unjust must mean All the unjust, for the phrase is alike of both of them: so that he that grants the one, may not deny the other. And therefore that Text in Daniel cannot tend to strengthen that Opinion; which that we may the better perceive, these three things may be considered. 1. That the [Multi ex dormientibus, many of them that sleep,vid. Synops crit. in loc. is in substance the same, as if it were said [Multi dor∣mientes, i. e. Those many that are sleeping in the Dust of the Earth. And then it will be no less, than if it were said, All of them.
2. That the Proposition is particular only, and therefore will not warrant a Universal Negative to be inferred from it. Many Saints, or Multitudes of Saints, shall be caught up together, to meet the Lord Jesus,1 Thess. 4.17. at his coming to Judgment, is a Truth. Yet we cannot truly conclude that All shall not. Doubtless their Lord will receive them all, as well as any. And St. Paul makes no difference between himself and the rest of the faithful, in respect of that priviledge. 3.Many] some∣times put for All. By the word [many] we may (by a very usual figure) understand [All], and so we find it is put for All, in several Texts of Holy Writ. Psal. 97.1. The Lord reigneth, let the earth be glad; let the multitudes of the Isles, or the many Isles, be glad thereof: i. e. let all Countries be glad of it. (Let all the faithful in all Nations comfort themselves by the thoughts of his Soveraignty and Dominion over all.) So in Rom. 5. Through the disobedience of one, (viz. Adam) many were made sinners: viz. All those that descended from him in a Natural way. And if any that are dead (or sleeping in, &c.) should not awake, and arise hereafter, it must be the wicked, (for that's our Adversary's Opi∣nion in the case) but that cannot be supposed, nor cannot stand with the truth of this Text, which tells us, that some (of those many) shall arise to everlasting shame and contempt. Which is most direct for my purpose: And so plain, that I cannot guess any thing that can, with any shew of reason, be objected a∣gainst it. For first, If the wicked shall awake to everlasting contempt,The proof of the point from Dan. 12. it can∣not be but they must remain as to their Natures and Personal Beings, and not be annihilated. And secondly, If they awake to everlasting contempt and shame, it must needs follow that they shall be everlasting∣ly under shame, &c. As in case Mr. R. his Book against Hell, &c. should bring his name into perpetual reproach among Christians, it must needs be perpetually under reproach. (And the everlasting shame is everlasting in the same sense, as the glory (of the righteous) in the same verse is everlasting) — And thus I have proved the everlasting punishment of the wicked in another World, from several Scriptures. See also to the same purpose, Matth. 3.12. Luk. 3.17. Matth. 18.8. Mark 9.47. Jo. 3.36. Revel. 19.20.20. vers. 10. and many more,Rev. 14.11. which thy own Reading may furnish thee with. And thus having proved the Point by several Texts of Scripture,Some Scripture Arguments for the Doctrine. I shall now add (ex abundanti) some Scripture-Arguments to confirm it. And the first is this: The wicked and impenitent shall always (or to all Eternity) have a Being: But they shall not have a Being in Joy and Hap∣piness,
nor in a middle state between Happiness and Misery: therefore they shall always have a Being in Misery and Torment. 1. From the e∣verlastingness of their Being.The Major (or first) Proposition is easie to be proved: For first, The Dead shall be raised incorruptible, in 1 Cor. 15.52. What Dead doth he mean? surely all of them, since he makes no distinction between one sort and another in this respect. As when it is said, that the Sea shall give up her Dead,The wicked shall always have a Being. that is, all her Dead. And if we shall suppose that it must be meant only of the Dead Saints, (or as the Scripture calls it,1 Cor. 15.52. the Dead in Christ) then it might be said as properly, that the Dead shall not be raised incorruptible, for we might mean it of the wicked that are Dead; yea, it might be more properly said so; for the wicked that are dead, are many more than the Saints that are dead: (because most of the Living never were Saints indeed) Now the Denomination being to be given from the greater part, I see no Reason why it might not more fitly be said, [The Dead shall not be raised incorruptible] than to say the contrary, if only the dead Saints should be raised. Nor hath my Author, or any for him, ever been so resolute, as to affirm, the word Dead, to signifie the Saints more than the wicked.— And their Souls being immortal, we cannot think that God will unite them at Judgment to Mortal Bodies: If God had meant that the Bodies of the wicked, after the Day of Judgment, should dye again, (in a proper sense) surely he would not raise them at that Day from their Graves. If Death and Destruction of their Flesh were the great wrath they were to lye under, the Worms would be sufficient Executioners of his wrath upon them. What need any such Miracle be wrought upon them, as the quickning and raising of their putrified Bodies, if he intended they should dye and corrupt again? So then, the first Proposition is certain, that the wicked themselves shall be raised to an Immortal state at the Day of Judgment. (They that would come but seldome to the Church, shall not have the Happi∣ness to lye always in the Grave; they shall be remembred in that bond of forgetfulness, and not dye like Bruits, though they lived like such.) The wicked shall not be happy to Eternity.The second thing to be proved, is this, [That the wicked shall not have a Being in Happiness, after the Day of Judgment.] This I need not be large in proving to them, that know any thing of Holy Scripture. They shall come forth to the Resurrection of Damnation,John 5.28, 29. (which will be far enough from all Happiness in the least degree; though they were joy∣ful enough when they were Damning and Sinking on Earth, yet they will be sorrowful enough, when their Damned Petition is granted, when they sink irrecoverably into Damnation it self, when instead of
thinking themselves Companions for Gentlemen, they will find them∣selves companions for Devils) Damnation doubtless will destroy all joys whatsoever,Matth. 25.41. and the curse that shall be on them will seclude all bles∣sedness.—Nor shall they be in a middle state between Happiness and Misery after the Day of Judgment, for there is no such middle state thought of by any sober Christians, nor so much as dream'd of by the Papists themselves, (whatsoever properties Purgatory may have in it before the Day of Judgment, yet they hold it shall cease for ever after that Day, and nothing remain but Heaven and Hell, and Joy and Tor∣ment, to be the places and portions of reasonable Creatures.) And this conceipt is abundantly confuted by what hath been said already; for Wrath and Damnation and the Curse are, or imply a proper state of Misery, not a middle state between Misery and Happiness. Wherefore the Consequence is clear as the Light:The Conseq. cleared. for if the wicked shall always have a Being after the Day of Judgment, and yet never have a Being in Happiness; then it must needs follow, that they must have a Being always in Misery and Torment. And this, I think, is a plain Argument, and that which follows is no less plain, being taken from the nature of Divine Justice. It is thus, good Reader. Divine Justice requires that the Wicked that continue such,A second Ar∣gument taken from God's Justice. 1. Cleared. should be punished for ever. Therefore they shall be punished for ever. The Consequence will not be denied. The Antecedent is proved thus. If the wicked are always worthy of Punishment for their Wickedness, then Justice requires that they should always have it; for it is the part of Justice to render what is deserved. But the wicked (supposing them to have a Being always after the Day of Judgment, as was proved just before) must needs be always worthy of Punishment.Rom. 6. ult. The wages of sin being Death; even Eternal Death or Damnation, as appears by the Antithesis, and other places. Let any sober man judge whether the punishing of sin always, upon them that always deserve punishment,Gen. 18.25. Psal. 9.7, 8. 2 Tim 4.8, &c. be not more agreeable to the nature of that God, who is a holy God and abhorring iniquity, who is the supreme Law-giver and Soveraign Lord, and in a word, the Judge of the world, and the Righteous Judge, than the letting of it go unpunished: If a Judge on earth is not counted so just as he should be, when he appoints no punishment; or but a small punishment for a Fact that deserves a great punishment: How shall God's justice be cleared as he is the Governour of the World, if he should punish them but for a time, who are worthy to be punished for ever? That Vindictive justice is Essential to God, is the great Foundation-Doctrine,
upon which the Champions of the common Faith have pro∣ceeded,Alting. in Cat. Palat q. 40. Arnoldus in Relig. Socin. cap. 1. de essen∣tia Dei, Sect. 38, 39, 40. &c. in opposing the Socinians (who I think are the most formida∣ble party, of all Satans Host of Hereticks) see those in the Margin, and others mentioned by Dr. Owen in his Preface to his Defence of the Trinity, and especially that Learned Doctor himself in his Diatrib. de Justitiâ vindic. (cap. 15.) where he well defends the Arguments of the famous Lubbertus, against the Acute oppositions of Dr. Twisse, about this particular point. 2. Defended.But this I foresee will not pass with some Readers unless it be de∣fended against the objections that may most naturally be brought to the contrary. 1. Say some, At this rate of Arguing it seems to follow that the Saints themselves should be punished everlastingly for their sins, for they also deserve such punishment, and they can do nothing to abate the evil of sin, or remove the evil desert of them. But for answer to such men, let it be considered that the case is far different between the Saints and the wicked, in this respect. God will deal with them in a way of wrath, they shall be brought forth to the day of wrath, and they are reserved to the Day of Judgment to be pu∣nished,2 Pet. 2.9. for so the Apostle tells us of the unjust, and our Saviour hath told us that they shall be accountable for idle words, in Matth. 12. But he will deal with his Saints in a way of Mercy, and spare them ac∣cording to the greatness of his Mercy,Mal. 3.17. yea, he will spare them as a man spareth his Son that serveth him. And no wonder since he spared not his own Son for their sakes, in Rom. 8.32. And though his justice be most strict and infinite (as being His justice who is God the Judge of all and glorious in Holiness) yet it requires not a double satisfaction, but is (if I may so speak) fully contented with Christs satisfaction and sufferings in their behalf, who bore their sins and had the Chastisement of their peace upon himself,1 Pet. 2.2. Esay 53. But as for the ungodly (that live and dye such) it is not so with them; they shall never be able to plead the satisfaction of Christ in their behalf: for he will disown them before the Holy Angels, and say unto them Depart from me.Matth. 7.23. So that there is a valuable considera∣tion, upon the account of which Divine Justice may dispense with the punishment of the Saints, even Christs sufferings for them: but it is not so with the wicked and impenitent. But say others, God is as just, &c. now, and his justice as strict now as ever it will be, and since it doth not move him to punish the Wicked according to their deserts now, why may we not hope the same for hereafter?
Because he hath told us he will condemn them hereafter, (however he spare them for the present) 2 Pet. 2.9. He knoweth how to reserve the unjust to the Day of Judgment to be punished. What if he let them alone in the day of his Patience, wherein he is minded to make known his long-suffering, yet he will not always be mocked as St. Paul inti∣mates in the Epistle to the Galat. What if his Justice doth not move him to punish them now, how will it follow that it will not hereafter, when the Day of Wrath is come, and when the Righteous Judge shall come from Heaven, on purpose to render unto them according to their works, and to take vengeance on them that obey not his Gospel, in 2 Thess. 1.8, 9. And here a question is very needful to be resolved, viz. How it can be just with God to punish the sins of a short life-time with Everlasting punishment? Possibly sinful men (being blinded with sin and self-love) may not discern the Equity of that severe Dispensation;How it can be just to punish Temporal offen∣ces eternally. but that will not prove it to be unequal. If God might do nothing but what they ap∣prove of, he should not be known to be a God indeed. And while he is such he may do whatsoever he pleaseth most justly, to any of his Creatures. His very Will is the Rule of Righteousness. And there∣fore to question whether it can be just with God to punish the Impe∣nitent Enemies of his Laws everlastingly, when we have seen so plainly that it is his Will so to do, is the very first-born of folly. 2. There is something that looketh like an everlasting punishment, which yet is not thought to be any injustice amongst men in this World; Princes do not count it unjust to put those men to death that transgress the fundamental Laws of their Land, as Murderers, and common Robbers, &c. And yet that is after a sort an Everlasting punishment, as taking them away for ever from all the priviledges, ho∣nours and comforts of the Common-wealth, that they were capable of if they had lived longer. And for many offences, they are com∣monly adjudged to perpetual Banishment or Imprisonment. And what is an offence against a King and Country, in comparison of an offence against the God of Heaven? surely nothing unto it: nor would it be any offence indeed, or deserve any punishment if it were not an offence against God. 3. The desert of sin is not to be measured by the shortness of the time wherein it was committed: It is not counted so here on earth: A reproachful word to a Prince though it be spoken in less than a mi∣nutes time, yet deserves perpetual Imprisonment, as being spoken against that person who is of so great dignity, and to whom he owes
the Honour of a true Subject. And if the Prince and he should live for ever, it were just that he should keep him in Prison for ever, till he acknowledge his fault, and humble himself unfeignedly for it, as the Wicked in Hell will not to any purpose: (They will not humble themselves for their sins, in any Religious way, no not then when they are tormented for them, as may be discovered ere long.) And if an offence against a man may deserve perpetual Imprisonment, how much more may an offence against God deserve perpetual Damnation? What are all the men in the world to him? Behold, saith the Prophet, All Nations before him are as nothing,Esay 40.17. and vanity. 4. It is not contrary to justice (but an executing of just vengeance) for God to condemn the sinful Angels to everlasting Punishment, 2 Pet. 2.4.2 Pet. 2.4. He spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell: when once they had sinned, God spared them not, his Justice took hold on them immediately and condemned them to Everlasting punishment, for their state is expressed by St. Jude v. 6. by Ever∣lasting chains under darkness, and our Saviour tells us, that Everlast∣ing fire is prepared for them:Matth. 25. v. 41. And certainly, no man will question whe∣ther they shall be punished Everlastingly by that Everlasting fire, or not, unless he be bewitched by Mr. R's evil Spirit. And though it were severity and strict Justice so to deal with them, yet we know it was no injustice at all; for He is a Righteous God and without Iniquity. And though His ways are sometimes past finding out,Deutr 32.4. Psal. 9.7. Rom. 11. yet still we must say, as those in the Revelation, Just and True are thy ways, O King of Saints. Assuredly he will not punish the Devils themselves one whit longer than their sins deserve.— And if the sins of Angels are justly punishable with Everlasting punishments, must we not acknow∣ledge the same concerning sinful men and their sins? Is sin any better thing in Men than in Angels, or is God any fitter to be despised and dishonoured by them than by the other? (Doubt∣less if it make the noblest Beings worthy of Everlasting shame, it must needs make their Inferiors so too.) To which let me add thus much, that he hath laid more engagements upon Men to obey him than he hath done upon the fallen Angels. He hath given Time, and Means, and Motives to Repent, and promiseth Mercy and Salvation in and through Christ,Esay 55.7. in case they forsake their evil ways, and turn unto him, which he hath not done for the fallen Angels. And as for the Inferiority of Mans Nature to the Nature of Angels, That (I say) is so far from excusing or extenuating their fault, in sinning against him, as that it seems very plainly to aggravate the offence. If it be so horrible for
Angels and Powerful Spirits to cross his Will and oppose his Laws, and Government, it seems to be much worse for Dust and ashes so to do. As 'tis a greater piece of Impudence for a mean person to contra∣dict his Prince, than for Lords and Nobles so to do. 5. 'Tis not unknown, what Miseries sin brought upon the Lord Je∣sus, when he stood in the place of sinners: It made him sweat as it were drops of Bloud, it made his Body subject to Buffettings, Scour∣gings, Wounds and Death, yea a shameful and accursed Death:Matth. 27. Luke 23. &c. it made his name subject to reproaches and Accusations, and bitterest Scoffs and Taunts from the basest and wickedest men; It made his Soul to be full of Sorrow, though it were free from all spot of sin. It made him a man of Sorrows on Earth, who is the Matter of Heavens Joy: It made him to be despised and rejected of men, and live a life of con∣tinual Persecutions, who is the object of the Angels Worship, and at whose Birth they sang A Hymn of Praise. Thus we see what Miseries he bore, when he undertook for sinners, and bare their sins, 1 Pet. 2.24. And yet the sins that Christ became answerable for, were not any sins of the Impenitent (that live and dye such,) for if he had made satisfaction for them, they should not be condemned for them, as we know they shall. Now if Christ suffered so much, when he undertook for them that in time should repent, (if they came to years) how great must that punishment be, which the Impenitent must bear when they must answer for themselves? That which (in the Penitent man) made Christ to suffer so great things for a time, being imputed to him (as the surety for the sinner) must needs (in the impenitent) deserve Everlasting Punishment. It is more for Christ to suffer for a time, than for sin∣ful men to suffer for ever. He beingRom. 9.5. God as well as man; that which, by Imputation to Christ, made him liable to temporal ven∣geance and the curse of the Law, must needs make the sinner worthy of Eternal vengeance, being inherent in him, and acted by him, and at∣tended with final impenitence, (as it is in them that perish.) Sixthly, Sin being committed against a God of Infinite Majesty and Excellency (as a dishonour to his Name, and a violation of his Law) must needs deserve a kind of Infinite Punishment, [for Justice requires a kind of proportion between the fault and the punishment] Now be∣cause the wicked cannot bear a punishment that is infinite in weight and degree, (to compensate the wrong done to an Infinite Majesty) there∣fore they must bear a punishment that is Infinite in duration and con∣tinuance.
Seventhly, An Everlasting Punishment is suitable, if not to the Act of sin so properly, yet to the principle of sinning: There is such a cor∣rupt disposition in wicked Men, that they would sin perpetually if they could: There is no ungodly course they have delighted themselves in, but they would do so still, if they might have their own choice. If a Lyar, a malicious Miser, a Contemner of God's Ordinances should live ten thousand years, he would be as very a Lyar, as covetous and ma∣licious, &c. as ever he was. And the like may be said in other cases. The hearts of the children of men are fully set to do evil.Eccles. 8.11. They would have sinned for ever, and why should not they suffer for ever? what more just than that those should never want for sorrow, that would never consent to forsake their sin? If a man were to live on Earth never so many thousands of years, and his Prince should know he would always be of a Rebellious disposition, he would think he had reason enough to keep him in prison all that time. And yet as was said before, there is no comparison between the Princes of this world, and the God that made it. The Wicked cease not offending when they are in Hell: They will be Blasphemers,Revel. 16.9.—11. when they cannot be Atheists, Drunkards and Chea∣ters, &c. and will hate God's people when they cannot hurt them. They will always be destitute of true Holiness, and be enemies to it (when they are in Hell) though they will be hindred from following the sins they like of. Hell will be as full of sin as of Torment, yea, and a great part of its Torment, will be by sin as well as for sin. Will it not fill the Hypocrites hollow heart with vexation to think with himself what a silly Dissembler he hath been, to remember what care he took to deceive others, and what pains he used to deceive himself, and how careless he was of that time which was given him to prepare for Eternity? Will it not torment the Drunkard, to think how he served the Devil till he could not stand on his Legs, how he valued a Barrel above Heaven, and the company of Sots, before communion with Christ in his ways, and so of the rest. In a word: when a reasonable creature comes to see that he hath been his own Ruine (by following the ways of his own heart) and hath lost at once the world and Heaven by his wilful wickedness, (when he was also warned of the danger time after time, and beseech∣ed to turn that he might be saved) who knows whether this very Re∣membrance of his former follies, as the Means and Causes of his un∣curable Miseries, will not be as great a Torment to him as hell-fire it self? Doubtless we cannot here comprehend what a Hell sin it self
will prove to the sinner, that lives and dies under the guilt thereof.— To conclude this Section, 'tis observable that the Jesuits themselves, (who of all the Men in the World, are least apt to think the worst of sin, since they have found out ways to make satisfaction for it themselves) yet I say these very Men do constantly own the Doctrine of the Everlast∣ing Punishment of the wicked hereafter, as Bellarmin, Valentia,Vid. Baronii Disp. de peccato Mortali. part 2. sect. 3. and the like Sophisters: And therefore (Reader) if thou can'st see no Reason for it, but judgest it unjust, that they should be so punished, thou wilt shew thy self more Blind, than these Sons of Darkness. And so much for the Proof of the Doctrine asserted. CHAP. II. SECT. I. A Tast of Mr. Richardson's Grapes in the beginning of his Garden, or the Sophistry and Impertinencies of the former Pages of his Pamphlet, discovered. HAving laid down some Proofs of the Doctrine asserted, and vin∣dicated those Proofs from Mr. R. and his Fellow's Evasions and Exceptions; I shall now proceed, with God's permission and assistance, to examine his Book, and encounter the Enemies of this Truth, (whe∣ther great or small) that are to be found therein. And though we may call them Legion, for that they are many, yet I trust thou wilt find, Rea∣der, in due season, that their united strength is far enough from being insuperable. My Author was wise enough to foresee, that all good Christians would not have a good Opinion of Him, or his Work, and therefore supposeth in his Epistle to the Reader, that (in this unthankful Age) those that are in the Dark themselves, might reject and undervalue the new Light he hath afforded them, and say of Him, as some did of Christ, [He hath a Devil, and is mad, why hear ye him.] And truly, if they shall say so of him, I shall not much reprove them for it. For in the entrance of his Book, he writes as though madness were in his heart, as 'tis expressed in Ecclesiastes; As though a Spirit of vanity and im∣pertinency had guided his valiant Pen: For he begins with a discourse of Christ's Descent into Hell, and seems to please himself abundantly in setting his Betters at variance with each other, I mean by reckoning up
the different Expositions of that Article amongst Protestant Divines: And what (I pray you) is that to the purpose he aims at? For what if Ʋrsinus and Mr. Perkins were not altogether of the same Opinion with Bucer, and others, as to the sense of that Article, yet 'tis suffici∣ently known, that they were far from thinking with Mr. R. that there is no Hell, nor no Everlasting Punishment for the Wicked hereafter. Or what if Hell (in that Article) do not signifie the place of Tor∣ment for the Enemies of God, yet how will it follow that it doth not signifie such a thing in those places, where mention is made of Hell-fire, and of destroying Body and Soul in Hell, and the like? To his Imperti∣nency may be added his Impiety; for I find not any thing of that sen∣tence in the place cited out of Dr. Fulk, (his Defence of the English Translation) which he alledgeth for His, in the 5. Page of his Book. Afterwards he brings in the Opinions of some learned Men about the word Sheol, which is as much to the purpose, as the other. He tells us, that it sometimes signifies the Grave (and what thanks shall we give him for such a discovery) but yet, alas, he had not shewed more of his Learning, in the two former Pages, than he hath shewed of his folly in two Lines following, (in p. 11.) where he tells us, that Sheol cannot sig∣nifie Hell, in their speech, that believe there is no Hell. As much as if he had said [The Devil is not conceived to be an Enemy to Mankind, by those that believe there is no Devil; (which hath been the Ale-house Doctrine of some Damners and Sinkers in our days) And then he adds, [The Greeks say plainly, that Mens Souls shall vanish like smoke:] If they do, the more ignorant are they, and if English Men think so too, they would be so much the fitter to hear and believe the Doctrine of his Book (which is no better than the other:) His Head hath as much of Atheism in it, which can (by the force of imagination) turn Hell into a Dream, and Everlasting Punishment into a Bug-bear and Scare-crow, as he that fancies the Soul to be turned into smoke. But enough of this.— Let us see a little of his Sophistry, in his Cavil at Dr. Ames his speech (if it be his indeed.His Sophistry.) Dr. Ames (saith Mr. R.) tells us, in his Marrow of Divinity,p. 4. that the Scripture speaks nothing distinctly of the place of Hell, or the manner of Torture there.— Whereupon he thus replies upon the Doctor. [If so, then it speaks nothing of these things, for what the Scripture speaks, it speaks distinctly.— But while he thus makes game at Doctor Ames, he doth another mis∣chief, viz. make himself ridiculous; for none but a Caviller would gather Mr. R.'s conclusion from it. His meaning (I dare say) was only
this, that it speaks nothing distinctly concerning its scituation; In what part of the World it is placed, how far distant from the Sun or Stars, or what compass it is of, or the like; But doth not mean that it speaks nothing of that place, which is commonly called by that Name, Scri∣pture assures us, that there was a Garden in Eden,Gen. 2.8. in which Man was placed, yet I might say without absurdity, That it speaks nothing di∣stinctly of that place, for it tells us only that it was East-ward, (in the general) but saith not what part of the World it was in; how long, or how broad, or how near to the place where Jerusalem stood, or the like. So in p. 6. He gives us another chip of the same Block,Page 6 for he tells us, that the word [Hell] is not found in the Hebrew or Greek. And that the word Sheol, which is so translated, signifies properly, the Grave.— A very precious Revelation! and such as might be well accepted, if my Author, or any of his Judgment would but impart it (kindly) to those Noble spirited Gentlemen that are Inamorato's to a play, and frequent those Places where all things are common. For might they not go the more pleasantly thither, when they are assured, that if they dye when they are at worst, they shall go to no worse a place than the Grave, and that there is no other, nor worser Hell than it; for that which precise Men have rendered by the word [Hell] doth properly signifie the Grave. But yet let them not trust too much to this kind of Learning: for if they please to consider what I have to say unto it, they will find it is not worth one Glass of good Wine.Mr. R.'s inven∣tion to prove [no Hell] will prove as strong∣ly that there is no Devil. For if this were a proof that there is no Hell; viz. that the word so rendered sig∣nifies another thing sometimes; then I say, at the same rate of arguing, we might prove (as well and as wisely) that there is no Devil neither: for the word Devil is not found in the Greek Testament: (since an Eng∣lish word is not a Greek word) And that which is translated Devil in the 4th. of Matth. and other places,. is known to signifie an ill-condi∣tioned Man, a Detractor, Railer, Accuser, and such like: This I say is the proper importance of the original word. And yet sobr Christi∣ans will believe (in spight of all Mr. R.'s subtilty) that it signifies (in that Chapter) the same that we use to call by that name, even the great implacable adversary of Mankind, and cannot doubt of it, if they read the 10. and 11. Verses of that Chapter. And this is that which he hath offered us upon the word [Sheol.] He adds something like it upon the word Gehenna. But of that (with God's leave) in the next Section.
CHAP. II. SECT. II. Mr. R. his Observations upon the word Hell-Fire, Damnation of Hell, &c. Of the Rich Man and Lazarus, in Luke 16. Of Tophet: Of the Worm that never dyeth, censured. R.—Hell-Fire, in Matth. 5. and other places, signifies the Fire that was in the Valley of the Son of Hinnom: And the word [Gehenna] which is used for Hell,P. 12. and 14. is borrowed from the Valley of Hinnom.— BUT by his leave the former is denied: Hell-Fire in the Gospel doth only allude to that Fire in the Valley of Hinnom,Jer. 7.31. where (as the Prophet Jeremy sheweth) the People most cruelly sacrificed their Children in the Fire,Of Hell. to the Idol Moloch. And is it not very fit for the place of Torment for the Enemies of God to be expressed by this place of Wickedness and Torture? As the word which notes a mischie∣vous Person, is fitly used to signifie the Devil, as was noted before. And that the casting into Hell-fire cannot signifie the casting into the Fire of Hinnom aforesaid, is manifest; because that Fire had been put out long ago, and the place turned to another use, by the good King Josiah, as we find in 2 King. 23.10. Gehenna, what.And for the word Gehenna, we confess it is borrowed from the Val∣ly of Hinnom, (that place of Torture aforesaid) and therefore is very fit to express the place appointed for the Punishment of the Wicked, &c. And that it only alludes to that place,Per Metapho∣ram, uti Pisca∣tor in Scholiis super Matth. 5.22. Matth. 10.28. but doth not mean the place it self, is manifest by what was now said; neither was that a place for the Soul to suffer in, or for the Body after its Death, as the Hell which our Sa∣viour speaks of most certainly is, Matth. 10. but rather fear him who is able to destroy Soul and Body in Hell: and that too after the Body is killed, Luke 12.5. that is, He can quicken the dead Body, and make it live in the Torments of Hell. Of the Rich Man and La∣zarus, in Luke the 12.Having pleased his Humour upon the word Gehenna, in the 16. and 17. Pages, (to as little profit to himself, or his Reader, as can well be desired) He proceeds in the following Pages, to darken the Light of
the word [Everlasting] from thence to the 22 page of his Book,p. 16, 17. and 23. which they that admire for good and sound, may conveniently Read the fore∣going Chapter, where I have examined them severally: This, Reader, I thought fit to mention, that thou mayst not think I do wilfully pass over any thing in his Pamphlet that is not grosly impertinent. Then in the 23 page, he passeth his grave censure upon that Text in St. Luke cap. 16. concerning the Rich man and Lazarus, where he tells us that it is but a Parable.— And that I am confident, was no new discovery of his own, it was found out long before the world had any benefit by this Book of his. Then (having time and paper to spare) he undertakes to prove it by no less than Ten Reasons (as the Socinians of old urged 30 Arguments against Infant Baptism,) But as all theirs were deceitful arguments, so Nine of his Ten Reasons, are needless ones, for in such a case one may be sufficient. And when he hath gained what he contends for, [that it is a Parable,] yet he hath gained very little as to the cause he hath undertaken. For as the Learned Mr. Baxter saith very well — If that of the Rich man in Hell, and Lazarus, should be no more than a Parable,Saints Rest. part 2. cap. 10. Sect. 4. yet it seems very unlikely, that Christ would teach them by such a Parable as seemed so evidently to intimate the Souls Happiness or Misery imme∣diately after death, if there were no such thing — So say I in like manner, it were very strange that Christ should teach them by such a Parable, as seems so plainly to intimate a Hell or Torment for the Souls of the ungodly that dye such (though they dye Rich) if there were no such matter. The next place of Scripture he hath taken a view of is Esay 30.33.Of Tophet, Esay 30.33. p. 26. &c. where he tells us we must understand by Tophet, only the Valley of Hinnom aforesaid. This he enlargeth upon, to little purpose, for se∣veral pages together, but that is the substance of his discourse, so far as it opposeth my Doctrine: (and where he doth not oppose the Truth, I can let him alone very contentedly) nor need I be large upon this point, we have enough for the upholding the Doctrine asserted, whe∣ther this Text will serve to that end or not: and that it need not be judged altogether impertinent to our purpose (notwithstanding that which he hath said) may be gathered in part from that which was said (but now) upon the word Gehenna, upon which he had plaid the same Critick. Mr. Calvin, and Vatablus (who could see as far as an ordinary man, into a Text of Scripture, whether they may compare with Mr. Richardson or not) They, I say, count it no absurdity to in∣terpret it of Hell, for that place of Torture is as fit (by a common
figure) to denote the place of Torment for the ungodly,Vid. Synops. Crit. in Esay 30 as Paradise, the place of Pleasure, was to signifie the place appointed for the Saints happy Mansions. Of the Worm that never dyeth.As Logicians say of an Absurdity, that one being granted a thou∣sand will follow it: So Mr. R. being so vain as to discourse as he hath done upon other particulars, was not afraid to shew himself so absurd, as to give a suitable gloss upon these words of our Saviour — where their Worm never dieth, telling us that this is in this present life; he means, only in this life, if he mean any thing to his purpose: And to make it good he citeth Mark 9.44.Mark 9.43, 44. p. 32. (misprinted, Mark 6.) and Re∣velations 14.10, 11. wherein he hath shewed himself very impartial, for he hath not spared himself and his Cause. There being hardly any Scriptures more apparently destructive of it than those: the latter I have mentioned before, the former I shall now insist on. The words are these.Mark 9.44. opened. p. 32.—to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched, where (viz. in which Hell) their Worm (speaking of the wicked) never dyeth, this is only in this life saith Mr. R.—strange certainly! for our Lord tells us, 'tis in Hell. And I hope Mr. R. himself will not be so bold as to interpret Hell in this Text of the Grave. For there is no Worm in the Grave, but such as dyeth in a little time. And this is so remarkable that it is set down three times within six Verses, and therefore seems to note something more than a Punishment in this life only. If he take it to be meant properly, of a real and natural Worm, 'tis a sign he hath a Worm in his own Pate; if he take it figuratively, of the Worm of Conscience, or the furious Reflections thereof upon its own wilful wickedness, and its fierce Accusations, &c. (as 'tis com∣monly understood) then he may not deny it to be after this present life is ended. Those Accusations and Terrors of Conscience that Judas found in himself, a little before he hang'd himself, were doubtless continued in his Soul after its separation from the body; and my Au∣thor cannot handsomly deny it, unless he have entertained the sottish Dream of the Socinians, That the Soul is asleep after the death of the Body. And thus I have spoken to all that is in any tolerable sense con∣siderable in the former part of his Book to the 32 page of it. In that page he deals with another Text of Scripture, but seeing it is such as I would not urge to prove Everlasting Punishments by, and seeing his Discourse upon it is (in a great part) wild and extravagant, I shall not trouble my self or my Reader with it, but rather proceed to the 36 page, where he hath something fit to be examined, as of the Burning the Tares, in Matth. 13. of the word Cursed, &c. which will be the Subject (in part) of the next Paragraph.
CHAP. II. SECT. III. Mr. R's Inventions upon the Parable of the Tares,Of the Tares in Matth. 13. of the word Cursed, of Eternal Damnation, of the word Fire, and of the Corporeity of Hell-fire. Mr. R.—The Burning of the Tares,p. 36. (Matth. 13.) i. e. at the end of the World, v. 39. The Tares are the wicked, the Har∣vest is the end of the World; by which it appears, that the Wicked with the Earth shall be consumed by fire, v. 40.42. 2 Pet. 3.7. BUT what will not those men venture to say, that are resolved to maintain a bad Cause by the strength of their own ungodly wits? [The Wicked shall be consumed with the Earth it self, and by this it appears, saith he.] No such matter say I; this is false in it self, and therefore cannot appear to be true by that Text in St. Matth. That it is false in it self, I need name no more than that formerly insisted on, in 1 Cor. 15. the dead shall be raised incorruptible.1 Cor. 15.52. Those of the Wicked that are now dead, shall be raised to life again at Judgment, yea, to a state of Incorruption and Immortality;Of Burning the Tares. and that these places do not speak the contrary is evident to those that duly consider them. The former runs thus. (v. 40. &c.) As the Tares are gathered and burned in the Fire, so shall it be (with the wicked) in the end of this world. The Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom, them that do Iniquity, and (v. 42.) shall cast them into a Furnace of fire, &c. For my part I cannot conceive how he should make an Argument for it, from hence, unless it be from the comparison between them, as thus. The Tares are burned so as to remain no longer Tares. But so shall it be at the end of the world in respect of the wicked. And if he would reason so, there is little reason we should much regard it. They shall be burned (as the Tares) viz. as they shall, in some re∣spects, i. e. certainly, irresistibly, as worthless things and the like. But it follows not that they shall burn in the same manner in every thing, as the Tares burn, or that the fire shall have the same effects upon them,
which it hath upon the Tares, 'tis manifest it shall pain them and Tor∣ment them, make them weep and gnash their teeth for vexation, but surely it shall not make the Tares do so.Esay 42. The Lord is as a man of War, saith the Prophet, shall I therefore apply Mr. R's Logick, to that saying, and infer (in spight of Religion and good sense) that the Lord is not in many places at once, because a man of War is not, or that the Lord is mortal, because a man of War is so? God forbid. It is enough that he is like a man of War in other things, or terrible as a man of War, and as it were ready armed against his Enemies, &c. 2 Pet. 3.7. not for Mr. R.Nor will that of St. Peter make for him, for there 'tis only said, that the day of Judgment will be a day of perdition to ungodly men, And Perdition is no more than the word Destruction signifies, and if he tells us Destruction when spoken of the wicked is meant of the destroying their Natures, and consuming their Substance, as the fire doth Tares or Stubble, we may answer him sufficiently, from what hath been said in Chap. 1. Sect. 2. (towards the end) and in the Margin. Cap. 1. Sect. 3. upon 2 Thess. 1.9. Of the word Cursed. p. 38.The word Cursed comes next to hand, upon which he gives us several notes [It is to be Barren, to be a Fugitive, and a Wanderer, &c.] and then he adds several Texts wherein it signifies, as he saith, so to be. But I pray Sir, is this all that it may be supposed to signifie? if not, 'tis no∣thing to our purpose; if it be, then let it be made appear, that it signifies so (and no worse) when 'tis said, Depart from me ye cursed, &c. Matth. 25. He that concludeth it must signifie [to be Barren] when spoken of wicked men,Matth. 21. because it signifies so when spoken of Trees, will prove himself to be but a wooden Disputant. Of Eternal Damnation. p. 39.Mr. R.—p. 39. Eternal Damnation is in the Greek, Eternal Judgment, and a Judgment is a Sentence, &c. Whether he will render the original word, by Damned or Judged, I shall not much regard in the present case, for the judging of the wicked is apparently the Damning or condemning of them, Matth. 25.41.Heb. 6.2. opened. We read in Hebrews the 6.2. of Eternal Judgment. What will my Author say to this? for he cannot well call it an Eternal Sentence: for 'tis plain, The sentence that Christ will pass is not to be called Eternal, for it will be passed in a little time, yea, in a moment in com∣parison; the Judgment therefore is called Eternal, rather in respect of the state that men shall be adjudged unto, whether of Joy or of Tor∣ment: and which will be the wicked mans portion, I need not now stand to discover.
He proceeds to the word [Fire] and to enquire what manner of fire the Fire of Hell (if any such thing be) may be called by us,Of the word Fire, and Cor∣poral fire, &c. p. 40. whether Corporal, or not. For the first, He gives us several senses of the Word, and tells us, it is sometimes used to signifie God's Word, sometimes God himself, by a Figure, &c. Which Observations I have no cause at all to admire, since they are matters of small difficulty, and little cause to thank him for, since they are designed for a bad end. These therefore I pass over,Q. If Corporal fire, or not? and shall con∣sider rather the Learning which his next page is beautified with, viz. in answer to the question in the Margin. He contends for the Negative. Mr. R. The Fire of Hell cannot be Corporal Fire,p. 41, &c. for these Reasons following.— (And then He mentions no less than Eight, that thou may'st perceive that his Brain is not cursed, viz. not barren or unfruitful.) And though I am not bound to follow him in all his follies, yet some of those Rea∣sons that seem strongest, I shall not think much to consider of. His first reason Mr. R. — One Reason is this, Because Corporal Fire con∣sumes the Combustible matter cast into it. But the Fire of Hell (they say) consumes not the Persons cast into it, there∣fore it is not Corporal Fire. Answer. If the Fire of Hell be Corporal Fire, yet nothing proves that it must needs consume them that are cast into it. For it is not to be considered, what it might do in an ordinary and a natural way, but what the God of all Power will have it to do, and hath appointed it to do. The reason why that Fire that fell upon Sodom and Gomorrha did consume them, was not so much because it was Corporal Fire, as because God had appointed it to consume them.Matth. 25.41. & 46. But how can my Author prove that the Fire of Hell is appointed to consume the wicked and impeni∣tent? It is appointed rather to Torment and Punish them: and there∣fore in Matth. 25.41. They that shall be sent away with a Curse into Everlasting Fire, shall be so far from being consumed, that they shall be in Everlasting Punishment, Vers. the last. And in Matth. 13.42.Matth. 13.42. 'tis said, they shall be cast into a Furnace of Fire, (not where they shall be consumed to ashes, but) where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth:
which cannot be when they are consumed, Mr. R. himself being Judge. And if the wicked should be cast into Hell-fire, only to be consumed by it; then I say, the case would be no worse with them, in respect of the Fire of Hell, than the case of Malefactors, in respect of the Faggot-fire, here on Earth; yea no worse than the case of faithful Martyrs of Christ, for they were consumed by Fire, (as to their Bodies.) And he that can think it will be no worse with the Enemies of God in the World to come, than it was with his Servants in this World, must stoutly deny the faith, and strongly oppose his own wits also. His 2d. reason. 2d. Reason. Mr. R.—Corporal Fire may be quenched, but Hell-fire, they say, cannot. But is it we that say so, or is it not our Lord that saith so? yea three times in a few Verses.— Mark 9.44. Where the Fire is not quenched, i. e. not at all, or never. As when 'tis said, He that believeth not the Son, (but lives and dies in unbelief) shall not see life, or happiness, not at all that is. And if it be Corporal Fire, God is able to continue it for ever, as well as for a Time. And let Mr. R. prove that he will not con∣tinue Corporal Fire in Hell, if he can. 3d. reason. 3. Things seen are Temporal only, saith Paul; Hell-fire there∣fore, if Corporal, is not Eternal, for Corporal fire is seen. But the Apostle doth not mean, that nothing visible is Eternal, for the Body of Christ is a visible Body, yet Eternal. 2. Hell-fire, though it were Corporal, is not actually seen by Mortal Eyes in this Life, and therefore is not proved to be Temporal by that Text. But possibly some may say, What is your Judgment in the case? If it were worth while to tell thee, it is thus. The Author's Opinion of Hell-fire.That the Fire of Hell is partly Figurative, and partly Real, and Cor∣poral; or that in some Scriptures it is to be taken in the former sense, in the latter in others. 1. Partly Fi∣gurative.For Example. When it is said that the Everlasting Fire is prepared for the Devil and his Angels, in Matth. 25. I am apt to think that the word Fire doth not there signifie any Corporal Fire, or Fire properly so called; because I believe Spirits not to be any sutable objects for real Fire to work upon; much less can I think that Corporal Fire can be the chiefest means of their Punishment, as this Everlasting Fire is inti∣mated to be, since there is no mention made of any worse thing prepa∣red
for them. This Fire therefore I would rather understand of the fire of God's vengeance, and the immediate impressions of his wrath: And so 'tis no absurdity to express the wrath of God by fire; for its terrible and piercing Nature may fitly represent it to us in some mea∣sure, which cannot be conceived by us to the full, for who knows the po∣wer of his Anger, saith the Psalmist: yea, and God himself also,Heb. 12. v. last. as he is a Revenger upon his Enemies, is called a consuming Fire, in Hebr. 12. This my Author hath took notice of, p. 44. — Others say,p. 44. That the Fire of Hell is Metaphorical, so St. Augustine, and some Modern Preachers.— And I think their judgment concerning it was as much worth as His. And though he is angry with them for it, yet he had more wit in his anger, than to undertake to disprove them in that par∣ticular. I shall not need therefore to say any thing more for it, unless he had been pleased to say something against it. Yet I am not of their mind, who make it wholly and only figurative. I see no reason at all to the contrary,2. Partly Real. or Corporal. but that we may suppose the Fire that shall torment the Bodies of the wicked to be real and corporal fire, as ours is, I mean as real, though perhaps not of the same kind. And this Opinion a Man may easily be led unto, by reading those Scriptures which so often and so plainly call it fire; a Lake of Fire,Matth. 13.42. Mark 9.44. &c Fire and Brim∣stone, a Furnace of Fire, Ʋnquenchable Fire, and such like, which seem to intimate real fire. And that real fire may be sufficient to punish the Bodies of the wicked by, (in case the terrible God shall be pleased to use it for that end) cannot be doubted. And if it should be but figurative fire, it would be no comfort to the wicked that shall be in it; for those things in Scripture, that are figura∣tively set forth, by real and corporal things, (to help our weak appre∣hensions) are such as do exceed those things, in their respective natures, whether for terror, or for comfort. God, who is called a shield, is a greater security to his Servants than a Shield: And as he is called a con∣suming fire, so he is more terrible to his Enemies than Fire, (in the day that he shall deal with them.) So that if Hell-fire be not fire indeed, but something else figuratively expressed by it, 'tis certainly something worse than fire.
CHAP. II. SECT. IV. Mr. Richardson's pleasant Game, or the sport he makes with the Learned, upon the account of the various Opinions (among them) where Hell is. Of the Place of Hell.Mr. R.—They generally hold it is in the lower parts of the Earth: But where these parts are, no Man on Earth can tell, saith Mr. Perkins upon the Creed. AND what if Mr. Perkins say thus? I suppose he did not say so to offend Mr. R. and if he will be offended without cause,p. 45, 46. he must be pleased again, or be offended still. He cannot tell me exactly and particularly the place where Paradise was scituate, nor in what part of Paradise the Tree grew, which bare the forbidden fruit; yet I hope he will not question whether there were such a Place, or such a Tree in the World: And why should we doubt whether Hell be a real place, be∣cause we cannot tell where it is? As God hath revealed the one, so he hath not revealed the other. And where ever it is, 'tis a Hell indeed. I know not the particular place which was blessed with my Author's presence, when he studied for this precious Book: Yet I doubt not but He was then in some place or other, (and I believe he studied for it also, for I cannot think that he wrote it by Divine Inspiration.) Behold what follows. Mr. R.—Bishop Bilson, Mr. Whately, and others say, Hell is below; But how many Miles it may be to it, they cannot tell us. But why should Mr. R. make such sport with them for giving him so little cause?Prov. 15.24. When they said Hell is below, they followed a wiser Man than Himself, who calls it Hell beneath in his Book of Proverbs. And it can be no disparagement to them that they knew not how many Miles it is to it, no more than it is to himself, that he knows not how many Miles it is to the third Heaven.
In the next Page (having recreated himself with two or three more Writers) he comes to propose a question,47. which he hopes will puzle us to answer (and defend his cause, if unanswered.) Mr. R.—We find in Scripture that the Earth shall be consumed by Fire, 1 Pet. 3.10, 11. and then where shall Hell be? I answer. 1. It is questioned by some, whether the Earth shall be con∣sumed, as to its substance, or no. The learned Wendeline, and others are for the Negative. But I know not any of their Arguments that seem so clear, as those for the Affirmative, alledged by Dr. Prideaux,Fascic controv. de Novissimis. 9.7. and Dr. Hackwell in his Apology of the Power and Providence of God. Wherefore we will take it for granted, that the Earth shall be consu∣med, (as my Author supposeth:) And what of that? Must Hell be con∣sumed, if the Earth be? surely not. But if it be below, (in, or under the Earth) What shall become of it, after the Earth is destroyed? What place can be for it, when its place is burnt up? — Alas vain Man! wilt thou make difficulties to the Al∣mighty? What! Is he the God of all Power, and the God to whom vengeance belongeth,Psal. 94.1. (or the God of Revenges) and yet shall he want a place wherein to execute his vengeance upon the Enemies of his Laws? O how silly is such a surmisal! If the whole Earth were destroyed, a word of his Mouth could make all that space wherein it stood, a suffi∣cient Hell for his Enemies. But what need he, or any others be curious to enquire where Hell is? for since it is a place of Punishment, the sci∣tuation of it cannot make it more comfortable, (let it be our chief care to escape it, and turn unfeignedly to God and his Service, and then where-e're it is, it shall be far enough from us.) In the latter part of the same Page,p. 47. He hath something of an Obje∣ction, from Revelation 20.14. verse, where he tells us, That Hell can∣not be the Lake of Fire, because it was cast into the Lake.—I confess there is some strength in this, and shall easily grant him, that Hell in that place doth not signifie the Lake of Fire, (though it doth elsewhere.) And for the sense of it, either Death and Hell may be said figura∣tively to be cast into the Lake, because they are conquered and trium∣phed over by Christ, and as it were condemned: (and so may by a fi∣gure, be spoken of, as of Persons condemned, in that respect) or else Hell may be taken (by a common figure) for the Devil and his Angels:Matth. 16.18. As when it is said, in Matth. 16. That the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against his Church: That is, the power and policies of all the Devils
shall not be able to ruine it.Vide Piscato∣rem in loc. (The gates being as places of strength to a City, so the places also where the chief Council was held.) 48. &c.In the 48, 49, 50. pages, His Pen dropped so much Vanity as that I shall not think it worth while to trouble mine with it. But after∣wards he speaks thus, p. 51.Mr. R. — Others say plainly, they cannot tell where Hell is (as some had held it was in one place, some in another.) Thus being full of Mirth at their different Opinions, he expresseth himself very freely in these following words R. — As it is reported of Fa∣ther Cotton the Jesuit,p. 52. that he could not find out a plain place of Scripture to prove Purgatory by, and therefore asked the Devil for one: So they are at as great a loss to prove their Hell of Torments by a plain Text. O admirable man! Well might he be a Ring-leader among the Ana∣baptists, and his name be an honour to their Printed Confession, whose wit was so far from being cursed or unfruitful, as that it brought forth (with ease) such a blessed comparison as this. But first he might have left out his story of the Jesuits enquiring of the Devil, &c. For he dares not say our Ministers enquire of the Devil for a Text to prove Hell by. Nor (secondly) have they any need to enquire of him for that purpose. The Scripture is plain enough in the case. Matth. 10.28.Matth. 10.28. (to name no more at present) is very full for it. Fear not them that can kill the body, but rather fear him who can destroy Body and Soul in Hell. Mr. R. shall be a Prophet if this do not prove a Hell of Torment. For to destroy in this place doth not signifie to turn into nothing, or destroy their BeingSee Cap. 1. Sect. 3., for the Soul shall remain for ever, as all but Atheists confess, besides what was noted upon the word [Destroy] in the place before cited in the Margin. To Destroy therefore in that place, is to punish. And to punish in Hell is manifestly spoken as an aggravation of that Punishment (or destruction) Hell cannot mean the Grave in that place. For the Soul is not destroyed (in any sense) in the Grave; what then can it mean but a place of Torment so called (the Valley of Hinnom is no receptacle for Souls) and there∣fore Gehenna, or Hell in that Text doth not mean that very place, but only, as was said, alludes to it. p. 53.In the next page, he gives us a proof of his confidence, and con∣cludes
with such passages as Crown the work (and are the Cream of the whole Jest.) R. Line 8 — See ye not the great uncertainty they are at?His Rhetorical Query. Do ye not see by their Reeling, Staggering, and Stumbling, that they are so drunk that they can find no ground to stand upon, &c. Than which a sober man can hardly speak any thing that savours of more profaneness, pride and sottishness. And if we weigh the speech a∣right we shall find defective in its Naturals as well as its Morals (in point of Truth as well as Goodness.) For 'tis more true to say, that Ortho∣dox Divines are at a certainty in the case, than that they are at an un∣certainty: For they are certain in the matter, though uncertain in one of the smallest circumstances: They are perfectly agreed that Hell is no Fancy, though they differ about the place where it is fixed, (and they may differ still without any danger to the Souls of men, unless they are so unreasonable as to conclude that That is in no place, whose place is not certainly known.) And Secondly, They cannot rightly be said to Reel and Stagger, that differ from each others in such small matters. Such differences are no signs of Drunkenness: yet if my Author will call it so, so let him do. And if he had but given them a more particular name, and said [the Black coats, or the Covetous Priests] instead of, [They, and These men] and then talked of their Reeling, Staggering and Stumbling, the Quakers might have called him an upright man, and almost have sworn (by the Light within them) that he was come out of the Darkness and the Witchcraft, and spake very honestly as the Spirit moved him. —Soon after he applies that Text in Esay 44.p. 54. He frustrates the tokens of Lyars, and maketh Diviners mad, &c. (And if we were uncertain whether there be a Hell or not, yet we may be very certain, that there is a Devil, when they that are pretenders to Religion, are so shame∣less and profane, as to abuse the Scriptures in this manner.)
CHAP. II. SECT. V. Mr. Richardson's Combate with Mr. Ed. Leigh, and his Triumph over him. p. 54, &c. to 74. THE said Mr. Ed. Leigh I can say little of, any farther than his Works discover him, and thereby I think he hath shewed him∣self a man of considerable Learning, Parts and Painfulness. For he hath wrote more than a little, and the least Book he ever wrote is much better (as well as bigger) than this I am opposing of. And doubtless if he had not been a man of some note Mr. R. would have thought it somewhat below him, to give him such a large considera∣tion as he hath done. I shall now undertake his vindication, and en∣deavour to make good several of his Arguments for the present point, against Mr. R. his Exceptions and Answers.p. 54, 55. Mr. Leigh—The Consciences of men are many times afraid of a Punishment after this life. Therefore there is such a Punish∣ment to be feared. p. 55.Mr. R. Replies—p. 55. That's no proof of it, for mens Con∣sciences are as they are instructed, according to the Proverb, Such as the Doctor, such the Scholar. And hence it is that the Conscience of a Papist tells him 'tis a sin to eat meat on Friday. Yet that's no proof of its being so. Conscience a proof of a Pu∣nishment after this Life.I answer as follows. The Comparison he useth about the Papists Con∣science will not argue any thing, but only illustrate that which he spake before; the instance of which, if I mistake not, is thus: That mens Consciences tell them there is a Punishment for the wicked after this life, meerly because they are so instructed (viz. by those unskilful Preachers whom they had the unhappiness to hear) so that the only reason why they fear such a Punishment, is because of the Instructions they have had about it.The 1. Evidence. Now this I deny. It is not meerly from the Instructions of others, that men apprehend and fear a Punishment after Death. For the Heathens of old, who were far from being instructed by our Preachers, had strange and powerful thoughts of a Punishment
for bad men after death, Witness their Expressions about Sisyphus, Tantalus, Rhadamanthus, and the Stygian Lake, several passages in Virgils Æneids, &c. And how many might we hear of that in the days of their health and strength were as confident as could be, and feared no sin that they liked of, that were also grosly ignorant, and cared for no Instructions unless it were how to get money, and enrich their Land, &c. that yet have been in great fear when a dangerous sickness seized upon them, O they shall dye, they shall die, and what shall become of them then— And how should they have such Impressions upon their Spirits, if they had not a sense of this Truth, as ignorant as they are.The 2. Evi∣dence. — And what if the Instructions they had about it be a means of the Terror upon their Consciences, this rather confirms the point than confutes it: for some∣times the thoughts of an Everlasting state of Punishment hereafter, is so powerful upon them, and so terrible to them that they can neither eat nor drink, nor sleep, nor take any comfort in wealth and friends, in Wine or Musick, or any of those things they naturally most delight in: Yea, fills their mouths with horrid cryes and groans, and hath put them into such violent shakings, as hath shook the Beds, yea, the Chambers they lay in. Read the memorable History of Francis Spira, and others, and you will see what Agonies and Terrors, the Appre∣hension of Everlasting miseries hath caused in them. Now hence I would offer Mr. R. this Dilemma to deal with— Either these unspeakable Terrors were natural works of Conscience,The Authors Argument. (as awakened by its God and Judge) or else they were occa∣sioned by the Instructions they formerly had about this matter.— If he say the former, then he doth as good as grant what I contend for, for that's the only reason of his denial of the proof, because Con∣science doth not act so, of it self, but by vertue of some former teachings. And whether he grant it or no, it must needs be a proof of it, for the natural workings of Conscience are from God, and therefore suppose the certainty of their objects in their respective kinds. As because it is natural to the Conscience to urge a man to pay what he owes (while he is able) thence it follows unavoidably, that it is a real duty so to do. If he say the latter [that these extreamest terrors are occasioned by those Instructions about a future Everlasting punishment] then he is cast also. For what (can he think) makes those Instructions so
powerful upon him? they have not naturally such effects, for many hear them often and regard them not. And if it be from a supernatural power, it must be Gods work or the Devils: not the Devils, for he would rather make men forget and slight such Instructions, lest they should be frighted out of his slavery. If from God, it must needs fol∣low that there is such a state, for God would not deceive them. Mr. Leigh his second Argu∣ment vindica∣ted.Mr. Leigh adds—The Heathen believed a Punishment for bad men, after this Life. Therefore there is such a Punishment— Mr. R. An∣swers in these words. [1. Why did you not say and prove that they held they should be in Torments without end? The Heathens do not believe any such Punishment after this Life,p. 56-59. for they deny the Resur∣rection of the Body.] And then he goes on after his own way from the 56 to 59 page, telling us a story of Pythagoras the Philosopher (for so he calls him, as though there had been a Pythagoras the Divine, from whom to be distinguished) and also of Plato and his Sacrifice, &c. which are not fit for my paper to be filled with; and therefore I leave them,p. 58. as more proper for his own Pamphlet, and for the Book that he so gravely mentioneth, I mean Mr. Jesse his Almanack. (And if Mr. Richardson had spent that time in making Almanacks, which he spent in composing this precious piece, it might have been more for his comfort, or at least, less for his sorrow, when he comes to dye.) But to come to the point; [why did not Mr. Leigh say and prove that the Heathens believed a Punishment for bad men, never to end?] Since I have undertaken this Task, I must suppose my self obliged to make Mr. R. some Answer in the case, and it is thus in short. It was (in all probability) because he thought there was no need of saying it or proving it: nevertheless if it may be any Satisfaction to Mr. R. or his Proselytes, I shall be content to say it and prove it too. The former is in effect done already: the latter I shall now en∣deavour to do, by citing some passages out of some of their writings. If he please to read Seneca the Tragedian,In Amphitryone. he shall find something to that purpose. Sanguine Humano abstine, &c. Then he adds— The Testimony of Heathens. Seneca.—Certus inclusos tenet Locus nocentes: utque fert fama, Impios Supplicia vinculis saeva perpetuis domant. Where he may fitly note that expression [ut fert fama] which speaks it to have been the common apprehension of men in those days, how strange so∣ever he is pleased to make of it.
Ovid also, in some of his Books (if I mistake not in his Book de Ponto) hath these two remarkable Verses, Nec mortis poenas mors altera finiet hujus:Ovid. de Pon∣to. Horaque erit tantis ultima nulla malis. i. e. This Death all times doth far transcend: Its pains shall never know an end. And we may find (upon tryal) that he was as much mistaken, in saying that the Heathens deny the Resurrection of the Body:Heathens Testi∣mony of the Resurrection. for if he mean it universally, I can affirm the contrary; for some of them did speak of it not obscurely, (speaking of the Souls of men.) —Mille peractis Oblitae ditem redeunt in corpora lustris.Syllius Italicus. And the other Seneca hath somewhere a speech very plain for it,Lucius An. Seneca. —Veniet iterum qui nos in lucem reponet dies. In English thus, —Another Day shall bring to light, Those whom pale Death drew out of sight. 2. He Answers, p. 59.—what if the Heathens do hold as you say,p. 59. His second An∣swer examined. must we believe in Religion as the Heathens do? Yes certainly, in those things that they believe aright. They rightly believed that they must be just in their dealings, and true in their speeches, and we must believe so too though we are Christians, (yea, because we are Christians.) And now it would be an easie matter to make a good Argument of the Heathens Judgment and Testimony aforesaid. For whence was it that they did judge there shall be an Everlasting Punishment hereafter for evil doers? Surely not from Satans suggestions, for the Reason afore given in the former Argument, (it were contrary to his design to perswade them of any such thing,) nor from meer weakness and silliness; for they were the soberest, wisest and Learnedst among them, that were of this Judgment. And if it were from God, and his Convictions upon their Consciences (whe∣ther in a Natural or Supernatural way) it must needs follow that it is a Truth, as 'tis plain in it self. Mr. L's Reason also proves the same,Mr. Leigh his third Argument from Gods ju∣stice, vindicated. for it assures us that God is just; many abominable sinners enjoy more prosperity in this world than they that live uprightly, &c.
Cap. 1. Sect. 3. Argument 2.The proof of the point from the justice of God hath been given before, and vindicated (I hope) sufficiently, and let men cavil as long as they please, Sober men will easily perceive that the justice of God, as he is the supream Lawgiver, and Governour of the world, can never be sufficiently cleared as to his dealings with wicked men, that have lived prosperously all their days, if there be no punishment for them here∣after, that is greater and longer than any Miseries his Saints have en∣dured in this world. Nevertheless, Mr. Richardsons Answer shall be considered. The substance of it is in the following words, p. 60, 61.Mr. R.—I see you are more bold to affirm than able to prove; what, doth reason deny the Punishment to be just, unless it be for ever? The Scripture you alledge (viz. Psal. 73.17.) saith, they have an end, and you say they shall have no end; Again, your Reason is against the will of God, who is pleased to save of the worst of sinners, Luke 7.47. 1 Tim. 1.19. If some wicked men enjoy more prosperity than others, must they therefore be punished without end? if that you say were true, what cause would there be to rejoyce in the day of prosperity, Eccles. 7. The Reply. This Answer is large enough, but whether it be good enough, is now to be enquired. For the first part, the charge of Boldness upon that learned person (if he had been guilty of overmuch) might be brought against him more honestly by (almost) any man, than my Author; for who ever was so bold as he, to write so much in defence of that Opinion which hath always been abhorred by Orthodox Divines? To his first question,Reply to the first part of his An∣swer. Of Gods Justice. I return this Answer, that though the Temporal Pu∣nishments upon the Impenitent be just Punishments, yet Divine Justice will not be satisfied by their Temporal Punishment, since his Wis∣dom thinks it fit to continue their being Everlastingly, and to raise them to an incorruptible state, and since he hath resolved not to par∣don the Impenitent (for if they should enjoy that Blessing, they should not be sent away with a Curse, Matth. 25.41.) I say these things considered, His justice will engage him to Punish them for ever, for they will be ever worthy of Punishment, their Iniquity will always deserve such wages, and it is the part of justice to pay it to them (supposing no compensation to be pleadable by them, as none shall be) The other particulars of his Answer (herein) will receive very easie and quick dispatch. For his urging of Psal. 73.17.
to prove that the wicked shall have an end,His Sophistry. and therefore not suffer endless Punishment; I say therein he proves himself a profound So∣phister, or rather, a most ridiculous one: for the Text runs thus, Then I went into the Sanctuary of God,Psal. 73.27. Opened. and so I understood the end of these men. (Speaking of the wicked that prosper'd in the world.) Their end in this place no man (I verily believe) did ever interpret, as he, of their coming to an end (as we call it) or of the ending of their Beings, as the Birds, and Beasts, and Plants shall have an end: and I shall not now trouble my self to confute so wild a conceit, since I have said enough to it upon the word Destruction, in the third Section of the first Chapter. By their End therefore I understand rather their Lot and Reward, their final Portion and last Estate, viz. that it will be Miserable, as on the contrary, the good mans End is Comfortable. Behold the upright, for the [End] of that man is Peace. That is, his portion at last is Peace, his last Estate is full of Peace and blessed Satisfaction in his God, whatever his former state in this present world hath been. His Assertion following deserves as little to be said to it, namely, [That God is pleased to save of the worst of sinners] for if he mean it of sinners against the Law, I confess it is true, God is pleased to save some of those that have been the grossest Transgressors of the Mo∣ral Law, as Idolaters, Adulterers and the like.The worst of sin∣ners have been saved in what sense a Truth. But if he mean it of the worst sinners against the Gospel, as those that live and dye in im∣penitency and unbelief, and finally refuse to give up themselves to Christ as Saviour and Lord, then I say, I deny it, and let him prove it if he can (And he might easily know that 'tis these that we affirm to be the objects of Everlasting Vengeance, and not the grossest Trans∣gressors of the Moral Law that turn unfeignedly from their Trans∣gressions, and believe in Christ, &c.) Nor do we say (as he would seem to intimate) that those wicked ones that prospered more than others, shall be punished Everlastingly for their prosperity, but for their wickedness, and their impenitency in it. And if he think it is unjust that they should suffer for ever upon that account, he had best An∣swer what I have said upon that Point in the latter pages of the first Chap. Sect. 3. And as for Eccles. 7.14. which he would fain get on his side, it maketh nothing at all for him; for the person Solomon bids, rejoyce in the day of Prosperity, must needs be supposed to be a godly man; for as for the wicked (whether he prosper or not) the Lord hath said, We unto him, Esay 3.11.
Mr. Leigh's 4th. Argument from the wick∣ed Man's will to sin.— Vindicated. p. 62.Mr. L.— It is but just that they should suffer for ever, who if they had lived, would have sinned for ever. Mr. R.— [If it be just that we should suffer for ever, 'tis just that our Surety should suffer for ever. (speaking of Christ.) B. This answer is short enough, but not so sweet, and Dunghill-like, the more we stir it, the more it will stink.— But before I come to meddle with it, observe good Reader, that it is in effect no Answer at all, for it concerns not that which Mr. L. had said; it neither grants it, nor denies it, nor hath any more suitableness to it, than the Sails of a Wind-mill have to a Ship. Alas for Mr. R. what a case was he in! though he were inspired with a spirit of contra∣diction, yet he could not tell what to say against it: To grant it, had been in a great measure to overthrow his design; to deny it had been to disparage his own wits: for his own Conscience could tell him, that if he were a King himself, (as God forbid he should) he would count it just to keep them always in Prison, who would always oppose him, if they were at liberty.— But because I cannot Reply to his Answer, I must say something to that which he hath offered instead of an Answer. p. 62.If it be just that we should suffer for ever, it is just Christ our Surety should have suffered for ever.] This assertion of my Author is very little for his credit, for it seems to speak him a meer Socinian, one that doth not believe the Deity of Christ. Had he believed him to be God, he could not easily have run into such an Error. I answer, in a word, That it will not follow that Christ should suffer Eternally, if we deser∣ved to suffer eternally. The Reason is, because he was a Person of In∣finite Dignity, (very God; as well as Man) and being such, those suffer∣ings which he underwent as a Surety of his People, had the nature of Merit in them,Cap. 8. De Morte Chri∣sti in censura Resp. ad quaest. 16. Sect. 3, 4, &c. and for the Merit of his obedience therein, God his Fa∣ther hath highly exalted him, Philip. 2.7, 8. The Learned Reader may consult the most Learned Nichol. Arnolus, in his Anticatechesis Ra∣coviana. The 63. and 64. Pages of his Book contain nothing of much moment. His chiefest subtilty therein, is in perverting that phrase in the Prophet [cast them out of my sight] which notes his displeasedness with them, not his annihilating of them, as he would have it.
Mr. Leigh (saith he) tells us,p. 65. that the wicked will accuse and curse each other in Hell, but how knows he that, saith he, in answer to it. — For my part I do not question but it might be proved very easily, and perhaps I may do it (if I think of it) in the Applicatory part of my Dis∣course. Mr. Leigh adds, It is the concurrent Judgment of Divines, &c. To which Mr. R. replies, We are well satisfied that they are not Infal∣lible. But he knew, that that was a very probable Argument of the truth of it, though not a demonstrative: And his Scriptures being an∣swered which he urgeth against it: Their concurrent Judgment, is far more to be regarded than his single testimony against it.—The follow∣ing Lines have nothing of Argument, but of prophaneness and scornful∣ness, which I shall not trouble my self to answer to, but leave them to him to answer for.— The 69, 70, 71.69, &c. Pages do contain much imperti∣nency, and some passages about the Point, which might lawfully be cen∣sured, but they are so trivial that I pass them. In the next Page he cavils at Mr. R. Bolton, that excellent Christian,p. 72. and eminent Divine. Mr. R.— Mr. Bolton saith, thou must live in endless woe, which thou mightest have escaped, (speaking to the impenitent sinner) which overthrows the Doctrine of Election.— I deny it. Doubtless such a Master-builder would not speak that which should o∣verthrow (by any just consequence) that Doctrine of Election which Scriptures, and the Reformed Churches teach. And if Mr. R. or his Brethren have any thing to say against it,The Rock un∣moveable. they may answer what I have written upon that Subject, against Mr. Charles Phelps his Book on that Point. And for the speech it self, he meant it doubtless conditionally, and so 'tis true of the worst in Hell: He might have escaped, if he would have turned in time, &c.—p. 73, 74.74. He hath somewhat more of pervers∣ness, (in several expressions) but I shall not stay upon those Minutissi∣ma, having greater matters to insist on, and hasten to consider his more valiant undertaking, viz. to Remove the Pillars of Hell-torments; which is his next work, and way to make his Name famous.]
CHAP. III. SECT. I. Mr. R. His Attempt to shake and remove the Seven Pillars of Hell-Torments (as he is pleased to call them in the 75. Page.) I Have formerly discovered such Pillars of my Doctrine, as he will never be able to shake (to any purpose) whiles the World stands, where also the main Pillars of his Sophistical exceptions and answers have been fully removed. See Chapter the 1. Sect. 2d. Nevertheless, because he takes himself to be a strong Man, I will try his strength, and endeavour to discover how far he hath prevailed towards the shaking of those Pillars, which he hath undertaken to shake and remove.— p. 77.Mr. R.— The Greek Fathers were the first Pillars of Hell-Torments: and it came to pass through their ignorance in the Hebrew Tongue, &c. But we have found some ancienter Pillars of them than they, viz. The Texts of Scripture, in Matth. 25. and elsewhere, (in the Chapter now cited.) 2. I deny them to be Pillars of them, for Christians do not believe an Everlasting Punishment for the wicked, because the Fathers believed so, but because the Scriptures tell us so. 3. We are not bound to believe them so grosly ignorant in the He∣brew Tongue, as my Author makes for. I know not but the Greek Fathers (some at least) might have as good skill in it, as such a bold English Man, as Mr. Richardson; or if they were never so unskilled in the Hebrew, they were very well seen in the Greek, (which the New Testament was written in, and which contains the clearest proofs of the Point.) Doubtless they knew how fully the Texts in the New Testament did prove it, and were very well able to understand that [] did signifie,Matth. 25. ult. into punishment without end, though my Author would not know it.
Mr. R.—The second Pillar of Hell-torments were the Writers of the Original Copies of the Bible: But their defect hath put us to a great loss; The Original Copy that the Apostles wrote is not now to be found. And 'tis not enough that we have Books in Hebrew and Greek, unless we were certain that these Copies (as they call them) do agree word for word, with those Copies that were wrote by the Prophets and A∣postles.— This, if I am not much mistaken, is bad enough; But the Apostle hath told us, that evil men and seducers will wax worse and worse,2 Tim. 3.13. deceiving and being deceived. Behold therefore that which follows, and read it deliberately, (if thou canst read it without horror) p. 76. line 13.p. 76. R.—Many boast of God's preserving the Hebrew and Greek Bible, &c.Mr. R.'s Hor∣rid Speech. But as he was pleased to deliver up Christ and his People, so hath he delivered the Scriptures also into the hands of Sinners to be used at their pleasure.— — Oh Mr. R. which way are you tending, whither do you mean your Pen shall run? What can you think of these black words,Examined. or what spirit (can you suppose) did inspire you with them? You seem to have a design to shake the foundations of all Piety and Religion, as well as the Pillars of Hell-Torments; for that end I confess your speech is ve∣ry proper: for if the Scripture be corrupted, as to the main (in its per∣fection and purity) as your words seem to suggest, then farewel to our Religion; our Faith (to use your own smooth phrase) must needs reel and stagger, and stumble, as having no ground to stand upon. You professed to write your Book for the glory of God, (in your Title page) and I beseech you, let it be considered whether it tends to God's glory, to bring the Authority of his Word into question; And as you desire to comfort sinners, so (methinks) you should have more love towards Professors, than to lead them to infidelity, in hopes of winning them to your own Opinion. [God hath delivered the Scriptures into the hands of sinners to be dealt with, as they pleased, i. e. to be depraved and corrupted how themselves would.] O monstrum horrendum, informe, ingens.—A bold Man indeed: He is Doctor Resolutus, (though not Durandus) He is resolved to carry it; He will turn all things Arsie versie, and weaken
the Scripture's authority, if it will not stand on his side, like him in the Poet. Flectere si nequeat superos Acheronta movebit. i.e. More ways than one: He will try all, If God will not him help, the Devil shall. But Reader, fear not (too much) his fearful Assertion, though it be fierce, yet 'tis but weak, yea, notoriously false. All those Argu∣ments, which Protestants use to prove that the Scripture is not imper∣fect (of such the Learned may see Polanus Scharpius,Bishop Ushers Body of Divi∣nity. p. 17. Gerrardus de S. Scriptura, and others, and the meer English Reader may consult those in the Margin.Mr. Leigh's Treatise of Di∣vinity, l. 1. cap. 6. p. 116. Proofs that the Scripture is not corrupted by men.) I say all those Arguments will serve against my Author in this particular, as well as against the Papists in the other. I shall now urge one or two Arguments in the case. If men had corrupted the Scriptures (and made them speak in any points of Divinity otherwise than at first) it must be supposed to have been done before the coming of Christ in the flesh, or after. If before, surely Christ who taxed many other errors in the Jews would not have suffered such a wickedness to pass without Reprehension. (And 'tis not unknown how careful the Jews were in keeping the Oracles of God committed to them.) And that they were not corrupted since the Death of Christ is clear, for Copies being dispersed in the world more and more (one age after another) how could such a thing be acted by some, but others would soon discover it? And it may not be doubted but God's Providence did watch somewhat extraordinarily, as to this matter which so much concerned his own glory, and the good of his people to the worlds end. Surely he that so often discovers those that have corrupted the Coin of Princes and States, would not conceal those long that should attempt to corrupt and pervert his Sacred Laws. And here I shall borrow an excellent passage of the worthy Mr. R. Baxter,Saints Rest. part. 2. cap 4. Sect. 6. in the last page of the cited Section, which may shame all the wittiest men of Mr. R's Religion, as to the point. If any man (saith he) be so blind as to think it uncertain whether these be the same Books which the Apostles wrote; I would ask him by what assurance he holds his Lands? 1. How doth he know that his Deeds, Conveyances and Leases be not counterfeit writings? or that they are the same that their Fore-fathers made? Surely they have nothing but mens words for it, and yet they verily think their Lands are their own. 2. And whereas they hold all by the Law of the Land,
how know they that these Laws are not Counterfeit? and that they are the same Laws that were made by such and such Kings and Parliaments long ago? They have nothing but mens words for all this. And yet if this be uncertain, then any man may be turned out of all he hath, as if he had no certain Tenure. And is it not certain that those Laws that are kept and practised throughout the Land, cannot possibly be coun∣terfeit, but it would have been publickly known? And yet a word in a Statute Book may be false Printed. And much more certain is it, that the Scriptures cannot be counterfeited, because it is not in one Kingdom only, but in all the world (almost) that they have been used, and the Copies dispersed; and Ministers still in Office to preach them and publish them. So that they could not be generally and pur∣posely corrupted, except all the world should have met and consented together for that end, which could not be done in secret, but all must know of it. And yet many Bibles may be here and there misprinted, but then there would be Copies enough to Correct them by. So that if it be uncertain whether these be (for substance and in the main) the same Books that the Apostles writ, then nothing in the world can be cer∣tain to us but what we see; and why we may not as wisely question our Eye-sight I do not well know. So far that Learned person. And after all this,The Author's Proofs. I shall add something more to this same end (for it is hard to speak too much in such a case) farther to confirm the Faith of the weak Christian against the attempts of this mighty Shaker (who I think hath out gone most of the Shakers that have went before him. Gregory Martyn, that grave profound Popeling in Queen Elizabeths Reign, did practise this Art with the greatest care and skill he had, and discovered (if he did not lye) a great many gross corruptions in our English Translation, to the advantage of our Heresies (as he calls it) But since the Learned Dr. FulkIn his defence of the English Translation against Gr. Martin. hath took him in hand, and shook him soundly for his pains, he was never able to recover him∣self so far as to write any thing more for that purpose; and his Bre∣thren in the Popish iniquity have thought it their best Policy to be si∣lent concerning it since that time. But my Author will go higher than so, ad shake the Authority of the Hebrew and Greek Copies that are extant in the world And well might he contend with the London Mi∣nisters, as his friends boasted he should, if he could prove the word that they preached to be uncertain, and their Greek Testaments suppo∣sititious Books; but though he cannot prove them to be so, yet he will give men occasion to suspect them for such, witness his Speech afore∣mentioned: possibly he might remember the Counsel of the Poet:
Horatius.Si vis esse aliquis, facinus aliquod. Audeas egregium, &c. i.e. If thou wouldst be a man of Fame, Thou must do something of great name. Other Conside∣rations to prove the Purity of the Original Copies of Scri∣pture.And now, Reader, That thy heart may be throughly antidoted against Mr. R's most pestilent suggestion, I shall offer thee these following Considerations. 1. That Books of another nature are seldom questioned after this manner; when did you hear any man making any doubt whether the Books of Plato, of Aristotle, Hippocrates, and of Pliny, and Galen, Plutarch, of Theophrastus and Cicero, of Homer and Hesiod, of Sue∣tonius and Florus, Tacitus and Livy, were the writings of those men whose names they bear, or whether they are agreeable to those Copies which they wrote at first? So that the Writings of Philosophers and Poets, Physicians, Histo∣rians, Naturalists, Moralists, (though very ancient) shall pass cur∣rantly for theirs, whose names they go under, and are not imagined to be corrupted, or altered from what they were at first (Mr. R. doth not insinuate any doubt in that case.) But when it comes to that which concerns our precious Souls, that word which contains our rules in Life, our comforts at death, and our foundations of hope, as to a better world hereafter, O then his patient heart is moved, his Doubts, and Fears, and Suspicions are suggested: he kicks and flings and lays about him extreamly; he throws his blackest dust in our Fa∣ces, that we may have no eyes to see, nor no reason to apprehend, that those Copies of the Bible which we have among us are the same (in sense and substance) with them that the Pen-men of Scripture wrote. And all because we have not those Original Copies to shew, (as we have not of the other, for he cannot shew us any of Plato's, &c. hand∣writing) Is it not manifestly the work of the Devil to cast doubts in mens minds about the one, while he raiseth no doubts about the other? It seems he can be content to have us believe that other Books are what they pretend to be, but he is not so willing that we should believe the same of God's Book: and no wonder, for he knoweth the belief of that will be more likely to do us good than the belief of the other. 2. If the Scripture were corrupted in the Originals, it must be by such as believed it to be the word of God, or such as did not: If he say, by them that believed it so to be, then I would fain know how
those that had so much Religion as to believe it, should at the same time have so much profaneness as to go about to corrupt the Copies of it? Would not the heart of the wickedest man fail him, when he was about such a horrid design, if he had but the least thought that it was the Word of his Maker that he set himself to corrupt? If he say it was corrupted by those that did not believe it to be the Word of God, but looked upon it as a piece of deceit, and a politick innovation to keep fools in awe; then why should they trouble themselves to corrupt it? doubtless they would think it were corrupt enough already, and would not much envy the holy Christians any of those delights and comforts which they had in it, or from it. And if they should ever have undertaken such a work (it being that which would require much time and pains to do it, to any purpose) it must be supposed that they must have had some considerable motives, from credit or profit, of which no rational account (I dare say) can ever be given. Nor can it be proved that ever any such thing was designed by the enemies of Christian Religion. Julian the Apostate Emperor (Acerrimus ille Christi hostis, as an excellent Author styles himZanchius in Tom. 8. Orat. 1.) He I say is well known to have been as fit a man to manage such a work as most ever was in the world, for he had wit and learning in abundance, he had also great power without him, and an impenitent hardned heart with∣in him, and employed all his power and policy to the ruine, not only of Christians, but Christianity: and accordingly he proceeded in mis∣chiefs, by Banishments and Imprisonments, fire and Sword, and by pulling down Churches and by putting down all Schools of Learning, (the two latter of which, some that go for Christians among us could have wished him good success in) yet I have not found that ever he did any such thing as this we are speaking of, or that he employed any others about it [to corrupt the Copies of Scripture that were in the hands of Christians, or to counterfeit it, by any other writing:] He was crafty enough to take other courses against Christianity that were easier to be followed. And if any such thing were done, how soon would it be discovered? If a Protestant should Print some Mass-Books with some considerable alterations, leaving out a prayer to the Virgin Mary, and putting in a Prayer to Christ instead of it, how quickly would the Romanists espy the change, how soon would the Bulls roar from BabylonRevel. 17.5.9.18.? How many Declarations, Manifesto's, and Testimonies would be published (speedily) in the world, to prevent the intended mischief, and to assure all that were concerned, that those Books were not Authentick
or Catholick, or allowed under the Hands of the Pope's Holiness.— And do ye think, that the Christians in the Primitive times were not as zealous for the Scriptures, as the Papist's are for the Mass-Books, or that they would not have been as careful to discover such forgeries, in or about them, if any such things had been? A 3d. Argu∣ment for the Purity of Scri∣pture, &c.3. If the Scripture were counterfeited, or the Original Copies cor∣rupted by any, it must be by blockish and ignorant Persons, or by Men of considerable Wit and Learning. The former would not undertake such a work, or if they should, they could not manage it and carry it on. Nor (may we well imagine) the latter; for certainly Men of wit in any tolerable sense, could not but apprehend the difficulty of such a work (the Copies being dispersed among Christians, that valued them more than all the wealth of the World, and would be as careful to pre∣serve them from such corruptions) I say such must needs apprehend the great difficulty of the work, and the horrible shame and reproach that they should bring upon themselves, if they should fail in it, or have their wicked design discovered: (and what great gain they might get by it, to countervail so great a shame, or to encourage them in the danger of it, cannot easily be conceived.) A fourth Ar∣gument for it.4. If the Scriptures were perverted in the Originals, it must be sup∣posed to be done in favour of some corrupt and heretical Opinions, or in favour of some loose and disorderly practises.Scripture Co∣pies not cor∣rupted by He∣reticks. The former cannot be supposed (at least not of any general corruption, I find not above one or two Texts in the first Epistle of John, that were attempted in that kind, by any Hereticks, and those were such as concerned mysterious Do∣ctrines, as of the Trinity, and the Union of the two Natures in Christ's person; and how soon their ill dealing in that kind was discovered and complained of,Vid. Arnoldi Lux in Tene∣bris in 1 Joh. 5.7. is not unknown) and that the generality of Hereticks did not play at this Game, is so clear, that I need not largely to prove it. They read those Copies which the Orthodox used, and opposed them therewith; which the Papists considering, did give out confidently (though blasphemously) that the Reading of Scriptures among the com∣mon People,Bellar. de verbo Dei. was the way to make them Hereticks; (so that their for∣bidding of them so to do, they would have us think did proceed from Religiousness, and not wickedness; this profaneness they acted, not for the Devil's, but for God's sake) And why should Hereticks set them∣selves to pervert the Copies of Scripture, whiles they hoped to main∣tain their Heresies by those Copies, and through their false Philosophy and vain deceit to turn the Texts thereof in defence of them? However, 'tis sure my Author cannot serve his turn hereby, for what if he could
prove that they endeavoured to corrupt some Texts, (about mysterious points) yet there is not so much as a shew of reason why we should su∣spect the places which speak of a Hell, and everlasting Punishment for the wicked, to have been added to the Text by their hands (that had been but a bad course, yea a mad course to get the favour and applauses of the World, which yet was the great thing they aimed at.) And that leud and disorderly Persons did not corrupt the Copies of Scripture in favour of their loose and wicked practices is plain;Nor by loose Livers. for if so, they would have blotted out those strict precepts of holiness and obedience that it is filled with and especially the Doctrines of God's wrath against sin, and everlasting punishments for them that follow it: which they have not done, for we see they remain in our Bibles, and shall remain still in spight of Mr. R.'s displeasure. 5 Argument from God's Providence. 5. And that God's providence hath eminently appeared in the pre∣servation of the Scripture, (how slightly soever Mr. R. speaks of it) is well known to them that have been desirous of information in that mat∣ter; if it were not so, how should it have continued to this Day, having so many enemies, as it hath always had? Church-Histories give us vari∣ous Examples of God's Judgments upon the Enemies of it, as the Per∣secuting Emperors, and especially Julian, and the Hereticks that abused it, to maintain their false Doctrines. Sabinian having wrote a Book against the Doctrine of the Trinity, his Head suddenly fell off from his Shoulders, no Man knew how; and the like (or as strange judgments) upon others of them, you may find related by Dr. Beard,Lib. 1. cap 19. in his Thea∣tre of God's Judgments, (and others.) And had he so many Judgments for those that abused some Texts of Scripture for bad purposes, and would he suffer Men to go unpunished, while they were upon such a design, as to corrupt the Scriptures them∣selves, and alter the sense of them? or could any Judgments be shewed upon such Persons, (if there had been any such) and the design not be manifested, as the procuring cause of them? Surely not. And since the writing of this last passage; I have met with a very Re∣markable History to our purpose in Josephus.Antiq. Jud. l. 12. cap. 2. in sine. — quamobrem Rex mul∣tum gavisus, &c. In English thus. Wherefore the Jews having tur∣ned the Books of the Law into Greek, according to the will of the King Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, He was (saith the Author) much rejoyced at it, and took much delight to hear it read to him, professing that he admi∣red the wisdom of the Law-giver; and thereupon he asked Demetrius a Learned Man, that waited on him, why the Poets and Philosophers did not mention this Law in their Writings, since it savoured of such
deep wisdom and goodness; To whom he replied, That they durst not so to do, because they looked upon it as Divine; and that God had shewed his displeasure upon those that went about to mingle it with their own Writings; where he mentions one Theodectes, a Poet, who purposing to put some part of it in his own Poems, was stricken with blindness, and recovered not his sight till he had changed his purpose. And the like he relates of another, in the foregoing words, which for brevity sake I omit. Now if God were pleased thus to rebuke them for such purposes; How much more, may we think, would he have re∣buked them, that should purpose to pervert the Original Copies of it? (for that were incomparably a greater wickedness, and more dishonou∣rable to his Name.) And if my Author could make us believe, That [Those shall go away into everlasting punishment] was forged into the Text, and corruptly added; He might as well make us believe the same of [The Righteous going away into Life Eternal] for doubtless the same spirit that would encourage the Enemies of Christ, would not much scruple to discourage his Servants. I shall now add only the Testimony of Him, who is the true and faithful Witness.Luke 16.17. See what he saith in the case, Luke 16.17. [Facilius est autem Coelum & Terram praeterire, quam vel unam api∣cem Legis excidere.] i. e. The Earth may fail, the Heavens may sooner pass Than one  of their Maker's Laws. And thus Mr. R.'s bad speech hath brought forth some good, and his shaking hath occasioned some matter of confirmation and establishment to the Christian's Faith. For which, not unto him, nor unto me, but unto our God be the praise. p. 77. &c. 85.In the following Pages, from the 77. to 85. there is a Miscellany of strange stuff tending to the same purpose, to weaken the Christian's faith, and love, as to the Bible and Testament; for which he may in time receive a reward; But I shall not trouble my self with it, because the main mischief of it may be prevented by that which is already said of the perfection and purity of the Scripture.Apud illos nil tam vulgatum quam Scriptu∣ras calumniari. However we may remem∣ber that in this particular, This good Protestant hath played a very Po∣pish Game; for nothing is more common among Papists than to re∣proach and undervalue the Scriptures, as Chamierus well observes.
In the next also, he hath rambled so much out of the way,p. 85. — 88. that it is not worth while to follow him; his Assertion in chief is briefly this: [Another Pillar of Hell-Torments are sond Expositors] Fond ones; he means, no doubt, Foolish ones. Which very expression makes a great discovery of the Man, and shews him to be very wise in his own conceipt. Surely if he can think all those to be but foolish Men, or foolish Expositors, that have expounded the word Hell, or Gehenna, for a place of punishment after this life, (such as Calvin, Beza, Paraeus, Musculus, Perkins Willet, and Multitudes more of eminent Protestants) he will shew himself fit enough to sail to Anticyrus, or to be cut for the Simples here in England. Well, had these Men been able to fore∣see the severity of his censure, they might easily have prevented it, namely by expounding Hell for no worse place than a Grave, in all the New Testament; Everlasting, for a few Minutes time, and Punishment for Annihilation: that is, a Punishment inflicted, for a punishment that cannot be felt: (for when a Man is turned into nothing, he cannot be sensible of any thing.) But though such an Exposition might have plea∣sed him and his party, yet it would have offended wiser Men. The fourth Pillar that he reckons up (and sets before him,p. 88. on purpose to beat it down) is the consent of Preachers; And of that I need say only as before, that it is a better Argument for it, than his judgment is against it. But see what a mood the Man was in, by the ensuing Lines.— R.— p. 89, 90. All sorts of Priests agree,p. 89. and abuse the People. The Mahometan Priests blow a Powder into the eyes of those that come to see Mahomet's Tomb,Note. to make them blind ever after; and then they say the glory of Mahomet hath blinded them: So the Antichristian Priests, and all sorts of Priests have greatly deluded the People; blowing something into their Ears, that they are never afterwards able to receive the truth. (This is the substance of what he saith therein more at large.) I hope, Sir, you do except the Priests of your own Order, and the Anabaptistical Preachers, what ever you say herein of the Antichristian Priests, and other sorts of Priests. But, Worthy Sir, I pray let us know where your Goodness hath read this worthy story, or at least let us know whether it were your Religion or Conscience, your Honesty or Modesty, that moved you to apply it after this manner? Not to pass
a censure upon your Grace, I am confident you had little shame in you when you wrote this. Methinks, Sir, you might now perceive, that the wicked may be compared to chaff and stubble, though God's wrath will not make an end of them, as Fire doth of the other. As our Doctrines may (if your judgment fail not) be compared to that Powder aforesaid, though they be not dug out of the Earth, or scraped out of a rotten Post, or any such thing, as that may be supposed to be. For however they may disagree in other things, yet they agree in this, that blindness (if you mistake not) is the effect of both; (the one blinding Men's minds, as the other their eyes) So, though wicked Men, and chaff and stubble are not alike in all things, yet they are vain and worthless things in comparison of the Righteous, as those are, in comparison of the Corn, &c. and therefore may fitly be compared with them. You are a Protestant in Profession, and therefore I do judge, you never wore a Pilgrim's Weed, nor travelled to that Sacred place, where Pope Joan's pretty Child was buried, nor do I think you ever saw the Miracles that were wrought by the Reliques of St. Anthony, nor how the Hand of St. Nicholas his Image moved, when it was lifted up to bless the People:Dr. Downham's Treatise of Antichrist. p. 112. (which at length, O what pity, was thrown into the Fire, like a common piece of Wood) And yet (Sir) if you had seen a Thousand such things as these, yet you could not speak of any more strange, than this which your pious Pen hath acquainted the World with, to very good purpose, viz. [That the Antichristian Priests, and all sorts of Priests have agreed to deceive the People] That is, Protestant Divines, yea the genera∣lity of them, as well as Popish ones: The Ministers of Christ, as well as the Vassals of Antichrist. And that all sorts (good and bad) should thus conspire for such a mischief; that the great Opposers of Antichrist should have such an Antichristian design, and wilfully delude the People, (and that too in no less a matter, than Men's everlasting state in another World) O how wonderful, and how incredible is this! And yet we must of necessity, believe all this; or else we must believe your Wor∣ship to be a Lyar. (And for my part, I had rather believe the latter than the former.) p. 90, &. 91.In these Pages, he mentions two more Pillars of Hell-Torments, viz. Some Scriptures and Reasons.—Of which he saith in effect no more but this, That those Scriptures are wrested, and those Reasons insuffi∣cient; But if he be of the same mind still, he had best answer what I have written for the proof of the Point, in the 2d. Chapter of this Dis∣course.
The last Pillar of Hell torments (which he is pleased to mention) is a perswasion,The last Pillar of Hell Tor∣ments. that the believing it is a means to make men leave their sins, and the not believing it, a means of Licentiousness. — Whether this may be called a Pillar of it or not, I shall not enquire; the thing I affirm to be a certain truth (whatever he say against it) for it could not be that men should follow any way of wickedness securely and quiet∣ly if they believed it did tend to so sad an end. If they did throughly and stedfastly believe the everlasting Punishments in another world, they would not run the hazard of them for all the pleasures and profits of this world, nor think the greatest spiritual care and pains too great (in a way of Religion) to make sure of escaping it. And that the Terror of the Lord (in the knowledge of it) tends to perswade men (to leave their sins) is clearly intimated by the manifold threats of wrath and punishment against the children of disobedience,Rom. 1.18. Colos. 3.5, 6, &c. for what do those threatnings serve for, if not to deter men from sin? And if any pu∣nishment will tend that way, surely everlasting punishment much more. And on the other side, that wicked men would be more bold to sin, if they were fully perswaded that there shall be no everlasting punishment after this life (and say as the Epicure, Let us eat and drink for to mor∣row we dye) is so plain that I shall not write one line to prove it, yet nevertheless I shall consider what he hath said to disprove it. And first (to pass over his extravagancies from the 92. page to 102. about the Decree of God as relating to mans fall, and the like points which are thrust in perforce, by the head and shoulders,His Arguments to prove the Be∣lief of Hell no preservation from sin. and have no more to do with the point in hand, than the Lines of his Book with the Beams of the Sun; I say passing these) I shall come directly to his Reasons, in the 103. page, thus. Mr. R.—That the belief of Hell torments is no such preserva∣tive from sin, is evident; for the greatest sinners believe there is such and yet sin still. But what doth he mean by [such a preservative from sin] and by [believing them.] If he mean in the former, a total and compleat preservative, such as keeps them from all sin,Examined. I confess it is not such a preservative: or if he mean it of such as preserves them from the common practice of gross sins, I grant it also. But yet the belief of Hell is a preservative from sin in some measure, and keeps wicked men (so far as it is believed by them) from sinning with so much greediness, security and peace as otherwise they would. As the Laws of the Land
against Robberies and Murders, do keep men from committing such crimes so often and so securely, as otherwise they would do, though they do not wholly restrain them from those crimes. And now let us examine his Reason or proof, viz. Because the greatest sinners do be∣lieve there is a Hell, and yet sin still as much as ever; This saith he, maketh it evident, that the belief of Hell is no such preservative against sin. But this proof proves nothing, nor would he himself like of it in another case: for (if he be not an Atheist) he will easily grant, that the belief of a God doth really tend to cleanse mens hearts and re∣form their lives: yet there is not any grosser wickedness in the world than those that are committed by some who profess to believe there is a God, and do believe it after a sort (and would abhor that man that should say there is none) He adds for confirmation as follows — R. for though they be never so wicked, yet they hope the Torments of Hell, which they believe do not belong to them, or that they may repent before they dye, &c. Just so may I say of the other. For though men believe there is a God, yet they (too often) hope that he sees them not, or that he is not much offended with their wickedness, or the like. And yet I will not doubt but the belief of a God tends in it self, to do some good upon men, (nor doth my Author himself imagine that an Atheistical opinion is a friend to Religion, but an enemy it.) And secondly, what doth he mean by a Belief of Hell torments? If he mean it of a slight belief, a fleeting opinion that they are real, while they know little reason why they should believe them, but only because others are of that judgment; This I confess is no great pre∣servative from sin, but a grounded and fixed belief of them is assuredly a great preservative from it as was seen before. P. 103.The following lines contain no great matter, but only a story of a drunken Arminian, that said he was at present in a state of Damnation, but to morrow (when sober) should return into a state of grace. And why might he not have told us as well of John a Leydon's many Marriages, or Knipperdoling's Breathing upon the people when he bad them receive the Holy Ghost. And what if the Arminian spoke so sottishly when he was drunk, or were of the same principles when he was sober, yet he never was so blind when drunk, or so bold when sober, as to deny there is a Hell, and to compare the terrors and tor∣ments thereof with the flames of Purgatory, and the Chimerical Bul∣beggars that women sometimes fright little children with, as he hath done, in page 88. and 90. of his admired Book.
Secondly, he proceeds after this manner. R. — If fear of Hell were a preserver against sin,His second Reason. p. 104. then those that are delivered from that fear (and believe they shall be saved) would sin more than others, which is not so. Very true, if they have nothing more or better to preserve them from sinful courses; but if they have the love of God and holiness in their hearts, they will shun the ways of sin, though freed from the fears of Hell. In a word, though the godly would eschew evil when he is freed from the fears of Hell, yet the wicked man would follow it the more if he were so. And I doubt not but many such have been more bold to do wickedly since his Book against Hell came into the world, than ever they were before. In the 105. page,p. 105. He hath nothing that is worth a large considera∣tion, yet that which may seem any thing pertinent shall not be omitted, viz. [That the lusts of men are stronger than the fears of Hell.] No wonder if they be so in this Age, wherein such a skilful workman as Mr. R. hath used all his craft to make them believe there is no Hell. But if men's belief of it were stronger, the fear of it would prevail against their strongest sinful lusts, so as that they would not give them∣selves over to follow and fulfil them in their ordinary course. In the 106. page, He hath several Texts of Scripture, as Psal. 19.11.p. 106. Malachi 2.2. and others, which tend not so much as in shew to con∣firm that which he had undertaken to prove. But possibly he might suppose that some will think the better of his Book when they see so many Scriptures in one page, though they be not serviceable to his design. And having spoken somewhat Heathenishly before, he will now make his Reader amends in part with a Divine Axiome of his own in the 106. page line 3. [If sinners could enjoy all the pleasures of sin for a season, yet they will find that they have made a bad bargain of it.] Which I confess is a truth; but it will better appear to be so by my Doctrine, than by his. If they live and dye ungodly, and so come to everlasting miseries, they will see what a bad bargain it was to purchase those miseries with the pleasures of sin for a season; but if they be turned into nothing at the day of Judgment (as he would have us think) Then (in that state, if I might call it a state) they could not be sensible of any of their follies, in chusing the pleasures of sin be∣fore the pleasures of piety. Doubtless too many in the world (yea too many that I know in the world) would think it no very hard bar∣gain,
but rather account it a happiness in some degree, if they could but please themselves (as they would) with their lyes and slanders,The fruits of Mr. R's Do∣ctrine. their malice and profaneness, &c. and be assured at the same time, that they should suffer no worse punishment than to be turned into nothing. (after they had wrought all the mischief they are able.) Would they not then be content (if the Laws of the Land would allow it) to hear a Sermon but once a year? and cast off the very shew of Religion? Would they not be content to sit round a Barrel (in the midst of a Green) on the Lord's day in the Afternoons (yea in the Forenoons too) and desire no better company than New Cards and Old Stories, all the day long? Would not a desperate Damning Gallant be more welcome to them than a Preacher? and his shameless, Whorish, Hea∣thenish Boastings be more pleasing to their honest hearts, than the best Sermons of the other? Yea, would they not count him a useless creature, and think him unworthy so much as of the dregs of their Merry-go-down, for all the pains that he took to prevent their Damnation? For if it can do them no more hurt than to consume them to nothing, they will not much value it, since that which makes an end of them, will also make an end of their Sorrows: and that it will do no worse, they have this pamphlet to perswade them; but let them not trust to it, for its Author was not infallible: Mr. Samuel was no Prophet, nor Mr. Ri∣chardson any of those that wrote by the Spirit. And what he pretends for it from [the Destruction] of the wicked, hath received a censure in the first Chapter. p. 107, &c.In the 107. page, and those that follow to the 113. page, he speaks little or nothing that needs to be examined by me, for it tends not (so far as I can apprehend) to strengthen his cause in general, nor to con∣firm that particular point, which he hath last endeavoured to defend. And having no more to say to him as yet, I shall clear one truth, which tends to make my way the plainer when I shall meet with him again, viz. when I come to take a view of his considerations, &c. in the 113, 114. pages,The endless pu∣nishment of the Devils, proved. and the rest. The truth that I assert (in this case) is thus: That the fallen Angels shall be punished with everlasting punishment, Matth. 25.41. We read of everlasting fire prepared for them, there∣fore they shall suffer everlastingly in it, for if they should suffer in it but for a time, to what purpose (to speak with Reverence) should everlasting fire be prepared for them? The word everlasting, which hath hitherto been looked upon as one of the saddest properties of that fire, would signifie very little in point of Terror, if it did not suppose the everlastingness of their punishment, for whom it is prepared. As the
durableness of a Dungeon or Prison will be matter of small considera∣tion to those that shall endure but a little while in it. And their perpetuity under punishment may also be cleared from their perpetuity in sinning (their everlasting impenitency) The Devils are past all true repentance for their sins, and therefore they that con∣tinue impenitent are called the children of the Devil, ye are of your father the Devil, said our Saviour to the obstinate Jews of old. And if the Devils will never truly repent of their sins, what won∣der if they never be released out of punishment? (yet I do not con∣clude they should be forgiven if they should repent, for God hath not made any promise of Mercy to them upon any terms, nor hath he pro∣vided any Mediator for them.) To which I might add (as equally ser∣viceable to my present purpose) those places of Scripture, that tell us, that the sin against the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven.Matth. 12.32. And if it never be forgiven, they that commit it shall never come out of pu∣nishment after the day of Wrath is come upon them. And thus we have seen the certainty of the Devils everlasting punish∣ment, which of it self will cut asunder the sinews of several of Mr. R's Arguments as shall be seen in the next Section. CHAP. III. SECT. II. The strong man armed, and his strength discovered, or Mr. Ri∣chardson's deep considerations considered. HItherto he hath fought (as it were) at a distance, but now (in the following part of his Pamphlet) he comes more close, and strikes down-right blows upon the Antichristian Priests and all sorts of Priests (to use his own words) that so he may, if it be possi∣ble, beat them out of their fond conceits about the everlastingness of hell torments. And though the number Seven be accounted a Num∣ber of perfection, yet he will go as far as Ten: for so many conside∣rations it hath pleased him to offer us in the 113, &c. pages. And though his folly hath been somewhat evident by what hath been said, yet I think I may affirm the same of it, which the Queen of Sheba once did of Solomons wisdom,p. 113. that one half of it (Reader) hath not been told thee, p. 113. l. 1.
Mr. R.— Several considerations that there is not to be any punishment that shall never end. B. O fortunate sir, what happy Planet were you born under that ever you should be able (and willing) to do such a great work as this, and so effectually to strengthen the hearts of the enemies of God in their most raging resolute wickednesses? Well: If you make good what you have undertaken, you shall surely have the credit of it — & eris mihi magnus Apollo, yea, and for your diligent endeavour in this kind, you shall (by my consent) refresh your heart with Malmsbury Ale, be a Chaplain to Mr. Hobbs, and contemplate the beauty of his famed Leviathan. But let us come to the work, and consider a little your several con∣siderations, and we will not disturb their good order, but take them, one after another, as they come to hand. R.—p. 113. l. 6. first we do not find the place of Hell men∣tioned in any of the six days work of God, and if it be not found in Gods Creation, it is a ground for us to judge that it is of mans Creation, viz. a vain imagination, &c. B. These are plain words indeed, and he hath spoken no parable therein, but how well he hath spoken a few words will discover. For first, how would he behave himself if he were to dispute with any such as the Sadducees of old, who held there was no Angel or Spirit? for they might very easily argue thus —We read not in the History of the six days work, of the Creation of Angels, therefore there be no such creatures in the world. If Mr. R. denies the proposition, he must forget the first of Genesis, or shew us some place of it that men∣tions the making of Angels,Mr. R's first consideration proves as well that there is no Angel. which he cannot do. If he deny the con∣sequence, he must disparage the Learning of no less man than himself: for his is just of the same complexion, There is no mention of a Hell in the six days works, therefore there is no Hell—so that if this conside∣ration will prove there is no Hell, it will also prove there is no Angel, and consequently no Devil neither (for Devils are confessed to be no other than wicked Angels or Spirits) and if so, the Damner's impre∣cation [the Devil take me] will be only Nonsense and not profaneness or wickedness. Nor Heaven of Glory.2. May he not at the same charges prove (as well) that there is no
place of glory for the Righteous, as that there is no place of torment for the Wicked? for 'tis a question whether the Heaven of Glory be mentioned in the first of Genesis or not. It is said indeed there [God created the Heaven] but the Hebrew is rendred by Fagius,Vid. Synops. Crit. in Gen. 1. Coelum hoc, i. e. This Heaven, that is the visible Heaven: and other good Di∣vines are not afraid to say, that Moses in that Chapter meant only to reckon up the visible works of God (in the former part of it) and yet I shall not doubt whether there be another Heaven above that, because I am not certain that any such is intended in that place; but do believe it because of the Testimony of other Scriptures: and so will I believe there is a Hell, because it is mentioned in other places, though it be not in the first of Genesis. His second Consideration is no less vain than the former, as thus: —R. Solomon was the Wisest of men,p. 114. and yet in his writings he mentions no Hell, nor any everlasting Punishment, &c. which he would have done if he had known of them. B. What doth he think of Proverbs 15.24. The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from Hell beneath. Doth not Solomon speak of Hell in that place, or can he perswade us that it means no more than the grave, when experience shews that the best and wisest do not scape that no more than the worst: yet that Hell (there mentioned) is manifestly supposed to be such as the wise (walking in the way of wis∣dom) may certainly escape. 2. Christ was wiser than Solomon himself,Matth. 25.46. and he hath told us of [everlasting punishment] whether the other hath or not. 3. Solomon speaks not (at least not plainly) of the Deity of the Holy Ghost, of the union of the Divine and Hu∣mane Nature in the person of Christ, or of the imputation of his Righteousness to believers; yet Christians have believed those points, and I hope the Socinians shall never baffle us out of our Faith therein. In a word, though Solomon were the wisest man, yet God never in∣tended that all Truth should be comprised in the small Books that he hath written. In his Third Consideration,p. 115. he tells us (out of the Hebrew Doctors writings) of the seven thousand years, in the world to come in which all Souls shall be blessed] If such a piece of Jewish learning be pleasing to such a Rabbi as Mr. R. yet that's little reason why I or other Chri∣stians should be in love with it; and I think it more worthy to be slighted than to be answered. And that which he concludes with [The Jews were great searchers of Scripture, and if everlasting punishment
were to be found therein, they would have seen it.] This, I say, is as little to be regarded; for no wise Man ever thought that the Jews ever saw, or acknowledged all Scripture-truths, they had as many errors and weaknesses as other Men. p. 116.R.—The Saints recorded in Scripture, did not believe there was any punishment for any to endure, that shall never end; for in their penitential confessions, they do not confess such punishment to have been deserved by them: Dan. 9 To us be∣longs confusion of face. (This is his fourth Consideration.) p. 117, 118.And in the following Lines, we have the second part of it, to the same Tune, in these words.— —We do not find that ever they gave thanks for such a deli∣verance, or so much as prayed for it; which yet could not but appear the greatest deliverance, if they had known of it. B. The substance of this Reasoning is thus: [The Saints did not confess any Everlasting Punishment to be deserved by them, &c.] I answer. Yes, they did implicitly confess so much; for, in the Text he mentions, in 9. Daniel, To us belongs confusion of face, it is not li∣mited to temporal confusion, and therefore may fitly be extended to Eternal confusion.Psal. 44.23. Psal. 44.23. They pray thus [O cast us not off for ever.] which was an acknowledgment, that God justly might have cast them off for ever, for their sin. And in Psal. 79.5. Lord, wilt thou be angry for ever? Is not that an acknowledgment, that he might pour out his anger upon them, (i. e. punish them) for ever for their sins? And if it were as he would have it, the Argument would prove but little, for the Saints in Scripture did not expresly confess, that they de∣served to be given over to the Devil's Tyranny, to be possessed, and ter∣rified, and tormented by him, and yet Christians will not doubt but their sins deserve so much. To the 2d. part.And the other may be answered as easily; for though I should grant, that the Saints in Scripture did not expresly give thanks for their deli∣verance from endless punishment, yet that is far from proving, that there is no such thing: for they did not give thanks in that manner for Heaven it self, and their appointment to it, yet we are very sure that there is a Heaven, and that they are appointed to it.—
2. I do not remember that ever they said, [we give thee thanks, O Lord, for giving us thy Holy Spirit to instruct us] and yet the Text tells, that it was so in those very words:Nehem. 9.20. Thou gavest also thine Holy Spirit to instruct them: And yet they could not but know that it was a very great benefit; (to allude to my Author's expression) Nor did they pray (expresly, and in Terminis) to be delivered from evil spirits, and their malice and violence: Yet I verily believe they want not will nor power to do us violence, (every Hour in the Day) if our God did not over-rule, and restrain them. Consid. 5.— R. Christ, when on Earth, did weep for the Jews,p. 119. because of that desslation that was to come upon them: would he not much more have spoken of a punishment never to end, and have wept for them that should suffer that, if there were any such to be endured by any? B. It is not unfit to be noted, how blind those Men are that have not a mind to see the Truth. [He would have spoken of such a Punish∣ment, if there had been such, &c.] As some Men will face us down, (and vow most stoutly) that they did not those things which we saw them do; So Mr. R. by that speech of his, would make Christians be∣lieve, that our Lord never spake any thing to that purpose, when they have often read his plain words concerning it, Matth. 25. last Verse, [These shall go away into everlasting punishment.] But saith he [He would have wept for them that should have suf∣fered such a Punishment.] And so he might for ought he knows to the contrary, for many things that Jesus did are not written. (Joh. 21.) But it is not written so of him: True, but what of that? for in the Go∣spel we read of some that should dye in their sins, and be shut out of Heaven, Matth 7.14. &c. and yet we read not that he wept for them, which notwithstandig was a misery in the saddest sense. His 6. Consideration is an Assertion,p. 120. That Scripture maketh no men∣tion of any Punishments, but those in this life; which certainly argues more strength of his Brow than of his Brain,31. to the end. and will not be believed by them that believe the 25. of Matth. (to mention no more at this time) for therein we find a Day, wherein all Nations shall be gathered before Christ, and have their sentence according to their works, to ever∣lasting life, or punishment: (which will be after most of them have been dead a long time, as I need not prove to them that believe that Article of our Creed, that He shall come to judge the quick and the dead.)
There is nothing more that needs to be considered by me, but only his heaping up Texts of Scripture one upon another; for upon this occasion, (in this 120. page) he hath as many Texts as Lines, which yet prove no more, [that there shall be no punishment after this life] than Mr. Hobbs his Latine Epistle to Mr. Wood, will prove Dr. Fell to be no Scholar. (And this, Reader, may be a caution to thee, that thou dost not always conclude the Excellency of a Book, or a Sermon, from the multitude of Texts of Scripture that are alledged therein, for a Man may name many, when most of them are little to the purpose they are brought for, and then they will profit thee no more, than the Meat that goes beside thy Mouth will nourish thee: 'Tis not how many Texts, but how pertinent to the point in hand, that is to be most regarded.) p. 121.R. —God's punishment of sin is not of so large an extent as his mercy, Psal. 108. Thy mercy is great above the Heavens: (And more of the same excellency, which they that want may read in the same page, I shall not trouble my self to transcribe it.) B. We would know what he means, when he saith God's punish∣ment of sin is not of such a large extent as his mercy.] If he mean, that the principle of it, and whence it flows, viz. God's Justice is not so extensive as his mercy, I may safely deny it; His Justice being Infi∣nite, as it is the Justice of an Infinite Being: If he means it of the exer∣cising mercy, and his inflicting punishment; Then I say in like manner, that the objects of punishment are as many, yea more than the objects of his special and saving mercy: All that live and dye ungodly shall feel his vengeance, and they are without controversie the greatest Number. Wide is the Gate that leads to destruction,Matth. 7.14, 15 and many there be that go in thereat; and (on the contrary) Narrow is the way that leadeth to life, and few there be that find it. That of the Psalmist, [That his mercy is great above the Heavens] signifies no more than the Infiniteness of his mercy, in that it knows no bounds, but was from everlasting predestination, and shall be to everlasting glorification upon the objects of mercy, even them that fear him; but doth not intimate that he will actually pardon more sinners than he will punish. p. 122.R. — Death (in Job) is called the King of Terrors, therefore Death is the greatest punishment, and the most terrible; But if there were an everlasting punishment after Death,Job 18.14.
that would be the King of Terrors, for Death is not terrible in comparison of that.— B. This reasoning is not so strong, as at first view it may seem to be, and is very far from proving, that Death is the worst punishment, that ungodly sinners are subject to. For first, What necessity is there of expounding Job 18.14. of death? The Text doth not mention Death, and I know nothing in the Context, that will force us to interpret it thereof. The LearnedInterpretum pene dixerim, Coryphaeus. Ʋti Doctiss. Po∣lus in praef. ad vol. 2. Synops. Mercerus, a Man well skilled in the Hebrew, renders it by gravissimos terrores, which may be in this life, as well as in another: The King of Terrors, by a common Hebraisme, signifies powerful, commanding, conquering Terrors, which may be fitly understood of the Soul in its separated state, when the Terror of the Lord, and the immediate impressions of his wrath have taken hold upon the impenitent Soul. Well, but my Author will not so easily yield to have it understood of any thing but Death, because that is most for his design, wherefore let us see if (taken in that sense) it will be any help to his cause; and I shall not fear to undertake the Negative. I will prove, I say, that it will not: For, the King of Terrors is but [most terrible] if we make the most of it that we can. Now Death may be said to be most terrible, though there be a greater terror after Death; For [most terrible] is not necessarily the very uttermost terror that can be, but in general very terrible. As when the Thunder shook down the Houses in Am∣sterdam, upon the Heads of them that dwelt therein, it may lawfully be said, that it was a most terrible Day to them, yet the Day of Judg∣ment will be more terrible than that,2 Pet. 3.10. wherein the Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the Earth with the works therein shall be burnt up. So when Men are said to be most excellent Scholars or Souldiers, we mean only that they have very good skill in Armes and Arts, but not that they do exceed all others therein. And in a word, the Scripture-phrase is Consonant to this; for, in Ezekiel 33.Ezek. 33.28. the Lord threatned to lay the Land most desolate, yea he assured them of it, [I will lay it most desolate] and yet it suffered not a greater desolation than other Lands had suffered, and doubtless not so great, in all respects, as the Land of Sodom had done: So that [most desolate] is in substance no more than very desolate: And so understand the King of Terrors, or most terrible, of that which is very terrible, as Death may be, (and is to many) though there be a worse thing after Death, to them that dye in their sins. And indeed Death is most terrible, as it hath relation to
that which comes after it — (which is enough for this new cavil.) Consider. 9. R.—Sin is punished to the full in this life, Ezek. 36.18. I poured out my fury upon them:p. 123, 124. (then he adds) would ye have it to be punished to the full in this life, and afterwards with a punishment never to end? — then after some ex∣travagancies he adds in the next page ['tis as disagreeable to justice to punish sin twice, as to receive the payment of a debt twice.] B. Herein (I confess) he hath hit the mark as well as if he had been Thomas Gunne himself: for the whole state of the question turns upon this hinge [whether sin be punished to the full in this life] And as Mr. R. and I can agree but in few things, so in this we differ as much as may be, for I say it is not, and my reasons are these. 1. Because many ungodly men have had a continued state of prosperity, and scarce ever felt any thing that they accounted a punishment (yea, nothing more common than for such persons to conclude their sins are pardoned be∣cause they do not find themselves punished for them) I was envious at the prosperity of the wicked,Psal. 73. 1 to 6 verse. and in the following words he tells us, they are not in trouble like other men (nor doth he intimate any visible Judgments that come upon them in this life.) And can Mr. R. per∣swade himself, that the sins of such men were punished to the full in this life? 2. Because the day of wrath is after this life, even at the coming of Christ. See Job 21.30. compared with the Text in the Margin2 Pet. 2.9.. 3. Because their sins make them worthy of everlasting punishment. See the first Chapter of this Book, in answer to the question how it is just to punish temporal offences eternally? But (on the contrary) my Author contends that sin is punished to the full in this life, or at least he saith so, if we can take his word for it. But how he will prove it who can tell? For those texts of Scripture which speak of his pouring out his fury upon the wicked in this life, as Ezekiel 36.18. are far from proving that there is no wrath for them in another life. Yea, so far, as that they will manifestly prove the contrary: for if God punish sin in the day of his Patience, how much more will he punish it hereafter in the day of his wrath, which is called the day of the Revelation of his righteous Judgment, and the day of perdition to ungodly men,Rom. 2.5. in 2 Pet. 3.7. They shall awake to shame and everlasting contempt, after they slept (as it were) in the dust of the earth, Dan. 12. and yet we know many of them have been brought to
shame in this world, and suffered shameful deaths for their crimes. But it is not agreeable to justice to punish sin twice, no more than to receive the payment of a debt twice, (saith Mr. R.) But certainly God best knows what is justice, and what is agreeable to it, and there is no unrighteousness in him, and his word tells us of wrath to come as well as wrath present, and of everlasting punishment as well as temporal, Matth. 25. 1 Thess. 1.1 Thess. 1.10. And the punishment he will inflict upon the impenitent in another world, will be so far from any appearance of injustice, as that it will be the revelation of his righteous judgment in the Text aforesaid.Rom. 2.5. Nor is it any shew of injustice to pu∣nish sin twice unless the former were as much punishment as sin deserves, (as a man may justly be required to make several payments of a debt, when the first payment is not to the full) and if my Author can prove that sin deserves no more or longer punishments than the punishments of this present life, he will shew himself a man of rare acuteness. His Tenth consideration is little different from the former, it being an assertion of the like nature, viz. That there is not a worse thing than Gods fury, wrath, and anger, and these (saith he) are poured out in this life (he means to the full so as that there shall be no more of it remaining for any man in another life.His abuse of Scripture. p. 125.) And how will he prove that these are poured out to the full in this present life? Why, by these places, Ps. 78.49. Ps. 85.3. Job 14.13. The former he renders thus, he poured out all his fierce anger, but by his leave, the Text saith no such thing, but rather thus, [he cast upon them the fierceness of his anger] or as Junius renders, aestum irae suae, the heat of his anger, namely, by bringing great calamity upon them here in this world: but how will that prove there is no punishment for the impenitent of them hereafter? So Psal. 85.3. is spoken of Gods own people, whom he would magnifie his Mercy upon [Thou hast covered all their sins, Thou hast taken away all thy wrath, viz. from them whose sins he forgave:] But must it be so therefore with his Enemies too, that dye in their sins and would never consent to forsake them while they lived? So upright Job speaks of wrath that would be past as to himself: But must there be no wrath hereafter for the mischievous Hypocrite? Sure that was far from his thoughts: The Hypocrites in heart do heap up wrath;Job 36.13. (viz. against themselves, as 'tis plain and needs no proof.) Wherefore if he blame those that make too bold with the Scripture, he must needs pass a hard censure on himself too. Yet there is one phrase which (to the men of his Religion) may seem to favour his assertion, viz. [the accomplishing of God's anger, in
this world] Ezek. 5.13.Ezek. 5.13. Considered. Thus will I accomplish mine Anger, viz. by the Judgments mentioned in the verse before, Famine, &c. But those people there spoken of may be considered either personally, or civilly and nationally: his anger may be accomplished as to Natio∣nal judgments, when it is not so as to personal punishments, as in Sodom, &c. 2. We may take the word Anger for the threatnings of punishment which he had made against them in particular, as Rom. 1.18. The wrath (or anger) of God is revealed from Heaven, i. e. His threatnings are set forth. So here v. 12. A third part of thee shall dye with the Pestilence, and with Famine shall they be consumed, &c. Then it follows, Thus (v. 13.) shall my Anger be accomplished; as much as if he had said, Hereby shall my threatning of judgment (in the 8 and 9 verses) be fulfilled and made good. And what is that to prove that there is no worse thing for the worst of them than temporal judgments and corporal death? Surely they that can gather such a conclusion from it, are as bad Logicians as the Mahometan Priests, that he so merrily mentioneth in the former part of his Book. Thus, Reader, I have considered his various considerations, and they that duly consider what hath been said in answer to them, will not be rung to sleep (in their sins) by the Musick of those sweet sounding Bells. CHAP. III. SECT. III. Mr. Richardson's Richest Learning discovered, or his ma∣ny infallible proofs disproved. R.—p. 126. line 6, and 7, &c. many infallible proofs that there is not to be any punishment after this life that shall never end. B. UNgodly sinners are more than secure enough in their evil wayes, though we tell them never so often (from the word) of the Everlasting Miseries they are liable to: How safe then may they think themselves now, when such a man as Mr. R. hath given them, not only some Conjectures against them, or probabilities of escaping them, nor barely some various Considerations to comfort their hearts
against the fears of Hell; but proofs to the contrary, yea Infallible proofs, and many of them too, that sinners may take their choice, and see which likes them best: (and which they may best trust to, to secure them from the storms of endless wrath.) Will they not now bless them∣selves in their iniquities, and think themselves almost as safe in a way of sin, as in a way of obedience? and go as chearfully to a Play-house, or a worse House, as to a Steeple-house? (to use the witty word of the reli∣gious Separatists.) And now by all means let us take his infallible proofs, since we may have so good a bargain in them, viz. more than Nineteen to the Dozen, for he mentions no less than Twenty of them. And (by the way) was it not strange, (yea most exceeding strange) that there should be so many proofs of it to be found, and yet none of them appear to the eyes of his many Betters, such as St. Austine, Chrysostome, Cal∣vin, Beza, Whitaker, Whately, Perkins, Bolton, (and such like) that are mentioned by my Author himself, and are confessed to be pious, as well as Learned Men. It seems their Prayers could not obtain that measure of Illumination (in this particular) which his have done: (for he hath made this discovery, not only by the strength of his wits, but also and especially by the fervency and frequency of his Prayers, as he tells us in the Epistle to the Reader, in these words—I upon often seeking God, and diligent search, &c. am fully perswaded that it is the truth which I contend for.—) Well, but whatsoever his perswasions may be, we must not be perswaded by him any further, than we have reason for it; Let us consider his infallible proofs, (and if they prove to be infallible, I will confess Him to be as good a Man as the Pope.) R.—Proof 1. The Scriptures hold forth no such thing;p. 126. and we ought not to presume above that which is written, Things revealed belong to us, Deut. 29. B. They that purpose to poison Men are not wont to give them pure poison, but rather to mix it with some thing that is good and wholesome, that it may go down the more freely, (and unsuspected:) So they that lye in wait to deceive the weak, and to corrupt their minds with Pestilent Doctrines, and Opinions, will not present them with any thing less, than a mixture of Truth and Error together, that they may receive the one to make way for the other. Just thus hath my Author done herein; for as it is a truth that revealed things belong to us, so it is as apparently false, that the Doctrine of Everlasting Punishments for the wicked in Hell, is not revealed in Scripture: See the 1. Chapter of this Book.
R. Proof 2d. Their Opinion of a Punishment never to end, is contrary to the Word of God.— B. The Devil is a Lyar, and his Servants (to my knowledge) do not always speak true, and many times also they have as little of shame in them, as they have of truth or goodness in them. But how shall this (which he hath said) be proved? Why thus. —From those places of Scripture, which speak of everlast∣ing life,p. 127. as the proper portion of Believers, as in particular, John 3. last verse. He that believeth not the Son shall not see life: and several other Scriptures to the same purpose. B. But if this be an infallible proof, I am very much mistaken: It is not such indeed, nor doth it look like such to the eyes of them that understand it. Let us observe the nature of it. [He that believeth not shall not see life.] whence he would have us conclude, that such a per∣son shall not live for ever, and consequently not live in Punishment for ever. But what reason is there, why we should make any such conclu∣sion from thence? for [to see life] in that place doth not signifie barely to have life, or to be alive, for so it is not a truth, since they shall live again at the last Day, and be raised out of their Graves, Joh. 5.29. yea be raised incorruptible, in 1 Cor. 15. and many other places. Where∣fore to see life is a figurative expression, for as by life is signified glory and happiness, (life being naturally the sweetest thing, and so very fit to express the state of glory by) so by seeing is meant enjoying; As when it is said,Matth. 5.3. Heb. 12.14. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God; and in Heb. 12.14. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord. We know, and are assured from the Revelations, that every eye shall see the Lord, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who is Lord of all, and by whom all things were created, in Colos. 1.16. and the most part of Men never were par∣takers of true holiness, nor ever will be; and therefore the most part shall see him without holiness. So that to see in that place must be meant of enjoying the Lord in glory, and so we grant none shall see him, in that sense, without holiness. And the like may be said of seeing good, (or good days) in 1 Pet. 3. it must needs be meant of enjoyment, and partaking that good, as 'tis plain. This therefore is no proof at all of it, (much less an infallible proof.)
The next attempt which he maketh for the proof of it, is from those places of Scripture,p. 128. where mention is made of their Pe∣rishing and Destruction; They shall be destroyed for ever, and the ungodly shall perish, and the like in the Book of Psalms, and else∣where. But for my part, I think it is the saddest destruction to be in a perpe∣tual state of misery: This I say, is a more dreadful destruction, than to be annihilated, and therefore fittest to be called a destruction: And if he think the word destruction must signifie (of necessity) annihilation, and cannot signifie a state of misery and punishment, he had best re∣move those difficulties that lye in his way, in my first Chapter, where the sense of the word hath been cleared against the Socinians. And what doth he think (to mention but one Text for many) of the words of our God in Hosea, O Israel, thou hast destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help:Hosea 13.9. Surely he doth not think it is meant, that they had turned themselves in∣to nothing, but that (by their sins) they had brought themselves into a miserable condition, and made themselves liable to greater miseries. In the following Page he runs very swiftly, and disputes us into absurdities after this manner,—The Word saith,p. 129. Their end is destruction,R. Philip. 3. Their Opinion saith, They shall never be destroyed, nor ever end: The Word saith, The last Enemy is Death,(1 Cor. 15.) Their Opinion saith, There is a worse thing after Death to be endured without end. B. There are a sort of Men in the World that have wit and sub∣tilty, and some kind of Learning too, that yet are little better than fools, for want of grace and holy wisdom, to make a good use of their wits; and therefore we use to say of them, that they are simple and cunning. And whether my Author be not somewhat of Kin to these kind of Men, let my Reader judge: For in these last passages there is something of subtilty, yea enough to deceive the ignorant and unstable, and the Men that are inclining to his Opinion: but if we view them narrowly, they will not appear more subtile than silly. For the for∣mer runs upon a false supposition, that the destruction threatned to the wicked is a Natural destruction, whereas it means only a Moral destru∣ction, viz. Condemnation and Punishment. (as was seen before) But he saith, their end is said to be destruction, which he thinks is contrary to us, who teach that there shall never be an end of them, but that they shall always remain under Punishment. But it doth not mean as he
would have it, that the destruction there spoken of, doth make an end of them, or imply the dissolution of their natures; for we have seen the contrary before; and if he entertain such a perswasion, he may easily be brought to believe, (upon the same ground) that Everlasting life (or happiness) will make an end of the Saints; for 'tis said, Their end is everlasting life.Rom. 6.22. Wherefore by [end] we are to understand, their final, and unchangeable state and portion in another World; which is everlasting destruction (or misery) to the wicked, as it is everlasting life (or glory) to the Righteous. But of this I have said something before. The other labours under as much weakness as the former, for (ob∣serve) it is not said in 1 Cor. 15. that the last enemy is Death, (absolute∣ly, as if there were no worse thing to come after) but thus only [The last enemy that shall be destroyed,1 Cor. 15.26. is Death] where he leaves out that main passage, which carries the whole sense of the Text. Just as the Devil alledged the Psalmist, [he shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee] and left out the following words [in all thy ways, or the ways God hath appointed thee to walk in] See Matth. 4.6. compa∣red with Psal. 91.11.Vid. Muscul. in Loc. Now we grant that Death is the last Enemy that shall be destroyed, though it shall not be the last evil, that by the wicked shall be endured. p. 130.In the next Page he heaps up many places, to prove that Eternal life belongs not to the wicked: To which I answer, by distinguishing of the word: if he take it, as the Scripture doth, for Eternal glory and happi∣ness, I grant it: but if he mean it only of an Eternal continuance in life, (as life is opposed only to Corporal Death or Annihilation) then I say, it will agree to the wicked also, after the General Resurrection; as in its due place hath been manifested. The Devils shall not have Eternal life in the sense aforesaid, as it is promised to the People of God; but yet they shall be eternally alive, (and live the life of spiritual substances) else they could not suffer eternally in the Everlasting fire, as we have proved they shall. R.— If Adam had never sinned, he should have dyed never∣theless.p. 131. This is proved first, because he had a Natural bo∣dy, and was of the Earth earthly; and therefore mortal and corruptible.— B. Whatsoever strength and goodness may be in this kind of Rea∣soning; it is no more than the World hath been acquainted with, be∣fore
ever it was blessed with the sight of his Book, the Learned Reader may find it amongst the most Reasonable Doctrines of those Masters of Reason (as they would be counted) I mean the Socinian Hereticks.See Ostorod. Instit. cap. 33. And it is easily answered, by distinguishing of the word Mortal. It may be taken two ways (as to this present case) either first to signifie a per∣son that may die, and is capable of dying, and so I grant Adam was al∣ways mortal, (which his Reasons sufficiently prove) but if we mean it of one that must dye, I deny that Adam was mortal in state of In∣nocency: for whatsoever may be said of a possibility of dying, he should never have been actually under the power of death, if he had not sinned. By one man sin entred into the world, and death by sin, &c.Rom 5.12. A porta in Def. fidei. cap 27. Aslingii l. c. p. 2. l. 5. q. 2. They that would see a larger discourse on this subject, may consult these in the Margin, where they may see the Author of this opinion. R.—Mr. Bolton saith, If Adam had stood, he could not have conveyed to us a Body Immortal, or not dying, in his Treat, of Heaven, p. 131. B. This Gentleman's word is not overmuch to be valued as to the Authors he citeth, so he citeth Mr. Bolton here, non bona fide, as they say: in plain English, very corruptly. For in that place the words run thus [our condition, (speaking of the Saints in Heaven,) is a thousand times more happy and glorious, than if we had stood still with Adam in his Innocency and Felicity; for if so, he could but have conveyed to us bodies Immortal, potentiâ non moriendi ex Hypothesi, as they say, but in Heaven they shall be Immortal impotentiâ moriendi:] if he knew not what that means, for a few good words I shall be content to tell him; if he doth know, he cannot but know that he granteth no sub∣jection to the power of death to proceed from the nature of Adam or his posterity, but from their sinfulness, and that they should not have dyed but upon the supposal of sin. And I think he hath done no good office, to suggest such a thing as this concerning Mr. Bolton, to make the world believe that such an able and faithful Teacher of Divine Truth, would play any (the least part) of the Socinians damned Game. In the two following pages, he is very vain,p. 132. and p. 133. and deserves not my Ink to he spent upon him: and if I should lay open all his weak∣nesses, 'tis possible I might be thought to deal over hardly by him: those therefore that little concern the point in hand, or are answered already I need not concern my self with. I pass therefore to the next:p. 134. where the substance of his many words is thus in brief. [That if death be the
punishment of sin, then Christ by freeing his people from the punish∣ment of their sins, must free them from dying, which he doth not.] I answer, Christ by freeing them from the punishment of sin hath also freed them from death, so far forth as 'tis a punishment, viz. from an accursed death. The Faithful therefore though they suffer death, yet they suffer it not as a punishment, properly so called, nor in a way of vengeance, but in a way of mercy; and therefore blessed are they that dye in the Lord. That pale horse though it sometimes affrights them,Philip. 1.23. yet it is sent on a good errand, viz. to bring their Souls into the blessed presence of their Lord and Saviour, which the Apostle assures us (in the same Text) is far better than to live with their friends in this sinful world. p. 135, 136.In the 135, and 136. pages, there is nothing that I think it worth while to trouble my self with, some things being beside his purpose, and others in a great measure against it. And that which is for it [how do the wicked perish for ever, if they must live for ever] is no new dish, but only the old coleworts▪ new sodden, and how much it is worth is discoverable from that which was said but a little before, to what he had offered about [eternal life] in pag. 130. p. 137.R. — Men build much in this point upon [the second death:] but what that death is they cannot agree. B. I think he is much mistaken in this, and do not doubt but Or∣thodox Divines are very well agreed in their Judgments about it, and describe it with little variation one from another. But the main mis∣chief is, that their Judgment of it agrees not to his (and if his be infallible, theirs must needs be erroneous.) R.—Mr. Perkins saith, the Second death is a total separation from God; and if so, it is not a punishment without end; and seeing God is every where, if they be any where how can they be absent from God? B. But as Mr. Perkins was as wise a man as himself, so his speech herein is not so absurd, as he imagines it to be: yea, I doubt not but it is sound and good; and now I shall consider briefly what he saith unto it. 1. [if so, then it is not a punishment without end:] what warrant he hath to make such an Inference from it, I for my part can∣not understand: for what if that Separation be everlasting (as we be∣lieve
it to be) then it will be vanity to say so (yea a contradiction too.) So that this Collection of his is utterly groundless, unless he understand this Separation to be by Annihilation; and if he do so, I have shewed the absurdity of it sufficiently already (in disproving the Doctrine of the Annihilation of the wicked.) 2. R.—If they be any where, how can they be absent from God, seeing God is every where— But certainly he must be a very silly man that can think Mr. Perkins was such a fool as to suppose that they could be absent from the Lord in a proper sense, or out of his presence. I dare say that was very far from his mind: and he needed no more to be taught the doctrine of God's Omnipresence, than wicked men need to be comforted by his Book (against the fears of Damnation:) yet because he hath mentioned the word [Absent from God] I may lawfully put him in mind of that Text of the Apostle,2 Cor. 5.6. in 2 Cor. while we are at home in the body we are absent from the Lord: he did not think, he and the rest of the Faithful were where God is not, while they lived in this world, and yet he expresses it after that manner: because here they were as it were absent from the comfortable presence of God, in comparison of that comfort which their Souls should have in his Glorious Presence after they had left their bodies. So in this case we mean by the Second Death, the total and perpetual: Separation of the wicked and impenitent from the comfortable Presence, and the glorious Presence of God;Luke. 13.28. as when they shall be shut out of his glorious Kingdom, and depart from Christ to dwell with the Devil and his Angels. And though this be not a death (properly so called) yet it may fitly be called by that name, because of the terror of it, (Death being naturally the most terrible thing) as Hea∣ven is fitly called Paradise, for the pleasure and purity of it,Luke 23.42. though it be not that place which was mentioned in the 2. of Genesis. And if a state of worldly troubles may be called a Death, (in 2. Cor. 1.10. compared with the 8. verse) how much more may a state of endless punishment be called by that name? See Rev. 21.8. And thus having vindicated Mr. Perkins from Mr. R's cavils, I shall pass over the idle discourses of the 139 and 140 pages, and speak a few words of that which seems more worthy of my censure, in 141 page, thus,
p. 141.R.—We read in Rom. 2.31. of very great sinners, proud, spightful, Inventors of evil things, and such like, yet the word saith not,Ro. 6.21. that they are worthy of more than death: and if death be the end of these things, then there is not any thing to come after death.— B. This is a rare piece of Learning indeed, and such as the common sort of Preachers never had the confidence to teach their hearers either from the Pulpit or the Press. But that it may not be thought better of than it deserves, let us examine it briefly: the main strength of his Speech lies in this [That God hath not said that those wicked ones mentioned in that place, were worthy of any more than death] true in∣deed they were worthy of no more punishment than death, for that death there spoken of is nothing less than eternal Damnation: And thus the unpardonable sin,1 Joh. 5.16. called by St. John, a sin unto death, that is, such a sin as necessarily and infallibly brings eternal damnation upon the sinner. And that so great sinners are worthy of more punishment than corporal death, I believe was scarce ever doubted of by any but Mr. R. (that ever were acquainted with Scripture, and the sound writings that ex∣plain it) yea, I doubt not but the proudest Jesuit in the world would easily grant it; and if it be needful to be proved, these considerations may be sufficient for it.Sin deserves worse punish∣ment than cor∣poral Death. 1. That this is no more than the Beasts and Birds endure who never sinned: they dye and dye totally; whereas men though never so wicked dye only in their bodies (as all but Atheists will acknowledge) And can we think an obstinate rebellious sinner deserves no worse than that which the most harmless useful creatures do suffer? 2. That the best of the Saints suffer death as well as the worst, yea, some of them have suffered much worse, viz. by conflicting many years with horrid Temptations, to despair and the like, (as Mr. Glo∣ver, a most excellent Christian, in the Book of Martyrs, is said to have been in despair five years together.) And shall we think the wicked are worthy of no worse evil than the best of God's children have un∣dergone? God forbid. p. 102.In the former part of his Book, He tells us of some Books that were burnt in London by the Hangman, and saith thereupon, the same Spi∣rit is alive to burn this which he hath written. And I think it doth as well deserve that honour as ever any book in the world did, as may appear not only by what hath been seen of it hitherto, but also
and especially by that which follows to the end of it, and particularly by this act of his, in this Page I am upon: viz. by urging Rom. 6.21. to prove that there is not any thing to come after Death: (to speak in his own plain words, p. 141. lin. 16.) Surely it is more than bad enough to doubt whether there be any thing to come after Death or not; much worse to hold absolutely, that there is not; for that contradicts the Scriptures, which tell us, that after Death there is a Judgment, and a Vengeance to be inflicted on them that obey not the Gospel of Christ, 2 Thess. 1.9. Hebrews 9.27.Heb. 9.27. and in a word everlasting shame and con∣tempt, (to the wicked, he means) Dan. 12.2, &c. But for a Man to act Mr. R.'s part, and to urge Holy Scripture in defence of such a Heathenish Opinion, who can imagine how horrible a thing it is in the eyes of God, (I doubt not but he would suffer worse than corporal Death for it, if God should deal with him after his de∣serts, what ever slight thoughts he hath of it) And how far these words [The end of these things is Death] I say how far these words are from proving, that there is no Punishment for any after Death, is so plain, that there's little need of any thing to be said about it, for Death here signifies (as before) Eternal damnation: As when it is said, if ye live after the flesh ye shall dye, that is, be Damned, Rom. 8.13. (for how∣ever they live, they are as much subject to temporal Death, as 'tis clear.) Proof 3d. R.—Their Opinion of a Punishment never to end makes not sin,p. 146. but Christ to be the cause of their so suffer∣ing; for if Christ had not come, there had been no Resur∣rection, and if no Resurrection there could be no Punishment after Death: But Christ may not be supposed to be the cause of their Punishment, &c. B. If this be a Proof, it is a very ugly one certainly, and will not be much valued by them that know what Christ, or Sin, or Punishment is. However, I shall not think much to say something to it. I confess Christ is said to be the cause of the Resurrection of the Dead: He is the efficient cause of the Resurrection of the wicked, as he is God of the same substance with his Father; and he is the Meritorious cause of the Resurrection of the Saints, as their Head and Mediator. (I mean as their Resurrection is a glorious Resurrection, in Philip. 3.11. If by any means I may attain to the Resurrection of the Dead.Intelligit non simplicem sed gloriosam. Zanch. in loc.) Now observe his Argument; Without the Resurrection, the wicked could not be pu∣nished
after Death: Christ is the cause of their Resurrection, (if they be raised) therefore if they suffer for ever, Christ is the cause of it, which is absurd — This is manifestly his Proof in this matter: and how ab∣surd it is, may be shewed in a Parallel case, as thus: [Without life and strength Men could not rob on the High-way: but it is God that gives them life and strength, and without him they could not have them; there∣fore God is the cause of their Robbing] Would not a Christian abhor such a Reasoning as this, yea, would not the Devil himself be almost a∣shamed of it? and yet if I am not most exceedingly mistaken, it is as good a Reasoning as that of his, yea the very same in kind. If he had not forgotten all his Logick he might have remembred, that Causa sine quâ non, is not a cause strictly and properly so called, but only a pre-requisite condition, &c. Sine ullo causali Influxu, as the Learned Schei∣bler expresseth it.Topic. de causis, cap. 2. Artic. 4. If my Author had not had Ink and Paper, (or something that might serve in stead of them) he could not have writ∣ten these his many Infallible Proofs, yet (if we speak properly) it was not his Ink or his Paper, or any such thing that was the cause of his writing them, but his Error, and his desire of defending it, &c. And seeing his great weakness in this particular, it will not be much amiss to bring in to his Assistance the Learning of his Learned Brother Mr. Tho. Hobbs of Malmesbury, who, though (in some things) he speaks more honestly than my Author hath done, yet is no approver of the Doctrine I contend for. For in his Leviathan (Chapter 44. p. 346. as the Reverend Dr. Tully citeth him in his Exposit. Symboli) he suppo∣seth the Everlasting Punishment spoken of in the Gospel,A Digression to Mr. Hobbs. to be meant, not of every Damned Man in particular, but only to be specifical, and to respect divers of them successively, so as that one should be punished a time, and then be turned into nothing, then another to come in his place, and so soon as he is annihilated, another after him, and another (again) after him, and so on.—Which doubtless was the fruit of his own Invention, for I verily believe it never came into the Head of any Man before him. But I answer, 1. By his leave, there can be no Everlasting Punishment upon them at this rate, unless they who are first annihilated, are made alive again, after their annihilation, (for if they be all annihilated one after another, at last there will be no Punishment upon any of them) and to suppose them to be raised from the Dead to suffer for a time, and then to be an∣nihilated, and afterwards to be made, and made alive again, that they may suffer again; This I say, as it would not be approved by other Christians, so 'tis a question whether it would not be looked upon as a
great absurdity by himself. And he that can imagine such a thing as probable, may by the same perfection imagine them to be annihilated and made again (& vice versa) every Hours space: (for the Scripture saith no more for the one than the other) And he that can think so, must needs have a very working fancy, or (rather) a mighty Wind-mill in his Pate. Secondly, If this might pass for true or probable, concerning the successive punishment of Damned Men, it might be thought so, in like sort of damned Spirits or Devils [That some of them shall be punished for a time, and then be annihilated, and others be punished, and so of the rest] which yet no Christian in the World (I believe) ever dream∣ed of. Thirdly, When they are raised from the Dead, they shall be raised in∣corruptible, so far shall they be from total corruption or annihilation.1 Cor. 15. They shall seek Death, but shall not find it. Revel. 9th. Fourthly, The Text it self confutes this conceit, and shews us clearly, that the Everlasting Punishment shall be upon the wicked, (in Individuo) upon every particular Person among them that are found such at the Day of Christ. For the words are thus, Matth. 25. v. 46. These (i. e. these in particular) shall go away into everlasting punishment: as much as if he had said, Every one of them shall be punished everlast∣ingly: as in Revel. 7.14. These are they that are come out of great Tri∣bulation. And if the former part of the 46. Verse doth not mean an everlasting punishment upon every one of the wicked in particular, how shall we be assured that the latter part of the Verse means the everlast∣ing happiness of every righteous Man in particular? for I will be judg∣ed by Mr. Hobbs himself whether the Greek Pronoun (there used) do not denote a particularity as plainly in the one as in the other. But I need say no more to this Error of his, since that worthy Doctor (in the place cited) hath proclaimed its vileness in these words — Regnum tenebrarum, de quo ibi delirat, maxime promovet, &c.(p. 142.) And in the following Lines, he assures us, that Mr. Hobbs compares the state of the Damned, in, and under Punishment, to the troubles of a Married state here in the World: which was such a piece of wisdome, as his Parents (I dare say) did never teach him. And is accounted by the same pious Person not only ridiculous, but Atheistical:Dr. Tully. 143. Lin. 4. And then he adds, [Nec istam sanè circa Impios in orco suo Ethnicorum ullus (etiam dementissimus) insaniam unquam insanivit.] In plain English, that the silliest Heathen never had such a mad conceit in his Head. Is it not strange Mr. H. doth not chastise him, by publishing a Latin Epistle con∣cerning
him; but if ever he should, I hope the Printer will not give much for the Copy of it, lest he should be a loser by it. (And if one Limb of his Leviathan be so monstrous,See Bish. Bram∣hall against it. what a frightful Creature may the whole Leviathan be?) But now it will be time to return to Mr. R. to examine his Fourth Proof, which is thus. His 4th. proof. Christ came to deliver his People out of the hands of all their ene∣mies, and to save them from all the miseries that they are sub∣ject to;p. 149. but there is no mention made in Scripture of his deli∣vering them from a punishment after Death.— So He, in p. 149. Answered. I answer: There is mention made of it implicitly and in substance, though not expresly in those very words: For it is said, that he redeem∣ed them from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3. and from the wrath to come, in 1 Thessal. 1. last verse. In a word, The wicked shall arise out of their Graves to punishment,Dan. 12.2. John 5.29. and come forth to the Resurrection of Dam∣nation: from which Christ hath freed the Saints. And here under this fourth Proof, for many Pages together, from the 150. to 161. he hath such a wild Discourse, as his Reader, I dare say, never met with in any other Book whatsoever: I shall not tran∣scribe it at large, (for why should my time be spent so vainly, especially considering how much of usefuller work I have to do) but shall only present thee with some of the choicest flowers therein, which will smell no whit better than stinking weeds: And the first is thus: p. 151.R.— If a Punishment for ever be due to man for sin, Christ must have suffered for ever to free us from it.— B. In these words we may note first his Opinion, and secondly his Proof of it. His Opinion (which they discover) is this, That ever∣lasting Punishment is not due to Man for sin, or that he doth not de∣serve to be punished for ever for his sin: It seems then, though he prayed for some things, (as he tells us in the Epistle to the Reader) yet he never prayed to be delivered from endless punishment, as ten thou∣sands of his betters have done, (and if God should cast him into it, he must not find fault, since he never desired him to save him from it.) And hereby we may perceive how far he goes beyond the very worst of Papists and Sectarists that are among us. The one, though they have
too many silly Dreams about Purgatory, yet they do not doubt of the Everlastingness of hell Torments, or of the desert of them by the sins of men, being taught the one and the other by their great Masters in the Catholick Faith, as Bellarm. de amiss. grat. l. 1. cap. 14. Valen∣tia Tom. 2. disp. 6. quaest. 17. punct. 4. and others, who cite the School∣men for it largely enough.Vid. Baronii disp. de Pecca∣to mortali. &c. part. 2. Sect. 3. And the other, though they are little in love with our Liturgie in general, or our Letany in particular, yet they count it no Superstition to pray as we do therein [from Everlasting Damnation, Good Lord deliver us] So that he differs herein from these persons, as much as from Orthodox Protestants, and the Church of England. And seeing he is singular herein, he had need give us a very good Proof of his Opinion before he may hope to win us to it. But behold what it is! R. [If everlasting punishment be due to us for sin, then if Christ free us from it, he must suffer everlastingly himself.] B. But this will need a proof as much as the other, and when he or his Brethren shall undertake to prove it, I will undertake to Answer them. And to that which he hath said, I reply thus: That Christs Sufferings in the place of his people were sufficient to deliver them from everlasting punishment, though he did not suffer for ever, for his Temporal Sufferings were of infinite merit and value, as being the Sufferings of an Infinite Person, the Eternal Son of God, whom all the Highest Angels are enjoyned to worship, or in St. Paul's phrase, God over all blessed for ever, in Rom. 9.Rom. 9.5. For like as the great∣ness of an Injury is measured by the greatness of the person that suffers it, so the value of the satisfaction is esteemed by the Excellency of the Person that makes the Satisfaction, as is well observed by the excellent and acute Author in the Margin, in his Anatome Samosatenianismi,Mart. Z. Thaly∣aeus. quaest. 1. Arg. 11. p. (mihi) 81. Actus secundi necessitatem supplevit tum dignit as personae, tum pondus passionum, &c. But of this something hath been said already, (only I may add thus much, that the eternity of Christ's Sufferings, if it might be supposed, could not work our deliverance, if his Tem∣poral Sufferings could not. For according to strict justice, He being to suffer in our place, could not deliver us, till he had suffered suffici∣ently for us. But now in case he had been to suffer for ever, he should never suffer sufficiently till he had suffered for ever, which ['till] implies a contradiction, since Eternity can never expire, wherefore his rare invention, in this case, is nothing worth.) And whereas we
suppose the dignity of Christ's person, as he is God, to add such a value to his Sufferings (that his Temporal Sufferings may serve in∣stead of our Eternal Sufferings) he gives us this for Answer, [That the Godhead of Christ did not suffer] which I confess is a Truth, but nothing at all to the purpose, for though his Godhead did not suffer, yet he, who is God, did suffer, (though only in his humane Na∣ture.) And it was more for God to suffer for a time, than for sinful creatures to suffer for ever, and with his Sufferings (for his people) God his Father is fully satisfied; since he hath given himself for them, an Offering and a Sacrifice of sweet smelling savour to God.Eph. 5.2. But against this he objecteth after this manner, p. 157.R. — [God was never unsatisfied: He is Perfect, Infinite, Blessed, unchangeable, and how could he be so if he were unsatisfied at any time?] B. Herein he doth greatly mistake our meaning, and supposeth that we hold God was discontented, when we say there was need of a satisfaction to be made unto him, for the sins of his people. Thick Ale certainly, that could fill the Gentlemans head with such gross Imagi∣nations! That indeed were as bad Divinity, as most that hath come from Rome or Malmsbury; and needs no more to confute it than the consideration of those Perfections of God which my Author men∣tioneth. But to recover him out of this Error, we would tell him, that we mean not (by a Satisfaction) such a thing as makes God better contented (or happier) than he was before, (that were mad∣ness so much as to imagine) but such a thing as Answers the de∣mands of his Law and Justice, which necessarily require that sin should be punished according to its demerit, either upon the sinner himself or his Surety: as the Learned Dr. Owen hath excellently demonstrated in his Diatriba upon that subjectDe Justitiâ Divinâ. (which my Author, I hope, will not undertake to confute.) And now let us proceed to the remaining Proofs that he gives us in the following pages, p. 162. p. 162.  R.— Zephan. 1.18. He shall make a speedy Riddance of them in the day of his wrath. But to continue for ever in Pu∣nishment, is no speedy Riddance. So the pouring out his Anger is called [a Day] which agrees not to a punish∣ment that never ends.—
B. Bold men will not scruple to act like themselves, he that hath perverted so many other Texts to his purpose will do the like by this, yet 'tis fit we should tell him of it (whether he will repent of it or no) Wherefore we desire him (or his companions) to observe that the Text doth not say as he saith, but thus [The whole land shall be de∣voured by the fire of his Jealousie, for he shall make a speedy rid∣dance of all them that dwell in the land.] Which words manifestly speak of a National judgment here in the World, but prove nothing of such a quick dispatch in another world, after the day of general Resurrection. And as for the word (Day) it is not always used to signifie, a day and no more, (or thereabouts) but a time indefinitely, as when we read of an Evil day, and of the day of Visitation, and the like. In that day the Lord alone shall be exalted,Esay 2.17. and what day is that? Surely for ever after this world is ended; Eternity will be the day of his Glory, and no less shall be the day of his Favour to his Ser∣vants, and of his Vengeance upon his Enemies. R.—The opinion of a punishment never to end doth cause much sin—I deny that—p. 163, &c. —Here he adds several Proofs (such as they are) some of the choicest of which I shall examine. R. 1.—It causeth fear.] True indeed, it doth so, but is it therefore the cause of sin? If so, what shall we think of the threat∣nings of God's judgments in this world? doubtless they cause or should cause fear in the wicked man, yet he had not best say that they cause, or should cause sin in them. R. 2. —Fear troubles the hearts of many of the Lords people, (he means his Faithful people) and Christ saith, Let not your hearts be troubled, John 14. It seems he would have their Fears removed, by telling them that there is no hell nor Everlasting Punishment for any after this life. But wise men will not go that way to work, in comforting the Godly, but rather will comfort them by telling them, that Christ hath saved them from it, and delivered them from that wrath to come. R. 3.—If the Soul apprehends it self lyable to Everlasting Pu∣nishment, it cannot submit to God or be quiet.—
What doth he mean in saying [It cannot submit to God] If he means a contentedness to undergo that Everlasting punishment, we say God requires them not so to be content, but rather to be content to turn to him, and his service, and to accept of Christ as Saviour and Lord, that they may (in a way of Faith and Holiness) escape that Punishment. If he mean any thing else, he may keep his meaning to himself, unless the world had need of it. And if he think wicked men should be quiet with their Spiritual state, aand live contentedly and se∣curely in a state of sin, I must profess I know no wise man that is of his Opinion. R. 4. —This Opinion maketh many to murder themselves that they may not live to encrease their sin, and consequent∣ly, their Punishment in another world. This Opinion (saith he) maketh this mischief— But as he doth not prove it, so I deny it. For 'tis not this Opinion, but their mi∣stakes about it, and other Delusions and Temptations that maketh them so to do. And it would be no hard matter to prove that this Doctrine rightly believed, would be a powerful Preservative against self-mur∣der; for if Murderers are so much in danger of suchRev. 21.8. misery, he that believes so will not easily be perswaded to murder himself, to bring this misery upon him. (yet we must not judge that all self-killers are self-murderers, or damned persons.) R. 5. —The contrary Opinion tends most to comfort those per∣sons whose friends have dyed, and left no testimony of their conversion to God.— This (Reader) is the present case (what course we should take to comfort those persons who are afraid their friends shall suffer the ever∣lasting punishments, as dying without any signs of a true Conversion?) My Author thinks it the best way to tell them, that there is no such thing for any man to suffer (though finally wicked and impenitent) This indeed were a very quick and easie way, if it were but as safe too, but certainly it is not, (as my first Chapter hath sufficiently shewed, where the proof of the point is given at large, and far above all that Mr. R. or all his Brethren, can ever Answer to it.) The surer and more warrantable ways for men to quiet their minds in that case, are as follows.
1. To judge charitably, and hope the best of their deceased Friends:The Case of those that fear the worst of their deceased Friends consi∣dered. and not too confidently to perswade themselves of their everlasting misery, because they could not see such signs of true Conversion as might be wished. For though we may be sure that all they are lost for ever (and beyond all hopes of recovery) that die unconverted, yet we cannot be so sure of such and such particular persons, that they did die unconverted: for God's Judgments are a great deep and his Ways past finding out; God may work his gracious work in the Soul, at the last minute of life, if he so please, and we cannot prove that he will not do so. Obj. But if a man should not shew any signs of Repentance to his last hour, 'tis very doubtful if he be ever converted indeed, and we have much more grounds for our Fears than for our Hopes concern∣ing him. 'Tis very true and cannot justly be denyed; if a man be not godly 'till his dying day, 'tis ten to one but he will dye an ungodly man (and if he do so, he is certainly undone for ever, in 2 Pet. 3.7. The day of Judgment is called a day of perdition to such persons,) But then consider— 1. That if your Friends have lived and dyed ungodly, and so are fallen into everlasting Punishment, yet it was God that cast them into that Punishment: He alone hath the Keys of Hell and of Death, and none but he could adjudge them to it; and therefore they must not murmur at it, since it was He that hath done it: Thus the Psalmist, Psal. 39. I was dumb,Ps. 39.9. and opened not my mouth (in a way of impatience, he means) for thou Lord hast done it. 2. As it was God that hath done it, so he hath never done it, but when it was fit to be done; he is perfectly just in this severe Dis∣pensation, of casting the impenitent into Everlasting Punishment. The proof of which I have given in the end of my first Chapter. As∣suredly, The Lord is holy in all his ways, and Righteous in all his works, Psal. 145.18. and if we doubt of it now, there shall hereafter be a Revelation of his Righteous judgment, Rom. 2. If they continued his Enemies, must he save them because they were your friends? or must their Relation to you hinder the Judge of the world from doing Right? Surely not. 3ly, Your excessive sorrow, from the fear of your Friends misery, will do no good at all, but only disquiet your hearts in vain; for it will not please God, nor profit them, but rather unfit you for the du∣ties that are incumbent upon you; and therefore submit to God, and pray to him to abate your sorrows.
4ly, Instead of murmuring at God's Dispensations in any kind, give him thanks for his patience and forbearance towards you, and the means of grace that are afforded you: And be assured, what ever be the state of the Dead, your selves shall be happy enough, if you turn to him in sincerity,Esay 55.7. while you live on Earth. 5ly, Study the vile nature of sin, view it in the Glass of God's holy Law, and in the Sufferings of Christ, &c. See how it crosses the will, and dishonours the Name of the great God; See how it breaks his Law, resists his Power, denies his Soveraignty, disparages his Wis∣dome, despises his Threatnings, and abuses his Mercy, &c. If we did rightly apprehend these things, we should be so far from murmur∣ing at our Maker for condemning some, that we should greatly admire that he doth not condemn all sinners in the World. R.— We read in Esay 57. v. 16. The words of the Lord him∣self, saying, [I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth, &c. Therefore he will not punish for ever. B. If he were deservedly looked upon as an absurd fellow that made his Answer concerning Onyons, when the question was proposed concerning Garlick only; what an intolerable absurdity is my Author guilty of, when he urgeth such a Text for the Impunity of the wicked, which manifestly speaks of the Mercy of God to the Saints. In the foregoing Verse he tells us, He will look (with an eye of favour, that is) to him that is of an humble and a contrite Spirit;v. 15. And then he adds, I will not contend for ever; viz. with such a one. But will this prove that he will not contend for ever with any others; with them that are so proud that they care not for God, that go on wilfully in the ways that his Soul hateth, and will not be reformed? surely not. If Mr. R. will see no difference between the godly and the wicked, the humble Christian, and the proud-hearted Hypocrite, yet our God will, and will also make others see the difference hereafter: when the one shall be separated from the other,Mal. 3.18. as the Sheep from the Goats, Matth 25. (setting the one on his right hand, and the other on his left.) Doubtless the boldest Hypocrite will tremble then, and their hopeless cries be far louder in another World, than their scornfullest laughter was in this.
CHAP. III. SECT. IV. The remaining part of his Infallible Proofs examined. R. — God hath planted in man an universal love to man, espe∣cially to his own off-spring, be they obedient or disobedient; What Bowels of love in Parents, &c.p. 170. They do not desire their off-spring, though disobedient, should suffer such a tor∣ment, as these men speak of, one Year to an end; therefore God will not inflict extreme miseries upon men for ever, since they are his off-spring, as they are his Creatures: for God is not less merciful than man.— B. THis is the substance of his proof. And if it be sufficient to prove what he intends by it,God's mercy, and Parents pity, not alike in all things. it will be sufficient for other purposes too, which Christians will not judge it to be, viz. to prove that the Devils shall not suffer extreme punishments without end; and that Christ was not punished (extremely) for the offences of such as we. For the former, we will take his Argument and urge it thus, [Parents would not desire to cast their Children into an irrecoverable state of misery, upon their first act of disobedience towards them: How can we think then, that God would cast the Angels (that were the noblest of all the works of his hands) into an irrecoverable state of misery, upon the commission of the first sin against him? for God is not less merci∣ful than Man.] Doubtless the Proof is as strong this way, as the other way, and yet it is not strong enough, nor will not (cannot) prevail upon them that believe what the Scripture saith in the case: for let us prove what we will, yet the Apostle hath told us,2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. Matth. 25.41. that God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down, &c. 2 Pet. And hath prepared everlasting fire for them, Matth 25. (And therefore whatsoever proofs are brought to the contrary, are not Proofs truly so called, but Sophistical Arguments and meer deceits.) For the latter also we may reason (as strongly) after the same rate. [A good Father would not have his beloved Son (that never offended
him) be severely punished for those offences that he never committed, therefore much less would the God of all Mercy lay the punishment of our sins upon his Holy Son Jesus, in whom his Soul delighted.] One Egg is not more like another than this is like my Author's Proof afore∣said. And though it might be approved by Socinians, yet Christians will not be wrought upon by it,Esay 53. while they read and believe Rom. 4.25. compared with Rom. 5.8 and, in one word, the 53d. Chapter of Esay. And thus we have seen how far this his Proof is from being infalli∣ble: and therefore the Reader will not think I am bound to say any thing more unto it; yet for his farther satisfaction, I will add thus much: viz. That God is not as Man in every thing, (for then he should not be a God indeed) nor may his goodness and Man's be compared to∣gether, any farther than the Scriptures will allow of: And though he be more merciful than Man is, and will shew forth more love and kind∣ness to the meanest of his faithful servants, than the most compassionate Parent ever did (or can do) to his beloved Child; yet his saving Mer∣cy hath its proper objects, and is not extended promiscuously to all the Sons of Men. He is free in the exercising of it, and hath mercy on whom he will: And his Mercy no more binds him to save All Men, than it did to save all Angels: The wicked and impenitent are the objects of his wrath, as the Returning sinners are the objects of his love. Again, God is not only a God of Mercy,Psal. 94.1. but a God of Vengeance. To him vengeance belongeth, Psal. 94. where the word vengeance, is mentioned twice in one verse; And he is the Supreme Law-giver and Governour of the World. Now as he is such, it belongs to him to see that his ob∣stinate and uncurable Enemies may not go unpunished: And though he desires not their punishment for everlasting, (to use Mr. R.'s word) as it is a punishment, yet he will inflict it, as it is an Execution of Justice, and a discovery of his holiness, and hatred of sin, and the like. And (to come to the comparison) a Father, that is a Judge and a Law-giver, as well as a Father, and (as such) hath made a Law that such and such offenders shall suffer so many Months imprisonment, who ever they be; may not dispense with that Law, (if it be just) no not in the case of his own Children, when they commit the said offences. So the God of Mercy being a Judge and Law-giver, is engaged by his Honour and Justice to punish sin, (which is the transgression of his Law) according to its desert. If you say it is not punished upon the Saints, I answer: That it was punished upon their Surety Christ Jesus in their place, and they are freed by the merit of his sufferings: But it is not so with the Enemies of his holiness, so remaining; they must answer for themselves.
R.—If men had deserved everlasting punishment, yet why may not God shew that mercy, as not to inflict it, as well as to let the Rain fall upon them that no way deserve it?p. 171, 172. Men often shew more kindness to disobedient Children than they deserve: And may not God do the same?— B. This [if Man had deserved such punishment] is spoken only for Argument sake, for he doth not grant it to be a truth, but it hath been proved before, whether he will grant it, or not. But this being sup∣posed, What then? For (saith he) why may not God shew so much mercy, as not to inflict it upon them that deserve it, as he gives the rain to them that deserve it not.— I answer, He doth shew so much mercy upon many such, (yea many thousands) as not to inflict it on them: All that truly turn from their evil ways, and believe on his Son Christ Jesus, shall for his sake be secured from it, and he will spare them, as a man spareth his own Son that serveth him. But if he ask,Mal. 3.16, 17. why he may not shew such mercy upon all in general, or upon the wick∣ed that continue such, Then I except against his question; for we are not concerned (in this case) to enquire what he may do, but what he will do. Things revealed (by his own confession) belong to us, now he hath revealed his will to the contrary, as in other places, so in that so often mentioned, Matth. 25. These shall go away into everlasting pu∣nishment: and, to take vengeance of them that know not God, and o∣bey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ,2 Thess. 1.9. who shall be punished with everlasting destruction, &c. 2 Thess. (But he hath not said he will give them no Rain while they live on Earth, and therefore is free to give it them, though they deserve it not.) So that for a Man to ask, why God may not shew such favour to the Impenitent, as not to inflict such pu∣nishment upon them, is in effect, to ask, why he may not act contrary to his own word? which is a question more fit to be abhorred than to be answered. And what if Parents shew more kindness to disobedient Children than they deserve, yet he must not think that Men are a fit rule for God to walk by; nor doth he believe that God is bound to shew such kind∣ness to his rebellious Creatures, as Men are to their disobedient Chil∣dren. (yet it must be remembred, that God doth shew a thousand times more kindness to his enemies in this World, than they deserve, or could deserve, if they were his faithfullest servants, and doth more for them e∣very day in the Year, than Parents can do for their best Children.) And
these things being considered, all that which he adds concerning the greatness of God's Mercy above the mercy of man, is vain as to that for which he intends it: But of that we may have occasion to speak more hereafter. p. 173.R.— Gods general goodness in the Creation of the world is to all his Creatures, Eccles. 5.9. The profit of the Earth is for all— B. And what of that? Is that a proof there shall be no everlasting Punishment for any man? Surely if it be, 'tis not an infallible one, but an Idle and impertinent one: for the question (in this affair) is not of God's general goodness, but of his saving Mercy: Now though we grant the one to be extended to all creatures, yet we do not grant it of the other. God indeed is good to all, but he doth not grant all goodness to all alike:Dan. 12. but as some shall arise to everlasting Glory, so others shall arise to everlasting shame. p. 173. lin. 18.R. — God takes care to provide for all, and bids us feed and cloath the worst that want, &c. and he that would not have them suffer want here, will not impose an everlasting Misery on them hereafter. B. We may say of Mr. R. as some did of our Saviour (though in a contrary sense) that never man spake like him: Surely, none but himself did ever go about to prove this point in this manner: And at the same rate a wicked man might need no better proof of his escaping Hell hereafter, than his health, and wealth and prosperity here, for he might say as Mr. R. Surely that God who would not lay upon them the miseries of sickness and poverty here, will not inflict greater miseries for ever hereafter. (Yet Christians will not count this any good evidence of a state of Salvation.) Doth not the Parable in Luke 16. manifestly suppose, that a man may have comfort here and Tor∣ment hereafter: All the Turkish Emperors, and all the Popes, (I should have set them first, as being the proudest of the two) All these I say, had Honour and Greatness enough in this world, yet we cannot doubt but many of them (if not all) will inherit shame in the world to come.
R.—Their Opinion lesseneth the goodness of God and limiteth it to a few—whereas the Scriptures declare it to be to all.p. 174. All flesh shall see his Salvation, Luke 3.6. and He will have all men to be Saved, 1 Tim. 2.4. The Protestants in Poland say there will come a time wherein the fallen Angels and the wickedest men shall be set free. — B. This is not all that he saith under this 11. Proof, nor do I take my self to be engaged to spend my Ink upon all the Vanities he is guilty of: (yet that which is for his turn, I shall not fear to deal with) He urgeth Rom. 8.19.21. to prove that all in general shall be Saved: but unless he had made out his Proof from it, or shewed some better man than himself that hath urged it for that purpose, I shall not think fit to say any thing to it: for I am sure Christians may read that Text a thousand times, without danger of being led thereby into that Opi∣nion. But let us come to the point.— Our Opinion (he saith) les∣seneth the goodness of God and limiteth it unto a few:] concerning which we would demand of him, what he means by God's goodness? If he means God's common goodness, it is utterly denyed: our Opini∣on denyes not the extent of that goodness to all; though we believe a Hell, yet we believe God is good to all here, and he therefore casts some into Hell because they would not be (truly) good to themselves, nor chuse the good ways which he commands them to walk in. But if he mean it of God's saving goodness, then I say our Opinion denyes it to extend to all (so as to save All) for narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few there be that find it. (i.e. few in comparison,Matth. 7.14. or not near so many as miss of it, though very many considered in them∣selves.) But he tells us [All flesh shall see his Salvation] very true, who doubts of it? But he that dares believe his Saviour (in that Text but now mentioned) will not think that it means that all without exception shall be Saved; and if it were so, then I say, what Divinity, yea what truth or sence (to speak with Reverence) shall be found in the words of Paul to the Corinthians, We are a sweet savour, &c. in them that are saved, and in them that perish: (what shall become of this division of mankind into [them that are saved] and them that [pe∣rish] if All should be saved and none perish?) If Mr. Richardson can crack this Nut, I will confess his Teeth are strong. And as for those Texts, they are far from proving the contrary:Luke 3.6, Cleared. All flesh shall see his Salvation, speaks nothing for his turn, unless he had made it
appear that [All in those Texts, means all whatsoever, without ex∣ception of any;] which I dare say he cannot do, nor could it agree with the other places alledged, if taken in that sence: wherefore by All, we mean All sorts (that Repent and Believe) such persons of what sort soever, whether Jew or Gentile, high or low, bond or free, &c. shall see the Salvation of God. As when it is said, our Lord healed all Diseases among the people, i. e. all sorts; and in another, ye shall be hated of all men for my Names sake,Matth. 10.22. that is, of all sorts of men, for certainly All in general did not hate them for Christs sake, yea some loved them as truly for it, as others hated them. 1 Tim. 2.4. Cleared.And the other Text may be vindicated with no less difficulty than the former. It runs thus, He would that All should be saved: may we hence infer, that God will actually and eventually save all, or that he purposeth to save all? no sure, nothing less. There are several Answers, to be made unto it to remove this sense from it. 1. That the word All, may be taken of all sorts as before; and if I should answer thus, Mr. R. might find it hard enough to confute it. 2. That the will of God is to be distinguished in this case, it may sig∣nifie either his Appointing will, or his ApprovingVid. Chamier. de praedestin. l. 7. cap. 6. will; God may be said to will the Salvation of All in general, by his Approving will: because he thus willeth them to walk in the way of Salvation, and to shun those things that tend to their Ruine. As a King may be said to will that none of his subjects should be put to death, because he ap∣proves not of (but wills them to shun) those evil ways which make them deserve such punishment from him. But yet in case they prove Thieves or Murderers, or unsufferable Enemies to the Common∣wealth, in any other way, he wills that they should die for it, and ap∣points them to be put to death. (and that without any disparagement to his goodness and merciful disposition) So in case men will not for∣sake their wicked ways, and turn to God and his true service, the Judge of the world doth will their deserved Punishment, and will pu∣nish them with an Everlasting destruction2 Thess. 1.9. (and that without any im∣peachment of his Mercy and Goodness) In a word, he doth not so will the Salvation of All in general, as to bring them to Salvation; that's plain, since strait is the gate and narrow is the way that leads to Salvation,Matth. 7.14. and few there be that find it. And that this Text aforesaid doth not mean any such thing is plain, for he would that All should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth (even his Gospel and word of Truth) But 'tis clear God doth not so will, that All should come to the knowledge of his Truth, as to bring them infallibly to the
knowledge of it: Therefore he doth not so Will that all shall be saved, as to bring them infallibly to Salvation. The Argument is good, be∣cause the Apostle maketh no difference between God's Willing that All should be saved, and his Willing that all should come to the knowledge of his Truth. And the word in the Original, not . I find is not active but passive only, and accordingly it is rendred in our Translation, (not He Willeth to Save all, but) He Willeth that all should be saved. The former would infer the certain Salvation of All, (for who hath resisted his Will?) but not so the latter, as the excellent Author in the Margin hath proved, in his most Learned Animadversions against Mr. HoardB. Davenant p. (mihi) 17, &c. (which our new Predestinarians, I hope, have so much wisdom as not to oppose.) He addeth [The Protestants in Poland say there will come a time wherein the fallen Angels, and the wickedest men shall be set free] (from Punishment he means.) B. And what of all that? Doth he think they were infallible, that we should believe so, meerly because they say so? Why did he not set down some of their Reasons for it? had he done so I would have been content to examine them, as I have done his, and doubt not but I could Answer them as easily, by God's ordinary assistance. 2. Whom doth he mean by [the Protestants of Poland?] If he means the best and soundest Protestants (as the Denomination ought to be à potiori) I say, if he means the Orthodox Protestants of that Countrey, such as Arnoldus, Maccovius, Chrzastovius (the latter of which wrote against the ArriansIn cap. 1. Jo∣han. Evangel. in general, as the two former against Socinus and Smalcius) orAuthor Cen∣surae Confess. Socin. Salinarius, Clementinus, Zabarovius, Zarnove∣cius, &c. If he mean such Protestants of Poland as these, and the like, I utterly deny that ever they taught such Doctrine: and if my Author would read their worthy Works, he might soon see very much to the contrary. But if he mean the Heretical Protestants of Poland (who were called Protestants in opposition to Papists, and yet were as bad or worse than Papists in doctrine) such as Smalcius, Archisevius, Os∣taradius, &c. then I do not deny but they might be of the opinion that Mr. R. speaks of. But the judgment of these men will not go far with me, for I am well assured, that such rank Socinians as they, were not guided by a good Spirit, and I think they were not Pro∣testants or Christians, unless in the same sense as Rebels are Subjects, i. e. bad Subjects.
p. 177.R.—All men are in God, for in him we live, and move, and have our Being: And if all men are in God, all men are in Christ, for He and the Father are one: Jo. 10. Now all confess, that all who are in Christ shall be saved. Rom. 8.1.] B. O admirable profoundness and learning! enough to puzzle those Mahometan Priests, that blew their blinding Powder into the eyes of the People, and no less mischievous to the minds of his deluded Dis∣ciples, than that Powder was to the Gazrs upon Mahomet's Tomb: I dare forfeit one of my Fingers, if he can shew me a more base, and more wilfully-distorted speech, a more gross and wretched piece of so∣phistry, in any of the Writings of the Romish Foxes, than this under consideration: Surely it is hard to guess which he strained most herein, his wits, or his conscience: For my part I do verily judge, that he of∣fered violence to both of them. And that he should take so much pains in vain, may well be matter of vexation to him; and yet so he hath done and no better. For consider, How all men are [in God.]1. When it is said in the Acts, That in God we live, and move, and have our Being, (speaking of Men in general) that doth not mean, that he is the Saviour of all Men in a special sense, but that he is the up∣holder, maintainer, and preserver of all Men: not that all Men have an interest in his saving mercy, but that they are sustained by his power and common providence (so as that they could not live, or move, or have a Being without him.) Wherefore, In him we live, is as much as if it were said, By him we live, &c. for the Greek Particle  doth commonly signifie, By, or Through;, &c. as we find in Hebr. 1.1. God, who in times past spake to our Fathers by the Prophets, hath in these last days spoken to us by his Son: where the Greek hath it, [in the Prophets, and in his Son] but the sense of it is, by the Prophets, and therefore our Translators have rendered it [by the Prophets] &c. And so in the Latine 'tis expressed, by Per instead of In:Daven. in Col. cap. 1. v. 16. by Beza, and others. And other Instances are given by the excellent Bishop aforesaid, in his Comment on the Epistle to the Colossians. Now when he saith, If all Men are in God, all Men are in Christ; I grant it in the sense aforesaid: All men are by Christ, for he upholdeth all things by the Word of his Power. And to the last passage,Heb. 1.3. ['Tis commonly confessed that All who are in Christ shall be saved] To this I say, my Return is thus: That if he mean All who are Members of Christ's Mystical Body, or that have an Interest in
Christ's Merits and Righteousness, as it is meant in Rom. 8. v. 1. Then I grant that All who are in Christ shall be saved, (which that very Text demonstrateth.) But I utterly deny that All men are in Christ, in this sense of the word. But if he mean, All that are by Christ, (made and maintained in the World by him) then I deny that All such shall be sa∣ved, for in this sense the Devils may be said to be in Christ, Colos. 1.16.. And thus Mr. R.'s rich Invention is proved to be worth nothing, but scorn and contempt. R.— In Rom. 5. The second Adam in saving,p. 178. is put in oppo∣sition to the first Adam in sinning. And if All Nations shall be blessed, as was foretold, in Gen. 22. Every particu∣lar must also, for the general word All, includes every parti∣cular. And it is a great lessening of the riches and fulness of God's grace and goodness, to say that God hath made this World for All, and the best World, but for a few.— B. That which he would have us gather from Rom. 5. is manifestly thus, That as all Mankind are liable to destruction by means of the first Adam, so all shall be freed from it by the merit of the second Adam, Jesus Christ: But I cannot think how he will find any Text in it,Rom. 5.18. cleared. that may be made very serviceable for such a design, unless it be the 18. Verse of that Chapter. As by the offence of one, judgment came upon all Men to condemnation; so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all Men to justification of life. But this will easily be an∣swered: For the comparison there made between Adam and Christ, is not in respect of the Number of Persons that are saved or destroyed; but in respect of the causes of Salvation and Damnation: That, as the cause of Damnation, even sin, is (originally) only from Adam; so the cause of Salvation, even Righteousness and Justification is wholly from Christ. As all sinners became sinners through the first Adam, and so are liable to damnation through him: so all justified Persons are ju∣stified through Christ the second Adam, and have a right to Heaven only through his Righteousness imputed to them. So that when Paul saith, by the Righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all Men to justification of life; it is not so to be taken, as if Justification were com∣mon to All men, but that it is through the Righteousness of Christ that All, who are justified, are justified. (viz. that none are justified other∣wise.) As the Psalmist saith, the Lord upholdeth all that fall;Psal. 145.14. not that he upholdeth every one that falls, for some fall irrecoverably: as Ju∣das,
Pharaoh, the Sinners against the Holy Ghost, &c. but that All who being fallen; are upheld and preserved from falling away utterly, are so upheld only by him. Hanc Deo tribuit gloriam quod sine ejus ope nemo sustentetur,Musculus in Psal. 145. as a worthy Expositor on the place. This glory (saith he) the Psalmist ascribes to God, viz. That without his help none are up∣held. Rom. 8.30. Whom he justified, them he also glorified: but God doth not glorifie them that live and dye unconverted; for, Except ye be converted,Matth. 18.3. ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Matth. 18.3. Therefore neither doth he justifie any such Persons. Nor is he more fortunate in alledging Gen. 22.18. for, though All (in it self) be inclusive of every particular,Genes. 22.18. opened. yet in that place all Nati∣ons cannot signifie all particular Persons of every Nation, for if all Na∣tions should be blessed, in this largest sense, none should be cursed, as our Lord will say unto many at the last Day,Matth. 25.41. Depart from me ye cursed. Wherefore by all Nations, understand some of all Nations, or (if you will) many of all Nations, even all true believers in every Nation: And that the word, all Nations, doth not always mean all men in gene∣ral,Esay 2.2. is plain, by Esay 2.2. where it is said, that All Nations should flow to the Mountain of the Lord's house; which cannot be said of all in general, and is expressed by [many] in the 4. of Micah, 1. Vers. And as for the fulness and riches of God's goodness, it is not to be judged of by the number of them that are saved by it,The goodness of God how to be judged of. but rather by the way and manner wherein and whereby they are saved; and by that great Salvation which his People shall partake of. Briefly thus: The riches of God's grace and goodness is seen in the excellency of its effect. For Life is a more excellent thing than Death, and Righteousness than Sin; and (secondly) in the powerfulness of the work, for it argueth a greater power to save than to destroy, to justifie than to condemn: (as 'tis a greater matter to reform a few, than to corrupt and harden a great many against the holy Ordinances and ways of God: An Idle Hypocrite is too well able to do the one, but a painful Minister is scarce able to do the other.) And (by the way) we do not say, as Mr. R. that God hath made the best World, (or Heaven) but for a very few: For many shall come from the East and the West, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Ja∣cob in the Kingdom of Heaven; yet they are few in comparison of them that miss of Heaven,Matth. 7.14. as was seen before from the words of him, whom he dares not (I hope) contradict or cavil at. And if a Man can think it is an obscuring of God's goodness to say, that he hath not made Heaven for so many, as he hath made the Earth;
for he may think it much more a denying of his goodness to say that he hath made comfortable provisions for the Birds and Beasts, and at the same time reserved many thousands of mighty Angels for extream and everlasting punishment: Yet so it is, whether my Author allow of it or not: he that spares the one did not spare the other. He that pre∣pares Food for these in this world, hath prepared everlasting fire for those in another world. Yet if a man do hence object and cavil against God's goodness, 'tis a sign he hath little goodness himself,See 2 Pet. 2. Judes Epist. Matth. 25.41. and as little wit: but he goes on, R.—Shall we think the fruit of the Son of Righteousness to be more narrow and confined, than the Sun in the Firmament,p. 179. whose excellency it is, that its bright Beams and Rays are dispersed into every corner of the Ʋniverse? B. How sweetly might this Gentleman sleep in the night time, that had his head so full of pleasant Dreams in the day time? And as for these words of his, they are no more worth than the former: for what∣soever of Rhetorick may be supposed to be in them, we are sure there is little of Logick or sound Reason in them. Mr. H. B. in his Book of Melancholy, tells us a merry story (as some may count it) con∣cerning the expectations of some of the Jews, which he hath as I take it out of the Learned Author of Synagog. Jud.Buxdorsius. Thus it is, That when the Arch-Angel shall sound his Trumpet, he shall gather all the Jews into the Holy Land, and make them a great Banquet, where∣in shall be all the Birds, and Beasts, and Fishes that ever lived in the Earth, Air and Ocean, and a cup of Wine that came from Para∣dise, &c. Reader, I will not, I cannot request thee to give heed to any such Jewish Fables, or to believe any of their lyes to be true, for I do not desire to believe them my self. And yet I profess unto thee, I may be as likely to believe all this, as to believe that assertion which Mr. Richardson's last words include and imply, viz. That the Glory of Heaven is as common as the light of the Sun, or that Christ will make All happy that the Sun shines upon; yea, so long as I believe the 7th. chapter of Matth. or the 25. chapter, it is utterly impossible that I should believe it. Thus of his Twenty Infallible Proofs I have examined and dis∣proved Eleven already; and if when we are in the middle we are half way over, then doubtless I am more than half way to the end of Mr. R. his pleasant Garden; and what precious Flowers are remaining in it,
the following pages will shew thee; and the next Proof is near as good as any of the rest; and it is thus in brief. p. 180.R. —It doth no way agree to the Spirit of a Saint, for Saints are ever merciful, as the Psalmist saith, doubtless they are so merciful, as that they would not desire that any man should be in such intolerable Torment one hour to an end, much less for ever. Therefore it doth not agree to the mind of God to punish any everlastingly. The more the Lord manifests him∣self in any, the more merciful they are, yea, to their enemies also. B. It is a strange way of Arguing which the man here useth, and supposeth the Soveraign Lord of all, and the Righteous Judge of the whole Earth to be obliged to follow the same rules which he hath given to his creatures. And how little excellency is to be found in such Imaginations may appear in these particulars following. 1. That the Saints do not desire that any should fall short of Hea∣ven, but would rather desire to further all men in the way to it, yet I dare say God will not bring all men thither. 2. Saints do not desire that any man should be mocked or abused, imprisoned or tormented in the world for maintaining the Truth, and opposing the Abominations of the Romish Religion; yet it would be madness to say God would not let his people suffer so upon that ac∣count, because it agrees not to the mind of a Saint; for Experience shews he hath often been pleased to exercise his people with such tryals, witness the Book of Martyrs, and the Histories of the former Perse∣cutions, &c. 3. A man of much Sanctity would not desire there should be so much wickedness in the world as there is, no nor would not suffer it to be if he could help it. I my self would turn all men to the love of God and Holiness if it were in my power: That little goodness that is in my heart (alas too little, and indeed so little that I am some∣times afraid it is none at all in sincerity, yet that) doth so dispose me, that I would turn all, if wishing or Preaching would do it, and would not suffer any man to love a pair of Cards more than a Ser∣mon, or a Barrel of Beer, or a Bag of Money more than Christ, and Grace, and Heaven, nor would I suffer men and women to play the Hypocrite for God's sake, and stay at home like Atheists, on the Lord's Day, under pretence of spending their time in Christian Du∣ties
in private. (whose base Hypocrisie the Lord will laugh at, for he knoweth that his Day is coming) I say, I my self would not suffer these things if I could help it. Yet God we see, doth suffer them, and yet his goodness is greater than man's. 4. I verily believe, a Saint (that is eminently such for knowledge and Grace) would not have suffered Mr. R. to have spent his time so sadly as to write This Book I am engaged with, yet God hath suffered him to Write and to Publish it too, or else it could never have been.—And that which he saith of the mercifulness of the Saints to their worst Enemies, is as far from being unanswerable: and because He hath not urged this Argument to the best advantage, I will do it for him, as thus: [A good man would not punish his enemies eternally, therefore God will not so punish his, for he is more merciful than Man.] I Answer, If God may not do otherwise than a good man would do, what sad conclusions might we make from it? for at this rate we might conclude that God the Father would not leave his beloved Son Christ Jesus to the malice of his wicked enemies, to be mocked and spit upon, to be Crucified and slain by them, for a good man would not deal so by his beloved Son; yet so it was, as sure as the Gospel is true, see Matth. 27. Luke 23. and other places. 2. There is no Reason why any man should punish his enemy ever∣lastingly; for his enemy doth not deserve it as he is his enemy: that is, his enmity against him, as it is against him, doth not make him worthy of such punishment. But offences against God, as they are against God, do deserve such punishment, and make the offenders wor∣thy of it. (as before.) 3. Men are but men, and therefore Vengeance is not their prero∣gative as it is Gods: To him it belongeth, Ps. 94.1. Neither are they Governors of the World, by natural rightful Soveraignty, and there∣fore a mans fault as against them, doth not respect any such Law, by which the world must be governed: But enough of this. R.—Such torment agrees not to the mind of Christ,p. 181 for he was full of Love, &c. praying for his Enemies, Luke 23.34. and would not bring fire from Heaven upon them when the Disciples would have had him do so. Luke 9. And he that would not suffer his Enemies to endure a short punishment by fire, will not inflict a worse that shall never end.—
B. All this is as vain as that which before he hath offered us, and will receive a quick dispatch. For this kindness he shewed forth was in the day of his patience, but when the day of wrath is come, he himself will come in flaming fire, to take Vengeance on them that abuse his Patience, and obey not his Gospel. Which is told us by that Apostle of Christ that well understood the greatness of the love of Christ.2 Thess. 1.9. And when he concludes that Christ will not inflict eternal pu∣nishment by fire upon any, from his Clemency in sparing those particu∣lar persons, that the Disciples would have destroyed by Fire; Herein I say,v. 41. he seems to have forgotten the 25 of Matthew, wherein we read that he will adjudge them on his left hand to everlasting fire (even all the ungodly in general) for they shall not stand in the Judgment, Psal. 1. (that is, not be absolved but condemned in that day.) p. 182.R. Such punishment agrees not to the fruits of the holy God. The fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, &c. B. How he will make this a Proof, that there is no everlasting pu∣nishment for the wicked in another life, I cannot apprehend; yea, I am confident it hath not so much as a shew of it, and therefore I shall say nothing to it, for though I have engaged to answer his Subtilties, and Sophistical Arguments, yet his meer Impertinencies and silliness it is below me to meddle with. p. 183. & 184.R. Such punishment agrees not to the Nature of God, for God is Love, and is kind to the unthankful and the evil. Luke 6. If God should only Love them that love him, do not the Publicans the same? God's Love and Mercy is infinite, and delighteth in Mercy, Mic. 7.18. and punishment is his strange act; Esay 28.21. and Christ dyed to answer the Law that we brake. B. This is the substance of this 15th. Proof, and is large enough if good enough. To the first part I reply—If it be contrary to God's Nature to punish sin for ever, then the Devils should not be punished by him for ever, the contrary to which we have seen already: 2. If it be contrary to God's Nature to punish sin for ever (it is not con∣trary to his Nature to preserve the sinners Being for ever, and when he will ever be a sinner, and so ever worthy of punishment) I say if it
be contrary to his Nature to punish sin thus, because he is a God of Love, it would be as contrary to his Nature to suffer sin to be in the World, because he is a God of Holiness and Righteousness. If Mr. R. say, He is Love Essentially; I say in like manner, he is Holiness Es∣sentially, and when he would swear by himself, he swears by his Holi∣ness, in the Psalms, and elsewhere. And if the matter be duly weigh∣ed, I do not question, but it will appear a stranger thing, that God should suffer sin to be committed, than that he should punish it, as it deserves after it is committed. (especially where it is attended with final impenitence, as in the Damned.) 3. God is a God of vengeance, as well as of love: and as the Saints are objects of his love, so the wicked and impenitent are the objects of his wrath; and the wrath of God abideth on them: John 3. v. ult. But he is kind to the unthankful and the evil. True indeed, he is so in this World; He waits on them day af∣ter day, and year after year, and gives them many times more advanta∣ges for their Souls good, than they care to improve, and loads them daily with his benefits; yea, he is more kind to them than they are to themselves, giving them Sermons which they care not to hear, and Bibles, and good Books, which they care not to read, unless it be in a profane and hypocritical way, to excuse themselves from coming to Church — But yet if they go on still in their sins, and abuse his kindness to the end, and continue to be the Children of Disobedience, his Mercy will not follow them in another World, but his Wrath will come upon them, as St. Paul tells us in the Epistle to the Colossians.Col. 3.6. To the next thing that he urgeth, [That if God should only love them that love him, he should do no more than the Publicans] I say unto this, as follows, viz. That we do not say, or suppose any such thing, as that God only loves them that love him, he loved his Elect from Eternity, and if he had not loved them before they loved him, they had never loved him, for all their love is from his,1 Jo. 4.19. and they there∣fore love him, because he loved them first: Yea, God loves all, with a common love, as they are his Creatures: The School-man spake not amiss upon the Point. — Deus diligit omnes homines,Aquinas apud Davenant. in Animadvers. &c. in quantum vult omnibus aliquod Bonum, &c. God, saith he, loveth all Men, in as much as he willeth some good unto all Men, yet he willeth not all that is good to all Men: That is,p. 170. he hath some special good which he bestoweth on∣ly upon some persons, as Heaven or Salvation only upon the Righte∣ous; for St. Paul tells us,1 Cor. 6. The unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. So that though God may be said to love all Men after a sort,
yet he doth not so love the wicked that remain such, as to give them Pardon and Salvation. If Mr. R. hath any proofs to the contrary, we desire him to bring them forth to light, and shall readily (if God per∣mit) examine them to the full. Well, but he is Infinite in Mercy, and delighteth in Mercy.— Very true: But may he not appear to be Infinite in Mercy, unless he save his impenitent Enemies? Sure he may. And though he delighteth in Mercy, yet he hath Vessels of Wrath as well as of Mercy, and re∣serveth wrath for his Enemies;Nahum 1.2. and when he will be pouring out his wrath upon them, yet then he will discover his delight in Mercy (and the infiniteness of his Mercy) to Thousands and Thousands of his faith∣ful Servants. Esay 28.21. opened.But he Objects, That Punishment is called his strange Work, in Esay 28.21.— But first: The word strange in that place is expounded by some of a great and wonderful work, and of an extraordinary judgment: and if we take it this way, it is far from serving his purpose, so much as in shew. Or, secondly, It may be taken for such a work as flows not natural∣ly from him, but is occasioned, and as it were enforced by the sins and provocations of Men. As in a Father to his Child; His comforting of it and providing for it, is his natural work, which his natural affe∣ction moves him to; But his threatning or correcting of it, is (in re∣spect of the other) his strange work, which he doth not as a Parent, but as an offended Parent. Thus punishing is God's strange work, such as he doth not as he is God, but as he is an offended God: and yet this work of his may con∣tinue for ever; as we have an Example in the fallen Angels. And I think his everlasting punishment is more plainly (as well as more fre∣quently) discovered against wicked Men, than it is against wicked Spi∣rits, in the holy Scripture. Lastly, The Death of Christ is so far from disproving our Doctrine, that it doth most strongly confirm it; For if God did punish his Son with an accursed Death, when he bare the sins of his People in this World, what wonder is it if he punish the impenitent with an everlast∣ing curse (or punishment) in the World to come? Nor did Christ dye to make an atonement for the sins of any such, as might easily be pro∣ved, if it were necessary.
R. — Such Punishment agrees not to the mercifulness of the Creator to his Creature,p. 185. to impose such a Punishment on any of them. And then he adds some places, that say, he is rich in mercy, and the like. B. Surely this would be very good news for the Devils to hear of, if it were true. But we have our Lord's words to assure us of their everlasting punishment, Matth. 25. and elsewhere, which shew my Au∣thor was mistaken, in thinking that it cannot stand with his goodness, as he is their Creator. Yet we say not that he will punish any thus, as they are Creatures, but as they are offending and rebellious Creatures. And as for his Mercy we have spoken of it before: and though it be great, yea infinite, yet it hath its proper object, and will not be acted in opposition to his truth, which tells us of everlasting punishment for the wicked, as well as of Eternal life for the Righteous. R.—Sin cannot overcome his love; where Sin abounded,p. 186. Grace abounds much more, Rom. 5.20. This declares the mercy of God to be greater than sin; if so, the grace of God is to all, even to the worst of men: for sin abounds in them most. And where sin abounds, grace, saith the Apostle, abounds much more; If so, then all their sins shall be forgiven: And if any were to suffer eternally, how doth grace abound to them, much more where sin hath abounded? Answer this if you can. B. This is a precious Proof indeed, and such as he hath shewed his chiefest strength in, and therefore he is pleased to triumph over the poor ignorant Men, that Preach up the Doctrine of Everlasting Punish∣ment, &c. as though he had a certain, and an everlasting victory over them, (as to this particular) Thus and thus the case stands, and Answer this if you can.— As brave a Challenge as any Gentleman of his Qua∣lity ever need to make to such as we: But did he not argue against his own conscience, as well as against us and our Doctrine? or could he real∣ly believe that this Proof was unanswerable? if so, we shall have cause to consider the words of Solomon, The Fool rageth, and is confident. Behold, Sir, the work is undertaken, your command with me is as good as a Law, and I will Answer you if I can. And first, I will deal with your first Assertion, that sin cannot over∣come
his love. (which is such a speech, as I have seldome met with in any Book, but yours.) If it be meant of God's faithful Servants, of humble and penitent sinners, I grant that his love will overcome (in due time) all their sins, and be magnified towards them by pardon here, and glory hereafter:Rom. 8.35. for, What shall separate them from the love of Christ? Rom. 8. But if he speak of the proud contemners of his Word and ways, and the deceitful workers of iniquity, that continue such, then though we care not to say that their sin doth overcome his love, yet we confidently affirm, that it will so provoke his wrath, as to cause him to punish them for ever in the life to come: See Col. 3.6. John 3.36. Matth. 25.46. Psal 92.7. and many other places. His second Assertion [That God's mercy is greater than sin] hath been spoken to already, and I need now to say but this about it: That it is greater than the sin of Devils, and yet Devils shall suffer for ever for their sins. (and so we may say, God's healing power is stronger and greater than Diseases, and yet Men dye by them for all that.) His third Assertion, That the grace of God is to all, even to the worst of Men; if it be meant of his saving grace, (or such mercy as ac∣companies salvation) is a gross untruth: for the Gospel tells us, that he that believeth not shall be damned, Mark 16. v. 16. (And his other, That all the sins of all Men shall be forgiven, is as loud an Error, and let him prove it a truth, if he can.) Thus much for his Vanity. His Subtilty follows, [Where sin a∣bounds grace much more abounds;Rom. 5.20. therefore the grace of God abounds to all sinners, yea to the worst, for sin abounds most in them. And if they suffer eternally, How doth grace (or mercy) abound to them?] —Yea doubtless, this is the Beast that carries the Bell, but let us pur∣sue it a little,His gross abuse of Rom. 5.20. and we shall perceive that 'tis not a pretty Creature, but a horrible deformed Monster. For I dare challenge Mr. R. and all his Brethren, yea all Mankind to shew me any one Text of Scripture, that ever was more abominably abused, more wretchedly wrested (whether by Papists, Socinians, Atheists, or any sort of Men) than this Text of St. Paul is, in this case, by Him. For when the Apostle saith, where sin did abound, grace did abound much more; he doth not mean, that God will shew himself most gracious to them that have committed the most or greatest sins; for then Pharaoh, Judas, and Jezabel should be more blessed than Moses, Joseph, and the Virgin Mary; And our Damners and Sinkers be more happy than the holy Prophets, Apostles, and Mar∣tyrs: For sin hath most abounded in them, (if we take Mr. R. his sense of the word) But the abounding there mentioned, is the abounding of
it in the sense and feeling of the sinner; that God's gracious goodness hath appeared most wonderful in the eyes of those Penitent sinners, to whom sin hath appeared most vile and hateful. That the abound∣ing of sin in that place is of this nature, the words just before will make evident, for we read thus (therein) the Law entred that the of∣fence might abound. Surely it was not given to make men abound the more in sin, or to make them more sinful, than otherwise they would be: but to make men more sensible of sin, and of the evil of it. The Law, saith that Learned Expositor upon the place, auget peccatum,Paraeus in Rom. 5.20. non efficiendo sed monstrando; It encreaseth sin (or maketh it abound) not by causing of it, but by discovering of it; and Piscator saith, the offence there is not taken properly for the offence it self, but figuratively for the knowledge of it; and makes this the sense of it, that the grace of Christ hath appeared to be more powerful to save Believers, than sin is to destroy them. Thus I have given an Answer to his Proof, and if he like it not, he may confute it if he can. R.—God is just and equal; but such an extream misery,p. 187. never to end, is not equal. B. 'Tis a sign he spent most of his strength in the last Proof, since this next is so exceeding weak. It seems he judgeth that it cannot be just with God to punish sinners eternally, and not only judgeth so but saith so too. [To suffer Torment never to end, is not equal.] But though he hath adventured to say so, yet his Word is not sufficient for it, (nor is he a fit man to judge of the equity of Gods Dispensations.) But 1. If the sin of Angels may be justly punished upon them for ever (as few besides himself will question) then may the sins of men also: for sin is as bad a thing in the one as in the other, and God is as worthy to be obeyed by men as by Angels. 2. 'Tis no wonder if guilty sinners (in a natural state) do not so easily discern the equity of this severe Dispensation, 'tis the nature of sin to blind the eyes of its followers, nor can we fully know the evil and vileness of sin, unless we could fully apprehend the Excellency of that God against whom it is committed. 3. Yet we have seen so much as may satisfie a sober Christian in the case, in the latter end of the first Chapter of this Book, wherefore I shall not need to say any more of the equity of such punishment, unless my Author shall Answer what is said therein.
p. 188.R.— It is no profit or pleasure to God to have any man suffer endless Torments; He hath no pleasure in the death of any, Ezek. 18. much less can it be any pleasure to him for any so to suffer. Hosea 6.6 He is said to desire Mercy and not Sacrifice: if so, he desires none should be sacrificed in a torment never to end. God abhors cruelty.— B. This kind of Reasoning is such as may well become a man of his Principles, and suits so fully to his blessed design, and to what he had said in other places, that we need not doubt but he was guided (here∣in) by the self same Spirit. The former part of it contains these two Propositions. 1. That it is no profit to God to have any man suffer endless punishments. 2. That it is no pleasure to him.— For the first I say thus: That if that would prove that God will not have any man suffer for ever, at the same rate of Reasoning he might prove, that none of the wicked Angels shall suffer for ever. For cer∣tainly God is no more profited by their sufferings, than by the suffer∣ings of sinful men; and yet Christians will believe that the wicked An∣gels shall suffer for ever, and I have shewed some reason why they should believe so. It was no profit to God to make the world (for what need could he have of it who had All-sufficiency in himself?) and yet Mr. R. doth grant that God hath made it: He grants also that God will make his Saints happy and glorious in Heaven, and yet (I believe) he is not so weak as to imagine, that God hath any need of their Happiness and Glory: nor had he any need of the Death of his enemies in this world, and therefore could not be profited by their deaths, and yet he hath brought them to death very often, and in the most remarkable manner. His Second Proposition is this: That 'tis no pleasure to God to pu∣nish any man (or any wicked man) for ever— If he mean 'tis no such pleasure to him, as 'tis to have them obey him, or that he is not so pleased with their misery as he is with their obedience, or with their happiness in case they were obedient; Then we may grant it without wrong to our cause. But if he mean, that God's pleasure is not in it, in any sense, then I deny it: for it is the good pleasure of his will to punish the impenitent as surely as it is to give the Kingdom of Heaven to his Saints. They shall suffer everlasting punishment, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it:Matth. 25.46. and since they suffer it not besides the good pleasure of his Will, or contrary to it, they suffer it with his Will,
or agreeable to it. The Text of Ezekiel ch. 18.23. runs thus: Have I any pleasure that the wicked should dye (or be damned) and not that he should return from his ways and live? And so the sense is clear against him, more than for him; and he hath no way to make it appear to be for him, but only to mention the first part of the verse, without the second, wherein he acts like you know whom, (See Matth. 4.6. compared with Psal. 91.11.) take the words together as they lye, Have I any pleasure that the wicked should die, and not that he return, &c. and then it is as much as if he had said, I take more pleasure to have them turn and be saved, than to have them go on in sin and be damned: But if they will not turn, they shall not be saved, nor escape damnation, and therefore, Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye dye,Ezek. 33.11. saith the Lord in the same Book, plainly shewing us, that they must dye (or be damned) if they go on still in their Trespasses and never turn. But the latter part of this Proof is (if possible) more strange than the former, viz. — God desires Mercy and not Sacrifice, therefore he desires not that any should be sacrificed in a punishment never to end.— As for his Expression of mens being Sacrificed in punishment for ever, I do not well approve of it, and could easily prove it to be very unfit; for the punishment of the wicked is not a Sacrifice for their sins, since it makes no atonement for them (either Typically or Really) where∣fore instead of that, he might more fitly draw his Conclusion thus: Therefore he desires not that any should suffer punishment for ever. Now observe, Reader, the strength of this Argument: God desires mercy and not Sacrifice, therefore he will not punish any man eternally. How could he speak more at random if he had striven to do it? for This is meant of his Preceptive will, namely that he values obedience in the general, or the exercise of Mercy and works of Love, (in particular) more than Sacrifices at the hands of his people, for the particle there used is not an absolute Negative, but a Comparative only, as in the Text before, Ezek. 18.23.Vid. Rivet. in Hos. 6.6. where the Particle [not] doth not deny his pleasure to punish, but compares his will of punishing with his will of returning, and of their Salvation in case they turn in Truth, and prefers the latter before the former. Now if we do but state the matter thus, and infer the conclusion according to the sense of the Text, it will need little or nothing more to be said for its confutation: for who sees not the vanity of this Argument—God regards the ex∣ercise of Charity and Works of mercy, more than Sacrifices, there∣fore none shall be punished for ever, &c. If he will take leave to infer thus, I will give him leave to make the same conclusion from the
History of Job's Cattel, or the fiery Tails of Sampsons Foxes. He concludes this Proof with a very great truth [That God abhors cruel∣ty] but 'tis such a Truth as little concerns either his design it self, or the things that he had said immediately before, but is brought in by the head and shoulders, and is forced to stand in this improper place by the meer violence of his Resolute Pen. If he would make it serve his turn, he must (of necessity) make it appear, that God cannot punish an impenitent sinner everlastingly without being cruel; which, I am confident, he cannot do, and do verily hope he will not undertake to do. And if he think so, I might easily subdue his error, if it be not maintained by an invincible per∣verseness, and that by telling him wherein the cruelty of a punishment consisteth; to wit, not in the duration of it, or degree of it, but in the nature and merit of it. As first, when the person punished is not fit to bear the punishment, as if a man should punish the perverseness of a child with a Rack, instead of a Rod; or as if he should disown and disinherit him for some smaller acts of disobedience to him. This were cruelty, because the punishment in the one is of such a nature as is unfit for the child to bear; and in the other, because 'tis such as is not due for such an offence, nor deserved by it, (as it respects man) (And therefore our honest Professors, that revile and reproach us be∣hind our backs for preaching God's word, and taking their Tythes, and make lyes of us, for telling them the sad Truths that concern them, are like enough to be indicted for cruelty, when the Judge of the world shall come; for though these things through his good Provi∣dence, do not hurt us much, yet they are things that are not deserved upon the former accounts, and therefore are no better than cruelties in the eyes of him whose we are, and whom we serve.) And on the other side, though a punishment be never so great and grievous, yet if it be such as the person punished doth deserve for his offence, it is not cruelty but justice. That wretched Villain Ravilliack, that murthered that Renouned King of France in his Coach (King Henry the IVth, if I mistake not) was afterwards taken and Tormen∣ted to death in a fearful manner, yet I believe there were few honest men that ever accused his Judge of cruelty, for condemning him to such a death, because (they knew) he had well deserved it, by the horrid crime he had committed. And now having taken so much pains to make good his bad cause, in the nineteen Proofs that we have seen, there is no doubt but he will make the best use he can of his strength and skill, in his 20th.
and last Proof: (as the Candle gives a great light a little before it goes out.) And behold what it is. R.—'Tis not for the glory of God to impose such a Punishment upon any man:p. 189. for glory lieth not in imposing great and ter∣rible Punishment, but in mercy and forgiveness, Exod. 34.6, 7. But by his leave, I judge otherwise, and do not doubt but it is for his glory, to impose great Punishment upon the wicked, namely for the glory of his Justice (which he doth not so much as pretend to disprove, unless it be by telling us, that glory consisteth in mercy and forgiveness; for which he alledgeth Exod. 34.6, 7. And how vain all this wisdome is, a few Lines may discover, for certainly God's glory doth not lye only in mercy and forgiveness, for he was glorified upon his greatest Enemies, even hard-hearted Pharaoh himself;Rom. 9.17. yet he was not glorified in a way of mercy upon him, but in a way of vengeance and severity, and the same may be said of the Devils; And in that Text in Exodus, as the Lord proclaims himself to be merciful and gracious, so one that will by no means clear the guilty, or wicked, so remaining: And the not clearing of them, is not an act of mercy, my Author himself being Judge.) Then he adds thus— R. — Proverbs 10.12. 'Tis said, Love covereth all sins.— But what of that? for it doth not mean that God's love will cover or forgive all Men's sins, (penitent or impenitent) no sure, the Pro∣phet tells us of some,Esay 27.11. That he that made them will not have mercy upon them. 'Tis meant therefore of the love of Men, one towards another. Love (so far as it prevails) will cause a Man to cover, to wit, to over∣look, and pass by the sins of his Brethren against him,vid. Synopsin crit. in Pro. 10.12. so far as with a good conscience he may. But he proceeds— R.— God doth all things for his glory,p. 190. and it is more for his glory to save all men, than to save a few.— In what sense we hold that [few] shall be saved, hath already been shewed: To wit, comparatively with them that dye in their sins, and perish; for otherwise, &c. Rev. 7.9. the number of them that are saved is a great number: Now, if Mr. R. supposeth, that 'tis more for God's glory to
save all Men, than to save some only, he may enjoy his Opinion, but ought not to impose it upon us, as an undoubted truth, without a suffi∣cient proof, which he hath not been pleas'd to give us. The Apostle speaks (all in a Verse) of them that are saved,1 Cor. 1.18. and of them that per∣ish. Surely then God doth not save all, (for we read of some that perish) but he doth what is most for his glory, saith Mr. R. himself. Therefore it is not most for his glory to save all (or to save the Impeni∣tent.) And if it were most for his glory to save all Men, why would it not be most for his glory to save all the Angels too, for is not their na∣ture as noble, and their salvation as precious as Man's? And yet he will not save the wicked Angels, (as was proved) therefore it appears he did not count it most for his glory so to do. And if I should say, that the saving of some only (only the Penitent and Returning sinners; I speak of them that are of years) tends most to the glory of God's mercy, Mr. R. may not honestly deny it: for his just severity and vengeance upon some sets off his mercy towards o∣thers. The blackness of darkness reserved for the wicked, makes the Inheritance of the Saints in Light appear the more glorious, and the mercy that brings them to it, by so much the more admirable. And having seen what he cannot do, (viz. that he cannot make good what he hath undertaken) he tells us (at last) what he cannot think. — p. 190. lin. 19. R.—I cannot admit to think any thing that is cruel, to be in God. B. This his disability he takes, doubtless, for his perfection: and I (for my part) shall readily grant it to be so: for he must needs be very weak, or very wicked, that can be perswaded to think any such thing: And I verily believe he never heard any of those Divines that he so much undervalues, preach or speak any thing that sounded that way: I shall add only these two particulars concerning it. 1. That God is not cruel in punishing the impenitent for ever, since they are worthy of such punishment (as before.) 2. That though there is nothing of cruelty belonging to the nature of God, yet there is of Justice, and Vengeance and Severity against sin. Consider the Example of the fallen Angels, and the sufferings of Christ. And this severity is so far from being inconsistent with his goodness, that St. Paul joyns them both together: Rom. 11.22. Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God, &c. And if our Author shall think his
severity to be cruelty, we can tell him of a Day wherein he shall have light enough to see his folly. Thus (Reader) I have led thee (and I hope safely) through the ma∣nifold dark Maze's, and crooked Labyrinths of Mr. R. his new-found Wilderness; and know not what I should need to say more unto him, unless it be to admonish him of his design, and to bespeak him in the words of that precious Man of God, Bishop Jewel, (to that Pestilent Popeling Mr. Harding) at the end of his Defence.— [Deceive not the simple, they are bought with a Price;Bish Jewel. they are the People of God, for whom Christ hath shed his Blood. Your shifts are miserable, you trouble your self, as a Bird in the Lime; the more you strive, the faster you cleave: you cannot bridle the Seas, you can∣not blind the Sun-beams: Give place to the glory of God: whether you will or no, the Truth will prevail.] And now (Good Reader) having given thee the Proof of this Do∣ctrine, and the Defence of it, against Mr. Richardson's violence, and wrath; I would humbly invite thee to ponder a little upon it to thy profit: To which purpose, I shall endeavour to assist thee, in the Uses and Improvement of it; which is the next particular to be spoken to, (and indeed the chiefest of all.) CHAP. IV. SECT. I. Containing some Uses of the Doctrine aforesaid. SInce Eternal Damnation is not a Dream,Ʋse 1. For In∣formation of the World's Vanity. since Everlasting Fire is not a Fancy, but a Real thing; Then (in the first place) let us hence be informed of the vanity of all Worldly things, yea of the best and bravest of them: Indeed the Men of the World will set their hearts upon it, let us say what we can (from Reason or Scripture) to the con∣trary; And if you tell them they have more need of Grace than Gold, or of a good Sermon, than of a Barrel of good Beer, they cannot un∣derstand how it can be; Their earthly sensual wisdome is not able to apprehend it to any purpose, (and the most of them will not be wise till 'tis too late.) But however they value earthly things, because they are most suit∣able
to their earthly minds, yet assuredly they have not that goodness in them which they expect to find, at least not that which can be wor∣thy of the principal affection and esteem of their hearts: and that part∣ly because of that little good that they are able to do for them in this life, for they cannot give any sound content to an Immortal Soul. (That which is capable of God can never be filled with the Creature.) Where is the Man that ever was satisfied with the greatest Riches, that had not something better than his Riches? and the like may be said in other things. And as they cannot content the Soul, so they cannot secure the Body neither: If God do not more for the wealthiest Man than all his Wealth can do, he will fall into mischief every moment. Yea, it can∣not procure him one good Night's rest,Dan. 6.18. when he hath most need of it: Though Darius kept his Money, and his Kingdom too, yet it is said, his sleep went from him. But there is a greater vanity than all this; for as the greatest of this World's good cannot content a Man sufficiently in prosperity, nor comfort him sufficiently in adversity, so it cannot secure him from Hell, or save him from Everlasting Burnings: It cannot work his deliverance from it, nor prove his deliverance from it: The former is plain, and needs no proof: Though the Papists will sell us Pardons for Money, yet they cannot assure us, that the one or the other can secure us from Hell. And the other is no less plain: for, we read expresly, of a Rich man in Hell, Luke 16. and we find in Job, that God regardeth the Rich no more than the Poor. If he be ungodly, and dye so, he shall not come to Heaven, because he had the World at will. And if he go to Hell, what will all his former comforts be to him, or how will the Remembrance of them comfort him? What will it be to live in ease for a time, if afterwards they live in Torment for ever? What will it be to have Honour for a while, if afterwards they suffer Everlasting contempt? What will it be to be clothed with Silk or Silver, and to fare deliciously every Day, if afterwards they be clothed with Hellish flames, and drink of the Cup of God's fiery Indignation? In a word, what will it be to enjoy the World, and miss of Heaven, or in our Saviour's phrase, to gain the whole World, and lose their Souls? Lord, put me not off with earthly enjoyments, let not any thing be my portion that may consist with thy displeasure. 2d. Informat. of the vileness of sin.A second Branch of Information, which will naturally spring from the Doctrine aforesaid, will be this, viz. Concerning the vile nature of Sin: That's almost the only thing that sinners are wont to make light of; yea, many of them make but a mock at it: And though the wise
Man tells us, that they are but Fools that do so;Pro. 14.9. Yet (alas) how many such Fools are to be found, and that too, amongst those that are counted good, honest, understanding Men: What if they (never so grosly) neg∣lect and forget the God that made them, what if they slight his holy Commandments, and turn away their Ears (never so frequently) from hearing his Law?Pro. 28.9. (and so run the hazard of having their Prayers reje∣cted) What if they are so proud that they care not for God, nor value a sound Sermon half so much for the bettering of their Souls, as they do the smallest piece of a rotten Dunghill, for the bettering of their Lands: In a word, what if they rail at us for desiring to make them better Christians than they care to be, spight at their Neighbours, and defraud and oppress their poor Brethren, and do the Devil any service in the World, that may but please or profit themselves, make their Purses heavier, and their Hearts lighter, &c. Yet, I say, they can make a small matter of it, and can see no great harm in it, or at least no such great harm, (in any of these things) but that they can easily dispense with it, for the attaining of those great ends which they pro∣pose unto themselves therein: But, Reader, if these Men could but look beyond the Grave, and see what is doing in the other World, a∣mong the Souls of such ungodly ones as themselves; If they could but see (in a lively and sensible way) how many are now Damned for those sins, which they are so much in love with, and be able to apprehend what sad thoughts those miserable Souls now have of their delightful∣lest, gainfullest wickednesses, which have laid them under Eternal ven∣geance; Then, believe me, they would judge otherwise of these things, than now they do. I grant indeed, there are other means whereby to see the evil of sin, as namely, the clear Glass of God's Sacred Laws, and the Red Glass of Christ's Bloud and Sufferings, &c. These doubt∣less may be sufficient to shew sin in its proper Colours, to a spiritual eye, (and will be confessed to be so, by all sorts, but blockish Papists, and blasphemous Socinians.) But this Point that I am now upon, might convince the blindest Worldling of it, in case he would truly believe and consider it; For he must needs grant, there is much evil in that which the Righteous God will punish with Everlasting Torment: How vile and hateful, how hainous and horrible must that be, which the God of all Goodness and Mercy will shew his Eternal Displeasure a∣gainst? How sad a work must that be which hath such a Death for its wages, as sin hath, yea all sin;Rom. 6. ult. For the Apostle speaks of sin in gene∣ral, as sin, and not of such, or such a sin in particular, in Vers. 23. As hath been excellently cleared by our Protestant Worthies against the
Romanists,Ames. Anti. Bel. Cham. T. 3. lib. 6. cap. 12. though the Mercy of God delivers them that turn unto him. And so it may discover the madness of ungodly sinners, that walk in the way to everlasting misery, but this will afford matter enough for another Section. CHAP. IV. SECT. II. Discovering the horrible madness of wicked men, in adven∣turing upon this dreadfullest Misery. Inform. 3d. of the madness of the wicked, &c.FRom hence also we may fitly inform our selves of the monstrous madness of wilful and resolute sinners, that will run the hazard of so great misery for the fulfilling of their sinful lusts and humors in this present world. Solomon often calls such men Fools, and St. Paul stiles them unreasonable men.2 Thess. 3.2. And certainly their folly and unreasonable∣ness appear in nothing more than in their venturing of their Immortal Souls in the ways of Destruction: they are apt enough to fear Plagues and Famines, Bonds and Imprisonments, or any ordinary Calamities; yea, they are afraid to obey the Commands of their God and their Consciences, lest they should run into some inconveniences by so do∣ing, and scarce dare to come to the place of Gods publick worship and service (in a constant and diligent manner) lest some Factious Atheists should call them fools for their pains. Psal. 9.17. Psal. 145.20.But as for the everlasting punishment that is threatned against them (and which they cannot possibly escape while they are followers of wickedness) these they have little fear of, they dread not the dread∣fullest dangers, and if (in love to their Souls) we warn them of it, and desire them to take heed in time, and turn from their evil ways before it be too late, they will thank us for nothing (as 'tis commonly said) and advise us to take care of our selves, and not to trouble our selves with them. But if they did but know aright the greatness of that misery that the damned shall endure, they would shun the ways that lead to it, and not walk in any way of wickedness for the gaining of all the wealth on earth, yea, they would be as loth to continue in a
state of sin, as to stay in a house that is on fire over their heads: That therefore I shall endeavour, in the next place to discover. And here I must needs say with the Apostle, who is sufficient for these things? who can fathom the depth of the Damneds sorrows? what heart can conceive them, or what words can express them? for who knoweth the power of God's wrath, or how miserable it can make the enemies of his holiness? But though we cannot fully set forth the Terror of the Lord upon them, yet we may soon see so much of it as may make it appear to be most exceedingly terrible: as he that can∣not sound the depth of the Sea, yet he may quickly find that 'tis very deep. I shall now endeavour to demonstrate (with all convenient brevity) the dreadfulness of the Damnation and punishment that the wicked that live and dye such, shall surely undergo.The extreme misery of the wicked in Hell, discovered. I shall not now speak of the perpetuity of it, (having spoken much of it before, and almost as much as need to be spoken on that subject, and much more (I am sure) than Mr. Richardson, or any of his Abetters will ever be able to answer in this world, or the world to come) but rather of the extremity of it, and that in Two generals, which will admit of a large considera∣tion; 1. The Happiness and comfort that they shall miss of or lose. 2. The miseries, pains and positive sorrows that they shall sustain and lye under. 1.1. In their Ba∣nishment from Christ. They shall be banished from the Blessed Presence of the Lord Jesus Christ. In their day they would not be commanded by him, but in His day, they shall be commmanded from him. He himself will say unto them depart from me, ye workers of iniquity;Matth 7.21. and oh what a misery will that be unto them! It was grievous to them to be banished from their friends in the world, to be shut up close in a Prison or Pest-house from the comfort and Society of their old acquaintance, &c. But how grie∣vous will it be to be banished from Christ, and be separated (ever∣lastingly) from all the comforts of his Presence and Favour? This, this will be a bitter thing indeed, and more dreadful than a Thousand Deaths: for Consider, O Christian,Rev. 25.23. 'tis He that is the Glory of Heaven, the Eternal Light of that City of God; 'tis He that is the Angels Joy, and at whose Birth they sang an Hymn of Praise: a little of His Divine Consolations have revived the drooping Spirits of his Servants, have Crowned their Souls with blessed Peace, and turned the Shadow of Death into the Morning, as the Prophet elegantly ex∣presseth himself. How bravely did the Holy Martyrs Triumph over
the saddest and sharpest of humane miseries, filling their mouths with Glorious Praises when they were ready to be filled with Smoke and Flames, and all through the sense of their interest in Christ, and the lively hopes of happiness with him after this life ended. And in many others of later times, The joy of their Lord hath made them more than Conquerers over all the fears and sorrows of Death [Millions of Praises to the Lord our God, let Heaven and Earth praise Him; for he hath remembred us in our low estate, and hath redeemed us to himself, said that worthy manMr. Janway. a little before he gave up the Ghost.] But now those Consolations of Christ which his Saints partake of in Heaven, are doubtless far beyond all that they were sensible of here on Earth,Phil. 1.21. for to be with him (there) is far better, as St Paul assures us; and yet these Consolations shall be no comfort to them that dye in their sins, for they shall have nothing to do with them, he will say unto them,Matth. 25.4. Depart from me, ye cursed. And O how cursed will their case then be, and how miserable will they then account themselves: for they will then lose all other comforts with him, which is the next thing to be spoken to. 2 In their loss of all other comforts.Secondly, the wicked in the world to come shall lose all other com∣forts too: whatsoever here they took comfort in, shall then be taken from them. Now they make a good shift without spiritual Consola∣tions, and though they seldom think of Christ and his Kingdom with any seriousness, yet the thoughts of present enjoyments, delight their Souls, and Sensual Contentments do supply the want of Spiritual ones unto them. But if they come to Hell, (as they needs must, if they go on still in their sins,) they will miss of all their Sensual enjoyments. But to come to some particulars. 1. Wealth and Honour.1. They will lose their worldly wealth and honour; they that mind∣ed their mony more than Heaven, shall lose both Heaven and money too: Their Riches will not profit (saith the Scripture) in the day of wrath, the heat of that day will melt their best coin, for all things of this inferior world shall be dissolved and burnt up.2 Pet. 3.10. They shall see all their pleasant things in flames, before themselves are cast into the fiery-lake: How speedily will their stately Buildings, curious Gardens, costly Clothes, and richest Jewels then be spoiled and destroyed for ever? Their meat and drink will also be denyed unto them, because they de∣spised the Bread of Life, and wilfully starved their precious Souls, and desired not (in truth of heart) the sincere milk of the Word, that they might grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2. Their Minds and Memories and Con∣sciences will have many foul sins to feed on, but their mouths will have
no fine bits to feed on: for whatsoever Sensual good may be expected in the Turks Airy Paradise, 'tis sure there is no such thing to be hoped for in the Devils fiery prison. Their honours also will be then at an end, since they must arise to shame and everlasting contempt.Dan 12.2. 2. Loss of rest and ease. 2. The Damned will lose all bodily rest and ease and sleep: The place of Torment they must be cast into, will admit of no refreshment at all: They that wearied others with their wickedness before, will then be wearied with it themselves; and though they could sleep (very soundly) in God's house of Prayer, yet they shall not sleep so much as one wink in his house of punishment: That saddest word [Go ye cursed] will keep them awake for evermore. They shall lose also all their carnal Mirth and Worldly Joy:3. Mirth. Here they had it (many of them) in abundance, their hearts were light when their Consciences were loaded with guilt; And though they said unto God Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, yet the Pipers and Singers were more welcome to them,Job 21. they take plea∣sure in the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoyce at the sound thereof: yea, rather than want Mirth, they will laugh at Religion, and make Do∣ctrine and Use the matter of their Sport. But then these things will be at an end, the Candle of the wicked will be put out: They that would not take up Religion, nor chuse God's Fear lest it should make them dull and melancholy, shall then be merry no more; for the Matter of their Mirth (we have seen) will then be taken from them, and God will distribute Sorrows in his Anger: yea, their own eyes shall see their destruction,Job 21.17.20. and they shall drink of the Wrath of the Almighty, as it is set forth in that Chapter. But how shall they live, may some say, in such a condition? For will not so much misery break their hearts, and will not life fail when it hath no means to support it, no food nor sleep, &c. I Answer, No, that may not be imagined: They must needs live still, because God will not suffer them to dye; they that lived on earth, as though they had thought their Souls were mortal, shall in Hell find their bodies to be immortal, they shall be raised incorruptible:1 Cor. 15. and what if they want the natural means of Life, as food and sleep, yet the princi∣pal cause of Life will still remain, even the will and pleasure of the Almighty: But I shall not say any thing more of this point here, having spoke unto it already, and maintained it against the wisest of Mr. R's oppositions. But, say some, the Saints themselves must part with their worldly comforts at last, as well as the ungodly: the universal flames will
burn up their dwellings, &c. as surely as the dwellings of the wicked.— True indeed, But though they must part with these things, yet they shall be no losers thereby, because they shall have better instead of them. Instead of Natural delights they shall have Spiritual, in∣stead of the weak comforts of the creatures, they shall have the strong consolations of God; instead of Temporal habitations on Earth, they shall have eternal Mansions in their Fathers house, Joh. 14.2. instead of Food and Physick,Rev. 21.4. they shall have perfect and perpetual health and ease, and the joy of their Lord shall be their strength: in∣stead of Psalms and Thanksgivings in the Churches, they shall have the Hallelujahs of Heaven, the High Praises of their God, and the full fruition of their Fathers love.—But the wicked in Hell shall have none of these things: their cursed state will exclude all Blessednesses, as 'tis evident, and needs not now be proved by me. 4. Peace.4. They shall lose all their peace which before they had; for though there be no peace to the wicked, as the Prophet saith, that is, no true, sound, well-grounded peace, that may deserve to be called peace; yet a kind of peace they have in their sins, yea some kind of peace from their sins, as from their ignorance, and hardness of Heart: but in hell their peace will leave them, and they will have as little quiet∣ness as before they had Religion and Conscientiousness. If Doctrine and Application can disturb them in some measure, Damnation and Torment will do it much more. 5. Hopes.5. They will then lose their hopes also; wicked men, as I said be∣fore, are unreasonable men, and therefore will hope for that which God hath not promised them; the Word doth not promise Heaven unto them otherwise than in case of true Repentance and Conversion, but they will hope to come thither, though they are yet in love with those sins that they should repent of. I believe there are few of them but have a strange hope to be happy at last, though destruction and misery are in their ways. (And therefore they will not be at the pains of being seriously Religious, because they hope to do well enough without so much ado) But those of them that dye such as they have lived, and so come to Hell, will fail of what they hoped for, and lose all the hopes of it. The hope of unjust men perisheth, Prov. 11.Prov. 11.7. Job 27.9. And Job in like manner —What is the hope of the Hypo∣crite when God taketh away his Soul? And if his hope shall perish when God takes his Soul from his Body, how far must he be from all hope, when he casteth him Body and Soul into Hell? The hope of
the Righteous shall be gladness, but the hope of the wicked shall be shame and confusion. A Continuation of the Positive part of the Damneds misery, HAving spoken of the Privative part of the Damneds misery,Positive Mi∣sery. or the losses they shall sustain, I shall now Treat, with God's Assistance, of the Positive misery that they shall suffer: And first,Bodily Pain. they shall suffer extream pain in their Bodies. The extremity of it is plainly intimated in this, that they shall go into everlasting fire, Matth. 25.41. Fire we know is the most Tormenting creature, the pains that are caused by it are most sharp of any, and therefore the Papists have so much delight to torture the Hereticks, as they call them, by Burning, and to oppose their obstinacy with Faggot-Arguments; And doubtless if they had not had a good God and a good Cause on their side, they could not possibly have withstood them. A small fire can fill a man with pains intolerable, though no more but one finger be scorched with it. A man would not be content to live one year in a burning Brick Kiln, if he might gain the wealth of a hundred Kingdoms, and be sure to enjoy it a hun∣dred years. And we may easily assure our selves that Hell fire will be more grievous than any other for these following Reasons. 1. Because it is such as is prepared on purpose for punishment,Hell-fire worse than any other. and the product of God's fiercest wrath, and therefore must needs be of a more tormenting nature than our ordinary fire, which is the effect of his gracious Providence, and was made for the help and comfort of mankind. 2. Because the Saints themselves may be afflicted with other fire, (and the greatest of them have been so) but Hell fire is proper and peculiar to the wicked; and sure that evil must needs be worser which is proper to the enemies of God, than that which his Ser∣vants may be afflicted with. To which I may add this also, that it is such a fire as the evil Angels shall suffer in,Matth. 25.41. [prepared for the Devil and his Angels.] If any shall say, perhaps Hell-fire is not a real corporeal Fire, but somewhat else figuratively expressed by the name of fire: I answer, 'Tis lawful to suppose that it is real fire, and the absurdities that my
Author would fasten upon that Opinion, are nothing but the irregula∣rities of his own imaginations, as you may see in that Chapter, where I have examined them. And if the word Fire were figurative, it would be no matter of relief to the Damned's miseries, but rather an aggravation of them: For those things that are figuratively expressed in Scripture, do commonly exceed those things by which they are ex∣pressed; As God, who is called a Father, for his love to his People, is more loving than any earthly Father, and Heaven, which is called Pa∣radise, is more glorious and blessed than ever Paradise was. Names of Hell.And as Hell is called Fire absolutely in that Text, so it is called else∣where, a Furnace of Fire, (a terrible word indeed) and (which is more terrible) a Lake that burneth with Fire and Brimstone. O how dread∣ful must that place and state be supposed to be, which is set forth unto us by such dreadful names in holy Scripture! See Matth. 13.41, 42. Revel. 21.8. So (to name no more) it is called a Prison. As Heaven is set out by things delightful, so Hell is set out by that which is distastful and loath∣some, amongst which a Prison is one, and Hell is called so, in 1 Peter 3.19. And it is the worst of Prisons, if we consider the properties of it. A Prison.1. It is a dark Prison. Darkness is naturally an uncomfortable thing: They that fear nothing in the light, yet are apt to be afraid of every thing when they are alone in the dark. Paul and his Companions had but an unpleasant sailing, when neither Sun, nor Moon, nor Stars ap∣peared to them for several Days together. And the Egyptians were little less than astonished at that Plague of thick Darkness that was upon them for three Days time,Exod. 10. they were in such an amazement at it, that they rose not from their places all that time: And if God should take away the Sun, or command it to with hold its Beams and Light, we should take little pleasure in living upon the Earth: But the Darkness of Hell is worse than all this;Jude 13. The blackness of darkness for ever. 2. It is a fast Prison, such as they that are once in, shall never be able to get out of: The Doors of it are shut upon them by the Justice, Truth and Power of the Almighty. 3. It is a tormenting Prison: Other Prisons are places where the Malefactors are reserved for Punishment, but may have some ease and comforts during their aboad therein; But Hell-Prison is the place of Punishment, where the wrath of God is executed continually upon his Enemies: I say continually, for they shall be punished with an everlasting (and therefore an ever-continuing) destruction, 2 Thess. 1.8, 9.
The Doctrines of the Holy God were grievous to them, though they heard of them but now and then; What intolerable grief may the displeasure of God cause in them, when they lye under it continu∣ally? And the more dreadful will this Prison be to the Slaves of Satan, be∣cause it will be (if I may so call it) a convincing Prison unto them: Therein they shall be made to see their deserts, as well as to feel their Punishment. Though they shall have no light of comfort there, yet they shall have a light of conviction. The Lord Jesus (at the Day of Judgment) shall come from Heaven to convince all the ungodly of all their ungodly deeds: And doubtless,Jude 14.15. that conviction will remain upon them when they are in Hell. They will then be able to know, what it was that they are sent thither for, and that they are so miserable, not meerly for God's good plea∣sure, but for their own evil doings; for obeying the Devil more than God, for chusing the ways of wickedness before his holy pleasant Paths, for rejecting the counsels of his Word, and refusing to return, that they might live; They will then be able enough to understand, that it was their loving of Darkness (or Ignorance) better than Light, that made Christ say unto them, I know you not, and to cast them into that black∣ness of Darkness eternally: Their mischievous designs and spightful dealings that hath laid them under the Vengeance of God, and the ma∣lice of the Devil; their mocking at Religion, and laughing at Reproofs, that hath moved God to laugh at their Calamity, and mock at all their Woes and Cries: Their Heathenish liberty on God's Holy-day, that hath made them to be bound in those Chains of Damnation; The Pride and Profaneness, and Unconscionableness of their Hearts, the cruelty and injustice of their hands, the Deceit, Hypocrisie and Baseness of their Tongues, with all their witty fine-mouth'd Railings, that brought them to that place of Torment, and made their Bloud and Bones so Hot in that everlasting fiery Prison. — I might add more of their Bodies misery, but I shall pass to that which is greater, the miseries of their Souls; for as they were most in sin, so they will be also most in Punish∣ment. If a Man were never so full of pain in his Body,The misery of their Souls. yet if his Soul have some rest and comfort, he is very far from perfect misery: But alas, it will not be so with the damned in Hell, their Souls will be as far from ease as their Bodies: for they will be afflicted perpetually with all sorts of tormenting passions; and that, 1. By sorrow, (in the saddest sense) our Blessed Lord,1. By sorrow. when he stood
in the place of sinners, had great experience of sorrow, he was a Man of sorrows,Esay 53. and acquainted with griefs, and said, that his Soul was ex∣ceeding sorrowful, Matth. 26.28. O what sorrows then may we think will fall upon the Souls of the wicked in Hell! If the Soul of that Holy One were so afflicted, when he stood in the room of others, what will be the case of them that must bear their own sins, and answer the de∣mands of Justice themselves?Psal 32.10. The Psalmist tells us, that many sorrows shall be to the wicked, and as it is sometimes verified here in this World, so certainly it will be most eminently fulfilled in the World to come; How merry soever they may be on Earth, our Lord assures us, that they will be weeping and wailing,Matth. 8.12. when they come to Hell: And how happy would they think themselves to be, if they might come out of Punishment, when they have wept as many Tears, as there be Drops in the Ocean. 2. By shame.Secondly, By shame: The boldest sinner of them all will then be a∣shamed, when his eyes are open to see his sins, and God's Majesty a∣gainst whom they were committed, with all the shameful aggravating circumstances of them: How will they be confounded to see the Judge of the World set them on his left hand, (in the sight of Men and An∣gels) and assign them their Portion amongst unclean Spirits. And sure∣ly their confusion in Hell, will not be less than that confusion that they suffered before they were there. That punishment to which they are judged, cannot be less than that which they suffered, while they were brought forth to be judged: They that gloried in their shame, (and made their Boast of their sins) in the Day of God's patience, will not do so in the Day of his Wrath. 3. By rage.Thirdly, They will be afflicted in their Souls by fury and rage; these passions they were often tormented with on Earth upon small oc∣casions, yea many times upon no just occasion at all: If a Man did but speak against the sins that they love, yea if he did but admonish them soberly in private, and entreat them for the love of Jesus to forsake those ways which his Soul hateth, presently what a rage are they in? and how mightily do storms of wrath arise in their Breasts? and if they could kill them with a wish, or burn them in their Beds with a fierce and fiery word, they were likely to live but a few Hours longer: If they have lost but a little of their estates, or but so much as missed of a good Bargain, they are ready to fret beyond measure at it. But what will it be to lose their Souls and Heaven, and endure the pains of Hell, for the love of their foolish Lusts on Earth, what unspeakable vexation will this be unto them; when they have nothing at all to make
up the loss, to asswage their pain, or abate their misery in any respect. And thus our Saviour assures us, the wicked will have as weeping, so gnashing of teeth too, when they shall see Abraham, Isaac,Matth. 8.11, 12. and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven, and they themselves shut out. Fourthly, In Hell they will be tormented by Desperation.4. Despair. This is a fearful thing indeed, and almost the only thing that wicked Men are much afraid of: When we labour to beat down their false hopes of salvation, and tell them they cannot be saved without that holiness that they yet hate, they have no more compendious way to make our Ser∣mons odious, than to report that we Preach Men into Despair: But if they dye as they lived, and so come to Hell, the thing they so much feared will come upon them, there will be an absolute, total and ever∣lasting desperation, Their hope shall perish, Pro. 11.7. They will be no more able to hope for any comfort, than to annihilate the Heavens; And how bitter this will be, who can tell? for verily Desperation is a Hell it self, said (one, who I hope is in Heaven) Francis Spira. Fifthly, Their Souls will be exceedingly miserable,5. Conscience accusing. through the re∣bukes and accusations of their own Consciences: They do sometimes accuse them on Earth, (or else our reproofs of their sins would not so greatly offend them) how much more will they do so in Hell, when they are throughly awakened and enlightened, and quickned by the wrath of their Judge? for then they will have nothing to do, but to testifie against them, and torment the sinners for not obeying them be∣fore. A wounded spirit (or conscience) who can bear, said Solomon; and yet the wounds of the Spirit, and troubles of the Conscience, do sometimes tend to the Health and Salvation of the Soul, (through the help of the Spirit of God) how intolerable then must the state of the Damned be, whose wounds of Conscience will never be healed, who will ever be tormented with its ragings and rebukes? And, O how much matter of accusation and rebuke will it then have against them! How will conscience work, 1. When they think of the excellency and eternity of that blessedness they have lost, and how they have lost it for sin and vanity, and those things that perished in the using, &c. 2. When they think with themselves how fair they were (many of them) for Heaven; how highly they were exalted in Gospel privi∣ledges, having the Word of Life and Salvation, and the Ministry of it among them, which if they had improved, as they might and ought to have done, they might have been as those Saints, whose glory they be∣hold with so much envy and astonishment.
3ly, When they remember how much time, and Golden opportuni∣ties they had to consider of their ways, and seek that grace and mercy that would save them, which they trifled away, as nothing worth. 4ly, When they remember how often they were perswaded to return, and how often they were convinced of the evil of their ways, of the necessity of turning; and yet (in spight of all) would go on still in their trespasses: O that sinners would consider of this, when they still enjoy the instructions and exhortations of a plain and faithful Ministry! How they will one day wish that they had been willing to obey it, or that they had never been able to hear it! It will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha, at the Judgment Day, than for such: That Sodom that was the shame of the World for wickedness, and the most eminent instance of Divine vengeance, of any People under Heaven, being burnt with Fire and Brimstone from thence, yet that Sodom shall be in a better case at Judgment, than the neglecters of this so great Salva∣tion. Matth. 11.24. It will be some abatement of their Torment, that they had not those means of grace, those constant Sermons, those strong perswasions, and clear convictions, that Gospel-sinners had: They shall not have so much darkness of sorrow, because they rebelled not against so much light. 5ly, When they remember what cost and charges they were at, what care and pains they took (many of them) in Satan's shameful services: How they adventured the shame and censures of the World, the loss of their health, their peace, their life, to please the Devil and their wicked humours; How they stifled their consciences, shut their eyes against the light, rejected Christ and Glory, his Word and his Kingdom, for the deceitful pleasures and profits of sin; and took more pains in the way to destruction, than ever any pious Man did in the way to Heaven. How perfect a Hell will Hell be unto them, where their own Consci∣ences shall be their Tormentors, where their Accusation and Rage shall never cease,Mark 9. v. 44. where their Worm shall never dye? Doubtless they will then be (in the saddest sense) a Terror to themselves. It were easie to name many other particulars that will aggravate the Damned's Misery; But I have other things to speak of, and therefore pass them by: How∣ever that little I have said already, if we write [everlasting] upon it, will in some measure shew the folly of them, that will venture their Souls in any way of wickedness,Matth. 16.26. though it were to gain the whole World by it. The great Ob∣jection answer∣ed.But, say some, If Damnation be such a dreadful thing as you make it to be, and be also everlasting, what will you say of the goodness of
God, which the Scripture speaks so often of? Or how can it stand with the goodness of a God (viz. with Infinite Goodness) to cast his Crea∣tures into so great misery, especially if we suppose this shall be the case of most Men, as you asserted before? I answer: He that hath well weighed what was replyed to Mr. R. when he cavilled somewhat to the same purpose, need not be much trou∣bled with this Objection; Nevertheless I shall not grudge a large An∣swer to it, it being that which is most commonly urged by selfish sensu∣al sinners, and hath not been wholly forgotten by the Author of that Paradoxical Book, De Amplitudine Regni Coelestis.Caelius Secun∣dus. — Boni Natura est Communicari; quomodo Deus Pater Miserationum, &c. It is the nature of good to communicate it self: and the more he communicates his goodness, the more he discovers it; And how shall God appear to be the Father of Mercies and Infinite in Mercy, if his saving beatifying Mercy be not extended to the greatest part of Adam's Posterity? So He.— But though a Man cannot go through a thick Hedge without scratches, yet he may go by it at an easier rate; so he that cannot make his way through objected difficulties, yet may pass them by, and hold fast the truth in spight of them: And as to this particular, if thy reason cannot untie this Knot, let thy faith cut it asunder: And if thou canst not see how the Infiniteness of God's goodness can stand with the ever∣lasting punishment of the Creature, yet believe it nevertheless, for the sake of that Word that testifies both of them unto us: For as our Lord Christ hath told us, There is none good but God; (viz. absolutely,Matth. 19. un∣changeably, infinitely good) So he hath told us no less plainly, That the wicked shall go into everlasting punishment:Matth. 25. And therefore 'tis cer∣tain, the one is not contrary to (or inconsistent with) the other, what∣soever the wits or follies of Men may judge of it. And that thy Reason (as well as thy faith) may have some satisfaction in the case, I shall lay down these following Considerations. 1. That there is in God Bonitas Regiminis, as well as Beneficentiae. In plain English, thus: There is in God the goodness of a Governour, and the goodness of a Benefactor; now his punishing the wicked with Eternal Damnation is not at all contrary to his goodness in either of these sences. 1. 'Tis plain, It is not contrary to the goodness of his Government; He is the great Governour of the World, and therefore is called a King, a great King, the King eternal, &c. in Holy Scripture,Malac. 1.14. 1 Tim. 1.17. Cap. 6.15. and as he is such, it belongeth to him to punish obstinate and impenitent offen∣ders, according to their deserts; and without this, the goodness of his
Government, namely, the wisdom and righteousness of it, would not be discovered to his Creatures: Even amongst Men, they are not accounted good Governours, that do not punish the disobedient, according to their deserts, and maintain the honour of Government thereby: And if a Man suppose that the wicked do not deserve to be punished for ever, who would gladly be wicked for ever, he little knows what wickedness is; and the equity of this dispensation hath been cleared in the first Chapter of this Book, (towards the end of it.) 2. It is the goodness of God's nature, that he hates sin and wicked∣ness; 'Tis his Excellency that he cannot look on iniquity: (else he were not a Holy God, and without Holiness he could not be a God indeed: for his Holiness is Essential to him, and therefore when he would swear by himself, he swears by his Holiness.) Now if the goodness of his nature doth make him to hate sin, it cannot be any disparagement to his goodness to punish it accordingly, since the punishing of it is but the just demonstration of his hatred against it; and he that shall go about to argue the contrary, will shew himself a bad Logician, and a worse Christian. 3. If it were not contrary to his goodness to threaten Everlasting Punishment and Destruction to the wicked,Matth. 25. 2 Thess. 1. &c. and to tell us of such Punish∣ment for them, (so continuing) then certainly it cannot be contrary to his goodness to make good that word by inflicting such punishment: Whatsoever Men pretend herein, for the extolling of God's goodness, yet he will not think himself honoured by them, when they would exalt it against his Holiness and Truth. 4. These Learned Objectors should not act so unlearnedly, as to argue the doing of that upon the account of his goodness, which cannot be done upon the account of his wisdome, nor complain of his casting those into Hell, whom his wisdome sees to be utterly unfit for Heaven; The Enemies of God and Holiness are not fit to dwell in his Holy place, [A Swine is fitter for a Prince's Presence-chamber, than an un∣holy Soul for Heaven.] And if Hell be fitter for them than Heaven, 'tis fit that they should be sent to Hell, rather than Heaven; for 'tis fit they should have what is fittest for them: If an ungodly Man should be brought to Heaven, it would be little comfort to him; yea, I doubt not, but he would count it a misery, if he should come there in such a state: The imperfect graces of his People on Earth, as discovered in gracious practises, are matter of trouble and grief unto him, and he had rather be amongst the Beasts of the Field, than be in company with those that would move him to be Holy in good earnest; How contrary
then would the Holiness of God be unto him, and what a vexation would it be to him to see those glorified, whom he so much delighted to vilifie and disgrace, to see those silly precise ones (as he counted them) sitting with Christ upon his Throne, whom he thought more worthy to be trodden under foot by such as he? Thus miserable would an ungodly Man be in Heaven, and is it not fitter that he should be mi∣serable in Hell? Is it not more proper and congruous, that he should torment himself in the place of Torment, than in the place of Glory and Blessedness? And secondly, Let me tell the Objector, that God will sufficiently appear to be good in a way of Beneficence also, though the wicked be under Everlasting Condemnation. This is so plain, that I need not spend much time in the proof of it: for it would not be accounted a reason∣able thing, that a King on Earth should be charged with unmercifulness, for condemning of Rebels to perpetual Imprisonment: He will appear a gracious and bountiful King for all that; while he takes care of the honour and safety of his true Subjects. Thus will the King of Heaven appear to be bountiful and gracious, and abundant in goodness, in his gracious dealings towards all his faithful Servants. 2. He is very boun∣tiful to the wicked themselves, yea to the very worst of them, here in this World. He gives them that Breath which they so often breathe out to his dishonour, and the reproach of his Gospel. He gives them all that time which now they mispend, and those precious means of grace, which they so unthankfully despise and abuse; He gives them drink to quench their thirst, though they drown their reason with it, and preserves them every minute and moment from many secret and unknown dangers, besides those that are open and visible: in which respect he is said to be the Saviour of all Men.1 Tim. 4.10. Yea he gives them time to repent, and promises of mercy, when they unfeignedly return from sin to his service; in Esay 55.7, &c. And as for the Number of them that perish, which Coelius,Of the Number of the Damned. and Mr. R. think so strangely of, we may easily perceive it is not so much to be wondered at, nor may not be imagined to be any disparagement to the Divine Goodness. A sober Christian may receive some satisfaction from the words of his Lord, in Matth. 7.14.—Broad is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many there be that go in thereat. Is it fit these Men should make a question of that which their Lord (who is Truth it self) hath so positively told us? Nevertheless, I shall add a few Considerations, to rectifie our thoughts hereabouts, that on that account we may not charge our God foolishly. And,
1. How many soever they be that perish, yet none of God's true servants ever shall:John 10.28. Christ will give them eternal life, and they shall ne∣ver perish: John 10. 2. Those many that perish were all out of the way of Salvation, and would not be perswaded to turn into it, by a true Conversion. What wonder, if Destruction and Misery be their end, when they are in their ways, as St. Paul, in Rom. 3.16. Destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way of peace they have not known. He that chuseth to travail in a Ship that is bound for Spain, may not wonder if at last he comes thither. As little cause have we to wonder that they should have Hell for their end, that make wickedness (in some kind or other) their common way, and will not consent unfeignedly to turn into the Holy Path; And that this is the case of the most among us, is so sadly apparent, that I may lawfully spare the pains of pro∣ving it. 3. It is no disparagement to the goodness of a King or Judge to con∣demn common Robbers or Murderers, nor to condemn many of them: Yea, Justice requires him so to do, and their Multitude can be no reason at all to excuse them in their wickedness: If these Men should meet with many to abuse them, (though it were only in words) and one should say, you need not take it ill, seeing there are many that do so, they would not think very well of his speech: And must the just Judge of the whole World, spare the wicked and impenitent, because there are many of them? If so, how shall the Judge of the World do right? for all the World knows, that were not Righteousness, nor any thing like it. And if that any Man could prove, that 'tis unreasonable that many impenitent sinners should be sent to Hell, he might as wisely prove that 'tis so for any at All to be sent thither: For, if many Per∣sons under the same guilt deserve not the same Punishment, a few that are so, do not deserve it neither: The Number doth not alter the Case. 4. It cannot be denied, but the greatest part of Men by far is actual∣ly ungodly and unconscionable, sensual and disobedient: and it must needs be granted that such are fitter for Hell and punishment, than for Heaven and happiness, and the delightful fruition of the Holy God: And it is not to be questioned, but the most of the wicked continue such still. Must a Man believe that the Enemies of God and holiness will be in love with God and holiness, because they are the greatest Number? If one Man, that dyeth unconverted, may go to Heaven, we may as well suppose that another may, and another again, and so of others still;
So that either we must suppose, that all that dye in their sins go to Hell, or else none; and which is most like to be true, they that know the Scri∣ptures may easily apprehend. 5. If Mens judgments were not blinded by guilt and selfishness, they would think it more wonderful, that God should suffer such a Deluge of wickedness to go unpunished in this World, than that he should pu∣nish it, according to its desert, in another World. 6. What if God should send but one wicked Man of a Thousand to Hell, and save all the rest, would they not acknowledge and admire his Mercy and Beneficence? Well, though he will not do so, yet we know not, but there may be as great a communication of his goodness, as that amounts to. For as the Heaven of glory doth incomparably exceed the inferiour Heavens and Earth in bigness; So it is judged by sober, learned Men, that there be ten thousand times more holy and blessed Spirits there, than there be wicked Men in Earth or Hell; and they were as wiseGassendus, and others. as other Men, that supposed the Planets, and other Luminaries of Heaven, to be inhabited by Spirits, as the Earth is by Men, and Beasts. And when I observe that all places (almost) here be∣low, both in Air and Water, as well as Earth, are inhabited by Birds, or Flies, or Fishes, or some other living Creatures, I am very willing to imagine, that the more glorious parts of God's handy-work, which so dazle our eyes but a little to behold, are not empty, but possessed by such excellent Inhabitants, as are suitable to their magnitude and glory. Thou knowest not, Reader, how many Millions of Creatures are over thy head, that are filled with their Maker's love and goodness, and therefore entertain no hard thoughts of it, nor murmur at the just Judg∣ments of thy God, upon the obstinate Enemies of his holy Laws, how many soever they may be. And thus I have answered the Objection aforesaid, and may now fitly proceed to a farther improvement of the Doctrine pleaded for, in a way of Exhortation and Caution to several sorts of Men; of which with God's leave, in the ensuing Paragraph.
CHAP. IV. SECT. III. Containing a Use of Exhortation and Caution to the Gentry and others. HAving proved the point so plainly before, and cleared it now at large from the grand objection about its consistency with the Divine Goodness, I shall urge it (by God's permission) upon several sorts of men amongst us. And I may fitly urge it upon those in the first place, that are first in place, viz. The Gentry of our Land— I need not doubt but some or other will think me a pragmatical person (in the very worst sense,) and may be willing to ask me what I have to do with such? Well, if they have any great desire to do so, let them do it by all means, for why should they lose their longing? But if they are reasonable men, I may hope to prevent that query by giving them this following account, in brief: Namely, that I am a debtor to all, and am bound (especially as I am a Minister) to do good to all so far as I may: and it is as much worth my pains to endeavour to prevent the damnation of these, as to prevent the Damnation of meaner men; for their Souls are as preci∣ous, and their sins as dangerous as others. And it is very proper to speak somewhat to such persons, because they are most taken notice of, and their Examples most powerful to lead others in the way to Salva∣tion or destruction. 1. To the Sen∣sual Gentry.There be two sorts of Gentry amongst us. 1. Sensual careless ones. 2. Serious and Conscientious. First, of the former, and certainly I had need be careful how I speak to those men that have ruined so many that never durst to speak to them so plainly as I intend to do. Who are such.But before I go any further, I must express my self clearly, and shew whom I mean by Sensual Gentry, even those that take more care how to please their senses, and sensitive Appetites, than their Consciences or their God; that make more account of Gain than Godliness, and regard not who or how many they ruine, so they may but raise them∣selves by it; that slight the Laws of the Eternal King, and care no more for a plain (sound) Sermon than for a dish of stinking meat;
that grosly undervalue the glory of Heaven, and think themselves as happy as need to be, if they have but health, and wealth, and honour here, &c.Dr. Saunder∣sons Serm. in 1 Cor. 7.24. or in the words of the Reverend Bishop Saunderson— that spend half the day in sleeping, half the night in Gaming, and the rest of their precious time in other pleasures and vanities, to as little pur∣pose as they can devise; as if they were born for nothing but to eat, and drink, and snort and sport, &c. or (as the worthy Author of the Discourse of the Decay of Piety) that live in the world, as the Levia∣than in the Sea, to take their Pastime in it, and to make up the paral∣lel, delight themselves to devour their Underlings.Matth. 6. Col. 3. &c.— or (as the Scrip∣ture Phrases it) that be lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God, that set their affections (mainly) on things upon earth and not the things that are above; that mind nothing seriously, but (Heathen like) what they shall eat, and what they shall drink, and with what they shall be cloathed: These I call Sensual Gentry, and I will be content to be judged by any but themselves, whether I may not fitly call them so, and may lawfully say somewhat the more to them, because others say so little. Yet lest I should lye open to too many Censures for it, and lest my plainness should be interpreted to be folly, pride, or peevishness or the like, I think it meet to mention some passages out of several Writers that speak as bluntly to these men, as I can do, and yet will be con∣fessed to be such as knew well what belongeth to Learning, Grace, and good manners. First, the famous Cambridge Orator speaks thus in his Poem,Mr. G. Herberts [Church Porch] O England full of sin, but most of sloth: Spit out thy Phlegm, and fill thy Breast with glory: Thy Gentry bleats as if thy native cloath Transfus'd a Sheepishness into the Story: Not that they all are so; but that the most Are gone to grass, and in the Pasture lost. That worthy Divine of BroughtonMr. R. Bolton. in Northhampton-shire in his excellent Assize Sermon at the end of his [four last things] com∣plained of the great degeneration of the modern Gentry, speaking to this effect—They are so vainly brought up, and so strangely pufft up with insolency and Self-esteem, &c. that commonly by such time as they come to strength of body and mind corrupt affection obtains its full strength and height and hardness in their hearts; and I am afraid,
if we go on (meaning, without a Reformation) our Posterity will find in the next age, the basest Generation of English, that ever brea∣thed in this famous Kingdom. So he, in p. 217, and 218. of the said work. And whether this thing he feared be now come to pass or not, I do not say, let others judge. The forementioned excellent Doctor also in that very Sermon makes as bold with them,Dr. Saunderson speaking to those Gallants that do nothing for the good of humane Society, but live as if they were made for no other ends but to eat and drink, and sleep and game, &c. tells them (how∣ever they might take it) that the poorest contemptible creature, that cryes Oysters in the streets for a livelihood, deserves his Bread bet∣ter than these brave men, and his course of life is better approved of God and every wise man than theirs. And as he adds [a Horse that is not good for the Cart, nor the Way, nor the Race, nor the Wars, nor any other service, though he be never so well made, never so well shaped, and never so well clothed, yet is but a Jade still] and (after the Application of it) adds [the titles of honour which in courtesie we give you, we bestow upon their memories whose degenerate off-spring you are, and they no more belong to you, than the Reverence the good man did to Isis, belonged to the Asse that carried her Image.] And thus having cleared my way, I shall now come directly to my intended work, to exhort the brave Gentile sinners to consider the things that concern them, which I take to be one of the fittest Uses that can be made of the Doctrine of Hell Torments. The Exhorta∣tion, &c.Since there is a state of extream and everlasting punishment for the ungodly in another world, 'tis high time, Sirs, to look about you, and to take care of your neglected Souls before you have lost them; O consider this, you that forget God, and use all diligence to escape this wrath to come; your Estates are better than other mens, and your Breeding too (as you would have us to think) and are your Selves more contemptible or less worthy of your care, and Religious re∣gard? Surely not. You know that your time is passing and will re∣turn no more: Death is at your backs as it were, that pale horse will shortly overtake you and tread your honour in the dust; and can you doubt of this or make light of it? You are not sure to live another day, you know nothing to the contrary but your Souls may be called for this very night,Luke 12.20. though you have built your Barns never so large∣ly, to lay up your substance in; and can you think the remembrance of the pleasures of a Sensual careless life, will make death more safe
or comfortable to you? or if it could, yet we are well assured, it cannot make Hell Torments the more tolerable; and as you are not more capable of escaping them, if you dye in a state of sin, uncon∣verted, so if you fall into them they will be as terrible to you as to other men; though you are a little better armed against the crosses of this world, than other men, yet you have no more security against the curse of the Law and the wrath of God: You have no musick that can charm the Devil or abate the fury of his Malice, no Playes or Romances that can delight you after death, no Clothes that can adorn you in the eyes of God, no money that can bribe your Judge or purchase a Pardon at his hand: In a word, no Courage that can bear up your Spirits against the Terrors of Judgment if it find you in an unrenewed state, and destitute of that Grace and Holiness that naturally you disregard. O that you did but know, any ways but by experience, what a sad creature a Gentleman in Hell will be; And that you may never know it in that way, give me leave I beseech you, to caution you against some special sins that are most likely to bring Great men thither. 1. Pride and haughtiness of mind.1. Pride. What if you speak great swelling words, and look as big as a blown bladder (scorning God and man at once) yet you must come down a little lower, if ever you dwell in the high and lofty place; you must of necessity lay aside your lofti∣ness, and stoop so low as to take up that poor despised thing, Religion, and walk humbly with your God, before you can see the Kingdom of Heaven, Esay 2.12.Mic. 6.8. The day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, And the proud shall be as the stubble in the day of his Anger, Mal. 4.1. and pride goes before destruction, saith, Solomon. And how apt the heart of man is to it, when it is attended with wealth and worldly greatness, I need not say. 2. Take heed of fleshly lusts which war against the Soul,2. Fornication. as St. Peter speaks, in 2 Pet. 2.9, 10. The Lord knoweth how to reserve the unjust to the day of judgment, but chiefly them that walk in the lust of uncleanness, &c. So St. Paul, Heb. 13.4.Adjudicabit exitio, Piscat. in Loc. 3. Idleness and unprofitableness. Whoremongers and Adul∣terers God will judge, (i. e. condemn.) They that would not be di∣vorced from their Harlots shall be married to Hell-fire. See Rev. 21.8. 3. If you would escape the miseries of another world, be sure to take heed of an idle and unprofitable life in this. Surely, Sirs, they are like to partake of little good hereafter, that care not to do good here. If Plays and Romances have not thrust the Gospel out of your minds,Matth. 25.30. I shall not need to tell you of the dreadful doom of the unpro∣fitable
Servant. Is it not sad to see how little good is done in the World, by many of those that are best able to do most, and how many there be among us, who have hundreds, it may be thousands a Year, that yet do not give, all the Year round, so much as the price of a good Periwig, toward the Relief of their poor distressed Brethren; (as though such as are raised to such high fortunes were gotten above the Law of Charity, or as if they thought the greatness of their wealth would well excuse them in the neglect of those good works it was gi∣ven for; or as though they had thought it an honour to them to have the Papists say, that they are Solifidians.) The neglect of this is no such harmless Peccadillo, as these Men may be apt to account it: We read in the Gospel, that our Lord will condemn Men at the great Day, for this sin especially, and make a particular mention of it, as a procu∣ring cause of Condemnation.Matth. 25.41, &c. He will say unto them, Depart from me, &c. For when I was an hungred (in his members he means) ye gave me no meat, when I was thirsty ye gave me no drink, &c. So then, they that were able to do good to their poor Christian Brethren, and were not willing to do it in some conscionable way, will be punished for ever for this sin, if they dye such as they lived; and when they have lost their Souls and Heaven, it will be no satisfaction to them to remember, that they kept, or saved their Money; they that would not live as Chri∣stians, shall not be spared because they were Gentlemen. I might also caution you against Cruely and Oppression, scorning of Reproofs, and scoffing at Religion, in the serious faithful Followers of it; but I have not time to say all that might be said unto you. 4. Mispending of Time.The next thing that I would entreat you to be heedful against, is, mis∣spending of your time: He that is careless of that, is (therein) careless of his God, his Soul, his Duty, and every thing that most concerns him, and therefore is most apparently (as yet) in the ready way to Hell. [See that ye walk circumspectly, redeeming the time] is no Precept of mine, but of the Apostle,Eph. 5.15, 16. or rather of God by him; and if Gentle∣men are not concerned with it, it would be hard to prove that any o∣thers are. Believe me, Sirs, your time is one of your choicest Trea∣sures, nor can you name any thing, besides God's grace, and your Souls, that can be compared with it for preciousness; What would you not give for another years time, in order to your preparation for an end∣less life, in case you were to dye to morrow? And though I am not concerned to accuse you of mispending your time, yet I may lawfully put you in mind of it, and desire you to call your selves to account for it, before your God doth. Compare, I beseech you, the time that you
spend in excessive sleeping, in trimming and adorning, in feasting and long meals, in pomp and state and vain curiosity, in vain thoughts and worldly cares, in Cards and Dice, and other Games, (at home and a∣broad) in fruitless and unedifying Books, in idle company and needless visits, in vain discourses and delights, in doing ill, or doing nothing; I say, do but compare this time that is spent in these ways, with that time which is spent in a serious seeking and serving of God, in reading of good Books, in thinking of good things, in governing your Fami∣lies religiously, in relieving the poor, in encouraging your Charge in the ways of God, or any thing else that tends to the promoting of piety, in your selves, or others; And let your own consciences tell you which is most: For in many of our Gentry, the time that is spent in the latter, is no more in comparison of that which is spent upon the former, than the poor Man's wages for a days work, to their Yearly Incomes; Their whole business and work is sports and pastimes, so that we might describe them in those words, in Exod. 32. [They are a People that sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play] But such provide but ill for themselves; nor can it be safe for them to be so pro∣digal of time, that have Death and Judgment before them, a Hell to escape, and a Heaven to prepare for. 5. There is another sin, that some who go for Gentlemen are sadly in love with,Rash Impreca∣tions. (and must not be forgotten in this Discourse) I mean horrid Swearing and Imprecations, Damning, Sinking, and the like. And surely if Damnation be a real thing, and not a Dream, it must needs be a damnable thing, (in the highest sense) rashly and profanely to im∣precate it upon themselves. What wonder is it, if these Men have Hell for their portion, that commonly have Damnation it self for the matter of their prayer! And if they did only shame themselves by this wickedness, the matter were not so much; but they (alas) shame their profession also, and bring a grievous reproach upon the holy Prayers of our Church. 'Tis the corrupt Lives and cursed Speeches of such Professors, that harden the deluded Separatists in their prejudice against them, as the Quakers, and such like: I read, not many Moneths ago, a passage to this purpose, (more than plain enough) in a Quaker's Pam∣phlet; where speaking to some Persons of this bad quality, he expres∣seth himself after this manner: [You cry out, God damn us, and God confound us, and soon after you go to your Church, and say, We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.] Thus (Reader) this clause in our Letany, We beseech thee to hear us good Lord, (than which it is hard to imagine any thing more humble, or pious, or better becoming a serious Chri∣stian)
is matter of greatest scorn and contempt to these poor Crea∣tures; and all because it is Profaned and Unhallowed by the pestilent Tongues of these Hyperdiabolical Gentlemen, these Damnable Damn∣ing, Sinking Gallants. O Sirs, if you are guilty of this sin, consider of it for the Lord's sake, and do no more so wickedly. O that I might disswade you from it by any means; to that end I will propose unto you these Two questions. The Damners questioned.1. What if you should be pleased to lay aside your Atheism, and adventure to believe that there is a God to whom vengeance belongeth? would you not then account it reasonable to honour him by a better Prayer than [God damn us, &c.] and think it more needful to beg his mercy, than to imprecate his Vengeance? And if you think that there is no God, and that Religion is only a silly thing that came into the World by chance, through the force of foolish causeless fears (as some of your companions are willing to perswade themselves) It may be worth your while to Read and Consider what that excellent GentlemanSir Charles Woolsley, p. 77. hath replied unto it, in his most Rational discourse of the unreasonableness of Atheism, and to answer it if you can. 2. What if you did but see that wicked Spirit that tempts you thus fearfully to challenge your Maker, and dare him to destroy you, would you not then take heed how you yield to his temptations, and follow his counsel? And is it not much worse to feel damnation than to see the Devil? Why then should you rashly imprecate so great a mischief upon your selves, and run the hazard of bearing that wrath we are as∣sured he doth tremble atJames 2.19.? 3. What if you had been among those Swaggerers in Bohemia, men∣tioned by Dr. B. in his Theatre of God's Judgmentsp. 552., out of an ap∣proved AuthorJo. Fincelius., who having delighted themselves in the night with profane Speeches and wicked wishes (much like that aforesaid, though not quite so bad) were found dead in the morning, with their necks bro∣ken, and crushed as if a Cart-wheel had gone over them, with bloud also flowing out of their mouths and nostrils to the astonishment of all that saw them. Surely had you seen this sad Spectacle, you would hard∣ly make so bold with the God of Judgment, as to dare him to destroy you. Well, if you will not be warned by such examples your selves, he can make you examples to others: and if such a death be dreadful, Damnation is worse, incomparably worse, how light soever you may make of it, (as you must needs grant if you believe there is any such thing, if you do not, let it please you to vindicate your good friend Mr. R. and make good his Arguments against my An∣swers.)
4. What makes you to be so fearful when any extraordinary signs of God's power appear?Psal. 77.17, 18. If his Thunder do but shake the Earth under you, if his Lightnings singe your well-set Hair, if a terrible Tempest overtake you in the field, and tear the Oaks in pieces under which you stand for shelter, your courage will fail, and your stoutest hearts tremble as a Leaf, how then can you bear up under his fiercest wrath, and endure that damnation which you so commonly and fearlesly impre∣cate on your selves? 5. If Damnation be so slight a matter as (by your speeches) you seem to make of it, why are you commonly so much afraid of dying? They who walked in your ways, and talked in your Language (most stoutly and presumptuously) yet spake very faintly when a deadly disease took hold of them: some of your Quality, when their Physi∣cian told them they were not like to recover, fell into a horrrid rage, and could scarce forbear cursing him to his face. And yet Damnation is ten thousand times dreadfuller than death, if all our Religion hath not deceived us. To lye in the place of darkness is as nothing to the living in the place of Torment. Read but the foregoing Chapter and you may see so much Terror in it, as might hinder you from wishing it upon your selves, though it were never so much in fashion amongst the Hectors of our Times. They would not delight themselves in [Damn my Bloud] if they knew the fierceness of Hell-fire. (And if they can see themselves so far in danger of it as to desire heartily to escape it, they may fitly read some directions for that purpose in the latter pages of this Discourse.) If any expect an Apologie for what I have said to these men, he is likely to be disappointed of his expectation; and if they themselves shall call me Stoick or Clown, or Puritan for my pains, I shall be con∣tent to take it at their hands, and will (as I verily hope) say no worse to them than I would to those that are infected with the Plague, viz. The Lord be merciful unto you.—And now I leave them, being willing to speak a few words to their Betters, namely, The Serious and Religious Gentry.
CHAP. IV. SECT. III. A Continuation, or a word of Exhortation to the Religious Gentry. ANd now, good Reader, since I am to treat of so Noble a Subject, I do really wish for thy sake, that I could speak what is sutable to it, and that which might be as worthy of thy Reading, as the Per∣sons to whom I speak are of thy Love and Respect; but alas, my mani∣fold imperfections will be a more than sufficient hindrance, so that I can∣not promise thee any thing extraordinary herein: yet if plain Truth may be pleasing, thou mayst fitly read what follows — They are as Gold, not only choice, but rare: And though some of them (as I have heard) are lately gone to their beloved Lord;Sir T. R. &c. yet blessed be God, there be some of them still remaining in our sinful Land: long may they live, and let those hearts be faint that wish them evil. Their Cha∣racter. I shall first tell you who I mean by Religious Gentry, and then speak a word of Exhortation, with all humility unto them. For the former, The Religious Gentleman is one that minds his God above his Money, and placeth his Happiness in a higher world than this he lives in; one that scorns nothing so much as sin, and desires nothing so much as a Conformity to Jesus Christ, and an absolute fruition of his Love and Glory; 'Tis his highest Ambition to be a Favourite in the Court of Heaven, and the best of his Buildings are disesteemed by him in comparison of the many Mansions that are there; his Tongue keeps time and tune with his Mind and Conscience, he doth not make or love a Lye (he looks upon such Drolling as a piece of damnable fooling) he counts it no pride to make his boast of God, nor no shame to speak often of his Attributes and Excellencies. He will glorifie his God in his body also, and therefore will not adventure to dishonour him with the Apparel he puts upon it, (God having given him his right shape, he sees no reason why he should be mis-shapen by any monstrous fashions.) In a word, as he is Religious, so he is not afraid to own and fol∣low the Exercises of Religion, in publick as well as in private; He seeks not for the Golden mean between Saintship and Atheism, but is resolved to be a Saint so far as he may, though the proud should call
him Puritan for it. He goes as joyfully to God's house as the Sen∣sual gallants to a Play-house, and comes out with more as well as bet∣ter satisfaction. He goes not to Church to save his Credit or his Purse, to see Fashions or to censure his Minister, but to discharge his Duty, and adorn his Profession, to Serve his God and Save his Soul. (and therefore he had rather go Twice a day than Once a month) This, Reader, is the nature and quality of these excellent Persons I am speaking of, and however thou mayst wonder at it, I dare affirm there are some such to be found among us; and to them I am now (with all Christian respectfulness) to address my self. The Exhorta∣tion. Honoured Sirs, since Hell is no Fancy, since the miseries thereof are real, intolerable, and eternal, give me lieve, I beseech you, to urge upon you these following Duties. The First Duty. 1. To rejoyce in the Lord, and delight your selves in the Thoughts of his Great Goodness towards you. For he hath freed you for ever from all this Misery. That Cloud of Vengeance which will fall upon the Careless Gallants at the last day, shall be far from you: You may meet with many distresses, but nothing of Damnation shall ever come near you, for there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit, Rom. 8.1, 2. Whoso∣ever believeth on him (to wit with a holy and True Faith, such as is attended with a Religious life) shall not perish but have everlasting life, Joh. 3.16. When the awakening Trumpet shall send forth its Echo's to the ends of the Earth, it shall be no matter of amazement unto you: when you shall look out of your Graves and see the Lord of Glory, Armed with irresistible power, clothed with shining Majesty, and flaming Vengeance, attended with all his Troops of holy Angels, (Cheru∣bins and Seraphins) honoured with their loudest shouts, their high∣est praises, their joyfullest Acclamations, &c. yet then I say your hearts shall not fail, for you shall come forth to the Resurrection of life, Joh. 5.29. and be raised up for heaven, not for hell; wherefore serve your God with gladness, and do not so much humor the Devil, or ho∣nour this malignant world, as to be afraid of its enmity, or to be dis∣couraged at the worst it can do against you: That Gracious God whom you serve is able to deliver you from all evils: and as he hath saved you from the power of sin, and the punishment of Hell, so he will be your shield from smaller dangers, Psal. 84.11. The Lord God is a Sun and a Shield, and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.
Second Duty. Secondly, To be often in the Heavenly Duty of Praise and Thanks∣giving. This Tribute you owe for every Mercy you partake of; how much more for your deliverance from the Everlasting Punishment? Methinks, (Sirs,) you should delight your selves abundantly in Pay∣ing of it, and Praise your great deliverer with enlarged hearts. O let that be a main part of your work here, which shall be your Beatifying employment in the high and Holy place. When Sensualists are delight∣ing themselves in Songs of Lewdness and Vanity, let your hearts be delighted with Songs of Praise. If the Blind man in the Gospel (Luke 18. ult.) could follow Christ so joyfully, glorifying God, merely because he was cured of his blindness, O what Joyful Praises should your hearts be filled with, and your glory (your Tongues) be exercised in, when you are saved through Christ from the Everlasting Darkness and destruction, and shall shortly see an end of all your Sorrows. Third Duty. Value not overmuch the Scorns and Censures of the ungodly world: fear not the reproach of men,Esay 51.7. nor be afraid of their revilings (while you walk in the Holy way) No reason for it, for why should they fear the contempt of any, that are secured from the everlasting shame? Fourth Duty. Another duty which I would humbly exhort you to, is this, To do what you can to save others from Hell. Not that you can save them in a way of absolute yower, by working saving Grace in their Souls, nor in a way of Merit, by procuring Heaven for them, This 'tis con∣fessed you cannot do: But yet you may do that which the Scripture calls a Saving of them, namely, Perswade them to be careful of their own Salvation, and occasion them to use the means of Salvation that are afforded them. And what can be imagined more excellent and ho∣nourable, or more truly worthy of a Religious Gentleman than this? Motives to it I might add in great variety, from the Glory of God, the Worth of the Soul, the Love of Christ, the Honour of his Gos∣pel, the honourableness of the Duty in it self, (To conquer Towns and Castles, and Kingdoms, is but a poor and worthless project to the furious endeavours of Saving a Soul.) But methinks God's goodness to your selves might be a very powerful engagement upon you so to do, if there were no other reason for it. As the King in the Parable, Oughtest thou not to have forgiven thy fellow-servant seeing I forgave thee? so may it be said much more in this case, ought you not to do your best to save others from Hell, since your God hath been so mer∣ciful as to save you? — And I beseech you, Sirs, let it be remembred what opportunities and advantages you have above other men, to do good to your Neighbours Souls. Your Place and Authority will bear a
great sway with them, they will regard your words and examples, when they will not regard ours: Happy would many a poor Minister account himself, if his People would mind the commands of God, which he ur∣geth upon them in the name of Christ, half so much as they would mind the words of a Man of Place and Wealth. If you shew a love to a Church, and a plain Sermon, they will seem to do so for their credit sake, and will not dare to call the one a Steeple-house, or the other a Puritanical Preachment. Now you may be Instrumental to their Salvation (or deliverance from Hell) many ways, especially these following. 1. In general, by your own example, by living godly, righteously and soberly in your general course. They will be more capable of believing profaneness, sottishness and injurious doings to be hateful things, when they see them so carefully shunned by such as you. In particular, If you would be a means of saving your Neighbours Souls from Hell, let it please you to observe these following Directi∣ons. 1. Endeavour to engage them to publick Duty, and to hear that word often, that is able to save their Souls. Shew your Zeal for the Solemn Service of your God, and let them know how greatly you love the Ha∣bitation of his House, and the place where his Honour dwelleth: This would be a means to bring them often thither, if not for love, yet for shame, and fear, and if they come within the sound of God's Word, whatsoever it be that moves them so to do, there is hopes they may be the better for it, or at least not so bad, (so blind, and bold, and harden∣ed in sin) as if they had been drinking, or prating with their ungodly Companions, when they should be hearing the Word of their Lord. 2. To shew your Zeal against Drunkenness, common Swearing, and all other gross sin, by punishing it according to the Laws of the Land, and to shew most of your favour and kindness to those Persons, or Fami∣lies, that seem to have the greatest kindness for Religion. 3. To discourse with your Neighbours in an edifying way. Let your speech savour of Grace, and discover your seriousness for your God and Souls. Let them know by your words, the holy temper of your hearts: Tell them how glad you would be to be more holy than you are, to be perfectly conformed to the will of Christ, and how little you value all this World's good, in comparison of his love, and the enjoy∣ment of it in Heavenly glory: Tell them what thoughts you have of the state of an ungodly Professor, and that you would not be in such a case for all the Wealth in the Earth: Tell them of the preciousness of
Time, and the greatness of that work which they must do for their Souls therein, and if they seem careless of it, ask them seriously some awaken∣ing Questions; As, 1. Do you not know that you are Men, and that your reason was gi∣ven you to make you capable of serving your God with a reasonable service, (that is, a ready, willing, and conscionable service.) And do you not know that he is always present with you, and pondereth all your goings? 2. Do you not know you must shortly dye, and your Souls enter immediately into an endless state of joy or sorrow, according as you dye, godly, or ungodly Christians? 3. Doth not God deserve infinitely more than your highest love, your best obedience? The Heavens declare his glory, and may it be∣come you to forget him, and live to his dishonour? Do you not admire the beauty and brightness of the starry Heaven, and will you venture to lose all the glory and joy which dwells in the Heaven of Heavens, for the transitory pleasures or profits of sin? O how much good might a few of such questions (or speeches) do from a Gentleman's mouth upon his Tenents, or Neighbours Souls. 4ly. Engage them in the reading of Scripture, and such Books as o∣pen and apply the great truths and duties in it, as Bishop Taylor's Rules of Holy Living, the Whole Duty of Man, Mr. Baxter's Books of Death and Judgment, or any other that your Prudence and Piety shall think fit for them. Such private innocent companions (I doubt not) have been a means of saving many a Soul. Engage them also to a con∣stant course of Prayer, by themselves, and with their Families: for the often approaching to God in so holy a work (whether with a Book, or without) will shame them from gross sins, and make them more seri∣ous in their provisions for Eternity. 5. Do all you advise them to your selves, and be ready to do good to their Bodies and Names, in any reasonable way, as well as to their Souls, and then there is no doubt, but your good Examples, and good Counsels, may do them good. And your labour (in all) will not be too much, in so great a work, as the saving of Souls from the second Death. My next work is to Exhort All in general, high and low, rich and poor, (one with another.) Surely, my Brethren, you had need be heedful to your selves, since Hell is real; O consider your ways, and use all possible means to escape the Damnation of Hell. I hope I shall not need to add any
Motives to it, if you believe its dreadfulness, and your own deser∣vings; And as for Directions for it, the following Section will supply you with them. CHAP. IV. SECT. IV. Containing some Directions to escape Hell Torments. Presupposition. THis part of my Discourse is designed for such (especially) as are yet in the ready way to Hell, as common Swearers, Lyars, Drunkards, Sabbath-breakers, and such like, to which I may add our factious spightful Professors, that mix (very wisely, as they think) their Malice, and their Re∣ligion together; whose wicked spight against their Parish-Ministers is most blessedly turned into a pure zeal for private Meetings: (abhorring Churches, as profane places, and crying out, when the time and company is fittest, Down with them, down with them, even to the ground) And in a word, Hypocrites, Worldlings, careless and ungodly Persons. To such I now speak; and to them I would give these following Advices, in order to the escaping of Hell-torments. After you have remembred how well you deserve them, and how wor∣thy the least sin makes you of them, (Rom. 6. last vers. The wages of sin is Death, viz. Eternal Death or Damnation, for to Eternal Life it is opposed in the verse) much more all your sins together, with your obstinacy and impenitency in, and under them, &c. I say, having considered your deser∣vings, consider carefully the danger of your present state of sin: O think a little, yea think much how uncertain your life is, and how impossible it will be to scape Hell, if you dye in an unconverted, unsanctified state, see Matth. 18.3. Hebr. 12.14. and other places. And withall, how intolerable its miseries will be to you, if for the love of sin you be sent thither. The light afflictions of this World are greatly dreaded by many, and carefully provided against by sober and prudent Men, How much more should the extremity of endless Torments? O consider what it is to be for ever, I say for ever, under the insupportable wrath of the great God, and whether the utmost that sin can do for you, may rationally encourage you to run the hazard of so great a misery? This is the first thing that I would ad∣vise you to in this case; and if the escaping of everlasting misery be not a thing worthy of our most serious thoughts that may tend that way, no∣thing in the World is; nor will Men be apt to provide against a danger, till they see and consider the reality and certainty of it, and the like. But (say some) this is harsh counsel, and we cannot take it: To consider
of such sad matters, alas we cannot do it, we dare not do it; if we should think much of such things, we are afraid it might make us mad.— But Sinner, take heed in time, and do not deceive thy self; thou know∣est thou hast a great adversary, that delights in nothing more than in his hopes of seeing thee in the same Hell with himself; do not joyn with him in working out thy own destruction. He will surely do it if he can, nor hath he any more compendious way and Method to undo thy Soul than to keep thee from considering thy State seriously, and the dreadful danger thou art in, while thou givest thy self up to the service of Sin (and dost not chuse the fear of the Lord) But to come di∣rectly to the point in hand: — Thou darest not spend any serious thoughts upon such matters lest it should distract thee — It seems then thou takest thy self to be well in thy wits as yet; and if thou art so in∣deed, I may hope thou wilt not think it unreasonable to make use of thy Reason, for the good of thy Soul: I mean by answering (for this particular) these following Queries. 1. Whether there can be any more dreadful or damnable distracti∣on than for a man to follow his sins, and not consider his danger; to rebel against the King of Heaven (wilfully and deliberately) and not to take time to consider what he is doing, and which way he is tending? I think there can be no greater madness than this (unless a greater de∣gree of the same kind) and I hope, Reader, thou art of the same opi∣nion: 'tis sad to see a man, that is thus mad for his Soul, to neglect it still, and plead that he doth so for fear of being mad. O what mon∣strous madness is this! 2. Whether thou wouldst Reason at this rate in other matters of far smaller moment? Suppose thou hadst passed through some infected hou∣ses (where the most were dead of the Disease) and one say unto thee, A∣las man, O how fearful is thy case; consider the danger, and seek out for help; for those houses had the Plague, and 'tis ten to one but thou art in∣fected, &c. wouldst thou reply I dare not consider of it, lest the thoughts of my danger and death should dull my Spirits, and make me Melancho∣ly? And why should not men Reason so in such cases, but that they less mind their Souls concerns than their Bodies? 3. Whether thy Reason was not given thee to consider of the state of thy Soul in order to its eternal welfare? and whether God doth not require thee to consider thy ways (what they are, and what they tend to.) Hag. 1.5. Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, consider your ways: and Esay 1.3. he complains that his people did not consider. And can you think that 'tis the way to be mad to consider of them, or that God will take away the use of your reason because you use it according to his will and command?
A Caution. Yet think not of thy danger despairingly, nor draw any sadder conclu∣sions from the consideration of thy present state, than the Scripture allow∣eth of. Say not I must needs be damned, because I am not yet in a state of Salvation; or that thou must certainly go to Hell, because thou hast been hitherto in the way to it, &c. 'Tis not despairing of Salvation but re∣turning from thy sins that is the work thou hast to mind: and if thou re∣turnest in Truth, as sure as there is a Hell, so surely thou shalt escape it through the Mercies of the Living God. Read for thy comfort Esay 55.7. Be sure to shun all gross and scandalous sins, and all such company (how merry soever) that may be likely to draw thee to them or to har∣den thee in them. 'Tis as vain to promise your self Heaven while you walk in any way of gross wickedness, as to promise your selves life and health when you resolve to take the rankest poyson. I have told you in times past (saith the Apostle) and now tell you also, that they that do such things (not only those there mentioned but such like) shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. And especially Take heed of such courses as are injurious to men; vengeance from God is most plainly intimated to be the Reward of such doings— 1 Thess. 4.6. That no man go beyond or de∣fraud his brother in any matter, for the Lord is the Avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned you and testified. Yea, this course hath brought men to a hell here on earth: Spira, a famous Gentleman of Cittadella, a Civil-Lawyer, who was almost a Miracle of Spiritual misery, and brea∣thed out Woes and Terrors to himself continually, discovered the sad thoughts that he had of his former practises in that kind, confessing his sin with a most sorrowful heart. His words are these,Spira's life, p. 3. lin. 1. (translated) I was exceedingly covetous of money, and accordingly I applied my self to the getting of it, corrupting justice by deceit, and inventing ways to de∣lude it; Good causes I either defended deceitfully, or sold them to the Adversary perfidiously; Bad causes I maintained with all my might, opposing often the known truth, &c. He saw, That money was too hardly earned, which was gotten with the loss of Justice and Truth. Noverint universi, & caveant universè. Take heed of your Company: Make not the known enemies of Reli∣gion and holiness, your ordinary familiar Companions. But mistake me not; I am not perswading you to forsake your necessary Relations, but your unnecessary wicked Companions; and there is no hope of your Sal∣vation till you are heartily willing to forsake them: a companion of fools (or wicked men that are notoriously such) shall be destroyed, Prov. 13.20. These are likely to frustrate (as far as is possible) the means of grace and Salvation to thy Soul, keeping thee from Hearing or Reading or other duties when thou shouldst be about them, and hardening thy heart against
God's fear. O how many that seemed very hopeful for Heaven a long time, have yet at last been taken and overcome by this snare of the Devil, and went to hell for company! shun them carefully as you love your souls, forsake the foolish & live, Pr. 9.6. better leave them than perish with them. If you would escape hell, content not your selves with a false and un∣grounded hope of escaping; do not conclude your safety from false and insufficient grounds. He that lyeth in an infected bed, and hopeth that he is in no danger of the Disease because his Smell and Taste is good, or on any the like insufficient ground and reason, is not only never a whit the safer for his hope, but is really so much the more in danger; because he contents himself with his dangerous condition, and concludes his safety from that which will not warrant any such conclusion. Just so in the pre∣sent case. He that is in the way towards hell, and yet hath a strong hope (upon unsound grounds) that he is not in danger of it, is not the safer because he hopes, but the more in danger because he hopes upon unsound grounds: here therefore I shall name some sandy foundations upon which sinners may be apt to build their hope of escaping hell torments; that so they may not rest in them, but seek for better, by a true and thorough returning to the Lord.— Now their false hopes of escaping it are grounded especially upon these following particulars. The sinner's false hope re∣moved.1. Riches and Worldly prosperity. Some doubtless are willing to make this an Argument of their escaping hell; Surely (they think) that God that is so good to them now in this world as to give them the good things thereof in so great abundance, will not be so hard to them as to send them to hell at last (though they go on in sin, and hate to be reform∣ed) they hope they may safely conclude he will not press them with his fierce wrath hereafter, because he loadeth them so much with his Bene∣fits here. But how plausible soever such Reasonings may seem at first view, I am sure they are not sound: for how can that be any sure evi∣dence of Salvation, which the worst in hell did sometime partake of? as, Pharaoh, Herod, Nero, Julian, &c. These 'tis confessed were as Rich & Great in the World as most men ever were, and yet we do not believe they are saved. The Pope (good man) hath wealth enough (if he could but think so) yet no understanding Protestant will say, that therefore his Holiness must needs be a Saint, and be Saved infallibly (because He is rich.) 2. Worldly Troubles and Crosses. As some hope to escape hell tor∣ments because they are Rich and Prosperous, so others (on the contrary) hope so, because they are Poor and Afflicted in the world: they have been poor and mean, and despised, (a long time) and therefore since they have their hell here (as they use to speak) they verily perswade themselves they are in no danger of hell hereafter.—And these men are just as wise as
the former, or rather as vain; for what place of Scripture saith, that he that is poor and afflicted here, shall therefore be saved hereafter, or that none who are such may ever perish, or the like? Doth it not threaten Dam∣nation to the ungodly in general? or may some of the ungodly be excused, because they are poor and afflicted? Are they not so much the less excu∣sable, if they will walk contrary to the Lord, when his hand is heavy upon them? And therefore when you read that God will save the poor, and the like, in the Book of Psalms, you must understand it either of the poor in spirit, the humble and contrite-hearted Man, or else of the poor that are sober, pious and peaceable, as well as poor. 3. Moral honesty in their common dealings with their Neighbours, freedome from gross and scandalous sins, performing of outward duties of Religion, hearing at Church, reading at home, &c. We do all this, say some, and therefore we do not doubt, but we are delivered from Damna∣tion. But (by their leaves) all this will not prove it; for, in Matth. 5.20. saith Christ, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of Heaven. Now he that goes no farther than so, doth not exceed them in righteousness. That they were (many of them) honest in their dealings, and free from scandalous sins, is so plain, that it may seem needless to prove it; Ye are they that ju∣stifie your selves before men, (speaking to these People) Luk. 16. Nor can we think our Saviour would have spoken thus, [the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees] if they had had no righteousness at all, if they had been grosly unrighteous and abominable, common Cheaters, Drunkards, Railers, or the like. And that they did use to observe the outward visible duties of Religion is no less plain: We have mention made of their Pray∣ers and Alms, Mat. 6. and elsewhere. How strict were they about the Sab∣bath? What a seeming zeal for the publick worship was to be found in them? They paid Tyth, so much as of Mint and Cummin, for the mainte∣nance of it. (which ye ought to have done, saith Christ himself, if our Ma∣lignants dare believe him) Mat. 23. These were some of the smallest mat∣ters that were tythable, yea it was doubted by some whether they were tythable or not; yet they for their part would be sure to pay them, lest they should seem to rob God and Church, by withholding them. And more might be said, if need were. What did they fail in? Or, why were they not right good and reli∣gious Men, if they had so much goodness and religiousness in them? For several Reasons, and these following in special. 1. Because they had not their Religion within them, but rather without them; 'Twas not inward holiness, but outside piety: when they made fairest shews, and out∣wardly appeared righteous to Men, yet at the same time they were full of
hypocrisie and iniquity within; like painted Tombs that have a beautiful out-side, but have nothing but dead Bones, and rottenness within them, which is our Saviour's comparison in the case. Matth. 23.27, 28. 2. As they wanted a true Principle of Religion within, so they wanted the main parts (and properties) of it; As first, true humility: How often soever they fell upon their knees to pray, yet still they rose up with proud and haughty hearts. We read how they affected the highest places, and would needs be called by honorable names; yea, their pride was the main ground and original of their religious services: They did them, that they might have glory of Men, , &c. (Mat. 6.2.) for that very end, that they might be honored of Men. That was the great thing they design∣ed in Prayer and Alms giving (for the hypocrites in that place means the Pharisees, as Piscator, and others observe. Compare it with the 23. of Matth. 6, 13, 14, &c.) their Pride also made them hate and scorn the plain Sermons and reproofs of Christ himself. See Luke 16. vers. 14. 2ly, They had no care to keep a good conscience towards God and Man in their general course. Their Religion and love of God did not conquer the love of Mony: Yea, they made it a cloke for covetous practises: devour∣ing Widows houses under plause of devotion. Mat. 23. They were really cove∣tous,Luk. 16.14. when they seem'd most religious—The Pharisees who were covetous— 3ly, They wanted a true valuation of Christ and his righteousness, and a true relyance upon it for justification. Self-righteousness they knew was a real thing, but for the imputed righteousness of the Son of God, it was but a putative sanciful thing with them, as it is with the Papists, and some Protestants amongst us that begin to Romanize in that point, and I hope will get little credit by it. (If Mr. S. would be pleased to call in his Book, and write a more Orthodox one instead of it, no honest Man would blame him for it.) To the true Believer Christ is precious (that is, most precious) but the Pharisees made light of him, and derided him, in Luke 16.14. Thus of the 4th. Direction. If you would escape Hell, make sure of a true and sound conversion, and wait upon God in the use of all holy means for it. But above all things take heed you mistake not in so great a concern, nor think your selvs converted when it is not so. Matth. 18.3. Except ye be converted—ye cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven. And surely if a Man cannot come to Heaven with∣out it, he cannot escape Hell without it neither. Now you must not think your selvs converted while you are predominantly in love with any wick∣ed course whatsoever; or in plainer English, while you count sin your li∣berty and priviledge, and had rather follow any way of wickedness than a way of real and universal religiousness, if it were not for fear of the shame of the World, or the damnation of Hell. Many, I doubt not, are religious,
sober, civil, just, &c. out of constraint, not willingly, and forbear gross sin more out of dread of punishment, than out of any love to God, or obedi∣ent regard to his Will and Law, serving God as the poor Indians did the Devil, viz. for fear lest otherwise he should do them a mischief. And what do you think, is such service worth? assuredly very little, or rather nothing in the sight of God; who seeth the principles of Mens works and services, and looks more upon the Bent of the mind and will, than the matter of the work. Know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a willing mind, 1 Chron. 28.9. A blockish, slavish, unwilling service (when the work is done, which he had rather should not be done) is fit only for a sensless Deity, or a dumb Idol, not for the high and holy one. Believe it, you are not truly and savingly converted, till God and holiness have the main disposition of your hearts and wills, till you had rather have God in Christ for your everlasting portion to enjoy, than Honor and Wealth, and all this World's good, (till then you are but Worldlings) till you had rather walk in a way of holi∣ness, than follow the most gainful Trade of sin. As a false defrauding ser∣vant is never turned to be a true and faithful servant, till he had rather be true and faithful to his Master, than to cheat and defraud him. Pray there∣fore for your selves, as the Apostle for the Thessalonians, that God would direct your hearts to his love, or (as our Church) [that he would encline your hearts to keep his Law.] Acquaint thy self with Christ, search the Scriptures, and see how suffici∣ent a Saviour he is, how able and willing to receive, and relieve returning sinners. Did he reject any that were but truly willing to accept of him? Did he not come into the World to save such? and complain that the Peo∣ple would not come unto him, that they might have life? Them that come unto him (with true faith and repentance) he will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6.37. O sinner, if thou wilt heartily forsake the Devils drudgery, he will save thee from Hell, and all its damnation; If thou turnest from every evil way, and givest thy self up to him, relying wholly upon his merit and righ∣teousness, he will give thee acceptance in the sight of his Father, and deliver thee from the wrath to come. 1 Thess. 1. ult. So much for the use of Direction. I come now to one or two Uses more, and so shall put a period to my Discourse. In the next place then, It may serve for our Instruction, and may teach us not to envy at the prosperity of wicked Men, nor to judge Gods ways to be unequal, because of their impunity (joyned with final impenitency) in this present World. No cause to judge so, when we consider that he hath a Hell to punish them in; for there the sinner shall have enough of sin, and such wages as is suitable to his works (of iniquity). There the proud sin∣ner shall be low enough, the jovial sinner shall be sad enough, the sottish
sinner be thirsty enough, the Revengeful sinner have vengeance enough, the Damner and Sinker be damned enough, and sink deep enough into the lake of fire.— There they that tyrannized over pious Christians shall be insulted over by the Devil, and be buffeted by the unclean Spirits; they that willingly forget their God and Souls shall remember their sins whether they will or not: they that made light of Christ and Sermons, shall be loaded (to the full) with wrath and curses; and in a word they that grinn'd at godli∣ness shall gnash their teeth at their impieties. God, to whom vengeance belongeth, will avenge himself upon them, and punish them with everlast∣ing destruction from his presence, 2 Thess. 1.8, 9. Lastly, Let me hence add a word to the godly in general; let them be exhorted to grow (more and more) 1. In Grace and holy obedience; for what love, what service, what obedience can ever be suitable to that good∣ness of God which saves them (through Christ) from the everlasting pu∣nishment their sins deserve? We may well exhort them to all holy duties, by the mercies of God, Rom. 12.1. They can never do too much for his Glory, that hath done so much for their Salvation, for he will give them eternal Life, and they shall never perish, Joh. 10. 2. In comfort and spiritual joy: Rejoyce in the Lord always, saith the A∣postle to such, Phil. 4.1. Christ is their all-sufficient Saviour, and they shall surely be saved from wrath through him, Rom. 5.9. why should any worldly Troubles trouble them overmuch, since they shall have none in the world to come? Death can do no more than rot them, and hell no more than fright them. Rejoyce therefore, O faithful Christian, and give thanks at the remembrance of the goodness of thy God; the joy of the Lord is thy strength, O let it be thy work too. Yea, most certainly, it shall be so at the coming of Christ to judgment. He will then receive thee to himself: Joh. 14.3. His love shall then be stronger than death, and conquer the last enemy for thee. Thou shalt be filled with Joy and Glory, when the wicked shall have their fill of shame and sorrow; and shalt be accepted graciously with him, when all the enemies of his Holiness shall be bani∣shed from his Presence, and be buried alive in everlasting fire.—And now bless the Lord, O my Soul, for all his gracious Providences, and, in spe∣cial, for all his gracious Assistances in this small Work! — — Say not This Work thy Hand to End hath brought, Or This thy Labour hath attain'd unto; Say rather thus: This God by me hath wrought, He's Author of that little Good I do. To Him be Glory for ever and ever. FINIS.
