B4466 12152449 55101
A SERMON Preached unto the Voluntiers of the City of NORWICH and also to the Voluntiers of Great YARMOVTH in NORFOLKE. By William Bridge Preacher of Gods Word. Judges: 5.9. My heart is towards the Governours of Israel that offered them∣selves willingly among the People. Blesse yee the Lord. IT is Ordered this thirtieth day of January, 1642. by the Committee of the House of Commons in Parli∣ament concerning Printing, That this Booke intituled A Sermon preached unto the Volunteers of the City of NORVVICH &c. be Printed. JOHN WHITE. London, Printed by J. F. for Ben. Allen, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes-head Alley. 1642.
A Sermon preached unto the Volun∣tiers of the City of Norwich, and also to the Voluntiers of great Yarmouth in Norfolk. 2 SAM. 10.12. Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for the cities of our God, and the Lord do that which seemeth him good. IN these words are the Speech of that brave Commander Joab, which he made at the head of his Army, being surrounded with many enemies, as you read vers. 9. He de∣vides his Army into two parts, the one led up by Abishai his brother, the rest of the forces he brings up himself, and spake thus to Abishai, and to the rest of his men: Be of good courage and let us play the men, &c. In those words you have these two parts, The brave∣nesse of his resolution. Be of good courage and let us play the men. The humblenesse of his submission. And the Lord do that which seemeth him good. Or if you will thus; An ex∣hortation to true noble valour in the former part, Be of good courage, &c. And secondly, an humble resignation of himself and cause, and successe into the hands of God, And the Lord do that which seemeth him good. His exhorta∣tion is strengthened with divers arguments, It is for our peo∣ple. The Ammonities and Syrians are now about us, if you do not behave your selves valiantly, your people are pillaged, plundered, captived, murthered, and therefore, Be of courage and let us play the men. And for the Cities of our God. Some think that by the City of our God, is meant
that City where the Tabernacle was: but as Abulensis ob∣serves,Omnes urbes Israel vocantur urbes Dei; quia Deus illas de∣derat Israelitis vel illa erat specialiter ter∣ri Dei, Abu∣lnsi in 1. Chr 29. though in 1. C: 19 13. it is read City, in this place it is ead in the plurall number Cities, and (as he saith) all their Cities were the Cities of God, because given by God, and because God in his worship and true Religion was in their Cities: and therefore now Joab seeing all the peo∣ple were in danger; and the Cities of God the Religion and worship of God, he breaks forth into this exhortati∣on. Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for the Cities of our God. I shall not at this time reach the second part, the hum∣blenesse of his submission, and gracious resignation: on∣ly from his exhortaiion observe thus much. Observation.In times of great danger when Religion is in hazard, and the people of God are in danger good courage is very requisite. It is then good for good people to have good courage when the times are evill. This is that which Joab pitch∣eth upon, and is the only matter of his exhortation, Be of good courage and let us play the men. So David, when he was begirt and berounded with many enemies; Wait on the Lord (saith he) and be of good courage. Some there are that do wait on the Lord, but are not of good courage: some have good courage, or courage, but do not wait on the Lord. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage both toge∣ther, Psal: 27.14. And he shall strengthen thine heart. So Psal: 31.24. Good courage then is very requisite in evill times. Some think this belongs only to Souldiers; but if you look into Hag. 2.4. You shall finde this com∣manded to all the people. Yet now be strong ô Zerubabell saith the Lord, that is, the Magistrates: and, be strong ô Josuah son of Jehosadach the high Priest: there is the Mini∣sters; and, be strong all ye people of the Lord: there is the
people; and that you read, be strong, in the Hebrew is all one with the word of my text, be of good courage, and if you will you may read the words so: be of good courage ô Zerubabell, &c. So that it lyes upon all in evill times, men & women to be of good courage. For my better prosecution of this point, I shall do these three things. First give the de∣scription of good courage, shewing what it is. Secondly confirme rhe point. Thirdly make application of all unto our selves. For the description of good courage, you may take it thus: Good courage is that gracious disposition of heart, whereby a man being called by God unto any service, doth adven∣ture upon difficulties either in doing good, or enduring e∣vill, and that without feare. Here are four or five things considerable in this descrip∣tion: first, good courage is a gracious disposition. There is  a morall boldnesse, and a naturall audacity, and this is not good courage, for the former is in Heathens, and the lat∣ter is in bruit beasts, Job describes the horse after this man∣ner, he rusheth into the Battell, he laughs at the Trumpet, and his neck is cloathed with thunder, Job. 39. This bruit beasts may have, and therefore this is not the vertue I presse upon you. Again,Fortitudo ju∣storum est car∣nem vincere, propiis volup∣tatibus contra∣ire delectatio∣nem vitiae prae∣sentis extingu∣ere, hujusmo∣di aspera pro ae∣ternis praemiis amare, prospe∣ritatis Blandi∣menta contemneie, adversitatis malum in corde superare; Reproborum vero fortitudo est transitoria sine cessatione diligere, contra flagella conditionis insensibiliter▪ perdurare, bonorum vitam non solum verbis & moribus, sed etiam gladiis impugnare, in semetipsis spem ponere & iniquitatem quotidie sinè ullo desiderii defectu perpetrare. Greg. moral. lib. 8. There is a sinfull desperatenesse whereby men are apt and ready to rush upon all that is evill; and are sin∣fully bold, and they thinke him a foole or a child that will not drink and be drunke, and whore, and run into all kinde of evill: this is not good courage, David he was as vali∣ant a mone of them, as ever the earth bare; & yet notwith∣standing in the matter of sin, he was very timerous: Surely, good courage is such a flower as grows upon a good consci∣ence: a man in truth hath so much good courage as he hath a
good conscience; and if that a man shall desperately run upon what is eviil and sinfull, his courage does degene∣rate into a foolish desperatenesse: Waite on the Lord (saith the Psalmist) and be of good courage; and again I say wayte on the Lord; good courage is hemmed in with waiting upon the Lord. Again, There is a vaunting, bragging, boasting Cava∣lierisme;Tumor animi non est mag∣nanimitas Sen. which hath no true courage; such a Cavalier was Rabshekah, who sayd, with us is valour and courage, when he defied the Hosts and servants of the living God; good courage is the health of the minde, this vaunting, bragging, boasting, is the swelling of the minde, not  courage. Leonum cle∣mentiae multa indicia sunt, prostratis par∣vunt, in viros potius quam in faeminas sae∣viunt, infantes non nisi in magra same perimunt. So∣linus.Again, There is a fierce, angry, revengefull disposi∣tion, whereby men are ready to run upon cruelties, this is no good courage. The righteous is as bold as a Lyon; the Lyon himselfe is mercifull, not revengefull, if a creature lyes down before him, he will spare it. I remember a Story one hath concerning Malcolmus, a King of the Scots; it seems there was one of his Nobles, who underhand conspired his death; the King having notice of it, hee chose a day to go a hunting, and called many of his No∣bles to goe with him, and amongst the rest hee calls this Courtier that was working of his death;Si igitur ani∣mus tibi sit, si valeas, si audeas, absolve quod propofuisti, redde hostibus meis & sociis tuis quod promisiffi: si me occidere stat animus, quando rectius, quando secretius, quando virilius? venenum parasti? mulierculis id relinquito, tortulo insidiaris? hoc & adulterae possunt? ferro ex insidiis me aggredi decrevisti? hoc sicarii & non militis est officium, solus cum solo congredere, ut saltem proditio tua turpitudine careat, quae perfidia carere non potest, Miles autem haec audiens mox verbis re∣gis quasi gravi percussus fulmine ad pedes regios cum lachrymis & tremore cucurrit: Cui Rex noli timere (inquit) quod nihil a me patieris; Cumque ei de caetero se fidelem amicum futurum promisisset, reveriunter ad socios, nihil paenitus referentes, Mat. Paris pag. 21. Hist. Willil. 21. and when
they were in the field, he singles him from all the rest, bids them go on with their game, he had something to speak to him alone; sayth he, I hear you are underhand working of my death; if you put poison into my cup, a woman may do that; if you set upon me with a company of Rascalls, Theeves may do that; if you will put me to death, do it as a Souldier, I will take my sword, take you yours, we will fight it out: the man fell down before him, and the King par∣doned him, and gained him ever after to be his owne. This was true courage, but a fiery cruell disposition is no good courage, courage is a gracious disposition. Secondly, It is a gracious disposition of heart; The  heart properly is the naturall element of courage; and therefore some do derive the word courage so, courage quasi cor agit, it is an action or motion of the heart. The truth is, the heart of man is the Artillery-yard, where all the thoughts of courage train continually. Thirdly, I say, whereby a man being called by God  unto any service. Gods call is the ground of a Christians courage. This was pretended in Rabshekahs speech, hath not the Lord sent me? and this was in truth the ground of Joshuahs courage. Be of good courage have not I commanded thee? If a man ventures upon any design, and Gods call doth not lead him to it, when he comes to make good his standing, the ground quakes under him, his heart trembles, his knees knock, his arms shake, and his heeles begin to run: When a man is called to do a worke by God, though the opposition and difficulty be never so great, he may encourage himselfe here, but I am called by God, and he will carry me through. Fourthly, I say; wherby a man being called by God un∣to  any service does venture upon difficulties, either in do∣ing good, or enduring evill; one would think that it were
a desperate venture, but indeed a brave venture of the men of Jabish Gilead, which we read of, 1 Sam. last, which fetcht away the dead body of Saul, out of the hands of the Phi∣listimes, there being a great fight between the Israelites and Philistimes, the Philistimes had the best of it, kept the field, and buried the dead, and amongst the dead they finde Saul,, they cut off his head, and fastned his body to the wall of Bethshan, and when the Inhabitants of Ja∣bish Gilead heard of it, all the valiant men arose, and went and took the body of Saul from the wall of Bethshan: here was valour, here was courage, wherein was it seen? in venturing upon difficulties in doing good, and endu∣ring evill. Fiftly, I adde, all this must be done without feare; and therefore in Scripture these go together, Be of good cou∣rage, feare not, neither be dismayed. The more a mans fears are enlarged, the more his courage is lessened, and the more a mans courage is enlarged, the more his fears are lessened. Good courage, it makes a man higher by the head and shoulders, than the thing feared, though never so great; good courage lifts a man up above fear: Put alto∣gether, and you have the description of good courage: It is that gracious disposition of heart, whereby a man be∣ing called by God unto any service, he does adventure upon difficulties, either in doing good, or enduring evill, and that without fear. Let us now advance to the second thing, the confirmation of the Point. Confirma. 1.In evill times, in times of danger, good courage is very requisite: in times of danger, good courage is the strength of man, it is the spirits of a man, it is the spark∣ling of a mans heart, it is the life of ones life, sayth Solo∣mon, The spirit of a man shall sustain his infirmity; with∣out strength there is no bearing of burthens; now this
is the way to be strong, to stand under burthens in evill times: Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart. Again, evill times are full of changes,Fortis est quē adversa non frangunt forti∣er est quem prospera non alliciunt▪ for∣tissimus est quem vicissi∣tudo rerum non deturbat. Senec. and good cou∣rage will keep us from the power of those. It is a good speech Seneca hath; He is a stout man whom adversity doth not quaile, he is yet more stout whom prosperity doth not allure; but he is most stout of all, whom the change of things doth not disturbe. And in another place (saith he) he hath no great minde, that can be bent by injuries; and evill times are full of injuries, without courage, a man will easily be bent by them,Magnus ani∣mus est quem non incurvat injuria, Senec. bent unto sin, and bent unto what is evill. Had not the three chil∣dren been men of courage, how would they have beene bent to Idolatry; but being men of courage, say they, Our God is able to deliver us, but if not;Dan. 3 17.18. be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy gods. Oh my belo∣ved, in evill times good courage keeps us from evil bend∣ing, and therefore in evill times good courage is very re∣quisite. Again, evill times are very expensive, then a man shall  be called to lay out much; his estate, his house, his liber∣ty, his body, his all; and no affection, no disposition so spending as courage; good courage will make a man spend, and be spent for God: but if a man should expend and lay out all upon other things, they will not be able to quit charges; good courage will make a man spend all on God; and be spent for God, as Paul was. Thus you see, that in evill times, good courage is very requisite. If this be so, you see what our duty is;Applica. to be of good courage, and play the men. You all know into what evill times we are now falne, better than I can speak; are we not berounded with many enemies, the Syrians before,
and the Ammonites behind, if Joab were alive hee could see the Battell before and behind. In the Prophets time he prayed that God would open the eyes of his servant, that he might see who were with him, now we had need to pray that God would open mens eyes to see who are against them: certainly enemies are amongst us, within and without, at home and abroad, before and behind, they are very ma∣ny: now the people of God are in danger, now the Cities of God, and Religion is in hazard; and therefore as Joab once, so now I may speak unto all; Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our People, and for the Cities of our God & the Lord do that which seemeth him good. Be of good courage, that is my exhortation, notwithstanding the times be e∣vill, yet be of good courage: good courage now if ever is requisite, requisite for Magistrates, requisite for Ministers, requisite for parents, and governours of Families, requi∣site for these Gentlemen that have listed their names for this great service of God and their Country, requisite for all the people. Requisite for Magistrates. Good courage is alwayes in a Magistrates Commission, though times be never so peace∣able, they are to be men of courage fearing God, much more in troublous times; good courage is a vertue annexed to their place,Aquin. Pecca∣tum majus ubi repugnantia major inter peccantem & peccatum. and therefore as injustice from the hand of a Judge is worser then from any other, because there is a speciall repugnancy between him and the sin, so want of courage and neutralizing in a Magistrate is worse then in others, because it is alwayes annexed to his place. Ministers, they must be of good courage. We read of divers valiant men, 2. Chron. 26.17, 18. who withstood Uzziah the King, and said unto him: It pertaineth not un∣to thee Uziah to burn incense unto the Lord, &c. You may see who they were 17. vers. Azariah the Priest went in af∣ter
him, and with him fourscore Priests of the Lord that were valiant men: wherein did their valour appeare? in that they withstood the King, in doing that which was unlaw∣full, these were valiant Priests indeed, and it stands upon Record, and that for ever; in times neerer to our selves we read of Doctor Latimer, that when the men of his order were to send New-years gifts unto the King, he sent a Bi∣ble with this posie written on the outside thereof, Whore∣mongers and Adulterers God will judge: was not Mr. Dee∣ring very bold with Queen Elizabeth, who told her, that though shee once went, tanquam ovis ad lanienam, as a sheep to the slaughter, yet now tanquam indomita juvenca, as an untam'd hiefer; in evill times, the Ordnance, and Murthering pieces are planted against the House of the Ministers, against them especially, and therefore in them also good courage is very requisite. Requisite also in the third place for Parents and Go∣vernours  of families. Otherwise if they have not good courage, they will quench the forwardnesse, and zeal, and courage of those that are under them. It is a lamentable thing that the carnall wisdom of a wordly parent should be the quench coale of the gratious devotion of a godly child. Granatensis makes mention of a woman, that hear∣ing her son run away in the Field, she got some advan∣tage of him, and put him to death with these words; Run∣away, thou art none of mine. And of another woman that when her son was slaine in the Battell, she being at the Funerall with divers friends; some wept and cryed ô duram fortunam, O hard fortune, she cryed, ô felicem fortunam, O happy fortune, that ever I was so honoured to beare a child to dye so bravely for his Country. Parents must have courage, and there are these three things to move parents; and Go∣vernours of families unto it: the danger that is now ap∣proaching,
the Protestation that you have taken, the spe∣eiall opportunity that you have. You that are Parents and governours of Families have the greater opportunity of serving the Common-wealth, and Churches and people of God then others. Your children are your goods, nothing is so much a mans own, as his childe, your children are your best houshold stuffe: One observing, that it was the manner and fashion to be∣spangle their cupboords with plate, when they made any feasts; when he was to make a feast, he got his children and set them on his cupboards head, the Guests asking the reason why he did so? saith he, these are my plate. Be∣loved, you have given your plate already to the service of your Countrey; what if God will have this plate also to be given unto him? Again, the danger that is now approaching; may move you unto this: you know the greatnesse of the danger, how we are begirt with the Assyrians and Ammonites, and should the Ammonites prevaile (I mean that malignant Jusuiticall party prevaile) in the Kingdome, what a dark and blacke day would it be upon England? the Lord be thanked we know partly what a comfort it is, to set under our Vines and Fig-trees; but should they prevaile, what would they do, yea what would they not do? the honour and safety of our dear Soveraign, the liberty of the Sub∣ject, the security of the Parliament, the Peace of the three Kingdoms, the power and liberty of the Ordinances; these are great mercies, and much to be prized by us; and me thinks every one should sit down and think with him∣selfe, what shall I give or do, that my person should not be enslaved? that my wife and daughters be not abused, that my poor children be not massacred, that my house be not plundred, that my Country be not betrayed? oh
if there be any spirit, or valour and courage in any childe or servant, to serve God and his Countrey, go on, oh childe and prosper, do couragiously. Then again, besides this; you may remember the Pro∣testation  that you have made; you have Protested before the Lord, and the world (or should have done) that you will maintain, and defend the Person of our King, the liberty of the Law and Subject, the Parliament, the Pro∣testant Religion; and shall you not give up your chil∣dren and servants, though never so dear and faithfull to make good your Protestation. But me thinkes I hear some say,Object. it is a hard thing to part with my childe, my only sonne, my onely joy; the comfort and stay of mine age; oh it is a hard thing to part with a childe. True it is,Answ. and wouldst serve God and thy Countrey with nothing? is that childe lost that Christ gains? I remember Origen observes, that when Abraham gave up Isaac unto God; and put the knife to his throat to offer him up as a sacrifice to him, then the Lord found him a Ram, another sacrifice, and gave Isaac again unto him; and (saith he) that which you give unto God, you shall receive from God; if you can give up your childe, and lift up your hand with a knife to offer him up unto him, the Lord will give you that childe, and that childe above others, shall be the father of many gracious. Me thinks I heare that speech sounding in mine ears; Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them, they shall not be asha∣med; but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate;Psal. 127.5. your children are the arrowes that the Lord hath given you into your quiver, if they be ready upon the string, will you breake these arrowes, or the spirits of them? they are made a purpose to meet your Adversary in the gate; and now the Adversary is in the gate, will you not let the
arrow flie? Oh, me thinks there should not be a father or Master that hath a childe or servant, but should say, I will send one Voluntier; what were it for such a Town as this to have two or three hundred? but I know your readines, the Lord blesse it; onely I leave the exhortation of Jo∣ab with you, the words a little altered, Be of good courage, and if you cannot play the men your selves, let your children and servants play the men. Fourthly, The exhortation looks upon them that have listed themselves in this great service of God, and their Countrey, in these dangerous times: Brethren I have need for to speak to you, and my commission especially is to speak to you, I had need do it; for have not some freely offered themselves to this work, yet shamefully de∣serted it again? I say shamefully, for what greater shame? Marcus Crassus amongst the Romans, caused the cowards to be let bloud, giving this reason; that it was fit their bloud should be shed in disgrace, which they would not shed in defence of their Countrey; and if you look Judg. 7.3. you shall finde, that when the hoast of the Midianites came against the Israelites, Gideon had gotten a good and well framed Army together, but when word came from the Lord, that the fearfull should return, how many think you did return of them? surely, no lesse than two parts of three, the whole Army consisting of 32000; the di∣vine story tells us, That 22000 of them went back, and but 10000 left, 22000 not ashamed to be called cowards and fearfull: so that I say, that I had need to speak to you, and to you is my commission, and if you please you may read my Commission, and your own duty together, 20 Deu. 2.3. And it shall be when ye are come nigh unto the Battell, that the Priest shall approach and speak unto the people; not the Cap∣tain, but the Priest? what sayes the Priest? Let not your
hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be you terrified because of them: therfore you see what I am com∣manded to speak unto you; well good sirs, and beloved in the Lord Jesus, be you also of good courage; and I have three words of encouragement to speak unto you. First, your worke and service you are about, it is very  honourable. It is observed to my hand, that when Solo∣mon built the Temple, he did not employ the Israelites a∣bout the meaner works, carrying of stones, and drawing of water, strangers were put to that worke, but the Israe∣lites were employed to be a guard about him: so did the most wise man in the world, Solomon count it an honou∣rable thing to bear arms, and to be a souldier: anciently souldiers were called Latrones, because they were a Late∣re Regis, and now the latine word miles for a souldier, sig∣nifies a Knight: when the children of Israel went out to Battell, some there were that went into the Field and some that did stay at home▪ concerning those that stayed at home, it is sayd, that she that tarryed at home devided the spoile, Psalm. 68.12. as if they were only women, and the weaker sort that stayed at home, as if all that were wor∣thy to be called men went into the Field. In the trium∣phing Psalm of Deborah, we read, that some are condem∣ned, and some commended, those that were condemned, were such as came not forth, that came not forth to helpe the Lord against the mighty, Judges, 5.23. Those that were commended, were the Voluntiers that offered them∣selves willingly amongst the People, vers. 2. and 9. The truth is that the Volunteers of England under God, are the Bullwarks of England, and England under God, the Bul∣wark of the Protestant Religion: Wherefore, honoured Brethren, be ye all of good courage, for your worke and service is very honorable.
And as your worke is honorable, so your worke is sase. In times of war, the safest place is the Camp, and whilst that those of poor spirits, that love onely to be in their beds, and in their houses, shall be pillaged and plundered, men of brave spirits that are willing to be in the Field shall be secured. A valiant and couragious minde com∣mandeth all thing, sayes Seneca: he that commandeth death commandeth all things, as the valiant man doth. Now Beloved, you see into what times we are fallen, of neces∣sity things must either go well or ill: if things go ill, the worst is death, and what great matter is it to dye for your God, a little before your time, who would live when Religion is dead? who would live to out-live his Reli∣gion? Cicero tells us of some Indians that having many wives, when the husband dyed the wifes strived to be burned with him, and she that was the strongest prevai∣led to be burned, and the rest went away very sorrowfull as having met with a great losse that they might not be burned with their husband; and do you desire to live a day after the protestant Religion, that you have bin marri∣ed too now for many yeers together? It is no great matter to live, the beasts, birds, and fishes live, this is truly great to dye well, honorably freely, wisely, as Seneca saith, It is better to dye in the Field for the cause of God, then die in ones bed, by the hand of a sicknesse. It is storied of one Bibulus, a great Roman, that having obtained many victo∣ries, he came to Rome to ride in triumph, where a Tile fal∣ling off the house, stroke him so deeply and mortally into the head, as he dyed of it. Thus may you dye by an un∣worthy Tile as you walk in the streets, or by the turning of some humour in your bodies; and is it not better then to dye for the truth? Can you lose too much for Christ that hath lost so much for you? Death is the worst.
And if things go well, I cannot but thinke it will go with the popish Maligant party, as once with the Freislanders, when the Earl of Holland had overcome them, they took up Arms to resist him again; whereupon he ordered,Hist. Nether. that the doors of their houses should be made so low, as they should alwayes stoop when they went in, noting their subjection; so though the mercy of those that are in authority may let the houses of Malignants stand, yet I make no question, but the doors of their houses shall be made so low, that they shall alwayes stoop, as a note of their subjection; whil'st you that stand for the cause, and Countrey, and Cities of your God, shall have the doors of your houses enlarged; and if a good cause have any interest in Heaven, and the prayers of Gods people hath any credit there, you shall undoubtedly in the end prevail; wherefore be of good courage, for your work is safe. And as your worke is safe, so it is also warrantable. I  know it is objected, They take up Arms against their King. I am perswaded there is not such a thought in the bosoms of any of you all, and God forbid there should: but there is much difference between taking up of Armes a∣gainst the Kings Person, and taking up of Arms for the defence of the Kingdom, without the Kings command. David though he were Gods annointed, yet he was a sub∣ject unto Saul his King, and he tooke up Arms to defend himselfe; he tooke up Arms indeed, but if you looke into 1 Sam. 26.19. you shall finde that David does im∣pute that unnaturall warre that Saul his King▪ made a∣gainst him, to those wicked malignants and wicked coun∣sellors▪ about him; If the Lord hath stirred thee up against mee, let him accept an offering; but if they be the children of men, cursed be they before the Lord, &c. He does not say the King had done it, but layes it upon those that were
about him, and therefore tooke up Arms to defend him∣selfe against the malignants; Davids example is our pra∣ctise: and certainly if the Parliament should not have a power to send for those by force of Arms which are ac∣cused before them for their just tryall, they should no longer be a Parliament; every Court of Justice have a power to send for by force, men accused to be tryed be∣fore them▪ now the Parliament as King James speaks, is the highest Court of Justice; therfore accrding to the known priviledge of Parliament, they do send Ser∣jeant at Arms for those that are acccused, to be tryed be∣fore them, and if they have power to send out one Ser∣jeant at Arms, then they have power also to send forth a hundred, and so a thousand, and so ten thousand if need require; and if the accused persons gather into an Army, how can the Parliament send for them but by an Army? so that when you consider the Law of the Land, or the Law of God; or the Law of nature, which is for a com∣munity to defend it selfe, your way and course is very warrantable, your cause is good, for that must needs be good that Religion maketh so; your enemies are weake, for they must needs be weake that sin makes weak; your victory is certain, which the Scripture promiseth, and first or last the victory shall be to you. Put all together, your cause is good, your enemies weake, your victory certain, your service honorable, safe, warrantable; wherefore, Be of good courage, and play the men, for your people, and the Cities of our God, and the Lord do with you what seemeth him good. Fiftly, This exhortation looketh upon all that heareth me this day, men, women, and children, be you all of good courage in these sad times, notwithstanding the e∣vill of the times, fear not, neither be dismayed. Did the
Lord do his work by halfs, when he brought the chil∣dren of Israel out of Egypt? notwithstanding for mens unbelief some fell in the way to Canaan, yet he brought them into Canaan. Beloved, you are now again coming out of Egypt (for the Romish superstition, and that part∣ly is called Egypt, Sodome, Babylon: you are now coming out of Egypt) marching up into the promised Land, and promised Ordinances; nothing can make you fall in the way, but unbelief: wherfore be all of good courage, and pray unto the Lord. Be all of good courage; thereby you shall be able to set upon great things for God, though never so great; thereby you shall endure great af∣flictions, though never so heavy; thereby you shall be untired, and unwearyed in the service of God, though the opposition be never so strong; thereby you shall ho∣nour the Cause; thereby you shall conquer your enemies; thereby you shall encourage others, your courage shall beget courage; your courage will have an influence upon all the Towns round about you, and make them of good courage, as I make no question but the courage and valour of London have had an influence upon your hearts, to make you couragious: so your courage will have upon others; what will they say when they come into Towns, and re∣turn home again? I will tell you what, I was at such a Town, and there they were working; and fortifying their Town for their Countrey and King, and I saw the best mans son in the Town go to the work, and the best mans daughter in the Town carry a basket; and father, and mother, shall we sit still? therefore put on, let the work ne∣ver die for want of money; let not such a Town as we are; be base, be poor, & low, & want courage? when on the one side ye have the Sea, on the other side the River, on the o∣ther side the walls, on the other side I hope friends; within
abundance of good people, and above a loving God; oh therefore put on, be all of good courage; I do but adde some directions, and so winde up all. First, be sure of this, That you make sure of God to be with you; I mean, not only in the generall causes, but in your particular, clear up your propriety to God him∣selfe. When David was in a great straight, his enemies had broken in upon him, taken away his wives, and then plundred all he had, his own Souldiers began to mutiny, and thought of stoning him; what did he do? it is said, he encouraged himselfe in the Lord his God:1 Sam. 30.6. therefore, first make sure of this, cleare up this your propriety in God himselfe. The sight of a great God under interest, will encourage your spirits, though dangers be nere so great. Secondly, Never go out upon any designe without Gods promise, Gods promise of assistance, acceptance, and successe: Joshua was a valiant man, and brave Com∣mander, and yet we read of him, 7 Joshua, when some thirty men were slain; and others fled, he fell down upon the earth much discouraged; why? the Lord had pro∣mised he would never leave him, nor forsake him, his e∣nemies should not be able to stand before him; but hee had lost the promise that God had given to him, and there∣fore was discouraged; but the Lord comes to him and saith, what dost here? and brings him to the view of the promise again; and then a new spirit and new life came into him; Gods promise is your encouragement, keepe that alwayes in your eye. Thirdly, take heed of all those things that will debase your spirits; these are three things especially: idlenesse, wordlinesse,otium est vivi hominis se∣pultura. false courage. As for idlenesse (saith Seneca) it is the burying of a living man. As for wordlinesse (saith Aquinas) it doth effeminate,
and set a man below himself. And false courage is a true enemy to true courage, if courage be layd upon the sense of the second cause, when there is an ebbe of the second cause, there is an ebbe of your courage. There were two sorts of spyes that went into the Land of Canaan: as for the first, we do not read of any hard use they met withall, and yet they were much discouraged, and discouraged the people: saying, the men of the Country are Giants, the Cities are walled up to Heaven, and the Inhabitants ride in Charets of iron: the other spyes met with ill use, and had not Rahab hid them, they had been every man cut off, and yet they returned with good courage, and so encouraged the people, saying, the men shall be meat unto us, &c. what is the reason of this? one would thinke rather that the first sort should be en∣couraged, and the last discouraged, but it was not so, the reason is this, the first spyes that were discouraged, looked only upon the men and walls, and iron Charets, went out in the way of sense, but as for the other spyes, they loo∣ked upon God, upon his promise, and upon his provi∣dence in delivering of them, and thereupon returned, and said, the men of the Land are meat unto us, &c. Would you not be discouraged, but encouraged, take heed how you raise, or how you lay your courage upon second causes: take heed of all those things that may debase your spirits, idlenesse, wordlinesse, and courage layd upon second cau∣ses. Again, Be sure of this that you keep your conscience  clear: A bad conscience is very timerous, the righteous are as bold as a Lion, but the unrighteous that have any con∣science left are as fearfull as a Doe, be sure therefore that you keep your conscience cleer. And then again, keep and improove all the experiences
of Gods delivering mercy. Beloved, how many delivering mercies have God wrought for us the last yeare, truly it may be said it hath been the annus mirabilis, year of wonders; and all the year long God hath been known to England by this Name, A wonder-working God: when any temptations arise to discourage, answer, Surely, if the Lord had meant to destroy us, he would never have done all this: experienced men are most couragious; onely make use of your experience as a stirrup to get up your spirits to the promise. 6. Again, Actuate, refresh, and strengthen your love. True love is very valiant, sayes the Apostle, Love suffers all things, it does all things, as one observes concerning a Sheep, though it be so feeble and fearfull a creature, that a little dog will make a whole flock run before it, yet not∣withstanding you shall see, That if a great masty comes to take away a Lamb from the Ewe, the Ewe will stamp, and run at him; why? love puts it on: Do you therfore love your Countrey? I know you do: Do you love the people of God? I presume you do: Do you love the Ci∣ties of God? I believe you do: often actuate, refresh, and strengthen your love, this will give courage. 7. In the last place, When ever any discouraging temptations arise, before ever you parly with those dif∣ficulties and temptations, step in to God by prayer: Be∣loved, if you first parly with difficulties before you go to prayer, you will never have done; a thousand Objections will be created in your mindes; whereas if you first go to prayer before you parly with them, in prayer you shall have the sight of a great God; and the sight of a great God, will make your spirits great. In prayer your heart shall be composed; for prayer is a soul-composing duty. In prayer you shall meet with the Captain of your Sal∣vation;
and he will leade up your hearts that are ready to run away. In prayer you shall bring your souls to this frame, quietly to resign up your selves, and cause, and suc∣cesse unto God, and a man is never more couragious than in that frame, as Joabs courage and resignation went to∣gether. Are you presented with any difficulty and dis∣couraging temptation? then say within your selves, it is true indeed, to attain to such an event; certainly it will be hard, notwithstanding I know that my cause is good, my work is good, the people good; and therfore, though the difficulties and temptations be never so great, I will give my selfe to prayer, and praying courage is good cou∣rage. Wherefore my beloved, in the name of the Lord pray, in these evill times, pray, pray, pray; and when you have done praying, then wait: wait on the Lord, and be of good courage, and again I say waite on the Lord: and what I say unto one, I desire to speake unto my own soule, and so unto you all in these sad and evill times, be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for the Cities of our God, and the Lord do with us what see∣meth him good. FINIS.
