B5249 11781517 49083
A Prophetick Demonstration OF Many Remarkable Passages (Observed and Gathered together) as they were FOUND IN A MANUSCRIPT INTITLED, The Mistery of Observable Pre∣dictions upon the Present State Of REYNELƲS, & ROMƲLƲS, OR, The unridled Hyraglip of a She FOX Nurss'd by a She Wolf In a Stile Answerable to Miltons Heroick Verses on lost Paradise, Causes Discovering how Death first contracted, Ʋpon the Stage, stands where its part is Acted. The First Part of Seasonable Cautions, &c. Now Published for publick Benefit, Which being Divided into Four CHAPTERS, Therein is Treated, the Matters Contained in the following Table; having Relation (by the unridled Hyraglips,) To the Discovery made of the Late POPISH PLOT. LONDON, Printed by J. S. for R. B. in the Year, 1680.
A Table of the Contents. CONCERNING I. All Changes come upon the Bo∣dy of Nature, 2ly. The Mistery of the Golden Fleece 3ly. The Enchanted Kingdom, and Dominion of the Draggon, &c. 4ly. The several Transformings of the Wolvish Nature. Ʋnder some Weighty Considera∣tions ƲPON. I. Eternity. 2ly. The Creation of the World. 3ly. Paradise. 4ly. What is most aptly and chiefly hince applyable, unto the present State of New Rome. She being built Nurssed up and maintained by the French Inte∣rest, in the same manner, as Ro∣mulus (being Nurssed by a Wolf,) was the Builder of Old Rome.
The Preface, OR, EPISTLE TO THE READER, READER, FOrasmuch as the Insuing Treatise, bareth an unusial stile; it being a Comment upon the Hyraglips of the Antients, and those Poetical fixions, wherein hath been buryed their know∣ledge of a Deaty; whom under divers signeficant terms and Charectors, do in effect confess the same things published, by that Holy and worthy Prophet of GOD Moses: who it is believed did write our first four Cannonical Books of Scriptures: [from Ge∣nises, to Joshua,] for this reason, we give you to understand, first that by those many Names of the Power of God, which is but one is lively displayed, the Virtue and Power of that One, upon whom all Second Causes have their dependance. And then because what is attributed to this one, who hath variety of Names [to make him so distinguishable, in his works] Second∣ly the use of those many Names, are to let you understand; how by the variety of Opperations, in that one Spirit, GOD did, hath and will, effect the purpose of his decreed resolutions, [to bring to pass all things, which by the Counsell of his will, and wisdom, he Eternally Intended;] and therefore considering that the same which those Poets, do call Aether, and Dies, Coelus, and Terra, Coelum, and Vesta, &c. is intended by Moses, concerning the Generations of the Heavens, and Earth, [wherein the Firma∣ment
and Day, were the two first seperated properties, of the work of GOD;] you by the same Rule, may trace a coherance between the Writings of these the Poets, [or Prophets to the Gen∣tiles] and Moses, the Prophet of GOD, unto the Jews, [who then were accompted his only People.] Moreover Thirdly, concerning the Names of those Healthenish Gods and Godesses, [Saturn, Jupiter, Neptune, Pluto, Juno, Venus, &c.] they being the Names of certain Powers, proper∣ties and Virtues, of the Heavens, and Earth, attributed unto Persons that in the Older Ages, of the world, might and did bare those Names; as doth also the Stars of that birth, [under which Each, hath it particular signification] you are to consult, that as by Saturn, TIME is signify'd, so whatever is generated [in Time,] being the product of Saturn and Ops, [signifying Na∣tures Necessity of help in that work;] Occeanus also, signify∣ing the mighty deeps, or Abiss, upon which the darkness remained; while the Earth was in its Chaos, [void of Form;] it doth ap∣pear, that untill the Spirit of GOD, had breathed and did move, upon waters of the unform'd world, [in its first nothingness;] the Generations of Oceanus, which now are brought forth of such A∣biss, did nevertheless till the Spirit of Nature became separate from its Heavens, [by the disjoyning of TIME from Eternity, lay hid in the Chaos [of Terra.] So that Fourthly, where any word or Term remains dubious; you are to proceed unto that part, by which it is explained, and you will finde such a coherence in the whole, that shall give you to un∣derstand a prophetical Interpretation of those Mistical Chara∣ctors, and Hyraglips of the Antients, [under which knowledge hath been lockt up from the more vulgar capacities] until this time, come for every thing to be reveal'd and stand unseal'd: the reason of which, both why was lockt up [in proverbical dark sayings and Sentences,] those Misteries now to be unridled; and also of the Time for its unsealing, every one will come to read in themselves, [who are once come to finde the key:] as also why the Arms of Englands principality, are signify'd and represented by that No∣ble
Species, of a Lyon [Rampant, Passant, Couchant, or Dor∣mant;] and why by the principality of France, is signifyed a Wolf, pawing on the Flower de Luce; these with the Fox, Ape, Swan, Peacock, Goose, &c. being Heraglips that we have seen: and of the reason of our application, have so much on our side, as every one must be forced to confess unto the truth thereof, (that owns or pretends to such reason;) unless while scrupeling whether or no Ro∣mulus was nurss'd by a Wolf, they fall into a flat denyal of New builded Rome, to be nurssed and supported by the French power and Interest. But our indeavours are Candidly for the Readers Benefit, Who am Reader, in all Service of Love thine, Robert Bryan.
A PROLOGVE To the Insuing TREATISE. GODS Wisdom first found out away, Foundations of all Worlds to Lay, Ʋpon a Cause more firmly fix'd; Then all the Seeds of Nature mixt, In one Great Mass, the Chaos was, Of matter unform'd [by Natures Laws,] Though we confess the Abiss was, To every thing a Second Cause: Of Form distinct to Natures Soul, And every Orb, about doth rowl, Of the Great Worlds Universe: On whom GODS Power did Impress, The Seal of Forms, that are distinct Among themsels [as Causes link'd, Together in One Golden Chain, Intelligable to remain.) And this doth draw about the whole, Of all the parts, that have one Soul Causing the End, with the beginning To meet together [as one wining, The Game and prize, at stake was laid, In Natures womb, none can upbraid;] Because Eternity did will, A Cause Eternal to fulfill, Those things which being brought about, Are the Effects of what doth sprout, From Cause of Nature, in a Lump In whom all Second Causes Jump; According to purpose decreeing, All Causes of Nature and being, [As well unto the parts, as whole Of matter and great worlds Soul.
CHAPTER, I. Concerning all changes come or made upon and in the body of Na∣ture, (subject to the revolution of matter in time) under some weighty-Considerations upon Eternity. WHere what is past and flown, meets in that one Whence causes present effecteth things to come, Before and after are those parts of time, Nature (in whom's pur forth the measuring Line) By labour (in motion) strives to undermine; Which to prevent Eternity contriv'd, How all the Laws of Nature might be reviv'd, On a Foundation firmer then that of self; (Which undermined, may be by Natures Elph:) But Kingdom of self, thus undermin'd doth cause, Establisht (under the Draggons Jaws) This new revive of Nature and her Laws. For II. Where Sathan had made his Seat, those now do dwell, Whom God will make witness against his hell; (As nature renewed, unto her rights once lost: Comes up adorn'd, with beauty of wisdoms cost:) Thus Nature a subject was to a first cause, Of being to the whole, and of those Laws, Wherein the minde of God, (on her Impress'd) Had a commanding power to make all bless'd? Before was open'd the Eternal Womb, Of Seeds Eternal (Eternally there Sown) By an Eternal power thus Generating, Causes of form (to all of Gods Creating. III. Before (we say) unseal'd was that shut down
Under Eternal silence (without renown) A hiden cause there was of all that's thence; Awaken'd from Natures Womb, to complyance. Which cause of form, was cause of births there strove, According to a power each seed did move, Where Lurk'd the cause why Man, from GOD was drove. For matter of form, while closing with its cause, Is subject unto natures will'd form and laws. Who like an Ass, is bended down between Two burdens born, (while couchant she is seen; Yeilding compliance, to all within the Scene.) IV. Unmanifest (as God) eternally, That one (before and after all) was he; Therefore what we Eternal Nature call, Dwelling of God (unmanifest the all) Was the before and after cause adorn'd; Will'd manifest (in matter once unform'd,) Being to forms of Nature, from that cause Of all in one Gold chain (so powerfull draws;) Where cause of self, as whole stands now divided, Variety disclosing, the strif decided. By Ʋnity, in whom (qualities distinct) Are swallowed up in one the whole is linkt; V. But while shut up, were various opperations, (In one Eternal Womb,) all seperations: Of matter (will'd by causes) did obey, The seperating cause, without delay, Thus causes in God (of Soul to Natures frame) Was one creating cause, caus'd him supream; To be over those causes, had a dependance, On will to seperation, caus'd by attendance. (Of Seeds unformed) occasion to Imbrace, They took (by opertunity to come in place, Where births distinct, accordingly were form'd, From cause of self, as self now stands adorn'd.
VI. From the Intelligable (Ideas made seperate) Are causes of form (in Nature) uncreate, In Nature, as seeds, Ideas thus were plac'd: But Shaddowy (in matter) they form Imbrac'd; For in Gods minde was plac'd (in unity,) Ideas of form that had Community, With him the one of all, while uncreate Was form to matter, he did seperate; According to causes distinguishable, (Among themselves) from the Intelligable; As such the Worlds Soul, that did admit Variety of Seeds, so causing it. VII. But will of causes, Atracting forms distinct, Was will unable, till quicknings there had linked, (In one, that Golden Chain,) Nature complying Caus'd will of one to be a cause denying, Power otherways to causes, then they serv'd To magnify that cause, in whom reserv'd; Was a reward of Justice, by equal measure, Proportioning effects, to be the treasure, Of will to all causes, made seperate, To serve that one, whose Power did Antidate; All disobedience made by will Inthrawl'd, Another Lord to serve, then truth Instawl'd: VIII. Thus changes in Nature had variety, Of causes Subjecting unto vanity: Not willingly (by God; who otherways Subdued in hope our forms again to rise. Throw all these changes, he suffering did will Eternal Glory form'd; that to fulfill, Which our frail Natures wakened, by deaths sting Unto his praise decreed about did bring;) For he decreed effects to every cause, Proportionable unto Natures Laws: (As cause of whole, and consequent of parts,
Dependant upon one, whom causes thwarts. IX. Thus Thwart, as they are thwarted by decree, (Of God that one; who holds Supremecy) Did causes of hurt (by change) first operate, Till God, had turn'd the course of Natures fate Brought (through her changes) to a better State. And hence all cause of various opperations, Effects produceth, as various in their Stations, While we under the Moon-light walk of will, Ordained to rule the changes; do fulfill His purpose decreed, that then shall stand reveal'd, (To be lights Fountain, when its Suns unseal'd:) Under whose righteous wings, Nations are heal'd. X. Mean time as Children of the day let's walk, And not like Bats by Night, the Sun doth bawk Seeing a better State, God hath ordained, For those who by his Power have sin refrain'd, And him doth love, whom evil hath restrain'd. Changes must be, before our Resurrection Compleated is, to out live that Infection, Which Death by 'ts sting, hath made on Nature frail While her comply did Misery Intail, On us her Subjects, may the hurt bewayl: But lets arise in Life, unchangable And leave behinde the form tangable. XI. For Act of causes, sinfull comes of self Where cause of Act, was will'd by Natures Elph; Who seperated birth, is of that seed Which sown in Natures Garden prov'd a weed; For though to will, God being first did give Which will of different seeds, came thence to live, Yet will of self, no power had to Act, Till change prevail'd, to Natrulise wills Fact Which self Intaild upon the will of Nature, Not absolute, though free (in every Creature:)
Where causes of will, are link'd all in one chain, Draws after will Effects, caus'd to remain. And XII. Where change of minde, preceedent cause is made Of change on bodys, to Glory (ne'er shall fade, Repentings are a needfull change begun, Till unto the unchangable, were come Where united stands a body with that minde; Which Glorify'd is, Glory to finde. Therefore though we in bodys vile, have dwelt This change begun on Nature we have felt, (As well as on our minds,) having a part In the first Resurrection, where our heart, With its affections, plac'd above are set, On Heavenly things renewings doth beget. CHAP. II. Concerning the Creation of the World, (in Nature) wherein stands represented, the Mistery of the Golden Fleece, that was carryed to Colchos. WHen God the Word began first to Create, The Earth being void of form was Nihils Seat, While Darkness Oceanus over spread, And on the face of Neptune Spirit sheed; Which was a Power supream, will'd seperation Of light from darkness of his first Creation. But while the Heavens and Earth, were thus Created The Stage of Nothings form therein stated. Fixation was requir'd, while apt to fly Was matter volatile, bove Natures Sky; Gods Spirit therefore breathing on those waters, Whose Face was the first beauty of all matters. II. A Firmament thus made, the Curtain was
Of Nature (forms) out-spread shewing a cause, Why unto Coelus and Terra; Aether and Dies Parents were feign'd under Natures Surprize, As also how Nature surpriz'd, (while Reign'd, The youngest Son of Coelus and Terra thus feign'd?) Both why and how (we say) became disjoyn'd, Such Coelus and Terra; from unity of minde, And what were the three sorts of Children born, Gyants, Cyclopes and Tytans from Heaven torn; (As Saturn the youngest race, of powers destructive With crooked Sith did cut off parts productive.) III. The cause (we say,) of all these things appears, When once the Curtians drawn in Aethers Sphears, That he on dies form'd, when seperated Was Light from Darkness, by what God Created; To be the Heavens and Earth; (were void of form While Oceanus cover'd as one unborn,) Stood capable, of Heavens Impregnation, On Vesta made the fruit of Gods Creation:) For Vesta's praise, who thence receiv'd her light, All then stood Cloath'd, with Coelums Nature bright, Cause vayld the Temple was whence light appear'd, Made th' outward Nature of all things be fear'd: IV. But till their Nature, by Earths heir was worn, And outward pomp, was from Mans Heavens torn; The outward Nature of all things did bare, An Image form'd in Gods own Heavenly Sphear, Till Neptunes Brats (we say) were born, all stood Capable of form from the Eternal good: Good 'twas to him, thus to create them so, While evil lurk'd (unform'd) Mens mortal foe, Proceeding whence took place the guilt of wo. But his Decree hereby was brought about, His Head to break that caus'd the reble rout, Conspir'd by Death, whence all our evils sprout.
V. 'Twas Amphitrite, to whom stood first united, Our powerfull Neptune, (whom hell fiends thus spited, Having contriv'd the way to frame desire, Of Ewe to self (in kinde and Sheeps first sire, From Natures harmless dress and best Atire:) Desire thus fram'd of One, in twains partake The Tye in wedlock did fond Neptune brake: For of Theophiness, Neptune soon grew fond Who her in Ewe-skin cloath'd, Wolf to Abscond, From near approach (because fear held the bond.) While he her other Lovers had transform'd, Under the Wolf-like shape, they stood Adorn'd; VI. In Nature bliss and fortunes direct way, All Labouring mov'd untill thus went astray, Subjects created one Lord to obey; Before our Adam did his Nature stain, To be this one, did Neptune strive amain, And how to get the Fleece (did Gold remain.) On fair Theophiness in such form of Ewe, Who from such other Lovers amazed flew, (That by Enchantment, Neptune Wolf-like form'd To fright his fair Theophiness, with shaps scorn'd; In form of Ram (we say) Neptune begot, The Golden Fleece, which of the Ram out shot; VII. Before the Ram of this his Fleece was shorn, Or shape of Wolves, were thus brought under scorn, On such the Ram, by whom was first begot, The Golden Fleece of Neptune, (now lusts blot) Phryxus to Colchos, Rod a journey hence, Before the Golden Fleece, was carryed thence, To Colchos from this our Elesian shore, The Ram carryed our Gold to deck the whore; When shorn and fleec'd he came, (now doth adore The Beasts form'd Image on a fleshly score,) Because while wounded was one head of power,
Six others grew and spread, for mans devour. VIII. The Ram thus fleec'd, as Phyxus then did Ride, To carry Gold away o're Neptunes tide: Ceres dismayed was, to see transform'd, From Ram to Horse, (with crest and huffs adorn'd; But yet prepar'd was there a Cave to hide, Her from the shame and loss, that did betide Her wandring fancy, after Proserpine By Jupiter begot (in seeds of Time:) Cause Jason entering in that open Cave, Thence brought his Plutus out from Natures grave, While Neptune on Ceres, venturing like attempt From cause of shame, could not Ceres exempt. IX. For Daughter of Time, (in Saturn signify'd) Was Ceres the Mother of Seed, that did abide The loss of Proserpine (her Daughter) when, She rang'd in Natures field to gather in, (To self) the Flowers thereof; until found ravish'd Was she, by Pluto carry'd who time had lavish'd, 'Mongst her Companions, (what Nature did then yeild, Wisdom, Beauty, and Wealth, to grace her Field, While thus from her Companions (in her prime, She's snatch'd to hell, and there held a Rapine,) To dwell Six Months with Pluto, as one famish'd, Who thus from Venus, Juno, and Minerve, stood banish'd. For what cause? X. Again to grace the World with Beauty new, And shew the Power of him, by whom then grew, What she had gather'd in, which did revive, (Other Six Months,) upon the Earth to thrive; A seperated Seed of Natures Soyl, Made subject to bare the Fruit of Adams toil; By fancy of his own that Love Imbrass'd; Who his Theophiness was, on whom was plac'd, That Virtue of his minde, in Nature grac'd;
Till Love turn'd Lust, was such a change in Man, That Nature favour'd in the Cave of Pan, Whence Ceres lighted Torches, (read who can.) —What XI. Devided Species of the Draggon was, Such Beast of prey the Wolf, that sets his paws, Upon the Flower of Crowns, in Natures Sphear, Where Subjects of that Crown, which Kings do ware, Are Armed men Sprung up, in Natures soyl, Who 'gainst each other fight, for his prevail Whose Teeth knockt out, by our Medeas hand, Were Sown to make the World to understand, How sleepy Death over powr'd the grim assays, 'Gainst her was made (who Tract the Draggons ways, Whom by no wit or Art, could then uphold The Breach of tottering Walls (from fall foretold) XII. While Bulls with fiery Mouths, both huff'd and horn'd, (With Ire of sparkling brass) Medea scorn'd, Although they were a guard, to Apples fair Which grew in Hespers Garden by such Air; To grace his Orchard, with such Fruit of Time, He holds in hell, for our Natures Rapine. Thus was out charm'd the Draggon of his prize, When once the seed first sown again did rise, Hurt to prevent of Natures open tyes, But how the Enemy did with mischief tange, What thus became misplac'd, to work such change, If you'l finde out consult, in Natures range.
CHAP. III. Concerning Paradise, and such the Draggon, Beast, and Whore under whose Power and Dominion, (by their Enchantments,) put upon the same,) our Felecity (of these Enjoyments; in a Life of Nature) hath been lost, and the Golden Fleece hence carryed. ONe was the Tree, (in midst of Garden plac'd, Which also with the Tree of Life, was grac'd; But senssed, though one; divided stood the form, Of twain, who from that one, quickly was torn, To re-unite all causes of twins Born: For (while thus one) the Fruit of both was senss'd; And from that one, the Taster soon was fenss'd; Where Glory of Paradise (in a better State, Then that wherein Exsists, our love and hate,) On wings of Angels fleed, to her new Seat. Seeking redress for loss, she had sustain'd By Death on Life, (where Adam first remain'd. II. Whence Death sprung up, in what was seperated, The twain of one (from whom Life thus retreated, Towards the Center; wherein it was retain'd, The Tree of Life, from lustfull Eyes restrain'd.) Cause thus the fence broke down, the Tree did yeild The Taster (pain for pleasure) in her field; As Good and Evil, springing from that Tree; Good Fruit did bare, but Evil unto we, Did prove by Tasting, (as forbid to us, Who disobeying fell under the curse:) Of that which self procur'd (in Nature frayl, O'er whom the Enemy came, thus to prevail. For III. Watch'd over was the Tree, (such Fruit did bare By the Old Serpent, and Enchanted were,
Both Fruit and Garden, where Pluto did feed, His Queen of pleasure, who grasp'd flowers of Seed, That Ravish'd was, by gathering such a prize, Which coveted, now opens Natures Eyes, To sense the Good and Evil of that Life, Which she in hell must loose, to end the strife; As he the Draggon (out charm'd) his Art doth loose, By strength of Teeth to bite or to abuse, The Power in Nature plac'd; which must arise To Glory in such Draggons first surprise, IV. Dying to live, was then the way prepar'd, Against the sting of Death, that all men fear'd. While living to dye, Nature her course thus stear'd, By Death to kill a Death, (in Life once cur'd, All pangs on Life by Death eas'ly indur'd. Are unto those in whom Lifes Crown Insur'd, But How Nature from its Paradise, did sink Into a lower station, where did link, Causes together, of that Golden Chain; Under whose drawing power doth remain: Subjects of her Dominions, now become Vasels unto a Lord (for what was done,) V. How he the Draggon, thus came to prevail O'er Nature Subjects, and his sting Intaile, On her posterity, by allowance took, That Heavens suffering caus'd in her forsook; By Angels of that Sphear, (their station kept, Of Glory from Heaven reveal'd (where Adam sleept.) The Mistery of which a secret was, That Angels into prying became a cause; Seals (while remaining on Gods Book) none can, Ʋnloose, untill times come, that God in Man, Hath taught a World Misterys to understand; Of whole to be fulfill'd is now at hand. VI. In order unto which take Observation,
Of what befell the World in its first station, Where Saturn (Angel of time) with his sharp Sith, Did seperate what from Coelus, he did deprive By Circumcise of parts, that Terra did catch; When he by hand and Sith, did thus dispatch (Cause of Coelus's sufferings) to seperate, That which Blood of such wounds did Generate: Forms of those Causes, from Coelus once disjoyn'd Their Mother Earth Imbrased, under like kinde Of a disjunction made twixt her and Coelus, 'Gainst whom she did conspire, with Natures Bellows What to do? VII. To blow up Natures Cole unto a fire, Her Subjects could not quench, under the Ire Of Instigated Saturn to unthrone, His Father Coelus, when an Eunuch grown: For From Heaven was then cast down, those monsterous shapes Which were cut off by Saturn (as Coelu's escapes, Until this time of Circumcision came; Thereby made Circumventive to Coelus of blame,) Whence Gyants these sprung up Monstroufly form'd, With many Heads of beast, that was ten horn'd, For unto Earth was cast, Members defil'd, No more to Generate in Heaven a Child, VIII. But then sufferings of Coelus from that cause, Blood spilt and sown on Earth, 'gainst Natures Laws, (Created vengance from the Throne of Power, Retaliated on him who did devour, (In cutting off those Members) his own race, Whom when made vomit up did him displace, From the usurped Seat, whence he disthron'd, Of Members was depriv'd, and unbemoan'd In his Exile, where none but Janus dar'd, In Italy to harbour what was spar'd, By Sword of Jove, (who Nourish'd was in Creet;)
And was confind where miseries do meet. How? IX. As into time was brought, hells hot desire, Which did create Eternal flames of fire, Those forms to destroy, which Nature gave In Childhood to be nurss'd, towards their grave; While open throat of Saturn down doth swollow, All principles to Blood, in whom did wallow, Natures first birth, cast forth in open Field, Ʋnswadled there, while none respect did yield, Like to Celeus, (unto Saturns Daughter,) Who took in Ceres, while she wandring after Her Proserpine, whom ravish'd and led to hell, From her was lost, (with Pluto constraind to dwell.) What? X. A Subject of Pluto, though in hell a Queen She in Natures adorn, doth sometimes seem; While Plutus her Mothers Son by Jason hides, The Gold that Ram, did carry o'er Neptunes tides, Whom Horse begot (on Cerees;) did cause that shame; She bares for Neptunes sake, where rests the blame Of what she having let in, the first was lost While second in Earth appear'd hers, in third crost But Angel of Justice, Heavens did retain, A thundering Jove (in Vesta did remain;) Whom Saturn on Ops, did Generate to be, Heavens restitution made of Liberty. But do you Ask? XI. How from the fall of Lucifur did rise, The Draggon unto Power for our surprize; How Lucifur cast down, and under chain Of Darkness there kept was so to remain, Reserv'd unto the Judgment of a day, By fire trys, what thus from God did stray? And yet how loos'd was such the Draggons power, Who in all Ages labour'd to devour? How he both loose and bound, at once could be
To serve Gods Justice, and himself go free; How (while Christ in his suffering Saints did Reign,) He vengeance could escape (from being slain?) XII. This all to Answer is a task too great, For humane wit or Art (that may create, More scruples then requir'd it to explain;) Because the Book thus seal'd, must so remain. Untill the Time is come to stand reveal'd, All Misterys (in Nature) to be unseal'd: For How bound [think ye] was he thus did prevail, By such Vice-Roy [the Beast] over that Tail, Made up of Heavens third part, that had been drawn After the Draggon their head [on whom did fawn, Slaves of his Dominion, Flattery did love, From such his Tail, he after him did move.] CHAP. IV. Concerning the Kingdom, Power and Dominions of such the Drag∣gon and Whore, in and unto the Beast, deliver'd up [under se∣veral forms, he had Power to transform himself into;] wherein by the appearance of the Wolf, [the Nurse of Old Rome] is un∣ridled a Prophetical Demonstration of a Mistery including, the Power of France, [under the Kingly Dominion of a Wolf, paw∣ing on the Flower Deluce.] NEptune with Triple Forck, thrust Triple Crown, From Earth towards Natures Heavens, for her re∣nown; To whom by crook she drew its Glory down. Who now grown whore, upon that Beast doth ride, That carryed Phryxus o're this Neptunes Tide; Which Beast, (in the Lambs form) hath Draggons voice: And is the now grown Ram, of the whores choice, That Life unto the Beast with wounded Head,
Recover'd, by healing that once almost dead, Unto which Beast the Draggon, gave up his power, (With Seat and great Dominion to devour; All those who were not shelter'd in his Tower. II. And cause his wounded Head again was heal'd, Unto and in his Image, Life stood reveal'd; The Mistery of Power reviv'd, [once was fast seal'd.] That he both Live and Spake, did with a voice Of a commanding power; with Natures choice, Unto a shape, (with Monsterous Heads and horns;) Wherein he worship'd was in several forms, For With Seven Heads, (and horns Ten) came he, On the Septentrion Angle where Waters be. That fills the Sea, whence he came up to shew How out from thence being come, his power doth grow, Over those waters that do over-flow. III. Those Waters many (whereon She doth set, Lady of pleasure, that doth pain beget,) Are Peoples, Tongues and Nations, o'er whom she rules, (As Queen) who is that whore, the world befools: On seven high Hills also, spread forth her Sate, Did She who rides on him, whose horns shall hate, That bloody City built on Mountains high, Which plainly doth the Beast, and Whore discry; Who both when taken alive, with Draggon great Are cast into the Lake fire uncreate, Eternally prepar'd to be their fate, That 'gainst God did presume (from such their sate,) IV. For while this Whore exalted was on him, Whose frightfull and Monsterous form unto Men, Fray'd first the Ewe Theophness, with Wolfs shape (As things transform'd, thus stood for her escape, Who flying from the Wolf, while Ram prevail'd, Hath on her shoulders, Eagles wings Intail'd, While thus (we say,) the Wolf Man was fear'd
He like a Wolf to Theophiness appear'd: Who now stands Cloath'd, the Ram that once was shorn And is Enchanting Neptunes better form, Whose Fleece again being grown, all men adore The Rising Sun who once went down before. V. 'Twas Romulus, that first began to build The City call'd by's Name in Natures Field, The Wolf that nurss'd him was Nature adorn'd, In such a shape, that Neptune had transform'd: Lovers of Theophiness, as frightfull Beasts of prey, They did appear the harmless Ewe to fray, Which caus'd the flight (on Eagles wings) of she, Our true Theophiness is, (Mother sets free; Her seed and Children dear, from the Wolfs Ire Who in his Stomach Nurss'd, brood of Hells fire,) For what Romulus, thus built she Fox became, Call'd Reynelus, thus Nurss'd (under Wolfs blame.) Of what? VI. Of nurssing him did build, a City great Whom thus She Fox became, found in the cheat Was (of her Mother Wolf; who sought advise, From Reynelus, how they an Interprise, Might bring about, to storm the Lyons Den; To whom Wolf Reynalds, sent (it to look in) And view the State of Lyon, how stood Guarded The Palace of that Prince; and how warded, Was Fort of Leo? and who there stood centry? Or kept the Gates; through which he mak's his entry? Fox taking leave of Wolf, his errand run Having more craft then Wolf, (whose tale was done.) VII. And when to Lyons Den come, in did peep Who unto Wolf brought word, Lyon did sleep, Which did encourage Wolf to travel on, Towards the Lyons Fort, (as Fox had done;) And thither coming without fear of danger, Found Fox a lyer, and no Forrest Ranger:
For Wolf no sooner peep'd in Lyons Den, But rous'd he stood to meet Wolf half-way in; (While crafty Fox, fleed towards Henroost to hide, Her self from danger, of the Wolfs betide, Under whose paw, was left (Wolf who had nurss'd, A City builder (she Fox became now curss'd,) So that VIII. Who plow'd hath with our Heifor may be bold, That they this ridle, shall come to unfold; Mean while consider, where the Wolf was left And whether fleed the Fox Guilty of theft; Who while to Goose doth preach, on Goose doth ride, To whom she proves a grave, (the Goose doth hide; Therefore let Goose beware, while Fox doth teach Peacock a lesson ('gainst pride) he don't Impeach; Goose for an Ape of France, and leave the Swan, In his white plums to pride, reade they that can For now on Stage are brought, with their black feet, Both Peacock, Swan, and Ape, whom Fox doth greet, For what? IX. To hear a Sermon made, although the Text She would not give, till Goose to her sate next, Upon whose back she leapt, setting a stride The prey she made (of Goose whom Fox doth ride:) For Hen-roost Fox was hunting, while she left The Wolf to Lyons paw, of power bereft, (To help her self, thus fallen under paw, Of Lyon Rampant, keeps all Beasts in awe.) While Necessity indeed of Justice was, A Foster Mother, and a Second Cause, (As Death awakend, Justice to Execute, Made hungry grave, its power to prosecute.) What? X. Causes (in Nature) why thus hath prevail'd, Death unto heirs, on whom it stands intail'd, And How needfull 'twas, the Wolf should come they know, Who are awakend 'against Deaths overthrow;
Till then the Wolf may paw, upon the flower, (That is no meat with ease he can devour, Whose stomach crav's to nourish deaths hungry power: And feeds upon those bodies wherein Life, Is cas'd remaining years, of Natures Strife, Throw Death to live again Gods Loyal Wife. 11. And thus her Sate, on whom the Change prevail'd, Over the Seed, to whom death stood intail'd, Is now seen Ram, by whom the wound was heald: Of head on Monster Heaven hath reveal'd To be the form reviv'd, for him to whom The Draggon gave up his Seat, Power, and Throne; So that you plainly now may see what rides, And what unto the who such Beasts betides, Him that hath carry'd her who rules the form On her begotten in a blustring storm: (Carry'd once to Colchos in form of a Ram, Phryxus that Rod o're Neptunes Ocean. 12. Through all transformings hitherto hath appear'd, Uncloath'd the Wolf, that in a Ewe-skin fear'd Self in a shape begot, by fire of Lust; ('Twixt twain) what's made a grave to hold the Just; When crucify'd (by her, that was the Nurse To Romulus the Sire of Natures curse:) The form was held, (as Wolf then did afford Her Nourishment of twain with one accord) Who though she be thus inwardly a Wolf, Yet stands in Sheeps-skin clad a greedy Gulph, And swallow'd in (by craft) beguiled minds While bait was cover'd hurtfull as flock finds. 13. Now mark you well, the Cause of false Larums, By Shepheards of that Flock, and sound of Drums, Have cry'd the Wolf is come to Stupify, The Ears so oft deceiv'd by their grossly, Till come he did, and shall (though self se∣cure, They all are grown, who look not to Indure Tryals by fire, preparing for a day Brings Sheep to sold again had went astray When naked, such Wolf time will bewray Who though a Wolf, he thus be inwardly Yet in Sheeps-skin, is clad from their discry By Sheepheards, are lead and left when dangers by 14. But how the Wolf doth come, if you will know, (Considering thus his cloathing her below) Mark well, no time that's past can time pre∣vent, (Decreed to bring about the whole event) Untill is ripend Fruits by Fire try'd That its consuming flames cannot abide, Though on the Flower de Luce this Wolf doth paw, In him Nurss'd up, (by her keeps Kings in Awe; Contented are, their Subjects should be hers, The time those horns have power that she confers, Yea, and transfers from those shall disobey To drink her Cup brimfull, the prize doth sway.) Errata. REader, thou art desired with thy Pen to a∣mend any litteral faults that have escap'd in Correcting, chiefly Hiraglip make Hyragliphick. FINIS.
