B6376 10840266 46090
AN Exact Relation OF The most Execrable Attempts OF JOHN ALLIN, Committed on the Person of His Excellency FRANCIS Lord WILLOƲGHBY of Parham, Captain General of the Continent of Guiana, and of all the Caribby-Islands, and our Lord Proprietor. LONDON, Printed for Richard Lowndes, at the white Lion in S. Pauls Churchyard near the little North door. 1665.
AN EXACT RELATION Of the most Execrable Attempts OF JOHN ALLIN, Committed on the Person of His Excellency Francis Lord Willoughby of Parham, &c. THis abominable Villain (as the sequel of this story will demonstrate him) was born in London, traded some years in Barbadoes, from whence he ran off, and on the 10. of April, Anno 57. arrived in this Colony. Here he settled with an active industry, but much addict∣ed to Swearing, Cursing, and Drunkenness; and on the 15. of February Anno 59. was accused and tried for horrid Blas∣phemy, cursing the most blessed Redeemer of the world, with expressions unfit to be named but by Devils; at the instant recital of which in his Penance and Recantation en∣joyned him by the Court, the very Foundation of the house wherein they sate (I being then an Auricular witness) gave a fearful crack, to the terrible amazement of all the trem∣bling
Auditours. This dreadful signal of Divine displea∣sure wrought no remorse in this vile Blasphemer, who dis∣regarding Scripture, and scoffing at Piety, entertained his hours of leisure with Romances, and the Lives of some bold Romans and daring Valiant ones, which bred in him an ad∣miration (which he often uttered in his discourse) how any man, endued with the least reason or courage, would on any account suffer torment or publick ignominious death, when his own hands with a stab or poison could give him ease and remedy. Besides, he would often plead that chil∣dren in misery might justly curse and stab their parents who begat them to beggery. He had good natural parts, but low education, which (had he had Grace) he might have improved. His principles Atheistical; on some subjects he would discourse very rationally, especially on Planting, in which time and experience had tutoured him. By his knowledge in this he advanced his humble fortune, which increasing, heightened strange apprehensions in him, at length more adapting him for Errantry than Planting; he would often say, that if he thought his labour and industry would not present him with more horses in his Coach than the Emperour, he would never toil; and gave out, that as soon as his Estate enabled him, he would buy a ship, sail to Constantinople, and kill the Great Turk. That he scorned contests with private men, for he was born to blow up Par∣liaments, destroy Kingdoms, &c. and these and such like swelling Vapours would often arise from the frothy brain of this Desperado. On the 4. of November Anno 63. he was exercising his sarcastical wit to the prejudice of Captain John Parker, who retorting grated on Allins former blasphemy: this begat a peek which ended in a Duel, and Captain Parker being wounded, Allin retires, expecting the issue; hearing no
danger, appears, and was bound over to Sessions. Captain Parker afterwards recovering, Allin declared, that had he miscarried, he would have erected a large pile of wood by his Negroes, and when throughly kindled, would have stab∣bed himself, and run into its consuming flames to prevent an ignominious death. On the 18. of November last His Excellency arrived in this River, to the unexpressible joy of all the Inhabitants, His Excellency under God being the foundation and essence of ths Colony. Allin was advised that His Excellency was informed in Barbadoes of his Blasphemy and Duelling, and that strict inquisition was made what punishment he had un∣dergone for such an accursed crime, and whether since his penance and recantation he had expressed any remorse and amendment, what life he had led, and how he came to be chosen a Representative, and possesse some Offices of emi∣nency in the Colony, it being a deserved scandal unto it, that such a known Blasphemer should be intrusted with pla∣ces of Dignity in it. Allin wrongfully conjectured that this intelligence was blown into His Excellency's ears by Captain Parker, whereupon he writes a very civil Letter to His Excellency in vindication of himself, utterly denying that he ever uttered those accursed expressions, that the ac∣cusations were malicious, and as he pretended, by reason he had formerly committed one for drinking the Kings health, and that Captain Parker continuing his animosities against him, had kindled his prejudice and disesteems. At Christmas all the Gentlemen near his Excellencies Plantation were invited, Allin (though not called) intrudes, and on the morrow after Christmas day His Excellency sends for Allin privately into his chamber, tells him he had received his Letter whereby be had perceived his parts, and on that was very fit for the service of the Country,
and should be sorry that this business, which he had said he durst not name, should be proved against him; that he sent for him, to let him know, he was not prejudicated, but must do justice; several people had complained against the lewdness of this Country, and not only Captain Parker, but several others told him of the business; that he never could per∣ceive Captain Parker had any prejudice to the Country (as Allin had alleged) and for Duelling he must and would be severe according to the Laws, it preserved mens lives, &c. But that he had no design on his Person or his Estate; Allin replyed, that malicious times produced strange effects, &c. and as he was going away he asked His Excellency whe∣ther his stay was any thing offensive; His Excellency re∣plyed, he would not thrust any person out of his house, but was no ways desirous of his company, till the business was cleared. This private conference in his Excellencies cham∣ber was immediately penned by Allin, and found amongst his papers. Immediately after this, Allin, informs seve∣ral of his acquaintance of what had past, retires, and was shy of exposing himself to the publick view; they all assu∣red him that His Excellency had no design neither on his person nor estate, for if he had he would have secured him. Notwithstanding all their good advice Allins obstinate sus∣pition falsly concluded, that His Excellency had a design upon his Vineyard (as he called it) and therefore would put him to death that it might be forfeited. This groundless apprehension made him desperately mad, and guided by an Atheistical Tenet, designed a most murderous inveterated revenge on his innocent Excellency, and his own death. And that his designed malice might have opportunity to ef∣fect his intentions, on the second of January, after he had made a short stiff Cutlash, exceeding sharp, he commanded five Negroes and a Christian servant to put some provision
into his Boat with some Axes and Bills, and then called ano∣ther Christian servant, and told him, that if he heard he were dead, he should take what he could get, and that he gave him his freedom. This done, he directs his course to the upper end of Parham Plantation, and near the open ground, not far from a path leads to Noctia, of an old saw-pit, he commanded his Negroes to build a Hut, and sent some of them to observe whether any approched that place, and that they might be unsuspected, ordered them to carry wood on their shoulders, as if they had belonged to a Planta∣tion near unto His Excellency's Plantation, where he some∣times walkt with very slender attendance. These recreations of His Excellencies gave Allin encouragement for his desir'd conveniency, but divine providence still steered His Excel∣lency from that part, where this murderer expected him. On Monday the second of January His Excellency visiting a Neighbours Plantation, came home late at the landing place, Allin lay undiscovered to murder him at his arrival, but a light, and attendance suddenly coming down to receive him, Allin at that time was disappointed. The day fol∣lowing His Excellency honoured a Neighbour with a vi∣sit, about two leagues from Parham, during his absence Allin sent a Letter by the hands of a Negroe Boy, but 'twas not left for, nor delivered to His Excellency that day, for it was late before his Bark returned. That night Allin cal∣led for victuals, and said, come lets eat a little before I die; his servant replied, I hope not so Master, I hope there is no cause or fear of death; I cannot tell answered Allin. The next morning being the fourth day, Allin sent a let∣ter very early, by the very same Negroe Boy, and charged him most strictly to deliver it with his own hand; the ld most confidently goes to His Excellencies chamber, pre∣sents
the Letter which was wrapped up in a leaf, and unseal∣ed, and so departs; His Excellency (because to Allin stood on his justification, and pleaded guiltless, that the Blasphe∣my for which he was accused) had sent for the papers out of the Records which concerned his tryal, and this morning about the time of the delivery of Allins Letter, received them, where he found three positive Depositions, his In∣dictments, and the Penance enjoyned him by the Court for his blasphemy: After this His Excellency shewed my self, and Major Banister (as he was walking in his Plantation) none attending him besides our selves, Allins Letter, with what impudency penned, the inserted Copy will evidence, and discoursing of him, His Excellency averred, he need not have any suspition of him, for he intended him no injury, but he was bound for to take cognizance of his fearful Blas∣phemy, and to search what judicial proceedings there had been about it, for such a business as this, being of a most dreadful nature, ought not to be slubbered over; and with∣all informed us, that for his satisfaction he had sent for, and that morning received all papers relating thereunto. And as for his Duelling which Allin so much feared to be pu∣nished for, he intended not to question him upon the late strict Act, being it was never published nor known here, &c. His Excellency had summoned the Council here to at∣tend him this evening at Parham, at which time as he inten∣ded to walk to his Wind-mill, near the place where Allin lurked, arrives some Gentlemen of his Council which prevented him, had he gone, Allin had at the place attemp∣ted to murther him. The usual hour for evening Prayers being come, all went to divine service in an upper dining Room, where my self, Council, and several Gentlemen of the Colony, besides Domestick Servants, attended His Ex∣cellency. And as his Chaplain was reading the first Lesson,
being the 3. of the 2. Samuel, and the 27 verse, And Joab smote Abner under the fifth rib, &c. Allin enters the room with a ghastly and direful countenance, at first unknown to any present, and going towards His Excellency with his left hand somewhat extended, as if he intended some civil ad∣dress, and his right hand aloof behind his right thigh, with his sharp Cutlace in it, and as soon as within reach smote  his Excellencies head with all his fury, and seconded his blow before I, who was one of his nearest, could enterpose; immediately other Gentlemen rushed on him: at the instant in which I seized him, Allin stabs himself with his short Cutlace in his right side, and down he fell: all were surpri∣zed with amazement and horrour, and had I not with a pas∣sionate earnestness most strictly commanded them to for∣bear, that he might be reserved for the hand of Justice, se∣veral would have slain him; and he hearing them cry out, Kill the Dog, replyed, I came here to dye, to kill my Lord, and then my self. After I had secured him with a Guard, I waited on His Excellency, whom I found through Gods mer∣cy far better than I expected, wounded in the Forehead with a slanting blow,By Letters since from Suinam, we understand that the Lord Willughby's wounds were for dange∣rous, that his brains were seen to beat. but his worst hurt was in his left hand, with holding it up after he had received the first blow, had his forefinger and middle finger cut off, and had lost a third had not a large Ring which he wore thereon defended it; I returning to Allin, commanded him to be searched; in his pocket were found some Powder and Balls, and several Papers; his wound had a large Orifice, and about his bare belly a new cord bound hard, for what use I know not; and charge being given to a Chirurgeon to dress him and take care of him, I with my Council perused his papers, amongst which we found the Letter which he had writ to His Excellency, which I have
here inserted, that the world may see what an imperious and bloody Villain this was; but this, as in the Postscript he writes, was sent, but not delivered. The Letter super∣scribed, For His Excellency the Lord Willoughby our Pro∣prietour. An Abstract of some passages out of Mr. Allins Letter sent to His Excellency. MY LORD, YOur Marshals gave out that they were come for me, which made me fly my house; I now stand upon my guard, and am resolved never to be seized by Mankind, &c. I do humbly beg, desire, and expect, that you will by my Boy the bearer send me your general pardon both for Words, Blas∣phemy, and Duels fought with Captain Parker, as like∣wise for this way of asking it, also a pardon for Captain Parker, &c. If you do not send me this pardon full and large, remember that you will be guilty of all the bloud that I shall spill, and mischief I shall act, which shall be as great as ever was acted by the instructions and hands of a private man; upon the reception of which I will lay by my Arms, and come in to your Lordship with the great∣est submission, &c. He that slights his own life may command any mans life in the world; and I have too much
of a Roman in me to possess my own life, when I can∣not enjoy it with freedom and honour. My Lord, but the very last night at your coming ashore I had your life in my hand, my sword drawn, and as much courage as ever Caesar had, and my convenience was so great, that I was overcome with the advantage, my reason overcoming my passion, and telling me I can ne∣ver lay an higher obligation upon this Nobleman, than by now passing his Life: and therefore (my Lord) remem∣ber however you deal by me, you met with a generous Enemy. My Lord, to conclude, if you seize my Boy, or that you force him to confess any thing, or that he be not with me by the setting of the Sun, or that he bring me no answer, I will conclude that you intend to destroy me, or at the least put ignominies upon me, which I will never en∣dure; I will renounce all Allegiance, revenge my self on all my Enemies, then kill my self. MY LORD, I am your devoted Servant, JOHN ALLIN. From the Woods, Tuesday Jan. 3. 1664. My Lord, I sent this yesterday by one of the clock, but you were not at home.
His Letter was too large and too impertinent to be all inserted in this small Narrative, but these are the most ma∣terial parts; But most of these Rants in their several Para∣graphs were not written in his last Letter to his Excellency, for had they been sent, a cautious care had been taken to have prevented his design of Blood on his Excellency. This night he lay in torment, with the anguish of his wound, which caused a violent Feaver. He repented for nothing but that he had not killed His Excellency; and cursed the Coat which he wore (which was one of his Ne∣groes, that he might be the less known) that dulled his sword from entring deep enough into his body. His Excellencies Chaplain giving him some spiritual advice, he bid him talk to the rabble, and not to him. He gloried in the action he had committed, but grieved it was unsuccesful; and being by an intimate acquaintance interrogated of his Complices; he answered, He scorned any man should share with him in so noble an action. Be∣ing demanded whether he desir'd any thing to dispatch him∣self, he answered, He could do that at any time: and about 12 at night, the Marshal being gone out of the room, he drew forth a Pistol (which was supposed to be tyed to his thigh) charged up to the Muzzel, clapt it to his Brest, struck fire but 'twould not go off; he then called to a Cen∣tinel to spare him a stick of fire to light his Pipe, which ob∣served, he clapt the burning cole to the Pan, but all would not discharge the Pistol, which then discovered, was taken from him. Being deprived of his Instrument to murther himself, he in vain ollicited the Marshal privately for another, still con∣tinuing obstinately unrelenting, and grieved at nothing but that he had not murthered His Excellency and butchered himself.
On the sixth day he was sent down to the Gaol with a strong Guard, and seemed chearful when he was put into the Boat, but had not gone above two Leagues, when feel∣ing death approching, but undiscernably to the Marshal and Guard, he discoursed a little, and was immediately seized with internal tortures, and in a short time became sense∣less and expired. His carcase was delivered to the com∣mon Gaol, where I commanded several Chirurgeons to dissect him, and narrowly observe whether he had taken any poison in his Maw. They found a Pill of Landocum undi∣gested, some digested, and some that had passed into his Intestines. This was privately given him by one Serjeant the Chirurgeon that dressed him, enticed thereunto by a Diamond-ring and some small presents, who now in durance too late bewails his folly. The Jury of Inquest found Allin Felo de se; and because such an unheard attempt merited an unusual punishment, his naked carkase was ordered to be dragged from the Gaol by the common Hangman, and Negroes, to the Pillory at the Town of Toorarica, where a Barbicue was erected; his Members cut off, and slung in his face, they and his Bow∣els burnt under the Barbicue, with a seditious paper which he had left to be published after his death, his Head to be cut off, and his Body to be quartered, and when dry-barbi∣cued or dry roasted, after the Indian manner, his Head to be stuck on a pole at Parham, and his Quarters to be put up at the most eminent places of the Colony. The Pole to be of the most durable wood, to the future terrour and cursed example of such incorrigible Villains. Thus died this perverse Atheist, unparallel'd in History, whose pride and passion, and overweening judgment of hs cursed Tenet, hurried him to this ignominious end, which his folly fansied should never seize him.
A most remarkable Example to be seriously considered by all that slight the Omnipotent God, his Word and Ser∣vice, blaspheme the most holy Saviour of the world, value their own vanities, and deny their ears to good advice. It is my duty, and it hath been my care, to inform the World aright of all the passages of this vile Assassinate and matchless Miscreant, wherein I have been exceeding cautious that onely Truth should direct my pen. Jan. 11. 64. WILLIAM BYAM. FINIS.
Let this Relation of John Allins Attempt upon the Person of His Excellency Fran∣cis L. Willoughby of Parham, Captain General of the Continent of Guiana, &c. be Imprinted. May 22. 1665. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.
