B6396 08092684 40830
THE Artificial Spaw, OR MINERAL-WATERS TO DRINK: Imitating the German Spaw-Wa∣ter in its Delightful and Medici∣nal Operations on Humane Bo∣dies, &c. By T. Byfield, M. D. Fellow of the College of Physicians at Dublin. LONDON, Printed by James Rawlins for the Author, and are to be sold by Matthew Keinton in Little-Britain, 1684.
TO THE Right Worshipful Sir WILLIAM JENNINGS KNIGHT. Honored Sir, THE Encourage∣ment these Wa∣ters receiv'd last Year from your own Experi∣ence
and Commendation of 'em to others, did in part Naturalize 'em; by gaining such Repute, that they were prescrib'd by several Physicians in Town to their Patients, and that with good Suc∣cess. For they alone wrought several Cures, as by the Testimony of the Doctors does ap∣pear.
I have bin therefore very industrious to keep open these Salutiferous Springs, that they may flow to the advantage of many. And I doubt not but under your Pa∣tronage their Medicinal Virtues will raise 'em to such general good esteem that they'l become the Metropolitan Fountain.
'T will not be diffi∣cult (besides Experi∣ence) to make it ap∣pear from Reason, that Medicinal Waters thus by Art prepar'd, will excel the Natural. But that being part of the ensuing Tract, I'le not here forestal the matter. But acknowledge your Obligations in permit∣ting a Rivulet of this
Fountain to have its Eruption among your ingenious useful Ʋnder∣takings, which that they may continue to prosper, are the unfeigned wishes of Honoured Sir, Your most humble Servant, T. Byfield. From my House in New-street by Fet∣ter-Lane near the Five Bells.
THE Artificial Spaw, OR MINERAL-WATERS To Drink, &c. CHAP. I. THe improvement of Arts and Sciences is the great design os all industrious Men. I have therefore in imitation of
such bin at pains, and cost too in making some useful improve∣ments within my own Sphere of Physick, of which at pre∣sent I shall only discourse of one, viz. The making of Ar∣tificial Mineral Waters equal to, if not exceeding, the Na∣tural, as to their Medicinal qua∣lities. For I have so strictly examin'd with what Minerals, Marcasites and Nitrous Glebes the healing Fountains are im∣pregnated, to make 'em such; that by preparing, purifying and exalting their Medicinal Virtues, I shall be able not only to imitate Nature, but herein excel; by defecating and ex∣pelling those gross Terrestrial
parts, and often unwholsome, that are commixt with Mine∣rals: from which to extricate the benign and useful parts, great diligence and curiosity is requisite. This boast I hope may be very well allow'd within the bounds of Modesty, since I have brought my undertakings to Perfection. And since things Natural (especially as to the Materia Medica) are greatly improv'd, in regard to their usefulness, by Learning and Industry, why may not this Mineral Preparation, among the innu∣merable store of others, be allow'd to challenge the cre∣dit it deserves. It has pleas'd
God, for our imployment, to make those things that Minister Food and Physick, capable of im∣provement by us, and our La∣bour and Industry in their pre∣paration necessary e're we can receive due Benefit and Refresh∣ment from 'em: whenas in those only which serve for De∣light and Pleasure, as rich Fruits and Flowers, &c. He has shown his infinite skill and excellence; which when we tamper with we only damage. So that no Artist is so vain and impious to vye with Nature, but only pleas'd when he can diligently and curiously per∣form that Labour and Culture assign'd him by his Maker.
But I must not digress; how high therefore this way of Phy∣sick is in vogue, or like to be, shall not be so much my con∣cern to recount, as to make the usefulness and conveniency of it appear. For if persons can with little expence and trouble be prevail'd upon to make a harmless trial of those things that are productive of great good, such insinuations are no ways culpable. 'Tis obvious how many perish for want of timely care, permit∣ting slenderer indispositions (which might soon be remov'd) to run to some high Distemper, and that too often suffer'd al∣most to have mischiev'd the Bo∣dy,
e're they will look out for re∣medy: being deterr'd from the use of means, either because the methods are harsh and un∣pleasing, or because they are Expensive and too Chargeable; none of which our Medicinal Waters can be taxed with. The Theoretick part of Phy∣sick being of late so richly adorn'd with accurate Anato∣mical Dissections and a refin'd Philosophy; I conceive it like∣wise requisite that the Practice should bear some proportion to it, otherwise the Ornament of Languages, and all other Embellishments, are but gilded nothings to the great Art of preserving and restoring a sound
and healthy Constitution. For to live long and in health, as 'tis the best thing belonging to this World, so 'tis most desir'd, tho' the methods conducing thereto are much neglected, 'tis not only furnish'd with delights in it self, but it gives a gust to all others; for without it all their Excellencies are impercep∣tible. But this is a Blessing most relish'd and best valu'd by those who sometimes are without it. 'Tis a great misfortune of Humane Nature not to dis∣cern wherein her happiness and delights consist, which often are nearer her than she's aware of; and the farther she wan∣ders in pursuit of 'em, she's at
the greater loss. For the me∣thods to be taken for a happy life are not so difficult, nor to be so far fetcht, as are by most imagin'd. But it being my bu∣siness chiefly to direct to that part which conduces to preser∣ving and restoring a healthy Body, I shall only concern my self in what tends thereto. How nice and delicate a thing it is to keep the Body in a just and due mixture of Principles, and to recover those decaying, is not soon apprehended. For the subtile vital Breath, or the volatile invisible Spirit of man's Body, deservedly nam'd Mer∣cury, nourisheth, feedeth and preserveth himself by the
Oleity of Man's Suphur, which is predominant in the Blood; besides these there is a Salt lying in the Juices, Flesh and Bones; this ministers its noblest part for nourishment to the Blood, and preserveth man's Body from putrefaction, and is that Vinculum whereby the other two are kept and dwell together. For in the Salt there lyeth a Spirit which protects and preserves the Balsoms in their worth and purity, it sa∣voureth all the rest, and is in∣exhaustible, unless it dye quite: for the Air which supports the Spirits with its Vital Breath, does carry in it a nitrous Spirit, which tempers the whole nou∣rishment,
and prevents the un∣ruly disorders of the other in∣gesta. Thus is preserv'd and kept a due temperament of Principles ad justitiam, which is the great skill of a Physician. But lest I make too large a Di∣gression, designing at present to discourse only of the excel∣lent uses of Medicinal Waters, and of my imitation of the Ultramarine Spaws; I shall ra∣ther now say somewhat of Wa∣ter in general and its useful∣ness.
CHAP. II. Of Water in general. SInce I am about to demon∣strate the advantages of Medicinal Waters, and to shew how fit a Vehicle this Element is to convey Medicine to the inmost recesses of the Body; I think it not besides my busi∣ness if I a little touch upon the Excellency of Water, which was created for the universal Drink of all Creatures, and the Health and life of the first Ages of the World may com∣mend its Wholsomeness. But if we examine its Nature, we
shall find it consist of those qualities which denote its Salu∣brity, as clearness, thinness, lightness, softness, &c. which cool, moisten, attenuate, re∣fresh, allay Thirst, and are a pabulum or recruit to fretted Spirits, and a proper Liquor to convey and distribute other Aliments. Some of the Anci∣ents call'd it  the Seed of all things: But I shall not here discourse of the pro∣ductions from Waters; what Vegetables, Minerals and Ani∣mals are generated by it: nei∣ther shall I treat of the various kinds of Water, as River-Wa∣ter, Rain-Water, Pump, Lake, Pond-Water, &c. That is the
best and most wholsome which is void of taste or odour, and is clear, pure, most light, soon heated, soon cold, and in which Flesh is soonest Boil'd. The living Spring I judge most valuable for Drinking, and that nearest the head of it the best. For those living Principles which actuate all Bodies, and keep 'em not only from putre∣faction, but qualifie 'em for re∣cruits and sustenance to other Bodies, are in proportion in Waters, which denotes 'em of such and such a strength and purity, and may be us'd in quantities accordingly. And 'tis no small advantage that they are capable of being re∣ceiv'd
in such large quantities, without fuming or disturbing the Brain, to irrigate and soften the whole Body, and bedew the fiery Spirits with their sup∣ple Vapours: And when those Airy brisk Particles do extri∣cate themselves from these soft lodgments, they are again en∣tangled with more to prevent their leaping out, or firing one against another: and such a pretty bustle or ferment in Nature raises that general efflo∣rescence and vigour, which plumps, exhilerates, and makes gay a well-temper'd healthy Body. The dispencing either of Food or Physick, in a clear, thin, soft and gentle Vehicle,
must make a better digestion, and a more equal distribution of it; then in a fiery Chariot, which precipitates Nature, and hurries the crude parts thro' those strait and slender passages beyond their Natural Emuncto∣ries, and lodges 'em where nei∣ther Nature can expel 'em, nor Art reach 'em. Whenas the milder Liquors make such easie gradations, that Nature can secern by her peculiar cleansing ducts those Feces and Crudities, which timely and orderly ex∣pell'd, prevent innumerable Obstructions and Diseases to the Body. I wish for my own particular, who am sometimes afflicted with
Stone and Gout, that I had earlier studied these things: but what I can't prevent in my self, I wish I may in others. But to shew how excellent a Vehicle Water is for the distri∣bution of generous and resto∣rative Medicines, is no difficult task, if its Nature be consider∣ed, as is before mention'd: for by searching out the minutest passages of the Body, it pro∣motes a general dispensation of the design'd matter to all parts of it. And I am of the opinion that fine Chymical Medicines should be deliver'd to Bodies in soft gentle Vehicles, but by no means in their own Terrestrial Bodies; for they are so fitted
there in their position, that our Bodies are not able to extricate the benign useful parts from the intricate meatus's of a tough Mineral, and raise its living principles from their domicils so stiffly munited and secur'd. Yet when by great Art and Labour these are got out and defecated, they are beneficially deliver'd in another Body, where they can't so soon shape a retirement: and if in thin light cooling Liquors, Nature can with ease gradually fetch out their help and refreshment; whenas those too hot fiercely assault Nature, and admit not of quantity enough for their equal distribution.
CHAP. III. Of Mineral Waters. IN the Mineral Kingdom thro' which the Veins of Water glide, are amas't mighty Trea∣sures, from whence may be ex∣tracted greater relief for the necessities of Mankind than is by most imagin'd. But to come near my purpose, excellent Medicines by the due managementof Fire, have bin obtain'd from several Minerals and Semi-minerals, &c. But to come yet nearer (by playing the Hydrotomist) the great account of Mineral Waters may be display'd, which
besides their own Nature, re∣ceive Medicinal qualities from Subterranean Mines. It may be consider'd that few Mineral Waters are simple, I mean impregnated only with one Mineral, but compounded as the Minerals and Marcasites lye confus'd in the Bowels of the Earth; and those who have bin curious to search into the Nature of Medicinal Springs, have always discover'd a mix∣ture of Minerals; tho' perhaps some of 'em have not bin so lucky as to assign their virtues to the proper Minerals, &c. In the Mineral Kingdom I place Salt, Nitre, Vitriol, Allom, &c. for in the Salts of many Bodies
Iye their chief Virtues, either for Purging by Stool or Urine, or for cleansing, cooling, dry∣ing, stimulating, opening of Obstructions, attenuating of gross humours, or astriction, corroboration, &c. according to the Nature of the Body. The Learned Helmont saith, (p. 55.) Semina salium cuncta in aquis sita sunt, attamen nondum saporem induerunt nisi corporum principia consentanea uteros{que} terrae debitos repererunt, &c. (viz.) That all the Seeds of Salts are plac'd in Water, yet are not endued with taste, unless they find a∣greeable Principles of Bodies, and suitable Matrices of the Earth; then, and not till then,
they manifest their Saltness, and become determined in a Saline Body; in one place into Allom, in another Salmarine, in a third in Nitre, &c. To which he adds, Quocirca notandum, Sal quoddam existere Hermaphroditicum metal∣lorum quod defectu nominis esuri∣num sive acetosum re & nomine vocari capit, generale equidem & ad omnia metalla accommodabile, (viz.) That there is a certain Hermaphroditical Salt of Me∣tals, which for want of another name is call'd an Esurine or Acid Salt, which is a general sort of Salt, and accommodated to all Metals. So that this Esurine Salt, while such, is no more than Salt, and not a Vitriol: but if
it become a Vitriol, it must espouse a Mineral or Metalline Body. He farther saith, Vitrio∣lum praestantissimum naturaliter erescit fodinis, quibus natura istud Sal Esurinum peperit, venam eris feracem, corrodens, & fontis la∣bentis liquore dissolutum; (viz.) That the best Vitriol is most na∣turally brought forth in those Mines where Nature hath begot that Esurine Salt, corroding a strong Vein of Copper, becomes dissolv'd in the gliding Current of a Spring. But should I here inlarge in an account of Nitre, Vitriol, Allom, Bitumen, Arse∣nick, &c. I should exceed my present intention, and prevent a future design. Yet I think it
necessary to my present business to say thus much of Nitre and Vitriol. The Esurine Salt dis∣cover'd in the Air, if it meet with a fat unctuous Glebe, and be preserved from Rain and Sun, that it spend not its strength in the production of Vegetables, breeds great store of Nitre: for 'tis observ'd that in these fat Earths there is at first no Ni∣trous taste; neither can any Ni∣tre be extracted from 'em; but after their continuance a while in the cool Air, its magnetick power from a Nitrous Principle, opens the unctuous Body of the Fat Glebe, a fit receptacle for the Esurine Spirit, and is there∣with coagulated and envellop't,
and after this manner is the Na∣tivity of Nitre. 'Tis commonly observed, that in Cold Weather the Ap∣petite is more keen, and the Thirst little, which proceeds from the great store of Nitre that is in the Air. Vitriol I take to be an Esu∣rine Acid Salt corroding the Sulphureous parts of Metals or Marcasites by an Acid sub∣terraneal Spirit (whereof there is great quantity in some Mines) corroding the Veins of Iron, Copper, &c. from whence are the varieties of Vitriol. Sometimes from a Vitriol Loam or Clay diluted with Water, and set in a cold Cellar, may
be gather'd an alluminous efflorescence, which shews there may be a mixture of Al∣lom with Vitriol: But the dif∣ferences or varieties of im∣pregnations, arise either from the difference of the quantity of the Acid Spirit corroding the Veins of Copper or Iron, or from the greater or lesser continuance of the course of the Water thro' those Metallick Veins. It need not seem strange to any that there is such Acidity in Water and Air: from whence else doth Iron and Copper being put into Water, or standing long in the Air in a cold Cellar, contract such a
Rust as they do? Is it not from the Acid Spirit of Air and Water uniting with the Esurine Salt in those Metals exciting its corrosive power to destroy the Texture of the Metal? And this Rust being Boil'd in Rain-water, will yield a Vitriol. There are many ways of of making Artificial Vitriols: but I shall pass beyond my in∣tention if I now discourse of 'em. 'Tis obvious what Beds of Minerals lye in the Bowels of the Earth, on which the Currents of Waters wash in their circulating Veins, from which they are impregnated
with their Medicinal quali∣ties. But before I dismiss this Chapter, I think fit to add this, that there is a universal common Salt of Nature, the first Ens of Salts which is spe∣cificated according to the di∣versity of Nature, and re∣ceives various forms. God the Original Founder of all Beings, hath implanted in the Superficies of the Earth that great variety of Vegeta∣ble Seeds, which propagate themselves in their Species: So that every Vegetable at its proper season, by the instiga∣tion of the Heavenly influ∣ences, setting at work its se∣minals,
by stirring up its in∣nate power, begins to shape it self a Body according to the Laws of Creation; Every Plant in its kind; till they have made up that wonderful variety which so richly adorns the Earth. In like manner are dispers'd the Mineral and Metalline Seeds in the Bowels of the Earth, determin'd for specification, and to become prolifick by the embryonate Sulphur ac∣cording to the purity or im∣purity of the Terrestrial Ma∣trix: And thus the Metallick Order is compleated by the perfected Metals, while the imperfect and middle Mine∣rals
arrive but slowly to Me∣talization. Now when Water impreg∣nated with a Spirit, or Va∣pour from the accensed Body of Sulphur, passeth through a salsuginous Glebe, already endow'd with the common Salt of Nature, it produceth Salt, when through Nitrous Veins, Nitre; when through Alluminous, Allom; when through a Copperas, White Vitriol; when through a Sil∣ver Mine, Blew Vitriol; and when through an Ironish Glebe it shares of some particles of Iron, and produceth Green Vitriol, &c. But these are more or less, according to the pro∣portion
of the Waters Acidi∣ty, and the Fertility of the Veins through which they pass. So that Waters ting'd with this Acid Spirit, become a proper Menstruum for the opening of the Ramenta, and Extraction of the excellent qualities of Minerals and Mar∣casites. But to demonstrate the Artificial performance of this, is the business of the next Chapter.
CHAP. IV. Of our Artificial Waters. A Physician must learn to Anatomize all things in Nature, as well as Humane Body, to know what they contain within and without, to separate the Poyson from the Medicinal quality: he must know how to dissolve, sepa∣rate, exalt and prepare fully Metals, Minerals, Vegetables and Animals: for Receipts found in other Mens Writings, cannot sufficiently instruct a Man to the Practice or Im∣provement of Physick.
The Field of Nature is very large, 'tis round and endless, affords room enough for eve∣ry industrious Man, so wisely has the great Creator contriv'd us all imployment, that none need envy or assault anothers labours, but may go out and provide for himself; and did he know the Treasures that lye undiscover'd, 'twould make him of a busie mind. Minerals as they yield the noblest and choicest Medicines, so they are of greater difficul∣ty, and require greater skill in their preparation than ei∣ther Vegetables or Animals. I have therefore (out of a de∣sire of useful rarities) apply'd
my self of late to hard labour in the Mines; from whence I hope to produce great benefit to others, and a little to my self, which shall suffice. And having now exactly compleated by the necessary Laws of Alchymy my Mineral healing Waters, I judge it nei∣ther Empirical, covetuous, or any ways base to permit 'em (on such easie terms as I do, for general good) to break up like a publick Fountain, to which every one may resort: Yet I do not impose 'em on any, let 'em fare according to the success they obtain. I have made 'em exactly resembling the Ultramarine
Spaws; by selecting those Mi∣nerals and Marcasites which give 'em their excellent Medi∣cinal qualities; and I think the Artificial Preparation of 'em in selecting the useful parts, and rejecting those more un∣wholsome with the dregs, can∣not but be of great advantage to the rendring these Waters more effectual and certain in their Operation, than the Na∣tural. For instance in Antimony, how churlish and unsafe is it, if given without any Artificial Preparation: but if dissected, separated, defecated, and by the rules of Alchymy pre∣pared, what useful, safe,
and noble Medicines does it yield? There is as great reason to except against White Bread, because 'tis the Flowers of the Wheat separated from the grosser matter of the Corn, and by the Baker's skill made Chymical Bread; as there is against Medicinal Preparati∣ons, because discharg'd of their feces and useless or hurt∣ful parts. If then the Natural Medici∣nal Waters receive their Vir∣tues from Minerals and Mar∣casites unprepar'd, only by washing on 'em as they pass through the Caverns and Veins of the Earth, and are esteem∣ed
of so great use: of how much more certainty then in their operation and usefulness must the Artificial Waters be, which have their Minerals purg'd and cleans'd from all their foul and noxious parts, and those that are Medicinal exalted and made ripe for the service of Nature. There is much in the World yet to be discover'd, which time and industry may bring to light. The Circulation of the Blood, how long lay that hid from Wise Men and great Phy∣sicians, though those Streams were always flowing about 'em; which when discover'd,
it seem'd strange they could be so long ignorant. The late great improvement of making Salt Water Fresh, brought to that perfection that it serves all the intentions of Natural sweet Fountains, has greatly encouraged me in the prosecution of this design, which is brought too to that perfection, that it bears all the tests of those Natural Medici∣nal Waters it imitates, as the German Spaw, &c. and its operations are of greater cer∣tainty and more manageable. For our Minerals, &c. are selected from all other, whe∣ther unwholsome, or not ser∣ving a Medicinal intention,
and are open'd, separated, purify'd, &c. hereby we know exactly the Doses, especially being freed from all the gleet∣ings of other Springs and Rain∣water. And the advantages of ha∣ving 'em daily made fresh are not inconsiderable, nor the conveniencies of contracting the entire Medicinal Dose to what quantity of Water or other Vehicle you please, by the help of our Tincture; be∣sides many more, which 'tis not necessary to enumerate.
CHAP. V. The Virtues and Ʋse of our Waters. I Think it not requisite to give an entire account of all the Virtues of those Mine∣rals, Marcasites and Nitrous Glebes, with which duly pre∣par'd, our Waters are impreg∣nated: For 'twould make too early a discovery of my Art, since it required so much la∣bour and cost to compleat it. Nevertheless, because I would give a rational account of all my undertakings; I'le say thus
much further with the Learned Kircher, Basis unica & absoluta origo omnium Aciditatum Mine∣ralium est a Spiritu Sulphuris Aci∣do. 'Tis apparent that there is a Spirit of Sulphur in Mine∣ral Glebes, from the Acid taste in Minerals. Our Waters having a Vitri∣oline Ironish Taste and Odour, which appears from their sharp and piercing pungency some∣what harsh, shews they are Acuated with a Sulphureous Acidity from the Embryonate Sulphur of the Minerals and Marcasites. But more plainly, I have carefully prepar'd my Men∣struum, that by the gentle
heat of a digester, I so open the Bodies of my Minerals, &c. that I can with no less pleasure than labour extricate their Volatile Salubrious A∣toms, from their gross and un∣wholsome Mixtures; and as easily preserve and convey 'em to the design'd Vehicle. I give this account, because I can in Glass Vessels Herme∣tically Luted, sublime all the Medicinal Particles from their Water, which shews their pu∣rity and aptness for the service of Nature. Whenas if you deal with the Natural Mineral Waters which soon evaporate their strength and good qualities,
especially if kept a while from their living Springs, you may precipitate a Vitrioline Ironish Rust, like Powder, but apt to sement and petrifie, which taken altogether into the Bo∣dy, is there precipitated, and by large quantities of potu∣lent matter distributed into the remote parts of the Body, and becomes fit Minera or Seedlings both for Stone and Gout. For the materies morbifica of both is one and the same, the difference only is in the scitu∣ation: though I know Rheu∣matick and Scorbutick pains are often ignorantly call'd Arthritick Symptomes: And
such who are afflicted with ei∣ther of these, and take these Mineral Waters not cleans'd from that sediment, which I can separate from 'em, in all probability minister much more Fewel than relief to their Distempers: And though they may by large draughts wash away some Sand and Gravel, and now and then expel some Stones; yet the question is, whether they don't lodge as much or more of this matter in the Body, as they thus drive through; which if, what Di∣vertisement is it thus to be employ'd? I'me sure I know by sad ex∣perience what hard labour
preambles to the Birth of a Stone. But to return, our Artificial Waters are so finely prepar'd, that they afford no sediment: yet they answer all the tests and intentions of the most re∣fin'd Spaw, they tinge of a pale Clarret Colour, and a deep Purple with a little scrapings of Gall, and discolour the Or∣dure, &c. they cleanse, cool, dry, stimulate, open obstru∣ctions, dissolve and attenuate gross humours; and are ab∣stersive of Viscous, Tartarous, and other Humours in the Stomack, Mesenteries, Hypo∣chondries, Reins, Womb, Bladder, and evacuate them
sometimes by Stool, largely by Urine, and other dischargers of Nature. They create a great Appe∣tite, when the Stomack's cleans'd, by recovering and strengthening her tone: the like they do by the Womb, which must be of great use to such who are subject to mis∣carriages, weakness in those parts, and are unapt to breed. But because I think not fit here to particularize, I'le once for all say, They are of excel∣lent use for Ladies in all their distinguishing circumstances from Men: But not to be us'd by those with Child, unless by the Advice of their Physician:
And if further direction be re∣quisite for any, 'tis fit they should have recourse to their own Physician. And here in a Parenthesis, let me say, 'tis requisite to the health and happiness of every person to have recourse to a Spiritual and a Physical Guide, and that in times of Health, to preserve, and provide a∣gainst those Evils, which the height of a Distemper, and the hour of Death, make un∣seasonable for any considera∣ble Ministration. Principiis obsta, &c. These Waters are powerful in all Cachectical and obstinate Diseases: like an Alkali they
imbibe the Acidity and Sowre∣ness of the Blood, and conse∣quently dulcifie the same: for by a Naturul Propensity uni∣ting (magnetically) with the Esurine Salt, they are ejected together with the obstructive humours, by a strong irritati∣on of Nature (from these Wa∣ters) to expel 'em. And from their Diuretick Nature, after they have atte∣nuated, cut, resolv'd, and so alter'd the Mucous and Tar∣tarous Humours of the Body, and prepar'd 'em for Excreti∣on, they then carry them off by Urine, which is the most safe and effectual conveyance (for all sharp and saline Hu∣mours
especially) of all other sorts of Evacuation whatever. This Water thus enrich'd by my Tincture or Essence, searches such latent passages and abstruse retirements of the Bowels and other parts, as other Medicines cannot reach, and after a dis∣covery made, doth not only dispossess what is preternatural of its usurped power, but also by corroborating and re-in∣forcing Nature, so firmly in∣titles her to her former right of inheritance, that scarce any thing but an act of Hostility or Old Age can cut off the Intail. They so correct and mend the Juices of the Body by ex∣pelling
watry, sharp, sowre, gnawing, hot, foul Humours, &c. that they are of excellent use to purifie the Blood, cure the Scurvey, even in those whose Gums and Teeth, as well as by Spots and other Signs, shew it to have deep rooting. Admirable against the Drop∣sie, especially to such where the humours fluctuate up and down, by falling into the Legs and returning again, which demonstrates 'em capable of Expulsion by Stool and Urine by things appropriate; and by thus doing, Sore Legs may be prevented.
They are justly recommen∣ded against the Jaundice Yel∣low and Black, Melancholy and fearful passions, Cholick, Diarrhaea, and Dysenteria, and the Distemper call'd Vapours offending Head and Heart. They cheer the Heart, pre∣vent palpitations, passions and faintings. They open, cool, cleanse and strengthen the Lungs, consequently good a∣gainst Asthma's, Defluxions, Coughs and Consumptions, if not too far spent. They are abstersive, cleans∣ing and healing, therefore con∣solidate Lungs decaying from Exulcerations; and likewise Ulcerated Kidneys, they cleanse
'em of mucous foul matter, the Duelech, Sand, Gravel and Stones. I may justly commend 'em to those subject to Head∣aches, Vertigo, Megrim, &c. and for Gonorrhea's and the fruitful improvements upon that Graft; especially if taken in method with but a few o∣ther things, to speak modestly they will answer expectation. 'Tis too tedious to enume∣rate so many Distempers as Authors have bin pleas'd to as∣sign names to. The preserving and restoring the Blood to a good temper, cuts off a thousand Diseases. And so the juice of Nerves rightly purg'd, purify'd and
enrich't prevents many there, as does the preserving a good Mass of Blood. I'le only add, they are of use to such as are afflicted with Wounds, Ulcers, Itch, Sores, Scabs, Sore-Legs, Leprosie, &c.
CHAP. VI. Directions to be observ'd before, in, and after the taking our Waters. TO them who intend the use of these Waters for the removing of any consider∣able Distemper, I advise that they prepare their Bodies with some gentle Vomit or Purge, which shall be thought most proper by their Physician. To those who carefully keep their Bodies from any glut of humours, and design only to take 'em for pleasure, or to re∣move slighter indispositions;
to dilute and temper the Blood and preserve it from decay or putrefaction in any measure, or to create a good Stomach, &c. I advise but a slighter preparation, (and that only before the first taking of 'em) by a few Stomach-Pills to clear the first passages, or by some gentle purging Tablets, which will finely prepare the Body, eating a few early in the Morn∣ing before you drink the Wa∣ters. But I leave every one to have recourse to their own Physician for such as these. What I have furnished my self with requisite to be given before and with the Waters,
&c. I shall keep at home for such who resort to me: For I would willing avoid all offence, not coveting any mans em∣ploy. And thus I hope I shall easily demonstrate my care to pre∣vent Obloquie, and satisfie any one I design not to Mono∣polize. If prejudice prevent not, these Waters may be prescrib'd by Physicians in Method to their Patients as well as the Natural Medicinal Springs; and by their Skill may be made in every respect a capable and useful Vehicle for the distributi∣on of such generous and noble Medicines as our Art directs.
The Waters are of excellent use, and serve many intentions taken alone from one Quart to two, or three at most. And the rules to be observ'd in the taking of 'em are com∣mon to other Mineral Waters, and so generally known, that almost every one can prevent me in those few and easie Di∣rections that are requisite. They are to be taken in the Morning Fasting (unless a few Tablets, or some such slight Physical thing preamble) not when the Body is heated with exercise. They are not to be drank too quick, nor too slow: but convenient distances are to be
allotted, as once in half an hour a Pint, or less, as your Stomach can bear 'em, and rid 'em, till you have taken the quantity you design; After you have taken two or three Draughts 'tis best to use some gentle exercise ad ruborem only, not ad sudorem, till you be pretty warm, but not sweat. Whilst you walk or ride, &c. you may eat Orange-chips, Citron-peals, Carraway Con∣fects, Elicampane Roots Can∣died, &c. But if you are advis'd that it be convenient to pass any of these Waters by Stool, the Purging Tablets taken with 'em will finely assist, and serve
very well in the room of the Confectionary, and much bet∣ter on Medicinal accounts. 'Tis not fit to Dine till the Waters are passed, and half an hour before Dinner a Glass of Rhenish, White-Wine or Clar∣ret I think not amiss. I shall not here prescribe the quality of your Diet; Every one knows that Mutton, Veal, Lamb, Chickins, Rabbits, &c. are good Fare. My care is to caution you as to quantity, and that the rather, because these Waters rightly us'd, give a great Appe∣tite. 'Tis better both to Dine and Sup moderately, whilst in this
Method, than to overcharge at once. Temperance prevents and helps to cure many Diseases. He that desires to eat much, must eat little; for by eating little at a time, he lives long and so makes it up. All intemperance in Drink should at all times be avoided, But excess in this Method may be of danger: Nevertheless I commend a little good Wine, or Beer and Ale with discreti∣on, especially an hour or two before you go to Bed. And here I think it kind to insert this Note, That the di∣lutive Cup, or Evenings draught so much in use, is generally
taken too late: for to fill the Body with Liquor and present∣ly to Bed, causes many Diseases. 'Tis fit it should as to the great∣est part be passed first, which would prevent Gravel, Stone, Gouts, Dropsies, &c. Those who take Drops, Powders, and several Physical Preparations in these Waters, or in Method with 'em, are to observe stricter rules than o∣thers, according to the nature of their Distempers and of the things they take, which as 'twould not be convenient, so neither can they be here pre∣scrib'd, recourse must be had to such as shall dispense their preparations.
The use of these Waters is to be continu'd as need shall require, or while they please you. They may be taken by some with great advantage mixt in their Wines, if they drink White, Rhenish, or Clarrets: For they finely dilute the Wine, cool and temper the Body: and very much pro∣mote the passing of the Wines by Urine, which will be of good use to them especially who frequent the Taverns, and sit there a while. These Waters will be made fresh every day upon the best and choicest Springs that can be got.
I shall make it great part of my business to see all those ne∣cessary rules strictly observ'd that are requisite to their ex∣act preparation. And if in this short Tract I have not given some satisfacto∣ry account of 'em, as to their Virtues and Use, I shall be ready at seasonable times to give further direction to any that are pleas'd to require it.
CHAP. VII. Of our Spaw-Tincture and its excellent Uses. THe advantages of our Tincture are not few or mean, if the power be consi∣der'd that's put into every ones hands. For here you have the Me∣dicinal qualities of the whol∣some Natural Spaws, by much Care and Art separated and cleans'd from their gross Ter∣restrial parts. Hereby any one never so remote, may have the entire benefit of the Natural Medici∣nal Waters.
Any one upon Travel or re∣tirement may with this Tin∣cture furnish himself with these Waters, and make 'em just as he takes 'em, and to what quantities he pleases. He may contract or dilate his Vehicle and yet have an entire Dose of the Virtues, by the order∣ing of his drops. And those that drink of my Waters may augment the Dose of the Medicinal part by this Tincture to what degree they judge fit, or are advis'd to for their particular circumstances: Or the Tincture may be dropt into Wine as you drink it to make it pass the better by Urine.
To those who frequent Tun∣bridge, or other Mineral Foun∣tains, this Tincture may be of excellent use to enrich their Virtues, and to make them more certain in their Operati∣ons: For by uniting with their Mineral Principles it will sti∣mulate 'em to a brisker dis∣charge; and by this help, the great quantities usually taken may be contracted, which will be of great use to weak Sto∣machs, and otherways infirm Bodies. And the dangers from the ill passing of those Waters may be prevented, and better by this Tincture, agreeable to
their own Nature, than by any opposite Physick. Persons unable to frequent the Wells through a low For∣tune are here accommodated at their own Houses: Those unable through sickness, and whose circumstances require, yet cannot take the quantities, or it may be not Water, may use this Tincture in appropriate Vehicles. 'Twould be too tedious to enumerate half the benefits of this Tincture; and from these already mention'd every one may supply many more conve∣niencies, Especially they whose necessities require, will be in∣ventive.
About Twenty Drops of our Tincture makes a Bot∣tle of Water to that strength our Waters are of: Now any one may add fewer or more as he desires, and make what quantities he pleases. For the improving our Wa∣ters or Tunbridge, &c. half the Dose of drops to a Quart may be us'd, because they are al∣ready impregnated with Mine∣rals. Unless you design to con∣tract your quantity of Water, then you must increase propor∣tionably, 10, 15 or 20 Drops may be added to each Quart of Mineral Waters, and so ad∣vance
daily, till you arrive to what pitch you purpose, and then abate by degrees. 'Tis not easie to commit any error, for as he that drinks three Bottles makes 'em more potent in operation than he that drinks but two, so 'tis with the Tincture. ANd now I'm come to fix the prices, with which I would rather give content, than consult my own benefit. I have therefore deliberated well on 'em, desiring they may be without exception in every particular, and so obtain a good esteem, and be of gene∣ral
use to answer their desig∣nation. I hope therefore at six pence a Quart our Water will not be accounted dear; nor our Tin∣cture at Five Shillings the Bot∣tle, which computed by Doses is much about the rate of the Waters; for one Bottle of Tincture will make Ten or Eleven Quarts of Water to that strength ours are of. And if any ones occasion requires the increase of the Dose, he must be content to be at the extraordinary Ex∣pence, which being but little, I hope success will make him restitution.
They that send for the Waters Seal'd up in our Bottles, are de∣sir'd to send 9 d. for each Bottle, the odd 3 d. being allow'd for the Bottle. These Waters and Tincture are to be had only at the Dukes Bagnio in Long-Acre. And near the Royal-Exchange, as will be directed on two Tables at the South and North Entrance. And at my own House in New-street by Fetter-Lane near the Five Bells. FINIS.
On Monday last died at his House in Salisbury Court, the famous Dr. Byfield, well known by  Medicine call'd, Sal Volatile Oleosum. The learned and pious Dr. Byfield, Sen. Fellow  the College of Physicians in Dublin, departed  Life the 28th of October (not at his former House  Salisbury Court, as has been publish'd; but) at  House in Great New-street, near Fetter-Lane▪  he has lived about 11 Years,  where his  continues to make the Sal Volatile, which the  prepared with her own Hands, near 30 Years.
