B861 12095737 53976
A SERMON Preach'd before the University OF CAMBRIDGE On the 9th of September, Being the Day of Publick Thanksgiving for the Deliverance of His MAJE∣STIES Sacred Person, His Royal Brother, and the Government, from the late Hellish Fanatick Conspiracy. By MILES BARNE, D. D. Chaplain in Ordi∣nary to His MAJESTY, and Fellow of St Peters College. Publish'd by Authority. CAMBRIDGE, Printed by J. Hayes, Printer to the University; for R. Green, Bookseller in Cambridge. 1683.
A SERMON Preach'd before the University OF CAMBRIDGE. St Luke 19. v. 14. But his Citizens hated him, and sent a message after him, saying, We will not have this man to Reign over us. WHich words are part of an eminent Parable spoken by the King of the Jews in his Triumphant Procession to Jerusalem, which had rais'd great hopes in the Disciples, and others his Countrymen who accompanied Him in that Glorious March,
that the Kingdom of God, which they had so long expected, and so earnestly desired, should now appear, that the Kingdom should even now be restored unto Israel, i. e. in their carnal conceits, that He would now in a most solemn manner proclaim Himself a Mighty Monarch, make Jerusalem the Chief Seat of his Empire, promote them to the Highest Places of Trust and Dignity, and that they should enjoy all the measures of Softness, Ease, and Plenty under his most Peacefull, Prosperous and lasting Reign. To correct the Vanity of this fancy, in his more immediate Approach to this Famous Metropolis, He tells them of a certain No∣bleman, i. e. One born Heir to a Crown, who went into a far Country to take Pos∣session of a Kingdom, of his returning a∣gain to his Countrymen in an Eminent man∣ner, and in the mean time of his commit∣ing to their Care a certain Fund of Mo∣ney, which they were to imploy in the way of Merchandise, that so He might re∣ceive an improvement, and they a suitable Reward. The far Country spoken of suffi∣ciently confuted their Error in thinking Je∣rusalem should be the Chief Seat of his Empire, and by making his servants Fa∣ctors and Merchants in his absence, and re∣quiring an improvement at his Return, they
had little reason to dream that his King∣dom should priviledge Sloth and Idleness, or secure the injoyment of carnal Plea∣sures. The words of the Text give the reason why He went into a far Country; because his Citizens hated Him, and manifested their Hatred in that Sullen undutifull Mes∣sage, which they sent after, saying, We will not have this man to Reign over us. Stat pro ra∣tione voluntas. Which well enough became the mouths of such Turbulent, Rebellious Citizens as the Jews were in General, but is yet better suited to the rude humour, and ungovern'd Zeal of the Pharisees in Particular, who towards the latter end of the Jewish state, and at the time of our Sa∣viours Appearance upon Earth, had work'd themselves into the Management of all Af∣fairs both Sacred and Civil: nothing of mo∣ment pass'd, but was directed by their Coun∣cels, nothing of weight but was influenc'd by their assistance: and what trusty Mana∣gers they were appeared by their involving their miserable Citizens into the most de∣plorable Calamities which ever befell a Peo∣ple since the Creation. The Jews were always a moody head∣strong People, impatient of any kind of Go∣vernment. Theocracy it self could not please
them; for they murmured against Moses and Aaron who had wrought such wonders for them in the land of Egypt, led them through the Red Sea, as upon dry ground, and fed them with food from Heaven in the Wil∣derness. They made not suitable returns to Joshua for conducting them into the promi∣sed Land: they were prone upon all Occa∣sions to impeach their Judges. The Votes and Decrees of the Sanedrim were not al∣ways so dutifully receiv'd: at length having forc't God by their importunities to give them a King after the manner of the Na∣tions, they soon repented their Choice▪ grew weary of Him, before He was well setled in his Throne, or had exercis'd any remarkable Jurisdiction over them. For their frequent Murmurings, Tumults and Rebellions God often punish'd them with Wars, Pestilence and Famine; with in-bred Distempers and Forein Captivity. At the time of the Messia's appearance these un∣gratefull Citizens had forfeited all their ancient Charters, all the Priviledges they could challenge in the Right of Abraham the Faithfull, and were become Tributa∣ries to the Insidel Romans. The Messias appears as Moses had done before in this great juncture of Hardships. They adhere to their Oppressors, and shame∣fully
reject their Saviour; by libelling his Government in General, by throwing con∣tempt upon his Person in Particular, Is not this the Carpenters Son? by traducing his Life and Conversation, making Him a Wine∣bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners; by making base Reflections upon his Dis∣ciples and Chief Ministers; by undervalu∣ing his Doctrines, as inconsistent with the Pomp and Grandeur of the Roman Empire; by making him an Innovator, a Disturber of the Establish'd Religion; and lastly (as the height of their Malice) by Proclaiming Him a Traitor and Enemy to Caesar, as having sinister Ends to set up a fifth Monarchy, in Opposition to the fourth. But when our Saviour by his Exemplary Life, Peaceable Doctrines, and Mighty Mi∣racles had overcome all these False and Ma∣licious Accusations: When by his willing submission to Authority, the painfull A∣gonies of the Cross, his patient Comport∣ment under them, and the terrible Prodi∣gies which accompanied his giving up the Ghost, He had convinc'd the Centurion and others that He was a just man and no other than the Son of God. When their sealing the stone and setting a Watch could no longer detain Him in the Grave; when their Sham-Plot in giving out that his Disciples came by
night, and stole Him away whilst they slept, could no longer obscure the Glories of his Re∣surrection; in short when in the grief and anguish of their tormented Souls, they perceiv'd that He was gone into his far Country, there to be Invested with Majesty and Dominion far above all Principalities and Powers, then to let the world see, that Citizens will be Citizens, Jews Jews, and Pharisees Pharisees still, when all their Pretences were baffled, and they reduc'd to the last Effort of obstinate Rebels, to own Rebellion for Rebellions sake, then they Magisteriously resolve themselves into the Sovereignty of their own Wills, and con∣clude against all Government in a direct Nolumus Hunc, We will not have this man to Reign over us. But was it then in their choice whether He should Reign over them, or not? Infatu∣ate Rebels! thus to oppose their own impo∣tent Wills against the Councels and Determi∣nation of Heaven, where it stood Record∣ed in the Books of Eternity, that his Scep∣ter should be an everlasting Scepter, and his Domi∣nion endure throughout all Generations. This mad Decree then could only shew the folly and impiety of these Rebellious Citizens: for the King whom they rejected did Reign over them. 1. In his Mercies, in the Con∣version
of 3000 of them at one Sermon of St Peters their Prime Apostle, and Prin∣cipal Teacher. 2. In Judgement, at his se∣cond Advent, but first Eminent judicial Return, after his Glorious Instalment in his far Country; in the Destruction of Je∣rusalem, when these Rebellious Citizens, or their Descendents suffered all the Extre∣mities of temporal Calamities. 3. He shall Reign over them at his third and last ter∣rible Advent, when He shall come with all the Solemnities of Majesty to judge the world, pronounce Sentence upon these wick∣ed Citizens, and make them the Vassals of E∣ternal Vengeance, the certain Doom of all unrepenting Rebels. From this short Illustration of the Text I hope it appears how well it suits with the Business of the Day, a Day of Publick Thanksgiving for the Deliverance of his Majesty, his Royal Brother, and the whole Government from the Hellish Conspiracy of Fanatical Republican Rage. I shall therefore, 1. Shew the Hatred of these Citizens to Monarchical Government in General. 2. Insist on the several ways they pursued in the carrying on this damnable Conspiracy in Particular. 3. Take notice that when these fail'd, like
the desperate Citizens in the Text, they be∣took themselves to desperate means, and wick∣edly resolv'd that the King should not Reign over them. 4. And lastly shew the folly and impiety of such mad Resolves, for the King whom they devoted to Destruction do's and shall Reign over them. First, The Hatred of these Citizens to Monarchical Government in General. You have been already told that the Jews were always a Rebellious Generation, but never so bad, as when the Pharisees had got so much the ascendent over them. I am sorry to tell you that the frequent Tumults and Insurrections which have infested the Reigns of our British Kings, gave occasion to that Sarcastical saying; Rex Angliae, Rex Diabolo∣um; but you may tell your selves that these Devils never acted more like Devils, than since they were possess'd and guided by the Turbulent Spirit of our Modern Pha∣risees the Presbyterians; who are the very Citizens that from their first Institution have shewn their Hatred against Monarchs and Monarchy. And they must be content, which perhaps they Glory in, to bear a Principal part in most of the unnatural Wars and Commotions, which have happen'd in Christendom, since they took upon them to
carry on their Blessed Work of Reforma∣tion. The rest of the Schismaticks are but their Spawn, and consequently included in this Denomination, though like a Cadmean Progeny, they have always fought against one another. And to the eternal honour of Presbytery be it spoken, that John Calvin confirm'd his Discipline the same year, that Ignatius Loyala the first Founder of the Je∣suits, was chosen their first General in a solemn manner; and that as He founded his Pres∣bytery in Treason and Rebellion, the Ci∣tizens having prepar'd his way by expelling from Geneva their Lawfull Prince and Gover∣nour, which violent Act was encourag'd, ap∣proved and confirm'd by Calvin; so has it e∣ver since been carried on by Schism and Sedition. Never was it receiv'd into any Church, but it presently dissolv'd the Ca∣tholick Unity of Faith, and broke the Bond of Peace; never into any State which it did not embroyl and throw into very dan∣gerous Convulsions; never into any fami∣ly which it did not divide, and set at va∣riance; never did it get possession of any sin∣gle man, whom it did not strangely trans∣form with Pride and Moroseness, made him unfit for civil Society and common conversation. Are not the Writings of the Leaders in this Schism, not only stuff't
with irreverent and reproachfull Language against the Sacred Persons of Princes, but likewise with dethroning Principles, and King-killing Doctrines: witness several pas∣sages in Calvins Institutions, and other his Works. That pestilent Pamphlet entituled Junius Brutus or Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, suppo∣sed to be written by Beza, his Successor; and to mention no more, Knox's Appellation to the Communality, and Buchanans Jus Regni apud Scotos; a Book which for subtlety and wicked position scorns to give place to the Jesuit, which nevertheless He had the impudence to dedicate to King James. In these you may find Dignities evil spo∣ken of, Majesty reviled: that a Sovereign∣ty is erected either in the People, or the subordinate Magistrate, that they are the Original of all just Power, that the Su∣preme Magistrate is prostituted to their Lusts, that wicked and irreligious Kings, i. e. all whom they please to call so, may be question'd, and consequently dethron'd, sentenc'd and put to Death. If it be said that these are but the Doctrines of pri∣vate men, and therefore unjustly chargeable upon the whole Order; I answer, that Cal∣vin and Beza were more than Private men, they were leading Foundation Apostles, their Authority was as great, and held as
Infallible at Geneva, as ever the Popes was at Rome. Besides this is the very same argu∣ment which the Papists use to clear their Church from the Guilt and Scandal of Bel∣larmine, Mariana, Sanctarellus, or any other de∣posing King-killing Jesuit. For we do not find that the dethroning Power, which these frontless Flatterers have seated in the Pope, is either made an additional Article to Pius's Creed, or trick't into the Canons of the later Editions of the Councel of Trent: besides, this Deposing Principle of the Jesuites, has been publickly censured and condemn'd as erroneous and impious in several Forein Universities, written a∣gainst by Men of the Romish Communion, and is most solidly and unanswerably con∣futed by Barclay in his excellent Book de Po∣testate Papae, &c. which Book is dedicated to Clement the Eighth. But have the Presbyte∣rians in any of their Synods censured or con∣demn'd the pernicious Tenets of Calvin or Beza? has any of them had the Grace to disown or write against their dethroning Doctrines? if they have, their Books have proved very ineffectual, for if we pass from their Principles to their Practices, we shall find that the Presbyterian has always been a Turbulent Imperious Bloudy Religion: that it has embroyl'd all the Kingdoms and
Estates in Christendom, where it got foot∣ing, with Rebellion, Civil War and Mise∣ry, from its first Rise at Geneva, to its re∣move into France, from thence into the Ne∣therlands, from thence into Scotland, and from Scotland to its unfortunate Arrival into this Island. 'Tis not expected I should enume∣rate the several wicked Plots and Designs▪ of these Hypocrites, during the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles. This is the business of an Historian, and is already faithfully done to our hands, by the Reverend Dr Heylin and others who have writ the Histories of Presbytery and Calvi∣nism. I shall only at present lay to their Charge all the Bloud that was shed, all the violence that was acted, during our late unnatural Wars: that they were the Dethroners and Murtherers of their Glorious Sovereign un∣der a cloak of Justice, and Mock-formali∣ties of Law. A Villany of so deep a Dy▪ that the Roman Conclave blushes at it▪ and was never debated and resolved, but in the Deep Infernal Councels of a Presbyterian Consistory: and is there not at this day great reason to charge them home with this Masterpiece of all Iniquity, since they have taken such great Advantage of the late Popish Plot, that the guilty Papists had al∣most made them innocent? and there have not
been wanting some Church-Trimmers, still retaining a fellow-feeling for the Cause, who from the Pulpit have endeavour'd to clear them, and lay the Guilt of that Horrid Murther chiefly upon the Popish Priests; though they cannot find the name of one Papist in the whole List of true-Protestant Regicides. But supposing the Jesuits did invent and direct in the Tiring Room, what they acted on the open Stage: This will be so far from excusing, that it adds to their Crime, and makes them pass for what they would be loth to be thought, fools as well as something else. For no man dares say a Presbyterian is the less dangerous for being influenc'd and guided by Jesuitical Councels. May we not now expose their Bloudy and Treasonable Pra∣ctices to the world, since almost five and thirty years have expired, since the perpe∣tration of that execrable Parricide, and they have not yet Repented? Since almost four and twenty years have run out, since His Majesties Happy Restauration, whom these abandon'd Citizens forc't into a far Country, not to receive a Kingdom, but to be expos'd to all the Hardships and Mi∣series of Exile and Banishment, and they have not yet Repented? Since all this time they have owed their Lives, too plentifull
Fortunes, and dangerous Liberty to a Gra∣cious Act of Oblivion at first, and repeated Acts of Indulgence since, and they have not yet Repented? Since all along His Ma∣jestics Mercifull, Peacefull and Godlike Reign, these Ungratefull Vipers have been warm'd with the Sunshine of his Favours, some of them received into places of Trust and Dignity, and they have not yet Re∣pented? An Obstinacy and Ingratitude not to be met with, but in an apostate An∣gel who cannot, and a Presbyterian who will not Repent. Lastly since they were even now Acting the same dire part over again, and we are (God be Praised) in the very Act of offering up our most so∣lemn Praises and unfeigned Thanks to God Almighty for the Deliverance of His Sa∣cred Majesty, His Dearest Brother, and the whole Government, from the Hellish Conspiracy of these Sons of Perdition: which brings me in the 2d place to consider the several ways they tryed to carry on this Devillish Conspiracy in particular. First, Then, as His Majesty observes in His Declaration, this Malevolent Party for several years last past made it their business to promote Sedition by false News, Libel∣lous Pamphlets, and other wicked Arts, whereby they endeavour'd not only to ren∣der
His Government odious, His most faith∣full Subjects suspected to the people, but e∣ven to excite a dislike and hatred of His Royal Person. And this is the common Engine, which they have always plaid a∣gainst the Government. They have always had Martin-mar-prelats and Marvels to sanctify Lies, Scurrility and Railing to the service of the good old Cause. But of late we have been infested with swarms of Pestilent Libels, which like Locusts overspread the land, poy∣son'd the minds of the people, devoured all the little remains of Duty, Allegiance, Ci∣vility and common Honesty; which swell'd their Breasts with Discontents, Jealousies, Revenge and Cruelties, and fitted them for the most Desperate and Barbarous un∣dertakings. Secondly, They took the Advantage of a Popish Plot, and made an Army of Pil∣grims, with black Bills in their hands, as formidable as if Hannibal himself had been at the Gates. However pernicious that De∣sign was in it self, it was by them im∣proved into more fatal Consequences, and they soon made no other use of the Po∣pish Plot, but as of a stale to carry on a Fanatical Conspiracy. For these Masters in the Trade were not now to learn what has been long since observ'd, that the Pre∣rogative
never suffered, no great Statesman has ever been disgrac't, nor the Church of England it self (nay the Liberties of the peo∣ple) ever wounded, but a dreadfull Out∣cry of Popery has still preceded. And in∣deed Hin illae Lacrymae. For this Popish Plot, though from its first Discovery prosecuted with a very severe and rigorous Justice, was nevertheless under pretence of a partial pro∣secution thrown upon the King, the Coun∣cil, all faithfull Ministers of State, Judges of the Land, and Loyal Clergy of the Church of England, nay at length the Go∣vernment was brought into the Conspiracy for its own Dissolution: in short, no man could shew his fidelity to the Monarchy, by opposing their antimonarchical Pro∣jects, but He was presently blasted with the odious Title of a Court or Church-Papist. Thirdly, By this means they secured to themselves Factious Elections for succeeding Parliaments; and none were now thought so fit to be entrusted with our Liberties and Properties, as either Old Commonwealths∣men, who had formerly been the shamefull Betrayers of both, or else such as by their untoward carriage in later Sessions, had manifested their Discontents and Hatred to the Government. The unwarrantable pro∣ceedings
and Seditious Votes of the late Commons are well enough known to you all, yet you must give me leave upon this Occasion to bring some of them to your Memories. And I shall begin with their pragmatical intermedling with the Successi∣on, a thing too Sacred to be touch'd by their unhallowed hands, their Sawcy, iterated pressing it upon His Majesty, after He had so often declared it was a point which in His Royal Judgement, so nearly concerned Him in Honour, Justice and Conscience, that He could never consent to it. And great Rea∣son was there for His making that Resolu∣tion, since 'twas always suspicious, but is now manifest that the Disinherison of His Royal Highness was carried on with that Violence, to facilitate the Dethroning of the King. To say nothing to the rude form observ'd in the penning of this Bill, that 'twas drawn up by a Person since accused of High Treason; to pass by the Ingratitude of the Contrivers, against a Prince of such Eminent Virtues; who has ventur'd His Royal Bloud as frankly for the good of His Country, as the meanest Subject in it, and who was even then Actually manifesting His unalterable Loyalty and Affection to His Sovereign in reducing Scotland to their Obedience; and we have at this hour great
reason to be thankfull to Him for His Wise and Prosperous Conduct in that Af∣fair; take the Villany of this whole pro∣cedure from this one instance; the chief∣est arguments which I have hitherto met with, for the Excluding a Popish Succes∣sor on the account of his Religion, are stolen out of Doleman the Jesuis, which Book was written designedly to hinder King James a Protestant Successor's coming to the Crown. Flectere si nequent superos. And I do here publickly declare, what was al∣ways my judgement, that I do believe no humane Acts or Power in the world can de jure hinder the Descent of the Crown upon the next Heir of the Bloud, which is his unalterable Right by Religion, Law, History and Reason. Next call to your minds their strange Illegal Votes. That if the King should come to any violent Death, they would Revenge it to the utmost on the Papists. Whereby they both prompted any bold Enthusiastick Hone to commit the Execra∣ble Parricide, and irritated the Rabble to the Massacre of innocent Persons. That whosoever should lend the King any mo∣ney upon the several Branches of His Re∣venue, should be adjudg'd to hinder the sitting of Parliaments, and be responsible
for it in Parliament; whereby they not only took away all hopes of necessary Sup∣plies, tyed up, as much as in them lay, the hands of all Loyal Subjects, but moreo∣ver, as His Majesty complains, would have reduced Him to a more helpless con∣dition, than the meanest of His Subjects. Their resolving that the Prosecution of Dissenters upon Penal Laws was grievous to the Subject, an encouragement to Po∣pery, and dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom, whereby they assumed to them∣selves a Power of suspending Acts of Par∣liament, of Licencing Riotous and Sedi∣tious Conventicles, and added strength and boldness to the Leaders of the Faction. If any Loyal Member, though never so E∣minent for his Talent in speaking, and other Abilities, stood up in the Defence of his King or Country, He was either rudely hiss't at, or run down with a Train of clamorous Speeches. How that they would have made use of an Impeachment to have rescued a Profess't Papist, and a notorious Traytor from Punishment. How impor∣tunately they Address't His Majesty for Pardons and Pensions for a pack of Prosli∣gate Villains, whom they kept in pay to accuse any man that stood in the way to their wicked Designs. How they Voted
several Eminent Persons Enemies to the King∣dom, without Process of Law, hearing their Defence, or any Proof, so much as offered against them. Lastly, How that at the same time when they amused the People with Jealousies, and apprehensions of Tyranny and Oppression, they assumed to themselves an unpresidented▪ Arbitrary Power of taking into Custody their Fel∣low-Subjects, for Matters no way Relating to Priviledges of Parliament. How they had an Intercourse with Traytors, a Cor∣respondency with the common Agitator for the Conspiracy. A Villain who declares King-killing a Glorious Act, hopes to see Regicides Rewarded by Parliaments, Sta∣tues Erected to their Memories, and they styled Liberatores Patriae, i. e. in the Blasphe∣my of the Modern Stile Saviours of the Na∣tion. And all this time we must be born in hand, and accurs'd for Tories and Papists if we will not believe them to be true Pa∣triots, the only Assertors of our Religion, Liberties and Properties, that they alone provided for the Safety of His Majesties Sa∣cred Person, and the Dignities of the Im∣perial Crown. Fourthly, These audacious Proceedings having forc't His Majesty to an Interval of Parliaments, They obstruct the ordina∣ry
Course and Methods of Justice, by pack't Ignoramus Juries, whereby Faction and Trea∣son became secure and frontless, being now above the reach of the Laws, an Impuni∣ty was Proclaim'd to the greatest State-Malefactors, the Principal Conspirator was Rescued out of the Hands of Justice, and Triumphant Medals dispers'd for his Deli∣verance: such a bare-fac't Affront to Au∣thority as can scarce be Parallel'd. To ac∣complish this Matchless Violation of Ju∣stice, Notorious known Dissenters are brought to the Communion and Sacra∣ments of the Church of England, to Capa∣citate them for Places of Trust, and take Oaths to Conform to the Government which they intend to Destroy, and so be∣come Perjured in the very Act of swear∣ing. And for this they have the Resolu∣tion of their own Casuists, that an Oath ob∣ligeth not in the sense of the Imposer, but the Taker. A more sure and Compendi∣ous way of Ruining our Church and State, than the Jesuit with all his Equivocations, and Dispensations hath hitherto Attempted. For it is now no longer an open Enemy, but a Familiar Friend that hath done us this Dishonour. Fifthly, By their Republican Clubs, Ri∣otous Rambles, and Descents into the se∣veral
Parts of the Nation to number the People, and try the strength of their Par∣ty; whilst their Chief, like another Absolon, takes his Glorious Progresses, addresseth to the Populace, and receives their Caresses, insinuates himself into the Minds of the Dis∣contented, and alienates their Affections yet farther from their Obedience to their Law∣full Prince. Sixthly, By Bandying themselves into an Accursed Association, which was neither better, nor worse, for worse it could not be, than a transcript of the old Scotch Cove∣nant, as that was of the Holy League of France, which laid three Kingdoms in Bloud, mur∣thered the King, and dissolv'd the Monar∣chy. These were the Principal Methods which they pursued in the carrying on their Trayterous Purposes; but these failing, and their Villanies rendring them every day more and more odious in the sight of all good Men, and the Unanimous Addresses of all Loyal Subjects from all Parts of the Kingdom, Proclaiming a Detestation and Abhorrence of their wicked Proceedings, and giving the greatest assurances of Fide∣lity and Affection to the King and the Establish't Government, by a free and Generous Proffer of their Lives and For∣tunes in the Defence of Both, they became
desperate, and resolving to trust no longer to the slow Methods of Sedition, betook them∣selves to open force. Which brings me to my third Particular, that when these means fail'd, they resolved with the desperate Citizens in the Text, Nolumus Hunc, We will not have This King to Reign over us. And this was to be ef∣fected either by raising an Army to ma∣ster His Guards and seize His Person, or by a Barbarous Assassination, and both these Designs were carried on by several Interests at the same time; the Particulars whereof are so Plainly and Methodically set forth in His Majesties Declaration, which has now been twice Publickly read, that it supersedes any further Relation. I shall therefore very briefly consider the Quality of this Hellish Conspiracy, and then set before your eyes that Scene of Horrour and Desolation which had over∣spread and blackned the Land in case it had taken Effect. If we consider the Quality, it is com∣pounded of so many Malignant Ingredients that it looks more like a Confederacy a∣gainst Religion, Morality and the common Sentiments of Humanity, than a Conspi∣racy against the Frame, Constitution and Administration of the Government. Am∣bition,
Avarice, Revenge have often be∣witch't men and led them into Treason∣able Associations; but this seems to be the sole Result of Abstracted Malice, of men abandon'd to the Curse of a Reprobate Mind. For what would they have enjoyed, which they had not, or what could they have desired, which they might not have had? Was not the Chief of the Conspiracy in the quiet Possession of all Places of Trust, Profit, and Honour, which could make him either Happy in himself, serviceable to the Government, or Gratefull to the People? Did not many of the Rest owe their For∣feited Lives, and rais'd Fortunes to His Majesties Grace and Bounty? Were not all of them even glutted with the Blessings of Peace, Plenty and Liberty? Here then is an unparallel'd Ingratitude against a Prince of the Highest Bounties towards them; whose whole Reign hath been so mild and mercifull, that He hath even Exceeded our Saviours Precept of Loving His Enemies, and doing good to those who despitefully use Him. We want not some few Examples in History of some Enthusiastick Ravilla, or other Bloudy As∣sassin, who not regarding the Sacredness of Majesty, has made his way to the Heart of an Imperial Monarch. But for
so many Flagitious Villains to Complot the Murther of their Lawfull Prince, His Dearest Brother, the Hopes of the Suc∣cession, to Design the utter Ruine of the Loyal Interest, to carry this on for so ma∣ny Years, in so many deliberate Cabals and Consultations, in defiance of Heaven, and so many Providential Disappoint∣ments, to continue all this while without any discomposure of mind, or Remorse of Conscience, the Assassination to be per∣form'd after such a Barbarous Butcherly manner; this is such a Villany and Obdu∣racy, not to be met with in the Christian world, but in the more obdurate Hearts of Fanaticks, blasted under the Curse of an unconverted Saul, that all this time they thought they did God good service; but a∣mongst Fanaticks whose Loyalty is Rebel∣lion, whose Religion is Treason, and whose very Gospel is the Mystery of Ini∣quity; lastly, but amongst Fanaticks and Atheists transform'd into malicious Fiends by the Hellish Divinity of that Monster of a Priest the Author of Julian the Apostate, whose whole Book is as great an Apo∣stacy from the Practice of the Primitive Christians, the Precepts of Obedience deli∣ver'd by Christ and his Apostles, and Christianity it self, as ever the Apostate
Julia was guilty of, and is indeed no o∣ther than the very Platform of this Hellish Conspiracy, and aims as directly at the eter∣nal Ruine of the Conspirators, as the tempo∣ral Death of the King, and the dissolution of the Monarchy. Secondly, Set before your eyes that Scene of Horrour and Desolation which had overspread the Land, in case this wicked Treason had succeeded. The King, His Royal Brother, the Ministers of State, Judges and Principal Magistrates all slaugh∣ter'd after a most inhumane, Savage man∣ner; the Government dissolv'd, our Altars polluted, our Liberties enslav'd, our Pro∣perties wrested from us, and all things laid open to the Violence of implacable Men. And indeed who can say, had that Tragedy been begun, how far it would have gone, or where it would have end∣ed? For in case of Opposition it must have been seconded with such a Devasta∣tion of Fire and Sword, as never before had been heard of in this Nation. Our streets had been fill'd with the Cries of Widows, and the Fatherless, with Mur∣ders, Rapins, Incests, Adulteries, Sacri∣lege, Massacres, and Conflagration. No Cruelties would have been thought Cruel enough to satiate the Revenge of Fana∣tick
Rage upon I Papists and Tories. A sudden Dispatch had been the greatest Fa∣vour we could have ask'd, or receiv'd from the hand of so base and merciless an Enemy. For what satisfaction would it have been to any Loyal Subject to have surviv'd the ruines of the Church and State, to have lived in a Land polluted and stain'd with Royal and Noble Bloud, to have had daily before his eyes the dis∣mal Spectacle of his enslav'd undone Coun∣try, and to have liv'd in perpetual fears of being made a Sacrifice himself. But it pleased that God who allotteth to A∣theists and Rebels a portion with the Hy∣pocrite, to Rescue His Majesty from the Paws of these Bloudy Miscreants, and to lay both Parties of the Conspiracy under the same Fate and Disappointment. Which brings me to my fourth and last observation, the Folly and Impiety of Treasonable Attempts. For notwith∣standing their Nolumus, He whom they de∣voted to Slaughter do's and shall Reign o∣ver them. That good Kings should be the more immediate Care of God, seems agreeable to the Oeconomy of His Providence, and is confirm'd by Examples in all Ages. For They are His anointed, His Vice-ge∣rents,
set over us by His Appointment, and in theirs is involv'd the Fate of particular men. And therefore their publick Sacred Character entitles them to a special Right in the Divine Providence. Of this truth, our Gracious King has been a very rare Ex∣ample through the whole Course of His Life; never did any Righteous King re∣ceive more strange and miraculous Deli∣verances, nor He himself ever a Greater, than this last, when Mercy was turn'd into Judgement, and the Dreadfull Fire at Newmarket, became to Him a Tower of Salvation. Which consideration alone was enough to have deterr'd any, but such bold Sons of Anak, who were not afraid to be∣come Fighters against God, from at∣tempting the Life of a Prince, who had been hitherto so wonderfully pre∣serv'd. But He shall Reign over them, First in Judgement; in a legal Execution of those Bloudy Conspirators who would have murthered Him. They must suffer, or He cannot be safe: Mercy would here prove Cruelty, Pardon an affront to Ju∣stice, and the highest Ingratitude to Hea∣ven. They are now under the command of those Laws which they would have
destroyed, under the hands of those Judges whom they had destin'd to Slaughter; and every Judge must remember that He is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that doth evil. That which seems truly deplorable in their Fate, is the execrable Treason for which they die, and the Hardness and Impeni∣tence which accompanies them at their Deaths. And wo be to those wretched Guides, who led them into both; those Betrayers of Souls, who instead of dispo∣sing them to Christian Confession, Re∣pentance and Resignation, have caus'd them to Publish such Justifications as seem written with Design to incite their Accomplices to do the Work of the Conspi∣racy here, whilst they are answering for it in the other world: this consideration makes the Hearts of all good Christians ake. For never did any Criminals suffer for a more Flagitious Crime, upon clearer Evidence, fuller Conviction, fairer Try∣al, juster Condemnation, or fall under a more mercifull Execution, one of them receiving that mitigation of his Sentence, which He had formerly denyed to be in the Power of the King to grant. And therefore we must believe those
men are given over to believe a Lye, who impudently cry up their Inno∣cency, and boast their Martyrdom. This can only demonstrate the Incorrigible ma∣lignity of the Faction, and awaken the Magistrate into a vigorous Execution of the Laws against such Boldness, as in the very Discovery and Prosecution of a Fanatick Conspiracy, dares justifie Treason and Canonize Traytors. And therefore Secondly, He shall Reign over them, in making a right improvement of this great Advantage which God hath put into His hands. The wonderfull Deliverances He has al∣ready receiv'd, do plainly say, that He is still reserv'd for some extraordinary Work in the world. And from His last mi∣raculous Escape, we may easily Presage what mighty Acts He shall perform for these Kingdoms in Particular. Now shall it be in His Power to subdue that Pe∣stilence of Puritanism, which for above these hundred Years has raged in this Nation, to crush the Seeds, and destroy the very Principles of Schism. To Him it is reserv'd to bring the Church of En∣gland up to those Glorious Heights, that
She shall appear the Envy of Rome, and the Terrour of Geneva. To settle the Monarchy upon so firm a Basis, that it shall be no more shaken by Republican Rage. His Sacred Person shall be no lon∣ger lyable to Violence, nor His Subjects to Oppression. No more shall Majesty be affronted by the Sawcy Votes of a Sedi∣tious Senate, nor we made Prisoners by our Representatives. But long and secure shall He Reign in the hearts and Affe∣ctions of His People, and when He re∣turns late to Heaven, leave the Bles∣sing of Peace, and a well Establish't Crown to His Successor; Posterity shall Praise His Memory, and Generations to come shall call Him the Father of His Country, and the Mighty Defender of the Faith. And it remains that we render unto God Almighty our most Solemn Thanks for the Comprehensive Mercy we this Day Celebrate, in the Deliverance of His Sacred Majesty, and the Government from the damnable Conspiracy of Fanatick Rage. And we must pray that as God in His infinite Goodness has hitherto discover'd and defeated their Hellish Devices, so
He would every day more and more con∣found their Wicked imaginations. That Justice may overtake those Trayterous Fugitives, whom Mercy could not Re∣claim. And let us never more be so far transported with the fears of a Popish Plot, as to think our selves secure from a Fanatick Conspiracy. This one false step had like to have led us into Destru∣ction. They are both formidable Ene∣mies, and since we are plac'd between two Extreams, common Prudence bids us have a watchfull Eye over both, and not to give a palpable Advan∣tage to the One, by applying all our Force against the Other. At this time the Dissenters appear to me the most Dangerous. For the Papists are com∣paratively contemptible as to their num∣bers, their Interest is broken, we have severe Penal Laws in force a∣gainst them, and those Laws in no danger of a Repeal, since both their Peers and Commons are made unca∣pable of Sitting in Parliament. But the Dissenters are formidable as to their numbers, they boast themselves in their strength, they are Restless in their At∣tempts, and Implacable in their Dis∣positions.
And it is very memorable that we should on the same day of the Month observe a Day of Thanks∣giving for the Deliverance of the Church and Defender of our Faith from a Fanatick Conspiracy, on which the Rebellious Commons in 41 first publish't their Order in Derogation of the Common-Prayer Book, and for the suspension of the Laws Ecclesiastical, of which Violation our late Martyred Sovereign of ever Blessed Memory so often and sensibly complains in His De∣claration of Aug. 12. 42. Wonderful art thou in thy ways O God! and thy Paths are past finding out. In a word then, as we are thank∣full to God for the Preservation of His Majesty hitherto, so let us im∣plore His Protection over Him for the time to come, that He may daily re∣ceive fresh Accessions of strength and Splendour, and be recompenc'd for the times, wherein He hath suffered Adversity▪ And let us evermore pay to so Gra∣cious a King, and so much Beloved, of our utmost Expressions of Duty, Love and Obedience. Let us Esteem
and Honour Him as the Gift of God, and receive Him as a new Present from Heaven. O Lord save the King, And Bless thine Anointed; Send Him help from thy Holy Hill, And evermore mightily defend Him. Let the Enemy have no Advantage over Him. Nor the Wicked approach to hurt Him. Which God of His infinite Mercy grant through Jesus Christ our Lord, To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost three Persons, and one God, be given all Glory, Praise and Dominion henceforth and for evermore. Amen. THE END.
