C1677 11741020 48490
The Ceremonies of the Vacant See.
THE Ceremonies OF THE VACANT SEE. Or a True RELATION Of what passes at ROME upon the POPE's Death. With the Proceedings in the Conclave, for the Election of a New POPE; According to the Constitutions and Ceremonials. As also The Coronation and Cavalcade. Out of the French by J. DAVIES of Kidwelly. LONDON, Printed by H. L. and R. B. for Tho. Basset at the George in Fleetstreet, near Cliffords-Inn. 1671.
TO My Worthy and much Honoured FRIEND, Mr. MICHAEL HALL OF DURHAM. SIR, THE Obligations I had to your Worthy Brother JOHN HALL, somtime of Grey's Inne Esquire, are no less present to my thoughts, when I am at the greatest distance from his Relations, then they are during my long Residences at London, where I frequently converse with those, who, knowing his worth, take oc∣casion to celebrate it, upon the least mention of his Name. But the Account I receiv'd from you of
Him not long since, and what you design'd to have done thereupon, rais'd in me a ge∣neral reflection on the Excellencies of that Person, at least what was within the reach of my happy knowledge of him. Of this I gave the world what satisfaction I could, before his Translation of Hierocles upon the Golden Verses of the Pythagore∣ans; that is, a short Collection of my own Observations, without communicating my design to any of his Friends. What Over∣tures you have made in order to the com∣pleating of it, I shall not here insist upon, further then to assure you, that my prose∣cution of it, shall, what lies in my power, be answerable to your desires. As to what is at present usher'd to you by this Dedicatory, be pleas'd, Sir, to take this short Character of it; That it is a particular account of that Action, which being of highest Importance in the Concerns of Christianity, occasions the discourse of all persons, during the process of it, as well of these, whose Principles induce them to a belief, as those, who stand upon the denial of a Supream Pastorship of the Christian Flock upon Earth. Whence
ROME derives the Priviledge of being the Scene of this great Transaction, is not my business to enquire: yet I think it not amiss, to bring in here two Distichs of that worthy Author, Sir R. Stapylton, compre∣hending, first, the Metropolism of that Ci∣ty, upon the Gentile account, and then its loss of that super-intendency, and after∣wards its retrival thereof upon the Chri∣stian score! Roma fuit quondam Terrae Regina Ma∣risque; At nunc nec Terras, nec Mare Roma regit. Roma fuit quondam Terrae Regina Ma∣risque. Nunc Mare, nunc Terras, amplius Illa regit. Thus as to the subject of the ensuing Treatise. The further Business of this Address, is, to acquaint you, that the Ma∣nuscript left in my hands by one nearly re∣lated to you, concerning your ancient Ca∣thedral, will ere long appear in publick. What else I have to adde, is only the usual
Complement made in the Infancy of the year; That is, my wishes to you, of Health, Prosperity, in Friends and Affairs; and, the greatest transient Happinesse, all the En∣dearing Enjoyments of a Conjugal life; and all this, without any other design, but that of assuring you, how much, and how truly I am, SIR, Your most Affectionate and most Humble Servant, J. DAVIES. Jan. 7. 1671.
An Historical Account of the Ceremonies at the Election of a Pope. ROME, having heretofore rais'd it self to that Great∣ness as to become the Seat of the World's Empire, continu'd its possession thereof for many after-Ages. During that vast Interval of time its Coun∣cils had an Influence over the Affairs and Concerns of most Nations: the Changes and Revolutions of States were regulated by its Policies; and its Judgments were Legislative to all places over which the Roman-Eagles had spread their victorious wings: in a word, the general Emergencies of the Universe are the ordinary discourse of the Inhabitants of this great City: and on the contrary, what is done in
it employs the reflections of all those who have heard of its name. But as it hapned heretofore at the death of any of its Emperours, all eyes were upon it, to observe the ma∣nagement of an Election, which they thought contributory to their happi∣ness or unhappiness, though as yet the Jurisdiction related only to temporal Concerns: so is it since it became the Seat of a spiritual Monarchy and Hie∣rarchy. For upon every vacancy in This, the whole Christian World is inquisitive to know what passes in a conjuncture of so great importance, to the tranquillity and advantage of Chri∣stendom, and wholly taken up with a consideration how worthy or how hap∣py that subject ought to be, who is to fill a Chair exalted above all the Thrones upon earth. As therefore every one thinks him∣self concern'd in this exaltation to the Papal Dignity, so does every one ima∣gine he hath a right and freedom to speak, and give his judgment of it. Accordingly hath it hapned, that all the
circumstances of so celebrious and sa∣cred an action have been so well ob∣serv'd, and thought of such conse∣quence, that the Memorials thereof have been transmitted to after-Ages; to the end it should be known, with what extraordinary precautions they were to proceed upon the like occasi∣ons, in order to the prevention of those misfortunes and disturbances, which the long continuance of a vacancy hath many times occasion'd in the Church. But what occasions long vacancies, and how far they are to be imputed to the interfering Interests of those temporal Princes, who think themselves more nearly concern'd in the Election, is no our business here to determine: Onl this seems rationally deducible from their proceedings therein, that they would demean themselves with a grea∣ter indifference, as to the Election, were they less perswaded, that the Person once elected must be acknowledg'd Supreme Pastor of the Catholick Church. But in process of time, through the
prudent provisions, which the Popes have made by their Constitutions: things are reduc'd to a certain order, so as that there is the less ground of fearing those fatal Accidents, where∣with the Church hath been but too much afflicted by so many schismes, most of which have deriv'd their birth or growth from the long continuance of Conclaves. And the City of Rome seems from that time to have attain'd a better constitution, so as not to be subject to any disturbance during that Interregnum; of which it is the design of this Discourse to give a particular Account, by discovering what is done, not only within the walls of Rome, but also those of the Conclave it self, upon the occasion of a Vacancy in the See Apostolick, and representing the Cere∣monies observed at the Exaltation of a Person to a spiritual Jurisdiction and Supremacy. As soon as the Pope hath submitted to the Laws of Mortality by resigning up his last breath, or seems past all hopes of recovery, the Cardinal Pa∣trone,
who is ordinarily the Nephew, and entrusted with the management of State-affairs, sends an account of his condition to the several Cardinals and Embassadors: by the Prelates he dis∣patches to them, and orders all the con∣siderable prisoners to be remov'd out of the ordinary Prisons to the Castle St. Angelo, in regard that immediately up∣on the Pope's death the Senate and People of Rome set open the prison∣doors, and give liberty to all those whom they there find in restraint. Soon after the Cardinals and Em∣bassadors make their Visits to the Car∣dinal Patrone, condoling the loss he hath received by the Pope's death; and if it happen that any of them be in the Pope's Antichamber, when he is rea∣dy to expire, they are admitted into his chamber to see his departure, and to address their prayers to God for him. Assoon as he is given over for dead the Cardinal's, and all the Officers, who had lodgings assign'd them in the Palace, dislodge themselves and go to
their houses in the City, save only the Cardinal, who has the title of Cham∣berlain, whose priviledge it is to con∣tinue still in the Pope's appartment. There are in the Sacred Colledge of Cardinals, (whose number is by the Constitution of Sixtus Quintus limited to seventy) three principal Charges, which admit not of any vacancy upon the Pope's death, but only upon theirs who were possest thereof. Those are that of Chancellour, (who yet assumes only the title and quality of Vice-Chan∣cellour, though there be not any other Person above him) that of the Grand Penitentiary, and that of Chamber∣lain. The Functions of the two former Charges are sufficiently known by their Nams; but the third is in its greatest lustre during the vacancy of the See, though the person who is pos∣sest of it be at all other times chief of the Chamber of Accompts and the Finances of the Holy See. But when, and as long as there is no Pope, he commands the Swisses of the Guard,
who had belong'd to the deceas'd, and they keep Guard about his Palace, and follow him up and down the City. He orders the coynage of money, on which there are engraven his own Armes under those of the vacant See, which are two Keys crossing one the o∣ther under a Canopy. He has this further priviledge, to be present with the three Chiefs of the Order of the Cardinals, (that is to say, the Dean of the Sacred Colledge, the first Cardinal-Priest, and the first Cardinal-Deacon) in all the Assemblies they shall hold during the vacancy of the See, to ad∣vise with them about the Affairs of the Church. It belongs also to the Cardinal-Chamberlain to see all things ordered relating to the Conclave, which he disposes to whom he thinks fit after the Election of a Pope. The chief Officer of the Datary, the Secretaries, and all others who are in∣trusted with Seals of any kind, which they had had from the deceas'd Pope, bring them immediately upon the first news of his death to the Cardinal-Chamberlain,
who, in the presence of the Auditor, and the Clerks of the Chamber (who are the Masters of Ac∣compts) and of the Grand Treasurer (who is Surintendant of the Finances or Revenues) orders them to be broken, that no foul play or forgerie be done with them; And the Ring of the Fisher, which is of Gold, and va∣lu'd at about a hundred Crowns, after it is broken, belongs to the Masters of the Ceremonies. It is also incumbent on the said Car∣dinal to send notice at the same time to all the Cardinals, the Senate, and people of Rome, of the Pope's death, and the three Chiefs in point of Deno∣mination (there being three different Classes of Cardinals, according to the difference of their titles; to wit, six titles of Episcopal Cardinals, fifty of Priesthood, and fourteen Deacon-Cardi∣nals) send the like notice to all the o∣ther Cardinals, to make their appear∣ance in the Hall of the Consistory that very Evening; or if that cannot be done with convenience the next mor∣ning
to take order for all the Charges which shall be vacant upon the Pope's death, and to appoint a Governour of the Conclave, and of St. Peter's, which is the most fortify'd Quarter of Rome, and wherein lie the Castle of St. Angelo, the Church of St. Peter, and the Vatican Palace, and where the Conclave is or∣dinarily kept; and they all go with the Roquet uncover'd, as a mark that the Sovereign Spiritual Authority is devolv'd into their hands, as having then no Superiours over them. Those who are Creatures of the deceas'd Pope are clad in Violet, as are also the other Cardinals, but with this di∣stinction, that the borders and orna∣ments of their garments are red. In the mean time the Pope's Almo∣ners, after they have washt the Corps, cloath it with his Cassock, his Ro∣quet, his Camad, and his Caloth, and by a secret pair of stairs convey it to the Chapel of Sixtus, which is in the Palace. There it is received by the Penitentiaries of St. Peter, who vest him so as if he were going to cele∣brate
Mass, setting on his head a Mitre of cloth of Gold, with all the other Ornaments peculiar to this Ceremony; and among others the Pallium and Pan∣nona, which none is to wear but on∣ly the Pope in his Pontifical Habili∣ments. Being thus habited, they lay him on a Couch in the midst of the Chappel, with a silver Cross upon his breast, and two Cardinals Hats at his feet, repre∣senting his spiritual and temporal au∣thority. Ordinarily, there are but a dozen Torches set about the Corps, and no Canopy. The Congregation of Cardinals be∣ing risen, the Creatures of the de∣ceas'd and his particular servants come into the Chapel; where, after they have said certain prayers for his soul, the Canons of St. Peter make their entrance with their Crosses, with eve∣ry one a wax candle in his hand, and taking the Corps they carry it into one of the Chapels of their Church, where it lies expos'd for the space of three days to the sight of all the peo∣ple,
who are admitted to kiss his feet and hands. After the expiration of those three days, the same Canons, accompany'd by the Relations of the deceas'd (the church-doors being shut) dispose the Body into his Sepulchre, in case he had ordered any to be made in his life∣time; but if not, they cover it with plaister in some part of their said Church, till his Sepulchre be made ready, which the succeeding Pope, if he be a Creature of the deceas'd, does ordinarily cause to be made at his own charge, together with one for himself, in such Church as he shall think fit to make choice of: Yet is it to be ob∣served, that the Body is to continue a whole year deposited in the said Church of St. Peter; after which it may be buried any where else, and the Tran∣slation of it is celebrated with great pomp aud magnificence; and they use in that Ceremony a particular Herse∣cloth embroidered, which the Clergy of St. Peter are oblig'd to get made for every Pope immediately after his E∣Election,
which Cloth is carefully laid up, during the life of the said Pope. The first day after the departure of any Pope being over, the Cardinals employ the mornings of the nine sub∣sequent days in having Dirges sung for the repose of the soul of the de∣ceas'd; and on the ninth the Funeral-Oration is made; after which all the Cardinals come about the Quire beset all with lights, under which there is a Bed of State, and five among them (of which number the Cardinal, who says Mass is one) with black. on, having given holy-water and incense, say the Suffrages and accu∣stomed Prayers. All the days next following the said Dirges of the said Cardinals meet in the Sacristy of St. Peter, to name the Officers of the Conclave, and to settle other affairs of the Ecclesiastical State. The Embassadors make them proffers of the Assistance of their Ma∣sters, in order to the security and free∣dom of the Conclave. At their com∣ing
in, they make a genuflexion, and speak standing and cover'd; and at their departure thence they make the like genuflexion. The House of the Ursini, and that of the Colonni, as being the chiefest Houses of Rome, are also receiv'd into it, but kneeling and bare-headed. They pretend that they have a priviledge to offer with their own service, that, of all the other Ro∣man Princes and Lords. These latter on the contrary, (whose Body is cal∣led the Baronage) are not willing to acknowledge any dependence on the former two Houses, and ordinarily make choice of the most ancient Person of their Body to make their Harangue. This Contest upon the death of Urban the Eighth, occa∣sion'd the Ursini and the Colonni to forbear going at all, and yet the Baron∣age was admitted to make proffers of their service. The ten days above-mentioned being expired, on the eleventh the Cardinals have a Dirge sung at
St. Peters, one of them celebrating Mass in Honour of the Holy Ghost, after which there is a Sermon preach'd, wherein they are exhorted to divest themselves of all passion and self-interest in the Election they are to make of a good common Father of the Church. After which they make their entrance by way of Procession in∣to the Conclave, the Musick singing the Veni Creator, and lay their Crosses in the Chapel Paulina. The Dean be∣ing come up to the Altar says the Prayer, Deus qui corda fidelium: which ended, the Cardinals take the Oath ap∣pointed for the observance of the Con∣stitutions of former Popes concerning the Election of the new one. That done, every one goes to dinner in his own Apartment, which had been as∣sign'd them in the Palace, for the preparing of their sustenance during their abode in the Conclave, they be∣ing not permitted to come out of the Palace till they have chosen a Pope. All that day the Conclave lies open, to satisfie the curiosity of the people,
who are permitted during that time to visit it; and towards the Evening e∣very one withdraws into his Cell, and about three or four hours after, the Cursors or Heralds put out the multi∣tude, crying aloud Extra omnes. But the Embassadors, who had spent the eleven days aforesaid in visiting all the Cardinals at their several Lodgings, come to see them once more in the Conclave; and as soon as they are come out thence, (which they commonly do last of any) the chief Person of the House of the Savelli, as Hereditary Marshal of the Holy Church, locks the door of the Conclave, sets a Guard at it, and hath an apartment adjoyning thereto, out of which he is not to stir either night or day till there be a Pope chosen. At the last Conclave, there arose a Contest between him and the Governour of the said Conclave a∣bout the Keys of it; but they were ad∣judg'd to the Prince Savelli, as'having been in former times in the possession of his Predecessors. The keeping of the Keys within the Conclave belongs
to the Cardinal-Chamberlian and the Master of the Ceremonies. In the door of the Conclave there is a little square window, which may be shut on both sides within and without, and is not open'd, but only when Em∣bassadors or some other Person of Quality brings some very important advertisement or intelligence to the sa∣cred Colledge, and then they direct their Speech through the said Win∣dow. According to the Constitution of Pius the Fourth every Cardinal may have two men with him to wait upon him in the Conclave; but Princes and the more ancient Cardinals may have three and no more: and these persons are called Conclavists, who all joyning together oblige all the Cardinals to take an Oath for the Observance of their priviledges. Nor can any of the Cardinals balk the taking of the said Oath, out of a fear of the re∣proach which might be made him of his desire to be Pope. Their Privi∣ledges consist in having ten thousand
Crowns out of the Chamber, to be di∣vided among them, and all the vacant Benefices, not exceeding two thousand Crowns Revenue. Moreover, it is further requisite, ac∣cording to the foresaid Constitution of Pius the Fourth, that the Conclavists, be actually menial servants to the said Car∣dinals at the vacancy of the Holy See, and that they had been in their service for the space of a year before. With this further Proviso, that the Ministers of Princes, Persons possessd of in for, ost. temporal Seigneu∣ries, having the rights of the Admini∣stration of Justice annex'd thereto, as also persons employ'd in Traffick and Commerce; and lastly, the Brothers or Nephews of Cardinals, cannot be cho∣sen by them for their Conclavists, though they were their Domesticks, and re∣ceiv'd wages or salaries from them. To this kind of persons there are added also two others, one for the ser∣vice of the two Masters of Ceremonies, and the other, for the Secretary of the Sacred Colledge. With this reserva∣tion
nevertheless, that the servant of of the Masters of the Ceremonies ought to be actually a Domestick of one of them, and have been such for the space of six months before: which condition is in like manner requisite in the servant to the Secretary of the Colledge of Cardi∣nals. Besides the Cardinals and their Con∣clavists, the two Masters of Ceremonies, the Secretary of the Colledge, and their servants there are also shut up in the Conclave a Penitentiary, to receive Con∣fessions, and resolve such Cases of Conscience as may be propos'd to him; as also a Sacristan, with a Chaplain to assist him in the service of the Sacristy, a Physician, an Apothecary, and a Chy∣rurgeon, with one or two servants, and the Drugs and Medicines requisite for the relief and accommodation of the indispos'd; a Carpenter, a Mason, and about twenty Porters or servants of the meanest sort, to be employed in the carrying of wood, sweeping the Cham∣bers and the streets of the Conclave,
and to what other services may be ne∣cessary within. All these Officers and Servants are chosen by the Cardinals by plurality of voices, and are not to be taken out of the houses of any of the said Cardinals, and their Salaries are paid out of the Chamber. Assoon as they have clear'd the Con∣clave of all those persons, whom ei∣ther their curiosity or some other occa∣sion had brought thither, the Embassa∣dor's also being retir'd, and the door lockt on the out-side by the Marshal of the Conclave, who has the Keys of it, and is to see it guarded, the three Cardinals, Chiefs of the three dif∣ferent Classes, accompany'd by the Cardinal-Chamberlain, and one of the Masters of Ceremonies, who have the custody of the Keyes within, (as hath been observ'd already) go with Torches all about the Conclave, visiting all parts of it, to see if there be any there who ought not to be, and whether the shutting up of the Conclave be per∣formed according to the Constitutions.
And the next day, immediately after dinner, there is a review taken of all the Conclavists and Servants in the Chapel, out of which they are order∣ed to go one after another, to be exa∣min'd, whether they have the quali∣fications requisite for their admission, as also whether they exceed not the number appointed by the said Consti∣tutions. But, before we come to a particular Account of what passes among the Cardinals in the Conclave, it will not be amiss to say somewhat of what is done in the mean time, in reference to the Government of the City. Upon the News spread abroad of the Pope's death, the Senate and People of Rome, (that is to say, the Consuls of the City) being assembled in the Capi∣tal, cause it to be publish'd through all the streets by beat of drum, order the prison-doors to be open'd, and set at liberty all they find in restraint, thereby signifying that the Jurisdiction of Rome during the Vacancy of the Holy See, is devoted to them. They order
all the Inhabitants to keep a candle lighted at their Window during all that night, and enjoyn the Captains of the several Wards or Quarters, (whose Companies consist of men, whom the Inhabitants of all Ranks and Orders, (excepting only both the Roman and Foreign Nobility) are oblig'd to fur∣nish them withal, to the number of one for every House with their Armes) to keep strict Guards day and night, eve∣ry one in their Lodgings, and to take their several rounds and patrouilles, to prevent the disorders which are many times very great, proceeding hence, that such as have been hardly or inju∣riously dealt with, during the prece∣dent Papacies, do for the most part de∣fer their resentments thereof to the next vacant See; so that it happens many Murthers and Assassinations may be committed. Not but that Justice is very severely administred at that time, and with greater expediti∣on, then at any other; but if the Mur∣therers and other mischievous persons be not surpriz'd in the very Facts, and
can make a shift to abscond themselves and keep out of the way till the Cre∣ation of a new Pope, they return to their habitations as if they had com∣mitted those crimes in some other Countrey. All the Cardinals, Embassadors, Princes and Lords about Rome raise Souldiers for the guarding of their Pa∣laces and their Houses, and they among the Cardinals who have any pretensi∣ons to the Papacy are more careful in this particular then the others, by rea∣son of the priviledge the people assume to themselves of pillaging them assoon as they are chosen. There passes not a day without some Processions, which from all Churches and Monasteries take their way to St. Peter's, and about the Conclave, singing as they go the Hymn Veni Creator, to implore the assistance of the Holy Ghost and its Inspirations upon the Cardinals. The Conclave consists ordinarily of three Galleries, aud twenty five or thirty withdrawing-rooms or Cham∣bers,
all of a floor, from the Vatican-Palace of equal height with the Gal∣lerie which is over the Portal of St. Peter's, which is the ordinary place of the Benediction given by the Pope to the people after his Coronation, and upon the great Festivals of the year: Which Gallery makes also part of the Conclave. In all which Galleries, rooms and chambers, they make parti∣tions of boards for so many Cells as there are Cardinals. Every Cardinal hath a Cell assign'd him about five pa∣ces in length, and about four in bredth, with a little wardrobe proportionable thereto. The Cells are taken by lot, and every Cardinal is to take that the number whereof he finds in his lot: and whereas it happens that the Cardinals are not all of them, during the whole time, confin'd within the Conclave, ei∣ther upon the account of sickness or ab∣sence, the Cells which are not taken up are divided among the next neighbors, who make this advantage only of the absence or indisposition of others, that their rooms are somwhat enlarg'd therby;
but the absent or sick Cardinals, re∣turning into the Conclave, reassume their Cells, and so oblige those who had made use of them to content themselves with their own divisi∣ons. They among the Cardinals, who were Creatures of the deceas'd Pope, hang their Cells within and without with Cloth or Serge of a violet co∣lour, and the others with green Serge, all setting up their Armes over their doors, which they make fast only with two staves crossing one the other after the form of a St. Andrews Cross. The Officers and Servants of the Conclave have their quarters assign'd them in some remote part. At three or four avenues of the said Conclave, there are Turning-Boxes, like those in the Monasteries of Nuns, through which the meat sent in to the Cardinals and their Conclavists is re∣ceived. Their Partizans and Servants at∣tend their meat as they were wont to do their persons when they were at li∣berty.
Before the entrance of the Cardi∣nals into the Conclave, there is a List taken of all the Prelates then about the Court of Rome, and the Governour of it appoints every day, two in the morning, and as many in the afternoon, every one in his rank, to be present at the said Turning-Boxes, to visit and observe whatever is sent in to the Car∣dinals, to prevent the sending in of Letters or Notes with the meat. They are also to hinder all persons from speaking to them or their Conclavists at the said Boxes, unless they speak a∣loud, and in the Italian or Latin Tongue, that every one may under∣stand what is said; inasmuch as by the Constitutions, it is matter of Ex∣communication to talk of, or to en∣quire what is done within the Con∣clave. But notwithstanding all the caution and vigilance us'd as to this particular, yet cannot some abuses be prevented; and people come to know what passes there. This happens sometimes by the way of Notes or Advertisements in
writing, which they find means to get in, either by the connivance of some Prelates, who are unwilling to disob∣lige the Crowns and Princes, whose Patrizans they are, as they think they should do, by obstructing their having intelligence of what passes. Some∣times also this is attributed to the Cardinals themselves, who do it to promote their different engagements and affections, or to prevent prejudi∣cing their hopes, or that their precau∣tions are really eluded. Another way yet, where there may be a discovery made of proceedings in the Conclave, is, a secret kind of language before∣hand, studied and agreed upon be∣tween the Conclavists, and their Cor∣respondents, whereof they make their advantages when occasion serves, comprehending under the supposititi∣ous termes of houshold-stuffe, Relati∣ons, or domestick Affairs, concerning which they enquire News, the Names of such Cardinals as are propos'd, or excluded, or that stand fair for the Papal dignity; and so by disguiz'd
discourses, and an affected Jargon appli∣cable to divers senses, disclosing what is most secretly carried on in the Conclave. Yet is there not any thing to be ob∣jected against the shutting up of the Conclave, since it is done with all the exactness imaginable. For the Chim∣neys are close done up at the tops, and the windows of all the rooms and Gal∣leries are in like manner stop'd to with∣in a foot of the upper part, which small distance is clos'd with course linen cloth, whereby a little light comes in; but so that if the Cardinals have any occasion to write or read, they must al∣ways have a wax-candle standing by them. And thence it proceeds, that not receiving any supplies of fresh air from without, and that within being many times infected and corrupted, they are apt to fall sick, especially when the Conclaves are of long continuance. The twelfth day after the Pope's death (the first, as hath bin already observ'd be∣ing spent in conveying the Body into one of the Chapels of St. Peter's Church, and the nine subsequent days in celebrating
Obsequies and singing Dirges for the soul of the deceas'd, and holding the ordinary Congregations at the end of the said Dirges; and the eleventh, in the Cardinals taking possession of the Conclave, which for all that day lies open to satisfie the curiosity of the people, who come not out of it till three or four houres after night) all the Cardinals resident about the Court of Rome, having shut themselves up in the Conclave, ina much as by the Constitu∣tion of Gregory XV. there can be no warrantable proceeding to the Electi∣on, till the shutting up of the Con∣clave be compleated, and acknow∣ledg'd such by a publick Act, which is made thereof at the request of the Master of the Ceremonies: All these things being thus order'd in the mor∣ning of the said twelfth day, before they apply themselves to any thing concerning the Election, the three Car∣dinals, Chiefs of the several Orders, and the Cardinal Chamberlain give a Commission to some within, to take an exact Survey of all parts of the Con∣clave,
to see that it is close and well shut up of all sides. Which if they find accordingly, after they have made their report thereof to the Com∣pany, it is formd into an Authentick Act, the substance whereof amounts to this, That the Conclave is close and shut up, as it is requir'd it should be by the Constitutions, and account∣ed and reputed such by the Sacred Col∣ledge of Cardinals. And this Cere∣mony is so essential, and of so abso∣lute necessity, that there would be a nullity in the Election, which should be made without this precedent Act. And as long as there is no Declaration contrary to that of the shutting up of the Conclave, that is, till such time as it shall have been declared by the Suf∣frages of two Thirds of the Cardinals, that there is an overture of the said Conclave, it is always accounted and reputed duly shut up; And the Ele∣ction which might be made after the publication of the Closure, cannot be disputed as to nullity, under pretence of any overture hapning afterwards, if
the Declaration of the Overture had not been made with the advice of two thirds of the Colledge of Cardinals. The Cardinals are permitted to hold their capitulary Assemblies or Congre∣gations, to agree among themselves upon certain Articles, before they en∣gage npon the business of the Election. These Articles are to be sign'd by all, even those which concern the privileges of the Conclavists heretofore mention∣ed, before or after their entrance into the Conclave, provided always that the Election be not retarded thereby. There is also a further examination made, before they fall upon any thing touching the Election, whether among the Cardinals there be any one that hath not receiv'd the order of Deacon, to the end he might not be admitted to give his voice, inasmuch as he is ex∣cluded by the Constitution of Pius IV. unless he had obtain'd permission in writing from the deceas'd Pope to do it. Nay, it hath sometimes heretofore come into debate, whether a Cardinal, on whom silence had been impos'd be∣fore
the Pope's death, could give his Suffrage for the Election of another Pope? But this question was decided by Pius V. who, by the Decretal of January 26. 1571. declar'd, that that imposition of silence was only a Ce∣remony introduc'd only to keep the Cardinals in a certain advertency (be∣fore they were admitted to give their voices and Suffrages, as the Consisto∣ries and Congregations wherein they were to assist) of that modesty and reservedness, which they were oblig'd to express in those and all other Acts, but not to deprive them of their power and principal function, which consists in the Election of a Pope. And this Constitution hath ever since been in∣violably observ'd. The shutting up of the Conclave intro∣duc'd at the Council of Lyons, by the con∣stitution of Greg. X. 1274. having ther∣fore bin duly acknowledg'd and verifi'd, the Cardinals (being advertis'd by the ringing of a Bell to resort to the Chapel Paulina, which is within the compass of the Conclave, if not diverted by sickness)
on the very morning of the twelfth day, go to hear Mass, and communi∣cate, as they are oblig'd to do, and im∣mediately after ought to proceed to the Election. Which Election, at the present, by the Constitution of Gregory XV. confirmed by another since of Ur∣ban VIII. cannot be made, otherwise then by one of these three formes and manners following; to wit, either by way of Inspiration, or by Compromise; or lastly, by Scrutiny and Access; all which it is but requisite that we expi∣cate, and make as intelligible as may be, that it may be the more easily com∣prehensible, with what extraordinary circumspection and wise precautions they are guided, in an affair of so high consequence. The first means or method of choo∣sing the Pope, which they call the way of Inspiration; or as it is exprest by the Sacred Canons As-it-were-by-Inspi∣ration, is, when all the Cardinals in ge∣neral, and every one in particular, with a common voice, as being in∣spir'd by the Holy Ghost, are unani∣mously
agreed, without any one con∣tradicting it, and without any prece∣dent particular treaty, and do freely concur to the acknowledging and pro∣claiming of such a person Pope. Con∣cerning which manner of Election we are to observe the following Circum∣stances, which are necessarily requi∣site by the Gregorian Constitution, which is a perfect Directory, as to the ways of proceeding at Elections, and ob∣serv'd at present without any contradi∣ction. The first circumstance is, that this kind of Election cannot be allowably made any where but in the Conclave, and that after the publication of its be∣ing duly shut up. The second is, that this Election is to be made by all in general, by eve∣ry one of the Cardinals in particular, who are present in the Conclave, by a common Suffrage, and without contra∣diction from any one. The third circumstance is, that there must not have been any precedent Pro∣posal, or particular Treaty, in reference
to a choice to be made by this kin of way, which ought to be clearly ∣prest by this word Eligo, I chuse, pro∣nounc'd with a loud and intelligible voice, or, for want of pronunciation, to be expresly set down in writing. The Roman Ceremonial gives an instance of an Election, which might be allowably made by this kind of way, which brought in hither will render the business more cle. It is said in the forementiond Cere∣monial, that if any one of the Car∣dinals, after publication of the shutting of the Conclave, (there having not been any precedent particular treaty about the person whom he would pro∣pose) should say, for example, in a full Chapel, addressing his speech to the whole Sacred Colledge, My Lords, ha∣ving always observ'd the rare and excel∣lent Qualifications and Vertues of my Lord the Cardinal N. and having an e∣steem for his remarkable Integrity, it is my judgement that we cannot make choice of a worthier subject to be Pope, and thereupon I from this present give him
my Suffrage, and chuse him for Pope. And that afterwards all the Cardinals, with one voice, without excepting any one, being of the same opinion, and all of them intelligibly pronouncing one after another the same word, I chuse him; or not being able to pronounce it, setting it down in writing, that per∣son would be canonically chosen, and acknowledg'd for a true and legitimate Pope, by that way which they call of Inspiration, or As-it-were-by-Inspiration; which in regard it is immediately at∣tended by Adoration, is thence com∣monly called the way of Adora∣tion. The second manner of proceeding in the Election of the Pope, is the way of Compromi'se, which is, when the Car∣dinals, either immediately after their entrance into the Conclave, or wea∣ried out with its long continuance, refer themselves to one or more among them, whom they empower to make provision, in the name of all, of a com∣mon Father to the Catholick Church.
And this kind of Election is practis'd conformably to the Gregorian Bull, and the conditions and provisions contain'd therein, which may also be reduced to three. The first is, that all the Cardinals in general, and every one in particular, who are present in the Conclave, not one contradicting or opposing it, ought to make a Compromise in writing, whereby they invest those persons whom they take for Compromissaries with an absolute power and faculty to make provision of a Pastor for the Holy Roman Church, yet with an ob∣servance of the forme, as also the Clau∣ses and conditions inserted and express'd in the Compromise, and to do it with∣in the time prescrib'd thereby: the said Cardinals, promising to acknowledge and account the person, whom the Compromissaries shall have thus chosen, according to the extent of that power which had been granted them by the Compromise, the true and lawful Pope. The second circumstance is, that it is not permitted any one of the Com∣promissaries
should give himself his own voice, otherwise his Election should be null. The third condition is, that the Com∣promissaries are oblig'd twice every day to assemble, in order to their conferring together, and promoting the execution of the Compromise; in the morning im∣mediately after the hearing of Mass, and in the Evening after the recitation of the Hymn Veni Creator Spiritus, and the Prayer of the Holy Ghost, to implore its illuminations upon them. But be∣fore they fall upon any thing of busi∣ness, they are wont to make this Pro∣testation precedent thereto, That they would not be understood to give their con∣sent by all sorts of words or expressions which might fall from them in the heat of the Debate, if they do not expresly set it down in writing. When they have absolutely agreed upon the choice of any person, and have prpos'd him as such to the Sacred College, he it to be immediately ac∣knowledg'd as true Pope, and Canoni∣cally elected.
These two ways of Inspiration and Compromise are not now much in use; but the way of Scrutiny, or of Scrutiny and Access joyned together, is the most ordinarily practis'd, wherein there are many Ceremonies to be obser∣ved. For the Election of a Pope by this last way, it is requisite, according to the Constitution of Alexander the Third, in the Year of our Lord MCLXXX. made at the Council of Lateran, that there should be two thirds of the voices of the Cardinals; which hath been confirm'd by subsequent Bulls, and in our Age by those of Gregory XV. and Urban VIII. And it is further requiste, that in the two thirds of the Voices, that of the Cardianl chosen, be not included, inasmuch as there is a prohibition upon pain of nullity of Election for any one to chuse himself, or give him∣selfe his own voice. They are oblig'd twice every day to take the Scrutiny and the Access; in the morning, after Mass; and in the E∣vening,
after the Hymn Veni Creator Spiritus, and the Prayer of the Holy Ghost which are said in the Chapel Paulina at which the Cardinals are oblig'd to be present, if not detain'd by indisposition, immediately, after the third ringing of the Bell. There is a great secrecy to be ob∣serv'd in the Scrutiny and Access, and the manner of proceeding therein may be reduc'd to three principal actions. The first is the previous or Fore-Scru∣tiny; the second, that of Scrutiny and Access; and the third, that of the Post-Scrutiny, or what follows the Scrutiny and Access assoon as they are compleated. The particular explication of these three different actions will give us a fuller comprehension of this way of Scrutiny and Access, and give us to understand what it is, by distinguish∣ing them as they are found explicated in the Roman Ceremonial. The Fore-Scrutiny may be distin∣guish'd into five principal Acts: the preparation of the Billets for the
Scrutiny and Access; the taking out by lots, the names of the Scrutators and Deputies, who are to collect the Suf∣frages of such as are indispos'd; that of writing them in the Billets of Access, that of folding them, and that of seal∣ing them. The Masters of the Ceremonies are the persons who take care for the pre∣paration of the Billets, which they cause to be printed according to the forme hereafter set down, as well for the Scrutiny as Access. They put them into two Basins upon a Table before the Altar; those of the Scrutiny by themselves in one of the Basins, and those of the Access in the other; in num∣ber so many as there are Cardinals. The Figure of the Billet of the Scru∣tiny is such, that the length exceeds the bredth. It is about a hands bredth in length, and about half as broad. The out∣side of the Billet comprehends three things; in the upper part of it are writ∣ten these words, Ego Cardinalis, with as much distance between the one and the other, as may be requisite for the set∣ting
down of the Cardinal's name who gives his voice, and a little lower there are two little Circles denoting the pla∣ces where the Seal is to be set. In the midst of the Billet are imprint∣ed these words, Eligo in summum Pontifi∣cem Reverendissimum D. meum, D. Cardina∣lem— I chuse for Supream Bishop the most Reverend Lord, my Lord Cardinal.— In the third and lowest part of the Billet are in like manner imprinted two little Circles, denoting also the pla∣ces of the Seal, and all the rest is blank. The form and figure of the Billets for the Access, is in all respects like that of the Billets of the Scrutiny, save only that in the midst of them, in stead of these words [Eligo in summum Pontifi∣cem Reverendissimum D. meum, D. Cardi∣nalem] these are inserted, Accedo Reve∣rendissimo D. meo, D. Cardinali, that is to say, I give again my voice to my most Reverend Lord my Lord Cardinal. But these things will be more easily com∣prehended by exhibiting here the fi∣gures of the Billets.
The Figure of the Out-side of the Billet of the Scrutiny. Fgo Cird. Eligo in summum Pontificem Rm. D. meum D. Cardin.
The Figure of the Out-side of the Billet of Access. Ego Card. Aced Revrendiss. D. mo Card.
Upon the other side of the Billets, as well those of the Scrutiny, as those of the Access, there are imprinted certain Bordures, or Flourishes, one about the midst of the upper part of the Billet, upon which is written the word Nomen, and the other in like manner in the midst of the lower part, upon which is also written the word Signa. The Flourishes were invented purposely to render the Paper the more obseure, and that the names and signes of the Car∣dinals Electors might not be perceiv'd through it: which will also be more easily understood by an inspection of the Figure here annexed.
The Figure of the other side of the Billets of the Scrutiny and Access. Nomen. Signa.
The second Act of the Fore-Scruti∣ny is, that of drawing by lot, the names of the Scrutators and the Infirmaries, who are the Cardinals appointed to go to the Cells of such as are indispos'd▪ and there to take their Suffrages, which is done in this manner. There are put into a purse as many little Bullets or Balls, hol'd through the middle, about the bigness of Beads, as there are Car∣dinals in the Conclave, with their Names written in little snips of Parch∣ment roll'd up, and thrust through the holes in the little Bullets, which the Masters of the Ceremonies take care to provide, as they do the Bil∣lets. As they are put into the purse they are counted all one after another, in the presence of the Cardinals, and then after they have been well shaken together, the last of the Deacon-Car∣dinals draws three out of the purse, and they whose names are found in them are chosen for Scrutators, accor∣ding to the order wherein they are drawn out of the purse. Then they draw out three others for the Infir∣maries
or Deputies, who are to go to such as are sick. And that done, the little Bullets are return'd into the purse. Twice a day, that is, in the morning and afternoon before the Scrutiny, there is an Election made of the said Offi∣cers. But if it happen that they draw the names of any of the Cardinals that are sick, or cannot by reason of some other impediment acquit themselves of the function of the said charges of Scrutators and Infirmaries, there are o∣thers drawn in their stead. The third Act of the Fore-Scru∣tiny consists in setting down what is to be written in the Billets, and in the filling of them by the Cardinals with their own names, and the name of the Cardinal to whom they give their Suffrages, and their Signets. To do this, every Cardinal, accord∣ing to his rank, beginning with the Dean or most ancient, goes and takes out of the Basin where∣in the Billets of the Scrutiny are standing upon the Altar one Billet,
and thereupon retiring into one of the two or three little Desks or Seats prepa∣red for that purpose, and furnished with Pen and Ink in the middest of it, or to some other part of the Chapel, so ex∣pos'd to the sight of all, that they may easily see him writing, but not discern what is written; and taking his seat prepar'd also near the Desk, he fills up his Billet thus; in the upper part he writes between these words [Ego Cardinalis] his own name; in the midst of it he inserts the name of him to whom he gives his voice, with some difference and disguise of chara∣cter as much as he can, according to the Bull of Gregory XV. that it may not be known by the writing: and in the lower part of the Billet is written some cer∣tain number in figures, according to his own phansie, with some sentence out of the holy Scripture, or somewhat of that nature. The figure of a Billet fill'd up will render what we have said more manifest to the eye.
The Figure of the Out-side of the Billet of the Scrutiny. Ego Fra. Card. Barb. Eligo in summum Pontificem Rm.D. meum D. Card Ca pineum. 10. In manibus tuis sortes meae.
The folding of the Billets is the fourth Act of the Fore-Scrutiny: It is no hard matter to comprehend how it is done. By the fold which is made of the Billet, in the upper part of it, the corners whereof are to be turn'd down upon the marks of the Seal, the name of the Cardinal Elector is co∣ver'd. In like manner, by the folding which is made of the lower part of the Billet, the corners whereof are also to be laid over the marks of the Seal, the Signes are likewise cover'd. After these two foldings, they fold it so often as is requisite to reduce it to the bredth of an Inch or thereabouts. There remains yet the last Act of the Fore-Scrutiny, which consists in sealing the Billets, the form whereof is as easily conceivable, as that of the precedent folding. Every Cardinal before his entrance into the Conclave, must have furnisht himself with a Seal, unknown to the others, purposely grav'd for this occasion, containing some fancy or character, or simple-fi∣gure, the impression whereof may be
easily perceiv'd. With this Seal the Cardinal makes an Impression on the back of the Billet, at the places design'd by the little Circles, on which the Masters of the Cere∣monies, before the putting of the Bil∣lets into the Basins, had claqt little bits of red wax. These things thus perform'd, the Cardinals proceed to the second princi∣pal Action called the Scrutiny, which the Ceremonial hath distinguish'd in∣to eight particular Acts. These are, the carrying of the Billets to the Altar; The taking of the Oath; The putting of the Billets into the Chalice prepar'd for the reception of them; The mixture which is there∣upon made thereof; The numbring of the Billets; The Publication of the Scrutiny; The Filing of the Billets; And the laving of them a∣side, either upon some part of the Altar, or upon the Desks of the Scrutators, or in an empty Cha∣lice.
The carrying of the Billets to the Altar, the taking of the Oath, and the putting of the Billets into the Chalice, are three acts, so consequent one to the other, that it is no hard matter to make a joynt imagination of them. And to that end, presupposing that every Cardinal hath at the Desk (as aforesaid) fill'd up the Billet of the Scrutiny with his own name, the name of him, to whom he gives his voice, and the or∣dinary signes, that he hath folded it, and seal'd it, according to the prece∣dent explication, he takes the said Bil∣let with the two fore-fingers of the right hand, he carries it openly up to the Altar, where the Scrutators are standing at the Desk, which had been there prepar'd for them; and being come thither, he falls down on his knees, and makes a short prayer; af∣ter which, rising up, with a loud and intelligible voice, he takes the Oath according to the forme, wherein it is transcrib'd in a Table upon the Altar, in these termes, Testor Christum Domi∣num, qui me judicaturus est, me eligere,
quem, secundum Deum, judico eligi de∣bere, et quod idem in Accessu praestabo. That is to say, I Attest Jesus Christ my Lord, who is to be my Judge, that I chuse him, whom according to God's Will I think fittest to be chosen; and that I will do the like in the Access. Having thus taken the Oath, he lays his Billet up∣on the Cover of the Chalice, and with the Cover he puts it into the Chalice, and thereupon making an obeisance to the Altar, he retires to his place. This Ceremony is observ'd by all the Cardinals, who are able to come up to the Altar. For if it happen, that any one of the Cardinals then present in the Chapel is not able, by reason of in∣firmity, to come up to the Altar, the Junior of the Scrutators takes the Ba∣sin, wherein the Billets of the Scrutiny are, and carries it to him, out of which the indispos'd Cardinal having taken a Billet, he secretly fills it up, at his own Desk, folds it, and seals it, as is before∣mentioned; and after he hath taken the foresaid Oath in the place where he is, he delivers his said Billet to the
Scrutator, who openly carries it up to the Altar, and without any Prayer or Oath lays it on the Cover, and with the Co∣ver conveys it into the Chalice. The same thing is done towards all the in∣dispos'd Cardinals who are in the Chapel. But as to those Cardinals, who, by reason of sickness are not able to stir out of their Cells, the Infirmary-Car∣dinals chosen by lot to go and receive their voices, go to the Desk of the Scrutators, and take from their hands a Box with a hole in the upper side of it, having a Lock and Key to it about a hands bredth high. This Box is publickly opened by the Scrutators, before the delivery of it to the Infirma∣ries, to the end that every one of the Cardinals may see it is empty, and that done they lock it up with the Key, which they lay upon the Altar, and then give the Box to the Infirma∣ries, who, having taken a little Basin, with as many Billets therein as there are Cardinals sick in their Cells, go to them. The indispos'd Cardinals having taken their Billets out of the Basin, se∣cretly
fill them up, fold them, and seal them, and after they have made the ordinary Oath, put them into the hole of the Box. If the Cardinal's sickness be such as that he is not able to write, he makes choice of such person as he thinks fit to fill up his Billet. But the said person so appointed to fill it up, is oblig'd to make Oath be∣fore the Infirmary-Cardinals, that he will not reveal the secret then entrusted to him: And this he is bound to do, not only upon the Obligation of the said Oath, but also upon pain of incur∣ring excommunication ipso facto. The Suffrages of the indispos'd Cardinals being thus collected by the Infirmaries, they return to the Chapel, deliver the Box to the Scrutators, who opening it, take out the Billets, which after they have been numbred, they lay, one after another upon the Cover of the Chalices, and with the Co∣ver convey them into the Chalice. But to the end the Scrutiny may not hold too long, and that it may be
carry'd on without any interruption, (as it is requir'd by the Balls) the Infir∣mary-Cardinals, before they go to the indispos'd, may fill the Billets with their voices immediately after the Dean-Cardinal; and then, while the others make the Scrutiny, address them∣selves to the sick to collect their Suf∣frages. The mixture of the Billets makes the fourth Act of the Scrutiny, and consists in the shaking of them well in the Chalice with its cover on; which is performed by the chiefest of the Scrutators, who, to that end, takes the Chalice from the Altar, and holding with one hand by the foot, and having the other upon the Cover, shakes the Billets so as that it may not be disco∣ver'd which were put in first, which last. The numbring of the Billets is the fifth Act, immediately following the mixture thereof, and is performed by the Junior of the Scrutators, who takes them one after another out of the Cha∣lice, and counts them, and puts them
into another empty Chalice prepar'd for that purpose. If the number of the Billets be not equal to that of the Cardinals, they are all burnt, and with∣out removing out of the place they renew the Scrutiny. But if the num∣ber be equal they proceed to the other subsequent Acts of the Scrutiny. The Publication, which is the sixth Act, and ought to be done by the Scrutators sitting at their Desk placed before the Altar, is thus performed. The chief Scrutator takes a Billet out of the Chalice, which he unfolds, without breaking the Seals of it, and having discover'd and seen the name of him to whom the Suffrage is given by the Billet, he delivers it to the second Scrutator, who having also seen the same name puts the Billet into the hands of the third Scrutator, who reads it with a loud and intelligible voice, so as that all the Cardinals present in the chapel may hear it, who having before them their names set down in a printed sheer of paper, wherein op∣posite to every name there are lines
drawn to the right hand and to the left, upon which they make as many dashes as a Cardinal hath voices. Upon line on the right hand they are to mark the votes of the Scrutiny, and on that to the left those of the Access. And this Ceremony is observ'd in the pub∣lication of all the Billets from the first to the last. Here place the Catalogue.
A Figure of the Printed sheet which every Cardinal hath lying before him, where upon to mark the Suffrages of the Scrutiny and Access. Accesse Day Suffrages month   Accesse Day Suffrages, 1667. —R. Fran Barberin—   — dono— —R. Ginetti—   —R. Barbarigo— —R. Ant. Barberin—   —R. Arragon— —R. Palotta—   —R. Boncompagno— —R. Branciacco—   —R. Litta— —R. Carpegna—   —R. Corsino— —R. Harach—   —R. Bonelli— —R. Durazzo—   —R. Picolomini— —R. Cabrielli—   —R. Caraffa— —R. Ursino—   —R. Palutio— —R. Fachinetti—   —R. Rasponi— —R. Grimaldi—   —R. De Comitibus— —R. Rosetti—   —R. Nini— —R. Ludovisio—   —R. Roberti— —R. Cybo—   —R. Spinola— —R. Sfortia—   —R. Visconti— —R. Odcscalchi—   —R. Caraccioli— —R. Raggi—   —R. Delphini— —R. e Retz—   —R. de Thun.— —P. Homodei—   —R. d'Est— —R. Otthobono—   —R. Donghi— —R. Imperiale—   —R. Rondanini— —R. Borrhomaeo—   —R. Maldachini— —R. Santa-Croce—   —R. de Assia— —R. Spada—   —R. Carl. Barbarino— —R. Albici—   —R. Pio— —R. Aquauiua—   —R. Gualtieri— —R. Chisi—   —R. Azzolini— —R. Ilcio—   —R. Vecchiarelli— —R. Farneze—   —R. Franconi— —R. Rospigliosi—   —R. Manchini— —R. Bonvili—   —R. Celsi— —R. Bichi—   —R. Perretti— —R. Palavicini—   —R. Vendosme— —R. Bandinelli—   —R. Moncada.— Present in the Conclaue— Absent upon sicknesse, from the Scrutiny-Palavicini. Absent from Coart-Arragon. The number is 70.
If it should happen in the Publi∣cation, that the Scrutators found two Billets so folded together, to any ones thinking, as if they were brought in by one and the same person; if in both these Billets there should be found one and the same thing, and one and the same Cardinal named, they shall be counted but for one; but if there be a diversity of Suffrages, neither is worth any thing, yet shall not there be any defect in the Scrutiny upon thar score. Moreover, the publication being compleated, they set down in two or three sheets of paper the names of all the Cardinals who have had voices, with the number of the voices; to the end, that when there is any oc∣casion, they should not be oblig'd to make any new enumeration of the Suffrages, which the Cardi∣nals might have mark'd and cross'd on the side of their names upon the lines of the printed sheet, of which we spoke before.
The two last Acts of the Scrutiny, which are the filing and laying aside of the Billets, are performed by the Junior of the Scrutators, who, after he hath with a loud voice publish'd the name of the Cardinal who hath the Suffrage by a Billet, files the said Bil∣let with a needle provided for that pur∣pose, at the place where the word Eligo is written. And after he hath so filed all the Billets immediately after his publishing them, he tyes a knot on the thing, and then lays them aside, either on some part of the Altar, or on the Desk of the Scrutators, or in an empty Chalice. The third and last principal Action perform'd at the Election of a Pope, by way of Scrutiny is, in the Ceremo∣nial called the Post-Scrutiny; which, if the Election be compleated by the Scrutiny, (which very seldom happens by reason of the different Factions in the Conclave) comprehends three Acts or Circumstances only, to wit, the numbring of the Billets, taking a re∣view of the Suffrages, and burning
the said Billets. Bnt if the Pope be not chosen by the Scrutiny, there are se∣ven remarkable Circumstances in the Post-Scrutiny; to wit, the Access, the opening of the Seals and Signs, the re∣marks made thereof upon the printed sheet, the examination or confrontati∣on of Suffrages, the review of the Bil∣lets, and the destroying of them by fire. The Access therefore, which is the first Act or Circumstance of the Post-Scrutiny, immediately follows the de∣position or laying aside of the Billets of the Scrutiny in some part of the Altar or elsewhere, when the Election is not compleated by the Scrutiny; otherwise, if the Pope were once chosen, there would be no place for the way of Ac∣cess, inasmuch as it were of no ad∣vantage, as being introduc'd to supply the defect of the Scrutiny, whereby, as hath been observ'd, we seldom find the Election compleated, by reason of the diversity of the Factions. There are observed in the Access the same things as in the Scrutiny, as
well in reference to the manner of filling the Billets, folding them, seal∣ing them, carrying them to the Al∣tar, and putting of them into the Chalice, as to that of numbring them, and making publicatiou of them, noting the Suffrages, filing and depositing the said Billets aside, save only that there is an obser∣vance of these circumstances follow∣ing. The first is, that the Cardinals go and take their Billets in the Basin of the Billets prepar'd for the Access, which stands upon the Altar, as does that of the Billets for the Scrutiny. The second is, that if a Cardinal be unwilling to give his voice to any one, (which he is at liberty to do) he must remember, in the midst of the Billet, in stead of the Cardinal's name, to whom he should have given his Suf∣frage, to write down the word (Nemini) To no body. Now it is to be observ'd, that the Billet of Access is to be fill'd with the same signes; and seal'd with the same Seals, and as the Billet of the
Scrutiny, upon pain of nullity of the Suf∣frage of Access. The third is, that one cannot make Access, (that is, give his voice a second time) to the person of a Cardinal, who had not had at the least one voice by the Scrutiny; nor yet to the same person to whom he had given his voice by the Scrutiny. The fourth is, that though a Car∣dinal is not permitted to nominate se∣veral persons in the Access, as he is not permitted to choose divers by the Scrutiny, upon pain of nullity of the Suffrage as well of the Access as the Scrutiny; yet is it lawful for him, to give his voice by Access to one of many who had been nam'd in the Scrutiny, though with nullity of Suf∣frage, provided he had elsewhere pro∣cured of some other a Suffrage, which was not null. The fifth is, That there is no ta∣king of the Oath anew in the Access, in regard it had been done before, for the Scrutiny and Access.
The sixth and last circumstance is, that the Infirmaries are oblig'd to carry to the sick Cardinals, with the Billets of Access, one of the sheets upon which they had marked the number of the voices which every Cardinal had in the Scrutiny, publickly and duly verify'd. The second, third, and fourth Acts of the Post-Scrutiny are, the opening of the Seals and Signs of the Billets of Ac∣cess, the marking of it upon the sheet, and the examination or confrontation of the Suffrages, which are practised only when the Election is compleated by the Scrutiny and Access, and thus put in execution. The chief Scrutator takes the Billets of Access filed, as they were upon the publication of them, and opens only those which contain voices in favour of the Elect, in the lower part of them which comprehends the signes; then after he hath exactly consider'd the Seals and the said Signes, he presents the said Billets as they are filed to the se∣cond Scrutator, who also takes a view of them, and then delivers them to the
third, who having made the same ob∣servation thereof, does, with a loud and intelligible voice, make publica∣tion of the Seals and Signes of the said Billets. That done, he marks down the Seals and Signes on the left side of a sheet of paper; where these words are imprinted, and under the said words (Sigilla et Signa Accessuum, that is to say, the Seals and Signes of the Acces∣ses) which remark may also be made by all the Cardinals, if they think fit so to do, upon the like sheets which they have lying before them, upon their Desks. This done, the said chief Scrutator takes the Billets of the Scrutiny from the place where they had been deposit∣ed, in order to the making of an exa∣mination or confrontation of the Suf∣frages which they contain, with those which are brought in by the Billets of Access. And beginning the examina∣tion at one of the ends of the string, on which the Billets are filed, he with the two other Scrutators, views the Seal of the first Billet of the Scrutiny, and then
seeks it out in the sheet, upon which the Seals and Signes of the Billets of Access were marked. If he find it not there, leaving that first Billet of the Scrutiny, he proceeds to the examinati∣on of the second, taking a view again with the other Scrutators of the Seal, and then seeks it upon the same sheet, where not finding any thing like it, he quits the said Billet, to pass on to the examination of the third, and so of all the other Billets, till he meet with the Seal of some one of the Billets of the Scrutiny, mark'd on the said sheet. But having found it, he opens the said Bil∣let at the lower part where the signes are written, to see whether the Signes of the said billet are answerable to the signes marked upon the said sheet: which if they are not, he there quits the billet, and proceeds to the exami∣nation of the next, and if he find the signes to be answerable and correspon∣dent to those of the Access, marked up∣on the said sheet, he shews them to the second and third Scrutators, who all to∣gether, after they have maturely con∣sidered
the correspondence there is be∣tween the seals and signs of the billets of the Scrutiny and Access, observe whe∣ther in both the billets there be a no∣mination of one and the same Cardi∣nal, or of divers Cardinals; For if the same Cardinal be named in both the billets, the Suffrage of the Access is null, in regard that (as hath been al∣ready observ'd) it is not lawful for any one to give his voice in both the Scru∣tiny and Access to one and the same per∣son. But if there be a nomination of different persons, the Suffrage of the Access being good, then the third Scru∣tator does with a loud and intelligible voice publish the Seal, the Signes, and the name of the person elected by the billet of the Scrutiny, and makes a mark thereof upon his sheet under those imprinted words (Sigilla et signa Scru∣tinii respondentia Accessibus, that is to say, the seals and signes of the Scrutiny answerable to those of the Accesses) op∣posite, and on the side of the seals and signes of the billet of Access, whereto they are answerable, which note and
mark all the Cardinals may also make upon their sheets. But these Acts, which are more hard to be explicated, then to be put in execution, are always best understood by Figures thereof. A Figure of the Printed sheet upon which they note and mark the Seals and Signes of the Access and Scru∣tiny, which are answerable one to the other. Seals and Signs of the Accesses. Seals and Signes of the Scrutiny an∣swerable to those of the Access. Cardinals named in the Scru∣tiny. ACD 50 Deus. BRF 35 Bonitas ROI 44 Beatitudo. NSP 26 Glria. BRF 35 Bonitas. RGI 44 Beatitudo Card Car∣pegna. Card S. Clement. Note that the Letters of the Alphabet re∣present the Seal of the Billets. If it happen, in this examination and confrontation of the Suffrages, that two, three, or some greater number of
the billets of the Scrutiny, be found to have the same Seals and Signes with some billet of the Access, as it may come to pass, if the person who is chosen be named in one of the said bil∣lets of the Scrutiny, and another Car∣dinal be named in another of the said billets, then the Scrutator (his Col∣leagues observing what he does) is to open the billet of the said Scrutiny, wher∣in the said elected person is named, to∣gether with that of the Access, at the very place where the name of the E∣lector is set down, to the end a judge∣ment may be made, according to the Gregorian Constitution, of the validity or invalidity of the Access. For if it be discover'd, that one and the same Cardinal hath given his voice to the elected in the billet of the Surutiny, and by that of the Access there will be an invalidity in the Suffrage of Access, as hath been observed before. But as to the billet of the Scrutiny, wherein he who is elected is not named, it shall not be opened, and the Scrutators shall pro∣ceed to the examination and con∣frontation
of the other Suffrages. The fifth Act of the Post-Scrutiny is, the enumeration of the Suffrages either of the Scrutiny alone, or of the Scrutiny and Access together, which is made by the Scrutators, whether the E∣lection ensue thereupon or not; if it do not ensue, it is done, to the end it may be known in that very Scrutiny, or in the Scrutiny and Access together, whether the Pope be not chosen; and if the Election do ensue, that it may appear, whether the Pope be canoni∣cally chosen or not. Now the enumeration of the Suffra∣ges is perform'd in this mannr. The Scrutators reduce into one summe all the Suffrages which they have obtain'd, who were named either in the Scrutiny alone, or in the Scrutiny and Access jointly; and if they siad, that not any one of the persons named, hath got two thirds of the Suffrages of the Car∣dinals, there is no Election at that time. But if, on the contrary, they dis∣cover that any one of the said nomi∣nated persons hath got just the two
thirds and no more of the Suffrages, they, in that case, open the billet of him who is chosen, at the part where his name stands; which is the upper part of the billet, to see whether he hath given himself his own Suffrage, which if he hath, the Election is null'd, according to the Gregorian Constituti∣on, by reason of the want of one Suf∣frage, it being not in his power to give himself his own upon pain of invalidity; but if he hath given it to another, and that he have two thirds of the Suffrages the Election is com∣pleated. Moreover, if it should happen, that several persons had obtain'd the two thirds of the Suffrages, or possibly some number exceeding the two thirds; in such case, through the parity and concurrence of the Suffrages, the E∣lection would be null; but, if there be an inequality, he who surpasses the o∣ther in number, though it were but by one voice, is accounted and acknow∣ledg'd for a true and canonically e∣lected Pope.
The fixth Act of the Post-Scrutiny is the review which is made, whether there be any Election or not, by the Commissaries, drawn out by lot, to the number of three Cardinals, whom the Bulls call Recognitors, who take cog∣nizance of, and look over, as well the billets of the Scrutiny and Access, as the notes and marks of the Suffrages made by the Scrutators, to verifie and confirm what they have done, if they have acquitted themselves of their Functions, with all the sincerity and fidelity whereto they were oblig'd. The said Commissaries are drawn by lot after the same manner, as the Scruta∣tors and Infirmaries had been; but still, after the compleating of the Scrutiny, if the Election be made thereby; if not, after the Scrutiny and Access, as soon as the Scrutators have finished the numbring of the Suffrages. The seventh and last Act of the Post-Scrutiny consists in the burning of all the Billets, which belongs to the Fun∣ction of the Scrutators, who cast them into the fire in the presence of the
whole Colledge, immediately after the review made by the said Commissio∣nated Recognitors, whether there have been any Election, or not. All the things before-mentioned ought to be observ'd twice every day; in the mor∣ning, after Mass; and in the Evening after the Hymn of the Holy Ghost; and this, till such time as the Church is provided of a Head and lawful Pa∣stor, which custom hath been intro∣duc'd, to prevent the long continuance of Conclaves. Those persons who pretend to make assured judgments of Elections, are ma∣ny times mistaken in their Conjectures, not only upon account of the diversity and clashing of interests, but also by reason of the ordinary alterations hap∣ning in the Colledge of Cardinals, by frequent promotions, which strangely invert the course of all proceedings in the Conclave, and destroys all the former measure which might have been taken of an Election. Let not therefore any be over-posi∣tive as to what they assert, in a matter
so uncertain, and which finds so much exercise for the wits of the Citizens of Rome, whom the Air of the Countrey ordinarily entertains in a certain lan∣guishment, whence it comes that they spend the best part of their time in spe∣culative discourse, and political divi∣nations. They for the most part ground their reasonings on certain considerations of the time, when the Vacancy of the See happens, and then from the quiet or disturb'd posture of affairs, draw their consequences in fa∣vour of a person to be exalted into the Pontifical Chair in one season rather then another, according to the diffe∣rence of the humours, and the vigour and force of the person. Some again reflecting on the length of the prece∣dent Papacies, do commonly make their Conclusions in favour of those Cardinals who are well advanc'd in years. For the Sacred Colledge be∣ing wearied out with a long-continu'd subjection to the Government of the same person, takes resolutions many times to exercise a right which makes
them considerable every where, and causes them to be courted by Crowns and Scepters, and the Princes, in that case pitching their choice upon anci∣ent Cardinals. On the other side a∣gain, when it happens that, by reason of the great Age of Popes, the See comes to be too frequently vacant, they endeavour to exalt into the Pontifical Chair a person, who likely to reign some years, may re-establish and settle the Affairs of the Church, which might have receiv'd some prejudice by the frequency of mutations, and so prevent the troubles it would be to the Cardi∣nals to remove themselves from the remote parts of Europe, once every year or two, to be shut up in the Conclave. Moreover, as to the persons whose pretensions are considerable to the Pon∣tifical Chair, there is a consideration had of their engagement to the Kingdoms and Provinces, where they had their birth or extraction. Whence it is affirm∣ed by some, that the chiefest persons a∣mong the Italians, nor the Tramontanes, ought not to be advanc'd to the Papacy,
not only in order to the avoiding of partialities, but also by reason of the possession, or rather usurpation, which the Italians, from the time of Hadrian VI. are chargeable with, in having not rais'd to the Papal Dignity, but such as have been of their own Countrey, there having been from his time eigh∣teen or nineteen Popes of the several Provinces of Italy, who have suc∣cessively fill'd the Chair of St. Peter. It is by some insisted on further, that, to be a subject fit for this eleva∣tion, he have not many Relations and Friends, that he may make the greater communications of his Grandeur, and that his benefits being not wholly ex∣hausted upon his own Relations, he may exercise greater liberalities to∣wards many others. There are yet some among the Ro∣mans guilty of a superstition, which argues them not fully clear'd from the Augural humour of their Ancestors. These discover such an excess of weak∣ness, as, by a kind of Onomancy, to search out of the names of the Car∣dinals
some conjectures of their ele∣vation; and this out of a persuasion, that a subject, who shall not have in the name of his house the letter R. when the deceas'd Pope had not the said Letter in the name of his House, will hardly be chosen Pope; and on the other side, that if the said deceas'd Pope had the said letter in the name of his House, the Cardinal who shall in like manner have it in his, can hardly be advanc'd to the Papacy; by reason of an alternate succession of the names of Families, having, and not having the said letter R. which hath been ob∣serv'd to have happen'd without inter∣ruption during about fourteen Exal∣tations to the Papal Chair. There are yet others so weak, as not to content themselves with this kind of superstition, but they must go and pick matter of divination, out of the brazen gates of St. Peter's Church, which they consult as Oracles, by the over-curious Re-searches they make, amongst the diversity of Figures, whereof they are full, for the Armes
of those Cardinals who aspire to the Papacy. And so their presa∣ges are in his favour, whose chance it is to have his Armes graven in some part thereof, and this upon no other account then that those of the last deceas'd Popes have been found there, which the People im∣mediately after their Election have made the more remarkable by their polishing and clensing. True it is, that there are many of the Col∣ledge of Cardinals, whose Armes may partly be found amongst the numerous multitude of Figures in the said Gates, but without any de∣sign of the Artist by whom they were cast. But quitting these vain superstitions, we affirm further, that how strong and considerable soever their reasons may be for the judgment they make of an Election, it happens that they are for the most part mistaken. This disappointment proceeds from the chan∣ges hapning in the Conclaves, where
parties and Factions are made, for the exclusion or inclusion of subjects, according to the variety of humours, affections and engagements. And as it is the design of every Faction to oppose the Elevation of a sub∣ject contrary thereto, so is it the bu∣siness of it to be assur'd of a third part of the voices in order to the framing of Exclusions, wherein it is no hard matter to have their desire, by reason there is not any Cardinal that aspires to the Papacy, and hath the Qualifications before requir'd, but will readily joyn with all those who would exclude a sub∣ject, who might contest with him for the Dignity. And thence it for the most part comes to pass, that they who are thought to stand fairest for the Chair, are always most easily excluded. The Factions most ordinarily fram'd in the Conclaves, are commonly re∣ducible to two or three principal ones, all the rest joyning with the former,
according to the different interests which they may have in the inclusion or exclusion of the subjects proposed. The Nephews of the deceas'd Popes are the ordinary heads of Factions, up∣on whom the Creatures of their Uncles have a certain dependence, and concur with them for the exaltation of those whom they are inclin'd to, and the ex∣clusion of all others, not creatures of their deceas'd Uncles, especially when by reason of their long sitting in the Chair, they had the opportunity to make a great number of promotions. And this is done, to avoid the reproach of not having made choice of Crea∣tures worthy to be advanc'd to so high a dignity, and of being expos'd to the inquisitions and inspections which a Pope, not being of their Creatures, might make into their administration of affairs. The Cardinals Protectors of Crowns are also Heads of Factions, to prevent the elevation of a subject, whom they suspect, or to promote to the Papacy some Cardinal well-affected to their interests. Those Sovereigns
whose intentions incline most to ju∣stice and moderation, wish only a Common Father; and yet all many times under that pretence prosecute their own particular advantages. There are also Brigues and Factions upon a National Account, as that of the Roman for instance, so as not to consent to the election of any one to be Pope, unless he be a Roman. Thus it happen'd at the Conclave upon the death of Pope Urban VIII. at which the lately deceas'd Innocent X. a Roman born was chosen. Nay, there are some Factions which carry on their de∣signes with that subtilty and indepen∣dency on the other Factions, that they make no publick profession of their de∣claring themselves for any in particu∣lar; and to follow their own inspira∣tions for the advancement of such as are propos'd to the Papacy; and so vote for those whom they in their conscien∣ces think worthy of that Dignity. These are easily induc'd to joyn with any of the others, either for the ex∣clusion of those whom they think un∣worthy
of that Elevation, or to give their Suffrages with those whom they think ably qualify'd to maintain with reputation the dignity of Head of the Catholick Church. This diversity of Factions when they are of equal strength, so as the voices are equally parted, is ordina∣rily the cause of the long continuance of Conclaves. For being equally in a capacity of excluding the subjects propos'd of either side, and each of them promoting the elevation of those whom they are inclin'd to, the Heads of the said Factions make it their on∣ly business to hinder the Cardinals of their party, of whose voices they think themselves assur'd from ever gi∣ving their said voices in the Scrutiny, to any of the subjects propos'd whom they would exclude. And the de∣sign in this is, that the said pro∣pos'd subjects wanting still above a third part of the Suffrages cannot be chosen Popes against their con∣sent, as it might happen by the Access, if any of the said Cardinals
of the contrary party had given them their voices in the Scrutiny. And hence it comes, that there are very few instances of any Pope chosen by the way of the Scrutiny alone. But whereas none of the said Head-Factions can be fully assur'd of the voice of a Cardinal, by reason of the secret of the Scrutiny, which hin∣ders the discovery of those who may change parties, and that whatever en∣gagement any Cardinal may have made to the said Head Factions, ei∣ther by word, oath, promise, or upon the score of gratitude, affection, or o∣therwise: he is dispenc'd from it by the late Bulls of Gregory XV. and Ur∣ban VIII. besides the precautions there are, that he be not suspected of having been wanting to his en∣gagement, whereof he may avoid the blame and reproach by means of the secret of the Scrutiny, it happens many times; that the said leading Factions are mistaken in the computation of their Suffrages, and they want voices, yet can∣not discover whence that want proceeds
and when they think themselves the most assur'd of an exclusion, one or two of their own Partizans having chang'd their humour or inclination, oither upon some disgust receiv'd, or greater hopes of establishment else∣where, or other private considerati∣ons, and transferring their Suffrages to another party, some other is chosen Pope, who 'twas imagin'd would ne∣ver have attain'd that dignity. And whereas many among them, to prevent the elevation of such as they suspect, bestow their Suffrages, as it were, at random on some other Car∣dinals, whom they presume not fit to be advanc'd to the Pontifical Chair, it happens sometimes that some one is chosen Pope, who had not been thought of before; so that what may be most securely affirm'd of these matters is, that we cannot make any certain judg∣ment of Elections; and that, through ways wholly opposite to those which humane policy had contriv'd, a more transcendent wisdom presiding over these great dispensations, disposes of
them quite otherwise, and turns and winds the spirits of those concern'd therein correspondently to those de∣signes which it hath from all eternity over the conduct of the Church. Assoon as any one is chosen Pope, the two principal Deacon-Cardinals conduct him from the place where they find him behind the Altar, where they vest him with the black Cassock, the Roquet, the Camail, and the red or white Calotte or Cap, according to the season, and put on his Slippers or Pantofles with the gilt Cross on them; they then bring him before the Al∣tar, and set him in a Chair, where all the Cardinals come to adore him, that is to say, kiss his feet, hands and cheek. Thence he is carried to St. Peter's Church, where he is seated on the high Altar, and the Cardinals render him again the same Homage: then the Ca∣nons of the said Church come up to kiss his feet: and then he is carried to the ordinary apartment of the Popes, and the Cardinals retire to their Pa∣laces.
The first thing that is broken about the Conclave is that part of the walls which shuts up the Lodg of the Bene∣diction over the Portal of the Church; There the principal Deacon-Cardinal goes and places the Cross, and cries out to the people Vivat N. who is made Pope, and hath assum'd the name of N. Some days after the Pope is crown'd in St. Peter's Church. To that end, the Cardinals, the Embassadors of Princes, and the principal Lords about the Court wait on him at his Apart∣ment, whence they accompany him to the Church, and even into the Sacri∣sty, whether he is carried in a Chair. There he is clad in his Pontifical ha∣bit, and at his coming out thence, he ascends a portable Theatre, upon which stands his Pontifical Chair, and is so carried up to the Altar, cross the Church, then ordinarily full of peo∣ple assembled to see that Ceremony. Nay, in some parts of the Church, there are Scaffolds set up for the prin∣cipal Lords and Ladies of eminent
quality, who are desirous to be Spectators of that celebrious Action. He is preceded by the Cardinals and Embassadors, while all the people kneeling echo out their acclamations of Long live Pope N. Just at his com∣ing out of the Sacristy, and his going up the said Theatre, is performed the Ceremony of setting fire to Flax fast∣ned at the end of a stick, and held up as high as his person, with these words, Sancte Pater, sic transit gloria mundi; Holy Father, thus does the glo∣ry of the world pass away, as an adver∣tisement to him, that he suffer not his heart to be surpriz'd with vanity, at that Elevation, while he sees all the people under his feet. In the midst of the Church the same Ceremony is reiterated, and is again performed a third time, when he is come up to the Altar. Being come down from the The∣atre, he says a Pontifical Mass, where∣at the most eminent amongst the Embassadors or Princes, who had
accompany'd him, minister to him at the washing and presenting the Towel. At which Mass there are some extraor∣dinary prayers said, as we find them in the Ceremonial. The Mass ended, he is carried to the Lodge of Benedicti∣on, where in the Presence of all the people then assembled, in the spacious place of S. Peters, the Chief Deacon-Cardinal takes off his Mitre, and sets on his head the three Crowns, or Tri∣ple-Crown, telling him, that he is to consider himself from thenceforward as the Common Father of Kings and Princes, for the maintenance of Peace amongst them. That done, he gives the Benediction, and is afterwards car∣ried back to his Apartment. There is yet another thing he is to do after his Coronation, which is to go and take possession of his Bishoprick, which is St. John's of Lateran. To do that, he appoints what day he thinks fit. The streets through which he is to pass are hung with Tapistry, and there are some Triumphal Arches e∣rected, representing the most remark∣able
Actions of his Holiness's life. And this is the order of the Cavalcade and Procession. Four light Horsemen of the Guard go first to clear the way, then come the Carriers of the Valises and Mails belonging to the Cardinals, then the Judges and Fiscalls of the Covernour of Rome, the Gentlemen of the Retinue of the Cardinals; Then all the Prin∣ces and Roman Lords, who ordinarily go confusedly, to avoid contesting about precedence, and have belonging to them a great number of Pages and Hal∣berdiers sumptuously cloath'd. Then follow the ordinary Gentlemen of the Pope's House in Scarlet Robes. Then the white Gennets presented every year by the King of Spain, by way of Ho∣mage for the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, are led one after another, ha∣ving their Harness of Crimson-Vel∣vet, with fringes of gold, and bosses of silver; then come the white Mules, and three Litters, one of Scarlet, and the others of Crimson-Velvet both within and without, and gold fringes. Then
the Pope's Trumpeters; his Taylor carrying his Valise; and the ten Of∣ficers of the Palace; the Consistorial Advocates in Garments of a violet-co∣lour, furr'd with Ermine about the neck: all the honorary Camerarii in violet Cassocks and scarlet Cloaks, four of whom carry at the end of a staffe, every one of them, a Hat of the Pope of Crimson Velvet, with frin∣ges of gold. Then follow several Ro∣man Gentlemen, who have been Con∣servators (that is to say, Consuls) in their Garments and Caps of black Velvet, and after them the Apostoli∣cal Prelates in black Garments. The Auditors of the Rota in their ordinary habit, the Master of the Sacred Pa∣lace, who is always a Jacobin-Frier, the Embassador of Bologna and Fer∣rara, the Captains of the several Quar∣ters of Rome, richly clad, and the prin∣cipal of them, whom they call their Prior, is in a Garment of Cloth of Gold, marching between the two Chancellors of the Roman people; Then the three Conservators of Rome
in Vests of Cloth of Gold, and Caps of black Velvet, and their Horse∣cloathes with fringes of Gold; On their left hand do ordinarily march the Chiefs of the houses of the Ursini's and the Co∣li's, or one of them, when they cannot agree about precedence; Then come the Embassadors, and after them the Cross-Bearer, and with the Cross of his Holiness, the four Masters of the Ceremonies, with red Cassocks and violet Cloaks; fourscore Estaffiers of the Pope's, for he is oblig'd at his com∣ing to the Papacy to take all the most ancient Standers among the E∣staffiers of the Cardinals and Embas∣sadors of Crowns, whom they call Pal∣freniers, to distinguish them from the Estaffiers of persons of a lower rank, (as in France, they who are called Lacqueys, when related to persons of of ordinary Quality, are named Valets de pied, when they belong to Royal persons and Princes:) Then follows the Governour of Rome, and after him the Pope's Pa∣ges, when he has any, follow afoot,
and bare-headed. Next them imme∣diately is conducted the Pope himself in a close Litter, having on each side of him the two grand Overseers of the High-ways, clad in black, on Horse∣back, and bare-headed, and all those who march between the Pope's Cross and his Holiness, what condition or qua∣lity soever they be of, are oblig'd to be uncover'd. After his Holiness follow all the Cardinals mounted on their Mules, the Patriarchs, Arch-Bishops, Bishops and other Prelates, two and two, every one according to their Quality: and the whole Pomp is brought up and clos'd by the two Companies of the light Horsemen of his Holiness's Guard, armed cap-a-pied. Being come to St. John of Lateran's, the Pope puts off his ordinary Habit, and puts on the Mitre and Hood, and takes up his Seat in a Throne which is prepar'd for him in the entrance of the Church, where the Canons of it come and kiss his feet. Then he goes to the Church-door, which he finds
shut; They give him the Key to open it; Te Deum is sung, after which the Pope ascends into the place of Bene∣diction, whence he gives it to all the people assembled below. As all the Pope's Tribunals cease during the vacancy of the See, so they begin not their Functions again till af∣ter the Pope's Coronation, upon which all Affairs reassume their ordinary course. FINIS.
A CATALOGUE of the Names; Surnames and Dignities of the Cardinals at the E∣lections of Clement IX. May 1667. Names and Dignities. Countrys. Crtations CARDINALS Bishops.     1. FRancis Bishop of O∣stium, Da, or the must ancient Cardinal of the sacred Colledge, Cardi∣nal Barberin Vice-Chan∣cellor of the Roman Church and Summiste, Arch-Priest of the Church of St. Peter. AFloren∣tine. Urban viii. Oct. 2. 1623. 2. Martio Bishop of Por∣to Cardinal Ginetti, Vi∣car to his Hliness. Of Velitra Urb. viij. Aug. 30. 1627. 3. Anthony Barberin B. of Palestrina Cardinal An∣tonio, Chamberlain of the Roman Church, Prefct of the Signature of Faour and Briefs, Arch-Priest of St. Mary Major. A Roman. Urb. viij. Aug. 30. 1627.
4. Iohn Baptist B. of Fras∣cati, Cardinal Palotta. Dela Mar∣che d' An∣cona. Urban viij. No. 29. 1629. 5. Francis Maria B. of Sa∣bina, Cardinal Bran∣caccio, B. of Viterbo. A Neapo∣litane. Urb. viij. No. 28. 1663. 6. Ulderic B. of Albano, Cardinal Carpegna. Of Urbin Urb. viij. No. 28. 1633. CARDINAL PRIESTS     7. Ernest Adelbert of the title of S. Praxeda, chiefest of the Priests, Cardinal of Hrrach, Archbishop of Prague. A Ger∣mane. Urb. viij. Jan 19. 1626. 8. Stephen of the title of S. Laurence in Lucina, Cardinal Durazzo. A Geno∣ese. Urb. viij. No. 23. 1633. 9. Julius of the title of S Prisca, Cardinal Gabri∣elli Bishop of Ascoli. A Roman Urb. viij. Dec. 16. 1641. 10. Virgnio, of the title of S. Mary of the An∣gels, Cardinal Ufino. A Roman Urb. viij. Dec. 16. 1641. 11. Caesar of the title of the Four Crowns. Car∣dinal Faceh netti, B. f Spoletum. A Bolo∣nian. Urb. 8. July 13. 1643.
12. Hierome of the title of the Holy Trinity in Monte Pencio, Cardi∣nal Grimaldi Arch-B. of Aix. A Genoese. Urb. viij. July 13. 1643. 13. Charles of the title of S. Silvester in Capite Card. Rosetti, B. of Fa∣enza. Of Ferrara Urb. viij. July 13. 1643. 14. Nicholas, of the title of St. Marytrans Tibe∣rim, Card. Ludovisio Grand Penitentiary. A Bolonian Innoc. x. Mar. 6. 1645. 15. Alderan, of the title of S. Pudentiana, Card. Cybo, B. Axinus, or Axinas. Of Masle Innoc. x. Mar. 6. 1645. 16. Frederic, of the title of S. Peter ad Vincula, Card. Sfortia. A Romane Innoc. x. Mar. 6. 1645. 17. Benedict, of the title of S. Onuphrius, Card. Odescalchi. Of Come. Innoc. x. Mar. 6. 1645. 18. Laurence, of the title of SS. Quiricia and Ju∣litta, Card. Raggi. A Genoese. Innoc. x. Oct. 7. 1647. 19. John-Francis-Paul, de Gondy, of the title of St. Mary super Miner∣vam, Card. de Retz. A French∣man. Innoc. x. Feb. 19. 1652. 20. Louis of the title of S. Alexis, Card. Homodei. A Mila∣ness. Inn. x. Feb. 19. 1652. 21. Peter, of the title of S. Mark, Card. Otthobono. A Venetian Inn. x. Feb. 19. 1652.
22. Laurence of th title of S. Chrysogon, Cardinl Imperiale. A Genoese. Innoc. x. Febr. 19. 1652. 23. Gilbert, of th title of SS John and Paul, Car∣dial Borromeo. A Mila∣ness. Innoe. x. Febr. 19. 1652. 24. Marcel, of the title of S Stephen in Monte Ce∣lio Card. Sainte Croix B. of Tivoli. A Romane. Innoc. x. Febr. 19. 1652. 25 Jo. Baptist, Of the title of S. Marcel, Cardinal Spada. Of Lucca. Innoc. x. Mar. 2. 1654. 26. Francis, of the title of S. Mary in Via, Cardi∣nal Albici. A Floren∣tine. Innoc. x. Mar. 2. 1654. 27. Octavius, of the title of S. Cecily, Card. A∣quaviva. A Neapo∣litan. Innoc. x. Mar. 2. 1654. 28. Flavius, of the title of S. Mary del populo, Card. Ghisi, Arch-Priest of the Church of S. John Lateran, Libra∣ry-Keeper of the Roman Church, and Legat of A∣vignon, Prefect of the Signature of Justice. Of Sienna Alex. vij. Apr. 9. 1657. 29. Scipio, of the title of S. Sabina, Card Ilcio. Of Sienna. Al. vij. Ap. 9. 1657. 30. Hierom, of the title of S Agnes, Card. Farneze. A Romane. Al. vij. Ap. 9. 1657. 31. Julius, of the title of S. Sixtus, Card. Rospig¦liosi. Of Pistoya. Al. vij. Ap. 9. 1657.
32. Hierom of the title of S. Hierom of the Illyri∣ans, Card. Bonvisi B. of Lucc. Of Lucca. Alex. vii. Apr. 9. 1657. 33. Anthony, of the title of S. Augustine, Card. Bichi B. of Osimo. Of Sienna. Alex. vii. Apr. 9. 1657. 34. Sforza, of the Society of Jesus, of the title of S. Saviours in Lauro, Car∣dinal Palavicini. A Roman. Alex. vii. Apr. 9. 1657. 35. Volumnio, of the title of S. Martin, in Monti∣bus, Card. Bandinelli. Of Sienna. Alex. vii. Apr. 9. 1658. 36. Peter, of the title of S. Calixtus, Card. Vidoni B. of Lodi. Of Cre∣mona. Alex. vii. Apr. 5. 1660. 37. Gregory, of the title of S. Thomas in pari∣one, Card. Barbarigo B. of Pavia. A Venetian Alex. vii. Apr. 5. 1660. 38. Paschal, of the title of S. Balbina, Card of A∣ragon, Arch-bishop of Toledo: A Spaniard Alex. vii. Apr. 5. 1660. 39. Hierom, of the title of SS. Peter and Marcellin, Card. Boncompagno, Arch-bishop of Bolonian A Bolonia. Alex. vii. Jan. 14. 1664. 40. Alphonsus, of the title of the Holy Cross in Je∣rusalem, Card. Litta Arch-bishop of Milan. A Mila∣ness. Alex. vii. Jan. 14. 1664. Al. vii. Jan. 41. Nerio, of the title of SS. A Floren∣tine. 14. 1664.
Nereus and Aquileius, Card. Corsino, Legat of Ferrara.     42. Charles, of the title of S. Anastafia, Card. Bo¦nelli. A Roman. Alex. vii. Jan. 14. 1664. 43. Caelio, of the title of S. Peter in monte Au∣reo, Card. Piccolomini. Of Sienna. Alex. vii. Jan. 14. 1664. 44. Charles, of the title of S. Susan, Card. Caraffa, Legat of Bolonia. A Neapo∣itane. Alex. vii. Jan. 14. 1664. 45. Palutio Palutio Al∣bertonio, of the title of the Church of the 12 A∣postles, Card. Palutio, B. of Montefiascone. A Romane. Alex. vii. Jan. 14. 1664. 46. Caesar, of the title of S. John ad portam Lati∣nam, Card. Rasponi Legat of Urbin. Of Raven∣na. Alex. vii. Jan. 14. 1664. 47. John Nicholas, of the title of S. Mary trans pontem, Card. de Co∣mitibus B of Ancona. A Roman. Alex. vii. Jan. 14. 1664. 48. James, of the title of S. Mary of Peace, Card. Nini. Of Sienna. Alex. vii. Jan. 14. 1664. 49. Charles, of the title of—Card. Roberti. A Roman. Al. vii. Feb. 15. 1666. 50. Julius, of the title of—Card. Spinola. A Genoese. Al. vii. Fe. 15. 1666. 51. Vitalian, of the title of—Card. Visconti. A Mila∣nes. Al. vii. Fe. 15. 1666.
55. Innico, of the title of—Card. Caracciola, Arch B. of Naples. A Neapo¦litane. Alex. vii. Feb. 19. 1666. 53. John, of the title of—Card. Delphini, Patriarch of Aquileia. AVenetian Alex. vii. Mar. 7. 1667. 54. Guibald, of the title of—Card. de Thun, Arch-B. of Salsbourg. CARDINAL Deacons. A German Alex. vii. Mar. 7. 1667. 55. Raynald, of the title of St. Nicholas in carcere Tulliano, Principal Deacon, Card. d' Est. A Mode∣nese. Urban viii. Dec. 16. 1641. 56. John Stephen, of the title of S. Agatha, Card. Donghi, B. of Ferrara. A Genoese. Urban viii. July. 13. 1643. 57. Paulus Emilius, of the title of S. Mary in Cos∣medin, Card, Rondanini B. of Assisium. A Roman. Urban viii. Jul. 16. 1643. 58. Francis, of the title of S. Mary in Via lata, Card. Maldachini. Of Viterbo Innoc. x. Oct. 7. 1647. 59. Frederic, of the title of S. Caesarius, Card. of Affia. A German. Innoc. x. Febr. 19. 1652. 60. Charles Barberin, of the title of S. Angelo, in foro piscium, Card. Carlo. A Roman. Innoc. x. Jun. 13. 1653. 61. Charles, of the title of S. Eustace, Card. Pio. Of Ferrara. In. x. Mar. 2. 1654. 62. Charles, of the title of Of Orvie∣to In. x. Ma. 2. 1654.
S. Pancrace, Card. Gual∣tieri, Arch-B. of Ferme.     63. Decio, of the title of S. Adrian, Card. Az∣zolini. Of Ferme. Innoc. x, Mar. 2, 1654. 64. Odoard, of the title of SS. Cosmus and Dami∣anus, Card. Vecchia∣relli, B. of Reate. of Reate. Alex. vii. Apr. 9. 1658. 65. James of the title of S. Mary in Aquino, Card. Franconi. A Genoese. Alex. vii. Ap. 9. 1658. 66. Francis Maria, of the title of SS. Vitus & Mo∣dostus, Card. Mancini. A. Roman. Alex. vii. Apr. 5. 1660 67. Angelus, of the title of S. George, Card. Celsi. A. Roman. Al. vii. Ja. 14. 1664. 68. Paul, of the title of S. Mary de Scala, Card. Sabelli Perretti, Legat of Romaniola. A. Roman. Al. vii. Ja. 14. 1664. 69. Lewis—Card. of Vendosme. A French∣man. Alex. vii. Mar. 7. 1667. 70. Lewis—Card. of Moncada. A Sicilian. Alex. vii. Mar. 7. 1667. In all LXX. Whereof Urban VIII. created VI. Bishops, VII. Priests, and III. Dea∣cons. Innocent X. created XIV Priests and VI. Deacons. And Alexander VII. created XXVII. Priests, and VII. Deacons. FINIS.
