C3123 R35492 15345547 103446
A MESSAGE From his Highness the Prince of WALES TO His Majesty, and the Commissioners in the Isle of Wight. VVith His Declaration concerning the Earl of Warwick, and the Parliaments FLEET. Also, a Letter from Lieut. Gen. Cromwell, to the Com∣mittee at Derby house, concerning the Treaty with his Majesty, and his advice touch∣ing the same. With a Journal of the last weeks proceedings between his Majesty, and the Commissioners, in the said Treaty, and how far his Majesty com∣plies, in signing of the rest of the Propositions. Printed for G. Lawrenson, and are to be sold neer Temple-Bar, Octob. 6. 1648.
A LETTER FROM THE NAVY SIR, THe Earl of Warwick Lord high Admiral with a Navy of 22 sayl of ships hath continued a∣bout 8 days in Goree Road, attending the mo∣tion of the revolted ships, or rather perswade them to return to their obedience to the Parl. or daring them to fight; but as yet neither summons, or other perswa∣sions hath been prevalent. And one that comes from the Prince, saith, That His Highness caused a Councell to be called, & advised with his Officers of a way to unite the Sea-men of the revolted
ships; and it was agreed, that every chief Officer in the ships should declare, that His Highnesse had procured 6000 li. in Gold, which they should have amongst them, with many other promises and perswasions, that the treaty would end all differences, both by Sea and Land, and then they should come off with more honour, then accepting of an Act of Indempnity now; and finding that the Saylers were somwhat pacified for the present, the Prince sent a Message to the Lord Admirall, declaring his great dislike that his Lordship should endeavour any way to draw His servants from Him, requiring him to desist for the future to do the like, and come and joyn with Him; which doing, He would procure a pardon for him from the King His Royall Father. The L. Admirall answered, that he takes it in dishonor that either in himself, or any others, there should be the least thought of his breaking the trust reposed in him; ac∣quainting his Highnesse, that if he were exposed to the greatest extremity that is incident to man, he would ne∣ver dissert the Parliaments service; and being in a good condition at Sea, his advice to the Prince was, to come & joyn with the Parl, but its thought nothing will be eected till its known how the treaty goes, and we hear that Sir T. Lunsford hath bin lately dispatcht privately from the Bruce for the Isle of VVight upon some Message to the King, or for some instructions or advice from those that attend his Mai this treaty. By other intelligence we likewise hear, that M. Mur∣rey is gone for England, but upon what Design as yet, we cannot hear. Some of our ships ride within two leagues of the
revolted ships, with whom we would fain ingage, but as yet cannot; for the Hollander instead of securing those revolted ships the parl. of England (a service which in some measure might well be expected at their hands) by holding a neutrality, say they will pre∣vent acts of hostility neer unto their parts, though it were never so many for promoting the affaires of the Parliament. Some assistance of Volunteers is said to be expected from Denmarke which hath beene long spoken of and is still likely, to be as slowly performed for we hear of none that come to the revolted ships, but some few which fled out of England, who are like to have as good a match by comming over to join with them, that are like to mutiny among themselves as the Hollanders had by coveting and engrossing the new Gold that of late they got out of England, or as those which adventured 7000 li. Armes to recrute Duke Hambletons forces, which were taken the last week going for Scotland, I have now done with such passages as are remarkable here, a word or two of two of some Letters we receive out of Ireland and so conclude. By an Expresse from London Derry it is certified how exceeding oppertunely Collonel Monk surprised the Scots at Belfost and other places by wch meanes the English have not only gotten more Elbow room in fruitfull parts of that Kingdome, but the poor English which were likely to perish by the in∣solent revolted Scots in Loncon Derry relieved, for the Scots of that Garrison being farre more in number then the English and standing to their principles for the Parliament of England, the Scots declared for the King deteyned the Lord president got most of the pro∣visions into their own Quarters and stopped others from comming in either by Sea or Land.
And had not this unexpected deliverance thus sudden∣ly hapned, in all probability the Scots in a very short time had been the sole masters of that City, which (setting aside the particular interest the City of Lon∣don hath there) is of great concernment, and conduceth much to the losse or gain of two or three Provinces in the North of Ireland. From aboard the Admirall Octob. 2. 648. Postscript. SInce the writing hereof, our Fleet is gotten within one league of the revolted ships, and have made many shot at them; whereupon the soul∣diers which appertain to the revolted ships, (being about 400 land men) brought out severall pieces of Ordnance ready mounted, and would have planted them against the Earle of Warwicks ships on that shore, but the Hollander caused them to draw the Ordnance again into the Harbour, and would not suffer them to annoy us therewith. And some of the townsmen tell us, that they are weary of maintaining so many ships and men in their harbour, as are with the Prince, and therfore it is expected, that the Governour of the town
should prefix a day how long the said revolted ships shall have liberty to stay in their protection, wherby to make their agreement with the Lord Ad∣mirall, or adventure their fortunes on the main O∣cean. I am Gory Road 3 Octob. 1648. Your affectionate friend, S T. Die Sabbati 7. Octob. 1648. A Letter came to the Committee at Derby house, from Lieu. Gen. Cromwell, certifying that Barwick and Carlisle were delivered up to him, for the service of the parliament, all arms laying down in Scotland, & to the end all differences may be composed in England and all his Maiesties Dminions, without the shedding of more bloud he desireth that the treaty may go on with all possible speed, great hopes being good upon the commencement thereof, that it will be concluded in peace and amity, which was Signed O. Cromwell. And as a further assurance hereof, Letters from the Isle of VVight to the parliament, do ascertain, that his Maiesty after severall dayes debate, hath yeelded to the most materiall clauses in the second Bill concer∣ning the Church, and settlement of Religion. By the
next, there is little doubt, but we shal hear that he hath passed his Royall word to pass this Bil, as he hath done already for the first. From St. Albans we had the copy of a Letter to his Excellency the Lord Fairfax. May it please your Excellency, WE make bold being prest in spirit, to represent to you, as the ground of our fears, so the mat∣ter of our desires. It hath pleased God after much plottings & endeavours of the old and new malignants to crown the Army with great success; and although that calls for Justice, little or none is done, and less is like to be done, unless your Excellency presently ap∣pears to do somthing, and the Army with you, to be a leading cause to us; we wait for it. Instead of Justice, behold a treaty with them for peace, that God speakes no peace to, and instead of owning just petitions, they are laid aside: some imployed in the treaty, not long since voted the Army Rebels; what that prognosticats in the future, when they have power, we leave to your Excellency to judge. So hoping you will so far honor us, as to stand by the Kingdom and the Army in their just rights and priviledge. VVe subscribe, Your Excellencies humble servants, Lieu. Col. Paul Hobson. Major Cobbett, &c. Newcastle 22 Sep. 1648. FINIS.
