C3737A 18271730 107280
A New Letter Concerning the JEVVES, Written by the FRENCH AMBASSADOR, AT, Constantinople, To his Brother the French Resident at VENICE. Being a true Relation of the Proceedings of the Israelites, the wonderful Miracles wrought by their Prophet, with the terrible Judgments that have fallen upon the Turks. LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell for Robert Boulter, at the Turks-Head in Cornhil, 1666.
The Translation of a Letter from Con∣stantinople, written by the French Ambas∣sador Monsieur de Cheaumont, &c. HEre are great Novelties about a Messiah of the Jews; he is expected here in brief. It's said, That the Grand Signior will be content to yeild him the Crown of whole Palestine. The most part of the Jews here meddle no more with Trading, but prepare to go for Jerusalem: At the first we mocked at them, and made no ac∣count of it; but now by all appearances we fear that it is good earnest. From a French Consul at Smyrna, unto one Sir Rosano a Christian at Livorn. Here are great Novelties by the arrival of a King of the Jews in this Town, who is a Person of great Consideration, and of great Wisdom, of whom the Turks have great esteem. Our Nation remains in some fear, God grant it may not cause us some damage. From Paris, Febr. 19. 1666. The rumour concerning the Jews, continues here daily, and that they are gathering together under one Man, who saith not, that he is the Messias, as it is reported; but only, That by Di∣vine Revelation he is raised, and sent to gather up the whole Na∣tion of the Jews from all parts of the World, and to teach them
to know the Messiah to come, which hitherto they have not known: It's said, That something of God appears in him. Abraham Perena, a rich Jew of this Town, parted on Mon∣day last with his Family for Jerusalem, after he had taken his leave of our Magistrate, and acknowledged his thankfulness for the favour he and his Nation in their dispersion had received here, &c. It's said he offered to sell a Countrey-house of his worth Three thousand pounds sterling, at much loss, and that on this Condition, That the Buyer should not pay one farthing till he be convinced in his own Conscience, That the Jews have a King. On the tenth of March came divers Letters from Gaza, Smyr∣na, Livorn and Venice, bringing our Jews such comfortable News, that yesterday they testified such joy, as never was seen here before: The matter was this, That now the four Pro∣phets which the King Sabbathi expected from Aleppo, to accom∣pany him for Constantinople, were come; and that on the 18th of December, the King, who a while had kept in at Smyrna, went forth in publick; which the Turks perceiving, went to the Cadi of the Town, saying, There was one that professed him∣self to be King of the Jews: The Cadi or Sherif of the Town judging that matter pertained to the Bassa, sent to him about it. He at first grew angry, resolving to Massacre all the Jews, and to that purpose gave order to his Captains to be ready for the next morning: But that very night appeared to them the Pro∣phet Elias in a fiery Colomn, saying to him, Take heed of doing any harm to the Jews. This so terrified and struck down his mind, that he craved pardon; and consequently, instead of ex∣ecuting his Cruel Design, he gve forth order, not to do any harm to any Jew. And from thenceforth the King marched up and down the City without any molestation. On a night as the King went to bathe himself in a River, (that is, as is the manner of Penitents, to wash themselves with cold water, yea, in the
midst of Winter) the Constable of the Watch met him, and asked if he was a Jew; and because the King did not answer, he lift up his Staff to strike him; but feeling his arm grow stff, and not able to move it more; he cryed out, I now acknowledge thou art the King, pray pardon me: He said, Stay till it be morning; and then he restored him in the Name of the God of Israel. On the 5th or 6th of January, the King with his four Prophets took Ship to go to Constantinople, without any Mariner, (as some say) or Pilate. He being aboard the Ship, was taken up in a fiery Colomn, and went so swift, that the King commanded to take some Port, because he was to arrive at Constantinople not before the 17th of Schebet (or January 21.) Note, that the num∣ber of Prophets doth encrease daily, amongst Women and Chil∣dren, as well as amongst Men; and that Elias had shewed him∣self at Constantinople, Smyrna, Aleppo, and divers other places, and that publickly, speaking unto the people openly. There are Prophets likewise at Constantinople. And by reason of Elias his appearing and speaking to them, there was celebrated great joy in their Synagogues. This the Great Turk having heard, sent for some of the chiefest of the Jewish Synagogue, and askt them about their King: They said, They knew none but him∣self: He commanded them to deliver him into his hands within seven days, if not, that they all should be put to death. This made a great stir at Constantinople amongst both Jews and Turks: The Mother of the Great Turk being warned by E∣lias himself, came to her Son, beseeching him to Revoke his Sentence; but to no effect. The next day arose a great Obscu∣rity in the Town, which lasted two dayes and two nights, so that one could not see another; and afterward there fell a showr of Hail stones as big as Hens Eggs, able to kill a man; whence the common people were so affrighted, that they cryed out, That all this was occasioned by the Sentence pronounced a∣gainst the Jews; and prayed the Great Lord to revoke his Sen∣tence:
But all this was in vain, had not God sent to him the Prophet Elias, warning him not to do any harm unto the Jews, and instructing him how he should deal with the King. This then being hapned, and the Great Turk being quite changed, he sent again for the chief Rabbies, and told them, he would send an Ambassadour for their King and receive him honourably, as he did indeed. But it came not to Smyrna, till after the de∣parture of the King. So much for a Compendium of those fore∣named Letters. Now concerning the arrival of the King, at Constantinople, it's affirmed from Venice Jan. the 6. that the Great Lord receiv∣ed him with much respect; setting him on Horseback, and on his right hand, &c. But to be sure in these particulars, we must expect yet one seven-night longer. As for the two Tribes and half, they are said by these Letters not to be in, but near Gaza. The Copy of a Bill, written by Mr. Plettenberg, Resi∣dent for the Emperor at Dresden, Feb. 6. He that dispersed Israel, will gather Him: The Mouths of all from the East are enlarged concerning the New King: of which it is said, Psal. 149. Sing unto the Lord a New Song, Thou mayst say, I pray Sir your opinion, whether an earthly King may satisfie the hope that hath been conceived touching the MESSIAH?
Lift up your Heads, this is the Wonderful Year, Feb. 26. 1666. Much beloved, and Brother in the hope of Israel: being re∣turned out of North-Holland, I found your most acceptable Let∣ters, Dated Feb. 9. wherein I see how to you, to M. I, & M. K, my News concerning the progress of the Israelitish affairs, have been most welcome. Now that I may add this to your joy, I would have you take it for certain, our Jews yesterday received from Alcaire, Livorn, and Venice, so many letters, and of so great credit, that all of them publickly in their Synagogues do now believe, that the Tribes of Ruben, Gad, and the half of Ma∣nasseh are come to Gaza, as the Prophet Nathan foretold. And that at Smyrna, King Sabbathai Levi, doth now publickly shew himself abroad, and professeth himself to be King of the Jews. For hitherto, for a time he lay incognito, untill by signs and many wonders; he had demonstrated he did act in the name of God, and not in his own. Among which signs whereby he proved himself to be sent of God; is, That he foretold the sud∣den death of some men, and the very day thereof. And that he premonished men of an obscure darkness, with a marvelous showre of Hail. And especially he commanded a Fire to be made in a publick place, in the presence of many be holders; as well of Christians, as of Turks, and Jews; and entered into the fire twice or thrice, without any hurt to his Garments, or to an hair of his head: With these, and the like prodigious signs he hath now gained so great authority to himself; that he is not afraid to go in the streets of the City in kingly manner, with a great Retinue of Attendants. Yea, moreover the King said; he is suddenly to go to Constantinople; And that in the month of June next, The Redemption of Israel will be published throughout the whole World. And which is more, now came some Letters from
Venice, and Vienna, which affirm the King is arrived at Constan¦tinople, and is there Reverently received: which thing, if true, this day or the next, tidings from Constantinople will tell us. The cause wherefore our Merchants at Smyrna have hitherto written nothing concerning this King, is, that by reason of the Increduli∣ty of the Jews, as well at Smyrna, as at Constantinople, he kept himself so long in private. Now by the passages and votes of all, he is come forth from his private withdrawing, and will go straight on to Constantinople, and that in the company of 400. Prophes, sent to him from Aleppo; and with a great multitude of Jews: so that the doubting touching the fact will cease, when the Great Turk shall spontaneously yield the King his Re∣quest: but there will remain a dispute touching the equity. Behold here the Title of a little book of Prayers, written and prescribed by Nathan the Prophet for all the Jews; which takes much among the Jews, and hath some esteem among Christi∣ans. I have begun to translate it. Thou shalt Meditate therein day and night. The Order of Dayly prayers to prepare every man, that he may Order his steps in the way which is right and straight before God, and may turn himself to the Lord; that he may have compassion up∣on us; and we may behold the delight of the Lord, and view; and behold his Temple. In the Year, wherein God bestowed upon me an Annointed of my People. Zecb. 8. 7. FINIS.
