C4108 R16368 12393828 61070
A FORM OF COMMON PRAYER, For Gods Blessing upon His Majesty, And His Dominions, And for the Averting of Gods Judgments: To be used upon Wednesday April the Tenth next ensuing, in all Churches and Chappels within the Cities of London and Westminster, the Suburbs and Liberties of the same. AND Upon Wednesday the Four and twentieth of the same Moneth in all the rest of this His Majesties Kingdom of England, the Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed. Set forth by His Majesties Authority. LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1678.
The Order for Morning PRAYER. ¶ Let him that ministreth read with a loud voice these Sentences of Scripture, and after them the Exhortation following. REnt your heart, and not your Joel 2. 13 garments, and turn unto the Lord your God, for he is gra∣cious, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repenteth him of the evil. To the Lord our God be∣long Dan. 9. 9, 10. mercies, and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him: neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his laws which he set before us. Correct us, O Lord, but with iudgment; not Jer. 10. 24 in thine anger, lest thou bring us to nothing. DEarly beloved brethren, the Scripture moveth us in sundry places, to acknow∣ledge and confess our manifold sins and wicked∣ness, and that we should not dissemble nor cloak them before the face of Almighty God our hea∣venly Father, but confess them with an humble, lowly, penitent, and obedient heart, to the end that we may obtain forgiveness of the same, by
his infinite goodness and mercy. And although we ought at all times humbly to acknowledge our sins before God, yet ought we most chiefly so to do, when we assemble and meet together, to cast our selves down at the throne of his hea∣venly Grace, and to pour out our humble Sup∣plications for the averting of his Iudgments, and for the procuring of his Blessings upon our Sovereign and his Kingdoms, to render thanks for the great benefits that we have re∣ceived at his hands, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most holy word, and to ask those things which are requisite and necessary, as well for the body as the soul: Wherefore I pray and beseech you as many as are here present, to accompany me with a pure heart and humble voice, unto the throne of the heavenly grace, saying after me. ¶ The Confession to be said of the whole Congre∣gation after the Minister, all kneeling. ALmighty and most merciful Father, We have erred and strayed from thy ways like lost sheep, We have followed too much the devi∣ces and desires of our own hearts, We have of∣fended against thy holy laws, We have left un∣done those things which we ought to have done, And we have done those things which we ought not to have done, And there is no health in us: But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us misera∣ble offenders; Spare thou them, O God, which confess their faults; Restore thou them that are penitent, According to thy promises declared un∣to mankind in Christ Iesu our Lord. And grant, O most merciful Father, for his sake, That we
may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, To the glory of thy holy Name. Amen. ¶ The Absolution to be pronounced by the Priest alone, standing; the people still kneeling. ALmighty God, the Father of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, who desireth not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live, and hath given power and commandment to his Ministers, to declare and pronounce to his people, being penitent, the absolution and remission of their sins: He par∣doneth and absolveth all them that truly repent, and unfeignedly believe his holy Gospel. Where∣fore let us beseech him to grant us true repen∣tance and his holy Spirit, that those things may please him which we do at this present, and that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that at the last we may come to his eternal joy, through Iesus Christ our Lord. ¶ The people shall answer here, and at the end of all other Prayers, Amen. ¶ Then shall the Minister kneel, and say the Lords Prayer; the people also repeating it with him. OVr Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass a∣gainst us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil: for thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.
¶ Then likewise he shall say, O Lord open thou our lips. Ans. And our mouth shall shew forth thy praise. Priest. O God make speed to save us. Answer. O Lord make haste to help us. ¶ Here all standing up, the Priest shall say, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost. Answer. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen. Priest. Praise ye the Lord. Answer. The Lords name be praised. ¶ Instead of Venite, exultemus, shall be said this Hymn following; one Verse by the Priest, and another by the Clerk and people. O Come, let us humble our selves, and fall Psal. 95. 6. down before the Lord: with reverence and fear. For he is the Lord our God: and we are the people 7. of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand. Come therefore, let us turn again unto our Hos. 6. 1. Lord: for he hath smitten us, and he will heal us. Let us search, and try our wayes: let us lift up our Lam. 3. 40, 41. hearts with our hands unto God in the heavens. Let us repent, and turn from our wicked∣ness: Acts 3. and our sins shall be forgiven us. Let us turn, and the Lord will turn from his heavy Jonah 3. wrath: he will pardon us, and we shall not perish. We acknowledge indeed, that our punish∣ments Joh 11. 6. Wisd. 11. 23. are less than our deservings: but yet of thy mercy, O Lord, correct us to amend∣ment,
and plague us not to our destructi∣on. We have provoked thine anger, thy wrath is waxed hot: and thy heavy displeasure is sore kindled against us. But thy hand is not shortned, that thou canst Es. 59. 1. not help: neither is thy goodness abated, that thou wilt not hear. Thou hast promised, O Lord, that before we Es. 65. 24. cry, thou wilt hear us: whilst we are yet speaking, thou wilt have mercy upon us. For none that trust in thee shall be confound∣ed: neither shall any that call upon thee be de∣spised. Our Fathers hoped in thee: they trusted in thee, Ps. 22. 4. and thou didst deliver them. They called upon thee, and were holpen: they 5. put their trust in thee, and were not confound∣ed. And now in the vexation of our spirits, and the Baruch 3. 1, 2. anguish of our souls we cry unto thee: hear, Lord, and have mercy. For many troubles are come about us: our Psal. 40. 15. sins have taken such hold upon us, that we are not able to look up. For thine own sake, and for thy holy Names Dan 9. 18, 19. sake, incline thine ear; and hear, oh merciful Lord. For we do not present our Supplications be∣fore 18. thee, trusting in our own righteousness: but in thy manifold and great mercies. Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of Ps. 79. 9. thy Name: oh deliver us, and be merciful unto our sins for thy Names sake. So we that are thy people and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks for ever: and will always be
shewing forth thy Praise from Generation to Ge∣neration. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost; As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen. ¶ Instead of the Psalms for the Day, shall these proper Psalms be used, VI. XXV. LI. Domine, ne. Psal. vj. O Lord, rebuke me not in thine indignation: neither chasten me in thy displeasure. 2 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord, heal me, for my bones are vexed. 3 My soul also is sore troubled: but, Lord, how long wilt thou punish me? 4 Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake. 5 For in death no man remembreth thee: and who will give thee thanks in the pit? 6 I am weary of my groaning, every night wash I my bed: and water my couch with my tears. 7 My beauty is gone for very trouble: and worn away because of all mine enemies. 8 Away from me, all ye that work vanity: for the Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping. 9 The Lord hath heard my petition: the Lord will receive my prayer. 10 All mine enemies shall be confounded, and sore vexed: they shall be turned back, and put to shame suddenly.
Ad te, Domine, levavi. Psal. xxv. UNto thee, O Lord, will I lift up my soul, my God, I have put my trust in thee: O let me not be confounded, neither let mine enemies triumph over me. 2 For all they that hope in thee shall not be ashamed: but such as transgress without a cause, shall be put to confusion. 3 Shew me thy ways, O Lord: and teach me thy paths. 4 Lead me forth in thy truth, and learn me: for thou art the God of my salvation; in thee hath been my hope all the day long. 5 Call to remembrance, O Lord, thy tender mercies: and thy loving kindnesses, which have been ever of old. 6 Oh remember not the sins, and offences of my youth: but according to thy mercy think thou upon me, O Lord, for thy goodness. 7 Gracious, and righteous is the Lord: there∣fore will he teach sinners in the way. 8 Them that are meek, shall he guide in judg∣ment: and such as are gentle, them shall he learn his way. 9 All the paths of the Lord are mercy, and truth: unto such as keep his covenant, and his testimonies. 10 For thy names sake, O Lord: be merciful unto my sin, for it is great. 11 What man is he, that feareth the Lord: him shall he teach in the way, that he shall choose. 12 His soul shall dwell at ease: and his seed shall inherit the land.
13 The secret of the Lord is among: them that fear him: and he will shew them his cove∣nant. 14 Mine eyes are ever looking unto the Lord: for he shall pluck my feet out of the net. 15 Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me: for I am desolate, and in misery. 16 The sorrows of my heart are inlarged: O bring thou me out of my troubles. 17 Look upon my adversity, and misery: and forgive me all my sin. 18 Consider mine enemies how many they are: and they bear a tyrannous hate against me. 19 O keep my soul, and deliver me: let me not be confounded, for I have put my trust in thee. 20 Let perfectness, and righteous dealing wait upon me: for my hope hath been in thee. 21 Deliver Israel, O God: out of all his troubles. Miserere mei, Deus. Psal. li. HAve mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness: according to the multitude of thy mercies do away mine offences. 2 Wash me throughly from my wickedness: and cleanse me from my sin. 3 For I knowledge my faults: and my sin is ever before me. 4 Against thee onely have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou mightest be justi∣fied in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged.
5 Behold, I was shapen in wickedness: and in sin hath my mother conceived me. 6 But so, thou requirest truth in the inward parts: and shalt make me to understand wisdom secretly. 7 Thou shalt purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: thou shalt wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow. 8 Thou shalt make me hear of joy and glad∣ness: that the bones which thou hast broken may rejoyce. 9 Turn thy face from my sins: and put out all my misdeeds. 10 Make me a clean heart, O God: and re∣new a right spirit within me. 11 Cast me not away from thy presence: and take not thy holy Spirit from me. 12 O give me the comfort of thy help again: and stablish me with thy free Spirit. 13 Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wick∣ed: and sinners shall be converted unto thee: 14 Deliver me from bloud-guiltiness, O God, thou that art the God of my health: and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness. 15 Thou shalt open my lips, O Lord: and my mouth shall shew thy praise. 16 For thou desirest no sacrifice, else would I give it thee: but thou delightest not in burnt∣offerings. 17 The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit: a broken and contrite heart, O God, shalt thou not despise. 18 O be favourable, and gracious unto Si∣on: build thou the walls of Ierusalem. 19 Then shalt thou be pleased with the sacri∣fice of righteousness, with the burnt-offerings,
and oblations: then shall they offer young bul∣locks upon thine altar. The first Lesson appointed to be read, is Isaiah l. or Isaiah lviij. ¶ After the first Lesson shall follow Te Deum Lauda∣mus in English. WE praise thee, O God: we acknowledge thee to be the Lord. All the earth doth worship thee: the Father everlasting. To thee all Angels cry aloud: the heavens, and all the powers therein. To thee Cherubin, and Seraphin: continu∣ally do cry, Holy, holy, holy: Lord God of Saaoth. Heaven and earth are full of the Majesty: of thy glory. The glorious company of the Apostles: praise thee. The goodly fellowship of the Prophets: praise thee. The noble army of Martyrs: praise thee. The holy Church throughout all the world: doth acknowledge thee. The Father: of an infinite Majesty. Thine honourable: true, and only Sn. Also the holy Ghost: the Comforter. Thou art the King of Glory: O Christ. Thou art the everlasting Son: of the Fa∣ther. When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man: thou didst not adhor the Virgins womb.
When thou hadst overcome the sharpness of death: thou didst open the kingdom of heaven to all believers. Thou fittest at the right hand of God: in the glory of the Father. We believe that thou shalt come: to be our Iudge. We therefore pray thee help thy servants: whom thou hast redeemed with thy precious bloud. Make them to be numbred with thy Saints: in glory everlasting. O Lord save thy people: and bless thine heri∣tage. Govern them: and lift them up for ever. Day by day: we magnifie thee. And we worship thy Name: ever world with∣out end. Vouchsafe, O Lord: to keep us this day with∣out sin. O Lord, have mercy upon us: have mercy up∣on us. O Lord, let thy mercy lighten upon us: as our trust is in thee. O Lord, in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded. For the second Lesson, Luke xiii. or Luke xxi. BLessed be the Lord God of Israel: for he hath visited and redeemed his people. And hath raised up a mighty salvation for us: in the house of his servant David. As he spake by the mouth of his holy Prophets:
which have been since the world began; That we should be saved from our enemies: and from the hands of all that hate us; To perform the mercy promised to our fore∣fathers: and to remember his holy covenant; To perform the oath which he sware to our forefather Abraham: that he would give us; That we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies: might serve him without fear; In holiness and righteousness before him: all the days of our life. And thou, Child, shalt be called the Prophet of the Highest: for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways; To give knowledge of salvation unto his peo∣ple: for the remission of their sins, Through the tender mercy of our God: whereby the day-spring from on high hath visited us; To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: and to guide our feet in∣to the way of peace. Glory be to the Father, &c. ¶ Then shall be said the Creed by the Minister, and the people standing. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Ma∣ker of heaven and earth: And in Iesus Christ his onely Son our Lord; who was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate; was crucified, dead and buried; he descended into hell; the third day he rose again from the dead; he ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty; from thence he shall come
to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholick Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlast∣ing. Amen. ¶ And after that, these Prayers following, all devout∣ly kneeling, the Minister first pronouncing with a loud voice, The Lord be with you. Answer. And with thy spirit. Minister. ¶ Let us pray. Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. ¶ Then the Minister, Clerks and people, shall say the Lords Prayer with a loud voice. OVr Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespas∣ses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil. Amen. ¶ Then the Priest standing up, shall say, O Lord, shew thy mercy upon us. Answer. And grant us thy salvation. Priest. O Lord, save the King.
Answer. And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee. Priest. Indue thy Ministers with righteousness. Answer. And make thy chosen people joyful. Priest. O Lord save thy people. Answer. And bless thine inheritance. Priest. Give peace in our time, O Lord. Answer. Because there is none other that fighteth for us, but onely thou, O God. Priest. O Lord save thy servants, Answer. Who do put their trust in thee. Priest. Send us help from thy holy place; Answer. And evermore mightily defend us. Prest. Let the enemy have no advantage against us: Answer. Nor the wicked approch to hurt us. Priest. Be unto us, O Lord, a strong towre, Answer. From the face of our enemies. Priest. O Lord hear our prayer, Answer. And let our cry come unto thee.
¶ In stead of the first Collect at Morning Prayer shall these two be used. ALmighty and everlasting God, who hatest nothing that thou hast made, and dost for∣give the sins of all them that are penitent; Cre∣ate and make in us new and contrite hearts, that we worthily lamenting our sins, and ac∣knowledging our wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all mercy, perfect remission and forgiveness, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. GRant, we beseech thee, Almighty God, that we, who for our evil deeds do worthily de∣serve to be punished, by the comfort of thy grace may mercifully be relieved, through our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. The Collect for Peace. O God who art the author of Peace, and lover of Concord, in knowledge of whom standeth our eternal life, whose service is per∣fect freedom, defend us thy humble servants in all affaults of our enemies, that we surely trust∣ing in thy defence, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through the might of Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. The Collect for Grace. O Lord our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, who hast safely brought us to the beginning of this day, defend us in the same with thy mighty power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind of dagner, but that all our doings may be
ordered by thy governance, to do always that is righteous in thy sight, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ Here followeth the Litany. O God the Father of Heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the Father of Heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the Son, Redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the Son, Redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon us mi∣serable sinners. O God the holy Ghost, proceeding from the Fa∣ther and the Son: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O holy, blessed, and glorious Triity, three Persons and one God: have mercy upon us mi∣serable sinners. O holy, blessed, & glorious Trinity, thee persons and one God: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. Remember not Lord our offences, nor the of∣fences of our forefathers, neither take thou vengeance of our sins: spare us, good Lord, spare thy people whom thou hast redeemed with thy most precious bloud, and be not agry with us for ever. Spare us, good Lord. From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and affaults of the devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation, Good Lord deliver us. From all blindness of heart, from pide, vain∣glory,
and hypocrisie, from envy, hatred and ma∣lice, and all uncharitableness, Good Lord deliver us. From fornication, and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceits of the world, the flesh and the devil, Good Lord deliver us. From lightning and tempest, from plague, pestilence and famine, from battel and murder, and from sudden death, Good Lord deliver us. From all sedition, privy conspiracy, and rebel∣lion, from all false doctrine, heresie, and schism, from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word and Commandment, Good Lord deliver us. By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation, by thy holy Nativity and Circumcision, by thy Baptism, Fasting and Temptation, Good Lord deliver us. By thine Agony and bloudy Sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, by thy precious Death and Burial, by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension, and by the coming of the holy Ghost, Good Lord deliver us. In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of death, and in the day of Iudgment, Good Lord deliver us. We sinners do beseech thee to hear us, O Lord God, and that it may please thee to rule and govern thy holy Church universal in the right way. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to keep and streng∣then
in the true worshipping of thee, in righ∣teousness and holiness of life, thy servant Charles, our most gracious King and Gover∣nour. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear, and love, and that he may ever∣more have affiance in thee, and even seek thy honour and glory. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to be his defender and keeper, giving him the victory over all his enemies. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to bless and pre∣serve out gracious Queen Catherine, James Duke of York, and all the Royal Fa∣mily. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to illuminate all Bi∣shops, Priests and Deacons, with true know∣ledge and understanding of thy Word, and that both by their preaching and living, they may set it forth, and shew it accordingly. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the Nobility, with grace, wisdom, and understanding. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace to execute Iu∣stice, and to maintain Truth. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.
That it may please thee to give to all Nations Vnity, Peace and Concord. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and diligently to live after thy Commandments. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give to all thy peo∣ple increase of grace, to hear meekly thy Word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the fruits of the Spirit. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred, and are deceived. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and help the weak∣hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and final∣ly to beat down Satan under our feet. Wee beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to succour, help, and comfort all that are in danger, necessity, and tri∣bulation. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by laud or by water, all women labouring of child, all sick persons and young children, and to shew thy pity upon all prisoners and captives. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless children and widows, and all that are desolate and oppressed. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.
That it may please thee to forgive our ene∣mies, persecutors, and slanderers, and to turn their hearts. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. That it may please thee to give us true repen∣tance, to forgive us all our sins, negligences and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy Spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy Word. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord. Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us. Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us. O Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world, Grant us thy peace. O Lamb of God, that takest away the sins of the world, Have mercy upon us. O Christ hear us. O Christ hear us. Lord have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. Our Father which art in heaven, &c. Priest. O Lord, deal not with us after our sins. Answer. Neither reward us after our iniquities.
Let us pray. O God merciful Father, that despise not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers that we make before thee, in all our troubles and adversities, whensoever they oppress us: and graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft and subtlity of the devil or man worketh against us, be brought to nought, and by the providence of thy goodness they may be disper∣sed, that we thy servants, being hurt by no per∣secutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, through Iesus Christ our Lord. O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thy Names sake. O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us, the noble works that thou didst in their days, and in the old time before them. O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honour. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost. Answer. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen. From our enemies defend us, O Christ. Graciously look upon our afflictions. Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts. Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people. Favourably with mercy hear our prayers. O Son of David, have mercy upon us. Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.
Graciously hear us, O Christ; Graciously hear us, O Lord Christ. Priest. O Lord, let thy mercy be shewed upon us. Answer. As we do put our trust in thee. Let us pray. WE humbly beseech thee, O Father, mer∣cifully to look upon our infitmities, and for the glory of thy Name, turn from us all those evils that we most righteously have deserved: and grant that in all our troubles we may put our whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness and pureness of living, to thy honour and glory, through our only Me∣diatour and Advocate, Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Lord, we beseech thee, mercifully hear our prayers, and spare all those who confess their sins unto thee, that they whose consciences by sin are accused, by thy merciful pardon may be absolved, through Christ our Lord. Amen. O Most mighty God, and merciful Father, who hast compassion upon all men, and ha∣test nothing that thou hast made, who wouldest not the death of a sinner, but that he should ra∣ther turn from his sin, and he saved; Mercifully forgive us our trespasses; receive and comfort us, who are grieved and wearied with the bur∣then of our sins. Thy property is always to have mercy; to thee only it appertaineth to for∣give
sins, Spare us therefore, good Lord, spare thy people whom thou hast redeemed; enter not into judgment with thy servants, who are vile earth, and miserable sinners; but so turn thine anger from us, who mery acknowledge our vileness, and truly repent us of our faults; and so make haste to help us in this world, that we may ever live with thee in the world to come, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ Then shall the people say this that followeth, after the Minister. TVrn thou us, O good Lord, and so shall we be turned, Be favourable, O Lord, be sa∣vourable to thy people, Who turn to thee in weeping, fasting, and praying. For thou art a merciful God, Full of compassion, Long-suf∣fering, and of great pity. Thou sparest when we deserve punishment, And in thy wrath think∣est upon mercy. Spare thy people, good Lord, spare them, And let not thine heritage be brought to confusion. Hear us, O Lord, for thy mercy is great, And after the multitude of thy mercies look upon us, Through the merits and mediation of thy blessed Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. GRant, we beseech thee, merciful Lord, to thy faithful people pardon and peace, that they may be cleansed from all their sins, and serve thee with a quiet mind, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
A Prayer of S. Chrysostome. ALmighty God, who hast given us grace at this time with one accord, to make our common supplications unto thee, and dost pro∣mise that when two or three are gathered toge∣ther in thy Name, thou wilt grant their re∣quests: Fulfil now, O Lord, the desires and pe∣titions of thy servants, as may be most expedi∣ent for them, granting us in this world know∣ledge of thy truth, and in the world to come life everlasting. Amen. 2 Corinth. 13. 14. THe grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen. The Communion-Service. ¶ The Priest standing at the North-side of the Lords Table, shall say, OVr Father which art in heaven, Hallow∣ed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not in∣to temptation: But deliver us from evil. Amen.
ALmighty God, unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom no secrets are hid: cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of thy holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magni∣fie thy holy Name, through Christ our Lord. Amen. Minister. GOd spake these words, and said, I am the Lord thy God: Thou shalt have none other gods but me. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law. Minister. Thou shalt not make to thy self any graven I∣mage, nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under the earth. Thou shalt not bow down to them, nor worship them; for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and shew mercy unto thousands in them that love me, and keep my commandments. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law. Minister. Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his Name in vain.
People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law. Minister. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath∣day. Sir days shalt thou labour and do all that thou hast to do, but the seventh day is the Sab∣bath of the Lord thy God. In it thou shalt do no manner of work, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, thy man-servant, and thy mild-ser∣vant, thy cattel, and the stranger that is within thy gates. For in sir days the Lord made hea∣ven and earth, the sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law. Minister. Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law. Minister. Thou shalt do no murther. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law. Minister. Thou shalt not commit adultery. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.
Minister. Thou shalt not steal. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law. Minister. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law. Minister. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbours house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbours wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is his. People. Lord have mercy upon us, and write all these thy laws in our hearts, we beseech thee. Let us pray. ALmighty God, whose kingdom is everlast∣ing and power infinite; have mercy upon the whole Church, and so rule the heart of thy chosen servant Charles our King and Gover∣nour, that he (knowing whose Minister he is) may above all things seek thy honour and glory: And that we and all his subjects (duly consider∣ing whose authority he hath) may faithfully serve, honour, and humbly obey him, in thee, and for thee, according to thy blessed Word and Or∣dinance, through Iesus Christ our Lord, who with thee and the holy Ghost, liveth and reign∣eth ever one God, world without end. Amen.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who hatest nothing that thou hast made, and dost for∣give the sins of all them that are penitet; Cre∣ate and make in us new and contrite hearts, that we worthily lamenting our sins, and ac∣knowledging our wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all mercy, perfect emission and forgiveness, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. GRant, we beseech thee, Almighty God, that we, who for our evil deeds do worthily de∣serve to be punished, by the comfort of thy grace may mercifully be relieved, through our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. For the Epistle, Joel II. 11. THe day of the Lord is great, and very terri∣ble, and who can abide it? Therefore also now, saith the Lord, Turn ye even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weep∣ing, and with mourning. And rent your heart and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God: for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repenteth him of the evil. Who knoweth if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him, even a meat-offering, and a drink-offering unto the Lord your God? Blow the trumpet in zion, san∣ctifie a fast, call a solemn assembly. Gather the people: sanctifie the congregation: assemble the elders: gather the children, and those that suck the breasts: let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet. Let
the priests, the ministers of the Lord, weep be∣tween the porch and the altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproch; that the heathen should rule over them: wherefore should they say a∣mong the people, Where is their God? Then will the Lord be jealous for his land, and pity his people. The Gospel. S. Matth. VI. 16. WHen ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward. But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face, that thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal. But lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth cor∣rupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. I Believe in one God, the Father Almigh∣ty, maker of heaven and earth, and of all things visible and invisible: And in one Lord Iesus Christ, the onely be∣gotten Son of God, begotten of his Father be∣fore all worlds, God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being of one substance with the Father, by whom
all things were made: who for us men, and for our salvation, came down from heaven, and was incarnate by the holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made man, and was cucified also for us under Pontius Pilate, He suffered, and was buried, and the third day he rose again, ac∣cording to the Scriptures, and ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of the Fa∣ther. And he shall come again with glory to judge both the quick and the dead: whose king∣dom shall have no end. And I believe in the holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, who proceedeth from the Fa∣ther and the Son, who with the Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified, who spake by the Prophets. And I believe one Ca∣tholick and Apostolick Church. I acknowledge one Baptism for the remission of sins. And I look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen. ¶ Then followeth the Sermon; and after that shall be said, Blessed be the man that provideth for the sick sal. 41. 1. and needy: the Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble. He that hath pity upon the Poor, Lendeth Prov. 19. 17. unto the Lord: and look what he layeth out, it shall be paid him again.
Let us pray for the whole state of Christs Church militant here on earth. ALmighty and everliving God, who by thy holy Apostle hast taught us to make prayers and supplications, and to give thanks for all men: We humbly beseech thee most mercifully (to accept our alms and oblations, and) to receive If there be no alms or oblations, then shall the words (of accept∣ing our alms and oblations.) be left out un∣said. these our prayers, which we offer unto thy divine Majesty, beseeching thee to inspire continually the Vniversal Church with the spirit of truth, unity and concord: and grant that all they that do confess thy holy Name, may agree in the truth of thy holy Word, and live in unity and godly love. We beseech thee also to save and defend all Christian Kings, Princes, and Go∣vernours, and especially thy servant CHARLES our King, that under him we may be godly and quietly governed. And grant unto his whole Council, and to all that are put in Authority under him, that they may truly and indifferently minister justice, to the punishment of wickedness and vice, and to the maintenance of thy true Re∣ligion and vertue. Give grace, O heavenly Fa∣ther, to all Bishops, and Curates, that they may both by their life and doctrine set forth thy true and lively Word, and rightly and duely ad∣minister thy holy Sacraments. And to all thy people give thy heavenly grace, and especially to this Congregation here present, that with week heart and due reverence they may hear and receive thy holy Word, truly serving thee in holi∣ness and righteousness all the days of their life. And we most humbly beseech thee of thy good∣ness, O Lord, to comfort and succour all them
who in this transitory life are in trouble, sorrow, need, sickness, or any other adversity. And we also bless thy holy Name, for all thy servants depar∣ted this life in thy faith and fear; beseeching thee to give us grace so to follow their good ex∣amples, that with them we may be partakers of thy heavenly kingdom. Grant this, O Father, for Iesus Christs sake our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen. GLorious, and gracious God, whose Iudg∣ments against obstinate Offenders are most severe, and terrible; but thy Mercies infinite to All, that with hearty Repentance, and true Faith turn unto thee: We, sinful people of this Land, do acknowledge before thee, to thy Glory, and our own Shame, and Confusion, that never any Nation under Heaven had more Experience of all the Instances of thy Goodness, and the Methods of our Amendment; nor yet did ever any more shamefully abuse them. When thou gavest us great, and long Prosperities; we fed our selves to the full, waxed fat, and wanton, and kicked against thee. When thou threwest us in∣to horrid Confusions, from which we saw then little Hope of arising; even in the time of that Distress did we trespass yet more against thee. When by Miracles of Mercy thou hadst turned our Captivities; we soon return'd to Folly, to our Vomit, and to our wallowing in our former, or greater Filthiness. Though thy Plagues have been since upon us to high, and dreadful Degrees; we did not then (as we ought) look every Man into the Plague of our own Hearts, nor return to him that smote us. We went through Fire, and Water; but were not by that
severe Discipline purified from our Dross, or purg'd from our Pollutions. Even while thou wert fighting for us against our Enemies a∣broad; we were by our Sins at home fighting a∣gainst Heaven, & against thee. And now we are no more worthy to be called either thy Sons, or thy Servants; whom neither thy Fear hath driven, nor thy Goodness led to Repentance. It is of thy meer Mercies, O Lord, that we are not consu∣med; thy unwearied unconquerable Patience, that thou hast not long since given us over as in∣corrigible. We adore the unsearchable Depths of thy infinite Goodness, that we are still under thy Discipline: We are ready here before thee meekly to kiss all the smarting Rods, which we may justly fear thou now holdest over us; be∣seeching thee by the Aids, and Influence of thy Grace to make them effectual to our Correction, and not to our Destruction. In Mercy awaken our drowsy Consciences; Soften and subdue our hard hearts into deep Contrition, and Repen∣tance; Pardon the many great Offences of us thy Servants, and the crying sins of the whole Nation; Remove the Evils we now lie under; Avert those Iudgments which we justly fear, be∣cause we most justly deserve; Vnite all our hearts in the Profession of the true Religion, which thine own right hand hath planted and established amongst us, and in a holy Conversa∣tion answerable thereunto. To this end Pour out the richest of thy Blessings spiritual, and temporal, upon our gracious Sovereign; that all his Counsels, Resolutions, and Endeavours may tend to, and end in the Glory of thy great Name, the Advancement of Piety, and Iustice, the Preservation of thy Church, and the Securi∣ty,
Peace, and Prosperity of all Estates, and Conditions of Men in these, and all other his Dominions: All which we humbly beg in the Name, and through the Mediation of Iesus Christ, thy Son, our Saviour. Amen. ALmighty God, who hast promised to hear the petitions of them that ask in thy Sons Name, we beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears to us that have made now our pray∣ers and supplications unto thee, and grant that those things which we have faithfully asked ac∣cording to thy will, may effectually be obtained to the relief of our necessity, and to the setting forth of thy glory, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ Then the priest shall let them depart with this Blessing. THe peace of God which passeth all under∣standing, keep your hearts and minds in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Iesus Christ our Lord; and the blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be amongst you, and remain with you always. Amen.
The Order for Evening PRAYER. ¶ Let him that ministreth read with a loud voice these Sentences of Scripture, and after them the Exhortation following. REnt your heart; and not your Joel 2. 13 garments, and turn unto the Lord your God, for he is gra∣cious, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repenteth him of the evil. To the Lord our God be∣long Dan. 9. 9, 10. mercies, and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him: neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his laws which he set before us. Correct us, O Lord, but with iudgment; not Jer. 10. 24 in thine anger, lest thou bring us to nothing. DEarly beloved brethren, the Scripture moveth us in sundry places, to acknow∣ledge and confess our manifold sins and wicked∣ness, and that we should not dissemble not cloak them before the face of Almighty God our hea∣venly Father, but confess them with an humble, lowly, penitent, and obedient heart, to the end that we may obtain forgiveness of the same, by
his infinite goodness and mercy. And although we ought at all times humbly to acknowledge our sins before God, yet ought we most chiefly so to do, when we assemble and meet together, to cast our selves down at the throne of his hea∣venly Grace, and to pour out our humble Sup∣plications for the averting of his Iudgments, and for the procuring of his Blessings upon our Sovereign and his Kingdoms, to render thanks for the great benefits that we have re∣ceived at his hands, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most holy word, and to ask those things which are requisite and necessary, as well for the body as the soul: Wherefore I pray and beseech you as many as are here present, to accompany me with a pure heart and humble voice, unto the throne of the heavenly grace, saying after me. ¶ The Confession to be said of the whole Congre∣gation after the Minister, all kneeling. ALmighty and most merciful Father, We have erred and strayed from thy ways like lost sheep, We have followed too much the devi∣ces and desires of our own hearts, We have of∣fended against thy holy laws, We have left un∣done those things which we ought to have done, And we have done those things which we ought not to have done, And there is no health in us: But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon us misera∣ble offenders; Spare thou them, O God, which confess their faults; Restore thou them that are penitent, According to thy promises declared un∣to mankind in Christ Iesu our Lord. And grant, O most merciful Father, for his sake, That we
may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, To the glory of thy holy Name. Amen. ¶ The Absolution to be pronounced by the Priest alone, standing; the people still kneeling. ALmighty God, the Father of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, who desireth not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live, and hath given power and commandment to his Ministers, to declare and pronounce to his people, being penitent, the absolution and remission of their sins: He par∣doneth and absolveth all them that truly repent, and unfeignedly believe his holy Gospel. Where∣fore let us beseech him to grant us true repen∣tance and his holy Spirit, that those things may please him which we do at this present, and that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that at the last we may come to his eternal joy, through Iesus Christ our Lord. ¶ The people shall answer here, and at the end of all other Prayers, Amen. ¶ Then shall the Minister kneel, and say the Lords Prayer; the people also repeating it with him. OVr Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass a∣gainst us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil: for thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.
¶ Then likewise he shall say, O Lord open thou our lips. Ans. And our mouth shall shew forth thy praise. Priest. O God make speed to save us. Answer. O Lord make haste to help us. ¶ Here all standing up, the Priest shall say, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost. Answer. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen. Priest. Praise ye the Lord. Answer. The Lords name be praised. ¶ Instead of Venite, exultemus, shall be said this Hymn following; one Verse by the Priest, and another by the Clerk and people. O Come, let us humble our selves, and fall Psal. 95. 6. down before the Lord: with reverence and fear. For he is the Lord our God: and we are the people 7. of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand. Come therefore, let us turn again unto our Hos. 6. 1. Lord: for he hath smitten us, and he will heal us. Let us search, and try our wayes: let us lift up our Lam. 3. 40, 41. hearts with our hands unto God in the heavens. Let us repent, and turn from our wicked∣ness: Acts 3. and our sins shall be forgiven us. Let us turn, and the Lord will turn from his heavy Jonah 3. wrath: he will pardon us, and we shall not perist. We acknowledge indeed, that our punish∣ments Joh 11. 6. Wisd. 11. 23. are less than our deservings: but yet of thy mercy, O Lord, correct us to amend∣ment,
and plague us not to our destructi∣on. We have provoked thine anger, thy wrath is waxed hot: and thy heavy displeasure is sore kindled against us. But thy hand is not shortned, that thou canst Es. 59. 1. not help: neither is thy goodness abated, that thou wilt not hear. Thou hast promised, O Lord, that before we Es. 65. 24 cry, thou wilt hear us: whilst we are yet speaking, thou wilt have mercy upon us. For none that trust in thee shall be confound∣ed: neither shall any that call upon thee be de∣spised. Our Fathers hoped in thee: they trusted in thee, Ps. 22. 4. and thou didst deliver them. They called upon thee, and were holpen: they 5. put their trust in thee, and were not confound∣ed. And now in the vexation of our spirits, and the Baruch 3. 1, 2. anguish of our souls we cry unto thee: hear, Lord, and have mercy. For many troubles are come about us: our Psal. 40. 15. sins have taken such hold upon us, that we are not able to look up. For thine own sake, and for thy holy Names Dan 9. 18, 19. sake, incline thine ear; and hear, oh merciful Lord. For we do not present our Supplications be∣fore 18. thee, trusting in our own righteousness: but in thy manifold and great mercies. Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of Ps. 79. 9. thy Name: oh deliver us, and be merciful unto our sins for thy Names sake. So we that are thy people and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks for ever: and will
always be shewing forth thy Praise from Gene∣ration to Generation. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost; As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen. Proper Psalms are XXXII. CXXX. CXLIII. Beati, quorum. Psal. XXXII. BLessed is he, whose unrighteousness is for∣given: and whose sin is covered. 2 Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputeth no sin: and in whose spirit there is no guile. 3 For while I held my tongue: my bones consumed away through my daily complaining. 4 For thy hand is heavy upon me day & night: and my moisture is like the drought in summer. 5 I will acknowledge my sin unto thee: and mine unrighteousness have I not hid. 6 I said, I will confess my sins unto the Lord: and so thou forgavest the wickedness of my sin. 7 For this shall every one, that is godly, make his prayer unto thee, in a time when thou mayest be found: but in the great water-flouds they shall not come nigh him. 8 Thou art a place to hide me in, thou shalt preserve me from trouble: thou shalt compass me about with songs of deliverance. 9 I will inform thee, and teach thee in the way, wherein thou shalt go: and I will guide thee with mine eye. 10 Be ye not like to horse, and mule, which have no understanding: whose mouths must be
held with bit and bridle, left they fall upon thee. 11 Great plagues remain for the ungodly: but whoso putteth his trust in the Lord, mercy embraceth him on every side. 12 Be glad, O ye righteous, and rejoyce in the Lord: and be joyful all ye, that are true of heart. De profundis. Psal. CXXX. OVt of the deep have I called unto thee, O Lord: Lord, hear my voice. 2 O let thine ears consider well: the voice of my complaint. 3 If thou, Lord, wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss: O Lord, who may abide it? 4 For there is mercy with thee: therefore shalt thou be feared. 5 I look for the Lord, my soul doth wait for him: in his word is my trust. 6 My soul fleeth unto the Lord: before the morning watch, I say, before the morning watch. 7 O Israel, trust in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy: and with him is plenteous redemption. 8 And he shall redeem Israel: from all his sins. Domine, exaudi. Psal. CXLIII. HEar my prayer, O Lord, and consider my desire: hearken unto me for thy truth and righteousness sake. 2 And enter not into judgment with thy ser∣vant: for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. 3 For the enemy hath persecuted my soul, he
hath  thy  to the ground: he hath laid  in the darkness, us the men that have been long dead. 4 Therefore is my spirit  ithin me: and my heart within me is desolate. 5 Yet do I remember the time past, I se upon all thy works: yea, I exercise my self in the works of thy hands. 6 I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul gaspeth unto thee as a thirsty land. 7 Hear me, O Lord, and that look, for my spirit waxeth faint: hide not thy fate from me, left I be like unto them that go down into the pit. 8 O let me hear thy loving kindness betmes in the morning, for in thee is my trust: shew thou me the way that I should walk in, or I lit up my soul unto thee. 9 Deliver me, O Lord, from ne enemies: for I flee unto thee to hide me. 10 Teach me to  the thing that seth thee, for thou art my God: let thy loving Spi∣rit lead me forth into the land of righteousness. 11 Quicken me, O Lord, for thy names sake: and for thy righteousness sake bring my  of trouble. 12 And of thy goodness slay mine enemies: and destroy all them that ex my soul, for I am thy servant. The first Lesson is, Amos vj. or Jonah iij. Magnificat. MY soul doth magnifie the Lord: and my spirit hath rejoyced in God my Saviour.
For he hath regarded: the  of his hand-maiden. For behold, from henceforth: all generations shall call me blessed. For he that is mighty hath magnified me: and holy is his Name. And his mercy is on them that fear him: throughout all generations. He hath shewed strength with his arm: he hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts. He hath put down the mighty from their seat: and hath exalted the humble and meek. He hath filled the hungry with good things: and the rich he hath sent empty away. He remembring his mercy hath holpen his servant Israel: as he promised to our forefa∣thers, Abraham and his seed for ever. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and in the holy Ghost; As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end, Amen. The second Lesson is, 1 Cor. X. beginning Vers. 1. and ending with Vers. 13. or,  Pet. III. Deus misereatur. Psal. 67. GOd be merciful unto us, and bless us: and shew us the light of his countenance, and be merciful unto us. That thy way may be known upon earth: thy saving health among all nations.
Let the people praise thee, O God: yea, let all the people praise thee. O let the nations rejoyce and be glad: for thou shalt judge the folk righteously, and govern the nations upon earth. Let the people praise thee, O God: let all the people praise thee. Then shall the earth bring forth her increase: and God, even our own God, shall give us his blessing. God shall bless us: and all the ends of the world shall fear him. Glory be to the Father, &c. As it was in the beginning, &c. ¶ Then shall be said the Creed by the Minister, and the people standing. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Ma∣ker of heaven and earth: And in Iesus Christ his onely Son our Lord; who was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suf∣fered under Pontius Pilate; was crucified, dead and buried; he descended into hell; the third day he rose again from the dead; he ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty; from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholick Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting. Amen.
¶ And after that, these Prayers following; all devout∣ly kneeling, the Minister first pronouncing with a loud voice, The Lord be with you. Answer. And with thy spirit. Minister. ¶ Let us pray. Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. ¶ Then the Minister, Clerks and people, shall say the Lords Prayer with a loud voice. OVr Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And forgive us our trespas∣ses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil. Amen. ¶ Then the Priest standing up, shall say, O Lord, shew thy mercy upon us. Answer. And grant us thy salvation. Priest. O Lord, save the King. Answer. And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee. Priest. Indue thy Ministers with righteousness.
Answer. And make thy chosen people joyful. Priest. O Lord save thy people. Answer. And bless thine inheritance. Priest. Give peace in our time, O Lord. Answer. Because there is none other that fighteth for us, but onely thou, O God. Priest. O Lord save thy servants, Answer. Who do put their trust in thee. Priest. Send us help from thy holy place; Answer. And evermore mightily defend us. Priest. Let the enemy have no advantage against us: Answer. Nor the wicked approch to hurt us. Priest. Be unto us, O Lord, a strong towre, Answer. From the face of our enemies. Priest. O Lord hear our prayer, Answer. And let our cry come unto thee.
¶ In stead of the first Collect shall these two be used. ALmighty and everlasting God, who hatest nothing that thou hast made, and dost for∣give the sins of all them that are penitent; Cre∣ate and make in us new and contrite hearts, that we worthily lamenting our sins, and ac∣knowledging our wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all mercy, perfect remission and forgiveness, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. GRant, we beseech thee, Almighty God, that we, who for our evil deeds do worthily de∣serve to be punished, by the comfort of thy grace may mercifully he relieved, through our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. O God, from whom all holy desires, all good counsels, and all just works do proceed; Give unto thy servants that peace which the world cannot give, that both our hearts may be set to obey thy commandments, and also that by thee we being defended from e fear of our enemies, may pass our time in rest and quiet∣ness, through the merits of Iesus Christ our Saviour. Amen. LIghten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son, our Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen.
O Lord, we beseech thee mercifully hear our prayers, and spare all those who confess their sins unto thee, that they whose consciences by sin are accused, by thy merciful pardon may be absolved, through Christ our Lord. Amen. O Most mighty God, and merciful Father, who hast compassion upon all men, and ha∣test nothing that thou hast made, who wouldest not the death of a sinner, but that he should ra∣ther turn from his sin, and be saved; Mercifully forgive us our trespasses; receive and comfort us, who are grieved and wearied with the bur∣then of our sins. Thy property is always to have mercy; to thee only it appertaineth to for∣give sins. Spare us therefore, good Lord, spare thy people whom thou hast redeemed; enter not into judgment with thy servants, who are ile earth, and miserable sinners; but so turn thine anger from us, who meekly acknowledge our vileness, and truly repent us of our faults; and so make haste to help us in this world, that we may ever live with thee in the world to come, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ Then shall the people say this that followeth, after the Minister. TVrn thou us, O good Lord, and so shall we be turned. Be favourable, O Lord, be fa∣vourable to thy people, Who turn to thee in weeping, fasting, and praying. For thou art a merciful God, Full of compassion, Long-suf∣fering, and of great pity. Thou sparest when e deserve punishment, And in thy wrath think∣est
upon mercy. Spare thy people, good Lord, spare them, And let not thine heritage be brought to confusion. Hear us, O Lord, for thy mercy is great, And after the multitude of thy mercies look upon us, through the merits and mediation of thy blessed Son Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. GRant, we beseech thee, merciful Lord, to thy faithful people pardon and peace, that they may be cleansed from all their sins, and serve thee with a quiet mind, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ A Prayer for the Kings Majesty. O Lord our heavenly Father, High and Mighty, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, the onely Ruler of Princes, who dost from thy Throne behold all the dwellers upon earth, most heartily we beseech thee with thy favour to behold our most gracious Soveraign Lord King Charles, and so replenish him with the grace of thy holy Spirit, that he may alway incline to thy Will, and walk in thy way; endue him plenteously with heavenly gifts; grant him in health and wealth long to live; strengthen him, that he may vanquish and overcome all his ene∣mies, and finally after this life he may attain everlasting joy and felicity, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ A Prayer for the Royal Family. ALmighty God, the Fountain of all goodness, we humbly beseech thee to bless our graci∣ous Queen Catherine, James Duke of York, and
all the Royal Family; Endue them with thy holy Spirit, enrich them with thy heavenly grace, prosper them with all happiness, and bring them to thine everlasting Kingdom, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. ¶ A Prayer for the Clergy and People. ALmighty and everlasting God, who alone workest great marvels; Send down upon our Bishops, and Curates, and all Congre∣gations committed to their charge, the health∣ful Spirit of thy grace; and that they may truly please thee, pour upon them the continual dew of thy blessing. Grant this, O Lord, for the ho∣nour of our Advocate and Mediatour, Iesus Christ. Amen. GLorious, and gracious God, whose Iudg∣ments against obstinate Offenders are most severe, and terrible; but thy Mercies; in∣finite to All, that with hearty Repentance, and true Faith turn unto thee: We, sinful people of this Land, do acknowledge before thee, to thy Glory, and our own shame, and con∣fusion, that never any Nation under Heaven had more Experience of all the Instances of thy Goodness, and the Methods of our Amend∣ment; nor yet did ever any more shamefuly a∣buse them. When thou gavest us great, and long Prosperities; we fed our selves to the full, wared fat, and wanton, and kicked against thee. When thou threwest us into horrid Con∣fusions, from which we saw then little Hope of arising; even in the time of that Distress did we trespass yet more against thee. Whe by Miracles of Mercy thou hadst turned our Cap∣tivities;
we soon returned to Folly, to our Vo∣mit, & to our wallowing in our former, or grea∣ter Filthiness. Though thy plagues have been since upon us to high; and dreadful Degrees; we did not then (as we ought) look every than into the plague of our own Hearts, nor return to him that smote us. We went through Fire, and Water; but were not by that severe Di∣scipline purified from our Dross, or purged from our Pollutions. Even while thou wert fighting for us against our Enemies abroad; we were by our sins at home fighting against Heaven, and against thee. And now we are no more worthy to be called either thy Sons, or thy Servants; whom neither thy Fear hath driven, nor thy Goodness led to Repentance. It is of thy meer Mercies, O Lord, that we are not consumed; thy unwearied unconquerable Patience, that thou hast not long since given us over, as incorrigible. We adore the un∣searchable Depths of thy infinite Goodness, that we are still under thy Discipline: We are ready here before thee meekly to kiss all the smarting Rods, which we may justly fear thou now holdest over us; beseeching thee by the Aids, and Influence of thy Grace to make them effectual to our Correction, and not to our De∣struction. In Mercy awaken our drowsy Con∣sciences; Soften, and subdue our hard hearts into deep Contrition, and Repentance; Par∣don the many great Offences of us thy Ser∣vants, and the crying Sins of the whole Nati∣on; Remove the evils, we now lie under; A∣vert those Iudgments, which we justly fear, because we most justly deserve; Vnite all our Hearts in the Profession of the true Religion,
which thine own right hand hath planted and established amongst us, and in a holy Conver∣sation answerable thereunto. To this end Pour out the richest of thy Blessings spiritual, and temporal, upon our gracious Soveraign; that all his Counsels, Resolutions, and En∣deavours may tend to, and end in the Glory of thy great Name, the Advancement of Piety, and Iustice, the Preservation of thy Church, and the Security, Peace, and Prosperity of all Estates, and Conditions of Men in these, and all other his Dominions: All which we humbly beg in the Name, and through the Me∣diation of Iesus Christ, thy Son, our Saviour. Amen. ¶ A Prayer of St. Chrysostome. ALmighty God, who hast given us grace at this time with one accord, to make our common supplications unto thee, and dost pro∣mise, that when two or three are gathered toge∣ther in thy Name, thou wilt grant their re∣quests; Fulfil now, O Lord, the desires and pe∣titions of thy servants, as may be most expedi∣ent for them, granting us in this world know∣ledge of thy truth, and in the world to come life everlasting. Amen. 2 Corinth. 13. 14. THe grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen. FINIS.
