C4259C 15367966 103545
A SHORT INFORMATION FROM THE COMMISSION OF THE GENERALL ASSEMBLY, Concerning the DECLARATION OF THE HONOURABLE COURT OF PARLIAMENT, Lately emitted to the KINGDOME. Imprinted at Edenburgh, and re-printed at London for Joseph Hunscot. 1648.
Edinburgh 5. May,1648. A SHORT INFORMATION FROM THE COMMISSION OF THE GENERALL ASSEMBLY, Concerning The Declaration of the Honourable Court of PARLIAMENT, Lately emitted to the Kingdom. 1 ALthough in the answer of April, 22. which we received in writing from the Honourable Court of Parliament, we are remitted to their Lordships Declaration (now printed and published) therein to finde satisfacti∣on
our eight desires, presented to the Parlia∣ment March 22. And although these desires were such as were most agreeable to the word of God, and doe highly concern the safety and se∣curity of religion; yet, after diligent perusall of the said Declaration of Parliament, wee can not finde therein any one of these our eight desires satisfied. 2 Wee finde twice in the said Declarati∣on a passage cited out of the Declarati∣on of both Kingdomes, 1643. viz. That the not takers of the Covenant are declared to be publike enemies to Religion and Country, and to bee punished as professed adversaries and Ma∣lignants: But while this passage is pressed and urged upon the Parliament of England against the Sectaries, wee cannot see that it is applied against such Malignants, as have not to this day taken the Covenant, Shall wee require of them the observing of such a rule, and not yet walk by that rule our selves. 3 As the three breaches of Treaties insisted upon in the said Declaration are disputable, and not without controversie, so the three demands sent to the Parliament of England (as they are conceived) are of most dangerous consequence to Religion, so far as wee are able to judge of them, or pry into them: And although wee are reall well-wishers to his Majesties Honour, free∣dome
and safety, in such a way as may not be inconsistent with the safety and security of Religion; yet the demand of his Majesties com∣ming with Honour, Freedom, and Safety to some of his Houses in or neare London, before security had from him, yea before applications to be made to him by his Parliaments for setling Religion according to the Covenant, we conceive to be not onely a postponing of Christs interest to the Kings, but an apparent hazzard of the subver∣sion of all the Ends of the Covenant; conside∣ring, that the Army being disbanded (as is also demanded) and his Majesty under no restraint, but restored with Honour, Freedom, and Safe∣ty, may gather new strength with the helpe of the Popish, Prelaticall, and Malignant party for hin∣dring the setling of Religion and Peace according to the Covenant; which we have the more rea∣son to feare and apprehend, his Majesty still retain∣ning his old Principles, and having not long since professed and declared, that he is obliged in Conscience to improve that power which God shall put in his hands for the establishing of E∣piscopacy. 4 There are in the said Declaration divers par∣ticulars highly concerning Religion, determined and resolved upon, without the advice and con∣sent of the Generall Assembly or their Commissio∣ners; which is a great prejudice to the just interest and liberties of the Kirk.
5 We doe not finde in the said Declaration all lawfull and possible wayes of Peace, and namely by Treaties (as before, in 1639. and 1640.) en∣deavoured or sought after, before an ingagement in warre; which method we conceive to be neces∣sary as well by common and naturall equity as by the Word of God, and especially between two Kingdomes united by Solemn Covenant. 6 The Declaration holds forth no resolution of Parliament for opposing and suppressing of the Popish, Prelaticall, or Malignant party if they rise againe in Armes, but only against associating or joyning forces with them, and not so much as that, except with limitations in case they be refusers to sweare and subscribe the Covenant; and in case they rise in Armes to oppose or obstruct all, or any one of the ends of the Covenant. Whereas it may be easily foreseene, that if the Popish, Prelaticall, or Malignant Party rise againe in Armes in England, they cannot only conceale their intentions against the ends of the Covenant, but also be easily exemp∣ted from being reckoned refusers of the Covenant, the Covenant not being now imposed upon them; and being once suffered to rise in Armes (as some are already) may grow so strong as that it will be very hard and difficult to suppresse them. 7 Whereas we have insisted for satisfaction to our Consciences concerning the persons to be en∣trusted with the managing of the warre, and that
none may be imployed in Committees and Armies but such as have given constant proof of their in∣tegrity and faithfulnesse, and against whom there is no just cause of jealousie; that so we may the more confidently encourage our flocks to follow the cause of God in their hands: the Declaration in stead of satisfying this desire, doth avoyd and keep off from these qualifications desired by us, and so leaves a latitude for employing such as these qualifications do not agree to. Finally, as we neither were, nor are against an engagement, if once satisfied in the grounds of undertaking, and manner of proceeding, and the other particulars expressed in our former papers; So for the reasons before mentioned, and divers others fully expressed in our Representation upon the Declaration, we judge the present engagement as it is stated, unlawfull; and trust that all the well affected in the Kingdom will make conscience of their Solemn Vowes, and will be carefull by the grace and assistance of God to keep themselves from being ensnared and carried along in any course contrary to the Covenant. A. Ker. FINIS.
