C531 13687242 101356
A PERFECT GUIDE FOR Protestant Dissenters, IN CASE OF PROSECUTION UPON ANY OF THE PENAL STATUTES Made against Them. TOGETHER WITH. The Statutes of 35 Eliz. and 22 Car. 2. at large. To which is added, A POST-SCRIPT ABOUT Ecclesiastical Courts, And PROSECUTION in Them. LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin. 1682.
The Preface. 'TIs the Common Practice now adays, for base and mercenary Pens to pass the worst Censures upon the best Intentions of Men. The Arguments that follow are all grounded either upon Scripture and Rea∣son, or upon Equal Justice and Prudent Morality; and those not enforced with Heat and Passion, but with all the Mildness and Submission imaginable; which argues the Fairness and Honesty of the Design, viz. to procure, if it may be done, a happy Union between Protestants and Pro∣testants; whom it rather mainly concerns to joyn their Forces against the Common Enemy of their Profession, than to make themselves the Scorn and Triumph of Popish Cun∣ning, by a needless Separation; which, if duly con∣sider'd, would soon be found unhappily fomented and encreas'd by the encourag'd Emissaries and Scribling Bravo's of Rome. Is it not apparent, how they already begin to un∣dermine and blow up the Truth of the late Horrid Plot, so miraculously discover'd? To which purpose, is it not like∣wise apparent what daily Affronts they put upon the King's Evidence, to the end that by rendring their Persons, and whatever they have said or sworn, ridiculous, they may be the better able to raise a Mist before the Eyes of the People, and then totally withdraw the Plot from their Belief? Is it not apparent how vigorously they assail the whole Body of the Dissenters, Men of Religious, Serious, Upright, and most Loyal Principles, under the scandalous Names of Fanaticks and Whiggs; and by throwing the Failings and Misdemeanours of some few upon all (this Earth not affording that Happiness to the most Holy Society in the World, of being without some Hypocrites and bad Men) to cast an Odium upon above a third part of the most Industrious and Wealthy Part of the Nation, on purpose to enervate and im∣poverish
the Protestant Interest, and make the softer and more easie way for Popish Intrusion? Enormities much more deserving the Punishment of Penal Laws, than Pub∣lick Meetings for the Worship of God. Upon which Considerations, it cannot be look'd upon cer∣tainly by Persons of truly pious and cordial Affection for the Good of their Country, as a Design either dishonest or factious, to vindicate, so far as may stand with Equity and good Conscience, the Protestant Dissenters from the heavy Imputations of Schism, Sedition, and Disloyal∣ty, every day cast upon them, though most undeservedly, by the Pope's Weekly Drudges here in this City. To which end, the Design of these few Sheets is to more than to plead their Cause, with all modesty and submission, before the Tri∣bunals of Justice and Divine Charity; to rectifie the Iudg∣ments of Persons misguided by Mercenary Scriblers, by setting forth the Nature and Ends of these Meetings, and the dangerous Consequences of setting up a Protestant Persecution, to the encouragement of those Pests of the Kingdom, ignorant and greedy Informers. And because a Sight of the Statutes themselves may be necessary to those that have them not, they are hereunto an∣nex'd; there being nothing more Moral than the Reason of Self-Preservation in a Legal and Orderly Way; which they that seek by no other Means than by those of Duty and Allegiance, no other being here propounded, cannot be thought to deviate from the Laws of God or Nature.
A Guide for Protestant Dissenters, &c. THere is nothing that seems a greater blemish to Christiani∣ty, than that little Differences about the Exercise of Divine Worship, should cause such Heats and Animosities among Men: And for them whose Business it should be to Preach Unity, Love, and Charity, under the Notion of Church-Government, to instigate and animate the Civil Magistrate to make rigid Penal Laws, to enforce the Consciences of good People, seems in some measure contradictory to the easie Yoke of Christian Obedience. It seems somewhat hard, when a poor Man has by his Industry and Frugality got together a small Subsistence for himself and his Family, that because he is dissatisfied with some few Indifferent Circumstances, that are impos'd upon their Consciences, he should be presently laid at the mercy of Rapacious Informers and Officers; that his Goods should be at the disposal of Persons many times fuller of Heat and Passion, than of true Charity; that he should be excommunicated, and consequently under the lash of a Civil Writ, because he will not come to the Parochial Church: as if the Place were so material where God were worshipp'd, so in any Place he be ador'd in Spirit and Truth. Nor is this spoken in the least in reference to the Civil Government, but onely in point of Divi∣nity. It is apparent by the very Prefaces of the Acts themselves hereby intended, that the Civil Magistrate aims at nothing but what is Right and Just; to prevent Sedition, for the Good and Quiet of the Kingdom. But 'tis to be fear'd, that want of Charity in others, and too much ad∣dictedness to Opinionated Severity, sways others to extend the lawful Pretence of the Civil Power beyond the Bounds and Limits of the Le∣gislaters Intention; in regard that for the Ministry to aggravate Civil Crimes upon their Brethren, and incence the Sword of Justice, appears no where in Scripture agreeable to Christian Doctrine. There are two Statutes, that of the 35th of Elizabeth, and the 22d. of His present Majesty, that create the loud Complaints that run through the whole Nation: And yet the Proems of neither of those Acts seem to al∣low that Rigour which is at this time meditated by some Persons, and desended perhaps with too much heat in the Pulpit. The Preamble of 35 Eliz. runs thus: For the preventing of such great Inconveniencies and Perils as might happen and grow by the wicked and dan∣gerous Practises of SEDITIOƲS SECTARIES and DISLOYAL PERSONS. The Preamble of the 22d. of His present Majesty runs thus: For provi∣ding farther and more speedy Remedies against the growing and dangerous Practises of SEDITIOƲS SECTARIES, and other DISLOYAL PER∣SONS, who, under pretence of tender Consciences, have or may at their Meetings contrive Insurrections, as late Experience hath shewn. Here are two Statutes, by which most Lawful and most Necessary Provision is made for the Preservation of the Peace and Quiet of the Go∣vernment. Now, if it should be asked, What the Civil Magistrate re∣quires from hence? It is to be answered, in general, Obedience, Passive and Active; Tranquillity, Publick and Private: and particularly, That no Disloyal Persons, nor Sectaries, shall meet, under pretence of Tender Consciences, to contrive Insurrections. Hence it is submissively pre∣sum'd, That if the Subject live dutifully towards his Prince, free from
giving occasion of Civil Disturbance; amicably toward his Neighbour; pay those Duties and Taxes which the Law or Custom imposes; and actively, if he be always ready with his Sword in his hand to defend his Prince and Country; the Prince does not regard the inward Consciences of such Subjects, nor their inconsiderable Differences in Matters of Cere∣mony; so that the Religion which they profess be not contrary or opposite to the Establish'd Law and Government of the Kingdom. And it is plain, that the Law extends it self no further than Sectaries and Disloyal Persons, as being look'd upon by the Law to be the most likely Persons to con∣trive Insurrections, and disturb the Peace of the Nation. Leaving then the Civil Power to its self, the Question is between the Dissenters and their Opposers, What a Sectary is? For it is suppos'd, That if the Ecclesiastical Wrath were appeas'd, the Displeasure of the Civil Power might the more easily be atton'd. Now then Sectaries must either be Heretics or Schismatics. Heretics the Dissenters cannot be; for they do not err in Fundamentals; for such a one is a Heretic. The next Question then will be, Whether they be Schismatics? What is a Schismatic? A Schismatick is one that holding firm the same Foundation of Faith, departs from some Ceremony of the Church, obstinately, and out of ambitious Ends. Thus it appears, that Obstinacy and Ambitious Ends are the Distinctions that make a Schismatic. From whence it is apparent, that there may be some Grounds and Reasons why a Man may dissent from some Ceremony of the Church, and yet be no Schismatic. For example: Obstinacy is the opposite to Constancy; Am∣bitious Ends, or Self-Interest, as being a Contempt of Conscience, the Op∣posite to Integrity. So then if a Man dissents from any Ceremony of the Church out of Integrity, which is a Vertue by which we yield up our Obedience to God, though imperfect, yet without Hypocrisie; or out of Constancy, by which a Man resolves to persist in the Knowledge of God and his Worship to the end, he can be no Schismatic. For the Disenters and their Opposers agree in the same Knowledge of God, in the same Sacra∣ments, and the same Worship; onely the Dissenters disallow some outward adiaphorous Ceremonies of their Church. Again, To make them Schisma∣tics, that is, Obstinate or Ambitious Dissenters, there must be Conviction and Contumacy: But in regard that neither the one nor the other appears against them, it follows, That they dissent out of Integrity and Constan∣cy, and consequently are no way liable to the Severity of the Statute, especially if the Preamble, as it is taken in Law, be the Key of the Statute. Seeing then that the Dissenters, where there is no proof of Petulancy or Ambitious Ends, cannot be said to be Schismatics, and consequently not obnoxious to the Law, it remains, that they must be Brethren, professing the same Fundamentals of Doctrine and Worship. And then it seems very hard, That the Severity of Persons who call themselves Divines, and Teachers of the Doctrine of Charity, should stretch and strain a Law to encourage Accusers of the Brethren, and to lay violent hands upon those, to whom it never meant any disturbance. And 'tis look'd upon as a strange and unhappy disagreement between the Common Lawyer and the Divine, that the one should take it for a Charitable Maxim, That Sum∣mum Ius est summa Injuria; while Men that pretend to be actuated by Divinity, and the Example of Christ, pressing Summum Ius yet with so much inveteracy, advance Summam Injuriam, to the prejudice of Bre∣thren, for inconsiderable Differences. Blessed are the Peace-makers, saith our most charitable Saviour. Which Sacred Truth of his, from his own
Lips, creates a just Appeal to all Rational Men, how far dissonant from this Doctrine of their Head and grand Instructer those Persons are, who avoiding the healing Doctrine of Unity, make their Pulpits ring with nothing but corrosive Invectives and Satyrs against Friend and Foe, Brethren and Schismatics, under the general Notion of Fanaticism; for∣getting the constant Rule, That he onely teaches well, that well distinguishes. Certainly it can never be thought that it should proceed from the Dictates of Reason and Conscience, that they who ought to come with Healing in their Doctrine, should make it their Business to exasperate and incence the Civil Power, meerly to establish an unlawful Hierarchie over the Consciences of their Brethren. They that first shook off the Roman Toke, thought it ex∣pedient not to make a total and absolute Change; but guided by Reasons of State, left several of the Ceremonies, Popish Ceremonies, untouch'd, which re∣main among us to this day; as, the Surplice, and with some th Rail'd Altar, Second Service there perform'd, Tapers, with this difference, that the Papists are lighted, and ours not; and lastly, a particular Reverence to the East, as if God were more individually present in the Chancel, than in the Belfry. But now that the State has no occasion for those Fears, now that the People uni∣versally desire to be freed from these Relicks of Superstition, for some Persons to insist upon it, and with so much obstinacy impose as a Duty, what was onely retain'd for State-convenience, as to raise a Persecution of Tender Consci∣ences for the sake of pure Ceremony, it is believed, that were those famous Re∣formers now alive, they would not have been angry with those that so readily sought the Accomplishment of what they left imperfect. The Law was made to punish Mutiny, Rebellion, and Insurrection, against the State and Civil Government; not to harrase the Liberties and Properties of Men for not conforming to the Impositions of Ecclesiastical Ambition. What tho the Civil Ma∣gistrate have been so careful to make Provision for the Repose and Quiet of the Kingdom? it may be thought a hard Chapter, that the peevishness and choler of some Men should turn the Stream of that Rigour, where no Proof is made, upon pretence of Breach and Disobedience. How ill will it sound in the Ears of Posterity, when they shall hear of Protestants being so severly dealt with for Trifles of Difference? How much does it at present advance the mirth of Popery, to see the Protestants doing their Business, and by some ∣ing Disunion among themselves, opening a way for Self-destruction, and the Inroads of Superstition, which otherwise the Papists were never able to hope for. Certainly the Profession of Divinity teaches Men to be of another Temper, and to have a Chancery of Charity always open in their Hearts, to mitigate and compose, not to exasperate and provoke the Civil Magistrate, especially in Concerns not of the Government, but of their own Interest. Some People will not have their Children sign'd with the Cross; others meet about five together in a place; and therefore let them be fin'd, let their Goods be seiz'd and embezel'd, and their Persons imprison'd: For the Law is of our side, and we will not remit a Tittle of its utmost Rigour. A severe way of Proceeding, that can never be thought agreeable to the Examples or Doctrine either of Christ or his Apostles. If such Persons did but consider how much more fragrant the Memory of a Cranmer smells in History, than that of a Bon∣ner, they would surely steer another Course. Nor can they be thought well to weigh with themselves that of Vis unita est fortior, and the Doctrine of the divided House, while by a fatal disagreement with their Brethren about outward Forms and unnecessary Circumstances, they render themselves less able to withstand the Impetuosity of daily-menacing Popery. That is no∣thing, the Decree is gone forth, and must be obey'd; and though the Preamble of the
Law may be avoided, the Body of it, more explanatory of it self, admits, no Evasion. For the Law positively says, That if any Person or Persons, above the Age of Sixteen years, &c. shall be present at any Assembly, Conventicle, or Meet∣ing, under colour or pretence of any Exercise of Religion, in other manner than according to the Liturgie and Practise of the Church of England, &c. Where there shall be Five or more Persons assembled, over and above those of the Hous∣hold, &c. As to the first part of the Words, Whoever shall be present at any Assembly or Meeting, under pretence or colour of any Exercise of Religion, &c. some Que∣stions do arise upon the fair accompt of Reason and Policy. 1. Whether the meaning of the Words extend themselves to such an Ex∣ercise of Religion which is truly Christian, and according to the direct Inter∣pretation of Scripture? 2. Or whether onely such a Religion as carries onely a pretence and colour, without any truth and sincerity? As to the first, it is most certain, That the most pure and Christian Exer∣cise of Devotion carries with it a pretence and colour, as well as the false one, though it be onely that of serving and performing our Duty to God. Now then it can never be imagin'd, that the Intention of this Law was ever to prevent the Exercise of Devotion and true Piety. let the Place or the Number be more or less, in a rational Proportion. For, if so, the Statute would be void in it self; in regard that all unbyass'd Casuists, Lawyers, and Divines agree, That all Humane Laws made against the Law of God, are ipso facto annull'd as to any Obligation upon the Conscience. Seeing therefore it cannot be thought, that this Law intendeth the De∣struction of it self, there must be a looking backward to the Reason and Policy of the Law, which from the Preamble is apparent to be onely the prevention of Disloyalty and Insurrection, for the Repose and Tranquillity of the Kingdom. Now then let a Meeting be suppos'd, though of more than Five or Ten; yet if at this Meeting there be nothing done that tends to Disloyalty, Insurrection, or disturbance of the Publick Peace, the Law hath its End, and can take no far∣ther notice, there being no Breach of the Law, and consequently no occasion of Punishment. And this is collected from Reason it self; for, should any other Constructi∣on be put upon the Words, it would be contrary to the Law of God, as in∣tended to prevent the true and real Worship of God, under pretence of Inno∣vation and Disloyalty. A Thought, an Intention, which it were a Crime to imagine such Worthy and Pious Legislators ever dream'd of, however the mean∣ing of the Law may be strain'd in the absence of its Makers. Now that such a Meaning of the Act, as it is inforc'd, is contrary to the Word of God, is apparent from the Scripture it self: Acts 28. And Paul dwelt two years in his hired house, and received all that came to him, preaching the Kingdom of God, no man forbidding him. 1 Tim. 2. I will therefore that men pray every where; with several others. Nor will it serve as an Objection, to say, That the Times are otherwise, now that there are such plenty of Publick Chur∣ches: For, if they be possess'd by such as will not admit their fellow-Chri∣stians to come together, without prejudice to their Consciences, 'tis the same thing to them, as if those Places were not at all. Which being a clear confirmation, that God may be Worshipped in Spirit and Truth in any Place, or at any Time; 'tis as clear, that the Meaning of this Law cannot reach the Exercise of Real Piety. For, if the Worship in it self be Evil, it is not to be endur'd in Four; if consonant to the Word of God, the Number of Fourscore cannot render it criminal.
But here in regard there is so much insisting and stress put upon the word Conventi∣cle, it will be much to be clearing the meaning of the Act, to enquire in to the Na∣ture of the word, and whether it be not taken too unwarily in an ill sense, by those that would extend the reason and meaning of this Act beyond its limits? A Conventicle then in the general sense is a certain place appointed for the Assembling and coming together of People to some purpose or other; In the particular sense it signi∣fies the Assembly it self there met. If then the purpose be for the sake of Divine Worship, it will be fit next to enquire the Difference between a Church-Assembly and a Conventicle-Assembly. That which constitutes a Church, is an Assembly or Congrega∣tion of people called to the state of Grace by Prayer, by Teaching and Hearing the Word, and the due administration of the Sacraments. The Efficient cause of this Assembly is the Holy Trinity, in general, particularly Christ. The form of this Assembly consists in a double Communion of the Assembly with Christ as the Head, and of the particular Members among themselves. The matter of this Assembly are the persons or several Members called to the Covenant of Grace. The end of this Assembly is the glory of God, and their own Salvation. The marks of the real Christianity and legality of this Assem∣bly are the true Preaching the Word, and due Administration of the Sacrament? If then the same substantial Efficient cause, the same substantial matter, the same substantial Form, the same substantial end, the same substantial Marks of a truly Christian As∣sembly be found in a House or any other convenient place, though not adorned with Steeples or Stone Arches, call them Presbyterians or Dissenters, or what you please they center the main fundamentals of Faith and Doctrine, differ only in some slight and outward Ceremonies, and are therefore an Essential Body of the Protestant Reli∣gion. And if there be any External Circumstances in dispute, they are to be argued and determined among themselves, not by the Arbitrary Power of a Justice of the Peace, who is an Officer only of the Peace, and not of the Conscience. So that it can never be thought that the determination of Christian Prudence will ever grant it to be rational that this Law was ever made for the prevention of such Conventicles, which must prove the suppression of much true Piety and Devotion. This makes some people think that Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is in a very weak condition and most de∣ficient of it self, when it is so earnest and clamarous after the Assistance of the Civil Magistrate. And indeed it is easily demonstrable in Story, that there was nothing more advanced the beginnings of the Reformation of England than the weakness which Henry 8. perceived in the Arguments which the Papists brought against the Reformers in all their Disputes. And therefore a Convocation Dispute had been much more proper for this Controversie than the destructive Arguments of Distresses and Crown Office Writs. Which, if it were put to the Test, there are many that questi∣on, whether the Law-Provokers might not come by the worst. For as to those things which are called the Rites and Ceremonies of true Worship, true Religion has none but what God has prescribed in His Word; and they are looked upon, either as parts or helps to our Devotion. As parts of Devotion, they consist in promulgation of the Word, the Administration of the Sacraments and Prayer, which requires also decent composure of gesture and posture. As helps to Devotion, they are divided into Fasting and Vows. And these are all the Rites or Ceremonies of true Worship. Cere∣monies of Form, are apt to wander into Superstition if not plain Idolatry. And there∣fore it is, that some unbyassed person, not without Reason, fear, That the Dissenters who have abandoned all, would have much more Argument on their side, than they whoretain some. It being thus apparent, that the Law was never intended to prevent such Assem∣blies, whose only end of Meeting is to Worship and Glorifie God, and that too ac∣cording to the same Fundamentals which the Statute enforcers profess, it now re∣mains to examin, whether the Evidence offered be sufficient to make the Dissenters guilty of the Crimes assigned by the Law, viz. Disloyalty and Insurrection. First then as for colour and pretence, they are only Non-Appearances lodg'd in the Heart of Man; which are only disclosed to the Omniscience of God himself. And therefore to judge of colour and pretence appertains only to God, and not to any Law: from whence
arose that common Maxim, that De non apperentibus, the Law takes no Cognizance. Much less is in the power of an Informer to make Oath of colour or pretence, until colour and pretence break forth into some overt and apparent act which may afford matter for Testimony and proof. From whence it is plain, that unless there be due and sufficient proof made of false Doctrine, seditious words, or contrivances tend∣ing to Insurrection and Disloyalty, which are the breaches of the Law; and Law can never punish, where there is no breach committed. Nor does the Conscience of any Magistrate oblige him to sine and levy upon the bare Information of colour or pre∣tence. As for the addition of those words, Do or may contrive, it seems somewhat repugnant to reason, that Plots and Contrivances should ever be carried on in the Pub∣lick Assemblies of Women and Children; so that the fear seems only to be of the Teachers moving the people to Sedition. But as for that, one would think it should be an Argument rather for the permission of Conventicles, it being a thing far more easie to discover a man that Preaches open Sedition, than one that goes from House to House, clandestinly insinuating the same Doctrine. Nor is this branch Indepen∣dant, but casts its influence into the whole Crime described and intended by the Act thus embody'd. If any person or persons shall be present at any Conventicle, &c. under coulour or pretence of any exercise of Religion, in other manner than according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England. Perhaps some persons carry away with the present torment of unwary Passion, may from hence assent that there is no other ex∣ercise of Religion, that can be truly real and sincere, but only colourable and pre∣tended, which is not performed in the very words of the Liturgy, according to the Common acceptation of the Word in England. To which though there were no other answer to be given, yet the consequent words, and the practise of the Church clearly contradict such an uncharitable Paraphrase, for that in all Parochial Churches it is the general custom to Pray both before and after Sermon. But if the nature of the word Liturgy be duly considered, that  or Liturgy is not more than the Office of Prayer: the Compilers themselves call the English Litur∣gy, an order for Morning and Evening Prayer, or a set Form of Prayer, whereby it becomes only a Species of the Grand Genus Prayer or Oration, by which with a true and humble contrition of Heart, we address our selves to God, concerning such things as are consentaneous to his Holy Will; and this divided into two parts Invoca∣tion, and Thanksgiving. Now suppose that the Liturgy of England, now the most exact Liturgy in the World, as most certainly it is not, it cannot be thought that the Dissenters are obliged by this Statute to use no other Prayers than what are set down in the Liturgy, For then the Law enforcers may be presum'd to lie under the Penalties of the Statute themselves. Who after the full performance of all the duties of Prayer, which is ordered in the Liturgy both for Morning and Evening Service, if it may not be said, out of a contempt of the Liturgy, yet somewhat to the discredit of the Li∣turgy, are never satisfied till they have given it the supplement of their tedious and vainly Ostentatious additions of super-excellent and super-fine: which after a full per∣formance of all the duties of Innovation and Thanksgiving, seems in them a kind of Tautology forbidden in Scripture. However because the Dissenters using the same form of Prayer, though not in the same words, avoid that inconvenience, therefore they must be reduced into obedience to something not well considered what it is, by Constabls and Informers. But there is a more exquisite Liturgy yet, the  or Liturgy prescribed by our Saviour himself; which though out of Veneration it be reduced into one Prayer for general use; yet is no other than a set form of Prayer, teaching heedless Mortals, who might else be extravagant in their Petitions, the true matter of Prayer; that is, what we are to implore from God, and what we are to give thanks for, as enjoy'd. Examin then the Prayers of the Dissenters, and if they differ either in the Cause, the Matter, the Form, or end from the English Liturgy of Men, mentioned in the Act, or the Heavenly Liturgy of Christ, let them be delivered over to all deserved punishment; but if their Prayers be agreeable to the prescrib'd forms of both; nay, if they be agreeable to the Coelestial Liturgy, though not according to the
Verbatim of the Establish'd Liturgy of England; 'tis a hard case that they should by any Statute be adjudged not to exercise such a Religion. If it be objected, that the Notions of many are Abortive, and through weakness may deserve Reprehension, there is an easie way to remedy those Errors by imposing a more equal Injunction by the Authority of Church Discipline, that no person should presume to ascend the Pulpit with ex tempore Raptures. For confirmation then that there is no need of using of Form and Order, so the matter be the same, there are many of the Disciples Prayers recorded in Scripture, and there is no question to be made but that they were acceptable to God; and yet we do not read they used the absolute Form prescribed by our Saviour, but expres∣sed themselves in other words, though altogether agreeing for matter. Upon the whole, suppose this Question should be put, Whether the Apostles did use any other Form than that which was taught them by Christ? There is, no doubt, but the Answer will be, They did not. Put then this Question to the Informer; Did the Dissenters use any other Prayers than what were agreeable to the Church of England? In the first place, 'tis ten thou∣sand to one, whether he be a Competent judge. If he be not, he stakes his Consci∣ence at a dreadful hazard; for it behoves him to Swear positively in the Affirmative, or else in justice his Information, and all his hopes of Gain, are lost. And thus by a rigid Prosecution of uncharitable severity, a necessitous and greedy wretch is brought to this tempting Dilemma, either to Perjure himself, or lose his Expectation. Again, The Liturgy it self is not always read altogether; but on some days more, on some days less. The Dissenters perhaps use least of all, yet they use some, for they read the Reading Psalms, A first and second Lesson, and afterwards make use of Singing Psalms: So then it being apparent that the degree of Comparison does not annihilate the subject of the Comparison, it may be presumed that the Dissenters are present at their Conventicles, positively according to the Liturgy of the Church of England. Which things not being considered, how uncharitably do they fall under the censure of Lavish and Inveterate Pulpits? In the last place, though it would be very unreasonable to disallow what has been al∣ready said; yet should it be contradicted, the next words, or the practise of the Church, will certainly give relief. For it is the practice of the Church of England, to Read and Sing the Psalms of David, to read the first and second Lesson, and so do the Dissenters; many of them also militate under the same Ordination: And if there be any that do not, 'tis presumed they might soon be better advised, the refusal deserving reproof if they may be admitted, being certainly to be look'd upon as an obstinate piece of weakness. But which is more, as to the Harmony of practice, they use the same Sa∣craments, though perhaps with some small difference in the Form and Ceremony of Administration, which one would think might be easily reconciled without all this Combustion. There is one thing more to be considered upon the account of Moral Equity: That though the Act of Ʋniformity made in this His Majesties Raign, it is here ex∣presly declared, That no other Form or Ceremony shall be used, but what is prescribed in that Act, or in the Book of Common Prayer: Yet both by the Act and the Book it plainly appears, that the Prosecutors of the Dissenters make no scruple to dissent from what is there Enacted, while they use several Ceremonies that are not there, and omit much of what is there, as their going up and bowing to the Altar, and reading second Service there. Their coming out of the Pulpit, and reading Part of the Com∣munion Service in their Desks, or at the Altar again, and giving no Blessing at all in Pulpit: Their setting the Communion Table Altar-wise, Richly adorned at the East end of the Church, whereas it ought to be placed either in the Body of the Church, or in some convenient place, Covered with a clean Linnen-Cloath. Their Turning their Faces all of a Sudden to the East, and bowing to the Name of Jesus, and not at the Name of God or Christ. These Dispensations argue an apparent Non-Conformity, or Over-Conformity; the same thing in strickness and partiality one among another: So that it seems a Trans∣gression
not only against Charity, but against Common Justice, to prosecute those that do no more than only Non-Conform to those very Ceremonies which they them∣selves regard less of a publick Statute, either neglect, or over act at their own will and pleasure. And for a further confirmation of the Nonconformity of our most Regular (so pre∣tending themselves) Conformists, point blank even against the very Law of the Land; let them that please but consider, how many there are that dispence with Non-Re∣sidence, and Pluralities, to the deteriment of many deserving persons that want, and positively against the Statute of the 21 of H. 8. and yet no question but they would think it hard measure to be prosecuted upon that Law. So Partial is a man to forgive those failings in himself, which he Prosecutes in others. However, because all the meekness of Perswasion and Argument will not stop the Career of some mens Impetuosity in the Prosecution of this Act, it will not be from the purpose to cast an Eye upon the Executive part of the Statute. In order to which the most considerable Instructions are couched in the first and eleventh Section. The Instructions of the first Section run thus. That it shall and may be lawful to and for any one or more Iustices of the Peace within the limits, &c. Where such Offence shall be committed, or for the Chief Magistrate of the Place or Corporation, and upon proof of such Offence, either by the Confession, or Oath of two Witnesses, or by Notorious Evidence and Circumstance of the Fact, to make a Record under their Hands and Seals, which Record shall to all intents, &c. be taken to be a full Conviction, that thereupon, the said Justices, &c. shall impose the sum of, &c. From which words it is clear, that by this clause no power is given to any Ma∣gistrate to make out any general Warrant upon this Act till after Conviction by two Wit∣nesses, or Confession of the Offender. Neither has any Constable to do with any such gene∣ral Warrant in reference to this Act, unless the Warrant grounded upon such a Record as is mention'd in the Act, upon confession or proof and conviction of the Party by two Witnesses be given into his hands. Whence arises this Question, Whether any Consta∣ble or Head-borough that acts in relation to this Statute, by vertue of a Power not Au∣thorized by the literal words of the Law, do not act at his own peril? 2. Whether he shall incur any penalty for not doing that which the Law requires not at his Hands? For by this part of the Law it is required only that the Witnesses should be the In∣formers. But by general Warrants the Constables, &c. are compelled to turn In∣formers themselves, and to find themselves work to accuse their Neighbours on pur∣pose to find themselves yet more work to disturb and distrain upon their Goods and Persons: A duty which the literal sense of this Paragraph does not in the least im∣pose upon them. But the Eleventh Section is more particular in these words: And be it farther Enacted, &c. That if any Constable, &c. who shall know or be credibly informed of any such Meetings held within his Precinct, and shall not give In∣formation thereof, &c. according to his duty, and endeavour the Conviction of the Parties, but shall wilfully omit the performance of his duty in the Execution of the Act, and shall be convicted thereof, shall forfeit the sum of five pounds. By this Paragraph it is very plain indeed, that if the Constable do either know of himself, or be credibly informed, and do not do his duty he forfeiteth 5 l. but still if he neither know nor be credibly informed, he is not bound to be so sedulous as to go upon the Hunt. But suppose the Constable, &c. should either know of himself, and be credibly informed, and should do his duty, that is, give Information, and should receive a Warrant to break open the House and enter: yet finding nothing of Resistance, he is still but where he was, in regard that not having been there from the beginning to the end, he cannot be positive, whether the Persons there Assem∣bled did exercise a Religion according to the Liturgy or Practice of the Church of England or not, which if they did, he has no power either to take their Names, or apprehend their Persons, unless they should be so imprudent as to make resistance, and give an occasion for their Military Power to be raised for their suppression, for
then as Mutineers and Seditious persons, they break their own peace by distur∣bing the Kings, and by making it appear they are the Persons intended by this Act, render themselves obnoxi us not only to the Penalties of this but of much more severe Laws. From which enjoyning of the Military Officers to be aiding and assisting to the Constables with armed Force, Reason may not impro∣perly collect the sense and meaning of the Act to be no other than what has been already presum'd. For Armed Force and Constabls, could never be intended by the Law against Passive submission and obedience. Naked Swords and Con∣stables Staves could never be intended by Christian Legislators to compel the compliance of sincere and upright Conscience, to things of small con∣cernment in respect of those Fundamentals wherein the Prosecutors and the Prosecuted both agree. And therefore while the Civil Magistrate has taken such extraordinary care for the publick safety and tranquility of the Nation, it should not be the aim of others to carve out for them their Care, the support and maintenance of any By Interest whatever: An aim too apparent, by their publick dissatisfaction, and open exclaiming against that noble Act of his Maje∣sties most Royal Goodness, His Declaration for Liberty of Conscience (too un∣happily severe those Counsels that removed the Land-mark of his Regal Benigni∣ty. A presumption that they believe themselves more worthy or more able to manage that part of Prerogative themselves, and grutch him the exercise of his Right. Whereas the Legislators with more Duty provide that nothing in their Act shall extend to invalidate or avoid his Majesties Supermacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs. But the Dissenting Protestants acknowledge their Soveraign to be both King and Priest: A King as he is the Supream Head of the Government; a Priest as the Supream Head of the Church. To whom, as their lawful Soveraign and Head of the Government, as they have been alwaies ready to yield the utmost of their obedience, so shall they never withdraw from him the utmost of their Fidelity. And from whose Priestly Office they have yet hopes to feel the influ∣ences of his former Grace and Mercy, when their Cause shall be better exa∣mined. For 'tis not the Exasperation of the Pens of Wicked men continually scribling Division, nor the Subornations of Popery to fix imaginary Plots, and load their Innocence with the guilt and Villanies of others, but the Truth of their Profession, and their upright walking before God and Man, which they hope will at length turn the Reproaches and Calumnies of their Enemies upon their own Heads. 'Tis Ʋnion which all True Protestants desire, which they daily im∣plore from God. There is nothing but Ʋnion wanting in this Rich and Plenti∣ful Land. Which as it is only obstructed by Papists, or persons papistically affe∣cted, as it is apparent by their daily Machinations and contrivances to unsetle and weaken the true Protestant Interest; so there can be no greater Argument for Protestants to unite with Protestants against the Common Enemy of their Religi∣on. From these and Grounds of the same Nature, there are some who have drawn this general Conclusion, That it would be more conducing to the good of the Kingdom, and the Benefit of the Protestant Religion, that the Penal Laws against Non-Conformists, in reference to differences of Religion, might not be put in Execution, but forborn, till our most Gracious Soveraign, and his great Council the Parliament, should take the state of Divided Protestants into their wise Consideration, and reduce things to a happier Legal Establishment. Eor proof of which it may not be altogether improper to give a short Reca∣pitulation of the Reasons brought in defence of the Position. 1. That it cannot be good to execute the 35 of Eliz. which the whole Par∣liament thought dangerous to the whole Protestant Interest in England, and did as far as in them lay disannul.
2. It cannot be proper to execute that Law upon them who cannot proper∣ly be guilty of the Crime at which the Law aims. 3. It cannot be proper to execute any Law upon Dissenting Protestants, which was promoted by men Popishly inclined, and which since appeared to be Papists, as was the Five Mile Act. 4. Because it seems somewhat preposterous to rid the Land of Dissenting Protestants, persons professing true Religion and Loyalty, yet leave the Papists the Enemies of the King and Church to stay behind. 5. Because the Penal Laws are to be inflicted upon the proper objects, as Seditious Sectaries, disloyal persons, Hypocrites, that make Religion a cloak and pretence to install principles of Schism and Sedition, not upon Meetings where there is no tendency to any such Designs. 6. A sixth Argument is drawn from the Piety of the Non-Conformists Prin∣ciples, and the Peaceableness of their Behaviour, found so to be from the Ex∣perience of many years. 7. Because they are Protestants; and it seems not so well done to use Prote∣stants, the Kingdoms Friends, and Strength worse than Papists, the Enemies of the Kingdom and Protestant Religion. 8. Because it is not good to execute the Law with a heavy Hand upon all and every Offender, without making a difference between one man and ano∣ther, between one Offence and another. 9. Because by their publick Preaching their judgments and practises are best discovered, and being in the Head of the younger Dissenters, they are as Directions and Examples to them, to keep them from dangerous Excur∣sions. 10. Because that when pious and good men have their publick Liberty, and make use of that Liberty only to instruct the People in their Duty to God and the King, &c. one chief end of the Magistrates care of the State is obtained, which is to maintain sound Doctrine. 11. Because thereby they will be better enabled and encouraged to perform other good Offices to the King and State. 2. Then in Reference to the Church, these Reasons are added: 1. Because agreeing in Fundamentals with their Prosecutors, they are a great Addition of Strength against the force and subtleties of Rome. 2. Because thereby Schism will come to a greater closure, when the Church shall be satisfied in their profitable Doctrine and peaceable Behaviour, which will create a greater desire of Peace and Union. 3. Because by this publick Preaching, Multitudes of poor Souls that will go no where else, are in the way of Salvation and Profession of the Gospel, of which some Divines of the Church of England are so deeply sensible, that they Treat the Non-Conformists as Friends and fellow Labourers. All which Reasons are more at large discussed in the Conformists Plea for the Non-Conformists, to which the Reader is referred. There remains now no more than only the humble Proposal of some few Queries, and so to conclude. First in Reference to the Church. 1. Whether a Dissenter may be lawfully prohibited from Preaching the Word of God in truth and sincerity, at any time, or in any place? 2. Whether by the blessings and rewards that are promised to those that pro∣pagate the Doctrine of Christ, they are not obliged to do it?
3. Whether the Example of Christ and his Disciples does not admit of Preach∣ing in Houses, Streets and Fields to more than five in a Company? 4. Whether it be not something Erroneons for the Law of Man to contradict the Law— 5. Whether the Passive Obedience of Persons prohibited by a Law from preaching the Word of God, be not destructive to the propagation and mainte∣nance of the Gospel of Christ? 2. In reference to the Law of the Land. 1. Whether the Opinion of the Commons of England, That the prosecution of Protestant Dissenters, upon the penal Laws, is at this time grievous to the Subject, a weakning of the protestant Interest, and an encouragement to Popery, and dangerous to the peace of the Kingdom, ought not to be taken into a more seri∣ous Consideration? 2. Whether the prosecution of Dissenters does not seem a little strange, as to the present timing of it, when the Papists lie under several Convictions of seek∣ing the Ruin of the protestant Religion in the Kingdom, and when the Kingdom is under such fears and Jealousies of the Predominancy of their Abettors? 3. Whether it be not more proper to begin with Popery before they go about to extirpate Non-Conformity? 4. Whether they who have with so much inveteracy rak'd into the forgotten and pardon'd Miscarriages of the Presbyterians, had not better have spar'd their pains, as nothing at all to the purpose, except to what is unbecoming either peaceable or wise men? 5. Fifthly, Whether a Law that creates Arbitrary Distresses and Imprison∣ments, be not contrary to the Fundamentals of Magna Charta. 3. In Reference to the Law of Scripture and Nature. 1. Whether the proceedings of the Law enforcers be not contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, Whatever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even the same unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets? 2. Whether it be according to Scripture; For Protestants acknowledging the same Jesus, the same Scripture, and agreeing in the Fundamentals of Religion, only for differences in human Ceremonies to tear and devour one another? 3. Whether in point of Appeal to make Parties themselves Judges, be a thing usual? 4. Whether in the prosecution of Protestants by Protestants, to make use of Informers and Promooters, which the Lord Cook calls, Turbiolum Hominum Genus, instead of Christian advice and solid Arguments, be according to Scripture? 4. In point of Policy. 1. Whether it be not against the Rules of Policy, for English-men of the same Religion, by cruelties and severities to destroy one another, which must of ne∣cessity weaken the Force, and destroy the Trade of the Nation? It being one of the Lord Cook's Maxims, That a King can never be poor when his Subjects are Rich; And therefore, 2. Whether it be not against the Rules of Policy to set up a Law for the encou∣ragement of vexatious Informers, who under the reverend Mantle of Love and Justice (to use the Lord Cook's own words) instituted for the protection of the Innocent, and the good of the Common-wealth, vex and depauperize the Subject for malice and private ends, never for love of Justice?
3. Whether it be not contrary to the Rules of prudence to make attempts in fruitless undertakings, since it is found by Experience, that persecution rather en∣creases than appeases Enmity, and the common Maxim is, that Sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae? 4. Whether forbearance and mildness would not absolutely remove the scan∣dal given to the protestant Churches abroad, and endear us to our Forraign pro∣testant Alliances? 5. Whether it be prudence to afflict Protestants at home, when we entertain afflicted Protestants from abroad? 6. Whether by these unnatural Divisions the necessary Leagues and Tyes of Friendship and acquaintance, common Trust and Confidence among men, may not in time be broken, to the ruin of all Society? 7. Whether the wicked distinctions of Tory and Whigg, &c. were not set on foot to encrease the Dissentions between Protestants, and whether the Inventi∣on and the Malicious continuance of them, do not deserve a punishment equal to the worst of Felonies? 5. In Reference to the Executive part. 1. Whether the Issuing out of general Warrants by the Justices of the Peace not Authorized by the Statute, do not render them obnoxious to other Laws. 2. Whether it be not almost morally impossible to Swear a Dissenters Meet∣ing to be contrary to the Liturgy or practice of the Church of England, where there is no overt act of publick Disturbance, or seditious Doctrine? 3. Whether the prosecution of this Law do not afford several advantages to the spiteful and revengeful to reck their Spleen upon their Neighbours upon every slight disgust or falling out? 4. Whither it do not afford great opportunitis of Combination between some needy Justice of the Peace, and their more needy Associate the Informer, to pro∣secute unlawful Gain; it being the general complaint of treble distresses made without any Return? 5. Whether the Constable not being authorized to break open any door, or force and Gate or Hedge, if the Informer be so fool-hardy as to do either, and the Constable follow him, the Constable and the Informer are not liable to the Law? 6. Whether there be any Penalty above 5 l. (directed by this Act) to be laid upon a Constable that shall be negligent in making Distresses pursuant to his War∣rants, it being a try'd Case at Bury Assizes in Suffolk, 1678. or 1679. before the L. C. J. Scroggs, where no more was recorded, although the Warrants were for some hundreds of pounds? 7. Whether it be not positively against the Statute for the Observation of the Lords Day, by which it is expresly Enacted, That no Warrants shall be served upon that Day, but in Cases of Treason, Felony, or Breach of the Peace, to serve a Warrant upon a Religious Meeting? This being the State of the Dissenters Case, there nothing remains behind, but for that most Sacred and Heavenly vertue Charity, to give up a true determina∣tion, accroding to the Precepts of Scripture, Reason and Morality, and the Rules of Christian Government. Although I cannot think but that most men are satisfied, that the Act of the 35 of Eliz. is expired, yet I thought it might not be amiss to subjoin hereunto the said Act at large, with all other Statutes made since that Act that have any Re∣ference to it; there have been so many solid Arguments given, by men under∣standing in the Law, to prove the expiration of it, that I shall not adventure to say any thing after them. The most material Act upon which Dissenters, are likely to be prosecuted, is that of the 22 of his present Majesty, which hath been the Subject of most of the preceding Discourse, therefore I have also inserted that at laage.
VESTIGIA VERITATIS, &c. An Act to retain the Queens Majesties Subjects in their due obedience. FOr the preventing and avoiding of such great inconveniences and perilsRast. Stat. vol. 2. c. 1. fo. 397. as might happen and grow by the wicked and dangerous practices of Seditious Sectaries and disloyal persons, Be it enacted by the Queens most excellent Majesty and by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled,This Parlia∣ment began the 19 of February, in the 35th of the Queen, and was dissolved the 10th of A∣pril following. and by the authority of the same, That if any person or persons above the age of 16 years which shall obsti∣nately refuse to repair to some Church, Chappel, or usual place of Common-Prayer, to hear Divine Service established by her Majesties Laws and Statutes, in that behalf made, and shall forbear to do the same by the space of a Month next after, without lawful Cause, shall at any time after 40 days next after the end of this Session of Parliament by Printing, Writing, or Express Words or Speeches advisedly and purposely practise or go about to move, or persuade any of her Majesties Subjects or any other within her Highness Realms or Domini∣ons, to deny, withstand, and impugn her Majesties Power and Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, or to that end or purpose shall advisedly or maliciously move or persuade any other Person whatsoever to forbear or abstain from coming to Church to hear Di∣vine Service or to receive the Communion according to her Majesties Laws and Statutes aforesaid, or to come to or to be present at any unlawful Assemblies, Conventicles, or Meetings; under colour or pretence of any Exercise of Reli∣gion, contrary to her Majesties said Laws and Statutes, or if any person or per∣sons which shall obstinately refuse to repair to some Church, Chappel, or u∣sual place of Common Prayer, and shall forbear by the space of a Month to hear Divine Service as is aforesaid, shall after the said forty days either of him or themselves or by the motion, persuasion, entertainment or allurement of any other, willingly joyn in or be present at any such Assemblies, Conventicles or Meetings, under colour or pretence of any such Exercise of Religion contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm as is aforesaid; That then every such person so of∣fending as aforesaid, and being thereof lawfully convicted, shall be committed to prison, there to remain without Bayl or Mainprise, until they shall conform and yield themselves to come to some Church, Chappel or usual place of Common Prayer and hear Divine Service, according to her Majesties Laws and Statutes aforesaid, and to make such open Submission and Declaration of their said Con∣formity as hereafter in this Act is declared and appointed. Provided always and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any such person or persons which shall offend against this Act as aforesaid, shall not within three Months next after they shall be convicted for their said offence, conform themselves to the obedience of the Laws and Statutes of this Realm in coming to the Church to hear Divine Service, and in making such Publick Con∣fession and Submission as hereafter in this Act is appointed and expressed, being thereunto required by the Bishop of the Diocess or any Justice of the Peace of the County where the same person shall happen to be, or by the Minister or Curate of the Parish, that in every such case every such offender being thereunto warned & required by any Justice of the Peace of the same County where such Offenders shall then be, shall upon his and their corporal Oath before the Justices of the Peace in
the open Quarter Sessions of the same County, or at the Assizes and Gaol-delive∣ry of the same County before the Justices of the same Assises and Gaol delivery,Abjure. Abjure this Realm of England and all other the Queens Majesties Dominions for ever, unless her Majesty shall licence the party to return; And thereupon shall depart out of this Realm, at such Haven or Port, and within such time as shall in that behalf be assigned and appointed by the said Justices before whom such abjuration shall be made, unless the same offender be letted or stayed by such lawful and reasonable means or causes as by the Common Laws of this Realm are permitted and allowed in cases of abjuration for Felony. And in such Cases of let or stay, then within such reasonable and convenient time after as the Common Law requireth in case of abjuration for felony as is aforesaid. And that the Ju∣stices of Peace before whom any such abjuration shall happen to be made as is a∣foresaid, shall cause the same presently to be entred of Record before them, and shall certifie the same to the Justices of Assises and Gaol delivery of the said County, at the next Assises or Gaol-delivery to be holden in the same County. And if any such offenders which by the tenour and intent of this Act is to be abjured as is aforesaid, shall refuse to make such abjuration as is aforesaid, or after such abjura∣tion made, shall not go to such Haven and within such time as is before appoint∣ed, and from thence depart out of this Realm according to this present, Act, or after such his departure shall return or come again into any her Majesties Realms or Dominions without her Majesties special licence in that behalf first had and ob∣tained: That then in every such Case the person so offending shall be adjudged a Felon, and shall suffer as in case of Felony without benefit of Clergy. And furthermore be it enacted by the Authority of this present Parlia∣ment. That if any Person or Persons that shall at any time hereafter, offend against this Act, shall before he or they be so warned or required to make ab∣juration according to the Tenour of this Act, repair to some Parish Church on some Sunday or other Festival day, and then and there hear Divine Service, and at the Service time before the Sermon, or reading of the Gospel, make Publick and open Submission and Declaration of his and their Conformity to her Majesties Laws and Statutes as hereafter in this Act is declared and appoint∣ed; that then the same offender shall thereupon be clearly discharged of and from all and every the Penalties and Punishments inflicted or imposed by this Act for any of the Offences aforesaid. The same Submission to be made as hereafter followeth, That is to say: I. A. B. Do humbly confess and acknowledg,The form of the Submissi∣on. that I have greivously offended God in contemning her Majesties Godly and lawful Government and Authority, by absenting my self from Church, and from hearing Divine Service, contrary to the Godly Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and in using and frequenting disordered and unlawful Conventicles and Assemblies, under pretence and colour of exercise of Religion; And I am heartily Sorry for the same, and do acknowledg and testifie in my Conscience that no other Person hath or ought to have any Power or Authority over her Majesty. And I do Promise and protest without any dissimulation or any colour or means of any dispensation, that from henceforth I will from time to time obey and perform her Majesties Laws and Statutes, in repairing to the Church and hearing Di∣vine Service, and do mine uttermost endeavour to maintain and defend the same. And that every Minister or Curate of every Parish where such Submission and Declaration of Conformity shall hereafter be so made by any such Offender as aforesaid, shall presently enter the same into a Book to be kept in every Parish for that purpose, and within ten days next following, shall certifie the same in Writing to the Bishop of the said Diocess. Provided nevertheless, that if any such Offender after such Submission made as is aforesaid, shall afterwards fall into Relapse, or eftsoons, obstinately refuse to repair to some Church, Chappel, or usual place of Common Prayer, to hear Divine Service, and shall forbear the same as aforesaid, or shall come and be present at any such Assemblies, Conventicles, and meetings, under colour or pretence of any Exercise of Religion, contrary to her Majesties Laws and Statutes. That then every such Offender shall lose all such benefit as he or she might otherwise by vertue of this Act, have or enjoy by reason of their said Submission, and shall thereupon stand and remain in such plight, condition
and degree to all intents, as though such Submission had never been made. And for that every Person having House and Family, is in duty bounden to have special regard of the good Government and ordering of the same; Be it enact∣ed by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Person or Persons shall at any time hereafter, relieve, maintain, retain or keep in his or their House or otherwise, any person which shall obstinately refuse to come to some Church, Chappel, or usual place of Common Prayer to hear Divine Service, and shall forbear the same by the space of a Month together, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, that then every Person which shall so relieve, maintain, retain, or keep any such Person offending as aforesaid, after notice thereof to him or them given by the Ordinary of the Diocess, or any Justices of the Assizes of the Circuit, or any Justice of Peace of the County, or the Minister, Curate, or Church-wardens of the Parish where such person shall then be, or by any of them, shall forfeit to the Queens Majesty for every person so relieved, maintained, re∣tained or kept after such notice as aforesaid, Ten Pounds for every Month, that he or they shall so relieve, maintain, retain or keep any such person so offending. Provided nevertheless, that this Act shall not in any wise extend to Punish or impeach any Person or Persons for relieving, maintaining, or keeping his or their Wive, Father, Mother, Child or Children, Wardes, Brother or Sister, or his Wives Father or Mother, not having any certain place of Habitation of their own, or the Husbands or Wives of any of them, or for relieving, main∣taining, or keeping any such person as shall be Committed by Authority to the Custody of any by whom they shall be so relieved, maintained or kept, any thing in this Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding. And for the more speedy levying and recovering for and by the Queens Majesty of all and Singular the Pains, Duties, Forfeitures and Payments, which at any time hereafter shall accrue, grow or be payable by vertue of this Act, or of the Statutes made in the 23th. year of her Majesties Reign concerning Recusants: Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all and every the said Pains, Du∣ties, Forefeitures, and Payments, shall and may be recovered and levied to her Majesties use, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, Information, or otherwise in a∣ny of the Courts commonly called Kings Bench, Common Pleas, or Exche∣quer; in such sort and in all respects as by the ordinary Course of the Com∣mon Laws of this Realm, any other Debt due by any such Person in any other Case should or may be recovered or levied wherein no essoign, Protection or Wa∣ger of Law shall be admitted or allowed. Provided always that the Third Part of the Penalties to be had or received by vertue of this Act, shall be imployed and bestowed to such good and charitable uses, and in such manner and form as is limitted and appointed in the Statute made in the 28th year of her Majesties Reign touching Recusants. Provided also that no Popish Recusant or Feme-covert shall be compelled or bound to abjure by vertue of this Act. Provided also that every person that shall Abjure by force of this Act, or re∣fuse to Abjure being thereunto required as aforesaid, shall forfeit and lose to her Majesty all his Goods and Chattels forever, and shall further lose all his Lands Tenements and Hereditaments, for and during the life of such offender and no longer; And that the Wife of any offender by force of this Act shall not lose her Dower; Nor that any Corruption of Blood shall grow or be by reason of any of∣fence mentioned in this Act; But that the heir of every such offender by force of this Act shall and may after the Death of every offender have and enjoy the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of such offender, as if this Act had not been made. And this Act to continue no longer than the end of the next Session of Parliament.
Anno 39 Eliz. cap. 18. An Act for the reviving, continuance, explanation, perfecting and repealing of divers Statutes. And amongst others it is there thus expressed, viz. ANd wherein the Parliament holden at Westminster the 19.39 Eliz. c. 18. day of Fe∣bruary in the 35th year of the Queens Majesties Reign that now is, there was an Act made, Intituled, An Act to retain the Queens Majesties Subjects in their due Obedience; Be it enacted by the Authority of this present Parlia∣ment that this Act (viz. 35 of Eliz.) as well as the other there recited Statutes and Acts, shall be by Authority of this present Parliament revived, continued, and endure in force and effect until the end of the next Parliament next ensuing. The next Parliament was begun and holden at Westminister the 27th day of October in the 43th of Eliz.43. Eliz. c. 9. Sect. 18. and there continued until the Dissolution thereof, be∣ing the 19th of December next following, Anno 1601. And there in the 9th Chap∣ter, Sect. 18. this 35 Eliz. is again continued by the Statute Intituled, An Act for continuance of divers Statutes, and for repeal of some others. As the 27. Sect.Sect. 27. of the said Act does make to appear. The words are these, Be it enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament that the same shall be continued and re∣main in force until the end of the first Session of the next Parliament. At the Parliament begun and holden at Westminster the 19th day of March,King James began his Reign Anno 1602 March the 24th. 1. Jacobi. ca. 25. Sect. 13. and 24. the first year of King James, and there continued until the 7th of July, Anno 1604 and then prorogued until the 7th of February next following, which ended that Session. In the 25th Chapter Intituled, An Act for continuing and reviveing of di∣vers Statutes, and for repealing of some others, in Sect. the 13th and the 24th this 35 Eliz. and among divers Acts, is again continued in these words, viz. Shall be continued and remain in force until the end of the first Session of the next Parliament. At the Second Session of Parliament begun and holden by Prorogation at West∣minster,Sessio. 2. 3. Jacob. the 5th day of November, in the Third year of King James, and there continued until the 27th of May, and from thence Prorogued till the 18th of November next following, there is no mention at all made of any con∣tinuance of this 35 Eliz. Neither was there any mention made of this said 35 Eliz.3. Session. 4. Jacobi. at the next Ses∣sion of the said Parliament, begun and holden at Westminster, by Prorogation the 18th day of November, in the 4th year of King James, which Session en∣ded the 4th of July, Anno 1607. and then was Prorogued until the 16th day of November next following. Nor during all the Fourth Session of the said Parliament,4. Session. 7 Jacobi. begun and hol∣den by Prorogation at Westmimster, the 19th day of February, in the 7th of King James, and there continued until the 23th day of July, (and then Pro∣rogued until the 16th day of October next following. Anno 1610.) was there any the least mention of a continuance of this said 35 Elizabeth.
The Vacation after Hil. 20. Jac. MEmorand.Huttons Rep. fol. 61. That on Monday the 17th of February at Ser∣jeants-Inn, upon the Assembly of all the Justices to take Consideration upon the Statute of 35 Eliz. c. 1. for the Ab∣juration of Sectaries;Resolutions upon the Sta∣tute of 35 Eliz. c. 1. concern∣ing Sectaries. the Attorny General and Serjeant Crew being there, after the perusal of the Statute, and the continu∣ances thereof, it was first upon debate considered, Whether this Statute was in force or discontinued, and upon the peru∣sal of the Proviso in the Statute of Subsidy, and upon rea∣soning the matter, these Points were resolved. 1.What shall be said a Session of Parliament. If a Parliament be Assembled, and divers Orders made, and a Writ of Error brought, and a Record delivered to the higher House, and divers Bills agreed, but no Bills Signed; That this is but a Convention, and no Parliament or Session; as it was Anno 12 Jac. in which (as it was affirmed by them which had seen the Roll) it is entred that it is not any Session; or Parliament, because that no Bill was signed, vide 33. H. 6. Brook Parliament. 86. Every Session in which the King signs Bills is a Parliament. 2. It was agreed, that if divers Statutes be continued until the next Parliament or next Session, and there is a Parliament or a Session and nothing done therein as to continuance, all the said Statutes are discontinued and gone. And then it was moved whether this Statute was discontinued, and seriatim, Jones, Chamberlain, Hutton, Denham, Haughton, Dodderidge, Winch and Bromley declared their Opinions,This Statute was Anno 18 Jacobi, and Printed, but is not in any of the Statute Books. that this Statute is discontinued, and that the statute of Subsidy is a Parlia∣ment, and that every Parliament is a Session, but not e con∣verso, for one Parliament may have divers Sessions as the Par∣liament 1 Jac. had four, and ended 7 Jac. vide 33. H. 6. Bro. Parl. 86. and that this Proviso is not to any other purpose but to continue their proceedings in the same estate as if this Act had not been made, and if this Proviso had not been, then this statute had been discontinued by this Act of sub∣sidy, but when this ends and is determined, then is the Sessi∣on ended, then it is a session, scil. a Parliament, which ought to be pleaded, at the Parliament holden, &c. and all the Com∣missions of subsidy are accordingly and the proviso call it a session; Then this being done, the Lord Chief Baron did not deliver any Opinion, for he said, that he had not consi∣dered the statute, and afterwards it was desired that the Lords
would deliver their Opinions, and thereupon the Lord Ho∣bart declared his Opinion accordingly, That it seemed to him that it was a Session, and that it was not safe to meddle with such Law; and that he would never refuse to declare his O∣pinion with his Brethren. After the Lord Chief Justice Ley made a long discourse concerning the purpose and intent of Parliament, Scilicet, That it was not their purpose to destroy so good Laws, and therefore it was not any such Session, as was within the intent of the preceding Parliament, which was, that these should determine when it is a Parliament or Session, in which good Laws are made. And Doderidge said, that it was fit to see the Commission, and that that which hath been said, was not to bind any one, but every one spoke what then he was advised of, and perad∣venture might change upon better consideration. And after∣wards, upon Tuesday on an Assembly of the two Chief Ju∣stices, the Chief Baron, Justice Haughtom, Baron Denham, Hutton, Chamberlain, and Jones the Attorney General brought the Commission de 12 Eliz. June 1. and that had these words; Pro eo quod nullus Regalis assensus, nec responsio per nos Praestat. fuit nullum Parliamentum nec aliqua Sessio Parliamenti lata aut tent. fuit. They have power to adjourn this Parliament thus begun, and the Commission to Dissolve this Parliament 28 Feb. Anno. 19 Jac. had the same words, saving that he recite that he had given his Royal assent to an Act of Subsidy, by which was intended, that it should not be a Session; and upon view of the Commission, the Lord Chief Justice moved that the King was mistaken in this, that he had given Power to Dis∣solve this Parliament, which had not any Session, and if it be a Session, then he had no power to Dissolve it, and then it is as it were a recess, and a Parliament cannot be discontinued or dis∣solved, but by matter of Record, and that by the King alone; and if the Parliament yet continue, then this Statute also con∣tinue during the Parliament by the Proviso; but that would not serve: For first it is against the intent of the King, and a∣gainst his Proclamation: And also the Case is truly put in the Com∣mission, as to the matter in Fact; and he is not misinformed, but mistaken in the Law, and then the Commission for the Dissolving is good, sem∣blable to the Lord Chandois Case, and other Cases, vide in Cholmley's Case; but because that all the Judges were not at this Conference, there∣fore it was deferred until the next term; and in the interim the Grand Secretary and the Attorney General were to inform the King, that the Statute is obscure, and had not been put in ure, and that we could not agree.
si divers Sessions sont in vn mesme Parlement & le Roy ne signe bille tanque al darren, la tout nest que un mesme jour, & tent avera relation al primer jour del primer Session & le primer jour & le darren jour nest que un mesme Parlement & un mesme jour in ley, nisi special mention soit fait in Pact quant ceo prendra force; mes chescun Session in que le Roy signe les Billes est un jour a per lui, & un Parlement a per luy & navera au∣ter relation, mes a mesme le Session: quod not a diversitatem (33. H. 8.) Bro. Tit. Parl. Fol. 119. b. num. 86. That is in English, if there be divers Sessions in one and the same Parliament, and the King Signeth no Bill until the last day, there all is but one and the same day, and all shall have relation to the first day of the first Session, and the first day and the last day is but one and the same Parliament, and one and the same day in Law, unless there be special mention made in the Act when that shall take its force; but every Session wherein the King Signeth any Bills, is a day by it self, and a Parliament by it self, and shall have no other relation but to the same Session; wherein note the diversity 33. H. 8. When a Parliament is called and doth sit, and is Dissolved without any Act of Parliament passed, or Judgment given, it is no Session of Parliament, but a Con∣vention, Coke 4. Inst. fo. 28. vide also 2. Bulstr. fo. 237. In Hobart's Rep. p. 78.Saint-John versus Saint-John. It is St. John's Case, there was an Action brought on the Statute 21. H. 6. for not returning one Burgess, &c. And there it is said, the Par∣liament was as none, because there was no Act nor Record of it. And in p. 111. Hobart says, the 12 Jacobi (which if you be judged by the Jour∣nal, was a large, and well occupied Parliament) because no Act Passed, nor Record is of it, was resolved by all the Judges to be no Parliament. And now we are come to the Parliament begun and holden at Westminster, the 19 of February, in the 21 Year of King James, which was there continued until the 29 day of May following, and then Prorogued to the second day of November, Anno 1624.21 Jac. c. 28 and there, in the 28 Chapter, is an Act Intituled, An Act for conti∣nuing and reviving of divers Statutes, and Repeal of divers others. wherein are these words, viz. And so much of one Act made in the 35 Year of the Reign of the said late Q. Elizabeth, Intituled, An Act to retain the Queens Maje∣sties Subjects in their due Obedience,58 Statutes in this Act revi∣ved and conti∣nued. as hath not been sithence Repeal∣ed by any other Statute (and the other 57 Statutes which are there mention∣ed) shall, by vertue of this Act be judged ever since the Session of Parliament in the 7th. Year of His Majesties Reign of England to have been of such force and effect as the same were the last day of that Session, and from thenceforth until the end of the first Session of the next Parliament.1 Car. 1. cap. 7. This Session of Parliament (by reason of the increase of the Sickness and other in∣conveniences of the Season requiring a speedy Ad∣journment ne∣vertheless) shall not de∣termine by His Majesties Royal Assent to this & some other Acts. Well, in the next Parliament begun and holden at Westminster the 18 day of June, Anno 1625. in the first Year of King Charlis the I. and there continued un∣til the 11th. day of July following, and then Adjourned until the first day of Au∣gust following unto Oxford, several Acts Passed and by a special Bill then Past, It was Enacted as followeth, (it is the 7th Chapter in Keeble) viz. And all Sta∣tutes and Acts of Parliament which are to have continuance unto the end of this present Session shall be of full force after the said Adjournment, until this present Session be fully ended and determined, and if this Session shall determine by Dissolution of this present Par∣liament, then all the Acts aforesaid, shall be continued until the end of the first Session of the next Parliament.
At the next Parliament begun and holden at Westminster the 17th day of March, Anno 1627.3 Car. 1. cap. 4. Sect. 21. in the 3d Year of King Charles the I. there is an Act in the Fourth Chapter, Intituled, An Act for repeal and continuance of divers Statutes, among which in the 21 Section this 35 Eliz. is mentioned thus, viz. And so much of one Act made in tho 35 Year of the Reign of the late Q. Eliz. Intituled an Act to retain the Queens Majesties Subjects in their due Obedience, as hath not been since Repealed by any other Statute;Sect. 22. and in the 22d Section it Enacts, that this 35 of Eliz, by vertue of this Act shall be and continue until the end of the first Session of the next Parliament, hold∣en in the first Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord the King that now is. From that 3d Year unto the 16 there is no mention made (in his Histo∣ry of the Life and Death of the 35. Eliz. c. 1. as the Observer has truly Remark'd) of any thing relating to the 35. Eliz. But in the 16 (at the Par∣liament begun at Westminster the 3d day of November, Anno 1640. c. 4.) it is Ena∣cted as followeth, viz. And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,An. 16. Car. 1. cap. 4. that the Passing of this present Act, or of any other Act or Acts, or His Majesties Royal Assent to them or any of them in this present Session of Parliament, shall not be any determination of the said Session, and that all Statutes and Acts of Parliament which have their continuance, or were by an Act of Parliament made in the 3d Year of the Reign of His Majestie that now is, Intituled, An Act for the Continuance and Repeal of divers Statutes continued until the end of the first Session of the then next Parliament, shall, by virtue of this Act be adjudged ever since the Session of Parliament in the said Third Year to have been of such force and effect as the same were the last day of that Session,An. 16. Car. 2. This 35. Eliz. c. 1. was con∣tinued, but that Act (it seems) is since expired. and from thenceforth until some other Act of Parliament be made, touching the continuance or discontinuance of the said Statutes and Acts in the said Act of the Third Year of His Majesties Reign con∣tinued, as aforesaid. And from this Statute we find nothing of the 35 Eliz. cap. 1. till we come to the 16 of his now Majesty, and that Act I have recited here at large, as follow∣eth, Viz. An Act to Suppress Seditious Conventicles. VVHEREAS an Act made in the 35th.Keeble St. fo. 1293. c. 4. Year of the Reign of our late Sove∣reign Lady the Queen Elizabeth,35. Eliz. c. 1. declared to be in force. Statutes are of two sorts. Those that are introductory of a New, and those that are declaratory of an old Law. Further reme∣dy against Se∣ditious Secta∣ries. Entituled, An Act to retain the Queens Majesties Subjects in their due Obedience, hath not been put in Executi∣on by reason of some doubt of late made whether the said Act be still in force, although it be very clear and evident, and it is hereby declared, that the said Act is still in force, and ought to be put in due execution. 2. For providing therefore of further and more speedy Remedies against the growing and dangerous practices of seditious Sectaries, and other disloyal per∣sons, who under pretence of Tender Consciences do at their Meetings contrive Insurrections, as late Experience hath shewed:
3. Be it enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty,Unlawful Conventicles and Meetings under pre∣tence of Ex∣ercise of Reli∣gion forbid∣den. by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this pre∣sent Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same; That if any person of the Age of 16 Years or upwards, being a Subject of this Realm, at any time after the first day of July, which shall be in the Year of our Lord 1664, shall be pre∣sent at any Assembly, Conventicle, or Meeting, under colour or pretence of any Exercise of Religion, in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy or Practice of the Church of England, in any place within the Kingdom of England, Domi∣nion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed; at which Conventicle, Meet∣ing, or Assembly, there shall be Five Persons or more assembled together, over and above those of the same Houshold; then it shall and may be lawful to and for any two Justices of the Peace of the County, Limit, Division, or Liberty, wherein the Offence aforesaid shall be committed, or for the chief Magistrate of the place where such Offence aforesaid shall be committed, (if it be within a Cor∣poration where there are not two Justices of the Peace) and they are hereby re∣quired and enjoyned,The punish∣ment and manner of proceeding against them for the first Offence. upon proof to them or him respectively made of such Of∣fence, either by Confession of the Party, or Oath of Witness or notorious Evi∣dence of the Fact, (which Oath the said Justices of the Peace and chief Magi∣strate respectively, are hereby impowered and required to administer) to make a Record of every such Offence and Offences, under their Hands and Seals re∣spectively; which Record so made as aforesaid, shall to all intents and purpo∣ses be in Law taken and adjudged to be a full and perfect Conviction of every such Offender for such Offence. And thereupon the said Justices and chief Ma∣gistrate respectively, shall commit every such Offender so convicted as aforesaid, to the Gaol or House of Correction, there to remain without Bail or Main∣prise, for any time not exceeding the space of three Moneths, unless such Of∣fender shall pay down to the Justices or chief Magistrate such Summ of Money, not exceeding 5 l. as the said Justices or chief Magistrate, (who are hereby there∣unto authorized and required) shall fine the said Offender at, for his or her said Offence; which Money shall be paid to the Churchwardens, for the relief of the Poor of the Parish where such Offender did last inhabit. 4.Second Of∣fence. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if such Offend∣er so convicted as aforesaid, shall at any time again commit the like Offence con∣trary to this Act, and be thereof in manner aforesaid convicted, then such Of∣fender so convict of such second Offence shall incurr the penalty of Imprison∣ment in the Gaol or House of Correction, for any time not exceeding six Mo∣neths without Bail or Mainprise, unless such Offender shall pay down to the said Justices or chief Magistrate, such Summ of Money, not exceeding 10 l. as the said Justices or chief Magistrate (who are thereunto authorized and required as aforesaid) shall fine the said Offender at, for his or her said second Offence, the said Fine to be disposed in manner aforesaid. 5.Third Of∣fence. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any such Offend∣er so convict of a second offence, contrary to this Act in manner aforesaid, shall at any time again commit the like offence contrary to this Act, then any two Ju∣stices of the Peace, and chief Magistrate as aforesaid respectively, shall commit every such Offender to the Gaol or House of Correction, there to remain with∣out Bail or Mainprise, untill the next General Quarter Sessions, Assizes, Gaol-delivery, Great Sessions, or Sitting of any Commission of Oyer and Terminer in the respective County, Limit, Division, or Liberty which shall first happen, when and where every such Offender shall be proceeded against by Indictment for
such Offence, and shall forthwith be arraigned upon such Indictment, and shall then plead the General Issue of Not Guilty, and give any special matter in Evidence, or confess the Indictment. And if such Offender proceeded against shall be lawfully convict of such Offence, either by Confession or Verdict; or if such Offender shall refuse to plead the General Issue, or to confess the Indict∣ment; then the respective Justices of the Peace at their General Quarter Sessi∣ons, Judges of Assize and Gaol-delivery, at the Assizes and Gaol-delivery, Justi∣ces of the Great Sessions at the Great Sessions, and Commissoners of Oyer and Terminer at their Sitting, are hereby enabled and required to cause Judgment to be entered against such Offender, that such Offender shall be transported beyond the Seas to any of His Majesty's Forein Plantations, (Virginia and New Engl. only excepted) there to remain seven Years; and shall forthwith under their Hands and Seals make out Warrants to the Sheriff or Sheriffs of the same County where such Conviction or Refusal to plead or to confess as aforesaid shall be, safely to convey such Offender to some Port or Haven nearest or most commodious to be appointed by them respectively, and from thence to embarque such Offender, to be safely transported to any of His Majesty's Plantations beyond the Seas, as shall be also by them respectively appointed, (Virginia and New England onely ex∣cepted.) Whereupon the said Sheriff shall safely convey and embarque, or cause to be conveyed or embarqued, such Offender to be transported as aforesaid, un∣der pain of forfeiting for default of so transporting every such Offender the Summ of 40 l. of lawful Money, the one moiety thereof to the King, and the other moiety to him or them that shall sue for the same, in any of the Kings Courts of Record, by Bill, Plaint, Action of Debt, or Information; in any of which no Wager of Law, Essoin, or Protection shall be admitted. And the said respe∣ctive Court shall then also make out Warrants to the several Constables, Head-boroughs, or Tythingmen of the respective places, where the Estate Real or Per∣sonal of such Offender to be transported shall happen to be, commanding them thereby to sequester into their hands the Profits of the Lands, and to distrain and sell the Goods of the Offender so to be transported, for the reimbursing of the said Sheriff, and such reasonable Charges as he shall be at, and shall be allow∣ed him by the said respective Court for such conveying and embarquing of such Offender so to be transported, rendring to the party, or his or her Assigns, the Overplus of the same if any be, unless such Offender, or some other on the be∣half of such Offender so to be transported, shall give the Sheriff such Sureties as he shall approve of for the paying all the said Charges unto him. 6.How seditious Sectaries be∣ing convicted may be trans∣ported. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in default of defraying such Charges by the parties to be transported, or some other in their behalf, or in default of Security given to the Sheriff as aforesaid; it shall and may be lawful for every such Sheriff to contract with any Master of a Ship, Mer∣chant, or other person, for the transporting of such Offender at the best rate he can; and that in every such case it shall and may be lawful for such persons so contracting with any Sheriff for transporting such Offender as aforesaid, to de∣tain and imploy every such Offender so by them transported, as a Labourer to them or their Assigns, for the space of Five Years to all intents and purposes, as if he or she were bound by Indentures to such person for that purpose. And that the respective Sheriffs shall be allowed or paid from the King upon their respe∣ctive Accounts in the Exchequer all such Charges by them expended for convey∣ing, embarquing, and transporting of such persons, which shall be allowed by the said respective Courts, from whence they received their respective Warrants, and which shall not have been by any of the ways aforementioned paid, secured, or reimbursed unto them as aforesaid.
VII.How the Of∣fendr  discharged pn payment of f  pund Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That in Case the Offendor so in∣dicted and Convicted for the said third Offence, shall pay into the hands of the Register or Cler of the Coart or Sessions where he shall be Conuicted (be∣fore the said Court or Sessions shall be ended) the sum of 10 l. That then the said Offendor shall be discharged from Transportation, and the Judgment for the same. 8.Punish  of Offendrs  the tird Offence And be it further Enacted, That the like Imprisonment, indictment, Arraign∣ment and Proceedings, shall be against every such Offender, as often as he shall again offerd, after such third Offence, nevertheless is dischargeable and discharged by the payment of the like sum, as was paid by such Offendor for his or her said Offence next before committed together with the Additional and increased sum of 100 l.How the sid Penalty of  pod shall be disposd. more upon every new Offece committed, the said respective sums to be paid as aforesaid: and to be disposed of as followeth (viz.) the one moiety for the Repair of the Parish-Church, or Churches, Chappel, or Chappels of such Parish within which such Conventicle, Assembly, or meeting shall be held, and the other moiety to the Repair of the High-ways of the said Parish, or Parishes (if need re∣quire) or otherwise for the amendment of such High ways as the Justices of the Peace at their respective Quarter-Sessions shall direct and appoint. And if any Constable, Head orough, or Tythingman, shall neglect to Execute any the said Warrants made unto them for sequestring distraining and selling any of the Goods and Chattels of any Offendor against this Act, for the levying such sums of money as shall be imposed for the first or second Offence, he shall forfeit for every such neglect the sum of 5 l. of lawful money of England, the one Moiety thereof to the King, and the other Moiety to him that will sue for the same in any of the Kings Courts of Record as aforesaid. And if any person be at any time sud for putting in Execution any of the powers contained in this Act,Persn sued fr execting this Act may plead the gene∣ral Issue▪ ad recover reble Csts. Felony to e∣scpe after Con∣victim, or to re∣trn after Trans∣portation. such person shall and may plead the General Issue and give the special matter in Evidence. And if the Plaintiff be Non-suit. or a Verdict pass for the Defendant thereupon, or if the Plaintiff discontinue his Action, or if upon Demurrer Judgment be given for the Defendant, every such Defendant shall have his or their treble Costs. 9. And be it further Enacted, That if any person against whom Judgment of Transportation shall be given in manner aforesaid, shall make escape before Trans∣portation or being Transported as aforesaid, shall return unto this Realm of En∣gland Dominion of Wales, and Town of Barwick upon Tweed, without the spe∣cial Licence of his Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors, in that behalf first had and obtained. That the party so escaping, or returning, shall be adjudged a Fellon, and shall suffer Death, as in case of Fellony without benefit of Clergy, and shall forfeit and loose to his Majesty, all his, or her Goods and Chattels for ever; and shall further loose to his Majesty all his, or her Goods and Chattels, Lands, Te∣nements and Hereditaments, for and during the Life of such Offendor, and no lon∣ger. And that the Wife of any such Offendor by force of this Act shall not lose her Dower, nor shall any corruption of Blood grow, or be, by reason of any such Offence mentioned in this Act, but that the Heir of every such Offendor by force of this Act, shall and may after the death of such Offendor have and enjoy the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of such Offendors as if this Act had not been made. 10.Seditious and tumltuous Mettings and Conveticles. And for better preventing of the mischiefs which may grow by such seditious and tumultuous Meetings, under pretence of Religious Worship. Be it further En∣acted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lieutenants, or Debuty-Lieutenants, or any Commissioned Officers of the Militia, or any other of his Majesties Forces, with such Troops or Companies of Horse or Foot, and also the Sheriffs and Justi∣ces of Peace and other Magistrates and Ministers of Justice, or any of them jointly, or severally, within any the Counties or places within this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, with such other Assistance as they shall think meet, or can get in readiness with the soonest, on Certificate made to them respectively, under the hand and Seal of any one Justice of the Peace, or Chief Magistrate as aforesaid; of his particular information, or knowledg of such unlawful Meetings, or Conventicles, held or to be held in their respective Counties or places, and that he (with such Assistance as he can get together, is not able to suppress or dissolve the same) shall and may, and are hereby required to repair unto the place where they are so held, or to be held, and by the best means they can, to dissolve and dissipate or prevent all such unlawful Meetings; and take into their Custody, such of those persons so unlawfully Assembled, as they shall
judg to be the Leaders and Seducers of the rest; and such others, as they shall think fit to be proceeded against, according to Law for such their Offences. 11. And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person who shall wittingly and willingly suffer any such Conveticle,The penalty of suffering Con∣ventieles in pri∣vate houses. unlawful Assembly or Meeting aforesaid, to be held in his or her House, Out-house, Barn or Room, Yard or Backside, Woods or Grounds, shall incur the same Penalties and Forfei∣tures as any other Offendor against this Act ought to incur and be proceeded against in all points in such manner as any other Offendor against this Act ought to be pro∣ceeded agianst. 12. Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authhrity aforesaid, That if any Kee∣per of any Goal or House of Correction,Goalers may not let Prisoners committed upon this Act to go at large. shall suffer any person committed to his Custody for any Ossence against this Act, to go at Large, contrary to the Warrant of his Commitments, according to this Act, or shall permit any Person who is at Large, to joyn with any Person Committed to his Custody, by vertue of this Act in the exercise of Religion disfering from the Rites of the Church of England. Then every such Keeper of a Goal or House of Correction, shall for every such Offence, forfeit the sum of 10.The Penalty. l. to be levied, raised, and disposed by such persons and in such manner as the Penalties for the first and second Offences against this Act are to be Levied, Raised and disposed. 13. Provided always, That no person shall be punished for any Offence against this Act,Within what time Offendrs must be prscu∣ted. unless such Offendor be prosecuted for the same within three Months after the offence committed; and that no person who shall be punished for any Offence by vertue of this Act shall be punished for the same Offence by vertue of any other Act or Law whatsoever. 14. Provided also and be it Enacted,Married wo∣men how to be punished. That Judgment of Transportation shall not be given against any Feme Covert unless her Husband be at the same time under the like Judgment, and not discharged by the payment of money, as aforesaid; but that instead thereof she shall by the respective Court be committed to the Goal or House of Correction, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize, for any time not exceeding 12 Months, unless her Husband shall pay down such sum not exceeding 40 l. to redeem her from imprisonment, as shall be imposed by the said Court, the said sum to be disposed by such persons, and in such manner, as the Penalties for the first and second Offence against this Act are to be disposed. 15.How Justices of the Peace may enter into houses suspected for Conventicles. Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of the Peace, and Chief Magistrate respectively, impowered as aforesaid, to put this Act in Execution, shall and may with what Aid, Force and Assistance they shall think fit for the better Execution of this Act, after refusal or denial, enter in∣to any House or other place, where they shall be informed any such Conventicle as aforesaid is or shall be held. 16. Provided,The houses of Peers. That no Dwelling-house of any Peer of this Realm, whilest he or his Wife shall be there Resident, shall be searched, by vertue of this Act, but by immediate Warrant from his Majesty, under his Sign Manual, or in the pre∣fence of the Lieutenant, or one of the Deputy-Lieutenants, or two Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum of the same County or Riding, nor shall any other Dwelling-house of any Peer or other person whatsoever, be entered into with Force by vertue of this Act, but in the presence of one Justice of the Peace or chief Magistrate respectively, except within the City of London, where it shall be lawful for any such other Dwelling-house to be entred into as aforesaid, in the presence of one Justice of the Peace, Alderman, Deputy-Alderman, or any one Commissoner for the Lieutenancy for the City of London. 17. Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,What persons may not be com∣mited to the house of Correction. That no person shall by vertue of this Act, be committed to the House of Correction, that shall satisfie the said Justices of the Peace, or chief Magistrate respectively, that he or she (and in case of a Feme Covert that her Husband) hath an Estate of Free-hold, or Copy-hold, to the value of 5 l. per Annum, or personal Estate to the value of 50 l. any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding. 18. And in regard a certain Sect called Quakers, and other Sectaries are found not only to offend in the matters provided against by this Act,Persons ser∣ved with Process Refusing to take au Oath. 14. C. 2. ca. but also obstruct the proceedings of Justice, by their obstinate refusal to take Oaths lawfully ten∣dered unto them, in the ordinary Course of Law, Therefore be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, that if any person or persons, being duly and legally served with Process or other Summons, to appear in any Court of Record except
Court-Leets, as a Witness, or returned to serve of any Jury, or ordered to be ex∣amined upon Interrogatories, or being present in Court, shall refuse to take any Judicial Oath legally tendered to him, by the Judg or Judges of the same Court having no legal Plea to Justifie, or excuse the refusal of the same Oath, or if any Person or Persons being duly served with Process to answer any Bill, exhibited against him or them in any Court of Equity, or any Suit in any Court Ecclesiastical shall refuse to answer such Bill or Suit upon his or their corporal Oath, in cases where the Law requires such Answer to be put in upon Oath, or being summoned to be a Witness in any such Court, or ordered to be examined upon Interrogatiories shall for any Cause or Reason not allowed by Law, refuse to take such Oath, as in such Cases is required by Law, That then and in such Case the several and respe∣ctive Courts wherein such refusal shall be made, shall be and are hereby enabled to Record, Enter, or Register such refusal; which Record or Entry shall be and is here∣by made a Conviction of such Offence, and all and every person and persons, so aforesaid offending, shall for every such Offence, incur the judgment and punishment of Transportation, in such manner as is appointed by this Act for other Offences. 19. Provided always, That if any person or persons aforesaid, shall come into such Court, and take his or their Oath in these words. I do swear,How such per∣sons may be ac∣quited. that I do not hold the taking of an Oath to be unlawful, nor refuse to take an Oath on that Account. 20. Which Oath, the respective Court or Courts aforesaid, are hereby Authori∣zed, and required, forthwith to tender, administer and Register before the Entry of the Conviction aforesaid, or shall take such Oath before some Justice of the Peace, who is hereby Authorized and required to Administer the same to be re∣turned into such Court, such Oath so made shall acquit him or them from such pu∣nishment, any thing herein to the contrary notwithstanding. 21. Provided always, That every person convicted as aforesaid, in Courts afore∣said (other then his Majesties Courts of Kings-Bench, or before the Justices of As∣size, or General Goal-delivery) shall by Warrant containing a Certificate of such Conviction, under the Hand and Seal of the respective Judg or Judges, before whom such Conviction shall be had, be sent to some one of his Majesties Goals in the same County where such Conviction was had, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize, untill the next Assizes or General-Goal-Delivery, where, if such per∣son so convicted, shall refuse to take the Oath aforesaid, being tendered unto him by the ustice or Justices of Assize or Goal-delivery, then such Justice, or Justices shall cause Judgment of Transportation to be executed in such manner as judgment of Transportation by this Act is to be executed; But in case such person shall take the said Oath, then he shall thereupon be discharged. 22. Provided always,Peers offend∣ing how to be proceeded against and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Peer of this Realm, shall offend against this Act, he shall pay 10 l. for the first of∣fence, and 20 l. for the second offence, to be levied upon his Goods and Chattels by Warrant from any two Justices of the Peace, or chief Magistrate of the place, or Division, where such Peer shall dwell; and that every Peer for the third and every further Offence against the Tenour of this Act, shall be tried by his Peers and not otherwise. 23. Provided also and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforsaid, That this Act shall continue in force for three years after the end of this present Session of Parliament,The continu∣ance of this Act and from thence forward to the end of the next Session of Parliament, after the said three years, and no longer. Since this was finished, I found in the London Gazette Published Thursday April 21. 1681. this Paragraph, viz. To undeceive the Kings Loyal Subjects, who may be misled into Error by a Pamphlet called The History of the Life and Death of 35 Eliz. These are to inform them, that that Act amongst others, was continued 1 Jac. until the end of the first Session of the next Parliament, There were four Sessions in that Parliament, the last whereof ended 7 Jac. but the Act was to continue to the first Session of the next Parliament; and though every Session to some purposes be as a several Parliament, yet it is no such Parliament which can have a first Session, and is never in Acts of Parliament stiled the next Parliament. The next Parliament summoned was 12 Jac. but because nothing was done therein, it was held no Parliament. Then a Parliament was summoned 18 Jac. wherein passed only Subsidies Granted by the Spiritualty and Temporalty. Hence a question arose 20 Jac. whether
35 Eliz. was not discontinued upon this ground, that 18 Jac. was a Session by passing the Subsidy Act, which being referr'd to all the Judges, nine of them were of Opinion, 35 Eliz. with the other Laws continued 1 Jac. were thereby discontinued. To prevent which mischief, The Parliament 21 Jac. not only revives 35 Eliz. and those other Laws in all 58. but Enacts that they shall be ad udged ever since the Session of Parliament 7 Jac. to have been of such Force and Effect as the same were the last day of that Session. And 'tis undoubted they all were then in force, by Virtue of 1 Jac. and the latter continuance run clear without the aid of the Declaratory Law of 16 Car. 2. And though this Con∣venticle Act of 16 Car. 2. be expired, yet there is another of greater Force 22 of the King yet in being. And having therein mentioned the Act of the 22 of his Present Majesty, I thought I could not justly acquit my self of what I had undertaken (viz. impartially and fully to let down all that might any ways have Relation to this 35. Eliz. c. 1.) without giving you that Statute at Large, whereby the Judicious Reader may fee how far it proves the 35 Eliz. still to be in force. An Act to Prevent and Suppress Seditious Conventicles. FOR providing further and more speedy remedies against the growing and dan∣gerous practises of Seditious Sectaries and other disloyal persons,Keeble St. A. 12. Car 2. c. 1. fol. 1. 61. who under pretence of Tender Consciences,The Preamble 16 Car. 2. c. 4. have or may at their Meetings contrive Insur∣rections (as late experience hath shown) Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled,Conventicles▪ &c. forbidden after the Tenth of May 1670. and by Authority of the same, That if any Person of the age of 16 years or upwards, being a Subject of this Realm, at any time after the Tenth day of May next, shall be present at any As∣sembly, Conventicle or Meeting, under colour or pretence of any exercise of Re∣ligion in other manner then according to the Liturgy and practise of the Church of England, in any place within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, at which Conventicle, Meeting or Assembly, there shall be five Persons or more assembled together, over and besides those of the same houshold; if it be in a house where there is a family inhabiting, or if it be in a house, field; or place where there is no family inhabiting: Then where any five persons or more are so assembled as aforesaid, It shall and may be lawfull to and for any one or more Justices of the Peace of the County,How the Offen∣dors must be Convicted. Limit, Division, Corporation or Liberty, wherein the offence aforesaid shall be committed, or for the chief Magistrate of the Place where the offence aforesaid shall be committed. And he and they are hereby required and enjoyned, upon proof to him or them respectively made of such offence, either by confession of the party, or Oath of two Witnesses (which Oath, the said Justice and Justices of the Peace and chief Magistrate respectively are hereby impowred and required to Administer) or by notorious Evidence and circumstance of the Fact, to make A Record of every such offence under his or their Hands and Seals respectively; which Record so made as aforesaid, shall to all intents and purposes be in Law taken and adjudged to be a full and perfect Conviction of every such Offender for such offence; and thereupon the said Justice,The penalty for the first Offence. The Record and Conviction to be returned to the next Quar∣ter Sessions The Penalty for the second offence Justices, and chief Magistrate respectively, shall impose on every such Offender so Convict as aforesaid, a Fine of 5 s. for such first Offence, which Record and Conviction shall be Certified by the said Justice, Justices, or chief Ma∣gistrate, at the next Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the County or Place where the Offence was Committed. 2. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if such Offender so convicted as aforesaid, shall at any time again commit the like Offence or Offences contrary to this Act, and be thereof in manner aforesaid Convicted: Then such offender so convict of such like offence or offences, shall for every such offence in∣cur the penalty of 10 s. which Fine and Fines for the first, and every other offence shall be levied by distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods and Chattels; or in case of the poverty of such Offender,The Penaltis how to be levied. upon the Goods and Chattels of any other per∣son or persons who shall then be Convicted in manner aforesaid of the like Offence at the same Conventicle, at the discretion of the said Justice, Justices or chief Magi∣strate respectively, so as the sum to be levied, or any one person in case of the po∣verty
of other Offenders amount not in the whole to above the Sum of 10 l. upon occasion of any one meeting as aforesaid,Constablet, & c. to levy the same and pay it to he Justice immedi∣ately. and every Constable, Headborough, Ty∣thingman, Church-wardens, and Overseers of the Poor, respectively, are hereby authorised and required to levy the same accordingly, having first received a Warrant under the Hands and Seals of the said Justice, Justices, or chief Magistrate, respectively so to do; the said Moneys so to be levied, to be forthwith delivered to the same Justice, Justices, or chief Magistrate, and by him or them to be distribu∣ted. The one third part thereof to the use of the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Succssors,How the penal∣ties are to be de∣vided. to be paid to the High-Sheriff of the County for the time being, in man∣ner following, That is to say, the Justice or Justices of the Peace, shall pay the same into the Court of the respective Quarter Sessions, which said Court shall de∣liver the same to the Sheriff, and make a memorial on Record of the payment, and delivery thereof, which said memorial shall be a fufficient and final discharge to the said Justice and Justices, and a charge to the Sheriff, which said discharge and charge shall be certified into the Exchequer together,Certificate into the Exchequer and not one without tho other. And no Justice shall or may be questioned or accomptable for the same in the Ex∣chequer or else where, then in Quarter Sessions. And other third part thereof to and for the use of the Poor of the Parish where such Offence shall be Committed. And the other third part thereof to the Informer and Informers, and to such per∣son and persons as the said Justice, Justices, or Chief Magistrate respectively shall appoint, having regard to their diligence and industry in the discovery, dispersing, and punishing of the said Conventicles. 3. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,The penalty of such as Preach or teach in a Conventicle how to be levied and dispsed. That every person who shall take upon him to Preach or Teach in any such Meeting, Assembly, or Con∣venticle, and shall thereof be Convicted as aforesaid, shall forfeit for every such first offence, the sum of 20 l. to be levied in manner aforesaid, upon his Goods and Chattels. And if the said Preacher or Teacher so Convicted be a stranger, and his Name and Habitation not known, or is fled and cannot be found, or in the judg∣ment of the Justice. Justices, or chief Magistrate before whom he shall be Convicted, shall be thought unable to pay the same; the said Justice, Justices, or chief Magi∣strate respectively are hereby impowred and required to levy the same by Warrant as aforesaid, upon the Goods and Chattels of any such persons who shall be pre∣sent at the same Conventicle; Any thing in this or any other. Act Law or Statute to the contrary notwithstanding. And the Money so levied, to be disposed of in manner aforesaid: And if such Offendor so convicted as aforesaid, shall at any time again commit the like offence or offences, contrary to this Act, and be there∣of convicted in manner aforesaid, then such Offendor convicted of such like offence or offences, shall for every such offence incurr the penalty of 40 l. to be levied and disposed as aforesaid. 4. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,The forfeit re of such as suffer Conventicles i their Houses. That every person who shall wittingly and willingly suffer any such Conventicle, Meeting or unlawful Assembly aforesaid, to be held in his or her House, Outhouse, Barn, Yard or Backside, and be convicted thereof in manner aforesaid, shall forseit the sum of 20 l. to be levied in manner aforesaid upon his or her Goods and Chattels; or in case of his or her povetry or inability as aforesaid upon the Goods and Chattels of such persous who shall be convicted in manner aforesaid of being present at the same conventicle, and the money so levied to be disposed of in manner aforesaid. 5. Provided always,Provso. And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person shall by any Clause of this Act, be liable to pay above 10 l. for any one Meeting in regard of the Poverty of any other person or persons. 6. Provided also, And be it further Enacted, That in all Cases of this Act where the Penalty or sum charged upon any Offender exceed the sum of 10 s.Appes way be and to whom and in wht Cases. and such Offender shall find himself agrieved, it shall and may be lawfull for him within one week after the said penalty or money charged shall be paid or levied, to appeals in writing from the person or persons convicted to the Judgment of the Justices of the Peace in their next Quarter Sessions, to whom the Justice or Justices of Peace chief Magistrate or Alderman that first convicted such Offendor, shall return the money levied upon the Appellant, and shall certifie under his and their Hands and Seals, the Evidence upon which the Conviction past, with the whole Record thereof and the said Appeal; whereupon such Offendor may plead and make defence, and have his Tryal by a Jury thereupon. And in cafe such Appellant shall not prose∣cute with effect; or if upon such Tryal he shall not be acquitted, or Judgment pass
not for him upon his said Appeal, the said Justices at the Sessions shall give treble Costs again such Offendor for his unjust Appeal; And no other Court whatsoever shall intermedle with any Cause or Causes of Appeal upon this Act, but they shall be finally determined in the Quarter Sessions only.Appellant to en∣ter into a Re∣cgnizace. 7. Provided always, And be it further Enacted, That upon the delivery of such Appeal as aforesaid, the person or persons Appellant shall enter before the person or persons convicting into a Recognizance to present the said Appeal with effect, which said Recognizance the person or persons convicting is hereby impowred to take, and required to certifie the same to the next Quarter Sessions; and in case no such Recognizance be entred into, the said Appeal to be null and void. 8. Provided always, That every such Appeal shall be left with the person or per∣sons so convicting as aforesaid, at the time of the making thereof. 9. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,Justices of Peace Cstabes, &c  refusal, may break upon dors. That the Justice, Justices of the Peace, and chief Magistrate respectively, or the respective Constables, Head-boroughs, and Tything men, by Warrant from the said Justice, Justices, or chief Magistrate respectively, shall and may with what aid, force and assistance they shall think fit, for the better Execution of this Act, after refusal or denyal to enter, break open and enter into any house, or other place, where they shall be informed any such Conventicle as aforesaid, is or shall be held, as well within Liberties as without, and take into their Custody the persons there unlawfully assembled, to the intent they may be proceeded against according to this Act. And that the Lieu∣tenants or Deputy-Licutenants or any Commissionated Officer of the Militia, or other of his Majesties Forces with such Troops or Companies of Horse and Foot, and also the Sheriffs and other Magistrates and Ministers of Justice,Lieutenants, & Deputy Lieute¦nans, and  Offi∣cers f the Mi∣liia, ust. dis∣perse Conventi¦cles either with Horse or Foot. or any of them, jointly or severally within any the Counties or places within this Kingdom of Eng∣land, Dominion of Wales or Town of Barwick upon Tweed, with such other as∣sistance made to them respectively under the hand and Seal of any one Justice of Peace, or chief Magistrate of his particular information or knowledg of such unlaw∣ful Meeting or Conventicle held, or to be held in their respective Counties or pla∣ces, and that he with such assistance as he can get together, is not able to suppress and dissolve the same, shall and may and are hereby required and enjoyned to repair unto the place where they are so held, or to be held, and by the best means they can to dissolve, dissipate or prevent all such unlawful Meetings, and take into their Custody, such and so many of the said persons so unlawfully assembled as they shall think fit, to the intent they may be proceeded against according to this Act. 10. Provided always,Proviso for Peers of the Realm. That no dwelling House of any Peer of this Realm where he or his wife shall then be resident, shall be searched by Virtue of this Act, but by immediate warrant from his Majessiy under his sign Manual, or in the presence of the Lieutenant, or one Deputy-Lieutenant or two Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum of the same County or Riding. 11. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,The penalty of all Justices of Peace, Constables and othr Offi∣cers Civil ad Military, that omit their duty in prforig this Act. That if any Constable, Headborough, Tythingman, Church-wardon, or Overfeer of the Poor, who shall know r be credibly informed of any such Meetings or Conventicles, held within his Precincts, Parishes or Limits, and shall not give information thereof to some Justice of the Peace, or the chief Magistrate, and endeavour the Conviction of the parties, according to his Duty, but such Constable, Headborough, Tythingman, Churchwarden, Overseers of the Poor or any person lawfully called in aid of the Constable, Headborough, or Tything-man shall wilfully and wittingly omit the performance of his duty in the execution of this Act, and be thereof convicted in manner aforesaid, he shall forfeit for every such offence the sum of 5 l. to be levied upon his Goods and Chattels, and disposed in manner aforesaid. And that if any Justice of the Peace or chief Magistrate shall wilfully and wittingly omit the performance of his duty in the execution of this Act, he shall forfeit the sum of 100 l. the one moiety to the use of the Informer to be recovered by Action, Suit, Bill, or Plaint in any of his Majesties Courts at Westminster, wherein no Essoin, Pro∣tection, or Wager of Law shall lie. 12, And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,All persons in∣depriied that put this Act in execution. That if any person be at any time sued for putting in execution any of the Power contained in this Act, otherwise than upon Appeal allowed by this Act, such person shall and may plead the general issue and give the special matter in Evidence: and if the Plaintiff be Nonsuit, or a Vordict pass for the Defendant, or if the Plaintiff discontinue his A∣ction,
or if upon demur Judgment be given for the Desendant, every such Desen∣dant shall have his full treble Costs. 13. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act and all clauses therein contained,This Act to be interpreted ost beneficially for the suppressing Conventicles. shall be construed most largely and beneficially for the suppressing of Conventicles, and for the justification and encouragement of all per∣sons to be employed in the execution thereof: and that no Record, Warrant, or Mittimus to be made by vertue of this Act or any proceedings thereupon shall be re∣versed, avoided, or any way impeached by reason of any default in form. And in case any person offending against this Act shall be an Inhabitant in any other Coun∣ty or Corporation, or flie into any other County or Corporation after the offence committed, the Justice of Peace or chief Magistrate before whom he shall be con∣victed, as aforesaid, shall certifie the same under his hand and seal to any Justice of Peace or chief Magistrate of such County or Corporation wherein the said person or persons are Inhabitants, or are fled into; which said Justice or chief Magistrate respectively is hereby authorized and required to levy the penalty or penalties in this Act mentioned, upon the Goods and Chattels of such person or persons, as fully as the said other Justice of Peace might have done in case he or they had been Inhabitants in the place wlfere the offence was committed. 14. Provided also,Offedrs to be prsecuted with∣in three months after the offence. Aldermen with∣in London have the same power there, as Justi∣ces of Peace elsewhere. That no person shall be punished for any offence against this Act, unless such offender be profecuted for the same within three months after the offence com∣mitted; and that no person who shall be punished for any offence by vertue of this Act, shall be punished for the same offence by vertue of any other Act or Law whatsoever. 15. Provided, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Al∣derman of London, for the time being, within the City of London and the Liberties thereof, shall have (and they and every of them are hereby impowered and required to execute) the fame power and authority within London and the Liberties there∣of for the examining, convicting, and punishing of all offences within this Act, committed within London and the Liberties thereof, which any Justice of Peace hath by this Act in any County of England; and shall be subject to the same penal∣ties and punishments for not doing that which by this Act is directed to be done by any Justice of Peace in any County of England. 16. Provided,Feme-Covert. and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the person offending and convicted as aforesaid be a Feme-Covert cohabiting with her Husband, the penalty of 5 s. or 10 s. so as aforesaid incurred, shall be levied by Warrant as aforesaid, upon the Goods and Chattels of the Husband of such Feme-Covert. 17. Provided also.Peers of the Realm. That no Peer of this Realm shall be attached or imprisoned by vertue or force of this Act, any thing, matter, or clause therein to the contrary notwithstanding. 18. Provided also,Proviso fr the Kings Supre∣macy. That neither this Act nor any thing therein contained, shall extend to invalidate or avoid his Majesties Supremacy in Ecclesiastical affairs; but that his Majesty and his Heirs and Successors, may from time to time, and at all times hereafter, exercise and enjoy all Powers and Authority in Ecclesiastical affairs as fully and as amply as himself or any of his Predecessors have or might have done the same, any thing in this Act notwithstanding. FINIS.
A Postscript touching Prosecutions in the Ecclesiastical Courts. HAving thus done with the Temporal Prosecutions, it may not be a∣miss to add a word concerning the Spiritual Persecutions now on foot, by Citations and Excommunications, not only to the great perplexi∣ty and trouble, but to the great expence of the people. In reference to which, Men are to consider whether the present Ecclesiastical severity be according to Law or no: For what ever is done to disturb the quiet and re∣pose of particular Subjects, contrary to Law, is down right Oppression. That the exercise of the Punishments of Excommunication and an Anathe∣ma is allowable against obdurate Hereticks and Schismaticks, is apparent from Scripture; and the same Scriptute directs both by whom, how, and upon whom these Sentences ought to be pronounced. On the other side, as there is no part of Scripture that erects any Ecclesiastical Courts of Judi∣cature, or Warrants the formal Processes of Citations, Pleas and Answers, or the extravagant Fees of Proctors, Apparitors and Promooters; so it ap∣pears, that since the Reformation, they have been abrogated by the Law of the Land, as being look'd upon meerly to be the effects of Popish Usur∣pation: For Episcopal Authority consists not so much in keeping Courts, as in a true Inspection and Care over the Flock of Christ; the Weapons of their Authory are only Admonition and Reprehension, and then Excom∣munication comes of course, a more Regular aud Apostolick way, than by Processes and Citations As to all other Jurisdiction comprehending Force and Compulsion, it is vested solely in the King, who is by all true Prote∣stants accounted the Defender of the Faith, and the supream Head of the Church. The Law it self runs thus. And whereas the Arch-Bishops, and Bishops, and other Spiritual persons in this Realm, do use to make and send out their Summons, Citations and other Processes, in their own names, and in such form and manner as was used in the time of the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome, contrary to the form and order of the Summons and Process of the Common Law used in this Realm (seeing that all Authority of Jurisdiction, Spiritual and Temporal, is derived and deducted from the Kings Majesty as supreme head of these Churches, and Realms of England and Ireland, so justly ac∣knowledged by the Clergy of the said Realm, that all Courts Ecclesiasti∣cal within the said two Realms) be kept by no other power or authori∣ty, either forreign or within the Realm, but by the authority of his most excellent Majesty. Be it therefore further enacted by the Authority afore∣said, that all Summons and Citations, or other Process Ecclesiastical, in all suits and causes of Instance betwixt party and party, and all causes of Correction, and all causes of Bastardy or Bigamy, or enquiry, de jure pa∣tronatus, Probates of Testaments, and Commissions of Administartions of persons deceased, and all Acquittances of, and upon account made by the Executor, Administrators, or Collectors of goods of any dead person, be from the first day of July next following, made in the name, and with the style of the King, as it is in Writs Original or Judicial at the Com∣mon Law: And that the Test thereof be in the name of the Arch-Bishop or Bishop, or other, having Excclesiastical Jurisdiction, who hath the Commission and grant of the Authority Ecclesiastical immediately from the Kings Highness, and that his Commissary, Official or Substitute, ex∣ercising Jurisdiction under him, shall put his name in the Citation or Pro∣cess, after the Test.
Further be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all manner of person or persons, who have the exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall have from the first day of July before expressed, in their Seals of Of∣fice, the Kings Highness Arms decently set, with certain Characters under the Arms, for the knowledge of the Diocess, and shall use no other Seal of Jurisdiction, but where His Mejesties Arms be ingraven, upon pain, that if any person shall use Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction (after the day before expres∣sed) in this Realm of England, Wales, or other his Dominions or Territo∣ries, and not send or make out the Citation of Process in the Kings name, or use any Seal of Jurisdiction other than before limited; that every such Offender shall incur, and run in the Kings Majesties displeasure and indig∣nation, and suffer Imprisonment at his Higness will and pleasure. Provided that no more, nor other Fees be taken or paid for the Seal and Writing of any Citations or other Process than was heretofore accustomed. Which being true, what power the Bishops have to hold their Spiritual Courts, and send out Process in their own Names, and to make Citations and Executions of Judgements under their own Seals, is an enquiry not improper for them that believed themselves wronged. This Act is said to have been repeal'd by the 1. and 2. of Philip, and Ma∣ry, c. 8. though no mention be made of it among the repeal'd Acts of that time. However, though it were, it was again reviv'd by the 1. of Eliz. c. 1. in these words, Most humbly beseech your most Excellent Majesty,Sect. 1. your faithful and o∣bedient Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this your present Parliament assembled, That where in the time of the Reign of your most dear Father of Worthy Memory, King Henry the 8th. divers good Laws and Statutes were made and Established, as well for the utter extinguishment and putting away of all Usurped and Forreign Pow∣ers and Authorities out of this your Realm, and other your Highness Do∣minions and Countries, as also for the restoring and uniting to the Imperi∣al Crown of this Realm, the Ancient Jurisdictions, Authorities, Superio∣rities and Preheminencies to the same of right belonging and appertaining, by reason whereof, we your most humble and obedient Subjects, from the Five and twentieth year of the Reign of your said dear Father, were con∣tinually kept in good order, and were disburdened of divers great and in∣tollerable Charges and Exactions before that time unlawfully taken and exacted by such Forreign power and authority as before that was usurped, until such time as all the said good Laws and Statutes, by one Act of Parlia∣ment made in the first and second years of the Reigns of the late King Phi∣lip, and Queen Mary your Highness Sister, intituled an Act Repealing all Statues, Articles and Provisions made against the See Apostolick of Rome, since the Twentieth year of King Henry the eight; and also for the Esta∣blishment of all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Possessions and Hereditaments conveyed to the Laity, were all clearly repealed and made void, as by the same Act of Repeal more at large doth and may appear; by reason of which Act of Repeal, your said humble Subjects were eftsoons brought un∣der an usurped Forreign Power and Authority, and yet do remain in that bondage, to the intollerable charges of your loving Subjects, if some re∣dress (by Authority of this your High Court of Parliament, with the as∣sent of your Highness) be not had and provided.
May it therefore please your Highness,Sect. 2. for the repressing of the said u∣surped Forreign Power, and the restoring of the Rites, Jurisdictions and Preheminencies appertaining to the Imperial Crown of this your Realm, that it may be Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament, That the said Act. made in the first and second years of the Reign of the said late King Philip and Queen Mary, and all and every branches, Clauses and Ar∣ticles therein contained (other than such branches, Clauses and Sentences, as hereafter shall be excepted) may from the last day of this Session of Parliament, by Authority of this present Parliament, be repealed, and shall from thenceforth be utterly void and of none effect. And to the intent that all Usurped and Forreign Power and Authority Spiritual and Temporal,Sect. 16. may for ever be clearly extinguished, and never be used or obeyed within this Realm, or any other your Majesties Domini∣ons or Countries, May it please your Highness that it may be further enact∣ed by the Authority aforesaid, That no Forreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, Spiritual or Temporal, shall at any time after the last day of this Session of Parliament, use, enjoy or exercise any manner of Power, Jurisdiction, Superiority, Authority, Preheminence, or Priviledg Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, within this Realm, or within any other your Ma∣jesties Dominions or Countries that now be, or hereafter shall be, but from thenceforth the same shall be clearly abolished out of this Realm, and all other your Highness Dominions for ever; any Statute, Ordinance, Custom, Constitutions, or any other matter or cause whatsoever to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And that also it may please your Highness that it may be established and enacted by the Authority aforesaid,Sect. 17. that such Jurisdictions, Priviledges, Superiorities and Preheminencies Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by any Spi∣ritual or Ecclesiastical Power or Authority hath heretofore been, or may lawfully be exercised or used for the Visitation of the Ecclesiastical State and Persons, and for Reformation, Order and Correction of the same and of all manner of Errors, Heresies, Scismes, Abuses, Offences, Contempts and Enormities, shall for ever, by Authority of this present Parliament, be united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. And that your Highness,Sect. 18. your Heirs and Successors, Kings or Queens of this Realm, shall have full Power and Authority by vertue of this Act, by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, to Assign, Name and Authorize, when, and as often as your Highness, your Heirs or Succes∣sors shall think meet and Convenient, and for such and so long time as shall please your Highness, your Heirs or Successors, such Person or Persons be∣ing natural born Subjects to your Highness your Heirs and Successors, as your Majesty, your Heirs or Successors shall think meet to exercise, use, occupy, and execute under your Highness, your Heirs and Successors, all manner of Jurisdictions, Priviledges, and Preheminencies in any wise touching or concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within these your Realms of England and Ireland, or any other your Highness Dominions and Countries, and to visit, reform, redress, order, correct and amend all such errors, heresies, schismes, abuses, offences, contempts and enormities whatsoever, which by any manner of Spiritual or Ecclesi∣astical Power, Authority or Jurisdiction, can, or may lawfully be reform∣ed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained, or amended to the pleasure of Almighty God, the increase of Vertue, and the conservation of the Peace and Unity of this Realm. And that such person or persons so to be named, assigned, authorised and appointed by your Highness, your Heirs
or Successors, after the said Letters Patents to him or them made and de∣livered, as is aforesaid, shall have full power and authority, by vertue of this Act and of the said Letters Patents under your Highness, your Heirs and Successors, to exercise, use and execute all the premises, according to the Tenor and effect of the said Letters Patents; any matter or cause to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. By which branches of this Statute, it seems to be most demonstrable, that all manner of Jurisdiction in Causes Spiritual and Ecclesiastical is in∣vested in the Crown, and that no Spiritual Courts may be holden, but by the Kings Commission. Lastly, By the 16. Car. primi, the very branch of the Statute for granting Commissions is also repealed, which left the Ecclesiastical Courts no pow∣er at all. Seeing then that all Power both Temporal and Ecclesiastical is vested in the King, it seems to be a high point of disobedience, for Subjects to hold Courts of Judicature to disturb and punish the Kings Liege People, without any Legal Authority. From whence may arise these few short Quaeries. Qu. 1. Whither it be not proper for the persons cited, to demand the sight and hearing of the Commission, by which the Judges claim their Ju∣risdiction? 1st. for their own safety? 2dly, In point of Loyalty to the King? 3dly, As being obliged by the Oath of Supremacy to renounce l Forreign Jurisdictions? Qu. 2. Supposing the said Judges produce no Authority from the King, yet proceed to Excommunication, whether the said Excommunication be not void? Qu. 3. Whether the said Judges be not Indictable upon a Pramunire? or liable to an Action, as Counsel shall direct? For what remains, the parties concerned may take their measures as they find most necessary for self preservation, from Mr. Cary's True Guide for all persons concern'd in Ecclesiastick Courts. FINIS.
