C7715 R17286 11738437 48468
HEAVEN OPENED, And the Pains of Purgatory AVOIDED, BY THE Very great Indulgences Of the two most Illustrious Arch-Confraternities: The One Of our Blessed Lady, called the ROSARY, And the Other Of the Seraphical Father St. FRANCIS, called, The Cord of the Passion. Printed in the Year, 1663.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE AND MOST REVEREND THE LORD Walter Mountague, Great Almoner to the QUEEN Mother. And Abbot of St. Martin, and Nantheüil in France, MY LORD, THis little Trea∣tise is due to your Lordship and to none else. For it containeth wonderful Priviledges,
and easie Obligations of Two, not onely the most Noble and Excel∣lent, but likewise the most Profitable Arch-Confraternities that have ever been in Gods Church, viz. The Arch-Confraternity of our Bles∣sed Lady, called the Ro∣sary, and the Arch-Con∣fraternity of our Seraphi∣cal Father Saint Francis. Though the whole Church of Somerset∣house,
and the Riches and Ornaments which raise its Splendor, pub∣lish to the World, the Queen Mothers great Piety: Yet notwithstan∣ding the Chappel of the holy Rosary is in some sort Yours, by a special Grant from Her Maje∣sty. It seemes there was an Holy strife between Her Royal Zeal, and Your excellent Fervor concerning the Decora∣tion
of that most Sacred Place: And after so Vertuous a Contest, the Queens Humility suffer∣ed it self to be overcome by Your Fervour, con∣descending that Your Pious Devotion to our Blessed Lady, should cause You even in your absence, to adorn and enrich that August Chap∣pel at Your proper Cost. Now for us Capucins, since we have the Honor
to wear the holy Weed of St. Francis, to profess his Rule, and to be his Children; and You, my Lord, as Her Majesties Great Almoner, being our Superiour, You are likewise Superiour of the Arch-Confraternity of our Seraphical Father. This little Book therefore be∣ing in so many respects due to You, it would be an act of Injustice to offer it to any other. To avoid
which, I here present it to Your Lordship, and with it, the hearty servi∣ces, respects, and submis∣sions of all the Capucins, and particularly of My LORD, Your most humble and obedi∣ent Servant, F. Cyprien, Capucin, Chaplaine to the Queen Mother.
THE PREFACE. THe Queen Mothers Extra∣ordinary Piety, having once more settled the No∣ble Church of Somerset-House, hath also given way to the re-settling of the most Illustrious Arch-Confraternity of our Blessed Lady, commonly called the Rosary; in which, about Thirty years ago, She was at her own desire Enrol∣led; her humility being such, that She vouchsafed to be called a Si∣ster of the same. But this is not
sufficient; it is moreover requisite, that the wonderful Priviledges and easie Obligations of that holy Arch-confraternity should be made known. I being resolved there∣fore to set them forth, happily met with a Book concerning that mat∣ter, written and published by a Pious and Learned Priest of the Order of St. Bennet, out of which I have collected what was neces∣sary for our purpose, and dispo∣sed it as followeth.
HEAVEN OPENED, And the Pains of Purgatory AVOIDED, &c. The Eminency and Holiness of our Blessed Lady. THe Perfections, Attri∣butes, Priviledges, and Prerogatives of our Bles∣sed Lady are such, and so great, that it is im∣possible for any one in this world (I will not say to express, but even) to comprehend them. Ne∣vertheless, that we may conceive some∣thing
thereof, let us consider, 1. That She was Appointed, De∣signed, and Predestinated by the Ho∣ly Trinity from all Eternity, to be the Worthy Mother of the Word Incarnate. 2. That her Birth was not only prae∣figured, promised, and prophesied of, but foretold also by an Angel appear∣ing to her sterile Parents immediately before her Conception. 3. That being born free from all sin, she led a life so full of Sanctity, so sin∣gular in all Purity, so excellent in all Perfections, that she deserved (saith St. Augustine) through Her Creators Mercy, to be chosen the Mother of Gods Son. 4. That she was a Mother, yet re∣maining a Virgin, even the Mother of God, which is an Attribute alone, con∣taining whatsoever is Great, Glorious, and Excellent. St. Gregory Neocesariensis in his second Sermon of the Anuntia∣tion, saith, That the sense of this only Word, Gods Mother, exceeds all other Encomiums which Men or Angels can confer upon Her. Being Gods Mo∣ther,
She is United to a term of an In∣finite perfection, and in a certain man∣ner Elevated to a Divine Order, saith St. Thomas, par. 1. qu. 25. art. 6. ad. 4. Saint Chrysostome in his Sermon of the Blessed Virgin, calleth her the Miracle, and the Miracle of Miracles. And Saint John Damascen, in his first Oration of the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, an Abysse of Miracles. The Christians Devotion to our Blessed Lady. THe Devotion of all faithful Chri∣stians towards the Holy Virgin Mary, is as Antient as our Faith and Christianity it self, She being Consti∣tuted our Mother, by the bequest of her Blessed Son, when on the Cross he uttered these words to St. John, and in his person, to all Christians: Son, be∣hold thy Mother; whereupon St. Bernard saith, If Mary be thy Mother, O Chri∣stian, then is Jesus thy Brother; then Christs Father, is thy Father; then his Heaven, is thy Inheritance; then Maries
Grace is thy Treasure, for Mothers u∣sually lay up treasures for their Chil∣dren: then she is sensible of all thy suf∣ferings, solicitous to supply thy wants, and careful to provide for thy necessi∣ties, for a Mother is tender over her Children; therefore, O Christian, make choice of Mary for thy Mother. I well know (saith the antient Father Theophylact) that thou, O most glorious Queen Mother, art the great Protectrix of mankind; and who is he, that ha∣ving placed his confidence in thee, hath remained confounded? Let us therefore to her make our humble addresses in all our necessities, since she is so powerful to assist us, so merciful to admit us, and so ready to relieve us. O Beatissima (saith S. Anselm, Arch-Bp. of Cant.) sicut omnis à te aversus & à te de spectus necesse est ut intereat, ita omnis ad te conversus & à te respectus impossibile est ut pereat. As he, O most blessed Mary, must needs perish, who turneth his back to thee, and whom thou rejectest from thy favours, so it is impossible, that he should perish, that is zealous of thy ho∣nour, and whom thou vouchsafest to behold and countenance.
I hold (saith Origen) as an assured verity; that the Virgin Mary will ne∣ver abandon that person that implores her assistance in the time of his neces∣sity; for she is full of goodness, full of mercy, and full of grace, and therefore cannot refuse to compassionate him that calleth upon her. The Practise of the Rosary, is an excellent Devotion to our Bles∣sed Lady. IF we consider the holy Rosary Pre∣rogatives, we shall find that it far ex∣ceeds all other sorts of devotion of this nature. Though every zealous Chri∣stian may so duly, diligently, and with such perseverance practise his devoti∣ons in his own private Oratory, as to arrive at the perfection of vertue and the salvation of his soul; yet these heights are not there obtained with that alacrity, facility, security and abun∣dance, as in conjunction with sacred Confraternities, which are the Aca∣demies of Devotion, Schools of San∣ctity, and Buttresses of Religion, Pie∣ty
and Perfection, where the fervour and good example of his faithful asso∣ciates, will warm his tepidity, excite his piety, adde continual fewel of cou∣rage and constancy to his resolutions, and make him partaker of many Pray∣ers, Merits, and spiritual Graces. Dum singuli orant pro omnibus, omnes orant pro singulis. When as every single person pray for all, it followeth that all pray for every single person, saith St. Ambrose. The Brethren and Sisters of these Con∣fraternities being any where received, are every where priviledged, and so made happy partakers of the spiritual perfections of all those persons, who are registred either in Rome, in Paris, or in any other part of the world. To come now in particular to the Confraternity of the Rosary. Surely that manner of Prayer cannot but be very pleasing to God, profitable to our selves, and grateful to the Blessed Vir∣gin, which directly tendeth to the ad∣vancement of the Divine Honour, the promotion of our own Happiness, and the encrease of the Sacred Mothers glory. Now the exercises of the Ro∣sary
aim at these three heroick ends. For 1. Since the Rosary consists of the two richest pieces of Christian Piety, viz. the Pater noster and Ave Maria, to∣gether with the principal mysteries of our Christian Faith, what Subject can be imagined more proper? What Ob∣ject can possibly be more powerful to raise our souls to the love, praise, & ho∣nour of our Creator & Redeemer, then the due and daily consideration of those Divine mysteries, which are, as it were the Sacred Tables, and lively Pictures, representing continually to our memo∣ries their admirable benefits, excessive love, and infinite liberality to mankind? 2. By what Prayers can we more confidently promise to our selves the obtaining of our just desires, and con∣sequently, the promoting of our Sal∣vation, then by the Pater noster, a pray∣er dictated by our Redeemers own Di∣vine Mouth, enjoyned by his special command, to be frequently used of all faithful Christians, and by him endued with so great efficacy and vertue? 3. By what Ladder of Praise can we more probably reach the glorious Vir∣gin
Moihers perfections, then by the Ave-Mary, a Salutation framed in Hea∣ven by the holy Trinity it self, and from thence brought down to earth by it's Ambassador the Angel Gabriel, in which, all the Greatness, Excellency, and Prerogatives of Gods Mother, are so briefly, distinctly, and Divinely Couched? The Author of the Rosary. THe Author of the Rosary, in the particular method and manner wherein we now recite it, and the be∣ginner of this Sacred Confraternity was St. Dominick, as appears by the Bull of Pius quintus in these words; The blessed St. Dominick, directed (as is pi∣ously believed) by Gods Holy Spirit, when France and Italy were miserably overspread with the Heresie of the Albi∣genses, lifting up his eyes to Heaven, and beholding that Mountain, the Glo∣rious Virgin Mary, Gods holy Mother, invented and propagated, a very easie, plain, and pious method of Prayer, &c.
The Name and manner of Recital of the Rosary. THis Devotion hath several Names, some having reference to the num∣ber of Salutations therein contained, call it the Virgin Maries Psalter, in imitation of the Psalter of David, con∣sisting of the same number of Psalms, viz. an hundred and fifty. Or alluding to that musical Instrument, by the An∣cient Grecians called Organum, and by the later Psalterium, composed of an hundred and fifty pipes, (the just num∣ber of these our Salutations) on which the Psalms of David were usually sung to the Divine Praise and Honour. Others call it by the now commonly received denomination of the Rosary, and that most properly, for as a Rosary litterally signifieth a place beset with odoriserous Roses; so this our Rosary, mystically betokeneth the sweet fra∣grancy which replenisheth their Souls who devoutly praise the Divine Majesty, and honour the Virgin Mary. The Ro∣sary
then is a certain peculiar manner of offering up our prayers to the Di∣vine Majesty, in honor of his holy Mo∣ther, by the recital of one hundred and fifty Angelical Salutations, prefixed to each ten of them the Lords Prayer, with a Meditation upon one of the Mysteries of our Saviour, or our blessed Lady. These Mysteries are in all fifteen, whereof five are called Joyful, five Sor∣rowful, and five Glorious. The Joy∣ful are 1. The Annunciation of the An∣gel, 2. The Visitation of St. Elizabeth, 3. The Nativity of our Lord, 4. His Presentation in the Temple, 5. His Disputing, being a Child, with the Do∣ctors. The five Sorrowful, are 1 Christs Agony in the Garden, 2. His Whip∣ping at the Pillar, 3. His Crowning with Thorns, 4. His carrying of the Cross, 5. His Crucifying and Death. The five glorious, are, 1. The Resur∣rection of our Lord, 2. His Assension, 3. The coming of the Holy Ghost, 4. The Assumption of our blessed Lady, 5. Her Crowning above all Angels.
The Excellency of the Rosary. ALL that can make any Association excellent is in this Confraternity, Antiquity, Extent, Generality, easi∣ness, Spiritual profit, large community of Merits, vast treasures of Indulgen∣cies, &c. Antiquity, of above four hun∣dred years. Extent, being spread over the whole habitable world, acknowledg∣ing no other limits, then those which bound the Universal Catholick Church. Generality, no person being excluded from it's participation. Easiness, requi∣ring no more knowledge, then the skill to recite the Pater and Ave, no more expences than the prise of a paire of Beads, no other place than where every one lives, no other scite of body, than that in which Devotion finds us, whe∣ther it be standing, sitting, lying, wal∣king or kneeling. Spiritual profit, first in respect of the especial Patronage and Protection of the Blessed Virgin; for though She is a careful Mother of all faithful Christians, yet surely She is more tenderly solicitous for the dome∣sticks
of Her Family, more heedfully diligent for the advancement of Her devoted Servants, more seriously stu∣dious for the good of Her dutiful Chil∣dren. Secondly, in respect of the com∣munity of Merits amongst the Members of this Sacred society; for it is a point of our Faith, that the Merits of all the Saints, are common to all faithful Chri∣stians; that there is a communication between the Church militant upon Earth, and the Church suffering in Purgatory, and the Church Trium∣phant in Heaven. But besides this ge∣neral communication of spiritual goods and merits among all faithful Christi∣ans, there is another bank in the bo∣dies of Confraternities, common to them alone who are of their particular Family and Community, and from whence all the influences of Graces and Blessings which Heaven imparts to this whole body, inflow into each one of its Members. Now, what an immense profit is it to have a part in all the zea∣lous Prayers, Meditations, actual Cha∣rity, and exercises of Vertue and Piety, performed in a whole Confraternity?
all which, entring into common, and making one only depositum, redound to each particular Members spiritual profit and advantage. so that when any one of us offers up his Prayers to the Throne of Mercy, he prayes (as it were) by as many mouths as there are Bre∣thren and Sisters in the whole Confra∣ternity; now, what an incredible force must this needs add to our Petitions? How can a just demand, presented by so many pious Souls, sent up to Heaven by so many humble hearts, pronoun∣ced by so many devout Tongues, suffer a repulse? Besides, what an inestimable profit is it to have a share of Merits in so many Divine Sacrifices of the Masse, celebrated through the whole world, yearly, monthly, weekly, daily to Gods Glory, to his Mothers Honour, to his Saints praises, to the solace of the liv∣ing, to the succor of the dead? Ano∣ther profit of great importance, is a confidence, a comfort, and a kind of security in the article of death. Death is commonly bitter for the cessation of all pleasures, dangerous for the Devils temptations, dreadful for the severe
Judgment immediately ensuing: but to the Members of this sacred Confrater∣nity death is not so bitter, because long before expected, prevented, pro∣vided for, the Devils temptations are not to them so dangerous, because the daily use of their Spiritual weapons, renders the expert in these combats, able to foil their adversaries, and expe∣rienced to defend themselves: The ap∣prehension of Gods Judgments is not to them so dreadful, because they con∣tinually think of them, and according∣ly order their life and actions, dis∣charge their consciences of sin, pra∣ctice works of piety, and endeavour to acquire the Sacred Virgins favour, in hope to have Her their Friend and Ad∣vocate, which is surely the best way to die with safety and security. So the Devotion to our Blessed Lady in this Confraternity, is a probable sign of be∣ing predestinated to eternal felicity: with the holy, you shall be holy, (saith the Psalmist) and with the elect, elect∣ed; but what better sign of holiness, what surer token of Election can one have in this life, then to be associated
with so many good souls, aspiring zea∣lously, and unanimously to piety, to perfection, to salvation? Another Spiritual profit that all Christians ought to look after, consists in the several, and very great Indul∣gences following. Of the Indulgences conferred up∣on the Confraternity of the Rosary. WE shall mention none but such as are expresly avouched by appro∣ved and authentical Authors, and di∣rectly drawn out of the Popes Bulls and Indults, omitting the multitude of less Indulgences which remit certain days, years, and quarantines of enjoyned pe∣nances, and set down the plenary Indulgences. I. At their first Admittance. UPon the day that any one is first received and Enroled into the Sa∣cred
Confraternity of the Rosary, ha∣ving confessed, and communicated, and recited a third part of the Rosary, and prayed for the peace and tranquility of the Church, he gains a plenary Indul∣gence, and remission of all his sins. Pius quintus in his Bull, consueverunt Romani pontifices, 27. of Sept. 1559. II. At their own Choise. ANy Member of the Rosary, hath the liberty once in his life, and at the Articles of his Death, to make use of any Ghostly Father, who is im∣powered to confer upon him a plenary Indulgence. Innocentius octavus, 15. Octob. 1484. III. At the hour of Death. IN the hour, Agony, and Article of Death. 1. Being confessed, and communi∣cated a plenary Indulgence, Pius quin∣tus Consueverunt, 27. Sept. 1557. 2. Or saying (with mouth, or in heart) Jesus Maria, a plenary.
3. Or calling thrice (either by mouth or in heart) upon the Holy Name of Jesus, a plenary. Pius quin∣tus, Greg. 13. Clem. 8. 4. Or having a blessed Candle of the Confraternity in their hand, in ho∣nour of the Blessed Virgin Mary, at the time of their departure, a plenary. Adrianus Sextus, Illius qui Domini∣cum, cal. Aprilis, 1523. Who is cited and confirmed by Clement the seventh Ineffabilia 10. cal. Aprilis, 1529. To gain which indulgence, the third part of the Rosary must have been (at least once recited in the Chappel of the Rosary, or in some place where the re∣citer thereof might have a view of the Rosary Altar, as appears by the colla∣tions of the words of the Popes grants, and by the ends for which they grant this priviledge, to wit, that the Rosa∣rists may shew more reverence and re∣spect to their Mothers Altar, and often visit it with more Devotion, all which is to be understood, where these conve∣niencies may be obtained; otherwise they may perform these devotions, and obtain the like Indulgencies in any o∣ther
Church or Oratory according to the express dispensation of the said Popes. IV. Every first Sunday within the Month. 1. HAving confessed and communi∣cated a plenary. Greg. 13. Pasto∣ris aeterni die quinta Maii, 1581. 2. Or visiting the Altar of the Rosary a plenary, Greg. 13. 3. Or being present at the Procession of the Rosary a plenary. Greg. 13. Ad augendam, 28. Octob. 1577. Paulus quin∣tus Piorum hominum 15. April. 1608. V. Ʋpon the seven Feasts of our Blessed Lady, which are: THe Purification, Annunciation, Visiration, Assumption, Nativity, Presentation and Conception. 1. Being confessed and communica∣ted, or being contrite with a will to confess and communicate at fit time a plenary. 2. Or visiting the Altar of the Rosary a plenary.
3. Or being present at the Processi∣ons of the Rosary upon these dayes a plenary. Pius quartus Dum praeclara meritorum, 1562. VI. For saying or hearing the Mass of the Rosary. 1. THey who by vertue of their pri∣viledges shall say the Mass of the Rosary, gain a plenary Indulgence. 2. Or shall cause it to be said a ple∣nary. 3. Or hear it, gain all the Indulgen∣ces which are granted to them that re∣cite once the whole Rosary which is a plenary. Paulus tertius ultimo Augusti, 1537. the said Mass of the Rosary thus begins, Salve radix sancta, &c. which grant is confirmed by Sixtus quintus, Dum ineffabilia, 3. Jan. 1586. VII. For saying the Rosary. THey who shall recite the whole Ro∣sary, gain toties quoties a plenary. Julius 2. and Leo 10. who granted a plenary to them who recited the Crown
of our Lady, consisting of sixty three Ave Maries, with seven Pater noster's in∣terposed; which Paul the Third com∣municated and extended to all such as should recite the whole Rosary toties quoties. VIII. For the dayes in which the fifteen Mysteries of the Rosary are celebrated. THey who being truly penitent, confessed and communicated, shall devoutly visit the Chappel of the Rosary upon the dayes in which the fifteen Mysteries thereof are celebrated, gain a plenary Indulgence. Greg. 13. Pastoris aeterni, 5. Maii 1581. IX. For praying for the Dead. 1. EVery time they recite the whole Rosary for the departed, they gain the delivery of a soul out of Pur∣gatory, Paulus 3.3. Junii 1542. gran∣ted this vivae vocis oraculo, to the Rosa∣rists of the Kingdom of Spain; which Pius quintus Consueverunt, Greg. 13. Pa∣storis
aeterni, and Sixtus quintus, Dum ineffabilia, extend to all other Confra∣ternities of the Rosary throughout the world. 2. As oft as they shall say; cause to be said, or are present at the Mass of the Rosary, celebrated for that inten∣tion, they free a Soul out of Purga∣tory. 3. All the Indulgences granted to the living, may be applied to the dead, by communicating, saying Mass of the Rosary, reciting the Rosary, &c. for them, Paulus 3.13. Aug. 1537. See John Carthagen. homilia 6. de Rosario. X. For them who cannot be pre∣sent. SUch Brethren and Sisters of the Ro∣sary, who by reason of sickness, journey, imprisonment, persecution, service, distance, danger, or any other lawful impediment, cannot be present at the processions aforesaid, nor visit the Altar of the Rosary, may notwith∣standing, gain all the indulgencies as if they were present.
1. By confessing and communicating. 2. Or by saying the Rosary. 3. Or the seven penitential Psalms, before some Altar or devout Picture. Greg. 13. Ad augendam devotionem, 29. Aug. 1579. Idem in Bulla. Cupientes. 24. Decemb. 1583. XI. Of the Stations of Rome. ALl the Indulgences of the Stations of Rome, are granted to the Mem∣bers of the Rosary, by visiting upon these dayes five Altars; or one only if there be no more, and reciting before each Altar five Paters and five Aves; or twenty-five before that one Altar. Leo 10. Maii 22. 1518. which grant Cle∣ment the Seventh recites and comfirms in his brief Etsi temporalium, 8. idus Maii 1534. and Paulus 3. Rationi con∣gruit, 3. Novemb. 1534. and Pius 5. In∣ter desiderabilia, 28. Junii 1569. XII. ANd these are the chief part of that vast Treasure of Indulgences and
Priviledges granted to the Arch-Con∣fraternity of the sacred Rosary. The rest being of less consequence, would we conceive, be as tedious to be read, as they are indeed needless to be known by them who shall duly consider, that besides the particular indulgences, which are determined to certain dayes times and places, there are others which are general, unlimited, perpe∣tual, and which we shall briefly set be∣fore you as a close of this Catalogue of Indulgences. I. Every day a Plenary. THe first is, that they who are of the Rosary, in the state of Grace, and having a general intention to pray for such ends as are required; which are the three conditions absolutely neces∣sary for the obtaining of any of these Indulgences, may gain a plenary upon every day in the year, and consequent∣ly every hour of their whole life, by performing any one of these things following:
1. Saying the Rosary. 2. Celebrating the Mass of the Ro∣sary. 3. Causing it to be said. 4. Hearing it. 5. Visiting five Altars, or one if there be no more, and saying five Paters and Aves before each Alttar, or 25. before the one. The Consequence hereof is most clear. 1. Because a plenary is annexed to the due performance of these acts of Piety toties quoties, how oft soever they are done, without any restriction. 2. Because at Rome, in the Church of St. John Lateran, there may be gained a plenary, if any one pleases, six times every day, and in each one of the seven Churches of the Stations; all which, and all other City Indulgen∣ces are granted to all the Brothers and Sisters of the Rosary, performing the Devotions aforesaid, wheresoever dis∣persed throughout the whole world by Leo the Tenth, 22. Maii 1518. and by the succeeding chief Pastors.
II. Every day a Soul out of Purgatory. THe second is, that they may every day, praying and being disposed as aforesaid, obtain the deliverance of a soul out of Purgatory; which direct∣ly follows from the former: First, since all the Indulgences granted to the liv∣ing may be applyed to the dead. Se∣condly, since at Rome there is every day in one part or other of the City, the delivery of a soul out of Purgatory. The particular grants of all these before recited Indulgences, may be seen at large in Peter Louvet, Aiphonsus Fernandez, Andreas Coppentanius, and other Fathers of the Order of St. Do∣minick, who faithfully collected and published them according to their Ori∣ginals. Misericordias Domini in aeternum can∣tabo. Our grateful hearts, O our Eter∣nal King! Shall ever of your boundless mer∣cies sing.
How these Indulgences are to be gained by the Members of the Rosary. FIrst, these Indulgences are not in∣differently obtained by all sorts of persons, but by such only as have duly and diligently purified, prepared, and disposed their souls to receive them by precedent penance, or have led their lives in such innocency since their last Confession, as that they continue in the state of Grace; or have made an act of contrition and detestation of their mortal sins, with purpose of con∣fessing them in fit time, and avoiding them for the future. Secondly, that they must obey such other particular commands as the Bulls of Indulgences import; that is, they must punctually perform the en∣joyned actions of Alms-deeds, Fast∣ings, Prayers, Processions, Visitations of Altars, and all other the works of Devotion and Piety there expressed. Thirdly, that they must offer up
their devotions for these generally re∣commended ends and intentions in all the concessions of Indulgences. 1. For the encrease of Gods ho∣nour and glory. 2. For the exaltation of the Catho∣lick Church. 3. For the prosperity of the Sea Apostolick. 4. For the peace of Christian Princes. 5. For the re-union of Schismaticks. 6. For the Conversion of Hereticks. 7. For the Correction of Sinners. 8. For the Consolation of the affli∣cted, both living and departed. The conditions of this Confra∣ternity. FIrst, all Christians of whatsoever calling and condition, may be re∣ceived into this Sacred Confraternity, without any obligation to pay any thing for their entrance or admittance, Leo 10. Pastoris aeterni, 1520. pridie no∣nas Octob. Secondly, there is to be a particular book provided, wherein the names and
surnames of all such as are admitted, must be Registred. Thirdly, whosoever is thus admitted in any one place, is made partaker of the prayers and Merits of all them that are of this Confraternity throughout the whole Universe. Fourthly, not onely the living, but also the faithful departed, to wit, the Souls in Purgatory may be received, and enrolled in this Confraternity, and made partakers of these spiritual bene∣fits, if any of the living Brethren and Sisters shall desire and procure it, per∣forming for their deceased friends, such pious duties and devotions as the Rules demand. Fifthly, all the Brothers and Sisters, are obliged to recite every week the en∣tire Rosary, which they may, as them∣selves please, either perform together, or divide into three parts for their greater ease and conveniency. Sixthly, In case of any lawful impe∣diment, the Brothers and Sisters cau∣sing the Rosary to be recited for them by another, satisfie their own obli∣gation.
Seventhly, If through forgetfulness, multiplicity of employments, or neg∣ligence, (and not out of contempt) they omit this weekly recital of the Ro∣sary, it is no sin, but only for that time a privation of such spiritual benefits, whereof they should otherways have been partakers. Eighthly, All the Rosarists should be present at the Mass and Procession, which are usually performed in the head Chappel upon all the feast dayes of the Sacred Virgin, and first Sun∣dayes of the month; this is injoyned by Pius quartus, in his brief, cum prae∣clara. Ninthly, Four Anniversaries are to be Celebrated every year at the Rosa∣ries Altar, for the Souls of their depar∣ted Brethren and Sisters, upon the mor∣rows of our blessed Ladies four princ∣pal Festivities, which are Her Nativity, Annunciation, Purification, Assump∣tion; at which all the Rosarists should also assist, that they may expect the same piety for their surviuing brethren as for themselves after their own de∣cease; when the dayes next following
the four Feasts, fall out to be either Sundayes, or some other greater So∣lemnities, then this Anniversary duties are remitted to the next day. Tenthly, The great Feast of the Ro∣sary, is not to be henceforth solemni∣zed as it was formerly upon the five and twenty day of March, but upon the first Sunday of October, for an Eternal and grateful Rememoration of that most remarkable and altogether miraculous Naval Victory, gained over the Turks, by a handful of Christians, in the bay of Lepanto, in the gulph of Acaia, upon the seventh day of October, which was then the first Sunday of that Month in the year 1571. about the end of Pius quintus's Popedom, (who was the zea∣lous promotor of this holy War) in which, twenty of the enemies Gallies were consumed with fire, as many more ingulphed by the Waves, one hundred and fourscore taken, the great Bashaw, with twenty five thousand Turkish Soul∣diers slain in the place, most of the re∣sidue brought away Captives, twenty thousand Christians freed from their slavery, and the Catholick Cause asser∣ted
from most eminent danger and ca∣lamity; the Pope Gregory 13. in his Bull Monet Apostolus, attribute this great Victory to the Prayers of the devout Rosarists, who even at that very time, were making their publick processions in the several parts of Christendom for this end, and imploring most earnestly the Divine assistance, by the Intercessi∣on of this powerful Mother. Eleventhly, The third Sunday of April, is also to be Solemnized by the devout Rosarists, according to the grant of Pope Gregory 13. in his Bull, Cum si∣cut accepimus, Jan. 3. 1579. The rea∣son of the Institution of this Solemni∣ty, was an entire cessation of the ra∣ging pestilence in Padua, when the In∣habitants had made a vow to erect a Chappel, which should be dedicated Virgini liberatrici, after their delive∣rance.
Our Blessed Ladies Litanies, that are sung for their Majesties the Queens, Henrietta Maria, and Katherina, and for all other people, all the Saturdayes, Sun∣dayes, and Holy-dayes, at the Chappel-Royal of Sommerset-house. KYrie eleison, Christe eleison, Ky∣rie eleison, Christe audi nos, Chri∣ste exaudi nos. Pater de Caelis Deus, Miserere nobis. Fili Redemptor mundi Deus, Mise∣rere nobis. Spiritus sancte Deus, Miserere nobis. Sancta Trinitas unus Deus, Misere no∣bis. Sancta Maria, Ora pro nobis. Sancta Dei genetrix ora Sancta Virgo Virginum ora Mater Christi ora
Mater divinae gratiae ora Mater purissima ora Mater Castissima ora Mater Inviolata ora Mater Intemerata ora Mater amabilis ora Mater admirabilis ora Mater Creatoris ora Mater Salvatoris ora Virgo Prudentissima ora Virgo veneranda ora Virgo Praedicanda ora Virgo Potens ora Virgo Clemens ora Virgo fidelis ora Speculum justitiae ora Sedes sapientiae ora Causa nostrae laetitiae ora Vas spirituale ora Vas honorabile ora Vas insigne devotionis ora Rosa Mystica ora Turris Davidica ora Turris eburnea ora Domus aurea ora Faederis area ora Janua Caeli ora Stella matutina ora
Salus infirmorum ora Refugium peccatorum ora Confolatrix afflictorum ora Auxilium Christianorum ora Regina Angelorum, ora Regina Patriarcharum ora Regina Prophetarum ora Regina Apostolorum ora Regina Martyrum ora Regina Confessorum, ora Regina Virginum ora Regina Sanctorum omnium ora Regina Sacratissima Rosarii, ora Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi, parce nobis Domine. Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi, exaudi nos Domine. Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis. Antiphona. Sub tuum praesidium con∣fugimus, Sancta Dei genetrix, nostras deprecationes ne despicias in necessitatibus nostris: sed a periculis cunctis libera nos semper Virgo gloriosa & benedicta.
Ora pro nobis sancta Dei genetrix. Ut digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi. Salvas fac ancillas tuas Reginas nostras Henericam Mariam & Katharinam. Deus meus sperantes in te. Mitte eis Domine auxilium de sancto. Et de Sion tuere eas. Domine exaudi orationem meam. Et clamor meus ad te veniat. Dominus vobiscum. Et cum spiritu tuo. Oremus. COncede nos famulos tuos quaesumus Domine Deus perpetuâmentis & cor∣poris sanitate gaudere, & gloriosâ Beatae Mariae semper Virginis intercessione, à prae∣senti liberari tistitiâ, & aeterna perfrui laetitiâ. Ecclesiae tuae, quaesumus Domine, preces placatus admitte; ut destructis adversita∣tibus & erroribus universis, securâ tibi serviat libertate. Deus servientium tibi fortitudo Regno∣rum, propitiare precibus nostris, & Sere∣nissimas
Reginas nostras Henricam Ma∣riam, & Catharinam ab omni adversitate deffende, ut salus servientium tibi famu∣larum, pax tuorum possit esse populorum. Per Christum Dominum nostrium. Amen. Divinum auxilium maneat semper nobiscum. Amen. The form of offering ones self to the Blessed Virgin Mary, to be admitted into her Con∣fraternity. THrice sacred Virgin Mary, Mother of God! IN. N. though most unworthy to be registred amongst your servants, yet mov'd (by that Good∣ness which the Angels admire in you) to an ardent desire of honouring, lo∣ving, and serving you; do here this day with all possible humility, sinceri∣ty, and devotion, (in the presence of my Angel Guardian, and the whole Court of Heaven) make a choice of you for my singular Lady, Advocate,
and Mother; firmly purposing to ho∣nour, love, and serve you, with all filial duty, diligence, and fidelity; and to procure (as much as it shall lye in my power) that all others may do the same. I therefore most heartily beseech you, (O merciful and compassionate Mo∣ther!) by the pretious Blood which your dearly beloved son, my Blessed Saviour, shed for me in his bitter pas∣sion; That you will be graciously plea∣sed to receive and admit me into the number of your devout Clients, as one dedicated to your perpetual service. Be you favourable to me (O Blessed Lady!) and obtain for me of your All-powerful Son, that I may so be∣have my self in all my Thoughts, Words, and Actions, as never more to think, speak, or act any thing dis∣pleasing to his sacred Majesty.) Grant furthermore (O my good and gracious Mother!) that I may never forget you, nor forfeit this my now made promise of honouring, loving, and serving you all the days of my life; that so I may never be forgotten, for∣saken, nor abandoned by you; but be al∣ways
ways protected, aided, and assisted by you, especially in the hour of my Death. Amen. Then the Superior receives him or her into the Confraternity, by speaking these words, and given them his Benediction, as follows. BY the Authority, which is com∣mitted to me for this end, by the Superiours of the holy Order of St. Do∣minick: I receive you into the Con∣fraternity of the Rosary of the most Blessed Virgin Mary: And do admit you to a participation of all the spiri∣tual Benefits, which (by the merits of Jesus Christ) the Brothers and Sisters of the sacred Rosary do commonly enjoy. ✚ In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, ✚ and of the holy Ghost, Amen. Then laying the Bedes upon the Altar, he puts a stole about his neck, and blesseth them for the use of the newly received Brother or Sister: say∣ing as followeth.
The Blessing of the Bedes of the Rosary. Vers. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini. Resp. Qui fecit caelum & terram. Psal. Laudate Dominum in Sanctis e∣jus, laudate eum in firmamento virtutis ejus. Laudate eum in virtutibus ejus: lau∣date eum secundum multitudinem magni∣tudinis ejus. Laudate eum in sono tubae; laudate eum in psalterio & cithara. Laudate eum in tympano, & choro: laudate eum in chordis & organo. Laudate eum in cymbalis bene sonanti∣bus; laudate eum in cymbalis jubilationis: omnis spiritus laudet Dominum. Gloria Patri & Filio, &c. Vers. Dignare me laudare te virgo sa∣crata. Resp. Da mihi virtutem contra hostes tuos. Vers. Cum dederit dilectis suis som∣num. Resp. Ecce haereditas Domini filii mer∣ces fructus ventris.
Vers. Domine exaudi orationem meam Resp. Et clamor meus ad te veniat. Vers. Dominus vobiscum. Resp. Et cum spiritu tuo. Oremus. OMmpotens & misericors Deus, qui propter eximiam Charitatem tuam qua dilexisti nos, Filium tuum unigenitum Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, pro Redemptione nostra, de coelis in Terram descendere, & de Beatissimae Virginis Ma∣riae Dominae nostrae utero, Angelo nuncian∣te, carnem suscipere, crucemque ac mor∣tem subire, & tertia die gloriosum à mortuis resurgere volusti, ut nos eriperes de potestate Diaboli: Obsecramus immensam clemen∣tiam tuam, ut haec signa Rosarii, in hono∣rem & laudem ejusdem Genitricis Filii tui, ab Ecclesia tua fideli dicata, Bene ✚ di∣cas, & sancti✚fices, eisque tantam San∣cti Spiritus infundas virtutem; ut quicun∣que horum quodlibet secum portaverit, at∣que in domo suo reverenter tenuerit, & in eis ad te secundum ejusdem sanctae Confra∣ternitatis Instituta, divina contemplanda mysteria devote oraverit; salubri & per∣severanti
devotione abundet; sitque con∣sors & particeps omnium gratiarum, pri∣vilegiorum, & Indulgentiarum, quae eident Confraternitati per sacram Sedem Aposto∣licam concessa sunt; & ab omni hoste visi∣bili & invisibili semper & ubique in hoc & in futuro saeculo liberetur; & in exitu suo, ab ipsa Beatissima Virgine Maria Dei gene∣trice, tibi plenus bonis operibus praesentari mereatur. Per eundem Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum Filium tuum, qui tecum vivit & regnat, in unitate Spiritus Sancti Deus. Per omnia saecula saeculorum, Amen. Then he sprinkles the Bedes with ho∣ly water, saying: In nomine Patris, & Filii, & Spiritus Sancti. Amen, and gives them to the partie. The Blessing of the Wax Candles, for the Brothers and Sisters of the holy Rasery, to hold in their hands, at the hour of Death. Vers. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini. Resp. Qui fecit coelum & terram.
CANTICUM. NƲnc dimittis servum tuum Domine: secundum verbum tuum in pace. Quia viderunt oculi mei: salutare tuum. Quod parasti: ante faciem omnium po∣pulorum: Lumen ad revelationem gentium; & gloriam plebis tuae Israel. Gloria Patri & Filio, &c. ANTIPHONA. AVE Regina Coelorum, Ave Domina Angelorum, Salve Radix, Salve Porta, Ex qua mundo lux est orta, Gaude virgo gloriosa, Super omnes speciosa, Vale O valde decora, Et pro nobis Chrisium exora. Vers. Post partum virgo inviolata per∣mansisti. Resp. Dei Genitrix intercede pro no∣bis.
Vers. Domine exandi orationem meam. Resp. Et clamer mens ad te veniat. Vers. Dominus vebiscum. Resp. Et cum spiritu tuo. OREMUS. DOmine Jesu Christe, lux vera, qui illuminas omnem hominem veni∣entem in hunc mundum! Effunde per in∣tercessionem Virginis Mariae matris tuae, & per quindecim eius Rosarii mysteria, Benedictionem tuam super hos caereos & candelas, & sanctifica eas lumine tuae gra∣tiae, & concede propitius ut sicut haec lumi∣naria igne visibili accensa, nocturnas de∣pellunt tenebras; Ita corda nostra invisi∣bili igne, id est, Spiritus Sancti Splendore illusirata, omnium vitiorum coecitate care∣ant, ut puro mentis oculo cernere semper possimus, quae tibi sunt placita, & nostrae saluti utilia: quatenus post hujus saeculi caliginosa discrimina, ad lucem indeficien∣tem pervenire mereamur. Qui vivis & regnas Deus, in saecula saeculorum. Amen.
OREMUS. DOmine Jesu Christe, splendor gloriae, & figura substantiae Patris, & vir∣ginalis uteri frucius! Qui per tempora∣lem Nativitatem tuam divinae Filiationis imaginem per gratiam hominibus contulisti, illosque fratres vecare dignatus es: Auge in nobis famulis tuis, (in Confraternitate virginis Matris tuae gloriantibus) Spiritum gratiae quem dedisti, & has candelas quas in honorem Nominis ejus suscipimus, ita Bene✚dicere & sancti✚ficare digneris, ut quicunque eas in manibus accensas te∣nuerit, ab omnibus liberetur tentationibus, & in hora mortis suae, remissionem omnium peceatorum percipiat; & demum ad Te, qui verum lumen es, ipsa dirigente perve∣niat. Qui vivis & regnas in saeculo saecu∣lorum. Amen. Then he sprinkles the Candles with holy Water, saying: ✚ In nomine Patris, & Filii & Spiritus Sancii. Amen.
We have here added all that is lately published, concerning the recital of the Rosary, in the Chappel Royal of St. James, that the devout Rosarists may find in this Book all that is elsewhere. The Method of saying the Ro∣sary of our Blessed Lady, as it was ordered by Pope Pius the V. of the ho∣ly Order of Preachers. The Joyful Mysteries assigned for Mundays and Thursdays through the Year, and Saturdayes in Advent, and after Epi∣phany till Lent. The first Mystery. The Meditation. LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how the Angel Gabriel saluted our Blessed Lady with the title of Full of
Grace, and declared unto her the In∣carnation of our Lord and Saviour Je∣sus Christ. Then say, Our Father, once. Hail Mary, ten times. OƲr Father, which art in Heaven. Hallowed be thy Name. Thy King∣dome come; thy will be done in earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our dai∣ly bread: And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. lead us not into temptation: But deliver us from evil. Amen. Hail Mary, full of Grace, our Lord is with thee. Blessed art thou among women; and blessed is the fruit of thy womb Jesus. Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us sinners, now and in the hour of our death. Amen. The Prayer. O Holy Mary, Queen of Virgins, by the most high Mystery of the Incar∣nation of thy beloved Son, our Lord Je∣sus Christ, by which our salvation was so happily begun, obtain for us by thy Inter∣cession,
light to know this so great benefit, which he hath bestowed upon us, vouchsa∣fing in it, to make him our Brother, and thee his own most beloved Mother, our Mo∣ther also. Amen. The second Mystery. The Meditation. LEt us contemplate in this mystery, how the blessed Virgin Mary, un∣derstanding from the Angel, that her Cousin St. Elizabeth had conceived, went with hast into the Mountains of Judaea to visit her, and remained with her three moneths. The Prayer. O Holy Virgin, most spotless mirror of Humility; by that exceeding Chari∣ty which moved thee to visit thy holy Cou∣sin St. Elizabeth; obtain for us by thy Intercession, that our hearts may be so vi∣sited by thy most Holy Son, that free from all sin, we may praise him, and give him thanks for ever, Amen.
The third Mystery. The Meditation. LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how the B. Virgin Mary, when the time of her delivery was come, brought forth our Redeemer Christ Je∣sus at midnight, and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for him in the Inns of Bethlem. The Prayer. O Most pure Mother of God, by thy Virginal and most joyful delivery, by which thou gavest unto the world thy only Son, our Saviour, we beseech thee obtain for us by thy Intercession, grace to lead so pure and holy a life in this world, that we may worthily sing without ceasing, both day and night, the mercies of thy Son, and his benefits to us by thee. Amen. The fourth Mystery. The Meditation. LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how the most B. Virgin Mary, on the day of her Purification, presented the child Jesus in the Temple, where
Holy Simeon giving thanks to God with great devotion, received him into his armes. The Prayer. O Holy Virgin, most admirable Mistris and pattern of obedience; who didst present in the Temple the Lord of the Temple, obtain for us by thy Intercession, Grace of thy beloved Son, that with Holy Simeon and devout Anna, we may praise and glorifie him for ever. Amen. The fifth Mystery. The Meditation. LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how the blessed Virgin Mary ha∣ving lost without any fault of hers, her Beloved Son in Jerusalem, she sought him for the space of three dayes, and at length found him the third day in the Temple, in the midst of the Do∣ctors disputing with them, being of the age of twelve years. The Prayer. MOst blessed Virgin, more then Mar∣tyr in thy suffering, and yet the
comfort of such as are afflicted; by that un∣speakable joy wherewith thy soul was ra∣vished in finding thy beloved Son in the Temple, in the midst of the Doctors dispu∣ting with them, obtain him for us, so to seek him, and so to find him in the Holy Catholick Church, that we may never be separated from him. Amen. Salve Regina. HAil Holy Queen, Mother of Mer∣cy, our life, our sweetness, and our hope, To thee do we cry, poor banished sons of Eve. To thee do we send our sighs, mourning and weeping in this valley of tears; turn then Most gracious Advocate, thy eyes of mercy toward us, and after this our exile en∣ded, shew unto us the blessed fruit of thy womb Jesus. O most Clement, most Pious, and most sweet Virgin Mary.
Vers. Pray for us holy Mother of God. Resp. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ. Let us pray. HEar, O merciful God, the Prayer of thy servants, that we who are met together in the society of the B. Virgin, Mother of God, by her intercession may by thee be delivered from the dangers that continually hang over us. Amen. The dolorous or sorrowful Myste∣ries for Tuesdayes and Fry∣dayes through the year, and Sundayes in Lent. The first Mystery. The Meditation. LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus was so afflicted
for us in the Garden of Gethsemany, that his Body was bathed in a bloody sweat, which ran trickling down in great drops unto the ground. Our Father Hail Mary as before. The Prayer. MOst holy Virgin, more then Martyr, by that ardent Prayer which thy beloved Son poured forth unto his Father in the Garden, vouchsafe so to intercede for us, that our passions reduced to the obe∣dience of Reason, we may alwayes, and in all things, conform and subject our selves to the Will of God. Amen. The second Mystery. The Meditation. LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ, was most cruelly scourged in Pilate's house, the number of the stripes they gave him, being above five thousand. (As was revealed to St. Brigit.)
The Prayer. O Mother of God, ever flowing fountain of patience, by those stripes thy only and most Beloved Son vouchsafed to suffer for us, obtain of him for us grace that we may know how to mortifie our rebellious sences, and cut off all occasions of sinning with that sword of grief and compassion, which pierced thy most tender soul. Amen. The third Mystery. The Meditation. LEt us contemplate in this Mysterie, how those cruel Ministers of Satan platted a Crown of sharp thorns, and most cruelly planted it on the most Sa∣cred Head of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Prayer. O Mother of our Eternal Prince and King of Glory, by those sharp thorns, wherewith his most holy head was pierced, we beseech thee, that by thy Intercession, we may be delivered here from all motions of Pride, and in the day of Judgement
from that confusion, which our sins de∣serve. Amen. The fourth Mystery. The Meditation. LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ being sentenced to die, bore with great pati∣ence the Cross, which was laid upon upon him for his greater torment and ignominy. The Prayer. O Holy Virgin, Example of patience, by the most painful carrying of the Cross, in which thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ bore the heavy weight of our sins, obtain for us of him by thy intercession, cou∣rage and strength to follow his steps, and bear our Cross after him unto the end of our life. Amen. The fifth Mystery. The Meditation. LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ being
come to Mount Calvary, was stripped off his Cloths, and his hands and feet most cruelly nailed to the Cross, in the presence of his most afflicted Mother. The Prayer. O Holy Mary, Mother of God, as the body of thy beloved Son was for us extended on the Cross, so may our desires be daily more and more stretched out in his Service, and our hearts wounded with com∣passion of his most bitter passion. And thou O most B. Virgin, vouchsafe to negotiate for and with us, the work of our salvation by thy powerful Intercession. Amen. Hail holy Queen, &c. with the vers. and prayer as above.
The Glorious Mysteries, for Wed∣nesdays and Saturdays through the year, and Sundays after Faster until Advent. LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ trium∣phing gloriously over death, rose again the third day Immortal and Impas∣sible. Our Father, Hail Mary, as before. The Prayer. O Glorious Virgin Mary, by that un∣speakable joy thou receivedst in the Resurrection of thy only Son, we beseech thee obtain of him for us, that our hearts may never go away after the false joyes of this world but may be ever and wholly em∣ployed in the pursuit of the only true and solid joyes of heaven. Amen.
The second Mystery. The Meditation. LEt us contemplate in this Mysterie, how our Lord Jesus Christ, forty dayes after his Resurrection, ascended into heaven, attended by Angels, in the sight of his most Holy Mother, his Holy Apostles and Disciples, to the great admiration of them all. The Prayer. O Mother of God, comfort the afflicted; as thy beloved Son, when he ascen∣ded into heaven, lifted up his hands and blessed his Apostles; so vouchsafe, most holy Mother, to lift up thy pure hands to him for us, that we may enjoy the benefit of his Blessing and thine here on earth, and hereafter in heaven. Amen. The third Mystery. The Meditation. LEt us contemplate in this Mystery, how our Lord Jesus Christ being seated on the right hand of God, sent
as he had promised, the Holy Ghost upon his Apostles, who after he was ascended, returning to Jerusalem, con∣tinued in prayer and supplication with the B. Virgin Mary, expecting the per∣formance of his promise. The Prayer. O Sacred Virgin, Tabernacle of the Holy Ghost, we beseech thee, obtain by thy intercession, that this most sweet Comforter, whom thy beloved Son sent down upon his Apostles, filling them there∣by with spiritual joy, may teach us in this world the true way of Salvation, and make us walk in the pathes of vertue and good works. Amen. The fourth Mystery. The Meditation. LEt us contemplate in this Mysterie, how the glorious Virgin twelve years after the resurrection of her Son, passed out of this world unto him, and was by him assumed into Heaven, ac∣companied by the Holy Angels.
The Prayer. O Most Prudent Virgin, who entring the Heavenly Palace, didst fill the Holy Angels with joy, and men with hope; vouchsafe to intercede for us in the hour of our death, that free from the illusions and temptations of the devil, we may joy∣fully and securely pass out of this tempo∣ral state to enjoy the happiness of Eternal Life. Amen. The fifth Mystery. The Meditation. LEt us contemplate in this Mysterie, how the glorious Virgin Mary, who was with great Jubilee and exul∣tation of the whole Court of Heaven, and particular glory of all the Saints, crowned by her Son, with the brightest Diadem of Glory.
The Prayer. O Glorious Queen of all the heavenly Citizens, we beseech thee accept this Rosary, which as a Crown of Roses we of∣fer at thy feet, and grant most glorious Lady, that by thy Intercession our souls may be inflamed with so ardent a desire of see∣ing Thee so gloriously crowned, that it may never dye in us, until it shall be changed into the happy fruition of thy blessed sight. Amen. Advertisement concerning the Arch-Confraternity of Saint Francis. Honour is to be given to those, to whom it is due. Therefore let the Reader be pleased to understand, that this Trea∣tise is collected out of the great Manuel of Father Angelus Francis, Professor of Divinity, of the Seraphical Order of St. Francis, my dear and most honoured Friend.
THE ARCH-CONFRATERNITY Of the Seraphical Father St. FRANCIS, Called The Cord of the Passion. The Original of this Arch-Confraternity. AS in all things our holy Father St. Francis hath born the figure and sign of Christ crucified, thereby
to reduce unto his memory the Passion of our Saviour: Even so he hath done it in his exterior habit, as may be seen in the 3. Chap. of his Life, written by St. Bonavent. where it is related, that he having heard the words of our Savi∣our, Mat. 10: to his Apostles going to preach; Do not possess gold, or silver, nor money in your purses, nor a scrip for the way, neither two coats, neither shooes, &c. he cryed out with great joy, This is that I desire, this I covet earnestly from the bowels of my heart. And thereupon presently cast off his shooes from his feet, laid away his staff, cast away his purse, and detesting money, was con∣tent with one thin coat or tunick, made in the form of a Cross, which he gir∣ded with a Cord. Then St. Dominick Founder of the holy Order of Preach∣ers, who was a great friend, and very familiar with St. Francis, one day after much spiritual discourse concerning their holy Orders, he demanded of him the girdle which he did wear, which after many humble denial he obtained, and ever after did wear with great re∣verence
under his habit, by whose ex∣ample each one did prosecute it with great devotion. And truly such was the Vertue and Holiness of the Partri∣ark St. Francis, that all the people did flock to him of all qualities, sex, con∣ditions, ages, men and women, Clergy and Layetie, married and single, no∣ble and poor, Citizens and Pesants, they did forsake the Towns, Husbands left their Wives, the Wives their Hus∣bands, and houses were depopulated through devotion they did bear to the Saint, each one striving to get some∣thing that the holy man had touched: One would say that these assemblies were like to that of the Christians in the Acts of the Apostles, Ch. 19. who brought from St. Pauls body napkins or hand∣kerchiefs & laid upon the sick, and the diseases departed from them, and the wicked spirits went out. The words in the Latin Text are sudaria & semicinctia, which as the Reverend Father Corne∣lius a lapide saith in his learned Com∣mentaries on this place, may very well signifie small or sirait girdles, or half gir∣dles, which he proves out of Isidore,
lib. 19. whereby we may gather, that it is no new thing to take the girdles of Saints and holy men out of devotion, neither is it done without profit, both spiritual and temporal, as is to be seen in the life of our holy Father Saint Francis, where amongst other Miracles, Saint Bonaventure recounts one of a certain man religious and searing God, who having a Cord wherewith the Saint was girded, when any were sick of divers infirmities, he would go to them, and dipping the Cord into the water, gave them to drink, and by such means many were cured. The Dignity of this Confrater∣nity of the Cord of the Passion. THe same Reasons that prove the great excellency of the Rosary, prove also the dignity of this Arch-Confraternity, for the same prayers, actions, confessions, communions and processions belong to them both; but besides, there are many noble things
particular to this, as you may see here. The vessel of election St. Paul, doth freely confesse himself, Eph. 3. the prisoner of Jesus Christ for the Gen∣tiles, and that for the hope of Israel he was compassed with a chain, wherein as he teaches, Eph. 6. he was a Legat of the Gospel, which made him exhort the Collossians, Chap. 4. to be mindful of his bonds; and Tim. 1. not to be ashamed of his chains; wherefore the Soveraign Bishops have had great reve∣rence and honour to the chains which have pinched and bruised the members of the Apostles and Martyrs. And St. Gregory, who was in the year 616. sent for a great rarity, to the Princes and Kings of his time, part of the chains of the holy Apostle, St. Peter and St. Paul, for he sent to the Empress Constantia part of the chains that were fastned to St. Pauls neck and hands, whereby, as he saith, many Miracles were wrought. The like he did to Childebert King of France, and to Richaredus King of the Visigoths. The antient Christians did with great reverence go to kiss the bonds and setters of the Martyrs: wit∣ness
Tertullian lib. 2. ad uxorem, and divers others; but St. Chrysostom shall serve for all, who in the 4. Chap. ad Eph. Serm. 8. sayes, That there is no∣thing so magnificent and excellent as to be prisoner for Jesus Christ, and as the chains by the sacred hands which they have envi∣roned. It is greater renown to be bound with manicles, and to be shackled for Je∣sus Christ, then to be an Apostle or Doctor, or Evangelist. And further down, he saith, If any one should give me in possession the whole Heaven, and the choice of this chain, I had rather chuse that chain. Moreover, If I should fail to be with the Angels in Heaven, or with Paul the pri∣soner, certainly I should chuse to be in pri∣son. If any one should set me in the number and rank of the celestial powers, who are about and near the heavenly Throne, or bind me with cords, I had rather be bound: there is nothing more happy then the chains, &c. I cannot assure my self that St. Paul was so happy in that, he was car∣ried and rapt to the third Heaven, as that he was cast into prison, &c. And a little after, O happy bonds! O happy hands which this chain hath adorned!
Babilas Patriark of Antioch, as Suidas affirmeth, desired that the iron of his hands and feet might be buried with his body, saying, That one day they would serve him for an ornament. But the bands and cords which have touched the holy and sacred flesh of Je∣sus Christ, are much more pretious and honourable; and therefore this Evan∣gelical Seraphin, this crucified Angel, Image, Imitator, and Standard-bearer of our Saviour, justly hath raised up this part of the arms of the Passion, girding his body with a rude and gross cord: for as with the heart we believe unto justice, but with the mouth con∣fession is made unto salvation, Rom. 10. so by this exterior sign, he would con∣fess the affection and devotion he did bear unto him imbracing his bands, which he gave to all his children, and to all the world, to wear in memory of his Passion; teaching that no man ought to blush, or be ashamed to wear this Cord, since our Saviour hath worn such for our sakes. So St. Anthony the Hermit did reverence St. Paul the Her∣mits weed, made of the Palm-tree
leaves, and did wear it on the princi∣pals and most solemn Feasts. St. Je∣rom saith; That he had rather chuse it, then the Royal Purple, not for any o∣ther respect then for that it was so holy a mans. The faithful People were no less de∣vout to our Seraphical Father; For happy were those that could get any part of his Habit, or of any thing that he had, which they kept with great faith and confidence; neither did their hope fail them, as may be seen by ma∣ny examples, especially of the Cord, as St. Bonaventure affirmeth, in the miracle related above, he saith, be∣sides, that by putting a piece of that Cord which St. Francis did wear, a woman in child-bearing, being in emi∣nent peril, was safely delivered. Pope Gregory the Ninth, and Pope Martin the Fourth, did not only wear the Cord privately, but also died in the habit of St. Francis: The like, four other Popes have done with the publick profession of this rule, there∣by adorning their triple Crowns with a poor Cord, chusing to carry the hea∣vie
burden of their worthy charge, be∣ing clad in a poor & contemptible man∣ner. Many Catholick Kings of France, Arragon and Sicil, the late Arch-Duke and Arch-Dutchess, and not long since Cardinal Infanta have chose to take this poor habit in their last passage and to be buried therein. Cardinal de Treio in his Epistle before the work of Saint Francis, saith, That it doth not unbe∣seem the Royal Purple to wear the Cord of St. Francis. St. Lewis, King of France, the Queen Blaunch his Mother, St. Elizabeth Queen of Hungaria, both Queens of England, both Queens of France now living; the Queen of Por∣tugal: Many other Kings and Queens, Princes, Dukes and Dutchesses, and other of Inferiour degree have girded themselves with it; insomuch, that Cornelius Mutius saith, That there is no Nation that doth not receive, and honour this Cord, glorying with Saint Paul in the Bands of our Saviour. And truly, We have nothing so pre∣tious in our Christian Religion, as the holy Passion of our Redeemer, whereof the wearing of the Cord is a continual
representation. The Pope Sixtus the 5th. saith, That the Cord representeth divers Mysteries, as Charity, which doth, as it were, ties God to us, and draws us to Him by Grace and Glory. Moreover, it putteth us in mind of our Sins, wherewith, as with Ropes, we are bound, and consequently stand in need of Gods Mercy: But principally it re∣presents the Passion of our Saviour, whose Memory ought alwayes to re∣main in our hearts: But such is our frailty and tepidity, that we quickly forget so great a benefit. And God hath raised his servant St. Francis, im∣printing his sacred Stigmates on his Body, to renovate, by all means possible, the aforesaid Passion in our minds. And to this end he hath cal∣led Fryers-Minors, that by Words and Deeds they might preach, teach, and represent his Passion and Poverty. From whence we may gather the dig∣nity of this Confraternity. Other Confraternities are founded on the Intercessions and Merits of Saints, in whose Honour they are erected; but this is erected and Ordained in the
memory and honour of the Passion of Jesus Christ, who is the Holy of Holies, and whose Merits are Infinite: Where∣by the Prophesie of King David is veri∣fied for speaking in the person of Christ, he saith, That the Cords and Bands of his Death and Passion are finally to be∣come glorious, Psal. 15. Cords are fal∣len to me in godly places. Sith so ma∣ny Kings and Queens, Princes and Princesses, Lords and Ladies do wear these little Cords in memory of the Band wherewith Christ was bound in the time his Passion: So then the Cord being worn in remembrance of the Passion, which is the cause of our Re∣demption, Graces, Merits, and Spi∣ritual Good, let us see here How we ought to have the Passion of our Saviour alwayes in our memory. THE Seraphical Father St. Francis, a little after his conversion, weeping and lamenting very bitterly, said to a Gentleman that desired to
know the reason thereof: Jesus Christ is crucified for us, and no man thinketh of it, no man is mindful of it. Non proposuerunt Deum ante conspectum suum; No man setteth Christ Jesus in his Passion, before their eyes. Dion. Carth. maketh the like complaint, say∣ing, Our Lord hath ministred unto us copious matter of consideration of his love, yet (alas) it doth not touch our hearts, so that it seemes that we are more senseless than insensible creatures, and more obdu∣rate than hard stones: For when he suffer∣ed death on the Cross, the Earth did quake, Darkness ascended, Rocks were rent, Monuments opened, and the Dead arose, as it were suffering with him, and detesting the cruel injuries done unto him; But we, (alas!) do little compassionate him. O great perversity? He hath suffer∣ed grievous things for us, and scarce any affection of compassion toucheth our hearts: If we were his members, and he our head, we could not but grieve at his paines: If there were any bowels of pitty in us, and we should see a brute beast to suffer such things, we should naturally be moved to condole him; And it doth not move us when
we see our Lord and Master of his exceed∣ing charity to suffer so grievous paines for us. Quid commisisti saith St. Augustine, ut sie judicareris? O blessed Saviour! what crime hast thou committed, to be thus judged? What sin hast thou perpetrated? What offence hast thou given? What is the cause of thy death? What is the occasion of thy slaughter? O! saith he, the wic∣ked sinneth, and the just is punished: the guilty offendeth, and the innocent is cha∣stised: the impious committeth the offence, and the godly is condemned: what the wicked deserveth, the good suffereth: what the servant oweth, the master payeth: what man meriteth, God endureth. O amiable death! O desirable passion! O ad∣mirable profundity! The least that we can do, is to have a continual memory of so great a benefit, of so great charity; and as the same holy Father saith, Sit nobis toto fixus in corde qui pro nobis fuit totus fixus in cruce. Let him be wholly fixed and placed in our hearts, who was wholly fixed and fastened on the Cross for us: and the Spouse in the Canticles saith, Chap. 8. Put me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thy
arm: Let thy heart be alwayes occupi∣ed in the cogitation and memory of my Passion, and let thy strength, vertue, and force, be sustained by the vertue of my sufferings. I do alwayes con∣serve the wounds of my body, that thou mightest keep the memory of my Pas∣sion alwayes in thy mind and soul: the holy Ghost by the mouth of the Wise∣man doth also invite us thereto, Eccl. 29. Forget not the kindness of a surety, for he hath given his life for thee. Let us, as St. Bernardine saith, by mental consi∣deration, gather together in a bundle all his derisions, flagellations, thorns, nails, dolours, pains, exprobrations, mockings, buffets, blowes, spittings, confusions, and such like, to contemplate devoutly, behold mentally, and tast sweetly; that we may say with the Spouse in the Canticles, Chap. 1. A bundle of myrrh, my beloved (in his Passion) is to me, he shall abide between my breasts: that is, between our understanding, contemplating his passion, and our will or affection tast∣ing it. How pleasing this bundle was to the holy Father St. Francis, is manifest, in
that having had an apparition of our Saviour Crucified, his Soul was so pe∣netrated by the force thereof, that thenceforth whensoever it came to his mind, he could scarce containe him∣self from tears and sighs. And S. Bona∣venture saith of him, that Christ cruci∣fied did continually abide between the breasts of his mind, as a bundle of myrrh, into whom, by the fire of ex∣cessive love, he desired to be transform∣ed. And in another place he saith, That by a sevenfold apparition of our Saviour on the Cross, he was wholly transformed into the Image of Christ crucified, by extatical love; and in the 13. Chapter of his life, he, in a manner assigneth the reason of that miracle (which Cardinal Bellarmine calleth the greatest and most singular miracle of all others, and as it were a wonder of wonders) of his sacred stigmats, to have been the continual meditation of Christs Passion. Conformably thereunto, St. Bernardine saith, He was transformed with so great love and fervent ardour into Jesus Christ crucified, that by a miracle, never heard of in any ages, the benignity
of our Saviour hath impressed in his flesh, the similitude of his most holy Passion or∣daining him his Standard-bearer, in a new rememoration of his Crucifying. And therefore Saint Antonine, the glory of St. Dominicks Order, and Arch-bishop of Florence, said, That because the me∣mory of Christs Passion seemed to be ex∣tinguished in the minds of men, through coldness and tepidity, therefore our Lord would exsuscitate and renew the memory thereof, by the manifest impression of his wounds or stigmats in the body of Saint Francis: whereby the Clemency of Al∣mighty God (condescending to his lovers beyond all estimation) hath gi∣ven him the banner of the Crosse to be carried in his body; that he who was prevented by a wonderful love of the Cross, might also become marvel∣lous by the wonderful honour of the Cross. How profitable a thing is it to have always the Passion of our Saviour in our Minds. THe Devout servant of Christ Saint Francis (col. 23. of his works)
saith: I desire you that you have always be∣fore your eyes our Lords Passion, which will roborate you, and animate you to suffer more valiantly for him. And the Prince of the Apostles offereth us no other coat of fence, no other Armour against all incursions and wounds, but this, saying, 1 Pet. 4. Christ having suffered in the flesh, be you also armed with the same cogitations. As if he should say, Christ hath suffered so great things for you, excogitate and consider what ye ought to do, and suffer for him, ra∣ther for your selves, to flie vice, and follow vertue, which he hath commen∣ded unto us by his Passion. Saint Paul teacheth us the same, saying, Think di∣ligently; seriously consider and ponder him which sustained such contradiction; such, and so great opprobries, mock∣ings, contumelies, blows, stripes, tor∣ments, and death of sinners, and for sinners, who did not only contradict him in words, but with deeds and stripes: That you be not wearied, or loose your force, fainting in your minds, Heb. 12. Let us therefore arm our selves with the memory of this sacred
Passion, because nothing is trouble∣some, nothing seemeth hard, nothing is accounted adverse to him that re∣membreth how, and what Christ suf∣fered for him. There is no shield more efficacious to resist temptations of the Devil, the Flesh, and the World, than the cogitation of Christ crucified. And therefore holy Saint Bernard said well, That such is the vertue and force of the Cross of Christ, that if it be conserved faithfully in memory, no disordinate de∣sires, no carnal delight, no desire of sin can prevail, but forthwith at the remem∣brance thereof, all the squadrons of sin will vanish. And in another place he saith: There is nothing so efficacious to heal the wounds of our conscience, and to purge our souls, as the frequent medita∣tion of the wounds of Christ. St. Augustin knew it by experience, saying of him∣self, In omnibus non inveni tam efficax remedium quam vulnera Christi, Manual. c. 32. I have not found in all things, so efficacious a remedy, as Christs Wounds. And in another place he saith, Nihil tam salutiferum nobis est, quam quotidie cogitare quanta pro nobis pertulit Deus.
There is nothing that conduceth more to our salvation than daily to think what great things Christ hath suffered for us. Because the Sufferings or Passion of our Saviour, well considered, doth re∣form all inordinate affections, extin∣guish all flames of vice, and conserve the fire of Devotion in our breasts. No∣thing more forceable to obtain Mercy, than the memory of that which is the Abysse of Mercy: so that Albertus Mag∣nus had good reason to say, That there was nothing more satisfactory for our sins, and to avoid Purgatory, than it. Yea, our Saviour revealed to St. Gertrude, that next to the Masse, and Communion, there was nothing more Meritorious than this exercise. And S. Catherine of Bolognia saith, That by it we may gain victory in every Combat, and without it we shall easily be vanquished: it is the cure of all wounds, most comfortable refuge in all adversity: it is food that sustaineth and fortifieth the weak, spirits, it is most sweet Manna, a ladder that eleva∣teth our hearts to heaven; the har∣bour of our souls, a fountain never dry, a most plentiful sea, and most secure passage.
Saint Lydwine, having been sick for the space of eight and thirty years, had no other consolation than the meditation of Christs Passion; for it giveth great force against all afflictions, and maketh us to fight: for, as to incite the Ele∣phants to the battail, men shew them blood; even so by the representation and memory of the blood of Christ shed for us on the Cross, we take courage to fight against the world, to vanquish our appetites and desires, to forsake all vain honours, riches and pleasures: this is the armour that Saint Paul, St. Augu∣stine, St. Francis, and many other Saints, have used against all temptati∣ons; this is a present remedy for all tribulations and afflictions: It is im∣possible to relate the great good that our souls may reap by this exercise: for as St. Bonaventure saith, we cannot offer to God a more acceptable sacri∣fice for the dead, nor bring greater joy to the Angels, nor give a more excel∣lent sign of recognisance to the holy Trinity, than to employ our selves or∣dinarily in it: And in another place he saith, That he that doth exercise
himself attentively and devoutly in it, findeth there abundantly all things that are profitable and necessary for him, and needeth not to seek any thing out of Jesus crucified; and amongst all other exercises of a spiritual life, none more profitable, none that carrieth the soul to a higher degree of perfection, than the meditation of the life and death of our Redeemer; which Christ himself hath revealed to a holy Her∣mite, who earnestly desired Almighty God to shew him what service would be most grateful to his Divine Majesty; at length he saw one naked, shaking with cold, bearing a great Cross, of whom he asked what he was? who re∣plied: I am Jesus Christ, thou hast of∣ten demanded to know what service is most pleasing unto me; assure thy self, that to help me to bear my Crosse, Wounds, and Passion, in thy heart, is most pleasing and grateful unto me.
The several Hours of the Passion of our Saviour, Whereby the Soul may be alwayes mindful of her Redemption. AT 6. a clock in the Evening. Our most humble Redeemer, Jesus Christ, true God and Man, on his knees, did wash the Feet of his Di∣sciples: And shall not I cast away all pride, and imitate the humility of my God, willingly exercising all offices, how base and humble soever, for the profit of my neighbour? At 7. Our most charitable Redeemer Jesus Christ, by an ineffable love to∣wards men, gave them his body and his blood for the nurture of their souls, ordaining the blessed Sacrament of the Altar. What love shall I render to my Saviour for so great love? what desire, what reverence, what affection ought I to have towards this venerable Sa∣crament? At 8. Our most amiable Redeemer Jesus Christ, gave his last adieu to his faithful, recommending unto them mu∣tual
Charity, demanding it of God his Father. O my Soul! by charity to one another, we are known whether we be true children of God. At 9. Our most pious Redeemer Je∣sus Christ, coming to the Garden of Olivet, surprised with a natural sadness of death, had recourse to prayer three times, and resigned his will to God his Father, and did cast a bloody sweat from all his body: let us presently run to God by prayer, when we are in any affliction or danger, let us never stay in the creatures, but cast our selves in∣to the hands of our Creator. At 10. Our most couragious Re∣deemer Jesus Christ, goeth to meet his enemies, voluntarily offering himself to death; and refuseth not to kiss the Traytor Judas And shall I, O my God, dare to betray thee by my sinne, for some base creature, or vain plea∣sure? it were better for me to embrace all the torments of this life, yea, to die, and so to suffer with my Saviour. At 11. Our most milde Redeemer Jesus Christ, did suffer himself to be taken by the wicked, and to be bound
with rough Cords, and to be treated as a malefactor and thief; and I, who, by my sins, am the cause of all this, will not suffer any thing from my neighbor, without seeking revenge. At 12. Our most sweet Redeemer Jesus Christ, Lamb of God, is outra∣giously treated before Annas the high Priest; and he who is innocency it self, is falsly accused before him, yet I, who am repleat with imperfections, and offences towards God and my neigh∣bour, cannot endure that any should accuse me, or that any one should re∣prehend me. At 1. Our most clement Redeemer Jesus Christ, who is Goodness and Ju∣stice it self, and the Soveraign Judge of all, is rudely led from Annas to Cai∣phas, a most wicked and most unjust Judge. But I cannot endure with pa∣tience to be judged or condemned of my superiours; of my equals, of my inferiours, be it right or wrong. At 2. Our most wise Redeemer Je∣sus Christ, did confess in the presence of the high Priest, that he was the Son of God, although he received a blow
from the hand of a bloody butcher. Let us never leave to do good, or to serve God for the hate of men. At 3. Our most amiable Redeemer Jesus Christ, is denied by Saint Peter; but when our Blessed Saviour beheld him, he presently repented, and bit∣terly deplored his sin. O Lord God, what man can presume that he will not offend thee? let us bewail our sins with Saint Peter. At 4. Our most meek Redeemer Je∣sus Christ, is blind-folded, spitted on, beaten, mocked, blasphemed as a false Prophet. Consider my soul, that thou hast spitten upon the face of Jesus Christ, that thou hast mocked and blas∣phemed him, when thou hast done it to any one of thy neighbours, who are his Brethren. At 5. Our most Innocent Redeemer Jesus Christ, the Holy of Holies, in a full Assembly and Counsel of the Jews, is condemned to death through envy. O how this Passion of envy doth make us often-times to judg evil of others better than our selves. At 6. Our most Gracious Redeemer
Jesus Christ, is presented to Pilate, and falsly accused: but not answering a word, he is found Innocent. O what silence of my Saviour so grievously ac∣cused, and I, sinner that I am, do no∣thing but make excuses. At 7. Our most Prudent Redeemer Jesus Christ, is sent from Pilate to He∣rod, and being demanded of vain things, held his peace; whereby he was mock∣ed, esteemed as a fool, and as such is cloathed in a white garment. O how much ought we rather desire to be con∣temned of men, and not to condesend to their evil will, than to displease God! At 8. Our most Just Redeemer Jesus Christ, is sent from Herod to Pilate, and Barrabas the murderer is preferred be∣fore him. And thou sinner, dost thou not do the same? dost thou not prefer the Devil before God, when thou in∣clinest to vice, and forsakest vertue? At 9. Our most Dolorous Redeemer Jesus Christ, is most rudely despoyled, and bound all naked to a pillar, most cruelly whipped, all torn with stripes, and bruised with blows. Behold, O
my soul, how they handle the Virginal flesh of thy Saviour, and how thou dost flatter and pamper thine, which hath so much offended. At 10. Our most Patient Redeemer Jesus Christ, revested with purple, crowned with thorns, having a reed for a scepter, is shewn to thee for a pattern of patience and all vertue, if thou wilt be glorified by him. O how much ought I to be ashamed, to be so delicate a member under a head crown∣ed with thorns for me. At 11. Our most constant Redeemer Jesus Christ, condemned to death by Pilate, carrieth his own Cross to Mount Calvary. Whosoever will follow him to Paradise, he must carry the Crosse (which are the afflictions of this life) after him with patience. At 12. Our most obedient Redeemer Jesus Christ, is stretched out, nailed and elevated upon the Cross, between two theeves, for the salvation of the world. Since our sinnes have been so punished in the person of our Redeem∣er. How shall they be punished in sin∣ners, if they do not amend.
At 1. Our most merciful Redeemer Jesus Christ, did pray for those that crucified him, and promised Paradise to the good Thief. Let us also pardon those that offend against us, if we will that God should pardon us. At 2. Our most Devout Redeemer Jesus Christ, did give Saint John to his Mother, for her Son; and his Mother to Saint John, for a Mother. O what affection did Saint John bear to the Mo∣ther of God: O that my soul might burn with the like devotion to the bles∣sed Virgin. At 3. Our most Perfect Redeemer Jesus Christ, did cry out, My God, my God, Why hast thou forsaken me? I thirst: All is consummated; and recommend∣ing his Spirit to God the Father, he expired. Let the earth tremble, the dead arise, the Sun be darkened, day become night; since the Creator and Saviour of the world is dead: but thou O my soul, awake from sin. At 4. Our most victorious Redeemer Jesus Christ, being dead, his Soul de∣scended to Limbo, for to deliver the elect; in the mean time his body trans∣pierced
with a lance, doth shed forth blood and water. Enter O my Soul, within the side of Jesus Christ, by a great considence in his mercy, give heart for heart, love for love, to him that hath done and given all for thee. At 5. The precious body of our Re∣deemer Jesus Christ, being taken down from the Cross, is put into the arms of the Virgin, his Mother, and afterward is most honourably buried. Receive my Soul, receive him in thy memory, and retain this sacred Passion of Jesus Christ in all thy thoughts, words, and works, living in such sort, that thou mayest be worthy of the name of a Christian, redeemed by the precious blood of the Son of God. The Soul of Christ sanctifie me, the body of Christ save me, the precious blood of Jesus Christ inebriate me, the water of the side of Jesus Christ wash me, the Passion of Jesus Christ comfort me: O good Jesus hear me: hide me in thy holy wounds, suffer me not to be separated from thee; defend me from the malign enemy, call me at the hour of my death, and command me
to come to thee, for to praise, bless, and glorifie thee eternally, with thy Saints. Amen. The Obligations and Rules of this Confraternity. 1. ALL those that are to be admit∣ted into this Confraternity, are to be of that age, that they may confess and communicate; which is gathered by the express words of the Bull, in that it ordains, that at their entrance they are to confess and communicate. 2. They shall endeavour daily, morn∣ing and evening, to make examine of their conscience, and to say some prayers, according to each ones devo∣tion; but principally (for the gaining of the Indulgences) five Paters and Aves, adding to the end of each one, the Gloria Patri, &c. saluring devoutly the five Wounds of our Saviour, where∣to they must join one Pater & Ave for the Popes Holiness; which, after the example of the Frier-Minors; if they be not hindred by Infirmity, or other∣wise, they may say with their armes
stretched out, in manner of a Cross, according as hereafter shall be decla∣red. 3. The end of this Confraternity is vertue, Christian piety, and imita∣tion of our Saviour in his Passion; and therefore the Brethren and Sisters thereof, ought diligently to observe the Commandements of God, and his Church; and above all things, not to give any scandal, but good example, in all things, and bear alwayes in their mind, Jesus Christ crucified. 4. All the Brethren and Sisters, are to confess and communicate once eve∣ry month, on all the Feasts in the year, principally on all the Feasts of our Lord, of the Blessed Virgin, and of the Saints of the Order of the Friar Mi∣nors; if they will communicate oftner, they may, so it be done with the ad∣vice of their Ghostly Father. 5. They must shew themselves very diligent in the service of God, in hear∣ing Sermons, Mass, and other exercises of Devotion. 6. They are to be present at the monthly Processions of the Confrater∣nity,
which ordinarily are on the se∣cond Sundays of the Month; as also at the Procession on our Lady of Angels day, which is the principal Feast of this Confraternity. They shall do well to be present at all the Processions of the Order. 7. When any of the Confraternity die, each one shall endeavour to be present at the burial, and thereto pray for the soul departed! and they shall never fail to assist the poor in such oc∣casions, be they of the Confraternity or no. 8. They are to help the poor, and visit the sick, especially in hospitals, and prisons, and never omit to accom∣pany the Blessed Sacrament to them. 9. They are to pray for the Dead in all their exercises, for to that end the Pope hath granted that special fa∣vour and Grace of applying all the a∣foresaid Indulgences for the Dead. 10. They are to bear great devotion and reverence to the Seraphical Fa∣ther St. Francis, whom they have cho∣sen for their Patron, and who, no doubt, will incessantly pray for them;
and must endeavour to imitate him in his devotion to our blessed Lady, but principally to the Passion of our Savi∣our. 11. If any one at the time of their death desire to be more perfectly uni∣ted to the Order, they may request the habit of the Frier-Minors, which by reason of this Cord they are capable of, as many Christians of all sorts, even Popes themselves have done. 12. Let them know, that they are bound to none of these under sin, either mortal, or venial; but each, according to the resolution he maketh at the en∣trance into this Confraternity, must endeavour to shew their devotion in their practices, that they may not be said to abuse the talent received, and so loose the merit and reward they might obtain. 13. For the gaining of all Indul∣gences, granted to this Confrater∣nity, it is necessary that they be in state of Grace, and that they accomplish the works, and other things enjoyned for that end, with intention to gain the Indulgence.
A brief Declaration of the prin∣cipal Indulgences of this Arch-Confraternity. A Plenary Indulgence on the day of their enterance into this Con∣fraternity. Once in their lives, when they please, with a plenary Absolution. Four times every year, at their plea∣sure, with a plenary Absolution also. At the Article of Death, by invoca∣ting the Name of Jesus. On all the Feasts of our Lord, to wit on Christmas day, New-years day, Twelf day, Easter day, Ascension day, Whitsunday, Corpus Christi day, and the Transfiguration: on all the Feasts of our Lady, Conception, Nativity, Pre∣sentation, Annunciation, Purification, Assumption, and ad Nives. Also on the Feast of our Lady of Angels, which is the principal feast of this Confrater∣nity. On all the Feasts of the Order of St. Francis, S. Bonaventure, S. Lewis, S. Antonie, S. Bernardine, S. Didaeus, the
7 Martyrs, the 5 Martyrs, S. Clare, and S. Elizabeth of Hungary. On the Feasts of all the Apostles and Evangelists. On all the Sundayes of the year. Also on S. Agnes, S. Joseph, S. Mary Magdalen, S. Anne, S. Laurence, S. Augu∣stine, S. Michael, S. Catherine, S. Nicolas, S. Stephen. On the Feast of S. John Baptist, of the holy Cross, on Innocents day, on all Saints, and all Souls day, with many other: in all which the Brethren may gain a plenary Indulgence, provided that they confess and communicate. For assisting at the monthly Processi∣on, for saying the Crown of our Savi∣our; for saying the crown of our Lady, containing 72 Paters and Aves, with a Pater and Ave for his Holiness. For celebrating or hearing the Mass of the Conception, for saying the ten Passional Psalms, or for saying the Gra∣dual Psalms. All which Indulgences, together with the Indulgences of the Stations of Rome, Jerusalem, and Compostella, the Brethren of the Cord may gain, by
saying five Paters and Aves in the ho∣nour of the five Wounds of our Savi∣our, adding one Pater and Ave for his Holiness: There are many other which are too long to be set down here. The sick Brethren, and such as have any Impediment, that they cannot come to the Church, (which is much to be noted for those in England) may gain the aforesaid Indulgences, in any place where they are. I have thought it convenient, to set down the particular Indulgences of the City of Rome, which were printed in the time of Pope Gregory the XIII. and afterwards by one Hierom Francin, with the approbation of Pope Sixtus V. who desired that they should be set forth in divers languages, which hath been done in Latine, French, Spanish, Italian, and others; and lastly, in our Vulgar, where the studious Reader may see them at full. STATIONS OF ROME. January. 1.|Circumcision or our New-years day.
6. Epiphany. 13. The Octave of the Epiphany. 14. The feast of the holy Name of JE∣SUS. 16. Five first Martyrs Fransciscans. 17. St. Anthony Abbot. 18. The Chair of S. Peter at Rome. 20. S. Sebastian. 21. S. Agnes. 23. Conversion of S. Paul. 28. Agnes the second. February. 2. Purification or Candlemas day. 5. 23. Franciscan Martyrs of Japonia. 15. Translation of S. Antony of Padua. 19. S. Conrade of the Third Order. 22. S. Peters Chair at Antioch. 23. S. Margarite of Cortona, 3. Order. 24. S. Matthias Apostle. March. 6. S. Collet poor Clare. 7. S. Thomas of Aquin. 12. S. Gregory. 14. Translation of S. Bonaventure. 19. S. Joseph. 20. S. Benedicts Eve and Day. 25. Annunciation of our Lady. April. 23. S. George.
25. S. Mark 29. S. Peter Martyr. May. 1. S. Philip and James. 3. Invention of the holy Cross. 6. S. John and Portam Latinam. 8. The Apparition of S. Michael. 13. S. Paschal. 18. Translation of S. Bernardine. 19. S. Felix. 20. S. Bernardine. 23. Translation of S. Francis. June. 13. Antony of Padua. 24. S. John Baptist. 29. S. Peter and Paul. 30. Commemoration of S. Paul. July. 1. The octave of S. John Baptist. 2. The Visitation of our Lady. 4. S. Elizabeth of Portugal. 14. S. Bonaventure. 17. S. Alexius. 22. S. Mary Magdalen. 25. S. James the Apostle. 26. S. Anne August. 1. S. Petri ad vincula, and 8 days fol∣lowing.
2. Our Lady of Angels. Feast of the 3. Cord. Invention of S. Steven. 4. S. Dominick. 5. Our Lady ad Nives. 6. Transfiguration of our Lord. 10. S. Laurence, and through his whole octave. 12. S. Clare. 15. Assumption of our Lady. 16. S. Roch. 19. S. Lewis Bishop. 22. The Octave of the Assumption. 24. S. Bartholomew Apostle. 25. S. Lewis King. 28. S. Augustine. 29. The beheading of S. John. September. 4. S. Rose of Viterbia. 7. The Eve of the Nativity. 8. The Nativity of our Lady. 9. S. Nicolas Tolentine. 14. The Exaltation of the holy Cross. 17. The Stigmats of S. Francis. 21. S. Mathew. 27. S. Elzearo. 29. S. Michael. 30. S. Hierom.
October. 2. Translation of S. Clare. 4. Our holy Father S. Francis, and all the Octave. 13. 7 Franciscane Martyrs. 18. S. Luke. 19 S. Peter Alcantara. 23. S. John Capistran. 27. S. Juo. 28. SS. Simon and Jude. November. 1. All Saints. 2. All Souls, and the whole Octave. 9. Dedication of our Saviours Church 10. Translation of S. Lewis. 12. S. Didacus. 18. Dedication of S. Peters Church. 19. S. Elizabeth of Hungarie. 21. Presentation of our Lady. 22. S. Cecily. 23. S. Clement. 28. S. James of Marchia. 30. S. Andrew Apostle. December. 6. S. Nicholas. 7. S. Ambrose. 8. The Conception of our B. Lady. Patroness of the Order.
21. S. Thomas Apostle. 24. Christmas Eve. 25. Christmas day. 26. S. Stephens. 27. S. John. 28. Innocents day. 31. S. Silvester. Of the moveable Feasts. ON all the Sundays of Advent. On the three Ember dayes. On Septuagesima Sunday. On Sexagesima Sunday. On quinquagesima Sunday. On Lent, from Ashwednesday to Low Sunday inclusively. On all the Sundayes of May. On the Ascension day. On Whitson Eve. On Whitsonday, and all the Octave. On Corpus Christi day. From the 8 of May unto the 1 day of August. Note here, that there is no day in the Year, but there are some Indul∣gences to be gained, which the Bre∣thren
of this Confraternity may gain, by saying the five Paters & Aves, as aforesaid. He that would see the validity of these Indulgences, and many good things, as the Popes Bulls concerning this Arch-Confraternity, and the Office of our Seraphical Father S. Francis, let him read the great Manual of the Pi∣ous and Learned man, Father Angelus Francis. The Benediction of the Cord. Versus. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini. Resp. Qui fecit coelum & terram. Versus. Sit nomen Domini benedictum. Resp. Ex hoc nunc & usque in saeculum. Versus. Domine exaudi orationem me∣am. Resp. Et clamor meus ad te veniat. Versus. Dominus vobiscum. Resp. Et cum Spiritu tuo.
Oremus. DOmine Jesu Christe Fili Dei vivi, qui funibus in Passione ligari vo∣luisti, & Beatum Petrum Apostolum tuum a vinculis absolutum illaesum abi∣re fecisti, te suppliciter deprecamur: ut hos funiculos quos ad imitationem almi Patris nostri B. Francisci Confes∣soris atque signiferi tui, in cingula cor∣porum suorum creaturae elegerunt, & ut strictius tibi conjungantur atque fir∣mius famulentur ferre decreverunt, Be∣ne✚dicere & una cum famulis tuis qui eis cingentur Sancti✚ficare digneris, ut sumbos suos castitate praecinctos gerant, sitque illis justitia cingulum lum borum eorum & fides cinctorium renum eo∣rum. Da eis, quaesumus Domine; Spi∣ritum Sanctum tuum, qui eos in bono proposito conservet, fide & operibus au∣geat, omnium virtutum incrementa praebeat, dona sua concedat, & tandem ad aeternam gloriam conducat, in qua vivis & regnas cum Deo Patre in uni∣tate ejusdem Spiritus Sancti. Amen.
Oremus. OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui ut servos vinctos absolveres, Fi∣lium tuum unigenitum funibus ligari voluisti, Bene✚dic quaesumus funculos istos ut famuli tui qui eis veluti ligami∣ne poenitentiali cingi ambiunt: vincu∣lorum ejusdem Filii tui Domini nostri memores existant; in statu devotionis salubriter perseverent, & a peccatorum suorum funibus soluti, tuis cum effectu semper obsequiis se ligatos esse cognos∣cant. Per eundum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen. Aspergendo chordas cum aqua benedie∣ta dicas Benedictio Dei Patris & Filii & Spiritus Sancti descendat super has chordas: Resp. Amen. Cingendo ad singulos dicat, Accipe cin∣gulum istud & Paratus vel [parata] esto alligari & mori pro Domino Jesu Chri∣sto, qui praecingat lumbos mentis tuae cingulo puritatis ut permaneat in te virtus continentiae & castitatis & Deo semper in omnibus obedias. Poste aquam omnes sunt cincti dicat.
Oremus. DEus qui Beato Petro Apostolo tuo prae∣dixisti in senectute sua per alium se fore cingendum, famulos tuos quos cingu∣lis nostrae fraternitatis praecinximus, tua quaesumus chorda salutari corda eorum Christiana praecinge disciplina; ut tui opi∣tulante gratia soluti & liberati à vitiis tuoque vincti servitio in statu devotionis us∣que in finem jugiter perseverent. Qui vi∣vis & regnas in saeculorum. Amen. Finalis Benedictio. BEnedictio Sanctissimae Trinitatis, Pa∣tris, & Filii, & Spiritus Sancti de∣scendat super vos, ut sicut chordis corpora vesira circundatis, ita animas fide, Jesu Christi & bonis operibus decoretis, quate∣nus suam gratiam in hoc saeculo, & in fu∣turo gloriam habeatis aeternam. Amen.
The Benediction of the Cord for one alone. Versus. Adjutorium nostrum in nomine Domini. Resp. Qui fecit coelum & terram. Versus. Sit nomen Domini benedi∣ctum. Resp. Ex hoc nunc & usque in saecu∣lum. Versus. Domine exaudi orationem meam. Resp. Et clamor meus ad te veniat. Versus. Dominus vobiscum. Resp. Et cum spiritu tuo. Oremus. DOmine Jesu Christe Filii Dei vivi, qui funibus in passione ligari voluisti, & beatum Petrum Apostolum tuum à vincu∣lis absolutum illaesum abire fecisti, te sup∣pliciter deprecamur, ut hunc funiculum, quem ad imitationem almi Patris nostri Beati Francisci Confessoris atque signiferi tui, in cingulum corporis sui creatura ele∣git, & ut strictius tibi conjungatur atque
firmius famuletur, ferre decrevit bene✚di∣cere, & una cum famulo tuo [qui vel [fa∣mula tua] quae] ea cingetur, sancti✚ficare digneris, ut lumbos suos castitate praecin∣ctos, gerat, sit que illi justitia cingulum lum∣borum ejus, & fides cinctorium renum ejus. Da ei quaesumus Domine, Spiritum San∣ctum tuum, qui eum vel [eam] in bono proposito conservet, fide & operibus au∣geat, omnium virtutum incrementa prae∣beat, dona sua concedat, & tandem ad aeternam gloriam conducat, in qua vivis & regnas cum Deo Patre in unitate ejusdem Spiritus sancti. Amen. Oremus. OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui ut servos vinctos absolveres, Filium tuum unigenitum funibus ligari voluisti, bene✚dic quaesumus funiculum istum, ut famulus tuus, qui vel famula tua, [quae] eo velut ligamine poenitentiali cingi am∣bit, vinculorum ejusdem Filii tui Domini nostri Jesu Christi memor existat, & in sta∣tu devotionis salubriter perseveret, à pec∣catorum suorum funibus solutus, vel [solu∣ta] tuis cum effectu semper obsequiis liga∣tum
vel [ligatam] se esse cognoscat. Per eundem Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen. Here the Cord is to be sprinkled with Holy-water; and then the party that receives it, is to be girded there∣with: the Priest saying as followeth. ACcipe cingulum istud, & paratus vel [parata] esto alligari, & mori pro Domino nostro Jesu Christo, qui praecingat lumbos mentis tuae cingulo puritatis, ut permaneat in te virtus continentiae & ea∣stitatis, & Deo semper in omnibus obedias. Amen. The Priest is to say this following pray∣er, upon the party that hath re∣ceived the Cord. Oremus. DEus qui Beato Petro Apostolo tuo prae∣dixisti in senectute sua per alium fo∣re cingendum, famulum tuum quem ve [famulam tuam] quam cingulo nostrae fra∣ternitatis praecinximus, tua quaesumus
chorda salutari cor ejus Christiana prae∣cinge disciplina, ut tui opitulante gratia so∣lut us, & liberatus, vel [soluta & libera∣ta] à vitiis, tuoque vinctus vel [vincta] servitio, in statu devotionis usque in finem jugiter perseveret. Qui vivis & regnas in saecula saeculorum. Amen. Benediction is to be given to him or her that takes the Cord. BEnedictio Sanctissimae Trinitatis, Pa∣tris, & Filii, & Spiritus sancti, de∣scendat super te, ut sicut chorda corpus tuum circumdas, ita animam fide Jesu Christi, & bonis operibus decores, quate∣nus suam gratiam in hoc saeculo, & in, fu∣turo gloriam habeas aeternam. Amen.
Litanies of the Passion of our Saviour. O all ye that pass by the way, stay a while, and see, if there be any dolour like to that of mine: They pierced my hands and feet, displaced and numbred all my bones; from the sole of my feet, to the Crown of my head, there is no health in me. Chap. 1. Hier. & Isa. & Psalm. 21. LOrd, have mercy upon us. Christ, have mercy upon us, Lord, have mercy upon us. Christ Jesu, hear us. God the Father, which art in Heaven, have mercy upon us. O Jesus Christ, Son of the Father, Redeemer of the world, and our gra∣cious God, have mercy upon us. O holy Ghost, which art our God, have mercy upon us. O holy Trinity, one onely God, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who diddest wash the feet of thy Apostles, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast sold for thirty pence, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who hast given thy precious body and blood unto us, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who prayedst three times in the Garden, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who diddest sweat water and blood, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who was kist by Judas, have mer∣cy upon us. Jesu, who wast taken and bound by the wicked Jews, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast presented to Annas and Caiphas, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast buffetted by a vile ser∣vant, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast falsly accused, have mer∣cy upon us. Jesu, who wast three times denied of thy servant Peter, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast delivered up to Pilate, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast examined by the Judge, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast found most innocent, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who wast led to Herod, have mer∣cy upon us. Jesu, who wast despised of Herod and his company, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast cloathed like a fool, in a white garment, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast less esteemed than the murtherer Barrabas, have mercy up∣on us. Jesu, who wast bound naked to the pillar, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast cruelly whipt with rods and scourges, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast all over goared with wounds, have mercy upon us. Jesu, whose precious blood was spilt upon the ground, have mercy upon us. Jesu, whose sacred face was covered with spittings, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast cloathed with purple, and mocked by the Jews, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast crowned with thorns, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who carriedst a Reed, instead of a Scepter, have mercy upon us. Jesu, whose sacred eyes were blind-folded, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, whose face was stroken, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast by Pilate shewn to the people, have mercy upon us. Jesu, against whom they cry out, Cru∣cifie him, Crucifie him, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who, for us, was condemned to death, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast falsly judged, have mer∣cy upon us. Jesu, who was delivered unto the hands of the common people, have mercy upon us. Jesus, who wast loaden with the heavy Cross, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who with the weight thereof wast prest even to the ground, have mer∣cy upon us. Jesu, who wast stripped upon Mount Calvary, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast stretcht out with cords upon the Cross, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast nailed to the Cross, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast lifted up together with the Cross, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast accompanied with two
theeves upon the Cross, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast blasphemed by those that passed by, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who prayedst for thine enemies, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who gavest heaven unto the Thief, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who gavest thy B. Mother into the custody of St. John, have mercy up∣on us. Jesu, who wast forsaken of thy Father, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who diddest drink vinegar and gall, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who saidst, All is consummated, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who dying, bowedst down thy ho∣ly head, have mercy upon us. Jesu, whose sacred side was pierced with a Lance, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who did dest shed water and blood, from thy bleeding wound, have mer∣cy upon us. Jesu, who wast taken from the Cross, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who diddest lye dead in the lappe of thy Mother, have mercy upon us.
Jesu, who hast wrapped in a winding sheet, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who wast laid in the Sepulchre, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who by thy death hath saved the world, have mercy upon us. Jesu, who by thy precious blood hast redeemed us, have mercy upon us. Jesu, be propicious unto us. Jesu, pardon us. From all evil, both corporal and spiri∣tual, sweet Jesus deliver us. From thy anger and wrath, Sweet Jesu deliver us. From sudden death, Sweet Jesu deliver us. From Plague, Warre, and Fa∣mine, Sweet Jesu deliver us. From all errors and Heresies, Sweet Jesu deliver us. From the sleights and temptations of the Devil, Sweet Jesu deliver us. From evil will, Sweet Jesu deliver us. From all impatience, Sweet Jesu deliver us. From all excess and riot, Sweet Jesu deliver us. From eternal death, Sweet Jesu deliver us. By thy prayers and agony, Sweet Jesu deliver us. By thy bloody sweat, Sweet Jesu deliver us. By thy captivity, Sweet Jesu deliver us. By thy bands and cords, Sweet Jesu deliver us. By thy buffets, spittings, and mock∣ings. Sweet Jesu deliver us.
By thy whips and scourges, Sweet Jesus deliver us. By thy Crown of thorns, Sweet Jesu deliver us. By thy holy Cross, Sweet Jesu deliver us. By the nails and hammers, Sweet Jesu deliver us. By the spunge and spear, Sweet Jesu de∣liver us. By thy five wounds, Sweet Jesu deli∣ver us. By thy precious blood, Sweet Jesu de∣liver us. At the hour of death, Sweet Jesu deli∣ver me. We sinners, Do beseech thee to hear us. That thou vouchsafe to bring us to true penance, We beseech thee to hear us. That thou pardon us, We beseech thee to hear us. That thou wilt be pleased to cleanse our souls with thy pre∣cious blood. We beseech thee to hear us. That thou wilt be pleased to de∣fend and exalt thy holy Church. We beseech thee to hear us. That thou wilt vouchsafe to pre∣serve our holy Father the Pope, and all the Prelates of the holy Church. We beseech thee to hear us.
That thou wilt be pleased to main∣tain the Emperour, the Christian Kings and Prin∣ces, in the zeal of the holy Ca∣tholick, Apostolick, and Roman faith, We beseech thee to hear us. That thou wilt vouchsafe to pre∣serve thy people redeemed with thy precious blood, from the in∣fection of Heresie, We beseech thee to hear us. That thou wilt be pleased to pro∣tect the Church from the fury of Turks, and tyranny of Hereticks. We beseech thee to hear us. That thou wilt vouchsafe to give victory to the Catholick Ar∣mie, We beseech thee to hear us. That thou wilt be pleased to con∣firm thy Christian People in peace, and union, under the o∣bedience of their temporal and spiritual Superiours, We beseech thee to hear us. That thou wilt vouchsafe to con∣serve the fruits of the earth, We beseech thee to hear us. That thou will be pleased to deli∣ver the souls of our parents, and friends, out of Purgatory, We beseech thee to hear us. That thou wilt vouchsafe not to permit thy precious blood to
be shed in vain, we beseech thee to hear us. That thou wilt be pleased to give unto us all that which is most fitting for us, both for soul and body, we be∣seech thee to hear us. O sweet Iesu, hear us. Jesu, Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the word, Pardon us. Jesu, hear us. Vers. We adore and bless thee, O Je∣su. Resp. Who hast redeemed the world, by the holy Cross. A Prayer. O Lord God, we humbly beseech thee to cast thine eye upon this thy family, for which our Lord Jesus Christ hath not feared to be delivered into the hands of the wicked, and to suffer the torment of the Cross. O most merciful Father, we give thee thanks, for that thou hast not spared thy only begotten, and well-beloved Son, our Saviour Jesus Christ; but hast delivered him up to a shameful death,
for our offences, to the end that there∣by we might be freed from eternal death. Grant, O good God, that we may acknowledge this benefit as we ought; and that by Faith, Hope and Charity we may be made participant thereof. Through Jesus Christ thy Son. Amen. O most bountiful Saviour Jesus Christ who with so precious a Jewel, hast so superabundantly satisfied for our sins, we beseech thee, by vertue of thy holy death and Passion, that thou wilt de∣fend us from the snares of the Devil, and allurements of sin. O thou who dyedst for mankinde, and livest and raignest with God the Father, in unity of the holy Ghost for ever. Amen. O blessed Jesus, who, for the redem∣ption of the world, wouldst patiently suffer injuries, contempts, contumelies, pains, dolours, afflictions, loss of thy precious blood, and a cruel death; We beseech thee, by vertue of all these thy sufferings which thou hast willingly en∣dured for our sins, that thou wilt de∣liver us from all the perils of this world, and pains of the world to come. Amen.
Jaculatory Prayers of the Passion to be said at every hour. 1. MY good Jesus, in acknowledge∣ment of what thou hast done, and suffered for me in this hour, I of∣fer unto thee my heart and my soul. Be thou blessed of all Creatures. 2. O blessed Saviour, give me the Grace not to offend thee in this hour. And I am sorry for having displeased thee hitherto. 3. Grant me grace, good Jesu, to endure in this hour, something for thy sake. 4. I offer unto thee, O my Saviour, all that I shall do at this hour, in the union of thy holy Passion. 5. Jesu, Saviour of the world, be merciful unto me at the hour of my death.
LITANIAE PASSIONIS Latinae cantandae in Proces∣sione quae fit Dominica se∣cunda cujuslibet mensis. HUmiliavit semetipsum Dominus noster Jesus Christus factus obe∣diens usque ad mortem, mortem autem Crucis, propter quod & Deus exaltavit illum, & dedit illi nomen, quod est su∣per omne nomen, ut in nomine Jesu omne genu-flectatur, coelestium, terre∣strium & infernorum, & omnis lingua confiteatur, quia Dominus noster Jesus Christus in gloria est Dei Patris. KYrie eleison. Christe eleison. Kyrie eleison. Christe eleison. Kyrie eleison. Christe eleison. Kyrie eleison. Christe eleison. Christe audi nos. Christe exaudi nos. Pater de coelis Deus, miserere. Fili Redemptor mundi Deus, mis. nobis.
Spiritus sancte Deus, mis. Sancta Trinitas unus Deus, mis. Jesu Christe, qui diversis opprobriis illusus fuisti, mis. Jesu Christe, qui Pilato traditus fuisti, mis. Jesu Christe qui ad columnam ligatus, & usque ad sanguinem verberatus fuisti, mis. Jesu Christe, qui a militibus veste pur∣purea indutus fuisti, mis. nobis. Jesu Christe, qui spinis durissimis coro∣natus fuisti, mis. Jesu Christe, qui verbum durissimum, Tolle, tolle, crucifige, saepius audi∣visti, mis. Jesu Christe, qui dulcissimum lignum crucis fessus & oneratus sustinuisti, misere nobis. Jesu Christe, qui in cruce levatus, cum latronibus associatus fuisti, mis. Jesu Christe, qui manibus & pedibus fixis in cruce, a praetereuntibus blas∣phematus fuisti, mis. Jesu Christe, qui speciosam faciem tu∣am, quasi leprosam habuisti, mis. Jesu Christe, qui pro crucifixoribus orasti ad Patrem, & latronem in
cruce exaudisti, mis Jesu Christe, qui Mariam matrem tuam dulcissimam Joanni commendasti, mis. Jesu Christe, qui lancea perforatus fui∣sti, & proprio sanguine mundum re∣demisti, mis. Jesu Christe, qui in monumento sepul∣tus fuisti, mis. Jesu Christe, qui tertia die a mortuis resurrexisti, mis. Jesu Christe, qui quadragesima die in. coelum ascendisti, mis. Jesu Christe, qui sedes ad dexteram Patris, mis. Jesu Christe, qui venturus es judicare vivos & mortuos, mis. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, parce nobis Domine, Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, ex∣audi nos Domine. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, Miserere nobis. Kyrie eleison. Christe eleison. Kyrie eleison. Pater noster, &c. Et ne nos inducas in tentationem: Sed libera nos a malo.
Oremus. DOmine Jesu Christe, qui pro sa∣lute humani generis quinque vul∣nera pati voluisti, tribue qua sumus, ut ob reverentiam illorum vulnerum tuo∣orum absolvi mereamur ab omnibus peccatis nostris, & da praesentem vitam bono fine terminari, & a tuae dulcissimae visionis contemplatione nunquam sepa∣parari. Oremus. DEus qui manus tuas, & pedes tuos, & totum corpus tuum pro nobis peccatoribus in ligno crucis posuisti, & coronam spineam a Judaeis in despe∣ctum tui sacratissimi nominis super caput tuum impositam sustinuisti, & quinque vulnera pro nobis peccatori∣bus in ligno crucis passus fuisti: da no∣bis hodie & quotidie usum poenitentiae, abstinentiae, patientiae, humilitatis, ca∣stitatis, lumen, sensum, intellectum, & puram conscientiam usque in finem.
Per te Jesu Christe Salvator mundi. Qui cum Patre & Spiritu sancto vivis & regnas Deus. Per omnia saecula sae∣culorum. Amen. We have here added the Pro∣fession of our Faith, which is of∣ten to be read to confirm our selves in the belief of the holy Church, to exercise and increase our Faith, and obtain the effect of our Prayers, the impetration thereof being attributed to Faith.
A PROFESSION OF THE Catholick Faith, Set out according to the Decrees of the holy Council of Trent. IAB Do with a stead fast Faith, Believe and Profess, all and every Point con∣tained in the Symbol of the Faith that the holy Roman Church doth use, (to wit) I do believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of Hea∣ven and Earth, of all things both visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begot∣ten Son of God, and born of the
Father before all Worlds, God of God, Light of Light, true God of true God, begotten, and not made, of the same substance with the Father, by whom all things were made; who for us men, and for our salvation, came down from Heaven, and was Incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Ma∣ry, and was made man; was cru∣cisied also for us, under Pontius Pilate, suffered, and was buried and rose again the third day, ac∣cording to the Scriptures, and as∣cended up to Heaven, sitteth at the right hand of the Father, and he shall come again with Glory to judge the quick and the dead, of whose Kingdom there shall be no end. And in the Holy Ghost our Lord and giver of Life, who pro∣ceedeth from the Father and the Son, who with the Father and the
Son together, is adored and con∣glorified, who spake by the Pro∣phets. And in one holy Catholick and Apostolick Church. I profess one Baptism for the remission of sins. And I expect the Resurrecti∣on of the dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen. I do steadfastly admit and em∣brace the Traditions of the Apo∣stles and of the Church, and all other Observations and Constitu∣tions of the same Church. I do also admit the holy Scrip∣tures, according to that sense which our holy Mother the Ca∣tholick Church hath held and doth hold, to whom it appertaineth to judge of the true sense and inter∣pretation of the holy Scriptures: neither will I ever understand nor interpret the same otherwise then according to the uniform
consent of the Fathers. I do also profess, that there be truly and properly seven Sacra∣ments of the new Law, instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord, and necessary for the salvation of man∣kind (although all be not necessary for every one) to wit, Baptism, Confirmation, Extream Ʋnction, Order, and Matrimony; and these Sacraments do give Grace, and that of them, Baptism, Confirma∣tion, and Order cannot be reitera∣ted without Sacriledge. I do also receive and admit all the received and approved Cere∣monies of the Catholick Church in the solemn administration of all the aforesaid Sacraments. I do receive and embrace all and every of the things which in the holy Council of Trent have been defined and declared touch∣ing
Original sin and Justifica∣tion. I do profess also, that in the Mass is offered up to God a true proper and propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and dead; and that in the most holy Sacrament of the Altar, there is truly, really, and substantially the body and blood, together with the Soul and Divi∣nity of our Lord Jesus Christ. And that there is made a Conversion of the whole substance of the bread into the Body, and of the whole substance of the wine into the Blood, which Conversion the holy Church calls Transubstantia∣tion. I do also confess, that under either form only, is received Christ whole and entire, and the true Sacrament. I do constantly hold that there
is Purgatory, and that the Souls which be there detained, are holpen by Prayers of the Faithful. Also that the Saints, who raign together with Christ, are to be honored and called upon, and that they offer up prayers to God for us, and that their Reliques are to be reverenced and honou∣red. I do most steadfastly affirm, that the Images of Christ, of the Mother of God, always Virgin, and of all Saints, are to be had and retained, and that due honor and reverence is to be given them. I affirm that the authority of Indulgences was left by Christ in the Church, and that the use of them is very behoofeful for Chri∣stian People. I do acknowledge the holy Ca∣tholick
and Apostolick Roman Church, to be the Mother and Mi∣striss of all Churches. And I do promise and swear true obedience to the Bishop of Rome, who is the Successor of St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ. And all other things also defined and declared by the holy Canons and Oecumenical Councils, and chiefly by the holy Council of Trent, I do undoubtedly receive and profess. And also, all contrary things, and whatsoever Heresies condemned and accursed by the Church I likewise do condemn, reject, and accurse. This true Catholick Faith, without which no man can be sa∣ved, now I willingly and truly hold the same. A. B. do promise and swear to hold and confess
most constantly, by God his help, entire and uncorrupted even to the last end of my life. So God help me, and the holy Gospels of God, Amen. Anglia chara Deo, Felix, & Sancta fuisti Sis modo qualis eras, sic pia vota petunt. FINIS.
