D1387 12279658 58643
A Precious TREASURY OF TWENTY Rare SECRETS. Most Necessary, Pleasant, and Profitable for all sorts of People. PUBLISHED BY Signier FRANCISCO DICKINSON an Expert Operator, and presumed to as good as any the best in all Europe. LONDON, Printed for the Author, whose skill is Approved, 1649.
The Contents of this Book. THe first Secret is how to make make Haire grow. The second how to write Letters either lack, Blew or Green, without Penne or Inke. The third how to write Letters of Secrets Severall wayes, that can be read by none without this instruction following. The fourth how any that in necessity are troubled with Lice or Vermine may destroy them suddenly. The fifth how to make a Horse to have a good hoofe. The sixth how to make Wine to be odoriferous. The seventh how to make strong Vineger. The eighth how to make haire of any colour to become black. The ninth how to make a Candle to burn in water, and to endure a long time. The tenth how to keep Wine from souring. The eleaventh how to ripen Musmelions, and such other fruit before their season. The twelfth how to clear your feet from all sweat. The thirteenth how to take out spots of greace or Oyle. The fourteenth how to keep meat a long time fresh, without salt. The fifteenth how to make a Powder that will make good Inke in an Instant. The sixteenth how to cure the Ague. The seventeenth how to appeaze the paine of the Tooth-ache. The eighteenth how to make haire to grow where there is none. The ninetenth how to make a most pleasing and wholsome messe of broth for a sicke body. The twentieth how to make ones hands and face smooth and fair.
I. How to make hair to grow. TAke half a pound of Aqua Mellis, in the spring time of the year, warm a little of it every morning when you rise in a sauser or such a thing; and tie a little spunge to a fine Box Comb, and dip it in the said water; and therewith moisten the very roots of your hair in combing it, and it will grow long, thick, and curled in a very short space. II. How to write letters either Black, Blew, Red, or Green, without Pen or Inke. Take the ashes of burned paper, with a little Sallet-oyl and mingle it like a thick Ointment; then take paper, warm it a little by the fire, and annoint it over with the foresaid Oint∣ment, and when you would write, lay this anointed side of your Paper upon a clean sheet of Paper: then take a peece of any strong wier, or a little stick smooth and small at the end: then write therewith upon the said Paper, and it will appear most plainly upon the white Paper. If you would have your letters blew, take Indigo, if green, Verdigreace. III. How to write letters of secrets severall wayes that can be read by none without this instruction following. Take fine Allom, beat it small, and put a reasonable quan∣tity of it into a little water, then write with the said water, the which writing cannot be read, but by steeping your Paper af∣tetwards in fair water. You may likewise write with Vinegar or the juyce of a Lemon, or of an Onyon; then when you would read the same, you must heat your Paper against the fire. Moreover, if you will anoynt a piece of Paper with Can∣dlegreace, and lay it upon an other white Paper, then write thereon, next open your Paper asunder, and strew a little Powder upon your Paper, and whatsoever colour you Powder be of, your writing will appear of the same colour.
IV. How any that in necessity are troubled with Lice or any o∣ther Vermin may destroy them suddenly. Take Laurell Oyle half an ounce, three penniworth of Quick Silver, mingle them well, and anoint therewith the pla∣ces where you have most Vermin, and you shall suddenly be clear from all such things. V. How to make a Horse to have a good hoof. Take Cowdung and Chimney soot, mingle them, beat them, and apply them to the Horse his hoofs, and bind it on with some course thing, and it will do the effect. VI. How to make Wine to be Odoriferous. Stick a Lemond or an Orange full of Cloaves, then fusten itto the inside of the Barrell, in such sort that it touch not the Wine, then stop your vessel very well, that the Odour go not forth, and it will be excellent. VII. How to make strong Vineger. Take Gooseberries and wild Mulberries when they are green, dry them, beat them into Powder, and then make a paste of them with strong Vineger, of which you shall make little round Balls, then take your wine, and boyl all together, and it will prove excellent good Vineger. VIII. How to make haire of any colour to become black. Take a little Aqua fortis, put there in a groat or six pence according to the quantity of the foresaid water, then set both to dissolve before the fire. Lastly, dip a little Spunge in the said water, and wet your beard or haire therewith, but touch not the skin. IX. How to make a Candle burn in water and endure a long time. Take a Candle and stick at the bottom of it as much Lead as will make it stand upright in a paile of water, and not sink, and the Canle will endure burning therein a long time. X. How to keep Wine from sowring. Tie a piece of very salt Bacon on the inside of your barrell, so as it touch not the Wine, in so doing your Wine wil ne∣ver sowre.
XI. How to ripen muskmelons, and such other fruit before their season. You must plant them in dry weather, and once every third or fourth day water them with warm water, and so they will be ripe before their season. XII. How to clear your feet from sweat. Take the fiings of Pins, otherwayes called Pin-dust, put a litle thereof ino your shoes or Boots, and it will keep your feet clear from sweat. XIII. How to take out spots of Oyl or Greace. Take the bones of Sheeps feet burn them almost to ashes, then bruise them to Powder, and put of it upon your spots, and lay all before the Sunne when it shines hottest; when the Powder becomes black lay on fresh in the place till it suck out the spots, which is done in very short time. XIV. How to keep Meat fresh and sweet a long time without salt. Put your Meat in Flower, Meale or Bran, and therein it will keep fresh and sweet a long time, or else cast beaten Co∣riander seed and Vinegar on it, and it will doe the same. XV. How to mae a Powder that will make good Ink in an instant. Take Roman Vitrioll, and Copperas, as much of the one as of the other; beat this into powder, mingle it, and put of it into a little water; and on the present it will be very good Ink: likewise if you strew of the same Powder upon white paper and write thereon with a little faire water, the letters will appear presently black. XVI. How to cure the Ague quartan, tertian, or quotidian. First take advice of your Doctor; that will be I know to purge, and let blood, which indeed is a great preparation for obtaining of health in all diseases; yet none can prescribe any certain rule for this purpose, but such a Doctor as partly knowes the constitution of your body, and the nature of your disease; therefore if your ague stick to you after you have been under the Doctors hands, take little pieces of Allom,
scrape and cut them to the fashion of Pills, and let them that are very young, very old, or very weak take three of these Al∣lom pills in three spoon fulls of Annis seed water; let the stronger sort take five or six, in the same manner; this is a remedy whereby I never failed to cure as many as ever I took in hand, observing likewise if you can to use Cardus Benedi∣ctus boyled in posset drink for your ordinary drink; especial¦ly when you have a mind to sweat. XVII. How to appease te pain of the Toothach. Take a little Cotton and dip it into essence of Cloves which you may have at the Apothecaries, thrust the said dipt Cotten in the hollownesse of your tooth, and it will appease the present pain. XVIII. How to make haire grow where there is none. Take Bees and burn them upon a fire shovell, or such a thing then boyle the ashes of the Bees in Sallet oyle, then anoint therewith the place where you would have haire to grow and you shall obtain your wish in a short time. XIX. How to make a most wholsome and pleasing messe of Broth for a sick body though his stomack be never so weak for other things. Take the yolks of two new Egs, put them in a little pipkin for that purpose, squeeze therin the juyce of a Lemon or two, then take a good Ladle full of good broth out of another pot that boyles, first beat the Egs yolkes and Lemon juyce very well together; then put in the sayd broth, but let it not be too salt by no means, then stir all together upon an easie fire, and at the first boyl thereof take it off and give it the sick body upon a little bread according to your discretion. XX. How to make ones hands and face smooth and faire. Take bitter Almonds, steep them overnight in water, then pill off their skins with your fingers, and then beat them very well in a morter with two or three yolks of Egges; use this paste to wash your face & hands often, and it will make your skin smooth and faire: to weare dogge leather gloves is like∣wise
good for that purpose, but especially any little delicate gloves, rub them well with some of the sweetest smelling oyl before a fire and weare these gloves under others awhile, there is nothing in the world better for that purpose. I have some things extraordinary which I cannot commu∣nicate to any but them that have need of my help, and will make use of me. I have written here somthing to satisfie the curious, but I must consesse they are but trifles in comparison of my manuall operations, which I presume to be as expert in as any man in Europe whatsoever he be, as my approbation of ome of the best Doctors of this Age shall justify if need re∣uires. I say agen, I have some things extraordinary, which I cannot ommunicate publiquely, but those that need my help may re∣ayr to me, and I will satisfy their desires. I glory not in knowing or doing much, but in doing well that which I undertake I help those that are thick of hearing without any the least pain to the party. probatum est. Those that are pained with the Tooth-ach may (without drawing their teeth) have present ease and remedy. I can also help the Bloody flux, though they have been long troubled therewith. I can give remedies against all kinds of Feavers, and can help quotidian, terian, and quartan Agues. I have likewise a most rare and precious approved Balsom for to ease any pain about mens joynts and limbs, an to heal old Sores, or green wounds by cuts or stabs, in a short time. I have also certain Minerall Stones, whose vertues are found to be good against diver sorts of maladies. I live at present in Stanhop street ove against the Black-moores-head neere the new Market, in St Clements parish, where they that have need of me, may finde me to give them all reasonable satisfaction, God willing. Per me FRANCISCO DICKINSON Operator.
