D1832 12756001 93430
A SERMON Preached before the KING On Tuesday, June 20th. 1665. Being the Day of SOLEMN THANKSGIVING For the late VICTORY at SEA. By J. DOLBEN D. D. Dean of WESTMINSTER, and Clerk of the Closet. Published by His Majesties Special Command. London, Printed by A. Maxwell for Timothy Garthwait. 1665.
PSAL. 54. Vers. 6, 7. 6. An offering of a free heart will I give thee, and praise thy Name, O Lord: Because it is so comfortable. 7. For he hath delivered me out of all my trouble: and mine eye hath seen his desire upon mine enemies. HAving the Honour to serve the De∣votions of the King and the Court in their joynt Thanksgiving to God for a Victory: I have taken the Theme of my Discourse from the mouth of a King, who was the greatest Conqueror, and withal, the greatest Master and Example of Devotion recorded in holy Scrip∣ture. A Prince, who with the same spirit and af∣fection led his People in their Battels, and in all
their Acts of Worship and Religion; Went In and Out before the Congregation as constantly to the Tabernacle as the Camp. And therefore, as the Hi∣storical Books of the Old Testament (a good part whereof are but Davids Commentaries, short and summary Memorials of his glorious Atchieve∣ments,) afford matter enough for the admiration of Captains and Commanders in War: So is his Book of Psalms a rich Treasure and Magazine of Heavenly Meditations, where every Pious Soul may find somewhat suited to its condition, fit to assist its infirmities, and improve it's Graces. If we can, as S. Augustine adviseth, form our souls In Psal. 30. by the affection of the Psalm, tune our hearts to the Aire and spirit of Davids raptures, we shall meet in these Divine Compositions, that which is able to kindle Zeal, inflame Love, mellow and im∣pregnate holy Sorrow for sin; to give Wings to our Prayers, and carry our Petitions with speed and force into Heaven; to animate and enliven our Praises, and make our Hallelujahs like those of Angels and Beatified Spirits; To actuate all the good Resolutions which any of these Affections, our Love, our Fear, the sense of our own unwor∣thiness, or Gods abundant Mercies, have begun in our hearts. In such plenty and variety, I could not be long to seek for words proper to our present occasion: And such will this Psalm appear to be; A Psalm
of Instruction; so the TITLE calls it, teaching us in few words how we ought to demean our selves in a War, for the procuring good success to our Armies, and making that success happy to us when we have obtained it. In the three first Verses, David being sought for by his Enemies (as we lately were by ours) prayes against them; That was his Course; He always began his Con∣flict with God, contending and wrestling with Him for a blessing and assistance. He durst not lift up his hands even against the Enemies of God (yet what durst not David do?) till he had first lifted them up in humble Supplication to the Lord his strength, Who taught his hands to war, and his fingers to fight. Psal. 144. 1. This being done, his Courage breaks out like Light∣ning, he doubts not of slaying his Thousands and Ten Thousands. So in the 4th. and 5th. Verses, he becomes his own Prophet, promising himself Victory. For who can resist him, who hath Omni∣potence for his Second? Or how can any Enemy maintain a Fight against that Captain, who hath before-hand defeated and broken their Forces by his Prayers, assur'd his Conquest before he put on his Armor. Then in the last Verses, which are my Text, David concludes where he began, thankfully acknowledgeth Gods goodness in his Deliverance, and the Dissipation of his Enemies, obliging himself to a return of dutifull affectio∣nate service, in consideration of so great Mercies
received; and those, as they are the essential parts of a Thanksgiving, so shall they be of my Sermon. I will begin with that which is first in the order of nature, though last in the words; The Acknow∣ledgment, which is double; of the Benefit, and the Au∣thor: The Benefit is likewise two-fold, consisting of a Deliverance and a Victory: David is delivered from all his trouble, all the treacherous plots and attempts of his Adversaries; And his eye hath seen his desire upon those Adversaries; and of all this, God is confessed the sole Author. He hath delivered me, &c. I Am to begin with the Benefit acknowledged, and with that part of it which is here called Deliverance; and that being in Davids case, not a Rescue from actual mischief or distress, but only a diversion of a Danger coming toward him, is such a Negative mercy, as we seldom trouble our selves to consider, much less to acknowledge and give thanks for: How many hundreds of Perils hath every one of us escaped, in our Persons, Fame, and Fortunes, which we never dreamt of? The watchful Providence of God maintaining a continual guard over us, waking and caring for our good, while we sleep, and perhaps neglect both our selves and him that keeps us. Would we but meditate a little upon the infinite accidents oc∣curring in the course of things, the infirmities of
our natural frame and temper, with the nice and curious contexture of our parts, the consequences of our Disorders, the malice of our enemies, and of the Devil; all or any of which, may easily shor∣ten our days, or make them miserable: And from hence admit these two evident Deductions; 1. That in this estate it is morally impossible for a man to continue one day, were not the goodness of God particularly intent upon his Preservation. 2. That it is a double mercy to be kept from danger, and from the knowledge of it too: Because had we a distinct apprehension of all the evils to which we are ob∣noxious, our fear and sollicitude must needs be a continual rack and torment to our Souls: This contemplation would (I assure my self) cause every Person here present to add in his private Closet-De∣votions one new Laud and Thanksgiving to God for his Deliverance from the Dangers which he never thought of. But how little soever we are affected with these unknown Perils and Escapes, wherein our eye is not sharp enough to discern the small thred by which a Calamity hangs over us, or the hand that holds it from falling on our heads: Yet when a considerable Danger comes close, and stares us in the face, when the Clouds gather apace, and the sky looks black about us, then we apprehend a Storm, and bethink us of a shelter and retreat: When death surrounds us, when the Pestilence walks in darkness, and the sword destroyes at noon day, casting down thou∣sands
besides us, and Ten thousands at our right hand, then Qui habitat in adjutorio, is a seasonable Hymn: Then 'tis a valuable Priviledge to retain unto Providence, and have an Interest in Gods favor, that he may defend us under his wings, and we may be safe under his feathers. 'Tis great pitty that after such convictions, Psal. 91. so devout Applications and fastning of our Souls unto the hand of God, we should start like broken bowes; fall off again from the confessed Anchor of our hope: When God says to the Destroying Angel, It is enough, that we should say so to our selves too: If he strike, or our enemies threaten no longer, that we neither pray, nor repent, or praise any longer: But as soon as ever the skie clears up, and the light of Gods countenance breaks through, and dispells the clouds which had begirt us, the very thought of what hath past, should in the same moment blow away likewise, and we forget that ever we had need of Gods protection, or that he interposed to deliver us. David did not so, he hid himself in the Wilderness; the Ziphites bordering upon his retire∣ment discover him to Saul, who comes with an Ar∣my to seise him, but is diverted and drawn back again by the invasion of the Philistines: David could not let such a preservation pass, without compo∣sing this Psalm before us in memory of it, as he hath done divers other upon the like occasions, that there may remain an Eternal Monument of his pi∣ous and dutiful resenting God Blessings; an indeli∣ble
Record and Character of a generous grati∣tude, which is always paying, and yet always owing, and charging it self with what it payes. All this hath been said, because I doubt not but the great Deliverance we now celebrate, had many Deliverances in it which we know not; And I fear, lest we forget ere long those which we do this day own and acknowledge, as we have already too apparently done the stupendious occasions of for∣mer Thanksgivings. Questionless, some mischiefs were projected, which have escaped the vigilance and sagacity of those who disquiet themselves to preserve our security: And some have been pene∣trated by their wisdome, which we of the many have no sense of. From all these we are freed, (for a while at least) and therefore they ought all to be put upon the account, that our Thanks∣giving may be compleat and commensurate to its Causes; for otherwise, there is enough in our open direct Deliverance, to take up all our Affections, and exercise all our Faculties in the best acknow∣ledgments we can make. To conceive it aright, take this obvious Truth into your thoughts, That the greatest Preparations imaginable may be defeated; the most formidable strength may be disordered and broken by a thou∣sand slight accidents. Consider, when two Ar∣mies meet in the Field, how little inconsiderable things (impossible to be prevented or foreseen)
oftentimes turn the Scale, and cast the main issue and success of a Battel beyond all recovery. And then, contemplate the Fortunes of a Nation put into Planks of a few inches thick, exposed to wind and weather, to the mercy of the Sea, and the danger of their own Provisions, which one spark of  fire may make more fatal then all the Ene∣mies Cannon. And (suppose these various hazards avoided, yet) a Force equal to Themselves must be encountred upon so unfaithful footing as the face of the Ocean affords: Then tell me, whether to come off safe from so dreadfull an adventure, be not a Deliverance for which we ought (in the Psalmist's Phrase) to rejoyce with trembling? Psal. 2. 11. If you say, that every Ship is a distinct and several Castle, a new Fort, which will endure a Battery and Siege by it self; and therefore those dismal Routs, which upon the miscarriage of one Troop, some∣times ruine Land Armies, are not to be feared in a Navy, which can dispute a Victory so often over: I must return, that we had so much of our Interest in one Bottome, that we might have bin undone at a Blow: I need not suppose such a shot as fired the Enemies Admiral: That cruel Bullet, which took off those brave Noble Persons, and came so near a Royal one, hath taught me, that to be preserved from such a Danger, to be delivered from all our Trouble, eased of all our anxieties and pangs of soul in so deep a Concern, and with no
greater loss upon the whole account, is a delive∣rance capable of no further addition, to be height∣ned and advanced by no other accession but this, That God hath compleated the abundance and riches of his Mercy, by giving us together with our own safety, a signal discomfiture of those we fought against: Our eyes have seen their desires upon our enemies: To the consideration whereof, I am next to raise your Devotions. ANd in this we have great advantage of Da∣vid; for though the Chaldie Paraphrase reads, Mine eye hath seen revenge, as We, Mine eye hath seen his desire upon mine enemies; Yet neither doth the original (which always expresseth things very concisely) tell us what David saw upon his Ene∣mies; nor do we find in the History of the Fact, that he saw much harm betide them. The trea∣cherous contrivance of the Ziphites was eluded; Saul was called off by a suddain irruption of the Philistines; and David had the pleasure to behold that Army which came to swallow him and his little company, and had even opened their jaws up∣on them, march away in hast to other more equall encounters; this was a delightful Prospect to him, but of no great damage to his Enemies: They suffered a disappointment, made considerable by their expectations and malicious Purposes; but without any real detriment, so far were they
from suffering great havock or slaughter; indeed the World was not then capable of such-Tragedies as we have seen; the Arts and Engines of Destruction, were but rude and imperfect in their first essayes and designes; Mischief was not yet grown skilful enough to convey Death at the distance of miles; to tear men and their strongest defences like raggs; to break a floating Castle as easily as the thinnest bubble in that water where it swimms; killing a competent Army at one blast, nay, almost annihi∣lating them and all their furniture; making a ship which a Province cannot set out in a year, as invisible pdams Ship o part of it er seen af∣ter it was down up. in one moment, as the Atoms of the Aire; Men had not yet inspired the Element of Fire, with their malice and witty managery of mischief; had not taught inanimate flames such a rational conduct of themselves, as to assault and apply their fury to a cluster of ships, sticking like Deianeira's Shirt to every one of them, till they perfect the ruine en∣joyn'd them, and actuate all the wishes of those by whom they are employed: There was not in Davids time means to effect, nor could the world in those days furnish out an Armada considerable enough to suffer such an overthrow as we have seen. But although David saw less then we, yet perhaps his eyes saw as much as we ought to desire to see upon our enemies; to behold their Designs frustrated, their Preparations vainly spent, their For∣ces disabled from hurting us. What ought a Chri∣stian
to desire more? Far be it from a Follower of Christ, a Disciple of his meekness, a Son of his charity, to feed his eyes with horrid Spectacles, to delight in mischief, and entertain himself with Feasts of Blood, the Repasts and Banquets of Devils: God forbid, they who profess it their duty to love and cherish their very enemies, should imitate the execrable ferity of Hannibal, who viewing a ditch full of Roman Blood, applauded the loveliness Plutarch. of the sight; or that diabolical temper of Vitellius, Suetonius. Tacit. who professed the stench and killing savour of enemies Carkasses, to be an odour and perfume more grateful then all the Gums and Spices of the East. Should our eyes thus offend us, 'twere good literally to pull them out; much more profitable to want all our senses, then that by them so much of Hell should be let in∣to our Souls: This hath so far affected some ex∣cellent men in the first and best Ages of the Church, as to make them conclude all War unlawful under the Gospel; and you know  among us (God-wot very unlike them) who profess the same be∣lief; I should be sorry to see them tried with such an opportunity of fighting as they wish, and I fear lately expected: But if war be now unlawful, then the Christian Magistrate beareth the Sword in vain (which Rom. 13. 4. yet St. Paul sayeth he does not) it being possible that an Army may be as needful to procure the exe∣cution of Justice, upon strong Thieves, and numerous Murderers, as the Sheriffs Halberts are to guard a
Common Hangman. I could heartily wish, the Commands of Christ were so universally and so sincerely obey'd, that there might be no need of Armies, nor of Courts of Justice; no use of Bonds or Mortgages, to secure the honesty of one Christian to another; which must certainly be the Case, if men having imbided the Doctrine of Christ into their hearts, and being thereby instructed in their Duty, would do it, Not for wrath, but Conscience sake. Yet seeing this is hopeless in the dreggs of a corrupted World, the End must be obtained as it may; We must pray for our Princes, that under them, by the protection of their Power, and their Arms, we may live peaceably and quietly in all Godliness and Honesty; and that God will bless and prosper their Wars, which are not only just, but charitable also, when they undertake to punish wrong Doers, that they may be able to cherish and defend them who do well. And if it be lawful to make War, it must be lawful to profe weaken and disable, nay and to Destroy those whom no fair course will bring to reason: And what we may so endeavor as to hazard our own lives for the procuring, we may with all doubt rejoyce in when we have it; so that we are thus far sure, it is an innocent and ho∣nest satisfaction to see our desire upon our enemies: We may and must be affected with such publick Bene∣fits; and he is unworthy to breath in England, whose heart does not exult and triumph, that the Pride of
our insolent Enemies is in some measure mortified, their Injustice chastised, their vain Rhodomontades returned upon them with shame and confusion, and their real extraordinary strength on which they bare themselves so high, become no further useful, then to embellish our Trophies, and enno∣ble our Victory; to make the KINGS Name more glorious, and the Bravery of those who Commanded his Navy more conspicuous then otherwise they would have been. The Caution then must be, That we rejoyce in our Victory soberly, and use it mercifully: Not fix∣ing our delight directly upon the Calamity of our Enemies, (for what can be more unnatural, then to make Sorrow the Object of Joy?) but recei∣ving it by reflexion from the advantage resulting thence to our own Condition. So Lucretius ob∣serves, that Men apprehend a Contentment in seeing from the shore, a Ship tost in a Tempest; not that he supposeth any so inhumane as to be pleased with the Danger and Misery of others; but such a comparison sets off and endears their own safety to them. Such a Pleasure I would prescribe you in this Case, as Merchants have when they hastily cast out their Goods to save a Ship; Or wounded Soul∣diers when they reward a Chirurgian for cutting off their Limbs to prevent the consequences of a Fever or a Gangreen: These are called mixt acts of the Will, being compounded of satisfaction and
regret. For 'tis impossible a man should desire to lose the effects of an Indian Voyage, be delighted in seeing the fruits of so much toil and hazard perish in a moment: Yet when he hath even at that rate redeemed his Life, he thinks the great and hardly gotten Treasure unhappily but profi∣tably expended. And no man so hates his own flesh, as to be glad to see it mangled and torn from him; But yet he loves the Knife, and applauds the Skill, which takes off a Member to save the Body, bemoaning nevertheless the necessity of that method. If you consider, that every Man is near∣er to us then our Goods, Bone of our Bone, and Flesh of our Flesh, and every Christian is our fellow-Member in that Body whereof Christ is the Head; We shall never behold the miseries of such Rela∣tions, but with that tenderness and sympathy where∣with the first Fathers of the Church looked on those whom they charitably punished, satisfying themselves in the good effects of their Censures both publick and private, the affrighting others from imitating what they saw so condemned, and correcting the offenders themselves by their sufferings; delivering them to Satan for the destru∣ction 1 Cor. 5. 5. of the flesh, that their souls might be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus; But yet leading them out to the execution of their sentence with Tears, and groans, and compassionate mournings, as we read frequently in ancient Christian Authors, and
St. Paul intimates to us, in many places of his 1 Cor. 5. 2. 2 Cor. 2. 1. 12. 21 Epistles; and in truth, had they not had such affe∣ctions, they had excommunicated themselves together with these Sinners, cut their own Souls off from that essential Charity which is the Life and Soul of our Profession, the only tye and bond which knits and holds us together in our real internal Christian Communion, while they separated others from outward Participation in the Churches Rites and Offices. If you think it hard thus to abstract the cause from the men, and to govern those affections which are inseparable from the estate of War, by such nice distinctions; I must acknowledge that it is no ordinary pitch of vertue which Christia∣nity aimes at; those Divine Instructions, Exam∣ples, Motives and Helps, given us by Our Saviour, were not intended to produce little and trivial things in us; but though perfection be not easie, yet sincerity and honest endeavor is: Me thinks it should be possible, not to indulge to that Passion which you are not at leisure to mortifie, much more to direct it to a right object, which is that I require. And after all, I can tell you of a Heathen, who says of a Judge condemning and executing a Man-slayer with delight, becoms himself a Murde∣rer, and is formally guilty of the crime that he pu∣nisheth: Now every one that makes War, assumes the Person of a Judge, undertaking by force to do him∣self that right, which he can no other way obtain;
Wherefore he ought to manage himself, not with Rage and Fury, but with a gravity and Majesty suitable to the office he sustains, and that will go∣vern us in the other part of the Caution which I interposed, to use our Victory, Mercifully. This is an admonition which I intend as a di∣rection of good Omen against the next occasion; for if all the evils which unavoidably follow War, be not otherwise justifiable, then as they are necessary means to attain the End (which we always suppose lawful) we shall ever be obliged to do no more mischief to our Enemies, then is requisite for the obtaining that End; not permitting any provoca∣tion to bring Revenge into the Quarrel (which both Christianity and gallant Heathenisme abhor) but considering always rather what is fit for us to do, then what our enemies have deserved to suffer; for if the War be just, and the Victory cruel, we grow less by our advantage, gain a Conquest like Valiant men, and use it like Cowards; wherefore I rejoyce with all my heart, that seeing God gave us a Victo∣ry with the expence of so little English Blood, our Commanders were so generous as to shed no more Dutch Blood then they must needs, conquering their Enemies twice, first by force, then by mercy: This was to remember whose Brother their Admiral is, and whose Servants they are; nay, this was even in hot Blood, to remember themselves to be Christi∣ans, to be merciful, as their Heavenly Father is
who though he often chastiseth sinners very severely, yet he calls that his strange work, professeth to go about it unwillingly and by constraint, and always inflicts less then hath been deserved: More then this I could not have wished, either to the Victors, or the Victory; and yet there is something behinde, which doth adorn and crown both us and the bless∣ings we rejoyce for: That God is the Author of all, He hath delivered, &c. The Second Part of the Acknowledgment. I Hope no body will think it a diminution to the courage or conduct, which have so eminently ap∣peared in this Action, that I ascribe the success to God: For what can so much dignifie any Mortal Man, as to be an Instrument in Gods hand, one whom he chuseth to bring about great and glorious things by, through whose vertue and wisdom he de∣lights to convey Blessings and Deliverances to a Kingdom? Much less do I conceive it needful in this Auditory, to handle the point by way of Thesis, and prove God to be the Governor of Heaven and Earth; and therefore the Giver of all Victory. If any who questions this, be crowded into the Chap∣pel, I must resolutely profess not to Preach to him; such we leave to their own Mire, knowing our Pearls are too precious to be cast before them, and trodden under their impure feet? It will be a more pleasant Task to me, and a more useful service to you, that
I observe to you how God himself in many notable particulars of our Case, hath really preached this al∣ready, made his arm bare, and asserted his right to the glory of our Victory; which he seems to have studiously contrived, and driven on with an affecti∣onate concern, and an industrious active provi∣dence. Let then any of those unkinde men, who will not endure God to be favorable to their Countrey, when they are angry with it, Tell me who pressed our Enemies with those distresses which made it ne∣cessary for them to break through their Flegm and Wariness, and their seeming Interest, to come out and pursue their evil fate in the hazard of a Battail; having no Merchandise to send abroad, or bring home; to fight onely for fightings sake; and yet so infatuated their Councils, as to make them preva∣ricate their own design; to foreslow the opportunity they had grasped at, neglect to attack us when seve∣ral circumstances of our condition invited them to an Advantage, but stay just till His Majesties Fleet was ready and at leisure to beat them, having taken in all the Provisions they designed, and received  a never to be forgotten opportune Supply from the immediate hand of God, which they could not de∣sign, nor hope for; A Fleet of Colliers coming by the very Squadrons of our Enemies Navy, and ex∣changing before their faces One thousand fresh-men, for such as sickness and their long fatigue at Sea had
made not so fit for present service. They who had heard their brags, read their goodly gazets, where they threatned so valiantly, and talked of seeking the English, as if they had been some sculking Capers hiding themselves behinde every Rock, or in every little Creek that could shelter their fear and weakness; would have thought they should improve the first occasion to execute all their threats, and make good their Boastings; nay, when they were come in view of that Fleet, which they had been so long in find∣ing, who held them back as with a Bridle, that they gave not the Onset while the Wind was fair, to fur∣ther their Assault, and make their Fire-ships, in which they trusted so much, useful to them? Fur∣ther yet, who after all this, turn'd the Wind in the very time, when our Ships were with much labor and pains, brought to a possibility of beginning the fight, thereby making us Masters of the Order and Man∣ner of the ensuing Battail; besides the rendring their great preparation of Fire-ships, but so many dead unprofitable Hulks; and our few, so dread∣fully serviceable against them: How much more un∣believing is Fanaticism then Infidelity? An ingenu∣ous Heathen would have discerned the Finger of God in such operations, traced the footsteps of Providence in such remarkable Instances; but they who would be thought the Secretaries of Provi∣dence, to be privy to all Gods hidden Councils, ap∣prehend nothing that he doth, because, Prejudice is
an Idol, which, whosoever worships, becomes (as the Prophet David says) like unto it; They have eyes, and see not; ears have they, and hear not; sal. 115. even stocks and stones are not more dull, then they who will not use their Sences, but stop their Ears like Adders; close their Eyes, and stupifie their Hearts, lest they should perceive and understand, and Matt. 13. 15. be converted and healed of those Spiritual diseases which have possessed their Souls. But I go on, Let any of those who will not al∣low the King and his family, to be within the care and protection of God, because they have delivered them to Satan by their sacrilegious Anathema's, tell me what discriminating hand guided and kept that Bullet from the Duke, which made so lamentable a Carnage, even in three persons by his side, onely suffering it to cast a hopeful young Noblemans Blood upon him, like that of the Paschal Lamb upon the Exod. 12. 22, 23. Israelites doors, to direct the presiding Angels, with whose safety they were intrusted, whom they ought to secure in the midst of all slaughters. Once more, Let those who Frame Commonwealths in Coffee, who have so often told their Credulous Auditors, That the House of Commons might beat the Dutch (be∣like a new Free-State may destroy an old one, as the Frogs of this year, do those of the last.) But no King shall prevail against Holland, and that God went out with those Fleets, (though the Dutch were as good Fanaticks then, as they are at this day.)
But now the case is altered, the same men fighting for the King, are not the same in Gods sight, because not in theirs; and all their hearts shall melt as water, and their strength become as Towe before the fire. Let them, I say, either give over to fume out their blasphemies against God and the King, or satisfie us, who, but the Almighty, All Good God hath done the things before-mentioned, turned the cunning Counsels of our Adversaries to folly, brought the Winds out of his Treasures seasonably to our assist∣ance, and made the devouring Element of Fire, serve, as it were, in pay, and under the command of our Captains, given our Seamen sinews of brass to go through all labor; and hearts (to use the high∣est expression) of Loyal Englishmen, to despise all danger. And lastly, who, but that Lord of Hosts (whose Providence, orders and sustains the universe, and is visible enough in all affairs: But most emi∣nently conspicuous in governing and disposing the events of Wars:) could so defend them from the dangers which he gave them courage to despise, carrying them in the hollow of his hand, and cover∣ing Isai. 40. 12. all their heads in the day of Battail; so that one∣ly 283 men were slain, of more then 30000 who fought so bravely and so long? We praise thee, O God; we acknowledge thee to be the Lord. In thy hands are the issues of life and of death: Thou hast bound up with thee, the Souls of thy servants in the bundle of Life, when the Souls of those that hated us, were
slung out as from the middle of a Sling. Thou hast delivered us from all our trouble, and made our eyes 1 Sam. 25. 28. to see their desire upon our enemies. Therefore an offering of free-hearts will we give thee, and praise thy Name, because it is so comfortable. And so I am come to the other part of our duty. THe imitating David in an affectionate hear∣ty return of worship and service to God, in consideration of his mercies. An offering of a free-heart will I give thee, and will praise thy Name, &c. That which David here promiseth, is an entire freewil offering; which consisted of two necessary parts. Oblation and Prayer, or Praise. For as God commanded his then people in general, never to Exod. 23. 15. Deut. 16. 16. appear before him empty, not to address any Prayer or Praise to him without a gift in their hands, honor∣ing him with their substance, as well as with their hearts and tongues. So did he prescribe, that all Peace-offerings (whereof those voluntary offerings were one kinde) should be accompanied with a solemn Confession or Thanksgiving for the Peace, that is (in their language) all worldly blessings which they had received from Gods favor. And when the case required it, a Petition for those they wanted: As we read in the Order for First-fruits Deut. 26. 6, , 15. and Tythings, which were commanded Heave-offerings; and the relation of David and his Princes
Voluntary-offering of Gold and Silver for building up 1 Chro. 29 the Temple. Before I speak of the Parts by themselves, give me leave, by the way, to observe, That even in that Oeconomy wherein God descended to a minute-prescription of every part and circumstance of his worship: Yet he left room and invitation for some services to be voluntarily and freely performed, as the instinct of their own devotion should prompt them to it; which must make it strange, that any should affirm it unlawful for the Christian Church, which is in that behalf left so much at liberty and discretion, to serve God with any thing which is not by himself enjoyned; and withal, put us in minde, that although (God knows) we are all far from be∣ing able to accomplish the whole of what is com∣manded us: Yet he must be a very stupid observer of Gods mercies, or his own need of them, who shall not sometime finde a warmth and zeal exciting him to particular expressions of his love to God, and sorrow for sin, in instances not expresly commanded, but flowing from the abundance of his own heart: And if ever that be fit for us, it is certainly most be∣coming upon such great occasions as now, when God hath poured out the riches and treasures of his mer∣cy so abundantly upon us. For all which we cannot but of our penury return him some Mites; poor, but hearty Oblations and Thanksgivings, which the same Goodness that calls for them, will also accept.
I begin with our Praises and Thanksgivings; and to that part of our return, methinks we should soon be perswaded; it being so easie and so cheap a service, to speak well and honorably of him that is all Good, will cost us no labor or study; the subject will loose the strings of our Tongues and make us eloquent. And to offer him the Calves of our lips will cost us Hos. 14. 2. no money: If our Praises may ascend as Incense, and the lifting up our voice be an acceptable Evening Sacrifice, the thriftiest Votary will afford God so much. YEt here is in the Text a more inviting Argu∣ment, I will praise thy name, because it is so comfortable; or as our new Translation reads, for it is good. It is a duty as delectable and pleasant as it is easie, it is lovely, saith David, Psal. 135. It is a good thing to sing praises unto our God; yea, a joyful Psal. 135. 3. and pleasant thing it is to be thankful, Psal. 147. So  & 147. 1. graciously God deals with us, expecting nothing from our hands, which shall not be as delightful to us, as acceptable to him. Certainly, next to that transcendent pleasure of conferring benefits, nothing is so joyous to an ingenuous heart, as to celebrate the munificence of a Benefactor. The one is the Prerogative of Gods infinite Power and Majesty, he onely is the Universal Benefactor that opens his hand, and fills all things living with plenteousness. The other he leaves to us, to glory, triumph, and solace
our selves in the contemplation and praising his goodness, that is, doing the same thing here which shall be the perfection of our happiness in Heaven, to do eternally: But why should I importune you to that which you are about already; your thankful∣ness to God hath brought you hither, and your bu∣siness here, is to express that thankfulness, and pour out your hearts before God, which are full of his mercies, and long to ease and empty themselves in all the expressions of Love and Joy, and boasting in the Lord, as David speaks, all the day long: Methinks I see a Thanksgiving in the looks of my Auditory, as Solomon says, when the heart rejoyceth, there will be . Prov. 15. 3. a Spring and flowery gayetie in the outward visage: That active sprightly Passion, will not be sup∣pressed or dissembled, but breaks out and dilates it self, casting a lustre and kind of Glory up∣on the Countenance; and so it ought to be: He that appears here to day without a Festival face and heart, is like him in the Gospel that came to the Marriage Feast without a Wedding Garment, deserves Matt. 22. to be cast out to the torments of his own envy, and deprived of those good things which he repines at, or despiseth: But yet give me leave to tell you from a good Author, that true joy is a severe thing; and to Seneca, add, that ours is a Religious one too. You heard be∣before that joyful praising of God is the work of Angels and Blessed Souls in Heaven, and therefore we must perform it with affections and demeanors
as like them as may be, remembring who gave the oc∣casion of our Joy, and to whom we profess to direct the expressions of it. I speak not this to suppress the jollity of the Town, to silence Bells, and extinguish Bonfires, or discourage any other hearty innocent Festivities; but I would have you consider that those Triumphs are not the main work of this Day, which calls for more solid Rejoycings, suitable to the benefit and the Au∣thor of it: Besides I cannot dissemble, that I have such a jealousie over you, as Job had over his children b. 1. 5. when they feasted, lest any of you indulge to ex∣travagancy, or slide into a Sin, forget what you are doing, and offend God while you praise him. Saint Paul exhorts women to a modest retir'd Garb, because of the Angels, by which some understand good, some bad Angels: I must beseech all you to carry your selves warily this day, because of both; you know what will please good Spirits, and I can tell you what some bad Spirits please them∣selves with before hand: Look too't, the Fanaticks say already, our Thanksgiving, though begun in the Church, will end in the Tavern, and we must con∣quer the Dutch over again in Sack: For shame do not gratifie them, and dishonor your selves so far as to take any part of your joy from that whence your enemies take their valor; you could fight without Brandy, I hope you can give thanks without it too: A sober Courage, and drunken devotion, is so vile a
contradiction, as I can find no name bad enough to call it by: This will put you to it, and discover whether you believe your selves, when you profess to have re∣ceived your Victory from God; if it be his gift it must be received with Reverence, and entertained with Spiritual Holy rejoycing; not Sensual Revellings, and Bacchanal Rites: If you think God the Author of all your success, you will so comport your selves, as that he may continue and increase his favor to you; you know the Evangelist tells you, there were some persons on whom Christ could not do so many Mi∣racles as he would, because of their indisposition: And Marc. 6. 5. I must tell you, we may so indispose our selves, as that God cannot do us the good he desires; mercy it self will restrain him, because it would be cruelty, not kindness, to cast away blessings on those who abuse them to their hurt, corrupt and envenome his grace by turning it into wantonness. But that I may not seem too severe, I will shew you how you may safely let your affections loose without danger of excess or intemperance, and profitably spend what I desire you to spare; make that a sweet smelling Sacrifice to God, which otherwise might provoke his wrath, by being a fuel to your sin: It is by perfecting and com∣pleating the Free-will-offering in my Text, adding the Oblation to the Praise and Thanksgiving. The last thing I will mention, and but mention.
THe Free-will Offering was part given to God, and part spent in festival entertainment of Men. For Gods part, perhaps, you will think your selves secure, and well discharged of it, because all Sacrifices are abolished under the Gos∣pel. 'Tis true, all the Ceremonial Typical Sacri∣fices of the Law are so: But why such an Act of Natural Religion, as presenting God with some part of the good things he hath given us, in ac∣knowledgment of his bounty, and as an expres∣sion of our Thankfulness, should be thought a piece of antiquated Judaism, I know not; especi∣ally, if we consider, that Abel offered such an ob∣lation, and God accepted it, many Ages before he spake any thing to the Jews concerning Sacrifice. And we Christians have so much more to thank God for then they had who lived before or under the Law. Certainly, Christ, when he com∣manded us to serve God with all our heart, and all our strength, meant not to interdict our serving him with some part of our substance. Surely, the first Christians thought so, who in their Celebra∣tion of the Eucharist made always an Oblation in Kind, of Bread and Wine, and other Provisions; part whereof was consecrated for the Sacrament, and part eaten in a common Feast of Charity a∣mong themselves. And we still, as far as we obey the Commands of the Church, preserve some
footsteps of this Practice, in our offering for the use of the Poor (in whom God's hand is every where held out to receive our free-will Offerings) before the Communion. But not to enter into new occasion of Discourse in the end of my Sermon: We know that God, even when he commanded Sacrifices, regarded them not for themselves, as the Prophets often tell the Jews; and David himself Psal. 50. very particularly rejects them all: But in the same Psalm tells us what Offerings God will always be delighted with, Offer unto God thanksgi∣ving, and pay thy Vows. Thanks and Praises will Verse 14. 23 be an acceptable honour, and ordering our Con∣versation aright will procure Salvation: Which the Chaldee paraphraseth thus; Repress thy evil desire, and it shall be accepted as a Sacrifice of Confession. To mortifie a Lust, is to slay a Goat, and more. To lay your hand upon a brutish Affection, as they did theirs upon a Beast, devoutly giving it up, abandoning it freely for Gods sake, is the noblest Wave-offering imaginable. This is S. Pauls Coun∣sel to present your selves a lively Sacrifice, holy, accept∣able unto God, which is a reasonable Christian service, Rom. 12. 1. I doubt not but many Vows were made to this purpose in the time of danger; and another Death now round about us calls loud for perform∣ance of them, and making more: Gods hand upon us assures me, some evil desires he would extort from us by so severe a method; and happy
we, if casting that from us which is worse then Death, will redeem us from the Plague; if our Sins themselves may be the matter of an Expia∣tory Sacrifice; if the price of a vanity or folly, a crime or a shame, may purchase an Atonement with Heaven; and that it may, if sacrificing our evil desires as an Oblation to God, we will bestow that wherewith we use to foment them, upon our poor Brethren; that will compleat our Free-will Offering: Give God his part, and Men theirs; make our indigent Neighbours, the members of Christ, rejoyce with us; that which fed our glut∣tony, and was a provocation, when spent in our intemperate meals, being put into the bellies of the Poor, may plead our Pardon, and procure Mercy for Mercy; our superfluity bestowed on their wants, may make up our defects with God; the Charge of our vain costly Apparel imployed to cloath the naked, may hide our nakedness and deformity in Gods sight, our Charity may cover a multitude of sins. This is a proper Exercise at every Thanksgiving, but now extremely seasonable when the Sicknesse falls chiefly upon poor People: 'Tis fear'd, many of them perish for want of what money would buy, and spread the Infection by their desperate breaking out at all hazards rather then be shut up and starve. I hope these Consi∣derations improved by your own Piety, will make your Free-will Offering liberal and bountiful;
make your Charity swell, and over-flow those banks wherewith avarice and hard-heartedness use to inclose it; and that no man will go out of Town without leaving a Blessing behind him, that he may carry one with him. I conclude with our Royal Prophets Prayer, O Lord God of Heaven, keep this and all thy former Mercies for ever in the imagination of the 1 Chron. 29. 18. thoughts of the hearts of thy people: and prepare and establish their hearts unto thee, that our Thanks∣giving end not with the Day; but that we may always thankfully serve and praise Thee, till thou remove us hence to praise Thee to all Eternity in Heaven. FINIS.
