D2003 17014079 105779
A PRAYER, OR Petition for PEACE. November 22. 1645. Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. And Verely yee shall not see mee tell yee say blessed is hee that commeth in the name of the Lord. Printed in the Yeare 1645▪
A PRAYER AND PETITION for Peace. By the Lady Eleanor. O Lord, the great and dread∣full God: As we having sinned deeply and offen∣ded guilty of no lesse then open Rebellion: by our excluding thee, flee∣ing from thy presence, with one voice (as it were) We will not have this man to raigne over us (or) He defers his coming, as others: Even departed from Thy precepts and Iudgements set before us, so here prostrate before the foot∣stoole of thy Throne, implore never∣thesse
pardon and forgivenesse. For this no stolne or secret trans∣gression committed, But with a high hand, and so much the rather presuming on such accesse, because the vulgar, (the bur∣then and heate of the day though theirs,) those sheep not guilty or accessary to this trespasse or Capitall crime: of deposing thee, or opposing the LORDS Returne as in not harkning to the loud voices of the Prophets accompli∣shed, His Messengers. But to our Kings, Princes, Heads and Rulers, which appertaines, so straitly com∣manded and charged in readynesse to be and watch, and signes of the time, they discerning them not, such celestiall signes and tokens, wherefore hast watcht over them, as since this a Nation, or under the whole Heaven
the like unknowne of those Vials  violently powerd out (without doubt) Not since the Flood as in this pre∣sent Century. Neither taking warning by our neigh∣bours houses set on fire first, like his seting in the front the handmaids and their chil∣dren, or like that great Massy Jmage, first smitten in the feet, by that stone without hands cut out, before broken in peices, And thus before hand thought others as lighted Becons for our use yet like the rest lightly weighed. Till suddainly like Sampsons seven∣fold new cords and green Wyths all pluckt assunder; when linked so fast and knit, France with great Britaine, Spaine with France, Germany with Spaine, Toge∣ther with these married Isles or united Kingdomes, now in widdowes wofull
estate, or as the divorced: somtime th as it been a new world, with such crea∣tions flourishing, and new names, and so walking like dayes of old,, when he voted out was to the open fields, No lesse then is not this great Babylon, and become as those, when God repented he made man, brought to a like Ebb or fall, as those insaciable Giants. Now behold O Lord through a high and heavie hand abased and so low brought humbled to ashes and Sackcloth from the highest to the lowest, then tread not one a Worme, breake not the bruised reed, the wounded smite them not, but heare us O thou our Anchor, hope and present helpe, ready to be consumed utterly and swallowed up, if thou calme not and aswage these tempestious working Seas through unruly raging winds let
loose, wrought and contrived, and so praying in His posture when as with∣out raine so long 42. moneths, even bowing himselfe double or kneeling on his head, also behold our estate since the yeare 1642. these miserable Isles and Kingdomes of ours whose store∣houses exhausted like those rivers dried up and like the dead trees burnt up our nation and habitation. To conclude; Blest as those two and forty unhappy INFANTS torn by two she-Beares, and as Gods curse upon them, so Lord let thy face shine upon us, cause thy voice to be heard, that some time speakest to the Fish, the fig-tree, the deafe, the dead, and very Divels subject, and turnest the hard Rocke into standing waters, &c.
also the waters of this CJTJE heare them, for the Lords sake our only Sa∣viour, say the word and it is done, that from hence forth, let there be no more Death, &c. no more Killing and Slaying, J beseech thee. FJNIS.
