D213 R24867 8630080 41494
A Friendly-Debate Between SATAN and SHERLOCK: Containing A Discovery of the unsoundness of Mr. William Sherlocks Principles, In a late Book Entituled A Dis∣course concerning the Knowledg of Jesus Christ, &c. By this only Medium, That they af∣ford the Devil the same grounds for his hope of Salvation, that they do Mankind; and so subvert the Gospel, and transform Chri∣stianity into Mahumetanism. By an hearty Enemy of Mahumetanism. In Socinismo, qui subtilior Mahumetismus non im∣merito vocatur, pandit os suum ipsa vorago, ipsum Ba∣rathrum irreligionis. Arrowsmith. Tact. Sacr. l. 2. c. 1. Sect. 14. Eos [sc. Socinianes] non modo Christianorum, sed nec haereticorum nomine dignor. Christianitatem nomine retinent, re destruunt, Itaque hos a Mahumetistis nos longe separo, qui e ipsi quidam Jesu maledicunt. Gro∣tius in Epist. ad Wallaeum. Wall. opera in fol. p. 399. Printed in the Year. 1676.
TO THE READER. A Sufficient (though a short) account of the design of these Sheets hath been al∣ready given in the Title Page; yet the Author con∣ceives himself obliged to make an Apo∣logy for three things, which he presumes an intelligent Reader may fault in them. 1. That they come out so late, when many Persons of ability have foiled the Adversary; and when he hath mollified the harshness of many expressions here re∣peated, in a second Discourse. To the former he answers, That none hath dealt with Mr. Sherlock upon the medium here suggested; and that the World had
had these Sheets sooner, if this medium they contain, had come sooner in his thoughts. To the latter, that he finds not in Mr. Sherlocks second Discourse, any retractation of his unscund Tenets, though he seems upon second thoughts not so well pleased with his own Phraseo∣logy, as giving cause to every Man whose addition is Christian, to suspect, that under a pretence of rectifying mi∣stakes, he designed to expose all Reli∣gion (which not without cause he inti∣mated his fear of, Pref. p. 3. of his first Discourse). 2. It may be blamed that Mr Sherlocks Principles are represented under this form of a Dialogue; and with so odi∣ous a choice of a Dialogist: For the form it self, the Author might suppose the examples which some of Mr Sh's. per∣suasion have set him, a sufficient justifi∣cation. Mr Hoard in a book Entituled, Gods Love to Mankind, hath framed a Conference between Tempted and Mini∣ster,
to shew how uncapable the Tempt∣ed are of true comfort, or Ministers to give it, upon the Church of England's Principles, in the Quinquarticular Con∣troversie. And this perhaps occasioned a most learned Father of the Church of England's accurate Discourse against the whole Book. And since, an Anonimous Author published in Latin a Dialogue, called Fur praedestinatus, Elect Thief. between a Calvinist Minister, and a Thief condemned to be hanged, with a design to expose the Doctrine of the Protestant Churches in the Five Points; which gave an Alarm to a learned Son of the Church of England, and made him take Arms in its defence and vindication. And since them, one bearing the name of the Irish-Saint, hath published Two parts of a Friendly-Debate. And since him (to trouble the Reader with no more Exam∣ples) another hath Printed, A Dis∣course between Two intimate Friends. Both which last, drive on the same de∣sign with the two first, but more covert∣ly,
upon pretence of lashing the Non-Con∣formists only (whom yet the Church of England hath more than once acknow∣ledged for Conformists in Doctrine). The Author of this Dialogue will not de∣ny, (what he supposes any intelligent Reader may except against the use of them) that Dialogues give an advan∣tage to their Compiler to put what words he pleases into his Adversaries mouth, to the prejudice of his own Cause. And whether the Compilers of the Dialogues above-mentioned, have not therefore made choice of this, rather than ano∣ther form of Discourse? And whether they have not sufficiently improved it to that end, he had rather others, than himself should say? As for himself, he can alledg, that the medium he hath pitcht upon, hath almost necessitated him to appear in this Garb: And whe∣ther he hath made a virtue (or a vice) of necessity, he is very well contented the Reader should be judg (as indeed he will be, be the Author pleased or dis∣pleased):
And that he may judg aright he is desired to observe, that what is Printed in a different Character, with the number of a Page, is Mr. Sherlocks own words: The rest (except now and then a little merriment, or chiding) contains Conse∣quences, and Explications of his Princi∣ples, so easie and uninforced in the Au∣thors own judgment, that he does hereby boldly offer himself to be tried by his Countrey. If fair words would win belief, he might borrow Mr. Sherlocks (which are fresh in memory) I have represented his Opinions in his own words, and am not conscious to my self, that I have put any other sense upon his words than he intended; and I cannot see what reason any Man hath to take it ill, that I repeat that which he himself thought fit to publish, Pref. p. 3. But so many have said of him, Quid verba audiam, cum facta videam, What do you tell me of words, when I see contrary deeds. That the Au∣thor is afraid lest his own sincerity should be suspected, eo nomine, because he affects
to profess it in Mr. Sherlocks words: However he hath run the venture for once, being assured that the words are in∣nocent enough, how guilty soever of abu∣sing them Mr Sherlock may have been. The only thing that the Author of this Dia∣logue conceives a less observant Reader may have just cause to dislike, is, that Mr. Sh. is brought in as ex professo, designing to give the Devil hopes of Salvation; which yet he no where does throughout his whole Biok. But for that, the Au∣thor is willing to be quit or cast, as Mr. Sherlocks own Practice and Apology for it, shall give their verdict. His Practice is this, That he brings in the Learned men against whom he Writes, as renouncing Christ's mediation, and trusting to the goodness of his Nature; as setting up a new Religion, which hath no Covenant, and no Promise, p. 23. and as quitting Christs Promise and his Covenant, to rely and rowl upon his Person, p. 24. The Apology is this, This is so very absurd at first
sight, that I know no Man will own in it so many words, nor do I charge any Man with it; but I say, this is the na∣tural Interpretation of trusting in the Person of Christ, in his Blood, and Merits, and All-sufficiency, and of re∣lying and rowling the Soul on Christ for Salvation, and the like Phrases of a late date, in which some men place the whole Mystery of the Gospel, p. 24. mutatis mutandis; the Author accepts it for his Apology, that to give the De∣vil as fair hopes of Salvation as Man∣kind, is so very absurd, that he knows Mr. Sherlock will not own it in so many words, nor does the Author charge him with it; but he says, This is the natural Interpretation of Gods loving all his creatures, according to the capacity of their Natures, and of Gods fetching the Reason of his Love to them, from their holiness (and that imperfect too); and of making the creatures ground of hope of pardon and acceptance, to be not an offer'd Saviour, or a Promise, but Gods
gracious Nature, which obliges him to receive a penitent sinner, and to reward all his good actions, which are sincerely (though not perfectly) good; and the like Doctrines of a late date, which Mr. Sherlock puts in the place of the whole mystery of the Gospel, till Christs Incar∣nation (as the Dialogue will more par∣ticularly inform the Reader). And what is this (by the by) to retort Mr. Sher∣locks unjust charge upon his Antagonists, most justly upon himself, but to re∣nounce Christs Mediation, and trust to the goodness of his Nature [as God] and to set up a new Religion, which hath no Covenant, and no Pro∣mise? As for the choice (odious enough) of a Dialogist to hold Mr. Sherlock in Di∣scours: The Author could not avoid it, in regard of the Medium he insists upon. For who can be imagined a fitter Person to debate the Point with him, whether there be any ground of hope for the De∣vils
Salvation, than the person con∣cerned, Satan himself? 3. The last thing that some Readers may fault is, That this Dialogue de∣tracts from the Devils abilities of ma∣naging a Controversy: For he is com∣monly introduced as acquiescing in Mr. Sherlocks grounds, which are liable enough to exception. To that the Au∣thor replies, that there is a Fitness and a Necessity of representing the Devil as a mean Disputant. A Fitness, There being nothing so dishonourable to him∣self, which the Devil will not submit to, to attain his mischievous end, the in∣volving mankind, into the same irre∣parable misery with himself (as dayly experience assures us): Satan may be presumed to be well enough contented to seem overcome by Mr. Sherlocks argu∣mentation, That sinful men may be in∣duced to lean upon an house which will not stand, to take up strong hopes upon weak grounds, which will certainly fail
them when they most need them. A Necessity, in regard of the deficiency of Mr. Sherlocks Book (to which the Dialogue is confined) which affords not answers to multitudes of exceptions (which might have been put into Satans mouth) against the Principles therein contained. And perhaps some Readers may find a fourth fault, that the Author brings in Satan as playing upon Mr Sherlock. But hath not Mr Sherlock taken the same liberty with his Antagonists? Yes, and made an Apology for it. The Au∣thor is content to do so too, and to un∣dergo the censure of a Fool, Qui maluit culpam excusare, quum non committe∣re, i. e. who had rather commit a fault, and get a pardon by an Apology; than to be innocent, and so stand in need of neither: And one Apology will serve us both (only changing the persons). Where he pretends to argue gravely, I have ex∣amined his Arguments with all possible
gravity and solemnity; where he plain∣ly toys and trifles, I have so far com∣plied with his humour, as to smile sometimes, though as modestly, as any Man can desire. Pref. p. 3. But the Reader hath been too long detained in the Porch, he may now with the Au∣thors good leave go into the House it self, if he thinks there is any thing within that is worth the seeing.
A Friendly-Debate BETWEEN SATAN and SHERLOCK. SHerlock, Well met Satan, I am sorry to see you look so sad; pray, What's the matter? Satan, Sure, Sir, you cannot be igno∣rant of the cause of my sadness. Alas! I am a miserable creature, and see no hope of men∣ding my condition. Sherlock, I had thought you had understood your self better, then to be so causelesly deject∣ed. The light of nature, and works of Crea∣tion and Providence assure us, that God is so good, that he designs and desires the happiness of all his creatures according to the capacity of their Natures, p. 42. Either therefore thou art none of his Creatures, or thy Nature un∣capable of happiness, or God designs and de∣sires thy happiness, as well as of other of his Creatures. Satan, What assurance the light of Nature
and works of Creation and Providence gives you, I know not: But to me it gives none of Gods pardoning Mercy to sinners. I have heard That the Love of God to sinners, and his pardoning Mercy, eould never have entred into the heart of Man or Angels, but by Christ. And the Scripture (which I believe against my will) seems to countenance the assertion; for this love is called a mystery hid in God, and made known to Gentiles, and to Principalities and powers: That is, to Angels. Sherlock, What! I perceive you have been an hearer at some Conventicle; one J. O. tells us so indeed; but I say, He is a confident Man to tell us so, when the experience of the whole World confutes him: For whatever becomes of his new Theories, both Jews and Heathens (who understood nothing at all of what Christ was to do in order to our recovery) did believe God to be gracious and merciful to sinners. — And these natural Notions the Heathens had of God, and all these discoveries God had made of himself in the works of Creation and Providence, did assure them, that God is very good, and it is not possible to understand what goodness is with∣out pardoning Grace, p. 44. You remember that passage I suppose, for I doubt not but you read our Books, as well as hear the Fa∣naticks Preachments. Satan, I am willing to resign up my self to your conduct, seeing your design is so fa∣vourable
to my interest; or otherwise I might start a small objection, against the last clause of your Discourse, That it seems then, that if Angels and Men had never sinn'd, it had not been possible for either of them to understand what the goodness of God is. But to let that pass, I have read in your Bibles, that God will be gracious to whom he will be gracious, and will shew mercy on whom he will shew mercy. It seems to me then by these passages, that not∣withstanding the graciousness of Gods Na∣ture, he uses a Soveraignty in the exercise of Grace; and is not induced thereto by any reason out of himself. Sherlock, I confess the Calvinists make strange work with such passages: But I am of opinion, that it is a strange notion of an Inde∣pendent being, that he must have no other reason for what he does, but his own arbitrary will; which is so far from being a perfection, that it destroys all other perfections of his Nature, p. 402. The excellency of Christs Love consists in this, that he loves for no Reason, in their sense, who make him love the Person of a Believer, without considering any other Qualification, than that he is such an Individual Person. Now I confess this is a wonderful Love: But wherein the excellency of a consists, I cannot see. I am sure we account that Man a fool, who loves at this rate; and how that should come to be the perfection of the Love of God, which is a re¦proach
to Men, is above my apprehension, p. 399. Satan, But I pray Sir, tell me then what other Reason but his own arbitrary Will, God could have for shewing mercy to sinners? Sherlock, The holiness of a Creature, is the Reason why God determines his Love to any par∣ticular person, p. 401. Satan, If I be not much mistaken, I have heard some such passages read in some or other of your Churches Second Lessons, That God hath chosen men before the foundation of the World, that they should be holy; and that Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that it should be holy, and without blemish; which seems to make the holiness of a Creature the effect, not the cause of Gods Love. But I have told you, I am resolved at this time to be a Learner, and oportet discentem credere, The Scholar must believe his Master, is a Rule a∣mong Teachers—It may be Paul was mistaken, for I have heard some say, that he was an hot∣headed Fellow; and now here's no body but our selves, you will excuse my freedom in tell∣ing you, that as far as I have been able to ob∣serve, none of your Club care much for him. For their greatest trouble in dealing with the Fanaticks, is to rid their hands well of the Al∣legations out of him. But to our business, sup∣posing your Doctrine true, I am an unholy Creature, I cannot deny it, and therefore God
hath no Reason for the determination of his love to me. Sherlock, If you be unholy, then you must make your self holy. Satan, I, but I doubt that's past my skill: There is a spiritual impotency and inability in a sinner to do any good thing. Sherlock, Who told you so, Sir Satan? John Calvin, I dare say, or John Owen: but I hope you have more wit than to believe them. Satan, No indeed, I was told so by St. Au∣stin, and many a great man of your Church, Fathers and Sons. But before them all, by your Arch-Adversary St. Paul, who says that sinners are dead in trespasses and sins; and that they are created to good-works, and become new creatures, and born again, when converted. Sherlock, When they talk of our spiritual im∣potency and inability to do any good thing, they prove it wonderfully from our being dead in tres∣passes and sins, and therefore as a dead man can contribute nothing to his own resurrection, no more can we towards our conversion: which is true of natural death, but will be hard to prove of a moral death, which consists in the prevalency of vicious habits contracted by long custom (which was the case of the Heathens, whom the Apostle there speaks of, (and is your case too, Sir Satan) which do so enslave the will) that it is very difficult, though not impossible for such persons to return to the love and practice of vertue. The other Argu∣ment
is of the like nature, that we are said to be created to good works, and to become new crea∣tures, and therefore can contribute no more to it (viz. our Conversion) than we did to our first creation: and that we are born again, which signifies that we are wholly passive in it: which were true indeed, if our being created to good∣works did signifie the manner and method of our conversion, and not the nature of the new crea∣ture, which is the true meaning of it, that as in the first Creation we were created after the I∣mage of God, so we are renewed after his Image in the second; which is therefore expresly call'd in other places the renewing and renovation of our minds, p. 109, 110, The fruitfulness of Gods love with respect to the methods of his Grace and Providence, doth not consist in producing what he loves, by an omnipotent and irresistible power (for then sin and death could never have entred into the world) but he governs and doth good to his creatures in such ways as are most sui∣table to their natures. He governs reasenable Creatures by principles of Reason, as he doth the Material world by the necessary laws of matter, and bruit creatures by the instincts and propen∣sities of nature, p. 212. This I am sure is a new discovery, (whatever you say of St. Austin, and the great men of our Church) that it is im∣possible for us to do any thing that is good, but we must be acted like Machines, by an external force, by the irresistibl power of the Grace and spirit of God, p. 50.
Satan. I have heard your long Discourse with a great deal of patience; and your mea∣ning as well as I can take it up, is, that conver∣sion is an effect of moral suasion, (a term of art which many of your good friends much delight to use, and I listned to hear it out of your mouth) so that if I do but attend to what God hath revealed of the excellency and necessity of Holiness,  ut puto Deus fio, I shall be holy all on a sudden. But I am not very apt to believe this, because my mind hath been a great while illuminated with such Revelations, and yet I do not find my Will moved by them. As for what you object against sinners being wholly passive in the work of Conversion, if you had to do with a Phanatick he would press you with this Argument; If the Image of God was received by the will in the first creation, without its own contribution to the production of it, why may not that Image be restored to it without the wills cooperation to the restitution? But because I per∣ceive you have a kindness for me, I will not per∣sonate any of that foolish troublesome sort of people, who can ask more Questions than a wise man can answer. Well Sir, let us go on; but suppose I should make my self holy, yet if I be not perfectly such, I am never the near to obtain my end, Gods favour and acceptance. For I well re∣member there is a passage in the Bible, That God is of purer eyes than to behold evil,
and cannot look on iniquity, that is with appro∣bation, (as I have heard Preachers expound it,) and you your self tell me that Gods natu∣ral love to holiness, is the reason why he loves holy men, p. 401. And by the like reason sure ho∣ly Angels; whence I infer (for I have pickt up a little Logick as well as Divinity in the Schools) that perfect holinevs in the creature must be the reason of Gods natural love to it, for that only is agreeable to his holy nature. Sherlock, Nay, there you are out in your inference; for the only way to obtain the pardon of our sins, is to repent of them, and forsake them, p. 54. God is as ready to pardon the worst of men, (and why not the worst of Angels) when they return to their duty, as a kind father is to receive an humble and penitent prodigal, p. 43. So that though God loves perfect holiness best, yet he loves imperfect so well, as to pardon the defects, and accept it. Satan, But God hath made me no promise of forgiveness, if I should repent and forsake my sins, and therefore I have no ground for faith or hope. And if I might credit St. Paul (which I should be apt to do, but for fear of displeasing you my good friend, who have put me in better hope of happiness than ever I had since I lost my place in heaven) sinners that are without promise, are without hope, and consequently without faith (for hope is an effect of faith). So that methinks your
plaister is not as broad as my sore. Sherlock. I perceive that either you have not read my Book, or you have not well minded some passages in it, which answer your Ob∣jection. Therein I affirm, that there is a na∣tural faith [and so proportionably a natural hope] i. e. a belief of the principles of the na∣tural Religion, which is founded upon natural demonstration, or moral Arguments, as that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that dili∣gently seek him, which was the faith of Abel and Enoch, whereby they pleased God: For there being no mention made of the faith of Abel and Enoch in the Old Testament, the Apostle proves that they were true Believers, because they had this Testimony, That they pleased God: now it is impossible to be sincerely religious, or to do any ac∣ceptable service to God, without the belief of his Being and Providence, and care of good men. These are the first Principles of all Religion, and God requir'd no more of those good men, who had no other particular Revelations of his will, pag. 252, 253. And again— Satan. Hold a little, I pray good Mr. Sherlock. I have greater things to mind, yet I cannot but gratifie my curiosity in paus∣ing a little upon your new Genus of Faith, that it is a belief. The Schools are wont to make it an assent. But like enough they are mistaken (as in an hundred things more.) And your ratio formalis of Faith is wholly new,
that it is natural demonstration, and moral arguments; so that (as I understand you) one and the same habit is Science, Opinion and Faith. I perceive your Philosophy as well as Divinity is quite different from theirs. But I forget my self, let those new notions be true or false, I will take them upon trust from you for once. I will recollect the sum of your discourse, That if I have no promise of Gods rewarding my repentance, and forsaking of my sin, no more had Abel and Enoch, and yet for all that they pleased God. And that the Principles of Natural Religion being com∣mon to me and mankind as rational Crea∣tures, a promise of rewarding my good acti∣ons, though they be not so good as they should be, if they be as good as I can afford them) is included in the very notion of Gods goodness. Is not this it? Sherlock. Right; now you have hit the nail on the head. And to confirm you in your apprehension, I will go on where we left. The light of Nature, and the works of Creation and Providence assure us, that God is so holy, that he hath a natural love for all good men, and will not fail to reward them, p. 42. And had Christ never appeared in the world, yet we had reason to believe that God is thus good, and holy and merciful.— The appearance of Christ did not first discover the nature of God to us, but—confirms us in the belief of what we had learnt before from Nature, p. 34.
Satan. Sir, Your Discourse is very solid, and hath but one small fault, a Contradiction to what you say elsewhere. These men who talk of the Person and personal excellencies of Christ frequently without any sence, and generally with∣out any just ground from Scripture or reason, are very clamorous, and alarm the world with strange jealousies and fears, as if there were a party of men started up, who design to make Christ use∣less, and to reduce Religion to its first natural state, which knew no Priest, nor Sacrifice, nor Mediator. A design which I profess I am wholly a stranger to, as I believe all those are who are so much charged with it; the foundation of my hope is that which is the foundation of the Christian Religion, the Sacrifice and Intercession of our Lord Jesus Christ, p. 13, 14. Pray let me ask you without offence (and I will speak softly that J. O. and that Fraternity may not over∣hear) Is not this to make Christ useless, and to reduce Religion to its first natural state, when you make no other duty necessary to happiness, than what the light of Nature sug∣gests; and no other ground needful to the hopes of it, than the goodness of God, which had been known as fully (as now it is) if Christ had never appeared in the world? This is the sum of your Discourse. I am very care∣ful not to do you wrong in misrepresenting your sense. Sherlock. Satan, you are grown so old, that
I think you begin to dote. If you had read on, you might have understood my mind to the full. But I doubt not, it will appear in the se∣quel, what the ground of these calumnies are, viz. That we are charged with making Christ useless, only because we dare not make his Laws and Religion so, p. 15. Satan. Methinks you are very short with me. I have been always accounted a knave, but ne∣ver was counted a fool before now. But as much a fool as I am, I am sure I did you a kind∣ness in reading no further, for that addition makes you more liable to that censure you would avoid: For 'tis plain enough you make Christs Laws and Religion useless, if Natures Laws and Religion will conduct a man safe to the same place, viz. Heaven, which Christ di∣rects him to, (for Frustrà fit per plura quod fie∣ri potest per pauciora, is a rule I learned among the fresh men, that chop Logick in the Univer∣sities) and consequently Christ is made useless, because you dare make his Laws and Religion so. And elsewhere you say, We have no reason to expect any thing from the person of Christ, which is not contained in his Covenant, much less which contradicts it, for that would be in effect to renounce his mediation, and to trust to the goodnsss of his nature. And let any man judg, whether this be not to set up a new Religion, which hath no Covenant and no Promise, p. 23. Sherlock. I think I have little to do to stand and hear you prate. Farewell.
Satan. Good Mr. Sherlock be not so hot. Pray let me find that what you want in Grace, you have in Vertue. Do not run away in a Pet, before you have finished your design. You must not suppose I oppose you ex animo, but argumentandi gratiâ; and to give you an op∣portunity of shewing your dexterity in loos∣ning the knots I tye. Sherlock. You might have told me so at first then, and then you might have escaped an hard censure. I will go on. Your great Objection was, That the Gentiles who were without promise, were eo nomine in that very respect without hope. To that I answer, When God chose the posterity of Abraham to be his pecu∣liar people he did not design to exclude the rest of the world from his care and providence and all po∣ssible means of salvation, as the Apostle argues in Rom. 3.29, Is he the God of the Jews only? is he not also of the Gentiles? yes of the Gen∣tiles also? Which argument if it have any force in it, must prove Gods respect to the Gentiles be∣fore the preaching of the Gospel, as well as since, because it is founded on that natural relation God owns to all mankind, as their merciful Crea∣tor and Governour, which gives the Gentiles as well as the Jews an interest in his care and pro∣vidence. This plainly evinces, that all these par∣ticular favours, which God bestowed on Israel, were not owing to any partial fondness and re∣spect to that people, but the design of all was to
encourage the whole world to worship the God of Israel, who gave so many demonstrations of his Power and Providence, p. 27. Satan. If I understand you aright, your meaning is, that the Gentiles before the prea∣ching of the Gospel, as well as since, had all possible means of Salvation, and as much ground for hope of it as the Jews, because God was their common merciful Creator and Governour. And therefore loved them all a∣like. And hence you would direct me to con∣clude (as well I may, if the premises be true) that God being the common merciful Crea∣tor and Governour of Angels and Men, there∣fore I have all possble means of Salvation, and sufficient ground to hope for it as well as men. If this be not the force of your Argu∣ment, I will forgive your hard censure, and think I begin to dote indeed. But methinks the premises are liable to exception. I might ask you, Sir, where were any Jews and Gen∣tiles before the preaching of the Gospel? for I always apprehended that the Gospel was preached to Adam and Eve before they did operam dare ad liberos procreandos, before they had any conjugall Society (you see as old as I am, I have not forgotten all my Latin) in those words, I will put enmity between thee and the wo∣man, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel. Sherlock. I have obviated this Objection in
my reply to a like instance of the promise made to Abraham; In thy seed shall all the na∣tions of the earth be blessed. To which my answer is, Christ was indeed the material object of Abrahams Faith, that is, he believed that pro∣mise which God made of sending Christ into the World. But Abrahams Faith was not a Faith in Christ; no Man could believe in Christ, till he came, that is, could not believe any thing upon his Authority, which is the true notion of be∣lieving in him. p. 247. Satan, The application I find easie; That the promise made to Adam, was of Christ that should be a Saviour Four thousand years after; not that should be a Saviour to him∣self, and Wife, and their immediate Seed. They were to be saved by a belief (not in Christ, but) of the Principles of the Natural Religion, founded upon Natural Demonstration, or moral Arguments, as that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, which was the faith of Abel and Enoch, whereby they pleased God (as you told me be∣fore). Sherlock, You have represented my Opini∣on in my own words; and I like that very well. Satan, I thought I would please you if I could, and put you in a good humour against I make some more objections. And but that you start so many Hares at once, that I am a∣fraid
by running after all, to lose all; I could please you better, by putting you in mind, that as to these Words of God to Eve, a very good Friend of yours, Valentinus Smalcius, whom a Learned Calvinist calls, insignis illefidei Socinianae hyperaspistes, the Champion of socinianism, does boldly affirm, Christum minime respexisse, nec ali∣quid in se promissionis Evangelicae continuisse; They had no respect to Christ, nor did they contain in them any Gospel promise Refut. Thes. Frant∣zii, p. 94. But I will go on; The Calvinists will object against your Logick in the Text now cited, Rom. 3.29. and tell you, that not the Relation which God as a Creator stands in to Jews and Gentiles, but as a Covenanter with Abraham on the behalf of both, is given as the Reason why both should be justified by Faith, and not one only. Sherlock. This Objection — Satan. Hold Sir, never give your self the trouble of answering it: It was a disparage∣ment to Domitian, to employ himself in catch∣ing and killing Flies. And in my mind you did discreetly in not answering E. P. H. H. and that Pert Man that called you Dirty-Fel∣low in the Title of his Book; for so Anti-soz∣zo signifies (whether you know it or no). And it had not been amiss, if you had let J. O. and R. F. alone too; for none of them all were your match: The most that can be said of them is, never was any Brazen Serpent half so subtil, p. 113.
Sherlock. I am not of your opinion, That I had better have let all my Antagonists alone; for then they would have said, that I did not answer them, because I could not. Satan. You have little to do sure, to mind what they say. To end this Chat, pray ease me of this Objection against Gods loving all his Creatures alike, That I find God hates me, and therefore will never love me, for his hatred is (like himself) immutable. Sherlock. To the Fanaticks fancy, that when God once loves them he will never hate them, because his love is (like himself) immutable, I have answer'd: Herein the immutability and unchangeableness of Gods love consists, not that he always loves the same person, but that he always loves for the same reason; for it is no perfection to be so sixt in our kindness, that where we love once, we will always love, what∣ever reason there may be to alter our affection: for by this means we may love undeserving ob∣jects, which is the greatest degeneracy of love; but the perfection of love consists in loving deser∣ving objects, and in loving upon honourable rea∣sons; and the immutability of love consists in lo∣ving always for the same reason, which is the only foundation of vertuous immutability, pag. 404, 405. Thou art not so dull, but thou canst apply all this to thy satisfaction. Satan. I apprehend your meaning well e∣nough, that there is par ratio (as your School∣term
is) of Gods love and hatred. And there∣fore therein the immutability of Gods hatred consists, not that he always hates the same person, but that he always hates for the same reason. For it is no perfection to be so fixt in our unkindness, that where we hate once we will always hate, whatever reason there may be to alter our affections; for by this means we may hate undeserving Objects, which is the greatest degeneracy of hatred, &c. In short, your meaning is, that God hates me for this reason, because I am bad, but he would love me if I were good, and I should then as well deserve his love, as I do now his hatred. Sherlock. I see you have not your name , knowing, for nought, you have wit e∣nough if you will but make a good use of it. Satan. I am beholding to you Sir, for your good word. And I promise you I will not be wanting to my own interest. The notion you have last given me does me a great kindness. For I have been hitherto so simple (though you are pleased to commend my wit) as to think that Love and Hatred when ascribed to God, in the Calvinists notion, which you decry, did import an eternal Decree or Will of God, to shew or deny mercy to his Crea∣tures, and so were immutable: but now I understand that they signifie variable affecti∣ons (as in the Creatures) which as the Wea∣ther-cock,
shifts its corner with the wnd, al∣ter with the persons upon whom they are placed. And I am now rid of a fear, which the mention of Elect-Angels in the Scripture did often put me into. I see nothing to the contrary but I may in good time be one of that denomination. If I can but bring down my stout stomach, to ask God forgiveness, and repent of so long continued disloyalty, and take a new Oath of Allegiance, I under∣stand I need not doubt the issue, God will love me, as much as now he hates me. Sherlock. 'Tis a great mater to be freed from prejudice or prepossession of judgment. You have often heard Calvinists preach, and been dabling in their writings: and have found them confident enough in their asser∣tions, and (as I gather from your words) been mislead into a conceit, (which they put into your head) that because it could not be known how just and severe God is, but by punishing sin, nor how good and gracious God is, but by pardoning it, therefore God de∣crees that men shall sin, that he may make some of them vessels of his wrath, and others the vessels of his mercy. Satan. I must confess, The sound and clink of words and phrases (which you say is all the Calvinists understand by keeping a form of sound words, p. 102.) did so fill my ears, that I could hear nothing else. And because they
were Scripture-words and phrases, they kept me in some awe, that I durst not absolutely conclude them a sound without sense. Sherlock. I, but nature would teach us, that so good a God had much rather be glorious in the happiness and perfection, and obedience of his creatures, than in their sin and misery, p. 51, 52. For vindictive justice, and pardoning mercy are but secondary Attributes of the Divine Nature, and therefore God cannot primarily design the glorifying of them; for that cannot be without primarily designing the sin and misery of his creatures, which would be inconsistent with the goodness and holiness of his nature, p. 52, 53. Satan. I know your meaning very well, that there is in God an Antecedent will, where∣by he willeth some things in the first place, and directly; and a Consequent will, whereby he willeth other things in the second place, or by consequence: thus whatsoever is good in it self, as the repentance and salvation of a sin∣ner, God wills by his Antecedent will; but whatsoever in it self is not evil, but evil to the reasonable Creature which must suffer it, as death, damnation, God willeth only by his Consequent Will. The Objections of the Calvinists shall not give me any trouble, That God wills that which never comes to pass, and which he knows will not, when he wills it by that Antecedent Will. This is enough for my comfort, that my repentance and salvati∣on
being things good in themselves, God wills them in the first place, and directly; my damnation he wills but in the second place, and by consequence. God is so good, that he had much rather be glorious in my happiness, (who am one of his Creatures, though I have lost it through my own de∣fault), than in my misery. And though Saint Paul seems to be of another mind, yet I will remember, that These men fetch all their myste∣rious Divinity out of some obscure passages of St. Pauls Epistles, notwithstanding what St. Peter told us of St. Pauls Epistles, 2 Pet. 3.16, and make them the foundation of their faith, p. 242. Sir, I have given you a great trouble; I have but two or three Objections more. If God loves all his Creatures alike, because he is their common Creator, then there is no need of a Saviour, the want of which was alway my greatest discouragement; I have often heard that the Son of God took not upon him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham, and that neglect of our nature, made my case desperate in my own apprehen∣sion. Sherlock. To this I answer two things: 1. That the only knowledg necessary to the purposes of Religion is such a knowledg of Gods nature and will, as is sufficient to direct our acti∣ons, and encourage our obedience, p. 33. Various ways God attempted for the recovery of mankind,
but with little success; at last God sent his own Son our Lord Jesus Christ into the world to be the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls, to seek and to save that which was lost, p. 89. God hath now committed unto Christ all the secret purposes of his Counsel concerning the salvation of man∣kind, which were concealed from ages, p. 30. Satan. I perceive you speak cautiously to prevent scandal; but I undrstand you not, unless you mean that the knowledg of a Sa∣viour was concealed from the world till Christ came in the flesh, (which was not till the World was about four thousand years old) and the reason of that concealment was, be∣cause the knowledg of God in Christ, was not absolutely necessary to the purposes of Reli∣gion (whereof eternal Salvation is not the least considerable.) And if the knowledg of a Saviour, be not absolutely necessary, then not a Saviour himself; for he gives salvation, by giving the knowledg of Salvation; and it is Eternal life to know Jesus Christ (if Christ himself or his Prophets deserve any credit.) And now we are under the Rose, I will tell you truly, that I believe all your talk of a Sa∣viour is but a Copy of your Countenance. For if the World was saved for so long time without a Saviour, why may it not for the remainder of its duration, be it more or less? And this I confess is no small Cordial to my dying hopes. But let me ask you one Questi∣on,
If a Saviour be of no greater moment in the purposes of Religion, why does the Scri∣pture call the contrivement of mans Salvati∣on by a Saviour, the wisdom of God? I had thought the reason had been, because there was no other means of Salvation but this, which he alone did and could find out. Sherlock. You are grosly mistaken. For if justice be so natural to God, that nothing can sa∣tisfie him but the death of his Son, the Redem∣ption of the World by Christ may discover his ju∣stice or goodness, but not his wisdom; for wis∣dom consists in the choice of the best and fittest means to attain an end, when there are more ways than one of doing it; p. 48. I grant indeed that no doubt but the Gospel of Christ makes great and glorious discoveries of the wisdom of God, Ib. and I have told you wherein before, In that he sent his own son, &c. when he had at∣tempted various ways before with little success for the recovery of mankind, p. 89. Satan. I pray proceed to your second head. Sherlock. That supposing a Saviour of ab∣solute necessity to your salvation, you need not absolutely despair of one: When we con∣sider that this Heavenly Embassador and Medi∣ator, is no less than the eternal Son of God, by whom the Worlds were made, we may reasanably conclude, that he came upon no less design than of universal goodness: for he can have no temptation to partiality, as being equally concerned in the
happiness of all men; and we cannot imagin why he should lay a narrower design of love in the Re∣demption, than in the Creation of Mankind; that when in the first he designed all men for hap∣piness, in this new and second Creation he should design and intend the happiness only of some few, p. 82, 83. Satan. I see the force of your Argumenta∣tion, That the eternal Son of God being my Creator, as well as mans, I may reasonably conclude he came upon no less design than of universal goodness to me as well as men. For seeing he designed me for happiness, as well as mankind in the first Creation, why should he design their happiness only, and not mine in the new and second Creation? For he as our common Creator can have no temptation to partiality, as being equally concerned in the happiness of all his reasonable Creatures, Angels and Men. The smaller Exceptions a∣gainst this Argumentation must give way to a greater. That you told me before, that none could believe in Christ till he came, p. 247. Now I understand not why they could not, if he was the eternal Son of God, by whom the World was made. For then he was pre-exi∣stent; and being God, they that lived before he came in the flesh, wanted not the Ratio Formalis of Divine Faith, the Authorety of God revealing. But I presume you mean, that Christ was from eternity decreed to be the Son
of God in time, non Deus natus, sed factitius not God by nature but deputation, as you know who says, and who added in a scoff, mirum quod non substituisset, fictitius. I wonder he did not say an imaginary God, Prid. Lect. 18.) And that the World made by him was non quem videmus, sed quem expectamus, not the world which we see, but a settlement of the Gospel-Dispensation. And now I think on it, it comes much to one for my comfort, seeing he was sent by our common Creator, who can have no temptation to partiality, in sending Christ for men only, and not for Angels, as being equally concerned in all our happiness. To dis∣miss this; There is one obvious Objection against my inference, of your own suggestion, The Son of God was made a man as we are, which argues a good will and kindness to humane nature, p. 81, 82. But I think, I can answer it my self, that the Son of Gods admitting an innumera∣ble company of my fellow-Angels to attend upon him as Mediator, argues a good will and kindness to Angelical nature. There is ano∣ther too, which I will not now put you to answer (having given you so great a trouble already) but will consider of it by my self. The Objection is this, that 'tis no partiality for the Son of God, though he hath taken the nature common to mankind, to save as few as he please, for partiality or respect of persons hath no place in granting largesses, or
bestowing donatives. And if so, 'tis no parti∣ality to save mankind, and leave me to the ruin I have brought upon my self. It is the Cal∣vinists answer to your great Argument for universal Redemption, and it leaves some scruple upon my mind. Upon the whole of your discourse, I perceive I slipt my time (for want of due information) of regaining the love of God without a Saviour, for that I might have done any time before he came in the flesh; for no man (nor Angel) could be∣lieve in Christ till he came: But that time is gone and past, and cannot be recall'd. I must now for my comfort consider what he hath done, and suffer'd, and how the benefit of both may redound to me. First then I consi∣der, that his active righteousness must be im∣puted to me so far as it is a conformity to that law of Nature which is common to me and mankind. Sherlock. This makes Christ suitable to the wants of a sinner indeed, that he ha a righte∣ousness for him which God infinitely prefers be∣fore any home-spun righteousness of his own. This is a very comfortable notion for bad men, and such as I would not part with for all the world, did I resolve to live wickedly, and yet intend to get to heaven, p. 234. Satan. What Sir, do you jeer? Sherlock. I tell you, that Abraham and all the good men of old, never heard of the righteous∣ness of Christ imputed to us, p. 256.
Satan, No, I see St. Paul is a man of no credit with you. He says that Abraham had a righteousness without works imputed to him. That could not be his own righteousness, for that were contradictio in adjecto, to say he had a righteousness of his own, without works of his own (as your Schools say) (righteousness resulting from the conformity of works to a Law.) It must therefore be the righteousness of another, and who that other should be, but Christ, I cannot tell; but I would be glad to learn. Sherlock, The great dispute in the Epistle to the Romans is, whether we must be justified by the Law of Moses, or by the faith of Christ, i. e. whe∣ther the observation of all the external rites and ceremonies of the Law, and an external conformi∣ty of our actions to the moral precepts of it, will ju∣stifie a man before God, or that fincere and univer∣sal obedience which the Law requires, p. 245. Satan. One would think that it had been unquestionable, that Abrahaus could not have had whereof to glory, if he had been justified by an external conformity to the Ceremonial and Moral precepts of the Law. But I perceive one may live and learn. But though there is no need of a Saviour, as to any active righteous∣ness of his to be imputed to sinners; yet I pre∣sume there is need of one to die as a surety in their stead and place. Sherlock, When Christ died for us, he died
not as a surely, p. 290. The Socinians have no reason to be afraid of such Adversaries, who have no better way to defend the satisfaction of Christ, than by the notion of suretiship, p. 291. Satan, 'Tis well J. O. that parlous man is not within hearing. What? will you acknow∣ledg the Socinians stand on the vantage ground, when Christians defend the satisfaction of Christ by the notion of suretiship? I am apt to think they cannot defend it by any other noti∣on, the sum whereof is (as I warrant you J. O. T. J. and all the letters of the Alphabet will tell you) that Christ put himself into the stead of sinners to suffer what they should have suffer'd; upon which God makes over Christs satisfaction to them. And they will take for their warrant that place, where Christ is call'd , The suerty of the Covenant. Sherlock, I confess I do not like to be call'd a Socinian, because that name does male audire, some ill in the Church of England. And I reckon my self therefore much beholden to my two Brethren, whereof one tacitly by an Impri∣matur, and the other by express words, vindi∣cated me from the imputation of Heresie, and particularly of being tainted with Cracovian Divinity. But let J. O. T. J. and who will besides please themselves with their own no∣tion of suertiship; I say, To be a surety of the Covenant signifies no more than to confirm and ratifie this Covenant, and to undertake for the
performance of it, that all the promises of the Covenant shall be made good upon such terms and conditions as are annexed to them, p. 289. Satan, Then it seems Christ is but Gods surety to man; that he will be as gsood as his word: but I should think that notion of sure∣tiship were out of doors, by the grounds you laid down a while since. For if the light of na∣ture assures sinners, that God is so good that he hath a natural love for all good men, and will not fail to reward them, though he never made them a promise, p. 42, 43. Methinks it may assure them too, that God is so faithful that he will not break his promise when he hath made it. And it may seem, that as to the confirmation of the Covenant of God with man (whatever your sentiments are of Christs God-head) Christ needed not to have been God, for whatever assurance can be gathered from the undertakers being God, is afforded us in the promisers being so. And in fine, Christ is no surety at all; and so we need not dispute a∣bout our interest in him: for as far as I can perceive by your principles, that sinners might have been saved, if he had never died for them; and they may be damned, though he hath. And now I am prevented in my en∣quiry how the benefit of what Christ hath done and suffered, might redound to me. I had thought to have asked what Faith is re∣quisite to the participation of the benefits of
Christs righteousness; and what Ʋnion re∣sults from that Faith whereby his righteous∣ness, and its effects become a sinners. Sherlock, You mistake the matter, you may enquire, and I will satisfy you about the na∣ture of Faith, and the Union thence resulting. For as hasty as you are in your censure of my making Christ useless (which I should take very hainously, but that I think you do but personate the Fan's): I will tell you, The death of Christ upon the cross, assures us what the merit is, and what the portion of sin shall be; that all sinners deserve to die, and shall certain∣ly have their deserts, without a sincere repentance and reformation of their lives: for to expiate sin by death can signifie no less than this, that death is the proper recompence of sin. p. 92. Satan, A goodly end of Christs death, would J. O. say, were he within hearing, which hath been and may be otherwise obtain∣ed. The light of nature, [or natural notions of Gods justice] and works of Providence [Gods judgments upon the wicked] would as∣sure men of the merit of sin, and what the portion of sin should be, without sincere re∣pentance and reformation [and with it too] as well as assure them (which you have often told me) of Gods readiness to pardon upon repen∣tance and reformation. Again, J. O. would say, that the death of Christ would not assure us, that death is the re∣compence
of sin; unless Christs death was the punishment of sin, which if it was, it must be of mans sin (for he had none of his own) and then Christ died as a surety in the sinners stead (a notion which J. O. embraces, and W. S. rejects), and so you have brought your hogs to a fair market indeed. Sherlock, In verbo sacerdotis, on the word of a Priest, I think you are turned Fanatick. Satan, You have granted one use of Christs death [which will serve my turn] as for the other, I presume it was Lapsus linguae, a slip of your tongue; but the hopes you give me with one hand, you take away with the other, when you tell me, The Sacrifice of his death extends no farther than the example of his life; he was made manifest to destroy sin, and in him was no sin, p. 93. It seems then that Christ died only for those in whom was no sin at all. And then I am too sure Christ died not for me: but one comfort then is, that neither died he for any body else. Sherlock, I explain my meaning well enough, when I say, that Considering how holy our Priest and Sacrifice was, we cannot reasonably conceive that he died, or that he interceded for incorrigible sinners, p. 93, Satan, All that I can gather from thence for explication, is, that we cannot reasonably conceive that he died for any sinners, unless he were a sinner himself, (though not incor∣rigible)
for otherwise the Sacrifice of his death would extend farther then the example of his life. He that was no sinner, would die for them that were sinners. To leave this to further consideration, pray tell me what use you assign to Christs active obe∣dience? Sherlock, Though the pardon of our sins, and our justification, be attributed to the blood of Christ, yet I could never perswade my self, that this wholly excludes the perfect obedience and righteousness of his life, p. 330. Satan, Very good; now J. O. and you are very good friends, for he could never per∣swade himself so neither. Sherlock, 'Tis not good manners to inter∣rupt me; J.O. and I are far enough from be∣ing good friends: For the Aqostle tell us, That we are accepted in the Beloved, Eph. 1.6. Satan, That very plaee J. O. brings for his own justification, in being always of your per∣swasion in this point. Sherlock, You are very unmannerly me∣thinks. Satan, Excuse me Sir, I am afraid you should forget your self, and say as J. O. says, unawares. Sherlock, Never fear that, but hear me out. And I think no man will deny that God was very highly pleased with the perfect obedience of our Saviours life, p. 330, 331.
Satan. No, I dare say, not Socinus himself. Enough, enough, I see what you would be at. Christ by his obedience satisfecit voluntati divi∣nae non justitiae, i. e. satisfied Gods will, not his justice. I am past doubt now that J.O. and W.S. are not like to be very good friends in haste. Sherlock. Verbum sat sapienti, A word is e∣nough to the wise. Now to answer your Que∣ries, which too hastily you concluded you were prevented in. I will tell you what Faith is not requisite to the participation of the benefits of Christs Righteousness. There is not a plainer Argument how apt men are to pervert the Scrip∣tures, to reconcile them to their own prejudices and preconceived Opinions, than to observe what work they make with Abrahams Faith; as if that Faith which was imputed to him for righte∣ousness, were a fiducial reliance and recumbency on Christ for salvation, upon which the righte∣ousness of Christ apprehended by Faith was im∣puted to him, p. 247. Satan. If Abrahams Faith was not a fiducial reliance and recumbency on Christ for Salvati∣on, then to be sure, nor any of his Childrens. For they walk in his steps, and imitate his Ex∣ample. But pray, what Faith is requisite to make Christ our Saviour, seeing a Saviour you will have him to be? I care not if I hear you out. Sherlock. Our Faith in Christ must signifie such a stedfast belief of all those revelations
which Christ both made to the World, as governs our lives and actions, p. 255. Satan. Then I perceive I am one half of a Believer already; for I stedfastly believe all those Revelations which Christ hath made to the World: and I am not without hopes of being the other half in good time, of having my life and actions governed by my Belief. Sherlock. You have no cause of despair: for besides (what I have told you already, that God produces not what he loves, by an Omnipo∣tent Power, but does good to his Creatures in such a way as is suitable to their natures), Righ∣teousness is called a gift, because it is not owing solely to humane endeavours, but is wrought in us by supernatural means, by those powerful ar∣guments and motives, and divine assistances which God in infinite love and goodness has afforded the world by Jesus Christ, p. 335. Satan. I understand you right well, That Righteousness [or the good government of life and actions] is called Gods gift, because he gives one half, (but hardly the better half would a Fanatick say), the arguments and mo∣tives which are very powerful [in genere mo∣rali] to induce the world to make it self-righ∣teous; and them you call divine assistances, be∣cause God assists the World by them, that is, by those Arguments and Motives perswades men to use the power they have; for to give them any power they wanted, were for God
to produce what he loves by an Omnipotent Power [in genere Physico.] Sherlock. There's no need of any Omnipo∣tent Power in the Fanatick sense; For that righteousness which Go equires under the Gos∣pel, must be an inward principle of love and obedi∣ence, which changes our natures, and transforms us into the Image of God, as much as if we were born again, and made new creatures, p. 265. Satan. You mean, Sir, that a stedfast Belief of Gods revelations, does excite that love and obedience, which changes our natures, &c. and so makes a new Birth needless; but Mr. Sher∣lock, some cavelling Fanatick would b so per∣verse (I dare say) were you discoursing with him, as to tell you, that our natures are chang∣ed before they can put forth a Belief stedfast e∣nough to excite love and obedience: And as they will be fooling with Scripture-metaphors (though you have corrected them for it, p. 281.) they would tell you, that the Childs motion does not give it life, but its life gives it motion. Sherlock. And as for that union that you mentioned between Christ and Believers, the Fa∣naticks commonly explain it by first a Legal union, such as is between the surety and debtor, p. 281. some insist most upon the notion of a Surety, others of a Mediator, which come much to one, but yet have some peculiar absurdities be∣longing to each of them, p. 287. As first for the notion of a Surety—
Satan. You need not tire your self with the repetition of them: I can easily guess at them, the imparity between Christs being a Surety, and sureties among men. As to that you know the Rule, Similitudo non currit quatuor pedibus, Similitudes do not hold in every thing. It will be thought enough, that they agree in the main, that as the Debtor and Surety are so far one person in the eye of humane law, that the payment of the Surety is the Debtors dis∣charge; so Christ and a Believer are so far one person in the eye of the Divine Law, that Christs undergoing the punishment of the Law, discharges the Believer from it; and Christs active obedience to the Law, disobliges the Be∣liever from obeying it to that end (for which it was originally intended, and) for which Christ obeyed it, viz. that it might be the material and meritorious cause of our justification. Sherlock. Let us now try whether the notion of a Mediator can do any better service, than the notion of a Surety, p. 296. The notion of a Me∣diator includes no such thing as the fulfilling of all righteousness for them, whom one is Mediator to, p. 296, 297. Satan. Sir, Your Antagonists answer will be the same in effect, that though a Mediator is one who interposes between two differing par∣ties, and his Office is not to perform the conditions himself (as you well observe) p. 297, yet the difference between God and man could
not be accommodated (you will be told) by this Mediator, but by performing the condi∣tions himself. For the reason why God would not enter into a Covenant with sinners without the intervention of a sacrifice, p. 297, was, be∣cause his Law being broken, till the penalty due to that breach was undergone; and his ho∣nour thereby vindicated, he could not right his Mercy, without wronging his Justice. Sherlock. I have done with the Legal Ʋnion. There is secondly, a Mystical Ʋnion, by vertue of which they imagine that we receive Grace from Christs person, just as we do water out of a Conduit, p. 197, 204. Whereas a Mediator as Mediator, ought not to be considered as the Foun∣tain, but as the Minister of Grace, p. 209. Satan. I have always understood, that they mean no more by their Mystical Ʋnion, than an union Analogical to natural union, such as that of Vine and Branches, Head and Mem∣bers, by vertue of which they suppose they are passive in receiving grace from Christ, as the Branches in receiving sap from the Root, and the Members spirits from the Head. But this I perceive is an imagination without ground in your opinion. And your reason against it confirms me more in my suspicion, that you do but verba dare, deceive, when you say, The Ʋ∣nion of the Divine and Humane Nature in Christ did excellently qualifie him for the office of a Me∣diator, p. 205, 206. For if Christ as a Mediator
be not the fountain of Grace, secundum natu∣ram divinam, i. e. as God he may pass from a Mediator, though he were , a meer man; then he might perswade men to be gracious by powerful motives (though he could not bestow grace upon them) which is all you intend by Christs being a minister of Grace. The Fanaticks indeed, silly souls as they are, think, that Christs Obedience was the meritorious cause of Grace, and his Spirit the efficient or fountain of it: but you instruct them better, that Christ by his blood purchased only a Co∣venant of Salvation, to them that have grace (come by it as they can.) But pray, Sir, what Ʋnion do you allow of, any, or none? Sherlock. The Union between Christ and the Christian Church, is but a Political Union, that is, such an Union as is between a King and his Subjects, p. 156. Satan. Then am I united already, (which is more than ever I knew before: for Christ is Head of Principalities and Powers, and they are his subjects, de jure, I am sure.) Sherlock. Hold there, our union to Christ con∣sists in our belief of his Revelations, Ib. Satan. Then still my claim is good; for I be∣lieve all his Revelations; (and were I sure none but friends were within hearing, I would say, that's more than you do.) Sherlock. You are a jeering Companion and a little too hasty; our union to Christ
consists also in our obedience to his Laws, and subjection to his Authority, p. 156. Satan. Now I am half gone. But yet I live in hopes, that the powerful motives you have talked so much of, may be powerful enough to move me to that obedience and subjection I owe to Christs Laws and Authority, seeing I already believe all his Revelations. I will not give you much longer trouble, I have but one scruple more. I perceive by your last discourse, That God requir'd not such a sacri∣fice as the death of Christ for the expiation of our sins, because he could not do otherwise, p. 46. This I would have made plain. For it sticks much with me, that I am a debtor to Divine Justice, and therefore I do not understand how God can be good to me, till that debt be paid, and Justice satisfied. For if he should, it seems to me that God should raise one of his Attributes upon the ruin of another, and so do himself a prejudice, to do me a kind∣ness. Your charity I believe is such that you wish me well, as you do all mankind. Answer but this one Objection, and I am satisfied. Sherlock. That God is so just and righteous, that he cannot pardon sin without satisfaction to his justice, is indeed such a notion of justice, as is perfectly new, which neither Scripture nor na∣ture acquaints us with; for all mankind have ac∣counted it an act of goodness (without the least
suspition of injustice in it) to remit injuries and offences without exacting any punishment; and that he is so far from being just that he is cruel and savage, who will remit no offence till he hath satisfied his revenge. That part of justice which consists in punishing of offenders, was always looked on as an iustrument of Government, and therefore the exacting or remitting punishment, was referred to the wisdom of Governours, who might spare or punish as they saw reason for it, without being unjust in either, p. 45, 46. And this is so rational, that thou canst not but sub∣scribe to the judgment of all mankind. And but that I think you propose this scruple only to try what answer I can make; I should won∣der one of so pregnant wit should talk so like a fool. Satan. I doubt Sir, you have not consul∣ted all mankind, I have heard other doctrine constantly taught in the Assemblies of Chri∣stians (who sure are part of mankind) where I have been a constant and attentive hearer, and I cannot but believe and tremble. Sherlock. I doubt, Sir Satan, your ears have not been matches. It may be you have heard such doctrine in Conventicles: There is one John Owen that hath given us a faste of the gift he exercises in such Assembles, in a late Book, Entituled, Communion with God the Father, &c. that tells us, what ever disco∣veries were made of the patience and lenity of
God to us, yet if it were not withal revealed that the other Properties of God, as his Ju∣stice and Revenge for Sin, had their actings assigned them to the full, there could be lit∣tle consolation gathered from the former, p. 95. But what say I to this? That is, J. O. would not believe God himself though he should make never so many promises of being good and gracious to sinners, unless he were sure, that he had first satisfied his reveng. The sume of which is, That God is all love and patience when he has taken his fill of revenge, as others use to say, That the Devil is good when he is pleased p. 47. Excuse me that I make use of your name. Satan. I willingly excuse your making use of my name; for seeing I have failed in my am∣bition of being like God, I am well enough con∣tent, you should make God like me. Sherlock. Elsewhere the same J.O. says, That in Christ the very nature of God is discovered to be love and kindness. But I think I pay him off. Hearken and you shall have my Comment with his Text to a tittle. An happy change, this from all Justice to all Love! but how comes this to pass? why the account of that is very plain; be∣cause the Justice of God hath glutted it self with revenge on sin, in the death of Christ and so hence∣forward we may be sure he will be very kind, as a revengeful man is when his passion is over, p. 46. Satan. But what's the matter then that sin∣ners (which I know by woful experience my
self) are haunted with continual fears of Gods Justice. Those fears seem to be the effects of the natural notions of God's Justice, which we carry about with us. Sherlock. The workings of the Law, the a∣mazing terrors of Gods wrath, the raging de∣spair of damned spirits, are the working of an heated fancy, and Religious distraction, p. 95. These must needs be the effect of ignorance, not of an acquaintance with Christ, which suggests so many encouraging-considerations to return to God, as to a merciful and compassionate Father, and not to tremble at his presence as a severe and in∣exorable Judg. Ib. Satan. O bene factum! O well done my white Boy: O Lepidum caput! now your work is done, you have obliged me for ever. For now I undeastand, that my fears are but melancholy and hypochondraical (such as timerous persons are subject to when left in the dark). There is nothing in Gods nature can give me cause of fear, (at least, if I do but return to God) but there is enough in it to give me cause of hope. And though I have no acquaintance with Christ, my acquaintance with God will serve my turn. For Christ discovers nothing more of Gods gracious nature to sinners, than we knew before by the light of nature (as I well remem∣ber you instructed me awhile since.) In short, it seems there is a naturalness of mercy in God, but not of justice.
Sherlock. No, no; of the naturalness of Gods Justice, that he could not pardon sin without satisfaction, I make this the import, That he is so just, that he hath not one dram of goodness in him, till his rage and vengeance be satisfied, which is a glorious kind of Justice I confess, p. 59. Satan. I perceive you are a merry Gentle∣man; and so are all of your Club. And I hope hereafter I shall be merry too, and be fit to make one of you. I am sure I had almost po∣red out my eyes with seeking for these Gospel my∣steries in the Gospel, and could never find them, p. 40. (To borrow your significant words, with your good leave) but now I understand that I looked for them where they were not. I should have learned to argue from the nature of God, and his works of Providence, and the na∣ture of mankind [and Angels.] though the Ea∣naticks call such arguings carnal reason, p. 79. There is nothing now remains (besides thanks for your pains), but to sum up the heads of Argument upon which my hopes of salvation (as well as mans are built.) And if I should misrepresent any of them, you will please to correct my mistakes. 1. That God is so good, that he designs and desires the happiness of all his Creatures, accor∣ding to the capacity of their natures [and there∣fore mine.]
2. That Gods will in that design is not arbi∣trary, having no reason but it self: For such a will would destroy all the perfections of Gods nature. 3. That holiness in the Creature, is the reason of the determination of his love to any particu∣lar person. 4. That this holiness is not an effect of an Omnipotent Power, but of powerful motives and arguments, [and so by the use of my free-will, I may be holy if I will.] 5. That though this holiness be not perfect, yet God will accept it, if sincere. 6. This acceptance of my sincere holiness, I have reason to believe and hope for, though I have no promise. For 7. Gods gracious nature obliges him to reward all sincerely, (though imperfectly) good actions. God is merciful to all, whose Creator he is, and affords them all possible means of Salvation, with∣out a Saviour, or any knowledg of one. And ac∣cordingly, 8. De facto, Abel and Enoch, and Abra∣ham, were saved without a Faith in Christ. And needs they must, because no man could believe in Christ till he came. And 9. Though God hates me now, yet he may love me hereafter. For Gods love and hatred are not immutable, nor does the immutability of them consist in loving or hating alway the same per∣son, but for the same reason, because they are
either good or bad. And (which may confirm me) 10. God never designed the glory of mercy and justice in saving some, and not others, in the permission of his Creatures sins. 11. Though a Saviour was brought into the world after it was about Four thousand years old; yet he was not of absolute necessi∣ty, for the only knowledg absolutely necessary to the purposes of Religion (whereof Salvation is not the least) is such a knowledg of Gods na∣ture and will, as is sufficient to direct our actions, and incourage our obedience And hence, 12. The wisdom of God was not discovered in sending a Saviour, if there were no other way of redeeming the World. For wisdom consists in the choice of the best and fittest means to at∣tain an end, when there are more ways than one of doing it. 13. This Saviour being the Eternal Son of God, we may reasonably conclude he came up∣on no less design than of universal goodness; for he can have no temptation to partiality, as be∣ing equally concerned in the happiness of all men; and we cannot imagine why he should lay a narrower design of love in the redempti∣on, than in the Creation of mankind, &c. [all which fits my case; the Eternal Son of God being my Creator, hath no temptation to partiality, being equally concerned in my
happiness and mans, as we are his rational Creatures.] 14. That a Saviour is of no great use now he is come. For he comes neither to fulfil the Law for sinners, nor to die in their stead, but only to confirm Gods promise of saving them that repent and forsake their sins; which pro∣mise was needless, Gods nature obliging him to save sinners upon those terms, before any promise; and the light of nature discover∣ing that obligation; nor was the confirm∣ing of it needful: For the light of nature would teach us that God will not break his promise. [And so if it should happen that the Saviour was not intended for me, yet I might be saved, as Abel and Enoch were, with∣out one.] And I gather from hence, that you make the blood of Christ no more sa∣tisfactory than the blood of Bulls and Goats were under the Law; but that God was pleased with both upon the same reason; because the shedding of his and their blood, was an act of obedience to his will, not a sa∣tisfaction to his Justice. And so you have subverted the Gospel, (which stood in the way of my hopes of Salvation) for which I con you hearty thanks. And hence I col∣lect, 15. That whoever was or shall be justi∣fied, were and shall be justified without any
righteousness at all. For righteousness im∣porting a relation resulting from the confor∣mity of dispositions and actions to their Rule, sincerity is no righteousness at all (supposing the righteousness of Christ not so far impu∣ted as to take away its defects) unless the Law as a Rule requires no more conformity to it self, than the Gospel as a Covenant ac∣cepts; which cannot be, because then no de∣viations from the Law are sinful, where there is sincerity. 16. A Saviour is the less needful, because Gods Justice is not natural, though his mercy is. And the fears of sinful men [and so of An∣gels] of Gods Justice, are but the workings of heated fancy, and religious distraction. 17. If a Saviour be of use, the way to come by an interest in him, is not a fiducial reliance or recumbence on Christ. For that Abraham had not, [and so nor his children] but a believing his Revelations, [which the Church of Eng∣land somewhere in her Homilies acknowledges I do. and the chief of them, The Articles of Faith] and governing our lives by them [which I hope to do hereafter.] So that Abrahams Faith and a Believers now, are of a different kind; but your faith and mine are of one kind, we both believe Gods Revelations upon Christs Authority, though I hope your belief governs your life and actions better than mine hath done hitherto.
18. The Ʋnion made by Faith, is not mysti∣cal, i. e. analogical to a natural Union be∣tween Vine and Branches, &c. nor therefore are we passive in the reception of Grace, to believe and live accordingly. For a Media∣tor as such is no fountain of Grace, but only a Minister of Grace, i. e. one that by powerful motives perswades us to be gracious (come by grace as we may) [and so it is not im∣possible but I may get grace, though I be not united to Christ] but the Ʋnion made by Faith is Political, consisting in a belief of Christs Revelations [which I have already] and go∣vernment of our actions [which I am in hopes of in time, for Christ is the Minister of this Grace, by proposing powerful arguments to it] Is not all this right? Sherlock, Very right. I admire your tena∣cious memory and ingenuity in so artificial a connexion of a rambling discourse, and in your easie and natural inferences from my grounds. Satan. I wonder at your freedom in own∣ing all my Consequences, (though I think ve∣rily they are deduced evidently enough from your grounds, because you have subscribed the Articles of the Church of England, and the Church of England somewhere says, They are to be had accursed that presume to say, that every man shall be saved by the Law or Sect
which he professeth, so that he be diligent to frame his life according to that Law, and THE LIGHT OF NATƲRE. For holy Scripture doth set out to us only the name of Jesus Christ, whereby men must be saved, [Art. 18.] Which directly contradicts one of the main grounds you laid down for my hopes. And again she says, The Old Testament is not contrary to the New. For both in the Old and New Testament everlasting life is offered to mankind by Christ, who is the only Mediator between God and man, being both God and man, [Art. 7.] And this thwarts another of your principal Positions. And out of the Articles and Homilies I could produce passages that are diametrically oppo∣site to every Position of yours, which I have epeated, and you approved. Sherlock. Do not trouble your head about econciling my Positions with the Church of Englands, as long as I have an Imprimatur. Satan. Excuse me Sir, I was afraid your indness to me should prove an unkindness to our self, and bring you under Church-cen∣ure. If your grounds be true (as I see no ause to doubt) I am sure I have cause to bless ou, though the Church of England curses ou [in her 18th. Article] and to wish that at curse being causeless, may never come pon you, in a suspension ab officio & beneficio. ong may you enjoy St. George Buttolph Lane, d St. Buttolph Billingsgate; in the latter of
which you may be sufficiently instructed in the eighth Liberal Art, which the vulgar call Scolding, but the learned Raillery. I know you can bear a jest. And now Sir, I heartily thank you for your great pains, and truly Catholick charity, which exceeds any Prophets, Apostles, and even the Church of England's it self. Sherlock. I wish the profit may be greater to you, than the pains have been to me. Farewell. Postscript to the READER. THe Author of these Sheets conceives he cannot ex∣cogitate a fitter close than Mr. Sherlock's to his second Se∣ction, with no other alteration than the substitution of two words, Gods nature, instead of Christ's person and of God instead of Christ. Thus Reader, I have given the an entire scheme of a new Reli¦gion, resulting from an acquain∣tance
with [Gods nature] in all its fundamental Principles and Practices; here is every jot and tittle of reason it is founded on, or pretends to, and the most ob∣vious and easie connexion of one part with another, whereby thou maist easily judg of the whole fa∣brick and contrivance; and I think there needs no more to ex∣pose it to the scorn of every con∣sidering man, who cannot but dis∣cover how inconsistent the Reli∣gion of [Gods nature] and of his Gospel are: this is that know∣ledg of [God] these men [Mr. S. and his Club] glory in, as con∣taining greater mysteries, & more soul-saving truths, than are revea∣led in the Gospel, p. 75. And the Author thinks fit to add, that he presumes that no considering man
will doubt whether this new Reli∣gion deserves that character which the learned Dr. Arrowsmith gives of it; and the men that are of that Religion, deserve that sharp censure which the learned Grotius gives of them, in the passages quoted in the Title-page, (which for the sake of the unlearned Reader it may not be amiss to translate. In Socinia∣nism, which not undeservedly is called a more refin'd Mahometa∣nism, Hell and Irreligion open their mouths wide. So Arrow∣smith. The Socinians I think un∣worthy not only of the name of Christians, but even of Hereticks. They retain the name of Christi∣anity, but they destroy the thing that bears that name. Therefore I judg they differ very little from Mahometans, who themselves do
not speak evil of Jesus. So Grotius. The only thing that may seem wan∣ting to brand the Sherlockians with the name of Socinians, and so of more refined Mahometans, is an explicite denial of the Godhead of Christ; which whether they be not in a good forwardness for, let the Reader judg by that passage, No man could believe in Christ till he came, that is, could not believe any thing upon his Authority, p. 247. It is a Question which for his own credits sake, Mr. Sherlock were bound (one would think) to answer, why no man could believe any thing upon Christs Authority, till he came? The only reason his Antagonists can imagine is, because Christ had no Authority before he came. And if that be it, the falshood of that ground is evident
enough (as otherwise so) by the light of Psal. 110.1. and Mat. 23.43, 44, 45, compared, where David call'd [and so accounted] Christ his Lord, before he came; and con∣sequently supposes him to have Au∣thority to exact belief. And from that false ground, that Christ had no Authority before he came, [sup∣posing it yet to be true] this infer∣ence is fair, that he was not pre∣existent, and so nor God before he came. And thence another, that he had no such Authority when he come, as Mr. Sherlock denies him before he came, that is no primary and immediate Divine Authority, but only secondary and mediate, that is, the Authority of a Prophet, the belief of whom is resolved into the Authority of him that sent him as its proper ground. And how finely
does this notion suit with the ac∣count which the Socinians give of the reason of the denomination of the Son of God, and God, given by Christ to himself. His verbis (viz. Joh. 10.35, 36.) apertissime indi∣cat Christus, quod nullam aliam ob causam majorem, seipsum Dei Filium, ac proinde Deum asse∣ruerit, nisi quod a Patre sanctifi∣catus, & in mundum missus fuerit, Cat. Racov. cap. de Cog. Dei. That is, In these words, viz. Joh. 10.35, 36. Christ does plainly declare, that for no other greater reason does he affirm that he is the Son of God, & therefore God, then because he was sanctified of the Father, and sent into the world. And least Mr. Sherlock (or any on his behalf) should complain of wrong done him, and not know of whom to demand
satisfaction, the Author hath thought meet to alter his first resolution of concealing his Name, and with the discovery of it to give this account of himself, that he is one who hath subscribed the 36 Articles of the Doctrine of the Church of England, and does hereby profess the continu∣ance of his approbation of them as Orthodox, and consonant to the Scri∣pture; and withal that he is not so void of candor, but that if Mr. S. convince him that he hath wrested any of his words, or made any illo∣gical deductions from his Principles, he will not fail to give publick sa∣tisfaction in what form Mr. S. him∣self shall prescribe, which (he con∣ceives) is as much as any reasonable man can require, or any honest man need to promise. THO. DANSON. Sometime Fell. of Magd. Coll. Oxon.
