D416 99826621 31024
Auctio Davisiana. Picturarum verè Originalium: OR, A COLLECTION OF Valuable Pictures, Consisting of the Collections, Of Cardinal Antonio Barberini. Sir James Palmer, &c. (All which shall be warranted Originals to the Nobility and Gentry, &c.) and for their Accommodation are brought from the Auction-house in St. Albans-street, and will be sold by Auction, at the House on the Right∣hand at the foot of the Stairs of the House of Lords on Monday Novemb. 23, 1691. from Ten in the morning, to Two in the Afternoon. By Edward Davis, Edward Millington. Catalogues are given at Mr. Sam. Crouch in Cornhil. Richards Coffee-house in Fleetstreet. Mr. Notts in Pall-Mall. Wag∣goners Coffee-house in the Court of Requests, and at the Place of Sale. 1691.
To the Nobility, Gentry, &c. THis Essay is design'd for the Entertainment of those Persons of Honour and Quality, &c. that are the ablest Judges and greatest Patrons of the Noble Art of Painting, as also to vindicate the Reputation of those Great Masters, who long since have obliged the World with the incomparable Stroakes of their Immortal Pensils, from the false and spurious Representations that of late hath frequently been made of them. It's by all confessed, that a very good and genuine Picture hath a real Excellency and Intrinsick Value, and that they are more or less to be esteem'd, as they appear to be the true Productions of those Great Masters whose Names they bear. The greatest Encouragement for Persons of Honour and Quality, &c. to buy what they fancy, or to make an Addition to what they have collected, is, that the Pictures that are exposed to Sale, shall be warranted to be what they are de∣scribed, viz. Originals, and truly painted by those famous Persons whose Names appear in the ensuing Catalogue. Conditions of Sale. I. THat he who bids most is the Buyer; and if any Difference do arise, the Picture shall be exposed to Sale again, and the Sale decided by the Auctioneer. II. That all Persons will be pleased to give in their Names after the buying any Picture, or Pictures, paying also presently down the fourth part of the Price it is sold for at the Place of Sale, the Remainder within two days after the Sale, otherwise the Money paid in part shall be forfeited to the Proprietor; and it shall be lawful for the Proprietor to expose the Picture or Pictures to Sale again. III. That it shall be at the liberty of the Proprietor to manage the Sale after his own Method. IV. All Persons are desired to come and view the Pictures three Days be∣fore the Sale, for their better Satisfaction.
1 THE Infanta of Spain, by Sir Anth. Vandyke. 2 St. Anthony's Temptation, by Brugell. 3 Sir P. Paul's Reuben's Wife, by Sir P. Reuben. 4 St. Austin, by Michael Angelo Caravagio. 5 A Representation of Vice and Vertue, by Tintoret. 6—A whole Length of Woman, by Tintoret. 7—Another of a Man, by Tintoret. 8 Venus and a Satyr, by Paris Bourdon. 9 Our Saviour in the Garden, by Mich. Angelo Caravagio. 10 A naked Venus after Titian. 11 A Landskip, by Nicolas Poussin. 12 Pope Leo, and the King of the Hunns, by Caval. J. Arpina. 13 A Landskip curiously copied after Poussin. 14 Martin Luther's Head, by Hans Holben. 15 A Landskip admirably painted, by De-Gob. 16 A Satyr and two Nymps, by Rotten-Hammer. 17 The little Swimmer, by Gerard Dow. 18 Susanna and the Elders, by Parmensis. 19 A little Madona, by a Disciple of Guido. 20 A little Landskip of old Brugell. 21 A Satyr and a Woman, by Pulen-Brooke. 22 A Madusas Head, by Julio-Romano. 23 A Madona and our Saviour, by Titian. 24 The Trinity represented by three Children, by Andra Delsart. 25 Our Saviour buffeted painted, by Hannib. Caratzs. 26 A Flower piece, by Maria de Fiora. 27 A Landskip, by Alexander Veronese. 28 A Landskip after the manner of Gaspar Poussin. 29 A Landskip of Harman Swanevelt. 30 St. Hierom, by old Blancher. 31 Rembrant's Head, painted by himself. 32 A Hermite, by Salvator Rosa. 33 A Head painted by Peter de Curtone. 34 A Man's Head, by Tintoret. 35 The Virgin Mary's Head, by And. Scavone. 36 Aurora painted by Charles de Lorrain. 37 A Woman's Head, by Tintoret. 38 A Landskip painted by Vosterman. 39—Another very large, by the same Hand. 40 A Flower-piece with Fruit, by old Van-Somar. 41 A Curtezan looking in a Glass, by Paris Bourdon. 42 A Madona, by Procachina de-Milani. 43 Ʋlysses, by Savator Rosa. 44 A Piece of Alexander painted by Du-Moulin. 45 A Flower-piece after the manner of old Brugell. 46 A Venus painted by an Italian Master. 47 An old Man's Head, by an Italian. 48 A Blackamore with Fruit in his Hand, by Dobson. 49 A Sketch, painted by Titian. 50 Massianello Fisherman of Naples his Head, by an Italian.
51 A Family-piece, painted by Dobson. 52 The Lady Venetian Stanley▪ painted by V. Dyke. 53 Duke of Buckingham, by P. Reuben. 54 A Head half-length, painted by Tintoret. 55 Venus and Adonis painted by Voet. 56 A Woman's Head, painted by Dobson. 57 A Woman's Head, by Tintoret. 58 A Piece of Fruit with a Monkey, by Fyt. 59 A Dutch Landskip—painted by a Dutch-hand. 60 A Woman's Head, by Jordains. 61 A Landskip, painted by Gerard de Wit. 62 Cardinal Infanta, painted by Jordains. 63 A Madona painted by Ludovico Caratzs. 64 Tobias and his Dog painted by Hannib. Caratzs. 65 A Woman half-length after the manner of Holben. 66 Isaac blessing of Jacob, by an Italian Hand. 67 A Sketch painted by Poussin. 68 St. Sebastian, in Imitation of Guido. 69 A large Landskip of Bartholomeo. 70 A Man's Head, painted by Dobson. 71 A Landskip, by Philip de Neapolitano. 72 An half length of the Countess of Portland, by Sir A. Vandyke. 73 A large piece of Perspective, by Viviano. 74 A Spaniard contending with the Devil, by Georgio Castil. Franco. 75 The Lord Pembroke, by Sir Anthony Vandyke. 76 A Nonconformist Parson, by Dobson. 77 A whole length of the Lady Carnarvan, by Vandyke. 78 Hunting of a Stag, a large Piece, by Bool. 79—A Consort of Birds, by Bool. 80—A Consort of Beasts, painted by Bool. 81 St. John preaching in the Wilderness, by Titian. 82 A Head painted by And. Scavoni. 83 A Ceeling-piece, painted by Pet. de Curtoon. 84 The four Seasons, by Nicol. Poussin. 85 A young Bacchus, by Jordains. 86 A little Landskip of Mompert and Brugell. 87 Lucretia finely copied after Gorgoon. 88 St. Hierom, painted by old Palmer. 89 Temple of Love, painted by Polenburg. 90 A Dutch Landskip. 91 A Copy of a Ceeling-piece after Paul Veronesse. 92 A little Head, painted by Sir Pet. Lilly. 93 A Piece painted by Brewer. 94 Blind leading the Blind, by Brugell. 95 A Singing Master teaching to sing, by Dobson. 96 A Duke of Venice, by Tintoret. 97 A Head, painted by John Bellin. 98 A Woman's Head, painted by an Italian. 99 Judith and Holofernes, painted by an Italian. 100 A Landskip after the manner of Molo, by Francisco.
