D589 12264174 196946
A DECLARATION FROM The City of Bristoll: BY The Maior, Aldermen, Sheriffes, and others of the City: DECLARING Their Resolution and fidelity to the Parliament and their designes: Also a Petition from M. Maioresse, M. Holworth, and 200. of the best Citizens wives in Bristoll, to the Maior and Common Councell of the City, for admitting the Parliaments Forces into their City, and many other things worthy of observation. Sent from M. John Ball in Bristoll, to M. James Nicolls, a Merchant in Fanchurch-street London. LONDON, Printed for Joseph Matthewes, and John Nicolls, and are to be sold in the Old-baily. Decemb. 23. 1642.
The Declaration of the Major, Aldermen, and Sheriffes, and other Citizens of the City of Bristoll. THings are now wheeling about towards this City, which hath hitherto been a Goshen, when other places are as Egypt, obscured and darkened with the dismall clouds of a Civill intestine Warre. Let me discover how the inhabitants stand affected; and surely although here are many malignants of the great ones amongst us Colston, Yeomans, and their brethren: and some of the Clergy, as Loveoing, and Willjamson, whose invective diveilsh letter was lately in∣tercepted, directed to Bathurst Chaplain to D. Skinner late Bishop of Bristoll, now of Oxon. wherein he calls the Major (a religious and well affected gentleman) Knave, with some other base passages, yet I conceive that the Ma∣jor part of this City is the best part and stand firm for the Parliament. This yeare the Major and Sheriffes are right which we hope will-prove a great blessing to the City. There came 3 letters to the City, one from the King, sent by Sir Baynam Thregmorton, the sum whereof was this, that the King said, he had been little beholden to them for their forwardnesse, to goe against the Marquesse at Sherborne, and Mendip, but would passe that by, and that although he was brought to that low ebbe by this war yet he had not hitherto taxed them, or been burdensome to them, but did hope to find them loyall Subjects in the con∣clusion,
charging them not to admit of any Parliament for∣ces into the City; which they observing, he said he would not trouble them with any of his forces (as he promised Shrewsbury) but if they did let any in, they should speedily heare from him. The second letter from the Parliament re∣quiring them to admit of some forces for the securing of the City, and their own safety. The third was from the Marquesse of Hertford in Wales, sent by Prior his Chaplain, desiring them that if any garrison were to be set there he would send 1500 men. Upon these 3 letters the common Councell sate the most part of the day: But what answer was returned to each letter I know not. There came to Bristoll, that worthy active Gentleman col∣onell Popham, and Sir John Seymer, a stirring Gentleman de∣siring to know of the City their Resolution, whether they would admit of any forces for the securing of that City be∣ing of Consequence, and so neare the Marquesse his forces in Wales, and lying Westward to Devonshire where Sir Ralph Hopton hath an Army; there was much agitation of the que∣stion, some being for admitting forces, some against it. The Sheriffe Seniour Iackson, Alderman Lock, and Master James went to Glocester, charging them not to come with any forces if they did upon their perill be it, but the Glocester shire men were so incensed against them, that they clapt them up, and would not set them at liberty, untill they had ingaged their lives for the admission of a Garison in Bristoll. The Gentleman forenamed Col. Popham and Sir John Sey∣mer came againe to the Common Councell for an answer to give and return to the Parliament, whether they would admit force or not into the City. A very great combustion there arose the businesse was canvased, some said it would be an invitation of the Kings Army suddenly, others said, it
better to admit the Parliaments Garrison, which would be a great means to unite the City with the Counties ad∣jacent in a firm association against the Cavaliers, or any malignants to the Parliament. There is newes brought, that unlesse a strength were admitted into the City, the Countrey would starve the City, keeping all manner of provision, by Land and Sea. The well-affected women (some of the chiefest) as M. Maioresse, M. Holworth and others, to the number of 200 frame a Petition to this effect Humbly shewing, that if the Parliaments forces were opposed, the effusion of bloud would be great, in regard they were resolved to en∣ter: and therefore to prevent the mischiefs that might a∣rise by a violent entring the town, and being much per∣plexed with the fear of scarcity of victuals, were much afraid and amazed, lest the Glocester and Somersetshire men should stop the market-people from bringing provi∣sion to the city, they humbly desired therefore that coun∣trey people might on market dayes have free passage into the city with all manner of provision, as formerly they had, and that the Parliaments forces might in a faire and peaceable manner be admitted into the city, it being for the security, safety and generall good of the city. The Parliaments Forces having billeted themselves neer the city over night, marched in the next day about eleven a clock, although the Malignants had hopes to keep them out, and to raise a mutiny and insurrection in the towne, they hire some sea-men to go to Froome-gate, (supposing it to be the place of entrance) and stand with their muskets, and their swords drawn, and set two peeces of Ordnance charged at the gate, an uproare and tumult they made, wounding one, and hewing another; but they
were prevented of their purpose, the horse and foot com∣ing in at New-gate, and Pitty-gate: but the uproar could not be appeased: although M. Maior himself came downe to the gate, yet such was their divellish malice and barba∣rous behaviour, that they resisted the Maior, and when he turned the Ordnance from the gate, they turned them back again: but some telling them the Parliaments for∣ces were entred at another gate, they desisted and quitted the gate: So that now are nigh three thousand in the city who are resolved to defend the city. Here was a rumour spread by the malignant party that the King was within ten miles of the towne, but it was but a bug-beare to affright people; this city, if at unity, doubtlesse is able to resist a great Army, the Castle being fortified with twelve peeces of Ordnance at the top, besides Ordnance are placed round upon the wals, and two at every gate, and well furnished with powder, match, and all sorts of ammunition. This day Marlborough men bought of our men two peeces of ordnance of some good weight for the defence of that towne, yet such was the malignancy of the ill-affected members there, that divers came and got porters and themselves together, and threw them downe out of the cart, although the man that bought them had the Maiors Warrant for carrying them out. But it is feared they will come too late, the newes being here that part of Marlborough is burnt by the Cavaliers, and that they are stripped of all, and left most miserable people. The Lord avert them from ruinating this place, and all other, if it be his will. Yours as heretofore, J. B. Bristoll, Decemb. 18. 1642.
A Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament. Die Jovis 23 December 1642. WHereas in and by a late ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, it is ordained for the cause therin ex∣pressed, that all persons of ability, within the Cities of Lon∣don and Westminster, and Suburbs of the same; and also with∣in the Borough of Southwark, who have not at all, or not answerable to their estates, contributed towards the main∣tenance of the Army raised by authority of this present Parliament, shall be assessed in such manner and proportion as in the said Ordinance is directed; Of which the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament do expect a vi∣gorous and speedy execution: but finding some doubt to be raised upon the point of time, whether that clause of not contributing at all, or not in proportion to their estates, be meant of not contributing before the passing of the said Ordinance in both houses of Parliament, of to be extended to any time before the assessing of them, and giving them notice of it, in such manner as in the said Ordinance is ap∣pointed. Wee the said Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, doe hereby declare, That if any person or per∣sons who have not contributed at all, or not answerable to their estates; shall before any assessement of them be made, and notice thereof left at their houses, according to the said Ordinance, contribute towards the mainte∣nance of the said Army, by loane or otherwise, according to their severall and respective estates, as others well-affected have already done, without evasion or collusion,
every such person so contributing, shall be accepted as do∣ing an acceptable service to the Common-wealth, and be freed from the paiment of all and every taxe and assesse∣ment of him to be made by the Assessors, authorized by the said Ordinance for that purpose; as likewise from all distresses, imprisonment, and other punishments to be in∣flicted by vertue of the said Ordinance, or any addition to, or explanation made of it, for the not paying of any such assessement: And hereof all such Assessors and Collectors are hereby required to take notice. And for this end, it is ordered by the said Lords and Commons, that this Declaration be forthwith printed and published. Joh. Brown Cler. Parliament. FINIS.
