D567 R37715 17007615 105731
A DECLARATION CONCERNING Colonel Henry Martin, Colonel Robert Lilburn, Colonel Downs, Colonel Temple, Colonel Waite, Mr. Smith, And Mr. Carew Esq; Who sate as Judges on the life of Our late martyr'd Soveraign King CHARLES; With a Charge and Impeachment of their Trayte∣rous and dangerous Proceedings, against His Majesties Loyal Subjects; And the Committing of them to the Custody of that worthy and faithful Sir John Robinson, Knight and Baronet, His Majesties Lieutenant of the Tower of LONDON. As also, a Discovery of their Treasonable Designs with those two perfidious Hannibals, Collonel John Barkstead, AND Collonel John Hewson. London, Printed for George Horton, 1660.
Etched by S. Allen KEY TO THE ENGRAVING BY S. BELLIN AFTER J. BRIDGES PICTURE REPRESENTING CHARLES THE FIRST AFTER PARTING WITH HIS CHILDREN. Portraits of the King, The Princess Elizabeth, Duke of Gloucester, Bishop Juon, Guards, Troopers of the Parliament SIZE OF THE PLATE 185 INCHES BY 21 PRICE OF PRINTS £ 1.1.0. PROOFS £ 1.11.6. BEFORE LETTERS £ 3 3 0. Published by Mary Parkes 22. Golden Square London 1th Fbruary 1841
A Declaration OF Col. Martin, and the rest of the Prisoners in the Tower of London. THere is not any thing in the Universe deserves less to be a Member of it, than a self seeking Man, who unconcern'd in the Publick Good, regards only his pri∣vate Interest. The World unwillingly contributes to his maintenance; and Nature less abhors a Va∣cuum, then that any place should be filled by Sub∣jects so empty of desert He is a savage Creature in the midst of civil People, not deserving to be born of others, as not caring to live but for himself. Such were those ho sate as Judges on the life of his lat
Majesty, pretending nothing more than Liberty and Freedom. Indeed, it is a truth so manifest, and not to be dissembled, that never yet was there a Ty∣rant, but pretended to be a Saviour to the People: Liberty, Conscience, a Glorious Nation, The Good Old Cause, and such specious Names are made use of. These Machiavilian Tricks, and Political Cheats, so often put upon his Majesties good Subjects in these late bleeding ad distracted Kingdoms, have now by the good Hand of Providence awakened Us, and undeceived the People with a sad experi∣ence of the miseries we have subjected our selves to, by a perpetual Itch of reforming, annulling, crea∣ting Laws, and framing New Governments to the model of every Usurper and Tyrants Ambition; And all this under pretence of the Good Old Cause, did divers Colonels of the Army now in happy and safe Custody, assume unto themselues the Name of Supream Authority, acting in a most unjust and ar∣bitrary Way by their own insatiate Wills, and Ty∣rannie of the bloody and persecuting Sword: Wit∣nesse that horrid and most unparallel'd execrable Murder upon our late Martyr'd Soveraign, who not long before that wicked and fatal blow, was reviled mocked, and with indignation spit upon; yet was this gracious King, and Mirrour of Princes, not di∣sturbed
in his precious Soul so much as to tread one foot awry, or to shew the least discontent in His Princely Face; but after Sentence, on the Saturday, having spent that last Sabbath of His on Earth, in holy meditations with his Chaplain, in hearing, reading, and prayer, he trimmed up his celestiall Spouse (his Soul) for her celestial Bridegroom, which he every hour looked for; Nay more, the night approaching▪ he spent the most part thereof in devout prayer, never putting off his Cloaths, praying so sweetly, so fervently, and so charitably, that one of His Enemies confessed, who privately herd Him, That if ever any King had Communion with God on Earth, it was this glorious and martyr'd Prince: The next morning being very desirous to see His Children that were in England, with muh ado they were permitted to go and visit their imprisoned and condemned Father; And his two tender & Princely Babes, the Lady Elizabeth, and the Duke of Glou∣cester, bing come to weep in their Royal Fathers Bosome, the King with a pleasant Countenance & Voice, blessed them and embraced them &c. The young Lady went weeping, not onely tears, but blood and the Duke, like a Dove in the Valley, grieving for the loss of his dear Father; both (as two weaned Lambs out of the Pasture) being bereft of Father and Mother, Brothers and Sisters, were taken by strangers from the Earl of Leice∣ster, and carried to the Isle of Wight, there to be pent up in that Castle, which their Royal Father, by wicked Traytors, had been kept a prisoner.
Well now let us take an account of these Rebel∣lious Brethren, and declare to the World their great Enormities for which they stand committed to the Tower of London: And first we shall begin with that ignoble Schismatick, deboist Lunatick, and disloyall Subject Henry Martin, whose notori∣ous same hath been sufficiently spread over all So∣dom and Gomorrha, and has the character of cou∣rage and abilities, fitting to sit with Betty Blunt, or amongst the greatest kennel of Whores in Crosse∣lane or Bloomsbury. Next comes the two Arch-brethren in iniquity, Col. Waite, and Col. Temple, whose right valiant treacherous and ambitious atchievements are suffi∣ciently made manifest, since the denouncing of that most horrid Sentence for the execrable & bloo∣dy Murder of our late Dread Soveraign and Mar∣tyr'd King CHARLES. Next comes that grnd Champion Col. Robert Lilburn, a great Protectorian, a most implacable Ene∣my against Kingly-Government, and a most inso∣lent Infringer of the Peoples Liberties; one that had more Wit than Honesty, but despised the Good old Law called Magna Charta. A pure Bird of Old Noll's Hatching; and one whose dark and obscure Actions sprung and were delineated from the blind
and preposterous Principles of Col Hewson, who by his base prudence vile and ambitious Wit drew up a thousand perfidious Hannibals to the Royall Exchange, and there slew his poor Brother-Cobler; for which he stands indicted for Murder upon Re∣cord at the Old-Bayley; and in due time may re∣ceive the just Reward of a notorious Traytor. The next are Col, Downs, Mr. Carey, and Mr. Smith, all Birds of the same Feather, and three of the late Kings Tryers; for which they stand impeach∣ed, and committed, in order to the several Misde∣meanours, Rebellions, and Perjuries; And to whom also some others of the same Order are sent to cu∣stody; amongst whom, that worthy Imp Colonel Barkstead (we hear) is one. FINIS.
