D887 15601713 104058
A LEGACIE TO HIS SONNES. Digested into Quadrins. By HENRY DELAUNE. Baudius Virtus decore sat nitet suo, neque Vulgus moratur, pluriumque gratiam, Contenta semet, atque paucioribus. LONDON: Printed for Henry Seile over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1651.
TO PARENTS. THese Precepts (Parents) which Paternall Love Gives to mine Own, and to their profit serve; May no lesse usefull to your Children prove, If you take Care they learn them, and observe. I send 'em You; That Good (if Good) may flow To All, and, Common, may the more be so.
TO THE HONOURABLE and vertuous Lady, THE LADY KATHERINE SHIRLEY. MAdam, To You, whose sublimated Minde, When  Things sink to Mischief, soars to finde The shortest way, to Goodnes; and whose Sage, Sweet, Staid Comport, in th'April of your Age, Is of so high Example, As from whom, The gravest Matrons, that 'ere graced Rome, Might have receiv'd a Copie, and no Shame In th'Imitation; Tis to you I aim, And in more speciall manner dedicate This small Essay: Yet Such, as may instate Those hopefull Scions, whom your fruitfull Wombe Gives to the World, In Vertues, that no Tombe Shall 'ere eclipse. At This you most aspire. And, That so be, (Madam) is the Desire Of Your Ladishps much humble Servant, H: DELAUNE.
TO THE READER. HAd I had (Reader) confidence, To Beg, Tis not unlikely but a Cap and Leg Had gain'd a Verse, or Two, or More; To raise This Pigmie upon Stilts: And by some Praise (How undeserv'd so'ere) have teazed on Thy better Part, to Expectation Of something worth thy Labour. But, in troth, I Love plain Dealing so, as I am loth To put Cheats upon Men. Pray take, thy self, The pains to sift what is Here, Pearl, or Pelf. If Bad; I know, Thou wilt soon make a Tush: If Good; Thou know'st, No good Wine needs a Bush.
THE PERMIT. NOr Momes, nor Criticks, do I, Hence, Avant: All may have fair Accesse; And after chant As to them Best shall seem. What's Good, is Good; And being, So; will, So, be understood By Them that understand: What's otherwise; I leave to be corrected by the Wise.
Errata. In Quadrin 42. line 1. read Ant, for Ape. Q 45. l. 3. r. fare, for face. qu. 75. l. 2. r. semblance. qu. 87. l. 4. r. Praises, for praise: and slanders, for slander. quad. 112. l. 1. r. noise. and l. 2. r. immateriall. qu: 116. l. 3. r. made, for make. qu. 121. l. 4. r. Herostratus. qu. 171. l. 3. at Pray, point; for? qu: 173. l. 3. r. sinks. qu: 183. l. 3. r. have little Flame. qu: 251. l. 2. r. your, for the: and Heaven, for Heav'n.
. OR, A FATHERS LEGACIE TO HIS SONS. 1. SProuts of my Stem, and Deeds of my Defects, (In whom the frailties of our Being reign) When I am gone (for Age my way directs) Let these few Precepts in my stead remain. 2. God, your great Maker, see you duely fear, And daily pray, and praise his holy Name: Who by this Compasse, steadily doth stear, Shuns Rocks of Earthly, and Eternal shame.
3. Be sound in Faith, and in Religion fixt; Gd not to change, nor fangled Fancies own: God doth reject a Worship that is mixt; He must have All, or else he will have None. 4. Honour your Mother, both in Word and Deed; So shall you bring a blessing on your head. Have speciall care, in her old age, to feed Her, her, by whom you have in youth been fed. 5. Have Peace among your selves; Let each provoke Each unto love: Banish all strife and wrong. Faggots, of smallest sticks, are hardly broke. And Cords, of many Twines, are very strong. 6. Implore the blessing of the God of might, Upon each work you set your hand unto: But set your hand to nothing but the right. Pyrate do pray, that they may mischeif do.
7. Think not to scale the sphears, with strain-tear-Eyes; A mimick face, and the long winded Art. Fervent ejaculations catch the skies: God looks not on your Lungs, but on your Heart. 8. Wear no Mausolean outside, of pure zeal, Lin'd with the putrid stuff of Tombs & Graves. A good Mask oft doth a bad face conceal: Many that Saint-it-out within are Knaves. 9. The Magistrates, the Aged, and the Wise, Look you obey, you honour, and attend: These will direct, instruct, and well advise, Your works, your ways, what ere you do intend. 10. Your friend, the poor, and such as are opprest, Respect, relieve, redresse in what you may: The first's a staffe; the second is your Guest; The third may help you when you may decay.
11. Deal squarly with all men; and what you do Maturely promise, see you duely pay: But rash Ingagements are the seeds of Wo; And Vows ill plac'd do ever lead astray. 12. Strive not to please the Most, but still the Best: The vulgar eyes are not so bright and clear. Be, what you should be; on that Basis rest. 'Tis better, to be good, then, to appear. 13. Be neither vainly proud, nor weakly base: If wealth abounds, think not your selves the more. If wants befall, yet let not wants debase. Be still the same in Scarceness, and in Store. 14. Store well your Mind, and then though Fortune rage, Though Time be crosse, though the world storm and tear, You are still rich: and like the Grecian sage, Carry your All about you every where.
15. Have speciall care with whom you do converse, Converse breeds liking, liking likenes makes: He smels of pitch, that hath with pitch cōmerce; Who with sweet odors, of their sent partakes. 16. Be not intic'd to any thing that's ill, Though you were sure that none should it per∣ceive; The supreme Eye doth over-look you still: You may cheat Man; you cannot God deceive. 17. Speak in due time, not rashly, out of course; And speak not much, for too much talk is vain: Let truth and grace still season your discourse, For 'tis a vice to flatter, lye, and fein. 18. Speech is the Index of the Wit and Minde: Silence conceals alike the Wise, and Weak: If prone, to talk, your Nature you do finde, Be sure to learn how you may wisely speak.
19 Get not the habit (by much use) to lie: For truth, at length, will hardly gain belief; He that oft cri'd, A Theef, and no Theef nie, When a Theef came indeed, had no relief. 20 Lies and Deceit, though with a good intent, And to good ends, you may not think to use: These pious frauds are by sound Doctrine shent, Sin, upon no pretence, can plead Excuse. 21 Let prophane Cursings, Oaths, and talk impure, Not touch your Lips with a polluting kiss: Where springs are sound, the streams are ever pure. The mouth's the shop, the heart the storehouse is. 22 Shun as a plague, or any thing that's worse, The lewd embraces of lascivious Dames: For they will breed Consumption in your purse; Rot in your Bones; and Cankers in your Names.
23. Of healthless Healthings hate the boundles cup; The, now, too much, too too much worship'd shrine; Know, 'tis a Circe, by whose fatall sup You are made worse then either Ape or Swine. 24. Gaming and Quarrels have a dismal fate Attending on them; come not neer their stings: The first like sulphur, blowes up an Estate: The last, the life, the soul in question brings. 25. Make still a conscience of the meanest sin: Sin fruitfull is, and one begetteth more. A little Theif, crept at a window in, May, to the great, wide open set your doore. 26. The point of Honour, that true Honour is, Cherish as much, nay rather more then life. But, oh, that point is understood amisse; And fools now bleed for any word of strife.
27. Know, that your life as a rich treasure is, Which you may well, nay you are bound to use In brave Results: But you do much amisse If idly you it squander, and abuse. 28. Your Countrey, Friends, & Kindred have a share As great in you, as in your selves you have: Wrong not their Right; But take a speciall care, By vertuous Deeds, to gain a noble grave. 29. Be, in expence, nor pinching, nor profuse: The golden mean is still the surest path. He lives in want, who, having, makes no use: He dies in want, who wasteth what he hath. 30. Let your Apparel be as may become Your place and person; yet without excesse. But Ape not the fantastick Modes of some She-Hees that wear fix Pedlars in their dresse.
31. Go not to Law, but when strong motives presse; Let some wise Friend the lesser Jars appease: Who thinks all wrongs by Law-suits to redresse, Shall finde the Cure far worse then the Disease. 32. Love Money for its use, not for it self; And that right Prudence too must regulate: Who, above measure, dotes upon that pelf, Hath, beyond Midas, an unhappy fate. 33 Study more to be Good, then Rich, or Great, These two last you must leave, or they will you; The first will place you in a glorious Seat, Of lasting Blisse, and Comforts ever new. 34 Let Prudence guide each Action you intend Of any weight: The want thereof hath brought Many to ruine. Still foresee the end; Tis a fool's part to say, I had not thought.
35 Flie not too low, lest Damps do flag your Wings; Soar not too high, lest the Sun melt your wax: A just course between both a safety brings; Most to be sought for, which each other lacks 36 Dissemble not, for tis a servile Vice: Yet who speaks all he thinks is counted weak. From solid Wisdome take a sound advice, How, when, and where, to be or Mute, or Speak. 37 Lend to a Freind, when he shall stand in need, Out of your purse; But avoid suretiship: If you loose that, you know how much you bleed; This is a leak that often sinks a ship. 38 Shun Idlenes, the Mistris of each ill. Honest Imployment sets the Mind to task. This wears an open face: The other still, Bears a Complexion that requires a Mask.
39 Labour, from education, to receive What Nature hath deni'd you; and is more Then fortune can bestow: which will so cleave, That She, nor Fate can ever make you poor. 40. Beasts passe you much in Body-qualities, The Lyon is more stout, more swift the Hinde; The Horse more strong; Eagles have better Eyes; If you excell, you must excell in Mind. 41. And to the moulding of that too, you may From Beasts have a fit modell; if you read, With a judicious Eye, the trace and way, Wherein Instinct of Nature makes 'em tread. 42. The Ape can teach you industry; The Dove, Mildnes; The Serpent, Prudence; Care, the Dog; Meeknes, the Lamb; The Pelican, true Love; Pure faith, the Turtle: But decline the Hog.
43. If your Imployments, or Desires shall Carry you forth to forrain Climes; be sure So to provide, as not to want. To all Emergent griefs, Money's a present cure. 44. Take along with you, as a speciall Passe, The eye, the front, the back, the mouth, the ear, Of Faulcon, Ape, and Camel, Swine, of Asse, To see, to soothe, to bear, to eat, to hear. 45. Foresight, is emblem'd in the Faulcon; fair Compliance, in the Ape; the Camel quotes, Patience; the Swine, not to be nice in face; The Asse, attention, and retention notes. 46. Let your Comportment, to each one, be such As you may gain their favour, and their love: It is a purchase will not cost you much; And, more then gold, may useful to you prove.
47. Keep all good parts, by exercise, in heart; But, upon none, be too too much intent: We slack the string when we have plai'd our part. The Bowe grows weak that standeth alwayes bent. 48. Good parts are much; yet, if you may, you must, On honest wealth, with a just hand, lay hold. Vertue, through wants, oft grovels in the dust. The Gem more glorious shines, that shines in gold. 49. Have not (as too too many have) an itch Of bringing gold, on a post-horse, to gold: He scarce is honest, that too soon is rich. A fair gradation, a fair name doth hold. 50. Give to Desert, with a wide open hand, Of what you have, and have no pressing need. But Nature's Laws he doth ill understand, That starves himself, and will another feed.
51. The state you have, whether or left, or gain'd, Keep in a modest, not profuse attire: That hand to no lesse merit hath attain'd, That doth preserve, then that wch doth acquire. 52. Be not self-will'd, and do not humour more Your own conceits, then sad & sound advice. He lets in ruine, that doth shut his doore To wholsome counsel, and contemns the wise. 53. Do not the Dog and shadow, imitate; Two Birds in Bush, are lesse then one in Hand: Who, Hopes, to come, buyes with a now-Estate, Doth hardly yet these Morals understand. 54. Run not in debt, by Bond or Merchant Book, So shall you keep your Credit, and Repute: If otherwise you shape your course, then look For scorne, Neglect, a Sergeant, and a Suit.
55. Compute your comings in, and by that square, Set forth your layings out. Go lesse, then more: Who loves to spend, and looks not how to spare, Soon turns himself and houshold out of dore. 56. Let Industry, whilst you have Halcyon dayes, Still with your Teem for food and fuel go. For if you stay till Winter's muddy wayes, You may want Meat and on your fingers blow. 57. When most you rise, then bear the humblest mind; So shall you make a Piramis, a Fort. Where Arrogance sets Pilot to the wind, The Vessell doth but seldome gain a Port. 58. Explode all self-conceit; It doth deprave, The better Judgment, and makes Reason blind: Yet of selfworth 'tis not amiss to have Some modest feeling, to uphold the Mind.
59. Bear not a greater Port then your Estate Will bear; or Calling cals for: Let the rail Of Wisdom hem you in. A dismal fate. Sails in that Ship that carries too much sail. 60. Have setled thoughts, and not a roaving Brain; The rolling Stone can never gather Mosse: Oft to remove, may plead uncertain Gain; But you will find it brings a certain Losse. 61. Avoid Excesse, as well in meat, as drink; So shall you reap much good, much mischeif shun: These two have sent more souls to Charons brink, Then ever yet did either Sword or Gun. 62. Of what God gives to you, give to the Poore Some Dividend, when he comes in your way: Make him not lowd, nor linger at your doore. He doubly gives, that gives without delay.
63. Abound in deeds of charitie; but so As not to sound a Trumpet when you give: Merit is lost where Boasting makes a show; He dies to God, that unto Man will live. 64. Look what you have to do; and do not look Into your neighbours closet, kitchin, shelves. Ardelious heads still learn beyond the book: And striving to finde others, loose themselves. 65. Make not your Tougue the Usher to your wit: And quarter not, within your mouth, your heart Self shafts, shot at our selves, more home do hit: And, more then others, do both wound & smart. 66. The double sconce wherewith wise Nature hath Fenc'd in the Tongue, doth plainly moralize, She must not rove at randome: guide her path So as she may not slip, and you are wise.
67. Let not unrighteous Mammon's sordid love Byas your thoughts to acts unjust, or base: Ill gotten goods do much unluckie prove; The third descent will hardly finde their place. 68. In all transactions be upright and square; Let your word still out-value Bond or Bill. Of him, that's good onely for fear, beware: He wants but an occasion, that hath will. 69. Impart not to a friend, what none should know; Lest that, at length, you strike upon a shelf: How can he think but others may be so, Who is the first that's false unto himself? 70. Secrets, receiv'd, from any friend, in trust, Blaze not abroad, though he become your fo: For your own sakes, if not for his, be just. If he be bad, yet may not you be so.
71. Let vertuous Aemulation's noble flame Burn still (like Vestall fire) in your brest: But banish, banish thence that snaky Dame Envie the hagg, that will not let you rest. 72. Tis Envies Nature ever most to blame Where she finds vertue most. Give her still cause To exercise her spleen. She cannot shame But such as fear her vipers, and her claws. 73. Love goodnes for it self, and all for it, Then be assur'd your Compasse right is set: Who doth this Pole-starr loose, is sure to split His Barque on Rocks that have too many met. 74. Motions to Ill, resist in their first grass, Lest gaining strength they shoot into the Eare Custome to Sin, at length, will make you pass That for a Bat, which was, before, a Bear.
75. You must not only shun the guilt of Ill, But all the remblance of it: For Men's Eyes Judg as they see. If Sheath, or Dagger kill; The end is one. Hee's lost whom Fame decries. 76. Guilt is still dogg'd with Terror, lesse, or much; Let your best Armour be, your Innocence: Should this All crack to peeces, not a touch Of Fear, can touch who hath it for defence. 77. Good turns receiv'd, you must in Marble write: And make a just requital when you can. No greater Brand on any one can light, Then to be counted, An ungratefull Man. 78. Of wrongs receiv'd, do not a Tally keep: Nor charge your Book of Records therewithal. The peacefull Soul doth fetch a quiet sleep. To Give is Well; But to Forgive is All.
79. Be not, as some, that boast the Deeds, and Race Of Ancestors, and yet themselves do flag: No, no; But lead of Vertue such a trace, As may give Cause, to yours, of you to brag. 80. Adorn not more your Body, then your Brain; Lest that this Embleme in your teeth be flung, That you resemble Houses, which remain With empty Garrets, though the Rooms be hung. 81. Admit All to your Courtesie; But Few Into your Councels: And those Few you must Choose by a Rule, that is as Old, as True, Look 'ere you leap; and try before you Trust. 82. Consult a Friend, then Canvasse his Advice: And if, therein, you do self-Ends perceive; Conclude Him One that turns upon a Vice; And will not stick, for profit, to deceive.
83. To make a trial of a Freind, you must Give him, for Secrets, what indeed are None. If He holds stauch, He hath discharg'd his Trust: If not; you take no harm; And he is known. 84. Another way there is. You may pretend Distresse, and wants. If He shall then relieve, His stamp is right: If, To assist, or lend, He frames Excuse; you know what to beleive. 85. If you do mean to have a Freind in store, Be sure to catch him when your Moon is full: For if Men find the Waining at your Doore, They loof it off; and let you lye at hull. 86. When you a wise, and trusty Freind have met, Then, then, indeed, you have a Treasure found: Make much of Him, as your souls Cabinet. Many professe; But very Few are sound.
87. Be Good, and to Applause not vainly move; Nor from Detraction feintly fear a Scarr: Whom a pure Conscience doth, within, approve, Praise can neither make; nor Slander marr. 88. When fawning Gales your well set Course shall fan, Then, then, take heed too too much sail to bear Where Pride and Scorn are Leaders in the Van; Vengeance & Shame do bring up still the Rear. 89. Stains, upon Scarlet, more affect the Eye. Lights set on Steeples further off appear. Look to your ways, if ever mounted high: And know, that Observation still is near. 90 Judges, or Umpires, If in any Cause, Or State, or Choise, at any time shall place you, Regard not Gifts, or Persons; But the Laws. The equal Ballance is the Point wil grace you.
91. Nature, on either side, gives you an Ear; And give an Ear to either side you must: Who Judgement gives, & but one side doth hear, Though He judge justly, is a Judge unjust. 92 Though All have right to Justice; yet the Poore In a more speciall Manner speed away. A Pound is much: A Pin to him is more. He more then half Denies, that doth Delay. 93. Bear not a Spirit, of so mean a Gage, To trample, in Distresse, not on your Fo. The princely Lyon, when he doth ingage, And finds his Rivall fallen, lets him go. 94. Let no accesse of Honours, or of Wealth, (Though to full banks) make you presume, or proud. No Man can be term'd (Happy) till his Death. Many a glorious Sun sets in a Cloud.
95. That female Vice, of Slander, and of Tales, Scorn, as a Shame beneath the pitch of Man: Who makes a practise of it, seldom fails Of a foule Draught, out of a filthy Kan. 96. Do, as you would be done to. Make your Beam Not short on this side, on that other long: Sell, by the Weight you buy; Forge the Stream Of Them will do no Right, & take no Wrong. 97. Be apt to speak the best of every Man: But chiefly of the absent, and the dead. Forbear (though urg'd) to do the ill you can: And ever sleep in a well minded Bed. 98. Go not without your selves to seek Content; You'l find it no where true, but in the Minde. All Pomp and State this vain World can present, Is Dew, and Dust before the Sun and Winde.
99. To test this Truth, He, whom the Est did fear, Dying, ordand his Page should, as a signe, Before his Herse, his Shirt high mounted bear; And cry, Here's all remains of Saladine. 100. So use this World, as not to fix, and place Your Thoughts, and Love upon it's vanities. God, unto Man, gives an erected face, And not to Beasts, To make him mind the skies. 101. The world's a Sea that ever ebs & flows; Where Nothing's fixt, but all things move to change. Lay hold still on the Present; For who knows What next Day's Light may bring of new and strange? 102. Summer is now; the Winter will succeed: The next Day may be foule, though this be fair. Life, thus revolves. Provide against a Need: Trust not a Calm, but for a Storm prepare.
103. When Storms most strain your Barque, more stoutly then Stand to the Helm, if you will safety find. Crosses, and Losses are the Tests of Men. No skill to be a Pilote with the Wind. 104. If Fortune shall upon you fawn and smile, Yet trust her not; and be prepar'd withall: For 'tis her trade and Nature, To Beguil; And oft doth raise, to give the greater fall. 105. I shall not need to instance. Your own eyes Are full of sad examples. Have a Care Not to increase the Number. He is wise That doth (not teach, but) learn how to Be∣ware. 106. Of thriving Ill, think not the Ill the lesse; And, through Events, do not on Actions look: Who still doth judge of Causes, by Successe, Oft blames the Meat, when he should chide the Cook.
107. Level your Thoughts at Honour, by that Square Which bright Desert, not base Sale holdeth forth. They chiefly spur to Buble-title Fair, Who have lesse want of Money, then of Worth. 108. If you, to Honour's Temple, will ascend, You must your Passage make through Vertue's Fane. And, unto that, Humilitie will lend Her leading hand, if you her love do gain. 109. O court the Love of sound Humilitie, All Goodnes springs from her: She, she alone Opens the Gate to blest Eternitie; No surer Base; no firmer Corner-stone. 110. Honour attain'd: Do not your selves deceive, To think that, then, it's Essence fixed lives In your own Vote. Not He that doth Receive Hath it in full dispose; But He that Gives.
111. Honour is but Opinion, of some Worth, For which Men court, and give you place and praise: But if they once leak this Opinion forth, Honour straight sinks, and Scorn doth blast your Bayes. 112. That Cracker, Boasting, which doth make a No se, And, like to Eccho, unmateriall is, Decline with scorn: Much Prattle, little Poise, Hath ever been exploded with a Hisse. 113. Court not the empty Man for his gay Cloaths; For, so, you make an Idol of an Asse. Fear not the roaring Blade; but fear his Oaths: Shoale streams run loud; Deep Rivers mutely passe. 114. Take the Dimensions of a Gallant-Man, Not from big Words, or Looks: But stayd Com∣port Such fight an absent Lyon, that look Wan At a Dog's snarling, or a Gun's report.
115. Let reall Worth, not ranting Gusling, binde Your love to Men, whilest it with them doth dwell. Worth a good Cement is: But when you finde They basely turn it off, bid them Farewell. 116. Be Cautious in all things; But never tie Your Thoughts unto Mistrust. For howsoere 'Tis make the Mother of Securitie; 'Tis still the Daughter, both of Guilt and Fear. 117. Of Ils foreseen, you may, by timely Care, And good take Heed, avert and stop the Fate. Preventing Phisick in a Med'cine rare. Death, not the Doctor comes, that comes too late. 118. When the black Welkin, frō its pregnant womb, Threatens a storm, strike your top-Masts, and Sails. He doth live wel, that can himself entomb From searching Eyes, when Mischeif most pre∣vails.
119. Value Men more for Worth, then Wealth or Race: And scorn not, by the meanest, to be taught: The Jewel may be rich, though plain the Case. Gold is still Gold, by whomsoever brought. 120. Love Vertue wheresoere: But yet explore How fair the Subject, and of what Descent. For Wine, though good, will please the Palate more, When in a Vaze of Gold, or Christal sent. 121. Bravely contend, a lasting Fame, to have. That Fame, I mean, bright Vertue gives to us: Better to sleep in an obscured Grave; Then to survive as an Evastratus. 122. Knowledg is the best purchase you can make; And of that Best, self Knowledge is the Best. Be not like many Travellers, that take Exotick Surveighs, and neglect their Nest.
123. Man, by how much he knows, by so much more He hath God's Image in him. Do not waste Your precious time. Who hath but little store Of Oyl, and much to Do, had need make haste. 124. Much you may know, if that you do not know Too soon you know enough. Know, To discern, No Knowledge yet did 'ere so fully flow, But the most Learned might stil learn, To learn. 125. Knowledge, the more 'tis us'd, the more shines bright: Impart it still, and to instruct be prone. Diffusive Good impares not. You may light. Another's Candle, and not waste your Own. 126. Let not that Day behold a setting Sun, But to the Gaol you have some Progresse made: Who spurs not on, when he hath once begun To run in Vertue's Race, doth retrograde.
127. What any Man may speak, or think of You, You cannot hinder: But 'tis in your Choise, To make what's said, or Thought, or false, or true. Elect the Best; Then Weigh not Thought, or Voice. 128. Mind still to do the Task you have in hand: And ramble not, from thing to thing, like Fools. Heat, at once, many Irons, some must stand; And whilst you anvile One, the Other cools. 129. If, in a Work you have begun, you shall Find Knots, and Rubs; loose neither Heart, nor Hold. More then one stroke must make a Tree to fall: 'Tis Perseverance doth a Task uphold. 130. Be Carefull, not to do the Ill you see, And tax in others; And would have them mend. No greater fault can in a Teacher be, Then to commit, What he doth reprehend.
131. The Friendly Guest, whom you have bid; or came Distress'd for shelter to your House; Have still A Care to treat with Love: For, with lesse Shame, You might have kept him out, then use him ill. 132. Pray for the Blessing of long-running-Days; For, well us'd, so it is. Yet let me tell, That Life's best Measure is not Time, but Praise: He hath liv'd long enough, that hath liv'd well. 133. That which is Good, you must still strive to do; But so to do it, as you do it Well. Nounes, to have Merit, must have Adverbs too. Men may do Good, and yet may go to Hell. 134. Hate Dalliance, for 'tis a Bait to Ill; And oft injects a loose, and wanton Thought. Though it seem sweet, it is a Sweet, To Kill. Who would love Sweet-meats, if they poyson brought?
135. Wanting the Kernel, never Vaunt the Shell: And, Having Worth, do not, as Cyphers, stand. Take value to your selves: Serve not to swell Figures that lean to the sinister Hand. 136. Weigh of each Man the Person, and the Place: Let no rash Anger in your Looks be seen. The Snarlings, and the Venome of the Base, Must rather move your Scorn, then raise your Spleen. 137. Passe by, with Silence, and not seem to see Many Disgusts, that will attend your Life: Unlesse you do, expect not, to be free From daily Jarrs, Distempers, Suits, and Strife. 138. Be not of rash Beleif, to enterta in Malicious Tales 'gainst Friends you long have known. Sift still the Truth. Losse is more swift then Gain. Forts are not rear'd so soon as overthrown.
139. Still at a distance, with Detractors, stand, Those base amphibious Beasts, and Pests of Life, That alwayes fish in troubled Waters; and, Like Salamanders, live in Flames of Strife. 140. If through Misinformations, You have err'd, Or injur'd any; Count it not a shame To give redresse. Right must be still preferr'd. Recanted Ill, can never bring you blame. 141. Learn, Not to learn Back-Racquet Complement; To praise, before; and raile at men, behinde. A forked Tongue is a base Instrument: The Satyr left the Man of double Winde. 142. Do not, like Cocks, on your own Dunghill, Crow; And prove Crest-fallen in another Clime: Order the Musick, of your Actions, so, As, in all parts, to keep both Tune, and Time.
143. Keep still within the Verge of your own Sphear: Let no eccentrick Motion catch your Thought. Comets affright, and Glow-worms scarce appear. Have all you do, to a due scantling brought. 144. Know that al things whatever have their Bounds, And due set Limits, both of Lesse, and More. Who from Them swerves, doth swerve from Ver∣tue; Wounds The Right; and thrusts Decorum out of Dore. 145 Look you so act the good turns you intend, As still good Manner, with good Matter, go. Many a Kine, a good Meal's milk, doth lend; And, with her foot, the Pail doth overthrow. 146. If through Example, or Infirmity, You chance to fall, get up, and scrape your Cloathes. The Best may slip: the Beast alone will lye And wallow in the puddle of his Woes.
147. As you grow more in yeers, more mind your End; And lesse the World; which still strives to de∣ceive. The young may die; the Aged must. Intend The Blisse to come; & not the Bane you leave. 148. The sentenc'd Pris'ner, that, each minute, looks To breathe his last, Who would not think him mad, To talk of Rents, trade, contracts, Bond, or Books? Age, that, Thus, carks, and Cares, is just as Bad. 149. Weigh well each Word you utter: But abstain From Writing much, unlesse your Vein do hit. Words wind away: But Writings do remain As lively Pourtraicts of the Minde and Wit. 150. Do that, to Day, which would be done too late If, till to morrow, you shod let it rest. Again take heed, Not to precipitate, And make, A Now, of what, Anon, is Best,
151. Sift not, by too too deep a scrutinie, Each rise of Scandals, or of Truths with thorns: Coals, blown, will blaze; Neglected, they may die. 'Tis Wisdom oft, To passe by Wrongs & Scorns. 152. From sacred Things keep a purloyning Hand; For, like a Rust they will the Rest consume: The Sacrilegious Eagle brought a Brand, That turn'd her Tree, Nest, Eaglets, into Fume. 153. Do not use Friends, As, basely Many do, Meerly for Steps, and Ladders to their Ends. Which gain'd; Away with Steps, & Ladders too: For what, now, most did help; most, now, offends. 154. Never presume upon, or Wealth, or Might To injure any; For the Meanest may Sometime or help, or hurt. A Mouse did bite The Toyls in twain that did a Lyon stay.
155. Confide not in a Multitude, begot 'Twixt Hydras and Cameleons. If you fail To answer their fond Fancies (as Who not?) He straight cries, Hang; that did, but now, crie, Hail. 156. Presume not, so, on what you undertake, As if you led, Successe, ty'd in a slip. Oft, in its Port, a Barque doth, Shipwrack, make. Many Things happen'twixt the Cup and Lip. 157. Hold still a Hand to help what is amisse. Yet be not vex'd if you shall often find Crosse-grains not to be smoothed: And learn, This, That what you cannot Mend, you must not Mind. 158. Hear all, observe; say little. Silence rows Under a Weather Shore, when Storms increase. He knows enough, although he little knows, That knows but well, how to, Well, hold his peace.
159. When you shall find your selves in any Straight, Let not your Rudder loose, or your Sheat flye. Courage and Prudence are a main Receipt To quell the Qualmes of such a Maladie. 160. Send not a Head of Glass 'gainst Stones to war: For quickly, so, you at a losse will stand. Trust not, at Need, to Friends that absent are: Waters a far cannot quench Flames at hand. 161. Trust, ty'd by faith, discharge with truth & Care; But chiefly that, from dying friends, or dead. Know, 'Tis not more a Sacriledge, To dare Steal Gold, from Altars; then from Tombs the Lead. 162. Collect, each where, (as Bees from Flowers do) The purest Sap, and joyn it to your Hive. Who day by day adds but a Mite, or Two Unto his Store, cannot, at length, but thrive.
163. You must use Reading, as you should use Meat; Surcharge in each doth cloy and Nauseate: He eats to health, that doth by leisure eat; He reads to Profit, that doth Meditate. 164. Let love of Vertue more restrain from Ill, Then any servile fear of Punishment. Where this Last sways, dwels a depraved Will: The First hold forth a Mind to Goodnes bent. 165. Be not deterr'd, by Fear, from what is Good. Be not allur'd, by Hopes, to what is Bad. Carry not forth two faces in a Hood. Keep Word and Work still in one Liv'ry clad. 166. If you have Means, then let an open Hand (Discreetly though) deal Gifts, Rewards, and Fees. Gold is the Monarch that doth all command. 'Tis Wealth, not Worth, that now gains Caps and Knees.
167. Know, & observe, with use; That Bad oft springs, By accident, from Good. Securitie, Breeds Danger; Plentie, Pride; Truth, Hatred brings; Contempt proceeds from Familiaritie. 168. Before you shoot still take a heedful aim: So, ere you speak look to Whom, What, Where, when. Speeches and Shafts, in This, are much the same, No Art (when loose) can bring 'em back agen. 169. Take heed, too oft, bad Lessons to repeat; Lest that, at length, in Ill you learned grow. Not to Ingage, is easier then Retreat. Habits more slowly ebb, then they do flow. 170. If, through neglect of Vice, you find Neglect From Those that court it, Let it be your Glory: Good Men will use another Dialect. Esteem from These in that will fame your Story.
171. When Visitations, from above, are sent For sins, upon your selves, or on the Land; Pout not, but Pray? Repine not, but Repent; Bite not (like Dogs) the Stone, but Blesse the Hand. 172. Think not, when you are spar'd, & others struck With th'angry shafts Heav'n oft to Earth doth send That, because Better, you have better Luck; But that 'tis Mercy shown, That you may mend. 173. If through God's Hand, or the Times Fate and Lot, You fal to wants, such wants can bring no blame. But he that finks by Play, Pipe, Punck, or Pot, Or such, locks Pity out, and lets in Shame. 174. To Want, is bad; To Have is, sometimes, Worse. Wants whet the Wit, and Waken Industry: To Have, is oft of many Sins the Nurse. Leave Wealth deprav'd, for Honest Poverty.
175. Submit to States; For, or for Woe, or Weal, They are ordain'd: And Might still makes the Law: In his Swords Hilt, the fifth Charles wore his Seal, To warn, That where that fail'd, the Blade should aw. 176. Wisely refrain from Things indifferent, At which the Times are apt to take offence. Prudence complies, Where Conscience is not rent. Tis better please our Reason, then our Sence. 177. When Power makes That Bad, Which you think Good, Struggle not with it; For you kick at Thornes. Things, as they are, are not still understood: Lyons may say, That Foxes Ears are Hornes. 178. Power is like a Sturdy Storm, whose Rage Rends, & roots up resisting Okes; when Weak, And Yeelding Reeds stand firm. Betimely Sage: And learn this Rule, Tis better Bend, then Break.
179. Of Prince, or State, under whose aw you live, 'Tis hard to talk and a Dilemma shun. For, Tis to Flatter, if you Praises give: If you find fault, You into Danger run. 180. When you are well, have not an itch, To change. Never forsake an old friend, for a New. Shun the resort of Them that loosely range. Be Fair, to All: Familiar, but with Few. 181. Converse most with your Betters; Men of brain Still bring some Feathers to emplume your Nest: And you more Credit, from a Meeting, gain, Where you the Meanest are, then Where the Best. 182. If by your Wits you be constrain'd to live, Get, if you may, Imployments to your Minde: But rather take such Lots as Time will give, Then to Court Fortune, and Cast Fame behind.
183. To do that which is Honest, never Shame, Though it be sometimes much beneath your Sphear. Glow-worms have Light, though they little Flame: And when the Night's most Dark, most bright appear. 184. Be with your selves, at home; Live not apart. (For To be Here, and There, at once, may hold) Man is not where his Body is, But Heart. We still find Misers with their Bags of Gold. 185. If you do mean, the Rich Man, to define, Look not on Coffers, Garners, Sellars, Store: But look on Him that can himself confine. He's only Rich, that doth not covet More. 186. Where you have smarted once, next time take heed; The Scalded Dog shuns to be serv'd the same. The Wise once May: The Fool that twice doth bleed, Of his last Wound, doth give himself the blame.
187. Seek not, by slubbring slights, to undermine, Or supplant Any; By much lesse a Friend. Who, of such Stuffe, makes Stairs to his Designe, Oft fals himself that way he did ascend. 188. Look oft within a Glass, (for that advice Wise Socrates unto his Scholers gave). If you be Fair; foule not that Fair, with Vice: If you be Foule; from Vertue Beauty have. 189. Both Eat, & Drink, when Thirst & Hunger crave; For these two mainly 'gainst weak Nature fight: But when, Enough, to quell them Both, you have, Seek not for Sawce to stir up Appetite. 190. Aim where you mean to hit, but aim aright; Lest that by Chance you hurt the Standers by. Shafts shot at randome, may to Mischeif light. Look thrice about, before you once let fly.
191. So Speak, and Do, as you may never Shame To own your Words and Deeds. He gives the Lye To himself basely, and a Coward's Name, That Speaks, or Does, what he must Needs Deny. 192. Let true Discretion (as a Cook does Meat) Set forth, and season all you Do, or Say: Nothing so much inviteth Guests to Eat, As sav'ry Sawce, drest in a cleanly Way. 193. Those whom you have receiv'd into your charge, From Nature's hand, or by some Compact made; To Them, in Love, your Bowels still enlarge. Debts justly due, are justly to be payd. 194. Purchase not Vain & Wanton Pleasures; though You, at an easie rate, may them obtain. Bad Wares never come cheap: 'Tis better throw Away your Money, then to Buy your Bane.
195. Go alwayes arm'd with Christian Fortitude; So no Events shall shake you from your Sphear. When Dangers presse, let not base Fear intrude: He more then once doth Die, that still doth Fear. 196. Life's Date is short; Arts have a long Carreer: Wings to your Feet, Let Active Vertue give. If once you drowse, your Sails do flat, and veer: The more you foster sleep, the lesse you Live. 197. Take Time while Time you have; For Time once lost, No Time, at any Time, hath Time to find: Time will not be recall'd by Care, or Cost; Time can no more be staid, then Sun, & Wind. 198. Keep promis'd Faith; And, Trusted, Trust main∣tain. Play not the Traitors upon any rate. Falshood may thrive; But it still bears a Blain. Such love the Treason, who the Traitor hate.
199. Sowe in good Ground your Seed, & it will grow. Stanch and Sound Vessels will preserve your Wine. Base Dunghill Birds the Pearls, aside, will throw. 'Tis Labour lost, when you do wash a Swine. 200. Consort with Men of your own Stamp, & Strain: For Like to Like is like to Cotton well. Think how absurd it were, and crosse the grain, Colliars and Fullers should together dwell. 201. Weave winning Words when you will Wroth al∣lay. A tart Reply makes Choler rant it higher. He much mistakes, who is of Mind, He may By Chasing Cool; and with Flax fence a Fire. 202. Of Sycophants, Dissemblers, Bawds, Beware, As of pernicious Beasts. The First are there Still, where they are not. And the Second are Not, where they are. The Third are ev'ry Where.
203. Strive, all you may, to Master fond Desire, Which daily doth with settled Reason fight: The Task is hard; so is the Glory higher. No Conquest like to That, of Appetite. 204. Never be rash in Censure. Let the Test Of Time set forth the Worth of ev'ry Man. Things are not still as they appear. 'Tis Best Ere once you Judge, five, or six times, To Scan. 205. If the World on you frowns, smile on your selves: For Frowns, that save, shame Favours that do kil. Who ever sail'd, and 'scaped Rocks and Shelves, But did rejoyce, though he might then be Ill? 206. Help stil where there is Need. Actions have Worth, Or Vilenes from their Objects. Hath he Eyes, Who, Having store of Water, poures it forth Into a River, when his Garden fries?
207. The more you are esteem'd, the more contend To merit that Esteem. Such as assume Aims, onely at a Name, and there will end; Do Die in Fact, and meerly Live in Fume. 208. When you find Fraud furl'd up in Friendship, then Stand to your Arms, & watch to ward a Blow: The Wary Fox that, from the Lyon's Den, Saw no Return, wisely refus'd, To Go. 209. Of Foes you may beware: But with what skill Can Wounds be fenc'd from Kindred false, or Friends? Corrupted Best becomes the Worst of Ill: The brightest Angels made the blackest Feinds. 210. Set such a Value upon reall Good, As due Discretion may therein appear. The Bargains make the Buyers understood: Nothing so Good, but may be bought too Dear.
211. Walk not in Wayes where Danger Centry keeps. Nor By-Paths leading to the House of Shame. Take heed, to wake a Lyon, when he sleeps. And shun to thrust your fingers in the Flame. 212. To help a Freind (so you may safely doe't) In any straight, be ready still, and prone. But Who, Not Mad, out of Another's Foot Will pluck a Thorn, and thrust it in his Own? 213. Him, whom you mean to Trust, be sure, To Trie; And how, to God, his pulse beats, duly Scan: Faith that is True, dwells with true Pietie: He that playes False with God, will cozen Man. 214. The Heart of Man full of Meanders is; Let not an Outside Glosse bind your Belief. Many do Well, till they can do Amisse. Fitted occasion is that makes a Theef.
215. Divine Astrea is to Heaven Fled. Conscience subsists in a bare Sound and Name. Religion's now by Sence and Fancy led. Gain, and Self-Ends do chiefly play the Game. 216. Have no Contrast with Souls of base Aloy, For you will Sill be Worsted in the End. Bespatt'red all, He needs must go away, Who, or with Mud, or Dunghils doth contend. 217. If oft you finde (as too too oft, you will) At the World's hands, Bad Dealings, & crosse Play; Fret not, or Fume: But use a Gamester's Skill, Out-face the Game; Throw not your Cards away. 218. Run not a Madding with the Uulgar Sort, That take all upon Trust; and wear their Ears, And Eyes, in Others Heads: Canvasse Report; And, with ripe Judgment weigh, both Hopes, and Fears.
219. When you, a Work of any Weight, intend, Rush not on Rashly; But ripe Councel ask. Rightly disposed Mediums Work the End. Who well Begins hath Ended half his Task. 220. In deep Designes, Whereon high Hazard floats, Look, that, With steddy Hand & Heart you stear Be not like skittish Brains, in shallow Boats, Who make, themselves, the Danger which they fear. 221. Weighty Resolves, must not shoot, in a Night, Like Mushrums up; Give'em due time, To grow. But, when full fleg'd, Let'em have speedy flight: Danger's oft Swift, Where Execution's slow. 222. Him, whom you Love, & whom your Love may aw, Admonish gently, when you See him Stray. Know, That, To Lead, is easier then, To Draw: Cauters inflame, But Catapsalms allay.
223. Shun, To be Good, as Hogs and Medlars be, Only when Dead, and Rotten: Merit lyes, When whilst We live, the Hand & Heart are free. What Miser breathes but leaves All, When he Dyes? 224. Fall not, By Ill, within the Lash of Laws: But if, For Good, you suffer, 'Tis no Stain. Brave is a passive Fortitude. The Cause Designes the Malefactor; Nor the Pain. 225. Do not, at any Time, contemn Advice, Which Men of Years and Wisdome forth do reach. He that hath Wealth, consumes it in a Trice, That is Too old, to Learn; Too young, to Teach. 226. When great Estates, to green Heads, do descend; The Juncture, oft, is like, To Flax and Fire. He seldome knows discreetly how to Spend; That never knew The Labour, To acquire.
227. If you may Choose; Then Choose not, To ingage The Freedom You, From God & Nature, hold. Not any Beast, but doth abhor a Cage. Fetters, are Fetters still, though made of Gold. 228. But if the Laws of harsh Necessity, At any Time, shall on You, put a Tie; Let Diligence, Care, and Fidility, Show, That you serve more then to please the Eye. 229. The more your Mind adorned is, the lesse Give Ostentation leave, to make a Show: And like the Wise Philosopher, professe, That all you know, is, That you Nothing know. 230. When you are fixt, let Hospitalitie Give Answer, at your Gate, to such as Call. But, in your Wall's foundation, have an Eye. Your Kitchin be not Wider, then your Hall.
231. Consult your Purse, How it doth sink, or Swell; And let that Nilus bound out your Expence. Where a lean Barn and a fat Kitchin dwell, The Beggar's Bush is never far from Thence. 232. By prescript Rules, You must your Household guide; Else you will soon put all Things in a Tosse. But, from those Rules, if you, First, start aside, What will They do that share not in the Losse? 233. Be, to your Servants, neither Cheap, nor Stern; The First, Neglect; the Last, will Hatred, draw: Let a discreet mild Distance make'em Learn, Not to presume; nor, too much, stand in aw. 234. As, of your Court, they are; so, sometimes too, They may be of your Councell: But take heed How, with your Secrets, they have much to do. Oft a false Servant makes his Master bleed.
235. The single State, so it be pure, is Best: Yet, full of Honour is the Marri'd Life. Matches, for Vertue, not for Wealth, are Blest. 'Tis Better want a Portion, then a Wife. 236. When, By wise Choise, not by Wild Fancy, led To sacred Hymen, He shall make you see The hopefull Blessings of a happy Bed; Bid Them be such, as I wish You, To be. 237. To give good Rules is Good; But 'tis not all, Unless your selves walk by the Rules you give. What, Words have rais'd, Works have soon made to fall. Men, lesse by Precept, then Example, live. 238. If ought, in me (as God knows much there is) Be out of Square; My Charge, as my Desire, Is, That you shun the Track: If That, or This Be Good; 'Tis Good, To imitate your Sire.
239. Actions of Vertue, of what kinde so ere, Pursue, embrace, and with all Might advance: Who hath such Props, to bear him, needs noe fear The Counter-buffs of either Time, or Chance. 240. Of what is Bad, and yet allures the Sense, Have none at all, or curb your fond Desire. Eternall Blisse crowns Vertuous Abstinence: When loose Fruition fries in quenchles Fire. 241. Build not assured Hopes and of long Winde, On This, both short and fickle, Term of Life: He, that hath other Eyes, is sadly Blinde; And doth, as sadly, meet the Sisters Knife. 242. Early set forth to your Eternall Race: Th'Ascent is steep & craggy you must climbe. God, at all times, hath promis'd Sinners Grace, If they repent: But He ne'r promis'd Time.
243. Cheat not you selves, as Most, Who then prepare For Death, when Life is almost turn'd to Fume. One Theef was sav'd, that no Man might despair: And but one Theef, that no Man might presume. 244. The Life of Man is but a Breath, a Blast, A Tale, a Dream, a Buble: Therefore Count Each Day you live, as of your Life the Last; And put not off, To make up your Account. 245. How Many hath the Morn beheld, To rise, In their Youth's Prime, as glorious as the Sun; Who (like a flower Cropt) have had their Eyes Clos'd up, by Death, before the Day was done? 246. Poison, a Knife, a Pistol, Thousands more Sad Instruments set Periods to our Fates. Nature lets in, to Life, but at one Dore; But, To go out, Death opens Many Gates.
247. Do at not on Life, What hath it that can please? Some few false Joyes: But of true Sorrows Store. Tis but a Clog, a Prison, a Disease; By how much longer 'tis, 'tis, So, the more. 248. That Death is horrid, is a Thing Untrue; Be not affraid; She but a Vizard Wears: That once remov'd, She hath a lovely Hue. The Child is laught at that a Vizard fears. 249. Nature Expects a Death, by Law of Sin. Our Longest dayes unravell, like a Clue. Make not this World your Palace, But your Inn: The Reck'ning Pay, and bid your Host Adue. 250. Do as that Prince, of Whom We read in Story, Who day by day did meditate his End. If you be good; A good Memento mori Will keep you so: If Bad, 'twill make you Mend.
251. In all the Course of your Life's Pilgrimage, So on the Load-Star (Heav'n) cast your Eye, As not to Shame your Parts upon the Stage: Nor (when your Exit comes) repine To Die. 252. Now may the glorious Triple, Unitie, That Made, Redeem'd, and Sanctifies us all, So guide, preserve, and in all puritie Bind up your Souls, that you may never fall. 253. May You, O May you, with all Graces fill'd, As your Dayes grow, in Goodnes so increase, That, your Thred spun, & your last Glass distill'd, You may all reign in Everlasting Peace. FINIS.
To CRITICKS. MEthod is wanting, Here, Youle say; 'Tis true: And needs must wanting be; since the whole Clue Consists of sev'rall Ends: Which who shall knit, In one smooth knotles Line, must have more Wit And Skill, Then I. Method, I must confesse, Is of especiall use; and gives a dresse Of Comelines. But Matters whose each Part Little Coheres with other, to this Art Submit not much: Such, Miscellanies are; And of Such, chiefly This: Wherein a Care Is mostly taken, You may cull, from Hence, Quadrin, by Quadrin, and not marr the Sense. And though, in their Disposall, I might show Something of Order: Tis enough, To Know, That the main Scope whereat my Thoughts do flie, Is, To teach, Well to Live; And Well to die.
THE PENITENT CHRISTIAN HIS METAMORPHOSIS. By H: DELAUNE. In nova, mutatas deformes dicere Formas Corpora, fert Animus, pretioso Sanguine Christi. LONDON: Printed for Henry Seile over against St. Dun∣stan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1651.
THE DEDICATION. TO You, Whom a true Sense, of What you are, And would not be, invites to a Desire To be Such, as you are not; Do I spare (To you alone.) This Coal of Sacred Fire. Whose Heat, I wish, may warm you So, As This, Here, may become your Metamorphosis.
To OVID. OVid, confesse Thy Metamorphosis (Though choisely rare) comes mainly short of This. Thine makes Men Beasts: This turns Beasts into Men. Thine makes Men die: This makes Men live agen. I blame Thee not; For, Herein, lyes the Ods, This know; but One; and Thine knew many Gods. This One, moves All: Thine could not see, nor go. This One is true: But None of Thine were so. By how much, then, Truth beyond Falshood is, By so much (Ovid) Thine comes short of This.
THE CHRISTIAN METAMORPHOSIS. 1. MOst glorious Essence, In whose sight The Angels bright, And Saints dare scarce appear, Thou art so Holy: How then may Worms, Ashes, Clay Adventure To draw near? 2. Ido Confesse, with contrite Heart, I have no Part, By Right, in any Good: For, as I was conceiv'd in sin, And born therein, In sin I still have stood.
3. And to that Ill, which Nature brought, Deed, Word, and Thought Have added more, and more: Commission and Omission reign In Me; these Twain Have heaped up the Store. 4. He that can ballance, in his Hand, The Sea, and Land, Count Atomes, Starrs, and Times: He, He alone, the Weight can tell, And reckon well, The Number of my Crimes. 5. If He, that oweth but a Mite, By Law and Right, Must to a Dungeon go: Oh then In what a Case is He, Let Any See, That doth a Million ow?
6. Such is my Debt; Nay ten times more Is on my Score; And Whips and Tortures be Prepar'd, in the grim Jaylor's Hands, Who roughly Stands Ready to Seize on Me. 7. I have no Means the Debt to pay; Or run away From Hell's wide open Gate. What shall I do? To whom shall I My Self apply For Help, in this Estate? 8. Shall I to Saints, and Angels go, To Cure my Wo, And ease my Pain and grief? Alas! They blush, and Sorrow too At what I do; But can give no Relief.
9. The Aid of Princes, States, and Kings, And such like Things, It is in vain to crave. For Each of them, as well as I, Is doom'd, To Die: And None, himself, can save. 10. Whither, Oh whither then shall I For Succour flie? Ay me, most wretched Wight! The griesly Fiends, with Iron teeth, Hook'd hands and feet; Come on, with main and might. 11. Hold, hold; Hands off: I do descry Mount Calvary, That much contemned Place: But, unto Me, in this strong Strife, A Hill of Life; And onely Seat of Grace.
12. And, there, behold, rais'd upon high, I do espie That ever blessed Crosse: Which unto Men not doubly born, Is mock and scorn, Strife, Scandall, Dung, and Drosse. 13. Upon it hangs that Holy One, Who can alone Whole Worlds of Sins deface. See, how with stretched Arms he stands, Gor'd Feet and Hands, Poore Clients to embrace. 14. Stand farther off, Accursed Crew, In spight of You, I'le, thither, haste and hie: Faith, and Repentance, come along, And make me strong, Till, at his Feet, I lie.
15. O thou, that wert, ere Time began, Moon Wax, or Wan, Sun Shine, or Stare appear: Ere Fire, Water, Air, or Earth, By refin'd Birth, Knew Day, Week, Month, or Year. 16. Thou, Thou, that art the only Word, That Made, Staid, Stir'd The huge Materiall, Out of the which, by wise Dispose, Thou did'st Compose This goodly Mighty All. 17. Thou, Thou (I say) Who, God above, Did'st Man so Love, As for his only Sake, Thou would'st thy glorious Throne forgo, To come below, And his frail Nature take.
18. (That as Man's Life, who first had breath, First, Sin, then Death Establisht in their Reign: So might Man's Death, who knew no Ill, Sin, and Death kill, And Life restore again.) 19. Help, Help, O Lord, I humbly crave, And quickly save My Soul from Death, and Hell. See how I am beset: O Pay My Debt, I pray; And all these Haggs repell. 20. One little Drop of thy Dear Blood Can do more good, To wash my Sins away; Then Ganges, Nilus, Euphrates, And such as These, Or the vast Ocean may.
21. Grant it, O grant it, Lord; For, Lo, A Stream doth flow From thy Feet, Hands, and Side: And, till I may attain that Grace, In this blest Place, Thus prostrate, I'le abide. 22. My Suit is gain'd; Up Faith, Go, stand With ready Hand; (But pure, have speciall Care) And, from his Hand, receive it: You Repentance true, Come, and all Things prepare. 23. Bring now, now bring that precious Balme, From the blest Palme Of my dear JESUS sent: Bathe, Bathe me in't, from Head to Foot, And so look to't, As none in vain be spent.
24. Ha! Dare I trust mine Eyes? O strange! What blessed Change Do I both feel, and see? I am become more white then Snow, Just now a Crow: All Terrors vanisht be. 25. The horrid Brood, of Barathrum, That were, Here, come To hurry Me away, Look how they fly; And in Despair, Do tear their hair, That they have lost their Prey. 26. O my Redeemer, For this Grace, In ev'ry Place, I will, for evermore, Set forth, and Magnifie thy Praise, In sacred Layes, And thy great Name adore.
27. And now, led by thy holy Spirit, Roab'd with thy Merit, I'le to the Father go, In full assurance of his Love, And one Suit move, Which he will grant I know. 28. Father, dear Father, For his Sake Who did me take To Mercy, Mercy have: And to the Kingdom of thy Son, When Life is done, Translate my Soul, I crave. FINIS.
A Table shewing the chief Matters contained in the severall Quadrins, as they stand in their Order and Number. THe Introduction or Adresse. Quad: 1 Prayer and Praise to God, and the benefit thereof. q. 2 Soundnesse in Faith, and stedfastness in Religion. q. 3 Honour and Reverence to Parents, brings a blessing. q. 4 Concord and amitie among brethren, addeth strength. q. 5 Invocation of God upon any work we toke in hand. q. 6 Outward shew, and longest prayers not most acceptable to God. q. 7 Against Hipocrisie in Religion. q. 8 Magistrates, the Aged, and Wise to be reverenced; and why. q. 9 Friends, and such as are in distresse to be respected, and relieved. q. 10 Rash Ingagements and Vows not to be run into. q. 11 The best, not the most, are to be pleased. q. 12 To bear a like mind in Prosperitie, and Adversitie. q. 13 The Goods of the Minde are only properly our own. q. 14 Election to be made of persons with whom to converse. q. 15
Not to do Ill, though unseen of Man. q. 16 To speak in due time and season, and how. q. 17 Who is apt to speak much, must learn to speak wisely. q. 18 The habit of lying begets often an unbeleif of the Truth. q. 19 Ill mnst not be done upon any Pretence of Good. q. 20 Against Oaths, and all prophane and impure talk. q. 21 Against the societie of loese Dames, and the Mischiefs thereof. q. 22 Against Drunkenness. q. 23 Against Gaming and Quarrels. q. 24 Conscience is to be made of the meanest sin. q. 25 The Point of Honour to be cherished, but much mistaken by many. q. 26 Life is a rich Treasure, not to be idly wasted. q. 27 Our Countrey, Friends, and Kindred have enterest in us. q. 28 A moderation in Expences, is to be used. q. 29 Apparrell must be fitted to the Person and his place. q. 30 Not to gote Law, but upon pressing Necessity. q. 31 Money onely to be loved for its use, well regulated. q. 32 Goodness more to be sought after, then Riches, or Great∣ness. q. 33 Prudence must be the guide of all our Actions. q. 34 A Medium between the two Extreams in the safest Course. q. 35 Against Dissimnlation. Yet not to speak all we think. q. 36 Against Suretiship. q. 37
Against Idleness. q. 38 Education gives, what Nature and Fortune cannot be∣stow. q. 39 The Excellencie of Beasts above Man, in body qualities. q. 40 The minde of Man may receive some information from Beasts. q. 41 Instances in sundry Brutes to the information of the minde. q. 42 Travel into forrain Countreys not to be undertaken with∣out Means. q. 43 Certain Rules to be observed in Travel. q. 44 The Emblems for Travel explained. q. 45 Fair Comportments gain favour and love. q. 46 Good Parts to be kept in use, but not to be too intent upon any one. q. 47 Wealth very necessarie to the setting forth of Vertue. q. 48 It is not good to be rich too soon. q. 49 We must so feed others, as not to starve our selves. q. 50 To preserve is no lesse vertue then to purchase. q. 51 Against self-will, and self-conceit. q. 52 A Certaintie not to be left for an uncertaintie. q. 53 Against running into Debt. q. 54 Expences must be limited by the Comings in. q. 55 Industrie in Yruth, must provide for Age. q. 56 In greatest Prosperity to be most humble minded. q. 57 Not to have too good, nor yet too mean an opinion of self-worth. q. 58
Not to carry a greater Port then our Estate will bear. q. 59 Ʋnsettledness in Thoughts, and oft removing much pre∣judiciall. q. 60 Against Excesse in Meat and Drink. q. 61 To give something to the Poore of what God gives to us. q. 62 Deeds of Charitie not to be done with ostentation. q. 63 Not to be busie and inquisitive into other mens Affairs. q. 64 The Tongue to be restrained. q. 65 Why Nature hath doubly fenced in the Tongue. q. 66 Base Gain must not byas our Thoughts to unworthy Acti∣ons. q. 67 Ʋprightness in Dealings, and keeping of word recom∣mended. q. 68 What None should know, not to be imparted to a Friend. q. 69 Secrets received in trust, not to be revealed. q. 70 Vertuous Emulation to be followed: and Envy shunned. q. 71 Vertue is still the Butt of Envy. q. 72 Goodnes for it self to be loved, and all for it. q. 73 The first Motions to Evil are to be resisted. q. 74 Ill not onely to be shunned, but all the semblance of it. q. 75 Terror dogs Guilt. Innocence is confident. q. 76 Good turns received are to be had in remembrance. q. 77 No Records to be kept of Injuries received. q. 78
Better give Examples of Vertue, then to boast of our An∣cestors. 79 To take more care of adorning the Brain, then setting forth the Body. 80 Courtesie to be used to All: Councels imparted but to few. q. 81 By the Counsell given, to judge of the Counsellor. q. 82 How to make triall of a Friend. q 83 Another way of triall of a Friend. q. 84 When Friends may best be purchased. q. 85 A true Friend is a rich Treasure. q. 86 Applause and Detraction, neither make, nor marr him, that is Good. q 87 Pride and Scorn bring always Vengeance and Shame. q. 88 Men the more eminent they are, the more their failings are Noted. q. 89 Equal Justice to be distributed without respects. q. 90 A just Judgment given, and but one side heard, makes an unjust Judge. q. 91 The Poore, in Justice, must be dispatched first. q. 92 Not to infult upon any in distresse. q. 93 No Man may be tearmed happy till his Death. q. 94 Against Slanders, and Tale-bearing. q. 95 To deal with others, as we would be dealt with. q. 96 To speak well of all men, but chiefly of the dead, and ab∣sent. q. 97 Solid content consists onely in the Minde. q. 98 Saladine his insinuation of the worlds vanity. q. 99
Our Love and Thoughts not to be fixed on this world, but on Heaven. q. 100 The instabilitie of this world, and of all things in it. q. 101 The Revolutions of Life; and to provide for them. q. 102 Adversitie is the triall of mens spirits. q. 103 Fortune deceitfull, and not to be trusted unto. q. 104 Tis wisdom to be warned by other mens harms. q. 105 Actions not to be judged of, by Events. q. 106 Titles of Honour are to be gained by Merit, not by Mo∣ney. q. 107 Vertue leads to Honour, and Humilitie to Vertue. q. 108 Humilitie opens the Gate to eternall Happiness. q. 109 Honour is in him that giveth, not in him that received it. q. 110 The Definition of Honour. q. 111 Against vain glorious boasting. q. 112 Against Out side Men, and Roarers. q. 113 How to know a gallant Man. q. 114 Worth must Cement our Affections to Men. q. 115 Tis good to be Cautious still, but not mistrustfull. q. 116 Timely prevention is the best Medicine of Evils. q. 117 Privacie in dangerous times most secure. q. 118 Tis no shame to learn, even of the Meanest Man. q. 119
Vertue in a fair and noble Subject pleaseth more. q. 120 Fame, which Vertue bestows, is to be sought after. q. 121 Knowledge of our self is the best Knowledge we can have q. 122 By how much a Man knows, by so much more he hath Gods Image in him. q. 123 A too early opinion of sufficiencie of Knowledge, obstructs the increase. q. 124 Knowledge by imparting it shines more bright. q. 125 Some progresse in Vertue is to be daily made. q. 126 Tis in our power to make Reports of us, either false, or true. q. 127 To end one work, before we undertake another. q. 128 Perseverance brings a work to perfection. q. 129 To commit, what we blame in others, is no little fault. q. 130 A Guest may with lesser shame be kept out, then when admitted, used ill. q. 131 Praise, and not Time, is the best measure of Life. q. 132 That which is Good, must still be done Well. q. 133 Against Wanton Dalliance. q. 134 Emptines must not vant: nor worth be a Cypher. q. 135 Each Man to be weigh'd: and to regulate our anger. q. 136 Tis not good to take alwayes Notice, of what doth offend us. q. 137 Against rashnesse in Belief of Reports, and Tales. q 138 Against Detractors. q. 139
When we have erred 'tis no shame to recant our Error. q. 140 Against Men of double Tongues. q. 141 Not to insult where we are in authority. q. 142 Every one ought to confine himself within his own Bounds. q. 143 All things have due set Limits, of Lesse and More. q. 144 Good Turnes may be marred in their Manner of doing. q. 145 Good Men rise from their falls: the Bad lie still. q. 146 Men in Years must more mind their End, then the World. q. 147 A parallel between a sentenced Prisoner, and a carking aged Man. q. 148 Not to write much, without good abilities. q. 149 Not to procrastinate: or precipitate, but seasonable time to be taken for all things. q. 150 Tis wisdome not to search for what we would not find. q. 151 Against Sacriledg. q. 152 Against such as use Friends to gain their Ends, and af∣terwards neglect them. q. 153 Not to do Injury to Any; For the Meanest may sometimes either help or hurt q. 154 A many headed multitude not to be confided in. q. 155 Nt to presume upon hope of Successe in our undertakings. q. 156 Not to vex when we cannot reform what is a misse. q. 157 Silence, in times of Danger, brings safety. q 158
Not to be fainthearted in Straights and Dangers. q. 159 Not to contest with stranger then our selves: Nor relie upon Friends afar off. q. 160 Promises to the Dead must religiously be performed. q. 161 To better our selves daily in Goodnes and Knowledg. q. 162 How to use reading of Books and Study. q. 163 Love of Vertue, not fear of punishment, must restrain from Ill. q. 164 Of Good and Bad: Work and Word. q. 165 Liberality captivates Observance. q. 166 Ill oft proceeds by accident, from Good. q. 167 Look how to speak, Words cannot be recalled. q. 168 Tis easier not to learn Ill, then to depose the habit of it. q. 169 Such is the praise, as they are that give it. q. 170 Corrections from Heaven must be humbly submitted to. q. 171 Not to presume, but Mend, when Heaven shows mercy to us, q. 172 Wants bring no shame from Gods hand; but from our own Vices they do. q. 173 Tis better sometimes to want, then to abound. q. 174 Authority must be submitted unto. q. 175 Things Indifferent, when they give offence must be ab∣stained from. q. 176 Tis not good nor prudenciall to struggle against Powers. q. 177
Power overthrows most, where it is most opposed: q. 178 Princes and States cannot be talked of without some In∣convenience. q. 179 Against Ficklenes, Change of Friends, and bad Resort. q. 180 The benefit of conversing with ones Betters. q. 181 In the lowest Condition, still to prefer Fame, before For∣tune. q. 182 It is no shame in necessity to do any thing that is honest. q. 183 Tis good to be at home with our selves. q. 184 The definition of the Rich Man. q. 185 Wisedome bewares, where it hath smarted once. q. 186 Against Ʋnderminers and Supplanters. q. 187 Socrates his Counsell to his Schollars touching Vertue. q. 188 Meat and Drink must only be used to sustain Nature, not abused in wantonnes q. 189 Wit and Mirth must be so used, as not to offend. q. 190 Against such as speak or do, what they afterwards deny. q. 191 Discretion is the Salt that Seasons Words and Actions. q. 192 To provide carefully for those whom we have taken in∣to charge. q. 193 No good Penniworth over to be had of bad wares. q. 194 Christian fortitude is a strong Bulwark against Adversi∣tie. q. 295 The Shortnes of Life, and the length of Arts, require an
Active Vertue. q. 196 Time is to be taken hold of whilst it is present. q. 197 Faith and trust not to be broken or defrauded. q. 198 Pearls must not be thrown before Swine. q. 199 Like to like makes the best Consortship. q. 200 Mild words are most proper to allay Anger. q. 201 Against Sycophants, Dissemblers, and Bawds. q. 202 Self-conquest, is the greatest victory. q. 203 Against rashness in censure of Men. q. 204 The frowns and disfavours of the World, oft turn to our Good. q. 205 Actions take their qualities of good or bad from their Objects. q. 206 Esteeme must still be a spur to Merit. q. 207 To beware of Fraud under the mask of Friendship. q. 208 Mischief from false Friends or Kindred hardly to be prevented. q. 209 To value every thing with Discretion. q. 210 To shun bad wayes; and not wilfully run into Dangers. q. 211 To assist a Friend, but with due respect to our own Safe∣tie. q. 212 The best ground of Trust, is Piety towards God. q. 213 Fair shews and semblances must not always binde our belief. q. 214 Of Justice, Conscience, Religion: Gain and Self-ends. q. 215 Contest with base persons is still disadvantagious. q. 216 To bear the Worlds Traverses with Patience. q. 217
Not to take things upon trust, as the vulgar doth. q. 218 Mediums rightly disposed work the End. q. 219 Courage and Resolution wade through deep Designes. q. 220 Weightie Resolves must be slow in growth, and speedy in Execution. q. 221 Gentle Admonitions are more prevalent then harsh Re∣proofs. q. 222 Good Deeds are to be done whilest we are living. q. 223 Persecution, for a good Cause, is not shamefull. q. 214 Contempt of sound Advice brings many to ruine. q. 215 He best knows how to spend, that hath sweated in the pur∣chase. q. 216 A Man's Freedom (if possibly) not to be ingaged. q. 227 Fidelitie, &c. in service recommended. q. 228 The more a Man is wise, the lesse he is presumptuous. q. 229 Hospitalitie recommended with due Caution. q. 230 The Beggar's bush is ever near a lean Barn, and a fat Kitchin. q. 231 Families ought to be governed by Rule and Order. q. 232 How Servants ought to be used. q. 233 Servants are not to be much trusted with Secrets. q. 234 Of the single State, Marrige, a Wife and Portion. q. 235 Parents ought to educate their children vertuously. q. 236 Parents must walk in these precepts they give their Chil∣dren. q. 237
Children must imitate what is good iu Parents, and de∣cline what is bad. q. 238 All vertuous Actions are to he imbraced, as solid Props. q. 239 Every thing that is bad is to be avoided, as destructive. q. 240 Not to depend upon the shortnes and uncertainty of this life. q. 241 To begin early our Journey towards Heaven q. 242 Against those who never think of Death, till they be ready to die. q. 243 To account each day our last, and to be prepared for Death. q. 244 Many have risen in perfect strength, and gone to bed to their Graves. q. 245 We come into Life at one Dore, & go out at Many. q. 246 Life not to be doted on, being full of Miseries. q. 247 Death in its self hath nothing that is terrible. q. 248 We ow a Death to Nature by the Law of sin. q. 249 The Continuall Meditation of Death very usefull, and necessary. q. 250 So to live, as not to shame to have lived; Nor repine to Die. q. 251 The blessings of the holy Trinity implored. q. 252 Daily increase of Grace, and eternall happines supplica∣ted. q. 253 FINIS.
