G2164B 99833985 38464
THE LYON DISTURBED Amsterdam by Steven Swart
portrait of Gusman Fonseca GUSMAN FONSECA DE HARO GRAEF van MONTERY Goevernuer Vande Spaensche Nederlanden
THE LYON DISTURBED: Containing An Historicall Relation of the most re∣markable Passages since the beginning of this War, be∣twixt the United Provinces, France, England, Colen, and the Bishop of Munster, unto this present. ANNO 1671. IN January a German Prince wrote unto one of the noblest Prin∣cesses of the Low Countries, admiring that people were so secure in Holland, and not more awakened, because of the great preparations of War by the French and their Creatures, which he verily fore-saw to tend to nothing else, but the invasion of the Netherlands. Cun∣ctaniem maxime Mars odit. In Febr. the Bishop of Munster took on many Officers in service, pretending his own security, which sed the States, as suspecting him, to choose four Horse and five Foot Regiments, appointing their several Places of mustering of them. April 23. The King of France began his journey to the Spanish Nether∣lands, which being in great Pomp and attendance, for to take a view of his Con∣quests, caused not a little fear to the Spaniard. But the Earl of Monterie held a vigilant Eye; yea, England it self would seem to be awakened, securing their Coasts. This State also took care both for Ships at Sea, and strengthening the Garisons on the side of Flanders. In May, when the French Court was at Dunkirk, abundance of French and English Gentry came to and fro for to view the Courts, which by both the Kings were so highly entertained, that it was judged far to surpass common civi∣lity, and somthing else to lurk under it, as afterward did plainly appear. In July, upon the tidings of the sickness of the Duke d' Anjou, the King return∣ed home, and arrived at St. Germain the 17. dito, finding his Son but a little be∣fore departed. In August, beside the continual taking on of Soldiers, and preparing Maga∣sins, an 187. Commissions were sent forth from Paris, beside Expresses to Ger∣many, Genua, Switserland, Savoy, Venice, Luqua, Corsica and Scotland, with other places, for to leavy Regiments, and whole France through, Sea-Equipage was hastened. At which time the States Fleet was before the Wielings, and the
Esquadron of Admiral van Gent was met by the Merlin, commanded by Captain Crow, sent over to fetch the Ambassadrix Temple from the Hague; who making a bravado, would have the whole Esquadron to strike, but as not having suffi∣ciently insisted, he was at his return clapt up in the Tower, which business pro∣ved afterwards the greatest pretence of the English to their breach of the league between us. In September, Soldiers were pressed both in England, Scotland and Yreland, for France, under pretext of recruting Douglas his Regiment, but Indeed of greater concern; it being afterward known that above 12000. were raised for the French service. In Octob. this State perceiving the mighty warlike preparations on every side, and that vast sums of money were sent from France to England, and may English, Scotch and Irish Soldiers were shipt over from Dover to Calis; they resolved also to increase their Militia, and to form a nearer instruction about a Captain General, which had somwhile been in deliberation. In Novemb. The French were yet busie to form Magasins in Luyk, Bon, Nuys, pretending it to be for the Bishop of Colen's service against the City; but in the mean while, abundance of French entred upon divers pretences the Coun∣tries of Overmase & along the Rhyne, which awakened Montrey, to visite and provide the considerable Places of his Government as far as Navagnie: The States also by their Committees visited their Frontiers, and resolved against Spring to set forth a Fleet of 72. Ships, and by their Edicts forbad the bringing in, buying, selling or consumption, of French Wine, Vineger, Paper, Canvas, and Chesnuts. In Decemb. This State perceiving the mighty increase of the French Forces, and their great endeavours to gain England, Spain, Sweden and Germany, on their side; sent a friendly Letter to be delivered by their Ambassador de Groot unto the King, who was kept from his audience the space of a Moneth: but in the mean while, in the Hague on the 17. dito a defensive League was (much against the will of France and England) concluded, betwixt this State and the Ministers of Spain, and afterward was ratified and delivered over on both sides. A LETTER to the King of France. MAy it please your Majesty. After serious consideration of that bounty, which the Kings your Progenitors, have alwayes shewed to this State, we could not without regret give credence unto the reports abroad, that those mighty preparations for War in your Kingdome should be intended against us, which nevertheless by reason of advertisements from all parts, and the management by your State Officers in the Courts of Kings and Princes round about, doth cause us to suspect. We therefore have strictly searched, whither there might not some∣thing in the management of our affairs be found an occasion to move your Majesty, tö decline that friendship, wherewith it hath pleased your Majesty to honour us unto this present; but ha∣ving found nothing to accuse our selves, nor for which we have been reproved by your Majesty, we could not imagine, that the Justice which is exercised in your Kingdome, would permit your Majesty to improve your Armes against your most faithfull and ancient Allies, without any
foregoing manifestation of those difficulties, of which you required reparation. And really, it is so far from us to give any just cause unto your Majesty, or in any thing to come short of the agreement concluded in Paris Decemb. 1662. that we apprehend, that we have observed the same with all strictness and care, and do offer without any delay, to make satisfaction, if through mistake we have come short thereof. It is true, Great Sir, that for some time, there hath not been that Compliance as to Sea affairs and Merchandise; but this was very much to our griefe, neither have we omitted anything that might justly be required of us to prevent, and wholly to remove the troubles that have fallen out on either side, even as we are ready yee to do, and not onely as to that, but in whatsoever may fully testifie to your Majesty our earnest desire, to render unto you the honour and high esteem we are obliged unto as to your Person and Worth, and to give you all the contentment, which you could desire from your best and most affectionate Allies, for the restoring of Trade at Sea, and Traffick in the same way, as it was at our last agreement; yea, in respect of our condescention to your interest, to go to the uttermost, we are able without prejudice to what we stand bound to other Confederates. To be short, Royal Sir, we do not believe to justifie those martial prepares, which are both at Sea and Land, according to the intelligence we daily receive; but we would assure your Majesty, that we do it not with purpose to wrong any, but through extream necessity, and most strong obligations to defend our State and Subjects: and that it shall be our joy to lay down our Armes, when it shall please your Majesty to free us from those troubles, which that War doth bring upon us, that seemeth near approaching on all sides, assuring our selves, we ought not to stand in fear of yours. We have given Commission unto our Ambassador D' Groot, to desire a particular audience as to these things by your Majesty, and to propound them more at large, with addition of whatso∣ever may serve to assure your Majesty of the uprightness of our intents. Here we will break off and not further enlarge; but onely to beg of God to preserve your Majesty. Written in the Hague Decemb. 10. 1671. ANNO 1672. Januar. 2. The Interim agreement between the Bishop and City, was signed at Colen, by which also the City was necessitated to cause Bamphields Regiment being in service of the States, to quit the City, which by reason of many obstru∣ctions, the French urging to muster them, and to take out all of their Nation among them, was retarded untill the 4 of February, but without molestation then departed to Rijnberck, and other Places on the Rhijn, when it manifestly appeared, that the French, Munsters, and Colens designes, were nothing else, but to fall upon us, to which end the Bishop of Colen claimed the delivery of Rijnberck, and the Bishop of Munster the Children of the Earle of Benthem: In the mean while, nothing more noysed than raising of Soldiers, and shipping over of numbers of English to France; and then because of the low waters, many flat boats were made ready here to lay upon the Rivers. Febr. 4. The Ambassador d'Groot first obtained an hearing, to deliver the States Letter to the King: receiving for answer that this Letter was already communicated to him from other Princes, and that about the Spring it would ap∣pear whereto this arming tended, to which end also the 6. dito a Letter was sent to the States in answer as followeth:
MUch endeared Great Friends and Allies: By the Lord d'Groot, your Ambassador Ex∣traordinary to us, we have understood what was on your behalf to be declared to us, and have received out of his hand of Decemb. 10. the Letter ordered by you to be given unto us. We were well pleased in it to find the acknowledgement you make to have received at divers occasions the tokens of the goodness of the Kings our Progenitors: but we could have wished you had not forgotten what hath fallen out since we came to the Crown, the remembrance whereof would have prevented you of judging so sincerely of your transactions to us ward as you doe, in the managing of your affairs since that time, you might have called to mind, that you have not alwayes observed that fidelity, which our ancient confederacy did oblige unto, and that we have not failed in your urgent necessities to afford you requisite assistance, for the preserva∣tion of your State: If so, it may be, the innovation you made in trading since 1662. would not have seemed so excusable unto you as you make it, and which we are willing to referre to the judgment of them that have lesse interest in it than we. If what you acknowledge, be true, that Justice be the rule of our actings, and that you are satisfied in the considering of our under∣takings, then ought you not to be troubled at our taking up of Armes; We grant that since our last journey to Flanders, we have increased our Bands, to improve our foot in the works of our Forts, and to difend our Subjects from danger, threatned by the more than ordinary number of Foot and Horse by you raised, and the Fleet you kept before our Coasts: as also because of im∣portune Addresses of your State Ministers at the Court of most Princes, for to combine with you against our Crown: Wherein we followed the Law of sage providence, and what the defence of our people obliged us to. We would therefore let you know, that we will go forward with our arming, both at Sea and Land, and when it shall be brought to that height, we have proposed to do, we shall so improve, as we shall think becoming our Honour, of which we are bound to give no account to any, assuring our selves, that God will blesse our righteous undertakings, and that shall be owned of all Potentates, who have not suffered themselves to be prejudiced by those evill impressions, which now for a long time hath been endeavoured to be done. This was our plea∣sure to give in answer to you Letter, although it was written not so much for us, as to stirre up the Princes against us, in whose Courts it was common, before we had received the same. We pray God, very dear great Friends and Allies, to keep you in his holy protection. Written at St. Germein de Laye. 6. Januar. 1672. Your good Friend and Ally, LOUIS. LE TELLIER. Was subscribed Under it, 8. Dito, The Ambassador Downing, who some dayes had been in the Hague, made his publick Entrance, but little satisfaction was taken as to himself, and not much exspected from his negotiation. About this time, the Lords, of Ameron∣gen went to the Elector of Brandenburg, and of Brasser to the Princes of Lunen∣burgh, for to treat with them about supplies of Auxiliary Troups. In France much people were now gathered, and the Militia was to be increa∣sed to an 180000 of which 14. a 15. thousand were already in the Countries of Luyck and Colen, with much Provision and Ammunition, and a Fleet of 30. Capital Ships made ready to joyn with the English, and continually English and Scotch Soldiers were shipt over to France, while in England they were gathering a Regiment of 2400. fighting men, for the Duke of Monmouth, who with them and much Gentry went unto the French service, they also hastened to set forward a Fleet in England, to which end the King to get money, shut up the Exchequer,
portrait of Willem Hendrick de III WILLEM HENDRICK DE III by de gratie Godts. PRINCE van ORANIE erf Stadthonder Cap: Gen: van Holl: Zeel: etc:
not permitting any moneys to be reimboursed to the Merchants, which was a great hinderance to trade, not there onely, but in most places also. Febr. 4. The Ambassador Downing had his farewell audience, declaring that forasmuch as he could not obtain an answer to his memorial & iterated instances about striking the Flag, he was ordered to return home. Although the State had divers times proffered to give due satisfaction, in case all pretences were brought in to be together treated on: which also the said States by their Letter had signi∣fied to the King: but Downing protested to have expresse order to treat of no∣thing, before satisfaction was made about the Flag, which the States declining he returned home, and soon after his return was put into the Tower, and depri∣ved of some of his Places of honour, the cause not being discovered▪ onely it was given out that he came back before he had order: although afterward it appeared that the agreement betwixt France and England was fully concluded, and sub∣scribed the 12. dito, so that it seemeth this was onely done to abuse us. 9. Dito, The States of Holland took on Officers for 8. Regiments of Horse, and 5. on Foot, and the 12. dito by provision for two more: which choice of Officers was pro rato also made in the other Provinces. In France, Patents were given out for 20000. Foot, and 6000. Horse more: The Bishops of Colen and Munster also gathered Forces amain. England hastened their Fleet under the Duke of York Admiral: Here also they neglected nothing which might hasten their Fleet. 25. Dito, After infinite consultations and disputes, at length his Highness was appointed Captain General over the Forces of the State, but with all possible restrictions, an Oath being taken of him, that he might never seek to be Stat-holder of any of the Provinces, nor accept of it, if he should be desired to it. Hereupon his Highness treated the Deputies of Knighthood and Cities of Holland with a Royal Feast, March 1. March 4. The frost, which this Winter was very long, now ceasing, here hap∣pily arrived a great and exceeding rich Fleet of Merchandise, with their Con∣voyes, having laid long at the Isle of Wight, fearing they might have been there arrested. 14. Dito, The Ambassador Meerman was sent to England, for to prevent, if possible, the breach feared, of which there was some hopes, because the Ships were suffered without any molestation to depart from the Isle of Wight, and the Embargo of their Ships in England was made nul; and especially because many English and Scotch Ships obtained Pas for Holland: On the other hand the mighty preparations made both in England and France, promised but little good to come from these overtures for peace; the rather because our Ambassador be∣ing come thither, was certified, there was little appearance thereof, it now being too late, which perhaps if had come sooner might have been attained. 20. Dito, Digby declared in France, that by reason of Downings mistake▪ his Master the King of England, would be forced to begin the work two moneths before it was intended, and it easily deserveth credit, that it was not their design to declare themselves so soon, so many Ships having so lately obtained Pasport for Holland, and the season of the year not yet fit for a Field expedition.
22. Dito, the Smirna's Messina's, and Mallaga's Convoy, returning with 50. Ships richly laden, among which also were five Convoyers from Gales, to whom the Convoy from Lisbon adjoned, being 20. in number, by a Catch from Zealand in the Chanel were warned, not to sail into any of the English Havens, or to trust their Ships, whereupon they also made all things ready for defence: & the very same night 4. English Ships appeared, shooting but without Bullet, but soon after, 12. more, who fired with shot lustily on ours, continuing all the next day, and the day after, being reinforced with other Ships, they fell upon the Mer∣chant Men; but were so saluted, that with their battered Ships and many slain, they were constrained to return home, paying dearly for their prey taken, viz. one Smirna's, one Messina's, with two other Ships of small value, all the rest getting safe into our Harbors, being a wonderfull providence of God, thus gently to awaken us, seeing the whole Fleet was in danger to have fallen into their hands, or we might have been warned with a greater disaster. And though the King by this unexpected and unjust attacque, did manifest what his purpose was, yet would they seem to colour it upon pretence of unwillingnesse to strike, and to have satisfaction by constraint; But they were Enemies in heart, as our foregoing observations do sufficiently declare, especially the Kings Declaration of War, following hereupon the 29. dito. His Majesties Declaration against the States General of the United Provinces of the Low-Countreys. Charles R. WE have been alwayes so zealous for the Quiet of Christendom, and so carefull not to in∣vade any other Kingdome or State, that We hope the World will do Us the Justice to believe, that it is nothing but inevitable necessity forceth Us to the resolution of taking up Armes. Immediately upon Our Restauration to Our Crowns, the first work We undertook, was the establishing of Peace, and the setling a good Correspondence between Us and Our Neighbours; and in particular, Our care was, to conclude a strict League with the States General of the United Provinces, upon such equal Terms, as would certainly not have been broken, if any obligations could have kept them within the bounds of Friendship or Justice. This League was maintained inviolable on Our part. But in the year 1664. we were stirred up by the Complaints of Our People, and the unanimous Vote of Both Our Houses of Parliament, finding it a vain attempt to endeavour the prosperity of Our Kingdoms by peace∣able wayes at home, whilst Our Subjects were still exposed to the Injuries and Oppressions of those States abroad. That whole Summer was spent in Negotiations and endeavours on Our side, to bring them to reasonable Terms, which notwithstanding all We could do, proved at length ineffectual: for the more we pursued them with friendly Propositions, the more obstinately they kept off from agree∣ing with us. Upon this ensued the War in the year 1665. and continued to the year 1667. in all which time Our Victories and their Losses were memorable enough, to put them in mind of being more faithfull to their Leagues for the future. But in stead of that, the Peace was no sooner made, but they returned to their usual custom of breaking Articles, and supplanting Our Trade. For
fortifications BON fortifications LEGNIGH fortifications KERPEN
portrait of Karel de II KAREL DE II by de Gratie Godts KONINCK van GROOT BRITTANIE
instances, The States were particularly engaged in an Article of the Treaty or Breda, to send Commissioner to Us at London, about the Regulation of our Trade in the East-Indies; But they were so far from doing it upon that obligation, that when We sent over Our Ambassadour to put them in mind of it, he could not in three years time get from them any satisfaction in the material Points, nor a forbearance of the wrongs which Our Subjects received in those parts. In the West-Indies hey went a little further; For by an Article in the same Treaty, we were to restore Surinam into their hands, and by Articles upon the place confirmed by that Treaty, that they were to give Liberty to all Our Subjects in that Colony, to Transport them∣selves and their Estates into any other of Our Plantations. In pursuance of this Agreement, We delivered up the Place, and yet they detained all Our men in it; onely Major Banister they sent away prisoner, for but desiring to remove according to the Articles. Our Ambassadour complaining of this behaviour, after two years sollicitation, obtained an Order for the perfor∣mance of those Articles: But when We sent Commissioner, and two Shipt to bring Our Men away, the Hollanders (according to their former practice in the business of Poleroon for above fourty years together) sent private Orders contradictory to those they had owned to Us in Pu∣blick; and so the onely effect of Our Commissioners journey thither, was to bring away some few of the poorest of our Subjects, and the Prayers and Cryes of the Most considerable and weal∣thiest of them, for relief out of that Captivity. After this, We made Our Complaints by Our Letter in August last to the States General, wherein We desired an Order to their Governours there, for the full observance of those Articles; yet to this time We could never receive one word of answer or satisfaction. But it is no wonder that they venture at these Outrages upon Our Subjects in remote parts, when they dare be so bold with Our Royal Person, and the Honour of this Nation so near Us, as in their own Countrey, there being scarce a Town within their Territories that is not filled with abusive Pictures, and false Historical Medals and Pillars; some of which have been ex∣posed to the publick view by command of the States themselves, and in the very time when we were joyned with them in united Councels for the support of the Triple League; and the Peace of Christendom. This alone were cause sufficient for Our displeasure, and the resentment of all Our Subjects. But We are urged to it by considerations yet nearer to Us, then what onely re∣lates to our Self; the Safety of Our Trade, upon which the wealth and prosperity of our People depends, the preservation of them abroad from violence and oppression, and the Hollanders da∣ring to affront us almost within Our very Ports, are the things which move Our just Indigna∣tion against them. The Right of the Flagg is so ancient, that it was one of the first Prerogatives of Our Royal Predecessors, and ought to be the last from which this Kingdom should ever depart. It was never questioned, and it was expresly acknowledged in the Treaty at Breda; and yet this last Summer it was not onely violated by their Commanders at Sea, and that violation afterwards justified at the Hague, but it was also represented by them in most Courts of Christendom as ridiculous for Us to demand. An ungratefull Insolence! That they should contend with Us about the Dominion of these Seas, who even in the Reign of Our Royal Father, thought it an Obligation to be permitted to Fish in them, by taking of Licenses, and for a Tribute; and who owe their being now in a condition of making this Dispute, to the Protection of Our Ancestors, and the Valour and Bloud of their Subjects. Notwithstanding all these provocations, We patiently exspected Satisfaction, not being wil∣ling to expose the Peace of Christendom for Our particular resentments, whilest they ceased not on their parts to endeavour to provoke the most Christian King against Us; of which they thought themselves so secure, that for above these Twelve months their Ministers here have threatned Us with it. At length, hearing nothing from them, We sent another Ambassador to them, who after se∣veral
pressing Memorials in Our Name, could receive no Answer, till after he had declared his Revocation. Then they offered a Paper to this effect, That in this Conjuncture they would con∣descend to Strike to Us, if We would assist them against the French; but upon conditiön, that it should never be taken for a President hereafter to their prejudice. Since the return of Our said Ambassador, They have sent an Extraordinary One to Us, who in a most extraordinary manner has given Us to understand, That he can offer us no Satisfa∣ction till he hath sent back to his Masters. Wherefore, despairing now of any good effect of a further Treaty, We are compelled to take up Arms in Defence of the Ancient Prerogative of Our Crowns, and the Glory, and Safety of Our Kingdoms; And We put Our Trust in God, that He will give us His Assistance in this Our just Undertaking, since We had no way left to defend Our People from the Artifice of that Na∣tion in Peace, but by the Valour of Our Subjects in War. We have therefore thought fit to Declare, and do hereby Declare, That We will prosecute War both by Sea and Land against the States General of the United Provinces, and all their Sub∣jects and Inhabitants. Hereby enjoyning Our most dear and entirely beloved Brother the Duke of York Our High Admiral, Our Lieutenants of Our several Counties, Governors of Our Forts and Garrisons, and all other Officers and Soldiers under them by Sea and Land, to oppose all the attempts of the States General of the United Provinces, or their Subjects, and to do, and execute all Acts of hostility in the prosecution of this War against the said States General of the United Provinces, their Vassals, Subjects, and Inhabitants; Willing and Requiring all Our Subjects to take notice of the same, Whom We henceforth straightly forbid, on pain of Death, to hold any Correspondence or Communication with the said States General, or their Subjects, (those only excepted who are necessitated thereunto for the withdrawing their Persons and Estates out of the United Provinces) And because there are remaining in our Kingdoms many Subjects of the States General of the United Provinces, We do Declare, and give Our Royal Word, that all such of the Dutch Nation, as shall demean themselves dutifully towards Us, and not correspond with Our Enemies shall be safe in their Persons and Estates, and free from all mo∣lestation and trouble of any kind. And further We do Declare, That if any of the Low-Countrey Subjects, either out of Affe∣ction to Us, or Our Government, or because of the Oppression they meet with at home, shall come into Our Kingdoms, they shall be by Us protected in their Persons and Estates. And whereas We are engaged by a Treaty to support the Peace made at Aix la Chappelle, We do finally Declare, That notwithstanding the prosecution of this War; We will maintain the true Intent and Scope of the said Treaty, and that in all the Alliances, which We have or shall make in the progress of this War, We have and will take care, to preserve the Ends thereof in∣violable, unless provoked to the contrary. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 17. day of March, in the 24. year of Our Reign, 1672. This was published in London the 7. April, and the very same day the French King Pro∣claimed War against this State; which afterward was also done by the Bishop of Mun∣ster. The frivolous reasons and idle pretences, I referre to the judgement of the Reader, it being sufficient barely to mention them.
portrait of Louis de Bourbon de XIIII LOUIS DE BOURBON DE XIIII by de gratie Godts. KONINCK van VRANCKRYCK. en Navarre etc:
The Declaration of the King of France, by which his Majesty after resolution to make War upon the States of Holland, forbiddeth all Correspondence or Trading with them. 6. April 1672. By the King. The dissatisfaction his Majesty hath had in the management of the States General of the United Provinces some years since, in their actings toward him; and it being come to that passe, that his Majesty can no longer but with stain to his honour connive at the unworthinesse acted against him by such manner of doing, which so little agreeth with the great obligations, wherewith his Majesty and the Kings his Predecessors, have so liberaly filled up the measure unto them: so that his Majesty hath declared, and doth declare by these presents signed by his own hand, that he hath arrested and fully resolved to make war with the said States General of the United Provinces, both by Sea and Land. To this end, his Majesty commandeth all his Subjects, Vassals, and Servants to fall upon the Hollanders; and hath, & doth forbid them from hence forward to hold any Correspondence, Trade or Intelligence with them upon pain of Death. And his Majesty to this end hath henceforward revoked, and doth revoke, all Permission, Pasports, Safegards or Free-passes, which either by himself or his Deputies, or other his Officers, may have been granted contrary to these, and ac∣counts the same as null and of no worth, forbidding all and everyone, who ever they be, to have any regard unto them. And his Majesty commandeth and appointeth the Lord Earl of Vermandois, Great-Master, Head and Superintendent General of the Navigation and Commerce of this Kingdom; The Marshàls of France; the Governors and Lieutenants General for his Majesty in his Provinces and Armies, The Field-Marshàls, Colonels, chief Officers, Captains, Heads and Leaders of his Soldiers whither Horse or Foot, French or Strangers, and all other Officers whom it may con∣cern, that they cause the Contents hereof to be executed every one in his Place throughout their command and Jurisdiction, for such is his Majesties pleasure, who willeth that these shall be published and affixed in all his Cities, and Sea-Coast Towns, and in all Havens and other Places of his Kingdom, where it shall be requisite, that none may pretend ignorance hereof. Acted in the Castle of Versailles the 6. April 1672. Signed Louis, and yet lower Le Tellier. It is ordered, that Charles Canto, sworn Herald of the King, shall Proclaim and cause to be affixed in all places of this City, Suburbs, Provostships and Markgraefships of Paris, where need shall require this Ordinance of the King of the 6. of this present moneth and year, that no ignorance be pretended. Signed De la Reinie. Read and proclaimed at the sound of Trumpet, together by affixion in all the common and ex∣traordinary Cross-streets and Suburbs of Paris, by me Charles Canto, Ordinary sworn Herald of the King in the said City, Provostships and Markgraefships of Paris, in proclaiming where∣of I was accompanied with five Trumpetters, viz. Prosme Trousson, Endime du Bos, sworn Trumpetters of this King, and three more, on Thursday the 7. April 1672. Subscribed CANTO. Now it was high time to hasten all warlike preparations, the Ambassadors of the States the Lord Meerman, and D'Groot, returning from England and France, re infecta; and the Generals being chosen both of the French and our Armies.
The Generals of the French Army. The Army of the King. nsieur the Duke of Orleans, Gene-Mralissimo. arshal de Turenne, Captain Ge∣neral. Earl of Soisons, Marquis de Rochefort. Earl of Lude, Earl or Gadaigne, Duke de la Favillades Earl de Lorge; Lieutenants General. Chevalier de Loraine, Marquis de Genlis, Martinet, de Montal, Field-marshals. The Army of the Peince of Conde. Marshal d'Humieres, de Bellefonds, Captains General. Foucault, de St. Arbre, Earl de Guiche, Lieutenants General. Earl du Plessis, du Nogent, Magalotti, Field-marshals. The Army of the Marshal de Crequi. Mons. de Nancre, Lieutenant General. Earl de Vaubrun, Monsieur du Plessis, Field-marshals. Duke of Luxenburgh, General of the Army of the Confederates. Mons. de la Valiere, Field-marshal. Mons. le Brest, Field-marshal towards Catalonia. Mons. d'Elbeuf, General of a Body at the Sea-side. The King before the setting forth of the Army, having commanded the Mar∣shals d'Humieres, Bellefonds and Crequi, that if the Armies come to be conjoy∣ned, or in absence of the Princes of the Bloud, they should for the time of this expedition submit to the orders of Turenne, which they excusing were put by in disgrace, and Chamely, Gadaigne and Navaile, put in their room, but after some time the former were replaced, yet with promise of submission to Turenne. Generals of the Army of the States of the United Provinces. The Prince of Orange, Captain Ge∣neral. Prince Maurits, and the Lord Wirts, Field-marshals. The Rijngrave Senior, General of the Horse. The Lord of Zuilestein, General of the Foot. The Earl of Hornes, General of the Artillery. John van Welderen, Earl of Nassau, Lieutenant Generals of the Horse. Alua, The Earl Koningsmarck, Lieu∣tenants Generals of the Foot. Mombas, Steenhuyse, Commissary Generals of the Horse. Kirpatrick, the Earl of Stirum, Ser∣geant Majors. Afterward was chosen for the third Field-marshal, the Earl of Waldeck and Kuylenburg. The 13. dito, The State proclaimed a general fast against the 4. of May; and so forwards to be kept upon every first Wednesday of the Month; and it was re∣solved to encrease the Militia, both for the State in general, as also for Holland in
particular, of which capitulations were formed to raise them of outlandish Sol∣diers: Also some of our Foot Regiments were sent over to the Spaniards, to be in Garrison, in Namen, Valencijn, and other places, and on the other hand to us came some Regiments of Spanish Horse, of which some Companies were sent to Mastricht. 16. dito, The Elector of Colen published a Manifest (though his whole Coun∣try of Colen and Luyck was already a Magasin for France,) that he would main∣tain neutrality, forbidding the acting of any hostility against the Subject of this State, unto all in his Dominion; but in truth, this was onely done for to de∣ceive us. 26. dito, Was the time appointed for the sitting of the Parliament at London, which instantly was prorogued without doing of any thing, to the 30. of Octob. and in place of Ayscue deceased, Sr. Joseph Jordan was placed jin the Fleet, to which the Duke of York went the 29. dito, to set to Sea: and the Duke of Mon∣mouth prepared himself for France, there to command those of the English Na¦tion, and in special his own Regiment in the Kings Army, and soon after de∣parted with many of the Gentry. 27. dito, After that the French King had for a long time been raising an huge Host, which was esteemed to amount to above 300000. men, which reckoning all the Pages, Lacquyes, Coachmen, Carriers, Boyes, Krauwels, Pioniers, Wo∣men, Trosses and Whores, might well be, for the Muster-rowles amounted to 146270. Soldiers at least, with Mortepaise, huge Artillery with an incredible quantity of Provision and Ammonition, both at home and in diverse Magasins abroad. Thus his Majesty, having committed the management of the King∣dom to the Queen and her Council, departed from Paris the 27. of April with the Marshal Turenne; three dayes together being spent in transporting of the Treine and Bagage, for which were imployed 40000. Horses, with a sufficient number of Carts and waggons. The 28. dito, the Duke Orleans with many Grandees followed, who took their march with his Majesty by Nantevil, Soi∣sons, Lion, Rocroy, and the 5. of May arrived at Charleroy. The same day the Prince of Conde passed by la Ferte and Reims, and arrived the 30. at Sedan, for to come down with an Army apart: In the mean while, much shipping came down the Moesel and Rijne, for to bring all manner of necessaries past Colen unto their Magasin at Nuys, great numbers also longst the Mase to Luyck, and the Troups which lay spread abroad thoughout the Country of Colen, were now called together to Nuys, and the Bishop of Munster also gathered his Sol∣diery together, preparing for the Field. May the 6. at Colen on the Spree a treaty of mutual assistance and defence was concluded between Brandenburg and the Lord of Amerongen, in which Bran∣denburg engaged to raise for the defence of this State 20000. men, to wit, 12000. Foot, and eight thousand Horse, to which Holland was to furnish the half of the levie mony, viz. 120000. Rijcksdollers, and for the pay of every Regiment consisting of 500. Horse, 4977. Rijcksdollers to stulvers, and every Regi∣ment of Foot, consisting of a 1000. 4214. Rijcksdollers 4. stuivers per Month, besides for the Artillery and other inevitable expences 14841. Rijcks∣dollers per Month, being together 79543. Rijcksdollers per Month, with pro∣viso
that Brandenburg at his charges should provide 50. pieces, with all the Am∣munition and Artillery thereto belonging, obliging himself 2 months after the receipt of the first payment, to have his Army in readiness; There was a Treaty also with the Princes of Lunenburg, but without effect: in the mean while our Army gathered near the Yssel about Doesburg, and the retrenchment alongst the Yssel was compleated, whither the Prince with most of the chief Comman∣ders came, and the Forts at Staphorst and Rouveen were with all diligence for∣warded, and the Army mustered. 9. dito, The French King having made a review of his Army near Charleroy, sent the Marshal Turenne with 15000. men, 4000. Wagons, and 27. Canons, to march to the great Cassey by Luyck, and Mastricht, and himself followed with the gros of the Army, and on the 11, 12. and 13. dito, having lodged in three se∣veral places of the Spanish bounds, came the 14. dito into the countrey of Luyk, passing near by Navagne, and arrived the 18. dito at Visé, where he stayed, and beset Tongeren with French Soldiers: In the interim, dito 16 the Avantguard under Marshal Turrenne had surrounded, and shot upon Maseyck, requiring them to deliver it up, and nothing, regarding the Luyckish neutrality possessed himself thereof, and Turenne entring it, said that there a Magasin for the King must be erected, and serve for a pas to the Armies, so departing, presently the French fell at work to fortify the Town, demolishing whatever stood in their way. Hereby Mastricht was as good as blockt up, and the rather because Condé came on the other side of Mastricht, with an Army of 35000. men, which was come marching from Sedan through Ardennes, longst the overside of the Mase, so that it seemed, they intended to assault Mastricht; of which there was no great fear, seeing it was well provided with all things necessary, and had a Garrison of 12000. Soldiers, besides the Citizens. 14. dito, Upon the advice that our Fleet was at Sea, which at Schoonevelt yet waited for some of our ships, and that the French Vice Admiral the Earl d'Estré was come to Wight, The English Fleet under the Duke of York made out to Sea, to joyn with them: which had not our Fleet come a little too late might have been prevented, one of them that followed falling in our hands, was sent up to Rotterdam: Our Fleet crossing there about some time, and seeing the Enemies Fleet came not out, returned back to our coasts. 18. dito, The Bishop of Munster desirous to share in the ensuing war, published upon frivolous pretences a Westphalian Declaration of War against this State. Declaration of his Grace the Bishop of Munster against the States of the United Provinces. BE it known, that forasmuch as by intercepted Letters and Persons detained in Prison, and by many other wayes, it is confessed and made evident, that in the United Provinces; many have been induced and misted through mony and great promises of reward to labour by them∣selves and their adherents to corrupt, and by great soms of mony to entice the Servants and Offi∣cers of our Gracious Lord of Munster and Convey, to fire the Forts, Cities, and especially the Ma∣gasins of his Highness, and through such horrid crimes to make the Senses possessors of his Grades Forts and Cities, and to debauch his Soldiers from their oath & duty, having stirred up ellion,
fortifications CHARLEROY fortifications MAESTRIGHT
and revolts by such damnable wayes: yea, have also not feared to conspire against the very life it self of his Grace, committing Crimen Assasinatus against his Graces Person: Which thing also, horrible to relate, hath in his Country, Cities, Forts, Lordships, Towns and Villages been practised, many places set on fire, as verily suspected to have been atchieved by these evill Doers; as hath been confessed and ocularly appeared: So as such horrid actions have scarce ever been perpetrated by Barbarians and Turks. Wherefore his Grace, both in care to his own Per∣son, as also to preserve, asmuch as possible may be his Graces Cities, Forts, Lordships, Towns and Subjects, in the Country from further dammage, doth command most graciously and ear∣nestly, all his High and Low Officers, whiter Civil or Military, all his common Soldiers and Sub∣jects most strictly to take care that none of these incendiaries and traytors be suffered to enter his Grates Dominions, which if any shall presume, to seize upon them, and deliver them to the nearest Garrisons, and whoever shall bring in any one of these, shall have a recompence of 100. Rijcksdollers. But to the end, that hereby other honest and well-meaning people be not hindred to come into his Highnesse Dominions, for to Trade in his Graces Cities and Country; they are required to signifie unto the Commanders and Officers where they first arrive, the cause of their coming, that so they may drive their trade and businesse in his Graces Dominions, having be∣fore obtained a Pas from them. His often before mentioned Grace, doth also command the more carefully and with assurance, to prevent all treachery upon the highest arbitrary, and after con∣viction upon pain of corporal punishment, as also confiscation of Goods, that no man of what state or quality soever within his Jurisdiction, thither Ecclesiastical or Laick, Civil or Milita∣ry person, do without consent granted correspond, with any of the said Netherlands, by inter∣change of Letters or Commerce, so as all trading with them is, from hence forward unlawfull: and that no man may pretend ignorance thereby to excuse himself, these presents, shall in all our Cities, Towns, Lordships and Villages, as also in all Garrisons and elsewhere be publickly from the Pulpit proclaimed, and afterward in usual Places affixed, that every one may have know∣ledge hereof, witnesse our own hand and printed secret Seal. Subscribed at his residence in Ludgersburg the 18. May 1672. Christoff. Bernhardt. Locus Sigilli. 18. dito, Here happily arrived the Fleet from St. Ubal about 80. sail, of which some that went towards the East Sea were taken by Scotch Capers. The same dito, the States did of their meer bounty set at liberty all the detained English and Scotch ships, which about the time of the breach and some while after were with pas from the Duke of York come hither, to the number of 70. Merchant men and more, allowing them freely to depart with ships and lading, which the States by their last agreement were not bound to do, but might according to the Law of Arms have made them prize. The day following the States chose Officers for the raising of four Regiments, and gave the Commander Stockheim an order to raise one Regiment more; also a part of our Foot, that had been quartered in the Spanish Netherland returned home, and the rest followed soon after. All Holland through the Pesants were armed and mustered, and 1375. of them were sent from North-Holland to the Yssel. 18. dito, in open field the King of France held a great Councel of War with all his High Officers, and concluded to keep Mastricht blockt up with 20000. men, and to march with the gros of the Army to the Rijn; Whereupon Condé the 21. dito brake up with his Army, passing through Gulicker-land, directly to Keysers-Weert, where the 27. and 28. dito he passed the
Rijn over a Bridge of ships, and came the 1. of June before Wesel. Turenne with his Army followed him, and passing the Maes, marched directly to Nuys, and from thence by the west-side of the Rijn, Orsoy and Rijnberg, to Burick, where he arrived the 1. June. The King with his Army followed the 27. May, and 31. dito arrived near Nuys, where the Elector of Colen had made great pre∣paration to entertain his Majesty, but the King excusing it, hastened his march directly to Orsoy and Rijnberg, where he came 1. June. 1. June, with break of day Orsoy and Rijnberg were surrounded by the King himself, Wesel by the Prince of Condé, and Burick which lay over against it, by Turenne: At the same time the Bishop of Munster with his Troups, and some of Colens brake up from Benthem, and falling into Twente, surrounded the City Grol. But of these more in particular. Orsoy, though a little, yet a strong City, having 700. Soldiers in it, for defence whereof more then 2000. had been needfull, was by the King summoned June 1. but the Councel of War, consisting of the Colonel Moulet Commander, Major Koerbeeck, and 7. Captains with their under Officers, would not listen, resol∣ving to defend the City, wherefore the King was necessitated to plant his Ca∣non, which the besieged seeing and fearing the great power of the Enemy, as ha∣ving no hope of succour, they began to despair, and to think upon good condi∣tions of agreement, and were constrained to deliver up themselves the 3. dito, to the discretion of the King, onely reserving Life and Goods, which accord the French not regarding, miserably abused the Garrison high and low, keeping them as prisoners of war. Rijnberg, gallantly and strongly fortified, and with great charge and labor re∣paired and furnished with all things needfull but Soldiers, there being but about 1000. within, which were scarce half enough to defend the Counterscharps, had for Governour the Colonel Bassen, and for his Assistent Colonel d'Ossery, be∣sides 15. Captains. The City besieged the first of June, as hath been said, saw on the 3. the King himself, after the taking of Orsoy before their Wall. The same day the Governour with Ossery suffered the Baron of Hovelig Mathematician of the Bishop of Straatsburg to enter the City, who pretended that he heard, that those within would set the City on fire, desiring that it might bestayed; but in the mean while, he secretly held correspondence with Ossery, taking an exact view of the fortifications. The 4. dito a Trumpetter came with a letter from the King, desiring Duke de Duras under hostages might come into the City, which the Go∣vernour and Ossery consented to; the 5. dito he came offering good conditions, among other things, that the Garrison should freely depart to Mastricht, if the City were given up, and so he returned after he had done his proposition, it be∣ing late, & was conducted by Ossory as far as the outworks, all things being shew∣ed unto him. The 6. dito, the Councel of War, which hither to had not any thing made known unto them, was called together, and the propositions of Duras laid before them, when as the Captains through their cowardly advice, and the Go∣vernour by his actions carried themselves not much better than Rogues, deliver∣ing over unto the Enemy such a strong City, without almost any attempt done upon it, and no defence by it, this being chiefly effected by the management of that cursed Traytor the Colonel d'Ossery. The Garrison was conducted to Ma∣stricht,
fortifications WEESEL fortifications BURICK
fortifications RYNBERCK fortifications ORSOY
but they not standing in need of such Heros, clapt all the Officers, except such as escaped by flight, into prison. Burick, right over against Wesel, being a small Fortresse with 5. bulwarks, and ruined fortification, no reparation a long time having been done to it, three hun∣dred soldiers onely in it, also unprovided of Canons and Ammunition, having for their Governour Peckendam, with 3. Captains, was also besieged the 1. of June by Turenne who (notwithstanding the besieged, considering their bad pro∣vision, defended themselves couragiously) advanced so strongly, that on June 3. early in the morning, he approached the Mote, and had almost half fild it up, having made all things ready to storm, and resolved to attempt it the next morn∣ing with 12000. men: The besieged having notice hereof, and finding them∣selves unable to resist so great force, made their composition with Turenne, and forthwith delivered up the keyes to him, upon which the French entred, and lit∣tle regarding their agreement, spoyled the Garrison and kept the Soldiers priso∣ners of war; Turenne not willing to loose time, removes with his Army further downward, and besieged the City Rees. Wesel, That known Fortresse and Magasin of all manner of provision, but with a sad ruined fortification, and unserviceable Canon on their Walls, their Lipper-Scons much decayed, was also surrounded by Condé on the 1. of June. Assoon as notice came of the Enemies approach, they began with might and main to repair the fortification, but could Burgers and Soldiers together scarce raise their Brestwork to a sufficient height, having onely planted here and there some Pallisades without being beset with Baskets; however they within did shoot stoutly the first and second day, the French not answering them, who were very busie in delving and making all things ready for the Battery, which the besieged might have more invaded, if their peeces had had more force: and while they thus manfully gave fire out of Burick and Wesel, they in the Lipper Scons did no∣thing, having but 2. peeces, and both unserviceable, and standing upon a Bul∣wark not compleated, having no Pallisados yet erected, which encouraging the enemy, they 400. only in the night about the 2. and 3. of June fell upon it, sur∣prising the Watch, and quietly coming over the Wall with out let, that corner laying flat open, thus they marched to the Head-Watch, who thus surprised, they within presently cryed for quarter, which was granted them, al∣though they should all have been kept prisoners, but being two Companies, and almost as strong as their assaulters, the most of them got out of the Schans into the City, one or two, who stood upon their defence, being shot to death. Thus this Schans was lost, and Wesels very heart vein pricked, which the 3. dito caused so great tumult in the City, that the Citizens forsook the Wall and carried home their Armes, and would watch no more, They especially the Women and Sol∣diers wives requiring the delivery up of the City, and threatning sword and hal∣ter to whomsoever withstand it, yea they were about to lay hold on the Gover∣nour by one whom they had bedaubed with soap for this purpose, intending to murder him, crying out, that seeing they had treacherously quitted the Scons, and the Canon in it, now made serviceable to shoot upon the City, nothing was to be expected, but it should be made a Theater of murder. The Garrison consist∣ing of about 15. or 1600. men was to defend the outworks and those within to∣gether;
therefore the Captains and Councel of War desired to deliberate about it, but Colonel van Zanten, who by reason of the absence of the Governour Jucchen, had the command, would not admit the same, but onely treated with Major Copes, and some Colonels and Captains as were not well affected, and they appointed, that the Soldiery should quit the outworks, and onely keep the Posts within, which the Citizens would no longer do. The same day in the af∣ternoon, the Burgomasters sent a messenger to the Head-watch, to be let out with a Letter to Condé, which the Captain that had the watch would not con∣sent unto, without expresse order from the Commander, who agreeing thereto, the messenger went and returned the same back again with two Trumpetterss from Condé. The 4. dito, the Burgomasters rode in a Coach with a Voeder of Rhinish-wine to the Prince, the Women stirred up thereto by some of the treacherous Captains, crying for an accord. In the mean while, the Comman∣der, Major, Colonels, Hoenderbeeek, Nieuland, van Haesten, together with the Captains Inyosta and Mengers, without calling together the Councel of War, or giving notice to the other Officers, deputed Nieuland and Mengers to go to the French Army, and privately to make agreement for the Garrison. Oh treachery of faithless and effeminate Rulers and Military Officers! Thus the 5. dito, being Easter day, the subscription was concluded to be done, and the civil and military Governours were early to be with the Prince upon pain of nullity, no sooner the Commander was come, but Condé layes a paper before him, which he must forthwith, after reading, subscribe, without a word contradicting: which also he underwrit, blotting out in that treacherous act the Lustre of the State, and also herewith early before day the Enemies had the keyes delivered up to them, and before eight of the clock the Garrison was shut up as prisoners of war in the Church, to whom, after a review of them, the Capitulation was read. Thus this invincible City was in the space of 4. dayes forced without any force, leaving so royal a Magasin full of Ammunition, with above a 100000. pound powder in hands of the enemy, of which, as is reported the Commissary Koeck was a principal instrument. Rees, being reasonably well fortified, and provided with a sufficient Scons over the Rijn, had a Garrison of 500. men for it self and Scons, This Turenne had blockt up, before the King was Master of Rijnberck, or Condé of Wesel, and no sooner was the Enemy come before it, but the Scons, commaded by Ca∣ptain van der Hoeve was shamefully delivered up by him, who a little before had vanted of wonders he would: The Citizens knew nothing of this, till by the Canon of the Scons turned against the City, they were untimely warned. They within shot furiously, but after the loss of Rijnberck and Wesel being more strongly assaulted, The King sent a Trumpetter to demand the Town, upon which the Councel of War sent Commissioners empowred to treat with him: The Army being yet encamped about Wesel, and the Capitulation was signed in form as with them of Wesel, that the Garrison should be 6. weeks prisoners, and after have liberty of ransome. So this City also was delivered up. Emmerick not so strong as the other, seeing it would now be their turn, and not willing to prostitute the Soldiers to Massacre, or to be shut up prisoners in the Church, seeing for want of men and slight fortifications, there was the least
fortifications REES fortifications GROLL
appearance to defend the City, the Garrison retreated in time to Schenkescons, at least to preserve that, as being a Bulwark to tho State, so leaving Emmerick open for the French, who now with their three Armies came down upon them, the King having appointed Mr. d'Estrade Governour of the Cities already con∣quered upon the Rhyne. When the French began to act, the Bishop of Munster also after a kind of De∣claration of War soon sent diverse Troups into Twente, who seizing on the small Towns Otmarschen, Enschede, Almelo, Goor, Delden, and leaving Sauvegard in them, the Bishop with his Army and some Troups of the Elector of Colen sat down before the strong City Groll, which without much resistance gave up themselves to the Bishop the 9. of June, whereupon the small Towns thereabout were forsaken of their Garrisons, so as Herenberg and Borkelo also fell into the hands of the Bishop. This was the unhappy succes of the beginning of June on the Land, in which more Cities and Fortresses were lost, than there passed dayes. In the mean while a battle fought was at Sea. After that our Fleet had often been in sight of the English, expecting they would fall upon us, having the wind of us, yet continually turned off from us, to them; thereupon, having intelligence the English lay in Soulbay, our Fleet with a favourable winde on our approach made to them, and the 7. June early in the morning got sight of the Enemy, and both parties ranged themselves into three Esquadrons, and began the fight at 8. a clock; The French who bore the white Flag, engaging with the Esquadron of Banckert, under whom were the Zeelan∣ders and Frieses: The Duke of York bearing the red Flag, with that of the Ad∣miral de Ruyter, and the blue Flag under Montague with that of van Gent. The fight was furious, and dured most part of the day; the advantage regaining on the side of the States. About noon, the whole French Esquadron was cut off from the English Fleet, and followed by Banckert, and of both the Enemies Fleets 4 or 5. capital Ships were fired and sunk, under which was Montagues Ship, who himself was drowned, and many persons of quality slain. Of ours onely the Josuah a Ship of middle size was lost, and at the beginning of the fight the Admiral van Gent shot to death. The 8. dito, the English who got the wind of us, were seen above us, sayling that whole day a mile loefwards, without co∣ming to us, and evening turning quite from us, so as on the morrow the 9. dito, the Fleets were wholly out of sight, upon which ours cast Ancre before Walche∣ren. The French had fought little or nothing, but left the English in the brunt, and themselves as soon almost as the Battle was well begun, drew back, and per¦haps they might then have been wholly separated from the English, and their after conjunction hindered, but it may be there was a particular reason, why ours so soon returned upon the Coast of Zeland, which I am not willing at present to enquire into my onely aime being to rehearse the Historie of what passed, and not to make comments upon it: But I return again to the affairs at Land. 9. June, The agreement with Rees no sooner was subscribed, but the Prince of Condé drew his Army to the Yssel-side, and that very day took in Deutecom two mile from Doesburg, which seemed to import, that Condé intended to fall
upon the Yssel: Turenne passed the same day by Cleef with 6000. Horse, as far as Nimwegen, where the Prince of Orange himself then was, and appointed Lieutenant General Welderen for Governour of the place, and in person went into the works, and observed the motion of the enemy: and it is credible, what then was reported, that the French design was to surround Nimwegen, and so on the land side to besiege it; and that Condé woulst endeavour some way or other to break through the Yssel: But forasmuch as then by the treachery of Mombas, opportunity was offered to get into the Betuw, by the Tol-house, the former design was stopped. However it be, Condé diverted his course from Doesburg towards the Tol-house, and Turenne returned from before Nim∣wegen, passing by Cleef to the Kings Army, which then was about Em∣merick. 10. dito, Condé made an assault upon the Tol-house, for to come over the Rhijn, but was repulsed and forced to retire, and cast up Batteries there. The Betuw was betrusted to Johan Barton of Mombas, Commissary General of the horse, having by him two horse Regiments & two of Foot, with a pretended or∣der, that in case the enemy should presson, & he be in danger to be driven back, by which Nimwegen also might be in danger, he rather should in time retire to Nimwegen, and command there: but whatever his order might be, this could not excuse him, for himself acknowledgeth that the Field-marshal Wurts had the 9. dito about evening, sent him a Letter, that his Highness had made van Walde∣ren Governour of Nimwegen; and that he, the said Mombas, therefore was discharged of that care: But that it was his Highness pleasure, that he should take care of the Betuw, and that five Regiment more were a coming to him for that end: But notwithstanding that this was order full enough to him, yet in the morning on the 10. dito, he sent away the Foot, and caused the Canon to be car∣ried from his quarters, so that the Regiment of Horse of Colonel Souteland was onely left to sustain the assault of the enemy, till that Mombas meeting the Re∣giment of Scot with three Companies of Painevin, the rest of the succours by his Highness being countermanded, because of Condé's approach so near Does∣burg, to whom Mombas said that necessity caused him to retire; but yet consi∣dering the enemy now passed the Rhijn did not set upon Souteland, he with these and Colonel van Gent, whom they also met with some Musquettiers, re∣turned, and then forced the enemy again to retire: But forasmuch as Mombas doubted not, but the enemy would the next day passe the River, he would not stand to it, but resolved to quit his Post, and took his way to Arnhem, and from thence to Dieren, where on then 11. dito about 9. of the clock, he came by the Prince of Orange, to the great astonishment of his Highness, who commanded the Lord Wurts thither with 2. Regiments to defend that Post, where he arrived toward evening, but found neither Canon nor entrenchments there. 12. dito, The Prince of Condé accompanied by Turenne, fell early in the morning upon that Post, where Wurts acquitted himself as a gallant Soldier, and made great resistance, but being too weak, that Post through the hellish plot of Mombas was lost, and our Horse pursued by the enemy, who in their flight met with the Regiment of Alua, sent by the Governour of Nimwegen, as well know∣ing what concernment the preservation of the Tol-house was, but they being
fortifications ARNHEM fortifications SCHENCKEN SCHANS
weary and overtoyled with continual marching, were for the most part route, and pursued almost to the gates of Nimwegen, where some of the French Troups also surrounded Knotsenburg. However the enemy did not get into the Betuw without considerable loss, Condé himself with 8. or 10. Dukes, Earls and Lords, being wounded, and the Duke of Longeville, Mons. de Guytry, the Marquis d'Aubusson, Earl of Nogent, du Plessis, Praslin, and other Great ones slain. Before the French were got over, the Tower of the Tol-house, where lay a Sergeant with 18. men, was deserted; but Turenne was no sooner got into the Betuw, but he marched to Aarnhem, part of them running through the Betuw who the 13. dito took Heusden and made spoil thereof, and from thence to Yssel∣oort, shooting all the afternoon upon ours who were in the Veluw, and at night rushed over the Rhijn upon the borders of the Veluw. And thus the 14. dito, being in capacity to shoot upon Aarnhem on both sides, they within the day after, being the 15. dito made an accord early in the morning, which was so hastily done, that the French entred before the Articles were once signed, which also remained un∣signed, forsooth there being no pen and inck at hand. The same day, Turenne was come before Knodsenburg, a strong Scons and reasonably well provided, where some Troups had appeared, but Turenne came not till 8. of the clock at evening, and the day after, the 16. dito in the forenoon was master of it, through a trea∣cherous disorder of a Drummer, and overgreat cowardise of the Governour, without any force done upon it. The Garrison was permitted by Turenne to depart to Groeningen, and then presently from the Scons fired upon Nimwegen, and the same day marched with his Leger to Schenckenscons, the 16. and 17. dito sending some Troups before Thiel, who gave up themselves, and took Sauve∣gard, which also was followed the 19. and 20. dito, by the impregnable Sconses of Voren and St. Andries. It was the 17. dito, that Turenne approached by his Loopgraves, that strong Fort of Schenckenscons, wherein lay 15. Companies, which by a Trumpetter he summoned, and the 18. dito had it delivered up to them: A Scons on which depended the welfare of our Country, sufficiently provided of all things requi∣site, and with a Garrison able to defend it, but commanded by a Rogue, who without the knowledge of the Councel of War had sent away the Outlayers, and demolished the Forts there erected by the Lord Wurts, and so for mony deliver∣ed up that invincible Fortresse. The Bishop of Munster after the conquest of Groll sate not still, but mastered Brevoort, Lochem, and what else was neer about; and on the 14. dito, shewed himself upon the plain of Deventer, to fetch away their beast that were grasing there; but was driven back with losse by the courage of some that issued out of the City upon him: But the 16. dito he came with his whole Army, assist∣ed by those of the Bishop of Colen, to besiege it, The King of France also with the gros of his Army sate down before Doesburg and summoned the same. If these first nine dayes were fatall to our Netherland, the following were no losse; especially, because his Highnesse was necessitated to depart from the Yssel, for Aarnem being conquered, the Veluw lay open to the Enemy, and our Army in danger of being fallen upon on all sides, and utterly to be ruinated, so that his
Highnesse having divided part of the Army, and put them in the Cities on the Yssel under the command of Alua General for Friesland, & brought the greatest Canons with the Ammunition and Provisions into Doesburg, Zutphen, Deven∣ter, he with the rest and lighter field Peeces departed thence, and coming at even∣ing the 15. dito, before Utrecht, the gates were shut upon him, and his followers being wearied and hungry by continual marching night and day, but were con∣strained to lay without the whole night, without any refreshing. His Highnesse desired he might be let in, offering to defend the City, in case they would suffer it to be fortifyed, as need should require, and breaking off what was in the way; which they of Utrecht refused to do, requiring that the Army should lay encamp∣ed without, pretending it would be to the great damage of the Citizens, who would not be burthened by quartering of Soldiers: but at length it was agreed, that the two Regiments of the repartition of Utrecht should be admitted to come in: but the States of Holland judging, that thus doing, they should not be able to maintain that Post, if set upon, resolved for the preservation of Holland to beset their Passes; whereupon the Leger brake up the 17. dito from Utrecht, and set for∣ward to Weesp, Bodegrave, Goverwelle-sluce, Schoonhoven, Gorcum, and afterward also Uythorn, which Posts being now fortifyed, are found sufficient to keep the Enemy out of Holland. The amazement, because of the breaking in of the Enemy into the Betuw, and our Armies retreating was greater than I am able to relate, and the fleeing from all places to Amsterdam was unspeakable, thou∣sands of Waggons and Boats daily came in, all filled with fear and anguish. To this retreat of our Army from Utrecht, they ascribe their damnable delivery up their City, and so would lay that upon others, which their own faithlesness and treachery brought upon themselves. Assoon as the Enemy was possessed of We∣sel, the Great ones began secretly to transport their goods, which the commons perceiving, opposed the same; yea, not without affronting the Magistrates them∣selves, openly crying out to the Burgemasters, you have ruled long enough, it is now our turn, from which tumults no good being to be expected, they sent to the French assoon as Aarnem was taken, and offered their City also to them, de∣siring Safeguard; but they were fain to go farther, for the King yet lay before Does∣burg, thus they went seeking the Enemy, and invited him to come, for 20. En∣glish mile in the round not a Frenchman was to be found; Thus they of Utrecht were waiting for their Enemy, some of them being impatient he stayed so long: They set a Trumpetter upon the Tower, to give notice when the French came, which by sound of Trumpet he did the 18. dito to signify to the City, and so to the whole Army, that the French were come into Utrecht: But it proved a mistake, for those the Trumpetter thought to be the French, were Burgers that had been sent forth, who returning saw no Enemy at all. In the mean while reports were so various, that nothing almost could be credit∣ed, but it was too true, the most of the great ones & Magistrates were gone, many houses and shops shut up, the Citizens in expectation what the Enemy would be pleased to do with them, not knowing whether he would onely send in Safeguard, or come with an Army and take possession, no conditions at all yet being made, all being left to the Kings pleasure; Many were sorry at their heart, and full of fears, but others well concept, as trusting to the civility of the French; who, as
fortifications HINDERDAM fortifications NIEUWE SLUYS fortifications MUY DEN
fortifications GOUDSE SLUYS fortifications NIEWER BRUGH fortifications PAIN ET VIN fortifications WIERICKE
fortifications DEVENTER fortifications DOESBURH fortifications AEN DEN fortifications ISEL
they said, kept promise in other cónquered Cities; and therefore they pityed Amsterdam and other Cities, that dared to set themselves in posture of defence. But little did they dream of the misery hanging over their heads, for they ought to have expected the certain reward of their treachery, by which they were the cause of their own and our destruction, neither will it any whit clear them, to say they were deserted of our Army, seeing they would not be helped, for two Regi∣ments could not do it, and their standing so much upon terms, sufficiently evi∣denced, that this change was aforehand resolved upon by them in power: It is true, most of the Citizens would yet have defended the City, but being in a tu∣multuous way, and trampling under foot the respect of the Magistracy, as a head∣lesse company not to be trusted, they were cause of their own ruin. And put the case they had been forsaken, yet would it not excuse them; for it was not likely that the French would have dared to fall upon Utrecht, being a great City, but not fortifyed, and no place of retreat being near it, where they might be secured. Certain it is, they had no cause to fear as yet, for Condé lay wounded at Emme∣rick, the King was at the Yssel, and Turenne before Nimwegen, far enough from them, gain of time in such occasions being of great concern, as appeared by the stop of the French progress soon after: and besides all this, they should have waited till the French had come, then had been time enough to fall to parly, and make way for as good terms, as they now have, being come in by invita∣tions, for none of the conquered Cities do complain more of the French, than they of Utrecht, and just it is upon them, having dealt more treacherously than any▪ could they not as well have shut the gates against the French, as they did a∣gainst the Prince? The 20. dito, Safeguard from the King came in with two Trumpetters, and soon after a French Garrison: whereupon they presently Capitulate for the whole Province, a thing never heard before, and cause of all subsequent disaster. For hereby Over-Yssel pretended to be cut off from Holland, so follows the example of Utrecht and make Capitulations also, a project also to do the same being made ready in Friesland; yea, Holland it self almost gone, most of the Cities speak of sending for Safeguard, and they in highest place knew no better remedy; all this came from Utrecht, Overyssel following their example, and had not Providence appeared for us in a wonderfull and unexpected way, we had all been delivered up to the fury of the Enemy. The 16. July, the Bishop of Munster came before Deventer, a gallant fortified City provided of all things with a strong garrison of Soldiers, besides 1450. South-Holland Countrymen & resolute Citizens together, making up 10000. able men, all resolved to stand out to the utmost against the Enemy. The Colonel Stecke was Commander in chief over the Garrison, as also Head of the provintial Mi∣litia: He held much communication with the Governour of Coeverden Colo∣nel Boersma, whom his Highness not trusting, had caused to come to Deventer, where he thought, he could do no great hurt. The Enemy marched over the Yssel, where was most convenience behind the hedges of the city gardens, to ap∣proach and plant his morter peeces, out of which the 20. early in the morning he shot into the City with Bombes, doing little or no harm with them, where∣upon the Commander for to satisfie the Citizens, offered to make a sally upon
the Enemy, as also he did, not altogether without successe; yet so purposely ordered, as not to do to much hurt to the Enemy. In the mean while, they continued the Bombes from the overside of the Yssel till the after∣noon, when some of the Magistrates without the knowledge of the Citizens or Garrison, sent a Letter to the Bishop, desiring a cessation of Armes, and safe con∣duct for Committees to go fetch the advice of the Cities Campen and Swol; this was done after that the Bishop the day before had notifyed, that his in∣tention was to joyn Deventer again to the Empire. And the 21. in the morning they sent again a Trumpetter, for cessation of Arms, the Canons sounding too loud in their ears, though they hitherto hast sustained little harm by them. Now they called the sworn Commons, where by the most voyces it was concluded to give over the City, and three were deputed to capitulate, the Citizens and Sol∣diers knowing nothing thereof, save the Governour insligated by that Traytor Boersma. In the mean while, upon pain of death, no man might shoot, and the Soldiers who were on flame to ruine the Enemies approches and Batteries, were not suffered to fall on. Toward evening the agreement was made without the knowledge of the Councel of War, and with a damnable secluding of the Soldie∣ry, who all, the very Pesants included, were by this horrid accord to remain pri∣soners of war, and be shut up in the Churches. The 21. dito, late in the night, the City was possessed by the enemy, none almost knowing thereof, or any necessity pressing thereunto, save onely the treachery of these wicked Guests. 22 dito, It was not enough for Deventer thus to have betrayd it's self, but it would have share also in betraying the rest. They had the 20. dito, seemed to desire the advice of Campen and Swol, but now they would be their advisers, sending a Commissary of the Bishop to them, with two Trumpetters and the Burgemaster Lespiere to Swoll, where after relation of what was past at Deventer, the same Capitulation was offered to them, which conspiracy being smelt by the Colonels Bamphield and Ripperda, they did wisely in time retire out of the City with their Regiments, though unjustly accused of some to have hereby malitiously betray∣ed the same; for here being of the same crue, who without the knowledge of the Militia had betrayed Deventer, these undoubdly should have been served in the same kind, and all have been laid up in the Church, as being before their depar∣tures they sufficiently perceived: for though the remainder were afterward per∣mitted to go out free, it was because they thought it not worth the while to detain so few: as their practise was for the most part where the Garrisons consisted but of few. However Swoll made their agreement full enough, though the sub∣scription were deferred to the morrow after: In the mean while shamefully abu∣sing the name of the States of Over-Yssel, Swoll summons the other Cities of the Province, there to appear with all speed, loosing no time, and to Capitulate for themselves: Whereupon all the Cities and Forts of Over-Yssel were Provin∣tially given up to the Enemy, and the Ommer-scons, with the new retrenchment laying round about in a Moras, was upon this news forsaken by its Garrison. I doubt not, but whoever hears what hath been related, will stand amazed; but this is the real Truth thereof. Though some of these Cities have not blushed to write Apologies, deserving to have been answered with an halter. The Enemy
fortifications SWOL fortifications CAMPEN
fortifications SUTPHEN fortifications DOESBERGH
fortifications SCHANS aut HEEREVEEN fortifications BLESSER BRUGH fortifications STOCKSTER HORN
comes in all hast taking possession of the places given up to him, viz. Swoll, Hat∣tem, Campen, Swart-sluce, Geelmuyen, Hasselt, Blockzijl, Steenwijk, Meppel, Scons the Rouveen, Ommer-scons, yea rusheth into the Kuynder it self; the Territory of the Frieses; and in case he had been in a posture to have marched forward, he would easy have mastered whole Friesland, the General Alua with his Militia being gone as far as Leeuwarden. After the Conquest of Over-Yssel the Province was parted between the head parties, Deventer is allotted to the Elector of Colen, Campen to the French, Swoll to all three together; the rest fell to the Bishop of Munsters share, and so remain to this day. 17. June, The King of France was come before Doesburg, and though there were a reasonable strong Garrison in it, yet without any great resistance, they gave up themselves to the King, who from thence in haste went to Zutphen, ta∣king it in without trouble, though it were also provided reasonably well of all things, and a Garrison in it: In both these Cities the Soldiery and also the Hol∣lands Waart-gelders or Auxiliary Troups, were detained prisoners of war. Thu there being no more to be conquered at the Yssel; the King brake up from thence, and came in Person with his Army the 27. dito past Aarnem hard by Utrecht, encamping himself without the City, and put Garrisons in all the Cities of that Province, as Wijck, Montfoort, Ouwater, Yselsteyn, Amersfoort, and the Gelder Cities, Harderwijck and Elburg; yea, in Woerden it self a City in Hol∣land, and some few coming before Naarden, the dread was so great, that they within cast away their Arms, some swimming over the Mote of the City, leaving it for the French to possess: Muyen also was gone, taken in by fifteen men, but were again driven out: These Successes so transported the French, that some few of them asked the way to Amsterdam, as thinking to take in that also. The King remained in the Leger without Utrecht, & came the 5. July accompanied with Duke d'Orleans, Monmouth, Luxenburg, and other Grandees, to take a view of the Town, being on Horseback, but soon returned out again into the Leger; appointing the Duke of Luxenburg Governour of the City and Pro∣vince, and Stoupa General of the Switzers, Commander of the City. But we will leave the King here a while, Turenne before Nimwegen, and the Bishop of Munster in Over-Yssel; for to take notice, what fell out worth the observation about that time, both in the Politicks and the Militia, and so make progresse in what was acted by the enemy. It was a small thing to loose Cities and Forts, whole Provinces together giving up themselves to the enemy. And though it seemeth ridiculous, that some of the French would know the way to Amsterdam to go and take it in; yet I verily believe, that if at that time 4. or 5000. horse onely had gone forward, Amsterdam it self and thereby Holland; yea, the whole State would have fallen into the ene∣mies hand, so great terrour had seized upon all, & the Regents voyd of Counsel: The Magistrates in their common Councel disputing, whither they should quit all, or endeavour a while to defend themselves: Many pretending that it was im∣possible, as not being provided with necessaries, wherefore their Counsel was in case the Enemy came, to meet him with the Keyes: Others would that Bul∣warks should be erected, bridges broken down; scarce knowing what they said or did, setting many times the cart before the horse. I dread even to think upon
the terrour and astonishment of that time, especially of the 25. June and there about, the most understanding of the Land then being at non-plus: The Pen∣sionary himself, who seldom or never was at a pinch, plucking up his shoulders, and is said to have given no other advice than a good and speedy accommodation with the Enemy, as the onely expedient to be found: In prosecution of which advice three Deputies were suddenly sent for England, and three to the French Leger, of whom the Lord d'Groot was the chief. I know not what instructions they had, but it is said, that they for England had no other Commission, than to learn what the demand of that King was, and that they for the French Leger had full power to treat with the King; that is, to deliver up the Country, for in that conjuncture of time, what else could be expected than an honorable capitulation. But the Province of Zealand, June 29. rejected the reasons alledged by Hol∣land for this Commission, and protested against them, declaring it to be a thing unheard of in the government of these Countries, to make any Plenipotentiaries (without an arrested instruction) to treat with any Potentate, much lesse with an open Enemy; especially when it concerned our Religion, Liberty and the law∣full government of the Land▪ wherefore they disavowed this Commission, as suspicious and of dangerous consequence. The Communalty, now taking notice of these transactions, and seeing the asto∣nishments of the Regents, and the thteatned danger, begin to raise tumults: Others flee where ever they imagine a place of safety to be, transsporting their families, and what was most precious East, West, to France, yea England it self, transporting an inestimable Treasure out of the Country to their extream dan∣ger and damage; the remaining with trembling spirits, at last take up Arms to defend their Country: The Magistracy in diverse Cities being fain, as if they were willing to animate and encourage the rest, to contribute for defence of their Cities, other places in the mean while wholy neglected; but the Posts for Hol∣lands security were beset with Soldiers, and made defensible, the Banks and Dams about Amsterdam opened, the Country set under water, the wayes cut throw, bridges cast down, Trenchments erected, Out-layers brought upon the Rivers, the Wall repaired, Canon brought up, the Watch doubbled, and for secu∣rity of the Citizens, the 29. of June it was published from the Town-house, that the Councel was fully resolved to defend the City to the utmost; and burgers were sent out of the Hague and Rotterdam to the Posts of the Army, and out of other Cities to the Frontiers of Holland, Heusden, Geertruydenburg, Breda, the Klundert, the Briel, &c. But all this could not take away from the disturbed spirits of men, that impression they had taken that many members of the Magi∣stracy were guilty of treason, and held correspondence with the enemy, as often it happens, the bad successe of undertakings is laid to the charge of the managers thereof. June 20. A remarkable example of this impression was seen in the Hague, when the two Sons of the Counceller d'Graaf with two other, coming at even∣ing on the Viverberg, and seeing light where the States of Holland were met, they concluded that the Pensionaris was yet amongst them, who having the greatest hand in the management of affairs, he was judged by many as the grand cause of all our disaster; yea, a very traytor to the Country: Thefore
map of Holland
thought they should do good service to the Land, if they made away with him; so he going home with two Servants, they fell upon him, and wounding him, left him for dead, and went away; but his wounds were not great, but that he soon rose and went home, one of the assassinates Jacob van d'Graaf being taken. At the same time, came four unknown persons to the house of his brother Cor∣nelis de Wit, in Dort, who being the Ruard van Putten, and having been Pleni∣potentiary on the Fleet, was now returned home sickly, whom these persons would speak with, having a like design upon him; but were driven away by some of the City watch. In the mean while, the murmurings of the common people increased against the Magistracy, and in special against the two de Wits, and all that were of their faction, laying to their charge the losse of the Country. Whi∣ther this were so or no, I leave to the judgement of others, this onely I know, of which none are ignorant, that they had the weight of the Government in their hands, directing the resolutions of the State according to their pleasure, and so perhaps may truly be said to be the cause, or at least the Ring-leaders of the reso∣lutions of that time: An extract of a Letter from Zeeland June 25. being very remarkable to this end; viz. That one Nussau Advocate in the Hague, had some dayes past, declared in the Councel of Vlissing with weeping tears, that some of his kindred sitting in the Councel of State and Cities of Holland, had discovered to him, how that Province had formed a Project, after what manner Holland should be delivered up to the French. And another Letter from the Hague dated June 27. This I can say, that within few dayes we shall inevitably be brought under the French yoke: and it is my opinion, that the work hath fully been agreed upon. See, how far we then were come. 25. dito, They of Aardenberg in Vlaenders got tidings, that the French out of their quarters at Cortrijck and thereabouts, had gathered many men for to assault them, at which very time Captain Cauw Commander of Aardenberg, perhaps being not ignorant of the exploit, was gone for Zeeland: Whereupon the Garrison onely consisting of 73. men, and 165. citizens were put into po∣sture by the vigilant direction of Ensign Beeckman, as much as possibly he could. At night about 11. of the clock the French approached being 4000. Horse and Foot, and by a Trumpetter summoned the City, which after refusal they fell up∣on by force; but by the magnanimity of those few within they were so manfully repulsed, that after three hours storming, they were forced with great losse to∣wards the morning to draw off, retiring out of Canon shot: and they of Aarden∣berg the 26. dito, got 60. men for succour with some Ammunition, whereupon the Enemy strengthened with 2000. more fell on again furiously, at one a clock at night, their Foot being driven on by the Horse advancing, (though most man∣fully resisting by them in the City) to the very walls & mastered a Ravelin before the Gate, the Fall-bridge of the inner-gate let down, when happily at that very nick of time Colonel Spindler came to assist them with 150. men, which so in∣creased their courage and strength, that the Enemy was forced again to retire: They of the Enemy who were got into the Raveling being amazed, because of the hot shooting, and of the bridge, which they must passe over, called for quar∣ter, which was not granted before they had cast their weapons from them, and drawing up the outmost Fall-bridge, they were brought in, the rest escaping from
whence they were come. The way round about was strawed with the slain, being to the number of a 1000. besides 200. wounded, whom they carried along with them, not one being slain in the City, and 1. or 2. onely wounded: The priso∣ners were, 1. Colonel, 2. Lieutenants Colonels, 28. Captains and Lieutenants, 530. common soldiers; a glorious victory for this Place, which should have been, according to former resolution, demolished as not tenable, but now hath deser∣ved better Walls than Utrecht, and such as they: for although their walls were not defensible, and the moat not 3. foot deep, yet the magnanimity of the citi∣zens was their strength, yea every woman and maid, to the very children them∣selves did service, as soldiers, supplying the defect of bullets with their shop waites, broken pots and the like. Oh, had things been thus carried in other pla∣ces, our Netherlands had not so shamely lost their renown. 29. dito, Jacob de Graaf was condemned to be executed by the sword, for as∣saulting the Pensionaris de Wit, (though his wounds were not perillous at all as to death) as having committed Crimen Laesae Majestatis, being brought to execution. the gates of the Cities near about were kept shut up, and all the wayes beset with Horse, so that this work, notwithstanding the Executioner made divers blows before he could cut off his Head, was accomplished without any great com∣motion. Just at this very time, the Communalty throughout whole Holland and Zea∣land were up in a dreadfull tumult, requiring that the Government should be al∣tered, and more power put into the hands of the Prince of Orange: They began at Dort, where the burgers by their Captains demanded of the Magistrates what they meant to do, to defend the City or not, and would know themselves what provision there was in the Magasins, which was found to be very slight, and the Key of the Powder-Tower not to be found, which made the citizens yet more unrestfull; requiring that the Prince of Orange should be made Stadholder with∣out delay; and that with high threatnings: whereupon Deputies from the Magistrate, and Citizens were forced to go to the Leger, to desire his Highnesse to come to Dort, the which forasmuch as he often denyed to do, the Deputies told him, that in case they should return home with such an answer, they should be in great danger to be put to death as traytors, which peril his High∣nesse considering, went the said 29. June to Dort, being received with the ap∣plause of the people: being come to the Town house, the Magistrates made known unto him, that the citizens desired he would be pleased to view the City Fortifications and Magasin, not at all mentioning the Stadholdership; where∣upon with some of the Lords, he rode round about the City, and so towards the Pauw, to dine there. The citizens perceiving, that they thought thus to put them of, began to murmur; crying out, that they sought to delude them, and thereupon laid hold on their Horses, binding their pikes and musquets to their Coaches, threatning to massacre all of them, in case his Highness were not made Stadholder: The Lords thus terrifyed, promise to content the people, and being come to the Pauw, discharge themselves and also his Highness of their oath con∣cerning the perpetual Edict, and so made him Stadholder: Cornelis de Wit, old Burgomaster, being come home sick from the Fleet, kept his chamber, therefore they sent these Acts to him by the Secretary, to be by him also subscribed, but he
fortifications TSAS VAN GENT fortifications AERDENBURG
refused, saying he neither could, nor would consent thereto: but his reluctancy was in vain, for by the perswasion of his Wife, and the Lords present, but prin∣cipally by the threatnings of the citizens, he was constrained thereto, as about that time, also the Magistrates of most the Cities of Holland and Zealand, were either through actual insurrection, or threatned perill, forced so to advance his Highnesse: Whereupon by the Deputies of the cities, having a voyce in Hol∣land, the perpetual Edict was mortified July the 1. and so by the annulling of that Oath the Members made capable to Elect a Stadholder, as also the 2. dito in Zealand, and the day after in Holland, his Highnesse the Prince of Orange was elected thereto, and also it was resolved to direct the case of the Generality ac∣cordingly, deferring on him the power of issuing Patents, as also to be Captain and Admiral General, in like manner as his Predecessors the former Princes of Orange had enjoyed. Whereupon, the 4. dito the said dignities and honour was proffered him, by most honourable Deputies in the name of the States: and after that the 8. dito, the case of his Highnesse eminent Character as Admi∣rality was finished, his Highnesse arrived the 10. dito early in the morning at the Hague, and being introduced by Deputies, and a multitude of Gentry, into the gathering of the States General, he there received his Commission, and took his Oath, as also was done in the Gathering of the States of Holland, and he sate that same day as Stadholder at the Roll: and the 16. dito, the Deputies of the States of Zealand came to the Hague, proffering his Highnesse the Stadholder∣ship of that Province, and took the Oath of him; hereby re-establishing him in all the Dignitiés of his Illustrious Predecessors. It ever any thing fell out to be wondred at, it was this, wherein especially is observable, that both the brothers de Wits, were by indisposednesse hindred, one at Dort the 29. June, the other in the Hague July 1. and 3. to be present at the Councel, and the case was so praeci∣pitated, that there was no time for any to advise with these Lords: for who know∣eth but by their great subtility, they yet might have found some Remora to this work, which on likelyhood might prove fatal unto themselves. But for all this, the spirits of the people were not appeased, they saw the Go∣vernment remained in their hands, against whose will and endeavour, his Highnesse was established, who they thought would not cease, asmuch as might to counter mine his Highnesse, and for to prevent their own fall, would presume to plot his fall though to the ruine of the State: They saw that the power deferred on his Highnesse, was fruitless without liberty to exe∣cute the same, They saw the same management of affairs, were yet as former∣ly; therefore they would have an alteration of the Government, and forasmuch as for some years past the Magistrates of most Cities in Holland were brought in by the direction of Pensionaris de Wit, that few other which were not of his fa∣ction, were admitted to the Government; therefore the Communalty would have these removed, terming them the States Party, Cabal of de Wit and faction of Louvestein; yea, some said plainly they were Traytors of the Land, of whom they said, the Pensionaris and his brother were Head, together with the Ambassador de Groot, and some other; Insomuch that the Pensionaris com∣plained in a Letter to his Highnesse 11. July of Pamphlets against him, and
in special that he was accused to have managed the secret correspondence-treasure unfaithfully, and not to have taken due care for the Armies of the State: Where∣to his Highnesse answered dito 22. that such Pamphlets were not to be regarded, that himself was fain to suffer the like licentousnesse against him; That of the se∣cret correspondence money he knew nothing, but that the Lords Councellers of the Commission were to be witnesses thereof: and that by reason of the multi∣tude of affairs he could not specify what defects of the Armies had been, nor what supply had from time to time been made, directing for his desired justification to the actions of his carefull performance therein. In Zeeland many of the Lords also were said to follow the party of de Wit: whereupon a general rising was on a sudden throughout whole Holland and Zeeland, some they assailed in person, others had their houses spoiled, many were forced to quit their places in Government; yea, in some places all the Ma∣gistrates put by; some Cities were by force of the Pesants taken in, and the Ma∣gistrates constrained to act according to their wil, which confusion presaging the unavoidable ruine of the Country, caused the States to resolve August 27. not onely to empower his Highness, according as should be requisite and his plea∣sure should be, to alter the Magistracy in all Cities, but also entreated him for the common good, to do it with all speed. The Bishop of Munster having put Garrisons in all Over-Yssel, and posted some of his Troups on the borders of Friesland, he made towards Coeverden, that famous and impregnable Fortresse, coming before it the 8. of July, the 12. dito, without much trouble became Master thereof; they within having scarfly lost a Soldier, and though indeed the drought at this time were such, as hath not been in memory of man, yet the Enemy in their approaches were fain to run knee-deep in water, and could not possibly have done any thing to the City, if they within had manfully withstood them: But on the contrary, these faithlesse wretches with all their might helped them out of the mire and moores. Thus they gat fast footing and an open way into Friesland, or Ommelands, and ap∣pointed the Traitor Boersma, who at the taking of Deventer, went over to him, Governor the second time of Coeverden, taking 4. of the Companies of the Garrison laying there, leading them about with him 5. weeks, and at length let them with their Ensigns depart to Groeningen, the 4. Companies being decrea∣sed to 110. men, of whom Captain Struyck remained with the Enemy, and Ca∣ptain Clant coming to Groeningen, had his Sword broken at his feet. After the Conquest of Coeverden, the Bishop brake too into the Groeninger-land, ma∣king havock through Drente and the Ommelands, and came the 19. dito with some Troups before Groeningen, possessing the 23. dito the whole Western Quarter, and the 27. dito fell upon Adwerder Zijl, but was manfully repulsed, where in the night he raised a Battery, and 28. dito began to fire on the City, formally besieging it, and upon the approach of the Enemy, the Old and New Sconses were forsaken by ours, as also Wijnschoter Zijl, The House the Wedde, and all what was thereabout, being possessed by the Enemy, whereby the Bourtange was blockt up and summoned; but through the generosity of Captain Prot had nothing in answer but powder and shot, who afterward when 200000. Gildens were proffered for the Sconse, answered, he would first gratify the Bishop with
fortifications OUDE SCHANS fortifications COEVENDEN
fortifications NIEWE SCHANS fortifications de BOUR TANGE
fortifications GRAAF fortifications GENNEPE HUYS
so many bullets: but Captain Huysman who had commanded the Old Sconse, was for forsaking it by the Councel of War hanged at Groeningen, and Lieute∣nant van der Berge Commander of the New Sconse had his Head cut off for de∣serting the same, as also the Lieutenant Colonel Taminga and a Major, which laid in Deventer were arrested, and the Colonels Steck and Boersma cited to an∣swer for their betraying of Deventer. Turenne, after the taking of Schenckensconse, was again come before Nimwe∣gen; but in the mean while, our Soldiers had quitted the strong House te Gennip, and the Garrison being 4. Companies marched to Nimwegen, and the 7. and 28. June, our Horse of Nimwegen went with 64. Carts to fetch thence 84. barrels of powder, bullets, and match, with some lasts of Rie, intending with a second Convoy to bring away the rest into Nimwegen: upon whom the French shot very hard out of Knotsenburg, and 2 Batteries they had made, casting also many Fire-bullets and Granados of 90. & 100. pound weight, by which three Out-layers before Nimwegen were: But they within were not behind hand with them: so that the French the 2. and 3. July passed the Waal by their Ship-bridge, and rounded the City on the Land-side, bringing their Loop-graves as in an instant to the Moat, and the 4 dito made a Battery with 5. half Kartouwen, and assaulted by storm that night the Pesthouse-bulwark, entring the same, but were driven out again, the Colonel van Gent, brother of the Admiral deceased, being there slain: The 6. dito in the night they stormed again, but were three times coura∣giously beaten off, as also the 7. dito. In the mean while, Patents were come to the Grave, to depart with most part of the Garrison to the Bos, where the Gover∣nour having gotten in some Spaniards, but no order to receive them, sent them back to the Grave, where being come near the City, they were set upon by the French, and for the most part routed, by which also the Grave was lost. By this time, the French before Nimwegen were advanced with their works to the Borst-werings, and already undermined two Bulwarks: whereupon the 8. dito they began to parly, and the 9. dito the agreement was made, that the Garrison consisting of 7. Companies of Horse, and about 40. Foot, with one Company Waartgelders from the Briel, should all remain prisoners of War, excepting five Companies of Utrecht citizens, and of Rhenen and Montfoort, who marched out free with their Arms▪ What the reason was, this City did so hastily and with∣out more constraint give up to the Enemy, is diversly judged of, and it is said that the losse of the Grave was a thing plotted aforehand. Then 11. July, Turenne from Nimwegen went to the Grave, and imme∣diately from thence to the Bos, which wanting all things, sent Deputies to his Highness, who well knowing what concernment the Bos was of, was fain to give this answer, that he was sorry he could not help them, having no more power, than they to do it: yet at length, because of the great importance of the place, some Canons and Ammunition were sent by Ships thither; but coming therewith to Gorcum, they had the tidings that Creveceur was lost, and there∣fore not possible to bring it to the Bos: Therefore the Field-marshal Wurts commanding there, unladed the Canon to use then for the defence of Gorcum. They of the Bos had quitted the Sconses Engelen and Orten, and brought the Canon into the City, with all which they had scarcely enough to defend the Brill
as was requisite, the Garrison also was but weak: The 13. July, they saw the ene∣my at Ulymen, and part marching to Engelen and Crevecoeur, the first of which they put forces into, and besieging the other with many more, after two dayes shooting on it, became conquerors thereof; the gros of the Leger laying at Box∣tel and the Vugt, above 20000. strong. The 11. July, the King brake up with his Army from Utrecht, lodging that night in the Grep, and arrived the 12. dito to Aarnem, drawing forth the Garri∣son of Woerden and Ouwater to Utrecht, they of Ouwater being pursued by some of the Earl of Horns quarters, and some taken prisoners, besides a good booty of Money and Arms. The King having given a visit to the Prince of Condé, and Duke d' Auguin, both lying very weak at Aarnem; departed thence the 13. dito to the Betuw, sending part of his Army to Bommel, soon mastering it, forthwith putting forces into the smaller Towns, Heucklon, Asperen and Leerdam: The 14. dito, the King marched over the Bridge by Nimwegen to the Grave, and arrived the 16. dito in his Leger before the Bos, being in person the 21. dito at Vugt, from whence he betook himself again to Boxel. Not onely the Netherlands, but all Christendom stood astonished to see the Enemy already approached within two dutch miles of Amsterdam, There keep∣ing Post, having in so short a time conquered so great a number of Cities and Forts. A List of the Cities and Forts conquered by the Enemy, since the 1. of June to the 19. Iuly. In the Dukedom Cleef. Orsoy. Rhijnberck. Burick. Wesel, and the Lippe-Sconse. Rees and the Sconse. Emmerick. In the County of Groe∣ningen. Winschoten. Oude Sconse. Boonder Sconse. New Sconse. In East-Friesland, and Friesland. d'Eyler Sconse. Slijkenburg or Kuinder Sconse. In Gelderland. Spijckfoort. Schencken Sconse. Tol-house. Ysseloort. Hattem. Elbrug. Harderwijck. Aarnhem. Wageningen. Knotsenburg. Nimwegen. Grave. Tiel. Bommel. Sconse te Vooren. Sconse St. Andrews. The Retrenchment of the Yssel. In Brabant. Crevecoeur. Sconse te Engelen. Orte-Sconse. In the County Zutphen. Ysselburg. Anholt. 's Heeren-berg. Zevenaar. Heussen. Dotechem. Brevoort. Grolle. Lochem. Doesburg. Zutphen. In Over-Yssel. Deventer. Hardenberg. Ommer Sconse. Rouveen Sconse. Zwoll, and the retrech∣ment,
fortifications NIMMEGEN fortifications SCHANS de VORN fortifications SCHANS S. ANDRIES
fortifications BOMMEL fortifications CREVECEUR
with three Sconses. Campen with the Scons. Hasselt. Swartsluce. Geelmuyen. Fullenhove. Blockzijl. Steenwijck. In the Drente. Meppel. Coeverden. In the Twente. Enschede. Oldenzeel. Degnecham. Almelo. Delden. Goor. Diepenhem. Rijssen. In Utrecht Province. Rhenen. Wijck te Duurstee. Amersfoort. Utrecht. Ouwater. Ysselstein. Montfoort. In Holland. Buuren. Kuylenburg. Vyanen. Heucklom. Leerdam. Asperen. Woerden. Naarden. The Province of Zea∣land onely being free wholy from them. England it self was jealous because of these successes, unwilling that France should become Master of all, thinking it therefore high time to see how the work lay, and speedily sent Buckingham, Arlington, and Hallifax as Plenipotentiaries to the King of France, with a Commission dated 31. June. These Lords arrived at the Hague 4. July, and departed the day after to the Army of his Highnesse at Bodegrave, without further declaring themselves, except in exorbitant demands. The 6. dito in the afternoon, they departed from the Princes Leger to the King of France, who yet lay encamped before Utrecht, and followed the French Le∣ger to the Bos, being every where nobly entertained, and complimented: Where they the 16 dito renewed their treaty of Alliance; thereby more nearly binding themselves to hearken to no propositions of Peace, but with knowledge on both sides, and to come to no agreement, but with the satisfaction of both, of which notice was to be given to the States by their Deputies, as also by a Letter of the English Plenipotentiaries was done from Boxtel dito 17. the same being communicated to his Highness, with an annex of the Articles, upon which they might have peace. Demands and Conditions on which his most Christian Majesty would make Peace with the States General of the United Provinces. THat the Proclamations formerly put forth by the States General, forbidding the French Wines and Brandewine, with all the impositions upon French Wares and Manufactures, be revoked: That within 3. months a Treaty of Commerce between his Majesty and the said States shall be concluded, wherein also shall be comprehended the regulating of the French and Holland East and West Indies Companies. 2. That for the future, throughout all the United Provinces not onely a full liberty; But also shall the publick exercise of the Romish Catholick, Apostolical Religion: so that in all places, where more than one Church shall be, one be given over to the Catholicks: To whom also it shall be permitted to build one where there is none, and they shall have liberty untill such time as the Church shal be built, openly to celebrate Divine service in such houses as they shall to that end buy
or hire. That by the States General, or every Province in particular, a reasonable main∣tenance out of the Goods which have formerly belonged to the Church, or such like, be allotted to the Pastor or Priest in every of the said Churches. 3. And forasmuch as the Deputies of the said States sent to his Majesty, have for special rea∣sons desired, that it would please him by the Peace to permit the Body of the United Netherlands to remain in the State, so as hitherto it hath been, and thereupon in change to give unto his Maje∣sty for the Conquests, wherewith it hath pleased God to blesse his just War, they have offered to him in stead of the Provinces, Cities and Places which his Majesty already possesseth, to quit un∣to him other Lands, Cities and Places, which in Brabant and Flanders by the Spaniard have been delivered up to them: His Majesty although he be now Master of three whole of the 7. Provinces in the United Netherlands, together with some of the Places and Posts in Hol∣land, hath willed for to preserve the said seven Provinces in their first Union, to restore unto them what by his forces he hath posessed himself of in the said Provinces, excepting what here under shall be specified and upon the following conditions. 4. That the said States shall quit unto his Majesty generally all the Provinces, Cities and Places, which they have in Flanders and Brabant, and those that have been quitted to them by the Spaniard, onely excepting Sluce and the Iland of Casant. 5. The said States also shall quit to his Majesty the City Nimwegen with the depencdencies and all belonging to it, The Fort Knotsenburg, Schenckenscons, and the part of the Province of Gelder∣land, lying on this side the Rhijn, as to France, together with the whole Island of Bommel, the Island and Fort of Voorne, the Fort St. Andries, and the Castle of Louvestein, and the Fort Crevecoeur. 6. The said States also shall quit to his Majesty Grave, with its dependencies and all belong∣ing to it, and shall give unto him the propriety of the City, and the County Meurs, to dispose thereof according to his pleasure, with condition that the said States shall indemnifie the Prince of Orange as to the said County, and other Places, Cities and Countries belonging to the said Prince, but yeelded up to his Majesty. 7. That the said States shall yeeld to his Majesty all such claim as they may have had or could pretend unto, in those places which his Majesty hath taken from the said States in the Empire, that also they yeeld the same in favour of the Prince and Earl of East Friesland, of all such claims as they have or may pretend, unto in such Places as they possesse in his Land; as namely, the City Embden, The Sconse van Leer-oort, and the Ylersconse, out of which they shall recall their Garrisons. 8. That also it shall be permitted to the Subjects of his Majesty, in all those Countries, Cities and Places of the States General, which have been yielded up to his Majesty to go in and out both by Water and by Land, Rivers and Streams, without paying any due or imposition, or be sub∣ject to be visited, as to their goods, bagage, munition of war, and provision what soever. 9. The said States shall oblige themselves to the Order and Religion of Malta, to cause to be restored unto the said Order all the Rights, which shall be found belonging unto them. 10. The said States shall promise to cause the Children of the Earl of Bentem to be restored to him, which by the authority and protection of the said States, are by the Countesse, wife of the Earl of Bentem, detained from him, notwithstanding his often requesting the same; thereto also obtaining the Letters of the Emperor, and of his most Christian Majesty, for the restoring of them. 11. The said States shall promise to indemnifie his Majesty of part of the excessive Charges he hath been necessitated to in this War, and pay unto him within the time that shall be agreed upon, the some of 20. millions, and then his Majesty will acquit them of the three millions, with all the intrest thereof, which they owe unto his Majesty for the said sum, his Majesties Father of happy memory, had lent unto them Anno 1651.
12. That in acknowledgment of the Peace, which his Majesty is willing then to grant unto them, when he could have made his Conquests further in their Country; The said States hall every year by an Ambassador Extraordinary upon a certain stipulated day, cause to be present∣ed to him a Golden Medal weighing a mark, which shall contain; that they hold the preserva∣tion of the same Freedom from his Majesty, which the Kings his Predecessors have helped them to obtain. 13. That although his Majesty doth declare to content himself with the foresaid Conditions, in case they be accepted within 10. dayes, after which his Majesty pretendeth to bee no longer obliged thereto; neverthelesse, herewith he gives to wit, that although the same should be owned by the States, they shall not be of any force, and that his Majesty will enter upon no Treaty of Cessation or of Peace, before such time as the King of England on his account shall receive sa∣tisfaction from the said States, and that the Princes of the Empire allied with his Majesty in this war shall likewise be content with the Condition, that shall by the States be offered unto them. Here followeth a further Amplication of the fore∣named Articles. ANd that it may appear by the choyce of more Conditions than one, how uprightly his Ma∣jesty had been pleased to present to the said States General, divers wayes for to obtain the Peace they desired of him, and not to bring so far as was in his power the pretences, which he justly might by force of Arms, and the continuance of his Victories; Therefore his Majesty de∣clareth, that without standing, precisely to the offers which here before have by the said States been made, as also the Conditions which by form of alternative he had required of them, He will content himself with keeping all the Conquests, his Majesty at present possesseth, together of those he may further Conquer, untill that the said States shall have consented to these Conditions; to wit, the whole Province and Dukedom of Gelderland belonging to the States, the Province of Utrecht and County Zutphen, all the Cities, Places and Fortresses, which are in the said Provin∣ces their appendencies, and what belongeth to them without exception; the Soveraignties of the Provinces, Lands, Cities and Places conquered by his Majesty with the appendencies and all be∣longing thereto, to remain for the future for ever to his Majesty. And to the end, the said Conquests, Countries and Places delivered up to his Majesty, may the better be brought to a capacity, through the assistance of the Empire to be strenthened; the said States shall renounce all Soveragnity over the Cities Mastricht and the Wijcke, as also of what they now hold in Overmase, Dalen, Fouquemont, and the Country belonging to the Bos, toge∣ther the City and Meyerije of the said Bos, and all what belongeth to the appendices thereof, with the Fort Crevecoeur. And that the Treaty upon the last Terms might serve, not onely to re-establish the friendships and alliance between his Majesty and the said States, but to procure the rest and tranquility of the Empire, which his Majesty as Guardian and conserver of the Treaties of Westphalia, doth in speciall lay to heart, his Majesty will promise, after the Peace made, to renounce in favour to the Princes of the Empire, to all that right which by law of Armes may appertain unto him, as to those Places which his Majesty hath taken from the States in the precinct of the Em∣pire, his Majesty reserving onely to himself the liberty to demolish the fortification thereof.
But forasmuch as his Majesty will of himself contribute to re-establis the Princes of the Empire in the free possession of the Cities and Places belonging to them; therefore he hath also willed to procure, that the said States General shall draw forth their Garrisons out of the Cities & Places, which they hold as yet in the Empire; namely the City Embden, the Fort of Leer-oort, and Iler∣sconse, which shall be delivered up to the Prince and Earl of East-Friesland, with all the Privi∣ledges appertaining in respect of the said County: and to the end that the needfull correspondence between France & the City Maestricht (which is to be given up to his Majesty) may be for the fu∣ture no occasion of Contest, It shall be by both parties estipulated, to endeavour a grounded and free passage for the Troups of his Majesty from the French Frontiers to the said Maestricht, from the Elector of Ceulen, as Prince and Bishop of Luyck, yet upon condition, not to make use of the pas∣sages, but with paying what charges they are at, that the Country be not burthened. Furthermore, the Articles mentioned in the former notition, shall remain in full as they are, even that concerning the quitting of the City and County Meurs, onely excepting those that con∣cern the delivery up of other Lands and Places, to be made by the said States to his Majesty. Demands and Conditions, upon which the King of England would consent to make Peace with the States General of the United Provinces. 1. THe King of England understands, that the Hollanders without any gainfaying shall give unto him the honor of the Flag, yea, so as their whole Fleet shall strike, and let fall their Top-sail for any one English Ship, bearing the Flag of his Majesty throughout the whole British Sea, even to the Coasts of Holland. 2. Free permission for a whole year to all English that remained in the Colony of Surinam, to depart thence when they shall desire, with all their goods, of what nature soever they be, ac∣cording to the Treaty of Breda. 3. Perpetual banishment out of all the Territories of the United Provinces of all the Kings Subjects that are declared guilty of Crimen Laesae Majestatis, together with all other, which shall be noted by his Majesty to have published seditious Libels, or otherwise to have conspired against the Peace, and tranquility of his Kingdoms. 4. Restoring to his Majesty the expences of the war, to the sum of one million of pounds ster∣ling, whereof 400000. shall be paid, between this and the month October next ensuing, and the rest by 400000. pounds sterling every year. 5. A yearly pay for ever of 10000 pounds sterling, for the grant they shall have from the King to catch Herrings upon the Coasts of England, Scotland and Yreland. 6. The present Prince of Orange and his Successors, shall have the Souveragnity of the United Netherlands, excepting of what shall fall to the share of the Two Kings and their Allies, or shall at least enjoy for ever the honour of Admiral General, and Stadtholder in the highest degree, that hath by the foregoing Princes been enjoyed. 7. That within three moneths after the Peace, a Treaty of Commerce shall be made, as well to the regulating of Trade in India, according to demands formerly made, as to the advance of the Subjects of his Majesty in their trading, going, coming or habituating in any of the Countries belonging to the said States, and with such advantagious conditions, as are agreed unto the Na∣tions most in favour. 8. The Island of Walcheren, the City and Castle of Sluce with its dependencies, the Island of Cassant, that of Goeree, and the Island of Voorne shall be put into the hands of his Majesty by way of Caution, for the performing of the Conditions before specified. 9. And however his Majesty declareth to content himself with the foresaid Conditions, in case the same be within ten dayes accepted, after which his Majesty understands himself no long∣er obliged; Nevertheless, he doth peremtorily declare, that although the said States should ac∣cept them, yet they shall be of no force, nor that his Majesty will make any Treaty of Peace or Cessation, before such time as the most Christian King shall in his regard by the said States have received satisfaction, as also that the Princes of the Empire allied with his Majesty in this War, shall be contented with the Conditions presented to them by the said States.
I believe there will few be found that do imagine such an unreasonable project to proceed from such prudent royal Councels, and nevertheless it pleased those Lords to rise thus high, perhaps not well advised that the Holland generosity (though at present much brougt under) was yet too great, thus willingly to subject them selfs to the arrogāt cruelty of the French, & insupportable yoke of the English. The 19. dito, the English Ambassadors came in the Kings own coach, conduct∣ed by 500. horse to Antwerp, where they had conference with the Earl of Mon∣tery, having a Commissioner of France with them, labouring with all their might to draw Montery from siding with us, forasmuch as hitherto, not onely by order from the Spanish Court, but through his own inclination and vigilancy, he had much assisted this State, by sending auxiliary troups in most of Frontiers in Bra∣bant, Flanders, Maestricht, and into our Army it self, wherefore they desired, that he would call them back again, or make himself master of those Cities in which they lay offering their assistance thereunto; but that noble Earl was too honoura∣ble so much as once to listen to such an hellish plot, declining as much as might be all conference with them and departed to Brussels, shortly after augmenting instead of calling back his auxiliary Troups. The English perceiving they could gain nothing upon him, departed the 26. dito from Antwerp over Calis for Lon∣don, where they arrived the last dito. The 26. July, the King brake up from Box tel, with Monsieur & other Gran∣dees, with a conduct of 14000. men, passing through the Meyery over Beringen, St. Truyen, Hanuyt, Charleroy, Quesnoy, directly to St. Germein, where he arri∣ved 1. August: the Prince of Condé following him shortly after with most of the Gentry and Voluntaries: in which return they of Mastricht, (as formerly & after∣ward got very great booty, as daily going forth for prey, and since the beginning of the war till now, have got an incredible spoil, of which the Spanish Auxiliaries had not the least part, whose horse were most in this service. The Duke of Mon∣mouth went home over Flanders, his Regiment of 2400. being melted away to 1500. And thus to the admiration of every one, this Companies was before Au∣gust broken up, Monsr. de Turenne also, Generalissimo of the Kings Leger in the Netherlands, left the siege of the Bos, and marched higher up, some Troups at times appearing before Heusden, and the Bos, to fetch in contribution, and burned some Villages about Breda. The Bishops of Colen & Munster had begun 28. July to play with their Canon upon Groeningen, & to open their Loopgraves. They in the City were reason∣ably provided, & had prepared all things without for to hold out a siege. But that which was most of all, they had a gallant Governour, the Lord Rabenhaupt, and a notable Commander, the Duke of Holstein Pleun, and other worthy Officers: The Governour took upon himself the whole management of the Militia and fortification, being very strict in discipline of war, and very vigilant to look to all things: Hereby the Magistrate was frustrated of their opportunity, to play their parts, as they in other Cities did, and citizens and soldiers kept from mutiny. The Enemy made his approaches both out of the Munsters and Colish Quarters, shooting very hard continually, whereby they got to the Counterscarp, ca∣sting without ceasing fiery Bullets, Bombes, Granados, Stink-pots and Pitch-Garlands into the City. But they within both Citizens, Studens and Soldiers,
defended the City with unwearied pains: never appeared the least discourage∣ment amongst them; but contrary it increased, through the successe of diverse issuings forth upon them, and by the succours of such as came from other places, as many Regiments of Konings mark, some Frieses, and the whole Regiment of Jorman of Amsterdam, beside the supply of all necessary Provision and Ammu∣nition. When they saw their Houses through the force of the Bombes tumbling down, instead of being disheartened, they were the more encouraged, The Wo∣men themselves stepping over the ruines of their habitations, to encourage their Husbands to the fight, they lightly esteemed the losse of an Arm, Leg; Child or Friend, in respect of their purchased liberty, in which they continued with such constant manfullnesse and unwearied zeal, untill that the Enemy the 28. August was forced with shame to quit the siege. Oh! Praise-worthy Groeningers, how wickedly did other Cities betray themselves; yet in truth, this of Groeningen could hardly be termed a siege, the City being onely closed at 2. or 3. Bulwarks, and the rest free, being provided of all necessaries, never sustaining a storm, one∣ly furiously shot upon with Bullets and Granados, which did little hurt except to the houses, although it is reported, they cast in above 5000. Granados, many of them weighing 4. and 5. hundred pound a piece, which indeed did ruine that part of the City, but did little hurt to the people, there being not above 80. slain du∣ring the whole siege, but very many of the Enemy, who besides the wounded amounted toy number of 4536. under which were three Commanders, two Lieu∣tenants Colonels, 63. Captains, with many other Officers: many were taken prisoners, and about 5000. ran away, so that the army of 24000. was decreased to 14000. and an infinite number of Fire-works consumed. The Enemy leaving the City, set their Tents and Leger-place on fire; but were fain to leave some Canon with much Ammunition and Leger instruments behind them, the which they of the City made good prize of, and slighted all the Enemies works. At Sea, since the battle of the 7. June, nothing considerable fell out, our Fleet still keeping near Zealand, upon what ground is diversly conjectured; The Enemies Fleet also seemed to have little stomack for another engagement, yet in the midst of July they came before the Texel, in all appearance the design being to Land their men some where or other, but the Heavens by a storm hin∣dred the same, which sooner than they were willing drave one of their ships a sho∣re, and sent back many shattered home again, the rest remaining crossing about our Sea-ports, thinking in appearance yet to bring about their design: in the mean while, our Fleet having no considerable losse. But the Enemy having repaired their Ships for the most part, spread themselves all about on Sea, for to watch our merchant men; but especially our Ships returning from the Indies. And the 1. August some Seamen came hither in an Advice-Yaght from Chilon, and be∣ing pursued by the English to our very Coast, and seeing no way or escape, they themselves sunk her, and so escaped in the Boat, however the English saved the said Jaght, and brought it for England, but was of no great valew. The 6. dito, tidings came of 14. East-Indies Ships, happily arrived upon the Eems, who not knowing of the war, and having met with no English, saving two Frigats before the Eems, who made signs for assistance, but in vain; and therefore were fain to
suffer them all safely to get in, which being at the time of the besieging of Groe∣ningen, the Fort Delf-zijl had the hap to be furnished with powder and shot out of East-India, the better to defend the ships. Suddenly many Smack-boats were sent thither, to take out the finest Wares, and to bring them home over the Wadden, and our Ships of War went to the Eems, to fetch off these India Ships, all which by a special providence arrived at their several Ports without any hinderance, and the Fleet returned again to Zealand. And it is very re∣markable, that the English who had so long lurked for to prey upon our East-Indie ships, themselves, of which the certain news came the 17. August, lost a very rich Indie ship of their own, called the Faulcon, being taken by a Zealand Caper, and brought up at Bergen in Norway, esteemed to be worth 1500000. gildens; After this nothing was done by both Fleets, the design of the Enemy, which was to Land on our Coasts, being continually hindered by hard weather, in the mean while our Capers, which at the beginning of the War were not per∣mitted, with many other that had Commission from Zealand, went out to Sea, and yet daily do, which already have so much endammaged the French, and especially the English, that their losse is rated at many millions. The condition of the remainder of our Country, we left under the sad tumult of the Inhabitants, by which all things were like to come into a lamentable con∣fusion, and if I judge not a misse, in greater peril, than through the Armies of the French, every moment we being in danger to strand upon the blind Rocks of the incensed vulgar, of which the effects were so many and diverse, that it would be too confused and tedious a work to rehearse or read them; it will be sufficient to relate the chiefest, by which may easily be judged of the rest. Upon the general insurrection of the Citizens against the Magistrates, it was in some Cities published, and Letters from his Highnesse divulged dated the 9. July, wherein the Citizens were commanded to abstain from such manner of proceedings, and to let things remain as formerly they were, upon pain of dis∣pleasure, and to be punished as disturbers of the common peace, it being an in∣trenchemend on his Highnesse authority as Stadholder, whose office it is to dispo∣se of the concerns of the Magistracy: wherefore if any in the Regency were guilty, they might be orderly charged, and being found guilty, should be according to de∣sert punished. Hereupon the Citizens expected that his Highness would make a general reformation in the Government, but nothing came of it; and no wonder, for this Iron was too hot for him to lay hold on, the time not be suitable to begin a work of such consequence: Nevertheless, the Commons would so have it, and therefore they set upon the work again. Rotterdam and Dort dis∣placed the most part of the Magistrates, and nominated others in their room: and in many other places, by threatning Petitions, the restitution of their Old Priviledges laid by, were required. Delf was taken in by the Pesants of Maes∣land, and the Magistrates constrained to give them and the Citizens satisfaction. The like was done at der Gou, and at der Tholen the Pesants came to alter the Magistrates. At Zierickzee they brake the windows of the Town-house, but the Citizens shut out the Pesants that were entring, themselves emptying the Town-house, shutting it up, and displacing all the Magistrates. At Middle-borough
the Citizens and common people had set upon the Magistrates till such time the Pefants came, brake open the City gates, and lifting up the Doors from off the Bars, drew 7. of the Lords without the City, whom they would not let go till they had received satisfaction. Vlissingen and ter Vere also turned all upside down, and at ter Goes, the Citizens rose up against some whom they termed Traytors: Leyden was deep in the reformation, deposing all their Lords and shut up the Town-house. Haerlem did not much lesse: In North-Holland the Women themselves very busy, to have things ordered to their mind. At Amsterdam also were meetings at their Doelens, some of whom, not satisfyed to have occasioned great trouble in the Church, by following of Labadie (who now is said to be married with the Lady of Sommelsdick) were ring-leaders also to do the like in the Policy: But the Magistrates according to their wonted wisdom, desirous to prevent the storm approaching resigned the whole Government, and every one his charge to the free disposal and pleasure of his Highness, who seeing the unavoidable necessity for the common peace, did according to the resolu∣tion of the States General in date of 7. August, take in hand the altering of the Magistracy, disposing thereof in some Cities as he thought best himself, in others he chose out some of them that were upon nomination, in some he did it by Commissioners, which notwithstanding gave not full content to all, but much dissatisfaction still remained, which was not a little fomented by such as imagi∣ned themseves injuried by this alteration. But blessed be God, this drew no further disaster along with it, and that the Government was in some measure brought to a more setled posture, by putting by such as the commons suspected. What concerns the plundrings, and personal assaultings, they were diverse, whereby also the greatest of the Land were in jeopardy, as Burgemaster Graaf, the Ambassador de Groot, the Lord of Beverning; yea, the ancient Prince Maurice himself; yea, such was the rage of the vulgar, as they threatned to plun∣der the house of Admiral de Ruyter, which also was really done to many of the Magistrates houses in diverse Cities: but it shall suffice to note in its place one example thereof, happened at the Hague the 20. August. After the King of France his departure, the quitting of the siege before the Bos, the breaking up of Turrennes Leger, and the delivery of Groeningen, no great matter of concern passed between us and the Enemy, except some skirmishes, of which I will note the principal as they fell out. 22. July, the Ambassador de Groot, who was the chief of the Commissioners sent to the King of France, silently departed the Land with his Family, as percei∣ving that the change of time, would not permit the transactions with France to go forward, his Highnesse not being altogether satisfyed with him therein; but disavowing the same, declared, that he was ready to defend his Country to the utmost, and to hazard life and all for the same. De Groot wrote a Letter to the State in way of excuse, that he was onely retired for to escape the machinations of his enemies, and the rage of the vulgar, by which for some while he had been in perill of being overwhelmed: That all his services had been improved for the good of the Land; neither would yet undertake any thing to the prejudice of the State.
fortifications GRONINGEN
26. dito, The Frieses under Alua, were unawares assaulted by 13. Standards of the Bishop, between Dragten and Bergen, where the Frieses being allured into an Ambush, would have fallen short, had they not been seconded, whereby those of the Bishop were driven back with the loss of 150. horse, and onely 25. of our soldiers. 31. dito, The Pensionaris de Wit, for the first time went to Church, after his re∣covery of his wounds, wherein he was the more hasty, for to have the opportuni∣ty, to be assistant to the dangerous condition of his brother the Ruart van Putten, who the 24. dito was brought from Dort to the Hague, and there kept prisoner. The 1. August, the Pensionar went and complimented his Highnesse over his Illustrious Character and advance. The 4. dito, he appeared in the Session of the States General: where he made an Oration of his great services and care of the welfare of the State, but perceiving that in this conjuncture it could be no longer for the profit, but contrarywise to the disadvantage of the Land, he therefore was come to lay down his office of Pensionarship, perhaps because he foresaw he was not like long to hold, or at least to execute the same, and withal desired that ac∣cording to the resolution before taken, he might have his seat in the High Coun∣cell; but forasmuch as there fell dispute about the Ranck, and afterward Zealand was opposite to the Session it self, and as is reported the Chair of State was de∣nied in the Church, he never after appeared in the Councel. Upon notice given in England of his Highnesse advance to the Stadtholder∣ship, came a rescription dated 28. July, which his Highnesse communicated to the State. A Letter of his Majesty the King of Great Brittain, To his Highness the Prince of Orange. From Whitehall  the 28. July 1672. Cosin, MOnsieur van Reede having made report of the sad condition to which you are brought, it went very near me, but which most troubled me was that you seem to have an appre∣hension, as if I had lesse care and affection to you than formerly: I pray you, that you be pleased to assure your self, that they are groundless apprehensions, & without cause, but on the contrary that I have the same tender respects and affection your person that ever I had, both in regard of your own worth, as in respect of that blood of which we both partake: Neither have I ever for∣got any of the least good services which your Father in his life time hath shewed to me, the obli∣gations whereof shall alwayes remain engraven in the bottom of my heart. Be pleased, I pray, to believe, though the present State of things, have not permitted me to correspond with you, and to communicate my designs and Treaties, which in all transactions I have undertaken with the most Christian King, I have alwayes endeavoured to advance your Interest so far as the nature of the Treaty could any way permit. The insolencies and continual Machinations against me, by those that for some time since have had so great direction in the Government of the United Netherlands, have necessitated me to joyn with the most Christian King, (who also hath the same Subject of complaint against them) to the end onely to cast down that insupportable great∣nesse of the Louvesteinish faction, and to assure our selves from the like future insults and mock∣age: The trust that I have to the Friendship of the most Christian King, the affection he bears to
your Person, and his aversion to them which have manifested themselves to be my Enemies as well as yours, do promise unto me a good issue out of all these turmoiles as to your self, and in case the Inhabitants of those Provinces, had in time considered their mistake, and conferred upon you the authority and dignities, wherewith your Illustrious Predecessors have so worthily been possessed of, then without doubt, the said most Christian King and We should have continued in a perfect and assured friendship with the foresaid Provinces. Notwithstanding I am very much satisfied with what the Commons of those Provinces now lately have done, choosing you for their Stadtholder. And when I shall see, that affairs are brought to such a stay, that it shall be no longer in the power of the said violent faction, or another as malitious, to dissolve or make fruit∣lesse, what is done, and that I shall be able to free my Subjects from the oppression and injuries they have so long sustained; I will endeavour to protect you and your friends, and improve all my interest with my Brother in law, the most Christian King, for to yeeld to such an issue to these embroiled affairs, that the whole World may perceive the particular care I bear to your Person, and what for your sake I will do for the interest of the foresaid Provinces. To be short, I would assure you, and you may certainly believe, that I have alwayes all manner of good in∣clination and intention for your well being, as such as you could desire, and which alwayes may witnesse that I am, and shall be, Cousin Your well-affectionate Uncle, and was under writ CHARLES REX. The Letter was diversly interpreted, which I leave to every one to judge of as seemeth him good, but look upon it as meerly complimental, and expressing the Kings bitternesse against this State, under the name of the Governors there∣of; and I pityed those who judged to see in it any affection of the King towards his Highnesse, and for his sake to this Country, or did hope by this change the easier to obtain an accommodation with England. 1. August, Towards evening went out of Utrecht about 3000. men, most Horse, having some pieces by them, with which the day after they came before Kroonenburg, where Captain Witze commanded with about 200. men, it was a strong Fort, but not provided with Ammunition, of which the French with some losse made themselves masters, carrying away our Soldiers prisoners to Utrecht, which also they did to the Fort Loenersloot, in which lay onely a few men, both which Forts a while after they left; by powder demolishing Kroo∣nenburg, and having plundered all Loenen and what was thereabout, retired with the spoil to Utrecht. 8. dito, In the Quarters of his Highnesse, Captain de Hing Yossa, who had laid in Wesel, was sentenced by the High Councel of War to be beheaded, for co∣wardize, mutiny, and treachery. Colonel Mombas, who had betrayed the Tol∣house, was the same day his brother in law, de Groot, departed the Land, senten∣ced to be deprived of all dignities and Offices, to be detained 15. years prisoner; but in the sentence nothing was pronounced against his Person, but not long af∣ter he escaped, and went over to the Enemy, upon which 3000. gildens was set upon him by proclamation. The 28. August, Colonel d'Ossery for his unfaith∣fullness at Rijnberck, was beheaded in the Princes Leger, And the 23. Septemb.
the Commander van Zanten and Major Copes, for their unfaithfull carriage in the delivery of Wesel, were disgraded and their Swords broken at their feet, and the first of these, in the presence of the other, had the Sword stroke over his head, his Goods confiscated, himself banished for 12. years out of the Land: another Colonel of Wesel also was disgraded and sent away; other Officers of Rijnberck, Wesel, and other places, for their cowardize were detained prisoners, some at Mastricht, others at Gorcum and Bodegrave. 10. dito, Some Horse out of the Quarters of his Highnesse; advanced to the very gates of Utrecht, rushing into the Enemies retrenchment, killing many and bringing away 16. prisoners, with the losse of two men onely. About this time, our Militia was mustered by the Lord Beverning here, and by others in other places, and were found to be 783. Companies, 200. whereof had their Offi∣cers discharged, to be (as they speak) reformed, and their Companies added to other; which also shortly after was effected by his Highnesse, and these reformed Officers had a certain maintenance allotted them, with promise to be again ad∣vanced according to merit, with the first opportunity. 12. dito, His Highnesse came to Amsterdam, all the 60. Companies with two Companies of Horse were in Arms, and the 13. dito his Highnesse took Session in the City Councel, and of the Admiralty, having before taken a view of the City fortifications, and at noon was treated in the Town-house, then he depart∣ed to Muyen, for to see the fortifications there, & so to Weesp, Hinderdam and Abkow, from whence he again returned the 14. dito, and the day following de∣parted in pomp to Bodegrave. 18. dito, A Troup of French Horse of 17. Standards, intended to have sur∣prized Gorcum, but the Field Marshal Wurts having notice thereof, sent some Foot with 3. Pieces against them, forcing them after the losse of 60. Horse to re∣turn to Vianen and Utrecht, 4. onely of our men being slain. The 20. dito, was fatal to two of the chief Persons of the Land, Cornelius and his brother Iohan de Wit, the first being old Burgomaster of Dort, and Ruard of the Land of Putten, being late the onely Plenipotentiary on the Fleet, The other Great Counceller, and Pensionaris of Holland and West-Friesland: It was the 24. July when the Ruart was by the Fiscale of the Court, brought pri∣soner from Dort to the Hague, being lodged in Casteleiny, it being not known for what, save onely that a Barber of Bodegrave accused him, that by money he sought to entice him, having also given a part of the promised sum, to kill his Highnesse; whereupon being examined by the Court, and diverse times con∣fronted with the Accuser, he was the 6. of August brought from the Casteleinye into the Fore-poort of the Court, his Accuser also being a while after there de∣teined, and after diverse confrontings, The Ruart was put to the torture, which he endured as is said, two times, And the 20. dito in the morning, the Accuser was set at liberty, the following Sentence being pronounced against the Ruart, prisoner in the Court Gate.
The SENTENCE of the Court of Holland and West-Friesland, against Mr. CORNELIUS de WIT, Old Burge∣master of the City Dort, pronounced the 20. August 1672. THe Court of Holland having seen and examined the Papers, delivered up by the Procureur General of the said Court, to the Charge of Mr. Cornelius de Wit, Old Burgemaster of Dort, and Ruard of the Land of Putten, at present Prisoner in the Fore-gate of the said Court, together with his Examinations and Confrontations, as what by the said Prisoner hath been delivered up, and having duely considered what was in the case to be taken notice of, or might any wayes be serviceable in it; Do declare the Prisoner to be fallen from all his Dignities and Offices by him hitherto possessed of; and further doth banish him the Country of Holland and West-Friesland, so as ne∣ver to return again upon pain of greater punishment, and that he depart the Country with the very first; condemning him in the Charges and Mises of the Law, at the taxa∣tion and moderation of the said Court. Acted by the Lords Adriaen Pauw President, Lord of Bennebroeck, Aelbrecht Nierop, William Goes, Lord of Boeckhorstenburg, Fredrick van Lier, Lord van Soetermeer, Cornelius Baen, and Matheus Gool, Councellors of Holland and West-Frieslend, and pronounced upon the Fore gate of the Court, the 20. August, 1672. Witnesse hereof A. Dr. POTS. The Citizens having a few dayes before heard a rumour that the Ruard was escaped, would not be quiet, before he had shown himself before the grates of the windows, and from that time kept the prison gate with watch. Seeing the Barber come off free, and hearing that the Ruard onely was banished, began again tu∣multuously to rise up, and set on by the instigation of the Barber, all the 6. com∣panies rose up in Arms. In the mean while, John de Wit came with his Father in a Coach, for to fetch away his brother, according to the Ruards desire, the Fa∣ther because of tumult riding away with the Coach: when now both the bro∣thers came from above, they were forced by the Citizens that kept the watch to go up again, till that two whole Companies came to the Gate, who with their Pikes and Musquets drave away the Horse that were coming thither; In the mean while, the mutiny of the Citizens encreased, crying now we have both the Traytors within, they shall not escape us; and two of the Citizens Officers, with some Gentlemen of the Companies and Commons went up to bring them down, where they found the Ruard in his Gown upon his bed, and John sitting before him, who with soft words and in way of excusing did pacifie these Offi∣cers, and prevailed with them to sit down at Table to eat: by which stay and the encrease of the vulgar, the tumult rose to an extream height, and so shot they fu∣riously at the prison Gate, and at length with iron Instruments brake it in pie∣ces, as also some inner-doores: upon which the doore of the prison chamber was opened, John de Wit asking, well good people, to what end is all this force? but seeing it was their intent to cause them to come down, he took his
brother by the hand, and went with much thrusting and kicking down the stairs: coming below, John thought to have gone behind the armed men, and not thorow the ranks; but was by the vulgar presently seised on, and by a citi∣zen stroke on the head with the thick end of his musquet, so that he fell down, but soon rose up again; but at the second blow he sunk down to the ground, and then a citizen setting his foot upon his neck, shot him with a pocket pistol thorow the head: The Ruard was served in the same kind, being fallen upon, beaten, shot, and thrust thorow, and his dead Corps troden upon, and the Gown of the Ruard, and Cloak of John torn into small pieces with their cloths, and so thrown about. It remained not thus onely, but their dead bodies were dragged to the place of execution, and hanged by their feet stark naked upon the assents of the Gibbet, in the sight of all the World; whereupon the vulgars fury not yet satisfyed, they toward the evening first cut off the two foremost fingers of John de Wit, wherewith he had subscribed the perpetual Edict, and afterward cut of the Fin∣gers, Toes, Nose, Ears, and privy Members of both of them, and prying into the innermost parts, plucked out their Bowels, winding them about their arms, tore their Hearts out of their bosoms, screwed open their Bodies with wooden pricks, offering to sale in all parts of the City; yea, in other Towns inlandish and outlandish the torn pieces of their Garments, and Members of their bodies; A Toe was sold for 10. the joynt of a Finger for 12. a Finger for 15. and an Ear for 25. stuyvers, and so pro rato, accordingly, some of them they dryed, embal∣med, and carried about to be seen for money, and they that went to the highest pitch of inhumanity, did (horresco referens) rost their Flesh and ate it. Who would believe that ever our Netherlands should have brought forth Anthropo∣phagi? The night drawing her Curtains before this tragical Theatre, the Actors and Spectators departed; whereupon came a Coach with five Laquies, which took away what was left of the Bodies, bringing the same into the House of Iohn de Wit; burying the same silently the next night in the New Church, in the Grave where Iohn de Wits Wife laid: Some there were that spake of taking them up out of the Graves again, to burn them to ashes, and fling them into the air; fearing perhaps, least by another change of time, their bones should rear them up, a Grave of honour as Martyrs of the State, as was formerly foretold, should be done to Barnevelt. However, they satisfyed themselves in putting their hands to the last work of breaking to fitters their Arms, which were made to be hung up in the Church, for they would root out their memory, if they could, as well as their Lives from the Earth. Their kindred complying with the intemperance of these times, did not ap∣pear in mourning apparel: Strangers spake of the transaction, as their fancies led them, some judged it an act of Chivalry and restauration of our oppressed li∣berty; Others did not commend, yet would not blame it, looking upon it as a special judgement upon them; yet many condemn the whole action, fearing the destruction of the whole Land would follow hereupon; but they who would seem
the most impartial, judged that in this conjuncture of time, it was a good service to the Land, that these men were removed, though they were the greatest Intel∣ligents and Politicians of the World; yet the action it self they lookt upon as barbarous and abominable, and which hath stained our Nation with the black mark of fury, which shall never be wiped of, and the more because no certain evidence, or confession of the one, nor accusation of the other hath been made known. This is remarkable, that at the very same time the Citizens were here busie to take away the life of John de Wit, who had resigned his Pensionaryship, even the States of Holland, during these tumults were employed in the choice of another Pensionaris, unto which the Lord Griffier Fagel was pro∣pounded. 1. September, The Field Marshal Wurts went with some Troups out of Gor∣cum, to the House Pouroyen, which the French had fortified, and garrisoned, which he soon mastered, taking some prisoners, the rest retiring to Bommel: and while ours were busie in this work, they of the Bos went before Crevecoeur, to impede that no assistance from thence might be sent to Pouroyen, which being sometime beset with our men, was soon after demolished by Gun-powder. 2. dito, Some Frieses with help of them that crosse upon the Souther-Sea, fell upon Block-zijl, and gayned the Sconse by them erected, upon which the Inha∣bitants fell upon the Munsters, and cut the throat of the Commander, and forth∣with by help of ours Soldiers did drive out the French, whereupon Vollenhoven was also left by the Enemy. About this time, also some Yaghts and Small-ships with Soldiers under the conduct of one Muller, went from Amsterdam with a design upon Swart-sluce, before which after long hinderance by contrary wind, they came; but the plot not being well laid, did not prosper, the Munsters being seconded by their friends, whereupon some of ours returned to Amsterdam, leaving there the Yaght of Muller, which was fired: but most of ours made for Block-zijl, from whence the 11. dito, Captain Holbaarn with 240. men made a gallant assault up∣on Slijckenburg, or the Kuynder-Sconse, soon putting 250. of the Episcopel to flight, taking 28. prisoners, a Coach with horses, and other booty, few being slain or wounded on either side, Captain Holbaarn remained Commander there. 7. dito, Toward evening 2000. Groeningers with 12. Field Pieces went forth out of Groeningen, under the chief Lieutenant of the Governor Rabenhaupt, to Winschoten, which the Episcopal were a making strong, by that Fortresse to straiten the Bourtange, Delf-zijl, yea Groeningen it self; Whereupon the Epi∣scopal being 800. Dragoons went the 8. dito out of Winschoten, and set them∣selves in posture by four Esquadrons in the Field till ours came, but were soon put to flight, and withal driven out of the Winschoter Sconse, loosing about 200. man, six pieces, many waggons, spades, and such like Instruments, retiring unto the Old and New Sconses; after which ours put a Garrison in the Fort Te Wedde, which is the Pas to the Bourtange, whereby the Passes of the Old and New Sconses are asmuch as possible could be shut and blockt up.
16. dito, Some Troups from the quarter of the Earl of Horn, marched into Oudewater, putting forces into it, making soon after his quarters there, leaving the Post of Gouverwelle sluce beset with some Troups onely: Which also his Highness would have done at Woerden, if they had not been unwilling to spoil their Tile-houses, so desired they might be excused, whereupon his Highnesse seeing he could not be secured, put no forces into the Town, but the French awakened through our strengthening of Oudewater, the Duke of Luxenburgh, Stoupa, Mombas, and many other Officers, marched from Utrecht with about 4. or 5000. Horse and Foot, 4. Peeces, and much bagage to Woerden, where ar∣riving the Duke, by a Trumpetter desired of the Lords passage for some Troups, which was granted: whereupon they all entred, and held their Post there, to the great astonishment of the Inhabitants: The 19. dito, many boats with bagage and provision, also carts with instruments and bullets, and two Canons, (for the other did stick in the way) were sent in, and with all speed the Pesants round about with the Citizens were forced to work at the fortification, for the streng∣thening of the City, and to leave all they had without the City, and demolish whatever stood in the way, so Luxenburg returned to Utrecht, leaving a Garri∣son of 2000. there. 20. dito, Some French went from Crevecoeur to Heusden, and on a sudden rushed into a Redout and Horn-work, which they of the City perceiving, were alarmed, whereupon the French were forced again to retire out of those Posts, taking along with them some prisoners; but on the other hand, at the same time a French Troup of Horse near the Village Capel, a little higher than Schoonho∣ven were soundly beaten, and many slain, without any great losse of our men. 4. dito, The Sommer season passing, our Fleet came in, some lighter Frigats keeping Sea near our Ports, the greater ships retiring to their several homes, up∣on which also the greater English ships were laid up, one Esquadron of the light∣er ships onely keeping at Sea, The French Esquadron also prepared to go home, but were kept at Sea by contrary winds till the midst of November, before they got to Brest: And it is past apprehension, how these two Fleets Enemies to each other could be so long, without any engaging. The War which till now hath been so sore upon us, was driven on by the professed enmity of 2. mighty Kings, one Elector, and the Bishop of Westpha∣lia, besides many other who under hand did favour and assist them: where on the contrary, we onely a little supplied by the Spanish Netherlands, were forsa∣ken of all our former Allies. With Brandenburg indeed a Treaty defensive was made, but hitherto without any effect, untill that the Lords of Amerongen and Pelnits took their journey thither with vast sums, but the ship in which they were, happily met a boat from Hamburg before the Weset, who told them there lay three English ships before the Elve, which waited for the coming of an Hol∣land ship with money, and that, if they would but look up they might see them; wherefore it seemed most safe to these Lords, to sail with the money to Bremen, where they well arrived; from that time forward, there was a gathering of some Soldiers, of which continually was much spoken and long expectation; At the same time also the Emperor raised forces at Egra, according to a league defensive
between him and Brandenburg, for the security of the Empire against France, in which league Spain and Denmarck also were included, which to us seem∣ed to promise some good, and the rather because it was certainly report∣ed the Brandenburgers traine came down, and the Elector himself 26. August ar∣rived at Halberstadt, where also the Earl Montecuculi, General of the Imperial Troups came the 10. September. It was expected that both these Armies would have come further to the Rhijn side, and presse into Wephalia: were upon, also Turenne gathered his Forces and encamped between Wesel and Doesburg, for to have a waking eye upon them: but the Auxiliary Troups having laid some while about Halberstadt, changed their course, returning back to Franckfurt, The Elector leaving some Forces upon the borders of Westphalia, and the Auxi∣liaries sate down at Fridburg and Butspach; whereupon Turenne also marched up higher with his Army, alongst the Rhijn, and pitched over against Ceulen. And notwithstanding, we here were altogether ignorant of the intent the Auxiliaries had in this march, yet it put some courage into us; for hereby Tu∣rennes Army was kept off from us, and in the interim our Armies encreased mightily with inlandish and outlandish Forces, as diverse Regiments of Ko∣nincksmark, The General Polens, of the Duke of Holstein Pleun, of the Earl of Witgenstein, and the like, which came out of other Countries, the method also of the Militia was better ordered; the Leger Posts in better defence, and the commotions at home sedated, all which gave more satisfaction to the Citizens; but on the contrary, it encreased the misery of the conquered places, and daily augmented their oppression: On the plains all was ruinated by fire and sword, in the Cities excessive burdens and contributions raised, and Soldiers inquartered in the Citizens houses, and themselves disarmed; and upon high threats of pu∣nishment required to bring all their Arms up to the Town-house to be lockt up: Diverse of their Churches, contrary to agreement, taken from them, and thorowout all the Conquest the following Proclamation of the King was pu∣blished Whereupon on the other hand by way of retorsion, a like Proclamation was published by the States. A Declaration of the French King, against the Inhabitants of Gelderland, Over-Yssel, and the Sticht Utrecht. FRom the King: His Majesty being well informed, that a great number of the Inhabitants of the new conquered Lands by his Arms in Holland, have aban∣doned and forsaken their Lands, Houses, and Inheritances, retiring themselves else∣where; His Majesties pleasure being to force them to return, doth ordain and command expresly, that the owners of the said Houses thus abandoned, do come and dwell there again, and that before the end of this month now running on, without any longer delay, upon pain, the time being past of confiscation of all their incomstes, and to be obliged every day to pay 50. gilders for the maintenance of the Troups of his Majesty, and in case of no payment, their Houses to be rased down to the ground, their plantations ruinated.
portrait of Raymundus Graef RAYMUNDUS GRAEF van MONTE CUCCOLI Generalissimus van t. Keiserlück Leger:
fortifications NAARDEN fortifications UYTERMEER SLUYS fortifications WEESP
His Majesty commands and ordains to his Lieutenants General, Commanders of his Troups in the conquered Countries, as also to the Lord Robert Intendant of the Justice Polity and Finances, in his regard to look unto the execution of these presents, the which his Majesty will have published, and in all places affixed, where it's require, that none may pretend ignorance hereof. Given at Versailles, the 9. Septemb. 1672. Was subscribed LOUIS. Yet lower LE TELLIER. In England the time of the Parliaments coming together approached, but it pleased the King to prorogue them untill February next coming, of which there were diverse thoughts, but most judged it a sign of small inclination to peace, which seemed the more credible, because of the news, that France and England bad prolonged the Alliance for 6. moneths. The 28. dito, Ours made an attempt upon Naarden, to which end many ships went with Soldiers from der Gow to the Southern Sea, and from Amsterdam and other Posts with boats to Weesp, for to fall upon Naarden altogether at one time early in the morning, both by Water and by Land; the Soldiers at Land, with whom his Highnesse was in person being ready at the set time, and were advan∣ced near unto the City, they within not yet knowing of it, but by reason of an extraordinary calm, the Soldiers in the ships, nor the Float-boats with the Canon could come up, so the attempt came to nothing, for his Highnesse not willing to hazard his forces, which might have been fallen upon from behind out of Amers∣foord and Utrecht, drew off the Militia to their Posts, onely leaving some Posted in Grave-land and Ankeveen. Octob. 7. Some French (who upon the attempt of Naarden were come from Utrecht) fell upon ours, who were Posted in Graven-land, putting to flight, and taking some of them prisoners; whereupon the French advanced before the Sluce of Ankeveen, where Prince Maurice had planted some Pallisados, and cast up of a sudden a Brest-work, upon which the French sell on with great fury, but were repulsed with the losse of fifty men, and on our side onely one Captain. 10. dito, An attempt upon Woerden was made, the Lord of Zuylestein out of the Princes Quarter, and the Earl of Horn out of Ouwater, coming in the night before it, but passed by to their appointed posts; Zuylestein with the Re∣giment of Solms, and some other Companies Groven-bridge, betwixt Ut∣recht and Woerden, to hinder succours from Utrecht, posting there with a Bat∣tery toward Utrecht: The Earl of Horn having by him some Companies of Mariners lay Posted upon Polanen and the Saw-mills, to shoot upon the City from thence. The 11. dito, with the breaking of the day, the Watch-man on the Tower spyed, that there were Forces come before the City, and sounding twice the Bells, all was alarmed in the City, and the sound of Musquets heard, answered one another: Whereupon the Watch made a fire upon the South-east Corner of the Walk, for a sign to them of Utrecht, that they were in stresse for
succours, and the wind blowing very hard, the Tower, Church, and 15. or 16. Houses were consumed to ashes, the fire during till the afternoon. In the mean while, his Highnesse made his approaches to the City from the side of Bode∣grave, to make an attempt upon it; but they within sent forth some to set on fire the Tile-houses, it being about the evening which in measure succeeded, but they were soon driven in again by ours: At which time the Duke of Luxenburg with 6. a 7000. men, fell upon the quarter of Zuylestein, but was manfully resisted: The 12. dito, early in the morning, the Princes men scaled the walls by the fa∣vour of Fire-balls and Granados, upon which they within issued out, but fell short, and soon returned back to the City, leaving behind many dead, among which were 18. Officers, being followed by our men to the very gates, which the French had out of a sudden fear left a good while open, and without guard, so as it might by our men have easily been taken, had they gone forward. While this was a doing, and all things prepared to force the City, for which the Prince himself in person advanced to the very Gate, the Duke of Luxenburgh (who the night before was beaten off from the quarter of Zuylestein) through the help of some Pesants was led along the Houdijck to Camerijck, and from thence came by the Cruipin (though the waters were knee-deep and higher) be∣twixt Woerden and the quarter of Zuylestein, and on a sudden fell upon them from behind, where it was naked and the Canon turned: and however they fought manfully, yet that quarter not able to stand out against the whole power of the French, would have been ruined, in case the Earl of Horn, had not come to their assistance, who fell upon the French with such courage, that many were slain, fighting with the rapier in their hand, and the Mariners with their knives. By which defence our men had opportunity to retire in order, onely the Canon of Zuylestein, with his Ammunition was taken; but the Earl of Horn brought of his men, and summoned the City before he departed: And his Highnesse hearing the tidings hereof, gave order to retire with the whole train, and to re∣turn to the Leger posts, the city by these succours being too much fortifyed, for to attempt further upon it. In this encounter indeed the design upon the City did not prosper, yet there was no disadvantage in the battle; there being lost on our side not above 500. men in all, both prisoners and slain, among was the Lord Zuylestein, and Lieutenant Colonel Schimmel-penning, on the other hand the French lost above two thousand, among whom were some of great qua∣lity with many high and inferior Officers, so that France it self did not greatly boast of this encounter. At the same time it was appointed, that the Garrison of Schoonhoven should make a diversion, under the Marquis de Lovigni, and alarm Vreeswijck, other∣wise called de Vaert, over against Vianen, which was also done, with such success that our men approaching longst the Dike, with the losse of 7. or 8. under which were two Captains, entered the same, but instead to advance further and fall up∣on the French, who not above an hundred meanly retrenched lay below the Sluce, every one fell a plundering, and with their booty retired, setting some houses on fire; whereupon the French came afterward and burnt down the Church it self with some other houses. At the same time also it was ordered to make a false alarm about Naarden, but had no effect.
fortifications WOERDEN fortifications OUDE WATER
17. dito, 36. Out of Aardenburg assaulted the Fort Knocke, laying on the Vaart, upon the Steen-straet, where the French had a Custom-house, which they took in, killing many of the French, and taking 25. prisoners, among whom was the Custom-master and the Controller, brought with them the Kings Arms, with good booty, setting the Forton fire, but was afterward again reared by the French. The 17. dito, the great Councel of War was held at der Gow, where were pre∣sent his Highnesse, and the Generals of the Leger, but their Consultations were kept very close: but soon after, a great number of Inland-ships to the number of 800 or 1000. were arrested, with which the 26. dito and following dayes from Rotterdam and der Gow were shipped the most part of the States Horse, and some Regiments of Foot, to the Brabants Coasts, being followed by some of the greatest Commanders and his Highnesse himself, who brought them into po∣sture about Breda, and marched into the Country of Luyck, with what design is kept very secret. 26. dito, The Munsters with 1400. came along the Long Acker or New-sconse, and fell upon ours for to raise the siege of the Belling wolder or Old-sconse, but were so welcomed, that they were forced soon to retire to the New-sconse, 200. and more being slain and stript, whereupon those of the Old-sconse the 27. dito began to parly, and departed thence with burning match, to the number of 400. of which scarcely an 100. came into Coeverden, and our men did with all speed labour to block up the New-sconse, as close as possibly might be; but forasmuch as it cannot be well approached to, and they within vvell provided, it may in all appearance hold out long. The Emperial and Brandenburger Forces kept along while about Franckfurt, where were held diverse Conferences with the Princes thereabout, touching the marching of these people through their Territories, the Elector of Ments, being resolved to hinder their coming over the Rhijne; and therefore took away the Bridge before the City, whereupon the Confederates in the beginning of November made a Ship-bridge over the Main near Fleersheim, where fell out skirmishes about Usingen, where some of the Emperialists guarding a Pas over the Lhaan, were set upon by some Companies of Turenne, who himself with his Army marched from Colen up higher, and was already advanced near Coblents and the Wester-wald: This encounter fell out to the advantage of the Confederates, they keeping the Pas, though they were fewer in number, and the 7. and 8. dito, they passed over the Bridge they had made; the Emperial Ge∣neral Montecuculi being to depart to Weenen, and the Duke de Bourneville to come in his place to command the Emperial Troups: And at this time the Prince of Condé was come to Mets, to gather an Army about the Moesel, to withstand the Confederates, to which end all was brought together in France, what possible could be, to send to Condé: The 24. dito, the Duke of Anjou, who was born, while the King was in the Field died. The French fearing that the Emperialists would march longst the Bergstraat through the Palts, and passe the Rhijn at Straatsburg over the Bridge, to come into the Elses, thereupon the Commander in Brisack shipping 700. men, came the 16. November in the night and burnt the Bridge at Straatsburg, ruining 8. arches thereof, to the great asto∣nishment
of the Straatsburgers: but the Emperialists not seeking that way, made a Bridge over the Rhijn a little higher than Maints, and in part marched over the same; Whereupon also the Marshal Turenne laid a Bridge over the Rhijne, somwhat below Coblens by Andernach, and departed with such speed out the Bergsland and Westerwald, that the sick and overweary were left behind above a 1000. in number, all which by the Pesants there about were put to the Sword. November 4. 400. French came into the Vïllage Waverveen, where the Pe∣sants at first made some resistance, but soon retired; an Outlayer having in it 28. men, and some iron pieces, defended it self couragiously, but ran a ground, and so was mastered, whereupon the French plundered the Town, much abusing the Pesants, and before they departed, set the Town on fire. The 7. dito, they burnt down the remaining Tile-houses about Woerden, as also the 8. dito the Villages Newveen and Over-meer: and the 9. a Fort by Newerbrugge, and wholy con∣sumed by fire that fair Town of Jaarsvelt, and the 16. dito, set on fire Abkow, nothing being exspected, but this Winter they will ruinate all the open Country where ever they can come. 14. dito, A party of 400. out of Ouwater, surprized 14. ships with Hay by Monfoort, with Oats, Straw and Corn, intending for Utrecht, some they brought with them, the rest they burnt. And the day following, the Marquis De Tours Commander of the Goverwelle-sluce with a gallant party, set upon many Boats with provision, going for Utrecht and Woerden, taking 30. of them, and sunk 8. before Woerden, whereupon soon after the French deserted the Cities Yssel∣stein and Monfoort, blowing up the Tower of the Fort of Monfoort. 16. dito, The Munsters forsook the Yler-sconse, because, as it seemed, 2500. Horse of the Prince of Courland, taken into service of this State, were arri∣ved at Lier in East-Friesland, for to come here into our Country through Groe∣ningen. About an hundred of our men laying before the Old-sconse, were commanded to take possession of the Yler-sconse; whereupon a day two or three after 3000. Munsters fell on again, driving our men out, and taking some prisoners, as also routed 200. of the Courlanders, who were gone a grasing too far in Westphaly, yet many of these afterward made shift to return to their main body: the Munsters lost not many lesse in this rencountre, and quitting the Yler-sconse, it was well nigh wholy ruinated. 2. dito, 50. men out of Block-zijl made a party, and hard by Hasselt encoun∣tred 36. of Colen with a Lieutenant whom with 24. they took prisoners, and kil∣led the rest. The 28. dito, The French came to the Post of Ankeveen, from which they were forced to retire with the losse of 8. men, and 4. or 5. prisoners; yet in their retiring burnt some houses behind the Town. The 30. dito, they came again to Abkow, thinking to burn down the remaining of it, but our men falling out of the Fort, hindred the same, and took 30. of them prisoners; and some other of ours in a boat, went to Breukelen, and fetcht 19. French from thence, and brought them prisoners to Abkow. 26. dito, In the afternoon 1000. men went forth out of Utrecht and Vyanen, joyning with some Horse and Foot of Cuylenburg, from thence they marched to that fair Town, or rather City of Armeyde, which had a retrenchment at the
fortifications SWART SLUYS fortifications HASSELT
Sluce, with Palissados, where Colonel Bamphield with his Soldiers had the watch: In the night the French fell on, and made themselves masters thereof, finding, as it seemeth, little resistance, for the Field Marshal Wurts at the noise of the shooting, hasting from Gorcum to their assistance, found the works yet entire, onely one Palissado hewed down, after the French had plundred and burnt down part of the houses, they returned back with 64. prisoners, of Sol∣diers, Countrymen and Women: but many of their own were wounded, among whom was the Marquis de Castelnou, a chief Commander and Head of this action, who dyed of his wounds at Utrecht: They had 4. times as many slain, as we, among whom were many Officers, for our Outlayers or Boats shot with their Canon sore upon them. Many of the Regiment of Bamphield ran away, and he himself was accused of not performing the charge of a Comman∣der, and as it is reported, was put in prison at Langerack; The French seeking by all means possible, through one or other of our Posts to break into Holland, made some few dayes after an attempt upon Schoonhoven, but were beaten off with great losse. 29. dito, 500. men from Block-zijl and the Kuynder, came before Swartsluce with 30. Capers, and 3. very great Flat-boats, which were fenced and provided with great Guns, or half Cartows, having about a 1000. men in them for to Land, and so altogether to fall upon the Sluce: 200. of our Land-soldiers fell on so stoutly at the appointed time, that they had even got the mastery of the Fort, but the Ships and Boats advanced not, but kept off, shooting at a distance, doing little or no hurt to the Enemy; our Men on Land making sign with their Hats for them to sail forward, but in vain, though they had both wind and stream for their advantage; whereupon a party of Horse from Hasselt and Meppel came rushing on, falling upon the back of our men, and took in the Fort again, about an 100. of ours, either slain, drowned, or wounded, and near 200. taken priso∣ners, which was imputed to the treachery or cowardize of some, for had they that fell on, as was meet been seconded, they had not only got Swart-sluce, but Hasselt also, which was the intent of the enterprize; but this was the second time brought to nothing, to our shame and losse. The season of the year, the badnesse of the wayes, and ill success of our under∣takings, did sufficiently shew, that this Winter time very little good was within the Country to be exspected: as also it could not help much to the redressing of our decaying State, in case it could have been attainable for us this Winter to gain Naarden, Woerden, yea, Utrecht it self; therefore it was a most prudent and praise-worthy resolution, and an undertaking of a more glorious and high∣er design of his Highness, leaving the Land in a good posture of defence, to go forth and meet the Enemy upon the borders, not shunning to face them in the Field; hereby peradventure being like to put a short issue to a long War. And however it might fall out with the undertaking, the successe whereof depends on the blessing of the Lord; nevertheless, the Impartial will in equity free him from that imputation, wherewith the enviers of his Greatness and prosperity have bespattered him, and be constrained to confess, that the liberty of his Coun∣try is more precious than his Life, & that his Princely youth doth not come short of any of the noblest undertakings of his Illustrious Predecessours.
This State not being satisfyed with the pretended neutrality of the Country of Luyck, where the French had put Forces in the Cities of Maseyck, Tongeren, and Valckenburg, and fortifying the whole Country (though against the will of the States of Luyck) and kept under their devotion; Therefore on our side also the said Country was set undër contribution, and with force furthered, upon which there followed enmity between Luyck and Mastricht, all communca∣tion being cut off: In the mean while, they of Luyck by Deputies in the Hague, and the intercession of the Spanish Ambassador, desired a cessation of further proceedings in way of enmity, and for Treaty of friendship, upon which the Earl of Slodorp went for Luyck, and the former correspondence was re-esta∣blished; especially, when his Highnesse was come thither to whom they sent Presents, and proffered all necessaries and assistance of men for the service of the State, so that all endeavour was made to secure that Princedom to this State, and his Highnesse with all his power laboured to engage Duras, who commanded the French Troups in Luyckland, following him even to Colen; but he with great dayes journies leaving the Maas, retired to the Moesel, though he were re∣cruted with some of the Forces of the Earl De Lorge. In the mean while, our Forces seized upon Valkenburg, and demolished it, taking 200. prisoners in the same, and brought to Mastricht, and blockt up Tongeren with the help of the Spaniards, who now did no longer secretly with some bands, but openly with all might and main, Horse and Foot and Artillery oppose the French, and in their publick prayers begged for a blessing on their Arms against them: and, as is said, by their Ambassador at Paris required the restitution of the Places taken from them in the last War, by the French. The Imperialists and Brandenburgers still remained with their Forces betwixt the Main and the Rhijn, guarding their Bridges over both those Rivers, and by some Horse had secured to themselves Keyserlauter, being a Pas to Mets, whereabout the Prince of Condé yet lyeth, and on the other side of the Moesel the Marshal de Turenne, to whom the Earl Duras hath adjoyned himself: What will be issue of these Armies so near one another, time will discover; but the Troups of Brandenburg left on the borders of Westphalia, under the General Spaan and other Commanders, are now grown to a formal Leger, and have be∣gun already to act as Enemies, being fallen into Munsterland, even to Waren∣dorp hard by Munster it self. Here in our Country all possible care is taken to resist the Enemy, and in this moneth of November, upon the advise of his Highness, a General Amnestia was proclaimed for all former differences and insurrections against the Magi∣stracy, to be wholy forgotten and pardoned, thereby upon pain of death forbid∣ding, to undertake any account in word or deed against the present Govern∣ment established by his Highness, that so the Governours being the better secu∣red, they might unanimously watch for the well-being of the Commonwealth: as already for the straitning of the enemy, they have caused all Provisions which are in the open Country, where the Enemy might come by, as Hay, Turf, But∣ter, Cheese, &c. to be brought into Places of security, and augmented and forti∣fyed their Posts, and the better to defend them, five Regiments of Foot which were going with his Highness to Mastricht, were sent back, and that no fear of
danger might be by the frost to be surprized by the enemy, the Cities of Rotter∣dam, Gouda, Delft, the Hague, Leyden and Haerlem, are fortifyed. Amster∣dam by its Outworks and strength being made formidable, and seats for 320. Canons already placed upon the Wall, of which many are already mounted the most being whole, three quarter, and half artowen; the Rivers and Streams with Outlayers filled with Mariners are secured, in which posture we are wayting upon God for his blessing on the righteousness of our War. This is according to the best Demonstrations and Intelligences, a true Rela∣tion of the wonderfull revolutions from the beginning of this unhappy War, unto Decemb. 1672. in this our Land, which not long since being at the very top of prosperity and wantonness, on a sudden is cast down into a poole of all manner of distresse, in all appearance without any hope of ever rising again out of the dust of abasement, to its former lustre. What following Ages will give credit to the Histories of this time? What Nations will be able to comprehend the possibility thereof? We see it before our eyes, and are depending betwixt doubt and astonishment: and with great reasons we stand amazed over so sud∣den a ruine, and in doubt, as not knowing from whence this fatall stroke is come upon us, at which many have guessed; but every one judging according as his Phantasie leads him, as may be perceived by the Pamphlets and Books spread abroad of the causes of our disasters, whereof some are without any ground, other are built on a false foundation, and the best onely upon probalities, and not on evident Demonstrations: But for my own part, contenting my self with the bare Relation of what hath passed, do commit the further consideration and judgement thereof unto others. Faithfully Translated out of Dutch into English, according to the Copy Printed at Amsterdam by Steven Swart, Bookseller. Novemb. 30, 1672.
