H3151 99827294 31711
THE BEAST That was, & is not, & yet is, looked upon: OR, The Bo-peeping Beast POINTED AT: OR, He that hideth himself hunted, because of whom Truth complaineth, and is spoken to by Pope and Prelate, by Presbyter, by Inde∣pendent, by Quaker, by Baptist: TOGETHER With her several Answers to them all. ALSO One DESCRIPTION of the BEAST. ALSO The coming forth and progress of the BEAST hitherto. ALSO An Epistle to Magistrates and Law-givers, likewise, to take off Pre∣judice if any be. Two Epistles, one to the Reader, and another to the Christian Reader. VVITH A true Reproof to W. S. a Quaker, who in his Book called The Ly∣ing Spirit in the Mouth of the False Prophet, wherein he endea∣vours to make Men believe that he had answered H. H. his Book, called The Doctrine of the Light within the Natural Man leading to Eternal Life, examined by Scripture-Light. London: Printed for Daniel White, at the seven Stars in Paul's Church-Yard. 1659.
Truth speaketh. I Have been despis'd & banish'd from one place to another in the world, ever since Adam en∣tertained a lye for self-exaltation sake, and so fell from me his covering, unto Fig-leaves, and brought his posterity under Excuses and May-bees for their souls food and comfort; so that a Tabernacle hath been ever since more proper for me then a settled condition. When the true One, the sent One was upon the earth un∣der scorn and sufferings, he did exalt me, and gave Apostles and Prophets for Master-builders of me upon the chief Corner-stone, viz. Himself, his Death, his Burial, Resur∣rection, Ascension, sending down his Spirit, which formerly inspired Scripture-Writers and Believers to joyn his in one Spirit, by which he is present in the heart by faith, keeping life eternal in them, and hiding it in God for them, Col. 3.3. He, I say, and his Apostles, left my Testimony in Scripture-writ, under a terrible charge that none should add to it, nor take from it. But as Christ and his Apostles did, so to this day all that will have me without mixture of mans inventions, must be sure to suffer; for whosoever will closely walk in my ways, he shall lose friend after friend, as he attaineth to more and knowledge of me: if he be a way faring man, and follow his knowledge heartily and sincerely, the harder he presseth after the mark, Phil. 3.14. the more he encreaseth in know∣ledge, to the loss of all or most of his friends whom he dear∣ly loveth, to the rending of his soul; so that he who encreaseth knowledge, encreaseth sorrow, Eccles. 1.18. Yet notwithstand∣ing, this sorrow could not stop the love of Christ in the
hearts of multitudes from keeping his commandments for some hundreds of years together after his Ascention, Joh. 14.15. though few or none now dare look at me, because there is so many of mine enemies that have put upon them∣selves a dead image of me under forms of godliness. And also another sort of mine enemies have received the spirit of Satan as an Angel of Light, to cry down forms of Godliness with; so that I cannot appear beautiful in form and power joyntly, as I did in the time of Christ and his A∣postles, and for hundreds of years after: The one of these sorts being offended at my life, because they think to enjoy me coldly, carelesly, easily, onely in form; and when that is obtained, they think they may sleep under the covering of May-be, and other excuses, without disturbance of self-ex∣altation or lusts. The other, exalting a spirit of deceit to the outing of all, yea the very form of godliness, in which the distinct order and commands are, That Christ and his Apostles taught, practised and recorded in holy writ for our admonition up∣on whom the ends of the world are come, 1 Cor. 10.11. that there may be As it is written, to reprove sin and Satan with, and all reproveable spirits and things with, to comfort the distressed with, to reprove ruleless walkers with. This form and record being cryed down, this spirit of deceit may rule without examination or reproof; and whatsoever he dictates in the children of disobedience (for disobedience is a denying of Gods order) he may call it the moving of Gods spirit. At the first, (before the depths of Satan was known) there was no other grief upon the sincere ones for Christs sake, but the worlds sore persecution; but now this is the worlds wo, they can no sooner look towards me for con∣version, but one of the two foresaid stumbling-blocks or offences puts themselves in the way, Mat. 18.7.
Now followeth the speech that may be aptly spoken by Pope or Prelate. Truth, I hope you will not out me of my honourable order that hath continued about thirteen hundred years, and hath been settled by the approbation of so many learned and reverend Bishops and Doctors, who have gone on to chuse an universal Bishop as Christs Vicegerent, resembling the high Priest under the Law, and being Peters successour, and have settled an attendance of eminent Cardinals that are all Princes, and are able by Authority of our holy Fa∣ther to controul Kings and Kingdoms. That hath conver∣ted divers Counsels, and in every Counsel hath brought forth some holy Law or Ceremony, or more that maketh for the honour of the Church, and fast binding her toge∣ther in strength and riches, so that now she is become grea∣ter and stronger then any Prince, yea, then all the Princes in this part of the world called Christendom. And she hath invented such Inquisitions, Racks, Fires, Tortures, &c. and hath so absolute a power, that both the greatness of Kingship and Nobility, and also the baseness of Whores and Harlots, and all lustful people; yea, the ve∣ry Thieves in Jayl, and Bawdes in Bridewel, have love to my Order; yea, and great reason they have, for I can (for money or love, if they be obedient to their Mother holy Church) grant pardons (that will quiet their consciences if they will believe me) of all their sins past, present and to come: so that (safely be it spoken) saving the honour of the Church, they have a petty licence to vaunting pride and youthful lusts, being but venial sins; and all this honour and greatness is the fruits of learning and study, which (as Mr. Baxter writeth) is very laborious It is not the sweat of the brows that God appointed man to get his living by.. By my wisdom I have provided away for younger Bro∣thers of Noble-men and Knights to creep under my wings for honour and greatness; therefore all the greatness in this part of the world, will hold me up, and help me to jerk any saucy fellow that shall hold an Argument (though never
so true) against me; yea, and if we were cruel (as I hope you will not say we are) I have made such provision of can∣dor to lust, honour and greatness in me, that all the honour, strength and multitudes are at my command, to tear the limbs as with their talents, and to bill out the brains (as with my Peak) of all contradictors; insomuch, that none can open his eye to discover my vanity, but a Sword lyeth on it. Zac. 11.17. I beseech you also take notice of the good I have done for this part of the world who are my Vassals: I have buil∣ded their Churches, and dedicated them to Christ, or one Saint or other, that they may be holy; I have divided their Lands into Parishes, settled Tithes upon them, left no means unthought out that may dignifie or distinguish them, but have made all conveniences for ease, pleasure and safety that the wit of man can invent. Tell me now, am not I a better Master to mine, then Christ was to his? Who suf∣fered his to be under cruel mockings, scornings, bonds, impri∣sonments, savings asunder, temptings, being slain with swords, and wandring up and down in sheep-skins and goat-skins, Rom. 16.33. Heb. 11.37. And no marvel; for he had no King∣dom of this world as I have,But wilst thou lookest on the Sas outward condition, thou feelest not his  of t, Prov. 1.10. nor whereon to lay his head; he was never born to that honour and riches that I and mine are, for he was fain to make shift with a Manger at the time of his birth: though we arose from out of his Charts, Act. 20.30. we have attained to greater riches and intail∣ments, and strong settlements in this world, then he, or a∣ny of his had or will have. Truth speaketh. Prelate, what I say to thee, I shall say to all thy issue, viz. If thou be not found in the Scriptures of truth, I cannot own thee; for then thou must be of mans invention of lies, and must be outed for ever having share of me; your Anti∣quity cannot maintain you, you are not older then the E∣pistle of Jude, vers. 4. who wrote of your old Ordination, and your coming in; neither can the approbation of Bishops
and Doctors justifie you, for Christ Jesus thanketh his Father that he hath hid these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them to babes. 'Tis not honourableness that will help you, for God will stain the pride of all grory, and bring in∣to contempt all the honourable of the earth, Isa. 23.9. Whereas you pleade your Councils, I cannot own them▪ for the Scripture of truth concludes them under a wo (Isai. 30.1.) for taking Counsel, and not by Gods Spirit. One thing wherein your Councils are point-blank against the Scri∣ptures of truth, is, A Bishop (the Scripture proveth) must be the Governour of a natural family consisting of wife and children, where the spirit of Government must be fruitful in governing his own house well, in these words, A Bishop must be blameless, the husband of one wife, &c. 1 Tim. 3.2. One that ruleth well, having his Children in subjection with all gra∣vity; for if he know not how to rule his own, how shall he take care of the Church of God? Even so must their wives be grave, &c. vers. 4, 5. And in Titus, If any man be blameless, the hus∣band of one wife, having faithful children, not accused of ryot or unruly, &c. But your Councils are so shameless, that they give out their Must be against the Scriptures Must-be; for you say, That a Bishop must be unmarried, and so are all your Priests to be by your Councils Order: Therefore let all men look upon thee as one that vieth it with God himself; and indeed, if the Scripture had not spoken of a false-dealing shameless Clergie, Jer. 13.15. I should have more admired your impu∣dency: your daughter Presbytery is not altogether so shame∣less, for she puts her May-be against the Scriptures Must-be; for she saith, A Bishop may be unmarried. And as for your fixing your self in the joynts of honour, riches, strength, cruelty, multitudes, &c. I must by the Scri∣ptures of truth tell thee, That the stone, the tryed stone, the precious corner-stone, when he shall lay judgement to the line, and righteousness to the plummet, the hail shall sweep away all your re∣fuge of lies, then your contract with hell and death shall not stand, Isai. 28.16. viz. All this will I give thee if thou wilt fall down and worship me. He that contracted with you, will then prove but a bad Pay-master.
And as concerning the people that is with you in con∣cord, this very thing is the curse that is upon them, viz. There shall be like people like priest, and both in love with lies: if sometimes the Nation that is called Gods people were in this condition, it is easily believed that Rome and England may be so; It is said of them, The prophets prophesie falsly, the priests bear rule by their means, and my people love to have it so: but what will you do in the end thereof? These things con∣sidered, I have done with the Prelate. Now followeth the speech that may be aptly spokenly sme of that Presbitery, that is the Prelates Daughter. Truth, (it is a folly to lye before thee, though I may cozen the people with sophistical Arguments, my learning being very useful to me for that purpose) I have not shaken off my Mothers foundation, but have kept her Baptism, her sticking to mans Ordination to preach, though not wholly in her Order; for I tell you truly, herein lyeth my pomp, my riches, my benefice, my parish-livings that my Mother Prelate provided for me, and is the very Saddle upon which I ride the Beast, by the help of my brother Lawyer, (which Beast some have interpreted to be the great powers of the earth) for I know, the same spirit that caused the Hierarchies successors to ordain me, will cause them to maintain me, and all my honours and greatness; for indeed, I have all the Ru∣lers and great ones power, (for few or none of the Rulers believe on poor Christ, and his poor despised people) and therefore I flatter them in their powdered locks and new fashions,Rom. 12. gives you no such warrant. and their wives in their long trailing Gowns, naked Breasts, and spotted Faces; or if I flatter them not, I make my reproofs so soft and so thin as the Tiffany they wear. And for their filth of meat and vain talk, I smile at them, whilst I formally reprove them, and I call it not Gluttony and Drunkenness, neither do I charge it so strictly upon them to face them with bold reproofs, telling them, That for every
idle word they must give an account at the day of judgment, as the poor silly followers of poor Christ do. Alas, poor souls! for their plain dealing, the world judge∣eth them accursed, and turneth them out of doors; where∣as I can be welcome to great persons, and we can call on another godly; lying, till we think we say truly: and both of us together fall upon the back of the poor silly followers of poor Christ; by which means it is no disgrace to me up∣on the earth, before the great ones, and the lustful ones, and the common people; though the foresaid poor people by plain proofs cut of Scripture make me naked. My Mothet Prelate hath provided for me an example, viz. to flee to the Authority of Fathers; which (though they will not clearly serve my turn) yet my Rhetorick and Learning, together with the help of my brother Lawyer, who is my Companion in Learning, and a good Orator both in Courts and Countrey, yea before Princes he will plead for me. The Scribes and Pharisees (viz. Priests and Law∣yers) were ever Companions, and Enemies to Christ and his poor Flock. However, in these two particulars my Brother Lawyer and I differ; they (though as Learned as I) let down themselves to speak as plainly and homely as may be, that the Country Juries may understand them, and so do justice: But I, for maintaining my Livings, Dignities, and esteem amongst men, am constrained to hide my self in the words of Art, and abstruse Phrases, as Divinity, and Habits of Grace, &c. that I may be as slippery as an Eel, when plain Country understanding would catch me, and have a hole to creep out when the plain simple wisdom and the truth of these Nazae∣rites hath inclosed me. The second thing wherein my Brother Lawyer and I dif∣fer. They may be in their callings, and Disciples of Christ, too, (provided they be not instruments of cruelty, but use honest Laws, honestly) as Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicode∣mus was, &c. but I (if I should be of the Sect of the Naza∣rites, every where spoken against) must lose both my Honour and Greatness, (what great men purchased by flattery) and by silence at their vanities, and all my fat Livings: and let the
World judge whether it were wisdom so to do. And the truth is (though I be not altogether so honour∣able in name as my Mother, yet) I think my self stronger a∣mong Hypocrites, and self-seeking Professors; for by how much I am esteemed Godly, by so much those are esteemed ugly that cannot joyn with me. And upon this account I have more reason (in the eyes of all our Fraternity, that seek honour one of another) to persecute any saucy Jack, that upon pretence of Scripture-plainness is dare reprove us, or cast contempt upon our Rhetorical Tropes or figures, which are as silk Gowns to honour us, before an ignorant Multitude, especially if we can foi out a little Latin, which (though this our learning, together with Mans Ordination, maketh us to stand to it, that we are to be preferred before Mechanicks, and so are holier then they, Isa. 65.5. though we be a stink in Gods Nose, and a fire that burneth a the day) maketh us a sweet sent in the nose of an ignorant multi∣tude; for because we are Learned, they think they may be hold to trust us, and so by this very means, they think they need not rave into what we say, as the Bereans did, but take all upon trust, and so are kept ignorant, and dwell at ease still. And now tell me, Truth, if thou canst approve of these things, I shall live bravely both here and hereafter. Truth speaketh. As I say to thy Mother Prelate, so I say to thee, Except thy Image or superscription be found in the Scriptures of Truth, thou art but of mans invention, which God hateth, Isa 66.3. and also the refuge of lies, which must be swept a∣way: Thy Mothers name is MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND ABO∣MINATIONS OF THE VVHOLE EARTH, Rev. 17.1. It is notorious, that she beareth her name in her forehead; which proveth, 1. She is ashamed of nothing. 2. That every one may apparently behold her Abominations in her Forehead. And now let us see how like thy Mother thou art.
1. Thou and thy Mother have all one baptism, which pass from one to another by the Proclamation of Princes, but not by Gods word; which proveth you both to be of Mans Generation and Maintenance; whereas a Proclamation had power to make you both the Religious legitimate Chil∣dren one of another: All thy Children were made thy Mothers, by Queen Maries Proclamation; all thy Mo∣thers Children were made thine, by King Edward's and Queen Elizabeth's Proclamations. The truth is, you are of such a Brood, and so neer of Kin, that you cannot be con∣verted one to another by preaching Faith, Repentance and Baptism, but being both of a nature, and depending both up∣on Man, a Proclamation can command the one to be a Chri∣stian Protestant upon the Papists Baptism, and the other to be a Christian Papist upon the Protestants Baptism. In your Infancy, when you were Cozened instead of Christened (as you call it) you were proclaimed Regenerate and born again, made a Child of God, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven, when you could neither under∣stand Doctrine with your hearts, whereby Man believeth unto Righteousness; nor with your Mouthes confess unto Salvation, Rom 10.10. for you could not speak to confess a∣ny thing. Is any of your Laws like the Law of God in this, which proclaimeth Faith comes by hearing? How shall they believe on whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? The aforesaid brazen-fac'd Act standeth by thy Mothers Canon-Law, and all thy oldest Priests that took Degrees in the Universitie, though godly in thy esteem) are sworn to observe all the Rights and Ceremonies of holy Church; which Canon Law intendeth the Church of Rome, then consider whose sworn servants thy priests are. And now consider (I pray thee) whether thou hast not a brow of Brass, in not being ashamed, though all the world (that are not Members with thee) behold thy Whoredoms, and thy Abominations written in thy forehead. Now out with thy Learning, thy Rhetorical Tropes and Figures; call for thy brother Lawyer, and all the power of the Magistrate, and all the lustful Multitude, that loveth to
hear and believe lies (thou hast nothing else to feed them with, but what is mix'd with lies: and indeed, Truth would be so bitter, that neither thou nor they could bear it, if you did not sweeten it, or rather fit it to your palate with lies) and see if they all can cover from reproof out of Gods word, by the mouth of poor mechanick despised Christ, and his poor mechanick despised Apostles and Disciples. Also thou forcest thy maintenance by mans Law, from those that thou sowest no spiritual seed in their hearts: if there were spiritual things betwixt Priest and People, it would make such a product of love, that the Royal Law of Heaven, Christs Church, Saints, Angels, Christ, and God the Father, as would procure the Priests maintenance from their Converts, they need not go to mans Law to get it, if thou hadst some few Converts. Thou dost like him that soweth two or three Lands in a field onely, and yet challengeth the whole field; though there be hundreds of Lands upon which none of thy seed is sown, and suest and undoest thy poor neighbours if they will not yeild thee their increase out of the whole field. Dost thou look for fruit when all thy seed is rotten under the Clods, and bringeth up none? Is not this thy Mothers name written on thy forehead? &c. Will the Scriptures own thee in this? Is it fit that thou shouldst reap that fruit by violence, that came not of thy seed? Again, did not Jeroboam carry all the ten Tribes from Gods Worship to the calves at Dan and Bethel, onely to save his honour, kingdom and standing? Doth not Edward, George and Richard, and all the godly Priests in England, know. That no Scripture-reproof can lye upon the Baptizer or Baptized, where Faith and Repentance is sincerely pro∣fessed before the performance of that Ordinance? And also that there is never a word to say (in Scripture) for their Infants Baptism but a May-be? Upon such an assurance they will not venture to buy twenty pounds worth of Land: And this their May-be is but imagined, and with∣out all warrant of Scripture. Do they not now cast the Anchor of their Rhetorick and Learning into any Lie or
May-be, to keep their Kingdom their Mother Prelate pre∣pared for them by Pope and Councils, they having never a word of God to prove Gods Must-be or commandment for their practice? And doth not all their May bees arise from Popes, Councils and Fathers, whose beings would fall, their honour cease, and none would buy their wares any more, Rev. 18.11. compared with the last words of vers. 13. if they did not (Jereboam like) hold the People from the worship of God recorded in the Scriptures of Truth? Have they not procured the Armour of the Magistrates Power to protect them, that none may speak in their pub∣lick places, nor speak to disturb them? Oh! what a License is here to tell lies without reproof, while they are going to, or coming from thence! but their own Learned Rhetorical, by man ordained Members; that are fast tied, not by Truth, but by the bonds of their own Livings and greatness, ha∣ving entertained that Temptation, which Christ refused, viz. all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory thereof; therefore His Servants are not payed for His VVork out of the world's common stock, of Honour, Greatness, and Li∣vings of a hundred, &c. a year; nor hath Christs Servants the flock of Knights, Ladies and Gentles, in their silk Gowns trailing on the ground, to seek them for their good esteem, as thou hast, even as thy Mother Pope and Prelate hath, for their blessings: But Sion is an out-cast in this world; This is Sion whom no man seeketh after, Jer. 30.7. It is the supposed know∣ledge of the learned Pharisees, together with the counte∣nance of his brother, and the supposed ignorance of Christs Flock; Doth any of the Pharisees or the Rulers (who are Law∣yers) believe on him, but this people who know not the Law, and are accursed? VVhilst thou art overcome with the aforesaid temptation, therein being an enemy to all Righteousness, in not ceasing to pervert the right wayes of God, Act. 13.10. The very thing that becometh Christ, and all that he calleth us to fulfil, Mat. 3.15. which are plain Scripture-Precepts; and in setting thy May-bees in the room thereof. These things considered, I leave thee, Presbyter, to judge thy self by the 13 Chapter of Ezekiel.
Prsbyter may thus Reply. I strange at your reproof, being my name is recorded in the Scriptures, 1 Tim. 4.14. I confess that is a proper name, and a name fit for Disciples, made and baptized by Christ or His disciples. I judge thee not for the name thou bearest, but for thy Nature and Generation, as thou art Pope and Prelates Daughter; those that are called by the foresaid name in cpere, had the nature of the name▪ thy nature is of  Mer, Mystery, Babylon the great, the Mother of Har∣lots, and abominations of the whole earth; my confederates are VVarriors against the Lamb, the place where thou fittest i Peoples, Multitudes, &c. the name aforesaid to thee is the sheeps clothing, that thy wolvish nature is covered with, Mat. 7.15. this nature of thine appeareth cruel, in that thou art a enmity with thy Mother Prelate, and thy Mother with thee; like two Boars with their Tushes in each others sides, whilst both of you desire to lay Gods Vineyard waste; like two wild Beast that are destroying one another, and all that com  you: as if you did resemble the two paws of that Bar, sacken of in the Scriptures of Truth, that had three ribs in her muths Dan.  5. whose ribs they were, is not named intimating, that it matter'd not to her whose sides she tore in pieces, so she might devour much flesh; the three ribs something resembling the treble damage that for∣ceth men to great distress, this beast being resolved to tear ll in pieces, rather then to want her Prey. These sheep of Christ (whose clothing you have put on in that Name) look in their mouths, there is no tooth in their heads that can draw blood of their fellow creatures; their food is that which they can eat without hurting their fellow creatures: a beast, a horse and a sheep may feed in one  ue without hurting one another: Their shepherd did not teach them to persecute men for conformity though they had to do with a false deceiving and deceived people, blinde leaders of the blind, Mat. 15.14.) that diffe∣red from them, but directs them to let them alone; and
when there was men casting out devils, and followed not them, forbid them not, saith their shepherd, Luk. 9.5. Mar. 9.39. As it is against the nature of a sheep to run after a wolf to worry him, so it is against the nature of the Sub∣jects of Christs Kingdom, to run after Errours and Heresies with Fire, Sword Death, Prisons and Whips in their hand; there is no such tools in Christs Kingdom; of the encrease of his government and peace there shall be no end, Isa. 9.7. Here, here in this place, I say, is the food and joy of their souls! whilst this brood of Mystery Babylon have no soul-food or content, except they may have a whip and other tortures in their hand to drive their neighbours into con∣formity. Thus going about to build up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, Mic. 3.10. and the chief rea∣son of this their violence, is, their heart is so fraught with pride and covetousness, that they cannot endure any Mor∣decal who will not give them honour, nor any piece of hus∣bandry that will not yeild them tenths or composition; and this maketh them (Hman-like) to run to the Magistrate when they conceive themselves wronged in this case. Look to thy self, Presbytery, I may not own thee for the body of Christ, because thou art not recorded in the Scriptures of Truth. Now followeth the speech which some Independnts, Grand∣child to Pope and Prelate, and daughter to Presbyter, may aptly speak. I have called my mother Harlot, and have left her as such a one; though she be a well favoured-one, she is the destru∣ction of all Nations and Families where she is, through her witchcrafts, Nahum 3.4. bewitching people upon a religions account, Gal. 3.1. I have none of her priests compelled maintenance, though some of us think our selves happy for having a Levite to our Priest, viz. one of those the Clergy were wont to pray for, viz. the whole Tribe of Levi, by what name or title soever
they were dignified or distinguished, Judg. 17.13. But be∣cause we would not be too far separated from our Mother, we love her a little; she may strengthen us, and we her; we would have a little of her worldly esteem: though the rude Multitude own us not, in time we may be as much honou∣red for Godliness as our Grandmother and Mother is, for their ability to prefer to setled honour and riches, and for their flattery, ease and lusts: but we doubt we have a little of our Mothers pride, and willingness to save our skins, therefore we will be modestly Godly; and that with so much wis∣dom as may keep as much of our mothers love, and our Mo∣thers friends as we can: Also we have Pastors of our own chusing, and some of us have Pastors that have no Authori∣ty from man, nor descent from mans Authority; yet we have our Grandmother and our Mothers baptism, by vertue of the Popes Decree, it was given to our Mothers Mother, and so we have that from Antiquity and Succession: If we should by denyal of that, tear our selves from our Ancient Worship, and deny the worlds Baptism, and unchristian them all at once , we should lose (all at once) our relation and hopes of worldly promotion. Truth speaketh. To have a neer Relation to me onely in similitude, will not make thee in Union with me; to be almost a Christian (like Agrippa) is to be no Christian, Act. 26.28. To be al∣most in heaven, and go no further, is never to come there; there is many who undertake to counterfeit me, but there is no likeness in all things of me, but my self: but the Counterfeits are in something lame, or in something super∣fluous: I agree with all and every command of God in Scri∣pture, and there is room for nothing else in me, but what Scripture will own. The Scriptures of Truth doth not clearly own you, the Scripture clearly owneth, that, upon believing, men and wo∣men ought to be, and were baptized, and walk together in Church-order; of this there is many witnesses throughout the
new Testament, as Act. 8. and Act. 2, &c. but not one witness that unbaptized persons walked in Church order, or that Infants was commanded to be (or was) baptized: of the first there is certainty, neither thou, nor all the Learned Rabbies in the world can deny it; of the second there is but a May-be, and that from mans inventions. I charge you all, and all that reads this writing, as you fear God, to search the Scripture, and see if in this particular you can attain to a better proof then a May-be; if thou canst not, be ashamed, and repent, for I look at thee to have more shame in thee, then either thy Grandmother or thy Mother, and presume not above what is written: you need do no more then Scripture warranteth you, it hath enough in it (if observed in Letter and Spirit) to furnish the man of God throughly to perfection and all good works, 2 Tim. 3.17▪ then lay aside all your Ordinances that are grounded upon May-be, though the wisest men that ever were in the world invented them; O consider God will take Vengeance on inventions, though they be of Moses, Aaron and Samuel, Psal. 99.6. to vers. 8. Consider also that mans inventions diverteth him from his Uprightness, Eccles. 7.29. And whereas yon tell me of chusing Pastors your selves, let me tell you, Pastors and Teachers are given by God, and not chosen by men; and except it be found in Scriptures of Truth, that man is directed to chuse any such Officers, take heed lest thou erect an Idol of thine own invention in so doing, instead of following Gods direction. God knoweth well thou canst nor chuse as God chuseth, for man looketh at the outward appearance (viz. a man that delivereth well-composed words) but the Lord knoweth the heart; take heed lest those that thou hast chosen (building upon their choice) silence those Pastors which God hath given, and that are gifted by God: Thou art no more able to chuse a Pa∣stor for thy self, then a company of School-boyes are to chuse a wise, learned Master: therefore God no where in Scripture put the choice of Pastor into thy hands: I advise thee, take it not: It is true, that a company of men who have followed Christ in the Regeneration, in Faith, Repentance,
Baptism, and (in the Form) have the Spirit and Life, have heard and learned of the Father, and have the Son revealed in them; even as the outward skin of the body, and the inwards, as Heart, Mind, Members, are all imbodied, and presented to our Understanding in one Body, so Form and Power, living Faith, and Repentance, and prevailing Prayer, which makes us as Israel, viz a Prince prevailing with God; like as the Tree and Fruit, the Sap and the Rinde, so Gods Order and Life are not to be separated, but are one in ano∣ther brought forth: The Form obeyed being the Creatures Duty, Life in the Form being Gods owning or acceptance in the Creature, like a golden Sceptre stretched forth by God, and like a seal of God, set upon the creatures heart, which maketh his heart merry, the joy of the Lord being his strength, Ephes 1.13. Eccles. 8.10. A company of such men (I say) that so have entrance into the Kingdom of God, viz. that have submitted to his Government, receiving the new birth of water and the Spirit in baptism, and all the following com∣mands recorded in the written word (that great Charter being their Law, without mixture of mans inventions, and thereby owning Christ to be their Lord, and themselves to be inchartered Citizens, he ruling over them (not like those recorded in Luke 19.14. by the same Charter) have authority to chuse two sorts of Officers for ordering of the outward man: but a Pastor is a higher thing, it is a gift of God, a heart-feeding gift, viz Bishops and Deacons, the one to keep the Church in order, the other to take care of the poors ne∣cessities to relieve them; whose bowels of tender-hearted∣ness have appeared to their natural Relations; whose wis∣dom hath been fruitful in governing by love; these may be chosen by mans Election, if there be any that have the qua∣lification the Scripture layeth down, not else; as in Tit. 1.6. If any be blameless. &c. There is no haste in chusing what God hath not marked out; If God hath not given thee men of such qualifications, as he approveth on, thou hadst better be without Governors lon∣ger, then to set up Antichrist in Christs chair: In this sense, He that believeth maketh not haste, Isa. 28.16. viz. to act
without his Guiders rule. The name of a Bishop hath the nature of his Office included into it, which is ruling and o∣versight; aptness to teach is but a qualification, that any o∣ther Member may have, in whom the Spirit of God doth or shall breath, being a truth-evidencing, and forceable con∣straint, and cannot stay for leave of Election by man to utter it self, which indeed is a gift of God, or Pastoral Spirit; as Marriage is another qualification wherein the spirit of go∣vernment must appear fruitful both in wife and children, and that from conjugal and natural love to the Yoak fellow, and procreated (in which affections Faith appeareth, and for want of them, infidelity, 1 Tim. 5 8.) so that children cannot be wanting to a Bishop, in whose government, the Royal Law (Love) of Gods Church is resembled, Marriage being the Type of Christ and his Church; and it is certain that a batche∣lor, or one that hath no children, or one whose wife and children are not qualified according to the word, cannot be chosen, except man will set his May-be against Gods Must-be: And so I leave thee Independant, warning thee to take the counsel of Christ to the Angel of the Church of Laodi∣cea, Rev. 3.17. A Speech that may be aptly spoken by these Quakers who hold forth a stupifying Spirit, denying plain Truth, and right Reason, under the Notion of a higher Mystery and Spirit then plain Scripture and right Reason will admit of; which plain Scripture they call Letter, and right Rea∣son they call Flesh, in contempt; notwithstanding that the Spirit of God is promised to be poured into him that turneth at Gods Reproof, Prov. 1.23. which Reproof convinceth Reason, or else man could not return: into Reason, among the rest of the Souls Members, the Spirit was poured, and is wrought upon to order Mans Affairs by Judgement, and doth receive wise Counsels, when the man of Understanding attaineth to them, Prov. 1.5. Truth, though we may not talk with thee, we are not ca∣pable
to receive directions by any that is call'd by thy name, nor by the writings called Scriptures of Truth; for what directions soever we have from without, can be but mans teachings, and the natural man understandeth not the things of God; we are taught by the Light within, we are to stand in the will of God, and observe the movings and commands of his Spirit. Truth speaketh. resembling God's people  great humility, Psal. 17.1. As in the vision of Esdras, the Eagles heads slept until her Feathers had reigned, as in 2 Esd. 12 25. These are they that shall accomplish his wicked∣ness, and finish his last end: even so in Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots, and abominations of the whole earth, the heads, and subtilest, and strongest of her delusions she hath kept until her last end (which I hope is approaching) that thou who wouldst not receive the Truth in the love thereof, mightst not hear the reproof of thy walk∣ing in false forms any longer, in so much that thou couldst not deny, that if forms must be owned, thou must come out of them, and come into the form of godli∣ness: Satan hath now cozened thee another way, and thy AS GOD, he hath perswaded thee that all forms must be cast off, and the Law of the Spirit of Life entertained. O cunning and subtile, (but false delusions) the words of the Prophets, and the Commandment of the Apostles were set in opposition formerly to lusts, 2 Pet. 3.1, 2. but never to the way of Righteousness by any but these last members of Babylon. Peter, in Chap. 2. 1. & 2. hath these words, And many shall follow their pernitious wayes, by reason of whom the way of Truth shall be evil spoken of. Wherein we may per∣fectly see, that their wayes and the wayes of Truth, stands in flat opposition one to another. Also in the first verse it is testified, that to bring in these damnable heresies, is to deny the Lord that bought them: but he himself is so far from that opi∣nion in verse 21. of the said Chapter, that he chargeth the
way of Righteousness, and the holy commandments as the very Centre from which Apostates fall; so that you may be∣hold clearly that it is not a Righteousness they are charged for falling from, for that is the secret issues which is betwixt God and the heart; but the way of Righteousness, which is visible to the understanding of Man. Many of their Leaders, whilst they were able to hold the Antichristian form, they were in the esteem of godly Priests, whose infants Baptism, and learned, specious Pastoral care, so much applauded by wise, sober, rich, silken-coated Profes∣sors, then (I say) not being able to resist the clear evidence that the true form of Godliness hath, because they did not love to be disquieted out of the woman Jezabels bed, Rov. 2.22. where they lay in pleasure of imagined Godliness, a∣mongst a company of wise, sober Professors, they were then so far from receiving the love of the truth, that they grew into disquietness of mind, and hatred of that form of God∣liness that Christ and His Apostles, and their Disciples wal∣ked in for many years; even (till the time that Antichrist grew popular) in so high a measure Satan being ready with this Temptation) that they struck hands with this strong de∣lusion, and so believed the lies thereof, 2 Thes. 2.11. that they cryed down all forms, that they might be shut of (yea and avenged of) that form, the thoughts whereof so much troubled them: if they knew their own hearts, they would ingeniously confess this. Therefore, whosoever desireth further satisfaction in this matter, is referred to a Book that the Author hath written, called The Doctrine of the Light, within the natural man, lead∣ing to eternal Life, examined by Scripture Light. Baptist speaketh. The Spirit of God having instructed me by the Scripture, I fell into a course of reasoning, which (though Mystery Ba∣bylon cryeth down in this her last dispensation) being the ve∣ry thing that Isaiah cryeth up, and reproveth the neglect of, Isa. 44. on this manner. There is no word for baptizing In∣fants
in Scripture, not no regular account from which that in∣vention can arise; it is the very door that the god of this world makes all this part of the world called Christendom, of one supposed Faith by: leaving no man at liberty to chuse his Religion, but maketh the instruments of his generation to be that which giveth him right to the Instruments of his Regeneration; and as for the new birth, he will have his to presume that from imagination; and all this to be done when the party supposed to be baptized could neither assent by understanding to what was done, nor dissent by doing a∣ny thing but crying, which he would have done, if they had gone about to kill him, as to have christened him, as they call it. Also herein those err (that have schism'd from Popery and Prelacy, but hold their baptism of Infants) saying, That Infants of godly Parents may be baptized; by which words, they acknowledge in effect that the fleshly copulation of godly Parents giveth right to the children of their natural Body to be instruments of Regeneration▪ so that it must needs fol∣low that there is no need of conversion to make them Christians, who are Christians born by the natural flesh of their godly Parents, and so the god of this world who hath binded their eyes, maketh them esteem it a great priviledge to have a perfect dead Act of his supposed Regeneration to be done by force upon their children; for they can have no meanes to know or guess that the Spirit is joyned with water in their baptism, which is the Instrument or outward Act of their Regeneration. Consider how fast the poor Infant is lock'd to presum∣ption, when they have either presumption or nothing for the Foundation of their Order, or rather Mystery Babylon's Or∣der; the god of this world knew well that none could be admitted into the Kingdom of God, or government of the Gospel without Regeneration of water and the Spirit; and his business in Mystery Babylon is to bring man to invent a form in imitation of God, and so keep men, that when they come to be capable of believing, they should not look after Baptism or Regeneration of Water and the Spirit, John .5.
As Christ hath His Disciples made and baptized, so Baby∣lon Mystery hath hers, supposed to be baptized too: and in this the man of sin exalteth himself above God, for God is merciful in forgiving sins, and receiving into grace and fa∣vour, upon Repentance, every penitent sinner; and there∣fore hath given Order to His Disciples, upon confession of Faith, and Repentance, to baptize; but this man of sin will make men believe that he hath more mercy then God by His word holds forth; for he receiveth all in Infancy, and needeth neither Faith nor Repentance in receiving his sub∣jects: the Subjects of Christs Kingdom have heart-pricking Truth to convince them, and bring them to Repentance; but Babylons Members are so easily made, that they neither knew nor felt when it was done: And thus the way is broad and easie that leadeth to destruction. Also considering that the keeping of Christs Command∣ments is a proof of our love to Christ, and that the receiving of the Spirit is an effect of obedience, Joh. 14.15, 16. and knowing that the written word is more surely to be taken heed to, then an Act of the Spirit in Transfiguration, though Christ Himself be present, 2 Pet 2.19. to the end; because Satan being a spirit can dissemble a spiritual Act, but his mouth is stopped, and he reproved with It is written. And further, knowing that Christ taught duty from the written word, and it to be believed and practised, rather then the words of one which should rise from the dead, Luk. 16.22. I stayed not for Revelation to teach me my duty; al∣though I expect Revelation to convey unto us, and evi∣dence in us Christ our life; but turn'd at Wisdom's reproof, expecting (after) obedience Wisdom's promise, Prov. 1.23. And now hating every false way, knowing, They that err from thy Statutes, their deceit is falsehood, Psal. 119.118. and e∣steeming thy Precepts concerning all things to be right, ver. 128. I cannot but say of Scripture record, Thy word is very pure, therefore my soul loveth it, verse 140. and upon this ac∣count I took the directions of that Scripture which Paul writeth by inspiration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. and proveth it by Isa. 52.11. viz. I came out from Babylon My∣stery
the great, her Daughter and Grandchild, and touched none of their precedent manners, Deut. 12.30. But I say, laying aside mans learned mists of darkness, and his prece∣dent Examples, I took the Doctrine of Christ and His Apo∣stles for my Foundation, and their Ensamples for following of Christ for my imitation, Ephes. 2.20. Truth speaketh. I tell thee Church of Christ, as thy name is the house of God, the Church of the living God, the Pillar and Ground of the truth, thou art not in thy order reproveable by Scriptures, 1 Tim. 3.15. And if any Enemy whatsoever undertake to reprove thee, and hath not Christs weapon he fought Satan with, vz. it is written, though he tell thee of standing in the Will of God, or being led by the Spirit, or of an inward Teacher, or of Light within, as if there were some secret thing that passed by peeping and muttering, which right Rea∣son cannot be used about the understanding of, they are no better the▪ VVizards or Familiar Spirits; To the Law and to the Testimonies, if there they miss any thing (viz. in that they hold forth or teach) and speak not according to this word, though they talk of Light within, it is because there is no Light in them, Isa. 8.19, 20. and their light is darkness, Mat. 5.19. fear thou no such Enemies, but live in the nature of rejoycing, there meet thy God, there work Righteousness, Isa. 64.5. viz. That which Christ began and shewed us, when he said, Thus it becometh Ʋs, &c. Mat. 3.5. Take thou no∣tice o the continuance of Gods wayes, though the Enemy would tell thee they are ended: and so expect thy Salva∣tion. And against the fear of those that would set a Spirit which teacheth not to obey Scriptures, and follow the examples of Christ and His Disciples in opposition to a Spirit that teach∣eth to live in obedience to Scriptures, and to follow the Ex∣amples aforesaid, Rom. 15.4. Comfort thy self by Faith in Scripture, and there with patience cast the Anchor of thy hope, Phil. .4. Rejoyce alwayes, yea, again I say rejoyce.
And that thy rejoycing may not be in vain, take these Cautions. First, Take heed that thou miss not of a way within a way, if thou bless thy self in the high way, without the way which is called holy, Isa. 35.8. which holy way is recorded in Job 28.7, 8, 9, 10. Is the turning up all things by the roots, cutting forth rivers among the rocks, discovering every pretious thing, binding the floods from overflowing, bringing forth hidden things to light. The high way being thy duty to walk in, the holy way being the laying of Gods hand upon Christ thy Cove∣nant, and doing all thy works for thee, Isa. 26.12. holding thee that thou canst not depart from him, and quickning the desires of thy soul, Psal. 18.17, 18. In all thy acts of obedi∣ence, thy Faith must be in the operation of God, Col. 2.12. through which our Duties are living Ordinances performed by two co-workers. Secondly, Take heed whilst you walk into the way of God, that your great business be to seek God, His Face, His strength evermore, Psal. 105.3, 4. where the Psalmist maketh this the ground of his joy; therefore (if you fail herein) your joy is groundless. In which search love kindleth more and more, as thou comest neerer God; so as the soul groweth sick of love, and cannot cease to press hard after God, Psal. 63.8. because it is upbeld by Gods right hand, till thou know thy self to be set as a seal upon Christs arm and his heart for ever, Cant. 8.6. and then also wilt thou follow on to know the Lord, Hos. 6.3. Thirdly, Take heed thou be not defiled in the way, Psal. 119.1. for it is less offence to bring a beastly Creature into a hogstie, or any filthy place, then to bring it into a Princes presence-chamber, or a bed of love, where there ought to be nothing loathsome, but all to be lovely, and love pro∣voking Objects: So is it less wickedness to have a mind and conscience defiled, in beastly prophaness, then to bring such a minde into the House of God, the Church of the living God, Tim. 1.15. That thy soul may bee deeply ingaged, take notice of the whole Order of persons and things wherein thy communion lies with the Father and his Son
Jesus Christ, 1 Joh. 1.3, 4. The whole Order is the innu∣merable company of Angels, the General Assembly of the first∣born, that are written in heaven, unto God the judge of all, unto Jesus Christ the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things then the blood of Abel. In the first place consider, whether the Father and the Son can have communion with thy sins, thy worldly plea∣sures, or pursued honours? in a condition where right and strong and pure Objects of eternal love, forceth the heart to a strong purgation, 1 Joh. 3.3. No, no, all thy pleasures, honours, &c. must be thrust from thee, as a menstruous rag. Secondly, Consider, whether such company can delight to talk with thee of good bargains, the honour thou hast from great persons, the delicates wherewith thy feasts are furnished, and thy new fashions: No, no, I tell thee, the mind that can feed on these things, is too defiled for Gods ways and can take no pleasure in Heavenly food; a pure mind is capable of remembrance of the commandments of Christ and his Apostles, 2 Pet. 3.2. of the enjoyning the commanded loving kindness of God, which hath such warmth and power, that it maketh them become one new heart with this new wine, and Gods Song with them in the right, when God useth their heart, their joy, and their and his own delight to sing his songs with, and their prayer with the God of their life, Psal. 42.8. As if it were said, God the life of his childrens prayer is with them in their act of praying. They need not travel hundreds of miles to present (their Petitions on pilgrimage: the marrying of his body together, and the rejoycing over them, as a Bridegroom rejoyceth over his bride, Isa. 52.4.5. proves Gods presence at their heart-working-life. Here, here, I say, is perfection, when God in a perfect way visiteth a perfect heart: the living man is as well able to lay aside his breathing, as these are able to forbear pressing on towards the mark, Phil. 3.14. or to follow af∣ter God, having no pattern but the Heavenly Fathers per∣fection to imitate, Psal. 36.8. being under the laver of that Blood which was shed by this eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14. Our perfection is in the life a working, it is yet perfe∣cting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. and whilst we
draw our natural breath, the blood of Christ in cleansing will do its work, the fear of God its work, and our Heaven∣ly Father will stand for our Pattern, and our Christ will be our life, 1 Joh. 1.7. There is nothing but it may be yet a perfecting in us, only our purchase by the blood of Christ is perfectly paid, and in that sense it is finished, and our salvation un∣dertaken: if either the Tempter were dead, or we our selves stronger then Adam was in his innocency, or the e∣vil day and hour of our temptation past, Gal. 6.1. we might speak of such a perfection as admitted of no imperfection; but whilst the Scripture is of use, let him that thinketh he stand∣eth take heed lest he fall; and we may (as the case now stan∣deth with us) with Paul speak of perfection and imperfe∣ction both in one Chapter, Phil. 3. If thou beest undefiled in the way, thy soul will be in this frame: 1. Thou wilt not endure to see the least defilement in thy self, without loathsome apprehensions of thy self, and running to that fountain which is set open for sin and iniquity to wash in, Zech. 13.1. And 2. If undefiled in the way, thou wilt be always a running, and not carelesly sleeping, Heb. 12.1. but rather weeping with thy face thitherward, Jer. 50.5. either for joy, shame, desire, or all these; so strongly will thy heart be ingaged to seek the Lord, Jer. 30.21. A fourth caution. Take heed that every one of you strive by watching, begging of God, beseeching one another to keep from among you Egyptian bondage; this ruling one over ano∣ther with rigor, Exod. 1.13, 14. which might not be one brother over another in the time of the Law. Reason first, because that love which procured the shedding of Christs blood, hath caused his poor Members to be set as a Seal on his heart and upon his arm, Cant. 8.6. and owned them for his people, Isa. 51.16. Therefore if thou hast Gods love shed abroad in thy heart to constrain thee, afford it them out of thy breast. A second Reason why we should not rule over our Bre∣thren with rigour, is, we are, and so was Elias, subject to the like passions that any feeble, brother is, Jam. 5.17. and thou mayest come to be remoted, Gal. 5.1. and it is possi∣ble
thy temptation may be this, that Satan may move thee to have low, contemptible, yea. (it may be) hateful thoughts of thy brother, and thou mayest have a Spirit of putting a∣way, and covering violence with a cloak, Mal. 2.16. there∣fore take heed of this temptation. The third Reason, why not with rigour, &c. Because thou art not godly or Godlike in so doing: for he did not take thee at advantages when he might justly have cut thee off, but waiteth for thee that he may be gracious unto thee, and will wait upon all to that purpose, Isa. 30.11. He cut none off suddenly, in a few days or a week, &c. nor pres∣sed thine offences to all advantages, that he might break thee off; he hath given contrary rules to that, to his Apo∣stles and Disciples how to move towards their Brethren, Luke 17. the five first verses. Let my fifth caution therefore be, That for no supposed advantage sake, or fear of disadvantage to the truth, thou darest step from the Rule that Christ laid down, one jot; for if thou dost, it is a judging of the Law-makers wisdom and foresight; as if he did not foresee and provide in his rule for all following effects. Secondly, It is an exalting of thine own wisdom, in that thou thinkest thou seest cause to be a ruler further then he hath left a rule to guide thee by. Thirdly, Thou mayest assay (in so doing) to prevent the fruit that God bringeth forth by contrary means. In this case how far might Abrahams imagination have fought against Gods command? He might have said of Isaac, he was the son of the Promise; and the Promised seed is in his loyns, &c. Amongst other Scriptures, I offer to thy conside∣ration, Luk. 17. the 5. first ver. where after the position laid down in the 2 first ver. in the 3 following ver. he thus apply∣eth, Take heed to your selves (as if he should say, Here will be a dangerous temptation) If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; if he repent, forgive him; if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, and say, It repenteth me, thou shalt forgive him. Where note, that the offenders heart is not to be judged by the offended. God allows thee nothing but his tongue to judge of in this
case; it may be his heart may more melt afterwards then at the first turning, by the offended's tenderness or other means: and the offended ought (from bare judg∣ment) to forgive him, if he do it as his duty, observing Christs rule; his heart may be opened with more love and tenderness to the Offender afterwards also, then at the first turn. However it is better to walk in self-denyal in this case, and observe Christs rule, then to satisfie thine own offended spirit; however, if thy brothers heart and tongue should not agree in his repentance, God hath not made thee a judg of evil thoughts, Jam. 2.4. And the Apostles answered, The Lord increase our faith: which answer proves they had great need of help to strengthen their faith to this purpose. A sixth Caution. Take heed of this Doctrine, That Saints do not serve God for salvation, but from the knowledge of salvation. This Doctrine not being rightly divided, hath been a stumbling block to many. Man since Adams fall is cor∣ruptly so proud, that nothing but the top of excellency will serve his turn, and therefore to be as gods knowing good and evil, tickled his mind. You shall hardly find one in a society (men are in this point so heightned by the Tempter) that will acknowledge he cometh to God for salvation, though it be at the first hour of the receiving into society. Men under this temptation are not willing to begin to stand without till the good man of the House be risen up, Luk. 13.25. but all judge themselves finders from the self-flatte∣ring conceit, before they have enjoyed the Lord Christ by manifestation. Few will own that there may be a conditi∣on of darkness in one that feareth God, Isa. 50.10. They had rather in this temptation compass themselves about with sparks, ver. 11, as if all had right to baptism only upon that account that is recorded in Act. 10. viz. Who should forbid water that these should not be baptised, that have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? And those that enquired, What shall we do to be saved? had no right, Act. 2. Though it be certain they received the Holy Ghost after Baptism, and also it is certain, that at the first the Disciples served Christ as servants, though after they were owned by Christ upon a more full account, Joh. 15.15. There was a
time when Paul knew Christ after the flesh, which must needs be for self-ends, or good that might come to himself there∣by; but after that, he knew neither man nor Christ any more after the flesh, but wholly having his spirit of love and de∣light exercised upon them, to rejoyce in Christ, and to serve the creature, with the love of Christ shed abroad in his heart. I would that all who are in Church-fellowship, upon ac∣count of Faith and Repentance, and have not as yet at∣tained to assurance, would (with understanding) own their condition, it would make them give all diligence to make their calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Therefore lest Members should split themselves upon this stumbling-block, shew your selves workmen that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth, 2 Tim. 2.15. Caution 7. Whereas Disputes hath been formerly, viz. about that time the Ranters and Quakers first sprung up; some holding it to be their Priviledg (but not their Duty) to serve the Lord; I advise thee to abolish this Dispute from thy Societies, and from your particular spirits: for it is the greatest Priviledge that can be, to have a heart united to fear God's Name, whilst they walk in God's truth, being instru∣cted in His way, Psal. 86.11. Here is no liberty from Duty, to walk in God's wayes and in his truth, and yet a heart uni∣ted by God, and that to fear His Name; and from this very act is David set at liberty to praise God's Name, Psal. 86.12, 13. I demand whether it be not a Saints Priviledge to have a heart enlarged by God, and yet it is then to run the way of Gods Commandments, Psal. 119.32. viz. enlarged and set at liberty from the pit of corruption, Isa. 38. from the horri∣ble pit, Psal. 40.1. to be bound to Gods love and wisdom, who hath provided Commandments that he knows serveth to unite thy heart to God; he hath commanded nothing but righteous things, which are according to the Divine Nature, that thou art (or art to be) partaker of, 2 Pet 1.4. and thou art (or art to be) joyned to God and one Spirit, that is to say, the breathings, love desire, delight of God is to be thine, and thy souls delight to breath in them, and thus thou art
in union with God, in Christ Jesus; so that the same things are now commanded by the Law of the spirit of Life, Rom. 8.2. which was by the Law of Sin and Death, viz. it had been Sin and Death to thee, if thou hadst not done those Com∣mandments which the Law of the Spirit of Life hath enabled thee to do; but they are a Law still, and now having a heart set at liberty, the Commandments which were before a bur∣den, is now not made grievous by love: and if the love of God be a Saints Priviledge, it is nothing less then to bind us to our Duties; for this is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments, and His Commandments are not grievous to us, 1 Joh. 5.3. Lo, here is no freedom from Duty. Christ Jesus, who said, If the Son make you free, you are free indeed, Joh. 8.36. said also, If ye love me, keep my Commandments. Here you see that love bindeth the freest people in the world to their Duty of obedience, Joh 14.15. And when Christ proclaimed his yoke to be easie, and his burden light, He did not alter it from being a yoke and a bur∣den, Mat. 11.30. but it is a sweet burthen, when there is nothing save a constraining love upon thy heart; it is a sweet yoke when thou art fastened to Christ Jesus and his Saints, to tread one trace by love in keeping such Commandments, as that the things commanded Christ, and his Saints, and thou in the unity of spirit loveth, upon account of the Comman∣ders love and wisdom, how can such Commandments be grievous? 1 Joh. 3.4. But if any should further still contend for liberty in this Case, let them know, that sin is the trans∣gression of the Law, vers. 8. and whosoever committeth sin is of the Devil, 1 Joh. 2.4. and let all who think they know God (whilst they despise that which He and His Disciples com∣manded and practised) let them remember this word writ∣ten in 1 Joh. 2.4. He that saith he knoweth God, and keepeth not His Commandments, is a Lyar. As from this opinion that was sometimes in the Church, (I desire it lurk not secretly there yet) the Ranters and Qua∣kers sprung, so also do now those who are zealous in decking their bed of Love, which they (poor deceived ones!) under pretence of peace-offerings and reconcilement to God, in
performing the very Vows of their souls, Prov. 7.14. seek to draw Proselites in a bed of solace with love, being so ena∣bled (as they think) and covered sufficiently, and beautified as with gifts and graces, vers. 16. that they can hide them∣selves and others from the reproof of Truth, whilst they are workers of iniquity; though they say they preach and cast out devils in Christs Name, &c. He that knoweth their works will call them so, Mat. 7.22, 23. And also they have perfumed their bed with divers spices, Prov. 7.17. and it is too too true, they hold forth the like∣ness of some of those spices, but not all; that Jesus Christ in his Visitation of His Spouse, cometh perfumed unto His Spouse-Bed, Cant. 3.6, 7. and these in the good Mans absence will have other pleasures and lusts then to obey their Lord; they have contracted a hatred in His absence to his Rule and Government, and will not have it, Luk. 19.14. and thus these poor deceived ones will be cut off, for making a perfume and smelling to it, in other places then where God and his Peo∣ple meet, Exod. 30.35. to 38. which is in God's wayes, while they rejoyce in working Righteousness, Isa. 64.5. viz. in ruleful obedience, where love to Christ is proved by keep∣ing his Commandments; and the love of God and Christ, together with their manifestation, is promised. These Libertines, tell them of walking in the wayes that Christ and His Disciples walked in, and they will reply, If God let them see it, they will obey. May not Solomon's harlots say as well (when the good Man of the house is come home) who will instruct her? for that is Christs practise with His Spouse, Psal. 32 8. she will forsake all her wooed Proselites, and cease to heal, defend and cover them, and will no more counterfeit a perfume to perswade them that Christs favour of his oyntments is amongst them, but but will come to the good man, and walk with Him in obedience to His Com∣mandments, and abide in His love, is He hath kept His Fa∣thers Commandments, and abides in His love, Joh 15.10. So that if it be truth (as surely it is) they refuse to obey; when the good Man of the house is come home, they must then see it, though they shut their eyes, and blame his absence for
their disobedience, whose presence would let them see, and with this excuse fall fast asleep in the arms of him who rules in the children of disobedience; whilst he furnisheth them with all counterfeit evidences of good, as if God were in their hearts all this while, 2 Thes. 2.4. the words are these: So that he, AS GOD, sitteth in the temple of God, shewing him∣self that he is God. And the first evidence that he furnisheth them with may be this, viz. That Christ hath put His beauty upon them: for the beauty of Christ may be put on one, and that by Christ, and yet they play the harlot with it, Ezek 16.14. here is the work of the Prince of the air, in a disobedient heart, to find wayes for Israel to disobey God, and give up a soul to Lust, and so play the harlot, even as if she were opening her heart or her legs, for Christ to take His pleasure in her, and she in Him. A second evidence of him who rules in the hearts of the children of disobedience, is, in the pleasure of the Plant which is but a strange slip; It must needs be a strange slip, if your wayes be not those wayes which Christ and His Disci∣ples walked in, for three hundred years after Him: your wayes must then be your own, and of your own chusing, and strange from Christs, Isa. 36.34. viz. The teacher with plea∣sure to thee and himself, may plant in thy heart with thy con∣sent, or with thy soul, a disobedient slip, strange to Gods word, it being not there to be found; and for all thy de∣light, thy portion will be desperate sorrow in the end, Isa. 17.11, 12. here is a deceitful work of the ruler in the heart of the children of disobedience. 3. He can make you lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? no evil can come to us, Mic. 3.11. he can make thee bless thy self in the name of God, with confi∣dence of freedom from evil. 4. Whilst thou art asleep, he can furnish thee with a flatter∣ing spirit, that causeth thee to dream, and healeth thee in thy disobedience; and so in your preaching and hearing one a∣nother, you have nothing but healing and pleasure, and love to tell one to another in disobedience: whereas he who hath
Gods word, will preach it faithfully, Jer. 23.28. and for his pains shall be cast out of your Societies: so unwelcome is the thoughts of obedience (to Christs Commandment) to those who dream they shall be saved without it: Although the true Saint be not only moved to obedience for salvation sake, but for loves sake; and thus by maintaining that which Christ neither taught nor practised in his worship, or at least, by gathering of what Christ taught, by pieces and snatches, and leaving the rest, viz. by taking that which will, and lea∣ving that which will not serve the lusts of a proud Society, that thou mayest hold some union with them, thou fightest a∣gainst the Lyon of God, and at the best (in this thy dream) dost but think thou eatest; when Truth it self shall awake thee, and thou be convinced of thy disobedience, thou wilt find thy self hungry, Isa 29.7, 8. And if any strive to awake them out of this their dream, wherein they have neither Truth nor Reason for their pra∣ctise, they will say, Let me alone with my Religion, and I will let you alone with yours. Whereas if they would not thus har∣den their hearts, but let Judgement come forth to Victory, what violent wrestling would there be in them? what ask∣ing and enquiring would their hearts be filled with? what weeping with their faces towards God and his wayes would melt their souls? Jer. 50.5. and not asking (as now they do) with their hearts set against Gods ways, to see if they can find any word (which if it do meet them) it must be by the spirit of delusion, mis-interpreted, to defend them from obedi∣ence to God and his ways. Is it not just, that these should have strong delusions, that they may believe lies? 2 Thes 2.11. Will not this properly one day be said unto them, Bring forth the blind people that have eyes? Isa. 34.8. Therefore I advise all men to disclaim any thing in Religion, that judgement cannot give thee to understand and hold forth to others, (when though shalt be asked a Reason of the hope that is in thee) to be truth, though a Spirit should offer to teach it thee. The tongue cannot move beyond the ear, being both natural, & these can both be but ministers of the natural Understanding; pen and eye are servants to the same, and can shew but utterable things: take but away the use of these under a pretence of a Spirits teaching, and the natural under∣standing and his servants are useless, and cannot glorifie God, which was the end of their Creation. VVritten by H. H.
THE DESCRIPTION OF THE BEAST. IT is to be premised, That the VVhore and the Beast, and the false Prophet, being that they are all appertaining to one Babel, or Members one under or in another, all of one spirit, all of the refuge of lies, to which men flee from truth, and are to be swept away together, and all at agreement with Hell and Death, Isai. 28.15 to the 19. and all come to an end by one power, when the VVhore shall be judged, and the Beast and the false Prophet cast alive into the lake that burneth with fire and Brimstone, Rev. 19.20. That this Description may the better appear, we are first to observe that this Beast is settled by the Dragon, who is the Devil and Satan, and that this settlement is his invisi∣bility: he hath the subtilty of the old Serpent imployed to hide him, that he might live. And First, Let us observe that he is like a Leopard, in which sence he is beautiful; and his beauty appeareth most to the minde and intellect, because the spirit of Satan, that is, his father, his Setler, yea, and his Life, is an applyer of himself to the soul, being an inward worker; for his deceiveableness of unrighteousness, is in them that perish, where he causeth delight and glory, and seeming happiness, to fill the minde;
but consulteth with Truth and Righteousness. Secondly, His likeness is never seen nor understood in his tearing actions, but as if something else had done them, for then he useth a Bears foot, and a Lyons mouth, Rev. 13. vers. 3. Thirdly, Consider that when the Scripture speaketh of his mouth being like a Lyon, it doth not speak of the Mem∣bers thereof, as tongue and teeth, (for his teeth hath ano∣ther likeness where they are described, as in Daniel, they are called Iron teeth) but mouth, which includeth all the act∣ing powers therein, whose invisibleness is set forth by the supremeness in dominion & strength that the Lyon hath over all Beasts; and that this best resembleth the Lyon most in his mouth, where his lordlyness, strength and victoriousness lyeth in the month: in the mouth is first a preparing of food for the stomach, and the second, utterance of the voyce: by the stomach, the minds satisfaction may be meant; and in this, his prosperity is great; for their eyes stand forth with fatness, they have more then their heart can wish, Psal. 73.7 to 11. Being that this Beast is the imbodyed power of Satan, whose name is Abaddon, we cannot think that his stomach can digest any thing but destruction and cruelty, and all hellish food; and, Satan-like, desiring the destruction of all men: and to this purpose this strong mouth worketh. Note that his strength in voyce cannot be any thing else but Eloquence (which is the enticing words of mans wis∣dom, 2 Cor. 1, 17.19. 2 Pet. 1.26.) and Lies, which is the very strong way they prevail in, to the destruction of the peo∣ple, Jer. 17.10. Zach. 10.2. (take heed Clergie that this word be not a witness against you) in this lyeth great strength to keep his dark hidden settlement, viz. in Elo∣quence and Lyes, of which he wants neither. Look about you, to see if you can see him when he is a working and present, but with Eloquence and Lyes he will be hidden from you, for he is always hid in the present tense, that is to say, though he yet is, he is not, (which must needs be understood whilst he cannot be seen) but it is appa∣rent enough he was, then men may see plainly what he hath
done in the Preterperfectense, for he brings all his blind ones to had-I-wist. The words that are written in Rev.  was and yet is, being there is no Scripture that can shew when this Beasts Creation was, or when he was not, can ad∣mit of no other sence, but the very plain words as it is writ∣ten: the words is not, being a plain contradiction to the words yet is, for one of the twain must needs be a contradi∣ction to the other, except expounded. Then [is not] is well understood to mean [is not visible,] being that he is alwayes hid from seeming what he is, when he teareth, and destroyeth, and deceiveth, with his Beares foot, and his Ly∣ons mouth: for if he were known to be what he is, the very knowledge of him would take away his strength, for then neither Magistrates nor People would do his works: his ap∣pearings are several; one when the confession of Christs Name caused him to rage to the destruction of the Confes∣sors, when there was no division of Papists and Protestants, being hunted our there, the very opposing of the Papists Transubstantiation and other innovations, caused him to rage to the destruction of them that engaged against them, though both of them confessed the name of Christ; and then the Papist might have said unto the Protestant, Yea, if your suf∣ferings had been for confessing Christs Name, as the Primi∣tive Martyrs were, then your sufferings had been right; and now here in England, being hunted thence by day-spring va∣liant Truth, he rageth against those that would have Christs Baptism, and all His Gospel-Order, so that as Light breaketh forth, he followeth that, roaring with Lyons mouth, and tearing with Bears foot all the children thereof, as Truth be∣getteth them, he being spirited by the same Satan or Adver∣sary to Truth that was under the Law. So that a man may best know him by the bloody sides he hath torn the ribs out of, Dan. 7. and by his past acts of cruelty. When Mr. Love was present with his fellow Traitors, in the glory of a god∣ly Clergy-man, who would have thought that they had a heart, to the overthrow of many thousands, to raise VVar and Blood-shed, onely to advance a Scotish Presbytery, which Beast had then a bloody face, but now it is hid again
under a supposed learned Godliness? and how blind was poor England, that could not see it to be the cruelty of this Beast, when Pulpits provoked their Natives in her own Bowels, for Religion to murther one another? in which horrid drun∣kenness, Jer. 13.13. Isa. 23.33, 34. the (esteemed) godlyest men (because they were most believed) sent forth most men to this slaughter. Let us again look upon this Lyon-like mouth, that can be stopped with nothing but the blood and flesh of the flock of the slaughter, Zach. 11.3, 4. where the howling of the shep∣herds, and the roaring of Lyons are mentioned both toge∣ther; where Israels Clergy are reputed pitiless, slayers and fellers of the flock, and hold themselves not guilty, saying, Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich; (ah poor England! how dangerous are acts of cruelty amongst thy shepherds, when they are labourers for license to destroy for Religions sake?) this was the condition of poor Israel, who was sometimes as dear in Gods sight as England, when it was at the best, Isa. 22.25. There is a conspiracy amongst her prophets, in the midst thereof, like a roaring Lyon; they have devoured souls, they have taken the treasures of their pretious things, they have made many widdows in the midst thereof. VVe may also look upon our Clergy, how they band together, to get, if it were possi∣ble, such Parliament-men as might be as teeth in their heads, (Christ takes no such care to exalt His Gospel by world∣ly Magistrates) it is apparent that these Priests took no care how many widdows they made, or of devouring souls; wit∣ness our Pulpit-VVar to maintain liberty for themselves to lead soules blindly, that were blind to destruction: but the pretious things they will bave, or else they will sue and di∣stress him that dare not for conscience sake pay them for de∣vouring souls, and many poor labouring men, and widdows, and children, that are constrained to fit with bread and wa∣ter pottage, whilst their labours and profits are required to feed them, and cloath them with the pretious things of our Nation: Is this love and pity, the Law of Heaven, where the servants in the Gospel should live upon giving and recei∣ving? no, no, it is the contending and distressing Law of hell
rather: take heed (good People) of such shepherds, if you once come to have a glimpse of them, search and look far∣ther, for if you delight in such, hear and observe, that he that loveth as well as he that maketh a lie, is without the City of Salvation, Rev. 22.15. Of the enmity of a Spirit something like this Beast, I found in the mouthes of some of our Lin∣colnshire Clergy, who (though they had not forty shillings a yeer, according to the Statute of Free-hold) were swarming to chuse the Knights of the Shire; I desire that any of the rest when Truth provoketh them, and will not be found to serve their turns, be of a better spirit; for these could bet∣ter digest lying, then to be reproved for lying. About thirty years agon, when I was persecuted by the Bishops, wandring from my dwelling place, I came to Spal∣ding, where I did remain a little time; where (being in the company of two or three Christians) I had occasion to look upon the 139 Psal. we being only talking together, I did read, I am wonderfully and fearfully mad, instead of I am wonderful∣ly made, I not at all being preaching then, as the Lyar did re∣port: some that failed in their Duty of taking things in the best part, reported it; notwithstanding, at the same time I did correct my self, and own the true reading: and this re∣port being gotten into the nest of the Clergy, and there hat∣ched by hatred & scorn, brought forth this enlargement, that I should preach it as a Doctrine: But I know not what. It came to pass, at the chusing the Knights of the Shire, up∣on Jan. 10. a great company of Priests being got together in Lincoln Castle, I coming neer where they were, one of them comes by me with a boy-like behavior, and cryeth, I am wonderfully and fearfully mad: to which I said nothing, and he past into the crowd of them; and another, either a Priest or one of their dear Berns, seeing the first did not provoke me to speak, accused me (by the name of this fellow) for preach∣ing of that Doctrine; but what, I could not gather, his words were so confusedly uttered, onely wonderfully and fear∣fully mad; for there is none of them agreeth in words what the Doctrine was; and so turned his back, to whom I an∣swered, Art thou not ashamed to maintain the Priests lies,
and then turn thy back, when thou hast spoken the words? but he turning his face and averting the same, the Synod of them turned to me with out-facing countenance, to whom I said, I stand here to maintain the Truth, against the whole Synod of you: And whereas I might expect something to be said that might make that which they said probably appear, first one of them, and then another of them cryed, Hout him, Boyes, hout him, all the rest standing silent, approving (for they did not reprove) what the two spake. Also Mr. Wood Mer∣chant of Boston told me, That one that he looked at to be a godly Minister, told him, That when some cryed, a Hall, a Hall, I cryed, a Halter, a Halter; which here by my pen and heart, in the presence of God, I deny, for I did not speak those words, nor any words to the contempt of Mr. Hall, nor had ever in my Life an offended thought at the man. Observe, if the supposed godly of them bend their tongue like a Bow for lies, Jer. 9.3. and the active men among them be so inclined to mutiny, as the Reader may judge how dan∣gerous such words were, at such a time and place: Are they not like to be Members of the aforesaid Beast, and like that company of Priests aforesaid, that muther in the way by consent, (for these sought my undoing, either by Mr. Hall's hands, or the multitudes, and to stain my repute) according to the interpretation of Christ, Mat. 5.21. and also guilty of slander, Psal. 50.20. and making a man an offender for a word, Isa. 29.20, 21. and shall according to that word, be brought to nought, consumed and cut off, if they repent not. H. H.
The coming forth, and Progress of the Beast hitherto. THe holy Scriptures foreseeing, Devourers for to grow. Amongst & out of church of Christ, Eph. 2.2 12 Acts 20.30 Doth truly stile such so. As Lyon, Bore and Wolfe, And dumb and greedy dogs, That selfness, honors, beast-like wealth, Doth wallow in like hogs In mire, yet still fild with fears, Their only loved prey, By strength of day-spring valiant truth Should taken be away. Their Lepord-like, with Lyons mouth do grin, Rev. 13.2 And paw of Bear, with Dragons strength stretcht out, A child of truth, in the act of covering Their worrying paw, least men should spie, Their naked, shameless, beastial cruelty. With Christ sheeps cloathing whil'st they can deceive Mat. v: 15. With that, when not, they Magistrate ask leave, That they may use his sword, and then they'r bold, Though inside wolvish nature men behold, To tel truth's children that they must not prate, But put into their mouths, else they will make Mica 3.5 War against them: whom God doth love, they hate. From somtimes Church of Christ Did Pope and Prelate spring, From Pope and Prelate, did
This Presbyter begin, From Presbyter did Independant fly, Yet members still of one body Made, ere they knew in infancie, But Scripture Baptist doth them all deny. For the good old way that Jesus walked in Ier. 7.16., And the Apostles taught repenters to begin Acts 2.38., Hereupon the spirit of the beast rouzeth up himself again. Yea thinks the Quakers spirit, then will I All that is called God or worshiped deny 2 Thes. 2. For where by order by making false order. I can have no place, I must exalt my self to the disgrace viz. in his deceived ones, who exalt the sound of name, but have (being ignorant of) the nature of the law of God and Christ. Of God, opposing order of his face; Though God be the God of order. Plainness of truth opposite to the beasts mysticall pretences. GOD sent his son in flesh to come, True naturall blood to shed, And did ordain his death to be In simple man, bake't bread. And Vine fruit wine that men do drink, Which God and man doth chear, When in his ord'nance spirit joynd The price of Christs blood dear, Shown to hold forth his death for sin, Until he come again, That is gone up true advocate, Our cause for to maintain. Where holy God and sinful man, By Christ a treaty hold,
Who takes our prayers, and there to God Our miseries doth unfold. And doth return into our hearts, The fruits of his blood shed, True pordon, strength, comfort and joy, By spirit witnessed. Who doth with blood and water joyn One witness manifested Iohn 1.5 8., In Gods one way whil'st men obey, Repent and be baptised; And then expect pardon of sin, And holy spirit Gods gift 2. Acts 38, Whil'st that our loves is prov'd to Christ, In making it our strit. For to keep all Gods commandments, Where Scripture comfort dwells Rom. 15.4, With Son and Father manifest, Where men are not Rebels Iohn 14 21.. Hereupon the spirit of the beast proceedeth. Thinks disobedient spirit, I have No share in this strong Saviour, Il'e cry down Lawes and holier be Then all that formes do favour, In the eyes of those that have the love Of simple truth denyde. Il'e serve their lusts and them perswade They need not to be ti'd. I strong delusion can command Affections into tears Ezek. 8 14, And cause men for to lean on God, And so free them from fears.Mica 5.11 And cause men to protest to God, That they'l obedient be Ier. 42.6, Yet his commandments to deny,
And say it is not he Ier. 43. i, 2. For in right steps of humbleness Ps. 17: 11, They shall seem after God to press. And though by Christs knowledge they scape, Through lusts the worlds pollution 2 Pet 2: 20, Yet Gods commandments turning from, They're fast in my possession, Although that they his way forsake, They holiness may hold The strength of delusion li∣eth in their seeming to themselves & others to hold forth their formal holiness:, For I will spirit them my self, Whil'st they're fearless and bold, I can my self transforme Into an Angels light; And there maintain the light within The disobedient wight 2 Cor. 11: 14 2 Thes. 2.. Truth speaketh. As righteous they must sure appear, Whilst they can have the Skill To seem as Christs Apostles right, And preachers of his Will 2 Cor. 11 13.15: These were so far convinc't, As to disclaim prophaneness; But love of truth did not receive, To bring them to obed'ence 2 Thes. 2; Self-love did them provoke, Lest they should damned be, Or of salvation be deny'd, Prophaneness for to flee; Doth it avail (saith they) To save us? let us see: All other Scriptures they throw by As useless for to bee. Delusion speaks. Therefore to them Ime sent 2 Thes. 2 11. compar∣ed with 10 Verse:,
Such lies they shall believe, As me their inward Teacher to Prefer, though God they grieve Gen. 6.6.; Before that simple Christ, That Scripture-writing gave, That men might read & know his law, And sure instructions have 2 Pet. 1 19, 20 2 Tim 3.17.. Truth speaks. The Man of God to make perfect, And furnish him throughout, There is a rule to know Gods will, None need of it to doubt. Delusion speaketh. In mans imagination Ile frame a lawless Christ, And set my selfe up there as God, And in his name be hi'st; Ile cause these to ascribe to me What ere to God is due, And to my inward motions, To flye from Scripture-view. [Remember Ahabs case, 1 King. 21.23.] Truth doth, and will conclude. When beauteous holiness appears, In sweetned-soul the dew of youth to bring,Psalm. 110 In morning womb, it never fears To own its Jesus Lord and King; That God-begotten, Virgin-born, That crosfide flesh was crown'd with thorn, Hath saving power, and law-giving, In person, place and time,
No true man can deny this thing, And say he 's without crime. That doth salvation to himself apply, Whilst that obedience he doth clean deny, Though faith and bapti'm in one book be writ, Yea in one Chapter, and in one Verse too, Delusion saith he can the faith out pick, And leave the bapti'm for some else to do. Thus self-love his salvation minds Whil'st love of righteousnesse thinks fit, To hate iniquity betimes. The Oyle of gladness with his Christ to get Psal 45.7, And thinks nothing for himself to imbrace, To be too low, carnal or base. That his Jesus to his Apostles gave For Church direction; but will tread the trace, With Christ and his Disciples to his grave. And knowes when's left his body, then that he From 's bodyes worship, not before is free. If our great God by such a lowly thing, As blew in fringe would Israel mind Of their obedience to their Lord and King Num▪ 15 38, That they might not to their own heart, Nor to their eyes be seeking, With spirit of disobedience dark, (Though light calld) go a-whoring, Then think not baptism & breaking bread, Mean Lawes, by Christ b'ing uttered; Flying to holier spirit they think, then Christ, That doth and will exalt himself the high'st, Within the disobedient child, That is by spirit, but not by God beguil'd.
To all Law-givers and Magistrates. WIth the submission of a poor worm that is under your feet, (that you may behold what God hath given to my heart to write a war∣ning to men, and that you may avoid all provocations to that horrid sin of building up Sim with blood, Micah 3.10.) I tender this treatise to your view, hoping that you will not despise the words of him that is as much your underling, as any maid-servant to her Master, (though they may Contend with some of you, Iob 11.13.) Being I am heartily engaged by Christ Jesus my master, to disswade all men from adhering to mans inventions, or devices, in and about the worship of God, because they are so dangerous to prince and people in the land of my nativity, as is proved in the 106. Psalme, & the 29. Vers. and Psalm 99.8. Isa: 66.5. and many other Scrip∣tures. And from declining the exact rule of Christ and his A∣postles laid down in the bookes of the New Testament only; under which grace we are, and not under the Law of terror, Heb: 12: 21. This poor Supplyant of yours, to whom God hath gi∣ven grace to be faithful, is willing (I hope) amongst many others, to stand in the Gap, by shewing to you and all Eng∣land, and praying to God for you and it, Ezek. 22.30. compared with the 28. Verse, the very way, by which an end must be put to the proceedings of the resisters of the truth, 2. Tim. 3: 9: Viz. by the discovering their folly to all men; to which purpose, this poor-servant of Christ Jesus hath written this treatise against this first Beast that ariseth out of the Sea, viz. the Church that hath his power maintained, and his worship exercised by the second Lamb-like horned beast, that is more like a Lamb then the
first, and ariseth out of the eatrh, viz: the world, and yet he holdeth up the first beasts power and worship by Magistrate sword, the place that the first arose out of yeeld∣eth no such power, his Lamb-like horns being the strength that prevaileth with the Magistrate to uphold him, viz: a repute of holyness and innocency, in which he exceed∣eth, therefore as a Lamb, or as one in sheeps cloathing, and in the pretended name of the Lamb Christ, he taketh pow∣er by the Magistrate to constrain rich and poor, small and great, bound and free, to worship, &c. Revelations 15. there∣fore where there is a constraint upon all into one worship, we may well suspect that it is the power of that beast, who is the very powerful life-giver to the bare Image of the first beast which Image, if it had not the Magistrates pow∣er to constrain it, it were life-less, and therefore called the Image, because it hath neither Scriptures authority to provoke, nor power to constrain, so that this beast is but a Dagon at the best, that cannot stand without mans art or power to uphold it, and shall certainly fall when Gods arke of testimony is brought to it, and this is the last beast that shal be at enmity with my Master Christ Jesus, and this is the same spirit with the first, who is the old Ser∣pent, and Satan, whose whole body consisting of beast, whore, and false Prophet, as head, body and taile, shal in the end perish together, Revelations 19.20. The beast was once wounded by my Masters providence and power, when he died upon the Cross, where he spoiled principalities and powers, and made show of it openly, Col. 2.15. the vertue whereof is his deadly wound to this day, and no Salve that the beasts healing flatterers hath (though for a time it giveth ease to the blind sleepy conscience) can make this deadly wound unmortal, viz. those Prophets spoken of in Ezek 13.9 But when triumphant truth, the beasts mortal foe, shal ap∣pear, to make manifest what this wounded beast is, that can never look upon Gods word to examine his own stand∣ing, but he so much feeleth there the soarness of his mind, as that he dare not in it prosecute his examination, he shall
be dead by that act, and taken out of the way, 2. Thes. 2.7. and by how much truth looketh forth, by so much this beast is sick of his wound; ask your selves when truth appears; where is lyes? are they not all dead and gone; then impudencie and out-faceing of lyes must needs cease, when God shall destroy the face of the covering of all people, and the vail that is spread over all nations, Ezek. 25.7. the ve∣ry discovery of him is his wounding; therefore let those of the Clergie that loves to be Masters of all people, upon the account of godliness, contrary to Christs counsel, Math. 23.10. look about them, for Christ Jesus woundeth the head out of the house of the wicked, by discovering the foun∣dation to the neck, Selah, Hab. 3.13. for then their standing will appear whether it be of God or no; then their begging for liberty to persecute those that dare not feed them, and honour them, will be at an end, when Gods out-casts are visibly provided for, and the oppressor ceaseth, Esa. 16.4. then those that made lyes their refuge, vvhen they fled from the written word to mens invented may bees will be utter∣ly undone, when the patient, Heb. 10.36. not hast-making beleivers, Esa. 28.16. is upon their sure foundation, then the Hail shall sweep away all the refuge of lyes, and the water shall overflow the hiding places, Esa. 28.17. So that it must needs follow, that the weapons of our war-fare are not carnal, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. but mighty through God, so that the sword of the Magistrate hath no such strength against this beast, as mighty truth hath; therefore be wise O ye Kings and Rulers of the earth, as it followes in the second Psalme 10.11.12. Verses, take heed of persecuting any for Gods sake, although they be presented to you as deceivers, Mat. 27.36. and seditious, Acts 24.5. For was not Christ and his Apostles so presented to their persecutors, it is better to take Christs counsel, viz. let both grow together till Har∣vest, then that the blood or distress of any one persecuted Saint should lie at your door; Christ disclaimed any in∣trest in your kingdom in the dayes of his flesh, and set an example of obedience to God, in being under your au∣thority: and his Apostles commanded submission to you,
and to pray for you, and we are yours, subjected to you in all civil obedience; so do you refuse to have autho∣rity in Christs Kingdom, and be you there subjected to him; and as he saith, My Kingdome is not of this world, so say you, that your Kingdome is not over his Church, and let his Laws be in your eys as they are in truth, so wholly, by which he governeth his Church, that man cannot add to them, or amend them; it is possible to help forward a delusion by persecution, making the erronious presume that they are martyrs for Christ when they perish in pri∣son upon religious accounts, (and then if you do that to them for Christs sake, or for Religions sake, for which you have no rule in Gods Word, it will be then (if God give you not repentance till the day of Judgement) that hee will come to say to you, Who hath required this at your hands?) but never to provoke them to love the truth, or make them willing by mans, but by Gods power, Psal. 110. Yet if you go about to drive them that Christ is a wooing and beseeching them by the mouth of his Apostles, 2 Cor. 5.20. you may come at the trouble of your conscience in the hour of death too too late to repent; but we as our duty is, do pray & indeavor that no such thing may fal upon you And in the words of the Apostle, We beseech you to be reconciled to God, and not opposite to his gracious pardoning mercy, in going about to take from man, or to make useless the forgiveness of that blasphemy against the Father and the Son, by the lips of Christ, now in the dis∣pensation of his Gospel granted and proclaimed, Mat. 12.31. for without repentance there is no forgiveness; and how can any repent when the sword of the Magistrate hath cut him off? [Concerning this there hath been some∣thing in a former Parliament] Paul took not that course, he did not flie to the Magistrate to have Hymenus and Alex∣ander cut off, but he took a course that made them capable of learning to amend, 1 Tim. 1.10. which had not been lawful for Paul to have done, had not Christ in his Gospel taken away the rigor of that Law which is written in the 24 of Leviticus, and the 16. And upon this Gospel ac∣count
Christ told James and John they knew not of what manner of spirit they were of; For the Son of man is not come to destroy mens lives, but to save them, Luke 9.55, 56. when they of Samaria would not receive Christ; therefore if any sort of men like these companie of Priests, that murder n the way by consent, that are spoken of in Hos. 6.9. (for it cannot be thought these Priests took away tem∣poral lives, by temporal weapons) should tempt you to mend those Lawes that Christ and his Apostles left for Church-government, and give punishment for breaking them (exceeding the severitie of the merciful Law-givers Edicts) which tend to the peoples destruction; when Christ the wiser then Solomon (and therefore wiser then any prince or Synod that ever was, or will be in this world) gave on∣ly such punishment for breaking his Lawes, as tended only to mans salvation, neither hurting their persons, estates, nor liberties; The Lord strengthen your hearts, and give you courage to resist them who care not that much people perish by you hands, yea and by war and bloodshed, ra∣ther then their Honor and easie fatt-conditions should go down, and they should miss to be Lords over mens consciences, and Gods inheritance, Witness Love's trea∣son. There is no fore-sight like Christs, nor nothing shall come to pass even to the end of the World which he fore-knew not; and upon this account he left sufficient provi∣sion for the being and wel-being of his Church: The very seed of the Devil when it sprang up, Christ would not have his Disciples pull it up, lest they should pull up the Wheat also, thinking it safer to let manie wicked Imps grow, then to venture the destruction of anie poor childe of God; Then be not overcome to let anie be destroyed for Christs sake by the petitioners for destruction, though those they vvould have destroyed are preseneed unto you for the Devils Ims, being you have Christs directions in the case, Matt. 13.28, 29. I do hereby earnestly supplicate you to consider, that England is not more dear in Gods eyes then sometime Israel vvas, and may come to be (if it bee
not alreadie) as far falne from grace as Israel vvas, vvhen there was four hundred prophets for one Micah, 1 King. 22.6. When the zeal of Jezabel was such, that she main∣tained four hundred and fifty prophets, and four hun∣dred prophets at her table all at once, 1 Kings 18, 19. and these false prophets that would flatter, face-painting Je∣zabels and wicked Ahabs, bare all the sway in Israel at that time, when as prisons and threatnings of death for the truths sake, was the portion of all the Micah's and Eli∣ah's, and to be hid in a Caves, and fed with bread and wa∣ter; it is good to have such a holy jealousie, as may pro∣voke all that fear God, to pray for the Land and the Ru∣lers thereof, and to warn our great ones that are Preist-feeders, to look to it, least their zeal deceive them not, and that they be not found of that number, that prepare a ta∣ble for that troope, and furnish a drink-offering for that number, that are spoken of in Esa. 65.11. to 16. and when Christ makes this great discovery, their zeal be found no better then Jezabels was, it must needs be thought that her Preists were confident, else they durst never have joyned issue with Elias about the tryal of their God, and his God; therefore let the truth advise you not to trust, for there is both learned Papists and learned Protestants, and one or both of them must needs be in an error, but bring all to the law and to the testimonies, Esa. 8.20. and if they deviate one jot from Scripture, and give an invented may be in the room of it, beleive them not, but take notice that the Scrip∣ture is able to furnish a man of God throughly, 2. Tim. 3.1.6. and there is no need of mans invented (may be) to be joyned with it; and least our great ones way, and their Preists way, or peoples way, should be a way of wickedness, they are intreated to follow Davids example, who was as right as any King or great man can come to be now a∣dayes, yet he was earnest with God to try him, least his way was a way of wickedness, Psalm. 129.23. It is undoubtedly true, that when the Prophets cry out to the Magistrates for harms to their neighbours, for religion sake, they are not of that spirit of Christ Jesus that came not to destroy, but to save mens lives, and if poor
England or the rulers thereof be willing to hear this com∣plaint, then those sad words may bespoken of it, as was spoken of Israel, Ier. 5.31. viz. The Prophets prophesy falsly, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my people love to have it so, but what will you do in the end thereof? And so it is, that we being under another spirit then E∣lias was, desire no harm to those destroyers from the Ma∣gistrate; No no, he might be quiet in his civil imployment, if our enemies would trouble him about matters of religi∣on no more then we do, but we desire that none may be welcome to you, that tempt you to keep us from the free & plain use of the Scriptures of Christ, in the simplicity there∣of, without spoyling us by Phylosophy or learned troops of figures, which are vain deceit when they are used a∣gainst the truth, Iob 2.8. to which Scriptures we appeal utterly, and that by the help of the same spirit that wrote them from all inventions of men, whether brought forth by Synods or Assemblies of Divines, or any others, and ac∣cording to my duty in the name of Christ my Master, I warn you in the love of God (who is love) that you suffer the word of God to run and be glorified in the same un∣compoundedness, that Christ and his Apostles left it, without changing the Laws thereof, or giving any other punishment for breaking the Laws thereof, then Christ and his Apostles left order for in the Scriptures; man can as harmlesly endeavour to change the Orgins and light by which the natural eye seeth, as to amend what Christ and his Apostles left for his church government throughout all ages to the end of the world. O ye Law-Givers and Magistrates, as my soul is a pitty∣ing your inevitable and dolorous danger, whilest you or a∣ny of you are meddling with the apples of Gods eyes, or whilest you are tempted to endeavour to mend the perfect Law of God Psalm. 19 knowing the tempter is so hidden under Christs name, & hath so prevailed with former Magis∣trates, as that they by the then Clergies present perswasi∣ons, have been as it were the slaughter men of Christ & his
Apostles, and all his suffering Saints to this day, it being the word of Christ to take away trouble from the sufferers hearts; when they know whilest they are under your hands, they are under the alsupporting and comforting power of God also, who least that these things should come upon them at unawares, foretold them that they should be had before Kings for his names sake, and whoso∣ever killeth them shall think he doth God service, Iohn 16.4. Loe here, is not here a prophesy sutable to a seeming god∣ly Clergie for Gods service sake, to bring to pass by temp∣tations? take heed Magistrate, and know that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, and for your help in this case, consider that there are many and sweet directions in that new Testament, that is sealed with Christs Blood, how sufferers should behave themselves, but not one how persecutors of Christ Laws should behave themselves, in bringing either the body or estate of any Heretick to distress for Christs sake, which proves that there is no Plaintiffes but all Defendants, or rather Passives for Christs sake, in Christs flock, the sheep have no means nor strength to commence one action against the Wolfe. Also consider how it would please you, if your servants should for their honour, riches and wealths sake, by their inventions only, bring forth as your mind, another rule to govern your house by (and that stated only upon ar∣guments) then you had left by plain express commands in writing, without any difficulty; and the Lord make the dutiful and loving endeavors of this poor servant, to be one means amongst many others, to hold you in a sweet apprehension of Christ and his Laws, that you may receive the blessing that is pronounced out of Christs mouth, viz: Blessed are they that are not offended in me.
To the Christian Reader. CHristian Reader, thy relation to our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, rendereth thee chosen, and called,Rev. 17.4 and faithful;* so that wheresoever thou behold this subtil beast that creepeth under the pretence of God and Christ, and so hide himself, it is thy duty to hunt him; for it is possible thou may hunt out some members of Christ out of him, Ier. 16.16. that are set down in his riches and pleasures, and there hidden from the feeling of Christs life in his com∣mands, and bring them forth to be wayfaring men, that they may travel in the high way, and the way that is cal∣led holy, where the blessing is not more entailed, or not so much upon the man learned, as upon simple ones, chil∣dren and fooles; (viz. in the worlds account) Mat. 11.25. Esa. 35: 8. Prov. 1.4. being that discovering is death to him; so thou hast nothing to fight with, but the lip of truth, which shining upon him, will melt him as the Sun melt∣eth Ice, and is a Cordiall heart, rejoycing life, and crea∣ting presence of Christ in thee, whilest thou beleivest in God, and uttereth his praises to his and thy enemies con∣fusion, who is made up of a lump of lies, frozen as it were together by Satans cruelty, Psal. 35: 25: when he is made manifest, he must needs be slain, for then no man will as God or godly, believe or receive a known enemy of God and godliness: Thou must not follow him with carnal weapons, as clubs, provoking mutenies against him, and whips, and pri∣sons, and spoiling of goods, those are his weapons; but thou must be so far from rendering evil for evil, that when any member of this beast striketh thee on the one cheek, thou must turn to him the other also, 2 Cor: 10: 3.4: yet the weapons of thy warfare are mighty through God, as prayer, tears, sword of the spirit, blood of the covenant, the whole armour of God spoken on in the 6: Eph: 11: and in as much as he calls it the whole armour of God, it
proves that God hath never a peice of armour but that for thee to use, in whose name then can prisons, &c. be used by thee, I know thy heart and thy labour goeth both together, thou hast a tender regard to thy Christs honour, therefore if thou discover any countertfeit coming forth in his name, thou with heart, and pen, and tongue, wilt cry out of him, according to the measure of the Talent thou hast received; and because the love of God is shed abroad in thy heart, thou wilt be an eye of discovery to, and a hand pointing at this beast, for thy weak brethren, that they fall not into his pits and snares, and as God loved the world, so thou be∣ing God-like, wil use the love of God shed in thy heart to love it also, yea thy very enemies in it, that thou know∣ing the terror of the Lord, viz. against this beast, wilt per∣swade men to look to their doings, and standing, (for we must all appear before God) least they perish with this beast and false Prophet, which false Prophet must needs be a supposed (but not) godly Clergy, which defendeth them that receive the mark of the beast. The perfect love that Moses had, was to work all the means of salvation by prayer to God, and instructing the people, yea when they were in acts of rebellion against God, reviling himself and Aaron; who was but a figure of our Lord Jesus, who was upon the act of the Jews eter∣nal salvation, and Gentiles, when they were in the act of crucifying him; they scoffed and peirced him, he prayed for them; and of the like mind must thou be Christan Reader, to those that are taken Captive of the Devil to do his will, thou art to recover out of his snares, 2 Tim. 2.26. though their hearts be enraged against thee, they make ready their hearts as an oven, Hosea 7.6. when the darts that comes out of their souls, (viz. terrible words and de∣vouring actions) though poysoned with Asps envy and rage, and self-tormenting agonies, they being shot at thee, fall into thy soul (thou receiving them by faith) all quench Eph. 6.16. by the love that faith worketh by, thy quieted mind, returns prayer for them and glory to God, rejoyce∣ing that thou art counted worthy to receive the rage of
men, which in thy soul turneth to Gods praise, but can do thee no further harm, Psal. 76.10: be encouraged for thou must overcome, thy heart must not be inslaved, thou must hear thy testimony for thy Lord and saviour, Rev: 15:3: if thou mean to sing his praises in heaven; and thou hast no other weapons but the word of thy testimony, and the blood of the Lamb, (and wo wil be to them that sight in Christs quarrel with any other weapons) the one is to keep out subjects and spirit of Abaddon; who fight with car∣nal weapons, and provoking temptations to destroy one-another, (which you wil easily see if you compare the 38: of Ezek: 10: with Rev: 20:8:) thy heart being sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb, they would destroy thee too if this blood did not kep them out, but no child of God can be destroyed, though his body perish, when his heart is held up in its rejoycing delight in God; prisons, and ene∣mies, and all persecution, being but keyes to open the hear to God more abundantly, and messengers to bring Gods presence into it, to keep his heavenly court there; then thou wilt not be provoked at thy enemies further then to pittie them, and pray for them, and do them good; the other is the Scriptures, which is the word that Christ thy Captain fought this beasts spirit with, when he bare testimony against him with it is written, and that is the word of the testimony, it is written, will find all his mem∣bers out, it will approve the proved perfect way of God, and discover every false way; and that thou and I may walk in the fear of God, and comforts of his spirit, with the Churches of Christ, Acts 9:31. and also in the comfort of the Scripures, our way being there recor∣ded, Rom. 15:4: we behaving our selves wisely in a perfect way, waiting for the coming of the Lord Jesus to us, Psal: 101: 2: may walk with a perfect heart is the desire of thy companion, in the faith, and under the cross of Christ: H: H:
To the Reader. REader, if thou hast a desire to take him in a snare that reproveth in the Gate, Esa: 29:21. and endeavoureth to make ie matter for thy hating or persecuting spirit to work upon, that these things are written against thee, as the Pharisees did against my master Christ, (unworthy I to call him so, yet he having given me grace to be faith∣ful, and commanding his loving kindness into my heart, and opening my heart to receive his father and himself, and ovvned me, and caused me to ovvn him) I am bound to tell thee that thou mayest shevv thy self of the Pharisees spirit, and as one of them by so doing. But the children of truth follovving the example of their Lord and Lavv-Giver, endureth contradictions of sinners, Heb. 12.3. vvithout heart-rising-malice, or pro∣curing evil, or persecution to them, but their rule is to love their enemies, & pray for them that persecute them; the Scripture cannot shevv any Disciple that ran to the Magistrate for help against any disputant; the Disciples of Christ have all one spirit, even the same that Steven had, that the gain-sayers could not resist the vvisdom of it, and not the Magistrates svvord at their call, neither dare they lay it upon the right eye of their enemies, that they nei∣ther dare look upon nor speak truth because of it, Zach. 11.17. though it be the gain-sayers portion, yet it is not from Christs Disciples, if they should not be inslaved that are fed, and maintained by the Magistrate, they could not be idle shephards, but vvould break through all difficul∣ties, to look upon the light, though it cost them vvhat∣soever harm the svvord that lieth upon their eye could do them. Truth and those that are of it begotten, are vvilling to come to the light, to have their practises and opinions ma∣nifested, for it delights to be exactly searched and examined, and the more contradictions are endured,
and the current of them not stopped the more it shi∣neth. I advise thee to understand that this little book is not written against any persons, but such as are ticntured with the spirit of that beast, it is a hunting to discover for, this spi∣rit cannot be attributed to Presbyterian, or Independant, or Quaker, or Baptist, no not to Pope and Prelate alone, or at all except they have the acts and instruments of cruelty men∣tioned by them, which are the cognisance of the fourth beast, that hath no certain creatures form, Dan. 7.7. as the other of the three had but was dreadful and terrible, to shew it was a persecutor, it had great Iron teeth, ten horns, which are in∣struments of cruelty; it brake in peices, devoured and stamp∣ed the residue, viz. all but it self; here is acts of cruelty in∣deed; O how like this beast is those religious people that would destroy all religions but themselves, by the Magistrates hand for non-conformities sake to themselves; but this beast is in every place, yea in the very Temple of God, 2. Thes. 2.1. and wheresoever there is either power, of man spiri∣ted to be Abaddon, and Apollons subjects, or of spirit that oppo∣seth either spirit or form that agree together in the true wit∣ness and worship of God, or wheresoever that opposing spi∣rit maintaineth his breath, there will some time or other ap∣pear the Tallands or the ten horns, or the stamping power, or some deceivableness of unrighteousness, that is in them that perish, yea though it be the very subtilty of him that can transform himself into an Angel of light, and these are all members of that self hiding beast. Wheresoever or among what people soever this beast hath lost his honour in one form, he taketh up another, yea and rather then fail of his purpose denyeth all formes, so that it may be said he was, and upon his hiding himself, he is not there where he was as visibly and formally the same, and yet is the same spirit of that beast that ruleth in the children of disobe∣dience, that alwayes either opposeth the plainness or the spi∣ritualnesse of Christs commands, one while saying they are too low or foolish, or carnal as (water baptism, &c.) for those
that look after spiritual light to one, another while exalting a false form, another while added form without either spirit or life; and thus he playeth bow-peep, appearing on the one side and on the other, here and there, when and where, he is discovered changing his form, or peeping out without any form, and it is apparent that he ascendeth out of the bottomless pit, because no rule that Christ hath given in his word can measure him, he dsiclaimeth that when it would dis∣cover him, and then telleth you that the place he cometh from is the movings of a spirit, and in this it is bottomless, because no right reason nor measuring line can declare, where or what, or when this spirit will make his progress, or try his work that refuseth all tryal but himself. These things considered, let not the Clergy be enraged, that this writing hunteth after this beast, if it be not a∣mongst the Clergy or Presbitery in England, it may be it wil be found in Rome and some other land, let them help me to hunt him out. If they do not rather compell by the Magistrates sword into conformity, then convince by sound doctrine; the gain-sayers, Ttus 1.9. 2 Tim. 2.25. and not desire them to be rooted out of their dwellings, to be cast into prison, to have their goods spoiled for want of conformity to them, if they be content not to be chief of all that come forth in the name of God; viz. not to give Laws to all, so that none may preach without their authority, and let Gods authority without mans serve the turn, if they can be content that any man cast out Devils, Mark 9.39. if they can be quiet in mind to see others preach Christ, that have not authority from them, and re∣joyce in it, though he be preached of envy, Phil. 1.15 if they be without all the forenamed instruments and acts of cruelty, nor have no heart to desire, nor sue for power to force conformity to them by the Magis∣trates sword, then they are no members of the Beast that this book pointeth at.
Hovvsoever none can deny but that some Presbyterians and Independants are held in their forms, upon account of riches and honour, or for some self-engagements sake, although most or all may not be so (vvhich I am afraid are) there is novv so much light abroad according to Daniels Prophesie Dan. 12.4: that if there vvere such a povver upon them as could make their hearts manifest, as one day there shal be, some of them must needs ovvn some part of the speeches that are spoken in this book to be the very thoughts of their hearts, & that they take comfort and have their standings maintained from the causes in∣serted there, and other-some the rest, and some all; hovv∣ever I am excuseable, because the spirit of God out of the mouth of Jesus Christ my master, in the undvidiing ex∣pression said, Wo to you Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites, al∣though some of them proved believers they were then the guides (though blind ones) & teachers of Jsrael, a people that God loved somtime as wel as ever he did England; al∣so Christ reproving Lawyers, spake wo to them in general, Luke 11.46. though some of them proved good men, as Io∣seph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus, &c. then it is possible that England may be as blind led, as Israel then was, for the Pharisees and Lawyers was as learned then as ours now are; therefore Reader take heed that thou let not thy heart rise against this book by unconsiderate prejudice, read it, ponder it to this purpose. 1. Take heed of retaining that spirit that thinks him∣self wise enough to controul plain commands of Christ in Scripture. 2. Also if the plaines and simplicity be that that offended thee in Christs Lawes, read Mat. 11.6. and seriously con∣sider whether the practise of the Apostles and Disciples for 300. years after Christ be not a good expositer of the Law, and that thou need not go to spirits or Angels for a higher exposition, against their plain practises. 3. Consider in thy mind whether any Statute recorded in the Scripture can be repealed, but by a Statute there
also recorded, and then take heed of changing Christs Laws upon mans authority. 4. Do not believe because the falling away is great, that therefore the Law of baptising beleivers is cancelled, for if the command were not yet in force there could be no fal∣ling from it, 2. Pet. 2.21 5. Understand that whosoever falleth away, & yet are religi∣ous, must needs have some inventions of man by Satans in∣ward working, either that the Rule is not exact enough, then meditate Eccles. 7.16. or that it is too strait, then carry thy meditations to the written Word, Isa. 8.28. and there pitch down thy Standard for truth. 6. If truth of God stir thy mind to trouble, and the Word carry a sharp edge, rightly applyable to thee, take heed that Satan work thee not into the rage of revengeful persecution, Psal. 76.10. and then thou may come to approve thy self to be a Christian Reader, which is the desire of the servant of Christ, who is a well-wisher to the whole Creation. H. H.
A true Reproof of W. S. SIR, HAving known your discretion in other things I can∣not but wonder that you should seem to suppose that you have any thing like an Answer to H. H. in your Book; but much more should I marvel that you should say, It is hard to draw Wine out of thy Lees; Which is as much as to say, It is hard to answer that which you go about to an∣swer. And though you see your self blundered in what you are about to answer, that you would go on (viz) to heal those that Truth woundeth, but that I consider that when once your heart cometh to engage in error, then wilful ig∣norance tempts God, and hardens your hearts against evi∣dent truth of God, then yours ceaseth to be an outward sin∣gle disobedience, but it is an inward heart working, God-tempting (though ignorant) Error, which is not charged in this place of Heb. 3.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. with ignorance of God but of his Wayes, and in this appeareth a heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God, when men are wilfully ig∣norant, and have a heart set against his Wayes: Wherefore herein you prove your selves to be of the shameless genera∣tion spoken of in Ier. 6.10. your spirit is not ashamed to take the Name and Title of God, and you are not ashamed to say you are moved by God, when indeed you are moved by the Evil One, you giving, and he taking the Name of God; or rather the using your lips to exalt himself above God, with 2. Thess. 2. and also in that he maketh you his voice by his own Authority to proclaim null the Laws that God made by Jesus Christ, and without any Warrant from Christ or his Apostles, crying down that vvhich they taught and practised, either they or you must needs be of Satan, being that the Scripture saith, If we, or an Angel from heaven teach
unto you another Gospel then what we have preached to you, let him be accursed, Gal 1.8. You say in your Book, (I deny) I am made to stand a witness against thee in the power of the Lord, vvhilst I hold up that Gospel. What self-exaltation is here! What proof is here of your matter? Here is great swelling Words; do you think your Spirits Authority enough, so that he need not to use Scripture to prove his matter by when he is questioned? Then he seems in this, as in other things, to be above Christ by his own exaltation, for Christ when he met vvith your spirit in temptation, though he be the Son of God, yet used Scripture, saying, It is written; and in his Word by the mouth of John, appealeth to Record, saying, There are three that bear record on earth, the Spirit, Water, and Blood, and these three agree in one; but your Spirit is so far from agreeing, that it opposeth two of them, wherefore it can∣not be the Spirit of God; your Spirit cometh forth in its own single Witness, and denieth to be tryed by Scripture, or any thing else but it self. You try all your matter by that you call the light vvithin, the natural man, &c. of vvhich light your spirit is the transfotmed Angel, 2 Cor. 11.14 and things are like to go on in his side in his ovvn Court. We acknowledge the light vvithin the enlightned man, vvhich agreeth with the Scriptures, Heb. 10.32. compared vvith 2 Tim. 3.17. but not before illumination; this is the light that enlightneth every man; but vve must not acknowledge it but where it is: It is good to answer Tempters by seeing the image or superscrip∣tion, though Tempters are more general. It is certain, there is something called a light by Christ, that is in the unregene∣rate man, and may be darkness, Matth 6.23. Surely this must be yours; for you own yours there, and vvould have all jud∣ged by that, and neglect Christ and his Apostles rules in Scri∣pture. And now to be short, Friend, you have not found out one particular in all my Writings, whereunto you might ap∣ply your self as a just matter of your reproof, therefore you fell upon me with many foul revilings, onely there is a mistake in the quotation, I not being at the Presse my self to correct it, the place should have been 1 Tim. 4.1, 2, 3. for which mi∣stake
you take him in a Snare that reproveth in the Gate, and maketh a man an offendor for a word, Isa. 29.21. yea, and that a word mistaken onely; and that you do with most foul insultations. In matters of the World he that should prose∣cute his Neighbor for vvitnessing the truth, when he onely mistakes he place and and upon that point, would be known amongst men as a cunning Knave. As for the matter you made shew to answer, you have gi∣ven it all the go by, yet you will be in Print; Well, according to Solomon in Prov. 26.5. I have answered you; and according to his counsel in Verse 4. I shall not answer you except you shew more Wisdom; you have asked me no question but what are plainly prevented in my Writings, if you had eyes to see it, you might see it, therefore I refer all to the judicious Rea∣der that shall read both Books. Again, you make something of the word [Carpenters Son] but that is your mistaking ig∣norance; for it was he that the Jews vilified by that Name, who is the Saviour of the world, and Law-giver to Saints; and as they reproached his meaness by that Name, so you re∣proach the meaness of his Laws by the Name o outside Law, carnal, unspiritual things, as not high enough for him that exalteth himself above all that is called God, or wor∣shipped. Therefore the VVord is a proper allusion to you, you and the Jews both vilifying Christ and his Laws as too mean for you. Again, you play upon the word, [Taking it upon me as my duty] you need not, for it is a Scripture phrase, Gen. 18.31. and whosoever is a VVitness for the Truth, taketh up the Cross, and upon him Christs burden, which to do is my duty; the word you see will warrant the phrase, and that is more sure then your As God his movings. I write against a Spirit and People in disobedience, and I bended my writings against the thing wherein the deceit lay; I did personally asperse no man, but thou hast missed the point, though thou comest forth as a man provoked, and one in union with that Error I reproved, and hast brought forth my Name and dwelling-place, that thou mightest reproach
me with railing terms, upbraiding me with what men had done unto me, and art to be reproved by Psal. 50 19▪ 20 and Jude 8, 9, 10. Is not this personal animosity? Have you not need to plead for perfection that do such things? Do you think your Spirit that hath set you about this, is the spirit of God, or no: You must needs call this either envy or malice, or both: Is this any proof for your matter, that you give folks to think you answer? This is as impertinent as all the rest, even so is thy calling that light in the natural man (of which Christ saith, Matt. 6.23. How great is that darkness) the light of Christ, and averring that I speak against it; the Lord will uphold my good Name, though thou wouldst blast it, and make me content to go through thy evil report, and be glad to see thee penitent and obedient to God, that thou and I may enjoy that one life and truth together with the Apostles and Disciples, and that God-man that dyed upon the Cross (and is now with his Father, and our Father, in heaven) which he gave in the dayes of his flesh, and now maintaineth. Written by an unworthy Servant of God, who in Gods perfect way waiteth for visitations of that Spirit that is sent from the Father and the Son, by that Man Jesus who is in Heaven in his eternal and unchangeable Priesthood, Heb. 7.24. H. H. FINIS.
ERRATA. Pag. 4 line 5. for talents read talands, l 6. for peak r. beak, l. 2. for Charts r. Church P. 12 l. 4 after the word Disciples, r. truth speaketh, l. 20. after the word mouhr when that Statute is as the mouth of some inveterae Clergy-men, to hold mens estates in at their pleasure, P. 16. l. 15. for Ecclesiasies r: Nehemiah.
