H895 13016972 96581
A THANKSGIVING SERMON FOR DISCOVERY Of the Late Phanatick Plot, September 9. 1683. By IOHN HARRISON D. D. Rector of Pulborow in Sussex. Tantum Religio potuit Suadere Malorum. LONDON, Printed for W. Crooke at the Sign of the Green Dra∣gon without Temple-Bar, nigh the Passage into the Temple, by Devereux Court, 1683.
To the Right Honourable Sir WILLIAM MORLEY Knight of the BATH, One of his Majesties Honourable De∣puty-Lieutenants for SUSSEX. Right Honourable, NEver was such a Mite presump∣tiously offered as this Trifle, to Your Honors Patronage: But having once Intituled it a Loyal Sermon, I knew not where more seeurely to shel∣ter it, than under Loyalty it self. Your Honors known Modesty could never yet endure large Encomiums, which are also unsuitable Prefaces for a Religious Di∣scourse,
nor can I give an account of any secret Impulse of Nature, except your Powerful Name, in relation to my Lord Bishop of Winchester, with your Train of attractive Virtues, that hath ever se∣cretly inclined my heart more peculiar to your Honors Service than any other Per∣son whatsoever. I have endeavoured my utmost, what will best agree with your Loyal thoughts, to keep my self (as close as possible) within the Method of his Majesties excellent Declaration, account∣ing it far beneath the sence of Honor, to write after an Enemies Pattern, either bitter Invectives, or, if in my Power, Characters of Blood, so humbly Addressing my hearty Zeal for my King and Countrey, better beseeming your Protection than an Elegance or softness of Style. I take leave with my Fervent Prayers to God for a
farther Discovery of this Fanatick Plot, with all imaginable success on your Loyal endeavours, and the other his Majesties Honourable Deputy-Lieutenants of this Western Division of Sussex, perchance for its bigness more fruitful of such great Examples, than any other Spot within his Majesties Dominions, Right Honourable, your Honours most obliged humble Servant, JOHN HARRISON.
A SERMON ON 2 SAM. XVIII. XXVIII. And Ahimaaz called, and said unto the King, all is well. And he fell down to the Earth upon his face before the King, and said, Blessed be the Lord thy God, which hath de∣livered up the men that lift up their hand against my Lord the King. THE Preacher tells us, that that which hath been, is now, and that which is to be, hath already been, and There is no new thing under the Sun.
We have had, and have still the same Instances of Danger: what befell David, in the case of his Son Absalom, hath befaln our Sovereign, of a like unnatural Son, both Righteous Kings afflicted with a Re∣bellious Off-spring. And if there be divers circumstances in either of these hellish Con∣spiracies, Ours hath been heightned of far more endearing Kindness. As Absalom by fair Speeches did steal the hearts of Israel, 2 Sam. 15. 5, 6. And it was so, that when a∣ny came nigh to him, to do him Obeysance, he put forth his hand, and kissed him, And on this man∣ner did Absalom to all Israel, that came to the King for Iudgment, so Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel. And our Israel can wit∣ness, this hath been no new thing, for that which hath been of old time, was also pra∣ctised of our Absalom. Again, the Rebel∣lion that was to begin at Hebron did happen under pretence of paying of a Vow unto the Lord, that is, under the Veil or Dis∣guise of Religion, 2 Sam. 15. 7. Absalom said unto the King, Let me go and pay my Vow, which I have vowed unto the Lord in Hebron.
But this pretence of a Vow was only in ef∣fect, to send Spies through all the Tribes of Israel, ver. 10. Assoon as ye hear the sound of the Trumpet, then ye shall say, Absalom Reign∣eth in Hebron. Nothing more usual than to give out the Cause of Christ, whilst under that Vizor, they act Parts quite contrary to his Holy Doctrine and blessed example, so true is the Observation of the Preacher, That which hath already been, now is. As if the Kings Declaration (for this Days Deliverance) had been the very Tran∣script of the Text. And this is ever obser∣vable, in a well-formed Conspiracy (if a Conspiracy can in any sense be so expressed) First, To settle it self under some chief Lead∣er, that especially of Popular Arts, hath in∣sinuated himself into the Multitude, giving out himself to be some Mighty one, and what he wants of a just Title, (as that ought ever to be pretended in an Hereditary King∣dom) he will make good, in his Defence, of the Peoples Religion, Estates, Lives, and Liberties.
The business is, to cheat the World with a pretence of Sanctity and Zeal, and to blind the Peoples eyes more strongly in these Mischievous Attempts; they do ever joyn this Chief Leader with some notable Achitophel, that is, some experienced Coun∣sellor (if such can be procured) as hath been formerly eminent or successful in the overthrow of a State or Kingdom, 2 Sam. 15. 12. And Absolom sent for Achitophel the Gilonite, David's Counsellor, from his City, even from Giloh, while he offered Sacrifices; and the Conspiracy was strong, for the People encreased continually with Absalom. And this was profes∣sedly done (as being no new thing under the Sun) in the late Earl of Shaftsbury. And to make it farther appear, that the Church hath formerly had such Enemies, he is at large described in Psal. 36. 2. 3, 4. He flattereth him∣self in his own Eyes, until his iniquity be found to be hateful; the words of his mouth are Iniqui∣ty and deceit, he hath left off to be wise, and to do good; he imagineth Mischief upon his Bed, &c. A Character so peculiar to our Achitophel, that instead of describing (as some Interpre∣ters
do hereby) an Enemy (in general) of the Church of God.) It seems a special Pro∣phecy (for so David was a Prophet) that such a wretch should arise in these days. Now from this Description, ye may easily conclude, the Conspiracy in a short time grew very strong. And to this purpose, there happens a singular Instance in the story of Absalom, how they did continually increase in numbers; and that was, by sending messengers through all the Tribes of Israel, nor can I deliver in more fitting words what these Spies did intend, than Tremellius's Pa∣raphrase on this Passage. Nunciorum speciem se ferebant, Re tames explorabant Animos Praecipuorum Israel, Absalonis Partes seductos: that is, These Spies did seemingly carry the joyful news of this Journey to Herbron. (Re tamen explorabante) But in truth, they were to underfeel the chief of Israel, who were in∣clined to take part in this intended Conspira∣cy. And is not Tremeliu his Paraphrase ve∣rified in our Spies? I Or else, what meant the Multitudes of Men and Horses in most Parts of England? utterly contrary to Law, unless
on (a Reception of the King himself; only to evince the King's Son (as they flatteringly stiled him) that by this mighty strength they were able to make him a King in∣deed. And now all things being thus ready for the fatal Blow, (and yet by an All-seeing Providence no Blow given) The old Fox that had never learnt that part of the Gospel▪ that it was expedient for one man to die for the Nation, begins to shift for himself. And pitching an eye on Holland, most agree∣able with his Common-wealth Genius. He chose rather to hazard his Den of Foxes, with his whole Association, than his own precious Neck to the stroke of Justice. It was this Association, together with a Vote of Parlia∣ment, That if the King fell by an untimely Death, it should be revenged on the Papists, which first gave birth to this Hellish Con∣spiracy, belief all along, to ac∣complish For some the Solemn League and Cove∣nant (on which  was bottom'd) never such a Piece of Machiavilian Mis∣chief
did enter on the Christian Stage, as this Association; which however they called The Solemn Union of all true Protestants, com∣prehending under this Union, all sorts of Se∣ctaries, no matter how Dignified or Distin∣guished, so they were in their wild Principles, quite opposite to the Communion of the Church of England, by Law Established (the true Protestant here intended, being a Dissent∣ing Member of the Non-conforming Commu∣nion of the Church of England.) Is not this then a meer Jesuitism, and a double-refined Trea∣son, for any of these Conspirators to pretend themselves of the Church of England? when the true Test, without tricks or evasions means only the Church of England, by Law Esta∣blished. No wonder then, if the Sword intended by this stratagem to be intrusted with our deadly Enemies of all sorts; it was very probable, to have been sheathed in the Bowels of the best of Princes, and his dear∣est Brother, his Royal Highness: for it was the Suppression of the Crown with Episco∣pacy, which they had resolved the best ex∣pedient for pulling down of Tyranny, and the Church of Rome.
And yet had these Weapons, so craftily formed, prevailed either against Church or State, these true Protestants had a Salvo at hand to have laid it on the Papists, a Peo∣ple bloody enough! Yet their numbers be∣ing very few, comparatively with these In∣cendiaries, (which have overspread this Na∣tion) they never could have aimed such an universal Massacre as was designed of these true Protestants. It is here observable of what mischievous consequence any Combination is, of what kind soever, whether influence of self-Interest, Pride, Ambition, Spight or Ma∣lice; to be led out of the Kings High∣way of Honesty into any By-Paths of our own, be it in the smallest matter: only at first perchance into a Combination of lesser moment; tho only against your Lawful Mi∣nister: for ye know not how soon of these beginnings of Mischief ye may be led into the broad Road of Rebellion. What a Tem∣pest should we have had, if this black Fana∣tick Cloud had broken over our Heads! Never was Death figured with so many ter∣rible shapes, as were visible in this Conspi∣racy;
but God have the Praise that we are in hopes not to see it not only blow over, but that the Storm is like to fall upon the heads that raised it. Some of these Treacherous dealers, who have dealt so very Treache∣rously with us, are already fallen into the pit which they digged for others, and are en∣snared in the mischievous works of their own hands. And it is to be hoped for the rest, that their violent dealing will fall upon their own heads. (For he who is truth itself, in whom we trust, whose we are, and whom we serve hath assured us, that wicked and blood-thirsty-men shall not live out half their days) For he who is the God of all mercy abhors the cruel and deceitful man. Thus far the Committee of six did suc∣ceed in this Enterprize, under many Fears and Jealousies of a Popish Successor, to hold correspondence in several parts of England, for a general Insurrection, their Followers being poisoned with several treasonable po∣sitions (viz.) that it was agreeable with the Christian Religion, with the Laws and Li∣berties of this Kingdom, to defend the Pro∣stant
Profession with open Force and Resi∣stance. That there is a Liberty in the Peo∣ple to acquire to themselves that which they apprehend to be their Right, by Force, if they cannot obtain it of the Prince by fair means. And this was especially instanced in the case of the Bill of Exclusion (where re∣flecting on many violences, that were offer∣ed for compassing this Bill, no passage did seem more unnatural than a forcing Sir Lio∣net Ienkins to carry it up to the House of Lords, who had best opposed it by his admi∣rable Reasoning) on purpose to represent him (had it been possible) a betrayer of his Trust and Conscience, grounding them∣selves on this Iulian Principle, that the Peo∣ples Preservation was the Supreme Law. Thus did these subtil Foxes (while their heads looke several ways) carry these Firebrands between their Tails to have re∣duced this flourishing Empire (once more) into Dust and Ashes. These Opinions, with divers of the like stamp, I might reasonably insist much larger (only bound in the com∣pass of a Sermon.) They can be only men∣tioned
to give a fair warning, how under the most colourable pretences we never be enticed to combine with any number of men against a Lawful Power; for however they sweeten or guild over this Poison, there is no more real way to introduce Popery than a vain fear of it; and this was the very thing the Jesuits aim'd at in the Reign of King Iames, and the late unnatural War, to destroy each other by these Jealousies, and at last, either by Force or Policy to bring us back to the Romish Church: nor can we ever enough abhor this Pestilence, which in several Kings Reigns hath struck many Subjects dead, by a due course of Law, too sadly made appear in the death of the late Lord Russel, who en∣couraged by this Scotch Doctrine, that it is lawful to defend a mans Conscience by open Force against any Authority whatsoever, did dare adventure his Body, (yea I tremble) his very Soul on this false Bottom, so his execra∣ble Paper seems to import; as if purposely to embolden such persons as are left behind of the same Leven; instead of a faithful (I fear) he met a faithless Confessor. I can∣not
believe but that the whole World will entertain this Discovery with horror; and tho the Sectaries will endeavour with the greatest Impudence to deny or mitigate it, yet certainly this many headed Hydra will receive the Blow which they intended for our Religion: for who, that is not resolved to quit Humanity, will believe that Religion which is to be maintained with Treasons and Murders of the most purple dye? But here a smile must part from me (which however is lawful enough on a Thanksgiving day) that all this was to be done to keep out Popery, when they made it one main branch of the Conspiracy to say they did fear it, and when they were to act that themselves which they had perswaded the World was ever the contrivance of the Jesuit, viz. to murder the King. In the case of the Bill of Exclusion, the Duke was to be made away for preserva∣tion of the King. In this Plot the King was to be Murdered for sake of the Duke; so King and Duke taken in this sad Dilemma were after this new Presbyterian Logick to be both Sacrificed. Where will these Wretches
appear hereafter? That of these hellish men∣tal reservations did design nothing Base and Inhumane, when forsooth relying of much Gallantry in their vast numbers, they did resolve to do it with Swords in their hands: but I would ask them what difference be∣tween Walcot's Sword, and Wakeman's Poison? When the Nation had laid weltring (as at this day) in its purest Blood; such had been the life of the best of Princes, his Illustri∣ous Brother Iames Duke of York, the Reve∣rend Bishops, Nobility, the Loyal Clergy, Gentry, and Commons of this Realm: But instead of these Fiery Tryals, we are to bless God for a sudden unexpected Fire at New-market, (which the Worcester Address excel∣lently expresseth) was purposely kindled a Sacrifice from Heaven for his Majesties hap∣py Deliverance. The Noon-day Star that appeared at this Glorious Birth, did doubtless presage our now Dread Soveraign, the peculiar care of Heaven, to be attended with Miracles, where ordinary means should fail his Preserva∣tion; instead then of his Majesties being
wounded of their deadly Quills, which in the Language of these Ishmaelites did signifie several instruments of Death, God shall sud∣denly shoot at them (as of this days discovery) and wound the hairy scalp of such an one, that still persisteth in this kind of wickedness. Tho it hath pleased an all-powerful God to preserve his Majesty in his Royal Person, through the whole course of his Life, safe and untouched of the innumerable attempts and devices of his Fanatick Enemies; yet (as if it pleased the same God) for an aggrava∣ting punishment of these Treasons hereafter, he hath given way of his permissive Pow∣er to set their Tongues (as it were) on Fire from Hell, to speak evil of Dignities, and such as are in Authority over them. The Sta∣ture of 13 Car. 2. says expresly, That who∣soever shall advisedly Publish or Affirm the King to be a Heretick or Papist, or that he endeavours to introduce Popery, to incite or stir the People to Hatred or Dislike of the Person of his Majesty, or the Established Government: Every such Per∣son or Persons being thereof Legally Convicted shall be disabled to have or enjoy, and is hereby
disabled and inade incapable of having, holding, or enjoying any Place, Promotion, Office Ecclesiastical, Civil or Military. Tho in other Cases these grand Reformers do seemingly Reverence an Act of Parliament more than the Word of God it self, vvhich hath expresly ordained, Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers; yet in this Case fully assured to advance them∣selves of a popular Odium to the Government, rather than of an Act of Parliament; I do here appeal daily Experience whether this be not the Billinsgate Language of our pre∣tended Saints? to burthen the King and all his Loyal Subjects with the hateful name of Papist: certainly a more senseless piece of detraction was never invented on this side Bedlam, than to Brand the Church of England by Law Established with the name of Pa∣pists, who are the only Bulwark against Pa∣pists and Phanaticks. And to deliver a known Truth, all sorts of Sectaries (how different soever) in other Opinions and Interests are here like Herod and Pilate made Friends, for a Crucifying the true Church of God; an ob∣servable to this purpose being first a demure
hatching abominable Scandals in Coffee∣houses, to belch them afterwards more loud∣ly, being heightned with Wine in several Fa∣natick Taverns, for these Shops of Wicked∣ness formerly objected on the Loyal Party, are become Nurseries of Rebellion, Incest, Drunkenness, Debauchery of every kind, becoming the sure marks of these chief Leaders of Sedition. The Lambs were ever allowed to skip and play, (but in this age joyned with Atheists) they may leap over Mountains; for, if you are for a Common∣wealth Vice shall pass for Virtue, Falshood for Truth. Enough (I trust in God) to discounte∣nance wickedness hereafter, and no Loyal Person ever to be out-stript of his real Religi∣on for the seeming pretence of it in others: so of this glib Treason of the Tongue as it usually happens, they were hastning to downright Blows. Several places appointed of these Traitors for this purpose, but with all imaginable Thanksgiving disappointed of an Almighty God.
Rumbold a Malster; a suitable Leader of these Sick-brained Wretches, staggering too and fro like Drunken men, yea, at their wits ends, of the deep draught which they had of∣ten taken in of Sin and Treason. These Bulls of Bashan far more disdain∣fully cruel, than the Bulls in Red-Lyon Fields, where again of Savage minds, they thirsted after Royal Blood. But why all this while no news from Scotland? Such a Train of Mischief to be hatched in any part of the World and no Scotch Treachery intermingled with it? Can there be a War at Hebron, under pre∣tence of paying a Vow to the Lord? Or in England under colour of Religion, and no∣thing in it of the Solemn League and Covenant? The Serpent may want his Sting, or the Ad∣der his Poison; but I fear this People will never be without an Argyle or a Ferguson, yet I must acknowledge, some few of Her Nobility, with her late Parliaments have somewhat atton'd past Offences: and per∣chance this Correspondence now intended, was rather to be held with the Field-meeters
than any sober heads of that Nation, for sure they have been so many years a Passing mark of Infamy (over the habitable Earth) for selling the late King of Blessed Memo∣ry, as Iudas did his Saviour; that they can∣not delight in a continuance of such Disgrace, as wants a Parallel. Now after a Survey of this Hellish Con∣spiracy which (being one of the meanest of my Brethren) I have drawn with a very weak Pensil; a sudden horror nere seizeth my trembling heart, at the sad apprehension what had befaln all of us (had this Conspi∣racy took effect) from the Palace of the King himself to the meanest Cottage, for such was the violence of this Treason, that it seems they had readily concurred to take up Arms, to destroy the Government, even before they had agreed what to set up in the place of it, so instead of a Reforma∣tion, which they pretended to have been, of taking up Arms, it must have hapned as it did in our late Confusions. First, Divisions had arisen among themselves, and then, on what side soever Victory had inclined her self,
the Conquered Party must have been Slaves to the Tyranny and Dust of the Conque∣ror. Then the proud Waters would have gone over our Soul, they would have swallowed us up quick, while they were so wrathfully displeased at us. The face and voice of an Angel (which hitherto had been for Reli∣gion, Estates, Lives, and Liberties,) would have been changed into the hands of a De∣vil, to have rent all these in a thousand pieces, the bleeding marks and lashes of these Common-wealth-Protestants scarce out of our sides had been turned into a very Shambles: For it is a damnable Maxim a∣mong them (if ever they again attain the Power) to destroy all Loyal Families Root and Branch, for, say they, the sparing these Amalekites, was the high provocation which Restored Charles Stuart to the Throne; no better Language to have been allowed our now Dread Sovereign and all his Loyal Followers. Should we ever trust a Rebellion, though flattered with Golden Lives and Liberties;
never any single Person that had signally served his King and Church, but he shall be shackled with Iron Fetters. In one word, to conceive our selves under the mercy of a Sword, is no other than England, now an Earthly Paradise, to become an Akeldama; that is, a very Field of Blood. Therefore the Thanksgiving in the Text fitly applieth it self on this days Delive∣rance. Blessed be the Lord thy God, which hath de∣livered up the men, that lift up their hand against my Lord the King. I can compare the Enemies of this day (next this of the Text) with no fitter Scri∣pture examples, than with Bigthan and Te∣resh, the Chamberlains of Ahasuerus, the great Persian Monarch, Esther 2. 21. Two of the Kings Eunuchs, Bigthan and Teresh were wroth, and sought to lay hands on the King. More than Heathenish wickedness this, to render evil for good, because the King had raised them to be the chief keepers of his Body, to be∣come the chief seekers of his Blood. The Text gives no reason for all this, only they
were angry; yet being said they were angry in those days, it is agreed by Interpreters, it was at the Marriage of Queen Esther, she being a Captive of the Iews, they present∣ly clamor, we shall now all be Iews, for A∣hasuerus must not Marry but where Bigthan and Teresh do appoint. No reason this at all, to forget an Oath of Allegiance, to cast behind them all past Fa∣vours, to betray their Trust, to lift up a hand against God's Anointed. Yet for a far less Reason were our Traitors full of wrath, not for the Kings Marriage with a Captive, but for his near adherence to his own flesh and blood, his dearest Brother, Iames Duke of York, presently we must be all Papists. As Bigthan and Teresh, so our Traitors, once men of great Wealth and Renown, some Guardians of the Kings Person, others of his Council-board, are on a sudden en∣trapp'd in the Devices of their own hands. This must needs be the Lords doing, and it is Marvellous in our eyes, O that men would there∣fore Praise the Lord for his Goodness, and declare the Wonders that he doth for the Childen of men!
Sure there are, the better they be dealt with, the worse still ye shall find them, and of these David was in most danger. Alas! nothing but a Vow at Hebron, when this Vow was to have deprived him of Life and King∣dom. This is the way of them all; that be∣fore it be seen it may do the Mischief that is meant. What Dangers are they in that are in this Case? How neer being lost, only the Kings Enemies being the Enemies of God? They are preserved of Ishbenot, an open Ene∣my, 2 Sam. 21. 16. as well as of Achitophel, a wicked Counsellor. No way (it seems) to prevail against a Righteous King, except they can keep back an All-seeing Eye. And shall it please God to find a watchful Eye to save us, and shall not we find Lips to Bless and Magnifie him for it? O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his Goodness, and declare the wonders that he doth for the Children of Men! Ahimaaz and Cushi strive very hard which might out-run the other, to bring an earthly King the defeat of a Rebel-Army. Theirs was an open Rebellion, opposed of a like open
Force, and so in some sence to be ascribed to the help of men, ours was a close Conspira∣cy, carried on in dark corners, impossible ever to have seen the Light, so as to have been prevented, except of an All-mighty God. How infinite more Reason then, for each of us to hasten, which may exceed each other in our Joys, Praise, and Thanksgiving. O that Men would therefore Praise the Lord for his Goodness, and declare the Wonders that he doth for the Children of Men. FINIS.
