J541 99828727 33158
A Cluster of sweetest GRAPES FOR SAINTS, Brought from the Heavenly Canaan. OR, The Saints Assurance, gotten, and to be had in this Life, by the several means spe∣cified in this Tract upon 1 Pet. 1.9. And fifteen Soul-solacing Conferences with Christ, touching Sins and the World's Conquest; according to the high and noble Art of fight∣ing the great fight of Faith, 1 Tim. 6.12. Fitted for all such gracious Souls as do most heartily desire to see the death of their strong and mighty corruptions, & a thorow victory gotten over this vile and troublesome World. By Christopher Jelinger M. A. LONDON, Printed in the year 1664.
Epigramma Authoris Auspicatorium, ad JESƲM CHRISTƲM, REGEM REGƲM, Dominum suum Clementissimum. CHrist Decus Coeli, Coelorum Gloria, Christe, Unica Progenies ex Deitate Patris, Adveniat nobis Regnum, quod nomine Coeli Scripturae dicunt, adveniatque salus: Monstretur nobis facies tua, Maxime Regum, Et tendat sursum quicquid ad ima ruit; Adveniat quo{que} laeta Canan, quae dulcia semper Tundit mella probis angelicisque viris, Tempora decedant, quibus (heu) FIDUCIA nobi Defuit, & veniant tempora grata Tuis; Adveniat nova Lux, veniant Saturnia Saec'la Quae exhilarent Sanctos, Optime Christe, tuos▪ Accedatque piis FIDUCIA Magna salutis, Et gustent Justi gaudia, magna Poli, Adveniat cunctis etiam, sperantibus in te Fons vitae, semper dulcibus Uber aquis; Ambrosios libent Coelesti è Nectare Rores Qui Coelum sitiunt, justitiamque Dei; Adveniat porro Coelestis Musica, Christe, Et nos nunc recreent Jubila Grata Poli, Quae nec Julaeae voces, nec tibia possit. Musica Cyrrhaeis assimilare Modis, Et te collaudent, spes, O fidissima Mundi, Omnia quae existunt, Lux, Polus, arva, fretum
To the truly Vertuous Lady, the Lady Margaret Courtney, Grace & Peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. MADAM, I Cannot but be mindful of you also in the pub∣lishing of my se∣veral Treatises. Your gracious carriage and good report which you have a∣mong good and gracious peo∣ple;
and your exemplary for∣wardness to come to our Le∣ctures when they were up; and the great respect which I have, and fervent love which I bear to your Noble Family, since I came first acquainted with it, hath in a manner constrained me so to do, and by name to de∣dicate unto you these Soul-so∣lacing Conferences with Christ which I have penn'd, and up∣on the earnest request of others published, for the good of all such gracious souls as do desire no better talk than such as is contained in one of these Books, and doubtless is most pleasing to Christ. Christ you know did soon draw near to
those Luk. 24.15. Emauntish Pilgrims, who did but talk of him; and therefore much more will not be far from us also, if we shall not only talk so of him, but al∣so with him; especially when he shall see that we do most heartily desire to see the death of our sins, and to live above this vile and evil world, as Conqueror of it, and not con∣quered by it. Oh! that doth his very heart good; and there∣fore how? Oh how should we confer and talk, and commune with him about it even day and night, that we may oppose it with all our might, prosper∣ing and prevailing against it to our souls delight?
Madam, Christ will be ex∣ceeding glad of our talk, if we shall so talk with him, as here we are taught of the con∣quest of this world, that we may reign with him in the o∣ther world. His heavenly Highness therefore gives us hearts to speak as we ought to speak, that after we have spoken with him here, we may be spoken unto, by him hereafter, to triumph with him for ever. So prayeth Your most humble servant in Christ Christopher Jelinger.
To the Worshipful THOMAS REYNEL, Esq And Justice of the Peace, Grace and Mercy be multiplyed WORSHIPFƲL, MAay it please you to give me leave to de∣dicate, and to present this little Tract of The Saints Assurance unto you, as to a Person so enobled with Grace, as that by God's Grace enabling you, I hope you wil not only Patronize it; but also promote my grand design in it, which is to stir up all that shall read it, to the gaining of the said
Assurance thorow Gods assistance. Worthy Sir, you see what a Subject I am faln upon, even a Subject which will subject our fears, eject our doubts, and deject all adverse powers, which in the want of this Assurance are wont illaqueate our very intellects, to captivate our wills, and to subju∣gate all the powers of our souls. Souls therefore will never do well till they be heavened with it; for my part, when I take a full circle of my self, and a thorow view of my condition, do find without it my very being to be a burden, my life a Sustain∣ing the loss of the light of God's counte∣nance. loss, my heart a hell; for Oh the hel∣lish horrors that a man shall feel in his heart, when this Assurance is far from his heart! But when
it is in it, O what a glad man is he! Heaven being in his heart, his heart in Heaven; Oh Sir! what a Heaven, what a Paradise, what a beatitude did circum∣scribe that holy * Father, when, St. Hie∣rom. as he writes of himself, he was, as it were, in medio Angelorum choro, in the very midst of the quire of Angels, hearing them sing, as he was in Eremo, in a Wilder∣ness! and may not we be so too? yes verily, if we would but labour, as we ought, for this Assurance, treading into the Vestigaes or footsteps of those blessed Hebrews, who were so assured of their sal∣vation, and eternal bliss, according to that memorable expression of the Apostle, Heb. 10.34. Know∣ing
(mark) knowing in your selvs, that you have in Heaven a better and more enduring sub∣stance; for then as they thereby were, so we thereby shall come to the innumerable company of An∣gels, &c. Heb. 12.22. Confess I must that it is as hard a thing to acquire, and to gain this Assu∣rance, as any thing I know in the world, and you know, Sir, how the Church of Rome doth fulmi∣nate and thunder out her Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 9. & 16. Ana∣thema's against us, for maintain∣ing this Assurance to be had in this life; but I am not discoura∣ged from this treating on it by ei∣ther, for against the one, I know that I am defensated and born up by God's never-failing Truth, a∣gainst
the other by his power; and therefore I say, for all this, let us, O let us labour, and labour hard (because our work is so hard) & strive, as for life, to be perswaded in our hearts, that without fail and doubt we shall enter into life. Life here is sweet, but that above is sweeter, & the Assurance of it the sweetest thing in all this world's circumference; for when a man hath it, he may truly say of it, Oh! what a life do I now live, living by the faith of the Son of God Gal▪ 2.20. who loved me and gave himself for me? Oh the unexpressible peace which I now have within me, being perswaded in my breast that with heavenly bliss I shall be for ever blest! Oh what a glorying
joy doth now warm me! what a Ocean of comfort overflow me and what a Heaven of glory becir∣cle me! Oh this Assurance, this heavenly Assurance is nothing else but the very gate of Heaven,  Jacob said once of the place where he saw the Angels of God ascend∣ing and descending upon a Ladder which reached to Heaven, Gen. 27.17. Oh Sir, could we but fol∣low those lessons which are laid down for our going up as it were by steps to that height of hope, which in this life a man may tower up to; could we live such a spot∣less, such a strict, such an holy, such a seraphical life as here is shewn us, could we get the par∣don of our sins sealed to us, could
we gain that high and unquestio∣nable testimony of Gods holy Spi∣rit, which is to be had by us, how soon would this be our case too? and how soon would we be able to eccho forth the same expessions be∣ing filled with unparallelable consolations? Oh Sir, let us stir therefore, and strive to our utmost, to express the vertue, the life, the power of the things here shewn us, labouring especially for a gust of the very joys of Heaven, which here we are pointed to; and to lead an extraordinary, exemplary, blameless, most holy, and heavenly life, which we are appointed to: And what I say to your worthy self, and my unworthy self, I say to all; strive, Oh strive with all
your might, for this most glorious and Heavenly Assurance of your salvation, which you expect to an endless duration for your souls delight. Your Worships most humble Servant, Christopher Jelinger.
A CLUSTER OF Sweetest Grapes for Saints Newly brought from the Heavenly Canaan. OR, The Saints Assurance, Upon 1 PET. 1.9. Even the Salvation of your Souls. MY Soul longs, and loveth to be there where she may be happy, and so she looks upon this Text as a Theme, whose handling and following (with God's blessing) is able to
centre her so, as that she shall be blessed; for it carrieth happiness in its bosom, and is ready to bring Salvation, and the Assurance of it to it, and to every believing Saint, who carries Christ in his heart: so that for this very end I have chosen it, that thereby I may unload my fraighted mind, and pursue my much drawn forth, and (for the Saints Assu∣rance of their salvation) bound and bent intention. If we look a little higher we shall see a very heap of Blessings cumulated and laid together by blessed Peter, as streaming from the Fountain of all blessings, to wit, God's infi∣nite, and not to be fathomed mercy, v. 3. More particularly he enume∣rates these following mercies: 1. Regeneration, v. 3. Then 2. Glorification, v. 4. And 3. Perseverance, by the power
of God here to be enjoyed, v. 5. Then 4. Onspeakable joy already obtained, v. 6. Which done, he superadds the procreant cause of the said great and glorious joy, as namely, a most certain hope of eternal life in my Text, Even the salvation of your souls. Where, let us con∣sider, Parts of the Text. 1. What. 2. Whose. 1. What. Even the salvation, Part which cometh in thus, Receiving, which neces∣sarily infers a great Assu∣rance. Recei∣ving the end of your Faith, Gagneius in Loc. per Me∣ton. Adj. Haebr. or fruit, as some, by your unspeak∣able joy, v. 8. and then by way of Amplification, Even the sal∣vation, &c. Salvation is taken, 1. For an external Delive∣rance, Exod. 14.13. 2. For the Metonymice. Author of any sal∣vation, Ps. 27.1. 3. Christ especially the Au∣thor
of our salvation, Luke 2.30. 4. Our spiritual deliverance in the beginning of our conversi∣on, Luke 19.9. 5. Our eternal deliverance from Sin and Satan and everlast∣ing happiness, consisting of two degrees. The first is enjoyed, when be∣ing unmanned by death, we are carried in the arms of Angels, in∣to the arms of Christ who is the head of Angels, as Luke 16.22. The second will be enjoyed after judgment, when being re∣suscitated out of the dust of the earth, we shall be enroabed with the refulgent beams of sparkling glory, in the Kingdom of glory, Heb. 1.14. Tropic. 6. The sure and certain Spes est in∣dubitatus ante thesaurum the∣saurus, Joh. Clim. gr. 30. hope of ever during bliss, and never fading glory in the foretast of it, as here, where I find some Expo∣sitors so to understand this fa∣mous
Scripture; I for my part, took this to be the sense of this high and lofty place, before I saw what others say; but when I found others to be of the same mind, I was glad and mightily corroborated in my judgment. I will cite at present, but one passage out of Piscator in Loc. one, who wri∣ting upon this Text, Even the salvation of your souls; saith thus, that is the certain hope of eternal life, in that they did most certainly hope that they should obtain salvation, as the re∣ward of Faith; thus he: but I do most of all ground this Exposition upon Rom. 8.24. For we are sa∣ved by hope, that is, we are assu∣red by an undoubted and a cer∣tain hope, that we shall be saved. For otherwise we are not alrea∣dy saved, but shall be, a notable place for our But if any will not re∣ceive this Ex∣position, yet will he be forced to ad∣mit of this by me here un∣derstood Assu∣rance, by the foregoing word Recei∣ving, for wha we receive we are sure of. purpose and this Assurance. The Greek word for
salvation here is  from , which signifies, I defend, and preserve; and so it shews how when salvation comes, defence comes; and preservation comes. For when it comes, we come to be defended against and preser∣ved from all the evils which now we feel, or fear, and especially, Death and Damnation, by a great and glorious deliverance. 2. Whose. Part. Your souls. 1. Souls. And yet hath each man but one, Videatur Suaretz Disput. Suet. to. 2. dep. 15. Sect. 8. not two, as some have held. For God breathed into Adam the breath of life, (that is, a rational Soul) not breaths, Gen. 2.7. But what is a Soul? It is an Act, saith the Philoso∣pher, of a body Arist. l. 2. de Anim▪ cui assentit Suaretz Met. Disp. to. 1. Disp. is S. W 8. organical, which hath life Religio me∣dici, p. 79. potentially, in it self being inorganical; mark, inorga∣nical, for the Learned in Anato∣my tells us, that among those
rare discoveries, and curious pieces they observe in the Fa∣brick of man, they find no Or∣gan, or instrument for the ratio∣nal Soul of man; for in the brain, which we tearm the seat of Rea∣son, there is not any thing more of moment, than there is in the Crany of a Beast: thus we speak according to Philosophers, as far as they are agreed, for they do not all, nor can agree among themselves, so as to tell us exact∣ly what it is. But what saith Di∣vinity of it? I Answ. That it is a spirit, Lactant. 1. de Opif. Dei, c. 17. and breath of life, Gen. 2.7. Eccl. 12.7. Heb. 12.9. If you go farther, and ask me, But what is that spi∣rit and that breath of life? I An∣swer, It is something in us, and in Est tota in toto corpore, & in qualibe parte ejus, Petr. Lomb. c. 8. l. 1. Et non in cor de tantum, ut scribit, Ter∣. l. 3. de Anim. c. 15. every part of us; but can be without us, and will be after us; though it be hardly known how it came into us; and how seated
in us, blessed Austin ingeniously confesseth it that he cannot tell, or thus, it is a truly spiritual Es∣sence; Num sit ex raduce, vel reata, ut nos ensemus cum Lactant. de Opif. Dei, c. 19. & aliis.  Bucan. l. 8. . 115. incorporeal, immaterial, and subsisting; when it is sepa∣rated from the body. 2. Your Souls, Contra Ter∣ull. qui eam definet esse orproream, . 3. de Ani∣a, c. 7. meaning the Souls of Saints, v. 8. who belie∣ving and rejoycing in Christ, re∣ceive the end of their Faith, which is the certainty of their sal∣vation, which cometh by Christ. Whence note. That If any would have this Doct. to run thus, That Saints in this life may gain and have this Assurance, he may take it so. But I, to encourage all Men to labor for it, shall use here the word Men, and yet chiefly aim at Saints. men in this life may gain and have the Assurance of their Souls salvation. See Job. 9.27. Heb. 10.22.34. 2 Tim. 4.78. and especially Heb. 3.14. Where give me leave to shew, 1. What this Assurance is. 2. Why men in this life may gain it. 1. What it is, namely, The soul of Faith, the Paradise of Saints, the Canaan of Believers,
the Ladder of Life, the Life of Heaven. Or thus, it is that where∣by we re-enter Paradise, sur∣mount all ordinary men, triumph over hell, transcend our selves, and ascend into Heaven it self. See Calvin. Inst. l. 3. c. 2. Sect. 16. how he defines it. 2. Why Men in this life may gain and have it. As Namely, 1. By reason of, Reason. faith Fidem ipsam quisque videt in corde suo, si credit Augustinus. Cui assentit Petr. Lomb. dist. 23. l. 3. fol. 259. sure of their faith, and see it, if they have true faith, 2 Tim. 1.12. I know, whom I have believed; and there∣fore they may be sure, also that they shall be saved; for, He that believeth, and is baptised shall be saved, saith Christ, Mark 16.16. see also John 3.36. and note it well: So that the Apostle might well call faith an evidence Heb. 11.1. and Ʋnde Basil de vera & pia fide, p. 345. Est approbatio sine ulla haesi∣tatione cum summa per∣suasione. Basil a most∣high
and undoubted perswasion, according to, Rom. 4.21. 2. Men may be sure of their Vocation in this life, Rerson. if they be called, For you see your calling, saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.26. mark, you see it, as a man may see himself to be out of a pest∣house, out of a prison, out of darkness, so a man may see him∣self called out of the pest-house and prison of sin, and out of dark∣ness brought into God's marvel∣lous light. 1 Pet. 2.9. Whereup∣on it followeth, that a man may also be assured that he shall be saved; For whom he calleth he glorifieth, Rom. 8.30. 3. Men may be sure of their election by the use of means, Reason. al∣though some of the Error Au∣gustini de cor. & grat. c. 3. Ancients denie it, it is evident from, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6. and if so, they may be of their salvation too; for whom he did Rom. 8.30. predistinate, he also glo∣rified;
and if chosen, then chil∣dren, Eph. 1.7. Having predisti∣nated us to the adoption of chil∣dren; and if children, then heirs, Rom. 8.16. For who shall have what we have, but our children? so, who shall have what God hath, viz. life and Heaven, but his Children? 4. Men may be sure of their justification, if justified, Reason. Hoc nega concil. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 9. sed temere. Quid aliud peccata nostra tegere potuit quam Christi justitia. Ju∣stin Martyr Epist: ad Di∣ognetum. where∣by their sins are forgiven, and covered with Christ's Righteous∣ness, Psal. 32.5. Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah. Er∣go, For whom he justified them he also glorified, Rom. 8.30. 5. Men may be sure of their sanctification, if sanctified; Reason. For to be sanctified, is to shine as a light in the dark, Phil. 2.15. Now, a light in darkness must needs be seen, so as that a man may truly say, here is light, where∣upon it followeth, that when a
man seeth that he is light in the Lord, and shines as a light, he may also be assured, that he shall be saved by the Lord, see a Thes. 2.13. how therefore san∣ctification and salvation are en∣link'd together. 6. Men may be sure here of their Reason. Videatur Cy∣pr. p. 141. perseverance, and o God's constant love to them in Christ, if once they be in Christ, let the Papists deny it a thousand times, after the tradition of their Fathers; who Cyril. Alex. in John 5. p. 703. intel∣ligit nostram charitatem; & dicit fide∣les nunquam b ea deficere. Anathematize us for saying so; It is clear from, John 13.1. and from Rom. 8.31. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? and v. 37, 38. I am perswaded that neither life, nor death, &c. Read that famous place. † Bellarmin, and Staple∣ton Rome's great Champions would have this place to yeild, but only a Stapleton Antid. p. 503. moral, and Bellarmine l. 3. c. 2. de justificatione. con∣jectural certitude, but how can Concil. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 116.
hey prove it, sith the Apostle saith expressely; I am perswa∣ded of it; they have a shift, that Paul was perswaded by a Reve∣ation, which we have not, and that he speaks of Stapl. ibid. himself, and ot us; but what saith Paul when he comes to his Revelati∣ons; he tels us, they were of things not lawful for a man to utter, 2 Cor. 12.4. but this he doth utter. Ergo, Besides, he doth not only speak of himself, but us also; as his ve∣ry words shew, who shall sepa∣rate us? Mark, us, not we. See also, Jer. 32.40. Rom. 11.29. John 10.28. 2 Tim. 2.19. For the Saints perseverance, and compare all with Matth. 24.13. He that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved. Now all these 7 Rea∣sons will serve for Saints also, if you leave out if still and that which goeth with it, and put in Saints for Men. Reason. Men in this life may feel the joys of Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.8. where∣upon my Text infers; that then
they receive the salvation of their souls; that is, the certain hope of their salvation, being already rapt up into Heaven; heavened in glory; embosomed in God, & elevated to the highest zenith of divine consolation. Now to the Application of this grand Conclusion. Use of Consut. And first, May not this serve to confute the Doctrine of the Concel. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 9. & 16. Church of Rome; averring that no man can in this life be sure of his justification (and so conse∣quently salvation) without a Revelation. The Champions of that Church, stand chiefly upon these two Objections, or places of scripture which Ile therefore briefly an∣swer. 1. That, Object. in Eccles. 9.1. No man knoweth love, or hatred, by all things before him; To this I answer 2 wayes.
1. That which followes, v. 2. shewes the meaning of this place; that no man knoweth that by these outward things, and by the event of things. 2. The words love and ha∣tred, are Metonymically ren∣dered; and expounded by Jun. or Tre∣mel. juxta, v. 8. Ex∣positors; to be things loved; and hated. 3. The other place is that in Heb. 6.4, 5. For it is impossible for those that were once enligh∣tened, &c. Read the place. From whence they infer; that a man may go very far; and yet fall away at last; and if so, how can any man be sure of salvati∣on, seeing he may fall away, though he be never so eminent now for holiness before he dieth? To this I answer thus. Either the Apostle speaketh of real, or of seeming Saints; if of
real, as some would have it; then these words, if they fall away, must be understood, as spoken by way of supposition. As 1 Cor. 9. ult. 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. and Gal. 1.8. Though I (or if as v. 9.) we, or an Angel from Hea∣ven, preach any other Gospel un∣to you, than that which we have preached unto you; let him be accursed. If, of seeming Saints, as I take it, then these words, were once enlightened, &c. must be understood of grace tempo∣raliter, as Divines speak, or for a time received; and of the com∣mon work of God's Spirit; and common gifts which Reprobates, and Temporaries, and such as sin against the Holy Ghost (which sin, some say, the Apostle here speaks of) may partake of, so that, no wonder it is, if they fall away.
2. But secondly, Use of Ad∣dubitation. may not this afford me matter of Addubita∣tion also? as thus; What shall I think then of those, who being Protestants do think that they cannot possibly be assured of their salvation in this life; and therefore alwaies doubt and rest so contented? There was a sect of men once called Skepticks, because they questioned every thing, and I take these men to be partly of that sect too, (for sects do not perish with their Authors altogether, but like the River A∣rethus, though they lose their current in one place, they rise up again in another) but oh the in∣sufferable infidelity in men pro∣fessing Christianity! 3. And may not this Doctrine afford us matter of Communica∣tion too? Yes verily, as thus; Use of Com∣munication. Addubitati est deliberati nobiscum Com∣municatio cum aliis. Then why do not men and wo∣men labour for this Assurance; I
say this Assurance which here I treat of, some Assurance some have, but it is that which is call∣ed Confidence in the flesh, or Carnal, not this. This not one of a thousand hath, nor seeks after. But why? my Brethren why? shall I tell you my thoughts, some do not, because they are not will∣ing to go to the pains which this Assurance costs him that will ob∣tain it, and herein even some true Believers may be faulty. O∣thers do believe that they do be∣lieve, when they do not, and so do not labour after Faith, nor Assurance, for why should they labour after it, say they, seeing they have it already? when either they have no Faith at all, or if any but a Dogmatical, or Tem∣porary, which is but a deceitful Faith like Alcumi. The Alcu∣mists are grown to that skill, that they will make Alcumi appear
to be perfect Silver and Gold, & much of it will bear the touch∣stone, that one can hardly disco∣ver it, but when fire and hammer come to it, it will bear neither of them, for it comes not from the right place whence Gold and Silver comes, namely from mines; so men are come up to that height of skill in deceiving that they will deceive any, for they will make their Temporary Faith e∣ven to glisten like Gold, and it will pass for true Faith amongst men; and for a time hold even under some tryals, but when greater tribulations indeed come and the word like fire and a ham∣mer comes, their Faith is disco∣vered to be no true saving Faith, for it cannot endure either, be∣cause it came not the right way, whence true faith comes, namely by the Word, and by true, and sound, and deep humiliation;
and there is much of that Alcumi. Faith now going, & that is much the cause of it why men want this Assurance, but I wonder how some of you, who are under this want, can be so contented; if a woman have a husband that can assure her of something, she will be assured of something, or else she will not be contented, nor let him to be quiet; and if a man have but one child, he will do what he can to make it assu∣red of something after his death, and till then he will not rest; but you methinks can rest, and sit still, and be contented, though you be certain of nothing; that is, though you be nothing at all assured, as ye ought to be, of a∣ny bliss or blessedness that you shall have hereafter in Heaven, and though you have but one poor soul each of you to be ca∣red and provided for, & though
you know that God, who is an e∣verlasting Husband to some of you, is able to assure you of something indeed, I mean of Heaven and happiness for ever, O monstrous carelesness! O stu∣pendious security! O how can you chuse but even doubt whe∣ther you have any Nam vere fiddis non est nisi qui divina benevolentiae promissionibus fretus indubi∣tatam salutis expectationem praesumit, Cal∣vin Inst. l. 3. c. 2. s. 10. true faith at all yea or no, it being a , or Though wrestling with doubt∣ings which oppose it and by degrees are overcome by it. full perswasion? Heb. 10.22. 4. I come next to a Use of Ex∣citation, to stir up my self & you to labour therefore for this Assu∣rance; Use of Ex∣citation. seeing it is so to be had in this life. For the better ma∣naging of which Use I shall ten∣der to you. 1. Directives, or Mediums. 2. Incentives. 1. Directives, to wit, these. Directives. 1. Labour to be born again if ye are not, Direct. for so were those blessed Saints here; who were so assured of their salvation, as
you may see v. 3. Hath begotten us again. Give me leave there∣fore to insist upon Regeneration a little while. And 1. Let me intrat you to im∣bibe, receive, and take inward∣ly the word of Regeneration; whereby we are born again; as it is written, 1 Pet. 1.23. Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever, where note, that this Regenerating word of God is partly Law & partly Gospel. 1. As Law, and so it doth three things. 1. It discovereth unregenera∣cie, and unregenerate men, and shewes what manner of men they are like a glass, Jam. 1.23. as for example, by that famous place, m. 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. where it descri∣beth them, what throats, mouths,
tongues, feet, they have, I pray you read the place. It is stori∣ed of Luther, that a certain Jew would have poysoned him, but was discovered by his picture, sent to Luther, by a faithful friend, warning him to beware of such a man, when he did see him, such a faithful friend is the law which so discovers unregenera∣cie, which would kill us, by such a portracture that we may escape it, and live. 2. It puts life into sin, as you may read, Rom. 7.8, 9. I was alive without the law once; but when the commandement came, sin revived, and I dyed: this is a notable place, I pray you, let me open it a little, sin revived, that is, it began to stir, to tear, Nitimur in vetitum sem∣per, cupimus{que} negata. to irrit, to exite, to do what is forbidden; and to affright withall, as some understand the place so that I felt it. Before
the law comes home close; sin is as it were dead; like a dead adder or Lion, and so quiet; but when the law comes, it is like an adder which is alive, so it bites, and 1 Cor. 15.56 stings, and like a living Lion, so it roars, and so it ter∣rifieth, and makes men afraid to Deducit e∣nim talis me∣tus ad poeni∣tentiam. Clem. Alex. strom: l. 2. p. 58. bring them to repentance, and Regeneration. 3. It killeth, according to the fore-alledged place, Rom. 7.9. Sin revived, and I died; that is, I felt and saw, that I was dead and damned by the law, where∣as before I was alive; that is, I thought as sure that I should be saved as any man alive. Thus the law kills men, and makes them sensible of the miserable sad and damnable condition wherein they are, whilest they are in the state of unregeneracie: according to that dreadful place, John 3.3. Read it.
2. As Gospel, so the regene∣rating word of God holds forth one sweet & precious promise or other, like an orient pearl, to re∣vive the dying, drooping spirits of men when the law hath brought them as it were to deaths door; as for example, That most refulgent and reviving pro∣mise, in Ezek. 36.26. And new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the stonie heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. Thus the Gospel opens a Hos. 2.15. door of hope for poor creatures condem∣ned by the law; that though they are, and must be prisoners, and condemned prisoners, yet they may be prisoners of hope, Zac. 9.12. that is, may not be with∣out some hopes of mercy; and of a gracious deliverance, Thus the law kills, but the Gos∣pel
saves. The law cometh, bringing Damnation, but the Gospel comes bringing salvation; the law cometh with a dagger to stab those that are alive; but the Gospel cometh with a plai∣ster to cure those that are stab'd; and lie for dead, as Christ him∣self came to save those that were lost; so the Gospel cometh to bring men to Christ, that they may not be lost; for when souls come to Christ, being born again by the word of Christ; Christ comes to them, and when he comes, salvation comes; for he cometh bringing Salvation, Zach. 9.9. (Read the place) that those which were under the sentence of Damnation, may at∣tain to the state of Salvation, even the Salvation of their souls, according to my text. Now, this regenerating word of God, you must take, and apply every
one of you, and not put it off, or let it lie as dead; saying; Am not I such an unregenerate man now? have not I such filthy hands, which have touched the unclean thing? Such a throat, such feet, such a mouth, and such a tongue▪ which hath talked so filthily? &c. But yet may not I hope that the Lord will shew me mercy, and regenerate me al∣so, as well as others, Giving me a new heart? &c. 3. Betake your selves to your Matth. 6.6. and I allude to Esa. 26.20 Chamber, and spend at least one day as a day of Jejuniis & orationibus vacato. Igna∣tius fasting; I have done the same upon the same account; if you think that the time of your regeneration is near come, as I hope it is, and that the pangs of the new birth are at the door, and shut your door, and there, and then see your selves convert, according to Psal. 4.4. thus rendered in your English meetre.
And in your Chamber quietly See you, your selves convert. 4. Begin to be in pain there as a woman in travel, for the pangs of Child-birth must go before the Child's-birth, and you must make this Dr. Preston on Gods Al∣suff. account, that if you never yet received the spirit of bondage, you also never received the spirit of Adoption, Rom. 8.15. and many there are, who, because they have withstood the troubles of their mindes, and the terrors of the spirit of bondage, have withstood their Salvation; wherefore let me intreat you to take the pains, to be in pains for a little season, that you may be at ease to an endless duration, and for a small moment to be in hea∣viness, through some necessary perturbations, that for ever you may be in joy and gladness, through unspeakable consolati∣ons. O let even all your joy be
turned into sorrow now, and your Esto sicut Rex in corde tuo; sublimis & risui jubens vade ut vadat, & dic tu fletui, veni ut veni∣at. Clim. Grad. 15. laughter into grief; that all your grief and sorrow had for sin now, may be turned into laughter hereafter; For blessed are ye that weep now, for you shall laugh, saith Christ, Luke 6.21. 5. Then cry out, and 1. For Anguish. 2. For, and to the spirit. 1. For Anguish, as a I allude to that famous place in Esa. 26.17. Like as a Woman with child, that draweth neer the time of her delive∣ry, is in pain and cryeth out in her pangs: so have we been in thy sight, O Lord. woman when her time is near, and her pangs begin to come upon her, or as a child cryeth as soon as it is born, so you before you be new born; as thus, what will become of our poor souls? for they are yet unregenerate, and there∣fore cannot in any wise enter in∣to the Kingdom of Heaven, un∣lesse extraordinary mercy be shewn them by the God of Hea∣ven; or thus, as the Egyptians once cryed out, when there was
not an house in all Egypt, where there was not one dead; saying We be all dead men, Exod. 12.30, 33. And there was a great cry in Egypt (See the place.) So let there be a great cry among you in every house and family, (For I believe that there is scarce an house where there is not one or more unregenerate and dead) and in your several chambers, un∣to which you have, according to my premised advice, betaken your selves, and let your cry be the same that was in Egypt. O we are all dead men; we that are unregenerate men, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it, That except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, John 3.3. Not all the art and wit of man, Not all the heorick of the eloquent'st Orator, Not all the inreaies of Saints and Angels can therefore, or will perswade
God to take one that is a drunk∣ard, or Whoremaster, or Usurer, or Lyar, or Thief, or covetous man (and such have been some of us) into his Kingdom, even as not all the perswasions of the men of this Country are or will be able to prevail with any one of us, to take but one toad, or snake into his bosome. Thus cry out for an∣guish. 2. Cry out for, and to the spi∣rit of Regeneration, for by the spirit also a man must be born a∣gain, according to that famous saying of our Saviour, John 3.5. where note that the Spirit doth three things to regenerate souls. 1. He convinceth them, John 16.8, 9. 2. He injects the feed of Re∣generation into them, according to that of Saint John, His seed remains in them, 1 John 3.9. 3. He delivers them and makes
them free, 2 Cor. 3.17. helping them to come forth out of the dark womb of nature, into his marvelous light, that by him as by a Irenaeus adv. haeres. bal. l. 3. c. 40. Ladder they may ascend into John 3.35. Heaven to our Father which is in Heaven; so that unto him you must cry and say, O blessed spirit of Regeneration, Regenerate our souls, O our poor souls that they may live, O con∣vince them of their unregenera∣cy; O inject the feed of Rege∣neration into them from above; Oh help them to come forth; Oh let a new heart be given to us, O let us have flexible, and ten∣der hearts, like the heart of a lit∣tle child; for we also must be like little children; Oh come blessed spirit, come and help us, Oh come quickly, come present∣ly and deliver us  come now whilest we are in this Room, waiting for thee, as thou comest
upon the Apostles in that house wherein they were sitting, Acts 3.2, 3. O, let this be the time of our regeneration, that we also may be sure of our Salvation: here be earnest, and cry mightily; Nay, if need be, and thou canst not be heard in that day, cry in the night too; and so come to the Spirit at this time, as Nicode∣mus came to Christ in old time; even by night, and so cry day and night; and then it will not be long before thou shalt be de∣livered, being regenerated; for as Christ said once, Luk. 18.7, 8. And shall not God hear his elect, which cry unto him day and night; though he bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. So I, shall not the spi∣rit of God hear his elect which cry unto him day and night? I tell you that he will hear them, and deliver them speedily; For ask,
and you shall have (saith Christ) Luk. 11.9. It is no more but ask and have; ask therefore the spi∣rit and you shall have How much more shall your heavenly Fa∣ther give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him. Luke 11.13. him; ask Regeneration of the spirit (un∣derstand in the manner afore∣said) and you shall have it, and it will not be long before you shall hear the spirit cry Abba Fa∣ther, Rom. 8.15. even most emphatically; For, therefore to the Abba from the Hebrew  Jun. & Tremel. in Marc. 14.14. Syriack word Abba, is added Father; if you shall so cry day and night for the spirit to the Father, Be∣loved, there is no crying which the Father of mercies loves bet∣ter, and the Father of lies likes worse than this crying, and there∣fore use it. 6. Strive to come forth; For as endeavour without God can∣not, so God without endeavors will not help us. See Phil. 2.12, 13. and therefore as Christ said once, strive to enter; so I, strive
to come out, Luk. 13.24. for ye will find a very hard bout before ye will be able to come out; therefore I say again, strive, and strive as other children do, when they come to their birth, or thus, strive as once Gen. 38.29. Pharez and Za∣rah in Tamars womb; nay, as Pharez so strove as that he made a breach, and was therefore cal∣led Pharez from that breach; so do you, make a breach as it were and tear away from Natures womb, and tear away from your beds of ease and sin, and tear a∣way especially from your lusts, your pride of life, your vile affe∣ctions, your violent passions, your vain, and filthy conversati∣ons, your usury, your atheism, polytheism, and abominable epi∣curism, and whatsoever else is contrary to the holy Law of God, thus strive to come out. I pray you pardon my boldness which I
took by this digression, which carried me so far in this Sea of matter concerning our Regene∣ration, and be pleased to impute it unto the vehemency of my love, which made me thus to for∣get and to lose my self, that you might not lose your selves, which God in mercy grant. 2. Labour to believe, Direct. or Medium. for so did those holy ones, who accor∣ding to my Text were so assured of their salvation, v. 8. and be∣sides, if a man do believe, and be sure of it that he doth, he must needs be assured also that he shall be saved; For so God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever be∣lieveth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life, John 3.16. Mark, He Nay, he that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life. Joh. 3.36. which much more and plainly demonstrates, that a believ∣ing soul must needs be assu∣red of its sal∣vation, because it hath it. shall have it, saith Christ, as if he should say, he may be sure of it, for the mouth of truth hath spoken it. Believe
then in the Lord, you that never did yet, and you may be sure & certain that your shall be saved: Here give me leave again to en∣large my self a little upon this most needful Medium, whereby you may gain the assurance of your salvation; shewing how you must go to work that you may believe. 1. Hear a powerful and faith preaching Ministery as much and as often as you may; for Faith cometh by hearing, the Word be∣ing like water which brings forth fruit, and especially the fruit of Faith, Isa, 55.10. John 8.30. Calvin Inst. l. 3. c. 2. s. 6. Rom. 10.17. some Divines do therefore call it the Fountain of Faith. 2. Be convinced, and labour to be convinced, 1. Of your un∣belief, as he Mark 9.23. for there∣fore it is partly that so many be∣lieve not, because they will not
believe that they believe not; & therefore why should they labor to believe, seeing they believe already, say they. Beloved, go from house to house, and ask, ho, are there any Believers here? and they will be ready to stone you, saying; What do ye make of us? do ye think that we are Devils, or Infidels? we are Christians, we are Christians, and believe in Christ as well as you; and as difficult a task it is for a Minister to convince men of their unbe∣lief, as any thing almost I know of. A Drunkard, a Fornicator, a passionate man, a swearer, a Sabbath-breaker, he may soon convince of his sin, for to that they will say, it is true, we are such, it is an infirmity we cannot leave; but when he comes to deal with men about unbelief, telling them that they have no Faith, Oh what a do is there! oh
how do their colours rise! they are even ready to fly in his face, none will believe him, or be con∣vinced that he doth not believe; therefore labour to be convinced of unbelief. 2. Of Damnation, For he that believeth not shall be damned, Mark 16.16. which also is a thing that unbelievers will not be con∣vinced of; for tell them of it, and they will tell you, God for∣bid, for God is merciful, and we hope to be saved as well as you; and not all the Ministers in Eng∣land can make men believe other∣wise, till God give them a sight of their unbelief; Then, O then, they can and will cry out, saying, Oh we shall be damned, and we cannot be saved; therefore la∣bour to be convinced of damna∣tion also. Quest. You will say, if it be such a hard thing to be so con∣vinced,
then what shall we do to be convinced? I Ans. Pray to the Spirit, that you may be convinced by the Spi∣rit, for it is his work, John 16.8.9. as thus, O blessed Spirit convince me of mine unbelief, for I must confess I am one that would not hitherto believe, that I do not believe. O open mine eies that I may see my unbelief, I humbly pray thee. Do the like for convictions about Damna∣tion. 2. Take on, and begin to be troubled, as that poor man in the Gospel, Mark 9.23, 24. who so cryed, and wept, and took on, and said, Lord help mine unbe∣lief; and those Acts 2.37. for else you build without a foundation, and then, how will your build∣ing stand? There is a notable place for this in Gal. 3.23. Be∣fore Faith came we were kept un∣der
the Law, shut up unto the faith which should afterwards be revea∣led. Mark, 1. Before Faith comes we are under the Law, that is, under the lashes and terrors of the Law, especially a little be∣fore Faith cometh, indeed, we are whipt, and troubled indeed, by that grim Schoolmaster whose name is Law. And 2. Before the Law comes we are shut up like Prisoners, and therefore must suffer as Prisoners. O my Bre∣thren, if then you mean to have Faith, you must not refuse to be under the lashes of the Law, you must be content to be in Prison a while; and as Scholars which are grievously whipt, grievously to weep because of your unbe∣lief; and because of the miseries which shall come upon you if ye believe not, For he that believ∣eth not shall be damned, saith Christ, Mar. 16.16. Mark, he
shall be damned, and what is that, you will say? Oh! it is to be sentenced to Hell; and what is that? Oh! it is a place called Hieron. in Matth. 10. Ge∣henna, a word first of all used by Christ, & afterwards by Sic{que} usurpa∣tur in lib. Pir∣keaboth admo∣dunt antiquo, cap. 1. & 5. others also for the place of the damned, and compounded of Gee and Hin∣nom, which signifieth a Valley of Hinnom, which was a Valley nigh to Jerusalem, in which the old Idolatrous Jews were wont to burn their children alive to the honour of the Devil, at the sounding of Trumpets and Tim∣brels, and other loud sounding instruments, that they might not hear the cry of their poor dying children, and for that the place was afterwards used for the re∣ceipt of all filthiness; as dung, carrion, and the like, and proba∣ble it is that our Saviour used this word above all other to sig∣nify the miserable burning of un∣believers
in that place, the pit∣tiful cries of the tormented, the barbarous and confused noise of the Tormentors, together with the most loathsome filthiness of the place it self. Go to now, ye Unbelievers, I say now as St. Jam. 5.. James once to rich men, and weep for the miseries that shall come upon you in that woful place called Gehenna; nay go and howl together, O ye Drunk∣ards, and Usurers, and Adulte∣rers, and Adulteresses, and For∣nicators, and Harlots, and Swea∣rers; and Lyars, and covetous Worldlings, and riotous Livers; as ye were wont to be merry to∣gether some of you, so now, mourn and weep bitterly toge∣ther because you have no Faith, and because you will and must, except you get Faith in Christ, lie and fry and burn like the lit∣tle children of the idolatrous
Jews, in that woful place of tor∣ment; thus howl together, say∣ing, Oh that Valley of Hinnom! for so Hell is called; and, Oh that place of torment! where there is such screeching and cry∣ing of men, women and children, that receptacle of all filth and filthy livers; Oh it will come for us, and for our portion! for un∣believers (such as we are) will be damned, Rev. 21.8. I have read of one Rich. Baxter in his Everl. Rest. Brumo a famous Preacher in his time, that when he was dead and to be bu∣ried he cryed out 3 times, 1. Ac∣cusatus sum. 2. Judicatus sum. 3. Damnatus sum. I am 1. Accu∣sed, 2. Judg'd, 3. Damn'd. Where∣as both others, and himself be∣fore that, verily thought he would surely be saved; so let every one of you, as dead and condemned by the John 3.18. words of Christ, now say; Oh, I am Dam∣ned,
I am Damned, I am Dam∣ned. I thought once that I should be saved assoon as any, and would not be otherwise perswa∣ded, but that my Soul should be heavened as well as others; but now I see that unless infinite mercy do save me, and help me to believe in Christ, I shall be most certainly condemned by Christ. For he that believeth not is Enallage Temporis. condemned already, saith Christ, John 3.18. 4. Desire to believe, as he Mark 9.24. For a desire of faith, if true, is faith; Or thus, as a wor∣thy Downam in his Christian warfare. c. 42. Writer saith confidently. Our desire of Grace, Faith, and Repentance, if true, are the Graces themselves; at least in God's acceptation, see Matth. 5.6. Blessed are they which hun∣ger and thrist after righteousness. Mark, they are blessed, who have such gracious desires, as are
called hungring and thirsting; and therefore they cannot be without faith; and the cause hereof is the blessed Blessed Bol∣ton. Nobleness of God's Nature, which by infi∣nite distances doth transcend the noblest spirit upon earth, now men of ingenious dispositions are wont to take sweetest content∣ment in prevailing over and gai∣ning the hearts, good wills, and affections of those that wait up∣on them; how much more then must needs spiritual longings, gracious aspires, and thirsty de∣sires be kindly accepted with that most kind God; whose most lo∣ving disposition passeth all mens kindness; especially sith mens good turns, turn many times to our good and benefit, but our well doing extendeth not unto God, Psal. 16.2. Were all the sons of men Abrahams or Angels, and as many in number as the stars
of Heaven, and as shining both with inward Graces, and out∣ward acts of piety, as they are in visible glory; yet could they make no addition to that incom∣parable Majesty above, nor con∣fer so much as one drop to that boundless and bottomless Sea of goodness, or the least glimpse unto that Almighty Sun of glory. If thou be righteous, what givest thou unto him? or what receiveth he at thy hands? Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit the Son of man, Job. 35.6, 7, 8. Our holiness helps him not; our sins hurt him not; it is only for our good that God would do us good; no good nor gain accrues unto him by our goodness; for, what good can come by our imperfect goodness, to that which is alrea∣dy infinitely good? What glory can be superadded by our dim∣ness
to him which is already in∣comparably glorious? Every in∣finite thing is naturally, and ne∣cessarily uncapable of addition. Possibility of which supposed im∣plies contradiction, and destroys the nature of infiniteness, where∣fore (to return to my purpose) sith desires are excepted with God for deeds, let every one of you that would be assured of his salvation, desire to believe to his salvation. It is reported of Lu∣ther, that when a certain poor student at Wittenberg would not be perswaded by any to believe, or that he did believe, and so was exceedingly troubled in his mind, and left by all, he was sent for, and when he came, did ask him (when he said he neither did nor could believe) but do not you desire to believe? where∣unto the poor student replyed, yes, with all my heart I do desire
it, why then, said Luther, you do believe; whereat the poor Scho∣lar was exceedingly comforted, satisfied, and perswaded that he did believe: so you be satisfied in this point, that if you truly desire to believe, you do believe. Our most gracious God As in Abra∣ham, Gen. 22.16, 17. read the place. accept∣ing the will for the deed, and your affections for actions; and so long, so thirst, Dyke of self∣deceiving, cap. 19. so hunger af∣ter Faith, as a Fame-lik after meat, a Febricitant after drink, a Mendicant after a piece of sil∣ver, and you shall be satisfied. For they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, and so con∣sequently after Faith, which ap∣prehends Christs righteousness, shall be satisfied. Mat. 5.6. and Bern. de Lect. Evan∣gel. Serm. 7. so much as they can desire, they shall receive. 5. Labor to see an excellency in Christ surpassing all things, and fixing thy heart upon him, re∣solve
to seek him without re∣sting; and seeking him, to sell all for the gaining of him; like the Merchant in the Gospel, who seeking after him and met with him, and seeing him to be a For Christ is that pearl, Hilar. in Loc. pearl of great price; and so estee∣ming him above all, sold all and bought him, Matth. 13.45, 46. For Rogers of Dedham in his Doctrine of Faith; e. 2. p. 128. then is Faith begun, when namely, a man begins to be of Kilians, a Dutch School-masters and blessed Martyrs mind; who being asked if he loved not his Wife and Children? said, Yes, if the World were gold, and were mine to dispose of, I would give it to live with them, though it were but in prison; yet my soul and Christ are dearer to me than all. O souls, souls, how do your hearts now stand affected? are ye so resolved to sell all? do you so prize Christ above all? will you seek after him upon such
terms? if you will, well; for as∣suredly you shall have him, and faith in him, and with him. O my God, help this people so to prize thy Son; help thy Sons to be∣lieve in thy Son. I humbly pray thee. 6. Labour to have your hearts over-powered with the evidence of truth and reason: For we find by experience, that though truth and reason, and conscience, and all make for it, so as that we may truly say Amen to what is said; yet the heart is stubborn, and will not yield, but stands out like a contentious Adversarie, which, though he be overthrown in eve∣ry trial, yet will begin again. So the heart, though it be answered and overcome with Arguments, and Pleas, and Reasons again and again; yet will begin again to plead against it self: For, say some, when they are non-suited,
and have nothing to say; Mini∣sters are mercifull, and good Christians compassionate, & will not discourage us; but did they know our hearts, what base un∣clean Cages they be, they would judge otherwise than they do. Therefore I say, give over quar∣relling, and be satisfied and per∣swaded, when Truth and Rea∣son tell ye, that ye ought to yeild, and to believe; because the Lord of Life and God of Truth hath said, Him that cometh to me, whatsoever his heart be, or have been, and whatsoever his former life have been; for he saith not, unlesse he have a base, filthy heart. Again, him that cometh to me, though he have been the vilest wretch that ever the Earth bore, though a notorious Belialist, a beastly liver, a filthy fornica∣tor, an insatiable Drunkard, an unreasonable Extortioner, I will
in no wise cast him out, John 6.37. O my Brethren! what could Christ say more? Christ you see speaks for you; and will you have us speak against you? nay, will you speak against your selves! O be overcome by Rea∣son, overcome by Truth; for Reason tels you, that you ought to yield, when your Reasons are answered; and Truth commands you to submit, when you are so well promised by the God of Truth. 7. Beg Faith, for it is the gift of God, Phil. 1.29. say, as Ra∣chel, Give me children or else I die, Gen. 30.1. So, Lord, give me Faith, or else I die, and he will not say thee nay. For eve∣ry one that asketh, receiveth, saith Christ, Luke 11.9. Ask therefore and say, Lord, thou hast said, e∣very one that asketh receiveth; O let me receive for one, or how
else can it be every one, if I may not for one; Prayer is the souls recourse to the fountain of life, and a Christians address to the God of all power, to fetch pow∣er and help in a time of need, Heb. 4. ult. Go therefore, O dear Christians, to the Christians God, for power and help in this time of need; Go, and cry, and say with that poor man in the Go∣spel, Lord help mine unbelief, Mar. 9.24. Lord help my poor soul to believe; Beloved, no less power is here required for you to be able to believe, being dead; than was for the raising of Christ from the dead, Eph. 1.19.20. see the place; and place your selves therefore before his Throne of grace, that you may get grace and power to believe, according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ when he raised him
from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in heavenly places. And thus beg power to believe, and to be good, and do not think that it is in Ʋt Platonici & Stoici aiunt apud Clem. Alex. l. 1. c. 61 your po∣wer to have faith in God, when all your power must come from God; Videatur Concil. Arau s. c. 24. It is man's greatest weak∣ness to presume upon his own strength, when his greatest strength is but weakness; and therefore I press and perswade you to beg, which if ye do as ye ought, I assure you in the words of Christ, that it will not be long before you get faith in Christ, & not long neither before ye will be blessed with that heavenly Assurance of the Saints which cometh by Christ, Christ not be∣ing able to deny you, because he cannot deny himself, 2 Tim. 2.13. and not deny himself, because he is Truth it self, John 14.6. and being Truth it self, hath said; Ask
and you shall have; seek, and you shall find; knock, and it shall be o∣pened unto you, Luke 11.9. Thus labour by all these holy waies and means to believe, and when your carnal friends shall go about to hinder thee, saying; what needs all this praying, and all this weeping, and all this run∣ning to Sermons? say, would ye not have me to live? if I do not believe I cannot live: Again, say, Would ye have me be assu∣red of nothing? I will be (by Gods grace) assured of some∣thing, and especially of my sal∣vation. Again, if Satan seek to hinder you from striving and praying that ye may not believe, yet pray, and use all the means premised; because God hath promised that you shall be heard; and he will do his best for you, when Satan shall do his worst a∣gainst you.
The Lord give you hearts to pray, and hearts to believe, that believing you may be assured that you shall be saved; so pray∣eth from his heart your faithful friend, to his & your best friend, who is a hearer of prayers, and can do abundantly above all that you or I can ask or think, or conceive; to him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, through∣out all ages, world without end, Medium. Now this and the rest of the ensuing Me∣diums are properly and chiefly provi∣ded for Saints, who do be∣lieve, for which cause and for whose sake I call this Tract the Saints Assu∣rance à potio∣ri. Amen, Eph. 3.20.21. 3. Labour to live as spotless a life as you can possibly; for 1 Joh. 3.3. e∣very man that hath this hope in him; What hope? that he shall see God, v. 2. namely, in Irenaeus, l. 4. c 37. Christ, and by himself, purifieth himself even as he is pure. Observe, e∣very man that hath this hope; and so consequently, whose soul is safe; whose faith is sound; whose heart is sure: Again, ob∣serve, purifies himself; that is,
labours to be pure; and how is that? even as he, namely, God himself, is pure. O height of ho∣liness! O profunditie of purity! are there any such in the world? say the men of the world; Yes, saith the Apostle, there are such, which though they are not with∣out sin, yet are not 1 Joh. 3.9. & 1 Joh. 1.9. under sin; that is, under a reigning sin, pres∣sing hard towards perfection; which is to be pure as he is pure; that is, aspiring to it, and climb∣ing after it, and towards it, as Johnathan's Armor-bearer after his Master. I remember what a Anselm, de Simil. Father saith, that he had rather be in Hell, than lie in any sin a∣gainst God: and I have been much taken with his saying; God grant that by it you also may be so taken, as that you may not be so often overtaken; But to the Law and Testimony for all the Fathers: Who is she that looketh
forth as the morning; fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun? Cant. 6.10. Observe, how Christ praiseth his Church, for her transcendent pureness, and surpassing fairness. Some spots she hath, and there∣fore she is assimilated to the Moon as well as Sun; and yet called fair, because she alloweth them not; and because of that Christ seeth them not: No, no, even Balaam could say, He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen perversness in Israel, Numb. 23.21. Again, She is fair as the morning; for she is Instar dilu∣culi quando aurera incipit tenebras dis∣pellere. Parae∣us. partly clear, and partly dim, like that wonderfull day which is only known to the Lord, not day nor night, Zech. 14.7. for so is the Vide Chry∣sost. in Rom. 13.12. Morning, and so is she; not al∣together day, because of sin re∣maining in her, nor altogether night, because of sin resisted by her; and so, and after this man∣ner
fair and clear and pure: but farther, what saith Christ of her? Thou art all fair, my love, there is no spot in thee, Cant. 4.7. that is, no spot Rom. 7.15. allowed, no spot ap∣proved; for whilst she is able to stand she stands, and Heb. 12.4. striveth a∣gainst sin: so do you, labouring to cleanse your selves from all fil∣thiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. and that by the Spirit, Rom. 8.13. For as any one blemish in the face mars beauty, and one dram of poison spoils a whole box of precious Ointment: so if you let alone but one sin to reign in you, and over you, that one will spoil all, even all your fair car∣riage, and all your confidence; for no Si unum in locum collata sint, omnia mala cum tur∣pitudinis ma∣lo non erunt comparanda. Cicoro 2. Thusc. evil like the evil of sin to spoil a man. When Phocas, the Roman Emperor had built a most fair and stately Pallace, there was a voice heard in the night, Sin within will destroy all: So,
when we have built Castles in the air, and by our fair and specious performances have gotten some Assurance & confidence towards God, but afterward give way to one sin or other, we shall hear one time or other a voice from within, Sin within will destroy all, our own consciences Rom. 2.15. accusing us, yea, condemning us for the same, and So the Pro∣phet Jonah lost his con∣fidence by his disobedience. Dr. King on Jonah 1.6. taking away our Assurance from us, for sin allowed by us. Let us fall therefore upon sin, and destroy it, that sins punishment may not fall upon us, and destroy us, and our confidence with us. Oh that this people were wise! Oh that they would so strive a∣gainst sin, and against every sin! Oh that they would unreserved∣ly cleanse their hands! Oh that they would thorowly purifie their hearts, Jam. 4.8. and cleanse them from lust, even every lust! Oh that I could help them! Oh
that I could even pull them away from their beloved sins! for then they should not live, or lodge in and with any of them one day, or one night longer: well, you must do this work with God's help; therefore go every one of you and kill every one of them; spare none, no, not the least; Oh save none alive, to be assu∣red that God will save you alive; else you cannot be so perswaded as long as any one sin is by you allowed: thus labour to purifie your selves, and to destroy sin, and when you have so done, la∣bour to keep your selves so; and if the Tempter re-assault you, do you also re-encounter him, and that with the Word, for that is a Christians sword: tell him as the Spouse told Christ in another sence, I have washed my feet, how shall I defile then? Cant. 5.3. Oh I cannot; Oh! I will not, by
God's help. When Satan came to Christ he found nothing in him, but when he comes to you, he finds much in you, even much corruption; but do you resist him in the faith: I say 1 Pet. 5.9. as Peter, that that which he findes in you, may not be found to be yours, but his; because you do not own it, but resist it, to be assured, as then you Damasc. Er∣ror de Perser. may be, that you shall be saved. Nay, crie to God to keep you; for it is not as Da∣mascene and others teach, in the power of man to hold out; no, no, we are kept by the power of God, through faith to salvation. 1 Pet. 1.5. and therefore you must beg this power of God, and that very much and often, yea, continually; for then Satan will not be able to harm you. It is storied of a malicious woman, that she gave her self to the De∣vil, provided he would do a mis∣chief
to such a Neighbour, whom she deadly hated; the Devil went once and again to do his work; but at last returns, and tels her, that he could not hurt him, because he found him al∣waies praying, or reading: do you likewise; pray so alwaies, and you will also speed as he did; especially then when Satan tempts you to make you fall; then do you fall to your prayers and say; Lord, this is the power and hour of darknesse; now therefore keep me in this hour of temptation, that I may keep up the Assurance of my Salva∣tion. 4. Make your calling and ele∣ction sure; Medium. for then you also make Heaven sure, 2 Pet. 1, 5, 6. giving all diligence, add to your faith vertue, &c. And then, v. 11. so an entrance shall be administred unto you abundantly, into the ever∣lasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. I pay you observe your work; you must become good Arithmeticians, ac∣cording to the perfect Rule of Addition, to be certain of your everlasting salvation: And there∣fore go, and add vertue to ver∣tue, and still say; But do I not mis-reckon? Am I in the right? Do I not miss temperance though I have knowledge. And do I not want patience, though I have temperance? Is not godlinesswan∣ting-though patience be not? Is not brotherly kindness forgotten by me though godliness be not? Have I not left out Charitie, though I do not miss Brotherly kindness? Are all the Graces of Gods Spirit here? and if any be wanting, go, and reckon again, and make a farther Addition; more especially if Patience be wanting in thy reckoning; Go,
and write, I should say, add pa∣tience, the like may be said of all the rest; and so labour to be compleat in Grace, having in you every Grace, and striving still to have more Grace, even more of every Grace; for though, if we believe in Christ we are sanctifi∣ed in every part, yet are we san∣ctified but in part; even as we 1 Cor. 13.1. know but in part, so that we shall need still to add somewhat to e∣very part, if in the Saints Assu∣rance we would have our part; Nay, had need to give all dili∣gence, as the Apostle tels us, v. 5. by our continual additions to make our calling, and election, and salvation sure, and to live an extraordinarie holy, strict, and Seraphical life to attain to it. I knew a most eminent holy walk∣er once, his name was Ignatius Jourdan a Justice of the Peace, who was after his conversion al∣waies
assur'd of his salvation, as he told me; but the course that he took was this, he would every morning rise at 3 of the Clock, as I was told, and spend his time in prayer, reading, and medita∣tion, till 7, and then do justice to all that came to him: Again, he would punish any for swearing, and other offences, if he were ne∣ver so great; and I never heard a vain, or evil word come out of his mouth, but he would be al∣waies talking of Heaven: do you live such an holy, and heavenly life too, and give all diligence thereunto, and you will be sure also, as he was, of Heaven. 5. Ger the pardon of your sins sealed, Medium. for what is remission of sin but justification from sin? Now, whom he justifieth, he also glorifleth, Rom. 8.30. Again, what is it but a covering of sin? and what saith David of that? Blessed
is he whose sin is covered, in Ps. 32.1. so that if I can but know that my sins are forgiven me, I may know also that Heaven will be given me; Wherefore be ear∣nest, even importunately earnest with God to have thy sins forgi∣ven thee by God, Dan. 9.19. you may see how earnest and eager he was in this thing, saying, O Lord, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do; Never was a condemned Malefactor so earnest for a pardon with his King. Ne∣ver was a poor Mendicant so im∣portunate for a piece of bread, or for an Alms with his rich Neighbor, as he for a pardon with his God and King, and so must you be, and therefore even press into the presence of God, for thy pardon to be sealed by God; Go and cry, saying, O God forgive, O God forget, O God Psal. 51. blot out all my transgressions,
and cleanse me throughly from my sins; O Dan. 9.19. Lord hear, O Lord defer not for thy own sake; here be more than ordinarily fervent, and instant; for the pardon of sin is the Carde & caput foederis. Paraeus. principal thing in the co∣venant of Grace so much urged, and to be pressed in prayer; he that is sure of that, may be sure also of God's being reconciled to him in Christ; Christ making for him his peace, peace passing all his understanding, his under∣standing now knowing that he shall have life everlasting. I for my part am therefore wont to be more large and more earnest in this, than in any other part of my more solemn supplications, and I desire, and strive still to be so prolix, and so long in this thing, till I have my errands end, other∣wise I am loath to make an end, and I have found much success and comfort in it, to God's glory
be it spoken, I pray you, do ye pray so too; and withall take this Corollary with you. When you are upon your knees asking God forgiveness, A Corollary. have in readiness a Catalogue of your many and knowable sins, either in your memories, or in writing, and spread them all before the Lord, as once Isa. 37.14. Hezekiah Rabshe∣ka's letter, for then you are most like to speed, because it is ex∣presly written, That if we confess our sins God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cheanse us from all unrighteous∣ness, I John 1.9. and you will be able then thus to plead with God, when you ask pardon of God; O God thou hast said, if they shall confess their iniquities, then will I remember my Covenant, Lev. 26.40, 42. and lo, we O Lord confess here our iniquities before thee, O do thou therefore re∣member
the Covenant made by thee, whose capital matter is the forgiveness of our sins. Again, you may then plead that famous place in Job 37.27. He looketh upon men, and if any say, Mark, if any say, and so if any of us here shall say so, I have sinned perverted that which was right, and it profited me not, He will de∣liver his Soul; as thus, we may say, Lord it is written, and said of thee (likewise shew him the book, the chapter, the place wherein this precious Scripture lies) That thou lookest upon men, and if any say, I have sinned, thou wilt deliver his Soul. O look upon us therefore here pro∣strate before thee, or in the sin∣gular upon me, a poor sinner here lying before thee, and cry∣ing, and saying, thus and thus I have sinned, and deliver my poor Soul, Oh! my poor Soul from hell,
and death, and damnation, I pray thee having forgiven me all my sins, for it is said, If any shall say I have sinned, now Lord, I say, and say it from my heart; therefore O God forgive me, O Lord wash me, and pardon all my offences, for they are won∣drous great, but not too great for so great a God to forgive. Thus confess, and so crave the pardon of thy sins, and withall to have the pardon of them Eph. 1.13. 2 Cor. 1.22. sea∣led, that is to be assured by the Spirit that they are pardoned, as David was, when he said, Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin, Selah, Psal. 22. O Sirs, here is work for you, to have sin not only pardoned, but also to be perswaded that it is par∣doned, which is a thing not so easily obtained, as is commonly believed, No, no you must sweat about it, and labour hard to have
it done, if you desire to be assu∣red that you shall be saved. 6. Get an undeceiving tast of the joys of Heaven, as those Be∣lievers did, which were so sure of their salvation, v. 8. For then you also must needs be sure of your reception, entrance and ad∣mission into Heaven; because they are fore-runners, and the earnest of it, Eph. 1.14. the Greek is , which properly is part of a price promised to be paid ( Vulteius in sua Jurispr. l. 1. c. 30. Distinguish∣ing it from Hypotheca, as being move∣able, whereas Hypotheca is not. Civilians call it a pledge) as here, part of the joys of Heaven promised to us, to be enjoyed by us hereafter; And these joys are so great for their quantity, and so sweet for their quality, as that I hope I shall not need to press you overmuch to the gaining of them; For are they not most sweetly resembled to Apples, to Cant. 2.5. Flagons, to ‖ Mannah, all which things though they are so Ibid. id est salutari potio∣ni Jesu Chri∣ste. Jun & Tremel. Rev. 2.17.
exceeding sweet, yet cannot possibly come near or match those joys which without all de∣gree of comparison, and measure of proportion do surmount and surpass the same; even infinite∣ly, infinitely, For they are un∣speakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. 1. Ʋnspeakable; were all the world full of Orators, and all they like Angels, speaking with the tongues of Angels, and able to utter their minds, and to pour out their conceptions with tor∣rents of elocution, yet would not they be able to express those joys. 2. Full of glory. The great, and main Ocean is not so full of water, though it be Mare nil nisi aquae. Owen. nothing but water, nor the spangled skie so full of Stars, nor the gay dia∣pery of the earth so full of flow∣ers, as they are full of glory. Methought I was in a Tryumph,
and even covered and deck'd all over and over, and over with most refulgent beams of glory, when it pleased God all-graci∣ous, to make my unworthy self a partaker of those joyes which are so full of glory. And there∣fore, oh! how should your Souls be now enamoured with them, and long, and labour after them? O Souls, Souls here are Apples, flagons, here showers of Mannah for you to be had by you. Oh! go after them, Oh! get them, for the Assurance of Salvation lieth in, and thorow them to be had by them. 2. You will say, how shall we get them? I Ans. Beg them, for Christ hath promised them. Q. Where? I Ans. Rev. 2.17. Read the place; And so place your selves again before the Lord Christ;
and say; Lord, give us, or me, in the singular, this Mannah, this sweet bread of of Heaven; Oh showre it down upon my poor Soul, and having tasted it, may be thereby assured; that as I have been fed with Angels food on earth; so I shall feed on the Angels bread in Heaven. But here A Case of conscience comes to be resolved, A Case of Conscience. for you will say happily, Sir, we have begged these joyes; and yet cannot en∣joy them; and therefore tell us what we must do in such a case? I Answer, It may be you have left undone some thing, which ye ought to have done; and where∣upon the fore mentioned promise was made, I mean overcoming; for so saith Christ, To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden Mannah, Rev. 2.17. Now if so, then you must for the obtaining of them covercome.
1. Satan by the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 12.11. 2. The World by faith, 1 John 5.4. 3. Your selves Matt. 16.24. denying your selves in many things, which as yet you have not denied your selves in, as in meats, in sleep, in pleasures, in the putting on of Apparel, &c. 4. God himself, as Jocob did the Patriarch, especially when you beg those joyes. Beloved, never did Luk. 16.21. Lazarus so beg crumbs that fell from Dives his table; nor Judg. 4.19. Sisera beg drink of Jael which then gave him milk to drink, as that holy man did beg those crumbs of comfort, which he wanted; and that glorious vision of Jehovah's face, which he to see so desired, when he said, I'le not leave thee; till thou bless me; constraining God thereby to bless his wrestling, with the Gen. 32.
sight of refulgent beams of the light of his pleased, and pleasant countenance, which runs parel∣lel with the joys of Heaven, and are infinitly sweeter then Jael's milk, which she gave Sisera to drink in a Lordly dish; yea, than all the milk of all the land of Canaan, flowing with milk and honey; O let your earnestness, and importunity match his; and let every one of you, now say after him; Lord I will not leave thee till thou bless me, as thou did'st bless him with a glimpse, and glance of the light of thy countenance; or thus, as the Spouse of Christ, said to Christ in the Cant. 2.5. Canticles; so say thou to him, in thine heart, and in thy Closet, comfort me, oh me also! with apples, even the sweet apples of they divine Consolations, pro∣mised from thy most Expos. 3. pa∣trum in Loc. sweet, and holy word; and stay me with
flagons, even flagons of love, for I am sagitia amo∣ris istius con∣fixa. Theodor. in Loc. sick of love. O my love do not, O do not deny me thy love; O my joy, do not with∣hold from me thy joy. Or thus, O my dear, thou hast said to him that overcometh, will I give to eat of the hidden Mannah; and wilt thou not give to me that Mannah, who come to thee for it's Manducation, to be assured of my Salvation; O my God, thou hast promised it to him that overcometh; and loe, I de∣sire to overcome, and to over∣come Satan by thy blood; my self, by thy love; the world by my Faith; and thy self by my prayers, and for that end am now come to overcome both my self, and thee; Oh! give me therefore, & let me have, what here I crave, even that Mannah which thou hast promised me, and that joy unspeakable, and full of glory.
7. Nay, Medidum. beg this great Assu∣rance it self, and beg it much, for it is a gift worth your asking, and all pains taking with it, they that have it are In Angeli statum prove∣hit. Euseb. Euris. hom. de Epiph. Angelized by the Spirit, extatized in the spi∣rit, and emparadized in God; God being their Assurer, who al∣so by this assurance, becomes their exceeding great reward; As for their life, it is the life of Heaven, as their joy is the joy of Heaven, Heaven being in their hearts, their hearts in Heaven. Labour therefore, dear hearts, for this Assurance, begging it of God, who is both able and wil∣ling to give it to those that ask it; Ask it therefore, and when you ask it do as Achsah Caleb's daugh∣ter, which wanting springs of wa∣ter, came to her Father, lighted off from her Ass, and said, Give me a blessing, for thou hast given me a South-land, give me also
springs of water, Judg. 1.14. answerably whereunto, do you also light off from your most eager pursuit after the gains, profits, emoluments, and pre∣ferments of this present world, and falling down before your heavenly father, say; Father, give me a blessing, for thou hast given me these outward things, and I want nothing but only the assurance of my Salvation; give me therefore springs of water al∣so; that is, the assurance of mine eternal bliss, which is like springs of water, yea, Fountains of liv∣ing water springing from that O∣cean and Sea of ineffable de∣lights, which are in thy blessed self. O blessed Father, give me both the upper springs, and the neither springs as Judg. 1.14. Caleb did his Daughter. The upper springs hereafter in Heaven; to wit, the joyes of Hea∣ven
in Heaven, and the neither springs; I mean, the assurance of Heaven here upon earth; I humbly pray thee, thus beg, and beg as earnestly, and ardently as a beggar begs his alms, because he needs it; so you this assu∣rance, because you cannot well live without it; I told you of a very holy man, Justice Jour∣dan. a Justice of the Peace; how holily he lived to gain his assurance; and now, let me tell you, what once he said to a Visitant that came to see him. How is it with you? Are you assu∣red now of your Salvation, or are you not yet? And, when the Vi∣sitant answered no. He told him, were it my case, I would go to my Closet, and shut my door and never leave begging it of God, till I had it bestowed on me, by God. Beloved, this was good Counsel; whether the Visitant fol∣lowed it or no, I know not, but
do you follow it, and so go, O go, and betake your selves to your Closets, again upon this account also; & shut your doors, Matth. 6.6. and pray to your heavenly Father which is in secret that he will give you this assu∣rance of your Salvation, which will reward you amplie and a∣bundantly, for all your paines taking in such a supplication; O Souls, when once ye are in, never come out, 8 till assurance comes in. Nay, go, and tell God so, thou that hearest me this day, and wantest this assurance, Lord, I will not go hence, till thou give it me, for thou hast said; Ask, & it shall be given to you, Luk  9. and do not doubt, but per∣swade thy self for certain, that as Caleb, Achsah her Father gave his Daughter, petitioning him, both the * upper-springs, Judg. 1.14. and the neither springs which she
wanted; See Luk. 11.11, 12, 13. so your heavenly Fa∣ther, in respect of whose tender compassions and bowels of pity, the kindest Father's greatest mer∣cy is but harshness; in respect of whose incomparably melting and sweetest inclination; the most loving Nature of any man living is but morosty, will give you also this by you so begged and petitioned Assurance of your souls salvation. 8. Medium. Get the Spirits testimony of which we read Rom. 8.16. The Spirit himself bears witness to our Spirits, that we are the chil∣dren of God, and if children then heirs; that follows v. 17. and therefore this Assurance of Sal∣vation must needs follow. Mark, here are two witnesses to assure us of our both filiation and sal∣vation. 1. Our own spirit, How? our own Spirit? what more deceitful
than a mans own Jer. 17.9. heart? but stay, it is not the carnal heart; but theregenerate heart, as the word spirit is taken, 1 Cor. 2.11. whence Origines in Loc. Origen. The Spirit bears witness, not to the Soul, but to the Spirit, that is, the heart regenerated by the Spirit, which goes for sence, and feeling, and finding it self to have Faith in∣deed, and truly to be regenera∣ted by the Spirit, is able to say truly with the Apostle, I know whom I have believed, 2 Tim. 1.12. and I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. see the place. Stapleton that sub∣tile Popish Writer, would have this witness to be our charity, but there is not a syllable for it in the Text; and therefore his asser∣tion I reject for false. The second witness is the Spi∣rit of God; who as a , or
Co-witness steps in, and confirms what our own spirit affirms, say∣ing; it is true, thou art a child of God; But how shall I know that this testimony is not a delu∣sion, but the Spirits truly? Thus you may be sure of it, saith a worthy Writer. Either it is the Spirits or the fleshes perswasion; Not the fleshes, for that doth not lead us, nor adduce us to divine, and heavenly things, therefore the Spirits, and the Spirit doth not lie. Bellarm. l. 3. de justif. c. 9. Thus he. Bell armine saith that this testimony of the Spirit begets but a conjectural certi∣tude of our salvation; but that is as false as God is true, for can any thing be more true and cer∣tain, than that which is asserted by the God of truth? well then, here are two Witnesses for you, and you know what the Law saith, that at the mouth of two Witnesses, matters shall be esta∣blished,
Deut. 19.15. and there∣fore why should ye doubt? Chry∣sostom upon this place triumphs as it were, saying; Chrysost. in Rom. 8.16. to be noted against Bellar∣mines conje∣ctural Assu∣rance. What ambi∣guity is there then left for us? if a Man, Angel, or Arch-Angel promise a thing, a man may hap∣pily doubt, but sith the supreme essence of God's Spirit, who makes us pray, promises to them that pray, and performs what he promises, doth so bear witness within us, what room is left for hesitating and doubting to us? Labour therefore for this testi∣mony of the Spirit. Q. But you will say, Qnest. How shall we come by it? I Answ. Luk. 11.15. Crave it, as thus, O blessed Spirit, bear witness to my Spirit, that I am a child of God: Venisancte Spiritus, Come O holy Spirit, and tell my Spirit so, that my Spirit may rejoyce
in the God of my salvation, I be∣ing assured of my salvation. Men suppine men to be witnesses for them; but do you only intreat the Spirit to be a witness for you, and he will be willing to do it for you; For as Christ saith of the Father, The Father himself loveth you, John 16.27. so I of the Spirit; The Spirit himself, who is one with the Father, loveth you. Therefore go again, and again to the Spirit, and pray to the same effect, saying, Holy Spirit, speak to my Spirit, and speak plain, e∣ven so plain as that I may know that it is thy voice, and not the voice of a stranger, for thy sheep do not love to hear the voice of Joss. 10.4, 5. Joh. 10.3. strangers; Nay, come blessed Spirit and call me, as it were by my Rev. 22.17. name, as Christ calls his sheep by name, saying, Christo∣pher, John, Peter, Mary, thou art a Child of God. O sirs, let every
one that heareth me this day say so; come blessed Spirit, come, and testifie so, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry, and when he cometh, Assurance cometh, for he comes not alone, when he cometh, but his reward is with him, and before him, to wit, his testimony, and his ear∣nest, 2 Cor. 5.22. which is the exceeding great reward of our supplications, and the merciful compensation of a truly graci∣ous conversation. 9. Medium. But I have one help more for you, and that is, you must try your selves daily by some evid en∣ces for Heaven; When a Travel∣ler, being bent for a certain place, and told by signs and tokens which is the way to it; as namely, there are such Meadows at the one hand, which he must pass by; such miry places at the other, which he must leave, and such
Mountains before him, which he must pass over, and he findes it so, he is sure that he is in his right way, and shall certainly come to the place appointed; For, saith he, when he is past the places spoken of; lo, there be the mea∣dows, the miry places, the moun∣tains which I was told of, I am past them; now a child of God being bound and bent for Hea∣ven is such a Traveller too, ac∣cording to that of the Psalmist, Psal. 84.6. and * thus rendred in your English meetre. Psal. 24.6. This is the brood of Travellers, in seeking of his grace: As Jacob did the Is∣ralite, in that time of his race. And this Traveller is told in the holy Scriptures, and by us Mini∣sters which is the way to Hea∣ven, and how he shall know that he is in his way, and shall certain∣ly arrive there; As for example, such sins and waies, which are
like miry places, and meadows must be left on the right, and on the left hand, and that such and such duties and perfections, which are like high and craggy Mountains he must go over, whereupon it followeth, that when he looketh back into his life and courses, and finds it to be so as he was told, he must needs be assured that for certain he shall be saved; for saith he, are not these sins which I have left, the miry places which I was told of? and these pleasures of sin for a season which I have passed by, the pleasant meadows which I was told of? and those difficult duties which I have laboured to perform, as believing, self deny∣al, a spotless walking, and a con∣stant, and laborious serving of God, even day and night, the high and craggy mountains which I was fore-shown? Beloved, it is
Mr. Nichols hath it, in his life. reported of that holy man Ig∣natius Jordan; whom I former∣ly mentioned, that when he was near his end, and one did ask him, how he did, and could so keep up and maintain his Assurance so constantly, even to the end? he answered, that every day, he did try himself, by some undeceiving signes; and evidences for Hea∣ven, & that kept it up, & so died. Do you therefore likewise as he did, and you may be assured as he was. But I know, you will be very inquisitive now, what those e∣vidences are, whereby you are to try your selves so; and there∣fore besides that which hath bin already spoken, I shall give you a more full information about it, and shew you more directly, which they are, out of Psal. 15. Where they lie even evidently before you. For there the Psal∣mist
states the Question, who shall be saved; saying, Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? Who shall dwell in thy holy Hill? mean∣ing Heaven, which is called Mons, a Hill, or Mountain, a Bern. in Serm. 29. Jan∣sen in Loc. Clarius in Loc. Engu. in Loc. Jacob. Panis∣cotus in Loc. Burgensis 1. p. scrut. 4. dist. 4. c. 4. Lorin in Lo. Dr. Boys in Loc. Mollerus in Loc. non mo∣vendo, because it shall never be shaken, or moved; Heb. 12.28, And then resolves it, saying, he that walketh uprightly, &c. where we have the most glorious evi∣dences, & blessed properties of a Athanasius in Lpist. de Interpr. Psal. Citizen of Heaven set down in order before us: They are 12. The 1. is, He that walketh up∣rightly. The word in the Hebrew is  which, though it be usual∣ly rendred perfect; yet signifieth, not Melancthen in Loc. one that is simply and abso∣lutely so, and altogether free from sin; for that is absolutely denied Pro. 20.9. Jam. 3.2.1. John 1.9. but one that in his desires & pur∣poses is without dissimulation, 1 Eviden. and hypocrisie, and so walks up∣rightly;
as it is here rendred: where give me leave, because this is the prime and chiefest Mark of a Citizen of Heaven to dwell a little while, and to shew you how this uprightness may be discerned, by these 3 proper∣ties. 1. By a right aim; Properties. of upright∣ness. 2. By true desires. 3. By Ʋniformity. A Right Aim. 1. By a right aim, for an up∣right man doth in all things, aim at the glory of God; above all things, like David himself, (who hath penned this Psalm, and here set down this property of up∣rightness) Psal. 115.1. where∣as Hypocrits, and such as are not upright do all that they do to be seen of men, Matth. 23.5. 2. By true desires, True De∣sires. after Christ and grace, I mean, which are e∣quivalent with deeds, as when Abraham had but a desire, and
purpose to please God, and to obey his command; it was taken for the deed, Gen. 22.16, 17. Read the place. And the truth of such desires may be known again by 3 marks. 3 Marks of true Desires. 1. True desires are flaming, and fervent, called hungring and thirsting, Matth. 5.6. pan∣ting, and breathing, Psal. 42.. for look, as the Hart, having swal∣lowed Serpents, and being there∣by most mightily inflamed, and put into a grievous heat, pank∣eth, and panteth after Rivers of water to quench his thirst, so do true desires which are flaming and come from a fervent spirit, even long and thirst after the things desired; whether it be Christ, or grace, or faith, in a most vehement measure, and manner. One writes of a gracious wo∣man; Bolton. that being asked in her a∣gony, as she was complaining of
the want of Christ, and Grace, and Faith; but doth not your heart desire, and long after Christ? Answered and said; O yes, I have an Husband, and Children, and many other comforts; but I would give them all, and all the good I shall ever see in this world, or in the world to come, to have my poor, thirsty Soul re∣freshed with that precious blood of his, &c. 2. True and upright desires are ever enterwoven with a sin∣cere and holy use of all such means, as may procure the enjoy∣ment of the things desired; as fasting, praying, hearing, reading, selling of all, and the like. See Isa. 26.9. how desires are fol∣lowed by seeking after God. 3. They are growing from lit∣tle to more, I mean more actions, from more to much more; from much more to habit, from habit
to some competent perfection & bigness in Christ. See, 1 Pet. 2.1. how desires and growing are conjoyned, and look upon Eph. 2.21. 2 Thes. 1.3. and try your selves often by these 3 signes of true desires; for if you have them, you have the graces which you desire to have, and so must needs be assured of your Salva∣tion. I speak after famous Mr. Rogers of Dedham; who hath converted so many Souls, his words are in his Doctrine of faith. c. 2. p. 128. What graces thou desirest, and constantly usest the means to attain, thou hast. Thus he. 3. Ʋniformity, Uniformity. an upright and sincere walker striveth, and la∣bours to be the same in all pla∣ces and at all times, like true Gold, which is the same in dirt, and when it is trodden upon, that it is when it is lifted up on
high; and worn in a Ring, or Crown, it shineth wheresoever it is put: so he is the same in ad∣versity, as well as in prosperity; among filthy livers, as well as a∣mong Saints; in bad company, as well as in good; at home as well as abroad; and like Aristotle's homo  he is, cast him this way, and that away, and try him every way, and you shall find him right, and square, in evil times as well as in good times; For he knoweth, that to be good at all times, and in all places, is but a Christian's duty; but to be good in evil times, and among evil men, is an upright man's glo∣ry, and to be blameless among a wicked and crooked Generati∣on, yea, to the very credit of Religon, and Garland of Chri∣stianity; and so lobours to be like a Rock unmoveable; as he is re∣quired to be, 1 Cor. 15.58. See
also, Psal. 1.3. his leaf also shall not wither, understand with any weather, and Gen. 6.9. where the Hebrew is, and Noah wal∣ked indesinently with God; though the world was bad, yet he was good, nay, as Chrysost. in Gen. Chrysostome speaks of him, like a spark he was in the midst of the Sea, which all that wickedness which did overslow the whole earth could not quench. Whereas Hypocrites, and such as want this uprightness are like Alcumy, which looketh like Gold, but proves not so; for when it is tryed; appears to be but counterfeit Gold: so they seem to be good, because of some glistering shewes which they make by their profession, pray∣ers, and performances, but when they are tryed, and faln into some Company or meet with op∣position; they prove false, and appear to be but counterfeits.
And like the fish Ambros in exaem. l. 5. . 8. Polypus which changeth colours, with every kind of stone it meets with in the Sea; so they in the Sea of this world shift and change their co∣lours, according to the place where they are, and the company into which they come; among the good, they will seem to be good, and talk as if they were good; yea, pray as if they were Saints; but among the bad, they are all as bad; so they will talk, and so they will do, and walk; abroad they will be like Angels, so they will behave themselves, and so pure and heavenly they will seem to be, and so they will speak, and pray very admirably; and as it were, with the Tongues of Angels; but follow them home, and you will see them car∣ry themselves as if they were Devils; so they will lie▪ and be proud, and envious, and spight∣full,
and so some of them will roar, and tear, and rave, and stamp, and be contentious and unclean, and when it comes to family Duties, they will scarce pray at all some of them, or read, or have a savory speech come out of their mouths all the day long; or if it happen that they do pray some of them, as brief, and could, and dry as may be, and com∣monly but a Repetition of the same things which they are still wont to have in their domestick Devotions; and a kind of I speak a∣gainst hypo∣critical forms and repetiti∣ons, as Christ, Matth. 6.7. & not against all sorms, and repetitions. form, and how can it be other∣wise, seeing they have but a form of godliness; denying the power thereof? 2 Tim. 3.5. But I have done with uprightness, but I hope you have not done with it, for it is the chief mark of all David's marks; and it will, if you can find it, yeild you as much Assurance as any. I know the
man, saith Blessed Hooker, he is yet alive, that in extremity of horror of heart, said, he had sinned against the Holy Ghost; and therefore would have made away himself; but now that which kept him, was, his consci∣ence told him, that at such a time his heart was upright before God, and that restrained him; & God after that blessed him with assu∣rance of his love, and favour; & therefore this uprightness; oh! this uprightness, what a mark it is? O try your selves daily by it. But I see that I have transgressed by my prolixity; I humbly crave pardon, and promise to be brief∣er hereafter, 2. Evidence. He worketh Righteousness. Righteousness i his trade, where∣by he trades for Heaven, la∣bouring to give to God what is Gods, and to Man what is Mans, and to every man his due. 3. Evidence. He speaketh the truth in his
heart. Another man may speak truth too, but he speaketh it not from his heart; because it is not in his heart, but commonly such as are none of Heavens Citizens will lie for advantage. It is gi∣ven to them all inasmuch as that they are called lyars. And ly∣ing Children, Isa. 30.19. because As Rabby Moyses, l. 1. c. 30. used to them, and not used to speak truth; whereas God's Children are called Children that will not lie, Isa. 63.9. Evidence. 4. He backbiteth not with his tongue; His tongue knoweth how to speak well, but it know∣eth not how to speak ill, 1 Pet. 2.23. especi∣ally of any man; For it hath not so learned Christ, * who when he was reviled, reviled not a∣gain; whereas some will do lit∣tle else, but revile, and slander, and backbite, and speak evil of other men, who many times are better than themselves.
5. He doth no evil to his neigh∣bour, Evidence. if he can do him good he will, hurt him he dares not, in his body, goods, or goodname; where∣as some will be good to no body, but themselves, and scarce them∣selves as they ought, but they will wrong any one to get by it. 6. He takes up no reproach a∣gainst his neighbour, Evidence. v. 3. for his charity will not suffer him which hopes better, because it 1 Cor. 13.7. hopeth all things. 7. He is one in whose eies a vile person is contemned, Evidence. v. 4. But how? it is not his Brother, (for so is even a vile person) but his Brothers fashions and vile cour∣ses, which he hates, and for which by him he is so scorned, and de∣spised; again, he contemns him not as he is a man, but as he is a vile man. 8. He honoureth them that fear the Lord. Evidence. I have read of a certain gracious King, called Jugo, King
of the Dranes, that once he made a great feast, and placed his No∣bles and Lords in his Hall; but the poor Christians which also were some of his guests, in a state∣ly higher Room, and kept them company; and when his Nobles repined, and wondred at it, he said, these poor. Christians I look upon, as those that will reign with me as fellow Kings, and such as will be my Companions in that other world; and therefore I place them and use them so. So highly he honoured them that feared the Lord; and so doth every Citizen of Heaven, where note, that this esteem goeth ac∣companied with love, as you may see, 1 Thes. 5.13. to esteem them very highly in love; concerning which love, you know what is said, We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the Brethren, 1 John 3.14.
which once so satisfied a gracious woman, that when she could find no other mark but this, this did gain her the Assurance of her sal∣vation, because her heart told her that she loved the Brethren from the bottom of her heart. 9. He sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not, Evidence. v. 4. He is a man of his word, what he swears or promises shall stand, because he knoweth that else he cannot stand, whether he win by it or lose he careth not; though it be to my utter undoing, saith he, it matters not, if I may but go to Heaven at last, it shall not trou∣ble me much, though I must for∣go all that I have upon earth first. 10. He doth not put his money upon Ʋsury, Evidence. v. 5. And what is Usury? It is not only interest of a due quantity, as Ʋsura defi∣iti interesse quantitat is de∣it. Civilians define it; but the loan of a thing
that may be De Ʋsur. 22. consumed in the use thereof, upon a compact for encrease; where note, that a man may commit it, whether he lend so to the rich or to the poor, the Tho. Aqu. 2.2. q. 79. . .  Hebrew calls it biting, because it alwaies bites, either actually, or potentially, see Deut. 23.19. Thou shalt not lend upon Ʋsury to thy Brother, Ʋsury of money, Ʋ∣sury of victuals, Ʋsury of any thing that's lent upon Ʋsury, which must be understood thus, and which may be consumed in the use thereof. Here observe how generally God speaketh, not ex∣cepting at all, him that is rich, but saying, to thy Brother. Now is not the rich thy Brother as well as the poor. I did preach once 16 Sermons against Usury, as near as I can remember, upon this Psalm, but now I must be very brief, because I have promised brevity. So that for 1500 years after Christ, not any one of all the Fa∣thers, and other holy Writers have stood for it. See Rob. Bolton against M. S. P. 5.
11. He taketh no reward against the innocent, Evidence. v. 5. He is an ene∣my to bribery, because God ha∣teth it, and because it blinds mens eies; and therefore whe∣ther he be a Judge or Justice, or Lawyer, or Minister, or Commissi∣oner, or Arbitrator, and ender of differences; he will rather beg from door to door, and from man to man, than be a false and bribe taking man. 12. He doth, Evidence. that is, labours to do all that is required to be done hre, and else where, consequen∣tially; I say all, for we have a Rule in the School, that an in∣definite proposition in a necessa∣ry matter is equivalent to an u∣niversal, and such a proposition is this, Ergo. And besides, by this All, the close of this Psalm, and this last mark doth sweetly symphonize with the beginning of it, & with the first, for the first
maketh him in a manner perfect, because the word for uprightness is  which signifieth perfect, namely in the sense foreshewn. So that a Citizen of Heaven is truly a Catholick, a man com∣pleat in Christ, a general trea∣der into all the vestigaes of God's Saints, like Zachary and Eliza∣beth, who walked in all the Com∣mandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, Luk. 1.16. and one that would not willing∣ly omit, or neglect any one duty joyned by God, any one fer∣vice to be performed to God, any good turn to be done for God; no, not for a world, nor live in a∣ny one known sin with allowance, because he knoweth that if he should, he would never be able to hold up his head with joy, nor have any confidence at all, that Heaven he shall have after all. That makes him to be so for all,
even all that is to be done, I add and consequentially to do it with his All. All the powers of my Soul, and all the members of my Body, and all the moments and minutes of my time (saith he) shall go and be for God, for Christ, for Heaven; Heaven at last, and the Assurance of it will pay for all; and then I shall not be Psal. 119.6. ashamed neither, whilest I am here, when I shall have respect to all the Lord's Commandments: For this is the confidence that I shall have, that Heaven hereafte I shall have; where drinking at the cistern of life. I shall take my fill of the waters of life & foun∣tains of pleasures streaming from Jehovah's face, blessed for ever. Now my Brethren, shall I entreat and exhort you after all this, to try your selves by these never∣failing Evidences; even daily to be assured that you shall inhabit
with God, that holy hill above everlastingly. I believe it is a thing which some of you never did. For men think it to be e∣nough if they try themselves then, when signs and marks are delivered in some certain Ser∣mons; Nay, some will not try themselves then, and therefore no wonder that such as are assu∣red of their salvation, are like Rara avis in terris. Turtles very rare; and shall I not for that cause perswade you as earnestly as I may, to take this new course of trying your selves; so every day hereafter to gain the Assurance of the salvation of your Souls. O Souls, in the bow∣els of Christ Jesus, I beseech you that you will be perswaded, and no longer neglect so great salva∣tion, I should say, the gaining of the Assurance of so great salva∣tion. But shall I pray to God for you
too? By God's help I will, say∣ing, the Lord bless these my la∣bours to you, and bless you. He grant that these very evidences may not only lie before ye in this Book, but also to you in your hearts. He minde you of them, because else some daies you will neglect them; that so you may come to be assured daily, that you shall mansion with his holy self, in that holy Hill it self, which is so far beyond all other Hills, and high Mountains in this world, most certainly, and ever∣lastingly. So be it. But, A Case of Conscience. here I must resolve a great case of conscience. For some will he ready to say; Sir▪ we have used such means as these, and yet cannot gain this Assu∣rance; and therefore what shall we do in this case? I Answer, There is a two-fold Assurance.
The Assurance of Evidence. The Assurance of Adherence. 1. The Assurance of Evidence; when with blessed Stephen, we see Heaven as it were open, and the Son of man in it, that is, when we see the splendor of his coun∣tenance, when his countenance is lifted up upon us, and in us; when in us for the present is no∣thing but Heaven; when Heaven is poured out upon our souls; when our souls are enroabed with the garment of salvation; when salvation crowns us, fills us, swal∣lows us; when we can see nothing, tast nothing, feel nothing but Heaven, and must say as Jacob, This is none other but the house of God, and this the gate of Heaven, Gen. 28.17. 2. Of Adherence. As when we can see no such thing, when eve∣ry thing goes against us, when God frowns, Christ withdraweth,
the Spirit chides; when if we look up, we can behold nothing but wrath, even the wrath of a sin-revenging God; if about us, nothing but horrour; if within us, nothing but despair; if under us, nothing but Hell, and yet can say as Job, though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, Job 13.15. Now, when the first Assurance cannot for the present by any means be had, we must stick to the second, we have a notable place for it, Isa. 50.10. Who is among you that feareth the Lord, that obeyeth the voice of his ser∣vant, (and so doth, what here hath been spoken as from the Lord, by his servant) that walk∣eth in darkness? let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. The Hebrew is ? whence is  a staff, to shew that a man in darkness goeth by a staff, sustaining himself by it, to
keep himself up; so such a one must rest himself upon God in this his dark and dismal estate to be kept up. See Psal. 23.4. con∣cerning this staff; and let me say unto you yet farther, let such a one cloath himself with patience, and never think himself the more For he may be more safe than he who feels the sweetness of joy, and may be lifted up with it, saith Gerson. unsafe, let him centre himself in Christ, let him wrap up him∣self in his merits; let him say, here I will live, and here I will die: If I perish, I perish, (as Esthe. .16. Est∣her said once) it is all one, but it shall be upon this So Ʋrse. tels us. staff which I will not let go, but keep to my grave whither I go. As for the other of Evidence, ye will, or may, in that also before you de∣part, and cease to be retainers to the Sun, sun yourselves, and have your part. 2. Incentives of a sorts. Now Incentives; and 1. Let me deduce some from the evils that will follow, if you
will not follow these directi∣ons. 2. Others from the good that will come, if you will come to labour for this Assurance. 1. As for the evils. You will live 1. In continual doubts. 2. In continual fears, and sor∣rows. 1. You will live in continual doubts, and question even every thing, as whether. ye did not all that ever ye did in Hypocrisie; & whether your love be true, your conversion true, your godliness true; and especially you will doubt of your Faith, whether that be true saving Faith, Nam fidel is non est, nis qui suae salutis se∣curitati in∣nixus Diabolo & morti confi∣denter insul∣tet quomo do doceinur, Rom. 8.38. Calv. Inst. l. 3. c. 2. s. 16. yea, or no, because so few have it, and because so much temporary and hypocritical Faith is going; where give me leave to dwell a little while, because I hear most doubt∣ing Christians call their Faith mostly in question. And because
those two kinds of Faith carry men so far as they do, and there∣by raise such doubts. As▪ 1. The Temporary carry men so far as to make them hear the word, even with jy, Luke 8.13. Oh! me-thought, saith the Tem∣porary, I was even ravished when I heard such a Sermon. 2. It maketh men to be not hearers only, but doers also of many things, both in their Fami∣lies and apart, even to admirati∣on, Mark▪ 6.20. St. Basil knew such a Tempo∣rary at Jerusalem, Basil Epist. mihi p. 515. who for a time lived so strictly, as that he did e∣ven admire him; for he had fast∣ed so often as that he had brought himself to nothing almost, but skin and bones, and counted the greatest wealth as dung, and wa∣tered his cheeks with rivers of tears, and walked as he thought with God day and night; in brief,
lived so solitarily, and retired∣ly, as if he had cared for no earth∣ly creature; and yet at last fell not only off, but also in love with a strange woman, having forsa∣ken his own wife, and I do not read in the same Basil of his reco∣verie at all; and this and the like examples cannot but make any man who wants this Assurance, to tremble, and doubt. So the hy∣pocritical, I mean the sturdie Hy∣pocrites faith, Famous Mr. Hooker. as Divines call it, Good Lord! how far it car∣rieth? 1. It brings him to a great deal of sorrow, being Matt. 13.22. thorny ground, and having his thorns in him, that is, pricking sorrows, and troubles of mind; The Tempo∣rary, saith he, is deceived; for he came easily by his faith; he was never much troubled before it, or about it; he believed by and by, but mine cost me dear;
and the truth is, such a Hypo∣crite commonly hath sorrow e∣nough for the quantitie of it, though not enough for the quality or uprightness, because everie valley is not filled, according to Luke 3.5. though he himself, like a high Mountain, was thrown & cast down by a soul-piercing Ser∣mon, there being a hollow false heart left in him. 2. It makes him even to trade with Christ, and that much too, like that Mat. 19.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. young man who also was so sorrowful, and had so much talk with Christ about his salvation; and made as if he would do much by Christ's per∣swasion, though not to the losing hand upon any terms, but only so far, and to so much as will suit with his estate and occasions. 3. Nay, it will carry him out e∣ven unto suffering; for saith he, the Temporarie cozeneth him∣self,
for he is Mat. 13.21. offended & yields, and De quo So∣crates, l. 3. c. 1. Ezebolius-like complies by and by, Luk. 8.13. and is gone; but I scorn to do so, I will stand it out to the last, though I die for it. See 1 Cor. 13.3. how a man may give his bodie to be burnt, and yet want Charitie; and so conse∣quently true saving faith, which works by love, Gal. 5.6. Beloved, there is a Rule in Logick. Those disjunct Propositions, both parts whereof are true, the whole must needs be true; if either part be false, then the Proposition must be false. Now here both parts are true, I may give my bodie to be burnt, and yet want Cha∣ritie; so a man may suffer, and yet want faith, Ergo. For there be many things in mans heart that he will rather die than yield, as Pride, Obstinacie, self-wildness, sturdiness, and the like: This, this maketh men doubt so; and
doubt they will, till by the use of means formerly prescribed, they gain that Assurance which is here required: and therefore get it, O, by all mean get it, my dearly beloved; for, how long will ye doubt so? 2. You will live in continual fear and heaviness; for you are whilst you want this Assurance in darkness, and see no light, Isa. 50.10. the Hebrew is brightness, which is more than light, and seemeth to allude to the bright∣ness of God's countenance, which a child of God walking in dark∣ness, and wanting this Assurance, cannot see. Now when a man walketh in darkness, you know what a sad fearful man he is, be∣cause he can see no light; every man that he meets he takes to be an enemie; everie voice he hears he thinks to be the voice of Rob∣bers; everie step he makes, he
fears will make him fall: so, when men are not assured of their salvation; and of God's fa∣vour, how sad and fearful are they? everie Scripture almost they meet with they take to be against them; everie step of theirs to be a step into hell; everie glimpse of comfort to be a delu∣sion of the Devil; and so they live the sorrowfullest, the dis∣mallest, the disconsolatest life that poor creatures can live, liv∣ing in a continual fear of death, of Devils, and of hell fire, which burns for ever. It hath been my own case when I wanted this as∣surance; I was afraid to be alone, and afraid of Satan, because of his buffetings, and so will you be, or are alreadie. O my brethren, the tongue of man is hardly able to express the sorrow, the fear, the perplexity that a poor doubt∣ing
Christian is in whilst he wants this Assurance, and cannot see the light of the Lord's counte∣nance; when he looks upon his Wife, (if he have any) his Chil∣dren, his Goods, wherein others take a world of comfort, he saith, what comfort can I take in them who cannot be assured at all, as others are, of the favour of God, which is better than ten wives, ten sons, nay, 10 thousand worlds? when he looks upon his meat and drink, he saith, what good can all this good meat & sweet drink do to me, who have no assurance at all that ever I shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and drink of that new & sweetest wine which they drink of in the Kingdom of God? When he looks upon his bodie, he saith; O, how will this bodie of mine be a∣ble to dwell in that flaming fire? and how, O how will it be able
to indure those * everlasting burnings? When he thinks up∣on his soul, he saith, O my poor Isa. 33.14. trembling soul, whether wilt thou go, when thou goest hence? to Heaven or Hell? I know not, God knows; or thus: As that great Emperor Ani∣mula Vagula Blandula. anxiviously I have li∣ved, doubtfully shall I die, not knowing whether I shall go; as Aristotle said, that great Philo∣sopher; or as David, that great King of Israel, 2 Sam. 18.15. said of Absalom his Son once; so saith he of his soul, with a little change; O my soul, would to God; I did know what would become of thee after me; but I know it not, and therefore O sad man that I am, and O sad soul that thou art, Oh! my soul, my soul; Oh! how should this prick ye on there∣fore like a Spur, to the getting of that here required, Assurance of the salvation of your souls.
2. Some Incentives I shall de∣duce from the good that will come, Sort of In∣centives. if you will come to labour for this Assurance: as, 1. Look as they that are sure of their vocation and election, so they that are sure of their salva∣tion; by a necessary consequence shall not be barren in the know∣ledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, in 2 Pet. 1.8. know∣ledge a man may have, though no assurance of his salvation he have. As good a Logician he may be as ever was Austin, Augustinus à petitiono vo∣cabatur diale∣cticus. who for it was called the Dialectick; speak he may diverse tongues, as He∣brew, Greek, Latine, &c. nay, as many as Genusbrey Sultan, Soly∣man's Interpreter, 15 Languages, or as Mithridates 22, as the French Academy hath it. An Oxford of learning, a walking Library, an ocean of wit, he may
be; abilities he may have to wade into the Abyss of the Ora∣cles of God, and to interpret my∣steries; a dexterity he may have with the piercing key of his most excellent knowledge, to un∣lock the golden cabinet of Go∣spel secrets; parts he may have with the far seeing eie of his large understanding, to penetrate the occult qualities of nature; able he may be to discover what is in the bowels of the earth, in the bottom of the seas, in the heights of mountains; nay, he may with the wings of his profound learn∣ing even sore up to that flaming hill above, where the stars are, yea, beyond the Castiopeia it self, and be able to discourse of the altitude, magnitude, natures, influences of those glorious lights which are in that spangled skie, even to admiration; but as bar∣ren he will be for want of god∣liness
and goodness, if he want the the Assurance of his election, of salvation, as the mountain of Gilboa, 2 Sam. 1.21. Contrarily, if he be sure of that, then, oh how fruitful will he be then in all manner of holiness, and godly conversation? and how, oh how will that even fill his sails, with life, with motion, with action, and make him navigate even with expansed sails, through seas of duties? For, what, oh! what will not a man do for God, when once he is certain of the favour of God? Oh! how he will pray, fast, read, meditate, love, when once he is perswaded of his love? and therefore who is there among all this people that fain would grow in grace, and not be barren in knowledge? let him labour for the assurance of his salvation, and he shall have his hearts de∣sire. O my God, fulfil thou the
desire of that soul, I humbly de∣sire, and beseech thee with my very soul. 2. You shall never fall, 1 Pet. 1.10. nor look back, like Lot's wife, which for it was turned in∣to a Pillar of Salt; yet to be seen, saith Tertullian, to season such as fall. Now, you do nothing almost but fall, as being in dark∣ness, Isa. 50.10. now into the sin of pride, then of passion, then of luxurie; now ye are too jo∣vial, then too fantastical, in your gates, cloaths; now too light, then too melancholick; now ye talk too much, then too little; now ye sell too dear, then ye use false weight, or mix your wares bad with good, some of you: now ye are too strange, then too familiar, too wanton, some of ye; now as high as Lucifer for pride, then as low as Demas for world∣liness; for even in our time are Tertul. in Sodom. Carm. p. 646. Aug. in Ps. 77. p. 830.
many Demases. The world is now as it was formerly; there was none then, but there hath been, or is some one now that parallels him, and is, as it were, his revived self. But let a man get the Assurance of his salvati∣on; let him sun himself in the light of God's countenance; let him be crowned with the certain hope of glorie; let him be re∣fresh'd once with the over-flow∣ing streams of divine consolati∣ons: Let God's Spirit once speak peace to his spirit, and he will say; O, I would not be as I have been, nor do as I have done, no, not for a thousand worlds; I was proud, passionate, envious, lascivious, covetous, as others are, but I would not be so again, if one would give me all the wealth of England. Oh! how much swee∣ter is the assurance of my salva∣tion, than all the pleasures of sin
for a season; or thus, as Joseph said to his Mistress, being enticed by her, Gen. 39.9. My Master hath kept nothing from me, but thee, because thou art his Wife, How then can I do this great wickedness and sin against God? so saith he when he is enticed by sin; My Lord Jesus Christ hath kept nothing from me but his glory, which, he saith, he will give to none other; Isa. 42.8. He hath put such joy in my heart, such light into my mind, such assurance in∣to my soul, as that I am even ra∣vished with him in my soul; and therefore how can I commit this wickedness, and sin against my God? Oh! I will not do it for the whole world. 3. You will thereby enter Hea∣ven: this also follows by a con∣sequence from the ensuring of our calling and election; for, he that is sure of the one must needs
be sure of the other also, as I shewed From Rom. 8.29, 30. formerly. Now, what saith Peter? Give diligence to make your calling and election sure, 2 ch. 1.10. and then v. 11. For so an entrance shall be mini∣stred unto, abundantly into the e∣verlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, which words may be understood, not only of an entrance to be mini∣stred hereafter, but also ministred now, when we are made sure of Heaven, as Rom. 8.16. when we are saved by hope, when namely Jesus Christ is pleas'd to shine up∣on us with the light of his coun∣tenance, beaming into our hearts; Quae est luae, quae irradiat cor meum. Aug. in Med. when our hearts do leap for joy; when joy triumphs over sorrow; when sorrow is turned into sing∣ing; when rivers of comfort are shed and showred down from the Throne of Grace upon our souls; when our souls feed on
Ambrosian dainties, then are we entred into the Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, which then is in us, as well as a∣bove us, and consists in Righte∣ousness and peace, and joy in the Holy-Ghost, Rom. 14.17. and therefore if now as well as here∣after you would live as it were in Heaven, then get the Assurance of Heaven, then beg it, then seek after it, by the means shewn for it, and never be at rest, till ye be so blest; for then, oh the extati∣call leaps of your rejoycing hearts! oh the dancings of your gladded spirits! oh the gloryings of your ravshed souls! which then you will be able to tell of, saying; O what a Heaven did I feel in me, when my Beloved spake to me, and assured me that my poor soul should be saved undoubtedly! Oh, how sweet was that voice, that word, that
saying to my soul! O how was my soul then even heavened in God, embosomed in Christ, ex∣tatized in the Spirit, and eleva∣ted to the highest horizon of di∣vine consolation! To say no more, this entrance gotten by As∣surance is the sweetest, the deli∣ciousest, the pleasantest thing that ever beatified and warmed the heart of man upon earth; for a very Paradise it is, and a Heaven upon earth; wherein I now de∣sire to leave you upon earth, and therefore I do so press it, to make you press for it, that you may gain it; beseeching you by the mercies of God, that you will af∣ter all this, sadly and seriously consider all this, and remember the sad condition wherein you formerly lived, living in doubts; and that if you love your souls, you will now even heaven your selves upon earth, ensouling your
selves in God, sunning your selves in Christ, and emparadi∣sing your selves in that ever, and over-glorious Assurance of sal∣vation, which I have so urged by believing, and those other bles∣sed means which have been fore∣shewn; shewing your selves to be not hearers only, but doers also, and such doers as are ex∣citated by the Word, suscitated by the Spirit, animated with heat of zeal, elevated with height of hope, and even ready to soar up upon the wings of confidence, and joy, beyond that flaming hill where the stars are, and to enter that holy hill above, where ful∣ness of joy is unutterable, tran∣quility blessed, immortality im∣mortal, felicity to be enjoyed thorow all eternity. To God alone be all praise, laud, and glory.
Fifteen Soul-solacing CONFERENCES WITH CHRIST, Touching Sins and the World's Conquest by Faith: Making use of the joys of Heaven, and of Christ's sweetest Promises, Love, Death, Offices, Intercession, and overcoming the World, &c. According to the High and Noble Art of fighting the great fight of Faith, 1 Tim. 6.12. Fitted for all such gracious Souls, as do most heartily defire to see the death of their strong and mighty Corruptions, and a thorow Conquest of this vile and troublesom World. By Christopher Jelinger, M. A. LONDON, Printed in the year, 1664.
The first Conference: Tending to the right happy subduing of sin, by the Word of Promise, Mich. 7.19. Believer. Psal. 42.11. WHy art thou cast down O my soul? why art thou so disquieted within me? Soul. Disquieted within me, say ye? Nay, wonder that I am not even overwhelmed. Believ. What is the matter? Soul. Ah! sin, sin, Ps. 38.3, 4, 6. which is as an heavie burthen, even too hea∣vie for me to bear, it makes me grieve all the day long. Believ. I do not blame thee, O my soul, that thou art troub∣led,
& takest on for sin. For a Cor. 7.10. godly sorrow worketh repentance to sal∣vation, Possidon, in Vit. Aug. c. 27. attribuit haec verba Am∣br. not to be repented of: but thou grievest too much, as if thou wer'st without hope, whereas thou servest a good and a graci∣ous Lord, who pittieth them that are his, as a Psal. 103.12, 13. Father pittieth his children, and removes our trans∣gressions from us, as far as the East is from the West. Soul. I grant that God is very pittiful, but I doubt whether he will have mercy on me, because it is written Prov. 28.13. who so confesseth and forsaketh his sins shall have mercy: but I am as full of sin still as the ground is full of piles of grass, the sea-shore full of sands, and the Ocean full of drops of water, so that I cannot say that sin is forsaken, and therefore I can expect no mercy. Believ. No mercy? what doest thou then make of David, whose
words but now were cited? did he not commit both murther and adultery, and yet thou seest he doth not forsake his own mer∣cy, though he was not able quite to forsake his own sinful lusts. Soul. Will you compare your self with David, who though he did fall grievously, commiting murther and adultery, yet was not full of adultery, for he re∣pented of that sin, and of mur∣ther also, and after that ye do not read that he fell so again: but I, your poor soul am (as I said but now) full of sin; even sometimes full of envy, then of pride, then of lusts, and therefore I must needs be hopeless. Believ. Hopeless! I perceive O my Soul, that thou doest ut∣terly forget and bury in oblivion the sacred words, sweetest con∣solation. Soul. What consolation?
Believ. Tim. 1.15, 16. That Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, of whom Paul was chief, who yet obtained mercy. Soul. It should seem you will compare your self with Paul al∣so, who though he was bad be∣fore his conversion, yet was not so afterward, for he tells us, that he was even Gal. 6.14. crucified to the world, and the world crucified to him; but you are not so dead to the world, for you take plea∣sure, even too much pleasure and joy in the things of this world, and are oft times mightily trans∣ported with the world and the fashions of it, unto which ye do too much conform your self, in your diet, apparel, discourse; yea, and ye cannot deny, but ye are too eager in the pursuit of the profits and deceitful riches of this world, forgetting both what the first and best Christians did
before you, and what you ought to do after them, vilipending and despising all the worlds stately pomp, and fading glory, and therefore I am so perplexed. Believ. I do not equal my self with Paul, but only comfort thee, O my soul, with his example; for though I be not equally mortifi∣ed to this vile world with him, yet canst not thou deny, but I do truly endeavour to be cruci∣fied to the world, and I would have thee know that Paul was not an Angel neither, though an eminent Saint, but a sinner, both before and after his conversion; an impenitent sinner, I mean first, and a repentant sinner after; for therefore he saith in the fore∣quoted place, Christ came to save sinners, of whom I am chief: mark, I am, and not I have been, and again Rom. 7.15. that which I al∣low not I do: mark, do, and not I
have done, and ver. 24. 'O wretch∣ed man that I am, Note again, I am, and not I have been, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Mark, shall deliver me, and not hath delivered me, though that be a truth too, that he was in a great measure morti∣fied, and partly delivered alrea∣dy; and therefore be not dis∣heartned, O my Soul, for though Paul was transcendently more crucified to the world than I, yet was he pestred and troubled with a world of sin, which he calls the body of death, as well as I; and his only hope and trust was in Je∣sus Christ, that he would deliver him at last, for so he saith, I thank God through Jesus Christ, as if he should say, and would you know what I mean to do in this heavy case? then I must tell you, that I will collocate and place my sole and whole trust
and affiance in the Lord Christ, who as he hath delivered me in part, so doubtless will deliver me yet more and more, & there∣fore as being certain of it that he will do it, I thank God for it thorow Christ who will do it, as if he had done it already, and this same course thou also must take, O my soul, and therefore hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him who is the health of my countenance and my God. Soul. But why is not that world∣liness, which I objected but now, as discovering it self so, by ea∣gerness after and delightfulness in the things of this world, with its fashions, at least more subdu∣ed yet (all this while) than it is? Believ. Doest thou wonder at that, O my soul? then consider, 1. What a multitude of enemies do continually assault me, I mean Satanical suggestions, the
worlds enchanting provocations, and the fleshes own insurrections most mighty and most frequent, which maketh me even wonder how a poor soul can overcome such a world in any measure; for who would not rather admire a little Ship, if fighting with many great & well mann'd Turkish Gal∣leys, it should escape though her mast and all the higher part of it should be beaten off down to the water, and many men slain in her, than enquire why it should be so spoiled, debilitated and weak∣ned? which is just thy case, O my soul; for thou hast fought with many great and pestilent e∣nemies, like a little Ship, and yet didst so far escape, as that they could not totally nor finally pre∣vail against thee, though it can∣not be denied, but that they have wasted and spoiled, and hurt thee much, and killed ma∣ny
good motions, and therefore I say, that even this is a thing to be wondred at. 2. Besides, God hath his time for every thing, a time for tryal and a time for help, and to sub∣due the world in a greater mea∣sure, as he will, and therefore Psal. 42.11. for the He∣brew is  expecta. wait thou upon God. 3. Again, it may be that the means were not so industriously used, whereby the world may be subdued, even the vision and application of Faith, and there∣fore let us amend this fault, and then I hope all will be well. Soul. You say well, and there∣fore up and be doing. Christ. What manner of com∣munications be these, which you have, being so Luk. 24.1, 18, 19. sad? Believ. Concerning sin which my soul is troubled for, and would be delivered from. Christ. Art thou. willing in∣deed,
O Christian Soul, to part with any sinful pleasure, profit, honour, and with life it self for my sake? Soul. Joh. 21.17. Thou Lord knowest all things, thou knowest that I de∣sire it, and would not willingly live or lie in the practise of any Psal. 119. one known sin. Christ. Luk, 24.25. O foolish soul then, and slow to believe all that the Prophets have spoken; did dest thou never read what is written, Mich. 7.19, 20. he will have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins in the depth of the sea? Mark, he will not only have compassion, par∣doning iniquity, and passing by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage, but also subdue your iniquities, that is, he will For the original is  subjugabit vi ac violentia capiet. subjugate and bring under the yoke, as it were, * all your sins, so as that, like yoked oxen you
shall be able to rule them, though in themselves they be never so unruly, and he will even offer and infer violence unto your na∣ture, so as that your sinful lusts, desires, and affections shall be e∣ven captivated in such a manner, as that they shall not be able to range and to rage so freely as they did: and therefore trust in God, O thou Christian Soul, who is the health of thy countenance, and thy God, who can, and will help thee and deliver thee at last most happily out of all thy mi∣sery. Soul. Blessed be thou, sweet Jesus, dear Saviour, who thus art pleased to comfort me; and praised be thy holy name, in the which I sweetly repose my trust, for I know thee what thou art, The Holy one of Israel, the mighty God, the Prince of peace, the God of comfort, even Im∣manuel,
God with us, who by this sweet and precious promise art fast bound to perform in me, what thou hast here promised un∣to me, and therefore, Lord, do un∣to me as thou canst, and then I shall be able to forsake sin as I would, I humbly beseech thee; yea, I do even assure my self, that as thou canst, so thou wilt, be∣cause thou art the Joh. 14.6. truth it self, and therefore I say, Mich. 7.19, 20. thou Lord wilt cast all my sins in the depth of the Sea of thy mercy, and suffocate them in thy precious blood, as the Egyptians were drowned in the Red-sea; and wilt subdue them, as they were subdued, that they may not rule over me, as they did, when I lived in Egypt, the house of bon∣dage, in the state of my unrege∣neracy; I mean, O Lord, Lord, I believe that thou wilt perform thy truth to me, as well as to
Jacob, and thy mercy as to Abra∣ham, which thou hast sworn from the daies of old, as thou art God from everlasting. Christ. I see thou wilt hold me to my word, like Jacob, and the truth is, that being the truth, I cannot go from them, nor deny them, and therefore Mat. 15.2. be it to thee as thou wilt. Believ. Amen, Lord Jesus. The second Conference: Wherein Faith makes use of the Promise of Heaven, and threat∣ning of Hell against sin. BEliev. Seest thou not, O my Soul, these snares, which Sa∣tan that cunning fowler hath laid for thee, to illaqueate and to catch thee? Soul. What snares? Believ. Snares of covetousness,
in the goods of this world, snares of voluptuousness in eating, drinking, marrying; snares of pride, in praying, preaching, dis∣coursing, Alms-giving, snares in sleeping, snares in waking, and in every other thing. Soul. I see them, I see them, but what must I do to escape them? Believ. Looking beyond them with the eie of Faith upon the word of truth in general, and ap∣plying the Word of Promise in special. Soul. But that is very large, and therefore how can I see it all, or appropriate it, when I am suddenly assaulted. Believ. nor is it necessary that one do make use of all at once, and therefore at this time chuse but one threatning, and one pro∣mise; for instance, Rom. 8.13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die,
but if ye thorow the spirit do mor∣tifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live; and then imagine 3 several habitations, a high, a low, a mid∣dle, the high is the House of God called Heaven, the low Hell, the middle this world; the two ex∣treams are quite contrary one to the other, but the middle is some∣what like to both; for in it is light and darkness, heat and cold, sickness and health, sadness and gladness, hatred and love, good and bad, just and unjust, Lords and servants, rule and subjecti∣on, death and life, whereof one part doth emblematize Heaven, the other Hell; for in this world there is a mixture of good and bad, but in Heaven are none bad, but all good, in Hell none good but all bad; and of the men of the world some are ele∣vated and lifted up on high into Heaven, others are drawn and
thrown down into Hell, for like and like are to be joined, good with good, bad with bad, just men with just Angels, and trans∣gressing men with Angels trans∣gressing; the servants of God with God; the servants of Sa∣tan with Satan: Think on this O my soul, when thou seest Sa∣tans snares before thee, and be∣lieve verily, that as living in the world thou seest the image and similitude both of Heaven and Hell before thee, even light and darkness, life and death; so they which live after the flesh, fulfil∣ling the lusts and doing the works of the flesh shall never inherit the Kingdom of God, and that they which mortify and over∣come them shall certainly be em∣paradised, & translated into that highest habitation and 2 Cor. 5.1. house e∣ternal in the Heavens; where there is light without darkness,
health without sickness, gladness without sadness, love without hatred, good and just inhabitants only, and none bad, satiety and fulness even of joy and pleasures without famine, and life with∣out death, even life for ever∣more; Doest thou believe this, O my soul? Soul. I do believe it. Believ. Then consider whether thou oughtest not to avoid all the foresaid snares; mortifying the flesh, with all the lusts and affections therefore, that thou maiest live and not die for ever. Soul. So I will by Gods help. But you said that I must apply also the word of promise in spe∣cial, what do ye mean by that? Believ. Thou must assure thy self, that thou in particular shalt live forever, and be Angelized in case thou subdue and morti∣fie thy corrupt nature, and resist
Satans tyranny; look up there∣fore, O my Soul, and possess thy self, as it were of Heaven by faith, and thou shalt easily over∣come the earth. Soul, I do now understand you; & therefore I lift up my self as well as I am able, and behol∣ding, as it were, the place ordai∣ned and prepared for me; I sa∣lute it as the Patriarchs saluted Hebr. 11.13. the promises, when by faith they saw them, saying; O Jeru∣salem, Jerusalem, whose Revel. 21.21 streets are of gold, and gates of pearls, how pleasant and how beautiful art thou? Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God, for in thee there is nothing but light, and joy, and bliss, and blessedness, and sweetness, and comfort, and peace, and life, even life vital, life beatifical, life immortal, life eternal without spot, without dolor, without Anx∣ity,
without corruption, change or perturbation, O sweet, O quiet, O blessed life! O life of lives! O life angelical! O thee also, O new & Heavenly Jerusalem, there is no adversary to oppose; no sin, to Intice; no fear, but love▪ no Night but only day; no Sun but instead of it the Son of God him∣self, the Son of righteousness, bles∣sed for ever. And therefore fare∣wel all earthly Pleasures, Profits, Honours. For they be but as dung and dirt, and shadows, and dreams in comparison of that Hebr. 10.34: induring substance, & that 2 Corinth. 4.17. Psal. 16.11: et ernal weight of glory, and those surpassing pleasures which are of the right hand of God for evermore. The third Conference like the former. The 3. Solil∣quie. BEliev. I perceive that now thou art quite chang'd, O my
Soul; For whereas in forme times thou hast been much dis∣quieted, now thou art very calm and quiet, or rather secure. Soul. So I am. Believ. How comes this to pass? Soul. I have felt so much com∣fort lately, as that upon it I did even joy too much, and promi∣sed my self too much peace and tranquility, which caused me to seek out for humane Consolati∣ons, and Contentments, at last; as being too inordinately disi∣rous to live comfortably still, whereas I should rather have fit∣ted my self for new Quouiam transibit hora illa & sequetur tentati. Tho. a Kempis de imit. Chri∣fli. l. 2. c. 9. tempta∣tions; this, as now I see, is the cause of my security. Believ. So it is, and therefore rowze up thy self, O my Soul, and look about thee. For nei∣ther Satan is asleep, nor the flesh quite dead; but both are com∣ing on with renewed strength, and
therefore we must resist them by faith. Soul. How by faith? Believ. In this case of securi∣ty, I see no fitter weapon to be used by faith, than the sight and serious consideration of hellish torments, compared with Hea∣venly joyes, that so being afraid of the one, and inflamed with a desire of the other, thou mayest resist Satan, and avoid sin, unto which now thou art more prone than thou hast been in times past; for security brings Licencious∣ness, and much imbecility. Soul. I like this well, and therefore make choice of one apt Subject or other whereon I may now muse and meditate. Believ. Me thinks that fearful place in Matth. 24.51. against Hypocrites, whose portion shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, will in this thy case be very sea∣sonable.
Soul. So it will be, for one may well suspect himself to be but an Hypocrite when he is so secure; as I am now, being apt to yeild to any temptation. Believ. Mark then, O my Soul, the two Principal punish∣ments of Hell here: in extin∣guible heat, and intollerable cold, for of Aug. de Tripl. habit. l. c. 2. heat comes weep∣ing, of cold gnashing of teeth, whence result innumerous sorts of punishments to be endured in that siery lake, even intollerable thirst, the punishment of hunger, the punishment of horror, the punishment of fear, the punish∣ment of anguish; add dolor with∣out remedies, bonds without any solution, vengeance without end; all which grievous Punishments do accompany the two foresaid principles, with whom compare, O my Soul, the joyes of Heaven, and whatsoever▪ accompanies
them, considering how in that blissful place there is so such weeping, and gnashing of teeth, but fulness of. light and peace, and charity, and joy, and glory, and sweetness, and melody, and Ʋbi nulla molestia inqui∣etat sed peren∣nis laetitia regnat. Le de Confl. vit. & Virt. fo. 115. Perenna beatitude, and of eve∣ry ineffable good thing, which neither can be uttered, nor ever entered into the heart of man, 1 Cor. 2.9. whereas Hell is all full of whatsoever is contrary to such blessedness. Again consi∣der how there are none but holy and just Citizens both men and Angels, whose King is God all powerful; whereas in Hell the Ci∣tizens are evil men and Angels, whose Prince is the chief of De∣vils: Moreover, in Heaven the just are satiated and filled with the vision of Saints and Angels, and Rev. 21.21, 2. streets of Gold, and gates of Pearls and Diadems of glory, and light unapproachable, and of
Jehovah's face it self above all, blessed for ever; whereas in Hell the damned are and shall be cru∣ciated with the sight of damned men, and Spirits, and of the De∣vil himself the Prince of Hell. Yea, consider, how there is no∣thing that may be desired but will be found there: whereas in Hell there is not to be found so much as a drop of water to cool ones tongue in that merciless flame, Luke 16.24. In a word, there is nothing to be found in Heaven, but what may oblect and please; whereas in that in∣fernal pit, there is nothing else but whatsoever may vex, grieve, displease, terrifie, offend, sting, tear, disquiet, molest, afflict, and that for ever and ever, for their worm dieth not, and their fire shall not be quenched, Mark 9. where the same punishment is twice mentioned by Christ him∣self,
v. 44. 46. because men had need be put in mind of it much and often: and therefore think on both these contrary habitati∣ons seriously, O my soul, and compare them exactly, and see what cause thou hast to avoid sin and Satan, that thou mayest not be cast into that fearful lake, but rather transported in the arms of Angels into Abrahams bosome, where there is only rest and no labour, ease and no trouble, tran∣quility and no hostility, comfort and no discomfort, triumphing and no fighting, rejoycing and no crying, for the former things will be all passed away, Revel. 21.4. Soul. O the good which you have done unto me, carrying me both into Hell and Heaven with such seasonable considerations, that I might see, as it were, both places; for now I do even nau∣seat
seat and loath the worlds most delicious pleasures, and richest treasures, and stateliest pomp, nor do I fear much the most sting∣ingst crosses and troubles, that may befall me in this world; I see Hell is more grievous than a∣ny torment, yea, all torments, if they were all put together; and that the profits and pleasures of this world, though never so great and delectable, cannot do me so much good, and bring me so much content, and satisfaction, as the punishments of Hell, which one shall incur, if he yield to sin and Satan will do hurt, and pro∣duce discontent, anguish, tor∣ment, and vexation for ever and ever to endure, I see likewise that there is more passing joy, pleasure, delight, comfort, and glory to be found in Heaven, than in any fools Paradise upon earth, I mean in any dainty fare
love of women, fine cloaths, mens applause, abundance of wealth, flowing in with the confluence of all earthly happiness; for there I see are pleasures without dis∣pleasure, dignity without fear, honour without envy, riches with∣out loss, abundance without a∣ny defects, prosperity without adversity, and eternity without vanity; yea, there is nothing but perfect love, perfect joy, perfect peace, Those that have imagi∣ned the earth to turn about, and the hea∣vens to stand still, have yet supposed that we may stand or fit still, on that whirling globe of earth: how much more may we be perswaded of our perfect rest above those moving sphears? Ha in his 13. Oc∣cas. Med. perfect rest: whereas here is all imperfect, in a word, there is no other voice to be heard but of triumphers and fingers, singing the sweet songs of Sion, and of harpers having the harps of God, Rev. 15.2. And O that I might be so happy as to hear some of those sweet songs that are sung to the honour of the blessed trinity by those heavenly Quiristers. Well, I hope that in Gods good time I shall not only hear them, being
taken up among them, upon the desolution of this my tabernacle the body, but also shall sing with them the sweet songs of Zion to the Lord Jesus Christ, my dear love, and sweet Saviour, who was slain for me, and redeemed me with his blood, Rev. 5.9. Therefore farewel all the Quapropter recedat amr praesentis saecu∣li, in qu nul∣lus ita nasci∣tur at non mo∣riatur, & suc∣cedat amor fu∣turt saeculi, in quo sic omnes vivificantur, t deinceps non moriantur, &c. Leo de. Cons. Vit. & Virt. mihi, o. 115. world, farewel pleasures, I am for him who hath provided for me more delicious and lasting pleasures, even for evermore, Psal. 16.11. farewel profits that may be sin∣ful, I am for him who hath pro∣mifed me in Heaven a better and an induring substance, Heb. 10.34. farewel all vain and glittering glory of this world, for I am for another world, where there is ordained for me a far more ex∣ceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. and where the glorious body of my dear love Christ shines with unconceivable
splendor above the brightness of the Sun for ever and ever. The fourth Conference. Wherein faith maketh use of the Word of Promise, touching the enjoying of God, and of the sacred words extenuation of all wordly things. BEliev. Why doest thou trou∣ble thy self so about the things of this life, O my Soul? knowest thou not that all is Vani∣ty? Pleasures Vanity? Riches Vanity? Honours Vanity? Soul. You do well, that you mind me of it. For I am apt to forget it▪ but what if this con∣sideration do not, nor can take me off from the love of those vain things, what shall I do then? Believ. Then elevate thy self
by faith, from visibles and flie hence like an Eagle, and cease not to mount us higher and high∣er still, till thou come to the in∣visible God, who only can, must and will satiate thine (else) un∣satisfiable desire, and ensoul thy self, as it were, in God, who is only good, and in whom are all goods; O my Soul, excite thy self and lift up all thy understan∣ding, and consider as much as thou art able, what, & how great that good is, which is God: as for instance; all good things are delectable: consider intensively, how pleasant that good must needs be, which comprizeth the jucundity, and pleasantness of all things. Again, if that life, which is created, is so good, how good is then the life creating? if Salvation wrought be sweet; how sweet and delicious is Sal∣vation it self, which worketh
all Salvation? if wisdome be a∣miable, when we do but think on things created, how amiable is that wisdom which produced all things of nothing? Lastly if many and great delights be in things delectable, and pleasant, what, and how much delectation must needs be in him, who made all things so delightful? And therefore why doest thou range so here, and there, O my Soul, to find out what may do thee good, among things created, which can∣not satisfie thee? possess thy self of God, in whom is every good thing, and let him fill thee, de∣sire that which is only good, and then thou shalt have enough, and desire no more; for in that good, which is God, thou shalt find far greater joy, greater delight, grea∣ter profit, greater glory, than all the world can possibly yeild thee.
Soul. I do not only believe it, that I shall find it so; but I do partly find it already, and there∣fore, O my sweet and gracious God, who art only good, turn thou all sinful joy and carnal pleasure into gall and betterness in me, that nothing may be so sweet, dear, pleasant, and amia∣ble unto me, as my Lord and my God, who art sweetness, pleasant∣ness, and amiableness it self, and be thou my joy, who hast also promised to be my reward, I humbly pray thee. The fifth Conference. Wherein Christ's aid is implored against Satans temptations, in a time of desertion. BEliev. I perceive, O my Soul, that thou canst not be long quiet; for thou beginnest to be as turbulent as ever thou hast been.
Soul. So I am, and I cannot be otherwise disposed now. Believ. Why so? Soul. Because, he that should comfort and sustain me is far from me, and the tempter, whom I wish farther off, is nigh me, & raises such storms against me, as that I know not what to do, that he may not sink me. For I am like that little ship, Matth. 8.24. covered with the impetuous waves of his tempestuous, and grievious temptations beating upon me, without any cessation, or intermission. Believ. Let not, this dismay thee, O my Soul, for thus Christ is wont to trie his best Nunquam in veni ali∣quem tam re∣ligiosum & devotum, qui non habuerit interdum gra∣tiae subtractio∣nem. Tho. a Kempis de imit. Chr. l. 2. c. 9. beloved Soldiers, withdrawing himself from them, for a season, that they may both see what need they have of him, and what they are without him, even Ʋnde fit il∣lud quod cogi∣tationes bonae & carae Deo placentes men∣tem veluti de∣ficiant. Basil. in Reg. brev. inter∣rog. 80. barren, dead, and dull, unable to do any thing,
and that they may likewise seek him the more thirstingly, who seeks them even by such deserti∣ons most lovingly; and therefore, wrestle thou with him, O my Soul, this being not a Gregor. Mo∣ral. l. 5. c. 4. sign of reprobation but only of probati∣on; thy beloved hath sufferd thee a great while, suffer thou also, and sustain thy beloved, and withall seek him. Soul. O sweet love, dear Savi∣our, where art thou that thou ab∣sentest thy self so long from me? when wilt thou return again un∣to me? O my Lord, and my God, Bern. Serm. 54. carest, thou not that I perish? Lo, Satan that grand adversary of mine seeketh to sink me in a Mark. 8.38. sea of misery, O save me for thy names sake. In mari tur∣bulente versa∣mur, &c, Aug. Saliloq. c. 35. Christ. Why art thou so fear∣ful, O thou Christian Soul, ha∣ving but little faith, Mat. 8.26. Believe only that I can, and will
save thee, and all will be well with thee, for all things are possi∣ble unto him that believeth, Mar. 9.23. Soul. I believe Lord, help thou mine unbelief. Christ. Then be safe, and let Satan cease to make a noise and raise tempests, Ma. 54.11. that this poor soul tossed with tempests may be cal∣med, and sweetly comforted. Soul. Oh the ease! and oh the peace and joy that I feel and find in thee and by thee, sweet Savi∣our! o what a mighty Christ is this my Christ, that even Satan that strong man himself must and doth obey him! The sixth Conference: Wherein use is made of Christ's incarnation by faith against sin. BEliev. how dost thou now, O my Soul?
Soul. I should do well enough were it not for sin that abomi∣nable thing. Believ. We may not expect an absolute perfection here, sin will ever Heb. 12.1. cleave even to God's dear∣est children, as long as they live, and therefore let not that dis∣may thee. Soul. If one did not give way to it, it would not trouble me so, but now I cannot but be trou∣bled, and much perplexed, being conscious of too much yielding∣ness and complying. Believ. Though this be an hea∣vy case, yet pray and trust in God, O my soul, who will not therefore withdraw his mercies from thee, nor forsake thee, but rather assist thee for after times, so that sin which is such a grie∣vous burden unto thee, shall be diminished & demolished in thee more and more, that it may not
reign over thee, Rom, 6.14. Soul. I fear that I have even so wearied God with sin that he will not hear me, though I should make never so many prayers, be∣cause I am so full of sin, for so it is written, Isa. 1.15. When you make many prayers, yet I'le not hear you, your hands are full of blood. Believ. What a strange com∣plaint is this that I hear! where is thy faith, O my Christian soul, that thou makest such a fearful conclusion? God speaks there a∣gainst irrepentant sinners, who lay nothing to heart, and revolt more and more, v. 3.5. but thou on the contrary art not only sen∣sible of fin, and the danger of it, but also strivest against it more and more, and therefore that place concerns not thee; so as that thou may est boldly come to the Throne of grace in the time
of need, Si forte ex humana infir∣mitate labi∣mur non ideo desperemus, sed iterum recur∣ramus ad cle∣mentem medi∣cum, &c. Bern. in Scala pa∣rad. c. 12. notwithstanding thi thy sad condition, Heb. 4.16. Soul. Do you say so? the I'le adventure it again, and say with the good Mat. 15.22, 23, 24, 25, 26. woman of Cana∣an, have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David, for I am grie∣vously vexed with the Devil. Christ. I am not sent to be a Saviour, but to those that obey me, who also may only expect salvation, Heb. 5.9. but thou hast been disobedient and rebellious against me. Soul. Yet Lord help me. Christ. It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to dogs. Soul. Truth Lord, yet the dogs eat of the erumbs which fall from their masters table, therefore if I may not obtain so much mercy and grace as others, who have been more obedient and dutiful than I, who am like a dog retur∣ning
to his vomit, in that I have recommitted so many sins, which I should have omitted, yet let me find but some crumbs of mercy, crumbs are not denyed to dogs; and that I may not be such a dog, returning to my former disobe∣dience, help me, I pray thee, and save me from sin, for therefore thou camest into the world, that thou mayest save sinners, of whom I a poor sinful soul am chief. Christ. O dear Soul, great is thy Faith, be it unto thee even as thou wilt. Soul. Oh the comfort! and oh the quietness, and tranquility, which I find in thee and by thee, sweet Saviour! for now I am per∣swaded, that neither Satan nor sin shall prevail against me, to separate me from my dear love Christ, who saves me from evils past, fuscitates and raises me from the present, and fortifieth me a∣gainst
those which are to come. O Lord Jesus, if thou didst not thus preserve me, there is no sin in the world which I might not, commit against thee; for I know that there is no evil perpetrated and done by any man, which may not also be acted by another man, if the Creator be wanting who made man. But now thou hast done that for me, which hath kept me that I might not do what I would have done against thee; and that I might abstain, thou didest prohi∣bit me; and that I might believe, thou didst infuse grace into me; unto thee therefore be all honour and glory.
The seventh Conference: Wherein the troubled believing Soul maketh use of Christ's death, to work the death of sin, and promises to be more thankefull. BEliev. How is it with thee now, O my soul? Soul. Not very well. Believ. Not well? Soul. No. Believ. Why so? Soul. I am not so well com∣forted as I have been in times past, and sin begins to gather strength, and I am not able to master it, as I do desire. Believ. It may be thou hast drawn this misery upon thy self by not being Tho. à Kem pis de Imit. Chr. l. 2. c. 10. thankful enough for mercies & comforts formerly distilled upon thee, or by some
secret pride, which if it be so, the cause must be first removed, then Faith must be rightly used, and all will be well. Soul. You have spoken as right as may be, I am such an unthank∣ful creature, and so high spirited by nature, and therefore it is just with God to bereave me both of comforts and strength to resist the common Adversary, who go∣eth, and goeth continually, seek∣ing whom he may davour, 1 Pet. 5.8. and whom by no other means I shall be able to resist, but only by Faith; and therefore I promise both to be more grate∣ful, for the future by God's help, and also more humble and lowly denying my self in all things, and aforibing all honour and glory unto him, of whom are all things, yea, Sileat sibi & ipsa anima & transeat se mon cogitndo se, sed de te Deus mous,  &c. Aug. Man, c. 12. passing by my self, so in my thoughts as that I may not think of my self but of God, who is
my only hope and confidence; and that I may overcome for the future both sin and Satan, who is the Author of sin; I'le, by the grace of God, set faith a work, & eye especially the bitter Nullum tam potens est tam efficax contra ardorem libi∣dinis medica∣mentum, quam mors redemp∣toris mei. Id. cap. 23. death & passion of my dear Saviour, who loved me and gave himself for me, that he might mundify me, & redeem me from Tit. 2.14. all iniquity, perswading my self, that I shall be delivered in his own good time even from these sinful lusts and passions, which now do so molest me; yea, I'le also call upon him even now forthwith, desiring his heavenly highness, that he will by the power of his death work the death of my sins, and free me from Satans power and ty∣ranny. Believ. Well said, this is the course thou must take, O my soul, and therefore call thou up∣on the Lord in this time of need,
for he hath said, Call upon me in the day of trouble, I'le deliver thee, and thou shalt glorifie me, Psal. 50.15. Mark this golden sentence, O my soul, for here is both a Precept for thee, to bind thee, and a promise to assure thee, the Precept is call upon me, yea, Clama. cry unto me and spare not, as if thou durst not speak, being afraid, but rather lift up thy voice and cry aloud, as being commanded to be so bold; the Promise is, and I will deliver thee, or I'le loose thee from thy bonds, for so much the original imports, even a solution from bonds; for troubles are as bonds, and so are sins, and thou shalt glo∣rify me; note how the Lord doth here promise not only to free thee from troubles, but also to cause thee to glorify him, being freed out of troubles, as which of thy self thou canst not do, though
but even now thou didst promise and vow to do it. Soul. Are not these thy words, O my Lord, my God, who must help me? didst not thou dictate them into David's pen, and leave them recorded in thy book, even for me, to excite and to secure me? Lo, I am in trouble, O Lord, being fast bound and capti∣vated, as it were, of sin, Rom. 7.23. and I cannot unite my self, of my self; but thou canst, who art omnipotency it self, and therefore I call even to thee, to help me. For thou hast said, call upon me in the day of trou∣ble, and I assure my self that thou wilt not leave me, because thou hast promised me, that thou wilt deliver me, saying, I will deliver, or loose thee. Loose me therefore, O thou, who art most free, and unbounded and yet bound to free me, having
bound thy self by a promise, to succor me, O let not sin, let not Satan keep me bound, whom thou Lord Jesus hast redeemed by thy precious blood, but free me, O free me, by thy power, from the power of the one, and tyranny of the other, that I may freely serve thee; being comforted in thee. Yea, Lord, when thou hast enlar∣ged me, then enable me also and cause me to glory fie thee. For thou hast promised that also un∣to me, saying, and thou shalt glory fie me, taking that saying to be a promise, as well as a pre∣cept. For else if thou shouldst but command me that I must glo∣ry fie thee, and shouldst not also cause me to do what thou com∣mandest, I should never be able to do what I ought, and so con∣sequently thou shouldest never have the glory, which is due to thy holy name. And therefore
blessed be thy holy name, O my God, and Saviour, who in one word hast both injoyned, and promised me that I shall glorifie thee. O inexhaustible Fountain of all grace and glory, cause me therefore to glorifie thee, and to be grateful unto thee, for every mercy that I do or shall receive of thee, and suffer me not to for∣get either it, or my self, and to seek my self and mine own glory in any thing I do, or shall do for thee, I humbly and ardently be∣seech thee. The eighth Conference. Wherein the believing Soul maketh use of Christs overcoming of the world against the world. BEliev. O Lord my God, who, being the eternal Son of the eternal God, hast given thy self
for me, to deliver me, a servant, and wast made man, that I, a man, might be made a child of God, being free from sin, which dwells in every man, Ro. 7.20. (thee, God and man, exempted) who art only without sin, Heb. 4.15. Yea, didst therefore over∣come it in thee, who art God and man, John. 16.33. deliver me, I pray thee, from sin, even from this Luciferian pride, feral passion, and this Soul-wasting envy, and self destroying self∣love, and from this evil cove∣tousness, and from these unruly lusts. Christ. Dost thou not believe that I am able to do it? Mat. 9.28, 29. Believ. Yea, Lord, Christ. Then according to thy faith be it unto thee; Believ. O my most sweet and blessed Saviour, how great is thy mercy! For when I silly wretch
did but call, thou didst hear me by and by, and when I was in fight, thou didst corrobrate me, and when I was ready to sink, thou didst support and sustain me, and when I did even despair in my self, thou didst lift me up above my self. Blessed be thy holy name for thy great and un∣speakable mercy. The ninth Conference. Wherein the believing Soul maketh use of the love of Christ a∣gainst sin. SOul. O thou Heavenly fire, which alwaies shinest, and O my dear love, which alwaies bur∣nest, shine I pray thee from Hea∣ven into me, and inflame me with thy great love, so as that nothing in this world may be so dear un∣to me, as thou my dear Saviour,
yea, let the world it self be as dead unto me, as it was to thy servant Paul, who now liveth and shines with thee in glory, Gal. 6.14. and do thou, which art life it self, live in me as thou livest in him, that I also may live in thee with him, Gal. 2.20. Christ. Cant. 2.14. O my dove, thou art thus in the clefts of the Rock, e∣ven in me, who am thy Rock, and desirest nothing more than me; be of good cheer, for thou shalt both love me more than e∣ver thou didst, and I'le express my love toward thee more than ever I did, and I will so stupi∣fie thy senses within thee, as that the world shall be as crucified un∣to thee, and I'le even live in thee, and work mightily by thee, Col. 1.29. and thou shalt live in me, and with me here and hereafter eternally, John 6.56. Soul. O how sweet, how ra∣vishing,
and how comfortable are these words which I hear, sweet Jesus! more to be desired are they than Gold, yea, than much fine gold, sweeter also than the honey and the honey-comb, Psal. 19.10. for, by them thy ser∣vant is now assured, that the world shall be subdued in me, & that thou also thy self, my most glorious Redeemer, wilt be my exceeding great and all-sufficient reward, living in me and with me now and eternally: O that this love and good affection, which thou, O my Love, hast diffused in me, might now be like that holy fire, which in the time of the Law was to burn alwaies, and never to go out upon thine Altar, and that no waters of affliction might quench it, and that no flouds of Satannical temptations drown it, Cant. 8.7. O do thou, who art Love it self, alwaies pre∣serve
it, that it may ever burn and never go out, I humbly ob∣secrate and pray thee. The tenth Conference. Wherein the believing Soul mak∣eth use of Christs intercession. BEliev. O my Soul, as thou hast done in times past, so cease not now to invocate thy dear Saviour, that he will save thee more and more foom thy sins. For he is thy Lord, and therefore worship thou him, Psal. 45.11. Soul. So I will by Gods help, O most fair, Psal. 45.2. Most holy, most gracious, most mer∣ciful Saviour, intercede for me, that I may be kept from this e∣vil world, Rom. 8.34. Christ. I have prayed for thee, John 17.25. and I even
ever live to make intercession for thee, Hebr. 7.25. wherefore doubt not, but assure thy self for certain, that thou shalt be kept from the evil which thou fearest, and overcome the world which thou hatest; for he that is my Fa∣ther and my God, is also thy Fa∣ther and thy God, John 20.17. and I know that he heareth me alwaies, John 11.42. and there fore hath heard me in this thing also, that I have prayed for, when I desired him to keep thee from the evil, John 17.15. Soul. I doubt not but God thy Father and my Father hath heard thee interceding for me, and me praying for my self for thy sake, and will hear me, for thou hast said, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it unto you, John 16.23. O sweet name! how pleasant? how de∣lectable? how amiable? and how
prevalent therefore must thou needs be in the mouth of him that prayeth, and in the ears of him that heareth such prayers, as are so sweetned with thy sweet savour, as with oint∣ment poured forth? Cant. 1.3. O blessed be thy sweet & holy name, sweet Jesus, in the which thou causest me to trust by this thy sweet and precious pro∣mise. The eleventh Conference. Wherein the troubled believing Soul maketh use of Christ's Prophetical Office. BEliev. It should seem that thou art not yet, nor canst be altogether quiet. Soul. Quiet? No, No, as long as I have this body of sin about me, I do not look for it.
Believ. But yet thou must not be so much disquieted and de∣jected. Soul. Dejected? how can I chuse, seeing that God is still so much by me offended? Believ. But this is not the way to peace which thou goest. Soul. Which way then would you have me to go? Believ. That way which is the best way. Soul. The best way? which is the best way? Believ. Christ who hath said of himself, that he is the way it self, John 14.6. Soul. You say true, and I had almost forgotten my self, forget∣ting the way it self, and pleasing my self with grief and sorrow for my sins, which though it be good and laudable when it is mode∣rate and seasonable, leading the pensive and perplexed sinner to
Christ, yet is it not sufficient, or a∣vailable when it goeth alone, and is separated from Christ; for he it is who must perfume & swee∣ten all such tears and sorrows as shall be unto God acceptable; he must free us also from sin, with∣out which freedom no grief for sins past can be profitable. Believ. Then go to Christ, O my soul, having been estranged from him, by reason of sin, which caused thee to absent thy self from him being so dejected, and to count thy self unworthy of him, being so polluted. Soul. So I will by Gods help, only advise me what I shall say unto him, when I come before him. Believ. Urge him upon his pro∣phetical Office, by vertue where∣of he is bound to turn thee from iniquities, Act. 3.26. Soul. O thou great Prophet,
and heavenly Doctor, who, being come from Joh. 3.2. God, God of God, light of light, teachest what no o∣ther Rabby can teach, & canst do what no man else can do, even turn men from their iniquities; O turn me also from mine ini∣quities, and save me from my sins; and let not so many lessons thought by thy Servants, who are but men, be lost in me, that look beyond them unto thee, who art both God and man, ordained by God to turn man from sin, which is the greatest folly, he being the greatest and wisest Doctor, yea, Wisdom it self. Christ. I perceive, O Christian soul, that needs thou wilt be taught of God, without whose teaching the Doctrines and in∣structions of men are all in vain; Cor. 3.7. and I see that thou groundest thy request upon a sure and everlast∣ing Rock, even upon the Word
of truth 1 Pet. 1.23. which abideth for ever, and cannot be denied; and there∣fore, as I have said, that he who cometh unto me shall in no wise be cast out, John 6.37. So be sure that I will not reject thee, nei∣ther, who so comest unto me to Mat. 11.29. learn of me, who am sent to Deut. 18.15. turn thee from thine iniquities more and more, that they may not have dominion over thee. Soul. I am perswaded, that thou wilt do even as thou hast said, Lord Jesus; for it's impos∣sible that God should lie. Heb. 6.18. and therefore I will even rest on thee, and put my whole trust and affiance in thee, for my turning from mine iniquities, casting away all self confidence, and self-relying on an arm of flesh; for, in vain is the help of man without thee, who madest man, and causest me also at this time Ps. 119.49. to trust in thee, and to dis∣claim Acts 3.26.
all power and abilitie in man to save, and to Jer. 31.1 turn himself or any other man. The Twelfth Conference. Wherein the believing soul makes use of Christ's Kingly Office against sin. BEliev. O King of Kings and Lord of Lords, I that am most poor, come to thee that art most rich  I, being most miserable, come to thee that art most mer∣ciful; being most weak, to thee that art most strong; and being most sinful, to thee that art most holy and good, desiring thee, that of thine infinite mercie thou wilt deliver me out of my mise∣ry, and according to thy power, subdue the strength and potency of Satans tyranny; and accord∣ing to the vertue of thy Kingly
Office, wilt debilitate & weaken the force and power of sin, that it may not reign. Christ. Dost thou believe that I am such a King indeed? and thy King, who not only can, but also will subdue thy sins? Believ. I do believe it, and therefore, O my King, and my God, Psal. 84.4. rule thou in my heart, even in the midst of thine and mine enemies, Psal. 110.2. and so rule, as that my Soul may rule my Bodie, Reason my Soul, Grace Reason, and I my whole self may be wholly and solely subject to thy holy will it self, both inwardly and outwardly, and that eternally: O Lord, thou hast said, Ask and ye shall have, Luke 11.9. I ask, help, let me have it. Christ. Thou shalt have it, & must have it; for I am so tied by the Promise which I have made,
as that I cannot denie thee, what ever thou dost request me, be∣cause I have said, that every one that asketh receiveth, and he that seeketh findeth, and to him that knocketh it shall be opened, Luke 11.10. Believ. I will extoll thee, my God, O King, and I will bless thy N for ever and ever: Psal. 45.1, 2. eve∣ry day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy Name for ever and e∣ver, for thou hast heard me, and art become my salvation, there∣fore my mouth shall speak the prai∣ses of the Lord, and let all flesh bless his holy Name for ever and ever, Psal. 145.21.
The Thirteenth Conference. Wherein the believing soul returns from the vain things of the world to Christ, and maketh use of the sacred words precepts to resist sin, craving assistance of Christ. BEliev. O my Soul, why dost thou range so, and wanderest here and there, whereas here is not thy rest? Soul. You do well to recall me, for I am apt to go astray, like a lost sheep, and to forget both God and my self, and to mind the vain things of this vile world. Believ. So thou art, and there∣fore seeing thou art thus sensible of it, return unto thy rest, O my Soul, Psal. 116.7. and flie thou hence, like a Dove, even like
Noah's dove, which finding no rest any where for the sole of her foot, returned into the Ark flo∣ting upon the waters, Gen. 8.6. so do thou return from fleeing a∣broad unto Jesus Christ typified by that Ark, who hath promised thee rest, Mat. 11.28. Soul. You say right, so I ought to do, and therefore I will seek no farther abroad, nor think so much upon such vain and tran∣sitory things as I have done, but rather come back again to him who doth so lovingly invite me, saying, Return, return, O Shula∣mite, return return, and I will say unto him Luk. 15.18. I have sinned against Heaven and against thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Spouse: but thou canst cure me, as well as call me, and make me as clean, as ever was any belie∣ving Soul, and therefore Take a∣way all mine iniquities and re∣ceive
me graciously, Hos. 14.2. Christ. I will do it, only sin no more, Joh. 5.14. and be not so worldly, and so vain hereafter, as thou hast been in times past. Soul. I hope I shall never be so overtaken again, only do thou Jer. 31. turn me, and I shall be turned, and subdue sin in me as thou hast promised me, Ezek. 36.26. Mic. 7.19. & keep home my thoughts and fix them upon thy self, and then I cannot possibly be so wordly. Christ. I see thou wilt needs hold me fast by my word, and I cannot go from it, because I can∣not deny my self, being the truth it self, and therefore Luk. 7.50. go in peace, thy faith hath saved thee; for lo, I, whom by thy faith thou didst embrace and urge by the Word of Promise, which I have spoken (as I am God who cannot lye, Heb. 6.18.) even I my self will
do that for thee, which thou canst not do without me, that is, I will more and more subject this vile world unto thee, and abject thy worldly lusts and affections from thee, and deject the strong mans holds in thee, and reject his Satanical proffers by thee, and eject even all his wicked in∣jections and suggestions out of thee, that they not be noxious and hurtful unto thee. Soul. O Lord Jesus Rev. 22.20. come and do it, yea, be thou like a Roe, or young Hart upon the mountains of Bether, or of Cant. 2. ult. Nam  significat divi∣sionem. division, ma∣king hast to fulfill thy Word in me, for lo I am even divided in two, having a will and a will, or a will which is against a will, a will regenerate, warring against the will unregenerate, and yet but one will; thus divided, as it were, in two, so as that Gal. 5.17. I cannot as I should overcome this vile
world, but mine eies are towards thee, O Lord, who only canst & must end this quarrel, and there∣fore I say with David, make hast to help me, O Lord my salvation, Psal. 37.22. Christ. Surely I come quickly, Rev. 22.20. Soul. Even so come Lord Jesus. The Fourteenth Conference. Wherein the believing Soul desires Christs presence that it may be able to overcome the world. BEliev. Thou must overcome thy self in many things, O my Soul, if thou wilt come to enjoy a more perfect peace, and tran∣quility, being freed from many doubts, fears, discomforts, and discontents, which many times surprize thee. Soul. Which be those many
things, wherein I must yet more overcome my self? Believ. First of all thou art too soon and too much angry, and passionate; yea, and thou lovest pleasure too well yet, even fine sights and dainty fare, and mo∣ney, and mens applause, and vain talk, and idle sports, and slan∣drous reports; again, thou hast not laid aside yet thine envy, thy malice, and thy revengefulness, thy high mindedness, and self∣conceitedness, and thy sloathful∣ness, and evil thoughts; yea, while the very steps of thy best beloved are yet hot in thee, thou dost even intromit adulterous and most ignominous thoughts of pride and revenge, and lusts, and strife, and worldly gain, and vain delights, and graceless talk; and those ears, which a little before did drink in the Word spoken by the everliving God himself, are
pestilently infected, and those eies which were even lately bap∣tised with sacred and precious tears, are horribly contaminated, and that heart which was recent∣ly and newly visited of the cele∣stial Bridegroom, is wofully soil∣ed and polluted, and that tongue which did decant, sing, and say the praises and songs of God, pi∣tifully abused. Soul. All this is most true, I cannot deny it, and therefore wo is me, that I have so loving and gracious a God, and Saviour who may now justly say unto me what could I have done more unto thee, that I have not done for thee? Isa. 5.9. thou wast not and I created thee, thou hast sinned and made thy self Satans bond∣slave and I redeemed thee, thou didst go astray in the worlds cir∣cumference with the ungodly, and I elected thee from among
them, I gave thee grace where∣by thou mightest overcome this vile world; Jer. 3.1. but thou hast played the harlot with the world, and neglected that grace and faith which I Jude v. 3. delivered unto thee. Again, I would fain have made mine Joh. 14.23. abode with thee conti∣nually, and therefore I have often knocked at the door of thy heart, saying, open to me, my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my undefiled, for Cant. 5.2. my head is filled with the dew, and my locks with the drops of the night, by reason of my long waiting for thee, but thou hast not opened unto me, and there∣fore what an unhappy creature am I, that have so horribly and detestably abused and offended the Lord my Creator, which made me! Christ. Thy case indeed is grievous, O perplexed Soul, but yet despair not; for Joel. 2.1. the Lord
thy God is gracious, and merci∣ful, and slow to anger, and of great kindness and repenteth him of the evil, and therefore he saith. Thou hast played the harlot with many lovers, yet return again un∣to me, Jer. 3.1. Soul. Are not these they words, O my Lord, and my God? did not they issue out of thy sa∣cred mouth? And are they not writen for my learning, that I, e∣ven I, through patience and com∣fort of the Scriptures might have hope? Ro. 15.4. Chr. Yes verily: for the whole word of God is my word, and I am Gods word, Rev. 19.13. Yea, God himself, John 1.1. who spake these words, for thine everlasting comfort. S. I believe it, I believe it, sweet Jesus, dear Saviour, who art Joh. 20.28. my Lord, and my God, and there∣fore though my sins be great, yet
will I not despair, nor be out of hope, having so great and lo∣ving a Saviour, who casts away none, but those that will cast a∣way themselves. O my dear Love, Christ, which ever burn∣est with love, and art Gregor. Na∣zianz. more merciful, than I can possibly be sinful, have mercy upon me therefore, and pardon all my grivous offences, and hainous transgressions, where with I have transgressed and sinned against thee. Inflame me also with the inextinguible flame of thy love, so as that I may love nothing in this world more than thee, O my sweetest Love and most merciful Redeemer, Christ Jesus. Jesus. I see thou wilt needs have a pardon and me too, whom thou desirest to love more than all things, and so conse∣quently to enjoy above all things, and therefore as both the one
and the other thou dost desire, so both thou shalt have; a pardon first, which may put away thy guiltiness; and me too, as by whom thou mayest & must over∣come thy worldiness, being wounded with arrowes of my love, and indued with suffici∣ent strength and power from a∣bove, by me, in me, and for me; that the world may not, as it hath in times past, overcome thee. Soul. And wilt thou give thy self unto me indeed, sweet Lamb, dear Saviour, who also hast Gal. 2.20. gi∣ven thy self for me? Christ. Yes verily; for I can∣not deny my self, 2 Tim. 2.13. being Hos. 11.9. God, as well as man; a meer man may deny himself, when a woman will marry him, and have him, but I cannot do it; if the poorest creature that is will have me, believing on me, I cannot keep my self from such
a poor Soul, but I must and will give my self unto it, because I have bound my self to do it by the word of promise, Jo. 6.51. Jo. 14.23. Rev. 2.17. Soul. O the joy, and O the comfort, which these sweet words of thine distill into me, sweet Saviour! For now I am fully per∣swaded, that thou my beloved, art mine, & that I am thine, Cant. 2.16. and that this vile world shal have no such power over me, as it had formerly, and that nothing in this world shall be dearer un∣to me, than thou, my dear Savi∣our; and therefore I am even bold upon that assurance, which I ground upon thy word of pro∣mise, to bespeak thee in the Lan∣guage and praise of thy dear Spouse, saying, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth; thy love (O my love) is better than wine, Can. 1.2. Yea, my beloved
shall even lie all night betwixt my breasts, Cant. 1.13. And my be∣loved is white and ruddy the chiefest among ten thousand, Can. 5.10. O my beloved, be not far from me, (Psal. 37.21.) at any time, but let thy mercy, truth, and love alwayes preserve, guide, and accompany me, and whenso∣ever thou givest any good thing unto me, give thy self also, as well as other things, & above all other things; Quoniam si cuncta qua fe∣cisti mihi de∣deris nam suf∣ficit servo tuo nisi teipsum dederis. Aug. Man. c. 3. for without thee they are all worth nothing, and there∣fore if thou shouldst give me all that thou hast made, it would not, yea, could not content me, if thou shouldest not give thy self withall, who madest all. Believ. I must needs inter∣rupt thee, O my Soul, (because I see that thou art not so thank∣ful as thou shouldest be, for this great mercy, which the Lord hath even now shewed toward
thee) saying, bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his bene∣fits, who forgiveth all thine ini∣quities, who heals all thy diseases, who redeems thy life from destru∣ction, who crowns thee with loving kindness and tender mercies, Ps. 103.1, 2, 3, 4. I add who hath given himself in part already, and hath promised thee that he will impart himself yet more un∣to thee. Soul. Well said, for Qui gratiam Dei retinere desiderat sit gratus pro gratia data. Tho. à Kem∣pis, de imit. Christi l. 2. c. 10. whoso∣ever will retain grace, must be thankful for grace received, and therefore while I live will I praise the Lord, I will sing praises unto my God while I have any being, Ps. 146.2. Believ. Yea, Let every thing that hath breath praise the Lord. Alleluia, Psal. 150.6.
The fifteenth Conference. Wherein the troubled believing Soul craves the promised hid∣den Manna, that it may be the more couragious to fight the fight of Faith. BEeliev. Why art thou sad, O my Soul? Soul. How can I be merry, be∣ing destitute of that true comfort which I was wont to find. Believ. Thou must look to the hand of God in it, who 1. doth so castigate and correct thee, for having been too jovial and vain in a carnal manner, 2. doth see that thou now art not fit for such joy & comfort, not being sound∣ly dejected; for though thou grievest now and then even be∣yond measure, yet at other times thou art as foolish and outward, and careless and fearless, as if
thou hadst never known the practise of Godly sorrow, which is ever to be renewed even day by day, Ps. 51.3. Soul. All this is true, and therefore I do resolve, that, by Gods help, I'le never be so vain, and outward, and foolishly merry, as I have been, but rather sober, grave, moderate, awful, careful, and constant in the daily re∣newing of godly sorrow. Believ. So do, and then look for joy, and comfort in the Lord; who is said to comfort such as are so cast down, 2 Cor. 7.6. and then forget not to use faith whereby thou mayest feed on the word of promise, as for instance, that in Rev. 2.17. To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden manna, even joy unspeakable to be found in me, who am that bread of life, that manna which came down from Heaven. Soul. So I purpose, and therefore, O thou ever-living bread of life, who feedest others, and yet never failest
thy self, nor art either diminished, or consumed; feed me also, and re∣fresh me, and comfort me, as thou doest others, and hast comforted me in time past, sweet Jesus, let me tast but of the crums that fall from thee, and let me feel but some of those ravishing joyes, which I was wont to feel in thee, O Lord, my God, thy ve∣ry name is as sweet as hony, and thou thy self art sweetness it self, & there∣fore as Samson found Jesus melinore in aure melos, in corde ju∣bilus, sed est & Me∣dicina, &c. Bern. Serm. 15. super Cant. hony in the dead Lion, which he flew, so let me find some sweetness also in thee, who art that Judg. 14.8. Lion of the tribe of Juda, whom the Jewes flew, yea, who is Rev. 5.5. risen again, having overcome death, and is ascended up into Heaven, from whence also I look for comfort and joy, to drop, and to descend upon me even as manna (whose tast was like Rom. 8.34. waffers made with hony, Exo. 16.13. did come Scilicet miracu∣lose. Non e∣nim fuit cadem cum Man∣na illa naturali, quae nas∣citur in Arabia. Danaeus Phys. Christ. tract. 2. cap. 26. out of Heaven, John 6.31. to fill and to feed the people of God upon earth. O Lord, dear
Saviour, who art the very bread of God, which cometh down from Heaven, and givest life unto the world, John 6.33. give me, I pray thee, this hid∣den manna, that I believing on thee may re∣joyce in thee with joy unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. Christ. Thou art too greedy and too eager after comfort, which for its continued fruition thou shouldest rather expect in Heaven than from Hea∣ven; for now is the time of fighting, and hereaf∣ter will come the time of tryumphing when the fight is ended; and therefore why dost thou de∣sire that in this world, which is reserved for ano∣ther world? Dost thou think to have a Heaven here, and a Heaven hereafter too, that is too much. Soul. Truth Lord, it is too much for me, who de∣serve not the least of thy mercies, yet seeing thou hast promised both Heavens, even a Heaven in Heaven and a Heaven upon earth, joy here and joy hereafter, therefore I look for both, even for a tast now, and for full fruition hereafter, and I'le not leave thee till thou bless me with such joy, crown me with such comforts, as may refresh, & strengthen, and encourage me so, as that like Jonathan I may with new supplied fortitude and valour reassault my spiritual enemies, having ta∣sted how sweet thou art, O Lord my God, even sweeter than that most sweet and pleasant hony which Jonathan had tasted, when his 1 Sam. 14.27.31 eies were inlightened, & himself so corrobora∣ted,
and enlivened, as that he was able to discom∣fit a host of men. Nor am I the first that crave this Heaven; for thy servant David, who was a man after thine own heart, did request thee for the very same thing before me, saying, restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation, Psal. 81.12. and therefore let not my Lord be displeased with me, who follow such an approved pattern, saying after him, who said so first, O Lord, restore unto me also the joy of thy Salvation, which I have found wanting a long time, & after the spouse in Cant. 2.5. Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples. For I am sick of love. Christ. I see thou wilt not be denied, and I can∣not deny my words, and therefore as one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort thee, and thou shalt be comforted, Isa. 66.13. Believ. As the Apple-tree among the trees of the wood, so is my Beloved among the Sons. For lo, Now I sit down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit is sweet unto my tast, Cant. 2.3. and therefore return unto thy rest, O my Soul, for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee; and now what shall I render un∣to the Lord for all his benefits towards me: I will take the Cup of salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord, because he hath inclined his ears unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live, Psal. 116.2, 3, 12, 13. Alleluia. FINIS.
