J517 99826158 30550
PROPOSALS Made to the Reverend Clergy OF THE Arch-Deaconry of Norwich, Concerning the Reformation of Manners, And promoting the Interest of true Religion and Virtue. Together with A Specimen of the Assistance They may afford their Parishioners for attain∣ing Religious Knowledge, and ex∣ercising Christian Devotion. By JOHN JEFFERY, D. D. Arch-Deacon of Norwich. LONDON: Printed for Tho. Goddard, Bookseller in Norwich. 1700.
Reverend Brethren, YOƲ have received the Letter of his Grace the Lord Archbishop of Can∣terbury, sent unto the Right Reverend the Lords Bishops of his Province: And as the Lord Bishop of Norwich, has, by the Arch-Deacons, recommended the same unto all the Clergy of his Diocese; so, being deeply sensible of the necessity of every One's endeavouring, according to his Place and Capacity, to promote the Reformation of Manners, and the Interest of True Religion and Virtue, (which is the pious Design of that Letter) I have resolved to offer unto your Consideration, some few Particulars, which I apprehend useful to this great Purpose, hoping it may put every one of you, upon further Thoughts, by what means (accommodated to the special Necessities of your several Parishes) Reli∣gion, may be brought to flourish among us. The standing Provisions made by Law, in this Church and Kingdom, either are sufficient for the Reformation of Man∣ners, or can be made so, only by our Le∣gislators:
But the Defects charged upon our Constitution would not seem considerable, if there were not worse Defects in some Persons, and bad Designs in others. Through these, or some other Means, the gross Corruptions of Manners are become so enormous, That the whole Nati∣on seems justly impatient of those Oppres∣sions which the wickedness of Men, mu∣tually impose upon one another: For the great Sins of every Man are manifestly a Mischief to those he is concerned with, when he commits them. So that, not only the Honour of Reli∣gion, and the Glory of God, but the Wel∣fare and Safety of Men, makes Virtue and Reformation necessary, and without Righteousness there can be no Peace or Safe∣ty upon Earth. That which I would Remind you of, in particular, is not any new Expedient, but such Things as the Laws of God and Men have always made our necessary Duty; and such, as cannot be neglected, without the Decay of Piety, and the frustrating our other Labours, for making Men Reli∣gious. I do therefore recommend I. The setting up Religious Exercises in all private Families. II. The strict Observation of the Lord's-Day.
III. The Teaching them, that Thse (and such like) are Means, in order to the making Men Religious: But, that no Man is Religious, meerly for having used such Means. I. The setting up Religious Exercises in private Families, is fundamentally ne∣cessary to the prevalency of Religion; and these Religious Exercises must be for First, Instruction; and Secondly, Devotion: In both which, the Minister of every Parish, may be high∣ly useful to Those of his Charge. And he is to help and assist them 1. In such Religious Exercises as are for the private Instruction of the Family: And these Exercises must be constant and frequent. One Catechism is as useful in the Church, as one Grammer is in the Schools: And that Catechism, with which Children begin, ought to be (as ours is) very Short. But as every one who has Stu∣died Christianity (with such Application, as becomes a Guide of Souls) has received an Idea of his Religion, from the Word of God, according to the Special Light, he stood in; when he took his Views of it, there: So I think, if every Minister (of Learning and Experience) did digest Those Apprehensions of Christianity, which are in his own Mind, according to the Me∣thod
of the Church-Catechism, and did Print and Communicate that Scheme (by which he is continually guided in his publick Discourses) to his Parishioners, that it might be Read by them, at all Times; They would not only have their Minds stored with the Substance of Christianity; but would have the same Apprehensions of it, that the Minister is continually incul∣cating upon them, in his Sermons and Ad∣vices. In what follows, I have given you a Specimen, or Example, of this, ac∣cording to my own Thoughts, by which you will more easily and fully understand my Meaning. 2. The Religious Exercises for Devo∣tion, may be in the Ʋse of a Form of Pray∣er framed according to the Sense of the Lord's-Prayer, an Example of which I have added. And having provided such helps for their Instruction and Devotion, the Ma∣sters of Families may be Advised, (1) To Read, every Morning and Evening, some Portion of Holy Scripture, as out of the Psalms and Proverbs, and the Gospel of St. Matthew and St. Luke, &c. (as most plain and easy:) And then (2) To use the Prayer formed by the direction of our Saviour, according to the Doctrin of his Religion; Euke 11.1. remembring al∣ways, to do both with the greatest Reve∣rence,
because, as in our Prayers, we speak unto the most high God, so by his Word, God himself speaks unto us, con∣cerning the Salvation and Life of our Souls. II. The strict Observation of the Lord's-Day, and spending it intirely, in Publick and Private Exercises of Religion, will be of excellent Ʋse, for the keeping up in the Minds of Men, a Sense of God, and of their Duty; for the enlarging their Knowledg, exciting their Affections, and fixing their pious Resolutions. And these Exercises of Religion may be so Varied, that they will not be tedious to any at first; but will be Delightful to all that are accustomed to them. And if in the Family, sometimes One, and sometimes Another, be employed to Read; so that none be meer constant Hearers, when the Family are together: And if each Person be permitted, otherwhile to Retire and Ex∣ercise himself, according to his personal In∣clination, this Variety will prevent the Fatigue, which might discourage, by too long Attendance of All the rest, upon what any One does; and by their Confinement too long, to any one Exercise. If Children and Servants were all their Lives, and in all Places, accustomed to such Religious Exercises, a strong Sense of Religion would be established in their Minds: And their Consciences would startle
at those Temptations, which for want of such Tenderness, they are Ruined by. By this Preparation, they would be enabled to Profit, by the Publick Preaching; which for want of such fundamental Instruction, many are uncapable of, and for want of such Conscience, they have little Regard unto. 'Tis very much thro' the neglect of this Family-Religion, that Immorality and Profaness has so much prevailed among us; and 'tis by restoring these Religious Ex∣ercises in Families, that the Reformation must be made. III. The Teaching every one, that These (and such like) Religious Exercises are necessary Means of Religion, but not the whole of it, Hebr 13.18. Tit 2.11, 12. or what will alone make Men truly Religious, is also requisite. Christi∣unity is Living Honestly (i. e. Soberly, Righteously and Godly) in all Things. A Temper of Heart, and Course of Life, conformable to the Eternal Rule of Righ∣teousness (the Law of Heaven) is the great End, and Aim of God, in setting up Re∣ligion, and is the necessary Preparation for Happiness. So far only, as the Reason of our Minds is reconciled to the Divine Law of Righteousness; and so far only, as Men Live with Delight, according to those
Measures; so far, and no further, are they truly Religious. But, He that per∣forms the Religious Exercises beforesaid, or any others, without making Conscience of Religious Living (doing Right to God, his Neighbour and Himself) shall be num∣bred among the Unrighteous which shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; and shall have his Eternal Portion with the Pha∣risees and Hypocrites. Our Families therefore, being Examples of these Religious Exercises; we may Ad∣vise (on just Occasions, and with prudent Seriousness) all Masters of Families, and Teachers of Schools (as by Law they are obliged) to Instruct Children in the Cate∣chism, and to Inculcate upon them the ne∣cessity of Living according to the Letter of the Commandments; and our Admoni∣tions will not be Vain, when in our daily Prayers to God for them, our Request is, That our Endeavour for their Edificati∣on and Salvation, may be effectual through the assistance of his Grace: And no Man, who considers the Account He must give of those Souls committed to his Care, can without the most sensible Concernment for Them, and for Him∣self, present such Supplications unto God.
And God grant we may All so Take heed unto our Selves, and to our Do∣ctrin, that we may both Save our Selves, and those that hear us. I am Your Friend and Brother JOHN JEFFERY, Arch-Deacon of Norwich.
The Sum and Substance of Christianity. HE that would receive Benefit, by the publick Instruction of the Ministers of Religion, must keep in Mind the Principles of that Religion which is the Subject of their Discourses. Jam. 1.27. And that I may Assist those who attend upon my Ministry, as far as 'tis in my Power; I shall lay before them very briefly, The Substance of that Doctrin, which I am constantly explaining and inculcating among them. True Religion is Obedience to the Laws of God, and that Religion is made known unto Men I. By Natural Reason: And II. By Supernatural Revelation. 1. The true Religion is manifested unto Men, by Natural Reason, in the use of which, we may come to the Knowledge of God, and Goodness; Rom. 1.19, 20. Rom. 2.14, 15. by observing the Structure of the World, and the Events of Providence. For, the Nature of Things, as perceived by
the Reason of our Minds, directs us to the Rule of Righteousness; the moral Per∣fections of God (his Goodness, Righte∣ousness and Truth) being transcribed into the principal Commandments of the Moral Law: And the Religion of Men being the Imitation of God: The doing all the Right they can to him, to their Neighbours and Themselves. But in time, This true Notion of Religion, Rom. 1.21-32. was overwhelmed by Polythe∣ism, Idolatry, Superstition, and Immora∣lity: And therefore it was necessary, That 2. The true Religion should be made known to Men, by Supernatural Revelation: And the First State of Religion, Ps. 147.19, 20. Exod. Lev. which God set up by Supernatural Revelation, was that among the Jews consisting of Laws Moral, Ceremonial and Judicial. The Substance of their Religion was con∣tain'd in the Moral Law: The Ceremo∣nial Law related to their Ecclesiastical Polity: Hebr. 8.6-13. And the Judicial Law related to their Civil Polity, which Jehovah, their King, and God set up among them. This Jewish State of Religion is called the Old Testament or Covenant, as the Christian State of Religion is called the New Testament or Covenant. Josh. 24.23. But the Jewish Religion was at length Cor∣rupted
by the mixture of Polytheism, 1 Kings 11.1. &c. 1 Kings 12.25. &c. Ido∣latry and Superstition, accommodated to it; and a better State of Religion was necessary for the making the World truly Religious. Therefore the Second State of Religion which God set up by supernatural Revelation, Jer. 31.31, 32. Deut. 18.15, 18. Act. 3 22. was that among Christians; and as this state of Religion is the Kingdom of God, of which we are Subjects; so, 'tis our Re∣ligion, and our Duty as Subjects of this Kingdom of God; to obey the Laws of the Kingdom to which we belong. This state of Religion was set up by the Messiah, our Lord and King (or Law∣giver, Saviour and Judge) and the Re∣cords of this is the New Testament. Therein we have the Institution, the Demonstration, and the Vindication of Christianity: And this is to be the uni∣versal Religion of all Mankind. Whenever this Religion shall be Cor∣rupted by Paganish Superstitions accom∣modated to it; 1 Tim. 4.1, 2, 3. those Corruptions must be cast out, and the Religion must be reduced to the original and divine Standard in the New Testament. The Doctrin of this Religion we must study, because we Profess it; and hope to be Saved by it: And in the Doctrin of Christianity (the Sum of which is contained in the Church Catechism) there is
I. The Fundamental and Initial part; Heb. 6.1, 2 which comprehends Repentance and Faith. II. The Substantial and Chief Part; which is Obedience to the Command∣ments of God, as explained by Jesus Christ. And III. The Instrumental, and subordi∣nate Part; which contains Prayer, and the Ministry of the Word; the Sacra∣ments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper. I. The fundamental and initial part of Christianity comprehends Repentance towards God; Act. 20.21 and Faith towards our Lord Jesus Chrst. 1. By Repentance we are to under∣stand the forsaking all false Religion, and the forsaking of all vicious Practices: The Purport of which, Tit. 2.12. is set forth in the four first Questions of the Cate∣chism. 2. By Faith we are to understand the receiving the Doctrin of Christianity, as containing the Principles and Measures of religious Life: And the Apostles Creed contains the Matter of that Faith, which may be Distinguished into these two Grand Articles, Heb. 11.6. viz. That this Re∣ligion is of God: And that they shall be happy who live according to this Religion.
1. One grand Article is, That this Religion is of God. So we believe, who profess Christianity as the Religion which God the Father taught, by the Son, I believe in God the Father, &c. And in Je∣sus Christ, &c. I believe in che Holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 8.6. 1 Tim. 2.5. Mat. 28.18 2 Cor. 13.14. Eph. 2.18. and confirmed by the Holy Ghost: And therefore we Christians are Disciples of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; who is the Author of our Religion. This divine Person Jesus Christ (who is the Author of our Religion and of our Salvation) is the only Mediator between God and Men; and has all Power in Heaven and Earth given unto him. By him, God the Father exer∣cises his Dominion over us; and by him we Sinners are Reconciled and have Access to God the Father. The principal Doctrin of meer supernatural and positive Revelation is This, con∣cerning the promised Messiah; 1 Joh. 4.2. 1 Joh. 5.1. and in this, all other Doctrins of meer posi∣tive Revelation necessary to our Salva∣tion, are comprehended. Joh. 17.3. This is the substance of the former part of the Creed. 2. The other grand Article is, The Holy Catholick Church; the Com∣munion of Saints, &c. Rom. 10.9, 10. That They shall be happy who live according to this Religion. Christians who (in Fel∣lowship one with another in the Church of God) live according to their Religi∣on, are assured of the Pardon of their sins; the full effect of which, is their Resurre∣ction
to a blessed Immortality; Act. 10.43. & Act. 4.2. Rom. 6.23. and this is the substance of the latter part of the Creed. & Catech. Qu. 5. & 6. And these two, Faith and Repentance, are the Fundamental part of our Religion. II. The substantial and chief part of Christianity is Obedience to the Command∣ments of God, as explained by Jesus Christ. The Commandments of God are con∣tained in the Decalogue. Ex. 20. Deut. 5. The Explication of them by Jesus Christ is contained in the Sermon on the Mount, Mat. 5.6, 7. and other Discourses of Christ, and his Apostles. The Commandments of God are con∣tained in the Decalogue, where, in the First Commandment, Deut. 6.14, 15. 1 Cor. 8.5, 6, 7. God forbids the Polytheism of the Heathens, i. e. the worshipping more, or others beside Je∣hovah the one true God; whether under the Notion of Mediators or otherwise, Thou shalt have no other Gods, &c. In the Second Commandment God forbids the Idolatry of the Heathens, or the representing God by Images, Isa. 46.5-10. 1 Joh. 5.21 in which, the Spirits to be worshipped were reputed to dwell, after the Con∣secration of those Images, Thou shalt not make to thy self any Graven Images, &c. In the Third Commandment God for∣bids the Blasphemy of false Swearing, Lev. 19.12 Mat. 5.33, 34. or any such like Profanation of his Holy
Name. Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, &c. In the Fourth Commandment God requires the spending one Day in seven in Religious Exercises, Gen. 2.2, 3. Deut. 5.15. Act. 20.7. to the Honour of him who is the Creator and Governour of the World. Remember the Sabbath-day, &c. These Commandments of the First Table, Deut. 6.5. Mat. 22.36, 37, 38. Deut. 13.2.3. contain the Elements of our Duty towards God, the sum of which is, To love him with all our Hearts, &c. The Six next Commandments of the Second Table, contain the Elements of our Duty towards Men. Lev. 19.18 Mat. 22.39 Rom. 13.8, 9, 10. Mat. 7.12. Mat. 22.40 The sum of which is To love our Neighbour as our selves; and to do unto others, as we would they should do unto us. In the Fifth Commandment God o∣bliges Children to Requite their Parents with all the Effects of Love, Lev. 19.3. 1 Tim. 5.4. Grati∣tude and Reverence; Honour thy Father and thy Mother, &c. In the Sixth Commandment God for∣bids the taking away the Life of any innocent Person by Design, Gen. 9.5, 6 Rev. 13 10 or of any guilty Person without Authority, Thou shalt do no Murther. In the Seventh Commandment God forbids the defiling our Neighbours Wife, Lev. 20.10 Heb. 13.4. and her suffering her self to be defiled, Thou shalt not commit Adultery.
In the Eighth Commandment, God forbids the detaining from another any of his Goods, Gen. 44.8. Eph. 4.8. contrary to Right, with∣out his Knowledge, or against his Will, Thou shalt not Steal. In the Ninth Commandment, God forbids any false Testimony in Cases of Judicature or otherwise, Deut. 19.16-21 Rom. 13.9. Thou shalt not bear false witness. In the Tenth Commandment, God forbids even the Designing or Willing∣ness to commit any of these Injuries, Rom. 7.7. which he has forbidden us to Do. Thou shalt not Covet, &c. These are the Commandments of God, and Rules of a Religious Life, V. Catech. Qu. 7.8, 9, 10, 11. Secondly, The Explication of them by Jesus Christ, is contained in the Ser∣mon on the Mount: Where we have 1. An Exhortation to Religious Obe∣dience, Mat. 5. Mic. 6.8. of which the Moral Law is the Rule: And in which true Religion ever did consist. 2. A Caution against Pharisaical Hy∣pocrisie, Mat. 6 & 7. v. 1-6. which is made up of the Osten∣tation of Piety, and the Licentiousness of Sin. 3. An Admonition concerning the ne∣cessity of living according to that Ex∣hortation and Caution. Mat. 7.7.
And this Obedience to the Moral Law as explained by Jesus Christ, is the Substance of Christianity. III. The Instrumental and subordi∣nate part of Christianity is either First, Moral; or Secondly, Ritual. First, The instrumental part of Re∣ligion which is Moral, contains in it 1. Prayer; Act. 6.4. and 2. The Ministry of the Word. 1. Prayer is a Means as well as an Act of Religion, and must be suited to the Doctrin of Christianity, Luk. 11.1. &c. that the Worship may be Christian. The Lord's Prayer is agreeable to that Doctrin; and by it, we are directed To address our Supplications to God, as the Best and Greatest Being; the Cre∣ator and Governour of the World. Our Father which art in Heaven. And the Petitions we make to him are (1). That God may be duly Ho∣noured, by all reasonable Creatures, Isa. 6.2. Rev. 4.8. Hallowed be thy Name. (2). That Christianity (the true Re∣ligion,) may be receiv'd by all Man∣kind; Thy Kingdom come. Mar. 1.1. Mat. 21.43. (3). That all Christians may live ac∣cording to the Religion they profess; Eph. 4.1. Phil. 1.27. Thy Will be done in Earth as 'tis in Hea∣ven.
These three Petitions are for the Glory of God: Those three which fol∣low, are for the Welfare of Men, viz. (4). That we may have all the neces∣sary Accommodations of Life; Prov. 30.8. Mat. 6.33. Give us this day our daily Bread. (5). That the Punishment of our Sins may be with-holden, Mar. 1.4. Mat. 6.14, 15. upon our Repentance; Forgive us our Trespasses, &c. (6). That Relapse into Sin may be prevented, Jam. 1.13.14, 5. 1 Cor. 10.13. by the Grace of God, Lead us not into Temptation, &c. After which Desires presented unto God, we Conclude with an Acknow∣ledgment of the Goodness and Greatness of Him to whom we Pray; Rev. 4.11. For thine is the Kingdom, &c. V. Catech. Qu. 12.13. 2. The Ministry of the Word is exer∣cised by an Order of Men Authorised for that Purpose: 2 Tim. 4.1, 2. 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. And this is the Ordi∣nary Means God has provided for the Information, Persuasion, and Conso∣lation of Christians. These are Moral: For, 'tis a natu∣ral Truth, That we must make our Prayers to God, and learn our Religion from Him. Secondly, 1 Cor. 10.2.3, 4. 1 Cor. 12.13. The Instrumental part of Religion which is Ritual, is the Sacra∣ments of Baptism, and the Lord's Sup∣per. V. Cat. Qu. 14.15, 16.
1. By Baptism (or washing with Wa∣ter, into the Name of the Father, Mat. .18, 19, 2. Acts 10.47. Son and Holy Ghost, we are admitted Dis∣ciples of Christ, and Professors of the Christian Religion, which God the Fa∣ther Taught by the Son, and confirmed by the Holy Ghost. V. Cat. Qu. 17.18, 19, 20. 2. By the Lord's-Supper, we re∣member Christ, and his Death, at, Mat. 26.26, &c, Mark 14.22, &c. Luke 22.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.23-34. and by which (as a Federal Rite, and the great Propitiation) the New Testament or Covenant (i. e. the Christian Religion) was set up. And as by the Death of Christ, we are absolutely obliged to Re∣pentance, and the Obedience of a Ho∣ly Life; Luke 24.47. and conditionally assured of Pardon and the Resurrection to a Bles∣sed Immortality: So by the Solemn Re∣membrance of Christ, and his Death, that Obligation and Assurance are Re∣inforced. V. Cat. Qu. 21.22, 23, 24, 25. These are the Fundamental, the Sub∣stantial, and the Instrumental Parts of Christianity; and in these the whole of Religion is contained. The External Circumstances of Order and Decency are provided for, by the Laws of every Christian Church: And every Private Christian is to study the publick Peace, and his own Edification:
For which Purpose, there is no M or Advantages to be had in any Chur which is wanting in ours. The Lord's Prayer. Our Father, which art in Heaven. The Paraphrase. MOST Great and Blessed Lo God; The Creator and Gove∣nor of the World, the Father of Sp∣rits, and of our Lord Jesus Christ. Hallowed be thy Name. May all Reasonable-Creatures who a capable to understand thy Perfections o Wisdom, Goodness and Power, ad∣mire and celebrate Thee, according to the glorious Manifestations of thy Self to Them. Thy Kingdom Come. May all Mankind come to the Know∣ledge and Belief of thy True Religion (and the Kingdom of Heaven upon Earth be set up among them) in which, the eternal Laws of Righteousness, with the greatest Clearness, Certainty and
