K24 R14904 13341543 99144
Good News FOR ENGLAND: OR, A PREDICTION, OF THE Happy Success that will attend Their Majesties Prote∣stant Army now in Ireland; and the Miserable Fate of the French and Irish Papists there in Arms and open Rebellion against Their Majesties. SHEWING, How that by the Policy and Power of the Great Duke Schomberg, and the rest of those worthy Gentlemen and Soldiers there under his Command, the late King James and all his Adherents (that do not timely lay hold on Their most Gracious Majesties Act of Indemnity) will be totally brought unto Ruine and Desolation; for Ireland must and will certainly be made subject to King William and Queen Mary. By W. K. Astrologer. Licensed Octob. 2. 1689. J. F. LONDON, Printed for Randal Taylor near Stationers-Hall, 1689.
Good News FOR ENGLAND. THE Noble Science of Astrology is an Honest, True and Lawful Art and Study, though by two sorts of Men now adays slighted, vilified and condemned, (to wit) the Envious and the Ignorant, both which have been suffi∣ciently corrected and refuted by the Learned Champions and Propagators of that sublime Knowledge. But to come to our intended Business, an Honourable, Worthy and Loyal Protestant Gentleman, with much Earnestness and Affection, desired me to erect a Scheme, and give him my Judg∣ment on the Affairs now depending in Ireland, and according to his desire, I took the exact time of his propounding the Question, and found the Heavens in the following Posture: And because it is so remarkable and pertinent a Position, I was earnestly soli∣cited to make it publick, which I have here done for the Reasons urged unto me. Now that a Man may lawfully seek a Resolution on any law∣ful Enterprize, is plain from that Example of David, who being in Keilah, and hearing that Saul was advancing towards him, in order to besiege that City, was desirous to know whether he would yea or no; and if so, then whether the Men of Keilah would be true unto him, and not betray him into the Hands of Saul?
The SCHEME. Sept. 21. 1689. at 6 h. P. M. diagram for astrological prognostication Judgment on it. IN this Figure the strength or weakness of each Planet is as followeth, viz. Saturn is here found strong by eight Testi∣monies; Jupiter is weak by five Testimonies; Mars is weak by three Testimonies; the Sun is weak by nine Testimonies; Venus
is equal in Fortitude, and Debilities; Mercury is strong by six∣teen Testimonies; and the Moon is strong by eighteen Testi∣monies; and thus they stand according to their Position, omitting the Aspects either good or evil, which shall be considered in the Sequel. By the Strength of the envious Planet Saturn in the Seventh, the House representing our Enemy, and the Square of Venus, Lady of the Seventh, unto the part of Fortune, and her Opposition to Jupiter Lord of the Ninth, in the Twelfth Retrograde, with the Opposi∣tion of Saturn to Mars Lord of the Ascendant, may we plainly see the Miseries, Calamities, Afflictions and Sorrows that have been inflicted upon the poor Protestants in the Kingdom of Ire∣land by their implacable Enemies; and what unusual and unnatu∣ral Barbarity would be further committed on all that either op∣pose them, or dissent from them in either Principles or Practice, should but their Antichristian Arms prevail against them. By the Weakness of Jupiter in the Twelfth, we may behold what would be the Fate of Religion, or at least the true Profes∣sors thereof, should our Enemies prevail over us, viz. The True Religion it self would be contemned, cast by, and trampled on by those Romish Idolators, and the true Professors and Propaga∣tors of true Piety cast into Prison, harrassed and condemned to Death; and others to perpetual Slavery. By the Weakness of Mars, Lord of the Ascendant, and his Affliction by Saturn Lord of the Tenth in the Seventh, may we be informed what Kindness the People of England may expect from a Popish King and Governor, should they again have such an Aegyptian Plague or Task-Master. But now let us see whether such a thing shall be yea or no, or whether the Protestant or Popish Army shall become Lord and Master of Ireland? Never could there have been a Figure erected (had the time been elected) more pertinent to the matter in hand, or intent of the Querent, than this very Face of Heaven is, wherein we have the Sign Aries Ascending, which Sign is truly accounted the Ho∣roscope of England, and Mars Lord thereof not long entered Taurus, the Sign owning Ireland, thereby signifying the English Army now Invading that Kingdom.
Saturn and Mars are mutually applying to an Opposition from the First and Seventh House, which imports a Resolution in both Parties to meet, and that an obstinate and Dreadful Fight may be expect∣ed between them. Saturn is (indeed at present) much stronger than Mars, and there are more Planets relating to the Seventh House, than there are to the First, which signifies the Enemy to be more numerous than we; and the Lady of the Seventh House being with Cor Leonis, puffs them up with Pride and Haughtiness, and with an expectation of Success: But Oh! the miserable disappoint∣ment that they will certainly meet with, for these Reasons in Art. First, The Lady of the Seventh, is in the Sixth, in Opposition unto Jupiter Lord of the Eighth, in the Twelfth, which import∣eth the miserable Havock that will be made of them by Wounds, Sickness, Imprisonment, and Death. Secondly, The Sun is in the Sixth with the Dragon's Tayl, which signifies Infamy and Disgrace, if not Imprisonment and Destructi∣on to a Great Don amongst them. Thirdly, The Moon, Lady of the Fourth in the First in her Ex∣altation, is a sure Argument that the Country of Ireland will surely fall into our Hands, and wholly at the Protestant Disposal and Use. Fourthly, That because Mars disposeth of Saturn, and Luna strong in the Ascendant, and applying to the Square of Venus, as she is Lady of the Seventh, there's no doubt but the Enemy will be routed, stand they never so obstinate. Fifthly, The Trine of Jupitur and Mercury signifies a Beneficial, Wise, and Successful Conclusion of this great Affair unto Eng∣land, and the Protestant Army; for Mercury is very potent in the Figure, and is Lord of the Second House, and Jupiter is exalted in the Fourth. Sixthly, Mars is exalted in the Tenth, but Saturn hath his Fall in the Ascendant; Mars is Rising, but Saturn is Setting; Mars by his Retrograde Motion returns in Aries his own House, and there becomes Direct; Venus, Lady of the Seventh, is trooping into Virgo her Fall; and Saturn continueth under the Dispose of Mars Lord of the Ascendant; and the Head of the Dragon is in Eng∣land's
Horoscope; from all which may thus much be said truly, That the Vanity of the Papists, Jacobites, or Grumbletonians is far beyond Laughter, for to think, or rather dream of a Victory, or that ever the Late King James should regain his Abdicated Crown and Dignity, notwithstanding the Assistance of his most Christian Majesty. No, the British Imperial Crowns are seated on the Sa∣cred Heads of such as know well how to keep them, to the Ter∣ror and Perplexity of their Enemies, but the due Praise and Glory of God. Vivant Rex Guilielmus, & Regina Maria. POSTSCRIPT. LEt not any Astrological Reader wonder that I should be so large and peremptory on a Horary Question; for I assure him, that I do not reckon it the least part of the Art; tho I really esteem of eve∣ry part thereof: But for to back the Truth of what I have said on the preceding Figure (with other parts of Astrology) let the Ge∣neathliacal Astrologer consider, That soon after an Eclipse of the Sun upon the place of the Sun, in the late Kings Nativity, and the Conjunction of the two Malevolent Planets, on the same place he Abdicated his Throne, and hath ever since strugled under those In∣fluences, and with French and Irish Forces hath been fumbling for it again: But now in August there happened an Opposition of those very Planets, Saturn then on the very place aforesaid; soon after which the Valiant, Politick, and Successful General Schom∣berg with their Majesties Forces entered that Kingdom; and now about the 22d day of this Instant September, those Planets make a second Opposition, and Saturn still near the same place, and also Mars in Taurus, Ireland's Horoscope; all which, according to Geneath∣liacal and Mundane Astrology, doth signifie no other than what we have said on this Horary Question; and that the Duke will purchase to himself and his Army a Lasting Name and Fame, by routing
the Popish Hornets out of the Protestant Hive in Ireland. And thus much are we encouraged by the Stars, which are Gods In∣struments: Now let us consider some more Divine Incourage∣ment which should animate our Protestant Souls and Souldiers to the highest pitch of Valour and Prowess: For, dear Hearts of Gold, you Fight the Lord of Hosts his Battel; but your Enemy Fights the Battel of their Lord God the Pope; for so their great Cardinal Bellarmine, and other Belweathers of Rome have called him; you fight for the Liberty of the Glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ: Your Adversaries Fight for that bundle of Trumpery, the Mass-Book: You Fight for a Protestant King and Queen, that will maintain you and yours in their Just Rights and Priviledges: The Enemy Fights to enslave you and your Posterity's Souls, Bo∣dies, and Purses, and devour you by French and Irish Canibals: Therefore, although the Enemy (with the Haughty Sennacherib) boast themselves in their Multitude, and humane (I had almost said inhumane) Strength; yet you know that you go forth to Battel in the Strength of the Lord your God, who can with a small Number, and without Bow or Arrow, Spear or Shield, with a few Lappers of Water, destroy the Midianites and Amale∣kites, although as numerous as Grashoppers; and I assure you (that as in Deborah and Barach's time, so now) the Stars in their Course Fight, and will Fight against the Romish Jabin and Sisera; and you have a Mighty Man of Valour and Conduct for your Leader; therefore make good use of the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon, and the work will be done, to the shame of such as Live in a fla∣vish Fear, or Treasonable Hope of the late Kings Return. FINIS.
