L986 12609805 64320
ANNOTATIONS UPON ALL THE NEW TESTAMENT PHILOLOGICALL AND THEOLOGICALL: Wherein The Emphasis and Elegancie of the Greeke is observed. Some Imperfections in our Translation are discovered. Divers Jewish Rites and Customes tending to illustrate the text are mentioned. Many Antilogies and seeming Contradictions reconciled. Severall darke and Obscure Places opened. Sundry Passages vindicated from the false glosses of Papists and Hereticks. By EDWARD LEIGH, Master of Arts of both the Universities. Plantavit. in Florileg. Rab∣bin. Num. 93. . Crysostom. . Singuli sermones, syllabae, apices, puncta, in divinis Scripturis plena sunt sensibus. Hieron. in Epist. ad Ephes. c. 3. LONDON, Printed by W. W. and E G. for William Lee, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Turks-Head in Fleetstreet next to the Miter and Phoenix. Anno Dom. 1650.
ALMAE MATRI CELEBERRIMAE ACADEMIAE OXONIENSI. ACademiae nomen (Alma mater) Athenis pri∣mùm inclaruisse apud omnes ferè Iunii Acade∣mia. auctores con∣venit. Vna urbs Attica (inquit Paterculus Lib. 1. hist. Sub finem. Recentiorum quidam scho∣las publicas, quòd auctori∣tate publicâ, sive quod idem ferè est, publicè instituuntur. quidam Vni∣versitates ap∣pellare malunt. Middendorpius de Academiis, lib. 1. cap. 1.) pluribus annis eloquentiâ quàm universa Grae∣cia, opibusque floruit, adeo ut corpora illius gentis separata sint in alias civitates, ingenia verò solis Athenien∣sium muris clausa existimes. Graeci Athenas vocant , id est, Graeciae Graeciam. Ex Athenis omnes ferè praestantissimi Ora∣tores, optimi Philosophi, excultissimi Poetae emicuerunt. Oxonium (Athenae nostrae nobilissimae) verè  Kiriath Josh. 15.15. Vide Menochi∣um de Repub. Heb. l. 7. c. 1. & in loc. Sepher, Academia Angliae est (ut Drusii verbis Praefat. ad Proverb. utar) atque adeo totius Europae ut vetustissima ita celeberrima & amplissima. Bellositum Vide Wake Regē Platoni∣cum. p. 3. & 21. Loci salubris ratio in institu∣endis Vniversi∣tatibus habenda est, Poetae mu∣sas in Helicone & Pamasso a∣maenissimis ru∣tissimisque mon∣tibus finxerunt. Middendorp. de Acad. l. 1: c. 2. olim ob amaenitatem loci audiebat, at nuper propter fossas, ag∣geres, propugnacula, copiasque militares, haud inconcinnè sic no∣minares. Bibliothecam Bodleianam non nemo Masonus libro. 10. de ministerio Anglicano. Oxoniae decus, An∣gliae gemmam, exterorum stuporem, totiusque orbis terrarum Phoenicem appellavit. Ex uno Collegio Mertonensi Vide Wake Regē Platonicum. pag. 184. & 20. (bonorum ingeniorum feracissimo) Occhamus, Scotus, Bradwardinus, aliique melioris notae Scholastici prodierunt. Faxit Deus ut Aca∣demia vestra aeternùm sit sanae doctrinae juxta ac pietatis fons limpidissimus, qui Ecclesiae & Reipublicae hortos suavissimè irri∣get. Inscribatur portis Collegiorum vestrorum (ut Collegij Caii in florentissimâ Academiâ Cantabrigiensi) porta laboris, porta
virtutis, porta honoris. Inscribatur Musaeis vestris singulis, ut olim Melchior Adam in ejus virâ. Vrsini Amice, quisquis huc venis, Aut agito paucis, aut abi, Aut me laborantem adiuva. Bonorum artium studiis non solùm immorari, verùm etiam immori volupe sit. Absit tamen Academici, imo procul à vobis absit, odas Pindaricas Psalmis Davidicis, Thomam Aquinatem Apostolo Paulo praeferre. Quinimo —Vos exemplaria Sacra Nocturnâ versate manu, versate diurnâ. Vos Oxonienses (qui linguarum callentissimi, inque artium & scientiarum encyclopaediâ versatissimi estis) Christi verbis alloqui liceat,Ioh. 5.39. Vide Bezam in Epist. 1. Pauli ad Corinth. c. 11. vers. 6. . Marcus Marinus in praefatione ad Arcam Noae dicit, Nullum Oratorem vel Latinum vel Graecum Mose & E∣saiâ dictionum puritate esse facundiorem, nullum Poetam Davide & Jobo figuris in versu argutiorem, nullum Historiographum Samu∣ele fideliorem. Aureum erat dictum Comitis (supra aetatem docti) Pici Mirandulae: Veritatem Philosophia quaerit, Theologia invenit, Religio possidet. Augustinus Confes. l. 3. cap. 14. Hortensium Ciceronis avidè legebat, verùm hoc solum (inquit ille) me in tantâ fla∣grantiâ refrangebat, quod nomen Christi non erat ibi. Alibi Conf. l. 8. c. 8. sic Alipium suum affatur, Surgunt indocti & coelum rapiunt: & nos cum doctrinis nostris sine corde, ecce ubi volutamur in Carne & sanguine. Hieronymus de Nepotiano sic scribit, nempe quod lectione assiduâ & meditatione diuturnâ pectus suum biblio∣thecam fecerat Christi.Epist. ad Helio∣dorum Epita∣phium Nepo∣tiant. Isaacum Casaubonum Londini narrare mihi memini (inquit Scultetus Observat. in primam Epist. ad Tim.) scilicet cum primum ingenii sui foe∣tum Criticum, notas nimirum in Diogenem Laertium, Patri suo ministro in Galliis Evangelico misisset, hoc ab eo responsi tu∣lisse, Mi Fili, laudo tuum studium: verum hoc scito: rem gra∣tiorem te mihi facturum, si vel unum dictum sacrae scripturae difficultatibus aliquibus obstructum explicueris, quàm si mille prophanorum Scriptorum loca depravata correxeris. Dignissima sane vox haec (ait Scultetus loco citato:) & Casau∣bono Patre & homine Theologo: quam ego ita adprobo ut ab ali∣quot jam annis omnes ferè curas cogitationes que meas in illustratio∣nem
Novi Testamenti conferam. Hoc semper sibi in animo haesisse professus est idem Isaacus Casaubonus audiente Doctissimo Praesule Hiberniae aliis que quibus hanc narrabat historiam. Vereor autem ne Ipse hujusmodi oneri impar plane sim, & vix aut ne vix pro dignitate subjecti hoc argumentum tractaverim. Annotationes tamen has qua∣les, quales, in novum Testamentum tibi dicare visum est, Mater vene∣randa, cui me maxime obaeratum esse non invitus fateor. Solvendo licet non sim, hunc tamen librum tibi pro beneficijs tuis abundè in me cumulatis tanquam grati animi  lubens offero. Viginti plus minus anni effluxerunt ex quo materiem hujus operis colligere occaepi. Quicquid jam inde ab eo tempore memorabile, & ad elucidandos tex∣tus Sacrae paginae utile, vel occurrebat in libris, vel audivi à concio∣natoribus, ad singula Capita & versus annotavi, Adeo ut opus viginti amorum aliquo saltem sensu appellari possit. Longum tem∣pus insumpsi exscribendis & ad praelum parandis hisce notationi∣bus. Multos non contemnendos Philologos Heinsius & Grotius in No∣vum testamen∣tū. Drusti Prae∣terita & pars altera. Camero∣nis Myrothe∣cium & Capel∣li Spicilegium. Sculteti exercitationes Evangelicae. Delit. Evang. & observat. in Mat. Marc. in Tim. & Tit. Casaub. Notae in Novum Te∣stamentum. Lodovici de Dieu. Comment in 4or. Evangelia & Act. Apost. & opera Posthuma. Fulleri miscel. Sac. Mayeri Philol. Sac. Spanhem. Dub. Evang. Drusii. Observat. Sac. de quaesisis per Epist Quaest. Heb. Parallela, de 3. Sectis Judae∣orum, de Proverb. Gassii. Philol. Sac. Grammat. & Rhet. Sac. Dilheri electa Sacra & Eclog è ad Novum Testamentum. Ca∣ninii loci Novi Testamenti. Alardi Pathologia Sac. Chitomaeus de Graeco-Barbaris N. T. imò & Theologos, Interpretes tum Protestantes, tum Pontificios consului, qui vel in totum Beza, Piscator, Cartwrightus, Fulco, Quistorpius, à Lapide, Novarinus, Menochius. Testamentum, in quatuor Calvinus, Cartwrightus, Chemnitius, Polyc. Lyser. & Gerh. Jonsenius. Brugensis, Maldonaetus. Evangelia, in Acta Aposto∣lorum, Epistolas omnes Calvinus, Estius, Vorstius. Paulinas, aliasque Catholicas, vel in sin∣gulas, atque Pareus, Brightmannus, Mede, Dent, Ribera, Gerhardus, Joannes de vado, Anglicè Foorthe vel Foorde. Apocalypsin scripserunt. Quibus omnibus Calvinus Hoc unum asseveratè pro∣nuntiare non dubito Institu∣tionem Calvini & Commenta∣rios in utrius∣que Testamenti tabulas à nullo ad hunc usque diem scriptore coae∣quari potuisse. Alexandri Mo∣ri Calvinus. vi∣de plura ibid. Ego certè nullo negotio plurima loca ex Salmerone, Maldonato, Fevardentio, & aliis Papistis Jesuitisque proferre possem, (habui enim jamdudum ea annotata) in quibus tacito ac suppresso Calvini nomine, Calvini expositi∣ones pro suis verbo tenus lectoribus venditant. Grotii Epistola ad Laurentium anatomizata. p. 19. Interpres  pal∣mam praeripere, & utramque (quod aiunt) paginam implere videtur. Beza fertur omnes Graecos autores, sacros & prophanos evolvisse, antequam Annotationes in Novum Testamentum auspi∣caretur. Voces sunt non paucae in Novo Testamento (inquit Cla∣rissimus Seldenus in Vxore Ebraica. l. 3. c. 23.) veluti . id genus aliae, quarum interpretatio solummodo ex
usu qui tunc temporis inoleverat, nec aliunde ritè petenda. Verìm Epistolae modum excessi; sereno vultu accipere digneris quaeso hoc munus literarium, & sicubi erraverim clementer ignos∣cas, cum nullum unquam sine veniâ placuerit ingenium. Acade∣mia vestra Scholae in Ecclesiae secundae Wake, Regem. Platon. Vide p. 2. & Cam∣deni Britanni∣am in Comitatu Oxoniensi. nomine olim inscripta, pie∣tate & verâ eruditione sit nulli secunda, hoc ex animo pre∣catur, summisque à Deo votis expetit Tibi submississime devotus EDVARDUS LEIGH.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. READER, THere is a threefold manner of citing Scripture out of the Old Testament used by Christ, the Evangelists and Apostles, for either they say simply, it is written, or it is said, Matth. 4.4.7.10. Or it is written by the Prophet,Laurentius in 1 Pet. 1.2.6. p. 122. or in the Prophets, Iohn 6.45. Or lastly it is written by the Prophet with the name expressed, Esay, Ioel, &c. Marke 6.7. Acts 2.16. Neither is it strange, that neither the Chapter nor verse is named by them, since this A∣rithmeticall distinction both of Chapters, and specially of verses (which wee have now in our Bibles) is a very late invention.See my Anno∣tations, and Beza on 1 Cor. 11.1. This distinction of the Bible into Chapters and verses was made by men subject to errour, and therefore is found oftentimes irregular, separating that which ought to follow in a continued threed, and confounding that which ought to be distinguished.That note on Matth. 5.26. the farthing was the least coyne used amongst the Jewes, &c. that had from Mr Perkins on that place, yet how is that the least, if a Mite be lesse by one halfe? Matth. 12.33. Christ can moderate the observing of the Sabbath, as he doth the other Ceremonies of the Law, these are Calvins words, by which hee seemes to make the observing of the law a Cere∣mony. The Bookes of the New Testament are 27. the Chapters 260. I do often in these notes relate the opinions and expositions of others, without passing my censure upon them, as Luke 2.7. I relate Mr Cartwrights opinion though I approve it not; for the originall is most cleere against it. And Mark 16.7. Peter is set behind, &c is Mr Cartwrights ob∣servation,
but not so solide; the marginall notes and those in the text may perhaps therefore sometimes interfeire and crosse each other, as Marke 1.1. I say in the text (out of Gerhard) that Marke relates Histories more largely, whereas the margent and the thing it self speakes, that he related them more briefly, sometimes the severall notes in the text it selfe may seeme repugnant, as Matth. 24.14. I say from Calvin, that Christ onely affirmes, that the Gospell shall be propagated to the ut∣most ends of the earth before his last comming, whereas v. 3. I observe out of B. Downam. that Christs comming is not treated of till, v. 23. Luke 5.39. Old wines are wont to be of a more gentle tast, &c. is contradicted by the margent and experi∣ence. I hope Divines will not censure mee, as if I did Falcem in alienam messem immittere. Dr Hall Practic. Cases of con∣science re∣solved. lec. 3. case 10. doth determine it lawfull for those that are not professd Divines, in some cases to interpret the Scripture. I shall neede the favourable construction of Divines in the worke it selfe, since it is the first of that nature where∣in I have adventured (though by the helpe of the best Com∣mentators) purposely to explaine the sacred text. I desi∣red (having had opportunity of consulting with so many Criticks for the accomplishing of my Critica Sacra) to make an Essay as it were in this booke, how usefull such kind of learn∣ing was for the clearer explication of the Scripture. I shall therfore much varie I beleeve in these Annotations from those Englishmen and others, which have formerly expounded either the New Testament or whole Scripture. In such a multitude of Collections taken from severall Writers, and many of them long since, there may be some luxuriant branches, which might by Judicious Divines have beene thought fit perhaps to have been lopt off, could I have been so happy as to have had them first diligently scanned by such. Opere in longo fas est obrepere somnum. I shall willingly submit it to the Judgement of experienced Divines, and such especially as are versed in this kind of learn∣ing. The New Testament in the Greeke is so little, that by one houre in the morning and evening in one weeke (saith Broughton Explicat. of the Apocal.) one may with ease and great delight read it o∣ver, yet this booke (saith hee) hath above 4600. words.
Pasor inlargeth the number; He saith the Appellative words are 4168. The proper names 474. The whole 5242. Hee re∣ckons up seven Dialects of the New Testament. Neither is it strange (saith he) that the footsteps of all dialects are to be found there, since the Apostles published the Gospel, not one∣ly to the Jewes, which used the Septuagint or Greeke version of the Old Testament, but also to other people differing in severall Dialects. The Attick Dialect, as it is the most elegant of all the rest in the Greeke, so it is most frequent in the New Testament. If Christians may by these Annotations (which have cost me a great deale of paines) be furthered in the study and knowledge of the Scriptures, I shall blesse God for it,See my Anno∣tations on Iohn 5.39. and thinke my labour well bestowed. Austen l. 3. confess. c. 5. while he was a Manichee slighted the Scripture for the plainnesse of the stile. Visa mihi est (saith he) indigna scriptura quam Tullianae dignitati compararem, the Scriptures seemed to me farre unworthy to be compard to the statelinesse of the Ciceronian eloquence; but after he grew acquainted with Christ, though hee much delighted in reading Tullies Hortensius, yet this thing onely (saith hee) in such a heate of zeale tooke mee off,l. 3. confess. c. 4. that the name of Christ was not in it. I shall wish thee as much delight and benefit in perusing my Booke, as it hath cost mee paines, in collecting, transcribing, inlarging, and reviewing it, and rest. Thy Hearty well-wisher, EDWARD LEIGH.
The names of such Bookes as this Authour hath formerly written. viz. 1. A Treatise of Divine Promises. 2. Analecta, or Observations on the Twelve first Caesars. 3. Critica Sacra on the Greek of the New Testament. 4. Critica Sacra on the Hebrew of the Old Testament. 5. A Treatise of Divinity in Three Bookes. 6. The Saints Encouragement in Evill Times.
❧ ANNOTATIONS UPON THE NEW TESTAMENT. The Gospel according to St MATTHEW. CHAP. I. THE word Translated Gospel in Classicall Authors signifies, first, Glad Tidings, or tydings of some good. 1 Sam. 4.10. and 18.24, 26, 27. Secondly, a reward given to him which brings glad∣some newes. Thirdly, Sacrifice or thankes offered to God for some acceptable thing. In the Scriptures of the New Teastament it signifies, First, the history of those things which Jesus both did and taught, Mar. 1.1. Mat. 26.3. Secondly, Preaching or publishing of the doctrine of Salvation. 1 Cor. 9.14. 2 Cor. 8.18. Rom. 2.16. Thirdly, The glad tydings of Salvation in and through Jesus Christ, Isa. 40.9. and 52.7. and 61.1. Rom. 10.15. , signifies a gift or tribute due for good tydings, whether as an offering to the Gods, the Authours, or as a reward to men, the messengers and bringers. M. Mede. See more there. 1 Cor. 9.14. Matthew is the first of the Evangelists, because he wrote first, the others Marke, Luke,Lucas Brugen∣sis. and John follow likewise according to the order of time in which they wrote. Matthew proceedes in this manner: First, he describes the Nativity of Christ. Second∣ly, his Baptisme. Thirdly, his Temptation. Fourthly, his Doctrine. Fiftly, his Mi∣racles. Sixtly, his Passion. Seventhly, his Resurrection and Ascension. Matthew and Luke agree; First, In their generall scope, which is to shew that Christ is the true Messias comming from Abraham and David. Secondly, In the subject matter or argument, which is to draw Christs Genealogie. Thirdly, In the persons of the first fourteen generations from Abraham to David, for the same persons altogether are re∣hearsed by both the Evangelists. They differ; First, In the forme of the series, Matthew proceedes by descending, Luke by ascending; Matthew includes their generations in certaine classes and genera∣tions, but not Luke. Secondly,Spanhem. Dub. Evangel. parte 1. Dub. 19. In the Head or originall which Matthew makes in Abraham, Luke in Adam or God. Thirdly, in the Order of the description, Matthew praeposeth the genealogie to the conception and birth of Christ, Luke postposeth it.
VERSE I. THe  Syrus para∣phrastes sim∣pliciter dicit, descriptio ge∣nerationis.Parum ac∣commodate Munsterus ver∣tit liber gene∣rationum. In tali enim con∣structione Se∣pher non signi∣ficat librum, sed catalogum, seriem, recensi∣onem, ut ex Gen. 5.1. pa∣tescit; nec li∣bri totius ar∣gumentum Christi genea∣logia, sed ex∣iguae tantum∣modo eius par∣ticulae. In eo∣dem significatu voce  utuntur hic Hellenistae Dilher elect. l. 1. c. 9. Generationis id est majorum ex quibus or∣tus est Chri∣stus, ut Ter∣tul. vertit. Bez. vide Pis. in loc. Booke] This first word of the first Evangelist, is a Greeke word, but in signi∣fication Hebrew. It is taken after the manner of the Hebrewes, who Gen. 5.1. have Sepher tholedoth, the booke of the generation, that is, a catalogue or reckoning up, but Moses speakes of the catalogue of the generation of Adam, Matthew of the booke of the generation of Jesus: so that generation is taken there actively, for them which Adam begot, that is, his posteritie; here passively, for those of which Christ is begotten, that is, for the Ancestors of Christ. Jesus] The name in Greeke and Latine, imitateth the Syriac Ieshuang, it signifi∣eth a Saviour, as the Angel explains it. v. 21. To save sinners was the maine designe of Christs comming into the world. He is first the alone Saviour, Acts 4.12. there is an utter inability in any other to save. Secondly, the Almighty Saviour, able to save. Isay 63. Heb. 7.25. Thirdly, it is his peculiar office to save those which were appointed him of his Father. Fourthly, it is for his glory that the Father hath made him a Saviour, John 5.22.24. Christ] It is a greeke word, and signifieth annointed, and comprehends in it all his Offices of Prophet, Priest, and King, they beeing all annointed: He is called  the annointed, by an excellencie, 1 John 41. and 4.42. Who is the sonne of David, the sonne of Abraham] These words may be taken two waies; first, this may be the sense, the sonne of David, which was the sonne of Abra∣ham: Or thus, the sonne of David and Abraham, the conjunction and beeing understood, and the sense then is, that Christ was the sonne of both. Jansenius likes the former better. Spanhem. Dub. Evangel. Facit autem Matthaeus A∣brahami & Davidis speci∣aliter mentio∣nem ob promis∣sa illis facta; Abrahamo de populosa pro∣genie, Davidi autem de regni stabilitate, quo∣rum utrumque in Christo emi∣nenter imple∣tum est. Grotius in loc. Matthew calles Christ the sonne of David and Abraham. 1 Because the most speciall and frequent promises concerning the Messiah were made to Abraham and David, be∣gun to Abraham, Gen. 12.2, 3. repeated and confirmed to David. Psal. 89.29. 2 Because these two were most in the esteeme and speech of the Jews, as men excel∣ling among the rest, one among the Patriarkes, the other among the Kings. 3 Because the Messias among the Jewes was thought to bee the seede of Abraham and the sonne of David according to the promises. He premiseth David before Abraham, First because it is solemne in the contexture of genealogies to ascend from the neerer to the more remote, as Luke doth c. 3. Secondly, for the better coherence of this verse with the other following, & Maldonate observeth that it is usuall with the Hebrewes to postpose that from which they will beginne what followes, as in 1 Gen. 1. Thirdly, because indeed Christ was not the sonne of Abraham but by David, and of him first and neerer than the other. Vers. 5. All the women in Christs Genealogie except his most holy Mother, have a marke of infamie upon them, Notandum in genealogia Sal∣vatoris nullam sanctarum as∣sumi mulierum sed eas quas scriptura reprehendit, ut qui propter peccatores venerat, de peccatoribus nascens omnium peccata deleret. Hieron. in loc. Thamar, vers. 3. with whom Judas her Father in law had committed incest, Gen. 38.18. Secondly, Rachab, vers. 5. who was a common strumpet, Heb. 11.31. Thirdly, Ruth, verse 5. she came of Moab, whom Lot begat of his owne daughter, Gen. 19.37. Fourthly, Vriahs wife, verse 6. with whom David committed adultery, and for whom he was so plagued of God, 1 Sam. 12.9, 10. Vers. 6. David the King] Onely David is adorned with this Elogie, because in his person God propounded a type of the Messiah to come. Calvin. Because a promise of a perpetuall kingdome was made to him, 2 King. 7.12. Maldonate. David is here called the King, because he was the first King in the genealogie of Christ, and because he was the first King among the people of Israel, in whose seede the King∣dome long continued. Jan sen. comment. in concord Evang. Vers. 8. Joram begat Ozias] It is manifest from 2 King. 8.24. and 11.2. 1 Chron. 3.11, 12. that Ioram begat Ahaziah, Ahaziah Ioaz, Ioaz Amazia, and lastly Amaziah Vz∣ziah, 2 Chron. 26.1. who also is called Azariah. Here three Kings, Ahaziah, Ioaz, and Amaziah are premised in this Genealogicall series; as Grand-children are called sonnes amongst the Hebrewes, so grandfathers and great-grandfathers, fathers, who may bee thought to have begotten their grand-children and great grand-children, viz. in a me∣diate
generation. So Christ v. 1. is called the sonne of David & Abraham,Spanhem dub. Evang. so we are all cal∣led the sonnes of Adam, Iohn 8.33.39. And those three are pretermitted for the peculiar curse which God twice threatneth to powre on the house of Ahab, 1 King. 21.21. and 2 Kings 9.8. which curse the Lord would ratifie here, by altogether rasing out these three Kings which were of the posteritie of Ahab, (for Ahaziah was begot by Ioram of Athaliah the daughter of Ahab) out of the catalogue of Christs progenitors. Or these three Kings may be omitted,Annotations in folio. because Matthew intended to keepe within the compasse of fourteene generations here as well as afterwards. Vers. 11. By the first Iechonias in the 11 vers. is understood Iehoiachim the sonne of Io∣siah, who also is called Eliakim, and he was either of two names and called also Iecho∣nias which is not unusuall in the holy storie, or it may be sayd the name Iehoiakim is rendred of Matthew per euphoniam, Spanhemitis. Gomarus. vide de Dieu. et Pisc. in loc. Josias tanquam avus nepotem mediante pa∣tre Iechoniam gignere dicitur, genuit enim Iosias Ioiachimum, Ioiachim vero Iechoniam, cujus fratres non leguntur quidem germani extitisse, sed intelliguntur patrui atque agnati ex Iosia rege descendentes. Iun. in Paralel. Iechonias. There seeme to be but 13. in the last ge∣neration, unlesse he that was last named in the second be againe to be rehearsed the first in that last, as some reverend Divines thinke, viz. Iechonias the father, and also the sonne, which both are to bee reckoned in the genealogie, and are called Iehoiachim and Ie∣hoiachin, 2 Chron: 36.8, 9. Vers. 16. Quest. Why is the genealogie of Christ drawne from Matthew here, vers. 16. to Ioseph, and not rather to Mary,Spanhemius. when yet Christ neither was the sonne of Ioseph nor descended from him. The common answer both of the ancient and moderne in∣terpreters (which Augustine propounds and defends, Lib. 2. Cons. Evang.) is this, that it was not the custome of the Iewes to rehearse a catalogue of generations by women, Num. 1.26. Hence it is an ancient maxime among them, familia matris non familia. Vers. 17. From David untill the carrying away into Babylon are fourteene generations.] Iun. in paral. Rainold. de lib. Apoc. praelect. 8. er alij. There were indeed 17. generations from David to the Captivity, but for memories sake three are omitted, that the same even number might be kept in all. Vers. 18. She that is be∣trothed is coun∣ted for a wife. Deut. 22.24. Espoused] Contracting is an ancient and commendable custome, see Gen. 19.8.14. Deut. 22.22. the very Heathens had their espousalls, Iudg. 4.1. Placuit des∣pondi, nuptiis hic dictus est dies, sayes he in Terence. Came together] The word which the Evangelist useth, either modestly signifieth a  de mutuo conjugij usu honeste dicitur ut 1 Cor. 7.8. Cui respondet Latina vox, co∣ire sed minus verecunda. lying together, or is simply taken for to dwell together, that the husband and wife make a house and family, so the sence shall be that the Virgin was not yet delivered from her parents into the hand of her hus∣band, but lived under their custody. Calvin. V. 18. With Child] Word for word, , ut Iud. 13.5.Pro eo quod Evangelista Matthaeus dicit, inutero habebit, in Propheta Isa. 7. scriptum est in utero accipiet: sed propheta quia futura praedicit, significat quid futurum sit, & scribit, accipiet: Evangelista quiae non de futuro, sed de praeterito narret historiam, mutavit accipiet, & posuit, habebit, Qui enim habet, nequaquam accepturus est. Hieron. in loc. See Luk. 1.35 having in her e bellie, as ver. 23. of the Holy Ghost.] Christ was not begotten spermaticè, not of the substance, but of the power of the Holy Ghost. He had his principium formale from him, and passivum from the Virgin Mary. Vers. 19. He was a just man, and therefore not willing to accompanie with a defiled woman as he might suppose, but gentle also,See in Beza the difference be∣tweene divor∣tium and re∣pudium. and so chose rather to put her away pri∣vily, than to cause her to be stoned as the Law was, Deut. 22.21. After marriage he could not have done this, but must have given her a bill. He would put her away because hee was just; and privily because he would not traduce her; He would put her away, that hee might satisfie his own conscience; and privily, that he might consult for his wives credit. Lucas Brugensis comment. in 4. Evangelia. Vers. 20. But while he thought on these things] In the Greeke, and as hee had these things in his minde. For that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost] Angelus docebat Iosephum numinis esse quod ille putaverat criminis. August. Epist. Vers. 21. Thou shalt call his name Iesus, for he shall save his people from their sinnes] To save from their sinnes is to deliver a sinner from all that hurt and mischiefe which sinne would bring, viz. 1 from the guilt of it, by which it defiles the conscience,Certum est il∣ludnomen Inaūs Iesus, à Grae∣cis Latinos, ab Hebraeis Graecos accepisse. Maldonatus in loc. See 2 Sam. 3.18. and maketh
it to accuse, condemne and terrifie, and causeth it contrarily to acquit and comfort. 2 From the punishments of sinne, that is, from all evills in this life so farre as they bee punishments, that is, testimonies of Gods hatred against the sinner, and from the eter∣nall miserie of Hell and the losse of heaven, making a man againe an heire of the kingdome of heaven. 3 From the dominion and tyrannie of sinne upon the will, by which one is a slave to it. 4 From the staine and filth of sinne, and makes the soule cleane and amiable in the sight of God, the filthinesse of sinne beeing taken away. Vers. 22. Of all the writers of the Old Testament the Prophet Esay hath the honour to be the first that is vouched in the New, and of all places this hath the honour to be the first of all in the first Evangelist and in his first chapter. Virgo illa. Gen. 3.15.Vers. 23. A Virgin] That virgin , that famous Virgin foretold, Isay 7.14. and selected from eternity, whose seede was to breake the Serpents head. They shall call] So the Vulgar, Syriac, and Ethiopic reade it, the Arabic in the same sense passively, He shall be called, Beza. Vocabis, Thou shalt call, Vide miscell Drusij cent. 1. c. 72. The right of giving the name, (which rather agreed to the Father, and not to the mother, but by his Gen. 35.18. Luk. 1.60.62. Iun. Esa. 7.14. renders it, vocabis O virgo. consent) is here given to the mother, by which it is signified that this sonne as he was man was without Father. But in the 21. v. (as de Dieu. notes) the giving the name seemes to be as∣cribed to Ioseph. Nobiscum carnis similitu∣dine, nobiscum utilitate. Bern.Emanuel] Which being interpreted, is God with us, that is, in our nature, as Cartw. or graciously present with us, as Calvin. Chemnit. Vers. 25. Helvidius would gather from these two words untill, and first borne, that Mary after had children by her husband. The word untill in Scripture is taken for ne∣ver. Gen. 28.15. Primogenitus est non post quē alij, sed ante quem nullus alius genitus est. Pareus Chemnit. He is called the first borne in Scripture, which first opens the wombe, whether others follow or no. Yet it is the ancient and common opinion of the Church (saith Pareus) that Mary alwaies remained a virgin, which we willingly follow. , Illum promogenitum, that first borne, to shew that Christ is not called the first borne of Mary, but absolutely the first borne, because he is that famous first borne, viz. the first begotten of all creatures as Paul hath it, that is, begotten before the Creation of all things. Iansen. comment. in concord. Evang. CHAP. II. Verse 1. BEthlehem] signifies domus panis, the house of bread, so called from its ferti∣lity, the bread of Life is found in Bethlehem the house of bread. of Iudea,] that is which is in the tribe  of Judah. Judg. 19.18. To distinguish it from the other Beth∣lehm in the tribe of Zebulon. Josh. 19.15. Herod] the Great, King of Judea. Luke 1.5. called Ascalonita from his Country, sonne of Antipater. Herod which killed Iohn Baptist in the 14. Chap. was called Antipas and was his Sonne. Herod the killer of James Acts 12. was named Agrippa, he was the grand-child of this Herod the Great by his sonne Aristobulus. Ascalonita necat pueros, Antipa Johannem, Agrippa Jacobum, Claudens in carcere Petrum. Wise men from the Terra unde venerant Ma∣gi, non Coeli re∣gio hac voce de∣notatur, inquit Grotius. Quot fuerint nūero, quia non exprimit evan∣gelista, nescire praestat quam temere pro certo asserere quod dubium est. Calvin. Magus vox non Latina, à magis, nec Graeca, aut Hebraea, sed Persica, ut volunt, fig. sapientem: Quos enim Graeci Philosophos, Assyrij Chaldaeos, Indi Gymnosophistas, eos Persae magos proprie vocabant. Pareus. Non parva quaestio est, quales fuerunt hi magi. Quidam n. maleficos fuisse autumant, alij sapientes, plerique etiam reges, Evangelista eos reges non vocat, vocaturus ut apparet, si tales fuissent, cùm id ad gloriam Christi non parum pertinuis∣set. Sed nec veterum interpretum quisquam hos magos reges vocat. Iansen. Comment, in Concord. Evang. East] Three say the Papists, because they offered gold, frankin∣cense and myrrhe, but they were commonly offered by them all, not every one seve∣rally his proper gift. Some make gold a symbole of Christs kingdome, frankincense of his Priesthood, myrrh of his buriall, but that is not solid; it was solemne with the Persians to have some present in their hand when they saluted their Kings, and they chose those three as being the principall commodities of the East, Gen. 43.12. Vers. 2. Where is he that is borne King of the Jewes] Some thinke a King borne here is secretly opposed against a King made or created, but that is too subtill, they meane
that this King was lately borne and remaineth yet an infant, to distinguish him from the King that was at his full growth and then governed. Which words may be understood two wayes; first simply, that the sense should bee, Where is that King of the Iewes who is now borne. Secondly, they may shew that that King which they seeke for is a King borne; that is, not chosen by men for a King and annointed in his fit time, but who was at his Birth the King of the Iewes, to distinguish him from other Kings of the Iewes. Jansen. His Starre] Vide Span∣hen. Dub. Evang. parte 2. Dub. 27. & 28. Origen saith it was a comet, Chrysostome and Theophil. an Angell,Hoc est certam illam & infig∣nem Stellam. Alrdi. Patho∣logia N. T. others say it was a wonderfull meteor, some say it was an extraordinary starre, won∣derfully made by God. For other starres in their daily motion move from East to West, this moved from North to South, from Ierusalem to Bethlehem. It was seene in the day, other starres are then obscured by the Sunnes splendor. These Astrologers (saith Chrysostome) are taught here the truth by this new starre, which had abused the old starres to all impiety. And are come to worship him] The Greeke verbe  is either derived à moto galero, vel ab osculando, vel à canibus, from a hat moved, from kissing, or dogges,  is a hat,  is to kisse,  are dogges, by it is signified the gesture of low vene∣ration when one casts himselfe at anothers feete, as fawning dogges doe. Lucas Brugensis. Vers. 6. And thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah] That is part of Iudah.Propheta Beth∣leemam mini∣mam appellans indicat, illam quantitate & angustijs, opibus & splendore minimam. Mat∣thaeus verò non minimam ap∣pellans intelli∣git illam honore & existimatione non esse minimam. Matth. 6. Cartw. historia Christi in 4. Evagel. ) Nihil hic Contra mentem prophetae, si verba ejus legas per interrogationem, parva es ut sis in Chiliadibus Juda? Nam quid hoc aliud est, quam quod Evangelista posuit, nequaquam minima es. Sic Apostolus expressit locum Davidis, An est intelligens? . Rom. 3.11. Alij aliter haec conciliant, nec in ullo loco laboratum magis, mihi simplicissinam videtur quod posui. Atque haud scio an hic locum habere debeat illa quorundam excusatio quod, quae prius minima fuerat, postea ex eventu haud minima evaserit, quum Matthaeus ipsum prophetam adducat suis verbis loquentem. Sic enim inquit, scrip∣tum est per prophetam. Aut si haec dicantur in persona Pharisaeorum, ne sic quidem, vereor, curiosis ingenijs fiet satis. Nam non legimus usquam notatos Pharisaeos, quod Prophetarum verba immutarint aut corruperint. Drusij not, in paral. sacra. Art nor the least] Object. The Prophet Micah saith that Bethlehem is little, that it should be accounted a∣mongst the Governours in Judah, Matthew on the other side extols its dignity, as if, it should be one of the chiefe, not the least, that is by a miosis, the most excellent. Answer. The Prophet (Christ being not yet borne) called it least in respect of out∣ward splendour, and earthly riches, yet he seemes to signifie, that this towne other∣wise but little, obscure and base, should be honoured and made famous by the birth of the Messias, now Matthew looked to the event of the prophesie, so it is not little in esteeme. Vers. 10. They rejoyced with exceeding great joy] There is a three fold emphasis. 1. An Attick elegancie to rejoyce with joy , as . Iliad. . the Latines say, servire servitutem, 2. Great joy. 3. Exceeding great joy. Vers. 12. Vide Canin. loc. novi Testa∣menti & Ap∣pendicem de Dieu.Being warned] having beene warned . They departed another way] Greeke, They passed secretly by another way, as v. 14. and departed, Greeke passed secretly. Vers. 18. In Rama was there a voyce heard] Vid. Spanhem, Dub. Evang. partem secundā Dub. 82.83.84. Dr. Clerke. Rama was farre from Bethlehem, which made St. Ierome make Rama an Appellative, In excelso vox audita est. The voyce of the dy∣ing children and the crying parents was heard on high, reacht round about through∣out all Ephrata. Three Synoni∣ma, as with the Prophet, la∣mentation, weeping, bitter∣nesses. Lamentation, weeping, and great mourning] If we observe this place, we shall confesse with Ierome that Matthew in relating this testimony, neither exactly followed the Hebrew nor the Septuagint. Drus. not. in parallel. Sac. Per Rachel.  intelligit matres Bethlehemiticas in vicinia sepulchri Rachelis habitantes. Piscat.  & noluit consolari. Quo loco consolari accipit vulgatus pro consolationem accipere sive admittere, quo sensu. Gen. chap. 37. v. 35. extat de Iacobe vicem Iosephi dolente. Noluit consolationem accipere, ut ibidem vulgata versio habet. Pas∣sive hoc dicitur Ier. cap. 31. v. 15. Comprobant haec Scriptorum Testimoniis. Dieter. Antiquit. Bibl. parte. 1. Rachel weeping for her children] That is, the mothers which inhabited those parts where the sepulcher of Rachel was. Vers. 22. He turned aside] Greeke he passed secretly.
Si ullus locus in toto novo Testamento Calumniae & cavillis hostium Evangelii op∣portunus vide∣tur, & Lectori attento crucem figere potest, fatendum hunc prae omnibus alijs & majori specie urgeri, & difficilem pati solutionem, Span. dub. Evang. Part. 2 Dub. 87. Vide plura apud Spanhem. loco citato & Dub. 88.89.90.91.92.93.94. et de Dien. Append. Sculter. Exercit. Evang. l. 1. c. 60.23. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophets] By which of the Pro∣phets was this name given to Christ, for we find no such testimony? Chrysostom and Theophylact, because they cannot undoe this knot, cut it thus, saying that many of the bookes of the Prophets are lost. Bucer thinketh that that place, Judges 13.5. is here noted. Sampson was a most excellent figure of Christ as he was a Redeemer, and did most notably represent him in his death wherein he killed more than in his life, and the booke of Judges was composed by divers Prophets. Calvin, Beza, and Mr. Per∣kins, doe incline to this opinion, Causabon in his exercitat. Iunius in his paralells and analys. in Num. Piscator, Dr. Tailor, Mr. Dod say, that Matthew hath respect to those places, Esay 11.1. and Zach. 6.12. a branch, in Hebrew Netzer, therefore Weemes in his Chri∣stian Synagogue saith, these words in Matthew, should bee interpreted, he shall be called a flower or branch. He shall be called a Nazarene] The Papists are of opinion, that our Saviour wore long haire, and so picture him, because, we read here he was a Nazarite, or rather a Nazarene, as with Beza our best Translators read it, by education, not by profession and institution, in regard of the place where he was educated and conversed, not any vow whereunto hee was bound, Numb. 6.4. He dranke wine and touched the dead. He observed not the rites and orders of the Nazarites, but he was the truth and sub∣stance of that order, for in him was fully accomplished that holinesse which was figu∣red by that order, he was perfectly severed from all sin and pollution. CHAP. III. Verse 1. IOhn] signifieth the grace of God, for he did preach the grace of God in Christ then exhibited. The Baptist] so named to distinguish him from Iohn the Apostle, and because He first administred baptisme the Sacrament of the new Testament.Vel quòd pri∣mus baptizare coepit, vel quòd Christū bapti∣zaverit. Maldo∣natus, vide Be∣zam. In the wildernesse] A place wherein wee find six Cities with their villages, Iohn 15.61. but called a wildernesse because thinly inhabited. Vers. 2. For the Kingdome of Heaven is at hand] That is the Church of the Old Testa∣ment is now abolished, and the Church of the New Testament is ready to take place by Christs coming, and therefore repent and amend. Vers. 3. The voyce of one crying] or, bellowing like an Oxe. Rollock observeth, that Iohn Baptist entred upon his calling in the yeare of Jubilee, which used to bee proclamed by a Cryer with the sound of a trumpet, and he is called the voyce of a cryer in allu∣sion thereunto. Illud observa∣tu non indig∣num, factum divina provi∣dentia ut qui veniebat in Spiritu Eliae, Elias propte∣rea à Prophetis nominatus, etiam habitu exteriori Eliam referret. Grotius in loc. vide Sculter. exercit Evangel. li. 1. c. 15.Vers. 4. Locusts] have their name in Greeke () from the tops of the eares of Corne which they fed upon as they fled. The question needes not to bee whether these be mans meate or no? it is certaine that the Jewes might eat them by the law of Moses, Levit. 11.22. Plinie l. 1. c. 29. speakes of them, Matthiolus upon Dioscorides saith, this was the reason, why John Baptist made use of them, as a strict observer of the Law; they are eaten in the East and else where. Vers. 4. In regioni∣bus Calidiori∣bus tanta apum Copia esse solet, ut cum alvearibus Capi non possint in sylvas avolent, & aut in arborum truncis, aut in ru∣pium fissuris mellificent, vidi ego in Boetica homines pauperes, qui hoc ex sylvis colligendo, vendendóque melle quaestum factitarent. Id in Palaestina multum fuisse credendum est, & quia calida & fertilis erat regio, & quia Deus saepe vocat terram lacte & melle manantem, & quia ex facto Ionathae, manifestum est mel à rupibus revera fluxisse. Maldonatus. Vide Scult. Delit. Evang. c. 9. Wild honey] Vers. 6. Confessing their sins] The confession of the Converts was voluntary, not con∣strained. 2. In general, not of every particular sin. 3 Publike, not into the eares of a Priest. Vers. 7. When he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadduces come to his baptisme] Two
kinds of men which were of great authority among the Jewes, with whom Christ had perpetuall enmity, as also with the Scribes, 5 Cha. 20. and 16.21. & 22.23. & 23.13. Generation of Vipers] The whole body and corporation of them was full of deadly poison. It is an allusion (say some) to Gen. 3.15.Progeniem vi∣perarum nomi∣nat potiùs quam viperas ut toti ordini exprobret vi∣rulentam mali∣tiam, ne{que} enim paucos tantum illos qui ade∣rant sed totum corpus damnari voluit, ac si diceret, u∣tramque factio∣nem non nisi serpentes gig∣nere. Calvin. Chrysost. Ope∣re imperfecto. Vide Spanhem. Dub. Evang. parte 3. Dub. 30. Viperae venenum in lingua, pellis speciosa. Alluditur simul ad locum Geneseos, ubi diabolus serpens Grotius. Where the wicked are called the seed of the Serpent, Chemnit. Others alleadge many properties of the Vipers. 1. He hath his Teeth covered and buried in his gummes, so that one would think it a harmlesse Beast and that it could not bite. Viperae dentes gingivis conduntur, Pliny. l. 11. c. 37. So also have these deceitfull Hypocrites their conveiances wherein they so cunningly couch their wickednesse, that one would take them of all others to be most innocent, and to this appertaines the similitude of our Saviour, Luke 11.44. Secondly, The nature of Vipers is such, that when they have bitten a man, they presently run to the water, but if they find not the water they die: so Hee calls them Vipers who committing deadly sinnes did run to baptisme, as Vipers to the water to avoyde the danger of death. Thirdly, it is the nature of Vipers to make themselves a passage through their mo∣thers bowels, (though some denie this) and therefore they are called Viperae, quasi vi partae; so the Jewes daily persecuting the Prophets did breake through their mother the Synagogue, Cant. 1.6. Fourthly, The Viper is very specious and beautifull without, as it were painted, but full of poyson within; so the Pharisees made a shew and ostentation of holinesse, but had the poyson of malice in their hearts. Vers. 8. Meete for repentance] It is a metaphor taken from trees transplanted or graf∣ted into other stocks, they must bring forth a new fruite. Vers. 9. God is able of these stones to raise up children to Abraham.]Spanhem. Dub. Evang. parte. 3. Dub. 35. The Baptist mentio∣ned stones either because there was plentie of them in that place where he taught and baptized, as the similies and examples that Christ brings are often fetcht from things obvious, or he puts a definite thing, for a thing indefinite, stones, that is, things unfit for such a matter, as Luke 19.40. or else alludes to Esay 51.2. Vers. 10. Now] That light is come into the world, also] this implies something be∣fore of the same kind, axe,] some would have that to be Gods own immediate hand, but it is here an instrument, the Roman Empire. Laid] A metaphor taken from the custome of men which cut with an axe, they usual∣ly lay the axe at the place where they would strike, to guide their stroke; God to pre∣vent his. The roote] Some would have Abrah. to be the root, others Christ, rather the Jewish State & Church, some say Gods presence in his ordinances, the civill government, and saints. Therefore] After so many warnings and convictions. Tree] The Nations of the Jewes. Every tree which bringeth not forth] Not that hath or will bring forth, but which doth not bring forth, that is, is not in a growing, bearing, thriving way;Fructus à fru∣or. it is not enough to bud or blossome, but must make it out to the use of the husbandman. Fruite,] not leaves or blossoms. Good] Answerable to the soile, the purpose God hath ordained it for, and his care and cost bestowed on it. Is cut down] As sure to be as if it were done already.Pareas. Exo. 3.5. Iosh. 5.15. Maldonate hath both those exposi∣tions. Vide Drusij. Adag. Class. l. 3. Solvere calceū vilissimum ac maximè despi∣cax est ministe∣rium. Aug. & Theoph. vide Bezam. Cut downe] by Gods hand, judiciously, & efficatiously, though they deserve it meritoriously. Cast into the fire,] which is proper for a barren tree, never to be pluckt out againe. Vers. 11. Whose shooes I am not worthy to beare] That phrase is taken from the custome of the Hebrewes, who being to enter into the more holy place laid by their shooes as the Turkes and Africans doe now; those which were more noble, had a boy who carried their shooes when they laid them by. The other Evangelists have exprest it in a different phrase, Marke 1.7. Luke 3.16. Iohn 1.26, 27. And they all allude to the forme of the shooe, for in the hotter countries, the shooes had soles onely below, they were tyed a∣bove, so that they were to be loosed in their bonds, before they could be pulled off. Vers. 11. Baptize] That is, drowne you all over, dip you into the ocean of his grace, opposite to the sprinckling which was in the Law, with the Holy Ghost, and with fire]
That is with the Holy Ghost, which is fire, et is taken not copulativè, but exegeticè. The Aethiopians (which we call Abisseni) take this word properly,See Gen. 3.16. Hoc est Spi∣ritu sancto ig∣neo, Spiritu Sancto qui est ignis, id est, qui est similis igni. est Hendya∣dis. Cornel. a Lap. Vide Scultet. Exer∣cit. evang. l. 1. c. 35. and marke their children as we doe our beasts with an hot yron when they baptize them. It must bee expounded metaphorically, or rather prophetically with reference (say some Cameron and Mr. Bedford on the Sac. part. 1. ch. 2.) to the History of the fiery cloven tongues, the visible representation of the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost. Act. 2.2, 3. or to Esay 6.6, 7. (saith Spicileg. in. loc. Capellus) where one of the Seraphims is said to have taken a burning coale from the Altar, and with it to have touched the lips of the Prophet, by which coal the Holy Ghost was signified, or his most efficacious force of purging, and by those words thy iniquity is taken away, inward baptisme (which whol∣ly consists in the purgation and expiation of sinnes) is noted. Glass. Rhe. Sac. Tract. 1. c. 11.Vers. 12. In which Allegoricall speech by the floore, the Church of Christ dispersed through Iudaea and the whole world is understood; by the fanne the meanes by which Christ separates beleevers from the hypocrites and wicked, which are preaching of the Gospel, afflictions, and the last judgement; by the purging of the floore, the action of se∣parating; by the wheate, the beleevers; by the chaffe, Impij & damnandi vo∣cantur paleae, quia ut paleae sunt levissimi, vilissimi & ad nihil fere utiles nisi ad ignem. a Lapide the wicked; by the garner, the kingdome of heaven and eternall life; by unquenchable fire, the torments of hell, Winnowing signifies the temptations of Satan, Luk. 12.31. Here the errour of Origen is condemned, who thought that the torments of hell would not be pepetuall, but should end after the great yeare of Plato, in which all things shall be renewed, it is unquenchable fire. He alludes to the 66 of Esay 24. and 33.14. Vers. 14. But Iohn forbad him,] He earnestly forbad him, as the , Ob∣nixè prohibuit.  in compo∣sitione intendit significationem. Geeke word signifies. Vers. 16. Apertio caelo∣rum pro mani∣festatione glo∣riae Coelestis interdum acci∣pitur, hic verò etiam significat visibilis Coeli cissuram ita ut perspicere potuit Iohannes aliquid planetis & astris superius; neque . alius potest esse sensus verborum Marci cum dicit eum vidisse diffindi coelos. Calvinus. Videtur respicere atque alludere ad locum qui est Proverb. 8.30. It is most likely it was a reall body, and corporall dove, for Luke ad∣deth in a bodily shape. The word likenesse is not to be referred to the Dove, but to the Spirit, which manifested his presence in this likenesse. Secondly, that phrase doth not alwaies note likenesse and similitude onely, but verity and identity, Iohn 1.14. Phil. 2.7. Mahomet, that wicked impostor, and ape of Christ, imitated this. For that he might perswade his followers that the Holy Ghost was familiar with him, he by often feeding a Dove brought her to fly over his head, and to picke graines of corne out of his eare. Vers. 17. In whom] Not with, or by, or through whom; but a larger preposition than them all, which signifieth two things: first, that God is well pleased with Christ. Secondly, in and through him with others. CHAP. IV. The weapons used in this combat by Christ art part∣ly offensive, the sword of the Spirit, it is written, partly defensive, which are principally three correspondent to the number of our three mortall enemies, the World, Flesh, and the De∣vill. He useth the wildernesse against the temptations of the world, fasting against the temptations of the flesh, and prayer against the temptations of the Devill.Verse 1. THen] This word hath reference to the end of the former chapter, so soone as Christ was solemnely inaugurated into his Office, and proclamed from heaven to be the sole Doctor and Prophet of Gods Church, even then immediately without any delay was he driven forth, as Marke saith, 1.12. Wildernesse] The great wildernesse is here meant saith Chemnitius; whose reasons are these. First, The other Deserts are circumscribed by some addition, as the wildernesse of Iudaea, Ziph, Maon, the great wildernesse is simply so called without any addition. Vers. 2. Matthew expressely makes mention of nights, lest it should bee thought to be such a fast, as that of the Jewes, who fasted in the day, and did eate at the evening and in the night.Chemnit. He would not extend his fast above the terme of Moses and Elias, lest he should have seemed to have appeared onely, and not to have beene a true man.
Vers. 3. It is probable (saith Maldonate) that he appeared in a humane shape, because he spoke to Christ of many things, and because he sought to be worshiped. The Devill is called the Tempter because he gives himselfe to tempt all men, by all meanes, at all times.Perkins. Command that these stones be made bread] The sense of the words is, since thou seest thy selfe to be forsaken of God, necessity compells that thou shouldst provide for thy selfe, therefore command that these stones be made bread. Vers. 4. That is, that speciall and powerfull word,Vide Pisca. in loc. whereby hee appointeth and commandeth it to nourish us, the word of command and benediction. Vers. 5. The Devill (saith Chemnitius) appeared in some visible and corporall shape to Christ, as the words of the Evangelists intimate: The tempter comming to him, tooke him with him, and get thee away Satan. Calvin & Scultetus think rather it was in a vision; but first then Satans perswasion to Christ to cast himselfe downe could have beene no temptation. Secondly, Christ might bee led of the Devill the ordinary way from the wildernesse to Jerusalem, so much the words will beare. Thirdly, the Devill might carry Christs body really through the aire, Piscator, Perkins, Dike, Tailour. In the fifth verse the words following confirme the reall transportation, for it is said the Devill set him on a pinacle of the temple, therefore having power to set him there hee might carry him thither; besides the word signifieth hee set him downe, who had formerly taken him up. Vers. 7. It is written againe] Not that another Scripture opposeth the true mean∣ing of the Psalme, but he opposeth it against, the corruption of the Devill which hee made by mutilating the words of the Psalmist, or rather by depraving them, saith Delit. Evang. c. 30. Scultetus. Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God] Hee is said to tempt God, who not or∣dinarily but presumptuously without necessity seekes an experiment of the Si locum Deuteronomij cum historijs antecedentibus, & cum Psal. 95.8. Conferas, apparebit  propriè hic esse Dei potentiam aut providentiam experiri, cum satis magna jam ejus documenta apparuerint, Sic Act. 15.10. Grotius. power, wisedome, goodnesse, and truth of God. Vers. 10. Get thee hence Satan] Signifying thereby not onely his abhorring of that sinne, but also the danger of the assault by the world. For it is written] All the Scriptures which Christ as yet cited, he brings out of Deuteronomie, After the manner of the Iewes, who were especially versed in that as an epitome of the whole law. Lucas. Brugensis. Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him onely shalt thou serve] By worship is pro∣perly signified bodily worship in a bodily gesture, the meaning then is, thou shalt with thy body adore the Lord, for so it is suitable to Satans demand. The word serve] Signifieth all worship due to God both inward and outward. onely] This word appertaines to both the members, and so to the whole sentence, Vbi fatetur Iansenius quòd res est, in pri∣mae etiam parte intelligi debe∣re vocem so∣lam: Ali∣oqui tentatori ceu ad ratio∣nem deposcentis minus aptè respondisset Christus. Down Diat. de Antich. vide Piscar. v. 2.8. for else there should be no direct deniall of Satans temptation, requiring onely the former and not the latter. Out of the words of Moses, that we must serve God, Deut. 6.13. Christ maketh col∣lection that we must serve God alone, teaching us to conclude in like case, that if the Scripture doe shew, that there is not any other power of conversion besides the Spi∣rit of God, then where it is said the Lord converteth or allureth Japheth, it is there meant, that the Lord onely converteth and allureth, and none other. Vers. 11. Angels ministred unto him] Non tanquam misericordes indigenti, sed tanquam subjecti omnipotenti. Augustin. Hom. 8. Vers. 18. As he walked by the Sea of Galilee] It was not properly a Sea, but accord∣ing to the phrase of the Hebrewes, who call all great meetings of waters by that one name. The River Iordan falling into this flat, makes sixteene miles long and some six in breadth, which was famous for fish though of ordinary kinds, yet of an extra∣ordinary tast and relish. Vers. 19. Follow me]  Come and follow mee. V. 23. Vox haec  tam latè patet quam Hebraea Gnedah, aut Latina conven∣tus. Omnis enim hominum Coetus qui ex instituto est sive judiciorū, sive publici consilij, sine rerum sacrarum gratia, hoc nomine appellatur. Deinde verò coepit & ad loca transferri, in quibus isti conventus habebantur, ut Luc. 17.5. Hic sive Coetum, sive locum in quo lex divina exponi solebat intelligas, nihil refert. Ne Christianos quidem ab hoc vocabulo abhorruisse apparet. Iac. 2.2. Grotius. Teaching in their Synagogues] The word  is usuall with the Septuagint Interpreters in the old Testament. In its first originall it is a generall word sig∣nifying
the very act of gathering together. Gen. 1.9. and 28.3. Esay 19.16. Ier. 44.15. and 50.9. Ezeck. 38.4. But in speciall it is used of the Church of Israel, Exod. 16.3. Levit. 14.3. In the same manner it is used by the Evangelists and Apostles in the new Testament, for the gathering together, viz. of the Jewish people, as in this place, and metonymically for the place in which the Iewes met every Sabbath to heare the Law and the Prophets read, Luke 7.5. Acts 15.21. and 18.7. Gerh. loc. commun. de ecclesia. c. 1. The Gospel of the kingdome] Because it declares both the nature of this kingdome, and the way leading to it. Heron. Vers. 24. And his fame went throughout all Syria] And the fame of him went into all Syria. Possessed with Devills] Greek, vexed with Devills. Lunatickes] Vel quod interlunio nati comitiali mor∣bo laborare soleant, vel quod epileptici ad conversiones lunares paroxysmis corripiantur. Scultet. exercit. Evang. l. 2. c. 12. vide Fulleri miscell. Sac. l. 2. c. 17. They are called Lunatickes in whom the force of the disease in∣creaseth or decreaseth after the inclination of the Moone, as those that have the falling sicknesse. CHAP. V. LInacer reading these fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of Matthew, burst out into this protestation, Either these sayings are not Christs, or wee are not Christians. In this Chapter, and the two next, is contained Christs Sermon in the Mount, preached to his Disciples and others that were converted unto him among the multi∣tude. This Sermon may be called the Key of the whole Bible; for here Christ openeth the summe of the Old and New Testament. Christ quotes and repeates whole sen∣tences out of it else where, Luke 11.2. and 12.22.13. ch. 14.14. ch. 34.16. ch. 18. This Sermon is the same with that which is set downe by Luke 6.20. For they have one beginning and one matter, the same order of preaching and the same conclusion. Luke relates things more briefly, Matthew more fully, Chemnitius, Calvin, Perkins, though Piscator and others bee of another opinion. Our Saviour sheweth here, that the happinesse which by him they were to expect, did consist in spirituall grace and eternall glory, the one being beatitudo viae, our hap∣pinesse in this life, the other beatitudo gloriae, our happinesse in the life to come. Vers. 1. The Mountaine] By the highnesse of the place Lex quae in monte lata fue∣rat, in monte exposita fuit. Heinsius in exercitat. Dominus ad montana conscendit, ut turbas ad altiora secum trahat. Hieronymus in loc. declaring that Hee would deliver nothing common or low. Eras. And when he was set] It belongs to the Teacher to sit in a chaire or higher place, that he may be heard from far. Session also notes the tranquility of Christ, for the body sit∣ting, the Spirit is quieted, and is apt to meditate in, & teach divine things. Corn. à Lapide. Vers. 2. Haec potius vis est hujus generis loquen∣di, ut qui ser∣mones mente conceptos pro∣ferant, ij di∣cantur aper∣to ore loqui ea quae mente prius conceperant alij loquenda. Rainold. de lib. Apoc. And he opened his mouth, and taught them] Theophylacts note is witty. He makes a question whether the first word be not superfluous or no, for how could Christ teach but he must open his mouth? He answers that these words were not idle, for Christ did sometimes teach and opened not his mouth, viz. By his life and mira∣cles; but now he opened his mouth and taught them by doctrine. It is a pleonasme, Calvin, as we use to say, I have heard it with mine eares. An Hebra∣isme. i.e. He bagan to speak. Some interpret it thus, he spake before by the mouth of his Prophets, now with his owne mouth.
This phrase is emphaticall, and signifieth that He delivered to them deepe matters of weight and importance. Ephes. 6.19. Iob. 32.23.Iansen. Chem∣nit. Perkins. And this may appeare by the con∣clusion of the Sermon. ch. 7. v. 29. Yet this is not perpetually true of this phrase saith Beza. These words imply two things, First, the excellency of the Speaker, Psal. 78.1. Secondly, the Majestie and authority of the Speaker, Pro. 31.28. And taught them] Not upon a perfect Text as Hee did Luke the fourth. These eight Beatitudes are as it were the eight Paradoxes of the world:Cornel à Lap. for the world and Philosophers place happinesse in riches, not in poverty; in sublimitie, not in humili∣ty; in fulnesse, not in hunger; in joy, not in mourning. Vers. 3. Christ sets not downe that wherein formally blessednesse consists, but rules whereby we may know whether we be blessed or no, occultae praedestinationis indicia, & futurae gloriae praesagia. To bee poore in Spirit, pure in heart, meeke, mercifull, are stiled so many beatitudes. Schoolemen say truely, they are beatitudo disponens, so ma∣ny dispositions to perfect blessednesse. Vos crediti beatos esse pauperes, ergo ut tanto facili∣us fiatis beati, omnia bona vobis adimi∣mus. Iuliani Scomma in Christianos jactum. Poore in Spirit] Graeca dictio  pro∣priè mendicòs significat. Ian∣sen. Beggers in Spirit, Esay 66.2. Austin and Chrysostome expound it of in∣ward humility; the meaning is, those that have a spiritual sence of their spirituall misery. Vers. 4. Mourne Doleat homo Christianus, & de dolore gaudeat.] It signifieth great sorrow. Piscator and others expound it of sorrow for sin. For they shall be comforted.] They shall have inward and outward comfort. Vers. 6. Blessed are they which doe hunger and thirst after righteousnesse] or, they that are hungring and thirsting, So the Greeke runs, after the participle of the present tense, intimating that wherever this is the present disposition of mens soules, they are blessed. Vers. 8. Pure in heart] Austin renders it mundi-cordes. Purity is of two sorts, First, that which is contrary to pollution, as water when it is cleane, and not mudded nor defiled. Secondly, Which is contrary to mixture, as wine when it is not mixt. Not carnall nor hypocriticall. For they shall see God] In the Hebrew phrase to see is ordinarily used for to injoy. Psal. 4. Who will she us any good? The word in the Hebrew is, who will make us to see any good, that is, to injoy good. To see God is to injoy him, there is no seeing God but in Christ. Vers. 9. Peace-makers] i.e. such as love to maintaine unity, concord, good-will and good agreement amongst men. Not onely those which take up differences, but the parties at variance which are most inclinable to peace. For they shall be called] i. e. they shall bee indeed,Luke 1.76. Called) i. e. accounted. Calvin. and shall also be knowne and re∣puted to be, the Sonnes of God, by their likenesse to him. Vers. 12. Rejoyce and be exceeding glad] Or, rejoyce, and that Vt sit poste∣rius verbum loco adverbij Hebraeorum more. exceedingly. Great is your reward] Object. Rev. 12.12. A reward implieth the merit of workes pre∣ceding. Answ. A reward is taken, First, strictly, for that which doth answer and is e∣quall to the worke. Secondly, Largely, for whatsoever is consequent to the worke; Heaven is a reward in this latter sence, therefore salvation is called a gift. Vers. 13. The salt of the earth] In regard of their ministry, they are to be totius orbis magistri, Chrysost. The interrogation wherewith imports a vehement deniall, as if Christ should say, if salt once lose his naturall propertie of saltnesse, it can never be recovered.Perkins. First,Discipuli sal terrae vo∣cantur à Domi∣no, & empha∣ticè quidem cum articulo , quas eximium illud sal terrae; nec Iudaeae duntaxat sal, sed sal terrae, pro lati∣tudine vocationis Apostolicae, ex porrectis ecclesiae Dei pomoeriis contra distinctè ad angustias vocationis Propheicae. Span∣hem. Dub. Evang. parte tertia. Dub. 91. Salt hath heate and acrimony by which it pierceth, attenuates and subdues the whole lumpe: nothing is more piercing than the word, which being committed to the Apostles subdues the whole man and seizeth upon the vitalls. Heb. 4.12. Secondly, Spanhemius Dub. Evang. part. 3. Dub. 91. Salt preserves from corruption, whence a perpetuall Covenant is called a Covenant of Salt. Numb. 18.19. The word which the Apostles brought is permanent and the Covenant of grace published by them is a stable and perpetuall Covenant. Thirdly, Salt is a symbole of wisedome. Wise men are called salsi, and fooles insulsi: so there is no true wisedome but in the word committed to the Apostles, without which no man is wise. Vers. 17. Our Saviour useth foure arguments to shew that Hee had no intent to ab∣rogate the Law. First he tells them in this vers. that Hee came to fulfill the Law.
2ly v. 18. He tels them that not any thing of the least signification in the Law shal fail. Thirdly, In the 19. Vers. He that breakes the Law, and teacheth men so, shall bee least in the kingdome of Heaven. Fourthly, His doctrine required a greater right than that of the Scribes & Pharisees. Vers. 18. Till heaven and earth passe] Greeke shall passe away. Some doe very sub∣tilly play with the word untill, as if that the passing of Heaven and Earth, which shall be in the last day of Judgement, should put an end to the Law and the Prophets. And truly (saith Calvin) as tongues shall then cease, and prophecies bee abolished, so I thinke that the written Law with the exposition shall cease. One Iot,Ioth apud Ebraeos inter alphabeti lite∣ras minima est, huic respondet  Graeco∣rum. Venustissimè usus hac hyperbola poeta ille nostri temporis videtur, qui dixit, Nescit Scripturae vel breve iota sacrae. Drus. Prov. Class. 2. l. 3. or tittle] Ierome calls Drusius de recta lectione linguae Sanctae. vide Capellum de punctorum Hebrarcorum antiquitate. l. 2. c. 14. & Piscat. in loc. Per  intellexit Christus literam minimam, quae est jòd apud Hebraeos: probabile itaque, illum per  intellexisse Puncta & Accentus, figuram minorem habentes; quia praeter literas nihil aliud est in Lege Hebraeorum, vim seu potestatem aliquam habens, praeter Puncta, vocalia, & Accentus, & di∣versum quid à literis existimant ideo denotari, quia  &  distinguntur per particulam disjunctivam. Aut, ut quasi oppositionem videatur facere inter Iota & Apicem. Buxtorf. de Punctorum Antiquitate & Origine. parte 2. c. 15. apices (tittles) those by which like letters in times past were distinguished, when he saith, that Resh and Daleth differ onely in the tittle; those erre that interpret them de punctis vocalibus; Iod the least of the Consonants, tittle of the vowells, which were as ancient as the Hebrew Consonants. Fulfilled] In respect of unpartiall and sincere obedience, for of that our Saviour speakes as is manifest by the words following, He that shall breake the least of these Com∣mandemes and teach men so, shall be called least, and except your righteousnesse exceede, that is, righteousnesse of Habit and practice, which is that which the Law as it is taken in that place required. Vers. 20. The Scribes were the best in those dayes for learning and interpreting the Law, Pharisees for practise, the strictest sect, Acts 26. Theirs was but an outward civill righteousnesse whereby they kept the Law onely in outward actions. Yee shall in no case enter into the kingdome of Heaven] Shall neither be accepted as mem∣bers of the kingdome of grace Chemnit. in loc. commun. By the king∣dome of Heaven, understands the Church; Grotius, that time when the Goates shall be severed from the Sheepe. here, nor injoy glory hereafter. Vers. 21. He doth not oppose his answer against the Suam doctri∣nam non op∣ponit Mosi ut illum vel reij∣ciat & dam∣net, sicut ma∣nichaei delira∣runt, vel velit tradere melio∣ra, perfectiora & graviora praecepta quam Moses, sicut Scholastici somniarunt, Moses enim plane eodem modo tradidit explicationem 5. praecepti. Levit. 19. v. 17. Sed Pharisaeorum corruptelas & reprehendit & reijcit. Chemnit. loc. commun. Commandement of Moses, but the common conceite of the Scribes. Vers. 22. But I say unto you] The Expositors are so at discord in the interpretation of these words, that while they endeavour to explaine the sence, they forget the duty con∣tained in it, and scarce any where shew more anger than here, calling one another Here∣ticke and foole. Hee alludeth to the custome of punishing offenders used among the Jewes; as there is a gradation of sinne, so of punishment. Iudgement, a lesse court which in∣fliced small mulcts as it were by a leete; Councell, the greater Court, as it were quar∣ter-sessions; Thirdly a more numerous Senate, a grand assise. Augustin saith in primo est ira tantum, in secundo est ira & Sermo, in tertio ira & certa ex∣pressio irrisionis. Our Saviour interprets the sixth Commandement and shewes besides the actuall taking away of life to which the Pharisees bound the breach of it, three degrees of sinners against that precept, He that is angry with his brother without cause, or rashly, or for nothing, for an injury offered to himselfe, not a sinne committed against God. Secondly, He that saith to his Brother Racha Rectius Raca vel Raka, , Ex Syriaco Raka vanus, cerebro vacuus à radice Rik evacuare, fun∣dere, effunde∣re. Ita cen∣sent plurimi, Verum ita cum sequente convitio, stulte, conveniret. Quid enim aliud est Cerebro vacuus, quam stultus? quid stultus aliud, quàm cerebro vacuus. Dilherri electa. l. 2. c. 20. Alij volunt,  esse interjectionem & sonum indignan∣tis, & tres dicunt constitui gradus eorum quos Christus contra quintum docet peccare praeceptum; primum eorum, qui intus duntaxat adversus proximum commoventur, iramque gerunt animi restricti; alterum eorum, qui eo usque efferves∣cunt, ut iracundum aliquid evomant; tertium denique eorum, qui in apertum aliquod convicium erumpunt. Racha indignantis vox, Hosanna laetantis. Vide Rainold. de lib. Apoc. tom. secundo praesect. 167. & Bezam in loc. Hoc verbum propriè Hebraeori∣st, Rakah enim dicitur inanis aut vacuus: quem nos possumus vulgata injuria absque Cerebro nuncupare. Hieron. in Loc. Racha, which is an expression of anger, in a word of lighter disgrace, as sirra, or pish, or the like. Thirdly, He that saith, thou foole, which is a word of reviling and soonest offers it selfe to him that is angry.
Vers. 23. That phrase, hath ought against thee] is a Law-terme,Non dicit si tu habes ali∣quid adversus fratremtuum: sed si frater tuus habet aliquid adversum te, ut durior reconciliationis tibi imponatur necessitas. Hie∣ron. in loc. and implieth a sute in Law. Act. 24.20. Vers. 24. Agree] i. e. Use meanes to become friends with him with whom thou art at variance. Quickly] i. e. Without delay; rather yeeld from thine owne right, than deferre to be reconciled.Satius est to∣tam locutionem quae metaphori∣ca & prover∣bialis est, quam particulae do∣nec idiotis∣mum, in expli∣catione hujus loci, attendere. Glass. Gramat. Sac. lib. 3. Tract 5. Ad ultimum quadrantem solvere dicitur is, cui de debito nihil remittur. Germanum proverbiale. Quadrans nummus est, qui à quibusdam vocatur teruncius. Drus. Prov. Class. 2. l. 3. Whiles thou art in the way] i.e. Whiles thou art going with thine Adversary to have the matter tryed before the Magistrate, Luke 12.58. Lest.] i. e. Lest thine Adversary having a good Action against thee, do convince and cast thee before the Magistrate and the Judge. Lest after thou art convinced of wrong doing, the Judge command the Sergeant to cast thee into prison. Farthing] This farthing was the least coyne used among the Jewes, called a Quadrin, which containeth two Mites, Marke 12.42. and it is the fourth part of a penny in English. This last phrase, (To pay the uttermost farthing) is proverbiall, like unto which is that in French, Payer jusques au dernier denier. As if he had said, See Maldo∣nate, Tolet, Iansenius. Looke for no compounding or agreement with thine Adversary when thou art once cast into prison, for he will shew thee no favour, but use thee as hardly as may be, remitting nothing, but causing thee to make full re∣stitution and satisfaction, even to the uttermost farthing. The Papists expound it allegorically,Chrysost. Theoph. Cartw. Mr. Perkins. and say that by Adversary is meant God com∣manding men in his Law; and by Way is meant the space of time in this life; by Iudge Christ; by Serjeant Gods Angels; by Prison Hell, or rather Purgatory; and by the uttermost farthing, veniall sinnes. As if this were the meaning: Dr. Prid. Agree with God while thou art in this life, betweene this and the day of judgement, lest thou come before Christ, and he cause his Angels to cast thee into Purgatory, and there thou remaine, till thou hast satisfied for the least veniall sinnes. But this cannot be the true meaning of this place, for first, these words depend upon the former, & are a continuance of the rule of reconciliation between man and man, and not between God and man. 2ly Mr. Perkins. By this exposition they confound the Adversary and the Judge, (for the Father and the Sonne are one) which in this Text are made divers and distinct. Vers. 28. Quod in homicidiis est irasci, hoc in adulteriis est concupiscere. There may be adultery (saith Austin) and a woman not toucht; murder, and a man not kild. Lust af∣ter her] with a will and desire to her. Vers. 29. Right eye, and right hand] are mentioned, because the right parts are dea∣rest to us; some speciall darling sinne, wherein the flesh most delights,Beza. Dike. Illa expositio probabilis per oculum dex∣trum & ma∣num dextram rem eandem, pretiosissima nimirum & Charissima quaeque intelligenda, quae aequè nobis Chara ac oculus dexter & manus dextro, talium videlicet jacturam voluntariam potiùs faciendam, si nos pelliciant ad malum, quàm ut illorum occasione in peccata, & sic in exitium praecipitemus. Hac interpretatione admissa non tantum constat sensus verborum Domini, sed & nexus. Christus adspectum inordinatum uxoris alienae vocaverat adulterium, adeoque grave peccatum coram Deo, quod ordinariè videtur leve. Inde occasionem sumit hortationis sequentis, ut summo studio caveantur cupiditates pravae, & Cha∣rissimarum ac pretiocissimarum etiam rerum dispendio potius redimatur salus, quàm ut patiamur illas nobis exitiosas esse & lethales. Spanhem. Dub. Evan. part 3. Dub. 146. which is as her right eye in regard of pleasure; as her right hand in regard of profit. Pull it out,] not pick it out, as the Eagle doth the eye of her prey, by degrees, but pull it out all together. Vers. 30. Cut it off.] In the Originall it is , which signifieth in the em∣phasis of the word, chop it off; not saw it by degrees, but chop it off; that is, on a sud∣den cut it off; on a sudden cut off thy sins which are as deare as thy right hand. Vers. 34. But I say unto you, Sweare not at all.] The Manichees and Anabaptists alto∣gether reject the use of an Oath; and they cite this place, and that of Iames 5.12. but in both these places an Oath is not forbidden, but restrained. There is a prohibition onely of idle Oathes, and collusion of Oathes (as Bucer,) or swearing lightly and loosely (as Gualther,) or swearing in common talke (as Zanchius,) or rash and unneces∣sary Oathes (as Vrsinus,Omnino, i.e. per ullam rem cre∣atam. Beza.) or private and ordinary swearing (as Aretius and Melanc∣thon,) or swearing by the creatures (as Beza and Pellican.) At all] in your usuall talke.
he forbids us not simply to sweare, but not to sweare by the creatures, since that is to ascribe a Deity to them,Dr. Featlie. or to sweare upon any trifling occasion, or in their ordinary communication. Vers. 37. Quā Iacobus repetit capite ultimo, qua ge∣minatione vi∣detur usus do∣minus ut de∣scriberet dupli∣cem conformi∣tatem nostrae vocit aut ver∣borum nostrorū, unam cum re, alteram cum conceptu nostro, ut id efferamus quod est & quod esse sentimus. Riverus. But let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay,] Affirme a truth, and deny a falsehood simply and barely, without making the name of God accessary to your vaine discourses. Dr. Featlie. Dr. Hamond. Vide Piscat. in Loc. In ordinary discourse you may use an affirmation (that is, one yea) and if occasion require, an asseveration, (that is, another yea) and so a negation and phrase of some vehemency (as a redoubling) to confirme it, that is, Nay, nay. The Evill one] à Malo illo vide Bezam. That evill one, that is, the Devill, because he is, 1. evill in the highest degree. 2. commits evill without ceasing, 1 Pet. 5.8. 3. he practises all sinnes of all sorts and degrees, in himselfe and by his Ministers. Pricaeus in Matthaeum. No so much the prepositive article () confirmes this exposition, for Iohn useth that 1 Iohn 5.19. where he speakes of the world, as another place of the same Writer, 1 Iohn 3.12. which is to be understood not of the thing, but person. Mr. Perkins. Phrases illae Christi, percu∣tienti nos in unae maxilla obvertenda altera, volenti tollere tunicam relinquendum etiam pallium, figuratae sunt, nec alius scopus dicen∣tis, nisi Christianos paratos esse debere, ad ferendam secundam potius injuriam, quam ad regerendum priorem. Spanhem. Dub. Evang. parte tertia, Dub. 125.Vers. 39. Christs meaning is, that a man must suffer rather a double wrong, than seeke a private revenge. Resist not evill] This is to be understood of private revenge, and so it maketh nothing against lawfull Warre, as the Anabaptists say. Vide Bezam. Vers. 40. Our Saviour there condemnes not all going to Law, but he intends to for∣bid all private revenge of a mans selfe,More Hebraico sub uno exem∣plo, similia, seu quae ejusdem generis sunt, complectitur, ut, 1. sub alapa, comprehendit omnes injurias, quae corpori seu personae vel cum lae∣sione vel cum contumelia inferuntur. 2. Sub spoliatione, complectitur injurias & detrimenta, quae rebus inferuntur. 3. Sub angariis, complectitur injustas superiorum exactiones, gravamina & oppressiones. 4. Sub contentione judicii, complectitur injurias, quae vel sub specie juris, vel denegatione aut perversione justitiae forensis inferuntur. Chemnit. in case he be wronged; or he speakes compa∣ratively, as if he should say, Rather suffer two wrongs than do one. Vers. 41. And whosoever shall compell thee to go a mile, go with him twain] As in our Common-wealth we have Post-masters, so in Persia there were like Officers, who by authority from their Kings or Emperours, might take mens Cattell, nay men themselves, and use them for travell and carriage at their pleasure. And this custome the Jewes had got among them,Mr. Perkins. Verbum hoc an∣gario, usurpa∣tum Interpreti vulgato & Vl∣piano, I. C. metaphoram continet proverbialem, quae ab angaris sumpta regum tabellariis apud Persas.  est ex verbis peregrinis, quibus usa olim antiquitas in Judaea: neque Graecum est, sed Persicum, ut Suidas dicit. Drus. Class. Prov. 2. l. 4. as may appeare, Matth. 27.32. Christ here speakes of the abuse of this Authority, saying, that if a man compell thee wrongfully, under colour of the Magistrates Authority, to go with him one mile, go with him two: That is, rather than by resisting thou shouldst revenge thy selfe, go with him two miles. Vers. 42. Whether he be knowne or unknowne, a friend or an enemy, although he do not deserve; whether he be able and willing to recompence that office or not, yet give him according to thy ability, Chemnit. Asketh thee.] , Luther rightly observes that this word implies indigence or necessity , signifies beggarlinesse, as Acts 3.2. we must give them what is necessary to relieve their necessities. Verse 44. Blesse them which curse you] . See Luke 6.27. The word in Greek, and the opposition to cursing, (i.e. evill and bitter speaking,) noteth kindnesse and friendlinesse of language. Vers. 45. That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven] We have the example of the great God for this, we say it is basenesse to seeke reconciliation; what had become of man, if Christ had staid till he had sought unto him? it is our glory to be like God. 2. He is our Father, his love is manifested to us in this: He is not our Father now by Creation, but by Adoption. Vers. 47. What do you more than others?] Or, what singular thing do you? Christi∣ans must be singular.
CHAP. VI. Verse 1. TO be seene of men] The meaning is, to this end they did all their workes, that they might be admired by men, so that they might be seene and praised of them; plus est quam videri, signi∣ficat enim pro∣priè spectari, id est, cum peculiari quadam attentione & admiratione videre, quod Poeta sic expressit, Digito monstrari & dicier hicest. Syrus hoc loco habet verbum quod significat accuratam contemplationem. and rested in this vaine glory, as in their last end. Vers. 2. In the Synagogues] The word Synagogue is from the Greeke  to ga∣ther together, and it is applied to all things whereof there may bee a collection. But Synagogues are commonly taken for houses dedicated to the worship of God, wherein it was lawfull to pray, preach, and dispute; but not to sacrifice. The Temple at Jerusalem was the Cathedrall Church, the Synagogues as petty Parish-Churches belonging thereunto. They have their reward] Not Gods reward, but theirs; for they are praised of men, for whose sake they exercised their virtues. Jerom. Vers. 3. An hyperbolicall metaphore, by which he gives understanding to the hands. Piscator. Do it without any ostentation. Calvin. Dextera quid faciat, fas est nescire sinistram. Vers. 5. As the Hypocrites] Christ commanded his Disciples, that they should not be as the Hypocrites; it is one thing to bee Hypocrites, another thing as the Hypocrites;In angulis pla∣tearum] Versio Aethiop. in an∣gulis platea∣rum portae. Respexit ad locorum orientalium consuetudinem, ubi multae plateae portis claudantur, & a se invicem distin∣guntur, Dilher. Elect. he would not have his to bee like the Hypocrites. Vers. 7. He useth two words but in the same sense,  is a superfluous and putide repetition,  vaine garrulity. Popish prayer in an unknowne Tongue is idle babling, in the rosary and canoni∣call houres the same things are repeated againe and againe. Vers. 9. Yee] First the Disciples, and under them he meaneth all Christians. Therefore] Hath a double reference, both to the sinfull manner dehorted from, and to the holy manner exhorted to. He reasoneth thus, the manner of hypocriticall and heathenish praying is sinfull, this manner here propounded is most holy, there∣fore pray in this manner: After this manner, or thus, or in this manner, it is a note of likenesse pointing unto the patterne following, that is, say Our Father, as Luke 11.21. Or if you use other words, let them bee according to this patterne. As the Decalogue is distinguished by two Tables, so is this prayer as it were distributed into two Tables of petitions, the three first of which respect God, the three latter our selves and our Neighbour. In the petitions which directly respect God, the first prayes for the glory of God, the two other declare the reason of glorifying of him. Which art in heaven] These Calv. Instit. l. 3. c. 10. words signifie the majestie and power of God, Heaven the place thereof being put for the things themselves, and then the meaning is, which art of infinite greatnesse, and height, and power, and immortality. Hallowed Sanctificari Dei nomen ni∣hil aliud est quam suum Deo haberi hono∣rem quo dignus est, ut nunquam de ipso loquantur vel cogitent homines sine summa veneratione. Calv. in loc. Hoc enim rogas ut quod semper sanctum est, sanctificetur in te. Austin.] We wish that honour to be given to God, which Hee is most worthy of; that men never thinke or speake of him but with exceeding great reverence; that God would not onely deliver that holy name of his from all contempt and dishonour, but subdue all mankind to the worthy esteeming of it.
Vers. 10. We pray that God would exercise his power both in his word and Spirit, that the whole world may voluntarily submit unto him. Calvin. Vers. 11. Supersub∣stantiall Rhemist. Luke (as Dr. Fulke noteth) is the best interpreter of the Greeke word, who sheweth that it signifieth bread suffici∣ent for every day, in which place our Re∣mists them∣selves translate it daily. vetus interpres quotidianum reddit, ut ex Hieronymo in hunc locum manifestum est. Atque ita omnes veteres authores Latinè legunt. Hieronymus supersubstantialem vertit quanquam in eo veterem versionem corrigere noluit. Itaque cautè quidam nostro tempore in vulgata editione pro quo∣tidiana supersubstantialem posuerint, quod corporis cibo quem hic à nobis peti probavimus, minimè convenit. Maldonatus in loc. Panis nomine intelliguntur quaecunque ad hanc vitam spectant. Cartwright. Historia Christi ex 4. Evangelistis.  Graecis proprie significat quod nobis sustentandis aptum & accommodatum est. Noster dicitur panis quia nobis datur, & quia nostro labore parari debet. Gen. 3. 1 Thes. 5. Psal. 128. Hodie à Deo nobis dari precamur, ut sciamus nobis assi∣duè & in singulas horas à paterna ejus providentia hoc benestcium petendum. Deinde ut doceamur curam nostram non in longinquum tempus extendere. Adverbium hodie fraenandae nimiae aviditati additum est, ut discamus singulis momentis à Dei beneficentia pendere, & eo demenso contenti esse quod de die in diem nobis suppeditat. Calvinus in loc. Ob Quomodo panem, quem jam vocamus nostrum, petamus nobis dari Sol. Vocatur noster non quod jure debeatur, sed quia paterna Dei beneficentia in usum nostrum destinatus est. Why should the Latine Interpreter translate it here Supersubstantiall, and Luke 11. Daily, when one and the same Greeke word is used in both places, and it hath the same signification in each? Food and raiment, all things needfull for the pre∣servation of this bodily life are here meant, as the Romane Catechisme tells us, so the word bread is used, Prov. 30.8. If it be translated supersubstantiall bread, how can bread and other bodily necessaries bee thereby meant? for these things are substantiall, and serve to nourish and maintaine the substance of mans body, but not supersubstanti∣all. Austin denieth the Eucharist to be here meant. To translate it supersubstantiall is not so right as to translate it daily, as Jansenius (Concord. c. 4.) their owne learned Bishop confesseth, who addeth that by the Greeke word used in both the Evangelists is most rightly understood bread necessary for the sustenance of the body, Hee proveth also that by daily or substantiall bread here is not meant the bread of Christs Body in the Eucharist, because when our Saviour taught his Disciples this prayer, the Eucharisti∣call bread was not instituted, neither did the Disciples so much as thinke of it, and if that should be here meant, how can the Lay-papists then say this prayer in sincerity, and yet be present when the Eucharist is celebrated at their private masses, and never desire to partake of it? Vers. 12. And forgive us our debts] There is no word which the Evangelists and Apostles more frequently use to signifie the remission of sins than the word  here used, it is used of them seven and twenty times as Wotton de reconciliat. observes. It seemes to be taken from releasing of debts, and loosening of bonds; in which the conscience of a sinner was tyed, being bound to answer at Gods tribunall. See Par. on Rom. 12. p. 29. As we forgive our debtors] Which is a promise of ours to the Lord, or a Law binding all that look for mercy from the Lord, to shew mercy, or a note of assurance. Sicu, as, is taken three manner of wayes in Scripture. First, for a note of paritie, as Matth. 10.15. and 19.19. Secondly, as a note of identitie, as Matth. 20.14. and Luke 15.19. John 1.14. and Thirdly, for a note of similitude, as here, and Matth. 18.33. and Iohn 17.22. Vers. 13. The meaning is not that we may not fall into temptation, but we be not overcome in it Dictio graeca significat u∣trumque, in∣ferre & in∣ducere, magis tamen inferre.. But deliver us from evill]  is affirmed rather of a person than a thing. Beza. The Devill is called  à labore, because he troubleth others with his wickednesse. This name is often given to the Devill, as 5. ch. 37. 3 John 17.15. 2 Thes. 3.3. 1 Iohn 2.13.14. and 3.12. and 5.81. For Coronis pre∣cationis Domi∣nicae, Quia tuum est reg∣num &c. etsi in multis Grae∣cis codicibus, & apud Syrum quoque interpretem reperitur, tamen Beza referente, in vetustissimis aliquibus Graecis codici∣bus deest, & a nemine exponitur praeterquam à vulgato & à Chrysostomo. Deest quoque in versione Arabica, nec in ullis Latinorum exemplaribus visitur: ut non immerito Erasmus conjectet ex solenni consuetudine à Graeci adjectam, & postea in Textum ipsum fuisse translatum. Sculter. exercit. Evang. l. 2. c. 33. thine is the Kingdome, the power, and the glory, for ever] Erasmus saith, that they which added this conclusion unto the Lords prayer did divinae precationi suas nugas assu∣ere, to so heavenly a prayer did sow patches of their owne. Mr. Cartwright saith, it appeareth manifestly that this sentence was borrowed from the Prophet David, 1. Chr. 29.11. with some abridgement of the Prophets words. Secondly, without this we should not have had a perfect forme of prayer, it consisteth of thankes-giving as well
as petitions, it is also a reason of that which goeth before. This clause was added by our Saviour, and registred by Matthew, 1. the Greek Copies have it. 2. The Syriack Paraphrast translates it. 3. Chrysost. & Theoph. expound it. Amen.] This is the seale of the Lords Prayer. Jerom. This word was not added (saith Grotius) by Christ, but according to the manner of the ancient Church; by that word approving of the publicke prayers. It signifieth truely, or even so, or so be it. It is an Hebrew word, but the Grecians and Latines have made it theirs, the Syriacke and Arabicke versions of the New-Testament keepe it, and so doe the Occidentall Tongues. Vers. 16. Of a sad countenance] The Greeke word signifieth properly the looke of a wild beast, a Lyon or a Beare robbed of their whelps, grim and gastly;, optimè tristes vetus, injuria à recentiore no∣tatus. Qui castè inter Latinos loquuntur, affectatam gravitatis & auctoritatis speciem indicare volentes, ea voce utuntur. Pricaeus. in loc. Tristes: bene vulgata versio. Vide Luke 24.17. Grotius. one would be afraid to looke on them,  from  sad, and  countenance. Disfigurs] The Greeke word is properly to take a thing away so that we cannot see it. Hence some reade it exterminare, others demoliri, others deformare, est nativum colo∣rem sinere ob∣literari, am∣bire ut pallor in ore sedeat, maciesque in corpore toto. Pricaeus. in loc. some others cor∣rumpere, the meaning is the same, they indeavour to take away the naturall frame and shape of their countenance. Their reward] viz. Here in this life, they shall have none hereafter. 17 But thou when thou fastest, annoint thy head, and wash thy face] That is,Ruth. 3.2. bee as you were on other dayes; for the Jewes did usually anoynt Mos erat pa∣trius Judaeo∣rum (id quod multis locis sacrae literae testatum relinquunt. Ruh. 3. v. 3. 2 Reg. 12. v. 20. Luke 7.46.) ut qui laetitiae vacare, aut comtiores gratioresque vellent prodire aliquò, lavarent faciem caputque ungerent; lavarent faciem, quo munda ea & niti∣da appareret; ungerent caput, quò colorem illius odoremque commendaret. Psal. 103.15. Iohn 12.3. Lucas Burgensis Comment. in 4. Evangelia. themselves on dayes of mirth. Our Saviour prohibits all vaine affected kind of sorrow. Our Saviour useth many arguments in this Chapter against the immoderate sinfull cares of this world. 1. More common. 2. More speciall to believers. Those of a more common nature. 1. From the consideration of the things themselves. The things them∣selves are perishing, they perish two wayes, either by open violence, or secret corrup∣tion. Vers. 19. Lay not up for your selves treasures] That is, striving to be rich and to get a great estate together. de Dieu refers moths to garments, theeves to money, and that which we translate rust to foode, under which fruits and cattle are comprehended; in which three things the whole treasure of man consists. Vers. 20. Some say this treasure in heaven is almes, as 1 Tim. 6.17, 18. Others say, make God thine, rather Christ, make him thy treasure; make him sure by being united to him. Ephes. 2.6. Vers. 22. The light of the body is the eye] i. e. the understanding in man the little world, is as that great light the Sunne in the great world. If therefore thine eye be single] That is, thine understanding bee well illuminated, and doe cleerely discerne the truth. The whole body shall be full of light] The whole man throughout will be well ordered. A single eye is that which lookes but upon one object, upon God, and God onely, and God principally; and on all other things in him, and with reference to him. The double eye, is that which though it lookes to God, and doth many things in obedi∣ence to him, yet it lookes to somewhat else, and takes other things as greater incou∣ragements. Vers. 23. But if thine eye be evill] If the understanding be blind; the whole body shall be full of darkness] the whole man must needs be out of order. Dr. Gouge. Vers. 24. Here is another argument, particular to Gods people, against the cares of this world, you professe your selves the servants of God. No man can serve two masters: Intelligen∣dum est hoc proverbium de dominis in solidum, quomodo & Juris consulti dicunt non posse duos esse dominos ejusdem roi. Grotius.] Two, that is, contrary, for many agreeing amongst
themselves are counted for one. That this is the meaning the words following shew, You cannot serve God and Mammon] that is, God and Riches. Mammon is a Syriack word. See my Critica. Vers. 25. Take no thought for your life] So it is in the English Books, but the word signifies, do not take such thought as should cut your heart asunder; it is derived from a Phrase which signifies,Mr Burroughs his Irenicum. to divide the mind; so ver. 28. , why do you di∣vide your hearts? And ver. 31, and 34. the same Greeke word is used again. Here is a third argument more common and generall against carking cares. He reasoneth from the greater to the less, the Lord which gave life it self, will not suffer us to want those things which appertain to the sustenance of the same; All that you take care for is meat and rayment, God gave you life without any care of yours, and a body without your contributing any thing to it. Vers. 26. Behold the fowls of the aire] Luke for the fowls names Ravens, alluding per∣adventure to that, Psal. 147.9. and some think David did especially speak of the Ravens, because, when the old ones have forsaken them, it is necessary that they should be fed of God. This is a fourth common argument against worldly cares, if God make pro∣vision for these Creatures, much more will he for us. Vers. 27. The words being propounded by way of question import a more vehement negation, as if Christ had said, undoubtedly not any of you by taking care can add one cubit to his stature. Here is then another argument taken from the vanity and unpro∣fitableness of this care. A Cubit is a Perkins Cubitus hu∣manae staturae mensura est. Euthymius. Definitum est divinitus cu∣jusque hominis staturae , Grynaeus. measure taken from a part of mans body, being the length of the arme from the elbow to the length of the longest finger. (saith Beza) signifieth both the stature of mans body, and the age of ones life, but in this place it seems rather to denote the former only; as Luke 12.25. and 19.3. Vers. 29. Even Solomon in all his glory was not arayed like one of these.] His beauty was Cujus rei causam Craeso Solon olim reddidit, cum splendori ejus gallinaceos, pavones, phasianos praeferebat, quia iniquiebat hoc quod habent, natura habent. Heinsius. artificiall, theirs naturall. Vers. 32. Here is an argument peculiar to Gods people against wordly cares; you that profess the name of Christ, or would be loath to be found in the condition of the Gentiles, should not do as they. After all these things.] That is, meat, drink, and cloaths, do the Gentiles Ethnicorum istae voces sunt non Christia∣norum, siqui∣dem illi aut Deum esse non credunt, aut non credunt agere curam mortalium. Erasmus.] that is, such as are yet strangers from God, Ephes. 4.17. seek] that is, only or chiefly; the Greek word signifies, to seek vehemently, and importunately. For your heavenly father knoweth that ye have need of all these things] A man may know our wants, and yet say, as James 2.16. another may desire to supply our wants and not know them, the Prodigall Son being in a farre Countrey might have been starved for want of food, and his Father not have known of it; but 1. God knows our wants. 2. Will supply our wants, for he is a Father. 3. Can supply our wants, for he is a heavenly Father. Vers. 33. Seek the Kingdom of God] Endeavour by an entrance into grace to gather assurance of an interest into glory. First] In time, in affection, before and above all other things. Righteousness] The righteousness, by which man being a vile and base sinner in himself, is accepted righteous before God, and justified in his sight, called Gods righteousness, because, as it is acceptable to God, so it is wholly wrought in man by God through Christ. See my Greek Critica.Added unto you.] Over-added, cast in as an overplus, as a handfull to the sack of grain, as an inch of measure to an ell of cloath. See 1 Tim. 4.8. There is bread as well as grace, and cloathing as well as righteousness in the promise. Vers. 34. Take therefore no thought for the morrow] Pythagoras said well, Chaenici ne insideas,Waserus de mensuris He∣braeorum. l. 1. cap. 6. that is, be not solicitous for thy food to morrow. For the Chaenix was the demensum, or daily meat of Greek souldiers, or slaves, to which our Saviour alludes. To morrow] not only signifying the day immediately following, but also the time
to come indefinitely, and at large, as also, Exod. 13.14. that is, hereafter,Dyke of the deceitfulness of the heart. in the time to come, and in that of the Poet. Quid sit futurum cras fuge quaerere. Seek not what shall be too morrow. For the morrow shall take thought for the things of it self; sufficient unto the day is the evill thereof] that day will have its care when it comes, and this day hath enough of it self now it is come. CHAP. VII. Verse 1. IVudge not, that ye be not judged] as if he should say, if you would have your own infir∣mity pittied, and your words and deeds construed in the best sense, then shew the like kindness unto others. By judging is meant, 1. All rash and temerarious, 2. All severe, unmercifull cen∣suring of other men. He doth not forbid to judge, but rather teach how to judge. Hie∣rom. There is a twofold judging; First, of the action when I condemn it as naught, it being so, this is lawfull. Secondly, of the person, when because the deed is naught I con∣demn the person as an Hypocrite, this is blamed, unless the action cannot be found but in an Hypocrite.Vt salutabis, ita & resalu∣taberis, qui ma∣le loquitur de proximo, pejus audiet. See Judg. 1.7. Vers. 2. The reason against rash judgment, lest you be judged] It was an Hebrew Proverb, midda bemidda, measure for measure; as if Christ had said, if ye judge men rashly, then men again by the appointment of God shall give rash judgment upon you: But if ye judge men righteously, then likely they will judge you so. This Law is establi∣shed, Lev. 24.19. See Obad. 1.15. and James 2.13. Pharaoh that drowned the children of the Hebrews, was drowned himself. Ver. 3. Why beholdest thou the mote] That is, upon what ground, for what cause, signi∣ficatur curiosi∣tas intuendi in alienos errores studio repre∣hendendi. Lucas Brugensis. with what conscience seest thou? and so in the fourth verse, How sayest thou] that is, with what face, with what honesty, and conscience sayest thou? so much these inter∣rogatories import. Mote] that is, small and little sins, or supposed sins, sins in his opinion, which gives rash judgment. And perceivest not] that is, well weighest and considerest not with thy self. Beame] that is, great and notorious reigning sins. Mr Perkins. The morall of the Fable of the man that had two wallets,Stultitiae pro∣prium est alio∣rum vitia cer∣nere, oblivisci suorum. Cicero Tusc. 3. in the former part of which he put the faults of other men, in the hinder part his own faults, whence that saying, Sed non videmus id manticae quod in tergo est, is sutable to this Proverb used among the Jews. The difference between the third and fourth verse is only this: In the third verse Christ speaks of rash judgment conceived in the mind, in the fourth of rash judgment uttered in speech.Christus repre∣hendit nimiam pespicaciam quae ex defectu charitatis nascitur, dum nimis scrupulosè excutimus fratrum vitia: Et indulgentiam qua peccata nostra tegimus & fovemus. Calv. In proximo reprehendendo cavenda est hypocrisis, ne scilicet vel amplificemus atque exaggeremus peccatum illius ex festuca facientes trabem, seu ex musca elephantum. Piscat. Vers. 6. Impure men are here compared to Creatures uncleane according to the Law, dogs and swine. See 2 Pet. 2.21. Mr Wheatly thinks he means not this either of the word preached publikely, or of the Sacraments, (for dogs & swine will not at all ren him which gives them the Sacra∣ments, and lets them come to Church, but they would rather all to rent him that should debar them from the fame) but of speaking to a man in private, by way of ad∣monishing and perswading him. Holy things] That is, first and properly the word of God and Sacraments (say some) being holy, and the instruments of Sanctification. Dogs and swine] That is, malicious and obstinate enemies of Gods word. Dogs] that is, oppugners of the truth. Swine] contemners. tread under feet] that is, profane and abuse. turn again] that is, to revile and persecute Gods Messengers. That our Lord Jesus was much delighted with the similitude of pearles, we may collect from thence, that in Matthew he useth it twice, here, & 13.45. wch latter place declares the
former and shews that the Gospell is that precious pearle which is not to be thrown to swine; and which being found, is to be changed with no riches in the whole world. There is a great agreement between Pearles & the Gospell. It is called a pearle in Greek, from its shining glory. See 2 Cor. 4.4. The Latines call them uniones, because they are found alone, so the truth of the Gospell is one. Vers. 7. It is not a simple repetition of the same thing, but a gradation. Aske] as a beggar, seek] as with a Candle, knock] as one that hath power, with im∣portunity. This promise, aske and you shall receive] is meant of things necessary to Sal∣vation,Perkins, &c. and not of particular and speciall gifts as continence, &c. Vers. 10, 11. A stone may be like bread, and a fish may be like a Serpent, yet Parents will not be so unnaturall as to give the one for the other to their Children.Pulchra opposi∣tio piscis & serpentis, rur∣sus panis & la∣pidis: figura enim sibi mutuò cum persimilia sint, ad hominis usum ex diametro distant. Lucas Brugensis. This adage concerning bread and a stone hath passed from the Hebrews also to other nations, as it appears by Plautus, Altera manu fert lapidem, panem ostentat altera. Luk. 6.31. Perkins on Iude.Ver. 12. That is, look what we would have other men to think, speak, and do to us, that must we think, speak, and do unto them, and no worse; And on the contrary. This is not to be understood of evill wishes, but of a will and desire well ordered, either by grace,Voluntas natu∣ralis bene ordi∣nata nulla per∣turbatione in∣fecta. A mes. l. 5 de Cons. c. 1. and according to the written word, or at least by the light of naturall knowledge and conscience; whatsoever thing either by the light of nature, and consci∣ence, or by direction from Gods word, you would that men should do to you, that do ye unto them: Nor yet of all things in particular (so Masters should serve their Servants) but by a proportion. Severus the Emperour was much taken with this sen∣tence, and cau∣sed it to be written in his Palace, and else where, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris.Law] That is, the five Books of Moses, Luk. 16.31. Prophets] that is, all the rest of the Books of the Old Testament, Mat. 2.23. 2 Pet. 1.19. The summe of the Law and Prophets, the Doctrine of the Law and Prophets. Brugensis. On this hang the Law and the Prophets, as after, 22.40. Grotius. Vers. 13. Christ is the doore for entrance, and the way for progress, called straight] because of the great disproportion between us and it, we must deny our selves; By the narrow way] is meant a conversation bounded by the restraints of the Law and Gospell, to enter into this gate] is to have experience of such a work in himself. Vers. 14. The way to heaven is a straight way, a perplexed, afflicted, persecuted way, that is the force of the word there used. Few there be that find it] Few comparatively. Is fermè habi∣tus erat Pro∣phetarum, at Christus, ut ex opposito mem∣bro liquet, sub habitus nomine omnem exterio∣rem innocentiae speciem in vul∣tu, verbis, & operosis ritibus vult intelligi. Grotius.Vers. 15. Christ alludeth to the practice of false Prophets in former times who coun∣terfeited the true Prophets in their attire, which were usually cloathed in rough and corse attire, 2 King. 1.8. Heb. 11.37. This the false Prophets did that they might more easily delude the people, Zach. 13.4. Christs meaning in this allusion is, to shew that false Prophets have plausible pretences for their damnable Doctrines, and therefore are the more dangerous. In Esops Fables the wolfe is brought in, cloathed with the Sheeps skin. Vers. 16. Ye shall know them by their fruits] That is, by the works of iniquity, as after in Ver. 23. So Grotius. He meaneth not so much the fruits of their lives, as of their do∣ctrine, said Brugensis and Dike. He alludes to trees, as he shews after, who are known to be good or bad, not by their leaves, or flowers, but by their fruit. Vers. 20. That is,Perkins case of Consc. partly by their doctrine, and partly by their lives, being judged ac∣cording to the rule of Gods word. Ver. 22. Prophesied] Here to prophesie signifies, to teach the people of God by ex∣pounding the Scripture,Geminatio sig∣nificat zelum & exaggerati∣onem. Chemnit. He bringeth them in doub∣ling the word, to express their earnestness of affection, and confidence that they have in him. Mr. Hildersam. and applying the same to their consciences for their edification. Name] Jer. 27.15. that is, being rightly called thereunto, id est,Prophetare in Christi nomine, est ejus autoritate & tanquam ipso duce fungi docendi officio. In nomine Christi edere virtutes, nihil aliud est, quam ejus virtute, auspiciis, imperio ac ductu miracula facere. Calvinus. ex autoritate & dele∣gatione tua, Brugensis; to preach in the roome and stead of Christ, to preach that which Christ would preach, and in that manner also which he would use, 1 Cor. 15.20.
Ver. 23. Lo preaching it self, though in Christs name, because,Dikes Deceit∣fulness of heart See Mat. 25.41 yet not for Christs name, is with God but a work of iniquity, and hell fire is the reward of it. Never] This word excludeth all times, as if he should say, I do not now, neither ever did, approve and accept you for mine own, yea, even in that time when you pro∣fessed me, preached and wrought wonders in my name, even then I say, I did not ac∣cept and approve of you. Workers of iniquity] That is, men addicted to all sins, (in the Hebrew Idiotisme, Pognalei aven, Psal. 6.9.) and who as it were exercise an art of sinning. Vers. 28. Ended these sayings] That is, when he had in divers places given a taste of his doctrine to the people. Vers. 29. The Scribes] For first, they failed in the matter, they delivered not the Doctrine of God. Secondly, in the manner, they taught coldly, and without zeale. Thirdly, in the end, they taught in pride and ambition, seeking themselves, and not Gods glory. CHAP. VIII. IN this Chapter are specified foure severall miracles: 1. The cleansing of the Leprous man. 2. The curing of a woman troubled with a fever. 3. The healing of the Centurions servant. 4. Lastly, the strange appeasing of the wind, and therefore this is rightly called by Ambrose, scriptura miraculosa, the miraculous scripture. Vers. 1. The mountain] Where he preached the Sermon which is contained in the three precedent Chapters. Vers. 2. And worshipped him] Marke saith, he kneeled down; and Luke saith, he fell upon his face, Luke 5.12. He shewed reverence in his gesture. Lord if thou wilt thou canst make me cleane] He acknowledgeth a divine power in Christ, in that he saith, he could make him clean if he would; a short prayer but a sign of great faith and speciall modesty. Vers. 3. The Law did not forbid to touch the Leprosie. That the Lepers might be healed thereby, but contrariwise, lest those that were not Lepers might be infected thereby. Hand] A right one it is probable. Piscat. Vers. 4. See thou tell no man] Some (that they may excuse the leprous person) do not think that he was seriously forbidden by Christ from divulging the miracle, but rather to provoke him to tell it: Others more rightly, that he was seriously forbidden, and think the cause was, because the seasonable time was not yet come.Calvin. Shew thy self to the Priest] 1. To confirme the truth. Marlorate. 2. The Law is the witness of Christ. Jerome. 3. To magnifie the Priests calling. Melancthon.Quia nondum abrogatae erant ceremoniae le∣gis, eas contem∣ni vel praeter∣mitti noluit Christus. vide Levit. 14.22. Calvin. He sends him to the Priest, (saith Jerome) 1. For humility, that he may seem to give honour to the Priests, for it was commanded in the Law, that those which were cleansed of their Leprosie should offer their gifts to the Priests. 2. That they seeing the Leper cleansed, might beleeve in Christ, and then they should be saved, or if not, they were inexcusable. Vers. 5. Luke setteth down the same history; the two Evangelists do so agree in all circumstances, as it were folly to imagine two miracles of one. Calv. Piscator is of the contrary opinion; this only is different in the words, that in Matthew, the Centurion is said to come to Christ, in Luke he is said to send some of the Jews, which in his name did speak to him. Jansenius also saith, it is the same history. Vers. 6. Matthew saith, the young man was grievously vexed; Luke that he was neare unto death. Vers. 10. Dictum est se∣cundum quid non simpliciter, hoc praesertim nomine ipsum commendat quod acquies∣cat in nudo verbo. Calvin. Not that he was ignorant of his faith, but that he might make it wonder∣full to others, and upbraid the Jews of their incredulity.
Ver. 11. Many shall come from the east and the west] That is, from all the parts of the world, and shall sit down as at a feast. See Luk. 22.30. See Beza and Piscator. Vers. 12. Children of the kingdom] That is, many Jews Filij regni potius quam fi∣lij regis, quoni∣am multi sunt in regno quos tamen rex tandem ut infidos reijcit: omnes autem regis filij sunt unici illius naturalis fillij cohaeredes. Beza. by birth borne in the Church. Vtter, or outward darkness] It notes two things, 1. The extremity, 2. The eternity of the torments. See 22.13. & 25.30. A state far removed from heavenly joy, called light. Gnashing of teeth] Signifies either horror from the thoughts of their consciences mutually accusing them, as Rom. 2.15. or most bitter indignation and murmuring pro∣ceeding from impatience; for so to gnash with the teeth is used, Psal. 35.16. and 37.12. and 118.18. Lamen. 2.16. Acts 7.54. That is foolish which some imagine from the phrase,Chemnit. that hell fire with its smoak doth stir up weeping, and that there is so much cold there that the teeth gnash again with it. Vers. 17. In Esay, it is he hath borne our griefes, or diseases: Here it is applyed to Christs healing of diseases,Mr Burges of justification. Propheta non de morbis agit propriò, sed de vitiisanimi, quae nos peccata di∣cimus, & mor∣bi appellantur ducta metaphora à corpore ad animum. Ad hanc objectionem respondent nonnulli, ut dicant morborum cau∣sas, ut plurimum peccata esse, secundum illud Hieronymi, Propter peccata pleraeque eveniunt corporum debilitates. Ita∣que qui haec è medio tollit, & morbos quoque non inscitè auferre, dicitur, aut in se recipere: Ego magis putarim verba Esatae latè accipienda, ut morbos corporis etiam comprehendant, quibus sanandie Christus quasi specimen & imaginem exhibuit sanationis animi, quae fit criminum condonatione. Proinde quum paraliticum sanaret, confide, inquit, fili remissa sunt tibi peccata. Drus. notae in parallela sacra. and 1 Pet. 2. to his suffering upon the Cross. This may well be, because the outward healing of diseases, was a Symbole or testimony of his inward healing; Although Grotius observeth, that Christ is therefore said to beare our diseases when he cured them, because of the great paines and travell he took therein, for it was after sun-set, and the multitude did much throng him. Vers. 20. Son of man] Some think he was so called, because he was borne of a Vir∣gin,Hellenistis  dici∣tur Ezekiel, Cum ubique Dominus ser∣vator,  dica∣tur: primi hominis respectu sine dubio, qui Adam, sive  vocatur, ut  sit homo primus, , qui secundus Adam dicitur. and had but one Parent, and so was a Son of man, not of men, that is, only of a Mother, and not of a Father and Mother both, as others are; but by the same rea∣son it might be inferred that Ezekiel had but one Parent, because he is called son of man: but this title is given him to shew, 1. That Christ was true man. 2. That he came of the stock of man. 3. That he descended very low for our sakes. Dr Gouge. Adeo se re∣motum à di∣vitiore fortuna Christus osten∣dit, ut ne do∣mum quidem habeat propriam. Grotius.It is a wonder that Christ denied that he had any where to lay his head, when he had many godly, and curteous men who would willingly have entertained him, but this is spoken by way of caution, lest the Scrib should expect an ample and rich reward from him as a rich Lord, since he himselfe lived precariò in others houses. Calvin. Dr Denison. Tantum docere voluit, quic∣quid nos à recto cursu revocat velmoratur, ni∣hil nisi mortem sapere. Calv.Ver. 22. As if he should say, if thou wilt be my follower, thou must totally addict thy self to me. Ver. 24. He was in a fast and dead sleep (for so much the word signifies) , ex  & , ex  &  ligo, Verê soporatus aut demersus somno profundo, his senses were well and fast bound, as if he had had no operation of life, and therefore the Disciples are said to raise him, as it were from the dead, suscitaverunt, the same Greek word is used in many places where mention is made of the resurrection, Joh. 2.19. Mat. 27.52. 1 Cor. 15.12. Stulte quid est somnus. &c. Ver. 25. The three Evangelists use three severall titles to our Saviour in this com∣pendious forme of prayer, all which (though the Latine and our English express not) are significant and emphatical in their original proprieties, That here importeth power, or might, answerable to Jehova; Markes title signifies, a teacher of letters, or any art; Lukes is englished, Defender, a present helper, and he to express the Disciples zealous devotion ingeminates the title with a double appellation.
They stucke too much to the carnall presence of their Master, for as it appeareth by Marke they doe not simply intreat him, but they expostulate the matter with him, Master carest thou not that we perish, Luke also noteth an amazed trembling, Master, Master? Vers. 26. Vt ostende∣ret se element∣rumomnium Dominum. Rebuked] Restrained and stopped. Vers. 28. The unclean Spirit kept this miserable man among the graves that he might torment him with continuall terrour, from the sad sight of death, as if being exemp∣ted from the number of men, hee now conversed with the dead. Calvin. Vers. 29. Torment] Judicis sui praesentia ex∣pavefacti de poena sua cogitassent, mala enim conscientia quid meriti essent, ipsis tacente Christo, dictabat. Calvin. The word in the originall is very significant, to cast us into the torments of hell, so the same word is expresly used by Luke 16.23. and 28. verses. Before the time] Either before we expected, or before the last day of judgement. So Gotius. See Aug. de civitate Dei. l. 8. c. 23. They who scorne the day of judgement are worse than the Devils; those who deny the Deity of Christ are worse than the devils, are Piscat. Vers. 31. The Devils desire to goe into the Swine, being the most uncleane of all Beasts; and having his name porcus quasi spurcus,Non quod con∣cesserit salva∣tor daemonibus quod petebant, dixit ite, sed ut per inter∣fectionem porcorum, hominibus salutis occasio praeberetur: pastores enim ista cernentes, statim nunciant civitati. Erubescat Manichaeus, si de eadem substantia, & ex eodem auctore hominum bestiarumque sunt animae, quomodo ob unius hominis salu∣tem, duo millia porcorum suffocantur. Hieron. in loc. delighting in filthinesse as the Devill with sin, given to devouring, as he himselfe is. 2. That doing so much hurt they might stirre up the inhabitants against Christ, and cause them to curse him for the losse of their Swine. CHAP. IX. Verse 1. AND came into his own City] viz. Capernaum. Mark. 2.1.Vide Brugen∣sem. There are three Cityes of Christ rehearsed; The first was Bethlehem, in which he was borne, Micha. 5.7. Secondly, Nazareth, in which he was educated, whence hee was called a Nazarene.Drusius de quaesitis per Epist. Epist. 4.6. Their Faith, portantium & paralitici Chrysostom, onely offeren∣tium, Ierome. Thirdly, Capernaum, in which he sometimes dwelt. Matth. 4.13. Hence Theophylact. Bethlehem genuit, Nazareth educavit, Capernaum incolam habuit. Vers. 2. To him] viz. Sitting and teaching, Luke 5.17. and that at his House, Marke 2.1. The glory of this Miracle was wonderfull, that a man taken in all the Cadaver hō∣inis verius quā homo. Eras. Chemnit in Harm. Inaudita mansueru∣dine filium ap∣pellat. Eras. Qua com∣pellatione promptum animi sui affectum ad sublevandum miserum ostendit, sicut pater miseretur filiorum. Psal. 103.13. Chemnit. parts of his body, whom they had let downe in a Bed by cordes, Mark. 2. Luke 5. Sodainely arose both sound & nimble. Although they neither said nor askt any thing, God saw and knew their faith, lurking in their hearts, Psal. 37.10. Rom. 8.27. by the painfull endeavour of those that carried him, & the patience of him that was sicke of the palsie. Yet he saith not hee seeing the patience of him that was sicke of the Palsie, & the desire of charity in them that carried him, but seeing their faith, when yet it is certaine that they also were acceptable to Christ. Two things are to be noted in that 1. That faith alone (although other vertues also be present) is that instrument by which the benefits of Christ, especially remission of sinnes is received. 2. That other workes are approved of God, and accepted of him, if they proceede from and bee done in faith. Vers. 3. The other two Evangelists adde, who can forgive sinnes but God alone] The Scribes accused him of Dicitur hic  Non qui Deo maledicit, sed qui quod Dei est sibi arrogat, vide infra. 26.65. Mark. 2.7. Grotius.blasphemie, the Pharisees of eating with Publicans and sin∣ners, 11. v. the Scribes accusation was a breach of the Law, the Pharisees, a breach of traditions. Vers. 5. Piscator. Quanto praestantior est anima corpore, tanto praecellit corporis sanitatem peccatorum remissio. Sed Christus sermonem ad eorum captum accommodat, qui ut erant animales externis signis magis movebantur quam tota spirituali Christi virtute quae ad eternam salutem valebat. Calvinus. This interrogation hath the force of a negation, that is, neither is more
easie than the other, but both equally difficult, and to God alone possible. He applieth his speech to their capacity, who being unregenerate were more moved with out∣ward signes, than all the spirituall power of Christ. Ver. 6. The Son of man hath power to forgive sins, but Luk. 23.34. saith, Father forgive them. Answ. Though all the persons in the Trinnity forgive sinnes, yet not in the same manner, the Father bestowes, the Sonne merits, the Holy Ghost sealeth up and appli∣eth remission of sinnes. This clause in earth] meaneth, that Christ for this cause came downe to the earth, that he might offer to men the present grace of God. Take up thy bed] That that which was a witnesse of thy infirmity, may now be a witnesse of thy health restored. Brugensis. Vers. 9. A man named Matthew] The Evangelist speakes of himselfe in the third per∣son,1 Tim. 1.13.14, 15, 16. Piscat. Levi significat ad∣ditum Mat∣thaeus datum, donatum. Chemnit. He is called of Marke and Luke, Levi, therefore he had two names; He was at first called Levi, after his calling Matthew, and so he is stiled after, though Grotius seeme to differ from this opinion. Luke saith, He made him a feast. Our Saviour invites him to a Discipleship, Matthew invites him to a feast. Vers. 10. At Jesus sate at meate in the House] viz. of Matthew, as it is plaine in Marke and Luke especially, for Matthew in modestie conceales his owne name. Many publicans and sinners] Publicans and sinners will flocke together, the one hate∣full for their trade, the other for their vitious life. These two publicans and sinners are often joyned together, Luke. 7.34. and 15.7. Vers. 11. The squint-eyed Pharisees looke a trosse at all the actions of Christ, where they should have admired his mercy, they cavill at his holinesse; when these Censurers thought the Disciples had offended, they spake not to them, but to their Master. Why doe thy Disciples that which is not lawfull] Now when they thought Christ of∣fended, they spake not to him but to the Disciples. Vers. 13. I will have mercy and not sacrifice] That is, rather than sacrifice. By sacri∣fice all externall worship of God is understood. Call the righteous but sinners] Those who acknowledge themselves to be sinners, confessing and forsaking their sinnes,Perkins on Jude. and not such as presume of their owne righte∣ousnesse. Caskes  Judg. 4.19. and she opened a Caske of Milke. Mollerus in haec verba psalmi. 50. pone lachrimas meat in utere tuo, Solebant orientales in utribus servare vinum & oleum, ideo hac metaphora utitur.The same thing is meant in both the similitudes, of discipline more harsh than weake Disciples were able to beare. Vide Scultet. Exercit. Evang. l. 2. cap. 52.Vers. 16, 17. No man putteth new wine into old bottles] That is, exacteth rigid and hea∣vy services of weake and tender Disciples, and therefore my Disciples fast not while I am amongst them in the flesh. But the dayes shall come] When I shall send them my Holy Spirit, to strengthen and prepare them forhard service, and then they shall fast. Calvin.Christ therefore compares his Disciples to old bottles and torn garments, not because they were worne with long use, but because they were weake. Vers. 18. All Alardi pa∣thologia Sa∣cra. N. T. the Three Evangelists begin this History of Jairus, with the particle Behold, which yet here is not a Demonstrative adverbe, but rather an adverbe of admi∣ration. For it is manifest that the men of this ranke were the greatest adversaries to Christ. Iohn 7.48. and 9.22. The name of Jairus is suppressed by Matthew, but set downe by Marke and Luke. Worship him] That is, bow the knee, which was common among the inhabitants of the East. He did not give divine honour to Christ, but worship him as a Prophet of God. Ver. 20. Diseased with an issue of bloud] It is but one word in the .Greek, The Evangelists do expresly declare that this Issue of bloud had endured for the space of twelve yeares, and that the woman had consumed all her substance upon Physitians, whereby the glory of the Miracle was so much the greater.
Vers. 21. She had no devotion to the hemme of his garment, but because she was kept off by the Presse, so that she could not come neere to desire his aide as others did, she said within her selfe, if I shall but onely touch the hemme of his Garment. Cart∣wright. If I may touch] A weake action, the hemme of his garment] the remotest part, with a trembling hand, a feeble apprehension; the vertue proceeded not from his gar∣ment, but immediately from himselfe, therefore he saith vertue is proceeded from mee. Luke 8.8. Vers. 23. Minstrells] Tibia ute∣bantur in fune∣re puerorum puellarumque, nam instrumentum est exilis & angustae vocis. Lactantius. Iubet religio ut majoribus mortuis tuba, minori∣bus tibia caneretur. Vide Scultet. observ. in Matth. 1.29. Christus loquitur eis qui flentes & ejulantes parabant exe∣quias defunctae, & non suscitandae; voluit testari se eam statim suscitaturum, quasi ex somno expergefactam, non potuit igitur aptius hoc significare quam illis verbis quibus est usus. Amesius de consc. l. 5. Tibiae praesertim & solum puerorum exsequijs adhibebantu, sicut tubae in funeribus aetate provectorum. Alardi epiphyllides Philol. Who played with their sad tunes. Cantabat maestis tibia fu∣neribus. Ovidius. Vers. 24. She was dead, therefore they scoffed at him, as though he endeavoured to raise one dead, as if she were onely a sleepe; but Hee really demonstrated that she slept to him, because He raised here onely by his call, as wee can those that sleepe. Piscat. Vers. 25. Tooke her by the hand] As we are wont to doe, when we raise one from sleepe. Christ hereby demonstrated, that it is as easy for God to raise the dead,Grotius. as to awaken those that sleepe, which might much confirme their faith. Vers. 33. I marvell not if the people marvelled, for here were foure wonders in one, the Blind saw, the Deafe heard, the Dumbe spake, the Demoniacke is delive∣red; rarity and difficulty are wont to cause wonder, but meete in this. If we respect either the multitude, or power of working miracles,Chemnit. there was never the like done. Vers. 34. The Pharisees were mad, to defame with wicked speech so notable a work of God, for the Antithesis is to be noted betweene the praise of the people and the blas∣phemy of these men, what could malice say worse? Vers. 36. He was moved with compassion] The word signifieth the yearning of the bowels, such as is in the most tender pitie and compassion, as Zacharie explaines it, verbum  à visceri∣bus deductum, quod plus habet emphaseos quam latinum misereri Hebraei enim viscera vehementem atque intimum affectum vocant, in visceribus enim residet humanitas, & mutua compassio ergo proximos. Indicat itaque hoc verbum, quo Graeci in∣terpretes expresserunt hebraeum Raham, quod hoc etiam loco Syriacè est, summam & vehementem commiserationem ex in∣timis visceribus profectam, non sine externa corporis alteratione; tanquam si dicas, commotus viseribus. Lucas brugensis. Comment. in 4. or Evangelia. Luke 1.78. Vers. 37. By this metaphore he declareth that many of the common sort were ready to receive the Gospell, see Iohn 4.35.Vtitur allego∣ria sumta à re rustica. Bru∣gensis. Those which professe themselves to be Gods people, and are in some kind of ripenesse to be instructed and become obedient to him, are the harvest. This was spoken at the feast of Tabernacles, which was in the midst of harvest, the Parable also of the Sower was in sowing-time. Labourers] The Ministers of Christ, see the 10. of Luke the begining. few] almost, onely Christ and Iohn. A harvest-labourer, or reaper, should be first skilfull, secondly, industrious, thirdly, sent. Vers. 38. Send forth] Word for word, cast them out,Extrudat ra∣ther than emittar. for men are very slow in so holy a worke. CHAP. X. Verse 1. THE number of Twelve did note the future restoring of the Church,Calvinus. for as the people rose from Twelve Patriarkes, so now Christ recalls the scattered relickes, to the memory of their originall, that they may conceive a certaine hope of their resti∣tution.
Potestatem ad∣versus spiritus impuros. Beza. , potestatem spirituum immundorum. vulg.Power against uncleane spirits] It is well translated so by Beza, and us, according to the meaning of the phrase, word for word, it is in the originall, power of uncleane spirits, and so the Vulgar reads it. Vers. 2. Peter and Andrew named first, because they were first called, Mat. 4.18. Theophylact.This is such a primacy as a fore-man of the Quest is wont to have in Ju∣ries: not a primacy of power, as over inferiours, but a primacy of order, as amongst equals. Dr Rain. against Hart. C. 5. p. 174, 175. Peter is placed first here, but Luk. 6. and Marke 3. the same order is not ob∣served, and by Paul himself, Gal. 2.5. Iames is put before Peter. We acknowledge the primacy, but not the preheminence of Peter above the other Apostles. Peter signifies a rock which hath firmnesse, he was so called for constancy, Andrew manlike, Iames striving, Iohn the grace of God, Philip a light or lampe, Bartholomew full of water, Thomas engraffed in Christ, Matthew pluckt out of the world, Iames a striver, Lebaeus hearty, Simon zeale. That they are sent two and two, as in Luke 10.1. The seventy Disciples are sent by paires,Polic. Lyser. this makes for the commendation of brotherly Charity among the Ministers of the Word, for the mutuall keeping of works and doctrine, also for conso∣lation and mutuall help in adversity, and for the greater confirmation of the truth of the word preached. Deut. 17.6. Because Christ sent his Apostles by paires, the Jesuits walk two together in the streets, but if more of them go forth together, there is a mystery in it, according to that speech. Iesuitae semper sunt bini, si verò sint trini, tertius est generis faeminini. Ver. 3. Matthew in describing his person, keeps humility and candour; humility in that, that when other Evangelists prefer him (in rehersing his paire) before Thomas, he for modesties sake postposeth himself to him; candor, that he makes mention of his ancient sinfull condition,Polic. Lyser. and confesseth that he was a Publican. Vers. 5. Sent forth] or commanded forth, for , whence the Apostles are derived, signifieth properly, Cum mandatis emittere, to send forth with commands. Go not, &c.] Object. Mark. 16.15. Answer, Distinguish times, and the Scriptures will be consonant enough, that in Mark is meant of preaching after Christs time, this in Matthew while he was living on the earth, both are true, because the times are divers. Vers. 6. He assigneth the first place to the Jews, because they were the first-borne. First,Calvin. Miraculous cures are there meant. 2. For those daies only. 3. There is a diffe∣rence between action and labour. 4. Forbids a mercenary affection. See 4. Deut. 5. and 14.Vers. 8. It may be understood of the Lords work generally, that as freely they have received the grace, so freely they should do the work. 1 Pet. 5.2. Vers. 9. Provide neither gold nor silver, nor brass in your purses] The Commandement was temporall, and given to the Disciples but only for the time of their first embassage into Iury,That is, of all necessaries for the mainte∣nance of this life. as appeares in the fifth verse; and the Commandements of their first message were reversed afterward, Luk. 23.36. Mr Perkins. Vers. 10. Scrip] Necessary provision.two coats] Change of rayment. staves] defence. Objection, A staffe is allowed, Marke 6.8. but here in Matthew, and Luk. 9.3. it is denyed. Marcus loqui∣tur de virga seu baculo & fulcimine cui innitaris. Hic enim est symbolum viatorum pauperum, qui baculo innixi incedunt ut fatigationem levent, sicuti incessit Iacob peregrinus in Mesopotamia, Gen. 32.10. Matthaeus verò hic loquitur de virga defensoria, vel vindicatoria, quam Christus Apostolis vetat. Cornel à Lap.Answer, Matthew and Luke meane staves which are a burden to them that beare them, but Marke meanes a staffe whereon travellers do ease themselves, Gen. 32.10. a walking staffe, take no staffe to strike with. See Piscator. Shoes] See Mark 6.9. The shoes which Matthew mentioneth are new, such as are with care and diligence prepared to travell in, the Sandales in Mark are such as are dayly worne on the feet. Mr Perkins. Vers. 11. And into whatsoever City or house ye shall enter, enquire who in it is worthy] and there be bold to tarry and receive entertainment; as if he should say, every one that is
worthy will be ready to shew kindness unto you. Acts 16.15. And there abide till ye go thence] Abide in that house till ye go out of that City; go not from house to house. See Luk. 10.7. Vers. 14.  excuti∣tur de pedibus in testimonium laboris sui, quòd ingressi sint ci∣vitatem, & prae∣dicatio aposto∣lorum ad illos usque pervene∣rit. Sive excutitur pulvis, ut nihil ab eis recipiant, ne ad victū quidem necessarium, qui Evangelium spreverint. Hieron. in loc. Piscat. Calv. See Acts 13.51. It is probable that the Jews then used to shake off the dust as a figure of cursing, as if they did it to witness, that the Inhabitants of the place were so wicked, that they infected the earth and dust with their contagion, and that they would not communicate with them in any thing. Iansen. Harm. Chrysostome, Ierome, Theophylact, and Austen say, that Christ commandeth them this,To shew the labour of them that came, their feet were dusty. Aquinas, Erasmus. To shew that their labour was lost. Ierome. that they might shew they would have nothing to do with them, and not carry away their dust who contemned the Gospell. Vers. 16. Behold I send you] The mission of the Apostles was twofold, first, more particular in this Chapter,Vtitur Parti∣cula demon∣strandi ecce qua & attentio∣nem excitat & rem notatu dignam se indicaturum innuit. Apostolis & verbi praeconibus ovium naturam tribuit. Ovium inge∣nium est simplex non versutum, secundò hominibus in omnibus, lana, lacte, carne, fimo, usui & commodo sunt, denique est animal inerme, placidum, mansuetum. Polycarp. Lyser. when Christ sent them only to preach the Gospel in the land of Iudea, 5, 6. v. Secondly, more generall after his resurrection, Mat. 28.18, 19. These words pertaine to Christs first mission. As sheepe] Harmeless, and helpeless. Among wolves] so called, first,Per lupos in∣telligit hostes veritatis quales tum temporis fuerunt Sacerdotes, Scribae, Pharisaei, sic vocantur partim propter rapacitatem partim propter indo∣mitam & insatiabilem rabiem. Pol. Lyser. For their anti∣pathy to the sheepe; secondly, For their cruelty, thirsting for their bloud. Be wise as serpents, and simple as doves] Be wise lest ye be circumvented by others,Vide Fag. in Gen. 3.1. and simple lest ye hurt others; Sine prudentia simplicitas stultitia est. Drusius. The Serpent is very quick sighted to escape danger, Tam cernis acutum quam aut aquila aut Serpens epidaurius, and therefore, He is called Draco of seeing. 2. He stoppeth his eares against the Charmer, with the earth on one side, and his taile on the other, and will not be gotten out of his hole. 3. Seekes to save his head, Ierome, Austen, Ambrose, Totum corpus in orbem circumvoluit ut caput occultet. 4. He hath a tortuous way not to be found; He hath respect here to that place. Gen. 3.1. The Serpent had in his Creation a speciall impresse of wisdome above all other Creatures, therefore Satan made use of him to deceive our first Parents. Doves] The Dove Simplex est animal, felle caret, rostro non lae dit. Bernard. The properties of the Dove, 1. Meekness, the Dove is without gall. 2. Simplicity,Bish. Lake. innocency, as here, the Dove is, without guile, a simple and harmeless bird. Cant. 4.1. and 5.12. and 6.8. The third quality is Chastity, she keeps to her mate, sincerity and singleness in heart and life. 4. Is neat, ad candida tecta columbae, they are pure, not defiled with sin. 5. The Dove is a loving, and lovely creature.Dr Taylor. 6. The Doves flie toge∣ther, Esa. 60.8. So they must joyne together in Gods pure worship. Vers. 17. But beware of men] As if he should say, what speake I of Wolves, you have more cause to feare danger from men, than Wolves, or from any other creature whatsoever. Homo homini lupus. Vers. 18. Governours] As Paul before Felix and Festus, Act. 23.24, 25. and 24:25. Kings] Peter before Herod, Act. 12.4. and Paul before Agrippa, Act. 25.26. Vers. 23. Son of man] It is a comfort given peculiarly to the Apostles.Calvin. Christ is said to come, when he brings remedy to things in despaire. Vers. 24. The Disciple is not above his Master] While he continues a Disciple, as Christs Disciples should never cease to be his Disciples, so Grotius interprets this pro∣verbe Dum adhuc discipuli fuerint minores sunt praeceptoribus, si verò praestantiores magistris evaserint, non amplius erunt discipuli. Theoph usuall among the Hebrewes. Vers. 28. As if he should say, I allow and command you to feare men onely for God, who hath set them over you; but feare God for himselfe. Perkins.
Vers. 29. Farthing] The tenth part of a Romane penny, of our Coyne halfe pen∣ny farthing;  passerculus is a diminutive of  or . There is almost nothing lesse esteemed than Sparrowes, for two were then sold for a farthing, or as Luke saith, five for two farthings, and yet the eye of God is watchfull to defend them, they are not shot and so fall downe without his providence. The Epicure altogether denies providence,See Dr. Gou∣ges Sermon on this text. Aristotle includes it in Heaven, some of the Arabians say it is imployed a∣bout universalls not singulars, but this verse and the next confutes them all. Mr. Perkins.Vers. 34. To send peace but the sword] That is, division by meanes of the doctrine of the Gospell. By the sword Tralatio inde sumta quia  proprium quasi officium est , quo alludit etiam scriptor ad Heb. 4.12. Grotius. here not warre but division is understood, as is most evident by Luke 12.51. Vers. 37. That is, whosoever loves what he hath best reason to love in this life more than his Saviour is not worthy to have any benefit by him, any share in his mercyes. Whether our love bee an ascending love up to Father or Mother, or a descending love downe to Son or Daughter, it may not bee greater than our love of Christ, nay our love of all others in comparison of our love to Christ must be hatred. Luke. 14.26. Is not worthy of mee] That is, shall have no benefit by him, shall not be saved by him. Vers. 39. Hee that findeth his life shall lose it] That is, He which thinkes he findes his life, he that thinkes that by the denying of the Gospell whereby he may preserve his life, and obtaine good dayes in it, he shall lose life. Loseth] It is not meant of an actuall losing, but a disposition or preparation of the heart to lose for Christs sake (if need be) the dearest thing we have, that is, our life.Mr. Perkins. Luke 14.26. Vers. 40.41. He that receives] That is, doth any good office, or deserves well of a Prophet. Righteous] Is to be taken by way of eminencie, for one of eminent sanctity, such as among the Jewes had therefore the sirname of Iusti, as Simeon Iustus, Iacobus Iustus. Give to drinke] Whence we may gather what receiving before is meant, viz. relieve, maintaine, support. A Prophets reward] An eminent reward, or of the quality of a Prophet, though himselfe be none. Mede in loc. These words of beneficence to Ministers of the word, are expounded by the chiefest Divines, that the sence should bee, as they who give honour to the Embassa∣dours of Kings or Princes, doe procure the favour of the King, so he that respects and honours the Apostles and the Ministers of the word, as the Embassadours of God, 2 Cor. 5.20. shall certainely receive a large reward from God. This is a pious inter∣pretation, and not strange from the mind of Christ; yet it doth not fully expresse the sence. For it is the same to receive the Apostles, Christ, a Prophet, a righteous man, as to receive the words of the Apostles, Christ, a Prophet, a righteous man, or to believe and hearken to them, so that true faith is especially exprest by this phrase, lay∣ing up in their hearts the word of Christ, the Apostles and Prophets; and adhering to him with all the heart, which shewes it selfe afterward in beneficence and hospi∣pitality toward the Preachers of the Gospell. That this is the mind of Christ, ap∣peares by a parallel place, Luke 16.16. where Christ expounds himselfe, what it is to receive the Apostles and Ministers of Christ. It is the same thing to heare one and re∣ceive him;Mayetus in hilol. Sac. so Matth. 11.14. if you will receive mee, if you will beleeve mee, heare mee. Iohn 1.11.12. Eo nomine.To receive in the name of a Prophet, and of a righteous man] signifieth, as much as to doe them good, for the honour of the Gospell, and in respect of the Gospell. Marke 9.41. A Prophets reward] Some understand it, that they shall bee partakers of the same reward,Calvin. which is laid up for the Prophets and righteous, rather a reward which is fit for the worthinesse of the person, upon whom the liberality shall be bestowed. Pro poculo aquae frigidae torrens voluptatis, for a cup of cold water (water the common element, and cold water which cost thee not the charge of fire to warme it) there is a torrent, nay, a very Sea of all pleasures provided for thee for all eternity. Bish. Andrews. Frigidae, inquit aquae, non calidae: ne & in calida paupertatis ex penuria lignorum occasio quaereretur. Hierom. in loc.Vers. 42. And whosoever shall give to drinke unto one of these little ones, a cup of cold
water onely] A proverbiall kind of speech, which wee use to this day in many tongues, as often as we would expresse the least benefit. God esteemes mens deedes by their mind, not their mind by their deedes. In the Greeke it is  Cold onely, not water, as the Latines say, frigidam bibere and frigida lavare. CHAP. XI. Verse 4. GOe and shew Iohn againe those things which yee do heare and see] Our Saviour answers them by a reall demonstration. Vers. 6. In me] With the simplicity and humility of my person, kingdome,Zepperus. word, worship and administration of the Sacraments. See 26.31. 1 Cor. 1.23. Vers. 7. Iohn] His name was famous among the people, and they spake honoura∣bly of him, but his doctrine was little esteemed; therefore Christ telleth them that they lost their labour, which went forth to see him, except they would observe his doctrine. Vers. 8. The simple meaning of this place is,Author imper∣fecti operis. Non sim∣pliciter redarguit sed dixit cui sta∣tui conveniat. that there was no such thing in the Wilderness, which should allure the people thither, for al things there were rude, they should rather looke in Kings Courts for fine trimming, which delighteth the eyes. Vers. 9. 1. Prophesied of all things, the old Prophets did. 2. In his Mothers belly, Luke 1.41. 3. Pointed at Christ with a finger; hee was middle betweene a Prophet and an Apostle. Vers. 10. Behold I send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before thee] It is a metaphor taken from Kings, for whom going forth the wayes are wont to bee prepared, the streets made cleane and adorned,Tostatus. Pareus. and his chiefe servants to goe before him, the chiefest of which is hee that goes next before him. Such a one was Iohn the last of the old Prophets, and the first of the new. Vers. 11. John Baptist was nearer Christ in time, being the very next unto him of all the Prophets which ever went before him; hee was therefore more happy than the rest, for he saw what they desired to see, and saw not;See Luke 7.28. Calvin. Harm. Evang. Peter Martyr. loc. commun. Beza. in Annotat. and also of a more worthy calling, as pointing out Christ with the finger, which the rest onely descri∣ed afarre off. Hee gained more to God by his Ministy, than any of them had done, as appeareth verse 12. Notwithstanding, &c.] That is, in the new estate of the Church, not in respect of his person and gifts, but of his ministry, greater than John Baptist. Hildersam. See Dr. Sclator on 1. of the Rom. p. 1. because hee is all what Iohn was halfe,John was so great, because Hee was last of the Law, and first of the Gospell, and the old rule is, minimum max∣imi, majus est maximo mini∣mi. Instituitur collatio non juxta mensuram donorum, sed gradus revelationis, Prophetae nunciabant venturum, Baptista monstrabat praesentem. Chemnit. wholly un∣der the Gospell of the kingdome. The least Minister of the Gospell is greater than Iohn, in respect of the preaching of Christ, so Bishop Down. de Antich. Grotius saith, the comparison is wholly in the gift of the Prophet, which Luke 7.28. expresseth more evidently, as much as Iohn exceld all the Prophets before him, so much the lowest Prophets of the New-Testament excell Iohn, viz. in greater know∣ledge of mans redemption: for that before Iohn was a mystery, in Iohns time it began to shine forth, after the passion and resurrection of Christ, and sending of the Holy Ghost, it was more evident than the light at noone day. Vers. 12. The Kingdom of heaven] Christ himself, Ambrose; Eternall life, or Heaven, Gregory and Bede; Faith, Chrysostome, Euthymius and Theophylact; some say the Church, or Gospell, Sancta fidelium in novi Testamenti Ecclesia irrumpentium violentia. There was such forwardness and zeal in them which heard Iohn preach, to procure to themselves the kingdom of heaven, that they strove most earnestly to get it. Mr Perkins. The kingdome of grace is called the kingdom of heaven, in opposition to the Kingdoms of the world, and to the spirituall kingdome of the devill, and because the Lord of it hath his throne in heaven, and all good things come to them from hea∣ven,
and because it differs but in degrees from the kingdom of glory; this is mixt and imperfect, that is pure and entire. s Metaphora sumta à Castris vel ab arce qua∣piam, quae irrumpentibus hostibus diripitur. Beza, Brugens.Take it by force] As a Castle is taken by a storme. These words are restrictive, the vio∣lent and only they, and promissive. Vers. 14. And if ye will receive it] That is, if you will give credit to my speech. This is Elias which was for to come] viz. in spirit and power like to Eliah, Luk. 1.17. but not the person of Elias, Iohn 1.21. Talia apud Po∣etas, Audire est operae preti∣um, & audite atque animis advertite ve∣stris. Grotius.Vers. 15. He that hath eares to heare let him heare] An Epiphonema with which Christ, and Iohn in the Revelation following him, Apoc. 2.7, 17. often shut up their speeches concerning things of great moment. Christ would signifie that it was a matter of great moment, to beleeve that Iohn was the Eliah promised by Malachie, for they mistaking in that might be deceived in the Messiah. Vers. 16. Christ useth a similitude (as it is supposed) of a game commonly used by children, Children leading severall dances did so sing one to another; Christ that he might overthrow the pride of the Scribes, took occasion to reprove them from chil∣dren playing together,Calv. Paraeus. their song was enough to condemn them. Vers. 17. We have piped unto you, and you have not danced] They were neither moved to mirth with merry things, nor to sadness with sad things. Vsus tibiarum apud Hebroeos duplex erat,Vsus tibiarum ad laetitiam erat in Templo & in festo Ta∣bernaculorum. in hilaritate & gaudio, & in luctu, in nuptiis & in∣funeribus; We have mourned unto you (viz. with pipes) and you have not lamented. Mat. 9.23. When as he had lived an austere and straight life, preacht repentance, and sang a mournfull song, and the Lord himself, as with a merry and cheerefull song ap∣plyed him self more pleasantly to allure them to his Father, yet neither of these waies profited amongst them.Vers. 18. He abstained from common meates, and common order of dyet. Luke hath it, not eating bread, nor drinking wine. Vers. 19. That is, to live after the common order of men, but he drank only water, and did eate only locusts and wild honey. Vers. 19. There is a secret Antithesis between naturall children and bastards, which vaunt of a vain title without a cause, as if Christ should say, let them go on in their pride which gloriously boast themselves to be wisdomes children in vaine, she shall yet have her praise, and her authority amongst her naturall children. Luke therefore addeth, of all her children, whereby he declareth, that the resistance of the Scribes was not such a let to any, but that all the Elect of God should remaine in the faith of the Gospell; that place, Luk. 7.29. well explaines this, that is, acknowledged the wis∣dome and goodness of God shining in Christ, and Iohn. Vers. 21. Hypotheticall propositions presuppose not a truth, as here, and Luk. 19.37. not that stones can speak, nor Tyre repent. Proverbialis est locutiò eti∣am Graecis & Latinis, ad astra tolli, aut sublimi vertice sidera ferire, pro eo quod est rebus florentibus & illustri loco esse. Grotius.Vers. 23. A proverbiall speech, and an allusion to the words of Esay 14.14, 15, 25. 1 Cor. 1.27, 29. Vers. 25. These things] That is, the Doctrine of the Gospell, and the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. Vers. 27. The opposition is made to exclude Creatures, and false Gods, not the Holy Ghost; the meaning is, None, that is, no Creature, or Idoll-God knoweth the Son of God but the Father. Mr Perkins. Vers. 28. Come Non simpli∣citer dixit ve∣nite sed , quae particula est hortantis.] That is, beleeve, so Christ himselfe expounds it, John 6.35. No man can come, that is, beleeve, except the Father draw him. John 5. You will not come to me. Wearied, and heavy laden See my Greeke. Crit. Observa em∣phases in vocibus  & , Priori peccatum durissimo labori, posteriore gravissimo oneri compa∣ratur. Glassius.]The first word signifies such as labour untill they be wea∣ry: and the other signifies such as are heavy laden with a burden unsupportable, and being grievously pressed therewith, desire to be eased of it. Heavy laden] Some say, 1. with Crosses, as Aug. de verb. Dom. 2. Rigour of the Law, Theophylact 3. Sin, Ier. 9.5. as Chrysost.
Rest] From reatus, vis, regnum, paena peccati, not radix of it, therefore not said take away, but rest, from the foure first; Here is no exception of sins, times, or persons. Vers. 29. Learne of me] Austin saith, what to do? Not to create the world, to walk on the water, to raise the dead; we must follow him, non in quantum Filius Dei, but in quantum Filius hominis; the same Father, He gives us a precept, and a patterne, the one requiring our obedience, the other our conformity. And ye shall find rest.]Not outward, naturall, but the repose of the mind and conscience. Vers. 30. My yoake) Not only Christs, because he as Lord puts it upon us, a le∣vitate & agi∣litate cervorum nomen habet.  non solū exonerabo, sed quod multo ampliùs est, in omni quiete vos constituam. but be∣cause he as a fellow-servant helps us to beare it. Metaphora à jumentis deducta. Easie] 1. By presence of grace. 2. Help of the spirit, Ezek. 11.19, 20. 3. Love to it, yet a yoke and a burden; suave, sed amanti, is Bernards gloss, i.e. Ioh. 5.3, 4. Iugum ejus merito est suave, cui servire est regnare. Augustin. My yoke is easie] The Greek word signifies more rightly, my yoke is a benigne, a gra∣cious, a pleasant, a good, and a gainefull yoke, all pleasure and profit is made up in the Word. CHAP. XII. Verse 1. THe purpose of the Evangelists in this history, was to shew, partly how malicious the Pharisees were, and partly how superstitiously they were addicted to outward rites of small importance, insomuch that they placed all their holiness in them. Vers. 3. Christ defendeth the fact of his Disciples, and confuteth the cavill of the Pharisees by five arguments: 1. By Davids example, necessity freed him from fault, for the Priest which gave him leave to take the shew-bread is commended by the Holy Ghost; indeed it was not lawfull but for the Priest only to eate the bread, that is, by the common Law. The second Argument is in the fifth, because it is lawfull on the Sabbath daies to kill Sacrifices, to circumcise Infants, and to do all other things that pertaine to the worship of God; the works of godliness cannot be contrary one to another. The Law] That is the Books of Moses, which describe the Law, a Metonymie of the Subject. Broken by the Priests] An improper speech which Christ useth, that he may frame himself to the hearers. The third argument is in the seventh verse, Christ re∣proveth the Pharisees because they considered not for what purpose the Ceremonies were commanded, nor to what end they did belong. Hos. 6.7. Mercie] That is,Calvin. all works of Charity, and under sacrifice is all the outward worship of the Law comprehended. The fourth reason is in vers. 8. Christ saith here that he hath power given him to set his people free from the necessity of observing the Sabbath, the Son of man (saith he) can of his own power moderate the observing of the Sabbath, as he doth the other Ce∣remonies of the Law. The fifth argument is reported by Marke only, Chap. 7.27. The summe of it is, they do wickedly which turne the Sabbath to mans destruction, which God instituted for his sake. Vers. 5. On the Sabbath day the Priests in the Temple profane the Sabbath, and are blameless] That is, they do such things as in other cases not concerning the worship of God, would be a profanation of the Sabbath. If a Butcher in his slaughter-house should so slay, flea, and cut beasts in peeces on the Sabbath, he would therein profane it.Dr Gouge. Vers. 9. He went into their Synagogue] viz. On another Sabbath. This history and the former tend both to one end, viz. that the Scribes were maliciously bent to carpe and cavill at every thing that Christ did. Vers. 10. They asked him] viz. the Scribes and Pharisees, Marke and Luke do only say, they watched what the Lord would do; but Matthew setteth it down more plain∣ly, that they tempted him also in words. And it is likely that he had healed some others on the Sabbath before, having therefore taken occasion of that, they demand of him, whether he think it lawfull for him to do again that he had done before, but God who instituted the Sabbath, laid not a Law upon himself, they should have considered
whether it had been the work of God or man to heale a dryed hand only by touching it, or with a word. Vers. 11. Christ sheweth againe what is the true and right observation of the Sab∣bath, and also reproveth them for their malicious dealing, because they cavilled at him for that which was usuall amongst them all. Marke and Luke have not this similitude, they only say that Christ demanded whether it was lawfull to do a good deed on the Sabbath day, or to do evill? For he that destroyeth the life of a man is guilty of an of∣fence, yea, differs little from a man-slayer. Vers. 14. Held a counsell] Or tooke counsell, with the Herodians sayes Marke, whom yet they hated most deadly. Chemnitius.Vers. 16. And charged them that they should not make him known] Because the time of his glorification was not as yet, but of his humiliation. 2. Because the multitudes did not yet sufficiently know the true end and use of his Miracles. Vers. 18. Behold my servant] The ) dictio  ambigua est in puero & servo. Hic autem servum denotat, cum in Ebraeo sit Nabor. Sed & Latinè puer pro servo ponitur. Drus. not. in Paralel. Sac. Greek word signifieth both a Son and a servant, but a servant here. Shew judgement to the Gentiles] That is, one should come that should restore righte∣ousnesse decayed, and Hee should be the Governour, not onely of the Jewes, but should bring the Gentiles also under the government of God. Vers. 19. Nor cry] Such a cry is here meant, which is a signe of a troubled and chafed mind. Vers. 20. A Reede is a tender thing, it will breake sometimes afore a man bee a∣ware, a bruised Reede is more tender, it will bee broken with a touch. A bruised Reede is a soule broken with the sence of sinne, and weake in faith. Matth. 11.28. Smoaking flaxe] The weeck of a candle which is newly lighted, and hath little light or heate, but rather smoakes and offends with an ill smell, i. e. A soule which hath but a little knowledge and zeale, or affection for God, and much corruption. Till he send forth judgement unto victory] The words of the Prophet are somewhat otherwise, that he shall bring or lead forth judgement in truth. Yet Matthews speech hath force in it, that we may know that judgement cannot be placed in the world without great strife or labour, for victory is not obtained but by fighting. Some ex∣pound these words thus,Calvin. untill the sanctified frame of grace begun in their hearts, be brought to that perfection, that it prevaileth over all opposite corruption. Vers. 22. Many are blind and dumbe of naturall diseases: but this man was blind in his eyes, and deprived of his speech, though there was no want in those parts per∣taining to the sight, or in the proportion of the tongue. Vers. 23. Is this the Son of David?] Interrogatio innuit affirmationem opinabilem, as if they should say, truely Hee seemes to be the Sonne of David, that is Christ, a peri∣phrasis from the efficient. Vers. 24. Beelzebub] It signifies the Lord of flies, but if it be read Beelzebul,For Beelzebub in many copies it is , which sounds, Dominus stercoreus, quod vocabulum sine dubio in contumeliam ipsius idoli & cultorum ejus est in∣ventum. Buxtorf. in Lexico Talmudico. it sig∣nifies the dunghill God. Vers. 25. Christ, 1. confuteth the cavill objected against him by a common proverbe, 2. hee proves it by an induction of three particulars; one of a kingdome, a∣nother of a City, the third of a house; the meaning is, there is nothing more ab∣surd, than that the Devill should willingly overthrow the power which he hath o∣vercome, who indeavoureth by all meanes to have them in his bondage. Vers. 26. When Exorcists by the help of Satan cast out Satan, that is done by de∣lusion of the Devill, ex pacto, that he might thereby retaine men in superstition and i∣dolatry, and that by his ejection out of the body, he might have dominion over the soule: for if Satan should violently cast out Satan, hee would be divided against himself, which Christ denies. Vers. 27. By whom do your children cast them out] This place is diversely expounded, some Maldonate, Hilary, Jerom, Theophylact, Euthymius. by children there understand the Apostles who were Jewes borne, and had re∣ceived
from Christ this gift and power to cast out Devils; others Calv. Chem. Iunius. rather think that by children are meant exorcising Jewes before Christs time, who did cast out Devils among them, pretending to doe this worke in the name of God, whereas in truth they were all flat sorcerers, and did it by compact made with the Devill. Act. 19.13.16.17. Judges] You need not to seek far for your condemnation,You have a∣mong you sun∣dry magicians and exorcists who pretend to exercise the gift of casting out devils, and you think they do it by the power of God, why then do you not carry the same opinion of me also. Mr Perkins. the miracles which I work you apply to Beelzebub, and you praise the same in your children; therefore you have enough at home to condemne your selves. Vers. 28. By the Spirit of God] Luke metaphorically calleth it the finger, for Spirit. For because God worketh, and sheweth his power, by the Spirit, the name of a finger is aptly given it; this speech was common among the Jewes. Come] This word is very forcible, and sheweth that Christ appeared willingly to them as a Redeemer, but they as much as they could, drove him from amongst them, and would give no place to him that was come, ready and prepared for their salva∣tion. Vers. 29. This sentence is but a confirmation of that which went before. He af∣firmeth that a strong and mighty Tyrant cannot be driven out of his kingdom, untill he be spoyled of his weapons; hee alludes to that place, Esay 49.24. Vers. 30. When Christ was much injured with the blasphemies of the Pharisees, he confutes the slander, and then layes downe this rule,Proverbium Iudaicum in u∣tramque par∣tem usurpatum, nam & dici so∣lebat, Qui non est contra vos, pro vobis est. Luc. 9.5. Sic in gnomis Salomonis, respondeas stulto, & ne respondeas stulto, quae omnia veritatem suam habent pro ma∣teria cui aptantur. Videtur autem proverbium istud hoc loco à minori ad majus hoc modo procedere. Si in bello internecino quale est inter Dei servos & daemonas, nemini licet neutrarum esse partium, sed medii pro hostibus habentur, quanto magis ergo hostis censendus sum diaboli, qui non modo illi non prosum sed obsum quam maximè? Obstat quicquid non adjuvat. Quintil. Grot. in loc. He that is not with me is a∣gainst mee, in such blasphemies against Christ, wee must take his part actively, and must resolve to be with Christ against the world. In Marke 9.40. and Luke 9.50. Some cast out Devils in Christs name, and the Disciples forbad them, here because they did act in Christs name (though they did not follow with them) they were not to be hin∣dred. V. 32. Christ said v. 31. Blasphemy should not be pardoned, in the 32. he adds, Shall be forgi∣ven neither in this world, nor in the world, nor in the world to come] that is, never, as Marke expounds it. Mar. 3.19. Bucer, Calvin, Martyr, Musculus, Zanchius, say, that those who out of malice and purpose blas∣pheme and oppose the divine truth revealed in their minds, shall never obtaine pardon; the Papists say they may obtaine pardon, but difficultly. Neither in this world, nor in the world to come] as we see in the Scripture the like positions are ampli∣fied, sometimes by a partition of persons, sometimes of places, sometimes of things, as here of time; by a partition of things, Gen. 31.29. of places, as Deut. 5.32. of persons, Rom. 1.16. Rainold de lib Apoc. tomo secundo praelect. 171. A proverbiall kind of speech for never, as neither good nor evill, for nothing at all; neither to the right hand, nor to the left, that is, on no side, Drus. Prouerb. Clas. 2. lib. 3. Proverb. 24. with the Scholiastes Ben Syrae, qui linguae morbo laborant, sanari non possunt neque in hoc seculo neque in futuro. Origen thought that all sins should be pardoned a long while after the last judge∣ment, which errour Christ refutes in those words, nor in the world to come.] Vers. 33. Either make the tree good, and his frite good, &c.] Christ commandeth the Pharisees to be either good or evill, as if he should have said, there is nothing more con∣trary to honesty than hypocrisie, and they challenge to themselves the title of righteous in vaine which are not upright; it is an upbraiding speech. Vers. 34. How can ye beeing evill speake good things] It is (saith Christ) no marvell if you vomite out evill words, seeing that your heart is full of malice. Vers. 36. Where by idle words, he meaneth such as bring no profit to men,Sermo otiosus pro inutili su∣mitur, qui nihil aedificationis vel fructus affert. Calvin. Verbum otiosum est quod justa necessitate & pia utilitate caret. Greg. Quod sine utilitate loquentis vel audientis profertur. Hieron. in loc. nor ho∣nour
to God, though they do not directly dishonour God, or hurt men. The words are a true proposition, and sound argument drawn à minore ad majus; if account must be rendred at the day of judgment of every idle word that men speak, then much more of blasphemous words. Vers. 40. By three daies and three nights are meant three naturall daies, because the Hebrews had no other words for a naturall day. It could not be said he lay three artifi∣cial daies in the earth, because he lay in the night part of a naturall day. His abode in the grave was about 38 houres.Mr. Perkins. He was but one day and two peeces of two daies in the grave (for he was buried in the evening before the Sabbath, and rose in the morning the next day after the Sabbath) yet this is sufficient to verifie Christs saying,Christ was buried in the heart of the earth, not the middest, but by an He∣braisme, as of Tyrus. Ezek. 27.4. Manifesta haec . Nam & Ebraeis, & Graecis, & Latinis, vox diei ambigua est, & nunc natu∣ralem nunc artificialem diem significat. Hujusce ambiguitatis tollendae causa solent Ebraei (quorum loquendi formam Apostoli & evangelistae retinent, Graecè quamvis scribant) cum intelligunt diem naturalem sive civilem, hoc est  ponere diei partes, licet res tota die gesta non sit. Tres dies & tres noctes ponuntur hic pro triduo, Triduum enim in sepulchro Christus fuit, . Imò haud aliter intelligendū videtur, cum Ionas in Ceto fuisse dicitur tribus diebus ac noctibus. Quistor pius. Non praecisè tres dies & tres noctes, nullo modo, sed figuratè & synecdochicè. Nam Christus sepeltebatur diei sextae ves∣pera, quo die crucifixus est, die septimo quievit in sepulcro, die octavo, primo septimanae proximae resurrexit. Itaque fuit in sepulcro duobus tantum diebus integris, ac vix quidem illis integris. At dicitur fuisse in corde terrae tres dies & tres noctes, sicut Ionas fuerat tres dies & tres noctes, ut commendaret istud mysterium Ionae Prophetae, quo adumbrata est Christi morr & resurrectio, atque doceret istud etiam verè de ipso affirmari, eum triduo fuisse in sepulchro, tres dies ac tres noctes sy∣necdochicè, quoniam dies conficitur ex die & nocte, Christus quievit in sepulchro parte dierum trium. Rainold de lib. Apoc. praelect. 128. for if the analogy had stood in three whole daies, then Christ should have risen the fourth day. Langus de Annis Christi lib. 2. cap. 1. saith, by this exposition Scripturae in os contradicitur, he saith two nights and two daies are not three nights and dayes, two and three are not the same. 41. The men of Nineveh shal judge exemplarily, and are produced to convince others, who have less profited by greater meanes. Beza, Piscator. Vunoleane] because of pol∣lution of sinne. Spirit] the Devill. Gone out] that is in part, as a Drunkard wrought on by a Sermon.Vers. 43. Is gone out] A voluntary action, but he is cast out of the godly. He may returne and actually possesse such men he was actually cast out of. It is said metaphori∣cally, that he walketh through dry places, for his banishment is grievous to him, and his dwelling out of men is like a filthy desert. Alludes to the Israelites being in the wilder∣ness, they were not content, but had rather have been in Aegypt again, there was no meat nor drink. Seeketh rest] So long as he is out of man, because that then he fretteth and torment∣eth himself, and ceaseth not to try every way untill he recover that he hath lost. Vers. 44. My house] It is his house though he be in part cast out. Temptations of a Hypocrite 1. they cease. 2. then the Hypocrite is a fit house for the Devill, the gracious are not empty.Empty] Or as the word is, idle, not possessed by grace; so void as no body lookes to it; the word is used by Pharaoh against the Israelites, you are idle; so the devill finds men idle not looking to their soules, and then comes in. Swept and garnished] As men expecting guests sweep the house to shew how welcome they shall be; so the idle man garnishes his house, and is ready to bid the devill welcome: A heart emptied and swept of goodness, and garnished with noisome lusts, is prepared for the devill. Vers. 45. Seven other spirits] The number of seven is taken here indefinitely, as in other places,Worse Devils in respect of the effects they work in a man, God gives the De∣vil leave to take a further possession of him. that is multitudes. Seven Spirits In the Revelation, that is, with severall operations, so the devill comes with greater temptations and sins. Vers. 47. His brethren] That is, his nearest kindred, see ch. 13.55. Vers. 48. Vpon this place some old Heretickes denied Christ to have any Mother. Interrogatio indignantis, as if he had said, What dost thou tell mee of my Mother and my brethren, as if it were fit that I should omit my Fathers businesse, to hearken to my earthly kindred. Luke 2.49. Marys importunity is here reproved. Vers. 49. Behold my Mother and my brethren] Spirituall kindred are stronger than carnall.
CHAP. XIII. Verse 2. THE occasion of our Saviours Sermon, was the gathering of much people to∣gether, and coming unto Christ out of all Cityes; the kind of doctrine he spake was by a Parable Parabola est explicatio re∣rum per simili∣tudinem quan∣dam. Refert quasi agricolae alicujus historiam quotidie sationis tempore consuetam. Sed hoc differt historia à parabola, quod illa est narratio simplex rei verè gestae: ista est narratio sive verè, sive verisimiliter gestae, ad aliquid simile significandum: verbi causa, hic vult significare Christus, ex tanta multitudine audito rum vix quartam partem credituram Evangelio, prout ipse Dominus parabolam interpretatur Discipulis. v. 18. Pareus., that is, a comparison and similitude drawn from ordinary matters; here it is taken for an obscure manner of propounding the truth under a continued si∣militude, or allegory, from the Greek  assimilare, Luke 21.29. see 24.31.33.44.45.47. verses of this Chapter. Behold a sower went forth to sow] The Scope of this Parable is twofold, First, whereas our Saviour saw a multitude of hearers, but not all coming with the same intent, nor all hearing with the same fruit and profit: he manifestly propoundeth this parable to shew the diversity of hearers. Secondly, that every man might enquire and make triall of himselfe, in which forme or ranke of Hearers hee is. Behold] A note 1. of certainty. 2. Of intention or excitation, that is, let him that heares consider, remember, apply. 3. Of castigation or checke to our dulnesse, in be∣holding such materiall things. A Sower] That is, Christ himselfe, vers. 37. Went forth to sow] That is, to preach in Spirit, person, ministry. His seed] That is, the word of God, ver. 11. Which by Christ and his Ministers is cast into the furrowes of the heart, as seed into the furrowes of the earth by the hus∣bandman. The word of God in this Sermon, is compared by Christ to seede:Vers. 19. Optimè  semini compa∣ratur: Nam & Latinè ser∣mo à serendo dici creditur. Grotius. Chemnit. in Harmon. and for divers reasons. First, as unknown seed, of which you know not what fruit it will bring forth, is a contemptible thing and of no price; so the word of God is not esteemed of. 1 Cor. 1.23. Secondly, as seed hath in it selfe a virtue of growing, of bearing fruit, and of procreating that which is like unto it; so the word of God hath in it a spirituall and quickning force of regenerating men. Thirdly, as the seed doth not quicken being kept in the garner, but being cast on the earth; so unles the word of God be spread abroad into the eares and minds of men, it doth not regenerate men, nor bring forth the fruits of faith. Fourthly, as in sowing the blessing of God is required, unlesse wee will cast away the seed in vaine; so in preaching the word, it is God onely that gives the increase. 2. Cor. 3.7. Fifthly, as in sowing the field is to be prepared, unles wee will lose our labour with the seede; so the heart is to be prepared to heare the word of God. Vers. 4. The high way being continually trod by the feete of men growes hard, seede will not grow there; so mens hearts through the continuall passing of the Devill and lusts. Our Saviour interprets it plainely in the 19. vers. the reason of unfruitful∣nesse is two fold, one inward, the seed was troden under foote, that is, they despise and undervalue it; the other outward, by malice of the Devill, the Foules came and devoured it up. Luke 8.12. he stealeth, that is, closely and secretly takes it away. Vers. 5. This second ground goes beyond the former, they are hearers and doers. If you sow seed in ground that hath some stones and some earth, it will soone come up, but growes not downward; so these heare the word with joy, but it takes no roote, if persecution come his Religion is gone. These bad hearers are compared to stones or stony grounds. 1. For their naturall hardnesse. 2. Coldnesse. 3. Heavinesse. 4. Vnprofitablenesse. This bad ground goes beyond the former. 1. It receives the seed. 2. Incontinently. 3. With joy. 4. Brings up the seed sowne; it sprung up to sundry degrees. 1. To externall obedience and reformation in most things. 2. To an outward profession. 3. To a kind of faith.
Much earth] Not as if there were no By sufficient earth is meant a particular distinct know∣ledge of the word, and of their owne part in it; by rooting, stabili∣ty, certainety, and sincerity of faith and other graces. earth, or rootes, or moysture, but as a Rock covered with a little crust of earth above, all stones below; so it had no rootes, that is, no deep rootes, no rootes to feede the stalke and blade that was come; no rootes which could save it from withering in time of heate. This is implied by all the Evan∣gelists, who say, because it wanted rootes it lasted but a while, it wanted moisture, that is sufficient moisture. Vers. 6. They withered away] Fell away, not all at once, but by little and little, as a leafe loseth his greenesse, and flourish, and withers by degrees. The causes, 1. Inward. 1. Positive, hardnesse, it fell among stones. 2. Privative, want of Moystnesse. Earth. 4, 5. v. Rootes. 6. v. 2. Outward Persecution. 21. v. Temptation. Luke 8.13. Moistnesse] humor, 1. Vnctionis, a sound supply of saving graces which continually feedeth and cherisheth the roote. 2. Compunctionis, sound sorrow for sinne, and the sound exercise of mortification. Vers. 7. This ground goes as farre as the former in hearing, Luke 8.14. in receiving, Matth. 13.20. and Mark. 4.14. and in growing, as Luke, it springs beyond the other: the other grows, but this sprang up, not only to a blade, but to an eare, though not a ripe one. These third hearers are doers & sufferers, in the winter time the thorns will cherish the seed, but when it should bring forth the earth, the thornes grow up and choake it. Bring forth no fruite] That is, not to perfection, bring not fruit to the end as the Greeke is, or maturity. The causes of this failing are set downe. 1. In generall to be thornes, viz. inward lusts, carnall affections, and corrupt desires. 2. In speciall of three sorts, 1. Cares of the world, to distinguish them from the cares of heaven, Luke 8.14. and 22.2.2. Riches, Luke 8.14. called deceitfulnesse of riches, verse 22.3. Voluptuous living, Luke 8.14. called lusts of other things by another Evangelist, these enter and choake the word, Mark. 4.19. Vers. 8. The ground is called good, not à priori, because the word finds it so, but à posteriori, it is made so by the word. The heart is called good in two respects. 1. as emptied of bad qualities, being contrary to the bad disposition of the three former kinds of ground. 2. as well qualified by grace, so it is called an honest heart, a generall word, and put for the approved disposition of the soule, containing both civill and religious honesty. The first received not the seede, this receives and retaines it; the se∣cond choakes the seed, this cherisheth it in a good heart; the third came up faire, but withered,Sicut in terra mala tres fuere diversi∣tates, secus viam, & pe∣trosa, & spinosa loca: sic in terra bona tri∣na diversitas est, centesimi, sexagesimi, & tricesimi fructus. Hieron. this continues fruitfull. Our Saviour speaketh not by an hyperbole, or an excessive speech, but according to the manner of the best ground in Canaan, which brought an hundred fold increase. Austin and Jerome say, our Saviour mentions three degrees of fruitfull ground, to note a difference betwixt Virgins, Widdowes, and Married persons. Theophylact applies it to Anchorites, Monkes, and Laickes. Christ mentioneth three degrees of fruitfull hearers, 1 to note the free disposition of Gods grace, who distributes to every one according to his good pleasure. 2. to com∣fort and encourage his Ministers, who though they lose much labour in the three bad grounds, yet the good ground makes amends, in which none are fruitlesse. 3. to com∣fort and strengthen such as have not, nor can attaine this hundred fold, though their en∣deavours be true and earnest, Christ honours them with the name of good ground, Matth. 25.23. Vers. 12. See Luke 19.26. That is, that useth well what he hath received. Drusius in his proverbs expounds it thus, He that hath the gift of faith, to him other things al∣so shall be given. Vers. 13. Audientes corporis sensu, non audi∣unt cordis as∣sensu. August. de corrupt. & grat. c. 7. Hee here plainely declares, why he used a parabolicall kind of teaching, because they seeing with their bodily eyes the Miracles of Christ, and hearing with their corporall eares his Sermons, they did not see nor heare with the eyes and eares of their heart. Vers. 19. And understandeth it not] Spiritually. .Then cometh the wicked one] That is, the Devill; this phrase notes a speciall wicked∣nesse. God is called by the Prophets in the old Testament, the Holy one, because he is infi∣nitely and altogether Holy; so the Devill, because hee hath the most wicked nature, is
called the wicked one. 1. the Devils fell of themselves and made themselves wicked. 2. they persist in their wickednesse. 1 Iohn 3.8. 3. they labour to make others wicked like themselves, they are wicked subjectivè and effectivè. And catcheth away that which was sown in his heart] Catch in our language imports a kind of violence, but the Greeke word  is more full,Marke saith he comes and takes away the word out of his heart. 4.15. fetcheth it away by vio∣lence as the Harpie her meate; the ravenous creature the Harpie hath her name from this word; Christ useth the word Matth. 11.12. where it is rendred, take by force, because of the vehement pursuit of their spirit, so this shews the extreme eagernesse of satans spirit. Vers. 21. Yet hath he not root in himselfe] It must bee a rooting of our owne, not in opposition to Christ, but any other person, and not so much inregard of quan∣tity as truth; It must have a rooting, 1. In the understanding. Eph. 4.14. 2. Memo∣ry. 3. The conscience. Rom. 14.15. 4. In the will. Act. 11.23. 5. In the affections. Eph. 3.17. 6. In faith. Col. 2.5. For when tribulation or persecution ariseth because of the word, he is by and by of∣fended] Tribulation is taken largely for any kind of affliction, here for such a tri∣bulation as hath something of persecution in it for the word; tribulation is often imme∣diate from the hand of God, persecution is ever from the hand of man. Because of the word] Received. Offended] At this persecution; it implies such a distast as puts a stop to a man in the way he is in. Vers. 22. This ground in the generall nature of it is thorny, thornes are lusts that thrive in the soule, so called, 1. because they are sponte nascentia, spring up naturally in the heart as the others doe in ground. 2. teare and wound the soule as thornes the flesh. 1 Tim. 6.10. 3. in the respect of the end, thornes are for fire, so lusts either for the fire of the Spirit of God, or of the wrath of God. And the deceitfulnesse of riches] Riches are a great portion of the things of this world, the Greeke word rendred deceitfulnesse, signifies the drawing one out of his way, ex a priv.  a path, a drawing out of the way. it notes the deceiving which is under the most cunning disguise of that which is good or true, the fairest colour to draw us out of the way. Riches are not deceitfull active∣ly as the heart of man, Ier. 17.5. or as lust, 4 Ephes. 22. but objectivè, because they are those things about which we are deceived, not as they are possessed and used, but as they are 1. coveted. 2. trusted to. 3. ill imployed. Vers. 24. The Kingdome of heaven] That is, the Gospell, because it is the meanes of setting it up. Vers. 25. His enemie came and sowed tares among the wheat] So long as the Church wandreth in this world, Hypocrites and wicked men bee mixed with the good and sincere, therefore the godly should arme themselves with patience, see 47. v. the mixture of good and evill must be patiently borne untill the end of the world, because the true and perfect restitution of the Church shall not bee before that time. This Text hath much prevailed with many of the Ancient and moderne Divines,Mr. Bedfords examination of the Argu∣ments of the compassionate Samaritane. to draw them to the use of much, peradventure overmuch, clemency toward Hereticks. Where there is a seeming repugnancy in the Texts, there it is fit the plaine precepts should guide our practice, rather than darke and obscure parables. The meaning of our Saviour is not to forbid the use either of the spirituall or civill sword. These tares in the Parable are expounded to be the children of the wicked, that is, of that wicked one the Devill. Why therefore should it be so expounded, as to favour Heretickes rather than Hypocrites? The intention of the Parable doubtlesse is to shew that there is no expectation of universall purity in the Church of God during this life; this is the in∣tention, and farther than so it is not doctrinall; it is evident that hee who forbad to pluck up the tares, did not forbid to hinder the sowing of them. He that sowes the good seed is Christ our Saviour, the field is the world,Rainold. de lib. Apoc. tomo secundo. praelect. 171. the good seed are the sons of the kingdom, the tares are the sons of that evill one, the enemy which soweth them is the devill, the reapers are the Angells, the harvest is the end of the world. Ver. 31. By these parables Christ encourageth his Disciples, lest they being offen∣ded with the small and base beginning of the Gospell should give back, therefore the Kingdom is compared to a graine of mustard seed, and leaven. Vers. 32. Which indeed is the least of all seeds] One of the least, or least of all those which after grew so big.
Lodge Vocem  (quae & in Graeco Danielis 4.18. in re simili occur rit.) Fateor non malè versum nidulari: at quid opus fuit à veteri recedere qui (verbo habitandi usus) tantundem ac meo animo elegantius expressit. Avicula est parvula, nomen ei Cassita, habitat nidulaturque in segetibus. Gel. l. 2. c. 29. Pricaus in loc. Graecè est , quod quidam vertunt nidulentur: nam & Interpres supra 8. ver. 28.  vertit nidos. Rectius tamen congruere videtur habitandi vox, quia non nidificandi tan∣tum gratia agunt in arboribus volucres▪ verùm etiam habitandi & versandi dum nullis opus habent nidis, dum scilicet carent pullis. Caeterum vox  quod est tabernaculum deducta, loco convenit, eo quòd frondosae arboris rami sint aviculis veluti tabernaculum seu tentorium. Lucas Brugensis Comment. in 4. Evang.Id est ut quasi habitent in ramis ejus, Psal. 104 13. neque enim de nidis tantum agitur. Respiciunt haec verba Nabuchado∣nosoris somnium apud Danielem 4.9. Grot. in loc. Videsis mea Critica Graeca.] The Greek word signifies properly, to dwell in a Tabernacle. Beza tran∣slates it, make their nests; the vulgar dwell. Ver. 33. This Parable is the same in effect with the former. A woman] He instanceth in her, because it is their way and nature to do it; the word of God rooted in the heart seasons the whole man. Chrysostome saith, the meaning is, that the Apostles should bring many nations to the Christian faith, as leaven is wont to turne a great deale of meale into its own nature; Leaven though small doth so spread its force, that a great heap of meale is leavened therewith. Vers. 34. He used not these continuall Parables so much for instruction sake, as to make the hearers attentive, and more apt for another time. Vers. 38. The field is the world] Christ meant not the wide world (but by an usuall trope) the Church scattered throughout the world, as John 3.16. 1 John 2.2. Else there had been no place for the servants wonder, that the world should be full of wic∣ked persons. ver. 27. Vers. 43. Then] The adverbe of time then is very forcible, for it containeth a se∣cret opposition to the present state, and of the last day, in hope whereof Christ comfor∣teth all his faithfull ones. Calvin. Vers. 44. The scope of that Parable is this, If one should come into any of our fields, and by searching find a gold mine, he would not make it known to any, but cover it close and go his way, and sell all that he had to buy the field, that thereby he might enrich himself: even so having found this, that the Gospell revealeth the way to life everlasting, though we must not conceale the same from others, yet we must be like this man herein, that we could be content to part with all that we have, that so we might make the Gospell ours.Perkins on Rev. All that he hath] Parts with the inward love and outward practice of sin; Christ crucified must be our treasure; there are five things intimated in the Parable, 1. We must find this treasure, so much is implyed in the word hidden, for we cannot have a thing that is hid before we find it. Mat. 11.25. 2. We must highly prize, and value it, so here, and Paul Phil. 3.8. 3. Obtaine and get it, so here, and Mat. 6.20. 4. Assure it to our selves, 1 Tim. 6.17, 18, 19. 5. Vse it as a treasure, have our conversation in heaven, for there Christ our treasure is, and where our treasure is there will our hearts be. Luk. 12.33.Vers. 46. And bought it] Ob. Esay 55.1. Ans. Heavenly life is the free gift of God, yet we are said to buy the same, when we do willingly bridle the desires of the flesh that we be not thereby hindered from obtaining the same. Phil. 3.8. By that a man hath, is meant sin, and by selling it, the renouncing and discla∣ming of sin.Not pawn, but sell them. The sinner must sell all that he hath, not his Goods, Lands, Children, for these be none of his own, God hath lent him these to use, our sins are our own and nothing else: He that will have part in Christ, must part with his sins, make a through sale, forsake them all, and for ever. Vers. 51. All the Parables were expounded privately to the Disciples, but now after that the Lord had so lovingly instructed them, he also admonisheth them, that they should not be wise for themselves only, but impart unto others that which was com∣mitted to them; therefore he saith, that Teachers are like to housholders, which are not only carefull to provide for themselves, but lay up also for the nourishment of others. Vers. 52. Every Scribe] This name, though given to some, who besides the ordina∣ry function wrote something, 1 Chron. 24.6. yet was given not from writing, but because they were skilfull in the word written. See Mat. 23.34.
New and old] Are new and old meates, Piscator, Grotius. New and old fruits, Drusius. Although some would have the Old and new Testament to be understood, that is, the Law and Gospell. Calvin interprets it of their divers and manifold waies of dispensing heavenly mysteries, which they do apply to every mans capacity. Vers. 55. Is not this the Carpenters son] Christ himselfe Mark 6.3. is called the Car∣penter; and Justin Martyr saith,Faber Latine &  Grae∣cè, vocessūt sig∣nificationis am∣plae, ad omnes artifices, qui corporis labore adhibito, è quavis duriore materia aliquid struunt, se extendentis, unde fit, ut vari∣ent opiniones, cujus generis faber Joseph fuerit, aliis existimantibus fuisse fabrum ferrarium, D. Hilario in hunc locum, aliis lignarium. Augustino. Lucas Brugensis Comment. in 4. Evang. Fabri silius] Scilicet lignarij, qui aedificia struit is enim  dicitur. De Dieu in loc. that he made plows and yokes before he exercised the function of the ministery. Hereupon Julian the Apostata scoffed at Christ our Saviour, saying (at his going against the Persians) to the Christians, what doth the Carpenters Son now?Cum Julianus bellā esset con∣tra Persas fa∣cturus, & mi∣natus fuisset se post bellum ec∣clesias graviter afflicturum, & petulanter insultaret, filium fabri nihil illis affere posse subsidii, Dydimus vir ecclesiasticus hanc de eo pronunciavit sententiam: Iste fabri filius arcam ei ligneam ad mortem parat. Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 2. And threatning, that after his returne he should not be able to save them from his fury: whereto a godly man answered by the spirit of Prophecy, He whom Julian calleth the Carpenters Son is making a woodden Coffin for him against his death; and a little af∣ter in that battell he dyed miserably. Vers. 57. A Prophet is not without honour, save in his own Country] It may be this was a generall Proverbe, that they which are eminent in gifts, are no where less esteemed than in their own Countrey;Vide Piscat. but Calvin and Chrysostome think the Jews were especi∣ally reproved by this saying, Christ was never less esteemed any where than in Galilee. CHAP. XIIII. Verse 2. THis is John the Baptist] His conscience troubled him for killing so holy, and inno∣cent a man. Vers. 6. When Herods birth day was kept] After the manner of the Kings of the East.We have a most ancient exam∣ple of this cu∣stome in Ae∣gypt, Gen. 40.20. That ancient custome cannot be disproved in it self, of joyfull solemnizing the birth∣day yearely, for that day, as often as it returns, admonisheth every one of us to give thanks to God, from whom being brought hither we have passed many yeares now through his mercie; then that it may call to our mind how unprofitablely we have spent the time allowed by him,Calvin. and that we would commend our selves for the remainder of our lives to his protection.Maldonate in∣veighes against Calvin for this that he here delivers, but he is vindicated by Paraeus. Vers. 19. He commanded the multitude to sit down on the grass] That Christ commanded the people to sit down by troopes, he did this first by counsell, that the miracle might be the more conspicuous to the troopes so disposed. Secondly, that the men might be the more fitly numbred, and when some looked back on others they might be mutually witnesses to themselves of this heavenly grace. Thirdly, Because he saw the Disciples sollicitous, he would approve of their obedience,Calvin. commanding them that which was in shew a miracle, for it was wonderfull when there was no provision, wherefore Christ would make shew of a banquet. Hilary disputes, whether the multiplication was made in the hands of Christ break∣ing, or of the Disciples distributing, or of the company taking; but it is probable that it happened in all three, and in breaking he so multiplied the fragments, that both the Apostles and the company saw the power of God in his hands,Polyc. Lyser. and after felt it in their own hands. Vers. 20. And they took up of the fragments that remained twelve baskets full] Every Apo∣stle, as it seems,Grotius. Vide. Juvenalis satyram terti∣am. brought his basket after the usuall manner of the Jews, as often as they went any journey far from the towns: In these baskets they were wont to carry bread with them, as it appears, 16.7. Mark 8.14. Vers. 23. Compared with ver. 15. These things cannot otherwise be reconciled,Vide Grot. in vers. 15. Gerh. in Har. than that the evening in the former place notes the time next the Sun-setting, in the lat∣ter
place the time after the sun-setting, which extends it selfe to midnight. Exod. 12.6. V. 25. And in the 4th watch of the night] The night was in times past divided into foure quarters, or greater houres, termed 4. watches, each watch containing three lesser houres. The first they called caput vigiliarum,Vide Grotium in loc. the begining of the watches, it began at the even or Sunseting. Lam. 2.19. The second was the middle watch, Judg. 7.19. not so termed be∣cause there were onely three watches, as Drusius would perswade, but because it lasted till midnight. The third watch began at midnight, and held till three of the clocke in the morning, gallicinium, Cock-crowing. Luk. 12.38. The last called the morning watch, the dawning, Exod. 14.24. it began at three of the clock, and ended at sixe of the morning, that is spoken of here, and all of them are mentioned, Marke 13.35. The Romanes did so divide their night, and distinguished their severall watches by severall notes, and sound of Cornets or Trumpets; thence the phrase de tertia vigilia in Caesars Commentaries. Vers. 27. Be of good cheere] The Greeke word signifies three things. 1. Be of good courage, forti animo estote. 2. Comfort, be of good comfort, consolamini. 3. Confidence, fiduciam habete, be of good confidence, beleeve. V. 28. Bid me come unto thee on the water] Rash zeale in Peter, yet God turned it for best, 1. Lest any say Christs Body was not like ours, Hierome. 2. He sank to check his blind zeal. 3. Theophylact and Hilarie thinke it a type of Peters forwardnesse when he denied Christ. Vers. 30. Lord save me] We should have an eye on Christ in all troubles, Psal. 121.1. Peter falls to prayer. Vers. 31. Christ is firme, though he sinke. Vers. 36. Only touch the hemme of his garment] Neither weake faith nor superstition, but as Luke 8.44. Act. 19.12. Christ hath all creatures to obey him, and he heales all diseases. CHAP. XV. Verse 2. WHy do thy Disciples transgresse the traditions] There is a manifest impiety in cer∣taine humane traditions, because they appoint perverse worship, and that which directly opposeth the word of God. others when they involve the worship of God with prophane fopperies, they doe vitiate its purity. Others which have more colour, and are not infected with any notable vice,Calvin. yet for this very reason are condemned, because they are feigned to be necessary to the worship of God. So we depart from the meere obedience of God alone, and a snare is cast upon mens consciences. Of this last kind it is here treated. For the washing of hands which the Pharisees urged, could not of it selfe be reproved of wicked superstition, otherwise Christ would not have suffe∣red water pots to bee brought at a wedding; unlesse it had beene a free ceremony. They are much deceived who have compared the sprinkling of holy water used by the Papists with the Jewish washings. Hoc est, Deo cui persolven∣da sunt omnino vota, & cujus priores sunt partes, jam antea consecravi id omne quo alioqui posses à me ex meis bonis in hac egestate sublevari. Drus. Vide Cameronem & Capell. in loc. & Scultet. observat. in Matth. c. 41. & Selden. de Jure naturali & Gentium. l. 7. c. 2.Vers. 5. Whosoever shall say to his Father or Mother, It is a gift by whatsoever thou might∣est bee profited by me] That is to say, that which thou askest for thy supply, is given to another use: and I have nothing for thee. Polyc. Lys. It is an ellipticke speech, but may easily be supplied, so that the sence should be this, if any one shall say Corban, he doth well, and hath well executed the office of piety to∣wards his Parents, and is not guilty of sin against the fifth Commandement; It is better and more holy to give Corban, or to bestow something toward the building of the Temple, than to relieve Parents. Vers. 16. Made of none effect] The Greeke word signifies to deprive of all rule and authority, as much as in them lay they did so. When the Commande∣ments of men are appointed as parts of Gods worship, and as necessary to salvation. Eos errare Christus pronunciat qui loco doctrinae (1 Sam 15.23.) obtrudunt hominum mandata, vel qui inde regulam petunt colendi Dei. Calvin.Vers. 9. In vaine do they worship mee] Christ cannot endure when divine worship is
feigned by mens wits. Christ by his quoting of Esay doth not a little illustrate the place, the Prophet by feare understands the worship of God, therefore Christ rightly in∣terprets it by worship, that is, whatsoever out of the word of God by the advice of men is brought into holy dutyes. They are said to worship God in vaine, either because they do not obtaine the end and fruit of divine worship, or else because the worship it selfe of it selfe is vaine and frivolous. Christ reprehends three things in the Jewish traditions, that they obtruded outward cleannesse on God, instead of the puritie of the heart. 2. that by their humane traditions, they made voyd the worship of God. 3. that they preferred humane traditions, before the divine precepts;Chemnit. and were so taken with their traditions, that they neglected the divine precepts, yea made them altogether vaine, as the Papists do. Vers. 17, 18. The things themselves did not defile a man, no nor hurt then when the Ceremoniall Law stood in force, as the doing of things imply unlawfull doth, and as the conceite of the Pharisees was, therefore our Saviours meaning here is to shew the nature of the things themselves, without respect to the Ceremoniall Law; which the Pharisees not considering, thought that the very eating of the things them∣selves had been sinfull, and had polluted the Soule: for if a man had then eaten upon necessity, the thing it selfe had not defiled, but alone the breach of the Law, and the defilement had beene meerely Leviticall and ceremoniall, not true and spirituall. Vers. 22. Behold a woman of Canaan] Her faith was such, that this Evangelist reporteth it with an ecce, behold a woman of Canaan. She is by Marke said to be a Grecian, and by nation a Syrophaenician. It was the common manner of the Jewes, to call all forreigne nations Graecians; and therefore that Antithesis betweene the Graecians and Jewes, is of∣ten found in Paul. Being borne in the coasts of Tyre and Sydon, she was called a Syro∣phaenician, when as the Region had the name of Syria, and Phaenicia was a part of Syria, and it is to be supposed that the most part of them came of the people of Canaan, who being banished out of their Country, tooke the next place of refuge in their banishment. And cryed unto him] To shew her great affection. Have mercy on me O Lord, thou Son of David] These words intimate Christs Office, Na∣ture, and Person; have mercy] Miserere mei, dicit, ut magis Christ∣um moveat, quàm si dice∣ret, filiae meae, Aut ut Chrysostomus, Theophylactus, & Euthymius putant, quia ejus filia sine sensu jacebat, ipsa vero utriusque, & su∣um, & filiae sentiebat dolorem. Maldonat. in loc. Shewes his Office, for he came to bind up the broken heart, to visite and redeeme his people; the word Lord] His divine Nature; Son of David] His humane; both together, one Christ. My daughter] not a servant, but a daughter; and she not onely troubled, but vexed, and that not a little, but piteously, nor with a common evill, but even with the very Devill. Vers. 23. First, Christ doth neglect her, answering not a word, then deny her. v. 24. reproach her. v. 26. Vers. 23. Send her away] Some say they spake this out of commiseration, rather from impatience. Vers. 24. I am not sent but to the lost sheepe of the house of Israel] Jesus Christ (saith a Fa∣ther) speakes not like Jesus Christ in the eyes of a mortall man, he that was to redeeme mankind, to say he was not sent. Object. Christ was a Saviour not onely of the Jewes, but Gentiles. Esay 49.6. Answ. Christ here speakes of his propheticall Office,The Jew was the elder bro∣ther, Mat. 10.5. in respect of which he was the Minister of Circumcision. Rom. 15.8. He was first sent to Israel, Jerome; while hee was in forma servi, untill he had consummated the worke of our Redemption, he was sent onely to Israel, Iunius. He that knoweth himselfe not a wandring sheepe,Mat. 18.11. Luke 17.10. Perkins on Jude. but quite lost, even in the Lyons pawe, ready to be devoured, such doth Christ take upon his necke, and like a good Shepheard bring back to his fold. Vers. 26. The reason is taken ab absurditate, the doctrine of salvation, is bread, and it is not meet,  fit, honest, decent, Maldonate. to dogges] Greek, whelpes,  Catellis,Neque Serva∣tor verbis illis concedit quae petebat Cananaea, sed fidem illius tentat vehementissimè, obliquè canem nominans, quod convitium apud veteres grave fuit. Sculter. Verum canes Hebraeis & Graecis veteribus dici solere eos quos contemnimus. Sed vox  ei significationi non convenit. Ita enim appelari vulgo canes qui in delitiis erant, quales Melitenses. Tantum ergo indicatum voluit Chris∣tus discrimen quod ad id tempus erat inter  & extraneos. Grotius. Beza. Our Lord used the diminutive that he might seem to speak the more contemptu∣ously.
Christ speakes after the manner of the Jewes, who called the Gentiles (as the Canaanitish-woman was) dogs. V. 27. Yet the dogges eat of the crumbs, &c.] She answers by an ingenious inversion, saith a Father, with a witty retorting or turning back of our Saviours words upon himselfe. I am a dogge, true, but dogges &c. Reliquias canibus dari receptum ubique. Grotius. If I be a dog, I am thy dog. Origen. Crummes belong to dogges jure quodam. Luther. Give me the portion of dogges. She had one property of a dogge, for she held fast. Observatione dignum est, nullius hominis fidem, nisi Gentilium, ad∣miratum fuisse Christum, ut hujus muhe∣ris, & illius Centurionis. Matth. 8.10. Maldonatus in loc.Vers. 28. O woman great is thy faith] Exclamat tanquam victus. Brugensis. He cryes out as conquered. Exclamatio admirantis; it is an interjection of marvelling, non possum am∣plius repugnare precibus tuis. I can no longer withstand thy requests. Foure things are required to justifying faith, knowledge, assent, confidence, application. In all these foure the faith of this woman was great. 1. For knowledge, she lived amongst blind people, and those that were igorant of the true God, and yet she had exact knowledge of Christ, that he was the Lord and true God; that he was mercifull and bountifull, that he could drive away the Devill, and weaken his power. She knew these things so exactly as if she had spent all the dayes of her life in the midst of Gods people. 2. For assent, she gave assent to none but to them which related that Jesus of Nazareth is that great Prophet of the Lord, which can drive away all evills and adversities. 3. For confidence, she came with such confidence to the throne of grace, that neither by si∣lence,Polycarpus Lyserus. nor by a harder answer given by the Disciples, nor by the reproach of a dogge, did she suffer her selfe to be deterred or driven away, untill she had obtained mercy. 4. For application, she firmely beleeved, if Christ at least would speake the word, or consent by his becke, that that should be so efficacious, that her daughter would forth∣with be delivered out of the power of the Devill. Vers. 32. And I will not send them away fasting] But the Apostles on the contrary al∣lege, 1. The inequality of proportion, we have seven loaves, but 4000. men, one loafe then must be divided into 550. particles, whence the portion of some, will scarce arise to the bignesse of a Pea, to satisfie him. 2. The incommodity of the place, here we are in the Wildernesse, where nothing growes; where you shall find more stones than loaves. 3. The continuance of want, they have continued with thee three dayes, whence their hunger hath greatly increased, that peradventure a whole loafe will scarce suffice for one man if it were given him.Polycarpus. Lyserus. This is a plaine evidence of a great weaknesse and unbeliefe, in the heart of the Apostles, which do derogate from Christ, the honour of his divine omnipotence, and they seeme to themselves to be very wise, whilst by their infancie they go about to informe the divine wisedome. Vers. 36. And gave to his Disciples] He would use the Ministrie of these, that they might be convinced by their own testimony, that the Lord did that thing, which they thought impossible to be done. The principall scope of this, as also of the former Miracle is, that we may be admo∣nished, that nothing will be wanting to them, who being inflamed with a holy desire of the kingdome of God, follow Christ, and faithfully worship him. V. 37. And they tooke up of broken meat, &c.] Although that was chiefely to recommend the Miracle, yet our Saviour would have nothing lost. Brugensis Comment. in 4. Evangelia.Seven baskets full] In a former Miracle there remained twelve baskets of fragments, now seven; then the number of the baskets answered to the number of Apostles, now to the number of the loaves. CHAP. XVI. Verse 1. TEmpting] That is, that they might trie whether he could performe this thing which they asked but captiously. Quale viz. signum edidit Iosue Soem sistens; Samuel tonitrua eliciens, Jesaias umbram regredi jubens in solario. Beza.A signe] That is, a miracle whereby he might signifie that God had sent him. From heaven] Like that of Elias, 2 Kings 1.9. Piscator. Like that of Moses, when God
rained Mannah from Heaven. See the 6. of Iohn. Vers. 2. The skie is red] That rednesse signifies a rarity of the Cloudes, and purity of the ayre.Polyc. Lyser. Vide Sculter. observat. in Matth. c. 4 5. Vers. 3. Foule weather] Because the Clouds are thicker than those which the Sunne in the day time can consume or dispell. Vers. 13. Cesarea Philippi] To distinguish that from another Cesarea. It was at the foote of Libanus neere Jordan call'd by Philips name. Calvin saith he took oc∣casion to move this question to strenghthen his Disciples the more. Men] Not pharisees, they would have said he had had a Devill. That I the Son of man, am] That is, ex numero hominum, Beza. I who am cloathed with flesh, Calvin. Vers. 14. And they said,Drusius de tri∣bus sectis Iu∣daeorum, l. 2. saith, this place, and that Iohn 9.2. do prove that the Jewes held a , or migration of soules from one body to ano∣ther. some say thou art Iohn the Baptist] Chrysostome thinkes they all made this answer; Calvin, those that were better disposed; they were Herodians that thought him Iohn the Baptist. Aquin. Hugo Card. Matth. 14.2. All that followed Herods judgement. Some Elias] they conceived that Elias would come out of Heaven, and preach before Christ came, Iohn 1.21. this arose from their false interpretation of that place, Mal. 4.5. The third sort Ieremiah. 1. Because Hee preached sharply and tartly. 2. As Ieremie was thought to be a Seducer of the people, so he. 3. Because holy from his child-hood. Theoph. 4. Because Hee was persecuted and railed on as He. Aqui∣nas and others. One of the Prophets] Like one of the Prophets. Vers. 15. But whom say ye that I am] This particle ye is put emphatically, by which he separates them from the common people; ye, that have been so long with me, which have continually heard my doctrine, whom do ye say that I am,Polyc. Lyser. who am disesteemed by others for my meane outside? Vers. 16. And Simon Peter answered] Peter was the mouth of all the rest;Quem os Apo∣stolorum non malè vocant Chrysostomus & Augustinus. they are few words but full of sense; he speakes ad vitandam confusionem. Vers. 17. But my father which is in heaven] vide Joh. 6.63. Grot. See 1 Cor. 12.3. Vers. 18. Thou a Peter, and upon this rock, or stone] It is not called a rock of Vide Bezam. Peter, but he is so called Peter f a rock, as we all Christians from Christ. Hilary, Cyrill, Chry∣sostome, Theophylact, Ambrose, understand by the rock, not Peters person, but the faith which he had professed in Christ; Chrysost. Epiph. Hary, Origen, Ierome, Ambrose, Beda. Super hanc petram non super hunc Petrum, for Christ built his Church upon the fah and not the man, or upon Christ. Their Learned Expositor Lyra (in loc.) their preacher Feru (in loc.) and Cardinall Hug expound Rock, Christ. Bish. Mortons Appeale, l. 2. cap. 17. or Christ himself whom he confessed, called a rock of old, Deut. 32.18. Psal. 18.3. so Austin often, it comes all to one either interpre∣tation saith Whitaker.Some say his ministery. Peter was  foundation both of the Church of the Iewes and Gentiles, Acts 2. and 15 7. Vide Cameron. The rock is Christ, not Peter; Peters faith, not person; the Apostle elsewhere tells us Christ is the head corner stone, and that the Church is built upon the foundation of Prophets and Apostles, not on one Peter. Whether it be to be referred to Christ whom Peter confessed, or to Peters faith or confession of Christ, or to Peter himself in respect of his Doctrine and Apostleship (as the Ancient Fathers have all these three relations) it commeth to one end, that Peter had no other authority than the rest of the Apostles, upon whom the Church was built no lesse than upon him, who also beleeved and confessed as Peter did, had the keyes of the kingdom of heaven, and power to bind and loose as ample as he, Mat. 18.18.Quibus verbis desertè Petrus distinguitur à Petra, cum persona, tum genere: quod esset absurdum si de uno Petro utrumque membrum esset intelligendum. Debuerat sa∣nè potrus dici tu es Petrus & super te Petro aedificabo. Chamierus. Vide Cheitomaeum de Graeco barbaris novi Testament. in voce . Iohn 20.23. Fulke on Rhem. Test. My Church] That is, not any visible Church on the earth, but the Church of the Elect, all the Elect, the strength of the Church shall stand unvanquished. 1 Ioh. 5.4. Gates of hell] Vide Sculte observat. in Matth. c. 46. & Brugen. in loc. That is, all the power and policy of Satan, so Interpreters generally explane it, though Grotius dislikes this exposition.
Vide Bezam. Traditio clavi∣um symbolum est potestatis at∣que authorita∣tis in aliquem Collatae. There are some therefore to whom the Lord hath commit∣ted the power of admission & ejectiō; to thee] therefore all men have not the keyes. It is a dispute whether the power be in the Congregation radicaliter, and in the Officers formaliter. Vers. 19. And I will give unto thee the keyes of the kingdom of heaven] This is a metaphori∣call speech, for the understanding whereof we must know, that Faith is compared to a dore, Acts 14.27. because by it we have entrance into Gods Kingdome; so accord∣ingly the meanes of begetting, preserving, and encreasing of faith, is the Word, Sa∣craments, Prayer, and Discipline, these are compared unto keyes which Christ hath committed to his Ministers, to admit such as are to be admitted, and exclude such as are to be excluded. This is also meant by that which followeth, whatsoever thou shalt bind] only another metaphor is there used, the meaning of which is opened unto us by that of Salomon, Pro. 5.22. Sins are as cords, and Christ hath given his Ministers power to bind with these cords such as remaine in impenitency and unbeliefe, but to loose from them such as repent and beleeve. This power they exercise, 1. By preaching the word. 2. By administring the Sacraments. 3. By Praying. 4. By executing Discipline upon gross offenders, and releasing them upon their repentance. 2 Cor. 5.19. James 5.14, 15. When one was made Doctor of Law among the Jews, they spake to him in this manner,D' Espagne de la manducation du corps de Christ. as the Rabbins shew; Receive authority to pronounce bound that which shall be bound, and to pronounce loose that which shall be loose. Christ speaking to his Disciples here whom he would make Doctors, saith, That which you shall bind on earth, &c. Keyes is a borrowed speech, signifying power and authority by the Ministery of the Word, either to give entrance into the kingdome of heaven, which is begun on earth and finished in the heavens,The keyes of the kingdom of heaven are the authority of preaching the Gospel, ad∣ministring the Sacrament, and Church-censures, all which things were in as ample manner granted to the other Apostles, As my Father sent me, so send I you, whose sins you retaine they are retained, and whose sins you remit they are remitted. If Christ had given or promised a primacy to Peter, in saying, thou art Peter, &c. then no doubt the contention would have ceased among the Apostles for that time forward who should have been chiefe, but the Disciples long after this con∣tended about that. Mr. Wheatly. To thee] cum reliquis. Origen, Austen, Chrysostome. To thee and thy fellow Labourers the other Apostles, and your Successors, Synecdoche membri; in another place he gives the keyes to all the Apostles, Iohn 20.23. Cyprian saith, that Christ in the person of one spake unto all, that he might commend the unity of the Church. to such as obediently receive the word; or to cast out from thence such as shall obstinately refuse it. This is not Peters key, but the Popes picklock; by binding and loosing are signified the same things noted by the keyes, and the same power is given to the rest of the Apostles that was given to Peter. Iohn 19.20. Cart. on Rhem. Test. The proper use of keyes is to let in and out, the ministery of the Gospell being exe∣cuted, partly by Preaching, and Sacraments, and partly by Church censures, is called the keyes, this is all likewise that is meant by binding and loosing Dr White. Vers. 20. Then harged he his Disciples that they should tell no man that he was Iesus the Christ.] Christ therefore forbids them this, because it was not simply necessary to Salva∣tion to know in speciall that Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah, for then men might be saved without this speciall knowledge, from a generall faith in the Messiah to come. Be∣cause the Disciples minds (the death of Christ being at hand) were troubled, they were not so fit publishers of so great a matter. Cameron praelect. in Mat. 16.20. The Apostles had not yet the Holy Ghost come down on them, and therefore could not fully declare it. Ambrose. Prius discendum antequam docendum. 2. Because Christ was not yet glorified. Vers. 23. Get thee behind me Satan] That is, out of my sight, See Mat. 4.10. Thou wouldst hinder mans redemption, and Satan could do no more. They that will have his trade shall have his name too. Tolet in Com∣ment super loc. observes, Abne∣gare plus est quā negare, ab∣negare implicat duo. 1. vehemē¦tiam. 2. Co∣tus magnitudi∣nem.Vers. 24. If any man will come after me let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me] Here are three branches: 1. Self deniall. 2. Gospell suffering. 3. Gospell service. Deny, or forsake himself] That is, all that he hath, as Luke expoundeth it, 14.33. all outward prerogatives touching the flesh. To deny is either when we contradict what is affirmed and affirme the contrary, or else when we refuse to grant ones request, and neglect or oppose it. The first is Logical, in our words, the other morall, in our actions. And take up his cross] Not as if he should make himself a Cross, but that which is
appointed for him. The originall word  is emphaticall, as Chrysostome notes, and signifies not simply negare, but pernegare, or prorsus negare, totally, utterly to deny, not at all to spare or regard, it importeth a universall deniall, rendred by Beza abdicet seipsum, which is as much as to reject and cast off, as a man doth a graceless son, 1. simply and absolutely mans sinfull self, and so it is all one with Tit. 2.12. Deny un∣godliness and wordly lusts. 2. A mans naturall self conditionally. 3. A mans morall, vertuous, renewed self comparatively, in relation unto righteousness. A man must willingly and obediently forsake all sin, subdue all generall concupisence, with his owne proper and personall corruptions, Psal. 18.23. absolutely without any limitation or ex∣ception cast away and forsake alwaies in praeparatione animae, and actually whenso∣ever Christ calls them unto it,Quotidie tollere crucem impli∣cat tria. 1. Vrias esse piorum afflicti∣ones. 2. Perpe∣tuitatem affli∣ctionū. 3. Prōp∣titudinem sub∣eundi quamli∣bet crucem. whatsoever is neere and deare unto him if it be∣come a snare to conscience, and disesteeme the best of his graces in respect of the righte∣ousness of Christ. 2. Gospell suffering, a cross, and his cross, and to be taken up volun∣tarily. Take up his cross, Luke addeth daily, Luk. 9.23. which hath great force in it, for Christ declareth that there is no end of our warfare untill we shall depart out of this life. 3. Gospell service, and let him follow me. There are two arguments used to set these three on, in Ver. 25, 26, 27. Vers. 25. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it] We may understand it, first, in reference to this present life, he runs himself into a greater worldly danger while he thinks to avoid it. Secondly, It is alwaies true in respect of eternall life, they lose a better life than they save; and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it] That is, lose temporall life, as men count it, shall find eternall. Ver. 26. For what is a man profited, if he shall gaine the whole world] The earth and all the things there that men can value and desire may be possessed without possessing God. And lose his own soule] Not in regard of being or property, but felicity. These words set forth the transcendent excellency of the soul of man.The soule put for the whole man, because a principal part. A man] that is, any one of all mankind. Gaine] that is, in the worlds apprehension, not profit in Gods account. World] that is, all that is in it. There are two arguments used to prove this, 1. A comparatis, the comparison consists of three paire of particulars: 1. Of Acts, gaine, and loss. 2. Of Objects, the world, and soule. 3. Of Adjuncts, the whole world, and his soule, 2. Ab impossibili, from the impossibi∣lity of recovering this soule and redeeming it if it should be lost. What shall a man give] That is, there is nothing he can give.Est interroga∣tio negantis, quasi dicat, ni∣hil proderit. Paraeus. The interrogation car∣ries with it, 1. a challenge, a triumphant deniall. 2. An appeale, to set it home on our consideration. Put the soule and the world together, and the soule will be found far more excellent. 1. The world was made for the soule, the end is more noble than the means. Gen. 1.26. Psal. 8. beg: 2. God prefers a soule before the world. Pro. 23.26. Esa. 66.1, 2, 3. The soule is the Lords, the world Satans; God is called the God of the Spirits of all flesh, Satan the Prince of this world. 4. The Soule is of a Spirituall nature, the world of an earthy nature. Omnia si perdas, animam servare memento. Vers. 28. In his kingdome] That is, the powerfull effects of the Gospell, as Mat. 10.7. and 12.28. 2 Pet. 1.16. The manifestation of the heavenly glory which Christ be∣gan at his resurrection, and shewed it more fully by sending the Holy Ghost.See Iohn 21.22. Calvin. for that which some do imagine of John is a fancy.The earth where Iohn was buried (if we may believe Austen) bubleth like water, to testifie his breathing, and that he is not dead but sleepeth. Sands his travells.
CHAP. XVII. Verse 1. ANd after six daies] Luke 9.28. saith, about eight daies, there is no contradiction. For either Matthew or Luke count that time from divers termes,Sex dies inte∣gros numerant Matthaeus & Marcus 9.2. qui medij flux∣erunt: Lucas autem factum esse dicens octo ferè postea diebus tam diem illum quo locutus erat Christus quam quo transformatus est, comprehendit. Calvin. or from the same: And then Luke reckons up eight daies, the first and last being reckoned with them, Matthew only sixe, the middle ones being cast between. This answer Calvin in his Har∣mony, and Scultetus observat in Matth. c. 50. Vt si dicam mensis est, recte dixisse intelligar etiamsi absint dies aliquot. Judaeos octo dies appellasse id quod ab uno sabbato est ad alterum, apparet. Joh. 20.26. Grotius. give. Jesus taketh Peter, Iames, and Iohn] Because it was not yet time of Christs full glory, he therefore shewed not his glory to all his Apostles,Non assumsit omnes, ne res divulgaretur priusquam id expèdiret (cer∣tè filium pro∣ditionis Judam non congruebat adesse) tres autem assumsit, quòd poterant sufficere ad ferendum Testimonium, quando divulgari expediret. Brugensis. Tres testes deligere satis habuit Do∣minus, quia hic numerus ad rem probandam à Lege praescribitur. Deut. 17.6. Calvin. but chose out of them some Ante∣signani, who might be sufficient and fit witnesse enough to others of Christs glory seen, viz. Those very persons who after in the mount of Olivet were to be spectatours of his low abasement, here first in the Mountaine of Tabor were beholders of his great Majesty and glory. There are divers causes why he tooke only these. Peter, that he might reclame him so much the more strongly from his errour, into which he fell by hearing of the passion of Christ. Iames, because he first of all was to shed his bloud for Christ, Acts 12.2. And lastly Iohn, because he was to defend his divine majesty against the blasphemies of Ebion and Cerinthus. Christ took upon him the heavenly glory for so short a time, to declare that he went willingly to his death, for it was as easie to exempt his body from death, as to adorne it with heavenly glory. Qualis futurus est tempore ju∣dicandi, talis apparuit A∣postolis. Hieron Scultet. obser∣vat. in Matth. c. 51. Vide plura. ibid.Vers. 2. And he was transfigured before them] Greeke metamorphosed, or transfor∣med. And his rayment was white as the light] Marke saith, white as the snow, Mar. 9.3. these do not oppose each other, for as darkness hath its blackness, so light its whitenesse, there∣fore it is all one whether the comparison be borrowed from snow or light, which the words of Marke shew; shining proper to light, and white proper to snow, applyed to one and the same garment; Marke there addeth, So as no Fuller on the earth can white them. Vers. 3. Moses and Elias were verily present. These two appeared, to shew that the Law and Prophets had no other purpose,Calvin. nor end, but Christ, and to shew the con∣sent of the Law and Prophets with him. It is probable Moses was raised from the dead, Deut. 34.6: about what they talked see Luke 9.31. In life eternall the Saints shall mutually know one another,Piscat. Polyc. Lyserus. Vide Capell. Spicileg. for these three Disciples here having but a taste of it, knew Moses and Elias. Vers. 4. Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here] Pe∣ter being astonished, spake as a man altogether amazed. Marke 9.6. Vers. 5. A bright cloud overshadowed them] A cloud was put before their eyes, that they might know that they were not yet fit to behold the brightnesse of the heavenly glory.Vox è nube, subaudi, facta est, quod expri∣mit Lucas. Nempe ex illa nube, cujus modò facta mentio, in quam illi fuerant ingressi, id quod notat articulus. Piscat. A voyce sounded out of the cloud; but neither was body nor face seene. Deut. 4.12. The cloud was a signe of the divine presence, as Exod. 11.34. Bright to distinguish it from the old Law, which was given in a darke cloud. This is my beloved Son] Some thinke that there is a secret opposition between Moses, Elias and Christ, as if Christ should command his Disciples to be content with the one∣ly Son, for that name is emphaticall, whereby he is extolled above the Servants. Heare yee him] Emphatically, heare him above Moses and the Prophets, as fulfilling of both. Grotius. Believe and obey his doctrine.
Vers. 6. Fell on their face]Id est, proni a∣dorarunt, nisi malimus prae metu cecidisse quasi semianimes, quamobrem, etiam Dominus eos erexisse dicitur. Beza in loc. Sic Maldona∣tus. Timore non veneratione ceciderunt, propterea dicitur eos Christus tetigisse: sicut solemus, ut ad se redeant, exanimes tangere. Vers. 8. Save Iesus onely] That glory was tyed to the Law and Prophets but for a time, that onely Christ might continue glorious.Solum Iesum auditâ istâ voce viderunt, ut scierent, illam de hoc solo pronuntiatam esse. Piscat. Vers. 11. And Iesus answered and said unto them, Elias truely shall first come and restore all things] That is, Iohn Baptist, see Matth. 11.14.Liquidum mi∣hi videtur ver∣ba haec eodem spectare quo ea quae sequntur, ad Iohannem Baptistam scilicet. Grotius. Vide Calvinum. Vers. 15. Lunaticke] Those are called Lunaticke which either at the wane of the Moone have the falling-sicknesse, or are troubled with a giddinesse.Lunatici medi∣cis dicuntur il∣li qui morbo comitiali sive caduco laborant. Sic verò dicuntur, quia existimant, eos qui interlunio nascuntur, potissimum hoc morbo di∣vexari, vel etiam quod ad motum lunae morbus vel accedat vel recedat, prout virtute Lunae humores cerebri vel augentur, vel minuuntur. Polyc. Lyser. Vide Scultet. observat. in Matth. c. 2. Vers. 17. O faithlesse and perverse generation] An apostrophe to the Disciples. Hee accuseth their incredulity. Vers. 20. If ye have faith as a graine of mustardseed, ye shall say unto this mountaine,Mr. Perkins on Heb. 11.30. Re∣move hence to yonder place, and it shall remove] Signifying, that by the power of true faith, such things as are impossible to mans reason, should be brought to passe, if God have promised them. This is a proverbiall speech among the Hebrews, as appeares by Paul, 1 Cor. 13.2. The sense is, you would performe things most difficult, saith Grotius. Vers. 21. This kind goeth not out, but by prayer and fasting] That is, this kind of evill Spirits which is sent for the punishment of greater offences, so Grotius. Earnest Elton. Dr. Taylor. i.e. Intensissima precatione. Bucer. v. 24. Vide Selde∣num, de Jure naturali & Gentium. l. 6. c. 18. and cōtinued prayer, having humiliation joyned with it; they go often together, Act. 10.30. and 14.23. 1 Cor. 7.5. We must stir up our faith by prayer, and our prayer by fasting. V. 26. Iesus saith unto him, then are the children free] As if he should say, if I would stand on my priviledge, as I am the Son of God, I am exempted,Per filios in∣telligit Chri∣stus Filios reg∣norum sive terrarum id est, inde natos sive oriundos, alioquin sermo ejus non videretur fuisse ad propositum, nam in plurali locutus est tam pro se quam pro Petro, quem constat non fuisse Filium talium Regum. Dr. Fulke. vide Cameronem. as a Kings Son is not to performe that ordinary service which other men performe; it cannot be meant, that the Jewes were free, for Christs Father and Mother were taxed. Vers. 27. This fish is called at Rome, Piscis Sancti Petri. CHAP. XVIII. Vers. 1. WHO is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven] In the Church. It is called the kingdome of Heaven, 1. Because the King which injoyes this kingdome is heavenly. 2. Because his seat is in heaven, thence he reignes, thence he exerciseth his power. 3. Because his Subjects after they are admitted into this kingdome, are heaven∣ly and spirituall. 4. The certaine seat of the subjects of this kingdome is in heaven. 5. Because the government is wholly heavenly and Spirituall. Vers. 2. And Jesus called a little child unto him] Some think, but without probability, that this child was that famous Ignatius, who was Christs Martyr under Traiane.Beza. Vers. 3. Except ye be converted and become as a little child] Two things are required of them that would enter into this kingdome. First, To become as little children, that is,Non videntur intellixisse reg∣num illud spi∣rituale & coe∣leste Christi, sed regnum terrenum & temporale Messiae, quale expectabant & animo concipiebant tum temporis Iudaei. Cameron. in humility, meeknesse, and freedome from pride and disdaine; the child of a Prince will without disdaine associate himselfe with a poore mans childe. Secondly, we must be coverted and regenerate by the Spirit of God, Iohn 3.3. Mr. Perkins.
Vers. 5. And who to shall receive one such little child in my name, receiveth me] The Greeke word  which properly notes hospitality, here is taken for all kind of benefits, as Act. 21.17. compar'd with Marke 9.41. Vers. 6. That place may be understood of men of yeares, who if they have contrite and humbled hearts,Psal. 131. are little ones believing in Christ. It was a custome (saith Ierome) amongst the ancient Hebrewes, that he which had committed any hainous crime (if he had been taken) should be tyed to a great stone, and so cast into the deepe, but Grotius denyes that there was such a custome among the Jewes,Du. observat. Sac. l. 3. c. 23. & citat Hieron. in loc. seeing there is no mention of it in the Law, and there were onely foure pu∣nishments used by them, viz. fire, stoning, sword, and strangling, therefore this kind of speaking, came rather from the Syrians their neighbours. A milstone were hanged about his neck] A huge milstone such as an Asse Mola asinaria cui viz. agi∣tandae afini ad∣hibebantur. Beza in. 9. Marc. 42. Hilary, Iansen. vide Grotium. can but turne about, as the word imports, Perkins. And as the Syriacke and Latine interpreters under∣stand it. And that he were drown'd in the depth of the Sea] The words in the Greek are word for word, in the middle of the Sea, where the Sea is deepest. Vide Scultet. observat. in Matth. c. 52. Vers. 7. Wo to the world because of offences] This is vaedolentis, as if a Physitian should say, wo to that man from this sicknesse, so Christ saith, wo to the world, because the scandales in it shall be very vulgar and usuall. But wo to that man by whom the offence cometh] This is a vae indignantis, and of one de∣nouncing punishment,Polyc. Lyser. the hainousnes of whose punishment by a comparison he sets be∣fore their eyes. Among the foure kinds of punishments used by the Jewes, they reckon this as the most hainous, because they were judged unworthy either to behold the Sun, or injoy againe the benefit of the Ayre. Vers. 8, 9. That is, our evill concupiscence, fornication, uncleanesse, wrath and ambition. Matth. 5.29, 30. Col. 3.5. Vers. 10. Take heed that yee despise not one of these little ones] By little ones he meaneth, young Infants which are within the Covenant,Mr. Perkins: see Dr. Pride∣aux his Ser∣mon on this verse. or others which are like to young infants in simplicity and innocency of life, and humility. Both little in christianity, and little in yeares, Babes and Sucklings, Angels are their rockers, Kings Sonnes must have their guard. Dike. Do alwayes behold the face of my Father, which is in heaven] That phrase implieth onely, they are in a ministeriall ready way, to be at the Lords appointment for any service. Vers. 12. Christ would shew that a good teacher must labour no lesse to recover what is lost,Calvin. than to preserve what he hath under his hand. Vers. 15. If thy Brother shall trespasse against thee] Do thee any wrong, or else sinne against God, & thou be privy to it (for that sin may be said to be against a man where∣to he is privy, though the wrong be not against him, because there is an offence given unto him.) then tell him] That is, correct & admonish him privately. Christ setteth down three degrees of brotherly correction.Perkins. 1. That he which hath sinned should be admo∣nished privatly. 2. If he shew any token of stubbornesse, that he be againe admoni∣shed before witnesses, the 3d is, if he prevaile nothing this way, that he be delivered to the publike judgement of the Church. Vers. 16. In the mouth of two or three witnesses] Not of one but of two or three, there∣fore the person offended is a witnesse. Vers. 17. Tell it unto the Church] This power and Jurisdiction was with them which were the Chiefe rulers of the Synagogue,It is a foule errour (as Be∣za in loc. thinks) to say the whole multitude is here comprized. Christus non ibi de doctrina sed de censuris tantum ecclesiasticis loquitur, & loci sensus hic est, Si quisquam, qui in fratrem peccaverit, eumque injuria aliqua affecerit, post unam & alteram privatam increpationem ad ecclesiam delatus, ejus monitis non obtemperaverit, eìusque censurae non paruerit: is excommunicetur. Whitakerus de ecclesia. Mark. 5.22. and an example of this custome is extant, Iohn 9.22. and 12.42. and 16.2. This punishment with the Jewes was like excommunication with us; the Church] not the Pope, as Papists say, tell the Church, that
is, many. Theoph. that is, tell the Governours thereof. Chrysost. Our Saviour riseth in his speech from private admonition, to admonition before two or three, and from them to the Church. Heathen] Not so well translated; we in our English, call Heathens such as know not God, as Mahumetanes; rather one of the Nations, that is, not of the Jewes; and the o∣ther word may better (say some) be translated a customer. As an Heathen] Let one that is excommunicated by the Church, be esteemed of thee as if he were some Heathen or Publican, that is, a stranger from the Church, and not belonging to it. Piscator. Vers. 18. Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, &c.] By the context it appeares that our Saviour speakes of Church-censures, for having said, v. 17. if any would not heare the Church (that is, the admonition of the Church) let him be as an Heathen or Publican (that is, excommunicated, cast out from the society of the faithfull) to ratifie the Church-censure in this case he addeth verily, &c. that is, whosoever shall be (justly) excom∣municated on earth, shall bee held excommunicated also in heaven, and whosoever shall be (justly) absolved on earth, shall also be absolved in Heaven. The same words that are in the 16. v. but in a divers sence; there his purpose was to confirme the authority of doctrine, and he speakes of the word preached, here of pub∣licke censure and discipline, the meaning is, whosoever having committed a sinne doth humbly acknowledge his fault obtaines pardon. The power of binding and loosing is that authority given by God to his Church on earth, whereby it pardoneth, or retaineth unpardoned, the sinnes of men.Perkins. Vers. 19. Agree] Greeke, sing one song, make a harmonie, .Translatio est à corpore ad animum, nam de voce & cantu propriè id dicitur. Beza. in loc. Vers. 20. Where two or three are gathered together] See 1 Cor. 5.4.Piscator Christus hic nullam mentio∣nem facit vel concilij gene∣ralis vel non er∣randi, nam duo aut tres non fa∣ciunt generale concilium. Calvinus. Et si Christus sit in medio eorum qui in suo nomine congregantur, non sequitur illos non errare. Whi∣tak. de concil. Those which assem∣ble together to handle those things which belong to the glory of God, may comfort themselves with this promise of his gracious presence. To be gathered together in the name of Christ, is no other thing but to meete for a pious and just cause, to propound to our selves the will of Christ in our meetings, to aime at nothing else but Gods glory and the good of the Church, the same with that in the 19. chap. verse 29. for Christ and his profession. Vers. 21. and 22. As if he should have said, Master,Septuagies septies, id est, quadringentis nonaginta vi∣cibus. Hieron. Septenarius numerus est septuagies mul∣tiplicandus qui conficiat numerum 490. Polyc. Lyser. how often wouldst thou have us receive them into favour that offend us? Christ saith, there should be no end of forgi∣ving, but as often as the sinner repenteth. The Lord confirmeth this doctrine with a most fit parable, the summe whereof is this, that they which will not be brought to for∣give the offences of their brethren, doe very ill provide for themselves, for they shall find God as hard to bee intreated towards them. The similitude consisteth especially in three points, for the Master is set against the servant, a Great summe against a small, singular Clemency to extreme cruelty. For what are we if we be compared with God, and what summe is every one of us indebted towards him, lastly how light are the of∣fences of our brethren to us, if our obligation to God be considered? Vers. 23. As if Christ should have said, the case between God and man, in respect of the soule and the estate of spirituall life, is like to that between a civill earthly Master and his servants, in respect of mony and the businesse of this present life. Vers. 25. God doth not alwayes shew his rigour unto us at the first, nay he prevent∣eth us with his free goodnesse, but he onely teacheth what would become of us, if God should use us, as in justice he might. Vers. 26. And I will pay thee all] Object. Therefore we our selves may pay our owne debts. Sol. 1. It is a Parable, and that is not the maine scope. 2. Feare forced the servant to promise more than he was able to performe. Vers. 32. and 34. The Schoole-men observe hence, peccata remissa redire, that sinnes being pardoned returne. The scope of the Parable (which is the right key to open it) is not to shew, that God will remember sinnes pardoned for new ones committed, but to manifest, that forgivenesse of others is a necessary qualification to be forgiven by
God, and that we may not beleeve God will forgive us, unlesse we forgive others; and this is cleare by the conclusion, v. 35. The Papists would draw Purgatory fire out of the adverb untill, but it is evident that Christ speaketh here of eternall death, and not of any temporall punishment, where∣by he should satisfie the judgement of God. Calvin. CHAP. XIX. Verse 2. AND great multitudes followed him, and he healed them there] From which we may conjecture who were Christs companions for the most part, the weake, sicke, deafe, blind, and the like miserable persons. Polyc. Lyser.Vers. 3 The Pharisees also came unto him tempting him, and saying unto him, Is it law∣full for a man to put away his Wife for every cause] The Pharisees demand, whether it be lawfull for a man to put away his Wife for every cause? If Christ deny it, they will cry out that he doth wickedly abrogate the Law: if he affirme it, they will condemne him for favouring mens lust, but Christ knew how to take the wise in their subtilty. Vers. 4. Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning, made them male and female] The question hath the force of a reprehension, as if he should say, if you have not read it, you may be ashamed of your sloathfulnesse; if you have read it and not understood it,Piscat. you may blush at your ignorance, being Doctors of the Law; if you have read and understood it, then you may be ashamed of your hypocisie, thus to tempt me. Christ doth not answer directly to what was asked, but doth fully satisfie the proposed question; as if one being now asked of the Masse, should faithfully expound the my∣sterie of the Lords Supper,Calvin. and should at last inferre, that they are sacrilegious and de∣ceivers, who dare adde or detract any thing from the pure institution of the Lord, he shall openly overthrow the feigned sacrifice of the Mass. Made them Male and female] viz. First, Adam, then Eve out of his body, which Christ conceales as sufficiently known. The meaning is, God the maker of mankind, made man and woman,Nonnulli ex hoc loco putant A∣damum à Deo creatum esse. hermaphroditū, ac utrum{que} ha∣buisse sexum, ut simul esset masculus & foemina: sed apage has nugas. Cornel. à Lapide. that every man being contented with one only wife should not desire any others, for he resteth in the number of two, Mal. 2.10. yet a man may law∣fully marry another wife when the first is dead, because the band is not only broken by death, but the second wife is placed by God in the roomth of the former as if she were one and the same. Whosoever should put a∣way his wife, should rend himselfe in peeces.Vers. 5. For this cause shall the man] Meaning the husband; he is here particularly mentioned, 1. Because at the first making of this Law the woman was first brought to him to see how he could like her. 2. Because of the preheminence that the man hath over his wife, yet the woman is also tyed thereby, for the nature and rule of relation requireth as much. Cleave to his wife] The Greek word importeth to be glewed unto, whereby it signi∣fieth that straight knot which is between man and wife,Vide Bezam. as though they were glewed together. To his wife] not wives, this is against Polygamy. And they twaine] not more, shall be one flsh] God that in the Creation made two of one, by marriage made one of two. Vers. 11. All men cannot receive this] Many persons mistake the help prepared of God, Gen. 2.18. or do worse, considering that some cannot abstaine. Augustin, Hier. Perkins.Save they to whom it is given] Continence is a gift of God, whereof all men are not capable, but those only to whom he giveth it, when, and as long as it pleaseth him. It is given of God, and that not unto all men, as the gift of speech, or reason, nor unto all godly men, as is the gift of faith, but unto certaine only, therefore Paul, 1 Cor. 7.7. calls it a proper gift of God, which some have, and some have not. Cartwright.
This saith Maldonate, almost all expound, as if the sense were,Id est, non om∣nes praestare possunt, ut sint sine uxore, quia carent dono continentiae. Sic ferè omnes exponunt, quam interpretationem adduci non possum ut sequar. Maldonat. in loc. all cannot performe what ye say, that is, want a wife, because all have not the gift of Chastity. Vers. 12. Christ nameth three kinds of men which are chaste: First,It is said of Ori∣gen, that though he was much given to alle∣gorizing the Scripture, yet he understood this place lite∣rally and guelt himself. Vide Euseb. Hist. Eccles. l. 6. c. 8. They that are chaste by nature, borne Eunuches; Or secondly, which are made chaste by men, those that are violently cut, and so are forced, because they lack those parts of a man. Third∣ly, Others which have voluntarily repressed their lusts by abstinence, temperance, made themselves chaste that they might the better serve God. These he setteth free from the necessity of marriage when by nature they are fit for marriage, though they do abstaine they tempt not God, because he granteth them liberty. Vers. 16. What good thing shall I do] Hilary saith, he did intend to be legally just. Vers. 17. Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, that is God] As if he should have said, thou dost evill to call me good master, except thou dost acknowledge me to come from God. Christs purpose was to bring his Doctrine into credit. Dum Chri∣stum (in quo nihil homine sublimius) bonum vocat, sibi etiam utpote homini laudem bonitatis arrogat. He applies himself to the opinion of him to whom he spake, who called Christ good in no other sense, than he would have done another Master or Prophet, and in this sense Christ re∣buked him for calling him good, that is legally, taking him to be a meere man. Vers. 18. He reckons up the Commandements of the second Table,v. 18. Non di∣ces] vel, non respondebis, quod verbum Ebraeum proprie significat, nam testimonium qui dicit, plerumque respondet ad interrogata Judicis. Drus. in Paralel. Sac. because in those of the First Hypocrites more easily conceale their impiety. Vers. 19. Love thy neighbour] Every man, so Christ expounds it, Luke 10.30. This answer was 1. suitable to the question, what shall I do? 2. The Law in it self is the way to life but for mans weakness Rom. 8.3. the godly keep it in Christ. Those that will be saved by works must keep the Commandements, and no man shall be saved by the Law unless he performe all those things which are written, as Paul teacheth, Gal. 3.12. from Levit. 18.5. Vers. 20. All these things have I kept from my youth up] A dreame of righteousness,He thought the keeping of the Law had been but a trick of youth. Calvin. Jerome saith, it was a lye; so also Ambrose, Austin, Hilary. from my youth, as common people say, I have had a good meaning ever since I could remember. What lack I yet] To perfection. Vers. 21. If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast] That is, if thou wilt shew thy selfe to be such a one indeed as thou boastest thy selfe to be.The words are 1. Personall and particular. 2. No counsel but a Comman∣dement of spe∣ciall triall. Mr. Perkins. Malè hic Papistae ex personali mandato constituunt generalem regulam, & ex singulari facto universalem definitionem, cum hinc definiunt paupertatem spontaneam esse perfectionem Christianam. Hemingius. He desired to be an ex∣traordinary man, therefore he hath an extraordinary triall. Relinquishing of all habi∣tually in preparation of mind. Aquinas saith, perfection may e without actuall renun∣ciation; the want of habituall forsaking of all was notable in the young man, as it may seem to be verified by Christs speech. Treasure in heaven] That, is, excellent, bread that came down from heaven, Our Father which art in heaven. Heavenly things are, 1. Absolutely good, have a fulnesse in them, earthly relatively. 2. They are pure and immixed things, earthly are mixed and imperfect. 3. They are alwayes new and fresh, these things have satiety in them, and please only with their variety. 4. Are lasting, they sought a better and more induring substance. Vers. 23. A rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven] Aquinas and Hilary say, he that loves money; Austen understands it of one that desires to be rich; Poly∣carpus of one that trusts in riches; so Mark expounds it, 10.24. Take kingdom of heaven for kingdom of grace, his riches choake the word and hinder holy counsell; of kingdom or glory, if it hinder him from the former, it will from that. Hardly] A rare, not impossible thing. Marke and Luke express it with affection, O how hardly can rich men be saved? Vers. 24. It is easier for a camell to go through the eye of a needle] There are three ex∣positions of this. The first is somewhat conceited, Hugo Cardinall saith, that there was a little Gate in Jerusalem called the needles eye, it was impossible for a Camell to
enter in at that, ome think our Saviour alludes to this. Secondly, Theophylact inter∣prets it of a Cable rope or Cord;Proverbium de re quae nullo modo, aut cettè difficulter ad∣modum fieri po∣est. Cameli no∣mine nonnulli funem nauti∣cum intelligen∣dum esse con∣tendunt, sed mi¦hi non persuadent. De animante intellexit Ambrosius, eodem modo Origines, nec aliter Hieronymus. Syrus quoque inter∣pres in eadem sententia fuisse videtur, vae enim illa rudentem, quòd sciam, non significat. His adde quòd de animante intel∣lectum sit hyperbola eminentior: tum etiam quod Christus in mentem habuisse videri possit proverbium apud Thalmudistas frequentatum, non est elephas, qui intret per foramen acus, substituto Cameli nomine in locum elephantis; fortè quòd id genus animantis in Syria vulgo notius esset, quum utrumque aequè  sit, sive Camelum legas sine elephantem. Drus. Prov. Glas. 1. l. 3 Confer Drus. observat. l. 1. p. 24. Et qui ex inde desumpsit Tarnov. exercit. Bibl. l. 470. vide Cor∣nel. à Lap in loc. & Canin. loc. N. T.In Syriaca lingua est Gamal quae vox Camelum animal significat, inde descendens nempe Gamela. Et ab eâ vox Graeca & Latina originem trahunt, vox Latina nullo pacto significationem funis Nautici admittit, sed animalis potius quod in Syria notissimum fuit. Alardi Pathologia Sacra.Graeci quidam ut & Thephylactus notat, ad funem nauticum haec traxerunt, sed perperam ignorantia adagij inter He∣braeos & Arabas vsitati, non minus de elephante quam Camelo. Grotius. Vide Bezam & Sculter, observat. in Mar. c. 53. See Weemes Christian Synagogue. p. 33. Our Saviour alludes to an Hebrew Proverbe, It was usuall with the Jews to say, when difficult matters were promised, hast thou been at Phumbaditha, where Camels go through the eyes of needles. Barlow.In praefatione prima libri Zohar scribitur. Nos in nomine Dei nostri commodum indicavinus introducere elephantem in foramen acus, id est, rem maximè arduam praestare, vastum hujus libri opus in formam minorem & breviorem contrahere. Hoc proverbium imitatus est Christus pro elephanto ponendo Camelum. Buxtorf. in Lexico Talmudico. so Aristophanes Scholiast saith the word signifieth; so Clemens Alexandrinus lib. 11. Strom. Arnobius, Suidas, Chrysostome, or author operis imper∣fecti, Hom. 33. in Mat. Austin, Ierome, Ambrose, Hilary, Calvin; But Drusius and Cani∣nius deny that the Word signifieth a Cable. Thirdly, these words are a Talmud Pro∣verb; when they would shew a thing to be unpossible, they were used to say, It was as hard as for an Elephant to go through a needles eye; our Saviour useth the word Ca∣mell because he was better known to them. That is, such a rich man as sets his heart to get riches and honour, not regarding the Religion of Christ. Perkins. Such a one as trusts in his riches. Mar. 10.24. Vers. 28. Ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel] Although for the double portion of Iosephs children the Tribes were made thirteene, yet for the most part they are wont to be named twelve. Act. 26.7. Iam. 1.1. Grotius. By giving his Disciples thrones, wherein they should judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, he com∣pares them to Embassadors, or to chiefe Counsellors and Presidents, which have the chiefe seats in the Kingly Assembly. All the Saints shall give their voice, and approve of his righteous judgment,Proximum mi∣hi Regi hono∣rem occcupabi∣tis. Grotius. 1 Cor. 6.3. but the Apostles above the rest shall fit as it were on the bench with him, because Christ shall give judgment according to their doctrine preached in the world. Piscator. Twelve Tribes] That is, the whole world, by a Synecdoche, as Rev. 7.4. CHAP. XX. Verse 1. FOr the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an housholder] This Parable is nothing else but a confirmation of the sentence going before, the first shall be last, and there∣fore the end of the Parable is concluded with the repetition of the same sentence, vers. 16. Christ saith, there is no cause why they which are first in time should brag over others: For the Lord as oft as he pleaseth can call them whom he seemed to neglect for a time,Calvin. and either make them equall, or prefer them before them which are first. This Parable is not brought to shew that there is an equality of blessednesse, but to reprehend the Pharisees,Ob. Ergo opera ex condigno me∣rentur vitam aeternam, sicut labor diurnus denarium diur∣num. Sol. Sco∣pus parabolae est, nullam esse causam, cur ob∣murmurent Deo, aut invideant aliis qui tempore sunt illis priores: quia Deus pro bene placito suo potest aequare posteriores prioribus. who repined that other Labourers (as the Apostles who were called to work after them) should be made equall with them, that is, have as much estimation and approbation as they, they having borne, as they imagined, the burden and heat of the day. Christ cleares himself from imputation of injustice, saying, they had that which they agreed for, they proposed unto themselves worldly honour and estimation, and they had it. And to prove that this could be no degree of eternall blessedness, no more need be said, than that they murmured, whereas he that hath least in the glorious kingdome of heaven shall be satisfied. A Pennie was the ordinary hire for a daies work.
The Penny is not eternall life, but some other reward common to the hypocrite,Si denarius diurnus vitam aeternam adum∣bret, est mer∣ces laboris diurni, ex munificentissima Dei pactione, non ex condigna aestimatione rei ad rem. Episc. Dav. de justitia actuali. and true hearted: for he that was sent away chidden for his envious grumbling was sent also with his Penny. Interpreters for the most part agree, that by the Husbandman is meant God himself; by the Labourers, men upon earth; by the Vineyard, the Church of God. Some of the Fa∣thers, as Origen, Chrysostom, Ierome, Austin, Gregory, say, that by the five houres in the Parable are noted the five ages of man. An artificiall day consists of twelve houres, Iohn 11.9. lasts from sun rising to sun∣setting; this day was divided into foure quarters,Mihi videntur primae horae esse operarij Samuel & Hie∣remias & Bap∣tista Ioannes, qui possunt cum Psalmista dicere, exutero matris meae Deus meus es tu. Tertiae verò horae operarij sunt, qui à pubertate servire Deo coeperunt. Sextae horae, qui matura aetate susceperunt jugum Christi. Nonae, qui jam declinant ad senium. Vndeci∣mae, qui ultima senectute. Hieron. The first began at sixe of the clock and held till nine, this was called the third houre, vers. 3. The second quarter ended at twelve of the clock, the sixth houre, vers. 5. The third at three in the afternoon, the ninth houre, vers. 5. The fourth at sixe of the night the eleventh houre. vers. 6. Vers. 6. Some are called at the eleventh houre of the day, but that is meant either of the latter age of the world, or else in our latter daies, but not at death, for they were to go into the Vineyard and worke. The last was called the eleventh houre by our Saviour, whereas among the common people it either was called, or should have been called, by proportion with the rest, the twelfth houre, to intimate that God seldome calleth any at the twelfth houre, for that is an houre rather to discharge servants, than admit new. Vers. 8. Beginning from the last unto the first] He begins with the last,Id est, nulla or∣dinis inter ipsos habita ratione, sed ita ut nemo praetermittatur. Grotius. a strange man∣ner of proceeding, and very unequall, but this is done on purpose saith one, to shew that at the day of judgment God gives the labourers in his Vineyard Heaven and Salva∣tion, not for any worth or merit in their workes, but according to his meere grace, and therefore they have as much as those that laboured ten times more. Vers. 11. Murmured] The Greeke word signifies, to grunt as Swine. It is used by the Septuagint, Exod. 17.3. Num. 14.24. and elswhere.Latine obloqui non male ver∣teris. Grotius. Vers. 16. Many be called, but few chosen] Called, viz. outwardly by the word,Amilitum de∣lectu deductum videtur, in quo ex magno hominum numero non nisi pauci, id est, praestantissimi quique eligantur. Schotti Adag. Sac. Chosen, viz. to eternall life. Vers. 19. Gentiles] That is the Romans, he understands Pilate and his Souldiers. Psal. 2.1. Drusius. Vers. 20. Her sons] viz. Iames and Iohn, who themselves are said to have put up this Petition to the Lord, Mark. 10.35. therefore the mother and sons joyned together in this work. Piscat.Probabile est quia illis obsta∣bat pudor, ma∣trem astutè fuisse interpositam, quae audactus peteret. Ab ipsis autem profectum esse vorum hinc colligitur, quod Christus illis non matri respondit. Calv. Vers. 21. Grant that these two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other on the left in thy kingdome] That is, when thou art made King here on earth, not in heaven. To sit at the Kings right hand signifies the next place to the King, 1 Kings 11.19. Psalm. 45.10. Heb. 12.3. The left hand then consequently meanes the third place in the king∣dom, for the greater any one was in a kingdom so much the neerer did he sit to the King in publique meetings Vers. 22. Are ye able to drinke of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the bap∣tisme that I am baptized with] That he may correct their ambition he propounds to them the Cross, as if he had said, have you so much leisure from the present warfare,Calvin. that you now appoint an order for the glory and pompes of the triumph? The cup] That is, the measure of afflictions which God assigneth to every man. See Beza.Duplici nomine damnanda fuit eorum inscitia, primùm quod ambitiosè appeterent plus quam decebat: deinde quòd pro Coelesti Christi regno aereum phantasma conceperant. Calvin. Plautus in Cassina. Eodem poculo bibere, pro incommodis ijsdem subjacer dixit. Vide Sculter observat. in Mat. c. 54. & Grot.
The faithfull are instructed by baptisme to deny themselves, to crucifie the old man, and also to beare the Crosse. Rom. 6.3, 4, 5, 6. As often as baptisme is mentioned, let us remember that we are baptized on this condition, and to this end, that we should beare the Crosse upon our shoulders. Vers. 23. Ye shall drink of my cup] By the word Cup, not strictly death, but more largely sufferings, especially more grievous, are meant saith Grotius. Because they were his Disciples, it was necessary that they should be made like their Master; he telleth them before what should come to passe afterwards, that they might arme themselves with patience; and under the person of these two men he speaketh to his Disciples. But to sit on my right hand and on my left, is not mine to give] Christ speakes according to their opinion who did dreame of the worldly kingdome of the Messias, therefore he would raise their conceits to a heavenly Kingdome, and as a Mediatour lift them up to the Father. Goijm. Cartwrights reply to Whirg.Vers. 25. Gentiles]  Signifies naturally not the Gentiles, but simply any nation, in which sence it is often taken in the Old and New-Testament. Gen. 10.31, 23. Deut. 32.28. Psal. 43.1. Matth. 28.19. Act. 10.35. Luke 7.5. Vers. 29. And as they departed from Jericho] Matthew and Marke say that the Miracle was wrought as Christ went out of the City,Dubium an eadem sit histo∣ria quae hic à Matthaeo, & quae à Marco 10.46. & à Luca 18.35. narratur. As∣sentior Theo∣phylacto qui∣vnam tantum historiam à tribus Evangelistis narrari putat. Maldonatus. Vide Grotium. and Luke makes mention that it was done before he came into the City; Marke and Luke speake but of one blind man, and Mat∣thew addeth two; Calvin supposeth that the blind man cried out as Christ came to∣ward the City, but saith he was not heard because of the noise; then he gat into the way at Christs comming out of the City, and then at length he called him. For the second knot it may be conjectured, when one blind man at the first sought for helpe of Christ another was moved by his example, and by this occasion two received their sight; but Marke and Luke speake of one onely, either because he was more known than the o∣ther, or because the power of Christ was as notably shewne in one as in two. It is uncertaine (saith Brugensis) whether the name of Ierico was imposed upon this City, from the figure of the Moone,Iareach is the Moone in Hebrew. Reach is odour in Hebrew. or from the most sweet odour of Balsame, of which it is very fruitfull. CHAP. XXI. Verse 3. AND if any man say ought unto you, ye shall say, the Lord hath need of them, and straight∣way he will send them.] Our Saviour did this as Lord, not onely of the Beast, but also of the owner. And therefore when he sent his Disciples, at the same time he en∣clined the heart of the owner to be willing to let them go, shewing thereby himselfe to be the Lord, that hath the hearts of all men in his hands, and consequently the Governour of all things else. Asino insidere apud Haebraeos veteres non erat paupertatis signum, nam proceres asino vectabantur; ut Jud. 10.4. & 12.14. videre est: sed cum Salomonis temporibus Aegypti commercio equorum copia apud Judaeos crevisset, ex eo eviluere asini. Sed & ipsa asini. Sed & ipsa asini statura & comitatus ur∣bem ineuntis facile ostendunt regnum quod sibi Jesus vindicabat diversissimum esse à regnis mundi. Grotius in loc.Vers. 5. Tell the daughter of Sion] That is, Jerusalem built on Mount Sion, the in∣habitants of that City, a metaphore and metonymie both. It plainely appeares by the other Evangelists, that Christ rode onely upon the Colt. He names two for one,Calvin. by a Synecdoche, or after the familiar use of the Hebrew tongue,Non utrique insedit sed pullo vehebatur se∣quente illius matre. Livelei∣us in Hos. Caldaeus dixit apud Zach. in asino, pulloque filio asinae, unde & notissima de Iudaeis ac Gentibus allegoria quam Chrysostomus, Theophylactus, Cyrillus, B. Hieronymus & alij, hic adferunt, quemadmodum non minus diligenter quae∣siverunt quid sit factum asina, cum inveheretur pullo Dominus. Alij enim modò huic modo illi insedisse, alij insedisse huic illam baiulosse vestes, alij postremò quod plerisque placuit, cum Iohannes insedisse eum pullo dicat, asinam secutam volunt. Hinsij dissertat. de verae Criticae apud veteres ortu, progressu, &c. vide Bezam in loc. he rehearseth one thing twice. Vers. 8. Great multitude spread their garments in the way] viz. As to one annointed and in deed a King; It was a custome with the Jewes, when Kings were made, to strew their garments and submit unto them.
Vers. 9. And the multitudes that went before, and that followed, cryed, saying, Hosanna] So saith one, both those which lived before Christ, and those which lived after him, are saved by him; see Weemes Divine ex ercitat. p. 171. This prayer was taken out of the 118. Psal. 25. Matthew also doth advisedly rehearse the Hebrew words, that we may know that applauses and votes were not rashly given to Christ, but that they reverent∣ly followed that forme of praying, which the Holy Ghost had dictated to the whole Church by the mouth of the Prophet. Calvin. This word Hosanna consisting of a verbe, and Hebrew particle,Grotius. Vide Canin. loc. Novi Testam. is used for the hymne it selfe, as  with the Greekes. It is used so also, 15. v. the sense is, we sing this well wishing hymme to the Messiah our King. The custome of carrying bowes the Jewes received, as many thers, from the Graecians. Blessed is he that commeth in the name of the Lord] Out of Psal. 118.26. The La∣tines in their acclamations said, Felix sit, aut vivat. He is said to come in the name of God, which doth not intrude himselfe, but by the commandement of God undertakes a kingdom. Divino mandatu ac potestate. Grotius. Vers. 11. The Prophet] Whom we have acknowledged hitherto as a Prophet, we ho∣nour as a true King. Vers. 12. Whereas people were to bring their sacrifices of Pigeons and Lambes a great way off, they provided all these, that the strangers might buy them for mony at the Temple, and so save a great deale of trouble, but Christ saw that under a pretence of buying and selling, they did nothing but cheate and cosen the poore people, and did in over-reaching and circumventing the poore buyers, steale. Vers. 13. Yee have made it a den of theeves] In that they robbed God in converting the place to profane and common uses which he had ordained onely for sacreduse, viz. the Temple. Vers. 16. Thou hast perfected praise] The same word is used, Gal. 6.1. Vers. 17. Bethany] Some expound it a house of sheep, others a house of a song, others the house of obedience, and others the house of affliction. Lodged] , which Matthew useth here, and Luke 21.37. of Christ lodging at Bethanie, is properly spoken de armentis, of Heards,Formatur ab  quod stabulum signi∣ficat. Gerh. Harm. afterward it was applied to men turning a side, and lodging all night with one, as it is often used by the Septuagint. Iosh. 6.11. and 8.9. Iudg. 19.6. Vers. 19. The fig-tree (as naturalists observe) puts forth her fruit as soone as her leafe; whereas Marke saith the time of figges was not yet, he meanes the time of inga∣thering figges. The tree (say some) was like others, and as fruitfull, Christ onely intended to shew to his Disciples that He was God and man,Voluit in ar∣bore symbolum proponere qua∣lis tandem exi∣tus maneat hy∣pocritis, & si∣mul detegere quam inanis sit ac nihili eorum ostentatio. Calvin. man in that He was ignorant whether it had fruit or no, God in that it withered upon his cursing of it. Others say, that though the time of fruit-bearing was not come, yet he cursed it, because it had no signe of any fruit. Vers. 20. Withered away] The leaves falling off,Casaubonus Monet illud vi∣tandae ambigui∣tatis causa potius vertendum esse, ut statim exaruit, quam quomodo. exatuit, cum  hic non sit quaerentis de modo, sed admirantis. and its naturall moisture being wholly consumed; the same Greeke word is used Mark. 5.29. Vers. 22. Here might seeme to be a tautologie, one would think that it had been large enough to have said, whatsoever yee shall aske, ye shall receive: but here is,Mr. Burrh. There is this illogicall rea∣soning of unbeliefe, that though we a∣gree to the promises in generall, yet when we come to particulars, we thinke they will not be made good to us.all things whatsoever. We would not speake so in ordinary language. And all things] Here is the generall promise, that all things which yee aske yee shall receive, and whatsoever may referre to particulars, every particular thing that yee aske yee shall receive. Vers. 25. The baptisme of John] That is the whole ministrie of Iohn, both the Doctrine He taught, and the signe of baptizing, wherewith he did confirme his doctrine. Which question tendeth to affirme that it was of God and not of man, and there∣fore to the Pharisees that despise Iohns baptisme, he saith, that they despised the counsell of God against themselves.
Vers. 32. Iohn came unto you in the way of righteousnesse] That is, the Doctrine of Iohn was sound and right. Beleeved him] That is, allowed, and with earnest affection embraced it. Vers. 33. Another parable] Iohn 19.32. Rev. 6.4. as one with the Hebrews signifies the first. The scope of the parable is to shew, 1. Gods great benefits to them. 2. Their great unthankfulnesse. 3. The great punishment that would fall upon them for their sinnes. Luke saith, Christ spake to the multitude, and the speech is here directed to the Priests and Scribes. But this is easily answered, for though Christ bent his speech to them, yet he discovered their shame before all the people. The summe of the Parable is this, it is no new thing if the Priests and other Governours of the Church do indeavour wickedly to defraud God of his right, for they have used the like theevery before, a∣gainst the Prophets, and now they are ready thus to slay the Sonne, but they shall not escape unpunished, for God will arise to revenge his own right. And this is spoken for two principall causes. 1. That he might reprove the Priests of unthankfulnesse and infidelity.Calvin. 2. That he might take away the offence which might be taken at his death, which was so neare at hand. Let it out] In Greek gave it out for their use for a time. There was a certaine house-holder, which planted a Vineyard] That is, God the people of the Jewes. Esay 5.Esay 5.2. a Wall. In universum ijs omnia signi∣ficantur quae aut ad tutelam aut ad ornatum pertinent. Grotius.Hedged it] 1. For distinction, God separates his people from all the people of the world. 2. For safety and defence. Some make the hedge the law of Moses in the whole latitude of it, others circumcision with all the Leviticall rites. A wine-presse] That is, all holy dutyes. Divinus cul∣tus. Cartw.And built a Tower] That is, the glorious Temple. Mic. 4.8. Not so much in refe∣rence to the materiall structure, as the Ministry of it, the doctrine and discipline of it. Ezek. 7.20. Let it out to husbandmen] That is, commended the Vineyard to the care and diligence primarily of the Church-governours, the Priests and Levites, and also of the civill magistrate. And went into a farre country] Some say this is spoken ornatus gratia, to fill up the pa∣rable; it is spoken (saith Ambrose) secundum opinionem colonorum, according to the opi∣nion of the wicked husbandmen. Vers. 34. He sent his servants] That is, the Prophets God raised up in the Church of the Jewes from Samuels time till the comming of Iohn the Baptist.Ier. 25.4. Vers. 25. Beate one] Ieremie. See 1 Kings 22.24. Ier. 20.2. And killed another] The Greek word signifies to murder with cruelty, as Esay. And stoned another] That is, killed him with stones. 2 Chron. 24.21. Zacharie the Son of Iehoiadab. Vers. 38. Expressing plainely in this Parable Gods dealing with Jerusalem, and theirs with him, and what was the immediate cause of their destruction. Vers. 42. By the stone is not meant any particular stone rejected in the building of Salomons materiall Temple (as some conceit) nor secondly the people of Israel, who though contemned for a while, yet were afterward advanced; but David literally re∣jected by Saul and the Nobles of the kingdom, and Christ typically, who was refused by the Jewes, but yet exalted and advanced by God to rule in the throne over his Church graciously, and over his enemies terribly, therefore compared to a Stone, because he is the foundation and support of his Church. The builders rejected] He granteth the Priests this title of chiefe builders, in respect of their calling, though they sought the ruine and destruction of the Church. The head of the corner] That is, Hee should be the chiefe stay of the building, as the Corner-stone upholds the chiefe weight of it. Some doe very curiously discourse of the word Corner, that Christ was placed in a Corner, that He might joyne together two divers walls, viz. the Gentiles and Iewes. And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken] That is, (saith Grotius) he that shall stumble upon Christ yet living, shall perceive his own weaknesse to his losse, as an earthen vessel struck at a stone.
But on whosoever it shall fall,He seemes to have reference to that place. Dan. 11.44. it shall grind him to powder] But he that shall persist in op∣posing him after he shall be exalted into his heavenly kingdome, shall as utterly perish as an earthen vessell on which a great stone is cast from a high place. This befell the Jewes when Titus beseeged Ierusalem, and will much more befall them at the day of judgement. CHAP. XXII. Verse 1. HEre is a proposition whereby hee farther condemneth the malice of the Pharisees;Vestis nupti∣alis Christus est, qui & spon∣sus & cibus etiam est in his nuptiis. Christū autem indui∣mus tum fide ejus meritum apprehendendo, ut nuditas no∣stra coram Dei judicio ipsius justitia tan∣quam pretiosa veste tegatur, Gal. 3.26, 27. tum sanctae vitae conversatione, qua ipsius vestigiis insistimus, cum Christus non solum nobis datus sit in donum, sed etiam propositus in exemplum. Gerhardus. the summe of the proposition is the same with that which was laid downe before, Chap. 20. that many are called, and few chosen, as is concluded in the 14 vers. He illustrates this proposition by a similitude or parable, the sence of which in briefe is this. The kingdome of heaven] That is, the state of the Church. A King] that is, God the Father, so called to declare his divine Majestie, and to set forth the magnificence of the Feast. His Sonne] that is, Christ. The wedding Feast] the glorious excellencies God tenders in the Gospel-ordinances. The wedding garment put on] by faith, including in it con∣version. The Bride or Spouse] the Church. The Guests] Jewes and Gentiles. First ser∣vants sent to invite] the Prophets. The second] the Apostles. The Marriage] eternall life, or the Kingdome of Heaven. Under this parable is threatned the Jewes destruction. Chrysost. Calv. The Jewes have the honour to be first called. This inviting to the Marriage feast, signifieth our inviting to partake of Christ and his benefits in the Gospel. See Esay 25.8.9. and Prov. 9. beg. Because in a Feast there is first plentie, secondly of dainties. The Lord provides dainties for the soules of his people in the preaching of the Gospel, 1 the dishes the love of God & his free grace and mercy, the body and blood of Christ with the merit of it. 2. The spirit of God in all the gifts and graces of it is there abundantly powred out. 1. This is foode for the soule, will feede the inward man. 2 pleasant foode. 3 will satisfie the soule and answer all the desires of it. Esay 55. because it puts it into the pos∣session of that which is its most sutable good. 4 It is medicine for the soule. Revel. 22.5. The refusers are such as come not to Gods Ordinances at all, or doe not at all accept of Christ. The man without a wedding garment is one that comes carelesly and unduly to these ordinances and so does not in deede and truth partake of Christ which will breede life in a dead soule, Iohn 5.25. It will nourish the soule up to everlasting life. Iohn 6.31. to the end. 2. To a Feast there is required not onely good fare, but good company; a voluptu∣ous Roman said he did often eate good meate alone, but he never feasted but in good company. Heb. 12. All the Saints here and the blessed Trinity eate and drinke with them. Thirdly, Heartie welcome from the Feastmaker. Prov. 23.1. Cant. 5.1. Fourthly, All is free cost. Esay 55.1, 2. Fifthly, The continuance of this Feast, all the dayes of their life, especially the great standing dishes, faith in the blood of Christ and communion with God. Vers. 2. The Kingdome of Heaven] That is, the Heavenly, by an Hebrew phrase, viz. Because it hath a heavenly King, Christ sitting at the right hand of the Father in heaven; heavenly law, a doctrine brought from the bosome of the Heavenly Father; the citizens of this kingdome seeke heavenly things, and their conversation is in heaven, Phil. 3.20. Col. 3 1. God reignes in them after a heavenly manner; the promises given to them are heavenly.
hic sunt non ipsum ma∣trimonium, ut vertit Syrus, quod mox dicitur prandium, alibi coena: ut & coenum nuptialem Plautus dixit, quomo∣do & nuptiarum vox Terentio atque aliis usurpatur. Grotius.Marriage] It is prepared in this life, consummate in the life to come. Trinae vocati∣oni opponit Christus tria eorum genera qui vocationi non responderunt, nec in nuptiali convivio comparuerunt; Prima classis complectitur nolentes, secunda negligentes, tertia persequentes. Gerhardus.Vers. 3. His servants] The Prophets to call] preach or prophesie; them] the Jewes. Vers. 4. Other servants] Evangelists, Apostles, they had a larger promise. Dinner] Knowledge of God, and forgivenesse of sinnes. Oxen] Strong Fathers of the Old Testament. Fatlings] The sweet Gospel. Killed] The Greeke word here is com∣monly used in Sacrifices, and is by translation used for other feasts also: for feasts and banquets were wont to begin with Sacrifices Not come] Cal'd by Preaching to sorrow, obedience. The marriage] Gregory applyes it to Christs incarnation, but it is a spiritual conjunction with Christ. Hilary, Calvin. Being invited, they are guests, being come, they are brides. Vers. 6. And intreated them spitefully] As Peter, and Iohn, and Paul, severall times. And slew them] As Stephen, and both the Iames. Vers. 7. Sent forth his armies] The Romans who spoyled Jerusalem, they were the executioners of Gods wrath, therefore called his Armies. Vers. 8. Servants] Apostles, Disciples, Ministers. Ephes. 4. They which were bidden were not worthy] The Jewes unworthiness was the cause of our graffing in. Rom. 11. Acts 13.46. Vers. 9. High wayes] The Gentiles called by the Apostles, faeces populi. Cartw. See 1 Cor. 1.22, 23. Vers. 10. And gathered all as many as they found] The Twelve Apostles were scattered in all Countries, and gathered together all as many as they found, the Gentiles came willingly, first, in that they withstood hindrances and dangers; secondly, they came by troopes, as in the Acts. Vers. 11. The King] In respect 1. of his Power, Ier. 10.7. 2 his Majesty, 3. his Domi∣nion. King in Heaven in respect of his Glory, in earth in respect of his Grace, in hell in respect of his Justice. Man] taken collectively for all. Origen in loc. Vestis haec est ambulatio digna vocatione Ephes. 4.1. Opera quae ra∣tam efficiunt vocationem. 2 Pet. 1.10. Grotius.A wedding garment] Righteousnesse imputed and inherent. Revel. 19.7, 8. Vers. 12. First, the examination, Friend; secondly, the conviction, from his owne mouth, qui tacet consentire videtur; hence we may inferre, that the wicked shall be speech∣lesse and have nothing to say at the last day; thirdly, the verdict, ver. 13. this punish∣ment is hell-fire. Vers. 13. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth] Weeping is the expression of sor∣row, and sorrow cooles the heart, and cold makes the teeth to chatter. Vers. 14. Few are chosen] This is the application of the Parable, few of those that are cal∣led and invited by the Ministrie are chosen. Snare him] in words or talke, the greek word is deri∣ved of snares which hunters lay for wild beasts.Vers. 15. Then went the Pharisees and tooke counsell, &c.] There was a great question then amongst the Jewes concerning Tribute, for when as the Romans had translated to them the tribute, which God in the Law of Moses commanded to be paid to himselfe, the Jewes were offended, therefore the Pharisees devise this subtilty to catch Christ by; so that he should insnare himselfe which way soever he should answer; if he should denie to pay it, he should be guiltie of sedition, but if he should grant it to be due, hee shall be accounted as an enemie to his owne nation, and a betrayer of the liberty of their Country. Vers. 16. True] That is, a faithfull interpreter of God. In truth] Without any corruption. Vers. 17. To give Tribute] The word here used signifieth a valuing and rating of mans substance according to the proportion whereof they paid tribute in these provin∣ces which were subject to tribute. , vt docet Aristote∣les, & nomen suum & vim ipsam habet . Hinc Majestatis criminibus accensetur nummos corrumpere. Nummos autem imper∣antium vultu ac nomine signari Persicum creditur esse institutum unde: Daricorum nomen. Grotius.Vers. 20. Whose is this image and superscription] The Roman Caesars imprinted their image upon their gold and silver too. As to make lawes, so to coyne money is a signe
of the chiefest dominion. The very money having its valew from Caesars edict, and bearing his name and image, did witnesse that he bore the chiefest rule over the Jewes, and that they acknowledged in their money. Vers. 21. Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesars] The money declared the sub∣ejection of their nation, as if hee should have said, if you think it absurd to pay tribute, be not subject to the Roman Empire, but the monie declareth that Caesar reigneth o∣ver you, and your owne secret allowance declareth, that the libertie which you pretend is lost and taken away. It is observable in this place, the article is twice repeated in the Greeke text when he speakes of God more than when he speakes of Caesar,Fundamentum opinionis Sad∣ducaicae fuit nullam substan∣tiam esse extra Deum praeter∣res sensiles. Cla∣rè id nos docet Lucas. Act. 23.8. ubi voce Spiritus in∣telligendus divi¦nus ille afflatus quo Prophetas à Deo impulsas recte credebant Pharisaei. Saedducaei qui prophetica scripta non recipiebant (nisi forte tan∣quam humanae sapientiae opera) nullam, ut videtur, admiserunt revelationem divinam, nisi per vocem, quomodo lex erat tra∣dita: cui soli obedientiam praestasse Sadducaeos apparet. Grotius. shewing that our speciall care should be to give God his due. Vers. 23. The Sadduces] Some derive the word from Sedek, justitia, justitiaries, such as would justifie themselves before Gods tribunall; others from Sadoc the first author of the heresie, as the Arrians from Arrius; they said there were no spirits, neither Angels nor humane soules separated from the body, Luke 20.27. Acts 23.8. The Sadduces (say some) Piscator, Maldonate. rejected the Prophets and all other Scripture, save onely the five bookes of Mo∣ses, therefore our Saviour here confuting their error, concerning the resurrection of the dead, proves it not out of the Prophets, but out of Exod. 3.6. But this of their re∣jecting all save the five bookes of Moses is denied by other De eo quod dicuntur negasse Spiritus, non disputo. Sane ut multi putant, sic sequeretur eos negasse Legem Mosaicam, quae variis in locis Angelorum mentionem facit; praeterea certum est eos non negasse librorum propheticorum autoritatem ut ex Talmude liquet. Menasseh Ben Jsrael de resurrectione mortuorum. c. 6. vide Horringeri Thesaurum Philologicum. l. 1. c. 1. Sect. 5. learned men. Vers. 32. God is not the God of the dead but of the living] Our Saviour Christ denieth not but that the godly departed are dead,See Heb. 11.16. for so he himselfe calleth them in the verse be∣fore, and it is of necessity that either they bee dead or translated, onely hee denieth them to bee dead in the sense of the Sadduces,Cartw. confut. of the Rhe∣mists. which esteemed that there was no other life after this, but that death made a man equall with a beast. As if should say, God is not the God of such dead, as you surmise shall never rise againe: but because they are intended to rise againe, God is their God. Among all the arguments brought to prove the immortalitie of the Soule, none seemes fitter to me to move mens mindes (saith Grotius) than that which Clement the Bishop of Rome was wont to urge, having received it from Peter the Apostle, If God be just, the soule is immortall, a like speech to which Paul hath 1 Cor. 15.19. for if we make any difference of things well or ill done, if we acknowledge a divine provi∣dence and justice, which the Sadduces durst not denie, for wee see it is worse with many good men here than with the wicked, it followes there will be another judge∣ment, and therefore that also which may receive a reward or punishment. This also proves the resurrection of the bodies as Grotius further sheweth. Vers. 34. Put the Sadduces to silence] The word is remarkable, it is ,Bishop Lake. See Beza on vers. 12. he bridled their mouthes, which is a phrase borrowed from fierce and stomachfull horses which are impatient of the rider, yet are they held in by a strong bit, and so subjected to the will of the rider by force, not out of their owne tractablenesse. Psal. 32.9. Vers. 35. Then one of them which was a Lawyer asked him a question] As many plotted the question, so there was but one that did propose it.Vnus à caeteris subornatus. Emi serunt unum, ut si vincat ille omnes victores habeantur, si vincatur solus erubescat. Brugensis. Chrysostome and others of the Fa∣thers observe a policie therein; For the Pharisees had reason to doubt of the successe upon their former proofe, therfore they handle the matter so that but one should speak, and if he prevailed they would all triumph, because he was of their Sect, but if he were foiled, then they would put it off and say it was but his private conceit. Bish. Lake. Vers. 30. The great Commandement] Great for greatest, for the Hebrewes have not su∣perlatives. Marke calleth it primum omnium, the chiefest of the Commandements. Hee askes (saith Chrysostome) about the greatest Commandement, which had not fulfilled the least. Vers. 37. All thy heart] Not that fleshie part of the body, but the will, the comman∣ing elective facultie and the directive the minde or understanding, with all thy heart, soule, mind,] that is, with thy will, with thy affection, with thy understanding,
All the heart is the same with a pure heart. 1 Tim. 1.5. as we say in Latine, Totus in hoc sum. Strength] Not that which thou hast, but which God at first gave thee. Supervacua il∣lorum diligen∣tia qui  nimium subtiliter hic distinguunt, cum vocum multarum cumulatio nihil aliud quam intensius studium designet: sicut ut & Latini dicunt, corde, animo, atque viribus, ut ab alijs est annotatum. Itaque eodem sensu quae hic habemus, terna modo, modo singula, modo bina reperias. Singula 1 Reg. 14.8. 1 Sam. 7.3. 2 Reg. 10.31. Psal. 119.2. Bina Deut. 4.29. 2 Pat. 15.12. 2 Reg. 23.3. Grotius.Soule] 1. Concupiscible faculty whereby the soule pursues after a thing, and minde] the irascible whereby it incounters with that which hinders it in its pursuite. Moses Deut. 6. and out of him Mark. 12. and Luke 10. adde a fourth, which is strength. Bernard thinkes that these 3. words, heart, soule, and minde, were intimated in Christs question tripled to Peter, lovest thou mee, affectuosè, prudenter, fortiter. Perkins First] In dig∣nity, because it commands us things concer∣ning God. 2. In order of nature, because the love of our neighbour flowes from the love of God. Piscat.Vers. 38. This is the first] viz. In nature and order. And great Commandement] viz. In excellency and dignity. Great] Because the true understanding and use thereof is of great importance. 2. Because it is one of the hardest to be kept. Vers. 39. Our Saviour answereth ex abundanti, first tels him of the love of God, & then addeth the love to his neighbour. He saith it is like to the first, yet so as it yeelds to it in dignity. 1. In the efficient cause, God that hath commanded thee to love himselfe, commands also this love of another as thy selfe. 2. In the matter, it is love that is re∣quired in both. 3. In the quality if it be sincere and unfeigned, even as we do our selves. 4. In the generality of it, containeth all those offices that belong to our neigh∣bour. 5. In the end, See 1 John 4.20. Like the first, 1. in objecto, for man in his neighbour must love no∣thing but God. 2. In subjecto, for this love must take up all the powers of man, as the love of God did, though with subordination. 3. In fructu, for it bringeth forth all the dutyes of the second Table, as the love of God did the dutyes of the first. 4. In duratione, it is everlasting. for as God is the scope of the Law in the first Table, so man is to be loved for God, and in reference to him. 6. In time, they shall alwayes indure. 7. In necessity, as a man cannot be saved without this, so neither without the love of our neighbour. 8. In difficultie, in the spirituall amplitude of it. Vers. 40. Hang] It seemes to be a metaphor (saith de Dieu) from things hung up, which sticke in that thing to which they are hung, till they be taken away, and there have their firmnesse and consistence, which metaphor is in Esay. 22.24. In those two commandements, the whole Law and Prophets have a firmnesse and consistence, are hanged on them and sticke in them, that they cannot thence be severed. See Grotius. CHAP. XXIII. OUR Saviour in this Chapter describes a hypocrite by his signes. 1. They say but do not. v. 3. He is nothing but leaves, shewes, he talkes but does not. 2. He is unmercifull. v. 4. severe in prescribing to other men, but partiall to himselfe. 3. He is ambitious, seekes the setting up of himself, not God. v. 5. 4. Hee must be the teacher, rule the roast. v. 6. 5. He perverts all religion, and hath an aime at his private gaine. v. 14. 6. Hee is most medling where he should not. v. 15. 7. Hee is partiall in his obedience. v. 16. 8. Preposterous in his obedience, lighter matters most busie him. v. 23. 9. He is still for the outside. 25, and 27. verses. 10. He cannot brooke a faithfull Ministry, especially the present Ministry. v. 30. est ca∣thedra in qua sedentes ma∣gistri legem aut populo publicè aut discipulis privatim interpretabantur: quomodo Cathedrae vox Graecis quoque & Latinis usurpatur. Grotius. Sedet in Cathedra Mosis qui non ex seipso vel proptio sensu sed ex Dei authoritate & verbo praecipit. Calvin.Vers. 2. Sit in Moses chaire] That is, shew out the Law of God. Their conjecture (saith Calvin) is probable, which referre it to the Pulpit which Esdras set up when the Law was read, Nehem. 8.4. Christ exhorted the people so farre to obey the Scribes, as they continued in the simple and pure interpretation of the Law. Moses signifies the
old Testament here, and his Chaire is the Chaire in which the Law was explained. Acts 15.1. 2 Cor. 3.15. to sit in Moses chaire, is not to succeed Moses (for the Scribes and Pharisees were not his successors) but to deliver the doctrine he delivered. Cameron. Vers. 3. They are ready enough to command, but slow and remisse in doing.v. 3. i. e. Quae∣cunque vera & recta dixerint, & quaecunque secundum legem docuerint, ea facite. Whitakerus. Vers. 4. Heavy burdens] Not ceremonies, for the Pharisees did abound in them, but justification by workes, looking for Christ a temporall King, and not a remitter of sinnes. Vers. 5. Make broad their phylacteries] Purple-studs woven on garments. Epiphan. schrolles of parchment for the head, Hieron. Chrysost in loc. Vide Bezam. Piscat. & Cameronem.  à Graecis dicuntur, id est, conservatoria, quòd ad conservandam legis memoriam instituta essent. or frontlets, or on garments,Phylacteria, ut Origenes, Chry∣sostomus, Hie∣ronymus & Euthymius scribunt, mem∣branulae erant, in quibus legis praecepta scripta erant. Maldonatus. on which were written the Ten Commandements. The Pharisees carried them about their head and arms, that they might perpetually set the Law of God before their eyes, so under∣standing that place, Deut. 6.8. See Scult. observat. in Matth. c. 61. And enlarge the borders of their garments] Num. 15.38, 39, 40. and Deut. 22.12. The Jewes were commanded to hang fringes upon the foure quarters of their garments,Lucas Brugen∣sis Comment. in 4 or Evangelia.  vetus editio habet magnifi∣cant fimbrias, hoc est magnas & amplas faci∣unt, non magnificè jactant aut extollunt, & interpres recentior, producunt fimbrias, est autem  ora vestimenti, quae & lascinia dicitur. Notatum est Christi vestem etiam simbrios habuisse, & Iudaeos hodie fila numero octo ex lana Con∣texta quatuor angulis Certa quadam lege in panno quadranguli vincire. Drusius De tribus Sectis Judaeotum. l. 2. which when they saw, they might remember the Commandements of God. For since men are apt to forget the Law, God would often put his people in mind of it, that which way soever they turned their eyes, they might meete presently with some pious admonition. The Scribes and Pharisees did weare these borders thicker and longer than others, as a certaine argument of piety, being desirous to be esteemed more mindfull of the Commandements of God than others, and being content with the good esteeme of men for these things. Vers. 7. Rabbi, Rabbi] A Master or Doctour, eminently gifted with variety of know∣ledge. Every RabbiRabbi ab Hebraeis nomi∣natur Doctor, à Verbo Rabab quod significat multiplicari, vel à copia sci∣entiae, vel ab authoritate. Piscat. Hoc est, ne optetis, desideretis, vel affectotis ita vocari, ut ex antithesi. v. 6, 7, 8. apparet. Glass. had his Disciple. Matth. 26.49. Iohn 3.26. 1 Iohn 38. The chiefe Rabbies sate in reserved Chaires, these are the chiefe seates in the Synagogues, which the Scribes and Pharisees so affected. Their companions sate upon benches or lower formes, their Schollers on the ground at the feete of the Teachers. Act. 22.3. Luke 10.39. Godwins Jewish Antiqu. Vide Grotium, & Cameron in loc. Ambition is here con∣demned by Christ, saith Theophylact. Vers. 9. The scope of the place is,Christ doth not forbid the name of Fa∣ther simply, but onely as it is affected and sought af∣ter ambitiously as it was in the Pharisees. Wee should not call any our Father on earth, as we call God our Father, that is, to put our trust in him. Elton. 1. To condemne the ambitious seeking and boast∣ing in the titles of Father, Doctor. 2. To teach that no man should depend upon any other as God, to put their trust in him, and make him the authour and preserver of our life. Some make this distinction to no purpose, that men which beget children, are Fathers according to the flesh, but God onely is the Father of Spirits; but the mean∣ing is, the honour of Father is given wrongfully to men, if the glory of God be there∣by darkned. Calvin. See Cameron. Vers. 12. And whosoever shall exalt himselfe shall be abased] A sentence often used by Christ, and famous without doubt among the Jewes, we say, pride will have a fall. And he that shall humble himselfe shall be exalted] Salomon saith more than once,See Pro. 15.33. and 18.12. before honour humility. Aesope being asked what God did, answered, that he abased the proud, and exalted the humble. Vers. 15. Compasse Sea and Land] It is a kind of proverb, and is like that, omnem mo∣vere lapidem, that is, you use all meanes to make a Proselyte. In the Greeke it is Sea and drie Land. The earth is called dry, Gen. 7.22. Ionah. 1.9. by an excellency, from the predominant quality in it,Scultet. obser∣vat. in Mat. Vide Bezam. for it is (as Philosophers teach) a most drie element.
, of coming or ad∣joyning to their Church. Prose∣lytus graecè idem est quod latinè advena, vel adventiti∣us. Corn. à Lap. Vide Grot.The Heathen people are called Proselytes, when they were call'd to the Church of the Jews, and embraced their Religion, as if he should say, Adventitij, as the Eunuch, Act. 8. There were two sorts of Proselytes or converted Gentiles. 1. Proselytes of the Covenant; these were such as were circumcised, and submitted to the whole Mosaicall paedagogy: these were counted as Jewes, and conversed with as freely as those which were so borne. 2. Proselytes of the Gate; these were inferiour to the former, they were not cir∣cumcised, nor conformed themselves to the Mosaicall Rites and Ordinances. Such a Proselite was Naaman the Syrian, and Cornelius. Mr Mede on Act. 10.4. Vide Drus. de tribus Sectis Judaeorum. lib. 2. The child of hell] As Iudas, Iohn 17.1. is called the Son of perdition by a most elegant Hebraisme, one ordained to destruction. Vers. 16. Is a debtor Ezek. 18.7. Gen. 90.17.] The Arabicke turnes it, hath sinned, purus putus Chaldaismus, hence sinnes are called debtes, and sinners debters. Drusius. whence that kind of speaking arose, forgive us our debts. Beza. Vers. 18. He is guilty] , that is, is a debter. Sometimes it signifies (after the Scrip∣ture phrase) to sin; but here it seemes rather to note after the usuall and proper sig∣nification to be bound to pay, Rom. 13.7, 8. Vers. 19. The Altar sanctifieth the gift] That is, consecrates it unto God, and appro∣priates it to his use. Vers. 23. Ye pay tith of minte, and annise, and cummin] The Pharisees did tithe the least things,Vide Drus. detribus sectis Judaeorum. l. 2. they payed tithes of all the things they possest. Luk. 18.12. Iudgement] That is, equity or upright dealing. Calv. In respect of our selves. Iun. Mercy] That is, charity towards our brethren. Faith] That is, piety to∣ward God. Iunius. Tit. 2.12. Rather truth and constancy in promises. Christ here (saith Calvin) doth try their holiness by their love toward their brethren, therefore he toucheth not the first Table at all. Vers. 24. Wine in hotter Countries is wont to have many gnats, so that it is necessa∣ry for them which will drinke, first to straine the wine that they may take away the Gnats, hence the speech is taken. Maldonate. Vers. 26. Build the tombes of the Prophets] Hypocrites honour the holy Ministers of God after their death, whom they could not abide in their life. Virtutem incolumen odimus, Horace.Sublatam ex oculis quaerimus invidi. Vers. 32. Fill ye up then the measure of your Fathers] An ironicall speech. Beza. Pro∣ceed ye also to imitate your Ancestors, that at length your wickednesse may come to some degree.Sunt verba permittentis cum significati∣one desperatae atque incorri∣gibilis illorum malitiae. Vers. 34. That is, God hath spoken of you before in the Spirit of prophesie what shall come to passe. Vers. 35. Here is mention made specially of Abell and Zachary, because we read that Abels bloud cryed to the Lord. Gen. 4.10. And Zacharie when he was ready to dye said, Let the Lord see and judge. 2 Chron. 24.22. The bloud of Abell shed by Cain is called blouds, but of all righteous persons here is called but one bloud, because it is the bloud of one common body the Church, and one common cause for Christs sake. Mr. Rainolds. Calvin. De Sclater. Inter prophetas duo fuerunt Za∣chariae, quorum uterque patrem habuit nomine Barachiam. Antiquior ex ijs hic memoratur cujus pater etiam Ioiada vocatur. 2. Paral. 24.21. in exemplari authentico est Zachariae Ioiadae filij. Drus. observat. Sac. l. 14. c. 22.Because their cruelty argued approbation of the like sin in their bloudy Progeni∣tors. The pronoune you doth generally comprehend the whole nation from the begin∣ing. Christ imputeth Abels death unto the Jews, because there was a certaine kindred of ungodliness between them and Cain. Some understand Zachary the Father of John Baptist, of whom, Luk. 1.5. S Ori∣gen, Basil, Theophylact, Baronius and Tolet, Hoc quia de scripturis non habet autoritatem, eadem facilitate contemnitur qua probatur, saith Jerome. Others say, that Zachary the last save one amongst the twelve lesser Prophets is here understood by Christ. So Chrysostome, Tertullian, Ordinary Glosse, Gualther, Sanctius, but this opinion besides the neareness of name hath no shelter, and therefore Ierome gives it the same censure that the former.
3. Some, as Glassius, Grotius, Calvin, Beza, understand Zachary the son of Jehoiada, of whom there is mention made,Glass. Philol. Sac. l. 1. Tract. 2. de Textus Grae∣ci in N. T. pu∣ritate.Slew between the Temple and the Altar] As if he should say, rebus vacans divinis, & in loco divino cultui dicato. Glassius ibid. Maldonarus idem sentit. vide Cornel à Lap. & Calv. in loc. 2 Chron. 24.21. that he was stoned in the Court of the Lords house, So Jerome, whom Luther and many of the moderne follow, and most rightly, for neither the scope of Christs words, nor the kind of Zacharies death, nor the place of killing, nor the name of his Father, any whit oppugneth that opinion. Grotius goes this way, See him in loc. Vers. 37. O Hierusalem, Hierusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee] As if Christ should have said, thou which shouldst have been a faith∣full keeper of the word of God, the Mistris of heavenly wisdome, the light of the world, the fountaine of true doctrine, the seat of the worship of God, an example of faith and obedience, art become a murtherer of the Prophets, so that now thou hast gotten a certaine habit in sucking their bloud. Christs purpose was for to meet with the offence which was at hand, lest the faithfull when they should see him slaine at Ierusalem without a cause, should be troubled at the strangenesse of such a sight. How oft would I] It is rather a word of disdaine than of compassion. Calvin.Gallina) Vox graeca communis est ad avem & gal∣linam, & mirus quidem inest avibus omnibus amor fovendi tuendique pul∣los, sed gallinae praesertim. Brugensis. See Deut. 32.11. Esa. 65.2. He describeth not here the secret counsell of God, but that which is learned by the word. Christ speaketh not of the will of his good pleasure, for that cannot be resisted, but of his signified will in the Ministery of the Prophets, and of himself as he was a Pro∣phet and Minister of the Circumcision unto the Jews, for so he might will their con∣version and yet they will it not. Perkins. And you would not] This may be referred to the whole Nation as well as to the Scribes, yet rather to them by whom that gathering together was most hindered, for Christ in∣veigheth against them in the whole course of his speech, and though he spake to Ierusa∣lem in the singular number he alters it now. Vers. 38. Behold your house is left unto you desolate] He fortelleth the destruction of the Temple, and the overthrow of the whole Common-wealth; they held the Temple as a Fort impregnable, as if they sate in Gods lap, but by calling it their house he sheweth plainely that it is the house of God no more. Vers. 39. Ye shall not see me henceforth] As if he had said, from henceforth, viz. after you have crucified me, ye shall not see me till the end of the world, when I shall come againe, which comming, some of you, viz. that are Elect, shall gratulate unto me and say, blessed is he] and perhaps as some interpret it, all you who now reject me as a vile person, will then, but too late, either by force, or in imitation of the godly, ac∣knowledge me the blessed that commeth in the name of the Lord. Mat. 26.64.Dr. Taylor. He doth not declare (saith Calvin) what they should become, but what he himself would do; so that this should be the meaning, I have behaved my self humbly and lovingly amongst you, and have discharged the office of a Teacher, now the course of my calling being finished, I will depart, and you shall not enjoy me hereafter, but the Redeemer and Minister of Salvation whom you now despise, ye shall find and try to be a Judge. Zach. 12.10. CHAP. XXIV. Verse 1. THe buildings of the Temple] How much that building cost Herod may be gathered by this,Calvin. Erat templum hoc orbis mira∣culum. à Lap. Immensae opu∣lentiae templū. Tacitus. that he had ten thousand workmen labouring about it for the space of eight yeares. The Disciples might well wonder at these stones, for they were goodly and faire, and (as Josephus writeth) fifteen Cubits long, twelve high, and eight broad. Vers. 1. There shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down] An hyperbole, as if he should say, it shall be utterly overthrown. This was fulfilled forty yeares after Christs Ascension by Vespasian the Emperour, and his Son Titus, say Eusebius and Josephus.
Et patet exemplis oppida posse mori. His Disciples] That is, foure of them, Peter, James, John, and Andrew. Mark. 13.3. Piscat. Calvin.Vers. 3. When shall these things be] They thought the Temple should stand as long as the world stood, therefore as soon as Christ said the Temple should be destroyed, they presently thought with themselves of the end of the world. Which question of the Disciples having two parts, when the Temple shall be destroy∣ed, and what shall be the sign of his comming and of the end of the world, receiveth an an∣swer to both: To the former, concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, from the 4. ver. to the 23. To the latter, concerning the comming of Christ, and the end of the world, from thence to the 42. Vers. 6. See that ye be not troubled] A metaphore taken from an allarm which dis∣quieteth Souldiers.Considerate ista diligenter: sed ne ita movemini istis, quasi extrema essent malorum quae Judaeos manent, ob contempta tot ad poenitentiam hortamenta. Grotius. Vers. 7. And there shall be famines and pestilences] It is elegant in the Greek, ; These two words  and , famine and pestilence, are wont often to be joyned together, as being by the sound of the Greeke words, and by a cer∣taine naturall connexion coupled amongst themselves; the old proverbe is, , after famine the pestilence. By the whole world is not to be understood every small corner and un∣known part of the world, but by a Synecdoche, the greatest part of the world then known to be inhabited, as Luke 2. Calvin. See Col. 1.6.23. Rom. 1.8. & 10.18.Vers. 14. In all the world] Some object the Antipodes and other people far re∣mote to whom not the least fame of Christ hath yet come, this knot may be easily un∣tied, for Christ doth neither design the severall parts of the world specially, neither doth he preixe a certaine time, but only affirmes that the Gospell shall be propagated to the utmost ends of the earth before his last coming. The end come] The end of the Temple and City, not of the world, if Chrysostome or Luke may be credited, Luke 21.20.24. Dan. 9.27. It is abominable wings (that is Armies) bring∣ing desolation. Austen, Cartw. Perkins.Vers. 15. The abomination of desolation] By the desolation which shall be executed by abominable men, Idolaters, the Prophet meaneth, and after him our Saviour, the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romane Armies; Luke 21.20. therefore hath it, When you shall see Ierusalem besiedged by an Army. Vers. 19. And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give sucke in those daies] Because they were not free and ready to flie. Vers. 20. But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the Sabbath day] Jerome saith, that our Saviour bids them pray that their flight might not be in the win∣ter,Christus re∣spexit ad opini∣onem quā tunc temporis Judaei habebant de Sabbatho, qui existimabant nulla de causa licere iter facere longius quam duorum millium cubitorum. Capellus. Vide à Lap. Because it could not but grieve them that made conscience of pleasing God, to be forced to forbeare those services on that day which God required. Mr. Hieron. nor on the Sabbath day, because in the one, extremity of cold forbids to go to the wildernesse and to lye hid in the mountaines and desarts: In the other there is ei∣ther the transgression of the Law if they be willing to flie, or eminent death if they abide, so the Ordinary glosse also. Ne scilicet festinationem, vel religio, vel itineris asperitas & brevitas dierum, impediat ac moretur. Calvin. Vers. 21. For then shall be great tribulation] Rev. 20.1. Dan. 12.11. He meanes the tribulation the Jews were to endure at the siege and suprisall of Ierusalem by Titus and Vespatian. See Luk. 21.20. Vers. 22. And except those dayes should be shortned] God did not make the daies of those troubles shorter than he had decreed, but shorter than the enimie had determined, or than any wise man who judgeth only by the rules of humane policy could have ex∣pected. There should no flesh be saved] That is, with a temporall Salvation from the Romane Sword and devouring calamities which attended that terrible War. Vers. 24. For there shall arise false Christs, and false Prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very Elect] The Fa∣thers
teach that this place is to be understood of Antichrist and his Ministers, the Papists confess it. It is not possible for any of Gods Elect to be so deceived by any false teachers, as that they should fall into those errours that are fundamentall, and persist in them.See Fulke on Rhem. Test. on John 16.13. One that is in the state of grace may for a time hold such errours in religion as do trench very neere upon the foundation: For all the Elect Apostles did beleeve that Christ should be a worldly King, Mark. 10.37.41. yea, after his Passion and Resurrection they held this errour, Act. 1.6.Hilders. on Psa. 51 ver. 7. Lect. 146. The whole Church of the Galatians held for a time that a man could not be justified by faith in Christ only without the workes of the Law, 3, 4, and 5. Chapters. Vers. 26. Secret Chambers] As when Papists say, he is in the Chappell, in the Al∣tar, in the boxe, beleeve it not. Vers. 28. Wheresoever the Carkase is, there will the Eagles be gathered together] That is, the Saints and Elect which now enjoy Christ. Irenaeus, Hilary, Chrysostome, Euthymius, and Beza, Interpret it of the Angels which shall accompany Christ to judgement; as the Eagles flie from far Countries through the clouds to the Carkasse, so the godly shall be taken up into the clouds to meet Christ, and shall be ever with him; The Eagles flie high, so the Saints are heavenly; The Eagles are endued with quick sight, can look upon the Sun, so the godly on the Sun of righteousness. Vers. 29. Immediately] That must not be measured by our,Paul so speakes of the time of the last day, as if he with his hearers should live to it. 1 Thes. 4.15. but the divine Compu∣tation, in which a thousand daies are as one, Psal. 90.4. 2 Pet. 3.8. That whole time between Christs first and last comming is called by the Apostle, the last comming, yea, the last houre, Act. 2.17. 1 Cor. 10.11. Phil. 4.5. Heb. 10.25. Iam. 5.8. 1 Pet. 4.7. 1 Ioh. 2.18. Starres shall fall from heaven] Not indeed, but in the opinion of men; The meaning is, there shall be so great a concussion of the frame of heaven, that the Stars themselves may be thought to fall. Calvin. Shall be shaken] In Greeke , which properly signifieth they shall be sha∣ken as the Sea troubled by the waves, and shall be in danger by shaking, for it is used of a reed shaken by the wind, Mat. 11.7. Luk. 7.24. Of measure shaken, Luk. 6.38.Gerh. de exire∣mo judicio. Of the foundations of houses moved, Luk. 6.48. Acts 4.31. & 16.26. And metaphorically of the instability and change of things, Heb. 12.26, 27. As also of the trouble of the mind, Act. 2.25. 2 Thes. 2.2. Vers. 30. Then shall appeare the sign of the Son of man] Bellarmins mouth runs over ex∣ceedingly when he saith,De Imag. l. 2. c. 28. Communis fuit semper opinio, crucem signum filij hominis ap∣pellari: eamque in Coelo, aut in aere, Christo veniente, quasi ejus vexillum apparituram esse. Maldonar in loc. Quaeres, quodnam est signum filij hominis, id est, Christi incarnati? Resp. est Crux. à Lap. in loc. Quidam accipiunt de speciali quadam claritate ac radio quodam igneo qui immeditate Chri∣sti adventum praecedet & in momento per universum orbem se extendet. Gerh. loc. Com. Signum crucis inquit Lessius, unde ecclesia Canit, hoc signum crucis erit in coelo cum Dominus ad judicandum venerit. Quidam (inquit ille) putant ipsam erucem in qua dominus pependit, divinitus instaurandam, & ibi apparituram, sed haec minor est inquit ille quam ut toti or∣bi possit esse conspicua. that the Ancient Fathers ad unum omnes interpret this sign to be the Crosse: For Chrysostome thinketh it to be the Body of Christ it selfe. Theophylact holdeth the true Cross shall appeare whereon Christ dyed. Abulensis and Iansenius are of another opinion, they think it shall be a Cross compacted of glorious and lightsome aire; so Lessius de perfectionibus divinis, l. 13. thinks it shall be a great and bright figure of the Cross, a Cross made of the aire or clouds which may be seen of all. See Rhem. Testament. It is a manner of speech borrowed from the wars,Cartw. confut. of Rhem. Test. for our Saviour by evident tokens of his glorious appearance, as by the displaying of a Banner, will gather his Saints to∣gether from all the corners of the earth. All markes of ignominie of Christ shall then be abolished, there is no likelihood then of the appearance of the Cross. As the morning Star, or a great brightness in the firmament, is a proper sign of the Suns present rising, so this of Christs immediate coming. There be divers opinions what this sign is. It is thought (by Calvin, Beza, Bucer,) that by this sign of the Son of man there are meant. (by way of Synecdoche) the great signs of glory and majesty which then shall compass Christ about, and shall Omnium oculos convertere ad se quasi signo dato, which seems to have strength from the explication which followeth, He shall be seen come in the clouds with power and great glory, That is▪
(saith Musculus) the foresaid events shall be certaine significations, and as it were, a sign of my coming.Abraham re∣ceived the sign of Circumcisi∣on, Rom. 4. that is, Circumcisi∣on which is a signe.Ipse filius ho∣minis tanquam signum certissi∣mum adventus sui ad judiciū. Piscat. Gerh. It is called the sign of the Son of man by an excellency, be∣cause that Christ himself imme∣diately upon that sign ap∣peares. Smith. Mark. 13.26. Lu. 21.27. Hie∣ronymus, & alij, vexillum crucis intelligunt. Mihi semper probabilior sententia eorum visa qui nubes coeli deotari existimant. Nam quod Marcus & Lucas signi filij hominis nullam mentionem faciunt, sed simplicitur dicunt: Tunc videbunt filium hominis venientem in nubibus cum potentia multa & gloria. Mar. 13.26. Luc. 21.27. Probabiliter concludimus apud Mat∣thaeum apparitionem signi filij hominis in coelo, esse conspectum filij hominis venientis in nubibus Coeli: praesertim cum verisimile sit, quod fuit proximum signum Christi à Discipulorum oculis abeuntis in coelum, idem fore proximum signum Christi redituri ad judicium, oculis omnium hominum primò objectum, vide licet, nubem. Hinc toties scribitur in nubibu∣sedens adventurus. Dan. 7.13. Mat. 26.64. Mar. 14.62. Apoc. 11.7. & 14.14. Taceo quod signum filij hominis populo Is∣raelitico interdiu praeuntis fuit columna nubis. Exod. 13.21. Scultet. obser. in Mat.Hoc verò signum, sit ne futura aliqua stella, an crux, an quale aliud, frustra inquiritur aut definitur. Paraeus in loc. Some take the words to be an Hebraisme, and think Christ himself (the Son of man) is there meant, so Ierome, Estie. But it cannot be taken so, (say some) for there is an opposition between these, so that the sign can never be the thing signified, and the words following distinguish him from that sign. They shall see the Son of man. Yet other Evangelists have only these words, then shall the Son of man appeare, which confirms this last exposition. Origen takes it for the miraculous power and vertues of Christ. Chrysostome expounds it of the wounds that be in the hands, feet, and side of Christ. Mr Perkins, Rollock on 1 Thes. 4. and others, take it to be the burn∣ing up of this world at the very instant of Christs coming, mentioned by Peter, because it is also said, Dan. 7.10. A fiery streame issued out when the Ancient of dayes sate upon his throne. Others take it to be the sound of the last Trumpet, but it cannot be that, be∣cause there is a distinction between them, ver. 30, 31. Smith on the Creed, and Barlow, say, it is the infinite brightness and splendour which shall come from Christs glorious Person, the brightness whereof shall darken all other lights. See Dr Hals Paraphrase, and Beza. Bifield on Colos. saith, what that sign shall be, I cannot describe: Some think that by it is meant the Gospell, and the power of it toward the latter end of the world. Grotius Paralells it with that Rev. 19.11. the white horse, that is, the pure preaching of the Gospell. See Rev. 6. All the tribes of the earth] That is, all people of the earth, a metaphor from the com∣mon wealth of the Jews, for the Jewish people were distributed into twelve Tribes. Synecdoche integri, for the wicked people only shall mourne. Piscat. Mourne] Yea, and that with deepe mourning, beating their breasts as the Greeke word importeth. Vers. 31. And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet] 1 Thes. 4 16. This is an allusion,Vide Grot. in Mat 6.2. & in loc.The Lord will use the Angels as Instruments. because by a received custome among the Jews, and those Easterne Countries, their great Assemblies were called by the sound of the Trumpet. The An∣gels shall not use any materiall Trumpet, but by some marvelous great shrill sound shall call all to judgment, Iohn 5.25. It is called the voice of Christ himself, Vox prae∣conis est vox Iudicis, the voice of the Crier is the voice of the Judge. Ver. 34. This generation shall not pass] Some by generation understand all mankind, as if it should not be till there were a period put to mans succession,That is, one ge∣neration shall not passe untill the destruction of Jerusalem be accompli∣shed, which was effected about forty yeares af∣ter, so it is like∣ly that after all the signs afore∣said, before one age shall pass the day of Judgment shall come. Cartw. so the word is used, Esa. 41.4. But our Saviour addeth a determining particular, this generation. 2. Others understand it of heaven and earth, making it the same in effect with that which fol∣loweth, and so the word is used, Gen. 2.4. 3. Others understand it of Beleevers, the generation of those that seek thy face. 4. Some understand by it this age, for  signifieth both, and so think Christ meaneth all that time intervening between his first and second comming, so that there should be no singular change in the Church of God againe before the day of Judgement. But the most plaine and simple meaning is to ex∣pound it of the destruction of Jerusalem, and by this generation is meant the age of those men living, as Noah was just in his generation, that is, with the men of that age. Vers. 35. Heaven and earth may passe away, but my words shall not passe away] These words may be taken either comparatively thus, Heaven and earth shall sooner passe away, as Luk. 16.17. Or positively, the heaven and earth shall passe away at the end of the world, but his word shall not passe away, that is, be destroyed, before it have its full and perfect end; for the Ceremonies and Sacrifices in the old Law did hold till
Christ came, but then they were to cease in him, who was the body and fulnesse of them. Vers. 36. But of that day and houre knoweth no man, no not the Angels of heaven, but my Father only] Christ knew it not 1. to reveale it, the Church knew it not. 2. He knew it not as man. Jansen. Ver. 28. Eating] , they gave themselves to eate, as bruit beasts; so the word signifies: for otherwise it is no fault to eate.See my Greeke Critica. Vers. 40. The one shall be taken, and the other left] That is, say Jerome and Theophylact, the first shall be elected and safe, the other reprobated and perish. Grotius thinks it is to be referred to the distinguishing of men which is made by the Gospell, especially in those first forty yeares, a visible sign also of which was the preservation of the Christi∣ans from the evill of the siege of Ierusalem. Vers. 43. If the good man of the house had known in what watch the thiefe would come] It hath troubled some that our Saviour should compare his comming and a thieves toge∣ther, but it is not comparatio personae ad personam, or negotij ad negotium, but temporis ad tempus; not the comparing of person with person, or business with business, but of time with time. CHAP. XXV. HEre are three Parables, 1. Of the Virgins wise and foolish. 2. Of the servants faith∣full and sloathfull. 3. Of the Sheepe and Goates at the last judgement. Two gene∣rall points are taught in all these Parables. 1. There are many hypocrites in the Church, as well as some sincere Christians. 2. That Hypocrites shall be damned at last, as well as more open sinners. In every one of the Parables, the Hypocrite is confident and thinkes well of himselfe, but the true Christian fearfull. Vers. 1. Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten Virgins] The kingdome of heaven sometimes is taken for the doctrine of the grace of the Gospell, the kingdom of heaven is like to a graine of mustard-seed. 2. Sometimes for the glorious State above. 3. For the state of the Church of Christ under the New Testament, where God ma∣nifests himselfe, which is a heaven on earth, so here, which kingdome is described by the King and subjects; The Head and King of this kingdom is described by his comming, He comes 1. As a Bride-groome. 2. Apparently, not hiddenly as in the dayes of his flesh. 3. Suddenly, in the darkest time, at midnight. The Parable of the ten Virgins is borrowed from the manner of the Country where our Saviour taught, where she that was given to marriage had her maidens,The scope and drift of this Parable is ef∣fectually to stirre us up to prepare our selves for the coming of Christ, and to shew it is not enough once to be prepared for our duty, unlesse we con∣tinue to the end. Calvin.Certè sine veteris Historiae luce, Simile de decem virginibus nemo satis probè intellexerit. Nuptiarum solemne cele∣brabatur noctu: quod persuadent verba Plutarchi in Problematibus: ille ait, Romanos noctu nupsisse. Et verba Lucae Evan∣gelistae. c. 12. v. 35. Adhibebantur lucernae & faces. Virgines cantaturae epithalamium domi per multas horas exspectabant lampadibus accensis. Accidit autem, ut dum ita exspectarent, dormitarent nonnunquam. Cum jam sponsus cum sponsa veniens limen domus tetigit, sese cum sponso in cubiculo repentè abdit. Scultet. observat in Matth.Virgines quae in thalamum ingressae clauserunt ostium, ita ut paucissimi & non nisi advigilantes possint ingredi cubiculum. Vide plura. ibid. and the Bridegroome his young men, which gave attedance on them, fetching the Bride from her friends to his house, which was done in the night. Iudg. 14.11. Matth. 9.15. By the Bridegroome is signified our Saviour Christ himselfe, so He is called often of Paul, Rom. 7.4. and Ephes. 5. whose Spouse is the Church; under the name of Vir∣gins all are comprehended, who by profession and promise of faith and baptisme, have undertaken to be Virgins, that is entire and faithfull unto Christ. Virgins not taint∣ed with the grosse pollutions of the world. Ten Virgins, five wise, and five foolish, non quod numero sint pares, not that they are equall in number. All were Virgins in opi∣nion; all had lampes to betoken their profession; all waited for the Bridegroome,
which shewes their joynt hope and expectation; all slumbered and slept, bewraying their common corruption; all had fellowship one with another. The wisedome of the wise Virgins consisteth in this, in that before their slumber (that is, before the day of their death, or before their change, at the latter day) they labour to provide themselves of such graces, as shall not forsake them when they come to judgement, the folly of the foolish, in that their light died with them, they having not the graces of true faith, sanctification and repentance: so that when they were to be changed or raised in the latter day, they have no saving grace at all found in them, whereby they might with boldnesse appeare before the Judge of all the world. By the lampe is imported that outward profession to men: the oyle signifies true faith and a good conscience inwardly to God.Hoc loco per lampades non intelligun∣tur faces seu funalia quae apud Graecos lampadum no∣mine intelli∣guntur, sed ejusmodi lucernae quae vasculis imposito ellichnio foventur, in hac significatione vox  usurpari videtur. Iohn 18. & 3. Act. 20.8. Gerh. Harm. Vide Bezam. in v. 1. Howsoever the lampes of foolish Vir∣gins, of idle and empty professours, gave them credit with men, so that they were not barred from the company and conversation of the wise, yet in the sleepe of death they shall go out and shall not serve to light them to go to God. Our Saviour expounds himselfe, ver. 13. where by prepared Lampes, he shewes to be meant watchfull mns, al∣wayes lifted up in attendance for the comming of our Saviour Christ. Traditio Judae∣orum, Christ∣um media nocte venturum in similitudinem Aegyptij temporis, quando pascha celebratum est, unde reor & traditionem Apostolicam perman∣sisse, ut in die vigiliarum paschae ante noctis dimidium, populos dimittere non liceat, expectantes adventum Christi. Hieron in loc.Vers. 6. At midnight there was a cry made] This cry (saith à Lapide) signifies the Trumpet of the Arch-angell raising the dead out of their graves. Vers. 14. to 31. This Parable of the Talents is the same in effect, with that of the Virgins, for as there was in the other a Bridegroome and a Bride, Virgins wise and foolish, the wise received, the others rejected; so here is a Master and his Servants, of whom some be faithfull, and some unfaithfull, the faithfull plentifully rewarded, the unfaithfull justly punished: yet this doth more effectually prepare us to his coming than the former, because it hath more arguments than the former. 1. In that they re∣ceived their Masters goods, whereof they were to give an account. 2. In that their just re∣ward is more lively declared. The Parable is, a certaine householder about to go into a strange Country gave to each of his servants a portion of his goods, answerable to their estate and ability, to occupy till his returne, and as they gained by employing the same, so they received their reward, Christ is the Housholder, the heavens are the strange Country in regard of us, Luk. 19.11, 12. whither when Christ ascended he distributed his gifts and graces to his Church, 1 Cor. 12.7. Ephes. 4.8. that we might use them in this life, and render a just account of them unto him at his next coming. Vers. 12. I know you not] That is, like you not, so to know is to approve. 1 Psal. ult. 2. Tim. 2.19. Vers. 15. To every man according to his severall ability] Therefore say the Papists, there is some prerequisite disposition in us. Answer, That is not to be understood of an active, but a passive capacity, men are not like stones. 2. Though the Lord may re∣gard some dispositions before, yet they also were the gift of God, and bestowed upon us freely. Vers. 21. Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord] It is a great joy. 1. Because our Masters. 2. He saith not let it enter into thee, but enter thou into it, shewing, that the joyes of heaven are so many, that they cannot be contained in the soule of man. Such a joy as Christ provided, and which he himselfe injoyes. See Ezek. 34.17. Dextra sym∣bolum est faeli∣citatis, gloriae, regni, victoriae & triumphi; sinistra verò infaelicitatis, opprobrij, servitutis & miseriae. à Lapidè Vide Grotium, Cartwright.Vers. 32. And he shall separate them one from another, as a Shepheard divided his sheepe from the Goates] In what manner all men shall be ranked and ordered at the resurrecti∣on, is set forth by a Parable of the Shepheard and the Sheep: for as the Shepheard when evening commeth, gathereth his flocke and separateth the Sheep from the Goates,
so in the evening of the world, our Saviour Christ shall gather all nations by the mini∣sterie of Angels, and then there shall be a full separation, the godly being set on the right hand, and the wicked on the left, which separation the Angels can most easily make in discerning between them, as otherwise, so even by their cheerefull or feare∣full countenances. Vers. 33. And he shall set the sheepe on the right hand,Praeter. l. 1. in v. 41. See Weemes his Christian Synagogue. but the Goate on the left] Drusius thinkes he had reference to the Jews custome of judgement, who had two notaries, one on the right hand, to set downe the words of those which did absolve, another on the left, to write the sentence of condemnation; some say he alludes to Deut. 27.11. This discovers truely the spirits of those men that shall be tried, the Saints are the Lords Sheepe, the wicked are Goats. The Saints and Sheep resemble one another in these particulars. 1. Sheep are meeke, mild, innocent, and harmelesse creatures, patient; so the Saints. 2. They heare the voyce of the Shepheard; so do the Saints what God saith,Electos compa∣rat ovibus, ob innocentiam, humilitatem, simplicitatem, modestiam, obe∣dientiam; re∣probos haedis, quia hoc ani∣mal faetet, est asperum, im∣mundum, petul∣cum, lascivum, rixosum.à Lapide. See 34. of Ezek. Olevian. his counsell swayes them. 3. The Sheep follow the Shepheard, that is, follow his Com∣mandement, his example, counsell, a whistle will fetch in the Sheep, Christs call in∣clines them to come. 4. Sheep are sociable. 5. Sheep are the profitablest creatures to their Master, that any one can keepe, profitable living, and when they are dead; so the Saints, they live and dye to the Lord. The Goate on the other side is refracta∣ry, wanders up and downe, and is not for the Shepheards voyce. 2. Is a noisome stink∣ing uncleane creature. Vers. 34. Blessed] viz. In Christ, who was made a curse for us. Gal. 3.13. inherit] or possesse by lot, therefore because adopted he doth not merit. Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world] What then could they deserve? these are the causes of salvation, that which he addes, Vers. 35. I was a hungred, &c.] Are the signes of true faith. Christ chooseth workes of the second Table, because they are most manifest to the world, and pronounceth sentence according to them, because they are more visible than faith. The causall conjunction for, implies the meritoriousnesse of workes, saith Bellarmine. Answer. It is note of consequence and order, not of the cause, as we say Summer is come, for flowers do spring, and it is a good tree, for it bringeth forth good fruit. See Luke 7.47. 1 Iohn 3.14. Bellarmine urgeth that, go you cursed, for you have done so and so; there is a great deale of difference between the evill and good we do; our evills are truely ours and fully evill, but our good things are not ours and but imperfectly good. Vers. 41. Depart from mee] There's rejection. Yee cursed] There is malediction. Into fire] There is the vengeance of that element.Calvin. And everlasting fire] There is the continu∣ance of it, therefore they dreame that say the Devill shall be delivered at last. No na∣turall but metaphoricall fire, that is sharpe punishment, for the worme which Esay joynes with it, is metaphoricall, Esay 66.24. and the Prophet declareth it to be a me∣taphoricall speech, 30. and 33. verses, when he compares the Spirit of God, to a paire of bellowes, wherewith the fire is kindled, and addeth also brimstone. CHAP. XXVI. Verse 2. YE know that after two dayes is the feast of the passeover, and the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified] Gods will was that his Sonne should be offered on the day of the pas∣over, that the old figure might give place to the onely sacrifice of eternall re∣demption, and that all Israel might be witnesse to it. Act. 2.23. and 4.22. Vers. 11. The poore you have alwaies with you] The world abounds with such, in his libris non est qui mendican∣do victum quae∣rit, ut multis alijs in locis tum praecipuè 1 Cor. 8.9. Videre est: sed qui de suo vix habet unde vivat: egentem rectius quam pauperem verteris. Grotius. there∣fore you may alwayes do good to them, but I am to dye shortly, and you can never after performe any such office to mee.
Vers. 12. She did it for my buriall] By this Christ would declare that the precious ointment was accepted, not for the savour of it, but only in respect of buriall, and shew that his grave should yeeld forth a pleasant savour. Vers. 13. Wheresoever this Gospell shall be preached in the whole world, there shall also this that this woman hath done, be told for a memoriall of her] She shall enjoy the honour of it in all the Churches for ever, so long as the Gospell shall continue in the world, which will be as long as the world it self continues. By this Sentence the calling of the Gentiles is testified. Vers. 14. Iudas Iscariot] Iudas signifyeth a Confessor, Iscariot either of the village where he was born, or of the Tribe of Issachar; Iachar signifies wages or hire, noting un∣to us Iudas nature by his name. Vers. 15. Thirty peeces of silver] Zach. 11.12.3 pound, 15 shillings, as some Travels of the Patriarkes. p. 391. sup∣pose, the price of a servant. Vers. 21. And as they did eate, he said, verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me] That he might make the trayterousness of Iudas the more to be detested, he set∣teth forth the vilenesse of the same by this circumstance, that when he sate together with him at the Table, he devised treason. Vide Daven. Animad. p. 100. and Dr. Twiss. vind. l. 1. part. 2. Sect. 4. & Grot.Vers. 24. It had been good for that man if he had not been borne] That is, not been. A temporall miserable being at the worst is better than a not being, but an eternall mise∣rable being is worse than a not being, in a Theologicall notion, what ever it be, in Metaphysickes or Philosophy. Vers. 26. As they did eate] Word for word, they eating, which we must interpret out of the words of St Paul, 1 Cor. 11. that saith after supper, so Luke; the Sacrament suc∣ceeded the Passover. This is my body] A Sacramentall phrase, the sign for the thing signified, as Circum∣cision is called the Covenant, Gen. 17. And the Lambe the Passeover, Exod. 12. Bap∣tism the Laver of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5. Vers. 27. And he tooke the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, drinke ye all of it] Christ in this seemes to have reference to the custome of the Jews, for it is an ex∣presse Law among them,Buxtorf. in Lex. Talmud. that of foure Cups all that are present at the Passeover should drink, whether they be men or women, of perfect age or children, especially of the fourth and last Cup. Gomarus.Vers. 28. My bloud of the New Testament] That is, a Sacrament or Signe in remem∣brance of his bloud powred out. Bux. in Lex. Talmud.New] That is, excellent, as Psa. 33.3. Rev. 3.9.Pollio & ipse amat nova car∣mina.Vide Pisc. in loc.Laetitia im∣mortalis quae per vinum ad∣umbrata intel∣ligebatur. Grot.Vers. 29. I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of the vine, untill that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom] Christ seems to have taken occasion of this from the custome of the Jews, in which it was forbidden, the Cup being drank up, to taste any more wine that night. Christ therefore saith, that in this he will do nothing against their traditions, but so, that not only he will drinke no more wine that night, but all that time that he is to continue in the world. Expositors interpret that of drinking wine new in his Fathers kingdom two waies. Chrysostome, and some others, understand, by the kingdom of the Father, Christs Resur∣rection; and by the new wine, that corporall eating and drinking of Christ with his Apostles after his Resurrection. Luk 24.43. Acts 10.40, 41. 2. More probably, by the kingdom of the Father is meant the kingdom of glory after this life, and by the wine he would drink with them, that celestiall liquor of sweet joy and eternall comfort which the Saints partake therein with Christ. Vers. 30. When they had sung a hymme, &c.] A hymme is a verse sung for the praise of God. Their opinion doth not seeme to be vaine, who think that the Apostles at that time sung a great hymme,Drus. observat. Sac. l. 7. c. 15. Vide Cornel. à Lap. in loc. & Dilher. Elect. l. 2. c. 20. Buxt. in Lex. Talm. which consists of sixe Psalmes, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, and 118. The Hebrews certainly sing this song in the night of the Passeover after the Lamb is eaten. Paulus Burgensis thinks that the Apostles rehearsed this hymme, according to the custome of the Jews, after the Passeover, and that this place is to be understood of that, which is very probable, for since in other things it is manifest that Christ with his Apostles observed the rite of the Jews in eating the Passeover, it is not unlikely that he might follow them in this also. Grotius saith, learned men think that the hymmes were sung by Christ which were wont to be sung at the Passeover, as the 114, and those
that follow, but he seemes to be of another opinion.Sed sicut ad veterem grati∣arum actionem Christus novam addidit suo instituto congruentem, ita & de hymno fecisse, credibile est. Grotius. Vers. 31. All ye shall be offended because of me] See 11.6. To be offended here is to fall from the office of a Disciple and friend, and to think lesse worthy of their Master. Grotius. Vers. 34. Mark. 14.30. saith, before the Cock shall crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice.Graece signifi∣cantius , id est ab∣negabis. à Lap.] He being Peters Scholler sets down things more exactly, not sparing his Master. The Greeke word signifies utterly to deny. See 16.24. and Grotius on this place. Vers. 36. Gethsemane] Some interprete it the valley of fat things; Caninius saith, it had that name from the plenty of butter. Luke nameth only the mount of Olives.Gethsemani à torcularibus vini atque olei sic dicitur, cum enim in vicino monte Oliveti magna copia creverint oleae, atque in vicinia illa cultissimae fuerunt vineae, ideo in praedijs illis habebant torcularia, in qui∣bus uvas & oleas exprimebant. Geth. Vide Capell. Spicileg. de Dieu, & à Lap. Mark and Matthew do give a more speciall note of the place. Luke saith, He went thi∣ther as he was wont. Iohn saith, that the place was well known to him that should betray him. Christ of purpose offered himself to death. Sit you here] Yet he enjoynes them a Prayer in regard of the danger of entring into temptation, as it is in Luke, which two seeme inconsistent,The Greeke word  used here, and Mark. 14.32. signifies, not only to sit, but also to remaine and expect, as it is used Luke 2.49. Act. 18.11. The LXX. use it for Ia∣shab to dwell and remaine. Judges 9.41. and 11.16. Alardi pathologia N.T. for that gesture seemes not convenient for prayer. Answer. The word sit is taken Synecdochically for remaining in that place. Cartwright. Vers. 37. Took with him Peter, and the two sons of Zebedee] He did that for that pur∣pose, that having the same men witnesses of his afflicted condition which he had of his glory shewed in the Mount, they might the lesse be sollicited by his miserable con∣dition to a defection from him. Cartwright in Harm. Gerh. He chose three out of the number of eleven, those which he did most confide in, and to whom he was wont to communicate his greatest secrets, to be witnesse of his Agony, and the horrour of his death approaching. Brugensis. Vers. 38. My soule is exceeding sorrowfull] Every word is emphaticall, my soule, his sorrow pierced that, Psal. 68.1. and sorrowfull round about, even to death; ,Tristitia undi∣que obsessa non tristis tantum ut vertit lati∣nus interpres nimis molliter, sed undique tri∣stis ut rectè Be∣za vim expres∣sit compositi vo∣cabuli. Chamie∣rus.He desired not to shun death as satisfactory for sin, but as it destroyed life. that is, heavy round about, Luk. 22.46. As the soule was the first agent in transgression, so it is here the first patient in affliction. To death] That is, this sorrow will never be finished, or intermitted, but by death. Vers. 39. Father if it be possible let this cup pass] Quid illa vex nisi sonus infirmitatis nostrae? Aug. in Psal. 110. By the word Cup is noted the providence of God, who dis∣sposeth to all a measure of afflictions, even as a housholder measures out a part to eve∣ry Servant, and divideth the portions among the Children. He prayeth for freedome from the cup and houre, that is, the sense of those grievous torments that were upon his soule, but withall he resigned himself to his Fathers will, saying, Neverthelesse, not as I will, but as thou wilt] As if he should say, but let me suffer yet still even so much as thou seest fit for me to suffer. See Cameron. Vers. 40. Could ye not watch with me one houre] Christ in the heaviness of his heart sought comfort from the Prayers of his Disciples. Vers. 41. Watch and pray] Even while we are praying had we need to be watching, for even then Satan watches his time to tempt us.Ideo vigiliaris praecipuè memi∣nit, quod nox esset & tempus quiescendi. Cart. in Harm. Vers. 43. Heavy] Sorrow encreasing their heaviness, Luk. 22.45. Vers. 44. And prayed the third time, saying the same words] That he repeates againe and again the same Petition, it is an amplification of the greatness and hainousnesse of the punishment Christ endured for us. A threefold petition declares the most vehe∣ment desire either of obtaining or declining something. Compare this with 2 Cor. 12.7, 8. Cartw. Harm. Vers. 48. Whomsoever I shall kisse] The Hebrews not only when they tooke their leave, and after a long absence, as some think, but at other times in token of love did kisse one another, as we are taught, Luk. 7.44. Tertullian saith, the Christians received this Custome from the Jews. This is the kisse of love, and the holy kisse, of which
there is so often mention in Paul.Grotius. In primitiva ecclesia preces, potissimum o∣rationem Domi∣nicam, osculo Christiani clau∣debant. Dih. Elect. l. 2. c. 4. Vide plura ibid. Tertullian calls it Osculum pacis, which the orientall Churches now also use. Vers. 50. Wherefore art thou come] That is, with what mind dost thou come to kisse me, with that which Joab did Amasa? So Grotius interprets it out of Luke 22.48. Vers. And smote off his eare] The Greeke word is , in Latine auricula, a little eare, or the tip of the eare which is soft, whence the Proverb, Auricula mollior. Grotius would have this only to be cut off, but because the LXX use it simply for an eare, twice in the Kings, and the Syriack useth it so, it is better hold that Malchus his whole eare was cut off, saith Gerb. Vers. 52. Put up againe thy sword into his place, for all they that take the sword shall perish with the sword] That is, they who have no calling to take the sword, if they take it they shall dye by it;Quod Petro dictum est, con∣tinet quidem prohibitionem utendi gladio sed non in de∣fensionis causa, neque enim se opus habebat defendere, jam enim dixerat Christus de discipulis Sinite hos abire, &c. Joan. 18.8, 9. Neque Christum, nam defendi nolebat. Ver. 54. Vl∣ciscendi ergo animo Petrus ut erat fervidus, non defendendi ferebatur, adde quod arma sumebat in eos qui nomine publica∣rum potestatum adventabant. Grotius de jure Belli ac Pacis. l. 1. c. 3. the other which our Lord addes, those that take the sword shall pe∣rish with it, either is a Proverbe taken from the use of the common people, by which it is signified, that bloud is drawn out by bloud, and therefore that the use of armes is not without danger, or (which is the opinion of Origen, Theophylact, and Euthymius) there is no reason why we should snatch revenge from God, which he will sufficiently execute in his time, as Rev. 13.10. and in these words there also seemes to be a Prophe∣cie of the punishment which the sword of the Romanes would exact from the bloudy Jews. Grotius de jure Belli. This is wont to be commonly interpreted, as if this commination belonged to Pe∣ter. But this sentence hurts not those who defend the innocency of another from in∣jury, although perhaps they exceed measure in it, as Peter did here; for Peters fault was impatiency, not a desire of shedding bloud, to which these words properly aime. Therefore this seemes to be the sense, Do not O Peter, Provoked by a consideration of that injury which is offered me, prevent Gods revenge. Grot in loc. Vers. 57. And they that had laid hold on Iesus, led him away to Caiphas the high Priest, where the Scribes and Elders were assembled] There was not at that time in any other place, either a Temple of God, or a lawfull worship, or a face of a Church, but at Ierusalem; the high Priest was a figure of the only Mediatour between God and men, they which were present with him in Councell represented the whole Church of God, yet they all conspire together to extinguish the only hope of Salvation, but it was prophesied of before, Psal. 118.22. and Esa. 8.14. Calvin. Vers. 59. False witnesse] They are called false witnesses, not which bring forth a lye made of nothing, but which calumniate those things which are rightly spoken, and wrest them to a crime. Calvin. Vers. 63. But Jesus held his peace] When he was charged by false witnesses, not only because they were unworthy to be refuted, but because that he did not seeke to be de∣livered, knowing that the houre was come, yet Caiphas triumphed upon his silence, as if he had held his peace as one convicted, as they are wont who know themselves guilty. Whether thou be the Christ the Son of God] This was an insnaring question of the wic∣ked High-Priest; if he had denyed that he had been the Son of God, he would then have exclaimed, why therefore dost thou assume that to thy selfe which thou art not? If he had affirmed it, he would have charged him with blasphemy; if he had been si∣lent, being adjured, he should have seemed to have contemned God, and the authority of the High-Priest. Vox est assenti∣entis atque vel modestè re∣spondentis. BezaVers. 64. Thou hast said] Mark. 14.62. interprets it, that it is as much as if he had affirmed that he is the person of whom the question was made. Vers. 65. Rent his cloaths] The tearing of their garments did signifie that their hearts were torne in pieces with griefe. Vers. 67. They spit in his face and buffeted him.] The face of Christ defiled with blows,See Esa. 50.6. and spitting, restoreth that image in us which by sin was corrupt and blotted out.
Sedulius elegantly expresseth. —Non denique passim Vel colaphis pulsare caput, vel caedere palmis, Aut spuere in faciem plebs execranda quievit. And a little after: Namque per hos colaphos caput est sanabile nostrum, Sputa haec, per Dominum nostram lavere figuram,He alluded ad alapas servo∣rum manu∣mittendorum. Casaubone. His alapis nobis libertas maxima plausit. This was a frequent signe of contempt with the Hebrewes, Num. 5.14. That which Esay saith of himselfe, perhaps in a figurative kind of speech, that was fulfild in Christ literally. Vers. 70. But he denied before them all, saying, I know not what thou sayest] Ambrose saith, that as long as Peter stucke close to Christs side, he did set upon a whole squadron at once, but when he was gone from under his wing, a sillie maide did out-face him. est devove∣re, detestari, maledicere, di∣rissima & pes∣sima quaeque imprecari, praepositio  addita augere significationem videtur. Significatur igitur Petrus extremis diris seipsum devovisse, Dei maledictionem sibi ipsi imprecatus esse. Beza, Lucas Brugensis comment. in 401 Evangelia. Corpus & animam suam exitio devovet, sibi enim maledictionem Dei imprecatur, si Christum noverit, atque perinde hoc valet ac si dixisset, male peream si quid mihi commune est cum salute Dei. Calvinus comment. in Harmon. Evang. Vers. 74. Then began be to curse] The Greeke word  imports a cursing and damning of himselfe, an imprecation of Gods wrath, and of separation from the presence & glory of God, if he knew the man. Some say he cursed Christ, as 1 Cor. 12.3. I know not the man] It appeares (saith Grotius) that it was a great amazement which brought Peter to so incredible a lie. For there was scarce any Jew which knew not Christ by sight, being famous for so many miracles. Neither could Peter alleage any cause why he came thither, if he had not known him. Vers. 75. He went out and wept bitterly] Clement notes, that Peter so repented,Cornel à Lap. that all his life after, every night when he heard the Cock-crow, he would fall upon his knees and weepe bitterly, and beg pardon of this sinne. CHAP. XXVII. Verse 3. THen Iudas which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself, &c.] When he saw the proceedings and issue of this businesse,Dr. Hals Para∣phrase of all the hard Texts of Scripture. Vide Iansen. concord. Evang.Omnes tres paenitentiae par∣tes attigit. Ian∣senins. viz. that Jesus was condemned to die, whereas upon the sight and knowledge of the continall mira∣cles of Christ, he perhaps supposed that (notwithstanding this wicked transacting of his) his Master would easily free himselfe from their hands, he was stricken with a late remorse. In Iudas may be found the Papists whole definition of repentance, for here is to be seen both contrition of heart, confession of mouth, and satisfaction of worke, as they speake. Thirty pieces of silver] By the Law of God slaves were esteemed at the rate of thirty Shekells, Exod. 21.32. See Iosephus. l. 4. c. 8. Vers. 5. Hanged himselfe] Vide de Dieu, Heinsium, Grotium, & Pricaeum, in loc. Some say it is passive, and should be translated, hee was strangled or stifled, but whether by the halter or with some suddaine desease, is not determined, and Luke. 1.18. saith nothing of it. Vers. 9. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Ieremiah the Prophet] It is hard to admit the corruption of the originall text by the negligence of the transcribers mistak∣ing the contracted word,  for , as some would have it;See my Trea∣tise of Divinity, Booke 1. ch. 6. Clarum est Testimonium hoc in Ieremia nusquam extare. Quin Interpretes, quos secutus sum, ex Zacharia illud depromunt, utrum igitur memoria fefellit, cum haec scri∣beret, evangelistam? Quidam ita censent, quod neque confirmare argumentis neque refellere animo est. Sed erit fortasse, qui culpam eom in librarios conferet. Quod mihi non improbatur, ut quemadmodum Theodorus notat, error sit ex compendio scribendi  & . Scire autem licet legi apud interpretem. Matthaei, Syrum simpliciter, quod dictum est per prophe∣tam. Drus. in Paralel. Sac. Vide Grotium in loc. & Brugens. notat. in Biblia. and it is harder with Origene and Ierome, to admit any apocrypha parts of the Prophet Ieremie; and hardest
of all with Augustine to grant a mnemonicke errour, a slip of memory, in the holy E∣vangelist. The Syriacke names not the Prophet; it was the custome for one man to have two names,Mr. Bayly on Zeph. 3.1. Ieremie and Zacharie, which differ not much in signification, one signifieth the commemoration, the other the exaltation of God; a learned man that saw a Copy written 600. yeares agoe, saith there was neither Ieremie nor Zacharie, but the Pro∣phet. Maldonate and Iansenius incline to this exposition. Zacharie hath the name Ieremie, abridging all his worke. Broughton. Vide Grotium.And they tooke the thirty pieces of silver] Of what value each piece was, is uncertaine, but the Jewes have given a rule, that when a piece of silver is named in the Pentateuch, it signifies a sicle; if it be named in the Prophets, it signifies a pound; if in the other writings of the Old Testament,Dr. Taylor of the life and death of Christ, who quotes Elias Levita in Tisbi, & A∣rias Montanus in diction. Sy∣ro-Chaldaic. it signifies a talent; this therefore being alledged out of the Prophet Ieremy, by one of the Evangelists, it is probable, the price at which Iu∣das sold his Lord, was thirty pound weight of silver. Vers. 14. He answered him to never a word] 1. Innocency needed no apologie. 2. Shewes he contemned death. 3. To teach us quietnesse. Vers. 16. Barrabas] Is a Syriacke word, and signifieth the sonne of a Father, Bar signifies a son, and Abbas a Father, as 16, 17. Bar-Iona the son of Iona, or a dove. Piscat. Vers. 19. His wife sent unto him, saying, have thou nothing to do with that just man: for I have suffered many things this day in a dreame because of him] See 1. Gods power to give testimony of his childrens innocency. 2. He oft keepes his testimony till the last mo∣ment. 3. A message is delivered against many objections. 4. Christ converts his wife, while he condemnes him. 5. Feare of wrath. 6. Vse of dreames. 7. Wives suffer for ill husbands. 8. It is a dreame in the day, it is unwholesome to sleep then. Vers. 23. But they cryed out the more, saying, let him be Crucem Christo optant, quia id ignomi∣niosissimumerat supplicium. Apuleius ex∣treman poenam dixit. Grotius. crucified] Such are the clamours of the peolpe in Tertullian, Christianos ad leonem, Christianos ad bestias, so the Jews cry out in the Act. 21.36. and 22.22. Away with him, A way with such a fellow from the earth. The like is that in Suetonius, Tiberium in Tiberim, and in Ammianus, Arde at Valens. Vers. 24. He tooke water and washed his hands] Pilate conversing with the Jews, imi∣tated their custome in this.Hujus confue∣tudinis apud Graecos vel Romanos nullum reperio vestigium: Itaque puto Pilatum inter Iudaeos versantem eorum instituta & consuetu∣dinem in hac parte esse imitatum. Nam quod afferunt docti viri ex Sophoclis interprete, id huic loco non convenit. Illi enim lavabant manus, ut scelus à se patratum quoquo modo expiarent: Pilatus ut innocentiam suam testatam faceret. Casaubonus in notis.Videtur mutuatus exemplum ex similibus ritibus Iudaeorum qui Deut. 21.6. jubentur, lotione manuum declarare, se expertes caedis: quanquam est quid naturale propemodum, nec musitatum Romanis, ablutione manuum, animi puritatem inno∣centiam que significare. Iudaico usus est more, inquit Origenes, volens eos de Christi innocentiâ, non solum verbis, sed eti∣am ipso facto placare. Lucas Brugensis comment in 4 or Euangelia. Credo id fecisse Pilatum potius Hebraico quam Roma∣no ritu. Sanctius in Act. 18.8. Vide plura ibid. There were three sorts of washing of hands in use among the Jews, saith Godwin in his Jewish Antiquityes. 1. Pharisaicall and superstitious, this was reproved. 2. Ordinary for outward decencie, this was allowed. 3. In taken of innocency, this was commanded the elder of the neighbour Cityes in case of murder. Deut. 21.6. Psal. 26.6. Officers should have clean hands; outward washing serves not, he had need to rub hard to get of guilt with so weake a meanes. It was not used (say some) among the Grecians and Romanes. Pilate (saith Casaubone Exercitat. 16. ad Annal. Eccles. Baron. Vide Grotium. against Baronius) did it not in imitation of the Jews, sed mos veterum fuit mentem suam significare non solum verbis sed etiam factis, ut Act. 12.2. Vers. 25. His bloud be on us, and our children] That is, the punishment of his bloud, his death. Iosh. 2.19. Vers. 26. And when he had scourged Iesus, he delivered him to be crucified] This shewes Pilates desire to content the people, and he also feared Caesar, Iohn 19.13. Vide Grotium in loc. & de Dieu in Joh. 19.2. Vestis haec erat diba∣pha, id est his tincta, scilicet semel purpura, id est, murice, & iterum cocco infecta. Cornel. à Lap.Vers. 28. Put on him a scarlet roabe] Marke 15.20. and Iohn. 19.2. have purple, which yet are distinct colours, but both of them belonging to Kings, Rev. 19.4. The Evangelists by reason of the affinitie, and almost promiscuous use of those colours, speake more commonly and grossely of them.
Vers. 29. And when they had platted a crown of thornes, they put it upon his head] They would not onely mock him, with the putting of such a Crowne on him,Atrox fuit haec Christi igno∣minia, quâ ipse quasi regi ficto coronâ spineâ illudunt, aequè ac ingens cruciatus, tum quia spinae erant acutissimae, tum quia infixae capiti & cerebro in quo est omnium nervorum, muscu∣lorum, sensuum, ac sensationum fons & origo. Cornel. à Lap.Ver. 31. Fecerunt id hoc fine, ut dolorem Christo augerent, quia Chlamys illa Coccinea vibicibus ex flagellatio∣ne relictis fortiter erat impacta, proinde non sine exquisitissimo doloris sensu detrahi potuit. Gerh. but by the same also shew their cruelty, fastning the thornes into his head; as also the purple roabe put upon him when he was all bloudy with stripes did not a little paine him. This part of our Lords passion was prefigured by the type of the Ramme. Gen. 32.13. Vers. 32. They found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name: him they compelled to beare his Crosse] 1. There was a type of this, Gen. 22.6. 2. Christ beares the curses of the law. 3. God will provide help. 4. There is a spirituall consociation between Christ and his members. 5. A stranger not a Jew, the Gentiles have part in Christ. 6. We are strangers to Christ till we suffer with him. Simon] signifieth obedient, he that is obedient carrieth the Crosse of Christ.It was a usuall custome among the Romans, whence they were called, Furciferi, Gallowes-bearers. Malefici cum ad supplicium educuntur, quisque effert suam crucem. Plutarch. The∣ophylact. Vers. 33. Golgotha, that is to say, a place of a scull] They brought Christ to Golgotha, a place of the dead, because (say some) he was numbred among the dead; rather because those who were dead afore had benefit by him. Golgotha, a Syriack word, signifieth the place of a Head corrupted, from the Hebrew Gulgoleth, a skull. Epiphanius and Origen say,Cranij locus sic dictus à Crani∣is hominum de quibus sumptum esset supplici∣um, ibi jacenti∣bus, non à capite primi hominis ibi condito, ut veteribus quibusdam placuit. Schind. in Lex. Penrag. Vide Cheitomaeum de Graeco-Barb. N.T. & Grotium in loc. Christ suffered in the place where Adam was buried, and that this place was so called from his skull; but this is false, for Adam (as we read in Joshuah) was buried neere Hebron. It was so called, because it was a place full of skulls of dead men that had been executed there. Vers. 34. They gave him wine mingled with gall] This Marke setteth down to have been myrrhe, Mar. 15.23. Myrrh in Hebrew and Syriack hath its name from extreme bitter∣nesse. The Jews were accustomed to give to those who were punished by death, a Cup of wine, with which there was mixt myrrh, or some other drug of that kind,Mede in Apoc. 148. Vide Grot. in loc. that they might bring them into a senslesse stupidity, but Christ refused to drinke it. Hence it commeth to passe, as it seemeth, that the Prophets in setting forth destructions, so often use the Parable of the Cup: as which was wont to be offered to them that were to dye, according to the Custome of the Nation. Vers. 35. They crucified him] With his armes open, with one hand calling the Jews, with the other the Gentiles. Aretius. As the extension of the first hand brought death, so the extension of the second hand brought life. Jerome. His Garments were taken from him, that we might put him on in Baptisme. Gal. 3.27. He was called King of the Jewes, even by a Heathen Judge, to reprove the infideli∣ty of the Jews; he was counted among sinners, that we might be reckoned among the Sons of God; his confidence to his Father is blamed, that ours might be praised; he wrestled with the temptation of desertion, that God may never forsake us; and that no man might doubt of his death, and that he might sanctifie our graves, he was ho∣nourably buried. Grynaeus. See Grotius. Vers 39. And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads] All sorts of Persons reproach him: 1. Those which passed by, that is, the promiscuous multitude, consi∣sting of men and women, Jews and Gentiles. 2. The chiefe Priests,Gerh. in Harm. Evang. the Scribes and Pharisees, ver. 41. 3. The Souldiers. 4. The Thieves, ver. 44. They accuse him for a Lyer, Ah thou that dectroyest the Temple] They would convince him of falshood in foretel∣ling the destroying of the Temple, when Christ spoke of his body. 2. They object the Crosse, If thou be the Son of God come down from the Crosse] As if they should say, if he were the Son of God he would not hang on the Crosse. 3. They carpe at his mira∣cles, descend from the Crosse that we may beleeve, as if they should say, now were a time for thee to exercise thy miraculous power in descending from the Crosse. 4. They
carpe at his benefits bestowed on others, He saved others and cannot save himself] They ca∣lumniously accuse him, as if his healing the sick, freeing of those which were possessed with Devills, and raising the dead, had been but counterfeit and meere delusions. 5. They except at his Doctrine and his profession, that he is not the Christ the chosen of God, nor the King of Israel, but that he arrogated all these things falsely to himself; they oppose his confidence in God, he trusted in God, let him deliver him if he will] As if they should say, he is forsaken of God; these are the bitings of the Serpent foretold, Gen. 3.15. Si placet ei. Be∣za. Si placuit sibi in eo. Syrus interples. Arabs. Si diligit eum.Vers. 43. If he will have him] The vulgar Latine, si vult, rather, if he take delight in him. These words are taken from the Lxx Interpreters, Psal. 22.9. Vers. 44. The theeves which were also crucified with him] Matthew and Mark by a Sy∣necdoche attribute that to theeves which was Calv. August. proper only to one of them, as appeares by Luke 23.39. So in Hebrews 11. They shut the mouths of Lyons, and were sawed asunder, when as the one belongs to Daniel, the other to Esay alone. Hillary, Origen, Chrysostome, say, that they did both first reproach him, but afterwards one was converted. Cornel. à Lap.45. From the sixth houre] That is, from high noon. Vnto the ninth houre] That is, till three in the afternoone. Aut Deus na∣turae patitur, aut mū limachi∣na dissolvetur. Denis the Are∣opagite. See Be∣za on Mar. 15. The darkness and Eclipse were not naturall, for at the Jewes Passeover the Moon was in the full. Ver. 46. Eli, Eli, lammasabachthani] gnazabhtani, so it is Psa. 22.2. But Christ used the Sy∣riack idiome, say Caninius, & others. Our Lord spake all in Broughtons E∣pistle to the Nobility of England. Syriack save the Revelation. Grotius saith, it may be collected hence and else where that Christ neither used the old speech of the Hebrews, nor the Syriack, but a mixt dialect which then flourished in Iudaea. My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me] Therefore truth and faith may be without feeling. Forsaken] 1. By denying of protection. 2. By withdrawing of solace. Non sol∣vit unionem, sed subtraxit visionem. Leo. The union was not dissolved, but the beames, the influence was restrained. Christ spoke partly in the Syrian Language. There is between Christ and God, 1. An eternall union naturall of the Person.My God] These are the words not of justify∣ing faith, wher∣of he stood not in need, but he had such a faith or hope where∣by he did put his confidence in God. 2. Of the Godhead and Manhood. 3. Of grace and protection; in this last sense he meanes, forsaken, according to his feeling, hence he said not, my Father, but my God. They are not words of complaining, but expressing his griefe. Athanasius de incarnatione Christi saith, He spake this in our person; Non enim ipse adeo desertus fuit sed nos, vox corporis sui, hoc est, Ecclesiae. Aug. Epist. 120. It shews that 1. God left him in great distresse. 2. That he withdrew from the humane nature. 3. That God powred his wrath upon him as our surety. 4. He suffered in soule. 5. Will comfort us in distresse. 6. God forsakes the wicked. 7. Feare and hope are in his words. Vers. 50. Jesus, when he had cryed again with a loud voice, gave up the Ghost] He yeelded up, or gave up the Ghost, therefore he could have kept it; that shewes he died Esay 53.12. Joh. 10.18. Palam ostendit, se mori, non vi∣olenter, quasi nequiret se ipse diutiùs in vita servare, sed propria voluntate: Nam qui moribundus valuit clamorem edere ingentem, valuit & à morte se servare. Impossibile est enim ut à clamore valido statim quis moriatur, siquidem morte lenta interficiatur: nam qui subitò confodiatur gladio, nihil mirum clamare simul & mori. Lucas Brugensis. Vide Grot. freely, and so do the other words; to be able to cry with a loud voice was a sign of strength, not of one dying. Vers. 51. The veile of the Temple was rent in twaine] Thomas thinketh the outward veile which divided the Court from the Sanctuary; rather the inward,Beza, Ribera, Tostatus in Ex∣od. Gerh. Cornel. à Lap. Lucas Burgen. comment in 4 or Evang. Vide Grot. which was put before the Holy of holiest; Christ opened the way to the Holiest, Heb. 8.9. The veile rent, 1. That there might be an entrance made into heaven by his death. 2. To shew that the ceremoniall Law was abrogated by his death. 3. To shew that he had cancelled the veile of our sins. 4. To shew that the veile of ignorance was taken away in the Law. 2 Cor. 3.13. Vers. 52. And the graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints which slept, arose] The whole earth was shaken, it was an universall earthquake, as the Eclipse. à Lapide. The Earth was troubled with a palsie,See Luk. 23.45. and with its violent shaking awakened the Saints out of their dead sleep. This earthquake was a sign of Gods wrath for mans sins. Psal. 18.8. Ioel 3.16.See Mat. 4.5. and Dan. 9.6. Siclorum in scriptio erat Ierusalem sancta. Grotius. Vers. 53. Went into the holy City] A periphrasis of Jerusalem, so called chiefly in re∣spect of Gods sanctification, and dedication of it from the begining unto himself, and because it was the seat of the divine worship. Esay 48.2. Nehem. 11.1.
CHAP. XXVIII. Verse 1. IN the end of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn towards the first day of the day of the weeke, &c.See Weemes his Christian Sy∣nagogue, p. 70. Sine teste e∣gressus est è se∣pulchro ut locus vacuus primum indicium foret: deinde mulie∣ribus per Ange∣los nuntiari vo∣luit se vivere: paulo post illis apparuit, ac tandem Aposto∣lis, idque saepius. Calvin.] Christ rose earely, to shew unto us, 1. The power of his Godhead. 2. The impotency of his enemies who could no more stay him than they could the Sun from rising. 3. The benefit which Beleevers obtaine by his rising againe. Luk. 1.78, 79. Mary Magdalene] John names her as the Captaine of the Company, and she was at the principall charge saith Grotius. Shee seemes to be more noble than the rest, because her name is wont to be set before others, 27. Chap. 56. and 61. verses, here, and Mark. 15.40. and 16.1. Luk. 8.2, 3. and 24.30. Vers. 2. And behold there was a great earthquake, &c.] The Lord by many signs shews the presence of his glory, that he might the better frame the mind of the holy women to reverence. Rolled back the stone] That Christ might come forth; therefore the body of Christ went not through the grave stone, as Papists say. Perkins. In Matthew and Marke there is mention made of one Angell only, when Iohn 20.13. and Luke speake of two, but this shew of repugnance is easily taken away, because we know how frequent Synecdoches every where occurre in Scripture. Therefore two Angells were first seene to Mary, then to her other Companions; but because the other who spake especially turned their minds to him, it was sufficient to Matthew and Marke to relate his Embassage. See Grotius. Vers. 3. His rayment white as snow] See Act. 1.10. The greatest whitenesse is com∣pared to Snow, as with the Greekes and Latines, so also with the Hebrews. Numb. 12.10. Lam. 4.7. Whitenesse is a sign of purity and holinesse. Dan. 7.9. Rev. 3.4, 5, 18. and 4.4. and 6.11. and 7.9, 13. Vers. 6. He is not here, for he is risen] In Matthew it is, Dominus non est hic, surrexit, The Lord is not here, he is risen: In Marke it is, Dominus surrexit, non est hic, The Lord is risen, he is not here. Matthew proves the Cause by the Effect, Mark the Effect by the Cause. Vers. 19. Go therefore and teach all nations] (make them disciples) baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost] As if he had said,Promiscuè u∣tūtur interpre∣tes scripturae, imò etiam ipsa scriptura, his vocabulis, in nomine, vel in nomen, vel su∣pra nomen. In Graeco textu verba instituti∣onis habent, , hoc est, in nomen, Interpretes ta∣men, paucis ex∣ceptis, reddunt nihilominus in nomine; Quem∣admodum Acto∣rum etiam 10. v. 48. ha∣betur, Petrum jussisse baptiza∣re Cornelium cum alijs, in nomine Domi∣ni; est autem baptizare in nomen, vel in nomine, vel super nomine Patris, & Filij, & Spiritus Sancti, primò baptizare veri & unius Dei authori∣tate, jussu & mandato, hujusque personam in baptizando sustinere. Vt si officiarius aliquis, vel legatus dicit, se in Domini sui nomine haec aut illa proponere, vel facere, hoc est, ex mandato. Praeterea significat baptizatum consecrare & obligare ad agnitionem, fidem, invocationem & cultum hujus veri Dei qui est Pater Filius & Spiritus sanctus. Zepperus. Vide Grot. first teach before you do administer the Sacrament unto them. These words were spoken to the Apostles only, and not to the Catholicke Church; now their teaching was infallible. 2. The Pastours of the Church in all ages have Commission to teach likewise, but that proves not all their teaching to be alway in∣fallible. He shews that as long as there are nations, Baptisme should be administred. Vers. 20. I am with you always, even unto the end of the world] This was a personall promise made only to the Apostles, and so cannot be extended to all the Church ac∣cording to their immediate sence. 2. To whomsoever it belongeth, the meaning is, that howsoever his bodily presence ceased, yet his providence should never faile to pre∣serve and comfort them in all their troubles, and help them in all their actions, and by degrees so enlighten them also, that they should not perish in their ignorance, but be led forward to more perfection. Jansen. 3. If it priviledge the whole Church from er∣rour, because it is made to it, then consequently the particular Churches, Pastors, and Beleevers therein, because it is made to them likewise, but experience sheweth these lat∣ter may erre. 4. the Papists say, the Pope may erre, which could not be if these words of Christ meant the Church of Rome. The Disciples lived not till the end of the world, therefore I am with you, and your Successors, the lawfull Ministers of the Gospell, for ever. Chrysostome bids us take notice that Christ mentioneth the end of the world, that he may therein hearten his Disciples in bearing of the Cross, since it must have an end, and preserve them from being besotted with any worldly hopes, seeing they are transitory, and must have an end.
ANNOTATIONS UPON S. MARKE. CHAP. I. ALthough Marke (as Ierome saith) made an Epitome of the Gospell written by Matthew, yet in the manner of handling he is unlike, and followes a∣nother order, partly by relating Histories more largely, and partly by in∣serting of new things. He was the Disciple Gerhard. Brugensis. Scripsit Evan∣gelum Mar∣cus, sed brevis simè: scripsit Lucas, sed luculentius. Vterque sui magistri vestigia pressit, expressit morem. Lucas Paulum est imitatus, Marcus Petrum: brevis iste & succinctus, profusior ille uberiorque. Novarinus in Evangelia.Graecè scripsit Marcus, quanquam in gratiam praecipuè Romanorum, sicut & Paulus ad Romanos epistolam Graeca scrip∣sit lingua, quia Judaei qui Romae agebant plerique Latini sermonis ignari longa per Asiam & Graeciam habitatione Graecam linguam did cerant: & Romanorum vix quisquam erat non Graecè intelligens. Grotius. of Peter. 1 Pet. 5.13. Every Evangelist hath his proper exordium, Matthew and Iohn begin with Christ, Matthew with his humane generation, Iohn with the divine generation, Marke and Luke begin with Iohn, Luke with Iohns nativity, Marke with his preaching. Vers. 2. As it is written] A testimonie is an inartificiall argument, and weake among men, because man is a lyer; yet when it is Gods testimony, it is farre above all demon∣strations. In the Prophets] Grotius reades it, in Esay the Prophet, and wonders that the truth of that reading should be questioned, seeing besides the authority of Copies, and Irenaeus so citing it, there is a manifest agreement of the old Interpreters, the Syriacke, Latine, and Arabic, because the testimonies of two Prophets follow, Malachie and Esay. See Mr. Lightfootes Harmonie.In libris pro∣phetarum, Plurali numero utitur vel per Synecdochen integri, vel quia recitat dicta duo ex prophetis diversis Malachia scilicet & Iesaia. Piscat. Non hic significatur in uno aliquo Propheta, ut saepè alias; sed in ea parte veteris instru∣menti quae Nebjim vocatur, hoc est Prophetae. Nam sacra Scripta dividunt Ebraei in Legem, Prophetas, & Hagiographa. Prophetas rursus partiuntur in priores & posteriores. Hos deinde tribuunt in majores & minores. In Prophetis ergo, id est, in ea parte quam dixi. Adigit nos ad hanc interpretationem rei veritas. Nam Testimonium quod sequitur, ex duobus com∣positum est, & quidem ex diversis Prophetis. Siquidem prior illa pars, ecce ego mitto nuncium meum, &c. Ex Mala∣chia descripta est, posterior verò, viz. vox clamantis in deserto, &c. Sumpta est ex Esaia. Drusius in Paralel. Sac.Per Synecdochen pars tota Scripturae ponitur pro uno libro istius partis, ut Marc. 1.2. Ioh. 6.45. Id est in ea parte Scrip∣turae quae Prophetas continet, in volumine Prophetico. Non enim in omnibus prophetis id erat scriptum, quod citabatur, sed in uno tantum, prius quidem, Mal. 3.1. alterum, Iesa 54.13. Buxtorfij Tiberias. c. 11. Vide de Dieu, Iansen. Bezam, & Brugens. notat. in Biblia. Vers. 3. The voyce of one crying] Voyce is not so much to shew that God doth all, as to shew the vehemency of Iohn. Vers. 4. Preach the baptisme of repentance] That is, adjoyned the word to the water, or which was used to testifie and professe repentance. Vers. 5. There went out unto him] Iohn did not go over the Cityes and Townes, as he preached, as Christ and his Apostles did, but men went out of Cityes and Townes to him in the wildernesse.Schind. lex. Pent. Verbum  seu  ita universè de quolibet indumento dicitur, ut etiam de armis signatè apud bonos authores dicatur, quae quis in aci∣em descendens induere solet. Quae notio aptè hic cadit; nam vili hoc & duro vestitu Ioannes utebatur, tanquam bellicis armaturis, quibus in campum descenderat. Novarinus in loc. Vers. 6. Cloathed with camels haire] 3 Matth. This they call Chamlot in the Spanish, in Latine, vestis undulata, because it is painted in the liknesse of waves.
Vers. 9. Was baptised of Iohn in Jordan] Our Lord was baptized,Quod in Iorda¦nis fluvìo bap∣tizari Christus voluerit, ma∣jus humilita∣tis indicium est, nam Iorda∣nes eum quondam, rerum omnium conditorem agnoverat, dum ejus jussu aquae sisterentur. Novarinus. not that He might be cleansed by the water, but intending thereby to cleanse and sanctifie the water. Ambrose. Our Saviour vouchsafed to be baptized to draw all men to Christian baptisme. Austen. Christ received baptisme from Iohn to ratifie and give authority to his baptisme. Ierome. That the faithfull might be more assured, that they are engraffed into Christ, and are buried together with him in baptisme. Calvin. Vers. 10. He saw the heavens opened] That word is used of three things rent Matth. 9.16.Cloven, or rent, Luke 5.36. Iohn 19.24. of a garment rent,Chemnit. and of the vaile of the Temple which was rent into two parts, Mark. 15.38. and here of the Heavens. Vers. 14. The Gospell of the kingdom of God] That is, whereby men attaine both the parts of Gods kingdome: both that of grace here in this life, and that of glory in the world to come. Vers. 24. Iesus of Nazareth] They cunningly call him so, to nourish the errour of the multitude, that thought he was borne there, and so not the Christ. Iohn 7.42. The holy one of God] Greeke, that holy one,  Ille sanctus, sclicet per eminentiam à Lap. Exod. 38.36. Rainold. de lib. Apoc. Be∣za in loc. by an excellency, In which words hee seemes to allude to that name which was written on the mitre of the High Priest, Holinesse to the Lord, in which the chiefest mysterie of religion and faith is contained. Vers. 25. And Iesus rebuked him] Matth. 8.26. Vseth this word,Daemones com∣pescit, licet vera dicentes, ne testes natura mendaces ap∣probaret. Nova∣rinus. when Jesus com∣manded the winds and the Sea. Christ hath absolute authority over Devils, not onely as God, but as Mediator: which is for our comfort; for as Mediator he came to dissolve the workes of the Devill. Hold thy peace] Or be musled, as 1 Tim. 5.18. Come out of him] Christ needes nothing to overcome the Devill, but onely his bare word, Matth. 4. Vers. 26. Had torne him] Luke useth a milder word,He threw him in the midst] This shewes his rage and fury. He tare him] That is, there were such grievous convulsions in his body, as if one limme had been pulled from another. yet they very well agree in the sense, because both would teach, that the going out of the Devill was violent, for hee so cast down the miserable man, as if he would teare him in pieces, yet Luke saith the labour was in vaine: not that that violence was altogether without hurt, or at least with∣out any sense of griefe, but because the man being whole, was after freed from the Devill. Vers. 27. With authority commandeth he even the uncleane spirits, and they do obey him] The Jewish exorcists were wont by invocation of the name of God to drive away the De∣vills. But no man before this time did that pro imperio as Christ here, see the 9. chap. vers. 25. Vers. 32. When the sun did set] Greek,Vide Bezam.  Graecis recte dicitur quicquid visi∣bus se subtra∣hit. Lxx. in Io∣el. 2.10. Grotius when the sun dipped, because it seemes to the people to dippe in the Sea when it sets. Vers. 34. And suffered not the Devils to speake, because they knew him] There may be a twofold reason why he would not suffer them, one generall, because the time of his full discovery was not yet come. 2. Another speciall, because he refused those publishers and witnesses of his Divinity, who by their praising of him would cast an aspersion upon him, he was rather to manifest that there was a hostile enmity, which the authour of eternall salvation, and life, had with the Prince of death and his Ministers. Calvin. CHAP. II. Verse 4. BEd] The word signifies the worst kind of bed, whereupon men use to lay downe themselves at noonetide and such other times to refresh themselves, we call it a couch. Vers. 26. In the dayes of Abiathar the high Priest] He that is here named Abiathar in Samuell is called Abimelech. It is not a fault of the pen men,Drus. in Para∣lel. Sac. Achimeleco nomen fuisse Abiathari, & Abiathari ejus filio vicissim nomen Achimelecho, nondum video probatum. Grotius. Vide plura. ibid. & Bezam one name being put for a∣nother; some say Abimelech had two names, (so Iansenius.) and this is he which also
2 Sam. 8.17. is called Abiathar, whose son was Ahimelech, who is called Abiathar, 1 Sam. 22.20. but this conjecture is not certaine; others affirme that Abiathar execu∣ted the Priests office together with his father Ahimelech, it may be so, but there wants testimony to prove it, so Drusius. Grotius saith the most probable reason why Marke saith, that was done here under Abiathar the High Priest, which was done under A∣himelech, is this, viz. Abiathars name was the more known for the bringing the Ephod to David, and for executing the office of the High Priest long under David. He was High Priest when this was done, viz. his fathers deputy to whom he succeeded in the office of the High Priest, as Deputyes were wont, and was present at the thing here related, and both approved of his Fathers and Davids fact. So Luke in designing of time added Annas to Caiphas the High Priest, as one more famous. Vers. 27. The Sabbath was made for man and not man for the Sabbath] Onely Marke hath this argument, it is taken from the foundation of the institution of the Sabbath, for man was made before the institution of the Sabbath; therefore man was not made for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath for man; that is, it was instituted for the use and profit of man; but two wayes it was instituted for man, 1. For his body, Deut. 5.14.21. 2. For the spirituall edification of his soule,Chemnit in Harm. Evang. Exod. 31.13. Ezek. 20.1. Gen. 2.2. the sence therefore is, the externall observation of it is not to be required, neither with the hurt nor destruction of man. CHAP. III. Simili sensu ait August. si famentem non pavisti occidis∣ti, quia permisisti eum fame emori. à Lapide. Chemnit. Docet exem∣plo suo Chrìstus ita irascen∣dum peccatis, ut simul peccan∣tium nos mise∣reat. Grotius.Vers. 4. IS it lawfull to do good on the Sabbath dayes, or to do evil] In the necessitie of my neighbour there is no middle to be held between doing good and doing evill: not to doe good when an occasion being offered thou maist, and necessity requiring thou oughtst, is the same as to do evill, and therefore Christ onely makes a division of two members; to do good or to do evill, for the omission of doing good is referred to evill deedes, es∣pecially where there is danger in omission. Chemnit. Vers. 5. Being grieved for the hardnesse of their hearts] It is an excellent description which onely Marke hath in this place, the anger of Christ was mixed with his com∣miseration for the hardnesse of their hearts; , the praeposition  shewes, that it is to be referred to his looking about with anger, with which his griefe was mingled; Christ was sad that men exercised in the law of God were so grossely blinded, but because malice blinded them, he was also angry as well as sorrowfull. Calvin. Vers. 26. And the Pharisees went forth, and straight way tooke counsell with the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him] By which the preposterous religion of Hypocrites is declared; for those that were so greatly angry that Christ healed on the Sabbath day, and with his word onely, and a miserable man: they themselves presently in the same Sabbath, are not afraid to take bloudy counsels against an innocent person, and doing well, and that with the enemies of the people of God. The Herodians Dr. Taylor of the Life and Death of Christ. 3d. Parr. Peculiaris quaedam inter Iudaeos fuit secta Herodianorum, qui nihil admodum à Iudaeis differrent, maximè quidem à Pharisaeis, quibus aliquoties in sacra Evangelistarum historia conjunguntur: nisi quod Herodem magnum pro Christo co∣lerent. Dilh. Electa. l. 1. c. 14. were a sect of people who said Herod was the Messias, because by the decree of the Romane Senate, when the Scepter departed from Judah, he was de∣clared King. Vers. 10. and 11. The Evangelists comprehend under two generall heads, the Mi∣racles which Christ there shewed, viz. healing of the weake, and casting out the De∣vils. And that therefore, because in these two things consists the office of Christ. 1. Hee bruiseth the Serpents head. 2. Hee frees men from the power of the Devill. Marke notes that peculiar thing in this place, that when Christ had healed ma∣ny by his word and by touching them, the rest of the company tooke so great confi∣dence from thence, that they did not doubt of being healed, although he neither
spake to them nor touched them, so they might touch Christ. Chemnit. Vers. 10. As many as had plagues] Marke calls diseases here plagues or stroakes, that Hee might shew that diseases are divine punishments of sinne, and sent by God. 2. That hee might signifie greater and more cruell diseases. Psal. 89.33. Chemnit. Vers. 13. And he goeth up into a Mountaine] As he was wont, as oft as he purposed to pray to his Father more earnestly. So he gave an example to his, that they should alwayes begin imposition of hands with prayers, which the Apostles followed, Act. 1.24. and 14.23. Vers 16. Foure names of the Apostles are Greek, Peter, Andrew, Philip and Bartholo∣mew, Cephas is a Chaldee word, the rest are Hebrew, Simon] Hearing, obeying. Iacobus] Supplanting. Iohn] Gracious. Iudas] Confessing, celebrating. Matthew] Given,Chemnit. Vide Canin. loc. Novi Testam. who was therefore called Levi, quasi adhaerens Domino, as it were adhearing to the Lord. Thaddaeus] As it were pappie, quasi mammosus, a pap in Syriacke is called Thad. Leb∣baeus] Corculum, a little heart, à corde derivatum. Drusius. Vers. 17. He named them Boanerges, which is, the sonnes of thunder] This name Boanerges] In Syriack, benaì regeschi, that is sonnes of a noise▪ because they were with a loud voyce to preach the Gospell. Pa∣sor. Tonare eos dicimus, qui orationis & eloquentiae vi maximè pollent: igitur vim sermonis duorum fratrum ut efferret Christus, eos tonitrui filios appellavit. Novarinus. Vide de Dieu, à Lapide. & Cheitonaeum de Graeco-barb. N. T. saith Ierome was given them, because they were taken with Christ into the Mountaine, where he was transfigured, to heare the voyce of the Father out of the Cloud, testifying of his Son, whose voice seemed to the people to be thunder, as appeares by the 12. of Iohn 29. Some think they were so called, because they were more vehement and terrible in their preaching, than the rest of the Apostles. See Rev. 4.5. Heb. 12.26. so Brugensis and others. Christ in imposing of this name, seemes to have respect to the second of Haggai 7. saith Grotius. CHAP. IV. Verse 9. HEE that hath eares to heare, let him heare] A forme of speech to stirre up attention, as v. 23. Matth. 11.15. and 13.9. and 43. Mark. 7.16. Luke 8.8. and 14.35. Vers. 11. Vnto them that are without, all these things are done in parables] By which hee not onely understands those, who through their whole life are altogether strangers from the kingdome of God, as the wild barbarous Gentiles,Chemnit. who were from their child-hood given to idolatry, but also all those, who for a time were the children of the kingdome, but by their owne impiety deserved to be divorced and cast out of the kingdome. Vers. 22. There is nothing bid] viz. In our hearts though never so closely, which shall not be manifested] viz. by the power of the word most plainely. Vers. 24. With what measure you mete,Prout homi∣nes prima & maximè neces∣saria pietatis monita grato & fideli animo accipiunt, ita se in eos magis magisque effundìt divina largitus. Grotius. it shall be measured to you] With what measure you mete to God in duty, God will mete to you in grace. Cant. 1.3. Vers. 25. For he that hath, to him shall be given] That is, He that heares as he ought to heare, every time that hee heares, he growes something more rich, he gaines some more saving knowledge. Vers. 26. So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the ground] Although this similitude tends to the same purpose that the two former,Sator non est hic quivis prae∣co veritatis, sed ipse primus e∣jus sator Christus, Mat. 13.37. Nam & hic qui se∣vit dicitur missurus in agrum messores, infra 29. Is autem haud dubie est Christus. Matth. 13.39, 40, 41. Grotius. yet Christ seemes pur∣posely to direct his speech to the Ministers of the word, lest they should more negligent∣ly follow their calling, because the fruit of their labour doth not presently appeare, therefore he propounds the Husbandmen to them to imitate, who cast their seed into the ground with a hope of mowing, neither are anxiously disquieted, but go to bed and rise, that is after their manner, are intent upon their daily labour, and refresh them∣selves with rest in the night, till at the length the Corne grow ripe. Calvin.
Vers. 38. Master, carest thou not that we perish] The Disciples were too much fixed on their Masters carnall presence; here they do not simply pray but expostulate with Christ; Luke notes their confused trembling, Master, Master, we perish. Vers. 39. And said unto the Sea, peace, be still] The Greek is more emphaticall, he put a bridle on the mouth of the Sea, or haltered it, that it might rage no more; it is used, 1 Cor. 9.9. of , fraenum. Addidum augmentum verbo (ut alij notavere) celerem obedientiam significat atque perfectam; quasi diceret: Statim penitùsque obmutesce. Brugensis, Novarinus in loc. Vers. 40. How is it that ye have no faith] That they entreated him to help them it was rather a testimony of their faith, if relying on the confidence of his divine power, they had quietly and without so great feare hoped for that help which they begd.Calvin. CHAP. V. Verse 2. IMmediately there met him out of the tombes a man with an uncleane spirit] Mat. 8.28. speakes of two, but Marke and Luke make mention but of one, yet they affirme not that it was one alone, and therefore are not contrary to Matthew. They mention only one, either because this was the more famous of the two, by the cure of whom the fame of Christ spred the farther,Jansen. Con∣cord. Evang. or because he only being cured would follow Christ, and being sent by him extolled him highly. Vers. 5. And alwaies night day and he was in the mountaines, and in the tombes] The Jews did not bury theirs in the Cities, lest they should be defiled by them, but out of the City in fields,ansen con∣cord. Evang. and especially in desart parts, where almost every family had his Se∣pulcre cut out in some rock. Vers. 7. What have I to do with thee] For indeed Christ and the Devill differ in nature, studies, and actions. I adjure thee by God] Who by his just judgement hath suffered me to be in these men for their sin, Polyc. Lyser. Vide Bezam. do not torment, nor expell me out of this Country. It was a great tor∣ment to the devill to cease from tormenting the man whom e had possessed, saith Novarinus. Vers. 9. And he asked him, what is thy name] He askes not as if he were ignorant, but that from the devils answer, the multitude of the devils, dwelling in him, might be dis∣covered to those that were present,Jansen. that so they might perceive the cause of that strange cruelty described, and the greatnesse of the miracle, in which by Christs power the man was afterward free from so great a number of devils, and might know that Christs power was greater than that of many devills joyned together. A Legion was a terme among the Romans for Souldiers, as we say a Regiment, it was 6666. saith Hesychius. Vers. 10. He would not send them away out of the country]Because (saith Cajetane) they have severall regions where they most haunt,Amare viden∣tur regiones il∣las prae aliis, in quibus more hominum propter longam consuetudinem, perspectiores habene, ac ubi major est eis nocendi occasio & spes. Brugensis. and they that are in such a region are loath to be put out of it, but would faine keep their place. Vers. 11. Now there were there nigh unto the mountaines a great heard of Swine feeding] Luke saith, this heard was in the mountaine. Austen saith, this heard of Swine was so great,Jansen. Intelligi potest grex ille tum fuisse in parte montis inferio∣r. Grotius. that some of it was neere the mountaine in the fields, some in the mountaine, or they were in the lower part of the mountaine which began to spread into the fields. Vers. 15. And cloathed] Ingenuous modestie; whom formerly the furies of the De∣vill had deprived of cloathes, he fits now cloathed, and in his right mind; not only indued with a right mind, and carrying himself modesty, which are the usuall signi∣fications of this word, but also rightly judging of the Doctrine and miracles of Christ, for it is evident out of Zenophon that this also is the use of this word.
Vers. 30. And Jesus immediately knowing in himself that vertue had gone out of him, turned him about in the presse, and said, who touched my cloathes] Christ would have this miracle discovered; First, In relation to the woman: 1. To prevent a temptation which might have fastened upon her afterward, if she had not sought to Christ, and returned thanks to him for this cure. 2. To maintaine his farther grace to her, he commends her faith, bids her go in peace. 3. That he might cure some infirmity in her. Secondly, In regard of himself: 1. To glorifie his divine knowledge, that he is able to discover so secret a thing. 2. His divine power, that by this touch only he was able to cure so deep and difficult a disease. 3. For the confirmation of their faith that were about him, and likewise to assure Iairus that he would recover his daughter. Vers. 33. And fell down before him] Those that prayed fervently were wont to fall upon their knees. Act. 7.60. This was used, not only by the Christians, but by heathens.Dilsher. Elect. l. 2. c. 23. Genua miseri∣cordiae consigna∣vit antiquitas, quod ea suppli∣ces att ingant, ad haec manus tendant. Id. ib. It was a signe of humility with both, but the Heathens intimate something more when they fall upon their knees: They thinke that those who would obtaine mercy should fall upon their knees, because the knees were consecrated to mercy. Vers. 37. He suffered no man to follow him] Either because they were unworthy to be witnesses to the miracle he hindered them from comming in, or because he would not have the miracle overwhelmed with the company clamouring about him. Calvin. Vers. 40. When he had put them all out] He tooke so many witnesses as sufficed for proving the thing, to admit more might have a shew of ostentation. Vers. 42. Were astonished with a great astonishment] An ecstasie is taken for a peremp∣tory sequestration from thoughts and dealings with the world, for the ravishment of the mind by contemplation of truths revealed to it. Acts 10.10. and 22.17.Sarson on 1 Tim. 1.15. Obstupuerunt stupore magno] hoc est, rei novitate ita perculsi fuerunt, ut prae admiratione quasi in sluporem quendm mentis conjecti fuerint. Polyc. Lyser. It is taken here, and Luke 5.26. for astonishment through admiration. CHAP. VI. Verse 3. IS not this the Carpenr] or that Carpenter. The Greeke word  is a generall word, rendred Faber; faber ille. and it is questioned by some whether should be meant by it Faber serrarius, or Faber lignarius, a Smith, or a Carpenter.Iustin. antiquis∣simus scriptor, disertè testatur Christum ante∣quam munus il∣lud suum exer∣ceret, fabrum fuisse lignari∣um, & aratra ac juga caetera∣que ejusmodi fabricasse. Beza in loc. Hilary and Ambrose thinke Christ was a Smith; The common opinion is, that he was a Carpenter; Some hold that the Greeke word is so taken when it is put absolutely and without addition, be∣sides the Arabick version is for that, and , a chiefe builder, comes from , princeps, and , faber. Hence Christ in his preaching (saith à Lapide) drew simi∣litudes from the yoake, Mat. 11.29. and plow, Luk. 9.62. Vers. 7. And he called unto him the Twelve, and began to send them forth two by two] Our Saviour sent out his twelve Apostles Binos Aposto∣los mittit, non solum ob concordiam & unitatem, sed ut promptiores fierent, & alter alteri exemplo esset, ferventiorque alterius alacritate alter redderetur. Novarinus. two by two, and so the seventy Disciples two and two before him, Luk. 10.1. both to make the message of more authority, the things being confirmed by the testimony of two witnesses, and for the mutuall comfort and aide which they might have of each other, both in their journey and business. See Mat. 10.1. And gave them power over uncleane spirits] Christ furnished his Embassadours with the gift of miracles, which was to them in stead of Chemnit. publique testimony, or (as they speake commonly) in stead of letters of credence. Vers. 8. See Mat. 10.10. God would in this first embassage give them a manifest docu∣ment of the divine providence. Vers. 13. And annointed with oyle many that were sicke, and healed them] Whence the Papists would ground their extreme unction, which they hold to be such a Sacrament of the Church, as is here insinuated by Marke. But first, the Evangelist saith not, that
the Apostles annointed those who were in the pangs of death, upon this opinion, that in that Unction they might have the last and firmest savegard against Sin, the Devill, and Death, but only describes the gift of healing, the power of which the Lord said he had granted them for that Embassage in the former Chapter. Secondly, The Evange∣list doth not prescribe that such an annointing with oile ought to be made and kept in all the Church of the New Testament alwaies even to the end of the world, but de∣scribes the gift of healing, which, as also other gifts of miracles, was temporall, and ceased after the Gospell was propagated through the whole world.Chemnit. Har. Vide Cornel. à Lap. Thirdly, We read not that the Apostles annointed them of which they might probably presume that they would presently dye, but they annointed those sicke lest they should then dye with that weakeness. Fourthly, We read here nothing of the command of Christ, nor of the fact of the Apostles, that the oyle of that unction ought first by expresse words to be consecrated and exorcised. Fifthly, Neither do we read, that it was either com∣manded by Christ, or that the Apostles practised it, viz. the annointing of the Organs of the Senses. Sixthly. There is no Letter or Syllable of a certaine forme of words, as is usuall in Popery. Seventhly, Marke doth not say, that the end and effect of this unction was, that their sins might be blotted out, and the snares of the Devill avoided in those that were about to dye, but that by this externall symbole, which then was usuall among the orientall people, the gift of corporall healing might be admi∣nistred. Vers. 21. When a convenient day was come] Not in respect of God, to whom it so seem∣ed comely to make the birth day of a wicked King lamentable by the death of a most holy man, but in respect of Herod and Herodias, who found not a fitter time of acting the murder long conceived and revolved within their minds. Vers. 46. And when he had sent them away] The Greeke word  doth not signifie simply to dismisse or send away,Novarinus. Lucas Burgen∣sis. but with tokens of singular good will, as we take our leave of, and wish well to our friends departing from us: So this word is used, Luk. 9.61. Acts 18.21. 2 Cor. 2.13. CHAP. VII. Vide Cameron myr. evang. & Grot Sedulo & accuratè, Cau∣saub. Syriac, curiosè. Vulgata versio habet crebro, quam voculam etiam Erasmus retinuit; & qui Turcis conversati sunt, illi norunt, ipsos mane preces suas non prius recitare, quam manus cubito tenus lavarint. Hoc à Judaeis mutuati sunt. Polyc. Lyser. Exponunt iterum atque iterum laverint, metaphora ducta à pugilibus qui iteratis pugnis decertant, etsi possit locus ille accipi de Iudaeis, qui pugno manum lavando fricarent. Drus. Prov. Clas. 2. lib. 4. Quidam vertunt  certatim, quasi dicas, pugilatim metaphora à pugilibus sumpta, ut lavandi summum studium ac veluti eertamen significetur. No∣varinus in loc.Verse 3. WAsh their hands oft] Or diligently, in the Originall, with the fist. Theophylact, usque ad cubitum, up to the elbow. Holding] That is, studiously and with all their strength holding, as the Greeke word signifies, . Vers. 4. And when they come from the market, except they wash, they eate not] The mar∣ket where they often happened to converse with sinners, and feared lest by the touch of profane men and heathens they should contract impurity. Also washing their hands they tooke heed of keeping their ring on their fingers, lest any filth should lye under it, whence all their washing would be vaine. So they thought that their cups would be prophane unlesse they were first washed, for it might come to passe that a dead flie might defile them; if any one rose from the bed not besprinkled with water, they thought him prophane, since it might happen that a flea was killed in it, from which he might be defiled. But all those things were taken out of Numb. 19.20. and Levit. 14.7. and 16.19. The Pharisees added these traditions or cautions to this Law, by which they tooke heed lest the Precepts of God should be violated on the sudden. Christ reprehends two things in the Jewish traditions: 1. That they obtruded outward cleannesse on God, instead of the purity of the heart. 2. That they made the worship of God out of their humane Traditions. See Grotius.
Vers. 7. In vaine do they worship mee, teaching for doctrines the commandements of men] In vaine, either because they attaine not the end and fruit of divine worship, or because the worship it selfe of it selfe was vaine and frivolous. Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 8. Laying aside the Commandement of God, yee hold the tradition of men] They pre∣ferred their humane traditions before the divine precepts, and were so taken with them, that they neglected, yea made void, the other. Vers. 11. If a man shall say to his Father or his Mother it is Corban] As if he should say, I have given to the treasury, therefore looke for no duty from mee, this word is the Jews solemne oath. Mr. Hildersam. The Scribes and Pharisees taught, that Parents might be freely neglected,Down. Diat. de Antich. parte prima. l. 3. c. 6. if the children had either consecrated any thing to holy uses, or had vowed that they would not helpe their Parents. See Dr. Rainolds his conference with Hart. c. 7. The Syriacke hath Corbani, the Evangelist seemes therefore to have retained the He∣brew word,Lucas Brugen∣sis Comment. in 4 or Evangelia. Gorban donum sive munus, propriè quod Deo offertur. Drusius De Tribus Sectis Iudaeorum. Vide plura ibid. Vide Dilher Eclog. Sac. Dictum. 11. because the Jews were wont commonly to use it for the forme either of a vow or an oath. Vers. 17. His Disciples asked him concerning the Parable] Matthew saith that Peter askt him, Marke his Disciples, that he would explaine this Parable unto them.Polyc. Lyser. There∣fore either Peter in the name of the rest asked him, and after the rest of the Disciples also in the house asked him.Calvin. Christ answer sheweth that his Disciples asked him, for not onely Peters ignorance, but the ignorance of them all is blamed by him. Vers. 18. Are yee so without understanding also] Which words here are very emphati∣cally put, in respect of the Apostles, as if he should say, what you whom I have had so long time with mee, to whom I have familiarly imparted the light of my doctrine, which I have made partakers of all the secrets which I have received from my Father, which I have made Doctors of the whole world, and have long since often instructed, in what things the true purity of man consisted, that you ought to understand my doctrine before others, yet are you so rude and unskilfull,Polyc. Lyser. that you do not under∣stand those things which are most plainely spoken? Do ye not perceive, that whatsoever thing from without entreth into the man, it cannot defile him] The words are to be understood according to the subject matter,Id. ib. the matter of which Christ treates in the present, is not properly meates considered in and by them∣selvs, but the use of them, whether they ought to be taken with washt or unwasht hands. Besides Christ here speakes not of Leviticall impurity, but of cleannesse before God, which are most different among themselves. Vers. 21. From within, out of the heart of men, proceed evill thoughts, adulteries, fornica∣tions, murthers] That is the heart corrupted with originall sinne, as if the heart, that is, the whole, were in a manner nothing else but sinne. Vers. 22. Pride and folly are against the first Commandement, blasphemies against the second and third, by which men reproach the word or name of God, of sinnes a∣gainst the fifth Commandement he spake before, and here are murders against the sixth, adultery and fornication against the seventh, thefts and covetousnesse against the eighth, guile against the ninth, evill thoughts against the tenth. See Grotius. An evill eye] That is, envy, as Rom. 1.29. or niggardlinesse, or both. Vers. 33. and 34. By sprinkling spittle on his tongue, he would note that the facul∣ty of speaking was derived from him alone, by putting his finger into their eares,Saepe Christ∣us externo ali∣quo signo inas∣pectabilem ef∣ficaciam velut spectandam ex∣hibebat, ita di∣gitis in aures imissis irrigataque lingua Testatum fecit eum esse cujus vi clausi meatus quasi perterebrarentur, & lingua palato adhae∣rescens motum recuperaret. Grotius. he taught that it was his proper gift to boare as it were the deafe eares, for there is no need to flie to other allegories, that he removed the deafe man aside from the multi∣tude, he did it partly for that purpose, that he might cause the glory of his truth to appeare a farre off to rude and not yet fit witnesses, partly that He might more freely and fervently poure out his prayers; that he looked up to heaven and sighed, it was a
signe of his vehement affection, whence we may perceive how singular his affection is toward men in whose miseries he condoled. Calvin. Ephphata] The Evangelist retained the Syriacke word, that he might shew how easie it was for Christ to heale this wretched man,Polyc. Lyser. Vox Syriaca: quae Hebraicis literis scribi∣tur Ethpatahh Piscat. Vide Canin. loc. Nov. Test. Vox Syriaca sive Syro-Chaldaica est, deducta à radice communi Hebraeis Syris & Chal∣daeis, Patah. sine petah. Brugensis. as he who using a familiar and or∣dinary word, perfectly restored him; but it is in the Imperative Moode, be thou opened, for all things are done at the command of this Lord. CHAP. VIII. Vers. 2. AND have nothing to eate] It is very observable, that our Saviour had a continuall care, that none who followed him should want. Mr. Clarke in loc.Vers. 15. Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of Herod] Erroneous corrupt doctrine is like Leaven. 1. In regard of the commonnesse. 2. In regard of the quantitie, little. 3. In regard of the quality, like, as that to dough. 4. In regard of its spreading property. 5. In regard of the effects, Leaven. 1. Sowreth. 2. Heareth. 3. Swel∣leth. Polyc. Lyser.Vers. 25. He was restored] This word notes such a restoring as is not inferiour to the first integrety, for so it is used, Exod. 4.7. Gen. 29.3. and 40.21. Ier. 15.19. and 5.19. Therefore the third of the Act. 21. The last day is called the day of resti∣tution of all things. And saw every man clearly] The Greek componitur ex  eminus &  quod lucem ac splendorem significat: quare vim vocis ut exprimant quidam, duobus latinis verbis adhibitis inter∣pretantur eminus & dilucide. Lucas Brugensis. word rendred clearly, is a compound word, and signifies a farre of and clearly. Vers. 31. And after three dayes rise againe] Matthew saith the Son of man must bee raised againe the third day, Marke that he must rise againe after three dayes. Here Inter∣preters much trouble themselves, wherefore Marke should say after three dayes, es∣pecially because the history of the resurrection shewes, that it cannot be extended be∣yond the third day. It agrees with the Hebrew Michzeb, which according to the Rab∣bines notes the extremitie either of the beginning, or end. Deut. 14.28. Not after three yeares, but it signifieth in every third yeare, in which a peculiar tithe was to be gathered.Polyc. Lyser. Vide Bezam, & Grotium in loc. There are like examples in prophane Authours, in Lucian, Euripides, Homer, from all which it is evident that Marke doth not differ from the rest of the Evangelists in sense, though he use a different phrase. Vers. 37. What shall a man give in exchange for his soule] The meaning indeed is, that nothing in the world can answer the worth of it. Vers. 38. In this adulterous and sinfull generation] adulterous] Not such as are borne in adultery, they are generatio adulterina rather than adultera, rather such as were given to adultery themselves, and Spirituall Adulterers. Iames. 4.4. Sinfull] That is, notoriously sinfull, as Mary Magdalen is called a sinner. CHAP. IX. Vers. 1. AND he said unto them] to Peter, Iames, and Iohn. There be some of them stand here here, which shall not taste of death, till they have seene the kingdome of God come with power] That which some feigne of Iohn is ridiculous, Iohn
himself will refute this fabulous opinion, John 21.2, 3.Calvin. Besides it is folly to refer that in the singular number to John, which Christ speakes in the plurall number of some. Polyc. Lyser. By the comming of Gods kingdom understand the manifestation of the heavenly glory which Christ began from his resurrection. Calvin. Very many, and those most rightly, understand these words of the following glori∣ous transformation, and transfiguration of Christ on the Mount:Polyc. Lyser. For the three Evan∣gelists immediately annexe that as an accomplishment of what Christ here promised. Vers. 2. And after sixe dayes] Matthew and Marke number sixe dayes, Luke eight dayes. Mathew and Marke reckon the sixe whole daies which flowed between, Luke comprehends as well that day in which Christ spake,Calvin. Polyc. Lyser. as that in which he was transfigu∣red. That is, in the seventh day Christ tooke to himself Peter, James, and John, being withdrawn from the company of the Apostles, and on the eighth day being accompa∣nied with them, he ascended into the Mountaine, prayed, and was transfigured be∣fore them. Vers. 6. They were sore afraid] This Greeke word is used of such a feare which makes one withdraw himself from the presence of another, of whose company he acknow∣ledgeth himselfe unworthy, as Deut. 9.19. It is used, Heb. 12.21. of the terrible vision which God shewed upon mount Sinai. Vers. 12. Elias verily commeth first and restoreth all things] That is, all things which according to the prophecie of Malachy he was to restore, Mal. 4.5, 6. By Elias in Mala∣chy is understood John Baptist, Luk. 1.17. Mat. 11.14. Vers. 13. But I say unto you, that Elias is indeed come] The Jews beleeved that Eli∣ah was to be sent before the Messiah began his kingdom; Christ confesseth that to be true, and saith, he was already come. Vers. 18. Teareth him] The Greeke word  signifieth to teare and rent as the dog doth. This tearing (saith Beza) is to be referred to the inward griefe of the bow∣els, because the Spirit invading him (as it happens in the Cholick) he was troubled as much as if he had indeed perceived his bowels to be torne asunder. Vers. 24. I beleeve, help thou mine unbeliefe] There is faith and unbelife in the soule, at one time, in one action, upon one subject. Mr. Perkins. Vers. 31. The Son of man of man is delivered] , Using the present tense, he signifies that the thing shall be shortly, for Christ did so hasten to death, and so se∣riously think of it, that it might seeme present to him, which was to come. Novarinus. Epiphanius saith, Christ called himselfe the Son of man, that he might shew that he is that Person which the Prophets foretold should take the nature of man, and amongst them Daniel by name calls him the Son of man. Vers. 37. Whosoever shall receive one of such children in my name] Christ respects the childish quality, not the individuum. Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 43. The fire that shall never be quenched] O that word never (said a poore despai∣ring creature on his death bed) breakes my heart. Vers. 44. Esay 66. ult. Marke addeth thrice, Where the worme dyeth not,Wormes and fire use to make an end of other things. and the fire is not quenched. By which words metaphorically the twofold punishment in hell, one of the body, another of the soule is thought to be noted, saith Polycarpus Lyserus. By the worme is declared the continuall remorse of conscience, and the dayly me∣ditation of the sins committed: By fire, a sensible punishment, and most exquisite torments in the body. So Lyserus. Rather by these two is meant the poena sensus in hell, the privation of all good is commonly called poena damni, the punishment of losse, this is one part of hell torments, The everlasting absence of all good from God or the Creatures. The second part is a presence of all evill, comprehended here under the worme that dyeth not, and the fire that is not quenched. The worme is the Spirit of God by the coactive power of the Law holding a mans sins before his eyes, filling him with self convictions, and perfect feare and despaire for ever; the furious reflection of the soule upon it self for all its neg∣lected opportunities, and the irrecoverable misery it is in. The fire is the wrath of the great God, let in upon the whole soule to eternity, but especially on the conscience, Heb. 12. ult. The fire is the essentiall part, the worme but the accidentall.
From Carkasses slaine in battell and putrifying, wormes are begotten, but the car∣kasses of the wicked shall not be consumed, their worme dies not, he seemes to have respect to the fire whereby the children were consecrated to Moloch, and to the Sepul∣cres and carkasses which are wont to swarme with wormes;Rivetus ex Sanctio. The valley of Hinnom. as if he should say, the hell where the wicked are everlastingly tormented, shall not have fire or wormes which soon faile, as those without Jerusalem, Jer. 19. but which continue and torment for ever. Vers. 49. Every one shall be salted with fire] In the Old Testament the force and effi∣cacy of the Holy Ghost is compared to fire,Vide Cappelli Spicilegium. Notū illud quod ex Cleanthe Varro dixit: animam suillo pecori pro sale datam ne putisceret: Et hujus rei causa salem in sacris Hebraeorum usitatum notavit doctissimus Abarbaniel. Mos hic ut & alij ad gentes quoque manavit. Grotius. Esay 6.6, 7. and 4.4. to which there seemes to be an allusion, Mat. 3.11. So here to be salted with fire, as by the force and efficacy of the Holy Ghost, he is preserved from the corruption of this world, and by sanctity of life he is sweet and pleasing unto God. CHAP. X. Verse 1. THe people resort unto him againe] That he repeates the word , againe, twice, we may thence collect, that he dismissed those former Companies healed by him, and that afterward another new Company met together,Polyc. Lyser. and came to him. As he was wont, be taught them againe] This is a laudable custome, for one to use to do those things which belong to his calling according to the will of God.Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 3. What did Moses command you] He asked, not as if he had been ignorant of Moses his Doctrine, but that he might shew himself to be in no wise a contemner of the Law. Vers. 14. Suffer the little children to come unto me] Not such as were like to children, for he took them up into his armes. For of such is the kingdome of God] He meanes not the kingdom of glory, but the vi∣sible Church of God, it is constituted of such; no child by nature is a Church mem∣ber, but by vertue of the Covenant made with his Parents. Ephes. 2.12. Vers. 17. There came one running, and kneeled to him] Which seemes to shew his zeale and humility; his compellation, good Master. His errand, or the matter of his question, What shall I do to have eternall life? Vers. 18. There is no man good but one, that is God] That is, simply, absolutely, essen∣tially, and of himselfe such. Christ neither denies himself to be God, nor to be good, yet he received not the epithete of good from this man; as if he should say, because thou thinkest me to be a meere man, thou oughtest deservedly to abstaine from calling me good, since God only is to be called good, and if there be any good found with men they receive it from God alone. Vers. 21. Loved him] With compassion, not approbation of his avarice. Chrysostome, Jerome.Ex usu vocis  apud Lxx interpre∣tes videtur no∣bis majorem lucem hoc loco ad ferri posse. Ibi enim non semper pro diligere, sed & pro amicis blandisque verbis compel∣lare & laudare sumitur. Vt Cant. 1.14. 2 Paral. 18.2. Psal. 78.37. Similiter ego & hoc loco intelligo, servatorum nostrum, audita juvenis jactantia, qui se universam legem observasse gloriaretur, noluisse eum apertè mendacij arguere, severisque verbis objurgare, sed adblanditus est ei, laudavit eum ac studium quod legi servandae impenderat, amicisque eum super hac re verbis compel lavit. de Dieu in Marc. 10.1. The Greeke word signifieth friendly to speake to, and deale gently with one, so the LXX use it, 2 Chron. 18.2. Chrysostome saith, that he was covetous; Jerome, that he came to tempt Christ. Sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poore] That commandement was not ordina∣ry,Mr. Perkins. but speciall, belonging to the young man; it was a commandement of triall given to him only, and the reason of it was peculiar to him, viz. to shew him his corrupti∣on, confidence in his riches, and to discover his hypocrisie. Vers. 22. Went away grieved] Lowring, a metaphor taken from the lowring of the heavens on a wet morning.Videtur mihi  ad vultum magis quam ad animum pertinere, quasi dicas fronte nubila. Vide Mat. 16.3. Grotius.
Vers. 24. Children] Thereby reproving their weakenesse of understanding. Vers. 29. For my sake and the Gospell] Matthew saith, for my sake, Luke, for the kingdom of God. The sense amongst all the three is the same, for it is Christ who brought the Gospell out of his Fathers bosome, and by that restores the kingdome of God, whence these three, Christ, the Gospell, and the kingdome of God, cannot be separated one from ano∣ther. Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 30. He shall receive an hundred fold] eminenter, not formaliter, not a hundred Fa∣thers,Perridiculus erat Iulianus ille Apostata, quum hunc lo∣cum exagitans, quaereret num centum etiam uxores habitu∣ri ossent Chri∣stiani. Beza in loc. but he shall have that in God which all the Creatures would be to him if they were multiplyed a hundred times; wife here is left out in the repetition; See 1 Cor. 12.28. With persecutions] Christ doth not promise persecution (which would be absurd) but saith it shall be, that in the midst even of persecutions they shall be more happy a hundred fold than ever before, who preferred Christ before all the commodities of this life. Marke addes this (saith Grotius) lest we should thinke that temporall felicity was promised us. Solatitia promittuntur, non delitiae. Vers. 49. Be of good comfort, rise, he calleth thee] Whence it appeares that he was troubled in his mind, peradventure because yesterday & now to day some blind persons were healed, he feared lest the patience of the Lord should faile in him. Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 50. He casting away his garment, rose, and came to Iesus] From whence we may collect his great desire, and the greatnesse of his confidence,Polyc. Lyser. he did not simply rise but leapt for joy, and that he might come the nimbler to Jesus, he also cast away his cloake, teaching us, that if at any time we be called of Christ by his word, we should hasten to him without any delay. Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 52. Go thy way] He commands him to go away, not as if he could not endure him about him; but as he gently dismissed others who received benefits from him,Polyc. Lyser. lest they should thinke themselves bound to service for the benefit received, as Marke 5.34. and 7.29. Followed Quorū salva∣bat animas, sa∣nabat corpora. Bernard. Iesus in the way] Going to Jerusalem to beare his Crosse. CHAP XI. Vers. 13. SEing a fig tree a farre off having leaves, he came, if haply he might find any thing thereon:Vide Grotium. Quis dubitat, quin ubi Domi∣nus tum fuit maturas fuisse ficus Evange∣lista dicat? istam autem ficum ideo damnatam, quod dissimilis tum coeteris spem dubitantis ac esurientis, secundum oeconomiam Domini eluderet aut frustraretur? Quem sensum sine ulla vocum vel levissima mutatione, invenies, si legas,  Vbi enim erat, tempus erat ficuum, vel, tempestivae acmarae erant ficus. Accentus enim spiritusque quos, ut distinctiones omit∣tebant veteres, plerique (quod antiqua docent exemplaria) aut negligebant, saepius mutatos, non est cur miretur quispiam; minimè autem qui antiquos codices vel obiter inspexit. Heinsius. and when he came to it, he found nothing but leaves; for the time of figs was not yet] The fig-trees in those hot Countryes bore all the yeare, the time of ripening was not yet come, though Christ meant by the curse of the fig-tree, to bring in the doctrine vers. 22.23. Vers. 24. What things soever ye desire when yee pray, believe that ye receive them] Where he shews two principall things required in prayer. 1. An earnest desire of the grace and blessings we aske. 2. Faith, whereby we believe that God will grant us the things we aske. Perkins. In the Greek it is , not that ye shall receive them, as some render it, but in the present tense, that yee do receive them, which hath a great force. It is so certaine that we shall receive what we aske in prayer, that we seeme to receive it when we aske. Novarinus. Vers. 30. The baptisme of Iohn was it from heaven] That is, from God. Coelum pro Deo poni notius est quam ut probari debeat. So, I have sinned against heaven, and the Poet saith,Drusius. Id est, Deo aut Coelicolis.—Coelo gratissimus amnis.
CHAP. XII. In a Parable aliud dicitur aliud intelligi∣tur.Vers. 1. HE began to speake unto them by Parables] A Parable is a Greek word derived  as Ierome notes, because it is likened to another thing, it signifies Gerh. in Harm. Evang. In Parabolis tria sunt primo radix, scopus, viz. in quem tendit parabola 2. Cortex, si∣militudo sensi∣bilis quae adhi∣betur 3. Me∣dulla seu fruc∣tus, sensus parabolae mysti∣cus. Glassius in Philol. Sac. a similitude and comparison, so it is taken, Matth. 24.32. Marke 3.23. It is used for any thing uttered more obscurely and figuratively, Matth. 15.15. For a proverb, Luke 4.23. For a type of the Old Testament prefiguring something in the New Testament. Heb. 9.9. and 11.19. But properly and strictly it is taken for the artificiall narration of a thing as it were done to signifie another thing, so it is taken here. Our Saviour used Parables and similitudes. Matth. 13.3.24.31.33.41.45. Marke 4.33.34. Christ alwayes observed this in Parables, (saith Chemnitius) either he him∣selfe interpreted them, or at least in the beginning or end of the Parable he added some sentence which is as a key to open the true sense of the Parable, that thence the genuine interpretation may be taken. There are many reasons given why Christ speakes so often in similitudes, either be∣cause the people of the East were accustomed of old, to propound their doctrine under such representations, as we see in many passages of the Old Testament, or because the divine oracles had foretold that the Messiah should open his mouth in Parables, or be∣cause supernaturall objects insinuate themselves more easily into the Spirit and make more lively impressions there, being conveighed by those things which are obvious to the senses. Vers. 13. To catch him in his words] In Greeke a metaphore from hunters  Sicut scilicet venator captat feram. Piscat. Matthew useth another metaphore from the hun∣ting after birds. Vide Bezam. Vers. 14. For thou regardest not the person of men]  Regarding of mens persons is where we more favour this man than another, not for difference in the cause but of the person. I am the God] I am that God, ego sum Deus ille, it is an emphaticall article, noting an excellent thing and known to the common people, as if he should say, that God which appeared to those holy Fathers, and gave them certaine promises, making a Covenant of grace with them. Piscat. Vers. 29. The first of all the commandements is] The first not of order in the Decalogue but by reason of weight and dignity, because it is the speciall commandement and most momentous. Capell. Spicileg. Vers. 34. Discreetly] The word is significant, as one having a reasonable soule, , quasi dicas, Habendo mentem, id est, cum mente. Piscat. Vide Bezam. Vers. 37. And the common people heard him gladly] Libenter, willingly. Beza and the Vul∣gar. Iucundè latè, suaviter, cum voluptate. Haec omnia adverbium istuc significat. Novarinus. Because that which is done with pleasure, is done willingly Totum victum suum. Drusus. i. e. Totas suat facultates è quibus victitabat. Piscat.  est id quo vita sustentatur, Laxius etiam  vocantur omnia quae in usus nostros possidemus, ut Luc. 8.43. & 15.2.30. Sic & Hebraei usurpant Chaiah. Bene autem hoc loco arbitror à viro ra∣rae eruditionis Aria Montano  accipi tantum, quantum quoque die homini alendo sufficit; Nam pauperrimorum hominum diurnus victus quadrante admodum parabatur. Grotius.Vers. 44. Even all her being] When a poore man offers any thing, hee seemes to offer his soule, or certainely it is as gratefull to God as if he offered his soule, that is his life. Life is put for foode.  all her life, so Luke 8.43. CHAP. XIII. Vers. 1. WHat manner of stones] Interrogatio admirantis, as if he should say, these stones (viz. of the Temple) what and how great are they?Piscat. how faire and how great. Luke expresly mentions their fairenesse, Marke their greatnesse in the answer of Christ.
Vers. 11. Take no thought before hand what ye shall speake, neither do ye premeditate] Our Saviour forbiddeth his Apostles both to take care,Vide Bezam▪ and to take thought before hand when they were to appeare before great persons; both to forecast with themselves what to speak when they come before them,Mr. Gataker. and to forethink how that they shall speak will be ta∣ken when they have spoken it. Vers. 30. This generation shall not passe] The word signifieth the space of an hundred yeares, albeit this came to passe before fifty yeares. Vers. 32. But of that day and houre knoweth no man, no not the Angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father.] To know here is the same with to teach;Cameron. myr. Evang. 1. Epiph. Chry. Bern. Non sciebat practicè ut pa∣ter. 2. Greg. He knew it not in persona ecclesiae, sed sua persona. 3. Oig. Naz. Cyrill, Not as man humana scientia, sed divina revelatione. 4. Jerome, Aug. Basil, Theoph. He did not know to tell them. Bellarmine urgeth this place for equivocation; the Fathers drew not hence mentall reservation. what soever things he might teach, he did, but it did not agree to his office to declare the day of his comming, as 1 Cor. 2.2. to know is taken for to teach, as it is commonly said in French, Vn ministre ne doit scavoir que sa Bible. He knew it not as he was man, or in his state of humiliation he did not precisely know it, although he knew it as he was God, or he knoweth for himself, although he will not reveale it unto us. CHAP. XIV. Verse 5. IT might have been sold for more than three hundred pence] Which amounts to above nine pounds, seven shillings, and sixe pence of our money.Joh. 12.5. Mr Hildersam. Trecenti dena∣rij faciunt 30. aureos Roma∣nos. à Lapide. Mary Magdalene (saith à Lapide) was more liberall in annointing Christ, than Judas in betraying him. Vers 8. She is come before hand to annoint my body to the burying] The Greeke word signifieth to Non est , quod est quo∣cunque modo ungere, sed , quod est unguentis & odoramentis ungere. Novarinus, & Brugensis in loc. annoint with sweet & aromaticall ointments. Kings bodies were annoin∣ted with pretious oyntments, the piety of Mary Magdalene perswaded her to annoint Christ with such, who was more worthy than all Kings. Vers. 21. The Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of him] The Greeke word ren∣dred goeth, signifies properly se subducere, to withdraw himself,Novarinus. Christ used the same word, John 8.22. when he spake of his going to heaven, as if the Crosse was as much desired by Christ as heaven it selfe. Vers. 23. When he had given thankes] The Greeke word is to blesse, which is here taken only to give thanks, as Luke and Paul interpret it, and Marke also, speaking of the Cup. Vers. 24. And he said unto them, This is my bloud of the new Testament, which is shed for many] That is, a sign and seale of it to all penitent Beleevers. The word Testament signifieth properly, the last will Est Testamen∣tum, Modestino definiente vo∣luntatis justa sententia, de eo quod quis post mortē suam fi∣eri velit. Heb. 9.17. of a man, by which he disposeth of his estate. It is used here to signifie the Covenant of God made with mankind in Christ concerning the remission of their sins, sanctifying of their hearts, and saving of their soules for his sake, which is called a Testament, because it was made good, ratified, and confir∣med by the death of Jesus Christ; and a new Testament in opposition to the old Cove∣nant of workes made with Adam, or to the old Covenant shadowed with Ceremonies unto the Jewes; for God made two Covenants with men, one with Adam in his In∣nocency, in which he required of him perfect obedience to all his Commandements, and promised him life everlasting as a reward of his obedience. This is called the Co∣venant of works. The other was made with Adam faln, in Christ, wherein God un∣dertooke to give unto Adam for Christs sake the pardon of his sins, and life eternall notwithstanding his sins, and required of him faith in Christ, and repentance for his
sins, consisting in sorrow for them, and carefull amendment of them. This was de∣livered to the Fathers with divers Ceremonies, of the bloud of Bulls and Goates, signi∣fying Christs Bloud, and this is called the old Covenant. It is delivered to us without shadow, and sealed by the bloud of Christ, which all those Sacrifices represented, and it is called the new Covenant. Vers. 33. And began to be sore amazed] That phrase signifieth, not only a begin∣ing, but also a proceeding, Mark. 6.34. and 13.5. Luk. 16.45. Acts 1.1. and 24.2. Sore amazed, or astonished] This  significat atto∣nitum esse, pa∣vere,  verò significationem auget, ita ut  sit animo & corpore perhorrescere, attonito stupore percelli, sicut in subitâ consternatione aut febrium ac∣cessu fieri solet. A medicis vocatur horripilatio. Alardi Pathologia N. T. word denotes such an astonishment as comes from feare, when a man seeth himself faln on a sudden into some great distresse, out of which he finds no comming out. There is an astonishment of admiration, and another of feare, this latter is here meant. Vers. 36. Abba, Father] This title is given to God twice elsewhere also, Rom. 8.15. and Gal. 4.6. Ita & Paulus, Rom. 8.15. & Gal. 4.6. Viden∣tur Hebraei Graeco utentes sermone retinuisse hanc vocem, quia naturaliter pueri eo sono patres salutant. Graeci dicunt . Sed & Latini ab eo sono dixerunt pappare. Duplex autem vox posita est affectus testandi causa. Grotius. Vide Capelli Spicilegium.Father, Father] The one word is Syriack, the other Greeke, the latter is added to explaine the former. The language of the Jew and Gentile, to signifie, that God by Christs Crosse was to become the Father, as well of the Gentile, as of the Jew. Vers. 51. Theophylact saith, it is probable that this young man was of that house where they did eate the Passeover, and there are the same words in Euthymius. This conjecture seemes most probable of all, he followed Christ before the Traytour came with the Souldiers. It might happen that this young man after he had been in bed might heare something of the danger of Christ whom he honoured, and so pre∣sently leapt out of bed only covered with a linnen cloath, and began to follow Christ, for it was late at night,Casaub. Exer∣citat. 16. and one of the watches was past. Vers. 58. We heard him say, I will destroy this Temple] Christ indeed said some such words, Joh. 2.19, 21. but he spake this of the Temple of his body, of which that Temple was a type, whereas they maliciously interpreted that he spoke of the Temple in Jerusalem; and again they change the words, for Christ said, destroy this Temple, but these witnesses affirme he said,Mr. Perkins. I will destroy this Temple made with hands. Vers. 65. And to cover his face] The covering of the face was a marke of a condem∣ned man,Vide Quistor∣pium in Ezek. 12.6. held as unworthy to behold and enjoy the light of the Sun, or of the Princes countenance. Esther 7.8. CHAP. XV. Verse 11. BVt the chiefe Priests moved the people] For they knew that Pilate was popular, and affected the favour of the people, and that there was not a more compendious way to kill Christ than by stirring up the people against him.See Act. 12.3. Vers. 19. Worshipped him] , Properly signifyeth, to fall upon the knees, or to be cast down at anothers knees, and to worship and honour him, as appeares from this place, and 1 Cor. 14.25. Vers. 22. And they bring him unto the place Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, the place of a skull] Gulgoleth in Hebrew is a skull, it is used 2 Kings 19.35. and Iudges 9.53. This word here is rather Syriack, but said to be Hebrew, Iohn 19.17. because Sy∣riack was the usuall tongue with the Hebrews of that time.See Joh. 19.13. Beza would have it read , but Ludovicus de Dieu thinkes that change unnecessary. Vers. 23. And they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh] The Jewes (saith Fa∣gius) gave condemned persons some graines of Frankincense in wine to cause giddiness that they might be less sensible of their paine, therefore Christ refused it. Matthew saith, it was Vinegar mingled with gall.Gerh. See Mat. 27.34 Psal. 69.21.
For reconciling of the difference between the Evangelists, their judgment is most probable, that say the women of Jerusalem out of pitty gave him wine mingled with mirrhe, but the Souldiers and Jews out of very spight and cruelty, changed it into vi∣negar mingled with gall. It is guessed that this was a custome even in Salomons time, because of that sentence, Prov. 31.6. Vers. 25. And it was the third houre, and they crucified him] Christs crucifying began at the third houre, that is, at nine of the clocke in the morning, and ended at the ninth houre, that is, at three in the afternoone. The day (from Sun-rising to the setting) had twelve houres, as Christ saith, Iohn 11.9. Are there not twelve houres in the day?Matth. 27.46. Vide Piscat. in vers. 33. One Evangelist saith the third houre, the o∣ther the sixth, in ancient copies both are the same. Tertia, non inchoans, sed finiens, ac desinens in sextam. Sexta enim hora crucifixum esse Christum, putà in meridie, patet ex vers. 33. à Lapide. Their first houre was about six of the clocke in the morning with us, their sixth houre was noon, their ninth houre was three of the clock in the afternoone. Christs cruci∣fying began at the third houre; but his hanging on the Crosse was not till the sixth houre. See Weemes his Christian Synagogue. p. 15.4. Crucifying] Signifies an inchoate, not a perfect act; as if he should say, at the third houre the Jews began to talke of crucifying Christ, crying crucifie him, crucifie him, Pilate consented to them and commanded that he should be scourged, as it were preparing him for the Crosse and death, but at the end of the third houre,Cornel. à Lap. in Ioh. 19.14. the sixth beginning, Pilate iuridically condemned him, and presently they crucified him; Marke therefore declares the originall and beginning of the crucifying at the third houre, but Iohn assigned the execution and complement of it at the sixth houre. Vers. 34. Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani] Psal. 22.2. In the Hebrew it is, Eli, Eli,It is thought he repeated the whole 22. Psalme, which is an admirable narration of the passion. These first words were spoken in a lan∣guage of it self, or else by reason of distance not understood, for they thought he had called for Elias to take him down from the Crosse. D. Taylor of the life and death of Christ. lammah gnazabtani. The name of God which Christ useth here Elis derived from strength, therefore he complaines, that the strong God who can free him, leaves him in such straights, yet cals him his God, that by this relative he may declare his confidence still in him. Forsake mee] The Greek word  hath a singular emphasis in it,  is to leave or forsake, but this is more, to forsake a man in danger, or drowned in the mudde. Vers. 36. And one ran, and filled a spunge full of vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drinke] Marke attributes that here to a Souldiour, which Matthew ascribes to others,The vinegar and the spunge were in execu∣tion of condem∣ned persons set to stop the too violent issues of bloud, and to prolong the death; but were exhibited to him in scorne, mingled with gall to make the mixture more horride and ungentle. Dr. Taylor of the life and death of Christ. but there is no repugnancie, for it is probable that the scoffing began with one, which being received greedily by others, stirred up a cry amongst all, so the word let alone, is not a word forbidding, but of sporting. Calvin. Vers. 40. Mary the mother of James the lesse] That is not to be understood in respect of age or yeares, as if he were younger than the rest of the brethren, but in respect of body or stature; the word in Greek is . For there were two of that name, one the Sonne of Zebedee the other of Cleophas, and they both Apostles, and such as conver∣sed with Christ, the former was taller in body, the latter shorter; therefore from the stature of their bodies He was was called the greater, but this the lesser. Chemnit. CHAP. XVI. Vers. 2. ONE of the Sabbaths] Why do the Evanglists say,  one of the Sab∣baths, and not  the first of the Sabbaths? That is after the manner of the Hebrew tongue, in which the first day is called one. Hag. 1.1. one day of the month, that is, the first. Neither is it improbable that the Evangelists in this manner of speaking, did point their finger to the history of creation, in which the first day of the world is called jom echad, One day. Gen. 1.5. For as that day was initiall to the world, so the day of the resurrection of our Lord is the beginning of our glorification;
as in that day light was produced, so Christ rising, the light of righteousnesse and joy is risen to us. Gerh. in Harmon. Evang. Vide Piscat. & mea Critica. Sac. Graeca. Vers. 3. Onely Marke expresseth this doubting, but when the rest of the Evange∣lists say that the stone was rolled away by the Angell, we may easily collect that they stucke perplexed & doubtfull in counsell,Calvin. untill a passage was made by the hand of God. Vers. 5. A young man sitting] Marke here, and Luke 4.4. Say they were men, Matthew and Iohn, they were Angells that appeared; Matthew and Iohn shew what they were in∣deed, the others declar'd what they seemed to be at the first appearance, or in what shape they appeared. Gen. 18.2. and 19.1. and 32.24. The Angells usually appeared unto men in the shape of men, that their Message might be delivered more familiarly, and received more comfortably. Mr. Ball. Affrighted] The Greeke word signifies to be sore amazed and astonished with feare, the Septuagint use it. Dan. 7.7. Vers. 7. Tell his Disciples and Peter] Peter was specially named and severally from the rest of the Apostles, not as Baronius thinkes, because of his superiority above the rest, but because he onely denyed Christ, and so had of all other most need of comfort af∣ter his horrible fall, yet is he set behind all the Disciples as inferiour unto them, whereas they preferre the Pope to the whole Church, and make him Lord over it. That he goeth before you into Galilee] These women followed Christ out of Galilee, therefore the Angell foretels them that before they returned into Galilee, Christ should go before them there, and manifest himselfe unto them; this promise of Christ is Matth. 26.32. Mark. 14.28. But wherefore doth the Angell foretell that Christ should specially go before them in Galilee, and that they should see him there, when he was seen there neither onely nor the first? both Christ and the Angell speake of that solemne and publike apparition in which Christ revealed himselfe to all the Disciples together, in a Mountaine of Galilee. 1 Cor. 15.6. Gerh. Vers. 9. First to Mary Magdalen] Therefore not to the Virgin Mary as the Papists say. It is very observable (saith Iansenius) that our Saviour after his regeneration, in consolationem paenitentium, for the comfort of true penitents, appeared first to Mary Magdalen and Peter who had been grievous sinners. Vers. 12. Into the Countrey] Luke saith they went to the Castle of Emaus. Marke ex∣presseth the middle of the way, Luke the terme or end. Vers. 14. Vpbraided them with their unbeliefe] Either because some of them did not yet believe, as it also happened in the last apparition, Matth. 28.17. and so their should be a synecdoche in the words, by which that is attributed to the whole society which some of it did, or because their faith was not yet free from all doubting, but their mind was strucke with the mutuall waves of faith and doubting. Gerh. Vers. 15. Every creature] That is, to all nations, so Matthew and Luke; by the name of creature (as 1 Col. 23.) is understood onely the reasonable creature, they onely were capable and stood in need of the doctrine of the Gospell; man is so called by an autonomasie, because he is the chiefe of all creatures. Gregory gives a more sub∣till than solide reason of it, because man is a microcosme, and hath some thing com∣mon with all creatures, Being with stones, life with plants, sense with beasts, rea∣son with Angels. The Monkes say St. Francis preacht to Birds, and to Fish. Beda to the very stones: Eve is called the mother of all living, that is, of all men. Preach the Gos∣pell to the Jews and Gentiles, to bond and free of what state, degree or condition soever, See Mat. 10.5. and 28. Matth. 19. Vers. 16. He that hath beleeved and hath been baptised shall be saved] Qui credierit & baptizatus fuerit, &c. that is, shall have believed, and shall have been baptised, but he that hath not beleived] That is, shall not have believed, shall be condemned. Vers. 17. The promise was made by Christ unto his Church, to be fulfilled imme∣diately after his ascension. It extends onely to the times of the primative Church, and to such as then lived. Perkins Vers. 21. Sat on the right hand of God] The Apostle most plainely shewes, 1 Cor. 15.25. what Christs sitting in the Heaven meanes, that which David said, sit at my right hand, he saith, it behoves him to reigne. To sit therefore is to reigne and to governe the Church, in the same phrase in which we are wont to say, that such a Pope now sits at Rome. Vide Estium ad Roman. 8.34. ad Ephes. 1.20. & ad Heb. 1.3. & 13.
ANNOTATIONS UPON S. LVKE. CHAP. I. LVke collected an Evangelicall History in the fiftieth year after Mark. See Grotius on ver. 1.Gerhard. He was the perpetuall Companion of Paul in his travells.Librum autem & hunc & qui est de Acti∣bus Apostolocis scriptum arbi∣tror non multo post quam Paulus Roma abijt in Hispaniam. Nam in id tempus desinit Actorum liber, qui si serius scriptus esset, in ulteriora etiam tempora narrationem protenderet. Puto autem Roma ijsse Lucam in Achaiam, atque ibi ab eo con∣scriptos quos habemus libros, quod & Hieronymus prodidit, sunt qui decimo quinto post Christi ascensum anno, sunt qui se∣cundo & vicefimo id factum narrant. Grotius. 2 Tim. 4.11. Col. 4.17. Philem. 24. He only makes a preface before his Gospell that he may briefly shew the reason which induced him to write. He was a Syrian by nation, being born at Antioch the Metropolis of Syria, and by his calling a Physitian. His speech both in the Gospell and Acts is more elegant,Jerome on Esay 6. and savours of secular elo∣quence. A Father said of Sains Lukes Gospell, which he dedicated to Theophylus (which signifieth a lover of God) Si Deum diligis ad te scriptum est: If thou beest one that lo∣vest God, this Gospell is written to thee. Vers. 1. Many] Either Matthew and Marke published before Luke, as Chemnit, non significat vanū conatum, sed ad verbum significat ma∣num operi ad∣movere vel ali∣quid aggredi. Vide Grot. & Scultet. Exercitat. Evang. l. 1. c. 1. Certe Matthaeum & Marcum à Luca fuisse reprehensos, con∣cedi nullo modo potest. Nam dubium, utrum Lucas ante Matthaeum & Marcum, an Matthaeus & Marcus ante Lucam scripserint, & vox , non duos, sed plures designat: quemadmodum velex Epiphanio notum est, plures in describenda Historia Evangelica fuisse occupatos. Lucas scriptores alios nec mendacij, nec erroris, nec incertitudinis, nec imperfectio∣nis arguit proaemio suo, sed causas tantum scriptionis suae exponit: Exemplum aliorum: notitiam exactae Historiae: confir∣mationem fidei sacrae Historiae. Scultet. Exercit. Evang. l. 1. c. 1. or some false Apostles and Evangelists, whereof there were many. He calls in this proaemium the Gospell a narration, or declaration, which the Apo∣stles viva voce delivered concerning the Person, Life, Office, and Actions, of Christ, which the whole Apostolicall Church then received with a certaine faith and full assent. Chemnit. Most surely beleeved] Or fully perswaded; dicūtur ea quae certo ex∣plorata & fir∣mis testimoniis quod ita se habebant comprobata sunt, ut nullus sit dubitationi locus: sed animus certa fide & plena assensione merito & tutò assentiatur. Chemnit. the word in the originall which signifi∣eth to be fully perswaded, is a metaphor borrowed from ships which are carried with full saile, and it signifies a most certaine perswasion of the truth of things which have been sufficiently proved to us, so Grotius. Vers. 2. Even as they delivered them unto us, &c.] The sense is,Eye witnesses] Plus est ocula∣tus testis unus quam auriti decem. Calvin. Har Vide Bezam & Capelli S∣cileg. that that is the true Doctrine of the Gospell, which the Apostles as Embassadours, being called by God, and sent to preach, delivered viva voce through the whole world, as the rest, or in wri∣ting, as Matthew. Vers. 3. Having had perfect understanding] The Greeke word is metaphorically de¦duced from them which tread in others steps lest ought should escape them, for Luke would declare unto us a diligent study and manner of learning. From the very first] He declares the cause why he writes after the other Evangelists, because he enquired after the conception, birth, and education as well of John Baptist as Christ, and began thence.
Vers. 4. That thou mightest know the certainty of those things]  is properly such a certaintie by which we are certaine that we do not erre. Vide Scultet. exercit. Evang. l. 1. c. 1.Wherein thou hast been instructed] Or catechized, , that is, wherein thou hast beene hitherto taught by a lively voyce either before or after baptisme,  in Paul and Luke signifies to teach the rudiments of Christian Religi∣on, viva voce. Gal. 6.6. Whence the candidates of baptisme were called Catechumeni in the primitive Church, because before baptisme the first principles of the Christian faith were taught them by their teachers viva voce. Lucas Brugensis. Vers. 5. Of the curse of Abia] That is, the weeke Latinus inter∣pres  modo vices, mo∣do turmas ver∣tit, rectius Classes dixisset more Romano, mentio harum Glassium frequens in sacris literis. 1. Paral. 23.6. & 28.13.21. 2. Par. 5.10. & 23.8. & 31.2.15.17. & 35.4. Scultet. Exercit. Evang. l. 1. c. 7. of Abia. 2 Chron. 23.8. For the family of Abia was not now extant among the courses, there is no mention at all of him among the Priests that returned out of captivity, and therefore the Evangelist saith not that Zacharie was of his family, but of his course, that is, of a course that bare his name. Mr. Lightfoot of the Temple-service. Vers. 6. Righteous before God] That is, upright, Walking in all the Commandements and ordinances of the Lord blamelesse] Commandements, That is, matters of morality and perpetuall necessity, Ordinances] That is, all such outward appurtenances to the worship of God as were required. Vers. 7. And they had no child, because that Elizabeth was barren, and they both were now well stricken in yeares] Elizabeth was barren in the flower of her age,Calvin. and old age makes fruitfull women barren, therefore in two obstacles there is a double wonder of the divine power, and that the Lord by a stretched hand from heaven might witnesse, that the Prophet was sent by him. Vers. 12. And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled] Both by reason of the new and unusuall vision, and also because of the Majestie of the Angell appearing, for hee appeared in a heavenly shape.Iudg. 13.21. Dan. 10.8. See v. 29. Even good men have been afraid at the presence of good Angells, when they have come with good tidings. Corpus mortale tumultus non velit aetherios. Vers. 15. He shall be great] Both by reason of gifts and authority, and especially by reason of office. Chemnit.In the sight of the Lord] That is, in the Church or in the Ministerie of the Lord, be∣cause he did as it were point with his finger at the present Messiah. Shall be filled with the Holy Ghost] The filling with the Spirit signifies excellent, singu∣lar, and extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, or abundance of gifts. For those which are furnished with the peculiar gifts of the Holy Ghost beyond the common reason of the vulgar are said to be full of the Spirit.Chemnit. Act. 6.5. and 11.24. Vers. 17. The disobedient] The Greek word may signifie either such as will not be perswaded to believe, or rebellious. Both doth imply some stubbornesse, and therefore the Syriacke translation hath it, stubborne. Cartw. Vide Sculter. exercit. Evang. l. 1. c. 9. Chemnit.Ita hic Ange∣lus dicitur, quia eo ministro Deus utitur ad summam poten∣tiam suā expli∣candam. Hujus nominis recitatione Zacharias ad Danielis librum revocatur, quasi dicat Angelus: mirari noli, si quid nunc eximium & naturae ordinem superans Deus efficit. Instant enim illa tempora Danieli indicata, quibus potentiam suam Deus amplissimè est exserturus. Hebraeorum magistri aiunt severitatis ministrum esse Michaelem, Gabrielem misericordiae, ideo illum una ala volare, hunc duabus. Similique de causa Michaelem vocant ignem, Gabrielem vero aquam. Grotius.Vers. 19. I am Gabriel] Gabriel signifies the strong of the mighty God, by this hee would teach Zacharie, that he ought to be admonished by beholding of him, not to measure this businesse by humane weakenesse. It makes also for the confirmation of the certainety, that the same Angell which foretold the supputation of the time of the Messiah, Dan. 9.21. Should declare the accomplishment of it. That stand in the presence of God] That is, which serve him, as the Lord lives in whose presence I stand, that is whom I serve. Grotius thinkes it is a speech taken from the Courts in the East, and is as much as if he should say that he is not every servant, but a Prince of the Heavenly kingdome. See Matth. 18.10. Vox Graeca mutum & sur∣dum significat. Vide v. 62.Vers. 22. Remained speechlesse] He was a Priest of Aarons seed, to signifie that the end of his Priest-hood was at hand, and that the people should looke for another Priest.
Vers. 24. Hid her selfe] The word in the originall signifies very secret hiding.Hoc ideo fiebat quod de re sub∣dubitans, noluit rem evulgari, priusquam eam ex vitali in∣fantis in utero motu, comper∣tam haberet; nam circiter quinque menses infans se ad matris sensum movere solet. Cartwrightus. in Harm. Evang. Hiding is comming into lesse company than ordinary. five months] A month is here to be taken as women in their matters use to count a month. Piscator thinkes it hard to be told why five months are mentioned. Beza alledgeth three causes, either because all Jewish women used to do so; or she misdoubted whether it would fall so yea or no; or because hiding her selfe so long, and then comming abrod on the sudden, the wonder might seeme the greater. Chemnitius saith because she was ashamed to have lust now in her old age, because she might at her first coming abroad, convince that she was with child. The Arabicke hath it, & occultavit graviditatem suam, she hid her being with child,De Dieu. com∣ment. in loc. lest we should think that she was not seen by any for five whole months, but that she conceald her being with child, for in the five first months those which are with child are not so big but it may be hid from those that behold them if they be silent, especially if by reason of their great age, there be no cause to suspect so much. Vers. 25. My reproach] In that she cals it her reproach rather than her husbands, we thence learne (saith Cartwright) that either yoakfellow ought rather to ascribe the sault of barrennesse to themselves, rather than to lay it on the other. Vers. 28. Highly favoured] or graciously accepetd, or much graced.vers. 28. In hac Mariae descrip∣tione videmus nihil de sancti∣tate & pietate Virginis admistum, cum tamen illud in uxore Zachariae diligentissimè factum sit: Scriptura enim praescia superstitionum, quae olim Virginis in cultu, & nimia existimatione exstiturae essent, in ea parte silentium sequuta est. Cartw. in Harm. Evang. The Greeke word signifieth freely beloved, not full of grace, both here and Ephes. 1. in Chrysostomes judge∣ment. The Monkes have depraved these words, and say, that Mary is full of grace as the necke of the Church, as Christ is the Head, and that blessed among women, they have in their postils transformed into this blasphemous sentence, let women be blessed in thee, as men in the Son Christ. These holy words of the Angell are prophanely, superstitiously,Fulke in his Annotat. on the Rhem. Test. and idolatrously abu∣sed by the ignorant Papists, as a prayer, when they are none, mumbled in Latine, whereof they know not the sense, said unto stockes and stones, yea to God himselfe. The Lord is with thee] That forme is most usuall in Scripture, but it is used two wayes. 1. Optativè, let the Lord be with thee. Iosh. 1.17. 1 Chron. 22.1. 2. Indicativè,Chemnit. the Lord shall be with thee. 1 Kings 10.7. Iud. 6.12.Sumo non in∣dicativa sed potius appreca∣tiva significa∣tione. Grotius.This latter signification doth bet∣ter agree to the Angels sentence. Gabriel might so speake because she was about to conceive and bring forth Immanuell, which is God with us. Blessed art thou among women] Or rather blessed be thou, it is taken out of Iud. 5.14. See Ruth. 3.10. Vers. 29. She was troubled at his saying] As before in Zacharie, v. 12. It is taken from stirred water, and signifies perplexity of thoughts, when one cannot tell what reso∣lutely to think. Iohn 11.33. and 13.21. Vers. 31. Shalt call his name Iesus] That which Esay called Immanuell,Grotius. Therefore Matthew saith that propheci is fulfilled in imposing of the Name Iesus. the Angell called Iesus performing the office of an Interpreter, whence it appeares, that there is the same signification in both. For whether we say this is he by whom God is favou∣rable to us, (which Immanuell signifies,) or this is our Saviour, the sence is one. Vers. 32. He shall be called great] 1. In respect of his Person, because He was both God and man. 2. In respect of his Office. 3. In respect of his kingdome. Chemnit. The throne of David his father] Christ may be said to have the throne of David two wayes. 1. Properly, for he was borne King of the Jews, by right discent from his Fa∣ther David, as his genealogy plainely sheweth. Luke 3. Matth. 2.2. 2. Typically,Esay 9.6.7. for Davids kingdome was a figure of Christs kingdome, and David himselfe a type of Christ. Ier. 23.5, 6. Hos. 3.5. Vers. 33. And of his kingdome there shall be no end] Obj. 1 Cor. 15.24. It is said, Christ shall deliver up the kingdome to the Father.Dan. 4.3. Esay 9.7. Ans. Luke speaketh of Christs kingdome in re∣spect of it selfe, the Apostle in respect of the administration of it. In the former respect it
shall never be abolished, Christ shall alwayes have a people to rule, but He shall not rule as now he doth by Magistrates, Ministers, the word and Sacraments. Non dubitantis esse arbitror, sed admirantis. Virum Cogno. vit. etiam apud Ovidium est. Grotius.Vers. 34. How shall this bee] There is threefold how] viz. of curiosity, incredulity, and infirmity, she doubted not of the effect, but inquired after the quality of the effect it selfe. The Holy Ghost did as it were cast a Cloud over her. Luk. 24.49. Act. 1.8. To teach us that we should not search over much into the mysterie of incarnaton. Mr. Perkins.Vers. 35. The manner of her conception is expressed in those two Phrases of comming on her and overshadowing her, to shew that this was an effectuall worke, and yet so difficult to conceive that we cannot reach unto it. The power of the most High] That is, the Holy Ghost. Over shadow] A metaphore from birds cherishing their young ones, that so the An∣gell may shew that this child shall arise by that power by which the world it selfe began.Grotius. See Iunius on Gen. 1.2. .Vers. 41. The babe leaped in her wombe] The Greeke word signifieth to leap as lambes and calves being well fed. The word is used by the LXX. for Iacob and Esaus stirring in the wombe. Gen. 25.22. Vers. 42. Blessed art thou among women] We do acknowledge that the Virgin Mary was blessed among women, as here, and a blessed woman, as 28. and 48. verses, yet more blessed as Austin saith in receiving the faith,i.e. Felicissima mulieril. Mar∣tin. Grammat. Heb. l. 2. c. 5. i.e. Laudatissi∣ma foeminarum Caninius. Vide Span∣hem. Dub. E∣vang. parte secunda. Dub. 48.49. Bellarmine and Gregorie de Valentia, end their bookes thus. Laus Deo, virginique Ma∣tri Mariae Deo iterum filio. Dicunt à foro justitiae Dei appellandum esse ad forum miserecordiae marris ejus, & multos, quos justitia Christi damnat, miserecordia matris ejus servari. then in conceiving the flesh of Christ. We count her holy, meeke, humble, we praise God for her, that he made her the in∣strument of Christs coming into the world, and desire to imitate those vertues and excellencies that were in her. But the Papists commit grosse Idolatry, they give her the titles of Mediatrix, Salvatrix, Shee-Saviour, Queene of Heaven, Queene of mercy, They paralel ubera & vulnera, making the milke of Mary to be as precious as the bloud of Christ, they call her unicam miserorum spem. O Foelix puerpera Nostra pians scelerae Iure matris impera Redemptori. Calvin saith, if she should now live and see that honour which is due onely to God, given to her, she had rather they should draw her about by the haire, spit in her face and offer her the foulest abuse that may be. Vers. 43. And whence is this to mee, that the mother of my Lord should come to mee] They are not the words of one being ignorant or doubting,Origen, Am∣brose. Beda. but affirming her selfe unworthy. Ruth. 2.10. Vers. 44. The babe leaped in my womb for joy] In gaudio magno the Syriack, that is for great joy. This motion was not naturall Haec exulta∣tio facta est di∣vinitus in in∣fante non hu∣manitus ab infante. Augustinus. Gracè  id est, exiliit in exultatione, licet enim  sig∣nificet gesticulationem, significat tamen gaudium quoque & exultationem, quae gestiendo & exiliendo ostenditur. Cornel. à Lapide in locum. but spirituall, and therefore Iohn was sancti∣fied in his Mothers wombe, and did really rejoyce at the presence of Christ in the Virgin. The word  signifies outward gesticulation or exultation, as Psal. 65.13. and so it is to be understood here: The Babe in my womb leaped with extraordinary gesticulation or exultation. Vers. 46. My soule doth magnifie the Lord, &c.] Compare this ode with that which Hannah sung after Samuel was borne. 1 Sam. 2. For as Peter martyr hath observed, they are so like, that the blessed Virgin seemes to have taken much out of that song. Vers. 47. And my sprit hath rejoyced]  The Greek word signi∣fieth exulting, such a joy as we use to expresse by outward signes in the body, as dan∣cing. The Syriacke hath a word whence an exclamation made for joy is deduced:
Euge, Euge. Some by soule would have the understanding to be meant, and by Spirit the will. à Lapide, by soule would have the inferiour part of the soule to be meant, which respects naturall things, by the Spirit the Superiour, which respects divine and Spiri∣tuall things. In God my Saviour] Who both delivers and keeps me, and is the author of perpetu∣all salvation, for the word  comprehends these three benefits of grace. The Sy∣riack renders it, In Deo vivificatore meo.aut  dici∣tur opus poten∣tissimum, qualis erat virginalis conceptio. Gro∣tius. Vers. 51. He hath shewed strength with his arme] A great power of God is declared by his finger, greater by his hand, greatest by his arme. See Exod. 15.16. and Psal. 76.16. and 89.14. and 97.1. Esay 40.10. and 62.8. Iob. 40.4. Vers. 53. He hath filled the hungry with good things] By the hungry are meant those who feel themselves void of grace, yea, as it were pined and starved for want of it Perkins on Jude. Adverte hic Judaeos non semper in Sy∣nagoga fuisse circumcisos. Nam Joannem domi fuisse circumcisum colligitur ex versu sequenti, Cornel. à Lap.. Vers. 59. On the eighth day they came to circumcise the child] We collect saith Calvin from the words of Luke, that although they circumcised their Infants at home, yet they were not wont to do it without the company of many men, and that deservedly, for since it was a common Sacrament, it ought not to be administred privately. Vers. 66. The hand of the Lord was with him] The grace of God was many wayes conspicuous, which openly shewed that he should not be an ordinary man.Calvin. Manus id est, potentia, providentia, cura, gratia, & favor (horum enim omnium symbolum est manus) mirabilis Dei ostendebat se in pu∣er hoc, scilicet Joanne Cornel. à Lap. Vers. 68. Blessed be the Lord God] He is worthy of praise, or Let the Lord be ce∣lebrated and extolled, redeemed] or as the words are, hath wrought redemption,Chemnit. the Sy∣riack is, fecit ei redemptionem. That is, by Christ incarnate inchoativè. Vers. 69. An horne of salvation] That is, a mighty Saviour for us, 2 Sam. 22.3. Psal. 132.2. Thou hast laid help on one that is mighty, which Esay expounds, mighty to save, Esay 63.1. The glory and strength of horned beasts consists in their hornes.Metaphora sumpta à cor∣nutis animalibus quae cornibus se defendunt, & adversarios prosternunt, Chemnit. Cornu Hebroeis robur significat. Vide Grotium. Cornu per Catachresin in Scriptura significat robur, potentiam, victoriam, gloriam, & consequenter regnum. Cornel. à Lap. Vers. 70. As he spake by the mouth of his holy Prophets which have been since the world be∣gan] As if they had all but one mouth and message. All the holy Prophets prophe∣sied of Christ, of his strength, victory, and Kingdome. Vers. 74. That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him without fear] Delivered out of some dark deep hole, it signifies to bring forth something to light, enemies] The Devills, wicked men, sinne, death, and hell. The manner of our service must be, first without feare, either without cause of fear, as Rom. 8. 1. Or without servile feare, not constraind, but willing and cheerfull. 2. Universall, in holinesse, toward God, in righteousnesse; towards men. 3. Before him, (as in his sight) sincerely. 4. All the dayes of their life, constantly in all estates unto the end. Col. 1.10. Vers. 76. The Prophet of the most High] See Mat. 5.9. as if he should say, Thou John (saith à Lapide) although thou beest such a little Child, only eight dayes old, yet after 29. yeares when thou art a man, thou shalt be a Prophet, publishing and decla∣ring Christ. Vers. 78. The day-spring] Greek the East,Vide Piscat. & Jun. paralel. in loc. & Cor∣nel. à Lap. by a metonymie of adjunct for the Sun rising. The Chaldee Zach. 3. and 6. Chapters turnes it Messias, that is Christ. The Hebrew word there is tsemach, which properly signifies a branch. CHAP. II. Vers. 1. ALl the world] That is, all the Provinces subject to the Romane Empire;Ad verbum to∣ta habitabilis, ita ut subau∣dias terra.  autem non accipitur propriè, ut Psal. 24.1. de toto orbe terrarum, sed de toto orbe Romano: sicut Synodus secunda Constantino∣politana  dicitur apud Theodoretum, hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 9. quamvis Congregati in ea essent Episcopi ex orientali tantum Romani orbis parte: & propriè loquendo, nulla unquam fuerit Synodus oecumenica, id est, univer∣salis, ex Orbe toto coacta. Scultet. Delit. Evang. c. 12. the Romans arrogantly called themselves the Lords of the whole world. The Syri∣ack
hath it, universus populus possessionis, or Dominij ejus, viz. subject to Augustus, and the Romanes. à Lapide. Joseph. Antiq. 18. c 1. , not taxing but enrolling.Vers. 2. This taxing was first] Luke saith this description was first, viz. in respect of the other, which followed after ten years, or the first generall tax which happened in the whole world now in peace under Augustus and the Romans, for the other imposi∣tions were particular in certain provinces. à Lapide. Vers. 4. And Joseph also went up from Galilee out of the City of Nazareth, into Judea, unto the City of David, which is called Bethlehem] That is, He went up from Nazareth a City of Galilee, where (as the Angel relates) the Virgin conceived Christ. Whence Christ was called by the Jews a Galilean and Nazarite. Bethlehem] The house of bread, it received its name from the goodness and fertili∣ty of the earth. It was situated beyond Jerusalem, and was distant from it a jour∣ney of two hours. Vers. 7. Her first born Son] The first born by the fault of the version (saith oneCartw. Harm.) is refer∣red to Mary, as if Christ were her first born, when he is so called in respect of his Deity, because He is before all Creatures, and for that cause truly God, as 1 Col. 15. and Heb. 1.5. Because there was no roome for them in the Inn.] An Inn is domus populi, open to all pas∣sengers that will take it up, Juris publici, wherein every one hath a right, yea and in the most common part of the Inn, the stable, all have interest. Alii vertunt, stetit super il∣los, quasi Ange∣lus è Coelo lap∣sius. à Lap. Gerh. Harm. Vide Bezam.Vers. 9. The Angel of the Lord came upon them] It signifies a sudden and unhoped for comming, Luke 21.34. and 24.4. Acts 4.1. and 10.17. and 11.11. and 12.7. 1 Thess. 5.3. It signifieth also to assist one from some higher place, Numb. 14.14. Luk. 4.39. in which sense it may be here also taken, Angelus pastoribus , that is, from above, as it were from the aire hanging over their heads, stood by them. Vers. 10. Good tidings of great joy] All Gods people throughout the whole world should greatly rejoyce in Christ. There are Prophecies extant in the Prophets of this great joy, as Esaiah 9.3. and 35.10. and 51.5.11. Vers. 13. A multitude of the heavenly hoast] So an orderly multitude of Angels is called,Angeli omnes Christum De∣um ac Domi∣num suum, in terram nascentem comitati sunt, sicut aulici vel comitantur Regem peregrè proficièntem, Heb. 1.6. Cor∣nel. à Lap. in v. 7. as elsewhere a legion of Devils; where many Angels appear there one as a Ruler is set over the rest. Vers. 14. First the Doxologie or praise, Glory be to God on high.] Secondly, gratulati∣on, rendring the reason thereof; because of Peace on Earth, Good will towards men; for the conjunction  is not to be taken here for a copulative, but as vau is frequently used in the Hebrew for a Conjunction causall. Glory when it is referred to God, often signifies the Divine presence, or Shecinah, as in 9. v. 2. the high and glorious supereminency or majesty of God,In Excelsis referri potest tum ad Deo, quasi dicerent, Gloria est Deo qui habitat in Coelis altissimis, ibique gloriam suam Angelis & beatis ostendit; tum potius ad Gloria, quasi dicerent, In Coelis altissimis Angeli dant gloriam Deo, sicut in terra homines fruuntur pace per Christum jam natum. Cornel. à Lap. which consist∣eth in his three-fold Supremacy, of power, of wisdome, and of Goodness, so here, and then to glorifie, or give glory unto God, is nothing else but to acknowledge this Ma∣jesty or greatness of his supereminent Power, Wisdome, and Goodness. Mr. Mede in loc. We translate it from the Greek, and un∣to men good will. Maldo∣nate confesseth that all the Greek Copies now extant have it good will (viz. of God) unto men, and Bellarmine saith this is the better. Bishop Mortons Appeale.Good will] Some refer it to God, and take it for the eternall love of divine compla∣cency which moved him first to the work of our redemption. See Cornel. à Lap. Others refer it unto men, and make it a limitation of that which goes before, reading  for , not peace on Earth, to men good will, but peace on earth to men of good will, so Austin, Cyprian, Ambrose, and most of the ancient and learned Fathers. The Rhemists translate out of the Latine, peace unto men of good will. Vers. 19. Pondered them in her heart] That is, by meditating upon them in her mind,Vide Piscat. she had wrought them into her heart and affections.
Vers. 21. And when eight dayes were accomplished for the Circumcising of the Child] Af∣ter eight dayes were consummated that he might be circumcised: dictum, ut significaret ur impletum id tempus quod ex lege Circumci∣sionis erat prae∣stitutum, cujus temporis dies ultimus erat à natali octavus. Grotius. Vide Brugens. So Erasmus and the vulgar Latine read it; but if the eight dayes were consummated, the infant against the precept of the Law was circumcised the ninth day; therefore Beza's version is better, cum advenisset dies octavus ut circumciderent puerculum, when the eighth day came, that they circumcised the Child: so 2 Act. 1. Beza renders it cum advenisset dies Pentecostes. Vers. 23. Every Male that openeth the womb shall be called holy to the Lord] Whereupon divers Fathers, viz. Theophylact, Ambrose and Origen, said, that Christ was that im∣maculate one,Aperiens ure∣rum sic enim mavult Lau∣rentius homo superstitiosè verecundus, quasi verò vulva sit obscaenum vocabulum. Erasmus. who alone (without the preceding act of man) Matris suae vulvam a∣peruit, as witnesseth their own Bishop Jansenius, yet the Papists condemne us for say∣ing, that the blessed Virgin did in bearing Christ vulvam aperire, which the Roma∣nists will have to be all one with virginitatem corrumpere. Bishop Mort. Protest. Appeal. l. 5. c. 22. Sect. 1. Vers. 24. A paire of Turtle Doves or two young Pigeons] A manifest signe of her po∣verty (for all à Lapides shifts) for the Law was that they should offer a Lamb with a little bird, but those whose poverty would not suffer them to do it,Licet tres Re∣ges magnam vim auri Chri∣sto obtulissent, tamen B. Virgo paupertatis stu∣diosa, ut osten∣deret se spernere omnia terrena, ex illis pauca duntaxat quasi libando accepit, quae brevi consumpsit. Cornel. à Lap. Vide. plura ibid. Vide Cartwright. Harm. in Evang. they brought two little birds, whence we may collect that the Wise men gave not much gold, since they brought it rather to honour Christ than to exercise their liberality, as their Custome was to come to their Kings. Grotius. Vers. 25. Waiting for the consolation of Israel] That is, vox Lucae peculiaris, qui bis praeter∣ea usurpat, Act. 2.25. & 8.2. Hebraeorum imitatione quibus Religiosus dicitur Jare sed plerumque addito Dei nomine, ut Isa. 1.16. Grotius. when Christ would come who is consolation in the abstract, the only ground of comfort to the Israel of God. See 40. Isaiah 1. and 51.3. and 61.1. Vers. 29. As if he should say, I have now Lord lived long enough;Quasi necessi∣tate quadam teneretur in hac vita, non voluntate, saith Ambrose. Let me now de∣part in peace, seeing I have seen thy Christ my Saviour. Depart] The Greek word  is properly to loose one bound with bonds, the LXX. use it Gen. 45.2. Numb. 20.29. for to dye.Hebraeum Pa∣tar & Graecum  est absolvere crimine debito, aut vinculis. Drus. in Mis∣cell. l. 2. c. 12. Vers. 30. Mine eyes have seen thy Salvation] There is a great emphasis in this pleo∣nasme, as when we say in Latine, His ego oculis vidi, we are said to see something in mind, and opinion; here Simeon rejoyceth at the corporall sight of Christ, which yet before he had really embraced with his faith, as John 8.56. Thy Salvation] Adumbrat Simeon nomen . Dilher. Simeon shadowes out the name of Saviour. Christ Jesus is here meant. See Psal. 50.23. Vers. 32. A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel] The light of the Gentiles is preferred before the glory of the Jews.Dr. Clerk. He puts the Gentiles before the Jews, because the second calling, the conversion of the Jewes to Christ, shall not be untill the fulnesse of the Gentiles come in. He is called,Cartw. in Harm. Evang. The glory of the people of Israel Not as if the Gentiles had not cause to glory in Christ, for all our glorying must be in him, but the Israelites have a peculiar glory from Christ, because he came of them,Veluti scopum, contra quem te∣la suorum con∣tradictionum dirigant inimici ipsius. Piscat. He shall be as a common mark whereat the arrowes of reproach shall be fully shot, Doctor Halls Paraphrase. Nescio an facilior hic locus fuisset, si nemo eum exposuisset, sed fecit multitudo & varietas interpretationum, ut difficilis videretur. Maldonatus in loc. In signum contradictionis, vel contentionis, ut vertunt Syrus & Ara∣bicus. Tertullianus de carne Christi cap. 23. vertit, In signum contradicibile. Maldonatus & Franciscus Lucas, Christus inquiunt positus in signum, id est in scopum sagittariorum in quom Judaei & Scribae increduli, non tan∣tum lingua verba maledica, sed & manu tela malefica conjecerunt. Basilius, Beda & Theophilactus intelligunt signum Crucis, ut alludat ad Isaiae 11.10. Ita Toletus, Cornel à Lap. in loc. Rom. 9.5. and was first appointed for them. Rom. 3.2. Vers. 34. And for a signe which shall be spoken against] Of sixe sundry senses I select two: Signum to meane here either scopum, or vexillum, the Archers marke, or the Banner in War, which every Enemy strives to win, or throw down. This later metaphor Tolet
rejects,Dr Clerke. and saith, the word beares it not, perhaps because Calvin and Beza so expound it. Maldonate, as learned a Jesuite as he, approves it. Both metaphors have the same meaning. à Lapide and others say the Evangelist alludes to that in Esay 8.18. I and my children are for signs, but a signe spoken against, many should be his adversaries. Vers. 40. And the child grew and waxed strong in Spirit] Which word is spoken of the nourishment and augmentation of the body in children. Gen. 21.8. Iud. 13.24. The words have relation to the gifts or spirituall operations,See Mr Rey∣nolds in the life of Christ. p. 423. Ephes. 3.16. Acts 6.3. , wisdome, signifies, gifts in the mind or understanding; , grace, gifts in the other in∣feriour faculties of the soule, in the gestures and actions, to all which a peculiar divine grace was added. Vers. 48. They were amazed] 1. Feared lest he should leave them. Thomas in loc. 2. Lest he should fall into enemies hands. Gloss. Thy Eather] 1. In opinion, Luk. 3.23. 2. In care. 3. Husband to Mary. An nesciebatis oportere me in ijs esse quae Pa∣tris mei sunt.Vers. 49. That I must be about my fathers business] It is an elegant phrase, in his esse, for to be seriously imployed, as that also was used in the Sacrifices, Hoc age, as now among Christians, sursum corda. Vers. 52. Increased in wisdome and stature] In stature really, and also in wisdome and favour with God, as Ambrose and Fulgentius interpreted it, limiting themselves to his humanity, and the state of humiliation which for our sakes he underwent. See ver. 40. CHAP. III. Verse 2. ANnas and Caiphas being the High-Priests] Not as if at one and the same time there had been two chiefe Priests,Vide Seldenum de Successione in Pontificatum Hebraeorum. l. 1. c. 12.Chemnit. Sacerdotij ho∣nor dimidia ex¦parte apud An∣nam Pontificis socerum reside∣bat.Calvinus. Scriptura summo Pontifici suum substituit non semel vicarium, ut rectè Theodorus Beza observavit Marci primo. Sum∣mus Sacerdos dicebatur Pontifex primus, vel magnus; Alter Pontifex secundus sive vicarius, ut 2 Reg. 25.18. Sic 2 Parae¦lipom, 24. Nadab & Ahihu conjunguntur, item Eleazar & Ithamar, sic alibi alij, ut rectè vir Clarisimus adnotavit Casaub. exercit. 13. ad Annal. Eccles. for this by the Law was not lawfull, neither do we read in histories that it was done. But when the last of the Roman Governours did vio∣late the Laws of the Temple, Annas, who according to the Law ought to be chiefe Priest in the whole time of his life, was removed from the Office, and after divers changes Caiphas at length was brought into his roome, or which is more probable, those two were Priests by turnes. Iohn 18.13. and Act. 4.6. Under the high-Priesthood both of Annas the Father in Law to Caiphas, and of Caiphas Son in Law to Annas, ruling successively; so as Iohn preached in the severall yeares where they succeeded in Government to each other. Dr Hals Paraphrase upon the hard Texts of Scripture. Vers. 7. O generation of vipers] Christ in generall seemes to have respect to that which is written, Gen. 3.15. of the seed of the Serpent, which namely are of the De∣vill, Ioh. 8.44. and 1 Ioh. 3.8. for thereby is signified a nature infected with the poison of sin by the Serpent, which by malice, wicked education, corrupt instruction, may be made incurable and deadly poison as that of the Viper is described to be, Act. 28.4. and Mat. 23.33. the Pharisees are called Serpents, a generation of Vipers. Vers. 8. Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance] Or meet for, as the very same phrase is translated, Mat. 3.8. Evill fruits deserve repentance, and therefore worthy here cannot imply any matter of desert. Vers. 11. He that hath two coats let him impart unto him that hath none] That is, He that hath things necessary and in abundance, let him give freely, yet so as he reserve one coate to himselfe. Vers. 14. Do no violence to no man, neither accuse any falsly] The first word signifies, tosse no man too and fro: The other, get nothing by Sycophancy. Be content with your wages  Graeci vocant non sola stipendia, sed omnia milìtiae merita, in quibus est & annonae praebitio & alia commoda quae sub imperio Romano erant non invidenda, si laborum militarium justa habeatur ratio. Grotius.] These are three commendable things in Souldiers.
Vers. 16. Shall baptize with the Holy Ghost, and with fire] That is, with the Holy Ghost which is like fire, not only in purging away their dross and corruptions, but mightily heating them, and stirring up strong and ardent affections in them for God and his glory. Vers. 23. And Jesus began himself to be about 30. years of age] Only Luke expresly saith,Chemnit. Christ was al∣must thirty years old, ferè triginta annorum, for he wanted above two months. See à Lapide in loc. and Mr Lightfoot on Acts 1.9. that in the thirtieth yeare of the age of Christ according to the flesh assumed this was done: in which age the Priests of the Leviticall kind were admitted to the publike Ministry. Numb. 4.3. Vers. 36. Which was the Son of Cainan] In the Genealogy of Christ the name Cainan is brought, which is not in the Hebrew Edition,Gen. 11.12. 1 Chro. 1.10, 24. but in the Edition which the Helle∣nists used: For learned men thinke that it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, when the history of the Gospell was delivered in Greeke to come to the Gentiles (which were to compare this narration of Luke with the Greeke Edition) to pardon that, it being now a received errour, although besides the truth. For we must not think that Luke opposeth the truth of the History, but somewhat indulgeth for a time the publike er∣rour which was so deeply rooted, untill there were a fitter place for the Church to order something concerning that thing without a greater losse. Although their opini∣on seemes to be the sounder, which deny that the name of Cainan was inserted either by the Septuagint, or by Luke,River. Isag. ad Script. Sac. c. 10. and that it rather crept in elsewhere after the Gospell was written by Luke, of which their conjecture they had good reasons, as we may see in Cornelius à Lapide his Commentary on the 11 Chapter of Genesis. Compare this place with Gen. 10.25. and 1 Chron. 1.8. there Arphaxad is said to have begotten Sala, and so Gen. 11.12. the yeare of Arphaxad is designed in which he was borne from that Sala, viz. 35. It is a wonder that Cainan is inserted between Arphaxad and Sala, as if Sala were not the Son of Arphaxad, but the Grandchild of Cainan. There are which would have Luke follow the Lxx. Interpreters, with which you may read in the like manner, Gen. 10.25. and the following Chapter. Therefore they think that the Evangelist in a matter of no great moment, and which nothing pertaines to the faith, with a holy con∣descention, had rather follow those that erre,Bocharri Geo∣graph. Sac. par∣te priore. l. 2. cap. 13. Vide plu ib. Vide Grotium than by an unseasonable dissent cast a scruple, or else to bring the authentickness of their Gospell into danger with the weak or obstinate, which he had perswaded, that these pen-men of it were without errour. But in this opinion (by the authors favour) there seemes to be nothing sound. Therefore I see not how Luke and Moses can be better reconciled (saith Bochartus) than by follow∣ing the opinion of Cornelius a Lapide a famous Jesuite, who thinks that by the errour of the Scribes the name Cainan crept into the sacred Text, and so into the Edition of the Lxx. & multa suadent imo persuadent, that that is not rashly affirmed by him, 1. Because Philo and Iosephus who do follow the Greeke Edition in other things, have not re∣membred this Cainan. 2. Ierome in the book of his Questions upon Genesis, in which by comparing the Greeke and Hebrew Copies he diligently notes if they any where differ, simply writes that Arphaxad begat Sala, neither doth he observe any difference between the Books. Lastly, A most ancient Copie of the New Testament, which Beza used, had nothing of Cainan, as he himselfe testifieth in his Annotations. CHAP. IV. Verse 1. WAS led by the Spirit] , agebatur,Chemnit▪ which word is used of a peculiar in∣ward force and impulse of the Spirit. Rom. 8.14. Gal. 5.18. Vers. 2. Being forty daies tempted of the devill] , that is,Multis modis quorum praeci∣pui hic referun∣tur. Grotius. suffering temp∣tation from the devill, from whence some collect, that Christ suffered many other temptations from Satan in these forty daies, besides the three temptations mentioned by the Evangelists; See 13. ver. Yet Luke (saith a Lapide) seemes especially in this word
to have respect to those three famous temptations of Christ, which he after rehearseth. See Matth. 4.3. Chemnit. Cuivis horum lapidum: quod pluraliter ex∣primit Mat∣thaeus, ut alibi spe. Grotius.Uers. 3. If thou be the Son of God, command this stone that it be made bread] Satan first propounded to Christ that He would either turne all or many stones of that place into bread. And presently according to the description of Luke, he may be understood to have added, Or if this be too much, say to this one stone let it be bread. He might hold one stone in his hand, and shew the other stone lying upon the ground. Brugensis. The opinion of many Divines is probable (saith à Lapide) that the Devils sin at first was this, when God revealed to him that the Son of God should assume humane na∣ture, and commanded him to submit himselfe to the man Christ, he envied Christ that he being a man should be preferred before him a most glorious Angell; and that the humane nature should be assumed into an hypostaticall union with the second person of the Trinity, therefore he rebelled against God and Christ; wherefore perceiving that this man was called the Son of God by the Father and Iohn the Baptist, he would try whether He was the true Son of God;Cornel à Lap. in 4. Mat. 3. that he might powre out upon him his an∣cient envy, anger, and indignation. Therefore it is probable (saith à Lapide) that the De∣vill did not at first abruptly say to him, If thou beest the Son of God, command these stones to be made bread, but that he first courteously saluted him, and by faire speeches insinuated himselfe into him, saying, what my Lord dost thou here alone, what dost thou muse on? I saw thee baptised in Jordane, and heard a voyce from heaven saying, this is my Son, I desire to know whether thou beest truely the Son of God by nature, or onely his adopted Son by grace? I see also that by fasting forty dayes thou art very hungry, therefore if thou beest the Son of God satisfie thy hunger, and turne those stones to bread; for it will be very easie for thee to do it. Qua Graeci proverbiali fi∣gura brevissi∣mum tempus indicant. Bene autem versum in puncto temporis, quomodo loquuntur Cicero & Caesar. Nam momenti significatio longius portigitur. Grotius.Vers. 5. In a moment of time] So the vulgar interprets it , in puncto tem∣poris. Beza. Erasmus thinkes the metaphore is taken from a mathematicall point. Some thinke it is a metaphore taken from the points of Scribes. Vers. 6. And the Devill said unto him, all this power will I give thee and the glory of them] Lucas Brugensis, on Matth 4.8. Thinkes the Devill by the art of the optickes, (in which he is most skilfull) did expose to Christs view all the kingdomes of the world. Vers. 12. For it is delivered unto mee, and to whomsoever I will, I give it] Whence it is manifest (saith à Lapide) that he feigned himselfe to be the Son of God, God, saith Hilary, and consequently to be adored. Delivered to mee] By God, he conceales the name of God both because he hated him, and because he would be esteemed and worshipped as God. Vers. 13. And when the Devill had ended all the temptation, he departed from him for a season] As if he should say,Calvin. that rest or truce was not given to Christ untill he was ex∣actly tried with all kinds of temptations. Chemnit. The word , comprehends all these.Vers. 15. Being glorified of all] That is, the Galileans and others, for his doctrine and miracles, began excellently, honourably, or gloriously to thinke and speake of him, to give great authority to him, and to have him in singular honour. Vers. 16. He went into the Synagogue on the sabbath day] In the time of his ministry he observed this custome, that in the dayes of the Sabbath for the most part he entred into Synagogues to teach.Chemnit. Iohn 18.20. And stood up for to read] Our Lord stands up to read the Law, but v. 20. sits downe to preach,Mr. Thorndikes Discourse of the Right of the Church in a christian State. ch. 4. the one, to shew reverence to the giver of the Law, the other, authority o∣ver the congregation, which he taught as a Prophet. Vers. 17. And there was delivered unto him the booke of the Prophet Esaias] Seing secti∣ons out of the Law and Prophets were read every Sabbath, there was given him a book which was more difficult to expound; and that book most cleerely prophesies of Christ.
When hee had opened the booke] , unfolding or opening. Their Bookes were not written as ours are in severall leaves; but according to the custome of those times, est evolvere.  con∣volvere. Nam Hebraeorum, ut & Latinorum, libri erant volumina, hinc evolvere librum apud Ciceronem atque alios. Idem est revolvere Livio & Martiali, qua voce & hic usus est rectè Latinus interpres. Ejusmodi libros etiam nunc in Synagogis videre est. Grotius.Olim libri non ligabantur sed involvebantur, sicut adhuc hodie liber▪ Legis (quem Iudaei Sepher Torah appellant) Jnde & liber Esther à velvendo megillah vocatur. Elias Thisbites. Eadem de causa librum volumen Latini à volvendo nuncupant.Olim libri ex futilibus foliis non constabant, ut hodie constant: sed una erat continua & perpetua pagina quam circa vir∣gam oblongam (ut bodie solemus tabulas Geographicas) quasi circa transjectum axem volvebant, ne à pulvere aut aliunde noceretur, inde libri ab Hebraeis megilloth, à Latinis volumina dicti sunt. Hinc sumpta metaphora, dicitur, Esai 34.4. Et coeli volventur ut liber, & Apocalyp. 6.14. Et coelum recessit sicut liber convolurus. Ioma seu Codex Talmudicus à Roberto Sheringhamio Cantabrigiensi editus. in one large scrowle of parchment, or other matter, which was rolled together like the web upon the pin. Psal. 40.7. Vers. 18. He hath annointed me to preach the Gospell] Enduing with grace is called an∣nointing for the resemblance it hath with an ointment. An ointment is a composition,Vnxit me] Vt Prophetam infra. 7.46. & 12.3. Cur unxit an testandae re∣verentiae? aut unxit ad fune∣rationem, Marc. 14.8. aut unxit ex consuetudine illius aevi, nam vnctio post lotionem facit ad obstruenda corporis spiramenta Drusius. and hath these ingredients, oyle and sweet odours, by vertue of oyle it soakes into the bones, Psal. 109.18. By vertue of the sweet odours mixt with it, it workes upon spi∣rits and senses; oyle represents the vertue of the power of the Spirit, and odours the comfort of grace. Vers. 20. And he closed the booke] The word is complicans, folding, roling it up, and v. 17. explicans, unfolding or opening it. See Beza on that verse. And sat down] Chal∣lenging to himself by his own right the office of a Teacher, others of the common peo∣ple did stand when they interpreted, Act. 13.16. Were fastened on him]  signifieth when with fixed eyes we do attentively, and as it were immoveably stick in the beholding of any thing.Chemnit. Vers. 22. And all bare him witnesse] That is, their mind was so convinced with those things which were spoken by Christ,Vide Bezam. Chemnit. that they could not doubt nor contradict the Prophecies agreeing to him. Gracious words] An Hebrew phrase, in which the force and grace of the Holy Ghost was conspicuous.Verba  sunt gra∣tiosa vel gratia plena, vel acceptabilia verba, afficientia cor. Chemnit. Vers. 30. But he passing through the midst of them] That is, with much confidence, safety and assurance, he withdrew himselfe. The same kind of speech is repeated Iohn 8.59. Where it is plainely intimated that Christ by his divine power was made invisible to his enemies, wherefore it is credible that he escaped here after the same manner. Vers. 36. With authority and power] , potestas, authority, is a right or morall fa∣culty, , potentia, power, is an active force or naturall faculty. Vers. 38. Simons wives mother was taken with a great fever] Peters Mother in law, (for that he had a wife is manifestly collected from this history) was ill of a fever, not a light or remisse one, but so vehement that she lay down with it. Luke cals it a great fever, for she was old being the Mother of Peters wife, and in old people such fevers are dangerous and deadly, which can hardly be cured by nature whose forces are weake. Christ did not onely heale her by his word,Chemnit. as he did the noble mans son that was sick of a fever; Iohn 4.50. But he used peculiar gestures. He came to her where she lay down, saith Marke. 2. Laying hold on her hand, he lifted her up. 3. He stood above her, not as if he stood upon her as it were kicking her with his feet, but that he stood so neare her, that bowing his body hee did as it were lye upon her,. that is the mean∣ing of the Greeke words. 4. He reproved the fever, this declares the power of Christ, that he so healed this woman that had long conflicted with a fever, and was so worne with it, that she kept her bed, that without the relickes of weaknesse she presently re∣covered both her strength and health.
CHAP. V. Verse 1. AS the people preassed upon him to heare the word of God] Christs hearers did , they lay upon him,Videtur haec vox non quem∣vis concursum, sed cum pressura significare: unde irruere non malè vertit Latinus interpres. Vide Act. 27.20. Grotius. they preassed upon him; the word of God, in opposition to the traditions of men which the Pharisees taught. Vers. 5. We have toyled all the night] Which is more seasonable for taking than the day, and have taken nothing. Vers. 6. And when they had thus done, they inclosed a great multitude of fishes, and their net brake] When Jesus called those Disciples, they had been fishing all night and caught nothing;Dr Taylor the Life and death of Christ part. 2. but when Christ bad them let down the net, they tooke multi∣tudes, to shew to us, that the successe of our indeavours is not in proportion to our labours, but the divine assistance and benediction. And their net brake] This verse seemes repugnant to that John 21.11. Suppose they had written both of one miracle (as they doe of divers) yet there is no contra∣diction,Finis miraculi fuit, ut cognita Christi Divi∣nitate, se illi Petrus & alij discipulos ad∣dicerent. Gene∣raliter tamen hoc exemplo docemur, minimè timendum esse ne respondeat labori nostro benedictio Dei & optabilis successus, quoties jussu & auspiciis Christi manus operi admovebimus. Calv. in loc. the one intending thereby to signifie, that the greatnesse of the burthen exceeded naturall ability of instruments which they had to bear it, the other that the weaknesse thereof was supported by a supernaturall and miraculous addition of strength. The nets as touching themselves brake, but through the power of God they held. Hookers Eccles. Pol. Vers. 7. Began to sinke] Would have sanke unlesse he had been upholden by a mira∣cle. Vers. 9. He was astonished, and all that were with him] Amazement besieged on every side,Simile est apud Latinos circū∣stetit horror. and possessed them all, so the Lxx use the word , Psal. 18.5. and 2 Kings 22.5. Vers. 16. And he widrew himself into the wilderness, and prayed] Thence we may ga∣ther what Christ did when he was not busied in teaching and working miracles, viz. was intent on prayer, praying and giving thankes for his ministery and office, and for the whole Church to be gathered in the New Testament.Chemnit. The power of the Lord was present to heale them] By this Hebraisme he meanes, that the Lord healed neither by medicines, nor prayer, but that he exercised his power in heal∣ing the sick, or the vertue of the Lord, that is, the divine power, exercised it self in and by Jesus Christ in healing the sick. Vers. 21. Who is this which speaketh blasphemies? who can forgive sins but God alone] That is, he cannot be either the Messias, or a Prophet sent by God, because he speaks blas∣phemies. Vers. 27. And saw a Publican] Publicans were certaine Officers in the Roman Em∣pire which did gather up the Tribute that was to be paid, and such gifts as were given: And because the goods of the Empire were called Publica, hence came the name of Publicans. Vers. 29. Levi made him a great feast] , A feast for all Commers. Erasmus out of Athenaeus saith the word signifieth splendidum epulum.Ad verbum ac∣ceptionē, quòd passim in eo omnes accipiantur. Beza. ,tam ad suavita∣tem quam adu∣tilitatem sive commodum va∣letudinis referri potest. Etsi enim vina nova plerunque sint dulciora, unde mustum  dicitur, adeoque gulosis gratio∣ra, prudentibus tamen magis arridet vetus, quia & defaecatius est & generosius, nec modo palatum magis afficit, linguam∣que gratius vellicat, sed & stomachum benignius iuvat, omnesque spiritus magis restaurat & reficit. de Dieu in loc.Vers. 39. The old is better] vulg. melius, salubrius Beza, suavius Syrus, Piscat. Eras. quia scilicet levius est. For this word properly signifieth levity, as Mat. 11.30. Luk 6.35. Rom. 2.4. Ephes. 4.32. Old wines are wont to be of a more gentle taste, new more austere.
CHAP. VI. Verse 12. COntinued all night in prayer to God] Either because it was concerning a business be∣longing to the kingdom and glory of God,Chemnit. or rather because it was a serious speech with God. Vers. 13. Whom also he named Apostles] This may be interpreted two waies: Either because afterward being installed into his Office he put that name upon them; or because he had now honoured them with that Elogie in hope of the future dignity,Calvin. that they might know to what end they were separated from the common Vulgar, and to what use they were destinated. Vers. 15. Simon called Zelotes] The Zealous, to distinguish him from Simon Peter;Par on the Rom. he was so called because of his earnestness and zeale for the Gospell. Vers. 18. Vexed with unclean spirits] Which Phrase he useth also,Chemnit. Acts 5.16. Vers. 23. Leape for joy] The word signifieth, to express mirth by some outward gesture. propriè dicuntur lasci∣vientes pecudes: translatitiè ijs tribuitur, qui prae gaudij abundantia, non possunt se continere quin varios gestus edant, hinc & inde subsilientes. Beza, Brugensis. Their Fathers] That is, the ancient people of the Jews, for Christ speaketh here to his Disciples and others that were Jews by nation. Perkins Ver. 24. But wo unto them that are rich] He curseth the Rich, not all, but those which re∣ceive their consolation in this world, that is, are so contented with their estate that they forget the life to come.Calvin. He shewes therefore that riches are so far from making one bles∣sed, that they are oft turned into the occasion of ones destruction. Vers. 25. Wo unto you that laugh now] It is the property of a man to laugh, therefore he speakes of laughter, not as a naturall, but as a sinfull act. For ye shall mourne and weepe] You shall have nothing but mourning hereafter. Vers. 26. Woe unto you when all men shall speake well of you]  is opposed to all those things which are spoken of, persecution, hatred, accusations, reproaches,Chemnit. sepa∣ration, ejection, and persecution. Vers. 35. Lend, looking for nothing againe] Our own due and right must be parted with, when it is not the parties sin, but externall calamity that hinders him,Christ sheweth with what affe∣ction and dispo∣sition of heart men ought to lend, viz. having respect only to the good of the party borrowing, and not to the restitution of the thing lent. Vide. Grotium. thou oughtest then to forgive it, at least to beare it till he be able. Vers. 38. Good measure] The good is generall of just measure. Pressed down] Levia, light things because they are porous we use to presse down to make good measure. Sha∣ken together] Some things go together more straightly by shaking, as corne.Vide Bezam in loc. Running over] Agrees to liquid things. The Lords meaning is, that God will most largely reward our beneficence. Into their bosome] That is, he will so reward them that they shall perceive that they are rewarded. An Hebrew phrase applied to the custome of the Nation, for the orientall Nations (among which were the Jewes) wore long garments,Piscat. so it was convenient for them to receive in their bosome those things which were plentifully given. Psal. 80.12. Esay 55.6. Jer. 32.18. Vers. 48. He is like a man which built an house, and digged deepe, and laid the foundation on a rock. And whn the floud arose, the streame beat vehemently upon that house and could not shake it: for it was founded upon a rock] The builder is the professour of the name of Christ. Three parts of professours of wisdom are propounded. 1. To dig deepe, that is, come to a deepe search and examination of his own corrupt heart, that he may know the iniquity thereof. 2. To make choice of a rock for a foundation, that is, Christ. Ephes. 2.20, 21. Acts 4.12. 1 Cor. 3.11. 3. To build thereon,Mr Perkins. we are built on Christ by our faith in him. Ephes. 3.17. Psal. 125.1.
CHAP. VII. Vers. 5. FOR he loveth our nation] It is no doubt but the Jews commend him for his piety, neither could the love of the Nation every where hated, elsewhere proceed, which he evidently witnessed that he favoured the Doctrine of the Law by the study of the Law and the worship of God, building them a Synagogue; It is wonderfull stupour in the meane while,Calvin. that by their suffrage they acknowledge a Gentile to receive the grace of God, which they contemptuously refused. A Synagogue] The Synagogue was 1. For instruction, there, as in a Schoole, they were instructed in Gods Law. propriè congre∣gationem significat: hic autem locum ubi congregatio fiebat. Piscat. Mr Coleman on Ier. 8.20.2. Petition, there was an Oratory, whether at times they went to pray. 3. Correction, there were offenders punished, as severall passages in the Gospell shew. Vers. 12. The gate of the City] For the Jews had their Sepulchres out of the City, as we may see,Grotius. Hinc collige Iudaeos sepul∣chra sua habu∣isse non in urbe, sed extra ur∣bem, ideoque tum ob nitorem, tum ob sanitaetem, ne cadavera suo foetore & putredine aerem inficerent. Cornel. à Lapide. Mat. 27.59. and other people also, whence he is said to be carried out. And so the cause of publike health requires, which is much impaired by the evill aire of graves. The more may we wonder why Christians should have their sacred meet∣ings in those places in which those carkasses are, which was first brought in for the me∣mory of the Martyrs, but not so well continued. Vers. 13. And when the Lord saw her, he had Compassion on her, and said unto her, weepe not] He really shewed the efficacy of comfort, restoring the raised Son to his mother. He useth two instruments,Chemnit. as it were, in the raising up of this dead person, for he touched the Biere, and spake to the dead; 1. That he might shew that the destruction of death, and restitution of life, is the power and work of his person, not in the di∣vine nature only, but in that also which he assuming from us, enriched with the fulness of the divinity. 2. That he might teach, that the meane, or instrument, by which those benefits of Christ are communicated to us,Loculum tau∣gendo fortè ostendere voluit sibi minimè horrori fore mortem & sepulchrum quo nobis vitam acquireret. Calvin. are his word, by which he will destroy death, and restore life in us. This is the first raising of the dead made by Christ in the New Testament. Vers. 14. Young man, I say unto thee, arise, or be raised from the dead] Jesus (when those that carryed the young man stood still) cried to the dead man, not in words of pray∣ing, (as Elijah and Elisha did) but in the word of commanding. For so is the word ,Chemnit. used of the dead, Mat. 11.5. and 14.2. and 16.21. Vers. 16. And there came a feare on all] The common people amongst them which beleeved not in Christ could not so lightly neglect or calumniate this miracle as the rest for the unusuall greatnesse of it, for in nine hundred yeares almost after Elisha we read of no such thing to have happened in Israel. And they glorified God] Because they declared that this miracle was a testimony and warning that God either sent some famous Prophet, or the Messias himself. A great Prophet is risen up] All those which were sent by God were called Prophets. They call him a great Prophet,Grotius. because he restored the dead to life, not by prayers, nor by the spreading of his body upon him, but by a bare command, without all example. Vers. 22. To the poore the Gospell is preached] Some translations (as the Geneva) have it,Vulg Lat. pauperes Evan∣gelizantur. The poore receive the Gospell: Which is more proper. The poore are Evangelized or Gospellized, so is the Greeke, as we say, one is Frenchified, or Italianated, when his Garbe and carriage are such as if he were a naturall Frenchman, or Italian, so their speeches or Iudgements, actions and affections are transformed into the Gospell. Christ speakes this in a twofold reference: 1. To the freeness of his love, he hath no respect of persons. 2. In reference to the effect, the poore receive the Gospell, have re∣ceived
a tincture or impression of the Gospell, are transformed into it. Poore) These words are absolutely true of the spiritually poore or humble: 1. Be∣cause he was made so by the Gospell. 2. Was bred by it, therefore is nourished by it; yet 2ly. they are intended by Christ of the outwardly poore, because he bids them tell what they had heard and seene, they could not see the spiritually poore. 2ly. All the rest of the things which they were to tell Iohn of were temporall, bodily blindnesse, lamenesse, death, therefore this. 3. Christ speakes of miracles, for a gracious man to receive the Gospell is no miracle. 4. This exposition agrees with other places, Ioh. 6.26. and 7.98. 3ly. This is not true of them universally, nor exclusively, not all the outwardly poore, nor only they, receive the Gospell; but fourthly probably and for the most part the poore rather than the rich embrace it, and more eminently receive it; 1. Into their understandings to know it. 2. Into their judgements to allow of it as true. 3. Into their wills to consent unto the goodnesse of it. 4. To obey the truth of it in their lives. Vers. 25. Are in kings courts] In Kings Palaces. Piscat.Vno verbo in regiis. Ovid. 2. Meram. Regia solis erat sublimibus alta Columnis, veruntamen periphrasis illa magnificentius sonat. Piscat. Vers. 28. He that is least in the Kingdome of God is greater than he] That is, the least Doctor in the time of the New Testament (who is in no wise to be compared with Iohn for the gifts of the Spirit) in which the Gospel concerning the kingdome of heaven is preached, is more excellent than Iohn in respect of the kind of his doctrine.Scultet. de pre∣catione. Vers. 30. The Counsell of God against themselves] , in or against themselves, the words will bear either: In themselves, because they knew it, Graecis ut & consilium Latinis signifi∣care potest aut id quod secum quis constituit facere, aut quod faciendum Censet. Potest utravis significatio hic locum habere. Grotius. Vide plura ibid. and tooke it into consideration, and yet rejected it: and against themselves, because it was their destru∣ction. Vers. 33. But Iohn the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine] That is, he observed not a vulgar, but an extraordinary, peculiar and austere kind of life,Chemnit. he drank only water, and did eat locusts and wild honey. Vers. 34. The Son of man is come eating and drinking] That is, Christ in his externall and common life affected nothing singular or extraordinary, but applyed himself to the vulgar and usuall custome. Vers. 35. Wisdome is justified] That is, acknowledged and declared to be just. Vers. 37. A sinner] A notorious sinner. Whereas divers others addressed themselves to Christ for corporall mercies, this only commeth for spirituall, even for remission of her sinnes. There are three great things observable in this historie. 1. Great sinnes.Mr. Burgesse of Justificati∣on. 2. Great repentance and humiliation. 3. Great love and grace of God through Christ in pardoning sinne. Brought an alabaster box of oyntment] It was a Custome to anoynt guests at feasts,This was a present for a Prince, an ala∣baster box of Nard Pistick was sent as a present from Cambyses to the King of Ethiopia. Dr. Tailor of the life and death of Christ, the third part. in token of welcome. See 26. Matth. 7. Vers. 44. Thou gavest me no water for my feet] It was a custome amongst them to give water to their guests comming far for their feet, as is manifest from Gen. 18.4. and 19.2. and 43.24. and Iudg. 19.21. 1 King. 25.41. Thess. 5.10. They did it either that they might wash their feet which they had fullied in the way, or because of their wearinesse, for cold water refresheth a wearied person.Non solum Iu∣daeorum & omnium Ori∣entalium, sed & Graecorum mos fuit, discubituris lavare pedes, in Conviviis cumprimis splendidis. Quistor pius. Simon seemes not to have neglected this Custome, because Christ came not farre, but was only invited to feast with him, unlesse it can be proved that water was wont to be given to such as were invited to a feast. Drusius in praeterit. Christ came from Ierusalem to Bethany,Grotius. for he spent the dayes with teaching at Ieru∣salem, and in the evenings for the most part came to Bethany. Vers. 47. For she loved much] Or, and therefore she loved much;Particula non causativa sed illativa vel rationalis. Vt Matth. 25.34. 1 John 3.14. Perkins on Jude. The Papists make
this for causa praecedens, and not signum subse quens, as if her love were the cause of the forgivenesse of her sinnes. The word (for) doth not signifie here a Cause, but a reason drawn from the signe, as it is also used elsewhere, the sence then is, many sinnes are forgiven her, and hereby you shall know it, because, or in that she loved much. The particle (For) is used as a note of the effect, or signe, in our common speech, as there is fire, for I see smoake, this tree liveth, for it sprouteth. Mr. Pinke would have it run thus, therefore she hath loved much, for first the whole scope of the Parable is to shew,See Downam. Of Justificati∣on. l. 6. c. 12. page 404, 405. To gather hence merit of remission for or workes of Charity is against the ground of faith, by which we beleeve remission of sinnes, which is directly opposie to merit. Dr Taylor. aliquando est conjunctio collectiva seu rationalis, & significat ideo vel propterea, ut hic, & 1 Sam. 2.25. Posse∣lius in Syntaxi Conjunctionum p. 300. that he loves most to whom most is forgiven, and not contrarily that most is forgiven to him that loves most. 2. The antithesis in the same verse requires it, the words, but to whom little is forgiven he loveth little, suppose this thesis, because many sinnes are forgiven her she loveth much. CHAP. VIII. Verse 2. MAry called Magdalene] Her name was Mary, but she was married to a noble personage,Vide Cornel à Lap. a native of the Towne and Castle of Magdall, from whence she had her name of Magdalene, though her selfe was borne in Bethany. Vers. 3. Which ministred unto him of their substance] These examples, say some, shew that the wife in some respect may dispose of goods without her husbands consent to good uses,Fieri potest ut Cuza Herodis procurator do∣mino suo nimi∣um similis consilio uxoris valdè fuerit contrarius: sed pia mulier ob∣staculum hoc zeli sui fervo∣re & constan∣tia superavit. Calvinus.Quòd quidam hinc argumentum petunt, licere uxoribus viros à fide alienos deserere, non video quid certi habeat. Credibilius aut uxorem dici quae vidna fuerit, aut maritum non alienum fuisse à pietate. Vt solet Deus rimuls quibusdam in aulis alioqui nimium sibi praeclusas penetrare. Nam & in Neronis aula non defuere qui Christianismo faverent. Phil. 4.22. Grotius. for it is like Herods steward was of Herods mind. But all the shew of probability that can be shewed, that the wife of Chuzas ministred to Christ without her husbands consent is, that Ioanna is there said to be the wife of Chuza, Herods Steward. But first the phrase doth not imply that Chuza was then living. Se∣condly some gather, that this Steward was the Ruler, whose son Christ healed; who thereupon believed with all his house, Chemnit. Harm. Evang. cap. 33. Iohn 4.53. which if it were, then it cannot be doubted, but that his wife followed Christ with his good liking and consent. Chuza being Herods Steward, and so a man of great place, and publike imployment, might if he were then living, depute the managing of all affaires at home to his wife, Prov. 31.11. and so she might have at least a generall consent. Vers. 13. In time of temptation fall away] Greek, opportunity of temptation, that is, (say some) when one is tempted by his darling sinne. Historicall and Temporary faith may be lost but not saving faith. Vers. 15. In an honest and good heart] Erasmus thinks it is an Hebraicall doubling, for very good, as Ier. 24.3. the Prophet calls figs good good, that is, very good. Others thinke it is a kind of speech used by the Greeks,Beza. and fetcht from the very se∣crets of Philosophie, although the common people usually had it in their mouth; Because there are some externall goods of fortune, as they call them, others of the bo∣dy, and others of the mind. The Graecians call a man adorned with all these  is referred to the externall life,  to the true vertues of the mind. Haec vox Hel∣lenistis fre∣quens constantiam illam denotat quae inter adversa durat spe meliorum. Grotius.Bring forth fruit with patience] Or as the Greek word may bear, in expectation or tariance, viz. for the fit season.
Vers. 23. A storme of winde] . It is not properly one winde,Aristot. dicit  esse ventum vi∣olentum qui infernè sursum versus repente convolvitur. but a con∣flict of many windes; the LXX. use it 38. Iob. 1. Vers. 25. Where is your faith] Or as the Greek Article intendeth, Where is that your faith? Vbi est illa fides vestra? Tolet. Comment. in hunc loc. that measure and de∣gree of faith, which you have shewed to be in mee. Vers. 29. It had caught him]  he made him run violently, as the horse when he is spurred. Beza. Vers. 30. Legion] A Legion in the warres contains above 6000. footmen, and 700. horsemen.Quod vocabu∣lum recentiores Graeci mutuati sunt à Latino Legio. Fuit autem Legio apud Romanos agmen militare, constans Hesychio autore, viris sexies mille sexcentis sexaginta sex. Secundum Suidam sunt sexies mille milites. Legio in summum (inquit Varro) Con∣stiterit duodecies millibus quingentis militibus, ut ut autem nume rarentur milites veterum Legionum apud Romanos, Di∣abolus hic ipse reddit rationem nominis, quia multi sumus. Quia enim tunc temporis Romanae legiones in Syria & Iudaea, hinc inde in praesidiis dispositae, & omnibus nomen illud non tantum notum sed & formidabile erat, ideo illud ipse sibi as∣sumpsit. Chemit. Vers. 31. That he would not command them to goe out into the deep]  bottomlesse deep, because there nocendi & perdendi potestas auferetur. See Beza and Grotius. We may find three notable evidences of Satans limited power in this one history of the man possessed in the region of the Gadarens. 1. In that he begs leave to enter into the Swine, he that afterward boasts that all the world was his, and all the King∣domes thereof, hath not power over a vile Swine. Secondly, as soon as he enters into the Swine, he presently carries them headlong into the Sea, why did he not so to the man possessed? not for any love he bare to him more than to the Swine, but because he was limited by God. Thirdly, his name was Legion, there was a whole Legion of Devills in him, though such an army of them was in one poore man, yet they were not able to destroy and drown him as the Swine. Vers. 38. Now the man out of whom the Devills were departed, besought him that he might be with him, but Iesus sent him away.] It is uncertaine why Christ refused to have this man his companion, unlesse that he expected a greater fruit of it, if he should be wit∣nesse of so excellent and singular a benefit among the Gentiles,Calvin. which Marke and Luke witnesse to be done. Vers. 39. Shew how great things God hath done unto thee] That Christ commands him to report it as the worke of God, not his, he did it to this end, that he might be ac∣counted a true Minister and Prophet of God, and might obtain an authority of teach∣ing, for so it behoved the rude people to be instructed by degrees,Calvin. to whom his divini∣ty was not yet known. Vers. 43. Spent all her living] Consumpsit , she spent her whole life, that is, the goods which maintained her life, so Prov. 27.27. Vers. 52. Bewailed her] The word signifies to beat and strike, and is transferred to the mournings and lamentations that are at burials, at which time men use such kind of behaviour.Camerarius in notis, rectè ob∣servat, verbum hoc habere significationem feriendi & caedendi, inque funeribus lugentium tales solent esse gestus.Apud LXX. in hac significatione verbum hoc legitur Creberrimè. Vide Gen. 22.2. & 50.10. 1 Sam. 25.1. 2 Sam. 7.12. Jer. 4.8. & 22.18. Quistorpius. CHAP. IX. Verse 3. TAke nothing for your journey, neither staves, nor scrip, neither bread] He commands them not to be sollicitous for food,See Matth. 10.10. that they might give themselves wholly to preaching, and commit themselves to the divine providence. A scrip is a little sack, in which they did put and heape their meate; by bread all food is here signified,Novarinus. as it is usuall in Scripture.
Deny himself] Greek utterly deny himselfe. Abnegare seip∣sum est suo ar∣bitrio, suae vo∣luntati, & om∣nibus proprijs animi motibus placitisque re∣nuntiare, pro∣prios affectus negligere, sug∣gestiones ac sua∣siones earum comprimere & repellere, atque posthac non sibi ipsi sed illi deditum esse, quem in Dominum ac magistrum dele∣git. Polyc. Lyser. 1. In persons, He must deny himselfe in his Father, Mother, Children, Friends, all. 2. In things, He must forsake, house, lands, goods. He must deny himselfe in his profit, credit, pleasure, ease, and offer up himselfe to God. 2. Take up his daily crosse, beare with patience the crosses that come upon him daily, or day by day. 3. Follow Christ through thick through thin.Vers. 23. If any man will come after me, let him deny himselfe, and take up his Crosse daily, and follow me] The meaning is this, every one that will become a scholar in the school of Christ, and learne obedience unto God, must deny himself, that is, he must in the first place exalt and magnifie the grace of God, and become nothing in him∣selfe, renouncing his own reason will and affections, and subjecting them to the wisdome and will of God in all things. Secondly, take up his Crosse, that is, he ought alwayes to make a forehand-reckoning, even of private Crosses and particular afflicti∣ons, and when they come to bear them with cheerefulnesse, for there is that emphasis in the word take up. This done, he must follow Christ by practising the vertues of meeknesse, patience, love and obedience, and by being conformable to his death in crucifying the body of sinne in himselfe. Mr. Perkins. Ne deterreat 1. Vitae pericu∣lum. v. 24.2. Opum jactura. v. 25.3. Famae ignominia. v. 26.Vers. 24. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it] That is, that will not take up his Crosse to follow Christ, shall never be saved. Apud Latinos exitus & ex∣cessus pro mor∣te passim occur∣runt. Grotius.Vers. 31. Decease] . Some think he alludes to the Exodus, or going of the Israelites out of Egypt; for as their going out of Egypt was to them the be∣ginning of their liberty, so also death to Christ was a way to glory, and after his ex∣ample also to us: whence also the ancient Christians loved to call death , 2 Pet. 1.15. As we may see in Irenaeus, Clement, and others. Vers. 41. Oh faithlesse and perverse generation] 1. Faithlesse, which neither by doctrine nor miracles can be overcome or reformed, so as to beleeve. 2. Perverse, which by no Lawes will be brought into order. This is taken out of 32. Deut. 20. where Moses gives these Epithets to the Israelites,Polyc. Lyser. who for fourty whole yeares could not be brought, neither by the Law of God, nor by stupendious miracles, to order their lives according to the will of God. Vers. 51. He setled himselfe] Or as it is in the originall, he hardened his face, to go to Ierusalem, ob∣firmare ani∣mum est om∣nem metum & horrorem mor∣tis deponere, & animo suo constituere hanc mortem esse ferendam, ut ut dura & horrenda omnium sese in ea praebeant LXX. interpretes hanc Graecam phrasin ponunt Ier. 21.10. Ezech. 6.2. Polyc. Lyser. in loc. Vide Bezam & Piscat in loc. as Ezek. 4.3. Christ by his whole outward habite and gesture declared that it was determined for him to go to Jerusalem. For he did not now go from one town to another, as he was wont, to preach the Gospell, neither staid he any where, but presently went in that way which leades directly to Jerusalem, till he was past Samaria. Vers. 54. And when his Disciples Iames and Iohn saw this, they said, Lord wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume them, even as Elias did] Here they shew themselves to be Boanerges, that is sonnes of thunder, quid mirum filios tonitrus ful∣gurare? Ambrose. Ragash is to make a great tumult, as a furious multitude gathered to∣gether, that maketh a noise as the noise of a troubled sea, Psal. 2.1. Therefore some not without reason say, the sons of Zebedeus are called Benai regesci, Sons of Thunder. Rutherfords Tryall and Triumph of faith. Crotius.55. Yee know not what manner of spirit yee are of] Some interpret it, you know not what spirit becomes you, rather you know not what Spirit acts you. The name Spi∣rit is of large extent, in its originall it signifies the wind; it is trasferred to other things, God, good and evill Angels, and the soule of man are so called. It is taken also for the affections of the mind, Rom. 11.8. Ezek. 13.3. The meaning is, you thinke you are acted by such a Spirit as Elias of old; but you erre, you have a zeale, but not ac∣cording to knowledge, and which is therefore a humane affection, not a divine mo∣tion, as the following reason proves. Vers. 62. No man having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the king∣dome
of God] As though he had said,Mr. Perkins. Vide Cornel. à Lap. & Grotium. He that starteth from the plough is not fit for the field: no more is he that shifteth from his calling, fit for Gods service. CHAP X. Vers. 1. APpointed] The Greeke word  Signifieth both to demonstrate and create, whence we may collect, that Christ did not onely rightly choose these seventy Disciples, de∣monstrated them to his Apostles, because he thought them fit for this embassage, but also by certaine ceremonies ordained them to this office, for so the Greek word signifieth in this place. Polyc. Lyser. signifies to designe to a publicke office. The seventy also] As there were twelve in the old Testament, from which the twelve Tribes were propagated; and which the whole nation of the Jews acknow∣ledged for their Progenitors, so Christ also would have twelve Apostles which should regenerate both the Jews and Gentiles by the word, and which the whole Christian Nation should acknowledge for their Patriarkes; and as Iacob descended with seventy soules into Aegypt, Gen. 46. v. 27. So Christ would have seventy Quod Lati∣nus posuit LXXII Non aliunde est quam ex antiqua traditione. Nam tot fuisse à Christo Creatos antiquitas credidit, etiam Graeci, qui hoc loco legerunt , ut Origenes & Epiphanius. Neque vero temerè, nam moris erat Hebraeis LXX. nominare numero rotundo etiam ubi constabat esse LXXII. Grotius. Disciples, but who these seventy Disciples were it is no where expressed in Scripture. And sent them two and two before his face into every City] This sending of two together commends brotherly conjunction, makes for consolation in adversitie, and for the greater confirmation of the truth, thereby is also signified that this businesse is such to which one sufficeth not; but two eyes alwayes see more than one; Moses and Aaron were sent to Pharoah, Paul and Barnabas by the Church,  i. e. , as Marke speakes from the idiome of the Hebrewes, ch. 6. v. 7. as we by interposing the copulati∣on say in english two and two. Vers. 2. The harvest truely is great but the labourers are few] This is the force of the speech, a great harvest requires many workemen, the doctrine of the Gospell hitherto expounded by me in all Palaestina, hath the reason of a great harvest, therefore it re∣quires many Ministers. And Christ saith this for the consolation of these his Embassa∣dours that they may hopewell. Vers. 3. As Lambes] Here we must not scrupulously inquire, why Christ names his Disciples here lambes, when he had called his Apostles before sheepe? for the sense is the same in both places, and the Syriacke useth the same word in both places, by this name Agnus à Groeco  derivatur quod castum signifi∣cat, innatam habet simplicitatem & hero suo utilis est. Caro et lac cibo inserviunt, vellus & lana indumento, stercus medicinae & foe∣cundandis agriis. Polyc. Lyser. He admonished the Disciples of chastitie, simplicity and publicke profit. Among wolves] So he calls the Priests and Pharisees, partly for their rage, against Christ and his Apostles, and partly for their power with which they were furnished to hurt. Vers. 4. Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes] This he saith not onely to warne them that they ought to be quicke in this journie that they may returne speedily to him, but also, that he might shew his divine power, that he can provide for them and all others following their lawfull vocation, though they be destitute of these things. Salute no man by the way] He would warne them to make speed, so 2 Kings 4.29.Festinationis signum ut su∣pra. 9.61. Est hyperbole, quasi dicat, Ne divertatis ad privatas salutationes & familiares prolixasque collocutiones, nam alioqui non vult Chri∣stus Discipulos suos esse inciviles & rusticos. Cornel. à Lap. Those salutations (saith Grotius) among the people of the East, were not done with a light gesture or word, but with many bendings of the body, kisses, embraces. Vers. 6. The son of peace be there] He cals him so who doth not disdaine the doctrine
of peace, or the Gospell, hears that attentively and receives it into an honest heart, one worthy of peace, as 2 Sam. 12.5. saith Drusius. It shall turne to you againe] Christ would teach them that they lost nothing by dis∣charging their duty by reason of the others incredulity. Vers. 7. Eating and drinking] He implies that necessary food shall not be wanting to them, although he send them without purse and scrip. Go not from house to house] He would not have them rashly change their Inne, which is signe of an inconstant and mutable mind,Lautiores men∣sas sectando. Quistorpius. or is joyned with a contempt of the first Host; as if he by his inhumanity or basenesse had driven away his guest. Vers. 8. Eat such things as are set before you] That is, be content with any meane provision. Vers. 11. Even the very dust of your City] By which symbole the Jews did witnesse that those men against whom they did shake off their dust,Erasmus in A∣dag: cum pul∣visculo. Eo∣dem pertinet Evangelicum illud quo ju∣bentur etiam pulverem excutere Apostoli ne minimum quidem ab eis secum auferre. were so execrable to them that they would not communicate with them in their dust. This shaking off the dust ought also to admonish us, that we have nothing common with wicked men, so that their dust may not cleave to us. Vers. 13. Wo unto thee Chorazin, wo unto thee Bethsaida] Which is thought to bee the country of five Apostles, Peter, Andrew, Philip, Iames and Iohn. Iohn 1.44. Vers. 15. And thou Capernam] Where Christ besides many excellent Sermons wrought so many Miracles that the Nazarites his Country-men objected it to him. Luke 4.23. Vers. 16. He that heareth you] viz. Teaching and prescribing what is right. Vers. 17. Through thy name] Christ wrought Miracles by his own power, the Dis∣ciples by Christs; whose name they also called upon, as we may see in the Acts and Books of the Jews; as before the Devils yielded to the name of the God of Israel, so now to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. Omni sua glo∣ria & potesta∣te.Vers. 18. I beheld Satan as lightening fall from heaven] From the degrees of know∣ledge, power, and dominion he had in the hearts of men, as Capernaum exalted to hea∣ven, as sodainly as lightning is wont to shine from heaven; this prediction is to be re∣ferred to the incredible swiftnesse of propagating the Gospell to the destroying of false religions, and all the workes of the Devill. Vers. 19. He may have respect to Esay 11.8. Sicut Latini id quod dura∣bile non est dicunt in vento & aqua scribi, ita Hebraei pa∣ri sensu dicunt scribi in terra, id est in pulvere. Ierem. 17.13. Huic contrarium est scribi in Coelo, id est vitae aeternae as∣cribi atque destinari. Grotius. He alludes to the 91. Psal. 13. alhough there he speakes of the protection of divine providence here of a wonderfull power. Vers. 20. Rather rejoyce because your names are written in heaven] A metaphoricall speech for to be counted sons and heires by God, as if they had been noted downe in a catalogue. It is better to have that which is proper to Saints, than what is commu∣nicated also to others. Calvin. Vers. 21. Rejoyced] He witnessed his joy not only in words but also in his gesture and countenance, so the Greek word signifieth. Vers. 26. What is written in the law? how readest thou] Taking it for granted Mr. Perkins. that men must read the Scriptures privately. As if he Mr. Hilder∣sam on Psal. 51.6. had said, In the written law of God (and there onely) thou shalt find what those good workes are that God will reward in heaven. Vers. 27. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soule, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind] By the heart is understood all the affections, desires, and inclinations; by the soule, the will, purpose, and resolution; by the mind, the rea∣son, understanding, discourse, and memory; and by the might or strength, all the fa∣cultyes of the soule, and parts of the body, with all their functions, actions and opera∣tions, both internall and externall. And thy neighbour as thy selfe] By the name of neighbour, all men, of what condition, sex, or nation soever, are understood. Polyc. Lyser. As thy selfe] 1. Truely. 2. Ardently. 3. Constantly. Vers. 28. This do, and thou shalt live] Object. Life is promised to the worker, yet
Rom. 4.3. It is said, Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousnesse. Ans. Both speake of the word, but not of the same part of the word, the Law promiseth life to the worker, and the Gospell life to the believer. Vers. 30. Wounded] With his sins and the sting for them; One glosseth well on it,Chrysost. Am∣bros. & Stella. Qui locus la∣trocinijs infa∣mis ut notat Hyeronimus. not from Jericho to Jerusalem, but the contrary; Jericho was a type of hell, Jerusa∣lem of heaven, a man that forsakes God and turnes to the Devill is like to be wounded. Vers. 31. By chance] Therefore, sayDr. Taylor. Vide Bezam. & Piscat. some, one may use the word chance. It is a para∣ble, and being uttered in the common received tearms, cannot be stretched so farre beyond the scope of it. 2. The Greek words  signifieth properly, it fell out, or came to passe, viz. by the providence of God overruling the matter. 3. It fell out casually to the Priest who expected no such event. Vers. 34. Pouring in oyle and wine] Wine serves to cleanse, and ease the paine within, oyle to mollifie the flesh, and allay the paine without. Wine and oyle] That is, the doctrine of Salvation. Ambrose, Stella, Calv. Chemnit. Wine, the Law to eate out the corruption, and oyle, the Gospell to heale it. Vers. 35. He took out two pence] Christ hath bequeathed unto us for our soules health both lawes, the old and new, say Optatus and Ambrose. Vers. 39. Which also sat at Iesus feet] It was the custome of old that the Doctors for honours sake sate in a more eminent place, but the Disciples and the common people sate at their feet. Act. 22.3. The same custome is yet to this day observed in Temples and Schooles.Polyc. Lyser. Mary also commends to us two gifts of the mind which in the greedy hearers of hea∣venly doctrine are necessary,Sessione signifi∣catur quies, at∣tentio, diligen∣tia & assiduitas. Lucas Brugen∣sis. one is tranquillitie of mind without all distraction of body and thoughts, the other is humility and reverence toward the Teacher, the first is noted by the word sate, and the latter by sitting at his feete. Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 40. And Martha was cumbred about much serving] The Greek word rendred Cumbred, , signifies to be drawne and wried round and round about. The adverbe of that word, , is used 1 Cor. 7.35. and rendred without distraction, not being torne, vexed and drawn asunder.Evangelista tribus verbis u∣titur  distendi & distrahi,  solicisum esse, &  tumul∣tuari, quibus excessum Marthae circa curam rei familiaris notare voluit. Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 41. Martha, Martha] A friendly compellation, as Matth. 7.21. Martha is named twice, it signifieth bitter, as if hee had said, bitter bitter. 1. Bitter to her selfe, in mak∣ing a drudge of her selfe, and neglecting the word. 2. To her sister, in chiding and accu∣sing her. The doubling of the name among the Hebrewes partly signifies vehemency of affection, partly greatnesse of good will, as Matth. 7.22. See. 22.31. 41.42. Verses. 4. Attributes are given to riches. 1. They are many things and re∣quire much labour. 2. Vnnecessary. 3. They will be taken from us. 4. They are not the best. See Luke. 16.2.Porro unum est necessarium Vulg. Atqui una re opus est. Beza. Vers. 42. One thing is needfull] So we read it with the Vulgar, that is, the word of God. Chrysost. Ambrose, Calvin. Primarily, simply, and per se needfull. The originall is, there is need of one thing, one dish is enough, but Grotius Non puto de uno ferculo Christum hic agere quod ta∣men quibusdam valde placere video: Satius est intelligamus Christum ex occasione ejus quod gerebatur generalem pronuntiasse sententiam: varias esse ac multiplices hujus vitae curas, sed unam esse rem quae si salvi esse velimus omnino nobis sit necessaria, curam scilicet pietatis. Matth. 16.26. Grotius. dislikes this. That good part] By an excellencie, that is, the best. Austin, Non tu malam sed illa meliorem. Which shall not be taken away from her] That hath once received it. Christ would not suffer Mary to be drawne away from an extraordinary exercise of the word, though there was much businesse by reason of his unlooked-for coming with his Disciples. CHAP. XI. Vers. 1. WHen he ceased] The Greek word signifieth to put an end to a thing, properly to sit downe and rest, as if prayer were a labour.
Vers. 2. When yee pray say our Father, &c.] Luke somewhat varies from Matthew in laying down the forme of the Lords prayer, that he might teach, that in prayer wee ought not to be so sollicitous of words as to pray in the mind and Spirit, and to at∣tend rather to the matter than to the words. For the sense, there is no difference to be found between both formes, onely the words are changed, when the sense is coinci∣dent.Polyc. Lyser. Omnino credi∣bile est in Grae¦cis codicibus adjecta ex Mat∣thaeo quae Lucas omiserat, cum non exstet in Latinis antiquis illud, qui es in coelis, item, fiat voluntas tua ut in coelo ita in terra (quod & Graeci codices quidam omittunt) item, sed libera nos à malo; quae ipsa etiam non expressa vi insunt verbis coeteris. Grotius. Matthew saith  this day, Luke  dayly, Matthew hath  debts, Luke  our sinnes, Matthew saith , as also we forgive, Luke  for even we forgive, but the sense in both is the same, and in Luke the conclu∣sion, for thine is the kingdome, the power and the glory, is omitted. Vers. 5. Which of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto him at midnight, &c.] There are five excellent things observable out of this Parable. 1. When a people of God are in the darkest condition they ought to sue to him for mercy and deliverance. 2. It is our duty then not only to be importunate but impudent with God. Ver. 8. Because of his importunity, in the Greek it is impudence; there should be a holy boldness in prayer. 3. A people that are so importunate with God, he will at last shew mercy to them. 4. God will not only grant what we desire, but will give more than we desire, he desired but three loves, he will give him as many as he needs. 5. When a friend comes to a friend he shall prevaile. Vers. 9. And I say unto you] It is a comparison not from the like but from a greater, if an impudent beggar obtaine so much from man, what will not an humble and dayly petitioner obtaine from God. Vers. 11. If a Son shall aske bread of any of you that is a father, will he give him a stone, &c.] This seemes to have been a common Proverbe.Videtur hoc fuisse vulgatum proverbium, cui respondet Plautinum illud quod Erasmus observat. Altera manu fert lapidem, panem ostentat altera. Ver. 13. Being evill] Either simply in our selves, or comparatively with God. The holy Spirit] By which is meant, First, the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost. Se∣condly, the inward sense and feeling of him in the heart, thus he who hath the Holy Ghost may pray both for encrease of his gifts, and for a comfortable sense and feeling of him. Vers. 21. His goods are in peace] Whereby is signified, that the wicked of the world being possessed of Satan, are at peace in themselves in regard of temptations; not as if lusts do not differ among themselves,Mr Perkins. but Satan will not suffer them to question their estate. Vers. 27. Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou hast sucked] The peri∣phrasis of a mother described from her belly and paps. See 23.29. Ovid Meta∣morph. l. 4. fab. 8.—Qui te genuere beati. Et mater foelix et quae dedit ubera nutrix. Vers. 30. As Ionas was a sign unto the Ninevites, so shall also the Son of man be to this gene∣ration] Signum non confirmationis, sed condemnationis; a sign not of confirmation, but Condemnation. Vers. 33. No man when he hath lighted a Candle, putteth it in a secret place, &c.] Christ by the name of a Candle understands the word of God according to that Psal. 119.105. and 2 Pet. 1.19. Prov. 6.23. The word of God is compared to a Candle in ma∣ny respects. 1. For the Author, which is God, he by his Son (who is the light of the world) kindled this Candle thence from the beginning, that is to say, he hath revealed his word, and by that his will to us. 2. For its nature, because as there is nothing purer than light in all the world,Polyc. Lyser. with which no filth can be mingled; so the words of the Lord are pure words, Psal. 12.4.7. 3. For its effects which are manifold, the Candle reveales those things (the darknesse being expelled) which did first lye hid, so the word of God reveales many things, which are otherwise unknown; the Candle directs the
steps and actions of the body; the word of the Lord shines in all spirituall actions. Light also expels the darkness of the mind, sadness, and feare; so the word of God first enligh∣tens the consciences of men, afterward frees from the terrours of sin and eternall damnation. Vers. 44. Ye are as graves which appeare not] As the deepe grave hides the stinking Carkasse, and keepes in the stench from offending any mans smell within: so the deep and dissembling heart of man is a cunning digger of such graves, nay it selfe as it were is a grave, wherein their rottenness and corruption lies so closely covered,Dike. that hardly the sharpest noses of such as converse with them shall be able to smell them out. Vers. 45. Then answered one of the Lawyers, and said unto him, Master, thus saying,Drus. detribus Sectis Judaeo∣rum l. 2. c. 13. thou reproachest us also] As if he should say, not only the Scribes and Pharisees, but also we Lawyers, therefore the Lawyers were somewhat different from the Scribes. Vers. 51. From the bloud of Abell unto the bloud of Zacharias] The question is who this Zachary was of whose slaughter Christ here speakes, and there are three opinions of learned men concerning three persons: 1. We read of one Zacharie, 2 Chron. 24.20. which agrees with those words of Christ, Who perished between the Altar and the Temple. For the Altar stood in the Court before the place of the Temple, and this very Zachary desired from God the revenge of his bloud, for he said, Let the Lord see and require it. But that in Matthew seemes to oppose this opinion, that Christ saith this Zachary was the son of Barachias, but in the Chronicles he is called the son of Iehoiadah,Polyc. Lyser. but others say, that he was Binominis, had two names. 2. Others say, it was that Zachary which was one of the lesser Prophets, who himself in the Book of his Prophecie,Neque proba∣bilis est eorum opinio qui hoc ad Zachariam referunt qui populum ab ex∣ilio Babyloni∣co reducem ad templum aedifi∣candum hortatus est cujus extant vaticinia. Tametsi enim libri inscriptio filium Barachiae fuisse docet, occisum tamen fu∣isse nunquam legitur. Deinde coacta est expositio quod medio tempore inter altaris & Templi aedificationem occisus fuerit. De altero Zacharia Ioiadae filio sacra historia refert, quod huic loco optimè quadrat, eum in atrio Templi fuisse lapidatum. Templum hic sumitur pro atrio, huìc propinquum erat altare. Calvinus. chap. 1. ver. 1. witnesseth, that he was the Son of Barachias, but though nothing be observed in the Scripture of his slaughter, yet some thinke that he also was killed by the Jews in that holy place. 3. Origen and Basill say, it is an ancient tradition, that Zachary the Father of Iohn Baptist, when he tooke Mary the mother of our Lord for a Virgin, after her birth, He was killed by the Jews between the Temple and the Altar, being accused by the people. Vers. 52. The key of knowledge] That is, the meanes of knowledge, whereby (as by the key) men are to have their entrance into the kingdom of heaven. Tertullian right∣ly interprets the key the interpretation of Scriptures. See Grotius. Vers. 53. Began to urge him vehemently] The old Latine Translation is thus, Coepe∣runt Pharisaei & legis periti graviter insistere & os ejus oprimere de multis,Haec una est vo∣cum in quibus intimam periti∣am Graeci ser∣moni Lucas ostendit. Nam  planè vox est de schola sumpta. Solebant magistri scholarum provectiores discipulos junioribus praeficere, ut illi hos inter∣rogarent. Id dicebatur . Doctè igitur hoc verbo usus est Lucas, ut indicaret Pharisaeos omni modo hoc co∣natos ut multa ex ore Christi elicerent. Sensum rectè expressit Syrus aucupandi vocabulo, & Arabs eo verbo quod signi∣ficat facere ut quis disserat. Grotius. which last words the Rhemists translate to stop his mouth about many things, whereas the Greeke sig∣nifies, to provoke him to speake of many things, as Erasmus out of Theophylact, and Be∣za do prove, and the words following in the Evangelists do shew, Lying in wait for him. Vide Bezam. Vers. 54. That they might accuse him) The Greeke word here comprehends complaint to the Superiours, and the publike action before the people, that they might condemn him publikely before the people who was privately accused as a seditious man, and a cor∣rupter of the Law. CHAP. XII. Vers. 1. HYpocrisie) That (as the Syriack declares) is an affected Counterfeiting of anothers person, and Christ understands by it that affected ostentation both of learning and
holinesse, by which the Pharisees did set forth themselves among the people, and so endeavoured to win authority and beliefe to their false doctrine.Polyc. Lyser. Also by the Antithesis he desires that the Disciples deliver bona fide the Doctrine of truth received by them, and that they confirme it by a sincere, not counterfeit holinesse of life. Vers. 2. For there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed, neither hid, that shall not be known] This sentence is also elsewhere used by Christ in the Gospell, as Mat. 10.26. and Mark. 4.22. Christ would have his Disciples and followers abstaine from all fraud and hypocrisie, as well in sayings as deeds, since all things in their time shall be brought to light,Id. ib. and be manifested before God, Angels and men; therefore it is most advised to do all things sincerely and candidly according to the prescript of God, that our works may beare the light as being done in God. Iohn 3.21. Vers. 4. My friends] That is, those which he knew favoured him, and he saw to be solicitous about their own safety. Be not afraid of them that can kill the body] It is not to be understood as though any man had any power in himself to kill it, but God gives them leave sometimes. But if you will feare profitably, and so as you shall be the better for it, I tell you whom you shall feare,Mr Dod. and I repeat it again that you may the better marke it, I say feare him. Vers. 6. Are not five sparrows sold for a farthing, &c.] A sparrow is little esteemed of as the price sheweth, and the haire of our head lesse, whence the Proverb, Non pili facio, to signifie a thing of small moment. Vers. 8. Whosoever shall confesse me before men] To confess Christ is not barely to ac∣knowledge him to be the only Saviour and Redeemer of mankind, God and man in one undivided person, also our Priest and King: but also to witnesse and affirme him to be the same before men, as Mat. 16.16. Nor in words only but in deeds, that so our whole life may speake Christ. Vers. 11, 12. Take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall say. For the Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same houre, what ye ought to say] There were among the Ancient Fathers, some (of which number is Augustine) who interpret this promise of infallibility (if we may so speake) made to the Apostles by Christ, of absolute illumi∣nation made simul ac semel when the Holy Ghost at the feast of Pentecost descended upon them; yet the opinion of Euthymius seemes more probable, who expounds it of an extraordinary and infallible suggestion to be made by the Holy Ghost, as often as occa∣sion required it, the very words of Christ seeme rather to favour this exposition, which also receives strength from thence, because it is manifest the Apostles used books, from 2 Tim. 4.13. But this would not be necessary the former opinion standing. Dum Christus de rebus gra∣vissimis & aeternam salutem concernentibus disserit, importunus quìdam de turba sermonem ejus interrumpit, & de fratris sui iniquitate conqueritur, qui tergiversans communis haereditatis partitionem vel justo diutius proroget, vel penitus recu∣set. Christus ob has causas hanc petitionem rejecit, 1. Non venerat in mundum ob temporalia sed ob aeterna ac proinde tempora∣libus hisce noluit se immiscere, 2. Noluit confirmare Iudaicam opinionem neque in discipulorum suorum neque in reliquorū auditorum animis qui arbitrabantur Messiae esse regnum mundanum. 3. Praecidere etiam voluit suis adversariis occasiones calumniandi, qui attentè observarent an ex dictis & factis aliquid arripere possent, quod speciem haberet, ac si magistratus politici Iurisdictionem sibi usurparet, quo seditionis ipsum accusare possent. 4. Praevidit futurum, si uni in vilioribus hisce gratificaretur, mox plures ex rudioribus adventuros, qui idem essent postulaturi, unde plus negotii in dirimendis litibus auditorum, quam in plantando regno Dei habiturus fuisset. Polyc. Lyser.Vers. 13. Master, speake to my brother that he divide the inheritance with me] Vers. 14. Man, who made me a Iudge, or a divider over you] As if he should say, it is not within the compasse of my calling, for I came to accomplish the work of mans re∣demption, and not to divide Inheritances, hereby giving us to understand, that every thing must be done by warrant of some calling, Ministers must not neglect dividing the word to divide Inheritances. Vide Grotium. Vers. 15. Take heed and beware of covetousnesse] Watch and ward, watch and guard, eyes and weapons. The first word implying an ocular warinesse, an eye-watch; the second, an hand watch, a kind of manuall, if not materiall guarding of a mans self, as if he had said, to paraphrase the Text, not to mend the Translation, watch and ward, nay, watch and guard, and defend your selves from the sin of Covetousnesse. Dike. The Greeke word rendred Covetousnesse, signifieth an immoderate desire of having. For a mans life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth] Christ plainely crosseth that opinion which the heart of man had conceived about riches, viz.
that the life of man consisted in them. But whether we consider mans life in the length and continuance of it, or in the comfort of it, it consists not in riches, no man lives a day longer, or merrier for his riches. See Brugensis. Vers. 17. What shall I do, because I have no roome where to bestow my fruits] Behold, abundance doth not bring to the Covetous tranquility and felicity of mind, but ra∣ther greater solicitude and misery, he calls them his fruits, he doth not acknowledge them to be Gods, from whose blessing all things proceed; if  covetous man had ac∣knowledged this he would have known what to have done, he would then have given thanks to God the giver. Vers. 21. So is he that layeth up treasure for himself] Gets together Lands, and Goods, and all abundance of things that the world counts precious. And is not rich towards God] That is,See 1 Tim. 6.18. was not plentifull in good works according to the measure of wealth which he had; men are rich toward God, 1. When they are recon∣ciled to God in the merits of Christ. 2. Cor. 8.9. 2. When they receive his grace, where∣by they are enabled to bring forth good works both in duties to God and man.Perkins. 1 Tim. 6.16. Vers. 24. Consider the ravens] See Psal. 141.9.R. Dav. Inquit pullos corvorum candidos esse ac proinde non ag∣nosci matri∣bus, item Deum pascere illos muscis. Drusius. Albertus magnus in the History of the li∣ving Creatures relates, that the yong Crows are forsaken by the old out of a cruel . Aristotle saith they are cast out of their nests. In such a great want of things Albertus saith, that certaine little wormes arising out of their dung do of their own accord cast themselves into their gaping beckes, and by this meanes wonderfully nourish them; When Matthew named the fowle in generall, Luke did not in vaine specially instance in the Ravens; For Job and the Psalmist extoll the speciall care of God toward the young Ravens. Vers. 29. Neither be ye of doubtfull mind] Hang not in suspence and doubt for the event of the work as the meteors do in the aire, uncertaine whether to stay there,In Syriaco E∣vangelio est, nec immoretur vel suspendatur mens vestra in illis. Videtur alludere ad gestum ejus qui prae magna solicitudine angitur vultum ad Coelum at∣rollens; verti potest, ne curetis sublimia, , propriè, in dubio esse & in incerto, ut quae suspensa sunt & sublimia facilè huc & illuc impelluntur, ita animus hominis qui in dubio est & incertus, huc atque illuc fluctuat. Varab. in loc. Vide Aretium in loc. or to fall to the ground. Vers. 32. Feare not little flock] There are two diminutives in the originall, the word translated flock signifieth a little flock; but that the exceeding littlenesse of it might appeare, Christ adds another word, so the words are, feare not little little flock, , little in their own esteeme, in the worlds account, and in regard of wolves. Christs twelve Apostles, seventy Disciples, and other faithfull persons which came out of Ga∣lilee and elsewhere, were but few, compared with the Priests, Pharisees, and the rest of the Jews. For it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the kingdom] Feare not the losse or want of earthly things, it is your kind and loving father that doth tender your estate and hath care of it, it standeth with his good pleasure, and he wills freely to give without any merit of yours. The kingdome] That is, the heavenly kingdom prepared for you. Vers. 33. Sell that ye have, and give alms, &c.] Our Saviours meaning is,Vide Aretium. in loc. Mr Perkins. in the case of extreme necessity, when there is no other way to relieve those that are to be re∣lieved. See Acts 2. and 4.34, 35. Vers. 35. Let your loynes be girded about,Metaphora à vigilatium ha∣bitu. As those who look for the returne of the Bridegroom, v. 36. Beata vi∣ta hic & alibi nuptijs compa∣atur, partim quia in ea nullus dolori, luctui aut lachry mis locus est, sed solidi & perpetuig audii plena sunt omnia, partim quia aeternus Dei filius ecclesiam suam sponsam verè in ea sibi adjungit, ut bonorum ipsa omnium particeps & Consori fias. Polyc. Lyser. and your lights burning] By these words he would intimate, that all whensoever they are called out of this prison of the world, should be ready and prepared to go out of it. By the name of light we understand the word of God, and the light of faith kindled by it. Vers. 36. When he commeth and knocketh] He knocks by his word, as Rev. 3.20. and when by the trouble of sickness he shews death to be neere, we presently open to him, when we readily and willingly receive it. Vers. 42. To give them their portion of meat in due season] He alludeth to the care of Governours of Families or stewards, who do allow to every one in the house their por∣tion. James 2.25.
Cam crescunt dona crescunt & rationes do∣norum. Gregory. As the gifts grow so grow the accompts too.Vers. 48. Vnto whomsoever much is given] Not whosoever hath much, but to whom∣soever much is given: 1. Because we have nothing but from gift. 2. It is a foundation of improvement, and of the duty of giving account. Things given are abilities natu∣rall, acquired, advantages, opportunities and time to improve all these. Much] A comparative: First In regard of our selves, so we receive much in regard of our desert. 2. God needs not to bestow any thing. Secondly in regard of others. Vers. 50. I have a baptisme to be baptized with] He cals the death of his Crosse a bap∣tisme, as also Marke 10.38. partly because it was a certaine immersion into extreme calamities into which He was cast,Christ also Matth. 20.20. understands by the word Bap∣tisme his passion, the dayes of the death of Martyrs were called Natalitia Martyrum, martyrdome it selfe, Baptismus sanguinis. partly also because in the Crosse he was so to be sprinkled with his own bloud as if he had been drowned and baptized in it. Straightned] Pained, or pent up, not with such a griefe as made him unwilling to come to it, but with such as made him desire that it were once over. There seemes (saith Grotius) to be a similitude implyed in the word , ta∣ken from a woman with Child, which is so afraid of the bringing forth, that yet she would faine be eased of her burthen. Vers. 51. Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you nay, but rather di∣vision] You expect that your Messiah should be such a King as should far exceed the Roman Emperour in Riches, Power, and Majesty, who may bestow a universall peace upon you freed from the tyranny of the Romans, may subdue all nations, and so set them in safety. But I say unto you, that not peace, but separation shall follow, even of those that ought to be joyned together in the bond of the straightest kindred and affinity. CHAP. XIII. Verse 1. THere were present at that season, some that told him of the Galileans, whose bloud Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices] Cyrill and Theophylact, with Euthymius think, that they were followers of that Judah of Galilee, of whom Gamaliel makes mention, Acts 5.37.Polyc. Lyser. Vide Calvi∣num. They relate these to be his absurd opinions, that he taught that no man is to be called Lord, that the Jews ought not to pay tribute to the Emperour of Rome, nor to offer sacrifice for the Romans, and for these things Pilate was angry with them, and commanded to kill them in sacrificing, yet these things are uncertaine. This is certain (since we may gather it out of Iosephus) that the Galileans were alwaies prone to se∣dition,Vult dicere seditiosos istos peccatores fu∣isse maximos qui graviter & Deum, & Magistratum offenderint. Ac proinde sup∣plicium quod sustinuerunt, justum esse atque sufficienter ab ipsis promeritum. Verum enim verò vos qui hujus Crudelitatis vel spectato∣res fuistis, vel ad quorum aures fama ejus pervenit, non debetis inde occasionem sumere ipsorum infelicitati insultandi ne∣que iam in ipsorum quam in propria peccata inquirendi. Polyc. Lyser. for they burned with an insatiable desire of getting liberty which they lost by the Romans, therefore it is probable that some of them conspired, and entred into a league to vindicate their liberty, and that things might succeed the more prosperously, they began with sacrifices, as it is usuall in making Covenants, where Pilate as a Go∣vernour in Rome comming upon them on the sudden with his Souldiers, cruelly slew those seditious persons, and so mingled and confounded their bloud and the beasts together. See 2 Kings 23.16. Vers. 3. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish] Though not in the same kind, yet as severely, Indicat ipsos quoque ex inopinato crudeliter & malè interituros. Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 4. Or those eighteen upon whom the tower in Siloe fell] That the Lord may the more move them, he addes also another example. There was neer Jerusalem a river or Fountaine called Siloa making a Fishpoole,Polyc. Lyser. as is manifest from the 9th. of Iohn 17. By it a tower was built serving for an aquaeduct through the City, as is manifest from Esay. 7.3. See 8.6. This tower fell, and slew eighteen men.
Think ye that they were sinners above all men] Beza and the Vulgar render it debitores debters, but the Syriack hath sinners which seemes more proper here.Debitores] hoc vocabulo in praesentia uti∣tur, ut innuat omnes homines legi divinae debere obedien∣tiam, & hanc si non praestent obligatos esse ad poenam. Polyc. Lys. Vers. 5. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish] That which Christ here threatens to the impenitent was fulfilled after forty yeares; for then Titus the emperour of the Romanes on the feast of the Passeover besieged the City, and having taken it slew many impenitent Jewes as they were sacrificing. Vers. 6. A certaine man had a figtree planted in his vineyard, &c. This vineyard notes the Church of God, Esay 2.1. Matth. 20.1. in which there is one vine our Lord Je∣sus Christ, in which all we ought to be ingrafted as branches if we will bring forth fruit to eternall life, Iohn 15 1 Vers. 7. Behold these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig-tree and finde none] Some of the Fathers interpret it only of the Synagogue of the Jewes, and so the three yeares wherein Christ expected fruit were three times, 1. Before the Law. 2. In the Law. 3. after the Law, as Gregory. Or the three Lawes; the first naturall, the second writ∣ten by Moses, the third Evangelicall by Christ, as Ambrose. Or the three govern∣ments of the Jewes; the first under the High-Priests, the second under Judges, the third under Kings; but Theophylact, Athanasius and Basil doe expound it more largely to signifie the three ages of men; Childhood, youth, and old-age, or else the three years which Christ spent in going through their whole Land, teaching and doing good, and healing all the world possessed with the Devill, Acts 10.38. Those which referre these things to the three yeares in which Christ taught seeme not to attend to what followes, of waiting one yeare,Grotius. neither did God being intreated by the godly defer the punishment of the Jews for one,Vide Maldo∣natum. but fourty yeares after the three yeares that Christ taught them. Wherefore it is better to understand the three years thus, that figs which are fruitfull doe not longer stay from bearing.Alludit ad na∣turam ficus, quae aliquando tertio demum anno à plantatione sua fert fructus. Sed si tertio anno nondum proferat, nunquam eos proferre solet. Cornel. à Lap. Vers. 11. A Spirit of infirmity eighteen years] The disease had so prevailed over her that she was crazed by habit.Hoc est, labo∣rabat illa foe∣mina morbo non naturali, sed qui ex Diaboli malitia & potentia, vel per incantationem, vel per fascinum aliquod ipsi obvenerat. Polyc. Lys. Vers. 13. And he laid his hands upon her, and immediately she was made straight] He could heal her by his bare word, without touching, but he doth not only vouch∣safe to touch her, to shew the certainty of his Charity and good will; but also that he might signifie, that his quickning flesh is that ordinary instrument by which he ma∣keth us partakers of his saving grace. Vers. 14. Said unto the People, &c.] He strikes at Christ as a violater of the Sabbath through the sides of the people, because that Jesus had healed on the Sabbath day] Not by applying of medicines, as the Latine curare, and the Greek  properly sig∣nifieth. See 4 Matt. 23. Vers. 16. Ought not this woman being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bound to these eigteene yeares, be loosed from this bond on the Sabbath day] This argument is am∣plified by a three-fold comparison. First He compares the Cattle together, the Oxe and the Asse, and this woman which he calls a daughter of Abraham, being not content to oppose a reasonable Creature to a beast which was enough, he addes a daugh∣ter of Abraham, which name was in great esteeme with them. See Matth. 3.9. Luke 3.8. John 8.33. Act. 13.26. Secondly, he compares the bond whereby the Cattle are tyed at the stall, and the bonds of the Devill; and Thirdly the time. The Cattle peradventure for one night or a few dayes are tyed to the stall, but this woman even for the length of time is worthy all commiseration. 19. and 21. Verses. By two Parables, one taken from the garden, viz. from a grain of mustard-seed; another from domesticall matters, viz. Leaven; He teacheth, that that is the nature of Evangelicall doctrine, that it growes besides the expectation of all men, and spreads it self farre. Vers. 23. Are there few that be saved] Christ is wont to reject curious questions without an answer, as here, and Acts 1.7.Grotius. Respondit Christus affir∣mativè paucos salvari, ut in∣sinuat Lucas, & clarè exprimit Matth. c. 7. ver. 14. Idem asserit Isaias, Cap. 10.22. & c. 24.13. Cornel. à Lap. It belongs to us to know what they are
that are saved, not how many are to be saved, although by one we may somewhat guesse at the other, for few are willing to enter into a hard and difficult way. Strive with all your strength to enter through. Greeke. Contendite, enitimini, conamini, adlaborate omnibus viribus. Hoc enim verbo significat opus esse labore & conatu, quia non sine magna & ardua difficultate queat quis angustam portam transmittere. Luc. Brugens.Vers. 24. Strive to enter in at the straight gate] That is, therefore strive to enter, because the gate is straight. Bradford well compared the way of Religion to a nar∣row bridge, and a large and deep river, from which the least turning away is dange∣rous. Vers. 28. All the Prophets in the Kingdome of God] Therefore also Salomon. Vers. 30. There are last which shall be first] The Gentiles which God in times past suf∣fered to goe after their own wayes. Acts 14.15. First shall be last] The Jewes politically and spiritually, for they are the most mise∣rable of all people. Vers. 32. Tell that Fox] The Prophets use to set forth Kings (saith Grotius) by the names of beasts, as the Goat, Ram, Leopard, Beare; neither undeservedly, because the greatest part of them have beastly conditions.Crotius. So Paul describes Nero by the name of a Lion; Herod being very subtill is fitly tearmed a Fox. I cast out Devills, and doe cures to day and tomorrow, and the third day I shall be per∣fected] Which words signifie both the nearnesse of his passion, and the certainty of the thing,Polyc. Lyser. and the propension of his mind to so great a worke. Vers. 34. Which killest the Prophets] Jeremy, Zacharie. As a hen doth gather her brood under her wings] There is in all birds a wonderfull love ingrafted to cherish and protect their little ones, but especially in the hen. This che∣risheth the young ones without feathers, provides them food, by clocking calls them to her, and contends for them against the Kite, even to bloud; the Jewes were so cherished and protected by God. And ye would not] Christ speaks not here of his hidden and absolute will, accord∣ing to which he doth whatsoever he will, neither can any creature resist him, but of his revealed will to which men ought to apply themselves. Vers. 35. Behold your house is left unto you desolate] First the Temple, which is else∣where called the house of the Lord; because the Jewes made it of a house of prayer a den of theeves, He calls it no more the house of the Lord, but their house. Desolate] Spoyled of all its grace; yet the word house may be taken more generally for the houses of all those of Jerusalem, yea even of the Jewes in that whole Countrey, as it is Psal. 69.26. Yet Christ prophesieth here of the destruction of all Judaea, which came by the Romanes under Vespasian and Titus. CHAP. XIIII. Verse 2. ANd behold there was a certaine man before him which had the dropsie] It is probable that the man which had the dropsie was brought thither purposely to tempt Christ,Calvin. Hoc miracu∣lum aliquid peculiare habet, viz. hoc, quod non petit sanari sed tantum erat ante illum, hoc est vel adstabat, vel assidebat, vel decumbebat, & tacebat. Polyc. Lyc. In Evangelio de multis aegris legimus quibus Christus subvenit; sed illi ejus opem vel ipsi implorarunt, vel alii pro ipste intercesserunt. Id. ibid. for he could not come to the table by chance, nor without the will and permissi∣on of the Master. Vers. 4. And they held their peace] As also at other times those that were asked were wont to be silent, for if they had said it had been lawfull, they had opposed their own observations, but if they had said it had not been lawfull, they feared the repre∣hension of Christ, therefore they were silent. And let him goe] He did not detaine him with him for ostentation sake, nor kept him with him for his service, but let him him goe to his owne.
Vers. 5. Which of you shall have an asse or an Oxe fallen into a pit, and will not straight∣way pull him out on the Sabbath day] Christ very fitly compares the man sick of the drop∣sie with one fallen into a pit, in which he had been drowned in the waters unlesse he had been drawn out, so a man that hath the dropsie will be choaked at length with the water between the skin, unlesse he be freed from the disease. Vers. 7. And he put forth a parable to those which were bidden, when he marked how they chose out the chiefe roomes] As in his first entrance he cured the dropsie tumour of the man sick,Opportunè Christus sana∣to eorporis hy∣drope, sanare etiam aggreditur duplicem animae hydropem, superbiae tumorem & pecuniae sitim. Grotius. so now he intends to cure the spirituall tumour and pride of the Pha∣risees. Vers. 16. A certaine man] God our heavenly Father, as Matth. 22.2. Supper] The felicity of eternall life, to which the elect are called by the ministery of the word. Great] Whether you respect the provider of this Supper, God,Polyc. Lyser. or the multitude of those which were called, or the plenty of the dishes. Bad many] The Jewes, especi∣ally the chief of them. Vers. 18. With one consent] Although they allege severall reasons, See that opened in my Greek Critica. yet they all a∣gree in that, that they pretend their owne businesses that they may not come to the Supper. Vers. 21. Goe out quickly into the streets and lanes of the City, and bring in hither the poore, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blinde] The remote Gentiles and barbarous people dwelling even at the end of the world.Polyc. Lyser. But these lie in the wayes and behind the hedges, because they wanted both divine and humane Lawes, by which a City may be established. Vers. 23. The Lord said unto the servant] It may be understood of the Christian Magistrate,Perkins. for that is the Magistrates duty in respect of the outward profession of re∣ligion, or Ministers by the promises and threats, to be instant with them till they over∣come them.Polyc. Lyser. 2 Tim. 4.3. Vers. 26. If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his owne life also, cannot be my Disciple.] That is, rather than not love Christ, if the case so stand, that they must be hated or Christ not loved, they must be hated, much more farme and Oxen; or so entirely to love Christ above all, as our love of Parents in comparison thereof is an hatred. His owne life] That is, in comparison of me and my gospel. Vers. 33. Whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he hath] The universality, 1. Of the Subject. 2. The object. 3. Peremptorinesse of the sentence, Cannot be. Forsake all. 1. In Judgement and inward esteeme. 2. In affection. 3. In resolution. 4. In reference to an actuall practise, and must actually forsake them when it commeth to this point,Must forsake it first as a snare, if it be a meanes to hinder from good, or draw to evill. 2. As a sacrifice, if God call for it. that either he must lose them or renounce Christ. Vers. 34. If the salt have lst his savour] If it be infatuated,Verbum Dei salis propria habet. 1. Sat est calidae na∣turae, sic ver∣bum Dei hominum mentes accendit & amore Dei quasi fervere facit. 2. Sale carnes à corruptione praeservantur, sic natu∣ra nostra per verbum Dei ab aeterna corruptione liberatur. 3. Sale cibi condiuntur ut ex sapore suaviore nobis commenden∣tur & à ventriculo facilius concoguantur: Sic verbum Dei nos gratos & acceptos Deo reddit qui alioquin coram ipso in∣suisi & insipidi futuri essemus. 4. In veteri Testamento salis magnus usus fuit in sacrificiis, Marc. 9.49. Ita omnis cultus Dei, omnia etiam dicta & facta nostra verbo Dei conata esse debent, si Deo grata esse velint. Polyc. Lyser. or growne foolish (a word that suites well with Zach. 11.15.) if it have lost his savour; If a Christian have either corrupted or cast away the word of life, and the sincere doctrine of the gospel. Vers. 35. Men cast it out] There is not a more miserable Creature than an Apo∣state Christian. He that hath eares to heare.] He that hath eares by which he may attend to what is said, and understand it, Let him hear] that is, let him attend, ponder, and practise it.
CHAP. XV. Verse 1. SInners] That is, those which were noted for some publick offence, as fornica∣tors. Polyc. Lyser.To heare him] That is, that they might receive from him wholsome instruction, Consolation and peace in their Consciences. Vers. 2. Murmurd] First taking ill among themselves that fact of Christ, then making a noise among the people, and saying to them, this man receiveth sinners. The particle  here seems to have a singular emphasis, as if they should say, that magnificent Doctor, to great a man, who professeth a certaine singular holinesse, that he would be publikely taken for the Messiah, yet this man doth not shun the company of evill men, but admits infamous sinners to familiar conference,Polyc. Lyser. also to his table, that he seemes to embrace them as his houshold servants. Christ to defend his fact the better against the Pharisees calumniation propounds three parables, taken from divers matters, but tending to one scope, viz. that men should not wonder, much lesse murmur if he con∣verse with sinners. Vers. 4. What man of you having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wildernesse, and goe after that which is lost, untill he finde it] The first parable which Christ also brought, Matth. 18.12. seemes to propound to us the mysterie of our redemption, how Christ the good and faithfull Shep∣herd sought mankind in the wildernesse of this world, and finding it put it on his shoulders, and brought it to the sheepfold of his Church. Lacrimae poeni∣tentium vinum sunt Angelo¦rum. Bern.Vers. 7. Likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth] That is, the holy Angels and blessed Trinity do rejoyce by generall consent of all antiquity. Ninety nine just persons, which need no repentance] That is, Pharisees, who seeme to themselves to be just, and therefore not to need repentance. Vers. 8. What woman] Eve. 1 Tim. 2.14. Doth not light a candle.] Drusius thinkes our Saviour in this speech hath respect to a Proverbe used by his own nation scrutari lucernis to search with candles, that is, di∣ligently and carefully to seeke for some thing,Drus. Prov. Class. 2. l. 3. as Zeph. 1.12. Light is the doctrine of the Gospell, besomes are sermons of the Law. It is in very ancient editions of the vulgar translation, evertit domum, for everrit domum. Vers. 11. A certaine man had two Sons] Adam had the image of God with other ex∣cellent gifts which he might happily use within his Fathers house, he would not obey God, but use them at his pleasure, and so lost those excellent gifts. Vers. 12. And the younger of them, &c.] By the Prodigall Son some understand one that was never called or turned to God, Mr. Perkins takes him for one that was the child of God, and afterward fell away. Derivant Grā∣matici, , ut cum declares qui sibi nihil servat, quem Latini effusum & profusum simili ratione vocant. Beza.Vers. 13. With riotous living] The Greek words signifie so to waste all that a man re∣serves nothing to himselfe. Vers. 15. To feed swine] Which was intolerable to a Jew to whom swine were an abomination. Vers. 16. Would faine have filled his belly with the huskes] Which is the food rather of beasts Quasi diceret; Porcinam qui∣dem egit vi∣ram, & tamen ne Porcino quidem victa saturatur. Cornel à Lap. than men, whence Horace exprest extreme frugality by these words saying, siliquis vivit, siliquis & pane secundo. Vers. 17. Came to himselfe.] Or into himselfe, as the Ad se redire etiam Latinis dicitur qui ad bonam mentem redit. Grotius. Greek, As a man that was drunk, mad, or newly raised from sleepe, or out of a swound; some Divines make allu∣sions of all. Have bread enough] By bread, according to the Scripture phrase, is meant all kind of
needfull wholesome food, for it is opposed to huskes which are unwholesome and fitter for swine than men. Vers. 18. I have sinned against heaven and against thee] Against the first and second Table.In Coelum] i.e. in Deum cu∣jus sedes in Coe¦lis potissimum collocatur. Coelo gratissimus amnis. Drus. Hic notant eruditi coelum pro Deo dici, quod verum puto, non  sed , ut Coelum significet eam potestatem quae in Coelo maximè relucet. Grotius. Vers. 20. And he arose and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way off, his fa∣ther saw him and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his necke, and kissed him] Amongst all the Parables of Christ this is excellent, full of affection, and set forth in lively colours. The old Father sees a great way off, dimme eyes can see a great way when the Son is the object. His bowels roll within him, he had compassion of him. He runs] It had been sufficient for him to have stood being old, and a Father, and an offended Father. Love doth descend not ascend, the Son goes to the Father, he runs to the Son. Then he cannot stay and embrace him, or take him by the hand, but he falls upon him, and incorporates himselfe into him: Yet he speakes not one word, his joy was too great to be uttered, but he puts his whole mouth unto and kisseth him, the badge of peace, love, and reconciliation. Here is declared the great goodnesse of God, who most mercifully pardons the sinnes of the truely penitent. 22.23. Verses. Some understand by the robe the royalty which Adam lost,Calvin Polys. Lyser. Filius timet conviti∣um, pater ador∣nat convivium. Ambros. by the ring the seale of Gods holy Spirit, by the shoes the preparation of the Gospell of peace, by the fat Calfe Christ who was slaine from the beginning. There is nothing else intended but to set forth the riches Hoc simplex sed certum est, Coetera inge∣niosa quidem sed incerta. Maldonate in loc. Vide Grotium. of Gods manifold mercyes, whereby he sup∣plies all our wants, and bestoweth whatsoever is needfull for us upon our true re∣pentance. The use of rings was ancient as appeares, Gen. 38.18.Annulus in signum recupe∣ratae libertatis quam amiserat, porcis pascen∣dis admotus post vitam pro∣fligatam. Gen. 41.42. Rivetus. Apud Romanos ingenuitatis, apud orientis populos dignitatis eximiae signum. Gen. 41.42. Aut etiam opulentiae. Iac. 2.2. Cum autem annuli usus inter alia sit signare, non male veteres respondere annulo putant donum Spiri∣tus sancti qui nos obsignat, ut loquitur Paulus, 2 Cor. 1.21. Grotius. Among the Romanes it was an ensigne of vertue, honour, and especially nobility, whereby they were distin∣guished from the common people, and the Son is exempted by this meanes from his servile estate, and finds place among the children free. Annulus aureus ornatus est hominis liberi & locupletis. Brugensis. Shoes on his feete] For his feete were naked. CHAP. XVI. Verse 1. THere was a certaine rich man which had a Steward, and the same was accused unto him that he had wasted his goods, &c.] Our Saviours intention in this Parable is to ex∣hort all men, especially those in great place,Summa hujus Parabolae est, humaniter & benignè cum proximis nostris esse agendum, ut quum ad Dei tribunal ventum fuerit, liberalitatis nostrae fructus ad not redeat. Quan∣quam dura & longè petita videatur similitudo, clausula tamen ostendit non aliud fuisse Christi consilium. to improve these outward things for the advancement of their own Spirituall and everlasting good, v. 9. Christ propounds in the Parable two person, 1. A rich man. 2. His Steward. 1. The rich man is God, whose Stewards are all men; because he gives their good things to them, although to one more, to another lesse. Those good things are 1. The goods of the world or fortune, as some call them, gold, silver, fields, cattle, livings, dominions, Gen. 9.2. 2. Goods of the body, as health, beauty, strength, all the senses. 3. Goods of the mind or Spirituall, wit, wisedome, prudence, memory, eloquence, peace, the word of salvation, the promise of grace, righteousnesse and life
eternall; God hath bestowed his gifts on us, that we may moderately use them in his feare, serve our neighbours with them, and improve them for the Lord; because wee shall give an account of them. How to use our goods so as to shew our selves good Stewards, 1. In respect of God, we must serve him with all these goods of ours. 2. For our neighbour, if we have more than he, we should communicate freely to him. Prov. 5.16. Vers. 8. The Lord commended the unjust Steward, because he had done wisely] Propter so∣lertiam non propter fallaciam.Prudenter] non quod pic & rectè. Non lau davit factum, sed prudenti∣am & industri∣am qua ut poe∣nam essugeret, usus fuerat. Maldonatus. Grotius. As we may condemne a matter, yet commend the parties wit. The children of this world are in their generation wiser] They are not in genere wise, but in genere suo, wise to do evill, Ier. 4.2. not wiser absolutely, but secundum quid, in their generation, that is, in the things of the world. The children of light] That is, Christians, who by the Holy Ghost and baptisme are made the sons of God. Vers. 9. Make to your selves friends of the mammon of unrighteousnesse] Riches are called unrighteous,Mammon] Significat co∣piama the sau∣ros divitiarum hujus mundi. They are not so in themselvs but in the common use, or rather abuse of wicked men. 1. Because they are commonly unjustly gotten. 2. Made an in∣strument of many evils. 3. Evill gotten goods are unjustly possessed. Mr. Perkins. not because they are always unjustly possessed, but because they are occasions and motives of great unrighteousnesse, or else rather unrighteous is put here for false, in the Hebrew phrase, that is, they are not true riches; the words fol∣lowing confirme this exposition. See Heinsius. That when ye faile] That is, die, so the Septuagint useth this greek word, by which it renders Moth. Ier. 42.17, 18. They may receive you] Receiving is not mentioned here in regard of merit (as the Papists say) as though a man could deserve it by giving almes, but either by way of hearty prayers made by the poore, that they may be received, or else because their almes shall be unto them a pledge and earnest of their receiving into Gods kingdome. Vers. 12. And if ye have not been faithfull in that which is another mans, who shall give you that which is your own] Teaching that he which is unfaithfull to another, seldome is faithfull in his own affaires. Vers. 13. No man can serve two Masters] Not contrary masters, as God and Mammon are. Vers. 14. And they derided him] The Pharisees did not simply laugh at Christ, but gave also externall signes of scorne in their countenance, gestures, they blew their noses at him, for that's the meaning of the originallGraecè , id est, subsannabant quasi contracto naso,  enim est nasus: atque hic est gestus fastidientis, spernentis, vafrè & callidè irridentis. Ignotos naso suspendit adunco. Horat. Serm. Satyr. 6. Tales sunt nasones, nasuti. à Lapide. Vers. 15. Christ doth not yeeld to the scoffes of the Pharisees, but defends the au∣thority of his doctrine, and in like manner inveighes against them with a just zeale, and puls away the maske of hypocrisie from them. Ye are they which justifie your selves] As if he should say, you would know what you are, I will in a few things declare it to you, whatsoever things you do, you doe them all for that end that you may get an opinion of holinesse and righteousnesse before men, but howsoever before men who onely judge by outward things, you may are accoun∣ted holy and righteous,Polyc. Lyser. God knows your hearts, which he abominates, because they are full of hypocrisie, envie, pride and scorne. Highly esteemed] Pharisaicall and hypocriticall pride, by which they boast themselves before men that they may seeme to be holy, they be inwardly hypocrites. The same thing is exprest Matth. 11.13.Vers. 16. The Law and the Prophets were untill Iohn] If the Law was to have its period in Iohn, then the subordination of it now to the Gospell is taken away. But the Law was not then abolisht, as the next v. shewes, as if he should say, do not mistake mee, ac si postat lex in ecclesia xauctorata sit. Secondly, that manner of dispensation which was under the Old Testament was to last till then.1 Pet. 1.12. The Revelation of the mind of God
then was but in glorious promises of things to come; we now injoy the things under the Gospell. Vers. 19. There was a certaine rich man which was cloathed in purple and fine linnen,Ambrose from the adding of the name saith it is a History not a Parable, many things are related in modum Para∣bolae, neither eyes, finger, tongue, nor water are in hell. and fared sumptuously every day] Whether it be a History or a Parable, Rainoldus de lib. Apoc. tomo primo. praelect. 79. Credo ego, nec solam historiam, nec folum Para∣bolam esse, sed mixtum quiddam ex utraque, qualis apud Poetas Tragicomaedia esse dicitur, atque haec ipsa est Iustini sen∣tentia. Nam quòd dives ille, & Lazarus fuerit, quodque ille in inferno sepultus, hic ab Angelis in sinum Abrabae porta∣tus fuerit, historia est. Quòd autem dives ille cum Abraham locutus fuerit, eum que rogaverit, ut Lazarum ad se mitte∣ret, qui gutta aquae linguam suam refrigeraret, parabola est historiae adjuncta, nec enim qui in inferno sunt sanctos rogare solent. Maldonatus in loc. (of which there are di∣vers opinions) that is of no moment, because whether Lazarus were truely a certaine poore man and begger, so handled by the rich, whose soule was after carryed by the Angels into Abrahams bosome, or whether by the name of Lazarus, Christ signified a beg∣ger, (as Lawyers are wont to propound their species under the name of Titius & Sempro∣nia) the matter comes all to one, all confessing that under that narration Christ de∣scribes the state of the faithfull and unfaithfull departing out of this life. Cloathed in purple]  frequentativè, a new suit for every day like our Gallants, Purple a precious garment, and proper to Kings, and those which are neere them. Marke. 15.17. Fared sumptuously] Which Irenaeus some where turnes Iocundabatur, for the Greeke word signifieth both, laetitiam mentis & hilare convivium, joy of the mind, Eras. Brugens. and a merry banquet; it signifies feasted and rejoycedIansen. Harmon., so that not only the delights of feasting are signified, but that he feasted with pleasure. Every day] That thou maist understand that he was wholly given to his belly, and was not at leasure for any other things; and this he did , splendidè, magnificé, pomposé, therefore he was wholly of their number who daily with the Epicure sing that hymne, Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas. Vers. 20. A certaine begger named Lazarus] The Hebrew (for Lazarus) sounds helped by the Lord, that very word also makes for a History; He was forsaken by men,Erasmus. Quod autem Tertullianus, Prudentius at∣que alij eandem hunc mendicum Eleazarum vocant, non de nihlio est, idem est Eleazari & Lazari nomen. Grot. Quanquam quibusdam simplex videtur esse Parabola: quia tamen Lazari nomen exprimitur, potius rem gestam narrari arbitror. Calvin. but had God for his help. Lazarus by changing of the dialect, is the proper name of Eleazar the servant of Abraham. Thus Christ placeth Lazarus in the bosome, or at the Table of this Patri∣arke, whose houshould servant hee had been. Laid at his gate full of sores] That if he desired to stand or sit, yet being pained with the greatnesse and multitude of sores, he could not. Vers. 21. The crumbes] Which otherwise would be trod by the feet of men, or gathered by the dogges. Vers. 22. By the Angels] Behold a sodaine change, he that even now was not onely scorned by men but dogges, is honoured with the ministrie of Angels. Abrahams bosome] The glory of heaven or heavenly Canaan is rather called the bo∣some of Abraham Perkins. Vide Cameron. myroth. & Capelli. Spicil. Christus  loquitur in si∣militudine. Quemadmo∣dum liberi quando in absentia parentum à familia malè tractantur, à matribus, quae tenerrimè ipsos amant, in sinum exci∣piuntur, ibi solatia audiunt, & omnium malorum facilè obliviscuntur, sic Lazarus benignè in consortium beatorum suscipi∣tur, atque gaudijs regni coelestis quod Abraham promissum recreatur. Polyc. Lyser. Vide Calvinum. than of any other of the Patriarkes. 1. For the excellencie of his faith. 2. Because the promise of inheriting the land of Canaan was first of all (perso∣nally) made to him. He alludes either unto the practice of the Eastern Countrys, where when any made a feast, the guests did sit leaning about the Table, and the most beloved guest leaned in the bosome of the Feast-maker, as Iohn at the Passover in Christs bosome, so Grotius, or else to the practice of parents which lay a sicke child in their bosomes. Vers. 23. And seeth Abraham afarre off, and Lazarus in his bosome] Seeth Abraham rich afarre off, and Lazarus poore in his bosome, both in heaven. Vers. 25. Son] An Ironie, being a sharpe exprobration to pricke the rich man,
who in his life boasted of being Abrahams son. By the scope of the Parable, the soules of the dead are but in two places, therefore no purgatory. Thou in thy life receivedst]  here, is fully to receive. Thy good things] This is spoken also emphatically. Those good things which thou countedst the true, yea the chiefest good things, which thou hast used not as commit∣ted to thee under a certaine law and manner, but as thine owne proper goods, in which also thou hast placed all thy confidence. Grotius. Vers. 26. Between us and you there is a great gulfe fixed] Gulfe] As there useth some times to be in earth-quakes. Graecè vulgatus inter∣pres reddit Chaos, quod per errorem vidtur factū pro Chasma sic enim principio probabile est adhibitum fuisse nomen Graecum à Latino Interprete. Quemadmodum in ejusmodi hiatu in quo vrb vel terrarum tractus absorbentur, non potest transt∣ri ab uno hiatus labro ad alterum cum os non sit compressum sed hiatus maneat, ita significat Dominus fieri non posse ut ullo modo transeatur ab eorum statu qui sunt tormentis adjudicati ad statum quietis & consolationis aeternae, est, sive constitutu est & firmatus . Rainold. de lib. Apoc. praelect. 1 62. Vide Grotium. Great gulfe] Signifieth the eternity of their state, Significat decretum Dei firmum & immutabile, ne quisquam unquam transiret à statu damnatorum ad statum fidelium. Rainold. de lib. Apoc. They which would passe from hence to you cannot] The glorified soules cannot go from heaven, worst themselves though they would, and those that would come hither cannot; there is an everlasting decree against it. Psal. 36.6. fixed]  a me∣taphore (saith Maldonate) taken from Forts and Castles which are fortified by a broad and deep ditch about them. Ambrose will have this to be an Historie, because of the addition of a name and other circumstances, but though the narration may be grounded on a historie, yet it hath many things in it parabolicall, and we may argue from the scope of a Parable, as Iud. 9.8. CHAP. XVII. IT is the generall proposition of Christ, that scandals are studiously to be avoyded by the godly, lest either they be a hinderance to themselves or to others in the way of salvation. He also addes reasons, because it cannot be but offences will come; they follow from the wickednesse of the world.Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 3. And if he repent, &c.] If he shall give signes of displeasure, by acknowledg∣ing the fault committed, and seeking pardon of it, forgive him, require no farther re∣venge,Polyc. Lyser. yea not so much as satisfaction for the injury offered. This place (saith Mr. Perkins) is meant of ecclesiasticall censures, that those must proceed no further after the party offending doth repent. Vers. 4. And if he trespasse against thee seven times] A finite number is here put for an infinite as it is usuall in the Scriptures for its perfection; Christs meaning therefore is, as often as hee shall offend against thee and repent,Id ib. forgive him. Vers. 5. Increase our faith] Greek adde unto us faith, As if they had said, unlesse wee have faith,. Ad∣de nobis fidem. Beza. we shall never be able to abstain from revenge so oft, but if thou wilt in∣crease our faith, we shall be able to conquer even this sin. Mr. Hildersam. The more faith the more mercy, for if you believe your owne ten thousands for∣given, you will forgive others tens. Matth. 17.20. Nominavit montem qui fortè tum ipsi vicinus erat, ut digito eum Apostolis monstrare potuerit. Hic nominat arborem Sycaminum quae absque dubio tum etiam ipsis obviam erat. Sic utrobique idem est sensus.Vers. 6. If ye had faith as a graine of Mustard-seed, yee might say unto this Sycamine tree, &c.] He shewes that he doth not require a great quantity of faith, but is content with a little faith which is like a grain of Mustard-seed, lively, sharp, fervent. Proverbiale de re minima. Drusius. Our Saviour Christ useth this and the like expression of removing a Sycamine tree, and the Mountaines, upon three severall occasions. 1. Upon occasion that the Disciples could not cast out the Devill, Matth. 17.19, 20. There he speakes of the faith of Miracles. 2. Upon an occasion of the drying up of the
fig-tree, Matth. 11.20. Both justifying faith, and the faith of Miracles are there in∣tended, one primarily, the other secondarily. Se Luke 17.3. Where a saving justi∣fying faith is intended. Vers. 7. But which of you having a servant plowing, &c.] As if he had said, if a servant that hath been toyling all the day long in following the plow or the like labour, at the night when he comes home weary and hungry, be commanded by his Master a further service, he is not to refuse to do it, he is still to do what his Master commands him.Loquitur Christus non de mercenarijs qui hodie nobis ministrant, sed de veteribus mancipiis quibus ea erat vivendi conditio, ut sibi nihil acquirerent, sed cum toto suo labore, studio, industria ad sanguinem usque heris essent addicti. Calvinus. Vers. 8. Gird thy selfe] It was the fashion in those Easterne parts, for men to go in long garments downe to their feet. And therefore when men were to go about any worke, they used to gird and take up their garments, that they might not trouble them in their worke, by hanging loose about their heeles. Vers. 10. All that yee can] To the utmost extent of naturall or gracious abilityes. We are unprofitable servants] Christ speakes here with the Apostles now justified and renewed. Vers. 14. Go shew your selves unto the Priests] The Papists fondly hence build their au∣cicular confession. The leprous men are I confesse sent by Christ to the Priest; but not to whisper into his eares their sinnes, but rather that they might offer sacrifice accord∣ing to the prescript of the Law; neither were they sent to cleanse themselves,Calvin. as with the Papists confession makes men cleane, but that they might shew themselves to the Priests, they were cleane before. Vers. 15. With a loud voyce glorified God] Which is a signe of a very cheerfull and thankfull mind. Vers. 17. Were there not te cleansed, but where are the nine] He askes, not because hee was ignorant,Polyc. Lyser. but that by this meanes he might reprove their ingratitude and make it known to others: he meanes, it is certaine that all the ten received the same benefit of cleansing, and yet onely one acknowledgeth that with a thankfull mind. Vers. 19. Thy faith hath made thee whole] It is an excellent sentence which Christ of∣ten useth in the Gospell, Matth. 9.22. Luke 17.29. vlt. and in many other places.Polyc. Lyser. For Christ observed this custome when he had a doctrine in which there was much con∣tained which he would commend to his hearers, and deeply imprint on their hearts, then he included it in some famous sentence, which he afterward often repeated. Faith is the meanes and instrument by which Salvation is received from God. Vers. 20. The kingdom of God commeth not with observation] That is, not with a world∣ly splendour which the Pharisees lookt for. with observation] with a splendour ob∣vious to mens eyes, and which might be observed.It is not a thing that by any outward pompous cere∣mony can be observed. Vers. 2. The kingdome of God is within you] That is, it was brought unto them by the ministery of Iohn Baptist, of himselfe and of his Disciples; although indeed it was without profit to many of them. Vers. 22. The dayes of the Son of man] By this he understands that outward conver∣sation which he used in the time of his ministrie familiarly with his Apostles, by ad∣monishing, comforting, nourishing and defending them. Vers. 23. See here, or see there] Is the Messias, for about those times Josephus witnes∣seth that there was great store of seducers,l 10. Antiq. Jud. 20. c. 4.11.12.14. & l. 2. c. 12. belli Iudaici some of which called them out into the de∣sert; others into the Mountaine of Olives, and professed that they would be their de∣liverers, amonst whom also was that Egyptian Act. 21.38. Vers. 24. So shall also the Son of man be in his day] He shall come to judgement with great light, and in the majestie of the Father. Vers. 32. Remember Lots wife] She was turned into a Pillar of Salt, ut te suo exemplo condiret. Augustine. Remember 1. Her going out of Sodome a type of hell, or the world,Consider her sin and her pu∣nishment, that so fearing the one wee may learne to take heed of the other. to Zoar, heaven, or the Church. 2. How in the way she lookt backe. 3. Her punish∣ment.
Vers. 37. Wheresoever the body is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together] Gregory and Austen by bdy understand heaven, by Saints Eagles, lift up your hearts thither. Ori∣gen by body understands the Church, by Eagles Doctors, gathering, that is consent. Ierome, Theophylact. Body Christs sufferings, Eagles Saints. Chrysost. Stella, Maldonate. By body o∣thers understand last judgement, by Eagles Saints, gathering together, brought generally to judgement. The Saints are Eagles. 1. They molter off old feathers. 2. Renew. Psal. 103.5. 3. Looke on the Sun. 4. Are heavenly. Ioh. 39.27. Wheresoever shewes Christs body is not every where, he saith not ubique corpus, but ubicunque. CHAP. XVIII. Verse 1. THat men ought alwayes to pray, and not to faint] Most firm Arguments are drawn from the scope of a Parable,Hinc Heretici, dicti Euchitae volebant sem∣per orare, nec unquam mai∣bus laborare▪ sed stultè. Scriptum est enim: si quis non vult operari, nec manducet. 2 Thes. 2.10. Dico ereo  semper hic idem esse quod sedulo, perseveranter, diligenter, assiduè, unde explicans subdit & non deficere. Graeci , id est, non defatigari. Cornel. à ap.Haec parabola sumitur à dissimili sicuti plures hujusmodi in Evangelio inveniuntur, non Iudex iniquus cum Deo, sed perse∣verantia viduae in instando, cum nostra constantia in precibus conferri debet. Polyc Lyser. although not from the parts of it. For which very cause in all the Parables of Christ, we see the scope is signified either in the precedent or subsequent words; as in this Parable in the precedent words, in Luke 16.9. In the following words. Rainold de lib. Apoc. praelect. 163. Christ propounds this Parable, to tach us to be constant and earnest in Prayer, saith Mr. Perkins, see v. 5. To pray alwayes here is not to faint in prayer, see Grotius. Vers. 3. Avenge me of mine adversary] Or free and defend me from mine adversary, which either hath taken away mine iheritance, or some of my goods, or otherwise injured mee. The Greek word  here doth not properly signifie, (saith Novari∣nus) to revenge, but to free and deliver from evill; which may be done without any revenge. Vers. 4.5. He beares the widdow, not from feare of God, nor out of commisera∣tion toward her afflicted, nor because she had a just cause, which a just Judge ought to regard. But there are other reasons. 1. Because she is troublesome to mee, as if he should say, I would be freed from the clamours of that importunate woman. 2ly. Lest by her continuall comming,, ad verbm est obtundere, at obtundere La∣tins est ad fa∣stidium aliquid repetere. Teretius: ob∣tundis ametsi intelligo. Bene ergo sensum expressit Syrus, molesta sit mihi, & Arabs, vexet me. in Grot. Vide Bezam & Piscat. Syrus vertit, Ne mihi molestiam omni tempore exhibeat. Arabicus, Ne semper ad molestandum me veniat. See ver. 7. Beare lng with them] That is, the wicked. she weary him weary mee] word for word, beate me down with her blowes, and it is a metaphore taken from Wrestlers, who beate their adversa∣ries with their fists or clubs, so do they that are importunate beate the Judges eares with their crying out, even as it were with blows. Vide Brugensem. If the unwearied prayer of a Widow, hath extorted an equall sentence from an unjust Judge; what may not the godly hope from God? Vers. 8. I tell you that he will avenge them speedily] That is, in his owne time; speedily in regard 1. Of God.Tempore con∣gruo & oppor∣tuno. Jansen. 2. Eternity. 3. The wicked. Shall he find faith on earth] That is a godly man that will beleeve his truth. Vers. 10. To pray] That is,  here, as also elsewhere in Scripture, to do all that which belonged to the worship of God, and was finished in the Temple. Polyc. Lyser.Vers. 11. Prayed thus with himself Convenit Pharisaeorum nomini qui se gregatus est. Cameron.] Leaving the Publican a far off behind him as impure. God I thank the that I am not as other men are Pro tribus rebus debet homo (Robbinus) quotidiè Deum benedicere; Benedictus qòd me non fecerit gentilem, infidelem▪ Benedictus quòd me non fecerit plebeim; Benedictus quòd me non fecerit multerem, ex hac scaturigine emanavit oratio a Pharisaica. buxtorf. in Florilegio Hebraico. p 32.33.] He begins with thanksgiving, he had nothing of confession for himselfe. He pleades his negative righteousnesse, he was no extortioner, and stands on his comparative goodnesse, not as this Publican.
Vers. 12. I fast twice in the weeke] Thursday, because Moses on that day went up to Mount Sinay: Monday, because then he came down. Drusius. He hath his positive righteousnesse of both Tables; here he speakes of his fasting, the duties of the first Ta∣ble: and for the second Table, he paid tithes. Vers. 13. God be mercifull to me a sinner] Oravit paucis sed affectu multo. Bucer. Here were few words, but much zeale and matter. Ver. 16. Suffer little children to come unto me and forbid them not] It is not spoken of Children in disposition, that is, such as are humble and meeke (as some would evade) but in age, Christ took them into his armes. For of such is the kingdom of God] Christ speakes not of these very children only, but of such, this is a standing rule; by the Kindome of God he means the visible Church, Mat. 8.12. and 16.19. that is, these have a right and title to the privileges of the visible Church. Vers. 19. Why callest thou me good? none is good save one,Jansen. None good but God] Ex se & independenter, alij participati∣vè. that is God] Christ answered to his mind, who thought Christ to be a meere man, so Basil, Ambrose, Ierome, Chryso∣stome. By that answer Christ hath taught us when we are commended, to turn our own commendations upon God. Ver. 25. It is easier for a Camell to go through a needles eye] Whether a Camell, or a Cable Rope be understood, in the impossibility there is no difference,Calvin would rather have it a cable rope, but Beza, Marlo∣rate, Aretius, Piscator, Cha∣mier interpret it of the Ca∣mell. but something in the proportion, for a rope is liker to a thread than a Camel, but simply to draw a thick Rope through a needles eye is impossible. For the Needle, some think by that is under∣stood a certaine gate in Ierusalem, which was so narrow, that the Camels could not (except their burthens were taken away, and they bowed their backs) passe through it. Rich man] Not so much from possession as affection; it is impossible for them to be saved in sensu composito, difficult in a divided sense; because they ought to be first chan∣ged, mutation cannot be easily done but by grace and power alone. Ver. 34. And they understood none of these things] It is a thing certainely worthy of admiration, that the Disciples understand none of these things, when this is not the first, but at the least the fifth or sixth time that Christ spake of the same matter: More∣over, all things were so plaine and evident, that a boy of seven yeares might understand. Ver. 36. And hearing the multitude passe by, he asked what it meant] Blind men, because they want eyes, are curious in enquiring.Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 38. Thou Son of David have mercy on me] Without doubt he heard in the Syna∣gogue, Esay 35.5. that when the Messias the Son of David should come the eyes of the blind should be opened. He heard also by common fame that this Jesus restored sight to other blind persons.Polyc. Lyser. Son of David] which Epithete was anciently and at that time given to the Messiah. He confesseth him to be God when he saith, have mercy on me: man while he calls him the son of David; and for his Office, he confesseth him to bee Iesus the Saviour. Vers. 23. That I may receive my sight] , These words sound as if this blind man had not been borne blind, but was made so by accident or some disease, therefore he desires the receiving of his sight lost.Polyc. Lyser. CHAP. XIX. Verse 2. BEhold there was a man named Zacheus] His name (saith Grotius) is purely Hebrew,Nomen Hebrae∣um seu Syria∣cum Zaccai, est à munditìa, in∣nocentia, seu ju∣stitia deductum. Lucas Brugen. as appeares Esra. 2.9. and 7.14. It is exprest for the certainty of the history, espe∣cially since he was a famous man. Brugensis. Which was the chief among the Publicans] A Publican is one that gathers publick pay∣ments. He exacted tribute for the Romans, and so he seemed an oppressor of the Jews, and therefore was odious to them, and they did often exact more than the Romans required, which they reserved for themselves. Luk. 3.13. Vers. 4. And he ran before, and climbed up into a Sycamore tree, to see him; for he was to passe that way] Being forgetfull of his own dignity and estate, running before as a man
of mean condition. He might easily divine that all which should see this thing would scoffe at him, that he a chief and rich man should climbe a tree like boyes, whence he might see Christ passing by. But his love and desire of seeing Jesus, and especially an im∣pulse of the Holy Ghost took away all his modesty from him.Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 5. And saw him] He saw him not only with a corporall aspect, but with that which was every where saving; nor only saw him, but vouchsafes to speak to him, cal∣ling him by his proper name, as familiarly known unto him, See Iohn 1.48. for Christ calls his own sheep by name,Polyc. Lyser. Iohn 10.3. To day I must abide in thy house] A wonderfull thing! we read in the Gospell that the Lord being invited by others went to them, but we never read that of his own accord he came to their feast, as he did to this Prince of the Publicans; so faith alwaies ob∣taines more than it wished, Zacheus desired to see Jesus, now he hath him his guest. Christ requires haste, that his readinesse to bestow faith may appeare to all. Vers. 7. Murmured] The Inhabitants of the Town, and perhaps some of Christs companions murmure, that he goes in to a man of an evill and reproachfull name, when yet no man invited him;Calvin. so when the world neglects the grace of God offered, it takes it ill that it should be given to others. A man that is a Sinner] That here, as in many other places, notes a man of a wic∣ked and flagitious life.Id. ibid. Vers. 8. The halfe of my goods I give to the poore) From this time I consecrate and de∣pute them to the poore. Vers. 9. This day is salvation come to this house] Because Zacheus should convert his whole family, as Cornelius the Centurion, and others did, or because the greatest part of his house were now turned to God.Polyc. Lyser. For so much as he also is the Son of Abraham] Because he was taken into Abrahams Co∣venant, Rom. 4.16. Vers. 10. To seek and to save that which was lost) The first shewed his diligence; the second his power; both his singular Philanthropie. Such as were lost indeed, and in their own apprehension. Nobilis  bene natus, ingenuus & il∣lustris. Syrus filius magni stemma is. Lu∣cas Brugensis.Vers. 12. A certaine nobleman] That is, our Lord Jesus Christ, and he truly calls himselfe noble, for he is Coeternall and coequall with his Father in respect of his Deity, in respect of his humane nature he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of a pure and immaculate Virgin, Christ hath in his Genealogie above twenty Kings and Princes. Into a far Country] That is, to heaven, it is a long while from the time of his death to his last comming. Vers. 13. And he called his ten servants and delivered them ten pounds] He observes a certaine number, ten, for God knows well both the number of his Servants, and gifts. His pound] That is, the Doctrine of the Gospell concerning the kingdom of heaven. Let him occupie] This was spoken parabolically,Polyc. Lyser. as a diligent Merchant spares not labour, but is intent upon all occasions, that even with the danger of his life he might promote his gaine; So let the Servant of Christ studiously strive by a diligent preaching of the Gospell, and faithfull administration of the Sacraments, to gaine many men to Christ. Vers. 14. His Citizens] That is, the Jews. Iohn 1.11. Vers. 15. And it came to passe when he was returned, &c.] This shall be in the last day, when he shall returne to the judgement of the quick and dead. Vers. 21. Neither acceptest thou the person of any] Or the face of any. The Greek word  may be rendred either way. Although the Hebrews, and Syrians, from whence that phrase proceeded,See Mat. 22.16 alwaies say, to respect the face, yet the Latine Interpreters use the word person, in judging to be moved with the person, face, or any outward quality, or appearance, nothing pertaining to the merits of the cause. Vers. 22. Thou knewest that I was an austere man] Then this should not have made thee sluggish, but have moved thee to the greater diligence. That at my comming I might have required mine owne with usury] Christ would no more note the rigour of God than praise Usury, when he brings in the Master of the Family so speaking, that money should be given to the banke that at least it might grow with
Usury: Only Christ signifieth that there will be no excuse for their sloath who both suppresse the gifts of God, and consume their time in idlenesse.Calvin. Vers. 23. But he perceived their craftinesse] The Greeke word rendred craftinesse sig∣nifieth a skill in ill doing gotten by long practice and experience.Significat  quan∣dam ad malè agendum solertiam, longo scillicet usu & tractandis rebus plurimis quaesitam, à  &  composita. Brugensis. Into the banke] Where either by the change of monis, or by a contract of the loane they make a gaine, and thou with them mightest have been partaker of the same gaine. Ver. 24. Take from him the pound, and give it to him that hath ten pounds] That so by his deed he may shew that he did not so much look after money as the gaine of it. Ver. 27. But those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither and stay them before me] Christ gave up the Jews his enemies which would not have him for their King to the Romans to destroy them, who wasted their City,Polyc. Lyser. and dispersed the whole nation into perpetuall exile. But in the last day he will condemne to eternall death all his enemies the Devills, Jews, Heathens, false Christians. Vers. 42. If thou hadst known] The more ancient Divines take the words optatively,Beza Quam felix eles & beata. Calvin, curares, thou wouldst have taken heed, wouldst have embraced these things.Pathetica est oratio, ideoque abrupta. Duo affectus hic si∣mul permisti, neque enim tantum miseretur Christus urbis cladem, sed simul ingrato populo extremum scelus exprobrat, quòd repudians oblatam sibi salutem ultro horribile Dei judicium accersat. Calvinus. Oh that thou hadst known, the moderne otherwise, that is, if thou hadst considered and taken speciall notice, Esay 1.3. Thou even thou] That is, Jerusalem, this is emphati∣call. At least] That is, after thou hast so often rejected me, and slaine the Prophets that came before me. In this thy day] That is, of visitation. Vers. 44. By the word, the things that belong] To thy safety temporall, or salvation eternall; Christ, the Gospell, and the preaching of it. Jerusalem in the Hebrew tongue signifies the vision of peace, these words then may meane, that contrary to her name she saw not her peace, Jerusalem was not Jerusalem. Vers. 45. And he went into the Temple and began to cast out them that sold therein, and them that bought] Christ purged the Temple but twice, first, at his entrance into his Ministery. Secondly, at his going out, Mat. 21. Marke 11. Vers. 48. Were very attentive to heare him] Greeke, hung upon him hearing him.. This very word is used Mat. 22.40. hang or depend upon, as a vessell upon a peg or naile on the wall: Others render it, pendebant ex ore ejus, as Bees on flowers, to suck out the moisture which is in them. CHAP. XX. Verse 5. THey reasoned with themselves] , (Whence Syllogismus) signifieth to rea∣son, by arguing to conclude, to infer one thing from another. Vers. 10. At the season] The word  here notes a certaine time of the yeare, viz. of fruits, as Matthew expresly names it, ch. 21.34. Vers. 20. And they watched him]  is to be curiously intent, cunningly and treacherously to observe. As in war all the actions of the Enemy are wont to be studi∣ously observed, or as in hunting, the steps of the wild beasts are wont to be observed.Gerh. Harm. Evang. The Pharisees were intent upon all occasions and waies how they might intangle Christ. Vers. 37. Now that the dead are raised, even Moses shewed at the bush, when he calleth the Lord, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob] Christ cites a place out of Moses, because he had to do with the Sadduces, who did not much beleeve the Prophets,Calvin. at least esteemed them no more than we do the Book of Ecclesiastes or the Macchabees: Moreover, because they brought Moses, he chose rather to answer them out of Moses than to oppose any one of the Prophets.
Spanhemius dub. Evang. parte 3 tia. p. 3. & Canaeus de Republica Heb. p. 476. say, the Sad∣duces received the whole Scripture, and not the Pentateuch only. The originall of the other assertion came thence (saith Hottinger) that some made the Sadduces the same with the Samaritans,Thes. Philol. l. 1. c. 1. Sect. 5. which acknowledged only the five Books of Moses for Scripture. CHAP. XX. Vers. 1. ANd he looked up, and saw the rich men casting their gifts into the Treasury] Not be∣cause the Treasury was in a high place that he had need to lift up his eyes;Novarinus. Brugensis. but be∣cause Christ being a patterne of modesty had cast his eyes upon the ground. The Greek word  signifieth studiously to behold, which notion doth best agree here. See Chap. 8.25. Ver. 3. Hath cast in more than they all] Qualitate, animi intentione, quantitate, pro fa∣cultatum ratione. Ver. 4. Hath cast in all the living that she had] That is, all the meanes she had to su∣staine her self that day. Ver. 11. And fearefull sights, and great signs shall then be from heaven] Josephus of the wars of the Jews l. 7. c. 12. recites divers signes which happened before the destruction of Jerusalem,Vide Grotium in loc. 1. That a blazing star in fashion of a sword hung over the City. 2. That at the feast of unleavened bread a light shone round about the Altar as cleare as day. 3. That a Cow led to be sacrificed calved a Lambe. 4. That the brazen Gate of the Temple, which twenty men could scarcely open, was seene to open at midnight of it own accord. 5. That in the first of May there were seen in the aire Chariots and stand∣ing battles skirmishing in the clouds, and compassing the City. 6. In the Temple was heard the sound of a wonderfull terrible voice which said, Migremus hinc, let us go hence. Ver. 13. And it shall turne to you for a testimony] That is, you shall have great honour by it, as you give testimony to Christ, so Christ shall give testimony unto you. Ver. 19. In your patience possesse ye your soules] As if he should say, if you would save your soules,Mr Perkins. you must labour to beare all crosses that fall on you with patience. Patience and strength to beare afflictions must be ours, not by usurpation, nor yet by lawfull use and occupation, as a thing borrowed for the present, but by just title and possession, we must have it of our own, and be provided of it to use when time shall serve. When one is comfortable and cheerefull, we say he enjoyes himself, so when one keeps himself quiet in crosses he possesseth his soule in patience. Ver. 24. And they shall fall by the edge of the sword] In the Greek by the mouth of the sword:So Judges 18.27. Acies gladij tam Hebraeis quam Graecis os vocatur, quòd acie tanquam ore gladius mordeat & occidat omnem carnem obviam. Lucas Brugensis. For the sword bites in that part in which it is sharper, therefore the sword is called  two mouthed for two edged, Heb. 4.12. Vt solent qui de loco superi∣ore liberatio∣nem expectant. Hoc est quod  dixit Pau∣lus. Grotius in loc.Ver. 28. Then look up and lift up your heads] That is, be of good courage, as the Sy∣riack hath exprest the sense in its Paraphrase by a metonymy of the effect, for when men are merry they lift up their heads, when sad they cast them down, and the reason which is added confirmes this exposition. For your Redemption] That full deliverance in which death shall be triumphed over, draweth nigh. Vers. 34. Be overcharged with surfetting and drunkennesse] With a surfetting arising from drunkennesse, or a drunkennesse which produceth a surfetting; but it is better in this place to take the metonymicall signification of this word for too much cram∣ming or pouring in of meat or drink,Gerh. Harm. from whence a surfet ariseth as an effect, so it is taken by the Septuagint in 77. Psal. 71. And so that day come upon you unawares] It comes unawares when peoples hearts are
hardned against the threatnings and Judgements of God, as the deluge came on the People in the old world.Luke 17. Erasmus reddidit ut li∣ceat vobis effugere, sed graecum est significantius, ut digni reddamini vel efficiamini. Geth. Harm. Vers. 36. Worthy to escape all these things.] CHAP. XXII. Vers. 6. IN the absence of the multitude] absque turba, without the multitude, that is, vel clam populo, vel sine tumultu. Brugensis.Vtrumque sig∣nificat, &  graecè & Latino turba multitudinem & tumultum. Sensus utrumque desiderat intelligi, cum abesset populus qui tumultum excitare posset. Lucas Brugensis. Either secretly without the peoples knowledge who were wont to follow, or without any tumult. Vers. 12. And he shall shew you a large upper roome furnished, there make ready] There was no need of a spacious roome for the present number there to meet and communi∣cate,Philip Goodw. Evangelic. Communic. but it might be to signifie that the Lord would not have this Communion con∣sined for the future. In that it was an upper roome, it set forth the divinenesse of the Sacrament, and the duty of lifting up the hearts of the Communicants; In that it was a prepared roome, cleane and ready trimmed, it was to teach the purity of the Sa∣crament, and what preparednesse is meet for Communicants. Vers. 15. With desire have I desired] An hebraisme, that is, I have exceedingly,Dike. Summoperè desideravi. Beza, Piscat. As if he should say, I have desired it in respect of the Passeover, to fulfill all righteousnesse, and in re∣gard of the Supper, to institute the same. ear∣nestly, and heartily desired to eat it with you. Vers. 19. This is my body] This, this bread say we, this body of Christ say some Pa∣pists, this third thing, Individuum vagum, say others, a substance confusedly taken.Bishop Morton of the Masse. The neuter gender will agree with any thing which hath not life; in the Vulgar trans∣lation it is said of Evah the wife of Adam, hoc est os ex ossibus meis, Gen. 2. Which is given for you] The other two Evangelists omit this particle, which yet is in no wise superfluous: for therefore is Christs flesh now bread to us,Calvin. because by it salva∣tion was once brought to us. Vers. 27. But I am among you as he that serveth] Viz. not as a Master,See 24 Exodus 13. 2 Kings 2.9. and 3.11. but as a Disci∣ple. All Prophets whom God imployed upon his messages had their Disciples to wait upon them, which is called ministring to them in the language of the Scripture. Vers. 29. And I appoint unto you a kingdome] This is not so in the originall; it rather hath relation to the words following, as my Father hath appointed unto me a kingdome,Vide Bezam. so I appoint unto you to eat and drink. Vers. 30. Iudging the twelve Tribes of Israel] The Apostles are said to judge by way of assession, or approbation, say the Schoolemen. Vers. 31. Simon, Simon] That Epizeuxis notes the singular affection and good will of the mind, that is, my most dear Simon, as 10.41. He putteth him in minde, First of his fall to humble him.Piscat. 2. Of his rising to com∣fort him. 3. Of his duty to quicken him unto Christ.In ribratione duo sunt, unum Concussio illa atque agitatio qua omnia sur∣sum deorsúm Vertuntur, al∣terum verò se∣gregatio atque separatio, se cundum priorem significationem hoc loco usurpatur, ut Christus nihil aliud voluerit, quam Satanam voluisse Apostolos & Petrum dedi sibi u  conturbaret. Cam. de Eccles com. 1. . Graecè est deposcere ad supplicium velad quaestionem, nempe ut Satanas Iobum, & Apoc. 12. Cameron. Myroth. Evang Satan hath desired] Satan signifies an adversary; The word that is here rendred desired is not used againe in the new Testament. But in other Authors that use it, it signifies such a desiring, as when one man doth challenge another into the field to a Duell. Or such a desiring, as when a man comes and calls for open, and publick punishment up∣on a man. That is (saith Grotius) he hath desired you to be given to him, it being an allusion to the history of Iob. Winnow] The word signifies to shake up and downe, as in a fan wheat is used, the kernell scarce ever lies still.
Vers. 32. That thy faith faile not] Be not wholly eclipsed in the originall. A mans faith is said to faile, either when it falls short of what it hath been, or should be. Christ now not only poured out these prayers for Peter, but also for the whole com∣pany of the Apostles, except Iudas, who then cast in his mind his betraying of Christ. This is manifest, first because Christ saith Satan hath desired you, not thee, for he laid not snares for Peter alone, but for the chief of the Apostles, although especially for him, because he made shew of greater constancie than the rest. Secondly this is mani∣fest from the words of Christ, Iohn 17.9. and 20. where he openly witnesseth that he prayed for his other Apostles and Disciples, Psal. 6.58. ConvertedPeter was converted from the state of sinne before, but now from a particular fall.] or returnest again so Ps. 58.6. strengthen thy brethren] That is, all the faithful. Vers. 38. Here are two swords] Vt sit parata defensio non ultio. Ambrose. That he may be prepared for defence not revenge. It is credible (saith Grotius) when the way from Ga∣lilee to the City was infested with theeves that many went to the City with swords, which we may collect also out of severall places in Iosephus. Two of the Apostles here imitated this custome. Vers. 41. Was withdrawn from them] Not severed and separated, but pulled and plucked like a tree by the root from the kindly soyle.Avulsus▪  violentam avulsionem ac distractionem significat. Alardi Pathalogia N. T. Vers. 44. Being in an agonie]  signifies summam Christi luctantis angustiam. Be∣za. The word agonie signifies a striving or wrestling against something, as two com∣batants or wrestlers doe each strive against other. The thing which our Saviour strove against was the feare and griefe which pressed his soule, that he might not be so farre overcome as to bewray any manner of impatiency. Magnus angor guttae grossae. Jansen. Non dicit simpliciter guttas sanguinis sudasse sed quasi grumos Concreti terrore sanguinis, & propterea addidit particu∣lam  ad leniendum id quod dixerat. Steph. Thes. Particula  hic non est similitudinis, sed veritatis, quomodo etiam alibi à Lucâ usurpatur. c. 3.22. c. 24.11. uti etiam Joh. 1.11. Alardi Pathologia Novi Testamenti.His sweat was as it were great drops of bloud falling downe to the ground) He wept with his members. Bern. A strange watering of a garden. Vers. 47. Drew near unto Iesus to kisse him) That signe was given to the Souldiers of the Romane band, who otherwise had not known Christ altogether unknown to them. But a mystery also lay hid under this kisse, for a great heap of execrable wick∣ednesse came by that betraying kisse,Casaub. exercit. 16. ad Annal. Eccles. 13. Therefore the Lord saith to Iudas, Vers. 48. Iudas betrayest thou the Son of man with a kisse] That also the greatnesse of the sin committed might appeare from it. Vers. 63. Mocked him and smote him] See Esay 50.6. He declareth how they scoft at him, not so much with their words as hands assaulting him; among the scoffes which consist in the deed it selfe,L'Emperear de Legibus E∣braeorum. c. 8. Sect. 6. it was not the least to pull the beard and to pluck away the haire, wherefore the Evangelist used  a most fit word, which signifies to pull away the skin it selfe, much more the haire. CHAP. XXIII. Verse 2. PErverting the Nation, and forbiding to give tribute to Caesar] There was nothing more odious than this crime with Pilate, who cared for nothing more than to defend the quiet state of the empire.Calvin. Therefore Pilate neglecting other things, most of all insists on that about sedition, because if he had found that Christ had troubled any thing in the publick state, he would willingly without delay have condemned him, this is the rea∣son why Pilate questioned him about the Kingdome. Vers. 5. He stirreth up the people] They say not in the preterperfect tense, he hath stirred up the people, but in the present tense, he doth stirre up, signifying that his
whole life was seditious. The Syriack hath a word which signifies to move with a cer∣taine tumult, which word the Thargum useth,Gerhard. Exod. 14.24. and Ier. 51.7. therfore the Priests meane this by their accusation, that Christ moved the people in Galilee and Judaea with new and seditious doctrines. By the very mentioning of Galilee they desire to provoke Pilate,See Luke 13.1 Acts 5.37. and make him an enemy to Christ, for the Galileans above others were prone to sedition, and impatient of the Romane yoake. Vers. 11. Mocked him] He derides Christ,Illudens ei, ut homini fa∣tuo: haec enim portio est Chri∣sti & Christia∣norum apud id genus homines. Grotius. as if he had been a foole who had boasted great things of himselfe, but when it was come to the point could performe nothing  is properly to handle one like a childe, to mock and scoffe at him. The Syriack hath a word which signifies to scoffe at, and play with. The Septuagint use this greek word of Sampson scorned by the Philistimes, who was a type of Christ 2 Pet. 3.3. Iude 18. They are called mockers who esteeme the doctrine of the last Judgement but a fable, and sharply scoffe at it; such a scoffer in this place is Herod, who not only refuseth the doctrine of Christ, but also jests and sports at it.Gerhard. Christ fore∣told this mocking of him, Matth. 20.19. Marke 10.34. Luke 18.34. which he would undergoe for us. Vers. 17. They delivered at the feast a malefactor] Some say in remembrance of the delivery of Ionathan by the people; others say to cause greater joy; others say it was a signe of their delivery from Egypt. Vers. 18. Release unto us Barrabas] No marvell to see murderers desire a mur∣derer. Vers. 21. Crucifie him, crucifie him] The Epizeuxis or repetition notes the vehemen∣cie of the hatred; as if they would crucifie him twice, they crie out twice, crucifie him, crucifie him. Vers. 27. And there followed him a great company of people, and of women, which also be∣wailed and lamented him] Although in publick all the people with one crie condemned Christ, yet we see that some of them forgat not his doctrine and miracles,Calvin. so God kept to himselfe a small remainder in that miserable dissipation. Vers. 31. If they doe these things in a green tree,Vide Piscat. 1 Pet. 4.15. Compare 20 Ezek. 47 with 21.3. what shall be done in the drie] This shewes First-Christ and the godly flourish. 2. The wicked are drie. It was a proverbiall speech, for the Hebrewes call good men green wood, bad men drie wood. If hus∣bandmen spare not their green trees which are of good use for timber but burne them, they will not spare old stumps. Vers. 34. Father forgive them, for they know not what they doe] Beza saith, here he is a true High-Priest, he prayed for those that persecuted him, because he foresaw their Conversion. Vers. 38. A suterscription also was written over him in Letters of Greek, and Latine, and Hebrew &c. Iesus of Nazareth King of the Iewes,John 19.19. Pilatus scrip∣sit tribus Lin∣guis, quod ne¦mo videretur ad festum ven∣turus, qui non unum saltem trium lingua∣rum intellige∣ret. Rainold. praelect. 256. Col. 1529. Latino sermone scripta haec  ob ma∣jestatem im∣perii; Hebraeo, ob locum in quo supplicium sumebatur; Graeco ob maximam turbam Hellenistarum quae ad Pascha convenerat: quanquam alioqui Graeco sermoni à Macedonicis temporibus & in Palaestina Iudaei vic inaeque gentes assueverant. Grotius in 27. Matth. 37. These three Languages were the most knowne of all the rest. The Latine because of the Romane Empire, and the Greek by reason of the studies of Philosophie, and the Hebrew for the antiquity of it, and being the Language of the Jews.] or rather as the originall sounds, Jesus that Nazarene, that King of the Jewes. Three languages, to shew first that he is a Saviour of all sorts. 2. Prayers in a knowne tongue. 3. Nothing can hinder Christs kingdome. Pilates purpose was that it might be read and understood of all, both inhabitants and strangers then gathered together over the whole world, but the counsell of God herein is to be regarded by us, who would by this way consecrate these three tongues for the propagation of his kingdome. The Scripture of the old Testament was written in Hebrew, that of the New in Greek, both were turned into Latine, which version was hitherto more usuall and common in the Church than all the rest, moreover the most excellent Commentaries upon the Scripture were written in one of these tongues. Gerhard. First here is an exact description of the substance of our faith. Secondly, he acknow∣ledgeth his name on the Crosse. Thirdly, he is King able to save, no power is lost in his abasement.
Vers. 39. And one of the malefactors, which were hanged, railed on him] Matth. 27.44. saith, the theeves. Some say it is a Synechdoche, and the Scripture ascribes that to both the theeves which agreeth but to one. Others answer it thus, that at the first both the evill doers did mock Christ,Perkins. and of that time speaketh Matthew: but afterward one of them was miraculously converted, then the other alone mocked him, and of that time speaks Luke; this is the better. Vers. 40. But the other answering, rebuked him, saying, Doest not thou feare God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation] It shewes First, a true Convert cannot abide sinne. Secondly, will reprove it in others, yea his companions. Thirdly, want of the feare of God is the cause of all disorder. Fourthly, mockers have great cause to feare. Fiftly, It is fearfull not to repent when there is a great Judgement on one. It makes not for late penitents. First it is an example without a promise. 2. A mi∣racle and rare,Many there∣fore deferre their repen∣tance. Hic est impiis∣simus optimi exempli abusus. we may as well looke for another crucifying of Christ. 3. He did not wit∣tingly refuse before. 4. He had no meanes before. 5. He expressed more than our late penitents doe at last. Vers. 41. But this man hath done nothing amisse] Or that is absurd, or out of place, as the . originall word doth import. Vers. 42. Lord remember me when thou commest into thy kingdome] First, Christ is King. Secondly, not of this world. Thirdly, hath the keyes of heaven. Fourthly, we must flie only to Christ for salvation. Fifthly, must believe in Christ though all be against it. Vers. 43. This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise] Christ promiseth more than the other asked. vox est, ut Pol∣lux verè dicit, Persica, quan∣quam & Haebraei usurpant, ut Eccles. 2.5. Nehem. 2.8. Sed Graeci usu hanc vocem suam fecerunt. Grotius. This to day is emphaticall, and is wont to be added to the mention of be∣nefits, as Ier. 1.10. Vers. 44. There was a darknesse over all the earth untill the ninth houre] This darknesse was not a naturall Eclipse of the Sun.Over all the Earth] viz. in Jury, and most Countries about. Philo∣sophers saw it in Athens. Signifies First, Sun of righteousness did not set. 2. Shews the Jews blindnesse. 3. Detestation of the fact. 4. Vilenesse of our sins. 5. Teacheth us compassion. For first it cannot be so totall. 2. Not so long, for the interposed Moone goeth swiftly away. It was dark, first to shew the sin of the people in crucifying of Christ. 2. That darknesse of ignorance should come on the people. Bellarm. This darknesse was spoken of by St. Dennis the Areopagite. Vers. 46. Into thy hands I commend my Spirit] That is, to thy safe custody and bles∣sed tuition, I commend my soule, as 1 Cor. 6.20. Acts 7.59. Gal. 6.18. 2 Tim. 4.22. 1 Pet. 3.19. as a speciall treasure or Jewell most charily and tenderly to be preserved and kept. est commenda∣re veluti com∣mendatur depositum servandum, ac reddendum tempore. Eras. & Gerh. Mr. Ball. CHAP. XXIIII. Vers. 4. BEhold two men stood by them in shining garments] Matthew and Marke say that one Angel descended.Dicuntur asti∣tisse mulìeri∣bus ex impro∣viso sc. & insperato, eo∣dem modo o ver∣bum illud usur∣patur, Luc. 20 ver. 1 Act. 4. v. 1. It is usuall with the Evangelists to put one for many, and ma∣ny for one. It may be that Matthew makes mention but of one Angell, because but one did speak unto the women; but Luke testifieth of two, and ascribes the speech to both of them, because he that spake not did give consent to all that was spoken. The two described by Luke have shining garments, but that one Angel which Marke remembred was cloathed with a white robe. The two Angels in Luke appear in a mans shape, but the Angel in Marke appeares in the forme of a young man. Therefore we must determine that these women came to the sepulchre of Christ two severall times after the resurrection, and at both times saw and heard the Angels, the Messengers of the Lords resurrection.Gerh. Harm. Luke describes their first comming to the Se∣pulchre, and the appearing of the Angels made in it; Matthew and Marke their running out to the Sepulchre and the apparition of the Angel seen in it.
Their garments are said to be shining, either because they sent forth a splendour and brightnesse, or because they were white like lightning; the proper significa∣tion of the Greek word confirmes the first interpretation; For  is to shine as lightning, and also the nature of Angels, Psal. 104.4. The Syriack hath a word which is used of lightning shining out, Matth. 24.27. Luke 17.24. Acts 15.13. Vers. 5. All they were afraid and bowed their faces to the earth] The brightnesse of the Angells garments did smite their eyes, an unwonted species and appearance struck their mindes,Gerh. therefore they bow their faces being turned away from the Angells toward the earth, which also is an argument of their humility and modesty. Rev. 5.14. and 7.11. and 11.16. Why seek ye the living among the dead] A friendly chiding, as if he should say, since there is life in Christ whom you seek in the grave, why do you yet seek him among the dead, that is, in the grave, which is the house of the dead. Vers. 6. But is risen] Viz. as a Conquerer and triumpher. When he was yet in Galilee.] The Angels warne the women of the Sermons of Christ had in Galilee, which are de∣scribed Matth. 17.22. Marke 9.31. Luke 9.44. because both the women were Galileans,Gerh. and when Christ first of all manifested himself in Galilee to be Christ, he also added this expressely, that he was to suffer, and by his suffering to enter into his glory. Vers. 10. It was Mary Magdalene, and Ioanna, and Mary the Mother of Iames, and other women that were with them, which told these things unto the Apostles] Therefore God chose these women, to which the resurrection of Christ should be first manifested, First, that he might observe his ancient Custome, by which he is wont to choose things con∣temned, ignoble, and base in this world, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29. These women were not only contemned for the infirmity of their sex, but also for their Country, being of Galilee, Iohn 1.46. but God exalted them by manifesting to them the resurrection of his Son, which is a principall article of our faith, and afterwards he sends them to the Apostles that they might be Apostolorum Apostolae, as the Ancients speak. 2. The wo∣men more weak by nature, were struck with most vehement griefe of mind for the ig∣nominy and torments of Christ, which they standing under Christs Crosse saw in the day before the passeover, therefore to them first of all the most joyfull resurrection of Christ is told, as also Christ afterward appeared severally to Peter, because as he of∣fended more hainously than the rest of the Disciples, so he was more grievously trou∣bled, whence it appeares, that the resurrection of Christ will bring consolation to the troubled Consciences and contrite hearts. 3. God would by this meanes prevent the calumnies of the Jews, the Priests lied,Gerhard. and said that the Disciples stole away the body of Christ from the grave, that therefore the impudencie and absurdity of this lie might be reproved, it came to passe by the wonderfull providence of God, that the women should come to the grave before the Apostles. Now it is no wayes probable that women and those few should steale his body out of a sepulchre kept with armed men, and shut up with a great stone. 4. The death of all rose by Eve a woman, therefore Christ would that his resurrection by which righteousnesse and life is restored to us, should be told by women. 5. These women went with a great deale of courage ear∣ly in the morning to Christs Sepulchre, the Apostles in the meane while being shut up for fear, therefore Christ would have this pious study of theirs rewarded with the most joyfull tidings of the resurrection. Vers. 11. Seemed to them as idle tales] They doe not believe their words, they hear them as a pleasant fable, they think that these foolish women dreame, the sense is, that they said, that a false vision was offered to the women, as those that doate imagine ma∣ny things to themselves. Vers. 12. Stouping downe] Iohn useth the same Greek word, both of himself and of Mary Magdalene in this historie.Vim vocabuli rectè expresse∣runt Syrus & Arabs, ille in∣trospiciendi, hic explorandi verbo. Grotius. Vers. 13. And behold two of them went to a village called Emmaus, &c.] Although Marke doth only briefly touch this history, and Matthew and Iohn mention it not, yet be∣cause it was very profitable to be knowne and worthy to be remembred, Luke doth not in vaine prosecute it so exactly; so, many visions which Iohn mentions, the other three Evangelists speak not of. Calvin. Vers. 16. But their eyes were held that they should not know him] The Evangelist
expressely witnesseth this, lest any should think that the figure of Christs body was changed, Therefore although Christ remained like himself, he was not acknow∣ledged,Calvin. because the eyes of the seers were taken, by which the suspicion of a Ghost or false imagination is taken away. Vers. 19. A Prophet mighty in deed and word] He excelled as well in the gift of teach∣ing, as in holinesse of life and excellent gifts. siue mente, sensu, intellectu, ex∣pertes intelle∣ctus.Vers. 25. Oh fooles] So also Paul stiles the Galatians 3.1. therefore 5. Matth. 22. such words are not forbidden, but anger, casting out such a word imprudently is for∣bidden, saith Grotius. Sometimes it is for the profit of the hearers that they should be sharply dealt with. Crudelem medicum intemperans aeger facit. Vers. 28. And he made as though he would have gone farther] Equivocaters abuse this place;Finxit] Vt ha∣bet vulgata edi∣tio, , Erasmus prae se ferebat (quod honestius & convenientius indicat Iansenius) longius ire. Hoc gestu externo voluisset dominus au∣gere & propalare desiderium quo tenebantur discipuli ut eum retinerent & ejus praesentia diutius fruerentur, ad communica∣tionem ampliorem: quem finem si non habuisset, tunc reipsa desparuisset, aut ulterius processisset. Rivetus. Haec simulatio fuit non verbis veritatì contradicentibus, sed in gestibus veritari consentientibus. Composuit sese Dominus tanquam lon∣gius, nisi in contrarium vehementes instarent discipuli & quasi vi ipsum retinerent. Ames. de consc. l. 5. Vide Cor∣nel. à Lap. he did not pretend one thing and intend another, but as he made an offer to de∣part, so without question he would have gone further if the importunity of the Disci∣ples had not staid him. See ver. 29. Vers. 36. Peace be unto you] This was the ordinary way and manner of salutation, as if he should say thus much unto them, that they should find him every way as cur∣teous and loving towards them now being risen, as he was before he dyed. Vers. 44. In the Law of Moses, the Prophets, and in the Psalmes concerning me] By the name of which he comprehends all the Scriptures, as it appeares from this verse com∣pared with the 27. where Christ is said to interpret concerning himself,In the Psalms] That is, in the Booke of the Psalmes, as 20.42. & Acts 1.20. Vetus est ab Hebraeis usurpata librorum veteris Testamenti distinctio, in Legem, Prophetas & Hagiographa, Thorah, Nebijm, Ceru∣bim, ad hanc respexisse Christus videtur quando scripturam, in Mosem, Prophetas & Psalmos hic distinguit. Psalmos ut praecipuum inter Hagiographia librum, pro illis exprimens. Quistorpius. the things written in all the Scriptures, and that which he first called all the Scriptures, that here he sheweth is to be understood of Moses, the Psalmes, and Prophets. Rainold de lib. Apoc. Praelect. 160. Vers. 47. Beginning at Ierusalem] Peter sheweth that Christs preaching began in Ga∣lilee, Acts 10.37. Therefore not at Ierusalem. 1. This place here is meant of the preaching of Christs Apostles, and not of his own, as that in the Acts is 2. This is meant of their preaching of him after his death and resurrection, that in the Acts of his own, and in his life time. 3. This was a ministeriall publishing of Christ, that in the Acts speaketh only of a voice, fame and good report in the mouths of the common people. Dr. Tailor. Vers. 49. The promise of my Father] Our Saviour cals the gifts of the Holy Ghost the promise of the Father, either because it was promised of the Father by the Prophets, Esay 44.3. Ezek. 36.24, 25, 26. Ioel 2.18. Or else because it was the Spirit of the Fa∣ther promised by Christ, but to be obtained of the Father, Iohn 14.26. and 15.26. and 16.7. Vers. 53. Continually in the Temple] Not that they spent daies and nights there, but because they frequented all the meetings, and at set and solemne houres were present to give thanks unto God. This cheerefulnesse is opposed to the feare which first held them shut up and lurking at home.Calvin.
ANNOTATIONS UPON S. IOHN. CHAP. I. IOhn in the Hebrew signifieth the grace of God, he wrote the last of all the Foure. Jerome. When he returned from the Isle of Patmos. Eusebius.Iohannes scrip∣sit, ita, ut vide∣atur scripsisse , i.e. relicta ab alijs, ut resu∣scitationem Lazari & alia, quae prorsus non sunt apud alios, mihi non est dubium, quin viderit-Evangelium Lucae. Melan. postil. parte postrema in festo Lucae. p. 427.De loco & tempore scriptionis dissentiunt auctores, alijs in Pathmo scriptum hunc librum volentibus, aliis Ephesi, & aliis quidem triginta, & quod excurrit, aliis verò sexaginta aut amplius post Christi in Coelum evectionem annis. Causam post a∣lios haec scribendi praecipuam tradunt omnes, ut veneno in ecclesiam jam tum sparso auctoritate sua, quae apud omnes Christi∣anum nomen profitentes non poterat non esse maxima, medicinam faceret. Grotius. Iohannes Graecè Evangelicam historiam scripsit, post Matthaeum, Marcum & Lucam, adductus duabus potissimum rationi∣bus. Vnâ eáque praecipua, ut Cerinthi, Ebionis, Caeterorumque, nascentes adversus Iesu Christi divinitatem haereses, refu∣taret; Altera, ut adderet quae observarat à prioribus Evangelistis praetermissa, facere posse ad illorum & totius Evange∣licae historiae intelligentiam. Haec fere Hieronymus, partim in catologo scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum, partim praefatione in Commentàrium Evangelij secundum Matthaeum, consentientibus reliquis patribus. Hoc Evangelium, ordine perfectionis ob∣tinet primas, quia divinam Christi naturam potissimùm declarat ac docet, caeteris circa humanam magis versantibus. Sed sicut tempore, ita & naturae doctrinaeque ordine postremum est, quo ab imperfectioribus ad perfectiora, & à facilioribus ad difficiliora cognitu, pergitur. Lucas Brugensis. Vide Calvin & Toleti argument. in Johan. There∣fore there is something more in every Chapter of Iohn than any other of the Evangelists. John in his Epistles was an Apostle, in his Apocalypse a Prophet, in his Gospell an Evangelist. Jerome. In this Gospell is declared, 1. Christs Person, chap. 1. 2. His Office, chap. 2. to the 12. 3. His Death, chap. 12. to the end. He begins not with words but wonders, yea, thunders, saith Ardens, Iunius was con∣verted by reading this Chapter. He begins his history with Christs eternall generation. Christs Divinity is described to the 14. verse. His humanity verse 14. Many in his time questioning Christs Deity, he writes this Gospell to prove the Divinity of Christ, and because he begins with that, is therefore (say some) called Iohn the Divine. Vers. 1. In the beginning was the word] Not because he is the internall word of the Father, but because he is the subject of the word, 1 Iohn 45.Desumptum ex Graeco Genese∣os, sicut vicis∣sim Syrus ex Hebraeo hicpo∣suit Bereshith. Grotius. Johannes Vide∣tur Augustum hoc & magnificum Evangelij sui initium è Prov. 8.22. sumpsisse. Mercerus in Prov. 8.22.  est cum primum re∣rum universitas Coepit creari. Grotius. 1. The substantiall word whereby God created all things. 2. As a word is begot of the mind, so is he of God. 3. God spake to us by him. See Brugensis. Before creation, in the beginning of the world. Christ is in the beginning, Creatures from the beginning. Here is a distinction of the Persons in the Trinity, Christ is God, and equall with God. Word] Or speech rather, Estey. Not Son lest we should look for a carnall generation. Theophylact. Was] Fuit imports a thing that once was and is not now; Erat was and is. Chrysost. Cyril, Theophylact. Rev. 1.4. With God] Not a locall, but personall distinction. The word was with God, there word is taken personally; And the word was God, there it is taken essentially. Vers. 2. The same was in the beginning with God] A repetition of the former to imprint
it in our minds, proves he was not only from eternity, but God from eternity. Vers. 3. All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made] This verse proves Christ to be God. Here we have the creation of Angels with other things. Beza. Sin is nothing but a privation of good, therefore not made by him, for an Idoll is nothing.Notam univer∣salem omnia op∣time explicat Paulus ad Col. 1.16. Omnia ab angelo usque ad vermiculum inquit Augusti∣nus. Vbi omnem exceptionem removere volunt sacrae literae id quod affirmarunt explicant oppositi negatione. Esa. 38.1. Jer. 42.4. Grotius. Not of him, but of the Father by him. Heb. 1.2. This shews the distinction and order between the Father and the Son. Without him] Not by him alone, all works ad extra are equall in the Trinity. Here is the being of things, verse. 3. Life, and reason, verse. 4. Vers. 4. In him was life1. Christus vita est nostra. 2. Efficit vitam in creaturis pro earum conditione. Duplex vita est quam Christus efficit in creaturis, viz. naturae & gratiae, hanc posteriorem Paulus vocat vitam Dei.] As in the fountaine, Act. 17.28. not as an accident in the subject, Exemplariter, intellectualiter. Light] Lux rationis. ver. 9. All men may see Christ if they be not wilfully blind. Vers. 5. And the light shined in darknesse, &c.] Minds are made ignorant by mans fall. Calvin understands by light reliques of conscience left in man, and by darkenesse mans corruption, and the light reformes not corruption; Others say, that the word was little respected before Christs comming. Ephes. 5.8. Rom. 1.21. John 12.35. Christ is a help against darknesse of sin, ignorance, misery, death, Gods wrath. He alludes here (saith Grotius) to Esay 9.2. Vers. 6. A man] Mans Ministry. Sent] Must have a calling from God, Rom. 10.15. John] Iehochanan Preacher of the grace of God, Luk. 1.13. This shews that Christ is author of the light in man. Vers. 8. He was not that light] Ob. Iohn 5.35. Ans. It speaks not of the same light, Iohn Baptist was not the Sun of righteousnesse, the Messias, the light that brings light into the world, but he was a light, and gave a notable testimony to the light. See Grotius. Was sent] Is not in the originall. Mat. 5.15. Iohn 5.35. Vers. 9. True] Truly heavenly. See Iohn 6.32. and 15.1. Lighteth] Luce rationis, the soule of a man is called a Candle in Proverbs. See Cameron. Every man] Jew and Gentile, without respect of persons, all that are enlightned cannot say they have light from any other. commeth] Viz. borne, Mark. 16.15. Mat. 20.19. The world was ignorant before his Incarnation, Luk. 1.79. world] is taken, First, for things created. Secondly, Per synecdochen integri, for men in the world, both are here meant. Some understand this of the light of grace, but it will be more universally and neces∣sarily true of the light of Reason,Cyrill took this light for the light of nature and naturall reason, because of the universall enunciation, so do our reformers for the most part following him. Divers others of the Fathers take this universall light (because Christ is said to be this light) to be Baptisme. For in the Primi∣tive Church, as the Nativity of Christ was called the Epiphany manifestation, so Baptism was called Illumination. And so Christ lightens every man that comes into the world (that is, into the Christian world) by the Sacrament of Illumi∣nation in Baptisme. Dr. Donne. Augustine thus expounds it, that is, all that were enlightned in the world were enlightned by Christ. which is in Infants radically, though not actu∣ally. Vers. 11. His own] Some say, all men are here meant, because he made all, the Jews were his people in a speciall manner, Psal. 85.1. Received him not] Beleeved not. Calvin. That is, they obeyed not his word, they would not be taught and directed by him. Iohn 3.32. Ver. 12. As many] Either Jews or Gentiles. Calvin. Bond or free. Chrysostome. Power] Therefore the Papists say, power is in man. See ver. 13. The word  never signifies possibility, but as in other places it is translated power or authority; so here, as also 1 Cor. 8.9. and 9.12. right or privilege, or as Iansen. Concord. Evang. c. 1. interpreteth, authoritatem, dignitatem, jus. Christ gives you the privi∣lege of Sons three waies: 1. By way of merit, Gal. 4.4, 5. In the sufferings of Christ there was not only debitum legale, but super legale meritum. 2. By vertue of the mysticall union, he is the Son of God, as man by vertue of the personall uni∣on, Luke 1.35. and makes us the Sons of God by the mysticall union. 3. Christ receives the Spirit and sends it into our hearts, and so makes us the Sons of God, Gal. 4.26.To become] Viz. made, Mat. 5.45. Sons] Gal. 4.5. Ephes. 1.5. Rom. 8.17.
His name] Gospell preached, Acts 4.12. Vers. 13. VVhich were borne, not of bloud, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man,Non nascimur sed renascimur Christani. Men are not born Christians, or regenerate 16 Matth. 17. but of God] Faith comes not by naturall generation. Bloud]Enallage numeri, genitale semen. The flesh] Gal. 5. opposite to the Spirit. Man] The same with flesh. Calvin. Some by flesh would have the woman to be meant. Augustine. Not of the will of man] Not by any naturall power, vertue, or strength which is na∣turally inherent in them. But of God] That is, of the Spirit of God. Vers. 14. The word was made flesh] Viz. incarnate, man by Synechdoche, Heb 2.16. Flesh signifies contemptuous man. And dwelt among us] As in a tabernacle or tent, that is for a short time.Habitavit] nam sic & qui in Coelo habi∣tant  dicuntur. Apoc. 12.12. & 13.6. Grotius. The Evan∣gelist in that phrase  probably alludes to the feast of Sarson. on 1 Tim. 1.15. tabernacles, in or near the time of which celebrated, by consent of many Authors of best note, he was conversant with us, Zach. 2.10. Heavens are his home, here was his pilgri∣mage. Beheld Spectavimus seu novum & admirandum spectaculum.  spectavimus, contemplati sumus, quasi in aperto, quasi in theatro. Maldonatus in loc. his glory] Saw it in his doctrine, miracles, life, passions, which agreed only to the only begotten. Full] Acts 6.8. All things in the Law were fulfilled in him. Grace] favour. Ephes. 1.6. Truth] All Christs were true and not fallacious, true knowledge, Col. 2.3. See Piscat. Vers. 15. And cried] Alia & clara voce, Esay, 58.Vtitur Evan∣gelista verbo clamandi, quia de Baptista scriptum erat ecce vox clamantis, utque significaret, Baptistam hoc testimonium publicè omni populo audien∣te, idque sonora voce, summa cum licertate, magno zelo, & peculiari Spiritus exultatione praedicasse hoc de Christo, quem diu expectatum jam manifestatum gaudebat & praedicabat. Ita enim usurpatur hoc verbum clamandi, Esa. 58.1. & de voce gratulabunda usurpatur. Luc. 1.42. Polyc. Lyser. For he was before me] So we read it, but in Greek it is He was my first, preferred before me, for he was my first. Vers. 16. Of his fulnesse] The greek word  is sometimes taken for abun∣dance, Psal. 24.1. there is not only plenitudo abundantiae, but plenitudo redundantiae,There is a ful∣nesse of grace in Christ as Mediator, ple∣nitudo not on∣ly vasts but fontis. an overflowing of fulnesse in Jesus Christ. Secondly, for fulfilling and perfecting of a thing: So love is said to be the fulfilling of the Law. Properly it is given to vessells that are brim full of liquor, and metaphorically here applyed unto Christ. Grace for grace] Interpreters all agree in this, that the scope of the words is to set out the abundance of grace we have from Christ; a kind of Hebraisme (say some) and notes the cumulation of grace, grace upon grace; grace answerable to the grace in Christ say others; or the grace in Christ which we partake of answers the grace in all Moses rites, and Ceremonies. See 14.17. verses. and de Dieu. in loc. That is, as one sweetly expounds it, as a child in generation receiveth from his parents member for member, or as the paper from the Presse receiveth Letter for Letter, the waxe from the Seale print for print,Dr. Preston. or as the glasse from the Image receiveth face for face, so doe we from Jesus Christ receive grace for grace, that is,Dr. Reynolds. for every grace that is in Christ, there is a grace in us in some measure and proportion answerable and agree∣able to the same in him. Grace for grace] That is, whatsoever Grace there is in Christ, there is the like stamp upon the heart of every Christian, like unto that expression. Matth. 5.38.Mr. Budge in loc. Grace] The word Grace is sometimes taken for the love and favour of God, Ephes. 2.5. 2. For holinesse, Col. 3.16. 3. For excellency or ability, as Ephes. 4.7. In all these respects there is a fulnesse of grace in Christ. Vers. 17. Grace] In opposition to the curse of the Morall Law, truth] in op∣position to the figures of the Ceremoniall Law. Dr. Reynolds. Grace comprehends all the perfections of the will, truth all the vertues of the understanding, Dr. Preston. Vide Fulleri Miscell. sac. lib. 1. c. 8. & de Dieu in loc. Vers. 18. Seen] Known fully,In sinu esse est proximum & intimum esse; dicitur de conjugibus inter se, Deut. 28.54.56. de amicis. Luc. 16.22. Grotius. Vide Brugensem in loc. as he is or now shall be revealed by Christ. Exod. 33.20. The bosome of the Father] That is the seat of love and secrecy.
Who is intirely loved with such affection as is due only to her who is to be laid in the bosome.Significat  res a∣loiqui latentes & obscuras planè & dilu∣cidè declarare. Glass. Onomat. Vide Piscat. & de Dieu. in loc. Vsus est Evangelista proprio admodum verbo, ut Chrysostomus admonuit, , Explicavit, quod est res obscuras, & quasi in tenebris latentes, in lucem proferre, & penitus explanare. Maldonatus in loc. Deut. 13.6. Men admit those into their bosomes with whom they impart all their secrets, the breast is the place of counsells. Calv. That is, Christ revealeth the secret and mysterious Counsels, and the tender and compassionate affections of the Father unto the world. Dr. Reynolds. declared] exposuit, discovered a secret, 41. Gen. 25. Matth. 11.27. The originall word signifies to conduct, and direct, and lead a man as it were by the hand to the finding out of something that was hid be∣fore. No man by the naturall force of his wit can know God with a saving knowledge necessary to eternall salvation. Vers. 20. And he confessed and denyed not] See third verse. It is familiar with the Hebrews by affirming and denying to expresse the same thing for the greater confir∣mation. Esay 39.4. Ier. 42.4. See 1 Iohn 1.5. Vers. 21. And they asked him? What then? Art thou Elias? And he saith, I am not. Art thou that Prophet? And he answered, no.] Iohn so denyed that he was Eliah, as he denyed he was the Prophet, neither absolutely, for so his answer had been false, (for he was the Eliah which was to come by the testimony of Christ, Matth. 11.14. and the Prophet, witnesse not only Zacharie, Luke 1.76. but also Christ, Matth. 11.9.) but in that sense in wich the Pharisees askt him. For they by Eliah in the 4th. of Mal. understood E∣liah the Tishbite, viz. that ancient Prophet, which they expected in his own person before the Messiah came, and by the Prophet 18. Deut. 18. they understood not Christ himselfe, but another famous Prophet that should come in the time of the Messiah, di∣stinct from him, and also from Eliah. Iohn 7.40, 41. and 1.20, 21. and this was called of themEpisc. Down. Diatrib. de Antichristo parte secunda, c. 63. Non sum] Hoc nimirum sensu quo interroga∣batur. Grotius. Vide Calvi∣num. . This is not only our interpretation of the words of Ma∣lachy and Christ, but of the most learned Interpreters among the Papists, viz. Paulus Burgensis on Malachy 4. and Ferus on Matthew 11. Vers. 29. Behold the Lamb of God which taketh away the sinne of the world] Every word is emphaticall,Perkins. There was a standing sacri∣fice in the Temple, morn∣ing and even∣ing, and that was a Lamb, therefore he is so called here to shew that he is the daily sacrifice. he makes here an opposition between Christ and the Paschall Lamb of Moses, which may be called the Paschall Lambe of men. As offerings and sacrifices are called theirs who presented them, so Christ is called Gods Lamb, because he offered him. Christ was agnus in passione, but Leo in resurre∣ctione. Rev. 5.5. A Lambe suffering death, but a Lion rising from death. The origi∣nall and our last translation reade it, That, or the Lamb of GodEximius ille agnus & singularis, qui per agnos Sacerdotii Levitici adumbratus est. Piscat. Ecce agnus Dei ille. Syr. Other beasts were sacrificed besides, but John Baptist names the Lamb, because the killing of the Paschall Lamb, and the effusion of his bloud was a most illustrious figure of the sacrifice of the Son of God. Gerh., foretold by the Pro∣phets, Esay 53.7. and resembling a Lamb in native innocency and godly simplicity, 1 Pet. 2.22. Which taketh away, or beareth]  tollens, the word is of the present tense, signi∣fying that it is as it were the continuall act or perpetuall office of Christ to take away our sinnes, as long as we are in this life; it may signifie either taketh away, or taketh upon him. The sin] The baptist names not sinnes, but sinne in the singular number, not as if Christ should satisfie for originall sinne only, but rather to shew that universally Christ hath taken upon himselfe the whole burden of sinne, and all the filth of the sinnes of the world, all the guilt of sinne, the anger and curse of God, and whatsoe∣ver belongs to the stipend of sinne, and so perfectly expiated the sinnes of the world, for when Paul speaks in generall and universally of sinne, he names it indefinitely, in the singular number  sinne, Rom 6.12. Of the world] There is a secret Antithesis in the word world, in the Leviticall sacrifices only the sins of the people were imposed on the Levites, but here the Lamb takes away the sins of the whole world. Vers. 31. Knew him not] Viz. de facie, for otherwise Iohn could not be ignorant that the Messiah was at hand,De facie ínqui∣unt nonuulli magni Theologi, id malim, quam de nomine & fama, quod nonnullis placet. Heinsius. unlesse he was ignorant of his own calling. Beza.
Vers. 38. Rabbi] Rab in Hebrew signifies multum,Rabbi vel Rab significat ex∣cellentem ali∣quem, sive is excellat generis nobilitate, sive virtute & re∣bus gestis, sive denique doctrina & rerum cognitione: Hoc autèm loco, ut in Evangeliis passim, in postremo hoc significato accipitur, & Latine red∣ditur per nomen magistri vel Doctoris, vox ipsa Etymo suo sonat eum qui sit instar multorum, velunum qui propter excellen∣tiam aequet multos. Rollocus.Inde nostro seculo auditur Rabbinorum nomen. Cheitomaeus de Graeco-Barbaris N.T. Est apud Hebraeos significationis ex∣cellentioris Rabbi quàm apud Latinos Magister, & apud Graecos . Toletus in loc. Vide plura ibid. magnum, much, great. Hence Rabbi (which is here interpreted Master) properly signifieth one which abounds with much knowledge, wisdome and learning. This name was given by Esay to Christ, 9. Esay 5. and that deservedly. Christ challengeth this appellation as proper to himselfe, reproving the ambition of the Pharisees, which would be calld of men Rabbi, Rabbi, and admonisheth his Disciples not to seek after that name. Vers. 39. And abode with him that day] Viz. from the Sun rising, so that only two houres remained to the evening, Therefore they could not returne that day to John, but remained that day with Jesus in his Inne.Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 42. We have found the Messias, which is by interpretation, the Christ] Viz. that Messias, who was peculiarly foretold by the Prophets,Evangelista hoc addit ut sciretur eun∣dem unum esse qui Judaeis Messias, gentibus Christus dicitur, utrisque & Iudaeis & Gentibus aequè communis, quacunque tandem linguâ effe∣ratur. Interpres Syrus, ut hebraicè scriberet, omisit pericopen hanc interpretativam. Lucas Brugensis. prefigured by the rest that were annointed, was then expected by all, annointed to be King, Priest, and Pro∣phet. Vers. 43. Follow me] When that phrase is used of the Master and the Schollars, it signifies to yeeld himself into anothers discipline, to follow some one as an individu∣all Companion, for instructions sake, so Luke 9.49. Philip was the first whom Christ called to be his disciple. Vers. 47. Nathanael] Is an Hebrew name,Jonathan in Hebrew. signifying the same that Theodosius with the Greeks, and with Augustine Adeodatus given by God. Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile] That is,Mr. Perkins. a man of an upright heart that serveth God in Spirit and in truth, for otherwise it is true only of Christ, he was with∣out guile, 1 Pet. 2.20.Respicit ad hi∣storiam Jacobi à quo Israelitae nomen habent. No guile] That is, none raigning, none imputed. Vers. 48. Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig-tree, I saw thee.] Christ speaks of three wonderfull things which are above man. First, although thou wast very farre distant, yet I saw that Philip called thee. Secondly, yea I saw thee before Philip found thee, when thou wast under that fig-tree. Thirdly, I saw into thy heart,Polyc. Lyser. that thou art without guile. Vers. 49. Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel.] Nathanael compre∣hends three things in his confession concerning the Messiah, whence it is gathered that he was learned in the Law, who rightly understood the speciall sentences of the Pro∣phets concerning the Messiah. First he calls him Rabbi,Polyc. Lysr. according to the opinion of Moses, Deut. 18.18. Secondly, he confesseth him to be the Son of God; As the Messias is called, Ps. 2.7. and 89.7. Thirdly, he confesseth him to be the King of Israel, Ier. 23.5. and 33.14. The promise is Zach. 8.9. and Psal. 2.6. Therefore he speaks of the essence and office of Christ, in which the true knowledge of him consists, and therefore the ar∣ticle ὅ is added, thou art that Son of God, and that King of Israel, viz. promised and expected. Vers. 51. Verily verily I say unto you, Hereafter ye shall see Heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.] Christ proves himselfe the Sonne of God, because they should see the heavens opened, and the Angels ascending and de∣scending upon him, as was figured in Iacobs ladder; see this Prophesie fulfilled 17. Mat. 1.2.28 Mat. 4.5. and Acts 1.Vide Bezam & Brugensem. Quaecunque Deo tribuntur in veteri foedere eadem in novo Christo tribuuntur. Angeli ascendentes & descendentes Deo mini∣strant. Gen. 8.12. Grotius.
CHAP. II. Verse 1. Third day] After Christ came into Galilee. Rolloc. After he went from Iohn. Beza hath both. Tolet reckons up five severall expositions, but follows that of Origens, as most probable, which numbers the third day from the calling of Philip, and Christs go∣ing into Galilee, for this was the last time described by the Evangelist. It is probable that some of Christs kinsmen married a wife,Scriptores ex multis circum∣stantiis colli∣gunt, vel sponsum vel sponsam fuisse ex cognatione Mariae. Polyc. Lyser. for Christ is here added as a companion to his mother. Calv. Vers. 3. They have no wine] Because she knew that the Messias would worke mira∣cles, and Jesus was declared to be the Messias, therefore she expects some such thing as the Prophets foretold. Vers. 4. Woman] As if he should say, in this case thou ceasest to be a mother, and art to be reputed as a bare woman.Non hoc repre∣hendit, quod de proximi diffi∣cultatibus solli∣citae intercedit pro aliis, hoc enim est man∣datum charitatis. Rectè etiam facit, quod Christum ipsum interpellat. Sed hoc vult di cere, in ijs quae ad officium meum pertinent, ut in exaudiendis precibus, in conferendis beneficiis divinis, nihil mihi & tibi est, nullum hic tuum jus, nulla aucteritas est, nihil in hoc officio commune mihi tecum est. Ideo appellat non matrem sed mulierem. Polyc. Lyser. Mulie∣rem vocat matrem suam hic & Joh. 19.16. ut ostendat se alium esse & majorem aliquem quam Mariae filium. Rolloc. What have I to doe with thee] A meere Hebraisme, Josh. 22.24. as if he should say, in this businesse I am not to be advised by you, neither will I; He reprehends this in her, viz. that for the prerogative of carnall kindred she thought Christ was obliged to doe this for her and her kindred, Matth. 12.48. Luke 11.17. See Rolloc. Mine houre is not yet come] That is, fit and opportune time, Rom. 13.11. Rev. 14.15. Iohn 13.1. Luke 22.53. When the wine was quite spent, when all took notice of the want, lest water should have seemed to have been mixt with wine, when all things were almost desperate, then is Christs houre, by this meanes the miracle is made more fa∣mous, than if he had prevented the defect of wine. Vers. 8. Draw out now and bear unto the Governour of the feast] Because this belonged to his office who was the taster, and who could judge of the goodnesse of the wine. Vers. 10. Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine, and when men have well drunke,Vide Martial. epig. l. 1.24. then that which is worse] It was a custome in the beginning of their feasts to give the best wine, and to reserve the worser unto the last, to which Custome our Saviour alludes. Vers. 11. This beginning of Miracles did Iesus in Cana of Galilee] The Evangelist twice names the place where this miracle was first shewed,Polyc. Lyser. Canah] Signi∣fies a Reed, Reeds grew round about this Town. Interpretor hoc fuisse primum signum, non omnium ominò quae fecit Christus, nec eorum quae eo fecit loco, sed eorum quae fecit, ut gloriam suam palam ma∣nifestaret, ut Iohannes ipse indicat, utque sese ostenderet esse Christum. Maldonat. in loc. for the certainty of the mi∣racle, and distinctly names it Cana of Galilee. That is, the miracles which Jesus shewed in the time of his ministry had such a beginning, so that this which was done in Cana of Galilee was the first. Admirable revelations were made in the birth and Baptism of Christ, but the Evangelist speakes of those things which Christ himself being in∣carnate properly did. And manifested forth his glory] Viz. That this Jesus is the Son of God and the Messiah. And his Disciples beleeved on him] Beleeved that his doctrine which he was about to deliver was true, divine, and heavenly. 2. They trusted beleeving that they should have eternall life through his name. Vers. 12. He went down to Capernaum] Which is a daies journey distant from Cana, Iohn 4.52. It was a principall City, a famous mart Town, and as is were, the Metropo∣lis of Galilee, thither therefore presently he went after he had shewed this miracle, that his glory there might be manifested to many, and might be farther spread for the cele∣brity of the place and frequent commerce, and would prevent him about to go to Ierusa∣lem, and therefore he brought thither the Disciples that were his kinsmen with him, who might testifie of that miracle which they saw.
Vers. 16. My Fathers house] My Father, not our Father; therefore he shews that he is the only begotten Son of God, and that the purging of the Temple belongs to him. He calls the Temple the house of God, because God promised that he would dwell there, and hear his people, by exercising his power.Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 19. Destroy this Temple] By the Temple he understands his body, ver. 21.Non jubētis est, aut adhortantis ad caedem, sed partim praedi∣centis partim permittentis, si∣cut Judae dicit, quod facis fac¦cito. Polyc. Lyser. That is, his humane nature being figured by the materiall Temple; that is, if ye shall de∣stroy, as Prov. 25.4. and Ephes. 4.26. Ver. 20. The Jewes presently, as if they had gotten the occasion of calumniating, which they sought for, crie out, forty six years was this Temple in building, and repeat also that calumny after three dayes in the history of the Passion; forty six yeares happened between the first laying of the foundation of the Temple of Zerubbabel and the con∣summation and dedication of it. Ver. 22. And they beleeved the Scripture, and the word which Iesus had said] That is, they understood the Scripture, and that speech of Christ in his death and resurrection being fulfilled. Ver. 24. Did not commit himself unto them] He did not acknowledge them for true Beleevers. CHAP. III. Verse 1. NIcodemus] His name signifies the victory of the people. Ver. 2. Came to Iesus by night] Both out of shame, for he was ashamed openly to come to Jesus who was poore, and to be his Disciple when he was a Master in Israel,Ne collegas jam Jesu male vo∣lentes offende∣ret: simile quid de Josepho Ari∣mathensi dici∣tur. 19.38. Gro∣tius. ver. 10. This seemed unworthy of his authority and gravity; and that he might not in∣cur the hatred of the Pharisees. This is three times mentioned ch. 7.50. and 19.39. Rabbi] He acknowledgeth him not to be the Messias, nor the Son of God, but a singular Doctor, and a famous Prophet. Polyc. Lyser. Ver. 3. Verily, verily] See 5. and 8. verses. No Evangelist but Iohn useth this double asseveration, and that in matters of weight nineteene times in this Gospell. See Mat. 5.18. and Cornel à Lap. Except a man be borne] He useth the Verbe borne or beggotten to shew that our very nature which we received at our birth is vicious, and shews also in that the cause why none by their own good qualities or works can come to the kingdome of heaven unlesse they be regenerated, because their very nature is so depraved. Again] The Greek word again is significant, it imports (saith Beza) we must go over all that is past, and reject it as unprofitable, and begin a new.Or above, as James 3.17. So Chrysost. Theophylact. Cyrill take it here, by a hea∣venly generati∣on. The Syriack interprets it here again, and so the Greek word is taken, Gal. 4.9. Cannot see the kingdom of God] Iohn 12.42. and 7.48. Cannot be a partaker of life eternall, as Ver. 5. Polyc. Lyser. Rather spirituall life is here meant. Calvin. Ver. 4. How can a man be borne when he is old] Hee names an old man, because he speakes especially of himself; as if he should say, I am an old man, and desire to en∣ter into the kingdom of heaven, how can it be that I which am an old man should be born anew? Vers. 5. Except a man be borne of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven] Those words must be understood of inward regeneration, in this sence,Our Saviour alludes to some speeches of the Old Testament, as Ezek. 36.25. He sheweth that this clean∣sing of us is by the inward working of the Holy Ghost. Perkins. Nicodemo Christus. (viro quidem minimè malo sed tamen supra modum elato vana aestimatione nobilitatis suae) objicit considerandam necessitatem novae cujusdam generationis, scilicet regeneationis. Ca∣meron. de Ecclesia. that is, by water which is the Holy Ghost, as Mat. 3.2. for to be born from above, and of water and the Holy Ghost, is in our Saviours Phrase all one thing. It is spoken to Nicodemus a Pharisee, who came not to Christ as the rest of the Phari∣sees with a bitter Spirit, he though a Jew, a Doctor in Israel, one that had good thoughts of Christ, vers. 2. yet he must be born again. 2. Must not be new dressed, but borne again, wholly new. 3. A man not a heathen, but one that lived in the Church.
4. Cannot else see the kingdom of God] Of grace. Calvin. He can neither be a true and living member of the Church here, nor shall have a share in glory. 5. The manner of expression, verily, verily, shews the earnestnesse of Christs Spirit in him and the importance of the matter. It is a great question whether he meaneth Baptism here, for then it was not institu∣ted though some did baptize; others think it to be like that phrase, Baptized with the Holy Ghost and fire; but if it be meant of Baptism, it implyeth only a contempt of it when there is an opportunity, and who can think that if a Parent should wilfully con∣temn Baptism, his Child should be damned for it? Error fuit eo∣rū qui hunc lo∣cum intellexere de conspicuo baptismo, ejus∣que eam esse crediderunt necessitatem, ut sine eo aeternis poenis infantes subjacerent, cum mollius de circumcisione Judaei sentiant, cujus omissae poenam non ad infantes, sed ad infantum parentes ait pertinere. At perspicaci lectori satis apparet agi hic de homini∣bus adultis rationisque & emendationis capacibus. Quod Graeci non ignoravere: apud quos mos fuit ad plenam aetatem, annum puta vicesimum aut ultra differre baptismum. Grotius dissertat. An semper communicandum per svmbola.This Text makes no more for the necessity of Water, than the like Iohn 6. Except ye eate the flesh of the Son of man, for giving the Communion to Infants. Dr Fulkes Annot. on Rhem. Test. on Mar. 1. Incredibile du∣cebat Nicodemus, quod de regeneratione & nova vita audierat: quia regenerationis hujus modus altior erat ejus captu. Christus ut ejusmodi scrupulum illi eximat, in vita etiam corporali mirisicam Dei virtutem extare docet, cujus ratio oc∣culta est. Calvinus.The Spirit working like water. There are these reasons of this exposition: First, Collation of other places where the Spirit is set out by water, as John 7.38, 39. Esay 44.34. Secondly, Collation of this with Mat. 3.11. 3. Because the other Interpreta∣tion, understanding it of Baptism, cannot stand, men may be saved without it, as the Thiefe. Dike. Vers. 8. The wind bloweth where it listeth] That is, God gives grace, and vouchsafeth favour,Perkins. to whom, when, and where it pleaseth him. Because he began to speak of the Spirit he instanceth in the wind, which is wont also to be called a Spirit, as Gen. 8.1. and elsewhere often. Vers. 11. Verily, verily I say unto you] Speaking in the singular, he immediately an∣nexeth that which followeth in the plurall, we speak, where passing on the sudden from (I to We) and so to Our, he intimated, that he was one of that plural of whom Mo∣ses spake in the creation. Vers. 12. If I have told you earthly things] Si per similitudines terrestres coelestia vos docu∣it;Fulk in his an∣swer to Greg. Martins pre∣face. p. 14. If I have taught you heavenly things by earthly similies. Our Saviour Christ him∣self calleth the doctrine of regeneration in such plaine manner as he uttered it to Nico∣demus, earthly things, in comparison of other greater mysteries, which he could have expressed in more heavenly and spirituall sort. Ascensus in coe∣lum puram my∣steriorum Dei notitiam & spi∣ritualem intel∣ligentiae lucem significat. 1. Cor. 2.14. Calvin. Eo loco ut intuenti Christi scopum satis liquet, ascendenti in coelum est inquirere aut admitti in conscientiā consilij divini. (Eo∣dem ferè sensu eadem locutio usurpatur ab Apostolo, Rom. 10.6.) Fortasse autem alluserit Christus ad factum Mosis, qui in montem ascendebat Deum consulturus, indidemque veluti à Deo ad populum descendebat, ut haec sit Christi sententia, nemo un quam conscius fuit consilij Paterni, aut consilium Patris revelavit, praeter unicum filium. Cameron. Praelect. in Psal. 68.19.Ver. 13. And no man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven] There∣fore none but Christ ascended bodily into heaven, and so not Enoch, Heb. 11.5. This place is not meant of corporall ascending, but of understanding mysticall and heaven∣ly things, as Prov. 30.3, 4. No man ascendeth to the full knowledge of heavenly myste∣ries but Christ alone who descended from the bosome of his Father. Perkins Dike. Ascendere in coelum dicitur, qui arcana coeli penetrat. Prov. 30.3. Grotius. Vers. 14. Must the Son of man be lifted up] Not on the Crosse, as Piscator, but by the preaching of the Gospell, Esay 2.2. Calvin. Vers. 16. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, &c.] This was a sic without a sicut; that sic, so, signifieth the vehemency of his love. Chrysost. So vehe∣mently, so admirably. Polanus. His Son, not his Servant; his begotten Son, not adop∣ted; nay, his only begotten Son, Non unum è multis, possit quis habere unigenitum & odio habere, saith Hugo Cardinall, but Christ was not so. Mat. 3.17. Prov. 8.30. Possit quis habere unigenitum sed stultum, saith he again, but he was the wisdome of the Fa∣ther. Col. 2.3. Vers. 17. God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world] Ob. John 5.27. Ans. The time of his abasement at his first comming, when he came not to judge, but to
be judged, must be distinguished from his second comming in Glory and Majesty to judge the quick and dead. Vers. 18. He that believeth not is condemned already] Five waies: First, in Gods Counsell before all worlds. Secondly, in the word, wherein this sentence of condem∣nation is read already, Mark. 16.16. Thirdly, in their own consciences, which is a forerunner of the finall judgement. Fourthly, By Judgements begun already upon them, as hardnesse of heart, blindnesse of mind. Fifthly, By the horrible torment of the soules of such as are in hell with the devils and damned ones. Ver. 21. But he that doth truth] That is, practiseth what he knoweth, and maketh conscience of his wayes. Vers. 26. Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan] Viz. Jesus who came to thee to be baptized.Perversae aemu∣lationis vox est, metuunt enim ne mox deseratur magister à frequentia. Calvinus. Vers. 29. He that hath the bride, is the bridegroome: but the friend of the bridegroome, &c.] As our Saviour was the Bridegroome, so his Apostles were the mariage-guests,Calvin in loc. Alludit ad pa∣ranymphos, qui sponso erant intimi & familiarissimi, adeo ut ad ipsum cubile & thalamum nuptialem, coeteris exclusis admitterentur, ideo que amici sponsi vocabantur talis enim erat Johannes Christo. Cornel à Lap. for so by an Hebrew phrase the children of the marriage Chamber here signifie. Vers. 32. And what he hath seen and heard that he testifieth] It is not only a generall phrase of things most evident (for we can certainly witnesse of those things which we see and heare) but there is a greater emphasis here in this phrase, viz.Duobus bis sen∣sibus homines ad cognitionem deveniunt. Grotius. That Christ hath not the things which he teacheth here by revelation, as the Prophets and Apostles, neither from the Law nor Testimony, had he learned those things as other Mini∣sters. Vers. 33. He that hath received his testimony, hath set to his seale, that God is true] That is, gives unto God, as it were, a testimony of his truth,Mr Perkins. Metaphora sumta à contra∣ctibus qui publicè impressis signis firmantur. Sic 1 Reg. 21.8. Nehem. 9.38.10.1. Esther 8.8, 9, 10. Jer. 32.10. Dan. 6.17. Grotius. Metaphora petita est ab ijs, quae apud Judaeos fieri consueverun: Nam solebant septem vicibus interrogate te∣stes, diligenterque singula eorum expendere verba atque testimonia. Petit. Var. Lect. l. 1. c. 10. and thereto puts his hand and seale. Ver. 34. Giveth not the Spirit by measure] That is, he hath received the Spirit of God in a wondefull extraordinary measure. In the time of the new Covenant God is not said to measure, but to powre out his Spirit, first upon the Head, then on the Church, Chap. 1.16. and 7.39. Acts 21.17. Tit. 3.6. Ver. 36. He that beleeveth not the Son] , He that will not be perswaded, or is obstinate; obstinacie against perswasion is either in the understanding, called unbeliefe,Mr Pemble. Vbi notanda est emphasis vocis manet. Nam in Scripturis  singularem habet significationem, notat enim constantiam & penitissimam adhaesionem rei illius quae dicitur manere, nam est quaedam ira Dei quae transit & quodammodo (si ita loqui liceat) lambit, ut ignis qui non destruit sed expolit potius ut est Esa. 4. ira quaedam Dei momentanea, quam experiuntur etiam filij Dei. At ira manens ea est quae ita perdit ut nunquam disperdat, & cruciat ita ut nun quam perimat. Cam. de eccles. Tomo. 10. properly to be understood here, as appeares by the Antithesis, and so translated, Rom. 11.30, 31. or in the will, and then it is called disobedience, so translated, Rom. 1.30. Tit. 1.16. CHAP. IIII. Vers. 6. NOw Jacobs well was there] A well which Jacob when he dwelt there digged for his own use, and the use of his Family. See ver. 12.Gen. 21.30. and 26.15. Vers. 9. For the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans] Have not common com∣merce, no not so far as that one should give the other meat or drink in his want,Notum est Sa∣maritanos fae∣cem populi fu∣isse ex alienigenis collectam. Quia corruperant Dei cullum, multosque prversos & adulterinos ritus colebant, Judaeis me¦ritò erant exosi, interea tamen non dubium est, quin Iudaei magna ex parte carnali suo odio Legis zelum praetexerent. Calv. or help him to it, as appeares in the words foregoing, they might not eat together.
Ver. 10. The gift of God] This is interpreted two waies, some expound it of Christ himself, his own person, so Rollock, and Dr. Hall in his Paraphrase. 2. Others of the pre∣sent occasion and opportunity he had now to know and receive Christ, we may take it for both. Living water] In the letter he meant spring water, for so she understood him, and so the word is used, Gen. 22.19. yet thereby, as by a metaphor, he meant the Spirit of God. Hildersam. Vocat aquam viventem & ratione fontis Christi in quo est, & ratione effe∣ctus, quasi vivificantem aquam. Polyc. Lyser. Vide Piscat. Vers. 12. Art thou greater than our Father Iacob who gave us the well] Because there was great use of wells in the hotter Countries, the woman commends this grant of Iacobs of the well as a singular benefit. Vers. 14. Of the water] By water our Saviour meanes the Spirit of grace, as Iohn 7.39. Esay 44.3. wherewith whosoever is once endued he shall never be after destitute of the Spirit, or of grace. Shall never thirst] That is,Never thirst] i. e. with a tormenting and deadly thirst. Mr. Hildersam. That is, be in the condition of nature He was in be∣fore, with a thirst of com∣placency, not of totall indi∣gency. 66. Esa. 1 Est duplex sitis, alia quae totais indigentiae de qua Christus, Non sitiet in aeternum, scilicet ut totaliter indigens. Est alia quae partialis qua quis de gratia salvifica degustavit, eaque amplius satiari anhelanter expetit, sic beati qui sitiunt. Matth. 5. Ames. in coron. ad collat. Hag. art. 5. c. 2. shall never be dry, or utterly destitute of grace, ver. 13. The Spirit shall be in him an ever-springing fountaine, untill he hath attained eternall life; it shall continue in him, and worke effectually to his salvation. The Spirit in its operation is like to water, 44. Esay 3. and 58.11. See 10. and 11. verses, and 7. John 37.38. The comparison lies in foure things, as Cornelius à Lapide and others shew. First, water serves to coole burning, any scortching unnaturall heat, so the Spirit of God cooles the soule when it is scortcht with appehension of Gods wrath. Secondly, quencheth the thirst, so the Spirit of God satisfieth the soule. Thirdly, water hath a cleansing vertue, it purgeth away filth, so the Spirit of God, Ezek. 36.25.12 Zach. latter end, and 13. beginning. Fourthly, water fructifieth, 17. Ier. 5. 1 Psal. 3. so the Spirit of God. Vers. 22. Ye worship ye know not what] That is, although you have a good intention, and direct your worship to God,Non dicit, ne∣scitis quid ado∣ratis, sed ado∣ratis quod nes∣citis, hoc est quia verbum Dei non est lucerna vestra, ideo incertae & vagae sunt imaginationes quas de Deo habetis, de essentia & volun∣tate ejus nihil certi & firmi potestis absque verbo statuere. Polyc. Lyser. and pretend the examples of your Fathers, yet be∣cause your worship was instituted without the manifest word of God you know not what you worship. See Dr. Reynolds on 110. Psal. p. 136. Salvation is of the Jewes] Which is understood First of the Messias being to be borne of them, Rom. 9. Secondly, of the Word committed to them, Rom. 3.2. Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 23. In Spirit and truth] First in Spirit] That is, not carnally. Truth] That is, according to the spirituall meaning of the Ceremoniall Law. They had killing of sa∣crifices in the Ceremoniall Law,Dr. Hall. now there should be killing of sinne; they had fire, we should have zeale; they salt, we sincerity. See Mr. Mede on this place. In Spirit and truth] inwardly and sincerely. Or secondly, Spirit] for the manner of his worship, truth] for the matter as he hath revealed. Inwardly, in their hearts and soules, and truly. Spirit] That is, in the mind, Conscience, will, and affections. Perkins. Vers. 25. That Messias commeth] The word is the present tense, he is even com∣ming,Significat ad∣ventum Messiae praeforibus esse. Polyc. Lyser. and when he commeth, he will tell us all things, that is, all these things that we speak of concerning the worship of God, he will teach us far otherwise. Like to this is that which the Jewes say at this day of Eliah, Elias veniet & revelabit omnia, Elias will come and will reveale all things. Vers. 29. Is not this the Christ] Not that she doubts, but from the declaring of things hidden she infers that he is the Messias.Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 35. Say not ye, There are yet four moneths, and then commeth harvest? behold I say unto you,Wilhelmi Langi de Annis Christi, l. 2. c. 4. lift up your eyes, and looke on the fields: for they are white already to harvest] As if he should say, you reckon yet foure moneths to the harvest (viz. to a naturall harvest) but see the fields waxing white with fruit for a spirituall harvest. Vers. 42. Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves, and
know that this is indeed the Christ] That is, we are experimentally convinced by what we have heard and seen, that this is he. This is indeed the Christ] The adverb indeed is opposed either to false Christs as Theudas was, ottypicall worldly Saviours, as in the history of Judges,Polyc. Lyser. it is sometimes said he sent them a Saviour: but this Jesus indeed is the Messias, the Saviour of the world. Esay 49.6. Vers. 44. A Prophet hath no honour in his owne Countrey] It seemes probable to me that the Proverb arose from thence,Calvin. that the Prophets were so ill entertained by their own nation. Vers. 46. A certaine noble man] Not by reason of stock or family, but by reason of office, as the Syriack hath rendred it, a Minister or steward of the King.Regius qui∣dam,  i. e. ex Herodis aulicis & eorum nu∣mero qui plurimum apud eum poterant. Beza. Herods Cour∣tier, who though he was a Tetrarch, yet he was commonly called King; it was his wife whom Luke 8.3. reckons among the followers of Christ, viz. Chusa who was Herods Steward, as is there said. Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 48. Ye will not believe] Viz. The word and promises of God, or you doe not believe that I am the Messias.Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 52. At the seventh houre the fever left him] By that consideration it appeares that the noble man did not anxiously make haste, because he believed the word of Christ, but went on quietly in his journey, which is an excellent description of true faith. Esay 28.16. CHAP. V. IN this Chapter because the Jews objected that Christ came of himselfe, he telleth them six times that his Father sent him. Vers. 1. A feast of the Jews] The acts of that Feast containe three heads,Polyc. Lyser. viz. a Mi∣racle, a disputation about the Sabbath, and a famous Sermon.The Passeover is called , by a Propriety, a Feast, thirteen times in the New Testa∣ment, by the Evangelists twelve times, and once Act. 18.21. and it was the princi∣pall, because it was the first, and was insti∣tuted for the remembrance of the greatest benefit, and also was the most lively type of Christ his sacrifice. Mr. Pemble in loc. Vide Cornel. à Lap. & Grotium. When a Feast is simply named without addition, it is often used of the Feast of the Passeover, Matth. 27.15. John 4.45. and so also John 11.56. and 2.12. it is used, John 6.4. there seemes to be an explication of this place, and the Passeover a Feast of the Jews was nigh. The rea∣son of the Antonomasie is, because the Passeover is the beginning and chief of the Feasts, there is a certaine prerogative given it above the rest, both for the memory of the be∣nefit past, and the signification of the future redemption. At this feast Jesus went up to Jerusalem, as also to other Feasts often in the time of his ministery. Chrysostome gives three reasons of it. First, that he being so subject to the Law for us might free us from its bondage. Secondly, lest he should seeme to be an Adversary of the Law, as if he had come to have broken it, but that he might shew that he would fulfill the shadowes and figures of him. Thirdly, because to the Feasts at Jerusalem there came Proselytes and religious persons not only from all the prts of Judaea, but the whole world, Christ would take occasion, both that he might instruct many, and that his fame concerning his doctrine and miracles might spread the more. Vers. 2. By the place of the sheepe] Some understand market, others gate, which is most probable, because mention is made of such a gate nigh the Temple, Probatica, Graeca vox est idem significan quod pecuaria vel ovina;  enim est ovis. Ita dicta fuit haec piscina tum quia erat juxta portam adjacentem templo, per quam scilicet & greges ovium introducebantur immolandi in templo, de qua 2 Esdrae 3. v. 1. & 32. tum quia in illa oves, quotidie manè & ves∣perè Deo sacrificandae congregabantur & abluebantur. Ita Theophyl. Jansen. & Hieron. Cornel. à Lap. in loc. Neh. 3.2. where the seventy translate it so, using the same word. Howsoever, it was a place where sheep were kept for sacrifice. That poole was to wash and water the sheep that were brought thither. In the Hebrew tongue] That is, in that tongue which the Hebrews not use, which was Syriack not much differing from the Hebrew.
Bethesda] The house of bounty,Bethesda Do∣mus beneficen∣tiae seu benigni∣tatis. Vide de Dieu, Grotium, & Toletum because in that place God freely exercised his pow∣er in curing all diseases of the people, and because there the godly relieved the sick with their almes. Brugensis hath both these. The greek books have Bethesda, the Latines Bethsaida, which signifies a house of fish∣ing, and so agrees with poole. Having five porches] Or Galleries, : it signifieth a spacious place to walk in. These were made for the reliefe of those poore people, that they might be dry from winde and weather, because they were to tarry a great while before they could be healed.Non quod vi∣deretur Ange∣lus, sed quod persusum esset Judaeis talia à Deo non nisi per angelos agi. Itaque ex mo∣tu aquae praesen∣tia angeli in∣telligebatur, ut ex terrae motu. Matth. 28.2. Grotius. Vide Bezam, & Toletum. An Angell was sent here that they might know, that the vertue to cure came not from the goodnesse of the waters, but that it was a divine work, seeing that could not cure till the Angel came. Mr. Pemb. Vers. 4. An Angel went downe at a certain season into the poole, and troubled the water] The Evangelist hath not marked, what signe there was by which the descent and pre∣sence of the Angel was represented, but it is necessary that there was some such visible Symbole by which men might marke, that the water was not troubled by any storme, or hidden cause lying in the very fish-poole, but that the Angell was sent from heaven into the very fish-poole, and when that visible Symbole descended into the fish-pool, then the water which otherwise stood was not only moved in the top, but was trou∣bled even from the bottome. Job 41.12. The Syriack hath a word which signifies Commotion with trembling; it was found by experience, that whosoever first entred into that troubled water (howsoever he was held) presently he returned whole. But if after the first, one, or another, or more entred into that fish-poole, they perceived no vertue of healing. Polyc. Lyser. Cerro tempore] Circa Pascha, ut veteres crediderunt. Grotius. Multa concur∣rebant, ne na∣turalis per a∣quam medicatio crederetur. Primum stato tempore fiebat. Deinde sanabantur omnia morborum genera: postremo commota prius aqua, cum alioqui ad remedia quaeratur ea quae tranquilla est. Grotius.The Angell did not daily descend into the water and trouble it, but at a certaine season. Lyra thinks that it began when the time of the revelation of the Messiah drew nigh, and ended after he was glorified. Some of the Shoolemen say that it began then when Christ being baptized in Jordan sanctified the waters; of the article of the time when it began nothing can be determined, but it appears that it began not long before Christs time. Vers. 5. A certaine man] In that he is only called so, it implies that he was a man of no great name or note, but that he was a poore man, as appeares in that he had layne here so long without help. Had infirmity thirty eight years] The woman with the bloudy issue was sick twelve years, the woman bound by Satan eighteen years, the blinde man, Iohn 9.21. till he came to mans age, yet all cured. Vers. 6. Wilt thou be made whole] He doth not ask this (of which there was no doubt, for therfore was he brought thither) as if he was ignorant, neither is it a sarcasme, but that he might declare the desperate force of the disease,Polyc. Lyser. Calvin. See Mr. Pemble and Cornel. à Lap. in loc. and the want of humane help, which made for the commendation of the miracle, and so both he and those that were about him, and those that did lie together with him, were stirred up to the conside∣ration of the miracle; that they might know who was the author of it. This is also a peculiar observation, that he healed only one among such a multitude that lay there, in Galilee he cured every kind of disease, Matth. 4.23. and in Caper∣naum all that were brought to him. Matth. 8.16. But when Christ wrought almost innumerable miracles elsewhere, he wrought famous ones at Jerusalem, but those ve∣ry rare,Polyc. Lyser. and that without doubt was done for this cause, lest they should rest in out∣ward signes, or lest they should think that the benefits of the Messiah are limited to the healing of mens bodies, or other externall commodities, but that the externall mi∣racles might lead them to the spirituall kingdome of Christ. In N. T. ubi de aegris fit mentio aliquoties legi∣tur . Quater hoc ipso capite, & Marc. 2. v. 4.9.11.12. cap. 6. v. 55. Act. 5.15. & cap. 9. v. 33. Etìam Amos 3.12. est grabatum. Apud probatos autores Latinos non semel invenire est. Senec Epist. 18. Grabatus ille verus sit & sagum & panis durus ac sordidus. Martial. lib. 1.93. Nec focus est, nudi nec sponda grabati. Lecticarum usus solis aegris quasi propriiusus erat. Dieter. Antiq. Bibl. part. 1.Vers. 9. Took up his bed and walked] The Law by name forbids to carry any burthen on the Sabbath-day, Jer. 17.21. but there was a twofold reason why Christ would
shew such a spectacle. First, that the miracle might be the better knowne to the com∣mon people. Secondly, that occasion might be given, and a way as it were made open for that excellent sermon which he presently made. A Lapide gives two other reasons: 1. Because Christ was Lord of the Sabbath, and therefore might dispense with his Law, 2. Because the work forbidden on the Sabbath was a servile work, not a pious and divine worke, as this. Ver. 12. What man is that which said unto thee, take up thy bed and walk] Behold the wit of malice, they say, not who is it that healed thee, but who commanded thee to take up thy bed. Quaerunt, non quod mirentur, sed quod calumnientur. Grotius. Ver. 13. Iesus had conveighed himself away] This word is used only here in all the New Testament: It signifies to escape privily, and steale out of a multitude;Beza. Vox haec usur∣patur in Graeca versione, Jud. 18.26. 2 Sam. 11.24. & 23.16. Jud. 4.18. it is pro∣perly spoken of those which swim out of the waters. Ver. 14. Findeth him in the Temple] Without doubt praying and giving thanks for his health recovered. Vers. 16. Did prosecute Iesus] The word is taken from Hunters which pursue the Beast, and suffer him not to be at rest, till he be taken. Sought to slay him]That is, they thought of a publick accusation, that according to the Law, Num. 15.25. he might be stoned. Vers. 17. My Father worketh hitherto, and I work] In which phrase is expressed a no∣table work of Gods heavenly providence, viz. that after the Creation of all things whereby God gave being unto the Creatures, and power and vertue to do the things for which they were created, he doth by his providence still preserve that being. Mr. Perkins. See à Lapide. Ver. 19. Likewise] In the same manner, with equall liberty, knowledge, power. Vers. 21. Raiseth and quickneth] Two phrases implying one thing, as appeares in the other clause where but one is exprest. Hereby is implyed 1. a Spirituall quickning from the death of sin, and 2. a corporall quickning, the raising of our bodies out of the graves. The Son quickneth whom he will] With the same and equall power. Ver. 22. For the Father judgeth no man] Foure things are to be considered in judge∣ment: 1. Judiciary power. 2. Internall approbation of good,Ferus in loc. Vide Jansen. Judgeth no man] That is, by himselfe a∣lone, but in and by the Son. and detestation of evill. 3. Retribution of reward; all those things agree to all and every person of the Trinity. 4. Externall fitting on the Tribunall, and publishing of the Sentence; and in this manner the Father judgeth no man, but commits all judgment to the Son. Some say these phrases judgeth, and judgement, are not to be taken (only) concerning the last judgement, but concerning the supreme disposition and government of all things in the world. Vers. 24. Verily, verily I say unto you] Happy are we that Christ makes such serious protestations for us to beleeve, unhappy are we that cannot beleeve without them.Geminatio haec attentionem excitat. Significat enim rem quam asserit, non tantum esse certissimam, sed & summè necessariam ad salutem aeternam. Vide. c. 3.3. Cornel. à Lapide. Brentius. Shall not come into condemnation] In all the english Books,See Drusius of foure that come not into judge∣ment. Dr. Clerke. even the last Translation too, it is, The beleevers shall not come into condemnation, which I marvell at, that's to ex∣pound, not to translate. The originall is , that is, judgement, not damnati∣on, and words are to be turned not as they meane in Trope, but as they signifie. Christ indeed meant in trope,  for , So St Augustine, Vtique judicium pro damna∣tione posuit, The Genus for the Species, the faithfull shall not come into damnation. But the proper sense is judgement, and the Rhemists read it so. Vers. 25. When the dead shall heare the voice of the Son of God, and they that heare shall live] Not such a voice as shall call them out of their graves, as in vers. 28. for he saith, now is, but the meaning of the place is to shew, that those that were dead in sin should be quickned, either by Christ in his own Person, or by his word in his Ministers.Mr Perkins. Vers. 28. Marvell not at this: for the houre is comming, in the which all that are in the graves shall heare his voice] His meaning is, though this be a stupendious thing, and exceed the capacity of all reason and sense, yet you ought not therefore to esteem it incredible, vain, and false. Christ saith that that houre comes, draws neerer and neerer, he names not the day but the houre or moment hastening.Polyc. Lyser.
All that are in the graves] That is, by a Synecdoche of one kind for all the rest, by what manner of death soever they dyed,Quia sepeliri communiter so∣lent mortui, per synecdochen omnes intelligit, qui pridem ex∣tincti sunt; vox Filij clangorem tubae significat qui Christi jussu & virtute personabit. Mat. 24.31. 1 Cor. 5.57. and howsoever they were consumed. Heare his voice] That is, the voice of Christ, ver. 27. As the voice of the Son is the voice of the Father, so the voice of the Archangell is the voice of Christ which shall send him. See 1 Thes. 4.16. 1 Cor. 15.51. Mat. 24.51. Vers. 31. If I beare witnesse of my self my witnesse is not true] Ob. Iohn 8.14. Ans. Christs Testimony is to be considered two wayes, as the Testimony of a meere man, and so he yeelds to the Jews, that his Testimony was unfit and unsufficient in his own cause, be∣cause by the Law, out of the mouth of two or three witnesses every word must stand: But se∣condly, consider him as a divine person coming from heaven, and having his Father giving witnesse with him, thus his Testimony is infallible, and so the latter to be un∣derstood. Vers. 32. There is another] That is, God the Father, not Iohn, as some say: For Christ would here bring in an undeniable Testimony.Mat. 3.17. He is another from Christ, 1. In regard of the Jews conceit, that Christ was but a man. 2. In regard of his humane na∣ture. 3. In regard of his Office, as he was Mediator between God and man. 4. In re∣gard of his Person, as he is God, being a distinct person from the Father. , id est ipsa lucerna, scilicet eximia & singularis. Cornel. à Lap.Vers. 35. He was a burning and shinning light] Greek that Lampe burning and shin∣ing; burning to himself, shining to others. Iohn was not only a Lampe shining in his Sermons, but a Torch burning with zeale, Nam qui non ardet, non accendit. Bernard. Nec lucere potest nisi prius ardeat. Aquinas. And ye were willing for a season to rejoyce in his light] All liked him very well, yea, they even danced about him, as Children about a bonfire (so much the word beares) for a season. Vers. 36. The same works that I do]  those very works which I doe. scru∣tamini. Vide Cornel. à Lap. The same word is used. Act. 17.11.Vers. 39. Search the Scriptures] Though in the Originall and Latine Translation, the word be ambiguous, and may be taken in the Indicative Mood and the Imperative also; yet I rather take it in the Imperative, as most Translations do, for a precept and duty, than in the Indicative, for a commendation of them, noting what they did, as if he had said, ye search the Scriptures. Search the Scriptures] That is, shake and sift them, as the word signifieth, search nar∣rowly till the true force and meaning of every sentence,Non legite tan∣tum sed attento animo expendi∣te. Sic  sumitur infra 7.5. 1 Pet. 1.11. Grotius. The Jewes themselves thought the Scriptures necessary to salvation. Mark 12.24. Col. 3.16. yea, of every word and sylla∣ble, nay, of every letter and jot therein be known and understood, confer place with place, the scope of one place with another, things going before with things comming after, yea, compare word with word, letter with letter, and search it thoroughly. Mr. Perkins. It is not only a metaphor taken from digging minerals, but also from hunting dogs who labour by smelling to find out the Hare. Chrysost. Which elegant similitudes sweet∣ly commend to us the accurate search of the Scriptures.Communiter reddi soler per indagare, sive per inquirere, quorum hoc me∣talli fossorum est, & eorum qui Margaritas ac lapidos presiosos è locis abditissimis magnâ solertiâ eruunt, illud verò venatorum proprium. Waltherus in exercit. Bibl. Vide ejus Harm. Bibl. in loc. The Lxx use this word, Prov. 2.4. Alphonsus the King of Arragon read over all the Bible foureteene times with Com∣mentaries. Beza being above fourscore yeares of age could say perfectly by heart any Greek Chapter in St Pauls Epistles. One Mistris Elizabeth Wheatenhall, the Daughter of one Master Anthony wheatenhall of Tenterden in Kent, late deceased, not yet being ten yeares old, having been about three yeares brought up in the house of her Unkle Sir Henry Wheatenhall, a very religious Knight at East-Peccam in Kent, and there carefully instructed by his vertuous Lady, be∣fore she was nine yeares old (not much above eight) could say all the New Testament by heart, yea, at that age she was so perfect therin, when she had not been there above two years, that being asked where any words were, she would presently name Book, Chap∣ter
and Verse.See more in Mr Stoughtons E∣pistle to the Reader prefix∣ed to the Trea∣tise of Davids love to Gods Word. One Mr Stoughton a Minister writeth this upon his own knowledge and examination of her, in about forty places at one time, wherein she never missed Book and Chapter but once: yea, she never erred in the number of the Verse, but alwaies told the just Verse, within one or two at the most, under or over. Ver. 43. I am come in my Fathers name] To come in the name of the Father, is to be sent by him to do all things according to his prescription, to seek his glory, for God to be present with, and efficacious by his Ministery. Polyc. Lyser. To come in his own name] Is not to be sent of God, to work from his own or others will, not Gods command, to seeke his own glory and profit. CHAP. VI. BEllarmine himself (de Euchar. l. 1. c. 5.) tells us, that many Papists (as Biel, Cusanus, Cajetane, Tapper, Hessels, Jansenius) deny, that our Saviour in this Chapter treates of the Sacrament. And for those which hold otherwise, they are divided also, (as Ferus sheweth on this Chapter) Some of them will have that which our Saviour here speaketh about the bread of life to be meant of the Eucharist, others will not have the Eucharist to be spoken of here till verse 51. and thus holdeth Bellarmine, and à La∣pide. But first, this Sermon was uttered by our Saviour (as Bishop Vsher saith) above a yeare before the celebration of his last Supper,Two yeares saith Cartw, wherein the Sacrament of his body and bloud was instituted, at which time none of his hearers could possibly have understood him to have spoken of the externall eating of him in the Sacrament. For in verse 4. this fell out not long before the Passeover, and consequently a yeare at least before the the last Passeover, wherein our Saviour instituted the Sacrament of his Supper, See John 11.55. Secondly, The eating which Christ speakes of here is by faith, even the very act of faith, ver. 29, 35, 48, 47. therefore it is spirituall eating, not sacramentall, which may be without faith. Thirdly,Crede & man∣ducasti August. See Iansen. Concord. p. 59. In hoc capite non minus com∣mendat potum quam cibum, in quo, si de Sacramentis loquutus fuisset, quod adversariorum plerique nunc existimant, nihil expressius esse contra Communionem sub utraque specie his verbis, verse 53. Rivetus in Cathol. Orthod. If those words ver. 53. be meant of the Eu∣charist, then how can our adversaries defend their Communion under one kind, seeing here the drinking of Christs bloud is required, as without which there is no life, this is argumentum ad hominem, a forcible reason against the Papists, and it prevailes with divers of them to interpret this Chapter not of the Eucharist. The eating of the flesh of Christ, and the drinking of his bloud, spoken of in this Chapter, is not the eating of the Sacrament of the Supper, but all manner of participa∣tion with Christ in the word and Sacrament. This eating here spoken of necessarily giveth life everlasting to the eater, 27, 35, 51, 54. but the Sacrament doth not so. 2. This eating of Christ is perpetuall, and that without which no man can have life in him,Cartw. cofur∣of the Rhem. Ex his verbis palàm apparet, perperam de Coena exponi totum hunc locum, nam si verum esset, quicunque ad Sacram Domini mensam se ingerunt carnis & sanguinis ejus fieri participes, omnes vitam referrent, scimus autem multis in exitium cedere. Et certè ineptum fuisset ac intempestivum de coena tunc disserere, quam nondum instituerat; ideo de perpetua fidei manducatione eum tractare certum est. Simultamen fa∣teor, nihil hic dici quod non in coena figuretur ac verè praestetur fidelibus, adeoque sacram coenam Christus quasi hujus con∣cionis sigillum esse voluit. Atque haec ratio est cur apud Iohannem nulla fiat coenae mentio. Calv. in ver. 54. hujus Capitis. ver. 53. But the eating of the Sacrament is not perpetuall, nor that without which a man cannot have life in him. Vers. 9. There is a lad here] , a little Lad, puerulus. Two small fishes] , two small fishes. Small they must needs be, as the word in the originall signifies, otherwise how could the little boy have tugged them thither? The multiplying is thought to have been first in the hands of our Saviour (as Augustine notes with St Hierome.) then to have continued under the hands of the Apostles (as Chrysostome) and lastly to have its complement in the hands and mouths of the eaters,Tolet. in loc. as St. Ambrosa concludes with St. Hilary. Vers. 12. Gather up the fragments] That is, forget not the least benefits.Bernard.
Vers. 13. And filled twelve baskets with the fragments of the five barley loaves] It is de∣manded whence the Jews being so poore,Cophinus Grae∣cum est nomen genus quoddam Cistae signifi∣cans, in usu erat apud Ju∣daeos, unde Martialis Ju∣daeum Cistife∣rum vocat. To∣letus in loc. Alardi Epiphil. Philolog. c. 8. and in the wildernesse remote from the society of men, had baskets so quickly to keep so many fragments reserved. Some think that bas∣kets and hay was their houshold stuffe, and that they never went without them. —Delubra locantur Judaeis quorum Cophinus foenumque suppellox. But they give no reasons of this their opinion. They still carried these with them, both because in Aegypt they carried their clay in their baskets, and because they used hay or straw to make bricks, that by these monuments they might remember their great slavery in Aegypt. Tolet saith, it is likely that so great a multitude of people had many baskets with them in which they carried things necessary for themselves. Vers. 14. The miracle that Jesus did] Although Christ to illustrate the miracle com∣mands the baskets to be filled, yet also he exhorts his to frugality. Calvin. Vers. 27 Labour not] The greek word is work not, take no paines for, and it sig∣nifieth also the work of the soule,Graecè , id est, opera, studio, & labore ve∣stro contendite, & sedulò curate ut acquiratis cibum, non corporis qui perit, sed animae qui non perit. à Lap. Vide Bezam & Piscat. study not, care not, take no thought for. Matth. 6.3. It must be understood comparatively, rather for the food that lasts to everlasting life. The Son of man is come] That is, the Messiah, a title known to the Jewes. Dan. 7. ver. 3. Him hath God the Father] That is, the heavenly Father, Sealed] That is, made his Commission authenticall,Messiae certas notas seu signa vel sigilla ad∣didit, ex qui∣bus prae reliquis filiis hominum cognosci possit. as men doe their deeds by their seale. It is a metaphor ta∣ken from them who ratifie their authorie whom they send, that is, approve of them as it were by setting to their seale. Loquuti erant de operibus: Christus ad unum opus eos revocat, hoc est ad fidem, quo significat, quicquid extra fidem homines moliuntur, inutile ac vanum esse, solum verò fidem sufficere quia hoc unum à nobis Deus postulat, ut credamus. Calvinus.Vers. 29. This is the work of God] That which he esteemeth in stead of all works, That ye believe on him whom he hath sent. The promise of never hun∣gring and thirsting is not made good fully till we come to heaven. Psal. 16. v. 6. Rev. 7.17. First, this promise doth not exclude the feeling and sense of our present wants. Secondly, it is not put to exclude those fervent desires that the faithfull have after more grace. 1 Pet. 2.2. A tast of Christs sweetnesse will make us hunger and long after more.Vers. 35. He that cometh to me shall never hunger, and he that believeth on mee shall never thirst] Shall a believer that partakes of Christ be so satisfied as never to hunger more? we are subject to wants, and commanded to hunger and thirst againe. Iohn 4.14. First, our Lord may speak this in opposition to outward food, grace is an ever∣lasting spring, he shall never have a totall drouth. Secondly, it may be meant of cor∣rupt motions to these outward objects, he shall never long more after them with that eagernesse or impatience. Thirdly, it may be spoken in regard of the full con∣tent that the soule may take by reflecting on its interest in Christ. Fourthly, they shall not thirst with an utter despairing thirst accompanied with a totall privation of Gods grace and love to them. Vers. 37. All] The greek word is neuter, that is, the whole body of the Church. giveth] That is, electeth, shall come to mee] by faith and love, I will in no wayes cast out] An emphasis in the originall, two negatives, in no wise, by no meanes, cast out, He that believes in me shall certainly have everlastingly life, 47. ver. Vers. 40. And I will raise him up at the last day] He repeats this foure times in the same words, that we may be certaine about this hope. Vers. 44. No man can come to me] There is a double cannot saith a reverend Divine, one of meere weaknesse, shewing that he which cannot doe the thing wants power to doe it. Another of malignity or willing aversenesse which shewes a violent bent of the will to the contrary, that he will not use the power he hath. I will not undertake the maintaining of this distinction. Except the Father which hath sent me draw Therefore there is no free will. Perkins. him] That is, incline and turne mans will
unto his aime, and make it of an unwilling will a willing will; the reason hereof is Rom. 8.7. In the calling of men by the word, there is a Trabere and a venire. The Fa∣ther draweth, and the man commeth, that notes the efficacy of Grace, and this the sweetnesse of Grace. Grace works strongly, and therefore God is said to draw, and it worketh sweetly too, and therefore man is said to come. Dr. Reynolds on Psal. 110. ver. 1. Vers. 45. In the Prophets] It is only in Esay 54.13. but because it is contained in that part of the bible which they called the Prophets, it is rightly so said. Calvin. They shall be all taught of God] Non singula generum sed genera singulorum, Cajetane,Quòd dicit omnes ad ele∣ctos restringi debet, qui soli sunt genuinae ecclesiae filii: Calvinus. that is, men of any nation, condition, sex, all that will shall be docible, say Chrysostome and Theophylact, all which shall be worthy, Cyrill. All] Because none is taught but of God, as he that only teacheth the children in a Ci∣ty teacheth all, not because all learne, but because whosoever learnes learnes of him; rather all the sons of the Church. Austen. Commeth unto me] That is, beleeveth in me. Vers. 47. He that believeth on mee hath everlasting life] Sanctification is the begin∣ning of glorification, therefore Saint Paul omitteth it. Rom. 8.30. Vers. 48. I am that bread of life] What ever was in the Manna formally and real∣ly, was in Christ transcendently, there was infinitely more in him to the soule than could be in that to the body. It was admirable in many things, yet it was but a crea∣ture, Christ is the Creator. Secondly, it was wholly an instrument in the hand of Christ, he fed them with that Manna, often in this chapter. Thirdly, though it was used to preserve life by the blessing of God, yet it self was without life; but Christ here tells them he is the manna, that living bread. It could not preserve from death, 49. ver. but Christ doth. v. 51. Vers. 51. I am the living bread] Or quickning bread, according to other translati∣ons. The person of Christ incarnate is meant under the metaphor of bread, and our be∣liefe is signified by eating. Christs flesh is living bread, both formaliter in se,Panem se vocat similitudine ap∣tissima, quia omnes conditi∣ones panis perfectissimè implet. Panis famen tollit, satiat, alit, & vitam prorogat. Polyc. Lyser. Rhem. annor. in ver. 32. & effectivè in nobis, makes them that eat it live for ever. 57. ver. My flesh] Or my body, this place, and that Heb. 10.10. is to be synechdocally un∣derstood, under one kind comprehending all his sufferings.Bis ponit ver∣bum dabo, quia verè duplici ratione caro Christi datur pro mundi vita, una ratione acquisitionis quando caro Christi in Cruce traditur in mortem pro to∣tius mundi vita. Altera ratione applicationis & distributionis, qua in praedicatione Evangelii haec vita itidem omnibus in mundo offertur. Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 52. Give us his flesh to eate] Here is not meant an externall eating and drink∣ing with the mouth and throat of the body, as the Jewes then and the Romanists more grossely since have imagined, but internall and spirituall by a lively faith. Bishop Vsher. Vers. 53. Except ye eate the flesh of the Son of God, and drink his bloud, ye have no life in you] We may ask a Papist whether the Eucharist be here spoken of; if it be not, why doe they allege this Chapter to establish their transubstantiation? if it be,Quem locum qui de symboli∣ca manducatio∣ne interpretati sunt, eò deve∣nere, ut non modo recens natis infantibus exhiberent Eucharistica symbola, sed & nisi id fieret, aeternus poenas ipsit infantibus crudeli scito denunciarent, cum revera ibi manducare & bibere nihil sit aliud quam intelligere, meditari, & in usum vertere. Gro∣tius. Dissertat. an semper communicandum per Symbola. Hinc homines malae linguae sibi persuaserunt Christianos filiorum suorum carnem esse, & sanguinem bibere. Dilher. Eclog. Sac. Dic. 18. why doe they deprive the people of that life in taking the Cup from them? It doth not serve the turne to say, that the people receive the bloud together with the host by a concomitan∣cy, for he that so receives the bloud doth not drink. Pet. du Moulin. Vers. 54. Who so eateth my flesh and drinketh my bloud hath eternall life.] To give us to understand that his manhood hath quickning vertue in it; yet not of it selfe as by it self, but as it is the manhood of the Son of God. Mr. Perkins. Vers. 55. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my bloud is drink indeed] It is as much as if he
had said, reall meat and drink, yet meaneth he not corporall but spirituall meat and drink. v. 65. Spirituall and corporall are opposite one to the other, not spirituall and reall. That is reall which is not imaginary or in conceit only, but in deed and truth. Vers. 56. My flesh and drinketh my bloud] That is, not only Christs body but per∣son,See 57. all his merits, his passions and priviledges which flow from them. He that eateth my flesh and drinketh my bloud, dwelleth in me and I in him] Christ in this Chapter is oft resembled to food; the Spirit of God delights in this metaphor, not only because they of Capernaum followed him for the loaves, but because the re∣semblance is suitable in five particulars. First, in regard of the necessity of Christ for the soule as of food for the body. 1 Tim. 6.8. Gen. 28. Food and raiment, food is more needfull. Adam in Paradise, and many Nations subsist without raiment, but none can without foode. Secondly, in respect of its complacency and delight. Thirdly, its efficacy, it continues and strengthens life, so Christ. Fourthly, because of the union between the meat that nourisheth and the body that is to be nourished. Fifthly, there is a unity. 1 Cor. 6.17. Vers. 62. What and if ye shall see the son of man ascend up where he was before] It is ne∣cessary to understand it one of these two wayes, either then you shall not be scandali∣zed, when you shall see, &c. or contrarily, then you shall be more scandalized. Ma∣ny follow the former sense, Chrysostome, Augustine, Cyrill, Theophylact, Beda, Rupertus. I can hardly perswade my selfe (saith Maldonate) that it is to be understood then you shall cease to be scandalized,Maldonat. ad loc. Vide il∣lum in v. 49. or then you shall understand, believe, as all the authors which I have read interpret it. What will you doe when you shall see me ascending into heaven, how much more will you be scandalized, how much lesse will you be∣lieve. I deny not (saith he) that I have none, the author of this interpretation, but I approve of this more than the other of Augustine, the most probable of the others otherwise, because this is more repugnant to the sense of the Calvinists, which to me is a great argument of probability. Vers. 63. The flesh profiteth nothing] That is, the fleshly eating of Christ; for in no other sense can the flesh be said to profit nothing,See Heb. 9.12. and 10.10. Matth. 26.27, 28. and 51. of this chapter. Prodest quic∣quam] ad vi∣vificandum sc. Terul. for Christs flesh was as necessary to the worke of our redemption as his Godhead. The Godhead supported but the flesh suffered. The words that I speak unto you are Spirit and life] Because the word of God is the pipe whereby he conveigheth into our dead hearts spirit and life. Perkins. As Christ when he raised up dead men did only speak the word and they were made alive, and at the day of Judgement by his very voyce when the trumpet shall blow, all that are dead shall rise againe. The flesh is his humane nature wherein by death he is become our bread; the Spirit his divine nature which maketh his flesh to live, and which gives a quickning vertue to this bread. Vers. 70. I have chosen you twelve] To the Apostolicall function. Calvin.Calvin. Vers. 71. When he was one of the twelve] Yet we doe not reade that he was moved, so stupid are hypocrites that they feele not their owne wound. CHAP. VII. Verse 5. NEither did his brethren believe in him] That is, they did not know nor believe that he was the Messiah,Hinc. colligi∣mus quàm ni∣hili sit carna∣lis propinquitas perpetuam euim infamiae no∣tam Spiritus inurit Christi cognatis, quòd tot operum testimoniis convicti, ne tum quidem credebant. Calvinus. and the Son of the living God, but they thought that he was only a man like to themselves. It belongs to a witnesse ingenuously to utter that which he knowes to be true, not to doe any thing for any mans favour or hatred which may oppose truth. Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 17. If any man will doe his will] That is, beleeve it, and subject himselfe to it,
He shall know] Viz. by that comfort which he shall feele upon his subjection.Perkins. Vers. 20. Thou hast a Devill] It is all one as if they had said, thou art mad; It was an ancient saying among the Jewes that men are troubled by the Devill when they were in a fury, or when their mind and reason was taken away.Calvin. Vers. 24. According to appearance] The originall is (as the vulgar rightly) secundum faciem, because the face only appears, the rest is hid. Vers. 35. The dispersed among the Gentiles] By the Gentiles he here understands the Hellenists, that is, dispersed Jews, so called because they spake the Greek tongue,Mr Mede on Acts 6.5. Placet doctis per  hic intelligere Hellenistas, id est, qui origine & natione Judaei (in qua autem Graeci erant) urpote inter Graecos dispersi, quales etiam intelligi videntur Ioh. 12.20. de Dieu in loc. Vide Bezam, & Drus. Praeterita. and used the translation of the Septuagint (which was made in Aegypt) in their Syna∣gogues. Vers. 37. Jesus stood] When otherwise the custome of that age carried it,Polyc. Lyser. that the teachers sate, even as Christ also often did, but here he stood that he might signifie that he would seriously execute the great Office of Teaching. Cried] Both for the multitude of the company that he might be heard of all, and that he might declare that he would speake of those things which it belonged all to heare and know, and also that he might shew an undaunted mind,Ibid. and that he feared no man. If any man thirst] The metaphor of thirsting was suitable, because it was hot weather.Esay 55.1. Rev. 21.6. and 22.17. Sitis est sensus deficientis hu∣miditatis in corpore. A thirst in Scripture in generall meanes a vehement desire, but here more, it is the same in the soule that thirst in the body. Three things meet in bodily thirst: 1. A fai∣ling of moysture. 2. A sense of unnaturall heat, therefore it is said in Scripture, burnt up with thirst, dried with thirst. 3. A vehement desire after moisture which may coole this heat, and supply this want. That is, finds himself empty of grace, is sensible of his corruption, and of the wrath of God, and then vehemently desires Christ. Vers. 38. As the Scripture saith] That is, as the Scripture is wont to expresse it, for otherwise there is no such place to be found. See Dr. Hals Paraphrase.Ad scripturm alluditur, non quòd haec eadem verba in ullo veteris Testamenti loco reperiantur: sed quòd sensus idem, non uno, sed multis apud prophetas locis sit. Maldonat. in loc.Ita saepe Iohannes ubi non anum aliquem locum sed & multorum consensum indicat, quare & Syrus pluraliter hic Scrip∣turas posuit. Grotius. There is no Scripture that saith this in terminis,Alij censent id scriptum non in uno loco, sed in multis, idque omnino non quoad verba, sed quoad rem & sensum. Cornel à Lap. See ch. 4. ver. 14. but all those Scriptures which speak of the powring out of the Spirit may be alluded to saith Grotius; yet he and Rollock say Esay 58. is especially meant, Ioel 2.28. saith Brugensis. Christ interprets what he meanes by the next verse.Vide Iun. Pa∣ral. l. 1. paral. 71. By Waters is meant the indwel∣ling vertue of the Spirit. See Ver. 39. By Rivers of water, the abundant and various operations and gifts of the Spirit. Calv. By living water, or water of life, some say is meant the reality of these, they have re∣all graces, and comforts; others say it is so called from the effect, because the nature of this water is to give and preserve life; this phrase is rather an Hebraisme,Ventrem per catachresin vo∣cat interiora animae. Cornel. à Lap. amongst the Jews a spring that never failes is called living water. See John 4.10, 11, 12, 13. That is, in his inward man shall be those inward graces that never faile. Flow out] He shall not only have enough for himself, but wherewith to refresh others. Vers. 39. The Holy Ghost was not yet given] That is, in comparison;Examen prae∣far. Morini. p. 180. See Calvin. The miraculous and sanctifying gifts of the Holy Ghost were not as yet so fully given as they were afterwards when Iesus was received into glory. Dr. Halls paraphrase. he was given be∣fore, but so sparingly, as in respect of this powring out, Tit. 3.6. He might seeme not to be given at all. Because that Iesus was not yet glorified] He had not yet ascended into heaven. That was the highest and perfect glory of the man Jesus when that of the Psalmist Psal. 109.1. was fulfilled, when the Father said to Christ triumphantly ascending above all heavens, Sit at my right hand. Brugensis Comment. in 4 or. Evangelia, vide plura ibid.
Ver. 48. Of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees] Yet Nicodemus was a Ruler and a Pharisee. John 3.1. CHAP. VIII. Vers. 1. IEsus went unto the mount of Olives] He sought this solitarinesse, partly that he might refresh with necessary rest his body wearied with the daily labour of teaching, partly that he might be more for prayer.Polyc. Lyser. About halfe a mile and a furlong from Jerusalem toward the east stood the mount of Olives, so called from the multitude of Olives. See Travels of the Patriarks. p. 483. Vers. 3. And the Scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adultery, &c.] The Graecians read not this history;Quia haec hi∣storia semper à Latinis ecclesi∣is recepta fuit, & in plurimis vetustis Graeco∣rum codicibus reperiatur, & nihil Apostolico spiritu indignū continet, non est cur eum in usū nostrum accom∣modare recuse mus. Calvin. Omiserunt hanc historiam Interpretes & Commentatores, non quod apocrypham censerent, sed quod in suis codicibus non inve nirent. Paulus Tarnovins in loc. Chrysostome and Theophylact wrote whole Commen∣taries upon this Evangelist, but explained not this history; Jerome also witnesseth that this history is not extant in any of the Latine Books, and it is not found in the Syriack Edition of the New testament. Polyc. Lyser. We know that the history of the adulterous woman was in times past expunged by many, and is not found in the Syriack Edition, or in the Paraphrase of Nonnus, but yet we deny that it is not found in the Greek fountaine; yea, Theodorus Beza witnesseth, that of seventeene of his ancient Copies only one wanted it; none of the printed books which are extant this day leave it out. Austen affirmes that it was perversly rejected by some Hereticks, because it seemed to promise to men an impunity of sinning. But this is nothing to us to whom it sufficeth that the fountaines are cleare. Chamierus tomo 10. l. 12. c. 7. Vide Piscat. in loc. & Seldeni, Uxorem Ebrai∣cam. c. 11. p. 368. ad 372. Bezam, & Drusii praeterita, Grotium, & Waltheri Harmoniam Biblicam.It is found in a Syriack book of speciall note, therefore Ludovicus de Dieu, who wrote it out thence, mentions it in his Animadversions. Tatianus (who lived within threescore yeares after John) expresly mentions it also in his harmony of the Gospels, as Mr Selden shews in his Vxor Ebraica. A woman taken in adultery] In the very act, , that is, in the theft, perhaps to intimate the great theft which is in adultery.Deprehensa est in adulterio] Hoc est, depre∣hensa est in ipso facto cum adul∣taretur,  est enim deprehendere in facinore ipso, & huiusmodi deprehensionem  appellat Erasmus. Tam manifestè ut negari non possit. Vox est Graeca forensis. Grotius.  (quamvis  nullibi inveniatur) in ipso furro, & per Sy∣necdochen generis pro specie in ipso facinore. Dilher. eclog. Sac. Dictum. 6. Id est, , In ipso furto. Piscat. Some say, they brought the Adulteresse and not the Adulterer, that they might try Christs chastity; but rather because she was easier to be taken than the man, saith Mal∣donate. Ver. 4. Master] They call him Master, whose Disciples yet they would not be, and whom in the former Chap. ver. 47. they called a Seducer. But they flatter him shame∣fully hoping by that the more easily to deceive him. They propound both the greatness and certainty of the crime. See Boys his Sermon on this Text in his Re∣maines.Vers. 6. But Iesus stouped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground, as though he heard them not] The Syrians write not to the left hand as the Hebrews, not to the right hand as the Greekes and Latines, but downward, as Masius shews in his Syriack Grammer, which custome of writing it is probable was then observed by Christ, because at that time the Jews used the Syriack tongue. Piscat. By this gesture Christ would shew that he was offended with the accusation of these men,Polyc. Lyser. Hoc gestu eorū contemptum prae se tulit. Calvin. and that he judged them unworthy of answer, because they carried all ma∣liciously and fraudulently, and would be swift in punishing when they were slow in doing rightly. What Christ wrote, and wherefore, it is not exprest, yet the Fathers diligently inquire
after both. Aug. l. 4. de Consens. Evang. gives these reasons why Christ wrote, First, that he might signifie that those were to be written on earth, not in heaven,Vide Toletum in loc. as he had said to his Disciples, Luk. 10.20. Secondly, That he might shew that he works miracles on earth, for miracles are certaine signs which are done one earth. Ambrose saith, that he wrote that, Ier. 22.29. And in another place he saith, he wrote, Thou seest the moe that is in thy bro∣thers eye, but dost not see the beame which is in thine own eye. Sunt hae Patrum meditationes. Certi tamen nihil statui potest saith Dilher.Dilher Ecclog. Sac Dictum quintum. These are the meditations of the Fathers, but nothing certaine can be determined. That he wrote with his finger significant letters, and made some words which might reprove the sins of most fraudulent men it is proba∣ble, but what they were it is beyond our capacity to understand, saith the same Dilher. Vers. 7. He that is without sin among you] He condemnes their Hypocrisie, not the fact simply. signifieth properly, one that is impeccable and not subject to sin. But Tolet thinkes it is here rather taken for one that is now without sin. Calvin thinks that he spake this according to the Law, Deut. 17.7. by which the wit∣nesses were with their own hands to kill the guilty person. But there God warned they should not condemn that person with their tongue which they would not kill with their hands, here Christ requires perfect innocency in witnesses, that none should un∣dertake to punish a crime in another, unlesse he be innocent and free from all fault him∣self. See more in Calvin. Vers. 9. Being convicted] Or reproved, the Greeke word signifies conviction by ar∣gument. Went out one by one] Vnus & deinde unus, One and then one; we have the same expression, Mark 14.19. Beginning at the eldest] Either because the younger for honours sake offered the first place of going out to the Elder, or because the elder were conscious to themselves of more and greater sins; and that he might give them the more confidence of going out, he againe bowed himself, Ver. 8. Vers. 10. None but the woman] In respect of the accusers, the Disciples were yet pre∣sent, and the people which Jesus taught. Vers. 11. Neither do I condemn thee] He came not then to the judgement of the world, but that he might give place to repentance Christ while he was in the forme of a servant neither condemned whoredome, nor absolved it civilly.Non ad Chri∣stum spectabat Politici magi∣stratus offici∣um, morte mul∣tando sontes exequi, sed hortari potius nec pergeret adulterari: sed quo minus illa puniretur ab aliis quorum inter fuit insontes animadvertere, nihil absuit. Dr. Twiss. vind. l. 1. parte 1. digr. 10. c. 2. Vide Bezam, & Piscat. Sin no more] Willingly, deliberately. Vers. 12. I am the light of the world] The light of the world visible by Creatures, of the invisible by grace; the light of the world which I have created by my word, redee∣med by my bloud; not of the Jews only, but of all men, of all times, places, orders, and conditions, Esa. 42.6. and 49.6. Luk. 2.32. He that followeth me] To follow Christ is to receive his Doctrine, to acknowledge him for the true Messiah of the world, to worship and invocate him, the following of Christ therefore comprehends true faith Charity and obedience, as Christ himself explaines it, Iohn 12.36. and 46. not only a lively knowledge of the true God and salvation, but also as Austen will, a continuation of the same even to eternall life. The light of life] Which may be referred either to Christ, who is the light, and en∣lightens every one comming into this world, he shall, I say, possesse this Christ the fountaine of life, that is, shall be partaker of his benefits and merits; or it may be referred to eternall life, that last end of our afflictions, as if he should say, he that obeys me shall have eternall life, shall once see that light inaccessible where God himself dwels,Aretius and enjoyes it. Vers. 32. And the truth shall make you free] Austen observed here the emphasis of the Greeke word, for they are said to be freed by the Latines, who are brought out of dan¦ger, or from a disease; but the Greeke word belongs to liberty which is opposed to servitude; also, he is called a free man amongst the Latines who is out of danger, but the Greeke word signifies, an ingenuous man, and one that is obnoxious to no servi∣tude,
the stomack of the Jews so declares it, We never served any man. Vers. 33. We were never in bondage to any man] Some of the ancient Fathers judge this speech of the Jewes to be the Character of an arrogant mind,Vide Rollo∣cum in loc. and also a manifest lye, See Gen. 29.20. & 39.1. Their Fathers served in Aegypt forty years, Gen. 15.13. and Exod. 20.2. They served also the Babylonians,Seldenus de Jure naturali & Gentium parte tertia. l. 6. c. 19. Duobus maximè modis homines servi fiebant, nascendo ex servis, aut bellico casu incidendo in captivitatem. Vtrumque à se removent. Non sumus nati ex Cananaeis aliisque servilibus populis, nemo nos in servitutem bello redegit. Non agitur hic de libertate status publici sed privati. Grotius. and even then the Romans. Mr Selden distinguisheth of a twofold servitude, one inherent in the person or intrinsecall, another extrinsecall con∣sisting in outward services, and civill obedience, they deny the first only here (saith he) as the words following in Verse 34. shew, Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin. Vers. 34. Committeth sin] That is, giveth himselfe unto it, , he that maketh sin, That is, that doth it as his work. Verily, verily] He was about to speake of a great matter, and that which the Jews would hardly admit of, and there∣fore he seriously confirmes it. Is the servant of sin] As if he should say, You understand my speech of a corporall servitude, of which I in no wise speake; there is another spi∣rituall servitude far more hurtfull, viz. the bondage of sin, from whom you and other men are in no wise free. Vers. 36. If the Son] That is, himselfe who was the naturall Son. Vers. 43. Why doe ye not understand my speech] That is, approve and assent to it. Because ye cannot hear my word] That is, understand it, ubi audire pro intelligere est. Glassius. Vers. 44. He was a murderer from the beginning] That is, the first murderer, and the author of murder, opposite to God, who is the first good, and author of all good, life to himsefe and in his creature. From the beginning] Not of the Creation of the world, or of time, but of man. He is a lyar and the father of it] So he is of all sinnes, but of lies because he brought sin into the world by way of lying at the first. Vers. 47. Yee therefore heare them not, because ye are not of God] That is, profitably, for they all heard. Melancthon. Luther.Vers. 49. Jesus answered, I have not a Devill] When the Jewes objected two crimes against our Saviour Christ, one that he was a Samaritane, another that he was a Devill, he neglected the crime which concerned his person, and passed it over as being of the least sort of wrongs, and stands upon that other especially which touched his doctrine, I have not a Devill. Vers. 56. Saw it] A farre off, Heb. 11.13. How could this be when Christ was borne many hundred years after? Answer, Not by the eye of sense or reason, but faith, where∣by he saw Christ more lively,Perkins. and more to his joy and consolation, so many hundred yeares before he was, than many which lived in Christs time, and saw him, and con∣versed with him. The Fathers say that he saw Christs birth at the vallie of Mamre, Gen 18. and his passion in the Mount Moriah, Gen. 22. Verum quidem est, nondum at∣tigisse Domi∣num annum tri∣cesimum quar∣tum (nam post annum tri∣cesimum terti∣um cum dimidio Christus sublatus est è terris) verùm hoc illi largiuntur, eum jam propè attingere annum quinquagesi∣mum: non potuisse tamen fieri affirmant, ut videret Abrahamum. Quo quidem responso corporalem hunc aspectum intel∣ligunt, eùm Dominus de spirituali & fidei aspectu loquutus sit. Rollocus in loc.Vers. 57. Thou art not yet fifty yeares old] In his prime and flower of age, a little past thirty Rogers pratic. Car. See Dr. Hackwells apologie, page 162. Hast thou seen Abraham] who died above two thousand years since., deemed by Jewes a man toward fifty, such shewes of over age (say some) had care and paines to win soules cast upon him. But Calvin dislikes this, and saith, they grant him more age lest they should seeme to deale too exactly and precisely with him, as if they should say, certainly thou wilt not make thy selfe so old that thou shouldst boast of thy comming to fifty, See Maldonate and Grotius. CHAP. IX. This is added to shew the greatnesse of the miracle. See 32. verse. Quo magis damnas vulnus eo magis lauda medicum.Vers. 1. HE saw a man which was blind from his birth] The Syriack hath it, blind from his mothers wombe. Those that become blinde after they are borne may be cured by
naturall meanes, but those that are borne blinde, can only be helped by God. Vers. 2. Who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was borne blinde] Speaking ac∣cording to the opinion of some Philosophers that was now also received among the Jewes (as learned men think) viz. that there was a preexistency of the soules before they were united to their bodies. Either himselfe or his parents, they were perswaded,Depravata tum temporis fuerit doctrina de peccato ori∣ginali. Phari∣saei infra huic caeco dicunt, tu totus in peccato natus es, & nos doces? Ergo de reliquis qui sine externo aliquo hujusmodi defectu nascebantur judica∣runt, eos non totos in peccatis, atque sic sine originali malo nasci; Hunc errorem Apostoli, sicut etiam reliqui Judaei ab ipsis hauserunt. Polyc. Lyser. Vide Cornel. à Lap. were guilty of some extraordinary sinne, or else such a Judgement sure would never have befallen him. Mr. Hildersam. Vers. 3. Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents] An Ellipsis, viz. that he should be born blind; blindnesse was not inflicted on him for his own or his parents sins. These words are not to be taken simply, but secundum quid, and according to the propounded question of the Apostles, viz. that they did not sin in that manner, that for any enor∣mous sinne he was borne blind, but that the works of God should be made manifest in him] The event of the thing confirmed, that many works of God were manifested on this wretched blind man, his Justice, mercy, power. Vers. 4. I must worke the works of him that sent me while it is day, &c.] He borrowes a similitude from the common custome of life. Psal. 104.22. He calls that a day,Calvin. the time limited by his Father, in which he should finish the worke commanded him. Verse. 6. He spate on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay] It is certaine that Christ in healing this blind man (as sometimes elsewhere) used such a meanes and remedy which might seeme altogether absurd,Polyc. Lyser. and contrary to our reason. As man was first made of clay,Calvin. so Christ used dirt in restoring his eyes, demonstrating his power in the same part of his body which the Father exer∣cised in making the whole man.Vide Bezam. Vers. 7. He went his way therefore and washed, and came seeing] A great commenda∣tion of his obedience that he simply obeyes Christ, although many things draw him away into the contrary part.Calvin. Vers. 9. I am he] He is not ashamed of his ancient miserable condition, so that he may give glory to Christ whose beneficence he had tryed. Vers. 11. And I receved sight.Est Cata∣chresis. Nam  propriè eorum est qui videndi facultatem aliquando habuerunt: sed nec malè recipere quis dicitur quod commu∣niter tributum humanae naturae ipse abfuit. Grotius.] Vers. 15. He changeth nothing in his answer, but constantly affirmes one and the same thing concerning the Lords fact toward him. He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see] By that he declares the continua∣tion of the benefit, that it was not vanishing but solid and constant.Polyc. Lyser. Vers. 16. How can a man that is a sinner] The Jewes were wont to call him a sinner who exceedingly offended, being wholly alienated from God, who was delighted with every sinne, and therefore was to be excluded from the Church or Syna∣gogue. Vers. 17. He is a Prophet] He thought Christ was above the vulgar by bestowing this benefit on him, that is, the annointed of God, and promised Saviour of man∣kind. Vers. 18. The Jewes] The Pharisees were so called because they dwelt in Judaea properly so called, and pretended that themselves only were the true confessours; they would not firmely believe it although they heard it expressely from their neighbours. Vers. 21. By what meanes he now seeth we know not, &c.] Out of feare to the Phari∣sees they gave not due honour to Christ Jesus the Sonne of God; they lie also when they say that they are ignorant of that which was now made knowne to all the neighbours. Vers. 24. Give God the praise] This was a form of obtestation, and as it were of ad∣juation
among the Jewes, which they used in drawing out the confession of truth Josh. 7.19. they meant, think that thou now standest before God and his terrible majesty, which God is a severe punisher of lying, wherefore conceale and dissemble no∣thing which that man hath done in healing of thee. That this man is a sinner] That is, a hainous sinner, with whom God hath no commerce. Calvin. Quasi diceret, quandoquidem de Dei gloria agatur, hoc nec dissimulare nec negare debeo aut possum, quod cum ab utero matris caecitatis malum sim exper∣tus nunc hujus viri beneficio oculi mei visus facultate sint instructi. Polyc. Lyser.Vers. 25. I know not] The meaning is, it belongs not to me to determine whether he be a sinner or no; this he speaks to prick them the more. Vers. 27. And you have not heard] That is, you have not believed for the hardnesse of your heart. Vers. 28. Thou art his Disciple] They count it for a reproach to be Christs disci∣ple. Vers. 31. God heareth not sinners] That is, such as live and lie in their sinnes, and turn not unto God by true repentance Perkins.; such as persevere in sinne, in whom it raignes. Polyc. Lyser. See 109. Ps. 7. Prov. 28.9. 1 Esay 15. Austen taught, etiam malos Sacerdotes ex∣audiri cum orant pro gre∣gibus suis, quamvis non exaudiantur cum orant pro seipsis.Ob. Therefore say the Separatists, I may not pray with an evill man. Sol. But this speech is not universally true. He may heare him as a publick person, though not as a private. Secondly, though God heares him not for himselfe, yet he hears him for the people, as Balaam blessing Israel, being both a wicked man, and speak∣ing against his heart, God heard him for the people, 23. Numb. This is a proverbiall speech as we may see Psal. 66.18. Esay 1.15. and elsewhere, and is to be understood (saith Grotius) as the words going before and following shew, of him who falsely affirms that he was sent of God, whom God heares not so as he shall doe divine works to confirme his mission. Vide Brugensem. Pecatores] 1. e. deceptores. Rolloc. Vers. 34. Altogether borne in sinnes] That is, a greater sinner even by nature than any other, because he was borne blinde Mr. Hilder∣sam.. See Brugensis and Rollock. Cast him out] viz. Out of the Synagogue or Temple, excommunicated him, ver. 22. a man may be excommunicated by the officers of the Church, yet not by the censure of it. Vers. 35. When he had found him] Therefore he sought for him. Vers. 37. Seen him] Not with corporall eyes, for Christ had departed before the blind man had returned to Siloe from the fish-pole, but with his spirituall sight, by which the divine power and mercy of Christ shined in the person of the blind man. Vers. 41. If ye were blinde, ye should have no sinne] This sentence may be expounded two wayes. First, if you did acknowledge your selves blinde, and confesse your sinne, your sinne should not remaine,None in com∣parison, not simply none. Austen. See 1 Cor. 1.17. that is, say Bu∣cer, Musculus, and Aquinas, agreeing with the glosse, your sinne had not been so exceeding sinfull as now it is. because ye would seeke mercy, and should be healed. Maldonate, Chemnit. Harmon. Evangel. Secondly, if you were blinde, that is, if ye had not the knowledge of the Scripture, whence if you would you might know the truth, ye should not have of great sinne as now yee have. Jansen. Harm. Compare the 39. ver. where by those that doe not see or are blinde, are understood those which acknowledge themselves to be spiritually blinde, and seek to be enlightned by God. CHAP. X. IT is a parable from oeconomy, and husbandmens sheepfolds. Secondly, since Christ compares the Church to a sheepfold into which God gathers all his, he compares himselfe to a dore since there is no entrance into the Church but by him. By this parable our Saviour first convinceth the Pharisees that they are false teachers, for they were not taught of their heavenly housholder, neither let in by the dore∣keeper at the dore, but of their own accord crept into Gods sheepfold. The order of the Pharisees neither was instituted by God, nor brought in by the Prophets, but feigned
by men, and they entred themselves into the sheepfold of God. Therefore they had no care of the sheep, neither did they feed them with the doctrine of Gods word, neither went before them by an honest example of life, but fatted themselves, suffering the people of God to wander into any errours. Secondly, Christ by this parable gives a reason also why many of the people leaving the Pharisees followed him and his do∣ctrine. Viz. They were wandring sheep, and heard that Christ in the word of God propounded the true doctrine of salvation. Vers. 1. Entreth not by the dore] Like as an honest man, climbeth up some other way like a thief or robber. Theeves (saith Jerome) lay snares, and deceive by hidden fraud,Vel fur qui fraude alie∣num diripit, vel latro qui vi oves rapit, & raptas dilaniat atque occidit. Polyc. Lyser. Fur quia venit ut rapiat alienum; Latro quia ut occidet. Sic exponitur infra v. 10. Grotius. rob∣bers boldly take away others goods, theeves lay waite for goods, robbers for life also. Tolot. Vers. 3. To him the porter openeth] Openly, and in the sight of all he enters in by the dore. Vide Bezam. He declares five marks which are necessary to a true Shepheard of the Church. First, he enters in at the dore, that is, hath a lawfull calling, non prece vel precio, much lesse by force is he obtruded on the hearers. Secondly, the dore∣keeper opens to him, by whom we understand the Holy Ghost. Thirdly, being let in into the sheepfold, he is not mute toward the sheep, but calls them, and that by name, that is, he studies to know the dispositions and manners of all his hearers, that he may afterward know according to the diversity of their tempers to speak to them, admonish and handle them. Fourthly, leads them out of a dark dungeon of the world into the light of heavenly doctrine, from the love of earthly things to the hope and desire of heavenly. Fifthly, he goes before them with his voice,Polyc. Lyser. and also with his example invites them that they may follow him to the lively food of the word of God. To which may be added this sixth out of the following explication of the parable, that a good Shepheard seeks not his owne profit from the sheep, but the good of the sheep, and so seeks it, that he is also ready to give his life for them. These things are to be considered in this parable. First, the Shepheard Christ,Ille pastor ille bonus sc. per excellentiam, hoc est, praecla∣rus, optimus & praestantissimus, imò unicus & singularis ille princeps pasto∣rum. Cornel. à Lap. Polyc. Lyser. in Greek it hath a singular emphasis, the article  is twice put, , I am that Shepheard, that good one promised by God, Esay 40.10. Ezech. 34. He proves this first from his fidelity, he defends his sheep, layes down his life for them. Se∣condly, he feeds his sheep, ver. 9. The pastures of the sheep are the doctrine of the Gos∣pel. To goe in and out in the Hebrew phrase signifies to doe prosperously in all the actions of his life, 1 Kings 18.6. to conclude, Christ so feeds his sheep that they have life, and have it more abundantly, they have life entring into the Church, and have it more abundantly going out of this world to eternall life. Austen. Secondly, from his care for his sheep, therefore he saith 14. ver. he knoweth his sheep, the word know signifies not a bare knowledge, but also comprehends a diligent care and custody, notes not only the affection but the effect, as 15. ver. the Father knoweth the Son, that is, acknowledgeth him for his naturall Sonne, embraceth him, loves him, and intimately cares and approves of all things that belong to him. I lay down my life] That is, being crucified he expires his soule, and is buried; also the Sonne knowes the Father, he acknowledgeth that he hath all things and hath received them from him, and he is dear to him, and honours him though all the world persecuted him. Thirdly, from his diligence, whereby he increaseth his sheepfold; he speaks properly of the calling of the Gentiles, which then were as yet strangers,In hac para∣bola ertam au∣ditorum verbi requisita sub imagine ovium repraesentantur, quarum sunt tria, 1. Vt boni & veri pasto∣ris vocem au∣diant, unicus autem verus pastor est Iesus Christus, hujus solius vocem in Evangelio traditam audire debemus. 2. Evocanti pastori obtemperent & praeeuntem sequantur. Haec est obedientia fidei quam passim Paulus Christianis commendat. 3. Alic∣num non audiant, non sequantur, sed ab eo fugiant. not of the sheep∣fold or Congregation of believers out of the Jewes. This may also be applyed to the sheep wandring from the Shepheard, Christ is very diligent in reducing these, Luke 15.4. Secondly, Christ compares his followers to sheep, 1. They easily wander from the Shepheard and the flock, and having once gone astray depart aside more and more. 2. They have exactly known their shepheard. Thirdly, they love the voice of their Shepheard, and willingly hear it, especially when they ought to be led to pastures and fountaines. Fourthly, they follow the Shepheard when he goes before them.
Vers. 4. And the sheepe follow him Loquitur hic Christus secun∣dum morem Iu∣daeae, in qua re∣gione pastores oves praecedere solebant.] In the Scripture both is said of the Shepheards, that they go before the flock and lead it, Psal. 80. and that they follow it, Psal. 78.71. 2 Sam. 7.8. That is for love, this for custody sake. Paulus Tarnovius. Vers. 5. A stranger] One that brings new and strange doctrine, other doctrine than such as their Shepheard doth teach; they will not follow, but flee from him] Lest they should be seduced and misled by him. Vers. 8. They are Theeves] Though they were dead, yet he saith not they were, but in the present tense they are Non de tem∣pore exponi de∣bet, sed de ordi∣ne & scopo doctrinae, quod illi homines sunt fures & latrones qui Christo non praeeunte, non ducente, non mittente, veniunt. Polyc. Lyser. Venire ante Christum est non mìttente eo venire ad docendum in ecclesia, prophetae itaque huc non pertinent, cum illi oves à Deo fuerint missi. Haec expositio est Augustini. Tarnov. in loc. Theeves, because  the impenitent sinne cleaveth to them no lesse after the committing of the sinne, than if still they were in the very act of doing of it. Vers. 9. And shall go in and out] By going in and out the Scripture doth often signifie unto us all the actions of life, as they say in French aller et venir, for to bee conversant. 1. They shall go safely withersoever they have need. 2. They shall bee fed to the full. Calv. Harm. Beza. Diligenter mu∣nere suo funge∣tur; vis haec est hujus phraseos. Vide Exod. 28. v. 35. Quistorpius.Or he shall go out and in, that is, shall live securely, for so this proverbe as it were is taken among the Hebrews, as Deut. 28.6. Psal. 121.8. Yet here it seemes to bee a peculiar allusion to the office of Shepheards, whose sheepe are daily lead out to the pastures, and thence backe to the sheepefold. Vers. 12. The Wolfe] That is, false Teachers, Matth. 7.15. Scattereth the sheepe] That is, the Church of the New-Testament. Vers. 14. Know my sheepe, and am known of mine] As the Sun casts down beames upon us, by meanes whereof we againe see the body of the Sun; even so the knowledge of God whereby hee knowes us for his, worketh in our hearts a knowledge of God in us;Vide Bezam. whereby we know him for our God. Mr Perkins. Vers. 16. One Shepheard] The Papists say, if by the name of Shepheard Christ should understand himselfe, why should he say, there shall be one Shepheard, and not speake it plainely,Bring] Effectu∣ally. Proverbi∣um fuit, Grex unus, unus pastor. Vide locum similem Ezec. 37.24. ubi typus est ejus rei, descriptio ecclesiae ndique colligendae sub capite Christo. Grotius. and I am that one Shepheard? Christ alluded to Ezek 33.37. and 23. ch. As if he should say, it shall be fulfilled which was foretold by the Prophets, there shall be one Shepheard, Besides it is usuall with Christ also when he speakes of himselfe to use the third person, as when he saith, VVhen the Son of man shall come, be will scarce find faith on earth. Cameron. de ecclesia. Vers. 27. My sheepe heare my voyce] That is, the elect, and such as are predestinated of my Father. Heare] That is, beleeve and obey it. And I Know them] Take care of them as my sheepe. Follow mee] As their Shepheard. Vers. 30. I and my Father are one] In consent, will, essence, power and domi∣nion.Polyc. Lyser. One] Frees thee from Arrius, who denyes the eternall Divinity of Christ. Are] Frees thee from Sabellius, who denyes the distinction of the persons in the Deitie. Vers. 34. Is it not written in your law] That Christ saith to the Iewes, it is written in your Law,Id est, in sacris illis literis quae vobis praescri∣bunt quid cre∣dere & facere debeatis, & proìnde non male legis nomine appellantur, id est Thorah, que significatur quicquid hominem dirigit. Sic infra 15.26. 1 Cor. 14.21. Sed & in ipsa Mosis lege non quidem exstant verba, sed sensus idem, cum judices Dij vocantur. Grotius. and yet Cites the saying out of the Psalme, that hath troubled some, because the Old Testament is sometimes divided into the Law of Moses, the Psalmes, and Prophets, Luke 24.44. Therefore some here allege Moses, Exod. 21.6. and 22.28. that so that saying may be cited out of the Law, but by the word Law, is understood the Scripture of the whole Old Testament. Vers. 35. And the Scripture cannot be broken] No man dare dispute Hoc est, non potest reijci, negari, infrin∣gi, averti aut irrita fieri. Polyc. Lys. against its au∣thority.
Non potest ei contradici, as he that doth any thing against a precept is said to breake it. Matth. 5.19. and John 5.18. and 7.23. So also he that contradicts an affirmation. Grotius. Vers. 37, 38. If I do not the workes of my Father, beleeve me not. But if I doe, though yee beleeve not mee, beleeve the works, &c.] The argument of it selfe is plaine; No man can of himselfe, and by his own power, do divine workes, unlesse he be truly God; I do divine workes by my own power, yea I doe the workes of my Father, not onely the like and equall, but the same with the Father; therefore I am truely God,Polyc. Lyser. neither deserve I to be counted a blasphemer, because I said I was one with the Father. That the Father is in mee] That is, that you may know that the unity of the Father and me, is so individuall, that one exists in the other. Such a union cannot be found in all the creatures, to finde two, one of which is so in the other, that they are one and the same nature numerically. But the nature and essence of God the Father and God the Son is so one and the same, that all the Fa∣thers essence is in the Son,Polyc. Lyser. and in like manner the essence of the Son wholly in the Father, and so the whole Father subsisteth in the Son, and the whole Son in the Fa∣ther. Iohn. 14.9. CHAP. XI. Vers. 1. WAS sick] The Greek word  is used of one that is very sick, Matth. 10.8 Luke. 4.46. The towne of Mary and her sister Martha] Those Sisters were the Commanders of that Towne and Castle,Polyc. Lyser. Vide Grotium. as Iohn. 1.44. Vers. 2. That Mary which annointed the Lord] There were many Maries, therefore for difference sake he addes those words, Which annointed] The time past which the Evangelist useth, annointed, ought not to be referred to the time of the thing done, of which he now speakes, but to the time in which he wrote, as if he should say,Calvin. this is the Mary which afterward powred out the ointment, upon which occasion the Disciples murmured. Vers. 3. Lord behold, he whom thou lovest, is sick] We may tell God what he knowes; Christs beloved is subject to outward miseries. Vers. 4. That the Son of God might be glorified thereby] By raising of him;Distulit sonare ut posset resus∣citare. Aug. which he deferres for his glory and our good. Vers. 5. Now Iesus loved Martha, and her Sister, and Lazarus] He loved those who were used to intertaine him, as Elias, 1 Kings 17.9. Elisha, 2 Kings 4.8. Kindnesses shewed to the Saints are not lost, Matth. 10.41. Vers. 9. Are there not twelve houres in the day] Christ comforts them from Gods pro∣vidence, God made the day twelve houres, who can make it shorter?An artificiall day. Simplex sensus est, loquitur Christus para∣bolicè & vult dicere. Quemadmodum Coelestis meus pater cuilibet diei in principio creationis duodecim attribuit horat, uni longiores alteri breviores, & quicunque in ejusmodi die ambulat, dum Sol adhuc lucet, non offendit, quia videt quo ambulet & ubi versetur: Sic idem Coelestis meus Pater cuivis homini suum diem vitae, & in eo 12. horas sive breves sive longas assignavit, & dum ille dìes durat, non metuat quod quicquam adversi ipsi citra Dei voluntatem accidere possit. Sed elapsis illis horis, & quando nox ingruit, tum non amplius mundo fidendum, quia pericula simul ncidere possunt. Polyc. Lyser. for who can shor∣ten mans life, Matth. 10.30. Psal. 139.16. Iob. 14.3. As when we walke in the day we need not stumble, so in Gods wayes, vocatio Dei instar lucis divinae est. Calvin. Vers. 11. Our friend Lazarus sleepeth] Death parts not friend-ship. But I go that I may awake him out of sleepe] As if he should say, I will not ascend into Judaea, that I may provoke the Jews with disputations or Sermons, but that I may visite Lazarus our common friend and raise him from sleep. Christs modestie appeares in this, that when he had said he slept, he immediately added that he would raise him, when he saith he is dead, he addes no such thing.
Vers. 12. Lord if he sleepe he shall doe well] They meant a naturall sleepe, for sleepe in greater diseases is a signe of health returning. Vers. 15. To the intent yee may beleeve] That is, that their faith may increase and bee confirmed. It was increased first, by that which they heard Christ to relate to them what happened about Lazarus, none telling them, and by that great Miracle of rais∣ing one dead foure dayes; which if he had been present, he had either driven away the disease, or raised him newly dead. Polyc. Lyser. Vox despera∣tionis est. Calv.Vers. 16. Let us also go that we may die with him] With Lazarus. Beda takes it to bee his godly desire, Polanus his infirmity, we shall be killed, as v. 8. Vers. 18. Bethanie was nigh unto Ierusalem about fifteene furlongs off] Stadium a Fur∣long containes 600. foote,The same of his death might easily come to Jeru∣salem. that is a 125. paces. Calv. The holy Evangelists St. Luke ch. 24.13. and Iohn here, reckon the way by Fur∣longs. See the Travels of the Patriarkes. p. 1. and 2. Vers. 21. If thou hadst been here] We sent thee word, a kind of reproving. Vers. 23. Thy brother shall rise againe] He tels not when. Polanus. Needes no prayers to raise him. Vers. 25. I am the resurrection and the life] The cause of the resurrection of all men as God,Ego sum resur∣rectio & vita, non formalis, sed causalis, quasi diceret, ego sum qui re∣suscito, ego qui vitam praebeo. Cornel. à Lap. Fundamentum realis consolationis. Polan. The wicked shall rise, yet not to life, but because he speakes of godly Lazarus he joyneth these two. of the Church as Mediator and head thereof, 1 Cor. 15.22. that is, I am the authour both of this life and the life to come. I quicken in this life by the life of grace, and give eternall life in the world to come. Vers. 26. Beleevest thou this] That I am the resurrection and life. Vers. 27. Lord I beleeve that thou art the Christ, the Son of God which should come into the world] A full and perfect description; she confesseth his person and office, that is, I can not doubt but those that cleave to thee shall have life eternall. Vers. 28. Secretly] Because of the Jewes malice. Vers. 29. She arose quickly and came unto him] Christ is accepted in trouble. Solent lachry∣mae lachrymis excitari preser∣tim apud ani∣mos misericordes. Grotius. Vide Dilher. Eclog. Sac. Dictum 9.Vers. 33. Groaned in the Spirit] The Greek word signifieth that commotion of mind which is in anger with a rage and horrour. Tremellius well renders the Syriacke, vehe∣menter commotus est in Spiritu suo. Impropriè ve∣hemens illa commotio, qua animus Christi commotus fuit, nominatur per∣turbatio: quo nomine viz. excessus affectuum notatur: qui in Christo nullus fuit; Verè quidem affectibus humanis commotus fuit animus Christi, sed sine , ut si aqua limpida in puro vitro inclusa agitetur ac moveatur. Piscat in loc.And was troubled] , he troubled himselfe, his own judgement, spirit and heart stirred up his affections to be troubled, His affections were wrought on ju∣diciously, right reason did alwayes direct and moderate them. These passions in Christ were not so much passions as propassions freely assumed, as Divines from Da∣mascene teach. Vers. 35. Iesus wept] The Text saith, he was glad, v. 15. so that hee wept onely for his friends sake who were then a weeping, to shew us the necessity of mourning with those that mourne, say the Fathers on the place. He hath a sence of our infirmi∣ties, See Luke 19.41. Heb. 5.7. Christ was here thrice very much moved and wept, First, v. 33. When he saw Mary and the Jewes weeping.See Luke 19.41. and 22.44. Secondly, here. Thirdly, in v. 38. when he saw Lazarus his Sepulchre. Vers. 44. And he that was dead came forth, &c.] Lazarus had no favour to be raised to dye againe, he dies once more than ordinary. Vers. 45. Beleeved on him] By beleeving here nothing else ought to bee unstood but a docilitie to embrace the Doctrine of Christ.Calvin. Vers. 47. Then gathered the chiefe Priests and the Pharisees a councill, and said, what doe we] Therefore not onely the high Priest arrogated this power to himselfe, but ex concilio totius Synedrii, with whom was jurisdiction, he appointed an assembly, that even by that the pride of the Pope of Rome may be reproved,Gerh. Harm. who when he would seeme to resemble the Priest-hood of Aaron in other things, yet saith he onely hath a power of calling a Councill from Peter.
Vers. 43. If we let him thus alone, all men will beleeve on him, and the Romans shall come and take away both our place and nation] After forty two yeares the Romans came and over∣threw both place and nation, destroyed the City of Jerusalem and the Temple, and brought the Jews into miserable captivity. Vers. 49. And one of them named Caiaphas] His name signifieth vomiting with his mouth,Nomen Caiphae fignificat vo∣mentem ore vel vomentem sta∣tutum à Kaah vel Ko vomuit, & Peh os, sermo, & specialius statutum. Num. 14. v. 41. quae etymologia non malè huic Pon∣tifici congruìt, quia fastu at ambitione ebrius crudam ac crudelem sententiam contra Christum evomuit. Isay. 8.7. which Etymologie well agrees to him who vomited out a cruell sentence a∣gainst Christ. Vers. 50. Nor consider that it is expedient for us that one man should dye for the people, and the whole Nation perish not] Not that he had any intent to prophesie, but because the Lord used him as an instrument to publish his truth. Perkins. Vide Cameronem. CHAP XII. Verse 3. ANd annointed the feet of Iesus] Matthew and Marke say, that Christs head was an∣nointed, John, his feet; but the three agree among themselves, that Christ was not sparingly annointed by Mary, but that a large plenty of ointment was powred up∣on him. Because therefore John speakes of his feet, it is all one as if he had said,Calvin. that the whole Body of Christ even to the feet was annointed. And wiped his feet with her haire] Hysteron proteron,Non erat sim∣plex liquor ex nardo elicitus, sed varia erat confectio ex rebus odoriferis, itaque non mirum est odore perfusam fuisse totam domum. Calvinus. for the first wiped his feet from dust and durt, and then annointed them. Vers. 6. This he said, not that he cared for the poore, but because he was a thiefe, and had the bag] The rest of the Apostles not out of an ill disposition, but inconsiderately condemn Mary, but Judas seeks an honest pretence for his sins alleging the poore of which yet he had no care. Vers. 7. Hath she kept this] He meanes it was not unseasonably, but according to the occasion. That is said to be kept which is in safe custody, and opportunely brought forth. The annointing of the bodies was not a vaine ceremony,Vide Piscat. but rather a spiritu∣all symbole, because it did put the hope of resurrection before their eyes. He was an∣nointed as one that was to be laid in the grave,Calvin. Mary certainly was moved on the sudden that she should do that by the guidance of the spirit which she had not before thought of. Vers. 9. Might see Lazarus] That they might behold a wonderfull signe of the power of Christ in Lazarus.Tanquam lae∣titiae & festi∣vitatis insigne quum novum Regem excipe∣rent. Vers. 13. Tooke branches of palme trees, and went forth to meet him] The palme trees among all people were alwaies signs of victory, by which is signified that the people acknowledged Christ a Conquerour, who by his Passion and Resurrection should glo∣riously overcome death and the Devill, as also the Elect are said to carry palmes in their hands, Rev. 1.9. Hosanna] By this voice they witnessed that they acknowledged Jesus Christ to be that Messiah promised in times past to the Fathers,Serva vel sal∣vum fac obse∣cro. Calvin. and from whom Redemption and Salvation was to be hoped. For the 118 Psalme (whence that acclamation was taken) was composed of the Messiah to this end, that all the Saints in their daily prayers might ardently desire his comming,Singulari quo∣dam jure ve∣nisse in nomi∣ne Domini Christus dici∣tur, quia per eum non ex parte (ut antea per Prophetas) sed in solidum Deus se patefecit. and receive him with greatest reverence when he was gi∣ven. He comes in the name of God who doth not rashly intrude himself, nor falsely usurpes honour, but beeing rightly called hath God the guide and author of his acti∣ons. See Mr Lightfoots Temple-Service, c. 16. Sect. 2. Vers. 15. Sitting on an Asses Colt] It is true that Christ rode upon an Asse which was
led together with his Dam, and the words of the Prophet agree, it being a frequent repetition among the Hebrews,Calvin. which expresse the same thing twice in divers words, upon an Asse, and the Fole of an Asse. Our Evangelist, which studies brevity, omitting the former member,Vide Waltheri harmoniam Biblicam in Matth. 21.5. Vectus autem est Christus asinâ prius, quia Judaico populo legem imposuit prior, deinde pullo sessoris inexperto, quia Gentilium populum posterius sibi associavit. Id ibid. only reherseth the latter; Mat. 21.5. saith, Christ sat upon an Asse, and a Colt; the other two Evangelists, Mark 11.7. Luk. 19.35. and John here, make mention only of the Colt brought and sate on. He rode upon them both successively and by turns say Tolet and others, which opinion they think, Zac. 9.9. and Mat. 21.5. doth favour. Est Hyperbole, quasi diceret, plurimi abeunt à nobis, creduntque in Iesum. Cornel à Lap.Verse. 19. The world is gone after him] That is, men of all kinds promiscuously. Vers. 22. Philip and told Andrew Jesus] Two together. Vers. 23. The houre is come that the Son of man should be glorified] Many expound this of death, because by that Christs glory was illustrated, therefore Christ according to them saith,Calvin. that now the time of his death draws neere. But I rather refer it to the publishing of the Gospell, as if he had said, that the knowledge of him will be short∣ly spread through all the coasts of the world. Ver. 25. He that loveth his life]  is here used of excessive and preposterous love, he that so loves his life, that out of a desire to save it he denieth mee and my Gospell; so this Greeke word is used, Mat. 10.37. The Syriack hath a word here that signifieth to love vehemently. Chap. 11.33. a vehement af∣fection is ex∣prest by this word.Vers. 27. My soule troubled]  signifies a vehement commotion and pertur∣bation, as Herods mind was troubled when he heard that a new King was borne, Mat. 2.3. And the Disciples when they thought a Spirit was present, so that they cried out for feare, Mat. 14.26. And Zachary at the sudden sight of the Angell, Luk. 1.12. and it is a metaphor drawn from the commotion of the water. Quia vox haec maxima, cras∣sissima & re∣sonantissima erat instar to∣nitrui. Fortè etiam quia confusè non articulatè vocem excipiebant, uti excipitur sonus confusus tonitrui. Cornel à Lap.Vers. 29. Said that it thundred] Because (as Jansenius well commenteth upon the place) some were so amazed, that though they heard a sound, yet they understood not what it was, and therefore they said that it thundred, but others heard it more di∣stinctly and understood it, and therefore they said that an Angell had spoken. Vers. 32. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me] There is a double lifting up of Christ,Vide Piscat. 1 Ignominious, on the Crosse, Quistorpius interprets it of this out of the 33. verse, then men fled from him. 2. Glorious in the Gospell preacht, then he draws men to him, therefore others expound it of that lifting up. I assent to Chrysostome who saith,Calvin. that Christ used an universall particle, because the Church was to be gathered both of Jews and Gentiles, John 16.16. Vers. 36. While ye have light beleeve in the light, that ye may be the Children of the light] The Gospell is a light, 2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Cor. 4.4.6. It resembleth it First, in its properties. It is 1. Pure, and remaines uncorrupt though it shine on dunghills. 2. Very necessary. 3 Pro∣fitable and usefull to worke and walk by. 4. Pleasant, brings glad tidings. Secondly, In the effects: 1. Expells darknesse, so this ignorance, errour, sin. 2. Makes discoveries where it comes. 3. Quickens, the Sun brings heate as well as light. Ver. 41. When he saw his gllory] In that vision, Esay 6.1, 2, 3. Ver. 49. What I should say, and what I should speake] Between saying and speaking (saith à Lapide) there is this difference, that to say is to teach and publish a thing gravely, to speake is familiarly to utter a thing.
CHAP. XIII. Verse 1. BEfore the feast of the Passeover] The other three Evangelists say, Christ celebrated the Passeover, and instituted the Eucharist in the first day of unleavened bread in which the Jews killed the Pascall Lambe. Therefore this here is to be understood,So the law Exodus 12. prescribes. that he did it in the 14. day at the evening which preceded the Feast of the Passeover, which was the fifteenth day. Vers. 3. And went to God] A Deo exivit, non eum deserens: & ad Deum vadit, non nos derelinquens. Bernard. He came from God not leaving him: and he goeth to God, not leaving us. Vers. 4. Laid aside his garments] Only his upper garment not his cloake,Calvin. for the Ori∣entall people used long garments. Vers. 5. Began to wash the Disciples feet] He chose to wash their feet rather than their head, that he might have the opportunity of a more humble posture,Dr. Taylor. of the life and deah of Christ. Upon consideration of this great example, Gue∣ricus a good man cryed out, Thou hast o∣vercome O Lord, thou hast overcome my pride, this example hath mastered mee. Quomodo non humiliabitur homo sub tam humili Deo? Bernard. and a more apt signification of his Charity. This washing of their feet which was an accustomed civi∣lity and intertainment of honoured strangers at the begining of their meale, Christ deferred to the end of the Paschall Supper, that it might be preparatory to the second, which he intended should be festivall to all the world. If he had washed Judas he had washed a Blackamore. Calvin saith, he did wash him and shewed his patience there∣in. Vers. 6. Lord, dost thou wash my feet] Oratio est abominantis rem absurdam & indignam. It is the speech of one abominating it as a thing absurd and unworthy.Calvin. Vers. 7. Thou knowest not] That is, thou knowest not what moves me to do this, for his eye taught him what he did. But thou shalt know hereafter] That is, in due time this shall be interpreted to thee, and thou shalt know the reason why I did this. Vers. 8. If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me] The word wash signifieth a free pardon of sins and newness of life. Calvin.Causaub. exer∣cit. 16. ad An∣nal. Bar. Christ washeth us when he blots away our sins by the expiation of his Sacrifice that they come not into the judgement of God, also when he abolisheth the wicked and vitious desires of the flesh by his Spirit. Vers. 10. Needeth not save to wash his feet] Our Saviour here alludes to the customable washing of the feet which the Jews used before Supper, especially after travell.Cartw. on Rhem. Tst. Sentio cum eruditissimo Iansenio alle∣goriam eam esse ex usu communi vitae depromptam, quare dictum secundum literam de ijs intelligendum qui corpus totum balneo lava∣runt; sed postea egressie balneo dum accedunt ad lectum convivale pedes macularunt, ac secundum anagogen omnino lotio totius corporis de baptismo accipienda, pedum vero ablutio de affectuum purgatione & ejus quem Theologi nominant fomi∣tem peccati, etiam in electis post peccatum remanentem. Calvin. Our Saviour refuteth Peter from the common custome of the Jews, as Casaubone ob∣serveth, those that are washed in the bath when they go out of the bath into their bed need no washing but of their feet. His feet] His affections say some, rather the defilements he contracts by his daily walking. The reliques of corruption must be purged away by little and little; an allu∣sion to the Easterne Countries which went in Sandales and defiled their feet; they must repent every day. But is cleane every whit] The faithfull are cleane, not that they are wholy pure so that no blot sticks in them, but because in their chiefe part they are cleane. Calvin. Vers. 14. If I then your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one anothers feet] Now he opens the reason of his deed, viz. that he who is the Master and Lord of all delivered an example which all godly men may follow, lest any thinke much to performe an office though meane for his Brethren. Vers. 14. Have washed your feet] Argumentum à majori ad minus.
Vers. 18. To lift up the heele) Metaphorically signifieth, under a pretence of friend∣ship,Calvin. treacherously to deceive one. Vers. 23. Now there was leaning on Jesus bosome one of his Disciples] They did not sit as we at the Table,Calvin. See Mr Light∣foots Temple-Service. c. 13. but putting off their shoes, and leaning upon pillows, did lye upon beds. Wom Jesus loved] More than others. Vers. 27. After the sop] Austen falsely thought, that this sop was a sign of Christs body,Calvin. since it was reached when they were not at supper. That thou dost, do quickly] Vox est detestantis. Calvin. Vers. 33. Little Children] Note here the tenderness of Christs affection and love toward his faithfull and Apostles, for he doth not say Children, but little Children, and because the Apostles were little in the faith and love of Christ, for they received the ful∣ness of it from the Holy Ghost in the day of Pentecost. Not new] Ab∣solutely. Iohn 2.7. The Law it selfe requires the duty, John 3.11. But new in the manner; before we were to love our Neighbour as our selves, now as Christ loved us; he would have it alwayes fresh in our thoughts. See 1 Iohn 3.8. Iohannes, 1 Ep. 2.7. & 2.6. Praeceptum hoc vetus & ab initio datum eum ait, initium Evangelij & Christianismi intelligit. Hieronymus Commentario ad epistolam Johannis, Iohannes Aposto∣lus à fratribus admonitus, cur semper inculcaret dicens: Filioli diligite alterutrum: respondit, quia praeceptum Domi∣ni est, & si solum fiat, sufficit. Grotius.Vers. 34. A new Commandement I give unto you, that ye love one another, &c.] Those that are going away are wont to command their Inferiours. Love is new, because 1. Re∣newed in the Gospell, Christs Example, and his last Will and Testament. 2. Excellent, so new, as Mat. 9.17. Rev. 5.9. Maldonate resolveth it to be an Hebraisme, in which language new, rare, and most excellent are synonima's; A new name, Apoc. 2. A most honourable name; a new song Ps. 69. A most excellent song; New wine; Mat. 26.29. The best wine, so a new Command, that is a rare, choice, speciall, remarkable one, one above all others. Maldo∣nate varies little from Calvin. New] As it were a Law newly enacted, not continually practised. Calvin. So called, saith Austen, from the effect, because it renews us, because it ought alwaies to be fresh in our mind and memory. As I loved you] Calls both for the manner and measure of our love, both intensivè, and extensivè: 1. Intensivè, as our Saviours was, 1 John 3.16. 2. Entensive, Rom. 5.8. See Mat. 5.44. As] Is not a note of Equality here, but of similitude, as Christ loved us freely, Iohn 15.16. greatly, Ibid. verse 13. and constantly, Iohn 13.1. so should we love our Neigh∣bour. CHAP. XIIII. Verse 1. LEt not your heart be troubled] For my departure. It signifies such a trouble as is in water when the mud is stirred up, or when the waves and surges are raised by some tempest or storme, such a trouble as is in an Armie when the Souldiers are disranked and routed, or disordered. Ye beleeve in God, beleeve also in me] That is, as ye beleeve in God the Father, so be∣leeve also in me: ye beleeve that God the Father is able to provide for you, beleeve in me that I am able to satisfie for you. Vers. 2. In my Fathers house] He calls Heaven, which is the kingdom of glory and eternall blessednesse, maneo. the house of his Father, to which Christ by his deah and passion contended; in it he saith there are many mansions, the word signifies a place of abiding, that he may shew the perpetuity of heavenly felicity and blessednesse, opposed to the shortnesse of our pilgrimage in this world,Paulus Tarno∣vius in loc. Vi∣de Bezam. The word mansions in the Originall, and our language, signifies a Remaining, and denotes the perpetuiy, the everlastingnesse of that State. Dr. Donne on this Text. Psal. 39.13. Heb. 13.14.
Vers. 6. I am the way, the truth,Hoc est, per me venitur, ad me pervenitur, in me permanetur. Augustinus de doctrina Christiana. Viain exem∣plo, veritas in promisso, vita in praemio Bet.Ingrediamur hanc viam, teneamus veritatem, vitam sequamur. Ambrose. and the life] These words have each their article in the Greeke; the way wherein, the truth whereby, the life whereunto we walke; or the only true way leading unto life; the way without errour, the truth without falshod, and the life without death. Bernard. This word way notes the meanes unto a thing, and when he saies, I am the way, it is as if he should say, Looke what ever meanes you do use in order to heaven, all those meanes have their vertue, power and efficacy from me. Truth lies between way and life, as if the way to life were through truth. The life, I, even I am he which gives life unto all your motions and actions for heaven, all grace is from Christ. Vers. 10. I am in the Father] Vt in origine & principio, as in the originall and principle, and the Father in mee] Vt in charactere & imagine, as in the character and image. Vers. 12. Hee that beleeveth on mee, the works that I doe shall he do also,Calvin. Austen. Chrysost. and greater workes then these shall he doe] It was a promise made unto the whole Church, neither peculiar to the Apostles, nor common to every Christian. Greater workes then these he should doe] for matter, as Peter, Act. 2. converted 3000. not for manner, because he did them not in his own name. It is meant of the conversion of the world by the Apostles. 2. Of other miracles,Dike. Majora non quo ad origi∣nem & dignitatem, sed majora numero usu atque fructu. Act. 5.15. Vers. 16. Comforter] Or Advocate, one that pleadeth the cause of another, Vox Graeca frequens apud Iudaeos in versione Chaldaea & apud Thalmudicos, non pro consolatore, sed pro eo qui causam agit alterius, & quidem rei. Grotius. and him a guilty person. Vers. 18. Not leave you comfortlesse] Or as Orphanes and Fatherlesse children. Vers. 19. Because I live, ye shall live also] Some expound this of the life of nature, but he speakes of a life peculiar to his Disciples, purchased by his death,See Dr. Ray∣nolds of the life of Christ. p. 481. accompanied with vision, which depends on the life of Christ, therefore it is meant of a Spirituall life; he gives it, continues it, augments it, manifests it. Vers. 20. At that day ye shall know that I am in the Father] They knew it before, hee speaks of a more glorious and spirituall discovery.Calvin. You in mee and I in you] We are said to be in him, because being ingraffed in∣to his body, we are made partakers of his righteousnesse and all his goodnesse; he is said to be in us, because he cleerly demonstrates by the efficacie of his Spirit that hee is the authour and cause of life to us. Vers. 21. He that hath my commandements] To have the commandements, signifies to be rightly instructed in them, to keepe himselfe and frame his life according to their rule. Vers. 26. In my name] That is, the Father sendeth the Spirit through the Son, both as Mediatour and as an Intercessour.Teach and bring to your remembrance] or warne you, we are taught about those things wee knew not, and warned about those things we have forgotten. All things] that are necessary unto salvation for you to know and to be perswaded of. These words were spoken to the Apostles onely, but not of them onely, Esay 54.13. And our Saviour citing this place, Iohn 16.45. delivereth the promise in generall termes. Vers. 27. Peace I leave with you] As bonum haereditarium. my peace] The peace which I have purchased and paid deere for, or mine for kind; the same tranquility from righteousnesse imputed which I have; it is his also to give; men wish the peace of God or Christ, he gives it. Not as the world giveth] Plainely distinguishing his peace from the worlds,Mundus dat pacem ut amo∣liatur res ad∣versat carni, Christus non ita dat pacem, sed pax Christi tum demum viget cum rebus secundum carnem adverss non pre∣mimur modo sed opprimimur; conferatur cum hoc loco C. ad Philip. & res erit manifesta. Cameron de ecclesia. both in the gift and manner of giving.
Vers. 28. My Father is greater than I] The Arrians objected this place to prove Christ a secondary God. The Orthodox Fathers said this ought to be referred to his humane nature; but Calvin dislikes this answer. Hic (inquit ille) nec de humana Christi natura, neque de aeterna ejus divinitate sermo habetur, sed pro infirmitati nostrae captu se me∣dium inter nos & Deum constituit. Calv. Vers. 30. The Prince of this world] The Devill is called the Prince of the world, not simply, but as it is corrupted; the Prince of this world saith the Text, that is, which now lies in malice and hostility against the Son of God. See 2 Cor. 4.4. Hath nothing in mee] That is, either nihil sui no sin in mee, or nihil juris no authority over mee. CHAP. XV. Graecè est ge∣minus articulus , Id est, illa vitis illa vera. Syrus: Ego sum vitis illa veritatis. Cornel. à Lap.Vers. 1. I Am the true vine] Greeke that Vine, that true one. Christs seemes to have begun this Sermon upon occasion of seeing some vine as he passed in the City, for he was wont to take occasions from earthly objects, to teach them spirituall things. Piscat. Vers. 2. Every branch in mee that beareth not fruit] He speakes of a withered branch, that hath no life;Cyrill. Theo∣phylact. Id est qui vi∣detur esse in me, quum tamen revera non sit, quippe alioqui ferret fractum. Piscat. they are called the branches and members of Christ in a generall or equivocall sence; because they professe the faith of Christ, and are numbred among the members of the Church. Vers. 5. The same bringeth forth much fruit] Both the Syriacke and Greeke take spe∣ciall notice of this; it is added emphatically; Christ points at such a one as abides in him, as John Baptist at Christ. Psal. 52.7. Such a one will bee fruitfull in unfruitfull times. 2. Comprehensively, it comprehends all true Christians as well as the Apostles, he changeth the second person into the third, See v. 4. 3. Exclusively, the same and onely hee. Bringeth forth much fruit] viz. By that life and sap of grace which he receiveth of mee; fruits of many kindes, groweth is universall. 2 Pet. 1.5. 2. For degrees and quan∣tity. 1 Phil. 11. Vulg. & Erasm. sine me. Beza Seorsim à me.Without mee] Or separate from mee. See Cameron. Piscat. Yee can do nothing] It is more emphaticall in the originall, two negatives, cannot doe nothing, not no great thing, but nothing at all. August. against Pelagius. Nei∣ther facere nor perficere as some of the Latines. Vers. 6. He is cast forth as a branch] There are two chiefe ejections, Ab interiori sanctorum communíone, per separationem spiritualem. 2. Ab exteriori communione, per publicam Apostasiam. First, from the internall communion of the Saints, by a Spiritu∣all separation, Secondly, from an externall communion, by apostasie. Vers. 7. Ye shall aske what ye will] Meaning with a will ruled by the word of God and ordered according to Gods will. Omnia inter amicos com∣munia.All things that I have heard of my Father I have made knowne unto you] As if he had said, I will communicate and impart my secrets unto you, as one friend doth unto another, as farre as shall be fit for you to know. Ferus de ob∣servatione non obsequiosa sed insidiosa interpretatur. Si me in verbis meis insidiose observarunt, & vobis pariter laqueos ponent. Gatak. de Nov. Instrument. Styli dissertat. c. 17.Vers. 20. If they have kept my saying, they will keepe yours also.] Vers. 22. They had not had sinne] The sin of contempt of mee and my doctrine, their sin had been nothing in comparison of that now it is, or they had had some cloake and colour for their sinne, as in the next words. Vide Piscat. But now they have no cloake for their sin] That is, no colour of plea, nothing to pre∣tend
by way of excuse. The Greek word  which is also used, 1 Thes. 2.5. sig∣nifieth a faire shew, pretence, or colour, which we use to call a cloake; Thereby intima∣ting that usually man hath a cloake for his sinnes. Vers. 26. Which proceedeth from the Father] Which very word Iohn useth of the two ed∣ged sword proceeding out of the mouth of Christ, Rev. 1.15. CHAP. XVI. Vers. 2. THey shall put you out of the Synagogues] Of the manifold significations of Syna∣gogues, their use, originall and antiquity, see Tolet on this place, and my An∣notations on Matth. 4.23. and 6.2. and on Luke 7.5. Vers. 7. It is expedient for you, that I go away] Expedient,Reinolds on 110. Ps. p. 136. And for v. 10. see him ib. p. 30. and for 21. v. ib. p. 50. to seale and secure our full and finall redemption unto us, and expedient, to prepare a place for us. Vers. 16. The comforter will not come] John 14.16. This Greek word is attributed to Christ, 1 Iohn 2.1. Vers. 8. Reprove the world] Or convince. Austin takes the word pro reprehendere,The word in the Originall signifies the refuting of an opinion that men had before drunke in and were possessed of. Vide Bezam in v. 8. Chry∣sostome and Cyrill, pro convincere; the last is the better, reprove by preaching. Act. 2. The Greek word more properly signifieth to convince than reprove,Verbum Grae∣cum  quod latine est arguo, est con∣vincere alterum contraria opinantem, quod Paulus optimè ostendit Tit. 1.9. arguere mùndum de peccato, est mundum o∣pinantem se à peccato immunem convincere & ostendere esse in peccato, secundo convincere est alterum opinantem contraria ita adstringere ut non habeat quod rationabiliter respondeat, nec quo suam tueatur opinionem, nec quo se defendat. Toletus. in loc. Evidentibus argumentis ac probationibus docebit, ita ut tergiversari non possit, ita ut nihil habeant quod praetexant. Sic accipitur arguendi verbum etiam supra, 8. v. 46. & alibi. Lucas Brugensis. to reprove is onely to discover a fault; to convince is to take away all reasons that can bee alleged for it. The Spirits convictions are never single, Satans voyce is to cry sin, sin, the voice of the Spirit is to cry grace and the righteousnesse of Christ onely. Convincing is a cleare and infallible demonstration which takes away all the cavils of the soule, when one shews a thing to be impossibly otherwise than he represents it. There is a twofold conviction of sin. 1. Rationall, when a mans reason is non-plust, and he cannot deny the truth of it. 2. Spirituall, when a mans heart stoopes under it, and he takes the shame to himselfe. Of sinne] It discovers 1. the nature and filthinesse of sin, shews the contrariety of it to the holy will and pure nature of God 2. the danger of it, that thou art under the un∣doing power of sin, as long as thou art short of faith in Christ. John 3. ult. Vers. 10. Of righteousnesse] That is, 1. Of the sufficiency of Christs righteousnesse. 1 Iohn 1.7. 2. Of the possibility of it,Because if any part of righte∣ousnesse had been to be ful∣filled, Christ should have been still in the grave, and not gone to heaven, his going thither argues all is done. Of inherent righteous∣nesse which is imperfect, Matth. 22.26. Sanctification. so Matth. 12.18. because the Devils power and sins strength to them is subdued. that his righteousnesse shall be effectuall to all pur∣poses for us; because he goes to the Father, and we shall see him no more, therefore God is fully satisfied. 1 Tim. 1.16. Vers. 11. Of judgment] That Christ hath erected a judicatory in the conscience. O∣racles are ceased, Satan in part is cast down. 2. Makes men submit to his judgement, Matth. 12.20. Observe the method of this conviction. 1. Of sin, to cure the presumption which is in men, and bring us to a selfe-despaire. 2. Of righteousnesse, to prevent despaire in the mercies of God, when our presumption is cured. 3. Of judgement and sanctification, to prevent that loosenesse we should else fall into; we are convinced of sin by the Law, of righteousnesse by the promises of the Gospell, of judgement by the Evangelicall commands.
, id est, ducet recta via ad verita∣tem quasi dux viae. Vide Camero∣nis Myroth. Evang.Vers. 13. He shall guide you into all truth] Guide] By inward motions, moving and perswading. 2. Changing the mind and will. 3. Kindling the affections. Guide you, As a man is led by the hand into a place, for we are not onely blind but lame too; shall lead you into the practise of them. That promise was directly and primarily made to the Apostles. All truth] Not simply all, but all necessary and saving truths; to be led into all truths, is to know and beleeve them. Leade them into all truth] That is, reveale Gods will unto them, and assure their hearts, that the same is true. He shall not speake of himselfe] Hence the Arrians blasphemously inferred (as Jerome witnesseth) that the Holy Ghost was inferiour to the Father and Son,Hieron. Dial. adversus Luci∣ferianos. Dict∣tum est  in∣telligendum autem . Est sermo dispensatorius. Iansen. they said the Father onely was true God, our Saviour a creature, and the Holy Ghost a servant of both. Christ speaks of the Holy Ghost as some Messenger and Embassadour whose fide∣lity is seen in saying nothing himselfe, but onely in relating that he hath in charge. Vers. 16. Shall not see mee] When he lyes in the grave, Theoph. Caiet. Rupertus. Shall see mee] In heaven Aug. not see him at his ascention, but at judgement. Beda. Vers. 20. Weepe and lament]  you would be inwardly dejected,  and outwardly declare it. These words are not onely meant of his Disciples, but of all beleevers,Perkins. who upon consideration of the sins, and their spirituall want of Christ, do mourne and lament. But your sorrow shall be turned into joy] If Christ had onely promised that their sor∣row should he mitigated or shortly ended, it had been a great comfort, but this mi∣nistreth abundant consolation.Dr. Taylor. Vers. 23. Whatsoever ye shall aske] Non quaecunque whatsoever onely, but quotcunque too, how many things soever; The Greeke word is pregnant, may meane both, doth meane both.Dr. Clerke. Vers. 33. Be of good cheere] The word signifies boldnesse, implying that our confi∣dence in God causeth holdnesse and courage. CHAP. XVII. THis Chapter is an Epitome of that intercession which Christs makes in heaven for his people, for though the prayer here was in the time of his humiliation; yet the matter of it belongs to his State of glory.That is, the cause and be∣ginning of life eternall. Vers. 3. This is life eternall] By eternall life understand grace by a metonymie of the effect, quia vitam efficit. Piscat. It workes life, quia radix & origo vitae, because it is the roote and originall of our life. Cyrill. Gustus vitae aeternae, the tast of eternall life. Brentius. That they might know] That is, beleeve in. v. 4. See Dr. Reynolds, the life of Christ. p. 420.Thee the onely true God] Hence the Arrians inferred that the Son was not true God, and the Macedonians, that the Holy Ghost was not true God. The exclusive word only here doth not exclude the Son and the Holy Ghost, but Idoles and false Gods. See Rom. 9.5. Vers. 9. I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given mee] Our Saviour prayed for those onely that his Father had given him,Oravit & pro mundo, ut resi¦pisceret & ve∣niam acciperet peccatorum. Luc. 23.34. Imo & mox ut credat 21. Sed haec quae nunc orat, de pro∣tectione pater∣na, de spiritu, de concordiâ, non nisi ad credentes pertinent. Grotius. Vide plura ibid. and for those whom hereafter he should give unto him. v. 20. And that with exclusion from the world, as here, and for their sakes he sanctified himselfe. v. 19. Which in like manner is to be un∣derstood with exclusion of the world. Now by sanctifying himselfe, is understood the offering up of himselfe upon the Crosse, by the unanimous consent of all the Fa∣thers whom Marlorate had read, as himselfe professeth in his commentaries on that passage in Iohn. And he had seen very many as there he signifieth, viz. Chrysostome, Cyrill, Augustine, Leontius, Beda, Theophylact, Euthymius, Rupertus. Vers. 10. All mine] All that I make intercession for, and am to redeeme, that are to have benefit by mee, are thine] Thine elect and chosen people, and thine are mine] All thine elect shall have benefit by mee, and, I am glorified in them] The glory and honour that I have in the world, is in and by them, and them onely.
Vers. 11. That they may be one as we are] The unity of the will is common to all v. 20.21.Vers. 12.  distneaura a , ita ut  referatur ad conservationem in bono,  ad praeservationem à malo,  ad media  ad finem: qui enim ab exitio praeservari debent, filios oportet in vera Dei agnitione & fide servari.  ad Christi fide∣litatem,  ad ipsius diligentiam. Gerh. Her. Vers. 13. These things I speake in the world, that they might have my joy fulfilled in them∣selves] That is, I have made this prayer in the world, and left a record and pattern of it in the Church, that they feeling the same heavenly desires kindled in their owne hearts, may be comforted in the workings of that Spirit of prayer in them, which testifieth to their soules the quality of that intercession which I shall make for them in heaven. Dr. Reynolds on 110. Psal. 4. p. 437. See him ibid on verses 5, 6. p. 491. Vers. 19. I sanctifie my selfe] In this Chapter where he refused to pray for all, hee professeth that he sanctified himselfe for their sakes for whom he prayed;Sanctifie here is not to make holy, and purge from fithinese, but to separate himselfe to all that worke hee undertook. now this san∣ctifying Dr. Twisse. That is, he offered himselfe a sacrifice as the place is expounded by Cyrill and Chrysostome, or consecrated himselfe to be a sacrifice. Vide Bezam. & Grotium. Christ was Priest, Altar and Sacrifice, Sacrifice in his humane nature, Altar in the Divine, and Priest in both. of himselfe was unto his death and passion by the unanimous consent of all the Fathers, as Maldonate acknowledgeth; therefore Christ died not for all and every man. CHAP. XVIII. Vers. 1. WHere was a Garden, into which he entred and his Disciples] Peccatum in horto pri∣mùm admissum, in horto coepit expiari. Brugensis. Sin being committed first in the garden, began to be expiated in a garden. Vers. 2. For Iesus of times resorted thither with his Disciples] Christ was wont alwayes to seek solitary places to pray in. These festivall dayes he was alwayes wont to con∣tinue there in the night, Luke 21.37. and 22.39. Christ by this deed did shew that he shunned not his enemies, but made choice of fit place and time for the executing of his Fathers and his owne purpose.Grotius. He chose rather to be taken in the place of prayer than of supper, and in the night,Impius & in∣gratus Iudas, qui Iesum eo laco quaerit ut comprehendat, quo, & novit eum orare, & didicit ab eo orare. Brugensis. that the feare of his enemies might be shewd who durst not take him in the day time. Vers. 14. It was expedient that one man should die for the people] He meant, it was better that Christ being but one should die, than that the whole people (whose destruction he thought unavoidable, if Christ were suffered to live) should perish and come to no∣thing. It was the will of God for the honour of the Priesthood,Dr. Field of the Church. l. 5. c. 10. that hee should utter that he meant ill, in such words as might have a good sense, though not meant nor in∣tended by him, wherefore he is said to have prophesied. Vers. 15. And so did another Disciple, that Disciple was knowne unto the High Priest] Some thinke this was John, who perhaps might serve the High Priest with fish,Chrysostomus, Cyrillus, The∣ophylactus, Brentius & alij, existimant fuisse Aposto∣lum Iohannem, quae sententia confirmari potest ex eo quòd Johannes hac periphrasi se ipsum solet significare Iohann. 20 v. 2.3.4. quòdque tam exactè describat, qua occasione Petrus in atrium Pontificis introductus sit. Gerhardus. Vide Piscat. but be∣cause after three yeares conversation in the Schoole of Christ, familiarity with the High Priest Christs sworne enemie would be no good signe, and because John could not with∣out imminent danger enter into the High Priests hall, therefore Austen and the ordinary glosse say rightly, who that Disciple was, because it is here concealed, it should not bee rashly determined. Grotius thinks it was not John, because he being a Galilean would have been questioned by those that stood by as well as Peter, nor any of the twelve, but rather him in whose house Christ supped, for that Matthew 26.18. Brugensis likewise
thinks it was not Jon, because he was familiarly knowne to the High Priest, nor any publique and open Disciple of Christ, but a secret one, as there were many then. Some thinke (saith he) that it was some honorable Citizen of Ierusalem: what if it was hee at whose house Jesus supped,Brugensis in loc. for he was rich and magnificent, Mar. 14.15. and also a se∣cret Disciple of Christ, Mat. 26.18. Vers. 31. It is not lawfull for us to put any man to death] The Jewes (say some) spake only of a certaine kinde of punishment, viz. as crucifying, with which they would have Christ sufferIansen. Con∣cord. c. 141. Ferus in Ioh. Vide Grotium in Matth. 22.for the greater ignominie. But this seemes not probable that the Jewes were so solicitous of crucifying Christ rather than of punishing him any other way, when wee reade that they would sometimes have throwne him downe headlong, and sometimes have stoned him. Therefore their opinion seemes to be most probable who understand these words of the Jewes, not as spoken simply and absolutely, but with the respect had of the time, viz. For the feast of the passeover which was then kept, that it was not lawfull for them to put any to death, see vers. 28. So Bellarmine saith many of the fathers interpret those words. Those things which follow favour this exposition. That the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled] Beza saith, the cause why the Jewes expressely required that Christ should be crucified, was not onely because this was a most bitter and shamefull death; but because this punishment was appointed by the lawes of the Romans for the authors of sedition. See Acts 6.12. and 7.58. and 24.6, 7. against this exposition. Vers. 38. Pilate saith unto him, What is truth? And when he had said this, hee went out a∣gaine unto the Jewes, and saith unto them, I finde in him no fault at all] Pilate speakes rough∣ly to Christ, but well of him to the people; he used foure meanes to deliver him, First, Loquendo, by speaking for him, when al the world was silent. Secondly, mittendo, by send∣ing Christ to Herod. Thirdly, jungendo, by joyning Christ & Barrabas together, thinking they would rather have chose Christ than such a vile fellow. Fourthly, flagellando, by whipping of Christ. Two things made him condemne him. 1 The importunity of the Jewes, Crucifie him, crucifie him, and his willingnesse to content them, Marke 15.15 2 The feare of losing Caesars favour, Iohn 19.13. Vers. 39. But ye have a custome, that I should release unto you one at the Passeover] Some say they used this custome in remembrance of Jonathans deliverance by the people, others in remembrance of their deliverance out of Egypt; a third, not in relation to either of those, but in solemnity of the feast, at the Passeover a malefactor was to bee set free, not an innocent condemned.Aquinas. CHAP. XIX. Vers. 1. ANd scourged him] It was established by the Romane Lawes, that he which was cru∣cified should be first beaten with rods.Ierome. Videte ejus miseriam & quam ridicu∣lum sit in ipso crimen regni affectari. Vide infra 14. Grotius.Vers. 5. Behold the man] That is, if there be any mercy yet in you looke on him, set him free. Castellionovo vocabulo  lapidipavium vertit. Melius famae suae con∣suluere, qui Graecum vocabulum retinuerunt, quippe usu Latinum factum Cheitomaeus. Gabbatha] Sic nominatur illud pavi∣mentum quod esset elevatum. à verbo Hebraeo gabah quod significat elevari. Piscat. Erat in loco sublimi, ut solent esse tribunalia, ut judex à circumfusa multitudine videri & audiri possit. Cornel à Lap.Vers. 13. In a place that is called the pavement, but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha.] Within the Court of the Temple in a house called the Paved Chamber, because of the curious cut stones it was paved with. See Piscator. In Hebrew] That is Syriacke, that is the speech of the Jews. Grotius Vox est ejus lin∣guae quae Christi tempore vernacula erat in Iudaea quae ideo Ebraica dicitur. Vers. 14. About the sixt houre] Then began his hanging on the Crosse say some, Mark. 15.25. saith, And it was the the third houre, and they crucified him, & so Mat. & Luke Cornel à Lap.
allegeth seven interpretations for the reconciling of these places, but approves of this best: Christ is said to be crucified the third houre, because at that houre Pilate pub∣likely assented to the Jewes crying crucifie him, that he might avoyd the tumult of the people, whence he commanded him to be whipt, as fitting him for the Crosse; (for the guiltie persons that were to die were wont first to be whipt) yet hoping by his cruel whipping to appease the Jewes,Luke 23.14. Matth. 27.24, 25. but when he saw them continuing in their clamour against Iesus, at the sixth houre fitting on the tribunall, he delivered a judiciary and formall sentence against him that hee should be crucified. Luke and Matthew seeme to favour this exposition. The best copies & Johns owne autograph Policarpi & Ignatij Episto∣lae à Reveren∣dissimo Episco∣po Vsserio editae p. 74.75. Vi∣de plura ibid. (which the Authour of the Constantinopolitane Chronicle saith, was kept in the Church of the Ephesi∣ans to his time) have  hora quasi tertia, about the third houre. Nonnus in his paraphrase on this place also so renders it. Vers. 17. And he bearing his Crosse] Although this was the custome among the Ro∣mans, that malefactors should carry their Crosse to the place of punishment, Lipsius l. 2. de cruce c. 3. So that without doubt the two theeves Christs companions bore their Crosses, yet Christ should have been spared. For since onely lustie theeves were wont to be crucified, they were able to carry such a burthen, but Christ being cruelly whipt and hardly used otherwaies, sunke under the burthen. Brugensis. In Hebrew Golgotha,] the Hebrew is Gulgoleth, wherefore the word is rather Syriack;Id est, Crani∣um seu Calva∣ria; sic dicta à rotunditate & volubilitate, nam galgal volvere sig. Piscat. Neque enim Gabbatha Hebraicum est aut Golgotha, sed planè Syriacum. Quid igitur? Lingua Syriaca appellatur à S. Iohanne Evangelista Lingua Hebraica, quòd eâ tunc temporis Hebraei in Iu∣daea Commorantes uterentur tanquam vernacula. Valeriani De Flavigny.Receptissimum est, Linguam Syriaeam Iudaeis Hierosolymitanis, dum Christus in terris, in usu etiam vulgo fuisse, ad∣eoque ipsi Christo. Seldeni Uxor Ebraica. l. 3. c. 23. this is often in the New Testament called the Hebrew tongue, because it was the vulgar tongue of the Jewes that were Hebrewes. Acts 22.2. See 13. v. Vers. 20. Wrote a title and put it on the Crosse] Writ faults over head to shew the equity of their proceeding. Euseb. hist. l. 5. c. 1. Vers. 22. What I hav written, I have written] I will not alter it; and if man say quod scripsi scripsi, num Deus quenquam scribis & delet? August. Doth God write any in his booke and blot him out againe? Vers. 25. Now there stood by the Crosse of Iesus, his mother, and his mothers sister, Ma∣ry the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene.] Her standing declared her constancy and trust in God; we have the Virgin full of grace, Mary Cleophas the married full of cares, Magdalene the penitent, all neede to look on Christ crucified. Vers. 26. His mother and the Disciple standing by] Stantem lego, flentem non lego, saith Ambrose of Christs mother, I reade of her standing, but not of her weeping. Woman behold thy Son] Hee calls her woman and not Mother, not as un∣willing to owne her for his Mother, but either as fearing that such an owning her might have created her further trouble, or as shewing that being ready to dye and re∣turne to his Father in heaven, he was above earthly relations, and knew none after the flesh, no not his owne Mother. Vers. 27. From that houre that Disciple tooke her unto his owne home] Ioseph belike was now dead.Vide Piscat. Vers. 28. Our Saviour knowing that all things were now accomplished] Our Saviour was not yet dead or buried. Some answer that all things necessary for our Redemption were accomplished, be∣cause Christ had borne the wrath of his Father, but rather it may bee answered, that all other things which were to goe before the death of our Saviour were accomplished, so that nothing remained but this tasting of Vineger. I thirst] Bleeding breeds thirsting, then was fulfilled that Psal. 21.6. in Christ. Vers. 29. Put it upon Hysop] Matthew and Marke say upon a Reede, Mat. 27.48. Marke 15.36. The Hysop stalke was put into a reede or hollow Cane,Vide Piscat. & de Dieu in loc. or else in those countries the Hysop did arise to that bignes that the stalk therof might wel be called a Cane or Reede,
as the tree of Mustardseed with the Jewes is farre greater and taller than it is with us. Vers. 30. Finished] That is, the Prophesies of him saith Augustine, and Chrysostom saith his Pilgrimage and the wrath of God: now the Jewish Law and Sacrifice was at an end. Iansenius. Gave up the Ghost] Emisit non amisit. Ambrose. Crurifragium five crurifran∣gium ut crux ipsa servorum peculiare quasi supplicium fuerat. Drusius. Vide Grotium & Brugensem.Vers. 31. That their leggs might be broken] Vers. 34. Pierced his side] Their malice dyed not with his death. The Syriack Para∣phrase saith,Vide Bezam, & Fulleri miscel. Sac. l. 5. c. 1. p. 14. Junias, Pis∣cat. Beza, Mr. Perkins. Tacto pericar∣dio ín quo est aqua & sanguis circum. Grotius. He pierced his Ribbe, that is, the fift ribbe, where the pericardium lay; forth∣with came there out bloud and water] It is very likely that the very Pericardium was pierced, a filme or skin like unto a purse, wherein is contained cleare water to coole the heate of the heart. Aqua quae diluat, sanguis que redimat. Ambrose on Luke. The bloud signifying the perfect expiation of the sinnes of his Church, and the water the daily washing and purging of it from the remainders of her corruption. Vers. 36. A bone of him shall not be broken] Christ would have none of his bones broken or taken off from the communion of his naturall body, to note the indissoluble union which was to be betwixt him and his members.Dr. Reynolds. Many thinke (saith Grotius) that he hath respect here to the Law concerning the Pas∣call Lambe, but hee rather conceives that that place Psalme 34.21. is aimed at, where Gods speciall care for a godly man is described.Vide Bru∣gensem. CHAP. XX. Verse. 1. COmmeth Mary Magdalene early] With her companions, which Matthew, Marke and Luke name;Luke 24.1.10 Cornel à Lap. Vnam praeci∣puam nominat pro pluribus. Sic Marc. 5.2. & 46. si cum Matthaeo conferas. Grotius. but here she alone is named, because she was their leader, more zealous and diligent than them all, (therefore she is named in the first place in the other Evan∣gelists) and especially because he intended to relate here upon what occasion Christ first appeared to Mary Magdalene alone. See 10. and 11. verses, and Marke 16.9. Aetate velocior. Grotius. 6. v. Petrus aetate prudentior, ea∣que diligentius omnia explorans. Id. ibid.Vers. 4. The other Disciple did outrunne Peter] As younger, and so more nimble. Iohn out-ran Peter, Love is swifter, but Zeale in Peter is bolder to looke into the Sepulchre. See verse 6. The Greek verbe is such as timber works fastened touch, and is to fasten unto, to be joyned unto, so St. Paul useth it 1 Cor. 7. not to touch, that is, not to be fastened by marriage, as one. Broughtons. Vide Bezam, Grotium & Brugensem. The words should be translated, I do not yet presently ascend. See Broughtons Epistle to the nobility of Engl. p. 45.Vers. 17. Touch me not] Goe in haste to tell my Disciples, stay not to touch me. 2 I am not ascended] viz. that it should bee time enough to touch me, or 3. she should touch him being ascended by faith, the profitablest touch. He forbids her to touch him, that is, not to looke to enjoy his corporall presence as before, but rather to seeke for his Spirituall presence by faith, considering he was short∣ly to ascend to his Father. Mr. Perkins. But goe to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God.]I ascend] To what end, see Iohn 14.2. The words are as full of Comfort as the Ocean of waters. My brethren] A loving appellation. My Father and your Father,] A blessed union in a happy Correlation; my Father by nature, yours by grace saith Austen. Vers. 18. Mary Magdalene came and told the Disciples that she had seene the Lord,] A Fe∣male Evangelist.En Magdalena hic à Christo fit Apostolorum Apostola & Evangelista. Cornel à Lap. Vide Piscat. in v. 26.
Vers. 19. When the doores were shut] Some thinke by his power hee caused the doore to give way, others that he rarified and thinned the substance of the doore.Primo non hab∣tur è Scriptue ris, Christum intrasse per ja∣nua claulas: sed , anas voces La∣tinus interpres reddidit semel, quum fores essent clausae, & iterum januis clausis. At Syrus utrobique cum essent fores clausae. Sic nihil necesse est penetrationem intelligere. Chamierus. Vide Calvinum. Mr. Perkins hath both. à Lapide saith falsely that Christ pierced the doores as he did the Virgins shut wombe when he was borne, and the stone of the Sepulcher in rising from the grave. The Scripture is evident that our Saviour was presented to the Lord according as it is writ∣ten, every male that first openeth the Matrix, Luke 2.29. Clausas portas vulvae virginalis aperuit saith Ierom. It is not said that Christ came through the doores being shut, but after the doores were shut, which yet at his entrie were opened miraculously, as to the Apostles the prison doores, Acts 5.19. and 12.10. The same may be said of the stone, if he arose be∣fore the Angell removed the same. Mat. 28. Fulke on the Rhem. Test. Vers. 21. As my Father sent me, so send I your] First,As my Father sent mee so I send you] To imply, that he sent all with equall authori∣ty, every mans jurisdiction coming imme∣diately alike from Christ. as Christ was immediately called by the Father, so were the Apostles immediately called by himselfe; Secondly, as Christ was sent from the Father to preach to the whole world, so Christ sent them into the whole world, for the whole world was their charge; Thirdly, as Christ was sent to reveale his Fathers will, so were they sent by Christ to reveale the Fa∣thers will, partly in making things more fully knowne, which were before but darke∣ly shadowed, and partly in foretelling things to come, they all being Evangelicall Pro∣phets. In regard of this manner of sending them they were above the Angells themselves. See Ephes. 3.10. Perkins on Jude. Vers. 22. He breathed on them, and said unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost] The ceremo∣nie of breathing on them, seemeth to give them all a like portion & power of the Spirit,Christ used the Ceremony of breathing upon his Apostles, with this forme of words, re∣ceive ye the Holy Ghost, as it were of set purpose visibly to represent he proceeding of the Holy Spirit from himselfe, so Cyrill and Austen. Flatus designat Spiritum Sanctum, quemadmodum & ventus (Act. 2. v. 2.) Eò quòd Spiritus Sanctusfit veluti flatus quidam Patris & Filij, nam & hinc Spiritus vocatur. Dedit autem praeterea intelligendum, Spiritum sanctum à se quoque procedere, & se illius esse datorem non minus quam Patrem. Brugensis in loc. that is, some smaller measure of gifts as a pledge for the time, but directing them when and where to expect the plentifull powring out of the Spirit upon them after his de∣parture. This outward breathing upon the Disciples was a lively token and resemblance of their inward inspiration with the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, for the Holy Ghost is as it were the breath of the Father and the Sonne. Our Saviour doth the same that God did, Gen. 2.7. to shew that the same person that giveth life giveth grace, and also to signifie unto his Disciples, that being to send them over all the world to preach his Gospell, he was as it were to make a second Creation of man by renewing the image of God in him which he had lost by the fall of Adam; also to put them in mind that their preaching of the Gospel could not be effectuall in the hearts of the hearers before the Lord did breath into them his Spirit. Cant. 4.10. Vers. 23. Whose soever sinnes ye remit, they are remitted unto them;Ambrose, Au∣gustine, Chry∣sostome and Cyrill, Make this observati∣on, that this is not their worke properly, but the work of the Holy Ghost, who re∣mitteth by them & there∣in performeth the work of the true God. The Minister remits sins by assuring them out of Gods word that beleeve and repent, that their sins are forgiven; a private Christian may do this, but the promise is peculiar to the Ministers. Matth. 16.19. and 18.18. and whose soever sinnes ye retaine, they are retained] First, it is certaine, that properly to remit sinnes belongeth only unto God, Marke 2.7. God challengeth this as his prerogative royall, Esay 43.25. The Ministers have power to remit or retaine sinnes ministerially, in that they have power to declare unto men remission of sinnes if they repent and beleeve, otherwise the reten∣tion of them; and also in that they are instruments under God to bring men unto repentance and faith whereby to obtaine remission, or otherwise to leave them the more without excuse. Compare this place with Marke 16.15, 16. and Luke 24.47. in all which places there is the same speaker Christ, the same persons spoken unto the Apo∣stles, and the same time of speaking after the resurrection.
Figuram cla∣vorum] i. e. Vestigium vul∣neris ex clavis impressum  est  vestigium, quod à percussione imprimitur, & post percussionem in corpore percusso relinquitur, Vulg. versio minus commodè reddit fixuram. Syrus vertit loca clavorum, Augustinus vertit cicatricem. Gerhard.Vers. 25. Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nailes, and put my finger into the print of the nailes, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not beleeve] Plus mihi profuit dubita∣tio Thomae quam credulitas Mariae. Gregorius Magnus. The doubting of Thomas hath pro∣fited me more than the credulity of Marie; Nil tam certum quam quod post dubium certum. Ex his ver∣bis manifestum est, Christum Dominum à resurrectione servasse non tantum cicatrices quinque vulnerum quae in cruce acceperat, quales remanent in plagis sanatis, sed & ipsa foramina vulnerum non repleta carne quae speciem clavi haberet, qualia fuisse dicuntur stig∣mata S. Francisci, sed aperta, ita ut caro continua non esset. Lugas Brugensis.Vers. 27. Reach hither thy finger and behold my hands, and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side] Into the wound of my side pierced with the Soldiours speare. Vide Bezam. Hominum alij Christum nec oculis carnis nec fidei intuiti sunt, ut Phocion; alij oculis carnis & fide, ut Apostoli; alij oculis carnis non fide, ut Carphas & Pharisaei; alij non carnis sed fidei oculis, ut Abraham. Ioan. 8.56. & nos omnes. Grynaeus.Vers. 29. Blessed are they that have not seen, but heard, and yet have beleeved. Ergo quae scrip∣ta sufficiunt ad salutem.Vers. 31. But these are written, that he might beleeve that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that beleeving yee might have life through his name] This was the finall cause of the writers of the Gospell. CHAP. XXI. Vers. 3. AND that night they caught nothing] The night is fittest for fishing, because in the day time the fearefull fishes are affrighted with the sight of men, and hide themselves in the deepe. Vers. 7. Girt his fishers Coate unto him] Hee was not altogether naked before, but had put off his outward Garment.Nempe partim pudoris causa ut Beza annotat, partim etiam ne indusio laxa∣t ac diffluente impediretur in natando. Piscat. Vide de Dieu in loc. He was clad after the manner of fishers, with some close inner garment onely, and having girt it to him, did cast himselfe (in the vehemence of his desire to come unto Christ) into the Sea. Dr. Hals Paraphrase. Notant quidam tot piscium nu∣merari genera, eoque significari ex omnì hominum genere capturam fore. Grotius.Vers. 11. An hundred fifty and three] There are so many kinds of the chiefe fishes say some, whereby is signified that some of all kind of men shall be taken. And for all there were so many, yet was not the net broken] So many and such great fishes in net but weake of it selfe, this also increased the Miracle. Vers. 14. This is now the third time that Iesus shewed himselfe to his Disciples] It may be understood of the day when our Saviour appeared,Refer ad die∣rum numerum. Primum appa∣ruit diversis ipso resurrecti∣onis die: iterum dive octavo, nunc tertium. Grotius. Vide Brugensem. not of the particular appea∣rances. This was the third day wherein he shewed himselfe to his Disciples, but not the third appearance, or we may understand it of his appearing to his Disciples, when they were together, not to severall persons, yet Grotius and Brugensis referre it to the appearances. See Dike of the deceitful∣nesse of the heart. p. 399. and Grotius.Mr. Hildersam, It is doubled in the vulgar, pasce agnos meos, pasce agnos meos.Vers. 15. Iesus said to Simon] Therefore to Simon alone, feed] Therefore rule over them as a King, My sheep] Therefore the whole Church scattered over the whole earth, so the Papists argue. When it is said to him it is said to all, lovest thou mee? feed my sheepe. Austin. He had denyed Christ thrice, therefore he thrice provokes him to a pro∣fession of his love; so the Fathers.
The Greeke verbe signifies to governe as a shepheard ruleth his sheepe, and addeth no more authority to Peter, than to any other Bishop or Elder of the Church, of whom it is also used. Act. 20.28. More then these] Than thy nets, than thy fish, than thy friends, that are here about thee. Mr Hildersam. Lambes] Peter must not feed his sheepe onely but his lambes also, and first his lambes, for the increase of the whole flocke dependeth on the towardnesse of the lambes, and they being well fed, lesse paines need to be taken with the sheep. Greenham. Vers. 16. Feed my sheepe] The Papists upon these words of Christ to Peter,Interrogatur amor & impe∣ratur labor. Aug. Peter had a primacie of or∣der, not of au∣thority say the Fathers. See Rainolds conference with Hart, Chapter the third. Feede my sheepe] would gather Peters supremacy over the Church in all the world, but then it will follow that every Christian man should have the like Supremacy, and be a Pope, See Rev. 2.27. The words in the Originall are thus, Hee shall feed and rule the Nations, as a Shepheard feedeth and ruleth his lambes with his hooke. Mr Perkins. Feede] By doctrine, life, discipline. Vers. 17. Thou knowst that I love thee] That my love is true and sincere.Aequum erat ut triplici ab∣negationi tri∣plex confessio apponeretur, ne de tanti peccati remissione & restitutione muneris Apostolici dubitaret Petrus. Beza. Peter being asked of the measure of his love, answered onely concerning the truth; being asked of the quantity, he answered only of the quality. Vers. 18. Thou shalt stretch forth thy hand] As captives are wont to doe;Syrus inter∣pres vertit, alius cinget lumbos tuos. Glossa inter∣linearis, cinget inquit vinculis. Chamierus tomo secundo, l. 11. c. 16. Vide Bezam. by the same figurative speech Pauls death was signified, when Agabus taking a girdle bound his feete and hands. And carry thee whither thou wouldest not] That is, in malam crucem. Grotius. Vers. 19. This spake hee, signifying by what death he should glorifie God] viz. By a vio∣lent and cruell death; a magnificent description of martyrdome,Grotius. it is a glorifying of God. See Iohn 13.31. Follow mee] Not in respect of changing his place, as when he said to Matthew fol∣low mee, but it is meant metaphorically of imitation and obedience, as Mat. 16. Chamier. Vers. 22. Till I come] Some understand Christs comming at the end of the world,Die a naturall deah on his bed, not be put to death as thou shalt. v. 18. See Sands his Travells. See Mat. 16.28 and that hath been the ground of a vulgar, but sencelesse errour, viz. that Iohn the Evangelist is yet alive. Austen (tract in Iohn) saith that the place where he was buried bubleth like water, to testifie his breathing, and that he is not dead but sleepeth; but Beda sheweth that he died in peace the 98. yeare of his life at Ephesus. Till I come] Not in person but in power, in the promulgation of the Gospell and conversion of sinners. Follow thou mee] Non corpore sed corde, not with his body but heart.Quod Petro dicitur omni∣bus dicitur. sequere me. Emissenus. It may be that sharpe reprose of our Saviour, quid hoc ad te, made Peter give charge against curiosity, as against Theft or Murder. 1 Pet. 4.15.22. Dr. Sclater. Vide Grotium.
ANNOTATIONS VPON THE ACTS of the APOSTLES. CHAPTER. I. LVke calleth his History the Acts of the Apostles, though it be specially of their sufferings because even their passions were actions,Dike on Phile∣mon. Describitur in Actis, progressus & confimatio ecclesiae, primò in Ierusalem ad caput 8. Secun∣dò esdem per∣secutio & aug∣mentum in Iu∣daea & Samaria à cap. 8. ad. 16. Tertiò ejusdem inter gentes cumprimis fundatio, & progressus à cap. 16. ad finem. Quistorpius. they en∣larged the Kingdome of Christ by their suffering. A History of 28. yeares is described in the Acts saith Quistorpius. Vers. 1. Of all that Iesus began both to do and teach] Understand those Non dixit omnia sed de omnibus, nimirum ordinem ac seriem rerum indicans potiu quam nihil esse praetermissum, alio∣qui dissentire: à Iohanne qui negat mundum sore capacem voluminum si singula quae dominus dixit fecitve scriberentur. Chrysost. Eras. things which are necessary to be known for salvation, as Chryso∣stome, Cyrill, and Austine rightly expound it. The sense is, which Jesus did and taught while he continued on earth: The Evangelists propound two things to themselves, viz. to set forth dicta, sacta, the sayings and deeds of Christ. Vers. 3. By many infallible proofes] By many Signes, say the Syrian and Arabick. But the word includes Signes of undoubted truth, and accordingly hath our English well expressed it. Mr. Lightfoot in loc. Being seene of them 40 dayes, and speaking of the things pertaining to the things of God] see Iohn 20.20, 21. he would converse a long time with his Disciples to assure them of his resurrection, and that hee might more fully informe them of his will. Vers. 4. And being assembled together with them] Some render it eating with them;  est communi mensa utor, ab  Sal, whence the Proverbe multos modios salis cum aliquo consumpsisse; to have eaten many bushells of Salt with one, is long to have lived together with him. Vers. 6. Wilt thou at this time restore again the Kingdome to Israel] Dreaming still of a temporall Kingdome, for which Christ rebukes them.Totidem in hac interrogati∣one sunt errores, quot verba. Calv. Vers. 7. Jt is not for you to know the times or seasons] As if he should say, the Father hath kept times and seasons in his own power, and therefore it is not for you to know them. Perkins. With the Greekes  season is sometime used for  time, but not contrari∣ly.  properly is the space of time in generall, as an age, yeare, moneth, day, houre;  the opportunity of doing a thing. Ver. 10. And while they looked stedfastly toward heaven.] looked with fixed eyes like lovers., est fixis & immo∣tis obtueri oculis amantium more. Erasmus. Vers. 12. A Sabbath dayes journey] One mile saith Tremellius on the Syriack Testa∣ment, about two miles say the Latines, 2000 Cubites say the Hebrewes, which are ra∣ther to be beleeved See Weemes his Christian Synagogue p. 75. and Doctor Willet on Levit. 23. quest. 5. pag. 567. A Sabbath dayes journey was 2000 Cubits which the Hebrewes make a mile,Oecumen. ad Act. 1. Iter Sab∣bathi, ut ait O∣rig. Strom. 5. erat 2000. Cubitorum, idque potissimum, quod sanctum tabernaculū & arca tanto interstitio castrorū ordinem prae∣cedebant, & à tanto intervallo tentoria sigebant, quo spatio licebat his, qui castra metati erant ad sanctum tabernaculum accedere. Drus. Ebr. quaest. 9.29. & observat. Sac. as appeares by their bookes. de Dien in loc. Vers. 18. And falling headlong he burst asunder in the midst,Necessarium non est, ut illam corporis inflatio∣nem fingamus ad quam non∣nulli confugi∣unt, cū hoc non naturali aliqua causa sed divino judicio contigis∣se ex istimandum sit. Sed si causam naturalem viscerum effusionis quaeramus, ea satis idonea videtur si dicamus ubi ruptus est laqueus, gravi è superiori loco lapsu, disruptum esse corpus, & difluxisse viscera; imò conatus ipse ad illud mortis genus, maxi∣me si ex humili loco dependeat, satis gravis existimatur adilia rumpenda, ut vir magnae fidei mihi narravit, aui & ipse norat cui illud idem in codem conatu contigisset. Sanctius. and all his bowels gushed out] The Greeke word signifies thus much, that Judas fell down flat, and was rent
in sunder in the midst with a marvellous huge noise. The Syriack, Aethiopick, and Arabick translates it, and he fell upon his face upon the ground, and that place Matth. 27.5. doth not oppose it saith de Dieu, because the Greek word there is not to be rendred hanged himself, but was suffocated or strangled. Therefore Heinsius, de Dieu and Doctor Price think that Judas died of the Squinancie. Vers. 19. That field is called in their proper tongue Aceldama, that is to say, the field of blood] The word is Syriacke, it was bought with a price of bloud Matth 27.7. and sprinkled with his blood that took that price. See Drusius and Quistorpius. Vers. 26. And he was numbred] The originall is more,  communibus calculis annumeratus est, he was by common assent, or common voyces reckoned with the eleven. See Beza. CHAPTER. II. Vers. 1. WIth one accord] Some render , with one mind, or heart. This Greek word is often used in the Acts.Animorum unio & concor∣dia est optima dispositio ad re∣ciptendum Spi∣ritum Sanctum It is used in reference to the twelve Apostles alone Chap. 1.15. Here in reference to the whole hundred and twen∣ty, and Chap. 2.4.6. in reference to the whole number of beleevers. It is used also 5.12. Vers. 3. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire.] In the originall  there were seene, for it was not a delusion of sense, but a true and reall apparition. Tongues, because they were to convert the world to Christ by the power of speech and perswasion. Secondly, Fierie, to consume the drosse of errour in men. Thirdly, Cloven, because they could tell how to divide the word of truth aright and apply it to persons and occasions. Ministers must be ardentes & loquentes; fiery, ergo ardentes: tongues, ergo loquentes, saith Chrysostome on this place. Vers. 4. As the Spirit gave them utterance] In Apothegmes or wise sentences as the Greeke signifies.Vide Bezam. In the usuall Greek  and  signifie a durable mansion; But with the Hel∣lenists in whose Dialect the Scripture speaketh, they are used indifferently for a stay of a shorter or longer time; that is, for to sojourn, as well as to dwell; as those two ex∣amples out of the Septuagint will manifest; Gen. 27.44. 1 Kings 17.20. Mr. Meade in loc. vide Grotium in loc.Vers. 5. Dwelling]  rather sojourning, for they were not proper dwellers, but such as came to worship at Jerusalem from these far countries at the Feasts of the Passeover, and Pentecost, and so had been continuing there some good time. Vers. 6. Heard them speak in his own language] that is, they spake to every man in his own language: not that the hearers heard that in divers languages which they spake but in one, as some have conjectured, for then (as Calvin upon the place well observes) the miracle had been in the hearers, not in the speakers, whereas the cloven tongues rested upon the Apostles not upon the People. Cujus autem diei? Sanctae nempe: De qua dictum erat, & laetaberis coram Iehova Deo tuo, eâ tamen lege ut prius sacrificia offerrent, ac convenirent sacrisque caeteris va∣carent. Haec autem hora Cultui Divino destinata cum esset, ideoque convenissent & ipsi, optimè suspicionem ejus de quo accu∣sati essent, ratione illa niti negat, non quasi nemo vino ea hora daret operam cum suo tempore propheta dixisset. Esa. 5. Heinsius.Vers. 15. It is but the third houre of the day] That is nine of the clock, tertia viz. ab orto sole. Beza. Vers. 17. J will poure out of my spirit upon all flesh] Peter alleadging that place out of Ioel. 1.28.Esay 44.3. Zach. 12.10. I will poure out my spirit, thus explaineth it, I will poure out of my Spirit, that is, the saving gifts and graces of my spirit; and poure out, Verbum Effundo uber∣tatem designat: quae enim effunduntur, non parcè dantur, aut stillatim, sed abundanter & copiose. Metaphora ab aquis sumitur, quibus irrorari leviter contingit homines; & baptizari, id est, ablui largè; & hoc posterius valet effundo. Sanctius in loc. that is, they shall have abundance of my spirit.
Vers. 24. Whom God hath raised up, having loosed the paines of death] Some take these to be the sorrowes of the second death, viz. the torments of hell,Non quibus nexus est sed ne nocteretur. Austen Not wherein he was bound, but that he might not be at all bound with them, quod non aliter quàm de ipsa morte potest intelligi. Dicit autem solutis, metaphora sumpta ab iis quae loris constricta sunt. Mors enim nos quasi vinculis & loris vinctos tenet. Drus. Prov. Class. 2. l. 4. because the loosing of no other sorrowes was necessary to the resurrection of Christ, and it is im∣possible that any man should be held of the first death. vide Bezam. Vers. 27. My soule in hell] That is, either thou wilt not leave me as in the 31. v. following where the Greek Text saith, his Soul was not left] the old Latine hath he was not left] or thou wilt not leave my body, as that Gen. 24.26.B Vsher. vide Bezam & Drusium. Vers. 36. Both Lord and Christ] That is, God the Father hath given the Church to Christ, and Christ again to the Church, and made him Head and Saviour of it by his eternall decree. Vers. 37. Pricked] The word in the originall signifies to vex, rent, and wound punctu∣ally, even every the least part and point of the heart, if the sharpest points of many empoysoned daggers had been all at once fastened in their hearts,Mr. Bolton in the cruellest man∣ner could be devised: they had not by the thousand part so tortured them, as did now the sting of conscience for their sins, and the sense of that horrible guilt of crucifying the Sonne of God. Vers. 39. And to all that are a farre off] That is, the Gentles, Ephes. 2.17. com∣pared with 12. vers. Vers. 42. And they continued stedfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayer] These were notes of the primitive Church next af∣ter Christ. They continued in the Apostles doctrine.] Secondly, in fellowship] wherein the duties of love are comprehended. Thirdly, In breaking of bread] That is,Perkins on Iude. the admini∣stration of the Sacraments, for the celebration of the Supper is put for both. Fourth∣ly, In prayer] That is, invocation of God with thankesgiving. Vers. 46. And they continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladnesse, and singlenesse of heart.] See first their constancy, they continued. Secondly, their fervency, daily.] Thirdly, Their uni∣ty, with one accord.] Fourthly, their audacity, in the Temple.] Fifthly, their charity, in breaking bread from house to house.] Sixthly, their familiarity, did eat their meat.] Seventh∣ly, their alacrity, with gladnesse.] Eightly, their sincerity, and singlenesse of heart. CHAP. III. Vers. 2. BEautifull] For the Prince onely did enter in thereat, and not the peo∣ple Ezek. 44.3. The people entred in at the North and South Gate,See Iosephus de Bello Iud. l. 6. c. 6. Ezek. 46.9. Vers. 18. By the mouth of all his Prophets] All the Prophets had one mouth. Vers. 19. Repent yee] To repent is to be wise after the fact, and so to grieve for our errour that we desire and endeavour to mend it. Be converted] Returne; for it is in the active in the Greek, blotted out] of Gods Book.Metaphora sumpta à Ra∣tionariis qui dissoluta nomina inducto Calamo expungunt, ut rectè Tremel. & Iun. observarunt in loc. Quae quidem nota ad Graecum textum optimè quadrat, ad Syram vero Paraphrasin non item. Tarnov. in exercit. Bibl. Dilher saith, it is a metaphor taken from a munificent Creditor,Dilher eclog. Sac. dictum, Septimum. which remitting a debt, presently blots it out of his book of Accounts, as if he had received it, Col. 2.14. or from a scribe, which razeth out the errours of his Pen, and the faults of his Writing with a Pen-knife: or, from a washer, which rubs spots out of linnen.
Times of refreshing] Tempora refrigerii times of Cooling] By a most fit metaphor, especially to the condition of those regions which were so hot in summer,Vt afflictio∣nes hujus vi∣tae comparan∣tur igni 1 Pet. 4.12. atque aestui; ita vicissim consolationes aeternae à fidelibus percipiendae vocantur refrigerium. Rainold. de lib. Apoc. Vocabulo  optimè à Luca describitur futurum seculum. Notat enim Recreationem, quae fit & contingit per Refrigerationem illis qui sunt aestu debilitati, ut in quibusdam qui animi deliquium sunt passi, uhi frigidam suffundis vide∣re est. Alardi Pathologia N. T. Ita vox haec Septuaginta usurpatur Exod 8.15. Psal. 6.4 11. Hos. 12.8. Quistorpius. as we see by their custome of washing the feet of their guests. Rainold. de lib. Apoc. Vers. 21. Whom the heavens must receive] It is questionable whether the Greeke words should be resolved,Locutio est am∣bigua quia tum intelligere possu∣mus Christum Coelo capi vel contineri, quàm Coelum capere, Calvinus. that the Heavens received Christ, or that Christ received the Heavens; Locus à multis vexatissimus. Times of restitution] This is not meant of the last day. See Barrh. on Hos. 1.11. p. 184.185. Filii pacti di∣centur Hebraeis, ad quos pactum pertinet. Gretius.Vers. 25. Ye are the children of the Covenant] Or, sonnes of the Covenant, because they have a right to the Covenant, as it were a birth-priviledge. CHAP. IV. Vers. 13. IGnorant men] The word used here is Idiots, which being spoken in com∣parison had to a magistrate, be tokeneth a private man: but when we speak of sciences and studies, it signifies one that is unlearned: and in accompt of honour and estimation, it importeth one of base degree. Vers. 25. Who by the mouth of thy servant David hast said] The Holy Ghost ascribeth here the second Psalme to David,M. Lightfoot. which ownes not its Author in the Title: and see∣meth by this very passage to give us close intimation, that every Psalme which telleth not in its Title who was the Author and Penman of it, is to be ascribed to David as the Penman. Vers. 29. Grant unto thy servants, that with boldnesse they may speake thy word] i. e. Lord, they would drive us from this worke whereto thou hast called us; but doe thou furnish us with such a measure of courage, that we may proceede faithfully in our calling, notwithstanding any menaces of theirs. Vers. 31. The place was shaken where they were assembled together] It is reckoned by the Learned writing upon this place, that God by this externall signe was pleased to declare,Heron. how much he liked of the act of their devotion: and withall that Gods shew∣ing himselfe to approve thereof was a speciall favour. Vers. 32. Of one heart and of one soule] That is, there was perfect union and unity among them. They had all things common] That communion was in such things onely as men had then freely given for the common good.Perkins. à comitate pro∣culdubio & ex∣imia in origen∣dis conscientiis facultate quadam sic vocatus Syra (inquit Junius) appellatione qua filius dicitur. Bar. Consolatio Nabba. Sed vide e potius ab Hebraeo (Nabba) quod significat Prophetare. Beza. vide de Dieu in loc.Vers. 36. The sonne of consolation] For this he was called the Sonne of Consolati∣on: because is was a comfort to many in the Church in this time of affliction. Vers. 37. And laid it at the Apostles feet] To signifie (as some thinke) that we must rather trample upon and contemne this trash, then to have over great admiration of it. Greenham. CHAP. V. Vers. 3. TO lie to the Holy Ghost] Because all secret sinnes are said to be done in a speciall manner under the privity of the Holy Ghost, who searcheth the heart: or to lie to the Holy Ghost by tempting, to see whether the Spirit of God could discover it.
And to keepe backe part of the Price] Purloyning of the Price, , tran∣slate by stealing or purloining, for so the word signifies: our English: which renders it,M. Mede in loc. The true signi∣fication of  is surri∣pere, suffurari, aut clam sub∣ducta in commo∣dum nostrum convertere: whence Beza turnes it by Intervertere, Intervertit ex pretio; and in Titus, Intervertentes. In the same sense it is used by the Sept. Iosh. 7.1. where what we read, Achan took of the accursed thing, the Septuagint renders, , he purloyned the accursed thing, that is, the thing that was consecrated to God, as all the silver and gold was, chap. 6.19. Keeping backe of the price, doth not sufficiently expresse the propriety thereof in this place. In another place it doth, Tit. 2.10. where it renders  purloyring. The Vulgar in both places useth Fraudare, defrauding. The Syriacke and Arabicke expresse it by two words, when they could not fitly by one, & cepit aliquid de pretio & occultavit, id est clam surripuit. de Dieu in loc. Vers. 9. To tempt the Spirit of the Lord]  translated here Tempt, sometime signifies to provoke God by some presumptuous fact to anger: as it were to try whe∣ther he will punish or not, to dare God, as Num 14.22.23.vide Bezam. Eos tentasse spi∣ritum dixit, quia fraudem suam se∣curè compolue∣rant, ac si Dei spiritus non esset cordium cognitor. Tentari enim Deum scriptura dicit, ubi vel sua illi potentia cripitur, vel detra∣hitur rerum omnium cognitio, Calvinus. To tempt is to take a tryall of a thing, as the Greeke word intimates, they proved whether God could discover the falsehood of their Spirits or no. Vers. 39. To fight against God] That is, labour in vaine, Prov. 21.30.See 23.9. It seemes to be drawne from the fable of the Gyants which were said to make warre with the Gods.Drus. Prov. class. 2. l. 3. Vers. 41. Counted worthy to suffer shame for his name] viz. From the grace of God so governing that matter.Piscat. in Philip. 1.7. CHAP. VI. Vers. 1. THe Grecians] The Hellenists or Graecists (so it ought to be read) not Grae∣cians. This word is used also, chap. 9.29. and 11.20.Gregory. Vide Drusiú & Grotium in loc. & Mede in Act. 2.5. Vers. 3. Looke you out among you] The originall word signifies, survey the whole body of the people, and choose the best you can cull out, see Exod. 18.21. Men of honest report] Gr. witnessed unto, well testified of. Full of the holy Ghost] There is a threefold fulnesse of the Holy Ghost in Scripture, according to a threefold capacity of the receivers. 1. Plenitudo superabundantiae, of the fountaine in Christ, Ioh. 1.16. Col. 2.9. He had not the Spirit in measure but above measure. 2. Plenitudo eminentiae, of the streame: so the Apostles those extraordi∣nary Officers, had a greater fulnesse of the Spirit then any since. See the fifth and eighth verses. 3. Sufficienciae, of the vessell: this fulnesse has every member of the body of Christ. Vers. 14. That this Iesus of Nazareth] They speake so contemptuously of Christ,Calvin. as if the memory of him were detestable. Vers. 15. Saw his face as it had beene the face of an Angell] Hoc de nativa facie non dicitur, sed potius de praesenti vultu, Calvinus. This is not spoken of his naturall favour,Locutio reve∣rentiam notans non sine tremore incussam. Gen. 33.10. & in Estheris histo∣riae. Hic puto denotari fulgo∣rem hominis paulò post caelesti gloria illustrandi. Pricaeus in loc. vide Sanctium. but rather of his countenance for the present. Guilty persons faces are wont to be pale, they are wont to stammer in speaking, and shew other signes of trembling: Luke shewes that there was no such thing in Stephen, but rather a certaine majesty shined in him. See 1 Sam. 24.19. 2 Sam. 14.17.
CHAP. VII. Vers. 2. MEn, Brethren] That is, Brethren: for the word Men is added onely by an Hebrew elegancy and custome, as Gen. 13.8. For we are men brethren; our English renders it, for we are brethren, so verse 26 of this chapter. Vers. 6. Intreat them ill 400 yeares] So was the prophecy, Gen. 15.13. Jerome hath troubled himselfe and left the knot as fast as he found it:Concinnio meo iudicio illorum est sententia, qui Abrahamum patronymicè su∣mi asserunt pro Abrahamide hoc est, pro Iaco∣bo Abrahae nepote, Gen. 48.15. Ioseph po duobus filus E∣phraim & Ma∣nasse expresse usupatur. Gloss. Philol. Sac. vide Bezam. & de Dieu. so hath Austin and Gene∣brard, reckoning from the descent of Iacob, and others from Abrahams departure out of Haran, Gen. 12.4. but if we reckon from his 85 yeare, we shall finde a right com∣putation. From that time till the birth of Isaack were 15 yeares, and Abraham was a 100 yeares old when Isaac was borne to him, Gen. 21.5. From the birth of Isaac till the birth of his sonne Jacob were 60 yeares, Gen. 25.26. From the birth of Jacob till his descent into Egypt were 130 yeares, Gen. 47.9. From Jacobs descent unto his death were 17 yeares, Gen. 47.28. From his death till the death of Ioseph were 53 yeares, Gen. 41.46. & 45.6. & 50 26. From the death of Ioseph till the birth of Moses were 75 yeares, as is gathered from received Mr. Torshell. Chronologers: and from his birth to the departure of Israel from Egypt were 80 yeares, Exod 7.7. now the peoples depar∣ture and the giving of the Law were the same yeare. Vers. 14. Threescore and fifteene soules] Moses saith that Iacob came into Egypt with seaventy soules, Gen. 46.27. Stephen here mentions seventy five. Some say that Luke following the Hellenists so wrote; but it is wicked to thinke that Luke related the thing otherwise then it was done.Vide Bezam, Drusium & Capelli spicleg. & de Dieu. Drusium in 10 Deut. p. 567. & Quistorpium in loc. Probabilis valde mihi Bezae sen∣tentia videtur qui ex conjectu∣ra Cornelii Ber∣trami, collegae sui in ecclesia Genevensi Lucam putat non  sed  scripsisse. Glass. Philol. sac. l. 1. tract. 2. de textus Graeci in N, T. puritate. That which some urge, that the Apostles writing in Greeke used the Greeke version, is not alwayes true. Neither did Steven cite these things so. He disputed then before the Sanhedrin without doubt in Hebrew a po∣pular dialect, before whom he was to follow the Hebrew text or Chaldee Paraphrast. Some say the word  is corrupt; but such things must not easily be granted. Sixty sixe soules, which came out of Iacobs loynes, came with him into Egypt. The Wives of Iacobs Sonnes which came downe with him into Egypt were but nine, and so all Iosephs kindred which was sent for by him into Egypt, besides his father Iacob who is here excepted, was seventy five. Moses expresly distinguisheth be∣tweene those who rising out of Iacobs loynes did with him properly constitute the house and family of Israel, and betweene his sonnes wives which were brought in into Iacobs house. Wilhelmi Longi de annis Christi, l. 2. c. 4. See Dr. Halls Paraph in loc. Vers. 16. Carried over into Sichem] Gen. 33.19. The father of Sichem, so it should be translated; so Mark 15.40. Mary the mother of Iames; either  should be rendred by and joyned to the word , and so the sense is, that the Patriarkes were tran∣slated into Sichem by the Sichemites,Dr. Featlie. and laid in Abrahams sepulchre which he bought for mony, or  to be understood, and then the meaning will be this, that some of the Patriarkes were laid in Abrahams sepulchre, some in the field that Iacob bought. See Gen. 52.13Object. Gen. 33.1. The same field was bought by Iacob. Ans. The field was bought twice. 1. By Abraham, and then afterward recove∣red by Iacob that he might maintaine his Fathers possession.Perkins. vide Bezam & de Dieu. 2. Abraham (say some) is here put for his posterity. The question is whether Abraham or Iacob bought this field wherein they were buried. Calvins answer is somewhat too peremptory, that there is an error in all our Copies of the new Testament, and ought to be corrected: and Beza saith the like. Lyranus and Lorinus thinke to salve all by putting two names upon the same man, whom they will have sometime to be called Ephron, sometimes Hamor: but if this should be true, the Cave in the land of Sichemites and Hittites is not therefore all one.
Vers. 26. Sirs ye are Brethren] The words in the Greeke are ,Est quidem ge∣neralis inter ho∣mines coniun∣ctio, ut mutuam inter se humanitatem colere debeant, & abstinere ab injuriis omnibus: sed hoc indignius ac minus ferendum, quum se invicem laedunt qui arctiore vinculo inter se sunt conjuncti. Calvinus. men ye are brethren, ye are men, and ergo, should not strive one with another, but much more considering ye are brethren. Vers. 38. The Angell which spake to him in the mount Sinay] That is, Christ the Angell of the Covenant, say Interpreters generally. Lively Oracles] Because they were uttered by lively voyce,Esley. not that they did give life, 2 Cor. 3.7. Vers. 42. As it is written in the Book of the Prophets] For although the prophesie which is brought be taken out of the fifth of Amos 25. yet the booke of the Prophets is cited in generall, one part of which Amos did make.Rivet. The twelve minor Pro∣phets were joyned in one booke, least by their littlenesse they should be scattered or perish. Vers. 43. Yea, ye tooke up the tabernacle of Moloch,See de Dieu and Capellus on the place, and Mr. Selden de Dis Syris Syn∣tag. 2. c. 14.See M. Pemb. vindiciae gratiae p 107. and the starr of your god Rempham] That which the Prophet Amos 5.26. cals Chiun, that Steven cals Rempham: some would have this to be Hercules, whom they thinke to have beene a Gyant, from the Hebrew Rapha a gyant, others say it is the God of the Syrians, Rimmon. Verse. 51. Ye stiffenecked and uncircumcised in heart and eares, yea doe alwayes resist the Holy Ghost] Whence the Arminians conclude there is a power in a man to resist the Holy Ghost. It must be understood of the Resistere Spi∣ritus dicuntur, qui eum in Pro∣phetis loquentem contumaciter rejiciunt. Calvinus. Perkins on the third Chapter of Rev. and on Jude. ministery of the Prophets and Apo∣stles, who spake by the Spirit of God, and not of the Spirit himselfe, and them in some things, not in all. A thing is said to resist, quod non cedit tactui, there is a more generall, and a more immediate touch, when the Spirit comes neere the soule. Vers. 53. Who have received the Law by the disposition of Angels] Or in the midst of the rankes Id est, in san∣ctorum Angelorū Castris montem cirumdantibus, ut mediatoris Mosem alloquen∣tis majestatem testarentur, ac∣ceperunt. Rivetus. vide Calv. & Bezam.  pro inter, ostendit quam magnificè data sit lex inter multas Angelorum turmas.  vox est militaris, Jud. 3.33. Grotius in loc. of Angels, who accompanyed God their Soveraigne Lord, when he declared the Law. Vers. 54. Gnashed on them with their Teeth]  they gnashed with their teeth, as if they had been cutting with a Saw. Vers. 55. And saw the glory of God] A certain brightnesse, by which the Majesty of God was represented. See Exod. 24.17. and 34.18.22. Ezech. 2.1. Vers. 56. Standing on the right hand of God] To stand Stantem inquiunt viri magni quasi in suorum opem paratum, & alii stantem emphaticè, id est paratum, ad me in confessione veritatis confirmandum, Pricaeus in loc. vide de Dieu in loc. up is for ones help, plead ones cause, Psal. 35.2. Non sedentem, quomodo alibi describitur ad ostendendam regiam dignitatem, sed stantem quasi paratum in opem suorum is Grotius his note on the 55. verse. Vers. 58. At a young mans Feet] Ambrose and Theodorete think that Paul was but 20 yeares old at his first conversion, but the Greek word here hath not so much re∣spect unto his age and youth, as to his courage and fiercenesse as the word signifies, as Budaeus sheweth; Euripides calleth bold and insolent speech . Paul is termed by another word, Act. 9.13. Besides he spent his youth among the Jewes Doctor Willet upon the Epistle to the Rom. before his conversion, Act. 26.6. and had authority committed unto him, not incident to a very youth, Acts 26.9. Vers. 60. Lay not this sinne to their Charge] The word which he useth here, noteth such a kind of imputing or laying to ones charge,He grieveth more for their sinnes then his own wounds. Austen. as remaineth firme and stedfast for ever, never to be remitted. vide Bezam. Si Stephanus non or asset, ecclesia Paulum non habuisset. Austen thought God ordained Stevens Prayer to be a meanes of Pauls con∣version; see beginning of the next Chapter.
CHAP. VIII. Quem postea ri∣tum in ordina∣tione Pstorum observatum fuisse constat, non tanquam signum acramentale salutaris gratiae, quam propriè non significat, sed tanquam indicium peronae designatae & electae. Rivetus. Volebat omere Spiritum Sanctum quia vendere volebat Spiritum Sanctum.Vers. 18. HE offered them Mony] He would buy the Holy Ghost, because hee meant to sell it. Dictio illa E∣braeorum lingua proverbialis est. Dicunt etiam, neque pars neque hereditas. Drus. Prov. Class. 2. l. 3.Vers. 21. Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter] A kind of Proverbe among the Hebrewes. Vers. 23. For I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitternesse] That is, the extremi∣ty of it (the Hebrewes when they cannot expresse a thing fully, they put two words together to shew the full extent of it:) that is, in a state of sin and impenitency, which will at last bring forth the bitternesse of punishment. Vir Aethiops. Quomodo vir, si eunuch? nam eunuchi evirati; vir hoc loco non est nomen sexus, sed est locutio, ut vir Aegyptius in Genesi, vir Judaeus Zach. 8.23. in quo sermone Pleonasmus est; satis enim erat Aegyptius, Judaeus; talá sunt mulier ancilla in Salustio, vir piscator apud Herodotum. Drusius. vide Bezam.Vers. 27. A man of Ethiopia] Vers. 30. Vnderstandest thou what thu readest] q. d. to what purpose readest thou if thou be not carefull to understand what thou readest? Mr. Hildersam. Vers. 39. The Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip] Some understand it of an An∣gell of the Lord,Doctor Taylor. as Mr. Beza noteth; from Gaza to Azotus which was about thirty six miles. CHAP. IX. Metaphora de∣sumpta à bbus oratoribus qui cum stimulis recalcitrant, non stimulos sed scipsos laedunt. Adhiberi po∣test in illos qui vel Deo vel potentioribus frustrà & magno suo malo reluctantur. Job. 15.25. Est proverbialis locutio profanis etiam Scripto∣ribus non infrequens. Terentius Phorm. Act. 1. sc. 2. v. 27. Nam quae inscitia est adversus stimulum calces?Vers. 5. IT is hard for thee to kick against the Pricks] It is a proverbiall Speech used in Heathen writers also. Vers. 7. Hearing a voice] object. 22. Acts. 9. the Apostle saith expressely they heard not his voice which spake unto him; Paul did not onely see Christs person but heard a voice distinctly; the others heard a sound but not distinctly nor saw his person. Cajetane truly expounds it, the voyce which they heard was Pauls not Christs, see Calvin, and Doctor Reynolds on Psal. 110. pag. 381. Vox organi demonstrat nihil posse homnes nisi quatenus, eorum operâ De∣us pro su arbitrio utitur. Calvinus. Vas Electionis, id est, electum vocatur Paulus, quia instrumentum eximium fuit, per quod Christus latè in omnes Gentes, & Evangelii lucem, & sui nominis gloriam diffunderet. Sanctius.Vers. 15. For he is a chosen vessel unto me] That is, to publish among them the doctrin or the Gospell Rev. 2.13. He alludes to that state of Sanctification whereto the Lord had lately called him, whereby he made him a fit instrument for the glory of his name in the ministery of the Gospell. Scripturis sci∣licet collatis demonstrans. Estenim  verbum Architectm cum ab artificibus desumptum qui si aliquid compingant singulas partes invicem committunt, ut inter se aliae aliis ad amussim quadrent. Bowles de Pastore Evangelico.Vers. 22. Proving]  confirming, that is, as Beza notes, Collatis testimoniis demonstrans, demonstrating it by comparing of one Scripture with another, accor∣ding to the manner of Artificers, who being about to compact or joyne, are wont to fit all the parts amongst themselves, that every one of them may perfectly agree with each other.
Vers. 37. Whom when they had washed,Sol. ti sunt vete∣res Judaei, Grae∣i, Romani, cor∣pora defunctorum aquâ lavare, & lota deinceps ad sepidturam tiblis Canentibus efferre vide Schickard de Jure regio Ebrae∣orum,  c. 6. p. 157. Dieterici Antiquit. Bibl. vide Calvinum & Sanctium. they laid her in an upper chamber] The wash∣ings of the dead were usuall with many Nations. Vers. 40. Tabitha arise] Tabitha is rather a Syriack then Hebrew name, which Luke rendred in Greek Dorcas; both signifieth a Goat.Caprea. Gaudeant olim mulieres nomi∣nibus ab amabi∣libus et placiis animalibus petitis. Buxtorsius in Lexic. Talmud. Drcas est Caprea: sed vitae sanctitas, nominis parū hone∣sti maculam facile delevit. Calvinus. He useth the same words by which those that sleepe are raised, that he may shew with what easinesse the Divine power raiseth the dead. CHAP. X. Vers. 11. ANd saw heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending unto him as it had been a great sheet knit at the four Corners, and let down to the earth] The foure Corners of the sheet signified the foure parts of the world;Optimè linteum à quatuor angu∣lu expansum om∣nium generum animalia recipit; quia nulla Mundi pars ab Evangelii communione excludtur. Sanctius. all sorts of living creatures signified all sorts of men, the sheet the Church militant. Vers. 13. Kill and eat] The Pope may kill or slay and eat when he will or can; but if he be Peters successor, he must feed the sheep not feed on them. Vers. 15. What God hath cleansed] God is said to purifie things, that is, he pro∣nounceth things to be pure; pollute thou not] that is, imploy thou not as thou dost o∣ther things to common uses, but let it serve to holy uses onely.Perkins. Sensuus est, non esse nostrum probare vel damnare quicquam: sed sicuti unius Dei judicio stamus & cadimus, ita ipsum esse rerum omnium ju∣dicem. Calvinus in loc. Vers. 16. The vessel was received up again into heaven] to shew that in the end of the world the whole Church militant shall be transported into heaven and become triumphant. Vers. 24. Neare friends;] Or necessary friends; vocat Familia∣res amicos, sicuti apud Latinos necessarii vocantur, qui arotiore vinculo inter se conjuncti sunt. Calv. Amicus Latinè quoque dicitur necessarius, quod eo tam egeamus quàm aqua aut igni. Act. 10.24. Et amicitia eodem, sensu dicitur necessitudo. they seeme to take away the Sunne out of the world (said the heathen oratour) who take away friendship from the life of men, and we doe not more need fire and water then friendship. Vers. 31. Thy Prayer is heard] Heard effectually, the compound word here used signifies so, See Heb. 5.7. Vers. 41. Chosen before of God] See after 14.23.Praeordinatis à Deo magis sonat delectis ut fit, per suffragia. Graeca vox dicta est a porrigendis digitis, quo gestu suffragabatur olim populus. Erasmus. vide Bezam.  vox est nata quidem in Graeciae civitatibus, ubi manibus sublatis fiebant electiones magistra∣tuum: sed coepit paulatim produci longius ad quamvis electionem. Grotius in loc. CHAP. XI. Vers. 20. PReaching the Lord Iesus] Lay-men may Preach upon occasion to Churches disordered, and to persons not yet gathered to any Church.Mr. Pemble. Those which were dispersed upon the persecution raised about Saint Steven did publish the Gospell, where there was no Church Acts 8.4. and here. But how emi∣nent soever mens abilities are, how well soever known to themselves or the world, to undertake the instruction of the people, without publike order in publike Assem∣blies is a thing that no Scripture, no time, no custome of the Primitive Church will allow. Thorndikes Service of God at Religious Assemblies cap. 11. See more there. Vers. 24. He was a good man] This lookes both wayes. First upon this, he exhor∣ted. Secondly upon this, much people. Being a good man, his care was great to be diligent for a common good;Heror. and in as much as he was a good man of a gracious and holy carriage, he did much good, the people were the more affected with his Ministry.
See Grotius, and Drusius in loc. Fulk on Rhem. Testam. Ante hoc tem∣pus Christi sectatores dicebantur Discipuli. Hic verò primùm à Christi nomine nobilissimum Christianorum Cognomentum nacti sunt. Sanctiu.Vers 26. Christians] After the manner of the Graecians which named the Schol∣lers from their Masters, as Pythagoreans, Platauicks, Aristotelians, Epicureans: Be∣fore they were called Galileans, and Nazarens, as Suidas testifieth; the most honou∣rable name of Christians is in Italie, and at Rome (the Country and Sea of Antichrist) a name of reproach, and usually abused to signifie a foole or a dolt. CHAP. XII. Vers. 6. THe same night Peter was sleeping between two Souldiers, bound with two Chaines, and the Keepers before the doore kept the prison] All these circum∣stances wonderfully illustrate Gods power. Peter was carefully kept, might not sleep alone, and was bound in two Chains, and other keepers also set at the doores. Vers. 12. Where many were gathered together, praying] In the originall it is, Many thronged together to pray]. See Beza, Ga∣meron Calvin & Cartwright.Vers. 15 It is his Angell] Or a Messenger from him, as it is translated, Luke 7.24. CHAP. XIII. Vers. 1. Brought up with Herod] The Greeke word  signifieth him, who from his infancy was educated with another;Grotius in loc. as 2. Maccha. 9.29. So Plato, Plutark, and others use it, and so the Syriack takes it here. See Calvin and Cartwright on Rhem. Test.Vers. 2. As they Ministred to the Lord] Baronius and Bellarmine translate it, they sacrificing. But Casaubone Exercitat. 16. c. 41.B. Morton of the Masse l. 6. c. 2 Sect. 1. See Rainlds conference with Hart. p. 869. Causab. ibid. vide Bezam, et Grotium. Fulk on Rhem. Test. in loc. vide. Quistorp. in loc. (who for Greek-learning, hath scarce had his equall in this our age) saith  hath been used ecclesiastically, for whatsoever religious ministration (even for sole praying when there is no occasion of sacrifice) and he in∣stanceth in the fathers mentioning the morning and evening  of the Church. Whensoever it is applyed to sacred ministery and used absolutely, it is alwayes taken for the act of sacrificing. Bellarm. l. 1. de Missa. c. 13. But therein he much mistakes; for in the example which he addes, Luke 1.23.  is not a sacrifice but a gene∣rall word, and comprehends all Priestly and Leviticall ministeries; but it fell to Za∣charies lot to offer incense; not to sacrifice. Here the Greek word used by the Evange∣list signifies to minister, or serve in any publike function, either of the Church, or of the common-wealth. So doth Saint Paul call the civill magistrates by a name derived of this verb, or from whence this verb is derived  Ministers, Rom. 13.6. Therefore the vulgar translation, hath better translated the participle in this place generally ministring then Erasmus doth by a speciall kind of ministring, that is, sacrificing. Vers. 15. And after the reading of the Law and the Prophets] From this place and that 15.21. It is collected that in the time of Christ, and the Apostles, that division of the Law into 54. De Dieu. in loc. or as some say Drus. in Act. 5.32. 53. Paraschas or Sections was in use. They read a Section every Sabbath (saving that they joyned two of the shortest twice toge∣ther) that they might yeerly read over all the Law. To these, so many Sections se∣lected here and there out of the Prophets answered. Vide Bezam. Graecè majorem habet emphasin & gratiam vebum Compositum, quo Dei indulgentia exprimitur, in sustinendo populo, quem pervicacem & immorigerum esse cibat. Calvinus in loc.Vers. 18. Suffered be their manners] He suffered the ill manners, the word is signi∣ficant. Vers. 21. By the space of forty yeares] See 1 Sam 13.1.
Vers. 33. As it is also written in the second Psalme] Some hold that the division of the Scripture into Hotting. Thes. Philol. Sect. 5. Chapters is neither divinely inspired,Vetus lectio, in Psalmo primo. Nam antiquitùs, qui nunc primus & secundus, unus idemque Psalmus erat. Drus. nor very ancient if we except the almes, the distinction of which into a certain number and order is very anci∣ent as we may see here. In the other Bookes the mention of Chapters followed long after. For Sixtus Senensis Bibl. S. l 5. Vide Geneb. Chron denyeth that any book written in Hebrew or Greek before 500 yeeres contained the distinction of Chapters. Some ascribe this to Hugo Cardinall, others to others. This day have I begotten thee] Christ is said in the day of his resurrection,Doctor Sclater Non quod tum demum coepit esse filius Dei — & ab eo gigni, sed quia tum Deus potentissimè per resurrectionem declaravit Christum esse silium suum. Cameron to be be∣gotten of his Father declarativè, because then he was most evidently shewne to bee the Sonne of God. Vers. 34. The sure mercies of David] Greek, the holy things of David, so mercies that they shall be sanctified. Vers. 35. Thou shalt not suffer thine holy one to see corruption] Yet presently vers. 36. He addeth that therein was verified the Prophesie in Psalme 16.10. implying there∣by that he descended in some sort for the time into corruption, although in that time he did not suffer corruption. As the word Shacath which the Prophet used in the Psalme, doth signifie as well the pit or place of corruption as the corruption it selfe: so also the word  whereby Luke expresseth the same is used by the Greek inter∣preters of the old Testament, to signifie not the corruption it selfe alone,Bishop Vsher. vide Bezam in v. 34. but the very place of it likewise, as Psal. 7.15. and 9.16. Prov. 26.27. Vers. 40. In the Prophets] That is, in one of the Prophets, viz. Hab. 1.5.All the lesser Prophets were joyned together into one Booke, least otherwise they should have been lost being so small. Vide Dru∣sium. Et Quistorpium. Vers. 42. Preached to them the next Sabbath] Gr.  in the space betwixt it, and the next Sabbath. Vers. 43. Religious proselytes] This word is used of Luke indifferently to note an earnestnesse both in the true and false religion. See 50. v.Cartwright. See him also on the 17. of Acts. 23. Vers. 46. It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken to you] Because the Jewes were the people that God had owned among all Nations, they had a dou∣ble priviledge; before Christs comming, they were soli the onely people to whom the Gospell was Preacht; after his comming they were primi the first invited guests. Vers. 48. As were ordained to eternall life] The Syriack hath it positi put.See Beza Cameron and Ames his Co∣ronis. Hee was ignorant (saith de Dieu) of that which the Heretickes of these dayes have dreamed, that by  are understood those which should be apt in themselves, and should dispose themselves to eternall life. Vers. 51. But they shook off the dust of their feet against them] It was a military signe of old, whereby they knew that the enemy was approaching for their destruction, when they saw the horses approaching neere unto them and raising the dust with their feet against them, then they might know their destruction was at hand.Weemes. Vide Calvinum, & Sanctium in loc. So the Jewes might know by the Apostles shaking off the dust of their feet, that there was no peace for them any more, but their destruction was at hand. CHAP. XIV. Vers. 9. PErceiving that he had faith to be healed] He perceived it by his countenance, he looked so cheerefully, and greedily upon him,Mr. Fenner. Arcano Spiritus instinctu pate∣facta fuit Paulo Claudi fides, sicuti ille unus dux & magister Apostolis fuit ad edenda miracula. Calvinus in loc. as if he drunk in eve∣ry point that he said. Vers. 23. And when they had ordained them Elders] The Greeke word saith one, Second reply against Whitgift. 136. See Cart∣wright also on this place; and Amesii Bellam. Enerv. tomo. 2. p. 97.98. vide Bezam. Acts. 10.41. signifies to ordaine by voyces. The Graecians used in their Elections,Cartwright. the cere∣mony
of holding up their hand, to testifie their liking of him that was chosen; the Romans going from one side unto another, whereof came pedibus ire in senteniam? The word doth not necessarily signifie a choosing by suffrage, but a choosing by and with authority and power, and is attributed to the holy Ghost, choosing of the A∣postles Vide Qui∣storpium. Our translation is true ordained by Election, and answereth the Greeke word, which we translate. Doctor Fulke, See More in him. elsewhere, where no suffrage of the people can have any place, and so here it signifieth; for it is attributed to Paul and Silos, not the people; they were pre∣sent not to certifie or disannull, but to yeeld to and accept of the choice which they should make. CHAP. XV. Vers. 9. PVrifying their hearts by faith] The heart is purified by the bloud of Christ which faith layeth hold on. Acts 26.18. which are sanctified by faith. Vers. 24. Ye must be circumcised] See 16. Chap. 3. Circumcision was taken away as a sacrament,Dr. Taylor. but it was not yet honourably buried, and therefore it remained onely as a ceremony. Vers. 28. It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us] As being assured of the certaine direction of the holy Ghost. Vide Bezam.Necessary things] Not as they were under the Law, but in respect of the edificati∣on of the weake. Vers. 29. From bloud, and from things strangled, and from fornication] The Gen∣tiles are forbid the eating of bloud and things strangled,Cum dupliciter possit comedi sanguis, vel in∣tra ipsum ani∣mal, cum adhuc carni admixtus est, vel extra animal cum fusus est; primus modus sub suffocato continetur, secundus sub voce sanguinis intelligitur. Rivetus. because of the cohabitation of the Jewes, who were to be forborne while the Temple stood, and untill that gene∣ration were dead, which sometimes saw the ceremonies of force. The reason of the conjunction of fornication with things indifferent, viz. bloud and things strangled: was the generall account that the Gentiles made of fornicati∣on;Perkins on Rev. 2.15. and in his Cases of Con∣science. See Elton on the seventh Commandement. not the Councels own opinion. Because all these did equally disturbe the Church and stir up strife, between the Gentiles converted and the weake Jewes. Bloud was forbidden after Christs ascension onely in regard of offence and for a time, so long as the weake Jew remained weak, not in regard of conscience. 1. Cor. 6.12. The Apostles forbid fornication amongst certain things indifferent, not that they judged it an indifferent thing, but because it so seemed to those Gentiles. And this seemes to have been the opinion of the Corinthians.Non est flagiti∣um mihi crede adolescentulum scortari. Mitio Terentianus. Eadem quae hic sacra Synodus, vetuit etiam suis Impostor Mahomed, nisi quod loco scortationis carnem porcinam nominet. de Dieu in v. 20. Amongst the Papists, simple for∣nication is accounted a veniall sinne; and those that are carnall among us take forni∣cation, committed by a young man especially, but for a trick of youth. of  and  acetum. Plus significat quam dissensionem, à  irrito. provoc, exacerbo. Significat illos usque ad commotionem hac in re dissensisse & adeo ut divellerentur. Apo∣stoli erant, sed tamen homines erant. Erasmus ad vrbum, facta est igitur exacerbatio Piscat.Vers. 39. And the contention was so sharp between them] The word signifies such sharpnesse as there is in Vineger. It is used by Physitians, to signifie the sharpnesse of the feverish humour when it is acting in a fit. Their dissention put them as it were into the fit of a fever.
CHAP. XVI. Vers. 3. ANd took and circumcised him] He was not circumcised;Grotius. because as Tal∣mudists say, it was not lawfull for the mother to circumcise her son his Father being unwilling, for the authority of the Father prevailed. He was not circumcised because it was necessary, or because the religion of that signe yet continued, but that Paul might avoid the scandall; the thing was free in re∣spect of God, circumcision was not now a Sacrament,Calvinus. Sepelienda syna∣goga cum honore. as it was to Abraham and his posterity, but an indifferent ceremony which might increase charity, but did not exer∣cise piety; Paul would not circumcise Titus. Vers. 13. Where Prayer was wont to be made] where there was taken to be a Proseu∣cha a place for prayer without the City.Ede ubi consist∣as, in qua te quaero Proseucha Juven. So Luke 6.12. in Proseucha Dei. Drusius thinks it is here to be taken for a place, Mede in Acts 16.13. see more there, vide Grotium & de Dieu in loc. The Syriacke hath, Quia ibi conspiciebatur domus orationis; the Arabick, Locus orationis. Verse. 14. Whose heart the Lord opened] The metaphore is taken from opening a door or lock; and he that is the opener, is he that hath the Key of David, Rev. 3.7. Vers. 16. A spirit of divination] Or of Python the Epithete of Apollo who gave an∣swer to these that sought him, , whence he is called Apollo Pythius,Id erat nomen draconis, quem jaculis suis con∣fecit Apollo, unde & ipse Pythius dictus. Deinde spiritus ille quo afflati praedicebant futura, Pytho. vocari coeptus est, Erasmus. vide de Dieu in loc. and Delphicus, from that famous place whose name also was Pytho. Beza. Vers. 22. Rent off their clothes] Of the Apostles, not their own. Erasmus saith the words may be taken either way; but Calvin, and Beza dislike that.Graecus anceps est sermo utrum magistratus lace arint Apostolorum tunicas, an suas ipsorum, Eras. Beza & Calvinus contra. vide de Dieu & Sanctium. Vers. 31. Beleeve in the Lord Iesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house] Shall one be saved by anothers faith? He shall not inherite eternall life unlesse he beleeve himselfe, but he speakes here of being brought under the onely meanes of salvation, Act. 28 28 Heb. 2.3. CHAP. XVII. Vers. 11. THse were more noble] Gr. Better borne and bred, of a more noble dispo∣sition. The Country towne of Berea,Laudo Cl. Bezam quod , com∣parativè potius quam superlativè acceperit, & de animo potius quàm genere aut prosapia, secus quam vulg. & Eras. fecerunt. de Dieu in loc. was more zealous and religious then the rich and stately City of Thesslnica. Vers. 18 Encountred him] The greeke word is taken from warres, as appeares,Congressi sunt cum. eo. Luk 12.31. so Polybius often useth it, whom Luke loves to follow, Grotius in loc. What will this babler say] Seminiverbius, this sower of words say; The Greeke word signifies such a one as they that stood in the corne-markets and gathered up the corne that fell besies the sacks in emptying, as Casaubone observes: that is, avicula est ejus nominis sic ap∣pellata à legen∣dis sive colligen∣lis seminibus, quasi seminilegam dicas: caeterùm in proverbii usu est de garrulo ac futili, nihilque homine, qui quam ex trivio, vel ex auditionibus nescio quibus adeptus est scientiam, passim deblaterat. Drus. Prov. class. 2. l. 4.  propriè aves quae sita depascuntu, Grotius. vide de Dieu & Sanctium in loc. a man of no worth. Some thinke it is an allusion to little birds which pick up the seed sowne, yet are troublesome with their continuall chirping. A setter forth of strange Gods] of strange or new devils or new gods (for the Gods of the Gentiles were devils) and the word  is of the middle signification, and signifieth either a good Angell or a bad, B Smith. Vers. 21. Spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell or to heare some new thing] To
which end they often met in barbers shops,Archaeol. Attic. l. 1. c. 3. where all the newes that was going in those dayes was currant; hence we say, verba in tonstrinis proculcata. Vers. 22. Too superstitious] The comparative degree, though mostly it increase, yet it is sometimes terminus diminuens; somewhat superstitious, and he puts a quasi to it to make it yet more milde,. Quasi religiosiores. Be∣za. Quasi su∣perstitiotiores, vulg. Supersti∣tion quasi supra statutum, more then is appointed by the Law of God, Isid. as it were somewhat superstitious; the Athenians had teretes aures smooth eares; yea and the word it selfe hath an Euphemismus too: for , is one that feares the Gods. They worshipt indeed devils, Moses called them so, so doth the Psalmist. Dr. Clerk. Vers. 23. And beheld your devotions] The Rhemists translate  here Idols, according to the vulgar which renders it simulachra which is too narrow;Qui simulachra vertit nimis id angustè fecit, cum quicquid religiosè colitur eâ voce in cla∣datur, Beza. Pricaeus. Non laudo autem quod Syrus & Arabs  templa verterint. Beza sacra vestra. Vulgatus & Aethiopicus non malè simulachra vestra; viderunt enim  propriè esse id ipsum quod colitur, quae quidem apud Athenienses erant simulachra: malim tamen numina vestra reddere. vt 2 Thes. 2.4. de Dieu in loc. our transla∣tion is fitter; the word Devotion is indifferent either to true or false devotion, & so is the Greeke. The originall word signifies whatsoever men doe reverence for religions sake. The Dictionaries say, it signifieth the formes of worship or devotions, as well as the thing worshipped. To the unknowne God] Lucian saith the neighbour Countries would sweare by him unknowne at Athens; some thinke they would not have their Gods knowne lest enemies by Magicke should get them away,Alexand. ab A∣lexandro l. 6. c 4. Alij Athenienses gravi peste oppressos, cùm colendis frustra Diis patriis se fatigassent, timerentque ne quod numen praetermissum à se esset,  aram hanc struxisse volunt, Heinsius. hence they chained their Gods, Ma∣crobius. Vers. 25. Life and breath] That is, the breath of life, as Gen. 2.7. see Iob. 3.5. It runs smoothly in the originall. Vers. 28. And move] Which is to be understood as well of the motions of the minde in thoughts and desires as of the body. And have our being] This is the meaning of it, we have not onely had our being from him at the first, but our being is in him. We have our being in him as the beames in the Sun and an accident in the subject. Vers. 30. God winked at] , That is, lightly passing over: God regarded not, as the old translation, est dis∣simulare, quasi non videas, Gro∣tius. vid. Deut. 32.1.3, 4. Doctissimis vi∣ris qui cum ve∣tere despicens verterunt, nullo modo assentien∣dum putamus; optimè recentior Interpres, connivendo dissimulans, Pricaeus. he did looke over it, he did not vouchsafe to looke or set his eyes upon it, cared not what became of men that lived in those dayes; for that that is the meaning of the phrase appeareth by the next words,Hildersam. and by the contrary, Psal. 34.5. Some thinke it notes the indulgence of God, that is, he did not deale severely or strictly with them when they sinned, because they had no meanes or so little meanes to keepe them from sinne, rather in those times wherein there see Calvin, & de Dieu in loc. was so much blind∣nesse in the world God let men goe on in their sinne. God had no regard to the Hea∣thens, he dealt with them as with Cain, had no regard to their sacrifices. CHAP. XVIII. Vers. 4. ANd perswaded the Iewes] Exhorted so that he perswaded, and so the word signifies. Vers. 10. In this City] That is, many that are to be converted and brought unto the faith.Perkins. Vers. 12. Gallio] So called from his milkie whitenesse.Sic dictus fuit à lacteo cand re unde & Gallos dictos esse plerique statuunt, Pasor. Vers. 14. Lewdnesse] The greeke word translated lewdnesse here doth elegantly
set forth the disposition of a lewd man,Burrh. on Hos. such a one as is easily drawne to any wicked way. Lewd comes from Loedan an old Saxon word, that is, of a servile disposition. Vers. 26. Expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly] What if I should say, he learned of them to mend the manner of his preaching?Heron. I am sure there is nothing against it in the text. Beza expounds it, the way which leadeth to God. CHAP. XIX. Vers. 2. WE have not so much as heard, whether there be any holy Ghost] It is meant in respect of the miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost;Vide Bezam & Calvinum. See John 7.34. for it cannot be supposed that these being now entred into Johns Baptisme could be so grossely igno∣rant, as not to know that there was a third person in the Trinity. Vers. 3. Vnto what then were ye Baptized] That is, into what doctrine were ye initiat∣ed, and instructed? Vnto Iohns Baptisme] into the 1 Cor. 10 2 doctrine which Iohn sealed by Baptisme. This interpretation frees this hard Text from the false Collection of A∣nabaptists; who hence would gather, that those were by Paul rebaptized,Doctor Taylor. who were formerly Baptized by Iohn. It cannot be proved that any which were once Baptized by John were ever Bapti∣zed againe. But the contrary may easily be gathered:vide Bezam. Doctor Fulke. for seeing our Saviour Christ Baptized none himselfe; it will follow, that the Apostles were either not Baptized at all, or else Baptized onely with Johns Baptisme. Vers. 4. Iohn Baptized with the Baptisme] That is, taught the doctrine of Re∣pentance. Vers. 5. When they heard] That is, by Iohns Ministery. Baptized into the name] viz. By Iohn, not by Paul.Textus Graecus (ut optimè no∣tavit ac declaravit doctissimus interpres (Beza scilicet) ex Philippo Marnixio, & ante utrumque, Lucas Lessius in eundem locum) non dicit istos Ephesios denuò fuisse baptizatos, sed quod Paulus eos docuisset, illos qui Iohannem Baptistam audierant, fu∣isse Baptizatos in nomen Iesu Christi: ut ipsis ostenderet, malè se Iohannis doctrinam intellexisse, quod dicerent, se ne quidem audivisse esse Spiritum Stactum. Rivetus in Catholico Orthodoxo. vide Grotium. Aliqui objiciunt Paulū baptizasse eos qui an∣tea Johannu baptismo fuerant baptizati. Paulus non eosdem iterum aquâ tinxit aut aspersit, qui fuerant tincti, sed alios; vel ille Baptismus intelligendus est de miraculosa Spiritus Dei donatione cum manuum impositione, quae totares illic Baptismus appel∣latur  Danaeus. Vers. 19. Curious arts] That is Magick, as the Syriack and Arabicke rightly ren∣der it, whence the proverbe Ephesiae literae. fifty thousand pieces of Silver] That is,Rainold. de lib. Apoc. ex Beza. vide Grotium. Syrus substituit, multi vero incantatores magi. Latè quidem patet vitium Curiositatis; quod diligentiae per excessum opponi∣tur: quando quis plus cognoscere laborat, quàm expedit, vel etiam quod sibi non expedit. Per hanc tamen Curiositatem Ephesino∣rum, de quibus hic agitur, magiam intelligi, ipsorum conditio persuadet. Ephesina enim civitas magicis incantationibus, Apol∣lonio Thanaeo illas ibi profitente, fuit dedita. Dilher. Ecloc. Sac. Dictum. 11. 6250. pound Sterling. vide de Dieu. Vers. 24 Silver shrines for Diana] Shrines or Temples, some Casaub. aedi∣culae exargento vel auro factae, in quas reconde∣bantur Dianae parva simula∣chra, quae vulgò ab alijs emebantur qui Dianam Ephesinam visebant, & fortasse reserebant istae aediculae Templi Ephesini artifici∣um. Casaub. notae. Vide Grotium. say little houses or Caskets to put the idoll in; others think the Temple Diana was engraven on their Coyne, as Beza, Imagunculae seu nummi quidam (saith he) qui a figura Templi quam re∣praesentabant Templa appellabantur, The Arabicke and Aethiopicke translations (saith de Dieu) have Images of Silver. Vers. 27. All Asia] Vniversalitie a Cloake for errour; but we must not follow a multitude to doe evill.Hoc supersti∣tiosis omnibus commune perfugium est, multitudinis consensum obtendere. Calvinus. Vers. 32. The Assembly] hic coetum quemvis significat, cùm concio Latinè non sit nisi à magistratu secundum leges convocata multitudo. Grotius
Vers. 33. And they drew Alexander out of the multitude] the same Alexander (as it is thought) was after a persecuter of Paul,An is sit Alex∣ander de quo alibi meminit Paulus, incertum est: conjectura tamen mihi videtux probabilis. Quod si credimus eum esse, discamus ab hoc sor∣midabili exemplo solicite ambulare, ne in similem defectionem abripiat nos Satan. Nam qui martyrio propinquus erat, perfidiū & sceleratum apostatam factum esse videmus. Calvinus in loc. 2 Tim. 4.14. Vsurest pecu∣liari vero  quae vox composita est ex  templum &  purgo si ve verro, autoribus Hesychio, Etymologico & Suida. Solert autem qui impensius dediti sunt alicui divae, aram illius varijs ornamentorum generibus cohonestare. Erasmus. vide Grotium.Vers. 35. A worshipper] Or the Temple Keeper. CHAPTER. XX. Dicitur Secūdus quasi sectus à primo, à secando, vel à sequendo quòd primum sequatur; ponitur pro prospero & soelici, ut navigatio secunda quae conatui & voto obsequitur, res secundae quae pro desiderio nostro sequuntur. Hinc secundare, obsecundare.Vers. 4. SEcundus] Calvinus hunc locum interpre∣tatur, ut parum subsidij ad Do¦minicam solen∣nitatem astruendam affere videatur  interpretantur quidam diem Sabbathorum, non pro primo sed imo hebdo∣madis die: quasi Lucas nihil altud significasset per illam phrasin, quàm quòd quodam die Sabbatorum, aut Septimanae conve∣nissent, quando Paulus praesto fuit; sed Sabbatum pro tota hebdomado ibi accipitur, & tunc uno aut primo Sabbatorum idem va∣lebunt, in quo sensu phrasis illa alibi occurrit. velut marc. c. 16. v. 2. & 9.  pro , id est, unā per primā expo∣nit evangelista: atque ita Graeci Patres, Apostolorum temporibus maximè vicint,  interpretantur; reque  pro  usquam legitur in N. T. Theophilus. Philo. Kuriaces.Vers. 7. Vpon the first day of the week] This is a better Translation then that, Some one day of the week.] The Hebrewes use often by one to signifie the first, as Gen. 1.5. and 10.25. the Greek words are an Hebraisme. That day of meeting was proper to Christians, 1 Cor. 16.2. It is called the Lords day, Rev. 1.10. Perkins Cases of Conscience, of which Chry∣sostome saith, media nocte vi∣gilabant ut eos condemnent qui media dic dor∣miunt. Continued his speech untill midnight] Perkins notes two things from this. 1. That the night mentioned here was a part of the seventh day of Pauls abode at Troas: for if it were not so, then he had stayed at least a night longer, and so more then seven dayes, because he should have stayed part of another day. 2. That this night was part of the Sabbath which they then kept, for they kept it in manner of a Sab∣bath in the exercises of piety, and viz. in preaching, yea, he continues there till the rest was fully ended. Vers. 21 Testifying hath to the Jewes, and also to the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Iesus Christ] Here is laid down the compleat duty of a Mini∣ster. 1. To preach repentance which a man must perform to God, whom by his sins hee hath grievously offended. 2. To preach faith in Christ, and free forgivenesse, and perfect salvation through faith in Christ, to all that shall truly beleeve in him; and after to declare unto man his righteousnesse, to shew that though a man in himselfe be evill,Perkins. yet in Christ he is righteous and just, and by him so justified, as he is no more a sinner in the presence of God. Vers. 22. I goe bound in the Spirit] There are three interpretations of that speech; one is of Camerarius and Beza, who interpret it of the Holy Ghost, viz. That Paul should say he goes by his impulse. 2.Pricaeus. in loc. He most ap∣poves of the first exposition. The other of Grotius, to perceive things future as present which interpretation, 1 Thes. 3.4. favours, a like speech of the same Paul. 3. Of Heinsius who saith that Paul was sadned in Spirit for the bonds he was to suffer; the Greek speech seemes to him to signifie so much. Vers. 24. Finish my course with joy] There is 1. Cusus naturae, 2. Nequitiae, 3. Pietatis, 4. Muneris; the fourth course of every ones particular calling, is principally here in∣tended. To finish ones course] Is to take up all those duties which belong to us, to performe the same with cordiall integrity, and persevere, even to the end of the goale. To finish it with joy] is so to live and worke as to meet with joy at the end of our work.
Vers. 27. All the Counsell of God] Not his secret decrees and purposes, but his re∣vealed will, specially his Counsell and purpose touching the way and meanes of sal∣vation by Christ, and Christ alone. Vers. 28. This verse may be stiled Saint Paul his Trumpet, not that where of hee speaketh; 1 Cor. 14.8. which sendeth out an uncertaine sound, but like the Trum∣pet of Sinay, wherein there is both Clangor, and horror, Ezod. 19.16 so vehemently it ratleth out this Episcopall, this Paschall Cantell. First intrinsecally, Take heed to your selves,] For qui sibi nequam, cui bonus? Secondly, extrinsecally, take heed to the flock] yea, to the whole flock] As Ezech. 31.39. to strengthen the weake, to heale the infected, to splint the sprained, to reduce the wandring, to seek the lost, to cherish the strong, this is the Clangor of the Trumpet. Sed sonitus buccinae adhuc crescit in majus & prolixius intendiiur, Exod. 19.19. And still Saint Paul raiseth his blast by a three∣fold inforcement. 1. Expressing the burden ad pascendum. 2. The authour Spirit. 3. The quality of the flock, populum acquisitionis, 2 Pet. 1.9. Purchased with bloud,Barlow in con∣cioe ad mini∣stros Scoticos. with Gods bloud, with Gods own bloud, & this is the horror of the Trumpet. Now then let him that hath an eare, heare what the Spirit speaketh unto the Churches.] Or ra∣ther soundeth out to Churchmen; for there is no Clergy man (unlesse he hath drunk the Cup of slumber to the very dregs, Esay 51.17.) but the voyce of this Trumpet will be unto him as Samuels Message, 1 Sam. 3.8. making his two eares to tingle, and his heart strings to tremble. Vers. 30. Also of your own selves shall men arise] Nicolaitanes, Rev. 2.6. speaking perverse things] Teaching those things which swerve from that which is right; so  is taken Luk 23.2. and Acts 13.8.10.Grotius. The Nicolaitanes held that marriage was a meer humane institution, and such a one as did not bind mens consciences, that it was lawfull to eat of the sacrifices of the Gentiles, to draw away disciples after them] Therefore they teach things pleasing to the flesh, that so they may draw them whom the discipline of the Church offends to their party. CHAP. XXI. Vers. 1. AFter we were gotten from them] The Greek word signifies, that they were as it were by force pulled away,Avulsi ab eis. Beza. it significantly expresseth their mutuall affections. Vers 3 Now when we had discovered Cyprus] A Mariners terme; they use this ex∣pression still when they would shew that they see a place,Est vox nautica which before was hid from them. Vers. 13. For I am ready]  I have my selfe in readinesse. Vers. 20. Thousands]  ten thousand. Not all of the Church of Ierusalem,Eadem locutio 2 Cor. 12.14. 1 Pet. 4.5. & Dan. 3.18. Grotius. but come up thither from forraigne parts, and far countries at this feast of Pentecost, Chap. 20.16. according to the Law. CHAP. XXII. Vers. 3. BRought up in this City at the feet of Gamaliel] The master sate in a higher place, the disciple did lye upon the ground at the feet of the master.Sedebat magi∣ster in loco edi∣tiore, at discipu∣lus dicebatur prostratus sive jacens in solo, ad pedes magistri. de Dieu. Ad pedes dicit, ideo quod discipuli sedebant multum infra ma∣gistros: proximi verò magistro ij quorum maximi profectus. vide Deut. 33.5. Grotius. Was zealous towards God Zelo accensus Dei, Sic Syrus, Arabs & Aethiopicus quoque legerunt. Sic Chrysostomus & omnia Graeca exemplaria quae videre contigit. Ludov. de Dieu.] The zeale which the Israelites had, was of the Law; the knowledge which they wanted was of the true meaning of it. Vers. 16. Wash away thy sinnes.] That is, Sacramentally. The Text joyneth with the
Sacrament invocation of the name of the Lord, whereunto salvation is promised (Rom. 10.13. Ioel. 2.22.Fulke on the Rhem. Test.) To wash away his sins. Therefore this place maketh no∣thing for the Popish Heresie, that the Sacraments give grace ex opere operato, of the work wrought. Vers. 25. A man that is a Romane] They had a law, that a Citizen might not bee tortured any way,12 Tables. but by the decree of the people. Vers. 28. With a great summe]  Because this sum was gathered head by head.Multa summa Novè. Nec enim  in re nummaria sed in oratione pro summa dici consuevit. Beza. in loc. CHAPT. XXIII. Vers. 3. THou whited Wall] A fit similitude to expresse wicked men, who for ho∣nour or profit sake, pretend to be Godly. Intrrsum turpes, speciosi pelle decora. Sanctius thinkes it is a proverb among the Hebrewes, as whited Sepulchre. Scio multos esse qui existimarunt id Apostolum dixisse per iro∣niam, quia cum inter Pharisaeos vixisset ipse Pharisaeus, quamvis potuit ipsi ignota esse persona, non po∣tuit tamen ex consessu, non ju∣dicare, quinam esset inter sacer∣dotes Pontifex maximus, cum praesertim antea dixerit sedisse illum de quo lo quebatur, ut ju∣dicaret. Sed id mihi veri similius est, audivisse quidem Paulum vocem emissam ab aliqus ex his qui ad judicandum sederant (venisse enim sa∣cerdotes & omne cncilium constat ex cap. 22. in fine) neque tamen scivisse à quonam illorum vox profecta fuerat. A Pontifice autem profectam non putavit, cum propter ejus autoritatem, à qua indignum erat tam praecipitem offensionis significationem edi, tum propter simulalam saltem sactitatem à qua tam iniqua vox non videbatur eventura. Rivet. Isag. ad Sac. Scrip. ex Sanctio.Vers. 5. I wist not brethren that he was the high Priest] Some say he doth as much as confesse his fault, by excusing it with the plea of ignorance, alleaging that place of Scripture, which might give them to understand, that he was better seen in the Law, then that he would have so spoken, if he had known the quality of the person to whom he spake. Others say his meaning was, that he did not regard or consider him as the high Priest: others that he did not account him worthy to be the high Priest: others, that he plainely meant he did not know him to be the high Priest, for it was possible hee might mistake. He acknowledged him not, but knew him rather to be an usurper, which made him use that boldnesse. Mr. Perkins. His meaning was (saith Grotius) that he is not the High Priest, or chiefe of the Senate, who purchased such a dignity; for Paul (saith he) had learned this of Gamaliel, that a Judge who shall give money for obtaining of a place of honour, is neither indeed a Judge, nor to be honoured; but, to be esteemed an asse; Calvin saith it is an ironicall speech, and that the meaning is, ego, fratres, in hoc homine nihil agnoseo Sacerdotale. Brethren I acknowledge nothing belonging to a High Priest in this man. See Doctor Prideaux on this Text, p. 5. to 9. And Doctor Willet on 22. of Exodus. Quest. 52. and Rivet on 23. of Exod. 28. Jun. Paralel. 1. Paralel. 98. Bezam. in loc. Vers. 6. But when Paul perceived that the one part were Saduces, and the other Pharisees] Paul wanted not humane prudence; and therefore makes use of the differences of his enemies. Of the hope and resurrection of the dead] The sense is, concerning the hope of the reward, which the just shall receive in another world, which therefore of the Hebrews is called seculum mercedis. For then shall every one receive a reward, worthy of his deeds: The Sadducees denyed that, and they denyed also the punishment of all sinne and wickednesse. Drusius de tribus sectis Judaeorum l. 3. De praemio ac poena. Vers. 8. Angell nor Spirit] Lukes true meaning is (saith Calvin) that the Angels, yea all Spirits were denyed by the Sadducees; some interpret Spirit the immortall soul of man. Others the Holy Ghost, which the 9 verse of this Chapter confirmes, saith Drusius De Tribus Sectis Judaeorum l. 3. Vox  (de qua quae magni viri protulerunt, confiteor non usque quaque probari mihi) non tantum magnatibus tribuitur, sed & cujus∣vis ordinis hominibus quos amici ejusmodi elogio honestare voluerint. Significat autem non ut recentior, potentissimus, sed op∣timus, ut optimè heic Luc. 1, 3. & infra 26.25. vertebat vetus Interpres; cujus eruditionem centenis aliquot locis ille alter ne∣quaquam assecutus videtur. Pricaeus in loc.Vers. 26. Vnto the most excellent.]
CHAP. XXIV. Vers. 2. SEeing that by thee wee enjoy great quietnesse] It is one of the rhetoricall pre∣cepts by praising the Judge, to make him benevolous to a mans selfe, which Paul was not ignorant of, as appeares vers. 10. and 26.2.3. Vers. 5. A pestilent fellow]  a pestilence;Pestem) sicut scelus pro scele∣rato dicitur pestiferum non expressa empha∣si. Beza. foolish Tertullus that mistooke the antidote for the poyson; the remedy for the disease! Doctor Hall. A ring-leader  Principem. Id est, quasi primos ordines ducentem, seu primipilarem. Est enim hoc vocabulum militare. Beza in loc. Sic vocantur qui in arte, qui in cōvivio, qui in judicio aut re quavis alia primarium locum obtinent. Grotius.] The word signifies the first man in his ranke, a military word. Qui primus ad frontem aciei constitutus est. Hesychius. Vers. 14. Written in the Law and Prophets] That is, to hold and imbrace the same faith, which was embraced by the Saints, and Servants of God, in ancient times;Mr. Perkins. and which was written by Moses, and the Prophets. Vers. 16. Alwayes] Or throughout, in all cases, by all meanes, or at all times;. as the word may indifferently be construed. Vers. 25. And as he reasoned of righteousnesse, temperance, and judgement to come, Felix trembled] Felix was deditus saevitiae & libidini Tacitus, see Josephus Antiq. lib. 20.  temperance, the word in the originall properly signifies Chastity.; righteousnesse hath reference to others, temperance to our selves, judgement to God. CHAP. XXV. Vers. 14. DEclared] This word signifies friendly, and familiarly to rehearse some∣thing to one; which otherwise by right, he is not bound to doe, as it appears here, and Gal. 2.2. Vers. 19. Of their own superstition] The word doth also signifie religion, but hee speaketh in contempt of the true Doctrine. explicat Plutar∣chus nimium & importunum deorum metum, unde exortae sunt superstitiosae ceremoniae. Beza. Vers. 23. With great Pompe] The originall words signifie with great phantasie, cum multa ostenta∣tione. Beza. or vaine shew. The Lord accounts of the great glory, and pompe of the world even as a phantasie, or shadow. CHAP. XXVI. Vers. 7. VNto which promise] That is, thing promised, viz. Life eternall by a me∣tonymie of the adjunct. Instantly] That is, with a kind of extension, or vehemency. vide Bezam. Vers. 14. It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks] He rehearseth the History more fully, then he had reheased it before in the 9. Chapter. This proverb used of those which attempt things that are like to prove ill to themselves,Terentius Phormione. came from the Graecians to the Jewes. The Latines also have taken it up.—namque inscitia est adversus stimulum calces. Vers. 18. Darknesse] That which is called darknesse in the first, is called the power of Satan in the latter clause, the Devill having and holding a man in igno∣rance hath and holds him in his power. Repent and turne to God] Which latter words expound the former,Perkins. and plainly shew what repentance is. Vers. 24. Much learning doth make thee mad] Paul was learned not onely in theGrotius.
Law, but also in traditions which did evidently teach the resurrection and good things of another life. He knew the Hebrew, Syriacke, Greek, and Latine tongues, and had read the Poets. CHAP. XXVII. Vers. 14. EVroclydon] This word hath its name so, because this wind stirreth up great waves.Vatab. Eras. Vers. 31. Except these abide in the ship yee cannot be saved] From whence it followes that the precise and peremptory decrees as they call them concerning the Salvation of any, either temporall or eternall, doe not render admonitions or threatnings un∣profitable,See 24. vers. because they are as means and serve to execute the divine decrees. Vers. 33. This day is the fourteenth day that ye have tarried and continued fasting, ha∣ving taken nothing] Physitians write that a sick man may live 14. dayes without meat;Perkins on 4th. of Matth. Calvin. vide Sanctium. it is probable they did eat very little or nothing at all, for so are the words. One may be found, which may endure abstinence longer; but for such a multi∣tude to doe it, it is scarce credible Fasting is here improperly called an unusuall ab∣staining from food, because all that time they had not a full meale, as sad persons loath meate. Vers. 34. For there shall not an hair fall from the head of any of you] A proverbiall speech, Quod non malè ita accipi∣tur, ut nulliut rei jactarum esse pertimescendam, intelligamus. Ast unde haec locutio, in periculoso maris ludibrio, est desumta? A mor veterum desumtam hariolamur, qui coortis in pelago procellis, ac mari naufragium minitante, vel omnino etiam inferente, capillos tondebant. Dilheri Electu. l. 2. c. 11. Hbraicum proverbium, ut 1 Reg. 1.52. quo significatur prorsus salvos & integros ipsos fore. Beza in loc. as may be said in Latine ne hilum quidem vobis nocebitur. See Luke 21.18. CHAP. XXVIII. Vers. 6. WHen he should have swollen or fallen down dead] for those that are bit∣ten by the viper, their flesh swells as Dioscorides l. 6. c. 38. Vox  tumorem an in∣flamationem no∣tet, eruditi di∣sputant; ego u∣trumque significari existimo. Pricaeus. teacheth: the Greek word here, signifies both to be inflamed and swell; but Beza prefers the latter, be∣cause of the observation of Dioscorides; Erasmus, and the Aethiopick translation render it to be inflamed, as de Dieu observes.
ANNOTATIONS VPON THE Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to the ROMANS. CHAP. I. OF the Epistle, and order of all Pauls Epistles, see my Treatise of Di∣vinity, Lib. 1. ch. 4. p. 70, 71, 72, 73. The Epistle to the Romans, and the Gospell of John are thePerkins art of prophecying. St. Augustine wished three things: to have seen Christ in the flesh, Rome in its glory, and to have heard and seen Paul in the Pulpit. Paulum quoties lego, videor mihi non verba au∣dire, sed toni∣trua. Hieron. contra Joveni∣an. de Epist. Paulin. In Paulinis Epistolis, ejus quae ad Romanos scripta est scopus, velut Atticus Mercurius ad reliquas iter indicat. Melancthon. Quae Pauli Epistola non melle dulcior est? non lacte candidior? Ambrosius de Epistolis Pauli. Epistolae Paulinae non temporis ordine locatae sunt ab iis qui eas primi in unum volumen compegerunt: sed pro dignitate eorum ad quos scriptae sunt. Ideo praecedunt quae ad Ecclesias; sequuntur quae sunt ad singulos. Et inter eas quae sunt ad Ecclesias, prima est quae ad Romanam, ab urbis ejus majestate. Grotius. See the preface De Launay upon the Epistle to the Romans in French.Keyes of the New Testament. Cardinall Poole answered well to him that demanded what course should be taken in reading the Epistle to the Romans; First (saith he) begin at the twelfth Chapter, and read to the end and practise the precepts of repentance and mortification; and then set upon the former part of the Epistle, where Justification and Predestination are handled. Vers. 1. Paul] Of his name see Beza on Acts 13.9 Calvin, à Lapide on this place. Paul is a Latin name, from Paulus, that is a little one; so the Romans were wont to call those which were of a lesser stature. Some think he had first this name given him, upon occasion of converting Sergius Paulus the Deputy, Acts 13.9, 12. before he was called Saul. Chrysostome writ eight Homilies in his praise, and usually cals him the Apostle. Hierome cals him the trumpet of the Gospel. A servant of Jesus Christ] In the Old Testament those which were in great Offices were called the servants of the Lord, that is, of God; as Moses, Jos. 1.1. Joshua, Jud. 21.8. David, Psal. 131.10. Nehemiah, Nehem. 1.6. In the New Testament also Jesus Christ. Called to be an Apostle] It is simply in the Greek called an Apostle; that is,Pierre de Launay. made and appointed an Apostle. See Matth. 5.9.19. Rom. 7.3. Separated to the Gospel of God] He alluded perhaps to the name of the Pharisees,Drusius in Prae∣ter. & de tribus sectis Judaeo∣rum. l. 2. c. 2.  est cum judicio separare ac secernere, inde  dicuntur canones magno judicio collecti & conscripti ac breviter pronuncia∣ti. Gerh. vide à Lap. which was à separando. The Pharisee was separated to the study of the Law; he being made a Christian was separated by God to the Gospel; separated from his mothers womb, to preach the Gospell to the Gentiles, Gal. 1.15. Vers. 2. By his Prophets] The Apostle hath respect to the Oracles concerning Christ and his Kingdom, Gen. 3.15. Levit. 18.18. Esay 9.6. & 52.7. & 61.1. & 65.1. Jerem. 31.31. Vers. 4. Declared] The word signifieth determined; and as it were by definitive sen∣tence concluded to be the Sonne of God. With power] that is, powerfully, an Hebraisme; or miraculously, viz. by the resur∣rection of he dead, as is added; for this Greek word ordinarily signifies a miracle in the New Testament.
According to the spirit of holinesse] that is, By the force of the Deity sanctifying and quickning the flesh, he was raised from the dead, and so declared mightily to be the Sonne of God. As in the former by the words, according to the flesh, was signified the humane nature of Jesus Christ; so likewise by these words, ac∣cording to the Spirit,De Launay sur les Romains. is here signified his Divine nature: which the Scripture sets forth by the word Spirit, 1 Tim. 5.16. Heb. 9.14. & 1 Pet. 3.18. The Apostle here cals this Spirit, the Spirit of holinesse; that is, the holy Spirit, according to the stile of the Hebrew. See Exod. 2.16. Vers. 5. By whom we have received grace and Apstleship] that is, the grace of Apostle∣ship,Beza. Hendiadys. de Launay. by the figure called  as 2.20: It is the Apostles stile to define his Apo∣sleship by the name of grace, as after Chap. 12.3. & 15.1. 1 Cor. 15.10. Galat. 2.9. Ephes. 3.2, 8. Vers 7. Grace to you, and peace from God the father, and our Lord Jesus Christ] the grace of God is that whereby be undeservedly favours us;Scultet. de pre∣caetione. See the French writer de Lau∣nay and Estius in loc. but peace is a prosperous and happy successe of all things; this wish is also 1 Cor. 1.3. 2 Cor. 1.2. Galat. 1.3. Eph. 1.2. Phil. 1.2. Col. 1.2. 1 Thess. 1.1. 2 Thess. 1.2. 1 Tim. 1.2. Tit. 1.4. almost exprest in so many words every where; so that it is a certain marke of Pauls genuine Epistles. Vers. 8. I thank my God, through Jesus Christ] In whose Name all our prayers and thanksgivings ought to be presented to God,Epistola Pauli ad Romanos est jam Epi∣stola Pauli in Romanos. Ephes. 5.20. Col. 3.17. Your faith is spoken of through the whole world] Miserum est fuisse felicem, as mise∣rable to have been faithfull. By these words is shewed the extent of the Roman Em∣pire, according to the stile and ordinary manner of speaking then. See Luke 2.1. Vers. 12. By the mutuall faith both of you and me] that is, by the faith which you and I have in Jesus Christ;De Launay. Tit. 1.1, 4. 2 Pet. 1.1. which the Apostle elsewhere cals the faith of the elect, and the common faith; and Peter stiles, the like precious faith. Vers. 14. I am a debtor both to the Greeks and to the Barbarians] the Greeks and the Romans call those Barbarians which spake any Language but theirs;De Launay,  vo∣catur, qui viti∣osa & insuavi, hoc est blaesa, balbutiente & inconditâ linguâ loquitur, tales à Graecis censebantur omnes qui extra Graeciam essent, uti ex Strabone patet. Gerh. in loc. and conse∣quently those which were unskilfull in their languages and customes. By the Greeks he means the most polite Nation, and by the Barbarians the ruder, as the following words shew. Vers. 16. The power of God] Not the essentiall power of God, but his organicall power; potentiae organon, or the great instrument of the power of God; it is called the arme of God, Esay 53.1. See 1 Cor. 1.17. Pareus. Or by a metonymie, the declara∣tion of his power. Faejus. whereby the preaching of the Gospell is made effectuall. To every one that believeth] the Gospell is offered unto all, but it onely profiteth un∣to salvation those that believe;Pareus. Grotius. as a medicine is onely effectuall to those which re∣ceive it. Vers. 17. The righeousnesse of God] that whereby we stand just and righteous in the sight of God.Justitia quae non in solis factis exterio∣ribus consistit, sed à Deo efficitur, & ut Dei opus Deo placet. Grotius. It is so called, 1 Decretoriè, 2 Revelatoriè, 3 Meritoriè, 4 Imputatoriè, 5 Approbatoriè. Walth. Harm. Revealed] and made known to our hearts. From faith to faith] that is, by such a faith as groweth and increaseth, from one degree to another.Id est, Ex fide promovente ac subinde augescente, ut sit Hebraismus, qualis in Psal. 84.7. Theoph. Oecumen. Peter. Estius. Beza, Calvinus, Paraeus. Vers. 18. The truth] that is, those true opinions which in their judgements they had conceived of God,Not every truth in gene∣rall, nor yet the truth of the written Word, but that light which remains in the nature of man after the fall, called the law of nature, and the law of Nations: which light they by their injustice, impiety, prophannesse and superstition, did seek to oppresse and extinguish, and so detain as a captive in the darke dungeon of their hearts, Dr. Taylor on Tit. That is, while they heare, learn, and can remember much of it, yet in their courses are as vaine and ungodly as ever before. and their duty to him.
Vers. 21. Became vain in their imaginations] Greeke, their practicall inferences and discourses. See Estius. He means it, of that world of pretences and allegations, where∣with they did make themselves believe that their Idolatry and other sinnes were no sinnes;  may better be rendered discourses or reasonings; such as they made out of their principles, they had in their understanding. Vers 23. And changed the glory of the uncorruptible God, into an image made like to cor∣ruptible man; and to Birds and fourfooted beasts and creeping things]He plainly alludeth to that phrase of the Psalmist, which saith, that the Israelites changed their glory into the similitude of a Calf that eateth Hay; when they should have conceived God to be so in∣finitely glorious that nothing could set forth his glory sufficiently: they conceived so basely of him, that they would even set up the Picture of an Ox to represent him. This is the Idolatry of the Papists in these daies, who picture God the Father like an old man, because of Dan 7.9. God the Holy Ghost like a Dove, because he appeared in that shape at Christs baptisme; and Christ like a Lamb, because of that place, Iohn 1.29. whence their agnus Dei. Vers. 24. Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleannesse] The Apostle instanceth in two particulars of unnaturall uncleannesse, as self uncleannesse, vers. 24. that is, alone by themselves. So Beza and Theophylact understand it; that is,Vers. 26. Paul hath a particular re∣lation to Mes∣salina. the first degree which is therefore unnaturall, because thou destroyest that which nature gave thee for propagation. Then secondly, unclean love of boyes, vers. 27. be it discovered in what dalliance it will, though not arising to an act of Sodomy. Vers. 25. The truth of God]that is, those true opinions, and conceits they had of God. Who is blessed for ever] When the Hebrews make mention of the true God,Gerh. in loc. they are wont to adde Ha Baruc le gnolam. Benedictus sit ille in saecula. Let him be blessed for ever. Vers. 27. Burned] , that word is emphaticall, expressing those prodigi∣ous and monstrous lusts of the Gentiles,Id. ib. proceeding from the fire of evill concupi∣scence, and deserving and forewarning hel-fire. Vers. 28. They did not like] The word  sometimes signifies to try or exa∣mine, 1 Thess. 5.21. Sometimes to approve and allow; so here it imports a not al∣lowing or regarding, or making that precious account of the knowledge of God. Not convenient] The Greek word implies two things, Duty and decorum; that is, they ran wilfully into the grossest sinnes, contrary to all even naturall duty and de∣corum. Vers. 29. Being filled with all unrighteousnesse] This is the genus, comprehending all those things which are after enumerated. Fornication, wickednesse] In the Greek is an elegant paronomasia, . Our English renders the latter word wickednesse, not so fit here,  being the purpose of the Holy Ghost to set down a particular vice; it may rather  ranslated according to the etymon, troublesomnesse or a desire to procure trouble and molestation to another; therefore it is given to Satan, the troubler of the Saints of God, he is often called , that troublesome one. Covetousnesse]  an inordinate desire of having more wealth then the Lord allots us. Maliciousnesse] that is comprehended under envy next following;  may bet∣ter be rendred mischievousnesse. Envy, murder] . As these words are alike in sound in the Greeke,V. 31. . Grata vocum allusio qua ni∣mirum innuere voluit vitiorum affinitatē. Estius. so the vices are alike; and one often follows the other. Estius. See 1 Iohn 3.13. Malignity] , taking all things in the worser part. Whisperers, backbiters] A backbiter speaketh evill openly of another; the whisperer, privily. Theoph. The backbiter intends to separate friendship, the other to hurt ones fame. Ver. 30. Haters of God] with a hellish hatred; .There are three things in hatred, saith Aristotle: 1. It is against generals, the whole kind; a wicked man hates God, and whatsoever be∣longeth to him, his Ordinances Image. 2 It will not be cured by time; the divells hate God for himselfe. Conversion is called reconciliation with God, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. 3 Nothing will satisfie it but the destruction of the thing hated; it strikes at Gods essence, Psal. 10.4. The word hath a passive termina∣tion
and signifies properly, hated of God; though words passive are sometimes actively taken, as 2 Pet. 1.3. And the Apostle here intendeth a Catalogue of the Gen∣tiles sinnes. Theophylact interprets it both waies. Despightfull] , contumeliously, or insolently injurious. Proud, boasters] The proud man boasteth of such things as he hath; the boaster, of that which he hath not, Oecumen. Vers. 32. Who knowing the judgement of God] The Greek word , translated here judgement,De Launay. signifies properly Law, Constitution, Ordinance; and in the Greeke version of the Old Testament, where it is very often used, it is ordinarily taken in this sense. By it here is signified the just will, law, and ordinance of God. They which commit such things are worthy of death] that is, thou considerest that Hell and damnation is the issue and desert of sinne, and yet committest it. But have pleasure in them that do them] or consent with them; so the Vulgar, but corruptly. To sinne is of it selfe wicked, and worthy of eternall punishment; but to approve and defend his own and other mens sinnes, and to judge them well done; to applaud them in mind and judgement, and to be delighted with them, is a high degree of un∣godlinesse. CHAP. II. Vers. 5. TReasurest up wrath] that is, punishments and judgements the effects of it; alludes to Iob 36.13. the Greeke word signifies to lay up for to morrow. Day of wrath] that is, of judgement. See vers. 16. Vers. 6. Render to every man according to his deeds] The Papists Vide Cornel. à lap. Vide Waltheri Harm. Bibl. in loc. See Down. of justification. Lib 8. c. 5. p. 612. infer merit of works from hence;See Matth. 16.27. Rom 2.6. 1 Cor. 3.14. 2 Cor. 5.10. Rev. 22.12. but 1. the word  to render, signifies not onely a just retribution, but a gift of favour, as in that place, Matth. 20.8. 2. The Apostle saith, secundum opera, non propter opera; which notes the quality, not the proportion of their works; that is, good works shall be rewarded with glory, and evill with punishment. Vers. 7. The best reading of these words is this, To them which by perseverance in wel-doing seek glory,Apostolus faeli∣citatem piorum in vita futura expessurus di∣cit, reddet iis gloriam, hono∣rem, immortali∣tatem, quia una dictione exprimere non potuit, usus est pluribus; sed tunc de futurae vitae beatitudine loquitur. Pareus & Beza. honour, immortality, eternall life] that is, shall render eternall life to such: so divers interpret it. The word here used doth as well signifie perseverance and continuance, ; the meaning is, they which persevere and continue in good works. So Luke 21 19: Matth. 24.13. and the Apostle to the same purpose, Heb. 10 36. where he useth the same word. And in this sence Jerome taketh patience here. Vers. 9. Tribulation and anguish] The first word  properly signifies compres∣sion, à , which is used of the active pressing of the shoe; of the passive pressing of Grapes; metaphorically of affliction; especially in the books of the New Testament, and in Ecclesiasticall writers. The latter word  is properly a straightnesse of spirit;Gerh. in loc. such as is wont to happen in diseases and terrours: Here it is taken meta∣phorically. Vpon every soule of man] Here is a double Hebraisme: 1. Every soule of man, is put for the soule of every man,De Launay. as in Chap. 1.18. Against all ungodlinesse and unighteous∣nesse of men, put for the ungodlinesse and unrighteousnesse of all men. 2. The word soule is put for person, as Gen. 12.5. & 14.21. & 17.14 & 36.6. & 46.26. Vers. 12. Perish without Law] That is, without a Law formally published, not ma∣terially enacted; he speakes of the Gentiles, who had the Law witten in their hearts.
Vers. 14. Doe by nature the things contained in the Law] That is, by naturall strength.Perkins. C' est à dire, par un instinct naturel & sans y estre poussez par aucune loy. De Launay sur les Romaines. Vers. 18. And approvest the things that are more excellent] So the Greek word is taken Matth. 6.26. and Heb. 1.4. Some render it triest the things that differ, Probas eximia Erasmus. See 1 Phil. 10. & ex ploras quae discrepant. Beza. Pareus. Acording to the former version some think De Launay sur les Romai∣nes. vulg. reddidit utiliora; Erasmus & Cajetanus eximia; alij excellentia & singularia. Sed ex verbo  colligitur quod hoc loco propriè significet differentia sive discrepantia. Gerh. in loc. that the A∣postle hath regard to the writings of the Rabbins and Doctors of the Jewes, which disputed exactly, and curiously, not onely of things lawfull, and unlawfull accor∣ding to the Law; but also of those things which according to it, were better and more excellent. Vers. 21. Thou therefore which teachest another, teachest not thou thy selfe] That is, dost not thou live as thou teachest. Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.Pulchrè Prosper. Bene inquit do∣cere & malè vi∣vere quid aliud est quam se sua voce damnare. Vers. 22. Thou that abhorrest idols, dest thou commit sacriledge  propriè est templa despoliare ab , postea in genere pro quovis sacrilegio accipitur. Gerh. in loc.] Sacriledge is (if not worse) yet as bad as idolatry; as if, Paul held as good a false religion, as a spoiling religion. CHAP. III. Vers. 2. CHiefely] This word  Erasmus taketh to signifie the order of the Apostles speech, as before cap. 1.8.Gr. premie∣rement. C'est à dire specialemēt & principale∣ment; car ce mot n' est pas ici mis pour denoter un commencement ni une enumeration dont la suite soit puis apres, exprimée, ainsi est encores pris ce mot, 2 Pet. 1.20. & 3.3. De Launay. See Beza. Non est ordinis sed qualitatis, significans primarium, quasi dicat ut unum eximium pro multis dicam. Pareus vide. Iun. Paralel. 1.2. Paral. 3. But there the Apostle beginneth his Epistle, which he doth not here; this word first here signifies chiefe, that this was the chiefe priviledge and immuity which the Jewes had, the oracles of God] so the Lxx. calls the word of God, Psal. 11.7. and 17.31. and 106.11. Vers. 3. The faith of God] That is, his constancy and fidelity in keeping his promi∣ses Psal. 33.4. fides quia fit quod dictum est. See 23. Matth. 2.3. Vers. 4. Let God be true] First let him be acknowledged such a one; he is true, not onely effectivè; because he performed his promises which he made to Abraham con∣cerning the land of promise, & Christ; but essentialiter, he is true and constant in him∣selfe. And maist overcome when thou are judged] Psal. 51.4. here the Apostle followeth the LXX. and changeth the testimony for illustration, for they who are pure, over∣come in judgement. Vers. 5. J speak as a man] q.d. Every naturall man is apt to thinke and speak so. Vers. 9. We have before proved] We have pleaded it at the Judges Barre; and have convicted them. Vers. 12. They are altogether become unprofitable] viz. to good; that is, they are wholly alienated from good, and made incapable to doe it:De Launay sur les Romains this is taken out of the 14. Psal. 3. where the Hebrew word signifies, they are become stinking, but the Apo∣stle followed the Greek version; and a stinking thing is also odious and unprofitable for any service. Vers. 13. Their throat is an open sepulchre] Throats like a sepulchre, sending out rotten, and unsavoury communication, Alludit ad hominem qui tetrum anhelitum ex corruptis spirat extis, & ad calaver quod ex sepulcro intolerabilem spirat odorem. or words tending to devoure. When the grave is shut up, we see nothing but green grasse; but when rotten bones
appear, a filthy stink comes out. With their tongues they have used deceit] flattering, faun∣ing and dissembling;Plin. l. 8. c. 28. the poyson of aspes is under their lips,] First, it stings, and wonder∣fully torments a man. 2. Is incurable. Vers. 14. Cursing and bitternesse] That is, sharp and furious inprecations, and revilings. Vers. 15. Their feet are swift to shed bloud] In aptnesse to oppresse, hurt and grind all one hath to deale with. Vers. 16. Destruction and misery are in their wayes] That is, their designes and actions tend to destruction and misery,De Launay. and produce it to themselves and their neigh∣bour. Vers. 19. Now we know, that what things soever the Law saith, it saith to them who are under the Law: that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God] It is a speech taken from a malefactor arraigned, when the Judge objecteth, what say you? this, and this treason is witnessed against you; the poore man standeth speechlesse and dumbe, his mouth is stopped. Vers. 20. Therefore by the deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be justified in his sight] The Greek is, All flesh shall not be justified in thy sight by the deeds of the Law] The meaning is, none shall. The word all joyned with the negative, is often according to the Hebrew Gen. 9.11. and 11.6. Exod. 10.15. & 12.43.48. and 20.4.10.17. phrase put for none. Vide Bezam.No flesh] Flesh by double figure Metonymia materiae. Synecdoche membri. is put for man, flesh for the body it being the matter of it; and that again as a part for the whole man. Vers. 21. The righteousnesse of God] Either because he is the founder and contriver of it; or because he bestowes it and gives it unto men; or because it is the righteous∣nesse onely that will stand and hold out before God;Mr. Goodwin. or by way of opposition to the righteousnesse of the Law, which may well be called the righteousnesse of men. Vers. 23. All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God] All] That is, all Na∣tions, Jewes and Gentiles; that the Gentiles sinned against the Law written in their hearts, the Apostles proved in the first Chapter; that the Jewes sinned against the Law, written in the Book, he proves in the second Chapter; so in this Chapter v. 9. Secondly all, that is, all persons young and old, 5. Chap. 12.14. verses, have sinned] the Greeke word signifies to misse the mark, and come short.] Greek, faln back, left behind, the word signifies Vide, Be∣zam. them which are left behind in the race, and are not able to rune to the mark; the glory] that is, the glorious Image which God stamped on man at the Creation, which consisted in knowledge, righteousnesse, and true holi∣nesse, and dominion over the creatures; or the glory of heaven, which should have been the end of their obedience. Bellarminus ergo errat qui justificationem dfinit per insu∣sionem justitiae. Scriptura saepis∣simè accumulat verba synonima ob majorem per spicuitatem at∣que emphasim, sic nos dicimus dabo tibi hoc gratis, ipsum verbum dandi donum gratui∣tum innuit, sic dicimus gratiam gratis datam, cum solo vocabulo gratiae illam gratis dari significetur; gratis, id est, ex mera liberalitate, atque haec est causa efficiens, per gratiam ipsius, id est (Interprete Bellarmino) per justiciam ab illo nobis infusam; & haec est cau∣sa formalis. Bellarmini glossa textum corrumpit non explicat. Per gratiam illius, nempe Dei, sunt exponenda, per amorem, sive gratuitam ejus benevolentiam nobis exhibitam. Contrà argutatur Bellarm. favor Dei a is explicatur per vocem illā gra∣tis. Probabile est ipsum Spiritum loquentem in Scriptura ingeminasse haec vocabula per gratiam & gratis ut coargueret illorum errorem & stuporem qui gratuitm in justificationem erant oppugnaturi. Episc. Davenant. de justitia habituali.Vers. 24. In this and the next verse, is described the great benefit of justification in all the causes of it. Being justified] That is, declared to be just, or absolved before God. The whole Act of our Justification is described in Law Termes; the sinner is the guilty person; the plaintiffe, or accuser the Devill; the witnesse conscience, the advocate Christ; the Judge God. This Justification is described. 1. From the efficient cause by his Grace] by grace here is not meant a meere outward proposing of the word of God as Pelagians say; nor any inward work of holinesse in us, as the Papists; but the goodnesse and love of God without us. 2. Impulsive, either. 1. Internall implyed in the word freely, it is op∣possed to merit or dignitie here. 2. Externall, the redemption of Jesus Christ. 3. The instrumentall cause through faith in his bloud.] 4. The finall cause, to declare his righte∣ousnesse for the remission of sinnes past, freely.] First, without cause or merit, so Iohn 15.25. Secondly, without price, 10. Matth. 8. vide Gerh. in loc. by his grace] that is, the free favour of God.
Vers. 25. Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his bloud] 1. God hath made Christ the mercy eat. 2. Under the Law it was but the type & figure of him, they that would obtaine any mercy from God, must seeke it in and through him onely. Secondly, now by the ministry of the Gospell, the Lord hath set forth this mercy seat openly to the vew of all men, all men may have accesse unto it; in the Law it stood in the holy of holies within the vaile, and the High Priest onely had accesse unto it, and but once a yeare. 3. No man may come to the mercy seat; nor hope to hude mercy with God through Christ, but onely by faith in his bloud, as Levit. 16.17. Mr. Hildersam on Psal. 51.7. vide Bezam. A Propitiation] So we read it, but rather a Propitiatory: the same Greek word  which the Septuagint used for the Jewes Propitiatory. See 25. Exod. 22. Vers. 31. We establish the Law] The Law is established by the Gospell.The Greek word signifies to settle a thing which was falling. 1. By ap∣prehending Christs righteousnesse for the perfect obedience unto it, and fulfilling of it by our surety. He hath fufilled the precept, and satisfied the curse. 2. By our own inchoate obedience unto it, which by meanes of the Gospell being a quickning Spirit, we are enabled unto. CHAP. IV. THe Papists oppose the imputation of Christs righteousnesse to us, and cavill at the very word imputation, calling of it justiriam putativam and a new no righteousnesse; yet Paul useth the word ten times in this Chapter, and in the same sense that we take it, verses 3.4.5.6 8.11.22, 23, 24. Vers. 5. That justifieth the ungodly] Not in their sins, but from their sins, through Christ; God doth justifie the ungodly, as Christ doth save sinners in sensu diviso, that is not while they are ungodly, no while they are sinners; but when they have for∣saken their wicked wayes, and turned to the Lord, by true and sound repentance. This place must not be understood simply of such one that doth nothing at all; but respectively of such a one as doth not rest upon his workes, nor rely upon his righte∣ousnesse; but renouncing his own workes, doth cast himselfe upon the free grace of God. 2. Ungodly is not used in the common sense,Mr. Bedford against Antino∣mianisme. for one that hath no good∣nesse in him at all, but in a limited sense, viz. for one that wantteh such perfection of goodnesse as on which he may build the hopes of his justification; the propo∣sition is drawn from the instance of Abraham, a man not altogether void of workes and righteousnesse, His faith is counted for righteousnesse] Faith is accounted for righteousnesse without our merite; for the merites of Christ which are not inherent in us; but are communicated unto us by his Spirit; whereby we are made members of his body, and partakers of his righteousnesse. Vers. 11. A seale of the righteousnesse of faith] Circumcision is a signe,The signe of circumcision] That is, cir∣cumcision which is a signe an usuall hebraisme; as we say the Sacrament of Baptisme, for Baptisme which is a Sacrament. in regard of the thing signified, a seal in regard of the Covenant made betwixt God and man; of righteousnesse] not our own, but that of Christ both active and passive; faith as the instrument makes the righteousnesse of Christ ours, by imputation. Vers. 15. The Law worketh wrath] That is, manifests it; and so when it brings it unto light, it semes to have effected it.Glassius. Verse 18. Against hope] Of sense and reason; beleeved in hope] of Gods word, that is, he conceived firme confidence in heart, of the truth and power of God, which is manifest by the Antithesis. Vers. 19. And being not weake in faith, be considered nor his own body now dead,Id non absolutè debet intelligi sed comparatè ad illam uxorem quam tum habebat, vetustam & sterilem. Alioqui Scriptura non in miraculo ponit, si aliquādo senes ex virgū∣culis mulieribus prolem suscipiant. Moses enim penè octogenarius liberos genuit, item Obed ex Ruth Moabltide. Nec no∣stro tempore desunt exempla corum, quo septuagenarij & octogenarij prolem susceperunt. Rivetus in c. 25. Gen. vide Drusium in loc. See Doctor Wllet on 18. of Gen. 11. vide Drus. quaest. Heb. when be was about an hundred yeeres old.]
Vers. 20. He staggered not] The Greek word in other places is translated doubting, nothing doubting, but the same word is also translated discerning 1 Cor. 11.29. plane per∣suasum habens.  est impleri ali∣qua re, ut appa∣ret. Eccles. 8.2. sic & 2 Tim 2.4.4.17. Hinc ducta translatio ad persuasionem, quia ubi quis non dubitat, sed rem pro certae habet, ejus cor dicitu tali re esse plenum. vide 14. Rom. 9. Hinc  & . Heb. 6.2.10.22. Grotius.  dicitur is, qui quasi plenis velis sic fiducia sua fertur ad eam rem. qua confidit, ut sit metaphora à navibus du∣cta. Vulg. reddi dit plenissimè sciens, ut referatur ad intellectum, sed rectius redditur plenè persuasum habens, certa per∣suasione concepta, ut Erasmus vertit; Vt ad voluntatem & cor referatur. Ita namque etiam in alijs locis usurpatur. Rom. 14. vers. 5. 1 Tim. 4. v. 5. In vetere Testamento tantùm semel occurrit pro implevit. Eccles. 8.11. Gerh. in loc.Vers. 21. Being fully perswaded] There may be a full assurance of faith respectu objecti, viz. the goodnesse, truth, and power of God; but not respectu subjecti, as it is in us, in regard of our corruption. It is a metaphore taken from ships that come in∣to harbour with full saile. Vers. 25. Was raised againe for our justification] Christ paid our debt when he di∣ed, and cancelled the bond on the Crosse. But in his resurrection he received an ac∣quittance, as it were a discharge was given then. 53 Esay. 8. CHAPTER. V. Vers. 1. BEeing justified by faith] That is, Christs righteousnesse made ours by faith.In qua sta∣mus] id est, confidimus, nec ab ea ullis vel tentationibus vel persecutionibus nos depelli patimur;  non simpliciter significat stare, ve∣rum etiam in statione persistere, in firma fiducia permanere, metaphora ducta ab acie in qua strenui milites ne latum quidem pedem hosti cedunt. Gerh. Vers. 2. In hope of the glory God] That is, that we shall partake one day of his glory. Non data sed effusa, liberali∣tatem ostendens. Chrysost. See Psal. 45.13. Titus 3.6. Justus, reddens cuique quod suam est. Bonus qui beneficus est, ac bene de mul∣tis meritus. Estius.Vers. 5. The love of God] That is, the sense and feeling of Gods love to us. See 8. verse, shed abroad in our hearts] the Greek word signifies powred out, a speech borrowed from one licour infused into another; as hot water powred into Beere, changeth not onely the colour, but nature of it. It notes the abundant manifestati∣on of Gods love toward us. Vers. 7. For scarcely for a righteous man will one dye] That is, an innocent, godly man. Peradventure for a good man some would even dare to dye] Would, and peradventure, and even dare; he speakes warily. A good man] That is, a usefull serviceable man; a man whose life and labour bene∣fits many; or one that hath shewed a great deale of goodnesse to us. Id est, Insignem et summè commendabilem esse ostendit. Beza.Vers. 8. Commendeth] That is, maketh known. Death, i. all evils Tempo∣rall and Spiri∣tuall. alij red∣dunt eo quod, quandoqui∣dem. Sic Eras∣mus, quem se∣quitur Calvi∣nus, Mrtyr. Alij in quo; sic Ambros. Chrysost. Pareus. See Mr. Burrrh. of Justification, p. 185.Vers. 12. By one man] That is, Adam, sinne entred into the world, and death by sinne] Sinne brought death into the world, either meritoriè as it deserves wrath; or privativè as it takes away the power of the Law to conferre life, passed upon all men] as the mur∣raine infects the whole flock; sinne and the curse seizeth upon all the whole world, as well as Adam and Eve. For that all have sinned] Or in whom as Beza. viz. That one man, as the stock of mankind▪ the sense comes all to one; in Adam legally as they stood under his Cove∣nant; in him naturally as they bear his Image. That is, not laid to their Charge by God, enligh∣tening their consciences, concerning the true object, root, nature, or fruit of Sinne.Vers. 13. Sinne is not imputed where there is no Law] Sinne was imputed before the Law of Moses was given, all were not righteous before; but either it was not imputed by God eomparativè, because men sin'd against a lower light, or rather man did not impute sinne to himselfe, till the Law came.
Vers. 14. Neverthelesse, death raigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression] There is a twofold interpretation of this place: 1 Some Zanchie, à Lapide, and di∣vert others. understand it of Infants which never committed actuall sinne, as Adam did. Others Calvin, Estius. Raigned] that denotes the power and ty∣ranny of death. Hoc voluit, absolutum jus exercuisse mortem; nemo enim magis absolutè regnat quam qui sine lege regnat. Ab Adamo autem us∣que ad Mosen lex non fuit. Heinsius. say it is spoken of the Heathens, which had not a clear know∣ledge of Gods law and will, as Adam had: But this proves not the Apostles intent; which is to shew that the guilt of the first sinne was imputed to the world. The former exposition is the better. As the second Adam conveys not onely grace by regeneration, but righteousnesse by imputation: so the first Adam sinne not onely by propagation, but imputation. Who is the figure of him that was to come] That is, the first Adam, of Christ the se∣cond Adam. Vers. 15. But not as the offence, so also is the free gift] In this verse, and 16, 17, 18 ver∣ses, Christ is called the gift of God, and the free gift of God, five times. See Esay 9.6. He is called the gift of God by an excellency, John 4 10. Hath abounded unto many] , redundavit, was plentifully powred out; a metaphor from waters over-flowing. Vers. 18 As by the offence of one judgement came upon all] Judgement, reatus. Beza, Pareus, Calvin; but the judgement of God supposeth a guilt. Vers. 20. Where sinne aboundeth] that is, the knowledge and feeling of sinne. Grace] the free imputation of Christs righteousnesse. CHAP. VI. Vers. 4. BVried with him by baptisme into death] Baptisme is an instrument not onely of thy death with Christ, which is the killing of sinne; but also of thy buriall with him,The plunging of them into water which were baptized, was a signe of their death and buriall with Christ. which is a perpetuall mortification or abiding under that death. He alludes to the manner in which baptisme was then administred; which was to strip them naked whom they baptized, and plunge them in the water; after which they put on new garments. Whence those manners of speaking used in Scrip∣ture,Galat. 3.27. Eph 4.22.23. Col. 2.11. & 3.9, 10.to put on Christ, to put off the old man, and put on the new. Vers. 6. Might be destroyed] or, weakned; and the strength of it broken, made fruitlesse and uneffectuall: for so the word signifieth. Vers. 11. Reckon ye] make account, conclude thus; so the same word is used, Rom. 3.28. Vers. 12. Raigne] It is the observation of Chrysostome and Theodoret upon the words, the Apostle did not say, Let not sin tyrannize; for that is sinnes own work,1 Peter 4.2. and not ours, Rom. 7.20. All the service which is done to a tyrant is out of violence, and not out of obedience. But he saies, Let it not Reigne in you; for when a King reignes, the Subjects do actively obey and embrace his command:Dr. Reynolds. whereas they are rather pati∣ents then agents in a tyranny. In the lusts thereof] By lusts here are meant the flames and motions of lust,Perkins. spring∣ing from the fountain of originall sin. Verse 13. But yeild your selves unto God] The Greek signifies properly to present our selves unto God; or, to tender our service and duty unto him. In which words he alludes to the manner of the Old Testament; when a man offered any Sacrifice for himselfe, he brought the beast into the Temple, or the Tabernacle, and set it before the Altar in token that he did resigne it unto God.Perkins. Vers. 14. For ye are not under the law] As a Covenant,See Gal. 5.18. We are under the Law as it hath rationem regulae, not as it hath rationem saederis. whether we understand it of its condemning or irritating power. Ye are not under the law irritating corruption, and compelling to duty: but under the law subduing sinne, and sweetly leading you on in all the waies of God. Vers. 17. That form of doctrine which was delivered you] or, into which ye were deli∣vered;
so the Greek imports. The phrase expresseth the efficacy of Divine doctrine in the hearts of Gods children;See 2 Cor. 3.18 Vide Bezam. as if they were cast into it as into a mould, and came forth bearing the stampe and figure of it. . Hominum more loquor. Beza.Vers. 19. I speak after the manner of men] So Beza, and we, I speak some humane thing. Humanum quiddam dico. Erasmus. And to iniquity unto iniquity] By the former iniquity is meant originall and habi∣tuall sinne; by the latter actuall sinne, as the fruit of the former. Vers 20 The servants of sinne] A servant hath two properties: 1 He is subject; the master is above him, orders him, appoints him his work. 2 He dwels in the house with him. Vers. 21. For the end of those things is death] That is, the reward; because it is the end of the work.Vide Bezam. And in this sense this word is used, 2 Cor. 11.15. Phil. 3.19. 1 Pet. 1.9. Vers. 22. I delight in the law of God after the inward man] That is, so far as I am re∣generate, and have a new principle of grace within me. slipen∣dia, capitur Luc. 3.14. & 1 Cor. 9.7. pro stipendio mlitum. de Dieu.  say some, quasi  of the evening; be∣cause wages are payd in the evening.  dicuntur tum pecuniae, tum annonae & Cibaria, quae militibus dantur; 1 Cor. 9.7. Luc. 3.14. Respicit igitur Apostolus ad id quod Vers. 19. dixerat & Vers. 13. Deinde loquitur in plurali , eò quod uno mortis vocabulo innuantur multae poenae, ac varii cruciatus impiorum. Gerh. in loc.  signifies a gift flowing from grace, or free favour; not rendered as due to the merit of the receiver, but vouchsafed freely, out of the free bounty and undeserved favour of the giver. Non erit Dei gratia ullo modo nisi gratuita fuerit omni modo. Aug. contra Pelag.Vers. 23. For the wages of sinne is death] The word in the originall signifieth pro∣perly victuals, because victuals was that which the Roman Emperours gave their Souldiers as wages, in recompence of their service: but thence the word extends to signifie any other wages or salary whatsoever. By death we must understand a dou∣ble death both of body and soule. But he doth not say, the wages of our righteous∣nesse is eternall life, but , The gracious gift of God, through Jesus Christ. We attain not eternall life by our own merits, but by the free gift of God; for which cause also he addeth, by Jesus Christ our Lord. Behold (saith Cajetan, in loc.) the merit, behold the righteousnesse, whose wages is eternall life; but to us, in respect of Jesus Christ it is a free gift. What could Calvin, or any Protestant have said more? CHAP. VII. Vers. 2. FOr a woman which hath an husband, is bound by the law to her husband, so long as he liveth, &c.]Sin may com∣mand far in the hearts of Gods people, but it is not a hus∣band; there is not onely au∣thority in a husband, but a principle of love. The Law is the husband, say Calvin, Estius, and the most ancient Interpreters; others, sinne in the dominion: But it is not much mate∣riall whether we understand it of the Law irritating sinne, or of sinne as irritated by the law. Vers. 7. I had not known sinne, but by the Law] That is, effectually; (for by nature he knew many sinnes) or, to my good and comfort. For I had not known lust] meaning the motions of originall concupiscence had been sin. Vers. 8 But sinne taking occasion by the Commandement, wrought in me all manner of concupiscence] Sin takes occasion from a threefold power in the law: First, The con∣vincing, or discovering power of the Law, as it is a Glasse; as to sweare, or the like, though there be no pleasure in it, because the Law forbids it. 2 It blinds a man. 3 It minceth it, thou shalt not forsake thy father or mother, except it be Corban. 4 Takes occasion to hate the light. Secondly, from its restraining power, as it is a bridle: 1 Lust then spreads the more inwardly. 2 It is inraged by it, acts with the more violence; Let us break their bonds. 3 It improves it; as the sight of an enemy stirs up a mans courage. Thirdly, it takes occasion, by the condemning power of the Law; we can be but dam∣ned, Let us eat and drinke, &c. 2 It takes occasion thence to drive men into despaire. 3 Drives a man to self-murder, as Judas. 4. Drives a man to blasphemy; as Spira and the damned in Hell. For without the Law sinne was dead] No more to me then a dead thing; it never troubled me.
Vers. 9. For I was alive] In performances, Phil. 1.6. presumption, hope, expectation, Acts 26.9. Without the Law] not in the literall, but spirituall sense; once, in the state of my unregeneracy. But when the Commandement came] in the spiritualnesse of it, and I saw in some measure its holinesse, Sinne revived] That is,By the life of sin the strength of it is under∣stood, 1 To condemne; 2 operate or worke in a man obedience to it selfe. the guilt of it was discovered to his conscience; And I dyed] I began to see I was in the State of death. Vers. 13. That sinne by the Commandement might beceme exceeding sinfull] That is, when the Commandement was cleared to me, then I saw that I was extream sinfull; or, felt the violent motions of my sinne. Vers. 15. For that which I doe I allow not, &c.] The Apostle speaking of the frail∣ties and infirmities that were in himself, and the rest of the faithfull, giveth us in this and the next Chapter four notes whereby a sinne of infirmity may be known from a raigning sinne. The first is in this Verse, What I hate (saith he) that I doe.Hilders. on Psal. 51.7. Lect. 136. He was convinced in his judgement that it was a sinne, and therefore hated it. The second is, Vers. 19. The evill which I would not, that I do. His will, the purpose and resolution of his heart was against it. The third is, Vers. 24. O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death! He was much troubled and grieved when he was overtaken with it. The fourth and last is, Chap. 8. vers. 1. They that are in Christ Iesus walke not after the flesh. It is not their custome and ordinary practice to do so. Vers. 16. I consent unto the Law] Gr. I speak together the same thing that the Law doth., est assentior, etiam Sophocli & Euripidi. Tum vero Hebraeis dicere est cogitare. Vers. 18. To will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good I finde not] He signifieth that he could begin good things, but not perfect them,Mr. Perkins. and go through stitch. Vers. 19. For the good that I would doe, I doe not] He speaketh of the inward endea∣vours of his heart.Quae memoras scio vera esse, nutrix, sed furor cogit sequi pe∣jora. Sencea Hippol. Act. 1. Scen. 11. But the evill which I would not that I doe] meaning, in respect of the corruption of his nature. Vers. 20. Now if I doe that I would not, it is no more I that doe it, but sinne that dwelleth in me] If against my generall purpose I sinne against God; and be sorry for it, and displeased with my selfe because I cannot obey God in that perfection I desire, it is no more I that do it, but sinne that dwelleth in me. Vers. 22. For I delight in the Law of God, after the inward man] Yet Vers. 23. Paul resisteth the Law of God. Answ. This is an opposition in the same person,Genus hoc lo∣quendi in Scho∣lâ Platonis usi∣tatum fuit, l. 9. de Repub. vide Dieteric. Anti∣quit. Bibl. but not in the same part; according to the Spirit he delights in the Law, according to the flesh he rebelleth against it. Vers. 23. Bringing me in captivity to the law of sinne] . It signifieth one taken with the point of a Speare or Sword; or with a bloody weapon: from , cuspis, mucro, & , captivus; so is the word Luke 21.24. Because (as a Law) sinne doth exercise power over all the faculties of the soule,See Rom. 16.17. and members of the body. CHAP. VIII. Vers. 1. THere is no condemnation to them that are in Christ] Peter Martyr here well observeth the wisdom of the Apostle, who before speaking of the humane infirmities, and of the force of sinne in our members, gave instance in himselfe, that no man, though never so holy, should be thought to be freed altogether from sinne in this life. But now comming to set forth the priviledge of those which are in Christ, he maketh it not his own particular case, but inferreth a generall conclusion,
that there is noAs if hee should say, there is not one condem∣nation; there is none in Hea∣ven, God doth not condemne them; there is none on Earth, their own heart and conscience doth not condemne them; no word, no commandement, no threatning condemnes him. Mr. Fenner on Lam. 3.57. condemnation, not onely to him, but, not to any that are in Christ Jesus. Cajetan saith falsely, when he saith, there is nihil damnabile: It is not said (saith Mr. Perkins) they do nothing worthy of condemnation; but thus, there is no condemnation to them being in Christ, though they deserve it never so much. There is a freedome both from the guilt and punishment of sinne, to them which are in Christ; i.e. which believe, are one with Christ, all his members, and so are effectually called. Who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit] Walking Walking, in Scripture usually signifies to hold on a course of life, as Gen. 5.22. & 17.1. is not now and then to make a step forward, but to keep his ordinary course in the way of godli∣nesse. Flesh] that is, the corruption of nature. Spirit] that is, the grace of regene∣ration; live according to the motion and guidance of it. Vers. 2. For the Law By the Law of the Spirit of life, we un∣derstand the vertue and power of holi∣nesse; not in us, but in Christ Jesus; who by his righteous∣nesse, and me∣rits hath deli∣vered us from the power of sinne and death. B. Down. on Justif. l. 7. c. 7. Law of death] i. The power of death, both of body and soule; both temporall and eternall, due to that blot and staine. of the Spirit of life in Christ Iesus] that is, the grace of holi∣nesse in the humane nature of Christ, which upon our union with him is by the holy Ghost conveyed unto us; meaning the power of the Spirit which is in Christ hath freed all them which are in him from sinne and death. By the law of sinne is meant, the life and power it hath in it selfe to make guilty in Gods sight, and binde over to punishment. As if he had said, of like things and persons there is the like consequence; my infirmities are not imputed unto me to death; no more shall yours. The Apostle, as in the former Chapter, vers. 24. so here, speakes in the sin∣gular, of himself; teaching us by his own example, and every true Christian to apply the benefits of Christ to himselfe. Vers. 3. For what the Law could not doe, in that it was weak through the flesh] that is, justifie us; God sending his own sonne in the likenesse of sinfull flesh] that is, in the hu∣mane nature subject to passions and infirmities. The Manichees and Marcionites did wrest the Apostles words to signifie that Christ had no true humane flesh, but a similitude and likenesse onely: But Basil well answereth them, That this word, similitude,Phil. 2.7. is not simply to be referred to flesh; but, to sinfull flesh: for Christ was like unto us in all things, sin onely excepted. And for sinne condemned sin in the flesh] that is, Christ in his flesh being made a Sacrifice for us upon the Crosse,And for sinne] that he might take away the sinne of the World. Condemned sin in the flesh] that is, exacted the due punishment of sinne in his humane nature. did beare the punishment due unto our sinne; So God condemned sinne in the flesh of his Sonne; that is, paenas peccato debitas exegit, he did exact punishment due unto our sin. Pareus. Vers. 4. That the righteousnesse of the Law may be fulfilled in us] i.e. That which the law requireth unto justification might by Christ be fulfilled in us who are his mem∣bers, which walke not (as also he had said in the first verse) after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Vers. 7. The carnall mind is enmity against God] . The word signifieth the act of a carnall mind, comprehending thoughts, desire, discourse. Pareus well no∣teth, that he useth not the word , which signifieth prudence it selfe, least he should seem to have condemned that naturall gift and faculty; but , which no∣teth the act rather and execution of that faculty: and he addeth to it , of the flesh, not condemning all prudent actions, but such as proceed from the pravity of the flesh. The wisdome of the flesh, that is, mans best things, his best thoughts and affec∣tions, the best inclinations and motions of the minde of a naturall man, are not onely enemies, but even enmity against God. Not an enemy, as the vulgar Latine readeth it. Hereby is expressed the irreconcilable enmity between the flesh and the Spirit; for an enemy may be reconciled, but enmity can never be reconciled. Not subject] That is, according to an ordinate and godly subjection, as the word signifies.
Vers. 8. So then they are in the flesh cannot please God] Pope Syricius wickedly ap∣plyed these words of Paul to wedlock; but to be in the flesh, signifies not to be in wedlock, but in the state of nature received by carnall generation; and not be re∣newed by the Spirit, as the next verse sheweth: The phrase is significant,Par. in loc. See Act. 8.23. noting a man drownd in corruption. We say of a man overcome of anger, he is in heate; of a drunkard, he is in drink. Vers. 9. If so be that the spirit of God dwells in you] The word is causall or conditi∣onall. If, not that he doubteth but that he is plainly confident. Dwelling meanes two things. 1. The holy Ghost doth abide in them, not for a time onely, but for ever; for the word noteth perpetuity.Chrysost. 2 Thes. 16. Mr. Pekins. He is not in us, tanquam hospes but indigena persetuus, as John. 14.16. 2. That the Holy Ghost hath the full di∣sposition of the heart; as when a man commeth to dwell in a house, whereof he is Lord, he hath liberty to govern it after his own will. None of his] His Creature, but not his Disciple. Vers. 10. The Body is dead because of sinne: but the Spirit is life, because of righteous∣nesse] Body is the mortall part of a man, which is subject to death; Spirit is the in∣ward part of a man, viz. His soule regenerate, which liveth by faith; that is, now for the present, the Spirit liveth by grace; as the just is said to live by faith; and that al∣so is a pledge of life everlasting afterward. Vers. 13. If ye through the Spirit, doe mortifie the deeds of the body, ye shall live] 1. Eve∣ry man must be an agent in this businesse, and not a patient onely; if (yee) doe mortifie, a man must do it himself. 2. There must be a true hatred to sin, and that is ever to death; he must strike it to the heart. 3. There is a slaying of every sin; the deeds of the body. That is, all the evill lusts, and affections. 4. A killing of sinne by true weapons, by the Spirit. Vers. 14. As many as are led by the Spirit of God] It is not said ruled but led, plus est agi quam regi; when one is ruled by another, he acts himselfe,Gal. 5.18. The spirit of God. 1. Al∣wayes leades a man according to the rules of the word; the Child of God hath a twofold guide, the word without, and the Spirit within, Prov. 6.22. 2 Pet. 1.10. 2. Inclines his heart readily to worke in that way, Esay. 30.21. and his own action is seene; when he is led by another, though he may act himselfe, the others action is more seen then his. Vers. 15. The Spirit of bondage] Not bondage to sinne, but by it. Whereby we cry Abba Pauls meaning is to signifie, that the Holy Ghost causeth us to make requests, and stirreth up on hearts to groane, and sigh to God. 2 Kings. 2.12. Mark. 14.36. Father] The reason of the gemination, is not barely by way of exegesis; but to shew that not onely the Jewes, but the Syrians, the Greeks, and Latines, should call God Father. 2. To shew the intensenesse, and fervour of af∣fection. There is the gift of prayer, and the Spirit of prayer; our prayers proceed from a Spirit of prayer, when our hearts are filled with holy longings and desires, af∣ter the things we pray for beyond our words; the spirit of supplication sets the regene∣rate part a work: here is not a calling onely, but a crying, which notes earnestnesse. 2. The petition Father, Father, notes vehemency of affection. 3. It is a repetition in severall languages, Syriack, and Greek, Abba Father. Vers. 16. The Spirit it selfe beareth witnesse with our Spirit] We have two witnesses joyning together their testimonies to assert this truth,See John. 5. 6. Yet doth the spirit work this assurance in the heart of man, not by immediate and extraordinary inspirations, and revelations; but by ordinary meanes. Hilders. on 51. Psal. 7. Lect. 124. that we are the Sonnes of God; viz. our Spirit, and the Spirit of God, that witnesse of our Spirit; That is, our conscience is the first, the Spirit of God is the second. His work is not , but , to witnesse together with our Spirit; That is, to confirme and rati∣fie what that hath asserted. Mr. Bedford against Antinomianisme. Chap. 5. Vers. 17. And if Children, then heirs, heires of God, and joynt heires with Christ] Chrysostome observes three notable passages of honour; every one rising by degrees, above another. 1. We are not onely Children but heires. 2. Not heires to any mortall man, but to the immortall God. 3. Not basely associated in this our inheritance; but are coheires annexed to Jesus Christ.
Vers. 18. I reckon] The Greek word signifies. I conclude upon an argument. Are not worthy] The words in the originall are, not worthy to the glory; or not worthy to be compared to it. The Greek work signifies, they are not to be put in the balance  signifies when a man hath cast his ac∣counts, & well weighed the matter, he concludeth, resolveth, and determineth, as Rom. 3.28. and 6.11. Bishop Dow. vide Bezam. with the glory of heaven; a word taken from a ballance. These suffe∣rings which the godly sustaine, are not worthy of; or not worthy to be compared, or comparable, or equall in worth to the glory, which shall be revealed in us, or upon us. Vers 19. For the earnest expectation of the Creature waiteth] The expectation of the Creature expecteth,Auget empha∣sim, quod apo∣stolus non sim∣pliciter dicit, creatura expe∣ctat, sed expe∣ctatio, creaturae expectat. q.d. Creaturae tam anxiè anque avidè gloriam illam expectant ut videantur esse ipsa expectatio. Gerh. Aliqui an Hebrew Pleonasme, to expresse the continuall desires, and ex∣pectation of the Creature. That is, as some re∣stringunt verba Apostoli ad novam creaturam, id est, fideles, expectantes beatam illam spem; non dicitur absolutè nam creatura, sed intenta expectatio creaturae; additur autem intentam illam expectationem expectare. Quae verba non malè meo judicio sic re∣somebat Thomas, creatura intentè expectans, filiorum Dei revelationem expectat; quibus verbis creaturae nomen circumscribitur, ut non intelligatur de quavis creatura, sed de ea quae est capax talis . Rivetus. expound it; the godly waiteth for the manifestation of the sonnes of God; that is, of themselves; as the Lord reigned Brimstone from the Lord; that is himselfe; it being an Hebraisme to put the Antecedent sometime in place of the relative. Vers. 20. Vanity] Of service, was constrained by God to serve unregenerate men. Vers. 21. The bondage of corruption] Some say of dissolution, others of subje∣ction; they are made serviceable to the lusts of unregenerate men. Vers. 22. Groaneth] As one pressed with a burden desireth to be eased. Travelleth in paine] As a woman in travell to be delivered.It is a Prosopo∣peia whereby a Person is feigned to the creature, as though it had will, desire, sorrow, groaning. Mr. Fenner in loc. Vers. 23. Which have the first fruits of the Spirit] Which are but as a handfull of Corne, in respect of the whole Corne-field. In this life we are not saved re but spe.  un à suble∣vat. Beza. vide Bezam.Vers. 24. We are saved by hope] That is, We are so assured of our salvation, as if we possessed it already. Vers. 26. Also helpeth our infirmities] Helpeth together. The word signifies such a kind of helping; as when a man takes a thing (as Timber or the like) at the other end, or the other side; one man standing the one way, and the other the other way; or one taking up one end, and the other the other end; that is the meaning of it. Vers. 28. We know] That is, Not onely I, and you; but all the faithfull people of God,All things] their prosperi∣ty, adversite, yea their ten∣tations and sinnes should in the end work for their good. have great proofe of it, by daily experience: that all afflictions (for of them specially he speaketh) how many or great so ever they be) shall by Gods blessing procure, and further our chiefest good; that is the happinesse of our soules. The word is not  he knew be∣fore, but  praecognovit he acknowledged before, 2 Tim. 2.19. Rom. 11.2.Vers. 29. Whom he did foreknow] By prescience here we understand not simply the foreknowledge of God; but his fore-acknowledging, which is a knowledge with approbation. Vers. 30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called them, he also justified, &c.] The Apostle compares the causes of salvation, to a chaine of many Links; whereof every one is so coupled to the other, that he which takes hold of the highest, must needs draw the rest with him. Vers. 31. What shall we then say to these things?] The Apostle having set forth the great mystery of the love of God to us in Christ,Magnificentis∣sima conclusio totius superioris de Iustificatione gratuita dispu∣tationis. Beza. concludeth (as some conceive) like an oratour. As if he had said, Here is a subject about which much might be said; but we had need bee very carefull, how and what we say about it. No man, no not the tongue of an Angel is sufficient to deliver, and unfold these secrets: such love, such goodnesse are beyond words. Mr. Caryll on 11. of Iob. 2.
Who can he against us] He meanes not in their affection, to oppose or work our annoyance; but to hurt us, 1 Pet. 3.13. Vers. 32. Delivered him up for us all] That is, for us who have all things given with him, all such as are chosen, justified, and shall never be condemned as in the next vers. Vers. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect] Or put in any accusation against them; the Greek word signifies in jus vocare, to call into the Law. It is a law-custome to clear men by Proclamation; if one have been indicted at the As∣sizes, and no Bill brought in against him; there is an O yes made; If any have any thing to say against the prisoner at Barre, he should come forth, since he stands upon his freedome. Vers. 34. Who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession Qualis est ista intercessio? non oralis; sed realis, ex merasui ipsius in cruce oblati repraesentatione. Hinc est quod dicitur comparere coram Deo pro nobis Heb. 9.24. D. Twiss. vind. l. 1. parte secunda. Sect. 23. for us] By appearing in heaven for us; and by willing that that his merits should be effectu∣all unto us. Vers. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?] By this interrogation, the Apostle doth more emphatically deny, that any thing whatsoever,Est autem ver∣bum  significanter positum; solet enim de Iudaïcis divortijs usurpari. Matth. 19.6. Marc. 10.9 Grotius. in loc. shall be able to se∣parae us from Christ, then if in plaine termes he had said, as after he doth; no∣thing whatsoever is able to separate. Shall tribulation] The word signifies any thing that presseth or pincheth us: Di∣stesse.] The word is translated from the straightnesse of the place, to the estate of the mind, 2 Sam. 24.14. persecution] when we are pursued from one place to another, and banished; famine and nakednesse] which follow the banished. Vers. 37. We are more then Conquerers] We doe over overcome, Super superamus, supervincimus. That is, triumph, or overcome before we fight; or are more then conquerers in them, because we are Conquerers by them. Vers. 39. For I am perswaded, that neither death, nor life, &c.] Whereby he meaneth all the faithfull and Elect; and by the love of God; not our love towards God, but Gods love towards us; the Apostle speakes before of Christs love to his chosen; and himselfe expounds it of Gods love to us in Christ, vers. 37. The ground on which the Apostle builds this assurance, is not any speciall revelation; but such a founda∣tion as is common to all the faithfull, as appeares,2 Pet. 1.1. v. 32, 33 34 the faith of every Chri∣stian is in nature all one with Pauls, though not in measure and degree; and as effe∣ctuall to save him as Pauls was. The Apostle proves that neither life, that is, the pleasures of life; nor death, that is, the paines and terrours before, as well as the stroke of death it selfe; nor things present, that is, evils of sense; nor things to come, that is, evils in expectation; nor height of prosperity; nor depth of adversity; nor any thing else can separate us from the love of God; That is, the love wherewith he loveth us in Christ. CHAP. IX. Vrs. 1. I Say the truth in Christ, J lye not] This duplication of contraries, is used for the more force, and to shew his sincerity. My conscience also bearing me witnesse in the holy Ghost] That is, the Holy Ghost who is privy to my conscience bearing me witnesse; or my conscience which the Holy Ghost is privy to.Mede on Acts. 5.3.4, 5. Vers. 3. My brethren my kinsmen according to the flesh] That is, the Israelites; mean∣ning for the advancement of Gods glory, in their calling and salvation.Perkins. Aliqui existi∣mant eum, quemadmodum apud Romanos Dux exercitus saepe unum aliquem pro toto exercitu devovebat & morti destina∣bat, itae Paulum cùm ad Romanos scriberet, ad illum morem adlusisse, & optasse, ut Christus ipsum pro populo Iudaico tan∣quam hominem sacrum, reijci & occidi juberet. Dilher. Eclog. Sac. Dictum septimum.
Vers. 4. Who are Israelites: to whom pertaineth the adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises] There are 7. priviledges. First, they were Israelites; that is, of the posterity of Jacob called Israel. The second is adoption; in that they were reputed, and called the children of God; not the inward and spiritual adoption spoken of Iohn 1.12. but the federall outward, Exod. 19.5. Thirdly, they had the glory of God; that is, the mercy seat; The Ark of the Covenants a speciall token of Gods glorious pre∣sence, 1 Sam. 4.22. the pledge of Gods presence. The fourth is the Covenant, Covenants Greeke; that is, the two Tables of the Covenant, Heb. 9.4. Fifthly, the giving of the Law, viz. of the judiciall, and ceremoniall Law. Sixthly, the worship of God, the publike solemnity whereof was tyed to the Temple at Jerusalem. Seventhly, to them pertained the pro∣mises made to the Patriarkes, touching the Messias. Perkins. Vers 6 The word of God hath taken none effect] That is, then the Covenant made with the forefathers is void, if the Jewes be rejected. Vers. 11. Neither having done any good or evill] That is, before he considered of their good or evill; in his decree he decreed to love Jacob, and hate Esau. Mr. Perkins. Vers. 12. Questio est, an Paulus Histoicè locum acceperit de duobus populis, & externis praerogativis, an mysticè de duo∣bus ipsi fratribus in particulari, & eorum descrimine ratione salutaris gratiae & ultimi finis. Nihil aliud est quam propositū electivum, ad∣eoque liberum.Vers. 13. J have loved Iacob, and hated Esau] There is a two fold love in God. 1. Amor benevolentiae, a love of well willing; which God did beare to the person before the world was; and it is called the love of Election, as here. 2. Amor complacentiae, a love of complacency, to his own Image in the person; of this Christ speaketh Iohn 14.21.23. Rutherfords Triall, and Triumph of faith. Vers. 14. God forbid] Greek Let it not be so, 3. Rom. 6. like that speech Gen. 18.25, that be farre from thee. Est longissime aver santis. Absit ut hoc dicamus. Grotius. Non obdurat Deus imperti∣endo malitiam, sed non imperti∣endo miserecordiam. Aug. Epist.Vers. 18. Whom he will, he hardeneth] There is a threefold hardnesse of heart. 1. Naturall, which is the Estate of all men. 2. Contracted by a custome of sinning. 3. Judiciary, which God inflicteth upon men as a judgement; this is here meant. Vers. 22. Vessells of wrath] Some interpret it the Instruments of wrath; rather those which fill themselves with sinne; and shall be for ever filled with wrath. Fitted] Made up, finished. Vers. 23. Riches of his glory] It is familiar with Paul, to call a great plenty of a thing richs, Ephes. 1. His most rich, and abundant glory. The word glory, which is twice here repeated,2 Rom. See 11.33. Quia praecipua ejus laus est in benefactis. Calvinus. is put for the mercy of God by a Metonymie; so E∣phes. 1. Vers. 29 The Lord of Sabaoth] Sabaoth, not Sabbath. of hosts, not of rest; and so James 5.4. R. David Kimchi gives two reasons, why God is so called. First, because he is the onely Lord of all creatures in heaven and earth. Secondly, because he can easiy scatter, and overthrow the great force that is in hoasts, or Armies. Vers. 31. The Law of righteousnesse] That is, the righteousnesse prescribed by the Law; an Hebraisme. Vers. 33. And whosoever beleeveth on him, shall not be ashamed] Or confounded. The Apostle followeth the translation of the Septuagint; in the originall Esay 28.16. the words are, he that beleeveth shall not make haste; the Septuagint put the consequent for the Antecedent, & the effect for the cause: because he which is rash, and maketh haste, is ashamed in the end, and confounded. Peter Martyr expoundeth it of the patience of the Saints which doe waite for the fulfilling of Gods promise in due time,Iund. 2 Paralel. 15. not hasting to use unlawfull meanes; and more particularly, the Prophet there reproveth those which would not waite upon God for deliverance, but depend upon present helpes.Shall not be con∣founded] Some doe refer it to the day of judgement, when the faithfull shall not be confounded, or ashamed; cum ve∣nerit in suturo; Glosse Interlin. Haymo. But it is more generall, shewing that the faithfull, neither in the time present, nor to come shall be ashamed; nor to be confounded, signifies non frustrari, not to be disappointed of their hope; P. Martyr. and more is understood then said; hat is, shall be confirmed, comforted, established. Fajus. Jun. annotat.
CHAP. X. Vers. 3. GOing about] or seeking, studying. Vers. 4. For Christ is the end of the law] The end of the Law is to justifie and save those which fulfill it; Christ subjected himselfe thereto,Finis perficiens non interficiens. Aug. The abrogater of the Ceremoniall, and fulfiller of the Morall Law, not for himselfe, but for us; therefore Christ doing it for believers, they fulfill the Law in Christ: and so Christ by doing, and they by believing in him that doth it, doe fulfill the Law. Perkins. Notanter appellatur  duo significat; semel finem seu complementum ali∣cujus rei, Matth. 10.22. & 24.6. Luc. 1.33. Joh. 13 1. Hoc sensu denotat obedientiam Domini activam, qua omnem Dei Legem à capite ad calcem, ab initio ad finem implevit. Interdum est retributio debita sive ea praemium sit, sive poena. Matth. 17.27. Rom. 6.21, 23, & 13.7. 2 Cor. 11.15. Phil. 3.19. Et sit subinauit obedientiam passivam, retributionem, seu poe∣nam nobis debitam in quam salvator se recepit. Walther. Miscellan. Theol. perfectly fulfilled it for us; and his perfect righteousnesse is imputed to us. Vers. 5. The man] Even the man himselfe, in and by himselfe. Which doth these things] Even all those things which are written in the law, according to the utter∣most extent of them. Shall live thereby] not onely temporally, but eternally. Vers. 10. With the heart man believeth unto righteousnesse, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation] The tongue confesseth what the heart believes. Vers. 13. For whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved] That is, whosoever hath this grace See Vers. 11. Prayer is sometimes ta∣ken for the whole worship of God. B. Dwn. of Justification. l. 7. c. 4. given unto him truely to worship God, it is an evident sign and assurance unto him, that he shall be saved. Vers. 18. Their sound went into all the earth] That which the Prophet David spea∣keth of the Sunne, the Apostle here applies to the Gospell to note,Psal. 19.4. that the circle of the Gospell is like that of the Sunne, universall to the whole world. The Hebrew is,Reynolds. Their line is gone out through all the earth; the LXX. which the Apostle followeth,Vide Drus. de quaesitis per Epist. epist. 77. their sound went into all the earth. The sence is one, though the expressions be diffe∣rent. Vers. 20. But Esaias is very bold] in telling the Jews to their faces that they were rejected. CHAP. XI. Vers. 9. LEt their table be made a snare, &c.] By Table, Origen meanes the Scriptures, which became a snare unto them, in that they perverted them to their own hurt. Haymo and some others say, that their Table is collatia verborum in mensa, their meeting and conference to take Christ; whereat they did but lay snares to take themselves. Chrysostome understands by Table, Omnes Iudaecrum deli∣cios, their prosperity, their publique State, their Temple. Calvin, Quicquid in vita optabile est & beatum, he gives them to their ruine and destruction. Peter Martyr saith it is an elegant allegory, wherein is signified that whatsoever is sweet and acceptable, becomes dangerous and deadly. Let it be made] non est optantis, sed prophetantis. Vers. 12. How much more their fulnesse] an enriching of the Gentiles. Vers. 15. Be the reconciling of the world] This cannot be understood of men in all ages; but, in the last age of the world, after Christs ascension,Perkins. wherein God offered to all the world life everlasting by Christ. Vers. 16. For if the first fruit be holy, the lumpe is also holy; and if the root be holy, so are the branches.] First fruits and root; that is, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Be∣cause they were first consecrated to God, and first in covenant with God.See 1 Cor. 7.14. It is such a holinesse as that Exod. 19.6. & Dan. 8.24. & 12.7. not a personall and inherent, but a federall and externall holinesse; so as to be owned by God in a visible co∣venant.
Vers 17. And if some of the branches be broken off] Some urge this and vers. 20 to prove that the regenerate may fall from grace. There is a twofold planting: 1 Out∣ward, when God giveth the word unto a people, and they publiquely professe it. 2 Inward,Perkins on Jude. when God giveth true faith, whereby men are set into Christ. The Jews were implanted by the former onely, and therefore might be broken off; the other is everlasting. Paul useth a similitude of graffing a branch of the wilde Olive into the true, but contrary to nature; for nature adviseth to set sweet graffes into sowre stocks; and though it be naturall for the stock to be vehiculum alimenti, to convey the nou∣rishment to the graffe; yet naturally virtus temperamenti, the quality of the juice is from the graffe, not from the stock: but in our supernaturall graffing the branch of a wild Olive is made partaker not onely of the root, but fatnesse also of the true Olive. And with them partakest of the root and fatnesse of the Olive Tree] This Olive tree is the visible Church, Ier. 11.16. so called, 1 Propter viriditatem, for its greennesse. 2 Propter pinguedinem, for its fatnesse. The root of this Olive tree was Abraham, by vertue of the Church-covenant; the Covenant began with him; therefore he is said to be the Root, Mic. 7. ult. Fatnesse] that is all the outward priviledges, ordinances, graces, The Gentiles partake of the root and fatnesse; that is, are taken among the children of God by outward profession, and partake of the externall priviledges of the Covenant.Vers. 18. Coelum astrife∣rum uno in loco est: & tamen ejus vox & verba ubique locorum audiuntur, id est, vis ejus intelligitur. Pari modò cum Apo∣stoli in illustrioribus urbibus fuerint, ibique & praedicaverint & miracula fecerint, ut Hierosolymis, Caesareae, Joppae, Antio∣chiae, Ephesi, Corinthi, Thessalonicae, inde fama verum tantarum pervenit ad omnes terras in quibus habitabant Judaei, idque sufficit. Grotius in loc. Vers. 22. Behold] is not the Adverbe, but the Verbe to note a narrow looking into the point, as in that of Iohn 1.29. As if Iohn had said, look well on him, eye him, and mark him well. The goodnesse] the word  benignitatem. Significatur ea voce facilitas ac promptitudo praestandi beneficia, Estius. signifies the propensity of God to do good. Severity]  Sic  severè 2 Cor. 13.10. Titus 1.13. Origo vocis à medicis qui membra insecta abscindunt. Grotius. such a severity as notes a cutting off: which word Paul useth the more to set forth Gods goodnesse to us. Vers. 25. Vntill the fulnesse of the Gentiles be come in] There is a double fulnesse of the Gentiles. 1 Before their conversion. 2 A greater fulnesse after. vers. 12. He means here a full and plentifull propagation of the Gospel, whereby many of all Nations shall be converted to God. Vers. 26. The deliverer] It signifies delivering by a strong hand, to rescue by force, as David delivered the Lamb out of the Lyons paw. This word is used in the sixth Peti∣tion of the Lords prayer. Vers. 29. For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance] That is, the peculiar gifts which pertain to salvation;Peace, joy; but the essen∣tiall gifts to salvation, viz. Faith and sanctification may be abated. for common gifts may be lost, and some saving gifts in some degree and for a time. Vers. 32. For God hath concluded them all in unbeliefe, that he might have mercy upon al.] The word all] is not to be expounded of every particular man, as some would have it; for then Paul should contradict himselfe, who said before, God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy. But it must be understood of all that are to be saved, both Jewes and Gentiles, as the article added to all importeth; the meaning is, that God will save all whom he purposeth to save of his mercy,Perkins. and not of their merit, because all are sinners. Vers. 33. O the depth &c.] wherein Austin saith is contained the solution of that que∣stion, why some are converted rather then others. Of the wisdom and knowledge] God by his wisdom discerneth courses most conve∣nient; but by his knowledge he comprehendeth all, whether convenient or incon∣venient.
Past finding out] A metaphor from quick-sented Hounds, who are at a losse, having neither footsteps nor sent left of the game they pursue; none can trace the Lord, and finde out the way and reason of his doings. Vers. 35. Or, who hath first given to him, and it shall be recompenced unto him again] as who should say, no man can challenge God as if he owed him ought.Sanderson. CHAP. XII. Vers. 1. BY the mercy of God] The word in the Greek translated mercies, is the plurall number, per miserationes. Though there be in God miserationes multae, yet there is but one mercy which is his essence;Chrysost. The ph. Aug. Vtitur numero multitudinis amplificationis causâ. Beza. from whence issue motus m∣sericordiae. Presnt] The Apostle exhorteth to exhibite, present, give up themselves, herein alluding to the rite of the sacrifices which were first exhibited and presented unto God at the Altar.Beza. This word is used of our blessed Saviour when they brought him into the Temple, and presented him before the Lord, Luke 22 3.Dr. Willet. Your bodies] That is, the whole man,Part for the whole. as 13.1. by soul he means the whole per¦son▪ there is an Hebraisme, the soul for the whole man: in this there is a Grecisme, and with us it is ordinary to use body for the whole man, as when we say, He is a very good or naughty body.The Greekes put  for persons. He alludes to the burnt offering that was wholly offered unto God. The head, body, legges, the inwards, all washed with water after it was killed,Present your whole selves, soules and bo∣dies unto God, as wholy con∣secrated to his service, wherein ye shall offer a farre more acceptable sacrifice to him then all the oblation: under the Law; theirs were of beasts, yours of your selves; theirs of beasts slain, yours is a living Sacrifice; theirs was as it were a bruit service, yours a reasonable. Dr. Halls Paraphrase in loc. was offered on the Altar for a sweet savor unto God. This noteth principally Christ offering of himselfe wholy in his perfect sufferings and obedience unto his Father; but secon∣darily it was also a type of our giving and consecrating our selves altogether unto God Reasonable service] , your service of the Word. That is, orde∣red according to Gods Word, the rule of obedience. As the same word is rendered, 1 Pet. 2.2. Milke of the Word; not reasonable milk, , Mr. Pemble. Or, Rationalis cultus talem de∣notat, vel de quo rationem reddere possu∣mus, ut exponit Origines, vel spiritualem ut Chrysostomus, qui opponitur Animae impetui, aut victimis legalibus, quae aliqud modo erant irrationales: ut exponit Verstius, & alii Dr. Prid. Lect. 22. de Authoritate Ecclesiae in rebus Fidei.reasonable; such service as is done unto him with reason and understanding; when the understanding is regulated by the wisdom of God, and the will by the will of God. Vers. 2. But be ye transformed] metamorphosed. The Greek word signifies to lay aside one form and assume another; as the Metamorphosis written by Ovid and others; but it is to be meant in respect of the qualities, as the words following by the renewing of your mind, shew. Prove] This probation signifies a discerning with judgement of those things which are good, as Phil. 1.10. he that hath a perfect taste discerneth of the goodnesse of meats. Vers 3. Not to think of himself more highly then he ought to thinke, but to think soberly] The Greek is very elegantHis omnibus verbis utitur hic Apostolus, non sine jucunda vocum allusione, quae in Latino retineri non potuit. Estius. Vers. 6. Gifts] That is, as some rightly interpret, according to the offices and im∣ployments wherein we are set, these are graces and favours unto which God doth call any person, Rom 1.5. Eph. 3.8
Sunt qui per Prophetiam in∣telligunt divi∣nandi saculta¦tem, quae circa∣incunabula E∣clesiae N. Testa∣menti obtiue∣bat Sed ego in eorum senten∣tiam conceden∣dum arbitror qui Prophetiae nomen accipiunt de Scpturae in∣telligentia, & singulari ejus explicandi facultate. Nam reliquis muneribus omnibus quae recensentur ab Apostolo, in Ecclesia perpetuus locus est, absur∣dumque foret si cum uno temporario Charismate citra manifestam causam perpetua aliquot conjunxerit. Gersomus Bacerus disserrat. de gubernat Eccles. Vide Calvinum in loc.Whether prophesie, let us prophesie according to the proportion of faith] This place, (saith Par.) is to be understood of the Prophets in the New Testament. There were in the Primitive times three extraordinary offices in the Church, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Ephes. 4.11. See 1 Cor. 12.28. The Apostles were immediately called and sent of Christ for the conversion of the world, and planting of Churches. Prophets were such who were immediately stirred up and called by the Holy Ghost; and also indued with singular wisdome and knowledge both of the mysteries of faith, and also of the secret judgements of God, present and to come; also they excelled in a wonderfull gift of understanding the prophesies of the old Testament, and of ope∣ning and applying the same to those times. They were inferiour to the Apostles; and by them appointed to govern the Churches which they had planted. Evangelists were such ac accompanied the Apostles in their travell, and were sent by them upon occasion to the Churches, to preach the Gospell; but not to be resident in any place for governing of the Churches, as were the Prophets. Vers. 8 With simplicity] that is, of meere pitty and compassion; and not for any sinister repect, pleasure, or praise of men. See Ephes. 6.5. Vers. 9. Let love be without dissimulation] Greek, without hypocrisie. See 1 Ioh. 3.18. Abhor] as Hell, hate with horrour, The Greek word is very significant . The simple verb imports extream detestation, which is aggravated by the composi∣tion. Chrys. Cleave to that which is good] Hold it, as one firmly glued to it, for so the word sig∣nifies;Agglutinati Beza. things glued are not easily disjoyned. The same word is used of the con∣junction between man and wife, Matth. 19.5. Eph. 5.21. Vers. 10. Vtuntur hac vce  Aristoteles, Xenophon, Cicero etiam ad Atticum. significat vehementem amandi affectum. Grotius. Vers. 11. Fervent] Or, zealous Vult nos qui sub lege vivi∣mus, nihil remissum, nihil tepidum habeamus in nobis, sed cum servore Spiritus & calore fidei cuncta peragamus. Origen. in spirit; as if no service could be acceptable unto God, without fervency of spirit. Serving the Lord] Some read the words, serving the time; because there is a great affinity between those two words in the Greek tongue,  time, and  Lord; ap∣ply your selves to the time; not that they should be men-pleasers, or time-servers: but to apply themselves to the time in the occurrent and occasions thereof. But Beza saith this reading cannot be received at all,Vide Estium. because no such phrase is found in the Scripture, to serve the time in any such sense. Vers. 13. Given to hospitality] The Greek word is well translated; for this kinde of phrase notes an eager affection,. It is not said, exercising, but pursuing hos∣pitality. Chrys. or following of a thing; so a common drunkard is said to be given to drink, and a covetous man to be given to money. The phrase importeth that we should be so hospitable, as not to stay till strangers seek to us, but prevent them by our invitation. Vers. 16. Be not wise in your own conceits] The wisdom here inhibited may be under∣stood, either in regard of the object; that is, be not over-curious to pry into se∣crets unrevealed; or in respect of the subject, that is, be not conceitedly lift up in minde. Vers. 17. Provide things honest] That is, take care beforehand for things that may purchase us credit, and make us to be well reputed amongst men. Vers 18. Live peaceably with all men] with a double limitation: 1. If it be possible; some are so froward that one cannot live peaceably with them.Quoniam id non semper ob∣tineri poterat, ut pax nobis cum omnibus constaret duas particulas exceptionis loco attexuit. Si fieri potest & quantum in vobis. Calvinus in loc. Pacem cum omnibus habere non solum difficule est, verum etiam, ut sunt multorum hominum improbi mores, impossibile, adeo ut nec ipse Paulus qui haec praecipit, potuerit cum omnibus hominibus pacem habere; meritò igitur Apostolus duas addidit clausulas generalitatem hujus praecepti limitantes: Si fieri potest, nempe salva justicia, pietate ac veritate; &, quod in vobis est; ne videlicet à vobis at que ex vestra parte praebeatur ulla dissensionis occasio. Estius in loc. 2 If it be in you, or so
much as lyeth in you that is, so far as it will stand with faith and a good conscience; whether you translate it, have peace, keepe peace, observe peace, love peace, exercise peace; live peaceably, comprehends them all, Par. Vers. 20. Therefore if thine enemy hunger feed him] . The Greeke word is em∣phaticall, and signifies to feed indulgently, as Birds their young; or as a man his friend carving to him of the best. See à Lapid, and Par. in loc. In so doing thou shalt heape Coales of fire on his head] Coales doe either melt, or con∣sume: The meaning is, that this mercy will be like a heap of hot coales: either to melt their hearts, and to make them our friends; or if they persist in their enmity,1 Sam. 24.16. Significat ju∣stas poenas ab ijs solvenlas, qui bene de se merentes odio habent. Cham. tom 1. l. 15. c. 1. Sensus est: si aliter illa tanta tua patientia ac beneficentia ad meliorem mentem revocari non potest, gravis ei impendet poena. Grotius in loc. vide Estium. to adde fewell to their torments in Hell. Vers. 21. Be not overcome of evill] That is sinne; be not made to sinneVincitur à malo, id est ab actione mala, qui malos imita∣tur. Grotius. Vincitur à ma∣lo (ut docet Thomas 2.2. quest. 108. art. 1.) qui vult peccare in alium, quia ille peccavit in ipsum. Estius in loc. Elegans Antimetabole, qua velut epilogo claudit exhortationem uperiorem de non ulciscentis injurijs. Id. ib.by the sin of another: when another man hath done evill against me, or any deare to me in word or deed; I must not therefore fall into sinne or forsake my duty. One is then overcome with evill, when his minde is so possest with the thought of the injury that he hath received, that his judgement is perverted, and his passion disturbed by it; and this may be either sodainly, and for a fit in anger; or habitually in malice. It is a metaphore taken from war and combating. 1. To prevent an obiection, that it is no bsenesse, but rather a bravery of Spirit, not to revenge. 2. To shew that we shall be assaulted; therefore we had need to arme and strengthen our selves against it; fight for it. But overcome evill with good] Evill] That is, the injuries done to us in word or deed; good] That is, curteous, righteous, humble, kinde behaviour. Overcome] Eanestly desire, and constantly labour by our humility, love,1 Sam. 26.21.25. kind∣nesse to make them ashamed of their unkindnesse; by our faithfulnesse, and care of our duty, to make them forbear doing evill. CHAPT. XIII. Vers. 1. LEt every soule Si omnis ani∣ma, & vestra. Quis vos excipit ab universitate? Si quis tentat excipere, tentat decipere. Pontifices Romani cavillantur hic & 1 Pet. 2.13. non contineri personam praecipientis, uti Petri & Pauli, sed refutantur à Chrysostomo, qui ait etiam Apostolos ipsos, nedum caeteros hoc nomine (omnis anima) comprehendi. That is, Every man, an Hebrew synecdoche; then the Clergy as well as others, none are exempted. Be subject] The Greek word signifies to be subordinate, where is insinuated the order of government; Chrysostome noteth that he saith not, be obedient; but be sub∣ject, which is a generall word comprehending all other duties and services. To the higher (or supereminent) powers] When they were at worst. He calleth the civill Magistrates powers (saith Pareus) because they are armed with power against others. And he calls them powers, rather then Kings, Princes, (saith he) that hee may shew, that he speakes not so much of the persons, as of the order it selfe. Vers. 2. Whosoever therefore resisteth] The Greek word notes such a resisting as when a man is contrary to the order established;  resisteth the Ordinance of God] Here the Greek word translated to resist] signifies to stand against, a military word. Vers. 4. Vpon him that doth evill] Any evill, civill, religious; all lawes propoun∣ded without limitation must be interpreted in their latitude. Vers. 7. Render therefore to all their dues, &c.] Chrysostome observeth well, that the Apostle saith render] not give, nihil eniur gratuitè dat qui hoc fecerit, for it is our duty to yeeld obedience in all things to the Magistrate.
Tribute to whom tribute is due, custome to whom custome] For the most part, these two words  and  are confounded,Juter tributum & vectigal, Gracè , ita grammatici di∣stinguunt, quod illud pro regione seu praedijs, hoc pro mercibus expertandis importandisve pendatur. Estius. Latinè tributum dicitur à tribuendo vel contribu∣endo. Vectigal à vehendo, quia solvitur ex his quae advehuntur, vel evehuntur. Cornel. à Lap. vide Sculceti exercit. Evang. l. 1. Cap. 17. and indifferently taken for any kind of tribute, or payment made to the Governours: Yet to speak distinctly, there are two kinds of tribute, which is either laid upon the persons, called  poll-monie Matth. 17 25. or upon their substance, and was due for commodities brought in; and this is  as the etymon of the word sheweth. Vers 8. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another] Love is such a desperate debt Est autem ar∣gutè dictum: Caetera debita solvuntur nec manent: dilectionis debitum semper & solvitur & manet. Grotius in loc. as a man can never discharge himselfe of. Vers. 9 Thou shalt not commit adultery thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not steale, &c.] The Apostle (saith Grotius) rehearseth the commandements here in that order, in which the Lxx. rehearseth them in Exodus. It is observable (saith Pareus) that he rehearseth the precept about coveting in one word,Elton on the fifth Comman∣dement. Vide Cornel. à Lap. as thou shalt not cover; this sheweth it is but one Commandement. The Apostle rehearseth here onely five Commandements of the second Table, and omitteth that Commandement, honour thy Father, and thy Mother, &c. Because the Apostle had in this Chapter, treated before of the duty towards higher powers, and superiors, under which Parents are comprehen∣ded. And if there be any other Commandement] viz. Of the same nature, requiring that which we owe one to another,Grotius. 25. Exod, 1.4.5. viz. to honour Parents, and other things which are in the Law, but out of the Decalogue. Briefely comprehended] For the whole Law commands nothing but the love of God, and our neighbour. Vers. 10. Love is the fulfilling of the Law] The love of God fulfills the Law, 1. Re∣ductivè, because we fulfill all Commandements for the love of God. 2. Effectivè, hee who loveth the Lord, is ready to obey him. 3. Formaliter, all our actions should be referred to his glory. Vers. 11. For now is our salvation neerer then when we beleeved] The Apostle, Con∣fert incrementa cum initijs fidei, compareth the increasing of faith with the beginning; here he perswadeth to newnesse of life ab utili, from that which is profitable; we are now come nearer the mark, then when we began to beleeve, and therefore it behoves us to be the more earnest;Nunc propior sa∣lus nobis adest, quam eo tempore quo credere coepimus: ut ad tempus reseratur quod fidem praecessit. Calvinus. as those which run a race, the nearer they come to the mark, the faster they run, least any should out strip them. Vers. 12. Cast off the workes of darknesse] That word cast off] implies two things. 1. Haste. 2. Hatred, as Esay 30.22. and 31.7. sinnes are called workes. 1. In refe∣rence to the wages. 2. The number of darknesse] because they begin in inward dark∣nesse, goe on to outward, and end in utter darknesse. Vers. 13. Honestly] Or decently, 1. Thess. 4.12. That is, order all our actions, and the whole course of our life mannerly.Rioting and drunkennesse] Giving ones selfe to exces∣sive eating and drinking.  sunt nocturnae ama∣tiones. . Nam & potari solet de nocte. 1. Thess. 5.7. Grotius. Chambering] That which we translate Chambering, is properly lying in Bed, long lying;  est congressus viri cum muliere. Grotius. Wantonnesse] The beginning of concupiscence, giving ones selfe to dalliance, and such behaviours; as feed, and provoke lust; vox Graeca  satis latè patens, & omnia comprehendens quae lascivè sunt sed hic ea quae sunt contra sexuum decoruna. Grotius. Vers. 14. Make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.] 1.  to make projects for it.
CHAP. XIV. Verse 1. TO doubtfull disputations] We should forbear (in our Christian conference) disputes about things doubtfull, and fall to exhorting, admonishing and edifying one another.Vers 4. Quodes dictum intelligitur qùi volebant non de factis manifestis, sed de cordibus alienis judicare. Aug. de bapt. Contra. Donat. l. 2. c. 17. Let every man be fully perswaded] The word which the Apostle useth▪V. 5. aestimat] Jd est, conten∣dt, unā dem esse alteo prae∣stantiorem, alius cntndit omnes esse pares. De Dieu. Nos existimamus verbum  hic esse Hebraeorum Dun, quod non judicare tantum sed & litigare, disceptare, litem & causam agere, eam que tueri significat, ut Psal. 54.3. De Dieu in loc. signifies not to abound in sense, as the vulgar translates it; but to be assuredly perswaded in heart of that which is done. See 22. verse  is a metaphoricall word, and seemeth to be borrowed from a Ship under full saile, that hath both wind and tide with it, to carry it with a straight and speedy course to the desired point, and nothing to hinder it; quasi plenis velis feratur. Piscat. Vers. 9. Might be Lord] Greek one word, that he might Lord it, or rule them as his. Vers. 12. So then every one of us shall give account of himselfe to God] This account is, 1. Universall, every one. 2. Necessary, shall give. 3. Strict, an account to God. 4. sin∣gular, of himselfe: That is, of all his thoughts, words, deeds, passed in his whole life; and of all things which concerne his person, calling, or actions. Vers. 17. Meat and drink] That is, hath not such need of such indifferent things as these are; but righteousnesse, and peace,Some inter∣pret it of the Kingdome of glory as Chry∣sostome; these differences about the law∣fulnesse of meates, and drinkes, will not bring you to heaven; it is rather to be understood of the Kingdome of grace, the power of godlinesse consists not in these things. and joy in the Holy Ghost] those are the essen∣tiall things to be respected of all such as are the subjects of that kingdome of grace. Righteousnesse] Of Christ, the assurance of our justification before God. Peace] Of conscience, which proceeds from this assurance, and joy in the Holy Ghost] which proceeds from them both. So Mr. Perkins. Vers. 22. Hast thou faith? have it to thy selfe before God] By faith the Apostle meanes a perswasion in things indifferent; the meaning is, if thou beest in thy selfe perswa∣ded, a thing is indifferent, use they liberty to thy selfe, have faith with thy selfe;Doctor Taylor. Faith here sig∣nifies know∣ledge, and perswasion of our Christian liberty, of which before verse 5. and 14. called knowledge, 1 Cor. 8.7.11. Par. but boast not of it to the offence of another. Vers. 23. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sinne] Whatsoever a man doth, whereof he is not certainly perswaded in judgement, and conscience, out of Gods word,Perkins. Quicquid fit reluctante & vacillante conscientia peccatum est. Faith is here taken for a perswasion of conscience, say Ambrose, Chrysostome, The∣odorere, Theoph. Oecumen, Calvin, and others. that the thing may be done, it is sinne. CHAP. XV. Vers. 1. BEeare] , not only to tolerate and support their infirmities sed in se suscipere ut curent; but to take them in hand to cure them.Gloss. interlin. Similitudo du∣cta ab itinerum socijs, quorum validiores qui sunt, minus validos parte sarcinarum levant. Grotius. Metaphora ab onere vel mole, quam columnae sustri∣tant, sicut Galat. 6.2. Pareus in loc. It is a meta∣phore taken from the fashion of building, where the Pillars doe carry the weight, and burden of the house; or the frame of mans body, where the bones bear up the flesh. Vers. 2. Let every one of us please his neighbour for his good to edification] It was ne∣cessary
for the Apostle, to limite his precept in this matter; for in another place, man-pleasing is condemned, meaning the excesse of it; when one doth chiefely, or ly aime at this to give men content. Vers. 4. Whatsoever things were written] Whether precepts, promises, threaten∣ings, examples; aforetime] in the old Testament, and then much more in the new. Learning] That is, Heavenly learning. Through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope] True hope to come to heaven is obtained by patience. Vers. 9. As it is written, For his cause I will confesse to thee among the Gentiles, and sing unto thy name] The Apostle alleadgeth this Text as a proofe of the conversion and calling of the Gentiles; and therefore by nations here are meant those heathen nations, which were at that time strangers from God. This place fitly serves to prove the conversion of the Gentiles. David gave thankes to God before the Gen∣tiles, that is, he did it presently, upon his victories in the place he sang praise to God; and that exercise did bring on some proselytes. But secondly, he doth it and meant that he should doe it continually in the use of those Psalmes and Songs which he did make by the Gentiles. Thirdly, this looketh higher also then David, viz. to Christ who did, and doth praise God before and among the Gentiles, by the Mini∣stry of his Apostles. Vers. 12. A root of Jesse] It is so called because then the family was obscure, when Christ sprang out of it, as the root of the trees lies hid in the earth; and Jesse is named rather then David, because the Kingdom of David was then ceased, only the fa∣mily of Jesse still remained. Vers. 13. The God of hope] Both objectivè, because he is the onely object of our hope, 1 Tim. 6.17. and effectivè, he onely is the authour, and worker of it. quanquam ab honoris appetitu originem trahit, usu tamen traductum est ad id omne quod studio magno ac contentione agimus. Ita enim usurpat Plato, Xenophon, Plutarchus, alij, & noster Apostolus. 2. Cor. 5.9. 1 Thess. 4.11. Grotius.Vers. 20. Srived] . It signifies an high ambition to Preach the Gospell. Vide Bezam. Jackson on Jer. 7.16.Vers. 30. Strive together]  simul contendere. The word signifies to strive to the shedding of bloud, see Luke 22.44. Vers. 31. Them that doe not beleeve The word signifies both unbeleevers, and diso∣bedient. CHAP. XVI. Vers. 3. GReet Priscilla and Aquila] Aquila and Priscilla his wife were Jewes, and of the same Trade with Paul;De Launay, sur les Ro∣maines. Pareus. Acts. 18.2.3. So Col. 4.15. Phil. 2. Bish. Dav. and Mr. Coto. vide Bezam. Tent-makers for the Souldiers. Priscilla is here named first, as she is, Act. 18.18. 2 Tim. 4.18. whence it appeares, that she was a very vertuous woman; and perhaps to be preferred before her husband for piety. Vers. 5. Greet the Church that is in their house] Sometimes it may be the whole Church was met together in some eminent mans family, yet withall it includes that the Family it selfe was a Church of God. Hanc vocem non accipit in significatione propria & usita∣ta, sed latius extendit ad eos omne qui non unam tantum ecclesiam instituunt, sed promulgando ubique Evangelio impendunt operam. Calvinus in lc. vide Estium. See Iohn 13.16. 2 Cor. 8.23. It may be they were imployed by Saint Paul, or Saint Peter about the Gospell at Rome. Mr. Thorndikes Right of the Church in a Christian State, Chap. 2. p. 73. See more there.Vers. 7. Who are of note among the Apostles] The sence may be, they were well known to the Apostles; but it is more probable, the word Apostles is to be taken in a large signification, for such as were messengers of the Church. Mr. Ball. Vers. 16. Salute one another with a holy kisse] That is, with such a kisse as becom∣eth Saints; as it is the fashion among us for men meeting with their friends to shake
hands, so was it among the Jewes, as appeares by the many places in both Testa∣ments, for men to kisse men at meeting, and parting.Osculum, fre∣quens ac pervul∣gatum benevo∣lentiae symbolum fuisse apud Ju∣daeos, passim ex Scripturis liquet. Illud in morem transit apud veteres ut Christiani ante Coenae communicationem se mutuò oscularentur, ad testandam e signo amicitiam. Hinc fluitritus ille qui bodie est apud Papistas, osculandae patinae. Calvinus in loc. Vide Estium. In the Primitive times Christians before the receiving of the Communion kissed each other; which fashion for some abuse was prudently layd down: instead whereof is the superstitious kissing of the Pax in the Church of Rome. Vers. 17. Marke them] .Vulg. & Beza ut observetis, Erasm. consi∣deretis, Syrus & Arabs. Ca∣veatis ab iis qui, &c. sic  accipitur Luc. 11.35. de Dieu in loc. Id est, attentè & diligenter, quasi hostes è speculâ ob∣servetis. Beza in loc. The word signifieth such a marking as a Watch∣man useth that standeth on a Towre, to descry enemies, he marketh diligently all commers, and giveth notice accordingly for the saving of the City, whence Episcopacy say some. And avoyd them] viz. After admonition and good means used for their reclaiming. Titus 3 10. Vers. 19. Wise unto that which is good, and simple (or harmlesse) concerning evill] wise to procure good to your selves, innocent in bringing evill on any. Vers. 20 Bruise] the Greek word signifies to break or crush a thing to pieces being applied to the feet, it noteth that breaking or crushing, which is by stamping upon a thing. Vers. 25. Establish you] Paul often attributes this Greek word to God, as 1 Thess. 3.13. 2 Thess. 2.17. & 3.3. 1 Pet. 5.10. elswhere he useth the same word concerning men viz. in their degree and order, which men do by word and example. Kept secret] (say some) from Jewes; rather thus, comparatively hidden;Dr. Sclater. being ne∣ver so clearly made known to the sons of men. Ephes. 3.5.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE First Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to the CORINTHIANS. CHAP. I. Corinthus ex angusto Achaiae limite hinc Io∣nium, inde Aegeum pro∣spectans mare, ex commercils magnas adepta divitias. Gro∣tius.Ibi Lais de tota Gracia tributa exegit libidinis, denis drachmarum millibus usum sui indicans, & mortua sepulchrum habuit omnium Poetarum versibus celebre. Id. ibid. Vbi Demosthenes mulietculae, pro horario usu corporis, deposcenti octona auri talensa, respondit, Ego tanti poenitere non emo. Cornel. à lap.THe City of Corinth was a famous metropolis in Achaia; notable for wisdom. Periander one of the seven wise men is celebrated for a Corinthian; and Tulle calleth it lumen Graeciae, the light or eye of Greece. The Corinthians were notedly infamous for lust and wanton∣nesse, hinc  pro scortari. Non cuivis homini contingit adire Corinthum. Therefore Paul in his first Epistle writes much against it, 1 Cor: 5.1, 9. & 10.8. & 11.6, 9. & 18.7. Both these Epistles to the Corinthians (saith à Lapide) were written before that to the Romans. This first Epistle to the Corinthians in weight of argument is far inferiour to the precedent Epistle to the Romans; but in variety of things it ought to be judged equall, and in order of time before the other. Morton. proprie aptari & coadunari significat: quem∣admodam membra humani corporis optima symmetria inter se cohaerent. Calvinus.Vers. 10. Be perfectly joyned together] The Greek word signifies such a joyning as when a bone out of joynt is perfectly set right again. As Gal. 5.1. Restore set him in joynt. See Mr. Burrh. on Hos. p. 171. Vult uni Christo magisterium ita asserere in Ec∣clesia, ut ab eo pendeamus omnes: ut unus inter nos dominus ac magister nominetur, ne ullum contra hominis nomen appenatur. Calvinus.Vers. 12. I am of Paul, and I of Apollo and I of Cephas, and I of Christ] That is, I am Pauls Disciple, follower; and so in the rest. Chrysostome interprets the place so that the last words should be the Apostles own crossing the Corinthians, shewing them in his own example who they must be called by. See Act. 26.16. Potissimum ad praedicandum, nam hic aliquos nominat qiuis ip∣se baptizasset. Vossius. Dicit has non fuisse praecipuas suae functionis partes: sibi non docendi munus praecipuè esse injunctum cui incumberet. Nam quum dicit Christus Apostolis, ite, praedicate, & baptizate, baptismum adjungt doctrinae tanquam ac∣cessi nem duntaxat vel appendicem: ut semper doctrinae prior locus maneat. Calvinus. vide Estium.Vers. 17. Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospell] Paul doth not sim∣ply deny that he was sent to baptize, for it was enjoyned to all the Apostles, Matth. 20.19. to preach and baptize; but comparatively; q. d. he rather enjoyned me prea∣ching then baptizing See Iohn 9.41. Vers. 18. The preaching of the Crosse] That is, the Gospell; not onely because the crosse followed it, but also in that it is the doctrine of Christ crucified. Vers. 20. The Disputer] Or, Inquirer; such as will receive no more in religion then
they can see reason for. See Beza. Fullers Miscel. lib. 3. cap. 7. The Jewish Doctors, that were still inquiring among themselves the truth of the Scriptures at their meet¦ings, and yet believed not. Thorndike. Vers. 21. The foolishnesse of preaching] an Hebraisme, for foolish preaching; that is,Sic vocat E∣vangelium con∣cessione ironica; non quod sit, sed quod talis habetur mundo. Paraeus. preaching which the most men and wisest men in the world esteem contemptibly of, 1 Cor. 1.23. for so he expounds himselfe, vers. 18. carnall men and those which shall perish, account it so. 2 The preaching of such men as have no shew with them in the world, such as the Apostles were Acts 4 13. 3 Such a kinde of preaching as is plain, & without all ostentation and shew of humane gifts, 1 Cor. 2.1. 4. M. Hildersm. Vers. 23. Christ crucified] That is, we teach that life and salvation is come to the world by the crosse and death of Christ. Pareus. He was crucified naked,In the Primi∣tive Church it was a con∣temptible thing both among the Jewes and Gre∣cians to be a Christian; to the one the Gospell was a stumbling block, to the other a laughingstock. Perkins. so he must be preached. Vnto the Jewes a stumbling-block, and unto the Greeks foolishnesse] The one expe∣cted a glorious estate of the Messiah in the world; the other deemed it a foolish and absurd thing to expect life out of death, glory to issue out of such extream contempt. The Jewes call  the Gospell aven gilion, that is, a revelation of vanity; and the Greeks traduce it for a doctrine of novelty, yea for a doctrine of devils, Acts 17.18. Vers. 26. Are called] Is not the Word preacht to these as well as to the poore? There is a twofold call: 1 Externall, by the word; this the rich and mighty have more then the poore. 2 Internall; so few of them are called, the word is not effectuall upon them. Vers. 30. Wisdome] that relates principally to the understanding;Quae nomina ex usu linguae Hebraea desig∣nant carum re∣rum authores, quarum nomitat sunt. Itaque Christus eo me∣diator noster est quod Doctor, Justificator, Sanctificator, & Redemptor noster est, quo∣rum, primum ad Propheticum, secundum ad Sacendotale, tertium & quartum ad ejus munus regium pertinet. Cameron. vide Pareum. all saving know∣ledge by which we are converted; and all the wisdome and prudence we have in our practicall understanding, which we receive at beginning, in progresse, and per∣fection hereafter, we have from Christ. Secondly, mark the phrase: It is not said, who by Gods appointment makes us wise, but, is made unto us wisdom, in the abstract; to shew, that out of Christ we have nothing but folly, Rom. 1.22.  To let us know, that in him we have an all-sufficiency; there is nothing in him but admirable wisdome. Col. 2.2, 3. 2 Righteousnesse] Justification, pardon of sinne, imputation of his righte∣ousnesse, acceptation of our persons; we are lookt upon in him as accepted, recon∣ciled. 3 Sanctification] Mortification, and Vivification, hatred of sinne, and love to the duties of God. 4 Redemption] which comprehends a freedom from all misery, sinne, temptation, everlasting damnation; all comforts, and refreshings by Gods Spirit, and everlasting salvation. Vers. 31. Glorieth] this is a lifting up of the heart on apprehension of some good,In Domino glo∣riari est totius lalutis nostrae summam solius Dei misericor∣diae, & Christi gratiae transcribere. Paraeus. whether reall or apparent. here are four acts of Spirituall glorying: 1 Selfe is abased. 2 Christ and free grace magnified. 3 All fulnesse is seen in Christ. 4 All this is ap∣plied to himselfe, vers. 30. CHAP. II. Vers. 2. TO know] , that is, to teach, preach, regard, or take notice of. To know Christ crucified is to seek comfort and salvation in the crosse of Christ by faith. The Antinomians causelesly urge this place,Docere, Came∣ron. in My∣roth ad Marck. 13.32. Profiteri Illyr. Beza. prae∣dicare. Calvin. to shew that Christ and faith onely are to be preached: not the law, nor repentance. The Apostle op∣poseth not the matter (for he himselfe preached other doctrine in this Epistle) but the manner; preached Christ plainly without humane eloquence, vers. 1. He resol∣ved with himselfe to shew no other learning but this,M Hildersam on Psal. 51.7. to set forth to them in the best manner he could the sufficiency of Christ, and the benefit and fruit that comes to
God by them;Downam. viz. Not onely the truth of it, but the vertue and efficacy of it in him∣selfe in the crucifying of his flesh with the lusts thereof. Vers. 4. With intising words of mans wisdom] that is, least men should ascribe that to humane eloquence and wisdom,Dr. Taylor on Titus. which is proper to the simplicity of the Gospell. Pauls condemes not all affectionate and eloquent preaching (for he was the elo∣quentest preacher of all the Apostles; and therefore it was one of Austins three wishes, to heare Paul preach in a Pulpit) but he condemnes the flattering kind of affected Rhetoricke, whereby men preached themselves, tickled mens eares, and delighted them with lascivious phrases of oratory. But in demonstration of the Spirit, and of power] That is, a secret power and autho∣rity of the Spirit,Tropus est quem Hendiadem vo∣cant; spiritus & virtutis, id est virtutis Spiritus sancti: quam videlicet Spiritus sanctus suppeditat. Estius. going with his Word, enlightning with his own other mens un∣derstandings, and heating by his own other mens affections. Vers. 9. Eye hath not seen nor eare heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him] This must not be understood of the joyes of Heaven (as it is interpreted by some) but of the Gospell-joy,See M. Ball of Faith. p. 137. of the Wine and fatnesse already prepared, and now revealed to the believer, by the Spirit. Vers. 11. For what man knoweth the things of a man] That is, those things which lie in the heart of man, but the Spirit of a man which is in him. Vers. 12. The things that are freely given us of God] that is, our election, vocation, justification,Ephes. 1.18. sanctification, and glorification. Vers. 14. The naturall man] that is, whosoever is indued with the faculties of na∣ture onely.Hominem  vocat in puris naturali∣bus considera∣tum, qui spiritu Dei vacat, & de rebus divi∣nis ex intelli∣gentia caruli judicat. Pareus. Hoc non tantum ad intellectum hominis naturalis referendum est, ac si sensus esset, non capit, intelligit, sed & ad voluntatem. Sensus enim est, homo animalis non recipit quae sunt Spiritus, non attendit, non curat, non nat Spiritualia, nec fideli corde amplestitur ea quamdiu manet naturalis; sequitur enim stultitìa siquidem illi sunt, hoc est, ut res frivolas & stultas spernit, quam vis minimè intelligere aut percipere valeat. Mayerus in Philol. Sac. Calvin. , the souly man, he that doth most excolere animam. The things of the Spirit of God] That is, which are in the Word by Gods Spirit plainly revealed. Discerned]  est vox forensis, a law terme, Acts 4.9.2.19. and is wont to be applied to the triall of doctrine, Acts 17.2. Grotius. Vers. 15. He that is spirituall] That is, one that is regenerate by the Spirit of God. M. Perkins. He opposeth the Spirituall to the naturall man. Calvin, Paraeus. By the Spirituall (though he oppose him to the naturall man) he meanes not every one which hath the Spirit, and is regenerate, but him which hath the Spirit in a greater measure then any other of the regenerate have; as appeares by the opposition he makes Chap. 3.1. between them which are spirituall and them which are babes in Christ. Judgeth all things] that is, is not onely certaine of the truth which himselfe hol∣deth,M. Hildersm on Psal. 51. As in a School the Master judgeth of e∣very boyes Theame and Exercise, but they are not able to judge of him. but can judge and clearly discerne, and reject the errour that is held by other men. But he is judged of no man) q. d. He is so certainly assured of the truth that he holdeth, that the contrary judgement of other men, whatsoever they be, cannot oversway him, or cause him to stagger. The Papists say that this Spirituall man is the Pope of Rome; because he alone is the Supreame Judge of the Church; judgeth all, and is judged of none. But when the Apostle wrote, there was no Pope. Vers. 16. We have the minde of Christ] that is, his sentence and judgement by him∣selfe delivered unto us. See 2 Thess. 2.2. Vide Bezam. It is uncertain whether he speake of the faithfull in generall, or of Ministers onely. Pareus saith he speakes of all the faithfull. Calvin would have it specially to refr to Paul and other faithfull Ministers.
CHAP. III. Vers. 1. BAbes] Such in whom grace is true, but very weak, and corruption strong, 2 Epistle John. 1. Heb. 5.13. in farre greater measure Carnall then Spirituall; for they had not been so much as Babes, if they had been altogether Carnall. Vers. 3. Are ye not carnall and walke as men] Or according to men,] Hoc est juxta volunta∣tem seu consuetudinem hominum carnalium. conser Rom. 8. v. 27. Contrariam phrasin . Vorstius. not according to God, and the rules of Christians; but according to the will and rule of Carnall men. Vers. 5. Who then is Paul? and who is Apollo?Se & Apollon nominat potius quam alios, de∣clinandae invidiae causa. Quid aliud enim habent ministri omnes, inquit, nisi ut sua praedicatione vos ad fidem adducant? Calvinus. but Ministers by whom ye beleeved] Paul of high calling; Apollos of excellent gifts. Vers. 6. I have planted Apollo watered] A metaphore from Husbandmen. Paul planted, that is, preached; Apollo watered, that is, Baptized, saith Austen;Papa Hadria∣nus, cum Lova∣nij collegium magnifico sumi∣tu construxisset, vestibulo aureis literis inscrip∣sit, Trajectum plantavit: ibi erat natus. Lovanium rigavit: ibi literas didicerat: Caesar dedit incrementum: ab hoc erat ex praeceptore Cardinalis Creatus. Hominis vanitatem redarguit alius subscribens, Hic deus nihil fecit. Pareus in loc. rather Paul began, and Apollo built upon it. Paul Preacht fundamentall doctrine, as Apollo taught them how to improve the doctrines to spirituall uses. But God gave the increase] That is, all the successe and fruit of their labour is from him. Vers. 7. Neither is he that planteth any thing neither he that watereth,Any thing] As a principall agent, but as an instrument. but God that giveth the increase] q. d. as excellent gifts as these men had, they did nothing in this work, the wholesuccesse is of God. Vers. 9. Labourers Eximium elo∣gium Ministerij, quod cum per se agere possit Deus, nos homunciones tanquam adjutores adsciscat, & tanquam organis utatur. Calvinus. together] In the Ministry, not conversion. Vers. 11. For other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Iesus Christ] He is the onely foundation personall; the Scripture is the foundation doctrinall. See Ephes. 2.20. Rev. 21.14. vide Pareum in loc. Vers. 12, 13. Now if any man build on this foundation, Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Wood, Hay, Stuble; Every mans worke shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every mans work of what sort it is] The Pope makes this place the principall foundation of his Purgatory (although the A∣postle here treateth of a probatory, and not a purgatory fire) Saint Austen maketh answer, that this sentence is very obscure, and to be reckoned among those things which Peter saith are hard to be understood in Pauls writings, which men ougt not to pervert unto their own destruction; and freely confesseth, that in this matter hee would rather heare more intelligent, and more learned then himselfe:Vide Bezam. & Mortonum. yet this hee delivereth for his opinion, that by Wood, Hay, and Stubble is understood, that over great love which the faithfull beare to the things of this life; and by fire that tempo∣rary tribulation,Bishop Vsher. The building of pretious matter upon the foundati∣on, is manifest∣ly to be under∣stood, of pure doctrine sin∣cerely deliver∣ed. The build∣ing of combu∣stible matter, is vaine affectation of eloquence, and other trifling matter; not taking away the foundation, but handling it unworthily. The Apostle saith the fire shall try every mans work. So that if this fire should signifie Purgatory (as Saint Augustine saith, expressely it cannot) and if every man should follow his work, no man should escape Purgatory. Doctor Fulke Annotat. on Rhem. Test. vide Calvinum, & Pareum in loc. which causeth griefe unto them by the losse of those things upon which they had too much placed their affections. Either sound and profitable do∣ctrines Bishop Down. of Justif. l. 4. Ruttherford against preten∣ded liberty of conscience. Chap. 27. Estius expounds it of the Lords trying of the Son of Levi. Mal. 3. See Rev. 3.10. which he compareth to Gold and Silver; or unsound and unprofitable, compared to Hay and Stubble. He makes the judgement that trieth all to be fire (whe¦ther it be the last judgement or fiery afflictions it is no great matter) but good do∣ctrine will bide the triall of fire, and not be consumed; and the man rewarded for his so building; and bad doctrine will be burnt, and not abide the Lords fire when it is tryed; for it will vanish in the day of triall, and yeeld the sower of such doctrine no comfort; yet he himselfe keeping the foundation Christ shall be saved, but hee shall be sadly afflicted for his fruitlesse building.
Vers. 18. Let him become a foole that he may be wise] That is, let him be willing to learne even of his inferiours.Mr. Perkins, id est, deponat inanem persuasionem, non indulgeat ineptijs humanis in rebus divinis, ne molestè ferat à mundo se haberi pro studo. Pareus. Est manu capere & firmiter tenere. Pareus.Vers. 19. Catcheth] And keepeth as beasts in a grin, so the word signifies. Craftinesse]  when they have done their utmost (as the word imports) to bring about their devilish devices. Vers. 20. The Lord knoweth the thoughts] , not the simple thoughts, but the most prudent discourses, and councells of the world. Of the wise] That is, of such as excell in naturall gifts, that are the choicest and most picked men. Vers. 22. Paul, Apollo or Cephas] Variety of gifts. He illustrates the universall by an enumeration;A Christian hath interest to and right in all these things 1. Entirely or wholly, Ephes. 1.23. and 2.10. Col. 3.11. 2 Refinedly the curse is taken away, Gal. 3.13. Prov. 10.22. 3 Really. 1 Cor. 7.31. Ephes. 1. ult. 4. Safely, 1 Prov. 33. 5. Serviceably, Rom. 8.28. 6. Satisfyingly, 22. Psal. 26. highest and lowest Ministers are yours. All things are yours, the whole world, all conditions are then yours, life and death; all events are yours, present in this, and future in another life. Things present, things to come] the comforts of grace in this life, and the assurance of glory hereafter. Hoc est, omnia propter vos sunt, & ad vestram ordinantur utilitatem. Estius.All are yours] That is, all things tend to your good, and help forward your happinesse and salvation. Doctor Gouge. Vers. 23. Ye are Christs] 1. By gift. 2. Purchase. 3. Conquest. 4. Covenant. 5. Communion. CHAP. IV. Vers. 3. OF mans judgement] Or day Dies homi∣nis pro judicio hominis, sive pro ultimo quo dies hominum definiuntur, die ponitur, cui dies Domini opponitur. Heinsius. Vbi diem posuit pro judicio, ex Cilicum phrasi (ipse enim Cilix fuerat) nam dies dici rei consueverit? Sed hoc non Cilicum, sed Hebraeorum idioma esse, qui diem Domini vocant judicium ait Drus. in annotat. N.T. Glass. Philol. Sac. Hieronynus putat hoc & alia quaedam esse ex Cilicum, ubi Graecam primum lin∣guam didicerat Paulus, idiomate. Illis enim diem solitum dici pro judicio: nec mirum, cum & Latinè dicamus diem dicere. Grotius in loc. Dei organum Paulus, quem Graecarum rerum gnarum perinde ut linguae fuisse constat, suas habet locutiones pa∣theticas & interdum singulares. Diem humanum vocat hominis judicium, ex interpretum consensu, metonymicè, quia judicijs stati sunt dies. Vnde & phrasis Dicere diem, pro in jus vocare, & Dies Domini, pro judicio extreme. Sic , 2 Cor. 2. v. 9. verbum esse Cilicum, Hieron. notat. & probat Dounaeus ad Chrysost. Hom. 23. Diem metonymice pro judicio dici interpretum consensu. Hinc Dies Domini pro judicio extremo. Dieterici Antiquitat. Bibl. that is, I expect another day besides mans day. q. d. Man carries all before him now, he hath all the doings now at this day, and he may judge and censure as he pleaseth; it is but his day, and I passe not for mans day. Vers. 4. I know nothing by my self, yet I am not hereby justified] That is, I have walked so in my calling since I was an Apostle and Minister of the Gospell, as I am not privy nor guilty to my selfe of any negligence therein. So Calvin, Pareus, à Lapide and Mr. Perkins. q. d. Though I should discerne no defect in my own righteousnesse (as for the main bent of my heart and course of my life I doe not) yet dare I not plead it before God, nor hope to be justified by it; for God can espie much more in me, then I can in my selfe; so one expounds it. Vers. 5. Iudge nothing before the time] He speakes of rash judging of hidden things, as Calvin, P. Martyr, Bullinger, Marlorat, Pareus, Beza, Estius interpret it. Vntill the Lord come] That is, to judgement. Estius and others. Who will both bring to light the hid∣den things of darkenesse]Whether good or bad, and will make manifest the counsells of the hearts] whether just, or unjust. And then shall every man (who is praise worthy) have praise of God] Vers. 6. Transferred]  is properly to change the habite as we may see,
1 Sam. 28.8. thence it is translated to speech, which seemes to say one thing, and meane another. Hoc est, Schemate quodam sermonis in nos transtuli. Vorstius. Vers. 7. For who maketh thee to differ from another] Episcupius (a great Arminian) saith ego meipsum diserevi. I made my selfe to differ, viz. by the improvement of nature. Vers. 8. You are full, now ye are rich, ye have raigned as Kings withut us] That is, you exalt your selves above us here, as much as a King is above his own subjects, you are supreame. He speakes this ironically as the next words shew.Vide Grotium And I would to God ye did reign, that we also might reign with you] I would be glad to share in those gallant Gospell notions you so much bragge of; but I feare your portion is but small in true spirituall Gospell-knowledge, except in your own conceits, and there you abound sufficiently. Vers. 9. God hath set forth us the Apostles last] Paul calls himselfe and Barnabas the last Apostles,Postremi Apo∣stoli hîc dicun∣tur Paulus & Barnabas, gra∣tium Apostoli, qui postremo in loco diu post duoecim illos constitutos & ipsam Christi ascensionem, ad hoc munus designati erant. Morton. Postremos haud dubiè vocat, qui in ordinem Apostolicum post Christi resurrectionem asciti fuerant. Calvinus. because they were last taken into the number. We are made a spectacle Vide Calvinū & Dilheri Electa Sac. l. 2. c. 25. Sumpta metaphora ab iis qui ignominiae causa cij cumducti ad mortem denique trabuntur, unde Hieronymus legit Theatrum fa∣cti sumus, ut Graecè est . Chrysostomus de theatro hujus vitae, in quo coram Deo omnia agimus, intelligit.] God hath set us upon a theater or stage upon whom all the eyes of the spectatours gaze, spectaculo proposuit. Beza. That word which Paul useth here is borrowed from the manner of the Romans, who brought the gladiatores on the arena to make sport to the people. Vers. 13. As the filth of the world,Duabus vocibus omnium hominū objectissimos judicat. Habe∣mur à mundo  & : net à pancis sed ab omnibus, nec semel sed usque adhuc: id est, perpetuo. Parous. vide ibid. and are the off-scowring]  signifies the dirt scraped of mens shooes; or from the pavement of the ground; rejectamentum, so Eras∣mus. He hath reference to that Lament. 3.45. , Mr. Burroughes on Phil. 4.13. See 21 Prov. 18. vide Dilheri Electa Sacra. l. 2. c. 25. Calvinum & Estium in loc. the filth gathered by sweepings up and downe, and cast upon the common dung —cart in the street. Budaeus thinkes those words have reference to the custome of the heathens; who in times of infectious diseases, or publike calamity, sacrificed certain men to their Gods, for the removing those evills which were upon them, and upon these men they did lay all the execrations of the people; as if they had been the causes of all their misery. CHAP. V. Vers. 1. SVch fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles] It is not meant, that the Gentiles never were infected with this sinne; but that even such as were but onely Gentiles, have out of the light of reason,Bishop Lake. Non intelligit nihil unquam tale extitisse, vel in historiis non referi, de quo compositae sint etiam tragediae, sed esse Gentbus detestable, non secu ac foedum & horrendum monstrum. Calvinus. vide Pareum. detested and for∣bidden it. The Apostles phrase is remarkable, that which was not, so much as named among the Gentiles was done by a Christian; whereas the rule of piety is, that those sinnes should not be so much as named amongst Christians, which are done by the Gentiles. Vers. 2. Mouned]  referres to the stile of mourners, and denotes the so∣lemnity usuall among the Jewes, of putting on mourning habite, and wailing over them that were excommunicate. Taken away] This precept is directed to the Church,Pareus hath these words, non dicit ut tolleretur è medio, sed è medio vestri, hoc est, ecclesiae. He commandeth not to kill him; but to remove him from them. whose weapons are spiritu∣all, speakes nothing of the Magistrates duty. Vers. 4. In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together] The au∣thority of excommunication pertaineth to the whole Church; although the judge∣ment and execution thereof, is to be referred to the Governours of the Church, which
exercise that authority,Vnde apparet hac potestate praeditas esse ecclesias, ut si quid est intus vitij, disciplinae severitate corrigant vel ejiciant. Excommunicationis ergo potestas hoc loco stabilitur. Calvinus. as in the name of Christ, so in the name of the whole Church, whereof they are appointed governours to avoid confusion. Fulke on the Rhem. Testam. vide Calvinum & Pareum. Haec excommu∣nicatio de qua agimus non est privata sed pub∣lica actio, & unanim totius ecclesiae cousensu, solemni omnium vestrum conven∣tu testato, in publico coetu & omnium conspe∣ctu praestanda. Morton. Satanae tradi idem est atque ex ecclesia, extra quam regnat Sa∣tan, ejectum de∣clarari quempi∣am, non tanquā apud Satanam permansurum, & cum eo peri∣turum, sed con¦trà ut miserrimi sui status sensu permotus, resipiscat: & ita carne abolitae quae antea ipsi dominabatur, spiritus superior evadat, ut itae salvus fiat: quod demū die Domini plenè in illo & electis omnibus apparebit. Beza de Presbyterio & excommunicatione. vide Bezam in loc. Bis reperitur haec locutis Tradi Satanae, semel hoc loco, & rursus, 1 Tim. 1.20. Quidam volunt tradere satanae esse idem, quod miraculoo modo è medio hominum tollere Ministerio satanae: sicut Petrus sustulit Ananiam & Sapphi∣ram. At Petius non est usus Ministerio Satanae, sed virtute Christi. Alij tradere satanae volunt idem esse, quod ex ecclesiae societate & regno Dei excludere, quod nos vocamus excommunicare. Pareus. vide Plura ibid. Vide Calvinum & Estium.Vers. 5. To deliver such a one unto Satan] Beza, Calvin, Pareus, à Lapide, Estius, and Morton interprete it of excommunication. The excommunicate person is to have his conscience terrified by being delivered unto Satan, that is, cast out of the Church out of which Satan ruleth. 2. Sorrow must be wrought in him for his sin, for the destruction of his flesh, and fleshly corruption, which is the ground of true repentance. Neither is it any thing else then excommunication, which the Apostle signifieth by delivering to Satan, saving that he expresseth an extraordinary effect that followed in the Apostles time, viz. that those which were put out of the Church, became visibly subject to Satan, inflicting plagues and diseases on their bo∣dies, which might reduce them to repentance; which the Apostle calleth the destructi∣on of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Iesus, as 1 Tim. 1.20. For the Apostles had power, like that which Saint Peter exercised on Ananias, and Spphira, thus to punish those that opposed them, as Saint Paul often intimates. Thorndikes discourse of the right of the Church in a Christian State, Chap. 1. Some say he was delivered to Satan in a miraculous way to possesse, or torment him; an Apostolicall power onely. Vide Grotium. But that cannot be for these reasons. 1 The Apostle saith, you deliver, the Apostles did not worke miracles by others hands. 2. The punishment is answerable to the sinne which was twofold, v. 2. 3. He makes it a generall ground of a duty; they must withdraw themselves from such a one. Vers. 6. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lumpe] The word of God compareth sinne unto leaven both in regard of the whole congregation; in that it spreadeth fur∣ther and further in the body of the Church, if opposition be not made, Levit. 19.29. and also in regard of the persons selfe; in that it doth more and more sowre and pol∣lute the soule, till at last it have left no part free; if the seasonable rendring of re∣pentance prevent it not. But yet it will not sowre the congregation; so as that all their worship and service shall be cast off by God as an abomination, that is the false glosse of some. For when the Gospell is compared to leaven, the holy Ghost meanes not that if the Gospell enter into any place, then the services of the whole congregation are made pleasing to God (for the services of hypocrites which are many never please him) but that the Gospell comming into a place, and conver∣ting some one or two will goe farther, and convert more and more, till it draw the whole place at least to outward submission. The meaning is, one sinner tolerated and winked at doth infect another, till the whole society be over growne with the like wickednesse; and not that one sinner causeth the service of all those with whom it is done to become uncleane or polluted. Vers. 7. Purge out therefore the old leaven] That is, which proceeded from the old man, and corrupt nature; though the Church of Corinth was very corrupt many wayes; yet he bids them not take the lumpe away, but remove the old leaven; he bids them not forsake the Church, but stay and reforme it. Vers. 9. Not to company with fornicatours] The Greeke word  both here and 2 Thess. 3. being compounded with two praepositions notes a most familiar ac∣quaintance and conversation.Commisceri est familiariter versari cum ali∣quo, & ejus consuetudine implicari. Calvinus. idem ferè habet Morton. See next vers. See 2. Thess. 3.14.Vers. 11. Not to keepe company] That is, in a private and familiar manner.
With such a one, no not eate] That is, make him not a speciall intimate friend.Cum talibus, id est, adeo vitiosis & Christiano¦rum nomen u∣surpantibus, ne epulas quidem habere commu∣nes, quod mini∣mum est inter amicitiae signa. vide Gal. 2.12. Grotius. In∣telligitur vel contubernium, vel interior cnvictus. Calvinus. This place being understood of all voluntary commerce with a scandalous person, whereby at least I appeare to countenance him in his sinne, contrary to that precept 1 Thess. 5 22 Its apparent (say The answer to Suspension suspended. some) that voluntary commerce at the Sacrament is here forbidden, as well as at my own Table: The rason say they is evident; First, because he ought to be kept from the Lords Table as well as from my Table. Second∣ly, because he might easily be kept from this, as well as that; provided that private Christians, and Church officers would both do their duties in their places. But if I do my honest endeavour for this purpose, and cannot keep him away from the Lords Table, the Lord accepts my will for my deed, and the guilt shall lie upon them who have power, but want will to suspend him. I shall find to my comfort, that to the pure all things are pure, Titus 2.15. Nor shall the wickednesse of others one jt hinder the efficacy of the Sacrament to me, if I be a worthy receiver. Vers. 12. For what have I to do to judge them that are without?Interrogatio affirmantis, q.d. omnino vestri id est officii. Quidni igitur & mei? Pareus. vide plura. ib. Do not ye judge them that are within?] That is, are not you by the power you have of judging those that are within, to take away him that hath done evill? leaving to God to judge those without. Mr. Thorndike. Therefore something makes one man to be without the Church, and another within. Where there is differentia divisiva, there must be diffe∣rentia constitutiva. CHAP. VI. Vers. 2. DOe ye not know that the Saints shall judge the world?] They shall not judge by pronouncing a soveraigne sentence of absolution or condemnation, which is proper to Christ the Judge;Perkins on Jude. but by assisting him (as Justices upon the Bench) both by witnessing and assenting unto that righteous judgement. The Saints shall not judge the world authoritatively; they are not in commission with Christ; but three waies: 1. As members of Christs body; he judgeth as the head. 2. By their lives; as it is said of the Queen of Sheba, she shall condemne them. 3. By an approbation of Christs judgement, exulting in it, Rev. 19.1, 2. Vers 4. Pertaining to this life] The Greek word (say some) signifies rather pertai∣ning to life; and so they would have it rendred also in the former verse; ad vi∣tam pertinentia. but Luke 21.34. , is rendred cares of this life; and Grotius renders the third verse here res hujus vitae. Set them to judge who are of last esteem in the Church] It is not spoken by way of precept, commanding them to let the simplest of their brethren judge their causes:Thorndike. but by way of concession, they were better so to doe, then to sue before Infidels. Vers. 7. Bcause ye go to law one with another] That is, so rashly as they did, and be∣fore Infidell Judges, to the scorn of the Gospell. Going to Law in this Chapter is not simply forbidden, but sundry abuses observed: 1. Going to unfit Judges whom the Apostle stileth unjust and unbelievers,Dr. Gouge. and bringing Christians before them, vers. 6. 2 Contending about small matters and meer trifles, vers. 2. 3 Too much forwardnesse to Law, vers. 5. 4 Doing wrong themselves vers. 8. Vers. 9. Idolaters] There were two kinds of them: worshippers of Idols, that is,Pareus. false gods, as all the Heathens were; Or secondly, of the true God, in an Idoll or Image, as the Jews often were; and as all the Papists are at this day. Effeminate] Or, soft. The Greek word  signifieth soft-spirited men,Such who are guilty of self-pollution. men of a kind of soft carriage, apt to all wantonnesse. Mollis erat facilisque viris Paeantius heros. Abusers of themselves with mankind] The Greek is but one compound word, . Paederastae. Calvin. Vers. 10. Revilers] which dare call him with vile terms that offends them.
Extortioners] that care not what they pill to themselves by hook or crook. Vers. 11. And such were some of you] The Apostle addes this word some (saith Estius) to moderate his speech, least he should seem to accuse all the Corinthians of all the fore-mentioned vices; to shew that some were guilty of some of those vices, and others of other; although the sinne of Idolatry was common to them all. Calvin thinks this particle is superfluous, after the usuall manner of the Grecians, which often use it Ornatus gratia,. and not for restriction; and that the Apostle in∣tends onely that no man is free from these evils until he be renewed by the Spirit. The plain meaning (saith he) is, that before their regeneration, some of the Corin∣thians were covetous, some adulterers, some extortioners, some effeminate, some revilers:See Mr. Pemble of Justification. Sect. 1. cap. 1. p. 11. but now being freed by Christ, they ceased to be such. The Apostle puts them in mind of the sinnes they had repented of, not to reproach them; but 1. That they might be more able to mortifie their present corruptions, Psal. 38. 2 That they might be more pitifull to others, Titus 3.11. and more thankfull to God. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified] He useth three words, saith Calvin to expresse one thing, the more to deter them from falling into those sinnes againe which they had escaped. Pareus saith Hisce in ver∣bis describit Apostolus exi∣mia illa benefi∣cia quae fideli∣bus in Spirituali lavacro conferuntur; primo ponit ablationem sive purgationem peccati quae se habet ut genus atque deducitur in has duas species, Justificationem scilicet & Sanctificationem. Iustificatio purgat & abluit à reatu peccati, idque uno momento & perfecte: sanctificatio purgat ab ipsa inhaerente contagione & sorde peccati, sed paulatim & per gradus. Epis. Dav. de justitia habituali. c. 23. we are to take washed generally for all the benefits of Christ; remission of sinnes and regeneration by the Spirit and Blood of Christ; the other two, for the parts of his washing; the first of which is Justification, and the other Sanctification. Vers. 13. Now the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body] The Apostle propoundeth six reasons why we should fly fornication: 1. Our bodies are the Lords, and must be serviceable unto him, in this Verse, the body for the Lord; the body is ordained for the Lords use, and ought to be imployed to his glory; and the Lord for the body, to redeem and sanctifie the body as well as the soule; and con∣sequently to rule and command it as well as the soule, being Lord of both. 2. We look they should be raised to glory in the last day, vers. 14. and therefore we must in the mean time keep them honourable. 3. They are the members of Christ, vers. 15. we may not then make them the members of an Harlot. 4. Whereas all other sinnes are without the body, this directly is against the body, vers. 18. where he also bids them flee Fornication. 5. The body is the Temple of the holy Ghost, vers. 19. and these sinnes make it the Devils stie and stews.See Mr. Caryl on Job 3.1. p. 325. 6 Our bodies are bought with a price, ver. 20. and it is sacriledge not to glorifie God in the body as well as in the soule, seeing they are both alike his. Vers. 16. Know ye not, that he which is joyned to a Harlot is one body] Paul notes three sorts of conjunction: 1. In the flesh onely, as betwixt a man and a whore. 2. In the Spirit onely, as betwixt Christ and his members, vers. 19. 3 In the flesh and the Spirit, when two faithfull are married together. Vide Bezam.Vers. 17. Is one Spirit] one spirituall body. Pareus. rather in respect of the bond, Gods Spirit. Beza. Vers. 18. Sinneth against his own body] not because the body is used as the instru∣ment; then it will hold also in stealing, backbiting, swearing; rather as Peter Martyr more eminently against the body then other sins. Or, the body is not onely the in∣strument, (as in other outward sins) but the object in this sin; a man sinnes against his own body,Dr. Sclater. Non negatur prorsus quin aliis quoque vitiis dehonestetur & probro afficiatur corpus nostrum: sed hoc tantùm dicitur, non ita residere in cor∣pore nostro foeditatem ex illis, sicuti ex scortatione. Manus quidem mea furto inquinatur vel caede: lingua verò maledicentia aut perjurio, corpus totum ebrietate: sed scortatio maculam in corpore impressam relinquit, qualis non imprimitur ab aliis peccatis. Calvinus. vide Pareum. spoyling it of that excellent honour whereto God hath advanced it.
CHAP. VII. Vers. 1. IT is good for a man not to touch a woman] Good is opposed to that which is incommodious or inexpedient; so Matth. 19.10. it is expedient.See 7, 8, 27, 38, 40 verses. Commodum. Bonum duplici∣ter dicitur, vel oppositum vitio seu malo morali, vel oppositum incommodo, unde saepè bonum nobis esse dicimus quod est commodum. Wendelinus. Con∣ducible to those who have the gift of continency, and no setled abode, and in times of persecution. See vers. 35. Obj. Gen. 2.11. It is not good for man to be alone. Sol. Paul wrote in times of persecution, which in all this Chapter he hath a speci∣all eye unto. See Calvin. Touch] The Greek word often signifieth not to touch with the hand, but to have any commerce with another; therefore the meaning is,Eras. Piscat. Tangit mulie∣rem qui cum ea congreditur aut rem habet, ut Prov. 6.30. unde virgo intacta. Drusius. bonum est abstinere ab uxore, hoc est non ducere uxorem: It is good to abstaine from a wife, that is, not to marrie. Vers. 2. Neverthelesse to avoyd Fornication, let every man (viz. which hath not the gift of continency) have his own wife. Vers. 3. Due benevolence] It is called  benevolence,Rem parum ve∣recundam vere∣cundè notat. Eras. because it must be perfor∣med with good will and delight; willingly, readily, and chearfully: It is said also to be  due, because it is a debt which the wife oweth to her husband, and he to her 1 Cor. 7.4. Dr. Gouge. Vers. 5. Give your selves to fasting and prayer] He speaks here of solemn fasting and prayer; these also are joyned together, Matth. 17.21. Acts 13.Non dixit oretis sed vacetis pre∣cationi, quod ea res desileret animum ab omnibus mundanis curis vacantem. Erasm. vide Bezam. Sensus est, ut omnibus soluti avocamentis, agatis illud unum. Calvinus. Vers. 9. To burne] That is, to have within a continuall fervency of lust in the heart.Hic uri vocat Paulus, non ti∣tillari duntax∣at, sed libidine aestuare, cui resistere nequeas. Vide Calvinum. Earnest desires are meant, Hos. 7.4. Rom. 1.27. Vritur infoelix Dido, &c. Virgilius 4 Aeneid. Vers. 10. Vnto the married I command; yet not I, but the Lord] The Apostle delive∣red as from the Lord the doctrine against separation of those equally joyned in mar∣riage; that is, from the plain relation of God in the Old Testament.Because there is an expresse Commande∣ment of the Lords concerning this thing. Matth. 19.6. Beza. Comparatè dicitur, non ego ex me, sed ex Christi auctoritate. Simile, Matth. 10.20. Grotius. Vers. 12. But to the rest speake I, not the Lord] Which hath reference to that before,That is, the Lord had not given any such expresse com∣mandement as Paul there de∣livered, but by collection and interpretation of Scripture he did gather it, and so spake not of himselfe, but by the assistance of Gods Spirit. as 40. Non ita intelligit à seipso esse quin ex Dei Spiritu hauserit; sed quoniam nusquam de hac extabat in lege aut Prophetis certum ac expressum verbum, praevenit hoc modo improborum calumnias, quum sibi quod dicturus erat, tribuit. Calvinus. vers 10. To this doubt of remaining together, where one is a believer, the other an Infidell, I say, not the Lord, not as though Paul did resolve any thing against the mind of God; but he gave this resolution as an Apostle under the New Testament, which was different from the dispensations of the Lord under the Law. Vers. 14. Sanctified by the Husband] But she shall never be saved but by her own faith; he sanctifieth her marriage, but not her person. Vide Calvinum & Bezam. Now are they holy] Notwithstanding the difference of Religion in the parents, yet the children are legitimate say some, and not bastards;Sancti non san∣ctitate quadam naturali vel in∣haerente, quae iis à fideli conjuge eodem modo, quo peccatum ori∣ginale communicetur, sed sanctitate externa, ex misericordia Dei, eos pro suis reputantis, juxta promissionem nobis nostrisque in∣fantihus in gratiae faedere nobiscum comprehensis factam. Rivetus. Vide Bezam & Estium. a civill sanctity saith Theo∣phylact. That interpretation cannot stand; for then all the children of Heathen should be illegitimate; there is a lawfull marriage where neither parents are believers; 2. This holinesse is derived from the faith of the parent; it is meant therefore of a federall holinesse; the children are taken into the parents covenant.
Vers. 15. But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart] He doth not approve or per∣mit such a defection; but speaks this to free the innocent from scruple in such a case. A brother or a sister is not in bondage in such cases] That he should be bound either to follow the deserting party,By bondage the Apostle means matri∣moniall sub∣jection. Vin∣culi conjugalis obligatio. Beza. or to continue unmarried. The Apostle saith the innocent party is free not onely from bed and board, but from the bond of the deserter; so Pareus. But (saith he) the Apostles limitation is to be observed in such cases, viz. such circumstances of desertion, in such a totall separation of religion as was then among the Pagans and Christians, and of which the Apostle properly speakes. Contrary to cohabitation is desertion; when the husband departs from the wife, or she from him, without each others good liking or privity; not for any commo∣dity or necessity of businesse, but out of dislike, and with an obstinate purpose of not returning again.Vide Calvinum & Bezam in loc. Obstinata desertio quamvis in parte deserente non contineat justam causam Divortii faciendi, parti tamen desertae post omnia alia media frustra tentata justam adfert causam divortii patiendi. Apostolus 1 Cor. 7.15. disertis verbis pronunciat partem desertam esse liberam. Qui autem liber est non est vinculo constrictus. Ames. de consc. l. 5. c. 38. See Dr. Gouges Domestick duties, Treatise 2. Such a one as doth so (say many worthy Divines) breakes the bond of marriage, and sets the innocent party at liberty. Vers. 23. Be not ye the servants of men] That is, in regard of conscience, in oppo∣sition to me.In respect of the inward man; but the Apostle speaks not of bodily service to men. Servos hominum vocat non eos, qui hominibus heris civiliter serviunt: sed qui perversis earum desideriis sese accommodant, impiis aut inhonestis hominum praeceptis morem gerunt. Pareus. We are not to serve men as Spirituall masters, Ephes. 6.13. not as su∣preame, but as subordinate masters, Ephes. 6.7. Vers. 28. Such shall have trouble in the flesh] The Apostle speaketh of all times; al∣though it be true,Intelligit labo∣res, euras, soli∣citudines de augenda re fa∣miliari, inopiam, lites, jurgia, sterilitatem, liberorum morbus, orbitatem, & talia sexcenta, quae fert. conjugalis vita. Notanter igitur dicit afflictiones in carne, ne delitiae carnis tantum quaerantur in conjugio. Pareus. most of times of persecution; because the present necessity (v. 26.) may as well mean the necessity of this life, as these times of trouble. Secondly, when are we not likely to meet with daies of persecution for well doing. See M. Whatelies Care-cloth. Terminus nau∣ticus.Vers. 29. The time is short] contracted or cut off; trussed up into a narrow scant∣ling; a metaphor from sailes, when men are almost at harbour they begin to strike their sailes and fold them up together. Some think he compares the time of our life with the time of the Patriarkes.Vide Bezam. Some think he means it of the end of the world, (as Peter expresseth it) the end of all things is at hand, 1 Pet. 4.7. he rather speaks of the duration of mans life. Vers 30. And they that rejoyce, as though they rejoyced not] The fathers on this place made this observation,Per Flotum & Gaudium res adversas & prosperas designat; est enim usitatum, causas per effectus notari. Calvin. That the joyes of this world are but quasi, as if they were joyes; not joyes indeed, but shadows or figures, as Esay 29.8. As though they possessed not] That is, in respect of moderation of the affections, and the disposition of the heart.Perkins. They should have fewest worldly cares, by how much the times are harder. Vers: 31. For the fashon of this world passeth away] The Apostle speaking of the world very elegantly and emphatically calls it,An accidentall Mathematicall figure without solidity or sub∣stance, a shew without a substance. The word signifies such a fashion as is in a Comedy or Stage-play, where all things are but for a while to please the eye. Vide Pareum & Bezam. Hac voce eleganter Apostolus expressit mundi vani∣tatem. Nihil est firmi, inquit, aut solidi: est enim facies tantum, vel externa apparentia, ut loquuntur. Calvinus. , rather then , intimating thereby that this world, to speak of it truly, is rather a matter of fashion, then of substance. Dr. Causabones Treatise of use and custome. Vers. 34. Holy both in body and spirit] Of Spirit, when it is either not tempted to uncleannesse;Dr. Taylor on Titus. or being tempted, yeeldeth not; or yeelding, is recovered by re∣pentance: of body also, when it neither exciteth, nor being excited executeth un∣cleanesse.
He joyns the sanctity both of body and Spirit,Matth. 5.28. because chastity is not so much a vertue of the body, as the spirit. Vers. 39. Onely in the Lord] That is, according to Gods word and direction, and not against it, religiosè & cumtimore Domini, pio affectu & cum persona fideli. Pareus.Id est, in nomi∣ne Domini quod est indubitatè Christiano, That is, in the name of the Lord; which is without doubt to a Christian. Tertul. vide Bezam. Vers. 40. And I thinke also that I have the spirit of God] He speakes not as if hee doubted whether he had, but to reprove those who slighted him;Vtitur verbo di∣luto, emphatica . Beza. Pareus. Non videtur ironia carere quòd dicit, existimo. Nam cum pseudo-apostoli, Spiritum Dei inflatis buccis identidem jactarent ad autoritatem sibi arrogandam, & interea Paulo detrahere studerent: dicit se quoque sibi videri compotem Spiritus non minùs quam ipsos. Calvinus. Vide Estium. as if he had not the spirit of God. He doth not meane (saith Grotius) a revelation, but a sincere affecti∣on of serving God, and the godly. And I thinke that I also shall be yeelded to have the Spirit of God, as well as your glorious and boasting teachers. Doctor Halls Paraphrase. CHAP. VIII. Vers. 2. ANd if any man thinke] That is, proudly conceits, that he knoweth any thing; he knoweth nothing yet as hee ought to know.Id est, si quis in hoc uno sibi placeat, quod ingeniosus, quod eruditus sit, quod dialecticas disputationes norit: Grotius. vide Calvinum Vers. 4. And Idoll is nothing in the world] That is, nothing subsisting in nature; or nothing in respect of the divinitie ascribed unto it, as the following words shew, and that there is none other God but one; but something in mans imagination,Perkins. which giveth to it the honour of God; and reputeth it as God making it a God unto him∣selfe. CHAP. IX. Vers. 5. HAve we not power to lead about a sister a wife] Our last accurate translation of the English Bible, hath woman in the Margin; it is the manner of that Edition to set al the Idiotismes of either language, and divers read∣ings in the Margin. The Greek word signifies both; but whether of them is fit to be received into the Text, our Text it selfe shewes,. our Translation is according to the plaine words, and meaning of the Apostle. The words in the Greek are not a wo∣man sister, but a sister a wife; for no man would say a sister a woman, because the word sister implyeth a woman: therefore of necessity the latter word signifieth a wife specially, and not a sister generally. Lead about.] Declares they were their wives.See Beza & Cartwright. Etsi  mulie∣rem quamvis significet, quod Hieron. ac August. urgent: tamen frequenter in sacris pro uxore usurpatur. Matth. 1.20. & 19. v. 3.5.8.9.11.29. Pareus. The word , secum ducere quo quis eat. Ezech 45.1.2. Grotius. Est circumducere secum quodam jure, ut suam non ut alienam. Ideo Syrus addit, nobiscum. Pareus. implies a power over the party led. The Popish Priests abhorre marriage, as unworthy the sanctity of their order, yet the Apostles did not dislike it. Vers. 9. That treadeth out the Corne] In that Countrey they did tread  dicuntur Boves cum grana ex aristis exterunt pedibus: Qui mos Orientis, sed & Graeciae ut ex Theophrasto & aliis discimus. Grotius. out their Corn with their Oxen, as we doe thresh it out.Huic contrarium est illud ethni∣corum, Bos apud acervum, quod Suidas intelligit de iis qui fruges in area terunt, sed Camo impediuntur quo minus quidquam inde gustare queant. Doth God take care for Oxen] Not chiefely and principally,Quod Dominus humanitatem erga boves praecipit, non id facit boum gratia, sed hominum potius respectu, propter quos etiam boves ipsi creati sunt. Calvinus. but subordinately as
his care is toward all the creatures, so Deut 25.4. 1 Tim. 5.18. Or, doth not so take care for them, as if he respected them onely in making the Law. Vers. 13. They which waite at the Altar]  continually set; continuall residence was required of the Priests,Cujus vocis em∣phasim Chry∣sostomus & Theophylactus annotarunt, ut quae sonet continuam & perseverantem servitutem: quam & Latinè vocamus assi∣duam. Estius. and so of Pastors. Omnium moribus & asse∣ctibus quantum licet, me accomodo. Estius.Vers. 23. I am made all things to all men, that I might by all meanes save some] Hee was content to undergoe any thing, for the good of any man. Mr. Perkins. Vers. 24, 25. They which run in a race run all, but one receiveth the prize? so run that ye may obtaine.Vide Bezam & Grotium. And every man that striveth for the mastery] He alludes to the Olym∣picke exercises. Cursus & lucta, running and wrestling, were two of the Olympicke games. Vers. 26. I therefore so run, not as uncertainely, &c.] That is, I so order my course of Christianity.Vide Bezam. Vers. 27. But I keep under my Body] The word signifies a buffeting about the face, and eyes, as a man would buffet his adversary on his knees; I molest and vex the flesh the old adversary that is in me. A battering of the body, as those are wont which try masteries with Plummets of lead, untill the blewnesse of the wound appeareth most grievous. And bring it unto subjection] Compelling to subjection as we would force a slave to grinde at the Mill;Vide Grotium. as the Greek words signifies. The Apostle useth two words which carry much Emphasis  I keepe under, and , I bring into subjection. The former word is taken from a Champion or wrestler that striveth for the mastery;Doctor Gouge on Ezra. 8.21. for it hath reference to the 25. verse. where mention is made of men that strive for the mastery. The latter word hath reference to Masters, that prudently keep their servants under; especially when they wax in∣solent or wanton. By the body he meanes the old man, which is called a body of sinne,Castigo corpus meum, hoc est, adversus carnem pugno. Theophyl. in loc. Rom. 6.6. CHAP. X. Vers. 2. VNto Moses] That is, sub ministerio aut ductu Mosis. Calvin under the Ministery,In Mosen] Id est, Moses Mi∣nisterium, unde Versio Syriaca rectè interpretatus est in Mosen, per manum Mosis. Rivet. 9. See Doctor Willet on 14 of Exod. 28. Question. or guidance of Moses, vel in doctrinam & legem Mosis, sicut Act. 19. Pareus into the doctrine and Law of Moses. Vers. 3. Did all eat the same spirituall meat] By the wonderfull power of faith which makes a thing absent present to the beleever; by that faith they received Christ as lively, as effectually, as much to their profit and comfort, as we doe since his com∣ming.Mr. Perkins. Manna is called a Spirituall meat] because it represented unto them the spi∣rituall food of the soule Christ Jesus the true Manna, Iohn 6.51. See Doctor Willet on 16. of Exod. 3. c. and Besa. Vers. 4. They dranke of that spirituall Rock that followed them] Not that the water of the Rocke did alwayes follow them,They drank of the naturall Rock, which is called a Spiri∣tuall Rock, because it was a Type of Christ. The Rock followed them, that is, the water that issued out of the Rock followed them as they journyed, and streamed after them in their removes. Dike. vide Calvinū. Bibebant è petra. Tradunt Hebraei & Chaldaei, Num. 21. v. 16. petram hanc per miraculum Judaeos in deserto assiduè secutam fuisse usque in Chanaan, eisque aquam dedisse. à Lapide. Id est aquam quae è petra fluebat; spirituali ratione significationis, quia rem spiritualem signifi∣cabat; eos insequenti, quia aqua illa è rape fluens sequuta est Jsraelitas in variis mansionibus suis. Rivetus. (so some expounded it) for that failed, and the people were athirst in the wildernesse; but Christ signified by the Rock, was alwayes with them, for their preservation. Christ is said to be the Rock of his Church; and
every Member in it three wayes. 1. As the fountaine in it, Zach 13 1. Jer. 2.1. 2. As the foundation of it. 3. As the refuge and shelter of it. It is not the Apostles intent I suppose, to affirme the truth of that which the Jewes still tell, and therefore without doubt did tell before Saint Pauls time; that the waters followed the Fa∣thers over mountaines and vallies, in their journey, to the Land of promise; but the Fathers dranke of that water which the Jewes say, followed them. Thorndikes Re∣view. But Calvin, Rivet, and Dike say, the waters out of the Rocke never failed them, where ever they went. Vers. 6. Now these things were our examples, to the intent that we should not lust after evill things, as they also lusted] When a man is not content with what God hath gi∣ven him, but must have some thing else vers. 7.Vers. 7. See Doctor Pride∣aux his Ser∣mon on this Text. Idolatry is the worshipping of God in an Image, as the Israelites in the Calfe, vers. 8. with the daughters of Moab vers. 9. tempting of God, as it were trying what he can doe. v. 10. Murmuring, whining, com∣plaining against God, because of the crosses they feele; or against man, to whom hee supposeth he may impute his crosses; as the Israelites did against Moses and Aaron. Vers. 11. All these things happened unto them for examples] A type is such a forme or representation of a thing, as is made by hard pressing or striking of it, such as we see in stamps and seales, implying (say some) that the Lord by those strokes upon his an∣cient people, left markes upon their bodies, or Printed Letters which were legible to their posterity; this exposition Calvin justly dislikes;See Iohn 20.25 Vide Calvinum in loc. God by them did set his judge∣ments before our eyes; and we are taught by those examples what a judgement hangs over Idolaters, whore-masters, and other contemners of God. Vers. 13. Such as is common to man] That is, a temptation arising from humane frailty.Dike. Vers. 15. I speake as to wise men] Because he was to bring an argument from the mystery of the Supper, he useth this preface,Calvin. that they may more attentively consi∣der the weightinesse of the matter; I speak not to novices; you know the force of the holy Supper; there we are ingraffed into Christs body; therefore it is profit for you to have no society with such. Vers. 16. The Cup of blessing which we blesse, is it not the Communion of the bloud of Christ?] Some thinke the Apostle names the Cup first, alluding to the custome of the Hebrewes, who in their solemne Banquets did begin their feasts with poculum gratiarum; others that Paul intending to be long about the bread,Benedicere cali∣cem, significat in hunc usum consecrare, ut nobis sit symbo∣lum sanguinis Domini. Jd sit verbo promis∣sionis, dū juxta Christi institu∣tionem conveni∣ūt fideles ad cele∣brandum in hoc Sacramento Mortis ejus memoriam. Calvinus. Vide plura ibid. Eucharistia legitimo modo sumpta instrumentum est ejus con∣junctionis, per quam in corpus unum cum filio Dei Iesu Christo, coalescimus, & cum caeteris etiam omnibus fidelibus, qui sunt omnes ejusdem corporis membra. In scriptis Patrum communio est unùm è proporijs appellationibus hujus sacramenti. Casaub. ex∣ercit. 16. ad Annal. Eccles. v. 17. id est quoniam unus est panis quem frangimus & in multas partes dividimus, & multi ef∣ficimur unum corpus, quia omnes de illo uno pane fracto & distributo manducamus. Pareus. doth therefore pre∣mise a few words about the Cup; by blessing some understand consecration, not the Popish charming, whereby they conceive the nature of these elements to be transub∣stantiated; but the separating of them, by declaring Christs institution to become holy signes of inward grace. A Communion is properly a society of men who are joyned together by certaine Lawes and Covenants, to partake in the calamities, and prosperity of one another. Chrysostome observes that Communion is more then par∣ticipation, that is where a man hath part onely of a thing; communion requires that we should be united to the whole. Id est Communionis illius Sacramentum seu signum ac monumentum. Gomarus. Vers. 17. For we being many are one bread and one body: for we all are partakers of that one bread] Objection. Those which eat one bread, make themselves one body with him with whom they eat; and therefore seeing we must not be one body with un∣sanctified men, neither may we partake with them in the Sacrament. Answer. All which eat one bread, are one body in publike profession and open shew, not in very deed and truth alwayes; and to be one body with that holy society whereof unsancti∣fied men in shew and profession doe make themselves appeare to be, that can bee no fault; for they professe themselves to be the body of Christ.
Ejus scilicet generis res de quibus & supra egit c. 6. v. 12. ubi idem dictum. Grotius.Vers. 23. All things are lawfull for me] That is, all indifferent things, for of those he speakes. But all things are not expedient] Proximis scilicet. Cal. viz. to my neighbour; one should not seek after his own profit, as he presently addes. Doctor Gouge.Verse 27. Whatsoever is set before you eat] That is, whatsoever is good and whole∣some meat. Vers. 31. Whether therefore yee eat or drinke, or whatsoever ye doe, doe all to the glory of God] That is,See 14. Zach. 21. habitualiter & virtualiter non actualiter. eat and drink, and sleep, and recreate our selves, that we may become the fitter to doe God some honour in our places. CHAP. XI. Vers. 1. BE ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ] Hence it appeares (saith Calvin) how unfit the Sections of the Chapters are,Haec clasula spectat superiora, quò eam mani∣festè refert Chrysostomus. Vnde & Oecumenius, Erasmus, Cajetanus aliique nonnulli eam annectunt capiti praecedenti. Nam quia Paulus suum Corinthiis allegaverat exemplum, dicens, Sicut & ego per omnia omnibus placeo; Nunc generaliter ad sui imitationem eos invitat. Estius. because this sentence is cut off from the former, to which it ought to be joyned, and added to these fol∣lowing, with which it hath no agreement. Vers. 2. The Ordinances, as I delivered them unto you] The vulgar Translatour here translates it praecepta; by traditions Apostolicae traditiones per∣tinent ad ordi∣nem & politi∣am. Calvinus. we understand here from the circumstances of the words following, rites and ceremonies prescribed by the Apostle, for order and decency in the publike assembly in their Church. Vers. 3. The head of every man is Christ] Christ is called the head of man, because he is every way the most principall,Perkins. and glorious man that ever was. The head of the woman is the man] That is the man, in that he is a man, is a person more excellent then the woman as she is a woman:Perkins. and the head of Christ is God] Both in respect Glass. Rhet Sac. Tract. 1. c. 7. of his humane nature, in which regard his Father is greater than him, Iohn 14.28. and in respect of his office, as mediatour. Vers. 4. But every man praying or prophesying, having his head covered dishonoureth it] It seemes there were some which taught the Corinthians that their men should pray, and prophesie with their heads covered;As for men covering, or uncovering their head in preaching, it can be nothing to Saint Pauls meaning, be∣cause uncover∣ing the head in signe of re∣verence was a custome un∣knowne in his time. Thornedikes Review. 155. Apostolus loquitur non de illo capit tegmine quod pileum vel galerum dicimus, & quo, facie aperta manente, capillus & sola capitis summitas tegitur. Hoc enim indecorum non est, quin potius ad valetu∣dinem tuendam necessarium: neque enim possunt homines praesertim in regionibus Aquilonaribus degentes, & qui vel valetudine vel aetate affecti sunt cerebrum sua natura frigidissimum sine gravi incommodo externo frigori exponere: sed de tali tegumento quo facies in qua una omnis viritis gravitas, dignitas & majestus se ostendit, obtegitur. Morton. and women uncovered. This abuse the Apostle corrects; if a man cover his head, he debaseth himselfe, and casts himselfe into servi∣tude from that eminency whereby he is placed of God and to the glory of Christ, his head is diminished. For he shames the head, when he doth not declare that prin∣cipality which God hath given him over his wife; for the covering with a vaile, was a signe of subjection. Pauls purpose is to shew the Soveraignty of the man, and subjection of the woman; the women in the orientall parts, with a vaile covered the whole head and face. Paul speakes not of such a covering of the head as French Pa∣stors use in prophesying, when the upper part of the head is covered, the glory and majesty of the countenance still appearing. Some say that in the infancy of the Church some women were extraor∣dinarily indued with that gift, and did indeed prophesie. 2. Others judge it to have bin a fault in that Church, & there∣fore say the Apostle reproveth it in the 14. Chap. commanding women to keep silence in the Churches. 3. A woman may be said to prophesie, when she singeth Psalmes, or readeth the Scripture. Mr. Perkins.Vers. 5. But every woman that prayeth, or prophesieth with her head uncovered, dishonou∣reth her head, for that is even all one as if she were shaven] The Christian women appeared open, and in publick uncovered, from a phantasticall imitation of the she Priests, and Prophetesses of the Gentiles when they shewed their Idols, as their Pythiae, Bacchae, or
Menadae, and the like, who used when they uttered their Oracles or celebrated the rites and sacrifices of their gods, to put themselves into a wild and extaticall guise, ha∣ving their faces discovered, their haire dishevelled &c. The Corinthian women con∣ceiting themselves when they prayed or prophesied in the Church,In Tertullians time, those that professed Vir∣ginity, took upon them to sit with their faces unveiled in the Church, taking it for a priviledge of their ranke, to disclaime the subjection of the sex, and professe freedome. This is the occasion of his Book De velandis virginibus. Thorndike of the service of God at religious Assemblies. Ch. 6. See more there. to be acting the parts of the Priests, or celebrating sacrifice, were so fond as to imitate them, and accordingly cast off their Vailes, and discovered their faces immodestly in the con∣gregation, and thereby dishonoured their head, that is, were unseemly accontred and dressed on their head. M. Mede on 1 Cor. 11.5. vide Grotium. To prophesie signifies sometimes strictly to foretell things to come,See Acts 21.9. as both men and women did in the primitive times, Ioel 2.28. . In a more large notion, to interpret and open Divine mysteries contained in Scrpture, for the instruction and edification of the hearers, 1 Cor. 14.3. 3. To praise God in hymnes and Psalms, 1 Cor. 11.5.See 1 Chron. 25.1, 2, 3. Mr. Mede ubi supra. For because Prophets of old did three things: 1. Foretell things to come. 2. No∣tifie the will of God unto the people. 3. Uttered themselves in musicall wise, and in a Poeticall straine and composure. Hence it comes to passe that to prophesie in Scripture signifies the doing of any of these three things,Prophetare hic accipio pro en∣arrare Dei my∣steria in aedifi∣cationem audientium ut infra capite 14. Calvinus. and among the rest to praise God in Verse or Musicall composure. Two places of Scripture, 1 Chron. 25.1, &c. 1 Sam. 10.5. prove this. Vers. 7. He is the image and glory of God] Holinesse and righteousnesse is common to them both;Mr. Perkins. but he is so called because God hath placed more outward excellency and dignity in the person of a man, then of a woman; carrying the marke of his soveraignty and dominion not onely over other creatures, but in respect of the wo∣man her selfe, who is likewise said to be the glory of a man, because it is his honour to have such an excellent creature subject to him. Vers. 10. Power over her head] That is, her vaile, which is a signe of her husbands power and superiority over her.M. Hildersam. Velum appellat potestatem, signum potestatis viri. Fuit velum speciale nubentibus, unde verbum nubendi apud Latinos. Rivetus. Vide Grotium. Among the Corinthians the covering of the head was not as it is with us, a token of preheminence and superiority, but a signe of subjection;Mr. Perkins on Rev. therefore the Apostle would have the women of Corinth when they came into the Congregation to have their heads covered, to signifie their submission and reverence unto the Ministery of the Gospell. Because of the Angels] That is, not onely the Ministers of the Church, Perkins. Hoc quidam de ipsis pastoribus intelligunt in coetu loquentibus qui Apoc. 2. & 3. saepius Angeli vocan∣tur. Hag. 1.13. Mal. 2.7. Alii de Angelis propriè dictis intelli∣gunt quatenus eorum ratio ha∣benda est, ne in∣decoro foemina∣rum habitu of∣fendantur. Vide Grotium & Bezam. Scimus Angelos Christo quoque tanquam suo capiti praesto esse & ministrare; ergo quum eò licentiae prorum∣punt mulieres, ut sibi dominationis symbolum praeter jus & fat usurpent, turpitudinem suam Angelis conspicuam faciunt. Cal∣vinus. vide plura ibid. Paraeus Calvinum sequitur. but Gods heavenly Angels, which daily wait upon his children, and guard them in all their waies. Pareus inclines to this latter rather. Some think the Apostle argues from the example of the Angels, we should imitate their modesty, who were wont to cover their faces to testifie their subjection toward God. So Vorstius. The Apostle hath respect unto the Legend reported in the Book of Enoch (which we see was read in the Church in the Apostles time, by the second Epistle of St. Peter, and that of St. Iude) of those Angels that are reported there to have been seduced by the beauty of women, out of Gen. 6.2. Not as if the Apostle did suppose that re∣port to be true, or did intend to give credit to the book; but that by alluding to a passage commonly known, he may very well be thought to intimate that a like in∣convenience to it, (not disputing whether true or not for the present) might fall out in the Church. Thorndikes Review. At first all Presbyters were Angels of the Churches, as appears by this place; that seems the most naturall meaning of his words: for Tertullian in divers places of his book De velandis virginibus, intimateth one reason
of vailing womens faces in the Church from the scandall of their countenances. Thorndikes service of God at religious assemblies. Ch. 4. Cum tamen id neque repugnet naturae, & mul∣tos apud populos usitatum sit, na∣turaliter ponitur pro eo, recepti passim moris est. Grotius de Jure Belli. l. 2. c. 13. But this of Grotius, and also what others say in defence of long haire is well answered in a book intituled Diatriba Theologica de capillis caustans disputatione Tex∣uali Ad 1 Cor. 11.14, 15.Vers. 14. Doth not even nature it selfe teach you, that if a man have long haire] The Greek word  is to nourish his haire long. Long haire is an argument either of effeminatenesse or cruelty, Iob 5.5 Psal 68.22. For that cause Paul commands them not to nourish their haire. Raynold. de lib. Apoc. Vers. 16. If any man seem to be contentious] the Greek signifieth rather, is pleased to be, desires or hath a will to be, yea boasts and prides himselfe in it. amans victoriae, ut cui victoria potior est veritate. Estius.Contentious] Greek, a lover of victory. Vers. 17. Now in this that I declare unto you I praise you not; that you come together not for the better,From the 17 Verse to the end of the Chapter. but for the worse] Throughout the whole Scripture the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is not so fully handled as in this Chapter, and that upon this occasion. The Corinthians (it seems) had much profaned and abused the Sacrament; how and in what manner, it is not so cleare, but so that the Apostle tels them in this Verse they came together not for the better, but for the Grande nefas, quando medi∣cina non modò non proficit ae∣gros, sed etiam in venenum ver∣titur. Pareus. worse; and vers. 20. This is not to eate the Lords Supper. We commonly say, that is not done which is not rightly done, saith Calvin. Illegitime edere, non est edere. Pareus. And therefore the Apostle saith twice, Vers. 22. I praise you not; a Miosis, I dispraise, I blame you. Then having blamed them for doing amisse, he instrusts them, and useth very strong perswasions to make them reform and do aright. He rehearseth unto them Christs institution, and explaines it;Vide Calvinum in V. 23. he lets them know how hainous a thing in its own nature, and how dangerous in respect of the consequence, it is, to communicate unworthily. Con∣sider three thing in generall: 1. The rehearsall of Christs institution of the Sacra∣ment, Vers. 23, 24, 25. Then the Apostles explication of it, Vers. 26. And 3. his appli∣cation, Vers. 27, 28, 29, 30. Vers. 18. For first of all, when you come together in the Church, &c.] Some take Church here per coetu fidelium.See Mede in loc. Yet Theophylact and all Greek Writers generally expound it the ministeriall place of meeting.Cameron oppo∣seth Fuller about this point. Vide Grotium. See v. 22. Schismatum nomine, id est, scissutarum (ut vetus interpres ad exprimendam Graecae vocis vim convertit) notantur animorum & voluntatum distractiones, quibus ecclesiae corpus quasi vio∣latur. Haereses autem, id est (ut verbum verbo reddam) electiones sunt opiniones atque sententiae non à Deo revelata sed electae ab hominibus adversus veritatem Orthodoxae fidei & sacrum Catholicae pietatis canonem. Raynold de lib. Apoc. praelect. 10. Vide Grotium.Divisins] Or Schismes. Schisme is a difference about rites or externall discipline; heresie is a difference about doctrine and faith. Schismes many times degenerate into Heresies. Vers. 19. For there must be also heresies among you] There is not any need of them, for any good in themselves, they are the diseases of the Church; but there are suf∣ficient causes alwaies in blind and corrupt judgements. He saith not, it is possible, but, necessary that heresies be, as fire to try and purge the Gold. It behoves that there be heresies in the Church, as it is necessary there should be poyson and venomous creatures in the world, because out of them God will worke medicines. See Matth. 18.7. That they which are approved (sincere in the faith) may be made manifest among you] That is, known to be sincere by their constancy. Vers. 20. The Lords Supper] so called, partly from the Authour, and partly from the free circumstance of the evening time, 1 Cor. 10.21. & 11.23. See Grotius. Eate] The Papists goe about to establish their administration of the Lords Supper under one kind from the Word , but that word is used generally for the whole action of the Sacrament, viz. the distribution of the bread and Wine; and the Syriack propounds it more distinctly, rendring it, Comedentes vos & bibentes. Waltherus in offi∣cina Biblica.
Vers. 22. Despise ye the Church of God] That is the place where Gods people come together for his service.Mr. Pierson. Vers. 23. For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you] And as he received what he delivered, so he delivered what he received, he kept nothing back, Acts 20.27. That the Lord Iesus] Onely he is sufficient to institute the Sacrament who can con∣ferre the grace of it. If we either respect Christ as Lord or Jesus, if either our duty to him, or safety by him, then let us also respect this Sacrament. The same night] Christ did institute the Sacrament at night,The night be∣fore he suffe∣red. because immediately after the Passeover, Matth. 26.19, 20, 26. and by the Law the Passeover was to be eaten at night, Exod. 21.6, 8. In which he was betrayed] Greek signifies delivered or given up into the hands of his adversaries who condemned and crucified him.The Hebrew signifies tradere ad mactandum. The word is often used of Iudas who did it treacherously, and so betrayed him, Matth. 27.3. Marke 14.21. Luke 22.22. Iohn 18.2. but sometimes it is used of God himselfe, Rom. 8.32. sometimes indefinitely,Pareus. Rom. 4. ult. so here it may be taken. Took bread] off the Table, setting it apart for a holy use, Exod. 12.5, 6, 21. This signifies, that Christ by the eternall purpose and decree of God was separated,Videtur mihi omnino accipi∣endi verbum de manus preben∣sione in verbis illis Christi intelligi, tum quoniam propia haec significatio est , tum quod certum sit dominum cum discipulis accum∣bentem retinuisse ordinarium & usitatum sumendi cibi modum. Beza.and set a part to be made a sacrifice and offering for us. Here, and in the 26, 27, 28 verses the Apostles cals it Bread after consecration, therefore the substance of Bread doth re∣main after the words of consecration. Vers. 24. And when he had given thanks] He gave thanks to God for his mercy to∣wards mankind, and the inestimable benefit of redemption by his death, the Sacra∣ment whereof he was instituting. This teacheth us to come with thanksgiving to the Lords Table; hence the Sacrament is termed the Eucharist. Calvin. This is my body] a figure, signe, and representation of my body;Hoc (id est, haec res, seu panis ac∣ceptus ac fra∣ctus) est corpus meum) quod pro vobis fran∣gitur, id est Sacramentum signum & mo∣numentum cor∣poris frangendi. Est pro significat poni apparet ex ipse Dei verbo, Gal 4.25. Danaeus. Septem extant horum verborum interpretationes. Prima eorum est, qui ajunt Christum notasse digito corpus suum, cum diceret hoc est corpus meum, non notasse panem quem porrigebat, tum dicendū erat potius Tradam hoc corpus. Secunda corum qui aiunt Christum tantùm hoc voluisse significare, corpus suum esse panem, itaque unt esse universorum; sed tum dicendum fuisset, tale quid est corpus meum. Tertia, Consubstantiatorum, qui dcunt hoc est corpus meum, significare, hoc pane continetur corpus meum; sed hoc est petere quod est in principio; non enim constat an pane contineatur crpus. Quarta, Veterum patrum nonnullorum, corpus Christi vi & efficacia. Quinta, corum qui dicunt agnoscendum esse panem esse corpus Christi, sed non esse quaerendum quomodo panis sit corpus Christi. Sexta Pontificiorum, qui rotunde sine suco & fallacia aiunt apertè hoc est corpus meum significare hoc esse essentialiter & revera corpus meum. Septima orthodoxorum, qui aiunt hunc esse genuinum & simplicem horum verborum sensum; Hoc, id est, quem manibus tenco panis, corpus meum est quod fractum est pro vobis. Cameron. opusc. Miscell. the signe put for the thing signified, because of the analogy between them. See Gen. 7.10. Exod. 2.11. 1 Cor. 10.4. Tit. 3.5. The Fathers generally expound it the Sacrament of his body. Cornelius a Lapide on Esay saith, if Christ had not been incarnate, the Priests pronoun∣cing of these words hoc est corpus meum, would have incarnated him; and on this place he saith, Sanè in hora mortis, in die illa terribili, cum sistemur tribunali Christi de fide & vita examinandi; si me roget Christus, cur credidisti corpus meum in Eucharistia? fidenter dicam. Domine credidi quod in dixisti, quod me docuisti, tu verba tua per tropum non explicuisti, nec ego per tropum explicare ausus sum. This doe in remembrance of me] By vertue of these words not onely power and au∣thority is given Ministers, but a necessity is imposed upon them to celebrate the Sa∣crament. The words are not permissive, but mandatory. Vers. 25. After the same manner Qualia fecit circa panem, talia & circa ca∣licem. Jansen. ad verbum post Caenavisse, Galli hunc Hellenismum eleganter exprimunt, apres avoir soupè. also he took the Cup] After the same manner, and to the same end he tooke the cup into his hands that he had formerly taken the Bread. When he had supped] Or, after having supped. This Cup is the New Testament in my blood] Here are two metonymies: 1 A meto∣nymie of the subject, Cup for the Wine contained in the cup, and the Wine in the Cup
is not the New Testament but a Sacrament of the New Testament, made and confir∣med by the blood of Christ. Is] That is, sealeth and confirmeth. Vers. 26. Eat this Bread] Still bread, even after consecration; bread, though not ordinary and common; but this bread, yet bread. And drink this cup] Drink this as well as eat that. Ye do shew forth the Lords death] Hence the Sacrament was termed by the Ancients a Sacrifice, viz. representative and commemorative, but not properly. Either to each particular man at the houre of his death, or to all men, and the whole Church at the day of judgement.Till he come] This shews the perpetuity of the Sacrament, the Passover remained till Christs first comming, his death; this must remain till his second comming, unto judgement. Vers. 27. Vnworthily] Ignorantly, unreverently, or prophanely. He that comes unto the Sacrament and receives it in an unfit manner,Id est, aliter quam dignum est tanta myste∣ria tractari. Beza. Carnaliter, prophanè & per consequens inutiliter, contumeliose & aliter quàm rerum tam sanctarum & au∣gustarum dignitas & Christi institutio sert. Morton. without that due regard which be∣longs unto such an holy action. Vers. 28. Let] Not spoken by way of permission but injunction, not here as 1 Cor. 7.6. & 36.As, Let it be enacted. A necessity is laid upon us, necessitas praecepti, for it is a plain and peremp∣tory command; necessitas medii, for without it there can be no worthy receiving. A man]  both man and woman, Gal. 3.28. the woman is partaker of the same dignity in this matter with the man; and therefore also bound unto the same duty. Examine] Prove▪ try, 2 Cor. 13.5. Some prosecute the metaphor of a Goldsmith searching the purity of his Gold, this being a proper word to them in their mystery, 1 Pet. 1.7. Others make it verbum forense and juridicum, as Magistrates question offenders. Himselfe] Had not this been added, many would have been diligent enough in ob∣serving the rest. Curiosum hominum genus ad cognoscendam vitam alienam desidiosum ad corrigendam suam.Aug. conf. Psal. 4.4 Luke 21.34. 2 Cor. 13.5. Not but that we may and ought to examine some others as well as our selves; the Minister the people committed unto his charge Heb. 13.17. parents their children, Ephes. 6.4. and masters their ser∣vants, 2 Kings 5.25. Iosh. 24.15. But we must not be bishops in others Diocesses, 1 Pet. 4.15. And so] God looks not so much at the thing done, as the manner of doing it. Ier. 48.10. Let him] He may eate and drink, and that to his comfort. Eat] Not onely stay and look on, and see what another doth, but let him eate; which condemnes the private Masse of the Papists, wherein the Priest alone doth eat, the people standing by and beholding what he doth, but not communicating of any part of the Sacrament at all with him. The end of the Sacrament is to be eaten, not carried about in pomp, to be made a spectacle to be gazed at, and an Idoll to be worshipped. Of the bread] Bread therefore yet it is, even after consecration, so the Apostle ever terms it, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. & 11.26, 27. And (which is worthy to be noted) the Apostle doth here so terme it in three Verses together, even when he reproves the Corinthians for their unreverent eating of it, and shews them the great danger which they incur that do so. Vers. 29. He] That is, whosoever, what person soever he be; that eateth and drinketh] That is, receiveth into his body the Sacramentall Seals of Bread and Wine; for of that the Apostle speaketh. Vnworthily] That is in an unfit manner, not in some measure answerable to the worth of this ordinance. Eateth and drinketh damnation to himselfe] That is, by eating and drinking unwor∣thily incurreth damnation, judgement temporall here, as vers. 30. and without repen∣tance eternall hereafter.
To himselfe] Sibi ipsi vulg. non aliis, his unworthy communicating prejudiceth not those which communicate with him. Every man shall beare his own burden.Marke the em∣phasis of the phrase he eats it to himselfe, q.d. he can blame no per∣son nor thing but himselfe; he cannot blame the bread or wine, nor Christ, nor the Minister that giveth it him; but his own unworthie selfe. 1. In regard of guilt and liablenesse unto Gods wrath. 2. In regard of the seale and obligation in the conscience, he eats and drinkes that which seales up his dam∣nation. Not discerning Hoc corpus domini & sa∣cram hanc coe∣nam non discer∣nunt, qui à profano & vulgari pane & coena vel convivio nihil differre putant, ne que dignitatem, rem signatam, usum & finem sacra∣menti hujus satis aestimant. Zepperus. Vide Bezam & Grotium. the Lords body] That is, puts no difference between the bread and wine in the Sacrament, and other common bread and wine. There are two parts of the Sacrament; one externall, the elements presented to the senses. 2. Ano¦ther spirituall presented to our graces; he hath to doe onely with the elements. Vrs. 30. For this cause] For comming to the Lords Table in the sinne of forni∣cation amongst others many were sick. See 1 Cor. 6.18. and 10.8. And many sleep] Are dead; men are liable not onely to the highest spirituall judge∣ment, damnation, vers. 27. but the highest temporall judgement, death, for un∣worthy receiving. Vers. 34. The rest will I set in order when J come] He speakes of the outward decorum which is in the liberty of the Church.Certum est Paulum non nisi de externo decoro loqui quod in libertate ecclesiae positum est. Calvn. vide Bezam. CHAP. XII. Vers. 3. NO man can say that Iesus is the Lord,Vers 1. Jn certum est an sentiat de donis spiritus ut Chrysost. Theoph. Am∣brose, an de psallendo spiritu, de quo videtur nata fuisse questio. Eras. but by the holy Ghost]Mr. Hildersam. As if he had said, He cannot say and professe it from the full perswasion of his heart; till the holy Ghost have taught it him, that he is so indeed. Vers. 4. See Doctor Hall on this Text. Vers. 6. And there are diversities of operations] Mighty workings.Vocabulū Grae∣cum non significat simpliciter operationem, sed vim quandam & efficaciam, qua Deus agit in nobis. Erasm. Vers. 7. To profit] The word is  which importeth such a kind of profit as redounds to communitie.Vt Ecclesia fru∣ctum inde perci∣piat. Calvinus. Vtilitatem sc. ecclesiae. Piscat. Vers 8. For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdome: to another the word of know∣ledge] God hath given to the Pastour, whose chiefe office is to apply the word,Mr. Hildersam.  knowledge infused by di∣vine revelation  knowledge acquired by study and industry. Barlow in Concione. vide Bezam. the word of wisedome; as to the Doctour, whose office is to interpret the word, and to teach doctrine the word of knowledge. The word of wisdome] That is, a more excellent re∣velation, and more speciall and immediate instinct and assistance of the Spirit, to∣gether with more eminent authority in explaining the mysteries of Christ. The word of knowledge] That is, by diligence in the Scripture, they obtaine such knowledge, as that they are able to make Christ known unto others; although they be farre inferiour to the former. Doctor Taylor on Titus. Vers. 10. To another the discerning of Spirits] That is, Inspirations.Perspicacia in dignoscendis hominibus qui se aliquid esse profitebantur. Calvinus. Vers. 14. And the others following. For the body is not one member, but many, &c.] One body and many members. 1. Use. 2. Necessity. 3. Honour. 4. Comeli∣nesse. 5. Mutuall consent commend these things. Vers. 21. Nor againe the head to the feet] He doth not understand (as the Papists
say) per caput & pedes Papam & Ecclesiam; but by the Head any man adorned with excellent gifts in the Church;Non monet Pe∣trum ne ecclesiae insultet, sed monet eos qui eminebant donis spiritualibus inter Corinthios, ne inferiores contemnerent; as Chrysost. Ambrose and Aquinas expound it. by the feet any meane Christian. Membra ista appellantur ab Apostolo inhonesta vel indecora, non per se sed comparatè, ratione eorum quae eximia venustate sunt praedita. Fullerus.Vers. 23. The members lesse honourable] Vers. 25. That the members should have the same care one for another] The words (in the Greeke) are,Eurroughes Jrenicum. That the Members may care the same thing one for another] and that with∣out dividing care, that there might be no schisme in the body. The word here used for care is , the same that Matth. 6.25.28. is forbidden. Vbi nomine Doctorum complexus est Evangelistas etiam & Pastores, quos tamen distinxit ad Ephesios, collocans post Prophetas, ipsos Evange∣listas, posteà Pastores, postremo Doctores. Zanch. in quartum praeceptum.  ecclesiae gubernatores, ut omnes boni in∣terpretes interpretantur tam novi quàm veteres. Jd. ibid. Vide Bezam.Vers. 28. Thirdly teachers] Vers. 31. But covet earnestly] The word in the originall is , be zealous after the best thing, that is, studiously affect them; so this word is used Iames 42. See 14. Chap. 1. A more excellent way] Hoc est, viam excellentiorem, vel, ut aliis pla∣cet, vtam ad excellentiam perveniendi, de qua sequente capite. Vorstius. ; a way of the highest excellency be∣yond any expression. CHAP. XIII. Angelorum lin∣guam hyperboli∣cè posuit pro sin∣gulari aut exi∣mia, quanquam de linguarum diversitate potius interpretor, quam magni faciebant Co∣rinthii, ambiti∣one non fructu omnia metientes. Calvinus. Vide Grotium. Apion Grammaticus ob garrulitatem dictus est Cymbalum orbis à Ti∣berio Augusto, teste Suetonïo. His proverbijs significat Apostolus inanem ac futilem garrulitalem. Drus. Prov. Class. 2. l. 3.Vers. 1. THough I speak with the tongues of men, and of Angels, &c.] Not that Angels have tongues or use of speech; but to note what grace and excellency of discourse must needs be thought in them, if it might be supposed that they should speak. Angelicum quicquid in suo genere excellit. Drusius, Prov. Class. 8. l. 3. Or if we interpret it with Calvin and Estius of diversity of tongues, the meaning is, though thou understandest not onely all the tongues of men, but also of Angels; yet there is no reason, why thou shouldst thinke that God regards thee any more then a Cymball, unlesse thou hadst charity. Sounding Brasse, and tinckling Cymball.] That is, sounding onely for pleasure, but signifying nothing. Vers. 2. All knowledge] Not understanding it simply and absolutely of all kinds of knowledge; but of the gift of knowledge. Id est omnium scientiam, scilicet eorum ad quae scientiae donum extenditur. Estius. All faith] This place is either gene∣rally under∣stood of all faith, or parti∣cularly of the whole faith of working mira∣cles, but in neither sense doth it shew that faith may be removed from charity. If generally, then the Apostle must be understood as speaking by the way of supposition, and not as positively affirming, that either he, or any other having all faith wanted charity; therefore this supposition (quae nihil ponit) proveth nothing. If the place be to be understood particularly of the faith of miracles, the particle all being not universall but integrall, as if it had been said, the whole faith, including all the degrees of it, this miraculous faith may be severed from charity. Down. of Justificat. l. 6. c. 3. See Cartw. Annotat. on Rhom. Test. De ea fide loquitur quam superius inter charismata recensuit, & sensus est: fi fidem habeam adeo perfectam, ut per eam miracula faciam etiam maxima, factuque difficillima, quale est hominum opinione, montem loco dimovere, & aliò trans∣ferre. Estius. By all faith he meaneth not all kinds of faith; but all measure of it in working miracles; some had faith to doe some miracles and not others; the Apostle sheweth, that if he had such a miraculous faith, that he could doe all miracles, and had not love, it were nothing. This is cleare in that the Apostle reckoneth miraculous faith among the gifts of the Spirit in the precedent Chapter, 1 Cor. 12.9. and by the example, or instance of moving mountaines, which our Saviour noteth as a master miracle amongst others. Matth. 17.20. Luke 17.6. Vide Bezam.  pro∣priè est ad ves∣cendum dare. Num. 11.4.18. Deut. 8.3.16. figuratè in alicujus usus impendere. Esai. 58.14.Vers. 3. Bestow to feed the poore] There is but one word in the Greek  breake my goods into pieces, or morsels, and distribute them to as many poore as they will reach. Graeca vox significat in frusta seu particulas escam divisam porrigere ac praebere in alimoniam. Estius. See à Lapide.
Vers 4. Charity suffereth long, and is kind: charity envieth not: charity vaunteth not it selfe] Here are certaine limits and effects of charity; is kind.]Institutum apo∣stoli est hoc ca∣pite cōmendare charitatem, qua∣tenus exercetus erga proximos per officia hominibus conspicua. Estius. V. 4. Vaunteth not it selfe] Verbum Graecum putant factum à Perperis fratribus, qui cecropes appellati sunt, homines tam insignis proterviae, ut ex eorum moribus verbum hoc obtinuerit. Pareus. Vide Estium. The Greek word sig∣nifies a gentlenesse and sweetnesse of manners; envieth not] envie is, anger at anothers prosperity; is not puffed up] made more conceited of it selfe, in regard of wealth, or any gift which God giveth. Vers. 5. Doth not behave it selfe unseemely] Is not transported by any ill affection to carriage not befitting ones place, calling age; seeketh not her owne] not that which is profitable for himselfe, but for many; is not easily provoked] soone distempered with anger; thinke no evill] takes not things amisse; nor quickly entertaines suspitions Vers. 6. Rejoyceth not in iniquity] Is not glad to see another commit sinne, that hee hath done ill, that I may disgrace him thereby. Vers. 7. Beareth all things] As the maine beame in a houseMetaphora à tignis, quae in aedificio juncta gravissima onera perserunt. Pareus. Instar trabis quae impositum onus sustinet, vel potius instar palmae, quae non succumbt oneri suo. à Lapide. Non facilè de quoquam desperat quin ad meliorem frugem venire possit. Grotius. the building;  sig∣nifies properly to cover, covers faults. Beleeveth all things] That is, in other mens sayings and actions it beleeves the best. 2. Not all things simply and indefinitely, but credenda vel credibilia. Pareus. Not errours and false-hood; but rejoyceth in the truth, vers. 6. 3. Not without triall and discretion. 4. There must goe a judgement of prudence, with the judgement of Charity. Hopeth all things] From his neighbour. Endureth all things] Bearing and enduring all things seeme to be the same, that is all evills from evill men. Vers. 10. Then that which is in part shall be done away] Grace, and so glory per∣fects nature quoad essentiam, sed evacuat quoad imperfectiones, it takes away all imper∣fections. Vers. 12. But then face to face] Understand we shall see. This is to be understood comparatively, in respect of how we know him now, now obscurely as in a glasse;It is not to be understood of our bodily eyes, unlesse of God in Christ. Vide Bezam. then distinctly, clearely, immediately, so as to make us happy; we shall then appre∣hend him clearely; but not comprehend him. Even as also I am known] viz. by God. As is not a note of equality, but likenesse; so that the sense may be; As God knoweth me after a manner, agreeable to his infi∣nite excellency; so shall I know God according to my capacity; not obscurely, but perfectly as it were face to face. Some expound it thus, by how much our Teacher shall be more excellent, sc. God, and the manner of Teaching more excellent, sc. the clear vision and contemplation; and by how much our condition shall be better when we put on immortality; by so much our knowledge shall be more perfect. Vers. 13. But the1. In bredth; for faith and hope are with∣in the bounds of mans per∣son, but love is to God himselfe, and from him to our friends, yea our enemies. Beatus qui amat te, & amicos inte, & inimicos propter te. Aug. confess. 2. In length the other end with life love continues in heaven, love is in God. Vide Bezam & Grotium. greatest of these is charity] The Apostles meaning is, that love is more excellent, not simply and absolutely; but in some respect onely, that is, in re∣gard of manner of working, extent, and use toward others, in respect of edifying the Church (faith and hope are private goods) or in the life to come, the Saints shall be wholly taken up with loving God. CHAP. XIV. Vers. 1. FOllow after charity]  persequimini. It signifies an ardent studie of charity, to pursue it as a Huntsman pursues a wilde beasts.Vehementius est verbum . We are zealous of such things quae probamus ac miramur, the other is magno studio adniti ut assequa∣ris Vide Bezam.
And desire spirituall gifts] The Greeke word signifies to desire with zeale and holy emulation, to be zealous after, or zealously addicted unto them. See 12.31. But rather that ye may prophesie] Interpret Scripture, because it tends to the build∣ing up of the brethren, the conversion of unbeleevers, and the glory of God thereby. Bezas translation is more exact then ours, Thorndikes Service of God at religious Assemblies. Chap. 5. be zealous of spirituall graces, but of all spirituall graces especially that of prphesying; prophesying is of the number of spiritu∣all graces, and therefore not to be excepted in opposition to them, as if the Apostle exhorted to study prophesying rather then spirituall graces. Vers. 2. For he that speaketh in an unknown tongue, speaketh not unto men, but unto God] Prayer in the Church in a tongue not understood of the people crosseth this whole Chapter; it profiteth not, v. 6. it is spoken in the aire, v. 9. that is, it is not under∣stood, he that speaketh is a Barbarian, v. 11. The understanding is without fruit. 14. v. It edifies not, 17. v. Instructs not, 19. It gives occasion to some to say that wee which use it are out of our wits,Not onely the reformed Churches, but also the Ethiopians, and Egyptians, Syrians, Armenians, Muscovites, Moravians, and Sclavonians, at this day, observe the ancient forme of praying in their vulgar languages. Bishop Down. of Prayer. c. 17. v. 23. Verses. 7, and 8. And even things without life giving sound, whether Pipe or Harp, except they give a distinction in the sound, how shall it be knowne what is piped or barped? For if the Trumpet give an uncertaine sound, who shall prepare himselfe, to Battell?] The Apostle illustrateth the impossibily of praying duly in an unknown tongue by two similitudes; the one taken from an Instrument of peace, v. 7. It is impossible for him to apply himselfe to the dance. 2. From an Instrument of of warre, verse, 8 as if he should have said,Bishop Morton of the Masse. it is impossible to know when to march forward, or when to re∣treat. Vers. 13. Wherefore let him that speaketh in an unknown tongue, pray that he may in∣terprete] That is, pray for the gift of interpreting, that which he was inspired to speake in a strange language.Mr. Thorndike. Sensus est, qui donum habet loquendi linguis, ne inutile donum circumferat, oret Deum largitorem donorum, ut ipsi adijciat donum interpre∣tandi: quo ea quae peregrina lingua loquitur ad aliorum intelligentiam proferre possit. Estius. Vers. 15. I will pray with the spirit] That is, in a strange tongue ministred unto me by the spirit;To pray in the spirit] Is to pray in the Closer of a mans soule, be∣ing not under∣stood of others; and to pray with understanding, is to pray that others may understand. So the Apostle seemeth to ex∣pound the phrase, v. 19. Bishop Down. of Prayer, c. 17. for of that kind of Prayer he speakes. With understanding also] That is, so as others which heare may understand: for so it must be taken, else it were impossible that he which prayes in the Spirit, should not pray with understan∣ding; and he speakes of publike prayers. Vers. 16. That supplieth the roome of the unlearned] Meaning any unlearned man; say Amen; and therefore prayers in a strange tongue were to be banished, because they could not with faith and feeling say Amen, that is give their consent at the end of them. The Papists Paulus scri∣bit ibi ad Co∣rinthios, apud quos tunc tempo∣ris & Hebraeos constantissimum fuit in lingua vulgari communia celebrare. Non igitur crediderim Paulum Corinthiis imposuisse, aut illud praecipuè voluisse, quoniam publicè in usu erat, sed vel de privatis eorum conventibus, vel saltem de privatis colloquis post commu∣nia offiia peracta habitis, ibi agit, & eos reprehendit, qui dono linguarum praediti etiam in linguis extraneis tum loquebantur. Franciscus à Sancta Clara. See Bellarmines opinion in Whitakers Epistle Dedicatory to his Treatise de Scripturis, and Whitak. de Script. Quest. 2. c. 18. and Dilh. Elect. l. 2. c. 20. say the Apostle meaneth the Clerk of the Church, who sup∣plieth the place of the Laity. But the words doe signifie not him who supplyeth the place or stead; but he that filleth or occupieth the place of the unlearned, that is, one of that rank; and so is expounded by the Greeke Fathers. Vers. 17. For thou verily givest thankes well, but the other is not edified] That is, be∣cause he understandeth not what thou sayest, he is not guided and directed to goe along with the thansgiving wherein thou goest afore in an unknowne language. See vers. 3. and 8.10. of this Epistle. Vers 18. I thanke my God] The pronoune is the voice of faith, applying the
promise of grace common to all beleevers to himselfe, as Rom. 1.8. That is, the God whose I am, and whom I serve, Acts 27. Vers. 22. Wherefore tongues are for a signe] Even judgement, and punishment sent of God to them that beleeve not. See Beza, à Lapide and Estius. Contumaci populo Deus linguas exoticas in signum irae minabatur. Pareus. Vers. 24. But if all prophesie, and there come in one that beleeveth not, &c. Unbeleevers were admitted to be present at preaching or expounding the Scriptures in the time of the Apostles. That they were excluded (saith learned Mr. Thorndike The service of God at Religi∣ous Assembles. Ch. 10.) at that time as afterwards when the Eucharist came to be celebrated, I have not the like evidence, but in reason I must needs presume it. 29. Let the Prophets speake two or three, and let the other judge] It was not then the custome (as it is now) for one onely to preach in the congregation;Certum est A∣postolum ibi non loqui de promi∣scuo piorum coe∣tu (id enim evidenter colli∣gitur ex verbis praecedentis c. 11. hujus epistolae V. 29. Nanquid omnes prophetae) sed de certo quorundan piorum ordine ex Act. 13.15. colligi potest, quod olim in ecclesia primitiva talis docendi modus usitatus fuerit, ut post hymnos decantatos locus aliquis Scipturae praelegeretur, ac deinde unus ex Ecclesiae doctoribus surgeret, qui locum illum praelectum exponeret ac doctrinas ex eo deduceret. Is cum dicendi finem fecisset, alius surgebat, pollens & ipse prophetiae sive scripturas interpretandi dono, qua ratione non unus tantum sed duo vel tres etiam erant concionatores, qui per vices loquebantur. Eo existimant Apostolum respicere his ver∣bis. Gerh. loc. commun. de ministerio Ecclesiastico. Vide Bezam. but that two or three chosen out of every assembly should speake in order. Let the other judge] viz. Prophets and others indued with the gift of understan∣ding and discretion. Vers 30. If anything he revealed to another that sitteth by, let the first hold his peace] That is, he that was expounding the Scripture should give way to him to whom the truth of it was revealed upon the instant of time. Mr. Thorndike. See Morton. It was the custome for the hearers to sit, and the speakers to stand. Estius. Vers: 31. For ye may all prophesie one by one, that all may teach] viz. all the Pro∣phets and Teachers. See Ch. 12.19. and Calvin in loc. Some hold that those mee∣tings were of Christians together, and that there was a mutuall improving of their Talents in an ordinary way, which did serve much for edification; and they that hold this are different from Anabaptists, for they hold this as distinct from the Mi∣nistry, to which they hold a call necessary. Others say, that this interpreting and preaching did not belong to all, but onely to the Prophets there, and also that it was extraordinary by reason of the peculiar gifts bestowed upon men. Vers 32. The spirits of the Prophets] That is, the doctrine which the Prophets bring, being inspired by the Holy Ghost. Perkins. Are subject to the Prophets] Hoc est Prophetarum censurae, Pareus. That is, the do∣ctrine (or interpretation of divine Scripture) propounded by one Minister of the Church is subject to the judgement of the rest of the Doctors. Glass. Rhet. Sac. Tract. 1. cap. 1. Vers. 34. Let your women keep silence in the Churches, for it is not permitted unto them to speak] A woman may sing in the Church,Mr. Cotton of singing of Psalmes. but she is not permitted to speake there in two cases: 1 By way of preaching. 2 By way of propounding questions, v. 35. Vers. 35. And if they will learn any thing, let them aske their husbands at home: for it is a shame for women to speak in the Church.] The Apostle there forbiddeth open and publique speech in the congregation: where if in the excercise of prophefying they had any doubts rising concerning the things handled, they were not permitted to stand up as the men were, either to teach or aske questions;D. Taylor on Titus. but keep silence for the time, and consult with their husbands at home for the resolution of their doubts. Vers. 40. Decently and orderly] Decorum is opposed to vanity, and filthinesse; order to confusion. Order is used metaphorically;Est ordo parium dispariumque rerum, sua cui∣que loca tribuens dispositio, vel est ubi aliqua con∣grenter sse praecedunt & sequuntur. Peter Martyr. it is used properly of souldiers to which certain stations are assigned. That is, let there be a care had of a decorum in all your publique actions, diligently to consider what the estate, sexe, age, dignity, gift, and office of every one require. Morton.
CHAP. XV. See Mark 16.9. & Luke 24.34.Vers. 5. SEen of Cephas] of Peter first among men, and Mary Magdalen among wo∣men. Then of the twelve] For the rotundity of the number, Iudas had made one long letter of himselfe.Hac ratione vocati sunt Ro∣mae Centumviri, quum tamen duo supra centum essent: nam invaluerat usus ejus appellationis. Calvinus. Videtur omnino intelligere undecim Apostolos etsi numerum solennem retinet. Alii tamen hanc apparitionem refeunt ad illud tempus quo jam Matthias electus fuit in locum Judae Vorstius. Primarii Discipuli, qui ad Apostolatum suscipiendum & Evangelium praedican∣dum à eliquis segregati erant, & qui juxta numerum tribuum Israel, quibus Evangelium praedicandem erat, duodecim erant, atque ita appellabantur, utcunque unus vel alter vel deesset, vel abesset. Morton. Vers. 8. As of one born out of due time] Paul having humble thoughts of himselfe, useth an humble expression,Verisimile est hanc loquendi formulam apud Ebraeos usitatam fuisse, cum de re vili, quae planè obiici so∣leat atque ab∣scond, loquun∣tu; praesirtim si spectes Num. 12.1. Diete∣rici Antiquit. Bibl.Paulus quasi Paululus, be∣cause he was least in his own eyes. which reason he seems to give in the next words vers. 9. Even as an untimely birth is not fit to be called a birth; or because children that are so born are very imperfect, they are lesser and weaker then those of full growth: so saith he, I am as a poore abortive, as a childe born out of due time, I am the least of the Apostles, and I am lesse then the least of all Saints, Ephes 3.8. I am not come to the sta∣ture and growth of a timely birth. Secondly, he cals himselfe an untimely birth, or one born out of due time, probably from this reason, because of the suddennesse or violence of his conversion Hoc ideo di∣cit, quia non longa institutione ad Christianismum perductus fuit, quo esset velut naturalis partio, sed vi subita, quemodo immaturi partus ejici solent. Grotius in loc. Se comparat abortivo idque (ut opinor) subitae suae conversionis respectu. Nam sicuti non ante ex uteo prodeunt infantuli, quàm legitimo temporis successu illic formati & confirmati suerint: ita justum temporis ordinem serva∣vit Dominus in creandis, fovendis ac formandis Apostolis. Paulus autem vix dum bene concepto spiritu vitali, ex utero projectus fuerat. Calvinus. Vide Cornel. à lap. For every abortion or untimely birth comes from some suddain danger into which the mother falleth; some strain or violence causeth abortion: Paul in this sense was an untimely birth, his conversion was a wonderfull violent conversion. See Acts 9. Lyra gives three fit reasons for this Metaphor; as a child is said to be abortive which is born either out of due time, or that is violently drawn out of the wombe, or that comes not to its due quantity: so Paul compares himselfe to an Abortive, both because he was called after all the other Apostles, and after Christs death, as out of due time; and because he was violently by Christs threatnings converted to the faith, and because lesse then another in respect of his life past, being a persecutor of the Church. Vers. 10. Yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me] That is, not by any thing in me, but Gods grace enabling my will to do the good I doe. Dr. Christus primitie do∣mumium non ob mortem, sed ob vitam im∣mortalem, quam omnium homi∣num primus post mortem est con∣secutus. Loquor jam sesundum Hebraeos, quibus vivere dicitur non animus solus sed homo totus. vide Col. 1.18. & Apoc. 1.. Grotius.Vers. 20. Christ is become the first fruits of them that sleep] Among the Jewes such as had Corn fields gathered some little quantity thereof before they reaped the rest, and offered the same to God: signifying thereby that they acknowledged him to be the Authour and giver of all increase; and this offering was also an assurance to the owner of the blessing of God upon the rest; and this being but one handfull did sanctifie the crop: so Christ to the dead is as the First-fruits of the rest of the Corn, because his resurrection is a pledge of theirs. Of them that sleep] That is, of all that die; for Christ entered into Heaven both in body and soul first of all then; but Henoch never died, Hb. 11.5. therefore he might be in Heaven in his body before Christs humane flesh ascended thither. Ob. Three dead men were raised in the Old Testament, and as many in the New Testament, before Christ himselfe rose: how then is he the first fruits of them that slept? 1 Christus pri∣mus surrext in incrruptione. Jerome. 2 Christ was primus though not tempore, yet intentione Dei. Cornel à Lap. 3 Aquinas saith Christus primus sua vertute resurrexit. 4 Alii suscitati sunt mortui, sed item morituri; Christus simul relurrexit & aeternam beatanique vitam recepit. Bern. Beza. Christus non dicitur primitiae resurgentium, quia nullus ante eum resurrexit, hoc namque falsum esset, sed quia solus virtute propria resurrexit, & omnibus iis qui ad gloriam resurgunt resurrectionis causa est. Ita solus virtute propa ascendit in coelum, & omnibus beatudinis causa est. Rivetus.Sol. Christ rose first in an incorruptible and spirituall body, v. 44. they in their
naturall and corruptible bodies, Iohn 11.39. He was the first of all those, which rose from death to life to die no more, but to live for ever; others were raised from death to life, not to live for ever, but to die again. He was first, not in order of time, but is the worthiest of all; they were raised by the vertue and merits of his resur∣rection. Vers. 22. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive] In the first part all simply, in the latter all with limitation, sc. that be in Christ, must be un∣derstood, shall be raised by him at the resurrection. There are two roots out of which life and death spring; as all that die receive their deaths wounds by the disobedience of Adam, so all that live receive life from the obedience of Christ. 2. As all die who are the sonnes of Adam by naturall generation, so all live which are the sonnes of Christ through spirituall regeneration. Non moriuntur omnes in Adamo, sed ii tantum qui in Adamo permnserunt; neque vivificantur omnes in Christo sed tantum qui Christo adhaeserunt. Cam. de Eccl. tomo. 10. Estius gives two expositions of this place; first, as all which die, die by Adam: so all which shall be made alive, shall be made alive by Christ. Or thus, as by Adam all die which are Adams, that is, all men: so by Christ shall all be made alive which are Christs, that is, all the elect. Vers. 24. When he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, even to the Father] By Kingdom here two things are meant;Vide Bezam in hunc locum & v. 28. & Pare∣um in hunc lo∣cum. Dicit Deo & Patri, id est Deo, qui idem est pa∣ter suus, (est enim in Graeco tantum unus articulus utrumque complecten) quia sicut Christus ut homo omnia refert in Deum, ita idem ipse ut Dei filius omnia refert ad Patrem, qui fons est & principium in deitate. Estius. 1. The Church which Christ shall present to his Father without spot; the Church is called a Kingdom also Matth. 13.4. So Chrysostome interprets it. 2. The manner of administration of it; the substance of the Kingdom is everlasting, Heb. 1.8. The present manner of administration shall cease, Christ shall govern no more by Magistrates, Ministers, Ordinances, supplies of the Spirit. This is meant by delivering up the Kingdom to the Father. When he shall have put down all rule, and all authority and power] That is, lawfull powers, and ordained of God. Tum in caelo principatus Angelici, tum in Ecclesia cessa∣bunt ministeria & praefecture: ut solus Deus per seipsum, non per hominum vel angelo∣rum manus potestatem suam principatumque exerceat. Calvinus. Vers. 28. Then shall the Sonne also himselfe be subject to him] Can Christ be more sub∣ject then he hath been? Things are said to be when they are publiquely manifested, as Psal. 2.7. Saints and Angels shall be subject to Christ, and he shall there professe that all the glory which he hath obtained, he hath it as his Fathers servant. That God may be all] Wickerius and other Familists say, that the union which the soul hath with Christ is not onely reall and Spirituall, but transmutativa & con∣versiva; and that not in respect of qualities onely, but the essence, turns us into Christ; the very essence of the body shall be turned into God, say they; se Christum esse & Deum esse dicere non est veritus; some such expressions there are in Plato and Photinus, that we shall be swallowed up into God as a drop in the Sea; but the hu∣mane nature of Christ was not turned into the essence of God; but the meaning is, He shall be all in all immediately (now he conveighes himselfe to us by means) and in∣finitely in full degrees. Vers. 29. Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead,Maxime receptd sententia illa est, quod hic notetur ritus veteris Ec∣clesiae quasi bap∣tizarint, bristi∣anos ad sepul∣chra ut ita sym∣bolum esset fidei & confessionis de resurrectione mortuorum, ita Bucanus, Piscator; à quibus diversum statuit Beza, & Pareus, qui rectè scribit, si constaret de illo ritu, optimam esse illam explicationem. Tarnovius probat ritum illum tempore Apostoli in usu non fuisse. Sensus igitur erit (inquit ille) si non speratur carnis resurrectio & in coelis refectio, quid facient deinceps qui baptizantur ac in magna cilamitates imò mortem volentes se immergunt, dum Christo suum profitentur nomen? Ita baptizari , figuratè es impropriè pro mortem de omnes generis calamitates ferre accipitur. Matth. 20.22. Marc. 10.38. Luc. 12.20. vide V. 30. & 31. hujus capitis. Tarnov. in exercit. Bibl. pro mortuis, prostatu mortuorum, hoc est ut sibi post mortem sit bene. Vossius de baptismo. vide Cameron. myroth. Evang. if the dead rise not at all, why are then they baptized for the dead] Baptizing some living man in the behalfe of his dead friend. Cerinthus held that Christ did not rise from the dead, and so went about to weaken the doctrine of the resurrection, yet it was their fashion that follow∣ed his heresie if one died unbaptized, they baptized a living man for him. Secondly, others take it for washing away of sinne, the effect of baptisme. Calv. Beza. It is in
vaine to be outwardly baptized,See Dr. Donnes two Sermons on this verse. if there be no resurrection. See Grotius. If men de∣sire baptisme when they are as good as halfe dead, esteemed pro mortuis upon an opinion that at the time of baptisme there was an absolute washing away and deli∣verance from all sinnes, men did ordinarily or very often deferre their baptism till their death-bed, that so they might have their passage out of this world in the purity which Baptism restored them to, without contracting any more sins after Baptism. Vers. 31. I protest by your rejoycing which I have in Christ Iesus our Lord, I die daily] That was an obtestation, and not an oath; for it is all one as if he had said, Thus my sorrows and afflictions which I endure for Christ would testifie (if they could speak) that as certainly as I rejoyce in Christ, so certainly I die daily. Estius makes it an oath. Vide Bezam & Alardi Pathol. Die daily] That is, daily expose my selfe to the dangers of death for the Gospell, and conversion of the Gentiles. à Lapide. Vers. 32. I have fought with the beasts at Ephesus] See Burrh on Hos. 2.12. p. 472. & Grotius in loc. Because the men of Ephesus fought with him after the manner of beasts, Mr. Cotton. Savage men of beastly quality. Baines. vide Scult. orat. de conjung. Philol. cum Theol. The Epicures of Ephesus, Demetrius and his fellows, Acts 19.9. So after Tertullian and Theophylact, Beza expounds it. Others understand it of his being cast unto the beasts to fight with them See 1 Tim. 4.1. Titus 1. Let us eat and drink for tomorrow we die] This was a proverb familiar with Epi∣cures, as that of Sardinapalus shewes, Ede, bibe, Iude, post mortem nulla voluptas. Paul took it out of Esay 22.13. Vers. 33. Evill communications corrupt good manners] This is an Iambick verse out of Menanders Comedy. Paul Acts 17 and Titus 1. brings testimonies from Heathen writers. Some render it evill speaking, or evill communication; some, evill conver∣sings; we may understand the word thus, conversing with others in their evill spea∣kings, sayings, or writings.Vers. 36. See Augustine De civitate Dei. l. 20 c. 20. Verses 41, 42. There is one glory of the Sunne, another of the Moon, and another glory of the Stars:Cartwright on Matth. 20. Calvin is of the the same opi∣nion, that this place proves not degrees of glory. for one Star differeth from another in glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead, it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption.] The circumstances of the disputa∣tion which the Apostle handleth, proveth that the comparison is of the difference between the bodies as they shall be in Heaven, from those which are now upon earth, and not of the difference of glorified bodies one with another; for he addeth, It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption. Vers. 44. Raised a Spirituall body] Spirituall is opposed not to visible, but to natu∣rall;Non substantiae sed qualitatum respectu. Spirituall, not in regard of substance, but state and condition. They shall be still visible as the body of Christ, which yet the Papists make in∣visible, and say it is in the Sacrament really present, and yet not to bee seen. Spirituall] that is, subject to the spirit (it shall not then need meat and drink) and subtill. Vers. 45. A quickning spirit] Because by the Spirit he quickned himselfe and quic∣kens us now to live the life of grace and shall hereafter quicken our dead bodies at the resurrection. Vers. 47. The first man] viz. In respect of his substance. Is of the earth earthly] In re∣spect of his quality, &c. The second man] The Lord, in respect of his quality. The Apostle speakes here as if there were but two men in the word,B Vsher. millions of men came between Adam and our Saviour; there are two mediators, Adam in the covenant of nature, Christ in the new covenant; as Adam conveighs his guilt to all his Children, so Christ his righteousnesse to all his, he was caput cum faedere, as well as the first Adam. Pareus and o∣thers take flesh and blood here for mans sinfull nature; as when men say, Flesh and blood cannot bear such a thing, they are ready to urge this place against them. Flesh and blood is taken either for the substance of mans nature, as Eph. 6.11. or 2 for the infirm qualities that accompany it, as here.Vers. 50. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God] Not the sinfull nature of man (as flesh and blood often signifie in Scripture, being opposed to Spirit) but the constitution of nature, or the estate wherein we stand as men, flesh and blood, qua nunc conditione sunt. inherite.] That is, beare that majesty, glory, and excellency of Heaven. Neither doth corruption] Nature subject to corruption.
Vers. 51. We shall not all sleep] To sleep here is to rest in the grave,Erit mors quia erit corruptibilis naturae interitus, non erit dormi∣tio quia amma non migrabit è corpore, sed erit subitus transitus à natura corruptibili in beatam immortalitatem. Calvinus in loc. Vide illum in 1 Thess. 4.16. to continue in the state of the dead, and so we shall not all sleep, not continue in the state of the dead. But we shall be changed] the soule and body shall be separated, and in a moment reunited. Vers. 56. The sting of death is sinne] That is, the destroying power; he compares sinne to a Serpent.Vide Grotium Metaphora est sive à stimulis, quibus aguntur boves, sive potius ab aculeis vesparum & similium bestiarum, quibus si demas aculeum, sunt il∣lae quidem sed nocere non possunt. Vorstius. The strength of sin is the Law] That is, 1. In regard of discovery of it, the Law en∣tred that sinne might abound. 2. For condemnation. 3. For irritation, it is stirred up and strengthened by this, that the Law forbids it. Nitimur in vetitum &c. Vers. 58. Stedfast] A metaphore taken from a foundation, on which a thing stands firme; or a Seate, or Chaire wherein one sits firme. Vnmovable] Signifies one that will not easily move his place or opinion. Abounding] Or excelling. In the work of the Lord] Because of Gods institution, as the Lords Supper or day; or because done by his strength or for him. Labour] Unto wearinesse as the Greek word signifies, is not in vaine] Not shall be, the worke is the wages the Lord;] Or with the Lord. CHAP. XVI. Vers. 2. THe first day of the weeke] That is the Lords day, which institution seemes to be derived from the Commandement of God in the Law twice re∣peated,] Hoc est primo die septimanae, quae dies dominica dicitur, Apoc. 1. v. 10. confer Joh. 20. Act. 20. Mr. Mede on Acts 10.4. Exod. 23.15. Deut. 16.16. As God hath prospered him] That is, according to the ability, wherewith God hath blessed him.Graeci verbi propria significa∣tio est prosperari in vijs, id est, actionibus suis prosperè agere. Quo etiam usi sunt Lxx. Cum alibi, tum etiam in Psalmo primo. Vers. 3. Vsus est & Paulus Roman. 1.10. Estius in loc. Vers. 13. Stand] The meaning is, continue, be constant and persevere in the faith; shrinke not, start not aside, nor slide from it; so stand is taken. Col. 4.12. Vers 19. The Churches of Asia salute you] Where the Apostle meaneth, not that they did by word of mouth send greetings unto them: but that all the Churches did approve of them, which he saith for their great comfort,Perkins on Rev. Rom. 16.16. Act. 16.2.3. Vers. 22 If any man] That is, That lives in the light of the Gospell, love not] That is Hate, Luke 11.23. Ephes. 6. ult. those who make shew of love to Christ with their mouthes.Jd est, odit & execratur, nempe sciens prudens, quod est peccatum in Spiritum San∣ctum. Beza. He seemes to have reference to that Jude 14 15. Mr. Hildersam. This is a dreadfull curse; See a gracious pro∣mise. Ephes. 6.24. Quibus verbis eum qui Christum non diligit, aeternae morti adjudicat. Nam sulmine anethematis illius quod aliàs Indaeis Shammathah decebatur (ubi Shem idem ac Dominum seu Deumipsum denotat) perculiebantur illi qui excom∣municati non resipiscebant ac de quorum salute penitus desperabant quasi dicerent, Dominus venit (h.e. Crtò veniet) ad judi∣candum ic. Mayerus in Philol. Sac. vide Bezam & Grotium, & Dilheri Electa l. 2. c. 19. Illud maranatha ad orationis vehemen∣tiam adijctur, gravissimam maledistionem denotans: quae autem sit propria verbi vis & unde hoc allatum sit, statuat qui potest Morton. Anathema] Accursed, or execrable, Rom. 9.3. Gal. 18. 1 Cor. 12.3. Maranatha) it consists of two Syriacke words Maran Lord, and Atha he commeth; pronoun∣ced accursed to everlasting destruction; as if hé had said, let him be accursed even unto the comming of Christ to judgement. It is as much as he is accursed untill our Lord come. It was the most fearfull, and dreadfull sentence of the Church which it used against those which (having beene o it) did utterly fall from it so as the Church might discerne that they sinned the sinne against the holy Ghost. Reduplication in Scripture signifies two things, vehe∣mency of Spirit in him that speakes; and the certainty of the thing spoken, Rom. 8.15. Abba Father in two Languages; the Spirit of God is a Spirit of supplication in Jew and Gentile; so here cursed in two languages; to shew that both Jewes and Gen∣tiles which love not Christ are cursed.
Neque statim post priorem, ne{que} multo post scrip∣sit hanc ad Co∣rinthios episto∣lam Paulus. Tantum enim intervalli suit quo Timotheus à Paolo nissus ire Corinthum potuit, Manda∣ta Pauli expli∣care, & ut is parcreur labo∣rare, & ad Paulum redire. Grotius.ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Second Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to the CORINTHIANS. VERS. III. CHAP. I. THe God of all comfort Pasis aposto∣lica, quae & in Psalmis ac pro∣phetis usitata vocare Deum patientiae, sola∣tij spei, pacis, quod sit horum author, Rom. 15. & alibi. Estius.] Of all sorts and degrees of comfort, who hath all comfort at his dispose. It intimates. 1. That no com∣fort can be found any where else; he hath the sole gift of it. 2. Not onely some, but all comfort; no imaginable comfort is wanting in him, nor to be found out of him. 3. All degrees of comfort are to be found in him. See 4. vers. Vers. 4. Who comforteth us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them, &c.] Plainely noting that he is not fit to comfort others, who hath not experience of the comforts of God himselfe. Vers. 12. For our rejoycing, or  Nullum theatrū virtuti conscien∣tia majus est. Cicero in Tuscul. boasting is this, the testimony of our conscience] Here we may see the quiet and tranquillity of a good conscience, See 1 Tim. 1.5. The mea∣ning is, that of which I boast, and in which I trust before God, is the testimony of my conscience. Vide Bezam & EstiumVers. 13. For we write none other things unto you, then what you read, or acknowledge] That which you read written, is indeed written as well in our hearts as in this paper. Vers. 14. We are your rejoycing] Or rather boasting , that is the matter and object of your boasting,Pia erat gloria∣tio Pauli quod sun Ministerio Corinthios sub Christi obedientiam redegisset: Corinthiorum verò, quod à tali Apostolo tam fideliter & probe fuissent instituti, quod non omnibus contigerat modus hic in hominibus gloriandi nihil obstat quo minus in solo Deo gloriemur. Calvinus. as you are of ours; or if we follow our translation, the Co∣rinthians shall rejoyce at the last day, that ever they saw Paul, and Paul in them. Solo Christo sulciuntur emnes Dei pro∣missiones. Sen∣tentia memora∣bilis, & unum ex praecipuis fidei nostrae capitibus. Pendet autem ex alio principio, quod non nisi in Christo propitius est nobis Deus Pater: promissiones verò testimonia sunt patern erga nos benevolentiae: sequitur ergo per ipsum solum eas impleri. Calvinus.Vers. 20. All the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen.) Yea] True in the event, and reall performance. Amen] That is, Stable and firme as the Hebrew word signifieth, that is, they are both made and performed in and for him. Vers. 22. Given us the earnest of the Spirit] But if God having once given this earnest, should not also give the rest of the inheritance, he should undergoe the losse of his earnest, as Chrysostome most elegantly, and soundly argueth. See Ephes. 1 13.14. Vers. 23. I call God for a record upon my soule] Or against my soule, it is all one. The Apostle the better to perswade men,Est juramentum persectum, sed in re gravissima. sic Job. 16.18. in animam meam, id est, cum maximo meo malo, si fallo. Vide Job. 22, 23. Sic ne vivam jurandi formula apud Ciceronem & Martiale ut, ne salvus sim, apud Ciceronem, alibi. Grotius in loc. to beleeve what he was about to speake, useth an oath, and that not a simple one, but with an execration added. As if he should say (saith Estius) Perdat me Deus, nisi vera dixero, Let God destroy me, if I speake not
truth. Onely God in Scripture is said to sweare by his soule, as 51. Ier. and 6. Amos, since he onely sweares by himselfe, because he hath not a greater to swear by. CHAPT. II. Vers. 15. A Sweet savour] It is one word in the Greek  beneolentia. The A∣postle so calls himselfe and his fellow workmen causaliter,Non autem re∣spectu Dei so∣lùm, hac phrasi de Evangelio Christi cru∣cifixi utitur, sid & respectu hominum, ad quos odor ille suavis se diffundit, & credentes quidem recreat salvatque, incredulos autem interfi∣cit & damnat, uti 14.16. declaratu. Glass. Rhet. Sac. Tract. 1. c. 7.  fragrantia, metaphora sumta à sacrificijs. Pareus. Gregory in his Morals saith, that this word is like the Planet Venus, which unto some is Lucifer a bright morning starre arising in their hearts, whereby they are rouzed up and stirred from iniquity; but to the other is Hesperus, an Evening star, whereby they are brought to bed, and layed asleep in impiety. as those which send out a sweet savour from themselves. To them that are saved] Indeed in them chiefely; yet not onely in them, but in them also that perish. Vers. 16. Savour of death unto death] viz. To seale up their condemnation while we preach Christ a Judge, 2 Thess. 2.8. The savour of life unto life] To assure their soules of eternall life, whiles we preach Christ a most mercifull Saviour to all that shall beleeve, 2 Thess. 1.10. And who is sufficient for these things] That is, what Minister of the Gospell is fit to performe these things which we speake of? viz. to be the sweet odour of Christ every where. Vers. 7. Corrupt the word of God] That is, such as by fraud and base arts play the hucksters to inhance the price, and amplifie our own gaine. See à Lapide, and Vorstius. CHAP. III. Vers. 2. YEe are our Epistle written in our hearts] That is, wherein we doe inward∣ly and heartily rejoyce.Jd est, ego E∣vangelium ve∣stris inscripsi animis; & dat totius nomen parti. Nam ipsos dixit, & ostendit se loqui de corum studio & affectu. Grotius. Vers. 3. To be the Epistle of Christ] Here is an Epanorthosis,Alludit ad pro∣missionem quae habetur Jer. 31.31. & Ezech. 37.26. Calvinus. Estius. or correction of him∣selfe, as 1 Cor. 15.10. For when he had said before, that the Corinthians was his E∣pistle that he might mitigate the envy of the speech, he saith that they are the Epistle of Christ, because their faith was his worke but written with his Ministery. Not in tables of Stone, but in fleshly tables of the heart] He alludes either to Ier. 31.31. Or to the law written in Tables of Stone; Drus. Prov. Class. 2. l. 3. which Tables shadowed out the great hardnesse of mans heart; to which the fleshly Tables of the heart are opposed, which by the force of the Spirit are made more tender, that the grace of the Gospell may easily be ingraven in them. Vers. 5. Are not sufficient] , Have no aptnesse to a good thought, the least part of a good work. But our sufficiency] Our fitnesse. Vers. 6. Able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit] That is,Origines literam hic grammati∣cum & litera∣lem sensum Scripturae vocat & exponit: Spiritum autem allegoricum sensum quem solum aedificare ait, & à nobli esse sequendum, literalem verò prorsus reijciendum. Vide Bezam & Grotium. Literae nomine significat externam praedicationem, quae cor non attingit: per Spiritum verò doctrinam vivam, quae efficaciter operetur in animis per gratiam Spiritus. Litera ergo perinde valet ac literalis praedicatio, hoc est mortua & inefficax, quae tantum auribus percipitur. Spiritus autem est doctrina spiritualis, hc est, quae non ore tantum pronuntiatur, sed efficaciter in animas usque vivo sensu penetrat. Calvinus. He hath made us Ministers rather of the Spirit then of the Letter; or more of the Spirit then of the Letter, because of the promise of the plentifull effusion of the Spi∣rit, after the ascension of Christ; so J will have mercy, and not sacrifice. That is, rather
mercy then sacrifice and Ioel 2.13. that is, rather rent your hearts then your gar∣ments. Vers. 17. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty] Liberty is opposed to three things.See Psal. 51.12. Cui unica tan∣tum est necessi∣tas non delin∣quendi. Tertull. Jer. 22.19. Per nomen liber∣tatis, non tantum intellego à pecati & carnis servitute manumissionem: sed etiam fiduciam quam concipimus ex adoptionis no∣strae testimontor, convenit cum illo Rom. 8.15. Calvinus. Libertatem dicit oppositam servituti. Hanc enim libertatem Graeca vox  significat. Intendit autem apostolus, hac parte explicate mysticam significationem ablati velaminis. Vt enim velum impositum subjectionis ac servitutis cujusdam judicium est in eo cui imponitur: quemadmodum docet apostolus, 1 Cor. 11.10. ita velaminis ablatin significationem habet donatae libertatis, quae donatio fit non per literam sed per Spiritum. Vt sensus sit; Spiritus Domini, cum ipse sit Dominus, ideoque liberrimus; libertatem communicat ijs quos inhabitat, id est, Christianis: libertatem utique spiritualem, quia Spiritus est, à servitute legis & peccati eos liberans. Estius. 1. Necessity; where the Spirit of God dwells in a man, he frees him from all necessity of sinning. 2. Coaction and constraint, such a one doth nothing by force, and from a principle without, but from an inward instinct and impulse; my soule fol∣loweth hard after thee; life is a selfe-moving power. 3. To restraint, when Gods sets a man at liberty, he in largeth his heart, Psal. 119.32. See Dr. Rey∣nolds of the glory of the Gospell. From one de∣gree of glori∣ous grace to another.Vers. 18. But we all with open face, beholding as in a glasse the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory] That is, seeing by the appearing of grace, the vaile is removed, that we may see the face of God clearely; now must we by meanes of this knowledge be transformed into his Image; that Image in which wee were created, must be daily renewed, and by degrees further restored in us; that is the Apostles meaning from glory to glory. As Adam was created in the Image of God, so must every beleever be renewed unto that blessed condition. Vide Estium & Vorstuum in loc.By the Spirit of the Lord] These words may also be rendred, by the Lord of the Spirit, or by the Lord the Spirit; but our version is most plaine. CHAP. IV. Vers. 2. COmmending our selves to every mans conscience in the fight of God] That is, he did so preach and live, that every mans conscience could not choose but say,Mr. Fenner.  habui∣mus Rom. 3.13.  habmus Psal. 15.3. & 36.3. dolo tra∣cta verbum Dei, qui ut hominibus placeant aut partem veri tacent, aut falsa admiscent. Grotius. certainly Paul preacheth the truth and liveth right; and we must live as he speak∣eth and doth. Vers. 3. Hid to them that perish] That is said to be hid, which although it be con∣spicuous of it selfe; yet is not seene as the Sun, by those that are blind, See Luke 19.42. The God of this world Tum à super¦bia, quia sibi ar∣rogat honorem Dei & vult a∣dorari ut Deus: tum à potentia, quia hoc obtinet in reprobis qui sunt major pars seculi. Zanchius.] Not in spect of dominion over things created; but 1. In respect of corruption, for he is the God of the evill in the world. 2. In respect of se∣duction. 3. In respect of opinion, or estimation, because the people of the world make the Devill their God. The Marcionites, and Manichees in times past abused this place, to prove that there were two principles or Gods; one which they called good, the other evill. Haesitamus at non prorsus haeremus. Beza. Tertullianus Graecarum vocum paranomasiam ita Latinè reddidit, indigemus, sed non perindigemus.Vers. 8. We are perplexed but not in despaire] Staggering but not wholly sticking. In the Greeke there is a sweet allusion of the simple and compound verbes. . Vers. 13. Having the same spirit of faith] That is, he and the rest of Gods Church and children,Spiritus fidei, id est, fides à Spi∣ritu donata, ut Spiritus mansuetudinis, pietatis, fortitudinis, dilectionis, sebrietatis, proipsis huijusmodi donis Spiritus Sancti. Estius. had the same faith proceeding from the same spirit. Vers. 16. Day by day] Non est hoc loco dissimulandus insignis lapsus Cajetani, viri alioquin egregiè docti, qui ex anno∣tationibus Erasmi male intellectis, pro illa parte de die in diem credit Apostolū scripsisse adverbiū novè ; em exponit, ac subtiliter in ea philosophatur: quum Erasmus non aliud dicat, quam novè scriptum à Paulo  die & die, pro  in dies. Quam facilè aberrat in Scripturis interpretandis qui linguae originalis ignarus tantum ex ajs authoribus venatur, quid Graeca, quid Hebraea habeant? Estius in loc.
Vers. 17. For our light affliction, which lasteth but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternall weight of glory] All that can be by man inflicted on man,Worketh] the Greek word signifies also to prepare, as the learned in that Tongue know, Dr. Fulke. Not by deser∣ving, but by shewing the plain way thi∣ther. Perkins. Dr. Gouge. Hic Hebraeo more verbum ge minans Apo∣stolus summam quandam excel∣lentiam indica∣vit. Grotius. Est ejusdem vocis excessum significantis geminatio, qua utuntur interdum Hebraei ad significandam vel copiam vel excellentiam quandam immensam, ut Gen. 17.2. multiplicabo te plurimum plurimum. & Cap. 30. v. 43. Levi vir valde valde. Tantùm illud hic peculiare, quod praepositionem Paulus variat, nihil tamen diversum significans. Estius. is but , compressio, a pressure, and that of the body onely; for which by way of re∣compence shall be conferred glory, which here compriseth under it whatsoever may make to the happinesse of man, and that both in body and soule. 2. The kind of affliction is but some light thing, easie to be born by him which is endued by a Divine Spirit; but the recompence is a weight (, alludit ad Hebraeum & Chaldaeum nomen gloriae Chabod & Jakar; Cameron) such a weight as infinitely over-poyseth all afflictions. 3. The continuance of afflictions is but for a while, even for a moment, but the weight of glory is eternall; to shew that in this comparison all degrees of comparison are exceeded; he addeth hyperbole upon hyperbole , which emphaticall Graecisme, because other Tongues can∣not word by word expresse to the full, they are forced to use words and phrases which exceed all comparison, as Mirè supra modum Erasmus, supra modum in subli∣mitate vulg. Lat. Excellenter excellens, Beza. Exceedingly exceeding, or as our last Tran∣slation turnes it, a far more exceeding. CHAP. V. Vers. 1. WE know] 1. By the revelation of the Word, Iohn 14.2. 2 By the per∣swasion of faith.Haec scientia non est humani ingenii, sed ex Spiritus sancti revelatione manat: itaque propria est fidelium. Calvinus. That if] The Apostle speaks not this doubtingly, as if it were uncertain whether our bodies were to be dissolved or not; but by way of concession, having in it a strong affirmation, as if he did say, albeit it be so that the earthly house of our Tabernacle must be dissolved, yet are we sure of a better. Our body is called a house, 1. in respect of the comely and orderly workman∣ship thereof; 2. in respect of the soule which dwels in it. Earthly] 1. in regard of the matter it was made of earth; 2. means by which our bodies are continued and upholden. A Tabernacle] to shew its mortality; that was made for transporting, so this, to which building (which is firm and stable) is opposed. Vers. 2. Desiring to be cloathed upon with our house which is from Heaven] The Apo∣stle desired that glory should come upon him without a dissolution, Emphasis hujus verbi plenius in∣telligi potest ex 1 Cor. 15.51. ubi de subita vivorum im∣mutatione agitur. Vorstius. as it doth on the elect that are alive when Christ commeth to judgement. Earnestly desiring, if it might be, that in this state of our bodies we might, with∣out the pain of dissolution be clothed upon with the life of glory and immortality. Dr Halls Paraphrase. Vers. 10. Appeare] Though some Interpreters render it apparere & astare, and make it all one with Rom 14.10. yet the word  signifies so to appeare as to be made manifest in that day; and so in the next verse the same word is twice rendered by our Translators. Vers. 11. Knowing therefore the terrour of the Lord, we perswade men] as if he had said,Scire terrorem Domini, est esse participem il∣lius cogitationis, quod semel red∣denda sit ratio coram Christi tribunali: nam qui hoc serio meditatur, necesse est ut tangatur timore, & neglectum omnem excu∣tiat. Calvinus. Vide plura ibid. I know in the last day I must come to the barre of Gods judgement, and there be tried of all things I doe, and therefore do I endeavour to keep a good conscience in all the works of my calling. Perkins.
Vers. 13. For whether we be besides our selves it is to God] That is, when I commend my selfe,Hoc per conces∣sionem dictum est. Sana enim erat gloriatio Pauli, vel sobria & sapientissima insania si ita vocare libel: sed quia multis videbatur ineptus, loquitur ex eorum opinione. Calvinus. and boast of mine own ministery against others, and in so doing seem mad to you; yet then I respect not my selfe in so doing, but onely God and his glory: or whether we be sober it is for your cause] That is, use such courses as to you seem wiser, we doe it faithfully for your good. Dike. Vers. 14. Constraineth us] Either an expression from those who had a spirituall prophesie upon them, Constringit] Id est, totos pos∣sidet ac regit, ut ejus afflatu quasi correpti agamus omnia. Alludit enim ad vatum furorem, ut diximus Acts 18.5. Beza. Similitudo sumta à parturientibus. Vide Luc. 12.50. Grotius. which was very powerfull, whereby they could not but speak; or from women in Travell, Heb. 12.15. which through pain cannot but cry out. The word signifies in a Pound or Pinfold, so that it cannot get out by any evasion; in doth faith controll the heart that it cannot winde out. Signifying thereby, that whereas Christ had so loved him as to shed his blood for him, that very love did con∣strain him to refer all he could do to the honour and praise of Christ. Perkins. Vers. 16. Henceforth knoww no man after the flesh] That is, do not regard carnall priviledges as before, not Christ himselfe in such a way, but looke on him as in Hea∣ven.Non stimamus quemquam è divitiis aut truditione, quae sunt res carnales, id est, hujus saeculi. Grotius. Vide Calvinum. See V. 17. Though we have known Christ after the flesh] Despising him for want of outward glory. Vers 17. In Christ] One may be so two waies: 1. Externally, Sacramentally, and in regard of profession onely, as Iohn 15. 2. Or really, we are in him as our head, re∣ceiving influence, direction and power from him. Si quis in regno Christi vel in Ecclesia locum aliquem obtinere cupit. Calvin. New Adam, new Covenant, new Paradise, new Ministery, new Creation: new Lord, new Law, and all new.He is a now creature] Some read it imperatively, let him be a new creature; but our interpretation is more probable. This new creation  is used both concerning the action it selfe, creation: and the object or terminus, creature. New] This word in Scripture signifieth as much as another, Mark 16.17. compared with Acts 2.4. Not that it is essentially new, but onely in regard of qualities, yet this Scripture useth this emphasis not onely to exclude a totall but partiall concurrence of our will. (for so it may be rendered) is not by the bodily presence of Christ, but by the apprehension of faith. Vers. 19. Reconciling the world unto himselfe] Object. Therefore he called all men effectually. Ans. Rom. 11.15. the Apostle expounds himselfe. Not imputing] It is a metaphor drawn from the custome of Merchants, which keep in a book all that is owing to them, and it is therefore translated number, reckon, and Rom. 5. five times imputed. Trespasses] The Greek word comes from a word that signifies to fall besides; it is translated fall, Rom. 5.12. offences, Rom. 4. foure times. Perkins on Rev. vide Calvinum.Vers. 20. Be ye reconciled to God] They were reconciled to God before, See Ch. 6.16. but he intends thereby to provoke them to get a more full assurance of their reconci∣liation by the daily renewing of their repentance. Hebraica phrasi qua peccata d∣cebantur hoiae immolandae pro hominum pecca∣tis, quod omnes observant qui hunc locum exposuerunt; neque enim alio sensu ullo fieri potest ut verè Christus dicatur factus pecca∣tum. Chamierus. Vide Bezam.Vers. 21. Sinne for us] as he was made a Sacrifice for sinne; for the sin offerings in the Old Testament were called sinne. Again, he was made sinne for us by impu∣tation, because our sinnes were charged upon him, but he had not sinne in his nature. 1 Pet. 3.21. See vers. 24. Bifield. See Grotius. Who knew no sinne] That is, experimentally, he felt no sinne in his own heart; he acted no sinne in his life.Dicitur Christus non novisse pec∣catum phrasi Scripturae; quia peccatum nullum fecit; id est, adeò suit à peccato alienus, ac si prorsus peccatum ignoraret. Estius. But otherwise he knew fully what sinne was; he knew what the nature and effects of it were. The righteousnesse of God] 1. Righteous by such a righteousnesse as God requireth. 2. He saith in the abstract we are righteousnesse it selfe,Mr. Hildersam. that is, perfectly and fully
righteous. 3. We are made so in him, not in our selves inherently. Not the essentiall righteousnesse of Christ, that is infinite: that were to make a creature a God; but the righteousnesse according to the law, to which the God-head of Christ (though it was wrought in the humane nature) gave an efficacy or excellency. CHAP. VI. Vers. 1. REceive not the grace of God in vain] Not that the saving graces of faith and love, and the like, may be received and lost again,Dr. Taylor. which is the Popish collection from this place; but the doctrine of grace and faith is here meant. Grace is taken, for the free favour and good will of God. 2 For the grace of the Spi∣rit, faith, love. 3 For the manifestation of Gods grace; so the Gospell is called the grace of God, the grace of God which brings salvation. Titus. both because it comes from Gods meere good will, and because in that doctrine there is a manifestation of the grace of God; so the grace of God is often received in vain. This Word of the Gospell is received, 1. By hearing. 2 By understanding. 3. By faith. 4. By affe∣cting. There may be a receiving it in vain in all these respects; we may heare in vain, understand in vaine believe in vain, shew some affection in vain. A thing is re∣ceived in vain three waies: 1. When it is so done that no effect at all follows. 2. When the effect chiefly intended and designed follows not, or not proportionably to the means and opportunities we have enjoyed. The Word of God cannot be received in vain in the first sense, so as that no effect shall follow, Esay 55.11. for it either softens or hardens, saves or destroyes, 2 Cor. 2.13. The Word is by most received in vain, in respect of the proper and intended effect; many come not up neither in pro∣portion to what they have received. Vers. 10. As sorrowfull] As notes not a counterfeiting of sorrow, but the over∣comming of sorrow.Quasi tristes. He brings in the sorrow of the godly with a quasi, as it were sorrow, saith Anselme; not that it is sorrow indeed, but as sorrowfull; as if it were à painted sorrow, not true sorrow indeed; but when he speaks of joy, there is no quasi, but true joy. As having nothing, and yet possessing all things] In Greek there is a pleasant Parano∣masia in the words having and possessing, , which the Latines cannot expresse. Vers. 24. Be ye not unequally yoaked with unbelievers] This Verse condemnes un∣equall yoaking of believers with Infidels, whether in familiar society, as Calvin,Vide Bezam. Estius. Or rather in marriage, as others take it: 1. For the inequality of such yoa∣king. 2. For the unavoydable perill of contagion. Vers. 15. What concord hath Christ with Belial] Not Beliar,Mercerus nota∣vit esse quos∣dam qui putent Paulum allusione sacta ad locum qui habetur 1 Reg. 18.21. posuisse hic nomen Christi pro nomine Domini, & pro Baal Belial. Vide Bezam. As the Grecians cor∣ruptly read it. That is, with the Devill, so the Syriack, cum Satana, one that is pro∣fitable to none, or without yoake, as the etymology of the word signifies. Vers. 16. I will dwell in them] The words are very significant in the originall: , I will indwell in them, so the words are.M. Burrhoughes. Dwelling to∣gether notes intimate and constant communion. The are two ins in the ori∣ginall, as if God could never have enough communion with them. And touch not the unclean thing] This exhortation is taken out of Esay 52.12. To touch an unclean thing is no more in figurative speech, but that which in plainer terms the Apostle delivers thus, Have no fellowship with the unfruitfull works of dark∣nesse; that is, joyn with no man in a bad action. The unclean thing not to be touched is not the man with whom we joyn in any action, but the action it selfe in which we joyn with them.
CHAP. VII. Vers. 1. HAving therefore these promises] Mentioned in the former Chapter, v. 16, 18.Paulus admo∣net hanc subesse conditionem universis promissionibus, ut nobis ad provehendam Dei gloriam sint incitamenta, unde ad nos extimulandos argu∣mentum sumit. Calvinus. Not onely having them made, but entertaining them. Dearly beloved] So Phil. 4.1. we have this epithite twice. He doth not say of whom, of God, Christ, the Angels and Saints. Vehementer ex∣undo gaudio. Beza.Vers. 4. I am exceeding joyfull] Over-abound exceedingly with joy. Vers. 6. Comforteth those that be cast down] made low, and be so in their own eyes. Vers. 7. Your fervent mind] it is in the originall your zeale. Vers. 11. For behold, this selfe same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what care∣fulnesse it wrought in you, yea what clearing of your selves, yea what indignation, yea what feare, yea what vebement desire, yea what zeale, yea what revenge] The Holy Ghost hath set down seven fruits or signes of godly sorrow.The whole man is set on work in repen∣tance; the un∣derstanding part must ex∣ercise it selfe in carefulnesse and apologie, the affections are to be exercised in indignation, feare, desire, and emulation; the body in revenge and punishment, the fruits of repentance. Perkins. 1. Care to leave all our sinnes. 2. Apologie, whereby a man is moved to accuse and condemn himselfe for his sinnes past, both before God and man. 3. Indignation, whereby a man is exceedingly angry with himself for his offences. 4. Feare, least he should fall into his former sinnes a∣gain. 5. Desire, whereby he craveth strength and assistance against sinne. 6. Zeale in the performance of all good duties, contrary to his speciall sinnes. 7 Revenge, whereby he subdues his body, that it may not be an instrument of sinne. CHAP. VIII. Vers. 9. MIght be rich] That is, that we might have the pardon of sinne, and be received into Gods favour.Perkins. vide Bezam. Spiritualibus divitiis, doctrina scilicet pietatis, peccatorum, remissione, justitia, sanctimonia, aliisque virtutibus. Cornel. à Lapide. Vers. 18. The brother] Silas, saith Estius; Luke the Evangelist say Jerome, Cajetane, Grotius, Bilson. some. Others Chrysostome, Calvin, Dr. Hall. Hunc alii Banabam, alii Apollo, alii alium fuisse putant. Sed res prorsus incerta est. Voistius. Vide Estium & Cornel. à Lap. in loc. say it was Barnabas, because he was by the Churches suffrage made Pauls compa∣nion. In the Gospell] Not the book which was not then as yet published, but the very Office which Luke had faithfully performed in many places in Pauls turn; or the very preaching of the Gospell, as Ch. 10.14. CHAP. IX. Vers. 5. BOunty] Beracah or , Blessing in Scripture signifies a gift or present bounty,Graeci  nomine usi sunt, ut Hebrai∣cam vocem ex∣primerent Beracah quae tam benedictio∣nem quam bene∣ficentiam significat. Calvinus. or beneficence; the present which Iacob provided for his bro∣ther Esau when he went to meet him, is in all the story through called his blessing. So 1 Sam. 30.26. & 5.27. and here the collection at Corinth for the poor Saints at Ierusalem is twice called , their blessing, which we translate bounty Mr. Mede on Psalm 112.9. Vide Bezam.Increasing and multiplying is so naturall unto blessing, that in the originall Tongues of the old and new Testament plenty is put for blessing. M. Bridge on Heb. 2.17.
Vers. 6. He which soweth bountifully] with blessing as it is in the originall, shall reap bountifully] with blessing. Vers. 7. According as he purposeth in his heart] That is freely, and of his own accord determineth with himselfe. Downame.Jd est, quisque tribuat, prout apud se & in a∣nimo suo libere constituerit ac praedelibera∣verit. Estius. Not grudgingly] When we performe good duties heavily, and with grudging. Or of necessity] When we doe them indeed, but against our will, onely because we must do so to save our credit, 1 Pet. 5.2. Vers. 8. God is able to make all grace abound toward you, that ye alwayes having all sufficiency in all things, may abound in every good worke] He prevents a secret objection of such as might fear poverty to themselves, if they should give abundantly; and shewes that whatsoever they shall give, shall returne to them with usury. The Apo∣stle in the originall is emphaticall, he triplicates the word. First  not in one but in every necessity. Secondly, , not sometimes, but at every time. Thirdly,  not some sufficiency, but a sufficiency of every grace. Vers. 10. Your seed sowne] Almesdeeds are called seed here; and 6. v. we shall gather the crop in heaven. These words and the following, are taken out of the 55. Esay. 10. CHAP. X. Vers. 3. THough wee walke in the flesh] That is, though we be weake; so some; though we doe indeed live in the flesh. Doctor Halls Paraphrase.Hic ambulare in carne signifi∣cat in mundo versari: quod alibi dicit, Ha∣bitare in Corpo∣re: Calv. Quòd Evange∣lij Ministerium militae comparat, aptissima est similitudo. Militia quidem perpetua est vitae hominis Christiani: nam quicun∣que se Deo in obsequium addicit, nullas unquam inducias habebit à Satana, sed assidua inquietudine vexabitur. Verùm Mini∣stros verbi ac Pastores reliquis antesignanos esse decet. Et certe nulli sunt quibus magis instet Satan, qui acriùs impetantur, qui plures aut graviores sustineant insultus. Calvinus. Vers. 4. Warfare] First, Ministry, as 1 Tim. 1.18. That is, discharge the duty of the Ministery as thou oughtst; The Hebrew Saba is sometimes rendred, ; warfare; sometimes Ministery . not carnall] See 3. v. and followes. But mighty through God] Or to God, Divinitus valida] id est, infinita illa Dei potentia nituntur. Beza. by an Hebraisme exceeding mighty; mighty through God, by divine power not humane strength. So Estius. Vers. 18. Approved] That is fit for life eternall. Similitudo à nummis probis sumpta. CHAP. XI. Vers. 5. FOr J suppose, J was not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles] A modest ex∣pression, that is, he was even with the chiefest Apostles.Modestiae causa dicit se ita exi∣stimare: quum res esset omni∣bus cognita & manifesta: intelligit autem quod suum Apostolatum ornasset Deus non minoribus gratijs quam Johannis aut Petri. Calvinus. Vide Estium. Apostleship as an Office, was of equall honour in all the Apostles; but even amongst them, some had more excellent gifts and greater enlargements. Vers. 6. But though I be rude in speech] This is spoken not simply, but partly by way of supposition, as if he had said, many may and doe take me to be rude in speech;Doctor Gouge. Imperitus ser∣mone] scilicet graeco, polita nempe & ver∣bosa eloquentia Graecorum, qualis est Isocratis, Demosthenis, Luciani. à Lapide. If I be not so eloquent in my speech as some of them. Doctor Halls Paraphrase yet none can imagine that I am so in knowledge, and partly by way of comparison; in regard of the vaine rhetoricall flourish and shew of eloquence, which other false teachers, and many heathen oratours made, 1 Cor. 2.1.4. Verse 9. I was chargeable to no man] That is, received nothing from any, which carnall men count a burden. The learned observe the word hath his weight from Torpedo, which signifies a cramp-fish; a fish (they say) that hath such a benum∣ming,
quality, that the cold of it will strike from the hook to the line, from the line to the goad,Annotat hic Theophylactus & Oecumenius id quod in Grae∣co est etiam sic intelligi posse, non tamen obtorpui aut elangui, (tale quid enim propriè verbum Graecum significat) id est, non idcirco segnior ad praedicandum sui. Verum altera lectio, nulli onerosus sui, contextui magis quadrat. Essius. Graecè , quod verbum di∣ctum est à torpore & oto, nam otiosi premunt & imminent alijs assiduè precando quod est oneresum esse;  enim est torpere. Vnde &  dicitur torpedo piscis. Ad verbum vertas non obtorpui in aliquem. à Lapide. from the goad to the arme, from the arme to the body of the fisher; and so benum him, and take away all use, and feeling of his limbs. His meaning is, that he was none of those idle drones; which by their lazinesse doe even chill and benum and dead the charity of well disposed people. See Beza and Grotius. Vide Diheri Electa. l. 2 c. 19. Et Estium in lc.Vers. 24. Of the Jewes five times received J forty stripes save one] Forty save one, so the Greeke, stripes being understood; that word is put in our translation in another Character, as Beza likewise hath Plagas. 25. Deut. 3. The Lord commanded, that the number of strokes should not exceed forty; the Jewes, that they might not transgresse, gave one lesse. Vers. 25. Thrice was I beaten with rs] By the Gentiles: for it was a custome with the Romanes, to beat the guilty with Rods; therefore Cajetane collects hence, that the Jewes were not wont to whip with Rods but with some other Instrument, because the Apostle saith, he was onely thrice beaten with Rods. 14 Acts. 19.Once was I stoned] By the Jewes at Lystra in Lycaonia, and that so grievously, that he was thought to be dead. Vers. 27. In hunger and thirst, in fastings often] Could not get bread sometimes when he would have eaten; and sometimes could eat and would not. Hilderam.Vers. 30. I will glory of the things, which concerne mine infirmities] Our afflictions are called our infirmities; the best are apt to bewray weakenesse in them. CHAP. XII. Vers. 1. IT is not expedient for me doubtlesse to glory] That is, although for you it be∣hoves me to glory,Estius. that I may defend the dignity of my Ministery against detracters; yet it is not expedient for me, viz. Simply, and unlesse in the present or like case, because it hath a shew of boasting. I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord] viz. To relate them. Revelation includes or supposeth vision,When Paul commeth to speak of him∣selfe, he speak∣eth in the per∣son of another. 2. He concea∣led it for 14. yeares. Vide Bezam & Gro∣tium. Calvin. but not contrarily. Vers. 2. I knew a man] That is himselfe, his modesty. Job. 42.5. In Christ] ha∣ving union, communion with Christ. 14. yeares ago] so long since Paul was conver∣ted, and after had this Revelation. Whether in the bdy I cannot tell; or whether out of the body I cannot tellWhether in body, or in an extasie of spirit. Doctor Halls Paraphrase.] By this hee expresseth the more the greatnesse of the revelation. For he meanes that God dealt so with him, that he himselfe did not conceive the manner. He saith therefore, that he knowes not whether in his body and soule he was caught up into heaven, on in his soule onely. Caught up to the third heaven] He calleth it the third heaven, in respect of the heavens under it: for the place wherein we breath is the first heaven; the starry fir∣mament is the second heaven; and the Paradise of God the third. See 4. vers. Vide Bezam, Such as he neither may nor can utter. Doctor Halls. Paraphrase.Vers. 4. Which it is not lawfull for a man to utter] Not lawfull for a man to think he can utter, which he had no Commission to utter. It fell not within the lawes of preaching to publish them. Vers. 7. A Thorne in the flesh, the Messenger of Satan to buffet me] It may be rendred the Angell Vide Bezam, Grotium & Estium. Saint Austins free confession, se nescire qud sit Angelus Satanae is more inge∣nuous then their interpre∣tation, who re∣fer it to an ex∣treme paine in the head, that Saint Paul should have as Theophylact sayes, or ad morbum Iliacum which Aquinas speakes of, or to the Gout, or paine in the Stomack, as Nazi∣anzene, and Basile interprete it. Oecumenius understands the messenger to be those Heretickes, which were his Adver∣saries in his preaching of the Gospell; according to the signification of the word Satan, 1 Kings 5.4. Others even amongst the Fathers understand it particularly, and literally of that concupiscence, and those lusts of the flesh, which even the most sanctified may have some sense of and some attempts by. Others understand it generally of all calamities spirituall, and temporall, incident to us in this ; but Cajetane goes farthest, who reads it not as we doe Angelum Satanae, but Angelum Satanam, not that Angell which comes from Satan; but that Angell which is Satan himselfe. Hee conceives it to be a prayer against all temptation from the Devill, and his Instruments. Doctor Donne on Psal. 6.4.5. Vide Estium in loc. Some inward suggestion of Satan working upon his corruption, whatsoever it was. Mr. Wheatly. Sunt quidam qui adversarum quendam insignem qui Paulo immineret indesinenter, puta Alexandrinum ararium, intelgi vo∣lunt, & sententia simplicissima videtur quae statuat Paulum caesum plagis ab Angelo quodam Satanae. Camer. praelect. vide My∣toth. Evangel. Satan. Some inward corruption which Paul felt in his own heart; which Satan stirred up in him. Mr. Hildersam. Some would have it originall corruption set on by the Devill; others interpret it
to be a wound in the Spirit, the sting of conscience pressing him down to the nether∣most hell in his sense, that was taken up afore to the highest heavens. Others say he was unapt to any good, praying, or preaching: for so God cured and prevented pride by eclipsing gifts and spirit; he repeateth it twice in this verse, as a thing worthy to be observed, least he should be exalted above measure. Some interpret this prick in the flesh, a bodily disease, the head-ache, the Iliacke passion; others blasphemous thoughts darted in with violence. Some say he was much reproached by the false Apostles, as a man of mean presence; and perhaps had some imperfection in his speech; they might charge him, that he had lived on the peoples bounty, or misled them. It is certaine it was some constant impetuous torment what ever it was. Vers. 8. Thrice] That is often, à Lapide. So Beza and Estius, oft and earnestly. Doctor Hall. Vers. 9. My grace is sufficient Sufficient for 1. Quantitie. 2. Efficacy. Mr. Perkins. for thee] That is, thine infirmity shall not be removed; content thy selfe, that thou art in my favour, and hast received my grace; by which thou dost withstand this temptation. My strength is made perfect in weaknesse] He meaneth that the lower men be brought,Doctor Gouge. Not that weaknesse puts strength into God; but gives him occasion of declaring his strength. and the more weake and unable to be established they may seeme to be, the more di∣vine is that power manifested to be, whereby they are established. Vers. 10. When I am weake, then am I strong] Strongest through hope in Christ, when I am weakest through sense in my selfe.Doctor Hill. Not onely by an intrinsecall disposi∣tion, that we are more inclined to seek strength; but indeed by a Spirituall capacity, Jesus Christ is more prepared to bestow strength, when we are sensible of our own weaknesse. Vers. 11. I am become a foole Alludit fortas∣se ad Hebraeum verbum halal laudare, quod in hithpael signifi∣cat insanire, amē∣tem esse, indecorè se gerere. Vide Bezam in 11. c. v. 1. in glorying] As if he had said, it is the guise and character of a foole, affectedly to commend himselfe; but I have not affected it, yee have compelled me.] You have forced me to this folly as it were, who so much esteeme false Apostles my contemners. I ought to have been commended of you] That is, ye ought to have given testimony to my integrity, and to have maintained the honour of my Ministery. For in nothing was J behind the chiefest Apostles] Therefore Peter was not the grea∣test of all. He speaketh it not of gifts alone, but of power and authority, as the Text shewes. See Beza on 11. Chap. v. 8. I am as much an Apostle as they, who are more then much Apostles,Significat Paulum nihil velle sibi pro∣prium sumere, sed tamen in Domino gloria∣ri; nisi forte magis placeat concessionem esse, in qua exprimat quid de se à malevolis & obtrectatoribus jactetur. Calvinus. As the Greek will beare it. Though J be nothing] Though you through envy account me nothing; and though I in humility would account my selfe nothing. Vers. 14. For I seeke not yours but you] That is in my Ministery with you, I doe not looke after my own temporall profit, but your salvation. Yet Ministers should find both us and ours us in our obedience, ours in our recompence. Vers. 15. Spend and be spent] Not onely lay out my substance, but lay downe my life for you. Doctor Halls Paraph. The former  notes to be at cost with them,
to take some paines; but the other word , notes the spending of all Super impendor. Gloriarum fla∣tus ob divitias, eruditionem, eloquentiam, 1 Cor. 4.18.19. Tumults] Seditiones quae ex schismate nasci solent. De hoc vocabulo vide Luc. 21.9.33.Vers. 20. Swelling] That is, taking things unkindly, sitting and musing that one should so wrong me; and even having the heart rise against him for it. Tumults] That is, making a great stirre of the wrong received, telling this body, running to that, filling the Town with it. Vers. 21. Bewaile] In Pauls Language (as a learned man observeth) to bewaile, and correct, seemeth to have been all one. Vncleanesse] All impure words, and behaviours, fornication, and wantonesse, things of the same kinde. CHAP. XIII. Vers. 1. IN the mouth of two or three witnesses] Himselfe and Timothy. 19 Deut. 15. Omnis animo (saith one) est aut sponsa Chri∣sti aut adultera Diaboli.Every soule is either the spouse of Christ; or the Devils strum∣pet.Nisi adulteri estis, id est, nomine non re Christiani, 1 Cor. 9.27. 2 Tim. 3.8 Tit. 1.16. Heb. 6.8. His oppositi , probi qui sunt quod videntur. Rom. 14.18. & 16.10. 1 Cor. 11.19. supra 10.18. 2 Tim. 3.2. Iac. 1.12. & hic mix 7. Grotius.Vers. 5. Examine your selves, prove your selves] Doubling his phrase, as it were his files; thereby shewing that it is not a superficiall, but a substantiall examina∣tion that is required in these weighty matters; some say the first word signifies a curi∣ous search, the other an approbation on triall. Whether ye be in the faith] That is whether the faith be in yee, so Iohn saith, he was in the Spirit, 1 Rev. so one is said, to be in the flesh, Rom. 8.8. Except ye be reprobates] In the state of reprobates, unapproved, counterfeit; hee meanes not such as are opposed to the Elect, as the word reprobates is usually taken by us in English; therefore the translation is not so proper.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to the GALATIANS. CHAP. I. GAlatia was a most brave Province of lesser Asia neere Phrygia.Vehementiorem in hac quam in aliis Epistolis esse Paulum satis apparet. Tempus quo scripta est haec ad Gallo-graecos Epistola, sicut designatè indicare non possum, ita videre mihi videor non longe abfuisse ab eo tempore quòd ad Romanos scripta est Epistola. Grotius. Illud huic Epistolae familiare, quod (sicut etiam à B. Hieronymo observatum est) ipsa sola, inter tredecim Paulinas non ad unius civitatis fideles scripta est, sed ad totius provinciae. Nam Galatia, non urbis sed regionis nomen est, in Asia minori sitae; in qua teste Augustino Ecclesiae erant innumerabiles. Et Gallo graecia alio nomine votata fuit, quod in eam Graeciae partem Galli quondam ob finium suorum angustiam, commigrassent. Vbi & quando scripta sit haec Epistola, non constat. Estius. See Acts 18. The Apostle handleth the same argument here that he doth in the Romans; this is as it were an Epitome of that, and hath many the same sentences, reasons, and phrases with that. Vers. 1. An Apostle] That is, called or designed to be an Apostle. Paul in his sa∣lutations is wont to stile himselfe an Apostle, that he may win authority to his do∣from his person. Not of men] as Princes send civill Ambassadors, or as the Jewes sent false Apo∣stles.Munus hoc mihi neque ab homi∣nibus suopte arbitratu impositum est, neque etiam Dei jussu per meros homines, quomodo multi in Ecclesis ordinati fuere per Apostolos dictante spiritu, ut Matthias ab Apostolis nominatus, sed ab ipso Christo jam extra homines in divina potestate constituto. Christus per evectionem suam in coelum non est homo, nempe qualis fuit, & quales nos sumus, id est, mortales. Grotius. Neither by man] as Timothy, Titus, Luke, who were ordained by man; or else not by the commendation, paines or instruction of any man. But by Iesus Christ and God the Father] That is immediately by God. Whosoever will take to him the place of teaching, it behoves him to speake in the name of God or Christ. But because the Galatians did more doubt of Pauls calling, therefore he expresseth more here then in his other Epistles, to assert that. He doth not barely af∣firme that he was called by God, but on the contrary denies that he either received it from men, or by men. He speaks not of the common Offices of Pastors, but of the Apostleship. Vers. 4. From the present evill World] From bondage under the custome of it;Bifield. from the fellowship with the men of it, and from the plagues that belong unto it. Vers. 6. I marvell that ye are so soon removed]  is properly to be trans∣ferred or transported from one place to another, as Plants or Trees are wont to be transported, Hos. 5.10. the Septuagint useth this word, whence the Apostle borrows it. He speaks here of the apostasie or seduction of the Galatians by false Apostles.Alardi Patho∣logia. N.T. He alludes (saith Ierome) to the word Galal to roll; as if he should say, You are Ga∣latians that is, rolling and changing, falling from the Gospell of Christ to the law of Moses.
Vers. 8. But though we or an Angell from Heaven preach any other Gospell to you] Plain∣ly implying,Notanter dicit praetet non contra. Pseudo-Apostoli enim negabant se contra Evange∣lium Christi aliquid decere quia fidem retineant, fide nos justificari concedebant. Docebant vero praeter hoc aliud, Etiam legis opera ad salutem esse necessaria. Parau that though the person which brings a doctrine were an Angell, yet he must be tried. He doth not say a contrary Gospell, but any other Gospell. That which is directly besides the Gospell, is indirectly against the Gospell; if we be justi∣fied by faith, understanding it exclusively, that is, sola fide, then we are not justified by works. Vers. 10. Doe I seek to please men?] This interogation is a negation; I do not seek. Nunc] id est, ex quo apostolus factus sum. Gotius.For if I yet please men] without respect to the pleasing of God, 1 Cor. 10.33. q.d. It is true indeed, once I did seek to please men, but I am now otherwise then I was. Vers. 18. I went up to Ierusalem to see Peter] From this Greeke word rendred see  comes historia, non est quomodocum∣que videre, sed quomodo spectare aut invisere solemus res aut personas in quibus ob excellentiam multa digna sunt cognitu. Estius. in which things are set before our eyes, as it were. CHAP. II. Vers. 1. I Went up again to Ierusalem] Or, ascended, because Ierusalem was placed and seated upon a mountain,Perkins. Ascendit, nempe ex Antiochia, Syriae, loco hu∣miliore maritimo in montana Jerosolymae. Paraeus. and compassed with mountains, Psalm 125. Or, in respect of the dignity and excellency of the place: as we in England are said to go up to London from all the parts of the Land, because it is the chief City. Vers. 5. The truth of the Gospell] That is, the truth of God revealed in the Gospel concerning justification and salvation by the free grace of God,Veritas Evan∣gelii accipienda pro genuina ejus puritate: vel quod idem est, pro pura & integra ejus doctrina, neque enim penitus Evangelium abolebant pseudo Apostoli, sed adulterabant suis commentis. Calvinus. vide Pareum. through the merits of Christ apprehended by faith. Vers. 6. In conference added nothing to me] That is, he had so full a measure of Di∣vine revelation, that when they came to talke together of the points of Christian Religion, they could tell him nothing which he knew not before. God accepteth no mans person] That is, for the outward appearance, as the Greeke will beare it; so he regards not the rich more then the poore. Vers. 7. The Gospell of the uncircumcision was committed to me, as the Gospell of circum∣cision was unto Peter] The words Circumcision and uncircumcision signifie the Na∣tion of the Jews and Gentiles,Metonymia satis nota est in voci∣bus Circumci∣sionis & Praeputii, pro Iudaeis & Gentibus: ideo praetereo. Calvinus. the one circumcised the other uncircumcised. Vers. 9. Iames, Cephas] Cephas is Peter, so called by Christ, Iohn 1.43. Iames na∣med before Peter,Bellarm. de Ro∣man. Pontifice dicit hunc tex∣tum corruptum esse. vide Gro∣tium. Primo loco Ja∣cobum pount omna Graeca exemplaia (Latmi quidem Pettum praeponunt non sine falsi crimine) quia fuit eximiae authoritatis Apostolus. Pareus. 1 Cor. 9. Iohn 1.44. Not Peter but Iames was the President of the Councell of Ierusalem, because he spake the last, and concluded all, Acts 15.13. and 21.18. He names Iames in the first place (saith Estius a Papist) for the honour of our Lord, whose brother he was, and because he was Bishop of Ierusalem, where these things were done, and also was much respected of the Jews for the opinion they had of his sanctity. Coram ipse im∣probavi ejus Consilium. Grotius. Vide Calvi∣num. Estium & à Lapide.Vers. 11. I withstood him to the face] Ierome and others would have it a shadow∣sight simulatè non verè; but face is not opposed to withstanding cordially but secret∣ly, behind his back. Paul resisted him in truth and good earnest; this appears be∣cause in the words following he sets down a weighty and urgent cause of his reproofe.
Vers. 15. And not sinners of the Gentiles] The Gentiles were not greater sinners by nature then the Jewes;Weemes. but the Apostle speaks here according to the opinion of the Jewes, who thought the Gentiles greater sinners then themselves. That is, not sin∣ners of the people of the Gentiles to whom the law was not given, they wanting the rule of Gods law ran head-long into every sinne.Estius. Vers. 20. I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me] shewing, that he had life whereby he did live, but had not life in himselfe to give to others, as Christ,That is, I live a Spirituall life, yet not I as a naturall man. Perkins. Iohn 5.26. Austen. CHAP. III. Vers. 1. O Foolish Galathians] The Greek word  signifies those that are stu∣pide, and which understand not what they ought;Non tam Gen∣tile vitium, quam inspera∣tam stoliditatem Apostolus ipsis exprobrat. Confer 1 Cor. 15.2.36. Vorstius. it is used also Luke 24.15. Foolish and slow of heart, the latter interprets the former. Who hath bewitched you] That is, who hath deluded your eyes, and caused you to think you see that which you see not. He useth a word borrowed from the practise of witches and sorcerers, who use to cast a myst (as it were) before the eyes, that is,Perkins.  propriè est o∣culis corrum∣pere. Sed ab oculis ad ani∣mum transfer∣tur, ut & Latinum inde deductum fascinare. Grotius. Fascinare est malesico aspectu laedere. Plinius, l. 7. c. 2. exemplis osten∣dit, etiam interficiendi vim oculis fascinatoribus inesse. Pareus. dazle them, and make things to appeare unto them which indeed they doe not see. Some say to bewitch is to hurt with the eyes. Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos. Virgil. So the Greek word seems to intimate,  quasi , id est, . Before whose eyes Iesus Christ hath been evidently set forth] As if he had said,Galatia was not the place where he was put to death. . The Greeke word signifies to paint forth a thing, Rom. 15.4. a Theologicall painting not Artificiall, as the Papists would have it to warrant Crucifixes. Vide Bezae annotat. & Piscat. Schol. to whom I have preached the doctrine of the Gospell in such evidence and plainnesse, as if Christ had been crucified among you, and you had seen his blood distilling from his hands and side. So Calvin, Pareus, Estius a Papist, and others. Vers. 2. By the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith] By works is meant the do∣ctrine of justification by the works of the law;Dr. Taylor. and by the hearing of faith is meant the doctrine of the Gospell: hearing being put for the thing heard, and faith for the doctrine believed.In utroque no∣mine videtur esse metonymia, quatenus auditus more Hebraeorum pro praedication, fides autem pro doctrina fidei, hoc est, Evangelio usurpatur. Conser. Rom. 10.16, 17. supra cap. 1. v. 23. Vorstius. Vers. 6. It was imputed unto him for righteousnesse] To impute properly is a speech borrowed from Merchants; and it signifies to reckon,Perkins. or to keep reckoning of ex∣pences and receits; so Ebilem 18. impute it to me, that is, set it on my reckoning; that is, the thing which his faith believed was imputed to him by God. Vers. 13. Being made a curse for us] He saith not, Christ was cursed, but a curse, which is more; it shews that the curse of all did lie upon him. Calvin.Execratio, hoc est execrabilis (metalepsis abstracti pro concreto) nostro bono & loco. Subeundo mortem ligni seu crucis execrabilem, Deo invisam, uti apostolus per scripturam subjectam docet. Pareus. Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree] The death on the Tree was accursed above all kinds of death, as the Serpent was accursed above all beasts of the field. Both for the first transgression, whereof the Serpent was the instrument, the tree the occasion. This is taken out of Deut. 27.26. the Apostle here and elsewhere alledgeth the old Testament according to the Septuagint interpretation commonly then known and received among the Grecians.Pareus. vide Estium. Therefore though he was most skilfull in the He∣brew Tongue, yet he thought it enough to expresse the sense of the Law. Vers. 16. Promises] By the promises are meant the covenant of grace made with
Abraham, so called for two reasons; 1. Because the main of the covenant consists in promises.Iohn 8.56. Heb. 11.13. 2 Because the covenant was revealed to the Fathers in promises, but not per∣formed. And to thy seed, which is Christ] Christ personall and mysticall, both; his person primarily and principally,To Christ in aggregato, as comprehending the head and the members in the unity of one body. Caput & corpus unus est Christus. Aug. his Church mystically. Vers. 17. The promise] So called, because all the promises are for substance one in the Lord Christ, and meet in him as lines in the center. Vers. 19. Ti the seed should come] that seed, that is, Christ, vers. 16. therefore he be∣ing come,Pareus. the subserviency of the Law to the Gospell should seem to cease. Some expound this onely of the Ceremoniall law, as Beza and some others; when Christ came, the Ceremoniall law was taken away; but in the 12 and 13 Verses he speaks of the Law whose sanction was, He that doth them shall live in them, therefore the morall aw is chiefly meant. Christ both personall and mysticall is here meant; the Law was given to the Jews to prepare them for Christ personall, and given to the Church till all be fulfilled. In the hand of a Mediator] That is, by the ministery of a Mediator. Typicall Moses, reall Christ.Vide Pareum. Vers. 20. But God is one] God is said to be one and the same, constant and unchange∣able like himself.Hoc est justitia & sanctitate semper sibi constans. Pareus. Vers. 22. All] Not  all men, lest some women might be exempted; not  all women,Dr. Clerke. Vide Bezam. Omnia dicendo, plus expressit quam si omnes dixisset. Neque enim solos homines, sed quaecunque habent vel afferre possunt, complexus est. Calvinus. lest some man might be exempted: but  all, that is both men and women; as if Paul would purposely prevent all cavils. Vers. 23. But before Faith came] That is Christ, saith Paraeus, Faith being taken metonymically for its principall object. The revelation of faith in Jesus Christ. Fi∣des significat revelationem plenam eorum quae tunc latebant sub obscuritate umbrarum legis, neque enim fidem adimit patribus qui sub lege vixerunt. Calvin. Vers. 24. The Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ] As without a School∣master first had and used for entrance in rudiments,Paedagogus non constituitur in totam vitam: sed pueritiae tantum destina∣tur. quemadmodum patet ex etymo nominis; deinde puerum formando, hoc spectat, ut rudimentis purilibus ad majora praepa∣retur, ut unque Legi cnvenit: nam aetatem habuit finitam cui prae esset: deinde promovere debuit suos discipulos aliquo usque duntaxat, ut superatis ejus elementis, dignos virili aetate progressus facerent. Calvinus. Vide Pareum. children come not to the Univer∣sity; so without the Law we cannot be sufficiently taught to be preferred unto Christ; he that changeth from a Countrey Schoole to the University, changeth his Tutor; so we are not under the law, but under grace. Vers. 27. For as many of you as have been baptized unto Christ, have put on Christ] A speech borrowed from the custome used in the Primitive Church; for those that were Adulti or come to age,Weemes. when they were baptized came to the Church the Sunday be∣fore the Pascha, and put upon them white clothes; therefore the day was called Do∣minica in albis,Vide Bezam. In Christum baptizari est per baptismum se profiteri Christi discipulum. Similis allusio ad ritum baptismi. Rom. 6.2. Grotius. and they were called Candidati. Vers. 28. There is neither Iew nor Greek] He saith this to take down the pride of the Jews, and lift up the heart of the Gentiles. There is neither bond nor free] To take away the great carnall difference among pro∣fessors. There is neither male nor female] To take away the base difference that the Turkish Mahomet puts between the two Sexes,See 1 Cor. 12.13. when he saith the weaker hath no soul to save. Vers. 29. Heires according to the promise] That is, we who are Gentiles must receive the inheritance no otherwise then Abraham did, and thus become Abrahams sonnes: but he was heir by promise,Dr. Taylor. and not by nature, and so must we.
CHAP. IV. Vers. 4 THe fulnesse of time] 1. Fulnesse of grace, 1 Iohn 10. 2. Of fulfilling pro∣mises, 2 Cor. 1.20. 3. Of fulfilling the Law, Rom. 10.4. and Prophets, Luke 1.70. 4. End of the world after him, 1 Cor. 10.11. Made under the Law] Not onely under the ceremoniall Law as he was a Jew, but under the morall as a man; for it is under the Law under which we were, and from which we are redeemed. See Gal. 3.13. Vers. 5. To redeeme them that were under Redemit Ju∣daeos propriè à jugo legis pliti∣cae, & à cere∣moniis sub quibus patres serviebant: à maledictione legis moralis tum illos tum nos, quoniam hoc omnes premebamur. Pareus. the Law] 1. On the Lawes part, it rigo∣rously exacted perfect obedience, under paine of eternall death. 2. On our part, we doe what the Law injoynes out of a slavish Spirit. That we might receive the adoption Adoptio in filios talis est, quando quis cer∣tis de causis, quem non genuit in filium & haeredem adoptat, qualis fuit Manasseh & Ephraim, Gen. 48. Moses Exod. 42. Graeca vox una voce omnia complectitur. Alardi Pathologia. N. T. of Sonnes] The Greeke word for adoption shewes the nature of it, to put one in the place of a Sonne. Vers. 6 Crying Abba Father] That is, causing you to cry;Rom. 8.15. as we call it a merry day, which makes men merry. Aug. de dono perseverantiae, c. 23. The gemination notes siduciall, filiall, and vehement affection.Pareus. The first is an He∣brew, or Syriack word. The second a Greek, whereby is signified the union of the Hebrewes and Grecians, or Jewes and Gentiles in one Church. Vers. 9. Weake and beggerly elements] Or to come neerer to the meaning of the A∣postle, strengthlesse and beggerly, as the Greek words signifie;Cartwright. In respect of those who re∣sted in them, and that when they were out of date. Hoc est, Iudae∣orum more cul∣tum & meritum religiosè ponitis in observatione dierum, men∣sium, temporum, annorū. Pareus. Apostolus non improbat discrimina temporum quae Deus ipse ordinavit, Gen 9.22. sed observationem superstitiosam dierum, qua alij aliis sanctiores pu∣tantur, cultus & meritum eis affingitur, quod faciunt Papistae. Pareus. both the Mosaicall ceremonies, and Heathenish worship. See 3. v. Strengthlesse] Because they could not justifie. Beggerly] Because they have no consolation, or salvation in them. Pareus. Vers. 10. Ye observe dayes, and moneths, and times, and yeeres] By dayes are meant Jewish Sabbaths: by moneths, the Feasts observed every moneth in the day of the New Moone. Times] Or seasons as the Greek word signifies, fit times for the doing of this or that businesse. It was the manner of the Gentiles, to make difference of times in re∣spect of good or bad successe; and that according to the signes of heaven. And it is very likely, that the Galatians observed dayes not onely in the Jewish, but also in the Heathenish manner. Yeere.] The seventh of Remission, and the 50. of the Jubilee. Vers. 15. Ye would have plucked out your own eyes] That is,A proverbiall Speech. Significat eos ad quid vis sibi charissimum praestandum, preciosissimum largiendum fuisse paratissimos. Oculis enim rem nullam habemus chario∣rem oat protiosiorem, Matth. 7.29. Pareus. departed from your dearest things to have done him good. Vers. 19. Of whom I travell in birth againe, untill Christ be formed in you] The Apostle useth a comparison drawn from the forming of an infant in the wombe,Vide Bezam. The word  transla∣ted, I travell in birth, signifies not onely the travell of the woman at the birth of the Childe; but also the painefull bearing thereof before the birth. which is not formed all at once, but the principall parts first; the heart, braine and liver; and then the other by degrees: for grace is not wrought all at once, but by degrees. The paines of travell breed not greater desire to see the man childe borne into the world then Pauls love in him, till Christ were new formed in them. Vers. 21. Yee that desire to be under the Law] That is,Sub Lege esse hoc loco signifi∣cat subire jugun Legis, hac conditione ut Deus tecum agat secundum Legis pactum, teque viissii ad servandam legem adstringas, nam alioqui sub lege sunt omnes fideles. Calvinus. Quia usitate lege naturae secundum insitam carni virtutem generandi natus est. Estius. the writings of Moses com∣monly called the Law, because the Law was the principall part thereof.
There is a threefold being under the Law. 1. For justification as here, and con∣demnation as in the fourth and fifth verses of this Chapter. 2. for Irritation, as it stir∣reth up sinne, so Rom. 6.14. 3. For compulsion, Gal. 5.18. That is, not forced to duty as a slave. Partus sequitur ventremVers. 23. Borne after the flesh] That is by a bare naturall power of generation. By promise] That is, not so much by any naturall strength of the Parents, as by vertue of Gods promise, which bound his truth to set his omnipotency a work above nature.Virtute super∣naturali paren∣ctibus effoetis promissa. Pareus. Vers. 24. Which things are an allegory] That is, being the things that they were, signifie the things that they were not;Allegoria est cum ex eo quod dicitur, aliud quiddam signifi∣catur. Estius. a figure of some other thing mystically signi∣fied by them; that is they represent or signifie the two Covenants. For these are the two Covenants] That is, distinct Covenants, of workes and grace; first and second Covenant; not the Covenant of grace differently administred in the Old and New Testament. Ishmael was not under the Covenant of grace in any sense; Isaac and Ishmael represented all men; regenerate, and unregenerate, all which are under the Covenant of workes and grace. Mount Sinai] Which came thence, being there published and promulgated; the Law the Covenant of workes. To bondage] That is, begets not Children of a free and ingenuous Spirit; loving God and out of love doing him service; and meerly of his grace, love, free favour, and promise, expecting their reward; but bond∣slaves, which out of a feare of punish∣ment, or hope of reward doe service, and expect the reward, for the worthinesse sake of their workes. This Covenant is Hagar] That is, signified by Hagar, so called for a double re∣spect. 1. For its condition, because it begets all Children to bondage. 2. For sub∣ordination, Sarahs maid the Law is a servant to the Gospell, and Gospell-ends. Vers. 25. Mount Sinai in Arabia] That is, so by signification, and representation; and answereth in signification and type to Ierusalem which now is, and is in bondage] That is, to the Law, and to the curse and rigour of it, being debtours to the whole Law to doe it; or if they doe it not, to the curse to suffer it. Vers. 26. Ierusalem] That is, the heavenly Jerusalem the Church; the number of true beleevers, which doe indeed seriously embrace the doctrine of the Gospell, which began by Christ and his Apostles to be preached at Ierusalem; not hoping to be justi∣fied and saved by the merit of their own workes, but by the free promise of God in Christ; these are free from the curse and rigour of the Law; and she is the mother of all true Christians of us all] That is, of my selfe and all those which with me looke for righteousnesse and salvation, alone through the merits of Christ, and mercy of God in Christ, through faith in his name. CHAP. V. Vers. 1. STand fast] A metaphore taken from Souldiers, which stand in their rankes, and fight valiantly where the Captain hath set them; not shrinking a foot. In the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free] This liberty consists in freedome, partly from the curse of the Law, partly in its rigide exaction; and partly from the observation of ceremonies. Vorstius. And not be intangled] The word is metaphoricall, alluding to Oxen who are tyed to the yoake;Ne implice∣mini. Aug. reads it ne atti∣neamini, Ambrose nolite cohiberi. Tertul nolite astringi. Vet. Lat. nolite contineri. Beza nolite implicari. Implicandi verbo alludit ad boves quorum cornua loris jug complicantur, ut colla demittant; ita olim implicatae tenebantur patrum conscientiae legum variarum quasi laqueis. Pareus. their necks being pressed and kept under. So Pareus and others. Let us not returne like willing slaves, to our chaines againe.
Vers. 2. Behold I Paul say unto you] q. d. These things are as certaine, as I am truly called Paul. Pareus. Behold] It is a word of one stirring up attention. I Paul who am an Apostle,If any revive the rite, which was a type of the Messiah to come, he de∣nies Christ to be exhibited, therefore Christ shall profit him nothing. Vide Grotium. and have authority to publish the Gospell say unto you, whosoever saith to the contrary; if you thinke circumcision of necessary use with faith in Christ in the matter of ju¦stification, you shall have no benefit nor comfort by Christs death, passion, resurre∣ction, or any thing he hath done; Christum dimidium quisquis habere vult, totum perdit. Calvinus. Vers. 3. Every man that is circumcised, is a debter to the whole Law] He is a debtor in regard of duty,The parts be∣ing insepara∣bly united. because be that thinks himselfe bound to keep one part of the cere∣moniall Law, doth thereby binde himselfe to keep it all. And he that is a debtor in duty to keep the whole Law must needs be a debtor in regard of the penalty, be∣cause he is not able to keep any part of it. Vers. 4 Christ is become of none effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the Law] So many of the Galathians as sought to be justified by the Law, that is, by their own obedience prescribed by the Law. Ye are abolished from Christ] Or as it is in the originall,Exinaniti estis à Christo. Cal∣vinus Evacu∣ati estis à Christo. Vulg. Vide Bezam. Siquam justi∣tiae partem quae∣ritis in operibus legis, Christus nihil ad vos. Calvinus. ye are made voide and empty of Christ, that is Christ is an empty and unprofitable Christ to you, that are of that erroneous opinion, and hold stiffely that you are justified by the Law. Falne from grace The love and favour of God, Perkins. All that professe Christ, are under the grace of God, in the judgement of Christian charity.] viz. of God, That is the doctrine of grace say some; the favour of God, and all the benefits flowing from it saith Pareus. See 11 Rom. 6. Vers. 5. Neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision] By circumcision, he meanes the outward priviledges of the Jewes; and by uncircumcision, the privi∣ledges of the Gentiles, Baptisme, and the Supper. All outward prerogatives availe nothing to justification. V. 6. But faith which worketh by loveFides opera∣bunda. Bellar∣minus ver∣bum operatur manifesto Bar∣barismo passivè interpretatur, efficitur, per∣ficitur, contra grammaticam vimverbi depo∣nentis opera∣tur, contraque omnium veterū & recentiorum interpretum sententiam;  enim est participium mediae, non passivae vocis, quia passivus sensus repugna∣res Apostoli scopo & verbis. Pareus.] Faith is not wrought by charity (as Bellarmine perverteth this Text) for then it will follow that love, by which faith is wrought, must needs be before faith; the Greeke word is not of the passive, but of the middle voyce, as the Interlinear, faith which is effectuall; Pagnine, working by love. Faith worketh by love, not as fire maketh hot by heat; which is a formall property inhe∣rent in it. But as the soule doth this, or that by the hand; which is an externe Instru∣ment conjoyned unto it. Vers. 7. Run well] Our Christian life is often compared to a course, because there is need of alacrity, and striving to it.As in se∣cond Ch. 2 v. Phil. 2.16. Heb. 12.1. 2 Tim. 4.7. 1 Cor. 9.4. Did let you] Stop you, intercept your course, turne you out of the way;, propriè est tran∣versum aliquid struere quo iter impediatur, unde translationo quadam significat impedire. Act. 24.4. Rom. 15.22. 1 Thess. 2.8. Grotius. secretly intimating their inconstancy. Vers. 12. Cut off videtur allu∣dere ad circum∣cisionem quam urgebant, quum dicit, Abscin∣dantur. Calvinus.] Seeing they glory so in the skin cut off. Which trouble you] Or as the Greek word signifies waste and overthrow; Qui vos quasi quasi sedibus vestris pellunt. Beza. because these men drive Christians out of house and home, as enemies when they come to sack or spoile a Towne. Vers. 13. But by love serve one another] That is,Rom. 13.8. let every man in his place and cal∣ling become servant to another, and so preserve love by the duties of love. Vers. 14. For all the Law is fulfilled in one word] This is secretly opposed to the do∣ctrine
of the false Apostles, which urged ceremonies alone. Calvin. Love thy neighbour as they selfe] It is a note of similitude, not equality. Vers 16. Fulfill the lusts of the flesh] That is, accomplish them with love, with pleasure, and with full consent of will. Vers. 17. The flesh] That is the corruption of mans nature. Lusteth against the spirit] That is, grace in the heart. And the spirit lusteth against the flesh] First, by labouring to overmaster, and keepe downe the motions thereof.Perkins. Secondly, by stirring up good motions, and inclinati∣ons to piety. Non esse sub lege est immunem esse à maledictione, à coactione, ab onere ceremoniarum legis, est verè ab his liberatum esse. Pareus.Vers. 18. Ye are not under the Law] Condemning or forcibly compelling you. Vers. 19. Now the workes of the flesh are manifest] The Apostle when he speakes of the fruits of the flesh,Vocat opera carnis: quia haec sunt studia, hmores & actus hominum carnalium. Pareus. he saith of them, that they are manifest not onely to God, but men, which have the light of reason and naturall conscience; but when he comes to speak of the fruits of the spirit, he saith not so of them, vers. 22. The grace of Gods Spirit is a hidden and secret thing, 1 Pet. 3.4. and is not so easily discerned. Vers. 20. Witchcraft] The word  properly signifies poysoning; but here it is fitly translated Witchcraft, In vidia: dolor ex bonis alienis;  voces pari sono amat jungere Apostolus ut has ipsas. Rom. 1.29. Grotius. because all poysoning is comprehended under Mur∣ther which followeth. Vers. 21. And such like] The Apostle having reckoned up many workes of the flesh is forced to conclude and say, and such like] as being not able to think of all the sins, which doe as fire sparkle out of the furnace. Of which I tell you before as I have also told you in time past] before] Before you goe to Hell, as I have already told you. Vers. 22. The fruit of the spirit] He called them workes of the flesh; vices end in themselves;Where the Holy Ghost ruleth, there he in∣gendreth those good gifts and motions of grace. but fruits of the Spirit, virtues abound with fruit. It is so called, as Ephes. 5.9. 1. Because all grace comes originally from the Spirit, as the fruit is de∣rived from the root. 2. Because of the pleasantnesse. 3. Of the advantage and profit to ones selfe. Faith] By faith he meaneth fidelity, in making good the words that have gone out of our mouthes; so Pareus, Estius, and others. Vers. 23. Against such there is no Law] Such persons, not workes. 1. They need not rigorous Law to compell them,Spontaneae sunt virtutes. by vertue of their graces they will doe them. 2. No Law to condemne them, so Pareus, that is the better. Vers. 24. Have crucified] He useth this word, to shew that mortification of the flesh, is an effect of the Crosse of Christ Calvin. The flesh] That is, the corruption it selfe of nature. With the affections and lusts] That is, the inward working of it in suddaine pas∣sions, and more setled desirers. Verbum  significat ordi∣natè incedere, & intra limites suos se continere. Estius.Vers. 25. Walke] Orderly by rule, by line and measure. sunt qui honorem ve∣nantur ex ijs re∣bus in quibu verus honor situs non est, ut ex opibus, eruditione, eloquentiâ. Grotius.  provocare dicitur de iis qui ad certamen aut bellicum aut Judiciale alios vocant: Jnde per translationem dicitur deijs qui in quovis alio certamine, puta eruditionis aut elo∣quentia, sperant se alijs superiores fore. Grotius.Vers. 26. Vaine glorious] Desiring to be accouted rich, eloquent, good by men. Provoking one another] Striving to anger, and vex one another with injuries, con∣tumelies, and contempt.
CHAP. VI. Vers. 1. IF any man he overtaken with a fault] He meaneth a frailty and infirmity; Erratum signi∣ficat, sive lae∣sionem temerè & quasi errante manu admissam. Alardus. and to be overtaken is on the sudden, ignorantly, and without delibera∣tion, to be drawn to commit some offence. Restore] The word is borrowed from Surgeons who being to deale with a broken joynt will handle the same very tenderly:Set him in joynt; so it is used Matth. 21.16. Perkins.  est aptum reddere: interdum & sanare quod corruptum est. Matth. 4.21. Marc. 1.19. quae signi∣ficatio bene congruit huic loco. Grotius. so must they be dealt withall in reproofe which sinne out of humane frailty. Lest thou also be tempted] Even with a powerfull and prevailing temptation to fall into thy brothers sinne. He doth not say lest thou also be overcome, but tempted; because if God leave thee to the temptation thou wilt soon be overcome. Vers. 2. Beare ye one anothers burdens] Both the inward burden of your temptations and corruptions, and the outward of afflictions, Esay 13.16.Meaning such things in our brethren as are like bur∣dens, even troublesome and grievous unto us. Etiam peccata sunt onera: portat aliena peccata qui non superbè lapsum contemnit, sed sperat de eo meliora. Grotius. The Apostle calleth slips, infirmities, and sinnes, by the name of burdens; taking his metaphor from travellers, who use to ease one another by carrying one anothers burden either in whole or in part. Pereus in loc. We must not beare with their sinnes, but help them out of their griefe by consolation, their sinne by di∣rection. Vers. 4. Let every man prove his own work] The Greek word  translated prove, signifies also to approve, as Rom. 14.2. 1 Cor. 16.3. And so the word is used in English, when we say, such a one is to prove a will, that is to approve it. The word here may be understood in both senses, to prove our works, and to approve them. To rejoyce] The Greek, to glory: which is more then to rejoyce. Vers. 5. Beare his own burden] as a Porter.Portabit  quod est bajulorum propriè. Erasm. Vers. 6. Let him that is taught] Gr catechized, Hoc est, propriè; qui viva voce instituitur. Confer. Rom. 2.18. Vorstius. or taught familiarly by word of mouth, or lively voyce, as when children are taught the first principles of Religion. Here it is taken more largely for him that is any way taught and instructed. Make him that taught him] catechised him, or instructed him, generally. Partaker] That is, communicate, afford, give unto them these temporall things. Vers 7. For whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap] It is an usuall proverbe among all Nations; You have the like sentences, Iob 4 8. Prov. 11.18. and elsewhere.Vt sementem feceris ita & metes. Cicero de oratore. To sow with the Hebrews often signifies to work, and to reape to be rewarded or pu∣nished, Matth 25.24, 26: 2 Cor. 9.6. Vers. 10. As we have therefore opportunity] Take the present occasion of doing all the good thou canst.  signifies in a large acceptation, seasonablenesse of cir∣cumstance, whether of time, place or any occasion: but most properly a seasonable time.Therefore it is turned, dum tempus habemus. Vet. lat. Beza. Pareus. Vbi tempus habemus. Calv. Vers. 14. Crosse of Christ] Some understand it of the afflictions which he did suf∣fer for the profession of Christ; but this sense cannot be,Greenham. Vide Grotium. Gloriari in Christi cruce perinde valet atque Christo crucifixo, nisi quod plus exprimit; significat enim mortem illam ignominiosam, probrique plenam, imò etiam maledictam à Deo. Calv. that we should rejoyce in nothing but affliction; it is rather to be understood of the Crosse which Christ suf∣fered for us then of that we suffer for him, as 2 Cor. 2.2. Vers. 15. For in Christ Iesus neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature] That is, are neither acceptable to God, nor available to salvation.
under these two synecdochically comprehending all outward priviledges and dig∣nities. As many as walk] The Greek word signifies not simply to walk, but to walk by rule,Atque ita ince∣dent ut recta serie & ordine progrediantur, illud enim est . Rainold. de lib. Apoc. vide Bezam. in order and measure, without treading aside, but making straight steps to our feet, Heb. 12.13. According to this rule] This Canon; that is, the doctrine of this Epistle Meta∣phora ab architectis. Pareus. The Israel of God] Israel of old was the Church of God; therefore the Church is now called the Israel of God. See 2 Cor. 11.23. & 4.10.11. Vide Bezam, & Grotium. Etsi illis non refragamur, qui asserunt, Paulum cicatrices suas intelligere, quas toties caesus virgis, toties lapidatus, toties bestiis objectus, toties in vincula conjectus reportavit; inficiari tamen nemo audebit, haud perperam nos sentire, si eundem, ad ritum respoxisse Romanorum con∣tendamus; apud quos militiae tyrones vel in facie, vel in manibus, vel in alia quavis corporis parte, inscriptionibus quibusdam, quas propriè stigmata denotant, signabantur, ne, si, leporina fortitudine militiam subterfugere auderent, possent latitare. Dilhet. elect. l. 2. c. 10.Vers. 17. For I beare in my body the marks of the Lord Iesus] The word in the originall translated marks, doth properly signifie Prints with a hot Iron. But here it is used generally to signifie any blemish, scar, or mark whatsoever. Prisons, bonds, whips, buffetings, stoning, reproaches of all kind, which he endured for the testimony of the Gospell.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to the EPHESIANS.Epistola haec semper inter exi∣mias est habi∣ta, scripta ab Apostolo jam diu functo Apo∣stolicum mu∣nus, cum in vin∣culis esset Ro∣mae, ad Ephesos civitatem Asiae praecipuam, è qua urbe multi viri docti & in saeculi rebus sa∣pientes prodie∣rant. Grotius. CHAP. I. Vers. 1. TO the Saints] 1. They were all Saints by outward profession. 2. There were many true Saints, the better part giveth the deno∣mination; Wine and Water is called Wine. Ephesus] This was a mother City in lesser Asia, famous for Idolatry, Conjuring, as the Acts of the Apostles testifie; so given to all ryot, that it banished Hermodorus because he was an honest sober man: yet here God had his Church. It was neer the Sea, given to merchandize, ample and rich. Bayne. Vers. 3. Blessed be the Lord God and Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, who hath blessed us, &c] Blessing is applied,Nos Deum be∣nedicimus, quum eum pro∣beneficiis lau∣damus; ille verò nos benedicit, quum nos bene∣ficiis afficit. Nam Dei bene∣dicere benefa∣cere est. Estius. Verbum Bene∣dicendi hic variè accipitur, prout vel ad Deum refertur, vel ad homines, Nostra erga Deum benedictio laudis est, dum ejus beneficentiam praedicamus; Deus autem nobis dicitur benedicere, quum soelicem rebus nostris dat successum & nos sua beneficentia prosequitur, ita ut bene & prospere sit nobis. Calvinus. First, to God; and signifies, 1. To consecrate to an holy use, Gen. 2.3. 2. To enrich with favours, as here, and Acts 3.26. Secondly, to man; who is said to blesse God when he prayeth unto him, or prai∣seth him for his mercy, as here, and Matth. 14.19. & 26.26. Psalm 103.1. & 104.1. & 115.18. Luke 1.68. Blessed] That is, praised. Who hath blessed us] That is, enriched us with all blessing or grace. With all Spirituall blessings] In the originall it is in the singular number,, in omni benedictione spirituali. Grotius. with all spirituall blessing; all, and yet but one blessing: to note, that Spirituall blessings are so knit together that they all make up but one blessing. Blessings may be said to be Spirituall three waies: 1. When they are blessings be∣stowed on mens Spirits; when their soules prosper. 2. When they are wrought, not in a naturall way, but by the Spirit of God. 3. When they tend to a Spirituall end. 2 Chron. 17.2, 3. Spirituall blessings are the chiefest, 1. Because they are the blessings of Gods right hand. 2. Come from his choyce love. 3. Because they are blessings of the spirit and soule. 4. Because of their conjunction; where God gives one Spirituall blessing, he gives all. In heavenly places] or things; places is not in the Originall. In Heavenlies. This word is used five times in this Epistle, Verse 20. of this Chapter,In coelestibus] non multum refert subaudias locis an bonis. Calvinus. 2, 6.3, 10. and 6.12. on which last place see Dr. Gouge.
Vers. 4. Chosen us in him] or, for him, as some would have it; not as if Christ were the foundation of election,Dicimus nos electos esse in Christo tanquam in capite, ut essenus illius membra eaque sancta, &c. Zanchius. but we are chosen in him as the foundation of our salvation. Vers. 5. According to the good pleasure of his will] The Greek word  rendred here good pleasure is a word peculiar to the Scripture, and (as Hunc sermo∣nem de He∣braic Ratson LXX. interpre∣tes transtulerunt, rebus novis, nova verba fingentes. Hieron. in loc. Ierome saith) was first invented by the LXX Interpreters, that they might expresse the signification of the Hebrew word Ratson. Nos gratis sibi acceptos fecit. Beza. Nos sibi gratis effecit gratos. Pareus.Wherein he hath made us accepted] Greek freely made us free. Vers. 8. All wisdom] 1. In regard of the excellency, because it serveth to all pur∣poses.Sapientiae fuit invenire ratio∣nes sanandi ge∣neris humani: prudentiae eas disponere. Grotius. 2. In regard of the quantity, not absolutely, but comparatively: 1. In compa∣rison of that measure which was given the believing Jew. 2. In regard of those which are more imperfect. Vers. 9. The mystery of his will] The Gospell of salvation may be called a mystery in three regards:Bayne. Vide Bezam. 1. Absolutely, because it is a thing of it selfe within the will of God, which no creature by it selfe is able to know. 2. In regard of the spare revelation and small number of those to whom it was manifested. 3. Now it is divulged, in regard of those whose eyes are not opened to see it. Vers. 10. In the dispensation] It is a word taken from Stewards, and such as have the keeping of things in common, and are to distribute them as they see fit for singu∣lar persons and occasions. To dispense them is to distribute that I have in common, as is fitting in wisdome, to persons and occasions in particular. Dispensation of times is put by a metonymie of the adjunct, for fulnesse of times wisely dis∣pensed.This Greeke word  sheweth that God hath a care of the Church, as a man of his house, and dispenseth to every one of the family his por∣tion. Est similitudo sumpta à familia, in qua paterfamilias aut aliquis ejus loco, ex cella deprompta dimensa dat singulis. Grotius. The Angels received their confirmation from Christ, and are reconciled to us by him. Baine. Of the fulnesse of times] Fulnesse of times indefinitely, universally notes the con∣summation of all these seasons successively which God had appointed for the gathe∣ring of his Saints Gather together in one] There are three significations of this Greek word. Chryso∣stome hath two: 1. Gather together as members under one head, (both which are in Heaven, and which are on earth) Angels and men; this interpretation Zanchy fol∣lows. 2. To recapitulate and summe up what was spoken more fully; so we say the heads of a Sermon; so it is used Rom. 13.9. All excellencies are summed up in Christ; all the Sacrifices were fulfilled in that one Sacrifice, all the promises were accomplished in him.So Tertul. Erasm. Gr.  quod verbum varie interpre∣tes vertunt & exponunt. Vulgatus vertit instaurare, Erasmus summatim instaurare, quod Bullingerus retinet. Tremelius ex translatione Syriaca, de integro renovarentur, quasi dictum esset . Calvinus recolligere, quod Bezae & piscatori placet. Hieronymus vertit recapitulare. Grotius in loc. Vide Lamperti Alardi Pathologiam Sacram Novi Testamenti. 3. Summatim instaurare, briefly to restore all things, and bring them to their primitive perfection; what we lost in Adam is restored in Christ, both in Heaven and in Earth. Angels and Saints in the Church Triumphant and Mili∣tant. Vers. 11. Also we have obtained an inheritance] We were sorted out; the old books read it we are chosen,In sortem ad∣sciti sumus. Certum est al∣ludi ad sortes, quibus inter Israelitas fuit divisa haereditas terrae Chanaan Zanchius. Vide Estium. the latter we have obtained an inheritance. The word signifies, we have been chosen as it were by lot to an inheritance. Vers. 13. After that ye heard the word of truth] That is, the Gospell; it was indited by the Authour of all truth, and containes so much supernaturall truth as is neces∣sary
for our salvation. 3. It excites us to the embracing, and practising of truth. In whom after that ye beleeved, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise] The ori∣ginall runs thus, In whom beleeving, or having beleeved, or when you beleeved, you were seale This implies 4. Things. 1. A work of reall and visi∣ble distinction of the called of God from other men. 2. A work of confirmation whereby we abide so. 3. Of transformation, and daily renewing the soule. 4. The evidence of all this to the conscience of him that is sealed. The nature of a seale is to make things sure, Dan 6.8. Matth. 27.66. as a wri∣ting is firme amongst men, when the seale is put to it; secondly men set their seales also on things to note their propriety in the thing which is sealed. See 2 Cor. 1.23. with that holy Spirit of promise] Gr. See Beza. Vers. 14. Which is the earnest of our inheritance] Our English relative (who) doth more distincly answer to the Greek then (which) This word earnest Bayne. Vox  vox est canamea sive Phaenissa, quae per com∣mercia inde in Graeciam venit, & valde huic rei convenit; est nm arrhabo sive ut Latini brevius dicunt arra pars pretii in antecessum data, quo minus de plena solutione dubitetur. Sic dona illa spiritus celestia portio quaedam erant foelicitatis coelestis, & aeternae, & de ea fidem faciebant. Grotius. Vox Hebraea est origine, Gen. 38.17. Latini dicunt arram. Est tamen & Latinum arrhabo. Accipitur pro munere, quod datur tam in contractu matrimonij, quàm emptionis. Cheiromaeus de Graeco-barbaris. N. T. 2 Cor. 1.22. & 55. is in the ori∣ginall tongues more large then our English; and may signifie pledges, pawnes, hosta∣ges, as well as earnest, which is in contract of buying and selling onely exercised; and is a giving some small part of a summe, to assure that the whole shall be tendred in due season. Of the purchased possession] It is one word in the Greek, but two in English, Hebraeo more abstractum pro concreto: Populus ille Deo acquisitas ut dicitur 1 Pet. 2.9. & Act. 20.20. Habet autem eam vox . Solemus enim magni facere ea quae nobis magni constant. Grotius. because we cannot otherwise expresse it; some refer it to the persons, so Calvin. Others to the estate they shall attaine unto, when they come to heaven. So 1 Thess. 5.9. and 2 Thess. 2.14. Vers. 16. Cease not to give thankes] 1. In all his solemne addresses. 2. By frequent ejaculations. 3. In regard of the habituall disposition of the soule. 4. Would per∣severe in it. Vers. 17. The God of our Lord Iesus Christ] 1. by way of opposition to all false Gods, as he is called the God of Abraham, Isaac and Iacob. 2.The Father of glory] That is, glorious father. See 24. Psal. lat∣ter end, Act. 7.2. because hee is the fountain of all visible glory, gave such abundant glory to the Sun. Secondly, of all invisible glory. 1 Tim. 3. latter end. Thirdly, the fountaine of the Deity, Chrysost. expounds it the Father of Christ as v. 3. Baine. In regard of his in∣carnation, God the Father gave him his body. 3. As he is mediator. 4. By way of exaltation; this is more then the God of the whole world, God of Nations. The Spirit of wisedome] Put for the gift of wisedome bestowed on us, so called both because the Spirit doth beget it in us; and is with it to sustaine and perfect it, as also because it selfe is of a spirituall nature, moving them in whom it is to work after the directions of it. Vers. 18. The hope of his calling] Hope is put for things hoped for,Spes pro respe∣randa more He∣braeo posita est, ut & alibi in∣terdum. Estius. not for the grace of hope, which springeth from faith; thus we say he is a man of faire hopes, that is goodly lands which in likelihood will befall him. His inheritance] An inheritance which comes by grace or lot, called his. 1. Be∣cause it is of his preparing and providing. 2. Because we shall have it with him. 3. Because he is the subject or matter of it; the heaven of heavens is communion with God, he shall be all in all, 1 Cor. 15. Vers. 19. And what is the exceeding greatnesse of his power to us ward who beleeve ac∣cording to the working of his mighty power] Observe the gradation,Burrh. Excel∣lency of a gra∣cious Spirit. 182. the Apostle spea∣king of the power of God put forth upon those which doe beleeve, expresseth it in a six fold gradation. 1. It is his power, onely the power of God could doe it. 2. The greatnesse of his power. 3. The exceeding greatnesse of his power. 4. It is the working of his power. 5. The working of his mighty power. 6. It is the same power by which he raised Christ from the dead, and set him above all; so v. 20. Vers. 21. Farre above all principality and power, and might, and dominion, and every
name that is named] Some interpreters understand this of terrene dominion; others of the Angels. Non dubium qum his nomi∣nibus Angelos designet: qui sic ideo nuncu∣pantur, quòd Deus per ipsorum manum, suam potestatm, vir∣tutem & domi∣nati mem exer∣ceat. Quemad∣modum ex di∣versitate nominum colligimus diversos ordines; ita subtiliùs de illis inquirere, & numerum finire & gradus statuere, non modò stultae est curiositati, sed tem ritatis etiam impiae ac periculosae. Calvinus. Nomina sunt ordinum angelicorum Deo ministranti∣um in Coelstibus Estius. Vid plura ibid. Intelligunt quidam de imperijs terrenis. Sed locus Coloss. 1.16. & quod hic infra est 3.10. evincit ag hic de eximijs Angelorum Classibus. Grotius.Principaliy] Those in principall authority. Power All secondary powers sent from them. Might] That is, Angels putting forth might in some miraculous effects of mercy and udgement. Dominion] Such Angells whose Ministry God used in the government of king∣domes and provinces. Name] Every creature howsoever named. Baine. Vers. 2. To be head over all things] Christ is a head in regard of intimatenesse of conjunction, by way of influence, the spring of sense and motion, in respect of go∣vernment. See 4. Chap. 15. v. Vers. 23. The fulnesse of him that filleth all in all] There are foure things considera∣ble in this last clause▪ both darke and excellent. 1. The Church is Christs fulnesse, te fulnesse of him] Actively if we consider Christ not personally, but mystically as a Head, alibi activam, alibi passivam habet significationem. Hic passiva rectius convenit, ob locum huic geminum Coloss. 2.10. & infra hic 5.18. Nec aliter sumenda vox eadem Coloss. 1.19. Grotius. Et  hic dictū forma Attica, sono passivo, sensu activo quomodo hoc verbum usia pant & Plato in Timaeo & Xenophon Graecae Historiae sexto. Christus in omnibus, ere∣dentibus scilicet, implet omnia, meutem luce, voluntatem pijs affectibus, cor∣pus ipsum obse quendi facula∣te. Id. ibid. and having the Church for his body, but it is rather called Christs fulnesse, be∣cause it is filled by him; the fulnesse it hath is from him, of his procuring, bestowing, continuing, accepting; and because all is for him, therefore his fulnesse. 2. Yet hee filleth it, that filleth] The Greeke word is of the middle voice; but here it is to bee translated actively; there is a great deale of difference betweene the fulnesse of the choycest beleevers, and the fulnesse of Christ; there is in him plenitudo fontis, a ful∣nesse of the Fountaine; in them plenitudo vasis, a fulnesse of the Vessell; in him (say the Schoole-men) there is a fulnesse of sufficiency, bounty, preheminence and re∣dundance. 3. The extent of this repletion, all] He fills 1. All creatures with naturall blessings, Psal. 104.28. and 65.9. 2. All men with common blessings, Iohn 1.9. 3. All the Saints with speciall, peculiar, and distinguishing blessings; though they have not all the same degree and measure of them. 1. With Spirituall gifts, for the edification of themselves and others, 1 Cor. 12.4.11. 2. With Spirituall privi∣ledges; all Saints are justified, and every one as truly as any one; though they be not so greatly sanctified, they have all the benefit of adoption, the youngest children as well as the eldest, the first born; all things shall happen for the good of all. 3. With Spirituall consolation requisite to their condition, Iohn 16.24. 2 Cor. 1.5. Lastly, he fills not onely all the Saints, but all the Saints,  all things, all their capa∣cities. 1. All the faculties of their soules, the understanding with light, Ephes. 1.18. and 5.8. Psal. 36.9. The conscience with quicknesse, purenesse, tendernesse, quiet∣nesse, Act. 24.16. 1 Titus 15. 1 Cor. 1.12. 1 Pet. 3.18. The will with Spirituall intentions, purposes, 2 Cor. 5.9. the affections of love, joy, feare, are set on him chiefely. 2 All the Members of the body, 1 Cor. 6.20. Rom. 6.13. 2 Cor. 4.10.11. 3. All the desires of the inward man. Psal. 25.13. and 37.4. Esay 58.11. 4. All the indeavours of the outward man 75. Psal. 2.3. Esay 22.12. Psal. 138. ult. 4. The qualification of this extent, in all) 1. Ordinances. 2 Occurrences and pro∣vidences, Rom. 8.28. 3. Ages and successions, 2 Cor. 4.13. 4. All relations, Rom. 3. 23. 5. Comforts. 6. amidst all their discomforts. 7. To all saving intents and pur∣poses: initiatively and gradually here, and consummatively hereafter. CHAPT. II. Vers. 2. THe course of this world] Ad verbum juxta seculum bujus mundi. Vorstius. Vide Bezam.  multa sig∣nificat interdum vitam, & per  rationem vivendi, quae Derech. Hebraeis; vixistis ut mos erat plerisque. Grotius.The world of the world, that is, that temper and frame of that age of the world.
Vers. 3. Fulfilling the desires of the flesh] , The wills lust is made up all of wills. Vorstius thinkes it notes the two perverse desires, some of which are more internall, some more externall. And were by nature the Children of wrath,We are sub∣ject to Gods wrath even as in nature a childe is to the Commande∣ments and authority of his Father. Vide Bezam. Per filios irae, simpliciter intellige perditos ac morte aeterna dignos. Ira enim judicium Dei significat: ideo filij irae perinde valet atque co∣ram Deo damnari. Calvinus. even as others] To be by nature the chil∣dren of wrath signifies these things. 1. Wrath is our proper due, we are borne to it. 2. It belongs to us as soone as ever we have a living soule, damnati priusquam nati Aug. 3. We are irrecoverably the Children of wrath, Adam might have helped it. 4. It is universally so, as we say a man is by nature mortall, because all are so. Locus est insignis adversus Pelagianos, & quicumque peccatum originale negant. Calvine. That which is naturally in all is originall. See Estius. The Apostle opposeth the word nature (saith Vorstius) to the boasting of the Jew, as of their carnall generation from Abraham. Vers. 5. Quickned] Greeke made alive; he repeates it againe in this verse (what he had touched on in the first.) 1. In regard of the grammaticall construction to make the sensefull; the sense being imperfect; in the first verse in the originall, he quickened is wanting; and he varies the person; in the first verse it is you; the Ephesians to whom he wrote; here (we) includes himselfe with the Jewes and repeats it to shew the generality of the condition, all are dead in sinne. 2. The certainty of it. 3. The corruption of our nature, that are unwilling to take notice of it. By grace ye are saved] And so verse 8. the Apostle brings in this sentence twice; not onely to shew that the progresse of a Christian is by grace,Gratia non est gratia ullo mo∣do nisi sit gra∣tuita omni modo. Aug. but the very first be∣ginning and setting out, tis all of grace. Vers. 7. He might shew] The originall is of greater force then our translation, that he might shew forth by demonstration and evidence; that so the world might see, admire, and applaud the bounty of his grace. Vers. 10. For we are his workemanship] 1. Hee workes the Saints off from their be∣loved sinnes. 2. He workes them above the dearest of creatures, and comforts. 3. Workes them out of carnall selfe. 4. Workes them in Christ. That we should walke in them] Walking imports 1. Spontaniety in the princi∣ple, moves from within; if a man be drawne or driven, he doth not walke, Prov. 20.7. The Hebrew word in that conjugation signifies, sets himselfe a going. 2. Pro∣gresse in the motion, he moves forward, gets ground of corruption, lives more in, to and upon Christ. Vers. 12. That at that time ye were without Christ, &c.The Covenants of promise] be∣cause severall wayes revea∣led and at se∣verall times dispensed.] 1. They are without Christ the ground of hope. 2. Out of the Church, the place of hope. 3. Without the Co∣venant, the reason of all our hope and beleeving. Without God] Not onely without the true knowledge and worship of God, and such as did neglect both: but such as were neglected, and not regarded of God; and suffered to walke in their own wayes and sinnes. See 19. v. Without God. 1. In reconciliation. 2. In Communion; grace is tendentia animae in Deum. Vide Bezam. Vers. 14. He is our Peace] 1. That of men with God was procured by him. 2. Of men with men. 3. Of men with themselves. Vers. 17. And came and preached peace to you,Voces Procul & Prope, non ad loci distanti∣am referuntur: sed Iudaeos Deo proqinquos sacit ratione soederis: Gentes verò remotas, quae à regno Dei exulabant, quamdiu nullam habebant salutis promissionem. Calvinus. which were afarre off] Christ preached peace to them that were afar off, that is, to the Gentiles in the persons of his A∣postles. Vers. 18. An accesse] The word is   leading by the hand, it is used al∣so, 3 Chapter v. 12. An introduction, or adduction; it is an allusion (saith Estius) to the custome of Princes, to whom there is no passage, unlesse we be brought in by one of their favourites.
Vers. 19. The houshold of God] Which words imply speciall care and government; as a wife and good housholder, hath a speciall care over them of his family. Vers. 20. On the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets] That is on the doctrine Pauci nonnulli, in quibus Chry∣sostomus & post eum Oecumenius, ac Theophilactus, quibus confentive videtur Tertullianus, sic interpretantur, quasi dictum sit, super Apostolos & Prophetas, qui sunt fundamenta. Quae expositio etsi coactior sit quam solidior: amen sut eam non refellam) certum est Apostolos & Pro∣phetas non posse dici fundamentum nsi habita ratione Ministerij, id est, quatenus ministri fuerunt jaciendi fundamenti; verum magis propta expositio, & quam sequuntur plerique omnes, haec est, ut voluerit Paulus fideles superstructos super doctrina veteris & novi Testamenti, quae sit fundamentum Apostolorum & Prophetarum, id est quod Apostoli & Prophetae constinerunt: quod idem est ac si ipsum Christum nominassent; sic Ambrosius, Anselmus, Glossa interlincaris & ordinaria, Lyranus, Thomas, Lombardus, Cajetanus & Gagnaeus, Chamierus tomo secundo l. 10. c. 1. Vide Bezam. of the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. CHAP. III. Minimissimus. Estius See 1. Cor. 15.9.Vers. 8 LEsse then the least] , a comparative made of a superlative. The unsearchable riches of Christ] Riches imply two things. 1. Abun∣dance. 2. Abundance of such things as are of worth, riches, and riches of Christ; unsearchable riches of Christ; in Christ are riches of Justification, Tit. 2.14. Sanctifi∣cation, Phil. 4.12, 13. Consolation, 2 Cor. 12.9 Glorification, 1 Pet. 1.5. Vers. 10. To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known by the Church, the manifold wisdome of God] That is, if it had not beene for the Churches sake that God would reveale so glorious a Mystery, the Angels in heaven must have been for ever ignorant of it. Perkins on Iude.By the Ministery of the Apostles, the Mysteries of God concerning mans redempti∣on have beene revealed to the Angels themselves. See Iohn 20.21. Some say by way of information, the Angels are edified by preaching; others by contemplating of the Church,Vide Bezam. Ecclesia ex Iu∣daeis pariter ac Gentibus col lecta, quasi speculum est in quo contemplantur Angeli mirificam Dei sapientiam, quam prius nesci∣erant. Calvinus. Dei sapientia angelis non innotescit per Ecclesiam docentem, sed per ea quae in Ecclesia geruntur, sive per execu∣tionem mysteriorum in Ecclesia. Estius. Vide à Lapide. seeing the manifold wisdome of God therein. The Schoolemen distinguish of a threefold knowledge of Angels. 1. A naturall knowledge concreated with them.See 1 Pet. 1.12. 2. Experimentall; some thinke this is here meant, the experience the Angels gather out of the observation of Gods dealing with his people. 3. Cognitio revelata. The manifld wisdome of God] Multivarious wisdome, The wisdom of God is sim∣ple and uncompounded; it is pure and unmixed with any thing but it selfe, yet it is manifold in degrees, kinds and administrations. vide Hieron. in loc. Vers. 12. In whom we have boldnesse and accesse] The word translated boldnesse, in the Originall is , ex origine quidem loquendi signifi∣cat libertatem, sed largius per∣ducta significa∣tione fiduciam, ut videre est Levit. 26, 16. Magnam autem fiduciam parit spiritus ille attestans Deum nobis esse patrem. Rom. 8.15. Gal. 4.6. Grotius.  veteri interpreti est fiducia, Erasmo est audacia. Beza reddidit libertatem, quae est facultas qua liberè loquimur, quicquid volumus. Non multum refert, veteremne an Bezae versionem sequaris. Vox utramque significationem ad∣mittit, unde Beza aliquando libertatem reddit, ut hic, & 2 Cor. 7.4. Act. 3.29. & 4.29. Alibi fiduciam Heb. 4.16. 1 Ioh. 2.28. Est autem libertas apud homines & Deum. Apud homines Joh. 7.13. Act. 4.13. 2 Cor. 3.12. Eph. 6.19. 1 Tim. 3.13. Apud Deum Heb. 10.19. Grotius in loc. it signifies liberty of speech, or speaking all, or boldnesse of face in speaking. A believer by faith hath boldnesse to goe to God by prayer; and accesse; it is  in the originall, which signifies such an accesse as is by ma∣nuduction, as Isaac took Rebecca; so Christ takes the soule espoused to him by the hand, and leads it into his fathers presence. Vers. 15. Of whom the whole family] That is, the Church. The Church triumphant in Heaven,Vox  significat sami∣liam seu cognationem eorum, qui ab uno patre, seu principe generis orti sunt. Estius. vide Vorstium. and militant on Earth, make but one family, Gal. 6.10.
Vers. 17. Dwell in your heart] By his Spirituall presence and gracious influence. Being rooted and grounded in love] That is, have a strong and firm love to the things of Jesus Christ; love is the great mover in the soule, which carries it out in all its actions. Vers. 18. May be able to comprehend with all Saints what is the edth and length, and height and depth] The Apostle sets out Christs love with heigth and depth,B. Andrews. Naturalists give us but three dimensi∣ons of a body, longitude, la∣titude, and profundity; the love of God hath altitude added, which is a erth. length and bredth, the four dimensions of the Crosse; to put us in mind (say the ancient Writers) that upon the extent of the Tree was the most exact love, with all the di∣mensions in this kind represented, that ever was. Vers. 19. To know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge] Christ love is great, 1. Because the love of all relations (as a Head, Lord, Father, King, Husband,) meets in Christs love to his Church. 2. It was the love of God and therefore, infinite, from everlasting. 3 It hath no motive: Christ loves because he loves,Videri potest Apostolus respi∣cere ad Gnosti∣cos, qui hoc superbo nomine sese nuncupaverunt à scientia quam sibi peculiariter vendicabant. Vtitur enim vocabulo , unde . Estius. vide plura Ibid. He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy. 4. He loves without measure, it is not provoked by un∣kindnesse; yet we may know more of this love of Christ though we cannot know it all. Filled with all the fulnesse of God] Desire,An Hebraisme. The Hebrews when they would set out any excellent thing, they adde the Name of God to it; Cedars of God, wrestlings of God. God appoints not onely the persons unto glory, but that fulnesse of grace which shall fit them for glory, Ephes. 4.13. Two things conduce to our happinesse in Heaven; 1. All our faculties shall be enlarged. 2. All our graces perfected. 1. To be filled with knowledge of all the will of God, Col. 1.9. 2. To have a more full repaire of the Image of God in you, 2 Pet. 1.4 3. In regard of your influences from God and enjoyment of him; here we enjoy him in creatures, ordinances; in Heaven we shall enjoy him immediately. Vers. 20. That is able to doe exceeding abundantly] in the Greek it is, to doe above all super abundantly. Vers. 21. Unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus &c.] Christ is a Mediator to us two waies: 1. As in him God the Father loved us, elected us, redeemed us;Zanchius. Lastly in and by him he bestows all good things upon us 2. As we by him have accesse to the Father; therefore the Church was ever wont to conclude her prayers, per Chri∣stum Dominum nostrum, by Christ our Lord. As it was the custome in the Church to pray, so also to give thanks to God by Christ, Rom. 1.8 & 7.25.Grotius. CHAP. IV. Vers. 1. PRisoner of the Lord] Or, in the Lord, in the cause of the Lord. See Ch. 3 v. 1. He was an Apostle thirty five or thirty six yeers; for the last eight or ten he was a prisoner, and wrote severall Epistles. That ye walk worthy of the vocation] Sutable to the purity and dignity of it. It is a holy and high calling, 1 Thess. 2.2.When Ati∣gonus was go∣ing into the house of a Harlot, one said, O remember that thou art a Kings sonne. Called] 1. To holinesse, to act it, 1 Thess. 4.7. 2. To glory, to enjoy it, 1 Pet. 5.10. 3. Peace, Col. 3.15. Vers. 3. Endeavouring] Studentes, Beza. Soliciti, Junius. Calvin and Vulg. using all possible carefulnesse. It is therefore first a difficult matter; secondly, of great con∣cernment. Verses 4, 5, 6. There is one body and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your Calling. One Lord, one faith, one baptisme, one God, and one Father of all, &c.] Here are seven ones together in two or three lines, to be an argument of unity. This is one of the most famous Scriptures for the union of Saints that we have
in all the book of God. Sith they have all one Father, and so are brethren; sith they have all one head, which is Christ, and so are fellow members of the same body; sith they are led all by one Spirit, sith they hope all for one Heaven, bear all one badge of baptism, are knit all by one bond of faith to Christ, and one another: therefore they should be at peace among themselves. Vers. 5. One faith] By one faith is there meant one Religion and Doctrine of salva∣tion,Perkins. Fides una re∣spectu non sub∣jectorum, gra¦duum, sed speciel, objecti, finis. 1 Tim. 1.19. The faith of the elect is but one; 1. In respect of the kind of it, being a justifying fath. 2. The object of it, which is one Christ. 3. The end salva∣tion, Iude 3. Vers. 6. Who is above all, and through all, and in you all] That is, the Lord is in all his Saints by his speciall grace; he passeth through every thing by his common pro∣vidence, his eyes run through the earth, and he is above all, looking what secrets are in mans heart▪ one that stands on high and looks over all that is below, can easily see whatsoever is done. Captivitas hic nomen est colle∣ctinum pro ho∣stibus captivis. Calvinus. Perkins.Vers. 8. Lead captivity captive] By captivity is meant sinne and Satan, which did and doe lead men captive into perdition. 2. Death and the grave, which held him captive, and in bondage for the space of three daies; he leads them all captive 1. in himselfe, triumphing over them; 2. In his members, subduing and weakning their power. Gave, gifts unto men] It is he received gifts, Psal. 67. the Apostle sheweth where∣fore Christ received gifts,Dr. Fulke in his preface to his defence of the English tran∣slation against Martin. viz. to bestow them on his Church; or else Christ gave of his own and received none, and so the Apostle shewes the excellency of the truth above the figure, Christ above David; what those gifts are, is expressed in the eleventh verse; not bare qualifications of men, but officers. Singular and speciall gifts as tokens of his favour, such as Princes bestow upon the day of their solemne Inaugu∣ration. Vers. 9. What is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth] Some interpret it of Christs incarnation, in allusion to that of the Psalme, lower parts of the earth,Hoc est, ad sub∣terraneum re∣ceptaculum ani∣marum. Bellar. Calvin. Bezae, Marlorati una eademque est sententia; viz. Christum descendisse è Caelis in terram, id est in hanc vitae conditionem nostram. Vel è Coelli in uterum. Vide Bezam. meaning the wombe; so they say, Christ descended to take our nature of the Virgins womb; but seeing that the descending into the lower parts of the earth is opposed unto his ascending into Heaven, some conceive by the lowest parts of the earth is meant hell, as the lowest degree of Christs abasement set against the highest degree of his glory. Vers. 10. Far above all Heavens] That is, all visible Heavens, Extra mundum hunc creatum. Calvin. Vers. 11. And some Pastors and Teachers] Pastors to instruct in righteousnesse, for the maintenance of purity in manners; and Teachers to maintaine the purity of do∣ctrine in soundnesse of judgement.Pastores & Do∣ctores idem esse nonnulli volunt, idque quòd A∣postolus in eo contextu ad Ephes. non dicit Christum dedisse alios Pastores & alios Doctores: quasi posterius nomen sit prioris explicatio. Sed credo illos falli. Quasi verò in hac brevi ministrorum Ecclesiasticorum descriptione admitti debeant synonima. Voces certè diversa habent significata, nam doctor est qui tantum docet. Pastor, qui regit, gubernatque ecclesiam, nimirum non tantum docendo, sed etiam arguendo, conso∣lando, sacramenta dispensando, orando, invisendo familias, arcendo lupos, invigilando gregi, denique patrem agendo. Ergo Pastores sunt ii, quos vocamus, am ministros Ecclesiae, & imprimis superintendentes seu Episcopos. Doctores sunt qui in scholis puram tradunt doctrinam veramque sacrarum literarum interpretationem; talis fuit Origines in schola Alexandrina & Clemens-Alexandrinus. Zanchius in quartum praeceptum & in loc. Vide Calvinum. So Mr. Perkins. Jerome, Augustine, Chrysostome, Theodoret thinks the Apostle expressed one office Bilsons perfect government: of the Church. by two names, to shew what thing belonged to the Pastorall charge. Implying that the scope of the ministery is to bring and preserve all the members of the Church in this unity of faith and know∣ledge. Vers. 14. That we henceforth be no more tossed about with every wind of doctrine] Their instability is expressed in two metaphors,  tossed to and fro; the former
is drawn from a wave of the Sea (for  is a wave) and so it denotes an uncertain man which fluctuates in opinion, and is explained to the full Iames 1.6.Vide Grotium. Dabus meta∣phois eleganter miseram eorum trepidationem exprimit, qui solide non recumbunt in verbum Domini. Primùm naviculis facit similes, quae medio in mari variis fluctibus jactatae, certum cursum non tenent: nec arte aut consilio reguntur, sed abripiuntur quocunque impetus tulit. Deinde comparat eos vel stipulis, vel aliis rebus infirmis, quae pront se ventus moverit, agitantur hec & illuc, & saepe in contrarias partes. Calvinus. The latter from a light cloud swimming in the ayre, , and carried about in a circle, having no weight in it, and may well be expressed by that of Iude 12. The slight]  Graeca vox est, sed Thalmudicis quoque & Rabbinis frequens; Et quia in alcae Iudo solent simpliciores circumveniri, ideo ad quamvis cir∣cumventionem haec vox tranferri solet. Grotius. signifies cogging with a Die, such slights as they use at Dice. Cunning craftinesse] , they watch all advantages. Lie in waight to deceive] . they have all the arts of consenage. Paul hath heapes of words to expresse this Serpentine quality of sinne by cogging and cheating. Vers. 15. Speaking the truth] So it is used Gal. 4.16. Others, doing or following the truth, Iohn 4.21. Truthifying, or following the truth. Veritatem sectantes. Vulg. Calvin. Vers. 16. Fitly joyned together] that phrase importeth that the erroneous are like a bone out of joynt, it will cost many an hearty groan before they be reduced to their right place. Vers. 17. Walk not as other Gentiles walke] viz. Unconverted Gentiles; doe not imi∣tate them from whom you have made so happy a departure. In the vanity of their mind]  the mind is the seat of principles, of supreame pri∣mitive and undenied truths; but saith he, their minds are destitute of all Divine and Spirituall truths. Vers. 18. Having the understanding darkned]  the reasoning and discursive faculty; the understanding is the seat of conclusions, and that is unable to deduce from Spirituall principles (if there were any in their minds) such sound and divine conclusions, as they are apt to beget. Being alienated from the life of God] That is, the life which God allows of, and which his children live by. Grace is called the life of God, or a godly life.à vita quae se∣cundum Deum est, & quam Dei leges praescri∣bunt. Estius. 1. Because it is from God as the Authour. 2. It is according to God as the pattern. 3. Unto God as the end. They are not onely strangers to it (for so all men are naturally) but estranged, that is, an enemy thereunto, as the Apostle expounds it Col. 2.21. Vers. 22. According to the deceitfull lusts]  according to the lusts of deceitfulnesse, because lust hath a deceit in it, it draws us from God.Secundum desi∣deria erroris. Vulg. Vers. 23. In the Spirit of your mind] in the most pure and Spirituall part of the soule. Vers. 26. Be angry and sinne not] Let us seek matter of anger in our selves rather then others, be angry with our own faults.Proverbialis di∣cendi figura, qua significatur iracundiam pri∣mo quoque tem∣pore coercendam. Deut. 24.23. Beza. Leontius Patricius was one day extreamly and unreasonably angry with Iohn the Patriarch of Alexandria; at evening the Patriarch sent a servant to him with this message, Sir, the Sunne is set: upon which Patricius reflecting, and the grace of God making the impression deep, he threw away his anger, and became wholy subject to the councell of the Patriarch, Taylors life and death of Christ. Let not the Sunne go down upon your wrath] He seems there to allude to that Law recorded by Moses, whereby it was provided that the malefactor which had been hangd before the Sunne should be taken down from the Tree before the Sunne went down; so wrath, anger, must be dismist, and not suffered to lie down with us. Vers. 27. Neither give place to the Divell] Therefore the Divell doth stirre up anger. Vers. 28. Working with his hands in the thing which is good] In some lawfull and Chri∣stian calling. A good thing must be honestum & utile, an honest and profitable good thing. Vers. 29. No corrupt communication] The Greek word properly signifieth that
which is rotten, Col. 4.6. the Apostle exhorteth to the contrary, Let your speech be alwaies with grace, seasoned with Salt; Salt is a preservative against rotten∣nesse. Vers. 30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God] The holy Ghosts person is set forth in the Greek with very great energy, such as our tongue is not able to expresse it fully; three words have three articles, every word his severall Article by it selfe, , the Spirit, not a Spirit; and not holy, but the holy; nor of God, but of that God. The holy Ghost is compared to a guest, and our bodies and soules unto Innes: and as men use their guests friendly and corteously, so should we such a guest, not grieve him,Tertul. Delicata res est Spiritus Dei; muchlesse resist, quench, or vex him, 1 Thess. 5.19, 20. Acts 7.51. Esay 63.10. This phrase is not to be understood properly but tropi∣cally, because the holy Ghost is uncapable of griefe or passion; we grieve the Spirit when by sinne we hinder the powerfull working of it. Sealed unto the day of redemption] A metaphor (saith Zanchy) from Merchants who having bought such goods, seale them as their own, that so they may transport them. Glory is here called redemption; there is a twofold redemption, 1. From our sinnes, 2. From our imperfections, Heb. 9.28. Vers. 32. Be ye kind] This word  is used of things and persons. Being used of things, it signifies both facilitie, Matth. 11.30. and utility, Luke 5.39. Being used of persons it signifies one that is desirous to doe well, and ready to gratifie. It is given to God Luke 6.35. 1 Pet. 2.3. and to men in this place. Tender-hearted] , well of bowels. The first word is opposed to anger, this to bitternesse.Quasi honorum viscerm. Respondet Hebraeo Racham, quod significat ex intimis visceribus misereri ut omnia viscera videantur commoveri-dolore & commiseratione miseriae proximi. à Lapide. CHAP. V. Imitatores Dei Calv. & alii. Liberorum est patrem moribus reserre. Grotius.Vers. 1. BE you therefore followers of God] , imitaters of God. As deare children]  as beloved children, (ut filii di∣lecti, Beza) viz of God. Vers. 2. Walk in love] A Christian should be so moulded into a loving temper, as all his actions should savour of love, his counsels, punishments. As Christ also hath loved us] 1 By way of motive, Christ hath loved us. 2. By way of pattern, as he hath loved us. And hath given himselfe for us] He doth not say, hath redeemed us, but given him∣selfe for us,The way to know whether Christ hath given himselfe for us is this: if he have given himselfe to us; to us in sanctification if for us in justification. Iohn 3.8, 9. and for our sinnes, as Gal. 4. to shew how he gave himselfe for us, quate∣nus sinners. An offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savour] An offering and sacri∣fice, to shew the compleatnesse of it, wherein God was well pleased and satisfied. The first word comprehends all Sacrifices, the latter signifies a bloody one. They used Incense called suffius in burning their sacrifices. To this the Apostle al∣ludes here. Vers. 3. But fornication and all uncleanesse, or covetousnesse, let it not be once named amongst you as becommeth Saints] Fornication, uncleanesse and covetousnesse are 1. Contrary to the very disposition and Spirit of a Saint, his new nature. 2. Pet. 1.4.2 To the dignity and priviledge of a Saint; his body is a Temple for the ho∣ly Spirit to dwell in, and all things are his, 1 Cor. 3.21. A Covetous man above
other sinners is called an Idolater here vers. 5. And in the Colos. (though there bee Idolatry in other sinnes) in a peculiar way. 1. In regard of the object,Nisi philosopho∣rum quidam Cynicus extitis∣set, qui doceret omnem titillati∣onem carnis & fluxum seminis ex qualicumque attritu tactuque venientem, in tempore non vitandum, & nonnulli sapientes saeculi in hanc tur∣pem & erubescendam haeresim consensissent, nunquam Sanctus Apostolus scribens ad Ephesios, ad fornicationem etiam omnem im∣munditiam copulasset. Hieron. in loc. he sets up his Gold instead of God. 2. Bestowes the disposition, and affection of his soule, which are proper to God; he loves it, rejoyceth in, and trusteth in it. Not named] With allowance, with any extenuation, but with some detestation. Vers. 4. Jesting] Scurrility, or scurrilous jesting, unworthy of a grave man. nativa sua significati∣one. Hic non intelligitur  illa, quae virtus est & urbanitas dicitur Latins, de qua Aristoteles. 4. Ethic. 8. The Greeke word signifies the handsome turning, or changing of a word, and is made a morall virtue by Aristotle; but because men are apt to exceed in jesting, it is here taken in an evill sense. Vers. 15. See then that ye walke circumspectly] The Apostle meanes in a spirituall sense the whole course of our life; here are foure things. 1. A living man having a locomotive faculty, one alive to God. 2. Terminus à quo, sinne. 3. Terminus ad quem, to God, Christ, Heaven. 4. Medium, or the path to walk in, the will of God. Vers. 16. Redeeming the time, because the dayes are evill] Seeing what is past cannot be recalled; then recompence the losse of it, by the well bestowing of time to come. Redeeme] Improve to the best advantage of glorifying God, and getting good to our selves and others.To redeeme is to purchase or buy as Trades∣men in the Market.The time] that is, season.The Children of God while time, meanes, health, and life, and liberty is afforded unto them, should store themselves with faith and ability against evill dayes. Mr. Hooker. The time] Greek, the opportunity or season, any opportunity for doing any businesse, more peculiarly the fitnesse of opportunity, in regard of the Gospell shining. Because the dayes are evill] That is, full of troubles and afflictions. Vers. 18. And be not drunke with wine, wherein is excesse] Doe not take in too much of the creature;  rendred excesse, signifies two things, excesse in expences opposite to frugality, and excesse in delights (whether it be in meats, or drinkes, or the like) opposite unto temperance; and it signifies these vices in an extremity. But be filled with the Spirit] q. d. drinke as liberally and largely of this as you will, here is no excesse to be feared.Opponit res in aliquo similes: illi vino implen∣tur: vos Spiri∣tu: illud illis gaudium parit: hoc verò quantò justius vobis? Grotius. Superfluit Sancto quamvis subintelligatur, saith Cajetane. Be ye filled] That is labour for abundance of the Spi∣rit that the Spirit may abundantly dwell in you. Spirit] viz. the holy spirit, so the vulgar, Spiritu Sancto, though (as Erasmus noteth) none of the Ancients read it so besides, yet the sense is rightly expressed; that is, with the gifts and graces of the Spirit; one is said to be full of that which he possesseth in great measure, as full of wealth, wit. See Rom. 15.14. and Acts, 6.3.5. Vers. 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalmes, and hymnes, and spirituall songs] Our Songs must be spirituall. 1. For matter, not prophane. 2. They must proceed from Gods Spirit, as the Author of them.See v. 17. and Psal. 37.4. 3. Must be framed with honest and gracious words beseeming the Spirit. 4. To a spirituall end. 1. Gods glory. 2. Our own and others edification; to the Lord, that is, before the Lord. Vers. 21. Submitting your selves one to another in the feare of God] This is a generall to the particulars that follow. First, an exhortation. Secondly, a direction. Vers. 22. Wives submit your selves unto your own husbands] The duties of husband and wife are laid down first, 1. Because God made them first. 2. They are the chiefest in the family. The Apostle begins with wives, as he doth in the Colossians, and in Peter, because she is the inferiour; and it is the Apostles order to beginne alwayes with the duties of the inferiour; and this order is observed in the fifth Commandement. 1. Because the inferiour is the lother to subject himselfe to his place. 2. Because it
will fare worse with inferiours, if there be strife who shall begin. Submit] , The word being of the meane voyce, may be translated either passively (be ye subject) or actively,Subditae sint. Hieron. Vet. Transl. Eras. Subjicite vos. Beza. submit your selves. Unto your owne husbands] ) which words containe two things. 1. That wives ought to have but one husband, 1 Cor. 7.2. 2. That this subjection is to be performed to him alone, for∣bidding all submission to adulterers; commanding chaste and faithfull obedience unto him. As unto the Lord] That is, to Christ Jesus: for this word is by a kind of excel∣lency appropriated unto him; and it is so expounded 6. Ch. 5. v. Vers. 23. For the husband is the head of the wife] For shewes this verse is a reason of the duty;The husband is called the vaile of his wife: which as it im∣plies subjection on her part, so protection on his, Gen. 20.16. 1 Cor. 11.10. and a husband must have a provident care to save his wife, as Christ his Church. This is metaphorically spoken, in allusion to a generall body, that is, the husband by reason of his place, is more eminent; he is to protect, defend, and go∣vern his wife. The Members are subject to the head, without reasoning. Particula  significat similitudinem non aequalitatem; & compararem cum re non autem modum cum modo; quia alio & praestantiori modo Christus est caput Ecclesiae quam vir uxoris suae. Zanchius. Even as Christ is the head of the Church.] And he is the Saviour of the body] He meanes it exclusively, of none but those who appertaine to the body, and are Members thereof. A Saviour , Grecians say this Greeke word cannot be fully expressed in Latine, signifying as much as a most abso∣lute deliverer from all dangerer and evill whatsoever, Matth. 1.21. Vers. 24. Therefore as the Church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be to their own husbands in every thing] Here is another reason, and another rule; as the Church is the manner; in every thing shewes the extent. The wife should subject her selfe to her husband, as the Church to Christ; such a subjection as the Church performeth to Christ, ought the wife to performer to her husband; cheerefull, ready, constant subjection. Jn every thing] Lawfull and honest. Verse 25. And gave himselfe for it] Greek gave himself willingly, he was a price and satisfaction,Gave himselfe] That is, his life and bloud; and purged it with water through the word. the end of Christs giving up; and himselfe was our justification, and san∣ctification. Vers. 27. That he might present it to himselfe a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle,Sicuti formae elegantia in uxore causa est amoris, ita Christus Eccle∣siam sponsom suam ornat sanctitate, ut sit hoc benevo∣lentiae pignus. Calvinus. or any such thing] Ob. 64. Esay 6. Sol. These places are both true, the Prophet speakes of the Church Militant; the Apostle of the Church Triumphant. The word present is taken from the custome of solemnizing a marriage: first the spouse was woed, and then set before her husband, that he might take her to wife, to be with him. Gen. 2.22. Esth. 2.13. Vers. 29. But nourisheth and cherisheth it] These two words  and  (to nourish and cherish) comprize under them, a carefull providing of all things needfull for a mans body; to nourish is properly to feed; to cherishProprie dici∣tur de gallina fovente ova quum illis incubat. The metaphore is taken from Birds which hover their wings over their young ones, or that sit upon their Egges. They doe it tenderly. is to keepe warme; the former is done by food; the lattet by apparell. 1 Tim. 6.8. Vers. 31. Shall be joyned unto his wife] He shall be glewed to her, as two bords are joyned together with glew.Agglutinabi∣tur] Firmis∣simè adhaere bit, ut quae sunt glutine compacta & conjuncta, Matth. 19.5. Drus. in Parallel. Sac. They two shall be one flesh] Our English cannot well expresse the Greeke in good sense word for word; which is thus, they two shall be into, or in one flesh; they which were two before marriage, by the bond of marriage, are brought into one flesh, to bee even as one flesh.
Vers. 32. This is a great mystery] The Papists make marriage a Sacrament. The vulgar Latine translation first led them into this errour;Quam vocem vulgatus inter∣pres tum hic tum alibi vertit Sacramentum] Sed propriè ar∣canum vel secre∣tum reddere de∣buit, juxta pro∣priam ac nati∣vam ejus voca∣buli significatio∣nem, ac proinde manifesta inscitia est ex maia versione velle hic novū Sacramentū cudere: quin ergo etiam ipsam incarnationem Christi, atque ipsam quoque praedestinationem Dei dicant esse Sacramenta propriè dicta  nam utrumque similiter Apostolus vocat , & in u∣troque loco vocem illam per Sacramentum vertit interpres vulgatus, 1 Tim. 3. & Ephes. 1. Adde quod totum illud de Sacramen∣to sive mysterio in hoc loco ad Ephesios 5. non intelligit Apostolus de matrimonio corporali sed de Ecclesia 32. v. Laurentius. for it translateth the word mystery here a Sacrament. But 1. A translation is no sufficient ground to prove a doctrine. 2. The word Sacrament hath as large an extent as a mystery. Vers 33. And the wife see that shee reverence her husband] As if he had said of all things, let her most carefully labour not to faile in this point of duty; the wife] that is, every wife; see] that is, carefully looke to it and not make shifts or excuses; feare or reverence] not as men doe a Lyon or Bear, run from them, but fear to offend him; let her not dare to displease him. Reverence him, an affection compounded of love, fear and desire, love to his person, fear of offending him, and desire to please, content, and satisfie him. CHAP. VI. Vers. 1. CHildren obey your Parents in the Lord] Inferiours duties are usually laid down first, because 1. They are unwilling. 2. May win superiours. your] restrained onely to their own Parents. Parents] In the plurall number meaning both sexes; the former word  chil∣dren is in the newter gender, including male and female, sonne and daughter, under obedience all duties are comprehended. In the Lord] A phrase used also, 1 Cor. 7.39. and it may be taken. 1. As a note of direction in obedience of God. 2. As a note of limitation, that it extend not to any thing against the will of God. For this is right] 1. According to Law. 2. By way of recompence. Vers. 2. Honour] All inferiours are comprised under one kinde, and all their du∣ty under this one terme, Honour. 1. Inward estimation. 2. Outward submission. 3. Maintenance; Parents bear Gods Image, and the Mother is subject to contempt. The first Commandement with promise] First is used in Scripture, where there is no second, 1 Matth. 25. The first Commandement of those which concerne our duty to men, with a speciall promise annexed to it. Vers. 3. That it may be well with thee, and thou maist live long on the earth] It is fit and just that he which honours those from whom he hath received his life, should have his temporall life prolonged. V. 4. Bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord] This phrase (to translate it word for word) nourish them in discipline or instruction, implyeth as much as if he had said, nourish and nurture them, or feed and instruct them. Vers. 5. Your Masters according to the flesh] Or outward man, not the Spirit. Se∣condly to be obeyed accordingly in civill and carnall things; as the dominion of one is bounded, so the subjection of the other. With feare and trembling] Feare signifies a reverend respect of one, it is that which was required of wives. 5. Chap. 33. v. trembling is more proper to servants,Jd est, cum magna solicitu∣dine. Sic enim & alibi utitur hac phrasi; ut 1 Cor. 2. & 2 Cor. 7. & Phil. 2. Estius. it is a dread of punishment. Vers. 9. Yee Masters doe the same things unto them] A strange speech,Eadem dicit non opere aut offici∣o, sed modo & proportione. Estius. but the mean∣ing is, that they also in their carriage toward their servants in doing the duties of ma∣sters, must doe it as unto the Lord as 5. v. that is, both the servants and Masters care in their mutuall duties one to another, must chiefely be this to please and approve themselves unto God. Mr. Hilderson. Vers. 11. Against the wiles of the Devill]  against the stratagemes of
the Devill; sig∣nificat afluta hominum stratagemata, quibus adversarios aggrediuntur, ex ea porte qua minimè pertimescendum erat. Methodici enim sunt ingenioso. Alardi Pa∣thologia N. T. for it signifies properly an ambushment, or stratageme of warre; whereby the Enemy sets upon a man ex insidijs at unawares; denoting the specious and faire pretences of false teachers. Vers. 12. Darknesse] Some expound it of unregenerate men, some of sinne. Spirituall wickednesse] Or spiritualls of wickednesse, as it is in the originall, most monstrous vile, malitious wicked spirits. In high places] The originall word signifies heavenly, in heavenly things, or places the word , here used is translated heavenly things, 1. Ch. 3. or places; the Devills have their abode in the ayre. Vers. 13. Evill day] That is, The time of temptation, because then Satan tempts us to evill;Beza translates it tempore ad∣verso. See 41. Psal. 1. and because it is a time of trouble or affliction. And having done all to stand] Or having overcome all, brake the strength of your enemies. A foure sold truth is here meant, 1. Of judgement and opinion. 2. Of heart and affe∣ction. 3. Of words. 4. Of deeds and actions.Vers. 14. Having your loynes girt about with truth] In the Loynes is strength, Job. 40.16. In them also is the power of generation, Gen. 35.11. This metaphore applied to the minde denotes strength, steadinesse and constancy. Truth is compared to a girdle, or a Souldiers belt, whereby they knit together, and close unto their middle, the up∣per and lower pieces of their Armour; these belts as they were strong, so they were set with studs, being faire. This girdle hath these uses, 1. It doth adorne, for this was the use of the studded belt, which Souldiers did were to hide the gaping joynts of their armour, which would have beene unseemely, for sincerity adorneth the soule, 1 Iohn. 4.7. 2. A girdle doth keep the severall pieces of ar∣mour fast and close together; so the girdle of truth containes and holds together all other graces. 3. It strengthens a man by trussing up the loynes moderately, Esay 23.10. and 22.21. Prov. 31.17. whence that frequent exhortation gird up thy loynes, Ier. 1.17. Iob. 38.3.20. and 40.7. 2 Kings 4.29. and 2 Kings 9.1. So this grace ad∣deth great strength to the Inner man, Iob. 27.5.4. In the Eastern Countries they us'd to gird up themselves close to the body, when they had any journey, combate, or labour in hand, least their long garments should be an impediment to them, 1 Kings 18.46. So to have their loynes girt, is to be fitted and prepared for any service, travell, or conflict, as Luke 12.35. 1 Pet. 1.13. Act. 12.8. So Christians girded with truth, are in readinesse for any spirituall duty, and to encounter with any adversary power. Brest-plate Alludes to Esay 59.17. It is used also for that piece of the armour which covereth this part. The use of a Brest-plate is to keep the vitall parts from being mortally wounded,; that a man be not stricken down without recovery; so righteousnesse the soule.] The word  here used, signifies the part of the body wherein are contained the vitall parts, the heart, lungs, liver, which being wounded theres no hope of life. His meaning is, that when once wee are assured of our peace, and reconciliation with God which is wrought by the Gospell; then are wee prepared to follow Christ through the most hard and stony, the most sharp and thor∣ny way of any trouble whatsoever. This preparation is that furniture which the Gospell of peace prescribes unto us, and which it works in us, viz. a heart settled and resolved to goe boldly thorow all troubles. Hieron. In omnibus. Beza insuper super omnia Erasmus.Vers 16. Above all] The originall phrase  is diversly translated, in all, as if he had said, in all things whatsoever you doe, use the shield of faith: to all, as if he had said, to all other graces adde this; above all, as we translate it. All these in effect imply one and the same thing; onely this latter is some what more emphaticall, and as proper as any of the rest; it is somewhat like to that Hebrew phrase, Prov. 14.23. The shield of faith]  a shield à  (say some) a door, or gate; it signifieth a long, broad, large shield, wherewith the whole body was covered. Bochartus Geograph. Sac l. c. 42. saith it is a barbarous word. 1 Because no Graecian used it before Poly∣bius, who lived long among the Carthaginians. 2. The Graecians reckon it among the Armes of the Barbarous. The Apostle alludes to the custome of old; for when they dipped the heads of their
in poison and shot them at their enemies, they fired their flesh; but souldiers then had shields made of raw Neats Leather (as Polybius and Vegetius testifie) and when the fiery darts lighted upon them, they were presently quenched; so these fiery tentations of Satan, when they hit the shield of Faith, are presently quenched. Vers. 17. The Sword of the Spirit] Because it is directed immediately by the Spirit, and because this Sword pierceth to the heart. Vers. 18. Praying alwaies] not by fits and starts; be alwaies in a praying frame, and actually pray on occasion. in every sea∣son; as any just occasion is offered, we must pray. With all prayer and supplication] According as our own and the Churches various necessities shall require. In the Spirit That is, either the soule of a man, to pray with the heart, or else by the holy Ghost, as Jude, that is, prayer must be the worke of Gods Spirit stirring holy desires.] fervently and not formally, and with lip-labour onely; watching thereunto against distractions and wandring thoughts, with all perseverance holding out, and not giving over when we speed not at first. Watching] The Greek word is a metaphor taken from hunting-dogges, that never leave following the sent, till they have gotten the game. Vers. 20. In Bonds] Or, word for word, in a chain, . At Rome (where Paul was a prisoner) such prisoners as had liberty to goe abroad, had a long chaine, Beza & Gro∣tius in loc. Dr. Gouge. Vide Grotium in Act. 28.16. the one end whereof was fastned to their right hand, and the other end was tied to a Souldiers left hand, so as a prisoner could goe no whether without a Souldier, who was to be a keeper to him. Thus it is likely that St. Paul was chained, for he mentions here but one chain, in the singular number. Vers. 23. Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith from God the father, and the Lord Jesus Christ] The Apostle prayes that they may have faith with both peace and love from the Father and Christ; that is, from God as an efficient cause thereof, and from Christ as a meritorious cause.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to the PHILIPPIANS. CHAP. I. PHilippi a principall Town in Macedonia took its name from Philip King of Macedon the founder of it,Est haec Epi∣stola, quanquam & ipsa Romae in vinculis scripta, laetior alacriorque & blandior caete∣ris ideo quod Philippis, quae urbs praecipua est Macedoniae & Colonia, his fuisset Paulus Act. 16. & 20. & bene successisset ibi Pauli praedicatio. Grotius. saith Estius. See Acts 16.12. Vers. 1. The Servants of Jesus ChristPlus certè est esse servum alicujus, quam ministrum; ministri vocantur etiam illi qui ad certum tempus, in certo officio & pro certa mercede alicui ministrant, & serviunt, ut ministri principum: sed servi illi propriè dicebantur, qui toti quanti quanti erant, alicuterant obstricti corpore in perpetuum: in quos Domini jus habebant vitae & necis, & quicquid lucrabantur totum illud reddebant dominis, tanquam illorum, & non suum: quorum denique erat nihil agere nisi ex praescripto & voluntate Dominorum. Hoc igitur epi∣thecon docet speciatim ministros verbi quid sui sit officii: Peculiari quadam ratione toti sunt obstricti Christo: ut ab ejus ore semper sit illis pendendum: Et non quae sua sunt, sed tantum quae Iesu Christi in suo ministerio quaerant, ut de Timotheo praedi∣cat Apostolus c. 2. Zanchius.] The name servant here is a Title of honour; as in other Epistles Paul cals him∣selfe an Apostle, so here he cals himselfe a servant: A servant of Christ therefore is the same with an Apostle of Christ. à Lapide. All the Saints] All those which were called out of the world to Christ, and have given their names to Christ, and were sealed by baptisme, and have not by a manifest apostasie fallen from Christ and his Church, are comprehended by the Apostle under the name of Saints. With the Bishops and Deacons] By those the word, Sacraments and Discipline; by these Almes were administred. Calvin hence notes, that Bishop and Pastor are Syno∣nima; and that the name of Bishop is common to all the Ministers of the Word, when here are many Bishops belonging to one Church. Postea (saith he) invaluit usus, ut quem suo collegio praeficiebant in singulis Ecclesiis Presbyteri, Episcopus vocaretur salus; id tamen ex hominum consuetudine natum est, scripturae authoritate minime nititur. Dr. Airay speaks almost to the same purpose. Estius seems to oppose this opinion of Calvins. See him and à Lapide. Vers 6. That he which hath begun a good work in you] , that he which hath in began a good work in you; for the work is wholly in∣ward and spirituall. Vers 7. I have you in my heart] That is, you are most deare and precious to me. Q Mary said Calice was in her heart, and there they should finde it if they ope∣ned her. Vers. 8. In the bowels of Iesus Christ] This phrase hath according to Interpreters two meanings.Vide Conel. à Lap. First, (in the bowels of Christ) is taken causally, as if he meant to shew that those bowels of compassions were infused into him from Christ, and so he longed after them with such kind of bowels as Christ had wrought in him. Or else secondly, in the bowels, is put for (instar) like the bowels, or after the bowels, accor∣ding
to the analogy of the Hebrew phrase, and then the meaning is this, Like as the bowels of Jesus Christ doe yearn after you, so doe mine.Viscera pro in∣timo cerdis af∣fectu & amore posuit hic Apostolus; sensus est, se ex intimo cordis affectu illos amare & desiderare; significat qualitatem sui amoris, eam esse spiritualem fundatam in Christo. Zanchius. Bowels are a metaphor to signifie tender and motherly affection and mercy, Luke 1.78, Vers. 9. Abound] The Greek word  signifies exundare & redundare, to over∣flow; a bubling fountaine keeps not the water in it selfe, but sending it forth it flows out to others, that every one may partake of its water; so charity is said to abound, or overflow, when it is so kindled in the heare both toward God and our neigh∣bour, especially toward the Saints, and toward all other men, even enemies, that it abundantly communicates it selfe both in friendly offices and benefits to all both ab∣sent and present. The Apostle wished three things from God to the Philippians, in∣crease of charity, increase of knowledge of Divine things, and of Spirituall sense, that is, of experimentall knowledge of Christian matters. Yet more and more] More and more notes the quantity, yet the perseverance of it; in knowledge, that is, in knowing all truths, say some; a full and solid knowledge, but not of all things. Calvin. And in all judgement] That is, in particular; for judgement is taken first for par∣ticular acts of the same, and for the working of those things upon themselves which they do know; and secondly, for the sense and taste in their hearts of what they know, for the word is . Vers. 12. The things which hapned unto me] that is, the troubles he had in carrying on his Apostleship. Vers. 13. So that my bonds in In Christo posuit, pro in negotio, vel in causa Christi; significat enim illustria fuisse sua vincula ad provebendum Christi honorem. Calvinus. Christ are manifest in all the Palace] Pauls Iron chaine was more glorious then all the Golden chains in Nero's Pallace. Vers. 14. And many of the brethren in the Lord waxing confident by my bonds, &c.] Many Christians that were not so bold before, were encouraged by his sufferings. See Estius. Vers. 19. The supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ] We have the Spirit of God by con∣tinuall supplies, Adam received it all at once. Vers. 20. My earnest expectation and hope] to signifie the strongenesse and surenesse of his hope, both expressing thus much, that his hope was sure,Id est, prout expecto & spe∣ro. Vox Graeca  non qualemcun∣que expectationem significat, sed intensam & vehementem. Rom. 8.19. Estius. that he expected the thing he hoped for, as they that earnestly looking for a thing stretch out the head to look for it. Whether it be by life or by death] If I live by preaching, if I die by suffering. Vers. 23. In a strait] The sense is, I am drawn divers waies, this way with the de∣sire of Christ, that way with the love of the brethren, for whom my life in the flesh is yet necessary. Estius, à Lapide. A metaphor taken from the straitnesse of places, where we are intercepted by an enemy, or otherwise shut up, so that we cannot finde an issue. Having a desire] This is somewhat more then simply to desire, for it noteth a ve∣hement, earnest, and continued desire, a desire which is in action, and working till we have our desire accomplished; whereas to desire simply may be used for any motion. To depart]  in an active signification signifies to return, Luke 12.36. and properly agrees to Mariners steering their course thither whence they loose Anchor; and what is our whole life but a most dangerous Navigation? Vide Dilh. Eclog. Sac. Dictum quintum & 13. & à Lapide in loc. And to be with Christ] These two are to be read together;Desperati ad mortem confu∣giunt taedio vitae: fideles ad eam libenter properant, quia liberatio est à servitio peccati, & transitus in regnum coelorum. Calvinus. for death of it selfe should not be desired, because this desire crosseth nature; but for another end it may, viz. for conjunction with Christ. This place may confute the errour
of those who dreame that the soules separated from the bodies doe sleep. Vide Estium. Which is farre better] It is very significant in the originall, far much better, or much more better.Multo magis melius. Vulg. Valet multo melius. Beza. Multò longéque melius. Erasmus. Apostolus non simpliciter dixit multo melius, sed multo magis melius; Videlicet comparativum duplicans, ut vehementem excessum significaret q.d. multò longéque melius, aut infi∣nitis partibus melius, quam permanere in carne; ut hoc illius respectu ne desiderandum quidem sit. Estius. . Vers. 27. Let your conversation be &c.] The word used in the originall implieth, that they were Citizens of a City which is above and enforceth this construction; onely ye, as Citizens of an heavenly Ierusalem, carry your selves as it becommeth the Gospell of Christ; that is, so that your life be framed after the doctrine of the Gospell, and be answerable to your profession. The word signifies worthy of the Gospell; but this cannot be meant as if so be that our conversation should be such as deserves all the good that there is in the Gospell; it is as much as beseeming the Gospell, meet for the Gospell; bring forth fruits worthy of repentance, meet for repentance, such fruit as may manifest your repentance. This word is translated in another place convenient and meet.Mr. Burroughs in lec. That ye continue in one spirit] Or stand fast, for so the word signifieth; like unto good souldiers which yeeld no ground, but keep their standing. CHAP. II. Vers. 1. IF there be therefore any consolation in Christ if any comfort of love, if any fel∣lowship of the Spirit, if any bowels of mercies] This is a very patheticall ex∣hortation, in which he intreats the Philippians by all means to be at mutuall concord among themselves. Any consolation in Christ] So Chrysostome, Calvin, Beza, and others; Ambrose, exhor∣tation; it signifies both, but the first is most received here. Any comfort of love] That is, if you so love me, as you desire to bring any comfort to me in my afflictions.Id est, si quod solatium ex charitate profectum à vobis expectari potest. Estius. Any fellowship of the Spirit] As if he had said, you professe a communion and fel∣lowship, I adjure you by this fellowship which you professe to perform these duties of love. Bowels and mercies] Bowels are any affections; mercies are affections toward those that are in any calamity. Grotius. Vers. 2. Fulfill ye my joy] And your own joy, and the joy, of the Angels in Hea∣ven, and the joy of the Bride and Bridegroom. That you may be like minded] , unanimous, as the Vulgar and Beza read; of one accord or mind, yea una anima, as Iunius translates out of the Syriack, one soule; or as informed with one soule; that is, as one man in the matters of Gods worship. Vers. 3. Through strife or vain-glory] out of a desire to crosse or excell another. Those two are most hurtfull to the peace of the Church. In lowlinesse of mind] To both diseases he applies one remedy. That which the Apostle here commends, the morall Philosophers reckon as one of the most con∣temptible vices; but the Spirit of God here crosseth them; the word plainly signifies base-mindednesse, when a man is low, base, vile, and abject in his own conceit. Let each esteem other better then themselves] Non minus verè quàm humiliter, as Ber∣nard glosseth,Vide Zanchi∣um. because in some gift or other, at least in the measure or use another may be better then us. Vers. 4. Look not every man on his own things, but evey man also on the things of o∣thers] What will be for my profit or advantage,Nemo studeat privatis commo∣dis, sed omnium saluti. Estius. and not what will be for the publike and common good, and benefit of others also.
Vers. 6. Who being in the forme of God] There is not a little contestation with Arrians and Socinians (who deny the deitie and eternity of Christ) about the true meaning of those words, who being in the forme of God;Vide Grotium in loc. Causabone. Of Christs ex∣inanition. Ex obscurissimis sacrae scripturae locis hic merito locus censeatur. vix alius in disceptationibus cum Photinia∣nis, imò & Luthranis nobilior aut magis decantatus locus.  vel  (nam eadem esse nemo dubitat) haud rarò Graecis pro praeda aut spolus quae parta victoria aut expugnata urbe victoribus cedunt. Christus homo cum in terris ageret, non duxit sibi faciedum, ut numine suo ad óstentationem uteretur, sed contrà exinanitionis statum praetulit. Causab. de verborum usu Diatrib. and a great controversie concerning the right sense of those words, thought it not robbery; the Greek words im∣port, He made it not a matter of triumph or ostentation; by which interpretation the Orthodoxe sense of the former words is much confirmed where (saith Calvin) is there an equality with God without robbery, but in the onely essence of God? mihi certe (saith he) ne omnes quidem diaboli hunc locum extor queant. Vers. 7. But made himselfe of no reputation] Gr. he emptied himselfe, se exinanivit. Beza, ex omni seipsum ad nibil redegit, is learned Beza's exposition. He did disrobe himselfe of his glory; even emptied himselfe as it were of his divine dignity; to un∣dertake a base and humble condition for our sakes. Verses 7. and 8. And took upon him the forme of a Servant, and was made in the like∣nesse of men; and being found in fashion as a man] Here is liknesse, fashion and forme; by likenesse man is described, by fashion or shape, a man is pictured, and by forme a man is defined to be a perfect man. Vers. 8 He became obedient unto death, even the death Ne perderet obe∣dientiam perde∣dit vitam. Bernard. Perkins. The meaning is, that Jesus is the true God, and all crea∣tures should be subject to him as to the Fa∣ther; name is put for per∣son, bowing of the knee a bodily ceremony to expresse inward subjection. Estey. of the Crosse] Vers. 10. That at the name of Iesus every knee should bow] That is, at the considera∣tion of the great Majesty, whereto he is now exalted; every heart, even of the greatest Monarch should be touched with submission, and reverence. This is taken out of Esay 45.23. Shall give that glory to Christ in our humane nature, which is due to Iehovah. See Iohn 5.20, 21, 22, 23. Every Knee] That is, the whole man shall be subject to the authority of Christ; the heart to beleeve in him; the affections to close with him. Vers. 11. Every tongue shall confesse] That is avow him openly; every tongue shall speake out together, as the Greek word notes. V. 12. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling] Greek, work till you get the work Non dicit A∣postolus nudè  in quit Chrysosto∣mus sd  id est (ut ipse interpretatur) accuratè magnoque cum studio operamini. Syrus magis operamini opus vitae vestrae. thorow. Timor & tremor, Feare and trembling thus differ, that timor sit cor∣dis, tremor corporis, feare is of the heart, trembling of the body, as Haymo and the ordi∣nary glosse; and trembling is wont to be an effect of more vehement feare; but when they are joyned together, they signifie a solicitude of working, with a feare of offen∣ding, as 1 Cor. 2 3. 2 Cor. 7.15. Ephes. 6.5. Austen rightly observes, that the Apostle here alludes to the words of the Psalmist. 2. Psal. 11. Vers. 13 Both to will and to due] If both be his own workes,Duae sunt praeci∣puae partes in agendo, voluntas & potentia effectus; utramque in solidum Deo asserit; quid amplius nobis restat in quo gloriemur? Nec dubium est quin perinde valeat haec partitio, ac si Paulus uno verbo totum dixisset; voluntas enim fundamentum est; effectus, absoluta aedificij superficies. Ac multo plus expressit, quam si Deum initij & finis authorem dixisset; tunc enim cavillarentur Sophistae, aliquid medium relin∣qui hominibus, nunc autem quid omnino proprium nobis reperient? Calvinus. the desire as well as the deed, he must needs love and like both. Vers. 14. Without murmuring and disputings] That is grudging that he must pay this, or doe that; muttering and arguing why he should not doe it: murmurings are secret complaints one of another, like to the grunting of hogges;Zanchius. disputings are open contentious and quarrells. Vers. 15. That ye may be blamelesse and barmelesse, the Sons of God without rebuke] That ye may be the spotlesse sons of God, Greek, that is,Deut. 32.5. without all such spots as are inconsistent with your Sonnership. Vers. 17. Yea and if I be offered] Yea and though I be offered as a drinke offering,Heb. 13.16. Vide Bezam. upon, or for the sacrifice. Vers. 21. For all seeke their own, not the things which are Iesus Christs] All not col∣lectively,
that is, all individuals, but distributively, all of all sorts, Christians of all sorts; hic posi∣tum pro multi, Sua agunt ple∣rique hominum. Grotius:Quod omnes dicit, non urgen∣da est particula universalis, ut nullam excep∣tionē admittas; erant enim alij quoque, qualis Epaphroditus, sed pauci: ve∣rum omnibus tribuit quod passim erat vul∣gare. Calvinus. Omnes dixit pro eo quod Latinè dicimus, plerique omnes, id est, plurimi, valde multi. Estius. or the generality, most Christians, as 2 Tim. 4.16. Seeke their own] 1. Honour and advancement, 2. Gaine, 3. Pleasures, 4. Ease and safety, 5. Satisfaction. Their own] Not properly, Hag. 2.8. Hos. 12.9. but first because they have a civill right unto them, secondly, because in the opinion of the world, they are their own. Not the things which are Iesus Christs] That is, the things of the Church. First, be∣cause the Church is the Spouse of Christ. Secondly, because he hath purchased it with his bloud. 3. Because of the love he beares to it. They seeke not the preserva∣tion, and propagation of Christs Kingdome; more particularly, First, the pure preaching of the word, and right administration of the Sacraments. Secondly, the truths of Christ. Thirdly, the worship of Christ. Fourthly, the government of Christ. Fifthly, the Ministers of Christ. Vers. 24. But I trust in the Lord] The word signifies an assured confidence, and is seldome or never used, but when the thing followeth, which thus is trusted. Syriacus, in ho∣nore habeto. sic, Theodore∣rus, Ambrosius. Calvinus, Beza. In pretio habeto;  enim utruquo significat. Zanch.Vers. 29. Hold such in reputation] Have them in high honour and estimation; for so the word here used in the originall signifieth. Vers. 30. Not regarding his life Beza & Steph. non habita vitae ratione. Ambrosius Graecam vo∣cm propius expressit in interitum tradens animam suam; graecum verbum significat malè consulero & non habere rationem alicujus, non quod Faber putat, sporte consultoque tradere. Sentit enim Paulus illum ope divina servatum fuisse: alioqui ipse se praecipi taverat in exitium vitae. Eras. Vide Bezam.] yriacke explaines it thus, despised his own soule; Calvin exposing his soule to danger. CHAP. III. Vers. 2. BEware of Dogs] The Greek word signifies to see, so 2 Col. 8. so the La∣tines use,Habet Empha∣sim quod on simpliciter ait cavete canes, sed addit articulum, istos canes, istos malos operarios; voluit omnino digito monstra∣re illos falsos Doctores qui erant Philippis. video pro caveo. Seducers and false Teachers are called dogges. First, because they make a great spoile among the flockes, where they are let loose, Ezech. 22.25. Acts 20.29. Secondly, they are fawning crouching creatures, they come in a specious way; pretending much humility, and in offensivenesse, 2 Tim. 3, 4.5. Rom. 16.18. Thirdly, in respect of their indefatigable industry; the dogge will compasse much ground in the prosecution of his prey; so these Sea and Land, to make a Proselyte. The Apostle termes such Jewes here dogges which revolted from Christianity to Circumcision. Duae sunt causae cur hos doctores ex circumcisione vocarit concisi∣onem: una quia sua doctri∣na de carnali circumcisione, apete se non∣dum esse verè circumcisos, nempe corde, sed tantùm corporis particula conci∣sos declarabant: altera quia dum illam carnalem circumcisionem urgebant, corpus Ecclesiae scindebant atque perdebant. Zanch.Beware of the circumcision] By this word beware thrice repeated, the Apostle signi∣fies, that he would have the Philippians diligently know and distinguish false teachers from true; and to take heed of the one, and highly esteeme the others. Zanchie. Concision] By an allusion to the circumcision of which they boasted, when they did nothing else but rend the Church. Calvin. Vers. 3. We are the circumcision] That is, truly circumcision, viz. in heart, not those which yet continue in the externall circumcision now abolisht. See Rom. 2.19. Rejoyce in Christ Jesus] That is, Place the whole confidence of Salvation in Christ; and confesse this openly, when there is need. Vers 5. An Hebrew of the Hebrewes Whereby he argues the ancientnesse of his stock and linage, as being continued from Abraham called the Ebrew, or from Eber of whom the Jewes were called Ebrewes; which was before the confusion of tongues, at the building of Babell. Doctor Airay. Gen. 14.13.20, 21, 25.] That is, excellent or famous among the He∣brewes,
Vide Drusn observat. l. 4. c. 20. Of those first most laudable and ancien He∣brewes, Abraham, Jsaac and Iacob. à Lapide. See Zanchius. Verses 8. and 9. Yea doubtlesse, and I count all things but losse, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Iesus our Lord: for whom J have suffered the losse of all things; and doe account them but dung, that J may win Christ: And be found in him not having, &c.Dung] Or dogges meat. Vide Bezam.  di∣cuntur quasi . mcae quae canibus projiciuntur. Vide à Lapide. That is, not barely to know these things, or to beleeve them by faith; but to have the experience of the vertue of his resurrection, in raising him from the death of sinne to holinesse, and newnesse of life; giving him a full conquest over his corruptions, and spirituall life and strength to serve God in some perfection. The Apostle speaketh of two kindes of righteousnesse, the one which is a mans own, not having mine own righteousnesse, the other which is anothers; and that is Gods or Christs. The former he calleth the righteousnesse of the Law, viz. Where∣by a man through observation of the Law, is accounted righteous, and in this Paul would not be found: not that he would not be found fruitfull in good workes, but he would not be judged by them; they being in comparison of the Lawes purity and perfection a stained Clout; the latter in which Paul would be found, that he might find acceptation in the sight of God, is not his own, but anothers. 2 Not obtained by any, even the best workes but apprehended by faith; which cannot be said to lay hold on any thing within us; but something without us. 3. It is of God through faith, that is, such a one as God freely through his Christ giveth us, and maketh ours; not by putting it into us as other graces; but by imputing it into us, and by this meanes acquitting us; and secondly of such a person that is God, as well as man. Vers. 10. That I may know him] Two things are comprized in it.Vide Bezam. ut perfectiè cog∣noscam. Jerome. 1. Have the experience within himselfe, of the things he knew. 2. A further degree of know∣ledge; both Theoreticall and Practicall. And the power of his resurrection] That is, that he might feele in himselfe that power whereby Christ was raised from death to life; to raise him also from the bon∣dage of his sinnes, to a new life. Perkins. Being made conformable] Or as Beza reads it, whiles I am made conformable. Vnto his death, that is, unto Christ being dead. Vers. 11. Vnto the resurrection of the dead] That is, by a Metonymie of the subject for the adjunct,That is, to have beene as per∣fect as the glo∣rified persons in the day of judgement. that perfection of holinesse which accompanieth the Estate of the resurrection. Vers. 13. Forgetting those things which are behind] viz. The former part of his care in the way of godlinesse, as Caesar in warlike matters, proceeding still forward.Alludit ad cur∣sores qui nus∣quam defle∣ctunt oculos, ne celeritatem cur∣sus sui retardent Calvinus. Vide Bezam Nilque putans factum dum quid superesset agendum. And reaching forth Graece , quod magnam habet Emphasim: significat enim manus totúmque corpus proten∣dere ad scopum, ut eum apprehendas antequam pedibus eum attigeris: quod faciunt stadiodromi, qui cum extremo nisu conantur, maximè dum metae & victoriae vicinae sunt, ut antagonistam aequis penè passibus currentem praevertant, caput totumque corpus & vires exerunt, ac praecipites ad scopum ruunt, ad eúmque summis manibus eum prebenfuri se extendunt. Jta Chrysost. Et The∣oph. à Lapide in loc.] Greek, bending or stretching forward, as if he threw himselfe forward like a dart, v. 13. After that Christian perfection, unto which he had not yet attained. See Doctor Airay in loc. Vers. 14. I follow hard (or presse wieh an eager pursuite (for so doth the word emphatically import) after the mark) as by levelling at the mark for) or unto,It is the same word that sig∣nifies to perse∣cute because the earnest∣nesse of his Spirit in pressing toward the mark now is the same, that it was in the persecution of those that pressed toward the marke before. Mr. Burroughes. As good runners when they come neer unto the mark, stretch out their head and hands, and whole body to take hold of them that run with them, or of the mark that is before them; so he in his whole race so laboured unto that which was before, as if he were still stretching out his Armes to take hold of it. Doctor Airay. that is, to attaine unto. The price of the high calling] That is to the heavenly glory, to which God calls all his Elect in Christ. , signifies praemium certantibus propositum.
V. 16. Let us walke by the sme rule] Or as some not unfitly translate it, let us  dicitur ordo in acie à fronte ad extremum ag∣men porectus. Thucid. l. 4. proceed by one rule, for the word properly signifies to goe on in order; it is a Military word borrowed from the marching of Souldiers unto the Battell; whose manner it is to keep their rancke, and without any outraying to march along after the prescript rule of their Generall, or Leader. Incedamus quasi milities in acie ordine & gradu nostro, Gal. 5.25. & 6.16. à Lapide. Let us minde the same thing] The phrase of speech here used, signifies to be of one minde, of one judgement, of one affection one toward another; so that nothing be done through contention amongst us. See 2. Chap. 2. v. and 4. Chap. 2. v.  idem sapere, id est, sapiamus, as the words before in the Greek are to walke in the same rule. The Infinitives are put for the Imperative, after the manner of the He∣brewes▪ à Lapide. Unlesse it be an Elliptick phrase, in which some word is to be understood. See Vorstius. The word sig∣nifies our Charter and, our munici∣pall Lawes, we live by the same Lawes, as the Saints and Angels in hea∣ven doe. Pro conversati∣one, Graeè est, , quae vox significat conversationem civilem, id est, civium intet se: tanquam dicat apostous, civi∣tas nostra in qua ut cives conversam, in coelis est; Jtaque nos non terrena spimus sed coelestia. Estius.  significat inquit Budaeus, regimen Politicum reipublicae vel civitatis. q.d. Nostrum regimen, nostra respublica, nostra civitas in coelis est; nos gerimus ut municipes coelorum. à Lapide. Corpore ambulamus in terra, corde habitamus in caelo. Aug. Anima non est ubi animat sed ubi amat.Vers. 20. For our conversation is in Heaven] Our City conversation, our trading and trafficking. The Greeke word comprehends two things. 1. The State of a cor∣poration, City, or body Politique; and the Lawes whereby they that are so embodi∣ed are regulated. 2. The wayes, indeavours, and aimes of such, in relation to such a State. In the first sense the meaning is, we are free of the City of God, naturalized; in the second sense the meaning is, we live as those of the City of God; our actions and wayes savour of heaven. Vers 21. Who shall change our vile body] An allusion to those who changing old and broken vessels, desire to have them wrought in the best and newest fashion. CHAP. IV. Epitheta qui∣bus compellat Philippenses duo indicant, qualis & quantus suerit Apostoli erga illos assectus. Singulari amore illos complectebatur ita ut cum illis semper esse cuperet: ideo au, Fratrs dilecti & exoptati: deinde declarat qualis suerat Philippensium pietas. Jta in univesum illa Ecclesia profece∣rat & constans suerat in doctrina Christi per Apostolum praedicata, ut eam vocarit Apostolus gaudium & coronam suam; Gaudium, quia sua pietate praebebant Apostolo materiam gaudendi; coronam quia erant ceu ornamentum, decus & gloria A∣postoli, quasi dicat, propter vos mihi placeo, propter vos clarus & illustris sio, ut exponit Theodoretus. Zanchius.Vers. 1. MY brethren, dearly beloved, and longed for] with fair compellations he in∣sinuates into their affections, which yet come not from flattery, but sincere love. Vers. 2 Of the same mind in the Lord] That is, of one mind, and one judgement in the things of the Lord, betwixt themselves, and with the Church. Vers. 3. True yoak-fellow] some speciall man that preached the Gospell purely and sincerely there with him at Philippi. Calvin will not determine whether he speaks to a man or a woman. See Beza. Which laboured with me] That is, when the Gospell was first preached by him at Philippi, they laboured yea and even strove, for so the word signifies, putting them∣selves in hazard for the defence of the Gospell. Significatur certamen quale est athleta∣rum, id est, vehemens ac laboriosum. Estius. In the Book of life] whereby he meaneth that their life was as certainly sealed up with God, as if their names had been written in a book to that purpose. See Exod. 32.32. vide Grotium. Vorstius thinks it a speech taken from the custome of Souldiers or Cities, in which the chosen Souldiers or Citizens are by name written in a certain booke. Zanchie.Vers. 4. Rejoyce in the Lord alway, and again I say rejoyce] As if he should say, I will not cease to exhort you that alwaies, and so in all things which are from the
Lord you rejoyce but in the Lord, he doubleth the mandate to shew the necessity of the duty. Vers. 5. Let your moderation be known unto all men] He saith not, be ye moderate,Eos ad omnia aequo animo se∣renda hortatur. Calvinus. but let your moderation or lenity, as the Syriack, be known, and not simply to men, but to all men: That is, not onely the faithfull, but Infidels and Heathens; not for vain-glory, but for the edifying of your neighbour▪ the glory of Christs name, and the Gospell, as Matth. 5. Let your light so shine &c. Observe three degrees of this mode∣ration toward our neighbour: 1. To tolerate faults which are not erroneous nor punished by the Laws, as anger, covetousnesse, frowardnesse. 2. To interpret doubt∣full sayings, or deeds the best way. 3. That we correct greater faults where there is not obstinacy, either gently or severely, as the thing it selfe requires. The Apostle speaks properly of the moderation which is necessary for every Christian, that he deale not rigorously with his neighbour. The Lord is at hand] three waies. 1. In respect of his Deity, by which he raignes in the midst of his enemies. 2. By the efficacy of his Spirit, by which he dwels and works in us. 3. By his comming visibly to judgement. He is ready to help his,Psal. 145.18. Jam. 58. as Psam 45.11. Calvin. Estius. Vers. 6. Be carefull for nothing] With a care of diffidence. The Apostle compre∣hends all kind of prayer under these words, But by every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your request &c.] 1. , prayer, whereby we aske of God temporall or eternall blessings. 2. , by which we deprecate all evils. 3. Thanksgiving for benefits received, as though God took no notice of their pray∣ers, that do not withall give thanks. Requests] This is the generall, and by it is meant any prayer made unto God, for the obtaining of that which is good, or avoyding that which is evill. The Apostle annexeth a promise to the precedent exhortation. Vers. 7. The peace of God] So called, 1. because it hath God for its object; 2. Be∣cause God by his Spirit is the Authour of it, it is peace from God. Which passeth all understanding] viz. Created, because the understanding of man cannot sufficiently conceive it. 2. Cannot sufficiently esteem or prize it according to the worth of it. Shall keep] as with a Garrison; vide Bezam. Keep all in their office. Your hearts Scriptura ani∣mam hominis quoad facultates, in duas partes solet dividere, mentem & Cor; mens intelligentiam significat; Cor omnes affectus aut voluntates. Calvinus.] That is, your affections to obey. Mindes] Greek, reasonings or imaginations. That is,. understanding in a readi∣nesse to direct their whole soules. The peace of God shall keep you so that you shall not fall from God, neither in wicked thoughts nor desires. Vers. 8. Whatsoever things are true] in opinion, that they may be free from errours in word, that they may be free from leasing; in deed, that they may be free from all hypocrisie, and dissimulation. Whatsoever things are honest] Or, as the word rather signifies, whatsoever things doe set them out with an holy gravity; whatsoever things are grave and comely for their persons, they may say and doe. Iust] That every man may have his right of them, and that which is due unto them, so that we deceive and hurt none. Pure] That in their lives they may be unspotted, and in their words and deeds undefiled. Whatsoever things are lovely] Or may make them lovely, and win them favour with God and men. Whatsoever things are of good report] That by such things they may purchase to themselves a good report amongst men. If there be any vertue] That is, any thing which hath in it commendation of vertue. And if there be any praise] any thing praise worthy with good men.
Thinke] It signifies a diligent consideration; a love and desire of the mind after such things. Vers. 9. And the God of peace shall be with you] That is his favour and love in Christ shall embrace you, and all that outward prosperity and successe, as his wisdome shall think meet for you. Vers. 10. Flourished] The word is borrowed from Herbs or Trees, which seeming in Winter to be dead and withered,Dr. Alray. Metaphora sumpta ab ar∣boribus, quarum vis hyeme intus contracta latet, vere florere incipit. Calvinus. in the Spring grow green again; so their care which for a time languished now again revived. Vers. 11. For I have learned] I am instructed and religiously taught; or taught as in a mystery, sacris imbutus, initiatus my∣steriis. Non fermidavit Apostolus vocem Graecae superstitionis ad meliores usus tranferre; nam &  vox hinc venit. Gro∣tius in loc. vide Bezam. or entered in this high point of Christian practise; so the word signi∣fieth. I have not this by nature, I am taught it, and I see it is a mysterie. In whatsoever state I am] The word state is not in the originall, but in what I am; that is in whatsoever concerns or befals me, whether I have little or nothing at all. Therewith to be content] Or self-sufficient, it is properly attributed onely to God. See 1 Tim. 6.6. quasi  se pedi∣bus proculcan∣dum prosternit. M. Burroughes on the place.Vers. 12. I know how to be abased] , even to be trampled under feet. Hoc est, patienter ferre humilitatem. Calvinus. Every where, and in all things] , in every place, in every time, in every thing; the words will beare all this. See Estius. Vers 13. I can doe all things through Christ which strengthneth me] That is, which belong to his calling. q. d. without Christ strengthning me I can doe nothing. Vers. 18. An odour of a sweet smell] The Apostle calleth the gift which the Philip∣pians sent him lying in prison, an odour of a sweet swell, in an Hebrew phrase; that is,See Heb. 13.16 Alludit ad id quod apud Moysen passim de sacrificits le∣gitur ea Deo accepta esse in odorem suavitatis. Vers. 19. But my God] Dixit meus 1. ut significet se verè illum agnoscere pro Deo suo. 2. ut significet hunc unicum esse illum à quo in carcere sustentetur & omni consolatione afficiatur. 3. ut docea cum ipse sit legatus hujus Dei quicquid ad se missum suit à Philippis, illud hunc suum Deum compensaturum. Zanchius. a most sweet or fragrant odour; for as sweet odours are a refreshing of the sences, so our refreshing of the Saints bowels, is in a manner refreshing of Gods own senses and spirits. A term borrowed from the perfumes which were made upon the Altar of Incense. See à Lapide. Vers. 20. Now unto God and our Father] The conjunction and is here exegeticall not copulative. Our God in respect of our creation, and our Father in respect of our regeneration; our God in respect of temporall blessings, Our Father in respect of spirituall graces, and eternall in the Heavens. Vers. 22. All the Saints salute you] viz. All the rest of the Saints, that labour not in the Gospell.Omnes sancti, nempe reliqui Christiani, qui Romae erant licet non laborarent in Evangelio. Subdit maxime &c. id est, Nerouis. Addit hoc, quo magis illos consoletur, simulque & animet ad constantiam. Si enim isti non metuebant Neronem, quin juberent salutari Christianos qui erant etiam alibi quam Romae: cur non & nos forti animo simus? Zanchius. Chiefly they that are of Caesars houshold] Piety is rare in Princes Courts; yet even in Neroes Court there were some Saints. That which some imagine, that Seneca is here designed among the rest, hath no colour saith Calvin] for he never by any signe saith he] shewed himselfe a Christian, neither was he of Caesars household, but a Senatour. See Estius.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to the COLOSSIANS. CHAP. I. THis Epistle was written by St. Paul when he was prisoner at Rome. The occasion of the writing of it was a report brought unto him concerning the estate of the Church at Colosse,Omnes Epistolae Pauli egregiae sunt: sed omniū imprimus quae Româ ex vin∣culis missae sunt. Harum primam temporis ordine arbitror fuisse illam ad Phile∣monem; Nam tunc adhuc cum ipso erat Epa∣phroditus qui & Epaphras: alteram ad Phi∣lippenses, ubi Epaphroditum remittit ad E∣phesios; & eodem prope tempore hanc ad Colossenses, cùm adhue quae ad Ephesios scripserat, in animo haererent: postrema verò omnium ea quae posterior est ad Timotheum. Grotius. that after they of the Church had been converted by Epaphras to the faith of Christ, and instructed in the truth of Religion, according to the doctrine of the Apostles, they were in danger to be seduced by false Teachers, raised up by Satan, who sought to impose and thrust upon them the observation of circumcision, and certaine rites of the ceremoniall Law, abolished by Christ, and to entangle them with many philo∣sophicall speculations; and to bring in the worship of Angels, and many other sorts of will worship devised by themselves. The Apostle hearing of this eminent danger like to fall upon them, was induced to write this Epistle unto them, as a re∣medy against these evils. The summe and substance of this Epistle is, that the Co∣lossians ought to continue constant in the doctrine of the faith delivered unto them by Epaphras; and to avoyd the corruption of flattering novelties and deceivers. The materiall parts of it besides the Proem and conclusion, are two. The first is concer∣ning Christian doctrine, in the two first Chapters; the second concerning Christian life and conversation in the two Chapters following. Vers. 9. That you might be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdome and spirituall understanding] The words are better translated by Tremelius and Calvin; wisdome and prudence. To see truths and the reason of them, this is wisdome;Ad sapientiam pertinet uni∣versalis myste∣riorum specula∣tio, ad pruden∣tiam mysteriorum cognitorum ad actiones applicatio. Estius. to be cunning in practise, that is prudence. Ephes. 1.8. in wisdome and prudence. The oppo∣site to wisdome is folly, the opposite to prudence is blockishnesse in a mans whole course. Vers. 10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord] Walking is an ordinary metaphor in the Scripture for the conversation of Christians, commonly used for the outward conversation, here for outward and inward too; because worthy and well pleasing is added. Worthy] is taken in a legall and strict sense;Sicut decet Christi fideles ac discipulos; ita ut ipsi per omnia placeatis. Estius. so the Angels can do nothing which deserves Gods acceptance and regard. 2. In an Evangelicall and comparative sense, 2 Thess. 1.11. Of the Lord] The word God alone ordinarily signifies the Father, the word Lord alone usually Christ; behave your selves answerably to his wisdome, authority, holi∣nesse, example. Unto all pleasing] Not in one thing onely, but that whatever we doe may be ac∣ceptable
to him; there are divers notes of Universality, vers. 9. and twice here, and vers. 11. Unto all patience] notes 1. totum subjecti, the man all patient; that is patient in tongue and in heart. 2. Totum ipsius quantitatis, a totality of the very grace of pa∣tience, pure patience without mixture of passion. 3. A totality in reference to condi∣tion,Lockyer. a heart so principled, so compos sui, master of himselfe, that no evill can make evill, not the greatest evill the least impression of evill. 4. A totality in refe∣rence to time, totum temporis such a patience as dies not till the man die. Vers. 12. Made us meet] It is not said, that he hath made us worthy, as the Rhe∣mists translate it;Crtwright. See Estius. but onely fit or meet, as both the Greek signifies, and the interli∣neall and Syriack have translated it; therefore merit cannot be drawn hence. Vers. 13. Who hath delivered us] The word signifies by fine force to deliver or pluck away, even as David pulled the Lambe out of the Beares mouth. It signifies such a deliverance as (in respect of them that are delivered) is never deserved by them, nor desired of them; but is (as it were) a drawing and haling, as the pulling of a beast, or rather a dead wight out of a pit: And in respect of the deliverer it signifies such a deliverante as is wrought by his Almighty power, by the power of his Spirit. Elton. And hath translated us] A word taken from those that plant Colonies, and cause the people to goe out of their native soyle to inhabite a new Countrey.Transtulit] vi∣detur hoc ver∣bum ab iis desumptum, qui Colonias deducunt & populum migrare cogunt ex natali solo, ut novam aliquam regionem incolant. Episc. Dav. Vers. 14. In whom we have redemption] a full and perfect redemption; It is not , but . Through his blood] So also it is, Ephes. 1.7. These words are wanting in six ancient Copies, and are not read by Chrysostome or his Epitimator Theophylact, nor by the Vulgar and Syriack. Vers. 15. Who is the Image of the invisible God] Christ is called so because of his equality every way, and likenesse to his Father; by him God, otherwise invisible, is manifested to us. The first-born of every creature] The first-borne is used two waies; 1. Properly for him that was born before all others like to himselfe; so Christ is not the first-born, so he should be a creature. 2. Improperly, for him who is Lord and heire of all his Fa∣thers goods; so here the first-born of every creature is the Lord of all creatures. Angelos iis or∣nat nominibus, quae terrenorum Magistratuum & Politicae au∣thoritatis pro∣pria sunt. Glas∣sius.Vers. 16. Whether they be Thrones or Dominions or Principalities or powers] The first two Thrones, Dominions, respect things in invisible or things in Heaven; the latter two Principalities, Powers, things on earth; for he seemeth to illustrate each part of the distribution by the particulars inferred, as Ephes. 1.21. see Bayne. Others interpret all these of the good Angels. Augustine saith, what difference there is between these four words, let them tell us that are able, so they prove what they tell us; for my part, saith he, I confesse I know it not. And for him] That is, to seve for his glory and praise. M. Perkins. Vers. 18. He is the head of the body] The head for influence, dominion, direction. The first borne from the dead] He hath this dignity and priviledge, to rise to eternall life, and glory, the first of all men. Lazarus and others rose before him; but to live a mortall life,Vide Bezam. Mr. Perkins. Caput seu prin∣ceps ac Dominus mortuorum. Dil∣her. Primogenitus ex mortuis dicitur non modo quia primus resurrexit, sed qui restituit etiam aliis vitam. Calvinu. and to dye againe. By vertue of his resurrection, he is the cause of the resurrection of all his Members; as the first borne among the Jewes did communi∣cate his good things to his brethren. See Rom. 8.29. For these two reasons, he is cal∣led the first borne among the dead. See 1 Cor. 15.20. Elton. Hoc ad angelos bonos propriè non pertinet, sed ad animas pio∣rum, qui tunc, quum Paulus illa scriberet, mortui erant, & quorum animae erant tunc in coelis per Christi sanguinem Deo reconciliatae ac receptae. Daneus.Vers. 20. And by him] That is, by Christ, not as an Instrument as the Papists say; but as a ministeriall, and meritorious cause of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19. To reconcile all things unto himselfe] To reconcile, is to set at one, and to make of enemies friends.
Both the things in earth] That is, the Elect living in this world; And the things in heaven] That is, the holy and Elect Angels, 1 Tim. 5.21. The Angels have need of a mediatour for confirmation in goodnesse; and that they might againe be knit together with the Elect, under one and the same head Christ Jesus, Ephes. 1.10. Vers. 23. Grounded] The word in the originall signifies, except you be so built as a house is built upon a sure foundation; as a tree that is soundly rooted, and setled] A metaphore from the sitting of the body, which is then most firme. The hope of the Gospell] viz. Those sweet promises of life, which are the very mat∣ter of the Gospell. And which was Preached to every creature, which is under heaven] That is,Vide Bezam. & Estium. so and in such sort, as every man living might have heard and knowne; had not the fault been in their own carelesnesse. Vers. 24. Fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh] He meaneth not the passion of Christ, but the sufferings of the body of Christ, that is,Vide Bezam. Perkins. See Acts 9.4. the Church whereof Christ is the head. For his bodies sake which is the Church] Because they confirme the faith of the Church.Non pro illis redimendis aut expiandis sed pro illis confirmandis, et aedificandis in doctrina Evangelica Vers. 26. The mystery which hath been hid from ages] That is, of the Gospell. But now is made manifest to his Saints] The Gospell was revealed to all the world,11 Matth. 25. and 13.44 2 Cor. 4.3. they might have a literall knowledge of it; but the Saints onely a spirituall know∣ledge. The common truths which others see with a rationall eye, they see with a siduciall eye. CHAPT. II. Vers. 5. BEholding your order] That is, your outward beauty.Ordinis nomine tam consensum, quam mores ritè compositos, & totam disciplinam intellige. Calvin. vide Bezam. And the stedfastnesse of your faith in Christ] , the firmament of your faith, so the vulgar renders it; it is as firme as the firmament it selfe. See 1 Pet. 5.9. Vers. 7. Duplex me∣taphora est; al∣tera à plantis bene radicatis, altera à domo bene fundata. Estius. vide Bezam. Rooted and built up in him] He alludeth to a tree well rooted in the ground; and to an house well set upon a good foundation. Calvin and others. He signifies that Christ is the root, in which he would have them firmely rooted; and the foun∣dation upon which he would have them built. Vers. 8. Spoile you] Verbo utitur admodum proprio; aludit enim ad praedones, qui dum violenter rapere gregem nequeunt, fraude abigunt pecudes. Cal∣vinus. Estius. , That is, make a prey of you. The Speech is taken from theeves, who come secretly to carry away a sheep out of the fold; to whom the Apostle compareth vaine teachers. Doctor Taylor. Through Philosophy] The Apostle speakes not absolutely of Philosophy, but of vaine deceiving by Philosophy as the Text implies.Non verum usum syncerae philosophiae, sed abusum, qui est confusio philoso∣phia cum Evangelio prohibet, vel potius Sophisticen illam rejicit, quam falsò aliqui Philosophiae titulo venditant, cum sit (ut eo ipso loco Apostolus ait) inamis quaedam deceptio. Pezel tract. de coena Domini. Omnes adulterinae doctrinae quae nas∣cuntur ex humano capite, qualemcunque habeant rationis colorem. Calvinus. Some say vaine deceit is here added interpretatively. Vers. 10. And ye are compleat in him, which is the head of all principality and power] As though he had said, because in himselfe he hath the wel-head of glory and Maje∣sty; the which becommeth ours in that he is also the head of his Church. Vers. 11. In whom] That is Christ, of whom vers. 8, 9, 10. Yee] That is all you Colossians and others that have truly beleeved in Christ. Are circumcised with the circumcision] That is, made partakers of the spirituall good whereof circumcision was anciently to the Jewes a signe and seale.
Made without In Graeco una composita dictio est, . Estius. bands] That is, not performed by any externall act of any man upon the body, but spiritually upon the soule; by a spirituall and inward act of Gods Spirit. In putting off the body of the sinnes of the flesh] That is, which inward circumcision consists in this,There were many ceremo∣nies in Bap¦tisme used in the Primitive Church, viz. Putting of old clothes, dren∣ching in water, so as to seeme to be buried in it; putting on new cloathes at their comming out, to which Paul al∣ludes in these two verses, 11, and 12. and 3 Col. 9, 10. and Rom. 6.4, 5. Thornedikes discourse of the Right of the Church in a Christian State. Chap. 4. that a man is inabled to cast aside, mortifie and overcome those ma∣nifold corruptions, and disorders of the soule, which come unto us by our fleshly generation; and doe shew themselves in our flesh, our outward man. By the circumcision of Christ] By merit and vertue of all those things which Christ hath done and suffered in his humane nature; among which this of his circumcision was one. .Vers. 13. Having forgiven you all trespasses] The word imports, that he hath free∣ly forgiven us all our sinnes. Rom. 3.4. The word rendred trespasses usually, is understood of actuall sinnes,. either it is a Synecdoche, and so one sort of sinnes is named instead of all; or else he speakes according to the feeling of many of the god∣ly, who even after forgivenesse are troubled with a wicked pronenesse to daily sinnes.Vehementius obligat syngratha autographo, There are two wayes of can∣cellng a bond, laceratione & litura; here it is blotted out and can be read no more then if it had never been; the obligatory power of the Law, as a Covenant is taken away. Glassti. Rhetor. Sac. Vide Bezam. Vers. 14. Blotting out the hand writing of Ordinances] Beza and Calvin understand it of the ceremoniall Law; it is meant not onely of that, but of the morall Law as a Covenant of workes, say Chrysostome, Oecumenius, Ierome; this is spoken (saith Zan∣chie) to comfort the Colossians, who were never under the ceremoniall Law. Vers. 17. Which are a shadow of things to come] Ceremonies are called shadowes, be∣cause that as the shadow carries though a dark, yet some resemblance of the body, whose shadow it is, so Ceremonies of Christ. Vers. 18. Beguile you, of your reward] It referres to prizes in the Olympick games, as that in 8. v. to spoiles in warre. He meanes their salvation. In a voluntary humility, and worshipping ofSee 23. v. This the Pa∣pists due, as though it were too much boldnesse, to goe, directly to Christ. Vide Calvi∣num. Angels] The worshipping of Angels which Paul condemnes arose from a pretence of humility. For such making a shew of humility, that they could not goe directly to God neither were they worthy to goe by Christ, therefore they taught that they must use the mediation of Angels; so Chrysostome, Theodoret, Theophylact, and the Greeke Scholiast in loc. Vers. 21. Touch not] A woman, 1 Cor. 7.1. Taste not] Meat; handle not] Money, meddle not with secular contracts. Doctor Sclater. Some observe that the rest of the words without copulatives, notes their eager∣nesse, in pressing these things, and perswading men to the care of them. Vers. 22. Which all are to perish with the using] The words signifie, are to corruption in the use.] That is they come to, no such use or end as is aimed at in them; those were such observances (as Zanchie sheweth) as men devised or used with an estimati∣on of worshipping God in them ex se as of themselves. CHAP. III. Vers. 1 SEeke those things which are above] It implies, 1. An act of the understan∣ding minde, and contemplate on the things that are above. 2. Of the will; long for, favour and affect them. Set your affections on things which are above, and not on things which are on earth] He repeates what he had said in the former verse, to shew our dulnesse of capacity in con∣ceiving, and backwardnesse in practise, and the necessity and excellency of the duty. Vers. 3. Your life is hid with Christ in God] A happy and glorious life, hid chiefely in respect of security, Extra pericu∣lum est vita nostra etsi non appareat. Nam & Deus fidelis; ideóque non abnegabit depositum, nec sallet in susceptu custodia: & Christi societas majorem etiamnum securitatem affert. Calvinus. and also in respect of obscurity, that your selves sometimes can
not find it; not onely hid from the eyes of the world, but also from our owne eyes,It is called mortification to shew that there is a great deale of misery and paine in it. A Father saith this is the hardest Text in all the Bible; and the hardest duty in all Christianity, that we can goe about. Mr. Fenner. in respect of the fulnesse, and perfection of it. Vers. 5. Mortifie] or put to death, He alludeth unto the ancient sacrifices, whereof so many as consisted of things having life, were appointed to be slaine by the Priest afore they were offered upon the Altar; as a type of our killing the old man, before we can become an acceptable sacrifie unto God. Your Members which are upon the earth] That is Some of which he nameth after∣ward. lusts, called Members, 1. Because the whole corruption of our evill nature, is compared to a mans body; and called the body of death. 2. Because they are as naturall to a carnall man; and as well beloved as his Members, Marke 9.43. 3. Because they doe dwell and worke in our Members, Rom, 7.23. Iames 4.1. Vpon earth, first because they are exercised upon things of this earth, as their proper object, secondly because they will continue with us during our naturall life, and abode upon the earth. The sinnes here reckoned up are sinnes either against the seventh Commandement, viz. fornication, uncleanesse, inordinate affection; or against the tenth Commandement, evill concupiscence; or the first, covetousnesse which is Idolatry; Inordinate affection] In the originall, it is but one word, , any violent strong passion, that chiefely which we call being in love.Mollities verti solet. Ab hac Pathici & Molles dicun∣tur: quales fue∣runt Heliogabalus, & ipsius foedissimi asseclae. Pareus. Some thinke it meanes the burn∣ing and flaming of lust though it never come to action; or the daily passions of lust, which arise out of such a softnesse, or effeminatenesse of mind as is fired with every occasion, or temptation. Vers. 11. But Christ is all and in all] Christ is all in a twofold relation,Hoc est, Chri∣stus solus pro∣ram & puppim (ut aiunt) prin∣cipium & finem tenet. Calvinus. of God and man; looke what God can require for his satisfaction, or we desire for our per∣fection, is so compleatly to be found in Christ, that it need not be sought else-where. In all] Men or things; it may be read either way; he is all things in all persons; or all things in all things. Vers. 12. Put on therefore as the elect of God bowells of mercies, kindnesse, humble∣nesse of mind, meeknesse, long-suffering] He wisheth them as they would be sure of their election, to have a sound note of their holinesse, and that God loved them,Qua locutione serium, & qua∣si visceralem miserecordiae af∣fectum notat. Calvinus. so to put on the bowels of mercy; let these be your robes and coverings, weare them as you weare your garments; and let them be as tender and inward unto you, as your own principall and most vitall parts. Such a measure of pitty and compassion, as maketh the inward bowels to yearn; and mercies of divers kinds, it is in the plurall number. Kindnesse] This vertue extendeth further then the former; for pitty and com∣passion is proper to those which are in some affliction and misery; but kindnesse reacheth to all whether in prosperity or adversity; it is a sweet and loving dispositi∣on of the heart, and a courteous affection to all, shewing it sefe in pleasing and good speech. Humblenesse of mind] A meane esteeme of our selves. Meekenesse] A quiet and calme disposition of heart, neither prone to provoke, nor easily provoked to anger by an injury. Long-suffering] A further degree of meeknesse, a continued quietnesse of minde, after many wrongs offered. Vers 14. And above all these things, put on charity which is the bond of perfectnesse] Above all] Because love is the root of all, he doth by this phrase compare charity to the most precious garment which is put upon all others. The bond of perfectnesse] That is, the most perfect bond which is among men to unite them together:Bishop Down. Of Justificati∣on, l. 5. c. 7. See Bifield. for according to the Hebrew phrase which is usuall in the writings of the Apostle] vinculum perfectionis is vinculum perfectissimum, quo plures inter se colligantur: for it is not , but , That is, as Cajetan speaketh, vinculum conjungeus amantes, or as Iustinian, perfectissimum quoddam vinculum. Vers. 16. Dwell in you Vult doctrinā Evangelij illis esse familiarem. Calvinus.] That is, let it not come as a stranger, but let it be familiar
with you, Richly] be not content to know one part of the word, but know it throughout, have a high esteeme of the Gospell.  notes two things, 1: The measure and so it is well rendred plenteously. 2. The worth of the knowledge of the word; and so it is rendred richly. In all By daily me∣ditation of the Commande∣ments, promi∣es, and threatnings revealed in the same. wisdome] A Childe may be able to say much by heart, and yet not have it in wisdome. Vt jnde scilicet edocti sapiamus quod oportet. The word of God is a rule for all the virtues before mentioned, and the study of that will fit us to the duties of our severall relations after rehearsed. Teaching and admonishing one another in Psalmes, and Hymnes, and spirituall Songs] See Ephes. 5.19. In both which places, as the Apostle exhorteh us to singing, so he in∣structeth what the matter of our Song should be,Mr. Cotton of singing of Psalmes, c. 4. and on 1 Cant. Psalmus est in quo concinendo adhibetia musi∣cum aliquod in∣stumentum praeter linguam. Hymnus propriè est laudis canticum, sive alta voce, sive aliter canatur. Oda non laudes tantum continet, sed paraeneses & alia argumenta. Cal∣vinus. viz. Psalmes, Hymnes, and spirituall Songs. Those three are the Titles of the Songs of David, as they are delivered to us by the Holy Ghost himselfe; some of them are called Mizmorim Psalmes; some Tehil∣lim Hymnes; some Shirim Songs, Spirituall Songs. Psalmes] Were sung on the voyce, and Instrument both, Psal. 108.1. Dan. 3.7. Hymnes] Were Songs of thankesgiving, for a particular benefit received, Matth. 26.30. Songs] Wherein we give thankes for generall blessings; as when David praiseth the Lord for the workes of creation, Psal. 104 3. Gratiam hoc in loco nonnulli exponunt animi gratitudinem, sive gratiarum actionem; vocabulum  aliquoties hoc sensu accipitur, 1 Cor. 15.57. 2 Cor. 2.14. alii exponunt in dex∣teritate quadam gratiosa, quae & jucunditatem & utilitatem afferat auditoribus; in hunc etiam sensum quandoque capitur voca∣bulum  ut infra 4.6. & ad Ephes. 4.29. Episc. Dav.Singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord] Psal. 103.1. That is, (say some) with a comely and reverent gesture; a decent and sweet Tune, rather with understanding and feeling hearts, 1 Cor. 14, 15. Vers. 17. And whatsoever you doe] If you would have God to accept of it. Doe all in the name of the Lord Iesus] To doe any thing in anothers name, imports three things, 1. To doe it by some Warrant or Commission from another. 2. To doe it for his sake and service. 3. By the assistance of another. That is, to be autho∣rized, and allowed by Christ, what we speak or doe, to doe it for Christs glory, and likewise for his sake, and by his strength; do it in this perswasion; that through Christ God is well pleased with you. Hildersam. Verses 18.19. Wives submit your selves unto your own husbands, as it is fit in the Lord. Husbands love your wives, &c.] The Apostle begins first with the duties of married per∣sons, as Ephes. 5.22.25. and so proceedeth to the duties of Children and Parents, of Servante and Masters, as Ephes. 5.20, 21. and 6.1.4. First, because this society is first in nature, and therefore in order. Secondly, this is the fountaine from whence the rest flow, Psal. 120.3. and 127.3. Prov. 5.15.16. And of them he begins first with wives; constantly observed both by Peter 1 Pet. 3.1. and Paul Ephes. 5.22.Mr. Gataker. First to shew the inferiority of the wife in regard of the husband; for the Apostle begins ever with the duty of the Inferiours, Ephes. 6.20.22. and 4.1. Secondly to shew where duty is to begin, at the Inferiour, and so to ascend to the Superiour. Wives submit your selves unto your owne husbands] That is, yeeld your selves unto the will, direction,1 Pet. 3.5. and discretion of your husbands. .As it is fit] The originall word is rendred three wayes, 1. Vt oportet as ye ought, and so is a reason from Gods institution. Yee must doe it. 2. Vt convenit, as it is meet. 3. Vt deeet, as it is comely; women delight in neatnesse. It is meet or come∣ly, in regard, 1. Of the Law of nature. 2. Of Gods Institution after the fall. 3. The Husbands headship. 4. womanly infirmities. Mr. Gataker.In the Lord] It may be taken as a note of direction, prescribing the ground and mannor of this submission; that it be done in obedience of God, and the com∣mand of God; in conscience of the order, and ordinance of God; so it is used
Ephes. 6.1.2 As a note of limitation,Sic placeat uxor voluntati con∣jugis ut non displiceat vo∣luntati conditoris. Gregory. describing the bounds and limits of this sub∣mission, reverence and obedience, that it extend not it selfe to any thing against the will and word of God. So it is used 1 Cor. 7.39. Vers. 19. Husbands love your wives] That is, carry in your hearts a kind and loving affection toward them, and shew it forth both in word and deed.A man loves his childe, tan∣quam aliquid sui; his wife, tanquam se. And be not bitter against them] A metaphor taken from such things as are bitter in the taste;See Ephes. 4.3. as Gall which when it is mingled with sweet things makes them di∣stastefull: so if the husband shall be bitter and fierce in his authority, reproofes, and commands, things in themselves wholsome, the wife will neither brook nor digest them.Mr. Gataker. Among the Heathen the Gall of the Sacrifice that was slain and offered at Weddings was thrown out of doores, to signifie that married folkes should be as Doves without Gall.Olim apud eas gentes, quae fal∣sos deos colebant, qui Junoni nuptiali seu pronubae sacrificabant, ii fel cum reliqua non conficiebant victima, sed exemptum abjiciebant apud altare: quo instituto legis autor obscurè intuebat à conjugio semper debere bilem iramque abesse; cujus rei testis est Plutarchus. Drus. Prov. Class. 2. l. 4. Vers. 20. Children] Greek , whereby is signified unto us a mans whole progeny. So that sonnes and daughters are not onely to be understood here, but likewise grand-children. Your parents] Under which word both fathers and mothers are equally compre∣hended; the child takes his originall from both.Prov. 23.22. & 15.20. Levit. 19.3. Vers. 22. In all things] That is, in all lawfull and bodily things, in all outward things which are indifferent. Ephes. 6.1. Your masters] All masters indifferently, without difference of sex, 1 Tim. 5.14. or of condition. Not with eye service] Not with eye-services, in the Greek, , Not onely when their eye is upon you. Vers. 23. Doe it] Work it; so the word properly signifies. Heartily] The originall word signifies from the very soule.Ex anime. The obedience of ser∣vants should be a hearty obedience. CHAP. IV. Vers. 1. GIve] The word properly signifies exhibite or yeeld. Iust] That is, feed them, govern them, protect them, reward them. Ye also have a Master in Heaven] That is, one which exerciseth the same authority over you, and will doe the same things that you doe to your servants, viz. oversee you, punish you, call you to account. Vers. 6. Seasoned with salt] Yea, as in meats, the more subject they are to putrefacti∣on, the more need they have of powdering; so in the matters of speech,Sal optimum & utilissimum est ciborum condi∣mentum, si mo∣deratè adhibeatur: transfertur autem ad sapientiam significandam, utpote qua nihil est hominibus utilius in vita. Estius. vide plura ibid. the readier we be in vulgar and ordinary matters to forget our selves, the more need have we the more throughly to season them with that holy Salt. Vers. 12. Alwaies labouring fervently for you]Hisce verbis de∣clarat qualis fuerit haec praecatio Epaphrae pro Colossensibus; assidua nimirum & etiam fervida; assiduitatem vocabulum illud  indicat, vehementiam verò & fervorem ostendit verbum illud  quod innuit certamen & quasi luctam cum Deo ipso. Episc. Dav. Compleat] or filled; the Greek word is a metaphor from a ship with sailes with
the help of Winds; when a man is filled with the commandement as the saile of a ship is filled with winde. Vers. 13. I beare him record] or witnesse with him; I yeeld him my testimony. Vers. 14. Luke the beloved Physitian] Beloved, because of the good he brought to the Church by the skill of Physick. Physitian, to distinguish him from Luke the Evangelist; for if it had been him, he would have given him the title. Calvin and Elton go this way. Estius saith it was Luke the Euangelist, and that he was a Physitian, and so stiled here peradventure,Bifield enclines to this opini∣on. because hereby his Physick was very helpfull to the faithfull. Vers. 16. And when this Epistle is read amongst you, cause it to be read also in the Church of the Laodiceans] Here is warrant for the publique reading of the word.See Act. 15.21. See 1 Thess. 5.27. Vers. 17. Take heed] The originall is, see to the ministery. So the Greek word is used 2.8. Matth. 8.25. and 12.38. 1 Cor. 8.9. the meaning is, Carefully look into the Office and function, and diligently weigh and consider what it is, the weight of it, and what belongs to that pastorall duty. That thou hast received in the Lord] That is, from the Lord, which he of his grace and mercy hath committed unto thee. That thou fulfill it] The word is metaphoricall, borrowed from a Vessell that ought to be full of liquor, or the like matter, and is not; and it is as much as if he he had said, that thou fill up that Vessell of thy ministery, as it ought to be filled, and leave no empty place in it; do it not to the halves, or in some part, but perform it in every respect, as it ought to be performed, accomplish all the parts of that Office and Ministery.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE First Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to the THESSALONIANS. CHAP. I. THe order of Pauls Epistles is according to the dignity of the Ci∣ties;Inter Novi Te∣stamenti libros Epistola ad He∣braeos quasi Paulina, & A∣pocalypsis quasi Johannis, ulti∣mum acceperunt locum, quia eo∣rum librorum authoritas diu in obscuro, aut controverso fuit. Haec Epistola ideo prior dici∣tur quod ante alteram jam locum suum occupasset in Epistolarum Paulinarum volumine; scripta est non multo postquam Thessa∣lonicae Paulus fuerat, non sanè Athenis, ut quidam Epistolae fini adscripsere, sed Corinthi. Grotius. therefore those which are directed to particular persons are put in the last place. Chrysstome, and some of the Anci∣ents say that both the Epistles to the Thessalonians are among the first which Paul wrote; which is most true (saith Grotius) of the second Epistle. Thessalonica () was the Metropolis or mother-City of Macedonia, anciently called Thermae, new built by Philip King of Macedon after his conquest of Thes∣saly, for monument of which it was so re-edified and enlarged, and obtained that name. In this City God was pleased by his ministery to collect a Church. See Acts 17.1. Vers. 3. Your work of faith] All good Offices and fruits which proceed from it toward God, our neighbour, our selves. And labour of love] That is, laborious love, Heb. 6.10. a labour undertaken out of love. Vers. 5. But also in power, and in the holy Ghost] That is, in the power of the Holy Ghost. Vers. 6. Having received the Word in much affliction] He doth not mean that they received the word when they were afflicted, that is, poore or otherwise distressed, (that is, a kind of advantage to the receiving of the Word) but afflicted in or for re∣ceiving the Word.See Chap. 2. Vers. 8. For from you sounded forth the Word of the Lord, &c.Graecè , id est reso∣nuit quasi eccho, & exsonuit quasi tuba, ait Theoph. Vatablus, A vobis ebuccinatus est sermo Domini. Syrus. A vobis manavit fama sermonis domini, id est, praedi∣cationis Evangelicae. a Lapide.] An elegant metaphor which signifies, that their faith was so lively, that with its sound as it were it stirred up other Nations. The Greeke word  is with the sound of a Trumpet or loud voice of a Cryer to make a sound far off. CHAP. II. Vers. 3. FOr our exhortation was not of deceit] That is, our preaching; a Synecdoche, because exhortation is a chiefe part of preaching.Exhortatio Tremellius & Boderianus; con∣solatio Syrus & Arabs;  vox ambigua est, ut nunc pro exhortatione, nunc pro consolatione sumitur. de Dieu in loc. See Acts 13.15. 1 Cor. 14.3.
Vers. 5. For neither at any time used we flattering words as ye know, nor a cloak of cove∣tousnesse,As all sinnes have cloakes, John 15.22. so especially covetousnesse. God is witnesse: The Apostle professeth against flattering words, and appeals to them who had heard him concerning that; but he might carry his covetousnesse so closely that they might not discern it, therefore he appeales to God for his free∣dome from that sinne. See Estius. Vers. 6. When we might have been burdensome, or as the Apostles of Christ]  hath a twofold signification;Nec iis qui ad gravitatem A∣postolicae prae∣stantiae aut dignitatem, cum Erasmo; nec re∣centioris, qui ad sumptus Ec∣clesiarum id re∣ferunt, quibus gravem se fuisse neget Apostolus, assentiri possum. Cum primò manifestè neget ullam se adulationis aut avaritiae suspicionem praebuisse, adeo ut ne rumoribus quidem ejusmodi de se occasionem dederit: ut nec contra nimiae severitatis accusari posse, quemadmodum illi qui ambitiosè hoc agunt, ut hominum gloriam venentur; quin potiùs cùm ita ut Apostolus Christi agere potuerit, mitem ac mansuetum fuisse, neque aliter cum iis quam nutrices cum alumnis, quos tenerrimè fovent, egisse. Heinsius. one to be burdensome, viz. that Paul as an Apo∣stle could have demanded necessaries from the Thessalonians, but he would not. This signification agrees with that which goes before Vers. 5. nor a cloak of covetous∣nesse; and with that which follows Vers. 9. Beza and others. 2. To be in authority, viz. Paul as an Apostle of Christ could have shewed more gravity and authority, but he would not; this agrees with what went before, I sought not the glory of men. Chrysostome, the Syriack, Calvin, and others follow this signification; vide Bezam. The Hebrew Cabad signifies tam onerare quam honorare. Exod. 20.12. honor est onus quoddam. Vers 7. Even as a nurse cherisheth her children] That is, the mother which is a nurse tenderly handleth them, but suffereth them not to harm or mischiefe themselves. See Esay 49 33. Num. 4.12. Vers. 8. Being affectionately desirous of you] Covetously or lustfully desirous, as the originall words signifie, which note the most swaying heart-passion. Were willing to have imparted unto you our own soules] That phrase signifies the effe∣ctuall affection (say some) wherewithall he delivered the word unto them. By an usuall Metonymie, our lives; whether by pains in preaching, or persecution; the latter is resolved by interpreters. Dr. Sclater. Vers. 9. Our labour and travell] The first Greek word  is not simple labour, but labour joyned with greatest care and solicitude;  travell addes something more, for it is a labour not onely having solicitude, but also wearinesse joyned with it, for when one hath wrought long and much, he is wont being oppressed with the burden of the labour, to be wearied. The Apostle therefore by these two words sig∣nifies, that he did not lightly, but diligently labour among them, even to wearinesse, and that day and night. Zanchy. Vide Bezam. See Dr. Sclater.Vers. 16. VVrath is come upon them to the utmost]  untill the end, wrath is come upon them finally, so as it shall never be removed; so some interpret it Vers 18. But Satan hindered us] By casting a necessity on him of disputing often with the Stoicks and Epicures which were at Athens.Whether satan hindered by sicknesse, or by imprisonment, or tempests at sea, who can resolve? Dr. Sclater. Vers 19. For what is our hope, our joy, or crown of rejoycing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his comming] Paul tels the Thessalonians that they are his hope,B Lake. Vo estis spes mea, gaudium meum, & corona mea, non formalis, sed objectiva sive materialis, quia estis materia & objectum spei, gaudii, & coronae meae. à Lapidè. that is, the thing hoped for; joy, that is, the thing wherein he shall joy; and crown, that is, the thing for which he shall be crowned. CHAP. III. Vers. 1. WHerefore when I could no longer forbeare] As if he had said, my love to∣ward you was such,See 2d Ch. 8.11 Cum desiderium vestri nn fer∣rem diutius, nec tamn aditus ad vos daretur, visum fuit adventum & praesentiam meam per alium mihi conjunctissimum, ac velut alterum me, suppleri. Estius. and so strong within me, that it was like a fire in my breast, I could no longer keep it; and from thence it was that I sent Timotheus our brother to establish and comfort you touching your faith.
Vers. 5. No longer forbear] A desire both of knowing your faith and affaires.Jllud verbum  propriè significat continere se seu onus sustinere. Significat ergo Apostolus desiderium quo tenebatur videndi & in tot calamitatibus Thessaloncenses consolandi, cum non posset praestaere quod cupiebat propter Satanae impedimenta, fuisse sibi onus grave. zanch. Vers. 8. We live] That is, lead a merry life, so the Hebrewes use this word,Vivimus, hoc est rectè valmus. Calvinus. Psal. 22.27. and the Greekes and Latines also so use it. Jf yee stand fst in the Lord] A Speech borrowed from them that stand upon their guard or watch, or in their ranck, wherein they are set,Doctor Airay. Significatio est ingentis gaudij, quod ex ijs quae Timotheus nunciaverat, percepit. Estius. See Rom. 5.2. 1 Cor. 16.13. 1 Phil. 27. and 4.1. CHAP. IV. Vers. 4. KNow how] There is a peculiar mystery in every branch of Christianitie; I have learned, saith the Apostle how to want and abound. to possesse his ves∣sell in sanctification and honour] That is, his body which is the instrument of the soule, and containing it as in a vessell. The Hebrewes call all Instruments vessells.1 Sam. 21.5. 2 Cor. 4. 1 Pet. 3.7. Sane meretrix vulgari dicterio vas fractum appellatur. Drus. Adag. l. 4. Class. 1 Prov. As if he had said, that is indeed true sanctification agreeable to the will of God, and plea∣sing to him, that is throughout; outwardly in the body, keeping that pure and unde∣filed; and inwardly in the heart, rooting from thence the lust of concupiscence. Vers. 5. Not in the lust of concupiscence] That is, not in the inward burning lust stirring up to filthinesse, comming from inward concupiscence. Vers. 11. And that ye study Graecum ver∣bum significat eniti; quomodo legit Ambrosi∣nus, id est, magno conatu quippiam agere, translatum à more hominum ambitiosorum, qui summo studio & animi contentione nituntur ad honores. Estius.] The Greeke signifies to contend as it were for ho∣nour. To be quiet; the Greeke word signifies to rest, and live in silence; and to doe your own businesse] That is, doe the necessary workes of your callings that belong to you. Perkins. He forbids two vices, which for the most part goe together, idlenesse and curi∣osity. Vers. 12. And that ye may have lack of nothing] Or of no man, that is not need re∣liefe and help of any man, or of any thing.Perkins. Vers. 13. Sorrow not as those that have no hope] As if he had said, sorrow if you will; but do not sorrow as they that have no hope.Grace destroy∣eth not nature but rectifyeth it. Mr. Fenner on 2 Lam. 57. That is a sorrow with nothing but sorrow; from which they have no hope of inlargement or freedome. Vers. 16. With a shout] The word which the Apostle useth here,Graecè , id est, hortamen appel∣lant quod prae∣cpuè apud nautas est quasi solemne, ut uno veluti concen∣tu remos addu∣cant. Beza. 17. vers. Electi (inquit Cajetanus in loc.) qui relin∣quimur non mo∣riemur, sed de vita corporali transferemur in vitam immortalem. Vide Bezam. signifies properly the encouragement, which Marriners use one to another; when they all together with one shout put forth their Oares, and row together. It is called a clamour, a vo∣ciferation, a shout, and varied by our Translators, and Expositors, according to the originall of the word to be clamor hortatorius, suasorius, and jussorius. The voyce of the Archangell is added (saith Calvin) by way of exposition, shewing what that shout shall be; the Archangell shall exercise the office of a cryer, to cite the living and dead to Christs Tribunall. à Lapide saith that these words with those following, And with the trump of God] are a figure called Hendyadis. With the voyce of the Archangell, which is the Trump of God; so called, 1. By an Hebraisme, that is great and loud, so as to be heard through∣out the world. Secondly, because it shall goe before God the Judge. 3. Because it shall be terrible such as becomes the divine Majesty.
CHAP. V. Est ea humani ingenij curiosi∣tas ut quae maximè latent, ea maxime scire cupiat. Sic multi ea aetate scire cupiebant, quando venturum esset illud judicium.  sunt majora temporum spatia, ut anni:  minora, ut menses ac dies. Habes haec sic distincta Dan. 7.12. in Graeco & Act. 1.7. Grotius.Vers. 1. TImes] The Greeke word signifies space of time in generall. Seasons] The opportunities of doing things. See Acts 1.7. Touching the yeere, or moneth or age; when the Sonne of man shall come, it is as much unrevealed, as the season. Vers. 3. As travaile upon a woman with Childe] The Scripture useth this simili∣tude, Psal. 48.6. Ier 6.24. and 49.24. and 50.43. He signifies that the evill is 1. Certaine. 2. Sodaine. 3. Inevitable. Vers. 9. But to obtaine salvation] Or to the purchased possession; so the same word is rendred 1 Ephes. 13. and so it may be rendred 2 Thes. 2.14. Vers. 12. Know agnitio potissi∣mum consistit in obedientia, reve∣rentia & rerum ad vitam neces∣sariaū prompta ac liberali su∣ministratione. Estius.  hic est, non simpliciter cognoscere: sed agnoscere: hoc est, pro nostris pastoribus ac patribus reverenter amplecti, honore que debito afficere. Zanchius. them which labour among you] That is, both in heart acknowledge them the Ministers of Christ and in affection love them as his Ministers. Which labour among you] That is, which painefully, and earnestly labour among you till they be weary; Ministers must be labourers not loyterers. Vers. 13. And to esteeme them very highly in love] Have them in singular, or abun∣dant; or more abundant love, for their workes sake. Vers. 14. Warne them that are unruly] Which keep not their station. If we see any man disordered in his carriage,Some thinke it is a metaphore borrowed from the cu∣stome of war, wherein every Souldiour hath his station and is assigned to his ranck, from which when he sarve, he becomes inordinate. Metaphora sumpta à militibus sparsis & inconditis, quique (ut ait Cicero) non sunt in numeros coacti. Estius. we must not thinke he is an unruly fellow, and so let him goe; but admonish him, that is a duty of charity, as well as the next fol∣lowing. Support the weake] hold up as a crutch doth a body that is lame; or a beame a house that is ruinated, 1. Beare with their wants, and weaknesses. 2. Put under thy shoulder, to helpe to beare their necessities, Rom. 12.13.3. Help his burden of sinne from off him by admonishing, reproving, exhorting and praying. Doct. Taylor. , est propriè, nitentem & conantem, sed non sufficientem, nec sat virium ha∣bentem adjuvare. à Lapide. Vers. 17. Pray without ceasing] Ephes. 6.18. That is, on all occasions, every day. The originall word signifies such a performance of this duty that you do not cease to doe it at such times as God requires it at your hands;It may fitly be expounded by that in the next verse, in all things; for the sense would be the same if we should say, in all things pray, and continually give thankes] that is, upon every just occasion pray and give thankes. The Euchetae thought they might doe nothing else but pray; and grounded their heresie upon Luke 18.1. Ephes. 6.18. and this place. Bishop Down. of prayer, c. 27. the same word is used, 2 Tim. 1.3. 2. A man must ever be praying habitually; a true Christian hath alwayes a disposition to pray, though not the liberty, 2 Sam. 19.13. 3. There is a vitall prayer as well as an orall, semper orat qui bene semper agit. 4. We must blesse and sanctifie every thing to us by prayer. 5. Pray in all Estates, in prosperity and misery. Vers. 18. In every thing] That is, in every condition, or with every duty. For this is the will of God in Christ] The acceptable will of God in Christ. Vers. 19. Quench not the Spirit] That is, say the Anabaptists, hearken to the sug∣gestions of the private Spirit.Ephes. 4.30. Zanchius. The word Spirit is not taken essentially for the three persons in Trinity,Grace can ne∣ver be quench∣ed, but we may doe our in∣deavour to quench it. Vide Bezam. nor hypostatically for the third person, but Metonymically for the fruits of the Spirit. The Spirit is quenched two wayes as fire, 1. By throwing on water; all sinne is as water; sinnes doe quench the Spirits operations. 2. Fire may be quenched and put out by with-drawing of wood and fewell; all negligent using of the word, Sacrament, Prayer, Meditation, holy conference, and communion of Saints, doe much quench the Spirit.
Vers. 20. Despise not prophesyings] The Greek word signifies, account it not a thing of nothing, account it not a slight matter. This  implies highest reverence and esteeme,1 Cor. 14.3. this sentence is fitly added to the former, as if the despising of prophecying were a quenching of the spirit. Verse 21. Prove all things] The Greeke word betokens such a triall, as Goldsmiths use touching Mettall, for the discerning whereof they have a touch-stone, at which that which will not hold is rejected, and laid by as counterfeit. Vers. 22. Abstaine from all appearance of evill] That is, doe nothing wherein sinne appeares, or which hath a shadow of sinne. Vers. 23. And the very God of Peace sanctifie you wholly] One would rather have thought, he should have been stiled the God of grace, but God will not be a God of peace with us, till we be throughly sanctified. He is called the God of peace,Ambrose ex∣pounds it of Christ him∣selfe. because he hath the fountaine of peace in himselfe, peace is in him as a fountaine. 2. As the authour and communicatour of all peace unto us in all kinds, externall, internall, eternall. The whole man is sanctified throughout, when the spirit thinkes nothing, the will affects nothing, the body effects nothing contrary to the will of God. Our san∣ctification is perfect in parts, but not in measure, nor degrees; as a Childe is a perfect man in all the parts of a man, but not in quantity. Your whole spirit soule and body] By spirit he meaneth the understanding and will, the reasonable and highest faculties; by soule the sensitive powers, the affections and the appetite. By body the outward man, the Instrument of the Soule. Vers. 24. Who also will doe it] That is,Idem ipse dabit perseverantiam; hanc enim om∣nibus electis promisit, in quorum numero vos esse confido. Estius. he will finish and perfect his gracious work begun.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Second Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to the THESSALONIANS. CHAP. I. Hanc Eposto∣lam, inter Paulinas ordine temporis secun∣dam esse, utpote proxime scrip∣tam post po em ad Thessaloni∣censes, recte censent eruditi: De loco minus inter eos conve∣nit. Estius.GRotius thinkes this Epistle in order of writing was before the former; but the order was inverted by those which gathered, and digested the Epistles. Vers. 5. Counted worthy Loquitur hic apertè non de merito, sed de dignatiene gratuita: Quis enim meritus est vocari? Pareus. The proudest linguist in Rome, can∣not give one instance from any Classicall Author Divine or Prophane, where  signifies other then dignari. In our English to vouchsafe, to account, esteeme, or accept as worthy. Doctor Sclater.] Some translations formerly had it make worthy. This is of Gods free acceptance of grace, and not of the merit of our constancy; and it is so likewise fitly translated, 11. v. But because the making worthy is referred to God, the translators were not so care∣full of the terme, seeing it might be understood that God by his grace makes us wor∣thy in his account. And the Rhemists have falsely translated their owne Latine Text, which is dignetur, that our God would vouchsafe, or accept as worthy; and not to make worthy as they have wilfully corrupted the Text to make it serve their heresie. Doctor Fulke. Vers. 8. In flaming fire] In the fire or burning of flame, that is flaming, ,In igne flam∣mae, id est Flam∣mante sive in flammato. Atque ita legit Ambrosius. Scire autem licet apud vulgatum interpretem esse in flamma ignis. Quo∣modo sanè Tertullianus legit adversus Marcionem l. 5. c. 16. Ego parum referre arbitror utro modo legatur. Nam sie illud sive hc dicas, sententia in idem recidit. Ignis flammae legitur Jesa. 4, 5. & Thren. 2, 3. flamma ignis Jesa. 29.8. Drus. Observat. Sac. l. 16. c. 13. Vide Zanchium & Gotium in loc. by an Hebraisme, in igne flammante. See 2 Pet. 3.10. Vers. 10. To be admired in all them that beleeve] The Saints of God know most of Christ and his riches, yet then they shall admire him; admiration is the overplus of expectation. Admiratio oritur ex rerum novarum & magnarum intuitus. Zanchius. CHAP. II. IOhannes scripsit Antichristi Mysterium, Paulus Commentarium. John in his Revelati∣on,Antichristum typicè adum∣bravit Daniel c. 7. & sequentibus. Topicè posteà delineavit planius Paulus, 2 Thess. 2. plenius Johannes in Sigillis, Tubl & Phialis Apoca∣lypticis, una cum capitis 13. & 17. vivacissimis descriptionibus. Doctor Prid. Lectione de Antichristo. doth write of Antichrist obscurely as it were in a mystery; Paul in this Epistle speaketh of him plainely, as it were by way of Commentary. In all brother∣ly love, we be∣seech you to beware of sedu∣cers.  from  signifying love. , a brother derived from  a wombe, a wombe-brother being properly uterinus, the fruite of one wombe; this shewes that he tendred the Thessalonians as he did his Mothers wombe or his own bowels, as brethren.Vers. 1. Now we beseech you brethren, by the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him] The meaning is this, you know that Christ will come with a company of Saints; and as you hope and desire that your selves shall be added to
that company; even so we beseech you brethren by our gathering together, that you be not moved from the truth by any seducers. Vers. 2. That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled] Their terrour is exprest by a double metaphor, 1. from a Sea-storm, Elegans metaphora à fluctibus marinis sumpta, Vorstius. Shaken in mind, yea from their mind, so the originall; their mind or under∣standing seemed to be torn from them through the feare of the day of judgement, as a storm forceth a ship riding in the road to cut cable. 2. From Souldiers frighted by a sudden alarm; the Greek word is metaphora à clamore tumultuantium, Vorstius. a word taken from the noyse and cry of men in an uprore. Squire. It imports such perturbation as ariseth from rumour, Marke 13. or relation of something trouble∣some. Either by Spirit] That is, pretence of inspirations, revelations, immediate and extraordinary from the Spirit of God. There were some which had revelations from Satan, but delusions, pretended to speak to the people of God in the name of God. See Micah 2.11. 1 Iohn 4.1. That the day of Christ is at hand] Nempe hoc anno, nam  hic dicitur de re praesenti,1 Cor. 3.21. Gal. ut Rom. 8.38.4.4. Heb. 9.9. Grotius. Vers 3. Except there come a falling away first] The word here used signifies the shrinking of Souldiers from their Generall to the enemy; tam in sacris literis Act. 21.21. Heb. 3.12. quam in Theo∣logorum scriptis, defectionem à Deo denotat, ejusque fide, vel religione, quam semel quis pro∣fessus fuerat. Quam esse sinceram Graecae vocis proprietatem, Suarez fatetur. Atque ita seipsum postea exponit Apostolus. Clarius verò 1 Tim. 4.1. eandem Apostasiam praedicens. Patres verba Apostoli de spirituali apostasia interpretantur. Down. Diatrib. de Antichrist l. 3. c. 1. now it is by proportion drawn from hence to signifie an apostasie and backsliding from the profession of Christ to the contrary part, that is to Antichrist. The article insignis quaedam & quasi Catholica apostasia. Episc. Down. Quanquam patres aliqui hunc locum de defectione à Romano Imperio interpretantur, ut Ambrosius, Sedulius, Primasius, Tertullianus & Hieronymus; & Bellarminus ait hanc esse valde probabilem sententiam: tamen constat hanc defectionem non intelligi. Nam loquitur Apostolus de illa  quae futura erat per Antichristum: at Antichristus fidem & religionem oppugnaturus erat, non politiam, Christo se non Imperatori oppositurus: Ecclesiae & religionis, non Regnorum & Rerumpublicarum statum mutaturus. Whitakerus de Ecclesia cont. 2. q. 3.sheweth that he speaks of a famous apostacie There is a twofold defection, one civil, from the Roman Em∣pire; so Ambrose, Jerome, Tertullian, interpret it; the other Ecclesiasticall, from the true worship of God to Idolatry, defectio à side; so Chrysostome, Oecumen, Theophylact, and Theodoret expound it. Austen de civitate Dei saith this is the more probable, and so Paul useth the word Heb. 3. 1 Tim. 4. Some expound apostasie by a Metonymie of the adjunct, and understand by it Antichrist himselfe the Apostate. And that man of sinne be revealed] Antichrist is called , the man of sinne, because he amongst men is the most sinfull, either from his personall sinne, or corrupting others. An Hebraisme, merum scelus, Beza. The sonne of perdi∣tion] A man devoted to destruction. See John 17.12. Vers. 4. Who opposeth] Or is an adversary, or opposite, , another Satan, he is a divellish adversary. The article is not alwaies restrictive, restraining the name to an individuum. Matth. 1.35. Luke 4.4. And exalteth himselfe above all that is called God] That is, all those to whom the name of God is communicated. Angels in Heaven, Psal. 8.5. compared with Heb. 2.7. and Magistrates on earth, Exod. 22.12. Or that is worshipped] Any thing that is worshipped as God, or wherein God is worshipped. See Acts 17 23. So in the Church of Rome are the Host, the Crosse, the Saints, and their Images and Reliques. The Pope advanceth himselfe above Angels, Kings, and Princes, who are called Gods; above the Saints, the Host, the Crosse, and whatsoever  is in the Church of Rome, and yet requireth them all to be wor∣shipped. So that he as God sitteth in the Temple of God] To sit, either absolutely or transitive∣ly to set himselfe. The Temple] Not of Jerusalem, that was destroyed, and never to be restored: but the company of them which professe the name of Christ, who are called the house and Temple of God, 1 Pet. 2.5. Heb. 3.6. Ephes. 2.20, 21. 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. 2 Cor. 6.16.
Rev. 3.12. The Apostle speakes here of Antichrist, and saith, he sitteth in the Temple of God as God; those words as God, evidently shew that he speakes not of a corporall sitting in a materiall Temple, according to the grosse imagination of the Papists, (for so God doth not sit) but of the dominion of Antichrist in the universall Church,Sedere for ca∣thedratica po∣testate praesi∣dere. Estius. As the use of the word is frequnt in Greeke and Latine authors. see Matth. 13. Act. 18.11. Downam. Diatrib. de Antichristo. l. 1. c. 3. The chiefe place of the Popes dominion is called his Sedes, that is, See or seat. and the usurpation of supreame power over all Christians. Sitting is raig∣ning Psal. 9.5. & 29.10. & 110.1. compared with 1 Cor. 15.25. Zach. 6.12. and whereas other Kings and Princes are said to raigne some moneths or yeeres, the Pope of Rome is said to sit so long: so Rev. 17.11, 15. & 18 7. As God] Challenging to himselfe supreame, universall, and divine power in the Church,The Pope of Rome ruleth over the Church as if he were a God upon earth. The Canonists call him Dominum Deum nostrum Papam. See Downam of An∣tichrist, ch. 5. & 6. and equalling himselfe to our Lord Christ, blessed for ever. He shall rule and raigne as if he were a God. Shewing himselfe that he is God] The Greek word rendered shewing, as Beza obser∣veth, is answerable to the Hebrew Moreth, faciens se apparare, prae se ferens; or as we say, taking upon him as if he were God. Hoc est occulta quedam iniqui∣tas, alta, pro∣funda & nume∣ris omnibus ab∣soluta, nam ea vis est ejus locutionis apud alios auctores. Causab.Vers. 7. For the mysterie of iniquity doth already work] That is, Antichristianisme; it is iniquity, but mysticall, that is, palliated with the name of piety; so the ordinary Glosse. It is a divellish opposition unto Christ, cunningly cloaked under the pro∣fession of Christ. He who now letteth] . This is expounded two waies, which come both to one: qui obstat, so Chrysostome, and after him Oecumenius, so Beza and we; or qui tenet imperium,Romae enim Dominus qui potuit esse Anti∣christus, quam, diu Rmae domi∣natus est Impe∣rator? Latinè in∣terdum tenere dicuntur, qui rerum potiuntur. Down. ib. sive imperat, so Austen; For the Emperour by holding the Empire at Rome, did let or hinder the revelation of Antichrist. Down. de Antich. Vers. 8. Shall consume with the spirit of his mouth] That is, the preaching of the Gospell in the mouthes of his Ministers. Damascene by the spirit of his mouth here understands the Word of God, and the Chaldee so interprets Esay 11.2. The Greek  signifies the same with the Latine consumere, to consume, whether it be done by degrees or together. Quibus verbis putamus duos gradus distingui destructionis Antichristi, nimirum inchoatae & perfectae. Haec tum erit demum cum Dominus illustris appareit, nempe secundo & ad orbem universum judicandum. Illa autem hanc praecedet, quum verbo ejus, id est spiritu oris, ita conficietur.And shall destroy with the brightnesse of his comming] The Apostle means either the light of the Gospell, or the second comming of Christ to judgement, or some other notable manifestation of Christs presence in waies of power and justice, and shaking the earth. Vers. 9. Lying wonders] Or, as the words are , signes and wonders of lying; that is, most lying signes and wonders. B Down. of Antichrist. 1. In their originall they proceed from the Divell the father of lies. 2. In their mat∣ter, lies, appearances, juglings, Rev. 13.13. 3. End, lying and seduction, confirming lies. Rev. 13.14. Dr. Taylor. See Beza. Vers. 10. And with all deceivablenesse of unrighteousnesse] An Hebraisme, they call falshood unrighteousnesse; they deceive by their relickes and miracles. Rev. 13.14.  the out path leading to wickednesse. Because they received not the love of truth] that is, wilfully despised grace offered, those doctrines of truth concerning God; and our duty to him, and our salvation. .Vers. 11. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions] efficacy of delu∣sion. That they should believe a lie] That lie, viz Antichrist. Vers. 12. That they all might be damned who believed not the truth] that is, that shall not have believed the truth, Qui non crediderint veritati. But had pleasure in unrighte∣ousnesse]
But shall have delighted in iniquity, Sed acquieverint in injustitia.B. Down of Antich. l. 2. c. 12. See Mark 16.16. Vers. 13. And beliefe of the truth] This hath reference to salvation, that is, he hath appointed us to salvation, which is to be had by this means.Vers. 13. Videtur Apo∣stolus in verbis illis  digitum intendere ad initia ingressus peccati in mundum per praevaricationem Adae. Piscat. quod & mihi etiam (inquit Twissus) plurimum arridet. Vers. 14. Whereunto he hath called you by our Gospell] That is, the Gospell discovered in my preaching. To the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ] See 1 Thess. 5.9. Vers. 15. Therefore brethren stand fast, and hold Retinete, , totis ni∣mirum viribus. Haec enim est propria declara∣tio  quod eruditè obsevavit Syrus interpes Beza. 1 Cor. 11.2. See Beza and Fulke against Martin. vide Grotium. Nihil aliud per traditiones fignificat Apostolus, nisi doctrinam Eangelii de vera fide in Christum, & refipiscentia; quam ex sua institutione pridem didicerant, deinde per epistolam quoque edocti suerant. Supervacanea enim & falsa forent ista verba, sive per Epistolam, si per traditiones intelligeret tantùm ordinationes  quae pòst per manus traditae essent, seu de dogmatibus, seu de ritibus, praeter verbum dei, in Ecclesia servandis. Zanchius. the traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word, or our Epistle] The traditions which the Apostle recommen∣deth to the Thessalonians were no other but such as he mentioned to the Corinthi∣ans, according to the Scripture. The Apostle by those words hath reference to those things which are written elsewhere. The disjunctive whether doth not alwaies di∣stinguish between documents or precepts in respect of the substance or thing it selfe, but onely insinuates the divers manners by which one and the same doctrine is deli∣vered by one and the same Teacher present. The traditions] The doctrines delivered unto you; which you have been taught, whe∣ther by word] By lively voyce in the ministery of the word preached, which you heare;Mr. Hildersam. or by our Epistle] Or by the holy Scripture which ye reade. CHAP. III. Vers. 1. MAy have a free course] That is, a speedy and uninterrupted passage; and be glorified] That is, purely and powerfully preached.Id est, ut Evan∣gelica doctrina per nostram praedicatioum foeliciter ac sine impedimento propagetur ac proficiat; utque celebris efficiatur, atque de eo homines ubi∣que bene loquantur. Estius. Vers. 2. Vnreasonable] Absurd, . And evill men] , men desirous of trouble. Vers. 3. Who shall stablish you, and keep you from evill] Stablish you in the faith,Observanda sunt diligenter illa verba  & . habent enim singularem emphasin; notant nempe vim & efficaciam gratiae, qua imbecillitas illa & inconstantia nativa stabilitur & con∣firmatur adversus omem insultum, quo debilitari alioqui & frangi denique sanctissimus quisque facillime posset. Cameron praelect. in Matth. 18.7. lest you fall from it; and keep you from evill, viz. the divell, lest he subvert your faith by evill men, as the instruments of his art. Estius. Or it may be taken more generally here for any evill. à Lapidè. Vers. 5. And the Lord direct your hearts] The word signifies, by a right line to direct one to somewhat. Into the love of God] we cannot waite on the Lord Jesus Christ except we first love him. Vnto the patient waiting for Christ] That is, to endure in waiting for Christ,  sustinentia, patiens expectatio rei desideratae. Vers. 6. That walketh disorderly] Either without a calling, or idly and negligently in his calling. He explicates this in the subsequent words. And not after the tradition which he received of us] What the Tradition was is ex∣pressed by and by after, Vers. 10. He which will not labour must not eate. This doctrine was written before when God commandeth every man to labour in his vocation. Vers. 9. Not that we have not power] , right, title,See 1 Thess. 2.6. lawfull authority to take maintenance from his Auditors.
But that we might make our selves an example, &c.] , as 1 Tim. 4.12. when ap∣plied to denote what tends to exemplary, it signifies the liveliest expression, and as I may term it, effigiation of that vertue or vertuous practice which we desire to ex∣emplifie. Dr. Sclater. Vers. 10. If any would not worke] viz. in some speciall and warrantable calling. Vers. 11. That there are some] He chargeth not the crime upon the whole Church, he saith not at all, or most of you, but some; loquitur quam fieri potest parcissime. 2. He speakes indefinitely. Which walk among you disorderly] Not labouring but being busie bodies, living without a calling, or neglecting their calling, and going trifling up and down here and there, twatling and talking of what pertaines not to them. The word being military signifies one out of his ranke, one that is not in file to fight against his enemy. Nihil agentes sed curiose sa tagentes. Steph. praefat. ad Nov. Test Nihil operantes sed circum operantes. Estius. Vide à Lap.Working not at all, but are busie-bodies] There is an elegant Paranomasia in the Greeke, , which other languages cannot expresse; not working, but over working; not working at home, but overworking abroad. Idlenesse and curiositity goe together. Vers. 12. And eat their own bread] That is, the bread which is procured and deser∣ved by his own just and honourable labour. As if he had said, He that doth nothing hath right to nothing, he hath no bread of his own to eat. Vers. 13. Be not weary in wel-doing] Giving over and fainting, because he findeth not such successe and encouragement from men as he should. Vers. 14. Note the man] judicially, that all may avoyd him; that is, excommuni∣cate him.Baines his Dio∣cesans triall. Significat no∣tare, nota qua∣piam insignire, & in abquem animadver∣tere: ut censores apud Romanos notare solebant. Dicit ergo, notate ignominia, tanquam probrum, & pestem publicam: seu ut nos lo∣quimur, excommunicate, excludite Ecclesiâ & coetu vestro. Zanchius. vide Bezam. Some rather render notice, or signifie him: the word signi∣fies both. Note him with a brand of infamy, or notice him as infamous to the Church, that all may avoyd him. See Dr. Sclater in loc. And have no company with him] Greeke, be not mingled with him, in intimate familiarity. See 1 Cor. 5.9, 11.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE First Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to TIMOTHY. CHAP. I. THe Epistles of the Apostles, were directed either to Churches in ge∣nerall as the Romans, Corinthians, Galatians, Philippians, or persons in particular, either publicke, as Timothy, Titus, or pri∣vate as Philemon. Pauls two Epistles to Timothy, and to Titus, are alike in their argument; for they instruct a Minister, and shew the speciall parts of his Office; although it be done more fully in this first Epistle. Timothy signifies the honour of God, or precious to God; he honoured God,From  honoro &  Deus q.d. Cultor Dei vel hono∣rans Deum. Pasor. Sic  a ver∣bo  magni aestimo, n preti habeo, honoro. and was precious to him. Paul wrote this Epistle to Timothy, to shew him how to carry himselfe in the house of God. Vers. 2. Grace, Mercy, and Peace] See 2 Tim. 1.2. These three are joyned together only in the Epistles to Timothy, and Titus, as Theophylact hath observed out of Chry∣sostome. Grace signifies the free good will, and favour of God towards us. Mercy the free pardon of our sinnes, and restoring of the Image of God. Peace tranquillity of conscience, and joy from the sense of Gods favour. Vers. 3. . Vide Bezam. Verbum Grae∣cum quo usus est Paulus, est compositum: ideóque tranferri potest, vel secus docere, ac novo modo: vel tradere diversam doctrinam. Paulus eos intelligit qui ambitionis causa novam doctrinam ingerebant. Non vocatur alia doctrina tantùm quae palàm cum pura Evange∣lij doctrina pugnat, sed quaecunque parum. Evangelium vel corrumpit novis & adventitijs figmentis, vel profanis speculationi∣bus obscurat. Calvinus. Si quis aliter docet, vel si quis aliena docet. Gerh. in c. 6. v. 3. Teach no other doctrine] The word may be extended both to matter (as some) to teach no other thing; or to manner, (as others) to teach no other way; not to teach nova, no nor yet novè. Vers. 5. Charity] That is love both to God for himselfe, and man for God. Intellige charitatem erga Deum simul & proximum. Vorstius. From a pure heart] That is, a sincere heart, 1 John 3.18. Vers. 6. From which some having swerved] or missed the marke. A metaphore ta∣ken from bad shooters, say Chrysostome, Theophylact, and Oecumenius. See Gal. 6.16. à scopo aber∣rantes. Quae vox sumpta est à jaculatoribus; diciturque de ijs qui carentes arte jaculandi & collimandi in scopum, ab eo aber∣rant, & in aerem alióve sua tela conjiciunt. Cornel. à Lapide. Vers. 8. But we know that the Law is good] 1. In respect of the matter of it therein con∣tained. 2. In respect of the authority stamped upon it by God,Lex est bona; ut pote à bono Deo profecta, & nihil praecipiens nisi quod bo∣num est; Deni∣que bona quia servata vitam praestat. Loquitur autem praecipuè de lege morali, quae continetur decalogo, ut patet ex peccatis & contrariis quae mox enume∣rat. Estius. whereby it becomes a rule unto us. 3. Instrumentally as used by Gods Spirit for good. 4. In respect of its san∣ction; for it is accompanied with promises temporall, Command fifth; and Spirituall, Command second. 5, In respect of the Acts of it. 6. In respect of the end of it, Rom. 16.7. In respect of the Adjuncts of it. 8. In respect of the use of it. Mr. Burgesse in loc.
Jf a man use it lawfully] There is an allusion in the words, the law lawfully, . 1. To discover his sins, that he may be kept low in his own eyes▪ Vt estia ista justitiae propriae occidatur. 2. When by the precepts and curses of the Law, one is brought to set a higher price on Christ. 3. When one delights in it, Rom. 7.22. The Law is good in it selfe, but it shall not be good to thee, if thou use it not law∣fully. See Mr. Pem∣ble of Justificat. Sect. 5. c. 2. p. 183.184. and à Lapide.Vers 9. Knowing this, That the Law is not made for a righteous man] This place seemes to make for the Antinomists. There is no law to the righteous man to condemne him, being a person justified; no law to compell him, because he is a voluntier, and doth willingly yeeld obedience to the law without constraint, but a law to command guide, and direct him. Doctor Taylor. Some interpret it thus, the law (viz. in the threatenings of it) is not made for a righteous man. The law was not set to bring any of the punishments which are here threatned upon the righteous and holy. Augustinus, Thomas, Glossa ordina∣ria slatuunt mentione igno∣raniae peccatum Pauli exag gerari. sic par∣ticula oi hoc loco non causa∣liter sed adversativè est accipienda ut Act. 1.17. quanquam ignorans feci. Gerh. in loc. Non causam adfert cur ipsi ignosci de∣buerit, sed cur Deus ipsi potius quàm aliis ignoverit. Grotius.Vers. 13. Because I did it ignorantly in unbeliefe] The words are rather thus to be read notwithstanding, or although J did it ignorantly, not for I did it ignorantly, or because I did it ignorantly by way of excuse. He was not converted because he did it ignorant∣ly; then all those which sin ignorantly should be converted;  is rendred although Luke, 23.40 the same Greeke word that is here used. The words are brought in by way of aggravation, did it ignorantly in unbeleefe, an ignorance of pave disposition. Some say his ignorance left a capacitie in the subject, not in the sinne; else he had sinned, committing it so maliciously against the holy Ghost. Mr. Bridge on 106. Psa. 8 Vers. 14. And the grace of our Lord] That is, Christ. Was exceeding abundant] , was over full, redundant, more then en∣ough. Superabundavit, plus quam abundavit. Gerh. Supermultiplicata est, supercrevit, exuberavit, superabundavit à Lapide. Vers. 15. And worthy of all acceptation] The Apostle in this word acceptationem & approbatio∣nem ntat, quo sensu Syus red∣ddt, Fidelis est sermo & dignus qui re∣cipiatur. Gerh. in loc. See Cjetane. (saith P. Fag. in Deut. 5.27.) hath respect to the Jewish Cabala, that which is authentique, certaine and undoubted is called Cabala, we must not doubt of this truth. That Christ Iesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom J am chiefe , I am the fist of sinners, so it is in the Greeke. Primus non tempore sed malignitate.] Some say Paul calls himselfe the chiefest of sinners, because his sinnes were more generall then others; his persecution against the whole Church. See Vorstius. 2. Peccatorum sal∣vatoum primus Aquinas. Not absolutely a greater sinner then the Pharisees, who sin∣ned against the holy Ghost; but the greatest sinner of all that should be saved, for he sayes in the same verse, Christ came to save sinners, of which saved sinners I am the chiefe. 3. Others interpret it thus, Paul was so in his own apprehension, he esteemed him∣selfe the greatest sinner; so Estius, à Lapide. By these words we are admonished (saith Calvin) what a great and hainous crime infidelitie is, especially where obstinacy and cruelty is joyned with it. Vers. 17. To the onely wise God] God is said to be onely wise, because he is of him∣selfe, perfectly and immutably wise. See 16. Rom. ult. honor est ipsius majestati Dei excellentia, splendor, a miratio & virtus:  verò seu gloria illius tantae virtutis praedicatio, praeconium & celebratio, quae sit oe hominum vel Angelorum. Danaeus in loc. Vide Estium.Be honour and glory] Fides est ut na∣vis: vita pura velut guberna∣culum. Guber∣naculo abjecto non mirum si navis in scopulos impacta frangitur. Grotius. vulg. Barbarè, naufragaverunt. Metaphora sumpta est à mecatoribus, quorum merces naufragio pereunt, vel potiûs à navigantibus in naufragio submersis. Geth. in loc. Translatio sumpta videtur on a navigantibus (non enim dicit Apostolus ipsos periisse) sed à mercatoribus quorum merces naufragio pere∣unt. Estius.Vers. 19. Holding faith and a good conscience, which same having put away, concerning faith have made shipwrack] He compareth our conscience to a ship, our Religion and faith to our treasures laid in it; as a hole in the Ship looseth the treasures by sink∣ing
the Ship: so crack the conscience, and the treasures of Religion suffer ship∣wrack. Having not expelled, but repelled; or put from them a good conscience, That is, not caring to keepe a good conscience. Concerning faith have made Shipwrack] That is, became Heretikes; he meanes not the gift of faith whereby we doe beleeve, but the doctrine of faith, which we doe be∣leeve, 2 Tim. 2.18. Vers. 20. Whom I have delivered unto Satan] By excommunication, whereby for their Heresie and blasphemy I have cast them out of the Church.Quod Beza & Pscat. per ex∣communicatio∣nem factum vo∣lunt. Sed quod pace tantorum virorum dixe∣rim, multum differt  ab excommunica∣tione, quan∣quam in finibus aliquatenus con∣veniant. Nam Satanae tradere est aliquem impoenitentem flagitiosum, qui sam excommunicatus est, aut excommunicari more∣retur, in Diaboli potestatem tradere, ut eum corporali quoque cructatu affligat, quo melius ad poenitentiam adducatur, & a tam enormi scelere terreatur, quo saltem anima ejus salva maneat. Fuit haec potestas quaedam peculiaris, à Domino unà cum dono mi∣raculorum Apostolis suis concessa: ut ita operâ Satanae aut alio quodam modo possent affligere, etiam absentes cum essent, enormiter flagitiosos, ut videre est Act. 5.10. & 13.2. Itaque non congregatio ecclesiae sed Apostoli tradebant Satanae, etiam ab entes 1 Cor. 5.5. Haec potestas tunc temporis ecclesiae impense suit necessaria ad coercendos contumaces. Nondū enim erant Magistratus Christi∣an, quorum auxilio hic ecclesia uti potuisset. Scultetus in loc. Tradidi Satanae) nempe morbis cruciandos ut 1 Cor. 5.5. expli∣ca vimus. Grotius in loc. Estius. Tertull. in Apol. c. 39. calls this excommunication divinam censuram, a divine censure. Cyprian Epist. 62. gladium Spiritualem, a spirituall sword. Ierome Epist. 13. virgam ferream an Iron rod. Chrysostome thinkes that those which were excommunicated by Paul, were also corporally vexed by Satan, 1 Cor. 5.5. but that doth not plainly appeare saith Estius. Calvi compares this place with Cor. 5.5. and expoùnds it of excom∣munication; for since Christs kingdome is in the Church, out of it Satan raignes. Therefore he that is cast out of the Church, must necessarily live so long under Satans Tyranny, till being reconciled to the Church, he returnes to Christ. Chry∣sostome, Theophylact, Oecumenius, à Lapide, Vorstius, with Doctor Hall, interpret it also of excommunication. CHAP. II. Vers. 1. FIrst of all] Not afore all other ordinances. Supplications] Under which word he comprehendeth confession of faith, and craving pardon for them. Prayers] That is, Petitions for blessings of all kindes that we stand in need of. Intercessions] By which he meaneth deprecations of those evills and judgements which we see cause to feare. Vers. 2. For Kings and all that are in authority] Greeke in dignity or eminency. Nero then ru∣led.Vide Calvinum Estium, à Lapi∣de in loc. That charge was given by Paul, even then when Caesar was a persecutor of Christian Reli∣gion. Heron. Tertullian in his Apologie, c. 39. speaking of those things which were done by Christians in their assemblies saith, Oramus etiam pro imperatoribus, pro Ministris eo∣rum & potestatibus, prostatu saeculi, pro rerum quiete. Vers. 4. Who will have all men to be saved] 1. All kinds of men, some of all sorts, Jewes, Gentiles, rich, poore; some of all ages, sexes, conditions, nations, callings.Genera singulo∣rum non singu∣la generum. De hominum generibus, non singulis personis sermo est. Nihil enim aliud intendit, quàm principes & extrancos populos in hoc numero includere. Calvinus. 2. Such as come to the knowledge of the truth. 3. q. d. No man is saved, but hee whom God will have saved, as when a publique Schoole-master teacheth children in such a City, we are wont to say, that he teacheth all the boyes of that City, not sim∣ply all, (for many are not taught) but all that are taught. Vers. 5. And one mediatour between God and men] In the Greek it is,Vnus etiam mediator Dei & hominum. Beza. Vulg. Mediator Dei dicitur, quia Deus ipso tanquam internuncio & sponsore utitur apud homines: Hominum autem quia pro hominibus apud Deum intercedit, ipsosque sua morte Deo reconciliat. Vorstius. one medi∣atour of God and men; which may referre either to the two parties betwixt which he deales, pleading for God to men, and for men to God; or to the two natures, mediatour of God, having the divine nature, and of men having the humane nature
upon him.Vide Estium in loc. The Papists say Christ is our onely Mediatour of redemption; but the Saints are Mediators of intercession. But the Apostle speaketh so plainly of Prayer and intercession, as that distinction will not serve; the office of intercession pertain∣eth unto Christ, as part of his Mediation, Heb. 7.15. Vers. 8. I will therefore that man pray everywhere] When God had not now limited Prayer to any place, had ruined the set place for Prayer at Ierusalem. See 4. Iohn 21. Lifting up holy Paes con∣stanter puras manus, non aqua lotas (sc. lustrali, ut Baronius) sed sanctas & purgatas ab omni iniquitate interpretantur. Sic Chrysostomus, Theodoretus, Oecumenius, Lyranus.  significat sanctum Heb. 7.26. Apoc. 15.4. etiam profanis scriptoribus; praestat igitur cum Lu∣thero sanctas manus, quam cum vulgata puras vertere. Scultetus. hands] which are not defiled with bloud and sinnes, Esay 1.15. Without wrath and doubting] Wrath against men, and doubting in respect of God; faith and charity are required in Prayer. Vers. 11. Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection] The Apostle here speakes of the order, and comlinesse of publicke Ecclesiasticall Assemblies, wherein women were not allowed to take upon them any power, or function of teaching, for three reasons here propounded. 1. From their condition, which is to be obedient unto man; and therefore in mans presence, they must not usurpe the authority of teachers. 2. Their function which is to serve men; for Adam was first created, and Eve for A∣dam. 3. From the weaknesse of their sexe, which lies more open to Satans seduce∣ment. Vide Grotium. Vers. 13. For Adam was first formed, then Eve] Therefore Adam must be superi∣our;Quod signum eminentioris in viro dignitatis, 1 Cor. 11.8. Grotius. Vide Calvinum. by that reason (may some say) Birds and Beasts should be preferred before both. The Apostle speaketh of the same kind, and not of divers kinds. Doctor Taylor. Vers. 14. And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived, was in the trans∣gression] To be deceived,Mirum quàm se hic antiqui tor∣serint. Ephipha∣nius hae. 49. Jun. paral. l. 2. p. 47. Calvin. Beza, say, Adam was not first deceived, as 13. verse. Chrysostom saith he was not properly, nor immediately deceived from the Serpent, but occasionally. Mercer that he was not deceived but en∣ticed. Ierome, and Drusius, that he was not deceived by the Serpent, but by Eve. Theophylactus mulierem à cupiditate, virum à multere seductum ait. Non deceptus est, nempe à serpente. Grotius. vide Estium & à Lapide. is to erre and mistake in judging. Adam did not eat out of errour as Eve; for he did not perswade himselfe, that he should get more knowledge by it, but alone was drawn to follow his wife by her intreaty, as not thinking that death could follow the eating of the fruit, when he saw that his wife (who had eaten already) was not dead, but as healthy as before. Yet Adam sinned more then Eve, because he received the Commandement from the Lord; he had more wisedome and strength, and had a greater measure of knowledge. Therefore this place here (saith Paulus Fagius on third of Gen. 19.) is to be understood of the weaknesse of women, not of the greatnesse of the sinne. Vers. 15. Notwithstanding she shall be saved in Childe-bearing] , by bearing of that childe viz. Jesus Christ, which words are to be understood (saith one) as those of Gal. 3.16. by the childe-bearing of one of that sexe, woman kinde shall be restored into a capacity of heavenly blisse; or in, that is thorough, or by Child∣bearing. Non causam cur salvabitur, sed statum in quo salvabitur designat. Rivetus. It is added, if they shall continue, which it is not to be understood of the children but of the woman, that is to say the sexe which being a word collective, signifying a multitude, is joyned to a verbe of the plurall, as turba ruunt. CHAP. III. Vers. 1. IF a man desire the office of a Bishop] This Greeke word signifies an earnester desire then the other following,Pro desiderat in Graecu non est unum idemque vocabulum, sed priori loco , appetit, unde  appetentia, praesertim cibi vehementior, vocabulum eti∣am Latinis authoribus usurpatum Posterius verbum est  cupit, defiderat; utitur autem in priori loco vehementioris signi∣ficationis vocabulo; quod eadenires nomine Episcopatus desideretur ardentiùs quàm nomine operis & officij. Estius. because the same thing (say Estius, and Ger∣hard)
by the name of Episcopacy, is more ardently desired, then by the name of work and duty. Vers. 2. A Bishop then must be blamelesse] viz. In respect of his life and outward conversation.The Apostle requires six∣teen conditions from a Bishop; ten affirmative, six negative. The husband of one wife] Because in the East particular men had sometimes more wives; as now the Jews and Turks have, say Gerh. in loc. Scultetus. Vide Bezam. See Titus 1.6. Polygamia hic nominatim in Episcopo damnatur quae tunc apud Iudaeos pro lege ferè obtinuerat. Gerh. some. But he means it at one time,See Vers. 12. as Ch. 5. v 9. though he have been married more then once. The godly ancient fathers accounted him to be Bigamus that had two wives at once, and not him that had been twice married. Vigilant] That diligently attends his flock, Vulg. Sobrium,. Perinde est, sive sobrium, sive vigilantem ver∣tas. Quanquam hoc posterius ad proprietatem verbi magis quadrat. Vorstius. Estius and Gerhard say both significations agree. Sober] . The Greek word properly signifies a man of a sound mind, that is, prudent and circumspect. Some have rendred it prudentem, o∣thers pudicum, others temperantem; the Greek word signifies all these, saith Estius, and Gerhard after him. Of good behaviour] Or, neate. . In countenance, gate, speech, and whole habit of the body, well and decently composed. Given to hospitality] . A lover of strangers; who willingly entertaines and receives Christians, especially Ministers. Apt to teach] , furnished with gifts of teaching. Vers. 3. Not given to Wine] That is, to be a common tipler  vinosus, q.d. vino assidens, scilicet ad perpotandum. Gerh. in loc. Non tantùm ebrietatem hoc verbo notant Graeci, sed quamvis intemperiem in vino ingurgitando. Calvinus., and one that loves to sit by the Wine, morning and evening, day by day. No striker] Cognata vitiae sunt vinolentia & violentia. Non oporet Episcopum esse per∣cussorem. Nor greedy of filthy lucre] When one by unlawfull means heaps up riches, and is more tenacious of his Goods then fit,  est turpis lucri sectator. It may be re∣ferred to the object, that one should not gaine by any base thing; and to the manner, that one should not filthily affect gaine from an honest thing Gerh. in loc. This seems redundant, for it follows after not covetous. à Lapide. But patient] One that will depart from his own right for peace sake. Not a brawler] , alienus à pugna. Not covetous] Not a lover of silver, . Munster in the third Book of his Cosmography hath a terrible example of covetousnesse, in Hatton Archbishop of Mentz, which calling the poore Mice, and suffering them like Mice to perish with hunger by the just judgement of God, was invaded by Mice, which fled to his Tower, (which is yet to be seen on the River of Rhene) and there devoured him. Vers. 6. Not a novice] Paul saith not , but ;Chrysostome. Nuper im∣plantatum, qui à falsa religione nuper ad veram transiit. Gerh. in loc. Vide Bezam. it is not meant of young in yeeres, but in faith; one newly converted to the Christian faith; as it were a tender and young plant in Christianity. Such a one is apt to be proud especially if a Minister. He fall into the judgement or condemnation of the divell] That is, into the same con∣demnation with the devill. Vers. 8. Likwise] Similer, Vulg. In the Greek it is not , but , which signifies itidem, in like manner. Must the Deacons be grave] . id est, Prae gravitate reverendus, to be reverenced for his gravity. Chap. 4.12. & Titus 2. ult. Vers. 13. For they that have used the office of a Deacon well] Some B. Barlow in his Sermon on Act. 20.28. Id est, qui diaconatus officio bene functi fuerint, viam sibi parabunt ad gradum majorem & honoratio∣rem, nompe presbyterii vel etiam Episcopatus. Estius. would have it ren∣dered, they which have discharged the office of a Deacon well,See Par on 12. Rom. 8. p. 257. and finde fault with the Ge∣nevah
for rendring it, those which have ministred well, purchase to themselves a good de∣gree.Id. ib. Graedum sibi honestum faci∣unt. nempe ad presbyterium. It enim mos erat illorum saeculorum, ut ex optimis de Christiana plebe diaoni fieint, ex diaconis optimis pres∣byteri, ex presbyteris optimis praesidente. Grotius. vide Calvinum. Some would have it rendered, prepare unto themselves a fair step since ; pro∣perly signifies a stair or a step, as Acts 21.35. Doe justly obtaine the favour and ho∣nour to be preferred to the higher offices in the Church. Dr Hlls Paraphrase. Vers. 15. The Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of truth] In old time the Gentiles used to write their Laws in Tables,The Apostle here speaks of a pillar not more architecto∣nico, under∣standing by it some essentiall piece of the building: but more forensi, for such a post or pillar on which Tables and Proclamations are wont to hang. Dr. Preston. and so hang them upon pillars of stone, that the people might read them, as Proclamations are nailed to posts in Market∣townes; they had other pillars also like the Pasquils in Rome, whereupon whosoever listed hung their Epigrams or Libels which they would have known. The Apostle describing the Church, likens it to one of these pillars, whose use was to shew what hung thereon. This Church Dr. Chaloner  Columnam Gal. 2.9. . generaliter susten∣ticulum & quasi sedem, aut id cui res quoquo modo innititur, significat. Gerh. in loc. here is not the Church which the Papists make to be the Judge of controversies; neither the Church representative which is a generall Councell; nor the Church virtuall, which they imagine to be the Pope: but the Church essentall, the Congregation of all believers, the House of God, as he cal∣leth it. These words, the pillar and ground of truth, may have reference, not to the Church,Chillingworth. but to Timothy, that thou mayst know how to behave thy selfe as a pillar and ground of truth in the Church of God, which is the House of the living God; for having called the Church a house, it may seem somewhat heterogeneous to call it a Pillar. 2. The Church which here Paul speaks of,Vide Camero∣nis myothecium Evangelicum, & Scultetum in loc. was that in which Timothy conversed; and that was the particular Church, and not the Romane. 3. If he speake of the Universall Church, this shews us what it should be, not alwaies what it is; as that, You are the Salt of the earth, said Christ to his Disciples, because it was their office to be so. 4 By truth here is meant all necessary to salvation, not all profitable truth, absolutely and simply All. Mysterium qod quae ea dsciplina tra∣duntur cogno∣sicada, naturae lace comprehendi nquant; mysterium verò pietatis, quod eadem illa (quaecunque tandem sint) agnita semel & credita excitent admirables affectus pretalis. Cameron.  saepe vocatur Evangelium, non modo quia tamdiu latuit, verum etiam quia humanâ industriâ ne∣qut reperiri. Matth. 16.17. Grotius.Vers. 16. Great is the mystery of godlinesse] The Gospell is so called. because as it is a doctrine made for the honour, dignity, and promotion of godlinesse; so it is a doctrine which consists of such truths and connexions of things that are farre remote from the common thought, reasons, and understandings of men. CHAP. IV. Vers. 1. EXpressely]  disertè Beza apertè significat. Grotius in so many words. In the latter times] viz. Under Antichrist. The Scripture speakes of the latter times,Appellatione  inteligitur to∣tum illud tem∣poris spacium, quo inter primum & secundum Christi adventum intercedit. Luc. 8. v. 8. 2 Timoth. 3. v. 1. 2 Pet. 3. v 3. 2 Johan. 2. v. 18. Jud. v. 18. Gerh. in loc. Novissimus dies dicitur in Scripturis quadrupliciter. Primò, pro multo seu longo temporis post. Gen. 49.1. Deut. 4.30. Dan. 2.28.29. Secundò, pro temporibus Novi Testamenti; hoc est, initio adventus Christi seu Messiae, Isa. 2. v. 1. Mich. 4.1. Act. 2.16. Tertiò, pro omnino novissimo ac extremo de mundi ac judicii universalis. Joan. 6.54. & 11.24. & 12.49, Quartò, pro antecedente, 2 Pet. 3.4. Judae v. 8. Atque ita etiam in loco isto Pauli secundum expositionem ipso∣rum Papistarum, Lyrae, Cajetani, Espensaei, Salmeronis, & aliorum. Laurentii Grotius Papizans. the times of Antichrists rise and discovery, when the Apostasie shall overspread all the Christian Churches, 2 Thess. 2.8, 10. and the last times, 2 Tim. 3.1. the times of Antichrists destruction, Rev. 106. Some shall depart from the faith] That is, from the doctrine of faith, which in gene∣rall is the holy Scripture, in speciall the Gospell, called therefore the word of faith, Rom. 10.8. and the law of faith, Rom. 3.27.
Vers. 2. Having their consciences seared with is hot Iron] , is to cauterize, to seare with an hot Iron, or cut off with searing, as Chirurgeons doe rotten Mem∣bers: Now that which is seared becomes more hard and brawny, and so more dull, and not so sensible in feeling as otherwise; in this sense  signifies those who have a hard and brawny conscience,Medes Apostasie of the latter times. Ali putant alludi ad Cau∣terium quo sig∣nabantur equi & mancipia in fronte, ut ex nota inusta cognosci possent; alludit Apostolus ad instrumentum Chirurgicum quo re∣secantur ustione partes malè sanae à corpore humano▪ Alsted paratir. vide Gerh. in loc. which hath no feeling in it: in the other sense, as  is to cut off by searing, it must signi∣fie those who have no conscience left; there is not much difference, but I follow the first, a hard and unfeeling conscience. vide Estitum. Vers. 3. Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstaine from meats, which God hath created to be received with thanksgiving] It was the very purpose and intent of else Creatour of all things, when he made the food wherewith we sustaine our selves, that the use of it should be joyned with giving of thanks,Aliud est dam∣nare nuptias & cibos, quod Mar∣cionitae, Taliani & Manichaei fecerunt; aliud prohibere; quod faciunt Ponti∣ficii. Down. Diatrib. de Antich. part. 1. l 3. c. 2. See Fulke on the Rhem. Test. Nota est Antichristi prohibere nuptias. Hieron. * Adversarii dicunt Montanum hoc in loco intelligi. At nos dicimus illos à Montano hoc accepisse. Whitakerus de Eccles. vide Calvinum. whereof we have example in Christ and Paul. Who forbid marriage and meats but the Papists? They forbid marriage to some men at all times, and certain meats to all men at some times, and that for religions sake: esteeming of marriage in their Clergy worse then adultery, or Sodomy; and eating of flesh in Lent, or other forbidden times, as a mortall sinne. Downam of Antichrist, l 1. c. 4. Which believe and know the truth] As if those that wanted faith and saving know∣lede did but usurpe the bread they eat. Vers. 4. And nothing to be refused] viz. Out of religious respect of conscience to Gods word. Vers. 5. For it is sanctified by the Word and prayer] Sanctified] that is, made holy and lawfull for us to use. By the Word] Certifying us of Gods will, that we may use them. And prayer] Whereby we crave his particular good liking for our use of the creatures, with praising him. Vers. 8. Having promise of the life that now is] That is of earthly blessings, and riches;Graecè promis∣siones numero plurali, videtur enim apostolus significare quod in sacris literis multae extant hujusmodi promissiones. Estius. Eternall blessings onely are promised absolutely, and temporall with restraint, viz. if they serve for Gods glory, and the good of his children. Vers. 10. Who is the Saviour of all men,Vide Calvi∣num. specially of those that believe] It is meant of Gods generall providence; or, if of his speciall mercies, that they are offered to all. Vers. 12. Let no man despise thy youth] Though young, yet so carry thy selfe in thy ministery,Nolo te talem exhibeas, ut possis ab aliquo meritò contemni, Hieron. Epist. ad Titum. See Titus 2.7. 1 Pet. 5.6. Fac ut morum gravitate tantum reverentiae tibi concilies, ne quid aetas tua juvenilis, quae alioqu contemptui obnoxia esse solet, tua authoritate minuat. Calvinus. that they may reverence and feare thee for thy gravity therein. In word] That from his mouth they might be instructed in the wholsome word of truth. And in conversation] That in his life they might see that integrity which becom∣meth Saints. It is all one (saith Calvin) as if he had said, Dictis & factis, adeoque tota vita. Vers. 13. Till I come give attendance to reading, to exhortation,Exhortation] or consolation  rather the first here, as Lavater Estius. to doctrine] As if he should say, that thou mayst be able to exhort and teach, study hard. Marke the order, he preposeth reading; for the Scripture is the fountaine of all wisdome, whence Pastors ought to fetch what they utter to their flock. Vers. 14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophesie] Hildersam. Vide Scultetum. As if he should say, suffer it not by idlenesse to decay, but stir it up, nourish and increase it. Vers. 15. Give thy selfe wholy to them]  be in them; which phrase implies much intention and Industry in our studies. Sic Horatius: totus in illis.
That thy profiting may appeare to all] As if he should say, strive so to teach as it may appeare thy gifts increase daily. Vers. 16. Take heed unto thy selfe, and unto thy doctrine] Luke 14.7. Take heed Attende tibi ipsi, ut rectè vivas; attende etiam doctrinae, ut alios rectè instituas. Estius. unto thy selfe how thou sinnest, and to thy doctrine what thou teachest. See Acts 20.28. CHAP. V. Vers. 1. REbuke not an Elden] Doe not handle him roughly, and as it were strike him,Ne rigidè eum tractate, & quasi plagam ei imponite. Vorstius. vide. Cornel. à Lap. as the Greek word signifies. Vers. 3. Honour widdows that are widdows indeed] He alludes (say Calvin, Estius, à Lapidè,Alludit ad ety∣mon , quod est à , id est, destituo, desolor, arbo; sic & La∣tinè vidua à viduando dicitur. Vide V. 5. à Lapidè.) to the Greek name for a widdow which comes of a Verbe that signifies to be destitute and deprived. Those widdows which were destitute of humane help and comfor, the would have sustained at the publique charge of the Church, which is ter∣med honour because they terrified thereby the vertues of those so sustained. Vers. 4. Any widdow] Any mother or father. Have children] That is, those which come immediately from their own bodies. Nephews] Grandchildren or great-grandchildren. Shew piety] To perform duty to parents is pious. And to requite  vicem rependere, in praebendis sc. alimentis. Gerh.] That is, doe one good turn for another. For it is good] That is, morally, a commendable vertue. And acceptable before God] pleaseth God wonderfully. Vers 6. But she that liveth in pleasure] That makes it her element, all her businesse is to take delight; significationem habet pruritus. Est ergo lasciva & procax. Iac. 5.5. Aug. quae in delitiis agit. Cyprian. Quae delicata est. Gerh. so Iames 5. Is dead while she liveth] That is unprofitable; a life led in pleasures is a death. The Ancients call idlenesse a buriall of a living man. Vers. 8. He hath denied the faith] He takes not faith in a full latitude; in that par∣ticular he shews himselfe to be no believer. And is worse then an Infidell] He that is worse then an Infidell is neere to the divell; there is no worse thing then an Infidell. But the Apostles meaning is, he commits a sinne greater in some respect then they doe which remain in infidelity. He is worse then an Infidell in this point, because he by the very light of nature knows this to be a duty. Hac parte fidelis, si curam suorum non habeat, infideli deterior est; absolute de∣teriorem esse non est necesse. Estius. Gerhard. Vers. 9. The wife of one man] A woman which hath not had two husbands at once; having so been wife of one husband,Hoc est, quae sua culpa non tran∣sierit ad secun∣das aut tertias nuptias, puta per divortium, aut repudium aliquod illegitimum. Vorstius. as that she hath not upon his repudiation mar∣ried to another. Dr. Halls Paraphrase. Vers. 10. If she have brought up children] Nourished her children; or word for word,, si filios suos piè educavit in timore Domini. Gerh. if she have fed her children. Vers. 12. Having damnation] That is subject to the censure of the Church, say some. Calvin saith Paul terrifieth them with the damnation of eternall death. Because they have cast off their first faith] That is, either the faith and promise which
was made to God in their Baptisme, or the faith and promise of service and releife,Perkins. Primam fidem dici fidem Baptismi, quae scilicet in Baptismo prima suscipitur, neque veteres neque recentiores Theologi mihi persuadent: quando quidem in Baptismo non promittimus nos vel à primis vel à secundis nuptiis abstenturos: & lascivia invencularum viduarum ad secunt∣das nuptias prorumpens, & in iis mrbi interniremedium quarens, pro insamia quidem, at non pro fidei Christianae rejectione habita fuit. Sculterus. to be performed to the poore. Vers. 13. And not onely idle, but tatlers also, and busie bodies] The Apostle coupleth these two together, idle and busie bodies; those which are idle in their own duties,They are not onely called  because not busie about what they should, but , or in∣tent on things they should not, Thomas Goodwin. are most busie bodies in other mens. Three things (saith Calvin) are here fitly joyned together by Paul; idlenesse, cu∣riosity which proceeds from that; and garrulity, which is the fruit of curiosity. Per∣contatorem fugito, nam garrulus idem est. Horace. Vers. 17. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honour, especially they who labour in the word and doctrine] Some learned and late writers conceive that this place makes for the Lay-Presbyters; others say here are not two sorts of Elders,Dicit qui la∣borant; quia doctrinam sa∣cram tradere sicut oportet non parvi laboris. Estius. Vbi manifestè duo Presbyterorum genera statuit Apostolus, interprete Ambrosio & aliis veteribus, & ex nostris fere omnibus. Bullingero, Martino, Calvino, Zanchius in quartum praeceptum. Saravius against Beza, Sculteus in loc And Bishop Bilson in his perpetu∣all goverment c. 10. goe the other way. Here two Elders are mentioned; but the difference whether officiall, or personall is very doubtfull; one office may comprehend both these duties, and the comparison may be in their perso∣nall excellencies, one may excell in the governing part of the office, and the other in the doctrinall part. Husseys Plea for Christian Magistracy. Vide Blondellum de jure plebis in regimine Ecclesiastico. p. 80.81. one to governe, the other to teach, but two duties of each Presbyter, viz to teach and governe. The illation of te former is this, there were elders that ruled well, and laboured besides in the word of God; therefore there were Elders that ruled, and laboured not. It is imagined that two kind of Presbyters, as well as two parts of their Office are expressed; one of Ministers of the Church, another of the people; one perpetuall,Thorndikes Service of God at Religious Assemblies, Chap. 4. the other ambulatory for their time; both alike interessed in the government of the Church, the office of Preaching charged upon the one. How little of this is set down in the words of the Apostle, were the sense of them that which is pretended, let all the world judge. But of this, See vindication of Presbyteriall government p. 37. &c. Be counted worthy of double honour] By which he meaneth maintenance, as appea∣reth, vers. 18. It should be such maintenance, so free, so liberall, as may testifie that you honour him in your hearts; such as may keep him from contempt. Mr. Hilder∣sam on 51. Psal. the honour of countenance, and maintenance, Dike on Philem. Peradventure the Apostle hath respect to the Law of the first-born, Deut. 21.17. in which a twofold portion is commanded to be given to him. The first borne was the chiefer, more excellent and honourable person of all the family, whence Elisha as the chiefest of all the Prophet Eliahs disciples desired a double portion of the Spi∣rit, 2 Kings 2.9. To the same purpose, the Apostle here seemes to declare that those who rule well, as the first borne, and the most excellent, are worthy of a double por∣tion of honour and reward. De Dieu in loc. that is ample maintenance, & officii & doctrinae Jerome. duplex, & reverentiae & subsidii. Aquinas, sibi & suis saith another; double not in comparison with any Lay-governours, but in regard of widdowes and Deacons. Especially] Sheweth not divers persons, but parts of their callings saith one. Vers. 19. Against an Elder, receive not an accusation] By an Elder understand Mi∣nisters, civill governours, and all superiours; and if we must not receive, muchlesse may we frame an accusation against them. Perkins. Vers. 20. Them that sinne] That is, openly and with scandall. Rebuke before all] The whole Assembly of the Church, Matth. 18.17. 2 Cor. 2.6.Id est palam & in publico con∣ventu ecclesiae, graviter ac severè sunt increpandi. Estius. Vers. 21. Doing nothing by partiallity] The Apostle chargeth Timothy, that he doe nothing , that is, by titing the ballance of one side.In alteram par∣tem inclinando. See 23. Exod. 2. Metaphora sumpta est à bilance. Gerh. Vide Bezam. 22.24.
Vers. 22. Lay hads suddenly on no man] By a part is here manifested the whole Act of ordination,As though hee had said more largely, use all the circum∣spection thou canst, yet some hypocrites will creep ino the Ministery: some are in∣wardly pro∣phane, and such close sin∣ners thou canst not discerne, till afterwards they manifest themselves; others are open sinners, of which thou maist judge aright; these latter thou art to hinder; the former reclaime, or seasonably remove, and so salve up the soare againe. Doctor Taylor. because hands were imposed upon them. Neither be partaker of other mens sinnes] This is diversely interpreted. First, as if this were the meaning, there are many will ordaine rashly, doe not thou fall into such mens sinnes, so as to be like them. Secondly, there are many that will importu∣nately desire such to be ordained, who may please their humours; but doe not thou yeeld to such importunity, least thou partake of their sinnes. But thirdly it may have reference to the persons ordained, that if Timothy were not diligent to examine them, both for their doctrine, and conversation; all the wickednesse these Ministers should afterward commit in the discharge of their duty, would be accounted as his; and he should answer for them. Vide Calvinum & Estium. Est stomacho la∣borantibus assi∣auus aquae po∣tus inutilis Celsus l. 1 c. 8. praecipitque similiter stomacho laborantibus ut vinum adhibeant. Sculretus.Keep thy selfe pure] That is from sinnes, that thou beest without blame. Vers. 23. Drinke no longer water] There are but two words in the Greeke, , Paul  doth wholly forbid Timothy to drinke water, but to drinke it onely, for so  signifies. Vse a little wine] That is, but a little wine; we sold the land for so much, that is, but for so much, Act. 5.8. drinke wine, sed modice, hoc est medicè to cure thine infirmities, not to cause them, pro remedio parcis, non pro delicius redundantius. Ambrose. Paul prescribes Timothy to drinke a little wine for his stomacks sake, and often in∣firmities; yet he never prescribed him but a little preaching, nay though a weake sick∣ly man; yet he charges him before the Judge of quick and dead, to preach in season, and out of season. Dike. Vers. 24. Some mens sinnes are open before hand q. d. Quamvis quorundam pec∣cata sunt mani∣festa propter quae ab ecclesi∣astick officijs eos excludere in proclivi est; tamen aliorum peccata sunt oc∣culta, quae tem∣poris progressu in lucem prose∣runtur; ideo ad ordinationem non est temerè & praecipitanter accedendum. Glass. Philol. Sac. l. 1. Tract. 3. Haec tota sentenua cum versu 22. & praeceentibus connectenda videtur: quippe in quo ratio redditur illius praecepti de cavenda commu∣nione altenuorum peccatorum. Vorstius.] Some there are who offer them∣selves to ordination, whose scandals are known before hand. And some men they follow after] Others offences they are not known, till after they be ordained. CHAPT. VI. Vers. 3. ANd to the doctrine which is according to godlinesse] That is, the Gospell by a Periphrasis. See the 3. Chap. 16. and Titus 1.1. because the nature, consti∣tution, and composure of it is such, as if he that framed it had intended the exaltati∣on of godlinesse by it in the world. Vers. 4. But doting about questions] In Greek, sick about questions. He means not such questions as are profitable,, vox haec à ty∣phonico vento dosumta credi∣tur, quem ve∣teres putarunt hominibus nentem ac rationem adimere, & vento isto correptos insanire. Gerh. but which are raised, ad ostentandum acumen, so that one question begets another. And strifes of words] , word bates. Vers. 5. Perverse disputings of men, inutiles contentiones, dispu∣tationes curiosa. Occumenius metaephoram deductam putat ab ovibus quae applicatae aliis & attritae etiam sanas morbo as∣siciunt. Gerh. in loc. Vide Estium.] In the originall, galling one another with disputes. He makes not the gaine of godlinesse to depend upon the condition of our contentment, as though there were no profit in it, unlesse we were contented with it; but that is the effect and an inseparable companion of godlinesse to make us contented with all estates, for it alwayes brings with it contentment. De pietate tria praedicantur quod sit quaestus: ingens quaestus: talis denique quae∣stus qui pariat ex se . Scultetus.Vers. 6. But godlinesse with contentment is great gaine] Godlinesse with selfe-sufficiency, for so it is word for word in the originall. It restores us our primitive
right and interest in the creatures; a godly man in his wants may claime the promise, and live upon God. 2. He is sure of the best supply, and in the best way. 3. Every creature and blessing shall be sanctified to him. 4. It produceth gracious effects. 1. True contentation of mind, 37. Psalm. 2. Makes him thankefull in the want of these things as Job. 3. He lookes on common favours as fruits of speciall love and pawnes of a heavenly inheritance. 4. It makes such an impression on his heart, as was in God in the bestowing of them; as God hath shewed love to him, so will hee to the Saints. Vers. 7. For we brought nothing into this world] Greeke, this new world. And it is certaine we can carry nothing out] He doth not say as it is, Iob. 1.21. we brought nothing into the world, and shall carry nothing out; but as if men affirmed some such thing in their own hearts, that their riches should goe out of the world with them, or could profit them when they are dead; he saith it is certaine we can carry no∣thing out. Vers. 8. And having food and rayment, let us therefore be content] That is, if wee have food and rayment necessary for us and ours, we ought to quiet our hearts,Perkins. He saith not Cates nor deli∣cates, but food that may feed; he saith not ornaments, or abillements, but coverings, garments, so much as may keepe thee from cold; garment quasi gardment. Minshew; toga quae defendere frigius, Quam vis crassa queat. Horace. and have no further care. The word signifies let us have enough, let us count it enough. Vers. 9. But they that will be rich] The Apostle saith not those that are rich, but these which inordinately desire to be rich, or such as referre the labour of their callings to the gathering of wealth; where the Apostle doth not simply condeme a rich estate, but rather the desire to be rich, that is a desire to have more then is necessary for the maintaining of a mans estate. Fall into temptations] That which we pray daily against, are overcome by them. And a snare] viz Of Satan, the vulgar addes the Devill, but it is not in the Greeke and Syriack. And into many foolish] Absurd and sordide. Hurtfull] And damnable to the soule. Which drowne men] Like one that hath a Milstone about his neck, and is throwne into the bottome of the Sea. , propriè est in profundum demergere. In destruction and perdition] That is, destroying perdition. He useth two words to signifie the greatnesse, and certainty of the destruction; or to note a double de∣struction, Temporall, and Eternall. Estius and others. Vers. 10. For the love of Money] The preposterous in ordinate love of it. Is the root of all evillsBion avariti∣am vocabat vitii metropolin, Timon malorum elementum.] He saith not that it is the cause, principle, originall, but the root, not of a few, many or very many, but of all evills, the covetous man will be ready to commit any sinne. Quid non mortalia pectora cogis Auri sacra fames. Pierced Verbum , notat proprie confos∣sionem, cùm quis in mucronem incidit. Sensus igitur est, tranfixerunt seipsos multis doloribus. Gerh. in loc. themselves thorough] One every side, circumcicra perforant, as if one were stabbed all over, from head to foot. With sorrowes] Such as women in travell are subject unto. Vers. 11. But thou O man of God, flee these things] Not onely because it was excee∣dingly unbecomming him, but because even he is inclinable to it. That is, thou who art to have office in the Church by ordinary calling, as the Prophets and men of God of old had by extraordinary; thou who after a speciall manner art to be Gods peculiar, by reason of thy function, 1 Sam. 2.27. 2 Tim. 3.17. Fly Verbum fuge emphasin habet; q.d Sis ab hu∣jusmodi longissi∣mè remotus. Estius. Doctor Taylor on Titus. these things] That is, preserve thy selfe from these noysome lusts, the breeders of most filthy and detestable cogitations and practices. And follow after righteousnesse] That is, deale justly, give every man his owne. Godlinesse] Covetousnesse is Idolatry; practise thou piety which is great gaine. Faith] This is a maine fruit of godlinesse; follow it and thou shalt not distruct Gods providence. Love] To men a fruit of faith; selfe-love occasions covetousnesse. Patience In adversity.
Meeknesse] Waiting and expecting Gods comming, to the supply of our want. Vers. 12. Fight the good fight of faith] That is, strive by faith, patience and Prayer, against all these lusts of infidelity,Vide Cornel. à Lapide, Metaphora sumta non à militia, sed a certamine, quod cursu fiebat in studio, 1 Cor. 9.24. 1 Tim. 2.5. Gerh. Ex Estio. distrust, earthly-mindednesse. Lay hold on eternall life Veluti bravi∣um sive praemi∣um certaminis. Persistit in Metaphora. Gerh. ib.] Being call'd by faith, and hope, lift up thy heart and af∣fections to a heavenly conversation, so some, That is, so strive in this course that thou maist obtaine eternall life. Vers. 14. That thou keep this Commandement without spot] That is, so keepe this Commandement,Mr Ball. that thou looke for Christ daily; and so that if thou shouldst live untill that time, thou remit nothing of thy study and care. Vide Cornel. à Lapide.Some interprete it in generall of all the commandements given by the Apostle to Timothy; some in speciall of the Commandements, in 11. and 12. verses, some of the Commandement of love; Calvin Nomine mandati signifi∣cat quae hactenus de officio Timothei disseruit: quorum haec fait samma ut se fidelem Christo & Ecclesiae Ministrum praeberet. Calvinus. goes the second way. Vers. 15. The onely Potentate] Because he is essentially, and independently potent, yea omnipotent. Vers. 16. Who onely hath immortality] viz. Perfect and independent; the Angels are immortall, not of their own nature, but by Gods grace. Jn di vitiis cupi∣ditatē reprehen∣dit non faculta∣tem. Austen.Vers. 17. Charge them that are rich in this world] This is added by way of extenuation, the world is brittle and all things in it; those are world-lings in heart, as well as in estate; there are other riches besides those of this world Matth. 6.20. and 19.21. That they be not high minded] He bids rich men take heed of two things, first Pride here, and secondly deceitfull hope in the next words. Nor trust in uncertaine riches , in incertitudine divitiatum, hoc est, in incertis divitijs. Gerh.] Yea to uncertainty it selfe, so it is in the originall; some render it unevidence of riches, they evidence not Gods love. But in the living God] This Epithete is added either to distinguish him from false Gods, or to declare the certainty of hope which is placed in God, who lives al∣wayes, and immutably. Vers. 18. That they doe good, that they be rich in good workes, ready to distribute, willing to communicate] All is but beneficence,, Graeca vo pro∣priè signi∣ficat eam com∣municationem quâ quis ea, quae habet, alijs quì non habent impertiendo communicat. Rom. 12.13. Heb. 13.16. 2. Cor. 8.9. Gal. 6.6. Gerh. in loc. expressed in the variety of four Epithetes. To doe good] Imports all good whatsoever belongs to a Christian life; the other two, distribute, and communicate, that good which properly is expected from rich men, that none else can doe.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Second Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to TIMOTHY. CHAP. I. THere is the same Argument generally of this Epistle with the former.Exordium po∣steriosis Epistolae ad Timothum rectè dixeris Exordium Epistolae ad Romanos contractum. Scultetus. Vers. 3. Whom I serve from my forefathers] or Progenitors: so Calvin. Some say Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob;Latini certè progentorum nomine, ut Graeci  vocabulo, complectuntur non parentes modò proximos, sed superiores quoque, qui nominibus carentes, eisdent majores vocantur. Espencaeus.  aliqui majores, nempe Abrahamum, Isaacum & Jacobum, & alios deinceps à quibus ortus est intelligunt; ego progenitores proximos significari puto. Scultetus. Gratias ago Deo meo, quòd quoties ad eum preces fundo, toties tui sum memor, ac pro te oro. Estius. others his naturall parents. With pure conscience] That is, a conscience purified from the guilt of sinne by the sprinkling of the blood of Christ. 2. A conscience purified from self-ends and re∣spects. Sincerely and without hypocrisie. Without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day] We cannot think that Timothy was never out of his thought; but the meanig is, when he did call upon God from day to day, he still remembred him. 1 Thess. 5.17. Vers. 6. Stir up the gift of God which is in thee] That is, as man preserves the fire by blowing, qui sopitos su∣scitat ignes; Est hoc verbum Genes. 45.27. suscitatur autem spiritus ille pre∣cibus dilgenti meditatione & jugi pia opera∣tione. Grot. Scultetus in loc. so by our diligence we must kindle and revive the gifts and graces of God bestowed on us. Therefore some thinke it is a metaphor taken from a sparke kept in ashes, which by gentle blowing is stirred up till it take a flame; so Calvin, Barlow, and others. But it is better (saith Gerhard) to refer it to the Type of the Priests of the old Testament, by whose daily and continuall ministery the fire com¦ming from Heaven was maintained: so Timothy is commanded to stir up and pre¦serve the gifts of the Holy Ghost received, and cause them to flame and burn in him. 1 Thess. 5.19. 1 Tim 4.14. Not those gifts common to all the faithfull, faith, hope, and charity, but the particular gifts of the Spirit, as the gift of teaching in the Schools, the gift of exhorting in the Church, and perswading men the faith of Christ; the gift of Tongues. In calling it a gift he signifies an extraordinary grace of that time; but in willing him to stir it up, and not to neglect it,Thorndikes Ser∣vice of God at religious As∣semblies. c. 5. he sheweth that it was in him to procure it at Gods hands, by reading teaching, and praying, and the like means. By putting on of my hands] The ceremony of laying on of hands hath been used of parents in blessing of their children Gen. 48.14. in Sacrifice Levit. 1.4. in healing of diseases, Acts 28.8. in conferring the excellent gift of the holy Ghost,Ordinatio voca∣tur manuū im∣positio, quia fit cum ceremonia impossionis ma∣nuum. Estius. Acts 8.17. and in making of Ministers; to which time these words have reference, 1 Tim. 4.14. Vers. 9. Who hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling] In calling he is
said to save us, to set us after a sort in possession of salvation, when he cals us voca∣tione sancta, id est sanctificante, making us holy According to his purpose and grace] That is, not moved by our workes, but by his purpose and grace, that is fore-purpose.Not according to our works] That is, not for the fore-knowledge of mans faith or works; marke the exclusive, when, before the world was; therefore this grace whereby we are saved, cannot be any gift of grace infused into us, unlesse it could be infused before the world was, or we were in it. Vers. 12. Neverthelesse I am not ashamed] There is confidence; I know and am per∣swaded] there is faith; That he is able to keep] there is a sure preserver; That which I have committed] there is the pledge of salvation. Here the Apo∣stle cals his own soule , be∣cause commit∣ted to God to keep to glory; in the 14 Verse the Gospell is called  because committed to us, to our keeping.Th Apostle saith he committed to Gods custody a pawn or pledge, or that which he intrusted him withall; and what that is Interpreters differ. One faith his soule, another (which is all one) himselfe; his works, saith a third; a fourth addeth his sufferings; a fifth his salvation. He committed to God his soule, himselfe, his doings, his sufferings, to be rewarded with life and salvation. Ea doctrina quae nihil in∣salubre habet admixtum qua∣lia multa erant in doctrina Rabunorum & Philosophorum. Grotius.Vers. 13. Hold fast the form of sound words] Or, wholsome words, such as have a healing property in them, as the word signifies. Principles of Religion grounded on Gods Word are called sound, wholsome, or healthfull words, both in regard of their matter and substance, and also in regard of their effect, they cause and preserve good, sound and spirituall health. Form] or pattern. A metaphor, say some, from a Car∣penter that worketh by rule. Hhora Weemes out of Iunius.  quidam vortunt expressam formam, quidam imaginem & delineationem, quidam informatio∣nem. Gerh. foramina, a speech borrowed from Mer∣chants who have severall boxes or holes wherein the put their severall sorts of money. In faith and love which are in Christ Iesus] That is, sound doctrine is contained in those two heads, faith and love, both which have reference to Christ. Neither Prote∣stant nor Papist Mr. Ward. See Gal 5.6. Ephes. 6.23. 1 Tim. 1.14. These two were figured by the Vrim and Thummim., Calvinist nor Lutherane, Conformist nor Unconformist, but faith and love in Christ Jesus is all in all. Dike. Translatio sum∣pta ab umbra aut ventulo in lcis aestosis. Grotius.Vers. 16. For he oft refreshed me] This is another word in Greek then is used Phi∣lemn 7. A metaphor taken from those who being almost overcome with heate, finde some cooling; to shew how acceptable and comfortable Onesiphorus his reliefe was unto him. Vers. 17. But when he was in Rome, he sought me diligently and found me] Therefore Paul was a prisoner at large. Found m] That is, came where I was. The difference between Invenire and Reperire is this; when we goe on a thing, it is invenire; when a thing comes on us we doe reperire. CHAP. II. .Vers. 2. AMong many witnesses] Per multos testes, by many witnesses; so the Vul∣gar, and the French Par plusieurs tesmoius. Fr. Bib. Vide Bezam. also, inter multos testes, so Beza and we accordingly, that is, many being present which can testifie of these things. That is, the better ver∣sion. Gerhard. Vers. 4. Entangleth himselfe] , is entangled. It is a comparison Thorndikes Right of the Church in a Christian State. Ch. 5. which St. Paul borroweth from the custome of the Romane Empire,Intangle quasi in angulum, &c. wherein Souldiers, as they were exempted from being Tutors to mens persons, or Curators to their estates, so they were forbidden to be Proctours of other mens causes, to undertake husbandry or merchandize.
Vers. 5. Strive for masteries] The Apostle hath respect to the manner of the Greci∣an combates,Verbum  ex quo athletae dicti, significat certare quocunque certandi genere, quod corpore exercetur, velut lucta, cursu, pugnis, disco, saltu. Estius. Gerh. in loc. in which those that were conquerers had a crown or garland of Herbs given them. A metaphor borrowed from Wrestlers, Justers. Vers. 15. Rightly dividing the word of truth] Or, word for word,Similitudo ducta à victi∣mis quae certo ritu secari de∣bebant. Est au∣tem & Eván∣gelii annuntia∣tio sacrificum & quidem egre∣gium. Grotius. Vide Bezam. Ex sectione sacrificatarum carnium metaphoram derivasse Apostolum ad concianotores verbi Dei, existimant nonnulli. Sed veriùs puto sumptam esse metaphoram à nutrieibus cibos in particulas & ofsulas secantibus, ut commodiù eas glutiant parvuli quos educant. Menochius de Republica Hebraeorum. l. 2. c. 10. In Graeco est  rectè in partes secantem & dividentem; mtaphora à structoribus sumpta, quorum munus est ex ipsorum artis praescripto in∣tegras verbi gratiâ aves, aut alias carnes in frusta ex cutere, & partem cuique suam apponere. Nec aliunde quam à partibus con∣vivalibus sumpta videtur metaphora illa, qaa usus est Christus Dominus Luc. 10.42. & illa qua usus est David, Psal 15.5. sumpta metaphora à symposiarchis qui quantum vini esset hauriendum praescribebant, atque ita calicis partem assignare vide∣bantur. Idem ibid. l. 6. c. 3. Vide Fulleri Miscel. Sac. l. 3. c. 16. rightly cutting into parts the word of truth] It is a metaphor (say Gerhard, Perkins, and others) taken from the Levites who might not cut the members of the sacrifices without due con∣sideration. The righteousnesse respects not onely, or not so much the subject or word divided, as the object or persons to whom the division is to be made, in giving every one his portion, or food convenient for him; as some parts of the Sacrifices were given to the Priests, others to the people. Vers. 16. Increase] The Greek word signifies to cut a thing before to make a pas∣sage for other things, as in some Countries they cut a passage for their sheep because of the yce. Vers. 17. And their word will rot as doth a canker] Estius defends this translation. Calvin and others would have it rather translated a Gangrene. Seu titus, Calvin and Grotius shew that they are not the same disease. That it hath its name in Greek from eating. Physicians say that if it take hold of any member in the body, unlesse speedy remedy be found, it fretteth the flesh, blood, bones, never ceasing till the whole man be destroyed. Errour is exceeding infectious and hurts the soule, unlesse daily pre∣vented, (as a Gangreen or running-tetter the body) 1. speedily, 2. incurably. 3. mor∣tally. Vide Calvinum, Estium, Gerh. in loc. Of whom is Nuptialis, nomen haeretici negantis carnis resurrectionem à themate , pellicula seu membrana virginitatis index quae primo coitu rumpitur. Pasor. Hymenaeus à nuptiarum Deo: Philetus nomen quasi Optatus, Desideratus apud Latinos. Grotius. Hymeneus and Philetus] It is not certaine who this Philetus was;Monstrat digito pestes ipsas, ut sibi ab illis om∣nes caveant. Calvinus. the Apostle speakes of Hymenaeus, 1 Tim. 1.20. They are Greek names, as many others in the Cities of Asia built by the Grecians. The one by interpretation is a love or wed∣ding-song: the other, amiable, or affected. Vers. 18. Who concerning the truth have erred] Swerved, missed the marke; Qui a veritatis scopo aberrarunt. Gerh. The Apostle useth this word thrice in these two Epistles to Timothy, by which not every errour in Religion is signified, but an errour of that kind wherein the foundation is not retained. Saying that the resureection is past already] Denying, viz the resurrection which is to be of mens bodies at the last day, and turning it into the resurrection onely of the soule from sinne. And overthrow the faith of some] Not the grace, but the profession of faith, or else the doctrine of faith which these did hold; they were runne into errours and here∣sies. It is in the present tense in the Greek, by which the Apostle signifies that they doe not onely persist in their errour, but also in a perverse study of propagating it. There is an Emphasis in the word subvert or overthrow, because the faith of the resur∣rection being taken away (as the fountaine of all Christian Religion) presently the whole fabrique of Christian Religion falls to the ground, 1 Cor. 15.13.Estius. Gerhard. Vers. 19. Neverthelesse the foundation of God standeth sure, &c.] That is,Singula verba pondus habent; certitudo haec nititur, Primo, fundamento. Secundo, non quocunque sed firmo. Tertio, non hominis sed Dei. Quarto, non vacillante sed stante idque obsignato, idque notitiâ Dei, non simplicis tantum inspectionis, sed discernente suòs à non suis. Dr. Prid. the decree of Gods election stands firm and sure, so as those who are elected by him shall never fall away. This he declareth by a double similitude; he saith the election of God is
like the foundation of a house which standeth fast though all the building be shaken. The Church of God is compared to a building, election to the foundation; A foun∣dation is first in order of the building. 2. Highest in honour, Christ is called the foundation of foundations,Standeth sue] Abideth firm, stable, con∣stant, without change or al∣teration. Our English word sure comes from the He∣brew zur a Rock. Barlow. Numerus certus non solum quoad numerum nu∣merantem ut suggerunt Ar∣mimati, sed quoad numerum numeratum ut orthodoxi tenent. Esay 28.16. 3. Is the stability of a whole building. Secondly, he saith that election hath the seale of God, and therefore may not be changed. Having this seale, the Lord knoweth them that be his] Or who are his, not onely how many are elected, but who they are, who be the very numericall persons. A seale is for two ends, secresie and safety; things which are sealed are made sure and authenticall; this seale hath two parts: the first concernes God in that every mans salvation is written in the book of life, and God knoweth who are his. Secondly, a second part of the seale which concerns man, and is imprinted in his heart and con∣science, which also hath two branches, the gift of invocation, and a watchfull care to make conscience of all and every sinne, in these words, And let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity] whereby he signifieth that those which can call upon God, and give him thanks for his benefits, and withall in their lives make con∣science of sinne, have the seale of Gods election imprinted in their hearts, and may assure themselves they are the Lords. Mr. Perkins. Vers. 21. He shall be a vessell unto honour] That is, known or declared that he is so. And prepared unto every good worke] The word in the originall signifieth when a man is fashioned as a Vessell is fashioned and the meaning is,Dr. Preston. that then a man is good, when his heart is fitted to good works. Vers. 22. Flee also youthfull lusts] There are lusts peculiar to that time of life, sensua∣lity, abuse of selfe, creatures, headstrongnesse. Vers. 24. But be gentle unto all men, apt to teach] Where the Apostle seemeth to con∣clude him not to be apt to teach who is not inclined to a gentle and meek dispo∣sition.Dr. Taylor on Titus. Neque enim doctrinae locus erit nisi adsit moderatio & a quabile quoddam temperamentum. Calvinus. Patient] The Greek word properly signifies Tolerantem majorum, one that beares evill. lenem, placidum man∣suetum humanum erga omnes; . propriè significat drcendi donis instructum, idoneum ad docendum. Gerh. , evill persons rather then evill things. Estius. Gerh. Vers. 26. And that they may recover] Or awake themselves; Syriack, that they may be mindfull of themselves. propriè è vino ad se redire, per translatio∣nem usurpatur ad liberationem ab omnibus rebus aliis quae mentem turbant, ut videre est Abac. 2.7. 1 Cor. 11.34. Grotius. The Apostle alludeth to one that is asleep or drunk, who is to be awaked, and restored to his senses. Barlow. Out of the snares of the divell] Greek, snare of the divell; that is, pleasures, which make men as it were drunke; we are freed from these by Christ, Esay 42.7. Who are taken captive] , taken alive, as souldiers in the warres, or beasts in a toyle. The Greek word is properly a warlike word, but is more largely used, as we may see Luke 5.10. CHAP. III. Vers. 1. IN the last daies Comprehendit universum Chri∣stianae Ecclesiae statum. Calvi∣nus.  tempora molesta. Tribuuntur tempori istiusmodi epitheta metonymicè, propter ea quae in tempore contin∣gunt maximè propter horum mores ac studia. Estius.] That is, all the time from Christs first to his second comming. Perilous times] Vulg. tempora periculosa. The Greek is proper∣ly difficult times, in which it is hard to consult, or to carry ones self. Vers. 2. For men shall be lovers of their own selves] Self-love is the root of these 19 vices here mentioned. The Apostle begins with self-love, and concludes with love of pleasures; men alwaies abound with self-love, but it shall then prevaile more then in times past.
Truce-breakers] Or promise-breakers,, foe difragi, infidi. for it needs not be confined to the leaving of those Covenants of Cessation from Armes betwixt enemies which we call truces, but may be understood generally of any promise or compact whatsoever. Vers. 4. Traytors] Such as betray , pro∣ditores, amici∣tiae desertores. those who put their confidence in them. Heady] Such as flye before they should; . High-minded] Such as are puffed up with pride, shew it outwardly . Lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God] There is an elegant paronomasia in the Greeke, . Vers. 6. For of this sort are they which creep into houses] Syriacke creepe like Ferrets, or Weesils.Vide Fulleri Miscell. Sac. l. 3. c. 14. & Be∣zam.Vulg. ex his enim sunt qui penetrant domos. Grae∣cum , hîc idem est quod , pe∣nicus seu in pro∣fundum ingredi, in penitiorem recessum se abdere. Ambrosiaster legit, qui irrepunt in domos. Locus parralleis, habetur, Tit. 1. v. 11. Gerh. in loc. Vers. 8. As Iannes and Iambres Jannes & Jambres qui fuerint, docent Hebraet, Graeci & Latini Scriptores. Apud Nathanum etiam Hebraeum autorem Lexici juris, scribit Drusius, se invenisse: eos principes magorum Pharaonis fuisse, ac Mosi edenti miracula restitisse. Scultetus. withstood Moses, so doe these also resist the truth] The series of the speech seemed to require that he should say, as Iannes and Iambres re∣sisted Moses so doe these also resist us. But he alters his stile, and saith more emphatical∣ly they resist the truth, that he may shew that their opposition is not so much against men preaching the truth of the Gospell, as against truth it selfe; and therefore a∣gainst God who is the first truth: Estius and Gerh. in loc. It is likely they were there∣fore two (saith Calvin) because as God raised up Moses and Aaron as two Captaines for his people, so Pharaoh would have so many Magicians to oppose them. Vers. 12. Yea and all that will live godly in Christ Iesus, shall suffer persecution] There is a kind of godlinesse, which may be free from persecution;Causis suffici∣entibus positis in actu necessa∣riò ponitur effe∣ctus. They have enemies enough. but if one will live god∣ly up to the rule and principles which Christ hath given, he shall be subject to perse∣cution. Vers. 13. But evill men and seducers  propriè significat incan∣tatores ac prae∣stigiatores, deinde generaliter usurpatur pro impostoribus ac deceptoribus. Estius. Gerh. shall wax worse and worse] That is, evill men who are seducers, or among all evill men, especially seducers. Vers. 15. And that from a Childe, thou hast known the holy Scriptures] , from his Child-hood, yea from his infancy as the word properly signifies,Mr. Hildersam. Mos erat & est nunc qucque Indaeorum, à pri∣ma aetate quae literarum capax est, sacra scripta legenda dare pueris. Grotius. Vide Gerh. et Espencaeum. in loc. from thine in∣fancie say the Rhemists who yet cannot endure that Children should be put to the reading of the Scriptures. See Estius. Here is a large praise of the knowledge of God; in the commendation we have 1. Of whom: Timothie, a Child: 2. For what 1 Act, knowledge. 2. Subject, Scripture, set out by the adjunct holy; effect, make wise to salvation. Vers. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God] . Because he had exhorted Timothy to the reading of the Scripture, therefore he here commends it, 1. From the authority. 2. From the profit of it, not onely the sen∣tences, but the severall words, and the order, and the whole disposition of them is from God, as speaking or writing by himselfe;Rom. 15.4. Consolation is added, but that may be comprehended here under doctrine or in∣struction. this is to be divinely inspired saith Estius. Is profitable.] Shewing that the word of God must never be medled withall but for some profit. Then particularly he sheweth wherein the profit consists. For doctrine] That is, to teach men what to know, and beleeve. Reproofe] Of errour and false opinions. Correction] Of ill behaviour. And instruction] In good behaviour. Vers. 17. That Verisimile est Apostolum respicere ad illud, quod in V. T. Prophetae peculiariter vocabantur viri Dei. 1 Sam. 9. v. 5. 1 Reg. 17. v. 18.2. Reg. 4. v. 7 Gerh. Quod si scriptura sacra doctoribus sufficit, quidni sufficiat auditoribus? Scultetus. the man of God] Meaning not any man, but the Minister, 1 Tim. 6.11. 1 Cor. 4.1. Yet not one particular person, but the whole calling.
May be perfect, thoroughly furnished] That is, sufficiently instructed to execute all the parts of his office. Bellarmine, and Andradius, make themselves merry here, and say that the word profitable never notes sufficiency; but the same Greek word is used, 1 Tim. 4.8. for sufficient. The Scripture is so profitable, that a Doctor of the Church may thence confirme the true doctrine, and confute false; may instruct and mend his manners, and be made wise to obtaine salvation; therefore it is perfect. That which containes all things necessary, containes a sufficient doctrine. Classicus hic locus est, ex quo Scripturae perfe∣ctio contra Pontificios demonstratur. Gerh. in loc. But Estius saith the Apostle here speakes onely of the old Testament; for Timothy could not from his Child-hood know the Bookes of the New Testament, since they were not then extant. To that we answer with Calvin, that for the substance there was nothing added; for the Apostles writings are but an explication of the Law and Prophets, together with an exhibition of the things. And if the Old Testament alone were profitable for all these ends, then much more now is the whole Scripture, the new being also added. CHAP. IV. Vers. 1. I Charge thee therefore before God and the Lord Iesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing] As if he should say,Hildersam. Thou canst ne∣ver answer it unto God, and unto Jesus Christ at the day of judgement, if thou doe it not. Vers. 2. Huc pertinet ista terribilis ob∣testatio; scilicet ut officium prae∣dicationis, ac coe∣tera quae sunt hominis Dei mu∣nia, dilgenter & constanter exequatur. Estius. Quibus verbis significat, multis stimulis opus esse ad nos impellendos ut in recto cursu progrediamur. Calvinus. When the Apostle foretelleth, that in these latter times men should have itching eares, he prescribeth to Timothy this remedy to cure it, preach the word, be in∣stant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine, as if he should say, teach diligently, zealously, profitably; using not onely doctrine, but application, grounding thy exhortations, and reproofes, substantially upon sound doctine. Hildersam. Stand much upon it, id est,  ope∣ri, instanter age quod agendum est. Estius. Saint Austen expounds it in a word, opportu∣nè volentibus, importunè nolē∣tibus; in season, to the willing, out of season to the unwilling. The Greek Commentators refer this to the Preacher, when it is commodious, or incommodious for him; others to the hearer, when he is willing and unwilling. See Estius.Preach the word] It is not onely a toleration, but a peremptory command. Be instant] The Greeke word signifies, to stand to or over a businesse; our English word expresseth it fully; to be instant in a businesse, imports two things, earnestnesse, and diligence. In season] May be understood two wayes, 1. It may be taken for the ordinary set time appointed, and set apart for this exercise, the Lords day, Marke 6.2. Luke 4.16. Act. 13, 14. and 20.7. 2. At such times and seasons, when the word may be most ac∣ceptable, most profitable unto the hearers. Out of season] Not in it selfe or in truth, but in the opinion of men. This duty of the Ministery, is twice pressed upon them, reprove, rebuke. See 58. Esay. 1. Rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering] Titus 1.13. There is a precept to reprove sharply. Some consider the persons to whom the Apostle writ these things, the one was Timothy who (they say) was severe and austere,Doctor Taylor on Titus. and therefore is exhorted to pa∣tience and meekenesse: the other Titus, who was gentle and meek of nature; and there∣fore spurred unto sharpnesse and severity. Others draw the difference from the peo∣ple, over whom they were set; the Cretians were hard and refractary, full of bad qua∣lities the Ephesians among whom Timothy was sent, were of some better temper, and disposition: and therefore were to be mildly dealt withall. Vers. 5. Do the work of an Evangelist] Hanorisica officij mentio tam ad um animandum quam ad com∣mendandam aliis ejus authorita∣tem valet: quorum utrun∣que spectavit Paulu. Calvinus. Hoc est, ita partes omnes Ministerii tui exequere, ut omnes intelligant te rem seriam agere & in Evangelij Praedicatione proram & puppim salut humanae positam esse. Scultetus. That is, which is worthy of an Evangelist, therefore say some, Timothy must needs be an Evangelist; and so no Bishop. Some by the name of an Evangelist, signifie in generall a Preacher of the Gospell; but these are rather meant saith Calvin, which the Apostle used as companions in ex∣ecuting,
their office, Act. 21.8. Eph. 4.11. As if he had said, doe thou Timo∣thy that which becomes thee in thy place and calling, faithfully and with consci∣ence, for I have so done in my place and calling; I have done my duty conscionably and faithfully; and stood against all opposition to the contrary, and now I am ready to be offered as a drinke offering, Phil. 2.17. and to depart this life; though Estius oppose this. Immolor ac libor more sacrificii, Metaphorae ratio à sacrificiis V. T. ducta, quibus addebantur olim libamina. Gerh. in loc. Vide plura ibid. Vide Calvinum & à Lapide. Vers. 7. J have fought a good fight] , Certamen illud prae∣clarum certavi, Beza. I have fought that excellent fight, a fight by wrestling; the Apo∣stle useth this Metaphore also, 1 Cor. 9.25. He addes this partly for his own com∣fort, and partly to provoke Timothy to imitate him. I have finished my course] As the first Metaphore was taken from a stout Cham∣pion, so this is taken from a strong runner. He compares himselfe to those which run in a race, which Metaphore he also useth and joynes it with the former, 1 Cor 9 24.26 I have kept the faith] This third Metaphore is taken from a brave Souldier, he was faithull to his Generall, 1 Cor. 4.2. Vers. 8. Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousnesse] As if he had said, I have finished my course, and done my duty in my place;Metaphora militū & curso∣rum, quibus co∣rona praemii loco solet proponi. Estius. Corona ut scribit Carolus Paschalius de coroa, signat absolutionem, conummationem, perfectionem, & evinciendo capiti destinatur, quae eminentissima & absolutissima pars est totius humanae compaginis. Corona est, ultra cujus excellentiam mortalium vota non extenduntur. Hinc summū omnium praemiorum sunt Coronae Hinc est, quod coronare quando{que} est remunerare, & corona remuneratio. Corona denique non qualecunque praemium notat▪ sed praemium victoriae, hoc est, pugnando, vincendo partum. Ubi durior pugna, ibi gloriosior est victoria, inquit Severus Sulpitius in Dial. Scultetus in loc. and hereby I know and am assu∣red that henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousnesse. Vers. 10. Having loved this present world] The word signifies,Mr. Fenner. Vide Calvinum Bezam & Gro∣tium. and so other tran∣slations render it, he embraced this present world, that is, the affections of his heart had a sympathy with it, as the Ive with the Elme, he embraced it. Vers. 13. The Cloake that I left at Troas with Carpus] Ierome, Chrysostome and Theo∣phylact say it was a kind of garment for a journey, which he used when it was raignie weather, or the season cold; Paul therefore being in prison, and the weather cold,Menoch. de Repub. Heb. l. 6. c. 7. and he unwilling to be burdensome, being content with his poverty, he caused that garment to be brought him which he wore in cold weather. But especially the Parchments] Which may appear to be Note-bookes of his own making; the Syriacke translateth it falciculum voluminum,Mr. Hildersam, the bundle of writings folded up together; for they used then Parchment to write in, as we doe Paper now. So Gerhard and others. Vers. 14. Alexander the Copper-smith did me much evill] This Alexander is conceived to be the man of whom we read,Per  inteli∣guntur schedae pelliceae, in qui∣bus Paulus quae∣dam scitu digna ad juvandam memoriam annotaverat, unde velut de iis singulariter solicitus dicit, Maximè membranas. Estius & Gerh. in loc. Act. 19.32. that stood to Paul when he was in that danger at Ephesu; there he had like to have lost his life for appearing on his side. So Calvin. Others doubt whether this Alexander be the same with him mentioned 1 Tim. 1.20. Vide Estium. Vers. 15. For he hath greatly with-stood our word] Not us but our words, our Preach∣ing; for the one is but a personall persecution and against charity; the other a do∣ctrinall offence, and against pietie and so more hainous. Vers. 17. And I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion] That is, out of the mouth of Nero say Beza à Lapi∣de. Dr. Hall. Vide Euseb. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 22. some so called for his power and cruelty, because he horribly persecuted the Christians. Or as some (taking it for a proverbiall Proverbialiter dictum pro è summo discrimine, & usurpatur ubi alicui ex insperato salus obtigit. Nam quem leo ore prehenderit quasi extra spem esse liberationis legitur Psal. 22.22. Drus. Prov. Class. 2. l. 3. speech, noting any eminent danger) I was delivered from the extreamest hazard of death; even as a man rescued out of a Lyons mouth, and pull'd from between his teeth. So Calvin and Estius.
, doth not signifie properly liberatus sum, as the vulgar hath rendred it, but ereptus sum, for the Apostle doth not meane that he was freed from his bonds, since he was in bonds when he wrote this Epistle, but that he was snatcht out of the present danger which was then feared. Gerh. in loc. ex Estio. Speeds Chron. l. 6. c. 9. ex Matthew Par∣ker. Arch∣bishop of Caut.Vers. 21. Linus] This is that Linus, who was after Bishop of Rome, as Eusebius thinketh l. 3. c. 2. Claudia) an English (or rather Brittish) woman went to Rome, converted by Paul, married a Roman Gentleman, who for his parts was called Pu∣dens as here, but before called Rufus. It was thought she sent the Gospell first into England. ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to TITVS CHAP. I. Hujus Epistolae, quam ad Titum, suum ex gentii∣tate discipulum, scripsit apostolus, idem serè argu∣mentum est cum duabus ad Timotheum, praeertim cum priore. Nam sicut Timothe∣um Asiae minore praesecerat, ita Titum Cretae celeberimae & amplissimae insulae, quae nunc vulgo Candia vocatur. Erat itaquo uterque de ijs quae ad regimen Eccliasticum pertinerent, etiam per literas instruendus. Quod autem multo breviùs ad Titum scribat, quàm ad Timothe∣um, ea ratio reddi potest, quia Titus ut aetate provectior, ita & Ecclesiastick rebus gerendis erat exercitatior: Timotheus autem junior, atque recentior; ideóque pluribus informandus. Estius.THis Epistle is by the learned, called Epitome Paulinarum Epistolarum, an Abridgement of all Pauls Epistles, it is fraught with such varietie of precepts fitted to all sorts, sexes, ages and conditions of men, as whatsoever he hath in all his Epistles more largely handled, hee seemeth summarily to have reduced the same into this one. This Epistle containeth three parts, 1. The salutation in the foure first verses. 2. The narration or proposition of the matter of it, from the 5. vers of the first Chapter, unto the end of the eleventh of the third Chapter. 3. The conclusion, containing some private businesse enjoyned Titus: and the ordinary salutation of the Apostle. , ante tempora saecularia. Non ab aeterno, sed ante multa saecula. Grotius.Vers. 2. Promised before the world began] Or rather from the beginning of ages, viz. in that famous promise of the blessed seed, Gen. 3. Estius Quia promit∣tentes constitu∣unt dare quod promittunt; hinc apostolus abusus est vocabulo promissionis, pro de creto seu praedestinatione: ut sit sensus, Deum ab aeterno praeordinasse, & constituisse da∣re electis vitam aeternam. Estius. and à Lapide interprete promised by purposed; he saith the same here (saith à Lapide) that he doth 2 Tim. 1.9. God promised, that is decreed to promise before the world began; and in due time hath made the promise manifest in the word preach∣ed. Doctor Taylor. It seemes somewhat harsh to interprete the word promised, by decreed to promise: and therefore it is better M. Ball of the Covenant. Vide Mede in 14. Apoc. v. 6. to referre it to the promise made from the beginning of the world. This promise was made to Christ (say someMr. Goodwin on 6. Iohn 37. Vide Hieron. & Bezam. in loc.) A promise is more then a purpose. A purpose may be in ones selfe, as Ephes. 1.9. but a promise is made to another. Vers. 5. Set in order] Supereorrigeres, so Jerome translates it, noting the emphasis of the praeposition added; whatsoever is corrected is imperfect; and some things were corrected by me before, yet not fully redressed; those things therefore which are wanting to perfection, doe thou proceed to correct, and set in order. The word properly signifies a continuall and instant straighning of things which grow crooked in the Church. Doctor Taylor. And ordaine Elders in every City Jn singulis ci∣vitatibus, sive oppidatim; haec enim insula quondam dicta est , quòd centum habuerit oppida.Vrbibus inclytae centum Creta ideo dicta à Craiis Hecatompolis olim. Mantuanus.] Jdest, per singulas civitates. , Acts 14.23. in every Church. Estius.
Vers. 6. Vnruly children] , a metaphor taken from untamed head∣strong beasts, that will not be brought under the yoake.Obstruere pror∣sus intendit haereticorum ora, qui nuptias damnant. Chry∣sost.The Apostle would by the society of marriage and Priesthood stop the mouthes of Hereticks that condemned marriage. The word therefore is fitly translated unruly, and is answerable to the Hebrew phrase given to disobedient children, viz. sonnes of Belial, Deut. 13.13. Hieron absque jugo, sonnes without yoake. Vers. 7. For a Bishop must be blamelesse] Since the Apostle prosecuting the same ar∣gument useth the name of Bishop and Presbyter indifferently in the same sense (as Jerome and Calvin in loc. observe) thence some inferre that there is no difference be∣tween them. By the name Bishop he meaneth those whom before he called Elders;Locus hic abun∣de docet, nullum esse Episcopi & Presbyteri dis∣crimen, quia nunc secundo nomine promis∣cuè apellat quos priùs vocavit Presbyteros. Calvinus. vide Bzam. and throughout the New Testament it is indifferently given to all teaching Elders, that is, Pastors and Ministers; and so is here to be taken. A title Dr. Taylor in loc. I conceive it to be as cleare as if it were written with a Sunne beame, that Presbyter and Bishop are to the Apostles one and the same thing, no inequality or difference of Office, power or degree betwixt the one and the other, but a meer identity in all. It is true Jerome saith, Quid facit exceptâ ordinatione Episcopus quod non facit Presbyter? but in the same place he proves from Scripture that Episcopus and Presbyter are one and the same; and therefore when he appropriates ordination to the Bishop, he speakes of the degenerated custome of his time. Mr. Hendersons answer to the Kings papers. See the Divines answer to the Kings Papers at Newport. well known in the Apostles daies in the Tongue then commonly used, to betoken a painfull Office, and a diligent labour; borrowed from such as are set in the Watch-towers of Ci∣ties or Camps, to espie, and by a loud voyce, or sound of a Trumpet, or otherwise by a Bell or Warning-piece, to discover and signifie the approaching of the enemy: for such were properly called () Bishops, or Watchmen. It is attributed to the Pastors and Teachers of the Church; not onely the great Pastor and Archbishop of our soules, 1 Pet. 5.4. and the Apostles, Acts 1.20. but the other Pastors and Teachers. And the word must be thus needs generally taken in the New Testament, as appeares Phil. 1.1. where the Apostle writeth to many Bishops in one City, Philippi. and Acts 20.28. speaketh to many Bishops in one City of Ephesus. Not self-willed] One that pleaseth himselfe in his own mind and will; will have his own way. ex origine est sibi placens, , explicante in magnis moralibus Aristotele. Latini veteres quidam hoc loco protervum vertunt. Grotius. Vers. 8. A lover of good men] Or good things. Estius would have it rather referred to persons, because so it agrees better with the words going before. Hospitall but to good men, Quasi diceret Apostolus, amatorem hospitum sed honorum. See Beza. These two are never to be abstracted one from another; for good men are to be loved for their goodnesse; and whosoever loveth goodnesse, loveth good men; yet of these two the context seemeth to favour the latter, a lover of good men; for the Apostle would have the Minister harborous to good men. Dr. Taylour. Vers. 10. Especially they of the circumcision] That is, the Jewes,Vide Bezam. Jerome on the fourth of Ga∣latians saith, Paul knew se∣cular Learning, though not perfectly, as this place and that in the 17 of the Acts, out of Aratus, and that 1 Cor. 15.33. out of Menander, shew. vide illum. in loc. as Rom. 3 30. Col. 4.11. for Creete had many of the dispersed Jewes; see Acts 2. The Apostle (saith Dr. Taylor) meaneth not so much the people of the Jewish Nation, as the Jewish Teachers, the teachers of circumcision, such as are mentioned Acts 15.5. Vers. 12. One of themselves, even a Prophet of their own] Epimenides, a Greek Poet, who was esteemed as a Prophet by the Cretians,Vocat proprium eorum Prophe∣tam, vel quia omnes Prophetae vates dicun∣tur, vel quia descripsit vitia naturaliv gentis suae, quod perin∣de est ac posterio∣rum vitia praedicere, quia vitia nativa parentum ferè in posteros derivantur; nisi dicere velimus Prophetam appellatum, quia scripsit librum de oraculis, & à Cretensibus habitus tanquam Propheta teste Laertio. Immò & Cicero, l. 1. de divin. Epimeni∣dem illorum catalogo adseribit, qui per furorem sunt vaticinati. Menochius de Republica Hebraeorum. l. 3. c. 14. to whom also they sacrificed after his death; therefore called so ironically by Paul, say some. But since Poets are some∣times called by the Grecians Prophets (as among the Latines Vates is so used) Calvin takes it here onely for a Teacher. He also hence notes, that they are superstitious which dare take nothing out of prophane Writers. Estius dislikes that he should be called a Prophet here, because he was a Poet; as if Paul spake after the manner of the Heathens, which were wont to call their Peophets Vates, because they thought them to be acted by some Deity; for elsewhere (saith he) viz. Acts 17. he cals them
Poets;He is so called because he was indeed a Pro∣phet and did divine and answer of events to come; some of whose answers and Oracles are yet extant, and recorded in Authors; besides that some of the Heathens confesse that he was the chiefe of those who by fury prophesied of things to come. Dr. Taylor. but rather Paul cals Epimendes a Prophet (saith he) because he wrote of Ora∣cles, and profest a knowledge of secret matters. See à Lapide. The Cretians are alwaies liers] They were so given to lying, that they occasioned a Proverb among the Heathens,Apud Graecos  usur∣patur pro mentiri, & Cretizas adversus Cretenses de en dicimus qui mendaciter agit subdoleque, contra hominem subdolum & vasrum. Rainold. de lib. Apoc. praelect. 134. Scultetus in loc. vide Erasm. Adagia. We may lie with the Cretians, that is, lie with the liers. Slow-bellies] A proverbiall speech of such as are greedy, and given to their bellies. So the Syriack interprets it. Vers. 13. This witnesse is true] Although Epimenides was a Cretian, that is, a lyer; because he spake against himself, not for himselfe, and against his own Nation, so that his testimony against them was more to be esteemed then Xenophons, or Plato's speaking for them. Wherefore rebuke them sharply] Or refute them. Non est increpa, sed argue, hoc est re∣felle. Erasm.  cuttingly, or precisely, or to the quick. He alludes to Chirur∣gions who cut away the dead flesh which festereth corruption in wounds. So Estius, Dr Taylor, and others. That they may be sound in the faith] Not the vertue or gift of faith whereby we be∣lieve, but the doctrine of faith, that which we doe believe; that is, the doctrine of the Gospell;Dr. Taylor. so it is taken Gal. 1.22. It is here opposed to Jewish fables and com∣mandements of men in the next Verse. .Vers. 14. Which turn away from the truth] In the word Turn away is a metaphor, the speech being borrowed from those who turn away their bodies from the things they dislike;Dr. Taylor. and here translated to signifie an inward loathing and dislike of the truth. Vers. 15. Vnto the pure all things are pure] That is, all things in their own nature indifferent.Quorum est pura & mens & con∣scientia rebus adiaphoris minimè polluntur. Lex Mosis ponit discrimen ciborum, ut alii quidem sint puri & liciti, alii verò impuri & illiciti. Sed hoc discrimen sustulit lex Christi, qui omnia sine delectu piis concessit 1 Tim. 4.4. Drus. Prov. Class. 1. l. 5. See 1 Cor. 6.4. & 10.13. Rom. 14.20. all such things are free now to be used in good conscience without scruple, by means of our Christian liberty. CHAP. II. Vers. 3. NOt given to much wine] So given as to be a servant, slave, or vassall to it; Non multo vino servientes.Quasi dicat, à vino in servitu∣tem redactus & quasi mancipium ebrietatis. Vulg. He hath expressed it significantly; for it is a sevitude and base condition for the senses of a man to be possessed with Wine, and not to be his own man, but a slave to Wine. Vers. 10. Nor purloyning] The Greek word signifies to detaine any thing to ones own selfe that belongs not to him,Est  decerpere ac fur∣tim detrahere, cum totam rem tollere non ausi, quod servi solent. Sicut Ananias Act. 5.2. Espencaeus. and to put it apart to his own use, as Ananias and Sapphira did, Acts 5.6. where the word is likewise used. This vice in times past was so common among servants that the Poets use the word fures for servi. Quid Domini facient audent cum talia fures? Virgil. Eglog. 3. Vers. 12. We should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world] In these words he concludes our whole duty: live soberly, toward our selves; righteously to∣ward our Neighbours, and godly toward God. Haec tria perpetuò meditare adverbia Pauli. Haec tria sint vitae regula sancta tuae. Vers. 14. Who gave himselfe for us] His soule, body, life; it shews the willingnesse of his death. Redeem us] Redeem by a price, ransome, and procure us a compleat pardon; us, Jews and Gentiles.
Purifie] By his word and Spirit, by the application of the doctrine of Christ and his grace. 1. The word doth this by way of example, while it sets out to us the holi∣nesse of Christ. 2. By way of argument, that we should not shew our selves so unkind to him, as sinne against him. Vers. 15. Rebuke with all authority] That is, with a derived ministeriall authority; Christ preached, as having authority in and from himselfe. Matth. 7.29. Let no man despise thee] He should not suffer any to contemn him. Paul doth not speake here to Titus as he did to Timothy, Let no man despise thy youth;1 Tim. 4.12. Id est, talem te exhibe tum vita tum verbo, qui contemni à nemine possis. Espencaeus. whence it is collected that Titus was elder then Timothy. The Greek word here rendered despise is not the same with that in Timothy. CHAP. III. Vers. 5. BY the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost] The Spirit of God alludes to the practise of all civill people at the birth of a childe; they first wash it from its naturall uncleannesse:16. Ezek. 4.6.9. so the Spirit of God cleanseth us from our spirituall pollution. Baptisme is sacramentally the laver of regeneration; not by the work wrought, but by the grace of Gods Spirit by which we are justified, 1 Pet. 3.21. Vers. 9. But avoyd foolish questions and genealogies] Such genealogies as are not in the word,Cajetan. Stultas quaestio∣nes vocat quae carent rationabili causa quaerendi, quaeque nihil adserunt aedificationis. Estius. Iudaei à parva aetate vernacula sui sermonis vo∣cabula penitissimis sensibus imbiberunt, & ab exordio Adam usque ad extremum Zorobabel, omnium generationes ita memoriter velociterque percurrunt, ut eos suum putes referre nomen. Hieron. in loc. vide Espencaeum. which gender questions that the Scripture doth not end and deter∣mine. Foolish questions] That is, unnecessary, idle, of no moment, of no good use to edifi∣cation, neither in faith nor love, in conscience nor manners.Dr. Taylor. And genealogies] here is condemned all that recounting of kindred and pedegree in all sorts of men, which proceedeth from a vain mind, and tendeth to worldly pomp, and vain-glory. The Jewish Teachers would be much and often in extolling of their Tribes and kindred. Vers. 10. A man that is an Heretick, after the first and second admonition reject] Or avoyd; not as Erasmus Quem Papistae Erat mus quia ulcera eorum rodit, per convi∣tium nominant. Vide Bezam. too truly, but bitterly scoffes the Romish practise, Devita, id est, De vita tolle; but reject in an authoritative or judicatory way; not a meere negative act of refraining company, but a positive act of censure is here meant. Gra∣viter quasi censoria correctione reprimendi sunt. Calvinus. Vers. 11. Is subverted] . It is as much as if he had said, He is an house subverted Cottons Bloody Tenet. or turned upside down, or inside outward,Metaphora sumpta est ab aedificio, quod non modo aliqua parte collapsum est, sed funditus dirutum, ut instaurationi non sit locus. Calvinus. Estius idem ferè habet. as a house turned off from the foundation. As a ship Mr. Vines. turnes up her keele; this Greeke word is used Deut. 32.20. a people turned upside down; or subverted. Hath the fairest side outward; the word is a Metaphor drawn Mr. Cranford on 2 Tim. 2.17. from foule Linnen, as Favorinus, the foule side turned inward; as if he should have said, such a man, what ever shews he makes, is a naughty man. Being condemned of himselfe] It is but one word in Greek, . Expe∣rience convinceth that most Hereticks think themselves in the right;Thorndikes Discourse of the Right of the Church in a Christian State: Ch. 1. Vide Estium. so far they are from condemning themselves, in their consciences. But they condemn themselves, by
cutting off themselves from the Church, which other sinners are condemned to by the Church.Fornicator, ad∣ulter, hoacida, per sacerdotes de Ecclesia propelluntur. Haeretici autem in semet ipsos sententiam ferunt, suo arbitrio de Ecclesia recedentes: quae recessio, propriae conscientiae videtur esse damnatio. Hieron. in loc. Vers. 14. And let ours also learn to maintain good works] The words are, let them learne to be eminent in good works above others.Dr. Fulke. See Cartwrights preface to the New Testa∣ment. The Vulgar hath it, curent bonis operibus praeesse. The Rhemists brag that their Translation (which hath it, to shew forth good works) is the better. We translate it also to excell, and the Greek signifies all three indifferently. THese Postscrips in the end of Pauls second Epistle to Timothy, and of that to Titus, (as learned Beza hath well observed) were not found in the most ancient Greek copies;They are not in the most ancient Parch∣ment Manu∣script Greeke Copy of the Bible, which Mr. Patrick Young hath to publish.Subscriptiones illae Apostolicae non sunt: & idcirco neque in Syro, neque in omnibus Graecis exemplaribus leguntur, sed aliquot post saeculis ex Graecorum scholiis videntur adjectae: ne dicam, quod haec ad Titum subscriptio Epistolae ipsi repugnat, quando dicit, Nicopoli scrptam Epistolam, cum Paulus. c. 3.12. Titum accersat Nicopolim. Scultetus. Certum est subscriptiones Epi∣stolarum numericas ortum traxisse à piis Christianis quibus vel Epistolae ab Apostolis fuerunt inscriptae, vel qui earundem  habuerunt. Tertullianus enim libro de praescriptionibus adversus Haereses post libri medium testatur, suo adhuc tempore, quod in tertium à Christo nato seculum incidit, Authenticas Apostolotum Epistolas fuisse recitatas, sonantes vocem, & repraesentan∣tes faciem uniuscujusque. Waltheri Centuria Miscel. Theol. nor yet in the Vulgar Latine translation, no not to this day; these additions were made some hundred of yeers after the Apostles. In Ieromes time they were not extant, as the translation that goes in his name can testifie, which hath no such Post∣script. Our former and ancient English Translations, though they have them, yet they are but in a small Character different from the Text, as no part of it. See Mr. Cudworth on the 6 of the Galatians annexed to Mr. Perkins on the Postscripts of the severall Epistles. ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to PHILEMON. IT is a very Rhetoricall Plena roboris & lacertorum est tota Epistola, & singulis ejus verbis mirifica quaedam argu∣mentandi vis latet recondita. Scultetus. Epistle. Philemon to whom this Epistle is written was Pauls Disciple, a man famous among the Colos∣sians, whose house Theodoret witnesseth was at Colosse unto his time. Gaius was the Churches hoast, he the Churches friend. His private piety (saith Scultetus) is especially worthy of praise, that he had as it were a certaine Church in his house. Philemon, which signifieth à lover, is a fit name for a Master; and Onesimus, which signifieth profitable, V. 11. is a fit title for a servant. Vers. 3. Grace to you and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ] The salutation is set down by the matter of it, which he wisheth to them whereof the parts are grace,Fenner. that is, full favour of God; peace, that is, by a Synecdoche of the spe∣ciall for the generall, all prosperity both of soule and body. 2. By the form, from God the Father, and from Christ.
Vers. 7. The Bowels Hoc idioma Apostolicum est, ut semper visce∣ra vocet, vo∣lens plenam mentis ostendere charitatem.Hieron. in loc. Si me habes pro amico, ac proin∣de rerum tua∣rum participe. Grotius.] This word is thrice used in this Epistle; that is, by an ex∣cessive Metaphore, the inward affections of the Saints. Are refreshed] A Metaphore drawne from the rest of the body wearied with tra∣vell, or tyred and over pressed with some burthen; and sweetly applied to the rest of the affections toyled and turmoyled with griefe, and ready to sinck under the burden of some grievous affliction. Vers. 17. If thou count me therefore a partner] The words in the originall are, if thou have me a fellow or partaker, that is one in common with thee, as we are wont to say if you love me doe such a thing; yea it hath a shew of an obtestation, q.d. Per ami∣citiam nostram te oro ut illum sucipias. Estius. ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Epistle to the HEBREWES. CHAP. I.Epistola Aposto∣li ad Hebraeos sacrosancta est & nihil nisi Deum spirat. Nescio equidem an post Evangeli∣um Johannis ullus novi Te∣stamenti liber, in quo plus pro∣sundae recondi∣taeque sit Theolo∣giae. Cunaeus d Repub. Heb. l. 3. c. 7.See Gal. 1.12. Doctor Fulkes answer to Mar∣tin.Vide Grotium. THe diversity of the stile and inscription of this Epistle, and manner of reasoning, makes some doubt of the writer thereof; and also some thing in the Epistle, shewes it was not written by Paul, as in the beginning of the second Chapter. The doctrine of salvation was confirmed to us by them that heard it after it was first spoken by the Lord himselfe, which seemes to agree with the profession of Luke in the beginning of his Gospell. An ancient Greek Co∣py (whereof Beza speakes) leaves out the name of Paul in the Title; and also divers Printed Bookes. Hierome in Catalogo Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum, after he hath recited all the Epistles of Paul, at length he commeth to this Epistle: but the Epistle (saith he) which is called unto the Hebrewes, is not thought to be his, for the difference of stile and speech, but either writen by Barnabas as Tertullian saith, or Luke as some thinke, or Clement. But I have in my Treatise of Divinity, proved this Epistle to be canonicall, written in Greek, and probably to be Pauls also. This Epistle is as it were the Harmony, both of the Old and New Testament; it shewes how Christ was prefigured in the one, and exhibited in the other. It is the onely key to the types of the ceremoniall Law, which hold forth the Priest-hood of Christ. The Apostle writes to the Hebrews, not to fall away from Christianity to Judaisme, for the persecutions which the Jewes their natives brought upon them, which is the full scope of this Epistle.Thorndike of the Right of the Church in a Christian State. c. 1.Nullus est ex sa∣cris libris qui de Christi sacerdotio tam luculenter disserat, nici quod morte sua abtulit sacrificij vim dignitatemque tam magnificè extollat, de caeremoniarum tam usu quàm abrogatione uberiùs tractet: qui denique plenius explicet Christum esse finem legis. Calvinus. The Apostles maine scope in this Epistle to the Hebrewes, is to set forth the nature, and exalt the excellency of Christs Priest-hood. Vers. 1. God who at sundry times and in divers manners, spake in times past unto the Fa∣thers by the Prophets, &c.] The excellency of the Gospell above the Law is set down in
these three points, 1. God spake unto the faithfull, under the Old Testament, by Moses and the Prophets, worthy servants, yet servans; now the Son is much better then a servant, vers. 4. 2. Whereas the body of the Old Testament was long in com∣piling,Bishop Smith. much about a 1000 yeares from Moses to Malachie; and God spake unto the Fathers, by starts and fits; one while raising up one Prophet, another while another; now sending them one parcell of Prophesie or story, then another: when Christ came all was brought to perfection in one age: the Apostles and Evangelists were alive some of them, when every part of the New Testament was fully finished 3. The Old Testament was delivered by God in divers manners, of utterance and manifesta∣tion, but the delivering of the Gospell was in a more simple manner, either by the tongues or pennes of them that held an uniforme kind of teaching. , at sundry times] So we translate it, or by sundry parts by piece-meale, the word will bear both,Plurifariam, id est, pluribus tempoibus tem∣poe Abraha∣mi, Isaaci, Jacobi: tempo∣ribus Mosis, Josuae, Iudicum: temporibus Da∣vidis, Salomo∣nis & Prophetarum: ac postremò temporibus Danielis, Aggaei, Zachariae, Malachiae. Grotius. and both are consonant to the circumstances of the Text. It signifies Multipartiè saith Ribera, By many parts, now a part of his will, and then a part further. Dickson. , and in divers manners] Or in divers formes, or similitudes, but the former is the better, in divers manners of utterance and manifestation, sometimes in darke words, sometimes plainly and familiarly, or sometimes by lively voyce, some∣time by vision, or dreame, or inspiration, or Vrim and Thummim, by signes from heaven. Tam veterem quòm novum mundum per silium factum esse intelligit. Pareus.Vers 2. By whom also he made the worlds] There is another world besides this, see 12. Matth. 32.11. Heb. 3. Or else it is so called for the variety of times and ages, and sorts of the creatures, one succeeding another. Vers. 3. The brightnesse of his glory, and the expresse image of his person] The latter words are an exposition of the former;Mr. Mede. Image expounding brightnesse; and person or substance glory. , is the thing which hath brightnesse in it, , is that which receiveth his brightnesse from another. Reercussus divinae Majestatis, qualis est solis in nube qui decitur . Grotius.The Greek word signifies somewhat more than brightnesse, even such a bright∣nesse, as hath a lustre cast upon it, from some other thing; a fit word to expresse the everlasting generation of Christ. The similitude is borrowed from the Sunne∣beames. The expresse Jmage] A comparison from the seale of a Ring, the forme of which is imprinted in the Wax. Purged our sinnes] Some make it a Physicke Metaphore, but rather be alludes to the law of purging sinne by sacrifice. Vers. 9. Therefore God even thy God bah annointed thee, with the Oyle of gladnesse, above thy fellows] This is taken out of 45. Psal. 7. the Chaldee Paraphrast and many Rabbines interprete it of the Messiah,Jude per ex∣cellentiam Re∣demptor nster dctus est He∣braicè Meschi∣ach. sive Mes∣sias, graecè , Latinè Vnctus. à Lapide. Vnctus fuit Christus supra nos omnes, quia sie mensura, nos autem ad certam quisque portionem, prout singulis ipse distribuit. Deinde nostrâ causâ Vnctus fuit, ut hauriamus omnes ex ejus plenitudine. Quare ipse Christus: nos ab eo Christiani, quasi rivuli à sonte. Calvinus. who as mediatour had a fulnesse of all graces. Accor∣ding to his divine nature, he had an infinite fulnesse of grace in his person; according to his humane nature, he had a fulnesse of habituall grace: Mary had a fulnesse of grace; and Barnabas was full of the Holy Ghost. The fulnesse of grace in Christ, is penitudo generum & graduum, a fulnesse of kinds and degrees; the Saints have funda∣mentall graces, as faith, repentance and the like; yet they may want joy, pace, assu∣rance; but Christ had a fulnesse of all kinds of graces. Esay 11.2.2. They have but their measure of grace; Christ had a fulnesse of grace for degrees, Iohn 3.34. He had all graces in the most eminent degree, the spirit of God rested upon him, Esay 11.2. See Esay 42.1. The oyle wherewith Christ was annointed, is called the oyle of glad∣nesse, because the sweet savour of it gladdeth the hearts of all his Members; that is all true Christians, which are his fellowes, and partners in the annoyting; he was Christ
as they Christians. That word in Psal. 45.7. translated above may signifie more then thy fellowes, prae consortibus tuis, so Tremellius; that is saith Mr. Perkins] Christs man∣hood was filled with the gifts and graces of God, both in measure, number, and de∣gree, above all men and Angels. Or, for his fellowes, pro consortibus suis, so some read it; Christ received not the spirit for himselfe, but for his people, John 1.16. Vers. 14. Are they not all ministring Spirit, &c?] He doth not so much aske, as plainly affirme; for the Hebrewes use an interrogation, when they would the more confirme a thing. CHAP. II. Vers. 1. LEast at any time we should let thm slip] That is coldly translatd, least we slow. Saint Paul had been a Babe (saith Broughtons Epistle to the Nobility of England. Sic Lament. 4.9. fluxerunt, id est conciderunt. Et hic ne cada∣mus vertunt Syrus & Arabs, nec aliter hic sumpsit Chrysostomus & Graecialij. Sic quae intereunt aquae effluenti comparan∣tur, Job. 20.27. Grotius. Broughton) if hee had thought that all Jerusalems Rabbins could forget upon what principles he disputed;Ne dilabamur ut aqua quae in∣utiliter effluit: quae similitudo exprimitur, 2 Sam. 15.8. Psal. 58.8. Gro∣tus. Est Metaphorae, quam alij sump∣tam putant à vase perfluente, alij ab aqua effluente. Priori modo, sensus est; ne audita nobis excidant è memoria; ne simus instar dolij pertusi, aut rimosi, quod liquorem infusum non retinet. Hunc sensum optare videtur antithesis quae est inter vocabua attendere & effluere. Estius. vide plura ibid. or thought that if the Rabbins had imbraced the rules and principles, they could soone forget them. Here Arabiques translate elegantly Nakitu we fall, the Syriaque Nabed we perish. Saint Pauls Metaphore was taken from Jeremie. Lam. 4.9. They that are slaine with the Sword, are better then they that are slaine with hunger: which flow∣ed, as peirced by wanting the fruit of the field. Least we leake it out, like water put into a Colander, or riven dish; some thinke it to be a Metaphore from paper that doth not beare Inke well, à Charta Bibula quae scripturam bene nos continet. See Pareus. Vers. 2. If the word spoken by Angels was stedfast, &c.] The meaning is briefely this, if every transgression of the Law was severely punished, how shall we escape, if wee doe but neglect the Gospell? See Estius. Vers 3. If we neglect] Greeke disregard, not care for it. So great Salvation Intelligit doctrinam Christi quae tan∣tae, id est, longe majoris salutis, ac foelicitatis promissiones continet, quàm lex vetus continebat. Estius.] That is the meanes of it. So he calls the doctrine of the Gospell, Metaleptically from the effect (saith Pareus) because faith in the Gospell brings to us eternall Salvation. For the Gospell is the power of God to salvation, to every beleever. Vers. 9. Should taste death for every man] Or every thing or creature, pro omni. Quod utrum accipien∣dū sit ut neutrius generis, pro omni re seu creatura; an ut masculini pro omni homine, non liquet. t neutrum acceperunt Origenes, Ambrosius & Theodoretus; ut Masculinum Chrysostomus, ac caeteri ferè omnes. Quod & Syrus interpres sua versione expressit, addens, homine. Estius vide plura ibid. who all these be the context Doctor Taylor on Titus. sheweth. 1 Sonnes that must be led unto glory, v. 10. 2. Christs brethren, v. 11. 3. Such Children as are given of God unto Christ. v. 13. See Pareus. Some Protestant Divines urge this Scripture to shew that Christ dyed for all, though not equally for Iudas, as for Peter. Some distinguish thus, they say Christ is sufficiens remedium, there is vertue enough in Christ, but not sufficiens medium, because besides the work of Christ, there is required faith to apply it, Mark 16.16. By tasting death he meanes dye. see Matth. 6.28. John 8.52. Whenceso∣ever the Metaphore is taken, whether from those which drinke poyson, or rather from the taste of those things which are bitter and unpleasing. Vers. 14. Destroy him that had the power of death] , That he might make Satan unprofitable, idle, and fruitlesse, as the word is used, Luke 13.7. Rom. 3.3. The
Devill hath the power of death in a double respect,He hath not imperium Prin∣cipis, he can∣not take men to death when he will, but Carnificis. à Lapide. 1. As he hath the power over sinne, 2 Tim. 2. ult. 2. As an executioner, Luke 12.20. Iob. 33.23. Vers. 15. And deliver them, who through feare of death, were all their life time subject to bandage] Every unregenerate man is subject to the fear of death. 1. Because all the comforts of this life forsake him then. 2. All his parts and accomplishments shall be taken away. 3. His hopes dye. 4. His conscience shall then be awake, this is the worm. 5. Must goe to God to give an account, whom he hath no interest in. 6. All offers of grace shall be at an end Vide Grotium. Vers. 16. For verily be tooke not on him the nature of Angels] The word in the origi∣nall ,He taketh not hold of An∣gels., apud Platonem & altos est so¦lemniter vindi∣care. Hic au∣tem ex superioribus intelligendum est vindicare sive asserere in libertatem manu injectâ. Sic somitut. Luc. 23.26. Act. 23.19. Sic infra 8.9. solent autem manu apprehendi qui è servitute aut vinculis educuntur. Grotius. Verbum Graecum non simpliciter as∣sumere aut accipere significat, sed apprehendere, vindicare, manum injicere in rem aliquam; vindicantur autem qui in libertatem asseruntur. Estius. signifies properly to take a man with thy hand, either to lead him some whether, or to uphold him thereby to help him. See Matth. 14.13. Mark 8.23. and Luke 9.47. and 14.4. Hence figuratively it is translated, to signifie succouring, or helping. For when we would help one from falling, or sinking under some burden, or would raise him being fallen, then we put our hand to him, and take hold of him. CHAP. III. Vers. 1. PArtakers of the heavenly calling] It is so called not so much for that the Au∣thour,See Phil. 3.14. meanes and manner are heavenly, but because the State whereto we are brought is heavenly and glorious. Doctor Sclater. Consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession Christ Iesus] The Greeke word sig∣nifies magno studio mentem in rem intendere.Quia ad super∣caelestia ns ducit, non ad terrenam pos∣sessionem ut lex Mosis. Grotius. 4. Ephes. 11. To shew that Christ hath the eminency of the chiefe offices in the Old and New Testament, these words are used. The High Priest was the highest office in the Old Testament, and Apostle in the New. He cals him here the Apostle , he is the chiefe of the Apostles. Our profession] That is of the Gospell which we professe, because he is the Authour and Doctor of the same.Perkins. Quidam sic ex∣ponunt: Quem nos apostolum & pontificem confitemur. Alij sidei seu doctrinae, quam nos profitemur. Quae est Graecorum in∣terpretatio eademque germanior. Estius. Vers. 2. Who was faithfull to him that appointed him, as also Moses was faithfull in all his house] Not in giving as full and exact directions for all particulars, concerning the worship of God,Because in the least thing that was done about the ma∣king of Gods house, he pre∣cisely followed the direction that God had given him, as it is expressely noted of him, Exodus 40.16.19.21.23.25.27.29.32. Hildersam on 51. Psal. and government of the Church of the New Testament, as Mo∣ses did in his time for the Church of the Old Testament; for there is not such a particular and exact forme of worship or Church government drawne, as we see in the Law, but herein stands Christs faithfulnesse, that he hath as fully revealed unto us the doctrine of the Gospell, as Moses did that of the Law; and that he hath faith∣fully performed, and fulfilled all the types of himselfe, and all the things signified by Moses ceremonies, as Moses hath faithfully and distinctly set them downe. See Pareus. Gloriatio de spe vitae & gloriae aeternae certò ob tinendae. Pareus. Intelligitur spes illa laeta, nempe vitae aeternae sub illis legibus sub quibus à Christo promissa est. Grotius. Vide Estium.Vers. 6. The rejoycing of the hope] That is the doctrine of the Gospell, whereby these are dispensed and confirmed.
Vers. 12. Take heed brethren least there be in any of you an evill heart of unbeliefe in depar∣ting from the living God] He shews five degrees of Apostacy: the first is, consenting unto sinne, being deceived with the temptation of it. The second is, hardnesse, of heart upon many practices of sinne. Thirdly,Mr. Perkins. the heart being hardned becomes un∣believing, and calls the truth of the Gospell into question. Fourthly, by unbeliefe it becomes evill, having a base conceit of the Gospell. Fifthly, this evill heart brings a man to Apostacy, and falling from God, which is the extinguishing of the light of the Gospell. An evill heart is a great evill, First, from the nature of it, 1. it is an inward evill; a seizes on the most principall part of man, the soule; 3. an inveterate evill, we brought it with us into the world; 4. an insensible evill. Secondly in the effects, 1. It indisposeth us to all good. 2. It is the root of other evils, Matth. 15.19 3. ma∣keth a man unfit to live or die. Vers 13. Exhort one another while it is called to day] When you commit a sinne, you think if you stay a week, a fortnight, or a moneth, you shall come in as well as at the first; no, saith the Apostle, while it is to day come in, doe it presently,Dr. Preston. for sin will de∣ceive you, it will harden your heart before you be aware. Through the deceitfulnesse of sinne] That is, deceitfull sinne, an hyppalage, Prov. 14.8. Ephes. 4.22. Rom. 7.11. 1. It hath its originall from the subtill Serpent Satan the grand Impostor. 2. It is the cause of all the deceit, guile, and falshood that is in this world, Psal. 54.20, 21. Acts 13.10. 3. Sinne is in its own nature deceitfull,Familiare scrip∣turis est, ut peccatum, seu concupiscentia dicatur homi∣nes seducere, decipere, ab∣strahere & allicere, ut Rom. 7. Dan. 13. Jacob. 1. Id autem dicitur per quandam Prosopopeiam, quatenus homo tentatione ali∣qua, velut suasione sollicitus & inductus, peccato consentit, quasi ab ipso peccato persuasui. Fit autem miro modo, ut dum cor emollitur delectatione peccati, paulatim obdurescat adversus praecepta Dei. Estius. every errour in opinion and evill in practice proceeds from deceit; the mind is deluded in the first with a shew of truth, and the will in the second with the appearance of goodnesse. Rather to believe then practice; the Apostles proper meaning is, the de∣ceitfulnesse of sinne in matter of believing. Vers. 14. If we hold the beginning of our confidence stedfast to the end] , the first act of faith, whereby we began to subsist in Christ.Vocabulum  de imper∣perfectione nostra nos monet: ut quotidie proficere studeamus; vox  dubitationem Papisticam excludit, certitudinem salutis nobis confirmat. Conditio adjecta studium perseverantiae in nobis excitat. Paraeus. Vers. 17. Whose carcasses fell in the wildernesse] The Vulgar renders it cadavera.  properly signifies members. The Syriack hath rendred it ossa bones.Vide Estium. Because those unbelievers lie prostrate in the wildernesse, therefore a great multitude of their bones lie dispersed in the wildernesse. CHAP. IV. Vers. 2. BUt the word preached did not profit them] Profiting may be taken here for the truth of grace, or for growth in grace; men cannot grow in grace that have no grace;John 5.25. but the word worketh true faith on that person which came to it without any true grace or faith at all. Not being mixed with faith in them that heard it] The word signifies as if we should say, such a potion did not good, because they had not such an ingredient.See Dickson. An exceeding strong, drink not tempered and qualified profits not nature; so those great promi∣ses, so much exceeding opinion and expectation of reason, not being mixed with faith, did not profit them. He compares the heart to a vessell, in which there must be both the word and faith; these two must be mingled together, and then it will be a word of power, life, and salvation.Perkins. Fides hîc com∣paratur partibus humani corporis per quae fit digestio, & cibus in succum vertitur. Ita Lucas medicus ex arte medica voces sump∣erit. Grotius.
Vers. 9. There remaineth therefore a rest to the people of God] A Sabbatisme, as Calvin and Beza render it.In this Chap∣ter is mentio∣ned a three∣fold rest: 1. In Heaven, Vers. 1. 2 A rest of Canaan, Ver. 5, 8. 3 The rest of the hly Sabbath. Ver, 9. That is, the keeping of the day of rest, (though it be commonly ren∣dered rest) he forbeares to use the same Greek word for rest, which he used both be∣fore and after. Estius and others take it here for a celestiall rest, and bring the next Verse to confirm their opinion. See Rev. 14.13. Vers. 12. For the word of God is quicke] Or living; 1. Formally in its own nature, in that it abides for ever,Id est, Ags per∣petuò ut ea quae vivunt. Conve∣nit hoc verbo Dei, sed praeci∣puè Evangelico. Psal. 105.9. & 107.20. & 147.15, 16. & 40.8. & 55.2. 1 Pet. 1.22.23, 24. in regard of the sence and matter contained therein, not as it is written in Paper. 2. Efficiently, and that in these respects: 1. It giveth life at the first, it is appointed by God as the instrument to beget the new life of grace in us, Iames 1.18. Iohn 17 17. the savour of life. 2. It increaseth spirituall life, 1 Pet. 2. 3. It directs and teacheth us the way to eternall life, Iohn 5. Piercing even to the dividing sunder of sule and spirit] That is, the whole man. It worketh not onely upon the inferiour faculties, which are lesse pure, but upon the purest and most supreame part of the soule; for the word pierceth as far as the eye of the Authr of it, to whom all things are naked and open. Grotius.And of the joynts and marrow] By the joynts he meanes the minima, the least things; and by the marrow the intima, the most secret and inward things. A discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart] , a CritickDirebantur critici nomine etiam à Latinis usurpato, homi∣nes acris judicii, qui de libris, aut versibus, aut aliis aliorum operibus censere poterant, ac discenere quid probum; quid reprobm, item quid genuinum, quid verò spurium ac supposititium. Quales in censendis Homeri versibus, Aristarchus & Aristophanes Grammatici memorantur. Estius., a curious Judge, and observer. rendred thoughts, are properly the secret and inward workings of pas∣sions and affections:  intents, are the secret and first workings of mens under∣standings and apprehensions. Vers. 13. Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight] Neither is there any creature which is not manifest in the sight thereof; so some read it, and the Greek will very well beare it, viz. of the word, and understanding by creature such thoughts intents and notions as are framed in the heart, which may be termed the creatures of the heart.Heron. See Dikes de∣ceitfulnesse of the heart. p. 10. This interpretation holds good correspondence with the Greek, the scope of the place, and the Analogy of faith. But all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to doe]  naked as when the skin is pull'd off; and  opened, as the intrailes of a Sacrifice cut down the back. He useth a metaphor taken from a sheep whose skin is taken off, and he hanged up by the neck with his back toward the wall,A speech bor∣rowed from the Priests un∣der the Law, who when they killed the beast, all things that were within the beast were laid naked before the Priest, and he saw what was sound and what corrupted. Weemes. and all his intrailes layd bare, and expo∣sed to open view. He alludes to the Anatomizing of a creature (say some) wherein men are cautious to finde out every little Veine or Muscle, though they be never so close. They are naked, therefore God sees their outside; and opened, dissected, quar∣tered, and cleft asunder through the backbone, so that he sees their inside also. Opened is more then naked; naked is that which is not cloathed, or covered: opened is that whose inwards are discovered and made conspicuous. That is, not able to sympa∣thize with, or pained with our infirmities.Vers. 15. Cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities] The originall word is purely Greek, as there are many in this book; it is used also 10.34. and no where else. Was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sinne] That is, say some, was never temped to sinne, as Matth. 15.38. but the Apostle here comforts the people of God against sinfull temptations, Christ was tempted to sinne, but not into sinne. Vers. 16. Let us goe] Because our Mediator is God, as in Ch 1. he is able to re∣concile God to us, and procure grace for us. 2. Man, Heb. 2.14. and our high Priest, Vers. 14.
Come boldly] So as to speak all our mind.The word sig∣nifies to speak all, or speake with hope and confidence. Vs] Generally all Christians; in the Law onely the High Priest might come, and that once a yeere; we may now come at any time when we have need. Unto the Throne of grace] The Cherubims or Mercy-seat was a Type of the Throne of grace. That we may obtaine mercy] viz. From God, by our High Priest, and Intercessour. Finde grace] In the originall, receive grace; not to earn, purchase or deserve it. CHAP. V. Vers. 2. WHo can have compassion on the ignorant] The word signifies to appor∣tion his compassion, or to compassionate them as much as they need. declarat indo∣lem quae ad commiserationem sit prona, quanta opus est. Beza. Qui quantum satis est miserari possit. Id. ib. Vers. 6. Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedec] Melchizedek signifi∣eth a King of righteousnesse, and Salem signifieth peace. Heb. 7.2, 3. Christ was a King of righteousnesse and peace. Vers. 7. Who in the daies of his flesh] That is, when having our weak and frayle nature he lived with us here, for so the word flesh is to be taken;Beza. vide Grotium. least any should think that he put off his flesh. When he had offred up prayers and supplications] The first word is nomen generis, the second signifies something more, most submissive prayers.Preces generale nomen est, sup∣plicationes autem supplicum preces sunt, cùm qui orat objicit se ad pedes, aut genu tangit ejus quem erat. Significatur ergo magnus affectus, & humilitas Christi precantis. Estius. And was heard in that he feared] And yet we see the Cup did not passe from him,Perkins. Preston. because he was strengthned to beare it. First, Christ did not aske deliverance from death absolutely,Mr. Ball. Est contracta locutio, frequens & Hebraeis & Graecis. Sensus est in hoc exau∣ditus fuit ut ab isto metu liberaretur. Grotius. but adding this con∣dition, if it be thy will O Father. Secondly, he was not delivered from suffering, but had strength and power given him, whereby his manhood was made able to bear the heavy burden of Gods indig∣nation. Vers. 8. Yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered] That is, he shewed obedience more then, then before. Not as if Christ were to goe to schoole to learne;Mr. Hildersam. Alludit ad Pro∣verbium Grae∣cum; , quales sententiae & cum simili  sunt ferme in linguis omnibus; sensus est, expertus est in tantis tentationibus quam sit arduum Deo obedire. Grotius. or as if by certain acts he were to fit himselfe for obedience; he did not learn that which he knew not before, but did that which he did not before; he then was put to the triall of his obedience. Vers. 9. And being made perfect] His perfection was declared, and his Mediatorship accomplished in the things that he suffered. He became the authour of eternall salvation unto all them that obey him] This is to be understood both of the obedience of faith, which is the principall, Iohn 6.29. and also of our new obedience. B. Down. of Justification. l. 7. c. 7. Vers. 11. And hard to be uttered] To be interpreted; Greek, to be fitted in the ut∣terance or expression of them to your capacities. Seeing ye are dull of bearing] Or rather slow, or slothfull, according to the Greek; that is, averse from taking paines, that you may be able to heare with understanding. There is a twofold dulnesse in the people in hearing; 1. Some are dull in the letter, so the high way ground. 2. To the Spirituall sense. Vers. 14. But strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age] To those that are perfect; so it ought to be translated, and so it is in the originall. Even those who by reason of use] , by an habituall use or long custome.Dr. Preston.
The old translation by reason of custome,Propter habi∣tum. Beza. and the new by reason of use; but neither is so full as the originall, by reason of habit. Have their senses exercised to discerne both good and evill] The word properly signi∣fies such an exercise as Wrestlers or such as contend for victory doe use,. Vulg. Reddidit, sensus exercitatos. Sed Graecum propriè significat organa sensuum ut sunt oculi, aures. In nominibus , est elegans paranomasia. Comprehendit autem nomine boni & mali etiam verum & falsum in doctrina Christiana. Gerh. in loc. which is with all their might and strength, being trained up unto it by long exercise. That is, he that hath this true wisdom, he hath such a distinguishing faculty, that as the taste discerns of meat, or as a man that is accustomed to taste Wine can easily dis∣cern between good and bad; so, by a certaine wisdom that is unfused into him, he is able to discern between good and evill, even as the senses doe (for that is the scope of the place) between colour and colour, taste and taste; there is an ability in the perfect to discern between good and evill. CHAP. VI. Vers. 2. OF the doctrine of Baptismes] Among the principles of Christian Religion that were first taught unto the Christians of those times,See my Prole∣gomena to my Treatise of Divinity for the opening of these two first verses. Vide Bezam & Grotium. Baptismi tantùm mentio fit, coena Domini omissa. Quod ideo factum existimatur, quia ut ex multorum veterum scriptis liquet, catechumenis olim doctrina de caena hac non proponebatur. Imò neque cum peragenda illa esset, interesse permitte∣bantur ut illius actionem spectarent. Zepperus de Sacramentis. the doctrine of Baptismes is one; that is, the doctrine of the Sacraments; figuratively putting one for both; and perhaps the plurall number is used because it hath a double washing and not a single; even the outward washing of the outward, and an inward washing of the inward man. Calvin thinks he meanes the solemn rites, or set daies of bap∣tizing. Vers. 4. For it is impossible for those which were once enlightned] That is, say some, very difficult; as it is impossible but that scandals should come, and so they would take it in that place, to deceive if it were possible the elect; but the reason given why they cnnot be restored, because of their crucifying of Christ again, argueth an im∣possiility, not indeed of it selfe, but by the just judgement of God upon them. All who hold falling from grace bring this place as a main support of the cause, and therefore understand this of the truely godly; but the Orthodox answer, If these were godly, it was onely an hypothesis propounded, this condition puts nothing in being; it is onely propounded conditionally, and by way of admonition, which is an effectuall meanes of keeping them from falling. 2. They deny these to be truly godly, they were onely close hypocrites. Enlightened] Have been baptized. So Heb. 10.32. the Syriack, Arabick, and Aethi∣opick render it; and so some of the Greek Fathers expound this word, because adulti were not baptized till they had been catechised,Quod Graecè est , sive illuminati, hoc Syrus vertit baptizati, & Justinus Mar∣tyr Apolog. 2. atque alii baptisma vocant . Itaque omnes pene veteres hinc probant baptismum posse iterari: ut Ambrosius, Epiphanius, Hieronymus, Augustinus, Cyrillus & alii. Rectius Anselmus, Lyranus, Hugo, alii, qui verba ista intelligunt de blasphemia in Spiritum Sanctum, quae non remittetur in hoc seculo neque in futuro. Vossius disputat. 17. de Baptismo. 2. and sufficiently instructed in the faith; rather inwardly enlightned in the mind, had a great measure of illumination in the mysteries of the Gospell; men cannot sinne against the Holy Ghost without a measure of illumination. And have tasted of the heavenly gift] or Supercelestiall gift. It is one thing to drinke or eat, saith Gregory, another to taste, Matth. 27.34. men may taste that which they spit out again; Ionathan did, but taste the Honey. The heavenly gift] That is, Christ, who is called the gift of God, Iohn 4.10. See Iohn 6.38, 50.
And were made partakers of the Holy Ghost] That is, the common gifts of it. Calvin.A Hypocrite may have a dis∣position to sanctificati∣on, have it in fieri not in facto esse. Pareus. That is something they have so like sanctification, that both themselves and others may think them truly sanctified. Vers. 5. And have tasted the good word of God] Received it with some love and de∣light; called good word, because it onely revealeth Christ, who procureth all good unto all beleevers. Vide Bezam. And the powers of the world to come Some under∣stand the gift of miracles in the Gospell-time, which is the world to come, in re∣spect of the Jewish peda∣gogie; rather the wonderfull workes of the life to come, as glorification and salvation. A hypocrite may apprehend some excellency of the resurrection, conceive the manner of the day of judgement.] Some interpret it of the world under the dayes of the Gospell, they may have a taste of the Gospell-ordinances, and priviledges. Most referre it to the world to come; God lets in a glimpse of heaven, 34. Numb. 16, 17. or a flash of hell upon the conscience. Vers. 6. If they shall fall away] Altogether, totally, Prolapsi, id est, prorsus lapsi. Anselme. Not at universalem ab Evangelio defectionem. Calvin. This place must be compared with Heb. 10. and so it is to be understood of a wilfull malicious Aposta∣sie, not from any temptation, but out of meer hatred to the truth; so that this place makes nothing for the Novatians which denyed repentance to them that sinned after Baptisme. See Grotius. To renew them againe to repentance] If ever they come to repent, they must be re∣duced to that former estate, though that be not enough; that is, to have knowledge and light of mind onely, it must be in a more powerfull way. Vers. 7. For the earth which drinketh in the raine that commeth oft upon it, and bringeth forth Herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God] All is an al∣legory; the earth is man, Ier. 22.29. The raine Gods word, Deut. 32.2 Amos 7 16.The word is usually in Scripture com∣pared to rain, Deut. 32.2. and that in three respects, 1. The raine for its birth is hea∣venly, it comes down from heaven, and waters the earth, saith the Psalmist; so the word Heb. 12.25. 2. Free; the raine is freely dispensed, Amos 4.7. So is the Lord in the dispensation of the word, 3. When it comes, it comes with a Commission, Esay 55.10. So the word. The Herbes are graces, and the blessing is a sweet retribution and accumulation of mercy. Blessing from God] Either incrementum, increase of those graces they have already received (to them that have more shall be given) or maturitatem, when fruits cease growing in bignesse, they grow in ripensse; their graces shall increase both in regard of greatnesse and ripenesse. Vers. 10. To forget your worke and labour of love] That is, those duties which out of love to him we performe with labour and striving.Mr. Hildersam. Vers. 11. To the full assurance of hope] Hope hath an eye to the good of the pro∣mise (as faith to the truth of it) the assurance of hope is, that we shall certainly re∣ceive that good. Vers. 13. Because he could swear by no greater, he sware by himselfe] q. d. If there had beene a greater God, he would have sworne by him. Vers. 17. The heires of promise] That is not onely such to whom the promises be∣long, but such as claime their inheritance by adoption and promise.Doctor Taylor. Vers. 18. To lay hold upon the hope set before us] The Greek word rendred to lay hold, doth not signifie quomodocunque tenere,. Estius. Gerh. sed ita tenere & complecti ut non patiaris ti∣bi eripi, to hold any way, but so to hold and embrace a thing, that thou sufferest it not to be taken from thee. CHAP. VII. Vers. 1. FOr this Melchisedek King of Salem &c.] There is nothing spoken of Melchisedek but in Genesis,Gen. 14. Psal. 110. and in the 5. Chapter of the Hebrewes and this.
, non ratio∣ne generatio∣nis sed ratione commemora∣tionis, quia Scriptura de eo sic loquitur, ut nec patris nec matris ejus ul∣lam saciat men∣tonem. Gerh. in loc. Non quod tale quod de eo ex∣stet, qui & patrem & matrem & majores habuit, qui & ipse postremò obiit ut coeteri, sed quod nihil de ipsis exprimatur. Hein∣sius. Vide Grotium. Origene saith Melchisedek was an Angel, Ierome consutes that opinion, and saith he was Sem, of whose mind are Epiphanius, Marlorate.Vers. 3. Without Father▪ without Mother, without dscent] This is not spoken sim∣ply, and absolutely, but by a figure; 1. Because the Scripture mentioneth not who were his Parents, no more doth it Iohs, or the three Childrens. 2. Because he being a type of Christ, hath eternity ascribed unto him by reason of Christ, who as he is man hath no Father; and as he is God hath no Mother; and as he is the eternall God, hath no beginning of dayes. Roberts of Tythes. Some thinke that this Melchisedek was Sem the ldest Sonne of Noah; for he was living when Jsaac was 50 yeares old; and therefore almost all the dayes of Abraham. He was without beginning in the new world, for he was born in the old; and without end in the old world, because he continued in the new after the floud. Constans veterum Hebraerum opinio est Melchisedek fuisse Sem filium Noe. Ribera. Some Heretickes said he was the Holy Ghost Vide Cunaeum de republica Hebr. l. 3. c. 3. or an Angel. Nettles an∣swer to the Je∣wish part of Mr. Seldens History of Tythes. Vide Alardi Epiphyll. Philolog. c. 7. Graecum propriè significat ex spoliis sive exuviis ab hoste detractis, quomodo etiam Graecorum scholia interpretantur. Gerh in loc. Vide Estium.Vers. 4. Vnto whom even the Patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the spoiles]  properly signifieth the chiefe parts, or top of the heape. Decimas acce∣pit ab Aba∣ham. Beza. Edecumavit Abrahamum. Grotius. Verbum , ac simplex  & activè usurpatur, pro eo quod est decimas dare, & passive pro eo, quod est decimas accipere. Gerh. in loc.Vers. 6. Received tithes of Abraham] In the Greek it is , which in plaine English is, he tithed Abraham; and tooke them of him as his due. Barlow Bishop of Roch. on 20. of Act. 28.Vers. 7. And without all contradiction, the lesse is blessed of the better] Taking it for the benediction, which is authoritate not devotione; for the subject may blesse the Prince, and man blesseth God in hearty devotion, but the blessing of authority comes from the greater. Vers. 22. By so much was Iesus made a surety of a better Testament] Christ was the surety of the first Covenant to pay the debt; of the second Covenant, to performe the duty. A better Testament] Not in substance, but in the manner of revealing. Vers. 24. An unchangeable Priest-hood] It signifieth such a Priest-hood which cannot passe from him to any other,, quasi dicas in transibile, quod ad alium transire non potest. Estius. as the Priest-hood of Aaron did Perkins. Vers. 25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost] In the originall , to the uttermost of time, at all times, and for ever; it must be referred to the perfection or fulnesse of time,To all ends and purposes pefectly. Beza. Perpetually or for ever; so Tremel Grynae∣us. In a ternum, Syrus. in perpetuum, vulg. ad plenum, Erasmus. ad perfectum, Stapulensis. quod Graeca vox propriè signifi∣cat. Gerh. in loc. and not of his saving; that is, continually and perpetually, as the latter words of the verse shew. Seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them] Superintercede, as the Greeke may signifie. Vers. 26. For such an High Priest became us] It was a just and decent thing that our High Priest should be such a one. CHAP. VIII. Vers. 4. FOr if he were on earth, he should not be a Priest, seeing that there are Priests that offer gifts according to the Law] That is, as in the times of the old Testa∣ment, if the Priest had onely offered a sacrifice, and not gone into the holy of holies with the bloud thereof, sprinkling the mercy seat, praying and interceding that it
might be accepted for the sinnes of the people,Mr. Bridge on 2 Heb. 17. the Priest had not done that worke of the Priest, and so he had not beene a compleat Priest; so if Christ had onely offered up himselfe here a sacrifice, and had not gone into heaven, the holy of holies, and car∣ryed the power and vertue of his death thither, to pray and intercede for us, he had not done the work of the great High Priest. Vers. 5. Was admonished of God] One word in Greeke ,. signifies to an¦swer as God doth men by oracles, Heb. 11.7. and 12.25. So 2 Matth. 12. , being warned of God, as it should have been exprest there. Vers. 6. He is the mediatour of a better Covenant,Ibi vetus & no∣vum Testamen∣tum non accipi∣tur pro libris veteris & novi Testamenti sed pro foedere ope∣rum & foedere Evangelico. Et meliores promis∣siones dicuntur quibus promittebatur vita aeterna sub conditione fidei, quam Deus in suis praestituturas erat, iis quibus cadem quidem pro∣mittebatur vita, sed sub ijs conditionibus quibus homines erant impares; etsi tamen non inutiliter proponerentur, ut suae imbecilli∣tatis co victi ad Dei miserecordiam confugerent, eujus promissiones in Christo venturo apprehenderunt Patres, qui sub lege constituti ad Christi justitiam se converterunt. Rivetus. Isag. See Cartwright on 11. Rom. 4. and on 7. v. Vide Cam. Myroth; Evang. which was established upon better Pro∣mises] The promises of the new Covenant are said to be better in foure respects, 1. All the promises of the Law were conditionall, this doe and thou shalt live; those of the Gospell are absolute, of grace, as well as to grace. 2. This Covenant pro∣miseth higher things; here God promiseth himselfe, his Sonne, his spirit, a higher righteousnesse, and a higher Son-ship. 3. Because of their stability, those of the old Covenant were swallowed up in the curse; these are the sure mercies of David. 4. They are all promised upon our interest in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. This makes the promises sweet, because they lead us to Christ, the Fountaine of them. Vers. 7. For if that first Covenant had been faultlesse] That manner of administra∣tion of the Covenant of Grace, may be said to be faulty two wayes, 1. As imper∣fect, dispensed in shadowes; their dwelling in the land of Canaan was to them a type of heaven. 2. As it did not make the person perfect, conveighed not grace. See 10. verse. Vers. 9. And J regarded them not] Greeke, I did not care for them. Vers. 10. For this is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after those dayes saith the Lord, I will put my law into their mind, &c] In this verse the Apostle sets down the Covenant of grace: That expression of writing the Law in the heart shews, 1. That the Law is not in any mans heart by nature; there is not a principle, and rule of conformity within, Rom. 7.9. 2. The Spirit of God makes use of the Law, to put a suitable disposition into the heart, to what the Law requireth. 3. In Con∣version, the Lord puts the whole Law into the heart;Sumpta est Me∣taphora à mem∣branis aut tabu∣lis in quibus aut super quibus ali∣quid scribitur. Estius. there is a conformity to the Law in all things. 4. The Lord so puts it there that he writes it; by which expres∣sion he signifies, that it shall for ever ever abide there. It is an allusion (saith Estius) unto the two Tables of the Law. They were first written by the finger of God, and then put into the Arke; so God first writes the Law in our hearts, and then puts it in our minds. Vers. 11. And they shall not teach every man his neighbour] The teaching of men shall not be laid aside, but they must not depend on it;He gives them sound and sa∣ving know∣ledge. the teaching of God shall make it effectuall to them. See Estius. All Gods people, little and great, weake and strong, shall know him; by knowing is not meant a bare apprehension, and notion of his being and nature, but a know∣ledge of acquaintance, a knowing him to be ones God reconciled to him in Christ,See 2 Cor. 4.6. so Hos. 2.20. Vers. 12. For J will be mercifull to their unrighteousnesse, and their sinnes and their ini∣quities will I remember no more] Here are two things, 1. There conciliation of God with his people, I will be mercifull to their unrighteousnesse, He will be mercifull, or propitious, appeased, and pacified toward them,The Scripture in propoun∣ding Gospell priviledges, sometimes us∣eth these three words, as Exod. 34.5. sometimes two. as Jer. 31.34. sometimes but one, as Ier. 33.8. See Ier. 31.33. and 32.38.39.40. (Where the Covenant is originally recorded) that God himselfe doth all. which hath respect to the ran∣some, and satisfaction of Christ. 2. He will pardon them completely; here are three words, unrighteousnesse. sinnes, and iniquities, to shew that he will forgive all kinds, and degrees of their sinnes, 1. The number of words implies the number of sinnes.
2. Some of these words are of a higher nature; God will pardon the most hay∣nous sinnes; God himselfe undertakes all in the Covenant of Grace, as we may see in the 10, 11. and this 12. v. He will put his Law into our mind, he will be to us a God, he will teach us, and pardon our sinnes; Christ is the Mediatour and surety of this Covenant, he undertakes with God, that we shall be his people; and with us, that God shall be our God. He had three Offices to make good this; all implyed in these three verses Vers. 12. I will be mercifull, Or pacified, by that propitiation the High Priest shall make, there is his Priestly office, v. 11. He teacheth his Church outwardly by his word, inwardly by his spirit; there is his propheticall office, v. 10. He saith he will put his Lawes in their minds, there is his Kingly office; he is as King to see that we shall be obedient to God. CHAP. IX. Vers. 4. WHerein or in which was the golden Pot that had Manna, and Aarons Rod that budded, and the Tables of the Covenant] He saith that there were three things laid up in the Arke, the Pot of Manna, Aarons Rod, and the Tables of the Covenant.Vide Menoch. de Repub. Heb. l. 5. c. 2. They conceit it well, that say the Arke is the Church, the Tables the word, the Manna the Sacraments, and the Rod the discipline. Ob. 1 Kings 8, 9. and 2 Chron. 5.10. It is said, there was nothing in the Arke, (save the two Tables of Stone) Paul saith besides these there was Aarons Rod, and the golden Pot having Manna. Sol. 1. Which here hath relation (say Ribera, Iunius in Paralel. l. 3. Vide Crotium in loc. See Weems his Christian Synagogue, p. 89. some) to the remote antecedent, which Ta∣bernacle, not Arke. Pareus saith this is a forced construction. 2. Others Estius. Gerh. à Lapide in loc. Facilia est hu locorum concili∣atio: vrnam & vrgam Aaron Deui jusse at coram Testimo∣nio repait. Quate probabile est, in arca simul cum tabulis fuisse inclusas. Quum autem templum extructum est, tunc ordine singula digeruntur. Calvnus. say that they were not included in the body of the Ark, but conveniently placed about it; this seemes most probable; for may be interpreted not onely in, but with, neer, about, as Iudges 18.12. Luke 9.31. and 13.33. and so it may be rendred, with, or about which, Pareus gives this answer. God Commanded the two Tables to be placed in the Arke, Exodus 25.21. Deut. 10.5. He commanded the Pot of Manna to be kept be∣fore the Arke of the Testimony, and there Aaron is said to have put it, v. 34. Also he commanded Aarons greene Rod to be laid before the Arke for a Signe to the Re∣bels, Numb. 17.10. And it is unquestionable that these three were kept in or neer the Ark, as long as the Tabernacle continued. But the Temple being built by Salo∣mon, onely the Tables are said to have been kept in the Ark; the other things being fitly disposed in the holy place. he Apostle therefore having respect to the first dispo∣sition, which was in the Tabernacle, before the Temple was built, relates nothing strange from the History. Vers. 7. But into the second went the High Priest alone once every yeer, not without bloud which be offered for himselfe▪ and the errours of the people] The High Priest onely once a yeare,Quanquam di∣citur summus sacerdos semel intrasse, id in∣telligendum quod uno tantū die intraverit, non quod non aliquoties exi∣crit & rursus intrarit. Vide Levit. 16.14, 15. Primùm caim intrare eum oportuit batilli inferendi causa: deinde suffitús: deinde sanguinis vi∣tula: primum, deinde & hirciul. Itaque quater illo die eum intrasse ait Moses Rotzi recte. Grotius. viz. on the day of expiation, might enter into the Sanctum Sanctorum; and that not without incense, and pretious sacrifices. See Levit. 16.2.29.33. That by this meanes, both the High Priest and people might be struck with a reverence of the place, and God dwelling there, saith De Republica Hebraeorum l. 3. c. 7. Vide Cunaeum de Repub. Heb. l. 2. c. 4. Menochius. This bloud here mentioned, was a type of the bloud of Christ, wherewith the Church is to be cleansed, as the High Priest himself was a type of Christ, saith Eslius. Vers. 10. And carnall Ordinances] Such as carnall men might easily performe, and as were very suitable to the disposition of a carnall heart. Mr. Hildersam. Vntill the time of reformation] Greek, the time of correction; that is, the time of Christs revealing,Tempus corre∣ctionis] allu∣dit ad vaticinium Jeremiae 31.37. Novum enim testamentum veteri instar correctionis successit. Calvinus. who was the body of all those shadowes.
Vers. 14. Through the eternall Spirit] That is, the divine power of his Godhead.Passus est Chri∣stus ut homo, sed ut mors illa nobis salvifica esset, proveniebat ex efficacia Spiritûs. Ideo Spiritum vocat aeternum, ut sciamus, reconciliationem, cujus est effector, aeternam esse. Calvinus. vide Bezam. Purge your conscience] That is, free you, 1. from the guilt and punishment of sinnes; the guilt of sinne lies heavy on the conscience. 2. the dominion of sinne, to serve it in the lusts thereof. From dead works] Sinnes are called dead works. 1. Workes, because the soule is busie about sinne, as a man about his work. So Eph 5.11. 1 Iohn 3.8. 2 Dead,Mortua opera intellige vel quae mortem gene∣rant, vel quae fructus sunt mortis. Nam cum animae vita sit nostra cum Deo coniunctio, qui alienati sunt per peccatum verè censentur mortui. Calvinus. partly to make the comparison more compleat; they were ceremonially dead by touching dead carcasses, so inwardly by sinne; and as a dead carcasse is loathsome and odious, so sinne, Ezek. 36.31.2 In respect of the effects, they bring forth death, Rom. 6.21. they leave a sentence of death upon the conscience till the vertue of Christs blood be applied. To serve the living God] Here is the end of their purging; we are not washed by Christ that we should defile our selves again; but our purity must serve to Gods glory, and nothing can come from us which will be acceptable to God, untill we be purged with the blood of Christ; and it is an elegant between dead works and the living God. Vers. 23. With better Sacrifices then these] Then those of the old Testament; not in substance, but in manner of exhibiting.Potiores victi∣mas pro victi∣ma, quia tan∣tùm una est: sed propter antithesim plurali numero liberè abusus est. Calvinus. Christ was then slain onely in types and figures; in the new Testament there is a reall and personall offering up of Christ himselfe. Bulkley on the Covenant. Vers. 24. Now to appeare in the presence of God] Verbum forense, an expression bor∣rowed from the custome of humane courts:Perstat in simi∣litudine. Nam & summus sacerdos dicitus apud Deum ap∣parere, ubi stat apud Arcam. Sic Christus apparet coram solio majestatis ut nostras res Deo commendet, supra 7.25. Grotius. for in them when the Plantiffe or De∣fendant is called, their Attorney appeareth in their behalfe, 1 Iohn 1.2. The Leviti∣call Priest was wont to appeare before God in the peoples name; he was but a figure; in Christ is the solid truth and full effect of the figure. Vers. 27. And as it is appointed to men once to die] It is a generall Law given for men to die; if it happen to any otherwise, as to Enoch and Elias, those are nothing,Statutum regu∣lare est; illos autem non mori singulare est. Ca∣jetanus in loc. Si quis objiciat his quosdam esse mortuos, at La∣zarum & simi∣les: expedita est solutio, Apostolum hic de ordinaria hominum conditione disputare, quin etiam ab hoc ordine eximantur quos subita immutatio corruptione exuet: quia non comprehendit nisi eos qui diu in pulvere corporum suorum redemptionem expectant. Calvinus. saith Grotius, to so great a multitude of men dying; so ye may say for those that shall be found alive when Christ shall come to judgement. Once to die] The word once (say some) is not to be referred to die, as if there were some suspition that man could die twice; but to appoint, it was once appointed, and that once shall stand. And after death the judgement] Some understand this of the particular judgement, the judgement which God passeth upon the soule immediately after death; but Estius interprets it of the generall judgement. Vers. 28. To bear the sinnes] The word , to beare,Vide Bezam. although it properly sig∣nifies to lift or carry something from a lower place to an higher, or at least from one place to another, yet in this place it simply signifies to take away; so it is used Josh. 24.32. and 2 Sam 21.10. and Ezra 1.11. and Psal. 102.24. For things lifted up are first taken away from the place where they were before: and things taken or carried away from a man must first be raised and lifted up. He shall appeare the second time without sinne unto salvation] Christ comes but twice corporally, once to merit salvation,Dr. Taylor. and again to perfect it.
CHAP. X. Vers. 1. FOr the Law having a shadow of good things to come] It was not so much as an Image,Similitudinem hanc mutuatus est ab arte picto∣ria. Calvinus. Vide Pareum. a shadow is not so much as an Image, but an Image is not so much as the thing it selfe; it was not an Image but a shadow. Burrh. Iacobs seed. Some think that the metaphor of the shadow is taken from painting; Painters are wont with choak or a coale to delineate that thing which they propound to them∣selves to expresse, which rude picture is called a shadow or adumbration, for the obscure representation: then with their Pensill they bring on the lively colours, that it may be a distinct and expresse likenesse of a thing, which is properly called an Image. Vers. 2. Should have no more conscience of sinnes] Not that they will make no con∣science of running into sinne, as many Libertines doe, that is not the meaning; but conscience will be able to lay no more sinne to their charge. Vers. 5. Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not, but a body hast thou prepared me] That is,Dr. Taylor. now after the comming of Christ; (but a body) That in this body I might offer that expiatory sacrifice of which all the other were but shadows. A body hast thou fitted me, Psal. 40.6. it is mine eares hast thou opened; but here so for illustration: Christs obedience began at his eare, but his whole body was obedient when he offered himselfe upon the Crosse.Weemes. Vers. 7. In the Volume of thy Book it is written of me] Interpreters enquire whither David, Psal. 40.7. and the Apostle here,Nam ad hunc usque diem non habent Judaei in Synagogis alium legis li∣brum quam longa per gamena volutum de Dieu. Vide Be∣zam & Grotium. Pentaeteuchus etiamnum hodiè à Judaeis dicitur semperque dictus est Sepher  liber, non libri. Caput accipitur pro volumine, liber pro Pentateucho. Olim & Evangelia unâ serie absque sectionibus scripta erant. Alardi Epiphyll. Phylol. c. 9. vide plura ib. Libri nomine Legem intelligi, quae regulam sanctè vivendi omnibus Dei filiis praescribit, absurdum non est. Quanquam mihi genuina magis videtur haec expositio, ut dicat se in eorum catalogo censeri qui se Deo praebent obse∣quentes, Calvinus. Vide Cunaeum de Repub. Heb. l. 3. c. 1. had respect to Christ; or where it is so written: they agree in this, that the Pentateuch is meant; for scarce any other bookes of Scripture were written in Davids time but it, unlesse Iob. The Pentateuch then was one book, and the text in the Bible was not so distinguished as it is now. Pareus saith, in the whole Volume of the Bible there are many Oracles extant concerning Christ, in which his obedience toward his father is described, especially in 52 and 53 chapters of Esay. Vers. 10. By the which we are sanctified] Sanctifying here is not taken strictly for the change of our image; but rather largely for all the benefits of Christ, reconcilia∣tion, adoption, justification, and salvation it selfe. So Pareus and others. Vers. 19. Having therefore, brethren, boldnesse to enter into the Holiest by the blood of Iesus] There is nothing that can make a man die and goe to God with true bold∣nesse and expectation of a better life, but onely faith in the blood of Christ. Into the Holiest] That is, Heaven, say some, whereof the Holy of Holies in the Tem∣ple was a figure or type. Others think that he meanes a cleare manifestation of the way to glory, under the Gospell. See 1 Iohn ult. Vers. 20. By a new and living way which he hath consecrated for us] 1. A new way; not the old,Vide Bezam. by the covenant of works. 2. Living, enlivens the person, God will en∣able us to walk in it. Through the vaile, that is to say his flesh] An allusion to the Temple, the vaile or curtaine did hide the glory of Sanctum Sanctorum, and withall ministred an entrance into it for the High Priest. Vers. 22. Let us draw neer with a true heart in full assurance of faith] Here we have the true disposition of the soule in worship: 1. A true heart; he doth not say, sinlesse, but a true heart,Omni trepida∣tione & dubi∣tatione de gratia deposita. Pareus. without guile. 2. In full assurance of faith] That is, to be sure of acceptance of my person and service when I come into the presence of God. A setled and full perswasion to be accepted through Christ. The first absolutely necessary, this not so absolutely.
Having our hearts sprinkled from an evill conscience] q. d. Otherwise your drawing neer will be to no purpose; you shall but provoke the Lord in drawing neer, except you be thus sprinkled, washed and purified.Dr. Preston. Abstrsionem cordis à mala conscientia ap∣pellat, vel quum impetrata pec∣catorum venia puri censemur coram Deo, vel dum cor ab omnibus pravis affectibus pur∣gatum, carnis stimulum non pungit. Ego licenter utrunque comprehendo. Calvinus. There is a twofold evill conscience: 1. That lives in some known sinne; 2. that accuseth a man, and is unquiet. He alludes to the old rites, in which the Israelites being to come to the Taberna∣cle and worship of God, purged themselves with many washings; or to the Sacrament of Baptism, in which there is an externall washing of the body; but men are purged from all sinne inwardly by the blood and spirit of Christ. Some say he alludes to Numb. 9.9. the sprinkling water made of the ashes of the red Cow, wherewith the people were sprinkled. Vers. 26. For if we sinne wilfully] This translation is better then the Genevah, fieri docent philo∣sophica, quae nec violentiâ, nec ignorantiâ, sed spontaneo voluntatis motu fiunt. Ergo desectionem intelligit non violentiâ extortam à tyrannis, aut metu factam, aut ex ig∣norantia admissam sed voluntariè, hoc est, deliberata voluntate & consilio malitiosè commissam. Malitiam enim docent ea quae in similitudine sequuntur. Pareus. which hath willingly. Seientes & volentes, wittingly and willingly, of set purpose. The word answereth to that of Moses, Numb. 15.30. Elatâ manu, with a high hand, a resolute wilfulnesse. See 1 Pet. 6.2. Mr. Bedford on Ioh. 1.16. Vers. 27. But a certain fearfull looking for of judgement] There is a twofold recei∣ving of judgement in this life: 1. One enjoyned as a duty,Cruciatum ma∣lae conscientiae significat, quem sentiunt impii, qui suâ culpa in perpetuum se abdicatos esse norunt. Calvinus. Vide plura ibid. 1 Cor. 11 31. 2. another inflicted on him as a punishment, when conscience at last shews him his everlasting damnation, as it did to Spira say some. Vers. 29. Who hath trodden under foot the Sonne of God]  noteth by tran∣slation extremity of contempt, Matth. 7.6. & 5.13. contemne and despise Christ;Extremi con∣temptûs indi∣cium est concul∣care quempiam: Infandi autem est sceleris, id committere in filium Dei. Estius. Proculcans tanquam inultilem. 1 Sam 2.29. Grotius. So Theophylact, Ambrose, and Primasius expound it: those things we despise and make no account of, we tread under foot. Dr. Benefield on Heb. 15.24. Wherewith he was sanctified] 1. Sacramentally, 2. putatively, 3. or at most by way of disposition. See Heb. 6.4, 5. Dr. Sclater.Erat sanctifi∣catio apostata∣rum non interna, sed externa in professione fidei & participatione sacramentorum consistens. Erant sanctificati, hoc est à Judeis & paganis professione segregati, & pro veris Christianis habiti. Pareus. Vers. 33. Ye were made a gazing-stock] Brought into the Theater, so the Greek, . A Metaphor taken from them (saith Ribera) who were sent into the Theater, that is into the publique sight of all the Citizens to fight with beasts, or with one another mutually, as the gladiatores, which all beheld with delight, and likewise observed diligently how they fought. The nowne is used 1 Cor. 4 9. and rendred spectacle; the Greek word is , a Theater Vers. 36. Ye may receive the promise] That is, the thing promised. Vers. 37. For yet a little while] The words in the Greek are a double diminutive,, adhuc enim tantillum. Drus. in Para∣lel. Sac. Vide Bezam & Grotium. a little little while to it. Though long for the time in it selfe, yet a little while as may be in respect of his desire, without the least delaying to come. He that shall come will come] For their deliverance. Perkins. The doubling of the phrase, veniens venit;Mr. Goodwin. comming he will come, implies vehemency of desire to come and that his minde is alwaies upon it; here is still a comming. The Hebrew phrase signi∣fies an urgencie, vehemencie and intensenesse of some act, as desiring I have desired. And as not content with these expressions of desire, he addes over and above all these,Id. ib. and will not tarry:With this sweet promise Mr. Wheatly comforted himselfe a little before his death. and all to signifie the infinite ardency of his minde toward his elect here below.
Vers. 38. Now the just shall live by faith] That is, shall sustain himselfe by expecta∣tion of the promises. But if any man draw back, my soule shall have no pleasure in him] That is, which for a time believe in God,Perkins. and afterward pull back their feet, and goe back from their faith. as 1 Thess. 5.20. Rogers on faith.More is meant then spoken, after an Hebrew manner of speech; as though he should say, I abhor all those that fall away through unbeliefe. The word is a Military word, taken from Souldiers who recoyle and leave their standing in whom the Captain delights not. Nor can we in our Christian fight by retiring and recoyling please our Captaine; but the Martiall law for such is in the Text,Dr. Taylor. Vers. 39.  Ad animae acquisitionem, id est, ad salutem. Metaphora à negotiatione ducta, quâ quis vel acquirit ampliùs & lucratur, vel perdit quod habebat. Marc. 10.39. Gerh. they withdraw themselves to perdition. CHAP. XI. THis Chapter is called the little Book of Martyrs, containing the Acts and Monu∣ments of the Church of God in the daies of old. Vers. 1. Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen] The substance] The meaning is, is that which gives a sub∣stantiall being to the things of eternall life. Burrh. that though there are many things promised by God, which men doe not presently enjoy, but onely hope for, because as yet they are not: yet faith doth after a sort give a subsistence or being unto them. Perkins. pro∣priè quidem con∣victionem sig∣nificat, sed quia solida demum est ea convictio quae fit per demonstrationem, hinc est quod etiam demonstrationem significat. Capellus in loc. vide Grotium.The evidence] Or convincing demonstration.  signifies the demonstration that convinceth the soule throughly of the certainty and truth of such things as by reason and naturall parts are not seen. That is, by believing a man doth make a thing as it were visible, being otherwise invisible and absent. Mr. Burrh. Perkins. Vers. 4. By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent Sacrifice then Cain] 1. Quia hostia copiosior,Incipit aposto∣lus ab Abel, Adamo praeter∣misso, quod de eo postquam pecca∣verit, nihil exi∣mium Moses narret. Estius. because he offered a double Sacrifice, himself and his Lamb; but Cain onely offered his Corn. 2. Quia excellentior, it was better chosen, because of the fattest and best of the flock; Cain carelesly took that came first to his hand of the fruit, and no more. 3. Quia ex fide, by faith he offered it. B. Andrews. God testifying of his gifts] Gen. 4.4. it is said that God had a respect unto him and to his offerings; meaning by some visible approbation, whether fire fromSee Gen. 15.17. Levit. 9.23.24. Judg. 6.21. 1 King. 8. to 12. 1 King. 18.38, 39. 1 Chro. 21.26. Finches Old Testament or the Promise, and others.Heaven or something else;Igne coelitus de∣misso ut Levit. 9.24. Vide Grotium. for Cain discerned it, and the Apostle here doth so interpret it. This visible and outward testimony which God gave signified the inward testimony of the Spirit testifying to our spirits that we and all we doe is acceptable unto God in Christ, Rom 8.16. Some of the Rabbines relate (as Paulus Fagius observes in his Annotations on the Chaldee Paraphrase) that a face of a Lyon was seen in the Heavenly fire infla∣ming the Sacrifices; which (if it be true) did probably shadow out the Lyon of the Tribe of Iudah, Revel. 5.5. of whom all the Sacrifices of the Old Testament were Types. Vers. 5. For before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God] Dicente Scriptura;One saith, quale hoc testi∣monium non liquet, the Scripture expresseth not what this testimony was. Haymo saith this testimony was the testimony of Scripture, Gen. 5.24. but the testimony of Moses was after his translation, therefore it was the testimony of his conscience which bare witnesse within that he pleased God. Mr. Fenner.
He pleased God]  is the word, which signifieth he gave God content, or kept Gods favour and good will. Vers. 6. Without faith it is impossible to please God] I must doe all duties out of a principle of faith; and not of reason onely, or an inlightened conscience. Three rules to know this, 1. Such a one hath an eye alwayes to the promise, as well as to the precept; he lookes to the Law as his rule, and to the Gospell for his power. 2. He lookes not unto the duty, but on Christ for acceptation. Exod. 28.38. Rev. 83. 3. He is not discouraged for want of a present income in duty 2 Cor. 5.7. For he that commeth to God,Bishop Down of Justification l. 6. c. 10. must beleeve that he is] To come unto Christ is to be∣leeve in him, Iohn 6.35.37.44. And if that be the meaning of the Holy Ghost in this place, then to come unto God, is to beleeve in him by speciall faith; otherwise the Apostle should enunciate idem per idem. And then the meaning is this, he that would beleeve that God is his God; and that he will be gratiou unto him, must first beleeve that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him, or the word come in this place may be expounded by seeking. He that will come unto God, that is, he that will seek God, must beleeve that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him. Vers. 7. Of things not seen as yet] That is, Gods mercy in his deliverance, and the destruction of the old world. Vers, 10. For he looked for a City which hath foundations] That is,Doctor Rey∣nolds. , ad artificium & excellentiam operis,  ad opus ipsum refertur. Zanchius. a City which was built upon the immutable stability of Gods oath, and promise of heaven, a pe∣riphrasis. Whose builder. The Greek is Artificer, God hath manifested great art in making the third heaven; he bestowed skill and wisdome on it. Vers. 11. Because she judged him faithfull who had promised] That is, she knew that whatsoever God had promised, he would faithfully performe. Vers. 13. Confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth] Strangers are a people absent from their own Country;Non agitur ibi propriè de gloria Coelesti; intelli∣guntur tum pro∣missiones de possessione terrae Canaan, quam Patriarchae nondum occupaverant, tum & maximè promissio de adventu Messiae. Rivetus. Pilgrims are strangers that have not any abiding where they are; Paul hath reference to the place, Gen. 23.4. See 47. Gen. 9. On the earth] Theophylact, and Oecumenius following Chrysostome say that not onely Canaan, or Palestina is understood, but the whole earth. Vers. 17. Offered up Isaac] Either because he presented him unto God upon the Altar, which was an offering of him up,Pergit trium patriarcharum commendure fi∣dem. Idque fa∣cit per singulos, in Abraham autem immoratur, quod ille totius generis Hebraeorum princeps esset, ac fidei virtute coeteros antecelleret. Estius. Vide Bezam in loc. or rather because he had fully purposed to have perfected the offering by his sonnes death, had not God himselfe interposed from heaven to restraine him. Vers. 19. Accounting] Or reasoning, Ratiocinatus, Beza. , id est, ra∣tione apud se subducta, cùm secum perpendisset, considerasset, ratiocinatus esset, suaque ratio∣ne conclusisset. Estius. The argument that prevailed with him, was that which fol∣lowes. From whence also he received him in a figure] That is say Erasmus, and others,Jn imagine quadam resur∣rectionis, quia qui immolationi addictus erat & postea liberatus videtur tanquam revixisse, haec est Calvini ex∣positio longè omnium optima. Scalig. Vide Bezam & Grotium. Abraham non aliter filium suum recepit, quam si illi ex morte restitutus esset in novamvitam. Calvinus. Vide Estium & à Lapide. in the type of the resurrection, viz. Of Christ, whose humane nature like a Ram, was tru∣ly slaine; and after raised again by the power of the Deity, and freed from death as Isaac. Pareus interprets it thus, non secut atque si Deus eum ex mortuis suscitasset, as if God had raised him up from the dead. The neerenesse of death wherein Isaac was, was a similitude of death. Vers. 21. And worshipped leaning upon the top of his staffe] Lifting up his body to do reverence unto God, thereby testifying his humility, faith, and hope.Perkins on Rev. Vide Be∣zam Cartwrightum & Grotium.
Vers. 25. Then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season] Greek, then to have the momentany fruition of sin; so Chrysostom, Theophylact, and Oecumenius read it. Honours, pleasures, delights are called the pleasures of sinne, not because they are so in them∣selves, but because they are occasions and instruments of sin; and are seldome had, or held without some sin or other.Doctor Taylor. Vers. 26. For he had respect unto] The Greek word signifies, to look up in admiration curiously; which is translated in Latine suspicere. The recompence of the reward] That is, to the blessing promised to Abraham. Vers. 35. Others were tortured] , sympanizatì sunt. Their bodies were rack∣ed out as a Drum.Verbum  dedu∣ctum est ex no∣mine , quatenus eo sig∣nificatur non in∣strumentum quod pulsatur, sed quo pulsatur, viz. Eustis, sive sustuarium, quo carnifices pulsabant corpora reorum per machinam tractoriam distenta. Gerh. What they suffered hath exercised all our Grammarians, Philolo∣gers,Doctor Donne. Vide Bezam, Grotium, et Estium, and Antiquaries that have enquired into the racks, and tortures of those times; we translate it roundly, they were tortured. Saint Pauls word implies a torture of that kind, that their bodies were extended, and rack't as upon a Drum, and then beaten with staves; what the torture intended in that word was, we know not. The Lxx use this word 1 Sam. 29.13. See my Greeke Gritica. Dan. 3.16, 17. Doctor Gouge.Not accepting deliverance] From death, viz. On persecutors termes, and conditi∣ons, cum nollent recipere conditionem oblatae redemptionis. Estius. See more there. That they might obtaine a better resurrection] It is usuall in Scripture, sometimes to put a comparative for a positive, or superlative, that is, a good, or the best resurrecti∣on, if we take it comparatively it is meant of a better resurrection then the perse∣cutors offered them;Vide Estium. they were at their enemies disposall, and as dead men; but if they would have turned from the faith, they should have beene restored to life; there∣fore it is elegantly called a resurrection,We say such a one is risen from the grave. The Heathens jeered the Christians, and told them they needed not to care for their lives, since they should rise againe; will you (said they) redicurae parcero vitae? because they were as dead men being in their power; yet they hoped to obtaine a better resurrection, viz. From an inflicted death, to eternall life. See Jones. Circuierunt in melotis]  autem melote est ovills pellis cum suo vellere, qua∣libus pellibus induos saepe videmus Romae circumjectae regionis rusticos habitatores, ac praesertim pastores. Vide 4. Reg. 1.8. Matth. 3.4. Me∣noch de Repub. Heb. l. 6. c. 5.Vers. 37. Were tempted] Beza saith it is much this should come in after the recitall of most sharp Capitall punishments, and which he mentions also after; and the Sy∣riack interpreter hath it not. Beza therefore would rather have it read were burned. But the word tempted, may well be retained; when they saw they could do no good with violence, they made them great promises, and tried whether they could prevaile that way, as appeares in the Martyrologie. Burrh. Jac. Seed.Vers. 38. Of whom the world was not worthy] They have that excellency, as the world is not worthy to enjoy them, they are not worthy of their presence, that they should so much as live amongst them; they are rather fit to be set as Stars in heaven, and be before the Lord in his glory. Vide Bezam.Vers. 39. They received not the promises] viz. In their reall exhibition. Vers. 40. That they without us should not be made perfect] Not that they were not taken to heaven, but before Christ they had not that perfect State in heaven, which now we and they are presently possessed of. For they expected in heaven their Re∣deemer,Bayne. even as soules now expect the resurrection of the body. CHAP. XII. Vers. 1. WHerefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of wit∣nesses] The examples of godly men in the Old and New Testament are called a cloud of witnesses by allusion:Haec conclusio est quasi epilo∣gus proximi ca∣pitis: ubi de∣monstrat quor∣sum recitaverit illum Sancto∣rum Catalogum, quorum fides sub lege excelluit: nempe ut se quisque comparet ad eorum imitationem. Et metaphoricè copiosam multitudinem vocat nubem; densum enim raro opponitur. Si pauci essent numero, tamen suo exemplo incitare nos deberent: sed ubi ingens est turba, acriores stimulos addere no∣bis debet. Praeteria dicit, nos densitate illa vel copia circundari, ut quocunque oculos vertamus, flatim occurrant multa fidei ex∣empla. Calvinus. Nubes Ebraicè  dicuntur à densitate, igitur nubes testium, id est, densitas, frequentia, multitudo. Drusius. Metaphora est ducta ab avibus magna multitudine volantibus quae all suis praetervolantes umbram instar nubis faci∣unt. Esai 60.8. Capel. Spic. Vide Bezam & Grotium. for as the cloud did guide the Israelites
through the wildernesse to the Land of Canaan: so the faithfull now are to be gui∣ded to the heavenly Canaan, by the examples of good men. Perkins. In their life and conversation they witnessed by word and deed to Gods Church. 2. In their death many of them witnessed by their bloud. 3. Hereafter they shall wit∣nesse for, or against us. Doctor Taylor. Let us lay aside every weight] That presseth down, that is, all earthly affections, and what ever may hinder us in our spirituall course. See Beza. And the sin which doth so easily beset Respicit forte locū Lam. 1.14. ubi peccata com∣parantur jugo lo∣ris implicanti∣bus hominem ac saepe dejicientibus. Grotius. us] The similitude (saith Deodate) seemes to be taken from such long and large garments, as were wont to be laid off in races, to be so much the freer. The Greeke work , is nomen composium signifying well, that is, easily besetting. And let us run with Patience the race that is set before us] This race is the course it selfe wherein we strive by running; for in the Greek it is  a strife-race, whereby is signified all kind of strife in this manner, whether it be by running, wrestling,Currere certa∣men est cur∣rendo certare. Certamen hoc cursorum, illud est quod sibi propositum habet ac suscepit omnis Christianus, quando renunciavit vitae veteri, & professus est novam. Estius. hurling, or any other way, but here he speaks of running. To run the race, is to strive by running, he meanes especially the false of our faith. 1 Tim. 6.12. See 2 Tim. 4.7. Vide Grotium. Vers. 2. Looking unto Iesus the Author and finisher of our faith] Faith here is taken for all grace, it is a compleat work at first as Christ is the author of it; but he is the finisher also that is, upholds and maintaines it. Vers. 4. Striving against sinne] That is, as interpreters of good note Piscat. & alij. Est in Graeco elegans verbum , quod est eorum qui totis virbibus in agone certant, ut vincant adversarium. Ribera in loc. In agone contrà certantes ut in∣telligamus nos esse debere peccati antagonistas, id est, adversarios, semper intentos ad vincendum & expugnandum peccatum: quomodo peccatum ex adverso semper vigilat in perniciem nostram. Estius. Vide Cornel. à Lapide. observe, either against the wickednesse of the enemies of the Gospell, which by cruell and bloody courses strive to force men from the faith, or against sinne, that is, against sinners, v. 3. Or against sinne in your selves. Vers. 5. My sonne despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art re∣buked of him] The Greeke word translated Despise Imports the littling or think∣ing of them little; doe not little, or slight the chastenings of God in thy thoughts, nor doe not thinke thy afflictions so great, that thou must needs sinke and faint under them. arguo, ad verba refer∣tur;  castigo ad ferulā parvorum. Aret. Rebuke is chiefely referred unto words, and chasten is chiefely referred unto the Rod, and sharpnesse of discipline. Vers. 7. God dealeth with you as sonnes] That is, he comes to you in the crosse, not as a Judge and revenger, but as a kind and loving Father. Perkins. Vers. 11. Afterward it yeeldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousnesse, unto them which are exercised thereby] That is,Perkins. Pro exercitatis est verbum ele∣gans , quòd de ils dicitur qui nudi exercebantur ad palaestram, unde & gymnasia dicta sunt loca in quibus athletae exerceban∣tur. Ribera & à Lapide in loc. afflictions and chastisements which seize upon Gods Children, doe leave after them amendment of life, as the needle passeth through the cloth, and leaveth the thred behind it. The Greeke word translated exercised, is properly spoken of them qui nudi exercen∣tur in palaestra, and it is translated to all kinds of more vehement exercise. Chrysostome and Theophylact urge this Metaphore, and say correction is called an exercise, because it makes the faithfull as certaine champions more strong, and invincible in patience.
Vers. 13. Least that which is lame be turned out of the way] The Greeke word is , est luxari vel diverti à justo acetabulo ac commissura ossium. Gerh. Claudicationem vocat, cum homines in religione alternant, nec sincerè Deo se addicunt. Calvinus. Idem habet Pareus. which may be taken in two senses; either for the luxation, or sprayning of some Member, or joynt necessary for walking, which being dislocated takes away all use of walking, or else for straying from the way, which to most Interpreters seemes most probable. Vers. 15. Looking diligently, least any man faile of the grace of God] He means not on∣ly to make us carefull for our own particular,Doctor Sclater. but watchfull over others, as the reason annexed imports: least thereby many be defiled. Trouble your] ,Graecum pro∣prie significat obturbet, in∣terturbet. Estius. Gerh. Prophanesse lies in two things, 1. In a low esteeme of spirituall servics. Amo. 8.5. Prosanus quasi procul à sano loco sacro. 2. In a low esteeme of spirituall priviledges. The Greeke word doth properly signifie to trouble; and hinder a mans rest; it is used onely here. Or prophane person as Esau] This example may serve to expound what he meanes by prophane. The Lord had annexed to the birthright the promise of the Land of Canaan as a figure of heavenly felicitie; wicked Esau not considering this despised it. So God hath appointed his Ordinances to be meanes of grace and life to men; when they doe not know and beleeve this, and receive it by them, they are prophane. Non immediatè reprobatio refer∣tur ad rejectio∣nem à gratia salutari & gloria aeterna, sed ad repulsam quam passus est Esau, quia quod pete∣bat ab Isaaco, non potuit impetrare. Rivetus.Vers. 17. He was rejected] viz. By his Father, Gen. 27.35.37.40. , is not to obtaine that which we will. For he found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with Teares] viz. In his Father, not in himselfe, that is for all his crying he could not move his Father to change his minde, and repent himselfe of his blessing Iacob; so Beza, Estius, Mr. Perkins, and others expound it. See Gen. 27.34.38. Pareus, and à La∣pide, would have the relative it referred not to repentance, but to blessing. Torquet inter∣pretes quòd Mosi haec ver∣ba Apostolus tribuit, quae ausquam legimus Mosem protulisse; verum solutio non evit difficilis, si consideremus Mosem nomine po∣puli sic loquutum, cujus mandata quasi internuntius ad Deum referebat. Fuit igitur haec communis totius populi querimonia. sed Mose in lcitor, qui fuit veluti commene os omnium. Calvinus. Quid locutus fuerit Moses Exod. 19. Non exprimitur. Colli∣cere hnc est eum his vocibus trepulationem suam testarum fuisse: Deum consolatione eum erexisse; unde verò Apostolus accepit? vel ex traditione: vel quod magis. videtur ex revelatione singulari: qua Moses Historiam creationis à Deo accpit. Trepidatio autem Mosis, argumento fuit, ipsum quoque peccatorem esse, licet propheta summus esset; metus enim ex peccato est. Pareus. vide Cornel. à Lapide.Vers. 21. I exceedingly feare and quake] Those words are not to be found in all the Bookes of the Old Testament. Perkins. See Exodus 19.19. Verses 22, 23, 24. But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God] The Apostle in a heap of words,The faithfull are made fellowes of Angels, and of all the perfect soules departed since the be∣ginning of the world, and of Christ himselfe. Doctor Fulke. amplifies the high dignity of every one effectually called. Not that we have now full fruition of the glorious Deity, but first the use of Scripture is to speake of things that shall be, in the present time, or time past, to sig∣nifie certainty of accomplishment in time prefixed. 2. We have present title thereto, Gal. 4.1.2. 3. We are united with God in Christ, and Made one body with the whole Church Triumphant and Militant. Doctor Sclater. Vers. 23. The spirits of just men made perfect] They are said to be perfect in respect of grace, though not of glory, till the body be there also. Quia carnis infirmitati∣bu non sunt amplius obnoxii, deposita ipsa carne. Calvinus. Vers 24. And to the bloud of sprinkling,] It is so called in allusion to the Passeover, where the blood of the Paschall Lambe was sprinkled on the posts of the doore to save the house from the stroake of the revenging Angel.Quidam volunt alludi ad san∣guinem agni paschalis, quo Israelitae jubebantur aspergere postes & superliminaria aedium, Exod. 12.7. Sed rectius dicitur respectum haberi ad aspersionem sanguinis foederalis quae describitur. Exod. 24. v. 8. Confer Heb. 9.18: Gerh. Sanguis Abel testimonium est divinae justitiae adversus Gainum: sanguis Christi realissimum est testimonium divinae misericordiae erga miseros peccatores. Sanguis Abel loquitur de terra & efflagitat vindictam. Gen. 4.10. Matth. 23.35. Sanguis Christi de coelo quasi loquitur re∣conciliationem cum Deo, pacem & vitam. Glassius. vide Grotium. Mr. Hildersam.
That is, that blood which is sprinkled and applied to us, pleades and cries for mercy unto God for us. That speakes better things then that of Abel] See Gen. 4.10. That cried for vengeance, this for pardon of sinnes. Vers. 25. See that ye refuse not him that speaketh] See that ye shift not him off that speaketh; some say it hath reference to the 19 verse. , id est, deprecari, v. 19. repellere, recusure, repudare ut hoc loco. Pareus. Vers. 26. Yet once more I shake not the earth onely, but also Heaven] The civill State, and Ecclesiasticall to, say some. Pareus saith by Heaven and earth he under∣stands both the frame it selfe of Heaven and earth, and the inhabitants of both, An∣gels and men. Vers 27. The removing] Mutatio, Tremel. Translatio, Erasm. Ar. Mont. The Greek word is . It is a common fault among translators, that they will ac∣commodate the words of a Text to their own apprehension of the sense and matter thereof: They understanding that the things here said to be shaken were the Jewish Ordinances, translated their disposition a Removall, and the truth is they were re∣moved, but the world signifieth no such thing. As its naturall importance from its rise and composition is otherwise, so neither in Scripture nor any prophane Au∣thour doth it ever signifie properly a removall. Translation or changing is the onely native, genuine import of it. Removall is of the matter; Translation of the form onely, Heb. 11.5. we render it translation and change, Heb. 7.12. CHAP. XIII. BIsh. Andrews calls this Chapter the Chapter of Remembrances, or the Remem∣brancers chapter.Ver. 3, 7, & 16. Vers. 2. Be not forgetfull to entertain strangers] See Rom. 1.13. 1 Tim. 3.2. & 5.10. 1 Pet. 4.9. The study of this vertue was then very necessary,Respicit Apo∣stolus ad consue∣tudinem isto∣rum temporum, quando non erant, uti hodie apud nos & alias Gentes Europae, hospitia publica aut tabernae mercenariae. Vide Gen. 18. & 19. & 24. Jud. 19. & alibi Job 31.32. Respicit quoque Apostolus ad statum istius temporis quo haec scribebat, quando propter persecutiones cogebantur fideles huc illuc fugere ac peregrinari. Laurentius in 1 Pet. 4.9. when there were no publique Innes, and the godly were often banished, lest they should either want en∣tertainment, or else goe to Infidels. For thereby some have entertained Angels unawares] As Abraham and Lot, Genes. 18.13. & 19 2. Vers. 3. Remember them which suffer adversity] The Greek word is a generall word which may be extended to all kinds of afflictions; or if it be restrained, it commonly signifies those that are sick or suffer bodily paines. As being your selves in the body] q d. because you are fellow-members with them in the same mysticall body (as Calvin interprets it;) Or, (as Luther) seeing your selves are yet in the body, you your selves are exposed to the like sufferings, and therefore should Christianly remember them. Quod cuiquam, cuivis accidere potest. Hodie mihi ras tibi. Pareus likes this best. See Beza. Vers. 4. Marriage is honourable in all] Not, let marriage be honourable (as the Papists say,) but marriage is honourable; the latter part of the sentence being af∣firmative, sheweth that the Apostle meant to speak affirmatively in the former also. I follow Pareus who would have it so meant, rather then Gerh. Res eodem redit, sive as∣sertivè accipia∣tur honorabile est conjugium, sive praeceptivè, conjugium debet esse honorabile. Gerh. Vide Bezam. Quum dicit in omnibus, intelligo nullum esse ordinem qui à conjungio prohibeatur. Calvinus. Chrysostome, Theodoret, Theophylact, Oecumenius, doe all prove out of this place the permission and lawfulnesse of marriage to all men. Vide Grotium. who thinks both readings come to one. In all] . That is, in all men And this is the true and proper translating of the words, for amongst all is not so fit; that may be honourable amongst all, which
all are not so capable of, as the ministery. And when it is said in all, it is meant (saith Pareus) in all those who by the Laws may honestly contract. See Iones in loc. Vers. 5. Let your conversation be without covetousnesse] The word for conversation in the Greek is , which either signifies a custome and manner, or the meanes and way of getting our livelihood.Vox Graeca , quam∣vis modum plerumque sig∣nificat, non tamen modum qui rei imponitur, ne immoderata sit, ut intellexit Cajetanus; Graecè imperitus; sed modum, id est, agendi rationem aut rei qua∣litatem. Caeterùm constat etiam pro more, & pro moribus, usurpari non sine elegantia, apud authores Graecos, Platonem & alios. Nec dubium quin ea significatio, quam & alii omnes retinent, huic loco sit optissima. Estius. Both these senses come to one; both our manner and our meanes of getting our livelihood must be free from all covetousnesse, or love of Silver, as the Greek word signifieth. See Luke 12.15. Ephes. 5.3. Col. 3 5. 1 Cor. 3.10. 1 Tim. 6.10. And be content with such things as ye have] Contensi praesentibus, so Beza; be con∣tent with things present. Grae∣cis vocantur ea bna, quae adsunt. Estius. The Hebrews had been plundered of all when the Apostle spake this, Ch. 10.34. Though they had nothing they must be content; so was Paul, Phil. 4.11, 12, 13. For he hath said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee] There are five Negatives in the Greek to assure Gods people that he will never forsake them.Ipse viz. Domi∣nus. Cur enim Christianis non liceat quod Py∣thagoreis omnes concesserunt. Beza. It may be rendred according to the Greek, I will not not leave thee, neither will I not not forsake thee. Vers. 7. Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the Word of God] As if he should say,The Apostle requires this duty three times in this Chapter. See the 17 and 24 verses. so farre forth as they brought you the warrant of Gods Word for that they held and practised, have them in reverent remem∣brance. Hildersam. Whose faith follow] q. d. Follow them not in every thing, but follow their faith, which we know is onely founded upon Gods Word. Considering] The Greek word  is emphaticall, signifying an iterated and formerly intermitted consideration: quasi diceret reconsiderantes, as it were sig∣nifying that they had ceased from consideration of this kind. Estius and Gerhard in loc. Vers. 8. Iesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever] Yesterday, that is, the time past before his comming in the flesh.Idem est, id est, sibi similis, sicut dicimus rex Jupiter omnibus idem. Grotius. Today, while in the flesh; and for ever, that is, after. The same afore time, in time, and after time. Vers. 9. Be not carried about with divers and strange doctrines] Ephes. 4.14. Be not carried about with every wind of doctrine, (where the same Greek word is used) brings light to this place.Vide Pareum in loc. The originall word signifies rashly to be moved, and to wander hither and thither; which happens to those that have nothing fixed in their mind to follow. For it is a good thing that the heart be stablished with grace, not with meates] A good thing; that is, better, or best; positive put for the comparative, or superlative: food doth establish the heart someway, it refreshes it, Gen. 48.5. But the lasting comfort and establishment of the heart is by grace.Vulg. optimum est. That is, with grace wrought in the heart, or with the doctrine of grace, for he opposeth grace to meats, about which questions were then started; and by meats he understands by a Synecdoche the whole body of the Ceremoniall Law, which is opposed to the Gospell, or the doctrine of grace; as if he had said, Doe not think to settle your selves by the Ceremoniall Law, one part whereof consisted in the choyce and distinction of meats, which have not profited them that have been occupied therein; they have gotten no establishment by them, but grace will doe it. Vers. 15, 16, By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his Name. But to doe good and communicate, for∣get
not, &c.] By the Sacrifice of praise he meanes the Eucharist,Thorndikes Discourse of the Rights of the Church in a Christian State. ch. 4. as it is called usually in the ancient Liturgies and writings of the Fathers. For to this purpose is the whole dispute of the place, that in the Sacrament Christians communicate in the Sacrifice of Christ crucified, (which the Jews can have no right to) instead of all the Sacri∣fices of the Law. And therefore by doing good and communicating, he means the oblations of the faithfull, out of which at the beginning the poor and the rich lived in common at the assemblies of the Church. Vers. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves] The Apostle useth two words to set forth the duty of the people to their Pastors, obey and submit,Obey them preaching, sub∣mit to them punishing. there being two sorts of things which they ought to come under, their Sermons and their censures. Vers. 18. They watch for your soules as they that must give an account, that they may doe it with joy, and not with griefe] The dreadfulnesse of these words did strike a great terrour into Chrysostomes heart,L. 3. de Sacord. though he himselfe preached many times every day. ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Epistle of JAMES. CHAP. I. THese seven Epistles written by Iames, Peter, Iohn and Iude, have unfit Titles prefixed before them in that they are called some∣times Canonicall, especially in the Latine Church;That the Epi∣stles to the Hebrews, of Iames, the se∣cond of Peter, the second and third of Iohn, and Iude, (though doub∣ted of for a time) are Ca∣nonicall, I have proved in my Treatise of Divinity. Ierome saith of Iames, Peter, Iohn and Iude, that they are breves pariter & longae; breves in verbis, longae in sententiis. Epist. Fam. l. 2. Epist. 1. That they are both short and long too; short in words, long in substance. Epistolae Canonicae dicuntur quia Canones, id est, regulas ac praecepta continent instituendae vitae Christianae. Estius. Vide Bezam. and some∣time Catholicke, chiefly of the Greeke Church: neither of which were ever given them by any Apostle or Apostolicke Writer. Yet though this Title cannot be defended, it may be excused and tolerated as a Title of distinction, to distinguish them from the other Epistles. Also they may have this Title Canonicall set before them, not because they were of greater authority then other Writings, but to shew that they ought to be esteemed of and embraced as divine, howsoever in former times they were unjustly suspected. The second inscription is as unfit as the former, therefore the Rhemists unjustly blame us for leaving out the Title Catholicke in our authorized English Bibles; for it is well known that that Title is not given by the Holy Ghost, but by the Scholiast who took it from Eusebius. The Epistle of Iames is especially paraeneticall, exciting the faithfull to constancy under the crosse, and to proficiency in a Christian life. Vers. 1. Iames] There were two of this name, Matth. 10.2, 3. He that was the Pen∣man of this Epistle was Iames the lesse, Marke 15.40. the Lords brother, Gal. 1.19. a pillar in the Church, Gal. 2.9.
Vers. 2. Count it all joy when ye fall into divers temptations] Count it, implying that man in his choycest deliberation ought to doe so. The other words are emphaticall. He saith not be quiet alone, but be joyfull; not with a little joy, but with exceeding great joy; all joy, an Hebraisme, full Omne, id est, totum, perfe∣ctum, plenum, summum. à Lapide. Vox  verbatim reddita, est cir∣cumcadere. Brochmand. in loc. After he brings in the example of Ioh, who did not suffer for Religion. perfection; when ye fall into] or, fall among, so it is translated Luke 10.30. when divers temptations as it were incompasse and begirt us, so that no hope of escaping seems left; into divers temptations] not some, but divers; that is, any kind of affliction, whether for Religion, or not; and not small afflictions, but trials and temptations, such afflictions as have in them a cer∣taine fiercenesse to shew what is in us. If ye cannot rejoyce in the sence of affliction, yet you may in the use of it, because it maketh to the triall of your faith and increase of your grace. Dr. Taylor on Titus. Vers. 4. But let patience have her perfect work] Patience is perfect, 1. when it puts forth perfect acts.Patientiam ha∣bere debet opus perfectum tri∣pliciter. Primò perfectum in se, putà in ser∣titudine & con∣tinuatione tole∣rentiae usque ad finem crucis & vitae. Se∣cundò perfectum in fine, ut scili∣cet patiat pro Christi fide, justitia, aut virtute. Tertiò perfectum in comitatu innocentiaec trarumque virtutum. à Lapide. 2. when it continues in those acts. There are five acts of patience in Scripture: 1. An universall resignation of our selves unto Gods will as to the rule of goodnesse, 2 Sam. 25. 2. A silent submission; patience keeps under all risings of the heart, Levit. 10.3. My soule keeps silence unto God, saith David. 3. An accepta∣tion of the punishment, Levit. 26.41. looking on it as proceeding from mercy, a fathers hand, and done in measure. 4. It makes the soule cheerfull under the bur∣den, as in the second verse of this Chapter. 5. It makes a man thankfull, Iob 1. ult. Secondly, patience must continue, if the burden  implies two things not to sink in their courage, for they must , nor shrink from their burden, for they must . B. Lake. continue. See vers. 12. and Iames 5.11. There are two motives here: 1. By this means you shall be perfect; grace per∣fects the man, and the perfect worke of every grace perfects the grace; acts intend habits. 2. Wanting nothing] The Greek word signifies possessing your whole por∣tion. Vers. 5. If any of you lack wisdome] That is, to suffer, to carry a mans selfe in affliction. If here is not of one doubting, but opposing it as a thing certaine; q.d. if any want wisdome, as you certainly all want, behold I shew you how to get it. And upbraideth not] Hitteth none in the teeth; either with present defects, or former failings. Vers. 6. But let him aske in faith] That is, affiance; as the other word wavering Dicuntus illi , qui mente & corde fluctuant, dubii quid statreant, quò inclinent, ubi pedem sigant. Hanc enim esse genuinam verbi significationem, videre est Act. 10. v. 20. & 11. v. 12. & Rom. 4.20. Brochmand. in loc. shews; for he that wavereth is like an arme of the Sea, driven with the wind; And tossed] He is off and on, to day he will aske, to morrow he will not. Vers. 8. A double minded man] Not one that pretends one thing, and intends ano∣ther (though the word be sometime so taken) but when the mind is divided be∣tween two objects,See Jam. 4.8.  cujus anim quasi divisus est, par∣tim Deo confi∣dens, partim diffideus. Vorstius. Vide Bezam. that it knoweth not which to choose, but stands as one in bivio, that hath two waies before him, and knows not whither to goe, this way or that way. Dr. Preston. Vnstable] , like a man that stands upon one leg, wavereth and is un∣steady, and easily overturned. Vers. 9. Let the brother of low degree rejoyce in that be is exalted] viz. In Christ to be equall with the greatest Prince in the world;Frater] id est Christianus; omnes enim Christiani fratres sunt. à Lapide. yea to be above him if he be out of Christ. Dike on Philemon. Vers. 10. But the rich in that he is made low] Even in this, that in Christ he hath made equall with himselfe the meanest, not in his outward preheminence over them.
Vers. 12. He shall receive the Crown of life] That Crown of life, that is, eternall life as a Crown;Piscat. as there was a Crown to him that overcame in their exercises a∣mong the Grecians. The word Crown representeth unto us, 1. The perpetuity of that life, for a Crown hath neither beginning nor ending; therefore it is called an immarcessible immortall Crown. 2. Plenty, because as the Crown compasseth on every side,B. Lake. so there is nothing wanting in this life. 3. The dignity, eternall life is a Coronation-day. Which the Lord hath promised to them that love him] Such promises there are Matth. 10.22. & 19.28, 29. Iohn 16.22.See Esay 64.4. Vers. 13. For God cannot be tempted] Greek, is impenetrable, no sinne can pierce him.. Vers. 14. When he is drawn away of his own lust] The whole corruption of the heart, or originall sinne, is called lust, est extra viam ra∣pere, à recto tramite tractu∣suo abducere. Brochmand in loc. because it principally shews it selfe in those lusts. And enticed] as a fish  elegans metaphora est, sumpta à pscibus, qui ex hamo falluntur. Vorstius. that is drawn aside into the deep water, and after caught by the bayt. Vers. 14, 15. By five degrees the lusts of the heart rise unto a raigne and regiment in the heart of every wicked man.Metaphora de∣sumpta est à me∣retrice quae im∣prudentem adolescentem abstulit à parentibus, sive à recto tramite & ad se veluti esca allicit, deinde ex congressu ejus conci∣pit & parit. Ludovic. de Dieu in loc. First, Lust tempteth, and that two waies. 1. By withdrawing the mind from God. 2. By enticing and entangling the mind with some delight of sinne. Se∣condly, lust conceiveth when it causeth the will to consent,Perkins on Jude. and resolve upon the wickednesse thought upon. Thirdly, it bringeth forth, when it forceth a man to put in execution the things consented unto, and resolved upon. Fourthly, it perfecteth the birth of sinne, urging a man to adde sinne unto sinne, untill he come unto a custome, which is ripenesse and perfection in sinning. Fifthly, it bringeth forth death, that is, everlasting vengeance and destruction. In all which he alludeth unto the beginning, proceedings, and end of man: who after he is past his full strength, decays againe and dieth. Vers. 17. Every good gift] Temporall and smaller; and every perfect gift] Spi∣rituall and greater blessings of grace and glory; is from above,A good thought is gratia infusa; a good word is gratia effusa, & a good deed is gratia diffusa, say the School∣men. and commeth down from the father of lights, with whom is no variablenesse, neither shadow of turning] God is here compared to the Sunne, and is therefore called the FatherPater lumi∣num, non lumi∣nis; omnis lu∣minis elementa∣ris, aetherei, Spiritualis & Caelestis. Pareus. Vide Cornel. à Lap. of lights, but yet is preferred before it, because it hath sometimes clouds cast over it, and sometimes is in ecclipse; but there is no change, or shadow of change with him. All these words are astronomicall; God is compared to the Sunne, and his light is much perfecter. The Sunne hath its parallaxes, in the East it looks one way, in the South and West another way, and his turnings, yeerely departures from us, which we call Solstices. God neither riseth nor sets, nor departs, but is alwaies neer to those that call upon him. That we should be a kind of first-fruits of his reatures] The Saints are called the first-fruits of the creatures. 1. The first-fruits are the choycest fruits,Selecti & Deo∣consecrati. See 18. Num. 12, 29, & 32 Verses. Mich. 7.12. 2. They were dedicated to God. Vers. 19. Quick to heare] This implies a readinesse to the duty, and of the spirit to close with the mind of God. Therefore Philosophers say we have two eares, and but one tongue; and eares open but the tongue hedged in with teeth. non modò celerem & velocem, sed & ingenio acri praeditum significat. Brochmand. in loc. Slow to speake] That is, not to presume of our own gifts, thinking our selves better able to teach others then to be taught by them. Vers. 20. For the wrath of man worketh not the righteousnesse of God] As if he had
said, in time of wrathfull anger thou canst doe nothing that is good and pleasing to God. Vers. 21. Wherefore lay apart all filthinesse, and superfluity of naughtinesse] That is, cut off as much as in you lieth,Mr. Perkins. all corruptions both of heart and life. Filthinesse] This Greek word  is used onely here, and properly signifies the filthinesse adhering to the body; but translated to the mind, it signifies covetous∣nesse, as sordes in Latine; but here, any kind of sinne. Estius, Cornel à Lapide. Vide Grotium. Superfluity of naughtinesse] Excrementum malitiae, Beza. All kind of evill thoughts and affections more then needs; all naughtinesse is supersfluous; but he means such naughtinesse as doth abound, doth superfluere float at top. Engrafted word] Because it should abide in our hearts like a Syence Mr. Perkins. in the stock, and never be removed, but there grow and fructifie unto life eternall. Mr. Hildersam.Because as the syence of a good fruit that is grafted into a Crab-tree stock will change the naure of the juyce and sap of it; so the Word is able to change our na∣tures quite. Paralogizantes vos ipsos, id est, captiosis quibusdam ratjunculis ex scripturae vel aliunde petitis vosmetipsos illaqueantes atque fallentes, sophistarum more. Estius. Vide Cornel. à Lapide.Vers. 22. Deceiving your own selves] Putting paralogismes, fallacies, and tricks on themselves. Hearers of the word shall be blessed: we are hearers of the Word, there∣fore we shall be blessed. Vers. 23. For if any be a hearer of the Word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man behol∣ding his naturall face in a Glasse] The Law is speculum peccati, a man may see his spots there; speculum justitiae, it declares to a man, 1. his primitive righteousnesse; 2. the perfect holinesse, and perfection of Christs active obedience, Rom. 8.2. 3. The duty he ought to performe, and the rule he should walke by. 4. Our perfection in the life to come. Vers. 25. Whose looketh]  is to look upon a thing by bending the neck and body. See Luke 24.12. Iohn 20.5. 1 Pet. 1.12. By this one word therefore is commended to us, both singular humility and intent study in contemplating of Christ propounded in the Gospell. See Cornelius à Lapide. The perfect Law of liberty] The morall Law is called the law of liberty Quia tum demum liber homo est, ubi legis divinae jugum suscipit, Deoque in lege praecipienti libenter paret. Lud. de Dieu in loc. in op∣position to the Ceremoniall law, and the bondage thereof. Vers. 27. Pure Religion and undefiled before God, and the Father] This is the way and means to declare pure Religion. Is this, to visit the fatherlesse and widdows in their affliction]  translated here visit is an emphaticall word, for it includes both a benevolous affection, and benefits which proceed from thence, Luke 7.16. Heb. 2.6. in Herodian it is used of Physitians which visit the sick and take diligent care of them. The fatherlesse and widdows] That is, all that are miserable; but these are named as being forsaken of all, and more miserable then other afflicted persons. And to keep themselves unspotted of the world] That is, forbeares the practice of those sinnes which all the world runnes after. Therefore in baptisme heretofore they re∣nounced all the pomp of the world and were cloathed with a white garment, and warned to keep it white,Rev. 14.5. and to present it before Christ the Judge in the last day. CHAP. II. Varii variè haec exponunt, sed pauci rem¦acu attingunt. à Lapide. Perkins cases of conscience.Vers. 1. MY brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Iesus Christ the Lord of glory, with respect of persons] We are not forbidden to honour rich men; but the Apostles meaning is, to reprove those who preferre riches before piety; when rich men are honoured being ungodly, and godly men are despised and rejected because they are poore.
Vers. 2, 3. For if there come unto your assembly a man with a Gold Ring, in goodly ap∣parrell, and there come in also a poor man in vile rayment. And ye have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing, &c.Vide Estium & Brochmand. in loc. See Luk. 15.22. & 23.11.] Rich and mighty men were wont in times past (saith à Lapide) to weare a Gold Ring, both to seale their Letters, for ornament, and to cheere their hearts; whence they wore it on the next to the little finger of the left hand, because there goes an artery from that finger to the heart, saith GelliusLib. 10. c. 10. With the Romans heretofore onely Senators Exploratissi∣mum est aurei annuli usum apud antiquos, insigne fuisse Nobilitatis, ut etiam apud Romanos hujus annuli gestatio equitum ordi∣nem distingue∣bat à plebe; qua de re vi∣deri potest Pli∣nius l. 33. c. 1. Tiraquellus in notis ad Alexandrum ab Alexandro, lib. 2. c. 29. Sigonius l. 2. c. 3. de jure Romanorum. Menochius de Republica Hebraeorum. l. 6. c. 7. & in loc.  Non ineleganter fecit nomen composiaum ad instar aliorum quae in Graeco erant recepta. Annulus aureus, non minus apud veteres Hebraeos quàm apud alias gentes gestamen honora∣torum ac ditiorum. Gen. 38.18, 25. & 41.42. Esai. 3.19. Grotius. and Knights did weare Rings. White apparell as well as Gold rings (saith à Lapide) was in times past an Ensigne of dignity; at Rome it was the garment of those that did ambire magistratus, who were thence cal∣led candidati. Yet it is not necessary (as Menochius de Repub. Heb. l. 6. c. 7. shews a∣gainst Baronius) to interpret it white apparrell; for the Greek word  signifies properly fulgentem or splendentem, gorgeous shining; there is an article in the Greek that shining garment; we translate it gorgeous, Luke 23.11. The white colour indeed hath more splendour and light then other colours. Here it is taken for precious or excellent, and is opposed to vile. He means in their thoughts they scorned a godly man because poore, in compa∣rison of a wicked man that was rich; for such are otherwise in a civill way to be preferred. Vers. 4. And are become Iudges of evill thoughts] That is, judges ill affected, carrying in them perverse and crooked thoughts, and judging in respect of persons. Vers. 5. Hath not God chosen the  non est quivis pau∣per, sed qui mendicissimus est, quod ait Cicero. Nam est à  timidè oberro mendicans. Brochmand. in loc: poore of this world] God usually elects the poore; that is, the lower sort of men; he speaks it not exclusively to the rich; but most of those that are chosen are poore, or of an inferiour ranke. See 1 Cor. 1.26. Vers. 6. De not rich men oppresse you?]  is wickedly to abuse ones power, tyrannically to oppresse others; in which sense it is used in Xenophon, and Acts 10.38. Vers. 8. If ye fulfill the Royal Law] That is, a commanding Soveraigne Law. à Lapide gives divers expositions. It is interpreted three waies; Lyra expounds it the Law given by God the King of Kings; so the Syriack reads it, the Law of God. 2. O∣thers expound it, that which excells in its kind, so the ordinary and interlineall Glosse. 3. Others Proverbialis, locutio, ut via regiam dicimus quae diverticula non habet: quiae lex sine ulla personarum acceptione omnibus patet, nec cuiquam adulatur. de Dieu. Vide Cal∣vinum, & Brochmand. in loc. say it is to be taken as the Kings way, that which is plaine and without any turning, or which is common to all. Vers. 10. For whosoever shall keep the whole Law] outwardly and in shew; and yet offend Metaphora ab iis qui inter ambulandum aut currendum ad obstaculum aliquod offendunt, ac pedem impingunt. Piscat. in one point] wittingly; and giving himselfe liberty to break any one Com∣mandement. Is guilty of all] That is, 1. either he breakes the chaine of duties, and so breaks all, the Law being copulative; or, 2. with the same disposition of heart is qualified to break them all; every one sinne containes virtually all sinne in it. Vers. 12. By the Law of liberty] The law is so called because it freely accuseth with∣out respect of persons,Mr. Ball. Rom. 3.20. & 11.30. and is not a bondage or burden to the regenerate, but kept of them freely, willingly, and of indulgence. Vers. 13. And mercy rejoyceth against judgement] The Greek word rendred rejoy∣ceth, , is emphaticall. Paul useth it Rom. 11.18. and James here,Vide Broch∣mand. in 3. Jac. 5. Radix est  cervix. & 3.14. It signifies to glory against one, to insult over one, and to lift up the neck and head as if a thing were well done. Vers. 14. What doth it profit my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? can faith save him?] The Apostle speakes not of a true justifying faith,
but of faith professed onely, or of the profession of faith. If a man say he hath faith] If a man professeth himselfe to believe; and have not works] That is, a conver∣sation answerable in some measure to his profession: can that faith of his, which is in profession onely, save him, or justifie him? No by no means; This affirmative Interrogation is a most emphaticall Negation. Vers. 19. Thou believest that there is one God: the Divels also believe and tremble] The Devils believe the generall Articles of the faith: but the Apostle instanceth in that, either because it is the distinction of a carnall believer from a Pagan;Hunc articu∣lum adfert pro exemplo, vel quòd in eo ma∣ximè Judaei differrent à Pa∣ganis vel quia in symbolo fidei nostrae primus est. Estius. or because it is the first article of our faith. The Divels acknowledge four articles of our faith, Matth. 8.29. 1 They acknowledge God, 2. Christ, 3. the day of judgement, 4. that they shall be tormented then. Tremble] They quiver and shake, as when mens teeth chatter in their head in extreame cold. The Greek word signifies properly the roaring of the Sea: From thence (saith Eustathius) it is translated to the hideous clashing of Armour in the battell. The word seemeth to imply an extream feare, which causeth not onely trem∣bling,Premenda est emphasis verbi . Nam Graeci significaturi metum vehementissimum, eumque subitaneum, quo quis corripitur, usurpare solent verbum : nam hoc sensu inventes hanc vocem apud Plutarchum & alios: quò etiam ducit radix vocis. Nam  est fremitus & horror maris ac stuctuum. Brochmand. but also a roaring and shriking out. Marke 6.49. Acts 16.29. Vers. 21. Was not Abraham our Father justified by works?] See V. 25. That is, their faith was by their works justified,See Mr. Pem∣ble of justifica∣tion. And Down of justi∣fication. l. 7. c. 8. Vide Bezam. See Mr. Hilder∣sam on 51. Psal. Sect. 6. c. 1. p. 193, 195. & 215, 216. and declared to be a true and living, not a false and dead faith; yea, themselves were thereby justified and declared to be true believers indeed, truly righteous before God, and not so in shew and profession onely. It is not meant of the justification of his person before God,Perkins and Dr. Taylor on Titus. Nec hoc intelligit Jacobus de causa justificationis, sed de ejus declaratione & manifesta∣tione, nec de causa perfectionis fidei, sed testimonio perfectionis illius, cui tamen testimonio & manifestationi tribuitur rei effici∣entia, usitata in Scriptura loquendi formula, quâ res dicuntur fieri cum manifestantur. Rivetus. Vid Dilherri electa l. 3. c 24. but of the faith of his person before men. The true meaning is, Abraham was justified by works; that is, he testified by his works that he was by faith justified in the sight of God. The Papists adde unto the Text, 1. a false glosse, by works of the Law. 2. A false distinction, saying that they justifie as causes. Vers. 22. Seest thou how faith wrought with his works] Faith professed, as vers. 24. did cooperate either to or with his works; that is, either faith with other graces did cooperate to the bringing forth of his workes, or else it cooperated with his workes; not to justifie him before God, but to manifest and approve his righteous∣nesse. And by works was faith made perfect] Not that works doe perfect faith; but faith whilst it brings forth good workes doth manifest how perfect it is, as 2 Cor. 12.9. See Beza. Vers. 26. For as the body without the Spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also] Either the Apostle Iames speaketh of the habit of faith, or of the profession of it. If of the habit,R. Down. of justificat. l. 7. c. 8. then the comparison standeth thus: As the body of man without the spirit, that is, without breath (which is the prime signification of the word  derived from  to breath; in which sense it is called the spirit of the mouth, and spirit of the nostrils) I say, as the body without breath is dead, so that faith that is without workes, which are as it were the breathing of a lively faith, is judged to be dead. If by faith we understand faith professed, or the profession of faith: as else∣where in this Chapter, and Act. 14.22. Rom. 1.8. then we may understand the similitude thus: as the the body of man without the spirit, that is, the soule, is dead: so is the profession of faith without a godly life.Apoc. 3.1.
CHAP. III. Vers. 1. MY brethren, be not many Masters] Or teachers; multi Doctores. Beza. Let not private persons take upon them to become instructers of others. So Mr. Perkins, rather censurers.Ego magistros intelligo, non qui publico mu∣nere funguntu in Ecclesia: sed qui jus sibi cen∣sorum in alios usurpant. Tales enim reprehensores, quasi magistri morum haberi volune. Atque haec loqintio tam Graecis quam Latinis est usita∣ta, Magistros vocare qui superciliosè in alios animadvertunt. Calvinu. Dr. Hall in his Paraphrase takes it in both senses; My brethren doe not ambitiously affect the title of the Authors, and lea∣ders of factions, drawing Disciples after you; neither be ye rigid and uncharitable censurers of others. See à Lapide. Knowing that we shall receive the greater condemnation] That is,Matth. 7.1. Rom. 2.1. by censuring and judging of others we shall receive the greater judgement. Vers. 2. For in many things we offend all] The Apostle puts himselfe into theYet he was worthily called James the just.num∣ber, and speaketh it of those that were sanctified, at least in his esteeme, and in the judgement of charity. We offend all]  labimur, impingimus, we stumble all: A Metaphor from Travellers walking on stony or slippery ground. The Apostle speaks not of the singular individuall acts, but of the divers sorts of sinne. Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus. And setleth on fire the whole course, or wheele of nature] He compares the course of mans life with a wheele. Calvin. That is, the whole man,Perinde est, sive rotam sive cur∣riculum vertas, prout accentum mutaveris; intel∣ligit enim Apo∣stolus metapho∣ricè, totum vitae nostrae tempus. Vorstius.  Calvinus, Beza, Vulg. Rotam potius quàm curriculum aut cir∣cumvolutionem dicere malui, quod Jacobus sic mihi videtur alludere ad rapiditatem circumdotae rotae, suo motu flammam con∣cipientis. Beza. a mans own tongue fires himselfe and all others: like the Sunne, (when it is out of order and course) sets all on fire. And is set on fire of Hell] That is, the hell of thy nature, say some; by the Divell, saith Estius, so called by a Metonymie. Vers. 8. But the tongue can no man tame] This is wilder then the wildest beast. Vers. 15. Divelish] Or full of Devils. The Greek word ends in  & denotat ple∣nitudinem. Because fleshly wisdome aimes at Satans end, viz. to keep a man in an un∣regenerate estate.. Satanica apud Arabem. Haec mundi sa∣pientia vocatur diabolica, tum quia diabolum imitatur, tum quia a diabolo suggeritur & aspiratur. Porrò alludit Iacobus ad etymon daemonum: daemones enim dicuntur quasi , id est, scientes, & his antiqui cribuebant scientiarum & artium bumanarum inventionem; sed propriè ipsi primi anctores & inventores sunt sapientiae mundanae quae docet se suaque attollere, alios deprimere à Lapide. The wisdome which is proper to Divels; or (as Piscator will have it) which is inspired by Divels or evill spirits. Vers. 16. Confusion] The Vulgar renders it inconstancy, vi vocis est tumul∣tuatio, agitatio inquietudo, res quae nescit stare certo loco. Brochmand. and so it sometimes sig∣nifies. Calvin and Erasmus pertubation; some tumult; tumulinatio. Beza. others otherwise. Vers. 17. Without hypocrisie] Great censurers are commonly great hypocrites. CHAP. IV. Vers. 1. FRom whence come wars?] Not by the Sword, or Armies; but their tongue and heart warres by reason of the difference of affections. Chap. 3.14. & 4.5.11. The Greeke word properly signifies quarrels in which much blood is shed; and fightings] or brawlings; is is rendred strifes, 2 Tim. 2.23. Among you] being brethren, and scattered brethren. Iames 1.1. Come they no ben, even of your lusts] That is the root, the Divell may increase them. The Greek word may be translated pleasures or delights. We must understand lusts in generall, all kind of lusts. That
warre in your Members] 1. Bello externo,1 Pet. 2.11. when the whole carnall part fights against the whole Spirituall part, Rom. 7.23. Gal. 5.17.2. Bello civili & interno, when one lust warres against another, as in carnall men. Vers. 3. Because ye aske amisse] Neither suitably to Gods mind, nor agreeably to his end. Vers. 4. Ye adulerers and adulteresses] because of the running out of the heart to any creature Adulteros ap∣pellat metapho∣ricè; tum quia voluptatum fecerat mentionem quarum immodicus appetitus adulteros facit; tum quia à Deo fornicatur, atque adulteratio, quisquis amorem quem Deo debet, ad mundum transfert. Estius. inordinately. Know ye not] This word hath an Emphasis and pricks sharply; as if he should say, what are you so ignorant, or doe you not consider? The friendship of the world is enmity with God] both actively and passively; for it both makes us hate God, and it makes God hate us. Vers. 6. But he gives more grace] That is, the Scriptures offer grace and ability to doe more then nature can; so some Weemes. Vide Bezam.; rather (as Calvin) to overcome our lusts, and bring them into order. God resisteth the proud] Sets himselfe in battell array against him, as the Greeke word emphatically signifies. Plutarcho & aliis ex adverso stare instructâ acie. Brochand. in loc. Vers. 7. Submit your selves wholy to God] The Greeke word translated submit is very Propriè signi∣ficans inferio∣rem obsequenter parere ordini à superiere constituto. Brochmand. in loc. emphaticall;  according to the force of the word is, place under, subcolleco. See Rom. 13.1. Ephes. 5.22. Vers. 8. Draw nigh to God] We have been enemies to God, farre off from him; now we must approach to him, and seek to recover his favour. Cleanse your hands ye sinners]  signifies in generall any sinner, in opposi∣tion to a righteous man; Rom. 5.19. In speciall it signifies a wicked man, one of a flagitious life; a sinner Qui sunt pub∣lici & perditi pececatores, at qui peccandi artem exercent. Brochm. , Luke 7.37. See Matth. 9.10, 11. & 26.45. Cleanse and purifie] An allusion to legall uncleannesse, and the purifying of them. Before an unclean person might draw neere to God, he must be purified from his un∣cleannesse. Hands and heart] The outward and inward man, being filthy and unclean, must be purified from corruption of heart and life. Ye double-minded] As chap. 1.8. such as have a double divided heart. Vers. 9. Be afflicted and mourn, and weep, let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to heavinesse] A man must so seriously consider of his wretchednesse,Affligitevosmet∣ipsos jejuniis, lugubrem habi∣tum induite, saccum, & cili∣cia, ut poeniten∣tes Christiani so∣lebant. Haec enim vi st istius vocis, ut videre est Gen. 37.23. 2 Sam. 13.37. fletus solet plerumque jungi cum jejunio. ut 1 Sam. 7.11. & 12.22. Grotius. till he be made sad by it, and till it doe even presse sighs and tears from him; and if his heart refuse to be broken at first, he must give himselfe to this sadnesse, and put from him all matter of laughter and mirth, and make it his onely businesse to mourne.  translated here afflicted, is he which is troubled with the burden of cala∣mities, as the etymology of the word shews. Heavinesse] Such a heavinesse Emphasis est in voce  qua utitur Apostolus. Nam propriè significat dimissionem vultûs sive è marore, sive pudore, sive utraque re ortam. Broch∣mand. in loc. Vide plura ibid. as may be seen by the casting down of the counte∣nance, as the word importeth. See Beza and Grotius. Vers. 10. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord] That is, present your humble supplications unto God for pardon of your sinfulnesse, and for help against it by his Spirit, and the blood of his Sonne. He humbleth himselfe in Gods sight, that doth from his heart confesse his own wickednesse, and acknowledging himselfe to be base and vile, and to deserve all punishment, yet takes boldnesse to supplicate for pardon and help in Christs name, and for Gods mercy sake in him.
And he shall lift you up] That is, help you out of sinne and misery. Vers. 12. There is one Law giver] This shews, 1. That Christ is he which gives Laws to his people. 2. That he alone gives Laws to them. Vers. 17. To him it is sinne] That is, sinne with a witnesse, by an excellency; sinne not to be excused by any plea or colour.Peccatum gra∣vius ac majus alludit ad Luc. 12.47. Estius. See John 9.41. CHAP. V. Vers. 1. WEepe and houle] Or, weep bowling; flete ejulantes. The Greek word , translated houle, some say, is proper to Wolves. Plutarch and Aristotle say it is proper to Frogs. In Homer and Demosthenes it signifies horren∣dum clamare, to cry horribly, or to cry with a certain howling. The Scripture useth this word to declare great sorrow, as we may see Micah 1.8. Ier. 4.8. Ioel. 1.10, 13. This threatning seems to be taken out of Luke 6.24. Vers. 2. Your riches are corrupted] The Greek word  is used by the LXX. Interpreters Ier. 22.19. of stinke exhaling from a carcasse. Vers. 4. Behold the hire of the labourers which have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud,See Mal. 3.5. crieth] There are foure enormous crimes which in Scripture are said to cry to Heaven: 1. Voluntary murder, Gen. 4.10. 2. The sinne of Sodome,Four crying-sinnes. Gen. 18.20. 3. The defrauding of the labourers wages, as here. 4. The oppression of the poore, Exod. 1.23. Clamitat in coelum vox sanguinis, & Sodomorum, Vox oppressorum, & merces detenta laborum. The Lord of Sabaoth] Of Hosts, not Sabbath,Vide Bezam & Grotium. so Rom. 9.29.  vox corrupta ex Hebraeo Zebaoth, quod exercitus significat in plurali Vorstius. Vers. 5. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton: ye have nourished your hearts as in the day of slaughter] The Apostle useth two very emphaticall words, and one elegant expression, to set out the ryot of those rich men. The first is , which is to live delicately and luxuriously. The Noune  is used Gen. 2. by the Septua∣gint interpreters, to note those delights which Adam enjoyed in Paradise.See 2 Pet. 2.13. The se∣cond word is , which signifies to passe one life luxuriously in pleasures. It is used also 1 Tim. 5 6. The third expression is, Ye have nourished your hearts, propriè est instar agnorum petu∣lanter exultare & lascivire. Hic metaphoricè ad delicatam & lascivam istorum vitam refertur. Vorstius. as in the day of slaughter, or Sacrifice. The Apostle points his finger (saith Piscator) to those solemne Feasts in which Eucharisticall Sacrifices were plentifully slain, and when they fared daintily, Prov. 7.14. Esay 2.14. Vorstius hath almost the same. Vers. 11. Behold, we count them happy which endure] either till God come in judge∣ment, or for your deliverance. The Lord is very pitifull]  multorum viscerum, of many bowels, of tender compassion. Vers. 12. But above all things my brethren swear not] Why above all things? Idolatry and superstition are as hainous: but 1 This is a sin of that slippery member, the tongue; 2. grown now through generall use familiar, custome hath made it habituall;Dr. Sclater. Quia Judaei valde proni erant ad jura∣menta, nec facile evelli ea consue∣tudo potuit, ideo Christianos mo∣net seriò Jaco∣bus, ut memine∣rint ejus praecepti quod Christus dedit, Matth. 5.33, 34, 35, 36, 37. Quae autem valde caveri volumus, ea dicere solemus cavenda ante emnia. Grotius. the propension thereto was greater, therefore is this emphaticall caution given. He had spoken of patience before in adversity, and now he wisheth them above all things not to sweare; meaning, if they be crossed, they should above all things take heed they doe not break forth to unadvised oathes. But let your yea be yea, and nay nay] Whatsoever we affirme in common speech, we should truely averre with a simple affirmation: and what we deny, deny it with a sim∣ple negation. Pareus.
Vers. 13. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? let him sing Psalmes] He doth not leave it as arbitrary, he may pray or choose; he must, there is the neces∣sity of a precept laid upon him. As he hath reason to pray then because of his own need, so he hath encouragement to pray then, because he may have stronger hopes to speed. The Greek words are more significant,  rendred afflicted, is to be great∣ly afflicted and vexed with evils. The word translated merry is , in his right mind; noting that all true mirth must come from the right frame of the mind. Dike.Let him sing Psalms] viz. of thanksgiving, as the opposition shews. Vers 14. And let them pray over him] This phrase is emphaticall, for being present with the sick man it moves us the more in our prayers; so Christ did over Lazarus, and Elishah over the widdows son. Annointing him with Oyle in the Name of the Lord] That annointing of the body was a ceremony used by the Apostles and others,Ex instituto Christi Marci 6.13. nempe quia oleum apud Hebraeos Divi∣nam gratiam significabat: ut & manum impositio, quae & ipsa circa aegrotos adhiberi solebat. Marc. 16.18. Act. 28.8. Omnia autem ista fie∣bant in nomine Christi. Marc. 16.17. Act. 3.16.19.13. Proculus Christianus Sverum Imperatorem per oleum aliquando curavit. Testis Tertullianus apud Scapulam. Grotius. when they put in practice the miracu∣lous gift of healing, which gift is now ceased. 2. That anoynting had a promise that the party annointed should recover his health; but the persons thus annointed die without recovery. Mr. Perkins. This was an extraordinary thing communicated to those which had gifts of miracles used by them,Vide Chemnit. Harm. See Fulke on the Rhem. Test. as an outward symbole and signe of the Spirituall healing; and so we deny not but it was an extraordinary temporary Sacrament; but now that miracles are ceased, still to retain the outward signe is a vain superstitious imita∣tion, although St. Iames his Oyle and the Popish Oyntment doe much differ. Vers. 15. Save the sicke] That is, restore to health. Vers. 16. Confesse your faults one to another] This Commandement binds as well the Priest to make confession to us, as any of us to the Priest, so say Cajetan and Scotus. The confession of faults which the Apostle here speaks of, is to be made, 1. in time of sicknesse. 2. In the private house. 3. One to another. The Apostle would not be so preposterous as to require a man first to receive that Unction which they say is not to be received before confession,Mutuò quod de pastore ac ove non potest in∣telligi. Vnde S. Augustinus id refert ad eos qui se mutuò offendorunt. Riveti Cathol. orthod. and then after to require confession. 2 Cajetan in loc. ingenuously confesseth that St. James speaks neither of Sacramentall Unction no Confession; he would have the people mutually confesse their faults one to annother, that so they may mutually pray one for another. The effectuall fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much] There is but one word in the Originall,M. Burthoughes. the working prayer, , but it is translated by two, effectu∣all, fervent. It signifies such a working as notes the liveliest activity that can be. It signifieth effectuall, or effectually working; and so both the Verb and the Parti∣ciple,Rom. 7.5. 2 Cor. 1.6.4.12 Gal. 5.6. Ephes. 3.20. Col. 1.29. 1 Thess. 2.13. 2 Thess. 2.7. James 6.16. B. Down of justification, l. 4. c. 11. which are used nine times at least in the New Testament, are or ought to be effectuall; namely in it selfe, or effectuall to worke according to the twofold  or act, whereof the Philosophers and Schoolmen use to speak; to wit, the first, and the second. Vers. 17. Subject to like passions] or, same passions; it is but one word in the Greek, and used onely here,Hoc est, simi∣libus sive iisdem passionibus obnoxius. Vorstius. and Acts 14.15. in both which places Beza renders it iisdem affectionibus obnoxius. And he prayed earnestly] Greek, and he prayed in prayer; that is, he prayed earnestly for the ingemination hath this force. & precibus precatus est. Beza. Et oratione oravit. Vulg.
ANNOTATIONS Upon the first Epistle generall of PETER. CHAP. I. Verse 1. THE inscription shewes that this Epistle was written to the stran∣gers, dispersed through Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, Bythinia. There are divers opinions about these strangers, the most common and true opinion is (saith Pareus) that Peter wrote this Epistle to the converted Jewes scattered through the provinces in Asia, which is very evident (saith Hee) from the first History of Pentecost described in the second of the Acts, for then the Jews came out of divers provinces, viz. Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, to Jerusalem to the Feast. This Epistle was by Peter written to these Jews made Christians, and returned into their provinces, and there much afflicted for the Gospell. The purpose of the Apostle in this Epistle is to confirme the Christians, to whom he writes, in the faith, and to assure them, that it was the true grace of God they had received, and to perswade them to all possible care of sincerity of life becomming the Gospell, and to constancy in triall. See 1 Pet. 5.12. and 2 Pet. 3.1. Vers. 2. Grace unto you and peace be multiplied] Or fulfilled. significat mul∣tiplicari, dila∣tari, incre∣mentum largi∣stimum capere, adimpleri, ut sic tum de multiplicatione in quantitate discretatum de augmento in quantitate continua ac∣cipiatur. Matth. 24.12. Act. 6.1. & 7. c. 7. v. 17. c. 9. v. 31. c. 12. v. 24. 2 Cor. 9.10. 2 Pet. 1.2. Inde quidam reddunt multiplicetur, quidam verò impleatur. Gerh. See Iude 2. Grace and peace are perfixed in the salutation before almost all Pauls Epistles, but this word fulfilled is here added. Vers. 3. Hath begotten us againe unto a lively hope] It is called a lively hope,Spes viva pro spevitae capitur: quanquam vi∣detur tacita esse antithesis inter spem, quae in regno Dei in∣corruptibili de∣fixa est, & in∣ter spes hominum fluxas ac evanidas. Calvinus. 1. Because it is active, it puts a man on lively endeavours, Hee that hath this hope purifieth himselfe. 2. Because it comforts and cheeres up the soule, brings life into the Spirit. 3. Because it lives when a man dyes. It is so called in opposition to the dying hopes of ungodly men, Iob. 11. vlt. We who before were strangers and without hope, are now through the mercy of God by the ministrie of the Gospell, regenerated, and so restored to the hope of an immortall inheritance. Vers. 4. To an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you] It is not corruptible, nor perisheth as the riches of the world,Zanchius. it can∣not be defiled with abuse, nor fade with antiquity; and is layed up in Heaven. Col. 1.5. It fades not away, there is the unchangeablenesse: it is immortall, there is the e∣ternity of it.Mr. Perkins. Vndefiled] , This Epithete is used of Christ, Heb. 7.26. Of the marriage bed, Heb. 13.14. And of worship acceptable to God, Iames 1.27. That fadeth not away] , This is the proper name of a Flower, which is still fresh and green.See 5.4.
Verum  pro∣prie significat praesidijs muniri,  enim significat custodiam sive praesidium militate. Vtitur Apostolus peculiari verbo , id est, qui Custodimni non quomodocunque, sed vigilantissima cura; qualis est militum qui in excubijs collocantur ea parte qua metuitur hostilis irruptio. Nam  militare praesidium. est. Estius.The word is used metaphorically, Gal. 3.23. Kept] East, as under a strong Garrison. Praesidio tenebamur. Shut up is there added exegittically. Cityes being kept with Garrisons against enemies are wont to be kept shut.Vers. 5. Who are kept] Or as the originall is, being a military word, safely kept, or guarded as with a strong Garrison. So it is rendred 2 Cor. 11.32. By the power of God through faith unto salvation] Two things are spoken of faith, the first is affirmed, viz. that faith preserveth a man to salvation through all hinderances either of inward temptations or outward crosses which the Devill or the world can lay in his way, the power of God preserveth, but through faith; the second is implyed, therefore we must labour to keep that faith evermore with us which must keep us, and to preserve that which must preserve us to salvation. Mr. Perkins. Vers. 6. Greatly rejoyce] There is a great emphasis in the word  for it sig∣nifies to witnesse the inward joy of the heart, in the countenance, voyce, and gestures, and therefore it is more than to rejoyce. Christ joynes these two together, Matth. 5.12. Rejoyce and be exceeding glad, not onely inwardly rejoyce, but also in outward signes, witnesse the inward joy of your heart, They are joyned together also, 1 Pet. 4.13. Rev. 19.7. Perkins.Vers. 7. Though it be tried with fire] Men are cleansed by affliction from their cor∣ruption, as gold from the drosse by the fire. Might be found unto praise and honour and glory] Praise consists in words, honour in externall signes, glory in a good opinion, yet here they are taken for the same thing. Vers. 8. In whom though now yee see him not yet beleeving] As if he should say, you beleeve neverthelesse assuredly in him, though you did never see him. Hee speakes to the Jewes which were in dispersion,Hildersam. many of which never saw Judaea. Metaphora à victoribus in stadio, qui potiti victoria post absolutum certamen de manu Agonothetae reportant bravium vel Coronam. Pareus.Vers. 9. Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your soules] Not onely here∣after, but here while they were obeying God. Vide Estium & Gerhardum. In verbis com∣positis  &  magna est em∣phasis, exprimit tum ardeus desiderium tùm singulare studium Prophetarum in exquirenda salute per Messiam promissa in ipstus adventu clarissimè revelanda. Gerh. in loc. Vide Laurentium.Id est, accuratè, diligenter, solicitè, magna contentione & studio perquisiverunt & perscrutati sunt. Comel à Lap. Salus pro conspicua manifestatione accipitur, quae nobis obtigit Christi adventu. Matth. 13.6. Calv. Vers. 10. Of which salvation the Prophets have enquired, and searched diligently, who prophe∣sied of the grace that should come unto you] Not that themselves had no consolation of that grace, which by the eye of prophecie they foresaw to light in abundance upon the Church of the New Testament, but because in comparison it came to us and was not accomplished unto them. Perkins. Hoc maximum Evangelij en∣comium est quod the saurum sapientiae con∣tinet, Angelis adhuc clausum & occultum. Calv. , This word signifies prying into a thing overvailed and hidden from sight, to looke as we say wishly at it as if we would looke even through it. Vide Bezam & Gerhardum. Vers. 12. Which things the Angels desire to look into] Stooping down to behold. The Cherubims were made with their eyes looking down to the mercy seate in the Holy of Holies. Exod. 25.18, 19, 20. Whereunto Peter here alludeth, when he saith, the Angells themselves desire with bowed heads to peepe. They stoope downe as it were; for the same word is used, Iohn. 20.5. of the Disciple that came and stooped to looke into that part of the Sepulchre where Jesus was laid. The Septuagint use it, Cant. 2.9. Gen. 26.8. 1 Chron. 15.29. Prov. 7.6. 2 Kings. 4.29. Iob. 40.2. Luk. 12.3. See Ep. 6.14. Similitudo ex more vetusto sumpta, nam quum oblongas haberent vestes, neque iter facere, neque quicquam operis commodè suscipere pote∣rant, nisi succincti. Vnde istae loquutiones Accingere se ad opus & res gerendas. Ergo impedimenta tolli jubet, ut soluti ad Deum contendant. Calvinus in loc. Vide Gerhardum & Laurentium.Lumbos succingimus ad quatuor usus, primò aditer, secundò ad opus, tertio ad bolla, quartò ad ministerium. à Lapidè. Vide plura ibid. Vers. 13. VVherefore gird up the loynes of your minde] Even as the Jews and easterne people at this day tuck up their long Garments to make them more expedite and free to a journey or businesse; so Christians journeying towards heaven, must take short their minds from earthly delights. Dr. Taylor on Titus. Vide Bezam.
The maine strength of the body is in the loines, therefore some say the strong pur∣pose and resolutions of the soule are here meant At the revelation of Iesus Christ] That is, when Christ is revealed, that is, gloriously at the last day, or when Christ revealeth himselfe by his word or Spirit now in this life. Some interpret it thus, Looke for the glory that shall shortly bee brought unto you, at the glorious appearing of Jesus Christ; others thus,See Calvin. & Bifield in loc Trust on the present grace that now is brought unto you by Jesus Christ himselfe, revealing and opening the same. Both are good and agreeable to Scripture, and each hath the countenance of learned men; the latter is the better, 1. Because it more agreeth with the plainnesse of the words. 2. Grace is rarely (not twice that I know) put for glory. 3. Peter having mentioned the last end before,Estey. v. 4, 5. It is most likely that here he should set downe the way and meanes thereunto. 4. If the former should be meant, then must the Apostle say that here, which he had set downe v. 7.5. The latter is fuller, a man may looke for glory and have little grace, and we are to take Scripture in the largest meaning. Vers. 14. Not fashioning your selves according to the former lusts] , viz. as a player was framed and fashioned to the gesture and words either of drunkennesse or adultery, when he played them on the Scaffold of the Theater.H. Steph. in Thes. Vers. 19. As of a lambe] Christ is like a lambe, 1. For harmelesnesse. 2. For pa∣tience and silence in affliction, Esay 53.7. Ier. 11.19. 3. For meeknesse and humility. 4. For sacrifice. Without blemish and without spot] That is, free from all sinne, either actuall,Significat hac similitudine in Christo nos ha∣bere quicquid veteribus sa∣crificijs adum∣bratum fuit, quanquam prae∣cipuè alludit ad Agnum paschalem; atque hinc discendum est quid nobis prodest Legis lectio in hac parte. Calvinus. Nomen , quod de Christo etiam usurpatur Heb. 9.14. quidam volunt esse originis Graecae deductum à  quod est Culpare, sed rectius deducitur ab Hebraeo Mum quod etiam Syrus hoc loco utitur, quod propriè significat vitium aliquod corporis. Levit. 21.18. de Sacerdote. c. 2.20. de pecore, ab eo enim descendit  significans dedecus ac probrum, prae∣sertim si à Poetis usurpetur. Gerh. that is without blemish, or originall, that is spotlesse saith Aquinas. By unspotted is meant right in the outward parts, by without blemish sound within. See Exodus 12.5. A lambe may be without blemish, , which yet is not without spot, , that therefore the most absolute and perfect purity of Christ prefigured in the lambes of the Old Testament that were to be sacrificed, might be better expressed, the Apostle calls him a lambe without blemish and without spot. See Eph. 5.27. Vers. 24, 25. These Verses hold out two things in a speciall manner. 1. The vanity of things Temporall. 2. The glory of things Spirituall and eternall. The vanity of carnall excellencies is set forth under an allegorie. Vers. 24. For all flesh] Caro hominem denotat cum omnibus donis naturalibus. Luther. By flesh is meant all mankind, and all the creatures since the fall given for mans use, Gen. 6.13. Grasse] This word is used three wayes, 1. To note a multitude. Ioh. 5.25. 2. Glory, a flourishing estate. Psal. 72.16. 3. A fading of that glory. Psal. 90.6. and Psal. 103.15, 16. All flesh is grasse] That is, all carnall excellencies of the outward and inward man have a flourishing estate, but they fade. Vers. 25. But the word of the Lord] Not that in the booke but written in the heart turned to grace as the former ver. shewes. CHAP. II. Vers. 1. WHerefore laying aside all malice and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies,Metaphora est, vel ab oneribus quae humeris deponuntur, vel à vestimentis quae exuere ac deponere sole∣mus. Laurenti∣us. nd evill speakings] There are five things we should lay aside, when we come into Gods presence to heare his word, Malice, Guile, Hypocrisie, Envy, and evill speaking. 2. Note the extent of it, all Malice, all Guile, and all evill speaking. He saith Hypocrisies, and Envies, and evill speakings in the plurall number, to note that we should not tollerate in our selves any kind of these evills. Bifield.
Vers. 2. As new borne babes desire the sincere milke of the word, that ye may grow thereby] The new man desires, in Scripturis ac∣cipitur tum pro infante adhuc in utero mater∣no concluso, Luc. 1.41. tunc pro infante re∣cens nato, Luc. 2.12. Act. 7.19. tum pro eo qui jam paulo a∣dultior, 2 Tim. 3.15. hoc loco in secunda sig∣nificatione acci∣pi adjecta vo∣cula  ostendit. Gerh. in loc. The word may be said to be sincere, 1. In it selfe, because it is without errour, sin, and there is no deceit in it at all, Pro. 8.7, 8. Psa. 19.8, 9. and because it hath no composition in it, but is the pure word of God, as it came from God himselfe at first. 2. In effect it makes men sincere, it both teacheth and worketh in the Godly a Spirit without guile. Psal. 19.8, 9. Bifield. 1. The milke of the word; when a Child is new borne no∣thing can give him content but milke, he desires, it as his livelihood, afterward he is more playfull, and every small matter makes him neglect the breast; so the new Creature esteemes the Word as his appointed food, he cannot live without it. 2. The sincere milke, unsophisticated, not compounded; the Child desires the mothers milke as it is of it self, without sugar; so the new Creature desires the word, for the Words sake, for its naturall sweetness, & loves to hear the downright naked truth without any mix∣ture; another man may desire to heare a Sermon for the neat composition, for the Learn∣ing that is shewed in it, but not for the sincerity of it. 3. Therefore he desires it that he may grow thereby in saving goodnesse, Faith, Zeale, Mercy. Another man may desire the Word that he may get more knowledge. The Greeke word  here rendred desire signifies a vehement desire of learning, which he compares with the earnest desire of the babe after the mothers milke, which comparison is certainly taken out of Psal. 131.2. that this Greek word signifies so may appeare by Rom. 1.11. 2 Cor. 5.2. and 9.14. Phil. 1.8. and 2.16. where it is also used. Vers. 5. Ye also as lively stones] The godly are called lively stones, stones, because of their solidnesse, lively, because of their activenesse. Vers. 6. Behold I lay in Sion a chiefe corner stone] Greek, ground stone, that is, Christ who is primus in fundamento,Quod aliqui in voce anguli subtilius philo∣sophantur, quasi hoc ideo dictum sit, quod Christus Judaeos & Gentes, tanquam duos parietes diversos simul conjungat, non satis firmum est, contenti ergo simus simplici expositione, ideo sic vocari, quia aedificij pondus illo innititur. Calvinus. Esay 28.16. 2. The glory of the building. The Pope, saith Bellarmine in his Preface to the Controversie de Romano Pontifice, but Paul and Peter teach that this stone can be meant of none but Christ. Estius here inter∣prets it of Christ. Vers. 7. He is precious] , Honor, He is an honour; the more of Christ any one hath, the more he is honoured. Laurentius thinks the abstract is put for the concrete  for  honour for honourable and precious. Vers. 9. That ye should shew forth] The Greek word  signifies publikely to set forth, and so to excite others to glorifie God. The LXX use it for Saphar to re∣herse, to number orderly, Psal. 9.14. and 55.8. which word the Syriack useth here. Vers. 12. Shall behold] With a narrow circumspection; it is not only seeing but with a narrow circumspection. penitius & per∣fectius inspicientes. Gerh. Vers. 13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man] It is not humane in regard of the Author, proprie signifi∣cat subordinari, ordine quodam subjici. Gerh. Ordinatio divina secundum substantiam, humana ratione subjecti, causae instrumentalis, finis. it was not devised by man, but in regard of the end, because it was or∣dained of God for man as the proper subject, and for his profit as the proper end of it. Vers. 15. That with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men] The Greek word translated well-doing is a participle of the present time,If ever wee would effectu∣ally silence wicked men, we must be con∣tinually exer∣cised in well-doing. Bifield. Vide Gerh. in loc. and notes the con∣tinuall custome of well-doing. Put to silence] Sometime this Greek word is tran∣slated to still a thing that is tumultuous and raging, and so the Sea was silenced, or made still, Mark. 9.39. Sometimes, to make speechlesse, or dumbe, so Mat. 22.12. Some∣times, to confute, so as they have not a word to answer, so Mat. 22.34. Sometimes, to muzzle, or tye up the mouth, so 1 Cor. 9.9. 1 Tim. 5.18. and so it signifies properly. The word here rendred, Foolish men, signifies properly, men without mind, or men that have not use of their understanding, and so are either naturall fooles, or mad men.
Vers. 16. As free and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousnesse] Free in respect of our consciences, exempted from humane powers,Not a civill but a spirituall freedome is here meant, called Chri∣stian liberty. Bifield. and yet as servants of God bound in conscience to obey him in obeying them, so far forth as he doth command us to obey them. B. Downames Sermon of Christian liberty. Cloake] The Greek word , which is no where else found in the whole new Testament but in this verse only, signifying properly any covering;Alludere mihi videtur Petrus ad veterem il∣lum morem quo pileati incede∣bant servi re∣cens manumissi. Beza. as the cove∣ring of Badgers skins, Exod. 16.14. and 36.16. That which was spread over the Taber∣nacle is in the Septuagint translation so called. And it is very fitly translated a cloake (though it doe not properly so signifie) in respect of that notion wherein the word in our English tongue is commonly and proverbially used; to note some faire and co∣lourable pretence, wherewith wee disguise and conceale from the conusance of o∣thers the dishonestie and faultinesse of our intentions in some things practised by us. Iohn 15.22. 1 Thes. 2.5. Sanderson in loc. Of maliciousnesse]  is properly rendred by malice or maliciousnesse. As these English words and the Latine word malitia whence these are borrowed; so likewise  in Greek, is many times used to signifie one speciall kind of sin, which is di∣rectly opposite to brotherly love and charity;Id. ib. but here it is taken more largely for all manner of evill and naughtinesse according to the adequate signification of the Greeke and Latine adjectives  and malus, from whence the substantive used in the text is derived. Vers. 17. Honour all men] The Jewes despised the Gentiles, Rom. 14.3. And a∣mong the very Jewes the rich despised the poore, Iames 2.3. The Apostle here applies a remedy to this disease; a parallel place we have, Rom. 12.10. Phil. 2.3. Love the brotherhood] Brotherhood is taken collectively for the whole multiude of brethren, as nobility for the whole societie of noble men.Vorstius. Gerh. The Apostle useth this word in the same signification, ch. 5. v. 9. Therefore the Syriacke hath rightly rendred it, love your brethren. Vers. 18. Good, Gentle] A Masters goodnesse hath relation to justice,Dr Gouge. his gentlenesse to equity. But also to the froward] Even where the servant may not obey, he must bee sub∣ject. vulgate reddidit discoli Graecam vocem alla voce Graeca exprimens, quod imperitis errandi occasionem praebuit;  proprie significat obliquum, curvum. Luc. 3.5. metaphoricè eum qui est moribus pravis, animo corrupto & depravato. Act. 2.40. Phil. 2.15. Gerh. Vers. 21. Leaving us an example] The Greek word  Translatio à picturis vel paedagogis sumpta. Beza. Translatio sumpta à lapidibus viarum indicibus. Arias Montanus. is a metaphore taken from Scriveners or Painters, and signifies properly a copy or patterne,Vsurpatur pro∣priè de exemp∣lari, quod prae∣ceptores disci∣pulis, pictores novirijs proponunt, ad quod in pingendis literis & imaginibus respiciant specimen artis suae exhibituri. Gerh. in loc. or portraiture of a thing exactly drawn out. Bifield. Vers. 24. VVho his own selfe bare our sins in his own body on the tree] The Apostle alludes to Esay 53. See Verses 4.6.11.12.Sicuti sub lege peccator ut re∣atu solveretur, victimam sub∣stituebat suo loco: ita Chri∣stus maledictio∣nem peccatis nostris debitm in se suscepit, ut e coram Deo expiaret. Calvinus. And he hath respect also to the saying of Iohn Baptist, Iohn 1.29. The word  himselfe hath a great emphasis, whence the Prophet so often there repeates it, v. 4.5.7.11.12. Bare] In allusion to the Sa∣crifices. See Heb. 7.27. Iames 2.21. and 53. Esay 4. Our sins] That is punishments. The originall word translated Tree] Signifies sometimes a staffe, Matth. 26.47. sometimes a paire of stockes,Vide Bezam. Act. 16.24. sometimes a tree growing, Rev. 2.11. usually wood, 1 Cor 3.12. here a Gallowes made of wood.Bifield.
By whose stripes yee were healed] . The whole Testament hath not the like,That is, for∣given. Compare Mat. 13.15. with Mark 4.12. See Esay 5. Vide Bezam. Erasmus ita reddidit haec verba, Cujus ejusdem vibice sanati sumus. two relatives at once in the originall, as if I should say, cujus livo∣re ejus sanati sumus, By whose stripes of his we are healed, the terme here hath a double Synecdoche, one stripe for many, and stripes for his whole passion. Dr. Clerke. Estius thinkes that the word  is either added for emphasis, or (which is more probable saith Hee) it is an Hebraisme peculiar to the Hebrewes as Psalme 73. and 104. Peter alludes (saith he) to the stripes that servants receive from their cruell Masters, therefore he returnes to the second person ye are healed. CHAP. III. Vers. 1. ] Ele∣gans metaphora à servis illis sumta, qui negotiantur cum pecunia heri sui, vide Mat. 25.14. Significatur id Christo velu∣ti lucrum accedere, quum multi ad fidem adducuntur, atque ita regnum Christi amplificatur. Vorstius. ac∣curatam inspe∣ctionē & consi∣derationem sig∣nificat ut colligitur ex hujus Epistolae c. 2. ver. 12. qui locus huic nostro parallelus, neque alibi in Novo Testamento hoc verbum occurrit. Gerh. in loc.Vers. 2. WHile they beheld your chast conversation coupled with feare] Behold] The o∣riginall word signifieth to observe and prie into a thing, to finde out the secrets of it. Bifield. Feare] Meaning, not slavish feare of blowes, but reverent feare of offending. See Ephes. 5.33. Vers. 3. Whose adorning, let it not bee that outward adorning of plaiting the haire, and of wearing of gold,Nehemiah Rogers. Vterque Apo∣stolus excessum prohibet & quod praecipuum est commendat. Rivetus. As Iohn 6.27. Vide Cartw. in Prov. 31.22. Some conceive that the Apostle doth simply and for ever forbid these things named, and all of like sort, and that for ever, which opinion (saith Bifield) is the opinion of almost all the Ancient and moderne Wri∣ters. Docet quo praecipuè cultu & ornatu mulieres se viris commendare debeant, viz. interiore potius quam exteriote. Estius. or of putting on of apparell] Neither Paul. 1 Tim. 2.9. Nor Peter here, doe simply condemne ornaments, but the abuse of them, they being used by persons of meane condition. 2. The Church was then under grievous persecution. 3. The words are rather an admonition than a prohibition, he forbiddeth not the using of them, but admonisheth them that they would rather adorne the inside than the out∣side, and this evidently appeares by the Antithesis that is used in both places, not saith Paul, but not saith Peter, desire more the adorning of the mind than the body. Vers. 6. Even as Sara obeyed Abraham] That is, constantly, and generally. He names her before others,Esay 51.20. Gen. 15.12. because she being the mother of all the Faithfull is worthy to be honoured and imitated by her Sexe. Calling him Lord] Or Sir, an honourable title, not in speaking to him, or of him, before others,Mr Burroughes in his Irenicum would have it spoken to A∣braham. There was but one good word (saith he) in Sarahs speech to Abraham, she called him Lord, the speech otherwise was a speech of unbe∣liefe, yet the Holy Ghost speaking here of her, in reference to that speech, conceales all the evill in it, and mentions only the reverend title she gave to her husband, commending her for it. See Bifield. by whom it might be told him againe what she had said; but when she thought of him in her heart, even in her inward cogitations; so Mr Wheately, and Mr Fenner in his Order of Houshold Government so likewise interprets it. Calvin saith Peter meanes she was wont to call him so. Vers. 7. That your prayers be not hindered] Sinfull walking in any relation hinders Prayer three wayes: 1. It deads our spirits, streightens our hearts, weakens our gifts for Prayer. 2. Hinders the effect, fruit, and successe of Prayers. 3. It hinders us from the very act, it breeds a strangenesse between our Soules and God. Vers. 8. Pitifull] The Greek word signifies rightly bowelled, or such as have true or right bowells; Quasi diceret, honorum viscerum. It is a word proper to the Scripture, and taken from the custome of the Hebrews, which use bowels for affecti∣ons.
One whose bowels are moved with the misery of others. There is the same Ety∣mologie almost of the Latine word misericordia. Vers. 18. That he might bring us to God] In reconciliation and communion. Put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit] When he dyed according to the humane nature, yet by the vertue of the divine nature,Rainold de lib. Apoc. See Rom. 1.4. Spiritu vivifi∣catus, vel subjectivè intelligitur, nimirum ut Christus dicatur vivificatus in sua parte, hoc est, Christi ea pars vivificata, quae spiritus dicitur: quemadmodum nos resurrecturi dicimur carne; nempe, quia caro ea est propriè quae resurgit à mortuis: vel efficaciter Christus vivificatus à spiritu, sive per spiritum, utrovis autem modo, evinci dico, absurdam esse hanc de animae descensu fabulam. Chamierus. and by force of the Spirit he was raised from death. Verses 19, 20 These verses and the former should be thus translated (saith Broughton) Christ suffered, being made dead in the flesh, made alive by the Spirit;In his Epistle to the Nobility of England. Ipsa vox  quintuplicē habet in scrip∣tura notionem, 1. Significat generatim receptaculum, Apoc. 18.2.2. Propriè carcerem in quo detinentur ac custodiuntur captivi, Mat. 14.10.3. Vigiliam nocturnam, sive horas vigiliae nocturnae, Mat. 14.25. & 24.43.4. Custodiam mili∣tarem, Acts 12.10.5. Infernum seu gehennam, Mat. 5.25. atque hoc in loco. Laurentius. in which Spirit he had gone and preached to them that now are spirits in prison: because they disobeyed when the time was: when the patience of God once waited in the daies of Noe. The Papists urge this place for the limbus patrum, preacht there to the Patriarcks.See Fulke on the Rhem. Test. Locus hic om∣nium pene in∣terpretum ju∣dicio difficilli∣mus. Estius. Petrus dicit, Christum per spiritum suum à quo fuit vivificatus, id est, per divinitatem suam Noachi tempore, nempe per os Sacrum hujus Patriarchae per spiritum Christi loquentis, praedicasse ijs quorum spiritus jam sunt in carcere, id est, in ferno, non autem limbo, quia fuerunt increduli, cum Dei patientia eos expectaret in diebus Noachi. Rivetus in Cathol. Orthod. Tract. 2. quaest. 43. Vide Calvinum, & Bezam. 2. For Christs descent into hell, but 1. Peter speaks of Noahs time, they hold it of all the Patriarcks. 2. He speaks not of the Fathers that were obedient, but of those that were disobedient. 3. Here he did not deliver them. The meaning is, He] That is, Christ. Went] That is, in the Ministery of Noah, preacht in Noahs time to those that are now in hell. Spirits] That is, the soules de∣parted; not men, but Spirits to keep an Analogy to the 18. 2. This place speaketh not of triumphing, but of preaching; now there is no preach∣ing in hell to convert. Vers. 21. But the answer of a good conscience] That is, the answer of a beleeving heart, acknowledging these sacraments to be seales and pledges of the righteousness of faith, and that inward baptisme which indeed saveth. Dr Tailor on Titus. The Apostle alludes to the custome that was in the Primitive Church, those who were catechized were demanded of the Catechist thus, credisne, beleevest thou, abrenun∣ciasne, dost thou not renounce the devill? And they answered abrenuncio,Weemes. Vide Bezam, & Estium. I do renounce him. CHAP. IV. Ver. 3. BAnquettings] Compotationibus, drinkings, because as Lyra noteth there be other waies and meanes to drunkenness besides by wine. quum pot ando certa∣tur & ad nume∣rum bibitur. Estius. Vers. 4. Metaphora est sumpra ab ijs qui in ignota regione peregrinantur. Significat enim impios ista vitae matione tanquam re peregrina & nova offendi: proue exporientia restatur. Vorstius. Phrasis etiam aliis linguis familiaris: ut Gallis. Ils se trouvent estranges. Laurentius. See 2 Thes. 2.2.Wherein they think it strange that you run not with them to the same excesse of riot] They are said  by the Grecians, who are troubled with admiration at a new, unusuall, or strange thing. Vers. 6. For, for this cause was the Gospell preached also to them that are dead] That is, unto those who are now dead, or were then dead when Peter wrote this, who then lived when the Gospell was preached unto them, as he saith in the fifth verse, accord∣ing to that we have in our Creed, the quick and the dead, that is, those which before
were dead, but then shall not be dead but living when they shall be judged. Vers. 7. But the end of all things is at hand] Not the end of the world, but of the Jewish Church and State. So Luke 21.9. 1 John 2.18. Be ye therefore sober and watch unto prayer] He doth not forbid zeale and fervency, but to have due respect to God and his will, to submit our will to the will of God, that is, to be sober in prayer. Vers. 11. If any man speake, let him speake as the oracles of God] Oracles] That is, the sacred writings the Scriptures, oratio elliptica est. Subaudien∣da enim sunt duo verba cog∣nata, ut sensus sit, siquis loquitur, ut eloquia Dei loquatur. Vorstius.  doth relate to the manner of speaking as well as to the matter which is to be delivered. as Rom. 3.2. So called, because God did inspire the Prophets to utter and write them. As if he had said, with that feare and reverence, with that prepa∣ration, with that judgment and discretion, with that zeale and affection, as it becommeth the oracles of God to be spoken with. Mr Hildersam. Vers. 13. But rejoyce in as much as ye are partakers of Christs sufferings] They are call∣ed the sufferings of Christ, 1. In respect of the originall, because they are for his names sake. Matth. 5.11. 2. Because of his sharing in them, though not affectu patientis, yet compatientis, though not with a sense of paine as in his naturall body, yet with a sence of pitty. 3. In regard of the order and issue. Luke 24.26. Vers. 14. For the spirit of glory, and of God resteth upon you] In regard of their present glorious condition (by reason of the value and excellency of grace) to be preferred before worldly prosperity;Hee seemes to allude to Esay 4.5. Mr Sarson. Vide Bezam. and the Spirit of God] In that they are assured by divine revelation, and the comfortable influence of Gods Spirit, that God will adde a gra∣cious event to their sufferings. Vers. 15. But let none of you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Theefe, or as an evill doer] Turne not thieves,See Ioh. 21.22. nor so carry your selves as thieves. Tale hominum genus nullus eleganti∣us descripserit quàm Terentianus ille senex, his verbis, Tantúmne ab re tua ocij tibi, aliena, ut cures, eaque nihil quae ad re attinent?A busie-body in other mens matters] It is but one word in the originall, and costs us a whole sentence; as Bishops in anothers diocesse, as priers into other mens mat∣ters. Vers. 18. And if the righteous scarcely be saved]  is used of those things which with much labour are brought about. Act. 14.18. and 27.7. Vers. 19. Wherefore let them suffer according to the will of God] These words note not onely righteousnesse, that it must be a good cause we suffer for, but the spring whence suffering comes ex voluntate Dei, each circumstance. A faithfull Creatour] That is, God did not onely make heaven and earth and so leave them, as Masons and Carpenters leave houses when they are built, but by his providence doth most wisely governe the same.Perkins. CHAP. V. Vers. 5. BEE cloathed with humility] , The Greek word comes of a pri∣mitive which signifieth a knot,Of  Innodaram ha∣bere, estote intus ornati. Beza. Metaphora sumpta videtur à genere vestimenti in nodum constricti, quo servi utebantur,  Graeci vocabant; sensus est, humilitatem animi indute, & instar vestis nodo astrictae vobis conjunctam retinete, ne uspiam excutiatur. Estius. Vide Gerhardum. because humility ties the graces together that none of them be lost, quasi dicat arctè vobis astringite. Estius. B. Smith.  verbum  est militare, ex adverso, quasi aciem instruere, praelio obsistere. Gerh.For God resisteth the proud] Or (as the originall speaketh more emphatically) set∣eth himselfe in battell array against him.
Vers. 6. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that hee may exalt you in due time] This verse is an inference upon that which went before, thus, God is no way to be resisted, but to be sued unto for grace, this is done by humility, hum∣ble your selves therefore; the Greeke word is not so rightly rendred passively by the Vulgar, be ye humble, as by others, and our latter translation actively,Dr Prideaux. humble your selves. Vers. 7. Casting all your care upon him] All the care of the end is to be cast upon God,In omni cura nostra de rebus necessarijs, & curam nostram postulantibus, toti pendeamus à providentia Daei. Estius. we are to be carefull in the use of the meanes. Vers. 8. Bee sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the Devill, as a roaring lyon walketh about, seeking whom he may devoure] Sobriety makes a man fit to watch; be sober in body, and watch with your minds. His name Devill, and that which he seeketh to devour, sheweth his malice; the beast whereunto he is resembled Lyon, sheweth his power and craft;Dr Gouge. and the attribute roaring, addeth terrour thereunto: lastly his walking up and downe shewes his sedu∣lity. Vers. 10. But the God of all grace] Hee is so called,Viz. auctor, conservator, promotor, per∣fector, remunerator. à Lap. because hee is the giver of all kinds, and of all degrees of grace; wherefore, it is added, he calls and perfects. Dr Sclater. Settle you] As a foundation is setled to be unmoveable. See Heb. 1.10. significat fun∣dare, unde  fundamentum. Matth. 7.25. Luc. 6.48. Col. 1.23. Gerh. ANNOTATIONS Upon the second Epistle of PETER. CHAP. I. IT is written to the same that the former Epistle was written to, ch. 3. v. 1. the principall argument of it is to take heed of false Prophets and teachers. Vers. 1. Have obtained] Obtained by lot, so the Greeke, sortiti sunt, So Luke 1.9. Acts 1.17. significat non solum sortiri sive sortes duce∣re, Ioh. 19.24 sed etiam sorte aliquid accipe∣re vel obtinere. Gerh. in loc. Like precious faith] See Eph. 4.5. Not that it is equall in all, but because all possesse the same Christ with his righteousnesse, and the same salvation by faith. Through the righteousness of God, and our saviour Jesus Christ] The righteousnesse of Christ is called Gods righteousnesse here, 2 Cor. 5.21. Rom. 1.17. and 3.21. and 10.3. Not because it is the righteousnesse of the God-head, but of him that is God. This is an excellent testimony to prove the deity of our Saviour; like to that of Titus 2.13. For it is not said, of God and of our Saviour, as noting two persons,B. Down. of Iustification. l. 4. c. 2. but of God and our Saviour, as betokening one. Vers. 3. Called us to glory and vertue] Through the Temple of vertue we must passe on to glory.
Naturae nomen hic non sub∣stantiam sed qualitatem de∣signat. Calv. Vide Bezam. Non transfor∣matione natu∣rae humanae in divinam, sed participatione donorum, quibus conformes efficimur divinae naturae. Pareus.Vers. 4. Partakers of the divine nature] Not of the substance of the God-head as the Familists say, therefore they use those phrases Godded and Christed when they are converted, but the words following shew the meaning, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust, they love and hate what they did not afore, the whole soule in the bent of it is carried to new objects. To bee made partaker of the divine nature, notes two things, 1. A fellowship with God in his holinesse, the purity which is eminenter and infi∣nitely in Gods most holy nature, is formaliter, or secundum modum creaturae, fashioned in us.Dr Reynolds. 2. A fellowship with God in his blessednesse, viz. in the beatificall vision and bright∣nesse of glory. Totus hic Ser∣mo B. Petri usque ad ver∣sum octavum Climaticus esi, sive scalaris, constans septem gradibus; quibus per octo virtutes jucundissimè progreditur. Estius. See Heb. 6.11.Vers. 5. And besides this, giving all diligence, adde to your faith vertue, and to vertue knowledge] That is, see that every grace act in its season and order; he speaks not of the habits of Grace, (all graces are wrought together) but of the Acts. The Greek word signifieth to supply and further, to mi∣nister.Adde] The Greek word hath a greater emphasis taken from dancing round, as in dancing they took hands, so we must joyne hand to hand in these measures or graces. Lead up the dance of the graces, as in the galliard every one takes his turne, in every season bring forth every grace. Faith] Is first mentioned, because it gives us the first hope and comfortable accesse to God, it is the Mother grace. By faith he meanes true religion and that gift of God, whereby we put our trust and confidence in God; by vertu, an honest and upright life shining in the vertues and workes of the morall law.Mr Perkins in cases of consci∣ence. By knowledge he meanes a gift of God whereby a man may judge how to carry himselfe uprightly, or prudence a more full understanding of hea∣venly mysteries, and applying them to practice. Vers. 6. Temperance] By it is understood a gift of God, whereby we keepe moderation of our naturall appetites, especially about meate, drinke and attire; by patience, a vertue whereby we moderate our sorrow in induring affliction. Godlinesse] Is a vertue whereby we worship God in the duties of the first Table. Vers. 7. Brotherly kindesse] Is a vertue whereby we love the Church of God, and the members thereof. Charity] Or love, that vertue whereby wee are well affected to all men, even to our enemies. Vers. 9. And cannot see farre off] The Greek word Quae vox de∣ducta est à  nictare connivere, &  id est, oculus. Dicuntur enim , qui non vident nisi quae oculis prope admoventur. Estius. signifieth, him that naturally cannot see except hee holdeth neere his eyes, so Peter calleth such as cannot see heaven∣ly things which are farre off, poare-blind or sand-blind. Beza renders it nihil procul cernens. Vers. 10. Wherefore the rather brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure, for if ye doe these things yee shall never fall] Which words containe 1. An exhortation to make our election sure;The Greek word transla∣ted give dili∣gence, signifi∣eth two things, 1. All possible haste & speed, so the verbe & nown are used, Luk. 1.39. Mark. 6.25. so the LXX. use it commonly, Exod. 12.11. Deut. 16.3. Dan. 6.19.2. All manner of se∣riousnesse and intention in doing: 2 Cor. 8.7. 2 Pet. 3.14. there is a double certainty, 1. Objecti, so it is sure with God, for with him both it and all things are unchangeable. 2. Subjecti, sure to our selves, in our own hearts and consciences. Secondly, the meanes whereby to come to this assu∣rance, that is, by doing the things before named in the 5.6. and 7. verses, to pra∣ctise the vertues of the morall Law, there set downe, to labour to grow in grace, and use diligence. First calling, from it thou maist easily ascend to assurance of election. For if ye doe these things ye shall never fall] That is, into scandalous sinnes, or fall ut∣terly, yee shall not fall for ever, Greek.
Vers. 12. But so an entrance shall be ministred unto you abundantly,Calvin refers this to the sup∣plies of the Spirit of grace here. Luther refers it to the time of a mans death, a godly man which hath as∣surance shall go to heaven alacri animo ac plena fiducia. Some interpreters refer it to a mans state after death: Oecumenius to the day of judgement; Estius to the different rewards in Heaven. into the everlasting kingdome of our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ] The Kingdome here mentioned is the kingdome of glory. 1. Because it is promised as a reward to one that hath made sure his calling. 2. Because it is stiled an everlasting kingdome. It is called the kingdome of Christ; because it is given to Christ as a reward of his sufferings, and because the go∣vernment of it is committed to him, Heb. 2.5. he hath entred into it, Luk. 14.19. He is the Ruler in this kingdom, Eph. 1.21. As conversion gives one an entrance into the king∣dome of grace, so assurance gives one an entrance into the kingdome of glory. 1. Be∣cause it is not barely faith but light with it. 2. An earnest. 3. Affections are hereby laid up suitable to a glorious estate, rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory. It is an everlasting kingdome, because the union between the soule and him is everlast∣ing; Christ is there medium visionis & fruitionis, as here he is medium reconciliationis & communionis. Vers. 14. That shortly I must put off this my tabernacle] In Greek it is, that the laying aside of this my tabernacle is quick. Vers. 15. I will endeavour that you may be able after my decease to have these things alwaies in remembrance] These words (according to the Rhemists Translation) their Je∣suites Salmeron, Suarez, and Bellarmine, do judge excellent for their purpose, to prove that Peter after his departure would remember them: And this must needs be (say they) by praying for them. Not to stand upon their bad Latine, and worse English Transla∣tion, the true construction of the words is, that Peter promiseth (whilest he is in the way) that is, in this life, that they should have his Books,So Cajtane. Petrus satagit ut etiam se mor∣tuo recta dctri∣na mane at apud fideles, & ad posteros transmittatur. Estius. (viz. his Epistles) which after his departure might put them in mind of such things. Vers. 16. Vnto the power and comming] That is, the powerfull comming of our Lord Jesus Christ. So Estius, and others. Vers. 19. We have a more sure word of Prophecie] More sure than Gods own voice in the Mount, of which he spake before. Erasmus explaines the Comparative by the Po∣sitive, more sure, that is sure. Beza and Piscator by the Superlative, most sure, or very sure. Vntill the day dawne, and the day-star arise in your hearts] Not (as some most falsely in∣terpret it) till Christ come into your hearts, and then throw away the Scriptures; ra∣ther, till there be a more full Gospell-light. So Estius, Gerhard and others. Vers. 20. No prophecie of Scripture is of any private Interpretation] Word for word, all prophecie is not of any private Interpretation, an Hebraisme,Potest quilibet Scripturam in∣terpretari pri∣vata industria ut tamen non inducat privatā sensum, hoc est, sensum aliquem ex cerebro na∣tum interpre∣tantis, longè il∣la ableganda est à Scriptura, sive is interpres privatam personam gerat sive publicam nullo discrimine. Chamierus. Vide Bezam, & Ca∣meronem.A private man may expound, but not in a private manner, by stamping new expositions upon holy Writ, different ab ecclesiae consortio, or by not taking the Text, and those things that naturally cohere. for no prophecie is of any private Interpretation. So Rom 3.20. Stapleton saith, Interpretation is private, either Ratione personae, when the man is private, or ratione medij, when it is not taken out of the Context or circumstance, or ratione finis, when it is for a false end. Now a private In∣terpretation in regard of the person, if it be publike in regard of the meanes, is not for∣bidden, for it is lawfull for one man with Scripture toti resistere mundo, saith the glosse of the Canon Law; the meaning of the place is, that the Prophets were not Inter∣preters, or Messengers of their own private minds, but of the will of God, as the next verse shews. Vers. 21. But holy men of God spake as they were moved] Or acti & impulsi, Esay 48.10. Heb.
13.7. Acts 28.25. Mic. 3.8. Nehem. 9.30. That is, they did not only utter their words by the Holy Ghosts immediate direction, but by the same direction did commit them to writing; for speaking is used for writing, 1 Kings 4.29. CHAP. II. Vers. 1. BVT there were false Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false Teachers among you] Prophets then, Teachers now; it is but a variation of the Language of the time, yet the new Testament calls false Teachers false Prophets, 1 Iohn 4.1. One may be called a false Prophet, or Teacher in a twofold respect, 1. As he teacheth lies,Mr. Vines in loc. or prophesies falsely. Ezek. 13.6. 2. As he teacheth without a Commissi∣on. Ier. 14.14. and 23.22, 35. The Hebrew expresseth not a false Prophet in one word, but calls him a Prophet, the Greeke (which hath the felicity of composition) doth. Who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies] Greeke, Heresies of destruction, that is, destructive Heresies,Damnable is either restri∣ctive to some Heresies, as im∣plying that there are some Heresies which are not damnable, or descriptive as describing what Heresies are in suo genere, so it is taken here. Gerhard. in loc. an Hebraisme, as Psal. 5.6. a man of blouds, that is a bloudy man. Grecè , quam vocem Vulgatus ali∣quando vertit haeresim, ut Act. 5.17. & 17.5. & 34.14. & 1 Cor. 11.19. Aliquando sectam, ut Act. 24.5. & 26.5. & 28.22. Gal. 5.20. & in hoc loco. Derivatur haeresis, non ut quidam insulsè nimis dixerunt, à Latino haereo, est enim vox graeca, sed  quod est eligore. Laurentius.Heresie was first taken in a good sense: it signifies Election, and was referred both to good and bad Sects. It seemes to be taken from the Schooles of Philosophers, where∣in every one chose a Faction to which he fided. Heresies in the plurall to point at a multitude. Even denying the Lord that bought them] The Socinian denies that men are bought by Christ, as if he were pointed at in this Text. See Laurentius. Perkins on Iude, and El∣ton, see verse 20.Object. How can Reprobates be said to be redeemed or bought by Christ? Answ. Not in Gods decree, for then they had been saved, but in their own conceit and judgement, and also in the judgement of other men led by the rule of Charity. Vers. 3. With fained words] Fine set words, formes of speech. Ad poenastarta∣reas damnavit. Mede. Vide Gerhardum.Vers. 4. But cast them down to hell]  is read but only here. Vers. 5. But saved Noah the eighth person a preacher of righteousnesse] Erasmus reads it, the eighth preacher of righteousnesse,See 1 Pet. 3.20. Noah was the first in order of yeares and dig∣nity of entrance into the Arke, yet he is called the eighth, in that he was one of them (as the Learned observe) qui octonari∣um numerum perficiebant, who made up the number of eight. (person is not in the Greeke) but Beza dislikes that reading, and gives a good reason against it. See Gerhard. Bringing the fioud upon the world of the ungodly] That is, the generation of sinfull men who lived in the daies of Noah. Vers. 8. Vexed his righteous soule] The word is a fine word implying two things: 1. The search and examination of a thing. 2. The racking and vexing a man upon the triall; so Lot observed all the evills, he weighed them. 2. He racked his soule, and vex∣ed himselfe with the consideration of them;Mr. Hooker. Vide Bezam. the same word is used, Mat. 14.24. in the matter of a storme. Vers. 14. Having eyes full of Adultery] Greeke, full of the Adulteresse, the Apostle alludes to Mat. 5.28. the very eyes discover the mind adulterating.Plenos adule∣rae. Inescant] Idest, quosi pisces ha∣mo captant. Beza. Vers. 18. They allure] As the baite doth the fish, as the Greeke word signifies. See Rom. 16.18.
Vers. 19. Is he brought in bondage] Greek, made a servant . Vers. 20. For if after they have escaped the pollution of the world] That is, such sinnes as worldly men are wont to be ordinarily defiled with, by being entangled,That is, grosse sinning. viz. in the like occasions of sin, and such sines as Satan had in the same set for them. Vers. 22. According to the true proverbe] The first of a dogge is a very ancient pro∣verbe used in Solomons time, Prov. 26.11. whence some thinke Peter tooke it.Canis reversus ad vomitum. The dog is turned to his owne vomit againe, and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire] Though the sow be outwardly washed never so cleane,Si canis hoc facit horret o∣culus tuus, tu quid eris oculis Dei. Aug. in Psa. 83. Dr Gouge. This similitude sheweth that the beginning of the Chapter is understood of wicked men as swine washed outwardly, then they are as faire as a sheepe, but backsliders have not their natures changed. Competunt haec proverbia in omnes quidem relapsos; sed potssimum ac propriissimè in illos, qui semel ab hujus saeculi immunditiis abluti ac mundati, & sanctificati; iisdem sese rusus in∣volvunt, ut olim, qui impurissimae sectae Gnosticorum sese adjungebant; nam pro luto sive coeno Graecè est , à quo nomen acceperunt Gnostici, ut Borboritae dicantur. Estius. Vide Cornel à Lap. yet because her swi∣nish nature is not altered, so soone as she commeth at mud, she besmeares her selfe againe by wallowing in the mire; and a dogge though being pained at his stomacke, hee vomits out that which paineth him, yet so soon as he hath ease, he licketh it up againe. They are two proverbes used to the same purpose. Christ joynes these two living creatures together, Matth. 6.7. CHAP. III. Vers. 3. SCoffers] Such as shall make childrens play of all the terrours of the Lord. verbum simplex  proriè significat lud pueriliter , veluti puer, sive puerorum more; Compositum autem  ut &  valde familiare est Evangelistis. Laurentius. The Greeke nowne  is onely here used, and v. 18. of the Epistle of Jude. Vers. 9. The Lord is not slacke] That is,Tardus is di∣citur qui occa∣sionem piritia effluere sinit, in Deo nihil simi∣le, qui tempo∣rum rationem ad salutem nostram optimè attemperat. Calvinus. Dr Hackwell. he sits not in heaven as one of the Idoll-gods, that regarded not what acts were kept here below, or laid not to heart mens carriages toward him. But is long suffering] Or patient, that is, he apprehends himselfe wronged, and is fully sensible of it. Not willing that any should perish] Of his. Calvin saith, he speakes here of his will re∣vealed in the Gospell. But that all should come to repentance] , to withdraw, to go aside, and bee private, to sequester our selves to our repentance. Vers. 10. The heavens shall passe away with a great noise] Like the hissing of parch∣ment riveled up with heate, for so signifies the originall word. Vers. 11. What manner of persons] Even to admiration Non simpli∣citer qualita∣tem significat rei vel personae sed cum emphasi quadam admirationis, ut Matth. 8.27. Marc. 13.1. Luc. 7.39. Estius. Vide Gerhardum in loc. . In all holy conversation and godlinesse]  in sanctis conver∣sationibus & pietalibus, vulg. in holy conversations and godlinesses;Numerus plu∣ralis excellenti∣am & magni∣tudinem rei de∣notat. when the Scripture would expresse a thing exactly it useth the plurall number. Cant. 1.4. thy loves, and the God of our salvations. Ps. 68.20. The God from whom salvation comes in the most high & eminent way. Gen. 19.11. with blindnesses, coecitatibus Montanus. That is, with the greatest blind∣nesse. Vers. 12. Looking for and hasting unto the comming of the day of God] The one is a word of faith, the other of earnest desire. See 2. Tit. 13.  votis accelerantes. Steph. God hath appointed when the day of judgement shall bee, but we may be said to hast unto it. 1. In our desires. 2. In our preparation.
Iustitiam pro justis accipio, abstractum pro concreto. Aret. Vide De Prid. in loc.Vers. 13. Wherein dwelleth righteousnesse] That is either perfect righteousnesse, or men perfectly righteous. Estius. Fulke on the Rhem. Testam. Locus hic evi¦dens est adver∣sus sectarios do∣centes Scrip∣turam sacram ubique facilem esse & omnibus intellectu per∣viam. Estius. Loquitur de magnitudine rerum divinarum non obscuritate Scripturae. Res in Scripturis sunt difficiles non in se, sed propter nostram coecitatem. Deinde non loquitur de omnibus, sed tantum de quibusdam: qualia sunt oracula de futuris temporibus, de Antichristi adventu. Pareus.Vers. 16. In which are some things hard to be understood] There are many things in the Scriptures hard to be understood, yet whatsoever is necessary to be knowne, is plain∣ly set forth and easily to be understood, of them that will reade diligently, marke attentively, pray heartily, and judge humbly. The Apostle would not by this hee saith here, discourage or disswade the people from reading and studying the Scrip∣tures; For in the first Chapter he commended the faithfull for their diligent attenti∣on unto the Scriptures of the Old Testament, which are more obscure in the chiefe mysteries of Salvation, than these of the New. Wrest] , A metaphor from torments; lay them on the racke to make them speake otherwise than they meant. See Gerhard. Yet Paul exhorts Timothy, 1 Tim 4. and others, to reade the Scriptures, even in the congregation. 1 Thes. 5.27. Col. 4.16. ANNOTATIONS Vpon the first Epistle generall of JOHN. CHAP. I. THIS Epistle is altogether worthy of the Spirit of that Disciple, which was loved by Christ. He is much before others in urging brotherly love. Calvin. He exhorteth the faithfull, First, against Heretickes, that they would preserve the true knowledge of Christ our Mediatour God and man, the faith, and the whole doctrine which they had learned of the Apostles, and take heed of the doctrines of Heretickes. Secondly against licentious men, that they would study to avoid sinne, to keep the Law of God, and especially to performe the duties of brotherly love. Zanchie. Vers. 1. Which we have heard] He alludes both to the Sermons which hee and the other Apostles heard with their owne eares from the mouth of Christ,Beatus Ioannes Evangelista, cum Ephesi mo∣raretur usque ad uljmam se∣nectutem, & vix inter Dis∣cipulorum ma∣nus ad ecclesiam deferretur: nec posset in plura verba vocem contexere, nihil aliud per singulas solebat proferre collectas, nisi hoc, filioli diligite alterutrum. Tandem discipuli & fratres qui aderant taedio affecti, quod eadem semper qudirent, dix∣erunt: Magister quae semper hoc loqueris? Qui respondit dignam Ioanne sententiam: Quia praeceptum Domini est, &  solum fiat. sufficit. Hieron in c. 6. Epist. ad Galat. Oculis vidisse non est pleonasmus sed major expressio amplificationis cusa. Imo non contentus simplici aspectu, addit contemplati sumus. Calv. and also to the testimony which the Father gave twice from heaven to Christ, the Apostles hearing, saying this is my beloved Son Zanchius which we have seen with our eyes] He alludes both to the Miracles wrought by Christ, and to the glory which in the holy mountaine (as Peter cals it 2 Pet. 1.) Christ gave to Iohn, Iames and Peter to see, and also to Christs resur∣rection and visible ascension into the Heavens.
Which we have looked upon] This is not a tautologie, but this word signifies some∣thing more than the former, thoroughly to behold. And our hands have handled] He alludes to the familiar conversation which the A∣postles had with Christ for about three yeares,Luc. 24. and also to that touching when after the resurrection Christ offered himselfe to the Apostles that beleeved not in him to touch him. Of the word of life] Christ is life, essentialiter & causaliter. Hee is a living word, that is, life it selfe, and a quickning word, bringing life and salvation to men. Vers. 4. That your joy may be full] Our fellowship with God and Christ brings full joy. 1. Because he is a full good. 2. A perpetuall good, Psal. 16. vlt. 3. This union intitleth us alwayes to this good. Vers. 5. God is light,Negatio con∣trarij auget vim affirmati∣onis. 1 Reg. o. 1. Deut. 33.6. Prov. 30.11. 1 Sam. 1.11. Iob. 20.27. Id est purissima est lux. Vide Bezam. Haec loquendi form a valde est Ioanni familiaris, ut quod affirmavit, contraria negatione amplificet. Ergo sensus est Deum ejusmodi lucem esse, ut nullas tenebrat admittat. Calvinus. and in him is no darknesse at all] There are many properties of light, for which God is often in scripture compared to it, 1. nothing is purer than light, so God is most pure. 2. All things are conspicuous to the light, so to God. 3. Without light nothing can be seen, so without the beames of divine wisedome, no heavenly things can be known of us. 4. There is nothing more pleasant than the light, so nothing more happy than God. The maine property of light is to expell darknesse where it is, and inlighten the place, so God expels the darknesse of ignorance and infi∣delity, and inlightens men with the true knowledge of himselfe. Zanchius. Vers. 7. Wee have fellowship one with another] God with us and we with him. And the bloud of Jesus Christ his Sonne cleanseth us from all sin] Not hath cleansed, or will cleanse, but cleanseth, viz. daily, neither doth hee say simply from sin,Zanchius. but from all sin. Estius thinkes it is not improbable that Iohn saith this to meete with those heretickes the Ebionites, who when they walked in darknesse, did beleeve they should be cleansed from their sins by their frequent washings, though they acknowledged not the myste∣rie of our redemption by Christ. Vers. 9. If we confesse our sinnes] That is, truely, seriously, and from our heart re∣pent before God.Vide Bezam. Hee is faithfull, and just to forgive us our sinnes, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousnesse] As if he should say, God of his infinite mercy hath promised to all true penitents and confessours, that he will forgive and never remember their sins any more, he must stand to his promises, or else he should be unfaithfull; and he is just,Dr Taylor. hee doth not say he is mercifull, but just to forgive the sinnes of true beleevers, because they are sa∣tisfied for, and Gods justice will not let him demand the same debt twice, of the Sure∣ty and of the debter. CHAP. II. Vers. 1. MY little children] Hee shewes that he delivered to us this doctrine con∣cerning the study of avoyding sin,Vox est blan∣dissimè monon∣tis, quo & Christus ad discipulos suos usus fuit, Marci 10. & Ioan. 13. & Paulus ad Galatas cap. 4. Ipse verò Iohannes in hac Epistola fre∣quentius utitur. Estius. and observing the law of God out of a Fatherly affection. These things I write unto you that yee sinne not] Hee teacheth that the study of holinesse and innocencie, is the first study which a Christian should perpectually labour in. If any man sinne we have an Advoate with the Father] Advoate, The Greek word is translated Comforter, Iohn 14.16. and 15.26. The word Advocate is a law-terme, quicunque adest alteri in causa officij gratia, saith the Civill Law.
Vers. 2. Hee is the propitiation Propitiatio actionem deno∣tat, qua Deus ex irato judice propitius redditus hominibus in gratiam eos recipit, ut in novi foederis promissione. Heb. 8.12. for our sinnes] That is, the propitiator by, a me∣talepsis. See Vorstius. Vsitatum est Hebraeis totum mundum dicere pro certa uni∣versitate quorundam de quibus in subjecta materia agitur. Ludov. de Dieu in loc.But also for the sinnes of the whole world] That is, of all the faithfull, mundus ex mundo, for he that is faithfull speakes to the faithfull, saith Ludovicus de Dieu. See Calvin and Beza. Vers. 3. And hereby we doe know that we know him] That is, we beleeve in him, and apply him with all his benefits unto our soules. To know that we know, is to be assured that we know. If wee keep his Commandements] The conscionable endeavour to frame our lives accord∣ing to Gods will revealed in his word, is a most certaine marke that wee are true be∣leevers, and so the true Children of God and heires of glory. They who have an up∣right desire, an unfeigned purpose, a sincere indeavour to walke in the obedience of all Gods Commandements, are said to keepe them. Vers. 4. He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his Commandements, is a lyer] Such a one is called a lyer in a double respect,A lyer] That is a hy∣pocrite whose love is not sin∣cere but feigned and counterfeit. both in that he sayes he hath that know∣ledge he hath not, it not being true, and because also he denies that indeed which hee affirmes in word. Mandatum vetus & no∣vum diverso respectu, vetus ratione substantiae praecepti, & rei traditae, novum ratione modi tradendi. Spanhem. Dub. Evang.Vers. 7. An old Commandement] Because it had been long agoe. The Gospell came from God, and is his eternall truth. Vers. 8. A new Commandement I write unto you] It is so called, because it was re∣newed by the Lord after it had beene as it were antiquated and almost extinguished. 2. Because it was commanded to such men as were new or renewed. 3. Because it was an excellent Commandement. Vers. 12. I write unto you little children] A child is he in whom grace is weake, and corruption strong, not one particular vertue but the generall body of the new man, as Nicodemus,Vide Bezam. Ioseph of Arimathea, the Apostles themselves while Christ lived with them, because ye have known him that is from the beginning] That is, with a knowledge of acquaintance, whereby they conceived him to be their Father; such as little children have of their Fathers and Mothers. Senes se ut plu∣rimum subdu∣cunt, quasi ex∣cesserint dis∣cendi aetatem: pueri, quasi nondum maturuerint, recusant audire: mediae aetatis homines, quoniam aliis studiis occupantur non adijciunt huc animum, ergo ne qui se eximant, Evangelium ad singulorum usus accomodat. Defignat autem tres aetates, quae magis recepta est hu∣nae vitae partitio. Calvinus. Videmus quam diabolica sit tyrannis Popae quae minaciter ab evangelij doctrina aetates omnes arcet, quas Spiritus Dei tam studiosè provocat. Calv.Vers. 13. Fathers] Or old men are they in whom the body of corruption is weake, and the whole inward man strong, to which perfection all the people of God must aspire as all men doe follow after old age. Abraham, Isaac and Iacob and the Apostles were such toward the end of their dayes, and old Simeon and Anna the prophetesse. Senibus compe∣tit notitia: & congruum est ut antiqui cognos∣cant antiquum dierum. Estius. What is more commendable in fulnesse of age, than fulnesse of knowledge? and what is more fit to bee knowne of ancient men than the Ancient of dayes. Dr Hals Paraphrase.He gives a reason suitable to old men, I write unto you Fathers, because yee have known him which was from the beginning. As if he had said, wisdome and knowledge are amongst old men, amongst the Fathers; I take it for granted, that you are knowing men, therefore I write unto you about these depths of knowledge. Iob. 12.12. I write unto you young men] A young man is he in whom the generall body of grace is strong, but some one or other corruption, as anger, lust, worldlinesse is still strong, as Ionah, Sampson.
Because you have overcome the wicked one] The strong Christian is of the winning side, his corruption decaies, grows lesse and lesse, he falls lesse often, lesse grosly, with lesse delight, riseth sooner out of sin, humbleth himselfe sooner and more for it, and is made more wary, carefull, and fearefull. Vers. 14. I have written to ye young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abideth in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one] Young men are called out to beare the heate of the day, because they are in their strength, and are chiefe Champions either for good or evill.Dr. Tailor on Titus. Vers. 16. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life] Every Creature is an occasion to draw out lust, whatever you see or heare. Lust of the flesh] That is, to fare deliciously every day, pleasures and delights. The lust of the eyes] The covetous and craving eye which can see nothing but it wisheth it. And the pride of life] Ambition, thirst after Preferments, State, Credit, Popularity,Dr. Tailor on Titus. The worlds Trinity. which three Mantuan hath exprest in an elegant distich. Ambitiosus honor, & opes, & foeda voluptas, Haec tria pro trino Numine mundus habet. Vers. 18. It is the last time] Greeke, the last houre;, Novissima hora est. Vulg. We hold An∣tichrist to be the whole bo∣dy of Hereticks in the last Age of the world, who under the name and pro∣fession of Christ advance them∣selves against Christ. Bishop Down. of Anrich. l. 2. c. 1. it refers not to the day of judge∣ment and end of the world, but to the desolation of the Jewish Church and State; now that there are many Antichrists which teach Doctrines contrary to Christ. And as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now there are many Antichrists] The word Antichrist is only used in the Epistles of John, and not elsewhere in the Scriptures. See ver. 22. and 4.3. and 2. Epist. 7. By which places it is evident that  doth not only signifie the head of the Antichristian body (which is not one singular man, but is continued in a succession of many) but also sometimes any Heretick that oppugneth the Natures or Offices of Christ: and sometimes the whole body or compa∣ny of Hereticks opposed unto Christ. For John affirmeth that those many Hereticks and Deceivers of his time, are the Antichrist. Vers. 19. They went out from us] viz.Ex ecclesia fidelium seu Christianorum per haeresin egressi sunt. Estius. By embracing Antichristian Doctrines. But they were not of us] That is,Augustin. even when they seemed to be among us they were not of us. He speakes of Ebion, Cerinthus, and such like Antichristian Hereticks, who Apo∣postatizing from Christ and his truth departed from the Church. They were once in the Church in regard of outward profession, but never truly of the Church, for then they would have persevered. Vers. 20. But ye have an unction from the holy One, and ye know all things.] The Holy Ghost is compared to oyle, his work in teaching us to annointing:Est autē  Vnguentū porius quam un∣ctio, oleum lae∣titiae, Heb. 1.9. Spiritus nimi∣rum ille qui sancta dogmata magis magisque imprimit animo. Rom. 5.5, 8, 15, 16. Ephes. 1.13, 14. & 4.30. Grotius. Christus per eminentiam dicitur . Sanctus ille, Acts 3.14. Apoc. 3.7. Opponit autem spiritum Christi spiritui Antichristiano, ut qui ex adverso pugnent inter se. Grotius. 1. Because there is a refreshing in the teaching of the Holy Ghost, it makes us glad. 2. His teaching is oyly, sweet, and soft. That is, ye have received from Christ the Holy Ghost the Comfor∣ter, and he hath taught and instructed you in all things which are necessary to the Sal∣vation of your soules for you to know and be instructed in. Mr.Hild. on Psal. 51. Vers. 22. Who is a lyer] A grand lyer, or that lyer . But he that denieth that Iesus is the Christ: He is Antichrist that denyeth the Father and the Son] John here speaketh neither of the body of Antichrist in generall (as elsewhere in his Epistles the word  is used) nor of the head of the body in particu∣lar, who is most worthily called , the Antichrist, but of some other mem∣bers of the body, that is, of those Antichrists or Hereticks of the time, as Cerinthus, and others, who denyed the Divinity of Christ; and denying the Son, did conse∣quently also deny the Father, for he is the Father of the Son. That is, Those which worship the Father without the Son, as the Jews and Turkes. 2. Those which do not beleeve that they are reconciled to the Father by the Son, as the Papists, those have not the Father neither. Pareus.
Hildersam ubi supra.Vers. 27. As the same annointing teacheth you of all things] That is, the Spirit of God teacheth you of all things that are necessary for you to know. And is truth and is no lye] This teaching of the Spirit is cleare, certaine. And even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him] As if he should say, ye shall abide in Christ, and in the profession of every truth of his, because ye have been taught by his holy Spirit. CHAP. III. Vers. 2. BVt we know, that when he shall appeare, we shall be like him] Not alone, we know that he is ours, but we know that he will hold and keep us in that estate till he cause us to inherit eternall glory with him our Head. Vers. 3. And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himselfe, even as he is pure] That is, he which hath hope to raigne with Christ in heaven, useth the meanes where∣by he may purifie and keep himselfe from sin,Mr. Perkins and others. that he may be in some measure pure as Christ is pure. Vers. 4. For sin] That is, every sin. Is a transgression of the Law] An anomie, ir∣regularity or lawlesnesse; utrin∣que appositus articulus de∣clarat veram esse definitio∣nem hanc in qua verè definitum & definitio re∣ciprocantur. Beza in loc. there is but one word in the Greeke, yet it hath the force of two;  consists of the privative particle , and the word  a Law; this is a pre∣cious definition (saith Beza) consisting but of one word, Peccatum est dictum, factum, con∣cupitum contra aeternam legem. August. contra Faustum. l. 22. c. 27. Any want of conformity to the Law though in the habituall frame of a mans Spi∣rit, or any practice swerving from it in thought, word, and deed, is a transgression of the Law. Vers. 6. Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not] This is not to be understood of parti∣cular sins, but of a course in a known sin. See 1 John 1.8. Vers. 8. He that committeth sin] That is, he whose Trade and course is in a way of sinning; two things shew that one commits sin, 1. If he love sin, Majus est peccatum di∣ligere quam facere. Aug. 2. If one lye in any sin unrepented of, Job 20.12, 13. Is of the De∣vill] That is, resembleth him as a Child doth his Father, and is ruled by his Spirit. Non dicit Pec∣cavit, sed Pec∣cat Nam in eo assiduè perseve∣rat, sicut & ip∣sius filii. Beza. Rutherf. Triall and triumph of Faith. That is, sinneth not totally and finally. Hee sinneth not 1. Studiously, he purposeth not sin. 2. Willingly, viz. with his whole will and full consent. 3. Not affectionately, he loves not sin. 4. Not deadly, Or not unto death. Dr. Tailor. Vide Calvinum. He doth not sin as the wicked man doth, of whom he had spoken vers. 8. with the full sway of his soule. Hildersam on Psal. 51. Bellarmine saith, this is the hardest place in all the Scripture urged for perseverance. For the devill sinneth] He not only saith he hath sinned, but , he sinneth, or is sinning. From the beginning] See John 8.44. Diabolus statim a creatione mundi fuit apostata. Calvin. That he might destroy the works of the Devill] Greek unravell, . The word in Scripture is ascribed to the casting down of a house, Joh. 2.19. to the breaking of a ship, Acts 27.41. to the loosing of any out of chaines, Acts 22.30. Christ is opposed to Satan, he not only is free from sin himselfe, but came to destroy sin. Vers. 9. Whosoever is borne of God doth not commit sin] That is, give himselfe over to a voluntary serving of sin. The originall is , cannot sin as a worke of iniquity, he cannot follow his sin as a workman follow his Trade. Compare ver. 8. with John 8.34. The reason is given, for his seed] The seed of God, the seed of grace, and rege∣neration, 1 Pet. 1.23. Perkins, Hildersam. That is, either the Spirit of God, whose vertue is a principall efficient, or the word whereby as an Instrument we are regenerate, and begotten to God. Dr. Taylor, Episc. Dav. de justitia actuali. Vide Piscat. & Vorsti∣um in loc. Remaineth in him, and he cannot sin] (He cannot so fall as Apostates) because he is borne of God. Hilders. on Psal. 51. That is, saith Arminius, so long as the seed of God
remaineth in him, but it may depart, but the Apostle gives this as a reason, why the Saints cannot fall away, because the Seed of God abideth in them,Quia verbum Dei, quod qua∣si semen est quo divina na∣tura in nobis gignitur, in ipso vegetum existir. Verbum evangelij semen dicitur passim. Mar. 4.14. Mat. 13.19. 1 Pet. 1.23. Hoc verbo regignimur, Jacobi 1.18. Grotius. Seminis nomine significatur Spiritus Sanctus ab effectu, quod ejus vi & efficacia regeneremur spiritualiter, quemadmodum ex carne & semine generamur. Rainold. de lib. Apoc. Vide Bezam. being regenerate it ever abideth in them, and therefore they cannot fall away. Vers. 10. Manifested] That is, evidently seen and known. Vers. 14. Because we lve the brethren] Here love is no cause of the change, but a signe and consequent thereof.Perkins. Our love is not the cause of justification, (or our translating from death to life) but a manifest signe and evidence whereby it is known that we are already justified, for so he saith, speaking in the time past, ,Dr. Down. of Justificat. l. 6. cap. 12. that we are already passed or translated from death to life. And to the like effect our Saviour speaketh, Luk. 7.47. as if he had said, hereby it appeareth, that many sins are forgiven her because she lo∣ved much. Vers. 17. Who so hath this worlds good] Greek, the life of this world, there is a mans ability. And seeth his brother hath need] Here is his brothers necessity. The rule of love is my brothers necessity, and my own ability. And shutteth up] In Greeke, locks as with a Key. CHAP. IV. Vers. 4. BEloved, beleeve not every Spirit] That is, yeeld no credence to every Doctor who doth gild over his Doctrine with pretence of the Spirit. Squire.Nomen spiritus metonymice ac∣cipio, pro eo qui spiritus dono sepraeditum esse jactat ad obeundum Prophetae munus. Calvinus. Spiritus nomine intelligit Prophetiam sive veram sive falsam, ut 1 Cor. 12. to & mox v.6. Grotius. But try the Spirits] That is,Perkins. Magnam hic quidem dili∣gentiam requi∣rit, metaphora ducta à fabris metallicis, & trapezitis ac nummulariis, qui aurum argentumque ut habeant defaecatum à scoria qua nunquam prorsus vacatcum è terra effoditur, purgatumque à sordibus aeris atque aliorū omnium metallorum quibus permiscetur & adulteratur aliquando, quando moneta cuditur, igne aliisque rebus illud expurgant, ita verbum hoc à Xenophone & Scriptoribus Ethnicis & ab Apostolo Petro usurpatur. 1. Pet. 1.7. Rainold. de lib. Apoc. Tomo secundo, Praelect. 214. those Doctrines which men pretending the gifts of the Spirit did teach, 1 Thes. 5.18. As Goldsmiths separate Gold and drosse, and examine every piece of Gold by the Touchstone. Whether they are of God] As they are boasted to be, many run not sent by God, but stirred up by ambition, covetousnesse, or by the impulse of Satan. See Deut. 18.22. Ezek. 13.2. and 26.18. Because many false Prophets are gone out into the world) This Age as the Lord foretold (saith Grotius) is very fruitfull of such Impostors. To go out into the world (saith he) is spoken both of good and evill Prophets, and signifieth to appeare to the peo∣ple, John 6.14. and 10.36. and 17.18. and 18.37. Ephes. 1.15. Vers. 8 For God is love] See verse 16. causally, not formally, say Schoolemen, He is the fountaine of love, therefore this must needs flow from him where ever the know∣ledge of him comes. Vers, 12. If we love one another God dwelleth in us] The meaning is, that by this graci∣ous love we do evidently demonstrate that God is in us. And his love is perfected in us] That is, either actively, that love whereby we love him, and that is perfected because it is demonstrated in the excellency of it, (as Gods power is said to be perfected in mans weaknesse, because it is manifested so) or else that passive love whereby God loveth us, is abundantly declared perfect in that he worketh such a gracious inclination in us. Vers. 17. Herein is our love made perfect] The Familists (who hold that there is a
perfection of love in the regenerate in this life) much urge this place, but by love here is not meant the love that is in us, or that we beare either to God or man: but rather Gods love to us,Hic Charitas Dei erga nos in∣telligenda est. Calvinus. Elton. that is, true Beleevers, which is said to be perfect in us in regard of the effect and use of it. Compare it with verse 16. But admit that John speakes here of that love that is in us either toward God or men, he meaneth then such as is true, sound, and unfeigned, opposed to that which is hollow and hypocriticall, so perfect is taken Esy 38.3, Vers. 18. Perfect love casteth out feare] It doth not cast out the of feare offending God, but that whereby we question the favour of God. Vers. 20. For he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seene, how can he love God whom he hath not seene] That is, He that cannot endure nor looke on that little glimpse and ray of holinesse which is in his brother, in one of the same infirmities and corruptions with himselfe,Mr. Reynolds. will much lesse be able to abide the light of the Sun of righteousnesse, and the most orient, spotlesse, and vast holinesse which is in him. CHA. V. Vers. 1. EVery one that loveth him that begat] That is, God the Father. Loveth him also that is begotten of him] That is, all the faithfull. Vers. 3. For this is the love of God, that we keepe his Commandements, and his Com∣mandements are not grievous] The Holy Ghost setteth down 2. notes whereby we may know that we love God:The meaning is, to him that loveth God, his Commande∣ments are not grievous, but he delighteth in them according to the inward man. 1. That we keepe his Commandements, Exod. 20.6. John 14.15. 2. That his Commandements are not grievous, for nihil difficile amanti, nothing is difficult to him that loveth. Gen. 29.20. a miosis, That is, pleasing, delightsome. The Rhemists quarrell with this Translation, they translate it, And his Commandements are not heavy. Our English word grievous Dr Fulke. commeth of the Latine word grave, which is not only weighty, but also troublesome; it better answers the Greeke and Latine than the word heavy, which is properly that which is of great weight. Vers. 4. And this is the victory that overcommeth the world, even our faith] Faith over∣commeth the world two waies, 1. It discerneth a vacuity and emptinesse in all terrene objects. 2. Because it uniteth to Christ, making the subject in which it is a member of him, and so a conquerour with him, John 16. ult. 1. The world frowning, with the troubles, feares, and dangers of it; he that be∣leeves is above the worlds frowning. 2. Fawning, faith overcomes the world that it shall do us no hurt that way, Heb. 11.26. Vers. 6. This is he that came by water and bloud] The Apostle alludes to the ancient Jewish rites,Water and bloud issuing from Christs side prefigured both these. wherein there was a purification by water, which was to take away the filth of sin, and an expiation by bloud, which was to take away the guilt; Christ came not only to justifie, but to sanctifie. See Calvin. Vers. 7. For there are three that beare record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost] Three,Dr. Taylor. Multa sunt lo∣ca, in quibus Syrus cum Vul∣gato concinit: plurima tamen loca sunt alia, quae discrepant quam maximè; quae mediocris lectio suppeditat. E. g. locus luoulentissimus, 1 John 5.7. tres sunt qui testimonium dant in Coelo, &c. In Vulgato legitur, non autem in Syro. Fidem igitur & adsensum à nobis difficulter impetrant, qui, ad deprimendem Syri utilitatem, & ad excusandam suam ignorantiam, Syriacam Paraphrasin non nisi vulgatam versionem esse contendunt. Dilh. Eclog. Sac. Dictum 11. 1. In the true and reall distinction of their Persons. 2. In their inward proprieties, as to beget, to be begotten, and to proceed. 3. In their severall Offices one to another, as to send and to be sent. In heaven] That is, è Coelo, from heaven say some, as God the Father, and the Holy Ghost by cloven tongues, and Christ is the faithfull and true witnesse; rather because their testimony is to witnesse the things done in heaven; there is the work of God up∣on us as Election. 2. A work of God in us as Conversion, Sanctification, 1 Phil. 6. The Father witnesseth by the Spirit, Matth. 16.17. compared with Rom. 8.17. 1 Cor. 12.3. The Son by bloud, Justification, the doctrine of free grace in the
Gospell, 1 Thes. 15. The Holy Ghost by water, sanctification.Rev. 2.17. Vide vorstium Dr Taylor. Hee that doth righteousnesse is righteous, hence we know that we are translated from death to life, and these three are one] In nature and essence, one in power and will, and one in the act of producing all such actions, as without themselves any of them is said to performe. Vers. 8. And there are three that beare witnesse in earth, the spirit, and the water, and the bloud] Baptisme,Spirit] That is, by a meto∣nymie, the heavenly doct∣rine delivered by the Spirit, water against the power of sin, bloud a∣gainst the guilt of sinne, the bloud of Iesus Christ as sprinkled upon our consciences within us, as Heb. 12.24. the Lords Supper, and the Ministrie. The Spirit is mentioned in both, the end of a witnesse is to decide a controversie vers. 10. The spirit is said to be a witnesse in heaven and earth, in regard of the things that are witnessed, that our names are written in heaven, and that grace is wrought in our hearts. The Lord alludes to the manner of purging sin under the Law by bloud and water, their sacrifices and washings must bee bloud for satisfaction, as well as water for sanctification. There was a double use of bloud under the law for effusion and aspersion, it assures our interest in Christs bloud. Vers. 10. Hee that beleeveth not God hath made him a lier] Not by transmutation of God, he esteemes his word and promises as false. Vers. 11. And this is the record] Or testimony, and this life is in his Son] there is a life of righteousnesse, holinesse and comfort laid up in Christ. Vers. 12. And he that hath the Son hath life] Of justification, of Sanctification, of glory. Vers. 13. That ye may know, that yee have eternall life] If a man could not know both that he were in the state of grace,By eternall life here is meant the truth of grace, grace is called glory, 2. Cor. 3. vlt. see ch. 3. of this Epistle. v. 14. John wrote this generall Epistle to all the faithfull, yea even to such amongst them as he calleth little children, 1 Iohn 3.18. the weakest and meanest of all the faithfull. and that he should be maintained and kept in that estate for ever, he could not know that he had eternall life. Therefore a multitude of markes, signes, or discoveries of a beleevers Spirituall estate are plainely laid downe in this Epistle more than in any other so short a piece of Scripture in the whole Bible. Vers. 14. If we aske any thing according to his will he heareth us] God heareth an e∣nemy, but to heare with favour is here meant, and so wee ordinarily say of a Favou∣rite, that he hath the Kings eare; and if a man be obstinate to a mans counsell, wee say hee would not heare though he gave the hearing.Mr Goodwin. Vers. 15. And if we know that he heare us, whatsoever we aske, we know that we have the petitions that we desired of him] That is,Perkins. if we can perceive and discerne that God liste∣neth to our prayers, hereby wee may assure our selves that hee grants our requests. Vers. 16. If any man see his brother sinne a sinne which is not unto death,Non hic inter veniale & mor∣tale Peccatum distinguit A∣postolus sicuti postea vulgo factum est: Prorsus enim insulsa est illa distinctio quae in Papatu obtinuit. Calvinus. hee shall aske] That is, which undoubtedly bringeth death, the sinne against the Holy Ghost, for every other sinne, we may pray for forgivenesse of it to others. There is a sinne unto death] By which he meaneth not, that there is a sinne that de∣serveth death (for so every sin doth) but a sin, which whosoever falleth into,Mr Hildersam. and committeth, he must needes dye and perish everlastingly. Vers. 18. We know that whosoever is borne of God sinneth not] That is,Mr Hildersam and B. Down. he sins not unto death, v. 16. And that wicked one toucheth him not] That is, tactu qualitativo, Cajetan. So as to leave an impression of his owne devilish Spirit,Scilicet letha∣liter. Calvinus, Vorstius. as the needle is touched by the Load∣stone. Vers. 21. Little children keepe your selves from idols] He biddeth them take heed not onely of Idolatrie as from the service, but of Idoles themselves, that is,Tertull. Vide Bezam. the very ima∣ges or shewes of them. For it is unworthy that the image of the living God should bee made the image of an idoll, and that being dead. At that time in which St. Iohn
wrote,The vulgar translatour saith filioli custodite vosà simulacris, which is all one as if he should have said, ab imaginibus, children or babes keepe your selves from images, as we translate it, against which Martin excepteth, and it sore grieveth him that this sentence is written in the top of Church-dores, o in the place where the Rood loft stood, as confronting and condemning the Crucifixes and Images that were wont to stand there. Dr Fulke against Martin.  signified an image generally, therefore it may be translated an image generally, and seeing he speaketh of the unlawfull use of images, it may also bee translated an idoll, as the word is now taken to signifie. ANNOTATIONS Upon the second Epistle generall of JOHN. CHAP. I. Verse 10. IF there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine] viz. Of Christ, bring] By an ordinary hebraisme,Dr Hall. Johannes lo∣quitur de iis qui asserunt doctrinam alienam à verbo Dei, & Christo nos volunt abducere. Pareus. opposeth it. Qui hanc Christi doctrinam aversatur & impugnat. Estius. Receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed] viz. After admonition and good meanes used for his reclaiming.Dr Taylor. Titus 3.10. Mr Perkins. Non sunt ag∣noscendi pro Fratribus, et vero prohibet omne commercium extra periculum Fidei, & casum scandali, quandiu adhuc spes aliqua est lucrifaciendi eos. Pareus.It is to be understood of giving an outward approbation to false teachers, of speci∣all familiarity. Ex veris pos∣sunt nil nisi ve∣ra sequi.Vers. 21. No lie] That is, no doctrinall lie, either about matters to be beleeved, or to be done, either concerning the misteries of faith, or the rules of a holy life, is of the truth.
ANNOTATIONS Upon the third Epistle of JOHN. CHAP. I. Vers. 2. THAT thou mayest prosper]  of  and ,Jons in loc. Epistolae Joan∣nis sunt tres nu∣mero quarum prima ad eccle∣sias integras conscripta est: reliquae verò duae, ad ecclesiae membra: & quidem vel plura ut secunda, vel unam ut tertia. Gomarus. that thou mayest take a good way, go well, a metaphore from travellers. This word is used, Rom. 1.10. Where Paul prayeth that he may have a prosperous journey to the Romanes, from thence it is translated to all prosperity whatso∣ever, 1 Cor. 16.2. Wee use to say in our common speech, how doth such a one goe on, that is, how doth he prosper. Vers. 9.  Quasi diceret à Jove nutritus seu à Jove in∣stitutus. Diotrephes] He had a glorious name, it signifies nourished by God, but he was a bad man. Vers. 10. Prating against us] , A metaphore taken from overseething pots that send forth a some, or from overcharged stomackes that must needes belch. See Prov. 15.2. ANNOTATIONS Vpon the Epistle of JVDE. CHAP. I. THE penman or writer of this Epistle was Jude or Judas the son of Alphaeus, who was brother to James, and cosin to the Lord Jesus in the flesh. He was a rare and notable Apostle to beate downe the Hereticks of that time. The Argument of this Epistle agrees with those things which Peter hath in his second Epistle, especially in his second Chapter and beginning of the third. Pareus saith it is an epitome of that second Chapter of Peter, and paralels divers verses in his Epistle and that Chapter. Vers. 3. Of the common salvation] In regard of the end and meanes of it, and also of the subjects called unto it.Taylor on Titus. That you should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered to the Saints] Austen saith there is fides qua creditur, the habite or grace of faith, and fides quae creditur, the doctrine of faith, the latter is chiefly here understood.De Trinit. l. 13. c. 20
Vers. 4. Who were before of old] That is, from eternity which is elder than time. Prius vel antè scripti. Vide Piscat.Ordained to this condemnation] , enrolled, billed, registred; or as it were written downe by the name in a booke. So a booke is given to God, Psal. 139.16. Dan. 7.10. Vincula haec sunt spiritualia, puta vis divina eos detinens, at∣que obligatio & alligatio eorum per illam ad carcerem, gehennam & poenam aeternam. à Lapide.Vers. 6. He hath reserved in everlasting chaines] 1. Of Gods justice. 2. Of his pro∣vidence. There are two sorts of chaines, 1. Those which torment the Devill, Gods wrath and his owne conscience. 2. Those which restraine him, his owne Finitenesse and Gods providence. Vers. 8. Likewise also these filthy dreamers] These surprized with dreames, the Greek word signifieth no more,. See 2 Pet. 2.10.14. sopiti. Beza. Some applly it to nocturnall pollution, therefore our translation (say they) puts in the word filthie, others say, such as did pretend dreames and divine inspirations. Pareus approves of Epiphanius his opinion, who in∣terprets it of the vanity of the thoughts. Defile the flesh] That is, are given to carnall sinnes. Pareus. Despise dominion] The Greek word rendred despise, signifieth to remove a thing from its place with some scorne and indignation. Dominion] That is, more than rulers, they despised not only Magistrates, but Magistracie it selfe. Speake evill of dignities] Blaspheme Proterviam seductorum no∣tat, qui quasvis dignitates convitiis in cessunt; nullum agnoscentes ordinem neque ecclesiasticum neque civilem. Quod fe∣cerunt olim Nicolaitae, Gnostici, & alij. Pareus. glories, Greek. Vers. 9. Yet Michael the Archangell, when contending with the Devill, he disputed about the body of Moses] It was the will of God that Moses body should be buried in a secret place unknown to any man, to prevent and avoid all occasions of superstition and Ido∣latry among the Jews, Deut. 34.5, 6. The Devill on the contrary would discover it, that so the Israelites might fall to idolatrie before it; Mr Perkins Fulke on Rhem. Test. Nicol. Lyra in Deut. 34.6. Et Epistolam Judae. Nomen proprium est Archangeli, compositum ex tribus vocibus Hebraeis, mi, Caph, el, quis sicut Deus. Reperitur autem Dan. 10. v. 13. & 12. v. 5. Apoc. 12. v. 7. Neque enim vera est eorum sententia, qui per Michaelem ipsum Christum desig∣nari volunt quum in 1 Thes. 4. v. 6. Christus ab Archangelo disertè distinguatur. Vorstius. herein the Archangell resisted him, and strove with him for the performance of the will of God, and the maintenance of his true worship. This Michael was a created Angell not the Son of God, for the Devill could not contend against the second person of the Trinitie in his person immediately, for then he had not cloathed himselfe with the nature of man. Vers. 11. Woe unto them] This woe is a short particle, but of terrible signification, denouncing eternall punishment on whom it falls as a thunder-bolt from heaven; it is vox non precantis sed prophetantis, the voyce not of one praying but prophesying here, else the Apostle should seem to transgresse his own instruction given in the 9. v. For they have gone in the way of Cain, and rangreedily after the errour of Balaam] Those two words  and , excellently set forth the dominion of sinne; gone in the way, an Hebrew phrase, that is, followed his course and life. The latter word signifieth to be powred out, that is, have given themselves over for lusts sake to follow the errour of Balaam.Effusi sunt. Beza. Instar aquae diffluentis projecta est eorum intemperies. Calvinus. Vers. 12. Trees whose fruite withereth] Or trees withered in Autumne,Dr. Fulke.  arbo∣res emaclae. Beza. arbores autumnales. Vulg. Vide Parcum. when the fruit-harvest is, and so the Greeke word importeth: or trees corrupting their owne fruit.
Vers. 14. Behold the Lord commeth with ten thousands of his saints] It should rather bee rendred (saith Mr Mede Mede on. Ec∣cles. 5.1. Vide Estium, & Vorstium.  est de∣cies millenarius numerus, certus pro incerto. Stipatus scilicet innumeris legionibus Angelorum & sanctorum. à Lapide.) with his holy myriads, or ten thousands, viz. of Angels, , in sanctis myriadibus ipsius. Christ himselfe witnesseth that the Angells shall come with him to judgement. Matth. 25.31. Pareus. Calvin saith, by these words he meanes both the Angels and Saints, for both shall attend his Throne when he comes to judge the world. Vers. 16. Great swelling words , id est, tumida, excelsa, fastuo∣sa, omnem mo∣dum fidemque excedentia. Syrus stupenda. à Lapide.] They bragge and boast. Having mens persons in admiration because of advantage] Beare great respect to them by whom they may get any thing, and that onely for gaines sake. Vers. 18. Who should walke after their own ungodly lusts] Greek, the lusts of ungodlinesses,Quosi diceret, desideria eorum sunt desideria impietatum, id est, rerum impiarum & implissima. à Lapide. Vide Pareum. because in these the heart is turned away from God. Vers. 19. These be they who separate themselves, sensuall, having not the Spirit] viz. ab ecclesia & coetu fidelium. à Lapide. Such who upon a pretended holinesse thought they might give over the hearing of the word they were so good, they had immediate teach∣ing; there is a lawfull separation from unholy persons and things, 2 Cor. 6.17. but those separated from holy dutyes, as the words following shew. Vers. 20. Building up your selves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost] As if he should say, the way to edifie and build up your selves is to pray in the Holy Ghost,Dr Preston. In Spiritu Sancto quatuor significat, Pri∣mò orationem veram esse donum Spiritus sancti, & sine eo neminem posse orare sicut oportet, ad obtinendam gratiam & salutem. Rom. 8.26. Secundo in oratione postulanda esse ea quae suggerit Spiritus sanctus, quaeque Spiritui sancto grata sunt. Tertiò oratio∣nem efficere hominem spiritualem. Quartò Spiritum sanctum dirigere orationem nostram ne noxia sed salutaria petamus & impetremus. Zach. 12.10. à Lapide. that is, Spirituall prayer made through the power, assistance and strength of the Holy Ghost. Vers. 23. Hating even the garment spotted by the flesh] Abhorre every thing that may carry a savour or suspition of uncleannesse. See Calvin.Impense edit, Dictum sump∣tum, ut apparet{us} à mulieribus sanguine mens∣truo pollutis, quarum vestes etiam pollutae censebantur. Drus. Prov. Class. 2. l. 3. Vide Bezam. Hee alludes (saith à Lapide) first to the rite of the old law Levit. 15. in which whosoever touched the garments of those that were polluted with the leprosie, or o∣ther wayes, were legally polluted. Secondly, to the profuse drunkenesse and filthinesse of the Gnostickes which sometimes defiled their garments.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE REVELATION. CHAP. I. Mihi tota Apo∣calypsis val è obscura vide tur, & talii, cujus explica¦tio citra periculum vix queat tentari. Fateor me hactenus in nullius Scripti Biblici lectione minus proficere, quam in hoc obscurissimo vaticinio. Graserus.DOmitian cast Iohn the Evangelist into a fornace of scalding oyle, but when he saw he came forth unhurt, he banished him into the Isle Pathmos, where he wrote this Revelation. Euseb. l. 3. c. 17. Verbum ipsum , id est, revelati∣onis, propriè scripturarū est, & à nullo sapi∣enum saeculi apud Graecos usurpatum. Hieron. in cap. 1. Epist. ad Galat. Apocalypsis idem est quod Revelatio, quo nomine utitur Paulus, 1 Cor. 14. & Galat. RibetaIt is called according to the Greeke Apocalyps, and according to the Latine Revela∣tion; That is, a discovery or manifestation of things which before were hidden and secret, for the common good of the Church. The subject of it is twofold, 1. The present estate of the Church. 2. The future state of it; the things which are, and which shall be hereafter. Rev. 1.19. Fata impii, & fata Ecclesiae, saith Mr Mede. Iohn in all the Revelations made to him, joyneth thunder with the Revelation, as chap. 4.5. and 6.1. and 10.3. because Gods Revelations made to the people were usu∣ally with thunder, Psal. 81.7. Exod. 19.16. Woman in this mysticall Booke signifies three things: 1. Idolls, 1. Because they are as entising and alluring as wanton women. 2. Idola∣ters go a whoring after them as uncleane persons after light women. ch. 14.4. 2. The City of Rome, the seat of Antichrist, ch. 17.3. 1. Because in her outward pompe and glory she is opposed to the Chast spouse of Christ, whose glory is all with∣in.Dr. Tailor on Rev. 12. 2 Because with her the great Kings of the earth have committed fornication, ch. 17. verse 2. 3. Because she is the mother of fornications, called the great whore, verse 1. of that Chapter. 3. The true Church, the wife and spouse of Jesus Christ. So Rev. 12.1. All the Judgements in this Book are still upon Rome, either Rome Pagan, or Rome Christian,Mr. Cotton up∣on the Vials. or Rome Antichristian; the one falls under the seven Seales, the other under the seven Trumpets, and the last under the seven Vialls. The three first Chapters are most plaine of all other parts of this Book; the maine Contents of them are severall Epistles sent by Iohn to particular Churches. First, Why to these? 1. Because the Gospell did heare eminently flowrish. Mr Manton.2. Because Iohn was President over them. Secondly, Why to the 7 Churches in Asia, since more were planted in that Country. 1. Because of the propheticall perfection of this number, with which the Spirit of God is much delighted in this Prophecie; seven Stars, seven Spirits, seven Candle∣sticks, seven Lampes, seven Seales, seven Angells.
2. Because in these seven Churches there was found enough to represent the graces and conditions of all other Churches. 3. These Epistles are directed to the severall Angells or Ministers of the Churches, either because they were notoriously guilty of the offences charged upon them, or be∣cause all the dispensations of Christ were to passe through their hands to the Church. Ephesus was so named quasi  or , signifying remission, or slacking,Languishing E∣phesus. that they may be put in mind of slacking or backsliding, wherewith the Spirit upbraideth this Church, Cha. 2. ver. 4. Smyrna signifying lachrymam myrrhae,Smyrna was an old Town fa∣mous for one of the seven that claimed Homer the Poet to have been borne in them. These bee Smyrna, Pho∣dos, Colophon, Salamis Chi∣os, Argos, A∣thenae. Here Po∣licarpus was Martyred. Broughtons Require of Consent. She is called sweet-smelling Smyrna, that is, Myrrhe, or she that is more delightfull, than any pleasant and sweet spices, as is evident by that, that he reproveth no fault in her. Brightman. the dropping or teares of myrrh, to put them in mind of the Cup of tears which this Angell was to drink, v. 10. Pergamus, quasi , or , signifying beyond, or out of the bonds of marriage, to put them in mind of the Nicolaitanes abounding in this Church which were great abusers of marriage. Sardis, quasi , signifying fleshly, because ma∣ny in this Church were fleshly given, Chap. 3. vers. 4. Philadelphia Whether it was so called from Ptolomeus Philadelphus; so entitled for his love to his brother, or in mockage for killing of him; he loved him at the first, but after contempt of his love he killed him; or from Attalus Philadelphus, or were built by the first, and argumented by the second. Broughtons require of Consent. signifying brother∣ly love, to put them in mind of this vertue eminent in many of this Church, therefore the Spirit rebuketh her openly for nothing, Ch. 3. ver. 10. Laodicea, quasi Whether it was so called from Ptolomeus Philadelphus; so entitled for his love to his brother, or in mockage for killing of him; he loved him at the first, but after contempt of his love he killed him; or from Attalus Philadelphus, or were built by the first, and argumented by the second. Broughtons require of Consent. , the righteousnesse or customes of the people, to put them in mind of the condition of the common sort in this Church, who were well conceited of themselves, Ch. 3. vers. 17. Thyatira so called , signifying to run mad after, and to spend ones selfe, because they ran a whoring after Jezebell, and spent their estates upon her, Chap. 2. vers. 20. Dr Featelie. Vers. 1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ] He doth not say, this is the Revelation of Jesus Christ; but after the manner of the Prophets, the vision of Esay, the word of the Lord which was to Hoseah, and after the manner of the Evangelists, the booke of the genera∣tion of Iesus Christ, Mat. 1. The beginning of the Gospell of Iesus Christ, Mark 1. which Ellipsis is elegant. Vers. 3. Blessed is he that readeth, and they that beare the words of this prophecie] Where have you a blessing so solemnly proclamed to the reading and hearing of any of the Books of God as to this Book? God would have us to enquire into these things though they seeme to be above us.Mr. Bur. He changeth the number, he that readeth, and they that heare, because many more may heare than read,Alstedius. only the Learned can do this for the time] Or rather the opportunity of time, tempus praestitutum, Beza, the time appointed, viz. by God, and therefore op∣portune, is at hand. Vers. 4. Which is, which was, and which is to come] In these words the Father is no∣ted. To come.] That is, to judgement.Mr Perkins. And from the seven Spirits] That is, from the Holy Ghost, who is exprest in the plurall number, not as though there were seven Holy Ghosts,Vide Bezam. but because of the plen∣ty, perfection, and variety of his gratious operations and influences. The number seven is rather taken than any other number, because it is a number implying perfection, and because he wrote to seven Churches in Asia,In Asia] Mino∣ri scilicet quae est pars Asiae Mojoris. Ad has septem scri∣psit, quia in il∣lis diu docue∣erat. Alstedius. and St. Iohn speaks here of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost as he saw them in a vision, now he beheld the Holy Ghost in the forme of seven lights in a vision. Vers 5. And from Iesus Christ] He doth not observe the order of nature, or of the per∣sons, but of better Doctrine, for the fitter progresse of the history, for the Pen-men of the Scripture set them in the last place, of whom they meane to speake most, as Mat. 1. He describes Christ at large from this ver. 5. to ver. 9. Who is the faithfull witnesse] The Prophticall Office of Christ is intimated Esay 55.4. And the first begotten of the dead] Here is Christs second Office, his Priesthood, the principall actions whereof stand in dying and rising againe from the dead, and making intercession for us. And the Prince of the kings of the earth] Here is the third title given to Christ, where∣in his Kingly Office is expressed.
Vers. 9. And patience of Iesus Christ] Three things argued Christs patience, if we consider, 1. What he suffered, maledicta, malefacta, he dranke of the brooke in the way, Psal. 110. ult. 2. From whom, the vilest of men. 3. The freenesse and volunta∣rinesse of his sufferings: He suffered not out of infirmity, quia resistere non posuit, but out of obedience, quia pati voluit. Euseb. l. 3. c. 21.Was in the Isle that is called Patmos] Banished thither by Domitian, Euseb. l. 3. ch. 18. from whence he returned in the daies of Nero, and dyed at Ephesus. Vide Bezam. Bifield. So the Lords day, as the Sa∣crament is called the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.20. and the solemne Prayer, the Lords Prayer.Vers. 10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords day) Not by Creation, for so all daies are his, nor by destination, for that intendeth a time yet to come; and so the day of ge∣nerall judgement is his, 1 Thes. 5.2. but by consecration, choice, and institution. And heard behind me a great voice, as of a Trumpet] That is, full of Majesty and po∣wer,Mos Hebraeo∣rum erat, ut cùm populus erat convocandus, ut rem magni momenti & omnibus utilem audiret, tuba ex edito loco personarent aut hucci∣na, Hos. 5. & c. 8. Isay 58. Ribera. which also God added unto it to further attention in Iohn. Vers. 13. Cloathed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle] Christ is here described in his Priestly Robes,Hic vestitus ta∣laris est symbo∣lum Sacerdotis, quia Sacerdotes V. T. ejusmodi vestibus induebantur. Geth. in loc. Vide Alstedium in loc. Cinctura est symbolum alacri∣tais & promptitudinis in administrando Sacerdotio, in defendendis piis. Gerh. Iohn wrote the Revelation long after his ascension. His girding about the pappes and breasts signifieth, that there is no defect or aber∣ration in any motion or affection in our Saviour Christ, but every thought and incli∣nation of his heart is kept in order by the fulnesse of the Spirit, Esay 11.5. Or it may shew his readinesse to help his people. Vers. 16. And be bad in his right hand seven stars] 1. In regard of his disposition of Ministers here and there at his pleasure. 2. Of his protection of them in their la∣bours. Vers. 18. And have the keyes of hell and of death] The phrase seemes to be borrowed from great Commanders and Conquerours, who having won and entred any City, presently have the keyes delivered to them in token of that authority which of right belongeth to them;That is, power over hell and death, Claves sunt symbolum potestatis. Solent victori radi Claves portarum urbis. Gerh. it shews that Christ vanquished hell and death, and obtained full power over them. Dr Taylor. Vers. 20. The seven stars are the angells of the seven Churches] By the seven Angells to whom the seven Epistles are in generall directed, Alcazar saith, the Bishops are meant, Pererius with some other Ancients thinke rather the people.Ministers are called Angels, viz. such as by whom he re∣vealeth his good pleasure unto us. Angeli, id est, episcopi; pastores dicuntur illi stellae, quia debent lucere, & praelucere aliis, sanā dactriná, & sancta vita. Idem sunt stel∣lae in dextrâ Christi; quia ab illo defend untur adversum hosies. Alstedius in loc. St. Ambrose, Haymo, and Beda joyne both together, and this (saith Dr Prideaux) is the best approved of our re∣formed Interpreters, Foxe, Fulke, Bullenger; for though the Inscriptions be to the Angels only, that is, the Pastors of those Churches, yet the Contents concerne their flocks as neere as themselves, ch. 1. vers. 11. CHAP. II. Vers. 1. UNto the angell) Exprest in the singular number, to note the union and combination in a body and society. He that boldeth] That is, Christ. The seven stars] By stars are here meant the Ministers of the Word. In his right hand] That is, strongly keeps them, to shew 1. His affection. 2. His care and protection.
The Stars 1. are heavenly bodies which shine with a borrowed light, so Ministers should shine as lights, but with a borrowed light. 2. Stars are in continuall motion for the good of the world, so should the Ministers be for the good of the Church.Mr Arrow∣smith. 3. They differ from one another in glory, 1 Cor. 15. There are Stars of the first, second, and third magnitude, so Ministers differ from Apostles, and among themselves. Vers. 4. Because thou hast left thy first love] Christ speakes not of the grace of Chari∣ty wholly, but of that degree and measure wherewith hee had been formerly adorned; he commends him for two notable fruits of faith and love which he did still exercise, v. 2.3. patience and constancie. Vers. 5. And doe the first workes] That is use your former diligence And will remove thy candlesticke out of his place] The Candlesticke is the Church. 1. Rev. vlt. That is, owne them no more for a visible Church. It is spoken of those that are of the carnall seed and externally graffed in onely. Vers. 10. Behold the Devill shall cast some of you into prison] That ye may bee tryed, and ye shall have tribulation ten dayes.] Though the Devill be malicious,His instruments, because like to him, as cruell, the De∣vill in Trajan say some. yet he is bound∣ed by God Mr. Harris. It shall neither bee so long a time as the Devill and wicked men would have it, for then they must never come out, nor so little a while as they them∣selves would have it, for then they would never come in, or stay but a while, but God will rule by determining the time for their good. Bifield.. 1. For persons, hee shall cast onely some of you into prison, he would all. 2. For quality, cast them into prison, not take away their lives. 3. For the end, Sa∣tan wils the undoing of Gods people, but God their triall onely. 4. The time that is set downe, ten dayes and no longer, God reckons not onely the yeares but dayes of our sufferings. 5. The event or wages. Ten dayes] That is, a long time ten in Scripture is numerus plenitudinis, thou hast changed my wages this ten times, saith Iacob to Laban, and they have provoked mee ten times, that is, often; or propheticall dayes, that is, ten yeares, so in Daniel; others take it indefinitely as Pareus, numerus certus pro incerto. Be thou faithfull unto death,See 4.4. and I will give thee a crowne of life] The reward of life gi∣ven to Saints in heaven, when they have striven as they ought to doe and gotten the victorie, is called a Crowne, 2 Tim. 2.5. or a Garland,Dr Rainolds against Harr. p. 482.Aeterna faeli∣citas dicitur corona, Primò, quia datur certantibus & vincentibus. Alludit enim ad pugiles, athioos, aliosque luctantes in slatio vel agone, verbi gratia, Olympico. 1 Cor. 9.21. Secundò qua corona rotunda significat perfectionem & complexum honorum omnium & gaudiorum, principio & sine carentem instar circuli & coronae. Tertiò, quiae pretiosissima est instar coron gemmis exornatae. â Lapide. by allusion to a custome that was among the Grecians. For such as got the masterie in their games of wrastling, or running, or the like, were crowned with a garland in token of victorie. See 1 Cor. 9.25. 1 Pet. 5.4. It is called the Crowne of life, 1. to shew that the Saints who laid downe their life for Christ, did not lose it but change it for a better. 2. Because their glory and joy shall alwayes live, 1 Pet. 1.4. 1 Cor. 9.25. 3. Because life includes delights, glory, wisdome, and all good, they come from this life. Vers. 15. So hast thou also them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans] They thought 1. That wives ought to be common.Clemens Alex∣andrinus. strom. l. 3. Affirmat Nico∣laum cum haberet uxorem liberali forma atque zelotypiae esset suspectus post Christi ascensionem, reprehensus ab Apostolis propter zelotypiam. Quo crimine ut so purgaret, dicitur produocisse uxorem in medium, atque ut doceret, se ab omni ze∣lotypia alienum esse, permisisse, ut quicunque vellet, eam duceret, huic autem facto consentientem adjecit vocem, abu∣tendum esse non ad scorcationem, imò potius concupiscentius carnis domandas esse carne. Quod sactum atque dictum Nicolai diaconi sine judicio accipientes, inquit Clemens Alexandrinus, atque impurè, qui ejus haeresin persequuntur, impudenter effuseque scortantur, atque docent licere cum alienis uxoribas commisceri atque carne abuti. Rainold de lib. Apoc. tomo secundo praelect. 109. 2. That it is lawfull to eate of the sacrifices of the Gentiles. 3. That whoredome is lawfull. Vers. 17. To him that overcometh will I give to eate of the hidden manna] Manna hadAlludit ad con∣cionem illam Domini quae scripta est Ioh. 6. Item adlocum Davidis Psal. 105.40. Beza. Significat vitam aeternam, non Christum ut aliqui interpretantur, quae manna dicitur absconditum, quemadmodum Paulus dicit vitam nostram absconditam esse cum Christo. Col. 3.3. dicitur manna propter delitias beatitudinis.
dew under it and dew over it,Dr Rainolds on Hos. 14.5, 6, 7. vses. as we may conjecture by comparing Exod. 16.12. with Numb. 11.9. Whereunto the Holy Ghost seemeth to allude, though it may likewise referre unto the pot of Manna which was kept in the Tabernacle. Exod. 16.32.33. Heb. 9.4. As our life is said to bee hid with Christ, now he is in heaven. Col. 3.3. And will give him a white stone] White stones were in great use among the Romanes, and served:De hoc calculo varii sunt doct∣orum calculi. The Rhemists translate it a white Counter, This translation is false, unlearned and ridiculous.  calculum, the word in both tongues signifies a stone properly, in which they used to write the names of them that were elected to ho∣nour or absolved from crime. 1. To declare the victour or conquerer in proving masteries. 2. To acquit the accused in courts of justice. Mos erat antiquis niveis atrisque lapillis. His damnare reos, illis absolvere culpa. 3. To deliver suffrages in the election of Magistrates. Upon all these senses this allegory toucheth. For this white stone is given in token of victory, vincenti dabo. 2. It is an evidence of our Iustification. 3. An assurance of our election to the kingdome of heaven. And in the stone a new name Nomen digni∣tate praestans. Pareus. Signum & indicium novitatis vitae. Iunius. Absolutorium in extremo judicio juxta promissionem Evangelii, Ioh. 5.24. Brightm. written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it] Beza, Bullenger, Pererius and other Expositors generally concurre upon filius Dei, which opinion they illustrate by other texts, viz. Rom. 8.15.16. and 1 Iohn 3.1. The benefit of adoption is not known but by experience. Impostores blasphemias suas vocabant profunditates, profunda my∣steria, & ab∣strusam sapi∣entiam, longe perfectiorem quam quae ab Apostolis praedicaretur, Christus concedit esse  profunditates, sed Satanae, à malo Daemone ex Orco inspiratas, eoque aversandas & exterminandas procul. Pareus in loc. 1 Tim. 4.1.Vers. 24. And which have not knowne the depths of Satan] That is, the darke opini∣ons and false doctrines of seducers: These called their opinions depths or profundi∣ties, and the Holy Ghost addeth an epithete, depths of Satan. As if he had said, you call your opinions depths, and so they are, but they are such depths as Satan hath brought out of Hell, they are the whisperings and hissings of that serpent, not the inspirations of God. A full injoy∣ing of himselfe Cartw. Pareus. Dr Tailors meditations from the crea∣tion.Vers. 28. And I will give him the morning starre] That is, Christ. See Rev. 22.16. I will communicate my selfe wholly unto him, and make him conformable unto mee in my glory. 1. The morning starre is the most bright and shining of all the starres in heaven, Christ in glory excelleth all men and Angels, as farre as the morning starre all the starres of heaven. 2. Pet. 1.19. 2. It communicates all his light to the world, so Christ to beleevers all light of grace and glory. 3. It dispelleth the nights darknesse, so Christ the darknesse of ignorance and er∣rours wherein we were wrapped in the night of sinne. 4. It is anteambulo Solis, the sunnes harbinger, and forerunner of perfect day, so Christ is a pledge of our perfect day and future glory. CHAP. III. Vers. 2. I Have not found thy wayes perfect] The words are  Thy wayes filled up, thou hast not filled up thy course in following mee, not followed mee fully. That is, when the inwards of the man are filled up with acts of graces and every grace with acts proper for it object.
Vers. 4. Thou hast a few names even in Sardis] That is, a few faithfull and Saints, he alludes to Souldiers whose names are enrolled by the Captaine when they are admit∣ted. Which have not defiled their garments] That is,2 Pet. 2.20. have walked answerable to their holy calling by the Gospell, or profession. And they shall walke with mee in white] Be partakers Faciam glo∣riae meae con∣sortes. Pareus. Alba vestis ni∣tore maxime conspicuae gloriae erat insigne. v. 5. & 7.9. & 19.14. Pareus ib. Vestes albae symbolum. 1. perfectae sanctitatis ac puritatis. 2. dignitatis regiae & sacerdotalis. 3. laetitae. 4. triumphi adversus hostes. 5. glorìae. Confer. Apoc. 4. v. 4. cap. 6. v. 11. cap. 7. v. 13. Gerh. in loc. with mee in my glory. This was the habite in times past of Nobles, saith Drusius, whence they are called candi∣tati. For they are worthy] And what is it to be worthy but to merit, say some. By Christs merits, obedience, righteousnesse, in him and for his sake they were counted worthy Abbot against Bishop. Deus in Chri∣sto eos reddidit dignos gloria Coelesti. Luc. 20.35. Phil. 1.27. 2 Thes. 1.5.11. Gerh in loc., and whatsoever worthinesse God pronounceth of them for their workes, it is by the gracious acceptation thereof in him; worthy, not dignitate sua, sed dignatione divina, they are worthy not absolutely, but compared to the other spoken of before. Vers. 5. He that overcometh, the same shall be cloathed in white raiment] After the manner Respicitur forosse mos Judaeorum sacerdotalis. Lud. de Dieu. Vide D'espagne de la manducation du corps de Christ. of the Priests among the Jewes. Vers. 7. He that hath the key of David] The key of the house of David, that is the Church, Lukh 1.32. See Esay 22.22.1 Tim. 3.15. He openeth and no man shutteth; and shutteth, and no man openeth] That is, Hee worketh irresistably.Dr Tailor. Vers. 12. Him that overcometh, will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God] That is,Mayerus in Philol. Sac. Pareus. Vide Gerh. in the Church Triumphant: pillars are both the firmament and ornament of Temples. And he shall goe no more out] That is, he shall receive eternall and immutable glory. Vers. 14. The beginning of the creation of God] Taken out of Prov. 8.22. See Mat. 8.12. Vers. 16. So then because thou art luke-warme, and neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth] These words containe an allegory drawne from the nature of warme water, as Illyricus and Bullenger, or from meates, as Pererius, Ribera and à Lapide, which if they be hot or cold, the stomacke may retaine, but if lukewarme, it casts them up againe. Vers. 18. I counsell thee to buy of mee] That is waite on mee in the way I conveigh grace. Gold] Some by this understand the word of God,That is, do as men doe in buying of com∣modities. 1. See thy want of it by viewing thy owne nakednesse. 2. Esteeme it in the just value of it. 3. Exchange all thy sinnes for this righteousnesse. Psal. 12. and 119. others the graces of Gods Spirit. 1 Pet. 1.7. Prov. 8. Gold is the most excellent of all metals and most esteem'd, so are spirituall graces among Christians. And white raiment] Raiment, that is, the righteousnesse of Christ, graces in Christ suitable to our necessities; white, because it is a naturall colour,Dr Tailor. walke with mee in white. therefore beyond all ar∣tificiall, a colour of purity and ornament. And that the shame of thy nakednesse do not appeare] The Priests had linnen breeches to cover their nakednesse; Christ must cover the shame of our nakednesse. And annoint thy eyes with eye salve, that thou mayest see] The Spirit of illumination. Vers. 19. I rebuke and chasten] We have no one English word capable of the whole con∣tents of either of the words in the originall,  primarily signifies to evict or con∣vince, to give evidence of any thing or against any person,Dr Featelie. to lay his sinnes open before him, so as he cannot but see them and be ashamed of them, as Heb. 11.1. Ephes. 5.11. Psal. 50.21.  is likewise a word much more pregnant than chasten, and may be expressed better in one word, I nurture or I discipline, for the word implyeth a well instruction as correction.
Thronus regis apud Orientales amplus & la∣tus est, lecticae instar, fulcris aliquantulum supra terram evectus ac tapetibus ornatus, adeo ut praeter sedem Regi propriam, alii quoque quos honore afficere cupit Rex in eodem throno sedes habere queant. Ludov. de Dieu. in loc.Vers. 21. In his Throne] See Iohn 17.24. Yet so as Christ the Head doth alwayes excell. Vers. 22. Hee that hath an eare, let him heare what the Spirit saith unto the Churches] The promises which belong to the whole Church, are to be applyed by every parti∣cular Saint. Verba sensus significant cum affectu & effectu, words of sense signifie with affection and the effect, that is, let him attend unto and follow the admonitions of the Holy Ghost. CHAP. IV. Vers. 2. A Throne was set in heaven] That is, Gods presence in his Church in Gos∣pell-ordinances;Thronus, quem vidit in Coelo postitum, fuit is, de quo supra cap. 1.4. & cujus deinceps vicies octies in hac Apocalypsi fiet mentio, quia imperium & judicium Dei in omnia, quod hic thronus repraesentat, perpetuo vult nobis esse in conspectu. Pateus. in allusion to the Holy of Holies, where God was pre∣sent in the Mercy-seate. Esay 6.1. and Ezek. 43.2. Vers. 3. The three precious stones hold forth the three persons in the Trinity. A Jasper having (as they say) a white circle round about it representing Cotton on 16. of Rev. Vide Brightm. the eternity of the Father; A Sardine stone of a fleshy colour representing Jesus Christ who tooke our flesh upon him; An Emerald being of a green colour, refreshing the eyes of those that looke upon it, representing the Spirit, who is (as the Rainebow) a token of In this place and 10. ch. 1. v. there is a de∣scription of Christs sitting in his throne, and mention made of the Rainebow, that we may acknowledge that the throne of Christ is compassed with mercy, and that he shewes in his countenance when he manifests himselfe to his. The Rainebow is signum gratiae & foederis, Gods covenant of grace and mercy toward his Church, is alwayes fresh and greene. faire weather, and a comfortable refresher wheresoever he cometh. By that is signified (saith Gerhard) our reconciliation with God by Christ. Gen. 9.13. Rom. 5.20. See 10. ch. 1. Vide v. 6. & 5.8. Typus hic proponitur & totius ec∣clesiae, & sanctissimarum quae in ea quotidie funduntur precum & laudum, quae velut thymiamata per Christum Deo offeruntur{us} quatuor animalia praecones omnes & ministros verbi Dei notant. Hieron. August. Beda, Nam & homines sunt, c. 5.9. & inter thronum Dei & Seniores, quasi legati inter deum & opulum positi sunt, & Animalia sunt, id est vegeta & agilia, quia ad Dei mandata exequenda expeditos esse oportet: Alena oculis sunt ut hinc notetur eximia illa qua praedi∣tos esse oportet perspicacia & populenta rerum divinarum intelligentia, quatuor sunt ut quatuor orbis plagas obire & verbo Dei illustrare possint. Crankanth. defens. eccles. Anglic. Vide Brightm. & Gerh.Vers. 4. And round about the Throne were foure and twenty seats, and upon the seats I saw foure and twenty Elders sitting] Hee alludes both to the twelve Patriarkes and twelve A∣postles, which put together make up these foure and twenty, by whom the whole Church under both Testaments is represented. Mr. Arrowsmith. Vers. 5. And out of the Throne proceeded lightenings and thunderings and voyces: and there were seven lamps of fire burning before the Throne] Here is a double benefit of the ordi∣nances. 1. Dona protectionis against all the Churches enemies, thunderings, Amos 1.2.2. Dona sanctificationis, all qualifying and sanctifying gifts, for their variety said to bee seven Spirits. Vers. 6. A sea of glasse like unto Christall] That is, saith Deut, the world transitory and brittle as glasse, tumultuous and troublesome as the Sea. Quistorpius interprets it of Baptisme. Mr Harris. See Brightman. All the ordi∣nances of God ere so cleare, as that you might see Christs face in them as in a mirrour of glasse. 2 Cor. 3.18. Mr Cotton on the 16. of Rev.Gods ordinances in this booke are set forth by name of a Sea of glasse, 1. For large∣nesse. 2. For steadfastnesse. 3. Clearenesse, as giving us a cleare sight of God, in which respect they are also here compared to chrystall.
Foure beasts full of eyes before and behind] Beasts is a barbarous translation, foure wights, living Creatures, , men full of knowledge, of Lions courage,Sic oculata etiam erant Ezechielis ani∣malia Oculio vigilantia & perspicacia Do∣ctorum significatur. Oportet enim ceu Argos quosdam omni ex parte esse oculatissimos in ovibus pascendis, & curandis fidei suae Commissis, in Scripturis sacris scrutandis, in lupis à grege arcendis. Pareus. of Oxes patience to sacrifice, of mans quiet and humanity, and Eagles high flight; Martyrs; Polycarpus was a Lyon for courage, an Oxe for patience, a man indeed for wit, an Ea∣gle for high flight, proclaming the Gospell. Broughtons Require of Consent. By foure severall formes of beasts is meant (saith Pareus) the collection of the Church of Christ in the foure quarters of the World, and divers Nations, People and Tongues. The Beasts represent the people, he alludes to the incamping of the People of Israel the wildernesse round about the Tabernacle.Numb. 1.52. and thence to the end of the second Chap. Mr Mede. The twelve Tribes which encamped round about the Tabernacle had some Beasts in their Scutchions. The 24. Elders in the fourth verse represent the Ministers which were cast by David into the 24. Orders. Vers. 8. And the foure Beasts had each of them sixe wings about him, and they were full of eyes within] These Beasts are described full of eyes, having also sixe wings about, and those full of eyes within. So many eyes do set forth the multitude of sharpe-sighted men, and full of knowledge of the mysteries of God; such as are in the Beasts, that is, the Church which the beasts do represent. The wings, signifie agility, and alacrity,Mr Mede. to put in execution the Commandements of God. The wings full of eyes zeale joyned with knowledge and faith. Holy, holy, holy] Some originall Copies have it 9. times over  Gerhard saith, tis better thrice  hoc fuit Seraphi∣norum. Iesa, c. 6.3. Ter sanctitatem Deo acclamant: sive S. Trinitatom in Deo innuentia, sive infinitam  ite∣rationem significantia. Est enim Deus ter sanctus, sanctissimus, sanctitas, & puritas ipsa, beatos angelos & homines sancti∣ficans. Pareus onely as Esay 6.3. Vers. 11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour] For what, for his po∣wer as followeth, and power, that is, saith Piscator, potentiae laudem, the praise of pow∣er, which is as much as to say, he deserves to be glorified and honoured by the acknowledgement of his eternall power, for as much as he created all things out of no∣thing. CHAP V. Vers. 1. ANd I saw in the right hand of him that sat one the throne a Book] That is, say some the Bible, others the Revelation;August. Hie∣ron. Ambros. Orig. Hilar. Eu∣seb. Beda, Hu∣go, exrecenti∣oribut Prima∣sius, Marloraus; intelligunt V & N Testamentum Gerh. Liber hic est ipsa Apocalypsis. Pareus. In the right hand] Because all the secrets revealed in it come from the decree of God, and are ordered by his providence. Deut. Gods Counsels are resembled to a Book, for their certainty and stability; the Revelation hereby understood (say Pare∣us, à Lapide, and Dent) is a Book of Gods eternall Decree concerning the Church and his enemies. Written within and on the back side] Because much was written. Ezek. 2.10. He speaketh (say Beza, Pareus, Brightman, à Lapide) according to the ancient man∣ner of wrighting in long Parchments, which were afterwards rolled together about some round piece of wood, whence Books were called Volumes or Scroles, and Christ is said to have unfolded and enwrapped the Booke, Luke 4.17. The outside did com∣monly abide cleane and unwritten, unlesse the inside were not able to containe the whole writing; for then they filled the outward part with Letters, which kind of writings were called backeside writings. Scriptus & in tergo needum finitus Orestes. Juven. Satyr. 1. Sealed with seven Seales] to note the great secrecie, and severall degrees of discovery of Gods Counsels.
Vers. 2. And I saw a strong Angell] That is, Gabriel (saith Gerhard) which name signifieth the power of God. Crying with a loud voice] Like a Crier. Who is worthy] That is, fit. To open the booke] By which is understood a manifestation of the Decrees of God. Vers. 5. And one of the Elders] Without doubt (saith Gerhard) one of those who rose with Christ, and ascended into heaven, Mat. 27.52. It seemes to be the Patriarke Iames (saith he) because from his Prophecie the name of Lion is given to Christ. Gen. 49.9 Behold the Lion of the Tribe of Iudah, the root of David, hath prevailed to open the Booke, and to loose the seven Seales thereof] Iohn 1.18. Christ is able to make known these hidden secrets,Christus Leoni comparutur 1. Propter ro∣boris excellen∣tiam, 2. Propter heroicum animum. 3. Propter principatum, Leo rex animalium. 4. Propter vigilantiam. Gerh. therefore he is called the Counseller, Esay 9.5. of the Tribe of Iudah, because he was borne of this Kingly Tribe, Heb. 7.14. this Tribe had the figure of a Lion in its Ensigne. Gen. 49.9. Vers. 6. In the midst of the Throne, and of the Beasts] That is, the middle between God and the Church triumphant, by which it is signified that the Lambe is the Media∣tour between God and men. And in the midst of the Elders stood a Lambe as it had been slaine] Not Christ as God, but as a Lambe slaine;Agnum reprae∣sentare Chri∣stum non est du∣bium, modo vo∣cabatur Leo ob dignitatem & potentiam, Leo enim rex animalium robore superant omnia; nunc agnus ob innocentiam & victimam. Jes. 53.7. Nec aliud duo agni quotidie mactati sub lege significabant, nisi Christi victimam jugiter efficacem. Joh. 1.29.36. 1. Pet. 1.19. Pareus. the discovery of the secrets of God in his Word are the fruit of Christ slaine and ascended. Stands, because 1. Prepared to perfect the worke of Redemption. 2. To helpe. 3. To judge. 4. To intercede. Having seven hornes, and seven eyes] The Lambe wanted neither power, Lament. 2.3: nor wisdome, Zach. 3.9. and 4.10. to open the seven Seales. Which are the seven Spirits of God sent forth into all the earth] This is taken out of Zach. 4.10. that is, the manifold graces of the Spirit which he gives unto his Church. Vers. 8. The foure beasts] That is, all the Ministers of the Word. And foure and twenty Elders] That is, the whole Church. Fell down before the Lambe, having every one of them Harpes, and golden vials full of Odours, which are the Prayers of Saints] It is an allusion to the manner under the Law, wherein they had pots or vials for Incense,See Zac. 14.20. Cytharae sunt symbolum, 1. Laudis divi∣na. 2. Gratiarum actionis. 3. Laetitiae. Psal. 33.2. & 149.3. Psalm. 150.3. Gerh. Musicke of Harpes and violls, that is, all kind of heavenly melody and harmony, such as the sweetest musick may not be compared unto. Dr. Taylor. Christians hearts are well figured out by golden vialls vessells narrow beneath and wide upwards.These golden Vialls are their sincere hearts, these odours, glorious apprehensions, and fervent affections. As gold excells in purity, so Prayers proceeding from a pure heart are precious to God. Dr. Crakan∣thorpe against Spallatto. Rev. 8.4. Mr. Hildersam.Their daily prayers and hymnes of praises are noted by the Harpe and Incense. The prayers of the Godly are called odours, 1. In respect of themselves, because they yeeld a sweet savour and unspeakable com∣fort unto their own hearts, John 16.24. but chiefly in respect of the Lord, to him they are the sweetest odours, even such as themselves feele small delight in. Vers. 9. And they sung a new song] A song which should never waxe old, which should be of perpetuall use in the Church of God,Canticum novū dicitur pro exi∣mium. Apoc. 14.3. Pareus. whiles she receives perpetuall bles∣sings from God in Christ, Psal. 33.3. and 10. And hast redeemed us to God] That is, to Gods favour, grace and glory. Vers. 11. Round about the throne] An expression according to the manner of the en∣camping of the People of God in the wildernesse,See Dan. 7.10. Quia angeli astant coram throne Dei pa∣rati ad exequendum ejus mandata. Psal. 130.20. Dan. 7.10. Heb. 1.4. Numb. 2. all about the Tabernacle, which had for their Ensignes foure Beasts.
CHAP. VI. IN this Chapter the seales are against Pagane Rome, in the eighth Chapter the Trum∣pets are against Christian Rome, in the 16. Chapter the vialls are poured on Rome Antichristian. Vers. 2. And I saw, and behold a white horse] This figureth the Virgin primitive Church upholding the purity of doctrine, and discipline of faith and workes,Vide Pareum. as appointed by the Apostles. And he that sat on him had a bow] Christ riding on his white horse hath a bow,See 19.11. See Psal. 45.6. Dr Sibbes. Ministers are called whit horses, 1. Horses in that God useth them in his battailes against sin, Satan, the world and wicked ones, and white for the purity of their doctrine and integrity of their lives. and goeth forth conquering in the Ministry, that he may overcome either to conversion, or confusion, Rev. 19.11. The conquerers entred into Rome carried on a white horse, The doubling of the word (saith Pareus) designes his present and future victory. And a Crowne was given to him] viz. Regall or rather triumphall. Vers. 4. There went out another horse that was red] This deciphers the Church now red with martyrdome, under the ten great persecutions raised up by Domitian, Trajane, Nero, Antonine, Decius, Dioclesian, Maxentius, Licinius, and other cruell tyrants, even un∣till the times of Constantine the great. Vers. 5. Lo a black horse] This notes the estate of the Church now blacke and in an afflicted condition by Hereticks which had mingled the truth of pure white doctrine with blacke darknesse of heresies and errours. To this horse is attributed a ballance to designe exceeding great scarcity, when ac∣cording to the curse of the Law, Levit. 26.26. men shall eate their bread by weight;By the bal∣lance is meant the Scripture faith Pareus, which Here∣tickes pretend. See Lam. 4.8. rather saith Pareus, a scarcitie of the word, Amos 8.11. Mr Mede would have the matter of this seale to bee, not famine or dearth of victuall, but the administration and severi∣ty of Justice through the Romane Empire. The colour of the horse agrees (saith hee) to the severity of justice, and the weights Justice is painted with a paire of ballances. are a symbole of justice. Vers. 7. Come and see] That is, come that thou maist see. Vers. 8. And behold a pale horse] Austen and Beda, apply it to the martyring of Saints, Bullenger and Forbes to plagues of death. Pale] The Greeke word properly signifieth, Greene as the grosse; sometimes it is that dead coulour of herbes that wax dry, whence it is sometimes put for palenesse,Equus hic dici∣tur , quod significat viridem colo∣rem, eum qui ad pallorem tendit cujusmodi hoc autumnali tempore arborum & vitium folia conspicimus quae deficiente succo nunc defluunt. Pareus. which is the hew of any withering and fading thing, so Constance the Father of Con∣stantine the Great was called Chlorus, because of his palenesse, as Zonarus saith in the life of Dioclesian. And hell followed with him] Hell the page of death attends him where ever he goes a∣mong the wicked sort, therefore they are often coupled in this booke, Death and Hell. Some understand by it the grave, when they are dead, they goe to be buried;Vide Cornel à Lapide. so some interpret that article in the Creed, hee descended into hell, That is, abode in the state of the dead; but he speakes here (say some) of the wicked, and judgements to them, therefore it is meant of Hell. Brightman would rather have the Grave to be here meant, seeing many Saints (saith hee) dyed among the rest, of whom it were wicked to thinke that they were devoured of the Hell of the damned. And with death] i.e. The Plague. The LXX use this word, Exod. 9.3.2. Sam. 24.13. It is called mortality by ecclesiasticall writers,Vide Bezam, & Mede. which now hath passed into many mother Tongues.
Soules] i.e. The persons which were martyred. under the Altar] Bcause their martyrdome was a certaine sacrifice. 2 Tim. 4.6. Phil. 2.11.Vers. 9. I saw under the Altar the soules of them that were slaine for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held] That is under Christs protection and custody. Haymo, Aquinas, Beza, Pareus. Under the shadow of his wings, the phrase alluding to the Tabernacle which gave the offerings grace and acceptation Lying under the Altar] That is, (saith Mr Mede) upon the ground, at the foote of the Altar, like Sacrifices newly slaine. Vers. 10. And they cryed with a loud voyce] This is not to bee understood of the de∣sire of blessed soules, or of any proper act of theirs, since it will not agree to their felicity;River. but in the same manner that Abells bloud is said to cry, because their death being alwayes fresh in Gods fight, requires revenge from the divine justice, the Saints in the meane time remaining secure. That which the propheticall vision representeth is to be understood suitably to Christianity, and to the kingdome of God attained by it. Since therefore revenge is contrary to the principles of Christianity,Thorndikes right of the Church in a Christian state. ch. 5. we cannot imagine, that blessed soules de∣sire it, but the cry which they make, must be understood to bee the provocation of God to vengeance, which their sufferings produce: So much more pertinently at∣tributed to blessed soules, in as much as, being acquainted with Gods counsells, they approve and rejoyce in his Justice, and the advancement of his Church by the meanes of it. Vers. 11. And white robes were given unto every one of them] A cloathing of Princes in their great solemnities of coronation and triumphs,White was e∣ver the colour of joy, 2 Sam. 6.14. Stola Albae principium glo∣riae caelestis de∣figuant. Pareus. sayes Eusebius; they were wont so to dignifie servants at their manumissions with white apparell, in token of their new liberty and preferment. In the Primitive Church one of the B. Lake. The whole Easter weeke Christians wore whte apparell, they were baptized then, and wore white after. The weeke some while after Easter was called Dominica in albis and Whitsontide from white, See Mede. Ceremonies of baptisme was this, that the baptized person had a cleane white garment put upon him, with these words, Take this white garment, and keepe it unspotted untill thou be pre∣sented before the Tribunall of Christ; the Churches meaning was, he should continue in that innocencie which he received in baptisme. Fulgentes animas vestis quoque candida signat. Esay 13.10. Mede.Vers. 12. And the Sun became blacke as sackcloth of haire, and the Moone became as bloud] This is a circumlocution of the eclipse of these lights, wherein the Sun is wont to ap∣peare blacke, but the Moone reddish. CHAP. VII. Vers. 3. TIll wee have sealed the servants of our God in their forebads] Amoris & singularis curae symbolum sigillum Glossius.See Ezek. 9.4. Sealing was a signe of speciall care. Vers. 4. An hundred and fourty and foure thousand of all the tribes of the children of Israel] The people of Israel was no Church long afore;Quaerunt Pa∣pista ubi erat ecclesia ante Lutherum & quinam fuerint? Audiant Johannem, cum antichristus videbitur omnia pessundedisse, erunt tamen 144000. signatorum. Pareus. the Gentile Church is called Israel, because they were graffed in instead of the Jewes that were broken off. Cartwright in his Annotati∣ons on Rhem. Testament.That a greater number of the Gentiles shall be saved than of the Jews, is truly gathe∣red out of this place. But that the elect of the Jews are in a certaine number, because their number is set downe, and the other of the Gentiles is not, is more than the Scrip∣ture doth warrant; in the enumeration of the Tribes there is no respect had of order, to shew that there is no regard had by God of carnall privileges in the matter of salva∣tion.
This ought to be taken for an indefinite number, as well as the 7000. which had not bowed the knee to Baal. The holy Ghost is not contented to have named the totall um of them that were sealed in Israel,Despagne his new observati∣ons upon the Creed. p. 172. but also divideth it into twelve times twelve thousand, distributed by equall portions among the twelve Tribes, every one of which is mentioned the one after the other, with the expression of its particular number: this sheweth that the number of the Elect, and multitude of Beleevers, are measured by certaine proportions which are known to him who is the Author. Vers. 5. Judah is first reckoned of all Leahs children, because our Lord sprang out of Judah, Gen. 49.10. Heb. 7.14. and Nephthali of all those of Rachels side, because Christ dwelt at Capernaum belonging to that tribe, that Christs prerogative (saith Mr Mede) might still excell. Vers. 7. He omits Dan Dan praeter∣mittitur, non quod Anti∣christus ex illa tribu naciturus esset, quod Scriptores Pontificii con∣tendunt sine ullo fundamento; sed quia tribus illa à cultu Dei ad idola jam olim defecerat, & se cum gentibus permis∣cuerat, Iud. 1.13. Vide Amos 8.14. Spanhem. Dub. Evang. parre prima. Dub. 4 Down of Antich. l. 2. c. 12. Mede & Pareus in loc. Ephraim is not spoken of neither as being with Dan a Ringleader of the Israelitish Apostasie (Jud. 17. c & 18.) but that the number of 12. notwithstanding may be filled, Levi is set for Dan, and the name of Joseph tacitly supplies Ephraims., and reckons up the tribe of Levi, not because Anti-Christ was to come of the Tribe of Dan, (as the Papists say) for which opinion those pla∣ces, Gen. 49.17. and Ier. 8.16. are quoted, rather (as Spanhemius, Mede, Downame and Pareu say) because that was the first tribe which fell from the true worship of God to idolatry, and mingled themselves with the Gentiles: and for the same cause (as some thinke) the genealogie of that Tribe is omitted in the 1 Chron. 7. Vers. 9. Cloathed with white Robes] In signe of their innocencie and purity. And palms in their hands] In token of victory over the world, the flesh,Palmae erant antiquitus signae victoriae. The Palme here mentioned is the Date tree, and not that which wee call palme. Cartw. on Rhem. Test. and the Devill. For palmes in ancient time were ensignes and badges of victory. Therefore palmes were engraven in Solomons and Ezekiels Temple, as declaring victory to those that entred in, if they would contend stoutly for God and overcome. Vers. 14. These are they which came out of great tribulation] There is a double article in the Greek, out of that tribulation, that great one. Matth. 24.21. Have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the lambe] Pareus acutely notes that it is not here said, that the Saints do wash,Mir haec  est sangui Christi non ru∣befacientis vel inquinantis, sed dealbantis ac mundantis. Gerh. but have or had washed their gar∣ments, for there is no washing in heaven . Many take whitenesse for an embleme of cleannesse or of glory, but bloud defileth in∣stead of cleansing, and taketh away whitenesse in stead of giving it. Some Interpreters say well, that this passage alludeth to the habit of the Priests of the Law, who entred not into the Temple but in white robes, but it was not permitted the Priests to ap∣proach to the Altar, or to exercise any office in the Tabernacle,Despagne his new observati∣ons upon the Creed. 166.167. till they were first sprinkled with bloud, both they and their garments, Exod. 29.21. Levit. 8.30. As therefore the ancient Priests were consecrated by bloud, and made capable to weare the Priestly habit in the house of God; so in the vertue of the bloud of Christ, we are reinvested of the quality of Priests, represented by the white garment. Vers. 15. Therefore are they before the throne of God] Causall particles sometimes sig∣nifie any argument or reason whatsoever.Alludit ad thronum Dei in templo, hoc enim mox nominabit, in eo enim Deus sedebat in sancto sanctorum super propitiatorium & Cherubim. à Lapide. The rendring of any reason is called  a rendring of the cause, though perhaps it is from the effect. And serve him day and night in his Temple] He alludes to the daily and nightly mini∣steries of the Levites, otherwise there is no night in Heaven. Day and Night, that is,Beza. Serviunt ei sine intermissio∣ne in Coelo, cu∣jus typus fuit templum Hie∣rosolymitaum. Heb. 9.24. Gerh alwayes, or the whole day; He mentions the night, because the Priests did watch the whole night by turnes in the Temple, and did by course lay the parts of the continuall sacrifice, viz. the evening Lambe, on the Altar, for this was burned all the night. See Levit. 6.9. à Lapide.
Metaph. à matre filioli lachrymas ab stergente. Esai. 66.13. Ribera. Gerh. à Lapide. Alsted.Vers. 17. And God shall wipe away all teares from their eyes] A metaphore from ten∣der Mothers which deale so with their little ones. See 21.4. CHAP. VIII. Vers. 1. THere was silence in heaven about the space of halfe an houre] That is, peaceSilentium est felicitas, seu respiratio ec∣clesiae à perturbationibus. Alstedius. in the Church by Constantine. Halfe an houre] i.e. A little time. Vers. 3. And another Angell came and stood at the alter] That is, Christ the Angell of the Covenant,Vide Bezam. Heb. 13.15. & 7.24.25. Mal. 3.5. so Augustine, Primasius. He offers our prayers. The Altar is himselfe, who sanctifieth our prayers, as the Altar doth the gift. Having a golden censer] i.e. His holy body. Sicut thymia∣ma ex veriis aromatum ge∣neribus confici∣ebatur, ita Thymiama hoc quod Deo Christus obtulit, ex variis Sanctorum omnium orationibus velut variis aromatibus constatum erat; quae diversis modis, diversis linguis, diversis votis, à diversis imò omnibus Sanctis Deo fundebantur. Cra∣kanth. Defens. eccles. Anglic. c. 56.And there was given unto him much incense] See 4. verse, that is, Christs intercession perfu∣ming the prayers of the Saints, of which incense of old was a type; is it spoken of Christ after his ascension. See Heb. 9.24. 1 Pet. 2.5. Vpon the golden Altar which was before the Throne] Under the law there was a brasen altar for the burnt offering, and a golden altar for incense; the incense came to God out of the Angels hand, our prayers must bee offered up to God by Christ our High Priest. Hereby is signified (saith Gerhard) that Christ as the onely Priest of the New-Testament, doth execute his Priestly Office in heaven. Heb. 7.22. See Rom. 10.9, 10.2. Tim. 2.19.Vers. 4. Which have not the seale of God in their foreheads] Profession of the Christian faith is the outward marke of a Christian. Vers. 7. The first Angell sounded] The Gospell was preached by the Apostles. Dr Tailor on 12. of Rev.And there followed haile, and fire mingled with bloud] That is, persecutions and perills, contradiction, exile and slaughter, by the stubbornesse of the Jews against them. And they were cast upon the Earth] The lowest part of Christians, being cold in Christianity,Mr Cotton. they were hot in Emulation and contention. Dr Tailor on 12. of Rev. 4.And the third part of the trees was burnt up] That is, the Apostles and excellent tea∣chers of the Church, compared to fruitfull and flourishing trees, for their greennesse shadow and fruits, a great part of them were afflicted, slaine, put to deadly torments, but not all, the dragon could scorch but a third part. And as it were a great Mountaine] That is, the Romane Tyrants, so called for their height,Id ib. power, and swelling pride. Burning with fire] That is, of fury and fiercenesse against Christian Religion. Was cast into the Sea] That is, many people of the world subject to the Romane power and Empire. And the third part of the Sea became bloud] That is, many thousand Christians were oppressed and consumed with the fire of the burning mountaine, but onely a third part. Vers. 9. And the third part of the creatures dyed] That is, faithfull Christians slaugh∣tered and murdered.Id ib. And the third part of ships were destroyed] That is, the Churches whose Pastors are her Pilots, and these planted by the Apostles themselves, oppressed and subdued. Vers. 10. There fell a great starre from heaven] That is, the Romane Bishop, for by starres are meant Teachers, fell from purity of doctrine. Burning like a Lampe] Hee seemeth to describe a blazing Starre or comet, amongst which Lampadias is one. Mr Mede.
Vers. 11. And the name of the starre is called wormewood] All interpreters grant this Starre was some eminent person in authority, called wormewood,The Heresie of Arrius say some. because princeps a∣maritudinum, a prince of bitternesse. The third part of the waters became worme wood] Many were infected with the heresie of Arrius, Nestorius and Eutyches. Vers. 12. The third part of the Sun was smitten, and the third part of the Moone, and the third of the Starres] The Sun the Scriptures, the Moone the doctrine borrowed thence, the Starres the Ministers. The day] That is, the joy and comfort of the Church in enjoying her happy Sun. So that the third part of them was darkened: and the day shone not for a third part of it, and the night likewise] A grievous night of darknesse, either of Idolatry and superstiti∣on, as some, or of persecution, as others, darkned and obscured the chiefe ornaments of the purer Church of Christ. CHAP. IX. Vers. 1. AND I saw a starre fall from heaven unto the earth] i.e. The Pope,Under this Starre both Mahomet and also the Pope of Rome is to be comprised. Brightm. Whitakerus de eccles. controvers. secundae, quaest. tertia, c. 3. Vide Pateum. & Deut. not one man, but that person and that seate, that is, the whole series of all Anti-christian Popes, they casting away heavenly doctrine, embraced earthly and Hereti∣call doctrines. And to him was given the key Hoc est fa∣cultas expro∣mendi & docendi Diabolicas opiniones. Erit ergo regnante Antichristo generalis quaedam eclipsis. Whitak. ubi supra. Vide Pareum. of the bottomlesse pit.] Vers. 2. And there arose a smoke out of the pit as the smoake of a great furnace, and the sunne and the aire were darkened] As it were a certaine cloud & night of errours; the sun and aire are said to be darkened by this smoke, because this cloud of errours and superstitions was largely spread over al things. By the sun Aquinas understands the Doctors to whom it belongs to inlighten others, by the Aire the Church spread farre and largely, which borrowes its light else-where from the Doctors. Dionysius Carthusianus understands by the Sun the prelates, by the aire the people. Vers. 3. And there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth] Those orders and num∣ber of religious people,Whitaker-Deut. viz. Fryers and Monkes which have been the followers and Pa∣trones of errours. And unto them was given power, as the Scorpions of the earth have power] Scorpions are of the nature of Serpents; God usually expresseth all deceivers of his people by serpents, because the Devill deceived our first Parents by a Serpent.Brightman. The Scorpion is one of the insecta, divided in the body, which hath five armes forke toothed. Of all creeping things that are poysonfull, the sting thereof is most cruell and grievous, as Plinie speaketh. It is of a very angry nature, and there is a verbe in the Greek tongue taken from a Scorpion, signifying to exasperate and to provoke like a Scorpion. Vers. 7. And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto battell, and on their heads were as it were Crownes like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men] Mr Mede saith, the Saracens and Turkes invading the Romane Empire are called locusts for their multitude. See Judg. 7.12. Others say, that the Teachers of Popery are here resembled to Locusts, their faces were like men, their Doctrine in shew hath no terrour in it.They have Crownes of gold upon their heads, they prevaile much, and have great reverence and authority where they come. Mr Hildersam. Vide. Pareum. Brightman would have both the Saracenes and the Monkes and Fryers here meant. 2. They have the haire of women, vers. 8. their Doctrine hath many enticements to allure men to the liking of it, and to provoke unto spirituall fornication.
And their teeth were as the teeth of Lyons] A symbole 1. Of cruelty, Joel. 1.6. 2. Of insatiable covetousnesse. Those which they cannot allure with their faire speeches, they terrifie with threatnings, and the faggot. Mr Hildersam. The sting in the taile, the propagation of the Mahometane heresie, say some, the smoake of which in the beginning of the Chapter rose out of the bottomlesse pit; they first conquered the nations, then infected them.Vers. 10. There were stings in their tailes] Their Doctrine in the end will intollera∣bly torment the Conscience of them that receive it. Vers. 11. And they had a King over them] The Pope over the Friers and Monks, who glories in the title of the Head of the Church. But none ever acknowledged Arrius, Luther, or Calvin for their King, though the Rhemists so interpret it. This Star, and this Angell of the bottomlesse pit, is a destroyer, as the Pope draws infinite number of soules to hell with him. Si Papa multa millia hominum mittat in infernum, nemo ei dicet Quid facis? Whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue hath his name Apol∣lyon] In both Languages the Destroyer, because a destroyer both unto the Jews and Gentiles.Both passively and actively, both destroy∣ed and de∣stroying, as Danaeus observeth, because he destroyeth many others, and at length is destroyed himselfe. 17.11. 1. Spiri∣tually, 2 Thes. 2. 2. Corporally, Rev. 18.8.  significat perdere & funditus evellere. The Hebrew word signifieth destruction, a metonymie of the effect for the Destroyer. The Devill or the Pope, which you will saith Deut. Pareus, Brightman, and Forbes interpret it of the Devill. Vers. 18. By these three was the third part of men killed] In allusion to the Romans (say some) who conquered the third part of the world. CHAP. X. IOhn having before prophesied of many mischiefes to befall the Church by Antichrist and the Turkes, both conspiring against it, in this Chapter he brings Christ in a vision for the comfort of the Church, thus described. Vers. 1. And I saw another mighty Angell] Protector of his Church, the Angell of the Covenant, our great Mediatour. Come down from1. Per carni assumptionem. Ioh. 6.28. Sic Psal. 72.6. Esa. 64.1. 2 Perverbi prae∣dicationem. 3. Per auxilii ex∣hibitionem. Ex. 3. v. 8. Esa. 41. v. 4. 4. Per poenarum inflictionem. Gen. 11. v. 5. c. 19. v. 24. Cum primis hic ad tertium membrum respectus habetur. Gerh.heaven] To make himselfe better known, and nearer to his Church. Cloathed with a cloud] Not only in our humane nature, clouding and vailing his Deity, but still obscured by the world. And a raine∣bow was upon his head] a signe of reconciliation, an assurance that he will remember his Covenant, Gen. 9.15. See ch. 4. v. 3. And his face was as it were the Sun] Shining as in his Transfiguration to his Church. And his feet as pillars] For strength. Of fire] To consume the enemies as chaffe and stubble. Vers. 2. And he had in his right hand a little  deducitur diminutivum primum , secundum , tertium : proinde ac à Latino liber diminuitur libellus, indeque libellulus, & libellunculus, hoc ergo tertio diminutivo significatur hunc librum satis minutum fuisse & exiguum. Porro hic libellus est ille de quo cap. 5. v. 1. à Lapide. booke open] That is, the Bible saith Deut, the Revelation. Gerhad. Christ opens it to the world, and holds it open, though Antichrist would shut up the truth, and did a long time. And he set his right hand upon the Sea, and his left foot on the Earth] To note the sub∣jection of the Sea, and Earth, and all Creatures to him. Ponere pedem alicubi est pos∣sessionem & dominium sibi vendicare. Gerh. The word here rendred roaring doth properly signifie the owing of Oxen and such beasts; Lyons roaring is called by three other names in Greek. Brightman. Pareus.Vers. 3. And cried with a loud voice, as when a Lyon roareth] That is, manifests his wrath against the Tyrants, and Antichrist. Some say,  is proper to Oxen  To Lions, but that difference is not perpetuall, saith Gerhard. Vers. 5. And the Angell] That is, Christ the Angell of the Covenant.
Lifted up his hand to heaven] According to the ancient solemne manner of those that sweare. Therefore to lift up the hand is often put for to sweare. Gen. 14.22. Numb. 14.30. Ezek. 20.5. Vers. 6. He sweares that time or delay shall be no longer] Some thinke he speakes of time absolutely, no more time at all; rather time no more to the Romane Monarchy,No more to that effect, but that the ancient prophecies should be quite fulfilled. Thorn∣dikes Review p. 172. to Antichrist and the Devill. Vers. 7. The mistery of God should be finished] That is, (say some) Gods secret in sa∣ving the Gentiles, Ephes. 3.6. and Jews, Rom. 11.25. viz. In the seventh Trumpet (saith Dr Taylor) an end shall be of the tyranny of Antichrist, and the Church shall obtaine happy daies. Vers. 9. Take it and eate it up] That is, Read it over earnestly, know it exactly; so Tully called Cato, Helluonem librorum,Ezek. 2.9. See Ezek. 3.1. because he did greedily read them and could not be satisfied with reading. Vers. 10. And I ate it] That is,Perkins. by study and meditation digested and setled it in his heart. Vers. 11. Thou must prophesie againe before many Peoples, and Nations, and Tongues, and Kings] That is, before the time of fulfilling of all things,Mr Bur. on Hos. this Booke of the Revela∣tion shall be made as cleare as if John were come to Prophesie againe before men. CHAP. XI. Vers. 1. ANd there was given me a reed like unto a rod, and the Angell stood, saying, Rise and measure the Temple of God] The reed here is the Word of God which is the most perfect rule of faith, and Ecclesiasticall Discipline. The measuring of the Tem∣ple signifieth the measuring of the Church,Pareus. This setteth forth the Pri∣mitive state of the Christian Church exactly conformable to the rule of Gods Word. Mr Mede. as it appeares by comparing this Prophe∣cie with that Ezek. 40.41. to which he alludes. Vers. 2. For it is given unto the Gentiles] That is, men of Gentile-like prophaneness, and iniquity, who had the keeping of the Church-Courts. And the holy City shall they tread under foot] Tread down, or tread it under foot. The originall word may be rendred somewhat more mildly,Cottons bloudy Tenet Walshed.  Cal∣cabunt, id est, conculcabunt, proterent affligendo scilicet & contemptui habendo. Alii malunt frequentabunt quia  saepe idem est quod . Alsted. Vide Down Diatrib. de Antichristo part. 2da p. 608, 609, 638, &c. it may expresse their walking upon it. Vers. 3. And I will give power unto my two witnesses] They are called witnesses, because they beare witnesse to truth and holinesse, against all the errours and unholinesse of Antichrist; so is Christ severall times called the faithfull witnesse by way of eminence, ch. 1. v. 5. and 3.14. because he beares witnesse to all truth, against all errours and impie∣ties whatsoever. Two they are, partly for their paucity,Duos testes in∣definitè succes∣sionem aliquo∣rum assertorum doctrinae Evan∣gelii adversus Antichristum intelligamus. Definitè tamen dicuntur duo, tum quia pauci erant, respectu locustarum qui orbem Christianum replebunt: tum quia duo ad firmandum testimonium in quovis judicio sufficiunt. Pareus. and in allusion unto the Pro∣phecie, Zach. 4.11. from whence the expression is taken. Some interpret these two of two men, and of the time of Antichrist, but who those two men were there is a threefold difference amongst them: Dr Prid orat. de duobus testibus. Vide Pareum. By two witnesses is meant a few faithfull Ministers which God will raise up here and there amidst the power of darknesse in greatest strength of the Antichristian reigne, the Apostle used the number of two, because the Law of God requireth so many witnesses for necessary triall of a matter in controversie. 2. He evidently alludeth unto Zach. 11.14. Cartw. on Rhem Test. 1. Victorinus, interprets it of Jeremy and Elisha. 2. Hilary, Catharinus, Gagnaeus with Jansenius, and Maldonate on Mat. 17. would have Moses and Eliah here meant. 3. Ribera, Zuarez, Vegas, Pererius Bellarmine, Barradius, Malvenda, interpret it of
Enoch and Eliah. Secondly, others would not have it restrained to Antichrists times of which some interpret it of Christ, and John the Baptist, some of Saint Francis, and Dominick. Thirdly, Others interpret it of all the Defenders of the truth, as Pannonius, or the faithfull in all Ages, as Arius Montanus, and Zegerus. By the two wit∣nesses, whether we understand the Scriptures in the two Te∣staments (as Austen) which are overcome in Popery, and their own traditions made equall, or rather set above them, or else the zealous and sincere professors of the Word of God, who both by their Doctrine and Conversation give witness unto the truth of it, it com∣eth all to one, for Antichrist is an enemy both to Scripture and Scripture men. Dr. Taylor. See him on 12. of Rev. p. 216.There are two more famous opinions of the Orthodox concerning this matter, the first holds that the witnesses are the Old and New Testament, according to that John 5.39.2. That this notes the Preachers of the Word, for those are more fitly said to op∣pose themselves against the Beast, to be killed, not to be buried, to revive in their suc∣cessors, to ascend by themselves to heaven. But those two opinions do fitly agree in one, since the testimony of these and the Testament is but one. Dr Prid. de duobus testibus. And they shall prophesie] That is, instruct the people in the good way. A thousand, two hundred, and threescore dayes] In their severall times and ages succes∣sively. Cloathed in sackcloth] They mourne and sigh to see Antichristianisme so spread. 2. King. 6.30. Amos 8.10. Sackcloth is opposed to the splendour and luxury of Anti∣christ and his Followers. Vers. 4. These are the two olive trees] 1. The olive tree keepes its greenesse, wi∣thers not in winter. 2. Is fertile. And the two Candlesticks] Hold out the light of it to others. See Zach. 11.14. and Exod. 25.31. Vers. 5. Fire proceedeth out of their mouth] 1. By their prayers. 2. By their prophecying. See Gerhard. Vers. 6. These have power to shut heaven that it raine not in the daies of their prophecie, and have power over waters to turne them to bloud] This is spoken in allusion to Elias and Mo∣ses; whereof the one by his prayer shut the heavens, the other by his rod turned the waters into bloud. The faithfull Ministers of the Gospell should not worke such out∣ward miracles as they did,ent. but they should be furnished with spirituall power, which is far greater. Mede. Cocceius in 2 Tim. 2.23. Qui exponit duos Testes Dei (verbum vet. & Novi Testamenti) dicit hoc nihil aliud esse, quam ver bum Dei in magno illo regno gentium ostentui quidem esse publicè, sed abnegata & non percepta illius vi ratque vitute pro cadavere ipsis esse; neque enim vivum & efficax esse in istit spiritualiter mortuis.Vers. 7. And when they have finished their testimony] Cum finituri sint, when they shall be about to finish their testimony, for so  is to be translated. Whether you understand it physicè, killing them as men, or Metaphoricè killing them as witnesses.And kill them] Not a reall, but a mysticall killing; the Resurrection, ver. 11. is mysti∣call, for of no resurrection, properly so called, do we read before the 20.5. of this Pro∣phecie, therefore the killing is a throwing them from place out of Office, some civill death. Mr Mede. Vers. 8. And their dead bodies shall lye in the streets of the great City] That is, Rome so called, not so much for the quantitie, as because she had been Queen of all other, as 17.18. Mede. Which spiritually is called Sodome, and Aegypt] Rome is here for her pride and filthinesse called Sodome, and for her Idolatry and cruelty Aegypt, and also in this Book Babylon, because of its sorcery and witchcraft, as if the wickednesse of them all were concentred in her. Where our Lord also was crucified] In respect of the place our Lord Jesus was cruci∣fied at Jerusalem,Deut: but if we respect the power and authority that put him to death, he was crucified at Rome: For Christ was put to death by a Romane Judge, by Romane Laws, by Romane Authority, by a kind of death proper only to the Romans, and in a place which then was within the Romane Empire. Even in Rome it selfe Christ hath been crucified in his members, and hee was not crucified within Jerusalem,Down. of Ant. l. 1. c: 2: Heb. 13.12. Vers. 13. And the same houre was there a great Earthquake] A mysticall (not a naturall) Earth-quake, when there are great stirrs and commotions in Kingdomes and States, and by these the formes of government changed. Such earth-quakes are those mentioned at the 8. ch. v. 5. & 16.18. and all along in this booke.
Vers. 15. The kingdomes of this world] That is, the principall State, power and persons governing in all the parts of the world, the maine ruling power of States. World here is taken in opposition to some particular climate or Region, so it notes the whole universe. Some referre this to heaven, but it must have accomplishment on earth. Are become] That is, manifested to be the kingdomes of our Lord] Lord properly notes God the Father in the primitive acception of it,Mr Hues. Domininostri & Christi] Kaì exegericum est, pro Domini nostri, qui est Christus, sicut passim Aposto∣lus, Deus & Pater, pro De∣us, qui est Pa∣ter. Pareus. so here. and of his Christ] Christ the name of God manifested in the flesh, signifies Annointed; That is, set apart to be the peculiar King, Priest, and Prophet of his people; here recorded emphatically, as Luke 2.29. And he shall reigne for ever and ever] Greeke, unto ages of ages, according to the He∣brew, unto generation and generation. Vers. 16. And the foure and twenty Elders] That is, the Church, See 19.4. Which sat before God on their seates] Their sitting on seates notes two things, 1. Their rest. 2. Their quiet and peaceable estate. Bish. Cowper. Vers. 19. The arke] That is, the secret mysteries of God He persists in the allegory of the old Temple, in whose secret place was the Arke of the Covenant of God, seene by none but the High Priest once a yeare. CHAP. XII. THis twelfth Chapter sets forth clearely the State of the Church,Fata imperii & fata Eccle∣siae. as the sixth did that of the Empire. It hath six principall parts. 1. A lively description of the true Church, v. 1, 2. 2. A description of the Devill her chiefe and furious assailant, v. 3, 4, 5. 3. The fierce battaile between these two parties, v. 7. 4. The victory of the Church and the Dragons overthrow, v. 8, 9.Dr Taylor. 5. The triumph of the godly for that victory, v. 10, 11, 12. 6. The fury of Satan renewing the assault, v. 13. to the end of the Chapter. Vers. 1. And there appeared a great wonder in heaven] By wonder or signe is meant a new vision; or an unusuall type of a strange battell, and marvellously to be wondred at. By Heaven commonly in this Booke is meant the true militant Church, and the members of it here upon earth, v. 4. Starres of heaven] Are Ministers of the Church, v. 12. rejoyce yee heavens, that is, beleevers and members of the true Church on earth, so v. 3. & 7.Dr Taylor. A woman] The woman is the Church, resembled to a woman partly for her weak∣nesse, but chiefly because the Scripture sets it forth by the Spouse of Christ,Woman in this booke signifi∣eth three things 1. Idols, because they are as enticing and alluring as wanton women. 2. Idolaters goe a whoring after them, as uncleane persons after light women. 14.4.2. The City of Rome, the seat of Antichrist. 17.3. 1. Because in her outward pompe and glory she is opposed to the chaste spouse of Christ, whose glory is all with in. 2. Because with her the great Kings of the earth have committed fornication. 17.2.3. 3. The true Church, and so is the word taken here. Dr Taylor. Cant. 4.10. Clothed with the Sun] That is, Christ, Psal. 84.11. Mal. 4.3. He resembleth it in its properties and effects, Frst, properties, 1. In unity, there is but one Sun in the world, and but one sun of righteousnesse in the Church, Ioh. 1.14. 1 Tim. 2.5. 2. Light, Rev. 1.16. 3. Purity. 4. Power and sufficiency. Secondly, Effects. 1. Illuminates. 2. Directs. 3. Refresheth. The righteousnesse of Christ is imputed to the Church. See Cant. 6 10. Shee is cloathed with it. cloathes serve for 1. Covering. 2. Shelter. 3. Ornament; so Christs righteousnesse. and the Moon under her feet] The Moon signifieth either Tem∣porary and Transitory things, as Dr. Tailor and others, it being both the cause and embleme of change; or the ceremoniall rights, because the Jews festivals were ordered by the motions of the Moon, as Mr. Burrh. on Esay. 66.10. from Mr Mede. And upn
her head a crowne of twelve starres] That is, The shining doctrine of the twelve Apostles. Vnder feete] For subjection, and contempt. Vers. 2. And she being with childe, cryed] Cryed] Two wayes, in her prayers to God. and her apologies to men, Mr. Arrowsmith. The Church hath 1. Its originall from heaven 2. Its tendence is to heaven. Heb. 11.14.16. 3. The Churches conversation is in heaven. Phil. 3.20. 4. It is dependent up∣on heaven. Iames 1.17. Mr Arrowsmith.Ver. 3. And there appeared another wonder in heaven, and behold a great red Dragon, &c.] Here wee have a description of the Churches adversary, under the name and type of a Dragon. By the Dragon is meant, 1. The Devill, for so it is expounded v. 9. to be that old Serpent called the Devill and Satan. A forma in qua apparuit, & ab estutia atque officio, est enim omniumastutis∣simus, & omni∣um imptarum astutiarum au∣ctor. Zanchius. Dr Tilor. The Devill is called metaphorically a Serpent or Dragon. 1. In allusion to that story, Gen. 3. Because under this forme and representation hee deceived mankind. 2. For his poison and malice whereof hee is full. 3. For his exceeding strength and power to hurt and destroy. 4. For his slighnesse, subtiltie and craft, Gen. 3.1. See 9. v. of this Chapter. This his nature is couched in his name, draco , acutè cernere, to see piercingly, for he is subtile, acute and quicke sighted to discerne a farre off his prey, and advan∣tage against us. The Greeke word here used, translated red, is emphaticall, noting him to be a fiery Dragon, fiery red, set on fire and all enflamed with an hellish flame of wrath and cruelty against the Church of God. 2. By the Dragon is also meant the instruments of Satans fury, Ier. 51.34. Ezek. 29.3. Psal. 74.13. 3. Some more speciall instruments, the Heathen persecuting Emperours of Rome. Dr Tailor.Having seven heads] The head is the seate of prudence and policie: the number of seven heads notes the manifold subtilties of the Devill and his instruments. Others by seven heads understand the seven hilles of Rome where the Dragon lived: or the seven kinds of governments in the Romane Monarchie.13. ch. 2. And ten hornes] The Dragons power and strength is here called ten hornes. Horne in Scripture is commonly taken metaphorically,Id ib. The Dragon employed the seven heads and ten hornes, that is, the po∣licie and strength of the Romane state especially to suppress the true religion, and overthrow the Church. and signifies strength, might, power, kingdome, glory. The number ten is here taken indefinitely for all those Kings, Princes and Captaines under them who banded themselves against the woman, which by the perfect number of ten, are noted to bee exceeding many. See 13.1. And seven Crownes upon his heads] By which is meant the supremacie of the Romane Empire, subduing under it the Princes, Provinces, Nations, by innumerable victories, but especially prevailing against the Church, and primitive Christians, as so many Conquerors. Vers. 4. And his taile drew the third part of the Starres of heaven] By Starres are meant the Ministers of the Gospell,Pro trahebat. Graecè est , quod sig∣nificat caudae ictibus devol vere, indéque mittere in terram, ut casu elidantur & occidantur. à Lapide. because 1. They are set in their severall stations (as the starres in their orbes) by God. 2. Because they give light to the Church by doctrine and holy example. Matth. 5.14. 3. They are eminent and in high place. Of heaven] Mysticall; they were removed from their holy doctrine and heavenly hope. His taile] That is, the power and policie of the Devill. And the Dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered] The Text hath reference both to the Serpents standing before Eve the woman, that is, the Mother of the world and Church, to seduce her; and to Pharaoh called the Dragon of Aegypt, watching the destruction of the male children of the Church, so soone as the Mothers should be delivered of them. This standing before the woman implieth, 1. His readi∣nesse and nearnesse. 2. His instance and diligence.
Vers. 5. And shee brought forth a man child] Some understand it of Christ. See Psal. 2.9. and Rev. 2.27. and 19.15. Dr Tailor In loc. gives good reasons against this exposition. Others of Luther, many of Brightman. Constantine the great a godly Christian Emperour. Dr. Tailor understands by it not one singular person, but some potent Princes or speciall deliverers, whom God stirred up to succour and relieve the Church against those Ty∣rannicall Romish Emperours and persecutors;Dr Tailor. ib. By whom the Dragon was defeated and disappointed, whose aime was to devour all the seed of the woman, for these were 1. Sonnes of the Church. 2. A man child, stout, strong, valiant. 3. Ruled over the Nations with a rod of Iron, viz. an unresistible power, and over-ruling the nations and Princes that were enemies to the Church. 4. Was taken into the throne of God] That is, advanced into chiefe government for the refreshing and defence of the Church, and curbing the rage of those imperiall Dragons. Vers. 6. And the woman fled into the wildernesse] This verse is here inserted by the Spirit of God, by anticipation, it was done after, though it be here mentioned,Woman signi∣fieth here a multitude, the Church miliant. it properly belongs to the 13. and 14.Idem ubi su∣pra.verses. It seemes to be an allusion unto Israels flying into the wildernesse from Pharoah that red and bloudy Dragon pursuing them even to destruction. The wildernesse is nothing else but an afflicted and solitary condition of the woman, excluded from her former glory, forced now to hide her face from the world, and to live in poverty and exile, and in a private and solitary condition. Where there is a place prepared of God that they should feed her] Alluding to the feeding of the Church of the Jews in the wildernesse. The word (They) standeth in relation to some persons spoken of before, viz. 11. ch. 2. The two witnesses shall feed her, for the time of both fitly agreeth. A thousand two hundred and threescore dayes] By these dayes are meant so many yeares,Ezek. 4.5, 6. for all things almost in the Revelation are expressed according to the manner of ancient Types. It is the same with times, time, and halfe a time. 14. v. and 42. moneths. 11.2. Vers. 7. And there was a battell in Heaven] That is, in the Church militant. Some speciall and notable part of that Warre which in the spring of the Evangelicall Church Satan raised to the overthrow of the salvation of it. Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his angells] This Michael is Christ, it is so expounded, v. 10. 2. This place is an allusion to Dan. 10.13. and 21.3. 3. The composition of the word of three Hebrew particles, Mi-ca-el,Dr Tailor ubi supra. who is like or equall to the Lord, that is onely Christ, Phil. 2.6. 4. We read no where in Scripture of this name but Christ himselfe must be understood, Iude 9. Which place al∣ludes to Zach. 3.2. His angels are not onely those which are Angels by nature and office,See Iosh. 5.5.14. & Rev. 9.11. but also such persons and instruments as stand with them in the defence of Christian Religion, and in warre with the Dragon both in ecclesiasticall and politicall states, godly Princes and Rulers, and also godly Pastors, holy Martyrs, zealous professors, all to whom sometimes the name of Angell is ascribed in Scripture. 1. Because they are all sent from him, on his errand. 2. They are called his Angels by speciall propriety. 3. Their whole service is due to him their Lord. The Dragon, the Generall, is the chiefe of Devils and head of wicked Angels, Belze∣bub; his Angels are wicked spirits, & wicked men, they sight by open force & secret fraud. Vers. 8. But they prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in heaven] By hea∣ven here the Church of God is meant, in which the Dragon sate and exercised his Ty∣ranny. The phrase not to have his place is taken out of Dan. 2.35. The Dragons had no more place in the Church to domineer and tyrannize against the Saints, as they had done, but they are now conquered and expelled out of heaven. A generall overthrow is not here properly meant, but a speciall victory of some speciall Dragons that rose up to waste the Church, because this is a prophecie after St Iohns time. Vers. 9. And the great Dragon was cast out, that old serpent called the Devill and Satan,Dr Tailor. Draco iste vo∣catur magnus, 1. Ob potentiam in impios, Eph. 2.2.2. Ob regni amplitudinem, ad quod pertinent omnes impii. Gerh. which deceiveth the whole world] The Devill is a Serpent,
1. Because he hid and covered himselfe in the serpent, in his first stratageme against our first Parents, Gen. 3.1. 2. Because of his serpentive disposition in his poyson and malice against Christ and all Christians, and in his winding by his slie flattery and subtilty, and in his accursed condition. 2. An old Serpent. 1. Because he is as old as the World, and at the beginning deprived our first Parents of their happinesse. 2. His malice is inveterate, as ancient as the world. 3. Is growne wonderfull cunning by experience. .The Devill] So called for his crimination, accusation and calumination. Hee is that egregious caluminiator, whose incessant delight and practice is in accusing and ca∣lumniating. 1. God to man of envy, injustice. Gen. 3.3. 2. Man to God, Ioh. 1. Satan] So called for his hostility; he is an adversary, 1. To God. 2. Good men. 3. Good actions. Hee seduceth or deceiveth the whole world] To seduce is to draw a man aside from the right way into some by-way; a metaphore taken from travellers; the Devill drawes men from the true worship of God, to Idolatry and false worship of Idols and heathen Gods. He incessantly labours in this as the . participle of the present tense noteth, even a perpetuall action of drawing men from the way of truth, to errour and false Re∣ligion. The persons that are seduced are the whole world, alluding to his generall seduction of all men in our first Parents, and also the generall corrupting of true Religion in the dayes of Noah.Dr Taylor. But by the whole world or earth are meant the reprobates or earth∣ly minded men, who mind earthly things with contempt of heavenly. He was cast out] By the members of Christ. 1. By casting out and resisting Paganisme, Idolatry, Blasphemy, Impiety, and all Injustice. 2. By the preaching and promulgation of the Gospel, which is like lightning, quick, piercing,Luke 10.18. and irresistable. 3. By open profession and maintenance of the faith and truth of the Gospell. Into the earth] 1. To manifest and cleare the certainty of his overthrow, and the Churches victory; as Goliah was seene to bee overthrowne, when David threw him down to the ground. 2. More specially, to shew, who they bee whom the Devill now tyrannizeth over, among reprobates, carnally, and earthly minded men. And his angels were cast out with him] That is, the power of al wicked persons (by whom the Devill putteth forth his power against the Church) was so broken as they could never prevaile against the salvation of any member of the Church,Dr Taylor. nor against the hap∣py proceedings of the Christian Religion in the infancy of the Church. Vers. 10. And I heard a loud voyce] The cherefull noise of innumerable Citizens of the Church militant, provoking themselves to sound forth the Majesty and praise of God, for his great mercy to his Church, and his great judgements against the Dragon and his Angels. In heaven] That is, the Church militant. Now is come salvation] That is, safety and externall security of Gods people by their deliverance from cruell tyrants, Ex. 14.13. Strength] That is, the mighty arme of God which beares up all things,Psal. 118.16. and subdues all contrary things to his will and power. And the kingdome of our God] The kingdome of grace which the Dragon specially opposeth. And the power of his Christ] His Christ, 1. For distinction, other Kings were annointed and set up by men.Psal. 2. 2. For eminence. 3. For neare relation.
For the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night] This  signifieth not any kind of accuser,Weemes. but such an accuser who accuseth before a King, here before the Lord. Night and day] Incessantly. See Zach. 3.3. Vers. 11. And they loved not their lives unto the death] That is, they slighted, contem∣ned, yea, despised their lives, and rather exposed them to hazard and losse, than to be removed from their holy profession. Thus are they said not to love their lives, that love Christ and his truth more.Hoc est, sponte & imperterri∣to animo sese propter sanguinem agni morti & martyrio subjecerunt: seu ut Beza vertit, animae suae prodigi fuerunt usque ad mortem. Animam hoc est vitam diligere dicitur qui nihil habet hoc vita Charius. Contrà non diligere animam suam, qui non dubitat illam perticulis & morti ipsi objicere; si gloria Christi & necessitas ita flagitat. Glas. Grammat. Sac. l. 3. Tract. 3. Vide Bezam. Vers. 14. A time, times, and halfe a time] A finite number for an indefinite; So Dr. Taylor, Mede, and Brightman say; by time is meant a yeare, by times two yeares,Per tempus tempora & di∣midium tempo∣ris intelligun∣tur anni tres cum dimidio. Gerh. Dan. 7.2. and 12.7. by halfe a time, halfe a yeare, a yeare, two yeares and a halfe. Vers. 15. And the Serpent cast out of his mouth water as a floud] Multitudes of people which he stirreth up to persecute the Church.That is, the Arrian Heresie, see Pro. 28.15. Triplex flumen denoratur. 1. Tentationis, quae fit per blanditias, ampla promissa bonorum temporállum & voluntatum hujus saeculi. 2. Persecutionis. Psal. 65.8. Psal. 124.4, 5.3. Haeresium. Gerh. Vers. 17. With the remnant of her seed] This phrase is a metaphor taken from Trades∣men, who having cut out a whole peece of cloath,Rom. 9.29. leave some small remnant or re∣mainder; even so the true professors of the Gospell are but a small remainder of the whole peece and people of the world. Beside, it is but the remnant of her seed: As a little seed-corne is reserved out of a great heape for store,Dr. Taylor. which is nothing to the whole Crop; so is the small number of true Beleevers, reserved by grace, to the whole field and crop of the world. CHAP. XIII. IF we compare this description of the Beast in this Chapter with that in the 17. we shall easily perceive that by both Beasts the Romane State is represented, but yet not of the same time. This designes old Rome, or the Romane State,Down Diat. de Antich. parte 14. l. 1. c. 5. as it was especially under the heathen Emperors, although Antichrist be not excluded from that descrip∣tion. For the perfect Beast is propounded having seven heads, the last of which is An∣tichrist. The 17th. Chapter describes Rome as it was after. The first Beast representeth the persecuting Emperours, and is described in the be∣ginning of the Chapter. The second Antichrist, and begins at ver. 11. and so forward to the end of the Chapter. Vers. 1. And I saw a Beast arise up out of the Sea, having seven heads, and ten hornes, and upon his heads ten Crownes] Rise up] Signifyeth to get strength, Dan 4.8. and 8.8.Quod Johan∣nem hanc besti∣am vidit è ma∣ri ascendere, eo significatur Ro∣manum imperi∣um ex multis populis confluentibus extitisse, Apoc. 17.15. & ad fastigium illud pervenisse. Gerhard. Out of the Sea.] That is, of many and divers peoples which it had vanquished. Crownes for dignity, hornes for power, and heads for subtilty. The seven Heads are seven Hills, and ten Hornes are ten Governments. Mr Dod. The hornes of the Beast are crowned and not his heads, because the Romane Empire hath alwaies more prevailed by power than by policy, but the Dragon hath his heads crowned and not his hornes,Deut. therefore he hath alwaies done more by policy & subtiltie than by power and strength.
Vers. 2. And the Dragon gave him his power] viz. That Dragon mentioned 12.3. the Devill that old Serpent, 12.9. whom Moses also set forth by the Serpent, Gen. 3.1. The Dragon hath something of the Serpent, but flying is added to it, that is, swiftnesse of moving.See 2 Thes. 2.9. Vers. 8. Whose names are not written in the Booke of the life of the Lambe, slaine from the foundation of the world] Some thinke this is not spoken of Election, since Christ as Me∣diatour was elected, but of those which the Father gave to Christ in the Covenant be∣fore the world.He speaks (say they) of the e∣ternal transacti∣ons between the Father and the Son. Si quis bene contulerit locum hujus libri. 17.8. inveniet trajectionem hic esse vocum, & ipsum librum dici , ab origine mundi, conscriptum scilicet, similitudine sumta à bene moratis civitatibus, ubi ab initio conditae urbis extant perpetua monumenta quae civium nomina continent. Merito autem hic liber ab eo nomen accepit qui ab aeterno erat destinatus ut omnium Sanctorum, inter quos eminent martyres, caput esset. Vide Heb. 11.40. Grotius. Others refer this from the beginning of the world to the book of life (as Apoc. 17.8.) rather than to the Lambe slaine,Causaub. of the Incarnation of Christ. not as though there were any absurdity or incongrui∣ty in the speech (as Ribera) being so justifiable by the parrallell places of Scripture. Weemes, and other learned men say from the beginning (not from eternity) in reference to that promise, Gen. 3.15. the death of Christ being then publisht,Mr Ball on the Covenant. Nempe sacra∣mentaliter sub sacrificiis & Agno Poschali. Wollebius. Vide Pareum. Per Agni li∣brum intelligit constantissimam Domini de suis salvandis Sententiam, illustratam , perlibri Allegoriam ut ex praxi nostra in iis memoria tenendis, quae nolumus excidere; concludemus, Agnum illorum, quos in librum suum retulit, nun∣quam futurum esse oblitum. Dr. Prid. in orat. 4ta. that is, slaine as well then as now, not only in the Counsell and Decree of God whereby he is borne and slaine in all times and places, nor only in regard of the eternall power, efficacy, and merit of his death; but also in respect of the heart of the Beleever, whose faith makes that which is locally absent after a sort truly and really present. Mr Perkins. In regard of Gods acceptation of it, for Belleevers, in the types and shaddows of it, whereof the Ceremoniall Law was full. Dr Tailor. Vers. 9. If any man have an eare let him heare] A solemne preface before some great matter, and diligently to be observed, Mat. 11.15. and 13.9.43. Mark. 4.9.27. and 7.16. and 8.18. Luk. 8.8. and 14.35. See afore Ch. 11.7.11.29. that is, let him heare with his eare, let the eare do its work and not be idle. Vers. 10. He that leadeth into captivity, shall go into captivity] Rome which had led cap∣tive the Christians, is become a Captive to the Goths and Vandales. For lead and goe there is an elegant para nomasia in the Greek. He that killeth with the Sword must be killed with the Sword] Domitian which had slaine so many Christians with the Sword, he also was slaine by the sword, and 17 of his own Servants. So Grotius. Here is the patience and faith of the Saints] That is, by this the patience and faith of the Christians is confirmed, because they knew that God would revenge their in∣juries. Ver. 11. This Beast can be no other but the Pope of Rome who riseth out of the earth, that is, out of most base beginnings, and steppeth or riseth above the earth, and all earthly power;Servus servo∣rum Dei, loqui∣tur ut Draco, idem, ut Dia∣bolus, Apoc. 12.9. hoc enim, sese effert super omnem qui di∣citur Deus; quasi ipse totius mundi princeps esset. Episc. Down. he hath hornes like the Lambe, that is, professeth the meeknesse and innocency of Christ (which the Turke never did) but speakes like the Dragon, which is to be understood, partly of his blasphemous speeches which he doth utter, partly of the Do∣ctrines of Devills which he doth teach, partly of those hellish Curses which he thunde∣reth against the true professors of the faith, partly of those great promises, which like the Prince of the world, he maketh to those that do adore him. Down. of Ant. l. 1. c. 4. The Pope of Rome with his Clergy, for the Pope by himselfe and alone though he
may be tearmed a false Prophet, yet he maketh not up the Beast, except his Clergy be joyned with him,Mede. since the Beast doth signifie a company of men composed of a cer∣taine order of members. Vers. 12. Whose deadly wound was healed] All the Papists almost say, that Antichrist is understood by that Head which was wounded, who shall feigne himselfe dead,Down. Diat. de Antichrist. l. 1. c. 5. and shall rise againe by the devills helpe, And that they say is the common and received opinion of the Fathers. Vers. 13. He maketh fire come downe from heaven on the earth] The Pope (say the Pa∣pists) doth not cause fire to come down from heaven, therefore he is not Antichrist.Receive the mark of the beast] That is, such as receive some indelible character of the Beast, as their Secular Regular priests, and all that receive religious orders from the Church of Rome, so 16.2.9. Cotton on Rev. 16. Such is the absurd perverseness of the Papists, that in other parts of Scripture which are simple and plaine they do hunt after mysticall and allegoricall senses: but in this Book of the Revelation which is most mysticall and alle∣goricall, without all reason they insist in the literall sence; as in this Chapter they understand the marke of a reall visible marke, and the image of a materiall Image animated and made to speake, and the fire of materiall fire brought down from heaven. Down. of Ant. This cannot be taken litterally, because the whole Chapter is mysticall; it is an allusi∣on unto 1 King. 18.24. that is, Antichrist shall make his false Religion appeare to men to be the truth, as effectually, as if (like Elias) he should cause fire to come from heaven, for a confirmation of his Doctrine. Squire on 2d. of Thes. Mr. Mede saith, Excommunication is meant, which is (saith he) not unaptly resembled to fire from heaven, or lightening. For what is it in the name of God to deliver any one over to that eternall fire, other than to call for fire from heaven, especially since that punishment of the wicked proceeding from God, is often in this Book set forth by the Lake of fire and brimstone, or Asphaltites, where Sodom and Gomorrah were burned with fire rained down from heaven. If that fire which Antichrist shall cause to descend from heaven be litterally under∣stood, it agreeth to the Pope,Down. of Ant. l. 1. c. 7. see more there. because in divers Popisth miracles there hath been (as they say) fire brought down from heaven. But it is rather to be understood mystically, and allegorically, as well as other Prophecies of the Revelation. Descending of fire from heaven in Scripture signifieth three things. 1. Gods approving of the Religion and Sa∣crifices of his Servants.Levit. 9.24. 1 Chro 21.26. 1 Chron. 7.1. Iohn saith in the sight of men. Not that they have done so indeed, but only that they have made men believe so. 2. His sending down of the graces of the Spirit upon his chil∣dren, Act. 2.3. 3. His vengeance executed from heaven upon his enemies. Antichrist doth by such signes and wonders confirme that Doctrine and Religion which he pro∣fesseth, as though God answered him by fire from heaven, 1 Kings 18.38. Vers. 16, 17, 18. Some hold that the marke, the name of the Beast,Down. Diat. de Ant part. 1. l. 6. c. 4. Every resolv'd papist hath the marke of the Beast, his name, and number of his name. and the num∣ber of his name, is one and the same thing, and that the latter of all these is the exposi∣tion of the former. The marke of Antichrist is nothing else but the name of the for∣mer Beast containing the number of 666. therefore Rev. 14.9.11. & 20.4. He reckons not these three as distinct, but mentions the marke alone. Vers. 16. To receive a marke in their right hand, or in their foreheads] Gerhard saith, the marke in the right hand is an oath by which the Clergy is bound to the Pope,In the fore∣head] That is by outward profession, and in the right hand] that is, by operation, as the ordinary gloss expounds it. Subjection to the Pope, and acknow∣ledgment of the See of Rome. See Down. of Ant. l. 1. c.  the Popes Vassals are named after him, even as Children beare the name of their Fathers, and must be called of the Pope, or Papa, Papists. The number of his name, that is, to live in subjection to the See of Rome and to profess themselves to be Romanes. and the marke in the foreheads notes the subjection of the Lay people to the Pope. Mede interprets marke his name, therefore it is said, the marke or name of the Beast, and in the Chapter following, the marke of his name. For he alludeth to the old custome, by which servants were wont to be marked with the names of their Masters, Souldiers the names of their commanders, the first especially in the forehead, the other in their hands. Therefore the followers of the Lambe also 14.1. that they may be contrary to the followers of the Beast, are written in their forehead with the names of the Lambe, and his Father; with the same meaning of the Type in both, to shew who is the Lord, and for whom each Company fighteth: Those professing themselves servants of the Beast, and his Image, these of  and his Father.
Vers. 17. And that no man might buy or sell] That is, live among them, or enjoy the benefits of humane Society. Romana ececl∣sia unde Anti∣christus sit pro∣diturus. de Di¦eu. Accommodatissimum sane nomen, siquidem in Italia dominatur, in qua olim Latinorum erat regnum. Latina Biblia fon∣tibus praefert. Latinè ministri ejus cultum sacrum administrant. Latinè bullas suas scribunt. Wollebius. Vide Pareum.Vers. 18. His number is sixe hundred threescore and sixe]  Lateinos, the Letters of which exactly expresse the number of 666. λ is 30. α 1 τ 300.  5. ι 10. ν 50.  70.  200. all joyned together make up the aforesaid summe. Irenaeus (whose Master Polycarpus had been Saint Johns Disciple) an ancient Father of the Church, mentions this word, as the name of the Beast, and affirmeth, that it was a common received opinion in his time,Saxonicè Mar∣in Louther; Graecè David Chytraeus. He∣braicè Johan∣nes Calvinus. uti & Beza Antitheos red∣dere hunc numerum 666 annotarunt Lindanus & Bellarminus. à Lap. that the Beast should be so called. The name of the Beast is not the name of Antichrist properly,Down. Diat. de Aut. part. 1. l. 6. c. 4.but of the Romane or Latine State, the last Head of which is Antichrist, which yet hath not been observed by some learned men who have diligently considered this place. It is said to be the number of the name because the letters (of which the name consists) comprehend that number, for the Hebrews & Greeks use their letters for notes of numbers according to the order of the Alphabet. It is called the number of a man, either because men do number, or because it is ob∣vious and usuall as occurring more than once in Scripture, or because the name of the Beast containing this number is also the name of a man.Ezra 2.13. 1 Kings 10.14. Episc. Down. ubi supra. It may be questioned, whether the number of the name be to be computed according to the Hebrew or Greek letters; if the name of the Beast be to be written in Greek letters, which is very probable, because the Revelation was written in Greeke, then the name shall be , as was before ex∣prest.Romane, or Latine. CHAP. XIV. Vers. 1. HAving his Fathers name written in their heads] Ad constantiam confessionis, for the constancy of their confession.See 9.4. Vers. 2. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers, harping with their harpes] The voice of the Lord is compared to many waters for its irresistible force and admirable noise, making men wonder;Forbes. to thunder for its terrour and power shaking all things, to a gentle sound of harpes for the worke of peace and joy in the conscience. Per hoc signifi∣catur celerri∣mus evangelii cursus. Gerh.Vers. 6. And I saw another Angell flye in the midst of heaven] That is, another besides one of those fingers. For he made mention of no Angell before this, except we shall say, those Musitians were a Quire of Angels. Mede. The everlasting Gospell] Not in respect of the future, but of the time past, viz. that which was promised from the beginning of the world.Mede. Not that it was eternally preacht, Rom. 16.25. but 1. Because it proceedeth from the eternall Counsell of God. 2. It containeth the words of eternall life. 3. It re∣maineth for all eternity. Dr Taylor on Time. As the hills, paths, and desola∣tions are said to be everlasting, or ancient, Esay 58.12. and 61.4. Jer. 6.16. and 18.16. Deut. 33.15. Gen. 49.26. Esay 54.47. So the Gospell that is from the beginning. It is called Eternall (saith Brightman) as if the Holy Ghost would of purpose meet with the offence of those times, when the truth that was restored should commonly be condemned for novelty. Vers. 8. And there followed another Angell, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen] After the Preaching of the everlasting Gospell, presently follow the fall of Babylon, that is, Rome. It is already accomplished in part: It is fallen,  purity of Doctrine. 2. In the estimation which once it had. 3. In authority, but th Prophecie notes the certain∣ty of her fall by an outward overthrow.Dr. Taylor.
This commination is taken out of Esay 21.9. and Jer. 51.8. in which words the Prophets threaten the ruine of Babylon of the Chaldees, which had grievously oppres∣sed the people of God with a 70 yeares Captivity. This cannot be that Babylon. 1. Be∣cause that neither was, nor is, nor shall be the Seat of Antichrist, as this Babylon shall by the consent of all Interpreters, saith Pareus.Pareus. Toti quae praefi∣det orbi. Vide Down. Diat. de Ant. l. 1. c. 7. 2. This Babylon is that great City which in the time of John ruled over the Kings of the earth, Rev. 17.18. but then that Mo∣narchy was with the Romans, not the Babylonians. Ribera ingeniously confesseth, that this Babylon is Rome, and the topographie of this great City agrees to none more evi∣dently than Rome, it is said to be seated on seven Mountaines, 17.9. which agrees to no City more than to Rome, set by Romulus heretofore on seven hills. Besides, this Babylon is called the great City, and that emphatically with a double Article , urbs illo magna, that great City. It is manifest that Rome was commonly called the City , and the great City,Vrbem quam dicunt Romam. Rev. 17.18. Distinctionem quandam com∣menti sunt in∣ter Paganem Romam & P∣panam. Illam enim Babylonem esse facile concedunt, hanc autem negant. Down. de Ant. It must be Rome Christian as it appeares from a double departure, 1 Of Babylon from the Church, Rev. 17.1. Apostasie is peculiar to Christians. Babylon is called a Whore. 2. Of the Church from Babylon, Rev. 18.3. the Temple of God is the seat of Antichrist, saith Paul. and no City but that in Saint Johns time ruled over the Kings of the Earth; all the shift the Jesuits have is, that Babylon was Rome Ethnicall under the Emperours, not Rome Christian under the Popes. But this is a poore shift, for Antichrist was not then come while Rome was Ethnicall. 2. It was Papall Rome that made all Nations drunke with the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and with whom all the Kings of the Earth committed for∣nication, and the people of God are commanded to go out of Rome Papall. Ver. 8. Because she had made all Nations drinke of the wine of the wrath of her fornication] With the wine of the poyson of her fornication, That is, besotted them with amorous potions being poysoned Wine. For  here hath not the force of anger or wrath, but as it is used by the Seventy. Poyson, That is,See Dan. 32.33. Job. 20.16. Deut. 32.24. Job. 6.4.  respondet Hebraeo Chemah, Quod significat quandoque venenum, Psa. 58.5. Sed potest ufitata significatio vocis  retineri. Dicitur vinum irae, quia Deus ex justa indignatiene tales seductiones & excaecationes permittit, ut con∣cemptus Evangelii puniutur, 2 Thes. 2.10. Gerh. in loc. they would have it equivalent to the Hebrew word Chemah, which one while signifieth anger, another while poyson. Vers. 10. The same shall drinke of the wine of the wrath of God, which is powred out with∣out mixture] That notes summam poenae severitatem, a punishment next to hell, there is utter darknesse, Philosophers say here non dantur purae tenebrae. Vers. 13. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord] Beza renders it who dye for the Lord, or for his sake; They die in the Lord which either suffer death for Christ,In the Lord.] That is, saith Mede for the Lord, as Ephes. 4.1. rather in the faith of Christ being in∣corporated in∣to him, as Rom. 8.1. and 16 7. In Domino mo∣riuntur, qui∣cunque per fidem uniti & conjuncti Christo, in unum quasi corpus cum e coalescunt. Rainold de lib. Apoc. praelect. 80. Mori∣untur in Domino, id est, propter confessionem nominis ipsius, in vera fide in Christum, in vera Dei invocatione, Rom. 16.12. 1 Cor. 7.39. Gerh. or end their life in firme faith in him, that suffer Martyrdome, or dye any way in the state of grace. Ribera a great Jesuite, though he confesse, that the common current of Expositors runs with the latter sense, yet is more earnest for the former, that Martyrs be meant speci∣ally, that (In) is put for (Propter) as oft in the old Testament, and sometimes in the New; he strives the more for that sence, because the other puts out Purgatory fire, for if all Beleevers dye in Christ and are blessed, and that henceforth, then none are to be purged. Martyres potissimum intelligi concedimus solos verò intelligi negamus, saith Gerhard in loc. From henceforth] That is, (say some) that constantly hold out in these times of persecution, presently (say others) from the very time of their death. So Dr Rainolds and Gerhard. That they may rest from their labours] That is, 1. Of a toilesome particular calling, Jer. 16.29. 2. Under afflictions from God, and persecutions from men. 3. Under sin their spirituall warfare. 4. Under temptation. 5. Desertion.
Opera eorum, i.e. Merces o∣perum, quae ex gratia datur. Gerh. Rainold. ubi supra.And their workes do follow them] Go with them, the words well weighed sound so, workes are put metonymically for the wages and reward of their works, as 2 Cor. 5.10. That every one may receive the things in his body] That is, the rewards of those things he hath done, agreeably to that which he hath done, whether good or evill. Their workes here are their eternall rewards, and that in foure things. 1. In a consummation of grace. 2. In a perfect communion with the Lord Christ. 3. In a per∣fect fruition of God. 4. In the glorious imployment that the soule shall have in heaven. CHAP. XV. IN this and the next Chapter is prophesied and declared the last ruine of the enemies of the Church, this Chapter is the preparation to it, and the next the execution of it. Vers. 2. And I saw as it were a Sea of glasse mingled with fire] Some say this is a live∣ly embleme of this Pareus Ribe∣ra, à Lapide. Dum splendet stangitur. See Rev. 4.6. world, whose glory is but glasse, bright, yet brittle: and it is mingled with fire, which signifieth the consumption of the world; which as glasse is melted with fire. 2 Pet. 3.12. Rather (saith Brightman) Gospell-ordinances, and the fire signifieth contention, Luke 22.45. Having the harpes of God] That is, divine, most excellent and sweet, after the manner of the Hebrewes, who say all those things are of God, which are chiefe and most ex∣cellent in their kind, as Gen. 23.6. Psal. 36.7. Or because God sendeth the joy of his Spirit into their hearts,Brightman. wherewith they may be able to give God his due praises for this his notable kindnesse and goodnesse unto them. Vers. 3. And they sing the song of Moses the Servant of God and the song of the Lambe, say∣ing, Great and marvellous are thy workes, &c.] Which expressions are taken out of Exod. 15. and Psal. 111.2, 3. & 7. verses. Vers. 6. Clothed in pure and white linnen, and having their breasts girded with golden gird∣les] The Angels are described to be cloathed with pure and white linnen, and to have their breasts girded with golden girdles, that is, all of them were cloathed with the righteousnesse of Christ, (which is pure linnen) both justifying and sanctifying them, the one imputed,Cotton. the other inherent, and all of them were sincere professors of the truth of Christ,Zonae aureae denotant prae∣clara Spiritus sancti Charismata, quibus sunt instructi. Gerh. in loc. their breasts girded with the golden girdles of truth. CHAP. XVI. Vers. 1. ANd I heard a great voyce out of the temple] Great] That is, vehement & terrible, such a one as he heard, ch. 1. v. 10. & 6.1. & 11.12. Without doubt of the Lambe or of God sitting in the throne as the chiefe disposer of these punishments. Pareus. There is a two fold voice mentioned in this booke. 1. From the throne, ch. 19. v. 5. that is,Brightman. from God immediately. 2. From the Temple, as here, that is obtained by the prayers of the Saints. Bullinger and others thinke these vialls im∣port onely temporall and bodily plagues, Brightman and some others will have them onely Spirituall, but they are mixed. Cowper.Go your wayes and poure out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth] The vials are vessels of large content, but of narrow mouths, they poure out slowly, but drench deeply, and distill effectually the wrath of God, they are vessels of full and just measure, as all these judgments are dispensed in weight and measure.
Of the wrath of God] That argueth, that upon what subject soever these vials fell, the wrath Cotton. As Antichrist rose by seven trumpets in the 8. Chapter; so he shall fall by seven vialls, they shall be poured on the whore of Babylon, Papists and wee agree in this, but differ in the other, who shall be the whore, we say the Church of Rome, and some of them also. Destruction comes upon all those that joyne with Rome, the earth, the common people, The Si ditionem Romanam, Rivers, those that carry abroad her trumperies, the Sun, the highest authority that holds on Rome. of God fell together with them upon the same, therefore that is a dange∣rous interpretation, v. 8. to expound the Sun to be the Scriptures. Vpon the earth] That is, the common sort of Catholiques. Vers. 2. Them which worshipped his image] They which worshipped the Image of the Beast are such as are devoted to the Canons of Popish Churches, and receive them as articles of their faith, these are all afflicted with a noysome and grievous sore, by the powring out of this first viall. For those who did powre it out were such as did con∣vince them of the damnable estate of a Catholicke, this was the common practice of the Martyrs of Jesus Christ in Q. M. Edw. the sixths, and H. the eights time, who dis∣covered unto them, that all their Religion was but the worship of God after the de∣vices of men, even will-worship, such as they were led unto by the man of sinne; up∣on this discovery there fell a noysome and grievous sore upon their Catholicke Priests, it is an allusion to Exod. 9.11. Vers. 3. And the second Angell poured out his viall upon the sea,Upon the con∣fluxe of all sorts at Trent. Brightman. Pareus. Those deadly decrees are written wih the blood of Heretickes. Cotton. and it became as the blood of a dead man: and every living soule died in the sea] This verse describes the powring out of the viall of the second Angell. He poures it on the sea, and it became as the bloud of a dead man. The allusion is to a like plague upon Egypt, Exod, 7.20.21. The Sea of the Antichristian world is here meant, a distinct world from that heavenly State wher¦in other reformed Churches stand. The confluence of all their ordinances as they doe administer the worship of God. The Sea is become blood] That is, this Religion of theirs is convinced and discovered to be such as holds forth a dead Christ, and dead ordi∣nances to any spirituall life. And every thing living in that Sea dyed, that is, every soul that had no other life, but what was bred and fed in that Religon; & had no other Christian life but what he sucked and derived from that Religion, they all perished everlastingly.Chemnitius, Iunius, Cha∣mier, Whita∣ker, Raynolds, Perkins and Ames. The Angell who powred out this viall was those worthy servants of Christ which have written either against the Trent-councell or Bellarmine, that have convinced their doctrine and worship to be all polluted, and to bee such, that if a man know, and practice, and beleeve no better, he cannot be saved. 4, 5, 6, 7. Verses. These Rivers and fountaines of water are generally conceived to be the Priests and Ministers of the Popish Church, who carry popish Religion up and downe the Nations, as Fountaines and Rivers doe the Sea up and down the earth. It became bloud as the Sea before, and carried but corrupt water which they received from the Sea. 2 Pet. 2.17. Bloud] Not onely in regard▪ that their waters themselves are bloud, the doctrine and worship which they doe hold forth to the people are cor∣rupt as their Sea is (like the plague in Aegypt, when their Waters and Rivers were turned to bloud) but chiefly in regard of the punishment which they inflict on them, for so doing, which is a bloudy death. To give a man blood to drinke is to kill him,See 5.6, verses. Cotton. Vide Pareum. as Tomyris of old said to King Cyrus. Thou hast been a blood-thirsty man, drinke thou bloud which thou hast thirsted. This Angell made the Priests to undergoe a bloody death, to drinke blood, and also made all that received and entertained them to drink blood too▪ and this was effectually accomplisht by Q. Elizabeth (saith Mr Cotton) when in the 27. yeare of her reigne, by the consent of the Parliament she made it a law, that if any Priest or Jesuite which had received orders from the Sea of Rome, or any authority from the Sea, should come into the Realme, and go about or practise to seduce any of the Queens loyall subjects from their allegiance to the obedience of the Sea of Rome; or practice to draw them to that Religion, he should be judged of high Treason, and suffer as in case of a Traytour. Vers. 5. And I heard the Angell of the waters] This Angell of the waters was he or she that poured out this viall on these waters.Q. Eliz. with the consent of her Parliament, saith Mr Cot∣ton. He attributes not onely righteousnesse to God in this, but immutabilitie and constancy, which art, and wast, and shalt be alway] Levit. 24.19.20, 21. Gen. 9.4, 5, 6.
The word translated Altar signifieth pro¦perly an Altar for beasts that are slaine, though some∣times it be put for the Al∣tar of Incense. as 8.3. Which is also a signe of Christs death in like manner.Vers. 7. And I heard another out of the Altar say] That is, another Angell, a Minister and Messenger of Gods justice. This phrase out of the Altar, in this booke doth usu∣ally hold forth some under persecution, either going in or new come out of persecu∣tion, so it is expressed, Rev. 6.9. The Altar is Christ, and Christ suffering; and those under the Altar are they that suffered with Christ for the word of God, speaking of the primitive Christians in their first persecution. Here he saith not, they were under mar∣tyrdome, but they were come out from under the Altar, that holds forth (saith Mr Cotton) those Christians in the Low-Countries, who of a long time had been under per∣secution by Duke D' Alva, and other Spanish Princes. Duke D' Alva boasted of it, that he had put 36000. Hugonets and Protestants to death, for the testimony of Jesus, but they were rescued by the faithfulnesse of God, giving and blessing the courage of Queene Elizabeth, and now they are got from under the Altar. Vers. 8. And the fourth Angell poured out his viall upon the Sun] That is, the house of Austria say some; the highest authority that holds on Rome, say others. Vers. 9. And they repented not to give him glory] See v. 11. Babylon must needs be destroyed, because she shall never repent. Vers. 10. And the fifth Angell poured out his viall upon the feare of the beast] The seat of the Beast is generally taken for the City of Rome,That is his kingdome, as the following words explain, and the fami∣liar phrase∣ologie of scrip∣ture doth evince. Dauids throne is put for his kingdome, and Satans for his ch. 2. & 13. Forbes. and it is confirmed from the like speech, Rev. 13.2. and therefore they gather from hence the ruine of Rome; rather the Popes singular sole authority, and monarchiall frame of Church-government, whereby he sitteth chiefe, and onely Judge in ecclesiasticall causes, in his own juris∣diction. And his kingdome was full of darknesse] A Kingdome is a government wherein one doth reigne. It is an allusion (say some) to the stratagem by which Cy∣rus made him∣selfe Master of Babylon, ha∣ving cut the river and turn∣ed Euphrates into many lit∣tle Channels.Vers. 12. And the sixth Angell poured out his viall upon the great river Euphrates, and the water thereof was dryed up, that the way of the Kings of the east might be prepared] The Christian Kings shall so farre fall off from Rome, as that they shall drie up all her re∣venewes, when they shall see and abhorre the vanity of their Images and Temples, and monasteries, and the unprofitablenesse of their expences, when they shall see the wick∣ednesse of their bloudy inquisitions, the unnaturallnesse of all those murders of Gods blessed servants, and their witcheries and sorceries; the horrible fornications and whoredomes of their Stewes, then is the fountaine of the Turkish maintenance cut off also, and a ready way made indeed for the Kings of the earth, that is the Jews, Exod. 19.6. Dan. 7.27. Out of their mouthes, that is their commands 3. That is, Car∣dinalls Bishops and Jesuites. Jesuites are frogges, 1. Vn∣cleane. 2. Make a noise in the darke. 3. They arise out of putrefaction and live of it. 4. Are animalia amphibia, one while in the earth, another while in the water; so they seeme lay-men and Priests. 5. As Pharoahs frogs, they go into the Kings bed-cham∣ber. These frogges by the common consent of Catholicke expositors are the rabble of Popsh Fryers Priests and Jesuites. Mr Perkins. Animal impudens, obstreperum, loquax, coaxatione & garrulitate intolerabile. Vide Fenneri Theol. p. 229.Vers. 13. And I saw three uncleane spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet] False Prophets which pretended to speake by the Spirit of God, 1 Iohn 4.1. They are spirits for nimblenesse and activity, for impetu∣ousnesse and strength, for close and cleanly conveiance; And Spirits of Devils, v. 14. That is, of a devillish nature, The Greeke word shews their knowledge and learning, they are learned spirits, and yet Devills for their deceit and mischiefe. The Dragon is Satan acting Rome, the beast There were foure beasts in Ezekiell which persecuted the Church of the Jews, here is mention made, but of the Beast, because this hath as much cruelty as all the other. B. Vsher. Rome Antichristian, the false Prophet the Pope. Vers. 14. Working miracles] 2 Thes. 2.9. Which goe forth unto the Kings of the earth] That is, the earthly Religion. The whole world] That is, both Popish and pagane Princes. To gather them to the battell of that great day of God Almighty] That is not the last judg∣ment (as some have thought) there will be no warning then,That is, to get a great battell against Christ and those Christian Princes that have been studious in the reformation of religion. but every day of great execution is called a great day of God Almighty. See 19. ch. 17.
Vers. 15. Behold I come as a Thiefe] Not in injustice or robbery, but sodainely, secretly and unexpectedly, yea and also violently and terribly as a Thiefe. See 3.3. Matth. 24.43. Luke 12.39. 1 Thes. 5.2. Blessed is he that watcheth and keepeth his garments] That is, He enjoyes his own blessed∣nesse, and increaseth and establisheth it. Some understand the keeping of his garments of the imputed righteousnesse of Christ, so it is to hold fast fiduciam remission is;Brightm. Others Cotton. interpret it of inherent righteousnesse, Rev. 19.8. Others of the glory of our pro∣fession, garments being given to cover our nakednesse, Rev. 3.4. That walke un∣spotted. Least he walke naked and they see his shame] He shall by this meanes prevent the dis∣covery of his owne shame and nakednesse. Ver. 16. And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue, Armageddon] That is, they went forth to perswade them, and did prevaile mightily with them.Vide Gerh. in loc. Because there at the univer∣sall slaughters of the beast the troopes or bands shall bee destroyed. For Arma signifieth destruction, Gedon or Geddon a troop, Army. Mede. Arma∣geddon signifieth the hill of Megiddon, for Mageddon & Megiddon are but different writings holding forth the same thing. Not that this battell shal be fought there, but it is so called because of the neere resemblance of the battell fought in this field, unto those battels which were fought in Megiddon in old time. For it is usual in the Prophets of the New-Testament to allude unto things spoken of in the old. Here is an allusion to three no∣table battels fought in Megiddon, Iudg. 5.19. 2 Kings 23.29. 1 Sam. 31.28. It is spoken of in the Hebrew tongue, because this shall befall the Hebrew people. The summe is, that these Spirits went forth to gather those Popish and Heathen Princes together, into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Cotton. Armageddon, where the battell shall have the like successe that it had of old, unto the destruction of Gods three enemies, the utter ruine of Antichrist, as of Saul, the setling of the kingdome of Christ upon David, unto the conversion of the Jews, who shall upon this occasion mourne bitterly over him, whom they have pierced. It is a mourning of compunction, whereby they (seeing in this bat∣tell that Christ is indeed the true Messias) shall mourne that they have been so long e∣stranged from him. Ve. 17. The aire] That is, the kingdome of Satan, Ephes. 2.2. See Brightman. Rather thus, the Lord will send forth such a bright and cleere knowledge of his Christ and Church, and Saints, and holy things, which will prevaile so farre as to dispell all the mists of darknesse in all the world. It is done] The mysterie of iniquity is abolished, and the mysterie of God is ful∣filled. Vers. 18. And there were voices, and thunders and lightnings] The Lord will so ter∣ribly affright and amaze the Sons of men with the power of his holy word and will, as that it shall suddenly breake forth all the world over. And there was a great earthquake] This imports agitations and changes, not terrour onely, it will shake out popery, and when by it the Popish aire is smitten, the Lord also will shake all the world by it, and the time doth hasten. Vers. 19. And the great City] That is, Rome. See 17.18. & 18.20. Was divided into three parts] It will be divided into three factions, some will sticke fast unto Popery; and others of the people of God that before durst not openly pro∣fesse Religion, will now renounce Popery; the third part may be a neutrall betweene both the other. And the Cityes of the Nations fell] The Cityes of the nations were they who did sub∣ject themselves to the popish government.See 11. To give unto thee the cup of the wine of the fiercenesse of his wrath] Cup is a part or por∣tion, Psal. 11.6. and 16.5. By a metaphore taken from Masters of feasts,Brightman. who were wont to measure out to every one as much as he should drinke. Gods judgements are inflicted upon men in a just measure, and wine because they are pleasing to God, as mens sins to them. Vers. 20. And every Island fled away, and the mountaines were not found] He speaketh of the Mountaines and Islands of the Antichristian state. The Mountaines are the places where they went a whoring after their Gods in old time, Ier. 3.6. Islands places consecrated by Popish devotions, as Church-yards and the like. Vers. 21. And there fell upon men a great haile] It is an allusion to the haile storme
in Aegypt, whereof the effect was, that they sinned and hardened their hearts ye more.See 28. Esay 17. This kind of haile-storme is such a plague of God upon men, as shall destroy all their lying refuges, and discover all the counterfeit Religions in the world. CHAP XVII. THe ninth and eighteenth verses are the key for the opening of this Prophecie, con∣cerning the beast and the whore. Down. Diat. de Antich. l. 1. c: 5.The Whore in this Chapter is Rome, the Beast the Romane State, the last head of the Romane State Antichrist. The name of the Beast is taken in this Chapter two wayes, either for the whole body of the Beast, as v. 3. where the woman is said to sit on the Beast, in which sense the Beast is the same with many waters,Id. ib. v. 1. viz. people, nations, languages, subject to the Romane Empire, or for the head which is Antichrist. See. 11, 12, 13, 17. verses. Vers. 3. And I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet coloured beast] First it is to be observed that St Iohn here and 13.1. according to the example of the Prophet Daniel, Dan. 7.3. doth by the tearm of a beast import some earthly kingdome, stateRegnum aut Imperium Ro∣manum.and govern∣ment, therefore named a beast to signifie the same to be led wholly with beastly and carnall affection to these things that concerne the flesh and savour of the flesh. Abbot against Bishop.2. By a woman, a harlot, he noteth a City, which is the place and palace of such a state given to fornications, both spirituall by idolatry, and corporall by wantonnesse, which sitteth and hath advancement by the preheminence of that kingdome, state and govern∣ment; thus the Angell plainely distinguisheth the woman and the beast, v. 7. Though sometimes they are used indifferently for the same, v. 1. Compared with 15. and 18. but there was no City that reigned over the Kings of the Earth, and over those many nations and people, but onely the City of Rome; therefore she is here meant, v. 9. further confirmes it. The City of Rome is famous for seven hilles. Septimontium nomi∣natur ab his septem montibus in quibus vrbs sita est.Vrbs Septi. collis is its common Epi∣there. Varro de lingua Latina l. 5. I heard one in Cambridge, wittily argue thus from the letters of Papa, P. Poculum. A. Aureum. P. Plenum. A. Abominationum, to which the respondent no lesse wittily replyed. Profecto Domi∣ne hoc est literatissimum argumentum.Ver. 4. Having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations] Pareus saith by this golden cup the golden titles of the Pope are meant, in which he hath hitherto drunke the wine of his fornication to the world, as Papa, Pater Patrum, Pater sanctissimus, Sanctitas, Christi vicarius, Petri successor, &c. Full of abominations, and filthinesse of her fornication] Gold without, but poyson with∣in. He understands the wicked blasphemous Doctrines, and filthy sins, with which the Whore of Rome hath made drunke the Christian world. Vt summus olim Pontifex. Exod. 28.36. in frontali in∣scriptum gestabat titulum hunc Sanctitas Jehovae: Ita Romanus Pontifex in sua tiara, hoc ipsum nomen, mysterium. Down. Diat. de Ant. l. 1. c. 7. Vide Quistorpium. Alsted.Vers. 5. And upon her forehead was a name written, Mystery] One saith, he saw a mystery engraven in the Popes Myter or Crown. It is called mystery, because Rome was raised in a mystery, that is, she got up to her height insensibly and cunningly. Babylon the great] Not long after the time of the foundation of the Church of Rome did Saint John write this Book of the Revelation, wherein he revealeth that the City of Rome is Babylon, according to the generall consent of their own Jesuites and Divines. B. Mortons appeale. ch. 4. Sect. 15. Babylon mysticall here is the fear, or chiefe City of Antichrist, resembling the Assyrian Babylon in pride, idolatry, filthiness, and especially, in most cruel persecution of the Church of God Down. concerning Antichrist ch. 2. see more there.Babylon Apocalyptica est Romana. Bellarmine, l. 3. de Pont. c. 12. & lib. 2. c. 2. Ribera & Ve∣ga in Apoc. 14. And not only Rome as it was Ethnicall in the daies of the heathenish
Emperours, but Rome Papall; see Rhemists on Apoc. 17.5. because say Ribera, and Vie∣ga, the Spirit warneth all that were in her to depart, 18.4. but there were then no faith∣full in the heathenish Rome, and they are commanded to come out of her for feare of being consumed with fire. Rome is termed Babylon in many resemblances, and one egge is not liker another.Dr. Taylor. 1. Babell was the great City that must rule over all Nations, Gen. 10.10. and Rome is the great City that must rule over all Cities and Churches. 2. At Babell was the first con∣fusion of Tongues, Gen. 11.7. In and from Rome is the first confusion of Tongues, and of errours, one not understanding another in the Word or Sacraments, or other their Services. 3. At Babell was horrible superstition and wickednesse in Priests and People, and thence it spread all abroad. Rome is a sinke of superstition and filthinesse, and all Nations have drunke of her Cup. 4. Babell held the Church in slavery seventy yeares; so the Church of Christ hath been oppressed a long time under the tyranny of the Romish Church. 5. Babell robbed and spoiled the Church of her Treasures, and the Temple of God, and horribly polluted it. Rome hath robbed the Church of the Word, Sacraments, the Offices of Christ, and most comfortable doctrine, the chiefe dowrie and revenew that Christ her head gave her. 6. Babell most miserably intreated the Church, Psal. 137.1. so all is full of cruelty in the Romane Church. Vers. 5. The mother of Harlots, and abominations of the earth] Because she infecteth all Nations that adhere unto her with her Idolatries and superstitions. See ver. 2.Hoc est, inven∣trix, confirma∣trix, propaga∣trix & propugnatrix quarumvis idolomaniarum, doctrinarum damnabilium. Glas. Rher. Sac. Vers. 6. And I saw the woman drunken with the bloud of the Saints, and with the bloud of the Martyrs of Jesus] Papists say that bloud was not shed in Rome but in Jerusalem where the Lord was crucified. Rev. 11.8. That place in the 11. ch. is not meant of Hierusalem, as Hierome saith, but may well be understood of Rome; Christ was crucified there, either because the authority whereby he was crucified was from the Romane Empire, or else because Christ in his members was and is there dayly crucified, though locally in his own person he was crucified at Hierusalem.Perkins. Vers. 8. The beast that thou sawest, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomlesse pit] For the darke and deepe schoole-learning,Symonds Pis∣gah Evange∣lica. or profoundnesse of Satan which it teacheth, leaving the plaine and easie Doctrine of the Scriptures. Vers. 9. The seven heads are seven mountaines, on which the woman sitteth] The moun∣taines are sufficiently known out of Poets and Histories. Neither could any more fa∣mous marke be brought to describe Rome, saith Grotius. Septem urbs alta jugis, toti quae praesidet orbi. The City mounted on seven hills, overruling the whole world] The names of these hills are commonly known, and usually named in Romane Authors, viz. Palatinus, Capitolinus, Quirinalis, Caelius, Esquilinus, Viminalis, Aventinus. Vers. 10. And there are seven Kings] Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespa∣tian, Titus. So Grotius. Others interpret it of seven severall Regiments,Down. Diat. de Ant. l. 1. c. 4. & alii. or Heads of Go∣vernment, to which the State of Rome was successively subject, that is to Kings, (which also were seven) Consuls, Decemvirs, Tribunes, Dictators, Emperours, and Popes; of these five ceased before Johns time, the sixth which was of Emperours was now, the seventh which was of Popes, was not yet. Vers. 11. The eighth head, which is also one of the seven,Down. of Ant. l. 1. c. 3. is the Empire renewed by the Pope, and is said to be the Beast, which was and is not though it be, whereon the Whore of Babylon sitteth. Vers. 12. With the beast] or after the beast, as others read it, that is, Antichrist. Vers. 13. And shall give thei power and strength unto the beast] . Their naturall power the power of armes, and their civill power, the po∣wer of authority. Vers. 14. And the Lambe shall overcome them] Not by destruction but conversion, he will make use of them after to overthrow Antichrist. Vers. 15. The waters which thou sawest, where the whore sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and
nations] That very universality which the Romans are wont so much to brag of. Vers. 16. The ten Kings or Kingdomes of Europe, some reckon up to be these, England,I am perswa∣ded that Pope∣ry shall never be established againe in this Kingdome, because the everlasting Gospell shall spread still more and more through all the Kingdomes of Europe, as ap∣peareth 14.6. otherwise how shall Rome fall? How shall the Jews ever be converted? Deut. Scotland, Germany, France, Spaine, Denmarke, Sweveland, Poland, Russia, Hun∣garie, that tooke part with Rome, and shall pull her down. They are compared to horns, because they were the strength and defence of the Romane Empire and Papacy. Vers. 17. And give their kingdome unto the Beast] That is, all the strength and warlike force, and the authority and Laws. Vers. 8. That great City, which reigneth over the Kings of the Earth] Rome was only that famous City, called therefore Vrbs by an excellency, and here with great Emphasis, that great City. Rome papall, that monarchie was then the only monarchie in the world. Mart. l. 12. Epig. 8. Down. of Ant l. 1. c. 2.Terrarum Dea Gentiumque Roma Cui par est nihil, & nihil secundum. By this title of great City thoughout the Apocalypse is meant Babylon or Rome, as ap∣peareeth by conference of these places, Apoc. 14.8. and 16.19. and 18.10.16.18.19.21. but especially by this place here. CHAP. XVIII. Vers. 1. ANother angell] One of the heavenly host and all other instruments acted by him. Vers. 2. Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen] That is, Rome, and new Rome. See 14.8. and 17.5.As the Eastern, and Chaldeon Babylon did a long time op¦presse the Church of the Jews, so this Westerne and Italian Babylon hath kept under most miserable oppression and thral∣dome the Church of the Christians. Dr. Taylor. See 18. ver. of this ch. Babylon called for its sorcery; the great] 1. From the greatnesse of their glory. 2. From the extent of their power and dominion. Is fallen, is fallen] The Lord speakes of it in praeterito, is fallen, after the manner of the Hebrews who put praeteritum pro futuro when they would shew the certainty of a thing. Ezek. 7.4.5. & cum reduplicatione, is fallen, is fallen. Such repetition used in Scripture for a double end, to set forth, 1. The perfection of a thing done, Esay 26.3. Psal. 137.7. it notes an utter destruction. 2. The affection of the speaker. Psal. 22.1. 2 Sam. 18.33. Three things are intended by this speech, the certainty of the destruction of Babylon, and its utter destruction, and the joy and triumph of Gods people at it. Vers. 3. For all nations have drunke of the wine of the wrath of her fornication) Therefore shall Babylon fall, because she hath corrupted Religion. And the Kings of the earth have com∣mitted fornication with her] She hath corrupted them, and they are her last refuge, 16.14. Magistracy is a stampe of Gods image, therefore he is provoked to have it corrupted. Vers. 4. Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues] Some interpret it of locall departing,Aliquot electi delitescunt ad∣huc. Bright. as Lot went out of Sodome, and the Text favours that interpretation. Come out in affection, in action, and in habitation, both by spirituall and bodily de∣parture: Little Mice (they say) presaging the ruine of a house do flie out before hand.Dr Taylor. Vers. 5. For her sins have reached unto heaven] The words in the originall are, her sins have followed,Brightman. Beza vertir. accumulata pervenerunt. that is, her sins following one upon, and after another, knit together in a continued order, have by this meanes grown to such a heape, that they came up even unto heaven at length. Vers. 6. Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her works] God doth not command here that Babylon should be twice punished for the same sin, that were not according to the rules of divine justice. Double here hath reference to Babylons dealings with the Church; Shee did greatly afflict Sion, and now God would have Babylon to have double affliction to that; Babylon did unjustly in oppressing Sion,Ier. 51.45. Sion should do righteously in destroying Babylon.
Vers. 8. She shall be utterly burnt with fire] See 17.16. Harlots by the Law of God were to be burnt with fire, Gen. 38.24. but Babylon, 17.1, 2, 5. is a Harlot. 2. By the law of retaliation, she must be consumed with fire, for she hath adjudged many of Gods Saints to the fire. For strong is the Lord God who judgeth her] Babylon must needs fall when God him∣selfe opposeth her. Vers. 10. Alas, alas, that great City, Babylon] 1. Great in splendor and beauty, as set upon seven hills, for which she is famous in all the world. 2. Great in power and au∣thority, the metrapolitane of all the earth then.Dr Taylor. Toties hoc in∣geminatun, ut gloriationem Romanistarum de magnitudine urbis & ecclesiae Romanae pudefaciat Propheie. Pareus. They have little cause to boast of their Temporall felicitie and greatnesse. Vers. 11, 12. The Merchants of the earth shall weep and mourne over her for no man buyeth her merchandise any more. The merchandise of gold and silver and precious stones, &c.] This can∣not be understood literally, there shall be merchandizing after Romes destruction, but that kind of merchandizing. Rome trades, 1. In the things of God, his doctrine, wor∣ship. 2. In the sins of men. 3. The souls of men. v. 13 Sets to sale the truths & ordinances of God, sins, and soules of men. It is well called nobile emporium rerum Spiritualium. Vers. 14. And the fruits that thy soule lusted after,Vide Bezam. Intelligit deli∣cias secunda∣rum mensarum, confectiones delicatas, quibus Romanus clerus etiam his terve in die se farciens, tamen jeiunat. Pareus. are departed from thee] The Greek word signifieth autumn fruit, their second services, suckets, sweet meates and delicate con∣fections. Vers. 21. And a mighty Angell tooke up a stone like a great milstone, and cast it into the Sea, saying,Lapis magnus suâ mole ruit, magno cum im∣petu; majori, si projiciatur; longè maximo, si projiciatur ab aliquo robusto & lacertoso. Alstedius. Thus with violence shall that great City Babylon be throwne downe] The Angell ex∣presseth it by this signe. 1. To shew the difficultie of putting down Babylon. 2. The violence of it. 3. The irrecoverablenesse of it. Vers. 22. And the voyce of harpers and musicians, and of pipers and trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee] See Ier. 25.10. The Jews were wont to have musick at their feasts, Isay 5.11.24. especially at marriages. See Luke 15.25. & v. 23. of this Chapter. Vers. 23. For thy Merchants were the great men of the earth] , Princes of the earth, for their great riches. See 33. Deut. 19. Vers. 24. And in her] That is, Babylon, now Rome. Was found the bloud of Prophets] Namely of the New Testament, they were killed at Jerusalem. Ribera. They were not all killed within the precincts of the City of Rome, but all which for Religions sake were put to death, by her authority or instigation were delivered to death. Romes cruelty will cause her ruine. CHAP. XIX. Vers. 1. IN heaven] Not the Church, but the innumerable company of glorified ones in heaven say some; others interpret it of the Church, and say praise is given to God in the Church in the Hebrew tongue, because the Jews the Hebrew people,Mr Bulklie on the Covenant. shall acknowledge the Lord Jesus with us. Vers. 2. For he hath judged the great whore] That is, Rome, called whore as before, because of her Apostatizing from the truths of God and her former covenant; the great whore, because of her universall poisoning of the earth. Vers. 4. And the foure and twenty Elders] That is, the Church; and the foure beasts] That is, the Ministers. Vers. 8. For the fine linnen is the righteousnesse of Saints] Righteousnesses Greek. This (say some) signifieth a double righteousnesse given unto us, 1. The righteous∣nesse
of justification, whereby we are justified before God. 2. The righteousnesse of sanctification, by which we evidence our justification to men: OthersDownames Summe of Di∣vinity. Vide Bezam & Pareum. say it is an he∣braisme rather, by the plurall righteousnesses noting the most absolute righteousnesse which we have in Christ; so the Hebrew word is used, Esay 45.24. Vers. 9. Blessed are they which are called unto the marriage supper of the Lambe] By this marriage-supper is meant the great generall wedding feast in heaven after the resurrecti∣on,Soliti fuerunt veteres, quod etiam nunc fa∣clitatur, spon∣sum honorificè deducere, illique cùm celebrarentur nuptiae adesse & comitari, ut illa sociorum, amicorum, propinquo∣rumque frequentia nuptiis dignitatem, hilaritatem conciliaret. Hos novi mariti comites sponsi filios appellat Christus Matth. 9.15. Hi socii nominatim eligebantur, & vocabantur ferè ab ipsis sponsis, ut sibi adessent, & conviviis etiam, aliisque hilaritatis significationibus, quae exhibebantur, interessent. Iudic. 14.11. Matth. 22.14. Menochius de Re∣pub. Heb. l. 3. c. 21. where the King of glory and the Angels are, where the Lambes wife, v. 7, 8. and all shall meete, at which are all the creatures in their greatest glory. See thou do it not] The prohibition is much more emphaticall in the originall, see not ,Vide ne scilicet adores. Ellipsis gravitatem facti denotat. Alsted. there is an ellipsis of the word doe or worship, saith Alsted. I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus] This is the first reason against the worshipping of Angels, We are equall in office, Therefore thou owest not to mee religious but sociall worship. The other reason followes, worship God, because to him alone religious worship is due as belonging to the first Table of the Decalogue. CHAP. XX. Vers. 1. AND I saw an Angell come downe from heaven] See the 12. ch. 9. v. Our Lord Jesus Christ.Quadrant in Christumaptis∣simè sacri con∣textus omnes circumstantiae. Reverendissi∣mus Episc. Vsserius de Christianarum ecclesiarum successione & statu. l. 1. Primasius, Austen and others. The Angell of the Co∣venant, Mal. 3 Iohn 3.13. He descends from heaven by his incarnation. Pareus. He hath the key of the bottomlesse pit, that is, the power of hell and death, which Christ ascribes to himselfe, 18.18. and binds Satan which is proper to Christ. Pareus. And a great chaine in his hand] By which he bound the Devill; the moderne Expo∣sitors interpret it the inevitable and binding power of the divine majesty, a long and strong chaine to bind a most cruell enemy, 12.13. Vers. 2. And bound him a thousand yeares] That is, he should not stirre up the lusts of men,Alii ante passi∣onem Domini tempus ligatio∣nis Satanae in∣choandum non existimant freti Ioh. 12.31.32. Quod quidem tum ad passionem Dominicam referri poterit, tum ad E∣vangelii quae illam subsecuta est, per orbem terrarum promulgationem, quo tanquam firmissimo vinculo ligatus est Satanas: atque ex tyrannide illa qua Gentes antea oppresserat, planè deturbatus. Episc. Vsser. ibid. Ligatus dicitur Satanas & in custodias inclusus, non ut omnino non seduceret, sed ne in omnes simul gentes, uti erat solitus, perversas atque impias religiones induceret; neve ita potenter ut antea, tantoque cum successu in mundo grassaretur. Id. ubi supra. Vide Pareum. to make warre against the Saints of God. See 8, 9. verses. What he was hindred from when he was bound he attempted to do when loose. Id est, firmiter muniit, ne ulla∣tenus pateret exitus. Nam mos erat Hebraeis & vicinis gentibus quando firmiter munitum & obseratum volebant ostium, ut ei sigil∣lum apponerent. Sic Dan. 6.17. Matth. 27.62. Mede in Clav. Apoc.And shut him up and set a seale upon him] That is, upon the dore of the bottomlesse pit, lest hee should breake out before his time. A thousand yeares] Not a definite time as is meant in the beginning of the chapter, but an indefinite time, that is, for ever, as Psal. 84.10. a thousand yeares is a type of eternity.Vers. 6. Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection, and shall reigne with him a thousand yeares] There are two common interpretations. Some understand the
first resurrection from the death of sin, and a reigning in heaven a thousand yeares, they interpret eternity and a further degree of glory for such as are called forth to suffer. Secondly, others understand it literally, that then shall be a corporall resurrection of all the Martyrs to live with Christ a 1000. yeares. First, it cannot be a reigning with Christ in heaven, because it is something peculiar to those that are beheaded, a resur∣rection which followes that, they rise from sin before they dye, besides the 9. and 10. verses shew it cannot be meant of heaven. Secondly, it cannot bee understood of the corporall resurrection, the dead in Christ rise first, yet so that all the rest shall be raised in the same moment. Resurrection is used commonly in Scripture to expresse a high degree of advancement after a low ebbe of misery, Ezek. 37. Esay 26.19. Those that were beheaded shall live. Priests of God] That is, sanctified to offer spirituall service. Vers. 7. Satan shall be loosed out of his prison] Because the very acting of the power which he hath, is at the dispose of God.Id est, recipies priorem potes∣tatem. Glosa interlinearis. Uers. 8. Gog and Magog] There is scarce a darker passage than this about Gog and Magog, for we read them joyned together only twice, once in the Old Testament, Ezek. 38. & 39. ch. and in this place. All the Schoole-men almost follow the Glosse and Prosper, who hold that by Gog, an hidden and secret enemy of the Church is meant,Dr Prid. in Orat. tertia. by Magog an open enemie, therefore they have no cause to find fault with our writers who apply those things to Antichrist in and Antichrist out of the Church.Some expound it the Papists and Mahome∣tans. Pareus interprets Gog and Magog to be those foure Angels bound at the great River Euphrates. ch. 9.14. Gog signifieth Asia minor, having that name from Gyges the King thereof. Magog is Hierapolis the chiefe seat of Idolatry in Syria, built by the Scythians, and from them hath that name. So that by the land of Magog we are to understand Syria, and by Gog, Asia minor. And for as much as the Princes and people of Syria and Asia minor,Plin. l. 5. c. 23. were the most grievous enemies of the Jews, by whom they sustained the chiefest calamities after their returne before the coming of Christ: therefore by an usuall speech in the Jewish language, the mortall enemies of the Church, are called Gog and Magog. And in this sense John the Divine useth these names, Gog and Magog,Down. of Antich. l. 2. c. 16. to signifie the enemies of the Church, meaning not the same enemies whereof Ezechiel speaketh, but the like enemies of the Church, which should afflict the true Christians, as Gog and Magog afflicted the Jews. Vers. 10. And shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever] Ever hath no end,Pareus. but here is a plurality for ever and ever. Vers. 11. And I saw a great white throne] A great throne] Because set for the great, that is, the universall judgement of the whole world; white] Shining with celestiall light and majestie. The white colour in Scripture is used to represent purity and glory,Elton. here it signi∣fieth that the Judge shall give most just and uncorrupt judgement, and free from all spot of partiality. Vers. 12. And the bookes were opened] There are two books, 1. Of Gods omniscience, in which all our speeches, deeds, thoughts, are registred. Psal. 139.15. Mal. 3.16.Alludes to Dan. 7.10. 2. Of every mans conscience. Luke 16.9. Rom. 2.15. And the dead were judged] The Apostle here speaketh prophetically, and putteth the past time for the future, they were judged, that is, they shall be judged.Mr Fennet. Vers. 14. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire] That is, the dominion of death found no where but in hell.
CHAP. XXI. Vers. 1. AND I saw a new heaven and a new earth] The interpretation of this (saith Brightman) may be taken out of Heb. 12.26. Heaven in this part of the Revelation is put for the more pure Church, and the earth for the degenerating Ci∣tizens thereof. Vers. 2. New Jerusalem comming down from God] St Iohns new Jerusalem, and Eze∣chiels City Quae omnia (de Novo Tem∣plo &c. à capi∣te 40. usque ad finem libri) statum, formam, conditionem & fortunam ecclesiae Dei in N.T. designarunt, & gratiae regnum (à quo transitus fit ad regnum gloriae, ab Ezechiele quoque non minus quam à Johanne in Apacalypsi) eleganter expresserunt. Haffentefferus in Templum Ezech. sive in 9. postrema Prophetae capita. and Temple, from 40. Chapter to the end (say some) are contemporary, and signifie one and the same thing. Ob. Iohn saith he lookt for a temple and saw none. Sol. He meanes in comparison of the former manifestation they had of God, and those darke wayes he had shewed him∣selfe in, it should be as glorious as heaven it selfe, longè uberior manifestatio. Bright. No Temple in opposition to the Jewish Temple, but a Gospell-Temple. Mr. Bridge. Vers. 3. Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and hee will dwell with them] A Ta∣bernacle is moveable, therefore (say some) this is not spoken of heaven. 2. Yet this glorious Church of Jews and Gentiles shall have ordinances. Vers. 4. And God shall wipe away all teares from their eyes] The meaning is, he takes from them all sorrow and crying, and paine, as the Spirit explicates himselfe. Dr Sclater. The phrase is taken out of Esay 25.8. and it is an allusion to the naturall affection of Mothers, which are wont to please little children crying, and to wipe away their teares. Pareus. à Lapide. And there shall be no more death] Neither the first nor second. He doth not meane those which are ever fearefull of their owne estates, lest they have not faith, or be hypocrites, that shall be damned, though these feares being excessive and ill grounded are faults.Vers. 8. But the fearefull] Here is a catalogue of the damend crue, and the fearefull are in the forefront, that is, those which are so afraide of bodily dangers and miseries, that they count it their best course to save themselves from such evill, by neglecting their duty. And unbeleeving] Which give not credit to the word of God. Perkins.Vers. 18. and 19. The State of this heavenly City is shadowed by precious stones, and gold, to signifie as well the durablenesse as the excellencie thereof. Vers. 22. For the Lord God Almighty, and the Lambe are the Temple of it] This cannot be understood of heaven. See 24. & 26. verses. See 22. c. 3.4. and Ezek. 48. vlt.Vers. 24. And the Kings of the earth do bring their glory and honour into it] To the Church, not when in heaven. Mr. Burrh on Hos. Vers. 26. And they shall bring the glory and honour of the nations into it] There shall bee a more glorious presence of Christ (whether personall or what it will,See Mr. Burrh. on Phil. 4.11. 3d Sermon. p. 52 we determine not) among his people than ever yet was since the beginning of the world.
CHAP. XXII. Vers. 2. AND yeelded her fruit every moneth] Were the trees so created at first, that if sin had never entred in (which hath brought into the world thornes, briars, sweate of face,Brightman. and difficulty of living) they would have flourished alwayes laden with their fruites? This allusion here seemes to intimate some such matter, and perhaps Christ would never have cursed the Fig-tree that was void of fruit, when the time of Figs was not come, unlesse it ought to have borne figs at all times by the first nature thereof. Marke 11.13. Vers. 4. And they shall see his face] Not that men shall have a beatificall vision of God here, but such a glorious discoverie of the will of God, that it shall be a beatificall vision in comparison of what was before seen. Vers. 8. I fell down to worship before the feet of the Angell] See Rev. 19.10.Johannes semel admonitus ite∣rum id non contendisset, nisi ex quadam tantum urbanitate prohibitum se credidisset. Lorinas in c. 10. Act. Apost. v. 25. Ejusdem opinionis est Viegas in. c. 19. Apoc. v. 10. & 22. v. 8. Verum verba Angeli pro urbana repulsa accipi nequeunt, sed pro necessaria prohibitione sunt intelligenda, inprimis si mandatum Adora Deum, & verba concisa Videne feceris, con∣sideremus. Rivetus in Catholico orthodoxo. Vers. 12. To give every man according as his worke shall be] Marke, he saith not to the worke, or for the worke, but to the worker, according to his workes. Perkins. Vers. 15. And whosoever loveth and maketh a lye] Some apply it to hypocrisie, others to hankering after the old way of Idolatry. Vers. 16. The bright and Morning Starre] That is, Christ, it is not unusuall to call any eminent person by this name. See Esay 14.12. Vers. 17. And the Spirit and the Bride say, come] That is (say some) the Spirit in the Bride. FINIS.
A Review of the whole worke, consisting of emen∣dations and Additions. MATTHEW. Chap. 2. verse 1, 2. THE Papists affirme three things of the wise men. 1. That they were Kings.Whitaker a∣gainst Rainolds Trium Regum incipit pudere Papistas, si qui sunt paulò Cordatiores. Canus relinquit in medio, fuerintne verè reges an non fuerint: negans eos qui asserunt niti historiae quam nullam probatam habuerint, sed probabilibus tantum Coniecturis nonnullis. Chamier tomo secundo. l. 16. c. 1. 2. That they were three. 3. That their names were Gaspar, Melchior, and Baltasar. But there is no ground in the Scripture for any of these opinions. Matth. 3.11. Whose shooes I am not worthy to beare] Or unloose, as Marke 1.7. The Baptist saith, he is not worthy to loose or take away our Saviours shoes, that is, to be his Disciple, for by Maimonie in the Title of learning the Law. ch. 5. we learne, that the Disciples of the Jews Doctors, were to doe that service for their Masters. Mr. Thorn∣dikes discourse of the right of the Church in a Christian State. ch. 2. Matth. 4.3. Since thou seest thy selfe to be forsaken of God, &c. Perkins there in the Margent should be set higher to the former note, and Calvin to that, though those words are no good sense, for how should he that is forsaken of God, be able to doe such a Miracle. Rather thus, if thou hast such neer relation to God, now that thou standst in need of bread and hast none at hand, command, &c. Matth. 5.18. Iota] The Syriack hath Iod, and so it is likely (saith In loc. p. 12. in the margent of my Anno∣tations, there is Ioth pro Iod. Menochius) Christ said, as speaking to the Hebrewes, amongst which Iod is the least of the letters: but the Greek interpreter put for it some thing like that it might be understood of the Graecians Matth. 6.2. Doe not sound a trumpet before thee] Because those fasts were solemni∣zed in the streete with sound of trumpet.Quod in hypo∣critas dictum, qui plus specta∣toris gloriola, quam ipsius benefacti conscientia, delectabantur. Elegantissimè verò Salvator respexit ad morem triumphatorum, Tragae∣dorum ac Comaedorum. In triumphatorum enim & histrionum ingressu, tubis canebatur ut omnes oculis & auribus at∣tenderent. Nam & hoc loco, quasi Tragaediam aut Comaediam aliquam Pharisaeorum, Christus inducit: &, observante Schotto, fabularum actores seu histriones qui personati, & cum larva prodibant, à Graecis dicti sunt . Dilh. elect. l. 1. c. 2. Thorndikes discourse of the right of the Church in a christian State. ch. 4. Matth. 8.12. Gnashing] In Greeke it is  a shaking or chattering of the teeth, such as is in those which are taken with the fit of an ague.Menoch. in loc. Matth. 9.15. Can the children of the bride-Chamber mourne] By which he understands the Apostles, and alludes to the custome of their weddings;Filij Sponsi] Gracè est  non autem  Est au∣tem Gracè  Conclave, seu thalamus nuptialis. Itaque significatur hac phrasi amici ac socij qui familiarius adhiben∣tur, & qui ad ipsum thalamum sponsos deducunt. Hi autem socij nominatim eligebantur & vocabantur ferè ab ipsis sponsis ut sibi adessent, & Conviviis etiam alijsque hilaritatis significationibus quae exhibebantur, interessent. Vide Iudic. 14.11. Matth. 22.14. Apoc. 19.19. Menochius de Repub. Heb. l. 3. c. 21. many were wont on the wedding day to attend on the bridegroome, and bring him home, that the frequency of friends and companions might adde to the dignity and cherefullnesse of the Marriage. Matth. 10.2. Instead of the Etymologies of some of the Names of the twelve A∣postles there, take these as more genuine and proper from Caninius his loci Novi Testa∣menti. Philip Warlike who is delighted with horses. Bartholomew the son of Thalmai. Thomas a twinne  in Greek, as the Evangelist interpets it: Iames a supplanter, Matthew the gift of God, in Greeke Theodorus, that of Bartholomew there being a Greeke name, Marke 3.16. (though some hold so) is not proper.
Cunaeus de Repub. Heb. l. 3. c. 7.Matth. 11.14. This is Elias which was for to come] Christ the best interpreter of Scripture, expounds here what is meant by Eliah, Mal. 4.5. viz. Iohn Baptist, who is called there Eliah, for the great similitude that was betweene them. They had the same girdle and raiment. Eliah offended Iesabel with his liberty of reproving; and Iohn Baptist Herodias, both dwelt in the desert, both were inspired by God. Respondens Iesus, id est, subiungens, vel fari or sus. Verbum enim Hebraicum ha∣nah, non so∣lum significat respondere in∣terroganti, sed etiam usurpatur cum quis nulla praemissa interrogatione sermonem Exorditur. Menochius in loc.Vers. 25. At that time Iesus answered and said] Here and in other places of the Gos∣pell it is said, that Jesus answered, where notwithstanding it appeareth not by any circumstance of Scripture, that any had spoke unto him: I take this terme not for a bare Hebraisme, but indeed for a proposall relative to another. Now many which opened not their mouth in the presence of Jesus Christ; ceased not to speake in the presence of their heart, but their thoughts being knowne to him, hee answered the subject of their thoughts, D'Espaigne of Popular errours, §. 4. c. 3. Vers. 28. Those words in my Annotations, p. 31. therefore not said take away but rest from the foure first should be left out. Chap. 12. v. 43, 44. The Holy Ghost would teach these particulars. 1. Where ever Christ comes by the Gospell to a people, hee finds the Devill dwelling in them. 2. His intention is to cast him out. 3. He is cast out in many. 4. He being thus cast out, the house is swept from many common corruptions, and adorned with many common gra∣ces. 5. The Devill will after try, whether they have indeed received Christ by faith. 6. Else the common gifts will rather incourage him. 7. When he returns againe, he returnes with seven worse Spirits, there will be more hope of a prophane person, then one which hath such common workes. Chap. 14. v. 6. But when Herods birth-day was kept] The ancients were wont with feasting to celebrate their birth-day, which custome the Hebrewes followed. Ierome on this place inveighes sharply against it:Gen. 40.20. Nullum alium invenimus observasse diem natalis sui, nisi Herodem & Pharaonem: ut quorum erat par impietas, esset & una solennitas. There is a key of royalty or Supreme au∣thority committed to Christ onely. 2. A key of subordinate power, or charity, given to men.Chap. 16. v. 19. Those words upon that place in the booke, this is not Peters key, but the Popes pick lock, should be out. An expression manifestly borrowed from Esay 22.23. Whence our Lord, Apoc. 3.7. is said to have the key of David, that is, of the house of David, whereby the Apostles under our Lord are made Stewards of the Church, as Eliakim of the Court, to admit and exclude whom he pleased. Mr Thorndike. Chap. 18.7. Let him bee unto thee as a heathen and a Publicane] Not as if the Hea∣thens could bee excommunicate the Synagogue,Eum vitabis ut vitantur ethnici & pub∣licani. Allu∣dit enim ad morem Judae∣orum, qui à Consuetudine ethnicorum. & publicanorum, quos pro publicis peccatoribus habebant, abstinebant. Menochius in loc. who never were of it, or as if the Jewes then durst excommunicate Publicans and Gentiles, it was proper for our Lord to signifie, how he would have Christians to use the excommunicate, there being no reason why hee can be thought by these words to regulate the conversation of the Jewes, in that estate, so long as the Law stood, but to give his Church rules to last till the worlds end. Thorndikes discourse of the right of a Church in a Christian State. Chap. 1. Ve. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them By the rules of the Synagogue, under ten that are of yeares there is no congregation. Be∣fore that number of such as are come to yeares be present, they goe not to prayers. But our Lord intending to free his Church of all rules that might abridge the privi∣ledges of it,Thornedikes Service of God at Religi∣ous assemblies. c 6. knowing that occasions might fall out to diminish the number of his people that desired to assemble, assureth them of his presence in the midst of them, where the least number agree in the things which they desire at his hands. Chap. 21.19. Let no fruite grow on thee hence forward for ever] Let that which is thy fault be thy punishment, thou bearest no fruite at all; whereas the nature of thy kind is ever to have one fruite, one under another, alwayes some though not in a full ma∣turity,
since therefore thou bearest no fruite at all, never maist thou more beare any fruite. Dr Hals Paraphrase. The reason (say some) why Christ cursed the figtree though the time of bearing fruit was not come, seemes this, that it made a glorious shew with leaves, and promi∣sed much, yet performed nothing; and so it seemes well to set forth the cursed condition of an hypocrite. I rather approve of this Interpretation then that first given in my Annotations, there being some just exceptions against it. Chap. 23. v. 4. That Exposition in my Annotations, Not Ceremonies, &c. may not seeme so proper perhaps, because the Pharisees also thought to be justified by their works, and lookt for Christ a temporall King. Beza saith, it is not to be understood of the corruptions of the word which men altogether ought to avoid,Vide Calvinum but of that exter∣nall exaction of the Law in which they are for the most part rigorous who are most in∣dulgent to themselves. Matth. 25.1. Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten Virgins, &c.] Ten Vir∣gins, that is, many; See Gen. 31.41.Videntur hae virgines quae faces praefere∣bant sponsae so∣ciae fuisse, quem∣admodum etiam viris socii quidam nuptiarum eo tempore dari consueverant. Lampadum verò ac facularum nocturnarum opportuna in nup∣tiis mentio, non solùm quia ad dispellendas tenebras noctemque vincendam erant necessariae, sed etiam quia boni ominis fuisse videntur ac foecunditatem novae nuptae portendisse. Nemo enim nescit satis frequenti Scripturarum phrasi lucernae nomine filios significari, Psal. 131.17. 3 Reg. 11.30. 4 Reg. 18.19. Porro quod attinet ad vespertinum aut nocturnum tempus, video etiam apud Romanos eundem morem viguisse, ut sole deficiente, atque stellis jam micantibus sponsae deduce∣rentur.Menoch. de Repub. Heb. l. 3. c. 21. Nuptiale convivium & sponsorum deductio intendentibus se tenebris fieri solita, que scilicet tempore illo aevo passim caenabant Id. ibid. Virgins] Having respect to the custome of that time, Virgins carrying Torches brought home the Bridegroome. Vers. 4. The foolish Virgins had only oile in their Lampes, an outward professi∣on, but not in their Vessells, grace in their hearts. Vers. 9. Go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your selves] This is not a direction, but an exprobration. Vers. 34. Then shall the King say unto them on the right hand, Come ye blessed of my Fa∣ther inherit the Kingdome prepared for you from the foundation of the world] Christ perhaps will not use that forme of words, but his Sentence will be according to the tenour of them. 1. We have a loving invitation, or calling of them to himself. Come] They were now at Christs right hand, come neerer to me; they loved his appearing, and longd for it; Come Lord Jesus, thy Kingdom come; he calls them as a Husband his wife, come into my Chamber, my bosome. 2. The title he gives them, ye blessed of my Father, That is, In relation to what they were in the world, this was their condition then, though themselves sometimes, and others perceived it not; blessed of my Father, not of the world; they began not to be blessed now, but appeared to be so. 3. The assignation of the reward, receive the Kingdom prepared for you, Kingdom is the height of all worldly felicity, therefore glory is so called. Vers. 37. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred and fed thee? or thirsty and gave thee drink, &c.] They shall not then make any such que∣stion; it is a Parable, and 1. God would have us know that what ever good or bad is done to the Saints, Christ counts as done to him. 2. The Saints at the last day will not look on any thing that they have done as worthy of Christs taking notice of it. Mat. 27.46. Those words in my Annotations Christ spake partly in the Syrian Language should be left out.
MARKE Chap. 1. Vers. 2. THose words in my Annotations, because the Testimonies of two Prophets fol∣low, Malachy and Esay, should be left out. Mar. 3.6. And straightway took counsell with the Herodians against him] The Herodians were Sectaries or Hereticks of the Jews which beleeved Herod the  to be the Messiah,I should be in very Annotati∣ also  Menochius de Republica He∣braerum l. 3. . 6. vide illium in Mat. 22.16. or the Christ promised by the Prophets, because they saw the Scepter in him to have de∣parted from Judah, according to the Oracle, Gen. 49.10. Herod greedily ard these flatterers, and favoured them, therefore he killed the Infants in , that he might kill Christ, that none might be taken for the Messiah to himself. Mark. 5.5. And alwaies night and day he was in the memories, and in the Torches] The Jews had their Sepulchres not in their Cities, but in the fields out of their Cities, like to Chambers which might receive many men.Menoc. in Mat. 9.28. See Esay 65.4. Both their publike and private Sepulchres were ordinarily out of the City, Josh. 24.30. we read that it was granted to their Kings, or some of their chiefe men, and such as had deserved well of the Commonwealth to have their Sepulchers within their Ci∣ties, 1 Kings 2.10. and 11.43. This custome they had to bury the dead out of their Cities,Menoch. de Re∣pub. Heb. l. 8. c. 4. left the aire corrupted with the stench of their Carkasses should hurt the living, and that their gastly looks might be removed far from them. By the touching also of the Tombs & Carcasses legall uncleanness was contracted, and therfore the Jews thought fit to remove the occasion of this by having their Sepulchres out of the City. Mark. 5.11. A great heard of Swine feeding] It is enquired whose Swine these were; Menochius saith it is most probable they were the Gentiles, for Jospus l. 7.  saith Gadara,De Repub. Heb. l. 7. c. 7. Greae multorum porcorum, quos vel Judaei con∣tra praescriptum legis, vel incolae regionis illius Graecae religio∣nis, alebant. Menoch. in Mar. 8.30. is an Ethnicke City in Religion. It is not likely (saith he) that the Magi∣strates of the Jews would suffer those of their own Nation to nourish heards of Swine, since these Creatures were condemned by their Law, and held to be uncleane, Levit. 11.7. and it was not lawfull to eate them. Neither doth that favour the contrary opinion (saith he) which is spoken of the prodigall Son, Luk. 15.15. that he fed swine, for that is a parabolicall, not historicall Narration, and if it were historicall it would not make for it, for the Prodigall went into a far Country, that is, out of the limits of Judaea, where no law forbad them to have Swine, and there kept Swine. Chap. 9.49. For every one shall be salted with salt] viz. With the salt of tribulation, Menoch de Re¦pub. Heb. l. 2. c. 9. The vindica∣tion of the Presbyteriall Government and Ministry. Estote acres in agendo, ita ta∣men ut pax non violetur. Meno¦chius. by which the Elect are proved, and with the salt of wisdome, with which they direct their actions and affections according to the rule of Gods Law. Vers. 50. Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another] By salt is meant (as Chemnitius, and others observe) sincere doctrine and Discipline, whereby the people of God are seasoned, and kept from the putrefaction of sin and errour; this salt is so to be sprinkled, as that if it be possible, it may have peace joyned with it. LUKE Chap. 1. ver. 1. Fully perswaded of, so it should be in my Annotations; so Esrey hath it. But though we say in Latine hoc mihi persuasum est, yet in English, not the thing, but the person is said to be perswaded. See Rom. 14.14. Chap. 2.4. Whence should be left out in my Annotations, and the words follow∣ing run thus, Christ was called by the Jews a Galilean and Nazarite because he lived there. Mat. 2. ult. Chap. 2.8. Shepheards abiding in the field, watching over their flock by night] That which Souldiers were wont to do in War by reason of Enemies, that Shepheards were wont to do by reason of wild beasts or theeves,Menechius de Repub. Heb. l. 6. c. 13. & in loc. See my Anno∣tations on Mat. 14.25. watch in their turnes. The night was divided according to their military Discipline into foure watches, that the Souldiers which could not watch all the night, might watch the fourth part of it, that is three hours, and that some still might be ready to relieve those who were oppressed with labour or sleep. This space of three hours is called a watch, hence the Scripture often speaks of the first, second, third, or fourth watch.
Ch. 3. v. 1. Herod being Tetrarch of Galilee] The word Tetrarch is a Greek Word  He is properly so called who possesseth the fourth part of a Kingdom or other dominion,Menoch. de repub. Hebr. l. 1. c. 1. & in Matth. 14.1. Vide Plinium, l. 5. c. 18. as Herod possessed the fourth part of the jewish kingdome, although it is sometimes simply taken, and Tetrarcha is the same with Toparcha, Hee that is Lord of some place or part of a Country; whether it be the fourth part, or a greater or lesser. Chap. 7. v. 22. To the poore the Gospell is preached] Some thinke that version is pro∣per (though I have something the other way in my Annotations) because here is shewed Gods goodnesse in sending his Gospell the glad-tydings of salvation even to the poore, Heb. 4.2. the words  are rightly rendred to us is the Gospell preached. Chap. 10. v. 31. And by chance there came downe a certaine priest that way] Some say Si fortunam di amus provi∣dentiam Dei, quatenus ejus rationobis in∣certa est; veri∣tatem rei te∣nentes; nomen quoque retine∣re possumus At∣que hanc lo∣quendi liberta∣tem scriptura nobis indulger. Epis. Down. in Rami Dialect. l. 1. c. 5. Vide plura ibid. one may use the word fortune and chance and urge this place, and that Eccles. 9.11. for it, but Dr Taylor is against it, whom I should therefore in my booke have set at the end of my note on this place, and not in the margent Austen in his retractations repented that he had so often used that wicked and execrable word fortune. Cum ex∣tremis duobus significandis adhibeantur fatum & fortuna: sicut rem detestantur toto animo Catholici; sic à vocabulis libenter abstinent. Chamier us. I dare not say (saith Mr Wheat∣ly) it is a sinne for one to say by good chance such a thing fell out, but unlesse when we name Chance, our intention be to denote Gods secret providence, and wee doe see and observe his hand in that thing which we say chanced, then I doubt not but that we are guilty of finise. Chap. 12. v. 35. Let your loynes be girded about] viz.Menoch. de epub. Heb. l. 6. c. 4. & in loc. That you may readily serve your Master, returning home, see v. 37. Christ did so, Iohn 13▪ 4 Servants waited at Tables girt; that they might be more fit for service, left their long garments which they used should hinder their service. Chap. 23. v. 40. In stead of those words in my Annotations, it makes not for late penitents, read thus, this example is too much abused by those that put off their repen∣tance, though true repentance be never too late. There is one example least any should despaire, and but one, left any should presume. Chap. 17. v. 10. When ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, wee are unprofitable servants; we have done that which was our duty to doe] This doth not as∣sert a possibility of complete fulfilling the law (as some Popish expositors abuse the text) but Christ speakes it by way of concession Unprofitable, not in that sense that he is spoken of Matth. 25.30. these here doe not hide their talents, but two wayes, 1. Be∣cause if they had done all this they could not have obliged God, nor merited, be∣cause they should have done but their duty, we cannot make him a debter by perform∣ing our duty. 2. You have not profited so much as you might have done. JOHN Chap. 1. Verse 1. MY Annotations on that should run thus, not onely because he is the internall word, and after those words the word was with God, there God is taken perso∣nally. Chap. 3. v. 29. Those words in my Annotations there, for so by an Hebrew phrase, &c. should be left out. Chap. 4. v. 46. A certaine noble man] A certaine Kingly man, Regius quidam. Calv. Beza. Vir Regius. Arabs. either of a Kingly stocke, Vox Grca  non regem aut re∣gulum significat, sed regium, quod scilicet, vel in Regis Herodis aut alterius aula versaretur. Itaque Syrus habet servus regius, Vulgatus noster in textu Geaeco videtur legisse , quod regulum significat, Menochius de Repub. Heb. l. 1. c. 8. & in loc. or one of Herods courtiers and of∣ficers.
ACTS. Chap. 2. Verse 3. AND there appeared, unto them cloven tongues, like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them] The Holy Ghost sate upon the Apostles in the forme of a tongue, because he made the Apostles here preachers of the Gospell; the tongue is the instrument of preaching,Cornel à Lap. by tongues therefore they received the gifts of tongues. By fiery tongues the efficacy of the Apostles preaching is signified. Vers. 44. And all that beleeved were together, and had all things common] Of the mean∣ing of the first words were together, see Beza, Mr Lightfoote in loc. Calvin interprets it not of dwelling together in one place, but of being of one heart. See my Anno∣tations on 4.32.For the latter words, the Papists say this community is a kind of perfection, and thence lay a foundation for their Monasteries and Nunneries, the Libertines also in Germany and others abuse this place. Nimium sunt impudentes qui Platonis deli∣rium sequuti, Meum & Tu∣um tolli evan∣gelica doctrina ex hominum societate vo∣lunt. Beza in loc. Est hoc singulare exemplum charitatis, atque ideo refertur à Luca, ut sciamus nostra abundantia sublevandam esse fratrum inopiam. Verum sana expositione indiget hic locus, propter fanaticos, qui bonorum  fingunt, qua omnis politia evertatur: quemadmodum hoc seculo tumultuati sunt Anabaptistae, quia nullam putabant esse ecclesiam, nisi in communem acervum congesta essent singulorum bona, ut inde promiscuè omnes sumenent. Calvinus. Vide plura ibid.1. The property of things was distinct, though they had all things common in the use; they sold their lands, therefore they had a right to alienate them; they themselves gave to the necessities of the poore. 2. There was no obligatory precept to bind professors to this. 5. Acts v. 4. 3. There was no ordinance of the Apostles whereby men were bound to this com∣munity, many precepts rather contradict it. See 1 Cor. 16.2. 1 Tim. 5.8. 4. If men had not a propriety in their goods, then stealing would be no sinne under the Gospell. Ephes. 7.28. Chap. 3. v. 21. Whom the heaven must receive] It is doubtfull (saith Cajetane) whether he means that Christ shall receive Heaven as a King his Kingdom, or heaven shall receive Christ, as a place receives the thing placed, both senses are true and agree to this place, but the latter is the more genume; the Syriacke renders the words thus, quem oportet Caelo Capi. Chap. 4. v. 13. Ignorant men] Idiots, so the Greeke, and so Calvin. Beza, and the Vulgar render it. Maior in Acta Idiota dicitur qui proprio tantum, natura lique idiomate seu lingua, & scientia contentus nescit studia literarum,  enm Gracè proprium significat. Menochius in loc.The Apostles are so called, 1. In respect of their state and kind of life, they were private men, not set in any publicke office. 2. By reason of their doctrine, illiterate men. 3. By reason of their dignity and esteeme, plebeians and of no account. 4. By rea∣son of their popular dialect; but that they were not idiots in knowledge, Peter and Iohn shew v. 19. and 27.28. Chap. 6.15. Saw his face as it had been the face of an Angell] The face of an Angell signifies some excellent and heavenly thing in his countenance, viz. an Angelicall shape and majesty.Cornel à Lap. Facies angeli significat exi∣mium quid, au∣gustum, coeleste in vultu, quali specie, & ma∣jestate Angeli apparere solent. Menochius in loc. God bestowed a new and wonderfull splendour on Steven, and as it were the beames of a glorious body, such as he gave to Moses Exod. 34.1. Chap. 7.14. The wives of Iacobs Sonnes which came downe with him into Egypt were but nine &c. those words I have in my Annotations out of Langus, but he had ele∣ven brethren, and they all had wives for ought appeares in Scripture. Vers. 16. Ibid. Those words the Father of Sichem, &c. to James are misplaced, they should follow the last words of that 16. v. Emor the father of Sichem, and therefore bee set in the margent against the question and answer. Chap. 9. v. 31. Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judea, and Galilee and Samaria] Rest in the exercises of the worship of God, had none to vexe oppose, or hinder them therein; a double effect followes this, and were edified. Every particular Church and member of the Church did grow and brought forth more fruit. The metaphor of a building agrees well, because the Church is the Temple and house of God. 1 Tim. 3.
15. And all the faithfull also are Temples, 1 Cor. 3.16.2. Were multiplyed, in num∣ber many came into the Church. Chap. 20. v. 10. And embracing him] Embrace him on every side.Complexus] Vox Graeca  id est, circum∣plexus notat arctissimum circumquaque Pauli complexum, ut viscera sua compassionis, charitatis, & misericordiae in eum effundere velle videtetur. Cornel. à Lap. Chap. 23. v. 26. Vnto the most excellent] Or most mighty, it was the title by which the President was usually called. Menochius in loc. Chap. 24. v. 16. I exercise my selfe]  id est, me exerceo, laboro, fatigo, q. d. totus sum in hac re. Chap. 27. v. 34. For there shall not a haire fall from the head of any of you] This is a pro∣verbiall forme of speaking, noting by an hyperbole,Walth. Cent. Miscell. Theol. 57. that they should not be hurt in the least thing, nor lose the basest things, such as are haires of the head; so farre should they be from losing their lives. The proverbe is taken not onely from the first of Sam. 14.45. 2 Sam. 14.3.11. 1 Kings 1.52. but also from the 21. Chapter of Luke. v. 18. ROMANES. Chap. 2. Vers. 15. THeir thoughts the meane while accusing or excusing one another] He meanes by turnes,Cogitationibus sese mutuò ac∣cusantibus, aut etiam excusan∣tibus. Beza inter se invicem cogitationum accusantium aut etiam defendentium. Vulg. In Graeco est , quae vox signi∣ficat non qualescunque cogitationes, sed quae fiunt ratiocinando & disceptando, dum adhibito judicio rationis animus exa∣minat aliquid, & de eo pronunciat sive verum sive falsum; bonum an malum. Menochius in loc. conscience excuseth them, when their actions are conformable to the Law, and ac∣cuseth them, when not. Chap. 3.30. It is one God which shall justifie the circumcision by faith] That is, the circumcised Jew, the abstract put for the concrete, so ch. 11. v. 3. the election, that is, the elect. The Hebrewes See Ps. 12.12. Cant. 1.4. Esay 3.4. Ier. 5.21. when they would expresse a thing to the height, put the abstract for the concrete, the quality it selfe for the person. Chap. 8. v. 13. Doe mortifie the deeds of the body] That is sinnes, because, the body is the instrument of them for the most part. Ye shall live] He speakes to beleevers, it is meant of a life of comfort and abun∣dant fruitfulnesse, live to purpose and doe much service to God. Vers. 15. The Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father] Abba Hebraicè Ab, Chald. verò & Syriacè Abba, & terminatio∣ne Latina & Graeca, Abbas, idem est quod Pater. Menochius in Gal. 4.6. is a Syriacke word, and Father Greek, to shew, that Jewes and Gentiles agree in calling God Father. Abba was then used by Children, and Father is added, as if he had said, Father, Father, both words are used, because when wee would please, we repeate the same words, as Matth. 7.22. or words of the same signification, as Iehovah Adonai in the beginning of one of the Psalmes. 1 CORINTHIANS. Chap. 4. Vers. 3. BVt with me it is a very small thing] The smallest  pro minimo est. Beza. Vulg. Chap. 6. v. 9. Nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind] The first are properly those, which are called Catamites, qui turpia patiuntur,Scorta scilicet mascula. Menochius in loc. Vide Grotium. those men which suffer filthinesse to be acted upon them. The latter are those, qui eadem turpia peragunt, which act that filthinesse on others. Chap. 11. v. 4. Every man praying or prophecying having his head covered, dishonoureth his head] The Apostle would have Christians to be farre from the rites of Gentiles, their custome was to pray with their heads covered.Menoch. de Repub. Heb. l. 6. c. 7.
2 CORINTHIANS. Chap. 4. Vers. 4. THe God of this world] That, is the Devill, he is not the Creator, upholder or pos∣sessor of the world, but the God thereof. 1. By unjust usurpation. 2. By busie operation, acting in every man of the world. 3. By a voluntary subjection, men yeeld themselves to him to be his slaves. 4. Because of that great universall dominion he hath over the world. Hee no sooner tempts, but we are ready to close with him. Chap. 5. v. 5. Who also hath given us the earnest of his spirit] Also this is cumulative and additionall to what went before, given, that notes the freenesse of the gift, he speaks of it as already given. The earnest of the spirit, that is (saith Menochius) the Spirit which is a pledge and earnest of future glory, not onely so, but because it is the spirits office to give assurance to the soule. This gift of God, or worke of the spirit is called an earnest in three respects. 1. An earnest is for confirmation of a promise or agreement, so here of Gods faith∣fulnesse. 2. An earnest is somewhat of the same kind of that which is to be paid after∣ward, and therein differs from a paune or pledge, which may be of another kind, so this gift is somewhat of that which wee shall receive fully in heaven. 3. An earnest is but little of that which is to be paid. Deut. 25.5. Menochius de Republica He∣braeorum. l. 8. c. 2.Chap. 11. v. 24. Of the Jewes five times received I forty stripes save one] The Jewes gave 39. stripes onely either to signifie their clemency in punishing lesse then the Law permitted, or to shew themselves religious and studious of observing the Law, wa∣rily taking heed that they exposed not themselves to danger, by violating it, if they fulfilled the number of forty. EPHESIANS. Chap. 6. Vers. 17. Galeam saluta∣ris, vel ut alij vertunt. Salva∣toris, id est Salvatorem ipsum assumite progalea. Menochius in loc. & de Repub. Heb. l. 2. c. 5. Vide Bezam.THe helmet of salvation] In Greeke it is  the helmet of a Saviour, that is, take our Saviour for a helmet, viz. that being armed with his faith, doctrine, and instructions of life, you may not feare the fiery darts of the most wicked one. PHILIPPIANS. Chap. 2. Vers. 17. Menochius in loc. 2 Tim. 4.6. Ego enim jom delibor , id est, pro libamento offeror, & immolor, sanguinem meum quasi libamem Deo profundo, consecro, & sacrifico per martyrium. Menochius in loc.AND if I be offered up] The Greeke is , which signifies to be poured out as a drinke-offering, viz. his bloud, for there were two parts of the sacrifices, viz. the sacrifice which was slaine, and the drinke-offering as wine or oyle, which was pou∣red upon it. The Apostle alludes to this rite of the sacrifices. 2 THESSALONIANS. Chap. 2. Vers. 8. WHom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightnesse of his coming] There is a difference between those two words, consume, and destroy,  and  and they are here in a speciall manner, distinguished. Illud est tractim imminuere, hoc funditus tollere. Fire consumes Wood, and the candle by feeding on it by little and little, water being powred on fire destroyes it. Cocceus de Antichristo.
1 TIMOTHY. Chap. 3. Vers. 6. HE fall into the condemnation of the Devill] Not that whereby the Devill con∣demnes, but whereby he is condemned, as the destruction of the ungodly. 2 TIMOTHY. Chap. 1. Vers. 7. THe Spirit of love and of a sound mind] Because it fils the soule with a sense of Gods love, and so heales the conscience. TITUS. Chap. 1. Vers. 6. THe husband of one wife] The Apostle doth not command that a Bishop should ne∣cessarily have a wife, but that he have not two wives. Neither is here forbidden (as Justellus Ad Codicem Canonum ec∣clesiae Vniversae p. 193. hath rightly observed) Digamia aut polygamia successiva, as the popish Estius, Cor∣nel à Lap. Menochius. Interpreters say, sed simultanea. HEBREWES. Chap. 2. Vers. 7. THou madest him a little lower then the Angels] In Greeke it is  which may bee referred to the thing, as if he should say, paululum quid, a little deale, and to the time, so it shall be the same with paulisper, a little while. If it be referred to the time,Menochius in loc. Vide Estium. Sanctus Tho∣mas utramque expositionem admittit; ita quod paulo∣minus referatur, & ad brevitatem durationis cum Chrysostomo, & ad quantitatem ret cum reliquis; & haec expositio Communior est. Ludovicus Tena. he saith, that Christ for a short space of time was lesse then the Angels, viz. so long as hee had his mortall body. But if it be referred to the thing, that is the dignity, the meaning is, in this thing onely he was lesse then the Angels, that he could suffer and dye. Chap. 3.11. So I sware in my wrath, they shall not enter into my rest.Quasi dicat, si ingredientur in terram pro∣missam, in qua sedes quietas illis pollicitus sum, non Existimer verax. Menochius in loc.] The decrees of God respect mens everlasting estate, his oath, his dealing and treating with men, that is, his Spirit shall no more strive with men. Chap. 7. v. 26. Holy, harmelesse, undefiled;Haec tria ita videntur di∣stingui, ut san∣ctus respiciat Deum, Inno∣cens proximum, impollutus se∣ipsum. Meno∣chius in loc. separate from sinners] Here are foure em∣phaticall words. 1. Holy, either generally comprizeth all goodnesse, or set apart of God. 2. Harmelesse, This hath relation to his outward carriage, Christ never did wrong to God or man, was free from actuall sinne. 3. Vndefiled, this goes to the inward parts, he was free from corruption of nature, holy in his conception. 4. Separate from sinners. Id est ab eorum vita & moribus longissime distants, & nihil cum illis habens commune. Menochius. All sorts of men are guilty of Adams sinne, but Christ was not, though he came from Adam, yet he came not by Adam. Chap. 9. v. 14. Purge your Conscience from dead workes to serve the living God] Sinfull workes are called dead workes, not onely because they merit death,Dixit viventi, quoniam dixe∣rat, ab operibus mortuis, quasi docens Deo vivo non placere opera mortua. Menochius in loc. but because they come from a dead nature, to serve the living God, that is, we must serve God with livelinesse, the Attributes of God are suited to the matters in hand. Chap. 11 v. 6. For he that commeth to God] Greeke .Accedens ad Deum. Vulg. Heb. 10.37. , id est, veniens, est Christi periphrasis, sic appellatur. Matth. 11.3. & Apocal. 1.4. Menochius in loc. He that is com∣ming, that hath put himselfe on the way. See John 6.37.
JAMES Chap. 2. Vers. 3. Sic ferè acci∣dit, ut homo Cultu elegan∣tiore nitidus, & auro gemmisque Collucens ad se rapiat oculos Circumstantium, & defixos teneat. Menochius. Iudicatur affectus ho∣minum admirantium & aestimantium splendorem externum. Quod enim admiramur & magnifacimus, id intentè adspi∣cimus, & cum reverentia atque veneratione respicimu Brochmand in loc.AAnd if ye have respect to him] The Greeke word  properly signifies (saith Menochius) Cum affectu quodam benignè aspicere. To behold favorably with af∣fection. 1 PET. Chap. 5. verse 8. BEcause your adversary the Devill]  is he, qui in causa & lite nobis adversatur, so Menochius, and others. He that opposeth us in a suit, such a one is Satan, who strives with us about the salvation of our soules. Walketh about]  circumambulat, scilicet assiduè, & continuò. The Devill is that great Peripateticke. Iob 1.7. Chap. 5. v. 10. The God of all grace make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you.] The Apostle heapes up many words to shew, that God preserves all graces, if it be weake, he protects it, he stablisheth it against opposition, gives new supplies of the spirit, and so excites and strengthens it, and keepes from wavering, settles us. 2 PET. Chap. 1. verse 21. AS they were moved by the Holy Ghost] , carried in the armes of the Holy Ghost. Chap. 2. v. 7. Vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked] The Greeke runnes thus, opprest under the conversation of the ungodly in wantonnesse. . Verse 14. An heart exercised with covetous practises] Greeke, exercised in cove∣tousnesse,. not onely with the practises, but principles. Chap. 3. v. 12. The Elements shall melt] Like mettall in a furnace, so the Greeke word signifies. 1 JOHN. Chap. 2. verse 20. BVt ye have a unction from the holy one, and ye know all things] By this unction He meanes the gifts and graces of the Spirit, the holy one, that is Christ. It is an allusion to the pretious ointment in the Old Law, that was powred first on the head of the High Priest and so ran downe. Chap. 3. v. 20. For if our heart condemne us, God is greater then our heart, and knoweth all things.] That is our conscience, Davids heart smote him, condemne notes a decisive and finall judgement concerning our State. God is greater two waies. 1 in point of judge∣ing, God is the Supreme, the heart the Deputy-Judge. 2 In witnessing, he knowes all things, therefore our owne hearts, Heb. 3.8. We are blind, Gods witnesse is more im∣partiall and severe. Accedendi, & ab llo postulata impetrandi. Menochius. Omnes tres personae SS. Trinitatis in Caelo, & de Caelo, tum Angelis, tum maximè hominibus testimonum perhibent Christo, quod solus ipse sit verus Messiae Deique filius. Menochius.Verse 21. Beloved, if our hearts condemne us not] That is, reproach us not for the evill of our States, then have we confidence towards God] That is, we may have a holy libertie and confidence to approach into Gods presence. Chap. 5. vers. 7. For there are three that beare record in heaven, the Father, the VVord, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one] Three witnesses to the Godhead of Christ, the
Father by audible voyce in Christs Baptisme and transfiguration. Mat. 3.17. and 17.5. Christ beares witnesse of himselfe by his Doctrine and Miracles, Rom. 1.3. The Spirit by descending on Christ Mat. 3.11. and on the Apostles, Act. 2.3. So Menochius. In heaven, that is, they gave witnesse in a glorious manner, John 5.31. and these three are one, in es∣sence, as the other three in testimonie. Verse 8. And there are three that beare witnesse in earth, the Spirit, and the water, and the blood, and these three agree in one] Water and blood, holinesse and satisfaction. He al∣ludes to the ablution and oblation of the Old Law, and to the water and blood that came out of Christs side, John 19.34.35. And these three agree in one; that is, to prove that we beleeve in Christ, and that he in whom we beleeve is the son of God. REVELATION. Chap. 1. vers. 1. THe Revelation of Jesus Christ] That is, received Menochius. Joannes de Vado. by Jesus Christ. When God in old time revealed his will to his Church two waies, viz. by vision or Dreames, Numb. 12.6. Job 7.14. the former manner, viz. vision is noted by the common name of Revelation. For all the things that follow in this book were revealed to John waking by visions, but not sleeping by dreames. There are two parts of this booke of the Revelation; first,Jd. ibid. a description of the pre∣sent state of the Church, as it was then in the three first chapters. 2. a prophesie of the future State of the Church even to the end of the world, from the fourth chapter to the end of that booke. VVhich must shortly come to passe] That is, which shall soone begin to be done,Menochius. although they shall not soone end. By his Angel unto his servant John] Therefore the whole Trinity revealed this revela∣tion to Christ according to his manhood, Christ to the Angel, the Angel to John,Menochius. Est haec pro∣phetia à Deo data, à Christo Mediatore accepta, Angeli ministerio Joanni delata, à Joanne nobis annuntiata. Jonnes de Vado. Iohn to the Church. Verse 13. And in the midst of the seven Candlesticks] That is, of the Church,See v. 20. it signifies that Christ is alwaies present in the midst of the whole Catholike and every particular Church as he promised, Mat. 18.20. and 28.20.Joannes de Vado. Clothed with a garment downe to the foote] As were the Priests under the Law, Exod. 28.4. therefore he signifies, that Christ is our Priest. And girt about the paps with a golden girdle] As the Priests were girt. Exod. 28.4. The meaning is, that Christ our High Priest stands ready,Id ib. and is prepared to undergoe what remaines of the Priestly Office for us, that is to intercede with God for us, and to offer the incense of our prayers continually to the Father. See Revel. 15.6. and Dan. 10.5. Verse 20. The seven starres are the Angels of the seven Churches] That is, the Pastors or Bishops of the Churches, for Prophets in the Old Testament were called Angels, Esay 44.21. Hag. 1.13. and Priests also, Mal. 2.7. Esay 42.19. and in the New Testament, Iohn is called an Angel, Mat. 11.10. and the Apostles of Christ, Luke 9.52. Chap. 2. v. 9. I know thy poverty] That is, in the world, outward poverty, because tribu∣lation is joyned with it, or if we interpret it of spirituall poverty, that is,Ad quam re∣dactus es ex∣spoliatione bo∣norum tuorum propter Christ∣um. Heb. 11.34. Menochi∣us. thou hast not high thoughts of thy selfe in spirituall things. But thou art rich] in grace and holinesse. Chap. 4. v. 7. And the first beast was like a Lion, &c.] These are the qualities of the Angels. The first is likened to a Lion, for his courage and power; the second to a Calfe, for his servile ministry and unwearied labour; the third to a man, for his prudence; the fourth to an Eagle, for his swiftnesse in executing his Office. One of these living creatures was not like to a Lion, another to a man, the third to a Calfe, the last to an Eagle;Joannes de Vado. but every one of these foure living creatures was indued with those foure qua∣lities, and that must be understood of each which is spoken of them all, viz. each of them had great power, diligence, wisedome and speed in executing the commandements of God Almighty.
Chap. 5. v. 6. A Lambe] Christ John 1.29. who for his courage a little before was called a Lion; here for his sacrificing, meekenesse and innocencie, is called a lambe. And seven eyes] These words may be expounded three waies; first, of the Holy Ghost, as the words following seeme to intimate: secondly, of the infinite providence of God, as Zach. 3.9. and 4.10. Lastly, of the Angels ministring to Christ, as Zach. 1.10, 11. Psal. 77.7. Heb. 1.6. This last interpretation Mr. Foord likes best. Chap. 9. v. 11. The Angel of the bottomlesse pit] The Devill, because he is condemned thither, reserved there, and seekes to draw men thither. Verse 14. Loose the foure Angels] That is, the Saracens, Turkes, and Tartars, for although these be three, yet they make foure Kingdomes. Joannes de Vado. Chap. 10. v. 2. A little Book] A little little booke  libellulum, it is a diminutive of a diminutive.Intelligit qua∣tuor precipuos angelos malos, qui quasi praesunt quatuor orbis partibus, ligati autem sunt, & divina potentia Coerciti, ne tantum noceant quantum vellent, & possent. Menochius. Chap. 11. v. 1. Measure the Temple of God and the Altar] The Temple signifies the Ho∣ly Catholick Church, 2 Cor. 6.16. Ephes. 2.19, 20, 21.22. 1 Tim. 3.5. Heb. 3.6. The Altar signifies the pure worship of God. 1 Cor. 9.13. and 10, 11. Heb. 7.13. Atrij nomine intelliguntur hypocritae, qui sanctitatem simulant quum sint impurissimi cans. Joannes de Vado.Verse 2. But the court which is without the Temple, &c.] It is an allusion (say some) to the manner of the worship of God among the Jewes, an atrium Iudaeorum, & Gentium, where the Church of God promiscuously received all, then troden downe. Alludit hic Scriptura ad id, quod in Vet. Testamento scriptum est. Deut. 6.6.8. in manu, ut in∣ter agendum respicias, in fronte, ut profitearis. Cocceus de Antichristo.Chap. 13. v. 16. To receive a marke in their right hand or in their foreheads] Those that professe, approve and defend the Popish Religion, and the decrees of the Pope, they have received the marke of the Beast in their forehead, those which live according to the Antichristian decrees, and doe what the Pope of Rome shall command; have re∣ceived the marke of the Beast in their hand. To receive the marke of the Beast, is Legem vel mente sequi, vel lingua profiteri. Cocceus. Alludit tantum ad prophetiam Ezechielis cap. 38. & 39. Quemadmodum enim ecclesia gravissimè affligebatur per Gogum & Magogum post reditum è Babylone, & ante pri∣mum Christi adventum: ita diabolus Pontificios omnes in Europa & Turcas in Asia, quasi alteros Gogos & Magogos excita∣vit ab anno 1300. vel. 1320. contra ecclesiam, ut eam funditus perderet, si fieri posset, antequam Christus secundo veniat ad judicium Judaeorum. Joannes de Vado.Chap. 20. v. 8. Gog and Magog] Ierome interprets Gog tectum & Magog de tecto, some Expositors therefore mistaking his meaning, interpret this place of the Pope and Turke, because the one is an open enemy, the other a secret one to Christ. September 14th 1649. Imprimatur, JOSEPH CARYL. FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE Of the chiefe Heads contained in these ANNOTATIONS. A ABba Faher 92, 217, 271 In the daies of Abiathar the high Priest clea∣red 79, 80 Abrahams bosome, why the glory of Heaven so called 127 Acts an History of 28 yeeres 185 what therein set forth ib. Doubts solved Acts 7. viz. Intreat them ill 400 yeeres 190 Threescore and fifteen soules 190 Carried over into Sichem 190 Acts 19.2, 3, 4, 5. cleared against the Anabaptists 199 Accuser, why the Divell so called 598 Outward Adorning, how condemned 558 Satan an Adversary to whom 598 Affliction cleanses from corruption 554 The Churches Affliction called Christs affliction 303 And after three daies rise again, cleared 86 Agree with thine Adversary &c. expounded 13 Amen 17 Anathema Maranatha 255 Angariation 14 Angels how they ministred to Christ 9 Matthew, Marke, and Luke, reconciled concerning the appearing to the women at the Sepulchre 138 Because of the Angels 1 Cor. 11.10. explained 243 Angels not to be worshipped, and why 612 Angels need a mediator 303 Annas and Caiphas being high Priests 102 Why Christ Answered not 74 Jesus Answered and said 618 Antichrist, who 569 Apostles Signification of their names 26.81 Apostles Sent two and two, why 26, 83, 113 Apostles their mission twofold 27 Christians compleat Armour 290 No man hath Ascended into Heaven 144 Assurance gives an entrance into the Kingdom of glory 563 Assurance of our calling and election twofold 562 Means to attain this Assurance 562 Now is the Ax layd to the root of the Tree 7 B BAbes in Christ, who 233 To Baptize with the Holy Ghost and with fire, what 7, 8 Baptisme, what it is a sign of 213 Christs passion called Baptism, why 120 Christ why Baptized 79 Baptized for the dead what 253 Baskets, whence the Jewes had them in the Wilder∣nesse 147 The reason of their constant carrying these ib. Beame in thy brothers eye, what 19 Fought with Beasts 254 This day I have Begotten thee 195 Behold, he severall exceptions thereof 33 True Believer, who 568 Bethany, what it signifies 55 Why at Bethesda Christ cured onely one 146 and why he's bid to take up his bed and walk 147
Bethlehem, what it signifies 4.100 Two Bethlehems 100 And thou Bethlehem &c. art not the least, the words plainly explained, and Micah with Matthew then reconciled 5 To Bind what 44 how this power is exercised ib. Bound in spirit, what 200 We were never in bondage 150 Birthday, solemnization thereof lawfull 39 Blessing applied to God what it signifies 277 Blessing applied to man what it signifies 277 Blessings said to be spirituall, why ib. Spirituall Blessings the chiefest ib. If ye were blind you should have no sin 152 Blind men, doubts concerning them Mat. 20. resolved 54 James and John, why named Boanerges 81 This is my Body 135, 245 Book a Catalogue or reckoning up 2 The Books were opened and the dead judged, what books 613 Where is he that is Born King of the Jews 4, 5 The Bosom of the Father, what 142 How Reprobates can be said to be bought by Christ 564 In the Bowels of Jesus Christ I have you in my heart 292 Our daily Bread, what 16 why called ours ib. Christ the Bread of life 148 Bread after consecration 246 C CAjetans errour 258 A twofold call 231 Came together Mat. 1.18. what it signifies 3 It is easier for a Camel &c. 51, 52, 131 The Word compared to a Candle 116 Lead Captivity captive 284 Arguments against the immoderate cares of this world 17, 18 Everlasting Chaines 576 Charity believeth all things 249 The greatest of these is Charity ib. Children, who 568 Children of wrath what it signifieth 281 Children must obey their parents, how, why 289 Christ annointed, the word comprehends his Kingly, Priestly, and Propheticall Offices 2 He is the anointed ib. The first-born 4 And I of Christ, opened 230 To confesse Christ, what 128 We are Christs, how 234 Three Cities of Christ 23 The Church called the Kingdom of Heaven, why 47 Two things required of those who would enter into this Kingdom ib. True Church compared to a woman, why 596 Tell it unto the Church 48 Circumcision and uncircumcision, what 268, 273 Circumcised debtors to the Law ib. Why Paul circumcised Timothy 197 Inward circumcision in what it consists 304 To heap coales of fire on ones head, what 225 The Epistle to the Colossians, when written 301 The occasion of the writing, with the sum and sub∣stance thereof ib. Commandement. the sixt interpreted 12 Three degrees (besides actuall murther) of the breach thereof ib. The punishment due to each degree ib. Commandement 7. interpreted 13 First and great Commandement, which, why so called 60, 90 The second, thou shall love thy Neighbour, &c. how like unto it 60 Why the fifth Commandement Rom. 13.9. omitted 226 Communion, what 241 He that believeth not is condemned already 145 Continence a gift of God 50 Corban, what 85 Corinth, where seated, notable for wisdom, infamous for lust 230 The Epistle to the Corinthians written before that to the Romans ib. A covetous man termed an Idolater, why 287 Take up his Crosse 44, 45 The preaching of the Crosse, why so called 230 To glory in the Crosse of Christ, what 275 A Crown of life what, why so called 581 A Cubit, what 18 Cup signifies afflictions 53, 54. why 75 This Cup is the New testament in my blood 245 D WHy the Tribe of Dan Rev. 7. omitted 589 Darknesse over all the earth at Christs death 138 Not naturall ib. What it denoted ib. Day divided into four quarters 53 Daily bread, what 16 why called ours ib. Ill translated supersubstantiall ib. The Dead shall heare his voyce 147 Pains of Death Act. 2.24. signifie not the torments of Hell 187 Not lawfull for us to put any man to Death 166
We cannot satisfie for our own debts 49 Who will render to every man according to his deeds Rom. 2.6. infers not merit of works 208 Deity of Christ proved 561 Self-deniall, what 44, 45 112 Depths of Satan, what 582 Destroy this Temple 144 Devill called a Dragon, why 596 The Devill bounded by God 581 Why Christ suffered not the Devils to speak 79 Diligence implies both speed and seriousnesse 562 The Disciple known to the High-priest, who 165 No prerequisite disposition in us 68 Dogs, who 19, 296 why Seducers so called ib. Dove, its nature 27 Saw the Spirit descending like a Dove 8 Shaking off the dust, what meant thereby 27, 114 195 Reciprocall duties of Wives and Husbands 288, 306 of Children and Parents 289, 707 of Servants and Masters ib. The Spirit of God to dwell in us, what 217 E THere will the Eagles be gathered together 128 To eat Christs flesh, and drink his blood, what 148 The Elect may fall into fundamentall errours, but not persist in them 65 Emanuel, God with us 4 Ephesus 277 Equivocation, not grounded on Luke 24.28. the place opened 140 , what it signifies 1 The Evil one, who, and why the devil so called 14, 36 Resist not Evil, but &c. opened 14 Excommunication termed a delivery unto Satan, why 236 To whom it pertaineth 235 Eye, Matth. 6.22. &c. taken for the understanding 17 A single eye, what ib. F FAith, what it signifies 226 Faith preserveth a man to salvation 554 One not saved by anothers faith 197 Faith overcomes the world 572 Faith as a grain of Mustard-seed, what 128 Faith obtaines more then it wishes 132 It worketh by love 273 The Faith of the Elect but one 284 If I had all faith, expounded 248 The excellency of faith 23 Four things requisite to justifying faith 42 All great in the woman of Canaan ib. God faithfull and just in forgiving sins 567 Whose Fan is in his hand 8 Farthing how much 13.28 To pay the utmost Farthing 13 Christ fasted 40 daies and 40 nights, why 8 My Father is greater then I 162 Call no man father 61 Father, mother, wife, must be hated, how 123 The Father judgeth no man 147 Fellowship with God and Christ brings full joy, why 567 Filled with the Holy ghost 96 A threefold fulnesse of the Holy Ghost 189 Fulnesse in Christ 142 The fulnesse of him that filleth all in all 280 To finish ones course with joy, what 200 Tried with fire, what 554 Maketh fire come down from Heaven 601 First born, who 4, 100, 302 Christ the First born, and why so called 4 Christ the First born of the dead 302 The First fruits of those that slept 252 To be in the Flesh, what 217 Flesh and Spirit what 274 The Spirit lusteth against the Flesh ib. Flesh and blood, what 254 Pray that your flight be not in the Winter, or on the Sabbath day, why 64 To follow Christ, what 150 Christ compared to food, why 148 Foolishnesse of preaching 231 For implies not meritoriousnesse of works 110 God onely forgiveth sinnes 169 How Ministers remit or retain them ib. Fornication to be eschewed for six reasons 238 Fornication forbidden amongst things indifferent Acts 15.29 why 196 How Christ was forsaken, and what it shews 76 Who so forsaketh not all cannot be my disciple 123 Four beasts with wings full of eyes 585 Four and twenty Elders 584 Fruits of the Spirit 274 A Furlong how much 156 G GAbriel, what it signifies 96 Why the Angel says, I am Gabriel ib Galatia, where 267. Of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate mingled with their Sacrifices 120 To gather together in one 278 VVhere two or three are gathered together &c. 49 It makes not a generall councell ib. Nor that they cannot erre ib. Severall doubts in Christs Genealogie according to Matthew cleared, as
1. The sonne of David, the sonne Abraham; the words explained; why Christ so called, and why David promised before Abraham. 2 2. All women in Christs Genealogie except the blessed Virgin, have a mark of infamy upon them, and why ib. 3. Those words Joram begat Ozias explained, and why Ahaziah, Joaz, and Amaziah are pretermitted 2, 3 4. The 11 and 12 Verses concerning Jechonias cleared 3 5. VVhy the Genealogy of Christ is drawn to Jo∣seph, and not rather to Mary ib. 6. From David untill the carrying away into Ba∣bylon are 14 Generations ib. According to Luke Concerning Cainan 13 Generation of vipers 102 This Generation shall not passe 66 The Father of Glory, why 279 Gnashing of teeth 22 God onely good 88, 131 The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, why 279 Gog and Magog 613, 628 Golgotha, what it signifies 75 The word translated Gospel what it signifies 1 The Gospel of the Kingdom, why 10, 79 Grace for grace 142 Grace and truth ib. Induing with Grace called anoynting, why 105 Grecians Matth 15.22. who 41 Grasse, a threefold acception thereof 55 He shall be called Great 97 Greeks and Barbarians 206 In whom is no guile 143 H HAllowed what 15 Hand of the Lord, what 99 Hardnesse of heart threefold 220 Hateth not Father, Mother, &c. cannot be my disciple 123 Father, mother, wife, must be hated, how ib. Three things in hatred 207 Christ the head of every man 242 God the Head of Christ ib. Covering the head a sign of subjection 243 Seven heads what 609 The eighth head, which is also one of the seven, what 609 ad hearers compared to stony ground, why 35 Two things necessary in Godly hearers 115 VVith all the heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind 58, 114 An Heathen, what 49 Which art in Heaven, what it signifies 15 Heavenly things 51 Heavy laden, what 30 Herelie, what. There must be Heresies 244 Herodians, who 80 Herods 3. and their acts 4 Why Elizabeth after conception hid herselfe 97 Higher powers 225 I wis not that he was the High Priest, expounded 202 Holy things, what 19 The God of hope, why 228 Lively hope, why so called 553 An horn of salvation 99 Horns of the beast crowned, why 590 The white, red, black, pale Horse, what 58 How threefold 98 The first, sixth, ninth, eleventh houres 53 Hungry, who 99 Never to hunger and thirst, what 145, 147 An hypocrite described 60 Hypocrites are as graves 117 I IDle words what 33 An Idol is nothing 241 Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremiah the Prophet, cleared 73 Jesus a Saviour, why so called 2, 3 Jesuits compared to Frogs 606 I knew him not, Iohn 1.31. cleared 142 In whom I am well pleased 8 Christ would not meddle with dividing the Inheri∣tance, why 118. marg. John, what it signifies, why called the Baptist, and when enterd on his calling 6 John by Domitian banished to Pathmos, where he wrote the Revelation 578 why he wrote to the Churches of Asia ib. why onely to those seven ib. why to the Angels of those Churches ib. when he wrote his Gospel, and wherefore 141 Joseph being a just man was minded to put her away privately, expounded 3 One jot or tittle, what 12 Joys of Heaven, great and many 68 Judging, what 19 Judging, twofold ib. Judge not that ye be not judged ib. The Father judgeth no man 147 The Saints shall judge the world, how 237 Judgement day how hastned unto 565 That day and houre not known of the Son 91 How we are justified 210 Julians scoff 11 K THe Kingdom of Heaven is at hand 6 The Gospel of the Kingdom 10, 79
Children of the Kingdome 22 Keys of the Kingdome of heaven, what 44 not given to all ib. yet to all the Apostles ib. By Kingdom of heaven, is meant the Church 12 and why 47 Kingdom of heaven taken diversly 67 The Disciples dreamt of a temporall Kingdom 185 No end of Christ's Kingdom, Objection, Answered 97 Seven Kings who 609 Ten Kings or Kingdoms, which 610 why compared to horns ib. Knowledge in Angels threefold 282 Christ Knows not the Day or Hower of Judgement how 91 L CHrist the Lamb of God 142 takes away the sins of the world ib. Christ like a Lamb 555 Law what 20.154 Christ came not to abrogate the Law 11, 12 Christ the end of the Law 221 We are not under the Law 213 Sin takes occasion from a threefold power in the Law 214 Love fulfills the Law 226 Vnder the Law threefold 272 Law of the Spirit, of sin, of Death, what 216 What going to Law forbidden 237 Leaven of the Pharises, what 86 Corrupt Doctrine, why compared to leaven ib. Sin compared to Leaven, why 236 A Legion how many 82.111 Where the spirit is, there is Liberty 258 The Liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free 270 In him was Life 142 Life of God, what 285 Grace why so called ib. Christ to be Lifted up what 158 A twofold Lifting up ib. The Light shined in darknesse 142 God compared to Light 567 The Gospell compared to Light, why 158 Christ compared to a Lion, why. Marg. 586 Little ones, who 48 Little flock, how 119 Locusts 6.591 Gird the Loins of your mind, what 554 A fourfold girding of the Loins ib. The Lord's day, how 580 Love no cause, but sign of justification 571 Christ's Love great, why 282 God's Love unto the world 144 A twofold Love in God 220 Love one another, as I have loved you 160 why stiled a new Commandement ib. Luke a companion of Paul 95 when he wrote his Gospell ib. savors of secular eloquence ib. Lunaticks, who 10.47 Lying wonders 316 M A Malefactor delivered at the Feast, why 137 Mammon, what 126 Mans day, what 234 Mark, Saint Peters Disciple 78 To receive the mark of the Beast 601.628. Marks of the Lord Iesus, what 276 Christ appeared first to Mary Magdalen, why 94 Matthew the first of the Evangelists 1 his Method ib. Matthew, and Luke agree, and in what 1 they differ, and in what ib. Christ our Mediator, how 283 Michael a Created Angel, proved 576 contended with the Devill about the Body of Moses ib. As new Born Babes desire the sincere Milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby 556 Ministers duty 200 Let your Moderation be known to all men 299 three degrees thereof toward our neighbor ibid. Morning Star, why Christ so called 582 To Morrow, what 18 Mortifie your earthly members, what 35 Mote, what 19 To sit in Moses chaire, what 60.61 And he opened his Mouth and taught them, explaned 10, 11 Multiplication of the Loaves and Fishes▪ where made 39.147 The Mystery of Gods will, why the Gospell so called 278 N PArtakers of the divine Nature, what 562 That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene, cleared 6 Thou shalt love thy Neighbor as thy selfe 114 Nicodemus commeth to Christ by night 144 Nicolaitans, their errors 581 Number of the Beasts name 602 O ALL Oaths not forbidden 13 Old men, 1 John 2.13. who 568 The Church compar'd to an Olive-tree, why 222 Humane Ordinances, why so called 556 must be submitted unto, and why ibid.
The Holy Ghost compar'd to Oyl, his work in teaching us; to anointing, why 569 P GIrt about the Paps with a Golden girdle, what 627 A Parable what 32.82 Why Christ speaks so oft in Parables 82 Parable of the Sower expounded 33 of the Marriage 57 of the Prodigall 124 of the Rich man, and his Steward 125 of Dives, and Lazarus 127 of the Pharise, and the Publican 128 of the Virgins 67 Why Christ offered on the Day of the Passeover 69 To possesse our ouls in Patience, what 134 Christ's Patience 580 Vnto all Patience 302 To pay the utmost farthing, what 13 Peace of God, why so called 299 it passeth all understanding ibid. The God of Peace 313 Christ our Peace 281 Pearl, what 19 The Gospell compared to a Pearl, and why 20 Three Persons of the Trinity set forth, Rev. 1 579 Which is, which was, which is to come, notes the Fa∣ther. And from the Spirits, The Holy Ghost. And from Isus Christ, Who is a faithfull wit∣nesse, intimates his Propheticall Office. The first begotten of the Dead, his Priesthood; Prince of the Kings of the earth, his Kingly Office ibid. Peter, to whom he wrote his Epistle, viz. To Strangers dispersed 553 who these were ibid. The scope of Peter in his first Epistle 553 In his second 561 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. expounded 559 It proves not Limbus Patrum, nor Christ's Descent into Hell ibid. Peter Mat. 10. First placed why 26 what Primacy he had ib. Peter not the Rock 43 Tell my Disciples and Peter, &c. Why Peter special∣ly named 94 Philippi where seated, and why so named 291 Phylacteries, what 61 Poor in spirit, who 11 The woman ought to have Power on her head 243 Prayer taken for the whole worship of God 221 Two things requisite in Prayer 89 Prayers called odours, why 586 Three parts of Prayer 299 The Lords Prayer expounded 15 Concerning the conclusion of the Lords Prayer 16 To Pray alwayes, what Marg. 128. Pray without ceasing 312 Praying in the Holy ghost, denotes four things, Marg. 577 To Pray with the spirit, and understanding, what 250 Publick Prayer should be in a known tongue ibid. J Pray not for the world 164 The Preaching of the Crosse, why 230 Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to Preach the Go∣spell ib. Foolishnesse of Preaching 232 To the Poor the Gospell is Preached, cleared 208 to what Poor 209 Why the cleansed Leper must shew himselfe to the Priest 21 Private interpretation of Scripture how forbidden 563 Prophesie what 224.243 Women Prophesying with their heads uncovered 242 To Prophesie in Christ's name, what 20 Prophets, what 20 False Prophets, who 564 A Prophets reward, what 28 To receive in the name of a Prophet, what ib. A Prophet, yea more than a Prophet how verified of John 29 Proselytes, who 62 two sorts thereof ib Psalms, Hymns, spirituall Songs 306 Publicans, who 106.131 Pure in heart, who 11 Purgatory rejected 128 Not proved by 1 Cor. 3.11. 233 Q QUench not the spirit 312 R RAbbi what it signifies 61.163 Racha, what 12 In Rama was a voyce heard, &c. explaned 5 Ravens, Gods feeding them 119 Reasonable service, what 223 To Redeem those under the Law, why 271 Redemption twofold 286 Render to all their dues 225 Repentance, what it is 203 Reprove the world of sin, of Righteousnesse, of Iudge∣ment 163 All sorts of persons Reviled Christ 75 Revelation what it signifieth 578 Two parts of the Revelation 627 Thunder joyned to all the Revelations, why 578 All Judgements in the Revelations on Rome Pa∣gan Christian ib. Reward implies not merit of works preceding; heaven said to be a Reward how 11
Rich towards God 119 Rich man who 51, 52. Riches how deceitfull 37 Riches how called unrighteous 126 Attributes given to Riches 115 Right eye, Right hand, what 13 why mentioned ib. pull it out, cut it off ib. Righteousnesse of God what 206 Why so called 210 Righteousnesse twofold, of the Law of Christ 197 Vpon this Rock, &c. expounded 43 Christ the Rock of the Church 243 Rome Papal Babylon 593. why 609 Christ said to be crucified at Rome, how 609 S THe Sabbath made for man two wayes 80 A Sabbath dayes Iourney, how much 185 One of the Sabbaths, what 93.200 Why God called the Lord of Sabaoth 220 Sacrament not treated of Joh. 6. and why 147.148. We may receive the Sacrament with unsanctfied persons 141 Sacraments confer not Grace ex opere operato 212 Sacrifice, what 24 Sadducees, why so called 59. their opinions ib. Whether they rejected all Scripture save the Bookes of Moses ib. Saints compared to Eagles, why 128 Sts. in Life eternall, shall mutually know each other 46 Salted with fire, what 88 The Disciples called the Salt of the earth, why 11 Gods word compared to Salt, Marg. 123 The Angels Salutation expounded, and cleared from Popish depravation 97 Sanctified throughout, when 313 We cannot satisfie for our own debts 49 To Save from sin what it is 3, 4 There should no flesh be saved, what 64 Our Saviour stands to read, sits down to Preach 104 God Saves all whom he purposeth to save, of his mercy 222 Schism, what 244 Scriptures hard to be understood, wherein, and to whom 566 Scripture divided into Law, Prophets, Psalms 140 Sea of Glasse, what 584, 604 Sealed with the spirit, what it denotes 279 Search the Scriptures, examples thereof 147 To See God, what 11 His seed remaineth in him 570, 571 To Seek our own, what 296 To Seek the things that are Christs ib. To be seen of men 15 Sell all thou hast expounded 51 Sermon on the Mount. 10. the Key of the Whole Bible ib. Gods Commandements improved therein 11, 12 This Sermon set down, Mat. 5, 6, 7. and Luke 6.20.10. Why Christ went into a Mountaine to Preach 10 Serpent and its nature 27 The Devill called the old Serpent, why 598 Our Service to God, after what manner 99 Seven stars. 580. why Minist. we called Stars 580, 58 Why said to be held in Christs right hand 580 Seven Signes of godly sorrow 262 Seven Churches what their names signifie 579 Seven Spirits ib. Christ the true Shepheard 153 marks of a true Shepheard ib. his followers compared to Sheep ib. Feed my Sheep, no ground for Peter's supremacy 171 Sheep and their nature 27 Saints resemble sheep 69 Whose Shooes J am not worthy to bear 7 Sicut in Scripture taken three severall wayes 16 Sign of the Sonne of man, what 65.66 Signes before the destruction of Ierusalem 134 A Sign which should be spoken against, what 102 Sin brought death, how 212 Sin not imputed where no Law ib. Sin to reign in us, what 213 Sin takes occasion from a threefold power in the Law 214 How a Sin of infirmity may be known 215 He that is born of God sinneth not 570 Sin unto Death, what 553 How each Person in the Trinity forgives Sins 24 God heareth not Sinners, how 152 To Sit signifies to reign 94.316 To Sit in the Temple of God, what 316 Son of Abraham, who 132 Christ called the Son of man, why 22.87 Sons of God we are through Christ 141 Then shall the Son himself also be subject 253 Spirits of the Prophets, what 251 Fruits of the Spirit 274 The Spirit lusteth against the Flesh 274 Soul and Spirit how they differ 99 Beleeve not every Spirit, but try the spirits 571 The Spirit compar'd to water 145 What Star appeared to the wise men 5 Christ the chiefe Corner Stone 556 The godly lively Stones ib. God is able of these Stones, &c. 7 Sun, Moon, and Stars darkned 591 Sun, what 595 Christ resembleth the Sun ib. Woman clothed with the Sun, what 595 Our sufferings called Christs sufferings, in what re∣spects 560 Superscription of the Crosse, why in three Langua∣ges 137 To support the weak, what 312
Swear not at all expounded 13 They that take the Sword, shall perish with the sword 72 Synagouge what it signifies 9.15 The use thereof 208 T LEt their Table, be made a snare, what 221 When Christ was driven forth to be Tempted 8 Where he was Tempted ib. What weapons be us'd when he was Tempted ib. Satan called the Tempter, why 9 The Tempter appeared in some visible shape ib. What it is to tempt God 9 Ten dayes, what 581 Testament what it signifieth 91 why called new Testament ib. Thessalonica where seated, by whom built and upon what occasion 309 The third houre 93 Mark and Iohn reconciled 93.167 Thirty pieces of silver, how much 70▪ 74 A Thorn in the flesh, the messenger of satan, what 264 Thornes are Lusts 37 why so called ib. Christ hath the Throne of David, how 97 Three hundred pence, how much 91 Christ three dayes, and three nights in the grave 34 Appeared cloven tongues like as fire, why 186 Traditions unlawfull, and why 40.41 Christs Transfiguration 46 why manifested not to all ib. Why to Peter, James, and John ib. Moses, and Elias appeared, and why ib. As Travaile upon a woman with Child, what it de∣notes 313 Treasure in heaven, what 17 The Trinity set forth by three precious stones 584 Twelve tribes, what 52 Christ chose twelve Apostles, and why 25 U TO receive the grace of God in Vaine, what 261 The veil of the Temple rent; 76 which veil, why 76 Verily verily 144 Vipers their properties 7 Of the Virgins, wise and foolish 67 Extreame Unction not proved from Mark 7.13.84 Unity of Saints urged 283 Untill, & first born, no ground for Helvidius error 4 Untill in Scripture, taken for never 4 Unworthily to eat and drink, what 246 The Dead shall heare his voyce 147 All in the Graves shall heare his voyce 147 W WAtches of the night, how many, their conti∣nuance, names 40 Of Pilats washing his hands 74 Three sorts of washing of hands amongst the Jewes 74 Waters what 610 The spirit compared to Water 145 Except a man be born of water and spirit 144 Narrow way, what 20 I am the way, the truth, and the life 161 Wite stone, why given 582 White garments what they signifie 583 Wine mingled with Mirrh, why given to the con∣demned 75.92 Matthew, and Mark reconciled ib. Wisdom and Prudence, what 301 Three parts of the Professors of Wisdom 107 Without Christ, without God 281 Wisemen, what they were, their number, gifts, names 4 617 Two witnesses 593.594 Three bear witnesse in heaven, three on earth 572 Wives must submit to their Husbands 288 Wolves and their Nature 27 Woman in the Revelation signifies Idolls 2. The City of Rome, 3. The True Church, why 578.595 Woman great is thy faith 42 Woman behold thy Son 167 Of the Woman taken in Adultery 149 Woman what have I to doe with thee 143 Women have first notice of Christs Resurrection, why 139 But by every Word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. The meaning 9 The Word of God compared to a Candle 116 to Salt, Marg. 123 The Word said to be sincere, how, Marg. 556 The Word of God compared to seed, and why 33 Work of God upon us, Work of God in us 57 Cast off the works of darknesse 226 Their works follow them 64 The Saints Gods Workmanship, why 281 In all the world the Gospell shall be preached, how to be understood 64 The God of this World, why Satan so called 258 Where the Worm dyeth not, and the fire is not qunched. 87 God only to be Worship'd 9 God to be Worship'd in Spirit, and Truth 145 Worthy taken in a double sence 31 For they are Worthy, cleared 583 What Christ Wrote on the ground, & wherefore 150 Y YEa yea, Nay nay 14 Young-men, who. 1 John 2.14. 568 Z VNto the blood of Zacharias the son of Barachias Mat. 23.35. What Zachary is there meant 62, 63, 117. Finis Tabulae.
A CATALOGUE OF THE Greek words or phrases, which are opened in these ANNOTATIONS. 11 554 88 585 565 14 90 136 114 241 24 564 142 293 14 215 280 285 11 241 291 560 553 570 553 162 555 134 193 113 ib. 278 316 232 150 105 246 315 233 188 140.269 312 560 225 315 569 45▪71 37 316 100 578 134 128 302 101 258 295 279 237 136 313 117 224 222 226 24 555 207 ib. 96 124 187 105.185 317 55 17 205 304 B 582 253 258 310 269 227.275 15 32 592 237 23 19 365 209 297 556 58 197 265 203 198 367 576 136 9 48 598 8 27.234 285 203 191 191 209 195 208 134 263 207 104 242 565 106 234 105 609 79 E 209 108 93 560 274 13 203 201 153 54 231.312
574 266 128 554 92 128 207 576 199 94 362 288 282 163.583 149 565 292 78 , imp. tert. pers. . feq. 127 274 315 261 576 556 135 133 554 242 112 26.105.142.317.609. 149 297 259 285 557 106 556 105 100 16 95 558 147 147 318 147 569 319 1 132 197 278 101 14 261 575 239 286 187 127 257 96 261 Z 148 585 H 90 18 258 283 15.142 76 281 561 207 212 256 164 290 169 290 I 209 257 211 268 : Aor. 2 infin. . 212 12 K 235 60 71 133.185.275. 312 291 89 207.557 207 41 60 33 275 230 38 264 295 316 599 96 271 186 256 274 12 558 164 284 226 244 30 310 317 24 202 227 260 41 226 561 11 560 89 127 194 64 218 223 203 147 M 235 61 289 18, 115, 248 571 234 27 119 195 195 255 119 286 560 160 310 300 592 126 577 201 91 562 558 N 299 189 285 559 O 164 278 100 90, 111 186 374 186 239 62 307 135 147 102, 214
147 583 32 300 307 133, 134 138 87 161 5 554 275, 304 133 196 593 282 103 189 235 582 95 241 106 279 115 293 285 30 204 598 207 553 227 212 142, 280 306 286 603 298 15 202 294 14, 16, 36 207 ib. 576 599 559 146 218 274 281, 282 244 182 92 374 140 90 132 163 226 209 69 11 P 87 565 65 193 316 142 ib. 557 229 297 17 197 565 25 311 208 303 317 112 146 276, 298 263 666 28 88 303 80 192 217 215 49 9, 108 236 218 305 120 186 115 555 194 596 240 99, 288 T 300 156 564 307 594 310 170.318 115 208 22 259 198 219 577 ib. 288 128, 242 244 259 302 274 207 258 244 224 ib 59 575 207 226 61 317 X 5 219 301 102 214 193 106 222 569 185 312 565 162 569 582 232 29 225, 248 271 612 136 72
ERRATA. REader, I shall intreat thee to excuse the misplacing of Marginall quotations sometimes, the false figuring of the page, and false pointing, and also to amend literall faults, where a Letter is wanting, or mistaken. The chiefest faults I have observed are thus to be corrected. Epist. Lat. p. 1. l. 17. propugnacula. ib. l. 18. decus. p. 2. l. 6. bonarum. l. 22. refrigebat. p. 3. l. 14. Annorum. p. 4. m. vide Wake Regem &c. Epist. Ang. m. I had, in the book. p. 1. l. 12. Mr. Mede on 1 Cor. 9.14. See more there. p. 2. l. 51. pretermitted. p. 3. l. 17. by Matthew. p. 6. m. Coeperit, p. 7. l. 27. Nation. ib. m. Pareus and the Scriptures should be lower against v. 11. p. 8. m. scissuram. p. 10. l. 33. patriae. p. 11. l. 6. set texts. p. 12. l. 4. righteousnesse p. 13. l. 47. . p. 15. l. 28. Josh. l. 39. being warned of God m. Cartw. Hist. ex 4. or Evang. ib.  videri. p. 17. l. 37. God in Christ. p. 28. l. 2. put out  or. p. 36. l. 20. put out the earth. p. 41. l. 3. without the word of God, ib. device. p. 43. l. 28. put out a there. p. 51. m. the brea∣king of the law, ib. l. 37. in preparation of mind is required. p. 59. l. 5. as if he should say. p. 60. l. 21. that it be sincere. p. 65. l. 21. a 1000. yeares as one day. p. 68. l. 15. minds. p. 70. l. 10. Sachar. l. 48. poeme sung. p. 72. l. 8. held. p. 88. in servatorem. p. 89. l. 15. Solatia l. ult. id est, Deo aut Ceelicolis, should follow part of the verse. p. 91. m. Novarinus. p. 93. l. 24. El is. p. 94. l. 34. there ib. l. 45. crediderit. p. 96. l. 29. feret. p. 100. m. proficiscentem. p. 105. m. Cur unxit to the end of the note should be put out. p. 107. l. 46. eos. p. 126. l. 34. contracted their noses. p. 131, l. 40. v. 41. p. 133. l. 47. Ecclesiasticus. p. 134. l. 6. Chap. 21. p. 140. m. longius iturus. p. 143. l. 4.9. Esay. 6. ib. last line save two, and likewise prevent him. p. 144. l. 14. being fulfilled in his death and resurrection. p. 149. l. 6. more free for Prayer. p. 158. l. 12. Andrew and Philip told. ibid. Naba. p. 191. m. Judg. 3.33. p. 193. m. sensus. p. 201. l. 7. Pastorall m. Deut. 33.3. p. 205. l. 5. Of the Title, Epistle. p. 230. m. opponatur. p. 238. m. ablutionem. l. 39. so great. p. 242. l. 3. sit. p. 243. l. 8. Grotium. p. 246. l. 2.3. p. 249. l. 2. from his neighbour should be in another character. p. 258. l. 3. respect. p. 260. l. 10. sig∣nifies such a hemming as of a beast &c. p. 263. in vita. p. 264. l. 38. or. p. 267. l. 18. doctrine. p. 275. m. M. Perkins in loc. p. 282. m. Grotius in loc. p. 296. m. ingeniosi. p. 311. m. 3. Lam. 57. p. 348. m. Agens. p. 357. l. 28. Heb. 10.29. ib. l. 47. he. p. 366. l. 9. fierinesse. p. 569. m. put Estius after sunt, and put out him in the Text. p. 578. l. 10. imperii. p. 579. l. 18. . p. 583, l. pnult. as well. p. 599. m. Joannes. FINIS.
