M148 12346499 59896
MOFFET-WELL: OR, A Topographico-Spagyricall de∣scription of the Mineral Wells, at Moffet in Annandale of Scotland. Translated, and much enlarged, by the Author MATTHEW MACKAILE, Chyrurgo-Medicine. As also, The OYLY-WELL: OR, A Topographico-Spagyricall description of the Oyly-well, at St. Catharines Chappel in the Paroch of Libberton. To these is subjoyned, A CHARACTER of Mr. Culpeper and his Writings; by the same Author. Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. Edinburgh, Printed for Robert Brown, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Sign of the Sun, on the north-side of the Street, over against the Cross, 1664.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE, AND TRULY NOBLE, WILLIAM Earl of MORTON, Lord Dalkeeth, one of the Members of His Majesties Honourable Privy Council in Scotland. Right Honourable, WHen I do usurpe the me∣mory of your Lordships most undeserved courtesie, in admitting me into the number of your Lordships favourites, by appointing me to attend the Sheriffdom of Orkney, as a publick servant unto your Lordship and
the Gentlemen there; I am perswaded to believe, that since your Lordship hath con∣descended to own me in so considerable a manner already, I shall also be patronized in publishing those following discourses, (al∣though they contain many fragile concep∣tions, and such things as will avert all popular Euges in this age, wherein Mr. Culpeper hath been, by the ignorant, more highly esteemed than both Hypocrates and Galen) and be indempnified for demanding the same; your Lordship being the fittest person upon whom I could pitch for patro∣nizing of them, (the first being a Tran∣slation and enlargement of the description of Moffet Well, which I performed since I was dignified to do service to your Lord∣ship) but more especially, of a description of a Well, which was so highly esteemed of by His Majesty, King James the sixth of blessed memory; and of a reprehen∣sory discourse, of most unchristian and trea∣sonable expressions, which were penned by Mr. Culpeper in the hour of darkness and rebellion: because descended of the most ancient and noble Family of the
Douglass, (which hath ever been most fer∣tile of magnanimous souls, whose signal and singular loyalty and courage, did evect them unto the highest pitch of honour, both at home and abroad, throughout all ages, since ever they were known by that name; so that Fame doth glory in having that name listed in her Legend) and of your Lordships most exact corresponding the most sincere loyalty of your immediat Ancestors; at this time, when the demo∣lished MONARCHIE of Great Britain hath been a re-edifying. I will, in the next place, add this most cordial wish, that it would please the Almighty to preserve your Lordship, in those your younger years, and to prolong your dayes to the utmost extent of possibility; and that all the Ho∣nour and noble Enduements of your Pre∣decessors, being multiplied upon your Lord∣ship, your Fame may never know ano∣ther season than a spring. In the mean time, all that I beg, is your Lordships favourable acceptance of this poor offer∣ing, from him who is most zealously am∣bitious, with all the circumstances of gra∣titude
and possible observances, to make good the Title of, My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and unfeigned servant, Matthew Mackaile. Kirkwall, Apr. 22. 1664.
The Author, his APOLOGY For the TRANSLATION. Courteous Reader, THe multiplied regrates of some, and reiterated solicitations of others, who were desirous to understand those mysteries of Art and Nature, which we had wrapped up (as they conceiv∣ed) in an inexplicable Idiom of a forraign Language (because of the deficien∣cy of Dictionaries, as to the vocables of Art) have been the main, if not the only incitement which made us set about this Translation; which w have not performed superstitiously, translating all the Sentences thereof ad verbum; but so, as th meanest capacity might understand, that which was (possibly) more obscurely expressed in the Original: such as is that Sentence, Page 15. Menstruum Rhabarbaro assusum, &c. which a
young Gentleman (being imployed by a Chyrur∣gian, equally versed in all Languages excepting his vernacular, to translate the Original into Eng∣lish) who was newly dignified to be a Master of Arts, translated thus, When Rubarbe toucheth a womans courses. Moreover, we have in seve∣ral places made additions, which were furnished by our , the Architect in rear∣ing this new pile upon the old foundation. It be∣ing an opinion long ago proseminated amongst the Vulgars, That Translations present the life of their Text at as great a disadvantage of dissimilitude, as the back-side of Hangings exhibite the story inter-woven, (as I remember Dr. Carleton saith in his Epistle prefixed to his Translation of the Magnetick cure of Wounds) we are confi∣dent, that the too accute severity of some, who have not been hitherto deficient to infest the ten∣der buds of our former intentions and actions for the bettering of others, with the virulent blasts of detraction (which proceed from the most corro∣sive Zone of envy) will affoord no better enter∣tainment unto these slender adumbrations, then it did unto their first draughts with Roman Oyl. But having attained unto a firm resolution of undervaluing the censures of such malevolent Criticks, we have been much allicited to commu∣nicat this Translation, (sending it forth—in dias luminis auras) by some, whose innate can∣dor did not only affoord, unto the Original, such approbation as did obstetricat it into the world;
but also did nutricat it with sincere acceptation. This Infant therefore having attained unto more years and a bigger stature, we have given it a new sute of ordinary Scottish Livery, that it might not (being in a better equipage) decline the doing of service to the meanest of our Country∣men who should require the same: and this is the unfeigned desire of, Thy Servant, M. M.
To his worthy and much honoured friend Pa∣trick Hepburn, the most skilfull Apothe∣cary, at Edinburgh. Worthy Sir, THe first seeds of Spagyrical Phar∣macie, being sown by you into the field of my understanding, I do most humbly consecrate un∣to you (who have been pra∣ctising Chymistry these sixty years) these their first fruits (which are most justly yours) as a perpetual te∣stimony of my due gratitude and observance; de∣siring most earnestly, that you would cheerfully ac∣cept this little offering, and permit your reverend Name to be thus inserted at it's beginning; that, as an Amulet, it may banish envy, and aprase malice. In the mean time, I shall pray, that the Almighty would be pleased to prolong your life for the good of your Relations, and of His own people; and that at length, when you shall be full of dayes, He would crown you with glory and immortality. Fare-well. Your most observant friend and servant, Matthew Mackaile. Edinburgh, Feb. 4. 1659.
TO THE READER. Courteous Reader, SEing these delectable things which fol∣low, were learned only from the opera∣tions of art and nature, I have permit∣ted them to take their flight from the dungeon of silence, into the luminous air of pub∣lick view; that (if it be possible) they may prove profitable unto others; at least, that they may ex∣cite such as are more experimented in this art, to essay an inquiry into the natures of the rest of the mineral Wells, with which our Country is abundantly furnished, and much adorned; they giving no small ground to suspect, that the earth is replenished with variety of minerals. And seing the earnest desire I have after promoving the knowledge of truth, and the good of others, did ob∣stetricat these first labours into the world, I do earnestly intreat for a cheerfull acceptance of them, and that you would swadle them in a favour∣able construction, and not expose them to the bru∣mal sharpness of mockery or detraction: For they
contain the rudiments of that nature-imitating-art Chymie, being only taken from the resolutory part, which is subservient to medicine; and make no mention of the Transmutation of Mettals, Po∣table Gold, and the Philosophers Stone, &c. Con∣cerning which many things which are false, ridi∣culous and inconsistent with reason, have been spoken by some, and with which others did, and yet do, egregiously deceive the world: For which some have been deservedly forced to finish their dayes upon Gibbets. And this is the reason for which, Artists are by some called dceivers, and by others fools; as appeareth in Florentius Schoonhovious his Emblem concerning Chymists, (to which he subjoyneth this verse; Dum certis incerta sequor, rem prodigus omnem Converti in fumos & miseros cincres. That is, Whil'st that by things most sure, such as uncertain are I seek, by smoak and ashes I'm deceived far) And in its commentary in these words, Alchymie, that amiable madness (whose sure companion is poverty and labour in vain) familiar to the curious, its vanity doth hence appear, ev'n in promising such things as nature can neither suffer nor attain unto, whilst it laboureth to over-turn the natures of things, by making a Philosophers Stone (as they call it) which will forth with change all bodies in∣to
Gold or Silver, at their touching it.—The miserable Alcumist, who hath spent all his dayes in trying of experiments, when all that he had is spent, and converted into smoak and ashes, in his old age he becometh raged, covetous, alwayes favouring of Sulphur, and Paralytick, through his continual handling of Mercury, getting nothing but painfull and sorrowfull sighs; because his labours hath produced nothing but errour, loss and shame. But I hope, that it shall afterwards clear∣ly appear to all (Momus and Zoilus only except∣ed) how wrongously these things are asserted con∣cerning all Alcumists. Lastly, seing we do not profess our selves to live without the confines of humane fallibility, we do humbly intreat all such, as know any things of greater worth, and more consonant to truth, than what we have set down hereafter (for, two eyes or moe, will see better then one) that they would upon the same account, communicat them unto others. If thus our labours shall work upon such, we shall (possibly) be there∣by excited to set about some other task, no less profitable to others. For we believe, that all good endeavours are praise-worthy, although their events be uncertain. Fare-well.
Mome favere decet, prodesse volentibus: ergo Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua. That is, Mome it doth become thee well, To favour such as would do well: Then either give to others yours, Or cease to carp and censure ours. Ad Lectores. Omnibus haec animae conamina prima modestae. Grata superveniant, quos nova scire juvat. That is. I. W. These first essayes which the modest mind hath offert. Accepted be, by such as novels covet.
To his most accomplished Friend and worthy Comrade, Mr. Matthew Mackaile, upon his elaborat description of the Mof∣fet and St. Catharines Wells. INgenious soul, who'll not admire thy skill? Who thus anatomisest with a quill, Dame natures hidden cabin, and displayes Treasures, beyond the conquest of the bayes. Such soveraign wealth, as miracles performs; Restoring death to life, and calming storms, Rais'd by intemperance: Thy water-brooks Refresh the panting heart and fainting looks Of anxious valetudinaries, thou Constrain'st the Peasant rude to make a vow. And from earths hidden cavern, then dost bring Him health and strength to pay his vow and sing. Thy Lynx-cy'd intellect receives no stop From intermedes; but thou, that well stor'd-shop. Survey can'st in a minut; and from thence, Bring soveraign Antidotes with small expence:
And from things despicable, like the Bee, Sweet remedies prepare; strange industry! And yet more strange the bounty of thine hand, To straw such treasures up and down our land; And in such form, that every vulgar Eye, From hence may learn profound Philosophy: Whereas their sole Monopoly were able, To bring thee fame and wealth inestimable. What inspiration moved thee to make Poor mortals of their Makers skill partake? I'st not enough that they His foot-stool tread? But must they also know how He it made? Sure, providence reserv'd hath these displayes, To give them life in these our halcyon dayes; And hath designed thee likewise to be Her message-bearer to posterity. O may thy virtuous soul receive the fruit! Of those the labours, and of thy wit acute! And may each barking Momus blush to see The lustre of thy ingenuity, That so thy nimble Pen may never sall, Till myriads of pens thy loss bewail. In amoris testimonium sic conatus est. I. A.
THE PREFACE. THat the following descrip∣tion of Moffet-wells may be the better understood, we thought it necessary to premise some things con∣cerning the elements of Chymie. 1. There are six simple (though Physi∣cally, of the four elements composed) bodies, whereof every Animal, Vegetable and Mi∣neral body is composed, and into which they are resolved, by destillation and calcination; and they are these. 1. Earth. 2. Phlegme, or the insipide Liquor. 3. Mercury, or the acide Spirit. 4. Sulphur, or the combustible Liquor. 5. Volatile-salt, which cannot endure the fire, but flyeth from it. 6. Fixed-salt, which resisteth the strongest of Vulcan's
fury (his vitrifying heat only excepted) without any damage. The last four only are called Elements (by way of excellency above the rest) because they only are endued with medicinal virtues. 2. The foresaid bodies are called simple; because they connot be resolved into heteroge∣neal parts, by destillation, without the adding of a heterogeneal body. 3. Mercury, Sulphur, Salt-volatile and Fixed-salt, are called the elements of all the foresaid Bodies, because they are composed of them; but not because all of them can be extracted out of any body, and made obvious to the senses: for, there can but a little Vo∣latile-salt be extracted out of some things, and very little Fixed-salt out of others. In the Original we asserted, that there can no Volatile-salt be extracted out of man's Blood: but having since attained a more exact manner of destilling the blood of Ani∣mals, and separated some Volatile-salt (which attacheth it self to the sides of the recipient, like Spiders webs) from them, we do retract that assertion; having in the Epistle to the Reader professed, that we did not live, with∣out the confines of humane fallibility.
But it is ordinarly, in greater abundance, ex∣tracted out of the hornes, feathers, &c. of living Creatures. Likewise, there can be but very little Fixed-salt extracted out of these, unless they be taken in great quantities, and put to a tryal: for, where the Volatile-salt doth abound, there is little of the Fixed-salt, and contrarywise. 4. The Earth (which they call the dead head) is, as it were, the subject of the fore∣said Elements, and is of no use or virtue, when the Elements are separated from it. 5. Phlegme is only the carrier of nou∣rishment to the Elements. As for example, water is only the carrier of that aliment, which Vegetables and Minerals do suck out of the Earth for their nutrition; and it is the carrier also of that nourishment, which living Creatures do extract out of the parts of Vegetables and Minerals, as the Phlegme of Wine is, only the carrier (or chariot) of those active Spirits, which do exhilerate the heart of man. 6. It is not only certain, from the Chy∣mical resolution of bodies, that the fore∣mentioned Elements have a real existence in nature, but it is also naturally known to all
Cooks; for in their dressing of Meats, they labour to supply the penury of Sulphur, Mer∣cury and Salt, by adding Butter, Vinegar and Common-salt, in making of Sauces. 7. In the resolution of any natural Body (that is in a natural estate) by destilling, the Phlegme exstilleth first; 2. the Mercury; 3. Sulphur; 4. Salt-volatile; and, 5. the Fixed-salt remaineth in the earthly part, from which it is to be extracted by calcina∣tion, solution, filtration and coagulation. Neither doth this falsifie what hath been said, that in the destilling of fermented Wine (that is, which hath stood one, two, or moe dayes, after i'ts being pressed out of the Grapes) the sulphureous Spirit exstilleth be∣fore the rest: for this cometh to pass, because the sulphureous Spirit (which is Volatile of it self) is separated from the rest of the Ele∣ments by fermentation, and is in an unnatural estate. Neither doth any more of this Spi∣rit exstill, then is separated from the Salt, &c. by fermentation. And in the destilling of new Wine, the sulphureous Spirit beginneth to exstill, before that the Phlegme is altoge∣ther separated; because of the suddain fer∣mentation of the Wine, which causeth the
sulphureous and volatile spirit reject that bond and tye, under which it was formerly: For all bodies, when they are in their natural con∣dition, are alwaies resolved by art, after one and the same manner: that is to say, their elements are still separated in the same order. So that it is probable, that in the destilling of not-fermented Wine, the Vinegar or mercurial-part (which is the true spirit of the Wine: For spirit is first, and most proper∣ly, attributed to Mercury, and in the next place only to Sulphur) would exstill before the sulphureous spirit, if the fermentation of Wine could be impeded whil'st it is a de∣stilling. You would here take notice of the reason, why the simple spirit of Wine, doth pass sooner and more facilely through the stomach, and occasion less unpleasant eructations from it, than when it is impregnat with the sul∣phureous spirits of Cinnamon, or other Spices. We conceive that this cometh to pass, because the spirit of Wine is a most homogencal body, which debateth less with the natural heat and flatulent vapors, which are contained in the slomach, than when it is associat to the sul∣phureous spirits of Spices: for the more sorts
there be of them, there is the greater confu∣sion and debate amongst them, and betwixt them and the forementioned flatulent vapors, when they begin to be altered and concocted by the natural heat; and therefore the eru∣ctations occasioned by this strife, cannot but be more frequent and noysom to the pallat, than such as proceed from a less confused and vio∣lent debate. 8. The Mercury, or acide Spirit, is the ferment of the forementioned bodies. 9. Ferment in general, is either natural or artificial; and each of these, is either simple or composed. 1. The natural and simple ferment, is the proper mercury of any simple body (as of Wine, Milk, &c.) which being incited by external heat, doth produce a swelling of the body (whose it is) and a separation of its he∣terogeneal parts or elements, as the mercury or vinegar of Wine causeth it to swell, and produceth a separation of the sulphur from it∣self, as also of the salt (contained in the tartar, which doth attach it self to the sides of the vessel) from both. 2. The natural and composed ferment, is made up of the praper mercuries of several
simple bodies (as of Cinnamon, Opium, &c. whereof Treacle is composed) and produceth a swelling of it, and a conjunction of the seve∣ral elements and qualities (of the many diffe∣rent bodies) as it were, into one new nature; and that by fermentation, concerning which you shall have more hereafter. Here you may observe, that a simple body, which hath been fermented, by its simple and pro∣per mercury, may be thus also, as it were, fermented. As, well fermented Wine, be∣ing put into a glass (hermetically sealed, or well stopped with a Cork) and exposed to the Sun his beams, in the Canicular-dayes, its mercury or fixed spirit, will alter the sul∣phureous and volatile spirit, and change it into its proper nature, by fixing it; and the sulphureous and volatile spirit, will in some measure volatilise the fixed spirit: for Vi∣negar thus prepared, is the best and strongest. And hence it appeareth, that the spirit which doth first exstill, in the abstraction of such Vinegar from Mettals, which have been dissolved by it (and which is commonly called the burning spirit of the mettal, and by Angelus Sala in his seventh Aphorisme of the first Sect, a part of the Vinegar conver∣ted
into a burning spirit, like to the spirit of Wine, and the very spirit of Vinegar) is not so much the spirit of Vinegar, as either a part of the sulphureous and volatile spirit of the Wine, which revivifieth, as it were, by defermentation (if we may thus speak) for it was fixed by the fixed spirit of Vinegar, and is now for saken, when it beginneth to operat up∣on the mettal which it dissolveth; or that part of the sulphureous spirit, which the mer∣curial had not fixed compleatly. The verity of this is proven by another operation like unto it, viz. in the destilling of the Butter of Antimony out of equal parts of Anti∣mony: and Corrosive-sublimed-Mercury, the salinous spirit of the sublimat, which had before corroded, and united to them∣selves the Mercury, when they are com∣moved by a new heat, they begin to corrod the Antimony, and do forsake the Mercury, which they did formerly corrod: for when the fire is augmented, the revivified Mercury exstilleth towards the end of the destillation. Yea, the Butter of Antimony, is nothing else but the salts of the sublimat, by corrosion impregnat with the Reguleal part of Anti∣mony. For we did convert the Emetick
powder (which is made of the Butter of An∣timony) into the Regulus of Antimony; and in this operation we perceived no sign of the revivifying of any parts of the Mercury, al∣though it was done by the great violence of fire. 3. The artificial and simple ferment, is the proper and natural ferment of any simple body, which produceth a fermentation, in any simple or composed body, to which it is artifi∣cially applied. As when the juyce of a Lem∣mon, Wine, or the proper Mercury of the stomach of a beast do produce the fermentati∣on of Milk. 4. The artificial and composed ferment, is a ferment made of many others, as the com∣mon Earning (which is made of the stomach of a beast, &c.) by which Milk is ordinarily fermented, or curded. Here observe, 1. that the natural ferment doth sometimes produce a more exact fermen∣tation, than the artificial. As when the na∣tural ferment of Milk doth produce a more exact separation of the sulphur from the rest (when it causeth it pass to the superior part in the Cream, although that separation must be afterwards perfected by motion, in reducing it to Butter) than the artificial ferment, whe∣ther
simple (as the juyce of a Lemmon) or composed (as the common Earning or Run∣net) which do not so exactly separat the Butter from the earthy part, &c. of which the Cheese is composed. for both the Cheese and the Whey are most capable of further fermenta∣tion, whereby their heterogeneal parts will be exactly separated from each other. 2. It is the Mercury, which is excited by external heat, that produceth the fermentation of a body, as doth appear in Milk, which being sufficiently fermented (that is, whose sul∣phur, &c. are sufficiently separated from each other) contracteth a sharp and mercurial taste which is gradually augmented, according to the different hours and dayes of its fermenta∣tion, as is known to every Rustick, that maketh Butter. Likewise Ale (which is sweet before that it be fermented) doth contract the very like taste (which doth reside into the Mercu∣ry, excited by external heat, and permeating all the liquor, and fixing some of the sul∣phureous parts; for a great external cold will impede the fermentation or working of Ale) when it is fermented. To these you may add, that the Bilious humour contained in the body of a living creature, is in two respects,
as it were, a ferment. 1. In respect of the Chyle, it is a natural and simple ferment (for it is generated of the natural and proper ferments of meat and drink) which produ∣ceth a separation of it self from the blood, Melancholick humour and Phlegme, and of these from each other, by fermentation. And in this resolution of Chyle, Blood an∣swereth to Sulphur, Choler or the bilious humour to Mercury, Urine (though impreg∣nat with some Volatile and Fixed-salts) to Phlegme, and Melancholy to the Fixed-salt contained in the earthy part. 2. In respect of the whole body: for it is commonly (yet deservedly) called a natural Clyster, which doth irritat the expultrix faculty of the In∣testines (into which it daily sloweth, out of its natural receptacle, the Gall) for the purg∣ing forth, and separation of, the excrements. From the premisses, you may collect the manner how some purgatives do open the belly. For when purgatives are put into the stomach (as into a Retort which hath a stroup arising from its upper part, serving for the re-affusion of that liquor, which did once ex∣still by the other, that it may be re-destilled: For the Wezand or Oesophage answereth to
that stroup in the Retort) they are altered by its heat, and by the heat of the circum-jacent parts, and their proper Mercuries, which do exstill by the nether orifice of the stomach, called the Pylorus which answereth to the common stroup of the Retort) do produce a commotion and fermentation of the humours in the Intestines, and thereafter (in the pro∣gress of this destillation-like operation) the Sulphur and Volatile-salt being commoved and exstilled, they do (by a certain occult qua∣lity, which is only known to God the Crea∣tor, and to which the creatures of this All∣knowing-God must have their recourse, seing that we know only in part) excite and irritat the expultrix faculty to expell; and when the strength of the purging Medicine, is pro∣portionat to the strength of the body, the bad humours only (which are onerous and most hurtfull to nature) are purged forth. For then nature retaineth the good and usefull humours, although they be commoved with the rest. But if the Medicine be in its strength disproportionat to the constitution and strength of the body, then the good, as well as the bad, are promiscuously purged forth, and that painfully: Because that such
things only as should, are not excerned, as said Hippoc. lib. 1. Aphor. 2. I said, 1. that the occult quality of the Sulphur and Vo∣latile-salt, did irritate the expultrix faculty: the first Liquor only wherein Rubarb hath been infused, doth purge by irritating the ex∣pultrix faculty; because the Sulphur and Vo∣latile-salt are dissolved in it. 2. That this irritation of the expultrix faculty, ought to be ascribed unto an occult quality (seing the Sulphur and Volatile-salt of Lamer, are neither purgative nor vomitive) because the Sulphur and Volatile-salt of Rubarb are simple Bodies, which cannot be (by Art) re∣solved into heterogeneal parts, that the causes of these effects which they produce, might be known. But when a Medicine made of Antimony, or such-like, is exhibited, vomiting proceed∣eth purging by stool; because the abounding humors in the Stomach, which are volatile, (not that they contain Volatile-salt, but only because bilious for the most part, which do occasion a nauseating, by their spontaneous tending upwards, as a bird in flying) are sud∣denly commoved by the Sulphur, &c. of the Antimony, &c. And not finding, a facile
egress by the neather Orifice, they are, by na∣ture, forced upwards. I shall add this assertion to what hath been said, and endeavour to render it's verity in∣dubitable. The knowledge of fermentation is the great key of Nature, which the Former of all things, hath put into the hands of man, for the unlocking of her secret Cabins, that he might the more clearly behold her greatest mysteries. The truth of this will become unquestio∣nable, if you will but consider, 1. that there∣by he is greatly inabled, to resolve the Bodies of Animals and Vegetables: for such are best resolved, when fermentation is premitted, As when fermented Barley affoardeth a most subtile, active, and ardent sulphureous Spirit, which it would exhibit under a grosser and oleaginous form, if it should be destilled, with∣out a previous fermentation. And Milk is better resolved into Wig, (which, by destil∣lation, may be converted into an insipid Wa∣ter and a Mercurial Spirit) Butter and Curds by fermentation in a Churn, then into un∣pleasant water, &c. by destillation: because of the empyreuma accompanying them:
2. The knowledge of fermentation dis∣covereth the reason, why all meats, (whether they be made of Animals or Vegetables) which are fermented, are more easily digested and do nourish better, than such as are not fermented. As for example, fermented Bread (i. e. sour∣ed) is more castly digested and yieldeth better nourishment, than any other doth; because it's sulphureous part is subtilized and loosed by fermentation, which maketh it to be the more easily and quickly separated from the Bread, whil'st it is a concocting in the Sto∣mach. And (for the same reason) the fleshes of all sorts of Animals are fittest for being eaten, the second or third day after their mactation, as the practice of all doth prove. Moreover, do we not delay the drinking of Wine, Sider, Ale, Beer, &c. untill they be fermented? for then they do nourish most, and are of a most facile digestion, because their alimentary parts (especially the Sul∣phur) are, by fermentation, loosed from the terrestrial and gross subject, wherein they did formerly reside, and are subtilized and evect∣ed to a more subtile and spirituous consistence, which rendereth them more plyable to the ope∣ration of the natural heat; and are not these
subtilized alimentary parts, the thing which doth inebriat a weak Brain, for a little time held over the Vessel wherein Wine, or Ale, &c. are fermenting. It is, certainly, undenyable; because, if Wine or Ale were put into a Still (artificially adjusted) when the fermentation begins to appear, you should (without the assistance of Vulcan) at the end, find some of those subtile Spirits con∣densed into an ardent Liquor in the receiver. In the Medico-Philosophical discourses of Dr. Thomas Willes, (a Physician at Oxford, the perfection of whose Learning, my quill is not able to describe) you will find many things concerning fermentation which were never heard of before, and which are (for the most part) consonant to what is here; all which were but lately published in Latine and came to our hands, two moneths after these, and what followeth, were written. And in them is the nature of fermentation more exactly described then ever. 10. The differences of Colours do pro∣ceed from the different degrees of the con∣coction of the Sulphur; as the colours of Red-roses, Gillofers, Violets, &c. do (with∣out doubt) proceed from th Sulphur which is
concocted, untill it contract a red, blew, or the like colour, whereof it was destitute, when impregnat only with viridity in the juyces which nourished the Flowers. For, when the Salt of a Vegetable, containing perfectly con∣cocted Sulphur, (as of Worm-wood, Fincle, the Vine, &c.) is mixed with the tinctures of those Flowers, they do presently contract a green colour; because the Salt produceth an indigestion and recrudescence of the Sulphur. For, the first colour of any Vegetable is green, which proceedeth from the crudity and im∣perfect digestion of the Sulphur, which be∣cometh red or blew, &c. when it is further concocted by nature, as it happeneth in the fore-mentioned Flowers, and in the leaves of many Vegetables, as of Trees, &c. which be∣come yellow, &c. when they attain unto ma∣turity. I said, 1. The salt of a Vegetable; because no Minerall-salt (as Nitre, Amo∣niack, &c.) doth render the Vegetable Sul∣phur indigested. 2. The Salt of a Vege∣table, which containeth perfectly concoct∣ed Sulphur; because the Salt of Scurvy-grass (which is a Vegetable, not containing perfectly concocted Sulphur) or such like, do not render the foresaid Sulphur indigested.
You may observe by the way, that the Spirits of Nitre, Common-salt, Vitriol and Brim∣stone, do perfect the foresaid tinctures which were made green, by re-investing them with their former colours; although the same Spi∣rit of Brimstone, ascending from it in smoak, when it is inflamed (for the foresaid Spirit of Brimstone is nothing else, but the smoak which ascendeth from inflamed Brimstone, and is afterwards condensed into a Liquor, as you shall hear) doth albisie a recent Red-Rose; and the Oyl of Tartar will invest it with greenness, if it be a little broken and infused in the Oyl. We acknowledge, that we have never, as yet, attained to the knowledge of the causes of these rare and wonderfull ef∣fects; especially seing we are of opinion, that the fore-mentioned Liquors and all Salts are not hot, but cold, as shall appear hereafter. We said before, That the differences of Colours do proceed from the different de∣grees of the concoction of the Sulphur; or from the alterations produced in the Sulphur, by the actions of corrosive bo∣dies: the truth of which assertion we will further essay to demonstrat, by shewing (accor∣ding to our own opinion) the manner how
Blood, the different sorts of Bile and Me∣lancholy, do acquire their different colours. It is vulgarly asserted by Physicians, that excrementitious Bile is of four kinds, viz. 1. Bilis Vitellina, which is general of yellow Bile. 2. Porracea, which taketh it's origi∣nal from the Vitelline. 3. Aeruginosa, proceeding from the Porraceous. 4. Gla∣stea, which oweth it's original to the Aerugi∣nous; all which they affirm, Majori sem∣per adustione generari, & plures caloris gradus acquirere. And concerning Melan∣choly they write thus; Dum Melancholia excrementitia praeter naturam se habet, atra Bilis apellatur, quae ferventissima est, & acerrima; & ex Melancholia naturali, Bile flava, sanguine, vl pituita salsa generatur. We humbly decline the giving of our as∣sent unto those opinions, though generally re∣ceived by the ablest of Physicians; and will in the like manner offer our own, to which we will premit these two assertions: 1. Salt, and all bodies wherein it doth pre∣domine, are cold and moist; as will afterward be proven by several arguments. 2. Every Liquor is salt, acide or sharp (i. e. acris) because of the admistion of Salt:
These things being premised, we are of opinion, that Blood containeth Sulphur, Salt, Spirit, &c. but more Spirit and Salt, or Sali∣nous Spirit than Sulphur, when the Chyle is first converted into blood in the second con∣coction, because this Salinous Spirit is to serve for other uses, than the alimenting of any part: for, in the second concoction, it is the chief agent in producing the red colour of Blood, by it's action upon the Sulphur of the Chyle. Moreover, another part of it, by operating after another manner upon some other part of the Sulphur, produceth the yel∣low colour in Bile; which being generat, is sent to the Gall, that it's gradual emanation from thence, may (like a natural Clyster) irritat the expultrix faculty of the Intestines. Lastly, another portion of it, by altering a third portion of the Sulphur, produceth the blackish colour in the Melancholick humour, which Nature maketh retire to the Splen, that by it's crasser parts, it may aliment the Parenchymatous substance thereof; and by it's more subtile and penetrating parts, it may promove the digestion of the Stomach, &c. The truth of these things will easily ap∣pear, to any who will be at the pains to observe
the destillation of Honey, and the gradual alterations of the colours in the Liquors ex∣stilling; to which operation of Art, this of Nature (viz. the generation of Blood, Bile and Melancholy) may be well compared, be∣cause of the great resemblance which is be∣twixt them. Moreover, none will question the truth of our former assertion, if they will but consi∣der, that as of the juyce of Celledon (which is of the colour of Bilis vitellina) the green leaves of it are made, when it is further con∣cocted by nature, and thereby it's Sulphur doth suffer a new alteration, by the action of it's acide spirit upon it, whereby the Vitelline (or yellow) colour in the juyce, is converted into a green in the leaves. Likewise, the Mercurial, Acide and fermentative part of Bilis slava, by producing a new alteration up∣on the Sulphur, it deposeth it's first yellow colour, and acquireth a Vitelline, which is a darker yellow. As also, the green juyce of a Leek is generat of the white juyce con∣tained in it's root, then it's greener leaves, inclining to an Aeruginous colour, likewise it's whitish Flowers; So is the Porraceous Bile generat of the Vitelline, the Aerugi∣nous
of the Porraceous, the Glasteous of the Aeruginous, and the black or Atra Bilis of the Glasteous, and that without any adu∣stion: For, wood which is a little burned, be∣cometh black Char-coal, and when it is fully burnt, it is converted into white ashes. Should he not deservedly be termed the most ridicu∣lous of Naturalists, who would affirm, that the redish colour of Copper and yellow colour of Brass, are, by adustion, converted into a green colour? when they contract their green rust (which is commonly called Aeru∣go) by reason of the action of Vinegar ap∣on them. Likewise, that the brounish colour of the tincture of Nut-galls, is, by adustion, converted into a black colour, when Vitriol is mixed with it in making of Ink. This is so well known to Dyers, who (not by ustion, but (by the admistion of Salinous Bodies, which do so operate upon the Sulphurs of others, that they change them from one colour into another, and so communicat divers co∣lours unto one and the same Cloath; that if any of them did understand the actions of acide Spirits upon sulphureous Bodies, they would affirm that opinion, concerning the transmutation of colours by ustion, to be ca∣chinno dignam.
Here we cannot but mention two conside∣rable things, and offer our opinion concerning their causes. The one is concerning some Vegetables in general, and the other concer∣ning the Hous-leek in particular. As to the first, it is vulgarly known, that there are many Vegetables, (as the Hous∣leek, Ivy, &c.) whose leaves do not fade or wither in the Harvest or Winter, but do remain as green and succulent then, as they were in the Summer. We conceive the cause of this perennal viridity is two-fold. 1. The imperfect concoction of their Sulphur, which (as you read a little before) perpetually ac∣companieth viridity in Vegetables, and is not capable of evaporation (as is the Sulphur of other Vegetables when they come to maturity; that is, when their seeds are ripe) so long as the Vegetative life is not extinguished; be∣cause of it's more strict union with their salts, which do detain it, and so prohibiteth it's avolation. 2. The salt of those Herbs, be∣ing more nitrous than the salt of other Herbs, it is more firmly united to the Sulphur, (which in such, is still more resinous, as in the Fir-tree, &c.) and therefore doth more strongly detain, not only the Sulphur, but
also the aqueous humidity from evaporat∣ing. As to the second, it is well known, that the Hous-leek, being suspended in the air with it's roots, doth not at first wither, as Worm∣wood, &c. but accress to a greater big∣ness, shooting forth new leaves and a stem. Before we offer our opinion concerning the reason of this, we will first acknowledge, that this accretion is not a proper growth, (as when the roots received aliment from the earth) because, as one or two leaves do pullulat from the top, as many at the root fade and become dry. These leaves therefore which do germi∣nat from it's centre, do not spring forth be∣cause of any nourishment which the root doth receive from the ambient air; but, because the juyce of the root and former leaves doth ede into new leaves and a stem: for they do wither more then if they had been separated from one another, and dryed apart. But in progress of time, all the Herb fadeth and ceaseth to germinat any more, by reason of the totall exhalation of the vegetative Spirits and their aliment, by insensible transpiration. For the same reasons, the Onion, being pre∣served in a convenient place all the Winter,
fadeth but little, and being suspended in the air, in the Spring it shooteth forth new leaves, which are alimented by the remainders of the subtile Sulphur and Volatile-salt, which hath not been exhausted by evaporation. From what hath been said, it appeareth im∣possible to make the magisterial Powders of all Vegetables, according to Dr. John Zuel∣fer (who did lately reform the Augustan Dispensatory by his Animadversions there∣upon) his Prescript, in these words, contained in his Animadversions upon the composed and simple Balsams. Take (saith he) of the leaves of Rue or Red-Roses, most richly endued with their native colours, as much as you please; and boyl them in water, ad∣ding a sufficient quantity of the Oyl of Tartar: Add to the strained decoction wa∣ter impregnat with Allom, and a thick mat∣ter like Pulse will precipitat or fall to the bottom; and if the Herb was green, it will be green, and if red, it will be red, as in Roses and such like Flowers: because the Oyl of Tartar is the salt of the Vine conver∣ted into an Oyl by deliquation: neither doth the dissolved Allom reduce the green tincture unto redness.
These are the things which we thought ex∣pedient to premise; and concerning which we must acknowledge, that there were but some of them at first intended, and the others occur∣ring unto us as consequences from the rest, or worthy the inserting, have made this Preface of a bigness disproportionat to the following Book Concerning which, some rigid Momus will possibly say, as Diogenes Laertius de vita Philosophi, lib. 6. affirmeth the Cy∣nick Diogenes to have said, when he came to the City Myndus, and saw a little City and magnificent Ports, viz. Viri Myndii, Por∣tas claudite, nè Urbs vestra egrediatur  You Myndians, shut your gates, lest your Town run out by them. I answer, that it is some∣times most expedient, that it be so in some ru∣stick Buildings (such as this is) especially where there are much Cornes and Hay to be carried home upon great Waggons; And therefore I do intreat the courteous Reader, not to censure me too much, seing I have been necessitated to take in considerable store ou of all the three Families of Animals, Ve∣getables and Minerals: And in confidence thereof, I will now set about the describing of the Wells.
MOFFET WELL: OR, A Topographico-Spagyricall descrip∣tion of the Mineral Wells at Moffet, in Annandale of Scotland. WE thought it fitting to present you first with a Topographical delineation of the Wells, and to declare the maner of their becoming not our unto men; and then to subjoyn the Spa∣gyricall description of them. Six years ago, a valetudenary Rustick (as I was credibly informed) who was accustomed to make an anniversary it neration to the Wells at Bramt∣ton, as he was travelling through Annandale, he felt a smell like to that of Brampton wells, which made him walk contrary to the wind, following the smell brought thereby; and then, upon the top of a little Rock (which nature hath scituated north-wards, and at the distance of one mile from Moffet) which was covered with mire and clay, he discovered two little Spring-wells, the neather
and biggest whereof, is distant from the steep Rock (by whose side runneth a little Burn, into which the Water descendeth) about two or three foot, and the upper about six or seven. When expe∣rience had induced him to believe, that these Wa∣ters, were, in their qualities and operations, most like unto the Waters of Brampton, he recom∣mended them to his friends and acquaintance, as∣serting that they were enriched with the like and many other virtues; So that within twelve mo∣neths after, all sorts of sick persons did begin to resort unto them, and that from all places of the Country. The manifold commendations which I did every where hear uttered, concerning their virtues and effects, did beget in me a longing desire after a sight and tryal of them; especially seing I could never hear from any, of a reason for the vulgar opinion concerning them. Two years are not yet expired, since the Earl of Hartfield, (to whose former titles of honour, His Majesty, since His happy restoration to the Govern∣ment of this His ancient Kingdom, hath added the Title of Annnadale, because of his Lordship and his Ancestors, their singular Loyalty) was pleased to command the dressing of the Wells; So that the entry into them is much bettered, and their diver∣sity is made more perspicuous, by the removal of the clay, and the surrounding of them with a wall. The stones of the upper Well are white and cry∣stalline, and the neather hath blackish stones, not much unlike unto the markasite of Antimony. Thus
you have the Topographicall description: Let us proceed unto the Spagyricall. The limpide Waters of the Wells of Moffet are impregnat with the putide Sulphur of Anti∣mony, Nitre, and natural Salt-Amoniack. We shall, 1. illustrat this assertion; 2. Prove it's verity by the strength of reason and experi∣ments; 3. We shall manifest the falshood of the common opinion; 4. answer some objections; and, 5, give some rules concerning the use of the Water. And first of all we say, that water which is im∣pregnat with Nitre doth extract the Sulphur of Antimony, whil'st it passeth through an Antimo∣monial Mine. 2. As this water which is impreg∣nat with the Sulphur of Antimony, passeth through other veins of the Earth, it encountreth some Salt-Amoniack (or Salt, which by coagulation cometh of the Urines of the (almost) innumerable Beasts, which live in the circum-jacent Moors: for, the artificial Salt-Amoniack is made of the Urine of Beasts) which produceth a precipitation, in∣digestion and putide smell into the Sulphur, through it's suddain fermentation. I will now prove the verity of the assertion. And, 1. I say, that the assertion is most pro∣bable; because the water wherewith the Saffran of Mettals (Crcus Metallorum) which is An∣timony calcined with Nitre, was washed, that is, wherein it was for a long time boyled, hath the same smell that the Water of Moffet-Wells hath,
when some drops of Aqua-regia (which is made of Aqua-fortis and Salt-amoniack) are instilled into it. Now the smell of the water of the Wells, is most like to the smell of the dross of powder, which remaineth in Guns which have been often shot. 2. This artificial Water tinctureth Silver, as the water of the Wells do. 3. In this water precipitateth the putide Sul∣phur of Antimony, which is redish-yellow; or rather the Antimonial atoms, wherein the fore∣said Sulphur doth reside. And the stones of the Upper-well are covered with a matter, very much resembling the same. 4. The stones of the Neather-well are a little coloured like Antimony, and some of them do contain a metallick like matter, which doth scin∣tillat almost like unto Antimony. 5. As the Water of the Neather-well descen∣deth into the preterlabent rivolet, a matter whi∣tish and salinous (and without doubt Nitrous wherein the diuretick virtue of the Water re∣sideth) doth attach it self unto the rocks. 6. There appeareth no such matter upon the rocks, by which the water of the Upper-well de∣scendeth; because the saltish and scintillating stones) of the Well have already detained and separated the same from the Water. 7. It is hence probable, that the Sulphur of the Upper-well will evaporat sooner, then that of the Neather; because it's Water containeth but little
salt, which should detain the evaporating Sul∣phur: for salt detaineth Sulphur, and the smell proceedeth from the evaporating Sulphur, as shall afterwards be proven. 8. Before the evaporation of the Sulphur, the water doth not depose its salt upon the rocks; else it would be attached to the very inmost stones of the Neather-well (which is false) as well as to the outmost. 9. The whitish stones of the Upper-well are nitrous and Antimonial: for when their double quantity of Nitre is added to them, and they af∣terwards calcined in a Mortar, they take flame af∣ter the same manner, that Antimony calcined with Nitre doth, and become like unto Diaphoretick Antimony. 10. Whilst this mixture is a calcining, it melt∣eth and boileth as Allom cast upon a hot Iron, and contracteth great saltness and acrimony. 11. When I was calcining one of those white stones (gifted by a friend) with its anatick quan∣tity of Nitre, and when I had caused pulverize the same, and mixed it with fountain water, there did immediatly arise a smell most like to that of the Wells. 12. When a little destilled Vinegar is instilled in∣to the water wherewith the Saffran of Mettals was washed, the like smell and precipitation are produced; and this mixture doth inquinat Silver with the colour of Copper.
13. The putide sulphur of the water of Moffet-Wells doth still evaporat; so that within few dayes the most limpide water is left destitute of all smell. 14. The putide sulphur of the artificial water doth likewise evaporat; yea, the simple water (without Vinegar) wherewith the Saffran of Mettals was washed, becometh destitute of all putide sulphur, when it is preserved for the space of three or four months: because it doth eva∣porat out of the alien humide body, and relinquish∣eth the antimonial atoms (wherein it did reside) separable by precipitation, upon the copious affu∣sion of fountain water. 15. From whence proceedeth the vomitive and purgative virtue of the water, if not from An∣timony? We do therefore reject the common opinion, viz. That the fore-mentioned water runneth through mineral sulphur or Brimstone, and that it borroweth its putide smell from it. But seing Dr. Andrew Baccius (a Roman Phy∣sician, in his fourth Book of hot Baths, and sixth Chapter, entituled, Concerning places or water that are abominable, in either taste or smell) saith, that there are two general causes of all th stink of terrestrial things, whereof the one is p∣se, as they say, by the mixture of a thing natu∣rally putide; and the other accidental, and by way of rottenness; and doth presently subjoy That almost the whole substance of Sulphur (by
which, me thinks, he can understand no other thing than Brimstone) consisteth in a rotten smell; and that the mixture of it with earth or water, is the first and general cause of all abominable smell and taste (yea, of natural rottenness, as he writeth a little after) but that the second cause of any stink is putrefaction, which is contrary to digestion and concoction, as saith Aristotle, viz. the corruption and indigestion of the proper and natural tempera∣ment, caused by external heat. In answer to which, we reply, 1. There is no body naturally putide: For, that stinking smell which is called putor, is the ingrate smell which proceedeth originally from the fore∣said rottenness or putrefaction wherein the sub∣stance of Brimstone cannot consist; seing that pu∣tor is only a quality and accident of a body: Now nature did never produce any kind of body natu∣rally stained with any such spot as rottenness is; But that the loathsome smell, called putor, doth proceed only from rottenness (by the Latines cal∣led putrede) and that the name putor is only given to its ingrate smell, hence appeareth; in that the multitude of Authors do call bodies, which are naturally indued with an ingrate smell, nor putide, but fetide, as Assa foetida, Atriplex foetida, &c. whose foetor or stink, is a good and medicinal qua∣lity, by nature conferred upon them, and not a quality consisting in the corruption and indigesti∣on of their natural and proper temperaments, by external heat. But they call Ʋlcers (whose in∣grate
smell proceedeth from the corruption of the natural temperament by putrefaction) putid, and never fetide, as doth Senuertus, Tom. 3. lib. 5. pag. 2. chap. 5. at the beginning, and through the whole Chapter, he calleth these Ʋlcers, which he describeth, putride, and never fetide. And Weckerus, Syntax. Medic. utriusque lib. 3. pag. 743. concerning the curing of external diseases, and, in particular, of the sordide and putride Ʋlcer. He calleth an Ʋlcer that putrifieth the member, sordide, putrified, and putride; although he saith, that from such an Ʋlcer ariseth a fetide and ca∣daverous smell, which we think improperly called fetide, seing it is not natural, but hath its origi∣nal from putrefaction. 2. Brimstone that is not inflamed, hath scarcely any smell; and that smell which it hath, is not in∣grate. Therefore the whole substance almost of Brimstone, doth not consist in an natural stink called foetor, much less in a preter-natural called putor; especially seing it is a natural and terrestri∣al mixed body; and a proper species or kind, in∣tended by nature, as the same Author confesseth in the beginning of the second Chapter of the same Book. 3. We shall hermetically explain the foremen∣tioned putrefaction, which the Author hath aristo∣telically described, by saying, that the putrefacti∣on of any body taketh its rise from the fermenta∣tion thereof. As for example, When the recent Ʋrine of a man, or Flesh which hath never been
salted, or keeped for the space of one month longer, whilst they are fermenting, they putrifie; that is, the dgested or concocted Sulphur, being by the internal Mercury, and the external heat inciting it, solved from the rest of the Ele∣ments, it beginneth to become indigested, and to evaporat; that is, to evanish, and then beginneth putrefaction and the putide smell, from the acti∣on of the Air, upon the evaporating and recru∣descing Sulphur: for, where there is almost no combustible, or perfectly digested Sulphur, as in some Minerals and Mettals, there is no fermen∣tation nor putrefaction. From what hath been said, it may appear, that fermentation is twofold, 1. When by the strength of the internal Mercury and external heat, the confused and naturally mixed elements of a body, existing in its natural estate (as of recent Ʋrine, and such like) are solved and separated from one another: For, the solved, recrudescing and eva∣porating Sulphur of fermented Ʋrine and Flesh, savoureth unpleasantly. And the sulphureous spi∣rit of fermented Wine is separated from the salt, contained in the Tartar; and the Tartar is sepa∣rated from the rest, when it is attached to the sides of the vessel: And fermented Wine savoureth, be∣cause of the evaporating Sulphur, whereas Wine, whilst it is in the Grapes, savoureth not, because it is not fermented, neither containeth eveporat∣ing Sulphur.
2. When many bodies, fermented, as before, are united by an humide body, they are by the strength of the internal composed Mercury, and of the external heat, brought under one dominion and power; and all their qualities and properties (which are naturally distinct) do, by a new fer∣mentation unite (as it were) in one new quality, (which nevertheless may afterwards be sepa∣rated by defermentation, whilst the body is putri∣fying) as when different meats and drinks are changed into Chyle, and when of so many simple (fermented as before) sudorifick Treacle is made, which in process of time will putrifie: For, the virtues of the ingredients of recent Treacle, are really distinct, and each of them attempteth ope∣ration, after their proper manners, before fermen∣tation; and then Treacle is exhibited with less success then afterwards, when it is sufficiently fer∣mented. And this was the reason why Bandern asserteth, that within ten years the frigidity of Opium and Hyosciamus, is overcome by the cali∣dity of the rest of the medicaments. And therefore Philonium Romanum (whose composition they enter) is of little or no virtue. And the Opiat, called Aurea Alexandrina, should not be made use of, until it be six months old; because the strength of the Opium doth predomine, and the fermenta∣tion is not yet ended. You will find these things in his Pharmacopoeia. But you would observe by the way, that putrefaction doth not arise in every fermentation, but in that only wherein is, 1. much
recrudescing Sulphur, as in Electuaries, both liquid and solide, whose compositions Almonds, the greater Cold seeds (commonly so called, but which yet are really, though temperatly hot; for there is nothing cold wherein Sulphur doth abound: And that the truth of this may be un∣questionable, I shall only add this, that the in∣tense heat of Mustard, doth mainly, if not only, exist in its abundant Sulphur or Oyl, whereof it containeth so much as will in few dayes wet a sheet of paper (as if it were dipped in Oyl) where∣in its pouder is keeped; and the difference betwixt the taste of this Sulphur, and that of the fore∣mentioned seeds, proceedeth only from the diffe∣rent degrees of heat proceeding from the different degrees of concoction) and such like do enter: for such become soon rancide, and do putrifie, because they contain almost no Salt for fixing of the Sul∣phur, and prohibiting its recrudescence. 2. Or where there is much superfluous humidity, which inqui∣nateth the Sulphur, as in the fermentation of fresh Fleshes. 3. Or where there is not a free egress given to the superfluous (though not abounding) humidity; as when a green herb, or piece of flesh, wrapped up in a two or three-fold cloath, doth putrifie, whereas it would have been fermented and dryed without putrefaction, if it had been hung up in the open air. 4. All savour or smell (whether pleasant or un∣pleasant) proceedeth from the evaporating Sul∣phur; for such things as are most sulphureous,
are most odoriferous, whilst the Sulphur is eva∣porating, as Camphire, Turpeutine, &c. But Stones, Mettals, &c. which are almost destitute of all combustible Sulphur, are likewise also desti∣tute of smell. And there be many very sulphure∣ous bodies which are void of smell before the Sul∣phur begin to evaporat, as the recent Ʋrine of a Man, and the flesh of new mactat animals, which smell most abominably whilst their Sulphur is eva∣porating in their fermentation. And yellow La∣mer, which is void of all smell, containeth a most odoriferus Oyl, as appeareth when it is destilled or inflamed. 5. Salt detaineth Sulphur, and to its power pro∣hibiteth its evaporation. And this is the reason why the recent Ʋrine of a Man smelleth not: For whensoever the Salt of the Ʋrine (which also stinketh, because of a little Sulphur which it de∣taineth united to its self) beginneth to be separated from it, and affixed to the sides of the Matule, the Sulphur beginneth to evaporat, and the loath∣some smell ariseth. Likewise fresh fleshes, for the same reason, have no abominable smell, and the future putide and loathsome savour is prevented by the admistion of Salt: For the Sulphur of salted fleshes is fixed and detained by the Salt, so that it cannot recrudesce, nor evaporat abundantly, with any abominable savour; and the putrefacti∣on is also exiled by the Salt, which doth not ab∣sume (as some do ridiculously affirm) but contem∣perat the supersluous humidity as before.
6. Brimstone, not inflamed, doth scarcely emit any savour; because its combustible Sulphur is by its Salts (fixed as well as volatile) detained from evaporating. Now that Brimstone containeth salts fixed and volatile, is hence proven, that out of its dross, after the separation or consumption of its combustible Sulphur, the former is extract∣ed by lixiviation; and it is the latter, which being resolved into smoak, and ascending into the vitre∣ous campane, is by the humide air resolved into a most sharp spirit, or spiritous liquour, which falleth down into the other campane, which is the receiver; and it is called the Oyl or spirit of Brim∣stone by the Campane or Bell. 7. The quality of the vapors of inflamed Brim∣stone, which affecteth the Nostrils, is not so much a smell as a corrosive quality, existing in the Vola∣tile-salt, resolved into smoak, as was said, which doth mordicat the tender skin of the Nostrils, pe∣netrateth into the brain, perturbeth it, and deceiv∣eth the sense, and sometimes killeth, as is demon∣strat by its killing of Bees; for all smell proceedeth from the evaporating combustible Sulphur, as was formerly proven: but the combustible Sul∣phur of Brimstone doth not evaporat when it is inflamed; because it is totally converted into flame and consumed, and none of it doth evapo∣rat, or is converted into smoak with the volatile salt: for, if from inflamed Brimstone, sulphure∣ous smoak doth ascend, with the salinous, into the vitreous campane, why are not the former con∣densed
into a sulphureous, as the latter are into a salinous liquor? Moreover, no sulphureous body, which is void of volatile salt, emitteth smoak when it is inflamed, unless it be blown upon by wind, and so a little of the flame be extinguished and converted into smoak; as Sheeps-tallow, &c. But the smoak of Lamer Camphire, and such like in∣flamed bodes, is only the volatile salt resolved into smoak; which any man will confess when he shall, in vain, have sought for a sulphureous and combustible liquor amongst the foresaid condensed smoaks, which become either a salt only, or a spiritous liquor, as was said concerning the vola∣tile salt of Brimstone, Likewise, no sixed salt doth emit any salinous vapors, when it is melted by the fire; and therefore in the destilling of such salts (as of Nitre, Sea-salt, &c.) the double quantity of some Earth (as of Bole of Armenia, calcined Allom, Sand, &c.) is usually mixed with them; that their fusion may be hindred: for the heat of the fire doth sooner convert the atoms of the salt, which are separate from one another, by being mixed with the atoms of the Earth, into a spirit, then if they were united into a liquor by fusion (for united virtue or strength, is stronger for operat∣ing or resisting, and contrariwise) and the atoms of the Earth do impede the union of the salinous which are melted by the heat, and converted into a spiritous vapor. But some perchance will say, if the quality of inflamed Brimstone, which affect∣eth the nostrils, were only a corrosive quality,
existing in the volatile-salt, then the foremention∣ed spirit of Brimstone (which is its volatile-salt dissolved into a liquor by the humide air) cast up∣on burning coals, would emit a smoak endued with a corrosive quality, which would affect the nostrils, trouble the brain, and deceive the sense, as before. To this I answer, that this cometh not to pass, because the volatile-salt (in which only the corrosive quality doth exist) is detained by the fixed-salt of the coals, which doth prohibit its evaporation with the humide air, which was first converted into water, and is again resolved into smoak. The truth of these things will afterwards better appear in the answers to the first and second Objections. 8. From the premisses we conclude, that the whole substance almost of Brimstone consisteth not in a rotten smell, and that it cannot, in a natu∣ral manner, communicat to any earth or water, an unsavoury smell, whether natural (called foetor) or unnatural, called putor. For only the salts of Tartar and Lime can produce the solution in wa∣ter, and indgestion (from whence proceedeth the putide smell, which it communicateth to water) of the combustible Sulphur of Brimstone; as in the composition of Lac sulphuris: For when Brimstone is boiled in water, with the salt of Tar∣tar, the combustible Sulphur with the salts (be∣ing by boyling associated to the salt of Tartar) becometh dissolved in the water, which (before its fermentation) smelleth no otherwise than Brint∣stone
which is not inflamed. Now the fermenta∣tion of this water, thus impregnat, is, 1. subita∣neous, when some drops of destilled Vinegar are instilled into it; for then the salt of Tartar doth associat it self to its like (according to the proverb) viz. the salt of Vinegar; both which have their original from Wine. And after the precipitation of the pouder, it relinquisheth some of the com∣bustible Sulphur, mixed with the water, which incontinent becometh indigested, and beginneth to evaporat, because it is dissolved in a strange humide body, and is associated to a strange salt, which cannot hinder its evaporation, from whence pro∣ceedeth the unpleasant smell (most like to that of the yoke of a hard boyled Egg; and most unlike to the smells of not-inflamed Brimstone, and Mof∣fet-Wells) which argueth the indigestion of the combustible Sulphur. 2. Or slow, because the salts, &c. of the Brimstone and Tartar, do with∣in few hours assix themselves to the sides and bot∣tom of the vessel wherein they were boyled, and then beginneth the fore-mentioned loathsome smell, as was said concerning the fermentation of Ʋrine. Now that the reliques of the combustible Sulphur, which are mixed with the water, do re∣crudesce, appeareth hence; that this putide water doth extinguish fire, and its relicts do not take flame as doth the Sulphur which is by the salts detained into the precipitated pouder. The same cometh to pass when the double quantity of the pouder of Lime is mixed with Brimstone, and
both are destilled together: for, then some few drops only of (almost) insipide (but stinking) Phlegme, (like the fore-mentioned water, im∣pregnat with the combustible Sulphur of Brim∣stone and Salt of Tartar) do exstill, although you should augment the fire unto the liquefaction o the Glass Retort: thus was I cheated, in seeking after Schroderus his Oleum Sulphuris rubrum described in his Pharmacop. Med. Chym. lib. cap. 28. Here you may take notice, that it is in∣possible to extract out of Brimstone, a sulphureors and combustible uor, without mixing with it some other body, containing a combustible Sul∣phur; because the combustible Sulphur of Brim∣stone is so united to it's salts, and so detained by them, that it cannot be separated from them with∣out the actual touch of fire; and when it is so touched, it becometh presently inflamed and con∣sumeth totally, as was asserted. We said, 1. that Brimstone could not, in a natural manner, com∣municat to earth or water, any putide smell. 2. That by the salts only of Tartar, or of Lime, the solution in water and indigestion of the com∣bustible Sulphur of Brimstone can be produced; because neither Nitre, Salt-Amoniack, nor Sal-Gemmae, (which only are true Mineral-salts) can produce the solution in water, or indigestion of the foresaid Sulphur: Neither will the longest infusion or decoction of Brimstone in water, pro∣duce the solution and indigestion of it's com∣bustible Sulphur; because it is most strictly united
to it's proper Salts. Seing these things are col∣lected from our own proper experiments only, w are of opinion, that from them may be concluded that it is most probable, that the water of Moffe Wells passeth not through Brimstone, seing th he solution in water, and indigestion of it's com∣ustible Sulphur, cannot be caused by any true m eral Salt; and the Salts of Tartar and Lime (by which only the fore-mentioned effects can be pro∣ced) neither were, nor ever can be, found is the veins of the earth, through which the wate do run. The fore-mentioned Author, (otherwayes most learned) in the beginning of his 9. chap. of h 4. Book of hot Baths, judgeth also amiss, in saying that the cause of fervide Fountains is an actual fire, in these words: Seing the waters do spring abroad very fervide or hot, we must of necessity confess, that an actual fire, above all degrees of heat, is beneath them: for, the very waters them∣selves, do bewray the very substance of fire it self, a most hot quality, and the operations like∣wise of fire; they burn, (observe here, that the Author useth two words, incendunt and urunt; by the former of which, if he do mean, that they do inflame or kindle, he is yet further in the wrong for, there is no solid body more easily set on fire then Gun-powder is, nor is there any liquide body of a more facile inflamation, then the rectified spi∣rit of Wine is; and yet neither of these could ever be inflamed by any such waters as he men∣tioneth,
neither by the most rectified Aqua-fortis, which according to his judgement, hath as many degrees of hear, as any of these waters of which he writeth) vesicat, destroy sense, expilat what∣soever Animals are cast into them, then excoriat a little, and at length do consume the flesh, and enervat to the very bones; all which, are the effects of fire. These things are spoken amiss, 1. because the very contrary effects are at some times produced by bo∣dies which are most hot; as when the most recti∣fied spirit of Wine, and all sulphureous Oyles which are drawn out of Spices, as also the Oyl of Lamer, do not destroy sense, but revivifie it when it is destroyed, and, as it were, dead, as in the Palsie. 2. There be two bodies, viz. Iron (which no man did ever call more hot then cold) and Aqua-fortis, (which is composed of Nitre and the Salt of Vitriol, which are really cold) radically frigide; the mixture of which (in a Glase Cucurbite co∣vered with it's Still) produceth a great heat, ebul∣lition and destillation, and that without the exter∣nal adhibiting of the heat of fire. Now this heat ariseth not from actual fire (seing the fore∣mentioned bodies are not firy nor hot) but rather from the motion of the corrosive Aqua-fortis, whilst it operateth upon the Iron, for dissolving of it: for, motion produceth heat, as when a piece of Lead (which is of it self most cold) contracteth heat, being beaten by an Iron Pestill or Hammor, which also are naturally cold. That actual fire is
in neither of these two bodies; and that it pro∣duceth not this heat, appeareth hence, that the most rectified Spirit of Wine (which is most easi∣ly inflamed) when mixed with Aqua-fortis, whilst it is dissolving Iron, conceiveth not flame, but doth debilitat the action, and totally prohibite it for a time: But we shall easily shew, that Aqua-fortis and every acide Spirit (as the Spirits of Vitriol, Nitre, Brimstone, &c.) which do vesicat, burn, as it were, &c. are not hot but cold; by proving, that every Salt (especially the fixed) is cold, se∣ing the fore-mentioned Spirits and water, are only Salts converted into Liquors, either by the heat of the fire or humide air. Arg. 1. And, 1. we say, that all Physicians (both Hermetical and Galenical) do acknowledge, that Nitre, the Spirit of Vitriol (which Angelus Sa∣la in his 6. chap. concerning the nature of the spi∣rit of Vitriol, asserteth to be borrowed from Brim∣stone, and to have the same virtues and properties with the spirit of Brimstone, and which in the 10. chap. he acknowledgeth to be hot in the fourth degree) the Spirit of Brimstone, &c. do refrige∣rat, although they do say, that they do it acciden∣tally only, and by de-obstruating. As for example, when some drops of the Spirit of Vitriol (which they call hot) by de-obstruating the pores of the body, do conciliat a more facile entry to the refri∣gerating water. I do acknowledge, that it is not admirable, that this opinion, thus masked with the specious dress of probability, and vulgarly be∣lieved,
because established by the authority of Antiquity, hath hitherto inclined the reasons of all men to an assent and conformity unto it; but yet, upon the evidence of hope, we dare promise to our selves, that our not understanding, how actuall cold, and (an effectually cooling quality, can consist with radical heat, will avert from us the odious attribute of presumption, and conciliat a favourable construction to this our singularity and non-adherence to Antiquity: because that distinction never was, nor could be, applied to any (without controversie) hot body not salinous; as to the spirit of Wine, Oyl of Cloves, Cinnamon, Mustard, &c. any of which, being mixed with the most cooling liquor, will, without controver∣sie, diminish its frigidity. 2. Aqua fortis, the spirits of Vitriol and Brim∣stone, the spirit of common Salt, the Oyl of Tar∣tar by deliquation (which is the Salt of Tartar dissolved into a liquor by the humide air in a cold or subterrancal place) the Oyl of common Salt by deliquation, &c, do extinguish the fire as doth the coldest water. Therefore they are, in their first qualities, heterogeneal to fire: for such bodies only are (and ought to be) vulgarly called homo∣geneal to fire in their first qualities, which do contain some matter which becometh nourishment unto fire (Salts and Salinous bodies only except∣ed) and that is only Sulphur, it from if it be al∣most insipide (as the Sulphur r Oyls of sweet Almonds, Olives, &c. before they become ran∣cide)
then the body which containeth it, is not called hot, but temperat in heat; but if the Sulphur b very sapide, and do affect the taste much, the body wherein it doth reside is called hot; and its degree of heat are commensurat by the degrees of its sapi∣dity. Now every pure Salt is altogether destitute of such matter. Moreover, the frigidity of bodie which are estimat cold, should likewise be measure by their different degrees of sapidity; as Cichory is colder than Lettice, and the juyce of a Limon is colder than either, and the spirit of Vitriol is the coldest of all the four, &c. Neither is this contra∣ry to the common saying of Phlosphers, viz. that water is the coldest of all bodies; for that is only to be asserted of the pute elementary water, which is not to be found amongst us, and unto which (without all controversie) frigidity in the highest degree is as proper as siccity, humidity and calidity, are unto the Elements of Earth, Air and Fire: So that it is more then probable, that as the refri∣gerating cold of some springing waters doth hugely surpass the same quality in common fountain wa∣ter, so likewise the frigidity of the elementary water doth surpass that of the spirit of Vitriol, and springing water, as far as the strength of Aqua fortis, doth the strength of the juice of Limons in dissolving of Pearls; both which do operat after the same manner, only dissolving them into pou∣der, without I roying their natural tempera∣ments, which five doth, when it dissolveth them, or any thing ; all which do undeniably evince
this, that Corrosives are not of a fiery and hot temperament. 3. Every Fixed-salt doth naturally attract those things which are cold and humide, as Water and Air: therefore it is in its first qualities (fri∣gidity and humidity) homogeneal to them. More∣over, as the action of the spirit of Wine, Aqua∣vitae, &c. upon Oyls, whereby they dissolve them, and unite them unto themselves, doth argue the Oyls (viz. of Cinnamon, Anise, &c.) and spirits to be homogeneal; so likewise we do most pro∣bably conceive, that the dissolution of Salts by water, doth demonstrat the homogeneity of their natures. For no natural body, which is in its na∣tural estate, doth naturally appetize or attract its contrary. Nor is it contrary unto this, that an animal whose stomach is, distempered with calidity and siccity, naturally desireth a humide and refrige∣rating body; because that stomach is not in its natu∣ral estate; neither is it the stomach, but the Animal, (whose the stomach is) which desireth the curati∣on of the morbifick distemper, by a humide and re∣frigerating body. You would here take notice, that the cause of Thirst which is by Aristotle, in his second Book of the Soul, called, a desire after a humide and frigide body) is two-fold, external and internal; each whereof is either hot, or corrosive and cold: For corrosives are really different from such things as are hot, as shall afterwards appear, from what hath been, and is to be said. 1. The internal hot
cause of thirst, is a hot distemper of the whole body (as in a Feaver) or of some part of it, as of the Stomach, Liver, &c. 2. The external hot cause of thirst, is the radical heat of meat or drink, existing in their sulphureous parts, which pro∣duceth a hot distemper in the stomach, &c. 3. The internal corrosive cause of thirst, is a bilious, salt, and corrosive humor, which corrodeth the skin of the stomach, and by motion, in the solution of continuity, conciliateth heat in the corroded part only, whereas the heat of meat and drink do some∣times produce a hot distemper in the whole body, each of whose parts, after the concoctions, it per∣meateth. 4. The external corrosive cause of thirst, is the corrosive salts of meat and drink, which do corrode the stomach, as before. For the cure of thirst, proceeding from a hot cause (whether ex∣ternal or internal) a body radically and actually cold and humide, is necessarily required. But for the cure of thirst proceeding from a corrosive cause, a humide body, radically only (though not actually) cold, is sufficient, wherein the Salts may be dissolved; which being done in a copious hu∣mide body, they become so debilitat, that they can∣not any more corrode the skin of the stomach: for disjoyned virtue or strength is weaker. Now this solution is more easily effectuat in a humide body which is actually hot, than in one which is cold. This sort of thirst is curable also by Pearls, Co∣ral, &c. For when such things are put into the stomach, the Salt of the corrosive humor doth
affix it self to the atoms of the Pearls, Coral, &c. and so the humor is dulcified (as is Vinegar, when affused to Corals, Red-lead, &c.) and loseth its cor∣rosive quality, and then the thirst ceaseth. Here we cannot but inquire after the cause and cure of that common and troublesome distemper, vulgarly called the Heart-scade. We conceive that it is caused by acide and corrosive humors, which being congested into the stomach, do irritat its ex∣pultrix faculty, so that they are constrained to mount upwards to the throat, where the greatest pain and trouble is found; because the corrosive humor having excoriat the Oesophage or Wezand, it is still most sensible of the mordication of the hu∣mor, which is most active upon the uppermost part, upon which it beateth with violence: So this may be called an imperfect vomiting; because there is but little or nothing expelled at the mouth, the humor descending again into the stomach. The cure of this turbulent distemper consisteth, 1. either in the evacuation of the peccant humor, (which is the perfect cure) or, 2. in the correcting of its corrosive quality by dulcisication; or, 3. in prohibiting this ascension of it to the throat, which are palliative cures: As to the first, the only best way for evacuating of the peccant humor is vomit∣ing: for Art ought to imitat Nature, and assist her in her attempts which tend to the good of the creature. The second sort of cure by dulcisi∣cation is (as we conceive) three-fold; 1. by drinking of the purest fountain water in the morn∣ing,
and at five of the clock in the after-noon, when the stomach is empty. I am confident that the water of Mosset-Wells will cede to none for this use; because it will not only dulcifie the corrosive humor, but also help to expell it by stool. The person may drink more or less, according to his, or her age. 2. By Corals, Pearls, and such like, as was said a little before concerning the cure of thirst. 3. By the using of Salts, either purely natu∣ral, as Sea-salt, or which have been by art extract∣ed out of vegetables, as Worm-Wood, &c. This will certainly appear as a great Paradox (if not a falsehood) to all who are ignorant of our Spagyri∣cal art, and particularly of the operations of salts of different properties, upon one another. But for the evincing of the truth of what hath been said, I will first relate a story, and then give the reason of the effect. A near friend of mine own, who was as much molested with this distem∣per as any other ever was, essayed all the cures which were known to any with whom he had dis∣coursed concerning that disease, but the most sove∣raign of all, he found to be the cating of a little of the saltest Beef in the morning; after doing of which, he was not at all assaulted by the distem∣per that day. Now the reason of this effect is evi∣dent, to be none other than the operation of the salt of the Beef, upon the salt of the corrosive humor, by which it was dulcified. As in the mak∣ing of Tartar-Vitriolat, the Oyls of Tartar and Vitrial (which are most salt, sharp and corrosive)
being mixed, do produce a liquor altogether in∣pide. The third way of curing this disease is by prohibiting the ascension of the humor to the throat. This is done by the drinking of the spirit of Wine, or Aqua-vita, which do prohibit the ebulition of the humor, and consequently the as∣cension of it, or of vapors from it, unto the throat: For either of these being mixed with Aqua-fortis, when it is dissolving Iron, will prohibit and hin∣der the action and ebullition of the corrosive li∣quor. This is the worst of all cures; for although the person will get present ease, yet the distemper will recidivat more violently than before; because the corrosive liquor is not only by the remedy aug∣mented in its quantity, but also in the degrees of its corrosive quality: for the corrosive liquor in the stomach doth six the volatile spirits of the Wine and Aqua-vitae, and so converteth them al∣most into its own nature; as you read before in the Preface, concerning the natural composed ferment. I will add a fourth way of curing this distemper, viz. the taking of such things as will imbibe the corrosive humor in the stomach, and carry it unto the intestines. I mention this, because I was in∣formed, that one who was molested with this distemper, used to eat a great quantity or number of Groats made of Oats, and so was eased. The ordinary cure by drinking of sweet Milk, cannot but be reprehended: for though it ease a little at first, yet it causeth a recidivation when it is fermen∣ted into the stomach, and becometh acide, as in a
Churn, when reserved for making of Butter. 4. Every pure fixed salt is radically humide, without the admistion of any sulphureous and combustible matter, (for by fusory calcination it is converted into a Liquor) therefore it is also ra∣dically cold. I said, without the admistion, &c. because every sulphureous substance is also radi∣cally humide. 5. Such bodies as contain more perfectly con∣cocted and combustible sulphur then others, are commonly (and deservedly) called hot; as are these Spices, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, &c. and the sulphureous spirit of Wine: and contrarywise, such as contain less of the foresaid sulphur than others, are said to be cold, as Lettice, Purse∣laine, Cichory (whose great bitterness proceed∣eth from salt and sulphur) &c. and the corrosive parts of many Vegetables (so called, because they dissolve Pearles, Coral, &c.) as Vinegar, the juyce of Lemmons, &c. are cold, without all contro∣versie. Now we desire to know, why such as acknowledge Vinegar, &c. to be cold, do deny the salts of Tartar, &c. (which are altogether void of sulphur) to be also cold, seing they are of the same nature? For, the acidity and corrosive quality of the Vinegar, do exist in it's salt, which albisieth the atoms of the Coral, Lead, &c. which are dissolved by it, (for every purified salt is white) and this salt is the very self same salt of Tartar so dissolved in an aqueous body, that it is inseparable by destillation, without the addition
of some other body: for, the acide Liquor of every body, which is commonly called Mercury, is no∣thing else but a little of the salt (especially) fixed of the same body, dissolved in the aqueous part; which appeareth hence, that in the abstraction of destilled Vinegar from Lead or Coral which it dissolved, whensoever the sulphureous Spirit (of which in the Preface) exstilleth, the next insuing Liquor is almost insipide, as water; because it's salt (which did formerly render it acide) hath for∣saken it, and betaken it self to the atoms of the body which it dissolved, and now doth albisie. Moreover, there is no corrosive body which is not saltish, neither any saltish body which is not cor∣rosive; neither doth the sulphureous Spirit of Wine, it's extraction of the resine out of Jalap, fal∣sisie this; for it extracteth it not by a corrosive quality (because it is void of salt, and therefore corrodeth not the terrestrial part of Jalap, dividing it into atoms, as Vinegar doth Lead) but by a real firy heat, which liquifieth the Refine, and existeth in the sulphureous and inslamable Spirit, and from thence proceedeth the mutation of the colour; for, the Spirit of Wine which is impregnat with the Refine of Jalap, is almost tinctured with redness. It doth hence appear, that the frigidity of Nitre may be questioned, seing it containeth much sul∣phur, though indigested; as appeareth hence, 1. Nitre cannot be dissolved by deliquation, as the rest of salts which are voide of sulphur, before that the sulphur be separated from it by calcina∣tion.
2. A drachm of Brimstone being injected upon Nitre which is liquified by the fire, flameth longer then if it had been cast upon burning coals; because of the sulphur of the Nitre which also conceiveth flame, and consequently prolongeth the burning. Here observe, that it it is only the cru∣dity or indigestion of the nitrous sulphur, which hindereth it's inflamation, when it is not associat to sulphur that is perfectly digested, and which is inflamable of it self, (of which fort are the ful∣phureous parts of Brimstone and Coals) because the salt which detaineth the sulphur cannot prohi∣bit it's inflamation, seing the most abundant salts of Brimstone do not hinder the inflamation of it's combustible sulphur. 6. Aqua-fortis, destilled Vinegar, &c. do not burn, therefore they are neither hot nor firy; for, such things as are burned or consumed by fire, can∣not be refuscitated, and their proper temperaments are destroyed, (as when Stones, Salts, Iron, An∣timony, &c. are vitrified by fire) but such things as are dissolved, as it were, burned and annihilated by Aqua-fortis, destilled Vinegar, &c. their pro∣per temperament is not destroyed, and they can be resusitated: for, what is the precipitation of Co∣ral and of such like, who have been dissolved by the fore-mentioned Liquors, but their resuscita∣tion? And when they are resuscitated, they are endued with the same virtues where-with they were enriched before their solution, as is confessed by all Physicians, who prescribe this manner of their
preparation; and then make use of them, as more effectual then formerly. But some, perchance, will say, they are not intirely resuscitated, nor can they be reduced to their pristine estate. As for exam∣ple, it is impossible to convert Lead which was dis∣solved by destilled Vinegar (and afterward sepa∣rated from it by precipitation, and converted into Ceruss) into Lead again as it was. I did truly essay this, but to no purpose; for this matter can∣not be liquified, without the most intense heat of the fire, and then it is only converted into a mat∣ter, like unto the litharge of Gold; the reason whereof is most probably thus, viz that the cor∣rosive salt of Vinegar, which hath affixed it self unto the atoms of the Lead, can never be separated from them (for which consult the Animadversions of Dr. John Zuelfer, upon the Magisterial gouder, described in the Augustan Pharmacopoeia) and prohibiteth the liquation of those atoms (which of themselves are most easily melted) before that it self be melted, which requireth a most intense degree of heat: for it is of the same nature with the salt of Tartar, as was said, which is nor easily melted. These things are most true, and being calculated according to their seeming altitude in the meridian of reason, would appear to be nearer the Zenith of truth, than our sixth argument; But the contrary will evidently appear, if you con∣sider, that it happeneth not so in all; for although you should a thousand times dissolve, and, as it were, annihilat Quick-silver, by the strongest cor∣rosives
and causticks (as they call them) yet a little heat will revivify it again, and cause it recu∣perat its pristine form, Proteus-like. And yet the self same Quick-silver, which is most im∣patient of the heat of fire (for it flyeth from its vesicating and depilating degree, and far more rather its actual touch, by which it is quite dissi∣pated) esheweth not the most intense (somniat) heat of corrofive bodies, nor is it dissipated there∣by, but only converted into most minute atoms, and that without the destruction of its proper and natural temperament. Therefore, such things as are (as it were) burned by corrosives, are not bur∣ned and destroyed by any fiery and hot substance, but only converted into most small atoms, by a corrosive and cold one, without the destruction of their proper and natural temperaments. It is no small ground of admiration to me, that no Chymicall writer which I have seen or heard of, did ever expresly assign unto their Principles or Elements, first qualities; as did the Peripate∣tick Philosophers, who attributed heat to fire, his∣midity to air, frigidity to water, and siccity to earth. I will therefore further attempt the proving of Salt to be radically cold, and Sulphur hot, from the most learned assertions of the most admi∣rably ingenious Physician Dr. Thomas Willis. I will begin with the last, being least controverted, and soonest dispatched. In his Diatriba Medico-Philosophico de fermen∣tatione, cap. 2. (cui Titulus, Chymicorum Prin∣cipiorum
descriptio, corum; proprietates & asser∣tiones) where writing of Sulphur, he asserteth thus: Rei cujusque temperies, quoad calorem, con∣sistentiam, & amabilem texturam, à sulphure im∣primis dependet. i. e. The temperature of every thing, as to heat, consistence and lovely texture, doth originally depend upon Sulphur. As to the first, that salt is radically cold, in that 2. chap. of salt he writeth thus: Rebus com∣pactionem & soliditatem, nec non pondus & dura∣tionem largitur, corporum dissolutiones retardat, congelationes & coagulationes promovet; putre∣dini, corruptioni, & inflamabilitati plurimum resistit. The knowledge of those things pertain∣ing only to such, whose literature doth capacitat them to understand them, as they are here set down; and it being impossible to express them so significantly in Scots, I will not molest the Reader with a Translation, but only deduce my conse∣quence from them. I am confident, that none, who have any know∣ledge of Nature and her admirable works, will deny, that the most compact, (Diamond) solid, (Gold) ponderous, (Lead) durable (Silver) bo∣dies, are radically cold; the existence of which quality in them, is further demonstrat by their long resisting the violence of fire (which is the most violent and agile dissolver of the natural uni∣ty of Bodies) their congelation and coagulation, whereby they are capacitat to deny obedience to the greatest violence (excepting that of mallea∣tion)
when thereby required to alter their natural circum-scription, by their own supersicies; as al∣so, by their incapacity of being putrified, corrupted or inflamed. If then the most compact, solide, ponderous and durable bodies, &c. be radically cold, it is undenyable, that that from which they have these properties is far more such; for, propter quod unum-quodque est tale, id ipsum est magis tale. Moreover, doth not, only their resisting of the violence of fire, demonstrat their natural qua∣lities to be opposite to those of fire. Whatever shall be said to the contrary of this, I am most confident that it is most undenyable in all other things. Further, our fore-mentioned Author (whose ingeniosity shall never be sufficiently admired) in his Diatriba de Febribus, cap. 3. he writeth thus. Rigoris aut frigoris, calori praecedanei, in febri∣bus intermittentibus, causa, est succi nutritii por∣tio, quae insignem acorem contraxit, quo partes nervosas valdè pungit & vellicat, at{que} frigoris sen∣sum incutit (non secus ac Cervisia novella, quae utribus inclusa, à dulci in acidum, & nitrosum saporem transit, ut prae acore & frigiditate vix deglutiri poterit) cum hujusmodi crudi succi par∣ticulae nitroso acore praeditae, in fluore esse incipi∣unt, spiritus vitales acore suo primo obtundunt, & calorem nonnihil obruunt: quare sanguis fri∣gidior existit, & tardius circulatur, quin & ob caloris defectum, sensus frigoris in toto corpore percipitur.
Ex praedictis (ni fallor) manifeste sequitur. 1. Sanguinem in statu naturali existentem esse calidum propter spirituum vitalium (quos sulphu∣reos esse, nemo insiciabitur) abundantiam & vi∣gorem; Cervisiam etiam esse calldam, propter spi∣ritus sulphureos. 2. Sanguinem & Cervisiam novellam, a colidi∣tate gradatim debiscere, prout ipsorum partes salinae, sulphureis praepollere incipiunt, viz. cum sluorem adipiscuntur, ut ait D. Willis. 3. Sanguinis partes salinas, frigoris ant rigoris sensum, nervis incutere, in febre intermittente; ut Cervisiae acidae sal, sluorem adeptus, linguae & fancibus tantam frigiaitatem infligit, ut degluti∣tionem ferme prohibit. 4. Sal radicaliter & natura sua frigidum esse. Prius dictum est, admiratione dignum esse, Medicum asserere, Acetum, Limonii succum, & similia refrigerare; Aquam fortem autem Vitri∣oli spiritum, &c. urere, & calefacere, cum gra∣dualiter differant, tan tum in frigiditate, u glo∣bus ferreus, it a tantum calefactus, ut manu con∣trectari possit, & ipsi frigido calorem communicet, in caliditate differt ab alio intensissime ignito, qui incendere, urere, &c. potest; qui tamen, si aquae quantitati proportionatae immittatur, ei ca∣caloris gradum communicabit, qui nativum ani∣malis calorem non destruet, sea tantum fovebit, ut Vitrioli spiritus, qui, ignis instar, vesicas exci∣tat, sensum destruit, animalia expilat, calorem sebrilem, praeternaturalem amice repellit, cum
Julepis refrigerantibus guttatim permiscetur▪ Audent etiam nonnulli impudenter asserere, Limo∣ni succum esse calidum; quod siver um sit, quod∣nam quaeso medicamentum dicetur frigidum? Ostendamus nunc quomodo differant salsum, acidum, acre, & amarum, idque latine etiam: Quia voces vernaculae congrua non suppetunt. Ex. gra. fal marinus decrepitatus, est simplciter salsus; decrepitationem vero antè, acidus potius dicendus est, ut & Nitrum, Vitriolum, Tartarum, instar Aceti, Limonii succi, & similium, qua acida sunt, propter Sulphur in quantitate exigua ad∣mistum, quod salsedini, dulcedinis quasi gradum unum inacit; ideo{que} Tartarum acdum, cum calcinatur sit salsum; & Acetum acidum cum Plumbi atomis, Sulphur continentibus, impraeg∣natur, dulcedinem quasi acquirit. Deni{que} idem sal marinus decreptatus (ut & Nitrum, Vitri∣olum, & quodlibet sal fixum) cumignis violentia, destillandum inter, in liquorem resolvitur, salsedi∣nem amittit, & acredinem contrabit. Itaque salsedo & acredo, in hoc tantum differunt, quod salsedo sit qualitas corporis salsi densoris, & mi∣nus activi; acredo autem, rarioris, ideoque ma∣joris activitatis; quod hinc ulterius patet. Salis etenim spiritus praeuictus acris, sali novo decrepi∣tato affusus, in vase circulatorio, cum post debitas circulationes fixatur, & sali decrepitato unitur, acredinem amittit, & salsedinem contrabit. De amarore autem dicimus, ipsum causari a mistione (forme anatica) Sulphuris & salis vola∣tilis,
aut salis alcati nitrosi, quod cum Sulphuris quid contineat, Olo firmiter ahaeret, quod id ipsum secum rapit, dum in calcinatione deflagrat, aut menstruo mediante extrahitur; atque Sul∣phuris haec extractio a sale praedicto promovetur: cum etenim in humore aqueo dissolvi incipit Sal, secum copiosius trahit Sulphur, idcoque Sennae uncia semis in aquae unciis sex, cum Tartari drachma una infusa, colatura erit magis purga∣tiva, quam si Tartarum non adderetur. Atque haec de Alo, Colocynthide, Opio, Absinthio, Car∣duo benedicto, &c. quorum omnium sal pure fix∣um, terrae firmiter adhaeret, antequam slucrem adipiscitur in fermentatione, aut per lixiviatio∣nem è cineribus extrahatur. From the premisses scriously considered, these consequences do manifestly result; 1. that it is necessary to distinguish betwixt hot and corrosive, as betwixt hot and cold. 2. That the intense heat of waters that boyl in fountains, ought not al∣wayes to be attributed unto fire (as said Dr. An∣drew Baccius) but rather to the action of a cor∣rosive body, as of Nitre, Vitriol, &c. being not far distant from the fountain. Obj. 1. Some will possibly object, 1. If there were any salt Ammoniack mixed with the water of Mof∣fet-Wells, without all doubt, it would assix it self with the Nitre, unto the white and salinous stones, from which it might afterwards be sepa∣rated by sublimation, seing it is by nature most volatile, but so it is, that nothing can be separated
from them by sublimation, as our own experience did testifie. To this we answer, 1. that a very little quantity of salt Amoniack, produceth the fore-mentioned precipitation, as appeareth in eve∣ry precipitation. 2. The salt amoniack is fixed, by the fixed salt of the Nitre and stones, so that it cannot be separated from them by sublimation; and this is most probable, if it be considered, that salt ammoniack is commonly sixed, when it is by stratification calcined with the pouder of Lime: For then the sixed salt of the Coals, which hath by calcination affixed it self unto the earth and sixed salt of the stones, doth six the salt amoniack, and rendereth it dissolvable into an Oyl (impro∣perly so called, because not sulphureous) by deli∣quation. 3. Or rather (because most probable) the volatile salt ammoniack, being dissolved in a strange humide and aqueous body (viz. the water of the Wells) doth evanish with the evaporating Sulphur: for, in every dstillation (which evapo∣ration doth still preceed) the volatile salt doth follow the Sulphur, and extilleth after it, as was already said in the Preface. 2. If the water were sufficiently impregnat with Nitre, for the dissolving of Antimony, the water of the Wells would not be sweet to the taste, as they are: for a very great quantity of Nitre would scarcely be sufficient for the opera∣tion. It is answered, that the water doth almost totally loss its saltness, by its action upon the An∣timony, and afterwards it deposeth the relicts of
its salt upon the stones, as appeareth from what hath been said. No man will question the truth of this, if these two experiments be considered; 1. That Aqua-fortis loseth much of its strength by operating upon Iron. 2. The Oyls of Tartar and Vitriol (which are most salt, sharp and corro∣sive) when mixed (as in the composition of vitri∣olated Tartar) do produce a liquor altogether in∣sipide: for we extracted such an one from them, when we were coagulating vitriolated Tartar. 3. Others will possibly say, that this is a new and unheard-of manner of anatomizing, a mine∣ral water: for it should have been examined by destillation, evaporation, calcination, &c. that thereby the foresaid assertion might have been proven. I answer, 1. there is here no need of destillation: for the water of the Wells is only impregnat with Nitre and the pntide Sulphur of Antimony; the former whereof is proven by na∣ture, seing the Nitre doth affix it self to the rocks, by which the water descendeth, and the latter is already shown by an experiment. 2. Se∣ing our Spagyrical art (the most excellent imita∣trix of nature) and nature her self, do excellently and evidently prove the assertion, operations should not be multiplied, without necessity. 3. The destilling of the water would prove a finstraneous action; 1. because it would require a vast quantity of water, for to acquire but a very little of the salt: for there is but little of it contained in the water, as appeareth by the rocks; for there is but
very little salt, as yet, attached unto them. 2. Un∣less the vessels were hermetically sealed, the water that would extill, would be destitue of all taste and smell; because its Sulphur doth constantly eva∣nish, so that in a short time, it leaveth it quite de∣stitute of smell, although it be keeped in a vessel most closly stopped with a cork. Concerning the use of the water. EXperience having taught, that many have got∣ten much good by the use of this water, and that others have reaped more harm, and finished their miserable lives soon after their making use of it; the difficulty of describing its virtues, is be∣yond controversie, as also that it were a most diffi∣cult task, to shew who should make use of it, and at what time; because some have been bettered (yes cured) by it at one time, and wronged at another, when they have addressed themselves unto it, for prevention only of that disease, which had once been cured by it. Therefore I shall only propose some general rules, concerning its internal and ex∣ternal use: For no man can prescribe to all sorts of persons particular rules, for using it internally, unless he had been an eye-witness for two or three years, to its different operations, upon persons of different constitutions. Now the rules are these, 1. The water of the Wells of Mosset would be most warily used, seing it doth sometimes pro∣duce as sad symptoms, as Antimony it self doth.
2. No man should use this water internally, who doth not (by vomiting, urine, or stool) eva∣cuat as much as he doth drink, especially if he be hydropick. 3. It conduceth to the cure of almost all Ʋl∣cers and external diseases, and pains of the joynts, &c. when it is only externally applyed. 4. It is very duretick; and the water of the neather-well, more than that of the upper, because it is more salinous, as was proven. 5. In the autumnal months, it is enriched with the most and best of its strength and virtues, the earth being at that time most dry: for, in the win∣ter and spring times, it is debilitat and vitiat by rain. 6. Such as are of a more robust constitution than others, would take an antimonial vomitory, for lousing of their humors, before they make use of the water: for then the water will be of a more facile operation, though in a lesser dose. 7. Since the printing of this little Treatise in Latine, it is by many, more considently reported, than ever, that this water hath often made the bar∣ren womb fruitfull; which we cannot contradict, having been greatly convinced of its certainty, by the effects which the water hath produced in some persons, which have been afflicted with that la∣mentable infirmity. And being rationally induced to believe, that such a putide water will prove an excellent hystorick (the most part whereof are such) for purging out all impurities (the most or∣dinary
remras of generation) from the microcos∣micall habitation of man. 8. Experience hath testified to many, that it is good for the Scurvy, being used both externally and internally; and paralytick persons also have been much bettered by using it, after the same manner. 9. This water deleteth the spots of cloath, when it is washed with it. Such as are, and ever have been, prejudicat against Antimony, and its use, will (no doubt) also condemn the using of this antimonial water, though composed by God himself, the Former of all things, and the best Chymist, who hath crea∣ted every thing for the benefit of man. Therefore I will mention, and answer, some expressions of D. A—Parisiis Neapolitanus, in rationibus sui contra Antimnii, cum crudi, tum praeparati, usum, which he subjoyneth to his Consilia medi∣cinalia de conservanda sanitate, printed and pub∣lished by him at Edinburgh, anno. 1620. He writeth thus, cap. 2. Andernacus, Antimo∣nium refert inter fossilia, quae primordia genera∣tionis suae ex Aqua ducunt, & inter illa, ei princi∣palem locum assignat: quae sententia nobis etiam placet.—Plus aqueae natura in stibio reperiri quam terreae, convinci potest ex not is boni stibii, quas Avicenna, lib. canonis sui, c. 7. tract. 2. refert. Cap. 4. Ab Avicenna stimmi frigidum scribi∣tur in primo, & siccum in secundo gradu—. Ab acobo Graminio, in tractatu suo de Antimonio,
rectius adhuc ad tertium completum frigiditatis ordinem refertur, quod ipsum & illius vires pro∣bant.—Miscetur cum Minio & Crussa, ad con∣solidanda ulcuscula, a comburente flamma excita∣ta.—Gulielinus Varignana, in secretis suis, pulve∣rem ejus Cancro depascenti ac phagedaenico ulceri inspargit.—Tantum de temperamento & facul∣tatibus crudi stibii, nunc ad adustum, paepara∣tumve, scrmo pertranseat. Collocatur autem a nonnullis doctissimis viris, quomodocun{que} calci∣natum, in quarto caliditatis & siccitatis gradu. Ratio est, quia ex mente illius aureoli Paracelsi Chymicorum principis (docente Arnaldo de Villa∣nova, in Rosario suo philosophico) quae calcinan∣tur & uruntur, ad quartum caliditatis gradum perducuntur. Actiones etiam sen operationes ejus, nobis adstipulantur. Quia omnibus putri∣dis & gangrenosis ulceribus, majorem in modum prodest, quod citra insignem ac prevalentem sicci∣tatem & caliditatem fieri nequit. This Author relateth only the opinions of others (and sometime from the second hand, as in that of Paracelsus his opinion, docente Arnalde, &c.) and then assenteth to what he conceiveth most probable, yet without giving any good reason for their asserting, or his own assenting. It being the most difficult task which a naturalist can take in hand, to determine the temperatures of bodes, either as to their qualities or their degrees; I will only humbly offer my opinion, with as much rea∣son as I can, in these two assertions.
1. Antimony containeth much earth and salt, from which it (and all other bodies) hath its soli∣dity and ponderosity. 2. Antimony containeth much inflamable Sul∣phur (from which it, and the glass made of it, have their colours) as is most evident in its calcination, either alone, or with Nitre. From these, and what hath been formerly said, concerning the natures of Sulphur and Salt, let each person infer what they please, concerning the temperature of Antimony. For my own part, I am of opinion, that the vomitive and purgative faculties of Antimony, do not proceed from its temperament (seing there are many other bodies of the same temperature with it, according to Au∣thors, which have usurped this determining power, which yet have none of these faculties of Anti∣mony) but from its natural form, which the Crea∣tor of all things hath bestowed upon it. As for that opinion of this Author, viz. that crude or natural Antimony, being cold in the third degree, and dry in the second, is by burning or preparing it any way, so metamorphosed, that it becometh hot and dry in the fourth degree (which he foundeth upon the opinion of others, and so in∣firm a reason of his own) I cannot sufficiently ad∣mire it; because I conceive it to be without the reach of any created being, to induce the fourth degree of any of the first qualities (which are by Philosophers attributed to the pure Elements only) upon any composed body, such as is Anti∣mony;
far less at all to alter their essential proper∣ties (such as are heat, cold, &c.) which proceed from their natural forms, without destroying the natural forms, and producing in them, not only new forms, but also new properties proceeding from them, at least the destruction of their former properties, as when Salt, Sea-ware, &c. are con∣verted into Glass. But here you have a Philosopher and Physician asserting the contrary concerning Antimony, to which he assigneth the same pro∣perties, before and after its preparation, which he affirmeth to operat so strongly upon it, that it al∣tereth its first quality, cold in the third degree, beyond contrariety, to hot in the fourth degree. In his fifth Chapter he laboureth to prove Quod Antimonium ne{que} crudum, ne{que} praeparae∣tum, intracorpus ullo pacto adhiberi debeat. And his only argument is this, Si Antimonium tota sua substantia est venenum, omnibus modis erit humanae naturae adversarium. Ergo Antimonium ut caeterae venena destruere naturam nostram, abs∣que controversia patet. Venenum tribus ratio∣nibus esse ostenditur. 1. Per similitudinem ejus cum Plumbo. 2. Per malignitatem ejus. 3. Per imperfectam correctionem ejus. Similitudo & cognatio ei cum Plumbo (quod inter venena annumerandum esse, neminem igno∣rare censeo) maxima est. Quod ad malignitatem atinet, odorem emittit virulentum ac insuavem (dum crematur) auri∣pigmenti venesicam ehalationem proxime reprae∣sentans.
Hinc ab to fumo, dum calcinatur, tan∣quam à praesentissimo veneno, Chymici cavere, & nares diligenter obstruere jubent. Imperfecta est ejus correctio: quia Petrus Matthiolus, super, 5. cap. Dioscoridis, ad tollendam ejus venenatam fa∣cultatem in coctione, Chrysocollam seu Boracem ei misceri jubet, vel Theriacam: etiam Cornu Monocerotis, & species Diamoschi, atque id ge∣nus alia alexipharmaca, ei commisceri ab aliis jubentur. Taceo jam purgationes, convulsiones, atque alia gravissima symptomata, co utentibut incidentia.—Stimmi non aliquem proprium & discretum humorem purgat, sed promiscue omnes humores per alvum exturbat. Ergo similitudin essentiae seu formae non purgabit, ut reliqua medi∣camenta quae forma similitudine purgant pro∣prios, & discretos humores, secundum Hippocra∣tem, lib. de natura humana. Asseveramus ita∣que Antimonium calcinatum, exitiosa sua (natu∣rae humanae & praesertim cordi) tum substantia, tum etiam qualitatibus, molestissime naturam, irritantibus, communi quadam traductione, non solum pravos, sed etiam optimos expellere succos—fit ergo haec purgatio, non per se, sed ex acciden∣te.—Concludimus praeterea, crudum omnino non purgare: calcinatum vero, non nisi per adhae∣rentem, & vi ignis exaltatam potentiam venefi∣cam, commoventem spiritus, & humores in toto corpore violenter concitantem; itaque neque cru∣dum, neque quomodocunque ustum, intra cor∣pus sumi debere, cum venenum sit, & statim, vel
non ita multo post psius receptionem gravissima apportet symptomata, quae hominent in extreman deturbant perniciem. I will not here molest the Reader with a tedi∣ous translation of these words, but only reduce them unto these assertions, to which I shall return particular answers. 1. Antimony in its whole substance is poyson, and therefore ought not to be made use of by men, whose natures (as other poysons do) it destroyeth. 2. It is poyson because of its similitude to lead, which (as all men know) ought to be reckoned amongst poysons. 3. It is poyson, because of its malignity: For whilst it is a calcining, it emitteth a virulent and venomous smell and exhalation, like that of orpa∣ment, from which (as from present poyson) Chy∣mists do advise to preserve the Nose. 4. It is poyson, because of its imperfect ∣rection: for Petrus Matthiolus upon the fifth Chapter of Dioscorides, bids boyl it with Borax to take away its venomous faculty, or add Treacle to it; also the horn of the Ʋnicorn, and species Diamoschi, and such like alexipharmicks are by others advised to be mixed with it. 5. The purgations, convulsions, and other sad symptoms, which are incident unto the users of it, declare it to be poyson; which incontinently, or not long after the receiving of it, redacteth man to extream ruine.
6. Antimony purgeth not any particular hu∣mor, but promiscuously all, both good and bad; as other purgatives do not, which purge by simi∣litude of their essence or form, and do therefore purge their proper humors, according to Hippo∣crates, in his book de natura humana. 7. Calcined Antimony, by its whole substance and faculties (which are most destructive of hu∣mane nature, and most inimical to the heart in particular) purgeth not at all of its self, but acci∣dentally: for it having most fearfully awaked the humors, and irritated the expultrix faculty, they are confusedly expelled. 8. Crude or natural and unprepared Antimo∣ny, purgeth not at all. 9. Calcined Antimony purgeth not, but by an adherent, and by the strength of fire, exalted veno∣mous power, which violently commoveth all the spirits and humor of the body. As to the first, which consisteth of an antece∣dent and consequent. By the antecedent, he will have Antimony to be one of those venemout things, quae corrumpunt complexionem huma∣nam, non sola qualitate, sed propriatate, which is the only definition competent unto such as Sen∣nertus termeth Venena praesentanea (as Arsenick) and which we do deny at all to belong unto Anti∣mony. 1. Because crude Antimony doth pro∣duce in man, none of those lamentable accidents which other venemous things do, as vomiting (as this Author confesseth) purging, convulsions, &c.
before it be prepared by art. 2. Antimony prepared (whereby its vomitive and purgative faculties are awaked) doth (when skilfully pre∣pared and exhibited) handsomly evacuat bad hu∣mors, which, if they should be retained, would prove most corruptive of the humane complexion. 3. Antimony Diaphoretick (which is neither vo∣mitive nor purgative) doth excellently expell by sweating, all venenosity. 4. If Venenum be defi∣ned (as Sennertus also doth) id omne quod aptum est nobis vehementer nocere, per occultam agendi rationem, it is undeniable that Antimony is one of those: as also Wine (immoderatly and unseason∣ably taken) Saffran, and what not. Yea, Sen∣nertus relateth a story of a Merchant (Medicinae pract, lib. 6. part 5. cap. 1. de natura veneni) who did eat at supper flesh wherewith much Saffran was boiled, and immediatly thereafter, he had al∣most died through laughter. It were superfluous to ad more to this purpose, seing the practice of all Physicians) who have any knowledge of Chymi∣stry) doth demonstrat, that Antimonial medica∣ments (externally or internally used) do operat as innocently, as any others. As to the second (which is a most confident asser∣tion, destitute of probation, and most unbeseeming a Physician, who for each of his assertions, ought to have in promptu causam) I do first deny Lead to be poyson, in any other respect, than I have conceded Antimony, Wine and Sssran to be such, in the fourth answer. And secondly, I deny the
consequence: for similitude of external formes, can never infer a similitude of internals, especially when the effects flowing from both the internal formes, are most discrepant, as in Antimony and Lead. For the third, that it emitteth a virulent and ve∣nemous smell and exhalation, like that of orpament, from which (as from present poyson) Chymists do advise to preserve the nose. I answer first, that nei∣ther of these exhalations are poysonous: for I have often breathed the air, that was vitiat with both (and oftest that of Orpament, yea, of Arse∣nick itself, when burned) yet was never prejudiced. 2. Though it were true, that the exhalation of Antimony is poysonous, doth it argue that An∣timony, after calcination (whereby it is freed from that poysonous exhalation) is still venomous? It doth certainly demonstrat the contrary (as in An∣timony Diaphoretick) or at least, that its venenosi∣ty is much diminished, as in Crocus Metallorum. Moreover, is not the flesh of vipers, an excellent Alexipharmick or antidot against poyson, when the head and gall (wherein its venom doth reside, according to Schroderus) are separated from it? To the fourth, viz. that it is imperfectly cor∣rected by Borax, Treacle, &c.) I answer, 1. this Author should have evinced by reason, that none of those mentioned Alexipharmicks, were capable to correct the venenosity of Antimony, and not have given his nudam assertionem for it. 2. Al∣though he and his informers could never attain the
skill of preparing it, so as that it would not produce any of those sad symptoms; should others who have attained it, be by him, or any, prohibited to use it; when frequent experience hath discovered unto them the innocency and usefulness of its ope∣ration. As for the fifth, the sad and lamentable symp∣toms which it produceth. I answer, that I never found the like, save once, notwithstanding of which I have still made use of it, with good success; and therefore every one would make use of it, as he shall find encouragment, from its peaceable beha∣viour. Concerning the sixth (viz. that it purgeth not elective, as they say, any peculiar humor, as others do, viz. Bile, Melancholy, &c. but promiscu∣ously all, both good and bad) I answer, 1. that it is well asserted, but ill proven. 2. I will not contra∣dict that opinion so generally received by the lear∣ned, that some medicaments are Cholagoga, other Melanagoga, &c. but only declare, that though I be by experience convinced, that some have a na∣tural aptitude to purge Be more then any other humor, and another sort for purging of Melanch∣ly, &c. Yet whensoever a potion composed of either sort is exhibited to any person, it doth promiscu∣ously evacuat a part of each of those humors which it encountereth; and this is undeniable by my who have been diligent observers of the egesa, which (in valetudinary persons) is as necessary, as the noticeing of the ingesta. 3. The assertion may
be denied: for I have known an Antimonial poti∣on evacuat a pound of Bilis porracea, which was the only cause of a constant vomiting two or three hours after meat, all that the person had taken at the last meal; as also another pound of Bilis Vi∣tellina, mixed with pituita salsa; wherewith the internal wrinckled superfice of the stomach, being, as it were, daubed, it and the other humor occasi∣oned an indigestion of the meat: and in others produceth either a lienteria (when meat is evacu∣ated by stool, without being at all altered by the stomach, which being slippery, cannot retain it; as when its wrinckles were not daubed with the humor) or Coelica passio, wherein meat is excerned after being but a little altered. Seventhly, he affirmeth, that Antimony pur∣geth not of it self (as other purgatives do) but ac∣cidentally. This is all one as if he had said, that Antimony purgeth, as drink, fruits, &c. (which are not purgative of themselves) do, when a per∣son hath taken a surfet of them, whereby nature being oppressed, it doth impetuously expell them and other humors, both good and bad, with them. The falsity of this is so palpable, that it were folly to set about the refuting of it. The eighth is an irrefragable truth. The ninth doth not well express the Authors meaning, which I conceive was (at least should have been) this, that so long as the natural misti∣on of the constituent parts of Antimony, is not altered by fire, the vomitive and purgative faculties
of it, do not discover themselves, but so soon as the Sulphur is freed in some measure from the bonds of salt, by which it was formerly fettered, it doth communicat it self unto the affused liquor, and draweth along with it the nitrous volatile salt, in both which resideth the vomitive and purgative virtues of Antimony. I shall add (for a Colophon) the reason why the foresaid water worketh not, but when it is taken by pounds, viz. because it is impregnat only with the putide Sulphur of Antimony: for if it were inriched with the Earth, volatile salt, and best Sulphur (that is, such as is not become putide, by recrudescing in fermentation) of Antimony, as is Spanish Wine, wherein the Saffran of Mettals hath been infused, it would, by ounces (as this doth) commove and purge out the humors, and contain such a matter as would be precipitable by some liquor: for the earth of Antimony (where∣in do exist the Sulphur and volatile salt, which commove and purge out the humors) doth by pre∣cipitation separat it self from Spanish Wine, when some drops of Aqua-fortis are mixed with it. But the water of the Wells containeth no precipitable matter. Now that the vomitive and purgative qualities of Antimony, existeth in the Sulphur and volatile salt, is hence proven, that Diaphoretick Antimony (which is Antimony that is totally de∣prived of Sulphur and volatile salt, by calcination) is neither purgative nor vomitive; and the sub∣limed flowers of Antimony, are most purgative
and vomitive. And hence it appeareth, that in Diaphoretick Antimony, the virtue of Anti∣mony, which attracteth and purgeth humors, is not imprisoned, but banished, by Nitre. Courteous Reader these are the things which we learned from the operations of Art and Nature; but if any shall (from the same or like principles) prove, that the fore-mentioned water runneth through Brimstone, or Vitriol, &c. we shall most wiling∣ly acknowledge an errour; in the interim, In mag∣nis voluisse sat est.—That is, In things of great excellency, Let the endeavour satisfie. And upon this account, we will plead for par∣don: for there is no man ΑΠΑΝΤΑ ΣΟΦΟΣ I. E. Omniscient.
AN APPENDIX, Concerning the saltness of the SEA, &c. THat the truth of what hath been said may shine more clear∣ly, we must refull some opini∣ons of D. John French; who in the 2. Chapter and 22. page of his Book, entituled, the York∣shire Spau, asserteth, That there can no other reason be given for ht springs; than the fire which burns in the very cavities and caverns of them, the cavities themselves consist∣ing of (or rather being replenished with) a Bitu∣minous matter. For Bitumen, and these things which are made of it, being kindled, burn in water (as Camphire also doth) a very long time; which could not be, unless it were fed by the moisture of the water, which it did attract and convert into its own nature. And in the 14. Chapter, concerning the putid Sulpher-well, about the middle of
page 107. The stinking odour thereof, I sup∣pose, is caused from the vapor of the burning Bi∣tumen; and adust terreness mixt therewith, which lye nor far from the head of the Will. And page 106. the aliness of the Sea proceedeth from the Salt of the burnt Bitumen, which is dissolved in the water, that ran̄ through these veins of the earth, wherein it was; which (page 106. and 107.) he confirmeth by the example of the Lake, called Asphaltites. And in the beginning of the 108. page, he asserteth, That it cannot be ratio∣nally conceived, that the whole Sea received all its salt into its self at one time, after a natural way, and therefore being such a great body, must become sultish by little and little, even insensibly. The falsehood of these opinions will manifestly appear by considering, 1. That it is more like an untruth than a truth that there is a perpetual subterraneal fire (of burn∣ing Bitumen) which doth naturally heat the wa∣water. 1. Because it is not probable, that there was ever so much Bitumen in any subterraneal place, as would, by it flame, have heated the waters, which do every where spring out of hot fountains. 2. Neither is it probable, that there is so much air in any cavity of the earth, as would necessarily (for to avoid the penetration of dimen∣sions) give place to so much flame, as would hear so much water. 3. If the inflamed Bitumen, did produc the, foresaid heat, then the fire would change  place, when it followeth its aliment, and
so the water of the fountains would not be alwaies impregnat with the same degree of heat; because the fire which heateth them, would not alwaies be equidistant from the fountains. In the 25. page of the forementioned Book, the Author an∣swereth to this argument, saying, that flame is nourished two wayes; 1. When it followeth its food, as in the burning of wood. 2. When the food follow∣eth the flame, as doth Oyl in a Lamp: and thus (saith he) is the flame of the Bitumen nourished; neither is this falsified by the flame of Brimstone, which followeth the mater. For (saith he) the Bi∣tumen is melted by the great heat, and so it follow∣eth the flame, and continueth the flame in the same place. But I reply, 1. That flame doth alwaies follow its food, neither doth Oyl follow the flame in a Lamp; but one part of the Oyl being conti∣nuous to another, doth follow it, whilst it is a consuming by the flame. That you may the better understand this, you would take notice of the rea∣son, why some sulphureous bodies (as Camphire, Turpentine, &c.) do of themselves take and con∣serve flame; when others (as Tallow, Bees-wax, Oyl of Olives, &c.) do neither take nor conserve it, but by the help of others, as of Linnen cloath, Paper, Rushes, &c. The cause of these things we conceive, yea affirm, to be this, that the first sort are bodies which contain much Salt (for they are very sapide) which doth still detain the Sulphur, even when it is converted into flame; and the last sort are bodies almost void of Salt (because insi∣pide
almost) which do not take flame; because they cannot conserve it, unless they be associat to the Sulphur of another body (containing much Salt, which detaineth its proper Sulphur) and so take flame with it. From these things it doth ap∣pear, that flame doth alwaies follow its food; espe∣cially seing the threeds of the Candle and Lamp, do wast and consume by the flame, whilst it fol∣loweth the Sulphur of the threeds, which is its food, whose consumption is retarded by the Tallow in the Candle, and Oyl in the Lamp, which do nourish it. 2. It is not probable, that all the Bi∣tumen is liquified, 1. Because the flame of the kindled Bitumen, liquifieth only the parts which are nearest to its self, as happeneth in a Candle, Brimstone, red Wax, &c. 2. Whosoever will say, that the Bitumen followeth the flame, because it is melted, he must also confess, that there is some other sire beneath or above the Bitumen, which melteth it; and this would infer the absurd pro∣gress in infinitum. 3. Nor can the flame of the kindled Bitumen, by heating the caverns of the earth, liquifie the rest of the Bitumen: because (as was said) it is not probable, that there is a place in the bowels of the earth, which would con∣tain so much flame, as would, by its heat, liquifie all the Bitumen which is within four, five, or six miles unto it; the contrary whereof must of ne∣cessity, be confessed, by him who will assert, that the flame of the kind led Bitumen, changeth not its place, by following its food.
2. It is most fal, that Bitumen, Camphire, and such like, which burn in water, do retain their flame longer, than if they were out of the water, because they convert it into their own nature, by which means it becometh food to the flame; but the cause of their longer burning in the water, is rather, because their external supersices (the up∣permost only excepted) are humected by the wa∣ter, which prohibiteth the flame to seize upon all their external parts (as happeneth when they are inflamed out of the water) and so they burn lon∣ger; because a few only of their parts are infla∣med. No man, who will be at the pains to put a little inflamed Camphire into water, will questi∣on the truth of this: For he will see the flame ex∣cavat the Camphire, and at length extinguished, when it penetrateth unto the external parts, into which the water hath insinuat it self. 3. Although the flame of Bitumen were in the veins of the earth, yet its vapors could not com∣municat any putide smell unto the water. 1. Be∣cause of the fore-mentioned reasons, when we wrote of inflamed Brimstone. 2. Because they contain no terrestrial adust matter: For, 1. no such matter (capable to communicat such a smell) doth ascend from any body whilst it is a destilling, and far less therefore whilst it is a burning. 2. Because smell proceedeth only from Sulphur; whereof, such earth (which did pass through the sire) would be most destitute. It were therefore more consonant to reason and truth to say, that the p∣tide
smell of the fountain (of which this Author writeth) doth proceed from the Sulphur of Bitu∣men (or of any other thing) which is recrudes∣cing and evaporating, whilst it is a fermenting. 4. Seing the Sea is a great body, it is more pro∣bable, that all its salt was concreated with it, in the very instant of its creation, than that its salt∣ness was, by little and little, communicated unto it by the salt of the Bitumen, which was burned in the caverns of the earth. For, 1. seing, sea-salt (which nature coagulateth in many places, as at the Rochel in France, and in many places of Spain) is such an usefull and necessary thing for man, it is incredible, that God (who created so great a vari∣ety of creatures for the use of man) did not, at the beginning, creat it with the rest, than many of which it is more usefull. 2. Seing every pound of Sea-water containeth about a drachin of salt; and the Asphaltick 'Bitumen (which is found upon the shore of the Lake Asphaltites, which is called eminently saltish) scarcely containeth any saltness that's perceptible by the taste; it is probable, that a mass of Bitumen (though calcined, and equipon∣derating the terrestrial Globe, could not communi∣cat so great and perceptible saltness, to so great a body as the Sea is. Moreover, the ashes of the Asphaltick Bitumen (from which the Sulphur is separated by burning) do scarcely contain any salt∣ness; for it is a sulphureous body, which, of it self, will hardly take or retain flame, unless it be associat to the Sulphur of burning coals. 3. Seing
it is most probable, that the saltness of the As∣phaltick lake proceedeth not from the Bitumen which is not dissolved in the water, but swimmeth only above upon it, and is thereby at length eject∣ed upon the shore it is more probable, that nei∣ther the fastness of the Occan is communicated un∣to it, by the Bittimen, seing it containeth no such matter. 4. Seing, 1. the Lk Asphaes is in the same place, where were Sodm, Gomorrah, and the valley which was full of bitumenous, or slymie (Genes. 14.10.) and salt (See the English Annotations on Joshua, 15.62.) pts. 2. Seing then the foresaid Cities and vlley were calcined (or incinerat) by Fire and Brimstone (which we proved to be most faltish) which came down from heaven. Gon. 19.24,25. 3. Seing the ashes of all calcined bodies, do contain a fixed salt, which naturally attracteth the humide air, that so it may be dissolved by diquation; without all doubt, the great saltness of that Lake (which is called eminently saltish) proceedeth only from the ashs of those things which were then calcined, whose salt did attract the humidt air, which did convert it into a liquor, which was afterwards augmented by Rain and the Rivulets, which ran that way. So that it is probable, that that water is  for no other cause; seing there are many great Lakes, whose sweet waters do peretrat, as far in∣to the bowels of the earth, as the waters of the Asphaltick-lake, and many bayes of the Sea do. Moreover, this continual attraction of the air (be∣cause
of the Salino-sulphurcous spirit, that is dif∣fused through it) produceth in the air, a perpetual circulation of suphureous and salnous spirits (for the fixed salt of the water attracteth the saline∣sulphureous spirit; and the more volaue parts, whether salinous or sulphureous, which are dissol∣ved in the strange humide body, do constantly attempt an avolation) which rendreth the birds valetu inary, when they transvolat the Lake, and at length killeth them. And it is the very-like circulation of spirits, which causeth persons (who are not accustomed to navigation upon the Sa) nauseat or vomit, when these salinous and suphu∣reous spirits, which are in their circulatory, moti∣on, do enter the body with the air. Now that there is such a salino-sulphureous spirit (which is the universal (yet subservient to the first) cause of generation) really existing in nature, is suffici∣ently proven by these four not ordinary argu∣ments. 1. The earth which was within the limits of the flux and reux of the Sea, remaineth barren for a time, after that the Sea deserteth it; viz. untill that Salino-sulphureous spirit have insinuat it self into it: for whensoever this cometh to pass, then all sorts of vegetables (whose seeds or roots, were seminated or planted there, or brought thither by the rain, from circum-jcent places) be∣gin to germinat in it. 2 It is the very Salino sulphureous spirit, which insinuateth it self into the earth that is al∣most
most barren, and maketh it more fertile, when it is not manured for two or three years: and the penetration of this spirit into the ground, is pro∣moved by the relicts of its proper Salt, which at∣tracteth it. But when earth, that hath not been manured for a long time, becometh barren (which happeneth sometimes, as I was informed by one skilfull in Agriculture) that ought to be ascribed unto the super-abundance of spirits (which doth often impede generation: for a woman immediatly before her menstrual flux, doth seldom conceive. For which look the second Thes. that was dispu∣ted in medicinal School at Paris, Nov. 23. 1656.) or to some other disease known, perchance, to Hus∣band-men. 3. It is the very Salino-sulphureous spirit, which is diffused through the air, that maketh Heathy, wilde, and almost barren, places, more fertile, when it is attracted by the Lime which they cast upon the ground; for, the fixed Salt of the ials, which is united to the earth of the stones, by calcination (when the Lime is a making) pro∣moveth the attraction of the foresaid spirit; and so the earth is rendred more apt for the generation of Vegetables, which require more Salinous and sulphureous spirits. 4. In the Isles of Orkney, the attraction of this Salino sulphureous spirit, is greatly promoved by the salt of the Sea-ware, and ashes of Peats, where∣with the inhabitants are accustomed to dung their lands, which are also much fatned by the abundant Sulphur of the same vegetable.
Here I will acquaint you with an observation, which by many reiterated experiments, I know to be most certain: And it is this, when Logh-leeches; are applied to the inhabitants of Orkney, they fall off sooner, and suck less blood, than when they are applied to such as live in the South-parts of the Kingdom. I conceive the reason of this to be, the saltness and acrimony of their blood, which mak∣eth those Animals, constantly to desist, long they be full of blood; and this acrimony or salt∣ness, doth (without all doubt) proceed from the salt of the forementioned Sea-ware, which causeth the Barley and Oats (the only Corus which grow there) to be more salt then in other places, where the earth is not dunged with the foresaid vegetable and ashes. This also, with the much eating of salted Fishes by the vulgars there, is the cause why multitudes of them, are molested with Ʋl∣cers of all sorts, Caucers especially. I do acknow∣ledge, that elsewhere, Logh-leeches will some∣times fall off ere they be full: But the cause of this is, the exuberancy of blood, which cometh so impetuously upon them, that it is like to choak them, for which they desist from sucking; as children ordinarily do, when the Nurse her milk doth molest them, after the same manner. For the same reason also, the most part of strangers, who go to reside in the Isles of Orkney, are at first molested with a Diarrhaea or Flux; the acri∣monious saltness of the bread and drink, irritating the expultrix faculty, more than ordinary, untill it
be accustomed with the same. This also is the reason, why the inhabitants there (for the most part) do require a far stronger dose, of any purga∣tive or vomitive medicine, than those who live in the South; because their expultrix faculty, being accustomed with the acrimony of bread and drink, which will prove purgative unto others, who are not accustomed unto it, requireth a stronger me∣dicinal exciter. We thought it not unworthy of our pains, to offer unto the consideration of Naturalists and Mathematicians, our opinion concerning the flux and reflux of the Sea, before that we should have put a close to these things concerning the Sea; and it is thus, seing the Moon doth by her pre∣sence refrigerat all sublunary bodies, especially the air; and seing fixed salt doth attract the cold air sooner and better than the hot, we conceive, that the fixed salt, which was concreated with the Sea, and dissolved in its water, doth abundantly at∣tract the air that was cooled (or so disposed by some other quality, that it might be the more easily attracted by the salt) by the presence of the Moon, or of the opposit point in its sphere; and so the quantity of the water is greatly augmented, and the water is again by little and little converted in∣to air, when the air loseth its foresaid quality, by the departure of the Moon, or of its opposit point, from the meridian. This opinion is sufficiently proven by this argument; viz. that Sea-stones, which are most saltish, do attract the air, when
it is altered, as was said, and do become so wet, that water droppeth down from them: But when the air loseth its foresaid alteration, then the wa∣ter is again converted into air, and the stones be∣come dry like others. Moreover, this humectati∣on of the stones, doth, as it were, observe the set times of the flux and reflux of the Sea. It is true, that in very moist weather, these stones will be constantly wet; because of the frigidity of the air: but yet they are more wet when the Moon is in the meridiau, than at other times; so that this doth not in the least render our opinion im∣probable. From what hath been said, it may probably be concluded; 1. that the Sea-water is not so sal∣tish, when the Tide is at the height, as when it is a Low-water; because then its salt is dissolved in a greater quantity of water. 2. That Sea-water, taken from the Ocean, would observe the set times of the increase and decrease of the Sea, if it were put into a Weather-glass (or a glass of the same fashion, hermetically sealed) seing it is impregnat with an active principle (Salt) whereof common water is destitute, which nevertheless doth alter, according to the mutations of the air, by occupying of a larger place at sometimes, and a lesser at another. Having, since the publication of this opinion in Latine, more seriously considered it, we conceive it needfull now to declare, that we do not believe this most real transmutation of air and water to
be the adequat and only cause of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, but that it is not one of the least considerable causes of this most admirable effect, the full and exact knowledge of whose causes, it seemeth the Almighty hath reserved unto himself. These things we do freely offer unto all, to be censured according to the difference of opinions concerning them. Some Spagyrical operations of nature, added in stead of a Conclusion. THe first is Destillation. For vapors being elevated into the second region of the air (which is cold, as the head of a Still) are there condensed, and do from thence fall down in drops. 2. Sublimation (as it were) of Snow. 3. Chrystallization of Sal-Gemmae, Ice and Hail. 4. Coagulation of Sea-salt, by the heat of the Sun. 5. Calcination of Horse-hones (and of other animals, which die in the fields) by the solar rayes. 6. Filtration of water through the veins of the earth: for it is most limpide which cometh out of fountains. 7. Dulcification of Sea-water, whilst it passeth through the bowels of the earth: for it is the very same (being sweetned) which springeth in foun∣tains, Ecclesiastes, 1.7.
8. Circulation of Salino-Sulphureous spirits in thesu perfice of the Sea, of which before. The transmutation of the Elements also, is a kind of circulation. 9. Salification of Nitre, in the concavities of Caves and Vaults. 10. Fermentation, which doth alwayes pre∣ceed generation: for there is no corruption, with∣out an antecedent fermentation, as appeareth from the premisses. 11. Solution of Minerals by water, which is impregnat with some corrosive salt, as was said concerning Antimony, in the description of Mof∣fet-Well. 12. Conflagration of Thunder. 13. Aurification in the veins of the earth, which many Spagiricks have, in vain, essayed to imitat upon its superfice. Therefore the Spagyrical Art, is a most excel∣lent imitatrix of Nature, from whose principles and operations, we may collect, most probable causes for (almost) all effects, whether natural or artificial.
THE OYLY-WELL: OR, A Topographico Spagyricall description of the Oyly-Well, at St. Catharines-chappel, in the Paroch of Libberton. To this is subjoyned, MONSTRUM CATHANESIENSE: OR, A description, &c. BY MATTHEW MACKAILE, Chyrurgo-Medicine. Edinburgh, Printed for Robert Brown, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Sign of the Sun, on the north-side of the Street, over against the Cross, 1664.
The Epistle to the Reader. Courteous Reader, I have yet again adventured to lanch forth into the Ocean of the World in this little Vessel, which doth not deserve the obser∣vation of any (where so many others, more excellent and stately do appear, adorned with the sinest sails of ratio∣nal discourses, supported by the surest expe∣riments, and furnished with most irresistible arguments, which do conclude only the weigh∣tiest of truths, for the routing and sinking into silence, of those irrational Pirats, who do what they can, altogether to hinder our arrival at the haven of verity) were it not be∣cause of the rarity and usefulness of the com∣modities which she carrieth: For surely they will be delectable to some, and usefull to all, who have had so great a benefit by Nature conferred upon them, as is, understanding not to abuse that, which might prove usefull for them. They are such things as have pas∣sed
through the Refrigeratory of my vulgar Brain, and which I offer to be rectified through the Serpens of a wiser; that the World may be presented with a Destillatum, which may prove magis restaurativum of truth, than this will: For the world had never more need of such a medicine, than in this our age, which hath (too too well) nursed so many Charletans, as betake themselves to no other employment than cheating all men, with some one medicine or other (as Coffe, Chocolat, or Jacolata, &c.) to each of which they ascribe more virtues, than any ten can have, and give them to all such, as will be so foolish, as to hazard the distur∣bance of the aeconomy of their bodies, in the hands of those, who are as ignorant of the na∣ture of the instrument wherewith they do it, as are the vessels which contain them, and far more of the way of restoring the greatly disturbed body, to its pristine healthfull con∣dition. Such Cheaters are those, who fill the publick places of every Town they come to with Programs for the end foresaid; or else arrogantly do assume to themselves the skill of curing, first, some particular diseases infal∣libly, and then all others curable by art, at
a cheaper rate, than any other; and to these they add many detracting expressions, which may prove derogatory to the reputations of the Physicians of the place, though never so learned; all which are the most infallible marks of a Cheater. Yea, their wandring all the world over, doth undenyably argue them to be such: for when people do perceive, that their medicine hath scarcely any one of those virtues which they ascribed unto it, and that their skill in curing is only palliative, they cease to employ them any more, and thereby they are constrained to begin, and to set up in another place, for getting of a new recruit of money, which they would have got to excess, in any one considerable Town or Country, if they or their medicine, could have cured the Gout, Chollick, Stone, &c. Such blades are pleas∣ed sometimes to erect Stage-playes in the Macrocosme, that by their skill in those, they may allicite men to permit them, to erect the like in their Microcosmes; which they often do, to the sad lamentation of some. I have let fly this Broad-side of exclamations at those of our age, who are most guilty of such actions; as also at such as have been so foolish as to be∣lieve, that every far fetcht fowl hath fair
and so have been very ingrate to their Maker, who hath furnished their native Country with such an abundance of most able and skilfull Physicians, and remedies of all sorts (purga∣tives and spices only excepted) as might (with very little help from our neighbours) serve in the greatest necessities; as also to those well-deserving Country-men, who have spent the most and best of their time and means (and in travelling have ventured their lives) for the good of their Country. I hope the Echo of these exclamations will prove, in time coming, a warning-piece to all such as have been so wise to bear off, and not to go near such Pirats, who rob so many not only of their mony, but also of their healths; and that the most part of those children who have been burned by them, will (in time-coming) dread their fire. I shall only add an earnest desire, that you would ac∣cept this, and what followeth, with as chari∣tible a mind to me, as mine is wel-wishing to you, and make such a good use of them as you may; in doing of which, you shall neither wrong your self, nor him, who is, and will still be Yours, as he shall have reason, M. M.
THE OYLY-WELL: OR, A Topographico-Spagyrical descrip∣tion of the Oyly-Well, at St. Catharines-chappel in the Paroch of Libberton. IN the Paroch of Libberton (the Church whereof lyeth two miles south-ward from Edinburgh) there is a Well at the Chappel of St. Catha∣rine, which is distant from the Church, about a quarter of a mile, and is situat to∣ward the South-west) whose profundity equalleth the length of a Pike, and is alwaies replet with wa∣ter; and at the bottom of it there remaineth a great quantity of black Oyl, in some veins of the earth. His Majesty King James the sixth, the first Monarch of Great Britain, of blessed memory, had such a great estimation of this rate Well, that when he returned from England, to visit this His ancient Kingdom of Scotland, in anno. 1617. he went in person to see it, and ordered, that it should be built with stones from the bottom to the top, and that a door and a pair of stairs should
be made for it, that men might have the more easie access unto its bottom, for getting of the Oyl. This royal command being obeyed, the Well was adorned and preserved, until the year, 1650, when that execrable Regicide and Ʋsurper, Oli∣ver Cromwell, with his rebellious and sacrilegious complices, did invade this Kingdom; and not only deface such rare and antient monuments of Natures hand-work, but also the Synagogues of the God of Nature. Before that we proceed any further, let us in∣quire from whence the water of all Springs (such especially as are most frequently deprehended up∣on, or near unto, the tops of high mountains) do proceed. The opinions of Philosophers concerning this affair, are these three, which are mentioned by Frambesarius in his natural history, and Dr. Andrew Baccius de Thermis, lib. 1. cap, 2. and by Dr. John French, in his York-shire Span, chap. 2. The first is Aristotles, viz. That these waters are generat of vapors (which are contained in the caverns of the earth) and of air (insinuating it self into them, by the conduits it encountreth) which are condensed into water, by the frididity of the earth. The second is, that these waters are only Rain∣water, which having insinuat it self into the veins of the earth, maketh way for its own egress, by the most convenient passages.
The third is, that these waters come from the Sea, through the veins of the earth; according to that saying of Solomons (Ecclesiastes, 1.7. All rivers run into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full; unto the place from whence the rivers come, thither they return again) who was the wisest of all meer men, who were before or should be after him, 1 Kings, 3.12. and that not only in spiritu∣als, but also in naturals: For the Scripture (1 Kings, 4.33) saith, that he spoke (by which you may well understand writing also) of Animals and Vegetables. He was also, no doubt, as skilfull in the art of Navigation, and knew well the natures of Minerals, seing (1 Kings, 9.26,27,28. and 10.22.) he made Navies of ships, which he sent with his servants, that had knowledge of the Sea, unto Ophir and Tarshish, from whence he brought gold and silver, in so great abundance, that in his dayes silver was nothing accounted of, 1 Kings, 10.21. He was also no less skilfull in Agricul∣ture, as may appear from Ecclesiastes, 2.5. And his making of Pools of water (ver. 6.) de∣monstrateth his dexterous skill, in finding out the subterraneal passages of water. As to the first of these opinions, we cannot em∣brace it, because of these reasons, 1. It is most improbable, that there are such large caverns in the earth, as will contain so great a quantity of vapors and air, as, being condensed, would afford so much water, as doth daily scaturiat in springs, which are upon high mountains: For ten Gallons
of air will scarcely afford one Gallon of water, as all will acknowledge. We will make use of this argument, not only in relation to such springs, as proceed from the tops of high mountains, but also in relation to some which are in lower places, and environed with mountains; one whereof we will instance, which perpetually, every moment yield∣eth many Scots quarts of water; and it is that known Well in Carrick, at the Wel-tries, near to Maybol, unto which Well, no man (who know∣eth the Country betwixt it and the Sea west∣wards) will deny its original to be from thence. 2. If the water, which doth scaturiat from, or near unto the top of an high mountain, doth pro∣ceed from vapors, which have been condensed in the caverns of the same mountains, these caverns being (of necessity) below the caverns from which the water issueth, it seemeth impossible, that the water can naturally ascend, from the lower unto the higher parts of these caverns, which are at the tops of the mountains; because water doth natu∣rally ascend no further, than it did descend. We will notwithstanding acknowledge, 1. that there may be some springs upon, or near unto the tops of some mountains, which do not proceed from the Sea immediatly, but rather from some Logh, whose superfice is more distant from the Centre of the earth, than the springs, and whose water cometh from the Sea immediatly, after that maner, of which you shall be informed afterwards. 2. When water issueth slowly from the lower part
of a mountain (as from St. Authonies Well, at Arthurs seat) it may proceed from vapors and air, which have been condensed in the caverns of that same mountain which are above the place out of of which it issueth. The second opinion is no less improbable; be∣cause it is incredible, that the Rain-water, which doth at sometimes only fall upon mountains and valleys, can be the only water, which doth perpe∣tually scaturiat in all fountains; and that as abun∣dantly from some, after a long summers drought, as after the greatest abundance of brumal showers. We will here likewise admit, that there be many springs issuing from mountains, which are furnish∣ed with no other water, than the bottles of the clouds do afford unto some valleys, whose super∣fices are further from the centre of the earth, than the foresaid springs, whose waters are perpetually increased by Rain, and diminished (totally some∣times) by drought. But these are not the springs, concerning the original of whose waters we are in∣quiring; and therefore all arguments which are, or may be taken from them, can conclude nothing against Solomon his forementioned assertion. The third opinion, which (as was said) is foun∣ded upon Solomon his assertion, is also dubitable; because it doth necessarily infer this improbable conclusion, viz. that the supersice of the Sea, is higher (that is, further distant from the centre of the earth) than the orifices of these subterraneal veins, from which its water is alledged to issue
forth upon, or near unto the tops of mountains, though never so high; and that because of the fore-mentioned Axiom, viz. Water doth natu∣rally ascend no further then it did descend; as is or∣dinarily demonstrat, by a stroup of white Iron, which is bowed at the middle. The verity of the opinion, and validity of the consequence will evidently appear, by proving the conclusion to be a certain truth; for the doing of of which, take these undeniable Propositions, from which we shall manifestly infer, that the waters of the most part of springs do come from the Sea, through the subterraneal veins; because of the al∣titude of its superfice, beyond that of the highest mountains from which water springeth. Proposition 1. In the evening of the first day of the worlds creation, the four elements did sur∣round one another, that is, the water did com∣pleatly surround the earth (Psal. 104.5,6.) the air surrounded the water end the earth, and the element of fire (if there was or is such a thing) did contain within its concavity, all the three. The truth of this is evident from, Gen. 1.1,2. For in the first verse it is expresly said, that in the beginning (that is, in the first day of the creation as ver. 5.) God created the heaven and the earth; and in the second verse, the earth was without form and void; that is, the form of the earth did not appear, because it was compleatly covered with the waters, which upon the third day of the creati∣on, God did gather unto one place, that the dry land might appear, as ver. 9.
Proposition 2. Before the gathering of the wa∣ters unto one place, the earth and the waters did constitute one rotund Globe, and never since, but when God commanded them, for drowning of the world, to return unto that their first position or ituation, wherein their superfice was fifteen cu∣bits above the top of the highest mountain (Genes. 7.19.20.) And that, 1. through the fountains of the great deep (Gen. 7.11.) or veins of the earth (as Job, 38.8.) the latter half of which verse, doth, without controversie, relate to the floud of Noah. 2. Through the bottles of the clouds (unto which they had ascended into va∣pors, and) from which they did descend, for ma∣laxing of the hard earth, that the subterraneal wa∣ters might the more easily conciliat a more facile egress unto themselves, by new passages, through the superfice of the same. Proposition 3. From the third day of the worlds creation, untill the floud of Noah, and since that after the floud, the waters returned from off the face of the earth (Gen. 8.3.) and the dry land appeared (ver. 5.11,12) the middle of the superfice of the Ocean (which we conceive most probably to be beneath the Arctick or North-pole) hath been, and is further distant from the centre of the earth, than the top of the highest mountain. This Proposition is undenyable: for, if when the waters surrounded the whole earth, their super∣fice was fifteen cubits higher than the top of the highest mountain, far more is it higher now, and
hath been ever since they returned from off the earth; and that (no doubt) unto one (yea their former) place, unto which they were at first ga∣thered, Gen. 1.9. Moreover, its truth is clear∣ly evinced from Job. 38.10. I brake up for it my decreed place, and set bars and doors, ver. 11. And said, hither to shalt thou come and no farther, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed. For these verses, and the first words of ver. 8. of the same Chapter, and Job, 28. ver. 11. (He bindeth the flouds from over-slowing, &c.) do no doubt relate unto the third day of the creation, whereon God did gather the waters unto one place (Gen. 1.9.) or unto the returning of the waters from off the earth (Gen. 8.3.) or both, which is most pro∣bable. This third Proposition is also proven, by Psal. 104.5. Who laid the foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed for ever, ver. 6. Thou covered'st it with the deep, as with a garment, the waters stood above the mountains, ver. 7. at thy rebuke they fled, at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away, ver. 8. they go up by the mountains, they go down by the valleys, uno the place which thou hast founded for them, ver. 9. Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over, that they turn not again to cover the earth; ver. 10. he sendeth his springs (that is, permitteth the springs to pass) among the hills. And, Prov. 8.28. When he strengthened the fountains of the deep, ver. 29. when he gvae to the Sea his decree, that
the waters should not pass his commandment. Seing it is most evident, from these places of Scrip∣ture (especially from Psal. 104.9,10. and Job, 28.11. and 38.8.10,11.) that the Sea hath a natural and perpetual inclination unto turning again to cover the earth (whereby all the parts of its supeefice, may be equidistant from the centre of the earth) and that by the omnipotency only of God it is detained in that situation, wherein now it is, we do from them and the foresaid propositi∣ons conclude, that the waters of all springs (even such as do scaturiat upon the tops of the highest mountains) which run perpetually, do proceed from the Sea, through the subterraneal veins. For further probation of this opinion, consider, that if the superfice of the Sea, where any of its water doth enter into the veins of the earth by which it is conveyed to the tops of high moun∣tains, were not further distant from the centre of the earth than the tops of those mountains, it could never ascend unto them, no more than the water which issued from the top of an high mountain, could move in a natural maner (as it doth) to∣ward the Sea-shore, if the place from whence it proceedeth, were not further distant from the centre of the earth than the shore. Here we cannot but take notice, how Dr. John French, in his York-shire Span, chap. 2. pag. 10, 11, 12. denieth, that the middle superfice of the Ocean is higher than the shore, and that there are such veins in the earth, as the water would pass
through, unto the tops of mountains where springs are; because the veins in the bowels of the earth, are not wholly and throughout full, as of necessity they must be, before water will ascend through them, for preservation of its continuity, and the avaiding of a vacuum, as those crooked pipes are, by which Wine-coopers use to draw Wine out of our vessel into another. For answer, in conside∣ration of our former reasons, we will as confident∣ly affirm, as he doth deny, that the middle super∣fice of the Ocean is not only higher than the shore, but also higher than the highest mountain; and that these veins of the earth, are wholly, and throughout, full of water; because if they were not so, the Sea-water could never scaturiat from the tops of high mountains. The foresaid Author having (as he thinketh) sufficiently refuted that opinion, which assert∣eth the ascent of the waters by the subterranea veins, which are in the mountains (though it be according to the express Word of God, Psal. 140.8.) They go up by the mountains, they go down by the valleys, unto the place which thou hast founded for them) setteth down his own (pag. 15.16.) which is this, the water which proceedeth from the tops of mountains, is only the vapors of the waters contained in the caverns of the earth, which the subterraneal heat (of the burning Bitu∣men, as pag. 22.) did elevat unto the heads of the springs, where they are condensed into water, a water is elevated from the Sea unto the middle
region of the air, where it is condensed into water. Having into our Appendix unto Moffet-Well, shewed the improbability (if not the impossibility) of that his subteraneal fire; for refuration of this opinion, I shall only make use of the words of his own 2. Arg. (pag. 2.) whereby he refuteth the opinion of Seneca, (viz. That springs are genera∣ted chiefly of earth, changed into water) changing only the words air and corrupted, and putting vapor and converted for them, thus, It is to be wondred at, that seing ten parts of vapor, if not moe, serve for the making of one part of water, containable in the same space, there should be so much space in the earth for containing so much vapor, as serveth the making of such a quantity of water, as springs daily out of the earth, how is it possible that so much vapor can be converted in such a moment? Moreover, as it is most probable (as he there writeth) that the whole elementary air, being of its own nature most subtile, and not being sufficient to make such abundance of water, as all the springs of the earth will amount to; so it is most like, that though there were such a subter∣raneal fire, occasioning the elevation of such va∣pors, yet all these would not be sufficient, to yield so much water, as doth daily proceed from all the springs that are upon the earth. Let us here applaud the most ingenious opinion of the most famous Philosopher Renatus Des Car∣res, princip. Philosoph. parte 4. Parag. 65. Ʋt ani∣malium sanguis in eorum venis & arteriis, sic
aqua in terrae venis circulariter fluit. Because thereby appeareth one great resemblance, which is betwixt the Macrocosme, and the choicest of Ani∣mals, Man, called the Microcosme. Not that we think, that the similitude holdeth in all things, but that because of its reality, the foresaid Author, is much to be admired and respected for his ingeni∣ous observation. In the next place, we shall first give you that description of the Well, which we find in J. Moni∣peny his Memorial of the rare and wonderfull things of Scotland, at the end of his Abridge∣ment of the Scotish Chronicles. 2. We shall shew, in what things this description is faulty. 3. Describe the maner of collecting this Oyl, and add such things as we have observed in the Well. 4. Prove, that the fore cited Author his opinion, concerning the Oyl, is most probable. 5. Set down the maner of its separation from the Coals. 6. Describe the Virtues, which undoubtedly it hath, or in probability may be ascribed to it. 7. Propose and answer three questions. As to to the first, viz. I. M. his description of the Well, these are his words. In Louthian, two miles from Edinburgh, is a Well-spring, called St. Catharines Well, flowing perpetually with a kind of black fatness or Oyl above the water, pre∣ceeding (as is thought) of the Parret coal, bring frequent in these parts. This fatness is of a mar∣vellous nature; for as the coal whereof it pro∣ceeds, is judain to conceive fire or flame, So is this
Oyl of a sudain operation, to heal all salt-scabs and humors, that trouble the outward skin of man; commonly the head and hands are quickly healed by the virtue of this Oyl. It renders a marvel∣lous sweet smell. Dr. Ja. Hart also maketh mention of it, to the same purpose, in his Dyet of the diseased, Book 3 chap. 19. at the end. The Author of the forementioned description is mistaken; 1. In saying, that the Oyl floweth perpetually above the water; 2. In asserting, that it hath a marvellous sweet smell. As to the latter assertion, it favoureth of mis∣information, because the smell of the Oyl is most like unto the smell of the smoke of Coals, and their Oyl, which are no wayes gratefull or sweet; and the first assertion is also of the same nature: For the Oyl remaineth in the veins of the earth, which are near unto the bottom of the Well, and doth never ascend unto the superfice of the water, but by drops only, and that when the water is commoved; because some drops of the Oyl, are then separated from the rest, which are detained in the veins of the earth, through their viscosity, by which they are attached unto the earth. 3. The manner of collecting the Oyl is this, the water of the Well being exhausted by buckets, un∣till the superfice of that which remaineth, be as low as the orifices of those veins, in which the Oyl is absconded, when the superfice of the water is often moved by a convenient vessel, from the side of the Well, where these orifices are, unto the
middle, the Oyl cometh forth of the veins, and floateth upon the water, from which it is separat∣ed, as Cream from Milk. Here you would take notice, 1. that when the Well is full of water, there appeareth sometimes: scum upon it, which is most delicatly vatiegat with these colours, blue, red, green, purple, &c. (and Chamelion-like) changeth all these colours, according to the variation of its position unto your eyes, either by your moving, from one place unto another, round about the Well, or by its moving its place upon the water, by motion. The reason of this variation of colours, we conceive to be the different wayes of reflecting the rayes of light, by by the foresaid scum, seing it is not altered by any other physical agent. 2. The water of the Well is scarcely affected with the taste of the Oyl, so that it may be justly esteemed as destitute of its other virtues. The reason of this is, because its taste (and consequently its parts, wherein its virtues do confist) cannot be communicated unto the water, without the mediation of its salt, either fixed or volatile: But so it is, that the fixed-salt of the Coals, remaineth inseparable from them, before they be calcined; and the volatile, being nitrous, is drawn along with the resinous oyl, whereby its solution in the water is prohibited. If it shall be demanded, what this Scum is? We answer, that it is nothing else, but one or more drops of the fore-mentioned oyl, which have been by agitation of the water, first separated from tho
rest, which lurketh in the subterraneal veins at the bottom of the Well, and then by a further com∣motion, extended over as much of the waters su∣perfice, as it could cover, when converted into a thin pellicule or scum. The truth of this is easily demonstrat by this experiment; take one drop of the fore-mentioned oyl, and instill it into a large vessel full of water, and then agitat the water with a stick, and you shall presently perceive the like scum, which will vary its colours, as was said. The Chymical Oyl of Worm-wood will do so also. 4. It is most probable, that the foresaid oyl, is the oyl of Coals: for proving of which, consider, 1. that this oyl is most like, in colour, smell and taste, unto the oyl, which is by the Spagyrical Art extracted out of Coals, save only in that it is not so strong; because it was not extracted by the violence of fire, as this, whose strength existeth in its most active spirits, which the fire hath separat∣ed from the Coals. 2. The artificial oyl of Coals, is impregnat with the same virtue (but in a more eminent degree) which the Author ascribeth unto the oyl of the Well, as experience hath often testi∣fied unto me. 3. A drop of the artificial oyl of Coals, being instilled into a large vessel full of wa∣ter, by agitation it will be converted into a scum, which will vary its colours, after the same manner that the scum of the Well doth. 4. The adjacent ground, south-wards, is full of Coal-pits and Lime-stones, which we conceive do tend unto the
nature of Coals, and do differ only from them, as Silver differeth from Gold; and this difference is easily collected from that Axiom, Metallizati∣onis finis est aurificatio. Moreover, Lime-stones are alwaies found near to Coals, as we are credibly informed, Having already afferted, that this oyl is the oyl of Coals, we cannot but also confess, that we are of opinion, that it is the very oyl of the Parret∣coal; because this is the most sulphureous Coal, whose copious Sulphur, is of a most facile separa∣tion, by the abluent water, as it passeth through the veins of the earth, in which this sort of Coal is contained. 5. Whilst the water of the Well passeth through the veins of the Earth, where the Coals are, it car∣rieth along with it, as much of the oyl, as serveth to make an unctuous scum upon its superfice; and when it passeth through other veins of the earth into the Well, it encountereth some dryer parts, to which it attacheth it self, untill it is converted into an oyl, by the contraction of its parts, and continual accession of more pellicules. This is suffi∣ciently proven by the forementioned experiment: For if one drop of the oyl be convertible into an un∣ctuous scum (as was proven) why should any doubt, that the unctuous scum may be again con∣verted into oyl, by having its parts more strict∣ly united? We hope that none will question the separation of this oyl from Coals, which are a most sulphu∣reous
mineral, seing many vegetables (less or no more sulphureous) do daily sacrimat sulphureous Gums, as Turpentine, Mastick, &c. The virtues of the oyl. 6. THe only virtues which, as yet, are ascrib∣unto this oyl, are, 1. Its singular curing of the Scab, by the forementioned Author. 2. A power of healing all aching of the Bones; by our learned Country-man Dr. Anderson, in his Cold-spring of Kinghorn. But we conceive, that these following virtues may, upon a most rational account, be attributed unto it, and to the artificial oyl of Coals. 1. It is very probable, that these are excellent Anti-podagrick and Anti-paralytick oyls; be∣cause of the intense calidity wherewith they are endued. 2. They are good Anti-hysterick oyls, for inter∣nal, as well as external use; because of the fetide smell, wherewith they are impregnat. 3. They will prove good Ant-asthmatick oyls; because of the aperitive quality, wherewith they seem to be enriched, by reason of the acrimony of their taste, resembling that of the Balsam of Brim∣stone, which is esteemed one of the best Ant-asth∣matick medicines which we have; and is best known unto our Aesculapian sons and servants, by the name of Dr. Macullochs Balsam; because that learned and expert Physician (to his Majesty
King James the sixth, of glorious memory) was the inventer of its more terss preparation (whereof the antients were ignorant, and) which he left be∣hind him, unto us his Country-men. 7. We shall propose and answer three que∣stions, one whereof is concerning Coals, and the rest are concerning Oyls. Quest. 1. Why do not Coals yield a sixed salt, when exposed to spagyrical resolution? seing they are one of the kinds of minerals, which do most abound in salt. It is answered, 1. that be∣cause they do not render this kind of salt, it is not to be supposed, that therefore they contain none of it; for the whiteness of their ashes, and their in∣tense corrosive quality, when converted into Lime, by calcination, with stones of their own nature (as was said) do sufficiently demonstrat the contrary. . They do not yield any fixed-salt; because, when they are calcined, their fixed-salt doth so corrode the metallick earth, which they contain, that it converteth the same, with its self, into a magisterial pouder; from which (as from the ma∣gisterial pouders of Pearls, Corall, Lead, &c.) ex∣perience teacheth the impossibility of separating the corrosive salt. 3. They afford no fixed-salt; be∣cause they are of the nature of Lime-stones, from which (when converted into the most corrosive Lime) it is impossible to extract any fixed-salt. Teste Zuelfero, Chymico expertissimo, in Anima∣adversionibus suis, in Appendice in Antidotorum Classem, de salibus Theriacalibus, Pharmacopoeiae
Augustanae, ab ipso ingeniosissimè reformatae, pag. 276. colum. 2. Quest. 2. Why do some oyls perpetually de∣scend unto the bottom of the water, as some oyls which ar destilled by descension? Ans. These oyls being more crass than others, are also more ponde∣rous, and therefore cannot be supported by water, which is endued with more tenuity of parts; but when these oyls are (by reiterated destillations) rectified, and so deprived of these craster parts, the water will support them. Quest. 3. Why do the most part of (if not all) oyls descend unto the lowest parts of sulphureous spirits (as of Wine, Barley, &c,) of an aqueous consistence. Ans. The tenuity of the spirit is the undeniable cause, why it cannot support the more crass oyl (unless it be in a most exile quantity) which is most participant of its nature and proper∣ties: For, if you will mix some crass water with such a spirit, it will then support the oyl, to which it formerly denied that service. Seing the curious Former of all things, hath much embellished the superfice of our Scottish ground, with so many mineral springs of diffe∣rent natures, and richly enambled its bowels with such a variety of metallick markasites (as is well known) it is much to be regrated, that so few have attempted the discovering of their natures, or (having made some progress in that) adventured to expose their conceptions, concerning either of them, unto Fames fingering. I know not if any
of our Country-men have published any thing concerning our Mettals; and it is to be feared, that there will be little, or nothing done to this purpose in haste, seing it hath pleased the Almigh∣ty, to put an end unto the dayes of that most learn∣ed and ingenious Mineralogist, the Lord Hopton, who died Dec. 1662. And (according to my best knowledge) there are only three, who have written concerning our Mineral Springs. The first is Dr. Moor, present Professor of Me∣dicine, in the Ʋniversity of Aberdeen; who pub∣lished a little book, concerning the Well of Peter∣head, in the year, 1636. from which it is mani∣fest, that then (though a student only of Medicine) he was privy to many of the most excellent actions of Art and Nature. The second is Dr. Anderson, who wrote most learnedly upon the Cold-spring of King-horn, in anno. 1618. and in that his book, mentioneth ma∣ny rare springs (wherewith Scotland is replenished, and) which we will here insert, because that book is rare to be found. The first is the spring which issueth from the top of Rattray-cave, in the Baro∣ny of Slains, whose water doth, in a short time, con¦gele into a hard stone, as saith our forecited Au∣thor also, in his memorial of the most rare and won∣derfull things of Scotland. Our learned and ingeni∣ous Country-man, Dr. Sylvester Rattray, doth also make mention of this water in his book, entituled, Aditus novus, ad occult as sympathiae, & Antipa∣thiae causas inveniendaes. Here you would take
cotice of a story, which will convince you of the possibility of this. A Scottish Gentleman, having been in France, and there acquainted with ano∣ther of that Country, who (it seemeth) was curi∣ous to know the various and (almost) miraculous operations of Nature, did inform him, by writing, concerning this Well, and its water. The French man returned him this answer, I am sorry, that you should think me such a fool, as to believe such a Paradox as this is, that water should, in a short time, be converted into a stone. Whereupon our Country-man fearing least the other should think this a meer fiction, he took the pains, to set a glass under the droping water, untill it became full, and then he sent the glass unto him, the water therein contained, being converted into a stone. A very ingenious argument, for convincing so confident a Gain-sayer. Secondly, a spring of the same na∣ture, which himself did see in one of the vaults (which were most curiously hewed out of a solide rock) of Roslain-castle. Thirdly, two Wells in the Castle of Dumbarton, distant two or three foots, the one from the other; the uppermost whereof, springing from north to south, yieldeth a very salt water; the other running from south to north, ex∣hibiteth fresh water. Fourthly, the Mud-earth wells of Menteith. Fifthly, the Lady-well of Stra∣thearn. Sixthly, the Lady-well of Ruthven-Seventhly, this Oyly-well at St. Catharines Chappel.
The third is Mr. William Barclay, whom Dr. Anderson stileth, his very learned friend, and old Parisien acquaintance, and of whom he writeth, that he would have all the effects of the Cold∣spring of King-horn to proceed from Tinn, &c. So it is very probable, that that Gentleman, hath written something concerning that, or some other spring. And seing there are very many rare and admi∣rable springs, in several places of this Kingdom, far distant from one another, concerning which none hath, as yet, put pen to paper, such as live near to any one of them, would do well to attempt the discovering of their natures and virtues, and then publish them for the good of others; by the doing of which, they would purchase unto themselves further access into natures Cabin, where they would find greater discoveries of her manifold and great mysteries, with the knowledge of which, Providence hath decreed to inrich none, but the diligent searchers after them.
MONSTRUM CATHANESIENSE: OR, A drscription of a monstrous Child, born and living in Caithness. IN the Sheriffdome of Caith∣ness, at the Church of La∣thron, there is a child (named Donald Sutherland) who upon the seventh day of May, 1663. was eighteen months and fourteen dayes old; yet as tall as any ordinary child of three years old; in describing of whom, we shall inform you of these following particulars. 1. He is so big, that a string of three quarters in length (wanting one inch) will only surround him at the middle, when all his cloaths are off. 2. His Head, Arms and Legs, are so sutable to his body, that he may be called the true pourtraicture of Bacchus; because most like un∣to him, as he is ordinarily pourtrayed.
3. He is of a most fair and ruddy complexion having a comely countenance and pleasant skin. 4. Yet it is to be feared, that he shall never b instrumental, in producing another like to him∣self; nature having decreed him an Eunuch from the womb: For his Scrotum is empty, and s fashioned, that to the touch (without accurat i∣spection) it would argue him to be an Herm∣phroditc. Moreover, his Yard is destitute of Glans; and the Praeputium is attached to the extremity, or entry to the Ʋrachus, on al sides. 5. He hath sixteen Teeth (eight above and eight below) most orderly and decently set; yet he is most unwilling to cat any bread, but loveth only soft meats. 6. His appetite to meat is so admirable, that upon the forementioned day, when he had eaten to the admiration of all who were by him, ere half an hour was expired, and dinner being pre∣pared for us who were newly lighted from off our Horses, he did eat three har-boyled Eggs, and six or seven ounces of new Cheese, and then would have eaten some boyled Fishes, if we had not restrained him. 7. There is upon him such a burden of Beef, that, standing, he resembleth a drunken man, whose head is giddy: so that he can hardly walk, unless he be led by the hand: But he will go very fast upon his hands and feet together. Moreover, when he essayeth to rise from off the ground, he
bloweth, and maketh a noise, as one having a bur∣den upon him. 8. His body is adorned (or rather deformed) with many lirks, by reason of the great quantity of flesh. He hath two lirks in his Neck, three upon every side, four upon every Arm, betwixt the Arm-pits and Thumbs; two upon each Thigh, betwixt the lirk of the Lisk and the Knee; and those were so deep, that a sixpence being put into the uppermost, it did abscond or cover the half of it. He hath also a lirk beneath every Knee, and a little above his Ancles. 9. His wrests (immediatly above the lirks) are more than seven inches in compass; and the brans of his Legs are three inches bigger. 10. His excrements are sutable to his age, but not to his cating: so excellent is the digestive faculty of his stomach, and the attractive of his lacteous vessels, that they permit nothing to be eliminat by the expultrix faculty, which can cede into aliment. The reason of this may, probably, be the superlative vigor of the ferment of the stomach (the great instrument in chylification) which is occasioned by the deficiency of that fer∣ment, which is the great spermato-poetick agent: For the Former of all things useth mercifully to repair the natural defects of some members, by enabling others to exerce their natural offices, more extraordinarily, than naturally they use to do. As when one born blind, hath a most ex∣quisite sense of hearing, feeling, or a good me∣mory,
&c. As was manifest in the person of Alexander Cushny, who lived near to the house of Drum, at the water of Dee, and being alto∣gether blind, did (as I was informed by an Eye∣witness) take asunder a house Clock of the ordi∣nary size, belonging to the Earl Marshal of Scotland, and having mundified all the wheels thereof, did set them together again in their due order. The goodness of his digestion is, doubtless, the cause of his excessive growing. 11. The persons who keep him did inform, that he was born of no bigger stature, than any other child useth to be; and that he began not to grow to that monstrous bigness, untill he was six months old; and that he had lost much of his flesh since he was weaned, which had been done only fourteen dayes before. 12. His strength is such, that being displeased, he will easily break spoons made of Horn. 13. He is only learning to speak the High-land language; but understandeth much of it. 14. The weight of his body (which could not be measured, because of the want of weights) is so great, that he is thereby rendered so lazie, that a Girl of twelve or thirteen years old must carry him from place to place, his arms being about her eck; and when she ariseth with him from the ground, she must be assisted. 15. He is of so hot a complexion, that a shirt sufficeth him for cloathing.
16. His Parents are poor people, of the middle stature, and somewhat inclining to the lesser sort. 17. To conclude, he is such a person as might be a Present for a Prince, who would be care∣full of dyeting him aright; which if it shall be neglected, will either occasion a short life, or make him a Buffle-head, destitute of understand∣ing; or else occasion his not continuing to ac∣cress unto a preter-natural bigness, as he encreaseth in years.
CƲLPEPER'S CHARACTER: OR, A CHARACTER of Mr. Culpeper and his Writings. BY MATTHEW MACKAILE, Chyrurgo-Medicine. Prov. 26.5. Answer a fool according to his solly, lest he be wise in his own conceit. Edinburgh, Printed for Robert Brown, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Sign of the Sun, on the north-side of the Street, over against the Cross, 1664.
The Epistle to the Reader. Courteous Reader, IT is too too probable, that the dis∣ciples of Mr. Culpeper, will not a little censure this attempt, and most furiously (after his manner) challenge me, as designing, 1. to condemn not only him, but all others, for publishing any thing relating to Medicine in the Eng∣lish tongue, and so tax me of envying the propagation of the knowledge of the Art amongst the vulgars. But such would know, that I ever had a great estimation of all, who have written soberly (as all have done, that ever I saw, Mr. Culpeper excepted) and to demonstrat the truth of this, to the most in∣credulous of that crue, I have done the like my self; being confident, that what ever hath been written in English, will tend to the honour of the Art and Artists; because im∣proved to the best use, by persons of under∣standing. And when such as are destitute of this director, do any harm, by presumptuous meddling with such writings, they, at least
others, will be taught to make their address unto those who are the licenced and qualified professors of the Art. 2. They will, no doubt, much resent my writing against a dead Man, who is unable to answer for him∣self, and so challenge me of baseness. To this I answer, that it appeareth, Mr. Cul∣peper, having astrologically foreseen, that some would write against him after his death, did pen that Pamphlet, entituled Culpepers Ghost, generously to excuse any that intend∣ed to do it, and to excite others who inclined not to it; and that he might not come short of them in the like work: For it is impossible to exult so much over him, after his death, as he doth in that Pamphlet, and others of his writings, over others, who were gone hence before his own birth. Others will possibly condemn my noticeing and answering such scurrilous, profane and unchristian expres∣sions, as are found in his writings, and which no sober or wise man will care-for. To these I answer, that though it be impossible, that he, by being answered according to his folly, can be rendered capable of being impeded from becoming wise in his own conceit, yet such as survive him, and are daily, in his
name, printing books, stuffed with such ex∣pressions, as were familiar unto him, may be taught this lesson. It ought to be the lamentation of all, who have any knowledge of the mysterious opera∣tions of sagacious Nature, that there are so few who make it their study, to discover more of her mysteries; and that such as have made some progress in this work, are so sparing in communicating their knowledge unto others, especially in this age, wherein there are so many, who (as Mr. Culpeper ever did) offer nothing to the most delicat pallats, but cram∣be recocta, that is ov'r-nights Keal. It is most probable, that if Mr. Culpeper had been so far favoured by the heavenly powers, as to have been made the first discoverer of the cir∣culation of the blood (as was the most lear∣ned and famous Dr. Harvey) he would have made Aurum Potabile of it, that is, written of it to no purpose. I am confident, that the learned Dr. Thomas Willis, considering the most laudable practices of Dr. Harvey, in writing de Generatione Animalium, & Circulatione sanguinis; and of Dr. Glis∣son in writing de Rachitide; and that there are too many books already in the world,
writen concerning all subjects, as they are already known, did defer to employ the Press, untill he had prepared something, which would (as all intelligent persons will acknow∣ledge) merit no small acceptation (viz. his Diatribae duae Medico-Philosophicae, de fermentatione & febribus, and his disser∣tatio epistolica de urinis, which do demon∣strat, that he is one, who maketh it his great study ingeniously to discover, and candidely to communicat the knowledge of the myste∣ries of Art and Nature) because, à vulgari sententiâ, tanquam via maximè trita pau∣lisper recedens, & minus calcato insistens tramiti, as he writeth in his Preface, to his Diatriba de febribus. But least this Epistle should become disproportionat to that, to which it is presixed, I will sum up all that I have to say, in this request, that you would put a favourable construction upon this at∣tempt, in doing of which, you shall obliege, Your cordial Well-wisher, M. M.
CULPEPER'S CHARACTER: OR, A CHARACTER of Mr. Culpeper and his Writings. IT was by some reported of Cato, that he never spake a word of which he had cause to repent; and there are (no doubt) not a few, who will say little less concerning what Mr. Culpeper hath wrote. But such as believe what Solomon said (Prov. 10.19. In the multitude of words there wanteth not sin) will easily be convinced, that he who made so many motions, in so many volumns which he wrote, could not but make some trippings. If Bishop Latimer was more cautious of what he said, before his examiners, when he heard the pen of another writing behind the hang∣ings (because literascripta manet, and nescit vox missa reverti) how much more cautious should Mr. Culpeper have been, in writing with his own hand, and thereafter publishing in print, such things as were most reprehendible, by any sober
man, as you will annon be convinced. I will first mention such of his expressions as are most deroga∣tory to the glory of God, and prejudicial to his servants. In the Epistle to the Reader, prefixed to his book, entituled, A directory for Mid-wives, he writeth thus, In this world the devil hath his agents, and their actions are to keep you in darkness. Who are our jaylors? I say Scholars; and thus I begin to prove it; in divinity they have given us a translation of the Bible (such a one as it is) all the proper names in Scrip∣ture they have given you in pure Hebrew names, in an English character. Pray do so much as read the four or five first Chapters of the first book of Chronicles, and see what in∣struction you can find there. And a little af∣ter he writeth of the Scripture thus, When you want knowledge, you know whether to go for it; not to an idle Priest, but to one that will not upbraid you far your labour. Besides all this, whole sentences in Scripture, are so translated, that t would make a man sick to see them—Had not the Priests formerly ab∣sconded the mysteries of the truth from us, Ser∣mons would have been cryed about the streets for three halfpence a dozen.
By these expressions you may know, how the pulse of his soul did beat at the writing of them: For Solomon hath said Prov. 21.23. Who so keepeth his tongue, keepeth his soul. Surely then, when the tongue raileth against God him∣self and his servants, it argueth the soul (at that time) to be in a lamentable estate, by reason of most depraved principles. Without transgressing against the rules of charity, Mr. Culpeper (no doubt) may be called the most audacious Momus of this our age, wherein he lived, in daring to vilisie that most exact translation of the holy Scriptures in such a parenthized expression; and also to speak the worst of evils concerning Digni∣ties, as you shall hear hereafter. I am confident, that if he had been more diligent in searching the Scriptures (like the Bereans, Act. 17.11.) for edification, he would have found more instructi∣on from these Chapters in the first book of Chro∣nicles; for by comparing them and the like places, with Matth. 1. and Luke, 3. he might (according to the judgment of all Divines) have understood, that they were penned by the Holy Ghost, chiefly for this end, that it might appear to the Church in after-ages, that Jesus Christ our Saviour was lineally descended of Abraham and David; and not only that we might be instructed by the etymological interpretations of the names; else the Spirit of God would have set down the interpretations of them all in the Text, as He did (for reasons known to Himself) of many in
several places, some whereof we will here in∣sert. Araham, Gen. 17.5. A father of a great mul∣titude, or many nations. Asher, Gen. 30.13. Blessedness. Babell, Gen. 19.9. Confusion. Ben-oni, Gen. 35.18. Son of sorrow. Beaula, Isaiah, 62.4. Married. Cephas, John, 1.42. A stone. Dan, Gen. 30.6. A judgment. El-beth-el, Gen. 35.7. Elymas, Acts 13.8. A Sorcerer. Ephraim,, Gen. 41.52. Fruitfull. Gad, Gen. 30.11. A troup, or band. Hephzibah, Isaiah, 62.4. My delight in her. Ichabod, 1 Sam. 4.21. Where is the glory? Jedidiah, 2 Sam. 12.24,25. Beloved of the Lord. Jerubbaal, Judg. 6.32. Let Baal avenge. Joseph, Gen. 30.24. Increasing. Issachar, Gen. 30.18. An hire. Ishmael, Gen. 16.11. God hath beard. Israel, Gen. 32.28. A prevailing with God. Levi, Gen. 29.36. Joyned. Loammi, Hos. 1.9. Not my people. Loruhamah, Hos. 1.6. Not having obtained mercy. Melchizedeck, Gen. 14.18. and Heb. 7.2. King of righteousness and peace. Moses, Exod. 2.10. Drawn out. Naphtali, Gen. 30.8. Wrestling.
Seth, Gen 24.25. Simeon, Gen. 29.33. Hearing. Zebulun, Gen. 30.20. Dwelling. Moreover, the pious and learned Interpreters, being most zealous to advance the knowledge of God and of the Scriptures, did, upon the margents of many Bibles, set down the interpretations of the most part of the proper names. I shall only add, that Mr. Culpeper, his cen∣sure of those Chapters in the Chronicles, savour∣eth of no less presumptuous impiety, than, first, the taxing of Almighty God, His Wisdom and Will, in not authorizing the holy Pen-men of the Scriptures to explicat all the proper names, as they did the most considerable. Secondly, that he would have had the Interpreters to have added unto the Scriptures, the explications of those pro∣per names, which are not explicat in the original text; by doing of which, they should have made themselves the object of that dreadfull threat∣ning. Revel. 22.18. As for that expression of his, Whole sentences in Scripture are so translated, that it would make a man sick to see them, I shall only say this of it, that no ingenuous and rational man, would have so impudently asserted so great a paradox and un∣truth, without instancing some particular sen∣tence for proving of his assertion. It is one of Mr. Culpeper, his own physical sentences, that physick without a reason, is like a pudding without fat; the like whereof may very well be said of this his
extravagant assertion, destitute of probation. It is admirable, that Mr. Culpeper, who (in his Epistle prefixed to his Translation of the London Dispensatory) assumeth unto himself, fellowship with Christ and his Apostles, and likeness to God, did not take the pains to translate, or correct some of those Scriptures which he reprehended. But his surviving wife (in her Epistle prefixed to his Treatise of Aurum potabile) seemeth to give a sufficient reason for this omission, in these words, My husband left seventy nine books, of his own making or translating, in my hands—Also my Husband left seventeen books, compleatly perfect∣ed, in the hands of Mr. Cole, for which he payed my Husband in his life-time. Let the sober and judicious Reader judge of the probability of this, considering that he had not above nine years for this work and his astrological studies also (for he began not to write till the year, 1648. or 1649. and he died, 1654. or 1655.) and whether or not ma∣ny books have been printed in his name, since his death, which were not written some years after the same; particularly that book, entituled, Arts Master-piece; or the beautifying part of physick; whereby all defects of nature in both sexes are amended, age renewed, youth continued, and all imperfections fairly remedied—Never before extant, though long since promised by Mr. Nic. Culpeper, but now published by B. T. Doctor in physick. London, printed, 1660. Concerning this book I have these six things to acquaint you with.
1. That it is most probable Mr. Culpeper never wrote it, else his Relict had published it, as she hath done other books, since his death. 2. The publisher of it in the Title-page, put∣teth B. T. for his name, but at the end of his Epistle to all truly virtuous Ladies, e setteth L. D. which discrepancy, reflecteth not a little up∣on the Publisher, as well as upon the Printer. 3. In the Title-page he affirmeth these Expe∣riments to be so far discovered, that every man may be his own Apothecary: but it is most pro∣bable, that the Penner of them, was as ignorant of the knowledge of that ingenious art, as a Mole is destitute of the visible faculty: for, pag. 71. he ordereth the making of an Oyntment, without Oyl, or any unctuous liquid body. 4. Many (if not the most part) of the prescrip∣tions contain, 1. either such things as are most costly, as that Oyntment (pag. 70. to cause a beard) for the making of which he prescribeth three ounces of Musk. 2. Or such things as can∣not easily be gotten, as, pag. 71. the blood of a Batt, for making of an Oyntment, for hindering the growth of hair. And, pag. 73. the turd of a Mole, for making of another Oyntment, to the same purpose. And, pag. 77. the blood of a Tor∣toise, for making an Oyntment to take away the hair. 3. Or else such things as are ridiculous; because not seconded with reason. As, pag. 79. the Gall of a white Ox, for making of a liniment to whiten the hair; as if the Gall of a red or black
Ox, would not serve as well. And, pag. 100 Grass-plantane, the rine taken off, and washt nine dayes in spring water, for making an oyntment, for leprous faces. Those nine dayes of purifica∣tion, might be sufficient for bleetching both the herb and the face into other colours. 5. Frustra sit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora: That is, there might be, from amongst the Tautological farrago of those prescriptions, some few composed of the choicest simples, for every several distemper there mentioned, which would prove more usefull, than any of these which are so confusedly set down. 6. The book is no wayes answerable to its pro∣mising Title-page; which may give just ground to suspect, that the effects of those remedies will be as disproportionable to the expence that men must be at in trying of the experiments. It is a most infallible token of ignorance, cheat∣ing and foolish ostentation, for a man to prefix a most flourishing Title-page to his book which doth scarcely deserve any at all; such as is that book, entituled: A discovery of subterraneal trea∣sure, viz. of all manner of Mines and Minerals, from the Gold to the Coal; with plain directions and rules for the finding of them, in all Kingdoms and Countries. And also the art of melting, refining and essaying of them is plainly declared, so that every man that is indifferently capacious, may with small charge, presently try the value of such eares, as shall be found, either by rule or by
accident. As also a way to try what colour any berry, leaf, flower, stalk, root, fruit, seed, bark, or wood will give; with a perfect way to make colours that they shall not stain, nor fade like or∣dinary colours. London, Printed, 1653. and are to be sold by Humphrey Mosley at the Princes Armes in St. Pauls Church-yard. This book consisteth of nine sheets only, and is so miserably defective in performing any thing promised in the Title-page, that the world can hardly produce another like it; so that the old saying, Parturiunt montes (which contain those Mines and Minerals) may be the motto of its Frontispiece, and Nascitur ridiculus mus, its Post-script. Before I pass from this purpose, I will give you a taste of Mr. Culpeper, his found divinity and abilities, in applying and interpreting of some pas∣sages of the holy Scriptures. As, 1. in his Trea∣tise of Aurum Potabile, pag. 3. he writeth thus, Truly we considering how mysteriously God by his Spirit hath penned the Scripture to the sons of men, that none but his own chosen ones understand the mysteries of it, have ceased to question the integrity of Philosophers, in penning such ridles (meaning their writings concerning the Philoso∣phers stone, Aurum potabile, &c.) that prophesie Isa. 6.9,10. which is so often repeated in the New Testament, must be verified; Go unto this people and say: hearing you shall hear, but not understand, and seeing you shall see, but not per∣ceive,
&c. Let the judicious Readers, who have any knowledge of the Scriptures, consider, whe∣ther or not that Prophesie was penned only, or at all, in relation to the writings of these Philo∣sophers, (as his words do clearly import) espe∣cially, seing the Apostle Paul applyeth them more (yea only) spiritually, Act. 28.25,26,27. 2. Page 9. of the same Book, from these words, (Gen. 3.22,23,24.) The Lord turned man out of the garden, lest he should eat of the tree of life, and live for ever; and he placed in the garden cherubims, and a flaming sword, which turneth every way to keep the tree of life; he inferreth as very probable, these conclusions: 1. That the place of the garden is still probably remaining, (and sure he meaneth, in it's primitive integrity) because Angels had been but a feeble guard, if they could not have keeped out a little water, (viz. at the flood of Noah, when all the high hills that were under heaven, were covered fifteen cubits upward, Gen. 7.19,20. 2. That the bodies of Enoch and Elias may be there, It is admirable, that he would not give Moses a place amongst them, (possibly, because, being the only chief Ma∣gistrat amongst the Israelites, he looked too like to a King) but it is more probable, that if the garden of Eden was the Coemitery of Enoch and Elias, that there also God buried Moses, and that the valley in the land of Moab, over against Beth∣peor, where God buried Moses (Deut. 34,6.) was the garden, But, it becometh no man to study
wisdom in the matters of God, above what is written; and far less did it beseem Mr. Culpeper to doubt (if not contradict) those Scriptures, 2 King 2.11. at the end. And Elijah went up by a whirle∣wind into heaven. Heb. 11.5. Enoch was tran∣slated, that he should not see death. 3. Page 11. He writeth thus, We read, Gen. 5.3. that Adam begat a son in his own likeness; that is, as we understand, not of pure and tempe∣rat Elements, of which he was created, but of corrupted and mixed Elements (as if at his first creation of temperat Elements, they had not been mixed) and therefore mortal. This rare Divine, alloweth no spiritual meaning unto those words. It is more probable, than any of these his opini∣ons, that an Assembly of the most ignorant Di∣vines (in the English Commonwealth, wherein he lived, & which licenced his impudent Pen to scrible) would have rejected him, as insufficient, for tran∣slating, or interpreting of the Scriptures unto them. In the next place, take notice of his treason∣able and scandalous expressions, whereby he spoke evil of Dignities, mocking at their afflictions, in the day of their calamity; and so, in a superlative manner transgressing that command, Obadiah 13. I shall pass by with silence, those of them, with which he larded his Almanacks (when the Sun∣like glory of Monarchy was eclipsed by the opa∣cous Republican Parliament, whose inconsider∣able and base constituent atoms, had no splendor, but what was communicat unto them at first, by
the King, the fountain of all honour) and desire you only to notice such of them, as were his most christian and charitable meditations, in relation to the fifth Commandment, when he was bidding farewell to the world; viz. when he was pen∣ning that Pamphlet, which he entituled Culpepers Ghost; In the second and twelfth pages whereof, he writeth such unchristian, treasonable and scan∣dalous expressions, as cannot be mentioned, with∣out committing the like crimes; and therefore I must forbear to insert them here, referring you to his own writings; and in these few words only give you my verdict of them. Notwithstanding that Solomon (the wisest of men) who was inspired by the Spirit of God, did affirm, Prov. 28.2. For the transgression of a land, many are the Princes thereof; and, chap. 30.21. When a servant reigneth, the earth is disquieted, and cannot bear it; yet Mr. Culpeper was so foolish and hasty in his words. (Prov. 29.20.) as to mock at the father of the state (Prov. 30.17.) and not be afraid of the judgment there threatned. The Supream Magistrat of the Ʋniverse, ha∣ving put an happy end unto the long and Cimmeri∣an dark night of Anarchy, wherein such fiery mete∣ors did appear, in our Brittish Horizon, but were not able to change the coats (and far less the hearts) of one truly loyal person, I shall not de∣termine their altitude in the region of Rebellion, but only offer unto you some of the sanctuaries measuring Reeds, by which you may do it your selvs
Titus, 3.1,2. Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, and to obey Magi∣strats, &c. Exodus, 22.28. Acts, 23.5. Thou shalt not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people. Ecclesiastes, 10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, &c, 2 Peter, 2.9,10,11,12,13. 1 Peter, 3.10. James, 3. to ver. 11. I shall conclude this purpose, with those three sentences of Gods Word, which a good Poet might convert into a most pertinent Epitaph upon Mr. Culpeper. Prov. 21.24, Proud and haughty scorner is his name, who dealeth in proud wrath. Pov. 10.31. But the froward tongue shall be cut off. Pro. 12.19 But a lying tongue is but for a moment. Take now some of his most christian and chari∣table complements, which he passed upon the Physicians of the Colledge of London; of whom many, for their singular abilities, and diligence in their business, were honoured to stand before the King and Princes of the and. In the second page of his Epistle to the Midwives, of England he calleth the Physiceans a compa∣ny of lazy Doctors, most of whose covetousness outweighs their wits, as much as a Mil-stone outweighs a feather. And in the Epistle to the Reader of that same book, who are they that cry out against Em∣pyricks?
who? The Colledge of Physicians▪ And why do they so? they kill men for wa of judgment; and who is the cause of this? themselves forsooth: for if they taught men the true rules of physick, is any man so madd as to practice false ones? I may now joyn them both together, like Simeon and Levi, brethren in evil. I will not instance any thing more to this pur∣pose (though there might be found as much of this sort of stuff in his writings, as many sheets would not be able to contain) only read his Tran∣slation of the London Dispensatory, where you will find most bitter railings against the Colledge; and in the close of his Epistle to the Reader, he taketh the heaven and all the powers thereof to record, that he never received the least prejudice from any of them, that would have extracted re∣venge from a melancholy breast. It appeareth that Mr. Culpeper would have wiped off the aspersion of hatred towards the Colledge, by these last words; but in so doing he resembleth one, who with inky hands would do away a black spot from off his own face, and thereby he rendereth himself a most proper object of the censures of all ingenuously-minded persons, who ever were, and will be, most ready to acknowledge with honour and love, the virtues of their very enemies, and detest that superlative baseness of envying and detracting from the de∣served elogies of such as never did them wrong.
Cesar caused re-edifie the demolished statues of Pompey, though his enemy, and gave this most generous reason for it, Least the honour of so brave a Commander should have bled and lan∣guished under mine eye. Doubtless the ground of this his implacable and unparallelable hatred, was only the merit of those Aesculapian worthies, whose deserved estimation should not have been envyed; especially, seing the Almighty God, did inhibit the very envying of evil men, Prov. 24.1,19. and the Prophet David did reprehend himself for being envious at the prosperity of the wicked, Ps. 73.3. The most charitable censure which can be put upon Mr. Culpeper for those expessions, is that of Solomons, Prov. 11.12. He that is void of wisdom, despiseth his neighbour, but a man of understanding holdeth his peace. I will now inquire, if Mr. Culpeper had any knowledge or estimation of the most excellent Art, Chymistrie. Surely the vulgars will cen∣sure me, as most ridiculously uncharitable, in doubting of either; seing he hath written (as they say) a most learned Treatise of Aurum Potabile, and Chymical Institutions, in his School of physick, printed, anno. 1659. For determining of this controversie, I will only propose some Querees, according to which the judicious Reader may conclude as he pleaseth. Quer. 1. Is it probable, that if Mr. Culpeper had understood any thing of the art called Chymic, in anno. 1648. or 1649. (at which time he be∣gan
to write) would he not have manifested some what of it in his Translation of the London Dis∣pensatory, when he came to the Chymical pre∣scriptions (seing he did censure many of their other prescriptions, as informal, &c.) and not have translated them verbatim, without any anima∣adversions; neither, at the beginning (when writing of the Oyl of Worm-wood) have given this advice? Your best way to learn to Still Chy∣mical Oyls, is to learn at an Alchymist: for I rest consident, the greatest part of the Colledge had no more skill in Chymistrie, than I have in building houses. Quer. 2. If he had understood this ingenious and usefull art, would he have, in the close of his dayes (when he penned his Ghost) given it such a slender and detracting commendatory testimony, as he did page fifth and sixth, in these words. And as for Chymistric, of which I had a mighty high opinion in my life-time, I must confess, though I still acknowledge the Art to be very inge∣nious and usefull to search into the mysteries of nature, and the best key of natural Philosophy, and that by help thereof, some very usefull medicaments are daily made, as my Aurum Potabile, of which I left a Treatise, yet I do do now much doubt, whether a general supply of medicaments, for all cases obvious in practice, can by Chymistrie be afforded, better than the often approved, and by experience confirmed, Galeni∣cal
and a Hippocratical remedies? It is too too evident, that if he had not left that Treatise of Aurum Potabile, (which is the only usefull me∣dicament which he acknowledgeth to be made by Chymistric) to have been published in his own name, the most excellent Art, would not have been so favourably mentioned. Quer, 3. If Mr. Culpeper had been it struct∣ed in the principles of this art, as would have be∣seemed one, in whose name Chymical Instituti∣ons and a Treatise of Aurum Potabile, were to be published, would he have, in those Institutions, begun with, and (for the most part) proceeded in the practical part of the art, and that only accor∣ding as it had been written of by others, above twenty times, before he saw the light of the Sun? Surely, when he penned those Institutions, he did forget, that the learned Sennertus, and all others who ever wrote Institutions to any Art, did confine themselves unto the the cretical part, describing only the necessary pracognita, before the practical should be attempted. I will here give you a taste of his great skill in this Art, by mentioning some of his expressions in the ninth Chapter of those Institutions, where writing of the Quintessence of every simple mater; he describeth it thus, Quintessence is the fifth part of every thing having form and substance, and a most subtile spirit drawn from its body, &c. And a little after, Quintessence—solely by its self, hath none of the four qualities in it, viz.
watry, airy, firy or earthly, which could be dis∣cerned or discovered, by the judicious inquisi∣tion of the most skilfull Philosophers.—There∣fore, for a conclusion observe, that it is neither hot nor cold, nor moist nor dry, but is a thing of a temperate nature, exceeding all the Ele∣ments which are under heaven. Then he affirmeth, that it is chiefly to be understood of Wine, the spirit whereof he calleth the Quintessence, and sheweth the vulgar man∣ner of destilling it, chap. 10 and biddeth lute the vessels, that the animal and vegetable Virtue may not exhale out of the Wine. Is it not admirable, that Mr. Culpeper, (upon whose Diet, Schooling and being at the University of Cambridge, four hundred pounds were spent, as is affirmed by that most adulatory Pen∣ner of his life, prefixed to his School of Phy∣sick, should affirm such paradoxes, and never give one reason (wise or foolish) for proving of any of them. As, 1. That any part of a Body, composed of the four Phy∣sical Elements, is not composed of the same principles, and doth not partake of the same qualities with that Body, of which it was a con∣stituent part. If he had proved it by sure demonstrations, he had truly deserved the
title of Magnus Appollo, to which he was busily aspiring in this age. 2. That the spirit of Wine, Aqua vitae, &c. are not at all hot. 3. That Wine containeth animal virtue. These two being so ridiculous, need no other anima-adversions, than what a critical Divine said once of anothers writ∣ings, vidi & risi. Those Institutions, which contain such doctrine, so methodically disposed, do challenge to the Author of them, the very same testimony, which Mr. Culpeper (though unde∣servedly) gave to the most part of the Colledge of Physicians at London, viz. that they had no more skill in Chymistrie, than Mr. Culpeper had in building houses; especially seing he is such a fool, as to contradict what he wrote formerly, in his Key to Galens method of physick, Sect. 1. when writing of Medicines temperat, thus—It is impossible that any medicine can be temperat. Quer. 4. If Mr. Culpeper had been instructed in the principles of this worthy Art, would he not have discovered some of that sort of knowledge, in some of his other writings? I do declare, that (according to my best remembrance) I never read any thing in any of his writings concerning this Art, saving what hath been just now mentioned, and some few lines in his Epistle to the Reader, prefixed to his Directory for Midwives, where∣in he, who pretended to be the greatest and most zealous promoter of the knowledge of natural and medicinal things, for the good of his Country (as may appear from those ridiculous words in his
Ghost, pag. 13. I dare say I have been a greater teacher of physick, and have had in∣comparably more disciples in that Art, than all the fellows of Amen Colledge, since old King Hary gave them their Charter doth scoff at, and vilipend natures key, and rail against that learned and skilfull opera∣tor to the Colledge, Mr. William Johnson, demonstrating, that his great zeal was void of the knowledge of nature, and that his chief designs were, 1. the acquiring of money from the Printers, for buying of Beer and Tobacco; for proving of which, take notice of these words, which the Au∣thors of the Preface, prefixed to the com∣pleat Midwives practice enlarged, in their Preface write thus—Its almost a miracle to us, that Mr. Culpeper, a man whom we otherwayes respect, should descend so low, as to borrow his imperfect Treatise from those wretched volumnes, some of which are before mentioned; and we must deal faithfully with you, that that small piece of his, entituled, the Directory for Midwives, is the most despe∣ratly deficient of them all, except he writ it for necessity, he could certainly have never been so sinfull to have exposed it to light.
2. The erecting of the Trophees of his own fame, upon the ruines of others, whom he was still decrying. His words are these, When the Temple of Disna was on fire, ont jumps the image that fell down from Jupiter, from Ephesus to England at one leap, whom all the world adore (some few children of my mother Nature excepted) and silver shrines must be made for her still, Demetrins the Silver∣smith having taken him a shop in Amen-Corner. The judicious Reader of these things, will surely think himself oblieged to ascribe the pen∣ning of that Treatise of Aurum potabile, only to Dr. Freeman, whom Mr. Culpepers Relict (in her Epistle prefixed to the said Treatise) ac∣knowledged to have studied, and attained to the perfection of it, joyntly with her Husband. Be pleased to take a view of some things in his book, entituled, The English Physician, &c. and first of its Title-page, wherein are these three things reprehendible; 1. He calleth it a compleat (fearing least others would not) Method of phy∣sick; whereas it containeth only a confused (saving that it is alphabetically almost disposed) descrip∣tion of English Herbs, and their virtues, with∣out any physical precepts, either methodically or confusedly ordered. For, by a Method of phy∣sick, nothing can be understood, but a methodi∣cal description of the Art of Physick, containing
the causes, signs and cures of diseases, such as is Philip Barrough, his method of physick. 2. He promiseth, thereby to teach a man to preserve his body in health, or cure himself, being sick, with threepence charge, with such things only as grow  England. And yet in the description of the first Herb, Amara dulcis and its virtues (and through the whole book almost) he prescribeth three pynts of white Wine, for to boyl the wood and leaves into. Surely the most favourable con∣struction which can be put upon this discrepancy, is, that to cause the book fell well, it behooved to have that blazing and dazling promise upon its Frontispiece. But, Vine vendibili non opus est Hedera, That is, Wine that is recent in the Seller, Needs not an Ivy for its Banner. Moreover, it is evident from these words, that Mr. Culpeper thought, that this book of his, would be sufficient to inform any man concerning the na∣ture and cure of his disease, (though it containeth nothing of the principles of Medicine; at least, that any man being informed of the natures of Remedies, is instantly enabled to cure a disease. Was not this a most speedy and effectual course which he did undertake, for multiplying and
patronizing the number of ignorant Doctors (who usurp the title, and have not so much Latin as would buy a loaf to a Dog) and Empiricks of both Sexes, who are not able to distinguish one disease from another. It will not be amiss to in∣sert some stories, concerning some such persons, as first, One who pretended to have some skill in phy∣sick, used to give these five rules, as the most ex∣cellent, for preserving of health. 1. Fear God. 2. Purge melancholy. 3. Live temperatly. 4. Ex∣tortion not your stomach. 5. Keep a good dyet. Secondly, There is a Doctrix, concerning whom I will relate unto you these most certain stories. 1. She desired a Gentleman, going for London, to bring home to her some Oyls. When he de∣sired to know what kinds of Oyls, there being Oyls of different natures and operations, she re∣plyed, Any Oyls, because I intend to try con∣clusions. 2. A sickly Rustick came unto her, complain∣ing of a pain in his neck, and betwixt his shoul∣ders. She affirmed his disease to be the Ripples in his neck, and essayed to cure him thus; every morning he got a good draught of warm Ale, with some Ginger; and so soon as he had drunk that, she put him into the Barn to thresh a Bar∣ley stack of her own. Thus continued he under physick till the stack was threshed.
A Rustick woman came unto her, to get her advice concerning the Gravell, wherewith she was much troubled. The Doctrix gave her this advice, for causing the stone fall down into the neck of the bladder, You must stand leaning forwards with your two hands, upon the arms of a great chair, setting your feet far asun∣der; then let your Husband take a broad shovel, and give you four or five good clanks or strokes upon the buttocks with it. In my own audience she confessed this story to be true, unto several considerable persons. 4. A valetudinary Rustick came unto her, and desired some things for his health; to whom (af∣ter some discourse, and stedfast looking into his countenance) she gave this answer, truly friend you will die. The person then (with a more melancholy aspect demanded how she did know that? But she declined to give him a reason for her prognostick, affirming, that it was not for him to know that: For (said she) it is sufficient that I know it. At length, being further pressed, she told him, that he had drunk a fou or un∣clean drink. The Rustick answered, Mistris, you know, that we who are country people, drink nothing but small drink, or clean water—No no (said she) but you have drunk a drink into which the Moon hath shined. Mistris (said he) you know we use to go to the Well at night, and drink water though the Moon be shining. But
(said she) the Moon hath shined into the cup wherein your drink hath been. Notwithstand∣ing of this discourse, the simple fellow condes∣cended to take from her some potion or other. The reason of this ridiculous expression concerning the moon, is none other than this; she having (to my certain knowledge) Mr. Culpepers English Physi∣cian or Herbal, hath read in it, that some herbs are herbs of the Moon, others herbs of the Sun, and others herbs of Mars, &c. and do cause such and such diseases, and cure others; and having some rude and ignorant conceptions, concerning such things, did utter that ridiculous prognostick and reason. It is not much to be admired, that a silly woman had such shallow imaginations, seing the most learned and famous Mr. Culpeper was so presumptuous, as to enslave all vegetables to a necessary and unavoidable dependence, up∣on the influences of the Stars, which were not created untill the fourth day of the creation, which was the day after the creation of vege∣tables. The consideration of which, made the truly most learned and pious Dr. Thomas Fuller (in his 18. Scripture observation, in his book, entituled, Good thoughts in bad times) resolve, hereafter to admire God more, and fear Astro∣logers less. It is most certain, that there are many igno∣rant Empiricks, who (by such books as Mr. Cul∣pepers English Physician is) know as many medi∣caments and their virtues, as the ablest of Physi∣cians;
and yet they are, and will still be, most unsuccessefull in their enterprizes: because igno∣rant how to make use of them in due season. The consideration of this made famous Hippocra∣tes begin his Aphorismes thus, Vita brevis, Art longa, occasio volucris, experientia periculosa, judicium difficile, &c. id est, secundum Heurni∣um, Nemo presentem agnoscit occasionem, nisi ille qui judicio, & experientia excellit. Such ignorant fellows, have often reason either to be∣wail their blind precipitancy, or to ruminat upon that old Proverb, Fronte capillata, post est occasio calva. An able Physician, considering the presumptu∣ousness of such persons, said well, Multa dan∣tur Medicamenta, nulla remedia; nam solus medicus prudens & sapiens, ex medicamentis, remedia facit. Medicamenti etenim ani∣ma, est occasto ipsum exhibendi. That is, there be many Medicaments, but no Re∣medies: for only the prudent and wise Physician maketh Remedies of Medica∣ments: for the soul of a Medicament, is the season of applying it. The Christian Readers of Mr. Culpepers writ∣ings, which contain such excellent stuff, as you have here before mentioned, may consider whe∣ther or not, the Publishers, Re-printers and
Sellers of his writings (or other mens in his name) have not reason to take to themselves that most excellent advice of Mr. Culpepers (being the last words of his Ghost, which was the last of his writings) which he left in Legacy to the Printer of the book, entituled, Culpepers last Legacy, without his own knowledge, in these words, If he leave not off such tricks, I would advise him to pull down the sign of the Angel, and hang up the Devil, or the sign of his Cloven∣foot, in stead thereof, that people may guess by the sign, what commodities he deals in, and know where to have them, without seeking any further about the Town. For when they see the father of lies and impostors, or his mitred foot hang'd up, they may be sure that love lies and sophisticated forgeries (as too many do) where to have their turn served. 3. In the Title-page also, he promiseth to shew the time of gathering all herbs, both vulgarly and astrologically; but when he cometh to treat of gathering roots (pag. 382. and 383) he only controverteth a little con∣cerning descending of the sap to the root in Autumn, and its ascending in the Spring, and laughs at it as a tradition. At length, he determineth the controversie thus, The truth is, when the Sun declines from the Tro∣pick
of Cancer, the sap begins to congeal both in root and branch; when it toucheth the Tro∣pick of Capricorn, and ascendeth to us ward it begins to wax thin again, and by degrees, as it congealed. This is an assertion of Mr. Culpepers, which he wrote, after that he had consulted (as he writeth in his Epistle to the Reader) with his two brothers, Dr. Reason and Dr. Experience, and that after his voy∣age taken to visit his mother Nature. Like∣wise after his asserting, that neither Gerard nor Perkinson, nor any that ever wrote in the like nature, gave ever one wise reason for what they wrote, but trained up young novices in the school of Tradition, and did teach them, just as a Parrot is taught to speak. From this assertion of Mr. Culpepers, it is most evident, that he hath been of opinion, 1. that the natural withering of herbs in autumn, whilst they are not cut down, proceeds only from the congealing of their sap: because of the Suns de∣clination from the Tropick of Cancer. The asser∣tion he learned from Dr. Tradition, and his pre∣tended Dr. Reason inferred from it this opinion; to which I oppose this, as savouring of more na∣tural reason, and less reasonless tradition. The root of the herb, having in the Summer-time, furnished the stems, &c. with vegetative spirits, which it conveyeth by the aqueous humidity,
these spirits being distributed amongst the leaves, flowers and seeds, provident nature appointeth the evaporation or exhalation of the same, by the Suns heat, as an enemy to their conservation, and a great accelerator of their putrefaction. 2. He hath thought, that the sap of the roots of herbs, is not so thin in the middle of winter (when the earth, about them, is most succulent or wet) as in the middle of summer, when the ground is not half so wet. But if he had required the judgment of Dr. Reason concerning this affair, he would have told him, that the vegetative soul, remaining in the root, doth, in the winter time, attract more sap to it, than it had at the end of autumn, for nourishing and strengthening it, the better to resist the brumal cold, which would be ready to kill it, after the loss of so many spirits, as it hath communicated unto the seeds, and other parts, which it sent forth in the Summer and Au∣tumn, and after the great cold is gone, it begin∣neth to operat upon that sap, sending it forth in∣to new leaves, stems, &c. which it alimenteth afterwards with new sap, which it attracteth from the ambient earth. Hence it appeareth, that the most convenient season for collecting of roots, is the Spring-time, immediatly before they put forth new leaves or stems. And I am confident, that Mr. Culpeper never eated Parsneeps, but in winter, though he did it not for this reason. Let the judicious Reader consider, if this be not a very clear hint∣ing
at the reason of that assertion of Mr. Cul∣pepers (chap. 1. of leaves of herbs or trees) which he (who wrote as before, in the Epistle) doth most impudently set down, without any reason, subjoyned unto it, in these words. The leaves of such herbs as run up to seed, are not so good when they are in slower as before, some few excepted, the leaves of which are seldom or never used. But here Mr. Culpeper seemeth to answer for such omissions, in that learned and compleat Method of Physick, by these words, concerning the book, in his Epistle to the Reader; In mine, if you view it with the eye of reason, you shall see a reason for every thing that is written. But these words, do rather pre-require more reason in the Reader, than is in the book. In the second place take notice, how he com∣mendeth this his book. You read before, that in the Title-page he calleth it A compleat method of physick; and in the Epistle to the Reader, he writeth thus; The prosit and benefits arising from it, or that may accreu unto a wise man from it, are many; so many, that should I sum up all the particulars, the Epistle would be a big a the Book; and then he reduceth all to three general heads, which no man, but he who hath the forementioned eye of reason, and can bring-but that which is not there-benn, will be able to discover. Mr. Culpeper, his sounding forth his own praises, after this manner, and his frequent satyrical reflections upon others, doth directly
transgress that excellent precept, which Diony∣sius Cate gave to his Son. Officium alterius multis narrare memento, Atque aliis, cum tu beneseceris, ipse siteto. As also the more considerable sentences of the holy Ghost, Prov. 27.2. Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth, 2 Cor. 10.18. For not he that commendeth himself is ap∣proved. If he had remembred, that the coats and garments, which Dorcas made in her life∣time, did commend her frugality most after her death (Acts, 9.39.) he would have been more sparing in penning, and causing print such com∣mendations of his own writings in his life-time, and rather have reserved them for to have been enlargements, or flesh and sinews to his like Ghost, which was printed after his death. In the third place take notice, that though Mr. Culpeper, in his Epistle to the Reader, did repre∣hend Gerard, Perkinson, &c. for never giving one wise reason for what they wrote, &c. yet all along through the book, he doth most confidently take upon him to determine the degrees of heat and coldness, or driness and moistness of herbs, according as did the most fabulous writers, who were the first authors of such like traditions. Take this one instance, as the most considerable (be∣cause a part of that discourse, which in the Epistle he calleth the Key of the whole book) which savour∣eth
of most presumptuous considence, and reason∣less tradition; and it is concerning Worm-wood, of which he writeth thus, it is hot and dry in the first degree, viz. just as hot as your blood, and no hotter. Should such a Critick have so perempto∣rily asserted, without giving any reason for it? at least, should he not have prefixed to his book a rational rule for discovering the temperaments of herbs in general, seing all others who wrote be∣fore him, concerning herbs, did assert the like, and never gave the least shadow of reason for it. Surely he had a good opportunity for the doing of this, in his Key to Galens method of physick, (subjoyned to his Translation of the London Dis∣pensatory) sect. 1. where he writeth of the tem∣perature of Medicines in general, and where he hath a discourse, not exceeding eight lines in 8vo, neither assording two grains of instructi∣on to the Reader. Fourthly, let the judicious Reader consider what he hath written at large concerning Worm∣wood (which discourse, he called the Key of the whole book; and in the close of it, he calleth it a Jewel, more worth than a Diamond; and as∣serteth, that in the words of it, lies a Key which will unlock the cabinet of Physick) for (as Mr. Culpeper wrote concerning some places of Scrip∣ture, translated into English) It would make a man sick to see it, being a discourse stuffed with variety of most ridiculous impertinencies; par∣ticularly where he saith, that where Dr. Reason
dwells not, Dr. Madness dwelleth, and Dr. Mad∣ness bringeth in Dr. Ignorance; Dr. Felly, Dr. Sickness and Dr. Death. You must excuse my not meddling with any thing in his writings which is astrological: For I acknowledge my self not to be sufficiently ac∣quainted with the principles of that Art, and therefore do refer him unto others. Only I will say this, that if his Astrology in Medicinals be no better than it (and the Astrology of others more famous than he) was in Politicks, in the time of the Commonwealth (when Monarchy was said to be eternally exiled from Great Britain, by all the powers of the heavens) they will mis-spend their time, who will take the pains to read. Concerning his great skill in the Pharmacopoe∣tical art, which he endeavoureth to manifest in his Translation of the London Dispensatory, and Chapters subjoyned unto his English Physician, I will only say this, that whosoever shall compare those his writings, with the ingenious and learned Animadversions of Dr. John Zuelfer, upon the Augustan Dispensatory, will be soon convinced, that an Apprentice of one years standing would have written as well, if not better than he did. Take now a demonstration of his matchless im∣pudence; which is this, in his Translation of the London Dispensatory, when he describeth the virtues of the Vinegar of Squills, prefixing his own name to them, he doth it, according to Ga∣len his words, which he had stollen, either out of
Galens own works, or else from the Augustan Dispensatory. Yet notwithstanding of this, he had so much impudent confidence, as (a little af∣ter) to challenge the learned Physicians of Lon∣don, for stealing the prescript of the Lochoch of Purslain, from Ausberg; and then addeth these ridiculous and scurrilous words, you shall shortly hear the Augustan Physicians come, with how and cry after the Colledge, and cry, stop theeves. Let others remember this proverb, which he forgot. Turpe est doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum. Before I conclude, I will acquaint you with this true story: An able Physician of our Nati∣on, being demanded, by one of Mr. Culpepers disciples if he had read any of Mr. Culpepers works? answered, I thak God, I never had so much leisure as to do it. It having been my mis∣fortune to have some leisure, for that end, I have given you a taste only, of what I found in such of his writings, as providence did throw into my hands. And all that ever I learned from them is this, which I look upon as the Corollary of this discourse. Mr. Culpepers writings, are only either other mens writings which he hath translated into Eng∣lish, or collections out of other mens works, which he hath deformed with malicious, scurri∣lous, detracting and railing expressions, and stu∣died
to beautifie with some ridiculous, and (some∣times) impertinent jests. So that that sentence (which you will find in the Epistle to the Reader, prefixed to his Transla∣tion of the London Dispensatory) may be most pertinently applyed unto himself, mutatis mutan∣dis; A Physician riding (passing) in Plush (Print) and not one grain of wit, more than was printed before he was born. By these words he doth well condemn those, who rest satisfied with what is already discovered and known unto all, and press not forward unto new discoveries, which ought to be the only exercise of the Scholars (especially Physicians) of our age, where∣in is abundance of most excellent books already published, concerning all subjects; and yet there was never a scribler in the world, which made the Press ruminat more, to little or no purpose, than he did. For a conclusion to this discourse, I will an∣swer one great objection, wherewith I will, very probably, be troubled hereafter; which is this, since Mr. Culpeper his death, his relict, Mrs. Alice Culpeper, hath in print, by way of Epistle, renounced many books of her Husbands, printed in his life-time, one whereof, called Culpepers last Legacy, &c, she denieth to have been written by him: because it is not written according to her Husbands lofty and masculine stile—and in such a solemn valediction, he could not, possibly, have forgot his wonted respects to the Colledge
(some whereof we have mentioned before) to whom he did so frequently address himself in i∣vers of his writings; and others of them are in Epistles subscribed by him self (viz. the English Physician, and Directory for Midwives, which I have seen) alledged to be very falsely printed, and to contain many gross mistakes. So that those passages, which I have before mentioned, out of his writings (and particularly that ridicu∣lous assertion concerning Barrenness, in his Di∣rectory for Midwives, Book, 3. Sect. 3. at the end, printed, 1652. but left out of those which were since printed. The words are these, I will tell you no more than I have known tryed, the cure is easie, and was done by the man only, who could not give his wife due benevolence, making water through his wives wedding Ring, so there was one super∣stition helped another.) may possibly be alledged to be such mistakes, as he, or rather she, in his name, did dis-own. For answer, 1. I conceive that it is a gross reslection, upon her Husband, to make people believe, that he was such a fool, as could not keep his papers, till they had gone to the Press, with his own knowledge. 2. It is pro∣bable, that when Mistris Culpeper shall die, some of her relations will, in her name, renounce that Epistle of hers (which I found prefixed to the English Physician, the Treatise of Aurum Pota∣bile, and the Directory for Midwives, all re∣printed, 1656, after his death) because she would not have been so much unchristian, as to have de∣nied
that book (Culpepers last Legacy) to be her Husbands, especially because it containeth none of his wonted respects to the Colledge; which were nothing, but most unchristian and scurrilous rail∣ings against men, by serving of whom, he would have been honoured, but he was ever so foolish as to forsake this mercy. Having called to remembrance, that Distichon of Cato's. Contra verbosos, noli contendere verbis. Sermo datur cunctis, animi sapientia pacis. I will proceed no further. Farewell.
POSTSCRIPT TO CULPEPERS GHOST. Animula vagula. I am confident, that since thy arrival at the Elysian fields, and conference with so many able scrutators of natures mysteries, as are mentioned in thy book, entituled, Culpe∣pers Ghost, thou hast attained the knowledge of such things, as thou wast not well acquainted with in this world (as appeareth from thy expressions, page 5. and 6. concerning Chymistrie) and therefore I will propose unto thee some Querees, to which I desire thee to return answers with the first Post. Quer. 1. What is it in the Netle, which at the first touch offendeth a mans hand, and sudain∣ly vesicateth the skin? seing Cantharides do vesicat as strongly, though not so soon. All that you have said of this in your English Physi∣cian
(which in the Epistle to the Reader, you assirmed to contain a reason for every thing, that is written) is this, Nettles are so well known, that they need no description at all; they may be found by feeling, in the darkest night. Quer. 2. Why Cantharides, which do vesi∣cat but slowly, are so prejudicial to nature, when immoderatly used, not only internally, but also externally (as appeareth from their inimical ope∣ration upon the Bladder) and yet Nettles, which vesicat so sudainly, do no harm, when used as a good Pot-herb? Quer. 3. Why the decoction of Nettles pro∣voketh the Menstrua; seing the juyce of the leaves stayeth bleeding at the mouth? as you af∣firmed in your English Physician, without giving any reason, for averting the challenge of impro∣bability. Quer. 4. Why the sensitive plant, contracteth it self at the touch of man? Quer. 5. Why recent Red Roses, being boyled amongst Oyl, do not communicat their redness un∣to the Oyl, as Chamomel doth its greenness? Quer, 6. Why the eyes of a Cat, and the flesh of many fishes, ar luminous in the dark, seing the most scintillent Diamond is defficient in this? Quer. 7. Why the flesh of fresh-water fishes, are not at all luminous in the dark? Quer. 8. Why the spirits of Sulphur and Vi∣triol, do intend the redness of the Tincture of Roses, when extracted by warm water.
Quer. 9. Why the smoak of inflamed Brim∣stone, maketh a recent Red-rose of a white colour, when held unto it? Quer. 10. Why the Oyl of Tartar, being in∣stilled into the said Tincture, or put upon the whitned Rose, destroyeth the redness of the one, and maketh both contract a green colour? Quer. 11. Why the Tincture of Red-roses, having a little Allum dissolved into it, and tasted by a man, maketh his spittle of a green colour, seing the Allum did not alter the colour of the Tincture? Quer. 12. Why Dogs which take much plea∣sure in killing of wilde fowls (or in serving such as kill them with Guns) as Plivers, &c. will eat none of their flesh or bones? Quer. 13. Why doth not the Sugar of Syrups, made of acide juyces (as of Limons, Sorrel, &c.) crystallize (after they have been boyled too much) as the Sugar of other Syrups, viz. the Syrup of Violets, pale Roses, &c. Quer. 14. What is it in Aloe which is so emi∣nently astringent, and stoppeth the slux of blood, when externally applyed to wounds, seing it is very purgative, when taken internally, and is de∣nied to haemoptoical persons, because of its open∣ing of veins, making orifices upon them, as if it were corrosive? Quer. 15. Why doth the weather of every Moon, exactly correspond to the weather of the Thursday before the change?
That is, if the Thursday before the change of the Moon (whether she change upon Wednesday, Friday, or any other) be a fair day, such will the weather be all the next Moon. If there be rain, wind, snow, hail, &c, in the morning, before-noon, after-noon, or at night, such will the wea∣ther be at those times of the Moon, answering such times of the day. This I have often obser∣ved never to fail, excepting three times in the year, viz. 1. at the end of March, the three last dayes whereof are commonly called the borrowing dayes, and use to be tempestuous. 2. In May, when there useth to be two or three dayes of bad weather (according to the proverb, Come it soon come it late, in May comes the Cow-quake) which are so cold, that the Kine do tremble. 3. At the be∣ginning of August, when there are much rains, which cause the Lammess-flood. Surely thy skill in Astrology will soon afford a reason for this? Quer. 16. Why Autimony being vitrisied, not only retaineth its vomitive quality, but also en∣joyeth it in a superlative degree? seing all other things almost, do loss their primitive qualities, when reduced into Glass, by reason of the de∣struction of their seminal forms. Quer. 17. What is it in the yoke of an Egg, which is the best (if not the only) mean, by which Tur∣pentine is rendred dissolvable by an aqucous body? Quer. 18. Why cannot Quick-silver, being once dissolved by the strongest corrosives, be de∣tained in that condition when exposed to the
heat of fire, seing Lead and all other minerals, being once so dissolved, are inseparable, by the greatest violence of Vulcan? Quer. 19. From whence proceed Worms, which are sound in green Pees? for it is impro∣bable, that they proceed from the sperm of such like animals, deposed upon the husk, containing them, seing there appeareth no blemish upon it, nor passage through it. And far less is it probable, that they are engendred in the Pees themselves; seing it is most certain, that omne Ens gignit sibi simile, except there be a degeneration; because of an aberration of nature, as when a more noble creature degenerateth into a less noble, of the same kind, as when Barley degenerateth into Oats, or when Worms, &c. do breed in the bodies of ani∣mals, or in their carcases after death, secundum Harveum de Generatione animalium, Exerci∣tat. 1. Quer. 20. Why the feet of a Swan are so black, seing all her feathers are most white? In answer∣ing to this, have a care, lest (reflecting upon your often approved, and by experience confirmed, Ga∣lenical remedies (as you wrote in your Ghost) and Method of physick, to which you made a Key of the softest mettal, and exposed it to sale, ador∣ned with the roust of Ignorance and Tradition, particularly, chap. 6.) you attribute this blackness, to the melancholick humor, which nature hath secerned to her feet. For I hope, that you, who was a Translator of Anatomists, will not so much
injure the Splen, which was Galen his receptacle of Melancholy, neither ascribe the yellowness of her bill unto Choler, lest you offend the Gall. Quer. 21. Why doth the Heron bow its neck when it flieth; seing the Swan (which hath a greater body, and a longer neck) doth extend its neck to its full length in flying. Surely if you shall alledge, that the blackness of the Swans feet proceedeth from melancholy, you will be per∣swaded, that the Swan should rather bow its neck, for fear of receiving prejudice by extending it: For (according to Gaelen) melancholy causeth fearfulness. Quer. 22. Why the Sheep of England have no horns, but tails which reach the ground? seing the Oxen and Kine have horns of superla∣tive bigness. Quer. 23. Why wilde fowls of one kind are all of one colour, seing tame fowls are of most different colours? Quer. 24. Why a man ganteth when he seeth another man do so? yea, I heard of one, who could not forbear ganting, if the lid, or cover of a Stoup had been moved once or twice up and down before him. Quer. 25. What is it in Oat-bread, which be∣ing smelled at by one who is taken by the Nose by Mustard, easeth the trouble? Quer. 26. Why doth the feathers of Doves spoyl the feathers of all other birds, with which they are mixed?
Quer. 27. Why Coneys do repair most fre∣quently out of their holes, to feed, only whilst the Sea is ebbing? Quer. 28. Is this opinion of the vulgars true, viz. that the treading of water-fowls out of the water, doth not foecundat their Eggs? And if it be certain, what is the reason of it? Quer. 29. Why a Plivers breast (which is white in Harvest and Winter) becometh black in the Spring, and continueth so all the Summer? Quer. 30. Why the Ewes in Orkney (where the North-pole is elevated about sixty degrees) have ordinarily two Lambs, frequently three, and sometimes four? As I was informed by a Gentle∣man there, who had an Ewe, which at one time brought forth four Lambs, three whereof were lame in the fore-legs, and went on their knees. Quer. 31. Why the North-wind doth not commove the Sea, so greatly as other winds do? Quer. 32. Why the West-wind doth still calme at night: when the air is not cloudy? Quer. 33. Why persons which have had the Teran-feaver are still distempered before stormy weather; and whilst the East-wind bloweth? Quer. 34. Why Sea-fowls extend their legs towards their tailes, in flying; and Land-fowls (the Heron and Lap-wing excepted) do contract their legs? Quer. 35. Why are there no Moles in Ire∣land? or rather, why doth the earth of Ireland kill Moles? For which reason some of the inha∣bitants
of the South-west parts of Scotland, have brought earth from Ireland, to put into their Gar∣dens, for that end. Quer. 36. Why in the Canicular dayes only a man cannot see the vapor which proceedeth from his own, or anothers mouth or nostrils, in breath∣ing, when the Sun shineth upon him? Quer. 37. Why persons who die not violent deaths use to expire at the Full-sea, or at a low∣water? This I have observed, seldom, or never to fail, and that within four or five minuts of these times. Quer. 38. Why the strongest Corrosives will not operat upon common Glass; seing Spanish or French Wines do operat upon the Glass of Anti∣mony? Quer. 39. Why the bottom of a Pot, which containeth a boyling liquor, is tractable by a mans hand; but becometh untractable when the liquor is poured out? Quer. 40. What is the irrefragable reason of the Echo, its once or twice repeating a mans words articulatly? Quer. 41. Why in Fairay-Sound (betwix the Isles of Fairay and Etha in Orkney) the Sea run∣neth north-east for the space only of three hours in slowing, and nine hours south-west in ebbing? This is the course of the Tide only in the middle of the Sound, which is but one mile broad. Quer. 42. Is it true that black Wool will admit of no other colour? And if so, what is the reason of it?
Quer. 43. Why the Jaundize is cured by me∣dicines of a yellow colour? as Rubarb, the juyce and flowers of Celledon, Saffron, &c. Quer. 44. Why the males of birds of Prey are less than the females? Quer. 45. Why are not children, under two years old, sick at Sea? If thou shalt give rational answers unto these Querees, I am confident, thou shalt gain more estimation, than by all thy labours under the Sun; and an act of indemnity for the many transgressi∣ons of thy Pen, which was only busied about things, the knowledge of which (as thou did'st rescribe) was so stale in the world, before thou came into it thy self, that no delicat pallat would have used it, when such Clusters of Grapes, might have been had, out of which, a more rational and rare Elixir, might have been extracted, for re∣freshing of the stomachs surfeted with such musty and rancide fare, as you did alwayes set before them. FINIS.
