M1597 13659652 101070
DIATRIBAE. DISCOVRSES ON DIVERS TEXTS OF SCRIPTVRE: Delivered upon severall occasions, BY JOSEPH MEDE, B. D. late Fellow of Christs Colledge in CAMBRIDGE. Printed by the Authors own Copy. The Contents you shall finde in the next leafe. LONDON, Printed by M. F. for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his Shop under S. Peters Church in Cornhill. M DC XLII.
The Contents of the severall Texts of Scripture, delivered in this Treatise. S. MATTH. 6. 9. Thus therefore pray ye, Our Father, &c. pag. 1. MATTH. 6. 9. LUKE 11. 2. Sanctified, or, hallowed be thy Name. p. 17. ACTS 17. 4. There associated themselves to Paul and Silas of the worshipping Greeks a great multitude. p. 82. 2 PETER 2. 4. For if God spared not the Angels which sinned, [] but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darknesse to be reserved unto Iudgement, &c. so we translate it: To which of S. Peter, answers that of S. Iude, (as almost that whole Epistle doth, to this) verse 6. And the Angels which kept not their first estate [or principality] but left their own habitation, he hath re∣served in everlasting chains under darknesse unto the Iudgement of the great Day. p. 99.
1 COR. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. p. 108. S. IOHN 10. 20. He hath a Devill, and is mad. p 120. PROVERBS 21. 16. The Man that wandreth out of the way of understan∣ding, shall remain in the Congregation of the Dead. , in coetu Gigantum. p. 132. GEN. 49. 10. The Scepter shall not depart from Iudah, nor a Law∣giver from between his feet, untill SHILOH come, and unto him shall the gathering of the People be. p. 144. PSALME 8. 2. Out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings, thou hast or∣dained strength, because of thine enemies; that thou mightest quell the Enemy, and the Avenger. p. 155. ZACH. 4. 10. These seven are the Eyes of the Lord, which run to and fro through the whole earth. p. 172. S. MARK 11. 17. Is it not written, My House shall be called a House of Prayer, [] to all [the] Nations? p. 187.
S. JOHN 4. 23. But the hour commeth, and now is, when the true wor∣shippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth; For the Father seeketh such to worship him. pag. 197. S. LUKE 24. 45. Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures. 46. And said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day. p. 210. EXOD. 4. 25. Then Zipporah took a sharp stone; and cut off the fore-skin of her son, and cast it at his feet, and said , Sponsus sanguinum tu mihi es. pag. 222. EZEKIEL 20. 20. Hallow my Sabbath, and they shall be a sign between me and you, to acknowledge that I Iehovah am your God. pag. 234. 1 COR 11. 5. Every woman praying or prophecying with her head uncovered, dishonoureth her head. p. 246. TITUS 3. 5. By the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. p. 262. IOSH. 24. 26. And (Ioshah) took a great stone, and set it up there (viz. in Sichem) under the Oak, which was in the San∣ctuary
of the Lord: Alii, by the Sanctuary. Heb. . pag. 274 1 TIM. 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of dou∣ble honour: especially they that labour in the Word and Doctrine. p. 296. ACTS 2. 5. And there were [] sojourning at Ierusalem Iows, devout men, out of every Nation under heaven. p. 311. 1 COR. 9. 14. Even so hath the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel;  pag. 324. Three other Treatises by the same Author for∣merly Printed, which may be added, viz. 1. The Name ALTAR, or . 2. CHURCHES, that is, Appropriate Places for Christian Worship. 1 COR. 11. 22. Have ye not houses to eat and drink in? [] Or despise ye the CHVRCH of God? 3. The Reverence of GODS HOVSE. ECCLESIASTES 5. 1. Look to thy foot [or feet] when thou commest to the House of God; and be more ready to obey, then to offer the sacrifice of fools; for they know not that they doe evill.
Errata. FOlio 9. line 10. testimonies, in, r. testimonies. In. fol. 24. l. 16, 28. the Hebrew words are false printed, and misplaced. fol. 87. 2. , the words inverted, fol 88. line 8. , r. . fo. 125. line 19. the Hebrew words are inverted. line 18.  r. . fol. 130. line 14. siqui r. siquis. fol. 150. line 11.  r. . fol. 162. ult.  r.  fol. 184. in the margin the Hebrew is amisse. fol. 229. the Hebrew is transposed, and mis-printed. fo. 273. line 14. imi∣tation, r. initiation. so. 284 line 3. Act 21. r Acts 16. fol. 334. line 21. .
DISCOVRSES Mat. 6. 9. ON DIVERS TEXTS of SCRIPTURE. S. MATTHEW 6. 9. Thus therefore pray ye, Our Father, &c. IT was well hoped, after the que∣stion about the lawfulness and fitness of a set forme of Prayer had been so long debated in our Church, that the sect of those who opposed it, had been ere this well-nigh extinguished; but experience tels us the contrary; that this fancy is not onely still living, but begins, as it were, to recover and get strength afresh: In which regard, my dis∣course, at this time, will not be unseasonable, if, ta∣king my rise from these words of our Saviour, I ac∣quaint you, upon what grounds and example
this practise of the Christian Church hath been esta∣blished, and how frivolous and weak the reasons are, which some of late doe bring against it. To begin therefore; You see by the Text I have now read, that our blessed Saviour delivered a set form of prayer unto his Disciples, and in so doing hath commended the use of a set form of prayer unto his Church; Thus therefore (saith he) pray ye, Our Father which art in heaven, &c. Is not this a set form of prayer? and did not our Saviour deliver it to be used by his Disciples? They tell us, No. For Thus, say they, in this place is not thus to be understood, but for, in this manner, to this effect or sense, or after this pattern; not in these words and syllables. To this I answer; It is true, that this form of prayer is a pattern for us to make other pray∣ers by; but that this only should be the meaning of our Saviours Thus, and not the rehearsall of the words themselves, I utterly deny; and I prove it out of the eleventh Chapter of S. Luke, where the same prayer is again delivered in these words, , Whē you pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven—that is, doe it in haec Verba. For what other phrase is there to express such a meaning, if this be not? Besides, in this of S. Luke, the occasion would be considered. It came to passe (saith he) as Iesus was praying in a certain place, that when he ceased, one of his Disciples said unto him, Lord teach us to pray, as Iohn also taught his Di∣sciples. From whence it may not improbably be ga∣thered, that this was the custome of the Doctors of Is∣rael, to deliver some certain form of Prayer unto their Disciples, to use, as it were a Badge and Symbolum of
their Discipleship; at least Iohn Baptist had done so unto his Disciples; and thereupon our Saviours Di∣sciples besought him, that he also would give them in like manner some forme of his making: that they might also pray with their Masters spirit, as Iohns Di∣sciples did with theirs. For that either our Saviours, or Iohns Disciples knew not how to pray till now, were ridiculous to imagine; they being both of them Jews, who had their certaine set houres of prayer, which they constantly observed, as the third, sixt, and ninth. It was therefore a forme of prayer of their Masters ma∣king, which both Iohn is said to have given his Disci∣ples, and our Saviours Disciples besought him to give them. For the fuller understanding whereof, I must tell you something more, and the rather because it is not commonly taken notice of; and that is, That this de∣livery of the Lords prayer in S. Luke, is not the same with that related by S. Matthew, but another, at an∣other time, and upon another occasion: That of S. Matthew in that famous Sermon of Christ upon the Mount, whereof it is a part; that of S. Luke upon a spe∣ciall motion of the Disciples at a time when himselfe had done praying: That of S. Matthew in the second; that of S. Luke in the third yeare after his Baptisme: Consider the Text of both, and you shall finde it im∣possible to bring them into one and the same: whence it follows, that the Disciples, when it was first utter∣ed, understood not that their Master intended it for a forme of prayer unto them, but for a pattern or exam∣ple onely, or it may be to instruct them in speciall, in what manner to ask forgiveness of sins: For if they
had thought he had given them a forme of prayer then, they would never have asked him for one now; where∣fore our Saviour this second time utters himselfe more expresly, , When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven—Thus their inadvertency becomes our confirma∣tion; For as Ioseph said to Pharaoh, The dreame is doubled unto Pharaoh, because the thing is established by God; so may wee say here; The delivery of this pray∣er was doubled unto the Disciples, that they and we might thereby know the more certainly, that our Saviour intended and commended it for a set form of prayer unto his Church. Thus much of that set forme of prayer, which our Saviour gave unto his Disciples, as a precedent and warrant to his Church to give the like forms to her Disciples, or members; a thing which from her infancy she used to doe. But because her practice is called in question, as not warranted by Scripture, let us see what was the practice of the Church of the old Testament, then whose example and use, wee can have no better rule to follow in the New. First therefore, wee find two set forms of prayer or invocation, appointed by God himself in the Law of Moses: One, the form wherewith the Priests were to blesse the people; Num. 6. 23. On this wise, saith he, shall Aaron and his sons blesse the children of Israel, saying unto them: The Lord blesse thee and keepe thee, the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee; The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. Is not this a set forme of Prayer? For what is to blesse, but to pray over or invocate God for another?
The second, is the forme of profession and prayer to be used by him, who had paid his Tithes every third yeare, Deut. 26. 13. O Lord God, I have brought away the hallowed things out of mine house, and also have given them unto the Levite, and unto the stranger, to the Fatherlesse and unto the widow, according to all thy commandements, which thou hast commanded me: I have not transgressed thy Commandements, neither have I forgotten them. 14. I have not eaten thereof in my mourning, neither have I taken away ought thereof for any uncleane use, &c. 15. Look downe from thy holy habitation, from heaven, and blesse thy people Israel, and the Land which thou hast given us, as thou swarest to our Fathers, a Land that floweth with Milke and honey. But what need we seek thus for scattered Formes, when wee have a whole booke of them together? The Booke of Psalmes was the Jewish Liturgie, or the chiefe part of the vocall service wherewith they worshipped God in the Temple; This is evident by the Titles of the Psalms themselves, which shew them to have beene commended to the severall Quires in the same, to Asaph, to the sonnes of Korah, to Ieduthun, and almost forty of them to the Magister Symphoniae in generall. The like wee are to conceive of those which have no titles; as for example, of the 105 and 96 Psalmes, which, though they have no such Inscription in the Psalme-booke, yet wee finde 1 Chron. 16. 7. That they were delivered by David in∣to the hands of Asaph and his Brethren for formes to thanke the Lord. This a man would think were sufficient to take away all scruple in this point; especi∣ally,
when  solve, and all the reformed Chur∣ches, use to sing the same Psalmes not onely as set formes, but set in Meeter, that is after a humane com∣posure. Are not the Psalmes set formes of Confession, of Prayer, and of Praising God? And in case there had been no prayers amongst them, yet what reason could be given, why it should not bee as lawfull to pray unto God in a set forme, as to praise him in such a one? What therefore doe they say to this? Why, they tell us, that the Psalmes are not sung in the Church unto God, but so rehearsed for instruction of the people onely; namely, as the Chapters and Lessons are there read, and no otherwise. But, if either wee doe, ought, or may sing the Psalmes in the Church, with the same end and purpose that the Church of the old Testament did, (and it were absurd to say wee might not) this exception will not subsist: for what is more certaine, then that the Church of Israel used the Psalmes for Formes of praising and invocating God? What mean else those formes, Cantemus Domino, Psallite Domino, and the like so fre∣quent in them? But there are more direct and expresse testimonies: In the 1 Chron. 25. it is expresly said of Ieduthu and his soes, that their office was, to pro∣phesie with a Harpe, to give thanks and to praise the Lord. In the second of Chron. 30. 21. wee read, that the Levites and Priests praised the Lord day by day, sing∣ing with loud Instruments unto the Lord. And as ye heard even now out of 1 Chron. 16. that David, at the time when he brought up the Ark unto Jerusalem, then first delivered the 105. and 95 Psalms into the hands of A and his sonnes, to confesse or give
thanks unto the Lord. And lastly, to leave no place for farther doubt, wee read Ezra 3. 11. That the Levites the sonnes of Asaph were set with Cymbals to praise the Lord, after the ordinance of David King of Israel. And that, they sung together by course, in praising & giving thanks unto the Lord, because he is good, for his mer∣cy endureth for ever. For this reason, the foure and twenty Courses or Quires, into which the singers of the Temple were divided by King David to serve in their turnes, consisted each of them of twelve, accor∣ding to the number of the tribes of Israel; that so every Tribe might have a mouth and voyce, to praise and to give thanks unto God for him in the Temple. Thus we have seene, what warrant to pray, and call upon God in a set forme hath from the practice of the Church of God in the old Testament; And, if reason may have place, in the publike service of God, where one is the mouth of many, there is none so proper and convenient. For how can the Minister be said properly to be the mouth of the Congregati∣on in prayer unto God, when the Congregation is not first made acquainted, and privy to what he is to render unto God in their names? which in a voluntary and extemporary Prayer they are not, nor well can be. I am sure neither so properly, nor conveniently, as in a set forme, which both they and the whole Church have agreed upon, and offer unto God at the same time, though in severall places, in the self-same forme and words: And this may be a second reason; I meane from Vniformity, For how can the Church, being a mysticall Body, better testifie her unity be∣fore God, then in her uniformity in calling upon him?
especially our Saviour telling us, that if but two or three shall agree together on earth, as touching anything that they shall ask, it shall be done unto them of his Father which is in heaven; So prevailable with All∣mighty God is the power of consent in prayer. Let us now, in the last place, see what reasons they bring, who contend altogether for voluntary prayer, and would have no set formes used. First, they say, it is the ordinance of God, that the Church should be edified by the gifts of her Ministers, as well in praying as preaching. Ergo, their prayers should be extempora∣ry or voluntary; because in reading a set forme this gift cannot be shewn. To this I answer: First, that there is not, in this point, the same reason for Prayer, and for Preaching; for in prayer (I meane Publique) the Minister is the mouth of the Church unto God, and therefore it were convenient, they should know what he puts up to God, in their names; but in preaching, he is not so. Secondly, Why should not the Pastours and Ministers of the Church, edify the Church by their gift of prayer, as well in composing a set forme of prayer for her use by generall agreement, as in utter∣ing a voluntary or extemporary prayer in a particular Congregation? Thirdly, Are not the members of the Church to be edified, as well by the Spirit of the Church, as the Church or some part thereof by the Spirit of a member? But how can the Church edifie her members by her gift of prayer, otherwise then by a set form agreed upon by her consent? Fourthly, Ostentation of gifts is one thing, but edification by them another. Ostentation of the gift of prayer is
indeed best shewn in a voluntary or extemporary prayer; but the Church may be edified as well by a set forme; Yea, such a forme in the publique service of God is more edificative, then a voluntary. And that, both because the Congregation is first made ac∣quainted therewith; and secondly, because they are better secured from being ingaged in ought that might be unfit to speak unto God, either for matter or manner, or such as they would not have given their consent to, if they had been aware of it. For, now that extraordinary assistance of the Holy Ghost, which was in the Primitive and Apostolicall times, is long since ceased; And all men, to whom that office belongeth, to speake to God for others, are not at all times discreet and well advised, when they speake to him at will, and extempore, but subject to miscariage. Lastly, I answer, That the Church is to be edified by the gift of her Ministers in voluntary prayer, loco & tempore, in fit place and upon fit occasions, not in all places, and upon all occasions. And thus much to this objection. But they object secondly; that the Spirit ought to be free and unlimited, and that therefore a Book or set forme of prayer, which limits the spirit in praying, is not to be tolerated or used. To this I answer: it is false, that the acting of the Spirit in one Christan, may not be limited or regula∣ted by the Spirit of another; especially, the spirit of a particular man in the publike worship, by the spirit of the Church, whereof he is a member. For doth not the Apostle tell us, 1 Cor. 14. that even that extraor∣dinary spirit of Prophecy, usuall in his time, might be
limited by the spirit of another Prophet? Let the Pro∣phets, saith he, speak two or three, and let the other judg: If any thing be revealed to another that sitteth by, let the first hold his peace. Is not this a limiting? He gives a reason: For the spirits of the Prophets, saith he, are subject to the Prophets. Besides, are not the spirits of the people, as well limited and determined by a vo∣luntary prayer, when they joyne therein with their Minister, as they are by a set forme? True; the spirit of the Minister is then free; but theirs is not so, but tied and led by the spirit of the Minister, as much as if he used a set forme. But to elude this, they tell us, that the Question is not of limiting the spirit of the people, but of the Minister onely; For, as for the peo∣ple, no more is required of them, but to join with their Minister, and to testifie it by saying Amen; but the spirit of the Minister ought to be left free, and not to be limited. But where is this written? that the one may not be limited as well as the other. We heard the Apostle say even now, The spirit of the Prophets, is subject to the Prophets; If in prophecying, why not in praying? And what shew of reasō can be given, why the spirit of a particular Minister in the publick wor∣ship of the Church, may not, yea ought not to be limited, and regulated by the spirit of the Church representative, as well as the spirit of a whole Congre∣gation, by the spirit of a particular Minister? For eve∣ry particular Minister, is as much subordinate to the spirit of the Church representative, as the spirit of the Congregation is to his; So much for this objecti∣on. There remaineth yet a third, which may be answer∣ed
in two or three words. No set forme of prayer, say they, can serve for all occasions: What then? Yet why may it not be used for all such occasions as it serves for? if any sudden and unexpected occasion happen, for which the Church cannot provide, the spirit of her Ministers is free: Who will forbid them to supply in such a case, that by a voluntary and ar∣bitrary forme, which the Church could not provide for in a set forme? And this is what I intended to say of this argument.
THE Mat. 6. 9. Luke 11. 2. SANCTIFICATION OF GODS NAME. MATTH. 6. 9. LUKE 11. 2. Sanctificetur nomen tuum. Sanctified, or hallowed be thy Name. ALthough I make no question, but that which we so often repeat unto Almighty God in our daily prayers, is for the generall meaning thereof, by the most of us, in some compe∣tent measure understood: Yet be∣cause by a more full and distinct explication, the knowledge of some may be improved, and the medi∣tations of others occasioned to a further search: I hope I shall not doe amisse, nor be thought to have chosen a theame, either needlesse, or not so fit for this Auditory; if I shall inquire what that is we pray for, in this first Petition of the prayer our Lord hath taught us, when we desire, That Gods Name may be
sanctified: For perhaps we shall find more contained therein, then is commonly taken notice of. The words are few, and therefore shall need no o∣ther Analyse, then what their very number presents unto us, viz. Gods Name, and the sanctifying thereof; Sanctificetur Nomen tuum. I will begin first with the last in order, but first in nature, Nomen tuum, Gods Name. By which, according to the style of holy Scri∣pture, we are to understand in this place, first of all, God himself, or his sacred Deity, to wit, abstractly ex∣pressed, according to the style of eminency and digni∣ty; . Dei , The Divine Majesty; as we are wont for the King, to say His Majesty, or the Kings Majesty, and of other persons of honour and eminency, Their Highnesse, Their Honour, His Excellency, and the like; So of God His Name, and sometimes with the self∣same meaning, His Glory, as Ier. 2. 11. Hath any Nati∣on changed their Gods, which yet are no Gods? but my people have changed their Glory (i. their God) for that which is good for nought. So Psalme 106. 20. of the Calf made in the Wildernesse: They changed their Glorie into the similitude of an Oxe that eateth grasse. And S. Paul, Rom. 1. 23. They changed the Glory (i. the Majesty) of the incorruptible God into an Image made like to corruptible man, &c. Such is the notion; but much more frequent, of Gods Name. In a word, Nomen Del, in this kinde of use, is nothing else but Divinum Numen. Whence it is, that in Scripture, To call upon the Name of God, To blaspheme the Name of God, To love his Name, To sweare by his Name, To build a Temple to his Name, for his Name to dwell there: And in the New Testament, To beleeve in the Name of the Lord Iesus,
To call upon the Name of the Lord Iesus; these I say, and the like expressions, have no other meaning, then to doe these things to the Divine Majesty, to the Lord Jesus, whose is that Name above every Name, where at every knee must bow. Accordingly here, Sanctificetur Nomen tuum, Hallowed be thy Name, is as much as to say, Sanctificetur Numen tuum, Sanctified be thy Divine Majesty. Secondly, under the Name of God here to be sancti∣fied or hallowed, understand, besides the Majesty of his Godhead, that also super quod invocatum est Nomen ejus, whereupon his Name is called; or that which is called by his Name, (as we in our Bibles commonly expresse this phrase of Scripture;) that is, all whatso∣ever is Gods, or God is the Lord and owner of by a peculiar right; such as are things sacred, whether they be persons, or whether things by distinction so called, or Times, or Places, which have upon them a relation of peculiarnesse towards God. For such as these are said in Scripture, To have the Name of God called upon them, or To be called by his Name; that is, To be His. Thus we read in Scripture, of an House which had the Name of God upon it, or which was called by his Name, that is, of Gods House, (1 Kings 8. 43. Ier. 7. 10. &c.) Of a City upon which the Name of God was called or named, to wit, the Holy City, Jerusa∣lem the City of the great King, the Lord of hosts, (Ier. 25. 29. Dan. 9. 18.) Of an Ark upon which the Name of God the Lord was called (1 Chro. 13. 6. 2 Sam. 6. 2.) that is, the Lords Ark, or the Ark of his Covenant, as it is elsewhere named. Of a people upon which the Name of the Lord was called, or which
were called by his Name (Deut. 28. 10. Dan. 9. 19. and elsewhere) that is, were his peculiar and holy people; as is said in like manner, and with like mean∣ing of the Church of the New Testament; Iames 2. 7. Acts 15 17. I represent not these places of Scripture at large, because I know that every eare that is ac∣quainted with Scripture, can beare witness unto them. And for the meaning of this expression of Gods Name to be called upon a thing, or a thing to be cal∣led by his Name, that it is all one as to say it to be His, (besides the evidence of the matter wherabout it is used) appeares by the same phrase used in two other places, of the like relation of men to that which is theirs, as Gen. 48 16. Where Iacob blessing Iosephs sons saith The Angell which redeemed me from all evil, blesse the lads, and let my name be called upon them; That is, let them be mine, namely, as Reuben and Simeon are mine, as he saith a little before; for they are words of adoption. Again in the fourth of Esay, where it is said, That seven women should take hold of one man, and say, We will eat our own bread, and weare our own apparel; onely let thy Name be cal∣led upon us to take away our reproach; That is Doe thou own us, or let us be thine, that it may not be a reproach unto us, that we have no husband. The Anci∣ents were wont to set the Names of the Owners upon their houses, and other possessions; whch they called Tituli, Titles: Chrysologus Serm. 145. Sicut dominos praediorum liminibus affixi Tituli proloquuntur. S. Au∣gustine in Psal. 21. Quando potens aliquis invenerit Titulos suos, nonne jure rem sibi vendicat, & dicit, Non ponere titulos meos, nisi res mea esset? Whether this
phrase of Scripture, of Gods Name to be called or named upon a thing, hath reference unto any such custome, I cannot affirme, but surely the meaning is the same; to wit, that God is the Lord and Proprie∣tar of them. And thus ye have heard what is this Name of God we pray here to be sanctified; to wit, a twofold Name: First, His Name and Majesty which we call upon; Secondly, that also which is called by his Name: The first we may call his Personall, the other his Denominative or participated Name. Having learned what Nomen Dei importeth, and so cleared the object of what we pray for, let us next en∣quire, What that is, which the word Sanctifie, or To be sanctified, implieth, being that which our vote witnesseth, ought to be done thereunto. And this I intended for the main and principall Argument of my present Discourse, being a matter not so well tra∣ced as the former, and perhaps not altogether freed of obscurity and difficulty to be understood. For our more certain and assured discovery whereof, we will first examine the abstract thereof, Sanctity, & find out the notion of it; namely, what is the ratio formalis, the formall state, or nature of that which the Scrip∣ture entitleth in the generall,  or , that is, Holy; not regarding what notion the Greeks or Latines had respect to in their Languages; but what the holy Scripture properly intendeth under that name: For because to be Sanctified can have but these two senses, either To be made holy, or To be used and done unto according to, or as becometh its Holinesse; and that the Majesty of God, which is the prime object of this Act, is not capable of the first sense (viz. to
be made holy,) but of the second onely: if we there∣fore once rightly understand what is the condition and property of Sanctity, according to the notion of Scripture, we shall not be long ignorant, what it is either for the Name or Majesty of God, or that which is called by his Name to be hallowed or Sanctifi∣ed, namely, to be done unto according to their Holi∣nesse. Now R. David Kimchi upon the 56 of Esay, ver. 2 [Blessed is the man that keepeth the Sabbath from polluting it] hath these words, The sanctification of the Sabbath (saith he)  to separate or distinguish it from other dayes: because every word of Sanctity  imports a thing separated or divided from other things, by way of preeminence or excellency. Thus the Rabbi. And that this which he saith is true, namely, that sanctity consists in discretion and distinction from o∣ther things, by way of exaltation and preeminence, may appeare by these instances and examples, which I shall now produce out of Scripture. And first from that Law touching the holy oyle, Exod. 30. 31. where, after the composition thereof described; This (saith the Lord) shall be an holy anointing oyl unto me. what is that? it follows, Vp∣on mans flesh shal it not be poured, neither shal ye make any other like it, after the composition thereof. It is Holy, therefore it shall be Holy unto you: that is, As this Oyle is Holy and discrete from other Oyles, so shall it accordingly by you be used with difference and discrimination: For the Text goes on; Whoso∣ever compoundeth any like it, or putteth any of it
upon a stranger, (that is, upon any besides those it was appropriated to) shall be cut off from his people. What else means all this, but that this Oyle should be a singular or peculiar Oyle, set apart and distingui∣shed from all other Oyles, both in its composition and use, and that to be such, was to be Holy or Sa∣cred? The like we shall finde in the 35. verse of the same Chapter, concerning the Holy perfume there descri∣bed: Thou shalt make it, saith he, (to wit, with the the ingredients he afore mentioned) a perfume, a confection, after the art of the Apothecary, tempered together, pure and Holy. verse 37. You shall not make to your selves (i. not for your own use) according to the composition thereof. It shall be unto you holy for the Lord. ver. 38. Whosoever shall make the like unto it, to smell thereto, shall be cut off from his people. But above all others this notion of sanctity or ho∣linesse is most expressely intimated and taught us in those divine periphrases or circumlocutions, which the Lord himself more then once makes of an Holy People, as Lev. 20. 24. speaking on this manner; I am the Lord your God which have separated you from other people.—And ye shall be Holy unto me: for I the Lord am Holy, and have severed you from other people, that ye should be mine. Mark here, that to separate is to make Holy, and that to be Holy is to be separated from others of the same rank. Again, Deut. 26. 18, 19. The Lord hath avouched thee (to wit, Israel) this day to be his peculiar (or appropriate) people, as he hath promised thee.—And to make thee high above all Nations, which he hath made, in praise, in name, and in honour;
namely, that thou maist be an Holy people unto the Lord thy God, as he hath spoken. What is this but Rabbi Kimchi's definition almost verbatim? That to bee sacred or Holy is to be separated or set apart from other things by way of excellence; or which is all one, To be set in some state of singularity, or appropria∣tednesse, whereby it is advanced above the common condition of things of the same order. He that will, may compare also two other passages, Deut. 7. 6. & 14. 2. parallels to those I have produced; where to be an holy, and to be a peculiar people, are made one and the same, or the one expounded by the other. It may be yet further confirmed by comparing Deut. 19. 2, 7. with Ioshuah 20. 7. For whereas in the former of these places it is said, concerning the Cities of refuge: Thou shalt separate, , three Cities for thee, in the midst of thee: In Ioshuah, where this com∣mandement is put in execution, we read in stead of separated, , they sanctified three Cities, Kedesh, Shechem, and Hebron. Where that the one is equiva∣lent to the other, the Septuagint so well understood, that even in this place of Ioshuah, for , which is, Sanctificarunt, they rendred By which they are wont o∣therwise to render the verb, . or . , separarunt, or discreverunt. The same notion of Holinesse may be gathered al∣so from the Antithesis, or opposite thereunto, to wit, unholy, or unclean, which the Scripture is wont to ex∣presse by the name of Common. So S. Peter in his Vi∣sion, Acts 10. Lord, saith he, I have never eaten any thing that is common or unclean, . For know, because that which is Holy ought to be kept pure and clean, or rather, be∣cause
cleannesse imports a separation from filth, as Holinesse doth from common, thence clean and holy, & so also unholy and unclean are used the one for the other: whence 1 Cor. 7. 14. Unclean and Holy are opposed. But to goe on; The voice from heaven an∣swers S. Peter in the same language: What God hath cleansed (that is, sanctified) , account not thou common. So in 1 Mac. Chap. 1.  are unclean beasts, and , to eate unclean things. The like Antithesis of holy and common is to bee found Heb. 10. 29. where the Apostle saith of a Belee∣ver or Christian that lives an ungodly and wicked life; He hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and counted the bloud of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, , as a common thing; that is, he hath profaned it. Our translation rendreth it an unholy thing, the opposition thereof to sanctified, witnessing that to be the meaning. Now then, if to be unholy or unclean be to be common, surely it follows by the Law of opposition, that to be holy, is to be separated from the common, and to be singular and appropri∣ate in some manner or other. Lastly, it is to be observed, that whereas in the Law given Numbers 6. concerning the Vow of Nazarisme (which signifies separation, of Nazar, to separate) the words, To separate, and separation come very often in As the 70. once or twice in this place, and else∣where sometimes render the same word. the Text; the vulgar Latine renders for them above ten times, Consecrare, consecratio, sanctificare, and san∣ctificatio: which shews, that this notion, namely, that Holinesse consists in a state of separation, is no new conceit, but such as Antiquity took notice of.
The nature of Holinesse, wherein it consisteth, ac∣cording to the idiome of Scripture being thus found out and cleared, that which was aimed at in this inqui∣sition, to wit, what the same meaneth by To sanctifie, and to be sanctified, will be no hard matter to resolve. For sanctity, and to sanctifie being Conjugates, or Denominatives, as Logicians call them, the one ope∣neth the way to the knowledge of the other. If there∣fore Sanctity or Holinesse be a condition of discreti∣on and distinction from other things, as we have shewed it to be; then To sanctifie must either be to put a thing into that state, which we call, To consecrate; or if it be such already, To use, and doe unto it, as be∣comes the sanctity thereof; that is Habere cum discri∣ne, to put a difference between it and other things by way of excellency, or in a dignifying wise, by appro∣priating and severing it in the use thereof from things of ordinary and common rank: or, which is all one, To use it singularly, appropriately, and in a word, un∣commonly. For not to use it so, it being such, were to abuse it; which the Scripture cals to prophane; to sanctifie, and to prophane being opposites. Whence Ezek. 22. 26. To prophane, is expounded by not putting a difference: The Priests (saith the Lord) have vio∣lated my Law, and have prophaned my holy things, they have put no difference between the holy and pro∣phane. This to be to sanctifie, all the places almost which I have alledged out of the Law, for the notion and nature of sanctity, doe apparently proclaim: for the one is so nearly linked to the other, that they could not well be separated. Thus was Israel, Gods holy
people, to sanctifie themselves by a discriminative manner of living, or usance, because the Lord their God had discriminated or separated them from other people. So Lev. 20. 24, 25, &c. I am the Lord your God, which have separated you from other people. Ye shall therefore put difference between clean beasts and unclean, and between unclean fowls, and clean: and ye shall not make your souls abominable by beast or by fowl, or by any manner of living thing that creepeth on the ground, which I have separated from you as unclean. But ye shall be holy unto me; for I the Lord am holy, and have severed you from other people, that ye should be mine. After the same manner were the Holy Ointment, and Holy Perfume or Incense to be sanctified by a discrimi∣native, singular, appropriate usance of them, and not to be used as other Ointments and Perfumes: to wit, the one not to be poured upon mans flesh, nor the other used for mans smelling unto; yea none of the like composition to the one or the other, to be made for any prophane or common use, upon pain of his being cut off from his people, who should dare to doe it. That is, not the particular or Individuum onely, but even the whole kinde of that composition was to be accounted sacred; otherwise this caution needed not, since for the Individuall, all sacred things ought to be appropriate and incommunicable in their use. And to this notion it is not altogether improbable, but the Apostle may allude, 1 Cor. 11. 29. when he ex∣presseth the prophanation of the Holy Supper in com∣ming to it, and using it as a common banquet, by , by not differencing the Lords
body; i. not sanctifying it, or using it, as became so holy a thing. HITHERTO I have considered the words of my Text apart: but now let us put them again toge∣ther, and see, how the Name of God ought to bee Sanctified, in the manner now specified, both in it self, and in the things which it is called upon; as in the beginning I distinguished. For the better under∣standing of which, we are to take notice of a twofold Holinesse; One originall, absolute and essentiall in God; the other derived or relative in the things which are His, properly (according to the use of the Latine) called Sacr, Sacred things. Both these have their severall and distinct Sanctifications belonging unto them: for whatsoever is Holy, ought to be san∣ctified, according to the condition and proportion of the Holinesse it hath. To speak of them distinctly; The first, originall or absolute Holinesse is nothing else, but the incom∣municable eminency of the divine Majesty, exalted above all, and divided from all other , or E∣minences whatsoever. For that which a man takes to be, and makes account of, as his God, (whether it be such indeed, or by him fancied onely) he ascribes un∣to it, in so doing, a condition of eminency, above, and distinct from all other eminencies whatsoever, that is of Holinesse. Hence it comes, that we find the LORD the God of Israel, and the onely true God, in Scripture so often styled Sanctus Israelis, The Holy One of Israel, that is, Israels most eminent and incom∣municable one, or which is all one, His God: as name∣ly Psal. 89. 18. The Lord is our defence, the HOLY ONE
of Israel is our King. Esay 17. 7. At that day shall a man look unto his MAKER, and his eyes shall have re∣spect to the HOLY ONE of srael. Habak. 1. 12. Art not thou from everlasting, O LORD my God, mine HOLY ONE? Agreeably whereunto the Lord is said also now and then, To swear by his HOLINESS, that is, by himself: as in the Psalm before alledged v. 35. Once have I sworn by my HOLINESS, that I will not lie unto David, &c. Amos 4. 2. The Lord God hath sworn by his HOLINESS, that lo, the days shall come upon you that he will take you away with ooks, &c. Accor∣ding to this sense I suppose also that of Amos 8. 7. is to be understood: The LORD hath sworn by the Excellen∣cy See Esy 24. 14. Micah 4. 3. of Iacob, (that is, Jacobs most eminent and incom∣municable One, or by Iacobs HOLY ONE) Surely I will never forget any of their works, &c. For indeed the Gods of the Nations were not properly and truly Holy, because but partially and respectively onely; Forasmuchas the Divine eminency, which they were supposed to have, was, even in the opinion of those who worshipped them, common to others with them, and so not discriminated from, nor exalted above all. But the God of Israel was simply and absolutely such, both in himself and to them ward who worshipped him, as who might acknowledge no other; and there∣fore , and by way of distinction from all other Gods called Sanctus Israelis, The Holy One of Is∣rael; i. That sole, absolute, and onely incommunica∣ble One, or  (as the Author of the Book of Wisdome cals him chap. 14. v. 21.) that God exalted above all, and divided from all, without pa∣reil, there being no other such besides him. There is
none Holy as the Lord (saith Hannah) for there is none besides thee, [The Septuagint, none Holy besides thee] neither is there any ROC like our God. Wherefore it 1. Sm. 2. 2 is to be observed, that although the Scripture every where vouchsafes the Gentiles Daemons the name of Gods, yet it never, I think, cals them Holy Ones, as indeed they were not. Thus you see that as Holinesse in generall imports a state of eminency and separation, so this of God, as I have described it, disagrees not from that generall notion, when I affirm it to consist in a state of peerlesse or incommunicable Majesty: for that which is such, includes both the one and the other. But would you understand it yet better? Ap∣ply it then to his attributes whereby he is known unto us, and know that The Lord is Holy, is as much to say. He is a Majesty of peerlesse Power, of peerlesse Wis∣dome, of peerlesse Goodnesse, and so of the rest. Such a one is our God, and such is his Holinesse. Now then to Sanctifie this peerlesse Name or Ma∣jesty of his, must be by doing unto him according to that which his Holinesse challengeth in respect of the double importance thereof: namely, To serve and glorifie him; because of his eminency; and to doe it with a singular, separate and incommunicated wor∣ship, because He is Holy. Not to doe the former is Ir∣religion and Atheisme, as not to acknowledge God to be the chief and Soveraign eminency: not to observe the second is Idolatry. For as the Lord our God is a singular and peerlesse Majesty, distinguished from, and exalted above all things and eminencies else whatsoe∣ver; so must his worship be singular, incommunica∣ble and proper to him alone. Otherwise (saith Ioshuah
to the people) You cannot serve the Lord. Why? For (saith he) He is an Holy God: he is a jealous God (that can endure no corrivall,) he will not forgive Iosh. 24. 19 your transgressions nor your sins, if ye forsake the Lord and serve strange gods, &c. Whence in Scripture, those who communicate the worship given unto him with any besides him, or to∣gether with him, by way of Object, that is, whether immediately, or but mediately, are deemed to deny his incomparable Sanctity, and therefore said to pro∣phane his Holy Name: See Ezek. 20. 39. 43. 7, 8. In a word, all that whole immediate Duty and ser∣vice, which we owe unto God, whether inward or outward, contained under the name of Divine wor∣ship, (when either we confesse, praise, pray unto; call upon or swear by his Name) yea all the worship both of men and Angels, is nothing else but to acknow∣ledge in thought, word, and work this peerlesse pre∣heminence of his power, of his wisdome, of his good∣nesse and other attributes, that is, His Holinesse; by ascribing and giving unto him that which we give and ascribe to none besides him, that is, To sanctifie his most Holy Name: This is that the Holy Ghost would teach us, when describing how the Seraphims worship and glorifie God, sa. 6. he brings them in crying one unto another Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord God of hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory; that is, San∣ctifying him. From whence is derived that which we repeat every day in the Hymne: To thee all Angels cry aloud, the heavens and all the powers therein; To thee Cherubim and Sraphim continually doe cry. Ho ly, Holy, Holy Lord God of Sabaoth; Heaven and
earth are full of the Majesty of thy Glory. And because the pattern of Gods holy worship is not to be taken from earth, but from heaven; the same Spirit therefore in the Apocalypse expresseth the wor∣ship of God in the new Testament with the same form of hallowing or holying his Name which the heavenly Hoste useth. For so the 4. Animalia representing the Apoc. 4. Catholique Church of Christ in the four quarters of the world, are said when they give glory, honour and thanks to him that sitteth upon the throne and liveth for ever and ever, to doe it by singing day and night this Trisagium; Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come: that is, the summe of all that they did was but to agnize his Sanctity or Holinesse, or which is all one, to Sanctifie his holy Name. When therefore the same 4. Animalia are af∣terwards brought in chanting; Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, riches, wisdome, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing And again; Blessing, honour, glory and power be unto him that sitteth upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever: all is to bee understood, as comprehended within this generall Doxologie, as being but an exemplificati∣on thereof; and therefore the Elogies or blazons As Gen. 31. 42, 43. Psal. 76. 11. So the Chaldee uses their , and more then once enders I A H the name of God by it mentioned therein to be taken, according to the style of Holinesse, in an exclusive sense, of such preroga∣tives as are peculiar to God alone. And according to this notion of sanctifying Gods name which I contend for, would the Lord have his Name Sanctified Esa. 8. 13. when he saith; Fear ye not their Fear; (that is, the Idolaters  or Gods; for so Fear here signifies, to wit, the thing
feared) neither dread ye it: But Sanctifie the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your Fear, and let him be your Dread; that is, your God. Again chap. 29. 23. They shall sanctifie my Name, (saith he) even Sanctifie the holy One of Iacob, and shall fear the God of Israel. The latter words shew the meaning of the former. The like we have in the first Epist. of S. Peter ch. 3. v. 15.  OBON  (i. Gentilium) , &c. Fear ye not their Fear, nor be in dread thereof, that is, Fear not nor dread ye the gods of the Gentiles which persecute you) but sanctifie the Lord God in your hearts, that is, Fear and worship him with your whole hearts. For that this passage (howsoever we are wont to expound it) ought to be construed in the same sense with that of Esay 8. before alledged, and the words to be rendred sutably; I take it to bee apparent for this reason, because they are verbatim ta∣ken from thence, as he that shall compare the Greek words of S. Peter with the Septuagint in that place of Esay, will be forced to confesse. Besides this evident and expresse use of the word Sanctifie, in the notion of religious and holy worship and fear of the Divine Majesty; there is yet another expression sometimes used in holy Scripture, which implieth the self-same thing: that namely, to worship God with that which wee call holy and divine wor∣ship, is all one with to agnize his holiness, or to sancti∣fie his Name. Those speeches I mean, wherein we are exhorted to worship the Lord, because he is Holy. As Psal. 99. 5. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his foot-stoole, for he is holy. Again, in the end of the Psalm: Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at his holy
hill, for the Lord our God is holy. The same meaning is yet more emphatically expressed by those that sing the song of victory over the Beast, Apoc. 15. Great (say they) and marvellous are thy works, Lord God Al∣mighty, just and true are thy ways, thou King of Nations. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorifie thy Name?  So Edi∣tio Complu. Andreas, & exempl. 15. , (for that I beleeve is the true rea∣ding, not ) for thou onely art Holy; therefore all the Nations shall come and worship before thee: i. they shall relinquish their Idols and plurality of Gods, and worship thee as God onely. For this was the Doctrine both of Moses in the Old Testament, and of Christ Jesus the Lamb of God in the New; That one God onely, that made the heaven and the earth, was to be acknowledged and worshipped, and with an incom∣municable worship: In respect whereof, as I take it, these Victors are there said to sing the Song of Moses, & the Lamb; that is, a gratulatory Song of the worship of one God; After that his , ra. Ordinances were made ma∣nifest. For otherwise the Ditty is borrowed from the 86. Psalm, the 8, 9, & 10. verses, where wee reade, Among the gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord, neither are there any works like unto thy works. All Nations whom thou hast made shall come and worship before thee, O Lord, and shall glorifie thy Name. For thou art great, and dost wondrous works: Thou art God alone; that is, Thou onely art Holy. Compare Ier. 10. ver. 6, 7. I have one thing more to adde, before I finish this part of my Discourse, lest I might leave unsatisfied that which may perhaps seem to some to weaken this my explication of the sanctification of Gods Name.
For the word, to sanctifie, or be sanctified, is sometimes used of God in a more generall sense then that I have hitherto specified, namely, as signifying any way to be glorified, or to glorifie; as when he saith, He will bee sanctified in the destruction of his enemies, or in the deliverance of his people, and that before the Hea∣then, and the like; that is, he would purchase him glory, or be glorified thereby. I answer, it is true, that to be sanctified is in these passages, to be glorified; but yet always to be glorified as God, and not otherwise. Namely, when God by the works of his power, of his mercy, or justice extorts from men the confession of his great and holy Godhead; he is then said to san∣ctifie, or make himself to be sanctified amongst them; that is, to be glorified and honoured by their convi∣ction and acknowledgement of his power and God∣head. For although men may be also said to glorifie, or purchase honour unto themselves, when by their noble acts they make their abilities and worth known unto the world: yet, for such respect, to be said to be sanctified, is peculiar unto him alone, whose Glory is his Holinesse; i. unto God. THUS we have learned how the Name or Majesty of God is to be sanctified personally, or in it self; which is the chiefest thing we pray for, and ought so to be in our endeavour; namely, to worship and glo∣rifie him incommunicably, according to his most emi∣nent & unparalleld Holiness: and so, O Lord, Hallowed be thy Name. But there is another sanctification or hal∣lowing of Gods Name yet behind, which must be joy∣ned therewith; which is, To sanctifie him also in the things which have his Name upon them; that is, are
separate and dedicate to his service, or in a word, which are His, namely, by a peculiar relation. For otherwise it is true: The whole earth is the Lords, and the fulnesse thereof, the World and those that dwell there∣in. But there are some things his, not as other things are, and so as they are no longer ours, such as accor∣ding to the style of Scripture (as I have already no∣ted) are said, to be called by his Name, or to have his Name called upon them. These are things sacred. There∣fore I told you before of a twofold sanctity or Holi∣nesse: The one originall, absolute, and essentiall in God: the other derived, or relative in that which is set apart to be in a peculiar and appropriate manner His. For whatsoever belongeth unto him in this man∣ner, is divided from other things with preeminence, whether they be things or persons which are so sepa∣rated. For in such separation we shewed the nature of sanctity in generall to consist. Now as the Divine Ma∣jesty it self is separate and holy, so know, it is a part of that honour we owe unto his most Sacred Name, that the things whereby, and wherewith he is served, should not be promiscuous and common, but appro∣priate and set apart to that sacred end. It is an honour which in some degree of resemblance we afford unto Kings, Princes, and other persons of dignity, (of in∣finite lesse eminency then God is) to interdict the use of that to others, which they are wont to use; some∣times the whole kinde, sometimes the individuall onely. As we know in former times, to wear purple, to subscribe with the Ink called Encaustum, of a pur∣ple colour, and other the like, which the diligent may finde, were appropriate to the use of Kings and Em∣perours
onely. In the Book of the Kings, we reade of the Kings Mule, so appropriate to his use, as to ride upon him was to be made King, 1 Kings 1. 33, 34. In the Book of Esther, Chap. 6. v. 8. of the Horse that King Ahasuerus used to ride upon, put in the same rank with the Crown and royall apparell, which none but the King might weare. And of individuall Uten∣sils thus appropriated, and as it were dedicated to the alone use of persons of eminency, our own times want not examples. Whence naturall instinct may seem to prompt unto us, that such appropriation is a testi∣mony of honour and respect. Sure I am, that Al∣mighty God hath revealed it to be a part of that ho∣nour we owe unto him. Thus all the Utensils of the Tabernacle and Temple were sacred and set apart to that use; and not the Utensils of the Altar onely, but even the instruments of musick, which David ordai∣ned to praise the Lord with in the Temple, were not common, but consecrated unto God for that end, whence they are called, 1 Chron. 16. 42.  Instrumenta musica Dei, The musicall instru∣ments of God; that is, sacred ones: And 2 Chron. 7. 6. , The musicall Instruments of the LORD. Agreeably whereunto those who sung the fore-alled∣ged song of victory over the Beast, are said to have had in their hands, , The harps of God, that is, not prophane or common, but sacred Harps, Apoc. 15. the Harps of the Temple, for there they sung this their Antheme, standing upon the great Laver or Sea of glasse which was therein. Nay, our blessed Saviour, Mark 11. would not suf∣fer a profane or common vessell to be so much as car∣ried
through his Fathers House, accounting it as great a profanation, as to buy and sell there. And yet was not this abuse (which is a thing well to be marked) within those Septs of the Temple, which the Jew accounted sacred, but in the outmost. Court called Atrium gentium & immandorum, the place in which together with such as were unclean, the Gentiles, and uncircumcised were admitted to pray; as that of the Prophet cited by our Saviour, rightly rendred, inti∣mates, My house shall be called a house of prayer, to (or for) ALL NATIONS. Consider Esay 56. 6, 7. This Court therefore the Jews made no other account of, then as of a prophane place; but our Saviour proved by Scripture, that this Gentiles Oratory was also part of his Fathers house, and accordingly not to be pro∣phaned with common use. Lastly, there was never any age of the Christian Church (till of late) wherein it was not commonly beleeved, that God was to bee honoured by such appropriation or consecration as we speak of; that is, that Gods Name was in this man∣ner to be sanctified. But are there any (will you say) now that deny it? Yes, there are some in our age so far carried away into a contrary extreme to that they flie from, that they hold that no oblation or consecra∣tion of things unto God, by the devotion of men, in the New Testament, whether of Utensils, goods, times, or places, ought to be esteemed lawfull; but that all distinction between sacred and prophane in externall things, by vertue of such consecration (ex∣cepting only the Sacraments) is flat superstition: Yet to him that seriously considers it, it cannot chuse, me thinks, but seem strange and absurd to affirm, (as this
assertion doth) that men now in the time of the Go∣spel, are exempted and freed from agnizing God to be Lord of the creature, by giving some part thereof unto him; then which no part of Divine Worship is more naturall, and which hath been used by mankinde ever since the beginning of the world. Yea, in the state of Paradise, among all the trees in the Garden, which God gave man freely to enjoy, one tree was Noli me tangere, and reserved to God as holy, in token he was Lord of the Garden. So that the first sin of Mankinde, for the species of the fact, was Sacriledge, in prophaning that which God had made holy. They say, It is true, that in the Old Testament, this way of honouring and acknowledging God was warranted by the Divine Law: but in the New wee finde no precept given concerning it nor confirmati∣on of that which was before. Now God is not to bee worshipped with any worship, but what he hath him∣self prescribed in his Word. I answer, What though there be no particular prcept in the New Testament for this, no more then for divers other duties, which a Christian is bound to; yet if a generall warrant be, the particular needs not. But our Saviour saith in his Gospel, in that Euangelicall Sermon hee preached upon the Mount, That hee came not to dissolve the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill or perfect them. Think not (saith he) that I am come to dis∣solve the Law and the Prophets [that is, to take away the obligation of that rule of the duty of man to God and his neighbour, given first by Moses in the Law, and afterwards repeated and incul∣cated by the Prophets; for so Prophets are here to
be Accor∣ding as in that Mat. 2. 40. On these two Commande∣ments [viz To love God above all, & our neighbour as our selves] hang all the Law & the Pro∣phets; and in that Luk. 16. 29 They have Moses and the Pro∣phets. understood, and not of predictions] ▪ but to fulfill them, that is, to supply, accomplish, or perfect those rules and doctrines of just and unjust contained in them, by a more ample interpretation, and other improvement befitting the state of the Go∣spel. For surely, this must be the meaning of this speech of our Saviour, if we be more willing (as we should) to take a sense from Scripture, then to bring one to it. Doth not the whole context following evince it? Indeed the Law, that is, the Legall Cove∣nant, or Covenant of works (as Law is oft taken in the New Testament) together with all the rites de∣pending thereon, is dissolved by the comming of Christ; and a better Covenant with new rites establi∣shed in stead thereof: But the Law, that is, the Do∣ctrine and Rule of life given by God contradistinct from those ordinances, which were onely appendages of that Covenant, (though these were also in some sense perfected by bringing the truth and substance, in stead of the figure and shadow thereof) is not disan∣nulled, but confirmed and perfected by him, in such manner as became the condition of the Covenant of the Gospel. For that this confirmation is not to bee restrained to the Decalogue onely, is manifest; be∣cause our Savior in the following words, insists upon o∣ther precepts besides it. If it be said, they are reducible thereto; this will not serve the turn, for so are all the rest of Gods Commandements. Unlesse therefore it can be shewn, that to honour God by an oblation of his creature, is no part of the Law here confirmed by our Saviour: Let no man be so daringly bold, as to exempt himself and others from the obligation there∣of;
unlesse he means to be one of them of whom our Saviour speaks immediately, saying, Whosoever therefore shall break one of the least of these Comman∣dements, and shall teach men so to do, (mark it) he shall be called (i. he shall be) the least in the Kingdome of heaven. The word is , i. loose, or dis-binde, as he doth, both that abrogates, and that observes it not; much more, he that affirmeth it unlawfull to be observed. Nay how dare we disbind or loose our selves from the tie of that way of agnizing and honouring God, which the Christian Church from her first begin∣nings durst not doe? Irenaeus, witnesse of that age which next succeeded the Apostles, is plain. Lib. 4. c. 34 Offerre oportet Deo (saith he) primitias creaturae ejus; sicut & Moses ait, Non apparebis vacuus ante conspe∣ctum Domini Dei tui.—Et non genus oblationum reprobatum est: oblationes enim & illic, (sc. in V. T.) oblationes autem & hic; sacrificia in populo, sacrificia & in Ecclesia: sed species immutata est tantum; quip∣pe cum jam non à servis, sed à liberis offeratur. Vnus enim & idem Dominus; proprium autem character servilis oblationis, & proprium liberorum, uti & per oblationes ostendatur indicium libertatis.—It behoveth us (saith he) to offer unto God a present of his creature; as also Moses saith, Thou shalt not ap∣pear before the Lord thy God empty.—For offe∣rings in the generall are not reprobated: there were offerings there, (viz. in the Old Test.) there are also offerings here in the Church: but the specification on∣ly is changed; For asmuch as offerings now are not made by bond, but free men. For there is one and the
same Lord still; but there is a proper character of a bond or servile offering, and a proper character of free∣mens; that so even the Offerings may shew forth the tokens of freedome.—Now where in Scripture he beleeved this doctrine and practise to be grounded, he lets us know in the XXVII. chap. of the same Book: Et quia Dominus naturalia legis, per quae ho∣mo justificatur, (quae etiam ante legisdationem custo∣diebant, qui fide justificabantur, & placebant Deo) non dissolvit, sed extendit, sed & implevit, ex sermo∣nibus ejus ostenditur. i. That our Lord dissolved not, but enlarged and perfected the naturall precepts of the Law, whereby a man is just, which also before the Law was given they observed, who were justified by faith and pleased God, is evident by his words. Then hee cites some of the passages of that his Sermon upon the Mount Mat. V. 20. &c. And a little after addes: Necesse fuit auferre quidem vincula servitutis, quibus jam homo assueverat, & sine vinculis sequi Deum, su∣perextendi verò decreta libertatis, & augeri subjectio∣nem quae est ad Regem, ut non retrorsus quis renitens indignus appareat ei qui se liberavit.—Et pro∣pter hoc Dominus, pro eo quod est, Non moechaberis, nec concupiscere praecepit; & pro eo quod est, Non occi∣des, neque irasci quidem; & pro eo quod est Decimare, omnia quae sunt pauperibus dividere. i. It was needful, that those bonds of servitude, which man had before been inured to, should be taken off, that so he might without Gives follow God: but that the laws and ordi∣nances of freedome should be extended, and his subje∣ction to the King encreased, lest that drawing back∣ward he might appear unworthy of him that freed
him.—And for this reason, our Lord in stead of, Thou shalt not commit adultery, commands not so much as to lust: in stead of, Thou shalt not kill, not so much as to be angry: in stead of to Tith, to distribute all we have to the poore, &c. All which saith he, in the same place, are not solventis legem, sed adimplentis, & ex∣tendentis & dilatantis, not of one that dissolves the Law, but fulfils, extends and enlarges it: alluding still to that in our Saviours Sermon upon the Mount. Besides, those who are acquainted with Antiquity can tell, that the Primitive Christians understood the holy Eucharist, to be, A commemoration of the sa∣crifice of Christs death upon the crosse, in an oblation of bread and wine. Tis witnessed by the Fathers of those first ages generally. Whereupon the same Ire∣naeus also affirmeth, That our Saviour by the institu∣tion of the Eucharist had confirmed oblations in the new Testament. Namely, to thanksgive or blesse a thing in way to a sacred use, he took to be an offering of it unto God. And was not Davids Benediction and thanksgiving at the preparation for the Temple an Offertory? Where note well that as he, upon that occasion, blessed the Lord, saying: Thine, O LORD, is the greatnesse, the power and the glory—all that is in heaven and earth is thine, thine is the Kingdome—Both riches and honour come of thee—Ergo, because all things come of thee, of thine own have we given thee. So doe Christs redeemed in their Euangelicall Song, Ap. 5. ascribe no lesse unto him, saying, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdome, and strength, and honour, and glory, and g. Yea, the 24. Elders, which are the Christian
Presbytery, expressing (ch. 4. ult.) the very argument and summe of that Hymnology which the Primitive Church used at the offering of bread and wine for the Eucharist, worship God, saying: Thou art worthy, O Lord▪ to receive glory, and honour, and power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created. TAKING therefore for granted, that which the practise of the Church of God in all ages; yea, I think, I may say the consent of mankinde from the beginning of the world, beareth witnesse to; that among those duties of the Sanctification of Gods Name, wherewith his Divine Majesty is immediately and personally glorified (of which I have before spo∣ken) this is one, and a principall one; to agnize and confesse his peerlesse Soveraignty and dominion over the creature, by yeelding him some part thereof to∣ward his worship and service, of which we renounce the propriety our selves; and that accordingly there are both things and persons now in the Gospel (as well as were before the Law was given) in this man∣ner lawfully and acceptably set apart and separated, by the devotion of men, unto the Divine Majesty, and consequently relatively Holy (which is nothing else, but to be Gods by a peculiar right:) I say, that these are likewise to be done unto according to their degree of sanctity, in honour of him, whose they are: Not to be worshipped with divine worship, or the worship which we give unto God, communicated to them, (farre be it from us, to deferre to any creature the ho∣nour due unto the Divine Majesty, either together with him, or without him;) but yet Habenda cum dis∣crimine,
To be regarded with a worthy and discrimi∣native usance, that is, used with a select, and differing respect from other things: as namely, if Places, not as other places; if Times, not as other times; if Things by way of distinction so called, not as other things; if Persons set apart unto the service and worship of God, neither to be used by others, nor they to carry themselves in their fashion of life, as other persons, (for that which in other things sacred is their use; in persons sacred is their conversation, demeanour or carriage of themselves) but all to be sanctified with a select, appropriate, or uncommon usage; that as they are Gods by peculiar relation, and have his Name called upon them, so to be separate, as far as they are capable, from common use, and imployed as instru∣ments and circumstances of his worship and service: which is the highest and most singular honour that any creature is capable of. Nay, (as I have said be∣fore) even this is to the honour of God, that as him∣self is that singular, incommunicable, and absolutely Holy One, and his service and worship therefore in∣communicable: so should that also which hath his Name thereon, or is consecrated to his service, be in some proportion incommunicably used, and not pro∣miscuously and commonly as other things are. They are the words of Maymonides the Jew, but such as will not misbecome a Christian to make use of, con∣cerning that Law, Levit. V. 15. If a soule commit a trespasse; and sin through ignorance in the holy things of the LORD: then he shall bring unto the Lord for his trespasse, a Ram, &c. Behold, saith hee, how great weight there is in the Law, touching sacrilegious
transgression And what though they be wood, and stone, and dust and ashes? when the Name of the Lord of all the world is called upon things, they are sanctifi∣ed (i. made holy.) And who so useth them to common use, he transgresseth therein; and though he doe it through ignorance, he must needs bring his atonement. Yea, it is a thing worthy to be taken speciall notice of, that, that so presumptuous, and most dreadfully vindicated sin of Korah, Dathan, Abiram, and their company, in offering incense unto the Lord being not called thereunto, did not discharge their Censers of this discriminative respect due unto things Sacred. For thus the Lord said unto Moses, after that fire from heaven had consumed them for their impiety: Speak unto Eleazar the Son of Aaron the Priest, that he take up the Censers out of the burning, and scatter thou the fire yonder, for they are hallowed: The Censers of these Sinners against their own souls, let them make of them broad plates for a covering of the Altar: for they offered them before the Lord, therefore they are hallowed, or holy. Num. 16. 37, 38. Now that by this discriminative usance or sanctifi∣cation of things sacred, the Name of God is honou∣red and sanctified, according to the tenour of our pe∣tition; is apparent, not onely from reason, which tels us that the honour and respect had unto ought that belongs unto another, because it is his, redounds unto the owner and Master; but from Scripture, which tels us, that by the contrary use of them, his name is prophaned. Hear himself, Lev. XXII. 2. Speak unto Aaron, (saith he) and his Sons; that they separate themselves from the Holy things of the children of Is∣rael,
and that they prophane not my Holy Name in the things which they hallow unto me. Also in the Chap∣ter next before, v. 6. The Priest that should not dis∣criminate himself according to those singular obser∣vations, or differing rules there prescribed, is said, To prophane the Name of his God. Again, Ezek. XXII. 26. When the Priests prophaned Gods holy things, by putting no difference between the Holy and Prophane: I (saith the Lord) am prophaned amongst them. Likewise Chap. XLIII. ver. 7. together with other abominations there mentioned, the Lord saith, that his Holy Name had been polluted, or pro∣phaned, by the carkasses of their Kings, that is, of Ma∣nasse and Amon buried in the Kings Garden hard by the walls of the Temple: for so by the Hebrews, and others that place is understood. See 2 Kings XXI. ver. 18, 26. by the pollution of the Temple, the Lord esteemed his own Name prophaned. Take in also if you will, that of Malachi Cha. 1. where the Lord says of those, who despised and dishonoured his Table, or Altar by offering thereon for sacrifice, the lame, the blinde, and sick, which the Law had made unclean and polluted, that they had prophaned his Holy Name. But if the Name of God be prophaned by the disesteem and misusage of the things it is called upon, then surely it is sanctified, when the same are worthily and discriminatively used, that is, as becommeth the relation they have to him. I have already specified the severall kinds of Sacred things which are thus to be sanctified: yet lest some∣thing contained under some of them might not be ta∣ken notice of, by so generall an intimation, it will not
be amisse a little more fully and particularly to expli∣cate them, then I have yet done. Remember there∣fore that I ranged all sacred things under four heads. 1. Of Persons Sacred; such as were the Priests and Levites in the Old Testament, and now in the New, the Christian Clergy, or Clerus; so called from the beginning of Christian Antiquity, either because they are the Lords , or Portion, which the Church dedicateth unto him out of her self, (namely, as the Num. X. 11 Levites were an offering of the Children of Israel, which they offered unto him out of their Tribes,) or because their inheritance and livelihood is the Lords portion. I preferre the first; yet either of both will give their Order the title of Holinesse, as doth also more especially their descent which they derive from the Apostles; that is, from those, for whom their Lord and Master prayed unto his Father, saying, Fa∣ther, , [ for ] Sanctifie Joh. 17. 17, 18, 19. them unto, or for thy Truth: thy Word is Truth; that is, Separate them unto the Ministery of thy Truth, the word of thy Gospel, which is the truth and verifica∣tion of the promises of God. It follows, As thou hast sent me into the world, so have I also sent them into the world, (this is the key which unlocks the meaning of that before and after.) And for their sakes I sanctifie my self, that they might be sanctified for thy Truth; that is, And for as much as they cannot be consecra∣ted to such an Office, without some sacrifice, to atone and purifie them; therefore for their consecration to this holy function of ministration of the new Cove∣nant, I offer my self a Sacrifice unto thee for them, in lieu of those legall and typicall ones, wherewith Aa∣ron
and his sons first, and then the whole Tribe of Levi were consecrated unto thy service in the old. An Ellipsis of the first Substantive in Scripture is fre∣quent. So here  onely, is put for , Truth, for the Ministery of Truth. Now that the Christian Church (for of the Jew∣ish I shall need say nothing) hath always taken it for granted, that those of her Clergy ought, according to the separation and sanctity of their Order, to be di∣stinguished, and differenced from other Christians, both passively in their usance from others, but especi∣ally actively, by a restrained conversation, and pecu∣liarnesse in their manner of life, is manifest by her an∣cient Canons and Discipline. Yea, so deeply hath it been rooted in the minds of men, that the Order of Church-men binds them to some differing kinde of conversation and form of life from the Laity; that even those who are not willing to admit of the like discrimination due in other things, have still in their opinions some relique thereof remaining in this, though perhaps not altogether to be acquited of that imputation, which Tertllian charged upon some in his time, to wit, Quod quum excellimur & inflamur De Mono∣gi. ca. 2. adversus Clerum, tunc unum omnes sumus, tunc omnes Sacerdotes; quia Sacerdotes nos Deo & Patri fecit. Quum ad per equationem Disciplin Sacerdotalis pro∣vocamur, deponimus infulas, & impares sumus. When we vant, and are puffed up against the Clergy, then we are all one, then we are all Priests; For he made us Priests to God and his Father. But when we are called upon, to equall in our lives the example of Priestly Discipline, then down goe our Mitres, and we are another sort of men.
Another sort of things sacred, which I named, was Sacred PLACES, to wit, Churches, and Oratoris, as the Christian name , implieth them to be, that is, The Lords. A third, Sacred-Times. i. dedicated and appointed for the solemne celebration of the worship of God, and Divine duties: such are with us, (for those of the Jews concern us not) , our Lords days, with other our Christian Festivals, and holy days. Of the manner of the discrimination from common, or sanctifying both the one and the other, by actions some commanded, others interdi∣cted to be done in them, the Canons and Constituti∣ons of our Church will both inform, and direct us. For holy Times and holy Places are Twins (Time and Place being, as I may so speak, pair-circumstan∣ces of action) and therefore Lev. XIX. 30. And again XXVI. 2. they are joyned together, tanquam ejusdem rations: Keep my Sabbaths and reverence my Sanctuary. The fourth sort of Sacred things is of such as are neither Persons, Times, nor Places, but Things in a speciall sense, by way of distinction from them. And this sort containeth under it many particulars, which may be specified after this manner. 1. Sacred Revenue of what kinde soever: which in regard of the dedication thereof, as it must not bee prophaned by sacrilegious alienation, so ought to be sanctified by a different use and imployment from other Goods; namely such a one as becommeth that which is the Lords, and not mans. For that Primitive Christian Antiquity so esteemed them, appears by their calling them , as they did their Place
of Worship , and their Holy day ; all of the Lord, as it were, Christening the old notion of Sacred, by a new name. So Can. Apstol. XL. Ma∣nifestae sint Episcopi res propriae (si quidem res habet proprias) & manifesta sint , i. res Dominicae—Author Constitut. Apost. lib. 2. c. 28. al. 24. Episcopus ne utatur , Dominicis rebus, tanquam alienis aut communibus, sed moderate. See also Balsamon in Can. 15. Concilii Ancyrani, and the Canon it self. Secondly, Sacred Vtensils, as the Lords Table, Ves∣sels of ministration, the Books of God, or Holy Scri∣pture, and the like. Which that the Church, even in her better times, respected with an holy and discrimi∣native usance, may be learned from the Story of that calumnious crimination, devised by the Arrian Fa∣ction against Athanasius, as a charge of no small im∣piety; namely, that in his Visitation of the Tract of Mareotis, Macarius, one of his Presbyters, by his com∣mand, or instinct, had entered into a Church of the Miletian Schismatiques, and there broken the Cha∣lice, or Communion Cup, thrown down the Table, and burnt some of the Holy Books. All which ar∣gues, that in the generall opinion of Christians of that time, such acts were esteemed prophane and impious; otherwise they could never have hoped (as they did) to have blasted the reputation of the holy Bishop by such a slaunder. Touching the Books of God, or holy Scripture, (which I referred to this title) especially those which are for the publique service of God in the Church, I adde this further; That under that name I would
have comprehended the senses, words and phrases ap∣propriated to the expression of Divine and Sacred things; which a Religious are cannot endure to hear abused with prophane and scurrilous applica∣tion. Thirdly, under this fourth head of things Sacred I comprehend Sacred Acts; such as are the Acts of Gods holy worship and administration of his Sacra∣ments. For albeit these Acts are duties of the first and personall Sanctification of Gods Name, whereof the immediate object is God; yet are the Acts them∣selves sacred things, and therefore have some sancti∣fication due to them also, as other sacred things have: of which, although it be most true, that the unfained devotion of the heart (as before him who alone knoweth the hearts of the children of men) be the main and principall requisite; yet unlesse even in the outward performance, they be, for the man∣ner and circumstances, discriminated from common acts, by a select accommodation befitting their ho∣linesse, their sanctification is defective, and by such defect, if voluntary, Gods Name is prophaned, even then when wee are worshipping him. How much more, when our carriage therein commeth short even of that wonted reverence, wherewith we come be∣fore an earthly Potentate? May not God here justly use the same expostulation with us, that he did with those in the Prophet Malachi, who presented them∣selves before him with such an offering, as was in re∣gard of the blemishes unworthy of, and unbefitting so great a Majesty, and therefore to be accounted rather an affront then an act of honour and worship? Yee
have, saith he, despised and prophaned my Name—Offer it now unto thy Governour: will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person?—yet I am a Malac. c. 1. v. 6, 8, 12, 14. great King, saith the Lord of hosts. And this is the document or lesson, which this place naturally and unavoydably ministreth to us; That to come before the Divine Majesty, with lesse reverent and regard∣full deportment, then we doe before earthly Kings and potentates, is to despise and prophane his holy Name. And not that, which some would shelter under this text, and lean too much upon; namely, That the acts of Gods externall worship ought to be wholly conform to the use of the semblable actions performed unto men, and not differ from them: and upon this ground charge the Christian Liturgies with absurdity in their forms of praying, and praising God with responsals, singing by turns, and speaking many together. For this principle is directly repugnant to the nature of Sanctification, which consists in discri∣mination and difference. And therefore, though the materiall of our gestures and other expressions vocall or visible, be borrowed from the use and custome of men; yet for the formality of them, not onely they may, but ought to be differenced from them. More∣over, touching this reproof of the Prophet; take no∣tice that it is grounded upon the Law, Levit. XXII. where we are taught, that when that is not observed concerning the Rites of Gods service which the san∣ctity of them requireth, as in other particulars, so in this of a not defective or unblemished offering, his Name is thereby prophaned. See v. 32. with the rest of the chapter foregoing it. And if so, then by the contrary it is sanctified.
Lastly, Unto this head of sacred Acts I reduce Oaths and sacred Covenants, that is, such as are made either with God, or between men; Gods Name be∣ing called upon, which therefore 1 Sam. 20. 8. are styled Covenants of the Lord: For that the observance due touching both is a sanctifying of them, as things upon which the Name of the Lord is called, is ap∣parent; forasmuch as when they are violated by falshood, they are said to be prophaned, as Levit. 19. 12. Psal. 55. 20. Ierm. 34. 15. Thus together with my explication of these seve∣rall sorts of sacred things, I have briefly and in ge∣nerall pointed at that also wherein the proper sancti∣fication of each consisteth, which though far short of such a tractation as the matter requireth: yet if it may serve but to give occasion onely to others who are better able, to bend their thoughts upon this ar∣gument (which perhaps the times call for) I shall fully attain the end I aimed at. For mine own part, to descend to particulars would be a task too high for me, and as I suspect, not very acceptable. For it is ten to one (if the grounds I have laid be true) but that the most of us would be found faulty in some things, and some of us in all. Well, the summe of my argumentation hath been this: Is there any thing in the New Test. Gods by a peculiar right? To say there is not, is absurd and against the perpetuall tra∣dition of Christianity. If there be, then it is holy; if holy, then to be sanctified; if sanctified, then to be discriminated in the usance and respect thereof, from that which is of common condition. NOW out of this discourse, which I have hi∣therto
made, you may see and take notice, That (contrary to the vulgar opinion) the Prohibition of Idolatry and the discriminative observance of things sacred; not to prophane them by a promiscuous and common use; are derived both of them from one and same principle, sc. Gods Incommunicablenesse, which derives a shadow and resemblance upon the things which have his Name called upon them, to wit, a state of appropriatnesse and singularity. Where∣fore the Apostle, Rom. 2. not without good reason, compares together the transgressions of the one and the other kinde, as parallel sins, or sins of affinity: Thou that hatst Idols (saith he) doest thou commit Sa∣criledge? Where by Sacriledge understand not onely the usurpation of things sacred, but the violation of that which is sacred, in generall: And it is as if he had said, thou hast mended the matter well indeed, for still thou dashest against the same principle. For it is one of the exemplifications of that he saith in the beginning of the Chapter: He that judgeth or con∣demneth another, and doth the same, or the like him∣self, is inexcusable. By this it appears how much they are mistaken, who under pretence of avoyding Idolatry and superstition, cannot endure that any distinction should be made between things sacred and common. Is not this to unhallow Gods Name one way, that so we might not prophane it another? Far be it from me to be a patron of idolatry or su∣perstition in the least degree: yet I am afraid, lest we who have reformed the worship of God from that pollution (and blessed be his name therefore,) , as S. Basil speaks, that is, by
bending the crooked stick too much the other way, have run too far into the contrary extream, and ta∣ken away (some of us) all difference in a manner be∣tween Sacred and prophane; and by this our trans∣gression in doing Gods work, made our selves lia∣ble to that upbraid of the Apostle; Tu qui idola abo∣minaris sacrilegium (i. sacrarum rum profanationem) admittis? Thou that abhorrest Idols, doest thou commit sacriledge? that is, prophanest thou Gods Name by violating that which is sacred? Let no man think it strange or incredible, that such an enormity should be committed, or an occa∣sion at least given thereof, in the manage of so ho∣ly and glorious a work: seeing the experience of all ages sufficiently witnesseth, how prone the nature of man is, in flying one extream, to run too far to∣wards the other. Why then should we think it un∣likely, or rather not think it very likely, that we also may have miscarried in the same manner? un∣lesse we will arrogate unto our selves that priviledge of infallibility, and freedom from errour, which we condemn as intolerable presumption in our Ad∣versaries. Besides, it is to be taken notice of, because of the prejudicate misprision of many to the contrary; That the measure of truth and falshood, best and worst, is not the greater or lesser distance from Po∣pery, (forasmuch as Popery also containeth much of Christianity) nor that which is most destructive of the man of sin, alwayes most warrantable and safe to be embraced. If it were, there be some in the world, (whose religion we would be loth to ad∣mit
of) that would be found more orthodox and better reformed Christians then any of us all. Nay, give me leave, without offence, for the bet∣ter awakening of some out of their deafnesse to what∣soever else may be said to this purpose, to propound such a Demand as this: Who knoweth, whether this transgression I speak of, be not a main and prin∣cipall ingredient of that guilt, which the Divine Majesty admonisheth us to take notice of, in this his so long and so severe visitatioh of our neighbours and brethren? whether he doth not visibly, or, if some passages be considered, almost vocally, up∣braid them; Thou that hatest Idols doest thou commit Sacriledge? I know right well, that rashly to assigne the particular causes of Gods judgements, without rule or precedent of Scripture, is a sin of presum∣ption, and a bold intrusion into Gods secrets; and therefore I affirm not, but demand onely, whether there be not here some cause which may minister such a suspicion. But whatsoever it be, the compas∣sion of their wofull affliction calls upon me rather to pray for them, then to follow this harsh and un∣pleasant passage any further. Onely thus much, If that which the Apostle saith in particular of the things which befell the Israelites, Gods first people, in the Wildernesse; These things happened unto them for ensamples; and they are written for our ad∣monition, upon whom the ends of the world are come: If this be to be extended also unto those punishments and their analogy, which befell them afterwards: then may perhaps two things further not uneason∣ably be enquired into. First, for what other sins, it is
remembred in Scripture, that God gave his people, during that his first Covenant (especially after they came to dwell in their own Land) under the sword of an externall enemy, or his worship thereby at any time to be trodden under foot; besides these two, Idolatry, and Prophanation of that which was holy, or Sacriledg? Examples of the first who knows not? of the second, see the Story of Achan, Iosh. the vii. of Elies sons, 1 Sam. Chap. II. the punishment of the Sacriledge of the seventh, or Sabbaticall year, (2 Chron. XXXVI. and the parallel places) for by the Law every seventh year, not onely the whole Land, but all servants and debts were holy unto the Lord, and therefore to be released, Levit. 25. 2, 4. Deut. 15. Exodus 21. Secondly, What was that Transgression, after the return from Babylon, men∣tioned in that Prophesie of Antiochus Epiphanes, Dan. 8. 12. for which it is there foretold, that An host should be given him against the daily Sacrifice, and that it should cast down the truth unto the ground, and practise and prosper? Perhaps the Story in the 2, 3, & 4. Chap. of the second Book of Maccabees will tell us. To that which is commonly alledged, That such distinction and reverent regard of things Sacred, as we contend for, opens a way for Idolatry: I answer, No otherwise, then the eschewing of Idolatry, may also, through the perversenesse of men, be made a bridge to prophaneness, that is, by accident, not from it own towardnesse, but our distemper. Otherwise this Discrimination or distinction, if we would un∣derstand or heed the ground thereof, prompts the
clean contrary; for we should reason thus: If the things which are Gods, o nomine, in that name, and because they are His, are therefore to be held segre∣gate in their use; then surely God himself, who is the Fountain of Holinesse, ought to have a preroga∣tive of segregation in the most eminent and absolute manner; namely, such an one, as that the worship due unto him must not be communicated with any thing else besides him. And indeed, unlesse both be done, Gods Name is neither fully, nor rightly san∣ctified. AND here I should now make an end, but that there is one thing yet behinde of principall conse∣quence, which I have deferred hitherto, because I could not elsewhere bring it in conveniently without somewhat disturbing the coherence of my discourse. There is an eminent species, or kinde of Sanctificati∣on which I may seem all this while to have neglected, for as much as it seemeth not to be comprehended under this notion of discretion and separation, where∣in I place the nature of Holinesse, and that is Sancti∣fcation, or Holinesse of life. To which i answer, That all notions of Sanctity and Sanctification in Scri∣pture are derived from discretion and separation, and that this now mentioned is likewise derived thence. For it is to be reduced to the Sanctification of Per∣sons Sacred, and set apart unto God. By which, though in the strict and proper sense, are intended onely Priests, and such as minister about Holy things, yet in a larger sense, and, as it were, by way of resemblance, the whole body of the People of God are a Royall Pisthood, and  Symb. A∣post. Holy Nation,
which the Almighty hath selected unto himself, out of the rest of the world, and set apart to serve him in a peculiar and different manner, from the rest of men: For you have heard it is a requisite of that which is Holy, to be used in a peculiar and singular manner, and not as things common. Hence it is, that the observation of that peculiar and different from of life, which God hath commanded those, whom he hath called, and set apart from the world unto himself, in Scripture carries the name of Ho∣linesse, or Sanctity, (especially in the New Testa∣ment) that is, such as becommeth those that are Holy unto God; According to that, Be ye Holy, as I am Holy. And here, I might have a large discourse, to shew how the Name of God is sanctified by the lives of his Children, when they conform not themselves to the fashions of the world, but as the Apostle speaks, are crucified thereto, and keep themselves unspotted from the pollutions and vanities thereof. But this I leave, to be supplied by your meditations according to the generall intimation given thereof.
ACTS 17. 4. Acts 17. 4. There associated themselves to Paul and Silas of the worshipping Greeks a great multitude. PAul and Silas preaching in the Jewish Synagogue at Thessalonica, & proving out of the Scriptures, that Mesiah, or Christ, was to suffer, and to rise again from the dead, and that Iesus was that Christ, it is said, That some of them which heard, beleeved; and that there associated themselves to them a great multitude , of the worshipping Greeks. Of these , there is elsewhere mention in the Acts of the Apostles more then once; But what they were, our Commenta∣tors do not fully inform us; Nor can it be under∣stood, without some delibation of Jewish Anti∣quity. The eplication whereof will give some light not to this passage onely, but to the whole Story of the Primitive Conversion of the Gentiles to the Faith, recorded in that Book. We must know therefore, that of those Gentiles, which imbraced the worship of the God of Israel,
(commonly term'd Proselytes) there were two sorts: One of such as were circumcised, and took upon them the observation of the whole Law of Moses. These were accounted as Jews, (to wit, facti, non nati) bound to the like observances with them, con∣versed with, as freely, as if they had been so born; neither might the one eat, drink, or keep company with a Gentile, more then the other, let they be∣came unclean. They worshipped in the same Court of the Temple, where the Israelites did, whither others might not come. They were partakers with them in all things, both divine and humane; In a word, they differed nothing from Jews, but onely that they were of Gentile race. This kinde the Jewish Doctors call , Prose∣lyti stiti, or , Proselyti fdris, name∣ly, because they took upon them the signe thereof, Circumcision. In the New Testament they are called simply, Proselytes, without addition. Of which Or∣der was Vriah the Hittite, Achior, in the Book of Iudith, Herod the Idumaen, Onkelos the Chld Paraphrast, and many others both before and in our Saviours time. But besides these there was a second kinde of Gentiles, admitted likewise to the worship of the true God, the God of Israel, and the hope of the life to come; which were not circumcised, nor con∣formed themselves to the Mosaicall rites, and ordi∣nances; but were onely tied to the observation of those precepts, whch the Hebrew Doctors call the precepts of the sons of Noah; namely, such as all the sons of Noah were bound to observe.
These precepts are in number seven, recorded in the Gemata Sanhedrin, in Perek  Talmud, Maiem. Hal. Me∣lachim. c. 9. vide Shick. de jure Regio Hebraeoru p. 128, 129 Maymonides and others, under these following titles. First, the precept , to re∣nounce Idols, and all Idolatrous worship. Secondly, , to worship the true God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth. Thirdly, , Bloodshed; to wit, to commit no murder. Fourth∣ly, , detectio nuditatum, not to be de∣filed with fornication, incest, or other unlawfull conjunction. Fiftly, , Rapina, against theft and robbery. Sixtly, , concerning administration of Justice: The seventh, , Membrum de vivo, so they call the Precept, of not eating the flesh with the blood in it, given to Noah, when he came out of the Ark; as Maymonides expresly ex∣pounds it, and addes besides. Quicunque haec sep tem praecepta exequenda susceperit, ecce is est, , ex piis gentium mundi, habetque par∣tem in seculo futuro. Note that he saith [ex piis Gen∣tium,] for this kinde were still esteemed Gentiles, and so called, because of their uncircumcision; in re∣spect whereof (though no Idolaters) they were, ac∣cording Act. 10. 28. 11. 3. to the Law, unclean, and such as no Jew might converse with; wherefore they came not to worship into the Sacred Courts of the Temple, whi∣ther the Jews, and circumcised Proselytes came; but onely into the outmost Court, called Atrium Gentium & immundorum, which, in the second Tem∣ple, surrounded the second, or great Court, where∣into the Israelites came, being divided there-from by a low wall of stone made battlement-wise, not above three Cubits high, called (saith Iosephus,
from whom I have it) in the Hebrew Dialect , in the Greek , that is, Lorica, close by which De Billo Judaico lib. 6. ca. 6. Graec. 1. stood certain little pillars, whereon was written in Latin and Greek Letters, . In atrium sanctum transire alienigenam non de∣bere; And this I make no question, is that which Saint Paul, Ephes. 2. alluded unto, when he saith, That Christ had broken down the , the partitionwall, (namely, that Lorica, which se∣parated the Court of the Gentiles from that of the Circumcision) and so laying both Courts into one, hath made the Jews and Gentiles Intercommoners; whereby those that were sometime far off, were now made nigh, and as near as the other, unto the Throne of God. But in Solomons Temple, this Court of the Gentiles seems not to have been, but in the second Temple onely; the Gentiles formerly worshipping without at the door, and not coming within the Septs of the Temple at all. This second kinde of Proselytes, the Talmudists call , Proselyti portae, or , Proselyti inqui∣lini; because they were under the same condition, with those Gentile strangers which lived as inquilini in the land of Israel. For all Gentiles dwelling with∣in the Gates of Israel, whether they were as servants, taken in war, or otherwise, were bound to renounce vid. Lev. 17. their false Gods, and to worship the God of Israel; but not to be circumcised, unlesse they would, nor farther bound to keep the Law of Moses, then was contained in those precepts of the sons of Noah. These are those mentioned (as often elsewhere in the Law, so) in the fourth Commandment by the name of the
Stranger within thy gates; whereby it might seem probable, that the observation of the Sabbath day (so far as concerneth one day in seven) was included in some one or other of those precepts of the sons of Noah; namely, in that, of worshipping for their God, the Creator of heaven and earth, and no o∣ther; whereof this consecration of a seventh day, af∣ter six dayes labour, was a badge or livery; accord∣ing to that, The sabbath is a signe between me and you, that I Iehovah am your God; because in six dayes the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: vide Exod. 31. 16, 17. Ezek. 20. 20. From the example of these inquilini, all other Gentiles, wheresoever living, admitted to the worship of the God of Israel upon the same terms, were called , or , Proselyti Portae, or Proselyti inquilini; of which sort there were many in all Cities and places of the Gentiles, where the Jews had Synagogues; and used to frequent the Synagogues with them, (though in a distinct place) to hear the Law and the Prophets read and expounded. But in the New Testament they are found called by another name, to wit of , or Worshippers, so often mentioned (though not observed) in the Acts of the Apostles. For first, these are those meant in that of the Acts 17. 4. alleadged at my entrance in∣to this discourse, where it is said that , a great number of the worshipping Greeks beleeved, and adhered to Paul and Silas; which the Vulgar rightly translateth, de colentibus Gentilibus multitudo magna, taking the name of Greeks, here,
as elsewhere in the New Testament, to be put for Gentiles in generall. And this place will admit of no evasion: For that they were Gentiles, the name of  betokeneth expresly, being given them by way of distinction from the Jews, then and there pre∣sent also. That they were worshippers of the true God, the God of Israel, their coming into the Sy∣nagogue, their name , their capablenesse of S. Pauls discourse, (which was to prove out of the Scriptures, that Messiah was to suffer death, and that Iesus was he) argues sufficiently; yea, abundantly. For who could have profited by such a Sermon as this, but those who already had knowledge of the true God, and beleeved the reward of the life to come? This place therefore, may serve as a key to all the rest of the places in this Book, where these  are mentioned. To that in the same Chapter, ver. 17. where it is said, that Saint Paul in the Synagogue at Athens, , disputed with the Iews and the worshippers. To that Acts 16. 14. where Saint Paul preaching the Gospel in the Jews Proseucha, or Oratory at Phi∣lippi, a woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the City Thyatira, , A proselyte worship∣per, was converted unto the faith, and baptized with all her houshold. In the like manner, to Acts 18. 4. when S. Paul is said at Corinth, to have reason'd in the Synagogues every Sabbath, and to have perswaded the Jews and the Greeks: For these Greeks were , what did they in the Synagogues else so regularly every
Sabbath day? True, the name of  is here wanting; But it presently follows, when the Jews opposed Paul, (there testifying Jesus to be Christ) and blasphemed; that he shook his rayment, and said, Your blood be on your own heads: From henceforth I will go to the Gentiles. And he departed thence, saith the text, and entred into the house of one Iustus, , a Gentile-worshipper, whose house joyned hard to the Synagogue. But above all, that narration Acts 13. deserves our consideration and attention: There ver. 43. it is said, that Saint Paul having preached the Gospel in the Jews Synagogue at Antioch of Pisidia, there followed him , many of the Jews and worshipping Proselytes; and vers. 42. That when the Jews were gone out of the Synagogue, the Gentiles, that is, the , besought the Apostles, that the same things might be preached unto them the next Sabbath; which be∣ing accordingly done, and many of the other Gen∣tiles (who were not ) upon the same of such a new Doctrine, unwontedly assembling with them, it is said, that the Iews when they saw the multitude, were filled with envy, contradicted and blasphemed. That then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said; It was necessary that the word of God should first be spo∣ken unto you, but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of eternall life; Lo, we turn to the Gentiles; as the Lord saith, I have set thee to be a light to the Gentiles, &c. 48. That when the Gentiles heard this they were glad, and glorified the word of God,
that is, the , who were already in procinctu, and in the posture to eternal life. The Jews blasphe∣med; the rest of the Gentiles were uncapable; onely the , (who were already Candidati vitae aeter∣nae, having been instructed in the worship of the true God, and hoping for the reward to come) they beleeved: Yet perhaps not all of them neither, (the words require not For  is often put for , and the sense then but indefi∣nite. so much) but that none but such: And it follows, that the Jews found out some , worshipping women, such as were of fashion (who yet perhaps had not been at the Apostles Sermon) by whose means they stirred up the chief men in the City, and raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas. This I take to be the true and genuine meaning of this passage, upon which no charge of Pelagianism can be fastened; nor needeth it any spinous Criticisms for its explication. The use of the word , de acie & collocatione Militum, de ascriptione in ordinem vel classem, (in which signifi∣cation the passive is most frequent) is well enough known: , Xenophon: In cam classem me ascribo. Plutarch, in Solone; , In pauperum ordinem se redigit, in∣ter pauperes se numerat: , dicuntur mi∣lites, unde &  appellantur: , est in numerum virorum ascribi. Compare the 1 Cor. 16. 15. . Accord∣ing to which sense and notion, the words might be rendred, Crediderunt, quotquot nomina suae dederant vitae aeternae, or, [per Ellipsin Participii] Qui de ag∣mine & classe fuerant sperantium, vel contendentium ad vitam aeternam: otherwise, Qui in procinctussa∣bant
ad vitam aeternam: or most fitly, (sensu modò mi∣litari) Quotquot ordinati fuer ant ad vitam aeternam. De re tota judicent viri docti, & à studio partium alieni. Besides, it will not be impertinent, as a Mantissa to these quotations for , to note that the same persons are otherwise (namely, twice) characteri∣sed by the title of  As first of Corne∣lius, concerning whom there is no question but he was a Gentile worshipper: The Text saith, There was a man in Caesarea, called Cornelius, a Centurion of the Italian Band, , (i.) . Again in that 13. of the Acts (whereon we have dwelt so long) S. Paul speaking at first to that mixt multitude assembled in the Synagogue, consi∣sting partly of Jews, and partly , he compellates them, verse 16. both distinct∣ly in these words,  By the former, meaning the Jews; by the latter, the , or Gentile worshippers. Of this kinde of Converts (as I have in part al∣ready intimated) were in our Saviour and his Apo∣stles time, very many in every Nation and City, where the Jews lived and had their Synagogues; yea, far more in number, then of that other sort of Pro∣selytes which were circumcised. The reason being, because it was the more easie condition, and not so prejudiciall to their outward liberty, as the other; in as much, as they might notwithstanding still live, and converse with their friends, kindred, and Coun∣trymen, bear office and enjoy honours among them, (as Naaman the Syrian did, who was of this kinde) which the other might not do.
These impediments being out of the way, the hope of the Resurrection from the dead, and the reward of the life to come, were powerfull inducements to draw many to the worship of that God, who onely among the Gods For since then, the Devil hath been Gods Ape. at that time, promised this re∣ward to such as worshipped and served him, and no other, which was the bait wherewith the Jews allured them, and that to their own no small emolument; this kinde, as it were to recompence their want of Circumcision, seeming to be very bountifull to∣wards their Nation, as may be gathered both from Cornelius, who is said to have given much alms to the people, (namely of the Jews;) And the Story of that Centurion, Luke 7. whom the Jews besought our Saviour so instantly for, alledging that he loved their Nation, and had built them a Synagogue, and therefore deserved that favour they sued for, on his behalf. Now, out of this discourse (besides the clearing of the passages afore-mentioned,) we may learn two things: One, how so many of the Gentiles, by the preaching of the Apostles, could so soon and so readi∣ly be converted to the faith of Christ. It was because they had already embraced the principles which led thereunto. For we are to take notice, that the founda∣tion of the Church among the Gentiles, was laid of these , who had already embraced the wor∣ship of the true God, had knowledge of his pro∣mises, beleeved and hoped for the life to come. For was not S. Peter (to whom the instructions for this Embassage were first given) sent first to Cornelius a Centurion, a Gentile, the first of this order? where∣fore?
but that this might be for a pattern for them, with what kinde of men they were first to deal in this great work; namely, with such as were idonei Audi∣tores Euangelii; those which were puri puti Gentiles, being not so; as who knew nothing of the principles requisite thereto. This will appear, if we consider well the tenor of the Apostles Sermons, to such Gentiles as they converted; which we shall observe to presuppose that they already knew the true God, and the promise of eternall life, to such as worshiped him, and so had no more to learn, but the way and means now revealed by God, for attainment there∣of, which was by the Gospel of Jesus Christ. The other thing we may learn, is, what was the true state of the Question, which the Apostles met to decide in the Councell at Jerusalem; whether the Gentiles which beleeved in Christ, were to be cir∣cumcised or not, and so bound to keep the whole Law? It was this, to resolve (that, whereas all such as embraced the worship of the God of Israel, con∣formed to one of these two kindes of Proselytes) to whether of them the Gentiles, which had or should receive the Gospel of Christ, were to conform them∣selves, whether to the Proselytes of the Covenant, or to the , and Proselytes of the Gate. Saint Pe∣ter standing up in the Councell, demonstrates it to be the will of God, that they should conform to the latter, and not to the first; and that upon this ground; because that Cornelius, the first Christened Gentile, unto whom himself was sent by Divine Commission, was no circumcised Proselyte, but a Pro∣selyte of the Gate, or a  onely; yet received
he no Commission to circumcise him: Yea, the ho∣ly Ghost, as he was Preaching, fell upon him and his houshold, being uncircumcised, as it did upon those of the Circumcision: whereby it appeared, that God would have the rest of the Gentiles, which embraced the faith, to be after the pattern of Cor∣nelius; and to have no more imposed upon them, then He had. And accordingly the Councel defines, That no other burden should be laid upon them, but onely to abstain from pollution of Idols, from blood, from things strangled, and from fornication: and as some copies Together with Ire∣naeus twise, Lib. 3. cap. 12. Cyprian.  Lib. 3. Ti∣stimon. in sine. have,  To do as they would be done to; that is, they should as , observe the praecepta Filiorum No∣hae, which here [by a ] are briefly reckon∣ed up. .
2 PETER 2. 4. 2 Pet. 2. 4. For if God spared not the Angels which sinned, []—but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains of darknesse to be reserved unto Iudgement, &c. so we translate it: To which of S. Peter, answers that of S. Iude, (as almost that whole Epistle doth to this) verse 6. And the Angels which kept not their first estate, [or principality] but left their own habitation, he hath re∣served in everlasting chains under darknesse unto the Iudgement of the great Day. THese two places are brought to prove, that the Devils or evil spirits, are now in Hell, before the day of Judgement: Which I cannot see how it can possibly stand with the rest of the Scripture, which testifies every where that they have their man∣sion in the Air, and here about the earth, where they tempt, seduce, and do all the mischief they can to mankinde; hence their Chieftain Satan is styled, The Prince of the power of the Air, that is, of the airie Dominion or Princedom. Therefore hither they were with their Prince exiled from Heaven, and no further, nor shall be untill the Day of Judgement. And of this I shall speak at this time: First, to clear
these Texts which seem to make for the contrary; Secondly, to enquire what was the opinion of the Ancients about this point. As for this place of S. Peter, and that imitation thereof in the Epistle of Iude, I can beleeve the tran∣slation of neither: Piscator (not conceiving how that of S. Iude (especially because of the word [] eternall) could be reconciled with other Scripture, and experience, which shews us that the Evill spirits are not yet bound with eternall chains, having so much liberty of gadding about) supplies in the Text vinciendos, as if there were an Ellipsis, reading it thus, Iudicio magni illius Diei vinculis aeternis (vinciendo) reservâsse. In that of S. Peter, if I understand him, he takes , not for Dativus instrumenti, with chains of darknesse, but as Dativus acquisitionis, for chains of darknesse; and construes it with , as if it were, He delivered them for chains of darknesse; name∣ly, supposing a trajection of the words. But for my part I take both  in S. Peter, and  in S. Iude, to be neither of them Dativus instrumenti, but both Acquisitionis, or Fi∣nis, and governed the one of , and the other of  that is,  to be put for , and  for —As in the Hebrew, the preposition , serves for the proposition , and for the Dative Case, whose propriety the style of the Greek Testament every where imitates, and why not in this?  therefore and , are here , not : Nay, among the Greek Grammari∣ans we finde observed, that the Dative Case is some∣times
put for the Accusative with the proposition  As in this example, , that is,  much more in the sacred Greek, which so frequently imitates the Hebrew Con∣struction. Next for the word  in S. Peter, it is , and so not bound by any use or example to the signification we here give it, to wit, throwing down to hell. I would therefore render it, ad poenas tarta∣reas damnavit, to wit, thus, Angelos qui peccaverunt, cum ad tartari supplicium damnasset, catenis caliginis servandos tradidit ad Diem Iudicii. For  here is , as S. Iude hath it: So also Mat. 12. 24. The Queen of the South shall rise in judgement with this Generation, (that is) in, or at the Day of Judge∣ment: Or I would render it, not casting down to hell, but casting down to hell ward: So the meaning in both places will be, That the wicked Angels were cast down from heaven, to this lower orb, there to be reserved for chains of darknesse at the Day of Judgement: which sense the ninth verse in this Chap∣ter of Peter, plainly intimates by way of reddition; Novit Dominus pios in tentatione eripere, as he did Noah and Lot, Injustos verò in diem Iudicii crucian∣dos servare, as he doth the wicked Angels. More∣over verse 17. where the same hellish darknesse is spoken of, it is said, to be reserved for the wicked, , to whom that hide∣ous darknesse is reserved for ever; whence it is proba∣ble, that S. Peter in the foregoing passage of An∣gels, referred also those chains of darknesse, to re∣serving, and not to delivering; that is, not that the
evill Angels were now already delivered to chains of darknesse, but reserved for them at the day of Judge∣ment. And thus much for clearing of the words of these two parallel Texts; now what hath been anciently the current opinion of this point? And first, for the Jews, it is apparent to have been a tradition of theirs, that all the space between the earth and the firma∣ment, is full of troops of Evill spirits, and their Chieftains, having their residence in the air; which, I make no doubt S. Paul had respect to, when he cals Satan the Prince of the power of the air. Drusius quotes two Authors, one the Book called , Munus novum; another, one of the Com∣mentators upon Pirke Aboth, who speak in this man∣ner, Debet homo scire & intelligere, à terra usque ad firmamentum omnia plena esse turmis, & praefectis, & infra plurimas esse Creaturas laedentes & accusantes, omnesque stare & volare in aere, neque à terra usque ad firmamentum locum esse vacuum: sed omnia plena esse praepositis, quorum alii ad pacem, alii ad bellum, alii ad bonum, alii ad mulam, ad vitam & ad mortem in∣citant. By praepositi, I suppose, he means such among the Spirits as are set as Wardens over severall char∣ges, for the managing of the affairs of mankinde subject to their powers. This was the opinion of the Iews; which they seem to have learned by tradition from their ancient Prophets: For in the Old Testa∣ment we finde no such thing written, and yet we see S. Paul seems to approve it. Now for the Doctors of the Christian Church, S. Hierome upon the sixth of the Ephesians, tels us,
that their opinion was the same; Tis the opinion of all the Doctors, (saith he) that Devils have their mansi∣on and residence in the space between the heaven and the earth. And that the Fathers of the first 300 or 400 years, nor did, nor could, hold the evill Angels to have been cast into Hell upon their sin, is evident by a singular Tenet of theirs. For Iustn Martyr, one of the most ancient, hath this saying; that Satan before the coming of Christ never durst blaspheme God, and that (saith he) because till then he knew not he should be damned. The same is approved by Irenaeus in his fifth Book and twentysixt Chapter; Praeclarè (saith he) dixit Iustinus, quod ante Domini adventum Sata∣nas nunquam ausus est blasphemare Deum, quippe non∣dum sciens suam damnationem; Post adventum autem Domini, ex sermonibus Christi & Apostolorum ejus, discens manifestè quoniam ignis aeternus ei praeparatus sit,—per hujusmodi homines (he means those He∣retiques who blasphemed the God of the Law) blas∣phemat eum Deum, qui judicium importat. Eusebius 4. Hist. Cap. 17. cites the same out of both, with approbation: So doth Oecumenius upon the last Chap. of the first of S. Peter. Epiphanius against He∣resie 39. gives the same as his own assertion, almost in the same words with Iustin and Irenaeus, though not naming them; Ante Christi adventum (saith he) nunquam ausus est Diabolus in Dominum suum blasphe∣mum aliquod verbum loqui, aut contra elationem cogi∣tare: expectavit enim Christi adventum—put avit∣que se misericordiam aliquam assecuturum esse. I will not enquire how true this Tenet of theirs is, but onely gather this, that they could not think the De∣vils
were cast into Hell, before the comming of Christ. For then how could they but have known they should be damned, if the execution had already been done upon them? Saint Augustine, as may seem, intending to re∣concile these places of Peter and Iude with the rest of Scripture, is alledged to affirm, that the Devils suffering some hell-like torment in their aiery Mansi∣on; the Air may in that respect in an improper sense be called Hell. But that the Devils were locally or actually in Hell, or should be before the day of Judge∣ment, it is plain he held not; and that will appear by these two passages in his Book de Civitate Dei. First, where he saith, Daemones in hoc quidem aere ha∣bitant, quia de Coeli superioris sublimitate dejecti me∣rito irregressibilis transgressionis in hoc sibi congruo ve∣lut carcere, praedamnati sunt. Lib. 8. Cap. 22. The other where he expounds that of the Devils Videa∣tur etiam Origen. in Numer. c. 22. Non vult Deus Daemonum genus ante tempus damnare; Sciunt e∣nim & ipsi Daemones, quia tepus eorum prae∣sens hoc se∣culum con∣tinet: Prop∣terea & Dominum rogabant, ut non tor∣queret cos ante tem∣pus, &c. Et ob hoc neque Dia∣bolum re∣movit à principatu hujus secu∣li, &c. Mat. 8. Art thou come to torment us before the time, (that is, saith he) ante tempus Iudicii, quo aeternâ damnatione puniendi sunt, cum omnibus etiam hominibus qui eo∣rum societate detinentur. Lib. eodem Cap. 23. in fine. The Divines of later times, the Schoolmen and others, to reconcile the supposed Contrariety in Scripture, divide the matter; holding some Devils to be in the Air, (as Saint Paul and the History of Scri∣pture tels us,) some to be already in Hell, (as they thought, Saint Peter and S. Iude affirm'd:) which opinion seems to be occasioned by a Quaere of Saint Hieroms, upon the sixth of the Ephesians; though he speaks but obscurely, and defines nothing. But
what ground of Scripture, or reason can be given, why all the Devils, which sinned, should not be in the same condition? especially Satan, the worst and chief of them, should not be in the worst estate, but enjoy the greatest liberty? It follows therefore that these places of Saint Peter and Saint Iude, are to be construed according to the sense I have given of them; namely, that the evill Spirits, which sinned, being adjudged to hellish torments, were cast out of Heaven into this lower Region, there to be reserved, as in a prison, for chains of darknesse at the Day of Judgement.
1 COR. 4. 1. 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers [] of Christ, and Stewards of the Myste∣ries of God. A Man would think at first sight, that this Scripture did exceedingly war∣rant our use of the word Minister, in stead of that of Priest, and leave no plea for them who had rather speak otherwise. Howsoever I in∣tend, at this time, to shew the contrary, (and even out of this text) that we have very much swarved herein from the Apostles language, and abuse that word to such a sense, as they never intended; nor is any where found in Scripture; I fayour neither su∣perstition, nor superstitious men; yet truth is truth, and needfull to be known; especially when igno∣rance thereof breedeth errour and uncharitablenesse. My discourse therefore shall be of the use of the words Priest and Minister, wherein shall appear how truly we are all Ministers in the Apostles sense, and yet how abusively and improperly so called in the ordinary prevailing use of that word: I will begin thus.
All Ecclesiasticall persons or Clergy men may be considered in a threefold relation. First, To God. Se∣condly, To the People. Thirdly, One toward ano∣ther. In respect of God, all are Ministers of what de∣gree soever they be; because they do what they do by commission from him, either more or lesse imme∣diate: for a Minister is he, qui operam suam alicui, ut superlori, aut domino praebet. In respect of the Peo∣ple, all are Bishops, that is, Inspectores, or Overseers; as having charge to look unto them: But lastly, com∣pared one to another, he whom we usually call Bishop is onely Overseer of the rest; Inspector totius Cleri. Deacons are onely Ministers to the rest; Ministri Pres∣byterorum & Episcoporum, and in that respect have their name  Bishops are a degree of Presbyters of divine ordinance, to be as Heads, Chiefs, and Pre∣sidents of their Brethren: All other Ecclesiasticall Ministers, whether in Ecclesia, or Foro Ecclesiastico (I mean whether they attend divine Duties in the Church, or Jurisdiction in Ecclesiasticall Courts) are all a kinde of Deacons, being to the Presbyters, ei∣ther single or Episcopall, as the Levites were to the Sacerdotes in the Old Testament, namely, to mini∣ster unto, or for them. These grounds being forelaid and understood, I affirm, first, that Presbyters are by us unnaturally and improperly called Ministers, either of the Church, or of such or such a Parish: we should call them, as my text doth, Ministers of God, or Ministers of Christ, not Ministers of men. First; Because they are onely Gods Ministers who sends them, but the Peoples Magistri to teach, in∣struct,
and oversee them: Were it not absurd to call the Shepheard, the sheeps Minister? If he be their Minister, they surely are his Masters. And so indeed the People by occasion of this misappellation, think they are ours, and use us accordingly. Indeed we are called Ministers, but never their Ministers, but as you see here, Gods Ministers, Christs Ministers, who imployeth us to dispense his Mysteries unto his Church. There are three words in the New Testament translated Minister,  the first is most frequent; but not one of them is given to the Apostles, in the whole Scripture, with rela∣tion to the Church or People; you shall never finde them called , or , which is so frequent with us, but Ministers of God; 2 Cor. 6. 4. 1 Thess. 3. 2. Ministers of Christ, as in my text, and 2 Cor. 11. 23. Col. 1. 7. Ministers of Iesus Christ. 1 Tim. 4. 6. or Ministers of that which they minister, as Ministers of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3. 6. Ministers of the Gospel, Eph. 3. 7. Col. 1. 23. but not Ministers of them to whose behoof they minister: Yet might this speech, Minister of the Church, if rightly con∣strued, be admitted; namely, if it be spoken by an Ellipsis, for Minister of God, for, and over the Church; so the Apostle Coloss. 1. 17. A faithfull Mi∣nister of Christ for you: that is, Christs Minister, not theirs; yet not for Christ, but for them; But those who use this speech commonly mean other∣wise. Secondly, Angels are called ministring spirits, but not our Ministers, but Gods Ministers to us-ward, or
for our behalf: So Ministers of the Gospel, not the Peoples, or Congregations Ministers, but Gods Ministers for their behoof. Thirdly, this speech [Minister of the Church, or, of this or that Church] is so much the more incommo∣dious, because it hath begotten (as incommodious and unapt speeches do) an erroneous conceit, not onely among the vulgar, but some of better under∣standing; namely, that a Minister is not lawfully cal∣led, unlesse he be chosen by the People, because he is their Minister, and so to be deputed by them: And indeed if he be their Minister, in proper relati∣on, they are his Masters, and so it is good reason they should appoint him, as Masters do those who are to serve them: But if in proper relation they are Gods Ministers, and not theirs, (though for them) then God is to appoint them, or such as he hath put in place to do it. It is an erroneous opinion, that some maintain, That the power of Sacred Order, and of the Keyes, is given by God immediately to the bo∣dy of the Congregation; and that they depute him who is their Minister, to execute the power which is originally in them; That power is conferred by God immediately to those, who are Bishops and Pastors, and, by and through them, belongs to the whole bo∣dy, and no otherwise: Sed tantum potuit incommodi sermonis usus. Some perhaps object against my whole assertion, that of S. Paul, 2 Cor. 4. 5. We preach not our selves, but Christ Iesus the Lord, (to wit, esse Dominum) and our selves your servants for Iesus sake: If the Apo∣stles were the Churches servants, why not their Mi∣nisters?
I answer, the Apostle sayes not, they were the Corintbians servants, but that he had made him∣self so, in his Preaching to them: So he sayes expres∣ly 1 Cor. 9. 19. For though I be free from all men, yet I have made my self a servant to all, that I might gain the more: Yet he confesses the Corinthians began to vilifie him for this condescent, 2 Cor. 11. 7. Have I committed an offence in abasing my self, that you might be exalted, because I have preached unto you the Gospel of God freely? This was that wherein he carried him∣self toward the Corinthians as a Servant, but to o∣ther Churches he did not so: It would be a strange assertion, to say the Apostle were the Corinthians Servant, in a proper relation; we know he sayes, Gal. 1. 10. If I pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ; And Rom. 6. 16. Know ye not, that to whom you yeeld your selves servants to obey, his servants you are to whom you obey? I come now to a second assertion, which is, that howsoever any Ecclesiasticall person may be rightly called a Minister, (so it be in a proper relation to God-ward) yet the word Minister is again most un∣fitly used by us, for a name of distinction of one Ec∣clesiasticall Order from another: As when we call those which are Presbyters, Ministers, by way of di∣stinction from Deacons; for so we speak Ministers and Deacons, in stead of Priests and Deacons. The reason we thus speak, is to avoid the name Priest, which we conceive to signifie Sacerdos, that is, one that sacrificeth, such as were those in the Law. But our Curates of holy things in the Gospel, are not to offer Sacrifice, and therefore ought not to be cal∣led
Sacerdotes, and consequently, not Priests. This is the reason; but if it be well examined, Priest is the English of Presbyter, and not of Sacerdos; there be∣ing in our Tongue no word in use for Sacerdos: Priest, which we use for both, being improperly used for a Sacrificer, but naturally expressing a Presbyter; the name whereby the Apostles call both themselves, and those which succeed them in their charge. For who can deny that our word Priest is corrupted of Presby∣ter? Our Ancestors the Saxons first used Preoster, which by a farther contraction came Preste, and Priest. The high and low Dutch have Priester, the French Prestre, Italian Prete, but the Spaniard one∣ly speaks full Presbytero. But, to come more near the point, our men in using the word Minister, for a distinctive name in stead of Priest, incurre four Sole∣cisms: I mean when we use the word Minister not at large, but for a distinction from the Order of Dea∣cons, saying Ministers and Deacons. First, we run into that we sought to avoid: For we would avoid to call the Presbyters of the Gospel, by the name of the Sacrificers of the Law; and yet run into it in such sort, that we style those of the Gos∣pel by the legall name, and those of the Law by the Euangelicall name; the Hebrew cals them of the Law, Cohanim, of , which properly signifies to minister, and thence comes the Greek word , and  but we call those of the Gospel, Cohanim, when we style them Ministers. On the contrary, the Apostles style those of the Gospel, Presbyteri; but we transferre that name to those of the Law, when we call them Priests: This is counterchange;
Incidit in Scyllam, qui vult vitare Charybdim. Secondly, It is a confusion or tautology, to say Ministers and Deacons, that is, Ministers and Mini∣sters: For  is in Greek, what Minister is in La∣tin; both signifying a Minister; as if one should say, Homo and , or Dilavium and Cataclysmus, and think so to distinguish things of severall natures or conditions. Thirdly, We impose upon that Order, a name of a direct cōtrary notion to what the Apostles gave them: The Apostles gave them a name of Eldership, and Su∣periority in calling them Presbyteri, we of inferiority, & subordination in calling them Ministri: The Jews had no name more honourable then that of Elders, , for so they called their Magistrates: so we read of Elders of the people, and Elders of the Priests and Levites, meaning the chief in both sorts; This honou∣rable name the Apostles gave, as a name of distincti∣on to the Euangelicall Pastors, whereby they digni∣fied them above those of the Law; whose name in the Hebrew (as I said before) is but a denomination of ministery: And we have rejected the name of Dig∣nity, of Fathership, and Eldership, and assumed in stead thereof, a name of under-service, of subjection, of ministery, to distinguish our order by; I say to di∣stinguish our order; For in a generall sense, and with reference to God, we are all his Ministers, and it is an honour unto us so to be, more then to be other mens Masters, as our Apostle in my text intimates. Fourthly, in the Churches beyond the Seas, there is a worse Solecism by reason of this misapplied speech. They have a kinde of Officers, who are the
Pastors assistants in Discipline, much like to our Churchwardens, these they call Elders, we style them Lay-Elders; These are but a kinde of Deacons at the most, and of a new erection too; And yet these are dignified by the name of Elders and Presbyters, who are indeed but Deacons or Ministers; and the Pastor himself is called a Minister, who in the Apostles style is the onely Presbyter or Elder. For so they speak, The Minister and his Presbyters, or Elders. To conclude, it had been to be wished, that those whom the term of Priest displeased, as that which gave occasion by the long abuse thereof, to fancy a Sacrifice, had rather restored the Apostolicall name of Presbyter in the full sound, which would have been as soon, and as easily learned and understood, as Mi∣nister; and was no way subject to that supposed in∣convenience. But the mis-application of the word Presbyter in some Churches, to an Order the Apo∣stles called not by that name, deprived those thereof, to whom it was properly due. Howsoever when they call us Ministers, let them account of us as the Mi∣nisters of Christ, and not of men: Not as deputed by the Congregation to execute a power originally in them, but as Stewards of the mysteries of God.
S. JOHN 10. 20. Ioh. 10. 20 He hath a Devill, and is mad. IT is a matter of greater moment, then perhaps every man thinks of, under what notions things are conceived, and from what property or Chara∣cter the names we call them by, are derived. For hereby, not seldom, it comes to passe, That the same things, presented to us under different notions, and names derived there∣from, are not taken to be the same they are. Even as he, that meets a man well known unto him, in an ex∣otick disguise, or antick habit, takes him to be some other, though he knew him never so well be∣fore. For example; a man would wonder that a Co∣met, (as we call it) being so remarkable and princi∣pall a work of the Divine power, and which draws the eyes of all men with admiration towards it, should no where be found mentioned in the Old Testament: Neither there, where the works of God are so often recounted to magnifie him, (when as Hail, Snow, Rain, and Iee, works of far lesse admiration are not preter∣mitted)
neither by way of allusion and figured ex∣pression, in the Prophets predictions of great cala∣mities and changes, whereof they were taken to be presages; especially, when we see them borrow so many other allusions, both from heaven and earth, to paint their descriptions with. Should a man therefore think, there never appeared any of them in those times, or to those Countreys? It is incredible: Or that the Jews were so dull and heed∣lesse as not to observe them? That is not like nei∣ther: What should we say then? Surely, they con∣ceived of them under some other notions then we do, and accordingly expressed them some other way: As what if by a Pillar of fire, such a one per∣haps as went before the Israelites in the Wildernesse; or by a Pillar of fire and smoke? as in that of Ioel, I will shew wonders in the heavens, and in the earth, Blood, and Fire, and pillars of Smoke: Or by the name of an Angel of the Lord, (whereby no doubt they are guided) according as is said of that Pillar of Fire which went before the Israelites, That the Angel of the Lord, when they were to passe the Red∣sea, came and stood between them and the AEgypti∣ans, when that Pillar did so. And who knows, whe∣ther that in the 104 Psalm; may not have some meaning this way? He maeth his Angels Spirits, (or windes) and his Ministers a Flame of fire, to wit, because they are wont to appear in both. It comes in, in the Psalm, among other works of God, in a fit place for such a sense; both in regard of what goes before, and follows after. These, I say, or some of these may be descriptious of those we call Comets;
which because they are disguised under another no∣tion, and not denominated from Stella, or Coma, hence we know them not. Now, to come toward my Text; a like instance to this, I take to be that of the Daemoniack, so often mentioned in the Gospel: For I make no question, but that now and then the same befals other men; whereof I have experience my self, to wit, To mar∣vel how these Daemoniacks should so abound in, and about that Nation, which was the people of God; whereas in other Nations, and their writings, we hear of no such; And that too, as it should seem, about the time of our Saviours being on earth one∣ly; because in the time before, we finde no menti∣on of them in Scripture. The wonder is yet the greater, because it seems notwithstanding all this, by the Story of the Gospel, not to have been ac∣counted then by the people of the Jews, any strange or extraordinary thing, but as a matter usuall; nor besides is taken notice of by any forrain Story. To meet with all these difficulties, (which I see not how otherwise can be easily satisfied) I am per∣swaded (till I shall hear better reason to the contra∣ry,) that these Daemoniacks were no other then such as we call mad-men, and Lunaticks; at least, that we comprehend them under those names, and that therefore they both still are, and in all times and places have been, much more frequent then we ima∣gine. The cause of which our mistake, is that disguise of another name, and notion, then we conceive them by; which makes us take them to be diverse, which are the same.
That you may rightly understand this my Asser∣tion, (before I acquaint you with the reasons which induce me thereunto) you must know, that the Ma∣sters of Physick tell us of two kindes of Deliration, or alienation of the understanding; One, ex vi mor∣bi, that, namely, which is with or from a Fever, cal∣led Delirium, or Phrenitis (the latter being a higher degree then the former;) Another kinde sine Febre, when a man, having no other disease, is crased and disturbed in his wits. And this, they say, is either simple dotage, pro∣ceeding from some weaknesse of the brain, or intel∣lective faculty; or Melancholia and Mania, which they describe and distinguish thus: Both of them to be when the understanding is so disturbed, that men ima∣gine, speak, and do things, which are most absurd, and contrary to all reason, sense, and use of men. But their difference to be in this; that melancholia is atten∣ded with fear, sadnes, silence, retirednesse and the like symptomes: Mania with rage, raving, and fury, and actions sutable; which is most properly styled madnesse. Now then, I say, that those Daemoniacks in the Gospel were such as we call mad-men: understand me to mean, not of Deliration ex vi morbi, or of sim∣ple dotage, but of these two last kindes, Melancholi∣ci and Maniaci; whereunto adde morbus Comitialis, or the falling sicknesse, and whatsoever is properly cal∣led Lunacy. Such as these, I say, the Jews beleeved (and so may we) to be troubled and acted with evill Spirits: as it is said of Sauls Melancholy, That an evil Spirit from the Lord troubled him; and therefore, passing
by all other causes and Symptomes, they thought fit to give them their Name from this, calling them , or . An occasion of the more frequent use of which expression, in our Saviours time, and the ages immediately before him, then formerly, had been, or may seem to have been given by the sect of the Sadduces, which, after the time of Hyrcanus, had much prevailed, and affirmed (as S. Luke tels us) that there was no resurrection, neither Angel, nor Spirit. To affront, and cry down whose errour, it is like enough the Pharisees, and the rest of the right-beleeving Jews who followed them, af∣fected, to draw their expressions (wheresoever they could) from Angels and Spirits: as presently they did, in the Acts, when Saint Paul awakened their fa∣ction in the Councell, saying I am a Pharisee, and the son of a Pharisee, &c. We finde no evill, say they, in this man, but if a Spirit or an Angel hath spoken unto him, let us not fight against God. Having thus sufficiently stated, and explicated my assertion, now you shall hear what grounds I have for the same: First therefore, I prove it out of the Gospel it self, and that in the first place from this Scripture, which I have chosen for my text, , he hath a Devil and is mad. Where I sup∣pose the latter words to be an explication of the former. Secondly, I prove it out of Mat. 17. 15. where it is said, There came to our Saviour a certain man knee∣ling down to him, and saying; Lord have mercy on my son,  because he is Lunatick, and sore vex∣ed: For oft times he falleth into the Fire, and oft in∣to
the water. That this Lunatick was a Daemoniack, it is evident both out of the 15. ver. of this Chapter, where it is said, Our Saviour rebuked the Devill, and he departed out of him, and the childe was cured from that very hour: As also out of the 9. of the Gospel of Saint Luke, where it is said of the self-same person, Lo, a spirit taketh him, and he cryeth out, and it teareth him, that he foameth again, and bruising him, hardly de∣parteth from him. By comparing of these places, you may gather what kinde of men they were, which the Scripture cals . Now I come to other Testimonies: And first, take notice, that the Gentiles also had the like apprehensi∣on of their mad-men; whence they called them Larva∣ti, and Cerriti, where Larvati is as much as Larvis, id est, Daemonibus acti: so Festus, Larvati, saith he, furiosi & mente moti, quasi Larvis exterriti. And for Cerriti, they were so called, quasi Cereriti, hoc est, à Cerere per∣cussi. And therefore you may remēber, that when Me∣nechmus in Plautus fains himself mad, and talks accor∣dingly, the Physitian, who was sent for to cure him, asks the old man who came to fetch him, whether he were Larvatus or Cerritus. If the Gentiles thought thus of their mad-men, should we think it strange the Jews should? I could tell you here, that the Turks conceit of their madmen, is not unlike this; but that they suppose the spirit that works in them, to be a good, rather then an evill one. But I let this passe. My next testimony shall be out of Iustin Martyr, who in his second Apology ad Antoninum, to prove (at least to a Gentile) that the souls of men have exi∣stence and sense after death, brings for an argument
their Necyomantia, and their Evocationes Mortuorum, together with other the like: & in the last place this of Daemoniacks; where by his descriptiō of them, we may easily gather what kinde of people they were, which were so taken to be. Item illi (saith he) qui à mortuorum manibus corripiuntur (for such were these Daemonia ta∣ken to be) at{que} humi abjiciuntur homines  which all call Daemoniacks and mad-men:  therefore and  were all one, as men then conceived. Note here that these  were taken to be the souls of men deceased, and that not among the Gentiles onely, but (as may seem) among the Jews also. For Iosephus in his se∣venth Book De Bello Iudaico, Cap. 25. mentioning these  upon occasion of a certain herb, supposed to be good for them, saith expresly by way of Parenthesis,  (sc. , Spiritus sunt pessimorum o∣mnum vivis immersi. I tell not this meaning to a∣vouch it for true; but only that you might understand, how Iustin Martyrs argument proceeds, to prove that souls have existence after Death, from Daemoniai. My last proof is taken from those Energumeni, (which are all one with ) so often menti∣oned in the Church Liturgies, in the ancient Ca∣nons, and in other Ecclesiasticall writings, many ages after our Saviours being on earth; and that, not as any rare and unaccustomed thing, but as ordinary and usuall. They were wont to send them out of the Church, when the Liturgie began; as they did the Poenitentes, Auditores, and Catechumeni, which might not be partakers of the holy Mysteries. If
those were not such, as we now adayes conceive of no otherwise then as mad-men, surely the world must be supposed to be very well rid of Devils, over it hath been; which for my part I beleeve not. Nay, that these  or , were such as I speak of, Balsamon and Zonaras both in their Scholia upon the Canons of the Church, will, I think, in∣form us: For to reconcile two Canons, concerning these Energumeni, which seem contradictory, one (called of the Apostles) in these words; Si quis Dae∣monem habet, ne fiat Clericus, sed neque cum fidelibus precetur: Another of Timotheus, quondam Patriarch of Alexandria, speaking thus, Si qui fidelis , debet esse sanctorum mysteriorum particeps. To recon∣cile these, I say, they affirm, the former (which ad∣mits them not) to be meant , or , of him that is continually and alwayes mad; ne forte quid mali aut inhonesti agat, aut Daemoniac as voces emittat, ita ut populum Dei conturbet, atque di∣vinum officium impediat. But that of Timotheus which admits them, to be understood , of him that is mad but by fits, and hath his Lucida intervalla. And thus I have acquain∣ted you with what I have observed, to confirm me in Vide Chryso∣stomi e∣pistol. . Item de precibus in ecclesia pro Energumenis; Hom. 4, & 5. de incom∣prehensibili Dei natura, versus finem inter Serm. ad Pop. Antioch. this opinion, and make no doubt, but there are more passages yet to be found, this way, then I have met with.
PROVERBS 21. 16. Pro. 21. 16. The Man, that wandreth out of the way of under∣standing, shall remain in the Congregation of the Dead. , in coetu Gigantum. IT is a question sometimes moved amongst Divines, and worth re∣solving; How, and by what name the place and condition of the damned (which in the Gos∣pel is called Gehenna) was ter∣med, or expressed in the Old Te∣stament before the Captivity of Babylon, and whilst the first Temple stood: For presently after the Re∣turn, the afore-mentioned name Gebenna began to be frequented; as appears both by the second of Esdras, the Chaldee Paraphrast, and other Jewish writings, where that name is often found; as also by the Gos∣pel, where our Saviour useth it, as then vulgarly known amongst the Jews. But it is as certain, that be∣fore the Captivity or second Temple (for so the Jews call the time of their state after their return) this name was not in use; both because it is no where to
be found in the Canonicall Scriptures of the old Te∣stament, which were all written within that time; and especially, because the ground and occasion there∣of was not till about that time in being; which was the pollution of the valley of the sons of Hinnom, or Tophet by King Iosiah, and the dreadfull execution of divine vengeance in that Place: Hence it became to posterity to be a name of execration, and apply∣ed to signifie the place of eternall punishment. For this valley of Hinnom (Gehinnom, or, as after∣ward they pronounced it, Gehenna) was a valley neer Jerusalem, in a place whereof, called Tophet, the children of Israel committed that abominable Ido∣latry, in making their children to passe through the fire to Moloch, that is, burnt them to the Devil. For an eternall detestation whereof, King Iosiah polluted it, and made it a place execrable, ordaining it to be the place, whither dead Carkasses, Garbage, and other unclean things should be cast out: For consuming whereof, to prevent annoyance, a conti∣nuall fire was there burning. Yea, not man onely, but the Lord himself, as it were consecrated this place, to be a place of execration, by making it the field of his vengeance, both before and after. For first, this was the place where the Angel of the Lord destroy∣ed the host of Senacherib, King of Assyria, where one hundred and eighty thousand of their Carkasses were burnt, according to that, Esay 30. Through the voyce of the Lord shall the Assyrian be beaten down. For Tophet (this was a place, I told you, in the valley of Hinnom) is ordained of old; yea for the King it is pre∣pared, he hath made it deep and large, the pile thereof is
fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone doth kindle it. This was also the place, where the Idolatrous Jews were slain, and massacred by the Babylonian armies; when their City was ta∣ken, and their Carkasses left, for want of room for buriall, for meat to the fowles of heaven, and beasts of the field; according to the word of the Lord, by the Prophet Ieremy in his seventh and nineteenth Chapters, The children of Iudah have built the high places of Tophet, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons and daughters in the fire, which I commanded them not, neither came it into my heart. Therefore behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord, that it shall be no more called Tophet, nor the valley of the son of Hinnom, but the valley of slaughter. For they shall bury in Tophet till there be no place. And the carkasses of this people shall be meat for the fowls of hea∣ven, and the beasts of the field, and none shall fray them away. Hence, as I said, this place being so many wayes execrable for what had been done therein, especially, having been as it were the gate to eternall destruction, by so remarkable judgements, and vengeance of God there executed for sin; it came to be translated to signifie the place of the damned, as the most accur∣sed, execrable, and abominable place of all places; the invisible vally of Hinnom. For such was the pro∣perty of the Jewish Language, to give Denomina∣tions unto things unseen, from such analogicall, and borrowed expressions of things visible. By all which it is apparent, that this notion of that name took its beginning after the Captivity, and was not in use before.
Still therefore we are left to seek, by what other name, and under what notion this place of the dam∣ned was expressed, before the word Gehenna, or Ge∣hinnom came to be used. I answer, out of my Text, it seems to have been called Domus, or Coetus Gi∣gantum. Vir qui erraverit à viâ intelligentiae, in Coe∣tu Gigantum commorabitur. In the Hebrew, in Coetu Rephaim, which word properly signifies Giants, and to that sense is alwayes rendred by the Seventy, , though we, and the la∣ter Interpreters, both in this, and some other pla∣ces, take it for manes, or mortui; but the ancient, I think, deserve the more credit, especially it being confessed, that the word elsewhere so signifies. In Coetu Gigantum therefore, that is, of those Giants, and Rebels against God, of whom we read Gen. 6. Those mighty men, and men of renown of the old World, whose wickednesse was so great in the earth, that it repented, and grieved God he had made man; and to take vengeance upon whom, he brought the generall Deluge upon the earth, and destroyed man and beast from the face thereof. Vir qui erraverit à viâ Doctrinae, The man that wandreth out of the way of understanding, shall go and keep them com∣pany; that is, go to that accursed place, and condi∣tion which they are in. That this construction of Coetus Rephaim is not improbable, may appear, first, by the glosse of Rabbi Solomon upon this Text, in Coetu Rephaim, that is, saith he, , in Coetu Gehennae; This notion therefore is not altogether new. Secondly, it is strengthened by comparing with
it other places of Scripture, where the like expressi∣on is used; as twise more in this Book of Proverbs; First, Chap. 2. 18. where we read according to the Vulgar, Domus mulier is alienae inclinata est ad mortem, & ad inferos semitae ejus; Here for ad inferos, the He∣brew hath , ad Gigantes; And the Seventy render it with an exegesis: , She hath put, or set her paths in Hades, or Hell, with the Giants. Again, Chap. 9. 18. Aquae furtivae dulciores sunt, & panis absconditus sua∣vior. Et ignoravit, (namely, he that goes in to a strange woman) quod ibi sint Gigantes, & in profun∣dis Inferni convivae ejus. Here in some Editions of the Vulgar are added these words: Qui enim applica∣bitur illi, descendet ad inferos, & qui abscesserit ab illâ salvabitur: an Argument how this place hath been understood; For the meaning of both these places seems to be no other, but, That the strange woman will bring them who frequent her, to hell, to keep the Apostate Giants company. There is another place in the Hagiographa, where these Rephaim are mentioned, to wit, Iob 26. 5. which though of a more ambiguous sense, and scope, yet as it is translated by the vulgar Latin, and well enough to agree with the Hebrew, seems to be no other, but a description of Hell with the former; Gi∣gantes, saith he, gemunt sub aquis, & qui habitant cum iis. Nudus est infernus coram illo (id est, Deo) & nul∣lum est operimentum perditioni. The meaning hereof seems to be this. The place where the old Giants mourn, or wail under the waters, and their fellow-in∣habitants, the rest of the damned with them, even
Infernus, and the place of Perdition it self, is naked and open to the eyes of God, from whom nothing is hid; which is agreeable to that, Pro. 15. 11. Hell and destruction are before the Lord, how much more then the hearts of the children of men? In this place the Jews take the word Abaddon, which we render destruction, for Gehenna; that is, elliptically, for Beth Abaddon, the House of destruction. And why then should not the same word be so taken in that place of Iob? and Nul∣lum est operimentum perditioni, be as much as, Nul∣lum est operimentum Loco perditionis, or Gehennae? Compare with these places in the Hagiographa, two in the Prophets; One in the 14. of Esay; where by way of a Poeticall or Propheticall hypotyposis of the destruction or fall of Babylon, the King thereof is brought in coming to the Rephaims, or Giants in the other world. Hell (saith the Text) from beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming: it stir∣reth up the Rephaims for thee, even all the chief ones of the earth: And they shall say unto thee, Art thou also become weak as we? art thou become like unto us? The other is the 32 of Ezekiel, concerning the fall of Egypt, where their slain are bestowed in like man∣ner, in the nethermost parts of the earth, with the Gibborim; which signifies not onely mighty men, but Giants, and so is rendred in this place by the Se∣venty: And thus much from comparison of places of Scripture. A third Argument to make this notion probable, which I have represented, is this; Because all the ex∣pressions almost in Scripture, whereby this place of eternall punishment is represented, relate and allude
to some places or Stories remarkable for Gods ex∣emplary vengeance executed upon sinners. As that of Gehenna to the notorious Judgements of God in the valley of Hinnom, for Idolatry, and Blasphemy. That of the Lake of fire and brimstone, so often mentioned in the Apocalypse, to the Lake Asphalti∣tes, the lasting monument of those showers of fire and brimstone from heaven, wherewith Sodom and Go∣morrah with the rest of the Cities of the plain peri∣shed for their abominable lusts. Our Saviours expres∣sion in his sentence of condemnation, (Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devill and his Angels) seems to relate to the punishment of the Apostate Angels, who for their rebellion were delive∣red unto chains of darknesse against that great Day. And was not the destruction of the old world, by the generall Deluge of water, as famous as any of these? Yea, not to be paralleld by any, but that second De∣luge of fire, at the last Judgement? How improba∣ble is it then, that this should not lend a denomina∣tion to the place or state of eternall punishment, as well as the rest? Nay, which is more, S. Peter in his second Epistle, and second Chapter recites these last three together, as if they had been intended, as patterns of the eter∣nall Judgement and punishment of sinfull men. For (saith he) if God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, and delivered them to chains of darknesse, to be reserved unto judgement. 5. And spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eight per∣son, a Preacher of righteousnesse, bringing in the Flood upon the world of the ungodly, (that is, of the Rephaim,
for so the Seventy sometimes turn it.) 6. And turn∣ing the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, con∣demned them with an overthrow, making them an en∣sample, or pattern (mark it well, , (i.) , of the punishment) of such, as should after live ungodly: (Hence, as I told you, was the Lake Asphaltites, or the Lake of fire and brimstone, borrowed by Saint Iohn, for a deno∣mination of hell.) 7. And he delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked; (If God did this) 9. He knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of Iudgement, to be punished. Ye see the applicati∣on, or reddition, and accordingly, how prone the destruction of the world, of the Rephaim or ungodly by the Deluge, is, to give denominati∣on to the punishment of Hell, as well as the o∣ther two. And now, I suppose, you look for my Appli∣cation, and putting the whole Text together, which I shall do: He that goeth astray from the way of under∣standing, (that is, he that wandereth from the Law and Discipline of God; For that indeed is the true wisdom. Timor Domini principium sapientiae, The fear of God is the prime wisdom; that is the mea∣ning; or to speak after our Academicall notion, the chief Philosophy; whence, through all this Book of the Proverbs, the wicked man who hath no skill in this Divine Philosophy, or Discipline of God, goeth for a Fool, and so is called) must one day go even to his Fellow-giants; who, as Baruch sayes in his third Chapter, were destroyed, because they
had no wisdom, and perished through their own foo∣lishnesse. Vir qui erraverit à viâ Doctrina, in Coetu Gigantum commorabitur. They who thus go astray, shall go to those Rephaims of the old World, whose true sons they are; that is, unto the place of ever∣lasting punishment; From which God deliver us.
GEN. 49. 10. Gen. 49. 10. The Scepter shall not depart from Iudah, nor a Law-giver from between his feet, untill SHI∣LOH come, and unto him shall the gathering of the People be. IT is a Prophecy of the coming of Christ, and the time thereof; namely, when the Scepter shall depart from Iudah; then should the coming, reign, and Scepter of Messiah begin, and not till then. The end of the one, should be the beginning of the other: Whence ariseth our demonstration against the Jew; If the Scepter be already departed from Iudah, as we know it is, many hundred years since; then must Christ needs be come. For the Scepter was not to depart from Iudah, nor a Lawgiver from be∣tween his feet, untill Shiloh came. For, that Shiloh here, is the name of Messiah, ap∣pears by the subjunction annexed, That the People or Nations (for it is , in the plurall number,) should be gathered, or obedient, unto him: Ergo, he is to be a King of the Nations; and who should this be but Christ?
That the ancient Jews so understood it, appears by all the three Targums, or Chaldee Paraphrasts. The Targum, called of Jerusalem, renders expresly: Untill the time when , King Messiah shall come: Ionathan: parvulus filiorum ejus, that is, of Iudahs sons, which one of the late Rabbies (saith Bux∣torf.) expounds, Rex Messiah, qui venit ex David, qui fuit minimus inter filios Isai Patris sui: Onkelos; Untill Messiah come, whose is the Kingdom. Like∣wise in their Thalmud, Shiloh is reckoned among the names of Messiah. Thus we and the Ancient Jews agree, about the aim and purport of this Scripture. But we Christi∣ans beleeve further, that it is long since fulfilled: Howsoever for the very point of time, when this Scepter departed from Iudah, we vary in our opini∣ons. Some will have it to have been, when Pompey first brought the Jewish State under the Roman sub∣jection. Others a little after: when Herod, an Idu∣mean stranger, yet formerly incorporated into the Jewish State and blood, was by the Romans inve∣sted to be their King, and the Hasmonaean, or Mac∣cabaean race (which till then had born the chief rule) by him extinguished. Others, not till the destructi∣on and finall dissolution of the Jewish State by Titus. These are principall moments of time, to be pit∣ched upon: But against the first, the subjecting of the Jewish State to the Romans, is objected; First, that it anticipates the time of Christs birth too much, be∣ing sixty years before it. Secondly, that it might as well be affirmed, that the Scepter departed from Iu∣dah,
when Nebuchadnezzar carried them captive to Babylon; or when they were subject to the Persian or Greek Monarchies, as when they were made subject to the Romans. Against the second, of Herod, lies the same excep∣tion that did against the former; that it was too ear∣ly, being thirty years and more, before the birth of Christ; and more then twice as much, before his pas∣sion and ascension, at what time he began his King∣dom. Secondly, that under the reign of Herod, the Scepter of Iudah might seem rather to be advanced then departed; for as much as they had then a King of their own, reigning over them; and though not of Jewish originall, yet a Proselyte, and so one of their own body. And, if the Scepter were departed from Iudah, because one not of their own Tribe had the soveraign rule over them; why was it not depar∣ted all the time, the Hasmonaean or Maccabaean fa∣milies, who were Levites, reigned? No man would say, that the Scepter were departed from Poland, though the Polanders should chuse a Swede, a Ger∣man, or a Frenchman, for their King. So neither from Iudah, though a Levite, or Idumaean Proselyte were their Prince. Against the last point of time, the dissolution of the Jewish State by Titus, is excepted, that it is as much too long after, either the Nativity or the Pas∣sion of Christ, as the other two were before it; to wit, seventy years after the one, and near forty after the other. I mean not to enlarge my self any further, in ac∣quainting you with each particular passage, agitated
concerning these differing opinions, or alledged in the disputing of them: I have selected onely so much, as I thought requisite for the understanding of what I aim at, which is to shew you such a con∣struction of these words, with but a little alteration of the common translating; as being admitted, will leave no more place for those difficulties, wherewith this question is entangled. For the handling whereof, I will divide the re∣mainder of my discourse into these two parts: First, I will unfold the words of my Text, which seem to have any difficulty or obscurity in them: Secondly, I will apply them to the time, wherein they were fulfilled. For the first; I begin with the word Scepter, which is not to be restrained to Kingly Dominion onely, but signifies any power, or Majesty of Government, under what form or name soever; whereof a rod, or staffe, was anciently the ensigne, whence every Tribe is cal∣led , (by the word here used) as being united together under one staffe, or power of Govern∣ment: The meaning therefore is not, that Iudah should never cease from having a King, or being a Kingdom; but that it should not cease from being a State, a body Politick, or Common-wealth, having a power of Government, and Jurisdiction within it self, untill Messiah came: wherefore the Septuagint here for Sceptrum, or , translate , not , say they, . For it is cer∣tain, that Iudah was so far from being a continued Kingdom, untill Messiah should come, that there was no Kingly Royalty in that Tribe, for more then two
third parts of that time, namely, not till David, nor after Zedekiah, saving that of the Maccabees, (who were Levites) and of Herod, (by originall an Edo∣mite) which both put together, will not make four∣score years; yet were they never without some Ruler, or Rulers of their own, at that time. The next word I consider, is Law giver, which will not be hard to understand, if we mark well, what is implied by Scepter; for , the word here trans∣lated Law giver, signifies not onely a maker of Laws, but qui jus dicit, he that exerciseth Jurisdiction; and so differs not much from the former, if they be not altogether Synonyma. As for the phrase, from between his feet, it means nothing else, but of his posterity; For so the Scri∣pture modestly expresseth the place of generation; as it doth also by the word , Femur, or Crus. For where we reade in the 26. of this Book of Genesis, and again in the first of Exodus; All the souls that came out of the loins of Iacob, were seventy souls: in the Hebrew it is, all the souls that came out of his thigh: whence, by the way, you may observe the occasion of that Fable, that Bacchus or Dionysius was born ex femore Iovis; which according to the Orientall expression, (whence that whole story of Bacchus came) implied no more, then that he was Iupiters son; but the Greeks, not understanding the meaning, converted it unto that Fable, which you all know. Now for the word Shiloh, if we derive it, as I think we should, it will signifie a Peace-maker, or Sa∣viour, of the verb , which signifies Tranquillus,
Pacificus, or Salvus fuit. And if the Masorites had so pleas'd, they might have pointed it , which was the name of the eldest son of Iudah that survi∣ved; and in the Hebrew Etymology, can signifie nothing else, but Peaceable, or Peace-maker. And whether the Patriarch Iacob, or the Holy Ghost di∣recting him, might not chuse this name, before any other, to designe Messiah in this Prophecy, in re∣spect of the allusion it had to one of Iudahs sons, I will not affirm; but leave to your better considera∣tion. Others, following the Jewish Rabbies, go far∣ther about, to bring the word Shiloh, to signifie Fi∣lius ejus, that is, Iudahs; construing the Prophesie thus: The scepter shall not depart from Iudah, till his son (namely, Messiah) come: For  they will have put for the affix Vau, as sometimes it is elsewhere , to be for , Secundina, (that wherein the infant is wrapped in the womb) and so by a Metonymie to signifie here, the Childe it self. In a word, they will have , to be for , Secundina ejus; and that to mean Filius ejus. But this, me thinks, is some∣what too ambagious, and therefore lesse probable; but let every one follow his own judgement. And now I am come to the Application, to shew at what point of time this prediction was fulfilled: To make the way plain whereunto, I must first alter a little the construction of the remaining words; namely, And unto him shall the gathering of the Peo∣ple, or the Nations, be. For here the word, shall be, or shall, is not in the Hebrew, but added in translating, and so may be left out; the words in the originall being onely, Et ei aggregatio, or obedientia populo∣rum:
I construe therefore the word , or Vntill, , as common to this with the former sen∣tence; namely, thus: The Scepter shall not depart from Iudah, &c. untill Shiloh come, and the gather∣ing of the people be to him: (that is) Untill Messiah come, and the People or Nations be gathered unto him, the Scepter shall not depart: Where note, that two things are specified to come to passe, before the Scepter departs from Iudah, or Iudah ceases from being a Common-wealth: First, the comming of Christ, or Shiloh into the world: Secondly, the ga∣thering of the Nations, or Gentiles unto him. For I construe the word Vntill, as I told you, as com∣mon to both sentences, Vntill Shiloh come, and untill the Nations be gathered unto him. And now, me thinks, your thoughts might al∣most prevent me, in designing the time when this prediction was fulfilled: namely, neither when the Jews came first under the Roman subjection, for then Shiloh was not yet come: nor under Herod, or as some will seven years after him, when his son Arche∣laus being banished, Judaea was reduced into a Pro∣vince: For though Christ was then born, to wit, in the end of Herods reign, yet were not the Nations or Gentiles yet gathered unto him: But at the de∣struction of the Jewish State by Titus, when both these things were come to passe, Christ being come, and the Gentiles converted unto his obedience, then did the Scepter depart from Judah, and they cease from being any more a Common-wealth. That this is the true application of this prediction, besides the evidence of the event, appears by our
Saviours Prophesie of this destruction of the Jewish State, in the Gospel of S. Mat; where, after he had named some other things to precede it, he addes this for the last signe; And this Gospel of the Kingdom, saith he, shall be preached in all the world for a witnesse unto all Nations, and then shall the end come: that is, the end of the Jewish State; when the Gentiles, by the preaching of the Apostles, should be gathered unto Christ, then should the Jewish Church and Common-wealth be utterly dissolved; which till then had continued united under some Polity, and form of Government from its first beginning; For so it pleased the wisdom of Almighty God, when he would reject the Iews, not to dissolve their State, till he had erected him a new among the Gentiles.
PSALM 8. 2. Psal. 8. 2. Out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings, thou hast ordained strength, because of thine enemies; that thou mightest quell the Enemy, and the Avenger. THese words are alledged by our bles∣sed Saviour, Matth. 21. 16. and three more of the verses following this by S. Paul, to prove, that Christ must raign till he had subdued all his ene∣mies under his feet: As Heb. 2. 4. What is man, that thou art mindefull of him? or the son of man, that thou visitest him? 5. For thou hast made him little lower then the Angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour. 6. Thou hast made him to have dominion over the works of thine hands; thou hast put all things under his feet. Again, 1 Cor. 15. 23. Christ, (saith he) shall deliver up the Kingdom to God the Father, when he shall have put down all rule, au∣thority and power. 25 For he must raign, till he hath put all enemies under his feet. 26. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. 27. For he hath put all things under his feet. This is the quotation; for it
follows presently; When he saith all things are put un∣der him, it is manifest that he is excepted, which did put all things under him. How principall a part of the Argument of this Psalm, what is in these two places cited by S. Paul, contains, every man may see, that reades and com∣pares them. But how it should be consonant to the meaning of the Psalm, seems somewhat difficult to ap∣prehend. For he that reades the whole Psalm, would think it were nothing else, but a description of mans ex∣cellency; whom God had made next to the Angels in dignity, & given him dominion over all things he hath made. For so after those words, Thou hast put all things under his feet; it follows immediately, All sheep and Oxen, yea and beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the Sea, and whatsoever passeth through the paths of the Sea. But what is the dominion over these, to subduing of enemies, which the Apostle cites it for? or how is that, which is a description of man∣kinde in generall, a Prophecy of Christ in speciall? Some therefore, as in other citations of the Old Testament, so here also, betake themselves to the covert of an Allusion; namely, that the Apostle onely borrows the words of the Psalmist, to expresse his own, and not the Psalmists mean∣ing. But, howsoever this may have place in some other allegations of the Old Testament, which are for Illustration or Exornation onely; yet when the testimony is brought for proof and demonstration, as this is, it can in no wise be admitted. For how can that testimony be of force to conclude any thing, where not the Authors meaning is brought, but his
words onely made use of? Others therefore say, that whatsoever is spoken of the Dignity and Ex∣cellency of Man in generall, is to be understood by way of eminency of Christ, the chief of the sons of men. This indeed is something, but not enough. For what is the dignity of man, in regard of his Dominion and Lordship over the creature, to con∣quering and subduing of enemies? which is that the Apostle seeks to demonstrate thence. Well, to hold you no longer in suspence, the key of the interpretation of this Psalm, and the ground of S. Pauls accommodation of that passage (Thou hast put all things under his feet) to Christs victory, is to be sought in the words I have now chosen; Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings, &c. which being first alledged by our Saviour in the Gospel, in de∣fence of that acclamation given unto him by his fol∣lowers, Hosanna, (that is, Save now) to the son of Da∣vid; (which the Pharisees thought too high an attri∣bute, to be deferred to flesh and blood) this appli∣cation thereof by Christ to himself, gave the Apo∣stle good warrant, to interpret the Psalm as he did, and to ground a Demonstration thereon. I shall therefore divide my discourse into two parts; First, I will shew the meaning of the words as they stand in the Psalm: And secondly, make it ap∣pear, that our Saviour in the Gospel cites them accor∣ding to that meaning. The whole drift therefore of the Psalm, is to praise and glorifie God for the dignity wherewith he hath invested Man: What is man (saith he) that thou art mindefull of him, or the son of man that thou vi∣sitest
him? For thou hast made him little lower then the Angels, and hast crowned him with glory and ho∣nour. This glory and honour is exemplified in two particulars: First, that God hath ordained man, e∣ven that weak and feeble creature, Man, to subdue and conquer his enemies; which is that my Text ex∣presseth in the words before named; Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings, thou hast ordained strength, because of thine enemies, that thou mightest quell the Enemie, and the Avenger. Secondly, that he hath made man the Lord of all his Creatures: Thou hast made him, saith he) to have dominion over the works of thine hands: then follows, as it were the summing up of both in a word: Thou hast put all things under his feet. For having ordained him, both the Cham∣pion to conquer thine enemies, and made him at his Creation the Lord and Ruler of the works of thine hands, Quid reliquum est? what honour couldst thou have given him, which thou hast not? Lord! (therefore) what is man, that thou art mindefull of him, or the son of man that thou visitest him? Where is to be observed, that the Corollarie, Thou hast put all things under his feet, comes in before his time, namely, before the description of this exemplifi∣cation of mans dominion over the creature, was ful∣ly ended: as if the Prophet, out of admiration, could hold no longer from telling us the summe of that Dignity, wherewith man was invested. Thou hast made him (saith he) to have Dominion over the works of thine hands, and so one way or other, Thou hast put all things under his feet. Then follows the other part of the Description, All Sheep and Oxen,
over these thou hast made him have Dominion, The Beasts of the field, the Fowles of the air, and the Fish of the Sea: whereas in direct order it should have stood thus; Thou hast made him have Dominion over the works of thine hands, over all Sheep and Oxen, the Beasts of the Field, and Fowles of the Air, and Fish of the Sea; And so in the upshot; Thou hast put all things under his feet. For this last particular of mans dignity, to have Dominion over the Creatures, is so plainly and evi∣dently intended in the Psalm, that I shall need speak no more of it: I return therefore to the former, to make it clear also. That God ordained man, not onely to exercise Dominion over the visible crea∣tures, but to be the Champion to conquer and sub∣due his Enemies; which is the drift of the words I have chosen for my text. Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings (saith he) that is, of mankinde, who springs from so weak and poor a beginning, as of Babes and sucklings; name∣ly, out of the mouth of babes, not in sensu composi∣to, but diviso: Of such whose condition is to be babes and sucklings; not that they should exercise this strength he speaks of, To quell the enemy and the Avenger, while they were babes; but that this power should be given to those, whose condition was to be such. And this is marvellous enough, that God should advance so weak a creature, and of so despicable a beginning, to such a power, as to grapple with the Enemy, and overcome him. But behold, there is yet something more admirable, namely, that this should not be done by the strength
of his Arm, but by the breath & power of his Mouth. Out of the mouth of Babes and sucklings thou hast or∣dained strength because of thine enemies. &c. What Enemies? Thine, saith the Psalmist, and such too, as are ultores, avengers, the enemies both of God and mankinde: And who are those, but Satan, and his Angels? those Principalities and Powers of the Air, those , and Rulers of the Darknesse of this world, as Saint Paul speaks: For when man∣kinde is the one party, what can the other be but some Power that is not of mankinde? Besides, who are the Enemies both of God and mankinde but these? And of mankinde especially; I put enmity, saith God to the serpent, between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed: Hence he is called Satan, the adversary, or Fiend, and the enemy . Behold, I give you power (saith our Saviour to the seventy Disciples, Luke 10. 19.) to tread on serpents, and scorpions, and over all the Power of the Enemy; Your Adversary the Devill (saith S. Peter) And this is he as I conceive who is here called the , the Enemy & the Avenger; mans tormentor; which words being found again in the 44. Psalm, may, for ought I know, by warrant of this place, be taken for the same Enemy, and the usuall distinction alter∣ed, and the place read thus. By reason of the Enemy and the Avenger, all this (to wit, the Calamity and confusion he spake of before) is come upon us; that is, by the malice of Satan. Now that such Enemies as these, should be subdued by an arm; yea, by a mouth of flesh, is a thing which might justly make the Pro∣phet cry out; Lord what is man, &c.
Now that this, which I have given, is the true meaning of this place, may be gathered from S. Paul inculcating the word Enemy; when 1 Cor. 15. he de∣monstrates out of this Psalm, that Christ, before the end, shall abolish , For He must raign, saith he, till he hath put all enemies un∣der his feet: The last Enemy which shall be destroyed  Death: and then he alledges for his proof, that Co∣rollary in this Psalm, For he hath put all things un∣der his feet: But, in all this Psalm, there is no men∣tion of Enemies, or subduing them, but onely in the verse I have in hand; which unlesse it be thus ex∣pounded, S. Pauls allegation from hence will be too narrow, to prove what he intendeth. Having thus cleered the words I chose for my Theme, I shall not spend much time to shew you, how directly and literally, the purport of them was fulfilled in our blessed Saviours incarnation: You have, in part, heard such Scriptures already, as do evince it. The summe is this: The Devill, by sin, brought mankinde under thraldom, and became the prince of this world, himself, with his Angels, be∣ing worshipped and served every where, as Gods; and the service and honour due to the great God, the Creator of heaven and earth, cast off, and aban∣doned; and all this to receive at last, for reward, e∣ternall wo and everlasting death. To vanquish and exterminate this enemy, and redeem the world from this miserable thraldom, the Son of God took upon him, not the nature of Angels, (which might have been the enemies matches) but the nature of weak and despicable man, that growes from a babe and
suckling: Who (saith Esay, in that famous Prophecy of Messiah) hath beleeved our report, and to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? (namely, that works such powerfull things by weak means:) for he shall grow [] as a tender plant, or sucker; (it is the very word here used in my Text, for a sucking childe, and translated by the Seventy ) and as a root out of a dry ground; that is, a small and little one. This is that whereof S. Paul discourses so divinely, in the Epistle to the Hebrews: To which of the An∣gels said he at anytime, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool? For unto the An∣gels hath he not put in subjection the world to come, whereof we speak: but unto him, of whom it is said, What is man that thou art mindefull of him, or, &c. Again, We see Iesus, who was made little lower then the Angels, (that is, was made man; that's the meaning) for the suffering of death, crowned with Glory and Ho∣nour: what can be so plain as this? It is the Son of man, by whom in part we are, and more fully shall be, delivered out of the hands of our enemies, that we might serve the true God without fear; as Zacha∣ry sayes in his Benedictus. It is the Son of man that delivered us from the power of darknesse, Col. 1. 13. The Son of man, that spoiled Principalities and Powers, and made a shew of them openly, Col. 2. 15. It was no Angel, that did all this; but the Son of man; even as was prophesied from the beginning, when the De∣vill first got his Dominion; That the Seed of the wo∣man should break the Serpents head. Nor is this all; for this Son of man enables also other sons of men his Disciples and Ministers to do
the like in his name: The seventy Disciples, in the Gospel, return with joy, saying, Lord, even the De∣vils are subject to us through thy name: Yea, not these onely, but as many as fight under his Banner against these enemies, have promise they shall at length quell and utterly subdue them: Yea, at that great Day shall sit with their Lord and Master, to judge and condemn them. Do ye not know, saith S. Paul, that the Saints shall judge the world? know ye not that we shall judge Angels? Lastly, this victory, as for the event, so for the manner of atchieving it, is agreeable to our Pro∣phesie. For as much as Christ our Generall, nor fights, nor conquers by force of Arms, but by the power of his Word and Spirit; which is the power of his mouth, according to my Text; Out of the mouth of Babes, &c. Hence, in the Apocalypse, Christ appears with a sword going out of his mouth: In the 2 Thess. 2. it is said, He shall consume Antichrist with the Spirit of his mouth: Esay prophesies, Chap. 11. 4. That the Branch of Iesse should smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips should stay the wicked. That is, he does all nu & verbo, as God made the world: By the word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Hoasts of them by the breath of his mouth, Psal 33. 6. So doth Christ vanquish his enemies, and enable his Mini∣sters to vanquish them, Verbo & Spiritu oris, accord∣ing to that Hos. 6. 5. I have hewed them by my Pro∣phets, and slain them by the words of my mouth. I come now to the second thing I propounded; namely, to shew, that our Saviour in the Gospel,
when he cited this place, alledged it for, and accord∣ing to this, and no other meaning. The Euange∣list relates it thus; When the chief Priests and Scribes saw the wonderfull things that Jesus did, and those in the Temple crying, and saying, Hosan∣na to the son of David, they were sore displeased; and said unto him, Hearest thou what these say? how they ascribe the power of salvation, (which is Gods peculiar) to thee, who art a son of man? Is that solemn acclamation of Save now, wherewith we are wont to glorifie God, fit to be given to thee? Our Saviour answers, Yes; for have ye not read, (saith he) Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings, thou hast ordained strength? Consider what that means. You will wonder perhaps, that a thing so plain, could be taken in a differing meaning. For, it is common∣ly supposed to be alledged, onely to prove that children should glorifie Christ, whilest the great ones of the world despised him: And there are two things which have occasioned this mistake, and drawn the sense awry; The first is, because the Septuagint, (according to which the Euangelist reads this place) in stead of strength, translate here , praise; Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings, thou hast ordai∣ned praise. Secondly, because those who made this acclamation, are said to have been , When they saw the things which Iesus did, , To the first, I answer, Our Savi∣our alledged not the words of the Psalm in Greek, but in Hebrew; where it is , strength, which is the constant signification thereof, through the whole Bible, and never Praise: Nor do the Seventy them∣selves
ever translate it otherwise, save, as it seems, in this place. But whatsoever the use of the word , be otherwise, it must be here regulated by the He∣brew verity; according to which our Saviour al∣ledged it, and must signifie not simply, praise, but Robur praedicandum, or Robur laude dignum, Robur celebrandum, or the like. To the second, that they are called , who made this acclamation of Hosanna, to our Saviour; I answer, Be it so: yet I am sure, they were no babes and sucklings, but of reasonable years; How then would our Savi∣ours quotation have, in such a sense, been perti∣nent? Besides, young children are not properly called , but . Again, the Pharisees found no fault with the speakers, but with the thing spo∣ken; which they thought too much for a man; and therefore our Saviour, when he alledged this Scripture, answered to that, and intended not to Apologise for the speakers. Fourthly, in all rea∣son, those who cried here Hosanna in the Tem∣ple, were the same company, that brought him crying Hosanna all the way thither. But these (saith Saint Mark) were of the multitude which followed him; and S. Luke of the multitude of the Disciples; who also tels us, that the Pharisees, who were offended thereat, bad him rebuke his Disciples.  therefore here signifies, either Christs Di∣sciples, or the retinue which followed him, and brought him up thither, as a King. Take which ye will, you shall not fasten upon the word, any notion other then usuall: I shall not need to tell you the Disciples of the Prophets are called, sons of
the Prophets, that is,  or that He∣rods Courtiers, Matth. 14. are termed his  He said , This is Iohn the Baptist, &c. Christ cals his Disciples , Iohn 21. 5.
ZACH. 4. 10. Zach. 4. 10. These seven are the eyes of the Lord, which run to and fro through the whole earth. IT is hard to keep a mean; which, as appears in many things else, so, in the Doctrine and speculation of Angels, whereunto men were heretofore so much addicted, as they pursued it, not onely to vain and ungrounded Theories, but even to Idolatry and superstition. There were in the Apostles times, who intruded in∣to things they had not seen: there were then, who be∣guiled men with a voluntary humility in worshipping of Angels, Col. 2. what after times brought forth, I shall not need speak. That ancient, and high soar∣ing (though counterfeit) Dionysius, describes the Hierarchy of Angels, as exactly as if he had dwelt amongst them, delivering unto us nine Orders of them, out of nine words, found partly in the Old, partly in the New Testament; Seraphims, Cherubims, and Thrones, Powers, Hosts, and Dominions; Principa∣lities, Arch-angels, and Angels; and tels us the seve∣rall natures, distinctions, and properties of them all:
Whereas it cannot be shewn out of Scripture, either that some of these names concurre not, (as Angels, not to be a common name to all the rest, especially to comprehend Arch-angels) or that these are de∣nominations of the natures of Angels, and not of their offices and charges onely; yet have these nine Orders passed for currant through so many ages of the Church. But we, who (together with divers superstitions) have justly rejected also these vain and ungrounded curiosities, are faln into the other extream; having bu∣ried the Doctrine of Angels in silence, making little or no enquiry at all, what God in his Word hath re∣vealed concerning them: which yet would make not a little for the understanding of Scripture, wherein are so many passages having reference to them, and therefore questionlesse something revealed concern∣ing them. I shall not therefore do amisse, if I choose for my discourse at this time, a particular of that kinde, which Dionysius in all his speculations hath not a word of; and yet seems to have strong footing in Scripture: It is this: The Jews have an ancient tradition, that there are seven principall Angels, which minister before the Throne of God, and therefore called Arch-an∣gels; Some of whose names we have in Scripture, as Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, and in the second Book of Esdras, mention is made of Ierechmiel the Arch-Angel. This Tradition we shall finde recorded in the Book of Tobit (whose antiquity is before the birth of our Saviour:) For there the Angel, who in
the shape of Azariah had accompanied his son into Media, when he discovers himself, speaks in this manner; I am Raphael, one of the seven Angels, which stand and minister before the glory of the holy One. The Vide Cyp. adv. Iud. li. 1. 20. H lar. in Psal. 129. vel. 130. Greek hath, which present the Prayers of the Saints, and go in and out, before the holy One. But neither Saint Hierome, who translated it out of the Chaldee, nor the ancient Hebrew Copie set forth by Paulus Fagius, (and in likelihood translated out of the same Chaldee Originall) hath any such matter; but reads as I first quoted. And therefore it seemes to be an addition, or liberty of the Greek Translator, who thought their Ministery to consist in presenting the Prayers of the Saints, and so translated accor∣dingly. This tradition is farther testified by Ionathan ben Vziel, the Chaldee Paraphrast, Gen. 11. 7. where the Lords words, spoken in the plurall number, Ve∣nite, descendamus, & confundamus linguam eorum, are paraphrased in this manner. Dixit Dominus sep∣tem Angelis, qui stant coram eo, Venite nunc, &c. Whether rightly or fitly in this place, it mat∣ters not: The testimony is sufficient for the Jewish tradition of seven Arch-angels, that stand before the Throne of God. This tradition Iunius saith is magicall; and not a little triumphs therein, as an undoubted Argu∣ment to evince the Book of Tobit not to be Canoni∣call: But whatsoever the Book of Tobit be, I hope to shew this tradition to have firm ground, and footing in Scripture, and not so rashly to be re∣jected.
The chief and most clear place is that I have now read; which gives us to understand, that these se∣ven Angels were represented by that Candlestick of Seven Lamps, which continually burned, in the Temple, before the vail, over against the Mercy seat; which was the Throne of God. For in the be∣ginning of the Chapter, the Prophet being shewed this Seven-lamped Candlestick in a Vision, and two Olive-branches on each side, ministring oyle to the Lamps thereof: The Angel asketh him, if he knew what these meant: The Prophet answers; No, my Lord; Then the Angel, discoursing a little by way of Preface, tels him what they were: These seven, saith he, (that is, the seven Lamps) are the seven eyes Angeli dicuntur  magni Re∣gis. Philo. Lib. de Somni is. of the Lord, which run to and fro through the whole earth: that is, those Seven Vigiles, or prime Mini∣sters of his Providence, the seven Arch-angels, As for the two Olive-trees on each side; These are, saith he, two anointed ones, which stand before the Lord of the whole earth; that is, Zorobabel, and Ie∣sua; the Prince and Priest, at that time; which should be Gods two instruments on earth, whereby his Church (signified by the Candlestick) should be re-established, and his Temple builded; and that not by force, or strength, as he saith in his Preface, but by the Spirit of God, working with them; as the olive trees here conveyed oyle to the Candlestick, not after a naturall and usuall, but a supernaturall and secret manner. This interpretation of the latter, hath the suffrage of the best Expositors, both Jews and Christians; and so I shall need say no more of it: but betake my self to make good the first, con∣cerning
the words I chose for my Text, That those seven eyes of God, signified by the seven Lamps, are seven Angels. That this is so, I prove out of two places in the Apocalypse, derived from hence; where as well the Seven Lamps before the Throne, as the Lambs Seven eyes are said to be the Seven Spirits of God: I saw (saith Saint Iohn, cap. 4. 5.) Seven Lamps be∣fore the Throne, which are the Seven Spirits of God. And again, cap. 5. 6. I saw in the midst of the Throne, and of the four Beasts, (as we translate it) and of the four and twenty Elders, a Lamb, as if he had been slain, having seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth. Here first, we have Zacharies very words, Seven eyes sent forth into all the earth: Secondly, That these se∣ven eyes are the seven Spirits of God: Thirdly, that these seven Spirits were represented by the seven Lamps burning before the Throne. If this be not suf∣ficient to make my interpretation of Zacharie good, I know not what can be. For who can now but think, that the Jews derived their tradition of these seven Angels, from this place of Zachary, and the Apoca∣lypse from them both? And that indeed the Jews supposed some such thing meant by the seven Lamps in the Temple, ap∣pears by the report of Iosephus, though depraved and fashioned unto the capacity of the Gentiles: For he tels us (both in his Antiquities, Lib. 3. cap. 7. and in his De Bello Iudaico Lib. 6. cap. 14.) that the seven Lamps signified the seven Planets, and the most ho∣ly place within the vail, (ibid. cap. 5.) the heaven of
God, or heaven of Glory; and that therefore the Lamps stood slopewise, as it were to expresse the obliquity of the Zodiack: Now it is true, that the Jewish Astrologians, savouring of Gentilism, make these seven Angels the prefects of the seven Planets, which they seem to have learned in part from the Greek Philosophy; which conceit, howsoever it be vain and groundlesse, yet may be as a key to under∣stand the meaning of this of Iosephus. And one thing more; If the visible things of God may be learned, as Saint Paul sayes, from the Creation of the world; why may not the invisible and intelligible world be learned from the Fabrick of the visible? the one (it may be) being the pattern of the other. But to let this passe, and return again to the Apocalypse. Where concerning the places alledged, there may be two things objected: First, That the seven spirits there mentioned, are and may be expounded of the Holy Ghost, thus represented in respect of those se∣ven-fold, (that is, manifold) Graces he communi∣cates unto the Church: I answer, that many indeed have so taken it; but, besides the uncouthnesse of ex∣pressing one spirit by seven, there is a reason in the Text why they cannot be so taken; namely, because not onely the seven Lamps are said to be those seven Spirits of God; but the seven Eyes, and seven Horns of the Lamb also, to be the same: Now it will be very hard and harsh to make the Holy Ghost, the Horns and Eyes of Christ, as he is the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sins of the world; that is, as he is a Man: Above Angels indeed the Man Iesus is exalted, and that too for the suffering
of death, that is, as the Lamb: but not above the Holy Ghost. This made not onely Drusius, but e∣ven Beza himself, in his Notes upon this place, to affirm, it could not be meant of the Holy Ghost, but of seven created Spirits. A second scruple is, how (if they be created spi∣rits) Iohn could pray for Grace, and Peace from them? Grace be unto you, (saith he) and peace, from him which is, which was, and is to come, and from the seven spirits, which are before his Throne, and from Iesus Christ the faithful witnesse, &c. would he pray for Grace, and peace from Angels? I answer, Why not? For first, he prayes not to them, but unto God, unto whom such votes are tendered: Second∣ly, he prayes for Grace and Peace from them, not as Authors, but as the Instruments of God, in the dispensation thereof: Are they not , sent forth to minister for them, who are heirs of salva∣tion? And if it be no Idolatry to pray unto God, to give Grace and Peace from the outward Ministery of his word; no more is it to pray unto him for it, from the invisible Ministery. For certainly, it is law∣full to pray unto God for a blessing from an instru∣ment, which he is wont to give us by an instrument. Secondly, it may be said, that the words, Grace and Peace, need not to be taken in that speciall and strict sense; but in the large and generall, wherein Grace sounds favour at large, and Peace all manner of prosperity. In which sense, no man will deny, but the blessed Angels have an interest in the dispen∣sation of the favours and blessings of God to his Church: and so God may be prayed to, to give
them, as he is wont, by their ministery. Grace and Peace from him which is, which was, and is to come, as the Author and Giver; and from the seven Spi∣rits, as the Instruments; and from Iesus Christ, as the Mediator. There is yet one place more in the Apocalypse, to confirm this tradition, chap. 8. 2. I saw, saith Saint Iohn, , The seven Angels which stood before God. Is not this as plain as Tobit? Why should then the one be accounted Magicall, and not the other? I adde moreover, that these Angels are those , Principes primarii, or chief Princes, mentioned in the 10. of Daniel, Michael one of the Princes (saith the Angel there) came to help me: Now, Michael, we know, is one of the Archangels: And why therefore may not these chief Princes be those , whereof Saint Paul speaks in his adjuration to Timothy? I charge thee (saith he) be∣fore God, and the Lord Iesus Christ, and the Elect Angels; not the good Angels at large, but those Angeli eximii, the seven Archangels, which stand before the Throne of God. And it may, not without reason, be conjectured, that those seven chief Princes fained in the Persian Monarchie, took their beginning from hence; And that Daniel (who in respect of his account for wise∣dom, and of his power under Darius the Mede, had a main stroke in the moulding and framing the go∣vernment of that State) caused the Persian Court to resemble that of heaven; ordaining seven chief Princes, to stand before the King. Of which we finde twice mention in Scripture, as in the book of
Esther, where they are recorded by name, and styled, The seven Princes of Media and Persia, who saw the Kings face, and sate first in the kingdom: And in the Commission granted to Ezra by Artaxerxes, Ezra 7. 14. they are called, The Kings seven Coun∣sellors: Forasmuch as thou art sent by the King, and his seven Counsellors, &c. And it may be, the Church of Jerusalem, when they chose seven Dea∣cons to minister unto their Bishop, had an eye the same way. Hitherto of the number of these Archangels; now a word or two of their office: And that is; first, to be the universall Inspectors of the whole world, and the Rulers and Princes of the whole Angelical hoast: which appears in that they are called Principes prima∣rii, , and  (1.)  their universall jurisdiction is meant by the words, sent forth into the whole earth, whereas the rest are limited to certain places. Secondly, to have the peculiar Charge and Guardianship of the Church, and affairs thereof, whilst the rest of the world, with their Polities, Kingdoms and Governments is com∣mitted to the care of Clemens Alex. Strom. Lib. 7.  (sc. Filius Dei) . Vide & Clementem Romanum Epist. ad Corinth. ubi citat Deut. 30. 8, 9. secundùm versionem  LXX.  qui non  sed  legisse videntur. subor∣dinate Angels, who, accord∣ing to their severall charges, may seem to carry those names of Origen seemes to acknowledge but four Orders, . Cont. Cels. l. 4. Thrones, Principalities, Powers, and Dominions. That the charge of the Church, quà talis, belongs thus peculiarly and immediately to the seven Archangels, may appear by
S. Iohns saluting the Churches with a Benediction of Grace and Peace from their ministery; and the typing of them by the seven Eyes and Horns of the Lamb; as Powers, which the Father, since he exalted Him to be Head of his Church, hath annexed to his Ju∣risdiction: Hence it comes to passe, that we finde these Angels peculiarly, both before, and in the Gospel, to have been employed about the Church affairs: In the Old Testament, the Angel Gabriel (one of the seven) revealed to Daniel the time of the restauration of the Jewish State, and comming of Messiah: And the Angel Michael (one of the chief Princes) was his assistant, when he strengthened Darius the Mede; who founded the Monarchy which should restore them, and is in speciall termed (Dan. 12.) the Prince that stood for Daniels people. In the Gospel, we finde the same Angel Gabriel im∣ployed both to Zachary, and the Blessed Virgin, with the Euangelicall Tidings; and that Zachary might take notice that he was one of the seven, he sayes unto him, I am Gabriel that stand in the presence of God. Likewise in the Churches combate with the Dragon, Apoc. 12. Michael and his Angels are said to be her Champions, and in her quarrel, to have cast the Dragon and his Angels down to the Earth: And in this Prophesie of Zachary, it is said, that these seven eyes of the Lord took care of one stone, which Zorobabel laid for the foundation of the Temple, and therefore the work could not be disappointed, but should certainly at length be fi∣nished. So as, by this time, we may guesse the mean∣ing of that which Hanani the Seer told King Asa
(2 Chron. 16. 9.) The Eyes of the Lord (that is, these seven Eyes) run to and fro through the whole Earth, to shew themselves strong in the behalf of those, whose hearts are perfect towards him.
S. MARK 11. 17. Mar. 11. 17. Is it not written, My House shall be called a House of Prayer, [] to all [the] Nations? THey are the words of our Blessed Sa∣viour, when he cast the Buyers and Sellers and Money-changers out of the Temple, and forbad to carry any vessels thorow it: Concerning which story, it is worth observation, that our Saviour, whilest he was upon earth, never exercised any Kingly, or coactive Jurisdiction, but in vindicating his Fathers house from prophanation; and this he did two severall times; once at the first Passeover after he began his Prophesie, whereof you may read Iohn 2. And now again at his last Passe∣over, when he came to give his soul a sacrifice for sin. This is that, which Saint Mark relates in this place, as do also two other of the Euangelists, Saint Mat∣thew and Saint Luke. The vindication of Gods House from Prophanation (how little account soever we are wont to make thereof) was with our blessed Saviour the Alpha and Omega, the first and last of his care; Vbi incipit, ibi desinit. The consideration of which,
how momentous it is, I leave to your selves to judge: Thus much by way of Preface. Now for understanding of the words I have cho∣sen, I will divide my discourse into a Question, and an Observation. The Question is; In what part of the Temple this Market was kept? A thing not com∣monly enquired after by Expositors, much lesse de∣fined. The Observation, That this fact of our Sa∣viour more particularly concerns us of the Gentiles, then we take notice of. For the first, (in what part of the Temple this was done) The Jews Religion, and scrupulosity to keep their Temple from propha∣nation, was such, as might seem to make this story incredible. Those who were so chary, that no un∣circumcised or unclean person should come therein; who trod the pavement thereof with so much religi∣ous observance and curiosity, who would not suffer (as Iosephus relates) any other building, no not the Palace of Agrippa their King, to have any prospect into it, lost it should be polluted with a prophane look; how unlikely is it, they should endure it to be made a place of buying, selling, and bartering; yea, a Market for sheep, and Oxen, as Iohn 2. it is expresly said to have been? Neither will it serve the turn, to excuse it, by saying, it was to furnish such as came thither with offerings: For the sheep, and ox∣en, whilst they were yet to be bought to that pur∣pose, were not sacred, but prophane, and so not to come within the sacred limits: You see the difficulty. But I answer, that this market was kept in the third, or Gentiles Court, which was the outmost of the Temple: For the Temple, in our Saviours time,
had three Courts, each surrounding one another. First, the inmost or Priests Court, wherein stood the Temple, and the Altar of burnt offering: Into this none but the Priests, and Levites came. Secondly, the middle or great Court, which surrounded that of the Priests: whereinto the Jews of all sorts, and cir∣cumcised Proselytes came to worship. Without this was a third Court for the Gentiles, which surroun∣ded the Israelites Court, as that did the Court of the Priests: The two first they accounted sacred; calling them ; into which therefore none might enter, but such as were circumcised and clean, according to the Law. The third was without the sacred limits, and so accounted prophane and com∣mon; which may be learned out of Iosephus, who Lib. 6. de Bello Iu∣daico. ca. 6. tels us of certain little pillars, or columns, placed by the Lorica, or Septum, which severed this Court from the rest, whereon was inscribed in Greek (and Latin)  That no stran∣ger passe within the sacred limits; , saith he,  The second part of the Tem∣ple was called Holy, as implying that the outmost was not so. Into this Court therefore, which had no legall sanctity, and was without the sacred li∣mits, the Gentiles were admitted, and had their station, together with such of the Jews, as were in their uncleannesse; further they might not go. By Gentiles here I mean such, which though uncircum∣cised, yet worshipped the God of Israel, and were called . In this Court therefore the Jews made no scruple of doing prophane and secular acts, being in their
opinion no better then a common place. Nay, it is very probable, that to shew their despiciency of the poor Gentiles (according to that in the Apocalypse, , without are Dogs) and to pride themselves in their prerogative and discretion from them, they affected to have such acts there done. And hence it came to passe, that they permitted a Market of Ox∣en and Sheep, Doves and other bartery, to be kept there, for the use of the Temple, and those who came thither to worship. And thus the poor Gen∣tiles, or , were stabled amongst Oxen, Sheep, and stals of Money-changers, and in that tumultuous place fain to offer up their devotions and prayers unto the most high God, whom they had chosen. But our blessed Saviour, who came to redeem, not the Jews onely, but the Gentiles also, and to make them a principall part of his fold, would not suffer them to be thus neglected, but in this act of his gave them a praeludium of his further favour intended to∣ward them, and he that was to vindicate their souls from death, and take away the partition-wall be∣tween them and the Jews, first vindicates their Orato∣ry from prophanation; alledging for his warrant this place of the Prophet Esay, My House shall be called a House of Prayer,  He did not say, My Fathers House is holy: For the Jews would soon have replied, That the Gentiles Court was without the sacred limits; But, It is written, saith he, My House shall be called a House of Prayer for all the Na∣tions, Ergo, the place of prayer for all Nations is a part of my Fathers House. If my Fathers House,
then holy, and not to be thus prophaned. For whatsoever is his, is holy; Relative Holinesse be∣ing nothing else but the peculiarity a thing hath to God-ward. Though therefore the Gentiles Court had no san∣ctity of legall distinction, yet had it the sanctity of such peculiarity, and therefore not to be used as a common place. The illation proceeds by way of conversion; My House shall be called the House of Pray∣er 1 Kings 8. 41. 42. to all Nations, or People; Ergo, The House of Prayer for all Nations is my Fathers House. And the emphasis lies in the words, , which our Translators were not so well advised of, when following Beza too close, they render the words thus; My House shall be called of all Nations the House of Prayer, as if the Dative Case here [] were not acquisitive, but (as it is sometimes with passive verbs) in stead of the Ablative of the agent for . Which sense is clear from the scope and purpose of the place, whence it is taken, as he that compares them will easily see, and I shall make fully to appear in the next part of my discourse, which I tendred by the name of an Observation. Which was, that this fact of our Saviour more particularly concerns us of the Gentiles, then we take notice of. Namely, we are taught thereby, what reverent esteem we ought to have of our Gentile Oratories and Churches, howsoever not endued with such legall sanctity, in every respect, as was the Temple of the Jews; yet Houses of prayer as well as theirs. This observation will be made good by a threefold Consideration: First, of the story,
as I have related it. Secondly, from the Text here alledged, for warrant thereof. And thirdly, from the circumstance of time. For the story, I have shewed it was acted in the Gentiles Court, and not in those of the Jews: It cannot therefore be alledged, that this was a place of legall sanctity: For according to legall sanctity, it was held by the Jews as common: onely it was the place for the Gentiles to worship the God of Israel in; and seems to have been pro∣per to the second Temple: the Gentiles in the first worshipping without at the Temple door in the holy Mountain onely. Secondly, the place alledged to avow the fact speaks expresly of Gentile worshippers, not in the words  onely, but in the whole body of the context: Hear the Prophet speak, Isa. cap. 56. vers. 7, 8. and then judge; The sons of the stranger, that joyn themselves to the Lord to serve him, and to love the Name of the Lord to be his servants; every one that keepeth the Sabbath from polluting it, and taketh hold of my Covenant, (namely, that I alone shall be his God) even them will I bring to my holy Mountain, and make them joyfull in my House of Pray∣er; their burnt offerings and sacrifices accepted upon mine Altar. Then follow the words of Text; For my House shall be called (shall be; it is an Hebraism) a House of Prayer, for all People. What is this but a Description of the , or Gentile worshippers? And this place alone makes good all that I have said before, That this vindica∣tion was of the Gentiles Court: Otherwise the al∣legation of this Scripture had been impertinent; for the Gentiles of whom the Prophet speaks, worship∣ped
in no place but this. Hence also appears to what purpose our Euangelist expressed the words, , namely, as that which shewed, wherein the force of the accommodation to this occasion lay; which the rest of the Euangelists omitted, as re∣ferring to the place of the Prophet, whence it was taken; those who heard it being not ignorant of whom the Prophet spake. Thirdly, the circumstance of time argues the same thing; if we consider, that this was done but a few dayes before our Saviour suffered; to wit, when he came to his last Passeo∣ver: How unseasonable had it been to vindicate the violation of legall and typicall sanctity, which with∣in so few dayes after he was utterly to abolish by his Crosse, unlesse he had meant thereby, to leave his Church a lasting lesson, what reverence and respect he would have accounted due to such places, as this was which he vindicated?
JOHN 4. 23. Iohn 4. 23. But the hour commeth, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth; For the Father seeketh such to worship him. THey are the words of our Blessed Savi∣our to the woman of Samaria, who perceiving him by his discourse to be a Prophet, desired to be resolved by him of the great controverted point between the Jews and Samaritans; whether Mount Garizim by Sichem, (where the Samaritans sacrificed) Jud. 9. 7. The Euan∣gelist here cals it Si∣char. ver. 5. alias She∣chem. or Ierusalem were the true place of worship. Our Sa∣viour tels her, that this question was not now of much moment: For that the houre or time was near at hand, when they should neither worship the Fa∣ther in Mount Garizim, nor at Ierusalem. But that there was a greater difference between the Jews and them, then this of place; namely, even about that which was worshipped: For ye (saith he) worship that ye know not: But we (Jews) worship that we know. Then follow the words premised: But the houre
commeth, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and Truth. It is an abused Text, being commonly alledged to prove, that God now in the Gospel, either re∣quires not, or regards not externall worship, but that of the Spirit onely: And this to be a characteristicall difference between the worship of the Old Testa∣ment and the New. If at any time we talk of exter∣nall decency in rites and bodily expressions, as fit to be used in the service of God; this is the usuall Buckler to repell whatsoever may be said in that kinde: It is true indeed, that the worship of the Go∣spel is much more spirituall, then that of the Law: But that the worship of the Gospel should be one∣ly spirituall, and no externall worship required there∣in (as the Text according to some mens sense and al∣legation thereof would imply) is repugnant, not onely to the practice and experience of the Christian Religion in all ages, but also to the expresse Ordi∣nances of the Gospel it self. For what are the Sa∣craments of the New Testament? are they not rites, wherein and wherewith God is served and worship∣ped? The consideration of the holy Eucharist alone, will confute this Glosse. For is not the commemo∣ration of the sacrifice of Christs death upon the Crosse, unto his Father, in the Symbols of Bread and Wine, an externall worship? And yet with this rite hath the Church, in all ages, used to make her solemne addresse of Prayer, and Supplication, unto the Divine Majesty; as the Jews in the Old Testament did by Sacrifice: when I say, in all Ages, I include that of the Apostles. For so much Saint
Luke testifieth of that first Christian society, Acts 2.  They continued in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers. As for bodily expressions by gestures and postures, as standing, kneeling, bowing, and the like; our bles∣sed Saviour himself, lift up his sacred eyes to heaven, when he prayed for Lazarus; fell on his face when he prayed in his agony: Saint Paul (as himself saith) bowed his knees to the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ: He and Saint Peter, and the rest of the beleevers, do the like more then once, in the Acts of the Apostles: What was imposition of hands, but an externall ge∣sture, in an act of invocation for conferring a blessing? and that perhaps sometimes without any vocall ex∣pression joyned therewith. Besides I cannot conceive any reason, why in this point of Euangelicall wor∣ship, Gesture should be more scrupled at, then Voyce. Is not confessing, praising, praying, and glorifying God by voyce, an externall and bodily worship, as well as that of Gesture? why should then the one derogate from the worship of the Father, in Spirit and Truth, and not the other? To conclude, there was never any society of men in the world, that wor∣shipped the Father in such a manner, as this inter∣pretation would imply: And therefore cannot this be our Saviours meaning, but some other. Let us see if we can finde out what it is. There may be two senses given of these words; both of them agreeable to reason, and the analogy of Scripture; let us take our choice. The one is, That to worship God in Spirit and Truth, is to wor∣ship him not with types and shadows of things to
come, as in the Old Testament; but according to the verity of the things exhibited in Christ, accord∣ing to that; The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Iesus Christ. Whence the mystery of the Gospel, is elsewhere by our Saviour in this Euangelist, termed Truth, as Cap. 17. ver. 17. and the Doctrine thereof by Saint Paul, The word of truth. See Ephes. Cap. 1. ver. 13. Rom. 15. ver. 8. The time therefore is now at hand, said our Saviour, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father, no longer with bloody sacrifices, and the Rites and Or∣dinances depending thereon; but in, and according to the verity of that which these Ordinances figured. For all these were types of Christ, in whom being now exhibited, the true worshippers shall henceforth wor∣ship the Father. This sense hath good warrant from the state of the Question between the Jews and Samaritans, to which our Saviour here makes answer: which was not about worship in generall, but about the kinde of worship in speciall, which was confessed by both sides, to be tied to one certain place onely; that is, of worship by Sacrifice, and the appendages; In a word, of the typicall worship proper to the first Covenant, of which see a description Heb. 9. This Iosephus expres∣ly testifies, Lib. 12. Antiq. cap. 1. speaking of the Jews and Samaritans, which dwelt together at Alex∣andria: They lived, saith he, in perpetuall discord one with the other; whilest each laboured to maintain their Country customes; those of Ierusalem affirming their Temple to be the sacred place, whither sacrifices were to be sent; the Samaritans, on the other side, contending
they ought to be sent to Mount Garizim. For otherwise, who knows not that both Jews and Samaritans had other places of worship, besides either of these? namely, their Proseucha's, and Synagogues, wherein they worshipped God, not with internall onely, but externall worship; though not with sacrifice, which might be offered but in one place onely. And this also may seem to have been a type of Christ, as well as the rest, namely, that he was to be that one, and onely Mediator of the Church, in the Temple of whose sacred body, we have accesse unto the Fa∣ther, and in whom he accepts our devotions and services: according to that, Destroy this Temple, and I will rear it up again in three daies: He spake, saith the Text, of the Temple of his Body. This sense divers of the Ancients hit upon, Eusebius Demon. Euang. Lib. 1. Cap. 6.  Not by Symbols and Types, but, as our Saviour saith, in Spirit and Truth. Not that in the New Testament men should worship God, without all externall services; (for the New Te∣stament was to have externall and visible services, as well as the Old.) But with such as should imply the verity of the promises already exhibited, not by types and shadows of them yet to come: we know the Holy Ghost is wont to call the figured Face of the Law, the Letter, and the Verity thereby sig∣nified, the Spirit. As for , both together, they are , but once found in holy Writ; to wit, onely in this place. And so, no light can be borrowed by comparing of the like ex∣pression any where else, to expound them: Besides,
nothing hinders, but they may be taken one for the exposition of the other; that to worship the Father , is the same with to worship him . But howsoever this Exposition be fair and plausi∣ble, yet, me thinks, the reason which our Saviour gives in the words following, should argue another meaning: God (saith he) is a Spirit, therefore they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth: But, God was a Spirit from the beginning: If therefore, for this reason he must be worshipped in Spirit and Truth, he was so to be worshipped in the Old Testament, as well as in the New. Let us therefore seek another meaning: For the finding whereof, let us take notice, that the Sama∣ritans at whom our Saviour here aimeth, were the off-spring of those Nations which the King of Assyria placed in the Cities of Samaria, when he had carried away the ten Tribes captive. These, as we may reade in the second Book of the Kings, at their first com∣ming thither, worshipped not the God of Israel, but the gods of the Nations from whence they came. Wherefore he sent Lyons amongst them, which slew them; which they apprehending, either from the information of some Israelite, or otherwise, to be because they knew not the worship of the God of the Countrey, they informed the King of Assyria thereof, desiring that some of the captiv'd Priests might be sent unto them, to teach them the manner and rites of his worship; which being accordingly done, they thenceforth (as the Text tels us) worship∣ped the Lord, yet feared their own gods too, and so did , as Saint Chrysostome speaks, mingle things not to be mingled.
In this medly they continued about two hundred years, till toward the end of the Persian Monarchy. At what time it chanced, that Manasse, brother to Iaddo, the High Priest of the returned Jews, marri∣ed the daughter of Sanballat, then Governour of Sa∣maria; For which, being expelled from Jerusalem by Nehemiah, he fled to Sanballat his Father in Law, and, after his example, many other of the Jews of the best rank, having married strange wives like∣wise, and loth to forgo them, betook themselves thither also: Sanballat willingly entertains them, and makes his son in Law Manasse their Priest. For whose greater reputation and state, when Alexander the Great subdued the Persian Monarchy, he obtai∣ned leave of him, to build a Temple upon Mount Garizim; where his son in Law exercised the office of High Priest. This was exceedingly prejudicious to the Jews, and the occasion of a continuall Schism, whilst those that were discontented, or ex∣communicated at Ierusalem, were wont to betake themselves thither: Yet, by this means the Samari∣tans (having now one of the sons of Aaron to be their Chief Priest, and so many other of the Jews, both Priests and others, mingled amongst them) were brought, at length, to cast off all their false gods, and to worship the Lord the God of Israel onely. Yet so, that howsoever they seemed to themselves, to be true worshippers, and altogether free from Idolatry; neverthelesse, they retained a smack there∣of, in as much as they worshipped the true God, under a visible representation; to wit, of a Dove, and circumcised their Children in the name thereof,
as the Jewish Tradition tels us: who therefore always branded their worship with , or spirituall  id est, Cultus ex∣ternus; sic Idololatriā oppellant. Heinsii Aristarch. p. 881. Fornication: Just as their predecessors, the ten Tribes, worshipped the same God of Israel, under the simili∣tude of a Calf. This was the condition of the Samaritan Religion in our Saviours time: and if we weigh the matter well, we shall finde his words here, to the woman, very pli∣able to be construed with reference thereunto: You ask, saith he, of the true place of worship, whether Mount Garizim, or Ierusalem; which is not so greatly materiall, for as much as the time is at hand, when men shall worship the Father at neither: But there is a greater difference between you and us, then of place; though you take no notice of it; namely, about the object of worship it self; For ye worship what ye know not, but we (Jews) worship what we know. How is that? Thus, Ye worship indeed the Father, the God of Israel, as we doe; but you worship him under a corporeall representation; wherein you shew, you know him not: but the houre commeth, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and Truth: In spirit, that is, conceiving of him no otherwise then in spirit; And in truth, that is, not under any corporeall or visible shape: For God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in Spirit and Truth; that is, , not fan∣cying him, as a body, but as indeed he is a Spirit. For those who worship him under a corporeall similitude, Jer. 3. 10. doe bely him; according as the Apostle speaks, Rom. 1. of such as change the glory of the incorruptible God, in∣to an Image made like to corruptible man, Birds or
Beasts: They changed, saith he, the truth of God into a lie, and served the creature,  juxta Cre∣atorem, as, or with the Creator who is blessed for ever. Hence Idols in Scripture are termed Lies; as Amos 2. 4. Their Lies have caused them to erre, after which their Fathers walked: The Vulgar hath, Seduxerunt eos Idola ipsorum. And Isa. 28. 15. We have made Lies our refuge. And Ier. 16. 19. Venient gentes à finibus terrae, & dicent, Verè mendacium possederunt (the Chaldee hath, coluerunt) Patres nostri, vanitatem, in qua non est utilitas. Nunquid faciet sibi homo Deos, & ipsi non sunt Dii? This therefore I take to be the genuine meaning of this place, and not that which is commonly suppo∣sed against externall worship; which I think this de∣monstration will evince; To worship what they know, See the Homily a∣gainst the perill of I∣dolatry. p. 3. where this Text is peculiar∣ly applied against worship∣ping of God in an Image. (as the Jews are said to doe) and to worship in spirit and truth, are here taken by our Saviour for equiva∣lents; else the whole sense will be inconsequent: But the Jews worshipped not God without Rites and Ce∣remonies (who yet are supposed to worship him in spirit and truth;) Ergo, to worship God without Rites and Ceremonies, is not to worship him in spirit and truth, according to the meaning here intended.
S. LUKE 24. 45. Luke 24. 45. Then opened be their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures. 46. And said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day. OUr Blessed Saviour, after he was risen from the dead, told his Disciples, not onely that his suffering of death, and rising again the third day, was foretold in the Scrip∣tures; but also pointed out those Scriptures unto them, and opened their understanding that they might understand them; that is, he expounded, or explai∣ned them unto them: Certain it is therefore, that somewhere in the Old Testament these things were foretold should befall the Messiah. Yea S. Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4. will further assure us that they are; I delive∣red unto you, saith he, first of all, that which I received, how that Christ died for our sins, according to the Scrip∣tures. 4. And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day, according to the Scriptures. Both of them therefore, are somwhere foretold in the Scriptures, and it becomes not us to be so ignorant, as common∣ly we are, which those Scriptures be which foretell
them. It is a main point of our Faith, and that which the Jews most stumble at, because their Doctors had not observed any such thing of Messiah. The more they were ignorant thereof, the more it concerns us to be confirmed therein. I thought good therefore, to make this the Argument of my Discourse at this time, to inform both you and my self, where these things are foretold, and if I can, to point out those very Scriptures, which our Saviour here expounded to his Disciples. Which that I may the better do, I will make the words fore-going my Text, to be as the Pole-star in this my search; These are the things, (saith our Savi∣our) which I spake unto you, while I was with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning me. Then follow the words I read, Then opened he their understanding, &c. These two events therefore of Messiahs death and rising again the third day, were foretold in these three parts of Scripture, in the Law of Moses, or Pentateuch, in the Neb im, or Prophets, and in the Psalmes; and in these three we must search for them. And first for the first, that Messiah should suffer death. This was fore-signified in the Law, or Pentateuch, first in the Story of Abraham, where he was com∣manded to offer his son Isaac, the son wherein his seed should be called, and to whom the promise was entailed, That in it should all the Nations of the world be blessed. What was here acted else, but the mystery of Christs Passion? to wit, that the promised seed should make all the Nations of the world blessed, by be∣comming
a sacrifice for sin: which that it might be the more evident, the place is also designed, the regi∣on of Mount Moriah; there Abraham was bid to of∣fer his son Isaac, even where Messiah, who was then in the loins of Isaac, was one day to be offered upon the Crosse. The second prediction in the Law, of Messiahs suf∣fering death, was by the slaying of Beasts, for the atonement of sin in their sacrifices; which were no∣thing else but shadows and representations of that of∣fering upon the Crosse, which Messiah was one day to make of himself for the sins of the world. Which mystery of the end of those legall sacrifices, was shew∣ed in the former story of Abrahams offering Isaac: For when he had now brought his son to the place ap∣pointed, and had built an Altar, and was now ready to slay him, as he was commanded; the Angel of the Lord stayed his hand, and shewed him a Ram caught in a thicket by the horns, which Ram Abraham took, and offered for a burnt offering in stead of his son, to signifie, that the offering of the blessed seed was yet to be suspended, and that God in the mean while would accept the offerings of Buls and Rams, as a pledge of that expiation, which the blessed seed of Abraham in the loyns of Isaac, should one day make. And thus much for the Law; now I come to the Prophets, wherein I finde three evident Prophecies that Messiah should suffer death. The first is that fa∣mous one in the 53. of Isay the whole Chapter through; I will not repeat it all, but some two or three passages thereof: ver. 5. He was wounded, saith the
Prophet, for our transgressions, he was bruised for  inquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed: And ver. 7. He was oppressed, he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he was brought as a Lamb to the slaughter,  as a Sheep before his Shearers is dumb, so he opened noi his mouth. Ver. 8. He was cut off out of the Land of the living; for the transgression of my people was  smitten. Now that this Prophecy was one of those by which the Apostles used to prove this verity, ap∣pears by the story of the conversion of the Eunuch Acts 8. unto whom Philip comming whilst he was in his Chariot, reading this place of Scripture, and h thereupon asking Philip, of whom the Prophet spake these words, the Text tels us, that Philip began at the same Scripture, and preached unto him Iesus. The second place, which foretels that Christ should suffer, is that in the ninth of Daniel, who pointing ou the time of Messiah's comming by seventy weeks, li∣mits his account, not at his birth, but at his suffering; as the most principall moment of his story. From the going out of the commandement, saith he, to restore, and build Ierusalem unto Messiah the Prince shall be seven weeks, and sixty two weeks:—and after sixty  weeks, shall Messiah be cut off: what can be more plain then this? A third place in the Prophets, is to be found Za∣chary 12. 10. where, at the time when the Jews shall be converted, Christ is brought in speaking in this manner; I will poure out, saith he, upon the House of David, and upon the inhabitants of Ierusalem, the spirit of grace and supplication, and they shall look upon me,
whom they have pierced. Hence it follows, that the Jews should have pierced Messiah before they recei∣ved him to be their Redeemer. And that this place also was one of those applied by the Apostles to this purpose, appears by S. Iohns twice alledging it. Once in his Gospel, when a Souldier with a Spear pierced our Saviours side; Then, saith he, was fulfilled that Ioh. 19. 37. Scripture, which saith, They shall look upon him whom they have pierced. Again, in the beginning of his Re∣velation, Apol. 1. 7. Behold (saith he) he commeth in the clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him. Now for the third division of Scripture, the Psalms, the principall place there which I dare warrant, is that Acts 2. 26, 27. 13. 35. of the 16. Psalm, quoted both by S. Peter, and S. Paul in the Acts of the Apostles; My flesh shall rest in hope, for thou wilt not leave my soule in the grave, neither suffer thine Holy One to see corruption. For David, as S. Peter and S. Paul say, was buried, and his body saw corruption, therefore it cannot be spoken of him; but of Messiah in the person of David, as a type in whose loyns Messiah was. Now then if Messiahs body were to be laid in the grave, it follows he was to die, and to be in the state of the dead. And thus I have done the first part of my task, and proved that Messiah was to suffer death, according to the Scriptures; namely, foretold in that threefold di∣vision of Scripture, mentioned here by our Saviour: The Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms. Now I come to prove the other part, that it behoved him also, to rise again the third day, according to the Scriptures. And this was first foreshewn in the same story of
Isaac, wherein his sacrifice or suffering was acted. For, from the time that God commanded Isaac to be offe∣red for a burnt offering, Isaac was a dead man, but the third day he was released from death. This the Text tels us expresly, that it was the third day, when Abraham came to Mount Moriah, and had his son, as it were, restored to him again; which circumstance, there was no need nor use at all to have noted, had it not been for some mystery: For had there been no∣thing intended, but the naked story, what did it con∣cern us to know, whether it were the third, or the fifth day, that Abraham came to Moriah, where he re∣ceived his son from death? Now, that I have not misapplied this figure, S. Paul is my witnesse, who ex∣presly makes this release of Isaac from slaughter, a fi∣gure of the Resurrection: For thus he speaks of this whole story, Hebrews 11. By faith, Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac; and he that received the promises, offered up his onely begotten Sonne. Of whom it was said, that in Isaac shall thy seed be cal led. Accounting that God was able to raise him up even from the dead: from whence also he received him in a figure. The same was foreshewn by the Law of sacrifices, which were to be eaten before the third day; some sa∣crifices were to be eaten the same day they were offe∣red, but those which were deferred longest, as the Peace-offerings, were to be eaten before the third day. The third day no sacrifice might be eaten, but was to be burnt: If it were eaten, it was not accepted for an atonement, but counted an abomination: To shew, that the sacrifice of Messiah, which these sacrifices re∣presented,
was to be finished the third day by his rising from the dead; and therefore, the type thereof deter∣mined within that time, beyond which time it was not accepted for atonement of sin, because then it was no longer a type of him. Thus far the Law; as for the Prophets, I finde no expresse prediction in them, for the time of Christs rising (for that of the Prophet Ionah, I take to be ra∣ther an allusion, then a Prophecie:) onely in gene∣rall it is implyed, that Christ should rise again; both in that famous Prophecie of Esay, the 53. and that of Zachary 12. In the former it is said, that after he had made his soul a sacrifice for sin, He should see his seed, and prolong his dayes, and the pleasure of the Lord should prosper in his hand. And again, that the Lord should divide him a portion with the great, and that he should divide the spoile with the strong, because he had poured out his soul unto death: which argues that he should not onely live again, but be victorious af∣ter he had died. In that of Zachary it is said, the Iews should look upon, or see him whom they had formerly pierced; and, that in that day he would powre upon them the spirit of grace and supplicati∣on: therefore he was to live again after they had pier∣ced him. I come to the Psalms, where not onely his rising again is prophesied of, but the time thereof deter∣mined; though at first sight it appears not so namely, in that fore-alledged passage of the sixteenth Psalm, Thou wilt not leave my soul in Hell, nor suffer thine Holy One to see corruption. All men shall rise again, but their bodies must first return to dust, and see cor∣ruption:
But Messiah was to rise again before he saw corruption: if before, then the third day at farthest; for then the body naturally vi. Meur∣si Glos. sar. Grae∣co. barba. rum, in . citat ev Triodio. begins to see corru∣ption: this may be gathered by the story of Laza∣rus in the Gospel, where Iesus commanding the stone to be rolled from his Grave, Martha his sister answered, Lord, by this time he stinketh; for he hath been dead four daies. Also by that rule, given by the Masters of Physick, that those who die of the Apoplexie, suffocation of the Mother, or like sud∣den deaths, should not be buried till seventy two hours were past; Because within that time, they might revive; and examples are given of those who have done so. They give also a reason of it in na∣ture; because, say they, in that time the humours of the body make their revolution; the flegme in one day, or twenty four hours; the choler in two dayes, or forty eight hours; the melancholy in three dayes, which is seventy two hours: and this to be the rea∣son why an Ague, founded in an inflammation of flegme, returns every day; an Ague, which comes from choler, every other day; from melancholy, every third day: Now if a body may be kept so long unburied, it is supposed it may be kept so long un∣corrupted; (namely, where a corruption is not begun before death, as in some diseases) but longer it will not continue. When therefore it is so often inculcated in the New Testament, that our Saviour should rise again the third day; the Holy Ghost, in so speaking, respects not so much the number of dayes, as the fulfilling of Scripture, that Messiahs body should not see corruption, but should rise before the time, wherin
dead bodies begin to corrupt: and indeed our Saviour rose again within forty hours, after he gave up the Ghost, and was not two full dayes in the grave. Therefore, if there be any other Scripture, which im∣plies Messiah should rise before, his body should see corruption, that Scripture, whatsoever it be, shews he should rise again within three daies.
EXODUS 4. 25. Exod. 4. 25. Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the fore-skin of her son, and cast it at his feet, and said ,—Sponsus sanguinum tu mihi es. THEN; that is, when she saw the Angel of the Lord ready to kill Mo∣ses her husband in the Inne, because his son was not circumcised; she took a sharp stone, () that is, she took a knife, which, according to the cu∣stome then, was made of stone sharped. This we may learn out of Ioshuah 5. 2. where the Lord sayes to Io∣shuah, Make thee , (sharp knives, say we) ad verbum, cultros petrarum, and circumcise again the children of Israel: The Chaldee Paraphrast hath, Make thee novaculas acutas: the Septuagint, . Thus far all is clear; but for the rest, we are to seek: First, on whom the fault lay, and what was the reason of this omission of circumcision: Then, who, and what is meant, when it is said, she cast, or made the
foreskin to touch his feet; and above all, what is meant by sponsus sanguinum. Zipporah is commonly reputed to have been a per∣verse and froward woman; and Moses, the meekest man on earth, to have had that mishap in his choice, which many a good man hath. The reason, because she not onely hindred her childe from being circum∣cised, out of some nicety and aversation thereof, as a cruell ceremony; but also, when she saw there was no remedy, but she must do it, to save her husbands life, yet she did it with an upbraiding indignation, telling him, that he was a bloody husband, who must have such a thing done unto his poor childe. But I see no ground either for the one, or the other. For, that the circumcision of the childe was not deferred out of any aversation of hers of that cere∣mony, may be gathered; First, because she was a Midianitesse, and so a daughter of Abraham, by Ketu rah, and therefore well enough acquainted, and inu∣red to that Rite, which not onely her Nation, the Midianites, but all the Nations descended of Abra∣ham observed, as may be seen in the Ismaelites, or Saracens, who learned not this ceremony first from Mamet, but retained it as an ancient custome of their Nation. Secondly, she had suffered already her elder son Gershom to be circumcised; wherefore then should we think she was averse from the circum∣cision of this? For that this childe, for whom Mo∣ses was now in danger, was Fleezer his youngest son, it cannot be denied; for as much as it is evident, that Moses at this time was the Father of two sons, which, by reason, as may seem, of this disturbance, he sent
back with his wife, unto her Father Iethro, as we may reade in the eighteenth Chapter of this Book: By which it may be gathered, that the cause of this omission of circumcision, was not any aversenesse in Zipporah from that rite, but rather, because they were in their journey, when the childe was born; and so having no convenient time or place to rest in, till the wound might be healed, and thinking it might endanger the infants life, to be tossed up and down, whilst the wound was green, in so long and tedious a voyage, they resolved to deferre the cir∣cumcision. And that Zipporah was delivered of this childe, when they had begun this journey, for Egypt, may be gathered by this; because Moses, before Gods sending him, hath but one childe mentioned, name∣ly, Gershom: For what reason can be given, why, if Eleezer had been then born, he should not have been mentioned also? But howsoever this case of travell afterward excused the Israelites in the Wildernesse, for deferring the circumcision of their children then, yet could it not excuse Moses here; in regard it was necessitas accersita, he being not forced to take his wife and children with him, (especially his wife being in that case) but might have sent her and them, back presently to her Father; as upon this admoni∣tion he did. Nor was it indeed fit, when God sent him upon such a businesse to carry such an incum∣brance with him. Thus have we freed Zipporah from the first charge of being the cause of this omission out of any averse∣nesse to the Divine Ordinance: Now I come to shew likewise, that the words she spake at the time
of circumcision, Sponsus sanguinum to mihi es, were no words of upbraiding indignation to her husband (as is supposed) but have a far other meaning. For I beleeve not, she spake these words to Moses, but to her Childe, whom she circumcised, as the For∣mula then used in circumcision; namely, that as the fore-skin fell down at her childes feet (not Moses, or the Angels feet) she pronounced the Verb  solennia, Tu mihi sponsus sanguinum. My reasons are; First, because a Husband is not wont to be called sponsus, after the wedding solemni∣ty is past; nor can there any such example be shewn in Scripture; Ergo, it is not like that Zipporah, af∣ter she was the mother of two children, should say to her Husband, Sponsus sanguinum tu mihi es. Secondly, because , the word here translated Sponsus, properly signifies Gener, a son in Law, and Sponsus onely by way of equivalence or coincidence, (because to be made son in Law to the Parents, is by being the daughters Sponsus) My meaning is that , the word used, signifies not the relation of the Bridegroom to his Bride; but his relation to his Brides Parents, by taking their daughter to wife. And therefore in the whole Scripture, we shall never finde it relatively used, or with an affix, but onely in respect to the wives Father or Mother: And of the same condition is the word , which we often by equivalence translate a Bride, but properly signi∣fies Nurus; wherefore we shall never finde the Bride∣groom call the Bride his  nor the Bride the Bride∣groom her , or that they are called so by others. But onely the Husband his Father and Mother in
Lawes , and the wife her Father and Mother in Lawes : In a word, there is no word in the He∣brew Tongue, which signifies a Bridegroom and Bride, as they stand in relation each to other, but as to each others Parents onely: whence it is re∣markable that in the Canticles, when this relation comes to be expressed on the Brides behalf, it is alwayes done by addition of the word , that is, Soror mea, as , the Callah, or Nu∣rus my sister, which we translate aequivalenter, Soror mea sponsa. Now if this be true, I see not how Zip∣porah could call Moses here her , by saying to him  sanguinum tu mihi es; For she should have called him her son in law, and not her Hus∣band: Ergo, she spake the words to the childe, and not to him. Thirdly, for a farther probability hereof, the Jew∣ish Rabbins tell us, that it was the custome of women to call their children when they were circumcised, ; the word here turned sponsus. Aben Ezra upon this place, Mos mulierum, (saith he) vocare filium cum circumcisus est . Rabbi Levi,  in principio connubii vocatur, qui alicui promissus est. Inde transla∣tum ad initium rerum aliarum, ut cum infans recens circumcisus à mulieribus sponsus vocatur. Nam tunc primùm incipit Deo servire. The like hath Rabbi Da∣vid Kimchi, in his Lexicon, who conjectures withall, that  should have some signification of causing new joy, and thence to be used both at the day of marriage, and day of circumcision. Fourthly, from this custome to call a childe at his circumcision ; with the Arabians (who are
of Abrahams posterity, and still use, and anciently used this Rite) Chatan is is to circumcise, Chiten cir∣cumcision, , circumcised, as is ordinarily seen in their Translation of the New Testament: whence comes this? but from the manner of calling a childe , when hee was circumcised; Even as we, because a childe in Baptisme is made a Christian, use the word Christen for to Baptize, and Christe∣ned for Baptized: And Zipporah was an Arabisse, and the Arabian tongue of near affinity with the Hebrew. Fifthly, this exposition is agreeable to the follow∣ing words, , and he let him goe, when he had said, Sponsus sanguinum, hoc est, circumcisionis; that is, the Angell let Moses goe, as soon as those solennia verba, Sponsus sangui∣num, were out of Zipporahs mouth: so the Vulgar rightly translates it: Et dimisit eum, postquam dixerat, Sponsus sanguinū tu mihi es ob circumcisionem. For , is here, as elsewhere, for , ex tunc, ab eo tempore, postquam, not simply tunc, as we translate it: Namely, as the destroying Angel, Exodus 12. when he saw the blood of the Paschall Lamb upon the lintels and side∣posts of the Israelites doores, passed by them, and destroyed them not; so the Angell here, when he saw the blood of the circumcision upon Moses child, let Moses goe, and slew him not: In these words, if you mark it, the Holy Ghost expounds what Zippo∣rah meant by those words, Sponsus sanguinum, that is, Sponsus circumcisionis. Et dimisit eum postquam dixit ,—Sponsus sanguinum, id est, circumcisionis; then are not these words spoken
of, or to Moses, but unto the childe. Having thus proved what I took in hand; that these words were not spoke by Zipporah to Moses, but as solennia verba, in that case to her childe, whom she circumcised; it remains, I should now tell you how they are so construed. I say therefore, Tu mihi sponsus sanguinum, in Zipporahs meaning, is as much as Si mihi initiatus circumcisione: It is well known, how tropically those words of relation of kindred, Father, Mother, Sister, Sonne, are used in the Hebrew Tongue; and Sonne, beside other notions, to be often the cir∣cumlocution of our vox concreta, as Filius percussio∣nis, is he that is strucken; Filius foederis, he that is foederatus; Filius mortis, he that is condem∣ned to die, or worthy of death; and the like. And why may not then , Gener sanguinum, that is, as the Holy Ghost expounds it, circumcisionis, be as much as circumcisus, and Gener sanguinum tu mi∣hi es (for so I told you  signifies) be as much as,  pronounce thee circumcised? As if the circumcised per∣son, by being married to circumcision, were made the circumcisers son in Law, and circumcisions Bride∣groom; as Es, or sis, mihi in generum desponsatus cir∣cumcisioni. Or if blood, or circumcision, note the Instrument, the Formula may be thus explicated, that the person circumcised becomes Gods son in Law, as being wedded and joyned to his Church, by the blood of circumcision, as with a ring; and then the pro∣noun mihi, must not be taken relatively to Zippo∣rah, as before, but efficienter onely in this sense, Per me factus es gener Deo, per sanguinem circumci∣sionis:
or Feci le generum, Deo: or (if you like bet∣ter the notion of sponsus) I have espoused thee to the Church of God, by this rite of circumcision, or Thou art, or be thou espoused, &c. Thus, as you see, may the Formula be either way explicated, to one and the same sense. But the first I like the best, because of mihi the relative to Zipporah, Tu mihi in generum es desponsatus circumcsioni. Now lastly, to free my interpretation from no∣velty, the sense I have given of these words, is that, which both the Septuagint, and the Chaldee Para∣phrast directly aim at; the Paraphrast expounding it thus; In sanguine circumcisionis istius, datus est spon∣sus, or gener mihi; The Septuagint, as we now read, thus, , Stetit san∣guis circumcisionis filii mei: where the Text is cor∣rupted, and I beleeve the Septuagint translated not , but —sit hic sanguis circumcisionis Filii mei; a Periphrasticall, but evident sense, with the change of one letter onely. From the sense of this place thus proved, I will point out two observations, and so con∣clude. The first is, that it is lawfull to use some fitting forme of words in the exhibition of a Sacrament, though not expresly ordained by God at the institu∣tion thereof; as appears by this form, that Zipporah used, no doubt ex more then, whatsoever the form were after that time. The second is, that the neglect of the circumcision of a childe then, and so consequently of baptizing it now, makes not so much the child, as the Parents li∣able
to the wrath of God; as here the Angel sought not to kill the child, who was uncircumcised; but Moses the Father, who should have circumcised it. Both which observations I mean to amplifie no far∣ther, but to leave to your exacter meditations; and so I conclude.
EZEKIEL 20. 20. Ezek. 20. 20. Hallow my Sabbaths, and they shall be a signe be∣tween me and you, to acknowledge that I Iehovah am your God. THis Commandement, with the end there∣of, the Lord bids Ezekiel tell the El∣ders of Israel, that he gave to their Fa∣thers in the Wildernesse. And it is re∣corded in the Law; so that I might have taken it thence: but I rather chose to make these words in Ezekiel my Text, as expressed more plainly, and so a Comment to those in the Law: the place is Exod. 31. where this, which my Text containeth, is expressed thus, Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep, for it is a signe between me and you throughout your generati∣ons, to acknowledge that I Iehovah am your sanctifier, that is, your God; as the expression in Ezekiel tels us. For to be the Sanctifier of a People, and to be their God, is all one, whence also the Lord is so often cal∣led in Scripture, the Holy One of Israel; that is, their Sanctifier, and their God. That which I intend at this time to observe from these words, is the end why God commanded this observation of the Sabbath to the Israelites; to wit, that thereby, as by a Symbolum, they might testifie
and professe what God they worshipped: Secondly, out of this ground, to shew how far, and in what man∣ner the like observation binds us Christians, who are worshippers of the same God, whom the Jews wor∣shipped, though not under the same relation altoge∣ther, wherein they worshipped him. All Nations had something in their ceremonies, whereby they signified the God they worshipped; so in those of the celestiall Gods, (as they termed them) and those which were Deified souls of men, were dif∣fering rites, whereby the one was known from the other. Those gods which were made of men, having funerall rites in their services, (as cognisances that they were souls deceased) and each of them some imi∣tation of some remarkable passage of the Legend of their lives, either of some action done by them, or some accident which befell them; as in the ceremo∣nies of Osyris and Bacchus is obvious to any that reads them: And indeed it is a naturall Decorum for ser∣vants and vassals, by some mark or cognisance to te∣stifie who is their Lord and Master: In the Revelati∣on, the worshippers of the Beast receive his mark, and the worshippers of the Lamb carry his mark and his Fathers in their Fore-heads. Hence came the first use of the crosse in Baptisme, as the mark of Christ, the Deity to whom we are initiated; and the same after∣wards used in all Benedictions, Prayers, and Thanks∣givings, in token they were done in the name, and me∣rits of Christ crucified: so that in the Primitive Church this rite was no more, but that wherewith we conclude all our Prayers, and Thanksgivings, when we say, Through Iesus Christ our Lord and Saviour;
though afterward it came to be abused, as almost all other rites of Christianity, to abominable supersti∣tion. To return therefore unto my Text: Agreeably to this principle, and this custome of all Religions, of all Nations, of all vassals, the Lord Iehovah, Creator of heaven and earth, ordained to his people this ob∣servation of the Sabbath day, for a sign and cognisance, that he should be their God, and no other. It is for a sign, saith he, between me and you, that I Iehovah am your God. In the place I quoted before, in the 31. of Exod. are these words; The Children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, to observe the Sabbath throughout their ge∣nerations, for a perpetuall Covenant; it is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever, for in six dayes the Lord made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he rested: As if he had said, it is a sign that the Crea∣tour of heaven and earth is your God. But for the distinct understanding of this significa∣tion, we must know that the Sabbath includes two respects of time: First, the quotum, one day of seven, or the seventh day after six days labour: Secondly, the designation, or pitching that seventh day, upon the day we call Saturday. In both, the Sabbaticall obser∣vation was a sign, and profession that Iehovah and no other was the God of Israel: the first, according to his attribute of Creator; the second of Deliverer of Is∣rael out of Egypt. For by sanctifying the seventh day, after they had laboured six, they professed themselves vassals and worshippers of that only God, who crea∣ted the heaven and the earth, and having spent six days in that great work, rested the seventh day; and
therefore commanded them to observe this sutable distribution of their time, as a badge and livery that their religious service was appropriate to him alone. And this is that which the fourth Commandement in the reason given from the Creation intendeth, and no more but this. But seeing they might professe this acknowledge∣ment, as well by any other six days working, and a sevenths resting, as by those they pitched upon; there being still (what six days soever they had laboured, and what seventh soever they had rested) the same conformity with their Creator; let us see the reason why they pitched upon those six days wherein they laboured, for labouring days rather then any other six; and why they chose that seventh day, namely Saturday, to hallow and rest in, rather then any other. And this was, that they might professe themselves servants of Iehovah their God, in a relation and re∣spect peculiar and proper to themselves; to wit, that they were the servants of that God, which redeemed Israel out of the Land of Egypt, and out of the house of bondage; and upon the morning watch of that ve∣ry day which they kept for their Sabbath, he over∣whelmed Pharaoh, and all his Host in the Red Sea, and saved Israel that day out of the hand of the E∣gyptians. This I gather from the repetition of the Decalogue, Deut. 5. where that reason from the worlds Creation (in the Decalogue given at Horeb) being left out, Moses inserts this other of the Redemption of Israel out of Egypt in stead thereof; namely, as the reason, why those six days rather then any other
six for work, and that seventh day rather then any other seventh for rest, were pitched upon, as Israel observed them. Remember, saith he, thou wert a ser∣vant in the Land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God, brought thee out thence through a mighty hand, and a stretched out arm: therefore the Lord thy God com∣manded thee to keep the Sabbath Day: Not for the quo∣tum of one day of seven, (for of that another reason was given, the example of God in the Creation) but for the designation of the day. But whether this day were in order the seventh from the Creation or not, the Scripture is silent; for where it is called in the Commandement the seventh day, that is in respect of the six days of labour, and not otherwise: and therefore, whensoever it is so cal∣led, those six days of labour are mentioned with it. The seventh day therefore is the seventh after six days of labour, nor can any more be inferred from it: The example of the Creation is brought for the quo∣tum, one day of seven, as I have shewed, and not for the designation of any certain day for that seventh. Ne∣verthelesse, it might fall out so, by disposition of Di∣vine Providence, that the Jews designed seventh day was, both the seventh in order from the Creation, and also the day of their deliverance out of Egypt. But the Scripture no where tels us it was so, (howsoever most men take it for granted) and therefore it may as well be not so: Certain I am, the Jews kept not that day for a Sabbath till the raining of Manna: For that which should have been their Sabbath the week be∣fore, had they then kept the day, which afterward they kept, was the fifteenth day of the second month;
on which day we reade in the 16. of Exodus, that they marched a wearisome march, and came at night into the wildernesse of Sin; where they murmured for their poor entertainment, and wished they had died in Egypt: that night the Lord sent them Quails, the next morning it rained Manna, which was the six∣teenth day, and so six days together; the seventh, which was the two and twentieth, it rained none, and that day they were commanded to keep for their Sab∣bath: now if the two and twentieth day of the month were the Sabbath, the fifteenth should have been, if that day had been kept before; but the Text tels us expresly, they marcht that day; and, which is strange, the day of the month is never named, unlesse it be once, for any station but this, where the Sabbath was ordained; otherwise it could not have been known, that that day was ordained for a day of rest, which before was none. And why might not their day of holy rest be altered, as well as the beginning of the year was, for a memoriall of their comming out of Egypt? I can see no reason, why it might not, nor finde any testimony to assure me it was not. And thus much of the Jews Sabbath, how and wherein it was a sign, whereby they professed them∣selves the servants of Iehovah, and no other God. Now I come to the second thing I propounded, to shew how far, and in what manner the like observati∣on binds us Christians. I say therefore, that the Christian as well as the Iew, after six days spent in his own works, is to san∣ctifie the seventh, that he may professe himself there∣by a servant of God, the Creatour of Heaven and
Earth; as well as the Jew. For the quotum therefore, the Jew and Christian agree, but in designation of the day they differ. For the Christian chooseth for his Holy day, that which with the Jews was the first day of the week, and cals it Dominicum, that he might thereby professe himself a servant of that God, who on the morning of that day, vanquished Satan, the Spirituall Pharaoh, and redeemed us from our Spiri∣tuall thraldome, by raising Iesus Christ our Lord from the dead, begetting us in stead of an earthly Ca∣naan, to an inheritance incorruptible in the Heavens: In a word, the Christian, by the day he hallows, pro∣fesses himself a Christian; that is, as S. Paul speaks, To beleeve on him that raised up Iesus from the dead; so that the Jew and Christian both, though they fall not upon the same day, yet make their designation of their day upon the like ground; the Jews, the memo∣riall day of their deliverance from the temporall Egypt, and temporall Pharaoh: the Christians, the memoriall of their deliverance from the spirituall Egypt, and spi∣rituall Pharaoh. But might not (will you say) the Christian, as well have observed the Jewish for his seventh day, as the day he doth? I answer, No; he might not: For, in so doing, he should seem not to acknowledge his Re∣demption to be already performed; but still expected. For the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt by the Mi∣nistery of Moses, was intended for a type and pledge of the spirituall deliverance, which was to come by Christ: their Canaan also to which they marched, be∣ing a type of that heavenly inheritance, which the re∣deemed by Christ do look for: Since therefore the
shadow is now made void by the comming of the substance, the relation is changed, and God is no lon∣ger to be worshipped, and beleeved in, as a God fore∣shewing and assuring by types; but as a God who hath performed the substance of what he promised. And this is that which S. Paul means, Colossians 2. 16, 17. where he saith, Let no man judge you (henceforth) in respect of a Feast day, New Moon, or Sabbath days, which were a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ.
1. CO. . 5. 1 Cor. 11. 5. Every woman praying or prophecying with her head uncovered, dishonoureth her head. I Have chosen this of the woman, rather then that of the man going before it, for the Theme of my Discourse; First, be∣cause I conceive the fault, at the refor∣mation whereof the Apostle here al∣meth, in the Church of Corinth, was the womens on∣ly, not the mens. That which the Apostle speaks of a man praying or prophecying, being by way of suppositi∣on, and for illustration of the unseemlinesse of that guise which the women used. Secondly, because the condition of the sex in the words read, makes some∣thing for the better understanding of that which is spoken of both; as we shall see presently. What I intend to speak upon this Text, shall con∣sist of these two parts; First, of an enquiry, what is here meant by prophecying, a thing attributed to wo∣men, and therefore undoubtedly some such thing as they were capable of. Secondly, what was this fault for matter and manner, of the women of the Church of Corinth, which the Apostle here reproveth. To begin with the first, and which I am like to dwell longest upon; Some take prophecying here, in
the stricter sense, to be foretelling of things to come; as that which in those Primitive times, both men and women did, by the powring out of the Holy Ghost up∣on them; according to that of the Prophet Ioel, appli∣ed by S. Peter to the sending of the Holy Ghost at the first promulgation of the Gospel: I will powre out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and daughters shall prophecy, and your young men shall see visions. And that such Prophetesses as these, were those four Daugh∣ters of Philip the Euangelist, whereof we read Acts 21. 9. Others take prophecying here in a more large noti∣on, for the gift of interpreting and opening Divine mysteries contained in holy Scripture, for the instru∣ction and edification of the hearers; especially, as it was then inspired and suggested in extraordinary man∣ner by the Holy Spirit, as Prophecy was given of old; according to that of S. Peter, Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. So because many, in the beginning of the Gospel, were guided by a like instinct in the interpretation and application of Scrip∣ture, they were said to Prophecy. Thus the Apostle useth it in the fourteenth Chapter of this Epistle, where he discourses of spirituall Gifts, and before all prefers this of Prophecy; because he that prophecieth, (saith he) speaketh unto men to edification, and exhorta∣tion, and comfort. But neither of these kinds of Prophecy sute with the person in my Text, which is a woman: For it is cer∣tain the Apostle speaks here of prophecying in the Church, or Congregation; but in the Church a wo∣man
might not speak, no not so much as ask a que∣stion for her better instruction, much lesse teach and instruct others. This the Apostle teacheth us in this very Epistle, Chapter the fourteenth; even there where he discourseth so largely of those kinds of Prophecy: Let your women (saith he) keep silence in the Churches: For it is not permitted unto them to speak,  but to be subject: And if they will learn, let them ask their husbands at home. Again in the first of Timothy, the second and the eleventh, Let the wo∣men learn in silence with all subjection. 12. But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence. Note here, that to speak in a Church Assembly, by way of teaching or instru∣cting others, is an act of superiority, which therefore a woman might not do, because her sex was to be in subjection, and so to appear before God in that Garb and Posture, which consisted therewith; that is, they might not speak to instruct men in the Church, but to God she might. To avoid this difficulty, some would have the word  in my Text, to be taken passively, name∣ly, to hear, or be present at Prophecy, which is an ac∣ception without example, either in Scripture, or any where else. It is true, the Congregation is said to pray when the Priest only speaks; but that they should be said to preach, who are present only at the hearing of a Sermon, is a Trope without example. For the rea∣son is not alike: In prayer the Priest is the mouth of the Congregation, and does what he does in their names, and they assent to it by saying, A men. But he that preaches or prophecies is not the mouth of the
Church, to speak ought in their names, that so they might be said to speak too; but he is the mouth of God speaking to them. It is not likely therefore, that those who only hear another speaking or prophecying to them, should be said , no more, as I said, then that all they should be said to preach, who were at the hearing of a Sermon. What shall we do then? Is there any other accep∣tion of the word prophecying left us, which may fit our turn? Yes, there is a fourth acception, which if it can be made good, will sute our Text better (I think) then any of the former; to wit, that prophecy∣ing here should be taken for praising God in Hymnes and Psalms. For so it is fitly coupled with praying: Praying and praising, being the parts of the Christian Liturgy. Besides, our Apostle also in the fourteenth Chapter of this Epistle, joyns them both together; I will pray, saith he, with the spirit, and will pray with understanding also: I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing, that is, prophecy, with understanding also. For, because Prophets of old did three things: First, foretell things to come: Secondly, notifie the will of God unto the people: And thirdly, uttered them∣selves in musicall wise, and, as I may so speak, in a poeticall strain and composure: Hence it comes to passe, that to prophecy in Scripture, signifies the doing of any of these three things, and amongst the rest, to praise God in verse or musicall composure. This to be so, as I say, I shall prove unto you out of two places of Scripture; and first out of the first of Chronicles, ch. 25. where the word Prophecy is three severall times thus used: I will alledge the words of
the Text at large, because I cannot well abbreviate them; These they are; v. 1. Moreover David and the Captains of the Host, separated to the service of the sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of Ieduthun, who should prophecy with Harps, with Psalteries, and with Cymbals: and the number of the men of Office according to their service was, 2. Of the sons of Asaph, Zaccur, and Io∣seph, and Nathaniah, and Asarelah, the sons of Asaph under the hands of Asaph, which prophecied according to the order of the King. 3. Of Ieduthun, the sons of Ieduthun, Gedaliah, and Zeri, and Ieshaiah, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah (and Schimei) six, under the hands of their Father Ieduthun, who prophecied with a Harp to give thanks, and to praise the Lord. Lo here, to prophe∣cy Vide etiam 2 Chr. 29. 3. & 35. 15. and to give thanks, (or confesse) and to praise the Lord with spirituall songs, made all one. Nor needs such a notion seem strange, when as even among the Latins, the word vates signifieth both him that fore∣tels things to come, and a Poet: for that the Gen∣tile Oracles were given likewise in verse: And S. Paul to Titus, cals the Cretian Poet, Epimenides, a Prophet; as one, saith he, of their own Prophets said,  And the Arabians (whose language comes the nearest both in words and noti∣ons to the Hebrew) call a chief Poet of theirs (Prin∣ceps omnium Poetarum (saith rpenius) quos unquam vidit mundus) Muttenabbi, that is, Prophetizans, or Propheta . Now then if Asaph, Ieduthun, and Heman prophecied when they praised God in such Psalms, as are entituled unto their severall Quires; as we find them in the Psalm-Book, (for know that all the Psalms entituled to the sons of Korah, belonged to
the Quire of Heman, who descended from Korah,) why may not we, when we sing the same Psalms be said to prophecy likewise? namely, as he that useth a prayer composed by another, prayeth; and that ac∣cording to the spirit of him that composed it; So he that praiseth God with these spirituall and propheti∣call composures, may be said to prophecy according to that spirit, which speaketh in them. And that Almighty God is well pleased with such service as this, may appear by that one story of King Iehoshaphat, in the second of Chronicles, who when he marched forth against that great confederate Army of the children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, the Text there tels us, that having consulted with his people, He appointed singers unto the Lord, that should praise the Beauty of holinesse, as they went out before the 2 Chron. 20. 21. Army, and to say, Praise the Lord, for his mercy endureth for ever, (that is, they should sing the one hundred and sixth Psalm, or one hundred thirty sixth, which begin in this manner, and were both of them not unfit for such an occasion;) And when they began to sing Verse 22. and praise, (saith the Text) the Lord set ambushments a∣gainst the children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, which were come against Iudah, and they were smitten. A second place where such kinde of Prophets and prophecying, as we speak of, is mentioned, is that in the first of Samuel, in the story of Sauls election, where 1 Sam. 10. 5 10. we reade, That when he came to a certain place, called the Hill of God, he met a company of Prophets comming down from the high place, (or Oratory there) with a Psaltery, a Tabret, and a Pipe, and a Harp before them, and they prophecied, and he with them. Their Instru∣ments
argue what kinde of Prophecy this was; name∣ly, praising God with spirituall songs, and melody. In what manner, is not so easie to define or specifie: But with an extemporary rapture, I easily beleeve. And if we may conjecture by other examples, one of them should seem to have been the Praecentor, and to utter the verse or ditty; the rest to have answered , the extremes or last words of the verse; For after this manner we are told by Philo Iudaeus, that the Essens (who were of the Iewish Nation) were wont to sing their Hymnes in their , or wor∣shipping places. And after the self-same manner, Eu∣sebius tels us, did the Primitive Christians, having in all likelihood learnt it from the Jews, whose manner it was; the same is witnessed by the Author Constitu∣tionum Apostolicarum in his second Book, and fifty se∣venth Cha. where describing the manner of the Chri∣stian Note to sing , i. alternis choris, and answer  are diverse. Vid. Hook. l. 5. p. 261. service; after the reading of the Lessons of the Old Testament, (saith he)  Let another sing the Psalms of David, and the people, succinere, or answer, . (.) , the extremes of the verses. Some footsteps of which custome remain still with us (though perhaps in somewhat a different way) when in those short versicles of Liturgy, being senten∣ces taken out of the Psalms, the Priest says or sings the first half, and the People answer the latter; quasi . As for example, in that taken out of Psal. 51. 17. the Priest says, O Lord open thou our lips; The People or Chorus answer, And our mouth shall shew forth thy praise. But whatsoever the ancient manner of answering was, thus much we are sure of, that the
Iews in their divine lauds were wont to praise God after this manner, in Antiphones or Responsories; as (to let passe other testimonies, and the use of their Syna∣gogues to this day derived from their Ancestors,) we may learn by two speciall Arguments; one from the Seraphims singing, Esay the sixth, where it is said, that the Seraphims cried one unto another saying, Holy, Ho∣ly, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his Glory. Note, they cryed one unto another. Second∣ly, from the use of the Hebrew verb , which in the proper and native signification thereof being to an∣swer, is also used for to sing: as in the Psalm, where we translate, Sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving, Psa. 147. 7. sing praise upon the Harp unto our God; in the Hebrew it is , Answer unto the Lord in thanksgiving, sing praise upon the Harp unto our God. And Isay 27. 2. In that day sing ye unto her, a vineyard of red wine. In the Hebrew, Answer ye unto her. And Numbers 21. in Is∣raels song of the Well; Spring up, O Well, sing ye un∣to it. In the Hebrew it is, Answer unto it. And Moses speaking of those that were worshipping the golden Calf, Exodus 32. 18. It is not the voyce of them that shout for mastery, nor the voyce of them that cry for be∣ing overcome, but the noise of them that sing do I heare; In the Hebrew, the voyce of them that answer one ano∣ther. And so in other places. But to put all out of doubt, look Ezra 3. 11. where it is expresly said, The Levites, the sons of Asaph, sung together by course, in praising and giving thanks unto the Lord, because he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever. Hence was deri∣ved the manner of praying, and praising God in the Christian service, alternis vicibus, in a musicall way,
and, as it were, by way of prophecying and versifying; even though we do but speak it only; as you know the Poet says, Amant alterna Camaenae. Thus I have ta∣ken occasion somewhat to enlarge this particular; That we our selves might the better understand the reason of what we do, and what precedents, and whose example we follow therein. And thus much of pro∣phecying. I come now to the second thing, I propounded to speak of; namely, what was that fault among the Co∣rinthians, which the Apostle here taxeth: For the right understanding whereof, I say two things; First, for the offenders, that they were the women, and not the men. That which the Apostle speaketh concer∣ning men, being by way of supposition only, and to illustrate his Argument against the uncomly guise of the women à pari: this appears, because his conclu∣sion speaks of women only, and nothing at all of men. Secondly, for the quality of the fault, it was this; that the women at the time of praying and prophecy∣ing were unveiled in the Church; notwithstanding it was then accounted an unseemly and immodest guise, for women to appear open and bare-faced in pub∣lique. How then, will you say, should it come to passe, that Christian women should so much forget them∣selves, as to transgresse this decorum in Gods House, and service which they observed other where? I an∣swer, from a phantasticall imitation of the manner of the she-Priests and Prophetesses of the Gentiles, when they served their Idols, as their Pythiae, Bacchae, or Maenades, and the like; who used, when they uttered their Oracles, or celebrated the rites and sacrifices of
their Gods, to put themselves into a wild and exta∣ticall guise, having their faces discovered, their hait dishevelled, and hanging about their ears: This these Corinthian women (conceiting themselves when they prayed or prophecied in the Church, to be acting the parts of she-Priests, uttering Oracles like, the Py∣thiae, or Sibyllae, or celebrating sacrifice, as the Maena∣des, or Bacchae) were so fond, as to imitate (as that sex is prone to follow the fashion) and accordingly cast off their veils, and discovered their faces immo∣destly in the Congregation, and thereby (as the Apo∣stle speaks) dishonoured their heads; that is, were un∣seemly accoutred, and dressed on their head: which he proveth by three Arguments; partly from Na∣ture, which having given women their hair for a cove∣ring, taught them to be covered, as a sign of subje∣ction; the manner of this covering being to be mea∣sured by the custome of the Nation: Lastly, by an Argument à pari, from men, for whom even them∣selves being Judges, it would be an uncomely thing to wear a vail, that is, a womans habit; so by the like reason, was it as uncomely for a woman to be without a vail, that is, in the guise and dresse of a man. And howsoever the Devils of the Gentiles, sometimes took pleasure in uncomelinesse, and absurd garbs and gestures; yet the God whom they worshipped with his holy Angels, who were present at their devotions, loved a comely accommodation, agreeable to Nature and Custome, in such as worshipped him. For this cause therefore (saith he) ought a woman to have a co∣vering on her head, because of the Angels. Lastly, he concludes it, from the example and custome both of
the Iewish and Christian Churches, neither of which had any such use, for their women to be unvailed in their sacred assemblies: If any man (saith he) be con∣tentious, (that is, will not be satisfied with these rea∣sons) let him know, that we, (that is, we of the Cir∣cumcision) have no such custome, nor the Church of God. For so, with S. Ambrose, Anselme, and some of the ancients, I take the meaning of the Apostle to be in those words. Thus you have heard briefly, what was the fault of these Corinthian Dames, which the Apostle here tax∣eth. From which we our selves may learn thus much; That God requires a decent and comely accommo∣dation in his House, in the act of his worship, and ser∣vice; For if in their habit and dresse, surely much more in their gestures, and deportment; he loves nothing that is unseemly in the one, or in the other.
TITUS 3. 5. Titus 3. 5. By the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. THese words, as it is easie to conceive, upon the first hearing, are spoken of Baptisme; of which I intend not by this choyce, to make any full or ac∣curate tractation, but onely to ac∣quaint you (as I am wont) with my thoughts concerning two particulars therein: One, from what propriety, analogy, or use of water, the washing therewith was instituted for a sign of new birth, according as it is here called , the washing of regeneration. The other, what is the counter-type, or thing which the water figureth in this Sacrament. I will begin with the last first, because the know∣ledge thereof must be supposed, for the explication and more distinct understanding of the other. In eve∣ry Sacrament, as ye well know, there is the outward Symbole or sign, res terrena, and the signatum figured and represented thereby, res coelestis. In this of Baptism, the sign or res terrena, is washing with water: The que∣stion is, what is the Signatum, the invisible and celesti∣all thing, which answers thereunto? In our Catecheti∣call
explications of this mystery, it is wont to be af∣firmed to be the blood of Christ; That as Water wash∣eth away the filth of the body, so the blood of Christ cleanseth us from the guilt and pollution of sin. And there is no question but the blood of Christ is the foun∣tain of all the grace and good communicated unto us, either in this or any other Sacrament, or mystery of the Gospel. But that this should be the , the counterpart, or thing figured by the water in Bap∣tism, I beleeve not, because the Scripture, which must be our guide and direction in this case, makes it another thing; to wit, the Spirit or Holy Ghost; this to be that, whereby the soul is cleansed and renew∣ed within, as the body with water is without; so saith our Saviour to Nicodemus, Ioh. 3. Except a man be born of water, and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. And the Apostle in the words I have read, parallels the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, as type and coun∣tertype. God (saith he) hath saved us (that is, brought us into the state of salvation,) by the washing of rege∣neration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost: where none, I trow, will deny that he speaks of Baptism. The same was represented by that vision, at our Sa∣viours Baptism, of the holy Ghosts descending up∣on him, as he came out of the water, in the simi∣litude of a Dove: For I suppose, that in that Bap∣tism of his, the mystery of all our Baptisms was visi∣bly acted; and that God sayes to every one, truly baptized▪ as he said to him, (in a proportionable sense,) Thou art my Son, in whom I am well pleased. And how pliable the analogy of water is to typifie
the Spirit, well appears by the figuring of the Spirit thereby in other places of Scripture; As in that of Isay, I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and slouds upon the dry ground: I will pour my Spirit upon Isa. 44. 3. by seed, and my blessing upon thine off-spring, where the latter expounds the former: Also by the dis∣course of our Saviour with the Samaritan woman, Iohn 4. 14. Whosoever (saith he) drinketh of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up to everlasting life: By that also, Ioh. 7. 37. where on the last day of the great feast, Iesus stood and said, If any man thirst let him come unto me and drink. He that beleeveth on me, as the Scripture saith (that is, as the Scripture is wont to expresse it, for otherwise there is no such place of Scripture to be found in all the Bible) out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. But this (saith the Euangelist) he spake of the Spirit, which they that beleeve on him should receive. Nor did the Fathers or ancient Church, as far as I can finde, suppose any other correlative to the ele∣ment in Baptism, but this; of this they speak often, of the blood of Christ they are altogether silent in their explicatiōs of this mystery: many are the allusiōs they seek out, for the illustration thereof, and some perhaps forced, but this of the water, signifying or having any relation to the blood of Christ, never comes amongst them; which were impossible, if they ad not sup∣posed some other thing figured by the water, then it; which barred them from falling on that conceit. The like silence is to be observed in our Liturgy, where the Holy Ghost is more then once paralled with
the water in Baptism, washing and regeneration attri∣buted thereunto; but no such notion of the blood of Christ. And that the opinion thereof is novell, may be gathered, because some Lutheran Divines make it peculiar and proper to the followers of Calvin. Whatsoever it be, it hath no foundation in Scri∣pture, and we must not of our own heads assigne sig∣nifications to Sacramentall types without some war∣rant thence. For whereas some conceive those two expressions, of , or sprinkling of the blood of 1 Pet. 1. 2. Christ, and of our being washed from our sins in (or by) his blood, do intimate some such matter, they are Apoc. 1. 5. surely mistaken; for those expressions have reference not to the water of Baptism in the New Testament, but to the rite and manner of sacrificing in the Old; where the Altar was wont to be sprinkled with the blood of the Sacrifices, which were offered, and that which was unclean purified with the same blood: whence is that elegant discourse of Saint Paul, (Heb. 9.) comparing the sacrifices of the Law, with that of Christ upon the Crosse, as much the better. And that whereas in the Law, , Almost all things were purified with blood; so much more the blood of Christ, who offered himself with∣out spot to God, cleanseth our consciences from dead works: But that this washing, that is, cleansing by the blood of Christ, should have reference to Bap∣tism, where is that to be found? I suppose, they will not alledge the water and blood which came out of our Saviours side, when they pierced him; For that is taken to signifie the two Sacraments ordain∣ed by Christ, that of blood the Eucharist, of water
Baptism, & not both to be referred to Baptism: I add, because perhaps some mens fancies are corrupted ther∣with, that there was no such thing as sprinkling, or , used in Baptism in the Apostles times, nor many ages after them; and that therefore it is no way probable, that  in S. Peter should have any reference to the Laver of Baptism. Let this then be our conclusion; That the blood of Christ concurres in the mystery of Baptism, by way of efficacy and merit, but not as the thing there fi∣gured; which the Scripture tels us not to be the blood of Christ, but the Spirit. And so I come to my other Quaere. From what property or use of water, the washing therewith is a Sacrament of our new birth; for so it is here cal∣led, the washing of regeneration; and our Saviour sayes to Nicodemus, Except a man be born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. For in every Sacrament there is some analogy be∣tween what is outwardly done, and what is thereby signified: therefore in this. But what should it be? It is a thing of some moment, and yet in the tractates of this mystery, but little or seldom enquired after; and therefore deserves the more consideration. I an∣swer; this analogy between the washing with water, and regeneration lies in that custome of washing in∣fants from the pollutions of the womb, when they are first born; for this is the first office done unto them when they come out of the womb, if they pur∣pose to nourish and bring them up. As therefore in our naturall birth, the body is washt with water from the pollutions wherewith it comes besmeared out
of the matrix; so in our second birth from above, the soul is purified by the Spirit, from the guilt and pollution of sin, to begin a new life to God-ward. The analogy you see is apt and proper, if that be true of the custome, whereof there is no cause to make question. For the use at present, any man, I think, knows how to inform himself: For that of el∣der times, I can produce two pregnant and notable testimonies; one of the Jews and people of God; another of the Gentiles. The first you shall finde Ezek. 16. where God describes the poor and forlorn condition of Jerusalem, when he first took her to himself, under the parable of an exposed Infant; As for thy nativity, saith he, in the day thou wast born, Ezek. 16. 4, 5. thy navell was not cut, neither was thou washed in wa∣ter, to supple thee; thou wast not salted at all, nor swad∣led at all: None eye pitied thee, to do any of these things unto thee, to have compassion on thee; but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the loathing of thy person in the day that thou wast born. Here you may learn what was wont to be done unto infants at their nativity, by that which was not done to Israel▪ till God himself took pity on her, cutting off the navell string, wash∣ing, salting, swadling: upon this place S. Hierome takes notice (but scarce any body else, that I can yet finde) that our Saviour, where speaking of Baptism, he says, Except a man be born of water & the Spirit, he can∣not enter into the Kingdom of God, alludes to the custom here mentioned of washing Infants at their nativity. The other testimony (and that most pertinent to the application we make) I finde in a story related by Plutarch, in his Quaestiones Romanae, not far from the
beginning, in this manner: Among the Greeks, if one that were living were reported to be dead, and fune∣rall obsequies performed for him, if afterward he re∣turned alive, he was of all men abominated, as a pro phane and unlucky person; no man would come into his company, and (which was the highest degree of calamity) they excluded him from their Temples and the Sacrifices of their gods: It chanced that one Aristinus being faln into such a disaster, & not know∣ing which way to expiate himself therefrom, sent to the Oracle at Delphos, to Apollo, beseeching him to shew him the means whereby he might be freed and discharged thereof. Pythia gave him this answer, , : What women do, when one in childebed lies, That do again, so maist thou sacrifice. Arastinus rightly apprehending what the Oracle meant, offered himself to women, as one newly brought forth to be washed again with water; from which example it grew a custome among the Greeks, when the like misfortune befell any man, after this manner to expiate them; they called them Hystero∣ptmi, or Postlimininati: How well doth this befit the mystery of Baptism? where those who were dead to God through sin, are like Hysteropotmi, regenerate and born again by water and the Holy Ghost. These two passages discover sufficiently, the ana∣logy of the washing with water in Baptism to rege∣neration or new birth; according as the Text, I have chosen for the scope of my discourse, expresseth it; namely, that washing with water is a signe of spirituall
infancy; for as much as infants are wont to be washed, when they come first into the world. Hence the Jews before Iohn the Baptist came a∣mongst them, were wont by this rite to initiate such, as they made Proselytes, (to wit) as becom∣ming infants again, and entring into a new life and being, which before they had not. That which here I have affirmed, will be yet more evident, if we con∣sider those other rites anciently added and used in the celebration of this mystery, which had the self∣same end we speak of; namely, to signifie spirituall Infancy. I will name them, and so conclude; As that of giving the new baptized milk and honey, ad infantandum, as Tertullian speaks; ad infantie sig∣nificationem, so S. Hierome; because the like was u∣sed to infants new born; according to that in the se∣venth of Isay, of Immanuels infancy; A Virgin shall conceive and bear a son; butter and honey shall he eat, Isa. 7. 14, 15. that he may know to refuse evill and chuse good. Se∣condly, that of salt, as is implied in that of Ezekiel, Thou wast not washed with water, nor salted with salt: that of putting on the white garment, to resemble swadling: All these were anciently (especially the first) used in the Sacrament of our Spirituall birth, out of reference to that which was done to Infants at their naturall birth. Who then can doubt, but the principall rite of washing with water, the onely one ordained by our blessed Saviour, was chosen for the same reason? to be the element of our initiati∣on; and that those who brought in the other, did so conceive of this; and from thence derived those imitations.
JOSH. 24. 26. Iosh. 24. 26. And (Joshuah) took a great stone, and set it up there (viz. in Sichem) under the Oak, which was in the Sanctuary of the Lord: Alii, by the Sanctua∣ry. Hebr. . THE Story whereupon these words depend is this; Ioshuah a little be∣fore his death assembled all the Tribes of Israel at Shechem, or Si∣chem; there to make a solemne Covenant between them and the Lord, to have him alone for their God, and to serve no other Gods besides him: which they having solemnely promised to do, saying, The Lord our God will we serve, and his voice will we obey: Ioshuah for a testimony and monument of this their stipulation, erects in the place a great stone or pillar under an Oak, which was by (or, as the Hebrew hath it, in) the sanctuary of the Lord. Of this Oak, or ra∣ther collectively, Querceum, or Oaken-holt of Sichem, is twice mention made elswhere in Scripture. For this was the place where Abraham first sate down, and where the Lord appearing unto him, he erected his first Altar in the Land of Canaan, after he came out
of Haran thither; as we reade Gen. 12. 6. in these words; And Abraham passed through the Land unto the place of Sichem, unto the Oak, or Oak-grove of Morch, where the Lord appeared unto him, saying, Vnto thy seed will I give this Land; and there he builded an Altar unto the Lord, who appeared unto him. And what place more fit for Abrahams posterity, to renew a Covenant with their God, then that where their God first made his Covenant with Abraham their Father? Again, it was this place, where in the after-times of the Judges, one hundred and seventy years after the death of Ioshuah, the Sichemites made Abimelech, the base son of Ierubaal or Gideon, King, as we read Iudg. 9. 6. That all the men of Sichem gathered together, and all the House of Millo, and went and made Abimelech King, by the Oak of the Pillar which was in Sichem: The words are , even the Oak, where Ioshu∣ah here in my Text set up this great stone for a wit∣nesse to Israel. For the word  here, and , or , in the other two places, signifie one and the same thing, to wit, either an Oak, Terebinth, or some other kinde of tree; as the Septuagint perpetually render them. Yea, that of Iudges must of necessity so be rendred, by comparing it with this of my Text, to which it hath reference: Neverthelesse our last Translation in the first of these places. Gen. 12. concerning Abraham, chose rather to follow S. Hierome (wherefore I know not) who follows not himself, and translates it a plain, not an Oak, to wit, the plain of Morch: by which Translation, the identity of that place with the other two, where it is translated Oak, is obscured and made
the lesse observable. If there be any difference be∣tween the words , and , it should rather be this, that , should signifie a tree, and , a grove, holt, or wood of such trees; as the Septuagint in that place of the ninth of Iudges, have expresly rendred it, namely,  the Quercetum, Oak toft, or holt in Sichem. And so, I beleeve, it ought to be understood in the other places, that is, to be taken collectively; of which we shall hear more hereafter. But this is no great matter of difficulty, that which follows is; namely, how this Oak, or Oaken-holt of Si∣chem, is said here in my Text to have been in (for the Hebrew is ) or by the Sanctuary of the Lord. For how comes the Sanctuary of the Lord to be at Sichem, when as the Tabernacle, and the Ark of the Testimony were at Shiloh, there set up by Ioshuah him∣self, and so remained (as the Scripture elswhere tels us) untill the time of the Captivity of the Land; which without doubt was not till after Ioshuah was dead and buried: and is usually understood of that time, when the Ark was taken captive by the Phili∣stims. And yet is not onely here a Sanctuary men∣tioned at Sichem, but in the beginning of the Chap∣ter, the Elders and Officers of the Tribes are said, upon Ioshuahs summons, to have presented themselves there before the Lord, which speech useth to imply as much. If we say, the Ark of God was taken out of its place at Shiloh, and brought to Sichem by the Levites, up∣on occasion of this generall Assembly, yet the diffi∣culty will not be removed: For first, how could the
Ark alone give doinintion to the place where it stood, to be called the Sanctuary of the Lord? Or se∣condly, if the Altar were there with it, how was the Law of God observed, which saith, Thou shalt not Deut 16. 21 plant a Grove of any trees, (or any tree) neer unto the Altar of thy God, which thou shalt make thee; Neither shalt thou set up a pillar, which the Lord thy God hateth; when as here are both, an Oak or Quercetum, in the Sanctuary of God, and a Pillar or Statue erected un∣der it? Thirdly, this Sanctuary, whatsoever it was, must be something which had a constant and fixed station, and was not temporary or mutable; because the Oak, under which this pillar was erected by Ioshuah, is here designed and appointed out by it, as by a con∣stant and standing mark: else to what purpose had it been to sign out the Oak by it, if it were such as would be here to day and not to morrow? For these reasons it appears that this Sanctuary could not be the Tabernacle, where the Ark and Altar for Israel were, but that it was somthing else: And what that should be, is to be enquired. I answer, it was a Proseucha, or praying place, which the Israelites (at least those of Ephraim, in whose lot it was) after the Country was subdued unto them, had erected in that very place at Sichem, where God first appeared to Abraham, and where he built his first Altar, after he was come into the Land of Canaan; The place where God said unto him, Vnto thy seed will I give this Land. For the understanding whereof, you must take no∣tice, that the Jews besides their Tabernacle or Temple,
which was the onely place for sacrifice, had first or last two sorts of places for religious duties: The one called Proseuchae; the other Synagogues: the diffe∣rence between which was this; Proseucha was a plot of ground, encompassed with a wall, or some other like mound or enclosure, and open above, much like to our Courts: the use properly for prayer, as the name Proseucha importeth: A Synagogue was aedifi∣cium tectum, a covered edifice, as our houses and Churches are, where the Law and Prophets were read and expounded, and the people instructed in divine matters; according to that Acts 15. 21. Moses of old time hath in every City them that preach him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day. From whence also ye may gather, that Synagogues were within the Cities, as Proseucha's were without; which was ano∣ther difference between them, as you shall hear con∣firmed. That Proseucha's were such places as I have descri∣bed them to be, I prove out of a notable place of E∣piphanius, a Jew bred and born in Palestine; who in his Tract against the Messalian Heretiques, after he hath told us that the Messaliam built themselves cer∣tain houses, or large places, , Fororum in∣star, which they called Proseuchae; he goes on thus; Et habuisse quidem Iudaeos jam olim, ut & Samaritas▪ certa quaedam ad precandum loca extra urbes, quas Pros∣euchas dicerent, ex Apostolorum Actibus liquet, ubi purpurae institrix Lydia Apostolo Paulo occurrisse dici∣tur; De quo ita Scriptura narrat, , it seemed to be a place of prayer, (of which I shall say more anon;) He goes on still, Est & Sicimis, saith he,
quae hodie Neapolis dicitur, Proseuchae locus extra urbem Theatro similis, secundo ab urbe lapide situs; Quem ita aperto coelo & area subdiali extruxerunt Samaritae Iu∣daeorum in omnibus imitatores. Out of these words you may collect every part of my description. First, that Proseuchae were out of the Cities in the fields. Secondly, that they were , like the ancients Forum, or place of market, and The like he hath a few lines after of the Sataniani; . , under the open aire, and without roof, such as the Courts of the Temple also were, whither the people came to pray; so that they were as it were a kind of dis-joy∣ned, and remoter Courts unto the Temple, whither they turned themselves when they prayed in them. Thirdly, that they were ordained for places of pray∣er; All these are in this passage of Epiphanius; and moreover that such a one was in his time remaining at Sichem, the place my Text speaks of, there erected by the Samaritans, in that, as in all things else, imita∣tors of the Jews: What better testimony could be desired? These Proseucha's of the Jews, both name and thing, were not unknown to the Poet Iuvenal, when describing in his third Satyr, in what manner proud and insolent fellows in the City of Rome, used in their drunken humours, to abuse and quarrell with those they met in the streets, in the night time, whom they took to be of mean estate and condition, he brings them in speaking thus: Ede ubi consistas; in quâ te quaero Proseuchâ? where dwell you? in what Proseucha should I seek or enquire for you? intima∣ting that he was some poor fellow, either that dwelt in an house that could not keep out wind and wea∣ther,
but was like a Jews Proseucha, all open above; or he alludes to the banishment of the Jews out of Rome, by Domitian, in his own time, and then fresh, as who had no where else to bestow themselves, but in their Proseucha's out of the City, or who used to assemble in the Proseucha's; according to some of these senses is Iuvenall to be understood. For that the Jews had Proseucha's about the City of Rome, appears by Philo Iudaeus in his De legatione ad Calum; where commending the clemency and mo∣deration of Augustus Caesar, he saith,  That he knew the Jews of Rome had their Proseucha's, and that they used to assemble in them, especially on the Sabbath days, and yet never mole∣sted them, as Caius did. The same Philo mentioneth Proseucha's elswhere, though it be not to be dissem∣bled, Vide de vita Mosis. Lib 3. that he seems to comprehend Synagogues also properly so called under that name, as being better known to the Gentiles, who called both by that name▪ Iosephus in his Life tels us of a Proseucha at Tiberias in Galilee, in these words,  On the next day, the Sab∣bath, the whole people were gathered together in the Proseucha, which is (saith he)  a large edi∣fice, fit to receive a great multitude. In the New Testament, the name of Synagogue is frequent, but that of Proseucba seldom; whence may be conjectured that both are comprehended under that name, as in Philo both are termed Proseuchae: yet once or twice, as learned Interpreters think, we read of Proseucha's in the new Testament; as namely
Acts 16. 13. (which Epiphanius even now alledged to that purpose) where S. Luke tels us, that S. Paul being come to Philippi in Macedonia on the Sab∣bath Day, they went out of the City to a river side, , where there was taken to be a Proseucha, or where was famed to be a Proseucha; , will bear both. The Syriack hath; Quia ibi conspiciebatur Domus orationis; the Arabick, Locus orationis. For if  were taken here for prayer it selfe, as if the sense were; where prayer was used to be made; it should ra∣ther have been said, , and not  yet, if it were so taken, it would still argue no lesse, then that there was here an appointed place for prayer, and that out of the City, which is all one, as to say there was a Proseucha: so I take , in the 16. verse of the same Chapter, where it is said; It came to passe, , as we went to the Proseucha: especially since we read not in the Text, that S. Paul went thither to pray, but to preach, where he deemed there was an assembly that day ac∣cording to custome: And we sate down, (saith S. Luke) and spake unto the women, which were come together there. A second place where a Proseucha is mentioned in the New Testament, may be that Luke 6. 12. where it is said, that our Saviour went out into a high Mountain to pray, and continued all night, , in Proseucha Dei, so Drusius thinks  is here to be taken for a place, and the Article helps the sense; otherwise it seems an odde and unaccustomed expres∣sion for , to mean, in prayer
made unto God; and why should it not be as likely, that our Saviour might sometimes pray in their Pros∣eucha's, as teach in their Synagogues? Thus we have seen the testimonies for Proseucha's, their use and difference from Synagogues. Now for Synagogues, the common opinion is, that they were not before the Captivity of Babylon; and that neces∣sity first taught the Jews the use of them in that Ca∣ptivity, which afterward they brought with them at their return into their own Country. The reason why men so think, is, I suppose, the absolute silence of them in Scripture, untill the time of the second Temple; but though the name were not, it is pos∣sible the thing might be: howsoever, because it is most received, that they were not, we will let it passe for currant. But as for Proseucha's, such as we have described them, none, that I know, have affirmed or determined ought of their antiquity; it may be, not taken it into consideration, either be∣cause they had no occasion to think of any such mat∣ter, or because they confounded them altogether with Synagogues. The matter therefore being free and undecided, I will make bold to affirm, that if Synagogues were not, yet Proseucha's, that is, open places for Pray∣ers, were a long time before the Captivity, yea e∣ven from the dayes of Ioshuah the son of Nun. And though the Jews had, or were to have but one Altar, or place of Sacrifice, that namely, which the Lord should choose, to place the Ark of his Covenant there, the Tabernacle or Temple; yet had they other places for devotion, and religious use. And that this
Sanctuary of God here mentioned in my Text at Si∣chem (which was a Leviticall City) was such a one; my reasons are these; First, because it is incredible, that the Israelites, having but one Temple for the whole Nation, whereat they were bound to appear, and those the males onely, but thrice a year, should have no other places of prayer nearer their dwellings, whither they might resort on Sabbath dayes, the Temple or Tabernacle being from some of them a∣bove an hundred miles distant at the least. Secondly, because (as I have already shewed) this sanctuary at Sichem could not be the Tabernacle, which was then at Shiloh, not at Sichem, and yet must have some stable and fixed place, because the situation of the Oak is designed by it: yea, must have been still there, when this story of Ioshuah was written; which is thought to have been long after his death: surely this Chapter was written after it, where both his death and buriall are recorded: wherefore to say the Ark was brought thither upon this occasion, will not serve turn. Thirdly, this place should be a Proseucha, because of that circumstance of trees growing in it; which, as it proves it not to have been the Taberna∣cle, (where no such thing was lawfull to be) so seems it to be a Characteristicall note of a Proseucha. For though it were not lawfull to have trees near the Altar of God, that is, in or about the Court of the Tabernacle; Yet was it not so with Proseucha's, yea they seem to have been ordinarily garnished and beset with them. This may be gathered from a pas∣sage of Philo Iudaeus, where relating the barbarous outrage of the Gentiles at Alexandria, against the
Jews, there dwelling in the time of Caius, , saith he, , of some of the Proseucha's they cut down the Trees, others they demolished to the very Foun∣dations. The same is implied by that of Iuvenal, speaking of a Jewish Wizard or Fortune-teller,—conducta sub arbore conjux. And again in his sixth Satyre, Arcanam Iudaea tremens mendicat in aurem, Interpres legum Solymarum, magna sacerdos Arboris, ac summi sida internuncia coeli. Interpres legum Solymarum, that is, of Moses Lawes, Magna Sacerdos Arboris, because of the Trees in their Proseucha's, or Places of worship. The same appears also out of those verses of his third Satyre, complain∣ing that the once sacred Grove of Fons Capenus, where Numa used to meet with the Goddesse AEge∣ria, was then let out to the beggerly Jews for a Pros∣eucha, and that every Tree (such were the times) must pay rent to the people: by which means, the woods which formerly had been the habitation of the Muses, were become dens for beggerly Jews to mutter their Orizons in; hear his words: Hic ubi nocturne Numa constituisset amicae, Nunc sacri Fontis nemus, & delubra locantur Iudaeis, quorum cophinus foenumqu supellex; Omnis enim populo mercedem pendere jussa est Arbor; & ejectis mendicat sylva Camoenis. Whence comes this connexion of Iews and Trees, but Vide Psal. 52. 10. Si∣cut olea in Domo Dei. from their having trees in their Proseucha's? unto which their situation without the Cities conduced; as also it did for privacy and retirement.
Thus you see how well the description and mark of a Proseucha agrees to this Sanctuary in my Text. And that the Jews had many other such in other pla∣ces, as well as at Sichem, even in those elder times, as at These three pla∣ces are cal∣led by the LXX.  Sa∣muel. 6. 16. , though in the Origi∣nall there be no such thing. Mispah, Bethel, and Gilgal, I make little doubt; which we reade to have been places of Assembly for the people; and the two last sanctified of old by Di∣vine apparition, as Sichem was. Of Mispah the Au∣thor of the first of Maccabees, in his third Chapter, if I understand him, testifieth as much; when he tels us, that whilst the holy City lay desolate, and the Sanctuary was trodden down by the tyranny of An∣tiochus Epiphanes; Iudas Maccabaeus, and those of the people which adhered unto their God, assembled together at Maspha to make there their supplications unto their God, , because at Maspha or Mispah had been a place of prayer in former time for Israel; as much as to say, there had been a Proseucha of old. And do we not reade in that story of the jamiticall war in the Book of Iudges, That the Iabernacle being at Shi∣loh, (as appears by the last Chapter) yet (in the Chap∣ter going before) it is said, that the whole Congregation of Israel was gathered together as one man unto the Lord in Mispah? and that in the twenty sixth verse is men∣tion of an house of God there, where the people pray∣ed and fasted? It is said indeed that the Ark of the Covenant was upon that extraordinary occasion brought thither, but it being certain, out of the next Chapter, that the Tabernacle was still at Shiloh, this House of God could be none of it: Nay perhaps, we may hence learn, that when the Ark upon occasion
of such a generall and extraordinary assembly was to be removed, they used to bring it to such places as these, which were as holy Courts, ready prepared for it, and that then it was lawfull, but not else, to sa∣crifice in them. Of these Courts for prayer, we may understand that also in the seventy fourth Psalm; They have cast Fire into thy Sanctuary, they have burnt up all the Conven∣ticula Dei in the Land, namely, in the Captivity by Nebuchadnezzar, who destroyed both their Temple, and their Proseucha's. For if we understand it of the persecution of Antiochus, as some do, it must then follow, that some Canonicall Scripture was written after Malachi, and the ceasing of Prophecy, that is, in the time of Maccabees; which will not easily be granted; Besides that we reade not, that Antiochus cast any fire into the Temple. Now if it speak of the vastation by Nebuchadnezzar, then had the Jews before that time, not onely a Sanctuary for sacrifice, but also , Coticula Dei, that is, either Proseucha's, or Synagogues; for either will serve my purpose. But now you will say, what profit is there of this long discourse? were it so, or were it not so, as I have endeavoured to prove, of what use is the know∣ledge thereof to us? yes, to know it was so, is use∣full in a threefold respect: First, for the right under∣standing of such places of the Old Testament, where a House of God, and assembling before the Lord are of∣ten mentioned, there where neither the Ark of the Covenant, nor the Tabernacle at such time were: as besides the places before alledged, we reade in the
tenth of the first Book of Samuel, of Sauls meeting with three men going up to God to Bethel, and of a place 1 Sam. 10. 3. 5.  called, The Hill of God, whence a company of Pro∣phets came from the high place there, prophesying with a Tabret, Pipe, and Harp before them; in nei∣ther of which places can we finde that ever the Ta∣bernacle was: and as for the Ark we are sure it was all this time at Kiriathjearim, till David solemnly fetcht it thence: and if at any time the Ark might (as now it was not) be transferred to any of them upon oc∣casion of some generall Assembly of the Nation, that so they might have opportunity to ask counsell of the Lord, and offer Sacrifice, yet were they not the ordinary station thereof. Secondly, we may learn from hence, that to have appropriate places, set apart for prayer and Divine duties, is not a circumstance or rite proper to legall worship onely, but of a more common nature: For as much as though Sacrifice, wherein the legall wor∣ship (or worship of the old Covenant) consisted, were restrained to the Ark and Tabernacle, and might not be exercised where they were not; yet were there other places for Prayer besides that; which are no more to be accounted legall places, then bare and sim∣ple prayer was a legall Dutie. Lastly, we may gather from this Description of Proseucha's, which were as Courts, encompassed onely with a wall or other like enclosure, and open above; in what manner to conceive of the accommo∣dation of those Altars, we reade to have been erected by the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, in the Book of Genesis; namely, that the ground whereon
they stood, was fenced and bounded with some such enclosure, and shaded with trees, after the manner of Proseucha's, as we may reade expresly of one of them at Beersheba: That Abraham there planted a Grove, and called upon the Name of the Lord, the ever∣lasting God. Yea, when the Tabernacle and Temple were, the Altar of God stood still in an open Court, and who can beleeve that the place of those Altars of the Patriarchs were not bounded and separated from common ground? And from these patterns in likeli∣hood, after the Altar for Sacrifice was restrained to one onely place, the use of such open places, or Courts for prayer, garnished with trees, as I have shewed Proseucha's to have been, continued still.
1 TIM. 5. 17. 1 Tim. 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honour: especially they that labour in the Word and Doctrine. THere are two things in these words to be explicated; First, what is meant here by Elders: Secondly, what is this double-honour due unto them. For the first, there is no question but the Priests or Ministers of the Gospel of Christ were contained under this name: for so the New Testament useth the word , or Presbyter, for the Ministers of the Word and Sacraments in the Gospel; whence commeth the Saxon word Priester, and our now Eng∣lish word Priest. And the Ancient Fathers thought these onely to be here meant, and never dreamed of any other. But in our time those who obtrude a new Discipline and Government upon the Church, altogether unknown and unheard of in the anci∣ent, will needs have two sorts of Elders or Presby∣ters here understood: one of such as preach the Word and Doctrine, whom they call Pastours; another of Lay-men, who were neither Priests nor Deacons, but
ned as assistants to them in the exercise of Ecclesiasti∣call Discipline in admonitions and censures of man∣ners, and in a word, in the execution of the whole power of the Keys. These our Church-men call Lay-Elders, and the Authors of this new device, Presbyterians; these Pres∣byters or Elders they will have meant in the first words, , Elders that rule, or govern well, whom therefore they call Ruling-Elders; the other whom they call Pastours, to be described in the latter words; they who labour in the Word and Do∣ctrine, whom therefore they distinguish by the name of Teaching-Elders. This is their exposition, and this exposition the ground and foundation of their new Discipline; but none of the Fathers, which have commented upon this Place, neither Chrysostome, Hierome, Ambrose, Theodoret, Primasius, Oecumenius, or Theophylact, (as they had no such, so) ever thought of any such Lay-Elders to be here meant; but Priests only, which ad∣ministred the Word and Sacraments. But how (will you say then) is this Place to be un∣derstood, which may seem, as they alledge, to inti∣mate two sorts of Elders, some that ruled only, others that laboured also in the Word and Doctrine? The Di∣vines of our Church, who had cause, when time was, to be better versed in this question, then any others, have given divers expositions of these words; none of which give place to any such new-found. Elders, as the Fautors of the Presbyterian Discipline, upon the sole Authority of this one place, have set up in divers forain Churches, and would have brought into ours.
I will relate four of the chief of these expositions, to which the rest are reducible. The first is grounded upon the use of the participle in the Greek tongue, which is often wont to note the reason or condition of a thing, and accordingly to be resolved by a causall, or conditionall conjunction. According whereunto this Text, , duplici honore digni habeantur, (or dignentur) , is to be resolved thus; Elders or Presbyters that rule or govern the Flock well, let them be accounted worthy of double ho∣nour, and that chiefly in respect, and because of their labour in the Word and Doctrine. And so this manner of speech will imply two duties, but not two sorts or orders of Elders, and that though this double honour be due unto them for both, yet chiefly and more prin∣cipally for the second, their labour in the Word and Doctrine: and this way goes S. Chrysostome and other Greek Writers. A second exposition is taken from the force and signification of the word , which signifies not simply , to labour, but to labour with much tra∣vell and toyl; for  is derived from , vexor, laboribus & molestiis premor, and so properly signifies molestiam, or fatigationem ex labore. Thus the mea∣ning will be; let Elders that do bene praesidere, i. go∣vern and instruct their Flock well, be counted worthy of double honour; especially such of them as take more then ordinary pains in the Word and Doctrine: Or thus; let the Elders that discharge their office well, be, &c. especially by how much the more their pain∣fulnesse and travell shall exceed in preaching the Word and Doctrine, &c.
Thus we have seen two expositions of these words, neither of them implying two sorts of Orders of Presbyters, but only distinguishing severall offices and duties of the same Order, or implying a differing me∣rit in the discharge of them: But if they will by no means be perswaded, but that two sorts of Elders are here intimated, let it be so; two other expositions will yeeld them it, but so as will not be for their turn; for their Lay Elders will be none of them. The first is this, That the Apostle should speak here of Priests and Deacons, considering both as Members of the Ecclesiasticall Consistory or Senate, which consisted of both Orders, and in that respect might well include them both under the name of El∣ders; it being a common notion in Scripture, to call the Associates of a Court of Judicature by that name Senatus in Latin hath its name à senibus, i. senioribus, of Eldership; and is as much to say, as . According to this supposall, the Apostles words may have this construction: Let the Elders which rule well, whether Priests or Deacons, be counted worthy of double honour, but more especially the Priests who besides their government labour also in the Word and Doctrine. Now what can be opposed against such an exposition I see not. For it is not improbable, but the Apostle should make provision as well for the maintenance of Deacons, as of Priests, seeing he omits it not, of Wi∣dows in the verse going next before this. But unlesse he includes them under the name of Elders, he makes no provision for them at all. Besides this is not the only place (some think) where Deacons are compre∣hended under the name of Elders. For the Councell
of Hierusalem, Acts 15. where they inscribe their Sy∣nodicall Epistle thus; The Apostles, Elders, and Bre∣thren to the Brethren which are of the Gentiles in Anti∣och, &c. may seem to comprehend the Deacons un∣der the name of Elders or Presbyters, otherwise they should omit them, which without doubt were part of the Councell. There is another exposition, which allows also of two sorts of Elders to be here implied, but makes them both Priests; namely, that Presbyters or Priests in the Apostles time, were of two sorts, one of Resi∣dentiaries, and such as were affixed to certain Chur∣ches, and so did , praesidere Gregi. Anothe, of such as had no fixed station, or charge over any cer∣tain place, but travelled up and down to preach the Gospel where it was not, or to confirm the Churches where it was preached already; such, as are elswhere known by the names of Euangelists and Doctors or Prophets: that these were those , spoken of here by the Apostle: that both these sorts of Presbyters were to be counted worthy of double ho∣nour, as well , as those that travelled up and down to preach the Gospel, , but especially these latter, because their pains were more then the others. This is confirmed from the use of the word  which in Scripture signifies not only corporall labour, as may appear in many places; but seems to be used by S. Paul even in this very sense we have now given, as 1 Cor. 15. where he says, comparing himself with the other Apostles, , I have travelled up and down more then they all, as is manifest he did.
These are the principall expositions given by the Writers of our Church, upon this passage of Scrip∣ture, which is the foundation and onely place whereon they build this new Consistory, and are so much in love with it. But this being capable, as you see, of such va∣riety of exposition; how much too weak and insuffi∣cient it is to establish any such new order of Elders never heard of in the Church from the time of the Apostles untill this last age, any man may judge. But give me leave to propound a fifth exposition, which shall be more liberall to them then any of those yet given. For it shall yeeld them all they contend for so eagerly to be implied in this Text, namely, that there are not only two sorts of Elders here implied; but also that the one of them are Lay-Elders, such as have nothing to doe with the administration of the Word and Sacraments; what would they have more? yet they will be never the nearer for this con∣cession; for the Lay-Elders here implied, may be no Church Officers, but Civill Magistrates, which in Scrip∣ture language we know are called Elders: as when we reade of the Elders of Israel, of the Elders of Iudah, of the Elders of the Priests, and Elders of the people, of Priests and Elders, and the like; according to such a notion the words may be construed by way of Transi∣tus à thesi ad hypothesin, as Rhetoricians call it, to wit, in this manner; Cum omnes Seniores, sive Reipublicae, sive Ecclesiae, qui bene praesident, duplici honore dignan∣di sint, tum maxime Seniores Ecclesiastici, qui laborant in verbo & Doctrinâ: Or thus, Let all Elders that govern well, of what sort soever, be counted worthy of double honour, especially the Elders of the Church which
labour in the Word and Doctrine; Is not this good sense? and doth not the Apostle in the beginning of this ve∣ry Chapter, use the name Elder, in the larger and more generall sense, when he says, Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a Father, and the younger men as Bre∣thren, the Elder women as Mothers, the younger as Si∣sters: why may he not then do so here? And doth not S. Iames in his last Chapter call the Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, , as it were in distinction from ? But it will be objected that this exposition is too ambitious, because it makes the Apostle to preferre the Elders of the Church before the Elders of the Common-wealth, that is, the Priest before the Civill Magistrate, when he says that all Elders, whether of Church or Com∣mon-wealth, are to be accounted worthy of double honour, so especially those Elders which labour in the Word and Doctrine, which are the Presbyters of the Church. But here know that the name of Elder is never gi∣ven in Scripture to the Supreme Magistrate, but to the subordinate only; and why the Ministers of the Word and Doctrine should not be accounted as worthy of dou∣ble honour, as they, or more worthy, I know not; e∣specially if S. Paul here says it; sure I am, this objecti∣on is not sufficient to refute my interpretation. Thus I thought good to acquaint you how many ways this place may be expounded, without impor∣ting any such new Elders, (neither Priests nor Deacons) as they would impose upon us for Church Officers, by the sole authority thereof; for though this Discipli∣narian controversy of our Church stirred up by the
admirers of the Genevian platform were in the heat before our time, yet the sect is not yet dead, but ready upon every occasion to surprise such as they finde un∣armed, or not forewarned. And thus having informed our selves who they are, wch are here termed Elders, we will now see also, what is that honour which is due unto them, which was the second thing I propounded, , let them be accounted (saith the Apostle) worthy of, or deign'd double honour. That by honour here, is meant honor arium stipendium, or a tribute of maintenance, is manifest by the following words, which the Apostle brings to inforce it; For the Scripture saith, (saith he) Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the Oxe that treadeth out the corn; and, The labourer is worthy of his hire: Who sees not what these proofs infer? The first of them he alledges also in the same argument, 1 Cor. 9. where he addes, Doth God take care for Oxen? Or saith he it altogether for our sakes? (ours namely, that preach the Gospel) For our sakes no doubt this is written, that he which ploweth should plow in hope, and he that threst∣eth in hope, should be partaker of his hope. The case is plain; It is an Hebrew notion, to bring honour, that is, to pay tribute, or bring a present, as Apoc. 21. 16.  to wit, the new Jerusalem. And thus much of the word Honour. But what is meant by double honour? Some (as among the Fathers S. Ambrose,) will have this double honour, to be honour of maintenance, and honour of reve∣rence. But because the Apostles proofs here infer only maintenance; I take it to be meant in this place only of it. And as for double, there seems to be an allusion to
the right of the first-born, to whom at first the office of Priesthood belonged in their Families, and into whose room the Levites were taken, and whom the Presbyters of the Gospel now succeed. As therefore they had a double portion among their Brethren, in like manner should the Presbyters of the Gospel be counted worthy of double honour. And if you will admit of that construction of these words, which I gave in the fifth place, namely to com∣prehend as well the Elders of the Common-wealth, as the Elders of the Church, (that both were to be accounted worthy of double honour, but especially those of the Church, who labour in the Word and Doctrine) it will agree yet far better; because both the one and the other succeed in the place of the First born; to whom belonged both to be Priests and Civill Governours in their Tribes and Families. Yet howsoever the ancient Christians were wont in their Agapes or Love-Feasts, to give their Presby∣ters a double portion, , with some reference to this Text, as appears by Tertullian; neverthelesse, I think double honour is not here to be so precisely ta∣ken, but only to note a liberall and ingenuous mainte∣nance, such as might set them above the vulgar, as the First-born by their double portion were preferred above the rest of their Brethren. But I have not yet done with the word , for from this that the Apostle here styleth the Priests mainte∣nance, honour; it followeth, that the Priests mainte∣nance is not to be esteemed of the nature of Almes, as some would have it, but is a Tribute of honour, such as is given by an inferiour to his superiour. For Almes
and honour, Nec bene conveniunt, nec in unâ sede moran∣tur, the one respecting those to whom it is given, as miserable, the other, as honourable. I mean if almes be taken, as we use the word, for a work of mercy. From the same ground also it follows, that the Priests main∣tenance is no ordinary mercenary wages, but such as is given by way of honour, as well as of reward: for such as is given to ordinary workmen is reward and wages only, and not a Testimony or Tribute of ho∣nour: But that which is due to the Priest, as you see, is , namely, of the same nature with that which is given to Princes and Magistrates, by those which are under them. For as the Ministers of the Gospel are in the nature of Presbyters or Elders, unto the people over whom they are set; so is their maintenance from them, such as is sutable to the condition and Digni∣ty of an Elder; not a common wages, which the supe∣riour often gives to his inferiour, or servant, but ho∣norarium, or .
ACTS 2. 5. Act. 2. 5. And there were [] sojourning at Ierusa∣lem Iews, devout men, out of every Nation under heaven. AT the Feast of Pentecost, when that won∣der hapned of the holy Ghosts descent upon the Apostles in the likenesse of Fie∣ry tongues, there were present at Jerusa∣lem (as the story a little after my Text informs us) men of severall Nations, as Parthians, Medes, Ela∣mites, and dwellers in Mesopotamia, Iudaea, and Cappa∣docia, Pontus, and Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphilia, AE∣gypt, and the parts of Lybia about Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, (or stranger-Romans) both Iews and Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians; all these, upon the noyse of this strange accident came together unto the Place, and were confounded, because that every man heard them speak in his own language, wherein he was born. Many when they reade this story, suppose the peo∣ple here mentioned, the most of them to have been Gentiles, and some Expositors cannot be excused from this mistake. For the more clear discerning whereof, and their better information, who may perhaps be overtaken with the same errour; I have made choyce of the words before read, for the argu∣ment of my present discourse; which tels us in expresse terms, that these Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, these Mesopotamians, Cappadocians, & the rest after men∣tioned
under those Nationall names, were Israel∣ites, or Iews of the dispersion; Iews born in Parthia, and Media, Iews of Elam, or Persia, Mesopota∣mian Iews, and so the rest of the Countries there na∣med; all of them of the Circumcision; for so saith my Text, beginning to speak of them: There were so journing, (or if you will, dwelling) at Ierusalem, Iews of every Nation under heaven; that is, of every Na∣tion where the Iews were dispersed. This is yet further confirmed by S. Peters speech unto them; as when having cited the words of the Prophet Ioel, verse the 22. he saith unto them, Ye men of Israel, hear these words; Iesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you, &c. Him being delivered by the determinate counsell and fore-knowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain: Men of Israel, and such as had slain their Messi∣as; surely those were no Gentiles. Likewise when at the hearing of this, they were pricked in their hearts, he saith unto them; Repent and be Baptized, every one of you, in the Name of Iesus Christ, for the remission of sins. For the Promise is made unto you and your children, and to all that are afarre off, even as many as the Lord shall call. The Promise, saith he, is made unto you and your children; were these then any others then Iews, or Israelites of the seed of Abraham? Lastly, we finde that of these Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, and of the rest named with them, there were added unto the Church by this Sermon of S. Pe∣ter three thousand souls; But it is certain that Corneli∣us the Centurion was the first Gentile that was con∣verted unto the Faith; Therefore these first Converts
were no Gentiles. Perhaps you will say, they were Proselytes of these severall Nations, and therefore cal∣led Iews. I say, not so neither; because Proselytes are by name rehearsed among them, when it is said of those Romani advenae, (verse the tenth) that they were Iews and Proselytes; Ergo, the rest were Iews by race, and not by Religion onely. But what need I to have heaped together all these proofs, when my Text alone is sufficient to evince it? I come now therefore to a more particular illustra∣tion thereof, according to what I have thus in gene∣rall premised. And first, for the word , which I translate sojourning, rather then dwelling; (for so I understand it, that they were not proper dwellers, but such as came to worship at Jerusalem from those far Countries at the Feasts of the Passeover and Pen∣tecost; and so had been continuing there some good time) It is true that in the usuall Greek  & , signifie a durable mansion; But with the Hellenists, in whose Dialect the Scripture speaketh, they are used indifferently for a stay of a shorter or longer time; that is, for to sojourn, as well as to dwell; as these two exam∣ples out of the Septuagint will make manifest: one, Gen. 27. 44. where Rebecca sayes to her younger son Ia∣cob, Son arise, and flee unto Laban thy brother to Haran, , and tarry with him a few dayes, untill thy brothers fury turn away;  is here to tarry but a few dayes. Another is in the first Book of Kin. 17. 20. where Eliah cries unto the Lord, saying, O Lord my God, hast thou also brought evill upon the wi∣dow, , with whom I sojourn, by slaying her son? here  is to sojourn onely: In a
word, , &  answer to the Hebrew verb , which signifies any stay, or remaining in a place. Next for the persons here specified, Iews out of eve∣ry Nation under heaven; for the right understanding thereof we are to know that before the last dispersion of the Iews by the Romans, after their Temple and City were destroyed by Titus (which at the time of this story was not, nor many years after it) there had been already two Captivities, and great dispersions of that Nation, besides some smaller scatterings: The first was of the ten Tribes, by Salmanassar King of Assyria, who is said to have planted them in Hala, and Habor, by the river of Gozan, and in the Cities of the Medes; and these never (I mean any considerable part of them) returned to dwell again in their own Coun∣trey; of these therefore we are (chiefly) to understand, to have been those which the story here cals Parthi∣ans, Medes, and Elamites; Elamites, that is, Persians of the Province of Elymais. For in those Countries which these names comprehend, were the ten Tribes placed by the Assyrian, and there still dwelt or there∣abouts, in our Saviour and his Apostles time, and long after. S. Hierome upon those words in the third of Ioel, Et Filios Iuda & Filios Ierusalem vendidistis Filits Graecorum, (which he understands of the Captivity by Vespasian and Titus) tels us thus much; Filit (saith he) Iuda & Ierusalem, nequaquam Israel & decem Tribuum, qui usque hodie in Medorum urbibus & montibus habi∣tant. The second Captivity was by Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, of the two Tribes, Judah and Ben∣jamin, more then a hundred years after that of the ten. Now a good part of these at seventy years end retur∣ned
again, under Cyrus and his successors, to dwell a∣gain in their own land, re-edified the Temple, and City of Jerusalem, re-erected their Common-wealth, which continued till our Saviours time and a little af∣ter. Notwithstanding all those that were Captives in Babylon returned not: it may be not much more then the half of them; certain it is, that a great num∣ber of them stayed there still, those especially which were rich, and so well accommodated, having no mind to stir; whence in our Saviours, and the Apostles times, there were an innumerable company of them in those parts, where they flourished with Academies, and Schools, and had Doctors not inferiour to those of Jerusalem it self: Yea, from them proceeded the Chaldee Paraphrase; and that great Doctor and Pa∣triarch of Rabbies, R. Hillel. Of these therefore, we have reason to think, were those which are here enu∣merated by the name of dwellers in Mesopotamia, : where note by the way that , are comprehended in the number of those, whom my Text saith were , which confirms my interpretation, that  there signifies sojourning, and not dwelling, for that they could not be said to dwell in both places. These two dispersions beyond the river Euphrates, how numerous they were, in our Saviour and the A∣postles times, we may gather from those words of King Agrippa, in Iosephus, in that Oration he made unto the Iews before that fatall siege, disswading them from rebelling against the Romans, their party being too much too weak to maintain them∣selves
against that mighty Empire: Quos igitur (saith he) ex orbe non habitato socios in Bellum assumetis? Si∣quidem omnes, qui in orbe habitabili degunt, Romani sunt: Nisi fortè quis vestrum spes suas ultra Euphra∣tem porrigat, & in Adiabenorum Regione Gentiles suos aestimet adjuturos; (Adiabenorum Regio, is that of As∣syria; he goes on) Verum nec illi propter irrationabilem causam tanto se Bello implicabunt: nec, si tam probroso operi assensum darent, Parthus tamen sineret. Mark then, that they were under the dominion of the Par∣thians, Iosephus himself testifieth as much in his Pro∣logue to his Tract de Bello Iudaico; where he informs us, that that History of his he had first penned patria lingua, for the use of those of his Nation in the East; which he thought soon after to publish in Greek, for the better information of the Greeks and Romans concerning the true gests of that war. Indignum esse ratus (saith he) Parthos quidem & Babylonios, Arabum, que remotissimos, & ultra Euphratem Gentis nostrae in∣colas, itemque Adiabenos meâ diligentiâ verè cognosce∣re unde coepisset Bellum, quantisque cladibus constitisset, quove modo desiisset: Graecos vero, & Romanorum ali∣quos, qui militiam secuti non essent, figmentis seu adula∣tionibus captos, ista nescire: Observe here the rehear∣sall of his Nation; Babylonii, Parthi, Arabes, Trans∣euphrateni or Mesopotamienses, and Adiabeni: Be∣sides he tels us in the same place, Quod Iudaei quidem cunctos, etiam qui trans Euphratem essent, Gentiles suos secum rebellaturos esse crediderant. Besides these two captivities by Salmanassar and Nebuchadnezzar; the first whereof never returned again into their own land, and the second but in part;
there happened a third Captivity and dispersion in the dayes of Ptolomeus Lag one of the Greek Kings, reigning in Egypt, who surprising the City of Jeru∣salem, carried many of the People of the Country, of the off-spring of those who returned from Baby∣lon, captives into Egypt, planting them at Alexan∣dria, and the places thereabouts; whom many others followed of their own accord, partly allured by the Kings favour, (who gave them equall priviledge with those of Alexandria) and partly by the fertility of the Country: so that this Colony became a very great one. These were called Hellenists, because they spake the Greek tongue, and used the Translation of the Septuagint (which was made in AEgypt) in their Sy∣nagogues. Of these three principall dispersions, came those lesser scatterings in all parts of the Roman Empire, and elsewhere. From that of Babylon and Mesopotamia, was spread that of Pontus, Galatia, Cap∣padocia, Asia, Bithynia, to which S. Peter as an A∣postle of the Circumcision, writes his two Epistles; which may be gathered, because in his second Epistle, he salutes them from Babylon, which was their Metro∣polis. The Church, saith he, at Babylon, elected together with you, saluteth you; that is, the Church of the cir∣cumcision there. From those of Alexandria and E∣gypt, were derived those plantations in Lybia and Cy∣rene, and all other Hellenists whatsoever in severall parts of the Roman Empire. Add to these, that ma∣ny of those of Judaea it self, that could not live well at home, upon some occasion or other, either alluring them or constraining them, seated themselves abroad among the Gentiles, and in their Cities, being toge∣ther
with themselves under the same Dominion of the Roman Empire. Insomuch that King Agrippa, in that fore-mentioned oration of his, before that last siege, disswading them of Judaea from rebelling a∣gainst the Romans, in regard of the evill they might bring thereby, not upon themselves onely, but up∣on their whole Nation wheresoever living among the Gentiles, sticks not to say, : For there is no people in the whole world, which hath not some part of ours dwelling amongst them; marvell not therefore, that S. Luke sayes in my Text, Iews of every Nation under heaven. All this is confirmed out of the New Testament it self; forasmuch as before the last Captivity by Ti∣tus, which was not till almost forty years after our Sa∣viours Ascension, and whilst their Common-wealth in the holy Land, was yet standing; we reade that al∣most in every City of the Gentiles, whither the A∣postles came to preach the Gospel, they found Iews with their Synagogues in them: To which adde that S. Iames directs his Epistle, To the twelve Tribes scat∣tered abroad, or as the Greek hath it, , as I have also before noted, that S. Peter doth his unto the dispersion of Asia. This is that I had to speak for the illustration of this Story, and Text: out of which besides the right understanding of Scripture, whereto it conduceth, you may observe these four things: First, the wis∣dom and providence of Almighty God, in so order∣ing the first publication of the Gospel, that the fame thereof, and of that convincing miracle, which gave authority thereunto, might be carried unto all Nati∣ons,
by so many both ear and eye-witnesses of the same as these Jews were. Secondly, a probable reason why the Apostles were so ignorant at the first, as they seem to have been, that the Gospel was to be peached unto the Gentiles, notwithstanding our Saviours Commission unto them; Go preach this Gospel unto all Nations. For it may be, they thought this command might be satis∣fied, in preaching the Gospel to those of the Circum∣cision onely, which were of every Nation under heaven. Thirdly, the Elogium here given to those who made conscience (as we speak) or Religion, to come unto the House of God to worship; they were , so saith my text, Thete were sojourning in Ie∣rusalem, Iews, devout men, &c. For there apppears no other respect why they are so called, but because they came so long a journey to worship God in his House or Temple at Ierusalem. Fourthly, the blessed opportunities and means for salvation which they meet with, which come thither to worship. For had these Iews staid at home, as the rest of their brethren did, they had not bin partakers of such a blessing; nor witnesses of so wonderfull a miracle for confirmation of their faith, as now they were.
1 COR. 9. 14. 1 Cor. 9. 14. Even so hath the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel; . MY purpose, in choosing this Text, is not to make the maintenance of the Ministe∣ry under the Gospel, the direct aim of my discourse; but only to enquire what is meant by these last words, ▪ Which that we may the more readily and certain∣ly finde, let us examine, and consider the , whereof the words I have now read, are the  Know ye not, saith the Apostle, that [] those that minister about holy things, [] doe eate of the holy thing, or, as we turn it, of the things of the Temple: [] they which wait at the Altar, [] are fellow-shares with the Altar? [] So hath the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Go∣spel should . Here, , those who were imployed about holy things, are the Levites who lived , of the holy thing, or if you had rather it should be a substan∣tive) of the Temple: that is, of that which belonged thereto; namely, of the Tithes which belonged to the Temple, but were no offering of the Altar. , they who did incumbere, or assidere al∣tari, were the Priests, whoseproper office it was to of∣fer sacrifices thereon, and hadpart of the same for their
proper maintenance; as the brest & left shoulder before it was burnt, and after so much as was reserved from burning: so they did , as the A∣postle speaks, they were fellow-shares with the Altar; the Altar having one part of the Offering, they another. Thus you see, the Apostle in both, sutes the mainte∣nance with the office: The office of the Levites was , their maintenance, , the holy thing, or the revenue of the Temple; , they eat of the . The Office of the Priests, ; their maintenance, , to share with the Altar. Now then must not the Apodosis answer the Protasis? what manner of similitude, what analogy wil there be else? Ergo, as  is the office of the Ministers of the Gospel, so is their maintenance noted by . Those therefore who interpret these words, as if  in the last place, were taken in no other sense, then it was in the first; namely, to note the function or calling of the Ministers; (as if the sense were no other, but that the Ministers of the Gospel, whose calling it is to preach the Gospel, should get their living by their Calling of preaching the Gospel;) make S. Paul the Author of a lame and inconsequent similitude, whose Apodosis answers not unto his Protasis. For what an , what an even so, or analogy would this be? The Levites lived of the holy portion, or revenue of the Temple, as their , or wages; Even so the Ministers of the Gospel must live by ther Calling and Function: The Priests were maintained out of the share they had of the Of∣ferings of the Altar; Even just so, the Ministers of the Gospel must live by their Calling and Function of
Preaching the Gospel: May not any one see that the Apodosis answers not the Protasis? For that speaks of the wages, this of the service, for which the wages is due. Well therefore, as in the Protasis the wages was compared with the work; so must it be in the Apodosis too; & consequently , must here express the wages, as , doth the work. But now here is the quaere; If , note not the function, but the wages, and maintenance due to the Euangelick Ministers, in what notion then is  here to be taken, and how to be expounded? Oecumenius would have , in this last place to signifie , the beleevers of the Gospel, , & the meaning to be, that those who preach the Gospel, should be maintained by those which beleeve the Gospel: But this would make our A∣podosis to answer the Protasis, little better then the former: For that speaks of the maintenance, and wa∣ges of the Levites, and Priests, not a word of the main∣tainers. Philo de Sacerdotú honoribus. , &c.  Besides, to speak properly, it is not true, that the people maintain the Ministers: They are not their Ministers, but Gods; and he maintains them, out of his own revenue, and not at other mens charges. Quis militat suis stipendiis? (saith our Apostle, at his entrance upon this Argument;) Who goeth to war at his own char∣ges? Now I ask; Cujus stipendiis militat, qui militat? nonne Imperatoris? To which purpose note also by the way, that it is not said here (as we translate it,) So hath God ordained, that those which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel: But, So hath God appointed, or given order to those which preach the Gospel, that they should live of the Gospel; that is, Non dicit Dominū mandasse aliis, ut
eos alerent, sed mandâsse ipsis, ut ex Euangelio viverent. But to return again to the interpretation of , which others therfore had rather take here for , for that which in the Gospel is consecrate to God; to wit, as the Priests and Levites had their main∣tenance Jol. 18. 7. The Priest∣hood of the Lord is their [the Levites] inheritance. out of that which was offred unto God in the Law: So God had ordained, that the Ministers of the Gospel should be maintained of that which is conse∣crate to him in the Gospel. And this sense is streight and good. But what need we fly to a Trope, when the naturall sense of the word  will serve our turn; yea do it much better? For howsoever in the New Testament it most commonly signifies good tidings; yet, in other Greek Writers, the more usuall signification in the sin∣gular number is , praemium quod datur laetum afferenti nuncium; the gift or reward wont to be given for good tidings. Homer (Odyss. 14.) brings in Vlysses in a poor travellers disguise, stipula∣ting with his servant Eumaeus, what his reward should be, for the good news he promised to tell him of his Masters life and speedy return,  let this be my , or Reward, saith he,  To whom Eumaeus answers,  Nei∣ther am I able to give such an , neither will V∣lysses ever come home again. Plutarch (in his De gloria Atheniensium) relates, that the Lacedemonians to one that brought them tidings of the victory at Mantinea, having been no actor, but a spectator only, sent for an , only a dish of meat from one of their com∣mon suppers, called Phiditia: The words are, . The same Author (within three
or four lines after) affirms, that Historians, who relate and describe battels and victories in such perspicuous styles, deserve an  from those who first read them: And (in his Demetrius) he tels, that when one Aristodemus brought news to King Antigonus, of a no∣table victory his party had obtained against Ptolomaeus Lagi, but put the King first in great perplexity, by dis∣covering nothing, either by word or countenance, what his tidings were, till he came to the Kings pre∣sence, then saying, Salve Rex Antigone, vicimus praelio navali Regem Ptolomaeum: The King answered, Et tu quo{que} herclè salve; quia vero ita nos torsisti, lues poenam, nam tardius  accipies; which is a sufficient te∣stimony both of the use of the word, and the custome. Cicero (in one of his Epistles Ad Atticum) useth the Li. 2. Ep. 8. plurall number: O suaves tuas Epistolas, (saith he) uno tempore mihi datas duas! Quibus  quae reddam nescio; deberi quidem plane fateor. Besides, in the plurall number, , signifies a sa∣crifice for good tidings; Hence Plutarch (in his Phoci∣on) hath  Isocrates (in Areopagitico) , ob tot succes∣sus bis quidem sacrificavimus  Xenophon (in his Hellanica) . To conclude; it is apparent by these examples, that  signifies a gift, or tribute due for good tidings; whether as an offering to the Gods, the Authours, or as a reward to men, the messengers and bringers. Now the most blessed & happy tidings that ever came to the ears of the sons of men, is salvation by Jesus Christ our Lord; whereof his Priests and Ministers are the daily messengers: Is there not then an  due for this? And is not this that our Apostle mea∣neth
when he says; The Lord hath ordained that they who preach the Gospel should . So that which of old was required only for acknowledgement of the Divine Dominion, under the bondage of the Law, is now turned into the nature of an  in the liberty of the Gospel; I mean that which we of∣fer now unto God for the maintenance of the Euan∣gelicall Ministery, and other uses of his service: The sense is most fit and agreeable, and makes the Apostles expression (if so understood) passing elegant. But you will say; What probability is there the A∣postle should use  in this notion? For though prophane Authors do so, yet the Scriptures meaning, both here and elswhere, is to be measured by its own Dialect. Have therefore the Hebrew, the Chaldee, the Septuagint any such notion as this? I answer, Yes; all three of them. For in the Hebrew, , the onely word for good tidings, signifies also Praemium boni nun∣cii; Yea, being not above five times found in the Old Testament, some will have it thrice taken in that sig∣nification, and twice will be easily yeelded them. Like∣wise in the Chaldee, , and , signifie as well the one as the other; both nuncium and nuncii praemi∣um. As for the Septuagint, the word  is but thrice found with them, and once so apparently in this signification, as leaves no place for contradiction. It is 2 Sam. 4. 10. where they have, , Cui oportet me dedisse Euangelia. They are the words of King David, when Rechab and Baanah brought Ishbo∣sheths head unto him; When one told me, saith he, Behold Saul is dead, (thinking he had brought good tidings) I took hold of him, and slew him in Ziklag, when I should have given a reward for his tidings. The Hebrew word
rendred here reward for good tidings, is : The Septuagint, as I said before, have . The Vulgar, or S. Hierome, mercedem pro nuncio: The Chaldee Paraphrast, Donum boni nuncii. Thus you see, this notion was familiar to all the Languages that S. Paul was brought up in. Why should it then be improbable, he should use it when he had occasion? And no marvel it is to be found no oftner; For, unlesse it be in this Chapter, in the whole New Testament the thing it self (reward for good tidings) is never mentioned, intimated, or alluded to. How then could the word be used? But in this Chapter, me thinks I hear it used a second time, ver. 23. I will only propound it to your consideration, and so conclude. The matter stands thus; S. Paul, though he received no reward at the hands of the Corinthians for his pains in making known the glad tidings of salvation unto them, but did it gratis to them-ward: yet he looked for an  from God, stored up in the heavens, for all his faithfull Messengers, and to be received at the great Day: In expectation whereof, he not only preached the Gospel to them freely, but endured all things, and made himself a servant to all:  (saith he)  this I doe for the , that I might be partaker thereof. What  should it be, that Paul here aimed to be partaker of? Surely, it should seem  here notes some Proemium, even by that which immediate∣ly follows; Know ye not that they which run in a race, run all, but one receiveth the brabeum; So run that ye may obtain. I leave it to your better meditations, and so conclude. FINIS.
DIATRIBAE. OR, A continuation of certain DISCOVRSES ON SUNDRY TEXTS OF SCRIPTURE: Delivered upon severall occasions, BY JOSEPH MEDE, B. D. late Fellow of Christs Colledge in CAMBRIDGE. Never before published, being exactly printed ac∣cording to the Authors own Manuscripts. LONDON, Printed by M. F. for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his Shop under S. Peters Church in Cornhill. MDCXLVIII.
The Texts newly added. LUKE 2. 13, 14. AND suddenly there was with the Angel a multi∣tude of the heavenly Host, praising God, and saying, Glory be to God on high, (or, in the highest) and on earth peace, good-will towards men. pag. 241 MATTH. 7. 21. Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall en∣ter into the Kingdome of heaven; but he that doth the will of my Father which is in Heaven. 264 ACTS 10. 4. And he said unto him, Thy prayers and thine Almes are come up for a memoriall before God: Or, (as it is verse 31) are had in remembrance. 285 PSALM 112. 6. The Righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. 311 NEHEM. 13. 14, 22. Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my good deeds [Heb. ] that I have done for the house of my God, and for the offices thereof. And spare me according to the greatnesse of thy mer∣cy. 324 MATTH. 10. 41. He that receiveth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward. 356 DEUT. 33. 8. And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and thy Vrim be with thy Holy One. 350
ACTS 5. 3, 4, 5. But Peter said, Ananias, why hath Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to purloin of the price of the land? Whiles it remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thy power? why hast thou con∣ceived this thing in thine heart? Thou hast not lied un∣to men, but unto God. And Ananias hearing these words, fell down and gave up the Ghost, &c. 379 JOEL 2. 17. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, weep be∣tween the Porch and the Altar, and say, Spare thy people, ô Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach. 404 GEN. 3. 13, 14, 15. And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is this that thou hast done? And the woman said, The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. And the Lord God said unto the Serpent, Because thou hast done this, thou art cursed above all cattell, and above every beast of the field: upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life. And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed: It shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel. 414 MALACH. 1. 11. For from the rising of the Sun, even unto the going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gen∣tiles; and in every place Incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure offering: for my Name shall be great among the Heathen, saith the Lord of Hosts. 471
Four other Treatises by the same Author for∣merly Printed: viz. 1. The Name ALTAR, or  THPION. 2. CHURCHES, that is, Appropriate places for Christian Worship. 1 COR. 11. 22. Have ye not Houses to eat and drink in? [;] Or despise ye the CHVRCH of God? 31. B. 3. The Reverence of GODS HOVSE. ECCLESIASTES 5. 1. Look to thy foot [or feet] when thou commest to the House of God; and be more ready to obey, then to offer the sacrifice of fools; for they know not that they doe evill. 81. B. 4. Daniels WEEKS. DAN. 9. 24, 25, 26, 27. 24. Seventy Weeks are allotted for thy people, and for thy holy City, to finish transgression, and make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousnesse, and to fulfill Visi∣on and Prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy. 140. B. 25. Also know and understand, that from the going forth of the Commandement to cause to return and to build Ierusalem, unto MESSIAH the PRINCE,
shall be Sevens of Weeks; even threescore and two Weeks; the street shall be built again and the Wall, even in a strait of Times. 146. B. 26. And after threescore and two weeks shall MES∣SIAH be cut off, but not for himself, and the people of the Prince that shall come, shall destroy the City, and the Sanctuary; and the end thereof shall be with a floud, and unto the end of the Warre Desolations are determined. 158. B. 27. And he shall confirm the Covenant with many for one Week: and in the midst of the Week he shall cause the Sacrifice and the Oblation to cease, and for the over∣spreading of Abominations, he shall make it desolate, even untill the consummation; and that determined, shall be poured upon the desolate. 163. B.
A Luk. 2. 13, 14. CONTINVATION OF CERTAIN DISCOVRSES ON Sundry Texts of SCRIPTURE. LUKE 2. 13, 14. 13. And suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly Host, praising God, and saying, 14. Glory be to God on high, (or, in the highest) and on earth peace, good will towards men. AT the Creation of the world, when God laid the foundations of the earth, and stretched out his line thereon, the stars in the morning (as God himself describes it Iob 38. 7.) sang together, and all the sons of God (that is, the holy Angels) shouted for joy. This in my Text is so like it, that a man would think some new Creation were in hand;
nor were it much wide of truth to affirm it: for if ever there were a day wherein the Almighty Power, the incomparable Wisdom, the wonderfull Goodness of God again the second time appeared, as it did at the worlds Creation, it was this day, whereof S. Luke our Euangelist now treateth; when the Son of God took upon him our flesh, and was born of a Virgin, to repair the breach between God and man, and make all things new. The news of which restauration was no sooner heard and made known to the Shepheards by an Angel sent from heaven, but suddenly the hea∣venly Host descended from their celestiall mansions, and sung this Carol of joy; Glory be to God on high, welcome peace on earth, good-will towards men. A Song renowned both for the singularity of the first exam∣ple, (for untill this time, unlesse it were once in a Pro∣pheticall Vision, we shall not finde a Song of Angels heard by men in all the Scripture) and from the cu∣stome of the Church, who afterward took it up in her Liturgy, and hath continued the singing thereof ever since the days of the Apostles untill these of ours. Yet perhaps it is not so commonly understood, as usually said or chaunted, and therefore will be worth our labour to inquire into the meaning thereof, and hear such instructions as may be learned therefrom. Which that we may the better do, I will consider first the Singers or Chaunters, The heavenly Host: Se∣condly, the Caroll or Hymne it self, Gloria in excelsis Deo: Glory be to God on high, &c. For the first, the heavenly host here spoken of, is an Army of holy Angels: For the Host of Heaven in the language of Scripture is twofold, Visible and In∣visible.
The Visible Host are the Stars, which stand in their array like an Army, Deut. 4. 19. Lest thou lift up thine eies (saith the Lord there) unto heaven, and when thou seest the Sun, Moon, and Stars, even all the Host of heaven, shouldst be driven to worship and serve them. The Invisible Host are the Angels, the heaven∣ly Guard; according to that of Micaiah, 1 King. 22. 19. I saw the Lord sitting upon his Throne, and all the Host of heaven standing by him, on his right hand and on his left. So Psal. 103. Blesse the Lord ye his Angels, that excell in strength, that do his Commandements. Blesse the Lord all ye his Hosts, ye ministers of his that do his pleasure: Where the latter words do but vary that which is expressed in the former. From this it is that the Lord Jehovah, the true and only God, is so often styled the Lord or God of Sabaoth, or of Hosts, that is, King both of Stars and Angels: according to that Nehem. 9. Thou art God alone;—and the Host of Heaven worshippeth thee. By which Title He is distinguished from the Gods of the Nations, who were some of the Host, to wit, of the Stars or An∣gels, but none of them the Lord of Hosts himself. For the same reason, and with the same meaning and sense, in the Books written after the Captivity, he is styled Deus coeli, the God of heaven, as in Ezra, Ne∣hemiah, Daniel; in which Books, together with the last of Chronicles, the title of Deus Sabaoth is not to be found, but the title of Deus Coeli only, and as may seem taken up for some reason in stead of the other. But to return to what we have in hand: It was the Angelicall Host, as ye hear, who sang this Song of
joy and praise unto the most High God. And where∣fore? For any restitution or addition of happinesse to themselves? No; but for Peace on Earth, and Good-will towards men. He that was now born took not upon him the Nature of Angels, but of men: He came not into the world to save Angels, but for the salvation of men. Nor was the state of Angels to receive advancement in glory by his comming, but the state of men; and that too in such a sort as might seem to impeach the dignity, and dimme the lustre of those excellent creatures, when an inferiour nature, the nature of man, was now to be advanced into a Throne of Divine Majesty, and to become Head and King not only of men, but of the heavenly Host it self. O ye blessed Angels! what did these tidings concern you, that ruined mankinde should be restored again and taken into favour; whereas those of your own Host, which fell likewise, remained still in that gulf of perdition, whereinto their sin had plunged them, without hope of mercy or like promise of De∣liverance? what did it adde to your eminent Digni∣ty, the most excellent of the creatures of God, that the Nature of man should be advanced above yours? that at the Name of Iesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things un∣der the Earth? The Observation therefore which this Act of the Angels first presents unto us, is the ingenuous good∣nesse and sweet disposition of those immaculate and blessed spirits, in whose bosomes Envy, the Image of the Devil and deadly poison of charity, hath no place at all: For if any inclination to this cankered passion
had been in these heavenly creatures, never such an occasion offered, nor greater could be, to stir it up to envy. But heaven admits of no such passion, nor could such a torment consist with the blissefull condition of those who dwell therein. It is the smoke of that bottomlesse pit, a native of hell, the character and cognisance of those Apostate Angels, which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, and are reserved for chains of everlasting darknesse. These in∣deed grieve no lesse at the happinesse of men then the Angels joy; witnesse the name of their Prince Satan, which signifies the Fiend, or malicious one, who out of envy overthrew mankinde in the beginning; out of envy he and all his fellow-fiends are so restlesse and indefatigable to seduce him still. The Use of this Observation will not be far to seek, if we remember the admonition our Saviour hath given us in the prayer left unto his Church; which is, To make the Angels the pattern of our imi∣tation in doing the will of our heavenly Father; for so he teacheth us to pray, Let thy will be done in earth, as it is done in heaven; that is, Grant us ô Lord to do thy will here, as thy holy Angels do it there. And as we should imitate them in all things else; so in this affection towards the happinesse and prosperity of others. And good reason I think, if we mean at all to approve our selves unto God our Father, why we should endeavour rather to be like unto them, then unto Devils: But in nothing can we be more like them, then in this, to rejoyce at the good, and not re∣pine at the happinesse of our brethren: Hoc enim An∣gelicum est; This is the Character of the Angelicall
nature, and consequently of those, who one day shall have fellowship with them. To be contrarily affected Diabolicum est, the badge and brand of Devils and Fiends; and those who wear their Livery, reason good they should keep them company. Let every one therefore examine his own heart concerning this point, that he may learn upon what terms he stands with God, and what he may promise himself of the blessednesse to come. Do the gifts of God? Doth his favour or blessing vouchsafed to thy brother, when thou seest or hearest of them, torment and crucifie thy soul? Dost thou make their happinesse thy mi∣sery? Is thine eye evill to thy Brother, because Gods is good? If this be so, without doubt thy heart is not right before God; nor doth his Spirit, but the spirit of Devils or Fiends reign therein. But if the contrary appear in any reasonable measure, with a de∣sire to increase it; (for we must not look to attain the perfection of Angels in this life, but in some measure and degree only) if thou canst rejoyce at anothers good, though it concerns not thy self; the Spirit of God rests upon thee: For emulations and envyings (saith the Apostle, Gal. 5.) are the fruits of the flesh, but the fruits of the Spirit are  & , kind∣nesse and goodnesse: So he cals the opposite vertues to those former vices. But as any good that betides our brother ought to affect us with some degree of joy, and not with grief and envy; so chiefly, and most of all his spirituall good, and that which concerns his salvation, ought so to do. This was that the holy Angels praised God for in my Text, on the behalf of men; that unto them
a Saviour was born, who should save them from their sins, and reconcile them unto God. Which sweet disposition of those good and blessed spirits our Sa∣viour himself further witnesseth, when he saith, (Luk. 15. 17.) There is joy in heaven (namely, among the holy Angels) for one sinner that repenteth. But is there any man, will you say, such a son of Beliall, as will not do this, will not imitate the holy Angels in this? Judge ye: There is an evil disease which commonly attends upon Sects and Differences in opinion: that as men are curious and inquisitive into the lives and actions of the adverse party; so are they willing to finde them faulty, and rejoyce at their fals and slips, hear and relate them with delight; namely, because they suppose it makes much for their own side, that the contrary should by such means be scandalized, and the Patrons and followers thereof disreputed. But should that be the matter of our grief, whereat the Angels joy; or that the matter of our joy, whereat the Angels grieve? How is this to do our Fathers will on earth, as the Angels do in heaven? Nay, if this be not to put on the robes of darknesse, and to shake hands with hellish fiends, I know not what is. O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly mine honour be not thou united. There is another Lesson yet more to be learned from this act of the Angels; namely, that if they glo∣rifie God for our happinesse, and the favour of God towards us in Christ, much more should we glorifie and magnifie his goodnesse our selves, to whom sole∣ly this Birth, and the benefit of this Birth redounds. If they sing, Glory be to God on high, for his favour to∣ward
men; we to whom such favour is shown, must not hold our peace; for shall they for us, and not we for our selves? No, the Quire of heaven did but set us in, we are to bear a part, and it should be a chief part, since the best part is ours. As there∣fore the Church in her publick Service, hath ever since kept it up: so must every one of us in par∣ticular, never let it goe down or dye on our hands. Thus much of the Quaere; Now come we to the Antheme or Song it self: whose contents are two; First, the Doxology or Praise; Glory be to God on high. Secondly, a gratulation rendring the reason thereof; Because of Peace on earth, Good will towards men. For the conjunction  is not to bee taken here for a copulative, but as Vau is frequently in the Ita Zonar. ad c. 74. Trullan. Hebrew, for a conjunction causall, or for . Glory to God in the highest; for that there is Peace on earth, Good-will towards men. Or if we retain the copulative sense, yet we must understand the words following as spoken by way of gratulation: Glory be to God on high, and welcome peace on earth, good-will towards men. Or both causally and gratulatorily thus, Glory be to God in the highest; for (ô factum bene!) there is peace on earth, and good-will towards men. To begin with the first, the Doxology or praise; Glory be to God in the Highest: that is, Let the Angels glorifie him, who dwels on high: for  is to be referred to Glory, and not to God; the sense be∣ing, glorified be God by those on high; and not God, who dwels on high, be glorified. This may appear by the like expression in the 148. Psalm, whence this Glorification seems to be borrowed: Praise ye the
Lord from the heavens, praise him , rate ye him all his Angels, praise ye him all his Host. There∣fore Iunius for Praise ye the Lord from the Heavens, hath Laudate cum coelites: The Chaldee, for Laudate eum in excelsis; Laudate eum Angeli excelsi. In like manner here, Gloria in excelsis eo, are the words of the Angelicall Quire, inciting themselves and all the Host to give glory and praise unto God for these wonderfull tidings. Now therefore let us see what this Glory is; and how it is given to God. To tell you every signification of the word Glory in Scripture, might perhaps distract the hearer, but would inform him little. Nor will it be to purpose to reckon up every signification it hath, when it is spoken of God: I will therefore name only the two principall ones: And first, Glory when it is referred to God, often signifies the Divine Presence, or , as in this Chapter, a little before my Text, when it is said, The Glory of the Lord shone round about the Shep∣heards, and they were sore afraid. But this is not the signification in my Text, but another which I shall now tell you. For Glory besides signifies in Scripture the high and glorious Supereminency or Majesty of God, which consisteth in his threefold Supremacy of Power, of Wisdome, and of Goodnesse. And as words of eminency and dignity with us (as Majesty, Highnesse, Honour, Worship) are used for the persons themselves to whom such Dignity belongeth, (as when we say, His Majesty, his Highnesse, his Honour, his Worship:) so in the Scripture, and among the Hebrews, His Glory, or the Glory of the Lord, is used to note the Divine Essence, or Deity it self. As in
2 Pet. 1. 17. There came a voice (saith S. Peter) from the excellent Glory; (that is, from God the Father) This is my welbeloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Rom. 1. The Gentiles are said to have changed the glo∣ry of the incorruptible God, into the likenesse of things corruptible. As it is said (in the 106. Psal. ver. 20.) of the Israelites in the Wildernesse, That they changed their Glory into the similitude of an Oxe that eateth Jer. 2. 11. grasse. S. Iohn cap. 1. 14. of his Gospel says of the Son, We beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begot∣ten Son of God. According to which sense he is called Heb. 1. The brightnesse of his Fathers glory, and the expresse Image of his person; where the latter words are an exposition of the former, Image expounding brightnesse, and person or substance expounding glory. If Glory therefore signifie the Divine Majesty or Greatnesse; to glorifie or give glory unto God is no∣thing else but to acknowledge this Majesty or great∣nesse of His; namely, his supereminent Power, his Wisdom, and Goodnesse: for in the peerlesse super∣eminency of these three, (under which all his other Attributes are comprehended) his glorious Majesty consisteth. Take this withall; That all the religious service and worship we give unto God, (whether we praise him, pray, or give thanks unto him) is nothing else but the acknowledging of this glory, either in deed or word; namely, by confessing it, or doing some act whereby we acknowledge it. To come to particulars: By our Faith we confesse his Wisdome and Truth; by our thanksgiving, his Goodnesse and Mercy: when we pray, we acknowledge his Power and Dominion;
and therefore the form of prayer our Saviour taught us, concludes, For thine is the kingdome, power, and glory. In praise we confesse all these or any of them, according to that in the Hymne of the Church, Te Deum laudamus, Te Dominum confitemur; We praise thee, O God, we acknowledge thee to be the Lord. All which is evident by those forms of glorification set down in the Apocalypse, which are nothing else but expresse and particular acknowledgements of the greatnesse or Majesty of God, and his peerlesse pre∣rogatives. When the four Wights are said to have gi∣ven glory, honour and thanks to him that sate upon the Throne: what was their Ditty but this? Thou art worthy, ô Lord, to receive glory and honour and power; for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. When the Lamb opened the book with 7. Seals, the Wights, the Elders, and eve∣ry creature in heaven, in earth, and under the earth, sung, Worthy is the Lamb to receive power, and riches, and strength, and honour, and blessing. And again; Blessing, honour, glory, and power be unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. In which we may observe the whole glorifi∣cation to consist in the acknowledgement of these three soveraign prerogatives of the Divine Majesty, his Power, his Wisdome, his Goodnesse: The two first, Power and Wisdom, are expresse; and Riches and Strength belong to Power: The third is contained in , Blessing, or thanksgiving; which is nothing else but the confession of the Divine goodnesse. Hence it is, that the Septuagint and Vulgar La∣tine commonly render the words  & , which
signifie to praise, and glorifie, , confiteor: Confitemini Domino quoniam bonus, quoniam in saecu∣lum misericordia ejus. Psal. 106. 107. 136. Confi∣tebor tibi Domino in toto corde meo, quoniam audisti verba oris mei. Psal. 138. Confitemini Domino, & in∣vocate nomen ejus. Psal. 105. and the like. And in the 148. Psal. Confessio ejus super coelum & terram: that is, His glory is above the heaven and the earth. The Holy Ghost in the New Testament useth the same language, Luc. 11. 25. , because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them to babes; where we have, I thank thee ô Father, Beza and Erasmus read, Gloriam tibi tribuo; which I think is the better. So also in this Chapter Luke 2. 38. it is said of Anna, , Deo laudes gratiasque agebat. So Heb. 13. 15. By him there∣fore, (that is, by Christ) let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, . the fruit of our lips confessing to his Name. By all which it is evident, that to praise and give glory unto God, whether by praise at large, or prayer and thanksgiving in speciall, is nothing else (as I have said) but to confesse and acknowledge his peerlesse Majesty over all and in all; which the Scripture cals his glory. And if ever there were a work of God, wherein all these peerlesse Prerogatives of Power, Wisdome, and Goodnesse, all together appeared in the highest de∣gree, it was undoubtedly in this wonderfull work of the Incarnation of the Son of God for mans re∣demption: well therefore might the heavenly Host sing, Gloria in excelsis Deo; The Power, the Wisdom and Goodnesse of the glorious God be acknowledged
by the holy Angels and all the Host of heaven for ever and ever. This is the meaning of the Doxology. Come we now to the gratulation, which contains the cause thereof; glory be to God on high; for (ô factum benè! ô happy news!) there is peace on earth, good-will towards men. One and the same thing two ways ex∣pressed: for it is an Apposition, or , the latter words declaring the meaning of the former; Peace on earth, that is, good-will towards men, . 'Ev for ; to wit, in imitation of the Hebrew construction, where  &  verbs, which signifie , &  the nown signifying , are con∣strued with , which is  in Greek, and according∣ly both the Septuagint and New Testament expresse the same. But the Vulgar Interpreter reads here, Pax in terris, hominibus bonae voluntatis, as if the Greek were , and not , as now all our Copies constantly read, and I beleeve ever did: yet Beza seems here to favour the Vulgar Latine, ex∣pounding Homines bonae voluntatis of those whom God wils well to; to wit, of the Elect, to whom this Peace by Christ belongeth: and from the conveni∣ency of this sense, inclines to beleeve, that the Greek anciently read so; quoting to this end Irenaeus, Origen, and Chrysostome (as he saith) in divers places. But he trusted too much the Latine Translation of Chryso∣stome; for the Greek Chrysostome hath no such mat∣ter; but both in those places Beza points to, and in divers others reads constantly , as our Copies doe. And so I make no question Irenaeus and Vide cont. Celsu lib. 1. p. 46. gr. Origen did too in the Greek Originals if we had them to look into. But the Latine Translators
thought not fit to alter the words of the Hymne so ordinarily sung in the Liturgy, and so expressed it in Latine, as the Latine Church used. And for the meaning, I beleeve the Vulgar Latine aim'd at no other sense, then what the Greek implies; namely, that this Peace was no earthly peace, but the peace of Gods good-will to man, referring the Genitive Case voluntatis, not to hominibus, but to pax. Pax in terris: what pax? Pax bonae voluntatis hominibus. That which makes me think so is, because Origen and his Translator, in the place Beza quotes for this rea∣ding, expresly expounds it so. And so there will not be a pin to choose; save that the Greek expresseth this sense by way of Apposition more naturally; the Latine by way of Rection, somwhat harshly; and yet perhaps the Translatour thought, lesse ambigu∣ously. Well then; this peace on earth is , Gods good-will or favour to men: and Gods , is the peace on earth, the Angels gratulate; namely, the reconciliation of God to men in Christ: For by reason of Sin, heaven and earth, God and man were till now at enmity: but by Christ this enmity is taken away, and man, by the forgivenesse of his sin, restored unto peace and favour with God. And as by this Nativity God and man became one Per∣son, so by this conjunction Heaven and earth, Angels and men, become one Fellowship, one City and Kingdome of God: the Kingdome of Satan, that Prince of the powers of the Aire, who by reason of sin had captivated, and brought under his service the whole Earth, and thereby held the same at open
war and enmity with Heaven, being now by degrees to be destroyed and rooted out. And this is that admirable mystery of our Redemption by Christ, which the Angelicall Host here gratulates, by the name of Peace on earth, and good-will towards men. And that we may not doubt, but we have hit the meaning, that this peace on earth, is Gods good-will to men, and therefore expounded by it; besides that in the Old Vid. Num. 6. 27. Judg. 6. 24. Psal. 85. 7. &c. Cant. 8. 10. Jer. 16. 15. 29. 11. Testament peace is often taken for Gods favour and mercy to men; (as in that of Isay 54. 10. The mountains shall depart, and the hils be removed, but my kindnesse shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath mercy on thee.) So if we examine the Use thereof in the New Testament, we shall finde it in speciall applied to this our Reconciliation to God in Christ by remission of sin. S. Peter to Cornelius Act. 10. describes the Gospel thus, The word which God sent to the children of Israel, preaching peace by Iesus Christ. And S. Paul, Col. 1. It pleased God the Father, that in Christ all fulnesse should dwell. And (having made peace through the bloud of his Crosse) by him to reconcile all things unto himself. What can be plai∣ner then this? The same, as I take it, he means Eph. 2. when he tels us, That Christ came to preach peace both to those that were afarre off, and to them that were nigh; that is, both to Jew and Gentile. But what peace? namely, that through him, we both might have accesse by one Spirit unto the Father. Hence the Gospel is cal∣led the Gospel of peace; and God so often in the New Testament, the God of peace; that is, of reconcilement and favour: and the Euangelicall salutation is,
Grace, mercy, and peace, from God our Father and Iesus Christ our Lord. The meaning of this Angelicall gratulation being thus cleared, let us see now what may be learned and observed therefrom. Where my first Observation shall be this: S. Peter tels Cornelius, That to Christ give all the Prophets witnesse, that through his name, whosoever beleeveth in him, shall receive remission of sins. Our Saviour after his Resurrection, expounding the Scriptures to his Apostles sayes, the same, Luke 24. 47. Thus it is written (saith he) and thus it beho∣ved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day, and that remission of sins should be preached in his Name among the Nations. But where is this publi∣cation of remission of sins by Christ written? for in those formall words we shall hardly finde it. Let us take here the Angels key, and we shall: for they tell us that peace on earth is this good-will towards men. Now do not the Prophets speak of some peace on earth, which Messiah should bring with him when he comes? yes surely: well then, let us look for this publication of remission of sins under that name, and we shall finde it, Isay 9. 6. Vnto us a Childe is born, unto us a Son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder; and his name shall be called Wonder∣full, Counsellor, the mighty God, the Father of eternity, the Prince of peace, that is, of peace not between men and men, but between God and men) and of the in∣crease of his government and peace shall be no end. Isay 52. 7. How beautifull upon the mountains, are the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace, that bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth sal∣vation,
that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth: which place S. Paul, Rom. 10. 15. interprets of the publica∣tion of the Gospel of Christ. Esay 53. 5. The chastise∣ment of our peace was upon him; that is, he suffered for the remission of our sins. Is. 57. 19. quoted by S. Paul to the Ephesians, Chap. 2. Peace to him that is afarre off, and to him that is near, saith the Lord, and I will heal him. Ezek. 34. 24, 25. I the Lord will be their God, and my servant David (King Messiah) a Prince among them.—And I will make a Covenant of peace with them. So Chap. 37. 26. Hag. 2. 9. The glory of this lat∣ter house shall be greater then of the former, saith the Lord of Hosts; and in this place will I give peace, saith the Lord of Hosts. Zech. 9. 10. Shout ô daughter of Ie∣rusalem; behold, thy King commeth unto thee,—and he shall speak peace unto the Heathen, and his Dominion shall be from Sea to Sea, and from the River unto the end of the earth. Thus much of the Use to be made of the Angels expression in this heavenly Carol: Now I shall pro∣pound to your consideration another, and that taken from the argument it self; namely, that if Almighty God, our heavenly Father, be so graciously disposed to us-ward, as to be reconciled unto us, by forgiving us our trespasses: then ought we semblably to be re∣conciled to our brethren and forgive them their tres∣passes, when they have wronged or offended us. Leo Serm. 6. de Nativit. Natalis Domini, natalis est pacis, ergo singuli fideles offerant Patri pacificorum concordi∣am filiorum. The Illation is good; we have the au∣thority of the Apostle S. Iohn to back it; 1 Ioh. 4. 10. God (saith he) so loved us, that he sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins. What follows? Beloved, (saith he) if God so loved us, we ought to love end ano∣ther. So I say, if God be so gracious, to forgive and be reconciled to us, we ought as it were, to eccho this his loving kindnesse, and to forgive, and be reconciled one to another. This congruity and semblablenesse of our actions and affections one towards another, with Gods fa∣vour and mercy towards us, is the Rule and Reason not only of this, but of many other duties he requires at our hands. Thus the Jews were every seventh year to manumise their servants, as an act of congruity and thankfulnesse to God, who had delivered them, when they were servants, out of the land of Egypt, and house of bondage. They were bidden to use a stranger kindly, because themselves had been stran∣gers, and God when they were oppressed, had been compassionate and kinde towards them, and redee∣med them from their thraldome. Likewise we reade in the Gospel, Luk. 8. 36. Be ye mercifull, as your hea∣venly Father is mercifull: And Matth. 5. Blessed are the mercifull for they shall obtain mercy. In a word, God hath revealed, he will shew mercy to none, but such as appear before him with this congruity. Iames 2. 13. He shall have judgement without mercy, that sheweth no mercy: and therefore the tenor of our sen∣tence at the last judgement runs, Come ye blessed, and be partakers of mercy, because ye have shewed it: But, Goe ye cursed without all mercy into Hell fire, be∣cause ye have shewed no mercy. Thus we see how God requires this congruity in generall: and as for the particular of reconcilement
and forgiving our brother, it is written in capitall let∣ters, and urged in such sort as it might not unfitly be termed the Livery of Christianity. In so much that if we consider it duly, it cannot but breed astonish∣ment, that the evidence and necessity should be so ap∣parent, and the practice among those who look for the benefit of Christ and call upon his Name, so lit∣tle regarded: when as I dare boldly pronounce, there is no remission of sins to be looked for at the hands of God without it. An invincible argument whereof is, That our Sa∣viour himself, in the prayer he hath taught his Church, hath put in a barre against asking it, but upon this con∣dition, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespasse against us. If we ask not with this dispositi∣on, there is no promise that any such prayer shall be heard: nay, our Saviour tels us in plain terms, it shall not: If (saith he) you forgive not men their trespasses, no more will your heavenly Father forgive you your tres∣passes. How then can any man whose heart is fraught with malice, and meditates revenge against his bro∣ther, hear this and not tremble? Is it not a fearfull thing for a man to carry in his own bosome, not only an evidence that his sins are unpardoned, but a barre too, that he cannot ask the forgivenesse of them? Let no man deceive himself: Etsi enim multis bonis conscientiis abundemus, saith S. Chrysostome, reconcilia∣tione tamen contemptâ, nullum possumus promereri sola∣tium. As the fifth Commandement is called by the Apostle the first Commandement of promise, so is this petition for forgivenesse of sins, the only petition with condition: and such a condition too, as our Saviour
dwels upon and enforces, when he had delivered this form of prayer to his Disciples: For he passes by all the rest of the petitions, and singles out this alone to comment upon, as that wherein the chiefest mo∣ment lay, and without which all our prayer would be uneffectuall, and to no purpose. A further confirmation of which we have in that parable of Servus nequam, Matth. 18. whom his Lord being moved with compassion, when he besought him, forgave a debt of ten thousand Talents: But he fin∣ding one of his fellow-servants which ought him an hundred pence, though he fell at his feet and besought him, yet would not hear him, but cast him into pri∣son. Then his Lord was wroth, and said, O thou wicked servant! shouldst not thou have had compassion on thy fel∣low servant, even as I had pity upon thee? And he de∣livered him unto the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due to him. The Application is terrible: So likewise, saith our Saviour, shall my heavenly Fa∣ther doe unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses. We are this Ser∣vus nequam, if when our heavenly Father forgives us thousands of Talents, we stand with our brethren for an hundred pence. There is no proportion between the offences wherewith we offend God, and the of∣fences wherewith our brother offends us. And there∣fore we have no excuse, hath our brother wronged us never so often, never so much, never so hainously: For whatsoever it be, or how unworthy or undeser∣ved soever; our sin, our ingratitude to Almighty God is and hath been infinitely greater, even much more then ten thousand Talents surpasse an hundred pence.
To these two testimonies adde a third, and that also as the former, out of our blessed Saviours own mouth: Mat. 5. If thou bring (saith he) thy gift to the Altar, and there remember, that thy brother hath ought against thee: leave there thy gift before the Altar, and goe thy way; First be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift: , the word whereby the Septuagint constantly render that which the Law cals Corban; and the Gospel concurres with them, Mar. 7. . Now Corban in the Law is in speciall used for those offerings, which were made for atonement of Sin, as the Burnt-offering, Sin-of∣fering, Trespasse-offering, and Peace-offering, call'd Offerings by Fire or Sacrifices. So that this precept of our Saviours here, is the same in effect with the for∣mer, when thou commest to offer an offering unto God for an atonement of thy sin; Go thy stay first, and be reconciled unto thy brother, for without this thy sin shall not be forgiven thee. I shall not need tell you, that now in the Gospel, Christ is the Sacrifice, is the gift which a Christian by faith offers unto God for the propitiation of his sin; and that this sacrifice is commemorated, sealed and communicated unto us in the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper; whereby it will easily appear, how this precept of our Saviours uttered after the style of the legall worship is appliable to the Euangelicall. Hence in the ancient Church, when they assembled to celebrate this Sacrament, the Deacon was wont to proclaim, , Ne quis contra aliquem; Let no man have ought against his brother: And then, , Salute one another with
an holy kisse: which accordingly they did, first the Bishop and Clergy, then the Laity, the men apart by themselves, and the women by themselves; and this was a profession of friendship and reconciliation, and therefore called Osculum pacis, the kisse of peace. In after-times the Priest gave this kisse of peace unto the Deacon, and he to the chief of the Congregation, and so it was given from one to another. In stead of which at length was brought in that foolish ceremo∣ny, still used among the Romanists, for the Priest to send a little guilded or painted Table, with a Cruci∣fix or some Saints picture thereon, to be kissed of eve∣ry one in the Church, before they receive the Holy Bread; which they call the kissing of the Pax. So of∣tentimes profitable and usefull Ceremonies degene∣rate into toyes and superstitions. Our Church, though she useth no ceremony, retains the substance; when the Priest in his exhortation to the Commu∣nicants, saith, If any of you be in malice or envy, or any other grievous crime, bewail your sins, and come not to this holy Table: and by the Rubrick the Priest, if he know any such, is to turn them back, unlesse they will be reconciled. Lastly, the necessity of this duty is testified by that pious and generally received custome amongst Chri∣stians, to exhort those that are dying to forgive all the world, that so themselves may finde mercy and forgivenesse at the hands of God. Is it needfull at the hour of death, and not as needfull in the time of our health? Is there no forgivenesse to be expected at the hands of God without it, when we are dying, and is there while we are living? No certainly; All times
are alike here; and there is no time wherein God will forgive us, unlesse we forgive our brother. What then remains, but that we do every day, as we would do, if we were to die the next? It is a blessed disposi∣tion to have a becalmed heart to those who have wronged us, and not to let the Sun go down upon our wrath: To be able to come before God with confi∣dence, and say; Lord forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespasse against us.
MAT. 7. 21. Mat. 7. 21. Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdome of heaven; but he that doth the will of my Father which is in heaven. THere are three sorts of men in the world; some which call not Christ their Lord, as Turks, Jews and In∣fidels: some which call him Lord, as all Christians, but not all in like man∣ner, for there are two sorts of them; some which call him Lord, and that is all; others which both call him Lord, and doe the will of his Father, the administration whereof is committed to him. The first of those three sorts, those who do not so much as call Christ their Lord, it is plain they can∣not be saved; for there is no other name to be saved by, but the name of Christ onely. For the second sort, those who call Christ their Lord, that is, are Christians, and professe to beleeve in Christ, and hope to be saved by him, and yet do no works of obedience unto God; though such as these may think themselves in a good estate, yet our Saviour here expresly excludes them from entring into the King∣dome of heaven: But the third sort, which doe not
onely call Christ their Lord, but doe the will of his Father, these are the onely true Christians; for these there is hope, but for none other: Not every one (saith our Saviour) that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, &c. Our Saviour foresaw there would be among those who beleeved on his Name, such as should think their faith sufficient, and that as for works they might be excused, having him for their Lord and Captain of their salvation, who himself had both undergone the punishment due for their sins, and fulfilled that obe∣dience which they should have done. So that now there remained nothing on their part for to obtain salvation, but to trust and rely upon him, without any endeavour at all to please God by works, as being now become unusefull to salvation. If ever there were a time when Christians thus deceived themselves, that time is now, as both our practice sheweth plainly by a generall neglect of such duties of piety and charity, which amongst our Fore-fathers were frequent; as also our open profession, when being exhorted to these works of piety to God, and of charity towards our brethren, we stick not to alledge, we are not bound unto them, because we look not to be saved by the merit of works, as they, but by faith in Christ alone; as though faith in Christ excluded works, and not rather included them, as being that whereby they became acceptable unto God, which of themselves they are not: or as if works could no way conduce unto the attaining of salvation, but by way of merit and desert, and not by way of the grace and favour of God in Christ, as we shall see in the handling of this Text. We greatly now a days, and that most
dangerously, mistake the errour of our forefathers, which was not in that they did good works; I would we did so; but because they knew not rightly the end why they did them, nor where the value of them lay: they thought the end of doing them was, to obtain eternall life, as a reward of Justice due unto them, whereas it is onely of grace and promise in Christ Je∣sus: They took their works to have such perfectness in them as would endure the touchstone of the Law of God, yea such worth and value as to merit the re∣ward they looked for; whereas all the value and ac∣ceptablenesse of our works, issueth from the merit of Christ, and lieth onely in his righteousnesse commu∣nicated unto us and them by faith, and no otherwise. But setting aside these errours of the end, and of the value of works, we must know as well as they; That not every one that saith unto Christ, Lord, Lord, &c. but he that doth the will of his Father, &c. Now for the Explication of the words: To call Christ, Lord, is to beleeve in him, to acknowledge him, to look for salvation by him, or, as the Scripture expresseth it, Luke 6. to come unto him, every one, (saith our Saviour there, explaining this very Text we have in hand) Every one (saith he) that commeth unto me, and heareth my words, and doth them, I will shew you who he is like: where to come unto Christ, is put in stead of that which in the former was, to say unto him Lord. The doing of his Fathers will, is the doing of those works of obedience, which his Father hath comman∣ded in his Law, and now committed to his Son, whom he hath made the head and King of his Church to see executed and performed by those he bringeth to sal∣vation.
But how, and in what manner, we shall see by and by. The Text consists of two parts; The one negative; Not every one that saith unto Christ, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdome of heaven. The other affir∣mative; But those who doe the will of his Father shall onely enter thither. But these are so nearly linked to∣gether, that they cannot be handled asunder: And the observations which I shall draw thence depend on the whole Text; the first and chiefest whereof is this; That faith in Christ without works of obedience, and amendment of life, is not sufficient for salvation, and consequently not that faith whereby a Christian is ju∣stified. For if it were, it would save us: If it be not sufficient to save us, it cannot justifie us: This floweth directly from the Text, and cannot be denied; if ye remember what I said before; that to call Christ, Lord, is to beleeve in him. For the better understanding of this, you must take notice that there is a threefold faith whereby men be∣leeve in Christ: There is a false faith: There is a true faith, but not saving: and thirdly, there is a saving faith. A false faith is, to beleeve to attain salvation through Christ any other way then he hath ordained, as namely, to beleeve to attain salvation through him, without works of obedience to be accepted of God in him; which is a faith whereof there is no Gospel. A true faith is, to beleeve salvation is to be attained through obedience to God in Jesus Christ, who by his merits and righteousnesse, makes our selves and our works acceptable to his Father. A saving and justifying faith is, to beleeve this so
as to embrace and lay hold upon Christ for that end. To believe to attain salvation through obedience to God in Christ, so as to apply our selves, and rely up∣on Christ, for that end, namely, to perform those works of obedience, which God hath promised to re∣ward with eternall life: For a justifying faith stayeth not onely in the brain, but stirs up the will to receive and enjoy the good beleeved, according as it is pro∣mised. This motion of election of the will, is that which maketh the difference between a saving faith, which joyneth us unto Christ, and that which is true indeed, but not saving, but dogmaticall and opinio∣native onely. And this motion, or applying of the will to Christ, this embracing of Christ and the promises of the Gospel through him, is that which the Scripture (when it speaks of this faith) calleth comming unto Christ, or the receiving of him, Joh. 1. 12. As many as received him, to them he gave power (or priviledge) to be the sons of God, even to them that beleeve on his Name: where receiving and beleeving one expound another. So for comming; Come unto me (saith our Saviour) all ye that are heavy laden, and I will ease you. The last is very frequent, Iohn 5. 40. Ye will not come to me (saith our Saviour) that ye might have life. And Chap. 6. 37. All that the Father giveth me shall come unto me. ver. 44. No man can come unto me, unlesse the Father draw him. 45. Every man that hath heard, and learned of the Father commeth unto me; and such like. All which expresse the specification of a saving faith, which consists in the embracing, re∣ceiving and applying of the will to the thing be∣leeved.
What this embracing, receiving, or applying unto Christ is, I will farther make plain thus: He that be∣leeveth that Christ is an atonement to God for the sins of all repentant sinners, (and surely he is an atone∣ment for none else) must repent and turn from all his sinnes, that so Christ may be an atonement for him, else he embraceth not what he beleeveth. He that beleeves that God in Christ will accept and reward our obedience and works of piety, though short of perfection, and of no worth in themselves, must apply himself accordingly to doe works of Re∣ligion and Charity, that God in Christ may accept and reward them. For our beleef is not that saving beleef, untill we apply our selves to what we beleeve. To beleeve to attain salvation through Christ, with∣out works of obedience to be accepted in him, is, as I have already said, a false faith whereof there is no Gospel, no promise: To beleeve the contrary, that Christ is given of God to such only as shall receive him, to perform acceptable obedience to God through him, and yet not to apply, and buckle our selves thereto, were indeed to beleeve what is true, but yet no saving faith, because we embraced not the thing we beleeved, as we beleeved it. Thou sayest then thou hast faith, and beleevest that Christ is the atonement to God, for the sins of all such as leave and forsake their sins by repentance; Why then repent thee of thy sins that Christ may be an atonement for thee. Thou sayest thou hast this faith, that God in Jesus Christ will accept thy unde∣serving works and services unto eternall life; why then embrace thou Christ, and rely upon him for this end,
that thou mayest do works of piety towards God, and charity towards men, that so God in Christ may accept thee and them unto eternall life. Now if this be the faith which is saving, and unites us unto Christ and no other, then it is plain that a sa∣ving faith cannot be severed from good works, be∣cause no man can embrace Christ as he is promised, but he must apply himself to do them. For out of that which hath been spoken three reasons may be gathered for the necessity of them. First, it is the end of our faith and justification by Christ, yea the end why he shed his blood for us, that we being reconci∣led to God in him, might bring forth fruits of righte∣ousnesse, which else we could never have done. This is no speculation, but plain Scripture. S. Peter 1 p. 2. 24. telleth us, that Christ his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead to sin, should live unto righteousnesse. S. Paul, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14. The grace of God (saith he) that bringeth salva∣tion, hath appeared unto all men; (wherefore?) teaching us that denying ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world; looking for that blessed hope, the glorious ap∣pearing of the great God, and our Saviour Iesus Christ; who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purifie unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. These words contain the summe of all I have hitherto told you: That Christ is there∣fore given us, to be a propitiation for our sins, and to justifie us, that in him we might walk before God in newnesse of life; so to obtain a Crown of righteous∣nesse in the world to come.
Answerable is that place Ephes. 2. 10. where the Apostle having told us, we are saved by grace through faith, and not of works, lest any man should boast; he addes presently, (lest his meaning might be mistaken, as it is of too many) that we are Gods workmanship cre∣ated in Iesus Christ unto good works, which God hath before ordained () that we should walk in them: as if he should say, Those works of obedience, ordained by God aforetime, in his law for us to walk in, which we could not perform of our selves; now God hath as it were new moulded us in Jesus Christ, that we might perform them in him; namely, by way of acceptation, though they come short of that ex∣actnesse the Law requireth. And thus to be saved, is to be saved by grace and favour, and not by the me∣rit of works, because the foundation whereby our selves and our services are approved in the eyes of God, and acquitted of guilt, (which the Scripture calleth to be justified,) is the meer favour of God in Jesus Christ, and not any thing in us. And this way of salvation excludes all boasting; for what have we to boast of, when all the righteousnesse of our works is none of ours, but Christs imputed to us; whereby onely, and not for any merit in themselves, they be∣come acceptable, and have promise of reward. But that men should be saved by Christ, though they be idle and doe nothing, I know no such grace of God revealed in Scripture. Now that in Christ we may perform works of righteousnesse, which God will accept and crown, is plain by the tenour of Scripture. S. Paul, Philip. 1. 11. desires that the Philippians might be filled with the
fruits of righteousnesse, which are by Iesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God. And the same Apostle tels the Romanes, Rom. 6. 22. that being made free from sin, and become servants to God, they have their fruit unto holinesse, and the end everlasting life; that is, as the Syriack turns it, Sunt vobis fructus sancti, they have holy fruits, whose end is life eternall. And if we would seriously consider it, we should finde, that the more we beleeve this righteousnesse of faith in Christ, the more reason we have to perform works of service and obedience unto God, then if we beleeved it not: For if our works would not be ac∣ceptable with God, unlesse they were compleat in every point, as the Law required; if there were no re∣ward to be looked for at the hands of God, unlesse we could merit it by the worthinesse of our deeds: who that considers his own weaknesse and insufficien∣cy, would not sooner despair, then go about to please God by works? He would think it better to do no∣thing at all, then to endevour what he could never hope to attain, and so lose his labour. But we, who beleeve that those who serve God in Christ, have their failings and wants covered with his righteous∣nesse, and so their works accepted, as if they were in every point as they should be; why should not we of all men fall to work, being sure by Christs means and merit, we shall not lose our labour? A second motive why we should do good works is, because they are the way and means ordained by God to obtain the reward of eternall life, without which we shall never attain it: Without holinesse no man shall see God, Heb. 12. 14. Look to your selves (saith S. Iohn
Ep. 2. ver. 8.) that ye lose not those things ye have wrought for, but that ye may receive a full reward. The Angels message from heaven to devout Cornelius was, Thy prayers and thine alms are had in remembrance in the sight of God: whereupon S. Peter inferred, that in every Nation, he that feareth God and worketh righ∣teousnesse, is accepted with him, Acts 10. Hence it is that we shall be judged, and receive sen∣tence at the last day, according to our works: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdome prepared for you from the foundation of the world: For I was hungry, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me: For in as much as ye have done these unto one of the least of my brethren, ye have done it unto me. Lord, how do those look to be saved at that day, who think good works not re∣quired to salvation, and accordingly do them not! Can our Saviour passe this blessed sentence on them? think they he can? If he should, they might truly say indeed, Lord, we have done no such matter, nor did we think our selves bound unto it; we relied wholly upon our faith in thy merits, and thought we had been freed from such services. What? doe they think Christ will change the form of his sentence at that great day? No certainly: If the sentence for Blisse will not fit them, and be truly said of them, the other will, and must, for there is no more; Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels: For when I was hungry, ye gave me no meat, &c. This must be their doome un∣lesse
they suppose the righteous Judge will lie for them. And it is here further to be observed, that the works named in the sentence of Judgement, are works of the second Table, works of mercy and charity; Fee∣ding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the sick; all Almesdeeds, which men are now a-days so much afraid of; as if they looked toward Popery, and had a tang of meriting: For now a-days these costly works of all others are most suspicious; but will it be so at the day of Judgement? True it is, they merit not the reward which shall be given them: but what then? Are we so proud we will doe no works, unlesse we may merit? Is it not sufficient that God will re∣ward them for Christs sake, though they have no worth in themselves? The third and last motive to works of righteous∣nesse is, because they are the only sign and note where∣by we know our faith is true and saving, and not counterfeit: For 1 Iohn 1. 8. If we say we have fel∣lowship with Christ, and walk in darknesse, we lie, and doe not the truth. Chap. 2. ver. 3. Hereby we know that we know him (viz. to be our Advocate with his Father, and the propitiation for our sins) if we keep his Com∣mandements. And Chap. 3. 7. Little children, let no man deceive you: He that doeth righteousnesse, is righteous, even as Christ is righteous. The same al∣most you may finde again, Chap. 2. 29. For if every one that beleeveth in Christ truly and savingly, be∣leeves that salvation is to be attained by obedience to God in him, and not otherwise, and therefore em∣braceth and layeth hold upon him for that end; How
can such an ones faith be fruitlesse? how can he be without works, who therefore lays hold on Christ that his works and obedience may be accepted as righteous before God, for his sake, and so rewardable? It is as possible for the Sun to be without his light, or the fire to want heat, as such a faith to be without works. Our Saviour therefore himself makes this a most sure and never failing note to build our assurance of salvation upon, Luke 6. 46. where the mention of the words of my Text gives the occasion, Why call ye me, Lord, (saith he) and doe not the things which I say? 47. Whosoever commeth to me, and heareth my sayings, and doth them, I will shew you to whom he is like. 48. He is like a man which built an house, and digged deep, and laid the foundation on a rock. And when the floud arose, the stream beat vehemently upon that house, and could not shake it, for it was founded upon arock. 49. But he that heareth and doth not, is like a man that without a foundation built an house upon the earth; against which the stream did beat vehemently, and immediately it fell, and the ruine of that house was great. Whom these three motives or reasons will not perswade to good works, let not my soul ô Lord be joyned with theirs, nor my doome be as theirs must be. A second observation out of these words, and near a-kin to the former is; That it is not enough for a Christian to live harmlesly, and abstain from ill, but he must do that which is good. For our Saviour ex∣cludes not here those onely, who do against the will of his Father, but those who do not his Fathers will: It is doing good which he requireth, and the not do∣ing
evill only. This is an error which taketh hold of a great part of men, even of those who would seem to be religious. He is a reformed man, and acquits himself well, who abstains from fornication, adultery, who is no theef, no couzener, or defrauder of other men; who will not lie, or swear, or such like: But as for doing any works of piety or charity, they think they are not required of them. But they are much deceived: For God requires some duties at our hands, which he may reward not out of any merit, but out of his mercifull promise in Christ. But not doing ill is no service rewardable: A servant who expects wages, must not onely do his Master no harm, but some work that is good and profitable: otherwise the best Christian would be he that should live altogether idlely; For none doth lesse harm, then he that doth nothing at all. But Mat. 25. 30. He that encreased not his Masters Talent, though he had not mis-spent it, is adjudged an unpro∣fitable servant, and cast into utter darknesse, where is weeping, and gnashing of treth. So also Mat. 3. The tree that beareth no good fruit, is hewn down, though it bore none that was evill: The axe is laid to the root of the tree, every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire. Mat. 21. 19. The sig∣tree is cursed for having no fruit, not for having evill fruit. And the sentence of condemnation, as you heard before, is to passe at that great day, for not ha∣ving done good works, not for doing ill ones: Goe ye cursed, for when I was hungry, ye fed me not, &c. Thus having let you see how necessary it is for a Christian to joyn good works with his faith in Christ;
I will now come to shew you, how you must do them, hoping I have already perswaded you that they must needs be done. First therefore, we must doe them out of faith in Christ, that is, relying upon him onely for the accep∣tance, and rewarding of them: for in him alone God is well pleased with us and with what wee doe, and therefore without faith and reliance upon him, it is impossible to please God. We must not think there is any worth in our works, for which any such reward as God hath promised, is due; For, alas! our best works are full of imperfections, and far short of what the Law requires. Our reward therefore is not of merit, but of the mercifull promise of God in Christ: which the Apostle means, when he says, We are saved by grace, and not by works: That is, it is the grace and favour of God in Christ, which makes our selves ac∣ceptable, and our works rewardable, and not any desert in them or us. Having laid this foundation; the next thing requi∣red is sincerity of heart in doing them: we must doe them out of the fear of God, and conscience of his Commandements, not out of respect of profit, or fear, or praise of men; For such as do so are hypo∣crites: Not every one, saith our Saviour, that saith un∣to me, Lord, Lord, but he that doth the will of my Fa∣ther; Now it is the will of our heavenly Father that we serve him in truth and uprightnesse of heart: I know (saith David, 1 Chr. 29. 17.) that thou my God triest the heart, and hast pleasure in uprightnesse. And so he said to Abraham, Gen. 17. 1. I am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou upright, or be thou
sincere. This manner of serving God Ioshuah com∣mended to the Israelites, Iosh. 24. 14. Fear the Lord (saith he) and serve him in sincerity and truth: and the Prophet Samuel, 1 Sam. 12. 24. Onely fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your heart. This since∣rity, uprightnesse and truth in Gods service is, when we do religious and pious duties, and abstain from the contrary out of conscience to Godward, out of an heart possessed with the love and fear of God. It is otherwise called in Scripture, perfectnesse, or per∣fectnesse of heart: For it is a lame and unperfect ser∣vice, where the better half is wanting, as the heart is, in every work of duty both to God and men. And therefore it is called perfectnesse, when both go toge∣ther, when conscience as the soul, enlives the outward work as a body. And indeed this is all the perfection we can attain unto in this life, to serve God in truth of heart, though otherwise we come short of what we should: and therefore God esteems our actions and works, not according to the greatnesse or exact∣nesse of the performance, but according to the since∣rity and truth of our hearts in doing them: As ap∣pears by the places I have already quoted, and by that 1 King. 15. 14. where it is said, that though Asa failed in his reformation, and the high places were not taken down, neverthelesse his heart was perfect with the Lord his God, all his days. A note to know such a sincerity and truth of heart by, is, If in our privacy, when there is no witnesse but God and our selves, we are carefull then to abstain from sin, as well as in the sight of men. If when no body but God shall see and know it, we are willing to
do a good work, as well as if all the world should know it. He that findeth himself thus affected, his heart is true, at least in some measure, but so much the lesse by how much he findeth himself the lesse af∣fected in this manner. When we are in the presence and view of men, we may soon be deceived in our selves, and think we do that out of conscience and fear of God, which indeed is but for the fear or praise of men, either lest we should be damnified, or impair our credit, or the like: but when there is none but God and us, then to be afraid of sin, and carefull of good duties, is a sign we fear God in truth and sinceri∣ty, and not in hypocrisy. The speciall and principall means to attain this sincerity and truth of heart is, to possesse our selves with the apprehension of Gods presence, and to walk before him as in his eye: wheresoever thou art, there is an eye that seeth thee, an eare that hears thee, and a hand that registreth thy most secret thoughts. For the ways of man (saith Solomon Prov. 5. 21.) are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his doings: How much ashamed would we be, that men should know how much our hearts and our words and acti∣ons disagreed? How would we blush that men should see us commit this or that sin, or neglect this or that duty? what horrible Atheisme then doth this argue, that the presence of man, yea sometimes of a little child, should hinder us from that wickednesse which Gods presence cannot? This having of God before our eyes, and the continuall meditation of his all-see∣ing presence, would together with devout prayer for the assistance of Gods grace, be in time the bane of
hypocrisie and falshood of heart, and beget in stead thereof that truth and sincerity which God loveth. Another property of such obedience as God re∣quires, is universality: we must not serve God by halfs, by doing some duties and omitting other, but we must with David, Psal. 119. 6, 20. have respect to all Gods Commandements; to those of the second Table, as well as to those of the first; and to those of the first, as well as those of the second. The want of which universality of obedience to both Tables is so frequent, as the greatest part of Christians are plunged therein, to the undoubted ruine of their souls, and shipwrack of everlasting life, if they so continue. For there are two sorts of men, which think them∣selves in a good estate, and are not: The one are those who make conscience of the duties of the first Table, but have little or no care of the duties of the second. And this is a most dangerous evill, by reason it is more hard to be discovered: those which are guilty thereof, being such as seem religious, but their Religion is in vain. Such were those in the Church of Israel against whom the Prophet Esay declaimeth Chap. 1. from the 10. ver. to the 17. To what purpose are your sacrifices and burnt offerings, saith the Lord? your oblations and incense are an abomination. Your new Moons, Sabbaths, calling of Assemblies; even the solemne meeting, I cannot away with; it is iniquity. Would you know what was the matter? see the words following; Learn to do well, seek judgement, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherlesse, plead for the widow. Lo here a want of the duties of the second Table.
Such is that also of Hosea Chap. 6. I desired mercy, and not sacrifice; which is twice alledged by our Savi∣our in the Gospel against the Pharisees hypocriticall scrupulosity in the same duties of the first Table, with a neglect of the second. But here perhaps some may finde a scruple, because that if sacrifice in this or the like places be opposed to the duties of obedience re∣quired in the second Table, it should hereby seem, that the duties of the second Table which concern our neighbour, should be preferred before the duties of the first, which concern the Lord himself; forasmuch as it is said, I desire mercy, and not sacrifice; that is, rather mercy, which is a duty of the second Table, then sacrifice, which is of the first. I answer, The ho∣ly Ghosts meaning is, not to preferre the second Ta∣ble before the first, taking them simply, but to per∣form the duties of both together, before the service of the first alone: Be more ready to joyn mercy, or works of mercy with your sacrificing, then to offer sacrifice alone. To go on: The duties of the first Table are by a speciall name called duties of Religion; those of the second Table come under the name of Honesty and probity: Now as a man can never be truly honest, unlesse he be Religious; so cannot that man (what shew soever he makes) be truly religious in Gods esteem, who is not honest in his conversation toward his neighbour: Religion and Honesty must be mar∣ried together, or else neither of them will be in truth what it seems to be. We know that all our duty to God and our neighbour is comprehended under the name of love, as in that summe of the Law; Love God
above all things, and thy) neighbour as thy self. This is the summe of the whole Law contained in both Tables. But S. Iohn tels us 1 Ep. 4. 20. He that saith, I love God, and hateth his brother, is a lier; which is as much as if he should say; He that seems religious to∣wards God, and is without honesty towards his neigh∣bour, he is a lier, there is no true religion in him. If you would then know, whether a man professing Religion, by diligent frequenting Gods service, and exercises of devotion, keeping sacred times, and hear∣ing Sermons, be a sound Christian or not, or a seem∣ing one onely; this is a sure and infallible note to dis∣cover him, and for him to discover himself by: For, if notwithstanding his care of the duties of the first Table, he makes no conscience to walk honestly to∣wards his neighbour; If he be disobedient to Parents, and lawfull Authority; if he be cruell and unchari∣table; if he be unjust in his dealings, fraudulent, an op∣pressor, a falsifier of Covenants and promises, a back∣biter, a sclaunderer, or the like: his Religion is no better then an hypocrites: For such was the Religi∣on of many of the Pharisees, whom therefore our Sa∣viour termeth Hypocrites; Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites: They were scrupulous in the duties of the first Table, they paid tithe even of mint and annise, they fasted twice a week, they were exact observers of the Sabbath, and other ceremonies of Religion; but judgement, mercy, and faith in their conversation towards men, our Saviour tels them, they regarded not. Besides our Saviours woe denounced against such, there are two dangerous effects which accompany
this evil disease, which should make us beware there∣of: First, those who are addicted to Religion with∣out any conscience of honesty, are easily drawn by the Devil to many intolerable acts under colour and in behalf thereof, as they imagine We see it in the Papists and Jesuits, whose preposterous zeal to their Religion, makes them think Treasons, Murders, Rebellions, or any other such wicked acts, are law∣full and excusable, so they be done for the good of the Catholique cause, as they call it. And if we search narrowly amongst our selves, we shall light upon some examples of indirect and unlawfull courses, undertaken otherwhile on the behalf of Religion, and all through want of this conscionable care of main∣taining honesty towards our neighbour, together with our zeal for Religion toward God. Even as we see an horse in some narrow and dangerous passage, whilest he is wholly taken up with some bugbear on the one side of the way, which he would eschew, and in the mean time mindeth not the other side, where there is the like danger, he suddenly slips into a pit or ditch, with no small danger to himself and rider: So is it here, with such as look onely to the first Table, and minde not the second, whilest they go about as they think to advance the duties of the one, they fall most foully in the other. The second evill is a most dangerous scandall, which follows profession of Religion without honest conversation towards men: It is a grievous stumbling block and stone of offence, making men out of love with Religion, when they see such evil effects from it, and those who seem to professe it. Those who are not
yet come on are skared from comming, resolving they will never be of their Religion, which they see no better fruits of. Those who are entred, are ashamed and discouraged, forsaking the duties of Religion, that they might shun the suspition of hypocrisie and dishonesty. But woe be unto them by whom scandall commeth: Let us all therefore take heed to adorn and approve our profession, by bringing forth fruits, not onely of piety and devotion toward God, but of works of righteousnesse and charity to our neigh∣bour.
ACTS 10. 4. Acts 10 4. And he said unto him, Thy prayers and thine Almes are come up for a memortall before God; or (as it is ver. 31.) are had in remembrance. WHen the Jews had crucified our blessed Saviour, the Lord and Prince of Life, though their impiety were most horrible, and such as might seem to admit of no expiation or atonement, yet would not God for that reject them; but after he was risen from the dead, his Apostles, and Messengers were sent to offer and tender him once more unto them, if so be they would yet receive him as their Messiah and Re∣deemer, which was promised to come; telling them that what they had formerly done unto him, God would passe by it, (namely, according to our Saviours prayer upon the Crosse, Father forgive them, for they know not what they doe) as done of ignorance on their part, whilest himself was by the dispensation of his Providence, fulfilling that which was long before spoken by the mouth of all his Prophets, that Christ or Messiah should suffer death: All which you may reade in the Sermon which S. Peter preached unto them in the Temple, Acts 3. Thus the Lord shewed
himself according to his style, A God gracious and mercifull, long-suffering, and slow to anger. But when these Jews, notwithstanding this second tender, not only continued in their former obstinacy, refusing to accept him for their Redeemer, but also misused and persecuted his Ambassadors sent unto them, this their ingratitude was so hideous and hai∣nous in the eyes of God, that he could bear with them no longer, but resolved thenceforth to cast them off, and choose himself a Church among the Gentiles. To prepare a way whereunto, he sent a Vision much about the same time, both to Peter, (who was then by reason of the Jews persecution fled to Ioppa) and to Cornelius a Gentile, Captain of the Italian Band, living at Caesarea upon that coast; ordaining the one (Peter) to be the Messenger and Preacher; and the other (Cornelius) to be the first Gentile which should be partaker of the faith of Christ: Therefore accor∣dingly Peters Vision was to admonish him, not to make scruple, as all Jews did, of conversing with a Gentile as unclean; signified by a sheet let down from heaven, wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the aire, that is, of all both clean and unclean; wherewith came also a voice, saying, Peter, kill and eat. Whereunto when Peter answered, Not so, Lord, for I have never eaten any thing that is common or un∣clean: the voice replies, What God hath cleansed, that call not thou unclean. Now as this Vision was to give Peter commission to go unto Cornelius; so was Corne∣lius his Vision to command him to send for Peter; For he saw a Vision at the ninth hour of the day, an An∣gell
of the Lord comming unto him, and saying, Corne∣lius. Whom when Cornelius looked on, being afraid, he said, What is it, Lord? The Angel said unto him, Thy prayers and thine almes are come up for a memoriall, or had in remembrance before God. And now send men to Ioppa, and call for one Simon, whose sirname is Peter, and he shall tell thee what thou oughtest to doe. And thus have I brought the Story as far as my Text; which is as you see a part of this Message of the An∣gel to Cornelius, namely, his Report; And he said un∣to him, Thy prayers and thine almes, &c. Wherein two things are to be considered; First, who was the man, and what was the condition of this person to whom the Angel spake, namely, Cornelius. And the Angel said unto him. Secondly, what the Mes∣sage or Report he brought importeth; Thy prayers and thine almesdeeds are come in remembrance before God. To begin with the first; The man here spoken to, (as you may read in the beginning of the Chapter, and as I have in some part told already) was Cornelius, a Gentile, Captain of the Italian Band at Caesarea, and so no doubt himself of that tion. To understand which, ye must know, that at t  the Land of Jury, like as most other Nations were, was under the Romane Empire, and ruled by a President of their appointing: which President had his Court and Seat at Caesarea, a great and magnificent City upon the Palestine coast, some seventy miles from Jerusalem, where was continually a guard of Souldiers both for the Presidents safety, and awing the subdued Jews: And among these was our Cornelius a Commander, being Captain of the Italian Band. But howsoever
he were by race and breeding a Gentile, yet for Reli∣gion he was no Idolater, but a worshipper of the true God, the God of Israel, or God the Creator of hea∣ven and earth: For the Text tels us, that he was a devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, who gave much almes to the people, and prayed to God alway: which is as much as to say, he was a Prose∣lyte, for so were those converted Gentiles called, who left their false Gods, and worshipped the true. Yet was he not circumcised, nor had taken upon him the yoke of Moses Law, and so was not accounted a mem∣ber of the Church of Israel: wherefore according to the Ordinances of the Law he was esteemed unclean, and so not lawfull for Peter, or any other circumcised Jew to accompany with him, had not God given Pe∣ter an Item that he should thenceforth call no man unclean, for as much as that badge of separation was now dissolved. For the better understanding of this, we must know, there were, while the legall worship stood, two sorts of Proselytes, or converted Gentiles: One sort which were called Proselytes of the Covenant; These were such as were circumcised, and submitted themselves to the whole Mosaicall paedagogy: These were coun∣ted as Jews, and conversed with as freely as those which were so born. But there was a second sort of Proselytes inferiour unto these, whom they called Proselytes of the Gate: These were not circumcised, nor conformed themselves to the Mosaicall Rites and Ordinances, onely they were tyed to the obedience of those Commandements, which the Hebrew Do∣ctors call the Commandements of Noah, that is, such
as all the sons of Noah were bound to observe; which were, first, to worship God the Creator. Secondly, to disclaim the service of Idols. Thirdly, to abstain from blood, namely, both from the effusion of mans blood: and fourthly, from eating flesh with the blood therein. Fifthly, to abstain from fornication, and all unlawfull conjunction. Sixtly, to administer justice: and seventhly, to abstain from robbery, and do as they would be done to. And such Proselytes as these, howsoever they were accounted Gentiles, and such as with whom the Jews might not converse as being no free denizens of Israel; yet did they yeeld them a part in the life to come. Such a Proselyte was Naa∣man the Syrian, and of such there were many in our Saviours time; and such an one was our Cornelius. Hence it was, that when afterward there arose a controversie in the Church, Whether or no the Gen∣tiles which beleeved, were to be circumcised, and so bound to observe the Ordinances and rites of Moses; S. Peter in the Councell of the Apostles at Jerusalem determined, It was the will of God they should not; and that upon this ground, because Cornelius the first beleeving Gentile was no circumcised Proselyte, but a Proselyte of the Gate only, and yet neverthelesse when himself was sent (as ye have heard) to preach the Gospel of Christ to him and his house, the Holy Ghost came down upon them as well as upon the Cir∣cumcision; whereby it was manifest, that God would have the rest of the Gentiles which beleeved, to have no more imposed upon them, then Cornelius had: and accordingly the Councell concluded, that no other burden should be laid upon them, but onely those
precepts given to the sons of Noah; To abstain from pollutions of Idols, from blood, from things strangled, and from fornication, and the rest, which they had received already in becomming Christians, and so nee∣ded not to be expresly mentioned. Now that I may not seem to have held you with so long a story without some matter of instruction: Let us observe by the example of this Cornelius, how great a favour and blessing of God it is, to live and dwell within the pale of his Church, where opportunity and means of salvation is to be had. If Cornelius had still dwelt among his Countrimen the Italians, where he was bred and born, or in any other Province of that Empire; he had in all likelihood never come to this saving and blessed knowledge of the true God, but dyed a Pagan as he was born. But by this occasion of living at Caesarea, within the confines of the land of Israel, where the Oracles and worship of the most high God were dayly resounded and professed; he became such an one as ye have heard, a blessed Con∣vert unto the true God, whom with all his house he served and worshipped with acceptation. If this be so, then should we our selves learn to be more thankfull to God then most of us use to be, for that condition wherein by his Providence we are born; for we might, if it had pleased him, have been born, and had our dwelling among Pagans and Gen∣tiles, who had no knowledge of his word and pro∣mise; (and such our Nation once was:) But behold his goodnesse and mercy! we are born of Christian Parents, and dwell in a Christian Country, and so made partakers of the name and livery of Christ as
soon as we were born: How great should our thank∣fulnesse be for his mercy? Nay, wee might have been born and bred in a Christian Nation too, and yet such an one where Idolatry, false worship, and Pope∣ry so reigned, as there had been little hopes or means to have been saved: But behold, we are born, bred, and dwell in a reformed Christian State, where the worship of God in Christ is truly taught and practi∣sed; where no God is worshipped but the Father, and in no other Mediator but his Son Jesus Christ. How should we then magnifie our good God for his so great and abundant mercy towards us? Luther, or some other tels a story of a German pesant, who on a time beholding an ugly Toad, fell into a most bit∣ter lamentation and weeping, that he had been so un∣thankfull to Almighty God, who had made him a man, and not such an ugly creature as that was. O that we could in like manner bewail our ingratitude towards him who hath made us to have our birth and habitation, not among Pagans and barbarous Indi∣ans, a people without God in the world, but in a belee∣ving and Christian Nation, where the true God is known, and the means of salvation is to be had! Thankfulnesse for a lesse benefit is the way to obtain a greater: To acknowledge and prize Gods favour towards us in the means, is the way to obtain his grace to use them to our eternall advantage: where∣as our neglect of thankfulnesse in the one, may cause God in his just judgement, to deprive us of his blessing in the other. Consider it. And thus much concerning the person to whom the Angel spake, Cornelius, And he said unto him. Now
I come to the message it self, Thy prayers and thine almes are come into remembrance before God. Where before I make any further entrance, there is an Obje∣ction requires to be answered; namely, how Cornelius his service could be accepted of God, (as it is said to be) when as he had no knowledge of Christ, without whom no man can please God. I answer; Cornelius pleased God through his faith in the promise of Christ to come, as all just men under the Law did: which faith God did so long accept after Christ was come, till his comming and the mystery of Redemption wrought by him, were fully and clearly made known and preached, which had not been to Cornelius till this time: for though he had heard of his preaching in Galilee and Judaea, and that he was crucified by the Jews, yet he had not heard of his Resurrection from the dead, and Ascension into glory, or was not assured of it, till it was now confirm'd unto him, by one sent from God himself. And it is like that having heard somewhat of the Apostles preaching, and of the Jews opposing their testimony, and so knowing not what to beleeve, he had earnestly besought God in his Devotions to lead him in the way of truth, and make known unto him what to doe. This being premised, I return again unto the An∣gels words; wherein I will consider three things: First, the conjunction or coupling of Almesdeeds with Prayer; Thy Prayers and thine Almes. Secondly, the efficacy of power they have with God; Thy Prayers and thine Almes are come up into remembrance before God. Thirdly, I will adde the reasons why God so much accepteth them; which are also so many Mo∣tives,
why we should be carefull and diligent to pra∣ctise them. For the first, the joyning of Almesdeeds with pray∣er: Cornelius we see joyn'd them, and he is therefore in the verses before going commended for a devout man, and one that feared God. And by the Angels re∣port from God himself, we hear how graciously he accepted them; giving us to understand, that a De∣votion thus arm'd, was of all others the most power∣full to pierce into his dwelling place, and fetch a blessing from him. Therefore our Saviour likewise, Mat. 6. joyns the precepts of Alms and Prayer toge∣ther, teaching us how to give alms, and how to pray in one Sermon, as things that ought to goe hand in hand, and not to be separated asunder. It was also the Ordinance of the Church in the Apostles times, that the first day of the week, which was the time of publike prayer, should be the time also of Alms. So saith S. Paul, 1 Cor. 16. 1. Now concerning the collection for the Saints (saith he) as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye. 2. Vpon the first day of the week (that is, upon the Lords day) let every one of you lay by himself in store as God hath pro∣spered him, that there be no gatherings when I come. Which institution seems to be derived from the Commandement of God in the Law twice repeated; Let no man appear before the Lord empty: For the words annexed to that Law Deut. 16. (where it is ap∣plied Exo. 23. 15 Deu. 16. 16 to the three great feasts, when all Israel was to assemble to pray before the Lord in his Tabernacle) the words I say there annexed, sound altogether like unto these of S. Paul concerning the Lords day; Three
times a year (saith the Text there) shall all the males ap∣pear before the Lord: and they shall not appear before the Lord empty. Every one shall give as he is able, accor∣ding to the blessing of the Lord thy God which he hath given thee. Is not this the same in sense with S. Pauls, Let every one lay by himself in store, as God hath prospe∣red him? The Primitive Church after the Apostles followed the same president, and our own Reformed Church hath ordained the same in her Service-book, were it accordingly practised as was intended: For af∣ter the Epistle and Gospel she appoints divers choice sentences of Scripture to be read, which exhorts us to Almes and other Offerings to the honour of Almigh∣ty God; and then as supposing it to be done, in the Prayer for the whole estate of Christs Church, We humbly beseech him most mercifully to accept our Almes, and receive our prayers, which we offer unto his Divine Majesty. Shall I now need to exhort Christians thus to fur∣nish and strengthen their prayers which they daily of∣fer unto God, to couple them with Almesdeeds, to come before God with a present, and not empty-han∣ded? Whom neither Gods Commandement, the practice of his Church, the example of his Saints, nor the acceptance of such prayers as the hand which dea∣leth Almes, lifteth up to him; whom these will not move, no words of mine will do it. But some may say, Would you have us always give Alms when we pray? No; I say not so, but I would not have you appear before the Lord empry; that is, such as are not wont to give them, nor mean to do: for you may give them before, or second your prayers with them
after; you may have set and appointed times for the one, as you have for the other; or when the Law of man injoyns you any thing in this kinde, do it heartily, faithfully, and with a willing minde, without grud∣ging, that so God may accept it as a service done to him. Or lastly, thou maist doe as the holy men of Scripture were wont, vow and promise unto God if thy prayer be heard to offer something unto him ei∣ther for relief of the poor, the Widow, the Orphan, and distressed one, or the maintenance of his service and worship. If God will be with me, (saith Iacob, Gen. 28.) and keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, &c. Then shall the Lord be my God, and this stone which I have set for a pillar, shall be Gods house: and of all that thou shalt give me, I will surely give the tenth unto thee. (See the use of vowing by such as came to pray in Gods House, Eccles. 5. 4.) If thou commest before God in any of these ways, thou shalt not come empty-handed. But send not thy prayer single and alone; the prayer with Alms is the prayer God loveth: Hear what himself saith Psal. 50. 14. Offer unto God thanksgiving (Alms is an Offering of Eccl. 35. 2 Thanksgiving) and pay thy vows unto the most High. So call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorifie me. Now I come to the second thing I propounded, The power and efficacy which Prayer and Alms have with God. Thy prayers and thine alms (saith the An∣gel) are come up for a memoriall (or, are had in remem∣brance) in the sight of God. God is said to remember our prayers when he grants them, our Alms and good deeds when he rewards them, or in a word, when he
answers either of them with a blessing: as on the con∣trary he is said to remember iniquity, when he sends some judgement for it. So God is said to remember Hanna, when he heard her prayer for a Son, 1 Sam. 1. 19. and Nehemiah speaking (cap. 5. 19.) of his deeds of mercy and bounty shewed unto his poor brethren returned from captivity, says, Think upon me, or re∣member me ô my God for good, according to all that I have done for this people. Thus were Cornelius his prayers and alms remembred. Prayers therefore and alms, be they performed as they should be, are power∣full and approved means to obtain a blessing at the hands of God. To speak first of prayer: What is it that prayer hath not obtain'd? It hath shut and opened heaven; see the story of Eliah. It hath made the Sun and Moon to stand still; reade the book of Ioshua. It is the key that openeth all Gods treasures and blessings both spirituall and corporall: for spiri∣tuall blessings, Cornelius we see obtained thereby illu∣mination and instruction in Gods saving truth. And S. Iames saith, If any man lack wisdome let him ask of God, who giveth to all men liberally, and it shall be gi∣ven him Ephraim in the 31. of Ieremy prays for con∣verting grace, Turn thou me, ô Lord, and I shall be tur∣ned: To whom God presently replies, Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant Childe? For since I spake against him, I doe earnestly remember him still: There∣fore my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy on him, saith the Lord. Prayer obtains remission of sins; I said (saith David Psal. 32.) I will confesse my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the ini∣quity of my sin. For this shall every one that is godly
pray unto thee in a time when thou maist be found. Pray∣er also obtaineth corporall blessings; When heaven was shut and it rained not, Eliah prayed for rain and it rained: Hannah prayed for a Son, and she concei∣ved: If we be sick (saith S. Iames cap. 5.) The prayer of faith shall heal the sick: Nehemiah prayed that he might finde favour in the sight of King Artaxerxes, and found it. Chap. 2. 4. But some man wil say, If prayer have such power and efficacy, how comes it to passe that many even godly men, oft pray, and yet speed not? I answer, There are divers causes thereof; Either we pray not as we ought, or we are not disposed as we ought to be when we pray; We pray not as we ought, either when we pray not heartily, or not constantly: For God re∣gards not formall and superficiall prayer, but prayer that comes from the heart, and loves to be importu∣ned before he grant, as our Saviour tels us in the pa∣rable of the woman and the unjust Judge, whom though at first he would not hear, yet importunity made him doe her justice. Or secondly, we rely not upon God as we ought, when we pray, but trust more to second means, to our wit, to our friends or the like, then to him. And this seems to be that wavering in prayer S. Iames speaks of, when he bids us pray in faith, without wavering, Chap. 1. that is, without ree∣ling from God to rest upon second means: but as with our mouth we pray to him, so should our hearts rely upon him to give us what we ask; we often pray to God for fashion, but indeed we look to speed by others; and so God takes himself mocked, and then no marvell if he hears us not: If it were our own case
we would not listen to such suiters. Or thirdly, we pray and speed not, when we make not Gods glory the end of what we ask; Ye ask (saith S. Iames) and receive not, because ye ask amisse, that ye might con∣sume it upon your lusts. Or fourthly, we may ask some∣thing that crosseth the rule of Divine providence and justice, and then also we must not look to speed: Da∣vid prayed for the life of his childe by Bathsheba, Vri∣ahs Wife, but was not heard, because it stood not with the rule of Divine justice, that so scandalous a sin, which made the Enemies of God to blaspheme, should not have an exemplary punishment. In like manner sundry times when the children of Israel re∣belled against the Lord, and murmured against Mo∣ses and Aaron their Governors; Moses poured forth very earnest prayers to God for removing his judge∣ments from off the people, but God would not hear him, because their sins were scandalous, and com∣mitted with so high a hand, that it could not stand with the rule of his justice, not to inflict punishment for them. Again, sometimes, and that too often, we are indis∣posed for God to grant our request; as first, when some sin unrepented of lies at the door, and keeps Gods blessing out; Psal 66. 18. If I regard (saith Da∣vid) iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. Psal. 50. 16. And his Son Solomon observed it, Prov. 28. 9. where he says, He that turneth away his eare from hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be abomination. So God would not hear Ioshua praying for the Israelites, when they fled before the men of Ai, because of Achans Sa∣criledge; Get thee up, (saith God) why liest thou thus
upon thy face? Israel hath sinned—for they have taken of the accursed thing; that is, the thing that cursed were those that medled therewith: Therefore the children of Israel could not stand before their Enemies,—because they were accursed: Neither will I be with you any more, except ye put the accursed thing from among you. Or lastly, our Prayers often are not heard, because we appear before the Lord empty; we do not as Corne∣lius did, send up prayers and alms together: we should have two strings to our bow, when we have but one. This is another indisposition, which unfits us to re∣ceive what we ask of God: For how can we look that God should hear us in our need, when we turn away our face from our brother in his need? When we re∣fuse to give to God, or for his sake, what he requires, why should he grant to us what we request? Hear what an ancient Father of the Church, S. Basil by name, in concione ad Deum; Novi quosdam (saith he) qui jejunarunt, qui orarunt, qui ingemuerunt, verùm ne unum quidem obolum in egenos expenderunt: Quae uti∣litas hîc est reliquae virtutis? I have known, saith he, many who would fast, who would pray, who would sigh; but not bestow one half-peny upon the poor: But what then will their other devotion profit them? Adde to all these reasons of displeasure, a reason of favour, why God sometimes grants not our requests; namely, because we ask that which he knows would be hurtfull for us, though we think not so. We ask sometimes that which if he granted us would utterly undoe us: As therefore a wise and loving Father will not give his child a knife, or some other hurtfull
thing, though it cries never so much unto him for it: so does God deale with his children. And how wise soever we think our selves, we are often as ignorant in that which concerns our good, as very babes are, and therefore we must submit our selves to be orde∣red by the wisdome of our heavenly Father. Moreover, we must know and beleeve, that God often hears our prayers, when we think he doth not; and that three manner of ways: As namely first, when he changes the means, but brings the end we desire another way to passe: we ask to have a thing by our means, but he likes not our way, but gives it us by another means which he thinks better. S. Paul that he might the better glorifie God in serving him, de∣sires the prick of the flesh might be taken from him: God denies him that means, but grants him grace suf∣ficient for him; that so being humbled by the sight of his own infirmity, he might glorifie God for his power in mans weaknesse. And is it not all one, whether a Physitian quench the thirst of his Patient by giving him Barberies, or some other comfortable drink, as by giving him Beer which he cals for? Secondly, God often grants our request, but not at that time we would have it, but defers it till some other time which he thinks best. Daniel prays for the return of the Captivity in the first year of Darius, but God de∣fers it till the first of Cyrus: we must not therefore take Gods delays for denials. The souls of the Saints under the Altar, Rev. 6. cry out aloud for vengeance; God hears that cry, and cannot deny the importunate cry of innocent blood; yet he defers it for a little sea∣son, saith the Text; and why? because their fellow∣servants
and Brethren that should be slain as they were, might be fulfilled. Lastly, God sometimes grants not the things we ask, but gives us in stead thereof some∣thing which is as good, or better: And then we are not to think, but that he hears us. And thus much concerning the power and efficacy of prayer. Now I come also to shew the like of Alms, how powerfull a means they are to procure a blessing from God: Not thy prayer onely, saith the Angel, but thine Almes also are come up for a remembrance in the sight of God. For Alms is a kinde of prayer, name∣ly, a visible one, and such an one as prevails as strong∣ly with God for a blessing, as any other. Hear David in the 41. Psalm, Blessed is he that considereth the poor, the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble. 2 The Lord preserve him and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon earth; and thou wilt not deliver him unto the will of his enemies. 3. The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing: thou wilt make all his bed in his sicknesse. A place so evident as flashes in a mans eye. But hear Solomon speak too, Prov. 19. 17. He that hath pity upon the poor lendeth unto the Lord, and that which he hath given, he will pay him again. And Pro. 28. 27. He that giveth unto the poor shall not lack; but he that hideth his eyes shall have many a curse. Also Prov. 11. 25. The liberall soule shall be made fat; and Pro. 21. 13. he that watereth, shall be watered also himself. Likewise Eccles. 11. 1. Cast thy bread upon the waters, for thou shalt finde it after many days. These are for corporall blessings, and of this life; but hear also for spirituall blessings, and those of the life to come. David, Psal. 112. (quoted by S. Paul, 2 Cor. 9.) He hath dispersed,
he hath given to the poor, his righteousnesse remaineth for ever, &c. That is, he shall be remembred, not onely in this life, but in the life to come. Luke 16. Make to your selves (saith our Saviour) friends of the unrighteous Mammon, (that is, of these deceitfull and uncertain riches) that when you fail, they (that is, the friends you have made) may receive you into everlasting Tabernacles: that is, that God looking upon the Almesdeeds you have done, and hearing the prayers and blessings of the poor, may reward you with eter∣nall life. So S. Paul, 1 Tim. 6. 17, &c. Charge them that be rich in this world,—that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God,—That they doe good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate: Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternall life. Non memi∣ni (saith S. Hierome) me legere mala morte mortuum, qui libenter opera charitatis exercuit, habet enim multos intercessores, & impossibile est multorum preces non ex∣audiri. What should I say more? Shall we not re∣ceive our sentence at the last day according to our works of mercy? Come ye blessed of my Father, and inherite the Kingdome prepared for you from the founda∣tion of the world: For when I was hungry, ye gave me meat, when I was thirsty, ye gave me drink, &c. ye know the rest: O the wonderfull efficacy of Alms in prevai∣ling with God! What favour doe they finde in his sight? how are they remembred? but not for any merit in them, which is none, but of his meer mercy and mercifull promise, who accepts them in Christ our Saviour. Whence is that prayer of Nehemiah c. 12.
concerning this case of good works, Remember me ô my God, concerning this, and spare me according to the greatnesse of thy mercy. Thus much of the efficacy and prevalency which prayer and Alms have with Almighty God, to pro∣cure a blessing from him. Now I come to the third thing propounded, The reasons why God requires them, and why they are so pleasing unto him: which reasons when they are known, will be also strong mo∣tives to us why we should frequent them: For though indeed their efficacy alone were a motive sufficient to invite any reasonable man to do them; yet will these reasons adde a further enforcement thereunto. To be∣gin then with prayer; the reasons why God requires this duty at our hands (I will name but the chief) are these: First, that we might acknowledge the proper∣ty he hath in the gifts he bestows upon us: otherwise we would forget in what tenure we hold those bles∣sings we receive from his hands; Though therefore he be willing to bestow his benefits upon us, yet he will have us ask them before he doth it. Even as Fa∣thers do with their children, though they intend to bestow such things upon them as are needfull, yet they will have their children to ask them. Unlesse therefore we ask of God the things which are his to give, as we shall not receive what we have not, so we cannot lawfully use any thing we have. Secondly, Another reason is, that we might be acquainted with God: Acquaint now thy self with God, saith Eliphaz Job 22. 21. and be at peace; thereby good shall come unto thee. Now acquaintance we know grows amongst men by conversing together, by inter∣course
and speaking to one another. So it is here, by accustoming to speak to God in prayer we grow acquainted with him: otherwise if we grow strangers to him, and he to us, we shall not dare to behold him. Thirdly, Prayer is the way to keep our hearts in order: For to come often into the presence of God, breeds an holy awe in our hearts: It makes us to call our sins to remembrance with sorrow and shame, and to be afraid to commit them: we may know it by experience; men are afraid to offend those into whose presence they must often come to ask and sue for fa∣vours, and if they have offended, they are presently ashamed, and the first thing they do, will be to sue for pardon. These are the reasons for prayer: Now let us see the reasons also why Alms are required; which are near of kinde to those for prayer. For first, we are to offer Alms to testifie our acknowledgement of whom we received, and of whom we hold what we have. For as by prayer we ask Gods creatures before we can enjoy them; so when we have them, there is another homage due for them, namely, of thanksgi∣ving, without which the use of the creature, which God gives us, is unclean and unlawfull to us. Every creature of God (saith S. Paul, 1 Tim. 4.) is good, if it be received with thanksgiving; not else. And the same Apostle 1 Cor. 10. tels us, that even those things, which according to the manner of the Gentiles, were offered unto Idols, (that is, to Devils) a Christian might lawfully eat, so it were done with thanksgiving to the true and onely God: for so he should professe,
he eat not meat of the Devils gift, or Devils Table, but of the Lords, whose of right was the earth, and the fulnesse thereof: Whether therefore, saith he, ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do else, do all to the glory of God; that is, give him the glory of the Lordship of his creature by your thanksgiving. Now our thanksgi∣ving to God for his creature, must not expresse it self in words only, but it must be also in work and deed; that is, we must yeeld him a rent and tribute of what we enjoy by his favour and blessing, which if we doe not, we lose our Tenure. This Rent is twofold; ei∣ther that which is offered unto God, for the mainte∣nance of his worship and Ministers; or that which is given for the relief of the poor, the Orphan and the Widow, which is called Alms. For not onely our riches, but our Alms are an offering unto Almighty God; So Prov. 19. 17. He that hath pity on the poore, lendeth to the Lord: and Chap. 14. 31. He that hath mercy on the poor, honoureth his Maker. And our Savi∣our will tell us at the day of Judgement, that what was done unto them, was done unto him. This then is the reason why we must give Alms, because they are the tribute of our thanksgiving, whereby we acknow∣ledge we are Gods Tenants, and hold all we have of him; that is, of the Mannor of heaven, without which duty and service we have not the lawfull use of what we possesse. Whence our Saviour tels the Pha∣risees, who stood so much upon the washing of the Cup and Platter, lest their meat and drink should be unclean; Give alms, saith he, of such things as you have, and behold all things are clean to you. Luke 11. 41.
Now that this acknowledgement of Gods Domi∣nion was the end of the Offerings of the Law, both those wherewith the Priests and Levites were main∣tained, and those wherewith the poor, and the Or∣phan, and the Widow were relieved, appears by the solemne profession of those who paid them were to make, Deut. 26. where he that brought a basket of first-fruits to the house of God, was to say, I professe this day unto the Lord, that I am come unto the Coun∣try which the Lord sware unto our Fathers for to give us. And when the Priest had taken the basket, he was to say thus; A Syrian ready to perish was my Father, and he went down into Egypt and sojourned there with a few, and became there a Nation great and mighty, and populous. And the Egyptians evil intreated us, &c. And the Lord brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and out-stretched arm, &c. And brought us into this land, and hath given us this land, even a land that floweth with milk and honey. And now, behold, I have brought thee the first-fruits of the land, which thou  Lord hast given me: and thou shalt set it (saith the Text) before the Lord thy God, and worship before the Lord thy God. This was to be done every year. But for Tithes the profession was made every third year, because then the course of all manner of Tithing came about. For two years they paid the Levites Tithe and the Festivall Tithe, the third year they paid the Le∣vites Tithe and the poor mans Tithe: So that year the course of Tithing being finished, the party was to make a solemne profession: When thou hast made an end (saith the Lord) of Tithing all the Tithes of thine increase, the third year, which is the year of Ti∣thing,
(that is, when the Tithing course finisheth) and hast given it to the Levite, the Stranger, the Father∣lesse, and the Widow, that they may eat within thy gates and be filled: Then thou shalt say before the Lord thy God; I have brought away the hallowed thing out of mine house, and also have given it to the Levite, and to the Stranger, to the Fatherlesse, and to the Widow, according to all the Commande∣ments which thou hast commanded me.—Look down from thy holy habitation from heaven, and blesse thy people Israel, and the land which thou hast given us, as thou swarest to our Fathers, a land that floweth with milk and honey. What we have seen in these two sorts, is to be sup∣posed to be the end of all other Offerings in pios usus, (which were not sacrifices) namely, to acknowledge God to be the Lord and giver of all. As we see in that royall Offering which David with the Princes and Chieftains of Israel made for the building of the Temple, 1 Chron. 29. where David acknowledgeth thus; Thine ô Lord is the Kingdom, and thou art exal∣ted as Head over all: Both riches and honour come of thee, and thou reignest over all, and in thine hand is power and might, and in thine hand it is, to make great and to give strength unto all. Now therefore our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious Name.—For all things come of thee, and of thine hand have we given thee. For this reason there was never time since God first gave the Earth to the sons of men, wherein this acknowledgement was not made by setting apart of something of that he had given them, to that purpose. In the state of Paradise among all the trees in the gar∣den,
which God gave man freely to enjoy, one tree was Noli me tangere, and reserved to God as holy, in token that he was Lord of the garden: So that the first sin of Mankinde for the species of the fact was Sacriledge, in profaning that which was holy. For which he was cast out of Paradise, and the Earth cur∣sed for his sake, because he had violated the signe of his fealty unto the great Landlord of the whole earth. Might I not say, that many a man unto this day is cast out of his Paradise, and the labours of his hands cursed for the same sin? But to go on. After mans ejection out of Paradise, the first ser∣vice that ever we read was performed unto God, was of this kinde: Abel bringing the best of his flock, and Cain of the fruit of his ground for an Offering or Pre∣sent unto the Lord. The first spoils that ever we read gotten from an Enemy in war, paid tithes to Melchisedek the Priest of the most high God, as an ac∣knowledgement that he had given Abraham the Vi∣ctory. Melchisedek blessing God in his name to be the possessor of heaven and earth, and to have delivered his enemies into his hand. To which Abraham said A∣men by paying him Tithes of all. Iacob promiseth God, that if he would give him any thing, (for at that time he had nothing) he would give him the tenth of what he should give him: Which is as much to say, as he would acknowledge and professe him to be the giver, after the accustomed manner. For the time of the Law, I may skip over that; it is well enough known, no man will deny it. But let us come to the time of the Gospel, which though it hath freed us from the bondage of typicall Ele∣ments,
yet hath it not freed us from the possession of our Fealty unto God as Lord of the whole earth. 'Twere strange me thinks to affirm it: I am sure the ancient Church next the Apostles thought other∣wise. I will quote for a witnesse Irenaeus, who Lib. 4. cap. 32. tels us that our Saviour, when he took part of the Viands of his last Supper, and giving thanks with them, consecrated them into a Sacrament of his body and blood, set his Church an example of dedi∣cating part of the creature in Dominicos usus; Domi∣nus (saith he) dans discipulis suis consilium primitias Deo offerre ex suis creaturis, non quasi indigenti, sed ut ipsi nec infructuosi, nec ingrati sint, eum qui ex cre∣atura panis est, accepit & gratias egit, &c. Et novi Testamenti novam docuit oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens in universo mundo offert Deo, ei qui alimenta nobis praestat, primitias suorum munerum in novo Testamento. But this is no proper occasion to follow this argument any further: I will therefore leave it, and adde a second reason why God requires Alms and such like offerings at our hands. Namely, that we might not forget God: our bles∣sed Saviour Mat. 6. and Luk. 12. 33, &c. speaking of this very matter of alms, Lay not up (saith he) for your selves treasures upon earth; but ay up for your selves treasures in heaven:—For where your treasure is, there will your heart be. The proper evill of abundance is to forget God and our dependence up∣on him: the remedy whereof most genuine and na∣turall is, to pay him a rent of what we have: So shall we always think of our Landlord, and lift up our hearts to heaven in whatsoever we receive and enjoy.
Yea, when this service is so acceptable to God, that he promiseth a great reward to those who thus ho∣nour and acknowledge him, how can it choose but detain our hearts in heaven in that respect also; when we shall so often think of God, not onely as the Lord and giver of what we have, but as the rewarder also of the acknowledgement we perform?
PSAL. 112. 6. Psa. 112. 6. The Righteous shall be in everlasting remem∣brance. A Word fitly spoken, saith Solomon, is like Ap∣ples of Gold in pictures of Silver; that is, gracefull and comely: so is a Text of Scripture fitly chosen, and rightly applied to the occasion. Such an one, as I take it, is this I have now read, not chosen by me, but ap∣pointed by order to be used at these times of com∣memoration. I shall need no other preface to com∣mend it to your attention: Let us therefore see what is the sense and meaning thereof. The Righteous; that is, the bountifull: shall be in everlasting remembrance: In remembrance with God; in remembrance with men: with God; in the world to come, and in this world: with men, how, and in what manner? These are the severall heads I shall treat of; and first of the first, the Subject; The Righ∣teous, or the bountifull man. Righteousnesse in a speciall sense, in the Hebrew and the rest of the Orientall Tongues of kinde to it, signi∣fies Beneficence or Bounty, both the Virtue and the work; and therefore by the Hellenists or Septuagint
is it translated , the word so frequent in the New Testament, for that we call Alms. 'Tis a known place, Dan. 4. according both to the Septuagint and vulgar Latine; Peccata tua Eleemosynis redime, & ini∣quitates tuas misericordi is pauperum: where in the O∣riginall for Eleemosyna is  Iustitia, as we in our English render it; Break off thy sins by righteousnesse, and thine iniquity by shewing mercy to the poor. This notion of righteousnesse is to be found thrice together in the 12. of Tobit, ver. 8. Prayer (saith old Tobit there to his son) is good with fasting, and with alms, and righteousnesse: A little with righteousnesse is better then much with unrighteousnesse: It is better to give alms, then to lay up gold. 9. For alms doth deliver from death, and shall purge away all sin. Those that ex∣ercise alms and righteousnesse, shall be filled with life. Here in the Greek copy, alms and righteousnesse are exegetically put the one to expound the other, but in the Hebrew there is but one word  for them both, that being the word in that language for . Hence in the Syriack Translation of the New Testament  is rendred by  Iustitia, and so in the Arabick. Hence Mat. 6. 1. for, Take heed that you do not your alms before men, (as we reade it) the vulgar Latine and some Greek Copies have, At∣tendite, ne justitiam vestram faciatis coram hominibus:  for . Namely, as the word charity with us, though in the larger sense it signifies our whole duty both to God and man, is restrained to sig∣nifie our liberality to the poor; so is the word Righ∣teousnesse in the Orientall Languages. If Righteousnesse therefore signifie Beneficence and
Bounty, then is the righteous according to this notion the bountifull man, or as we speak the charitable. And that it is so taken in my Text, both the generall scope of the Psalm, and the connexion with the words be∣fore and after, is proof sufficient; for before goes this; A good man sheweth favour and lendeth: he will guide his affairs with judgement: Surely he shall not be moved for ever: Then come the words of my Text; The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. After it follows this; He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor; his righteousnesse remaineth for ever: which S. Paul alledgeth 2 Cor. 9. to promote their collection for the poor Saints at Jerusalem. For illustration of this and our further information, it will not be amisse I hope, to commend to your ob∣servation some other places of Scripture where the word righteous is thus taken; as namely Psal. 37. 21. The wicked borroweth and payeth not again; but the righteous sheweth mercy and giveth. Again, Psal. 25. 26. I have been young and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous for saken, nor his seed begging their bread. He is ever mercifull and lendeth, and his seed is blessed. Here the righteous is the mercifull and bountifull; to whom namely this blessing, that his seed shall not want, is proper and peculiar. The same use is, Prov. 10. 2. Treasures of wickednesse profit nothing, but righte∣ousnesse delivereth from death. The same is repeated again cap. 11. 4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath, but righteousnesse delivereth from death. Where righ∣teousnesse to be taken for alms is apparent out of To∣bit 12. where it is so applied and rendred, namely, Alms doth deliver from death. I could adde also
another place, Prov. 21. 28. but these shall be suffi∣cient. Hence appears their error who conceive of the na∣ture of Alms, as of an arbitrary thing, which they may do if they will, or not do, without sin; as that which carries no obligation with it, but is left freely to every mans discretion. And this makes some contend so much, to have the Priests maintenance granted to be eleemosynary, that so they might be at liberty to give something or nothing as they listed. But if that were so, yet if Alms be Iustitia in the Hebrew tongue, and the language which our Saviour spake. If our Savi∣our call'd them Iustitia, when he mentioned them, who dare affirm then, that Iustitia implies no obli∣gation, or that a man may leave it undone without sinne? So much for the subject, The Righteous: The next is the Praedicate, shall be in everlasting remembrance: In remembrance, I said, with God and men: with God, in the life to come, and this life: Let us consider the first, The world to come. It is certain, that at the day of Judgement we shall receive our doom, according to our works of charity and mercy; and that of all the works that a Christi∣an man hath done, these alone have that peculiar pri∣viledge to bee then brought in expresse remem∣brance before God: Come ye blessed of my Father, in∣herit the Kingdome prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stran∣ger and ye took me in; naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto
me, &c. For asmuch as ye have done thus unto the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. Matth. 25. What doth my Text say? The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance; God remembers our good deeds, when he rewards them, (as he doth our prayers when he hears them;) If to remember then, be to re∣ward, an everlasting reward is an everlasting remem∣brance. 'Tis remarkable that this priviledge which the works of Bounty and Mercy shall have at the day of Judgement, was not unknown to the Jews them∣selves: for so we read in the Chaldee Paraphrast up∣on Ecclesiastes; Futurum est ut Dominus mundi dicat omnibus justis ante se constitutis, Vade, gusta cum gaudio panem tuum, ut statutum est, pro pane quem dedisti pau∣peribus & obscuris qui esuriebant; & bibe corde bono vinum quod repositum est tibi in horto Eden, (id est, Pa∣radiso) pro vino quod miseuisti pauperibus & obscuris qui sitiebant: quia ecce modò accepta sunt opera tua bona coram Domino. The reason of this prelation of works of mercy at that great day is, because all we can expect at the hands of our heavenly Father is meerly of his mercy and bounty: we can hope for nothing but mercy, without mercy we are undone; according to that of Nehemiah in his last Chap. Remember me, ô Lord, con∣cerning this, and spare me according to the greatnesse of thy mercy. Now in those that are to be partakers of mercy, the divine wisdome requires this congruity, that they may be such as have been ready to shew mercy unto others, judging them altogether unwor∣thy of mercy at his hands who have afforded no mer∣cy to their brethren: for so the Scripture tels us, that
they shall have judgement without mercy, that have shewn no mercy. The tenour of our Petition for for∣givenesse of sins in the Lords Prayer, runs with this condition, As we forgive them that trespasse against us. And who can reade without trembling the Parable of the unmercifull servant in the Gospel, to whom his Lord revoked the Debt he meant to have forgi∣ven him, because he shewed no mercy to his fellow-servant, who owed him a far lesse Debt? Shouldst thou not, saith he, have shewed compassion to thy fellow-ser∣vant, as I shewed compassion unto thee? This rule of congruity, I say, is the reason why at the day of our great account, we shall be judged according to our works of mercy and bounty: To do as we would be done to, hath place not onely between man and man, but between God and men. Nor is this I speak of, manifest by the form of our last sentence onely, but by other Scriptures beside: what else means that of our Saviour, Luke 16. Make unto your selves friends of the unrighteous Mammon, (that is, of these slippery and deceitfull riches, for  in the Scriptures Dialect is ) that when ye fail, they may receive you into ever∣lasting Tabernacles? Or what means that of S. Paul 1 Tim. 6. 17. Charge them that be rich in this world,—that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God,—That they do good, that they be rich in good works, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternall life? Laying up a good foundation, &c. in the Greek,
. Here it is observable that works of Beneficence are said to be , or the foundati∣on of the reward we shall receive in the life to come. If any but S. Paul had said so, we should have gone near to have excepted against it for an error: Works the foundation of eternall life? No, that shall not need: but the foundation of that blessed sentence we shall receive at the last day for them, and that is evi∣dent by the form thereof, which we have alledged: whatsoever is meant, a great priviledge sure is here∣by implied, that these works have above others. A like place to this we have in the old Testament, with application particularly to Alms or works of mercy, Tobit 4. 9. For thou layest up for thy self a good treasure against the day of necessity: in the Greek it is, , &c. which answers to the He∣brew word, . Here give me leave to tell you what a late sacred Critick hath observed concerning the word  in that place of Timothy; namely, that the signification thereof there is not Vulgar, but Hellenisticall, agreeable to the use of the Hebrew word  whereto it answers; for  signifies, as it doth, Radix or fundamentum; but besides this in the Rabbinicall Dialect it is used for Tabula contractus, a Bill of contract, a Bond or Obligation whereby such as lend are secured their loan again. That therefore  which answers  in the first sense, doth answer the same likewise in the second; and accor∣dingly the Apostles meaning to be, that those who exercise these works of beneficence do provide them∣selves as it were of a Bill or Bond, upon which they may at that day sue or plead for the award of eter∣nall
life, Vi pacti, but not Vi meriti. In the same sense he takes , 2 Tim. 2. 19. The foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal: The Lord knoweth them that are his. And let every one that nameth (or calleth upon) the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. The mentioning of a Seal here, implies a Bill of contract; for Bils of contract had their Seals appendent to them; each side whereof had his Mot∣to, the one suiting with the one party contrahent; the other with the other: That to this S. Paul al∣ludes; Gods , saith he, standeth sure; (that is, Gods Bill of contract, or his Chirographum,) having a Seal according to the manner; the one side where∣of carrieth this Motto, The Lord knoweth them that are his: the other this, Let every one that calleth upon the Name of Christ, depart from iniquity. Thus God remembreth the Righteous, or charitable man in the world to come. He remembreth him also in this: For that which the Apostle saith of godlinesse that it hath the promise of this life, as well as of that to come, is most properly and peculiarly true of this righteousnesse of bounty and mercy: other righte∣ousnesse indeed must not look for reward till hereaf∣ter, but this is wont to be rewarded now. For spirituall blessings we have the example of Cor∣nelius, who for his Almesdeeds found favour with God, to have S. Peter sent unto him, to instruct him in the saving knowledge of Christ: Thy prayers and thine Almesdeeds, said the Angel, are come up in re∣membrance before God; Now therefore send to Joppa, and inquire for one Simon Peter, &c. For temporall blessings hear what David says, Psa.
37. 25. (quoted before) I was young, saith he, and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread. He is ever mercifull and lendeth, therefore his seed is blessed. This blessing is the mercifull and charitable mans peculiar, that his children shall not want, who was liberall and open∣handed to supply the want of others. But think not that God remembers the charitable man with a tem∣porall blessing in his posterity onely; for he remem∣bers him also in his own person: Thus the same Da∣vid, Psal. 41. 1. Blessed is he that considereth the poore, the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble. 2. The Lord will preserve him and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon the earth, and thou wilt not deliver him unto the will of his enemies. 3. The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing, &c. And doth not his Son King Solomon say the same? Prov. 19. 17. He that hath pty upon the poor lendeth unto the Lord, and that which he hath given, he will pay him again. But this perhaps some will think, may be applied to the reward in the life to come: If it be, it would much illustrate that of S. Pauls  I now spake of. But Prov. 28. 27. is a place not capable of this exception; He that giveth to the poor shall not lack: but he that hi∣deth his eyes, shall have many a curse. Thus we have seen, how the righteous man is in re∣membrance with God: Now let us see how the same is and ought to be in remembrance with men: And it may be inferred from the former; for why should not we remember those whom God doth? The pra∣ctice in the Church of God hath been accor∣dingly.
The Jews, when they make mention of any of their deceased Worthies, are wont to do it with this Enco∣mium, , id est, Memoria ejus sit in benedicti∣one: Otherwhile with this, , Me∣moria ejus sit ad vitam futuri seculi. And of their Rabbies in generall, when they mention them, they say, , Magistri nostri, quorum memo∣ria sit ad benedictionem. Which encomiasticall scheme is taken from that of Solomon Pr. 10. 7. , Memoria justi sit ad benedictonem: which therefore they sometimes use unaltered to the purpose afore∣said; sometimes with addition, as Memoria Justi sit in benedictione ad vitam futuri saeculi; sometimes, Me∣moria Justi & Sancti sit ad benedictionem. These for∣mulae are frequent in their writings: Nor hath this commemorative Scheme been taken up by them (as some perhaps may suppose) since the comming of our Saviour in the time of their dispersion; but was used long before, as may appear Ecclus. 45. 1. where Moses is thus remembred, Moses beloved of God and men, , whose memoriall is blessed. And in the next Chapter like mention is made of the Judges of Israel; namely, The Judges every one by name, whose heart went not a whoring, nor Eccl. 46. 11 departed from the Lord, , Let their memory be in benediction. So of Iudas Mac∣cabaeus, 1 Mac. 3. 7. He grieved many Kings, and made Iacob glad with his acts, , His memoriall is, or let his memoriall be bles∣sed for ever. But what is the meaning of this Formula? what is it for the memory of the righteous to be ,
or in benedictionem? The Septuagints Translation of that Prov. 10. 7. (whence, as I told you, this form of honourable remembrance is taken) will soon resolve us; for they in stead of the words , Me∣moria justi in benedictione, , the memory of the just is with praises. To make men∣tion therefore of the righteous by way of benedicti∣on, is to praise them, for the word , or , to blesse, in Scripture hath a treble notion: First, to speak well of: Secondly, to speak well for: Thirdly, to do well unto. To speak well of, is to praise; So we are said to blesse God, when we praise and glorifie him: Benedic anima mea Domino; Blesse the Lord ô my soul; that is, praise him. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; that is, praised. Blesse the Lord all ye Nations; that is, praise him: and so every where in the Psalms. The second notion, to speak well for, is to pray for: So the Priest is said to blesse the people, when he prays for them: The Lord blesse you, and save you, the Lord make his holy countenance to shine upon you, and be mercifull unto you: So other blessings of the like kinde, are prayers for those, over whom they are pro∣nounced. The third notion of blessing is, to do good unto, to bestow some gift or good upon: Thus God is said to have blessed man, when he said unto him, In∣crease and multiply, replenish the earth and subdue it; that is, He endowed him with these gifts. In thy seed shall all the Nations of the world be blessed; that is, re∣ceive some great benefit. So God is said to have blessed the Patriarchs when he made them to thrive, and gave them wealth and riches; according to that of Solomon, Prov. 10. 22. The blessing of the Lord ma∣keth
rich, and he addeth no sorrow with it; namely, such as is wont to accompany riches gotten without Gods blessing. Hence , or  in Scripture signi∣fies a gift or present, bounty or beneficence: the pre∣sent of cattell which Iaacob provided for his brother Esau, when he went to meet him, is all that Story through call'd his Blessing: The Presents which Da∣vid sent of his prey to the Elders of Judah, 1 Sam. 30. 26. are there call'd Blessings. And in the New Testament, 2 Cor. 9. the collection at Corinth for the poor Saints at Jerusalem, is thrice called , their blessing, which we translate Bounty. I thought good to be a little diligent in this explication, that we might be the better able to discern what kinde of re∣membrance of righteous men deceased is commen∣ded unto us in that Scripture, The memory of the righ∣teous is with blessing: whence not the Jew onely, as you have heard, but the Christian also seem to have derived their practice in that particular, which I am now to shew. For the Christian in this point hath been no whit short of the Jew, but exceeded them rather, not in the later only, but in those better and primitive times: witnesse those anniversary remembrances of the Mar∣tyrs and Saints deceased; the appointing of Festivall days for their memoriall; the custome to assemble at their Sepulchres, to make Panegyrick orations in their honour; and above all, that ancient and so long continued custome without known beginning, to commemorate at the Holy Table, when the Eucharist was celebrated, the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Euangelists, Martyrs, and Confessors: All which
tended to this, that the memory of the righteous might be with blessing. In the extent of which blessing the Christian went beyond the Jew: for of that three∣fold notion of blessing I now spake of; first, to speak well of, or to praise: secondly, to speak well for, or to pray for: thirdly, to do well unto; the Jews seem (not only anciently, but of Vid. Bux∣torf c. 35. late) to have used none but the first in their commemorations, namely, that of praise. But the Christian added the second of prayer and good wishes for the Saints departed, namely, for their publike acquitall and consummation at the day of Resurrection: which, had it con∣tinued in the first and originall meaning, could not be disliked; but having roved in time, (the Mother of many Superstitions and Errors) and kindled the fire of Purgatory, it was thought fit by the Authors of our Reformation, to be disused, and the blessing of the Dead to be confined to that of praise onely, name∣ly, of praising and commending them, by recounting their worthy deeds; and then secondly, of praising God for them.
NEHEM. 13. 14, 22. Nehem. 13. 14, 21. 14. Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my good deeds [Heb. ] that I have done for the house of my God, and for the offices thereof. 22. And spare me according to the greatnesse of thy mercy. THese words are the words of Nehemiah himself, by way of a short ejaculatory prayer, or Apostrophe unto Almighty God: But what were those good deeds, will you ask, which he speaks of, done for the house of his God, and the offices thereof? Of this the words going before will inform us; v. 10. I perceived, saith he, that the portions of the Levites had not been given them, whereby the Levites and the singers that did the work, were fled every one to his field. 11. Then contended I with the Rulers, and said, Why is the house of God forsaken? And I gathered them toge∣ther, and set them in their place (or station.) 12. Then brought all Iudah the tithe of the corn, and the new wine, and the oyl, unto the Treasuries (or store-houses.) 13. And I made Treasurers over the Treasuries;—such
of the Priests and Levites as were accounted faith∣full, and their office was to distribute unto their Bre∣thren. 14. Remember me, ô my God, concerning this, &c. There needs no more for understanding the mea∣ning of the words: Now therefore let us see what Lessons we may learn therefrom. And in the first place, that which is most pregnantly to be gathered thence, and best fits our turn; namely, That to make provision for the maintenance of Gods worship, and the Ministers thereof, is a worthy work, and of high esteem and favour with God: forasmuch as Nehemi∣ah commendeth himself unto the Divine favour and remembrance, under that name of having done good deeds or kindnesses unto the House of God, and the Offices thereof; a manifest argument he took them to be most pleasing and acceptable unto him. The truth of the observation appears not only by this, but by other places of Scripture both of the Old and New Testament: Let us take some survay of them. And first for the furnishing a place for Gods worship, take notice of that famous benediction and prayer of King David, when his people offered so willingly and liberally towards the building of the Temple; In the uprightnesse of my heart (saith he) I have willingly offe∣red all these things: and now I have seen with joy thy people which are present here, to offer willingly unto thee. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel our Fathers, keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare their hearts unto thee. 1 Chron. 29. 17, 18. Surely therefore it was a most excellent disposition, and such as he knew, God prized and esteemed.
For, entertainment and provision for his Prophets and Ministers, in what account God hath it, appears by his great sollicitude in his Law that they should not be neglected: Take heed to thy self (saith he, Deut. 12. 19.) that thou for sake not the Levite, as long as thou livest upon the earth: What expression can go be∣yond this? Again, by that story of the Shunamite woman, 2 King. 4. 9. who entertained the Prophet E∣lisha and made provision for him, when he should have occasion to passe that way: Behold, (said she to her husband) this is an holy man of God, which passeth by us continually. 10. Let us make I pray thee a little chamber on the wall, and let us set for him there a bed, a table, and a stool, and a candlestick, and it shall be when he commeth unto us, then he shall turn in thither. How acceptable to Almighty God was this good office done to his Prophet, appears by the double miracle he wrought for her, both in giving her a childe, when her husband was now so old she despaired; and in rai∣sing him again to life, when he was dead. But let us come now to the New Testament, and see whether the like be not to be found there; lest otherwise any might think (as some are prone enough to do) the case were now altered. And first also to begin here with the provision of a place for Gods worship; the story of that Centurion of Capernaum in S. Lukes Gospel is worthy our consideration; Who when he heard of Iesus (saith the Text) sent unto him the Elders of the Iews, beseecbing him, he would come and heal his servant. The Elders came to Iesus, and besought him instantly, saying, He was worthy for whom he should do this. Why so? For (say they) he loveth our Nation,
and hath built us a Synagogue. Luk. 7. 4, 5. Then Ie∣sus (saith the Text, without any more ado) went with them; namely, as well approving of their motive, that he who had done such a work deserved that fa∣vour should be deign'd him. Also concerning provi∣sion and entertainment for his Apostles and Mini∣sters; Are they not our Saviours own words and pro∣mise when he sent them forth? He that receiveth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet shall receive a Pro∣phets reward: Nay, He that should give them but a cup of cold water, should not lose his reward. According to which S. Paul speaking of the Philippians bounty and communication towards him; I have received (saith he) of Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you, an odour of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well∣pleasing unto God. And 2 Tim. 1. 16. concerning the like good office done him by Onesiphorus, he speaks in this manner; The Lord (saith he) give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus, for he oft refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain. The Lord grant unto him, that he may finde mercy of the Lord in that day. Which is not much unlike this of Nehemiah in my Text, if it had been spoken in the first person by Onesiphorus himself, as it is in the third by Saint Paul: Howso∣ever, who will deny, but it implies the same thing? Now then, if this be so as I think we have proved; What shall we think of the times we live in, when men account them the most religious to Godward, who do, or would unfurnish the House of God most, who rob his Priests most? But they have an excuse sufficient to bear them out, and what is that? The Priests they say have too much. If this excuse would
serve turn, some of themselves perhaps might soon have lesse then they have: for sure some body else as well as the Priest, have more then they need, and might spare some of it. But whether the Priests have too much or not, will not be the question: Suppose they had; hath God too much too? For these men consider not that the propriety of such things as these is Gods, and not the Priests; and that to change the propriety of what is sacred, by alienating thereof to a profane and private use, (I say not, by diverting it from the Priests livelihood to any other holy use, in case the Priest have more then needs;) is to rob God himself: yea, God tels us so much, Malach. 3. 8. Will a man (saith he) rob his God? (as if it were a thing intolerable, and scarce ever heard of;) yet ye (saith he) have robbed me. But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and Offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse, because ye have robbed me. (For that's the burden that goes with things consecrated, Cursed be he that alienates them.) This Malachi lived at the same time with Nehemiah, and the Jews say, 'twas Ezra; whence this exprobration of his, and this fact of Nehe∣miah in my Text, may justly seem to have relation one to the other. And thus much of my first Obser∣vation. My second is; That God rewardeth these, and so all other our good deeds and works, not for any merit or worthinesse that is in them, but of his free mercy and goodnesse; Remember me, ô my God, (saith Nehemiah) and wipe not out my good deeds: Why, is there any re∣ward due to them of Justice? No; But remember me, ô my God, and spare me according to the greatnesse, or
multitude of thy mercy. Thus he expounds himself: And S. Paul taught us even now the self-same thing in his Votum or prayer for the house of Onesiphorus, for like good service done to the Offices of Gods House; The Lord (saith he) grant unto him, that he may finde mercy of the Lord in that day; that is, the day of Judgement, which is Tempus , when every one shall receive according to his work. The controversie therefore between the Roma∣nists and us, is not, whether there be a reward promi∣sed unto our works: we know the Scripture both of the Old and New Testament is full of testimonies that way, and encourageth us to work in hope of the reward laid up for us: We know that in keeping of Gods Commandements there is great reward; Psa. 19. 11. And that unto him that soweth in righteousnesse, shall be a sure reward; Prov. 11. 18. We know our Saviour saith, Mat. 5. 12. Blessed are ye, when men revile and persecute you,—for great is your reward in heaven. Also that he that receiveth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward. And whosoe∣ver shall give a cup of gold water only, to one of his little ones in the name of a Disciple, shall not lose his reward, Mat. 10. Again, we read Luk. 6. 35. Love your enemies, Do good and lend,—and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of the Highest: we know also what S. Iohn saith, 2 Ep. v. 8. Look to your selves that ye lose not those things which ye have wrought, but that ye may receive a full reward. But the Question is, Whence this Reward commeth; whether from the worth or worthinesse of the work, as a debt of Justice due thereto; or from Gods mercy, as a recompence
freely bestowed, out of Gods gracious bounty, and not in justice due to the worth of the work it self? Which Question, me thinks, Nehemiah here in my Text may determine when he saith, Remember me ô Lord for my good deeds, according to thy great mercy. And the Prophet Hosea, Chap. 10. 12. when he biddeth us, Sow to our selves in righteousnesse, and reap in mercy. And S. Paul, Rom. 6. 23. where though he saith, that the wages of sin is death, yet when he comes to eternall life, he changeth his style, But (saith he) eternall life is , the gracious gift of God through Iesus Christ. For as for our works they are imperfect, and whatsoever they were, we owed them to him, in whom we live, and have our being, whether there were any reward or not promised for them. Neither do we hereby any whit detract from that Axiome, That God rewardeth every man according to his work: For still the question remaineth the very same, Whether there may not be as wel merces gratiae, as merces justitiae; that is, Whether God may not judge a man according to his works, when he sits up∣on the Throne of Grace, as well as when he sits upon his Throne of Justice. And we think here, that the Prophet David hath fully cleared the case in that one sentence, Psa. 62. 12. With thee, ô Lord, is mercy; for thou rewardest every one according to his work. Nay more then this; we deny not, but in some sense this reward may be said to proceed of Justice: For howsoever originally and in it self, we hold, it commeth from Gods free bounty and mercy, who might have required the work of us without all pro∣mise of reward, (for as I said, we are his creatures and
owe our being unto him) yet in regard he hath cove∣nanted with us, and tied himself by his word and pro∣mise to conferte such a reward; the reward now in a sort proveth to be an Act of Justice, namely, of Iu∣stitia promissi on Gods part, not of merit on ours: Even as in forgiving our sins (which in it self all men know to be an Act of Mercy) he is said to be Faith∣full and Iust, 1 Ioh. 1. 9. namely, of the faithfull per∣formance of his promise: for promise we know once made, amongst honest men is accounted a due debt. But this argues no more any worthinesse of equality in the work towards the obtaining of the reward, then if a promise of a Kingdome were made to one, if he should take up a straw; it would follow thence, that the lifting up of a straw, were a labour of a work worth a Kingdome, howsoever he that should so pro∣mise were bound to give it. Thus was Moses carefull to put the children of Is∣rael in minde touching the Land of Canaan, (which was a type of our eternall habitation in heaven) that it was a Land of promise, and not of merit, which God gave them to possesse, not for their righteousnesse, or for their upright heart, but that he might perform the word, which he sware unto their Fathers, Abraham, Isant, and Iaacob. Whereupon the Levites in this book of Ne∣hemiah, say in their prayer to God; Thou madest a Co∣venant with Abraham, to give to his seed the Land of the Canaanites, and hast performed thy word, because thou art just; that is, true and faithfull in keeping thy promise. Now because the Lord hath made a like promise of the Crown of life to them that love him, S. Paul sticks not in like manner to attribute this also
to Gods Justice; Henceforth (saith he, 2 Tim. 4. 8.) is laid up for me a crown of righteousnesse, which the righteous Iudge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but to all them that love his appearing. Upon which S. Bernard most sweetly, as he is wont; Est ergo quam Paulus expectat, corona Iustitiae; sed justitiae Dei, non suae: Iustum quippe est, ut reddat quod debet, debet autem quod pollicitus est. Lastly, for the word merit; It is not the name we so much scruple at, as the thing wont now adays to be understood thereby; otherwise we confesse the name might be admitted, if taken in the large and more generall sense, for any work having relation to a reward to follow it; or whereby a reward is quo∣cunque modo obtained; In a word, as the correlatum indifferent either to merces gratiae or justitiae: For thus the Fathers used it; and so might we have done still, if some of us had not grown too proud, and mistook it, since we think it better and safer to disuse it: even as Physitians are wont to prescribe their Patients recovered of some desperate disease, not to use any more that meat or diet, which they finde to have caused it. And here give me leave to acquaint you with an Observation of a like alteration of speech, and I sup∣pose for the self-same cause happening under the old Testament; namely, of  changed into , Righteousnesse into that which findeth mercy: for so the Septuagint and the new Testament with them render the Hebrew word  Iustitia; not on∣ly when it is taken for beneficience or alms, (as in that Tongue it is the ordinary word) in which use we are
wont to expound it works of mercy; but where there is no relation to Alms or Beneficence at all. Whence I gather that by , the Septuagint meant not, as we commonly take it, works of mercy, but rather works whereby we finde mercy at the hands of God. I will give you a place which me thinks is very pregnant, Deut. 6. 24, 25. where we reade thus, And the Lord commanded us to do all these Statutes, (you may see there what they are) to fear the Lord our God, for our good always, that he might preserve us alive, as at this day. And it shall be our Righteousnesse, if we observe to do all these Commandements before the Lord, as he hath commanded us. Here the Septuagint (for, And it shall be our Righteousnesse) have, , and it shall be our , that whereby we shall finde mercy at the hands of God, if we ob∣serve to do all these Commandements, &c. This place will admit no evasion; for there is no reference to Alms here: And indeed all our Righteousnesse is no∣thing else but , that whereby we finde mercy at the hands of God; and no marvell if works of mer∣cy, as to relieve the poor and needy, be specially so called, for they above all other are the works where∣by we shall finde mercy, and receive the reward of Blisse at the last day. And so much of my second Observation. I come now to my third; That it is lawfull to doe good works, Intuitu mercedis: It is plain that Nehe∣miah here did so; Remember me, ô my God, concerning this, &c. So did Moses of whom it is said, Heb. 11. That he chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; estee∣ming
the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures of AEgypt; for, saith the Text,  (aspi∣ciebat vel intuebatur , He had respect unto the recompence of Reward. And I confesse, it seems an unreasonable thing to me, that that which is made the end (though but in part) of the Action, should not be at all looked unto by the Agent, when as Finis is principium Actionis; and that which God hath promised unto us, as an encouragement to make us work with the more alacrity, should not be thought on, nor looked to in our working. Do not they, who would perswade this, go the way to discourage men from good works, by removing out of their sight, the encouragement which God hath given them? But they object: The obedience of Gods children ought to be filiall, that is, free and not mercenary, as that of hirelings. I answer; Obedience, which is on∣ly for reward, without all respect or motive of love and duty, is the obedience of an Hireling; not that which acknowledgeth the tie of obedience absolute, and the reward no otherwise due, then of his Fathers free love and bounty, as every true childe of God doth, and ought to do. They object again that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 5. Charity seeks not her own: now say they, the works of Gods children must proceed from love and chari∣ty. I answer; what though Charity seeks not her own, may not a charitable man so much as look or hope for his own, or have an eye to what is promised him? But this place is altogether misapplied and abused: For that property of charity now mentioned (as some also of the rest of that Chapter) concerns only our
charity towards men, and not our charity towards God: the meaning thereof being, That a charitable man will sooner lose his own, then by seeking or con∣tending for it, break the band of charity. To conclude: The Use that follows from all this Discourse shall be only this; That if Almighty God remember them, who have done good deeds unto his House and the Offices thereof; much more ought we who are partakers of the comfort and benefit of such bounty, to remember and honour them with a thank∣full celebration of their Names.
MAT. 10. 41, Mat. 10. 41 He that receiveth a Prophet in the name of a Pro∣phet, shall receive a Prophets reward. OUR blessed Saviour giving his Apostles their mission to preach the Gospel, unfur∣nished with outward things, and forewar∣ning them what harsh and unkinde usage they and their successors were like to finde amongst men: for the better encouragement of such as should entertain and minister unto them; he pronounceth, That whosoever received them, received him, and he that received him, received him that sent him: Where∣by it appeareth how honourable an office it was to af∣ford them entertainment, and such as the noblest need not be ashamed of. But because the hope of reward is the most forcible spur to all undertakings, he addeth that too in the words of my Text, He that receiveth, saith he, a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall re∣ceive a Prophets reward: that is, he that receiveth a Prophet, not for any respect, but quatenus talis, be∣cause he is a Prophet, shall have a Prophets re∣ward. Which words contain in them evidently these two Propositions: First, that there is some speciall and eminent degree of reward due unto a Prophet above
other men. Secondly, That he that shall entertain a Prophet, and do any good office unto him under that name, that is, for his office sake, shall be partaker of that Reward. Of these two I intend to treat, begin∣ning with the first, the more generall. That there shall be differing degrees of Reward in the life to come, is evident by sundry places of Scri∣pture: As first, from that so often iterated passage, wherein God is said to reward every man according to his works; which is not to be understood only of the differing quality of our works, good and evill, which God rewards accordingly, the one with everlasting blisse, the other with eternall fire, (as some here ex∣cept) but also of the differing works of just men compared together, as is manifest by that 1 Cor. 3. 8. where the Apostle comparing his own and Apollo's work together, saying, He had planted, and Apollo wa∣tered; addes, That both should receive their reward, according to their work; that is, as their work differed, so should their reward do. In the second place the same is represented by that Parable, Luke 19. of the ten servants who received of their Lord, being to go into a far Countrey, ten pounds to trade with till his return. At what time he that had increased his pound to ten pounds, was made ruler over ten Cities; He that had gained but five pounds, over five Cities, and so the rest, according as they had improved the stock given them. A third place is that 1 Cor. 15. 42. There is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, and another glory of the Stars, for one star differeth from another in glory. So also is the Resurrection of the dead. Here is the full stop, and not the words to be referred to that
which follows, to wit, That the body is sown in corrup∣tion, and riseth again in incorruption, as some would have them. For the Apostle speaks here of the diffe∣rence of things heavenly and glorious, (one star, saith he, differs from another in glory;) and not of the dif∣ference between glorious, and inglorious, corruptible and incorruptible: For this belongs to his other si∣militude; There are celestiall bodies, and bodies terre∣striall, but the glory of the celestiall is one, and the glory of the terrestriall is another. A fourth place is that 2 Cor. 9. 6. where the Apostle speaking of the reward of beneficence, avoucheth, that he which soweth spa∣ringly, shall reap sparingly, and he that soweth bounti∣fully, shall reap bountifully. Fifthly, that speech of our Saviour to the twelve, Mat. 19. imports as much; Behold, we, saith S. Peter, have forsaken all and follow∣ed thee: ; what shall we have therefore? Verily I say unto you, that ye which have followed me, , in the Regeneration, or Resurrection, when the Son of man shall sit upon the throne of his Glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. S. Luke relates it upon another occa∣sion; whereby it appears our Saviour uttered it more then once, You (saith he to the Twelve) are they which have continued with me in my temptations: Therefore I appoint you a Kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdome, and sit on Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. Luk. 22. 28, &c. Whatsoever is meant by the reward intimated in this expression, for the quality thereof: 'Tis plain there is some peculiar and more eminent degree of glory here promised the A∣postles,
which shall not be common to others with them: First, because it is the reward of their proper and peculiar service unto Christ, as the Text shews. Secondly, because these twelve thrones in regard of their number, can befit no more but these twelve. Thirdly, supposing the twelve Tribes of Israel here mentioned, to be likewise in a condition of blisse and happinesse; it must needs be, that those who sit upon twelve Thrones to judge, that is, to govern them, must be in a higher degree of dignitie, then those over whom they shall be set: Whatsoever therefore the meaning of the reward be, thus much may be ga∣thered from the description thereof, That there shall be differing degrees of glory in the Kingdome of Christ to come. To conclude; It hath been the an∣cient and constant Tradition of the Church, testified by the unanimous consent of all the Fathers, was ne∣ver questioned by any, untill that Peter Martyr in this last age Age first began to doubt thereof, and others since more boldly adventured to contradict it. Their main reasons or objections are these two: First, that the Reward to come depends not upon the virtue or dignity of our works, but only upon the merit and satisfaction of Christ: But his merits and satisfaction is uniform and the same to all: Ergo, The Reward also which is to be given by virtue thereof shall be so. This Objection proceeds from that scru∣pulosity, which many of ours have to admit of any relation or connexion between our works and the re∣ward to come: Whence also is that, that they should not be done intuitu mercedis; which is an assertion repugnant to the tenour of the Scripture, where the
Holy Ghost is wont to ground his Exhortations up∣on the hope and promise of reward. Now what an unreasonable conceit is it to think that where wages is promised for the encouragement of the labourer, the labourer should be bound to work without having any eye or respect to his wages? But to the objection I answer thus; That it is true, the merits and satisfa∣ction of Christ is the foundation of our reward, name∣ly, that alone which makes our works capable there∣of, without which they were not: neverthelesse it is true also, that our works are the subject of Reward; and the same merit of Christ, makes differing works capable of a different reward. Their other objection hath a little more likelihood, and seems therefore somewhat more difficult to an∣swer: It is taken from the Parable, Mat. 20. where the Kingdome of heaven is compared to a Vineyard, the Master whereof went out in the morning to hire labourers, and agreed with them for a peny a day: Three hours after, or at the third hour, and so again at the sixth and ninth hours; yea at the eleventh, but an hour before Sun went down, he did likewise. And when they came all to receive their wages, he gave the last hired as much as he had agreed with the first, to wit, every one a peny, neither more nor lesse: Whence it seems to follow, that the reward to come, signified by the peny, shall not be proportioned accor∣ding to the difference of works, but be one and the same to all. I answer; First, the Parable proves no more but this; that the sooner or later comming of men into the Vineyard of the Church, (for all were not to be
called at one time, nor in one age) shall not make their reward greater or lesser: not that the reward shall not be different according to the diversity of our works. Secondly, I adde, that this Parable hath re∣spect to the Churches of the Jews and Gentiles not called, nor to be called at the same time: For the Jews were hired into the Vineyard betimes in the morning, the Gentiles not till the day was far spent; yet shall they by the goodnesse of their heavenly Ma∣ster receive the same reward of eternall life, which was promised to the Jew, with whom the Covenant was first made, and who bare the heat of the day, whilest the other stood idle. Besides, in the new Vineyard of the Gospel the turn is changed; for into it (because the Jews would not) the Gentiles have first been hired, though at severall hours, the Jew be∣ing not to come in untill the eleventh hour; yet when Christ comes to give us wages, shall receive his peny, that is, eternall life as well as we. This to be the genuine scope of the Parable, may be gathered by that which is presently subjoined by our Saviour as it were to be the key thereof. So the last (saith he) shall be first, and the first last; , for many are called, but few are chosen: which I understand thus; The last, that is, the Gentiles who came in last, shall be the first par∣takers of Christs Kingdome. The Jews who were first in Covenant, and had wrought so long before us in Gods Vineyard, shall be last in the Covenant of Christ, and not converted till the fulnesse of the Gen∣tiles be come in: For though many of them were in∣vited at the first comming of Christ, yet few or none
obeyed, and so the Nation became not of his peculi∣um, but stands yet rejected; . To the like purpose is the same speech used by our Saviour, Luk. 13. They shall come, saith he, from the East, and from the West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit down in the Kingdom of God. And behold, there are last, which shall be first, and there are first, which shall be last. What means this? Out of the eighth of S. Matthew, where the same pas∣sage is related, we shall hear it expounded; for there the words run thus, Many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Ia∣cob, in the Kingdom of heaven: But the children of the Kingdom (that is, the whole generation of Israel, who received not the Gospel, at the Preaching of Christ and his Apostles, and all the generations since, who have continued in unbeleef) shall be cast out into utter darknesse. And here by the way, because the Parable useth the notion of a day, to signifie a time of many ages; it will not be altogether unseasonable to note, that the Metaphor may appear the easier, how that the Scri∣pture often elsewhere cals the whole time of mans pilgrimage in this world, by the name of a Day; As, To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. S. Paul, Heb. 3. 13. Exhort one another , every day, whilest it is called to Day; where we say Day to include every day. And I beleeve we are thus to understand Day in the Lords Prayer, in that Peti∣tion, Give us this day our daily Bread; that is, the whole time we live in hoc seculo. For in stead of S. Mat∣thews This Day, spoken after the Hebrew notion, Saint
Luke hath in the same Petition, , that is, eve∣ry day. Therefore S. Matthews Hodie, must compre∣hend S. Lukes Every day, if the sense of the Petition in both of them be the same, as I beleeve it is. Nay more then this; The world to come, even seculum aeternitatis, or eternity it self is likewise termed a day, 2 Pet. 3. ult. Domino nostro, saith he, & servatori Iesu Christo, sit gloria & nunc, , & in di∣em aeternitatis: A long Day indeed. But this obiter. Thus having cleared my Proposition in thesi, or in generall; That there shall be differing degrees of glory in the reward to come: It remains that I make it good in the hypothesis concerning a Prophet; namely, that to them who instruct others in the ways and will of God, which is the Office of a Prophet, there be∣longs a preheminence of reward, above and besides that which is common to all Saints. This prehemi∣nence of glory the Schoolmen term Aureola, that is, an Additament of felicity to that essentiall glory in the Vision of God, which they term Aurea: This Aureola or Coronet to be added to the Crown of glory, they ascribe to three sorts of persons; To Vir∣gins, to Martyrs, and to Doctors or Prophets. The two first are out of my scope: The third, of Prophets, let us see how it is proved out of Scripture. First therefore it is apparent from my Text, He that recei∣veth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward; Ergo, there is some speciall or pecu∣liar reward belonging to a Prophet, and that too an eminent one; otherwise our Saviours speech will have no enforcement in it, as he that considers there∣of may easily see. The second is, Dan. 12. 3. where
the Angel prophesying of the Resurrection to be at the end of Time, and saying, That many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake; some to ever∣lasting life, and some to shame, and everlasting con∣tempt; he addes, And those that be wise (that is, have learned the true wisdome, which consists in the fear of God) shall shine as the brightnesse of the firmament. But those that turn many unto righteousnesse (that is, the Teachers and Instructers) as the stars for ever and ever. Here the difference between those that teach and are taught, is as much as between the light of the Stars, and the brightnesse of the Firmament. Some will have the whole sentence to speak of the eminency of glory laid up for Prophets, Translating  in the first place not docti or intelligentes, but Doctores: The Teachers shall shine as the brightnesse of the firma∣ment, and they that turn many unto righteousnesse, as the stars for ever and ever: but I have followed that interpretation, which our Translators thought most likely. Thirdly, to this eminency of glory the Angel seems also to have respect in the end of that Chapter, when he says, But go thy way Daniel, till the end be; for thou shalt rest, and stand up in thy lot at the end of days: in sorte tua, i. in sorte Prophetarum. And this perhaps may be that too which our Saviour intends, Mat. 5. Qui fecerit & docuerit, magnus vocabitur (i. erit) in regno coelorum. The reason of all this is, because those who teach & convert others to righteousness, have an interest and a kind of title to all the good works which they shall do: How then can their reward but be great and eminent, when not onely their own works, but the works of their converts and disciples, shall be brought into their account?
A matter, if we consider it, of no small encourage∣ment and comfort unto us, whom God hath placed in this condition to be Teachers and Instructers of others, if so be we bury not our Talent in a Napkin, but imploy it for the advantage of our Lord and Ma∣ster. For it is not the habit or faculty, but the work, which shall reap the reward we speak of: Happy are we therefore, if we neglect not this opportunity of blisse, which God hath given us. And thus having done with the first Proposition I undertook, I come unto the second; which is, That he that receiveth a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall be partaker of a Prophets reward: He that receives, that is, doth any good office, or deserves well of a Prophet: For this to be the meaning, may appear by that which follows; He that receiveth a righteous man, in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous mans reward; where righteous is to be taken by way of eminency, for one of eminent sanctity, such as among the Jews had therefore the sirname of Iusti, as Simeon Iustus, Iacobus Iustus, and other the like. Then in the next words the expression is varied; Who∣soever shall give to drink to one of these little ones, a cup of cold water in the name of a disciple, shall not lose his reward: whence I say we may gather what good of∣fice, the word receiving before used, intimated to us, namely, to relieve, maintain, support, and the like. He therefore that thus receives a Prophet, shall be par∣taker, saith our Saviour, of a Prophets reward; that is, have an eminent reward, or of the quality of a Pro∣phet, though himself be none. The reason is, because he that supports and enables
a Prophet for his duty, hath an interest in his work, and consequently in the reward that belongs unto it: This appears by the contrary, because he that main∣tains and abets those, who commit an evil act, makes himself guilty of their sin, and so of the punishment due to the same. An example whereof we have in that of the Benjamites in the Book of Judges, who by abetting the men of Gibeah, who committed that foul abomination with the Levites Wife, made them∣selves guilty of their sin, and brought that hideous judgement, which at first was deserved only by a few sons of Beliall, upon the Heads of the whole Tribe: It is a known story. Now it is par ratio for a man to entitle himself to anothers good works, as to his ill. But there is a modification in the Text, whereup∣on this reward we speak of depends, otherwise not to be looked for: And that is, This good office must be done in nomine Prophetae, not for any other respect, then as he is, and because he is a Prophet: He that recei∣veth a Prophet in nomine Prophetae, shall receive a Prophets reward: not he that receives him onely for some personall or by-respect, because he is his kins∣man, friend, or friends ally, or which is the ground of the most respect the Prophet gets among the most now adays, because he is one of their own side and fa∣ction; but setting all such respects aside, eo nomine quia Prophet, with meer respect to their office and calling, or because they are (as Valens and Valentini∣an in their Rescript apud Theodoretum cals them) , Procuratores magni Regis. I may tell you that this is no ordinary thing now adays;
we may perhaps finde some that can be content to make much of the Prophet for some personall quali∣ties of his, or perhaps because he hath abilities above ordinary, or because it may be he is like to further the way they wish good luck to, or that they may gain repute among some sort of men, or other respects of like nature. But are there many which regard them in nomine Prophetae? How then comes it to passe that their courtesies are so appropriate to the persons of some, that they shew no respect or esteem to the calling in others? Whence comes that Unchristian, or indeed Athe∣isticall language, A base Priest, A paultry Priest? It would never have grieved me, if any other had ser∣ved me thus, but to be served thus by a base Priest, who can endure it? Tell me in good earnest, is this to honour a Priest or a Prophet in nomine Prophetae; or not rather point-blank unto it, to reproach and dis∣honour him under that reverend Name; that is, to de∣spise and reproach the Calling it self? For can a man honour that condition, the name whereof he thinks to be a reproach? Is any man wont to say, A base Lord, A base Knight, A base Gentleman, A base Christian? No: And why? because he accounts them all terms and titles of honour. Judge then by this, what ac∣count they make of Gods Ambre, who turn the very title of their Calling into a name of reproach, and what reward by proportion they are like to merit at Christs hands: Not a Prophets I am sure; and whe∣ther a Christians or not, themselves may judge. 'Tis often, and too often true indeed, that for our persons we are unworthy of any better respect, but even then
it best appears, whether a man hath respect to the Cal∣ling eo nomine, when there is nothing in the Person to move him to it. But there is another sort of men, who honour not a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, yet behinde, namely, such as rob and spoil them of their livelihood and daily bread, and not onely themselves give no∣thing to enable and encourage them the better to per∣form their Ministery; but take from them severall ways, that which the piety and bounty of their Ance∣stors hath allotted them; yea to many, if not to the most, no gain or theft is more sweet, then that which is gotten out of the Priests portion: But whether it will prove so at that day, when the just God shall re∣ward every man according to his works, may be greatly feared. I told you a little before, that the rea∣son, why he that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall be partaker of a Prophets reward, is, be∣cause he that supports and enables a Prophet to do his duty, hath thereby an interest in his work, and conse∣quently to the reward due to the same. If this be so; what can they look for, who by subtracting their dai∣ly bread from them, hinder and disenable them from the free and chearfull performance of their duty, by distracting them with the cares of providing for their bodily life? Do they not derive upon themselves the guilt of whatsoever impediment comes hereby to the propagation of the Kingdom of Christ? Shall not the losse of every soul that perisheth for want of due provision to maintain an able Minister, be cast in their account at the last day? I will speak nothing now of the burden which Sacriledge it self, being a robbing
of God, carries with it, (see Prov. 20. 25. It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy; and after vows to make enquiry;) nor of those dreadfull execra∣tions, which the Donors of such things were wont antiquo ritu, to lay upon the heads of all such as should divert them to profane uses, wherewith these men willingly and wilfully involve themselves. But for a close, let us join in an humble and hearty ac∣knowledgement of Gods goodnesse and mercy, and say, Blessed be God our heavenly Father, who not∣withstanding the malignity of many, hath not left us destitute, but in every age hath raised up some to shew kindnesse unto the Prophets, and to provide enter∣tainment for them: Witnesse the goodly structures, and liberall endowments in our two Seminaries for the entertainment and education of Prophets and Prophets Sons; being the bounty of those Worthies, the fruits of whose Piety and Devotion, the whole Church of God by his Divine goodnesse doth enjoy; To whose blessed Names, as their deserts challenge from us, let all due honour and thankfulnesse be for ever rendred.
DEUT. 33. 8. Deut. 33. 8. And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and thy Vrim be with thy Holy One. . THis verse is part of that blessing where∣with Moses the man of God blessed the children of Israel before his death; and these words are part of the blessing of Levi: a blessing which much exceeds those that went before it, and is far above all that come after it: For as S. Paul proves Melchisedec to be greater then Abraham, because he blessed Abra∣ham, and worthier then Levi, because he tithed Levi in the loins of Abraham; so may we say of this bles∣sing, that it is the greatest of all, because it is the blessing of him who by his Office was to blesse all the rest, and the worthiest of all, because by it the party blessed is enabled to blesse the rest of his Brethren: , Always that by which another is, that thing it self is more then the other. In the words themselves we will consider first the subject blessed, and then the quality of the blessing it self: The subject blessed is expressed both by name,
and by description; by name, Levi; by description, Gods Holy One. The blessing it self is contained in words few, in substance plentifull; Vrim and Thum∣mim; nay more then so, Thy Thummim and Thy Vrim; that we might know whence this blessing comes; how that it is , & , a divine thing, the gift of God, who is the Author and giver of all good things: And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim, &c. To begin first with the Subject Levi: What Levi was is so well known, that it were needlesse to say much to make it better known. Only this, that Levi was the Tribe which God had especially bequeathed to himself, and set apart for the Ministery of the Al∣tar. Concerning whose name, (though observations drawn from names are like an house raised upon the sand, yet because of old, and among the Patriarchs Names were given by the Spirit of Prophecy;) it will not be altogether unworthy our speculation, to remember the reason why this Name Levi was impo∣sed; which we shall see as truly verified in that Fun∣ction, to which God did advance his posterity, as it was by his Mother fitly given to himself, upon the good hope she conceived at his birth. For Levi signifies a Conjoyner, an Uniter or ma∣ker of union; for thus said Leah when she bare him; Now at this time will my husband be joyned to me, be∣cause I have born a third son: And she called his name, Levi. She called him Levi; but for ought we reade, in regard of her self, she found him no Levi as she ho∣ped; but she prophecied of that sacred office, whereby all the sons of Levi became conjoyners, became ma∣kers of union, not between Iacob and Leah, but be∣tween
God and Man, between Christ and his Spouse, between the spirituall Iacob and his deformed Leah. For as truly as ever Leah spake, might the Church then, and may the Church now, affirm, when she hath born these sons unto her husband; Now I know my heavenly husband, my Lord my God, will be joyned to me, because I have born him these , these sons of Union, these Ministers of reconciliation. Plato could say, a Priest was , A friend-maker between God and men: Nay, his whole office is nothing but the service of peace, and that not only between God and man, but between man and his brother; for how can he love God, who loves not his brother? or how can he be at peace with God, who is at variance with his brother? Needs must he therefore that is Minister of the one, be Mi∣nister of the other also; and he that is so, nay he alone that is so, is a right Levite, and a true son of Union. How unworthy then of this holy name, how un∣worthy to succeed in the holy Order of Levi, are those who are Ministers of division, who by their lives, doctrine, example, or any other way divide God and his Church, and the Church within it self; who neither have peace with God themselves, nor will suffer others to have it; who neither agree themselves with others, nor suffer others to agree among them∣selves? Beati pacifici, Blessed are the peace-makers, especially in the sons of Peace. This Christ prayed for in his Apostles, Ioh. 17. saying, Holy Father, keep them through thy name, that they may be one as we are one. Christ is so one, that he makes all one, who are one in him; so should every son of Levi be one. In
summe, the Ministers of God are called Angels, and therefore should sing a song like unto that song of Angels, Glory be to God on high, peace on earth, and good will amongst men. That Church which hath such a Levite, such a Minister, such a son of Union, may truly take up the words of Micah, Iudg. 17. and say, Now I know the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my Priest. And thus much of the name Levi: Now I come unto the Tribe it self; concerning which there may be two things asked: First, why God did confine the Priesthood to one Tribe alone, and not suffer it to be common to all, as it was before the Law, and is now since the Law? Secondly, why Levi was chosen to this holy Function rather then any other Tribe? To the first, why God did limit this holy Function to one Tribe only, some of the Jews make this an∣swer: That one of the sons of Israel with his whole posterity was due unto God by virtue of Jacobs vow, Gen. 28. which was, that if God would be with him in his journey, and bring him back again unto his Fa∣thers house, of all that thou shalt give me, saith he, I will give the tenth unto thee; Now because God gave children, as well as beeves and sheep, therefore they also must fall within compasse of his Vow. And that there might be no difficulty about tithing the odde children, because there were more then ten, they de∣vise this way to make all even: for first, say they, the full number of Iacobs children was fourteen, because that Iosephs two sons Ephraim and Manasseh go in the number of Iacobs sons: for Iacob Gen. 48. said unto Ioseph, Thy two sons which are born unto thee in the land
of AEgypt before I came into AEgypt, shall be mine, as Reuben and Simeon are mine; but thy lineage which thou begettest after them shall be thine. Now of these fourteen, four were the Lords by his right unto the first-born, for so many there were which first opened the womb of their four Mothers, Rahel and Leah, Bilhah and Zilpah, Iacobs two Wives and his two Concubines: Now of the remainder being ten, one fals to Gods share for Tithe, as being comprized within their Fathers Vow. This reason, though it be as you see handsomely framed, yet hath no great likelihood, because men use not to be tithed; and therefore this extent of the Vow, is beyond the intent of the Vower. And whereas they urge the words, of all that thou shalt give me; they seem to forget, that God gave unto Iacob besides his sons, great store of man-servants and maid∣servants, and yet we reade not that any of these were dedicate unto God, or that he challenged any of their posterity. The only or chief cause (if I am not deceived) why God restrained the Priestly Function to one Tribe, was for a sign and band of restraint of his Church to one people: For, as the Church cannot be with∣out the sacred Function of holy Ministery; so like∣wise the condition thereof must follow the con∣dition of the Ministery. As long therefore as none could be a Priest but of the Tribe of Levi, so long there could be no Church, but of that people whereof Levi was a Tribe. A point of sacred Policy so to or∣der the choice of Ministers, as shall be most fit to up∣hold the present state of an established Church.
The other question we propounded was, Why God chose Levi before any other Tribe? And of this many reasons may be given: As first, for Moses sake, whom God would honour by advancing the house of his Father to the highest pitch of dignity that mor∣tall man could attain to: for what greater honour then to be Embassadour of the Lord of Hosts, to be admitted unto the inspection of his most secret my∣steries; to be Gods , his proper and peculiar portion. Would God they either knew or beleeved this, who think their house disgraced, and their blood stained, if any of their Kin become of the Clergy. It was not so in Gods opinion, no, nor Moses his neither, for had it been, Levi of all Tribes should not have been Gods holy one. The second Reason was the Nobility of this Tribe, for Levi was enabled both generally, as being the son of a lawfull Wife, and not the son of an Handmaid; and specially as being of kin to Moses the Prince of the Congregation: In the first respect he was nobler then many of his brethren; in the second, more noble then any of them. This example of Gods own choice of men for his holy Service, if we would look unto, we would not sin the sin of Ieroboam, to make Priests almost of no other but of the lowest of the people: I speak not only of the lowest for externall condition, but of the lowest for the gifts of their minde; for I know it is true which the Virgin hath in her Magnifi∣cat, That God often puts down the mighty from their seats, and exalteth them of low degree. . I know it is true that he often filleth the hungry with good things, and
the rich he sends empty away: but we should know that whensoever we offer unto him, he requireth the best thing in our hands; and therefore for this worthy Calling we are to give unto him, as far as may be, the worthiest among the sons of men. Another reason why God chose this Tribe afore other, may be the smalnesse thereof, being not above the sixtieth part of the people: A number which God in his wisdome saw fit for that Church, as being both sufficient for instructing the people, and dis∣charge of the duties of their order; and not too great to live of Gods ordinary, his Tithes and the other of∣ferings of the Altar, whereas the least of the other Tribes were as big as three of it. But the last Reason, and as it seems one of the chiefest, is that which Moses intimates in the very verse following my Text, speaking thus of Levi, that he said unto his Father and to his Mother, I have not seen them; neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children; but observed Gods word and kept his Covenant. In which words Moses alludes unto their forward zeal to avenge the Lord of the people which worshipped the golden Calf, Exod. 32. where it is said, that Moses stood in the gate of the camp and cried, Whosoever is on the Lords side, let him come unto me. And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves unto him. Then said Moses, Thus saith the Lord God of Isra∣el, Put every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the Camp, and slay eve∣ry man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbour. And the children of Levi did according to the word of Moses, &c. For Moses had said,
(so it follows in the Text) Consecrate your selves unto the Lord this day, even every man upon his son, and up∣on his brother, that there may be given you ablessing this day. This blessing here spoken of is our Urim and Thummim, the blessing of Sacred Order: So boun∣tifully did God reward them who were so forward to be on his side when Moses called them, that himself vouchsafed to call them unto his side for ever. Whence, first, we may learn whom we are chiefly to preferre unto this holy Function, namely, those who are zealous for the Lord of Hosts, who preferre the glory of God above all worldly respects whatsoe∣ver: This got Phinehas the son of Eleazar the High Priesthood; this got all the sons of Levi the guer∣don of Urim and Thummim, the blessing of holy Orders. Secondly, we may see by the advancement of this Tribe, how mercifull our God is: We know that Le∣vi's fury did once as much offend him, as his sons zeal now pleased him; and yet for this one action he for∣got the sin of their Father in the bloody slaughter of the Sichemites: He remembred not the curse of Ia∣cob, Into their secret let not my soul come: My glory be not thou joyned with their assembly. Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce, and their rage, for it was cruell. Gen. 49. 6, 7. Nay, he turned the very curse of Iacob into a blessing, By dividing them in Iacob, and scatte∣ring them in Israel. Here mercy and Truth met both together, and Justice and Peace kissed each other. Lastly, here God verified his own description of him∣self, That though he be a jealous God, and visits the sins of the father upon the children unto the third and
fourth generation, yet he is also a mercifull God, and shews mercy even unto the thousandth generation of them that love him and keep his Commandements. And thus have you seen why of Levi Moses said this Blessing. And of Levi he said. Now I come to the description of this blessed Tribe in these words, Gods holy one: Let thy Vrim and thy Thummim be with thy holy one. How is Levi here called Holy? how is this Title given to him above the rest of his Brethren? Are not all the Lords people holy? certainly whatso∣ever is meant hereby, it is something more specially belonging to Levi, then to any other Tribe. Which, that we may the better finde, we must take notice of a threefold holinesse; Essentiall, Habituall, Relative. Essentiall holinesse is the holinesse of God, all one with God himself, and this is a glorious holinesse: Who (saith Moses) is like unto thee ô Lord among the Gods? who is like unto thee, glorious in holinesse? Exo. 15 11. Habituall I call an inherent holinesse, such as is the holinesse of righteous men, integrity of life, or righteous holinesse, whereof Abraham, Iob, David, and all the Patriarchs are called Saints and holy men: This is that which the Greeks call , the Latines Sanctimonia. Relative holinesse I define a speciall re∣lation, or relation of peculiarity which a thing hath unto God, either in regard of propriety of possession, or speciality of presence: that which is holy after this manner the Greeks call , the Latines, Sacrum. The first of these three is proper to God alone, for he only is essentially holy. The second is proper to rea∣sonable creatures; for they are only habitually holy, or endued with holy qualities. But the last is com∣mon
to all manner of things; for all things animate or inanimate are capable of relative holinesse, or pe∣cularity towards God: Persons, Things, Times, Places. Persons, so the Nazarites of the Law are cal∣led holy; thus was Sampson, thus was Samuel holy from their Mothers womb. Things, so the Offerings of the Law, yea and of the Gospel too, are holy things: The censers of Korah and his company were Holy, because (saith the Text) they offered them unto the Lord. Times, so the Sabbath day and other Festi∣vall days are holy days. Places, so the Temple of the Lord is an holy Place; Mount Sion an holy Mount; yea the ground about the bush where God appeared to Moses is called Holy ground. And of these four, Persons, Things, and Times are holy, because of Gods peculiar propriety in them, in that they are his Per∣sons, his Things, and his Times: But Places are holy in another regard, because of Gods speciall man∣ner of Presence in them. Now let us see in which of all these three ways, Levi may be said to be holy: Essentially holy he can∣not be, for he was not God, but the holy one of God. Habitually holy the event shews he was not more then the rest, though he should have been. The Tribe of Lvi was always Tribus sacra, holy unto the Lord, but was not always righteous before the Lord. It was not always true of Levi, that he walked before God in peace and equity, and turned many from iniquity; but often, yea too often they were gone out of the way, and caused many to fall by the Law. Phinehas the son of Eli, was not like Phinehas the son of Aaron: Annas and Caiaphas high Priests, as holy as any for their or∣der,
as unholy as any in life and conversation. It should therefore seem, that Levi should be only called holy by a Relative holinesse; namely, because he was Gods peculiar one, because his offered one, be∣cause his peculiar of peculiars; that is, his peculiar Tribe of his peculiar People; for in this Levi had a priviledge above the rest, in the other none: and this Ezra gives unto him cap. 8. 28. when he delivered un∣to the Levites the holy Vessels, Ye are holy (saith he) unto the Lord, and these Vessels are holy also: that is, Ye are holy as the Vessels are; for he saith not, they were holy before the Lord, for so he had meant holy in life; but holy uto the Lord; , which always im∣plies a Relative holinesse. But though this be true that Levi was holy after this manner, yet the word which in my Text is turned Holy, seems scarce to admit of this construction: for the word here used is not , but , which signifies favourable and gracious, and in Religion charitable and godly: All which leans to an habituall, not to a respective holinesse. But because Levi was not in this sort holy above other, as I said before; It may seem therefore it should be thus construed: That  is taken actively or passively: Actively it signifies fa∣vourable, benigne and gracious. Passively, he that is favoured or graced. And thus Iunius expounds  in this place, Let thy Thummim and thy Vrim be with thy favoured one; not  as the Septua∣gint, but  which word and sense the Angel useth in his salutation to the blessed Virgin, , Hail, thou highly favoured one; Hail thou whom God hath especially graced to be
the Mother of his only Son: So Levi is here descri∣bed to be one upon whom God bestowed a speciall favour or grace, a speciall , or , the grace of holy Ministery: for so S. Paul cals this power of Order, a grace or favour,  & , as Eph. 3. 8. Vnto me who am lesse then the least of all Saints is this grace given, to preach among the Gentiles, investigabi∣les divitias Christi. And of Timothy the same Apostle speaketh, Neglect not that , or grace in thee, which was given by prophecy and imposition of hands. With this grace was Levi graced, with this favour was he highly favoured, and well might be called, , Gods highly favoured one. And thus the issue will be all one,  in this sense will fall out to be Gods holy one in the last sense: for to be specially favoured of God, is to have a speciall relation to God-ward, to be Gods more especially; and this is to be holy with a relative holinesse. Now which soever of these we take to be here meant, we see that that is in speciall given to Levi, which otherwise was common to all the other Tribes. If you take it in the first sense for holinesse in life, as it were to put Levi in minde, how it behoved him above all to be holy; were not all the Tribes as holy as Levi? and yet Levi alone is called Gods holy one. If you take it in the se∣cond sense for a relative holinesse; were not all the Tribes of Israel thus holy unto God? were not all his own people, his peculiar people, and a chosen Na∣tion? and yet Levi alone is called Gods holy one. If you take it in the last sense, for Gods favoured one; were not all Israel a Nation favoured of God above all Nation? and yet Levi alone is especially called Gods favoured one.
We therefore whom God hath set apart to mini∣ster about holy things; we who are holy unto the Lord, and Gods own in a peculiar manner; we who have a speciall relation unto God; we who have re∣ceived a speciall favour from God; we must remem∣ber we owe a speciall thankfulnesse unto him: we who are Gods peculiars, must demean our selves peculiar∣ly both toward God and man: we are unto God as other men are not, and therefore may not always do as other men do; we cannot reason from others to our selves, no not in things of themselves lawful, Why should not we do as every man may do; for all that is lawfull for others, will not be seemly for us; for we are the houshold servants of the most High, we are speciall men, of whom God requires a speciall de∣meanour in life and actions. This was one cause why God injoyned the Jews so many peculiar rites and speciall observations differing from the fashions of other people, because they were his peculiar people, an holy Nation; because they were toward him as no other was, though all the world were his, and therefore would have their man∣ners differ from the fashion of all other Nations, as a badge and acknowledgement of that speciall relation they had to him above other. Levit. 20. 25. I (saith God) am the Lord your God, which have separated you from other people; ye shall therefore put difference between clean beasts and unclean, unclean fowls and clean, &c. And ye shall be holy unto me: for I the Lord am holy, and have severed you from other people, that you should be mine. This was also a cause why God restrained the Priests of the Law from that which was lawful for the
rest of the people; They might drink no Wine; they might not mourn for their kin; they might not marry a divorced woman: the reason of all this is given, be∣cause they were holy unto the Lord; that is, with a rela∣tive holinesse, as being Gods men in a speciall man∣ner, and therefore required they should specially de∣mean themselves in their lives. These observations indeed were ceremoniall, but there is something mo∣rall in them: And therefore in the Gospel we hear of some speciall things required in a Minister; as that he should have a good report of those who were without; this was not required in every one who was to be a Christian. Again, S. Paul requires in a Bishop, that he should be the husband of one wife; this was not in those times required of every one who was to be a Christian. I shall not need to tell you what speciall demeanour the ancient Church bound her Clergy un∣to: but it came to passe at last this rule was over pra∣ctised by them, for hence it was that a Bishop might not marry at all, that Priests and Deacons might not marry being once in Orders, and at last marriage was quite forbidden them all. Thus our Fathers erred on the right hand, but we go aside on the left: they restrained their Clergy from that which was lawfull for, and beseemed all men; we think almost that lawful for us, which is lawfull for no man, at least we think that which any man may do we may do also: But there is a golden mean between these extremes, hap∣py is he that finds it, for he alone shall demean himself like himself, like a Levite, like Gods holy one. Secondly, from this speciall title given to Levi, we may note how causlesly some are offended to hear
those who minister about holy Things, distinguished from others by names of holinesse and peculiarity; to hear them called Clerus, and Clerici, as it were the Heritage of God; for so saith S. Hierome, Clerus dici∣mur, quia sors Dei sumus. But say they, are not the People also Gods heritage? Doth not S. Peter call them , when he forbids Presbyters, , to domineer over Gods heritage? I confesse he doth: But those who reason after this manner come too near the language of Dathan and Abiram, Num. 16. Moses and Aaron, you take too much upon you; Is not all the Congregation holy, every one of them? and is not the Lord among them? why then lift ye your selves above the Congregation of the Lord? If this reasoning had been good, wherein had these Rebels offended? It could not be denied them, that all the People were an holy People; for they might have alledged the testimony of God himself, avouching them to be his peculiar People, and an holy People unto the Lord their God; All the earth (saith he Exod. 19.) is mine, but you shall be my Segulla, my peculiar people, a King∣dome of Priests, and an holy Nation. But it might be answered them, Though all the people were Gods peculiar people, and therefore his holy ones, yet Levi was his peculiar Tribe of his pe∣culiar people, and therefore comparatively his only holy one. All the Land of Canaan was the Lords; The Land is mine, saith he, and therefore it could not be alienate beyond the year of Jubilee, and yet for all this there were some parts of the Land specially cal∣led Holy unto the Lord: All the increase of corn, all the increase of wine, all the fruit of the field was the
Lords, and yet the offerings alone were called holy unto the Lord. God himself cals them his , his inheritance, and therefore gave them unto that Tribe alone, which alone he had made his , the Tribe of his inheritance: So the offered Tribe lived of Gods offerings, the holy Tribe on the holy things. Again, why may we not call our Clergy Gods inhe∣ritance, when God himself cals the Levites his Le∣vites? Thou shalt (saith he Num. 8.) separate the Le∣vites from among the children of Israel, and the Levites shall be my Levites; that is, my , my Clergy. Why may not we call the Ministers of Christ his , when he himself cals them the gift his Father gave him out of the world? for so he saith Ioh. 17. I have declared thy name unto the men thou gavest me out of the world, thine they were and thou gavest them me: and again, Holy Father, keep them in thy name, even them whom thou hast given me. If you say he speaks here of all his Elect, the words following prove the contrary; for those (saith he) whom thou hast given me, I have kept, and none of them is lost but the child of perdition. Here he plainly affirms, he lost one of those his Father gave him, wherefore he speaks not of his elect ones, for those no man can take out of his hands. Again, ver. 18. As thou didst send me into the world, saith he, so I send them into the world: but I hope all the Elect are not sent, as Christ was sent by his Father. I conclude therefore, so long as God in the Law says specially of the Levites, They are mine: so long as Christ in the Gospel of his Apostles, They are mine, ô Father, which thou hast given me out of the world; it is neither arrogancy, nor injury, to style those who
minister about holy things with the name of , the inheritance of the Lord. What Levi was, and what is meant by this Title Gods holy one, we have now shewed sufficiently. It remains we should come unto the words containing the blessing it self, which is called Vrim and Thummim; the words themselves signifie light and perfection, Il∣lumination and Integrity: good endowments certain∣ly, whosoever shall enjoy them. But because they are not only Appellative words, but also proper names of certain things, we must en∣quire further what is meant by them; and that in a twofold consideration; First, specially and properly as they are names of certain things belonging in spe∣ciall unto the High Priest: Then generally, as they are applied by Moses unto the whole Tribe of Levi. The first again shall be twofold, what they were in the High Priest personally; or what they signified in him typically, himself being also a Type. For the first, what is meant by these things, as they belong unto the High Priest personally, is a matter full of controversie; and therefore that we may the better proceed, we will first see the generals wherein all or the most agree; and after come unto the parti∣culars wherein they disagree. The first, wherein all agree s, that this Vrim and Thummim was some thing put in the Brest-plate, which was fastened to the E∣phod over against the heart of the High Priest: And thus much the Scripture witnesseth, Exod. 28. 30. where God saith to Moses, And thou shall put in the Brest plate of Iudgement, the Vrim and the Thummim which shall be on Aarons heart, when he goeth in before
the Lord. And for this cause as most think, was the Brest-plate made double, that the Vrim and Thum∣mim might be enveloped therein. The second thing wherein all agree, is that this Vrim and Thummim was a kinde of Oracle whereby God gave answer to those that enquired of him; and from hence the Septuagint call the whole Brest-plate , which some turn Rationale, but might more truly be turned Orationale, for an Oracle is as it were , the Voice of God, though this Voice or Revelation were of divers kinds; for at sundry times, and in divers manners (saith S. Paul) God spake in old time to our Fathers. The Jews therefore make four kinds of Divine Revelation: First, , or Prophecy, which was by dreams and Visions: The second , afflatus Spiritus sancti, as was in Iob, David, and others. The third Vrim and Thummim, which was the Oracle. The fourth, , filia vo∣cis, which was usuall in the second Temple after the Oracle had ceased; as Mat. 5. at Christs Baptism there came a voice from heaven, saying, This is my welbeloved son, in whom I am well pleased: and Ioh. 12. when Christ said, Father glorifie thy name: There came a voice like thunder, saying, I have both glorified it, and will glorifie it again. But to return again to our purpose; That Vrim and Thummim was an Oracle of God, besides the con∣sent of Jews and others, it is plain by Scripture, Num. 27. when God had commanded Moses to put his hands upon Ioshua, and to set him over the con∣gregation in his stead; he addes, And he (that is, Io∣shua) shall stand before Eleazar the Priest, who shall ask
counsell for him by the judgement of Vrim before the Lord. So 1 Sam. 23. when David was to ask counsell of the Lord, he called for the Ephod, wherein the Oracle was: and whereas before he had once or twice asked counsell of the Lord concerning Keilah, to pre∣vent the objection how the Lord answered; it fol∣lows in the next by way of a Prolepsis, That Abiathar then Priest, when he fled to David to Keilah, brought the Ephod with him. ver. 6. Lastly, in the second of Ezra, when certain of the Priests which returned from Captivity, could not finde their names written in the genealogies; it is said, that Ezra commanded they should not eat of the most holy things, till there rose up a Priest with Vrim and Thummim; that is, till God should by Oracle reveal whether they were Priests or no: whereby it also appears that this Oracle had then ceased. And for more light to that we have in hand; it will not be amisse to observe, that Teraphim among the Idolaters, was answerable to the Vrim and Thum∣mim of the holy Patriarchs. Both were ancient, for Rahel is said to have stollen away her Fathers Tera∣phim: And Vrim and Thummim seems to have been used among the Patriarchs before the Law was given, because the making of it, is not spoken of among other things of the Ephod: And because God speaks of it to Moses demonstratively, , the Vrim and the Thummim. Both also were Oracles; for the Jews and others agree, Teraphim were small Images made under a certain constellation, which they used to consult both in things doubtfull, and things future, supposing they
had a power to this effect received from heavenly in∣fluence; much like to puppets made of wax and like matter, which our Wizzards still use unto like pur∣pose. And therefore Ezek. 21. we reade that the King of Babel among other divinations, consulted al∣so of Teraphim: And the King of Babel (saith the Text) stood at the head of the two ways, to use divinati∣on, consulting with Teraphim, he looked in the liver. And Zac. 10. 2. Surely (saith the Text) , The Teraphims have spoken vanity, and the Soothsayers have seen a lie, and the Dreamers have told a vain thing. Besides, from this like use of Teraphim with the holy Vrim and Thummim, we may reade Ephod and Teraphim joyned both together as things of like kind, as Hosea 3. The children of Israel, saith the Lord, shall remain many days without a King, and without a Prince, and without an Offering, and without an Image, and without an Ephod and Teraphim. Yea, of so near a na∣ture was this Teraphim unto the Vrim and Thummim, that Micah, he that had an house of Gods, when he had made an Ephod, because he had no Vrim and Thum∣mim, he put Teraphims in stead thereof, as we may gather Iudg. 17. 18. where we may see also that when the children of Dan enquired of the Lord concerning their journey, it pleased him to give answer by the Idolish Teraphim. So we may gather likewise that the Israelites after Ieroboams schism, having no Vrim and Thummim, used Teraphim in the Ephod, and therefore it is that Hosea threatens that they shall be without Ephod and Teraphim. Having hitherto shewn how far it is agreed about
Vrim and Thummim, in the next place the points of difference ought to be considered; which are either about the matter whereof it was made, or in the man∣ner how God answered by it. For the matter, some will have it to be nothing else but the writing or carving of the great name Iehovah, which was put within the folding of the brest-plate; and that it was called Vrim and Thummim, because by the knowledge of the mystery of Iehovah in the Tri∣nity, our minds are enlightned, and understandings made perfect. Some other there are of the same opinion, but they will have it called Vrim and Thummim, because by the virtue of that name written, Sacerdos verba sua illu∣strabat, & perficiebat: And moreover they say the brest-plate was called , the brest-plate of judgement, because by it the Lord gave as it were sentence and judgement, what was to be done in hard and doubtfull matters. And this is the opinion of Rabbi Shelomo. Some other will have it called the brest-plate of judgement, because that by it the judgement of the Judges, if it were amisse, was hereby as it were pardo∣ned: because the High Priest was to bear the sins of the people: The Authors of this opinion are menti∣oned by R. Shelomo. Aben Ezra saith, it was so called because by it the judgement and decrees of the Lord were known: And he thinks also that Vrim and Thummim were some∣thing made by the hand of the craftsman. But Nehemanides and R. Shelomo say, it was opus di∣vinum, and given to Moses in the Mount, or at least that God shewed him how to make it.
Some think it was nothing but the stones in the brest-plate, by the shining whereof God did annuere, by the not shining, abnuere. But Kimchi confutes this, because it is spoken of as a differing thing in the same place, where the stones are described: But he him∣self says, it is not certainly known what it was. Nehemanides saith, it was certain sacred names, by the virtue whereof the letters of the brest-plate were en∣lightned and ordered, so that the Priest might read the answer of God: and that which caused shining was cal∣led Vrim; & that which made them legible, Thummim. The summe of these Opinions laid together is, That this Oracle was either the stones of the brest-plate themselves, or something in the folding of the brest-plate, which by a divine virtue did cause the stones to shine, and by the letters of the Tribes names in them, as it were to expresse the answer of God. For concerning the manner of this Oracle, the Tal∣mudists report thus much: First, no private man might consult with Vrim and Thummim, but either , he that was King or chief of the Consisto∣ry, or , the Consistory or Judges themselves, and that in matters difficult and of great importance. Secondly, , he that enquired must stand with his face looking full upon , the Priest whom he asked; and the Priest stood with his eyes fixed up∣on his brest where was the Vrim and Thummim. Thirdly, the voice was to be a soft still voice, and not above one thing to be asked at one time: But if they asked two things at once, the answer was only unto the first; but in case of extremity, unto both: and such was Davids case, 1 Sam. 30. when he asked
concerning the Amalekites, who had burnt Ziklag, Shall I follow this company, saith he, and shall I over∣take them? The Lord answers, Follow, for thou shalt surely overtake them, and recover all. Now if you ask how the Priest knew the answer of the Lord? First, you must remember, there were twelve stones in the brest-plate, and in those stones the twelve names of the sons of Israel, either set or carved; and that there might be a full Alphabet of letters, there was also, say they, written upon the brest-plate, Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, and these two words , the Tribes of Israel or Jeshurun. Now when the Lord answered, the letters expressing the answer, by the divine virtue of the Vrim and Thum∣mim became , i. prominentes; that is, shewed forth themselves with a splendor, that the Priest might read the answer of God: As 2 Sam. 2. when David asked the Lord , Shall I ascend into any of the Cities of Iudah? the letter  in Shimeon,  in Levi, and  in Iehudah, put themselves forth, or shone forth with a splendor, that the Priest might read , Ascend: Though some of the Jews say the letters be∣came , that is, joyned themselves together and made a word: which as I cannot conceive how it should be, so I think it lesse probable. And thus hitherto have you heard the divers opi∣nions of the matter and manner of this Oracle of V∣rim and Thummim: Here is variety enough, I leave to every one to make his own choice which he will beleeve; only give me leave to adde thus much in way of censure of them, which is, that all seem against reason and likelihood, to confound Vrim with Thum∣mim,
in making them one and the same thing called by divers names, in regard of divers effects and uses: which I can the lesse beleeve, because I finde Vrim alone used in matter of consultation with God, where∣by it seems Thummim had some other use. In the 27. of Numb. Moses commands Ioshuah in all businesse to consult the High Priest, by the judgement of Vrim before the Lord; but no speech of Thummim. Again, 1 Sam. 28. it is said, that Saul asked counsell of the Lord, when he was to go against the Philistims; but the Lord answered him not, neither by dreams, nor by Vrim, nor by the Prophets. Here also is Vrim spoken of, but no word of Thummim. If I may therefore speak what I think; I would say, that Vrim and Thummim were a twofold Oracle, and for a twofold use. And that Vrim was the Oracle, or part of the Oracle, whereby God gave answer to those who enquired of him in hard and doubtfull ca∣ses; therefore called Vrim, or lights, because as igno∣rance is called darknesse; so is all knowledge a kinde of illumination or enlightening; and that which bring∣eth knowledg is fitly called a light, because it dispels the darknesse of our minds. But Thummim was that Oracle or mean whereby the High Priest knew whether God did accept the Sacrifice or no; therefore called Thummim, that is, Integrity; because those whose Sacrifice God ac∣cepted, were accounted Thummim, that is, just and righteous in the eyes of God; because their Sacrifice was a shadow of Christs Sacrifice, by accep∣tation whereof we are justified and made righteous before God. For without doubt the Patriarchs and
legall Church had some ordinary mean to know when their Sacrifice was accepted, else had they been behinde the Gentiles; for they had a sign to know when they did Litare, that is, when their false Gods accepted their false sacrifice; and as the Devil was Gods Ape in giving Oracles, so I verily beleeve he was in this also. Nay Iosephus expresly affirms it of the Jews, though for the particular I suppose he is mistaken: For he saith, that whensoever God did accept the Sacrifice, the Onyx stone on the Priests left shoulder shone with an admirable splendor; but this, saith he, ceased certain hundred years before his time: and no wonder, for when the Sun of righte∣ousnesse drew near unto his rising, those dimmer Vrim and smaller stars must needs lose their light. Now that which Iosephus affirms of the Onyx stone on the left shoulder, I suppose was mistaken for the Thum∣mim on the left part of the brest-plate. And lastly, as I said before of Vrim, so I think of Thummim, that it was in use among the Patriarchs of old, and that by some such means as this Abel knew that God accepted his Offering, and Cain that his was refused. And thus much of Vrim and Thummim considered personally in the High Priest; now I come to consi∣der it typically: for as the High Priest himself was a type of Christ, so must these Adjuncts of his also be types of something in Christ; which we shall not be long a finding out, if we remember again the sig∣nification of the words, and the use of the things themselves: Vrim is Light and Illumination; Thum∣mim Integrity and Perfection. By Vrim the Jews
were ascertained of the counsell and will of God; By Thummim of his favour and good will towards them. All this agrees to Christ both in himself, and in re∣gard of us. In himself, his brest is full of Vrim, full of Light and Understanding, in him dwell all the treasures of Wisdome and Knowledge, as S. Paul saith; He is the Wisdome of the Father by which the world it self was made. His heart is also endowed with Thummim, with all kind of Perfections; He was conceived with∣out Originall sin, lived without Actuall sin; fulfilled the whole Law of God, which is the Law of Thum∣mim, the Law of all Perfection. Thus to Christ himself agrees both Vrim and Thummim, and so it doth also in regard of us, for he is an Vrim and Thummim both to us and for us: To us he is Vrim, a light which enlightneth every one which commeth unto the world: He is the light which shone in darknesse, but the darknesse could not comprehend it. He was that light by which the people (as it is said in Matthew 4.) which sate in darknesse saw great light. And of this Light Iohn came to bear witnesse, that all might beleeve in him, Ioh. 1. In summe, Christ is  &  Patris, the Word and Oracle of his Fa∣ther, by whom we know and learn the Fathers will: for so S. Iohn saith, cap. 1. No man hath seen God at any time, but the Son who is in the bosome of the Father, he hath revealed him unto us. Neither is Christ only an Vrim, but also a Thum∣mim to us: For as by Thummim the Jews were ascer∣tained of Gods favour toward them in accepting their Sacrifice: so by Christ comming in the flesh is revea∣led
the unspeakable mercy of God to mankind, in that he would accept his Sacrifice once offered for the expiation of the sins of the whole world. This is that Good-will toward men, which the Angels sung of as∣soon as he was born; Glory be to God on high, peace on earth, and good-will towards men: Yea, glory be to God on high for this peace on earth, and for this good will towards men. Thus we see Christ an Vrim and Thummim to us: now let us see how he is the same for us; and that is when his wisdome and righteousnesse is made ours by imputation: So his Vrim becomes our Vrim, his Thummim our Thummim, that is, his wisdome is made ours; his righteousnesse and favour with God made ours; for this is my welbeloved Son, said a voice from heaven, in whom I am well pleased. In brief, S. Paul comprehends both these together, where he saith, Christ Iesus is made unto us Wisdome, Sanctification, and Redemption. And so Lord, let thy Vrim and thy Thum∣mim be with thy holy one. And thus much for the speciall consideration of this Vrim and Thummim, both personally and typically: Now I come unto the generall meaning thereof, as it concerns not the High Priest only, but the whole Tribe of Levi, for this is the blessing of that whole Tribe. And in this large respect, the meaning cannot be proper, for so it belongs unto the High Priest to have Vrim and Thummim; nor typicall, because the Priests only, and not the under Levites were types of Christ: but the sense must be analogicall, signifying some endowments common to all Levites, which re∣semble the Vrim and Thummim upon the brest of the High Priest.
Now what these are, the words themselves import, namely, Light of understanding & knowledge; this is their Vrim; and Integrity of life, this is their Thummim. The first makes them Doctores, the second Ductores po∣puli: He that wants either of these two, wants the true ornament of Priesthood, the right character of a Levit. For though these endowments may well beseem all the Tribes of Israel; yet Moses specially prays for them in Levi, because by him they were to come to all the rest; and the want of them in him, could not but redound to all the rest; It a populus, sicut sacerdos: the Priest cannot erre, but he causeth others to erre also; the Priest cannot sin, but he causeth others to sin also. And this is it that Malachi saith from the Lord, Mal. 2. 6, 8. unto the Priests of his time; Ye are gone out of the way, and have caused many to fall by the Law: But the Le∣vites of old, (saith the same Prophet) The Law of Truth was in their mouth, and iniquity was not found in their lips: they walked with God in peace and equity, and tur∣ned many from iniquity. Here you see when the Le∣vites erre, the people erre also; when the Levites walk in equity, the people are turned from iniquity. The Ministers of Christ must be Lux mundi, the light of the world; Vos estis lux mundi, ye are the light of the world; ye are the worlds Vrim, saith Christ unto his Apostles; for the lips of the Priest should pre∣serve knowledge, and they should learn the Law at hs mouth. This light of knowledge, this teaching know∣ledge is the Vrim of every Levite; and therefore Christ when he inspired his Apostles with knowledge of hea∣venly mysteries, he sent a new Vrim from above, even fiery tongues, tongues of Vrim from heaven: He sent
no fiery heads, but fiery tongues; for it is not suffici∣ent for a Levite to have his head full of Vrim, unlesse his tongue be a candle to shew it unto others. There came indeed no Thummim from heaven, as there came an Vrim, for though the Apostles were secured from errors, they were not freed from sin: And yet we who are Levites, must have such a Thummim as may be gotten upon earth, for S. Paul bid Titus in all things to shew himself an example of good works: and this is a Thummim of Integrity. But besides this Thummim the Ministers of the Go∣spel have received from God more especially another Thummim, like unto that which was proper to the High Priest; namely, the power of binding and loo∣sing, which is as it were a power of Oracle to declare unto the people the remission of their sins, by the ac∣ceptance of Christs Sacrifice: And this directly an∣swers to Thummim in the first sense.
ACTS 5. 3, 4, 5. Act. 5. 3, 4. 3. But Peter said, Ananias, Why hath Satan fil∣led thine heart, to lie to the holy Ghost, and to purloin of the price of the Land? 4. Whiles it remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thy power? why hast thou conceived this thing in thine heart? Thou hast not lied unto men, but unto God. 5. And Ananias hearing these words, fell down and gave up, &c. IN the 110. Psalm, where our Saviour is Prophetically described in the person of a King, advanced to the Throne of Divine Majesty, glorious and victori∣ous; The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand till I make thine enemies thy foot∣stool, &c. amongst other Kingly Attributes and Gra∣ces, it is said, (if it be translated as it should be) That his people in the day of his power should offer him free∣will offerings; that is, bring him Presents at the day of his Inauguration or investment, as a sign of their Homage: For so was the manner of the East to do unto their Kings; and therefore when Saul was anoin∣ted
King by Samuel, it is said of those sons of Belial, which despised and acknowledged him not, that they brought him no presents: But of Messiahs people it is said, Thy people in the day of thy power, (that is, the day when thou shalt enter upon thy power, or the day of thy Investment) shall be , a people of free pre∣sents, or shall bring thee free-will Offerings. It is an Ellipticall speech , for , or , and rightly expressed in the Transla∣tion of our Service Book. This we see fulfilled in the story of the fore-going Chapter, when after our Saviours ascension into hea∣ven, to sit at the right hand of God, which was the day of his power or inauguration in his Kingdome, assoon as this Investment was published by sending of the Holy Ghost, presently such as beleeved in him, that is, submitted themselves to his power, and ac∣knowledged him to be their King, dedicated their goods and possessions to his service, selling their lands and houses, and laying down the money at the Apostles feet; namely, to be distributed as were the sacred Offerings of the Law, partly to the maintenance and furnishing of the Apostles for the work where∣about they were sent, and partly for the relief of the poor beleevers, which belonged to Christs pro∣vision. According to this example one Ananias with Sap∣phira his wife, consecrated also a possession of theirs unto God, and sold the same to that purpose; but having so done, covetousnesse tickling them, they purloyned from the price, and brought but a part of the summe, and laid it down at the Apostles feet:
Then said Peter, according to the words of the Text, why hath Satan filled thine heart (that is, made thee so daring: the like phrase we have Fsth. 7. 5. , where is he whose heart hath filled him (we read it, That durst presume) to do so? and again, Eccles. 8. 11. The heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evill. In the former the Septuagint hath , emboldened; in the latter, , is filled) to lie unto the Holy Ghost, and to purloin from the price of the field, &c. Which words contain two things; Ananias his sin, and his punishment therefore: His sin in the third and fourth verses: His punishment in the fifth, Ananias hearing these words, fell down and gave up the ghost. Concerning his sin, it appears by the relation I have already made, it was Sacriledge, namely, the purloi∣ning of what was become holy and consecrate unto God, not by actuall performance, but by vow and in∣ward purpose of the heart: for as it is well observed by Ainsworth, on Levit. 7. 16. out of Mamony in his Treatise of offering the Sacrifice, Chap. 14. Sect. 4, 5. &c. In vows and voluntaries it is not necessary that a man pronounce ought with his lips; but if he shall be fully determined in his heart, though he hath uttered nothing with his lips, he is indebted. And this is no private Opinion of mine, the Fathers so determine it: S. Augustine, that Ananias was condemned of Sacri∣dedge, Quod Deum in pollicitatione fefellisset, (Serm. 25. de verb. Ap.) And in another Sermon, Ananiam dtraxisse de pecunia quam voverat Deo. (Serm. 10. de diversis.) S. Chrysostome in his 12. Homily upon this place; Pecuniae illae, saith he, deinceps crant sacrae. Igi∣tur
qui voluerat suum vendere & distribuere, & postea de illis acceperit, sacrilegus fuerat. Again, Vides quod hoc crimen imputatur, eo quod pecunias suas accepit quas consecraverat; or, as the Greek, sacras fecerat. S. Ie∣rome in his 8. Epistle, Ananias & Sapphira dispensate∣res timidi, imò corde duplici; & ideò condemnati, quia post votum obtulerunt, quasi sua, & non ejus cui semel ea voverant; partemque sibi alienae substantiae reserva∣verunt, praesentem meruere vindictam non crudelitate sententiae, sed correctionis exemplo. Caesarius brother to Gregory Nazianzen, in his fourth Dialogue expres∣seth the sin of Ananias thus; Semel Deo dicatum au∣rum, saith he, sacrilegio vulneratus alienaverat, inter∣rogatus negaverat: He alienated the money dedica∣ted unto God, being wounded with Sacriledge, and when he was asked thereabout, denied it. Lastly, Oe∣cumenius, in whom we have the currant interpretati∣on of the Greek Fathers, thus expounds the words of S. Peter to Ananias, Neque enim invitos vos trahimus; sed cum ultroneè vobis placuerit offerre Deo victimam, rursus vos ipsos ad proprium usum insumere, Sacrilegium indubiè est: And then addes, Ideo & Sacrilegorum poe∣na sunt percussi: Quanam? morte. Also Asterius Bi∣shop of Marpurg in Germany, who lived near the time of Iulian, in his Hom. in Avaritiam, cals Ananias and Sapphira, . I quote these Fathers the more fully, because many of our late Commentators omit the main sin, and dwell upon the circumstances only, as hypocrisie, vain-glory, covetousnesse, and the like. But we must distinguish between Ananias his fact, and the manner and circumstance thereof: The fact was Sacriledge:
In the manner of doing, other sins attended as hand∣maids. It will be plain, if we ask but these two que∣stions: First, what Ananias did? The Text wil make an∣swer, , He purloined of the holy mony. This was his fact. Ask secondly, how and in what manner he purloined? The story will tell us, dissem∣blingly and hypocritically, making an appearance to the contrary. This then was but the manner and cir∣cumstance of his fact, and so the species of the fact not to be placed therein. Now this Sacriledge or Sacrilegious act commit∣ted by Ananias, is in the words of the Text partly expressed, partly aggravated from the inexcusable∣nesse thereof. In the expression is spent the third verse; the aggravation is in the fourth. The crime or fact of Ananias is expressed two ways: First, by , purloining of the sacred price. Se∣condly, by , by lying unto, or deceiving the Holy Ghost. For both these I suppose to mean one and the same thing; namely, the same fact of Ananias two ways expressed. The first, , I translate by stealing or purloining, for so the word signifies: our English which renders it, Keeping back of the price, doth not sufficiently expresse the propriety thereof in this place: In another place it doth, Tit. 2. 10. where it renders , purloining; Exhort servants, saith the Apostle, to be obedient unto their Masters, and to please them well in all things, , not purloining, but shewing all good fidelity. The Vulgar in both places useth Fraudare, defrau∣ding. In a word, the true signification of  is surripere, suffurari, aut clam subducta in commodum
nostrum convertere: whence Beza turns it by Inter∣vertere, Intervertit ex pretio; and in Titus, Interver∣tentes. In the same sense it is used by the Septuagint in two severall places, both pointing at the sin of Sa∣criledge: One is in Achans story, Iosh. 7. 1. where what we reade, Achan took of the accursed thing, the Septuagint renders, , he pur∣loined the accursed thing; that is, the thing that was consecrated to God, as all the silver and gold was, ch. 6. ver. 19. for which cause when God relates to Ioshua Israels sin, as the reason of their flying before their enemies, he makes a distinction between Achans Sacriledge, and his theft and dissembling, ver. 11. of the 7. Chap. saying, For they have even taken of the ac∣cursed thing, and have also stollen and dissembled also, and they have put it even among their own stuffe. The other is, in 2 Mac. 4. 32. Menelaus his Sacriledge (who stole the sacred Vessels) is expressed by it; Menelaus (saith the Author) supposing he had got a convenient time, , stole certain vessels of gold out of the Temple, and gave some to Andronicus, and some he sold into Tyrus and the Cities round about. The second expression of Ananias his Sacriledge is by , deceiving or lying to the Ho∣ly Ghost; or as it is repeated immediately after, , lying unto God.  is fallo, frustro, mentior, To deceive, cozen, lie; (as also the Hebrew word , which peculiarly signifies Sacrilegious transgression, as Lev. 5. 15. and in the story of Achan, is in all those places (as elsewhere) rendred in Targum, , to lie, and the substantive , a lie) and in Oaths and promises, Non servo, frango, not to keep,
or to break them. So Ananias his sin, was a lying unto, or breaking of promise with God: for having vowed, or promised unto him in his heart the whole price of the field, he brought him but part thereof. Both ex∣pressions point out the same fact; which in regard of the matter, was stealing or purloining: in regard of the Vow and Consecration, a breach of promise or lying unto God. So that when Peter says in the third verse, Why hath Satan filled thine heart; to lie unto the Holy Ghost, and to purloin of the price of the land? The latter is the explication of the former; and is, as if it had been said, Why hath Satan filled thine heart to lie unto the Ho∣ly Ghost, in purloining the price of the land? But what, will some man say, means this speciall expression of the Deity in the Person of the Holy Ghost? why is Ananias said, to have lied to the Holy Ghost, rather then to have lied unto God only? For lying unto God would bear the sense I speak of; should not then lying unto the Holy Ghost, seem to have something else, or something more in it? I an∣swer, Ananias his lie or breach of promise is applied thus in speciall to the Holy Ghost, in respect of the prerogative of that Person, as to stir and sanctifie, so to take notice of the motions of the heart: forasmuch therefore as Ananias his Vow and Promise which he broke, was not such as men could witnesse or take no∣tice of, but such as his own heart or conscience only was privy to; hence it is said to have been done under the privity of the Holy Ghost, and he in the breach thereof to have lied unto him; because that which none but the inward man knoweth of, and is yet but in the purpose of the heart, is under his privity. There
is a plain place Rom. 9. to this purpose, I say the truth in Christ, saith the Apostle, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me witnesse in the Holy Ghost: that is, the Ho∣ly Ghost, who is privy to my conscience, bearing me witnesse, or my conscience which the Holy Ghost is privy to. Some other places of Scripture I could name, which may receive light from this notion, but I am loth to meddle with them. But for their interpretation, who expound this ly∣ing unto the Holy Ghost, of Ananias his hypocrisie, I cannot well see how it can stand; For Ananias dis∣sembled not with the Holy Ghost, but with men; the Holy Ghost knew his heart well enough. And the hypocrite properly lies unto men, who guesse only by the outside, and not unto God, who knows the heart. Others expound lying unto the Holy Ghost, as if it were lying to try whether the Holy Ghost in the A∣postles could discover him or not: But this is an harsh and forc'd sense. As for that in the 9. verse, whereon it is grounded; viz. How is it that ye have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? The word Tempt, or , is mistaken, the notion there∣of in Scripture being otherwhile, to provoke God by some presumptuous fact to anger; as it were to try whether he will punish or not, to dare God. There is an evident place for this sense, Numb. 14. 22. Those men, saith the Lord, which have seen my glory and my miracles which I did in Egypt and in the wildernesse, and have tempted mee now these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice. 23. Sure∣ly, they shall not see the land which I sware to
their Fathers, neither shall any of them that provoked me, see it. And thus much of the bare description of Ananias his sin: Come we now to the aggravation thereof; While it remained, was it not thine? and after it was sold, was it not in thy power? That is, before it was sold, was it not thine? and being sold, was not the money paid thee? was not the price in thine hand? Thou hast therefore no excuse for what thou hast done. For there were two cases which might have excused Ananias for bringing but part of the price: If either he had not been Dominus in solidum, the full Proprietary of what was sold; or had not received the whole price it was sold for. For, as for the first, it is a rule in Law, Quoties Dominium transfertur ad ai∣um, tale transfertur, quale apud eum fuit, qui tradit. A man can sell no more then is his. So that if Anani∣as had been owner but in part, he had power to dis∣pose but in part. Secondly, though he were Dominus in solidum, the full Proprietary of the field, and so had right enough to sell it, yet had not the whole price been received, and in his power and possession, he might still have been excused for bringing but part thereof. But Ananias could plead neither of these: for saith S. Peter, ; whilest it remai∣ned unsold, did it not remain thne? or wer't not thou owner? ; and when it was sold, was not the money it was sold for in thy possessi∣on? The first words, ; (though there be no such speech again in Scripture) yeeld the sense I speak of plainly enough, nor will they bear any other meaning, unlesse somewhat forsaking the letter,
we should with others construe them to imply, that Ananias was not constrained or urged to sell his pos∣session at all, but might have kept it still: Which sense is most commonly followed, and hath the au∣thority of Oecumenius in the words before alledged; Neque enim (saith he) invitos vos trahimus, sed quum ultronsè vobis placuerit offerre Deo victimam, rursus vos ipsos ad proprium usum insumere sacrilegium est. Therefore Beza translates the words, Nonne, si ser∣vasses (so he renders ) manebat tibi? True it is, this sense makes as much for the unexcu∣sablenesse of Ananias, as the other: for could he have alledged that what he had done for the sale of his land, was done not spontè, but coactè, not willingly, but by way of constraint, it might have excused him: be∣cause that act only is taken to be of force in Law, which a man consents unto: But that which is done by constraint or compulsion, is not done with full and free consent, and therefore bindes not. So this sense agrees well enough with the story, only it may seem somewhat to strain the words: Howsoever if you had rather follow it, because of the authority, I will not contend. Only note thus much, that the Sy∣riack Translator inclines to the first sense; for he tran∣slates, ; Nonne tuus erat antequam venderetur. A second plea for the excuse of Ananias might have been in case he had not yet received the full price, and so had not the whole money in his hand. But this S. Peter also takes from him,  (saith he) ; was it not when it was sold, in thy power? that is, was not the price it was sold for in
thine hands? For  must here be understood for the price of what was sold, or the field reduced to money: otherwise the contrary would be true to that which Peter intimates, namely, that when it was sold, it was now no longer in his power, because he had sold it. But the same words, , in thy pow∣er, I understand to be as much as, in thy possession, or in thine hand; meaning, as I have said, that he had received the price. For not only that which a man hath dominion and propriety in, but that also which he hath but in bare possession, is rightly said to be in his power: for in the Law Ius possessionis extends farther then Ius dominii, namely, as far as habere, to have a thing; Habere autem dicitur, non solùm qui rei dominus est, sed qui rei quidem dominus non est, sed rem tenet; that is, as they speak, corpore possessioni in∣sistit. And in this sense the price which Ananias had received, is said to have been , in his power, that is, in his possession: which will not seem a forc'd exposition, if we consider that  hath the same sense with , or in manu in the Hebrew; which implies not dominion only, but also bare pos∣session. As it is said of Abrahams servant, Gen. 24. 10. That all the goods of his Master were in his hand; as well as of the rich misers son, Eccles. 5. 14. That there was nothing in his hand; that is, he was a begger. Both which might be expressed by , as manus in Hebrew, yea and in Latine too, is well enough known to be put for . I confesse there is another exposition usually gi∣ven of these words, but it is such an one as directly contradicts the story; namely, that Was it not in thy
power? should be, was it not in thy power to have kept the price when it was sold? But first there is no such word in the Text as to keep it, and so we are not bound to understand it. It is only said, was it not in thy power? And if any verb be to be understood to supply the sense, why should it not as well be the con∣trary? was it not in thy power, to dispose it according to thy Vow? intimating there might be some just impediment after the sale, whereby he could not; especially he could not get the money. But to ex∣pound, was it not in thy power? to be, was it not in thy power to have kept it? is directly against the drift of the story: For how did Ananias sin in bring∣ing but part of the price, if he might have kept all? Is not his sin expresly placed in that he purloined of the price? what other fact of his is mentioned save only this? Nay, if this should be the meaning of the words, it would follow, a man might vow a thing unto God, and yet be at liberty when he had done, whether he would perform it or not: He might lie unto God, and yet be guiltlesse. Without doubt this exposition was it that so obscured the whole narrati∣on, that it could not appear, wherein Ananias his sin consisted. But his sin as I have already shewed out of the Fathers, was Sacriledge, and of that kinde where∣of Solomon speaks, Prov. 20. It is a snare to the man who devours that which is holy, and after vows to en∣quire. He had dedicated the whole value of the field in his conscience, and the purpose of his heart was evident by the sale thereof to that end; and yet when he had done, he repented him, and brought but part thereof. This meaning is evidently contained in the
body of the narration, and therefore such a sense of any part as cannot stand with this, is in no wise to be admitted. He that considers it, will perceive the ne∣cessity of what I say. Having thus cleared the words of the Text where there was any doubt or obscurity: Let us come to the Observations to be deduced thence; whereof the Relation affords us three evident ones: First, that Sa∣criledge is a sin against God, and not against men. Se∣condly, that that which is consecrate to God, must not be alienated to other uses. Thirdly, that it is an hainous sin which God thus severely punished. For the first, that Sacriledge is a sin against God, and not against men, is plain by the Text, Thou hast not lied, said Peter, unto man, but unto God. For whatsoever is sacred is his; yea, to be sacred is nothing else but to be set apart from mans interest to be Gods in a pecu∣liar propriety and relation. To steal then or allenate that which is sacred, is to rob God and not man; for he is robbed whose the propriety is, but of sacred things God is the Proprietary and not man. It is an error therefore to be observed among the Expositors of the Decalogue, who rank Sacriledge as a sin of the eighth Commandement, when Sacriledge as Sacri∣ledge is a sin of the first Table, and not of the second: A breach of the loialty we immediately owe to God, and not of the duty we owe to our neighbour. True it is, he that committeth Sacriledge, indirectly and by consequent, robbeth men too, namely, those who live of Gods provision; but Sacriledge it self is the robbing of God. This is evident by that of the Pro∣phet Malachi, Mal. 3. 8. Will a man rob God? yet ye
have robbed me; (saith the Prophet in the person of God) But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and Offerings. ver. 9. Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation. 10. Bring ye all the Tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it, &c. The observation of this would be usefull in the question of the due of Tithes; for the state thereof is not rightly framed, when the Quaere is made, Whether Tithes are due to the Ministers of the Gospel, mea∣ning as a duty of the people unto them: we should say rather, Tithes are due unto God; for so is the style of the Scripture, All the Tithes are mine: these I give to Levi, and not you. God maintains not his Ministers at others charges, but out of his own Re∣venue which he hath reserved to himself: As was well observed by Philo the Jew, in his Book de Sacerdotum honoribus, where speaking of that , that honorable maintenance, & without bo∣dily toil, which God had provided for his Priesthood; to take away from them out of whose labours this maintenance did accrue, all occasion of upbraiding those who by Gods assignment were to receive it, he saith, , &c. The people were commanded to bring their offerings first to the Temple, that thence the Priests might fetch them: It being not unworthy God himself, in token of gratitude
for his infinite bounty and benefits, to take some part back again from him upon whom he had conferred so great be∣nefits; and seeing himself the giver of all good gifts, stood in need of nothing, it pleased him to transfer that honourable maintenance, which was so returned him by way of thankfulnesse, upon those that served at his Altar, and ministred about holy things: , (as he gives the reason)  because they (the Priests) might take that their provision without being ashamed, as not comming from men, but from God the giver of all good gifts to every one. For they are his Ministers, and not the peoples, and therefore to re∣ceive their wages from their own Master who imploys them, and not from them. The stating of the questi∣on thus, would make the way to the resolution of the controversie more easie, and lesse invidious, whilest we should plead for God and not for our selves: for it is not needfull that all which is given unto God should be spent upon his Ministers, though it be true that their maintenance should be out of his Revenue, and that honorable & competent. But there are many other uses for the imploiment of bona sacra, if there be more then is competent for them and theirs, buil∣ding of Churches, defraying of such as are sent to Sy∣nods, and imploied upon other occasions of the Church, furnishing of treasures for a Holy War, the relief of the poor, the Orphan, the Widow, the Captive, and the distressed: All which belong to Christs provision. The second Observation is, That that which is consecrated to God, may not be alienated to other
uses. The reasons whereof are; First, because none can alienate but he that hath the propriety, and is owner: Dominium transferre non potest, qui ipse Do∣minus non est: But in things consecrate to God, none hath the propriety but God. For certainly, a man cannot be said to have given that unto God, wherein he still reserves the Title to himself as the Owner: he that gives, transferres the Dominium from himself, unto him to whom the gift is made. If therefore that which is given to God, be Gods, then must those who go about to alienate it, dispose of that which is none of theirs: which, whether it be just or not, let any man judge. Secondly, to alienate that which is given unto God, is a breach of vow or promise made unto him; A ly∣ing unto him, as my Text speaks. And if it be a sin not to perform what was vowed in the purpose of the heart only, as we see it was in this story of Ananias, much more is it to revoke a vow already performed. Nor will it serve turn to say, This reason may indeed concern the person himself that vowed, that he should not revoke again what he hath vowed; but doth not take away from the Common-wealth, or publike Ma∣gistrate their power to dispose of things subject to them. For howsoever it be true that every private person and his goods are under the tuition of the Publike, and the interest the Publike hath in either, cannot be given away by the sole act of a private per∣son: yet in this case that rule hath place which is gi∣ven by Almighty God, Numb. 30. concerning a Mai∣dens vow in her Fathers house, or a womans vow un∣der covert; That if the Father or the Husband hear
the Vow, and the bond wherewith she bound her soul, and disallow it not, but shall hold his peace; then the vow shall stand: So when the Common-wealth or pub∣like Magistrate consents to and allows what is done, as in this case it is supposed they do, the vow and de∣dication is also irrevocable on their part. Hence in Scripture it is made an inseparable pro∣perty of that which is sacred or Gods, not to be alie∣nable: As in Ezek. 48. 14. it is said of the portion of land to be laid out for the Levites, They shall not sell it, neither exchange, nor alienate the first-fruits of the land; (mark the reason;) for it is holy unto the Lord. This was the reason likewise, why a Jew might not sell outright his possession in the land of Canaan, but only for fifty years term, or untill the year of Jubilee, because the whole land was holy, and Gods land, and they but usufructuarii: So saith God, Levit. 25. 23. The land shall not be sold for ever, or outright; for the land is mine, for you are but strangers and sojourners with me: therefore in all the land of your possession, ye shall grant a redemption for the land. Where he saith, ye are strangers and sojourners with me; the meaning is, that as the Gentiles who became Proselytes, had no inheritance in the land, but dwelt therein as so∣journers; so was all Israel in the sight of God, who would have none accounted Proprietaries of that land but himself, having acquired it by his own pow∣erfull conquest from the Canaanite. For although in the same land, some part were yet in a more speci∣all manner the Lords land, yet comparatively, & se∣cundum quid, the whole land was sacred and His: As all Israel was a peculiar and holy people, though the
Tribe of Levi were in a more speciall sort the holy Tribe. Now if that which was but in a more generall sense holy and the Lords, might not be alienated; what shall we say of that which is holy and His in the most speciall manner of all? I speak all this while of that which is dedicate unto God absolutely, and not with limitation or for term of time only, for such De∣dications I suppose there may be. Now if any shall ask me, whether this assertion, That things dedicate to God are unalienable, admits not of some limitations? I answer, It may be; and that in two cases; If either it can be proved, that the donation made unto God were a nullity; or shewed, that God hath relinquished the right which once he had. But here the water begins to grow too deep for my wading; yet I hope I may say thus much, That whosoever he be that shall plead either of these two cases to acquit himself of Sacriledge, had need be sure in a point of such moment, that his evidence be good, and such as he can shew good warrant for out of Gods own book: To go upon bare conjectures will not be safe. And for direction and caution in this case, I will adde further, That not every sinfulnesse of the person who is the Donor, nor every default or blemish in the consecration, makes the act it self void. It appears in the story of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, in that oblation of Incense made by the two hundred and fifty Princes of the Congregation, whose service though it were so displeasing unto the Lord, that he sent fire from heaven to consume them; yet when all was done, he gave this commandment to Moses, Speak (saith he) unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the Priest, that
he take up the censers out of the burning; and scatter thou the fire yonder, for they are hallowed. The censers of those sinners against their souls; Let them make of them broad plates for a covering of the Altar: For they offe∣red them before the Lord, therefore they are hallowed, Num. 16 37, 38. Mark here; though they were offe∣red by sinfull men, and in a sinfull manner, and were not to be used any more for censers, yet must they be applied to some other holy use, because they were be∣come sacred by having been offered unto the Lord. So Rabbi Solomo Iarchi, , Unlawfull for common use, because they had made them vessels of Ministery. My last observation is raised from the judgement which befell Ananias; That it must needs be a hainous sin which God so severely punished, namely, with death: For there is no example to be found again in the whole New Testament, of so severe a punishment inflicted by the mouth of the Apostles, for any sin whatsoever. But this was the first consecration of goods that ever was made unto Christ our Lord, af∣ter he was invested to sit at the right hand of God: And this transgression of Ananias and Sapphira, the first Sacriledge that ever was committed against him; wherefore it was requisite that by the severity of the punishment thereof, he should now manifest unto men, what account he made, and how hainous he esteemed that sin; that it might be for an example to the worlds end unto all that should afterward beleeve in his name to beware thereof. So saith S. Hierome, Ananias & Sapphira quia post votum obtulerunt quasi sua & non ejus cui semel eavoverant, praesentem mane∣re
vindictam, non crudelitate Sententiae sed correction is exemplo. For the first in every kinde is the measure of that which follows; & though Sacriledge be not since punished by God as often as it is committed, by such a visible death, yet was it his purpose that by this first punishment we should take notice how great that sin was, and how displeasing in his sight, which was a punishment by the greatest visible judgement that could be. The like severe example to this, and for the like end, was that upon him who at first profaned the Sab∣bath day in the Wildernesse by gathering sticks, Num. 15. 32, &c. who by the sentence of God himself was put to death, and stoned by the whole Congregati∣on: That the Jews hereby might know, that howso∣ever the like were not ordinarily afterward to be in∣flicted for the like sin, yet that the gravity thereof in the eyes of God was still the same, which that first se∣verity intimated. Furthermore, it is worthy to be noted, that we finde three examples of such a kinde of coactive ju∣risdiction, (if I may so term it) exercised either by our Saviour when he was here on earth, or by his A∣postles; and all three for the profanation of that which was sacred. The first two by our Saviour him∣self against those that profaned his Temple, by buy∣ing and selling therein as a common place: For which at the first Passeover after his beginning to Preach the Gospel, he made him a whip and whipped such pro∣faners out of it, saying, Make not my Fathers house a house of Merchandise, Ioh. 2. 13. Another time, which was at his last Passeover, He overthrew the Tables of
the Money-changers, and the seats of them that sold doves, and would not suffer any to carry a Vessel through the Temple, telling them, that his house was made for an house of prayer, but they had made it a den of Theeves; Mat. 21. 12. Mark. 11. 15. Luk. 19 45. The third exam∣ple is this which the Apostle Peter exercised upon Ananias and Sapphira for Sacriledge. Whereby it should appear that how small account soever we are now adays wont to make of these two sins, yet in Gods esteem they are other manner of ones then we take them for. Another argument of the hainousnesse of the sin of Sacriledge is, that there was no sacrifice appointed in the Law to make atonement for the same, if it were committed willingly and wittingly; but onely if it were ignorantly done: For so we have it, Levit. 5. 15. If a soul commit a trespasse, and sin through ignorance in the holy things of the Lord, he shall bring for his tres∣passe unto the Lord, a ram without blemish out of the flock.—And he shall make amends for the harm that he hath done in the holy thing, and adde the fifth part thereunto.—And the Priest shall make an atone∣ment for him, and it shall be forgiven him. Thus if it were done ignorantly; but if wittingly and presum∣ptuously, there was no atonement appointed for it: though for other sins there be, even to perjury it self: For, as it is in Mal. 3. 4. Will a man rob his God? Another proof and testimony of the hainousnesse of this sin, is that so ancient a custome in Dedicati∣ons todade it with a curse; which to be no late custom (as some may suppose) taken up among Christians, but used both by Jew and Gentile before Christ was
born, may appear by that Decree of K. Darius for the building of the Temple of Jerusalem, which con∣cludes with this execration; The God that hath caused his name to dwell there, destroy all Kings and People, that shall put to their hand to destroy this house of God, which is at Ierusalem. I Darius have made a Decree, let it be done with speed. Ezra 6. 12. From this custome it came, that Anathema signi∣fies such a Donary given unto a Temple, and an ac∣cursed thing, or that which hath a curse with it. So  in Hebrew, a thing cursed and destined to destructi∣on, and also a kinde of offering or consecration which had a curse laid upon it, namely, a curse to him that should meddle with it. Which kinde of consecration had this peculiar, that even the very individuall might never be altered, changed, or redeemed upon any terms, Levit. 27. 28. whereas other offerings might, so that a valuable thing or better were given for them. Such a consecration (I mean a Cherem, or consecration under pain of a curse in the very indivi∣duall) was that of the City Iericho, as the First-fruits of the conquests of Canaan. To these Arguments I will adde two or three ex∣amples to this of Ananias, of the punishment of this sin, and so conclude. To begin then with the begin∣ning of all: Was not the first sin of Mankinde, for which himself, his posterity, and the whole earth was accursed, a great and capitall sin? But this if we look well into it, was no other for the species and kind of the Fact, then Sacriledge: Such the ancient Jews conceived Adams sin to have been; namely, a species of theft; as may be gathered out of the Book De
morte Mosis, where Moses is brought in deprecating death, and answering God that his case was not such as Adams; for he transgressed by stealing, and eating what God forbad him to meddle with, and so was just∣ly condemned, ; But who could Adam steal from, save from God on∣ly? And therefore I say the first sin of mankinde for the Fact, was the sin of Sacriledge: For whereas among all the trees of the Garden, which God gave man freely to enjoy, there was one Noli me tangere, which he had reserved unto himself as holy, in token he was Lord of the Garden; Man by eating of this as common, violated the sign of his Fealty unto the great Landlord of the whole Earth, and committed Sacriledge: for which he was cast out of Paradise, and the whole earth accursed for his sake. Might I now say, that to this day many a son of Adam is cast out of his Paradise, and the labours of his hands ac∣cursed for medling with this forbidden fruit? But to go on: Achan for nimming a wedge of gold, and a Baby∣lonish garment of the devoted thing of Iericho afore∣mentioned, brought a curse both upon himself, and the whole Congregation of Israel. For the Sacriledge of Eli's sons, who not content with those offerings which God allowed them for their maintenance, robbed him of his Sacrifices to furnish their own Tables; God gave not only his people, but even the Ark of his Covenant into the hands of the Philistins. For the Sacriledge of the seventh or Sabbaticall year, God caused his people to be carried captive,
and the land lie waste 70. years. By the Law of Moses every seventh year the whole land was sacred unto the Lord; so that no man that year might challenge any right of propriety, either to sow his field, or prune his vineyard, or reap that which grew of it self, or gather the fruits of his vineyard undressed, only he might eat thereof in the field, as at other times any might of that which was none of his, as he travelled by, otherwise every mans field and vineyard was that year free as well to the Servant as the Master, to the Stranger as the Owner, to beasts as well as to men. The same year also were all servants and all debts sa∣cred unto the Lord, and so to be released; whence that year was called The Lords Release. See Exod. 21. Levit. 25. Deut. 15. This consecration, being as much as the forgoing of the seventh part of every mans profits, the covetous Jews for many years neglected the observation thereof; For which sin the Lord, as himself professeth, caused them to be carried captive, and the land to lie waste seventy years without Inha∣bitant, till it had fulfilled the years of Sabbath which they observed not. For their Idolatry he gave them into the hands of the Gentiles their enemies: for their Sabbaticall Sacriledge, hee added this unto it, that they should beside their bondage, be carried captives into a strange Countrey, and their land lie desolate 70. years. For the Sacrilegious profanation of Belshazzar, in causing the Vessels of Gods House to be made his Quaf∣fing-bowls for himself and his Lords, his Wives and his Concubines to carouse in; was the hand writing up∣on the wall sent, which did so affright him, that the
Text says, His countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him so, that the joynts of his loyns were loosed, and his knees smote one against another. And the same night Gods vengeance light upon him, Dan. 5. Lastly, in the days of the Greek Kings, God gave his own Temple and worship to be profaned, and his people to be trodden under foot by Antiochus Epi∣phanes a Gentile King; because they themselves had a little before profaned the same with sacrilegious hands, having betraid the Treasures and Offerings of the same unto a Gentiles coffers, and sold the sacred Vessels to the Cities round about them. 2 Mac. 3, 4. & 5. cap.
JOEL 2. 17. Ioel 2. 17. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, weep between the Porch and the Altar, and say, Spare thy people, ô Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach. THese words are part of a description of a Fast, as the Context before and after will tell you; and they contain a Rite or Custome wont to be used in such solemne deprecations, namely, for the Priests of the Lord, (who are to be the Interces∣sors and Mouth of the Congregation) not then, as at other times, to enter into the Temple, to offer and sanctifie with Incense the prayers of the people at the Golden Altar before the vail, but to prostrate them∣selves without the door, between the Porch and the Altar of burnt-offering, as unworthy to approach the Throne of the Divine Majesty, or come over his Threshold, and therefore keeping a distance; as it is said also of the Publicane in the Gospel, that when he Luk. 18. 13 came into the Temple or Courts thereof to pray, he stood, , afarre off, saying, God be mercifull to me a sinner. For ye are to know, that the great or brasen Altar, called the Altar of burnt-offering, whereon
the sacrifices were offered, stood not within or under the roof of the Temple, but sub dio, over against the door or Porch thereof in the middle of the Priests 2 Chr. 15. 8 Ezek. 8. 16. Court. For at the entrance into the Temple or House of God, Solomon built a large vestibulum, or Porch, on each side whereof stood those two famous Pillars of brasse, the one called Iachin, and the other Boaz: Between this Porch and the great brazen Altar (which stood without it) the Priests the Ministers of the Lord are here commanded to weep, and say, Spare thy people, ô Lord, and give not thine heritage to Re∣proach. This Rite of humiliation, we finde mentioned in two other places of the Book of Scripture: As first, in that humiliation of Ezra for the peoples marrying of strange wives, Ezra 9. & Chap. 10. 1. where ha∣ving rent his garment and mantle, he cast himself down (saith the Text) before the House of the Lord, (viz. be∣fore the door or Porch thereof;) weeping, and confes∣sing, and said, Lord, I am ashamed to lift up my face to thee my God, for our iniquities are encreased over our head, and our trespasse is grown up unto the heavens. Another mention we have thereof in 1 Mac. 7. 38. when Nicanor proudly threatned, that unlesse Iudas Maccabeus and his host were delivered into his hand, if ever he returned in safety, he would burn up the House of God: Then the Priests, saith the Text, entred in (namely, into the Courts of Gods House) and stood between the Altar and the Temple, weeping and praying. Which passage the Greek Interpreter of that Book, did not well understand, when he rendred it, , before the Altar and the
Temple. For Ioseph Ben Gorion hath expresly in the Hebrew, , the very words of Ioel in my Text, between the Porch and the Altar. A like custome whereunto, and as is probable taken up in imitation thereof, is that of ours, To read the Letany (or our Parce Domine, parce populo tuo) kneeling at a low desk in the body of the Church before the Chancell door, (as was ordered by the first Injuncti∣ons of our Reformation when Procession was taken away) or at the bottome of the steps or ascent unto the Altar, as is used in the Cathedrall and Collegiate Churches. And this may suffice for explication of the Rite which the Prophet here describeth: Now the Lesson we are to learn from hence is, That the nature of a right and religious Fast consists in an humble demis∣sion and abjection of our selves before Almighty God, out of the apprehension of the greatnesse of his Majesty, and our unworthinesse to finde any favour at his hands, whom we have so much provoked by our sins. For this to have been the meaning of that Ceremony, besides the naturall signification of the deportment it self, appeareth by the Exordium I but now quoted of Ezra's confession, when he thus cast himself down before the Porch of the House of the Lord, weeping; Lord, I am ashamed (saith he) and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God: For our iniqui∣ties are increased over our head, and our trespasse is grown up to the heavens. Besides, thus to humble and bring us down, is the end why God sendeth his judge∣ments of Plague, Famine, or the like, for the aversi∣on whereof these solemne supplications and assem∣blies
are ordained. And therefore rightly at the be∣ginning of our publique worship of God are we ad∣monished to be humble, by some of the first words we are to utter; O come let us humble our selves, and fall down before the Lord with reverence and fear. Hence fasting and humbling a mans self go in Scripture for equipollent terms: My cloathing was sackcloth, (saith David, Psal. 35. 13.) I humbled my self with fasting. So Ahab humbled himself, and thereby deferred his judgement, 1 King. 21. 29. Hezekiah humbled him∣self, both he and all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, 2 Chron. 32. 26. Manasseh is said likewise to have be∣sought the Lord and humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, 2 Chr. 33. No disposition fit so and apt for devotion as hu∣mility; no more powerfull means to prevail with God and appease his wrath, then this abjection of our selves; Satis est prostrasse Leoni; Let me with reve∣rence apply it unto the Majesty of God. For all Eminency is worshipped with humility, reverence, and submission, that is, as we are wont and rightly to speak, by keeping a distance. Therefore the soveraign or supreme Excellency of God must be adored with the lowest demission and greatest stoop the soul can make. We finde by experience that that disposition of the eye, which fitteth us to behold the visible Sun, maketh a man blinde when he looketh down upon himself: So here, the apprehension of the transcendent excellency of God, ten thousand times brighter then the Sun, if truly admitted into our hearts, will darken all our overweening conceit of any worthinesse in our selves. The greater we would
apprehend his power, the more sensible must we be of our own weaknesse; The greater we acknowledge his goodnesse, the lesse goodnesse must we see in our selves: The more we would apprehend his wise∣dome, the lesse we are to be puffed up with our own knowledge: As in a pair of skales, the higher we would raise one skale, the lower we pull down the other; so the higher we raise God in our hearts, the lower we must depresse our selves. Hence we find the humblest natures, and the most humbled condition, to be the fittest for devotion; I say, the humblest natures are the most pliable and ap∣test to Religion: whereas those which the world is wont to commend for brave spirits, of all others buckle the worst thereto: But let the world fancy what it will, God seeth not as man seeth; It is not the tallest Eliab, but the humblest David who is the man after Gods own heart; He that humbleth himself as a little childe, the same is the tallest and goodliest soul for the Kingdome of God: The Stars in the Firmament howsoever they here seem small to us, yet are bigger then the earth; so he that is despicable and small here in the eyes of men, is there a great one in the eyes of God. Let those therefore that think all worth resides in a lofty and brave spirit, remember, that the Devil was a braver fellow then any of them all, and that his high and lofty spirit, was the cause of his downfall and Apostasie from his Creator, and so of that damnation to everlasting fire prepared for him and his Angels. And as the humblest nature, so the humblest or most humbled state and condition, is the fittest also
for the exercise of devotion, as the poor and mean, rather then the rich and full. Wherefore Agur desi∣red of God, not to give him more then food convenient for him, lest being full he should deny him, and say, Who is the Lord? Such likewise is the state of adversity and affliction, whence it is that God useth this disci∣pline of his corrections and judgements, to make us crouch and bow down unto him, when he seeth us ready to forget him. Whence David, Psal. 94. 12. pronounceth the man blessed whom the Lord chastiseth; and Psal. 119. ver. 67, 71. Before I was afflicted, saith he, I went astray, but now I have kept thy word. It is good for me that I have been afflicted. For diseases, say the Physitians, must be cured by contraries: It was pride that caused the disloialty and rebellion both of men and Angels against their God and Maker; Whence it is that Syracides saith, Ecclus. 10. 12. The beginning of pride is when one departeth from God, and his heart is turned away from his Maker. 13. For pride is the beginning of sin, and he that hath it, shall pour out abomination. If pride be the beginning of our rebel∣lion against God, then must lowlinesse be the proper disposition of those who fear and worship him; And so Tanto quisque est vilior Deo, quanto est pretiosior sibi. Now then to return to our Argument of Fasting; we may observe beside the ceremony specified in my Text, that all other Rites or Ceremonies used by the Ancients in this solemne devotion, or yet continued by us, imply nothing else but lowlinesse and humility, partly to work and beget it, partly to expresse and sig∣nifie it. They are reducible to three heads: 1. of ha∣bit;
2. of gesture; 3. of diet. For habit, it was anci∣ently sackcloth and ashes, by the coursenesse of the sackcloth they ranked themselves, as it were, amongst the meanest and lowest condition of men; by ashes, and sometimes earth upon their heads, they made themselves lower then the lowest of the creatures of God: For the lowest of the elements is the earth, then which we use to say a man cannot fall lower, Qui jacet in terra, non habet unde cadat. For gesture, they sate or lay upon the ground, which in the Primi∣tive Church was called, , humicubatio; a na∣turall ceremony both to expresse, and ingenerate or encrease this disposition of lowlinesse and abjection of our selves; and as frequently practised by our de∣vout Fore-fathers, as it is seldome or never used amongst us. It were a thing most comely, and un∣doubtedly most profitable, if either these ceremonies, or some other answerable to them, were revived amongst us at such times as these. If we were all of us this day attired, if not in sackcloth, (which perhaps sutes not so well with the custome of our Nation) yet in the dolefullest habit of mourners; if we lay all groveling upon the ground; would not such a rufull spectacle, would not the very sight of so uncouth an assembly, much afflict and move us? The mournfull hue of Funerall solemnities, we know by experience, will often make them to weep, who otherwise have no particular cause of sorrow; how much more when they have? But the principall ceremony, and which we still re∣tain, is abstinence from meat and drink, whence this kinde of supplication hath the name of Fasting: the
end thereof being as to bring down our bodies, there∣by the better to humble our souls, so to expresse and testifie the same. Mores animi sequuntur temper amen∣tum corporis: If the body be full and lusty, the minde will be lofty and refractory, and most unfit and un∣composed to approach the Divine Majesty with reve∣rence and fear. How uncomposed is that heart to sue to God for mercy, and aversion of his judgements, which is fraught with rebellious, unclean and lustfull thoughts, like so many dogges barking within it? But these are all ingendred and cherished by full feeding, and cannot be easily quelled unlesse they be starved: When I fed Israel to the full (saith the Lord Ier. 5. 7, 8.) then they committed adultery and assembled by troups in harlots houses, &c. Ieshurun (saith Moses in his Prophe∣ticall song Deut. 32. 15.) waxed fat and kicked, and for∣sook the Lord that made him, and lightly esteemed of the Rock of his salvation. Wherefore S. Paul was fain to pinch his body, and bring it down with Fasting; I keep under my body (saith he 1 Cor. 9. ult.) and bring it into subjection, lst that by any means when I have preached unto others, I my self should be a cast-away. Hilarion a religious young man, when after much abstinence and course diet he felt his flesh still unruly and rebellious; Ego, inquit, Aselle, faciam ut non Calcitres, nec te hordeo aam, sed paleis, Fame & siti te conficiam: such is the danger of a pam∣pered body, and such the necessity of keeping it under. But as Fasting is a Physicall means (if it be used to purpose) to take down the loftinesse of our minds and affections, by subtracting the fuell and foment of our lusts, which is full feeding; so is it a ceremony
chosen for that naturall effect it hath to signifie and testifie, that by reflection upon our vilenesse and un∣worthinesse, we strike the sail of our high flying affe∣ctions, and humble our selves before the Majesty of Almighty God upon such occasions as these. For as we use feasting not only to beget, but also to expresse and testifie our erection and chearfulnesse of heart in times of joyfulnesse, (whence in the Old Testament, to rejoyce before the Lord, is put for to feast before him;) So is fasting, when we would intend our devotions, used, not only as a means to further, but also as a ce∣remony; whereby we testifie our sorrowfull dejection and humiliation of minde before God. Well then, you see what is the chief end we are to aim at in this our solemne abstinence, namely, to take down our proud hearts, and bring them to a state of lowlinesse and humility, a disposition so acceptable and prevailing with God; to check our high-moun∣ting passions, and allay the smoaking flames of our unruly lusts; which as it is at all times requisite in some measure, whensoever we approach the Majesty of God to sue for mercy and forgivenesse; so then especially, and in a more then usuall manner, when God shakes the rod of his judgements over our heads, and biddeth us down and prostrate both soul and body before him, lest his wrath break us in pie∣ces if we will not bow. He that hath attained this, hath fasted well; he that hath not, may hereby know, he hath not done enough, or not as he should do. If the boiling of our lusts be cooled and calmed; if the swelling conceits of worth in our selves be taken down, with a true and feeling
apprehension of our vilenesse and wretchednesse through sin, which maketh us the most unworthy creatures in the world; if those ramping weeds of contempt and despising of others, be cropped and withered, (and these I can tell you will quite spoil a garden where many good flowers grow;) If after this manner we be affected, then are we humbled. If not, we are not sufficiently taken down; all our ser∣vice is hypocrisie, nor will our devotions be accepted of that all-seeing Majesty who resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble.
GEN. 3. 13, 14, 15. Gen. 3 13, 14, 15. 13. And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is this that thou hast done? And the woman said, The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. 14. And the Lord God said unto the Serpent, Be∣cause thou hast done this, thou art cursed above all cattell, and above every beast of the field: upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life. 15. And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel. THE Story, whereof the words I have read are part, is so well known to all, that it would be needless to spend time in any long preface thereof; Who knows not the story of Adams fall? who hath not heard of the sin of Eve our Mother? If there were no Scripture, yet the unsampled irregularity of our whole nature, which all the time of our life runs counter to all order and right reason, the wofull misery of our condition be∣ing
a scene of sorrow without any rest or content∣ment: This might breed some generall suspition, that Ab initio non fuit ita, but that he who made us Lords of his creatures, made us not so worthlesse and vile as now we are, but that some common Father to us all, had drunken some strange and devillish poyson, wherewith the whole race is infected. This poyson saith the Scripture, was the breach of Gods comman∣dement in Paradise, by eating of the forbidden fruit: for which Adam being called to an account by the great Judge, and laying the fault upon the woman which God had given him for an helper, God vouch∣safes, as ye hear in my Text, to examine the Woman, saying, What is this that thou hast done? And she an∣swers, The Serpent beguiled me and I did eat. These words contain in them two parts; First, Gods Inquisition accusing. Secondly, the womans Confession excusing her fact. The first in the first words, And the Lord said unto the woman, &c. The se∣cond in the last words, And the woman said, The Ser∣pent, &c. For the first words which God speaks being considered absolutely, are an indictment for some crime; as they are interrogative, they are an inquisiti∣on concerning the same, and therefore I call them an Inquisition accusing. So the second are a Confession, as the woman says, I have eaten; but with an excuse when she says, The Serpent beguiled me; and therefore I call them, a Confession excusing. In the Inquisition are two things to be considered, First, the Author and Person who makes it, which is the Lord God himself; So saith my Text, And the Lord God said unto the woman. Secondly, the Inquisi∣tion
it self, What is this that thou hast done? In the Person who comes and makes this Inquest, being the Lord God himself, we may observe and behold his , his wonderfull goodnesse, and unspeakable love to mankinde, which here reveals it self in four most remarkable circumstances: First, in his forbea∣rance; And the Lord said; When said the Lord? namely, not till Adam had accused her; she who was first in the sin, was last questioned for the same; and that too because her husband had appealed her. God knew and observed well enough the first degree, and every progresse of her sin, he needed no information from another, yet as though he were loth to take no∣tice thereof, as though he were loth to finde her guilty, yea as though he were loth to denounce the punishment which his Justice required, he comes not against her untill now; and that as though he were unwilling to come at all. If we look back into the story, we shall yet finde a further confirmation thereof: How long did God hold his hand before he stripped the woman especi∣ally, of that glorious beauty of her integrity, and made her with opened eies to see her shamefull nakednesse? She had at the first onset of her conference with the Serpent, sinned a sin of unbeleef of God, and yet God spared her: In the progresse she sinned more in her proud ambition of being like to God himself, and to be wise above what was given her; and God yet spa∣red her: She sinned when she coveted and longed once to eat of the forbidden fruit, when it began to seem more pleasing and desirable unto her then obe∣dience to Gods Commandement; and God yet spa∣red
her: At last she takes and eats thereof, and so came to the heighth and consummation of her sin, and yet behold and see the clemency and longanimity of our good God, he paused yet a while untill she had given unto her husband also, and then, and not till then, he opened their eyes to see their wofull mi∣sery. A lesson first to us men, if so be we think the ex∣ample of God worthy our imitation, to bear long with our brother as God bears with us; to admonish him, as it is in the Gospel, the first, second and third time, before we use him like an Heathen or a Publi∣can; to forgive him seven times, yea, (as Christ says to Peter) if he repent and ask forgivenesse, seventy times seven times. Secondly, this may be a cordiall of spirituall com∣fort unto us sinners, though we make a shift to keep our selves from the execution of sin, yet we finde our hearts full of sinfull thoughts, ungodly desires, and unclean lusts, and such like sinfull motions from the infirmity of our flesh: which notwithstanding we cannot ever expell or be rid of, yet let us hope that God out of his mercy will bear with our weaknesse, and passe by our infirmities, who bore with the sin of our first Parents untill it came to execution. The second circumstance is the temper of his Ju∣stice; in that he vouchsafes first to enquire of the of∣fence, and examine the fact, before he gives sentence or proceeds to execution. The like example we have Gen. 11. where it is said, The Lord came down to see the City and Tower which the children of men had builded, afore he would confound their language, or scatter
them abroad from that ambitious Babel, upon the face of the earth. Again, Gen. 18. the Lord says, I will go down, and see whether they of Sodme have done altoge∣ther according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will know. He from whom no secrets are hid, he that formed the heart of man, and knows all the works we do; he that trieth and searcheth the heart and reins, even he will first examine the fact, will first hear what miserable man can say for himself, before his sentence shall passe upon him: not out of ignorance of what was done, for how should the om∣niscient God be ignorant? but out of his wonderfull clemency, and unspeakable moderation towards man: I say, towards man, for to him alone he shews this favour; for as for the Serpent, we see, he vouchsafes not to ask him one question, nor to expect what he could say for himself, but presently without exami∣nation proceeds to judgement against him. Doth the great God, the Almighty Creator of heaven and earth, deal with so unspeakable a temper with his creature, and is vile man, a base earth-worm, so austere unto his brother? It was the heighth of Eves whole ambition to be like unto God, but her off-springs ambition is to be most unlike unto him; He glories in mercy and clemency, we in rage and rash austerity: He hears his creature speak before he con∣demns him, we condemn our brother before we hear him speak. Be wise and learned ye Judges of the earth, let this great example of God be the pattern of your imitation; yea let no private man condemne another rashly, untill he hath heard what he may say for him∣self, as God himself here vouchsafed to go before us.
The third circumstance is Gods condescent unto man, in that he sends neither Angels nor Ministers to examine our first Parents, and to make inquisition of their offence, but he comes himself in person to take notice thereof. When men are offended, especially great men, they will not deign to look upon, or to admit into their presence those that have offended them: How great therefore is this indulgence of Al∣mighty God, who deigns here his presence to our most wretched and most naked Parents, who had so grievously sinned against him? How happily graced would a poor offender think himself, if he might be admitted to the presence of his Prince, there to say what he could either for his defence or excuse, or else to sue for mercy and move compassion? By how much therefore God is greater then the greatest Mo∣narch of the world, even as much as they are greater then nothing; so much is this indulgence of God here expressed in my Text to Eve, as before to her hus∣band, surpassing all the favour and condescent of men, who sent not for man, but came himself unto him; yea, who vouchsafed then to seek them out, when they ran away from him. Now all this is spoken , after the fashi∣on of men, and therefore not so much to expresse what God himself did, as what men ought to do: Let it be a lesson therefore to those who are set over others, not to be too hard of accesse to such as are obnoxious unto them. If God himself vouchsafed so far unto his creature so wretched, much more should man unto his brother. The fourth circumstance is the manner of his speech
to Eve, in that he that was the Lord God should so mildly speak unto her, What is this thou hast done? The Lord God said it, saith my Text, but who would not think it rather the speech of a familiar and con∣doling friend, then of so great a Judge, so greatly of∣fended: here is no word of asperity, but of lenity, no menacing, no upbraiding terms, but only, What is this thou hast done? And should not we learn hence not to insult over such, whose offences make them liable either to us or others? should we upbraid, rail, triumph, and vomit our impotency upon them? certainly we seem not to remember what a gentle and commiserating Judge God is, or that our selves are men, and have to deal with humane frailty, and mans miserable condition, which we ought to behold with pity, and not handle with bitternesse. THE next thing is, the inquisition it self; What is this thou hast done? Some reade, Why hast thou done this? expounding  for . But Eves an∣swer following where she saith, I have eaten, plainly argues the question was what she had done, and not why she had done it: And therefore I take the words as our Translation hath them, and understand this manner of asking by God to be a scheme of admirati∣on, and to imply an exaggeration of the womans sin, as if he had said, O what an horrible sin is this thou hast committed? How grievously hast thou transgressed? O what hast thou done? And therefore, God en∣quiring of her sin with exaggeration, she makes an∣swer with diminution; Indeed, she had offended be∣cause she had eaten, but yet the offence was the lesse, for the Serpent had deceived her.
This then being the meaning of the words, let us behold in them the greatnesse of the sin of our first Parents, which made the Lord God himself to say, What is this thou hast done? The greatnesse of this sin I will first consider as it concerns them both in gene∣rall, and then as in particular: The greatnesse of the sin in generall appears in these four considerations. First, it was a transgression of such a Law, as was given only to prove man whether he would be under God or no: For the morall Law which was written and engraven in the hearts of our first Parents, and was for the doing of things simply good, and abstai∣ning from things simply evill; such things as a good man would do, were there no commandment, and such things as he would not do, were there no prohi∣bition; so that in these there was no triall whether man would obey God or no, only because he com∣manded him, and meerly for obedience sake. And therefore had God ordained this Symbolicall Law, prohibiting a thing in it self neither good nor evill, neither pleasing nor displeasing unto God, but indif∣ferent, that mans observance thereof might be a pro∣fession and testimony, that he was willing to submit himself to Gods pleasure, only because it was his plea∣sure. And that it might yet the more appear, God made not choice of such a thing as man cared not for, but of a pleasant and desirable thing, whereunto the more his inclination was carried, the more by his ab∣staining might his willing subjection be approved: The violating therefore of this Law, was an open profession, that he would not be under God, and re∣nouncing of him to be his Lord. And this is the
first respect, wherein appears the greatnesse of A∣dams sin. The second consideration arguing the same is, that he on whom God had bestowed so many glorious en∣dowments, whom he had as it were stuffed with so many excellent abilities, and adomed with so many precious graces, that he should sin against him, and set so light by his commandment: for of those to whom God had given so much, he might justly re∣quire and expect much: Therefore those whom God hath furnished with the best gifts, either of knowledge or other abilities, they, if they sin, sin most grievously: so that in this respect the sin of Adam and Eve excee∣ded the sins of their posterity, as much as their inte∣grity did our corruption. The greater the person, the greater his sin: The sin of a Prince greater then the sin of a vulgar person, and therefore in the Law there was a greater Sacrifice to be offered for the sins of the Prince and Priest, then of the people. The third circumstance aggravating his sin, was the easinesse of the commandment, and the easinesse man had to keep the same, both in regard of himself, whom no itching concupiscence urged, as being al∣together free therefrom; and not as we his off-spring are continually vexed with the boiling thereof: Se∣condly, in regard of the thing it self he was to abstain from, being onely one fruit, in so great a liberty of all the garden besides. How easily might he have ab∣stain'd from one, to whom God had given the use of all saving this one? he wanted not to feed him, he wanted no variety of food, he had even enough to surfet on; only to approve his obedience to Him who
had given all the rest unto him, he was to abstain from one, and yet he would not: Quanta fait (saith S. Aug.) iniquitas in peccando, ubi tanta erat non peccandi fa∣cilitas? The fourth circumstance aggravating this sin, was the place, which was Paradise, as it were in Gods own presence, even afore his face: for as heaven above other parts of the world, is the place of Gods speciall presence; so was Paradise above other parts of the earth, as it were an heaven upon earth: the place wherein he singularly revealed himself, and therefore an holy place and the Temple of God. Do not men, otherwise giving the loose rein to wickednesse, yet abhorre to commit it in Gods Temple? How im∣pudently contumelious was this sin therefore which was committed in Gods very Presence-chamber? All these aggravations are common to both our Parents, which all laid together makes their sin as great as ever any was, saving the sin against the holy Ghost; for so the best Divines do think. But Eve addes one aggravation more to her weight, in that she was not content to sin her self alone, but she allured and drew her husband also into the like horrible transgression with her, whereby she was not only guil∣ty of her own personall sin, but of her husbands also. And this added so much unto her former summe, that S. Paul, 1 Tim. 2. 14. speaks of her as if she had been the only transgressour; Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived, was in the transgression: So great and horrible a thing it is in the Eye of God, to be cause or mover of anothers sin: woe be unto them, who by any means are the cause of anothers
fall: And justly might God say to Eve for this re∣spect though there had been no more, What is this that thou hast done? Now I come to the womans excuse, The Serpent beguiled me. In which words are three things consi∣derable: The author, the Serpent. The action, Guile. The object, Me. Concerning the author, the Serpent; two things are inquirable: first, what the Serpent was indeed▪ secondly, what Eve supposed him to be? For the first; I think none so unreasonable as to beleeve, it was the unreasonable and brute Serpent: for whence should he learn, or how should he understand Gods commandment to our first Parents? Or how is it possible a Serpent should speak, and not only so, but speak the language which Eve understood? For though some there be who think that beasts and birds have some speech-like utterings of themselves, yet none that a beast should speak the language of man. It remains therefore, that according unto the Scri∣ptures, it was that old deceiver the Devil and Satan, who abused the brute Serpent, either by entring into him, or taking his shape upon him. The last of which I rather incline unto, supposing it (as you shall hear presently) to be the law of spirits, when they have in∣tercourse or commerce with men, to take some vi∣sible shape upon them, as the Devil here the Serpents, whence he becomes styled in Scripture, The old Serpent. Now for the second question, what Eve took him to be, whether the Serpent or Satan? If we say she thought him to be the brute Serpent, how will this
stand with the perfection of mans knowledge in his integrity, to think a Serpent could speak like a reaso∣nable creature? who would not judge her a silly wo∣man now that should think so? and yet the wisest of us all is far short of Eve in regard of her knowledge then. Again, if we say she knew him to be the Devil; I will not ask why she would converse at all with a wicked spirit, who she knew had fallen from his Ma∣ker; but I would know, how we should construe the meaning of the Holy Ghost in the beginning of this Chapter, where he saith, The Serpent was the subtillest of all the beasts of the field which God had made; and so implies the womans opinion of the Serpents wisdome was the occasion why she was so beguiled: otherwise to what end are those words spoken, unlesse to shew that Satan chose the Serpents shape, that through the opinion and colour of his well-known wisdome and sagacity he might beguile the woman. For the assoiling of which difficulty I offer these propositions following: First, I will suppose there is a law in the commerce of spirits and men, that a spirit must present himself under the shape of some visible thing: For as in naturall and bodily things there is no entercourse of action and passion, unlesse the things have some proportion each to other, and unlesse they communicate in some common matter; so it seems God hath ordained a Law that invisible things should converse with things visible, in a shape, as they are, vi∣sible: which is so true, that the conversing presence of a spirit is called a Vision or Apparition. And experi∣ence with the Scriptures will shew us, that not only evil Angels, but good, yea God himself converseth
in this manner with men. And all this I suppose Eve knew. Secondly, I suppose further, that as spirits are to converse with men under some visible shape; so is there a law given them, that it must be under the shape of some such thing as may lesse or more re∣semble their condition: For as in nature we see every severall thing hath a severall and sutable physiogno∣my or figure, as a badge of the inward nature, where∣by it is known as by a habit of distinction; so it seems to be in the shapes and apparitions of Spirits. And as in a well governed Common-wealth, every sort and condition of men is known by some diffe∣ring habit, agreeable to his quality; so it seems it should be in Gods great Commonwealth, concer∣ning the shapes which spirits take upon them. And he that gave the law, that a man should not wear the habit of a woman, nor a woman the habit of a man, because as he had made them divers, so would he have them so known by their habits; so it seems, he will not suffer a good and a bad spirit, a noble and ignoble one to appear unto men after the same fashion. And this also I suppose Eve knew. Now from these grounds it will follow, that good Angels can take upon them no other shape but the shape of man, because their glorious excellency is re∣sembled only in the most excellent of visible crea∣tures; the shape of an inferiour creature would be un∣sutable, no other shape becomming those who are cal∣led the sons of God, but his only who was created after Gods own image. And yet not his neither ac∣cording as now it is, but according as he was before
his fall in that glorious beauty of his integrity. Age and deformity are the fruits of sin; and the Angel in the Gospel appears like a young man, his countenance like lightning, and his raiment white as snow as it were Mar. 16. 5. Mat. 28. 3. resembling the beauty of glorified bodies in immu∣tability, sublimity and purity. Hence also it follows on the contrary, that the Devil could not appear in humane shape, whilest man was in his integrity, because he was a spirit fallen from his first glorious perfection, and therefore must appear in such shape which might argue his imperfection and abasement, which was the shape of a beast: otherwise no reason can be given, why he should not rather have appeared unto Eve in the shape of a woman then of a Serpent; for so he might have gained an opinion with her both of more excellency and knowledge. But since the fall of man the case is altered, now we know he can take upon him the shape of man, and no wonder, since one falling star may well resemble ano∣ther: And therefore he appears it seems in the shape of mans imperfection, either for eyes or deformity, as like an old man, (for so the Witches say;) and per∣haps it is not altogether false, which is vulgarly affir∣med, that the Devil appearing in humane shape, hath always a deformity of some uncouth member or other; as though he could not yet take upon him humane shape entirely, for that man himself is not en∣tirely and utterly fallen as he is. By this time you see the difficulty of the question is eased: now it appears why Eve wondred not to see a spirit speak unto her in the shape of a Serpent, be∣cause she knew the law of spirits apparitions better
then we do. Again, when she saw the spirit who talked with her to have taken upon him the shape though of a beast, yet of the most sagacious beast of the field, she concluded according to our forelaid suppositions, that though he were one of the abased spirits, yet the shape he had taken resembling his nature, he must needs be a most crafty and sagacious one, and so might pry farther into Gods meaning then she was aware of. And thus you may see at last, how the opi∣nion of the Serpents subtilty occasioned Eves fall; as also why the Dev, of all other beasts of the field, took the shape of a Serpent, namely, to gain this opi∣nion of sagacity with the woman as one who knew the principles aforesaid. Here I observe that overmuch dotage upon a con∣ceived excellency, whether of wisdome or whatso∣ever else, without a speciall eye to Gods commande∣ment, hath ever been the occasion of greatest errours in the world, and the Devil under this mask, useth to blear our eyes, and with this bait to inveigle our hearts, that he may securely bring us to his lure. It was the mask of the Serpents wisdom and sagacity, above the rest of the beasts of the field, whereby he brought to passe our first Parents ruine. The admi∣red wisdome of the long living Fathers of the elder world, having been for so many ages as Oracles to their off-spring, grown even to a people and Nation while they yet lived, was the ground of the ancient Idolatry of mankinde, whilest they supposed that those to whom for wisdome they had recourse being living, could not but help them when they were dead. This we may learn out of Hesiod, The men, saith he,
of the golden age being once dead, became  they became godlings and Patrons of mortall men, &c. So the opinion of the blessed Martyrs superla∣tive glory in heaven, was made the occasion of the new-found Idolatry of the Christian Churches, wherewith they are for the greater part yet overwhel∣med. And the esteem which Peter had above the rest of the Apostles in regard of chiefdome, even in the Apostles times was abused by the old Deceiver to in∣stall the man of sin: This made S. Paul to say, the mystery of iniquity was even then working; and there∣fore laboured as far as he could to prevent it, by as 2 Thes. 2. 7. much depressing Peter as others exalted him. Nay, he puts the Churches in minde of this story of the Ser∣pents beguiling Eve, that her mis-hap might be a war∣ning to them; 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3. I am jealous over you (saith he) with a godly jealousie, for I have espoused you to one husband, that I might present you as a chaste Vir∣gin to Christ. But I fear lest by any means as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilly, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. And to come a little nearer home, have not our Adversa∣ries when they would get Disciples, learned this of the Devil, to possesse them first with an opinion of superlative learning in their Doctors surpassing any of ours? I will say no more in this point, but that we ought so to prize and admire the gifts and abilities of learning which God hath bestowed upon men, that the pole-starre of his sacred word may ever be in our eye. THE next thing to be spoken of is, the action,
Guile: and first, I shall shew what it is: To beguile is through a false faith and perswasion wrought by some argument of seeming good, to bereave a man of some good he had or hoped for, or to bring upon him some evill he expected not. Practice hath made it so well known, that I should not need to have given any definition or description thereof, but only for a more distinct consideration: whereas therefore I said, that guile wrought by forelaying a false perswasion or beleef, I would intimate, that it was nothing else but a practicall sophism, the premisses whereof are coun∣terfeit motives; the conclusion an erroneous executi∣on. Now as all practice or action consists in these two; The choice of our end; and the execution of means to attain thereunto: so is this practicall sophism we call Guile found in them both, either when an evil end is presented unto us in the counterfeit of a good, and so we are made to embrace Nubem pro Iunone, and find our selves deceiv'd in the event whatsoever the means were we have used: or else we apply such means as are either unlawfull or unsufficient to attain our end, as being so mask'd that they appear unto us far otherwise then they are. With both these sorts or parts of guile the Devil wrought our first Parents ru∣ine; first, by making it seem a thing desirable, and by all means to be laboured for, to be like unto God: which was an ambition of that whereof man was not only not capable, but such as little beseemed him to aspire unto, upon whom God had bestowed so great a measure of glorious perfections, as he seem'd a God amongst the rest of the creatures. What unthankful∣nesse was this, that he upon whom God bestowed so
much, as he was the glory of his workmanship, should yet think that God should envy him any degree of excellency fit for him? for this was the mask where∣with the Devil covered both the unfitnesse and im∣possibility of the end he insinuated; but he beguiled them. Secondly, he puts the same trick upon them in the choice of the means to be used, which was to transgresse the severe commandement of Almighty God: Had the aim been allowable, yet could not the means have been taken for good, but only of such as were beguiled, in that the Devil made the woman be∣leeve with his questioning the truth of Gods com∣mandement, that the danger was not great, nor so certain as it seemed; or that evil which might be in the action, would be counterveiled with the excellen∣cy to be attained thereby; the gloriousnesse of which end the Devil so strongly sounded, that it drowned in her imagination the least conceit of evil in the means. And as a man which always looks upward, sees not the danger in the path and way he walks in, untill he tumbles into a pit; so was it here with our first Mother, when thus the Devil beguiled her. This first act of the Devil is that wherein we may behold as in a glasse, the art he still useth to tempt Eph. 6. 11. us unto sin, and bring us to utter destruction: All his method is nothing else but guile; he presents all things fair unto our face, and suffers not evil to ap∣pear before us in its own ugly shape, for so every man would fly from it: when he would tempt a man to covetousnesse, he cals it thrift; when to bribes, he cals them gratuities; when to intemperance, forsooth it is good fellowship; when to cruelty, it must be cal∣led
justice; when to prodigality, it must be taken for no other but liberality, and such like. This is that which the Scripture saith, The Devil transforms him∣self into an Angel of light: when he draws to vice, he would seem to mean nothing but virtue; when he tempts to works of darknesse, he presents them as the works of light; when he plots our ruine and everla∣sting undoing, he bears us in hand, that all aims at our welfare and felicity. This is that which is meant in the following verse, where it is said, The seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents head, but the Serpent should bruise his heel; as though the Serpent should love to assault at una∣wares, and so as he might not be seen to intend any such matter before he had done the feat, and there∣fore his fashion should be to come behinde a man, and as it were to catch him by the heel. For that this was the embleme of guile and deceitfull dealing, it may be gathered from the story of Iacob and Esau, when as Esau being beguiled of the blessing by the craft of his brother Iacob, makes an allusion to his name; Well, saith he, may he be called Iacob, for he hath beguiled me now these two times: Now Iacob had his name in the beginning because he caught his bro∣ther by the heel, when he came out of the womb; for  signifies the heel, and , is as much to say, as an Heeler, whence the allusion of Esau hath this sense, if we take it verbatim; My brother may well be called an Heeler, for he hath heeled me these two times: Now because to come behinde a man, and take him by the heel was foul play, therefore of  an heel comes , (dolus, fallacia) guile, and , a verb signifying
to deceive or beguile, which is the second sense that Esau would imply by his allusion, that his brother might well be called a Beguiler, because he had begui∣led him now these two times. But of this I shall have occasion to speak more hereafter. Since therefore we have seen the Devils practice, and learned that he works altogether by deceit, how wary should the consideration hereof make us to be in all the ways of our life? If we knew we had to deal with a man that used to beguile all that came into his fingers, in what continuall jealousie and suspition would we be? how would we cast about to find which way he might not circumvent us? how wary would we be to entertain any proffer from him? there could be nothing made seem so fair, but we would suspect some foul meaning to be in it. If we would be thus disposed in matters of lesser moment, how carefull should we be in greater? if where the ability of de∣ceiving is lesser, what manner of men should we be when we know the Arch-deceiver of the world is continually attending upon us, labouring to beguile us? should we here adventure upon any action rashly? No surely; but be first well advised. We should not be too confident in our own perswasions, lest they may prove the Devils suggestions: and though the reasons we apprehend be never so good, and the case seem never so clear, and the way we are to walk in never so secure, yet ought we to make some pause, and act a fit of jealousie afore we adventure. And thus much of the Serpents action, Guile: Now I come to the object, Me. Me, that is, the wea∣ker of the two. Me, so much endeared in the affection
of my Lord, that he could not but do any thing at my request. Of these two respects I will speak in or∣der; and first of the first. The Devil assaults us there where he finds us weakest, as here in this first sin he attempts the woman the weaker vessell; The Serpent beguiled me: for he knows this is the readiest way to overcome. A skilfull Commander being to take a City, will not make his battery on that part of the wall, which is strongly fortified, (for so he might make his shot in vain;) but will assault it there where it is least defensible, where a breach will be easily made, and yet entring he becomes Master of the whole, how well fortified soever: even so the Devil will be sure to force us there where we are least able to resist; if he finds any part not well bulwark'd with resolution, there he plants the Cannon of his temptation, and with an easie breach becomes Master of the whole piece. Hence we may learn what to esteem of those im∣perfect courses concerning the Commandements of God, too frequent among the sons of men: There are many who resolve firmly against divers kinds of sins, that they will never be drawn by any means to commit them, but they have always some one where∣in they demurre whether they should resolve to yeeld to or not, if occasion should be offered. Many will fortify themselves very strongly against the assaults of bribery, of covetousnesse, of theft, of promise-break∣ing, of drunkennesse; but as concerning their lust they are unresolved what to do, if a temptation should assault them; & so in others, there is some other incli∣nation but slenderly guarded, when for the rest they
could glory how strongly they are fortified. But we must know, that when the Devil comes to assault us, he will passe by us where we are strength, and attempt us only there where our weaknesse lies; and then we shall find all our labour lost, and all our other strength to have stood us in little stead: For what wil it boot to guard the wals of our City never so strongly, if but one part be left unguarded for the enemies to enter? Is not all the enemies? A Ship though in other parts never so sound, will sink, if but one leaking hole be left unstopped. Let us therefore survey our hearts diligently, and finding where we lie exposed to dan∣ger, there most to strengthen our selves with reso∣lution. And thus I come to the second respect, why the Devil made choice of the woman, namely, because of the vehemency of her husbands affection towards her; so that to have gained her was to have gotten him al∣so: for he seemed to think that her strength in her husbands affection was more powerfull to prevail with him, then his subtile motives were to overcome him; and indeed the event prov'd he was not much deceiv'd. Hence we are to observe that the Devil ta∣keth advantage of the vehemency of our passions, to work our overthrow, if he once finde these to fasten his hold by, he then thinks he may lead us whither he list. To have gained our affections is as it were to have gotten a party within, which is a dangerous ad∣vantage to further the invasion of an enemy; especi∣ally when most of our passions are our favorites, which we can deny nothing they ask, and if they be once bribed, will work us wholly to the dispose of our arch∣enemy. Eph. 4. 27.
That we may not therefore afford the Devil this advantage, and as it were reach him a rope to hang us withall, it behoves us so to govern and temper our passions and affections, that they transport us not in∣to the Devils jurisdiction: which that we may the better do, it will not be unfit to set down some rules for performance thereof, First, therefore it is best to resist our passions at the beginning, and to use the same policy which Pharaoh did with the Israelites, that they might not over-run his Country, in killing all their infants as soon as they were born. While the sore is green Surgeons seldom despair, but festered once, they hardly cure it: So it is with the passions of our minde, when they are first growing, they are soon curbed, but being a little en∣tertained, they will hardly be subdued. The second means is, to inure our selves to crosse our passions when there is no danger, and to bridle our selves sometimes from ordinary and lawfull de∣sires, that we may do it with more ease when we are in danger; for how can he hope to be able to master his passions when dangerous temptations assault him, who never used them to it in the time of his security? We know that men who would fit themselves for the Wars, will practice in the time of peace when there is no enemy near, and will toil and labour when they might be at rest, will lie hard when they may com∣mand a soft bed, will watch when they might sleep, and all to make themable to indure the like when they shall have need: the like must we do, that we may get an habit to crosse and subdue our passions when we shall have need.
The third means is, to fly occasions which may in∣cense the passions whereunto we are inclined: Occa∣siones faciunt latrones, saith the Proverb, Occasion makes him a theef, which else might have been an honest man; wherefore he that commits himself to Sea in a boisterous tempest is worthy to suffer ship∣wrack; and he that willingly puts himself in the com∣pany of infected persons, may blame himself if he fall into their diseases. Lastly, but chiefly, when thy passions are most ve∣hement, then seek for succour from heaven, fly un∣der the wings of Christ as the chickens under the hen, when the kite seeks to devour them: beat at the gates of mercy, and crave grace to overcome thy misery: He is thy Father and will not give thee a Ser∣pent, if thou ask him Fish: humble thy self before him, open thy sores and wounds unto him, and the good Samaritan will pour in both wine and oyl, and thy passions shall melt and fall away as clouds are dispelled and consumed by the Sun.
VERSE 14. And the Lord said unto the Serpent, &c. THese words contain in them the Serpents doom and destiny, pronounced upon him by the great Lord of Heaven and Earth; They contain in them two parts: First, the reason of this sentence in the words, Because thou hast done this: Secondly, the sentence it self in the words following, Thou art cursed above all cattell, &c. The reason of this heavy doom is, Because he had done this. What This? namely, because he had beguiled the man and woman, which God had made, and caused them to transgresse his great commandment. He therefore that is the cause and occasion of anothers sin, is as hatefull to God as the door, and is liable to as great, or rather a greater punishment then he: for the Serpent here for causing hath this doom, as well as the man and woman for doing. Nay, which is to be observed, his doom is the first read unto him, as if he were the arch∣offender, and not to the man or woman till he was done with: What should this mean, but that his fault being the mover, was more grievous in the eyes of God then theirs? which is the reason also, why the woman comes in the next place to have her sentence, because she had been a sin-maker, and was guilty not only of her own personall sin, but of her husbands al∣so; whence the man who had sinn'd only himself, and not caused others to sin, had his judgement last of all. I might also confirm the same from the qua∣lity
of their severall judgements, in that the Serpent alone is doom'd to be accursed, and no such word spoken either of the man or the woman. But I shall not need to tarry here to prove how hor∣rible and fearfull a thing it is to be the author of ano∣thers sin: We know they are the words of our Savi∣our, Mat. 18. 6, 7. Wo unto the world because of scan∣dals, and woe unto the man by whom a scandall commeth; it were better for him that a milstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. And S. Paul (1 Cor. 8.) would eat no meat as long as the world lasteth, rather then make his brother to of∣fend. Would they would consider this, who are not content alone to sin themselves, but play the Devil in corrupting others. It seems they long to be double damn'd. I would also they would think of this, who make no conscience at all by extremities and vexati∣ons, and other grievances, to drive a man to perjury, and other grievous sins, and yet think themselves free, when they should know, that he that is the au∣thor of anothers sin, makes anothers guilt his own, and shall share in the punishment every whit as deep as he. But this shall suffice to have observed in the first part, the reason of the Serpents doom. Now I come to the second, the doom it self: wherein the words as you see have all relation to the Serpent, for the Lord said unto the Serpent, Thou are cursed &c. Thou shalt go upon thy brest, &c. But because this Serpent was more then a brute Serpent, the Devil himself be∣ing the chief agent in this his instrument, it is a thing much controverted, upon which of these this curse is
here pronounced. Some would have it spoken only of the brute Serpent, because here is a comparison made with cattell and beasts of the field, thereby ac∣counting the Serpent one of that number. Besides, Satan they say was accursed before this time, and some of the words in this curse cannot well be appli∣ed to any but the brute Serpent, as that he should eat the dust of the earth, &c. Others would have this curse pronounced only upon the spirituall Serpent the De∣vil, because the brute Serpent was only an instrument abused by the Devil, and neither knew what was done, nor could do withall; and why should it there∣fore be punished? Others would divide the contro∣versie, applying the first part of the curse in the 14. verse, to the brute Serpent, the latter in the 15. verse, to the Devil or spirituall Serpent; because as the lat∣ter of the promised seed of the woman, which should destroy the Serpent and his seed, must needs be meant of Christ and Satan; so the former words are most fitly appliable to the brute Serpent only: But against this may be said, that the same Thou and Thee spoken of in the first part of the curse, is all one with the Thou and Thee in the latter; and therefore of what∣soever the first is meant, of the same is also meant the latter. There is therefore a fourth opinion, that this curse is throughout pronounced upon both, both upon the Serpent and the Devil: In which, though there be some difference about the manner how, yet I imbrace it as the truest, as not only conceiving it may be so, by the fitnesse of all the parts so applied to both; but think moreover that this only ought to be the meaning and no other, if it be conceived as I am now to shew.
For in the first place, the Devil when he beguiled man, came not as a naked spirit, but in the shape and figure of a Serpent, (as I have shew'd heretofore;) and therefore that his punishment in the manner might be sutable and answerable to his offence, he was to receive his doom likewise under the figure of a Serpent, and the style thereof framed unto a Serpents condition: for it is the constant method of the all∣wise God to brand the punishment with the stamp of the sin, that the offender thereby might not only know what he felt, but also read why he suffered. Why was Adonibezeks thumbs and great toes cut off, but that he might read therein, as he did, his former cruelty? Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbs and toes cut off, gathered meat under my Table. As I have done, so God hath requited me. Why was Pharaoh with his Host rather drowned in the Sea, then slain in the field, but that all the world might read it was for his cruell Edict to drown all the male children of the Hebrews? Why did Absalom lie with Davids Con∣cubines, but to put David in minde that he had lien with Vriahs wife? And why was the curse of the De∣vil shaped here in and unto the condition of the Ser∣pent, but because he had beguiled man in a Serpents shape? Secondly, for the Serpent; The fashion, excellen∣cy and subtilty of the Serpent above all the beasts which God had made, the Devil had abused to gain credit with the woman, that he was an excellent and a most sagacious spirit, and therefore might be able to pry farther into Gods meaning then she could, which was the cause of her attention, and so of her ruine. For
I have shewed heretofore that the woman in the state of integrity knew well enough, that as it was the law of spirits in their commerce with men, to present themselves under the shape of some visible thing: so it must be likewise under the shape of some such thing, as may more or lesse resemble their condition: And that as the glorious spirits might take no other shape but of man, the glory of visible creatures: so the fallen spirits could not then afore mans fall, take any other shape but of a beast, thereby to bewray his abasement: yet because the Devil here took upon him the shape of the most wise and most excellent of beasts, he so bleared the womans eyes with an opini∣on of his excellency and sagacity, that in a manner she forgot, or regarded not, that he was one of the evil and abased spirits, which was the ground of her miserable ruine and overthrow. Now because the excellency and sagacity of the Serpent had thus been the occasion of mans confusi∣on, by being made the lying counterfeit of the De∣vils excellency and wisdome, and the mask whereby he so covered his vilenesse, that the woman took him not to be as he was indeed: Therefore God in his wisdome thought good to change the copy, and henceforth to blurre and deface that unhappy physi∣ognomicall letter, and by abasing the Serpent for the time to come, to make him an everlasting embleme and monument, wherein man might hieroglyphically read the malice, vilenesse and execrable basenesse of that wicked spirit which had beguiled him, to hate him (as now we do the Serpent) with mortall hatred, and by his unlucky and brained fortune, to expect the
Devils destiny: In a word, that which was once used for a mask to cover the Devils knavery, should for the future be a glasse wherein to behold his villany. These being the reasons which have led me to un∣derstand this curse in an equall sense, both of the brute Serpent and the Devil, and in the literall applied unto the Serpent, yet therein shaping out the malediction of the Devil, as truly as the Devil had taken upon him the Serpents shape: Let us now come to the particular handling of the words; and first consider them, as they are the curse of the unreasonable Ser∣pent. Secondly, as they include the Devils male∣diction. But for the better understanding thereof, before we can proceed, two things are to be resolv'd: First, how it could be just with God to punish the brute Serpent, who was Instrumentum , and had neither will to sin, nor yet knowledge of what the Devill had done; especially, if we suppose as I have hitherto, that the Devil took only the shape of a Ser∣pent, which the Serpent could not do withall? for this argument hath driven some to affirm, that the whole curse was to be understood only of the spiri∣tuall Serpent, and not at all of the naturall. But why should this stumble them more as concerning the justnesse of God, then that in Adams censure in the 17. ver. where the whole earth is cursed for Adams sake, Cursed be the earth for thy sake, &c. But what had the earth done? or how was it guilty of Adams transgres∣sion? Again, in the sixth Chapter following it is expresly said, That because God saw the wickednesse of man was great in the earth, he said, I will destroy both
man and beast, and the creeping things, and the fowls of the aire. But how were the beasts, the creeping things, and the fowls of the air partakers of mans wicked∣nesse? what had they done more then been abused by him? which they could not avoid he being their Lord and Master. And should not we think that Law of God just, Levit. 20. where if a man commit abo∣mination with a beast, the beast is commanded to be slain as well as the man, who only had sinned? This proves that objection to be wholly insufficient: But yet the difficulty of the resolution, How this may stand with Gods justice, remains as before; which therefore comes now to be resolved. First, we know that all the beasts of the field, all the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the Sea were made for the use and service of man in one kinde or other, as he should have occasion to use them. Se∣condly, if man had stood in his first creation, the ser∣vice of the creatures should have been sutable to his excellency and integrity, and so far more noble then now it is, that even the creatures might be partakers of his happinesse then, that since they yet look for the glorious liberty of the sons of God to come. Third∣ly, but when man was once fallen, the service of the creature was altered, and became a bondage of cor∣ruption, as S. Paul terms it, that is, gnoble & sutable to the corrupt condition of man under sin: those which should have been imploied excellently for the use of his integrity, are now to serve him ignominiously ac∣cording to his sin and misery; namely, either to be the means to punish him for his sin, or to relieve him in his misery. To punish him, all the creatures for
his use are become base, corrupt and unworthy, and so nothing so usefull for him as they had been: The earth will not bring forth for him, but with his labour and toil, and then too when it should bear him corn, it brings forth thorns and thistles: The creatures which should serve and honour him, do often seise up∣on him, and destroy him. And thus are the creatures imploied for mans use, indeed but a wofull use to af∣flict and punish him for his sin all the days of his life. Another way notwithstanding they are usefull and serviceable for his good, as helps to relieve and better him in this his condition of sin; as to be made docu∣ments of the wrath of God to move him to repen∣tance, and emblemes to know the condition of his most deadly enemy the Devil, and how he ought to abhorre and hate him, and the hope and expectation of conquering and triumphing over him in the blessed seed of the woman. And for this use and service was the Serpent abased and made vile, according to his curse in my Text; that as he was made excellent to serve him in integrity, so he was now abased, to be made fit to do him the best service in his misery. And what injustice could this be in God? when he made him at first so as he made him for the service of man, and now when he marr'd him, he marr'd him likewise for mans service. The second thing to be resolved is, Whether this curse were pronounced only upon one individuall Serpent; or whethet upon all Serpents in generall; or upon some one only kind which the Devil had thus abused? Of one individuall Serpent it cannot be, because there is mention here of the seed of the Ser∣pent,
and seed of the woman, which implies a gene∣ration of many Serpents; and besides, this curse was to be a monument not only to him but to all his po∣sterity, as long as the world lasted, but one individuall Serpent lived not so long. Neither is it credible to be spoken of all kinds of Serpents in generall, because there is almost as great a variety of Serpents as of four footed beasts of severall kinds and species, and why should any kind suffer, save that only which had been abused to offend? Besides, I make no doubt but di∣vers kinds of Serpents went at the first Creation up∣on their brests as now they do, and were every whit as base as now they are, excepting the generall decay of all creatures since the fall. It remains therefore that it was only one kind of Serpent which bore this speciall malediction; and that such a kind as was not only the noblest of all the kinds of Serpents, but as it seems far excelling all the Creation besides (man on∣ly except) for beauty, wisdome and sagacity, but af∣terward by this curse became not only baser then the rest of the beasts of the field, but even as base and vile as the vilest kind of Serpent. And therefore it could not be the Basilisk, as some have held, though it be the most poisonfull of all others, and as it were a King among Serpents, as the name imports; for if Plinie and Solinus, who report the former, say true, this Serpent here accursed, should rather be any other kind then that, because the Basilisk (upon their report) goes with his brest and fore-part of his body advanced, (erectus à medio incedens, saith Plinie, or as Solinus, mediâ corporis parte serpit, mediâ arduus est & excel sus) but this Serpent here was from the hour of his
doom, to go for ever upon his brest, which I wonder they considered not, who from the advanced posture of the Basilisks body have conceived the clean con∣trary: For as by this example we may beleeve that the Serpent now accursed, did so before his curse; so that he should still do so, it is a most direct gainsaying of Scripture to imagine. But to come to the words of the doom; which, as you see, are first generall; then particular. Generall in these, Thou art cursed above all cattell, and above, &c. What it is to be accursed, we shall know, if we first un∣derstand what it is to be blessed. To be blessed or happy, is nothing else, but an all-fruition of good, or to have a sufficient provision and furniture of good, both for being and well-being: So therefore that creature is happy and blessed which hath a sufficien∣cy of all good for the being and preservation of it self; which wants neither endowments inward, nor means outward for the attaining of that end, whereof it is by nature capable. To be accursed is to have the con∣trary of this; to be despoiled either of indowments internall or inherent, without which it hath no digni∣ty among the creatures; or externall, without which it cannot live or preserve it self, but with much penu∣ry, difficulty, toil and danger. Whatsoever therefore among the beasts of the field, (for with such only is the comparison made) is for inherent perfections of all the most unworthy and base; or for the outward furniture of means for the preservation of that igno∣ble being by unprovision of all others the most wret∣ched and miserable; this is that which is accursed above all cattell, and above every beast of the field.
And such was the Serpents condition to be for the generall. And now for the particulars; Let us go on and see how they are expressed, and that is in three things: First, To go upon the brest, or to have the posture of the body groveling on the earth; whereby (as I shall shew presently) is implied the abasement of the crea∣ture. Secondly, to have for meat the dust of the earth; wherein is shewn its unprovision of food for the maintenance of its life, being of all beasts of the field to have the basest and coursest fare. Thirdly, to be in continuall, mortall, and irreconcilable enmity with man, both his Lord and the Lord of the rest of the creatures: from whom it should be in continuall danger and fear of its life, and once espied be sure to have its brains dash'd out by him. And which makes the misery so much the greater, to be no way able to be revenged of his enemy other then to come una∣wares behind him, and then neither not able to reach above his heel; as being most unequally matched, he walking aloft with his head and whole body advan∣ced, while the miserable Serpent shall lie groveling on the ground, ready to be trodden apieces under his feet. Of these three particulars let us speak severally; and first of the first, Vpon thy brest shalt thou go. In the Hebrew it is , which some turn, upon thy belly: which interpretation hath been one great cause of the difficulty to understand the meaning of this malediction: For if the shape of the Serpent were after the fashion it is now, it is not possible to imagine how it could ever have gone otherwise then
upon the belly; for to think that ever it went an end, were a conceit more worthy to be derided then to be beleeved. By which means there appeared no other way of evasion out of this difficulty, but to affirm that the Serpent indeed went upon his belly from the beginning; but either it was not so toilsome to him, or not for a curse unto him till now, which for my part, it being so far from the letter of the Text, I could never yet beleeve. I had much rather in this follow the Vulgar, or Ieromes Translation, which reads, super pectus tuum gradiêris; for upon the belly I beleeve the Serpent went from the first Creation, but not upon the brest untill this present malediction. The brest of the Serpent I call the upper part of the Serpents body, from the navell to the head; the other part of the other half downward, with which though at the first he walked prone to and upon the earth, yet was the other part, his brest and head, reared up and advanced, untill for having been abused to the ruine of mankind, he was now with his whole body to creep groveling upon the earth. And perhaps thus much the Septuagint meant to insinuate by their Translati∣on, which is , upon thy brest, and thy belly; where it may seem that they rendred two words for one in the Text, for illustration, and for in∣timation of this, that whereas the Serpent before went only upon his belly, , now he should from henceforth walk ▪ upon his brest and belly too. As for the Hebrew  here used, there is no ne∣cessity at all to translate it, the belly, but rather some probability of the contrary in the etymology of the
word: for though in the Hebrew the theme be not used, yet in the Chaldee , which signifies incurva∣tus fuit, to bow downward, and seems to mean the inclination of the head and brest, or upper part of the body, to the earth, as may be gathered from that of Eliah, 1 King 18 42. where it is said, that Eliah went up to the top of armel, & pronum se abjecit inter∣ram, and put his face between his knees; for here the Targum useth this word , the radix of . Again Mark 1. 7. in those words of Iohn Baptist, There is one commeth after me, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose; here for the Greek word , stoop down, the Syriack hath , of as near a kin to  as is the Syriack to the Chaldee. The word  it self is of rare use in the Bible besides in this place, and therefore we can receive no great help from the comparing of places. It is read again Levit. 11. 42. and that with a singular mark, as the Masorites have observed, for the Vau cholem in the last syllable is , a great Vau, and exactly the middlemost let∣ter of all the Law of Moses; if their Arithmetick failed them not. But no particularity of signification can from that place be gathered, the speech being of cree∣ping things, which go as well upon the brest as the belly, and the belly as the brest. Since therefore the word here used neither hin∣dreth our opinion, nor much furthereth it, we will come to such other grounds as may prove our asser∣tion, for the Serpents going with brest advanced afore the fall of man, and not groveling till his malediction. And first let it be considered there is no impossibility of it in regard of the frame of the Serpent, which ap∣pears
both by their advancing themselves when they assault a man, (which the Painters expresse in their Pictures) and also when they swim through the wa∣ter, which is with their head and some part of their brest raised above water, even as a Swan holdeth up her neck, as I have heard affirmed by such as have been eye-witnesses: and lastly, Plinie and Solinus re∣port of the Basilisk, that the Basilisk walks so still; as I shewed a little before. And it may be as when the Giant-like stature of mankind was diminished after the stood in a manner throughout the world, and for many ages, yet was there by Gods disposition, still a race of Giants left even till the time of David, for a monument and witnesse of the truth of a far bigger stature in former times, which else could not so easily have been beleeved or imagined. Such were the Zan∣zummims in Abrahams time, the sons of Anak in Mo∣ses, and Goliah in the time of David; and it may be there are yet some in some part of the world to be found. So I say, as these seem to have been preserved by God, as a memoriall unto men, that they were not now as at the first; so it may be it was the will of God and is, amongst so many kinds of Serpents to preserve this one, that it should not as the rest go groveling upon the earth, but might be as a monu∣ment of the truth of the malediction of the rest to all posterity. Thus much of the possibility, which would be far greater, if we should with S. Basil, Ephrem, Bar Cephas, and many others affirm that the Serpent had feet, namely, some short ones beneath the navell: for feet are not essentiall to the nature of a thing, as appears by the lame, who can live without them, and
by others, sometimes by the defect of nature born without them. And those who can beleeve the won∣derfull change of man by his fall, of an immortall creature to become mortall; of one to have been born with all glorious endowments both of body and soul, now to be brought into the world the most unfurnished of the creatures. Those who beleeve the great alteration of the earth it self, when it was accur∣sed for mans sin; the diminution of the time of mans life, and of his stature, even since the flood. Can any who believe these things, think it so incredible for the Serpent once to have had some small feet, and after∣ward to have had none, being a creature wherein God intended to leave a monument for ever? But of this I will determine nothing, neither doth my assertion simply depend upon it, but may well enough consist without it. But because possibility is not sufficient of it self alone to infer a probability, I have therefore one thing to adde more thereto, namely, the reason and cause even in nature (supposing still Gods abasing of the Serpents first creation) of this alteration of the po∣sture of the Serpents gate from that it was at the be∣ginning. First, we know the more excellent and sublime the nature of a creature is, the more it raiseth it self up∣ward; the more ignoble and baser, the more it fals downward. This we see in the elements themselves; the fire the most excellent and operative of the four, raiseth it self above the rest: The earth the basest and most unactive of all, is also of all the most de∣jected.
Secondly, as there is this difference in the ele∣ments, so there is in the mixed bodies; some consist∣ing of a more sublime and excellent temper, others of a more base and ignoble mixture: and that as in other, so amongst such creatures as live and move up∣on the earth. Thirdly, this their noblenesse within discovereth it self in the body without, by advancing them natu∣rally in their gate and gesture; whence man being of all creatures living upon the earth of the most excel∣lent temper and sublimed condition of nature, is therefore of all other the most advanced in body: Pronáque cum spectant animalia caetera terram, Os homini sublime dedit, &c. Yea, experience will tell us, that even amongst men themselves, those who are of a more exalted nature, either by heroick tem∣per, or predominancy of heat, are also more advanced in the posture of their bodies. Among beasts them∣selves, the basest is the most creeping, the noble Lion advanceth his head and brest so far as the frame of his body is thereof capable, and so the rest: and of all creatures we may observe besides, that such creatures have the most sagacity, who come most near to walk upright as a man doth. If therefore the Serpent were of so sublime a na∣ture at the first, as thereby it was more subtle then any beast of the field which God had made, how could so excellent a temper, the ground of so much sagacity, but advance the body thereof, as far as the frame and shape thereof could admit? On the contra∣ry, if afterward the Serpent became the most abased and accursed of all the beasts of the field, how should
not this alteration of his former temper and dispositi∣on of nature, make the gesture of his body also su∣table, by stooping and groveling upon the earth? Who knows not that the naturall position of man is erected agreeable to his excellency above other crea∣tures having life and motion? and yet notwithstan∣ding so much hath the dejection of his primitive na∣ture for sin weakned in him this propension, that were it not for education, it is supposed, yea and by experi∣ence confirmed, that he would walk upon all four like a beast. And shall we wonder that the malediction of the Serpent, exceeding that of mans, should produce as much as this? So then to conclude this first particular of the Ser∣pents curse; I understand it, from the ground afore∣said, as insinuating the cause by the outward and sen∣sible effect, according to the manner of the Scripture; namely, the abasement and fall of the Serpents whole nature from his primitive perfection, discovered by the fall of his once advanced body, thenceforth to go groveling upon the earth: Even as the despoiling of the nature of man, of the inward indowments of per∣fection, is by the same sacred trope, insinuated by his outward nakednesse; that is, the obsruration of that glorious and celestiall beauty, which he had before his sin: The difference whereof was so great; that he could not endure afterward to behold himself any more, but sought for a covering, even to hide himself from himself. And now I come to the second particular; Dust shalt thou eat all the days of thy life. The coursest diet that any living creature hath allowed him: None of
the beasts of the field with whom he is compared, are thus poorly provided for; nay, not any other, unlesse the base earthworm, not worthy to be named among the creatures. Even with this vilest of creatures is now ranked that once so noble a creature, the Serpent. Which yet is not so to be understood, as though the Serpent did not sometime eat something else, for they sometime devour birds, frogs, and such like; but that this is the ordinary fare which God hath provided him, and if at any time he getteth any other, he goeth beyond his limits. Whence Esay 65. among the bles∣sings of the new Jerusalem, this is reckoned for one, That the Serpent should eat dust; that is, be made con∣tented with the diet God had appointed him, and not to encroach upon the food appointed for others. But why did God appoint him this food? I an∣swer, even to continue him in that accursed and vile condition to which he had dejected him: For food is for the repairing and preservation of nature, and the goodnesse and badnesse thereof doth make the tem∣per of the body better or worse. Hence according to the degrees of excellency in the creatures, their food is finer or courser: Plants suck the moisture of the earth; beasts live most upon plants, but man of the flesh of cattell, fowl, and fishes: Since therefore the Serpent was to have no better fare then the dust of the earth, as it argues the basenesse of his nature, which can with such food be nourished; so doth it necessa∣rily imply his continuance in that his dejection and vilenesse: whereas otherwise it were not impossible, because his nature for the essence is still the same it was, if his diet were as it had been, for him to improve
himself more near to his primitive temper then now he is. But God who had decreed he should ever re∣main under this malediction, appointed also the means to retain him therein. VERSE 15. And I will put enmity between thee and the wo∣man, &c. THE third and last particular remains to be treated of; I will put enmity between thee and the woman, &c. This no doubt intendeth in some things, more directly the spirituall Serpent then the brute; yet for the generall it may and ought as well as the rest, to be expounded of the brute Ser∣pent, as a glasse wherein to behold the malice and de∣stiny of the other the Devil. It containeth two parts; The Enmity, and the Event and managing thereof. For the enmity, how it is verified concerning the brute Serpent, experience telleth: It is some part of the happinesse of the creature, to be the favourite of man who is the Lord thereof; what honour could betide it greater then this? But between the Serpent and Man is the most deadly enmity, and the strongest an∣tipathy that is amongst the beasts of the field: Such an one as discovereth it self both in the naturall and sensitive faculties of them both: For the first, their humours are poison each to other; the gall of a Ser∣pent is mans deadly poison; and so is the spittle of man affirmed to poison the Serpent. For the sensitive antipathy, it appears in that the one doth so much ab∣horre
the sight and presence of the other; mans na∣ture is at nothing so much astonished, as at the sight of a Serpent; and like enough the Serpent is in like manner affected at the sight of man; And that more especially, as the Naturalists affirm, of a naked man, then otherwise. As though his instinct even remem∣bred the time of his malediction, when he and naked man stood before God to receive this sentence of everlasting enmity. And whereas the words of the Text do in speciall point out the woman in this sentence of enmity; the Naturalists do observe, that is greater and more vehe∣ment with that sex, then with the male of mankinde: Insomuch that Rupertus affirmeth, that if but the na∣ked foot of a woman doth never so little presse the head of a Serpent before he can sting her, both the head and body presently dieth, which no cudgell, or other weapon will do, but that some life and motion will still remain behinde: Hoc (saith he) ita est, ipso∣rum, qui per industriam exploraverunt, fide relatione comperimus. Lib. 3. de Trin. c. 20. You know my Author. The remaining words of my Text do expresse the managing and event of this enmity, which is far more dangerous and unlikely on the Serpents part then on Mans; for man is able to reach the Serpents head, where his life chiefly resideth, and where a blow is deadly: but as for the Serpent he shall not be able to prevail against man otherwise then privily and una∣wares, and that but in his lowest part, namely, when he shall passe him unseen, to sting him by the heel. And that this is the nature of a Serpent it appeareth
in the words of Dans blessing, Gen. 49. Dan shall be a Serpent by the way, an Adder in the path, that biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward. And to make an end of this discourse also, it is a thing to be observed in the nature of a Serpent, that assoon as he perceiveth man ready to throw or strike at him, he will presently roul his body for a buckler to save his head; even as though he had some impression of that doctrine, which God here read him in my Text, Ipse conteret tibi caput; Beware thy head. And thus hitherto I have considered these words as they are the curse of the brute Serpent; now I am to go over with them again, to shew how they are propounded unto us by God, as a glasse wherein to behold the Devils malediction: the Serpent being made now the discovery of his vilenesse, which once he abused for a mask to hide it from the woman. As therefore the Serpent is the most accursed of all the cattell and beasts of the field; so is the Devil the most accursed spirit amongst all orders and degrees of spirits; namely, of the highest of Angels become the abjectest of spirits, more base & accursed then the most cursed damned soul, having little or nothing left him of that good which was sutable to a spirituall conditi∣on: and this is the state of the Devil for the generall, answerable to that of the Serpent. Now for the particulars: The first is, Vpon thy brest shalt thou go: How doth this befit the Devil? The Devil hath no bodily brest to go upon: But as I shew∣ed in the Serpent, that this groveling signified the abasement of his whole nature from his primitive ex∣cellency; so in the Devil it signifies, his stooping down
and falling from his most sublime and glorious condi∣tion. A wonderfull stoop this was, when that which had been advanced as high as heaven, was made to fall down as low, yea lower then the earth it self; This is the Devils going upon his brest, this the groveling of that once so highly reared posture; according to that description of Iude ver. 6. who cals them the Angels that kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation: agreeable to that of S. Peter 2 Ep. c. 2. v. 4. God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell. The second particular is, The dust of the earth shalt thou eat all the days of thy life. The food wherewith spirits are fed, is analogicall, spirituall and not corpo∣rall, we must therefore here seek out that, which in them hath the fittest resemblance with corporall food. The life of Angels consists in the continuall contemplation of the excellent greatnesse, wonderfull goodnesse, and glorious beauty of the essence of God, both as it is in it self, and as it is communicated un∣to his creatures. This is that which our Saviour intimates, Mat. 18. 10. Their Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven. The food of Angels whereby this their intellectuall life and vege∣tation is strengthned and continued, is that unspeak∣able joy and delight which accompanies this contem∣plation of God, and which they finde in the beholding of whatsoever else hath any conformity or sutableness with him, his power, his wisdome, his glory, his good∣nesse: According to that in the Gospel, There is joy in heaven, and in the presence of the Angels of God, for one sinner that repenteth. This is that Manna which
feeds the blessed Angels, and which makes them un∣weariable and unsatiable in their contemplation, and imitation of God, as corporall food enableth the bo∣dy for the continuance of corporall works. And such as this had been the Devils fare, had he not fallen from his first estate by sin: whereas now in stead of that Manna, he is fain with the Serpent to feed of a food as course and as base as the dust of the earth; for as of a glorious Angel he is fallen to be a damned spirit; so is his diet answerable to continue him in that damnable estate; namely, a food clean contrary to that of the blessed Angels, and a very earth to their heaven; A most execrable joy, and a malicious de∣light in whatsoever is opposite to the power, the wis∣dome, the goodnesse, the glory of God his Creator: this is that he hungreth and hunteth after, and nothing but this. If there were no sin, no confusion, no mi∣sery of creatures in the world, the Devil would be soon starved; for this is that he preys after, this is that carrion he seeks for, when he goeth about, as S. Peter saith, like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour. I have read of a people of America, that will eat no flesh before it be stinking rotten, and then it seems to them most tender and delicate: These are of a diet like unto the Devil, for nothing but garbage and carrion are his dainties, the more rotten with sin, the more pleasing to his palate, that which stinks most in Gods nostrils, that smels the sweetest in his. The last part of this curse remains, I will put enmi∣ty between thee and the woman, and between thy seed, &c. In which we will first consider the parties who are to be at this deadly feud: Secondly, the event and suc∣cesse
they have one against the other: For the first, the parties are on one side said to be the Serpent and his seed: on the other side, The woman and her seed. By the Serpent we are to understand Satan the Prince of darknesse and Father of Devils: This Serpents seed in the first place are the whole crue of Devils and damned spirits, who are fallen from their first estate and condition. These are the Serpents first-born, be∣gotten by him not by corporall generation, nor as they are spirits, but by spirituall deformation, as they are Devils: For it is the opinion of Divines, that Sa∣tan fell first himself, and afterward propagated his A∣postasie by drawing others after him, over whom therefore he worthily deserveth to have the principa∣lity and chiefdome; in which respect also were there no other, yet he might be called their Father, and they his sons or seed, as we know the use of the Scripture is, to call Princes Fathers, and Subjects sons. The lat∣ter off-spring of the Devil being a second brood, are the whole company of wicked and reprobate world∣lings: for that such as these are the spawn of that foul fiend, it appears clearly by the words of our Saviour to the Pharisees, Ioh. 8. 44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father ye will do. And again, 1 Ioh. 3. 10. The children of God are opposed to the children of the Devil: Therefore Christ cals Iudas a Devil, Ioh. 6. And Paul Act. 13. 10. cals Elymas the Sorcerer, A child of the Devil. The case is plain: And as the Vanguard consisted of the first crue, so these latter are the Rere of Satans Army. Now on the other side against this Army of Hell∣hounds, stand the Woman and the Womans seed. The
woman though only named, excludes not the man, who was to be at enmity with the Devil as well as the woman: But the reason of this unusuall Trope, which cals the kind by the name of the weaker and inferiour sex, is because of the words following, of he seed, wherein is contained the great mystery of Christs In∣carnation, under whose colours, and in whose power alone this Army is both to march and overcome: for this great Captain was to be, as you know, the seed of the woman only, and not of the man; A Virgin should conceive a Son, whose name is called Emmanuel. Whence it comes to passe, that some by seed, will have no other seed to be understood, but the person of Christ only; both because he is alone that seed of the woman, which is not the seed of man; and because S. Paul, Gal. 3. 16. in those words, In thy seed shall all the Na∣tions of the earth be blessed, expoundeth seed singular∣ly and individually of Christ himself alone. But if it be well observed, the case here is not the like; for the seed of the woman, is opposed to the seed of the Ser∣pent, which seed cannot chuse but be taken collective∣ly for Satan and all his regiments of Devils and hell∣hounds. And why should not also the seed of the woman be understood of Christ mysticall, that is, of Christ the Head with all his members, who are incor∣porate into him by faith into one mysticall body? For although they are naturally the seed of man as well as of the woman, yet spiritually by this incorpo∣ration, they are the feed of the woman only, as is their Head with whom they are one: And this it is which makes them of the party against the Serpent, for till they once became the seed of the woman only, there was no enmity betwixt them.
The seed therefore of the woman, I expound to be Christ and his Members: He , the seed of the woman by nature, they , by their spirituall engrament into him. Hence appears the difference of these two Armies; First, in Satans Army all march under their Father, who begot them; but Christs Ar∣my sighteth under the Colours of their elder brother, the first begotten seed of the woman. Secondly, in their ranging Christ and his Army are as one body in∣formed by one Spirit; the Devil is far more disuni∣ted. Thirdly, in their fighting, for in Satans Army every Souldier useth his own strength, and fights with his own weapons; but in Christs Army the whole strength lies in Christ their Generall: All our Ar∣mour is on his back, and our weapons guided by the power of his hand. So we may learn out of S. Paul, Ephes. 6. 11, 12. Put on (saith he) the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darknesse in this world, against spirituall wicked∣nesse in high places. Thus then having seen the marshalling of these two Armies, which are at so deadly an enmity, let us at last see the successe of their skirmishes, and of the stra∣tagems which they practise one against the other: these are described on the Devils part very terrible, that his head should be mauled. But on Christs side the losse should be very small, the Devil prevailing but to the wounding or bruising of his heel. But what is this Head of the Serpent? and what the Heel of the womans seed? Those who understand
the seed of the woman singularly of the person of Christ only, make his head to be the Godhead, against which the Serpent could prevail nothing; but his heel to be the manhood, which the Serpent so bruised at his Passion, that the grave became his bed for three days together: This indeed is true, and no marvell, for the head is as it were the whole bodies epitome. But we who have expounded the seed of the woman collectively, of Christ and his Members, must also in this mysticall body find a mysticall head, and a my∣sticall heel: and so in like manner for the Serpent and his seed. The Head therefore, or if you had rather, Headship, is nothing else but Soveraignty: The Serpents head is the Devils Soveraignty, which is called rincipatus mortis, the Soveraignty of death; namely, both ob∣jectivè and effectivè; that is, such a Soveraignty as under which are only such as are liable to death both temporall and eternall; and such a Soveraignty whose power consists not in saving and giving of life, but in destroying, and bringeth unto death both of body and soul. Under the name also of death understand, as the Scripture doth, all other miseries of mankind, which are the companions of this double death I speak of: This is that damnable head of the Serpent, the Devil∣lish Soveraignty of Satan. Now the Sword whereby this Soveraignty was obtained, the Scepter whereby it is maintained, or as S. Paul speaks, the sting of this Serpents head, is Sin: This is that which got him this Kingdome at the first, and this is still the right whereby he holds the greatest part thereof: Imporium iisdem artibus conservatur, quibus acquiritur.
This Soveraignty of the Devil, which once over∣whelmed nigh all the world, the womans seed should break in pieces and destroy, which according to this Prophecy, we see already performed in a great mea∣sure, and the grounds laid long ago for the destructi∣on of all that remaineth. As saith S. Iohn Ep. 1. c. 3. v. 8. The Son of God is revealed for this purpose, that he might destroy the works of the Devil. And Christ him∣self said, that the time was come that the Prince of this world should be cast out; and bade his Disciples be of good chear, for he had overcome the world. If you would see what a wonderfull victory he hath long ago got∣ten of the Serpent, when after a terrible battell he overcame and destroid the Soveraignty of the Ser∣pent in the Romane Empire, see it described in the 12. of the Revelation, where a Michael (that is, Christ) and his Angels, fought against the great Dragon and his Angels, till the Dragon with all his Army was dis∣comfited, and their place found no more in heaven, that is, he utterly lost his Soveraignty in that state; whence there was a voice in heaven, Now is come salvation, strength, and the Kingdome of our God, and the power of his Christ. And what he will at the length do with the remainder yet of the Devils Soveraignty, you may finde in the 19. and 20 of the Revelation; For he must reign, as S. Paul saith, untill he hath put all his ene∣mies under his feet, untill he hath destroyed all power, rule, and authority adverse unto him: And then, last of all destroying death by giving immortality to our raised bodies, shall surrender up his Kingdome unto his Father, as it is 1 Cor. 15. But Satan, saith my Text, shall prevail something
against him, for the Serpent shall bruise his heel. What is this heel? Those who understood the seed of the woman singularly, as I told you, made it Christs Manhood. But how we expound the seed Christs my∣sticall body, what shall we make the heel thereof? I could say that by it were only meant a light wound; or the Devils assaulting the Body of Christ ex insidiis, at unawares, for that is his fashion since the great overthrow, which our Michael gave him, to work his feats underhand, and to undermine our Lord in his members: But this though true is not full enough. It may seem therefore the fittest, to make hypocriti∣call Christians, who professe Christ outwardly, but inwardly are not his, to make those the heel of his mysticall body: for against such the Devil we know prevaileth somewhat, and by them annoyeth the rest of the Body with his venome, though he be far enough yet from impeaching our Lords Headship, and So∣veraignty. But will you give me leave to utter ano∣ther conceit? If the blessed souls in heaven be the upper part of Christs mysticall Body, the Saints on earth the lower part of the same; may not the bodies of the Saints deceased, which lye in the earth, be ac∣counted for the heel? for I cannot beleeve, but they have relation to this mysticall Body, though their souls be severed from them, and yet must that relation be as of the lowest and most postick members of all. If you will admit this, then it will appear presently, what was this hurt upon the heel, when Christ had once mauled the Devils head; for the Text seems to intimate that the Devil should give this wound after his head was broken.
I will hold you in suspence no longer; read the 13. of the Revelation, and see what follows upon Micha∣els Victory over the Dragon, what the Devil did when he was down: He forms a new instrument of the wounded Roman Empire, by whose means under a pretence of the honour given to the precious re∣liques of the Saints and Martyrs, he conveyed the poison of Saint-worship, and Saint-invocation into the Kingdome of Christ, with which wound of the heel, the Devil comming on the blinde side, the true Church had been long annoyed and limpeth still.
THE Christian Sacrifice, OR, The Solemne VVorship in the EVCHARIST: Foretold by the Prophet Malachi, Taught by our blessed SAVIOUR, AND Practised by the Primitive CHVRCH. BY JOSEPH MEDE, B. D. and late Fel∣low of Christs Colledge in CAMBRIDGE. LONDON, Printed by M. F. for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his Shop under S. Peters Church in Cornhill. MDC XLVIII.
THE Christian Sacrifice. MALACHI 1. 11. Abortu solis usque ad occasum, magnum erit no∣men meum in Gentibus, & in omni loco offeretur In∣censum Nomini meo, & Munus purum; quia magnum erit nomen meum in gentibus, dicit Dominus exerci∣tuum. THIS place of Scripture, howsoever now in a manner silenced and forgot∣ten, was once, and that in the eldest and purest times of the Church, a Text of eminent note, and familiarly known to every Christian, being al∣ledged by their Pastours and Teachers, as an express & undoubted Prophesie of the Christian Sacrifice or so∣lemne worship in the Eucharist, taught by our blessed Saviour unto his Disciples to be observed of all, that
should beleeve in his Name: And this so generally Mal. 1. 11. and grantedly, as could never have been, at least so early, unlesse they had learned thus to apply it by tra∣dition from the Apostles. For, in the age immediately succeeding them, be∣ing the second 100 year after Christ, we find it alled∣ged to this purpose by Iustin Martyr, and Irenaeus, the Pillars of that Age: The former of them flourishing within little more then 30 years after the death of S. Iohn, and the latter a Disciple of Polycarp S. Iohns Scholar. In the Age following, or third Seculum it is alledged by Tertullian, Zeno Veronensis, and Cyprian: In the fourth Seculum by Eusebius, Chrysostome, Hie∣rome, and Augustine, and in the after ages by whom not? Nor is it alledged by them, as some singular opinion or private conceit of their own, but as the re∣ceived Tradition of the Church; whence in some Li∣turgies, (as that of the Church of Alexandria, com∣monly called the Liturgy of S. Mark) it is inserted in∣to the Hymne, or Preface, which begins Dignum & justum est, the conclusion of the Hymne or Laud there being, Gratias agentes offerimus rationalem & incruen∣tam, , seu, oblationem hanc, quam offerunt tibi Domine, omnes Gentes, ab ortu solis ad occasum, quoni∣am magnum Nomen tuum in omnibus Gentibus, & in omni loco incensum offertur Nomini tuo, & sacrificium purum. Thus you see the antiquity of Tradition, for the meaning and application of this Prophecy. But for the Christian Sacrifice it self, whereunto it is applied, what the ancient Church understood there∣by, what, and wherein the nature of this Sacrifice con∣sisted,
is a point, though most needfull to be known, yet, beyond belief obscure, intricate, and perplext. He that shall make tryall, will finde I say true. A re∣verend and learned Prelate of ours acknowledges as much: Apud veteres Patres (saith he) (ut quod res est liberè fateamur) de sacrificio corporis Christi in Eucharistia incruento, frequens est mentio, quae dici vix potest quantopere quorundam, alioqui doctorum hominum, ingenia exercuerit, torserit, vexaverit. The reason of this obscurity hath grown partly from the changing of the notion of the Church thereabout in following times; partly by the violence of the controversies of this last Age; whilest each party finding the knot, and studying not so much the right way of untying it, as how to give the least advantage to the adverse party, have infinitely intangled the same, and made it more indissoluble then before. I have acquainted my self long with this Ar∣gument, and spent many a thought thereabout; using the best means I could conceive to be in∣form'd. Namely, Not so much to relye upon the opinions of modern writers, as to peruse and com∣pare the passages of the Ancients themselves, and their Forms of Liturgies, out of which I was assur'd the truth might be learned, if I were but able to un∣derstand them. What I have found and learned, I desire to give an account of in this place, as I shall have occasion; the Argument being such as befits no other Audito∣rie, but the Schools of the Prophets. Nor will the discourse be unprofitable for such, as mean to be ac∣quainted with the writings of the Fathers and An∣tiquities
of the Church: there being nothing in them so like to stumble the reader as this. To come then to the matter: where I will chalk out my discourse in this order. First, I shall premise, as the ground thereof, a De∣finition of the Christian sacrifice, as the ancient Church meant it. Secondly, Explain the meaning of my Text, by application thereto. Thirdly, Prove each part of the Definition, I shall give; by the Testimonies of the Fathers, Coun∣cels, and Liturgies of the first and best Ages, inter∣lacing therewith such passages, as may make for the better understanding either of the Testimonies I bring, or of the matter it self, for which they are brought. SECTION 1. TO begin with the first; The definition of the Christian sacrifice; under which name first know, That the ancient Church understood not, as many suppose, the meer Sacrament of the Bo∣dy and Blood of Christ, but the whole sacred Action or solemn Service of the Church assembled, where∣of this sacred Mysterie was then a prime and princi∣pall part, and as it were the Pearl or Jewel of this Ring; no publike service of the Church being with∣out it. This observed and remembred, I define the Christian sacrifice, ex mente antiquae Ecclesiae, in this manner: An oblation of Thanksgiving and Prayer to God
the Father through Jesus Christ, and his Sacrifice commemorated in the Creatures of Bread and Wine, wherewith God had first been agniz'd. So that this sacrifice as you see hath a double object, or matter; First, Praise and Prayer, which you may call Sacrifi∣cium quod. Secondly, The commemoration of Christs sacrifice on the Crosse, which is Sacrificium quo, the sacrifice whereby the other is accepted. For all the Prayers, Thansgivings, and Devotions of a Christian, are tendred up unto God in the name of Jesus Christ crucified. According whereunto, we are wont to conclude our Prayers with Through Iesus Christ our Lord. And this is the specification, where∣by the worship of a Christian is distinguisht from that of the Jew. Now that which we in all our Prayers and Thanksgivings do vocally, when we say Per Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum, the ancient Church, in her publick and solemn Service, did visibly, by repre∣senting him according as he commanded, in the symbols of his Body and Blood: For there he is commemorated and received by us for the same end, for which he was given and suffered for us; that through him we receiving forgivenesse of our sins, God our Father might accept our service and hear our prayers we make unto him. What time then so fit and seasonable to com∣mend our devotions unto God, as when the Lamb of God lies slain upon the Holy Table, and we re∣ceive visibly, though mystically, those gracious Pledges of his blessed Body and Blood? This was that sacrifice of the ancient Church, the Fathers so much ring in our ears. The sacrifice of praise and
prayer through Jesus Christ, mystically represented in the Creatures of Bread and Wine. But yet, there is one thing more my definition in∣timates, when I say through the sacrifice of Iesus Christ commemorated in the Creatures of Bread and Wine, wherewith God had first been agniz'd. The Body and Blood of Christ were not made of com∣mon Bread and common Wine, but of Bread and Wine first sanctified, by being offer'd and set before God as a present to agnize him the Lord and giver of all: according to that, Domini est terra & plenitudo ejus. And, Let no man appear before the Lord emptie. Therefore as this sacrifice consisted of two parts, as I told you, of Praise and Prayer, which in respect of the other I call sacrificium quod: and of the comme∣moration of Christ crucified, which I call sacrifici∣um quo: so the symbols of Bread and Wine traversed both; being first presented as symbols of Praise and Thanksgiving to agnize God the Lord of the crea∣ture, in the sacrificum quod: Then by invocation of the Holy Ghost, made the symbols of the Body and Blood of Christ, in the sacrificium quo. So that the whole service throughout consisted of a reasonable part, and of a materiall part; as of a Soul and a Bo∣dy of which I shall speak more fully hereafter; when I come to prove this I have said, by the testimonies of the Ancients.
SECTION 2. ANd this is that Sacrifice which Malachi fore∣told, the Gentiles should one day offer unto God; In omni loco offeretur incensum Nomini meo & Mincha purum, quoniam magnum erit Nomen meum in Gentibus, dicit Dominus exercituum. Which words I am now, according to the order I pro∣pounded, to explicate and apply to my Definition. Know therefore, that the Prophet, in the forego∣ing Words, upbraids the Jews with despising and disesteeming their God; forasmuch as they offered unto him for sacrifice, not the best, but the lame, the torn and the sick; as though he had not been the great King, Creator, and Lord of the whole World; but some petty god, and of an inferior rank, for whom any thing were good enough. If I be a Father, where is mine honour? If I be Dominus, where is my fear? saith the Lord of Hosts unto you, O Priests that despise my name! and ye say wherein have we despised it? Ye offer polluted bread upon mine Altar, and ye say, Wherein have we polluted thee? In that ye say, The Table of the Lord is contemptible; or, not so much to be regarded: that is, you think so; as appears by the basenesse of your offering: For the Present shewes what esteem the giver hath of him he honou∣reth therewith. But you offer that to me, which ye would not think fit to offer to your Prorex, or Go∣vernour, under the King of Persia: which shewes you▪ have but a mean esteem of me in your hearts, and that you beleeve not, I am He that I am; because you see
me acknowledged of no other Nation, but yours; and that ye have been subdued by the Gentiles, and brought into this miserable and despicable condition, wherein you now are; you imagine me to be some Topicall god, and as of small jurisdiction, so of little power. But know, that howsoever I now seem to be but the Lord of a poor Nation; yet the days are coming, When from the rising of the sun to the going down of the same, my name shall be great among the Gen∣tiles, and in every place, incense shall be offered to my name, and a pure offering: for my name shall be great among the Heathen, saith the Lord of Hosts; it follows, though you have prophaned it, in that ye say, the Table of the Lord is contemptible; whereas I am a great King, and my Name shall be dreadfull among the Hea∣then. This is the dependence and coherence of the words. Now to apply them: Incense (as the Scripture it self tels) notes the Prayers of the Saints. It was al∣so that, wherewith the remembrance was made in the sacrifices, or God put in minde: Mincha which we turn Munus, is oblatio farrea, an offering made of meal or flower baked, or fryed, or dryed, or parched corn. We, in our English, when we make distinction call it a meat-offering; but might call it a bread-offe∣ring, of which the Libamen, or the drink-offering, be∣ing an indivisible concomitant, both are implyed un∣der the name Mincha, where it alone is named. The Application then is easie; Incense here notes the rationall part of our Christian sacrifice, which is Prayer, Thanksgiving, and Commemoration: Min∣cha the materiall part thereof, which is oblatio farrea, or a present of Bread and Wine.
BUT this Mincha is characterised, in the Text, with an attribute not to be overpast; Mincha purum: in omni loco offeretur incensum nomini meo & Mincha purum; The meat-offering, which the Gentiles should one day present the God of Israel with, should be munus purum, or as the Septuagint ; Let us learn if we can, what this Purity is, and where∣in it consisteth, or in what respect the Gentiles obla∣tion is so styled. Some of the Fathers take this Pure offering, to be an offering, that is purely or spiritual∣ly offered: The old sacrifices both of the Jew and Gentile, were offered modo corporali, by slaughter, fire, and incense: but this of Christians should be of∣fered onely , as Iustin Martyr expresses it; whence it is usually called , a reasonable and unbloody sacrifice; namely, of the  &c. Const. in Orat. ad Sanctor. coet. c. 12. manner of offering it; Not that there was no materiall thing used therein, as some mistake, (for we know there was Bread and Wine) but be∣cause it is offered unto God immaterially or  onely; which the Fathers in the first Councell of Nice call , to be sacrificed without sacri∣ficing rites: This sense of Pure sacrifice is followed by Tertullian, as may appear by his words ad Scapulam; where speaking of the Christian Liturgie, Sacrifica∣mus (saith he) pro Imperatore, sed quomodo praecepit De∣us, pura prece; Non enim eget Deus, Conditor Vniversi∣tatis, odoris aut sanguinis alicujus. Also in his third Book against Marcion, cap. 22. In omni loco offertur in∣censum Nomini meo—& sacrificium mundum; that is, (saith he) gloriae relatio, benedictio, & hymni, which he presently cals munditias sacrificiorum: The
same way go some others: But this sense, though it fitly serves to difference our Christian sacrifice, from the old sacrifices of the Jews and Gentiles, and the thing it self be most true; yet, I cannot see how it can agree with the context of our Prophet, where the word Incense (though I confesse mystically un∣derstood) is expressed together with Munus purum: For it would make the literall sense of our Prophet to be this; In every place Incense is offered to my Name, and an offering without Incense. And yet this would be the literall meaning, if Pure here signified without Incense. Let us hear therefore a second Interpretation, of this Puritie of the Christian Mincha, more agree∣able to the dependence of the words; and that is a conscientia offerentis, from the disposition and af∣fection of the offerer, according to that of the A∣postle, Tit. 1. 15. To the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled and unbeleeving, is nothing pure, but even their minde and conscience is defiled: They professe they know God, but in their works they de∣ny him. The Jews offering was prophane and pollu∣ted, because it proceeded not out of a due beleef, and a conscience throughly perswaded of the greatnesse of their God; that he was the Creator and Lord of the whole earth, but rather some petty and particu∣lar god, like the gods of other Nations: But the Gentiles, who should see him not onely the God of one Nation, but universally acknowledged over all the earth, should have no such reason to doubt, but firmly beleeve him to be the Great God, Creator of heaven and earth, and worship him as such, and so
their offering be a pure offering, not polluted with un∣belief. And it is to be observed, that all the ancient Christian Liturgies begin with this acknowledge∣ment: For the summe of the Eucharisticall Doxo∣logie, when the Bread and Wine is first presented before God, is comprehended in that of the Apo∣calypse, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glorie, ho∣nour, and power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. And to this way of interpreting the purity of the Christian sacrifice; to wit, from the conscience, and affection of the offerers, the Fathers mostly bend: Irenaeus, lib. 4. cap. 34. Sacrificia non sanctificant ho∣minem (non enim indiget Deus sacrificio) sed conscien∣tia ejus, qui offert, sanctificat sacrificium, pura ex∣istens. Quoniam igitur cum simplicitate Ecclesia offert, justè munus ejus purum sacrificium apud Deum deputa∣tum est. And a little after, Oportet enim nos oblationem Deo facere, & in omnibus gratos inveniri fabricatori Deo, insententia pura & fide sine hypocrisi, &c. Nei∣ther is Tertullian, whom I alledged before for the o∣ther interpretation, averse from this; for in his fourth Book Con. Marc. c. 1. Sacrificium mundum, that is, saith he, simplex oratio de conscientia pura. But this conscientious purity they seem to restrain, at least chiefly, to freedom from malice; as that singular puritie whereby this Christian sacrifice is differenced from that of the Jew; because none can offer it, but he that is in charity with his brother; according to that in the Gospel, When thou bringest thy gift unto the Altar, and remembrest thy brother hath ought a∣gainst thee—go first and be, &c. And therefore
in the beginning of this Christian service, the Dea∣con was anciently wont to cry, , Let no man have ought against his brother; and then fol∣lowed osculum sanctum, the kisse of reconciliation. Thus the Fathers of the first Councell of Nice, took Sacrificium purum, as appears Can. 5. where they ex∣pound , that which is offered omni si∣multate deposita. But according to this exposition, the puritie of the Christian sacrifice will not be opposite to the pollution of the Iewish, in the same kinde, as it would, if more generally taken, but in another kinde, and so the sense stands thus: You will not offer me a pure offering, but the Gentiles one day shall, and that with a puritie of another manner of stamp, then that my Law requires of you. And thus I have told you the two wayes, according to which the ancients understood this puritie; and I prefer the latter, as I think they did. But there is a third Interpretation, were it backt by their Authority, (which I confesse it is not) which I would prefer before them both: and I think, you will wonder with me, they should be so silent there∣in: Namely, that the title of Puritie is given to the Christian Mincha, in respect of Christ whom it signi∣fies, and represents; who is a sacrifice without all spot, blemish, and imperfection. This the Anti∣thesis of this sacrifice, to that of the Jews, might seem to imply: For the Jews are charged with offe∣ring polluted Bread▪ upon Gods Altar; whereby what is meant the words following tell us: If you of∣fer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evill? And if you of∣fer
the lame and sick, is it not evill? And in the end of the Chapter, Cursed be the deceiver, who hath in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrificeth to the Lord a cor∣rupt thing. Now, if the sacrifice of the Gentiles be called pure, in opposition to this; is it not so called, in respect of that most perfect, unblemisht, and unva∣luable sacrifice it represents, Iesus Christ the Lamb of God? I leave it to your consideration. SECTION 3. HAving absolved the two first things I pro∣pounded; given you a definition of the Christian sacrifice; and explained the words of my Text: I come to the third, and longest part of my task, to prove each particular contained in my Definition, by the testimonies and authorities of the Fathers, and writers of the first Ages of the Church. The Particulars I am to prove are in number six. First, That this Christian service is an Oblation, and expressed under that Notion by the utmost An∣tiquity. Secondly, That it is an Oblation of Thanksgiving and Prayer. Thirdly, An Oblation through Iesus Christ com∣memorated in the creatures of Bread and Wine. Fourthly, That this Commemoration of Christ, according to the style of the ancient Church, is also a Sacrifice. Fiftly, That the Body and Blood of Christ, in this
mysticall Service, was made of Bread and Wine; which had first been offered unto God, to agnize him the Lord of the Creature. Sixtly, That this Sacrifice was placed in Commemo∣ration onely of Christs sacrifice upon the Crosse, and not in a reall offering of his Body and Blood anew. When I shall have proved all these by sufficient Authority, I hope you will give me leave to con∣clude my Definition for true; That the Christian sa∣crifice, ex mente antique Ecclesiae, was, An Oblation of Thanksgiving and Prayer to God the Father, through Iesus Christ and his sacrifice, Commemorated in the creatures of Bread and Wine, wherewith God had first been agnized. SECT. I. LEt us begin then with the first: That this Christian service is an Oblation, and under that 2. Notion expressed by all Antiquitie. The names whereby the Ancient Church called this Ser∣vice are, , (i. Oblatio, Sacrificium) , (a word if rightly understood of aequipol∣lent sense) ; Sa∣crificium Mediatoris, sacrificium Altaris, Sacrificium precis, sacrificium Corporis & sanguints Christi. It would be infinite to note all the Places and Authors, where and by whom it is thus called. The four last are S. Augustins;  and  are to be found
with Iustin Martyr, and Irenaeus; whose antiquitie is the Age next the Apostles. But, you will say, the Fathers even so early had swarved from the style of the Apostolick Age, during which these kinde of terms were not used; as appears, by that we finde them not any where in their Epistles and writings: But what if the contrary may be evinced? that this language was used even while the Apostles yet lived: For grant they are neither found in the Acts of the Apostles, nor in S. Paul and S. Peters writings; yet this proves not they were not used in the Apostles times, no more then that , was not; whose case in this point is the same with the other. But to confine the Apostles Age, within the limits of Saint Pauls and S. Peters lines, is a generall mistake: For the Apostles Aage ended not till S. Iohns death Anno Christi 99. and so lasted as long within a year or thereabouts, after S. Paul and S. Peters suffering, as it was from our Saviours Ascension to their Deaths; that is, one and thirty years. And this too for the most part, was after the Excidium of Ierusalem; in which time, it is likely the Church received no little improvement in Ecclesiasticall Rites, and Expressi∣ons; both because it was the time of her greatest in∣crease, and because, whilest the Iews Polity stood, her Polity, for its full establishment, stood in some sort suspended. This appears by S. Iohns writings, which are the onely Scripture written after that time, and in which we finde two Ecclesiastick terms of , for the Deitie of Christ; and , for the first day of the week; neither of both seeming to have been in use in S. Paul and S. Peters time; and
why may we not beleeve the like happened in others, and by name in these now questioned? Which, that I may not seem onely to guesse, I think, I can prove by two witnesses, which then li∣ved; the one Clemens, he whose name, S. Paul says, was written in the Book of life; and the other Igna∣tius. Clemens in his undoubted Epistle ad Corinthios (a long time missing, but now of late come again to light;) In this Epistle the word  is three times used of the Christian service, pag. 52. Debemus omnia (saith he) rite & ordine facere, quae Dominus nos per agere jussit, , praestitutis temporibus Oblationes &  obire: And a little after; Qui igitur prae∣finitis temporibus oblationes suas faciunt, accepti & beati sunt, Domini enim mandata sequentes, non aber∣rant. The other, Ignatius in his Epistle Ad Smyrnen∣ses, hath both  and ; Non licet (saith he) absque Episcopo ; where  he cals, in a stricter sense, the first part of this sacred and mysticall Service; to wit, the Thanksgiving, wherein the Bread and the Wine, as I told you, were offered unto God, to agnize his Dominion. , he cals the mysticall Commemoration of Christs Body and Blood; and  the receiving, and participa∣tion of the same. For  and  are some∣times used for the whole Action, and sometimes thus distinguished: Of this Epistle the learned doubt not; but if any one do, I suppose they will grant, that The∣odoret had his genuine Epistles. Let them hear then a passage which he, in his third Dialogue, cites out of
the Epistles of Ignatius, against some Hereticks; Eucharistias & oblationes non admittunt, quod non confiteantur Eucharistiam esse carnem Servatoris nostri Iesu Christi, quae passa est pro peccatis nostris. Here you see oblationes & Eucharistias exegetically join toge∣ther. And so, I think, I have proved these terms of  and , to have been in use in the Church, in the latter part of the Apostles Age. But what if one of them, namely , were used sooner even in S. Pauls and S. Peters time? In the first Epistle of Peter 2. 5. You are (saith he, spea∣king to the Body of the Church) a holy Priesthood, to offer  to God by Iesus Christ. In the Epistle to the Heb. 13. 15. By him (that is, through Christ our Altar) let us offer , the Sacrifice of praise to God continually. Why should I not think, S. Paul and S. Peter speak here, of the solemn and publick Service of Christians, where∣in the Passion of Christ was commemorated? I am sure the Fathers frequently call this sacrifice . And in some ancient Liturgies, immediate∣ly before the Consecration, the Church gives thanks unto God for choosing them, to be an holy Priesthood to offer sacrifices unto him, as it were alluding to S. Pe∣ter. Thus you see, first or last, or both, the words  and , were no strangers to the A∣postles Age. I will now make but one Quaere, and answer it, and so conclude this point: Whether these words were used (seeing they were used) properly, or impro∣perly () of the subject we speak of. I an∣swer briefly. This Christian service, as we have de∣fined
it, is an Oblation properly; for wheresoever any thing is tendred or pretended unto God, there is truly and properly an Oblation; be it spirituall or visible, it matters not. For oblatio is the Genus; And Irenae∣us tels me here, Non Genus oblationum reprobatum est; oblationes enim & illic, oblationes autem & hîc; sacri∣ficia in populo, sacrificia & in Ecclesia, sed species im∣mutata est tantùm. But as for , or Sacrifice, ac∣cording to its prime signification, it signifies a slaugh∣ter-offering as in the Hebrew, so in Greek, of , macto. As the Angel in the Acts sayes to S. Peter, , Peter, kill and eat. Now we in our Christian sacrifice, slay no offering, but comme∣morate him onely that was slain, and offered upon the Crosse. Therefore our Service is called , improperly, and metaphorically. But if  be sy∣necdochically taken, for an offering in generall, as it is, both in the New Testament and elsewhere, then the Christian sacrifice is as truely called  as , or . SECT. II. NOw I come to the second particular contai∣ned in my Definition; to prove that the Christian sacrifice according to the meaning of the ancient Church is an Oblation of Thanksgiving and Prayer. My first Author shall be Iustin Martyr in his Dia∣logue
with Tryphon the Jew; where, to the evasion of the Jews, labouring to bereave the Christians of this Text (by saying it was meant of the Prayers which the dispersed Jews at that time offered unto God in all places, where they lived among the Gentiles; which Sacrifices, though they wanted the materiall Rite, yet were more acceptable unto God, in regard of their sincerity, then those prophaned ones at Jeru∣salem; and not that here was meant any Sacrifice which the Gentiles should offer to the God of Israel; to this evasion) Iustin replies, Supplicationes, & gra∣tiarum actiones, quae à dignis peraguntur, solas perfectas esse, & Deo charas , ipse quo{que} affirmaverim; Has verò solas facere Christiani traditione acceperunt. If you ask, where, and how? he tels you, Nempe in comme∣moratione Alimoniae suae aridae juxtà & liquide, in qua & passionis, quam per seipsum pertulit Dei filius, memo∣ria celebratur: It is a description of the Eucharist, wherein, as I have already told you, the Bread and Wine were first presented unto God, as the Primitiae to agnize him, the Giver of our food, both dry and liquid; and then consecrated to be the Symbols of the Body and Blood of Christ. My next Author shall be Tertullian ad Scap. in the place before alledged, Sacrificamus (saith he) pro salute Imperatoris;—sed, quomodo praecepit Deus, purâ prece: Non enim eget Deus, Conditor Vniversitatis, odoris & sanguinis alicujus: Haec enim Daemoniorum pabula sunt. The Gentiles so thought, that their Gods were refreshed and nourisht with the smell and savour of their Sacrifices: Besides, in his third Book contra Marcionem cap. 22. In omni loco sacrificium nomini meo
offertur, & sacrificium mundum, (to wit, saith he) Glo∣ri relatio, benedictio & hymni; And Lib. 4. ca 1. Sa∣crificium mundum, scilicet simplex oratio de conscientia pura. Thirdly, Clemens Alexandrinus Lib. 7. Stromat. . We (Christians) honour God by Prayer; . And this we send up unto him, as the best and holiest sacrifice, honouring him by that most sacred Word, whereby we receive knowledge; that is, by Christ. Again, . The sacrifice of the Church is an oration ex∣haled from sanctified souls: He speaks not of the pri∣vate Prayer of every Christian, but the publick Pray∣er of the Church, as a Body, as will be evident to him that reads the place, and appears by the words quo∣ted; , The Sacrifice of the Church; and , exhaled, not from a san∣ctified soul, but, from sanctified souls. For to private prayer was not given this title of the Christian Sacri∣fice, but unto the publick, which the Church offered unto God, when She presented her self before him, as one Body in Christ, by the mysticall communion of his Body and Blood. This my next Author, Cyprian, will make plain in his 16 Epist. ad Mosen & Maximum. Nos quidem (saith he) vestri diobus & noctibus memores, & quando in sacrificiis precem cum pluribus facimus, & cum in se∣cessu privatis precibus oramus; where we see the sacri∣fice of prayer to be, cum precem cum pluribus facimus; and distinguisht from that we do, cum in seessu priva∣tis precibus oramus.
These Authorities are all within the first three hun∣dred years: to which I will adde one of the fourth; Optatus Milevitanus Lib. 6. contra Parmenianum, where he thus expostulates with the Donatists for breaking and defacing the Altars of the Catholicks: Quid est enim tam sacrilegum (saith he) quam Altaria Dei (in quibus & vos aliquando obtulistis) frangere, radere, re∣movere? in quibus Vota▪ opuli, & membra Christi porta∣ta sunt; quo Deus omnipotns invocatus sit. Gather hence what parts the Christian Sacrifice consisted of; Vota populi, are the Prayers of the Church, Membra Christi, the Body and Blood of Christ, which the Prayers were offered with; both of them upon the Altar; For it is worthy your notice, that the ancient Church had no other place whereat she offered her publick Prayers and Orizons, but that, whereon the memory of the Body and Blood of Christ was celebrated; that as they were joyned in their Use, so might they not be se∣vered in their Place. According to which use, and agreeable to this pas∣sage of Optatus, speaks the Councell of Rhemes, com∣manding the Table of Christ to be reverenced and honoured, Quia Corpus Domini bi consecratur, & san∣guis ejus hauritur; Preces quoque & Vota populi in con∣spectu Dei à Sacerdote offeruntur. Furthermore, that the Christian Sacrifice was an Oblation of Prayer, and consisted in Invocation, is al∣so another way to be evinc'd; Namely, because the Fathers, when they speak thereof, use the terms of Prayer, Oblation, and Sacrifice promiscuously, and in∣terchangeably one for the other, as words importing the same thing.
Tertullian Exhort. ad Cast. disswading a Widower from marrying again, because it would be uncomely in the Sacrifice of the Church, to make mention (as the manner then was) of more Wives then one, speaks thus; Etiam repete apud Deum pro cujus spiritu postules; pro qua oblationes annuas reddas; stabis ergo ad Deum cum tot uxoribus, quot illas oratione commemoras; & offerres pro duabus, & commemorabis illas duas per Sa∣cerdotem de monogamia, ob pristinum de virginitate sancitum, circundatum virginibus & univiris; & a∣scendet sacrificium tuum cum libera fronte? Here postu∣latio and oblatio; oratio and offerre; oratio and sacrifi∣cium are interchangeably put one for the other. So also in his Book De Oratione, are Oratio and Sacrifici∣um; where he speaks of the kisse of Peace, and Re∣concilement, used at the Eucharist; Quae oratio (saith he) cum divortio sancti osculi integra? quale sacrifici∣um, à quo sine pace receditur? Augustine De Civit. Dei Lib. 8. cap. 27. speaking of the honour of Martyrs; Nec Martyribus (saith he) sa∣crificia constituimus—quis audivit aliquando fide∣lem stantem ad Altare (etiam super sanctum corpus Mar∣tyris) ad Dei honorem cultúm{que} constructum, dicere in Precibus; Offero tibi sacrificium, Petre, vel Paule, &c. Here Sacrificium is expounded by Preces, and Preces put for Sacrificium. And Lib. 22. cap. 8. concerning one Hesperius, a man of quality in the City whereof Austin was Bi∣shop, who, by the affliction of his cattell, and ser∣vants, perceiving his Country-Grange liable to some malignant power of evil spirits, Rogavit nostros (saith S. Austin) me absente, Presbyteros, ut aliquis corum illò
pergeret, cujus orationibus cederent; Perrexit unus, ob∣tulit ibi sacrificium corporis Christi, orans, quantum potuit, ut cessaret illa vexatio; Deo protinùs miserante cessavit. The Priest was intreated to pray there, he went, and offered sacrifice and so prayed. For this reason the Christian Sacrifice is among the Fathers, by way of distinction, called , Sacrificium laudis; that is, of Confession and Invocati∣on of God; to difference it from those of Blood and Incense. Augustine Lib. 1. contra Adversarios Legis & Prophetarum cap. 20. Ecclesia immolat in corpore Chri∣sti sacrificium laudis, ex quo Deus Deorum lcutus vo∣cavit terram à solis ortu us{que} ad occasum; Again Epist. 86. Sacrificium laudis, ab Ecclesia toto orbe diffusa, di∣ebus omnibus immolatur; and elsewhere. And amongst the Greek Fathers this term is so frequent as I shall not need to quote any of them. Now this joining of the Prayers of the Church, with the mysticall commemoration of Christ in the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, was no after-In∣vention of the Fathers, but took its originall from the Apostles times, and the very beginning of Chri∣stianity: For so we reade of the first beleevers Acts 11. 24. that they were  which the Vulgar Latine turns, Erant autem perseve∣rantes in doctrina Apostolorum, & communicatione fra∣ctionis panis, & orationibus; But the Syriack, Perse∣verantes erant in doctrina Apostolorum, & communica∣bant in Precatione, & fractione Eucharistiae; hoc est, Assidui erant in audiendis Apostolis, & sacrificio Chri∣stiano celebrando. Both which Translations teach us,
that , and , Breaking of Bread, and Prayers, are to be referred to , as the Exegesis thereof; namely, that this Communion of the Church, consisted in the breaking of Bread and Pray∣ers; and so the conjunction, , to be exegetically ta∣ken, as if the Greek were rendred thus, Erant perse∣verantes in (audienda) doctrina Apostolorum, & in communicatione; videlicet fractione panis, & oratio∣nibus: And who knows not that the Synaxis of the ancient Christians, consisted of these three parts, Of hearing the Word of God; of Prayers; and commemora∣tion of Christ in the Eucharist? Our Translation there∣fore here is not so right, which refers  to , and translates it, The fellowship of the Apostles. The Antiquity also of this conjunction we speak of, appears out of Ignatius, in his Epistles to the Ephe∣sians, where speaking of the damage which Schisma∣ticks incurre, by dividing themselves from the com∣munion of the Church, he utters it in this manner: Let no man (saith he) deceive himself; unlesse a man be within the Altar, he is deprived of the Bread of God: And if the prayer of one or two be of that force, as to set Christ in the midst of them, how much more shall the joynt prayer of the Bishop and whole Church, sent up unto God, prevail with him, to grant us all our requests in Christ? These words of Ignatius directly imply, that the Al∣tar was the place, as of the Bread of God, so of the publick Prayers of the Church; and that they were so nearly linked together, that he that was not within the Altar, (that is, who should be divided therefrom) had no benefit of either.
SECT. III. THE second Particular thus proved, the third comes next in place, which is, That this obla∣tion of thanksgiving and Prayer was made through Iesus Christ commemorated in the crea∣tures of Bread and Wine: Namely, they beleeve, that our blessed Saviour ordained this Sacrament of his Body and Blood, as a Rite to blesse and invocate his Father by, in stead of the manifold and bloody Sacri∣fices of the Law; For that those bloody Sacrifices of the Law were Rites to invocate God by, is a truth, though not so vulgarly known, yet undeniable; and may, on the Gentiles behalf, be proved out of Homer and other Authors; Sec 1. Sam. 7. 9. Ezra 6. 10. Psal. 116. 13. Prov. 15. 8. Baruch. I. 10. 11. 1 Mac. 12. 11. 2 Chron. 7. 1. on the Jews, by that speech of Saul, 1 Sam. 13. 12. when Samuel expostulated with him, for having offered a burnt-offering; I said, saith he, The Philistims will come down upon me to Gilgal, and I have not made supplication to the Lord; I forced my self therefore, and offered a burnt-offering: upon which place Kimchi notes, that , (hoc est) Per manus holocaustorum precatio eorum, ut plu∣rimùm, vel preces suas, ut plurimùm per holocausta Deo offerebant. The same is likewise true of their Hymns & Doxologies, as is to be seen 2 Chro. 29. 27. and by the words of the Chaldee Paraphrast Ionathan, upon Exod. 38. 8. concerning the women that assembled at the doore of the Tabernacle. Stabant (saith he) muli∣eres quae veniebant ad orandum, in Porta Tabernaculi
juxta oblationem elevationis suae, & laudabant, & con∣fitebantur, deinde revertebantur ad viros suos, & parie∣bant filios justos. It is further confirmed for Invocation in generall, by that which the Scripture so often reports of Abra∣ham and Isaak, That they built Altars where they called upon the Name of the Lord: The Altar was a place for Sacrifice. In stead therefore of the slaying of Beasts, and bur∣ning of Incense, whereby they called upon the Name of God in the Old Testament; the Fathers, I say, be∣leeved our Saviour ordained this Sacrament of Bread and Wine, as a Rite whereby to give thanks, and make supplication to his Father in his Name. The mystery of which Rite they took to be this; That as Christ by presenting his Death and satisfacti∣on to his Father, continually intercedes for us in Hea∣ven; so the Church on Earth semblably, approaches the Throne of Grace, by representing Christ unto his Father, in these holy Mysteries of his Death and Pas∣sion. Veteres enim (saith Cassander) in hoc mystico sa∣crificio, non tam peractae semel in cruce oblationis, cujus hic memoria celebratur, quam perpetui Sacerdotii & jugis sacrificii, quod in Coelis sempiternus Sacerdos of∣fert, rationem habuerunt; cujus hic Imago per solennes Ministrorum preces exprimitur. This a Reverend and famous Divine of blessed me∣mory, once of this Society, and interr'd in this place, saw more clearly, or exprest more plainly, then any other Reformed Writer I have yet seen; in his Demonstratio Problematis, and title de Sacrificio Missae: where he speaks thus: Veteres Coenam Domini, sen to∣tam
coenae actionem & formulam, vocarunt Sacrifici∣um; tum aliis de causis, tum quia est commemoratio, adeóque repraesentatio Deo Patri, sacrificii Christi in cruce immolati: He goes on, Hoc modo fideles, etiam inter orandum, Christum offerunt Deo Patri victimam, dum scilicet mente affectúque ad sacrificium ejus unicum feruntur, ut Deum sibi habeant faciántque propitium: that which every Christian doth mentally and vocal∣ly, when he commends his prayers to God the Fa∣ther, through Jesus Christ; making mention of his death and satisfaction: that in the publick service of the Church, was done by that Rite, which our Sa∣viour commanded to be used in Commemoration of him. These things thus explained, Let us now see, by what testimonies and authorities, it may be proved, the ancient Church had this meaning. I will begin with Saint Ambrose, because his testimony is punctu∣all to our explication. Offic. lib. 1.mo cap. 48.o An∣te (saith he) Agnus offerebatur; offerebatur & vitu∣lus; nunc Christus offertur, sed offertur quasi homo, quasi recipiens passionem, & offert se ipse quasi sacerdos, ut peccata nostra dimittat; hic in imagine, ibi in Veri∣tate, ubi apud Patrem pro nobis quasi advocatus inter∣venit. And in his Missa or Liturgie after the confra∣ctorium, the Priest prayes in this manner; Ipsius prae∣ceptum est Domine quod agimus, in cujus nunc te prae∣sentia postulamus; Da sacrificio Authorem suum, ut im∣pleatur fides rei in sublimitate mysterii; ut sicuti verita∣tem coelestis sacrificii exequimur, sic veritatem Dominici corporis & sanguinis hauriamus. An Author, which Cassander in his Consultations
quotes without name, expresses this mystery fully; Non imptè à nobis (saith he) Christus occiditur; sed piè sacrificatur; & hoc modo mortem Domini annuncia∣mus donecveniat: hoc nim hîc per eum humiliter agi∣mus in terris, quod pro nobis ipse potenter (sicut filius pro sua reverentia exaudiendus) agit in Coelis; ubi apud Patrem pro nobis quasi advocatus intervenit; cui est pro nobis intervenire, carnem quam pro nobis & de nobis sumpsit, Deo Patri quodammodo pro nobis ingerere. My next Author shall be Eusebius; Demonstrat. Euangel. lib. 1. cap. 10. where mentioning that of the 23 Psalm, Thou hast prepared a Table before me, &c. Thou anointest my head with oyl: Palam, saith he, in his mysticam significat unctionem: : veneranda mensae Christi sa∣crificia; (he means the Symbols of the Body and Blood of Christ) , hoc est, per quae litantes, aut propitiantes, supremo Deo rationales, in∣cruentas, eique suaves victimas, in tota vita per emi∣nentissimum ipsius Pontificem, offerre edocti sumus. Here Eusebius affirms, that Christians are taught to offer unto God reasonable and unbloody sacrifices; that is, Prayer and Thanksgiving:  propitiating, or finding fa∣vor with God, through the venerable mysteries of Christs Table; For  is, litare, propitiare, or placa∣re Numen, votum impetrare, , gratum facere. Next I produce Cyrill of Ierusalem (or more likely Iohn his successour) Author of those five Catecheses Mystagogicae; In the last of which, relating and ex∣pounding the meaning of that, which was said or done in the celebration of the Eucharist, according
to the use of his time, amongst other things he sayes thus; Post absolutum spiritale illud sacrificium & incru∣entum cultum, after the thanksgiving and invocation of the Holy Ghost, upon the Bread and Wine, to make it the Body and Blood of Christ (of which he was speaking before) was done, , Super illa propitiationis hostia obsecramus Deum 1 Mac. 12. 11. pro communi Ecclestarum pace, pro tranquillitate mundi, pro Regibus, pro militibus, pro socils, pro aegrotis & afflictis, & in summa, pro omnibus iis qui egent au∣xilio; And this is the manner of the Greek Liturgies, immediately upon the consecration of the Dona, to be the Symbols of the Body and Blood of Christ, and the commemoration thereon of his Passion, Resur∣rection, and Ascension, : Dionys. Areop. Ep. ad emoph. Therapeutam. to offer to the Divine Majestie, as it were over the Lamb of God then lying upon the Ta∣ble, their supplications and prayers, . Euseb. de Vita Constant. lib. 4. c. 45. for the whole state of Christs Church and all sorts and degrees therein, toge∣ther with all other their suits and re∣quests; and that ever and anon inter∣posing the word  we offer un∣to thee, for these and these; that is, we commemorate Christ, in this mysti∣call Rite for them. This Prayer therefore our Au∣thor Cyrill in the place aforequoted cals , supplicationem sancti & tremendi praejacentis sacrificii; and saith, that it is a most powerfull prayer, as that wherein we offer unto the Divine Majesty, ; Christ that was once
slain for our sins , propitiating the mercifull God, for our selves and others we pray for. And this is that, if I mistake not, which Tertullian means lib. de oratione cap. 11. where he sayes of the Christians, that they did Dominicâ passione modula∣ri, & orare: Nos vero (inquit) non attollimus tan∣tum manus, sed etiam expandimus; & Dominicâ pas∣sione modulantes, & orantes confitemur Christs; id est, Christum. According to the dialect of the Scripture; Confitemur Domino, for Confitemur Dominum; For by commemorating Christ, and offering our prayers to the Father in his Name, we confesse and acknow∣ledge him, to be our Mediator; so Eusebius de Laude Const. cals it, , To send up Prayers in his Name to the God of all. The same with Tertullian, means Saint Austin, describing the Christian sacrifice to be; immolare Deo in Corpore Christi sacrificium Laudis, lib. 1. contra Adversarios Legis & Prophetarum: cap. 20. Ecclesia (saith he) immolat Deo, in Corpore Christi, sacrificium Laudis, ex quo Deus Deorum locutus vo avit terram, à Solis ortu usque ad occasum, Psalm. 40. Lastly, that the representation of the Body and Blood of Christ in this Christian service, was inten∣ded and used as a Rite, whereby to finde grace and favour with God, when the Church addressed her self unto him, (which is that I undertook to prove,) is apparent by a saying of Origen Hom. 13. in Levit. where treating of the shewbread, which was continu∣ally set before the Lord with incense, for a memori∣all
of the children of Israel; that is, to put God in minde of them: he makes it in this respect to have been a lively figure of the Christians Eucharist; For, saith he, Ista est commemoratio sola, quae propitium facit Deum hominibus. All these testimonies have been expresse for our purpose: That the Thanksgiving and Prayers of the Church in the Christian sacrifice, were offered unto the Divine Majestie through Christ commemorated in the Symbols of Bread and Wine, as by a Medium whereby to finde acceptance. There is, besides these, an usuall expression of the Fathers, when they speak of the Eucharist; which though it be not direct and punctuall, as the former, yet, I verely beleeve, it aymed at the same Mysterie. Namely, when they say, that in this Sacrifice they of∣fer Praise and Prayer to God the Father, through Iesus Christ, the great High-priest. I will quote an Example or two; Clemens, or the Author of the Con∣stitutions, lib. 2. cap. 29. Vos hodie (saith he) ô Episco∣pi, estis populo vestro sacerdotes & Levitae:—assi∣stentes ad Altare Domini & Dei nostri, , per Iesum Christum, magnum Pontificem. The same Clemens in a more undoubted writing of his, to wit, his Epist. ad Corinthios, quoting that of the 50. Psalm after the Septuagint, ; the sacrifice of Praise shall glorifie me; ;—and there is the way wherein I shall shew to him that sacrificeth the salvation of God. This is the way saith Clemens, that is, the sacrifice of Praise is the way,
, wherein we have found our salvation, Iesus Christ, the High-priest of all our offerings. The Fathers are wont to expound this place, of the Eucharist; and there∣fore I doubt not, but Clemens means of the same, and tels us that in this Sacrifice Christ the High-priest of our offerings is found; that is, represented and commemorated. In the same style speaks Iust. Mar. Dial: cum Try∣phone. Ne unum quidem est genus Mortalium, sive Graeco∣rum, sive Barbarorum, sive quocunque nomine appellan∣tur—inter quos per nomen cruci fixi Iesu , Patri & fabricatori omnium non fiant. He is spea∣king of the Christian sacrifice, & our Text in Malachi; In omni loco offeretur incensum nomini meo, where by Nomen Dei he understands Christ, through whom, in this Sacrifice, our devotions are offered. So doth Ireneus, and others; Iren. lib. 4. cap. 33. Quod est a∣liud Nomen, quod in Gentibus glorificatur, quàm quod est Domini nostri, per quem glorificatur Pater, & glori∣ficatur homo:—quoniam ergo Nomen filii propri∣um Patris est & in Deo omnipotente per Iesum Chri∣stum offert Ecclesia, bene ait secundum utraque, Et in omni loco offeretur incensum Nomini meo, & sacrifici∣um purum. Now how this Incense and Sacrifice, which the Prophet saith the Gentiles should offer to the Name of God, may be expounded, Offered by the Name of God, to wit, by Christ, Origen lib. 8. contra Cels. will inform us; Vnum Deum (saith he) & unum ejus fi∣lium, ac verbum imaginemque, quantum possumus, sup∣plicationibus & honoribus veneramur; offerentes Deo
universorum preces per suum unigenitum; Cui prius eas adhibemus, rogantes ut ipse, qui est propitiator pro peccatis nostris, dignetur tanquam Pontifex preces no∣stras & sacrificia & intercessiones offerre Deo super om∣nia. That, which we offer to the Father by Christ, we offer first to Christ; that he, as our High-priest, might present it to his Father. More passages hath Origen in the same Books of this kinde. But I will not weary you too much in this rugged way; out of this which we have hitherto discoursed and proved, may be understood the meaning and rea∣son of that Decree of the third Councell of Carthage and Hippo. Vt nemo in Precibus, vel Patrem pro Filio, vel Filium pro Patre, nominet. Et cum Altari assisti∣tur, semper ad Patrem dirigatur oratio. The reason; because the Father is properly the Object,  to whom; the Son onely, , by whom, in this Mysti∣call service; and therefore, to direct here our Prayers and Thanksgivings to the Son, were to pervert the order of the Mystery, which is, as hath been proved, An oblation of Praise and Prayer to God the Father, through the Intercession of Iesus Christ, represented in the Symbols of Bread and Wine.
SECT. IV. THe fourth particular propounded was this; That the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, or Lords Supper is a Sacrifice, according to the style of the ancient Church. It is one thing to say, that the Lords Supper is a Sacrifice, and another to say, that Christ is properly sacrificed therein. These are not the same; for there may be a Sacrifice, which is a representation of ano∣ther, and yet a Sacrifice too: And such is this of the New Testament, a Sacrifice wherein another Sacri∣fice, that of Christs death upon the Crosse, is com∣memorated: Thus the Papists gain nothing by this Notion of Antiquity, and our asserting the same; For their tenet is, that Christ in this Sacrifice is real∣ly and properly sacrificed; which we shall shew in due time that the Ancients never meant. To begin with this: As in the Old Testament the name of Sacrifice was otherwhile given to the whole action in which the Rite was used; sometimes to the Rite alone: so in the Notion and Language of the ancient Church, sometimes the whole Action or Christian service (wherein the Lords Supper was a part) is comprehended under that name; some∣times the Rite of the sacred Supper it self, is so ter∣med, and truly, as you shall now hear. The resolution of this Point, depends altogether
upon the true Definition of a Sacrifice, as it is distin∣guished from all other Offerings. Which, though it be so necessary, that all disputation without it, is vain; yet shall we not finde, that either party inte∣ressed in this question, hath been so exact therein, as were to be wished. This appears by the differing De∣finitions, given and confuted by Divines on both sides; the reason of which defect is, because neither are deduced from the Notion of Scripture, but built upon other conceptions: Let us see therefore, if it may be learned out of Scripture, what that is which the Scripture, in a strict and speciall sense, cals a Sa∣crifice. Every Sacrifice is an oblation or offering: but e∣very offering is not a Sacrifice, in that strict and pro∣per acception we seek. For Tithes, First-fruits Heav∣offerings in the Law, and whatsoever indeed is conse∣crated unto God, are oblations or offerings; but none of them Sacrifices, nor ever so called in the Old Testament: What offerings are then called so? I answer, Burnt-offerings, Sin-offerings, Trespasse-of∣ferings, and peace-offerings. These, and no other, are called by that name. Out of these therefore must we pick the true and proper ratio of a Sacrifice: It is true indeed, that these Sacrifices were offerings of beasts, of beeves, of sheep, of goats, of fowls; but the ratio of any thing consists not in the matter thereof; As the gowns we wear, are still the same kinde of apparel, though made of differing stuffs: These Sacrifices also were slain, and offered by fire and incense: But neither is the modus of any thing the ratio or essentiall form
thereof. That therefore may have the nature and formale of a Sacrifice which consists of another matter, and is offered after another and differing manner; Those we call Sacraments of the Old Te∣stament, Circumcision and the Passeover, were by effusion of blood; ours are not, and yet we esteem them neverthelesse true Sacraments; and so it may be here. To hold you therefore no longer in suspence, a Sacrifice, I think should be defined thus; An offering, whereby the offerer is made partaker of his Gods Table, in token of Covenant, and friendship with him, &c. more explicately thus: An offering unto the Divine Majesty, of that which is given for the food of man; that the offerer partaking thereof, might, as by way of pledge, be certified of his accepta∣tion into Covenant, and fellowship with his God, by eating and drinking at his Table. S. Augustin comes toward this Notion, when he defines a Sacrifice (though in a larger sense) opus quod Deo nuncupamus, reddimus, & dedicamus, hoc fine, ut sanctâ societate ipsi adhaereamus; for to have society and fellowship with God, what is it else, but to be in league and covenant with him? In a word, a Sacrifice is oblatio foederalis; for the true and right understanding whereof, we must know, that it was the universall custome of mankinde, and still remains in use, to contract covenants and make leagues of friendship, by eating and drinking toge∣ther. When Isaac made a covenant with Abimelec the King of Gerar, the Text saith, He made him and those that were with him, a feast, and they did eat, and drink,
and rose up betimes in the morning, and sware one to an∣other, Gen. 28. When Iacob made covenant with La∣ban, after they had sworn together, he made him a feast, and called his brethren to eat Bread, Gen. 31. When David made a league with Abner, upon his promise to bring all Israel unto him, David made Ab∣ner and the men that came with him a feast, 2 Sam. 3. Vide eti am Ios 9. 14. 15. Psa. 41. 10. Vir pacis meae in quo fidebam; qu come∣dibat pa∣nem meum. Hence in the Hebrew tongue, a covenant is called  of , to eat; as if they should say, an eating; which derivation is so naturall, that it deserves to be preferred, before that from the other signification of the same verb, which is eligere. And this will suffice for the custome of the Hebrews. Now for the Gentiles, Herodotus tels us, the Per∣sians were wont to contract leagues of friendship, in∣ter vinum, & Epulas, in a full feast, whereat their wives, children and friends were present. The like Tacitus reports of the Germans: Amongst the Greeks and other Nations, they eat bread and salt to∣gether. Unto which comes neer that ceremonie, somewhere used at weddings; that the Brdegroom, when he comes home from Church, takes a piece of cake, tasts it, then gives it to his Bride to taste it likewise; as a token of a covenant made between them. The Emperour of Russia at this day, when he would shew extraordinary grace and favour unto any, sends him bread and salt from his Table: And when he invited Baron Sigismond the Emperour Ferdinands Ambassador, he did it in this form; Sigismunde com∣edes sal & panem nostrum nobiscum. Hence that Sym∣bol of Pythagoras , Break no bread, is interpreted by Erasmus, and others, to mean, Break
no friendship: Moreover the AEgyptians, Thracians, and Lybians in speciall, are said to have used to make Vid. Turci∣cum ritum apud Bus∣bequium, Epist. 1. 11. leagues, and contract friendship, by presenting a cup of wine one to another; which custome we finde still in use amongst our Western Nations; and what is our To pledge, but to take as a pledge of league and friend∣ship? Yea it is a rule in Law, that if a man drink to him, against whom he hath an accusation of slander, or other verball injurie, he loses his Action, because it is supposed he is reconciled with him. Such now, as were these covenant-feastings and eatings and drinkings, in token of league and amity between men and men; such are Sacrifices between man and his God; Epulae foederales, wherein God deigneth to entertain man, to eat and drink with or before him, in token of favour and reconcilement. For so it becomes the condition of the parties, that he which hath offended the other, and seeks for fa∣vour, and forgivenesse, should be entertained by him, to whom he is obnoxious; and not è contra, that is, that God should be the Convivator, and man the Conviva. To which end, the Viands for this sacred Epulum, were first to be offered unto God, and so made his, that he might entertain the offerer, and not the offerer him. For we are to observe, that what the fire consumed was accounted as, and called by himself, the meat of his fire-offerings; the rest was for his guests, which they were partakers of, either by themselves, as in all the peace-offerings, or by their proxies, the Priests, as in the rest; to wit, the Holocausts, the sin and trespasse-offerings. The reason of which difference was, I suppose, because the one
was ad impetrandum, or renovandum foedus; where therefore a Mediator was needfull; the other, to wit, the peace-offerings, ad confirmandum & consig∣nandum, onely: wherein therefore they addressed themselves before the Divine Majesty with greater confidence. If any shall object, that the Holocaust was wholly burnt, and consumed, and so no body partaker thereof; I answer, it is true, the beast, which was slain, was wholly burnt, and so all of it, as it were Gods Messe. But there was Levit. 23. 13, 18. Num. 8. 8. & 15. 24. & 28. 20, 28, 31. & 29. 6, 11 19. a meat-offering, and drink-offering annexed thereunto, as a part of the ho∣ly feast; of which a handfull onely was burnt for a memoriall, the remainder was for the Lev. 7. 9. Priests to eat in the holy place; Besides, burnt-offerings were re∣gularly accompanied with peace-offerings (as you shall finde them in Scripture ordinarily joined toge∣ther,) now in these the people that offered had the greatest share. In a word, that those who offered sa∣crifice, both among Jews and Gentiles, were parta∣kers of the same, is a thing to be taken for granted; as appears by the warning God gave the Israelites, Exod. 34. That they should make no covenants  e inhabitants of the land; lest when they went a g after their gods, and offered a sacrifice unto the ey might call them, and they also eat of their sacrifice. And by that Psal. 106. They joined themselves to Baal-Peor, and eat the sacrifices of the dead. By that of S. Paul; Hebr. 13. We have an Altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve at the Tabernacle; So that of this, there needs be no question. It remains onely, we prove that these sacred Epulae, were Epulae foederales; and so our Definition will
stand good: Now this will appear, first in generall, by that expression of Scripture, wherein the co∣venant, which God makes with Man, is expressed by eating and drinking at his Table, Luk. 13. Those, to whom the Lord opens not, plead for themselves: We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets, &c. Cap. 22. Our Saviours tels his disciples; I appoint you a kingdom, as my Father hath appointed me; that ye may eat, and drink at my Table in my Kingdom. Apoc. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock; If any man hear my voyce, and open the door, I will come in unto him, and sup with him and he with me: But these passages, you will say, shew rather how fitly sacrifices might be feasts of amity between God and men, then prove they were so in∣deed: Hear therefore such proofs, as I think come home to the point. First, Every sacrifice, saith our Saviour, Mark 9. is salted with salt. This salt is called Levit. 2. The salt of the Covenant of God; that is, a Symbol of the per∣petuity thereof. Now if the salt, which seasoned the sacrifice, were sal foederis Dei: what was the sacrifice it self, but Epulum foederis? Secondly, Moses cals the blood of the burnt∣offerings and peace-offerings, wherewith he sprinkled the children of Israel, when they received the Law, the blood of the Covenam, which the Lord had made with them: This is, saith he, the Blood of the Cove∣nant, which the Lord hath made with you. Thirdly, and above all, this may most evidently be evinced, out of the 40. Psalm; the whole Argu∣ment whereof is concerning sacrifices: There God
saith, Gather my Saints together unto me, which make covenant with me by sacrifice, . And vers. 16. of the sacrifices of the wicked, and such as amend not their lives; Vnto the wicked God saith, What hast thou to do to declare my statutes , and take my Covenant in thy mouth? seeing thou hatest instru∣ction, &c. Statutes here, are Rites and Ordinances, and particularly those of Sacrifice, which who so bringeth unto God, and thereby supplicates and cals upon his Name, is said, to take the covenant of God in his mouth; Forasmuch as to invocate God with this Rite, was to do it by way of commemoration of his Covenant, and to say, Remember Lord thy Co∣venant, and for thy Covenants sake, Lord hear my pray∣er and supplication. For what hath man to do with God, to beg any favour at his hands, unlesse he be in Covenant with him? whereby appears the reason, why mankinde, from the beginning of the world, used to approach their God, by this Rite of sacrificing; that is, ritu foederali. I adde in this last place, for a farther confirmation; That, when God was to make a Covenant with A∣braham, Gen. 15. he commanded him to offer him a Sacrifice; Offer unto me (saith he, so it should be tur∣ned) a heifer, a she-goat, and aram, each of three years old, a turtle Dove, and a young pigeon; All which he offered accordingly, and divided them in the midst, laying each piece or moity one against the other; and, when the sun went down, God in the likenesse of a smoaking furnace, and burning lamp past between the pieces, and so, as the Text sayes, made a Cove∣nant with Abraham, saying, Vnto thy seed will I give this
land, &c. By which Rite, of passing through the parts, God condescended to the manner of men; And note here, that the Gentiles, and Jews likewise, in their more solemn covenants between men and men, (which were made under pain of curse or exe∣cration) used this Rite of Sacrifice, whereby men covenanted with their God, as it were to make their God both a witnesse, and a party with them. And here the Jews cut the Sacrifice in sunder, and past between the parts thereof; as God did here with Abra∣ham: which was as much, as if they had said, Thus let me be divided, and cut in pieces, if I violate the oath, I have now made in the presence of my God. The Gentiles, besides other ceremonies, used not to eat at all of these sacrifices, but to fling them into the sea, or bury them in the earth; as if they had said, If I break Covenant, thus let me be excluded from all amity and favour with my God; as I am now from eating of his Sacrifice. Hence came those phrases; secare foedus, in the Hebrew; of ferire, percutere & icere foedus; in Latine: of , in Homer, à feriendis, percutiendis, & secandis sacrificiis in foederi∣bus sanciendis; Though this manner of speech may be also derived from their ordinary Epula foederales, wherein they killed beasts, which the Ancients in their ordinary diet did not. Having thus seen what is the nature of a Sacrifice, and wherein the ratio thereof consisteth, it will not be hard to judge, whether the ancient Christians did rightly, in giving the Eucharist that name, or not: For that the Lords supper is Epulum foederale, we all grant, and our Saviour expresly affirms it of the Cup in the
stitution; , This Cup is the Rite of the new Covenant in my Blood, which is powred out for many, for the remission of sins; evidently implying, that the bloody sacrifices of the Law, with their meat and drink-offerings, were Rites of an old covenant, and that this succeeded them as the rite of the Eusebius (Demonst. Euang. lib. 9.) vinum mysticum sacrosan∣ctae Eu∣charistia vocat . Casaub. exerc. ad Ann. 32. N. 26. new. That, that was contracted with the blood of beevs, sheep, and goats; but this foun∣ded in the blood of Christ: This parallel is so plain, as I think none will deny it. There is nothing then re∣mains to make this sacred Epulum, a full sacrifice, but that the Viands thereof should be first offered unto God, that he may be the Convivator, we the Convi∣vae or the guests. SECT. V. MY last task was to prove, that the rite of the Lords Supper is indeed a Sacrifice, not in a Metaphoricall but a proper sense; and this, if the nature of Sacrifice be truly defined, is no whit repugnant to the reformed Religion. To evidence which I shewed, that a Sacrifice was nothing else but a Sacred-feast, wherein God mysti∣cally entertained man at his own Table, in token of amity and friendship with him: which that he might
do, the Viands of that feast were first made Gods by oblation, and so eaten of, not as of Mans, but Gods provision. There is nothing then wanting to make this sacred Epulum, of which we speak, full out a Sacrifice, but that we shew, that the Viands thereof were in like manner first offered unto God; that so being his, he might be the Convivator, man the Conviva, or the guest: And this the ancient Church was wont to do; this they beleeved our blessed Saviour himself did, when, at the institution of this holy Rite, he took the Bread and the Cup into his sacred hands, and looking up to heaven gave thanks and blessed: And, after his example, they first offered the Bread and Wine unto God, to agnize him the Lord of the Creature, and then received them from him again in a Banquet, as the Symbols of the Body and Blood of his Son. This is that, I am now to prove out of the testimo∣nies of Antiquity, not long after, but next unto the Apostles times, when it is not likely the Church had altered the form they left her, for the celebration of this Mystery. I will begin with Irenaeus, as the most full and co∣pious in this point; He, in his fourth Book cap. xxxii, speaks thus; Dominus Discipulis suis dans consilium Primitias Deo offerre ex suis Creaturis, non quasi indi∣genti, sed ut ipsi nec infructuosi, nec ingrati sint▪ eum, qui ex Creatura est panis, accepit, & gratias egit; di∣cens, Hoc est corpus meum; & Calicem similiter, qul ex Creatura est, quae est secundum nos, suum sanguinem con fessus est; & Novo Testamento novam docuit oblatio∣nem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens offert Deo, ei
qui alimenta nobis praestat, primitias suorum munerum in Novo Testamento. And Cap. xxxiii. Igitur Ecclesiae oblatio, quam Do∣minus docuit offerri in universo mundo, purum sacrifi∣cium reputatum est apud Deum; & acceptum est ei; non quod indigeat à nobis sacrificium, sed quoniam is qui of∣fert glorificatur ipse in eo quod offert, si acceptetur munus ejus: Per munus enim erga Regem honos & affctio ostenditur. He alludes to that in the first of Malachi, I am a great King, saith the Lord of Hosts. Ibid. Oportet nos oblationem Deo facere, & omni∣bus gratos inveniri Fabricatori Deo, Primitias earum, quae sunt ejus, Creaturarum offerentes; & hanc oblatio∣nem Ecclesia sola puram offert Fabricatori, offerens ei cum gratiarum Actione ex Creatura ejus. In the same place, Offerimus autem ei, non quasi in∣digenti, sed gratias agentes Dominationi ejus, & san∣ctificantes creaturam. He alludes again to that in this Chapter of Malachi, Si Dominus sum, ubi est timor meus, O sacerdotes, qui offertis super Altare meum panem pollutum? My next witnesse shall be Iustin Martyr, in time el∣der then Irenaeus; He in his Dialogue with Tryphon, (the place defore alledged) telling the Jew, that the Sacrifices of Christians are Supplications and giving of Thanks; Has vero solas (saith he) facere Christiani traditione acceperunt, in commemoratione Alimoniae suae, aridae juxta & liquidae; in that thankfull remembrance of their food both dry and liquid; in qua & passionis quam pertulit per se ipsum Dei filius, memoria celebra∣tur: Here is a twofold commemoration witnessed to be made in the Eucharist; The first, as he speaks, of
our food dry and liquid; that is, of our meat and drink by agnizing God, and recording him the Crea∣tor, and giver thereof: The second, of the passion of Christ the Son of God, in one and the same food. And again in the same Dialogue, Panem Eucharistiae in commemorationem passionis suae Christus fieri tradi∣dit (, &c.) ut simùl gratias ageremus Deo, cum ob id, quod mundum, cum omnibus in eo Creaturis, hominis gratia condiderit, tum etiam, quod ab omni in qua fuimus miseria nos liberarit, Principatusque ac potestates perfe∣ctâ dissolutione dissolverit, per eum qui de consilio & voluntate ejus factus est patibilis. To which he im∣mediately subjoins the Text, and applies it to the Eucharist. Thus Iustin Martyr. My third witnesse is Origen in his VIII. Book Con∣tra Cels. Celsus (saith he) thinks it seemly we should be thankfull to Daemons and to offer them , but we think him to live most comely , that remembers, who is the Creator: unto whom we Christians are carefull not to be unthankfull, with whose benefits we are filled and whose Creatures we are; ; that is, And we have also a Symbol of our thanksgiving unto God, the Bread which is called : Where note, that the Eucharisticall Bread is said to be a Symbol, not onely of the Body and Blood of Christ, but a Symbol of that Thanksgiving, which we render to the Creator through him. Again, in the same Book, where Celsus likewise would have mankinde thankfull unto Daemons, as those to whom the charge of things here upon earth
is committed, and to offer unto them, , Primitias & supplicationes. Origen thus takes him up. Celsus Deum nesciens,  persolvat Dae∣monibus; nos mundi Creatori placere studentes (or gra∣tum facientes, Gr. ) Panes, cum gratiarum actione & precibus pro datis, oblatos comedimus, Cor∣pus sanctum quoddam per precationem factos. Mark here, Bread offered unto God, with Prayer and Thanksgiving pro datis, for that he hath given us, and then by prayer made a holy Body, and so eaten. Thus much out of Fathers, all of them within lesse then two hundred and fifty years, after Christ; and lesse then one hundred and fifty, after the death of Saint Iohn. The same appears in the forms of the ancient Vide eti∣am Can. A∣postol. II. (al. III.) Can. XL. Synod. Car∣thag. Can. VII. Edi∣cti Theo∣phili Alex∣andrini a∣pud Balsa∣mon. Liturgie, as in that of Clemens, where the Priest in the name of the whole Church assembled speaks thus: , Offerimus tibi Regi & Deo, secundum ejus (id est, Christi) ordinationem, , hunc panem & hoc pocu∣lum, gratias tibi agentes, eo quòd nos (he speaks of the whole Church) dignos fecisti astistere in conspectu tuo, & fungi sacerdotio tibi. Rogamusque te, ut benignè aspicere digneris super haec dona, proposita in conspectu tuo; Tu qui nullo indiges Deus, & complaceas tibi in ip∣sis, in honorem Christi tui, &c. Again, Pro dono oblato Domino Deo oremus, ut bonus Deus suscipiat illud, per intercessionem Christi sui in coeleste Altare suum in odorem suavitatis.
Yea, in the Canon of the In Ordi∣ne Romano, dimissu Ca techame∣nis. Rubri∣ca habet; Postea in∣cipiunt cantores cantare of∣fertorium, & populus dat oblationes suas, id est, panem & Vinum; & offerunt cum Fanonibus, id est, ve∣lis candidis; primò malculi, deinde Foeminae, novissimè Sacerdotes & Diaconi; sed solum panem, & hoc ante Altare: Tunc acciplens Archidiaconus à subdiaconis ob∣lats, ponic tantas super Altare, quantae possunt populo sufficere ad communionem. Videatur Theod. in hist. de Theodosio offerente, , &c. l. 4. c. 17. Consule Cyprian. de Op. & Eleemos.—Quae in Dominicm sine sacrificio venis; quae partem de Sacrificio, quod pauper obtulit, sumis: August, de Temp. Serm. CCLI. Oblationes quae in Altaria consecran∣tur offerte; Erubescere debet homo idoneu, si de aliena oblatione communicaverit. Roman Church, though the Rite be not used, yet the words remain still; as when the Priest, long before the Consecration of the Body and Blood of Christ, prays, Te clementissime Pater, per Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum supplices rogamus, ut accepta habeas, & benedicas haec dona, haec∣munera; and other like passages, which now they wrest to a new found oblation of the Body and Blood of Christ, which the ancient Church knew not of. But, of all others, this Rite is most strongly con∣firmed, by that wont of the Ancient Fathers, to confute the Hereticks of those first times (who held the Creator of the world, to be some inferiour deity, and not the Father of Christ) out of the Eucharist: For, say they, unlesse the Father of Christ be the Creator of the world, why is the Creature offered unto him, in the Eucharist, as if he were? would he be agnized the Author, and Lord of that he is not? Here Ireneus, Adversus Haeres. lib. 4. cap. 34. Hae∣reticorum Synagogae (saith he) non offerunt Eucharisti∣cam oblationem quàm Dominus offerri docuit; Alterum enim, praeter fabricatorem, dicentes Patrem, ideo, quae se∣cundum nos Creaturae sunt, offerentes ei cupidum alieni ostendunt eum, & aliena concupiscentem: and a little
after, Quomodo autem constabit eis, eum panem, in quo gratiae actae sunt, Corpus esse Domini sui, & Calicem san∣guinis ejus, si non ipsum Fabricatoris mundi filium di∣cant; id est, verbum ejus per quod lignum fructificat, & defluunt fontes, & terra dat primum quidem gramen, post deinde spicam, deinde plenum triticum in spica? From the same ground Tertullian argues against Marcion; contra Marc. lib. 1. cap. 24. Non putem (saith he) impudentiorem, quam qui in aliena aqua alii Deo tinguitur; ad alienum Coelum alii Deo expanditur; in aliena terra alii Deo sternitur; super alienum panem a∣lii Deo gratiarum actionibus fungitur; de alienis bonis ab alium Deum nomine elemosynae & dilectionis operatur. Origen against the same Heretick useth the same Argument; Dialog. Advers. Marc. 3. paulo ante finem. Dominus aspiciens in coelum gratias agit: Ecquid non agit conditori gratias? cum panem accepisset, & pocu∣lum, & benedixisset, quid? alterine pro Creaturis con∣ditoris benedicit? an potius illi qui effecit & exhibuit? Lastly, this oblation of the Bread and Wine is im∣plyed in S. Pauls parallel of the Lords Supper, and the Sacrifices of the Gentiles: You cannot (saith he) be par∣takers of the Table of the Lord, and the Table of Di∣vels; namely, because they imply contrary Cove∣nants, incompatible one with the other. A sacrifice, as I told you, being Epulum foederale; Now here the Table of Divels is so called, because it consisted of Viands offered to Divels, (so S. Paul expresly tels us) whereby those that eat thereof, eat of the Divels meat; Ergo, The Table of the Lord is likewise called his Table, not because the Lord ordained it, but be∣cause it consisted of Viands offered unto him.
Having thus, as I think, sufficiently proved what I took in hand, I think it not amisse, to answer two questions, which this discourse may beget. The first is, How the Ancients could gather out of the In∣stitution, that our Saviour did as hath been shewed? I answer, they beleeved, that he did as the Jews were wont to do; But they did thus. How will you say doth this appear? I answer, it may appear from this, The Passeover was a Sacrifice, and therefore the Vi∣ands here, as in all other holy Feasts, were first offered unto God. Now the Bread and Wine, which our Sa∣viour took when he blessed and gave thanks, was the Mincha or meat-offering of the Passeover: If then he did as the Jews used to do, he agnized his Father and blessed him, by oblation of these his Creatures unto him, using the like or the same form of words, Bene∣dictus tu Domine Deus noster, Rex mundi, qui producis panem è terra; And over the Wine; Benedictus tu Do∣mine Deus noster, Rex mundi, qui creasti fructum vitis: Moreover the Church ab initio applied that precept of our Saviour, Mat. 4. 23. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, &c. to the Eucharist; for they beleeved, that he would not enact a new law concerning legall Sa∣crifices, which he was presently to abolish; but that it had reference to that oblation, which was to con∣tinue under the Gospel. The other question is: If all this be so, how is not our celebration of the Eucharist defective, where no such oblation is used? I answer, this concerns not us alone, but all the Churches of the West of the Ro∣man communion, who, as in other things they have depraved this mystery, and swarved from the primi∣tive
pattern therof, so have they for many Ages disused this oblation of Bread and Wine, and brought in, in lieu thereof▪ a reall and hypostaticall oblation of Christ himself; This blasphemous oblation, we have taken away, and justly, but not reduced again that expresse and formall use of the other: Howsoever, though we do it not with a set ceremony, and form of words; yet in deed and effect we do it, so often as we set the Bread and Wine upon the Holy-Table: For whatsoever we set upon Gods Table, is ipso facto de∣dicated, and offered unto him: According to that of our Saviour Mat. 23. , The Altar sanctifies the gift; that is, consecrates it unto God, and appropriates it to his use: In which respect, it were much to be wisht, that this were more solemnly done, then it is usuall; namely, not un∣till the time of the administration, and by the hand of the Minister, in the name and sight of the whole congregation, standing up, and shewing some signe of due and lowly reverence, according, as the Dea∣con was wont to admonish the people in Ancient Li∣turgies, : erecti ad Dominum, cum timore & tremore stemus oblaturi. SECT. VI. THe sixt, and last thing to bee proved was, That Christ is offered in this Sacrifice com∣memoratively onely and not otherwise. Though the Eucharist be a Sacrifice (that is, an
Oblation) wherein the offerer banquets with his God, yet is Christ in this Sacrifice no otherwise offered, then by way of commemoration onely, of his Sacri∣fice once offered upon the Crosse; as a learned Pre∣late of ours hath lately written, objectivè onely, not subjectivè. And this is that, which our Saviour him∣self said, when he ordained this sacred Rite, ; This do in commemoration of me. But this commemoration is to be made to God his Father, and is not a bare remembring or putting our selves in minde onely, (as is commonly supposed) but a putting of God in minde; For every Sacrifice is directed unto God, and the Oblation therein, what∣soever it be, hath him for its Object, and not man. If therefore the Eucharist be Sacrificium Christi com∣memorativum, as ours grant, then must the comme∣moration therein be made unto God: and if Christ therein be offered objectivè, that is, as the object of the commemoration there made, (as that learned Bi∣shop speaks) if the commemoration of him, be an oblation of him, whom is this oblation, that is, com∣memoration, made unto, but God? Well then, Christ is offered in this sacred Supper, not hypostatically, as the Papists would have him, (for so he was but once offered) but commemoratively only, that is, by this sacred Rite of Bread and Wine, we re∣present, and inculcate his blessed Passion to his Fa∣ther; we put him in minde thereof, by setting the Mo∣numents thereof before him; we testifie our own mindefulnesse thereof unto his sacred Majesty, that so he would, for his sake, according to the tenour of his Covenant, in time be favourable and propitious unto us miserable sinners.
That this, and no other offering of Christ in the blessed Eucharist, the Ancient Church ever meant, or intended, I am now to shew, by authenticall testimo∣nies. First, by the constant form of all the Liturgies; in which, after the reciting of the words of Institution, is subjoyned, , commemorantes, or commemorando offerimus. Clemens, , &c. , &c. That is, commemorantes igitur Passionem ejus, & mortem, nec non ex mortuis resurrectionem atque in coe∣los ascensionem—offerimus tibi Regi Deo hunc pa∣nem & hunc caliem; Mark here, commemorantes offe∣rimus, that is, offerimus commemorando; Commemo∣rando autem apud Deum, cui offerimus. This is the te∣nour of all the Greek Liturgies, save that some, in stead of offerimus tibi hunc Panem & hunc calicem, have , offerimus tibi tremendum hoc, & incruentum sacrisici∣um; as that of Jerusalem (called S. Iames his Litur∣gie.) Others, , as that of S. Chrysostome: Others , tua ex tuis, as that of Basil; and of Alexandria (called Saint Marks:) but all , commemorantes offerimus. In the same form runs the Ordo Romanus, Memores Domine nos servi tui, sed & Plebs tua sancta Christi Filii tui Domini Dei nostri, tum beatae Passionis, nec non ab inferis resurrectionis, sed & in Coelum gloriosae ascensionis, Offerimus praeclarae Majestati tuae, de tuis donis ac datis, hostiam puram, sanctam, hostiam immacu∣latam,
panem sanctum vita aeternae & calicem salutis perpetuae; note here also memores offerimus. Which Ivo Carnotensis explains thus; memores offe∣rimus Majestatituae, (id est, saith he, oblatam comme∣moramus per haec dona visibilia) hostiam puram—san∣otam, immaculatam, &c. Et hanc veri sacrificii com∣memorationem postulat sacerdos ita Deo Patri fore acce∣ptam, sicut accepta fuerunt munera Abel, &c. Thus he. Memores therefore, in the Latin Canon, is commemo∣rantes, which the Greek expresses better , of the sense whereof that we may not doubt, hear the explication of that great Councel of Ephesus in this manner. Annunciantes Mortem unigeniti Filii Dei, Iesu Christi, & resurrectionem ejus atque in coelum ascen∣sionem pariter confitentes, incruentum in Ecclesiis cele∣bramus sacrificii cultum. therefore is Annunciantes & confitentes. But unto whom should we confesse, but unto God? To him therefore, and not unto our selves is that  to be made, which Christ commended to his Church, when he said, Do this , for my commemoration, or in remembrance of me. In the Councell of Ephesus, Cyril of Alexandria was chief Actor and President; and it is to be noted, that the Liturgie of the Church of Alexandria (usu∣ally called S. Marks) hath in stead of  the self-same words, Annunciantes & confitentes, which I now quoted out of the Councel for an explication of the same: which argues, as I take it, Cyrill to have been the penman of the Decrees of the Councell, and the Liturgie of his Church to have then run in this form. I shall need alledge no more of the Latine Litur∣gies;
there is no materiall difference amongst them: So that, if you know the form of one, you know of all: I will adde onely out of S. Ambrose an Explica∣tion following those words, of the Institution, Do this in remembrance of me; exprest in this manner, Man∣dans & dicens ad eos, Quotiescunque hoc feceritis, toties commemorationem mei facietis, Mortem meam praedica∣bitis, resurrectionem meam annuntiabitis, adventum sperabitis donec iterum adveniam. This may suffice for Liturgies▪ Now let us hear the Fathers speak. I quoted heretofore a passage out of Iustin Mar∣tyr, affirming a twofold , to be made in the Eucharist; The one of our food, dry and liquid, (as he speaks) that is, of our meat and drink, by agnizing, and recording him the Lord and giver of the same: The other an  in the same food , of the passion of the Son of God: The first of these commemorations is made unto God; for to whom else should we tender our thankfulnesse for the Creature? Ergo, The second commemoration of the Passion of the Son of God, is made to him likewise. My next Father is Origen, Homily 13. In Lev. c. 24. where comparing the Eucharist to the Shew-bread which was every Sabbath set for a Memoriall before the Lord: Ista est, saith he, meaning the Eucharist, commemoratio sola, quae propitium facit Deum homini∣bus. Where note, that both this commemoration is made unto God, as that of the Shew-bread was; and that the end thereof is to make him propitious to men: According to that of S. Augustin l. 9. c. 13. Illa quae in coena Christus exhibet, Fides accepta interponit
inter peccata nostra & iram Dei, tanquam satisfactio∣nem & propitiationem. My next witnesse is Eusebius Demonst. Evan. li. 1. cap. 10. Post omnia, saith he, speaking of Christ, mira∣bilem quandam victimam sacrificiúmque eximium Pa∣tri suo operatus, pro nostra omnium salute obtulit , Me∣moriam nobistradens loco sacrificii Deo continuè offeren∣dam. And again toward the end of that Chapter ha∣ving cited this place of Malachi, which I have chosen for my Text, and alluding thereunto, Incendimus, saith he, propheticum illud Thymiaa—sacrificamus & incendimus aliàs quidem memoriam magni illius sa∣crificii, secundum mysteria ab ipso tradita, celebrantes, Eucharistiamque pro salute nostra religiosis hymnis & precibus Deo offerentes; aliàs nosmetipsos totos ei conse∣crantes, ejusque Pontifici verbo corpore animo{que} dicantes. But above all other, S. Chrysostome speaks so full and home to the point, as nothing can be more; to wit, Hom. 17. in Epist. ad Hebraeos, upon these words cap. 9. v. 26. But now once in the end of the world, hath he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself: Quid vero, saith he, nos nonne quotidie offerimus? He answers, Offerimus quidem, sed mortem ejus commemo∣rando, & ipsa una est hostia, non multae: Quomodo una est, non multae? Quoniam semel fuit oblata; Illa illata fuit in sancta sanctorum, hoc est, illius figura & ipsa illi∣us [veritas:] And a little after, Pontifex illo noster est, qui hostiam illam obtulit, quae nos mundat. Illam nunc quoque offerimus, quae tunc fuit oblata, nec consu∣mi potest. Hoc , Hoc in commemorationem fit illius, quae tunc fiebat. Hoc enim
facite, inquit, . Non aliam hostiam, sicut pontifex [Iudaicus,] sed eandem semper facimus, vel potius sacrificii Memoriam operamur; Graecè, ; what can be more exprest then this is? Prima∣tius is short, but no lesse to the purpose. Offerunt qui∣dem, saith he, Sacerdotes nostri, sed ad recordationem mortis ejus, in 10. cap. ad Hebraeos. S. Augustin cals it Memoriale sacrificium in his Book against Faustus. In a word, the Sacrifice of Christians is nothing but that one Sacrifice of Christ once offered upon the Crosse, again and again commemorated; which is elegantly exprest by those words of S. Andrew, re∣corded in the History of his Passion, written by the Presbyters of Achaia: where AEgeas the proconsull requiring of him to sacrifice to Idols, he is said to have answered thus; Omnipotenti Deo, qui unus & verus est, ego omni Die sacrifico, non thuris fumum, nec taurorum mugientium carnes, nec hircorum sangui∣nem: sed immaculatum agnum quotidiè in Altari crueis sacrifico; cujus carnes postquam omnis populus credenti∣um manducaverit, & ejus sanguinem biberit, Agnus qui sacrificatus est integer perseverat & vivus. This Riddle though AEgeas the Proconsull were not able to unfold, I make no question but you are: And here I conclude. FINIS.
