M2870A R216384 99828115 32542
THE MOST Christian Turk: Or, a VIEW of the LIFE and Bloody REIGN OF LEWIS XIV. Present King of FRANCE. CONTAINING An Account of his Monstrous Birth, the Tran∣sactions that happened during his Minority under Cardinal Mazarine; afterwards his own unjust En∣terprizes in War and Peace, as Breach of Leagues, Oaths, &c. the blasphemous Titles given him, his Love-Intrigues, his Confederacy with the Turk to Invade Christendom, the cruel Persecution of his Pro∣testant Subjects, his Conniving with Pirates, his un∣justly Invading the Empire, &c. laying all Waste before him with Fire and Sword, his Quarrels with the Pope and Genoieze, his Treachery against England, Scotland, and Ireland, the Engagements of the Con∣federate Princes against him; with all the Battles, Sieges, and Sea Fights, that have happened of Con∣sequence to this Time. LONDON, Printed for Henry Rhodes, near Bridean End, in Fleetstreet, 1690.
depiction of Lewis XIV Behold the Christians Scourge, by fortune hur Like Damn'd Pandoras Ao to plague ye wor. No Leagues nor oath's, bind this Leviathan; With fire and Sword, he madly rushes on.
LICENSED, ecemb. 6th. 1689.
THE PREFACE. THE Reader, at first View, may suppose this History to be written by some prejudiced hand, and therefore it may Savour of too much Partiality; but if he more deliberately consult the Actions of this Monarch, and the Reflexions the Cal∣mest Spirits of Europe, and even his own Subjects have made upon them, we hope the Censure may pass over us. For there be few who allow him not the Epithet of, Troubler of the Peace of Europe; in which least Part of the Earth, he has caused more Blood to be shed since his mounting the Throne of France, than many Ages before had seen, and made so many Towns and Villages sink in Fire, that no barbarous Nation dares venture to reckon with him on that score. Nero was a Hea∣then,
and yet we have him painted in the blackest shape, for setting Fire to Rome, and Persecuting the Chri∣stians. What then could have been expected from those Historians, had they been to set forth the Actions of Lewis XIV. who is styled, The Most Christian King, who has not only Destroyed one Town or City, but laid whole Countries and Provinces Waste, with Fire and Sword, Persecuted and Destroyed a Million of Christians, and joined with Infidels, to bring Destru∣ction even upon Christendom it self; and, as he Phrases it, Scorning to be a Slave to his Word, has counted the most sacred Leagues and Oaths as Tri∣fles, to be made and broken at pleasure, or things only framed to serve his pur∣pose, and no longer durable than his Interest requires. Therefore we hope the Candid Reader will not impute i too great a Boldness in a Historian of these times, to lay down in a brief, bu compact Series, undeniable Truths, tha have attended his Birth and Reign.
A VIEW of the LIFE and ACTIONS OF LEWIS XIV. The present King of France, &c. NOT doubting but many are unacquainted with the Life and Actions of Lewis XIV. of France, especially as to sundry Periods and Particulars; we have undertaken to compile what has materially happened relating to that Prince, who has for many Years, but especially of late, made such a noise and bluster in the World, to the damage and disturbance of all Christendom, and has, as it were, fat∣ted himself with Christian Blood. After a tedious War between France and Spain (which began in the Reign of Henry IV. and continued by Truces and Intervals in the Reign of Lewis XIII.) nothing was thought more Expedient to put a stop to the Progress of those
Miseries that equally afflicted both King∣doms, than a Match; and, both Parties agreeing, a Marriage was made between Lewis XIII. (styled by some The Just) and Anne of Austria, the Infanta of Spain: But although they were both in the Flower of Youth, they deceived for a long time the Expectation of the world, living together in mutual Society Twen∣ty-three Years, without any Appear∣ance of the Queen's ever being with Child. Insomuch, that France and all Europe suspected one or both of them Defective or Stiril; but at the end of these Years, when all were out of hopes, a Crotchet came into the Queen's Head, (supposed to be put into it by Cardinal Mazarine, who Ruled all at Court) To go in Pro∣cession barefooted to the Chapel of the Virgin Mary near Paris, whom the Pa∣pists hold for a very Lucina, to demand of her a Son and Heir to the Crown of France. And indeed, when a Man sends his Wife abroad to ask for a Child, 'tis but just she should bring one home with her, if she can get it. But, to the pur∣pose. As if this, as a Miracle, was to be ascribed to the Blessed Virgin, and an Effect of the Answer of the Queen's Prayers; according to the time of Child∣ing,
the Queen was brought to bed of a Son in September, in the Year One thou∣sand six hundred thirty and eight. And, that the Miracle might be increased, or the better to hush some Scruples and Doubts in Court, the Parliament of Pa∣ris welcomed him into the World with the Salutation of Dieu donne, or Given of God; conceiving a Birth, as indeed all Europe did, (though perhaps in ano∣ther sense,) to be Miraculous, after so many Years passing over without any Child, and the Father at that time be∣ing Indisposed, &c. Some things were whispered abroad at the Birth of this Prince, and although Mazarine laboured to still them, yet notwithstanding several of the Blood-Royal (who had promised themselves great Advantages upon the Death of Lewis XIII. who appeared to them very Infirm, as well in Body as Mind,) could not for∣bear speaking aloud. And as a presage of Cruelty, (as it happened to our King Richard III. of England, and others who have delighted in Blood,) This Prince, contrary to the Rules of Nature, was born with long and sharp Teeth; which made many of the Grandees of France look upon so unusual an Accident, as the
fore-runner of ill Luck to the World; and upon that consideration Monsieur Bassam∣peire, a very Judicious Man, and a great Favourite of the Father, wrote to the Bishop of Greenoble in these Words: My Lord, IN my last I gave you the good News of the Queen's being brought safe to Bed of a Dauphin. All that I tell you at present is, that her Majesty Recovers every Day, and the Child is strong and lusty, and seems to promise a long Life. There is one thing of him much taken notice of by some, That his Gums have Teeth pointing out already, and there is scarce a Woman that can suffer him to suckle. He sucks so eagerly, that he brings Blood with his Milk; and, upon this ac∣count, he has had two Nurses changed al∣ready. I pray God this may not be an ill Omen to France. We need Princes of a healing and mild Temper, Corrosives not a∣greeing with the good of this Monarchy. The Prince is to be named Lewis Dieu donne, (Given of God,) as his Majesty was plea∣sed yesterday to declare in Council. I am, My Lord, Your very humble Servant, Bassampeire.
This Letter is found in the Cologne E∣dition of Mareschal Bassampeire's Memoirs, page 134. in French. But to return: Lewis XIII. made great Joy for the Birth of this Son, and all France shined with Fires of Triumph. And no sooner was he Christened, but he was Inaugu∣rated into his Principality, as Dauphin of France, and had given him his Officers and Attendents; the chief of which were his Governess, a Lady of a Mascu∣line Spirit, and Hardovine de Perefexi, who since obtained to be Bishop of Rhodes, and after that Archbishop of Paris. This Man served in the nature of his Tutor, being very cunning and politick. Whilst Lewis XIV. lay in the Cradle, as we may term it, nothing of Weight or Moment can be expected. But scarce was he capable of distinguishing Right from Wrong, before the Sceptre of France dropp'd into his Hand: For Lewis XIII. declining more and more, at the End of Four Years and a few Months af∣ter the Birth of this Son, left the Stage of this World to sleep with his Ance∣stors. He was the Eldest Son of Henry IV. of the House of Bourbon, to whom the House of Valois had given Place, by the Death of Henry III. who was slain
by one Clement, a Jocobine Monk, with a Consecrated Dagger, in his Tent, when surrounded by his Army. His Mother was Mary de Medicis, of the House of Medici of Florence. The King, before his Death, publish∣ed a Declaration, bearing Date April 12. 1643; by Virtue of which he appointed the Queen as Regent during the Minority of his Son, as likewise Governess of the Kingdom; and the Duke of Orleance was made her Lieutenant. The Chief of the Council, were the Prince of Con∣de, and Cardinal Mazarine, the latter swaying all with the Queen, Monsieur Seguire, Chancellor of France, Monsieur Bauthlier, and Monsieur Chauvigny: And the Conduct of the Army on Foot, was given to the Duke of Enguin, after∣ward Prince of Conde. So that Lewis XIII. giving up the Ghost on the Four∣teenth of May 1643. this Order pre∣vented the Contests that would have happened in the Court about Priority. However a Calm did not ensue; for the King was no sooner in his Grave, but Discontents, that in respect to him seemed stifled, broke out; both People and Grandees being dissatisfied with the Cardinal's management of Affairs, and
too great Influence upon the Queen, who Acted all by his Advice; and he being an Italian, proceeded to impose an Italian Government in many things, which were highly disgusted. So that they proclaimed their displeasures at the Head of an Army, with the Noise of Trumpets, Drums, and the thundering of Cannon, &c. of which the Spaniards taking the Advantage, endeavoured to enlarge their Dominions in the Low Countries, where Don Francisco de Melo the Vice-Roy, besieged Rocroy; but his Army was beaten off by the Duke of En∣guin, General of the French Forces, and a considerable Defeat given them, which happened six days after Lews XIV. came to the Throne. And to flush him with this Success, the Colours taken were spread before him at Paris, and several Applauses of Triumph made. And, to say true, this Victory proved a Check to Spain, and gave the French Army an Opportunity to enter into their Ter∣ritories, and take several Towns and Fortresses, as Maubeuge, Borlemont, Aim∣merikt, Binch, and Thionville, with o∣thers. Yet the small Castle of Cirke, stopped the Course of the French, who before rolled on like a Torrent, to the
endangering of all Flanders. But they had not the like Success in Germany; fore there the Mareschal de Gubriant, General of the French Forces, was slain, and his Army worsted, with the loss of a great many brave Men, which drew off Enguin from Flanders. But how∣ever, the War ceased not, for the War with Spain engaged most of the Princes of Europe in the Quarrel. The Trum∣pets carried the Noise of War round the Borders of Savoy, as likewise in Italy, Navar, Catalonia, Germany, Alsatia, Flanders, and other Places. Nor were the Seas free from Blood; for the Duke of Breze, being Admiral for the French in the Straights, he twice engaged the Spanish Fleet. Nor did this War end without Rivers of Blood, Burnings, Plunderings, and great Devastations; and then the Misery it had occasioned in Europe moved the Princes to send their Plenepotentiaries to Munster, to compose the Differences, and agree a general Peace. For the Countries were so wa∣sted and Impoverished in many Places, that more died by Famine, than the Sword; so that Lewis XIV. began early to build his aspiring Greatness upon Ruine and Desolation, which threat∣ned
the World with a turbulent Prince. To this Treaty, which was absolute∣ly necessary for the preventing an uni∣versal Famine, the Queen Regent of France sent the Count d' Avaux, and Monsieur Servien, to manage the Inte∣rest of France; and the Duke of Longue∣ville soon after followed them. So that, after many Debates, and the Interposi∣tion of the uninterested Princes, on the Twenty fourth of October 1648. a Peace was concluded, and the Monarchs of Europe agreed to lay down their Arms, that Plenty might be restored by Peace. And this had been done sooner, had not the French, according to their accustom∣ed Manner, (even in the midst of a Treaty, when others depending upon the publick Faith thought themselves secure,) surprized several Places, and suddenly brought their Arms into Ger∣many, Lorrain, Flanders, Catalonia, and Italy at once; as they did early in the Spring, 1645. which so exasperated the Spaniards, that they requited it before the Peace was concluded, by setting upon the French Fleet over against Na∣ples, putting it to Flight, with the loss of a great many Men, and some Vessels; the Admiral being killed with
a Cannon Bullet, and the Mareschal de Gassion, a great General of France, as he laid Siege to Lens, was wounded, and being carried to Arras, there died; and the Spaniards recovered many consi∣derable Towns in Flanders and other Places, as Fuens, Courtray, and Lens; and the French Army suffered very much. However, the Peace held not in France; for the Prince of Conde, with divers o∣thers of the First Quality, being grieved that Mazarine (once a poor Priest and of mean Birth) should play the King of France, making his young Pupil, Lewis XIV. do what he pleased, Impoveri∣shing likewise the Kingdom, by sending vast Treasures into Italy, to enrich his poor Kindred; insomuch, that his Fa∣ther, who had never seen such Summs before, imagined it rained Gold in France: These things, I say, and the In∣solence of that proud Priest, made them take up Arms to Reform Abuses in the Government, publishing their Manifesto's to justifie their Proceedings, and remove the Cardinal from the Young King. So that the great City of Paris declared for them, resolving to defend their Interest to the utmost, as did many other Towns. Insomuch, that the Crown
was visibly at Stake; nor could the Car∣dinal's Policy have saved it, had not the Courage and prudent Conduct of the Mareschal de Turin put a stop to the Progress of their Arms, whereby he be∣came a great Instrument of keeping Lewis the Great in his Throne, who else had by this time been Little and Insi∣gnificant. But in what manner he re∣quited him, the Sequel will demon∣strate. The Prince of Conde, after much Blood-shed in an intestine War, retrea∣ted into Flanders, with divers of his Party, who would not leave him, and there was set at the Head of the Spanish Forces. Whereupon Hostilities ensued, and the Spaniards recovered a great many of the Towns that had been taken from them. So that where Force could not prevail, Insinuation and Flattery took place, and at last the Prince was gained upon to return Home, as did the Dukes of Conti and Longueville, being highly Caressed; and a Pardon was published to all that had been in the Civil War; and Lewis, who hitherto had acted no∣thing memorable in his own Person, being arrived at the Thirteenth Year of his Age, Anno 1651, he was declared
to be of sufficient Years to take upon him the Government, and to act in Person, which Declaration was approved by the Parliament of Paris, and Proclaimed throughout the Kingdom. Yet the War continued with Spain, and many Battels were fought, and Towns lost and won, things being carried on with various Success. So that the King, that he might say he had been on Horse-back, got up at the Head of his Troops, to shew him∣self to the People, which did indeed give a little hopes to those that were ready to revolt, that things might go better than they had done. But how they were mistaken, will appear in its proper place. In the Year 1654 great Preparations were made to Crown Lewis King of France and Navar, and on the Fourth of June the Court arrived at Rhemes, and was received by about Two thousand of the Citizens on Horseback, about a League from that place; to which was made a Guard of about Five thousand of the Inhabitants in Arms, and the Sub∣urbs were crouded with the Soldiery. At the Entry were divers Triumphal Arches, beautified with golded Lilies, and many flattering Devices, the Streets
being hung with Tapestry, and other Or∣naments. And upon his approach the Cannons were thundred off, and volleys of small Shot discharged; and the Alder∣men of the City taking him for some petty Deity, fell on their Knees, and in that posture presented him the Silver Keys of the Town: And Cardinal Mazarine be∣ing at the Church of Nostrodame with the Clergy, the King alighted there. The Bishop of Soissons officiated in the stead of the Archbishop of Rhemes, who was a little before dead, the Bishop of Caesaria being his Coadjutor. The Bi∣shops of Noyon and Beauvais attended in their Pontificals, the first making an O∣ration, in which he gave the King many flattering Epithets, scarce due to mor∣tal Man. However, knowing that Air of Vanity possessed his Mind, that makes him value himself much upon his own Praises, nothing was omitted that a Court-parasite could industriously pro∣duce. Then the Archdeacon did the like, and the Deacon gave him a Mis∣sal to kiss, who kneeled down upon two Velvet Cushions, placed on a Foot-cloath under a Canopy of State; and from thence he went unto the Choire to assist at the Te Deum, and the Vespers were performed in Musick.
The Vespers over, he went to the Arch∣bishop's Palace, which was prepared to receive him; and the next day the Co∣ronation was Solemnized with great Pomp, the Queen-Mother of England, and the Dukes of York and Gloucester being present. And there he was annointed with the Holy Oil, which the Priest makes the ignorant People believe, was miraculously sent from Heaven, on pur∣pose to annoint their Kings, that they may be the more Dreaded and Reve∣renced. And now this spruce young Monsieur being on the Throne, began to make some Figure in the World, though he still acted by others Heads and Advice. And to give the World a proof of French Fidelity, he clapp'd up a Peace, contra∣ry to all Mens Expectation, with Oliver Cromwell, the English Protector, at the time when King Charles II. with his two Brothers were at the French Court, and had been promised, not only Protection, but also aid to regain the usurped King∣doms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, &c. Nor was this all, but he procee∣ded more treacherously with his near Kinsmen; for in the Treaty, amongst other things, there was an Article, to
Banish them France, and its Territories. Of which King Charles having private Notice, and finding it fruitless to com∣plain where the Royal engagement was so little regarded, to avoid a ceremo∣nious Expulsion, with generous disdain he turned his Back upon that ungrateful Court, and with his faithful Followers, as Prince Rupert, and other Nobles, he retired into Germany, and was there re∣ceived with all imaginable Joy, and found amongst Strangers that Reception, without any promise or word given, which his Cousin of France had so gene∣rously promised, and afterward so base∣ly denied. But his Brothers, the Dukes of York and Gloucester, stayed behind; the first having a Command in the Army, under Mareschl de Turin, against the Spaniards. But that weighed nothing; for the League being made, he was or∣dered to be Packing. Nay, it went so far, that a Message was sent to their Mo∣ther, though Daughter to Henry the Great of France, to be gone; but she sent Word, That she knew her Right to be in France, if the King knew not what be∣longed to his Dignity; and that a Daughter of Henry IV. from whom he was descended, and held the Crown, was not so easily ex∣pelled
from her Native Country. This re∣solute Answer of the Queen's, made Lewis XIV. dissemble the Matter, and her stay was winked at, though not ap∣proved. Here you may see French Faith to di∣stressed Princes, who though never so near Ally'd to that King, could obtain Refuge no longer than his Interest mo∣ved him to break his Promises. And this early beginning has been very much improved, as will appear in the Series of this History. The League Offensive and Defensive being made with England against Spain, Six thousand Men were sent into Flan∣ders, who beat the Spaniard, and took Dunkirk, whilst the French, in a manner, stood still, and looked on. For, as an Historian of their own truly has it, Though France abound with Men, it is wont to make use of the Valour of its Neighbours in all Wars against Strangers. For it hath (continues he) been found by Experience, That the French are only for the first Onset, but cannot abide, nor weather so many Discouragements as the English, Scots, and Switzers can in War. Besides, their Foot are not to be compared to
Strangers, therefore they may ascribe their most difficult Conquests to their Money, and the Valour of the English, Scotch, Irish, and Switzers. According to the Treaty, Dunkirk was secured by the English. For the crafty Protector not being ignorant of the Fals∣hood of the French Court, had given secret Orders to Lockhart, who Com∣manded in Chief, immediately upon sur∣render to enter it, and Post his Men there, and even to dispute it with the French, if it was not quietly put into their Hands. However, though Ma∣zarine and his Pupil had a great Mind to this strong and important Place, yet at that time they were forced to let it slip through their Fingers, as well knowing the Protector had a powerful Army on Foot in England. But, some time after, they found means to Charm it from us with French Gold, to the great endama∣ging of our Shipping which Trade on that Coast. In the Year 1656. the French relying upon their own Strength, at the remark∣able Siege of Valenciennes, received a great Overthrow. But the English had better Success; for whilst the French stood looking on, and concluded it utter∣ly
impossible, Sir Thomas Morgan, who Commanded the English Forces, Stormed Mardike, recovering the Top of the Walls almost before they were expected, passing through showers of Bullets and Fire, to the Astonishment both of the French, and the Besieged, and possessed themselves of that strong Fortress, and after that they saved it from a Surprize, attempted by the Spaniards in the dead of the Night. And indeed, most of the Towns that were taken, during this War, may be justly ascribed to the English Va∣lour; which Valour peradventure Lewis XIV. may one day Experience in the Heart of France, as several of his Predecessors have done. The Spaniards grown weary of this War, the usual way of Accommodation was proposed, viz. a Match between the Spanish Infanta, and the French King. This Match was greatly opposed by Ma∣zarine, who concluded, if a Peace ensu∣ed, and the King gave himself up to the Embraces of a Young Wife, his Autho∣rity would be lessened. But the Queen-Mother declared resolutely for it; say∣ing, That whether he would or no, it should be done; for that her Son should marry one of her Kinswomen. But this had like to
have broken off by the Sickness of Lewis, which every one concluded would termi∣nate in his Death. Whereupon Cardinal Mazarine knowing the many Villainies he had committed in France, and the Mis∣chief done by his Evil Council, was about to pack up his Awls and trudge for Italy; fearing, if the King should die, he should fall a Sacrifice to the Fury of the Rab∣ble. And thereupon he sent a Gentle∣man to the Mareschal de Turin, to know if he might have a safe Retreat in the Army, till he could otherways shift for himself. But that Protestant General re∣turned him so cold an Answer, that he was put out of all Hopes. However, whilst he was studying what to do, the King began to recover; and accordingly esca∣ped that Death that threatned him, to be the cause of the Death and Ruine of more than a Million of People. The King being Recovered, Mazarine was sent to Bayon, and Don Louis d' Ardo de Gusman came to Saint Sebastians, the more commodiously to treat about the Peace, being constituted for that end Plenepotentiaries. And accordingly it was concluded on sundry Articles, to the great Joy of the Frontier-Towns, who by Burning, Plundering, Quartering Sol∣diers,
and Contributions, were redu∣ced to extream Misery. And Lewis sent a Procurator to Don Louis d'Ardo, in his Name to Espouse the Infanta, and the Marriage was consummated at Fonterabia, in the presence of the Court of Spain; and the two Kings met in the Isle of Con∣ference, situate between both Kingdoms, where Mary of Spain was delivered to Lewis of France as his Wife, and both Kings solemnly swore to keep and confirm to one another the Treaty of Peace, and the Young Queen entered Paris in an open Chariot, shining with the Treasure of both the Indias. But Card. Mazarine for Grief to see his Purpose crossed, as some gave out, fell sick, and died on the Nine∣teenth of March 1661. to the Joy of all France; to whom he had a long time been a Scourge, and instilled that Spirit of Cruelty into Lewis XIV. that has since been manifested to the World in Cha∣racters of Blood. This Cardinal had his first Rise under Richelieu, the great ardinal of France, and from a mean Birth raised himself and his Family to the greatest Dignity France could afford a Subject. He was born an Itaelian, and by his cunning bore himself up in the Favour of this King
and his Father, in spight of all the migh∣ty Opponents he met withal. For be∣side the Prince of Conde, Duke of Conti, and most of the Nobles; he stood the Envy of the People in general, whom he had sorely vexed by Taxes and Oppres∣sions. The Court went into Mourning for him, but continued it not long; for, an occasion of Joy soon after made it vanish. The Duke of Orleance falling in Love with the beautiful Daughter of Charles I. of England, the Lady Henrietta, at the publick Ceremory of that illustrious Marriage the Mourning went off. Thus far we have traced this Monarch, as we may term it, in his Leading-strings. For the Cardinal, whilst he lived, had the absolute Rule of his Mind, what∣ever share he had in his Body; and from thence we may hitherto conclude him an Engine, that moved by the Dictates of that covetous and ambitious Prelate; but for the future we must consider him moving more directly in his own Sphere. It is observed of Nero, by Suetonius and others, That the beginning of his Reign, was tolerable, and not comparable to those Cruel and Irregular practices that followed, and left a Lasting stain upon him to all Posterity.
Notwithstanding the terrible Name Lewis XIV. supposed to have gained in the year 1662, his Ambassador contending with the Spanish Ambassador for Prece∣dency, at the Reception of another Am∣bassador near the Tower, was there wor∣sted, had several of his Horses, and some of his Attendence killed and wounded. For the King of England's Council not undertaking to determine in this Matter, they were left to di∣spute it; and a Proclamation was put out, forbidding any English to meddle in this Matter, upon great Penalties; so that the Ambassador of Lewis the Great appear'd but very Little, being forced to sneak to his Lodging by all the by-Ways he could find, though they pre∣tend to claim Precedency of all the Am∣bassadors of Europe unless at the Court of Vienna, where the Lords of Austria bear Rule. Yet this made Monsieur to storm and bluster at a strange rate, insomuch, that the King of Spain being of a quiet disposition, and not desirous to involve himself in another War, gave him such satisfaction as contented him upon his sending complaints to Madrid, preferring the Quiet of his Kingdoms be∣fore a Punctilio of Honour. Which so
puffed up the Frenchman, that he had a great Mind to be Quarrelling with En∣gland; and not well knowing how to be∣gin, he pitched upon a peremptory de∣mand of Dunkirk that was then in the Hands of King Charles II. This De∣mand was looked upon by the French themselves as so Extravagant, that they could not imagine the English would hearken to the delivery of a place gain∣ed with the loss of the Lifes of so many brave Men, and extreamly strengthened and fortified, at the Expence of vast Treasure, lying at the same time so Commodious for Trade, and other Ad∣vantages. The pretences the French King made were, That there was an Agreement with Oliver Cromwell, that upon the Pay∣ment of a certain Summ of Money, it should be delivered to the French. But no body, as we can hear of, was privy to this Contract but himself. However, contrary to all Mens Expectation, his French Pistols gained that strong Town, which all the Cannon and Forces of France, had the King of England de∣fended it, could never have done. But now we Experience the damage of that Oversight, when too Late. For Dun∣kirk
was delivered for Money, and Lewis had the unexpected Pleasure of entering into it in Triumph, on the Second of December, in the Year 1662. These Successes flushed his Ambition to greater Attempts, nothing less now than the Dukedom of Lorrain will serve his turn, and thereupon he sent his cun∣ning Sophisters to wheedle the Duke out of it by Threats and Promises. First, That he had an Army ready to fall into it, if it were refused. Secondly, That he would consign him Lands more secure in Lieu of it in another place. And, to make the old Duke more fond, promi∣sed to declare him Heir to the Crown of France, in Case the Family of Bourbon failed, although there was a Dauphin born of the young Queen. These, and other inveiglings between Force and fair Means, wrought so powerfully, that the Agreement was made the Sixth of Febru∣ary 1662. and in March following con∣firmed in the Parliament of Paris, to the apparent Wrong of Prince Charles, the present Duke of Lorrain; who, though of years, was no ways consenting to his Father's Act. And upon this Agreement, the French Troops were immediately sent, who seized upon all the Cities and
Country of that fertil and spacious Duke∣dom, except Marsal, which being gari∣soned and influenced by the young Prince, opposed their Progress. This made Monsieur storm and immediately he or∣dered his Generals to be ready for an Ex∣pedition, to make War, as he term'd it, for the Glory of his Arms; and came on so terribly in the Head of his Forces, that the old Duke, though he repented of what he had done, foreseeing the ru∣ine that would insue to his People if he opposed, and being altogether unfur∣nished, by the surprize of his Towns, to Encounter a great Army, thought it his best way to submit to his Misfortune. And thereupon, in an humble manner he went to Metz in Lorrain to excuse himself to Lewis, who received the vene∣rable old Man after a haughty manner, and would hear of nothing but the sur∣render of Marsal; which not being a∣ble to hold out against such a powerful Army, as he had brought into the Coun∣try, it was put into French hands on the Third of September 1663. Much about this time, Lewis fell a ca∣velling, like an Unchristian Son, with his Holy Father at Rome, and the Manner was thus. Monsieur de Crequi, his Am∣bassador
in that City, bearing himself with too high a hand, and putting A∣buses even upon the Pope himself, it so enraged some of the Pope's Guards, that (whether willingly, or by chance, remains doubtful) a Harquibus was shot into his Coach, which wounded some of his Ser∣vants. This Affront made such a noise in the Court of France, that Lewis, in∣stead of going in Devotion, immedi∣ately prepared to make a Procession to Rome with his Dragoons, which so frighted Pope Alexander II. that then held the Chair, that he was forced to send and meet his Army with Prote∣station of his Trouble for what had hap∣pened, and that he should have any sa∣tisfaction. This stopped his Carier a little, and Pisa was pitched upon as the City to examine the matter. And on the Twelfth of March 1664. it was agreed between the French and Pope's Deputies, (a thing that the Pride of the Popes of Rome never submitted to for ma∣ny Hundred years;) viz, that Flavio Chigi, the Pope's Nephew, should come to the King, and beg the Pope's Par∣don, (so that it seems, the Great Par∣doner was forced to creep at this Time for a pardon from one of his Sons.)
And farther, That a Monument should be raised in the place where the Affront was done, with an Inscription, decla∣ring the Cause of its being erected. This was performed, but it did not sa∣tisfie: For whilst it was a doing, the French fell into the Pope's County Pala∣tine of Avignon, drove out the Garrisons, and without respect to St. Peter, Mo∣ther-Church, or Father Pope, plundered his Patrimony; for which the most Chri∣stian King highly applauded them. But soon after, the Queen-Mother of France died; and now Lewis XIV. began to take his pleasure without Regard to the young Queen. Wherefore, though it may be looked upon as a digression, it may not be amiss to see a few of Lewis the Great's Intrigues with his Little Mi∣stresses; for you must understand, his Inclinations have been as well to Love as Glory. Since Lewis XIV. was Married to Maria Theresa of Austria, daughter of Spain, the first Mistress (though the Queen was charming enough, young, brisk, and lively,) that he publickly owned, was Madam de la Valliere, and that she might come up the better to his Humour, he made her Duchess of Vau∣jour.
And although the Queen grew jealous, and the Queen-Mother very much reproved his over-fondness of this Woman, yet he little regarded their Reproaches. Whereupon they used ma∣ny devices to draw off his Affections, but those not succeeding, one Father A∣nat, a Jesuit, and at that time his Con∣fessor, was prevailed upon to reprove him. So that he took upon him boldly to represent to him the Scandal, and bad Effects such a loose way of Living occasioned, by making an ill Impression upon the Minds of the People, and that if, he did not Reform, he must enjoin him sharper Penance at his next Con∣fession. But the most Christian King, lit∣tle satisfied with this Discourse, coldly replyed, That he thanked him kindly for his good Advice, and his past Service, but that for the future, he would make use of no other Confessor, but the Parson of the Parish. And so the old Fellow was turned out of Service for his Ill timed Preachment, which made the Society of Jesuits curse him for being so scurvy a Politician, on such an occasion; which he might have Improved to their Advantage. But however, though this was Cashiered, yet others of the Society, more cunning
and facetious, made a shift to creep in∣to the King's Bosome, making their own Advantages by embroiling a great part of Europe. And the more to flatter his Ambition, contrary to the Rules of their Order they took away the Name of Jesus from off the Gates of one of their Colleges in Paris, and placed the King's Name instead of it, which occasioned this Distich. Abstulit hinc Jesum, posuit{que} Insignia Regis Impia Gens, Alium non habet Illa Deum. They Jesus name have ta'en from their Aboad, And plac'd the King's, he only is their God. After a long Caressing of this Mistress, (by whom he had some Children, and is said, in a great Immergency, to play the Man-Midwife to one of them himself,) and Entertaining her with all the Glo∣ry and Gallantry of his Kingdom, he grew weary of those Beauties-himself had sullied, and searched for those that were fresher. Whereupon he cast his Eyes upon Madam Montespan, who char∣med his Affections a very considerable time; which so vexed the former to see her self outed, that she went into a Nun∣nery,
and there turned Penitent, leaving the King to take his full swinge with Montespan, who made her Advantage by preferring all her Kindred to places of Honour and Trust. Her Brother, who would otherways have never deser∣ved it, was made Duke, and Peer General of the Galleys, and a Mareschal of France. These Qualifications rendered him of the greatest Quality for a Subject in the King∣dom, which caused a pretty Retort, when one was comparing this Vivone with Feillade, viz. that the last was made Mareschal by the Sword, and the first by the Scabbard. Yet many were of Opinion that the Kings passion was not so great for Montespan as he pretended; for if fame be true, one Madam Du Lude, a Nun of Lorrain, came in with her for a share, though privately, to save the Credit of that Order; which occasioned these following Verses. La Valliere of common Race, Montespan of Noble was, And Du Lude a pious Nun, All for Mistresses are Known; If you'd know the Reason why These three his Favourites he creates, Our great Prince has a mind to try To Ʋnite the three Estates.
But his mind continued wavering; for not long after Montespan was laid aside, and Madamosel de Fontagne was taken in∣to Favour; but she lived not long after∣ward, as being supposed to have received a Dose from her she had rivalled: and the Prince of Marsilack, who brought her to the King, was, for finding the Game so well, made Chief Huntsman of France. To her succeeded Madam de Maintenon, who joining with Montespan, as a Testimony of their Repentance, built the Abby of St. Cry, by some called the Seraglio, to train up young Women: Which occasioned this Epigram; Two of fair Venus's Votaries, Their Souls with holy Zeal inflam'd, Have founded two new Nunneries With the Revenues by their Pleasure gain'd. But, without Miracle, they seem To be in a pitious taking, Since that that founded and supporteth them Is now in a continual shaking. But to cut off this Digression, if it may properly be so termed, as to what is consistent to History of this Nature, we find that Lewis XIV. was not satisfied with having Dunkirk delivered to him;
but dreading the Growing Greatness of his Protestant Neighbours, viz. England, and the Ʋnited Provinces, by some extra∣ordinary Contrivance they were set toge∣ther by the Ears, and engaged in an Un∣happy War, occasioning much blood∣shed on either Part, whilst France was a looker on. But when that Court per∣ceived the Dutch inclined to a Peace, as being wearied with an Expensive and hazardous War; then, and not till then, the French put in to assist the States, to keep the flame still blazing; that so the two most powerful Nations at Sea under Heaven, might weaken each other, and thereby lay themselves more open and exposed to the Projects of France, which has but too apparently been manifested. For, although in the Year 1666. the French Fleet was abroad, yet it was on∣ly in a bravado; for we could never learn from any hand, That that Fleet (though the Ships carried many terrible Names, as Tempest, Lightning, Thunder, &c.) effected any thing; but rather stood as a looker on, whilst the English and Dutch battered each other; though at the same time they might have come up, the Wind being favourable. Nor were the English better served when they
were on their part, as will hereafter ap∣pear: So that if there was not (as let those believe who are very credulous, if they please,) a design in it for the weakning the Protestant Interest; at least we may conclude, That this produced nothing as to the Reputation of making War, for the Glory of the Arms of Lewis XIV. However, after several Fights, and much Blood-shed, though little or none of the French in these Acti∣ons, upon more deliberate Considerati∣ons, a Peace was concluded in 1668. Yet in this Interim, there are other Re∣marks than what we have mentioned. The French, during this Naval War, had not the Courage to make any de∣scent upon England, or any of the Three Kingdoms; but upon our People in the West-Indias their Treachery appeared in a Crimson dye, especially in the Island of St. Christophers; where the French and English, as planters of that Island, had lived together in neighbourly Love, as every one thought, for many years, re∣ciprocally and with much satisfaction enjoying the Fruits of their Labour. But upon Notice of this War, and the iustigation of French Popish Cruelty, they fell unawares upon the English, and
Massacred them without mercy, or so much as giving them time to think of a future State, seizing upon their Goods and Possessions, to the eternal Infamy of the French Nation. They likewise sei∣zed upon the Islands of Antigo, Saint Eu∣stach, and Tobago. Yet all this while the Court of France pretended they had no Quarrel against the English, but what they did was in the defence of their Al∣lies, pretending a great Kindness for the Dutch; who since have experienced it to their no small Detriment, which however may in time be repay'd. How the Port at Constantinople, and the French Court have hitherto taken equal Mea∣sures, never observing any Obligation longer than it tended to their Interest, we leave the World to judge. This was not all the design of Lewis XIV. for by embroiling England and Holland, he had leisure (notwithstand∣ing the Peace solemnly sworn to, and concluded with the King of Spain) to enter Flanders, under Pretence of some Particulars not performed, relating to the Contract of Marriage with the In∣fanta. Nor could his Queen persuade him to reason, but in May 1667. he entered Flanders with an Army of 30000.
Horse and Foot; upon which unexpe∣cted surprize, many of the Garrisons drew off, as Armantiers, Labassee, Conde, Bergues, S. Guilhain, and Furves; of which the Mareschal d' Aumont took Possession. And the better to secure the Frontiers, Lewis commanded Charleroy to be Rebuilt and Fortified. Many o∣ther Towns of Note were taken, being rather got by surprize than by true Va∣lour on the part of the Franch: For many of them, in this security, were unprovided of many things that might have contributed to a longer Defence, or secured them from falling into the Hands of the Invader. Lille was the only Place that made a resolute Defence; for in this place was a Governour of great Repute, under whose Command was a Garrison of 4000 Foot, and 800 Horse: Nor was it gained but by a bloo∣dy Siege, when the Governour found all hopes of expecting Relief vain, through the want of timely Notice of the French King's Intentions to Invade those Pro∣vinces, or the unpreparedness of the Court of Spain to send an Army to op∣pose the Torrent of a French Power, ad∣vantageously poured into those Coun∣tries. The Town Surrendered upon
Articles on the 28. of August, and Lewis, who then was in the Army, entered into it. Notwithstanding, the Spaniards during the Siege made some Attempts to Relieve it, but, their Forces being small, they were frustrated. In the Year 1668. for the Glory of his Arms, Lewis XIV. thought of ano∣ther Enterprize, which was, to take into his Possession by Force the French Comte, which, as a kind of a Palatinate, or separate Principality, had enjoyed many Privileges and Immunities; which being altogether unarmed or capable of Defence upon such a Surprize, the In∣habitants were forced to send to the King's Deputies to treat of Yielding; thereby to prevent the Spoils and Ra∣vage of a Hunger starved Army. How∣ever, in the midst of the Treaty, Be∣sanson was possessed by a forced Surren∣der on the Sixth of February. Salines was also Surprized; and many other places not being sufficiently Garrisoned, or provided with Stores, were obliged to their Gates. Dole only was capable of making a shew of Resistence; but the French Army being numerous, and sud∣denly possessing themselves of the Out∣works, they were forced to accept of
such Terms as were offered by the French King, and thereupon they sent him the Keys of the City. It may be guessed what little Expecta∣tion this Country had of a French Army, when in the space of Twelve Days so many strong Places Yeilded, that were capable of holding out many Years, had they had timely Notice, and well pro∣vided. But it has ever been observable, that this King gains most of his Advan∣tages by this way, or the force of golden Pistols, charged into the Governours Pockets. The French King perceiving that the Dutch (weary of his Alliance, who had done so little for them, and pretended so much,) were inclined to make a Peace, and join with the Spaniards; and thinking he had gained sufficiently, if he could keep what he had got, Overtures of Peace where thereupon proposed, and Mon∣sieur Colbert was sent to Aix la Chapelle to meet the Ministers of the Mediating Princes. And accordingly the Articles of Peace between France and Spain were signed on the Sixth of May, and made Publick at Paris and Brussels. Yet Lew∣is was not well pleased to be frustrated in his Expectation of swallowing the
Spanish Provinces, attributing his disap∣pointment to the Dutch; who declaring for the Interest of Spain, had obliged him to this Peace. But his Threats were retarded by another Enterprize. It so happened, that the Turks, with a nu∣rous Army, had besieged the City of Candia, situate in the Island formerly called Creet, belonging to the Venetians: So that may of the French Nobility, who had prepared their Equipages for the ensuing Compaign, and being prevented by the Peace the French King was forced to comply withal, went thither, and upon their Return gave an account of the place. Insomuch that Lewis think∣ing to have the Honour of relieving that Bulwork of Christendom, which had held out a long, doubtful, and bloody Siege, and upon the Event of which the Eyes of all Europe were fixed, sent an Army of French men, under the Command of the Dukes of Beaufort and Navailles, consisting of 10000 Men; who, with∣out any detriment, entered that City, which was laid almost in Ruines with the Bombs shot in by the Infidels. Where∣upon, it was concluded in a Council of War, that it could be no longer tena∣ble without performing some extraor∣dinary
Exploit; and after a farther-Consult, it was agreed, That a vigo∣rous Sally should be made, in Order to the raising of the Siege. The French indeed were very forward; and, to give the Duke of Beaufort his Due, he behaved himself like a man of good Courage and Conduct. The Sally was accordingly made, with great Re∣solution, and the Turks at first were beaten out of their Trenches: But the Christians possessing themselves of a Ma∣gazine of Three hundred Barrels and Sacks of Powder; whether by Matches laid on purpose by the Enemy, or fired by chance, it blew up and destroyed al∣most one whole Regiment, in which it was thought the Duke of Beaufort was killed, and buried by the overthrowing of the Earth; for his Body was not af∣terwards found. Which terrible thun∣dercrack so dismayed the French-men, who were the foremost in the Sally, that they retired in great confusion, think∣ing by the Earthquake it made, that all the Ground was hollow, and charged with Mines. So that the Turks Rallying, and being reinforced with great Num∣bers that came pouring from the Hills, the Belieged were driven into the City,
and the French never after that could be persuaded to make any other Sally, or so much as to stay for the Defence of the Place, although the Governour almost with Tears besought it. But the Duke of Novailles, who now Command∣ed in Chief, pretending Orders from his Master, took Shipping, and with those Forces he had left, returned to France; which was not for the Glory of the King's Arms. For, had they stayed, and done what became Soldiers, that famous City had undoubtedly been saved, which by this Defeat, was in a short time after delivered to the Turks, with whom Lewis XIV. has since had a better Cor∣respondence; as will appear in due Place and Order. In the year 1669. the Duke of Lor∣rain, grieved that he had so easily par∣ted with his Countries, hoping it was not yet too late to retract, he required Aid of the Emperor, and King of Spain, labouring to engage them against France. Whereupon Lewis sent the Mareschal de Crequi with an Army of 18000 Men in∣to his Country, who dismantled and pulled down the Walls of divers Towns, making great Ravagement, though he found little or no opposition. For on∣ly
the little Towns of Epinal and Chate made some shew of a Resistence. But there being no Army that could promise them Relief, they were compelled to sur∣render, and the old Duke to fly his Pa∣trimonial Country, and foregoe those vast Promises the French Court had made him. The Eyes of all Europe being up∣on this unfair dealing, and greatly Re∣gretting it; to keep the Inhabitants qui∣et, he ordered they should be treated with somewhat more Mildness than is usually observed in the French Conquests, (as they term them, though for the most part got by Surprize or Treachery.) And finding the Hollanders were no way satisfied with his proceedings, (for he had infringed upon their Commerce,) he resolved to begin first; and having visited and strengthened his Towns in Flanders, and upon the Frontiers, he by a subtil Negotiation (as some Histori∣ans will have it) of Henrietta, Duchess of Orleance, who had an Interview with her Royal Brothers at Dover, drew the King of England into an Expensive War against the States. But whether by the means of that Princess, who died upon her return into France, or otherwise, we determine not. However, it is cer∣tain
that great Naval Preparations were made before it was publickly known to what Intent. The Duchess of Orleance dying sud∣denly, and not without Suspicion of e∣vil Practice; the Duke, by the persua∣sion of Lewis XIV. was Married to the Daughter of the Prince Palatine of the Rhine. Upon which Country no doubt (and it since has but too plainly appear∣ed) he had an Eye. In the Year 1672, on the 7th of April, the French King's Declaration was put forth, prohibiting all Trade and Com∣merce with the States of the Ʋnited Pro∣vinces. And, out of a Bravado, he mar∣ched in person at the Head of an Army of 150000 Men. By which surprizing Invasion, he like a Torrent carried all before him. So that many looked upon the Low Countries to be lost, if no speedy Stop was put to this Progress. But it has always been observed, that though the first Motions of the French are impe∣tuous, yet the least discouragement makes them Recoil. They had on a sudden filled with their Troops the Duchy of Cleves, the Electorate of Collen, the Duchy of Limburg, the County of Zutphen, Ʋtreitcht, and its Territories,
with many other places, and got into their hands several strong Towns; and into this Combination the Bishop of Mun∣ster was drawn, who took Groll and some other places, though not very con∣siderable. They passed the Rhine like∣wise, and did considerable damages in such places as were found unprovided, Committing great Outrages. Which so puffed up Lewis XIV. that being return∣ed to Paris, he was congratulated with Flatteries and Applauses from all the So∣cieties of the Kingdom. And in Imi∣tation of the Heathen Idolaters, the Queen caused a Chapel to be built at Roan, dedicated to our Lady of Victories. The King was styled the invincible Hero, though he was always so tender of him∣self, that he neither engaged in any Bat∣tel or Skirmish, or seldom came within Cannon shot of any place that resisted, doing what best suited his Valour, which has not overmuch of the Hero in it. But indeed the Progress of his Arms had a Recoil: for the Provinces being reco∣vered out of the Amaze this sudden At∣tempt put them into, and the Prince of Orange (now King of England) con∣firmed in his Patrimonial Offices, and honourable Trusts, as Stadtholder, Ad∣miral,
and General of the Ʋnited Provinces; he presently took the Field with an Ar∣my of 24000 Men, recovering several places, and causing the French to retire, and performing many other Exploits worthy himself, and the Glory of his An∣cestors. But having taken a view of the French King's Affairs hitherto at Land, let us cast our Eyes a little upon the Ocean The Fleets being Abroad in May 1672. on the 28th of that Month a sharp In∣gagement ensued, the then Duke of York commanding as Admiral. It continued a long time bloody and doubtful, du∣ring which many brave Men were lost, as the Earl of Sandwich, &c. who would not leave his Ship, though all in Flames, till it was too late to succour him. His Body was found sloating, and afterward honourably buried; but we cannot learn that the French did any thing considera∣ble in this Action, or that any more than their Reer-Admiral, Monsieur de Rabi∣niere Trees les Bois, came up to a close Fight; who behaving himself like a man of Courage was slain, and afterward honourably Interred at Rochel; the rest lying off in a Line and firing at a Di∣stance, and many times greatly enda∣maging
the English, especially in their Rig∣ging, though they perceived only the Blue Squadron Engaged, the Red not being able to come up in time. So the French stood rather Neuters, or Lookers on, than any ways concerned in the Battel. From this there grew a suspicion, that they had Orders to keep from Engaging as much as possible, that the two Fleets of England and the Ʋnited Provinces might batter each other, that through their weakness the French King might become strong at Sea; which more visibly ap∣peared the following Year, 1673. This Year the Valiant Prince Rupert Commanded the English Fleet, where the French joining him, he made One hundred and twenty Sail of stout Ships. The Dutch were Commanded by Du Ruytter and Van Trump; so that a sharp Engagement happened. But the French no sooner heard the Bullets begin to rat∣tle, and saw with what Fury and Vio∣lence the Dutch and English Engaged, but almost all that Fleet stood away, pretending to gain the Weather-gage, the which, when they had very favou∣rably got, they e'en kept it for the Glo∣ry of their Master's Arms; for they ne∣ver came up again during the Fight.
And those few Captains, that had so much Sense of Honour, as not to follow their Admiral, (who were but very few,) had secret Intimation that they were in danger of being hanged, when they came into France, for not following their Flag, or Orders. But how they came off, has not yet occurred. The Prince, though he made good the Fight, and came off with Honour and Bravery, stormed to be thus deserted. Whereupon, when the French Admiral came on board him to make his Excuse (which proved but a very lame one) the Prince is reported to look upon him with Indignation, and after reproaching him with Baseness, told the Monsieur, That had he been one of his Master, the King of England's Subjects, he would have killed him with his own Hand. And to let the World see how much the English Valour surpasses that of the French, and how much Lewis is be∣holden to it for his Greatness, I need instance but one Particular, viz. During this War the strong City of Mastreicht was besieged by an Army of about Forty Thousand, and the King came as near as he durst venture, that his Men might be the better encouraged. It was in∣vested
on the Sixth of June, and there was in it a Garrison of 7 or 8000 Men, one Faro, a Valiant Man, being Gover∣nour. The besieged made a stout re∣sistence, and many were killed on both Sides; insomuch that the French began to saint. At what time the Heroick Duke of Monmouth, who was at the Head of the English, in the height of Youthful Valour, despising Danger, went on to the Assault through Showers of small and great Shot; and Commanding in the Trenches, though Two or Three Mines were sprung to obstruct his Pas∣sage, he and the few that followed him, charged with such resolution, that they carried the Half-Moon, contrary to the Expectation of all Men, in less than half an Hour; though the Shot flew round him as thick as Hail, maintaining it till he had delivered it to a French Collonel, who was sent to relieve him. But no sooner was the Duke and the English re∣tired, but the French, though strongly possessed, not being able to endure the fire of the Besieged, quitted it. This vexed the Duke to see that a Regi∣ment could not keep, when put into their hands, what himself and a very few English had got. Insomuch, that he
prepared to regain it, which he did with such daring Resolution, that, ac∣companied only by Twelve Voluntier-Gentlemen, he threw himself over the Works and Trenches, with his Weapon in his Hand, and beat out the Defen∣dents, gaining the Half-Moon a second time, and delivered it Monsieur de la Feuvilade, whom then shame more than true Valour compelled to secure it. And indeed, it is conjectured by many, that this strong Place had put a stop to the French Arms, had not the English, who bore all the brunt of the Siege, done things to a wonder; so that at last it surrendered upon honourable Conditions on the Thirteenth of June. But the French fury, like a blazing Comet, ha∣ving by this time spent it self, and the Confederate Armies gathering like a black Tempest around them, Lewis found that this had been but a kind of a Frolick, to make him more known. For he was not capable of Garrisoning the Towns he had possessed and keep an Army in the Field, which made him spue them up as fast as he had swallowed them; withdrawing his Garrisons, and Abandoning them to their true Owners. which occasioned a Comical Portraicture
of Lewis the Great, Spewing and Sh—ing Towns and Castles. However, upon leaving those places, many of them were dismantled, and the Inhabitants obliged to part with almost all they had, for their Contribution or Ransom, at the discretion of the Soldiers. King Charles II. of England, by this time grown weary of a War, into which he had been unadvisedly drawn, and the which without any advantage to Eng∣land, had cost a great deal of Blood and Treasure, whilst the French reaped the Profit; a Peace was concluded with the States for himself on very honourable Terms. So that the English Fleet being laid up, the French durst be little at Sea; yet at Land the War continued, where the French Gold did the greater Service, as indeed it has all along had the Luck to do. And in this State things continued, till the beginning of May, 1674. Lewis XIV. finding he had ingaged himself too far, and that his violent Pro∣ceedings had drawn a great many Princes upon him, (for they found it high time to Confederate against the Disturber of Christendom,) some Overtures of Peace were made, and a Treaty set on Foot
in the City of Cologne, where divers were assembled, in hopes of bringing it to Perfection. But upon the Emperor's seizing of the Prince of Furstemburg, (who worked the French Interest, tho' a Subject of the Empire, and ought to have done the contrary,) it greatly dis∣gusted the French King, and proved a Remora to this Treaty. So that Hosti∣lities continued, and the Prince of Conde seized on Navaigne; which, after a short Siege was delivered up; and the King himself laid Siege to Dole, which made a stout resistence, and killed him a great many Men. But not being timely suc∣coured, it at last fell into their Hands. These proceedings made the Confe∣derate Armies draw together to oppose them; so that on the Fifteenth of June, the Duke of Lorrain, and the Count of Caprara, gave Turin Battel; but want∣ing Foot, as having but One Regi∣ment of Foot to Seven thousand Horse, and hourly Expecting the Duke of Bournonville, who was coming towards them, the French on the other hand being Twelve thousand strong, not∣withstanding a desperate Fight, they were forced to retire over the Necker, many brave Men being killed, and di∣vers
taken Prisoners. The loss of the slain are held to be equal; and had not the Duke wanted Foot, the French had been utterly routed: For he Charged with such Fury and Resolution, at the Head of his Troops, as if he had been weary of his Life, and expected a Duke∣dom in another World, rather than this. Whilst these things passed, the Dutch scoured the Seas with their Fleet, the French not daring to peep abroad; for now they had nothing to fear on the Ocean, having made a Peace with the English. Whereupon they braved the French in their Harbours, and made a Descent on Bell Isle, but could make no Advantage on that strong Place. But the Dutch Forces at Land took the Grime, a very strong Place, after a hard Siege. And now Lewis XIV. betook him to the French Policy, of tampering abroad: And finding by his Agents, that the In∣habitants of Messina in Sicily, grew wea∣ry of the Spanish Government, he en∣couraged them to Rebel, and sent them Succours under the Command of the Duke de Vivone; seizing that City, and taking an Oath of Fidelity of the Inhabi∣tants. But when he had brought them to this Revolt, and kept a Garrison there a
very considerable Time, contrary to the Expection of all Men, and out of what Caprice none perhaps but himself knows to this Day, he suddenly recal∣led his Forces, leaving so many of the Inhabitants, as would not leave all they had to Ship themselves and fly into France, (where they could rely upon no Succour,) to the Mercy of the Inraged Spaniards, whom they had highly of∣fended by this Revolt. Nor had they above four Hours Notice: Yet as many as could, crowded on Board, and after∣ward lived in Exile, not daring to re∣turn. King Charles II. of England having made a Peace with the States of the Ʋni∣ted Provinces, issued out a Proclamation on the Nineteenth of May, 1675. com∣manding all his Subjects in the French Service as Soldiers, since the Treaty of Peace, to quit forthwith that Service, and return Home; and prohibiting any English-men to engage themselves in the like for the future; which proved a great Detriment to the Progress of the French Arms, as soon after appeared: For the Army as not only overthrown, but Turin, the most Experienced General of France, was slain. But, because this
Action was very Memorable, we shall not think it amiss to give a brief Account of it. On the Eighteenth of July 1675, the Mareschal de Turin commanded out the Regiments of Horse of Campaigne and Orleance, with Nine Squadron of Horse, under the Command of the Marquess de Rone, Mareschal, to pass the River Ren∣chau, by the Means of Two Bridges he had laid over. And being informed, That the Imperialists had laid an Ambu∣scade on the other side, he went in per∣son to see if he could discover it from a certain Height, near the Bridge: When the Imperialists, having planted Two small Pieces in a Wood hard by, fired one of them without any considerable Execu∣tion; but the secoud being Charged with Iron, or Cartridge-shot, put a period to Turin's Life; killing likewise, the Lieutenant-General of the Ordnance, and divers others of Quality about him; though some Accounts say, he was killed with a Cannon Shot. However, thus ended that great General, who had been brought up in War, as we may proper∣ly term it, from his Infancy, and seen many Rivers of Blood; whose Death gave a great check to the French Affairs,
and the Army was so much discouraged, that it immediately retired in some dis∣order; when being pursued, and hotly engaged by Montecuculi, the Imperial General, between Six and Seven thou∣sand of them were slain, and several Colours, with some Cannon and Bag∣gage taken; the Count de Lorge, who Commanded after the Death of Turin, being wounded, and many Persons of Quality killed. This was seconded by the Overthrow of the Mareschal de Crequi, near Treves: For the Confederates having besieged that place, which had been surprized by the French, the Mareschal came to Succour it; but the Besiegers drawing off, and giving him Battel, his Forces were totally defeated, with the loss of Three or Four thousand Men, and of all the Baggage and Cannon, &c. the bro∣ken Army scattering, and getting into the adjacent Town. The Mareschal with sive or six men got into Treves, and, the Governour being killed, took upon him to defend the place; but the Besiegers having made Three Breaches so wide, that Forty Men a-breast might enter; the Officers finding the Ditches likewise filled up, and the Storm ready to be
made, they Capitulated without Crequi; who, to regain in some measure the Credit he had lost, suffered himself to be made a Prisoner of War. Binch was likewise taken by the Dutch, and many other Advantages gained. So that Lewis the Great, began to think that he had overstood his Markets, and thought it high time to look out for Confederates. Whereupon he drew the King of Sweeden into an Alliance with him, to divert the War on that side of the King of Den∣mark and Duke of Brandenburg. But the Sweeds had but little Success in his Quar∣rel, as being worsted by Land and Sea, and having nothing but the French King's Word for Reparation. Insomuch that they were obliged to sit down by the Loss, and thereupon Lewis XIV. began to tamper with the States of Holland, to clap up a Peace without the Consent of their Allies. But whilst it was on Foot, which made the King grant the larger Terms, his Forces under the Duke of Luxemburg were beaten near Mons by the English, Dutch, and Germans. In which Action, his present Majesty of England signalized his Valour and Con∣duct to a wonder; and the Duke of Monmouth being a Voluntier in the Ar∣my,
by his Example so animated the English, that they let the French see they were capable of turning the Scale of Victory. These Bad Successes making Lewis the Great fear he should be reduced to Lewis the Little, he made such Offers (which were seconded by many Promises and Crafty Insinuations) that the States did conclude a peace, and had all their Towns, except Maestreicht, delivered into their possession; which made many wonder. But those that have weighed the Matter, give these Reasons for their making a peace, when other Princes their Confederates were in Treaty; for that of Nimeguen was still on Foot: First, They perceived the Ambassadors of their Allies, had been several Years in debate at Nimeguen, without bring∣ing any thing to Perfection as to the Treaty with France; and they had great∣ly wasted their Treasure in the War, and found a peace was necessary to Re∣cruit. Secondly, Their Trade, on which the Provinces mostly depend, was greatly obstructed; by which means the People were Impoverished. Thirdly, They were Constrained to
take up Moneys on the publick Trust, to supply the Charge of the War; which being of long Continuance, could not but have consumed vast Treasures Fourthly, That the Spaniard had not those Forces on foot in the Netherlands that was Expected; which might have hindered the French from taking several Towns in Flanders, of which, without any considerable Opposition, they had pos∣sessed themselves. Fifthly, That all things were restored to them that had been taken away, which would have been difficult to have Recovered by other means. Sixthly, By this Treaty they caused to be rendered up to Spain, part of what had been taken during the War. Seventhly, That the French Ministers assured the States, that they would spee∣dily make a Peace with their Allies, and that they, the States, should be Arbi∣trators of that Peace. These are given as Reasons. And indeed, considering how the Ministers of France pressed it with Eagerness, and declared the Extream Passion and De∣sire the King their Master had to be at peace; it might have been thought, that he mean'd as he said. The King
himself, during the Negotiation, sent them a Letter, wherein he styled them, His good Friends, Allies, and Confederates; promising wonderful things in the most obliging Flattery. But no Words or Promises can bind this Leviathan; for Lewis knew well enough what he did by making a Separate Peace; conside∣ring, if he should be brought to Strict Terms with all the Allies, he must of Necessity part with Lorrain to the Duke, its Rightful Lord, and with the Franche Compte of Bourgogne, to the King of Spain, taken, contrary to faith given, since the Pyrenean Treaty. But, by not ha∣ving the Dutch Army upon his back, he sound himself able to deal with the rest, and to tire them out by delays. And indeed, by taking these Measures, he constrained the Duke of Brandenburg, and the Prince of Zel, to restore all they had taken from the Sweed, since that King stood for the French Interest. King Charles II. of England, perceiv∣ing Lewis XIV. delayed the Treaty to incroach upon Flanders, found his Ho∣nour touched, since he became a Medi∣ator, and was to be Guarrantee of the Peace. And thereupon sent over five or six Thousand Men, to defend the Spa∣nish
Netherlands, where the French, du∣ring the Treaty, and daily Expectation of Peace, were like so many Tartars, or wild Arabians, Ravaging and destroy∣ing the Country; but the Terrour of the English put a Check to their Pro∣gress. Lewis XIV. having obtained a Peace with the States of the Ʋnited Provinces, he more and more delayed the Treaty of Nimeguen, as not doubting to bring the other Confederates to more Advan∣tageous Terms, than otherwise he could have been capable of doing. And that which made the French King more ur∣gent for a Separate Peace, was, that he knew well enough that it could not be Reasonably made with the Allies in Con∣junction, but that the Country of Lor∣rain would be required for that Duke, and the Franche Compte for the King of Spain, or what ever had been snatched from that Crown since the Pyrenean Peace, which had been so openly vio∣lated by France. And therefore he con∣cluded, to divide the Allies was to make his own Terms. And indeed it so fell out, to the great prejudice of the Con∣federaters, Especially Spain and the Em∣pire, as in due place will appear. And
indeed, Lewis XIV. by this means pre∣served most of his important Conquests at that time, whilst the Elector of Bran∣denburg, and the Prince of Zell, found themselves in a Necessity to Restore to Sweden all they had taken, or, by stand∣ing out, run the Hazard of a French Ar∣my Ravaging their Countries; whilst their Allies, who had already made peace, could not fairly give them any Assistence; unless, like him with whom they had made the peace, they layed no Stress upon Leagues, any longer than it tended to their purpose. But the Em∣peror, as well as Holland, having con∣cluded with France, the rest found them∣selves too weak long to contend with a Monarch of such vast Territories, and one whose Flatterers style Invincible; though, the contrary has often appea∣red. And, according to the opinion of Politicians and those Experienced in war, had that vast Army of the Confederates been unanimous, and vigourously pushed on, they might, by entering the very Heart of France, have reduced the Great∣ness of Lewis, and have made their own Terms. Sed, divide, et Impera. The Peace, as is already said, being concluded with Holland at Nimeguen, a∣bout
the latter End of the Year 1678, was soon followed by his Imperial Ma∣jesty. But, before either of these were concluded, it will not be amiss to shew the plausible pretences of Lewis XIV. to the former, in a Letter in Answer to a Letter to the States General, presented him by their Ambassador, the Heer Vain Beverning, in these Words: Most dear great Friends, Allies, and Confederates, WE have with much Pleasure un∣derstood, as by the Letter you writ us, so by the Assurances which the Heer Van Beverning, your Extraordinary Ambassador, hath in your Name given us, the Dispositions in which you pro∣fess your selves to be at Peace. We cannot better let you know how firm and sincere our Intentions are, to pro∣cure so great and so general a Good for Europe, than by a Writing, which we have Commanded to be put into his Hands. You will see the new Facilities we offer, to put you in a State to bring your Allies to consent to the Conditions, which we cannot doubt but you will judge Equitable. And having nothing farther to add thereunto, we only as∣sure
you of the Satisfaction we shall have of giving you back with the Peace our old and real Friendship, and in enter∣ing with you into the strongest and most capable Engagements, for secu∣ring ever your Liberty; which we have more amply explained our self upon to the Heer Van Beverning, whose Conduct and Person hath been very acceptable to us. There remains on∣ly, That we pray God to have you, most dear great Friends, Allies, and Confederates, in his holy Keeping. Given in our Camp at Wetteren, the First Day of June, 1678. Your good Friend, Ally, and Confederate, LOVIS. Underneath Signed Arnauld. The Matter to which Lewis XIV. re∣fers them to, is a Memorial delivered to the aforesaid Ambassador by his Order, in these following Words: THE King hath with Pleasure seen, as by a Letter from the States Ge∣neral, so by the Assurances which they have given him by the Heer Van Be∣verning, their Extraordinary Ambassador,
that their Intentions to a general Peace, correspond with the Desires his Ma∣jesty hath always had to procure the same; and that they are ready to ac∣cept the Conditions that his Majesty hath offered them by his Ambassadors and Plenepotentiaries at Nimeguen. But, at the same time the Heer Van Bever∣ning hath made known to him the Sen∣timents of the said States General, he hath in their Names pray'd, that his Majesty would grant a Cessation of Arms for six Weeks, and hath represented to him, that they had need of that time to Communicate with their Allies, and obtain their Consent for the concluding so great a Work: The Condition in which his Majesty's Arms are at pre∣sent, and the favourable Opportunity that would be lost in deferring their Acting, would not permit him to con∣sent to this Proposal, if the desire of giving Peace to Europe did not much more prevail with him, than that of enlarging his Frontiers by new Con∣quests. It is upon this Considera∣tion, of contributing to the publick Repose, that he will agree, at the de∣sire of the said States General, to a Ces∣sation of Arms for Six Weeks; such a
one as was stipulated between France and Spain, Anno 1668. But for as much as it would not be just, if the Enemies of his Majesty should let the time pass fruitlesly; and that, instead of its serving to Advance the Peace, they should make Advantage of it, to avoid the Effect of his Majesty's Arms, that he should have lost the advanta∣geous Conjuncture that is at present in his Hands: His Majesty desires of the said States General, that they do pro∣mise him, that in case during the Time of Cessation of Arms, they cannot bring their Allies to accept the Conditions he hath offered, that they will not assist them directly or indirectly against him or his Allies, during the whole Course of the War. In Exchange, his Ma∣jesty will in such Case renew to them the same Engagements, which he hath taken with them, by his Letter of the Eighteenth of the last Month, as well as what concerns these same Conditi∣ons, which he will be always ready to agree to. As for the security of the Places in the Spanish Netherlands, his Majesty hath thought fit to make known unto the States General, by this Memo∣rial which he hath appointed to be de∣livered
to the Heer Van Beverning, the sincerity of his Intentions for a Peace. And to give yet a greater Testimony thereof, he doth Command the Duke of Luxemburg, General of his Army, to go and expect their Answer, during this Month, in the Neighbourhood of Brus∣sels, with Orders not to Attack any Place during that time. In this we may observe no small piece of French Policy, not so much desiring the Peace of Europe, (which has never been the aim of this Ambitious Prince,) as during the time of this Truce, to draw his Army farther into Flanders, which soon after proved almost the Ruine of many delicious places in that fruitful Country, when Peace was in the high∣est Prospect. And these Flatteries ser∣ved only to render those he treated with somewhat more secure, whilst he made his own Markets. And indeed by these, and such like Artifices, he gained upon the Belief and good Intention of the Con∣federates, more than by open sincerity he thought convenient to do. For Lewis XIV. having earnestly sued for Peace, though under a Reserve or Mask of Dis∣guise, which was not then sufficiently
looked through, all the Princes and States of Christendom supposed they should remain at rest; and those Coun∣tries that were at the brink of Ruine, by being the Seats of a tedious War, be∣gan to rejoice, thinking the French King in good earnest; and that he would (af∣ter so much Waste and Desolation, by Firing, Plundering, Quartering, Ex∣actions, Contributions, Slaughters, and making the Fields white with the Bones of the Slain, whilst the Rivers were discoloured, and run red to the Sea with Christian Blood,) take pity on the languishing Estate of; Europe, there being a powerful Enemy in the East, viz. the Ottoman Emperor. But, instead of Sincerity, all proved but outside and formal. For France rather coveted time to breath a little, than to give over. And Lewis, who so often pretends to make War for the Glory of his Arms, that he might with less trouble Invade the Netherlands, secretly Negotiated with Teckely, to Invade with an Army, such as he could gather in the Turkish Territories, the Emperor's Hereditary Countries in Hungary, &c. furnishing him with Money, and folliciting by his Ambassadors at Constantinople, with Gifts,
Presents, and promise of Diversion on the other-side, to break the Truce. And all this under the glorious Title of the most Christian King, and Eldest Son of the Church; which even barbarous Na∣tions have detested in a time of Peace. And yet, such have been the Humours of this King's Flatterers, that they have more and more blown up his Ambition, by comparing him to the Sun, as, to the Star of Stars, from whence all other Kings and Potentates receive their Lustre, with many other Attributes, as if they in∣tended to set him up for an Idol for all the World to fall down before. And of these we shall give the Reader a touch; because those Parasites strive, by glo∣rious Epithets, to make him appear white and shining, almost, if not al∣together, to a height of Blasphemy, whom all unprejudiced and unbiassed Men behold cloathed with Oppressi∣on and Cruelty, and dying his Scarlet Robes yet deeper in innocent Blood. Amongst other things attributed to him, passing over what is mentioned as to the placing his Name on the Jesuits College, instead of that of Jesus, we find these that follow, which may be said to exceed what the Heathens have
ascribed to those they foolishly Worship∣ed for Gods, viz. 1. Lowis the Great, born for the Glo∣ry of France, and Happiness of his People, in whom there lives an admirable Argu∣ment of Divine Wisdom and Fortitude, that alone is sufficient to convince Atheists, &c. 2. Lewis the Great, a King indeed, since he Reigns not only over his Subjects, but his own Passions; being Invincible, and strongly and sweetly overcoming all things; who, just as a God, by one single Act of his Will, subjects all things to his su∣pream Power, &c. 3. Lewis the Great, strong in Zeal for Justice, a powerful and most just Rewarder of all good Actions, the severe Punisher of Duels, Blasphemy, and all Iniquity, the true Imitator of God, who is so Good to re∣pay by way of Recompence what he promises by way of Mercy. 4. Lewis the Great, according to God's own Heart, annointed with his own Holy Oil, whom in a particular manner God comman∣ded his Holy Angels to preserve in all his Ways, and whence the Existence of Angels is deduceable, &c. 5. Lewis the Great, meditating only on eternal Things, and knowing that the gain∣ing
the World with the Loss of the Soul pro∣fiteth nothing, and therefore seeking of God the alone Happiness which God of his Good∣ness has called Man to. 6. Lewis the Great, Intent upon the Extirpation of publick Sin, and the Encrease of Integrity, of Manners and Virtue, and for that Effect giving most sure Laws, through the Inspiration of God, the Supream Law giver, by whom Kings Reign, &c. 7. Lewis the Great, the Prodigy of the Grace of God, and of so thankful a Mind towards him on that Account, being Careful to Exalt that Grace, has comman∣ded all the Faculties of his Kingdom to explain that Grace, conform to the Edicts of the Popes, &c. 8. Lewis the Great, the Eldest Son of the Church, who has restored to their See the Bishops that had been banifhed by He∣reticks; the Enemy of Heresie; the Van∣quisher of the Turks, confiding only in God, and burning in Love towards him; the Ex∣ample of Faith, Love, and Charity, &c. 9. Lewis the Great, a Prince of Peace, the Scourge of War, having so far layed aside his Majesty, that he might Remember the Mercies of Christ, &c. 10. Lewis the Great, destroying all Vice, and decreeing Several punishments on
the Infringers of Divine and Ecclesiastical Laws. In all things he hath demonstrated himself a most obedient Son of the Church. 13. To declare the kinds of Sin, though hard to some, yet not to perfect Christians, whose defender Lewis the Great, justly to be named the King of Glory, Strong and mighty in Battel, &c. We might recite a number more of this Kind, which we find in print, Ex∣ceeding the boasting Language of the Turks, in their denunciation of War, or magnifying their Emperor. They have not only put them in print, no doubt, with the Approbation of this King, who is not a little Ambitious of his own Praise, but the Duke De Fe∣villade has erected his Effigies Crowned with Rays and Stars, as the old Romans used to do their God Jupiter, and in ano∣ther place he is figured driving the Cha∣riot of the Sun, with this Motto, I shine to All. And indeed, this very much Re∣sembles him; for Europe has found him a very Phaeton, if we consider the almost numberless Towns and Villages he has caused to fall in Flames. At other times, they call him Homo Immortalis, an Im∣mortal Man, the same Character the Heathens were wont to give to those
they fansied to be deified; gathering the Conduct, Courage, Wisdom, &c. not only of his Ancestors, but of all the Renowned Heroes that ever have been, which they will have centre in him, who indeed is but Mortalis Homo, cum Fistula in. Ano, notwithstanding all the Flattery of Medals, Prints, Landskips, Inscrip∣tions, Statues; or, as they have in one place made the Figures of Europe, Asia, Africa and America, Kneeling at his feet, as if he gave Laws to the whole Earth. But how far he answers any of these Characters, let us lay aside for a time his Actions and Behaviour to∣wards his Neighbours, and look a lit∣tle into the Interiour parts of his Domi∣nions, and there see how he keeps his word, and uses his own Subjects, by whose Help and faithful Assistence, his Ancestors mounted, and himself as yet is fixed in the Throne of France. King Henry IV. Grandfather to Lewis XIV. had, for the Many memorable and signal Services done him, granted the Protestants the free Exercise of their Reli∣gion by an Edict, and other Privileges that were granted them by Lewis XIII, Father to this King. The Edict of King Henry was given at Nantes in April 1598,
under the favour of which, the Protestants that had escaped the bloody Massacre in the Reign of Charles IX. and the Sword of War that had continued for many Years, revived, as we may term it, or multiplied in their Generations: But when they thought themselves most se∣cure, and every one sat under their Vines of plenty, this King by the Instignation of the Jesuits and his own Inclination, be∣gan to thirst after their wealth, as Ahab in another place had done after Naboth's Vineyard. And finding whilst this Edict was in force, it could not be attempted with the least Colour of Justice, he pub∣lished a Strict Decree to disannul it, as likewise the Edict of Nismes given in Ju∣ly 1629. together with all the Concessions granted in them, as well as other De∣clarations, Edicts, and Arrests, of what nature soever; forbiding any of the Reformed Religion, under great Pains, Pe∣nalties, and Forfeitures, to have any pu∣blick Worship amongst them; as know∣ing, like those who sought to destroy Daniel, he could not make them disobey him in any thing Lawful. The Bloody Decree being signed by the King at Fountainbleau, in October 1685, it was Registered and Published by the
King's Attorney General. And in order to its being put in Execution, and the Copies being examined and compared, it was sent into the several Bailiffwicks, and Courts of Justice, Sherifs-Courts, Districts, &c. there to be Registered, and Charge given to the Deputies of the Attorney General, to take care they were put in Execution, with all Imaginary Force and Rigour, and to certisie the Court thereof at Paris in the Court of Vacation on the 22d of October. Lewis XIV. when he did this, had, it seems, forgotten that he had on the Word of a King Ingaged the contrary, or he concluded, it was no dishonour for a King to break his Word whenever he pleased. Wherefore, before we be∣gin to take a view of his persecuting his best Subjects, it will be convenient to In∣sert his own Letter in Answer to a Let∣ter of the Duke of Brandenburg's on the behalf of the Protestants. Lewis XIV's Letter to his Electoral High∣ness of Brandenburg. Brother, I Would not have discoursed the mat∣ter you writ to me about, on the behalf of my Subjects of the Preten∣ded
Reformed Religion, with any other Prince, beside your self: But, to shew you the particular Esteem I have for you, I shall begin with telling you, That some Persons disaffected to my Service, have spread Seditious Pamphlets among Strangers, as if the Acts and Edicts that were passed in Favour of my said Sub∣jects of the pretended Reformed Religion by the Kings my Predecessors, and Con∣firmed by my self, where not kept and executed in my Dominions, which would have been contrary to my Inten∣tions: For I take Care that they be Maintained in all the Privileges which have been granted them, and be as kindly used as my other Subjects. To this I am engaged by my Royal Word, and in Acknowledgment of the Proofs they have given me of their Loyalty during the late Troubles, in which they took up Arms for my Service, and did vigorously oppose and succes∣fully Overthrow the ill Designs which a Rebellious Party against my Autho∣rity Royal, &c. This, one would think, was suffici∣ently binding; but, as it appears by a Clause in the Decree, bearing date long
since this Letter, the King never intended to be as good as his Word, viz. Whereas, (says the Decree,) That it hath pleased God to grant that our Sub∣jects enjoy a perfect Peace, and we our selves being no longer taken up with the Cares of protecting them against our Enemies, are now in a Condition to make good use of the said Truce, viz. of Nimeguen, which we have on purpose facilitated, in order to the ap∣plying our selves entirely to the search∣ing out of means, which might succes∣fully effect, and accomplish the Design of the Kings, our said Grand-father and Father, our Intentions ever since we came to the Crown; we see at present, (notwithstanding a just ac∣knowledgment of what we owe to God on that account,) that our endeavours have attained the end we proposed to our selves, forasmuch as the greater and better part of our Subjects of the said pretended Reformed Religion, have already Embraced the Catholick; and since by means thereof the Execution of the Edict of Nantes, and all other Ordi∣nances, in favour of the said pretended Re∣formed Religion become useless, we judge that we can do nothing better towards
the entire effacing the memory of those Troubles, Confusions, and Mischiefs, which the Progress of that False Reli∣gion have been the cause of in our King∣dom, and which have given occasion to the said Edict, and to so many other Edicts and Declarations which went be∣fore it, or were made since, with re∣ference thereto; than by a total Re∣vocation of the said Edict of Nantes, and particular Articles and Concessions granted therein, and whatsoever hath been Enacted since, in Favour of that Religion, &c. By this 'tis evident, That when he passed his Word to the Elector, and ap∣proved the Loyalty of his Protestant Sub∣jects, he had it in his thoughts upon his first coming to the Crown to suppress them. But this is the very Genius of Lewis XIV. and now let us see how gent∣ly he deals with them, and what Re∣ward they have for their Fidelity, and the Expence of their Blood and Trea∣sure to keep him in the Throne, against a powerful Faction under the Prince of Conde and others, who were at the point of supplanting him; why those that were to see the bloody Decree Executed, fell to Consulting how they should raise ther
Malice high enough in Cruelty against People that had never injured them; whilst the Protestants, like the Jews, when Ahasuerus's Decree went forth, mourned their hard Fate, and made their Application to the King; but Hester's Tears could not prevail with his Most Christian Majesty, though they had power to make a Heathen relent. The Intendent of the Ʋpper Guienne, who Resided at Montauban, summoned the Chief Protestants of that City to appear before him, and let them know, That it was the unalterable Pleasure of the King, to have but one Religion in his Kingdom, and that they must prepare to com∣ply with it; giving them time to assem∣ble themselves in the Town-house, where they unanimously agreed, rather to die than violate their Consciences, and by one deputed by the rest sent their Reso∣lution, when, the following Day, a Ba∣tallion of La Ferre, consisting of Sixteen Companies, entered the City, and were followed by a greater Number. The Protestants thereupon consulted each o∣ther, and resolved to submit to what should befal them, not caring for the Spoil of their Goods, so they might pre∣serve their Religion, resolving to rely
on Providence; and the Richer agreed to help the Poorer to the last of their Sub∣stance. But whilst they were thus con∣sulting, the Dragoons entered their Hou∣ses like the Locusts of Egypt, and having eaten up all they found, fell to destroy∣ing their Goods, suffering their Wines and other Liquors to run about the Cellers, scattering also their Corn in the Streets. And when they grew even wea∣ry of this wasteful Destruction, they car∣ried Linnen, Plate, Puter, and other things, to the Market-place, and offer∣ed it to Sail, where the Jesuits and Popish Priests bought them for trivial Prices, and encouraged the Lay-Papists to do the like. So that the Protestants, in four or five days, lost to the value of a Milli∣on; yet they might be said, even to take joyfully the spoiling of their Goods: But when this availed not to shake their Con∣stancy, these Missionaries of Lewis XIV. very proper Fellows to convert Souls, fell to Out-raging their Persons with Cruelties and Barbarities worse than Death. One Bervois they dragged to the Guards, and there for a whole Night the Soldiers continued in turns to kick and buffet him. Monsieur Solignack's Hand they bound to a Spit, and forced
him to turn it, till, by the Excessive Fire they made, he himself was near Roasted to Death: And, to shew their farther Malice, made a Stable of his Di∣ning-room, where the Furniture was worth Ten thousand Livres, which they afterward destroyed. Another Person they dragged to Mass, and because he hung back, and cryed out, He would ne∣ver do it, they beat him to Death. But should we come to particular Persons, the Numbers would fill a Volume as large as those of the Martyrs. Monsieur de Garrison, a Venerable Man, who had done great Kindness for the Intendent, went to wait upon him in this extremity to intreat his Protection; but he, like a true Papist, who holds no Faith to be kept with Hereticks, notwith∣standing he offered him all his Goods, not only rejected his suit, but caused him, beyond what he had suffered, to be dragged through the Streets, and mise∣rably misused, as a means to deterr others from Petitioning him. This sort of con∣verting was not only used in this City, but throughout all the Dominions of the King, though in different Methods of studied Cruelty. Some they tossed from one Soldier to another, kicking, buf∣feting,
and beating them with Rods three or four Days and Nights together to keep them waking; and when at any time they fainted, or sunk down, then they used them in that manner on the Ground, or on Beds, and when they had rested, roused them again: Some they hung up by the Heels, and smoaked them with burning wet Straw, till they were almost dead Some again they blew up almost to bursting, by putting a pair Bellows into their Fundaments: They basted the Soles of the Feet of others with Lard, and held them to a Fire till almost Roasted. One Isaac Favin, a Citizen of Negroplisse, they hung up by the Armpits a whole Night, and pinched off his Flesh with Pincers, yet could not prevail to make him abjure. These Cruelties, and many more, were committed not only upon Men, but also upon Women, and even upon Children that were of any Years. The younger Infants were every where taken from their Parents by force, and thrust into Monasteries and Nunneries; Wives, Wi∣dows, and Virgins were in many Places Ravished and Deflowred. Some Chil∣dren, though of very tender Years, they kept fasting till they fainted, and then
brought them before their Parents, as imagining they would rather turn, than see their Children Perish. Many times the Priests would persuade some to Abjure, declaring, it should be only seemingly, to comply with the King's Decree; but when they had unadvisedly done that, in hopes of some respite, then they compelled them to torment their Friends and Relations into an Ab∣juration; the which, if they did not in three Days, or so much time as was gi∣ven them, the Booted Apostles are sent to them again, upon a scruple of their not being thorowly Converted. Sometimes they bind the Mothers, that give suck, to Posts, and lay their Infants to perish in their sight, unless they will Abjure. And when these Dragoons were weary of tormenting, and inventing new manner of Torments, tired with the patience of the Sufferers, and despairing to bring them to their Terms, the Officers Rate them, and send them back to torture them worse, saying, The King has Com∣manded it, and it must be done; bawling out, That the King intends to have but one Religion in his Dominions. These are the pleasant Paths by which Lewis XIV. invites his Protestant Subjects
to enter into the Bosom of Mother-Church, exceeding those of the Heathen Empe∣rors; for they only killed, and made way for the triumphing Martyr to enter into Glory; but here they have a linger∣ing Death, and by a Series of Torments, above what humane Nature is able to bear, their Hearts are sometimes forced to give their Tongues the Lye. Some Persons they tortured with Engines, and put brass Pans or Kettles over the Heads of others, and with continual beating upon them, made the Party in a manner distracted. Those of the better Sort fled to Paris, thinking the Dragoons would not come so near the King's Pa∣lace: But alas, there they found no Re∣uge; for a Decree was set forth, com∣manding them to depart the City, and retire to their respective Habitations on greater Pains and Penalties. Nor did these Monsters of Converters only spightfully misuse their Persons, but likewise shewed their Malice upon the poor Cattle; as if the King had commanded them to bring the Hogs, Cows, Sheep, and Oxen over to the Church, as well as their Owners; for some of them they Hoxed, and so suffered them, for want of Legs, to go to perish in the Fields; others they killed
out-right, and suffered to rot on the Ground. Some again they drove into Rivers and drowned. They cut down the Timber, and burnt it; destroyed their Vineyards, and sold their Houses; drew their Fish-ponds, and threw their Fish into the Street. These Missionaries exceeding the Bar∣barity of Tartars, were attended by a multitude of Rascally Friars and Priests to take Confessions and Abjurations, as likewise by a Bishop, before whom they were to be Examined. And when those that through Torments, and being tired out, had Abjured, were at Mass, they had Spies set upon them; and if it appeared that they did it not sincerely, then they were thrown back into their former Mi∣sery. And although these Loyal People (as the King himself confessed them to be) would have left all they had, and forsaken the Country; yet that was for∣bid them on strict Penalties, as even Death, or perpetual Imprisonment. The Ports were strictly watch'd, and Ships on pain of Forfeiture forbidden to take them in; yet, through Providence, many es∣caped into England, Holland, Germany, &c. and found Succour and Shelter. Their Ministers only found the Favour
to be Banished, but to leave behind them their Wives, Children, and Relations: Nay, they hardly escaped sending to the Gallies; for such are the Ʋnchristian Ways of the Most Christian King, that he will have it a Crime, in his Country, for Men to be Learned and Vertuous: So by this means a Million of Families were ruined, and many Thousands pe∣rished through Want, Torture, and in Prisons; for all the Gaols of the Pro∣vinces were filled with these distressed People. Nor did their Malice and Cru∣elty stop here; for although the Mini∣sters had Liberty to go into Banishment, under the hardest of Conditions; yet the King's Ministers on the Frontiers, frequently stopped them, under frivo∣lous pretences, till the time given them to depart was expired; and then char∣ged them with breaking the Orders, in not departing within the limited time, and that they must go to the Gallies; by which means they stripped them of all that little they had left; and well they thought it, if they so escaped, to wan∣der in strange Lands, and relie upon Pro∣vidence, which indeed did almost every where plentifully provide for them. The Elector of Brandenburgh put out a Decla∣ration
in Favour of them, inviting and encouraging as many as would or could Escape, to take up their Habitations in his Territories; commanding all his Subjects to Comfort, Harbour, Cherish, and Entertain them; and gave Order to his Ministers, to see it carefully observed in all his Cities, and Towns, through∣out his Dominions. The like, in effect, was observed in England, Holland, and other Places, where Briefs were granted, and large Contributions given for the Support of such poor Refugees as took shelter, and by many Difficulties escaped the Ʋnchristian Cruelties of the Most Christian King. Nor will it be im∣proper, for the better informing the Protestant Reader, to give a brief Account of what the Manner and Form of the Ab∣jurations and Subscriptions those of the Reformed Religion were to make, for the Pleasure of Lewis XIV. in which Popery is briefly anatomized: viz. IN the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen. I Believe and Confess with a firm Faith, all and every thing and things contain'd in the Creed, which is used by the Holy Church of Rome, viz. I Receive and Embrace
most Sincerely the Apostolical and Ec∣clesiastical Traditions, and other Ob∣servances of the said Church. In like manner I Receive the Scriptures, but in the same sense as Mother-Church hath and doth now understand and expound the same, for whom and to whom it only doth belong, to Judge of Inter∣pretation of the sacred Scriptures; and I will never take them or understand them otherwise than according to the Unanimous Consent of the Fathers. I profess, that there be truly and properly Seven Sacraments of the New Law, Instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, and necessary for the Salvation of Mankind, although not Equally needful for every one, viz. Baptism, Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Extream Ʋnction, Orders, and Marriage; and that they do confer Grace, and that Baptism and Orders may not be reiterated without Sacrilege. I receive and Admit also the Ceremonies Appro∣ved by the Catholick Church, in the Solemn Administration of the foremen∣tioned Sacraments. I Receive and Embrace all and every thing and things, which have been de∣termined concerning Original Sin and
Justification, by the Holy Council of Trent. I likewise profess, that in the Mass there is offered up to God a true, pro∣per and propitiatory Sacrafice for the Living and Dead, and that in the Ho∣ly Sacrament of the Eucharist, there is truly realy and Substantially the Body and Blood, together with the Soul and Di∣vinity of the Lord Jesus Christ; and that in it there is made a Change of the whole Substance of Bread into his Bo∣dy, and of the whole Substance of the Wine into his Blood. Which Change the Catholick Church calls Transubstanti∣ation. I confess also, that under one only of these two Elements, whole Christ, and the true Sacrament is Received. I constantly believe and Affirm, that there is a Purgatory, and the Souls there detained are relieved by the suffrages of the faithful. In like manner I believe, that the Saints Reigning in Glory with Jesus Christ, are to be worshipped and Invo∣cated by us, and that they offer up Prayers to God for us, and that their Relicks ought to be honoured. Moreover, I do most stedfastly A∣vow, that the Images of Jesus Christ,
of the blessed Virgin, the Mother of God, and of other Saints, ought to be kept and ained; and that due Honour and Veneration must be yeilded unto them. I also do affirm, that the Power of Indulgences was left to the Church by Christ Jesus, and that the use thereof is very beneficial to Christians. I do acknowledge, the Holy Catho∣lick Apostolick and Roman Church, to be the Mother and Mistress of all other Churches; and I profess and swear true Obedience to the Pope of Rome, Suc∣cessor of the blessed St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ. In like manner, I own and profess, without doubting, all other things left, defined, and declared by the Holy Ca∣nons and General Councils, especially by the most Holy Council of Trent; and withal, I do condemn, reject, and hold accursed, all things that are contrary thereto, and all those Heresies that have been condemned, Rejected, and Accursed by the Church. This is the Goodly stuff to be Imposed on the Consciences of the Protestants, which even an Ignorant Indian, almost by the Light of Nature, might detect.
And for refusin, this, they were forced to undergoe all the Torments that wit∣ty Horrour could Invent. And to this those that Recanted were obliged to swear in the following Words: I Promise, Vow, and Swear, and most constantly profess by God's Assi∣stence, to keep entirely and inviolably, till death, this self-same Catholick and Apostolick Faith, out of which no Person can be saved. And this I do most truly and willingly profess; and that I will, to the utmost of my power, endeavour that it may be maintained and upheld, as far as any ways belongs to my charge. So help me God, and the Holy Virgin. And now to conclude this part of the Glorious Actions of Lewis XIV. who would be taken for the very Champion of Mother-Church, we shall give you a Copy of the Certificate, that the Re∣canting party is to leave with the Preist, when he makes his Abjuration: I A. B. of the Parish of C. do cer∣tifie to all whom it may concern, that having acknowledged the Falsness of the Protestant or pretended Reformed Religion, and the Truth of the Catho∣lick Religion, of my own free Will,
without any Compulsion, have accor∣dingly made profession of the said Ca∣tholick Roman Religion, in the Church of D. in the Hands of W. G. In testimony of the Truth whereof, I have signed this Act, in the presence of the Witnesses whose names are under-written This  day of the Month of  in the Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord the King  and of our Redemp∣tion  &c. By this the Reader may see how In∣nocent Lewis XIV. would appear, when the Person is compelled to say he makes his Abjuration, without any manner of Force and Compulsion, voluntarily and willingly; when indeed, all People, e∣ven the Preist that takes it, knows it to be a palpable Lye. Indeed Pope Innocent XI. (and the Pope we must conclude to be no Friend to the Protestant Religion, which is diametrically opposed to his In∣terest,) when Lewis XIV. by his Am∣bassador at Rome, bore himself so much upon the Meritorious Service he had done the Church, in converting such a number of Hereticks, (as he styled them,) told the Ambassador, That if his Ma∣ster had nothing else to boast of, it would be little to his Glory; for his manner of Con∣verting
Hereticks, was neither pleasing to God nor Man. But, to trace this ambi∣tious Prince a little farther, let us see how little he regards Religion, when his Interest or Wilfulness calls him on to Vio∣lent and Arbitrary Motions. For e∣ven the Pope himself fared little better in his Hands, as far as lay in his power to attempt against him, though he would be styled, the Eldest, and most obedient Son of the Church: Whereby it will appear, that his Hand is against all, without di∣stinction. Whilst Lewis the Great was so earnestly persecuting his Protestant Subjects, Pope Innocent XI. (of a Pope, reckoned to be the best that has been for some hundreds of Years) finding an Increase of Mur∣thers, Outrages and Villanies in the City of Rome, and that those that committed them were harboured and protected; he thought the best way to prevent such disorder for the future, was to deprive them of their shelter, by taking away the Franchises of all the Ambassadors, that none might have cause to complain. And, in order thereto, he revoked those Privileges by a Bull, bearing date the 12 of May, Anno— which was migh∣tily opposed by the Marquess D' Lavar∣dine,
Ambassador for Lewis XIV. though none else opposed it, as holding the Pope a Sovereign Prince: in his own City. But he proceeded not only to shelter Murtherers and Thieves, even in the City of Rome, but to Protect them, and with armed Force stood upon his Guard to oppose the Officers that were sent to demand them, sending a Dispatch to his Master, to let him understand what had happened; who, in a Bravado, fell to big Words against his Holy Father, resolving not to part with any part of his Franchises. However he seized upon the City of Avignion, whch had been held for many Ages as part of St Peter's Patrimo∣ny, and caused the Pope's Supremacy to be denied in the Parliament of Paris, as appears by the Speech of Monsieur de Tolon, Advocate General, who likewise plays with the great Thunderbolt of the Roman See, (which has so long been a Bugbear to all the Roman Catholick Princes,) like a Tennis-Ball, when he has this Expression; And to add, (says he,) to that Bull, (meaning that by which the Franchises were taken away,) vain Threats of Excommunication, that are not capable of creating the least Terrour in the most timerous Minds, and in the nicest
Consciences, &c. But neither these big Words, nor his frequent Solicitations, nor his many Purses of Gold distributed amongst Favourites, could bring the Old Man to buckle to his Most Christian Son's Humour: For the Ambassador persisting to contemn the Pope's Orders, he Ex∣communicated him, and Interdicted the Church of St Lewis in Rome, for admit∣ting him in the Night-time to the Holy Sacrament, forbidding all manner of Per∣sons to have Converse either with them, or him. But the Circumstances of this Matter we shall see in an Act of Appeal, put in by the Attorney General of France to the Council, upon the Subject of the Pope's Bull concerning the Franchises, &c. in these Words: Before the under-written Apostolick Notory, was present in his own Person Messire Achilles de Harlay, Counsellor of the King in his Conncil of State, and his Majesty's Attorney General; who (in the Presence, and by the Advice and Coun∣sel of Messire Denis Talon, and Messire Fracois Critean de la Moignon, also Coun∣sellors of the King in his Council of State, and his Advocates General in his Courts of Parliament,) has declared, That ha∣ving some time since seen Copies of a
Bull given on the 12th of May last past, by our Holy Father, Pope Innocent XI. concerning the Franchises, which cer∣tain Persons are in Possession of in the City of Rome; he could not have ima∣gined, that His Holiness could have con∣ceived the Design of comprehending the Ambassadors the King was willing to send to him, in the general Menaces of Excommunication, which he judg∣ed convenient to insert therein, con∣trary to the use observed by other Popes in the Bulls made by them. He had hoped, that if the remembrance of the sovereign Power, which the King's Majesty's Predecessors exercised in Rome, of their Liberalities to the Holy See, and of the Protection they gave to several Popes, could not induce this Pope to cause to be rendered to the King, in the Person of his Ministers, Honours and Testimonies of Acknowledgment, proportionable to his Bounties: At least his Holiness, as visible Head of the Church, would not be insensible to the Prodigies the King had performed before his Eyes, for the Reuniting with∣in the Bosom of his Good Mother, so vast a number of Children that were gone astray from her;(by these he means the
Dragoon'd Converts;) but that he would be Affected with the Piety of this Prince, and the powerful Prote∣ction he continually gives to Prelates; though he insists not on his Victories and Power, and that he would not enter into Disputes with him about Rights that had not suffered any Inva∣sion under his Popedom for many Years: But being informed, that His Holiness had given Orders to the Cardinal, that is his Vicar in Rome, to declare the Church of St Lewis, in that City, and the Ecclesiasticks that officiate in it, In∣terdicted, for having admitted to the participation of the Holy Mysteries of the Sacrament, on the Night wherein is Celebrated the Solemnity of our Lord's Nativy, Monsieur Le Marquis de La∣vardin, the King's Ambassador Extra∣ordinary to His Holiness, and that it was supposed upon the Ordinance delivered upon this Subject, that he was noto∣riously Excommunicated, for preten∣ded Contraventions to the Bull; the said Attorney General did not think he could, without being wanting to his duty, remain any longer in Silence he hath hitherto kept. Now, if the matter which has given
an occasion to so great an Excess, did concern the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction that belongs to the Pope, he would easi∣ly shew the Errours that have been com∣mitted by proceeding against a person that has not been particularly specified in that Bull, to whom the State of the matter has not been signified since his being at Rome, who might be ignorant of them in France where it was not pub∣lished, that the Pope could condemn him as an Ambassador, though his Cha∣racter ought to secure him from these Thunders, in regard of his Functions; yet His Holiness would not so much as hear him, or own him in that Quality, whatever Addresses he has caused to be made for that purpose; and that, in fine, the very Rules of the Ca∣non Law requires, that Persons of so eminent a Dignity should be pointed out by Name in Bulls of that Nature, before they incurr the Penalties they utter. But the Pope, in a matter purely Tem∣poral, as are these Franchises, has made use of the Spriritual Arms, which he is intrusted with, only for the Conduct and Edification of the Church. (Here, by the way, the Pope might have de∣manded
of Lewis XIV. Why he used Temporal Arms in Spiritual matters, as his Dragoon-Converts can testifie. But to go on:) And having constituted himself Judge in his own Cause, the Excommu∣nication which his Holiness Cardinal Vi∣car declares to be Incurr'd, is so Null, that there is no occasion for any Pro∣ceeding to annihilate it; and those that are therein comprehended ought not to receive Absolution, though it were offered them even at their own homes. And indeed the said King's Attorney does, with all the French, ex∣pect from his Majesties Single Power, the Reparation which these Proceed∣ings challenge, and the Conservation of those Franchises which only depend on the Judgment of God, as the Rights of this Crown, which can admit of no Dominion but such as the King's Moderation and Justice may give them. But as not any thing can Contribute more to lessen, in the Minds of shallow Persons and Libertines, the Veneration which people ought to have for the Power of the Church, than the Ill use which it's Ministers may make of it; the King's said Attorney General de∣clares, that he is Appealing, as indeed
he appeals by the present Act, from the Abusive use that is made of it in the said Bull and Ordinance, not to our Holy Father Pope Innocent XI. so as has been practised by some of his Prede∣cessors: When that they had the True Ideas of their Power that their years allow them to act of themselves, there might be hopes that in time they might be brought to know the Justice and Truth of the Complaints that were brought before them: And, that nei∣ther the preventions in favour of their Country, or the Partialities of those they honour'd with their trust, did pre∣vail over the obligations which the Qua∣lity of Common Father of all Christians does Impose; Protesting to carry on this his said Appeal upon this grievance, and upon others which he reserves to repre∣sent to the first General Council that shall be held, as the Tribunal truly Sove∣reign and Infallible of the Church, to which it's Visible Head must Submit as well as it's other Members; and therein to further, amongst other things, a Regulation that shall prevent the Imploying so Holy an Authority, in uses so far from those for which it was consided in the Church in the Person of
Sr Peter. This may make the Pope be mindful, that God having separated the two Powers of the Priesthood and of the Empire, the Pope cannot make use of the Authority of the First, for the Rights that depend on the Second; that is, according to Temporal Laws, he ought to possess those Large Territories which his Predecessors have received from the Liberality of Temporal Prin∣ces, and particularly from that of our King's. And, in short, he would con∣sider upon a Truth, which a Great Archbishop in France wrote to one of his Predecessors, that a Prelate who Excommunicates a Christian, contrary to the Rules, and for Rights of a King∣dom of the Earth, may in such an oc∣casion lose the Power of binding and unbinding, which his Character gives him, but he cannot deprive of Eternal Life him to whom he does this Injustice, if his Sins do not render him unworthy of the Mercy of God. This Act was signed on the 22d of Ja∣nuary 1688. We hope the Reader will pardon us the tediousness of this Matter, when by it he may perceive how little Zealous Lewis XIV. is for the Church of Rome,
when he thus violently affronts his Fa∣ther, the Pope, its Visible Head, only about a place of shelter for Thieves, Mur∣therers, and such like Villains; when at the same time he will not allow his pious Subjects of the Reformed Religion, (whose Loyalty himself has owned, and whose Estates have been always ready to furnish his Wars,) to have any shelter or aboad in his large Dominions, though they have all along appeared the very sinews of his Kingdom, and held with a strong Hand, and open Purses, the Crown he wears on his Head. However the Pope would not yield to Revoke the Bull, but the Fran∣chises remained Null; the Pope publick∣ly declaring Lewis XIV. the apparent Enemy of Christendom, and the only Per∣son that influenced the Turks to break the Truce, and with an Inundation of Barbarians to Invade the Empire. We have several times had Advice, That the Ambassador of France has been Abused in the Divan at Constantinople, being not only denied the Sofra, but beaten by the Command of the Grand Vizier, for throwing up his Cushion that chanced to fall upon the said Vizier, as he was going out. And although him∣self has placed, and held his Stool upon
the Sofra, it has been removed; nay, he has had of late an Ambassador Im∣prisoned there, whose Liberty was not gained without 100 Purses of Money. And whilst all Europe was wondering what Measures this Great Monarch would take to revenge the Affront, alas! the Business was tamely clapped up, the Ambassador was recalled, and another sent in his stead, and as good Friends as ever, though the Kingdom of France, at the same time Reaps no extraordinary Benefit in the Turks Dominion. But those that have more narrowly pried into this Affair, give their Opinion, That these Affronts were agreed on, to cast a Mist before the Eyes of the Christian Princes, so that they might not see the underhand∣dealings that were carried on between the Most Christian and Mahomitan Turk. For this way of misusing the Ambassa∣dor, was indeed looked upon by most, as tending to a Breach, and a Rupture was daily expected. But it seems the Most Christian King delights most in shedding Christian Blood, and his Zeal for Religion is manifested, in Burning, and Blowing up Churches of all Christian Persuasions, as well those of the Roman Catholicks as the Protestants.
Let us look now a little back, and we shall find Count Teckely in Hungary de∣stroying with Fire and Sword, raising Troops with French Gold; and though a Protestant, secretly encouraged to In∣vade the Empire by the French Emissaries, with Promise of greater Assistance. But proving too weak of himself to oppose the Armies that were drawn that way, the Turks broke the Truce at the Instiga∣tion of France, as will more largely ap∣pear when we come to insert the Empe∣ror's Declaration of War with France. And under that Advantage, the Impe∣rial Troops being drawn off, Lewis XIV. very Piously Besieged and took the City of Strasburg, a Free Imperial Town, when hardly any Body expected any Hosti∣lity. His pretence was, to restore the Bishop, which that Protestant City refused to admit with his Popish Trnmpery. The Articles of Surrender were very advan∣tageous to the Citizens; as, a promise of their Religion, Liberties, and any thing they desired. But the French gain∣ing Possession, soon barred them of a great part, delivering many over to the Mercy of the enraged Bishop, who never was any Favourer of the Protestants; and likewise restored Popery, building a
Cittadel, or Castle, for the better cur∣bing the Citizens; many of whom find∣ing themselves so hardly dealt with at first, and fearing worse, secretly with∣drew, with what Substance they could, to other Cities remote; whereupon the Effects they left were seized, a strict Charge was given to have an Eye upon the Inhabitants, and such as they suspe∣cted going off were Imprisoned, and all the small Towns and Villages were taken in as Dependences, and constrained to pay great Contributions; and such as could not, or refused, were threatned with Military Execution. A great Army also of the King's, lay hovering on the West Frontiers of the Empire, whilst Cara Mustapha, the Grand Vizier, was coming down on the East like a De∣luge, with about Two hundred thou∣sand Turks and Tartars, who burnt and destroyed all before them: For by this time, Mahomet IV. had proclaimed War against the Emperor, and detained the Count de Caprara, his Ambassador. All Princes of the Empire, upon the sudden Allarm, were in doubt, and suspence, which of these Turks they ought most to fear. Though Lewis XIV. out of a seem∣ing pretence for the House of Austria, had
made an offer to assist the Emperor; but this was only shadow, as appeared af∣terwards, by his violent falling upon the Spanish Netherlands, whereby the Forces of the King of Spain were hinder∣ed from Assisting in the common Cause. And although most of the Princes of Eu∣rope used their Interest with him, though all Christendom in a manner lay at stake, nothing would prevail, till he perceived the Turks could not effect what they pur∣posed. For, in the Year 1683▪ they were totally Routed, and beat off from the Siege of Vienna, the principal City of Austria, when it was at the last Crisis, and could have held out but a few days longer. It is no wonder that the Jesuits, who, on all Hands, are detested, and accoun∣ted the Incendiaries of Christendom, by the moderate Roman Cotholicks, have so great an Influence in France, since Father Maimburgh, and Father La Chese have had so great an Influence over Lewis XIV. to whose fiery Spirit they labour to add Fuel, and plunge him into Cruelty with∣out Remorse, or distinguishing Prote∣stants from Roman Catholicks. And these were the blessed pair, that laid the Foun∣dation of the Misery of his Subjects of
the Reformed Religion, by persuading him, That by Rooting the Protestants out of his Kingdom, he would render himself greater than his Ancestors, who were never able to accomplish that mat∣ter; and, that if he could bring it to pass, it would render his Name Im∣mortal in the Roman Kalendar. And, no doubt, as many Instances affirm, these Locusts who seek to devour every thing that is pleasant, have had as great an Influence in the Ruine of the Neighbou∣ring Roman Catholicks. For, from the Wideness of his Conquests, they could not but promise to themselves great Ad∣vantage, where they have so great an Influence over the Conqueror, as to have his very Conscience in their keeping and dispose. We have not of late heard that any, like Father Ante, have repro∣ved him for Exorbitancy of Lust, or o∣ther Vices, but rather encouraged him therein, that they might reap the pro∣fit at the Price of his Eternal State. And of this we may give some hints, as we find it in a Letter that has of late been frequently Printed, and held to be Au∣thentick, sent from La Chese, Confessor to the French King, to Father Edmund Petre, late Great Almoner to King James II.
though fatal in his Counsels to the repose of that unfortunate Prince. Wherein, amongst other matters, undertaking to give the Jesuit directions to put forward affairs, by his Counsels, Interest, and Power with King James, and others great at Court, he thus proceeds: Most Reverend Father, TO satisfie the desire I have to show you by my Letter, the Choice you ought to make of such persons fit to stir up, &c. I will, in few words, since you desire it, inform you of the Genius of the people of our Court, of their inclinations, and of them we make use of, that, by a Parallel you make be∣tween them and your English, you make use of, you may know them. There∣fore I shall begin with the Chief, I mean our Great Monarch. It is certain, he is naturally Good, and loves not to doe Evil, unless desired to doe it. This being so, I may say, he never would have undertaken the Conversion of his Subjects, without the Clergy of France, and without our Society's Correspon∣dence abroad. He is a Prince Inlightned, who very well observes, what we put him upon is contrary to his Interest,
and that nothing is more opposite to his great Designs and his Glory, he aiming to be the Terrour of all Europe. The vast number of Malecontents he has caused in his Kingdom, forces him in time of Peace, to keep up three times more Forces than his Ancestors did in the greatest Domestick and Foreign Wars, which cannot be done without prodigious Expence. The Peoples Fears also begin to les∣sen as to his aspiring to an Ʋniversal Monarchy, and they may assure them∣selves he has left those Thoughts, no∣thing being more opposite to his designs, than the method we enjoin him. His Candour, Bounty, and Toleration to the Hereticks, would undoubtedly have opened the door of the Low Countries, Palatinate, and other States of the Rhine, and even of Switzerland; whereas things are at present so altered, that we see the Hollanders at present free from any fear of Danger, the Switzers and City of Geneva resolved to lose the last drop of their Blood in their de∣fence. Beside some Diversions we may expect from the Empire, In case we can∣not hinder a Peace with the Turks. Sir, His Majesty's Brother is always
the same, I mean, he takes no notice of what passes at Court. It has sometimes happened, the King's Brothers have acted so, as to be noted in the State: But, this we are sure, will never do any thing to stain the Glory of his Sub∣mission and Obedience, and is willing to lend a helping hand for the Destru∣ction of the Hereticks, by the Instance he makes to his Majesty, who now has promised him to cause his Troops to enter the Palatinate the next Month. The Dauphin is passionately given up to Hunting, and little regards the Con∣version of Souls; and therefore we do not care to Consult him, how or which way the Hereticks shall be destroyed. He openly laughs at us, and slights all the Designs of which the King his Fa∣ther makes great Account. The Letter goes on to Characterize the Dauphiness in her witty Humour, and Hatred to the Protestants; as like∣wise Monsieur Lovois, the Archbishop of Paris, and others, who labour to Agran∣dize Lewis XIV. by following the Me∣thods of the Society of Jesuits, who have always been held the Foxes with Fire-Brands at their Tails, who have labou∣red to promote Violence, War, and Blood∣shed
in all Places where they come. Hen∣ry IV. Banished them France, and de∣molished their Houses, for setting one of their Pupils to kill him in his Presence∣chamber amidst his Nobles, because he would not hearken to their Counsels, but detested their pernicious Ways. Yet, knowing them to be Sycophants, fraught with Malice and Revenge, after he had frustrated many of their Attempts, that great Prince, who had faced Death in all its Shapes, fearing their wicked Pur∣poses, thought fit to make fair Weather with them, and to recall them; which being opposed by a Lord of his Council, who alledged how pernicious they were in all Kingdoms, States and Governments, the King passionately broke out into this Expression, viz. Secure me my Life then. And indeed, this King who had remain∣ed safe in forty Battels, found his Death, as has been said, in the midst of his Ca∣pital City, amongst his Friends and Guards. Nor could the Obstinacy of the Assassinate and Paricide denote any thing else, but that he was set on by these Men. For Raviliack, the bloody Actor, neither sought to fly, nor excuse the Fact: nor, when his Flesh was pluck∣ed off with hot Pincers, would he con∣fess
who inspired him to doe it, but re∣mained obstinate in the midst of the most horrid Tortures, which demonstrated, that he had been decoyed by such as made him believe, the Fact was no less than Meritorious, and that Eternal Life was entailed upon him for the Deed. And no boubt, Lewis XIV. is not fear∣less, (notwithstanding his Bravadoes) of some such Fate, if he should reject them and their Counsels; which makes him so far comply with their Maxims, as to involve the Nations in Blood, and carry Fire and Destruction where-ever his Armies come, and make himself the very Phaeton of the World. Some will object in their Excuse, that Lewis XIV. dares not keep his Armies Idle; for, the Soldiers having been so long trained up in War by a long Ease, would grow Luxurious, and be apt, like the Roman Pretorian Soldiers, at every little di∣saster to Mutiny: or, if that he should disband them, they for the most part being Incapable of any other Imploy∣ment than the Sword, would infallibly shake his Throne, by joining with those his Tyranny has reduced in a manner to Despair. However, any Reasonable Man might think, he might employ
them in other matters, as fortifying his Inland-Towns, and building Piramids to his Glory, as the Kings of Egypt did, to keep their People from Idleness, upon the same Score, as most Historians con∣jecture, whose Labour produced those Lasting Monuments, whose Aspiring Tops are said to penetrate the Clouds. But Lewis XIV. is of another Mind; he is for building a Structure with the untempered Mortar of Rapin and Vio∣lence, and Cementing it with Christian Blood; wishing, no doubt, that all who oppose his designs, had but one Neck, as Heliogabulus did by the People of Rome, that himself, as a Lasting Monument of his Glory, might have the Honour of cutting it off; which shews the very Spi∣rit of Jesuit-Counsels. Pardon, Reader, this Digression, if it may be so termed in a History of this Na∣ture; for, where a Man pretends Con∣science, he is inclined to one side or o∣ther, and ought to have the Awe of Re∣ligion, of what persuasion soever he be, upon his Mind, favouring that party to which he inclines. But Lewis XIV. is of a contrary Temper, having his Hand against all, whilst all mens Hands are more justly against him. We will not
determine, what Orders he would give in relation to Turkish Mosques, or Mahomets Religion. But sure we are, in all the Progress wherever his Arms have carried Destruction, the Christian Churches of whatsoever persuasion, have felt the Marks of his Irreligion and Sacrilege. Nay, it is affirmed upon credible testi∣mony, that when the numerous Host of Infidels over-ran Hungary, and the Suc∣cess was doubtful, whether the Loss or Relieving Vienna should hazard or save the Eastern part of the Empire; and Prayers were put up almost every where for the Success of the Christians, Anno 1683. the Most Christian King's Inten∣dent at St Omers, gave a severe Repri∣mand to the Bishop, for having ordered publick Prayers to be put up, and a Fast to be held on that occasion. And when this Inundation of Barbarians were en∣tered Christendom, carrying Fire and Sword into most of the Emperor's Heredi∣ditary Provinces, with Slaughter, Bon∣dage and all the Outrages that can be Imagined; insomuch that the flaming Towns and Villages seemed but one great scene of Fire, and the cries of the miserable People rent the Skies, which blushed with the Ascending Heat and Re∣flexion
of Blood; even then, when all good Men were overwhelmed with Sor∣row, Lewis XIV. brought down his huge Armies on the Front of the Empire, to o∣ver-awe the Little Princes, and keep their Troops for the Defence of their own Territories, that they might have no share in the Glory, by assisting the Em∣peror against the Infidels. And Monsieur Seppeville was a Spie upon the Emperor's Affairs, giving Lewis, his Master, from time to time, an Account of the Progress of the Turks, and of their Success; and that the League between him and Maho∣met IV. Emperor of the Turks, might be as much shadowed as it was possible, Monsieur Fouchay persuaded him to make a Diversion in the Spanish Netherlands, thereby to divert the Forces of the King of Spain from Aiding the Emperor. And here, under pretence of Dependencies, and other Matters, frivilous and ground∣less, in the Opinion of the Neighbour-Princes; he swep'd away many Towns, though even the Turks themselves, had they determined impartially, could not but have judged it not only Ʋnchristian like, but also unreasonable: Or else what could any unbiassed Man conjecture, but that the Turks and the French King had
combined to share the Empire between them. Yet it would not have been so easie to have stopped an Inundation of Barbarians, flushed with Victory, as Lew∣is XIV. imagined. And who can tell, but if they had prevailed, they might have been by this time in the Heart of France, and shewed him play at his own Weapons. How unjustly this King took Luxemburgh, and other Places in the Ne∣therlands, few are ignorant, even when it was least suspected any Hostilities would have happened. But that great City could not suffice the Ambition of this Prince; for he sent his Dragoons Abroad when Spain was altogether un∣provided, and under Pretence of Depen∣dencies, swept away whole Provinces, compelling the miserable Villages, who had been ruined by a lingering War, to part with the small Subsistence they had reserved for the Preservation of Life, un∣der pretence of Contribution; by which means many of them perished in their Houses, and in the Fields, when they had eaten all the Unclean Things they could find; and those that refused, had their Houses fired about their Ears, and their persons Tortured, to make them confess where they had hid their Trea∣sure,
or Goods; so that some of them died under the Tormentors Hands: By which it appears, that Lewis XIV. shew∣ed his Zeal to the Church, in Dragooning as well the Papists as the Protestants, and even those of Flanders, which above all are accounted the most zealously Devo∣ted to the Romish Superstition; and this by way of Surprize, whilst the Emperor of Germany, and the other Princes, his Con∣federates, as has been hinted, were ac∣quiring Glory at the point of their Swords. For this Monarch cares little for ingaging his Armies, it ever having been seen, that he has gained little or nothing by the fair dint of the Sword. And indeed, if we consider how easily many strong Towns have been delivered up to him by Garrisons that were able to defend them, the World cannot but conclude, false underhand Dealing has been a main Advancement to his Con∣quests; by which Methods his vast Trea∣sures have been frequently shrunk, and his Subjects Estates stretched upon the Tenters to recruit them. Upon this a French Rhimer descants, as it was found in a Billet laid on the King's Dressing Table, and Englished thus;
Thy Grandsire Harry, the Name of Great he bore, Thy Father Just, but thou'art Lewis d'Ore. A Lewis d' Ore is a piece of French Gold Coin, by which we may under∣stand that the Poet, such as he was, insi∣nuated, That he gained more by his Gold than by Valour or Vertue. The King was surprized at this, and dissembled the Affront; seemed to praise the Au∣thor, and promise, if he would disco∣ver himself, not only to give him a par∣don, but reward him. But, it seems, he had more wit than to trust himself in the Lyon's Paws upon such slender Secu∣rity: Yet, not to give over his Poetical Whimsey, there was soon after found in the same Place a Distich, in English thus, Lewis, the thing cannot be known, I writ it when I was alone. Hitherto we have endeavoured to shew the World the State of Affairs relating to France, since the coming of Lewis XIV. to the Crown, who has in all Parts an∣swered the Prodigie of his Birth, living, as we may term it, in a perpetual Tem∣pest of War, to the Scourge of Christen∣dom.
Few Kingdoms or Estates there are, that can boast themselves exempted from the Damage received by the Cala∣mities that have frequently happened on that Occasion. Nay, where his own Power has not reached so effectually, that of others has been imployed; not to mention his engaging the Northern Crowns of Denmark and Sweden, though Protestant Kingdom, in a tedious and expensive War, but even soliciting the Pirates of Argier and Tripoly, to Invade the Traffick of the Christians, by hin∣dring Navigation, and taking their Ships, offering them his Ports, lying advanta∣geous for the purpose, and, as it were, cajolling Nests of Thieves, and the Off∣scum of Mankind, with whom it is not for the Glory of so great a Monarch, as Lewis XIV. would be thought to be, to have any Converse withall. But we see Ambition will stoop low, when it hopes to soar aloft. Lewis XIV. when he committed these Outrages, and disturbed the Repose of Christendom, had little regard to his Oath, and the Credit of his Ambassadors, who concluded the Peace at Nimeguen, nor of the Honour of the King of En∣gland, Charles II. who was Guarrantee of
that Peace; nor were the States of the Ʋnited Provinces less abused, who had so great a hand in bringing that memorable Treaty to pass, wherein the Ministers of all the Princes of Christendom were con∣cerned, and at which place most of them were in Person. But to give a far∣ther Light into this Matter, take the fol∣lowing Proclamation of Peace, published by the States. BE it known to all Persons, that, to the Honour and Praise of God the Lord Almighty, to the Welfare and Furtherance of the Common Good of these Ʋnited Netherlands in General, and the good Inhabitants thereof in Par∣ticular, a good, sure, faithful, and lasting Peace was made at Nimeguen, the Tenth Day of August, in this pre∣sent Year 1678. betwen the King of France on the one side, and the States General of the Ʋnited Netherlands on the other; and that the Ratification on both sides were exchanged in due Form at Nimeguen aforesaid, on the Twen∣tieth of this Instant September. And that in pursuance thereof, all Acts of Hosti∣lity and Enmity, as well at Sea, and in fresh Water, as at Land, in all Cities
and Places under their Respective Do∣minions, without Exceptions; as like∣wise between their Subjects and Inha∣bitants, of what Condition soever they be, must cease and determine after the respective Terms hereafter mentioned; to wit, after four Weeks, to reckon from this Day the publication of the Peace hath been made in the Hague, that is, after the 26th of October next, in the East and North Seas, from the Ness in Norway to the Lands End of the Chanel; and after Six Weeks, that is, after the 9th of November next, from the said Lands End in the Chanel to the Cape St. Vincent; and after Ten Weeks, that is, after the 7th of December, from Cape St. Vincent to the Line; and lastly, af∣ter Eight Months, that is, after the 28th of May, 1679. in all Places of the World. Wherefore all, and every one, as well Subjects and Inhabitants of the several Provinces of the Nether∣lands, as those that are under their High and Mighty Dominion and Obedi∣ence, are expresly Charged and Com∣manded, inviolably to Maintain the Peace, pursuant to the said Treaty; and not to Act in the least contrary thereunto, on pain of being punished as
Disturbers of the Publick Peace, with∣out Favour or Connivance. Done in the Assembly of the States Gene∣ral in the Hague, September 22th. 1678. This may sufficiently demonstrate the good and honest Intentions of the States General, who could not think, but the Word of a King, and the Most Christian King, as Lewis the Great styles himself, would continue Sacred and Inviolable. But alass! his Ambition and Interest weigh down his Words and Oaths; and, in Conclusion, it appeared, that he on∣ly did it to bind up their Hands, whilst that he might the more securely prey up∣on the Spanish Netherlands a Country the most pleasant and fruitful in Europe, and for which many of his Predecessors have heartily longed, but never undertook the Methods he has observed to bring it under his Subjection. However, this Great Monarch has failed in his Expe∣ctation, and has frequently been baffled, when his numerous Armies have thought themselves most sure. Yet, by the way, we may Mark out a peice of French Trea∣chery, though of an Elder date; by which we may see, it is in a Manner the
very Genius of the Nation, though more superabundant in Lewis XIV. It so happened in the Year of our Lord 1551. that the Protestants in Germany being greatly oppressed by the Emperour Charles I. Henry II. King of France, pre∣tending to compassionate them, sent Monmorency the Constable, with four thousand Horse and Foot, as it were to Relieve them, who demanded with ma∣ny Insinuations and Promises of Prote∣ction, a Passage through the City of Metz, a City under Protestant Government. The People in hopes to be delivered from the Ravages the Imperial Soldiers com∣mitted in their Territories, joyfully con∣sented; and, in Gratitude, spread Ta∣bles in the Streets ready furnished with Provision, for the Soldiers to eat as they Marced through; bringing Barrels of Wine, and other Liquors, to Accom∣modate them, the Magistrates waiting upon the Constable with all Imaginable demonstrations of Kindness and Respect; who seeing his time, feigned to be trou∣bled with a sudden Fit of the Gout and other Indispositions, and thereupon in∣treated the Magistrates, that he might have the opportunity of a Place of Re∣tirement for some time, and that he not
knowing what might befal him in the Wars, or by that Sickness, was desirous to make his Will. The Good-meaning Magistrates were highly satisfied with the Favour he would doe them, and be∣gan to contend which of them should have the Honour of entertaining him. But their Joy was soon turned into Mourning; for, when the Magistrates and most of the Gentry were assembled in his Chamber, whilst the Scrivener was making his Will, to which they were to be Witnesses, he gave private Orders for seizing the Gates. And, as soon as he knew it was done, rising up in a fury, he suddenly stabbed the Mayor of the City to the Heart with his Dagger; which being the Signal to his Guards, they fell upon the rest that were in the Chamber, and put them to the Sword. This being known, the French Soldiers over-ran the Streets, crying out, The City is won; and thereupon fell to plundering the Shops and Houses. So that this City (like the flying-Fish in the Indian Seas) whilst it thought to Escape one Mischief, fell into another, as great if not greater: For, of this kind of Fish, Sailors report, that being pursued by the Dolphins, and finding it
self ready to be devoured, by help of its long Fins, that serve for Wings, it shoots into the Air, and flies a great many pa∣ces, till the Fins grow stiff by dryness, and then falls into the Sea; but frequent∣ly, whilst it is flying, the Cormorants, and other Ravenous Fowl that haunt those Seas, catch them, and by them they are devoured. A Second Instance of Later Date, we may mention in Lewis XIII. Father to the present King, when he designed to seize upon the Dukedom of Lorrain, he, by the Advice of Cardinal Richlieu, sent for the old Duke to come to him at his Town of Lyons, who, dreading no such Treachery, left Nancy the Place of Se∣curity, and went to Complement the King who was at the head of his Troops; and after he had payed him that Homage and respect he conceived was due to him, he prepared to return, but found him∣self mistaken; for he was Arrested by the Captain of the King's Guards, upon frivolous Pretences and Claims, and made him deliver up Nancy into which he entered as a Conquerour, the surren∣der of which occasioned the Loss of the whole Duchy. Many Instances of the Like Nature, even the French Historians
give us, who make the Actions of their Kings appear as fair and candid as they can. But now we come to Lewis XIV. The Peace, as we have said, being made, and all Christendom Relying on it, and firmly keeping it, except the French King; he thought this his time to play his Game, as thinking he had Charmed the Princes, or made them fear the Con∣sequence of a Rupture. He soon forgot his Word, as appears by the Emperour's early Complaint against his Proceedings by several Letters and Memorials, That, contrary to the Peace of Nimeguen, 1. He continued his Troops in the Empire. 2. Remaining possessed of Places they ought to Evacuate. 3. Requiring Contributions. 4. Obliging the ten Towns of Alsace to take a new Oath, thereby pretending a Sovereignty over them, Erecting a new Court of Appeals, and forbiding any Ad∣dresses to be made to the Imperial Cham∣ber of Spires. 5. Requiring an Oath from the Vassals and Nobles of Alsace. 6. Setting up Pretentions upon the Vassals of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, as likewise upon other Imperial States and Countries
7. Consiscating the Rents and Re∣venues of the Chapter of Strasburg. 8. Making new Fortifications at Scie∣stadt and Hunningen. 9. Not Restoring Monpelgard. 10. The slighting Daxburgh. 11. The Taking Hamburgh and Bit∣seth And other Matters. Upon this, the Diet of Ratisbone, to whom the Complaint was made, after some Deliberation, came to a Resolution; That the proceedings of the French King were directly contrary to the Trea∣ties of Westphalia and Nimeguen; that therefore the Emperor shall be prayed, by Letter or by Embassie, in the Name of himself and the Empire, to demand of the Most Christian King Reparation for the same; and that in the mean time the French Ministers residing at the Imperial Court and here, shall be made acquain∣ted with this Resolution of the Diet, and that it shall be represented to them. For what concerns the two first Points, That the same are directly contrary to the 27th of the Treaty of Nimeguen, and the First, Second, and Fourth Articles of the Instrument, afterwards signed by the Ambassadors, for the Executing the said
Treaty, that have been Religiously ob∣served by the Emperor. That the Third Point is contrary to the 30th Article of the said Treaty, and the 8th Article of the said Instrument. That for what con∣cerneth the Fourth Point, it is known, that the Third Article of the Treaty of Munster says, that the Countries of the Ʋpper and Lower Alsaces, and the Lord∣ship of Haguenaw, shall be yeilded to France, with an Express Exception of the 10 Imperial Towns, and their Rights and Privileges; and that the French King shall pretend no Superiority over them, or require any Oath or Fidelity from them; and in pursuance of the Agree∣ment made at Nurenburgh, in the Year 1650. Haguenaw, Landaw, and other Pla∣ces, and other of the said ten Towns, more Actually Evacuated by the French, with∣out pretending then, and several years afterwards, to any Sovereignty over the said Towns, or requiring any Oath of Fidelity from them. That afterwards in 1665. Complaints were made to the Di∣et, of the French setting up new Preten∣sions; whereupon Arbitrators were cho∣sen on the Part of the Empire and of France, Amicably to determine the same, who were several Years employed in that
work, which was put to an end by the French possessing themselves of the said Towns, even before the War: That the Treaty of Nimeguen Confirms that of Westphalia, and consequently that the said Towns ought to have restored to them the Rights and Privileges which that sti∣pulates for them. That for the Fifth and Sixth Points, they likwise directly con∣tervene the said Treaties. That as to the Seventh, they expect farther Infor∣mation in it. That for the Eighth, they cannot Imagine what Right the French have to Fortifie Sclechstadt, considering what is abovesaid of those Free Towns. For the Ninth and Tenth, the French have acted notoriously contrary to the Westphalian and Nimeguen-Treaties. For the Eleventh, that Hamburgh belongs to ths Count of Nassaw, as appears by the Treaty of Osnaburgh. That concerning Bitseth, they expect farther Information. And lastly, They hope the King will not prejudice the City of Strasburgh in its Rights or Privileges, and particularly in that of fortifying Kiel, so necessary for its Security. This so Early Breach of the Peace, that had been so long laboured for by the Princes of Christendom, much displeased
them, and filled many with Detestation, observing that Lewis XIV. went beyond the Bounds of the Decree of the Council of Constance, which says, That no Faith is to be kept with Hereticks; but he neither regards his Faith with those the Romans unchristianly term so, nor with Roman Catholicks. However, having a mind to secure what he had belonging to the Em∣pire, or Princes dependent, as appears by the Resolution of the Diet, in his detai∣ning some, and imposing on others, con∣trary to the Articles agreed on, he sought to bring the States of the Ʋnited Provinces into an Offensive and Defensive Alliance, against which all the Provinces, but Groningen and Friesland Excepted, who did not so long; and their Reso∣lutions were publish'd, declaring, They intended to keep inviolably the Peace and Esteem they had for his Majesty's Friend∣ship, but could not enter into any such Alliance as he required. However, he persisted to encroach upon the Empire, suffering his Troops, that should have been withdrawn, to quarter at discre∣tion, eating up that little the Inha∣bitants had left them to subsist withal; winking at the many Complaints that were made, and proving deaf to the Cries of the People.
This occasioned the King of England to complain by his Ambassadors; but this prevailed little or nothing, till he found a Defensive Alliance was carrying on against him; and then, under pretence of Winter Quarter, he drew off some of his Troops. Let us look a little back upon the Pro∣ceeding of Lewis le Grand, in the Princi∣pality of Orange, a place of Sovereign Right for some Ages, belonging to the Illustrious House of Nassaw, and the In∣heritance of his present Majesty of Great Britain. This Principality and City of Orange, is very advantageously Situate, exceeding fruitful, and for the most part Inhabited by Protestants. These Consi∣derations made the French King Long to be Master of it; for he seldom troubles himself to War on the Alps, or in cold barren Countries. Whereupon, during the Minority of the Prince, without the least Title or just Pretence to warrant his Actions, he sent an Army to take Pos∣session of it, in the Year 1660. exerci∣sing a great deal of Cruelty and Inhu∣manities upon the Subjects, contrary to the Law of Arms, and of Nations, de∣molishing the Bastions and strong Forti∣fications; thereby purposing to himself,
if he should be obliged by the Princes, who looked upon him as an Intruder and an Oppressor, to relinquish it, he might with more Ease repossess himself of it, as he saw occasion. Nay, so far extended his Malice, that he not only ruined the Cittadel, but caused the Magnificent Monuments of Prince Maurice's Great∣ness to be laid in Ruines: And indeed, in the Year 1665. he was obliged to Re∣linquish that Principality, and the Sieur Zuilychem to take Possession of it for his Master. When in April that year, as a presage of the Prince's good Fortune, and future Greatness, a Crown of Light darting Rays, appeared over the City of Orange, hanging, as it were, in the Air, over the Palace, or place of State, ap∣pointed for his Reception, to Consolate his distressed Subjects, who for five years had groaned under the Tyranny of France. But their Tranquillity lasted no longer than the Year 1673, for then the French King supposing to make his Arms the Terrour of Europe, that so he might at pleasure become the great Arbitre of Peace and War; he, on a sudden, and very unexpectedly, entered it with his Troops. And although after by an ex∣press Article of the Treaty of Nimeguen,
the Principality of Orange was restored, and the King of England was Guarrantee of that Peace; yet the unwearied In∣croachments of the French Troops of Provence, and the Intrigues of the Po∣pish Bishop of Orange, rendered daily the Subjects of the Principality more un∣easie, till in the Year 1682. Lewis XIV. in a time of full Peace, as well with the States as Confederate Princes, commanded a powerful Army to take possession of it, without any manner of colour or pre∣text, but the Turkish Motto, viz. Sic Volo, sic Jubeo; stat pro Ratione Voluntas, This I will, this I command; My Will it does for Reason stand. And thereby his booted Missionaries or Dragoons, acted inhumane Barbari∣ties on the Inhabitants, unparallel'd in any Reign but his own. And here for an Essay of his insupportable Vanity, or ra∣ther of a Kindness unusual amongst Prin∣ces, and derogatory to Majesty it self, we must not omit; That in a Breve in Favour of the late Prince of Conde, as Ad∣ministrator of the Duke of Long aville, Lewis XIV. had the foolish Confidence to treat his present Majesty of Great Britain, with the Title of Messire William, Count of
Nassaw, living at Amsterdam in Holland, as if thereby he had entailed upon himself the Principality of Orange, which at that time was the Supream Title of King William. As for the Actings of the French King in this Principality, we shall give you a brief Account, in the words of Monsieur e Chambrun, viz. The dismal Cruelties (says he) acted upon my unhappy Country, and the City of Orange, so famous by the Greatness of its Princes, is at this day nought but a dismal Heap, where one cannot enter without treading upon its Ruines. She is at this day a doleful Monument of Cru∣elty and Injustice. I cannot persuade my self, that the Ruines of Troy, or Carthage were more terrible than these I have mentioned, since to one that beholds them at a distance, they appear the Habitations of Ostriches and Owls. If Posterity shall enquire the cause of this horrid Desolation, as certainly it must, the Account that shall be given of them will no doubt tend to the dishonour of France. History will not forget to hand down to succeeding Ages, the he∣roick Vertues of our Prince, when she comes to relate the Ruine of his Ter∣ritories, and Desolation of his Subjects,
and when they shall understand, that the Justice, the Sincerity, the Valour, and indefatigable Care of maintaining the Liberty of Europe, were the only Mo∣tives that induced the French King thus to treat an Illustrious Prince; doubtless they will say, This has been the most dismal and most corrupt of all Ages, since that which ought to have been the Ad∣miration of the Great Ones of the Earth, was the Object of their Aversion and Hatred. If this great Prince would have consented to the overturning of the Go∣vernment of his Country, as he was ear∣nestly courted so to doe; if he would have taken part with those that aim at the enslaving Europe: In a word, If he would have betrayed his Country, and broken his Faith to his Allies, he might have mounted a Throne then offered him: But because he loved his Coun∣try better than his Interest, and pre∣ferred his Honour to the richest Advan∣tages, and the Liberty of Europe to a Crown, it behoved his great Actions should be regarded with Hatred, and followed with the unjustest of Treat∣ments. But although this Conduct has been blamed in all the Courts of Europe; yet nothing has been done to oppose it.
And I am forced to say, 'Tis the dis∣honour of all Europe, to have suffered a great Prince to expose so often his Life with the greatest Bravery, for its Good and Liberty, and at the same time to abandon his Interest with such an unaccountable Neglect. En∣gland was obliged to protect and assist this Prince, not only as being the Guar∣rantee of the Peace of Nimeguen, but from the Principle of Blood and Alli∣ance. And indeed, what Honour can Accrue to England, to see a Sovereignty wrested by unjust violence, from a Prince that had Married the Heiress of Three Kingdoms. As for me, I cannot think of the Desolation of my Country with∣out saying, amidst my Tears, with Je∣remiah, How doth the City sit solitary, &c. Is it nothing to you, all you that pass by? &c. In short, is it possible (continues he) that a man that loves his God, his Re∣ligion, and his Prince, could behold with dry Eyes so many Ruines as I saw in the Principality of Orange. Hic Seges est ubi Troja fuit. For this, see the Book of this learned Man, Printed at the Hague the last Year, Page 61, 62. Nor was it only the Buil∣dings that suffered, but the People also,
who for the most part, as well Papists as Protestants, were plundered of all they had, and many of them Dragooned out of their Religion, by the same barbarous Methods as were taken with his own Sub∣jects of the Reformed Religion. Lewis XIV. is seldom without preten∣ces to quarrel with his Neighbours; for, he has for that purpose, and to exalt himself Chief Monarch of Europe, set up a Chamber at Metz, called the Sovereign Court, before which he causes to be Ci∣ted Kings and Princes (well knowing they will not appear then) under pre∣tence their Lands are Dependences, or under the Claim of antient Titles or Claims, for which himself can give no Reason; he causes them to be condem∣ned as forfeited. And from this Court, where himself is both Judge and Jury, he will admit of no Appeal, but pro∣ceeds to take possession, by sending his Troops to quarter there, and Leavy great Contributions upon the Inhabitants, that, so by Impoverishing them, as he u∣ses his own Subjects, he may the better keep them under. And by this means he adjudged part of the King of Sweeden's Terretories, and seized on the Countries of the Primes of Montbelliard, Pellite
Pierre, and divers others, swallowing up Provinces like the Great Leviathan, with∣out making any Account of Rights or Ju∣stice, though the time peradventure is at hand wherein he will be obliged to dis∣gorge them with Interest. His Eye has been indeed a long while up Italy, soa∣ring that way towards the Ʋniversal Mo∣narchy, which made him deal under∣hand with the Duke of Mantua for the strong Garrison of Cassel, which serves as an Inlet over the Alps. Nor had Ge∣neva escaped his Bombs, had not the Swisse-Cantons, fearful of their own Safety, declared with much warmth, to stand by that Protestant City with all their Forces. The Peace being concluded with Spain, Lewis XIV. finding himself uneasie to be out of Action, picks a Quarrel with that Nation about 500000 Crowns he pretended were to be restored for da∣mages done in the West Indias, and there∣upon sent the Duke's D' Estree and Mor∣temer, with a Squadron of Men of War, to block up Cadiz, and to take and destroy all such Merchants-ships and Galleys as they light on. And indeed, they did considerable Mischief against that Mari∣time Town, by casting Bombs, and sen∣ding Fire-ships into the Harbour. Nor
thought they this sufficient, but they would have compelled the Dutch Men of War, who were at Peace with Spain, to assist them, and by that Means Involved them in an open Violation of the League. For, the latter of the Dukes having with him Eight Sail of Men of War, and happening to meet two Ships belonging to the States, Commanded by Capt. Ewycke, and Capt. Mevart, he compelled them to Sail with him towards Cadiz. However, in the Night the former stood away, and chan∣ged his Course; upon which, he was followed by the Seiur Belle Isle, who be∣ing come up with him the next morning, ired several shot at him; whereupon the Dutch Captain returned him a Broad-side, and began a sharp Engage∣ment, which lasted four Hours; but then the Captain being killed with a Can∣non shot, as likewise a great many of the Men killed, and more French Ships ap∣pearing in sight, they sent on board the French to let them know, they would make no longer Resistence. This open Violation being highly resented by the Sates General, Monsieur D' Avaux, the French Ambassador at the Hague, put in a dissembling Memorial to excuse it, in which he complained, That Captain
Ewyeke, had given the Duke his Word to go with him to Cadiz, but changing his Course by Night, he gave ground to suspect his Intentions; and that the Sieur Belle Isle following him, and he finding himself alone with one of his most Christian Majesty's Ships, put out his Cannon, and came with all the Sail he could upon the French man, who si∣red three shot one after another, as a Signal that he should not advance any farther, to which the Hollander return∣ed a whole Broad-side of 25 peices of Cannon, whereupon the sight began: That the Dutch Captain being killed, the other Officers sent on board the Sieur D' Belle Isle to let him know, that they would make good the Word of their Captain: That the Sieur received the Messenger very kindly, and after having Lamented the Loss of the Dutch Captain, a very brave Man, sent him back, and gave them time till the E∣vening to repair their Ship (of which the French had not less need, having fourteen Men killed and six wounded.) And so he goes on to salve up the mat∣ter, by endeavouring to make the Dutch Captain the Aggressor. The Damage the French King did
the Spaniards at Sea and upon their Coast, were received but trivial by the King, and therefore contrary to Oath and Pro∣mise he caused all the Spaniards Estates and Effects in the New Conquests to be seized; so that after some Debates, the Court of Spain found it self under a Ne∣cessity of complying with his perempto∣ry Demands; and thereupon the Mar∣quess de Los Balbaces, obliged himself to pay the 500000 Crowns at one entire Payment, so soon as the Spanish Plate Fleet arrived; and this Agreement was taken by the French as satisfaction, yet it proved not so; for, the Men of War being yet Abroad, took, after a long and desperate Fight, two of their Galleys, which Monsieur D' Avaux undertook likewise to excuse, by another Memorial to the State, viz. That the Sieur Forran, that had com∣manded a Squadron of his Most Christi∣an Majesty's Ships, not knowing of the Agreement and Accommodation con∣cluded by the French Ambassadors at Madrid, concerning the Five hundred thousand Crowns, had met on the Coast of Biscay two Spanish Galleyoons, moun∣ted each with Sixty four Guns, sailing towards Cadiz, and that endeavouring to
hinder them from going thither, ac∣cording to his first Orders, there ensu∣ed a very obstinate Fight between them, which lasted a Day and an half, when two Ships of the same Squadron coming in, and joining with the Sieur Forran, the Galleyoons yielded, and were carried into Rochell: That his Most Christian Majesty having received certain Advice thereof, had sent Orders for the dis∣charging the said Galleyoons, and had commanded him to tell the States, that this Accident should not make any alte∣ration in the Accommodation: That the Count Stirum, their Admiral, being pre∣sent at the end of the Fight; and ha∣ving answered the Sieur Forran (who sent to him to know, whether he would assist the Spaniards) that he had no Or∣ders to intermeddle with this Disse∣rence, and retiring thereupon after he had saluted the French Ships; his Most Christian Majesty had farther directed him to let the States know, how well satisfied he is with the Orders they had given the Count de Stirum, and with his prudent Conduct in pursuance of them. By this we may see, whilst the Dutch made a Conscience of the least Breach,
and had their hands tied from assisting their Allies by a Treaty, they would not break with Lewis XIV. who could never find any strong enough for his Consci∣ence, when he saw it advantageous to break it. However, Heaven does not wink at such Actions, nor leave them un∣punished; for much about this time, Lewis the Great fell into a raging Tor∣ture, occasioned by an ulcerous Fistula in his Fundament, and knew in some kind, what it was to be miserable, who had made many thousands so. All the chief Chirurgions of France were con∣sulted about this matter, and concluded his Life was in danger, unless his Royal Bum was Cut and Launced. And, in fine, an Incision was made, and after that di∣vers others, which kept him long in Bed, and consequently put the thoughts quite out of his Head, of plotting a far∣ther Disturbance in the World at that time. Yet his Creatures were not Idle; for, to pick a new Quarrel, the Gover∣nour of Maeubuge set up the Arms of France in divers parts of the Spanish Ne∣therlands, under the old pretence of Boun∣daries and Limits of Dependencies; and although Complaints were made, yet little was returned in Satisfaction but a
few Excuses, and a Promise, that it should be considered at a more convenient time, and that Persons on either side should be appointed to adjust the Limits, And, at the fame time they proceeded to build strong Fortresses (contrary to the Trea∣ty) near Huneguen, and in the Territories of the Margrave of Baden; of which the Emperor complained by his Ambassadors, declaring how Religiously himself and all the Princes of the Empire intended to observe the Treaty. But this little availed; for the French went on with their Designs, and upon the setting out the Boundaries in the Spanish Netherlands, and on the Frontiers of the Empire, made unreasonable Exactions of Places no ways belonging to them, nor any where as∣signed in the Treaty of Nimeguen.  which the King of Spain was obliged to acquiesce, as having Exhausted his Trea∣sures in a tedious War, and not in a con∣dition to contend alone, when the Con∣federates did not hold themselves obli∣ged to take his part, Lewis XIV. not content with Matters, and the Extraor∣dinary Trouble he had given his Neigh∣bours on this side the Alps, began to breath towards the Dominion of Italy. He remembred his Predecessors, by ma∣king
Inroads to that fruitful Country, had snatched many a pleasant Morsel, and not only satiated their Ambition, but enriched themselves till the Time of Charles V. Emperor and King of Spain, as likewise Philip II. King of Spain, in whose Reigns the Spanish Monarchy was at the highest it ever was known to be, when it was grasped from the French with a hard hand, and they have since had little pretensions to any place be∣yond that vast ridge of Mountains. But this King strikes in with the Duke of Mantua for his strong Fortress on the Frontier, for an Inlet into Italy; and, though it was opposed by all the Italian Princes, the French Gold out-balanced their Sollieitations, to prevent that Duke's surredering a place, which would at one time or other be the occasion of swal∣lowing up his other Territories. The French King having possessed him∣self of Cassel, delayed not to threaten an Invasion of Italy. This made most of the Princes combine in a strict League, and sollicite the Pope to his immediate Protection, and that he would become Head of the League. These Proceedings stop the Ambitious Monarch at that time, but hindered him not from fra∣ming
several pretensions. Nor did he defer to shew his angry Resentment, by picking a Quarrel with the City of Ge∣noa, an Italian City, and the Head of a famous Republick, situate advantage∣ously on the Sea, upon a rising Hill, there being a large Bay before it: So that he conjectured, that getting this Inlet and Harbour, he might facilitate the large Enterprizes he had cast in his mind. The occasion or Grounds of his Quarrel was about Ceremonies, and tri∣vial Matters, but where the Power is, and in a hand like that of Lewis XIV. it is easie to find occasion of Offence, or to suggest one. Long he stood not to digest or debate the matter, before a considerable Fleet was equipped, which put some of the neighbouring Nations into doubt to what it might tend. Dis∣courses were given out it was designed a∣gainst the Infidel Piratical Governments of Argier, Tripoly, &c. though People of better Understanding considering how he had favoured and incouraged those Miscreants, to make Spoil and Robbery upon the Seas, whilst himself was doing the like at Land, and shedding Streams of Christian Blood, were of a contrary O∣pinion. Nor did the wonder last, for
the Fleet being ready, immediately set Sail, and stood away for the Coast of Italy; and his Threats were sent to the Doge and Senate of Genoua to comply with his demands of Satisfaction and Re∣paration which, appeared to them so un∣reasonable, that they were rejected, and the City prepared for its Defence. The French Fleet of about Thirty Men of War, besides Fireships and Tenders, be∣ing come to an Anchor before the Bay, drew into a Line to block up the Har∣bour, and fired very furiously; which was answered from the Cannon of the Town, those in the few Ships that lay under the Shoar, and the Forts, and o∣ther Works that lay as Curtains and Bull∣works. But the Cannon from the French Fleet doing little other damage, than beating down some Chimneys, the Tops of Steeples, and a few of the Battlements, they drew in under the Favour of the Night several heavy Galleys, with Gab∣bions and Earth on their Decks, gaurded by Men of War and Fireships, from whence they played their Bombs, without con∣sidering the Churches and Religious Houses, that for the most part stood near the Sea, and had with them such Fatal Success, that a great part of that
Famous City was layed in Ruines by their beating down and blowing up. Yet the French attempting to Land, were beaten off with considerable Loss; who find∣ing the Governour of Milain was pre∣paring to come down with Forces to the Assistence of the Genoise, and that in all likelihood the Princes of Italy would not stand neuter, the French Admiral admit∣ted those that were sent off to come on board him, in order to treat of Condi∣tions, but was so extravagant in his De∣mands, that nothing was concluded at that time. But the Inhabitants finding the City almost ruined by the Bombs, which played upon them continually, and despairing of any Relief by Sea, be∣gan to Murmur and Mutiny, which ha∣stened the Agreement, very dishonourable to that State, which had sometimes Lor∣ded it over the Ocean, and often defen∣ded it self against the most powerful of States and Kings. For nothing would satisfie Lewis the Great, but that their Senators should come into France, and beg his Pardon, and humble themselves before his Greatness. A strange sort of Acknowledgment, when themselves had received the Injury, which four Mil∣lions could not make Good. Yet what
must be must be. Many other things were considered which mainly puffed up Lewis the Great, who now slattered him∣self to be the Terrour of Europe as well by Sea as Land, not imagining but this dreadful Example, and the fear of bom∣bing, would make others cautious how they incurred the Fury of such a Fire-Drake. But it seems his Terrour reached not so far as the Shoar of Africa. For even the Pirates of Argiers, whom he had so much countenanced, and to whom he had allowed his Ports as a safegaurd of Retreat, and for bringing in Prizes, and thereby a better Opportunity to rob his Neighbours; made no Scruple to break with him, and brave him, by ta∣king his Ships even in the Mouth of his own Harbours. This no doubt vexed Lewis the Great, and made him think him∣self undervalued, if he should put up such Affronts. And though perhaps he was loth to shed Infidel Blood, having so long deal'd in that of Christians, which he had poured out in Rivolets, he found the Eyes of the Neighbouring Princes were upon him, and that his Greatness would suffer an Eclipse if he dissembled it, and that he should become cheap to the World; notwithstanding his being in
League with the Grand Signiour, under whose protection this Government is, he set forth a Fleet to bomb it, but had not the Success as before Genoa. For, the obstinate Turks being strongly forti∣fied, made a vigorous Defence; whereby his Ships were constrained to keep off at Sea. However, having spent a great many of his Fireballs at a Distance, with∣out doing any extraordinary Damage, and not daring to land any Force; when Count D'Estrees, the Admiral, sent to demand the French Slaves, and Repa∣ration for several Ships taken, and the breaking the Truce, all the Answer that could be obtained was, to have his Consul that resided there to negotiate Affairs, halled out of Prison, and Ram∣med into a Cannon or Mortarpeice, and by its being fired, shot towards the Fleet. So that this great Preparation was fru∣strated, and the French could only boast of some few Slaves that scaped on boards, as they lay before the City, pretending they were Constrained to return, by rea∣son of the boisterousness of those Seas, through the far Advancement of the Sea∣son; when, on the contrary, it may be said, to the Honour of the English Na∣tion, that a small Squadron of our Ships
has reduced those Barbarians frequently to such straits, that they have been ob∣liged to truckle under what Terms has been thought fit to have been imposed. Lewis XIV. having procured Cardinal Furstemburg, his Creature, to be Coad∣jutor to the Elector of Collogne, and that Elector dying in June 1688, he immedi∣ately struck in to make a Party; and, to support the Interest of Furstemburg, and to procure his being chosen, as know∣ing himself should have the Advantage, and supposing to hector others out of their Pretentions, the Count D' Avaux, on the 10 of June presented the following Memorial to the States General, viz. That he was commanded to let them know, that the King his Master desi∣ring nothing more than to preserve the Peace of Christendom, his Majesty was willing to prevent whatever might trouble it. And seeing nothing is more capable of preserving the publick Tran∣quillity in the present Conjuncture, than if the Princes, Neighbours of the Ele∣ctorate of Cologne, should not leave the Chapter in an entire Liberty to proceed Canonically to the Election of a new Archbishop; That his Majesty in such case could not refuse the Canons and
Chapter the Assistence they might stand in need of, for the Preservation of their Rights, and for the Security of the Peace of the Country that depended on the Electorate; And if any one should go about to cause any Troops to march towards the said Electorate, under what pretence soever it may be, and to force the Canons and Chapter in any Manner whatever, or to use any force or violence against the Places or Coun∣try of the said Archbishoprick, his Ma∣jesty will send thither, at the same time, all the Succor that is necessary, to Main∣tain those that have the Administration thereof in all the Rights that belong to them. But if the States neighbouring to the Archbishoprick, do leave the Chap∣ter in an intire Liberty to chuse a sit and worthy Person, and in case there be no moving of Troops either in the Empire, or in the Territories of this State, or in the Spanish Netherlands, to Intimi∣date the said Chapter, those of his Ma∣jesty will not likewise doe any thing that may be able to trouble the publick Tranquillity, or ever give the least Ap∣prehensions to those that are well In∣tentioned for the Maintenance of the Peace.
These were the pretences of Lewis XIV. to Amuse his Neighbours; but they were too Apprehensive, and knew him too well to be lulled into a Security, For indeed, he longed for this Electorate, and knew no better ways to gain it than by placing a Person in it wholly devoted to his Interest; and, to accomplish this, Parties were made, and vast Treasures expended: But, finding the Pope not a∣ny way inclined to Furstemburg, insomuch as he had not approved or confirmed his Coadjutorship, and thinking he should fail in his Expectation; he caused his Troops, contrary to what had been proposed, to march to the Frontiers, and a great ma∣ny French came privately Armed into the Cities of Cologne and Bonne; and the Car∣dinal, not like a peaceable Church man, but like a Martial Prince, came with Ar∣med Troops at his heels, which gave Apprehensions to some, of the Danger that might befal them if they refused to give their Voice; and on the 19 of July they proceeded to Election, where after some Contest of the 24 Canons that have Voices, 13 were gained for Furstemburg, 9 gave their Voices for the Prince Cle∣ment of Bavaria, Brother to the Duke of Bavaria, and one for the Prince of Neu∣burg:
This puffed up the Cardinal's mind, as thinking certianly he had car∣ried the day, and was capable of gratify∣ing his Master to the full. But then there arose other Scruples; for, those that had voted against him made their protest, alledging that the Cardinal, as being Bishop of Strasburgh, could not, without the Pop's Dispensation be chosen, but by Postulation, which required two Thirds of the Electors to be for him, and that it was sufficient for any other to have nine, in case the Voices were divided be∣tween two; but if they were divided a∣mongst several, it was necessary that he that was postulated should have double the number that any other had. So that Prince Clement having 9 Voices, and the Cardinal but 13, he was by virtue of his Holiness's Dispensation duly elected. However, the Cardinal and his Party, went and Proclaimed himself in the Choire of the Metropolitan Church, and the next day the Election of Prince Cle∣ment was proclaimed. Upon this dis∣pute, the French Troops began to move nearer. The Cardinal took possession of the Palace, and both parties sent to the Pope to be confirmed and approved in the Election. However, the Election of
Liege coming on, the Cardinal departed to Bonne, and from thence to Liege, in hopes to be elected there. But the French Gold, it seems, had not a suffi∣cient Opperation; For here he fared worfe than before, for the Baron of El∣deren, Great Dean of the Cathedral, was chosen in the 17 of August, Bishop and Prince of Liege, having 20 Voices, and the Cardinal but 18. And after the Election had been proclaimed, he was accompanied by the Prince of Neuburg, Great Master of the Tutonick Order, to his Palace, where he received the Com∣plements of the Chief of the Country. So that the Cardinal sinding himself de∣ceived, retired to Bonne, and proceeded to strengthen himself in that Place, pri∣vately drawing in some French Troops that were advanced in order thereto. And Lewis XIV. fretting to see his Pro∣jects prosper no better, prepared for Ho∣stility, ordering a new Leavy 10000 Foot and 6000 Horse to be speedily rai∣sed; giving out Commissions for that purpose, making a great many new Ge∣neral Officers as Lieutenant Genera Mareschals de Camp, and Brigadiers of Horse and Foot, commanding the Gen∣darms and Light-horse to form a Camp
at Acheres, and the Mareschal d'Humi∣ers was sent to Flanders to form an Army of 25 Men near Mabeuge. How this a∣grees with the Memorial of his Ambassa∣dor, we make the Reader judge. Upon notice that the Pope had declared in fa∣vour of Prince Clement of Bavaria, the French Ministers at Cologne pressed that City to a Neutrality, offering it if they would take no more Troops in. But they were too wary to trust to such Pre∣tences, when they could expect nothing more than to be suddenly invested. Whereupon they permitted the Mares∣chal to advance on the 11 of September with 2600 Foot and 100 Dragoons of the Circle of Westphalia. So that having left part of these Forces that made the Garrison 5000 strong, and viewed the Fortifications, he returned to Wesle. A∣bout this time we had Notice that the Dutch Fleet was about to set Sail for England, which made Monsieur Albeville, the French Ambassador at the Hague, set forth, by a Memorial, amongst other things, how desirous his Master was to observe the Peace of Nimegnen, when at that time his Armies had entered the Palatinate under pretence of securing the Right and Pretensions of the Duchess of
Orleance; and General Monclar Invested Philipshu, in which Count Maximilian of Staremourg was Governour, with a Garison of 3000 Men, and Keyserlanter after two Assaults was taken, and Oppen∣heim, Altzheim and Worms, were compelled to receive French Garrisons. They made themselves Masters likewise of Neustadt, Spires, and many other Places, and put the Countries of Wertemburg, Franconia, and Suabia under Contribution, and that the Dauphin might partake herein, he was sent to the Camp before Philipsburg, which Place was defended with much Bravery; a great number of the French, and many of note were killed in the Attacks and vi∣gorous Sallies of the besieged. Yet whilst the Siege went on, the French found an opportunity to surprize and Garrison Treeves and Mayence, and put the Counties of Hanau, Darmstadt, Solms, and the adjacent Countries under Con∣tribution. They likewise seized on Hei∣delburg; and on the 29 of October, as∣ter all that could be expected of a small Garrison against a powerful Army and despairing of Relief, Philipsburg was sur∣rendered upon very Advantageous Ar∣ticles. viz. That the Garrison which then consisted not of above 1800 Men, should
march out, with Arms and Baggage, Drums beating, and Colours flying, and four Pieces of Cannon; the Garrison to be Conducted to Ulme. Nor had it been so easily ta∣ken, had not the Governour been disa∣bled from giving necessary Orders, by a dangerous Sickness. Nor were the Ar∣ticles any better observed, that what has been usual with the French, or, as some will have it, by the Turks. This strong Hold being in their Hands, they soon possessed themselves of almost all the Towns and Villages upon the Rhine, relating to the Palatinate, com∣mitting great Spoil, and many Outrages. They took Frankendale and Manheim, en∣tering the Electate of Clge, and de∣manding Two hundred thousand Crowns of the Country of Julirs, to be paid in Eight Days, upon pain of Military Ex∣ecution, and the like Contributions from the Country of Liege; which put the poor People, who had so often been ruined by the War, into the greatest Surprize imaginable. These Proceedings obliged the Mar∣quess of Baden, the Emperor's Plenepotentia∣ry, and Principal Commissioner at the Diet of Ratisbone, to represent to them the State of Affairs, in the following man∣ner, viz.
That he doubts not, but that the En∣voys, Counsellors, and Deputies of the E∣lectorate Princes, and States of the Em∣pire, are fully satisfied and informed, in what manner the Crown of France, besides the former Acts of Hostility, has lately, for want of Succour, taken the Fortress of Philipsburgh, and afterwards, in a Hostile manner, attack'd, and be∣sieged the remaining Places of the Pala∣tinate, to wit, Manheim, Fredricksburgh, Frankendale, as likewise the Fortress of Coblets, in the Electorate of Tryger, as likewise made Incursions into the Cir∣cles of Suabia, and Franconia. That since the said Crown does every day carry the Fire of the War farther into the Empire, having already possessed it self of almost the four Electorates on the Rhine, by Force, and of other Lordships and Towns; so that the whole Empire is in danger to be intirely Desolate. And since that the extream Necessity, to which things are now re∣duced, plainly shews, That the Delibe∣rations of the Diet upon the Grievances complained of, and the Assistences de∣manded, are no longer to be waited for; it ought with all speed to be taken into deliberation in the Colleges of the
Empire, to declare without any delay these Irruptions to be a War against the Empire, and to resist the Hostilities of France, with their whole and united Force; and that accordingly his Im∣perial Majesty, out of the paternal Care he has for the Empire, had commanded him to inform and assure the Diet, that he will not be wanting on his part, to contribute thereunto all that is possible for him to do. Lewis XIV. having thus openly Vio∣lated the Treaty, and being no longer able to dissemble the Matter, proceeded to thunder out his Denunciation of War against the States General of the Ʋnited Provinces; which, for the better under∣standing of Matters, and to what he mainly pretends, we have thought fit to take notice of Lewis XIV. in his Decla∣ration of War against the States General, published at Paris in December 1688. after he has set forth, That he has done strange things, to give Peace to Europe, he comes to the main Point, that most of all grieves him, viz. That the States drawing their Army together, under the Command of Prince Waldeck, had an Influence upon hindering the Cardi∣nal of Furstemburgh (whom, he says,
he for many Reasons was bound to In∣fluence, and Protect) from being Inve∣sted in the Electorate of Cologne: And for this Reason, and no other given, he declares War against them by Sea and Land, commanding his Subjects to fall upon them, forbidding Trade or Com∣merce upon pain of Death, and Re∣vokes all Pasports, and Safe Con∣duct, &c. By this we may see, that he bore him∣self mightily upon the Election of that Cardinal, whom not only a great part of the Roman Clergy, but the Pope himself, looked upon as an Enemy to the Church. By which it may appear, That the French King's Pretensions to Support him, ten∣ded only to sinister Ends, and hopes by this means to annex that Electorate to the Crown of France. Upon this Declara∣tion, contrary to the Law of Nations, a Guard was set upon the Dutch Ambas∣sador, which obliged the States General to do the like upon Monsieur d' Avaux; by which means an Exchange was made, and either of them permitted to return. And now, though in the depth of Win∣ter, the French were abroad, ravaging the Country; and although this King had not declared against Spain, yet a
great Impost was laid on Goods, to be brought out of the Spanish Netherlnads. But perceiving the Confederate Armies draw∣ing together in great Bodies, he caused several of the Towns he had possessed himself of in the Palatinate to be sligh∣ted, and many Dismantled, or Demo∣lished; the Souldiers requiring great Summs of the Inhabitants, to save them from plundering. Yet many, after they had paid what was demanded, had their Goods taken away, and their Persons miserably misused. To retaliate in some Measure these Proceedings, the Governour of the Spa∣nish Netherlands laid an Impost upon Wines, and Brandy; of which, when the Mareschal complained, his Excellen∣cy told him, He could not but wonder, that his Master having done the like on the Goods of that Country, he should find any Reason to complain. The Emperor more∣over commanded the French Envoy to leave Vienna, and the Plenepotentiary of Ratisbone. Prince Clement of Bavaria re∣fused to see the French Minister sent to Complement him, because he denied to give him the Style of Elector; and those Canons of the Electorate were comman∣ded to leave him, and return to their
Dignities, on pain of being Disposses∣sed, and of incurring Excommunicati∣on. Whereupon the Cardinal, in a Pet, made a new Protestation against the Pope's Proceedings, touching the Electo∣rate of Cologne. Whilst these things were doing, the French Troops quitted Heyl∣bourn, after having Plundered it, blown up the Gates, and part of the Walls, carrying with them four Hostages, for the payment of Fifty thousand Crowns laid as a Tax. They likewise flighted Offemburgh, demolished Manheim, and burnt Oberadt, with the Villages belong∣ing to that City, declaring they would burn and destroy all the Places of the Palatinate, and Electorate of Mentz, ex∣cept Philipsburgh. And indeed, the whole Country at a distance seemed in the Night time for some space, but one Fire, the Villages and Towns every where flaming; which shew how little Lewis XIV. notwithstanding his specious Pre∣tences, regards the Peace and Tranquil∣lity of Europe, this way of burning being altogether a Turkish Fashion, which is not for his Glory to imitate. These Proceedings made the Swisses, that were in the French Service in the Electorate of Cologne, quit it, declaring,
They could not fight against the Empire; and thereupon the Cardinal sent to the French Court for more Assistence to se∣cure Bonne, the Cittadel of Liege was commanded to be blown up, and accor∣dingly performed, except one Bastion, and its Works; and although the Castle of Montjoy Surrendered upon good Ar∣ticles, the Soldiers, contrary to Faith given, were made Prisoners of War; and slighting Huy, they blew up the Walls, and either destroyed, or much defaced all the Places in the Diocese, except Chinay, which they Garrisoned. On the 12th. of February, 1688. the States of the Empire assembled at Ratisbone, having taken into their Consideration the Mischief the French had done, contra∣ry to the Truce of Twenty Years, con∣cluded at Nimeguen, proceeded to give their Resolutions, to stand by the Empe∣ror, and assist him with all their Forces, for the suppressing the Disturber of Chri∣stendom; setting forth at large, their Resentments of his Proceedings. Upon this, and the like Resolution, the French bethought themselves of slighting Hey∣delburgh, and Frankendale, and Fortified Mentz, Bonne, and such other Places as they conceived tenable. And now the
States of Holland finding the French Men of War, and Privateers, had taken many of their Merchants, and that open Hosti∣lities were begun, proceeded to proclaim War against France, and accordingly a Declaration of War was published at the Hague, and at other Places; setting forth, That considering the French King had openly broke the Treaties, and Peace conluded, without any just Reason or manner of cause, and had declared War against them on ground∣less Pretences; they find themselves constrained to make a publick Decla∣ration of War against France. And towards the Conclusion they strictly command, viz. 1. That none of the Inhabitants of this State, or any Fo∣reigner residing within their Territo∣ries, shall Transport any thing to France, that is prejudicial to the State. 2. That all Counterband Goods that shall be taken going to France, shall be declared Prize. 3. That good Secu∣rity shall be given by all Persons carry∣ing any Goods out of these Countries, that they are not designed for France. 4. That all Ships laden with Counter∣band Goods, that shall be found on the French Coast, shall be taken for good
Prize. 5. That all Ships ought to have lawful Pasports. 6. The Men of War not to molest any Ships, having such Pasports, and not bound with Coun∣terband Goods to the Ports of France. 7. That such as shall be offending here∣in, shall be punished with Confiscation of Ship and Goods. 8. That the Com∣manders of the Ships of War, shall pun∣ctually govern themselves in this mat∣ter, according to the Treaties made in relation thereto with other Kings, Prin∣ces, and States. 9. That the Admi∣ralties shall have the Cognizances of these Offences. 10, 11, 12. The Mo∣ney arising by such Confiscations, shall be disposed of, as has been practised in like Cases; and as to the Seizures, &c. Former Placates to be observed. 13. None of the Inhabitants of this State, shall Insure any French Ships or Goods, or others bound to France, on Penalty of forfeiting the Summ Insurred. The Confederates being early Abroad this Spring, the French had not so good Success as the former. For the Bran∣denburgh Forces defeated a great Party of the Garrison of Nuis, as likewise gave another Defeat to the Chevalier de Sourdis, who came with a strong Party to the Re∣lief
of the other, killing a great number in the Fight and pursuit, gaining a good Booty. Upon these Defeats, the Ca∣stles of Lintz, Nuis, Zons, &c. surren∣dered, and the French set Fire to, and blew up many places they despaired to keep; which so astonished the Cardinal of Furstemburgh, that he attempted to leave Bonne, sending, in order thereto, his best Moveables to Mentz. Nor was Lewis the Great free from Apprehensions of his own Subjects Revolting, which made him draw his Guards near his Per∣son, and publish an Ordinance for the hindering the meeting of the New Con∣verts in several Provinces of his Kingdom, and for the putting in Execution the E∣dict of October 1685. and to raise the Ban and Arrear Ban of the Isle of France; many small Skirmishes happened on the Frontiers during the beginning of the Campagne; the French attempting to Surprize and Burn Bopert, were beaten off, and many of them killed; and soon after some of the Troops of the Land-grave of Hesse, Surprized the Garrison of Lintz, and cut them off. And notwith∣standing Liege had purchased a Neutra∣trality, at the cost of One hundred and thirty thousand Crowns, and the suffer∣ing
their Cittadel to be demolished; the French, who scorn to be Slaves to their Words or Oaths, ranged up and down in their Country, and gathered Contri∣butions, under a slender Pretence, that the Cittadel was not demolished so soon as it was agreed on by the Treaty of Neu∣trality, and were forced to shelter their Convoys, and furnish even the Troops that were oppressing their Country, with such Ammunition and Provision as they could spare. The Palatinate by this time growing somewhat too hot for the French Com∣plexion, they resolved to doe what Mis∣chief they could before they should be obliged to abandon it; and, amongst o∣thers, upon quitting Fredericksburg, they set it on fire, and ruined the Fortifications of Cassel. But now the City of Liege finding the Misfortune of it's Neutrality, and being pressed by the Emperor to de∣clare either for the Confederates or France, (for he would allow no Neutrality,) it declared for the former, and secured the French-Resident, with divers Officers and their Arms, as Hostages for the safety of their Minister in France. The Count de Rabenac, the French Ambassador, was likewise dismissed the Court of Spain,
and Furstemburgh got into Mentz; and the French Garrison of Strasburgh at∣tempting the Siege of Oberkirk, was beaten off, a Captain, with divers others, killed, and some of Note wounded. On the 19 of April. 1689 Lewis XIV. caused a Declaration of War to be pub∣lished in the City of Paris against the King of Spain, and sent orders to break down all the Bridges on the River Sambre from Chastelet to Maubuge and so to Lan∣drecy; the Garrison of Luxemburgh com∣manding all the Country that depends on them, to bring in their Provisions that exceed a Store for three Months, on great Penalties, flattering them, that after the Expiration of that time they should be other ways supplied. But, for a brief Account of the Actions of Lew∣is XIV. in his late proceedings, the Em∣peror gives us these passages, amongst o∣thers, in his Letter to the King of Po∣land, viz. Your Serenity will have sufficiently un∣derstood by our former Letter how unjustly and treacherously the Crown of France, violating the Treaties of West∣phaila and Nimeguen, and the 20 years Truce concluded a few Years since, hath invaded us and the Empire at a time
when we expected nothing less. But the Inormity of this Invasion is infinitely Agravated, by the horrid Cruelties and Barbarities they continue to excercise in the Places they have possessed them∣selves of, pillaging whole Towns and Countries, which, to preserve them∣selves, surrendered upon Articles, and afterwards payed the Contributions imposed upon them, contrary to the Faith given them and confirmed by the King himself or the Dauphin, and after∣wards destroying them with Fire, or Levelling the Walls and Houses to the ground, and carrying away the Inhabi∣tants bound as Slaves, in a manner on∣ly practised amongst Barbarians; and forcing them with Threats of Death to follow the French Army unto other parts, not sparing the stately Houses and Palaces of Princes, which had been preserved for Ages in the bloodiest Wars; and not with-holding their Im∣pious hands even from the Churches, and excercising many other Cruelties and Inhumanities, such as are seldom Committed by the Turks themselves, and which can be hardly found in any History to be practised amongst Chri∣stians; Which as they most deservedly
Excite the Hatred of all Christendom against France, so they especially lay a necessity upon us, of providing for the Safety of the Roman Em∣pire, and of using all means to free it from un∣heard of Violences, and Oppressions, &c. Thus we have the Word of an Emperor, to confirm what we have set forth; nor did his Ele∣ctoral Highness of Brandenburgh find himself less aggrieved, and in April 1689. caused his Decla∣ration of War to be published against France, in which, amongst other things, he sets forth, That desiring nothing more, than that the publick Tranquillity of Christendom might be preserved, and that his own Subjects might, under his Government, enjoy the Benefit of Peace; but that the French King having, against all Right and Justice, not only attacked the Roman Empire, but having likewise possessed himself of whole Circles and Provinces, and de∣stroyed the same, in a most barbarous Manner, never before heard of amongst Christians, with Fire and Murthers, and other execrable Cruel∣ties, and threatned the Countries of Branden∣burgh, and his Electoral Highness's Subjects of Frankendale, with the same Inhumane Treat∣ment, which he has begun even already to put in Execution, and having committed other the like Attempts upon his Electoral Highness, and his Allies, as well within as without the Empire, directly contrary to the Treaty of Peace and Truce, in order to the total Ruine of the Ro∣man Empire; His Electoral Highness having re∣gard to the Resolution of the Emperor, and the Dyet at Ratisbonne, is obliged to make use of the Power which God and Nature have put into his Hands, and to take up Arms for the Defence of his Subjects, and for the opposing with all
his Force, the perfidious Attempts of France. And so proceeds to forbid all Commerce, upon very great Penalties. And now the English, not to be behind-hand with other Nations, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses assembled in Parliament, waited upon his Majesty of Great Britain, on the 26th of April, and presented him an Address in the Banqueting-House, wherein, amongst other things, they de∣clared, That whenever his Majesty should think fit to enter into a War against the French King, they would give him such Assistance, in a Parliamentary Way, as might enable him (under the Protection that God Almighty has ever afforded him) to Support and go through with the same. To which His Ma∣jesty was graciously pleased to return this following Answer, viz. I receive this Address as a Mark of the Con∣fidence you have in me, which I take very kindly, and shall endeavour, in all my Actions, to confirm you in it. I assure you, That my own Ambition shall never be an Argument to incline me to engage in a War, that may expose the Nation either to Danger or Expense; but, in the present Case, I look upon the War so much already declared in effect by France against England; that it is not so properly an Act of Choice, as an inevitable Necessity in our own Defence. I shall only tell you, That as I have ventured my Life, and all that is dear to me, to rescue this Nation from what it suffered, I am still ready to do the same, in order to preserve it from all its Enemies. And, as I do not doubt of such an Assistance from you, as shall be suita∣ble to your Advice to me, to declare War a∣gainst a Powerful Enemy, so you may relie upon me, that no part of that which you shall give
for the carrying it on with Suucce, shall be di∣verted by me to any other Use. The Confederate Armies by this Time began to draw together, which made Lewis XIV. hasten his Troops, and form Two Armies under the Commands of the Duke of Duras, and Mareschal d' Humiers. Whereupon the Governour-General of the Spanish Netherlands, caused a Declaration of War to be published against France; wherein, after he had set forth the Cruelty and Injustice of the French King, as the others had done, he forbids all Commerce, &c. Upon which Lewis XIV. caused his Declaration of War to be proclaimed against Spain, at Marseilles, viz, on the 29th of April, and proceeded to fill all the Towns of the Palatinate, that were not reduced to Ashes, with his Soldiers, as foreseeing the Storm that threat∣ned from so many Quarters of Europe; and, that such Protestants as were willing to avoid his cruel Usage and Extortions, might have Encourage∣ment to leave the Kingdom of France, their Ma∣jesties of Great Britain put forth a Proclamation, bearing Date the 25th of April, for the Encoura∣ging the French Protestants to Transport them∣selves into this Kingdom, another Prohibiting the Importation of all Sorts of Manufactures, and Commodities whatsoever, of the Growth, Pro∣duction, or Manufacture of France. And on the 7th of May, a Declaration of War was Signed, and afterwards Published, setting forth, The perfidious Dealing of the French King, as well in Europe as in Africa, against the Subjects of England, &c. And whilst these things were doing, News came from the Coast of Ireland, that the English Ad∣miral, with a Squadron of the King of Britains Ships, had engaged and worsted Forty four Sail of the French, being double the number of the
English, as they were attempting to land Men and Arms in that Kingdom. And, to shew the French a farther Proof of our Naval Courage, the None-Such, a small Fourth Rate Frigat o 36 Guns, meeting off of Guernsey with two French Men of War, one of 30 Guns, and 120 Men; the other of 16 Guns, 6 Pettereroes, and 120 Men, who were bound, with about Twenty small Mer∣chant Ships under their Convoy, to Newfound∣land, the English Man of War engaged them, but in the beginning of the Fight the Captain was killed, with the Master and Cook, and the Car∣penter wounded; upon which, there being no Lieutenant on Board, the Boatswain took upon him the Command of the Ship, and continued the Fight with that Bravery, that after a sharp En∣gagement of three Hours, he took both the French Men of War, and brought them into Plymouth. During these Transactions, Rhinburgh, that had been Garrisoned with French Troops by Car∣dinal Furstemburgh, surrendered to the Confede∣rates, and Keyserwaert was blocked up. The French continued to fortifie Mentz, pulling dow Streets of Building for their better convenienc on that Occasion. Yet so far either Passion o Fear had wrought in Lewis XIV. that he was ta∣ken on the 30th of May with an extraordinary Fi of an Ague, which held him for nine or ten Hours which made him fly to his old Refuge of taking the Jesuits Powder, as well as their Counsels, th latter having ever been fatal to Christendom And, as if the French King had wanted Torche or Bonefires for Joy of his Recovery, his Troops not satisfied with the Execrable Barbarities they had committed in the Palatinate, and other Places proceeded in the later end of May to lay in Ashe the famous Towns of Oppenheim, Worms, and
Spire; in the latter whereof, the Imperial-Cham∣ber had a long time been kept, not leaving so much as a House standing. But a party of the Garrison of Bonne attempting to do the like to the Village of Hauff, the Country People took Arms, and falling upon them, killed about sixty of their Number, putting the rest to flight; and likewise several Parties of French Foragers, and such as were sent to make Incursions into the Countries that neighboured on their Garrison, were fre∣quently defeated. And now the Most Christian King finding himself hard beset, sought to cajole the Algerine Pirates to make a Peace with him, and fall upon the Confederates Merchants at Sea, although they had a little before so sensibly af∣fronted him, as to shoot off his Consul, &c. and notwithstanding any Proposal, they would not hearken to any Treaty, unless he would redeem the French Captives, to the Number of 800, which he had demanded without any Ransom. And when his Agent perceived this would not take, he proposed a Truce, but that likewise was rejected by the Algerines. On the Ninth of June, the Marquess Choiseul passed the Rhine at Hunningen, with 4000 French Horse and Dragoons, and entered the Country of Durlach, declaring, That he came only to Forage, promising not to molest any that should remain quiet in their Houses; which the Country People relying on, thought they had nothing to fear; but they quickly found the little regard the French have to their Word: For no sooner had they posted themselves in the Places they designed, but the Country was given up to the Discretion of the Soldiers, who committed the most outrageous Insolencies, and Violencies, that can be imagined; So that many of the poor Peo∣ple
being plundered of all they had, and their persons abused, were driven before the Soldiers, like Sheep or Oxon, towards Friburgh and Brisac. A few indeed escaped to the Black Forrest, where several of them perished for Want, whilst the French were cutting up their Corn, and destroy∣ing the whole Country. During these Proceedings, Lewis XIV. caused his Declaration of War against England and Scot∣land to be published at Paris, viz. on the 28th of June, commanding his Fleet to put again to Sea, proposing great things to his Advantage. But as yet his Expections have been frustrated. The Town of Keyserwaert being formally Be∣sieged, and closely pressed by the Brandenburgh Forces, the Duke being before it in person, on the 25th of June Monsieur Marcognet, the Go∣vernour, Capitulated, upon Notice the German Soldiers, in Garrison, were inclined to make Conditions for themselves without him; and a Parly being beat, the Capitulation was Signed the next Morning; by which it was agreed, That one of the Gates should be immediately delivered up; that the French Officers and Soldiers should march out the Day following with Arms and Baggage, &c. and be Conducted to Luxemburgh, but that the Germans should be at Liberty to go where they pleased, but not any more enter into the French Service. Whereupon most of them entered into the Duke's Pay, and a great Number of French Soldiers deserted their Army, notwithstanding the severe Discipline to prevent it, by hanging up some Hundreds who had been taken going off. Nor did their Army in Flanders escape the angry Skies; for a violent Tempest happening, accompanied with extraor∣dinary Rains and Floods, divers Persons perished, a great deal of Baggage was spoiled, and carri∣ed
away in by the Rapidity of the Torrent, and the Mareschal d' Humiers, who commanded in Chief, hardly escaped drowning. And although the French King laboured by many secret In∣trigues and Contrivances, to widen, or keep on foot, the Differences between the King of Denmark, and Duke of Holstein; yet by the Medi∣ation of the Emperor, and Electors of Saxony and Bandenburgh, an Accomodation was made, and Signed on the Thirtieth of June, upon sun∣dry Articles. Upon this News, upon what Ac∣count we are yet to learn, the Duke De la Force, and the Marquess Vivaus, were clapped up in the Bastile at Paris, and their Papers se∣cured. The Duchess De la Force was likewise sent Prisoner to the Castle of Angers: And a∣bout the same time, a French Man of War, of Thirty six Guns, and Two hundred Men, was taken by two Dutch Ships, and carried into Am∣sterdam. And the French and Irish Forces Besieging Lon∣don-Derry, were beaten off with great Slaughter; and, amongst others, many Principal Officers were killed, which obliged them, upon the Ci∣ty's being Relieved with Provision, to raise the Siege, and retire in some Confusion. The French Forces likewise in Catalonia were beaten by the Spaniards, and upon the Approach of the Imperial Army, quitted all, or most of the Places they yet held in the Palatinate. And now the Storm of War threatning Montz and Bonne, the only strong Places the Frence held in those Parts, the Marquess Ʋxelles, Governour of the former, sent to the Court of France to demand speedy Aid; but had no other Answer returned him as to that particular, than, that the King had sent the Arrear-Ban towards the
Coasts, and that by reason of some Disappoint∣ments, he must not expect very Powerful Suc∣cours, for that there were every where too great Occasion for their Troops, the Enemy having never had such numerous Forces in the Field, as at present. For at that time, the Army Com∣manded by the Duke of Lorrain was composed of 20000 Imperial Foot, and 8000 Horse, 10000 Saxons, 8000 Lunenburghers, and 6000 of Hesse-Cassel. The Bavarian Army, with the Troops of Suabia 14000, with which were joined 8000 Imperialists under Caprapra. The Forces of the Duke of Brandenburgh amounted to 32000, those of Munster 6000, which with the 3000 Hollanders that were in that Country, and the 8000 after∣ward sent by the Duke of Hanouer, amounted to 123000 Men, not accounting the Dutch and Spanish Armies in the Netherlands. These ex∣traordinary Forces made Lewis the Great begin to look about him more than ever, labouring with the King of Denmark to hold a Neutrality, to which he found him no ways inclinable. And the Pope's Nuntio being called Home, to prevent the Clergy flocking to him in his way, an Officer, contrary to Custom, was sent to him out of the Kingdom, and published an Ordinance, com∣manding all the Subjects of France, whose Fa∣thers, Children, or Brothers, are in the Ser∣vice of his Enemies, and the Women, whose Husbands are in that Service, to depart the Kingdom within the space of a Month, which was, in many Places, put rigorously in Execu∣tion. The French Troops under the Command of the Duke Duras, making an Attempt upon Heidel∣burgh, the Regiment of Wertemburgh got oppor∣tunely into the Town, and beat them off, with
the loss of Three or Four hundred of their Men. And in Flanders, about Forty English Horse meeting with a greater Number of French, kil∣led Fifteen, and took Eight Prisoners. These bad Successes, one upon the Neck of another, made the French King cause his Orders to be published, Commanding the Inhabitants of Se∣dan, Mezieres, and other Places, not to Sow their Ground with Corn this Year, on pain of Death, promising they should be furnished other ways. It would be too tedious to mention all the Skirmishes that passed this Campaign with vari∣ous Success, though mostly to the Advantage of the Confederates: Wherefore, passing many over, we come to Instance that great Engage∣ment between the French, under the Command of the Mareschal d' Humiers; and the English and Dutch, under the Command of Prince Wal∣deck, &c. The French Troops Attacking the Village Forge, where Eight hundred Men were Posted under the Command of Collonel Hodges, and Lieutenant-Collonel Goes, they bravely defended it, till sending one Party after another on both sides, the two Armies, in a manner, Engaged; where the English, more especially, behaved themselves with such Bravery and Resolution, that after a long and obstinate Fight, the French gave Ground, and retired in some Confusion, leaving behind them their Cannon and Ammu∣nition, and about Three thousand Killed and Wounded. And the Six Battalions of Guards were for the most part cut off, which Loss may be best guessed at by the following Account. Monsieur de Gelais, Mareschal of the Camp, was killed with a Cannon-Shot, as likewise were
Monsieur de Metz Tirecelin, Commissary of the Artillery. Killed of the Guards the Count d' Artuagan, four Captains, five Lieutenants, a Gentleman-Voluntier wounded. Three Ca∣ptains, eleven Lieutenants, the Aid-Major, and two Voluntiers of the Regiment of Campaign, the Chavalier de Colbert, Brigadier and Collonel, mortally wounded, the Lieutenant-Collonel wounded, the Major mortally wounded, two Captains killed, two Lieutenants killed, five Captains and seven Lieutenants wounded, the Liutenant of the Artillery wounded; of the Gensd'arms, an Exempt of the Guards wounded; of Vilpians Regiment of Horse killed one Captain, wounded a Cornet and Aid-Major; of Greders Regiment of Foot, killed one Captain and Aid-Major, wounded two Captains, one Aid-Major, and a Lieutenant, several of the wounded dy∣ing of their Wounds soon after the Battel. This blow greatly allarmed the Court of France, and might have put Lewis XIV. into another Fit of his Ague, had not cordial News come from Rome, of the Death of Pope Innocent XI. upon which, he immediately sent away the Count de Chaulms. his Ambassador; and the French Car∣dinals, such as he would trust with his Interest, prepared to follow him, in order to make his Party in the Election of a new Pope. But when they came to Rome, their Admission into the Conclave was disputed, till such time the French King should relinquish his Pretensions to the franchises, which at last was agreed to be done, during the time of Election. But it so fell out, that neither the French Interest nor Gold was so Powerful as heretofore; for, after some Con∣test amongst the Factions, Cardinal Ottoboni, a Noble Venetian, was Elected, and Confirmed
Pope by the Name of Alexander VIII. The City of Mentz having been violently At∣tacked by the Confederates, under the Com∣mand of the Duke of Lorrain, and others; and the Duke Duras in vain watching an Opportu∣nity to relieve it, with an Army of between Six∣teen and Eighteen thousand Men; the Besieged beat a Parly, and on the Eighth of August Hosta∣ges were exchanged, and on the Ninth the Ca∣pitulation was Signed; in pursuance whereof the Place was Surrendered, and the French Garrison marched out, viz. 4500 Foot, 400 Dragoons, 280 Horse, besides six or 700 Foot, that went in small parties with the Baggage, being the Remainder of 10000 that were in Garrison at the beginning of the Siege. The reduction of this strong Place, that had cost so great a Summ in Fortifying, and in which such confidence had been reposed, did not a little startle the Court of France; and, as is usual upon such Emergen∣cies, occasioned the change of a great many Mini∣sters of State. And what heightned the Con∣sternation more, was a fear of a General Revolt of the Protestants of that Kingdom, seeing many of them forced their Way through the French Barriers of Languedock, Provence, and Dauphin, and brought Terrour upon Savoy, (the only stickling Prince for France,) joining with others in the Valleys of Piemont, Lucern, &c. which ob∣liged the French King to keep strong Guards on the Frontier Places of Dauphin: And some French Troops attempting to burn the Corn near Ghent, were so warmly received by the Cannon of the Town, and an Ambushment laid in a hollow Way, that most of them were cut off. And now perceiving they must quit the Electorate of Trier, they resolved to use it with the same Civility
they had done the Palatinate, burning ten Towns, beside what they had formerly Consumed, and laying that fruitful Country Waste like a Wil∣derness; and farther proceeded to burn Franken∣dale, Neustadt, Lubesheim, Pettersheim, Dirmin∣stheim, Wachenheim, with several other Places, and a great many Villages in Housdurgh. Which Ʋnchristian Proceedings demonstrated their Power to be of short Durance in those Countries. The City of Bonne, Fortified by the Care and Diligence of Cardinal Furstemberg, at the extra∣ordinary Charge of the French King, having been a considerable time Besieged by the Elector of Brandenburgh, and making a stout Resistance, despairing of Relief, was constrained on the 10th. of October to beat a Parly, and sent out three Officers to treat about Articles of Surrender, which were finally concluded; and Signed on the 12th. under Seventeen Heads, considerably Honoura∣ble to the Garrison; and the same Day, Three undred Men of the Troops of Brandenburgh, Hol∣land, and Munster, took Possession of one of the Gates of the Town, and on the Fifteenth the Garrison, which at the beginning of the Siege con∣sisted of 7000 Men, marched out to the number of 3500, and 1500 remained sick and wounded in the Town. The Governour Count Alsfelt, was carried out in a Litter, and all the Stores and Cannon, &c. were delivered up to the Elector. So that by the Loss of this Town, the French lost their footing in those Parts, and began to think of going into Winter-Quarters, after having in∣damaged those Countries more than Forty milli∣ons can repair, in one Campaign. Whereupon, to be rid of so cruel and wastful a People, the Em∣peror published his Avocatoria, commanding all the French to depart out of his Dominions; when,
on the other hand, Lewis XIV. lay great Taxes to raise Money for his carrying on the next Cam∣paign. We might enlarge upon many other Particu∣lars, to display this Ambitious and Bloodthirsty Monarch, who has been so long the Troubler of Europe, as his League with the Empire, his sol∣liciting them to make no Peace, and encou∣raging them to stand off, by promises of the powerful Diversions he intends to make in the Western Parts. Under the favour of which, his Ambassador at the Port insinuates what they have lost in the East, as we find it set forth at large in the Emperor's Declaration, &c. But we think we have said enough, to give the World a Pro∣spect of this great Leviathan, Who floats on Seas of Blood, with vast desire To out-brave Heav'n, and set the World on fire. But Heaven's Bolts hit sure, whene'er they're aim'd, And oft have Monsters, full as mighty, tam'd. FINIS.
