n733 11771411 48871
A NEVV Protestant Litany. FRom the Race of Ignatius, and all their Colleagues, From all the long Counsels of Bougres and Teagues, And from Papacy Rampant, and all her Intreigues, Libera Nos, &c. From Cobweb-Laun-Charters, from sham-freedom Banters Our Liberty-keepers, and New Gospel Planters, In the trusty kind hands of our great Quo Warrantors, Libera Nos, &C. From High Court Commissions, to Rome to Rejoyn us, From a Rhadamanth Chanc'lour, the Western Judge Minos, Made Head of our Church by new Jure Divino's, Libera Nos, &c. From our great Test Records, cut out into Thrums, From Waste Paper Law, us'd with Pasties and Plums, Magna Charta, Magna Farta, made Fodder for Bums, Libera Nos, &c.
From a new-found Stone-Doublet to th' old Sleeve; of Laun, And all to make Room for the Pope-Lander-Spawn; To see a Babe Born, through Bed-Curtains Close Drawn, Libera Nos, &c. From resolving o're Night, where to lye-in to Morrow, And from cunning Back-door to let Midwife thorow, Eight Months Full-grown Man-Child, Born without Pang or Sorrow. Libera Nos, &c. From a Godfather Pope to the Heir of a Throne; From Three Christian Names to one Sir-name unknown, With a Tyler Milch-Nurse, now the Mother's Milk's gone, Libera Nos, &c. From Gun-Powder-Bonfires, all turned out of play, Not a poor Window Candle dare to give a stoln Ray, But all kept reserv'd for Great Simnels Birth Day, Libera Nos, &c. From Dad Petre Pilots at th' Helm to befriend us, With all Hands that Pope, Turk, or Devil can lend us, And all from a Second Queen Bess to defend us, Libera Nos, &c. From Nuntio's from Rome to consult how to drub The Protestant Hydra by our Hercules Club; And a Warming-Pan-Plot, worse then Celiers Meal-Tub, Libera Nos, &c.
From old Hundred of Thousand Pound Fines under-rated Russels Head for his Common-House-Votes Elevated, And Essex's Razour at Rome Consecrated, Libera Nos, &c. From Sampson-Cord Oaths, snapt asunder with Ease; From No faith in Man, Colemans Mouth with a squeeze Stopt to tell no more Tales of Father Le-chese, Libera Nos, &c. From old Dunkirk sold for a Song and a Dance, The Protestant long-design'd Cause to Advance, By Most Christian Reformers, the Dragoons of France, Libera Nos, &c. From supporting our Church Alamode Magdalano, From Mahomet Monsiuer our new Lord Soldano, And the English Pipes tun'd to French Fistula in ano, Libera Nos, &c. From Tyrconnels Bogtrotters at th' old Trade of Throat-Cutting, From new Conqu'ring Ireland for th' English old footing, And from Sacrament Oaths of North-Heresie Rooting, Libera Nos, &c. From Judges with Epsom and Dudleys Infection, From Knaves in Fools Coats, by Infallible Direction, Raising Heretick Armies for the Roman Protection; Libera Nos, &c.
From threescore thousand Crowns, under Planet malignant Given Loretto's great Lady, that famous Heav'n-Regnant, To purchase no more then a poor Cushion Pregnant, Libera Nos, &c. From a Courage of Steel with Intellects Leaden, From Renouncing Three Crowns, and all for God-Breaden, To follow the Dance of Christain of Sweeden, Libera Nos, &c. From giving our Parliament Writs a withdraw, Our last Game for preventing of Justice, and Law, In hopes of Concealing our dear Cloven Paw, Libera Nos, &c. FINIS. LONDON Printed in the Year MDCLXXXIX.
