S2554 R37365 16412069 105368
THE SENTENCE OF Nathaniel Thompson, VVilliam Pain and John Farewel, Who Received Judgment at the Kings-Bench, Westminster; On the Third of this Instant July: As haveing been Cast at Guild-Hall, for Writing, Printing, and Publishing The Letters & Libels, PURPORTING, That Sir Edmundbury-Godfrey MURTHERED HIMSELF. A Rule of Court having been serv'd on the Marshal of the Kings-Bench, to bring the Bodies of Nathaniel Thompson, John Farewel and Willi∣am Pain, into the Court of Kings-Bench, it was done according∣ly; when as Mr. Attorney pray'd Judgment against them, upon their late Conviction, which being Granted, Mr. Thompson the Counsellour mov∣ed in the behalf of the King, that the Prisoner might have Corporal punish∣ment, and layed open the heinousness of the Fact, how that by Printing and Dispersing those Libells Intitled Letters to Mr. Prance, about the Murther
of Sir Edmundbury-Godfrey, they had Arraigned the Justice of the Nation in a high manner, by going about to make people believe, That Green, Berry and Hill, lately Executed for the Murther of that worthy Gentleman dyed wrongfully, and that they were so far from being sorry for what they had done, that Mr. Thompson, since his Conviction, had published in one of his Intelligences, That he had done nothing whereof he need be asham'd, where∣upon that and another Intelligence were produc'd, and a Paragraph of each of them read, importing to self-Justification; to which, Mr. Thompson pleaded Ig∣norance, saying, They were Printed without his Knowledge; and as for the Two Letters, he said, That he received them upon the credit of Mr. Pain and Mr. Farewel, who were his Neighbours, and that he intended no hurt thereby. To which my Lord Chief Justice replyed, That he had done insuf∣ferable Mischief by Arraigning the Justice of the Nation, thereby to make Forreigners believe that the persons Executed for the Murther dyed fault∣less; and that such Papers being dispersed into all Countries, might induce severl to believe there was no Popish-Plot, but that the Protestants out of Envy to the Papists, had put it upon them, and therefore such things ought not to be suffered; and that as for Farewel, upon his Tryal, he seemed ra∣ther to go about to prove it self-Murther than to express himslf sorry for what he had done, although all the Witnesses he called gave Evidence That they believed Sir Edmundbury-Godfrey was Murthered; and so His Lordship proceeded to repeat many particulars that were given in Evi∣dence upon the Tryal. Thn Mr. Pain's Council moved that he had shew∣ed great sorrow, and that what he had done was by Inadvertency, he hav∣ing been drawn into that Premunire; many Affidavits were likewise pro∣duced in Court to  he Murther was in all likelihood done at Sum∣merset-House. So that in fine, Mr. Justice Jones (after he had declared the heinious∣ness of the Fact) proceeded to give Judgement; which was, That Natha∣niel Thompson, John Farewel, and William Pain, having been Convicted of Trespass and Misdemeanor, the judgement of the Court was, That the two first, Viz. Thompson and Farewel should stand upon the Pillory in the Pallace-Yard, on Wednesday next, between the Hours of Ten and One, by the space of one hour, and to pay One Hundred Pounds each to the King, and to con∣tinue in Prison till it be paid; and as for Pain, by reason of his Submission, he was onely Fined the summ of One Hundred Pounds, and to be Imprison∣ed till the payment thereof; whereupon they were all remanded to the Kings-Bench. Printed for J. Heathcott, 1682▪
