S2736A R31809 12258996 57733
SEAVEN GREAT MATTERS OF NOTE. Ʋidelizet, First, two Petitions of the LORDS and COMMONS to his Majestie: February, 2. 1641. 2. His Majesties Answere to the two Petitions of the Lords and Commons delivered, as aforesaid. 3. His Majesties Consent for the Princesse Maries going to Holland, and the Queen to accompany her thither. 4. Her Majesties Answer to a Message of both Houses. 5. His Majesties Message to the House of Commons. February, 7. 1641. 6. The humble Answere of the Honourable House o Commons to the Kings fast Message, as aforesaid; in defence of the Speech lately spoken by Mr. PYMM. ALSO The humble Petition of many thou∣sands of Courtiers, Citizens, Gentlemens and Trades-mens wives, inhabiting within the Cities of London and Westminster, concerning the staying of the Queenes intended voyage into Holland, with many se∣rious causes and weighty reasons, (which they desire) may induce the Honourable House to detain her Majesty. Printed by R. O. and G. D. for F. Coules.
The Petition of divers Courtiers, Citizens, and Tradesmens wives concernig the staying of the Queenes intended Voyage into Holland. sheweth, THat your petitioners, their Husbands, their Children, and their Families, amounting to many thousand soules, have lived in plentifull and good fashion, by the exercise of seve∣rall Trades, and venting of divers workes: For learning whereof, many of them have served Apprentiships, others taken houses and shops both in the Citie and Suburbs, and also in the Exchanges at very great rents: All depending wholy for the sale of their com∣modities, (which is the maintenance and very existence and being of themselves, their Husbands, and Families) upon the splendor and glory of the English Court, and principally upon that of the Queenes Majesty; By occasion of whose Royall presence we have hitherto had ready utterance for our commodities, and were there∣by enabled to pay currents, and live in good repute: But upon late notice that her Majesty is resolved instantly to depart the Kingdom, we cannot but thereby fore-see an utter cessation & decay of all our Trading; So shall we become utterly disabled to pay our rents, support our selves, or our families; and can apprehend nothing but distraction, penury, and ruine: Or that our eminent and inevitable necessities will produce some violent effect. And your Petitioners have cause to feare that this sudden resolution in her Majestie is oc∣casioned by some just distaste taken at divers unusuall and tumul∣tuous assemblies, to the affright of her Royall person, and at the un∣punisht printing of many licentious and scandalous pamphlets, some covertly, some plainly, wounding her sacred Majesty in the opinion of the vulgar, as an Abbettor or Counsellor of such designes, which are preten∣ded to disturbe the peaceable government both of this Kingdome and Ire∣land: Whereas your Petitioners are confident She was not only a soli∣citous Mediator for the assembling of this gracious Parliament, but that since Her coming into this Kingdome She never did ill office to any par∣ticular Subject, but hath oft been an Instrument of many Acts of mercy and grace, to multitudes of distressed people. And your petitioners likewise considering the great happinesse brought to this Nation in her princely Issue, of which native com∣fort this Nation hath been barren now almost a hundred yeeres; are the more encouraged, Humby to pray, That this Honourable Assemby would give some speedy assu∣rance to her Majesty, that the Anthors and Instigators of such seditious tumults and scandals shall be strictly inquired after, and punish'd; and that shee may re∣ceive such publique vindication by the Parliament, against all such calumners of her sacred Majesty; and give Her that due honour and reverence wee are sure She merits, and joyne with us in Petition for her continuall residence amongst us: whereby she re receiving full assurance of the love and fidelity of Her Subjects in this Kingdome; your Petitioners may with some comfort addresse themselves to Her Majesties compassion of her affectionate people, humbly to pray her stay,, And your Petitioners shall daily pray &c.
TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAIESTIE. The humble Petition of the Lords and Commons now assembled in PARLIAMENT. THe present Evils and Calamities where∣with your Kingdomes are most miserably in∣tangled, the eminent dangers which threaten your Royall person, and all your people, have caused us your most faithfull and obedient sub∣jects, the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament, with thankfulnes to entertaine, and with all earnestnes of affection and endeavour to pursue the gra∣cious proposition and direction which not long since we have re∣ceived from your Majestie: and we have therupon taken into our most serious consideration, the wayes and meanes of securing the safety of your royall person, preserving the Honour and Authori∣ty of your Crowne, removing all jeasousies betwixt your Majestie and your people, suppressing the rebellion in Ireland, preventing the feares and dangers in this Kingdome, and the mischievous Designes of those who are enemies to the peace of it. And that we may with more comfort and security accomplish our duties herein, we most humbly beseech your Majestie, That you will be pleased sorth-with to put the Tower of London, and all other Forts and whole Militia of the Kingdome, into the hands of such persons as shall bee recommended unto your Majestie by both Houses of Parliament, which they assure themselves will bee a hopefull entrance into those courses, which (through Gods bles∣sing
and  apprehension betwixt your Majestie and your People; and for establishing and enlarging the Honour, greatnesse, and power of your Majestie and royall posterity, and for the restoring and confirming the peace and happinesse of loyall subjects in all your Dominions. And to this our most necessary Petition we in all humilitie ex∣pect your Majesties speedy and gracious answer, the great distra∣ctions and distempers of the Kingdome, not admitting any delay. To the KINGS most excellent Majestie. The humble Petition of the Lords and Commons now assembled in PARLIAMENT. Sheweth, THat whereas your Majesty by a Message sent to both Houses of Parliament, signified an apprehension of some Treasona∣ble matter to have beene committed by the Lord Kymbol∣ton, Mr. Hollis, Sir Arthur Hazlerig, Mr. Pym, Mr. Hampdem, and Mr. Strode; and thereby declared your Majesties intention to proceed against them in an unquestionable way. We the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, did make our humble Petition to your Majesty, to beseech your Majestie to give directions that your Parliament might be informed before Tues∣day then next ensuing, what proofe there was against them, that accordingly there might be legall and Parliamentary proceeding against them, whereby they might be brought to condigne pu∣nishment, if guilty; or discharged from so heavy an accusation if innocent: And whereas your Majestie was graciously pleased Answer to Petition to express your good approbation of the Hou∣ses for the speedy proceeding against the persons in that petiti∣on mentioned; yet your Majestie gave no other satisfaction to their desire then this; That your Majestie held it necessary, lest a new mistake should breed more delayes that it should bee resolved, whether your Majestie were bound in respect of privi∣ledges to proceed against them by impeachment in that Parlia∣ment, or to be left at libertie to prefer an Indictment at the Com∣mon law, in the usuall way to have your choice of either; and we finding still that there is no legall and Parliamentary procee∣dings
against them, and that they still lie under the burden of that high Charge. We think it our duty once againe to beseech your Maiesty to give direction, that your parliament may be informed before Friday next, what proofe there is against them, that accor∣dingly they may be called to a legall Triall, it being the undoubted right and priviledge of parliament, That no member of parlia∣ment can be proceded against without the consent of parliament. And this we most humbly conceive our selves obliged to aske, it being no lesse agreeable with Justice, to have the innocency of parties unjustly charged, manifested, then to bring the nocent to their iust puishment. His Majesties answer to two Petitions of the Lords and Commons delivered, Febr. 2. 1641. HIs Maiesty having well considered of the two severall Peti∣tions, presented unto him on Wednesday the second of this moneth, from both Houses of Parliament, and being desirous to expresse how willing he is to apply a remedy, not only to your dangers, but to your doubts and feares; he therefore, to that Peti∣tion which concernes the Forts and Militia of this Kingdome, returnes this answere; That when he shall know the extent of power which is intended to be established in those persons, whom you desire to be the Commanders of the Militia in severall Coun∣ties; and likewise to what time it shall be limitted, that no power shall be executed by his Maiesty alone, without the advice of Parliament, Then he will declare, That (for the securing you from all dan∣gers of iealousies of any) His Maiesty will be content to put in all the places, both of Forts and Militia in the severall Counties, such persons as both the Houses of parliament shall either approve or recommend, unto him, so that you declare before unto his Maie∣stie, the names of the persons whom you approve or recommend: unlesse such persons shall be named, against whom he shall have iust and unquestionable exceptions. To the other petition, concerning the members of either House, His Maiesty returnes this answer, That he once conceived, that he had ground enough to accuse them, so now his Maiesty findes as good cause wholly to desert any prosecution of them.
And for a further testimony of his Majesties reall Intention to∣wards all his loving Subjects (some of whom haply may be invol∣ved in some unknown and unwilling errors.) For better composing and setling all feares and jealousies, of what kind soever, His Maie∣stie is ready to grant as free and generall a Pardon for the full con∣tentment of all his loving Subiects, as shall by the approbation of both Houses of Parliament be thought cōvenient for that purpose. His Majesties consent for the Princesse Maries going to Holland; And her Majesty to accompany her thither. HIs Majesty being very much pressed by the States Ambassa∣dor to send the Princesse his Daughter immediately into Holland; and being likewise earnestly desired by his royall Consort, the Queen, to give her Maiesty leave to accompany her Daughter thither; hath thought fit to consent to both desires, and to make this his Maiesties resolution knowne to his Parliament. Her Majesties Answer to a Message of both Houses. THe Queene having received a message from both houses of Parliament by the Earle of Newport and the Lord Seymoure, intimating unto her, that she had bin told that the House of Com∣mons had an intention to accuse her of high Treason, and that Arti∣cles to that purpose had bin shewed unto her, returns this answer, That there was a generall report of an Accusation intended against her, but she never saw any Articles in writing, and having no certain Author, either for the one, or for the other, shee gave little credit thereunto, and much lesse now being assured from the House of Commons that never any such thing came into their thoughts. Nor will she believe they would lay an aspersion upon her, who hath ever bin very unapt so far to misconstrue the actions of any one person, and much more the proceedings of Parliament, and shall at all times wish a happy understanding betweene the King and his people.
His Majesties Message to the House of Commons, FEBRƲARY 7. 1641. HIS Majesty taking notice of a Speech, pretending in the Title to have beene delivered by Master Pym in a Confe∣rence, and prined by Order of the House of Commons, in which it is affirmed, That since the stop upon the Ports against all Irish Papists by both Houses, many of the chiefe Commanders, now in the head of the Rebels, have beene suffered to passe by His Majesties immediate Warrant; And being very certaine of having used extreme caution in the granting of Passeports into Ireland; So that He conceives, either this Paper not to have beene so delivered and printed as it pretences, or this House to have re∣ceived some mis-information; His Majesty would be resolved, Whether this Speech were so delivered and printd, and if it were, would have this House to review upon what Informations that particular was grounded, that either that may be found upon re-examination to have been false, and both this House and his Majesty injured by it; Or that his Majestie may know by what meanes, and by whose fault, His Au∣thority hath beene so highly abused, as to be made to conduce to the assistance of that Rebellion, which Hee so much detests and abhors, and that He may see Himselfe fully vindicated from all reflections of the least suspicion of that kinde. The Humble Answer of the Honourable House of Commons to the Kings Maties. last Message, FEB. 7. 1641. In defence of the Speech lately spoken by Mr. PYM. YOur Majesties most loyall and faithfull Subjects, the Com∣mons now assembled in Parliament, have taken into their serious consideration the message received from your Majesty the 7th of this instant February, And doe acknowledge that the Speech therein mentioned to be delivered by Master Pym
in a Conference, was printed by their Order, and that what was therein delivered, was agreeable to the sense of the House: And touching that passage wherein it is affirmed, that since the stop upon the Ports against Irish Papists, by both Houses, many of the chiefe Commanders now in the head of the Rebels, have beene suffered to passe by your Majesties immediate Warrants. They present your Majesty with this their humble Answer. THat they have received divers advertisements concerning severall persons, Irish and other Papists, which have obtained your Majesties immediate Warrants for their passing into Ireland, since the Order of restraint of both Houses; some of which, as they have beene informed, (since their comming into Ireland,) have joyned with the Rebells, and beene Commandrs amongst them, and some others have beene stayed, and are yet in safe custody: Particularly, the Lord Delvin, and foure other per∣sons in his company, whereof one is thought to be a Priest. One Collonel Butler, brother to the Lord Montgarat, now in rebellion, and Sir George Hamilton, all which are Papists, and one other (as is reported) being sonne of the Lord Nettersfield, whose father and brother are both in rebellion. The particular names of others we have not yet received, but doubt not but upon examination they may be discovered. And your Majesties most faithfull Subjects are very sorry, that the extreme caution which your Majesty hath used, hath beene so ill seconded with the diligence and faithfulnesse of you Mini∣nisters. And that your Royall Authority should be so highly abused, although (as it was exprest in that Speech by Master Pym) we believe, it was by the procurement of some evill instruments too neere your Royall Person, without your Majesties knowledge and intention. And we beseech yuor Majesty to take such course, that not onely your Honour may be vindicated for the time past, but your Kingdome may be secured from the like mischief for the time to come. Read, and by Vote upon the Question, assented unto. FINIS.
