s56 09614862 43817
ENGLANDS UNANIMOUS SENC To the present PARLIAMENT. HEnce sordid Fear, our spirits shall not droop, We will no more to such distraction stoop. It shan't be said we have dejected hearts, But that with courage we do act our parts: Heroickly our Spirits we'l advance, Despise the Pope and potent King of France. Their politick designs can't take effect Unless we suffer't by a strange neglect: Our sacred Soveraign for our content Hath furnishd us with a New Parliament; Who doubtless will make it their greatest care To keep our feet out of a Popish snare; They will with diligence dissolve our fear, No Popish Raskal must inhabit here. Those Fly-blown crew of wicked Popish Elves May now for pastime go and hang themselves: Hence then with speed ye Fire-brands of Hell, With Loyal Protestants ye shall not dwell; Amongst the Sheep there is no room for Goats, Nor here for Papists that would cut our Throats.
Therefore abandon us, flie to the Pope, Or else your necks shall stretch in Hempen Rope. With one accord we gladly now rejoyce, And thank the Nation for so rare a choice Of Knights and Burgesses for e'ry Town, Which will we hope preserve our King and Crown. And let nothing in competition stand Against the good and safeguard of our Land: In order thereunto we beg they may Observe these following Maxims e'ry day: After that happy day wherein you meet And are well seated in your Judgment-seat, Send for those Traitors now within the Tower, And let them have their merits by your Power: Forthwith to Justice do such Traitors bring, That dare presume against our gracious King To act such Villanies with base consent, As to subvert our happy Government. When that is done, let all those Popish Knaves That have endeavour'd for to make us Slaves, Receive this sentence with a joint consent, From England a perpetual Banishment. Next unto this, see how our Fleet doth stand, Let not a Rebel have in it Command; Let no suspected person have a Power, We shall be then in danger e'ry hour. When this is done, and all our Fleet secure, The Force of French or Turk we can endure. And for our safety, pray secure our Ports, See who are made Commanders in our Forts; Let none be there but such as are well known To be true Subjects to our King alone;
Such as have courage and are known to be True Protestants, of faithful Loyalty; And will with diligence discharge their trust, And prove to King and Country True and Just: Then may we say, we fear no Foraign parts, Nor Popish Blood-hounds with their Magick arts. After our Sea Ports thus in safety stands, And are intrusted under good Commands, Then to secure us from all further harms, See who are made Commanders now at Arms; Let Horsleach Papists all be quite debarr'd Of any Office in our Martial Guard; For if they once should come into the Field, To their commanding power we must yield: Like greedy Wolves they'd seize us as their Prey, And murder Protestants both night and day: Thus shall we be tormented at their Will, Until of Loyal blood they've suck'd their fill. Then will the Loyal Protestants decay, When once the Popish Blood-hounds bear the sway. To save us then from dangers eminent, You are our Guides, most Noble Parliament: Our Body Politick is much diseas'd, And only by your Power can be eas'd; It's only you that can our pain descry, And ease the Torture of our Malady: When by your skill the trembling Pulse you feel Of this our weak and tottering Common-weal, You soon will find our body Politick Of an Infectious Pain lies very sick; And therefore must be Purg'd with care and speed, And you are they that must perform this Deed.
Purge er'e vein let not our Loyal blood Be putrifid with Papists, Hells choice brood: Then may we all unanimously say, A  our Foes, blest be that happy day Wherein our Parliament did first appear, To be so kind thus to dissolve our fear; Then may we say we are in hopes to see Not only Months but Years of Jubilee, The just complaints of a decaying Trade Which formerly with sorrow we have made Must then be buried, none can then complain, For Trade will flourish in our Land again. For which I wee'l render, as we ought to do, Thanks to our Royal Soveraign and you; Whom God preserve from dangers, and defend The Faith of Protestants; and so we end. By J. S. Gent. FINIS. LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Harris at the Stationers-Arms in the Piazza under the Royall Exchange in Cornhill. 1680.
