S838 12389072 60948
1. La Maintenon 2. Scarron 3. Ragotin 4. La Rancune 5. La Rapiniere F. H. van. Hove. sculp:
SCARRON INCENS'D: OR, His Appearing to Madam de Maintenon, His late Wife, Reproaching her Amours with LEWIS the Great, Present King of France. And discovering several SECRETS of that COURT, Written by a Lady in French. LONDON, Printed for Randal Taylor, near Stationers-Hall, 1694.
TO THE READER. I Make you this small Present, not through any Inducements of Vanity, nor to set up for an Author not having the Honour to be known to ye. Your Divertise∣ment is my Design, and
to give you a faithful Ac∣count of some Particulars of the Court of France, always abounding in A∣morous Intrigues, which merit Attention, and the Pains of committing 'em to White Paper, as com∣ing from the most Polite Part of the World, and where all the Sweets of Life are tasted with the greatest Pleasure. The Subject of my Story is a Real Adventure
that lately befell Madam de Maintenon, as you will find by the Sequel. Scar∣ron appear'd to her with a pensive and louring Air, and upbraided her with the whole Conduct of her Life, but more-especially with her Amorous Cor∣respondence with Lewis the Great. The Persons I have made choice of to accompany his Ghost into this World, will make you believe, perhaps, the Story to be Fabulous; but my
dear Friend, let not that infuse into yee any Senti∣ments of Incredulity. For I only mention the same Persons which the Mar∣chioness of Maintenon nam'd her self, in recount∣ing one of her Dreams to a Lady of my intimate Acquaintance, for whom she has a passionate Kind∣ness, and in whose Breast she lodges all her Secrets, who was pleas'd to impart to me the knowledge of it in these Words, That
she found her self in a deep melancholy, for having seen and spoken to M. Scarron, who was attended by his Friends, La Rapiniere, La Rancune, and Ragou∣tin. You are not ignorant that these Illustrious Per∣sonages were Famous He∣ro's in the Romances of that Author, and that he mentions 'em every day, as well as our Heroess; for she had also her impor∣tant
Shares in his Con∣versations, for the Pa∣stime of the Court. More∣over, the Pilgrimages and Penances which the Mar∣chioness has lately under∣taken, may be look'd up∣on as sensible Proofs of the Truth of her Vision; those Hardships being thought a sort of Exor∣cisms to send Scarron to a Place where he may be better employ'd then to take notice of his Wife's Behaviour in this World:
for 'tis thought he is still in Purgatory, and is afraid his Wife will follow him thither. Which is the rea∣son that the poor Lady is continually at her Pray∣ers; especially at St. Cyr, whither I have the Ho∣nour frequently to accom∣pany her, as being very much in her Favour. These are the prevail∣ing Reasons why I durst not give this History to the Booksellers in France,
being assur'd that they would never have printed it, by reason of certain Passages in it that nearly concern the Court; and you know 'tis a dange∣rous thing to have Potent Enemies. Therefore I resolv'd to send it into Holland, in hopes it would there be welcome: for every Bo∣dy has an itching Ear for what passes in this King∣dom, and more parti∣cularly,
all Men gape after the Secrets of the Louvre. If you meet with any Faults in reading this small History, be so kind as to remember, that 'twas a Lady that wrote it, pur∣suing partly such Adven∣tures as she had seen with her own Eyes, and partly to deceive her solitary Half Hours. In the mean time, I should be over∣joy'd to hear that she had gain'd her Point; which
was, to please your Fan∣cies with telling Truth, and which for that reason occasion'd her Gadding abroad: assuring you, that merely that Satisfaction would make me gladly to forget the Trouble I have had to keep her secret in this Country.
SCARRON Appearing TO Madam de Maintenon, &c. THe Posture of the French Af∣fairs at this day, obliges the Most Christian King, as every body knows, to keep fair with the Northern Crowns; from whom as he may reap great Advantages, so his Ma∣jesty neglects nothing to preserve their Amity. Of which, his Officious Se∣dulity which he made appear in the magnificent Entertainments that he gave the Prince of Danemark, during his stay in Paris, was a sufficient proof: and it may be said, that the Court of France out-did it self at that time; there
being nothing omitted to engage that Prince, and lock him to her In∣terests. To this purpose Madam de Maintenon, and all the rest of the Court Ladies, had Orders from his Majesty, to caress him with all Imaginable Kindness; and therefore to charm the Prince's Youth∣ful Heart, she resolv'd to appear in a Ball, which the Duke of Orleance pre∣par'd for 'em in the Palace-Royal. This Ball had been preceded by a most Sumptuous Banquet, to which the Prince of Danemark, Monseigneur the Dauphin, the Princes and Princesses were invited. Several Healths went briskly about; and the King's, and that of the Princes who were Kind to him in the Present War, in not entring into the Confederacy against him, were drank first: after which the Dauphin's Health, and the Healths of all the Princes of the Blood went round, and then the Prince of Danemark's, and that of the Young Princess of ***** his Mistress. Presently after this, the Duke of Or∣leance, whispering to the Prince, gave
him to understand the extream Joy of his Majesty and the whole Court to see so perfect a Union, and so strict an Amity between the two Crowns: to which he added, that the most prevail∣ing means to render that Amity and that Union eternal and and inviolable, was to see one day his Royal Highness wedded to a Princess of France. The Banquet being over, they pre∣par'd for Dancing, and the Princesses appear'd with that Pomp and Magni∣ficence, that the like had never been seen. The Duke of Orleance perceiving that the Company thicken'd by reason of a great number of Lords and Ladies that had not been invited, caus'd the Apartment, where he was together with the Princes and Princesses to be shut, and left the rest of the Croud in the New Gallery of the Palace, with the Musick, where they made up a second Ball, and where several Ladies of Qua∣lity were habited in Masquerade. In the Prince's and Princess's Apartment, the Dutchess of Chartres being Queen of the Ball, took out the Prince of Dane∣mark
several times to dance. Nor was any thing so charming as that Young Beauty, the Lustre of whose Jewels drew upon her the Eyes of all the Assembly. Madam de Maintenon, whose Care did not a little contribute to the Good Order which was there observ'd, was taken out in her Turn by the Prince to dance, but she refus'd him, and re∣pay'd the Honour which he did her with a Profound Reverence, without stirring out of her Place. She answer'd the Prince of Danemark, who address'd to her, That her Character of Governess of St. Cyr, would not permit her so much Youthfulness; That she was there only as a Spectatrix, for that she had a long time ago, bid adieu to the Pleasures of the World. Nor was her Answer to be wonder'd at, for in truth that Lady is at this day the Greatest Pattern of Piety in France. However it were, never were the French Ladies so forwardly eager to make their Magnificence glitter in the
Eyes of Foreign Princes, as they were at that time. Toward Midnight several Pleasing Metamorphoses took place, e∣very one appearing in disguize and Masquerade. The Prince of Danemark disguiz'd himself like a Moresco Slave, attended by Eight Lords that accom∣pany'd him in the same disguize. The Prince's Patron, taking upon him to personate a Bashaw, presented him to all the Ladies of the Court, to see who would buy him, which occasion'd the most pleasing Pastime in the World: and twelve young English Lords sent by King James, appear'd at the same time like Quakers, which made all the Company Laugh, and was an Extra∣ordinary Addition to the Spectatours delight. After so many various Metamorpho∣ses, at length appear'd a Lord disguiz'd like a Devil. Nothing ever appear'd so hideously dreadful: the Dismal Ap∣pearance was so terrible to the Ladies, but more especially the Dutchess of Chartres, that they were forc'd to take a world of Pains before they could allay
the Commotions of her Fear; and in re∣gard of her Condition, not so seasonable for such sort of Spectacles, they were in terrible Fears that she would have mis∣carry'd: but it so fell out, that she was more afraid then hurt. Madam de Maintenon by this time per∣ceiving 'twas past one a Clock, retir'd first of all Incognito; and being got into her Chamber, she call'd La Caverna, one of her Damsels, who spread her Toilet, and brought her all her Accoutrements to pass away the Night. Now Madam de Maintenon is a Woman proper and delicately shap'd, plump, full Visag'd, lovely Eyes, and about five and forty Years of Age, but still appearing Young; Learned and extreamly Witty, well vers'd in the Lives of the Saints, but particularly in that of St. Lewis, to which she applies her self with extra∣ordinary Attention, reading in it every day an Hour or two before she goes to Bed. By such Pious Exercises as these she has render'd her self worthy the tender∣ness
of the Holy Society: and Lewis the XIV. from whom the Merit of this Lady could not be conceal'd, has vouchsaf'd her both his Heart and his Affections, which gives us a perfect De∣monstration of the nice and delicate Judgment of that Prince: as having never ty'd himself but to Persons of her Character. Consider him in the Choice of his first Mistress, Mademoiselle de Machini, who was by no means hand∣some, and had the worst Air in the World, but she was infinitely witty; and they that had heard her but speak, forgot all her other Defects. Made∣moiselle de la Valiere, had no less the A∣scendant over the Heart of this Monarch, even to the raising of Violent Passions in his Breast. But let us leave this Prince to his Tender Affections, and set what became of our Heroess Madam de Maintenon? After some moral Conside∣rations, she took up a Book, entituled, Reflections upon the Mercy of God, by Ma∣dam de Valiere. This devout Damsel having written the most curious Thoughts that ever were, and with Ex∣pressions enough to move the most
worldly minded; in those Meditations it was that our Pious Marchioness was Exercising her Thoughts, when she heard a noise in her Chamber. She thought at first it had been Diana her little Bitch; but looking behind her, she saw a Man with a Night-Cap upon his Head, wrap't up in a Winding-Sheet. Who should it be but her Husband Scarron, that Famous Author, whose touring Genius, and his Verses, have made such a noise upon the Earth, and who is still no less good Company in the Kingdom of Pluto, accompany'd with three of his Friends, Rancune, carrying a Folio, en∣titl'd, [The Annals of Hell, wherein are contain'd all the most Secret Actions of Mortals.] La Rapiniere, who carry'd the Contract of Marriage before God and their Consciences, pass'd between Lewis XIV. King of France and Navarr, sirnam'd God's Gift, and Frances d'Au∣bigne, Widow of Mr. John Scarron: And Ragotin, who carry'd the Flambeau; but he, out of Respect, retir'd into the next Gallery. Madam de Maintenon, who was not a little dismay'd to see so much Funeral Pomp, would fain have
hid her self in her Closet, had not the Ghost stopp'd her, crying out, Whither so fast, Madam? Pray stay here a lit∣tle, and hearken to the grievous Com∣plaints of the most Unfortunate of all Men. Since the Fatal Sisters cut the Thread of my Life, and my descent into the Lower Regions, I have done nothing but pin'd away, being all along tormen∣ted with Despair, and unconceivable Pangs of Grief, to hear every day, by all that thick and threefold arrive in our Territories from the Middle, Sides, and both Ends of Europe, the wicked Life you lead, and the Mischief you have been the cause of, by your dangerous and per∣nicious Counsels. 'Tis the Discourse of all the Infernal Court; there is nothing talk'd of but your Name upon the River Styx, and you are the Mirth for the most serious Souls in their Six-penny Passages by that Black Water. You have ut∣terly confounded my Reputation, to my irreparable Damage, in regard I am frequently in the Societies of the Poets, who are the rankest Scoffers in the World; and as often in the Assem∣blies of the Philosophers, no less Saty∣rical,
and full of their Girds and Sar∣casms. One day, as I was musing for some Thoughts proper for a certain Copy of Verses which Proserpine had commanded me to make, in Honour of Vertuous Women that had been always Constant to their Husbands, I flung out of that same dreary Academy, dull and morose, and not half so witty as I was wont to be in this World. Upon that, I walk'd a Turn or two in the Elysian Field to refresh my Brains, where Pluto met me, and swore to me, like a Beau of an in∣cens'd Deity, that as soon as ever he had yee in his Clutches, he would thrust yee into Tartarus, the most dreadful Place in all his Dominions, and there excru∣ciate yee with all the most exquisite Torments that your Crimes have me∣rited. I was in a terrible Agony to hear him pronounce so dismal a Sen∣tance. Thereupon, I besought him to grant me Audience, to the end I might obtain the liberty to give you a Visit, on purpose to admonish yee to alter your extravagant course of Life, and to re∣pent betimes, in order to your avoid∣ing Eternal Punishment. And now
that Tenderness, all that is left, and in∣deed the more Noble part, which I al∣ways had for yee, has made me take this long Journey, with three of my Friends: Anaximenes, one o our Philosophers, ha∣ving given us Air, as the Principal of all things, that we might appear Corpo∣real. Oh, Sir, (ery'd Madam de Maintenon,) how am I surpriz'd at the cruel Reproaches which you cast upon me! Miserable Crea∣ture that I am, what have I done, to be thus expos'd to the Anger of a Deity! Nothing can equal my Pains, nor the unfortunate Condition to which I am reduc'd: Heav'n and Earth conspire against me, and my Name, it seems, is the Sport of Hell. What a pretty Art, Madam, you have to counterfeit and disguise all your In∣triegues? but there is nothing conceal'd from us, in the Inferiour Regions. I will shew you in this Book, what you would be very unwilling to have known concerning your Amours, and all the other Particulars of your Life. Oh, — Sir, (reply'd Madam Maintenon,) you may perhaps be very much deceiv'd: 'Tis a long time since the Charms of this World have had any more then a feeble Operation over me; God having infus'd it into me, to betake my self to a more satis∣factory Retirement, I mean, the beautiful Abbey of St. Cyr; to which I dedicate all
the Days of my Life with a Pleasure no way interrupted by the fading Allurements of the World, that enchant others without Intermission. How ill grounded and unjust are all your Reproaches! I beseech yee, tell me, what mean yee by those Amours, and all those Gallantries that supply your daily converse with Merriment and Disdain, with∣in those gloomy Mansions where you now abide? I have heard you hitherto with a great deal of Patience; but I must tell yee, I look upon my self as much abus'd; and could a Scandalum Magnaium reach yee, I should make yee sensible of it; for I look upon my Conduct to be Exemplary, and that there is no fault to be found with me, as being the Model and Pattern by which so many young Ladies and Gentlewomen of Quality are to regulate and square their Lives and Conversations. I am well inform'd, Madam, (reply'd Scar∣ron) who put it into the King's Head to erect that same What de  of St. Cyr, and to do several other things prejudicial to his Honour, and the Repose of his Kingdom. The King hearkens to your Advice, and you are she that guides the Chariot of his Coun∣sels, and his Government. Yet all the World too apparently sees, that all his Conquests are hardly able to support him. I remember I have observ'd in History, that Hercules, who was once the most Illustrious and most ous of all the Heros of Antiquity, after
all his unparalell'd Atchievements and Ex∣ploits, at length became the Slave of Wo∣men. His Love for Omphale, Queen of Lydia, was so violent, as to make him ex∣change his Club for a Distaff, and spin in Petticoats among her Maids, only that he might have the opportunity to gaze upon her Beauty, and the Honour to be her Waiting-Woman. We read in the Histories of France, that several of our Princes would have been happy, had they not suffer'd themselves to be bewitch'd and possess'd by the Love of Women. 'Tis a Softness that effeminates the Courage of a Hero, and extinguishes the Lustre of his sublimest Qualities. Though you, Sir, in the Heighth of your T'other-World-Gravity, (reply'd Madam de Maintenon) would fain make it out, That 'tis a Weakness for a Prince to love our Sex; yet we cannot forbear being so vain as to boast of it, when we make our selves the domineering Mistresses of a Heart so tran∣scending in Value. There is nothing so charming as to Reign, and for a Woman to see her self the Depository of all the Secrets and Favours of a Court; to preside, as it were, in Council, and to dispose of the good or bad Fortune of the Courtiers. If all your Accusations were true, you had some ground for what you say. But lay aside these mo∣rose Thoughts; you wrong the Magnani∣mous Heart, and Great Soul of our Monarch; nor are you acquainted with his Humour,
while you subject his Absolute Will to Fe∣male Controul. 'Tis true, he vouchsafes me some Proofs of his Esteem, in Acknowledg∣ment of some Services that I have done him.— I see, Madam, (said Scarron) by your Dis∣courses, that you take it for a Celestial Ho∣nour to be belov'd by a King, and to find that all your Services are not repay'd with Ingratitude. But here it is that I must tax yee with a rank Oblivion of that Faith and Oath which you so solemnly swore to me, before God and Men, That you would never —never forget me after my Death; never— have any more Traffick with the World. But I find now, that you are no less inveigl'd and transported with the Vanity and Plea∣sures of it, then a Girl of Eighteen: and that the dazling Glitter of a Crown has made yee forget your Extraction; as being beholding to America for Primitive Day-light, and the first Minutes of your Life. 'Twas enough for you to have been contented with the Ho∣nour which I did yee, when I raisd yee from the Dust of abject Meanness, and matchd yee to our Illustrious Family, the most An∣cient of all the Scarrons in Paris. 'Tis true (reply'd Madam de Maintenon) that the Obligations which you heap'd upon me were infinite; and I must as sincerely protest to yee, That my first Knowledge of the King was extremely Innocent. You know that after your decease, I kept my
dark Chamber as disconsolate as the Ephe∣sian Matron. But I was low, and knew not which way i'th' World to turn me: so that after I had long mus'd upon my sorrowful Destiny, I resolv'd to look out for a Service; and one of my Friends promis'd to procure me a Place to wait upon a Lady, if I would go into Portugal: which Damsel liv'd at that time with Madam de Montespan; with whom I was often admitted to Chat, when I went to visit my Friend, who did all she could to bring me into the good liking of her Mistress. One day that I discours'd with the Lady about Indifferent Matters, I per∣ceiv'd her to be well enough pleas'd with my Company; which infus'd into me so much Confidence, as modestly to beseech her to recommend me to some Person of Qua∣lity. How! Mademoiselle, cry'd she, would you go to Service? — Most gladly, said I, — for I can assure yee, without any Hyperbole, I was so cast down for loss of You, that I was for any thing in an honest way. At the same time, Madam de Montespan frequently receiv'd Letters from the King who then, and after that, most tenderly lov'd her. Being indispos'd one Evening, she pray'd me to answer him. I obeyed her, but not without difficulty, as thinking my self not fit to write to a Mo∣narch. This Modesty of mine was quickly perceiv'd by the King, who is infinitely Witty; and next Morning he ask'd of his
Mistress why she had not writ to him? She answer'd, That she did according to Custom, the Pleasure of writing to him being too charming for her to neglect it. Ha! Madam (says His Majesty, laughing) the Complai∣sance of the Fair Sex is always acceptable to me; but tell me truly, who was it that did you that piece of Service? Madam de Mon∣cespan answer'd without Ceremony, that I compos'd the Letter, and she copied it. From that moment, I tell you freely, His Majesty hath always evidenc'd a great Pas∣sion for me. Here is also the Copy of the first Letter which His Majesty wrote to me. The King's Letter to Madame de Maintenon. I Did not believe, most Incomparable Lady that after I had seen all the Charming Ob∣jes of the Court, there had been any thing in the World that could have touch'd me so sensibly. The strong Impressions which your rare Qua∣lities have made upon me, convince me, and accordingly I speak it sincerely, That a King would be advanc'd to the highest pitch of Hap∣piness, were he as much beloved by you as  desires. Do not then oppose your self my Fairest to that which may render me happy; and be firmly perswaded, that never any Man was so passionately in Love as I. The Pledges which I design to give you, my most An table Lady of a Love so sincere and tender, are of a very
high Value, and merit your most tender Af∣fections. The Crown and Scepter which I lay at your Feet, my Aderable Lady, are sensible Proofs of the high Passion which I entertain for you, Farewell, my dearest Dear. And to engage me further (continues Madam Maintenon) his Majesty advanc'd me to the Quality of Lady-Governess to the Duke de Maine, his Brother the Count de Vexin, and the Mademoiselles de Tours and Nantes. You cannot imagine what trouble I had to resist all these obliging Me∣thods which his Majesty made use of, to bring me to be what I am. To say the truth, An Ambition to re my self Glorious and Fam'd in the World, cancell'd all the Impressions which my Duty, or Marriage-Covenant, had laid upon me; but I love you still, in spite of Death, which hath made a Separation betwixt us: And the greatest part of my Conversation with the King, is, upon the Loss I have sustain'd of such an Husband, who was the Glory of all the Wits of his Age. All those Arguments which you bring, Madam, (replies Scarron) to make your Inno∣cence appear, don't justifie you in the least; for you are still a faithless Woman, and I am unhappy to hear you continually talk'd of: The Publick takes no notice of your private Treaty of Marriage, of which, look you, here is a True Copy.
Scarron calls upon Rapiuicre, and taking the Contract of Marriage, reads it before Madam de Maintenon. The Contract of the Private Marriage be∣twixt Lewis XIV. King of France and Navarr, sirnam'd, The Gift of God, and Frances d'Aubigne, Marchioness of Maintenon. THE Council of Conscience belonging to Lewis XIV. sirnamed, The Gift of God, having most wisely consider'd that the said Prince, together with the Dauphine, hath sufficiently provided the Crown of France with Heirs, so that there's no reason to fear that it may fall to a Daughter, or that the Family of Bourbon should be extinguish'd for want of Heirs Males. And moreover, there being no Princess in Europe upon whom his Majesty casts his Eyes, in or∣der to a second Marriage; and his Ma∣jesty besides thinking himself of such an Age, as it is not convenient for him to med∣dle any more with the Affairs of the World, because of the particular Care which he de∣signs to take for the Quiet of his Conscience, and the Salvation of his Soul, by sacrificing unto God, from his Heart, all the criminal Passions which have turmoil'd him from his Youth, till now.
These weighty Considerations prevail'd upon his Majesty, with the Approbation of his Confessor, to cast his Eyes upon Frances d'Aubigné, the Honestest, most Vertuous, and most Pious Woman of the Age, that he might contract a Secret Mar∣riage with her; by virtue whereof, those Parties are inseparably united together be∣fore God, and Holy Mother Church: And thereupon, Lewis XIV. promises henceforth to renounce all Commerce which he hath, had, or might have with other Mistresses in time to come, and to acknowledge Frances de Anbigné, during the rest of his Life, for his true and lawful Spouse, to love her tenderly, and treat her with the same Respect as he did the late Queen Mary Therese, of happy Memory. On the other side, Frances d'Aubigné promises before God; and Holy Mother Church, to be Faithful to his Majesty, even to her Death; to Love and Obey him as a Faithful Spouse ought to do her Husband. His Majesty declares further, That on the Day of his Marriage he presents Frances d'Aubigné, his future Spouse, with the Mar∣quisate of Maintenon, that she may carry the Title thereof during her Life; and doth also promise to found a Nunnery; under the Title of The Ladies of St. Cyr, whereof she shall be Directress.
The said Frances d'Abvigné doth further engage, in consideration of the Honour which the King hath conferr'd upon her, by advancing her to the Dignity of the Queens of France, to endeavour with all imaginable Zeal, by the Assistance of the Reverend Father La Chaise, to extirpate the Hugonot-Heresie, whereby she may bring the Blessing of God upon his Ma∣jesty's glorious Reign, so that all France may have cause to rejoyce in the happy Choice which his Majesty hath made of such a vertuous Spouse. Amen. You see, Madam, (says Scarron) that your Honour is not preserv'd by this Method: All the World look upon you for all this as a Harlot; and speak of your Amours with the King, as they do of those of his other Mistresses. Father La Chaise, formerly my Friend, hath persuaded you, that by this secret Treaty of Marriage, your Converse with the King would make less Noise; but his Design was, to destroy Madam de Mon∣tespan's Interest, who was his Enemy, and by this means he surmounts those Difficul∣ties which stand in the way of his Designs, and at the same time secures himself of the King's Favour. And besides those specious Titles, of being Lady Abbess of St. Cyr, and Marchioness of Maintenon, both Eminent Qualities,
make a great Noise in the World, and draw upon you insensibly all that People say of you. Ha! (cry'd Madam de Maintenon, in anger) who could reveal to you this Secret? You told me, Sir, that you hear News every day from this World, by those who arrive in yours: It could be none but the Marquis de Louvois: He acquainted you with this Contract of Marriage. Treacherous Villaian! This is but a sorry Acknowledgment of his Master's Royal Boun∣ties, who spar'd nothing to raise his For∣tune to the heighth, first Minister and Secre∣tary of State, Commander and Chancellor of the Royal Order: Are not these very Ho∣nourable Titles? besides a thousand other Advantages which he receiv'd from his Ma∣jesty, who honours him still every day by a continual Regret for the Loss of him. It is true, the King has great need of his Assistance in this present Juncture, to bear a part of the Fatigue which he endures by this present War. This War, Madam, (answer'd Scarron) which the King maintains with so much heat, appears very unjust before our Judgee of the Lower World, and against the Sen∣timents of all disinterested Persons. That Prince having broke the Truce which he made with the Dutch for Twenty Years, banish'd all the Hugonots out of his King∣dom, revok'd the Edict of France, and acted a
thousand other things contrary to the Peace of a State. And not without good reason (continues Scarron) a part of those Mischiefs are charge∣able upon you, supported by Father La Chaise, and the Archbishop of Paris, the sworn Ene∣mies of the Publick Peace; so that the Dau∣phin has but too much reason to hate you, and call you his Step-Mother. You may remember many Affronts which you your self put upon the Dauphiness, and which did not a little contribute to the Distemper that carry'd her off: And King James II. of England is also indebted to you for the loss of his Three Kingdoms by your pernicious Counsels. If the King has banish'd all the Hugonots from France (says Madam de Maintenon) it was only to immortalize his Name and Me∣mory, according to the Examples of his Pre∣decessors Charles IX. and Henry III. by en∣deavouring, as they did, to extirpate Herefie, the King having a true Zeal for the Service of God. The Reverend Father La Chaise, and all the Cabinet-Counsel, possess'd him with the Apprehensions of a general Ruine impending over his Kingdom, if he did not intirely con∣vert all those Hereticks; and that he was never to expect the Blessing of God, if he did not bring back all those poor Souls to our Holy Mother the Church. The King, whose Zeal for the Catholick Religion is Exem∣plary, and which is altogether surprising in a
Monarch who is at this day the Terrour of Europe, and justly pretends that all other Sovereigns ought to submit to him, and hold of his Empire, subjects himself with a profound Obedience to all those things with which Piety inspires him. And by the Foundation of St. Cyr, this religious Prince has given a Proof how much Devo∣tion has the Ascendant over him; for we may see that Holy Places, such as Churches, subsist much longer in the Minds of the People, then Palaces, and Houses for Civil Use. In the mean time, Madam, (answers Scarron) we see that for the most part, those Princes who have ruin'd their Coun∣tries and People, are those who have caus'd most Churches and Monasteries to be built; witness Justinian, who fill'd Italy and Greece with 'em, after he had ruin'd and pillag'd all the Provinces of his Empire: And John Galeas, Duke of Milan, who foun∣ded the Charter-house of Pavia, the finest in Christendom. Devotion is not always the true Mark of the Vertue and Bounty of Princes. Charles IX. and Henry III. his Brother, being cruel Kings, Men of ill Conduct, and no Justice, yet were the greatest Bigots ima∣ginable in every thing by which they could merit Heaven; as, going Bare-foot on Pilgri∣mages, in Pentients Habit, in the Streets of Paris, wearing coarse Hoods, having Death's
Heads embroider'd upon their Cloaths, and shutting themselves up in Oratories with Her∣mits; yet all this external Devotion could not hide their bad Lives, and ill Government. It's always Glorious for a King to shew good Example to his Subjects; but Lewis XIV. is so far from doing so, that he imitates the In∣fidels in every thing. The strict Alliance betwixt the French Court and the Ottoman Port, makes it appa∣rent, that that Prince follows the vitious Manners of the Turks; insomuch, that he copies their greatest Crimes, and has made himself a perfect Mussulman. We need go no further then St. Cyr, which may truly be call'd a Seraglio, under the Title of a Religious Nunnery; and I have no reason to doubt, Madam, that you are the scanda∣lous Instrument of a thousand criminal In∣trigues which that Prince carries on there. And by this means you also procure to your self a great number of Creatures throughout the Kingdom, among those of Eminent Birth and Merit, who make their Court to you for an Alliance with those Ladies, in hopes of obtaining considerable Employments by your Favour. Ah! Sir (cries Madam de Maintenon) away with Thoughts so impious, and be not guilty of such an Outrage against the Modesty of that Holy Place. The King having en∣trusted me with the Conduct of that Spi∣ritual Militia, you wound me sensibly, and
sin also against the Vertue of that Religious Prince. 'Tis the Noblest and most Glorious Cha∣rity that ever was heard of, to have so many young Damsels that want Estates, bred up at the Expence of that great Monarch; and though that agreeable Retirement be within a League of Versailles, it may well be call'd a Holy Solitude, where nothing troubles their Repose. There is nothing there of that Magnificence which is to be found in the Palaces of Kings, but a noble Simplicity is its chief Ornament, and yet there appears in the same a thousand beautiful Charms. When you see all those young Ladies, and hear them sing the Praises of Jesus with so much Modesty, you cannot but conceive an Idea of the blessed Angels, and holy Mar∣tyrs in Heaven; and to speak sincerely, there's no Religious-House where more of Order and Piety is to be seen. All things are so well dispos'd in that Society, that Idleness is entirely banish'd thence: There they pray to God Day and Night; and those Damsels seeing nothing but good Example, are bred incomparably better then they could have been in the most pious and regular Families. The King, who is the sole Founder of that School of Christianity, will always be the Admiration of his People; and by that Sacred Place, his Name and Memory shall be render'd Immortal.
In fine, Madam, (replies Scarron,) seeing the time when I must leave you draws near, and that Rancune and Rapiniere, my Friends, do signifie as much unto me, Pluto not having allow'd us any more time then what I have spent with you, we cannot go beyond his Orders; and I observe also that Ragotin's Flambeaux is also burnt out. Make good Use of the Conversation which I have had with you; consider that your Life passes away like a Dream, and that in a little time you may be summon'd before our severe Judges, Rhadamanthus and Minos, who will pronounce your Eternal Sentence. In what a terrible Condition will you find your self, if you come to sojourn in the bot∣tomless Abyss, for not having reflected se∣riously upon the Vain-Glory of the World, and the Counterfeit-Lustre which attends its Honour. I perceive you are engag'd to fol∣low the Course of the Great Ones; but if you have any remainder of Shame left, I ad∣vise you to sacrifice the Interest of the Court, and the King's Embraces, to your own Ho∣nour and mine: Retire into a Convent, as did La Valiere and spend the rest of your days in the Service of God. The King being accustom'd to change, will treat you in the same manner as he hath done his other Mi∣stresses. I assure you, Sir, (says de Madam Maintenon) that I have profited extremely by the good Advice which you have given me; and be
perswaded, that neither the Splendour of the Crown, nor the Glory of the Court, shall hinder me from acknowledging the Change∣ableness and Inconstancy of this present Life; and I am very well satisfy'd, that no∣thing can be better said, then what you have now spoken. You are still the same for solid Reasoning, and have lost nothing of that sublime and pa∣therick Wit which procur'd you the Adora∣tion of all your Hearers. I wish that the Time allow'd you were longer, that I might enjoy your dear Presence: But seeing it is weak to wish for Impossibilities, I had rather im∣prove the precious Moments which remain; and I assure you, that I shall never lose the Idea nor Remembrance of all your Kind∣nesses. The Moral which you have made use of to make me sensible of them, hath made a very great Impression upon my Heart; but as to your Advice, of retiring into a Convent, 'tis impossible; for I am wedded to the King by indissoluble Bonds, and neither fear Change nor Disgrace, having taken such just Mea∣sures, that nothing but Death is capable to make a Separation; and moreover, I am more Sovereign then ever the late Queen was. But I can also tell you, That I never observ'd such a Changeable inclination in that Prince as you imagin: He always lov'd those very passionately, who had the good fortune to please him. I remember, that as to Made∣moiselle
Made∣moiselle de Fontange, the King said, one day, to the Duke of St. Agnan, That he was never so much in Love, and that according to all appearance, he should never change.— But, Sir, (continues Madam de Maintenon) I would willingly have some News concerning that beautiful Damsel, and what Rank she keeps in Pluto's Kingdom of Darkness; for I can assure you, that his Majesty was ex∣trmely griev'd at her Death. Madam, (says Scarron) I can tell you no other News of Mademoiselle de Fontange, but that she continually complains of you. The Prince, and the Marquiss de Louvois look upon you as a wretched Woman, and say that you caus'd her to be poyson'd, which has procur'd you a very bad Name in those dark Regions. Proserpine our Queen, was not griev'd when she saw that beautiful Nymph arrive in her Kingdom; for she is now the greatest Ornament of her Court, and chief Maid of Honour. In truth Sir, (answers Madam de Maintenon) I want Words to express my Astonishment, there must be some fatality in my Lot, for true or false I am always reckon'd guilty of whatever Mischiefs happen at Court. But Heaven is the Witness of my Innocence. Madmemoiselle de Fontange, the Prince of Conti, and the Marquis de Louvois, have had their Enemies since they believe them∣selves to have been poyson'd; but being so
Great Masters of Reason as they were, me∣thinks they ought to have considered that Death spares none, of what Quality, Age or Sex soever. I think I have read that the Pagans erected Altars to all their Deities, and being ask'd once on a time, Why they had not erected one to Death, they answer'd Because he was inexorable. I have still one thing of Importance to say to you before we part, which I did not think on. You must know, Sir, that the Reverend Fathers the Jesuits had no sooner perceiv'd my being in Favour with the King, but they resolv'd to gain me to their Party, they accoasted me with all manner of Civility and Submission, against which I was not able to stand out. They order'd the Reverend Fathers La Chaise and Bourdalon, to praise me to his Majesty, and to insinuate, that he could never have made a better Choice, nor one more worthy of his Conversation then he had done; by which those Religious Fathers gain'd so much upon that Prince, that I found my self oblig'd to receive their Visits daily, and to testifie my Satisfaction therewith. I confess to you, that I had a Confidence in that Order, and therefore chose one o them for the Director of my Conscience, and could have been content to have born the Title of a Lady of the Society of Jesus  and since that time Father La Chaise ha been my Confessor in Ordinary, insomuch that being at Confession one day, I pray'
him to pardon all those Sins which I might commit with the King; and for this end I discover'd to him all the Secrets of my Heart. He was so far from blaming me, that he assur'd me I was not at all Culpable, and that it was no Crime to entertain an Amorous Correspondence with the oldest Son of the Church, but that I must comply with that Monarch in such things as he was most sen∣sibly delighted with; that those things which were call'd Sins with other Men, were not so in regard of Kings and Princes; that God had set them above the rest of Mankind, that they might prescribe Laws to them∣selves; and that it was not lawful for any man to Controul them, but that their Sub∣jects were bound to pay emblind Obedience. Just so, Madam, (says Scarron) Sinners do generally flatter themselves, and find out Expedients to Extenuate their Guilt; but one may eternally Damn themselves by such a dangerous Practice, and those are the ad∣mirable Lessons which the Reverend Fathers the Jesuits teach their Penitents of both Sexes; can one then make use of the Sacred Tribunal which ought to be an Asylum for the Salvation of Souls to destroy them ut∣terly? I am not now surpriz'd at your ha∣ving given up your self with so much Free∣dom to satisfie his Majesty's Desires, since you have so rare a Secret, and such excellent In∣structions from the Reverend Father La Chaise, who tells you, that you may enter∣tain
an amorous Correspondence without any scruple, and not be so much as guilty of the least Venial Sin in so doing; that is the rare Morality which he learn'd from Fa∣ther du Vaux his Tutor in Philosophy, who hath since that, been advanc'd to the highest Preferments in the Order. 'Tis to him that he owes this fine Education and the Ad∣vancement of his Fortune. I wonder much, how those Doctors, who are apparently the Guides to Salvation and Lights of the Church, can reconcile this Conduct with the solemn Vows they are under to maintain Chastity. But the Reverend Fathers have a certain sort of fine-spun Morality, which they don't teach publickly in the Schools; for in truth, as they say, It is not Convenient that all the World should know it, and therefore they keep it in Reserve for Great Wits, and such as are capable of relishing the same. These are the Mysteries which make them so much admir'd. Behold here what one of the sub∣lime Doctors says. Then Scarron taking the Register from Ran∣cune shew'd Madam de Maintenon the Morals of the Reverend Fathers the Jesuits. When a man finds himself extreamly press'd with the Rebellion of the Flesh, and and that an occasion offers for an Amorous Rancounter, if he distrust his own Weak∣ness, and be afraid that he shall not be able to prevent his falling into the same,
that Person is guilty of no Crime, if he keep his whole Intreague secret to avoid worse. Here is also another Remark of their Doctor Escobar, If you cannot prevent your Loving of Women, it is not so much as the least Venial Sin to give your self up to Love, for I know that it acts upon People with great Violence, and sometimes puts them out of an Estate of Salvation. St. Francis Xavier, one of their most famous Religious Persons, hath fully inform'd us of it during his Life, by all the Torments which he suffer'd; and therefore he says very Ju∣diciously, That every man who sins after ha∣ving reason'd a little, his Faults are pardon'd, though with some more difficulty. Behold the Divinity of the Holy Fathers of the So∣ciety, and the secret Doctrine which they teach their Disciples! Scarron having signify'd to Madam de Main∣tenon by bowing his Head, that he was not allow'd to say any more, being press'd by Rancune and Rapiniere to return to their shady Palace, left the Heroess in a profound Trance, reflecting continually upon the Conversation which she had had with him, and the sensible Reproaches wherewith he had upbraided her. Ha! (says she) if all the Ladies of Plea∣sure which I know, and who have lost their Husbands, had such Visions as these, they would not take so much care to conceal their
Intriegues; and if the King knew the Vex∣ation that I am in at present, I am sure he would be touch'd with it, but he does not expect such an Extraordinary piece of News. In this manner Madam de Maintenon pass'd the Night without being able to sleep; next Morning La Caverne her Maid entred her Chamber as usual; and ask'd her Lady what she would have her to do. The Marchi∣oness answerd in a discompos'd manner, That as soon as she was dress'd, she would go to St. Cyr. Some hours after she took Coach to go to the Abbey, where St. Lewis's Ladies receiv'd her with incredible Joy, because they had been depriv'd of her presence for eight days time, that she had been taken up with the King's Affairs, and particularly the Ball which the Duke of Orleance gave in the Royal Palace. Our Heroess having consi∣der'd a little of what she had to do, took a general Review of that sine House, and was saluted by all the Damsels with a Charming Modesty, who accompany'd her four and four a-breast to the Church, to hear Mass. The King, who is always impatient where he loves, bethinking himself that he had not seen his Mistress in a long time, slew to give her a Visit, without any Consideration of St. Cyr. Into her Closet he went; and having saluted her after his usual manner, that is to say very tenderly, he recounted to her all the Pleasure he had taken at the Ball, imperfect only in this, that he could not en∣joy
her Company till the end of it, and then ask'd her why she went away so soon: tel∣ling her withal, That had she stay'd but a little longer, she might have seen the plea∣santest and most delightful Disguizes in the World; for that the twelve English young Lords who were sent by King James in the Dress of Quakers, escap'd a most terrible Danger; for that in making their way through all the Flambeaux that lighted that numerous Assembly, they miss'd but very narrowly of being every one of 'em sacrific'd to the Sport of the Night. You may have probably observ'd, Madam, (continu'd the King) in the History of France, what befell Charles VI. upon the like Occasion, at the Nuptials of one of the Queen's Maids of Honour. At what time, some of the Noblemen dancing masqueraded in the Shape of Bears, the Duke of Orleance holding down a Flambeau to look upon their Noses, set fire to the Linnen that was joyn'd together with Pitch. Presently the Room was all in Flame and Affright; the People crouded one upon another to get out, some cry'd, God save the King; but the Dutchess of Berry cover'd the King with the Skirt of her Gown, and preserv'd him from the fiery Torrent. You see (said the King, siniling) how useful Women are in this Life; for that by their Assistance we many times escape great Dangers.
Oh—Sir, (answer'd Madam de Main∣tenon) if all Men had the same savour∣able Sentiments of us, we should not be so much slighted as we are at this day. But we find that there are many Persons no way inconsiderable for their merit, who strongly oppose your Kind Opinon of us, while they assert, That Women are the cause of all the Mischiefs and Mis∣fortunes that happen in the World. Perhaps, (said the King) those Per∣sons have not been able to pay For∣tune a sufficient Sallary, to procure 'em the Favours of the Female Sex. For my part I can assure ye, Madam, that were it not for Women, my Life would be but very burthensome to me. 'Tis the sweetest of all those other Plea∣sures that slatter our Sences. Which therefore seems to me, to be the reason, why Nature foreseeing that we would make 'em the Objects of our Adora∣tion, form'd 'em so amiable as they are. The King would have continu'd this Discourse, but he was interrupted by one of his Gentlemen, who brought him Letters from the Duke of Luxem∣brgh and Mashall de Boulers. So that his Majesty immediately took Coach
and return'd to Versailles: where after he had spent some time in reading his Letters and returning Answers, He began again to reflect upon the Melan∣cholly Humour wherein he found his Mistress. For in truth she had ap∣pear'd to him to be incredibly cast down; so that the mighty Monarch not being able to penetrate the real Causes of such an Extraordinary Pensiveness, wrote her the following Lines. The King's Letter to Madam de Maintenon. DId I not Love ye, so well as I do, (Madam) I should never busie my self to study with so much attention what could afflict ye to that degree of Dis∣composure which I last beheld in your Countenance. But what∣soever pains I take to find it out. I cannot possibly divine the Rea Cause. You know how well I love ye, and that there is no∣thing I will spare to satisfie your
Revenge upon your Enemies. Adieu, Madam; speedily let me know whatever it is that grieves ye, for I am Impatient till I un∣derstand what it may be. The King gave this Letter to one of his Pages, with Orders to carry it to Madam de Maintenon, who joyfully re∣ceiv'd it, and return'd this Answer to it. Madam de Maintenon's Letter to the King. OH! my dear Prince, in what an Extasie am I, to find that you concern your self so deeply in my Grief. 'Tis true, that I conceal the Real Motives of my Disquiet: but there are some Secrets in this Life which we cannot unfold but with some kind of Torture; and this, of which you seek so earnestly to be inform'd, is that of Nature. I can say no∣thing farther in This: but I shall reserve all my Eloquence, till I happen to be alone in your Pre∣sence.
Our Marchioness folded up her Let∣ter with a more then Ordinary Curi∣osity, and sent it to the King, who read it two or three times, but all in vain; for he could not find what he sought with so much earnestness. The next Morning, his Majesty went to St. Ger∣mains, to visit the King and Queen of England, attended by several of the Nobility. Madam de Maintenon who had intel∣ligence of it, fail'd not to be there also in company with Mademoiselle de Lui∣ne, and Mademoiselle de Soubise, the most witty and most obliging Persons in the World. But the King was not present∣ly to be spoken with, and therefore while he was discoursing with King James and the Queen, M. de Maintenon went to walk with the Ladies. At what time, rambling from one thing to another, at th they sell by de∣gree; to talk of the little Cupids of Marble that flood in the mid'st of the Garden And then it was, that Made∣moiselle de Luine, who is a Lady of a brik humour, ask'd Madam de Maintenon why Poets and Painters had to ill repre∣sented Love in the Figure of a Child;
and what use he made of his Flambeau, and the Fillet about his Eyes; and that it would have been much more proper to have painted him a Young Man full grown, and in his flourishing Years. This Pleasant Question of Mademoi∣selle de Luine put the Ladies into a fit of Laughter. You are as yet too young, Fair Lady, reply'd our Marchioness, to make a true Comment upon all the Figure that you see. Pardon me there∣fore, if I undertake to unfold these My∣steries, and satisfie your Scruples. This Infant is a perfect Emblem of Love; that Passion in some respects being Weakness and Childhood it self, and in others meer Dotage and Foppery: As for the Swathe about his Eyes, it denotes his Blindness, which is not able to dis∣cern those things that are most proper and convenient for him. The Flam∣beau signifies that violent Heat which burns us in the most sensible Part of the Body, which is the Heart. Well, Madam, (cry'd Mademoiselle de Luine) I shall take care, I warrant ye, to keep my Heart from being burn'd by any such Flambeau's as that. Twill be very well, my dear Darling, (reply'd
our Heress) if you can. How far this discourse might have led 'em no body cn tell, for the Subject was allu∣ring enough, but the King meeting 'em at the end of a wide Alley, put an end to it, and the Ladies taking another way, left the two Lovers by themselves together. The King thus finding him∣self alone with his Mistress: Oh, Ma∣dam, (said he) you have too unkindly prolong'd my Languishing Desires to know the unhappy Occasion of your so deeply Afflicting Sorrows. You know the tenderness that I have for ye; and there∣fore you cannot, without a great deal of Injustice, conceal any thing from me. 'Tis very true, Sir, (answer'd M. de Maintenon) your Majesty's Kindness and Affection have been so singular toward me, that there is nothing which I can or ought to hide from your knowledge. Give me then leave to tell ye, that the other Night returning from the Ball, after I had been meditating a while in my Chamber, I heard a noise; but much more Terrible was my suddain Astonishment to behold the Gastly Appearance before my Eyes of Mon∣sieur Scarron and three of his Friends.
How! Madam, (said the King) do the Dead then begin to rise before we come to the End of the World. I know not that, Sir, (reply'd Madam de Maintenon) but I am sure, to no Com∣fort of mine, God knows, I was con∣strain'd to hold a Dialogue with him for above Two Hours. 'Twas long enough in all Conscience, (answer'd the King) for a Man without Flesh and Bones; but all this while, what said the Ghost to yee? Oh, Sir, (reply'd Madam de Main∣tenon) the most grievous things, and the most abusive and scandalous things that ever were heard. He Reproach'd me with an unparalell'd Confidence, that I had violated my Faith and Oath which I swore to him before God and Men; and that being belov'd by your Majesty, I was lookt upon both on Earth, and in the Infernal Court, as a Woman without Reputation, or in plain Terms a Harlot; and that Pluto, the Prince of the Abyss, has threaten'd already (the Holy Virgin keep me out of his Clutch∣es) to make me feel the Effects of his Fury; and that France was beholding for all the Mischiefs and Calamities that
had befallen her of late, to the dange∣rous and pernicious Counsels which I gave your Majesty. But that which most surpriz'd me was, that he shew'd me the Contract of Mar∣riage, by which you were so Good and Gracious as to espouse me to your Per∣son; nor can I imagine how this Fan∣tom could come by such a piece of Se∣cresie, and which your Majesty took such care to conceal. For my part, I must psitively accuse the Marquis of Louvois, who most certainly has betray'd your Majesty in the Kingdom of Dark∣ness. And for a further Accumulation of Grief upon Sorrow, he told me, That the Prince of Conti, Mademoiselle de Fon∣tange, and the Marquis of Louvois, assur'd him, that I had caus'd 'em to be poi∣son'd. Could any Man have said any thing more Extravagant or more Injurious. Madam, (reply'd the King) I am somewhat at a loss what Answer justly to return yee upon the Discoveries you have made me; nor can I readily believe these Things to be real: 'Tis only a Vi∣sion which perhaps you may have had in your Sleep, proceeding from some little Kindness which you may still re∣tain
for the Memory of that good Man. Sir, (answer'd Madam de Maintenon) all that I have told yee is most certainly true: neither was I ever lookt upon to be a Visionary. But, Madam, (reply'd the King) you made mention of the Marquis of Lou∣vois; now you know that he has been a long time in the other World, and 'tis impossible the Dead should know what is done in this. Oh— Sir, (said Madam de Maintenon) I was always of the same Belief as well as you; but M. Scarron shew'd me a large Register, which la Rancune brought along with him, wherein are contain'd all the most Secret Actions of Mortals. At the Word Rancune, which signifies Hatred and Malice, the King fell a Laugh∣ing; and ask'd her, whether she knew what the Name signify'd. Sir, (said Madam de Maintenon) never believe the Names of Rancune, Rpiniere, and Raguti to be sain'd like the Names of the Persons in a Comedy. For they were M. Scarron's very good Friends that always kept him Company in this World.
Why then it seems they take Journeys at pleasure from the other World hither, (continu'd the King, with some kind of Astonishment.) And yet if I could see once more the Men and Women which I have lost, it would be a Pleasure to me beyond imagination. But I believe it not so easie a thing to rise from the Dead; and yet methinks I could be wil∣ling to hear some Tydings of poor Made∣moiselle de Fontange. Sir, (answer'd Madam de Main∣tenon) 'tis a thing that I have study'd to bring to pass as much as any thing in the World, well knowing thereby, that I should oblige your Majesty; for I am convinc'd of the passionate Love which you had for her; but I was troubl'd that she had such an ill Opinion of me. It may be, Madam, (said the King) 'twas only a Scandal which that same Aesep rais'd of himself. I always lookt upon Mademoiselle de Fontange to be too prudent to harbour any such groundless Thoughts; and for your part, Madam, I am sure 'tis impossible but you must be innocent of so heinous a Crime. However, Sir, (reply'd Madam de Maintenon) all this while I suffer in my
Reputation, and in regard that M. Scar∣ron told me, how that beautiful Nymph is lookt upon with an Eye of Favour at the Infernal Court, and that she is one of Queen Proserpine's Minions, she may say what she pleases. These are Trifles, Madam, (said the King) not worth your Thoughts. I rather am afraid least Pluto should fall in Love with her, and consequently, least the poor Lady should incurr Proserpine's Displeasure, the ready way to bring up∣on her Head the dire Effects of Proserpine's revengeful Jealousie. I do not believe, Sir, (reply'd Ma∣dam de Maintenon) that those sooty Deities are capable of such a noble Passion. How!— Madam, can a Person so witty, as you are, be ignorant how the Deities of old pin'd away and languish'd in the Fetters of beautiful Women! Their amorous Transports are known to all the World. Did not Jupiter, chief Sultan of all the Deities, transform him∣self into a Thousand Shapes, even of Beasts themselves, to bring about the Designs of his Concupiscence: and all the other Demi-Deities, did they not
imitate him with extraordinary Delight? If Venus's little Baby had the confidence to discharge his Quiver into Heaven, What Reason is there to believe that Mortals are not sensible of his Wounds? I find Love, (continu'd the King) the most Noble of all the Passions: without it the World could never subsist. If I love an Admirable Object, I know I do no more then what my Predeces∣sors did, being as little Insensible as they. For this Reason it is, (reply'd Madam de Maintenon) that I blame the King of Barathrum, and all his Subjects, for be∣ing so saucy as to make your Amours their Hell-discourse. I know, the time was once when Pluto was in Love him∣self; and 'tis not unlikely but that some new Beauty may inflame his Heart at this very time. What you say, Madam, may very well be; but I know that the Prince of Darkness can never gain the Affection of Women. He was always so Deformed, and so ill a Courtier withal, that there was ne're a Hat-nos'd, Blubber-lip'd Nymph in the Roll of Antiquity, but scorn'd him. One Day therefore, in
the heighth of his Despair, he bully'd away Proserpina by force, as she was pick∣ing Dasies in a Medow: and therefore I set my self above a Thousand petty Railleries that they can put upon me, let 'em criticize as much as they please. I re∣member the Duke of Mazarin, who counterfeited a World of Godliness, desir'd a Private Audience of me one Day; I consented: but all the while he held me in a long Story of a Vision of his, That the Kingdom would be turn'd Topsy turvy if I did not quit the Com∣pany of la Vallicre; adding withal, that he admonish'd me by a particular Com∣mission from God. And I, (said I) ad∣vize yee to take a particular Care of your Brains which are in a very sad Condition, and to restore me all that your Uncle robb'd me of. The Duke made a low Congé, and sneak'd away. By and by comes to me Father Anat, my Confessor, egg'd on by the Queen, to tell me, That he would leave the Court, for that my Trading in Love made too great a Noise. I smil'd, and bid him take his Liberty. But then the poor Father, finding him∣self taken at his Word, would sain have
turn'd Cat in Pan; but I told him, my Curate would serve my Turn for the present. You cannot believe, Madam, how all his Order teaz'd him for being such a Ninny. I cannot endure such a Num∣ber of Hypocrites, that take a Pride in reforming others, but spare for nothing to gratifie their own Pleasures. For my part, I love Liberty in this Life. The King, who was in a good Hu∣mour, would have gone on, but he was oblig'd to return to Versailles with the Lords and Gentlemen that attended him. After he was gone, Madam de Main∣tenon went to join the Ladies again, who were diverting themselves in a Ter∣race Walk, at a distance off. Ah, Madam, (said Mademoiselle de Soubise, what a while have you been dis∣coursing with the King. I assure yee, (reply'd our Marchio∣ness) I never i' my Life saw our Mo∣narch in so good a Humour. All the Reason i' th' World, Madam, (reply'd Mademoiselle de Luine) for you inspire him always with Jocundry and Blitheness.
No, no, my Dear, (said Madam de Maintenon) 'tis not from my Influences that he derives his Gayety.— But here she stopt.— Her Lacquey came to tell her, that the Coach atten∣ded at the Gate, and she had a mind to be at Versailles that Night. But for all this, Madam de Mainte∣non could not be rid of her Melancho∣ly. Her Husband had left her, but the Dialogue still continually haunted her. The next Day she went to wait upon the King at his Hour of rising: And after they had discours'd together of several Things, she told him with a sad and lamentable Air, That she could not Sleep for the Phantom that was always hovering before her Eyes; and that her Soul was in great Disorder. The King, whose Heart is very Ten∣der and Compassionate, in respect of his Mistresses, bid her go to their Com∣mon Confessor, Father La Chaise, and impart her Afflictions to him. Immediately Madam de Maintenon call'd one of her Pages, and sent him away Post to Paris, to tell the Reve∣rend Priest, he was to attend the King. But he was not to be sound; for he was
gone to refresh himself with his Crea∣ture Enjoyments, at his House in the Fauxburgh St. Anthony. So that the Page return'd as wise as he went. Thereupon Madam de Maintenon, without any more ado, made bold with the King's Closet; where, in a short time, she wrote the following Note, and sent it away with all speed: For her Conscience was all this while upon the Rack. The Marchioness of Maintenon's Letter to the Reverend Father La Chaise. AT length, Reverend Father, after long Musing upon the unfortunate Accident that has be∣fal'n me, I have cast my Eyes up∣on you, as the Person from whom I expect my Deliverance; being fully perswaded that you can rid me of the Torment which I un∣dergo. 'Tis not any Politick Affair nor any Intriegue that I
am driving on, which engages me to send you these Lines. My Sufferings are inward, my Soul is harras'd with Remorse of Conscience. Hasten then to me with all possible speed, dear Father; for you alone can pro∣cure the Peace and Tranquility of my Soul. The Page was no sooner arriv'd, but one of Father La Chaise's Lacqueys car∣ry'd him into a Cabinet hung with For∣rest Work, where were also present the Bishop of Paris, and several other Per∣sons of Quality. So soon as the Father saw the Mes∣senger, he smil'd, believing he had some Message to deliver to him from the King. To which the Page reply'd, That he was sent from Madam de Maintenon, to deliver him that Let∣ter. 'Tis all one; (said the Reverend Fa∣ther) for Tydings either from the One or the Other, are equally grateful. And so reading the Note, with an Aire of Satisfaction, he told the Page, that he
would speedily do himself the Honour of going to affure the King and Ma∣dam de Maintenon of his most humble Respects and Readiness to serve 'em. And indeed the Reverend Father took no small delight to let all the Company see the Esteem and Tenderness which he had for that vertuous Lady, by expaciating into a Panegyrick upon the glistering Vertues that adorn'd her Mind. And certainly it may be said, with∣out any Aggravation, that among all the Clergy of France, there never was a Person that understood so well to com∣ply with all the Humours, all the Fega∣ries, and all the Intriegues of the Court of Lewis XIV. with so much Wit, so much Policy, and so much Dissimulati∣on. No wonder then that having so many Sleights and Ways to gain a Prince's Heart, we see him towring in so high a Sphere of Prosperity, and the Envy of his whole Order, who see him almost the sole Possessor of the King's Ear, and by that means, with Ease sur∣mounting all Obstacles that oppose his Designs.
Being then so eminent and so great a erson, let us wait upon him to Versail∣s; where he arriv'd at what time the King was in company with Madam de Maintenon. The King no sooner saw him, but reaching forth his Hand for him to Kiss, Father, (said he) you are she most Happy among Men; you were wisht for here with a more then ordi∣nary Passion; every Hour was thought  Day till you came. Sir, (reply'd the Reverend Father) with a Monkish Humility, all the Hap∣piness that I have in this World, is to be belov'd by your Majesty. The King was pleas'd with his Com∣plement, and bid him take his Place. Their first Discourse was about the pre∣sent Affairs; but that being soon over, the Father turning toward our Marchio∣ness, In truth, Madam, (said he) I have a long time had an extream desire to enjoy the Happiness of your Pre∣sence: Father Bourdalon has Preach'd two or three times, but you never wouchsaf'd him the Honour to hear him; which did not a little surprize me, knowing your Devotion to be so exem∣plary.
Truly Father, (reply'd Madamde Maintenon) I have been forc'd to kee my Chamber for some time, not find∣ing my self very well: Besides, I an fallen into a deep Melancholy that very much disturbs my Mind. May not the Cause, Madam, of s much Grief, (reply'd the Reveren Father) be enquir'd into, and whenc it derives it's Original? Assuredly, Father, (said the March¦oness) I am firmly convinc'd, That the is nothing that one of your true Peni∣tents ought to conceal from your Know∣ledge; and that we ought to apply ou¦selves to you, as to the real Comforte of our Souls. I'll tell yee then what ' that thus torments me. Monsieur Scar∣ron is return'd from the other World, and has laid those Things to my Charge that pierce my very Heart: For he told me, That he could not be admitted into Eternal Rest, for that I had neglected him after his Death, not having caus'd Masses and Prayers to be said for him sufficient to release him out of his pre∣sent Misery. And this is that which af∣flicts me extreamly, that I should be the Cause of his Sufferings in Purgatory.
I must confess, Madam, (said the ather) you tell me very sorrowful News — But pray Madam, how ong has he been Dead? As far as I can remember, Father, reply'd the King) he dy'd that very Year that I was marry'd to the deceased Queen, which was in 1660. Then, Sir, (answer'd the Reverend Father) we may reckon it to be about Thirty four Years that this poor Soul has been in fiery Tribulation. Good Soul!— sufficiently Purisy'd!— A Martyr in Purgatory.— We must intorm the Pope, that we may get him Canorin'd. His Holiness, Father, might do well to put him in the Kalendar of Saints, and order his Bones, as a new Discove∣y, to be carry'd to all the Churches in Christendom. But pray tell me,— Is there a time limited for us to be in Purgatory? Sir, (answer'd the Father) we have no certain time appointed for our Suffe∣rings. We are confin'd to this Place, according to the demerits of our Crimes, For a longer or shorter time, sufficient to purge us from all our Transgressions and Sins committed in this World: For
the Scripture tells us, That no Defile∣ment can enter the Kingdom of Hea¦ven. But that which very much surprize me, (said our Heroess) is, that M. Scar∣ron should be so long detain'd in this same Mansion of Pain; for I always found him to be a merry Soul indeed but full of Piety and Devotion: Besides the good Man, being seiz'd with a pa∣ralitick Distemper, liv'd many Year without the Use of his Limbs; by which means God gave him time enough to Repent. Repentance, Madam, (reply'd Fa∣ther la Chaise,) is the only means to ob∣tain the Mercy of God. But in regard that as I told yee before, we must for all that, suffer out our Sufferings in the Place appointed for the perfect Expiation o our Sins, I advize yee to use your utmost Efforts for this Martyr; to give Money speedily to two or three Churches, to say a sufficient Number of Masses for his Deliverance: 'Tis the surest way to get his Soul admitted into Paradise. You must also your self be continually at your Prayers to the Holy Vir∣gin and all the Saints, that they will
vouchsafe to put up their Petitions for him. What think yee, Father, (cry'd Ma∣dam de Maintenon) if I should undertake a Pilgrimage to our Lady of Deliverance, or perform some other Penance to get this wandring Soul out of Torment with all the speed that may be. I would fain have him, I car'd not how soon, in the Saints Everlasting Rest, rather then be troubl'd with him here upon Earth Lord! Madam, (cry'd the Reverend Father) what Religious, what Charita∣ble Sentiments are these for a Woman of this World, and in your Prosperi∣ty. But I sind that you have still an unexhaustible Spring of Piety in your Heart. Alas! Father, (said Madam de Main∣tenon, with an extraordinary Aire of Modesty, I am not so Devout as you take me to be.— The World, — the World, Father, will get the upper∣hand in spite of all Reluctancy,— and I am continually waging War with the Rebellions of my Flesh— Madam, (answer'd the Father, fetch∣ing a deep Sigh) we shall never be per∣fect
till we get to Heaven, where we shall meet with no more Tryals and Temptations of this Life. I am apt to believe, Father, (inter∣rupted the King with a Smile,) that we have been at a Sermon: You have preach'd to us the best Morality i'the World. Nothing grieves me, but that I fear me it will have so strong an ope∣ration upon Madam de Maintenon, that she'll forget all the Pleasures of this Life, and we shall lose her in these Di∣vine Contemplations. I will tell yee, Sir, (answer'd the Marchioness) that there is an unexpressi∣ble Joy to be met with, in the solid Contemplation of the Divine Myste∣ries. For my part I no longer wonder that so many Souls of the Saints have been transported to Heaven in Rap∣tures and Enthusiasms. But this same Zeal. God knows, is not perfect in us; so that we may say, that we always feel in our Heart, something that opposes right Reason Observe, Father. (said the King) that Ma∣dam de Maintenon never proposes any Argu∣ment, but she also supports it with a Philo∣sophical Proof, with so much Strength, and
Solid Reason, that Plato could have done no more. In all these Lovely Ar∣guments, continu'd the King, beholding our Heroess with a wistful Eye, How pleasant it is to hear a Person so witty as you are, argue so Pathetically. In good earnest, I find the Fate of Men is very Frail, in reference to the Female Sex. But who can help it? The Au∣thor of Nature having given 'em a sen∣sible Heart, and Senses capable to re∣ceive all Impressions, how is it possible for 'em to resist so many Enemies? So that 'tis no wonder, if many times, in despite of our own Wills and Consents, we suffer our selves to be surpriz'd. 'Tis very true, Sir, said the Reverend Father, that there it is where Human Weakness shows it self, and in that we are more unfortunate then Criminal, since we are not able, as your Majesty well observes, to Triumph over those Senses of ours, that without Intermission oppose our Will. I sind nothing in all St. Paul's Theology, that better agrees with the Frailty of Human Creatures, then when he says, that when he would do Good, evil is with him; but that he sinds another Law that hinders him from doing what he would.
Father, reply'd Madam de Maintenon, you have exactly hit the meaning of that Great Apostle, I am charm'd with this Discourse, nor do I care how long it were to continue. But in regard his Majesty has already Laugh'd at me, for taking so much pleasure in these seeming Enthusiasms, I am afraid of provoking him, and rendring my self in some mea∣sure troublesome. No, no—Madam, reply'd the King smiling, I am too great a Lover of what you delight in, to oppose your Holy Re∣creations. Besides, that a Converse wherein you intermix so much of your own Wit, and so engaging, can never be otherwise then most agreeable to me. Sir, said our Marchioness, I am infi∣nitely beholding to your Majesty for that Esteem with which you Honour me; and I return thanks to Heaven for my Good Fortune, and for that inestimable Minute, wherein I had the Felicity to ob∣tain your Favour. But your Majesty always exercises a sort of Goodness na∣tural to your Royal Inclination, which is to excuse all the Defects of the most humble your Servants. The King was about to have return'd
an Answer, but a Page brought Word, that the Cloth was laid. So that, now they minded nothing but Eating and pleasant Discourse. The King began the Reverend Confessor's Health; and he carried it to Madam de Maintenon, who receiv'd it very obligingly. Din∣ner being over, Father La Chaise, who has the Honour to accompany the King every day at Dinner, took his Leave of the King, alledging the necessity of his Return to Paris to his Profess'd House, where he gives Audience twice or thrice a Week to several persons of all Condi∣tions that come to kiss his Hands. Said the King to him, I give you leave to go home, but upon Condition that you return in the Evening. Upon which the Father Transported with the King's Civility, display'd his Acknowledgment by a profound Reverence, and a Humi∣lity attended with an extraordinary Re∣spect. After he was gone, the King went to Fontainbleau, with the Duke of Orleans, and the Dauphin to make a Hunting Match in the Forrest of Vincennes. In the mean time, our Heroess retir'd to her Chamber, to muse at Leisure upon
her intended Pilgrimage to our Lady of Deliverance. But before her departure, she stay'd three Weeks in her Abbey, from whence she went every morning in the Habit of a Penitent to the Great Church of Paris, to Order the saying of Masses for the Ghost of Scarron, at∣tended only by La Caverne, who waited on her in her Chamber. But the Marchioness was not content∣ed with a Legion of Orisons, which she caus'd to be power'd forth in the Cathe∣dral; for she set all the Devout People at Work in several other Churches; more particularly at St. Eustachius's, and the Abbey of St. Lewis, for whom she had a secret Veneration. After all these Mortisiations, she went the next day to St. Cyr, to prepare the Ladies of the Abbey, and all the young Damsels to live in her absence, with great Reserv'd∣ness, and with all the Discretion imagina∣ble, giving 'em to that purpose the most admirable Precepts in the World. They took their Leaves of her, full of Sor∣row and Affliction for their Cruel Sepa∣ration from her dear Presence. And at length, when those doleful Complements and Formalities were over, she took
Coach with La Caverne, in Order to her Travels, which were to be for a Month. 'Tis not to be imagin'd, what Floods of Tears her Absence cost the whole So∣ciety; but then the sorrowful Sisters so∣lac'd themselves again, with the hopes of their beloved Abbesses Return in a short time: Assuring themselves, that her Ver∣tue and her Devotion would secure her from all Attempts upon her Person, either of her incens'd Husband, or Plu∣to himself. The King, who stay'd at Versailles, with an incredible Impatience to see his Mistress before she departed, could not readily resolve to want her Company for so long a time; and disputed warm∣ly with himself, whither or no he should grant her Request. But as he was mu∣sing and pondering upon this mournful Journey, for by that Name he call'd it; the rather, because his Majesty was no Admirer of Penances and Pilgrimages, Madam de Maintenon made her Entry, to pay him her last Adieu's, with a Sorrow surpassing all Expression. The King Embracing her, Ah, Ma∣dam said he, how dear will this Ab∣sence of yours cost me! Those Words
went to the Marchionesses heart, and overcame her with such a piercing Dis∣consolation, that for a time she could not speak. The King, who had his Reasons for what he did, had let fall this on pur∣pose. For he knew that she stood in need of his Assistance upon several occasions. Before they parted for good and all, Madam de Maintenon settl'd all his Ma∣jesties Suspitions, by a thousand char∣ming Protestations. The Reverend Fa∣ther La Chaise, who by good luck Ar∣riv'd just in the nick of time, bestow'd au infinite Number of Benedictions up∣on her, to encourage her in her Noble design: Assuring her, that he would not cease to offer up his Prayers to God, and all the Male and Female Saints, that they would be pleas'd to depute a good An∣gel to be her Companion and Condu∣ctor, and that he hop'd the Success of her Pilgrimage would be greatly to her Glory. Adding withal, that it was a good Office of a high Nature, which she was going to do for her Husband. Thus it was, that Pyramus and Thisbe separa∣ted with mutual assurances, never to be forgetful of each other.
The Father, who was an Ear Wit∣ness of all these Protestations, stay'd behind with the King, discoursing for some time about the Marriage of Boufflers with Mademoiselle de Gramont, the Daughter of Antony Charles, Duke of the same Name, and whose Dowry was no less then 40000 Livres, besides a Magnificent Pre∣sent from the King in Jewels; and some talk of several other considerable Emo∣luments. But let us return to our Monarch, who was extreamly turmoyl'd and unea∣sie to be so long a Widower, as one that was never Idle in his Amours. Therefore, to pass time away, he went every day to St. Germains, to Visit the Queen of England. He found that Prin∣cess well Built and very Charming, and that she had a Heart not altogether in∣sensible of his Caresses. And indeed, her deplorable Condition, after her Husband had lost his Crown, cans'd her to entertain the Caresses of our Mo∣narch, with a more then ordinary ten∣derness, as being the most probable fu∣ture support of a King's unjoyntur'd Widow; so that his Majesty succeeded perfectly to his Content. For one day
that King Jame was at Paris, his Ma∣jesty had the Opportunity to be all alone a whole afternoon with the Queen, and to make her a Formal and Ample De∣claration of his Love. Lewis the Great's Declaration of his Love, to the Banish'd Queen of England. Madam, WERE it for that Reason, that I must be accounted one of your most Cru∣el Enemies, I could not forbear to Caress the misfortune, that brought you so happily into this Kingdom, and which has, by that means, procur'd me the Charming pleasure of your Company. I must needs declare to you, Madam, that ever since that Fortu∣nate day, I have always preserv'd a most profound Esteem for your Person, which has bred up and cherish'd in my heart, some∣thing that I can hardly tell what it is. I fancy to my self the most pleasing Idea that ever was in the World, of all your Spark∣ling Qualities, and I take delight to recall 'em to my mind every Minute of the day, and to Dream of you in the Night. I have habituated my self to that which appears to me the only thing that asswages the Di∣sturbances of my Love; that is to say, an
unfeigned Vow which is made to your self, by the most passionate of Men, and who burns with an Ardent desire to let you see, how far it is possible for that Passion, which he has for you, to extend it self. The Queen was not a little at a Non∣plus, to hear such inforcing and passio∣nate Expressions; which was the Rea∣son why she could not return a suddain Answer; for it behov'd her to look well about her on every side. She was afraid least her Husband should take notice of the King's Tenderness, and least Madam de Maintenon should turn her mortal Enemy, to whom she had been infinitely beholding, during her abode in France; foreseeing also, that her Succor might be very necessary still; and for that in her Afflicted Condition, it became her to make use of all her Poli∣cy and Precaution to preserve her friends. On the other side, it was not in her Power to look upon the King with an indifferent Eye; She felt within her self an Inclination strong enough to love him; besides, the Offers of his Service, and the continual Assurances of his Roy∣al Word, never to forsake her, and to
use his utmost endeavours for the Re∣storation of her Husband; all these Considerations stagger'd the Resolutions of her Chastity, and turmoyl'd her with a thousand various thoughts. In the mean time, the King, to whom the Queen had not as yet open'd her Lips, since the Vow that he had made her, first breaking silence, Madam, said he, I know not to what cause to attribute the disturbance which I behold in your Looks, or whither I may be able to make a favou∣rable Construction of it. To which the Queen, not able to re∣ject the Courtly Addresses of our Mo∣narch, and no less willing to keep him in hopes, that one day he might see him∣self Gainer of the Conquest to which he aspir'd; Sir, said she, after a most Ami∣able and engaging manner, The ex∣pressions you have made use of, to let me understand the Condition of your Heart, have plung'd me into a deep Me∣ditation; and I can hardly believe, that a Prince, like you, who are the Terror of all Europe, should be in want of bet∣ter Objects, to Sigh for a Person, whom Fortune has so severely handl'd. My Misfortunes are daily before my Eyes,
and the Fatal remembrance of 'em will never leave me till Death. Madam, reply'd the King, it would be in vain for me to reiterate what I have so often repeated over and over a∣gain; that I am deeply sensible of your Misfortunes, and that they never yet could make me loose the least respect which is due to your Birth. I look up∣on you still as a Queen and what is more, absolute over the Empire of my Will; and the secret Charms which I have discover'd in your Perfections, the force of which is inevitable, have con∣strain'd me to acknowledge the Tor∣ments which I suffer. Among a thou∣sand Beauties that appear at Court, I do not meet with those subduing Al∣lurements, which I find in you, and by which I perceive my self so mortally Wounded. The Queen was about to have re∣turn'd an Answer, and to have let his Majesty know, how infinitely she was beholding to him, for his kind Senti∣ments and Favours bestow'd upon her, when King James, who had been at Pa∣ris to Visit Father La Chaise, came in and spoyl'd a good Complement. The
Reverend Father, it seems, had carry'd him to his House in the Fauxburg St. Antony, where they had spent the whole day together, and where among other things, they fell into Discourse about the Affairs of England, and so by degrees, into a deep debate, which was the most probable way for the King to regain the three Kingdoms he had lost. The Re∣verend Father, whose Brains are Fertile in Counsel and Intrigues, had display'd upon that Subject, the whole extent of his Eloquence, promising the distressed King all the Assistance, that he was capa∣ble to afford him. Those Assurances so sincere and profitable, had warm'd the Unfortunate King's Heart, and brought into his Countenance an Air of Gay∣ety, which accompanied all his Actions. In this humour, entring the Room, Bro∣ther, said he, you've a Blessed time on't, to be always courting the Ladies. 'Tis very true, reply'd his Majesty, they have a powerful Ascendant over me. The Scene of the Discourse being thus Chang'd, King James fell into a long Story of the Fathers kind Entertain∣ment, the various Subjects upon which they had been conferring Notes toge∣ther,
and the wholesome Consolations he had receiv'd from that same Consci∣ence-Director. He extoll'd his Wit and his Merit, and applauded his Majesties Choice of such an Excellent Father Con∣fessor. But our Monarch, who had other Things to trouble his Brains withal, then the Encomiums of Father La Chaise, look'd upon K. James's Chat as imper∣tinent; as being altogether uneasie in his Mind, and not knowing how his Affairs stood in the Heart of his New Mistriss, who was no less displeas'd with the In∣terruption on her Side: And in this humour the King took his leave with only a Farewel, Brother, till I see you again. King James waited upon him to his Coach, where he pay'd him a thou∣sand Complements, and pray'd him to continue his wonted Goodness to∣ward him; and the King assur'd him he should be always the same. Being come to Versailles, he abandon'd himself wholly to his Amorous Passion, revolving in his mind all his Mistresses Charms, and the Obliging Ways by which she had engag'd his Heart, were the Subject of his Ruminations all that
Night. The next Morning he return'd with an Unconceivable Impatience to revisit the Object of his Love. But foreseeing, that perhaps he might not have a favourable Opportunity to find the Queen alone, she being Visited by the Dutchess of Portsmouth, and Madam de Noailles, her Intimate Friends, he wrote her the following Lines. The Kings Letter to the Banish'd Queen. Madam, SInce I was born, I never lov'd so much as now I do; my Love for you is of another Nature then what I was wont to feel upon the like Occasions. This Violent Passion can proceed from no other cause then from your Merit, which distinguishes you from other Women. Never say then, Madam. that this is the usual Discourse that Men make use of, to inveagle the Fair and Beautiful, since the Troubles of my Heart, and the restless Disquiet of my Mind continually prove the contrary. Answer my Love more
kindly then hitherto you have done; assuring you, that if you afford me the least Hope, I shall quickly find Re∣pose. Adieu Madam. The Queen receiv'd this Letter with an extraordinary Joy; but she did not think it proper to return an Answer: which very much disturb'd the King; and made him resolve to return that day to St. Germains. He found the Queen in her Closet, reading an Amo∣rous History sent her out of England; to whom, Madam, said he, I draw ye from a more pleasing Divertisment. To which the Queen made answer, that not having else to do she took a Book in her Hand; but that now she would make a better use of the happy Hour that presented it self, to enjoy his Maje∣sties Company. The King whose Passion was Violent, ask'd her in a kind of Disorder that fre∣quently befalls true Lovers, why she had not written to him; and told her withal, that she had reduc'd him almost to ut∣ter Despair to find his Love so ill re∣pay'd by a Person so Amiable; and that
he had great reason to bewail his Desti∣ny, not having ever Sigh'd in vain be∣fore. The Queen, who is Witty, and ready at Replys, told him that her Husband never parted from her all that Day; and that his Majesty having a Love for Madam de Maintenon, she was unwilling to draw upon her self the Hatred of a Rival, who might trouble that little repose that was left her. The King, who is an utter Enemy to Arguments and Reasons where he Loves, told her that he had power sufficient to preserve her from all her Fears; that he had a high Esteem for that Lady; but that he still preserv'd a Tenderness for an Object of Adoration: and that the Marchioness of Maintenon had too much Discretion to contradict him in his Pleasures. An Answer of that Nature split the Queen's Heart, and inspir'd her with several thoughts, that might have carry'd her a great Way; but the Dutchess of Portsmouth's Arrival deliver'd her out of her Perplexity; and the King, who is very Complaisant in Ladies Society, tack'd the Conversation together for a
long time, so that the Day pass'd mer∣rily away. They fell into Discourse of the French and English Customs, and of other things very diverting. But the Evening drawing on, as jealous of their Happiness, brake off these pleasing en∣tertainments, and separated the Illustri∣ous Company. Madam de Maintenon, who was by this time got safe to our Lady of Deli∣verance, upon All Saints Eve▪ and tyr'd with her Journey, having travel'd half the way a foot in the Habit of a Penitent, went to a House of one that was her Ac∣quaintance, with her Damsel La Caverne, who was no less weary then her Mistriss. The Lady of the House was very much surpriz'd to see that such a Person, as she was, should undertake such painful Mortifications; but the Marchioness up and told her the Important occasion of her Pilgrimage: That her Husband Scarron had appear'd to her, and up∣braided her; and that she was to say so many Masses for him: For this Reason, said she, my Dear Friend, I am come hither to Pray to the Patroness of your Parish, the Mother of Deliverance, to aid me in my present Affliction. To which
the Lady answered, that she was the best Saint in the World, and that she wrought several Miracles every Day, and that of all those that besought her with an Ardent Zeal, she never sent any one a∣way, without some effect of her Good∣ness. The next Day our Heroess lay all Day long i'th Church, (which was a great Testimony of her Piety and Zeal) con∣tinually and most Ardently imploring the favour of the Saint in the following form of Prayer. The Marchioness of Maintenon's Prayer to our Lady of Deliverance. QƲeen of Heaven, Guide to Salvation, Refuge of Afficted Souls, take Pity of Me, and of Him, whom I recommend to thy favour, and who has lain languishing for these thirty Years in Purgatory; and who perhaps without thy Succour must be for'd to stay there till Doomsday: Send me not back, dear Mother of Mercy, without Affording me some Sign of thy Protection. I recommend the Soul of Monsieur Scarron into thy Hands, and beseech thee to admit him into Paradise. This is the only favour, which a Miserable Penitent, Devoted only
to thy Service, begs at thy Hands. Pardon ne my past Transgressions, and all those Sins, which I shall commit for the future: Safely direct all the Designs of St. Lewis ur Good King; and so order it, that he may obtain Victory over his Fnemies, and particularly over the Huguenots that Pro∣phane thy Holy Name. Thou knowest how much I love the Light of the Eaithful; and that I put all my Confidence in thy Divine Power: Now then shew it, by giving Re∣pose to this Martyr, who must otherwise be a perpetual Slave to his Torments. She also said a world of Ave Maria's, which brought up the Rear of all her Pious Ejaculations. In these Extraordi∣nary Devotions the Day was spent; be∣sides that, she was present with a most Religious awe, at all the Prayers that were said to the Ghost of Scarron. The Festival being over, our Marchioness, who is as Generous as the Sun, scorn'd to depart the Holy Place, without ma∣king a Civil Present to our Lady of Deli∣verance, from whom she expected so much ease. She therefore presented her with an Infinite number of Wax Tapers, de∣siring the Priest, who was to say the Mas∣ses
to let 'em burn Night and Day, as many as he thought sitting for the Ho∣nour of the Saint; which she left to his Discretion, well-knowing that he would not cheat her for all the World. Madam, answer'd the Priest, you may return with full Assurance, and believe that  think my self extreamly happy, that 'tis in my power to be Serviceable to a Lady of your Quality; besides, that 'tis a matter of Conscience. This humble re∣ply mollify'd the Heart of Madam d Maintenon, and drew out of her Pocket a little Purse full of Single Money, which she presented to the Priest, conjuring him by all that was Sacred in the World to pray to God and all the Saints continu∣ally for her poor Deceased Husband. The next Morning, our Heroess set forward again in order to her return for Paris, very well satisfy'd and almost con∣vinc'd of the Good Success of her Voy∣age. Upon her arrival at Paris, the King was over joy'd to see her; He told her, that the Time of her Absence had been very tedious to him; that she had perform'd such an Extra ordinary Penance, that she could not question the Success of it, and that he believ'd that Scarron
was by that time in Heaven; or else he was certainly the most Miserable of all Mankind. To which, Madam de Maintenon fetch∣ing a deep Sigh, reply'd, that having done her Doty, she lest the Rest to the most Blessed Virgin to whom she had recommended  Martyr a thousand times: So that  all that Dy'd were to give the Living so much Trouble, there would be no felicity in this Would. I must acknowledge, Madam, reply'd the Monarch, that Purgatory is a thing which very much perplexes me; for when we have done all we can do in this World, we know not, when we are about to die, whither we shall go. Sir, answer'd the Marchioness, your Majesty cannot chuse but know that Good Works and Penances are of great force to moderate the Pains of Purgatory, and to avert the Anger of Heaven that hangs over our Heads; and in regard I know that M. Scarron had never any Inclina∣tion for these sort of Mortifications; his Genius carrying him rather to Jollity and Mirth, I am firmly perswaded that this is the Reason why he is kept so long in Purgatory.
'Slife, then cry'd the King, what an Unhappy Man am I, Madam, who love the Pleasures of this Life, as I do, and whatever is capable to Charm the Senses; and find but a very feeble Incli∣nation in my self, God knows, to Pe∣nances and Mortifications; what can I expect but to burn Eternally in the Fires of Purgatory? Sir, reply'd Madam de Maintenon, your Majesty carries things a little too far. I find ye extreamly Godly, and full of Devout Sentiments for Religion. You have perform'd a most noble Action of late Days, in Extirpating the Hereticks out of your Kingdom, and causing the Catholick Church to Triumph. These Great Exploits will never dye; but will Infallibly carry ye to Heaven without any danger of Purgatory. This is that indeed which comforts me a little, Madam, said the King; for God knows, the real Motives of my Design were grounded upon the Propa∣gation of the Faith. While the King was yet speaking, in came King James, his Spouse, and the Dutchess of Portsmouth, being newly ar∣riv'd at Versailles to Congratulate our
Heroess upon her Return from her Pil∣grimage, which she had conceal'd from them, as being unwilling that any Body should know it. Ah, Madam, said the Queen, saluting her, you keep your Af∣fars very Private. I ask'd the King se∣veral Times, what was become of ye; but he would needs persuade me all along, that you were still at St. Cyr, which I could hardly believe, because I never met ye abroad. You know, Madam, that the Con∣cerns of Devotion are or ought to be carry'd Privately; and that our Works of Piety are then most Meritorious, when they make least Noise. You must not take it ill then of the Marchiness, reply'd the Dutchess of Portsmouth, that she kept her Pilgrimage Private, for Reasons of Conscience: we must do all we can to purchase Hea∣ven. What you say, answer'd K James, is admirably well said: but you must agree with me, that there are some Persons born under bad Constellations; and that frequently those Stars shed down their Malignant Influences upon us in such a manner, that 'tis Impossible to avoid 'em.
My Misfortune is an Apparent Proof of what I have set forth. For all that I did in England, while in possession of the Crown, was only out of a Design to labour the Propagation of the Faith, to Reform the Laws, Polish the People, and to have done many other Things of that Nature; Nevertheless you all see what I got by it. Sir, said the Dutchess, what you have told us, would carry us too far; it de∣serves too long Reflexions; and the Sub∣ject being Mournful would beget a Con∣versation that would Kill us with Melan∣cholly. Our business is to divert Madam de Maintenon, who looks as if she came out of the Monuments. Let us all go to Morrow, if his Majesty pleases, to chuse King and Queen at Marli, and put a New Crown upon the Head of our Unfortunate Prince. All the Company applauded the Dutchesses Motion, who is Mistriss of the most Engaging Charms in the World, and who has the knack to win Affections when she pleases her self: And here it may be proper to let the World know, who this Dutchess of Portsmouth was, that Enslav'd the Heart of Charles II.
till Death. She is Daughter to the Marquis de Keroues, a Person of Quality in Britany, who had lost much of his Cre∣dit, before he got his Daughter into the Service of the Princess Henrietta Stuart, where the K. of England saw her the first time, and Lov'd her ever after. But to return to that Part which was acted next Day at Marli, where there were a great Number of Lords and La∣dies to Solemnize that same Courtly-Fe∣stival, the K. who was in a good humour, spoke a thousand pleasant things to the Queen; Nor could he retain from giving her Signes of his Passion. Madam de Maintenon seem'd a little Nettled at it; but being very Politick, she dissembled it. Abundance of Healths were Drank, and K. James was K. of the Ceremony. Whereupon our Prince said, siniling, that he was mightily pleas'd that For∣tune had savour'd him so well, and that he was disingag'd from his Word: For that he had often promised to make him King, and restore him to his Throne; and now he had no Reason to complain: adding, that to convince him further of the care which he took for his Welsare, he would entertain him with the Merit
of the Dutchess of G—on. K. James answer'd with an Air of Gayety, that he did not deny but that he had been touch'd with Love and respect for that Amiable personage. I know it very well, Brother, repli'd our Monarch, that you had an Extraordinary respect for her, and I agree with you that we are created to Love the fair Sex. The Dutchess of Portsmouth display'd her sparkling Wit upon many occasions; and particularly in sustaining the Kings Sentiments, who sate near to the Queen, and the most Passionate of all Mankind; but the Princess being afraid of her Ri∣wal, seem'd to be tormented with Jea∣lousie upon this Occasion. The K. who is Sagacious enough, perceiv'd it at first, and to convince her that he was above those Little things, he pull'd out of his Pocket some Verses which he had made for her in the Morn∣ing, telling her very pleasantly that he was happy in a Lovely Muse, which made him oftentimes have a mind to play the Poet, and that sometimes he took a Ramble with her to Parnassus. Look ye, says he, what she has inspir'd me with to Day, But he presented them to the
Queen in such a very Earnest and hasty manner, as discover'd the Confusion he was in. The Princess receiv'd them very Civilly, and read these words, My Tender Heart fair Iris hath in∣flam'd, He who hath seen her, can't for Love be blam'd: How amiable are those Charming Eyes! And yet how Guilty, Monarchs to Surprize. This last Blow was Like to have caus'd Madam Maintenon to die for Grief, but her Love not being so Nice as to endure no Sharer, she comforted her self the more easily, being unwilling to oppose the pleasures of her Prince, as preferring her Fortune and his Good Will to all the pleasures of an Amorous Amusement. The Day being spent in such agreea∣ble diversions, every one took leave of each other. The K. attended the Q. of England to St. Germains, and our Marchioness was fully resolv'd to return back to her Abby. As soon as she ar∣riv'd, all the Ladies of St. Louis, and the Young Damsels embrac'd her tenderly,
signifying that her absence was insup∣portable to them. Our Heroess, on the other hand, assur'd them, that she had had her share of the Grief, and suffer'd no less then they, having continually thought on her Spiritual Militia; and as it was not long since she return'd from her Pilgrimage, she had always a strong Inclination to see them again; but could not prevent her staying sometime at the Palace of Versailles to pay her respects first to the King, and that now she was to be more at St. Cyr, being oblig'd to pray further to God and St. Louis for Monsieur Scarron, that he might have a speedy entrance into his desir'd rest. Although the King, and all the Ladies whom I have mention'd, did their ut∣most to remove the Marchionesses dis∣content, nevertheless she abandon'd her self to a Continn'd Pensiveness. Two mighty things did constantly ope∣rate in her Mind, the Reproaches where∣with Scarron had upbraided her extreme∣ly, and the Admonition which he gave her, as to the Changeable humour of that Prince, and the inconstancy of his Love to any particular Object, as finding always Variety of new Charms,
which presaged that she should have the same fate with others of his Mistresses. These Last Words of Scarron had made a mighty Impression upon the Mind of our Heroess, and the Adven∣tures which befell her on the day of the three Kings at Marli, did fully confirm her in her thoughts, especially when she reflected upon the pleasure and transport, which his Majesty discovered in presence of the Queen of England; which con∣vinc'd her, that her own good Fortune was not to be of any long duration, if she did not behave her self with great Complaisance and Conduct. She very often blam'd the Inconstancy and Volatile humour of Men, whose Love is guided by their Sense, and lasts no longer then while the beloved Object is able to Charm them; it being Impossi∣ble to lay any Solid Foundation upon their Conduct. She consider'd also, that the Weakness of a Woman was Great to yield up what is most Dear and Valuable to her in the World upon such false Appearances; confessing In∣geniously, that a true Friendship had a thousand times more sweet Attractives and lasted till Death; that Love was
only a Passion begot by the presence of an Amiable Person, but that Friendship was a Virtue which Sympathy fix'd be∣twixt two Friends by their Mutual care of, and continual Services to one ano∣ther. Those Moral Reflections oblig'd our Marchioness to spend several days in great Solitude, although she assisted at the Masles which where said for Scar∣ron's Soul, with all her Damsels at Saint Cyr, every Day according to Custom. The Reverend Father La Chaise, and Father Bourdalon, who had not seen Ma∣dam Maintenon after her return, being taken up with Ecclesiastical Affairs, were impatient till they had given her a Visit; whereupon they took Coach and went to her Abby, where our Heroess re∣ceiv'd them very Agreeably after her Devout and Modest manner. The Re∣verend Fathers made known the Satisfa∣ction which they had to hear of her Arrival, and that apparently her Jour∣ney had been happy, for they had not ceas'd during her Absence, to Pray and make Vows for her and Monsieur Scarron, whose Soul must needs be now in the Enjoyment of the height of Bliss.
I wish it be so, Fathers, answer'd our Marchioness, with all my Soul, for that's the true rest to which all of us ought to Aspire, there being nothing in this Vast Universe certain nor Solid; we often possess Grandeur without tranquility, and pleasures without repose, our Rea∣son not being able to surmount all those Obstacles which oppose themselves to those good things, sills us with continu∣al Cares, which give us perpetual Dis∣quiet. In the mean time, Madam, replys Father La Chaise, we have that share of Reason which ought to distinguish us from other Animals, and direct us here to find Remedies for those things which torment us. 'Tis true, Father, says our Heroess, but Reason, of which we make such a Noise, affords but a small assistance against our Passions and the Troubles of Life; It opposes it self to all, but overcomes nothing; Tears our Hearts with a thousand Remorses and perpetual disqui∣ets, and those are all the effects which it produces by its severe strength. If it be as you say, Madam, answer'd the Reverend Father, the Beasts are
happier in their Innocence then we; for they follow their Natural Inclination with great Tranquility, and never feel any thing of those troubles which Am∣bition or Interest create within us Mor∣tal Men. You have spoke Excellently well, Fa∣ther, says Madam Maintenon, for we have reason to Envy the quiet and sweet repose of those peaceful Creatures; and consider that all the Advantages, which we brag of with so much Vanity, are not equal to their Living without in∣ward trouble. But, Madam, Answers Father Bour∣dalou, that Tranquility is all the happi∣ness which these Animals enjoy in their being, for their Soul dies with their Body, and returns to its first nothing. In truth, Father, if it were not the hopes which we have that our Souls are Immortal, and that after this Life we should enjoy a peaceable Repose, we should be more to be pitied then the Brute Beasts; but I believe that those Sweets and Joys shall be only dispens'd, according to our Good Works, which I do always believe to be Meritorious.
It is certain, Madam, Answers the Father, that our Works justisie us before God, and that they Merit not only Eter∣nal Life, but likewise an Augmentation of Glory; and we can also satisfie the Punishment due to our Sins by our own Sufferings. Then Father, says Madam Maintenon, 'tis of great Importance to a Believer to Labour with Great care for Mortifica∣tion by a continual Penance, and to do many Good Works to augment their degree of Glory. Madam, replys Father La Chaise, God hath Elected us, as having foreseen our Works, and the Good Motions of our Free Will; for the Conversion of a Man is in part due to his own Natural Strength, and not wholly to Grace. But, Father, Answers our Heroess, If there be any Persons persectly Just in this World, ought they not to be assu∣red of their Salvation. I will tell you, Madam, Answer'd the Father, that Believers may fall from the Grace of God, and perish finally. But we hope still that by our Mortifications, our Penances, and the Pains which we endure in Purgatory, we may co to
Paradise, for our Lord Jesus Christ hath deliver'd us from the Guilt, but not from all the Punishments due to our Sins. We must then be purg'd by the Expia∣tion of our Faults and endure those Tor∣ments; and this is what the Children of God are to expect when this Life is ended. I assure you, Father, answer'd Ma∣dam, Maintenon, with a Penitent Visage and Tone, that such thoughts as those do entirely cool my Heart, take it off from all the pleasures of this Life, and make me Groan earnestly for a Holy Solitude, where I may Work out my Salvation without any Interruption. Madam, says the Reverend Father, what we said was not a design to affect you, as it plainly appears to have done. This is only Discourse; We ought not to understand the Articles of our Faith in such a rigid manner, we must take up a milder sort of Morality; and moreover, a Person so Young and Charming as you are, is not oblig'd to abandon the Pleasures of Life so soon,
In the mean time, Father, says the Marchioness, I begin to disrelish them, and if it were not for the Engagements I am under to his Majesty, I would re∣tire my self out of the World for the rest of my Days, and go into a Covent; and I must Confess, that I have a mighty Inclination to the Capuchins: I envy the happiness of those Religious Per∣sons, they Live in much Devotion and Austerity, and every Day before they go to Bed they say a Rosary, with the Litanies of the Holy Virgin, all which Piety Charms me Extreamly. But, Madam, Answer'd Father Bour∣dalou, methinks you have reason to be contented, seeing you enjoy an Abbey, wherein you may carry your Devotion to what height you please. True, Father, repli'd our Heroess; but in this Society I am divided be∣twixt my Devotion and the World, and sometimes cannot be private, be∣cause of the continual Care which I must have of the Youth, and the Orders I must give out every Day to the Com∣munity. I tell you freely, that that does oftentimes vex my mind.
Just as the Father was going to An∣swer, a Gentleman from the King Ar∣riv'd at St. Cyr, and was Conducted in∣to the Marchionesses Closet, by one of the Penitent Sisters, which broke off that Conversation, and oblig'd the good Fathers to return to Paris. Our Marchioness ask'd the Gentle∣man what his Majesties Commands were; who answer'd, that he pray'd her to come to Versails to morrow. Madam de Maintenon, who knows above all things how to take her Mea∣sures, went to wait upon His Majesty next day, who was the most Melan∣choly and out of Humour that could be, upon Monsieur Catinats Arrival at Ver∣sails, to regulate the State of the War for next Campagne, after his Marriage with Mademoiselle de Dangeau. After Dinner, Our Monarch to divert himself, went with Madam Maintenon to the D. of Orleans; where were pre∣sent the Danphin, the D. of Chartres, the Duchess of Nouailles and Duchess of Portsmouth, with many other Ladies and Lords; and being the time of the Car∣nival, they play'd all day. After Sup∣per, those in Masks came in to Dance,
but retir'd betimes, referring it to an∣other Season, because there had been a Comedy, in which were Represented all the Celestial and Rural Deities, with their Royal Equipage and Extraordinary Machines upon the Theatre. The first Scene was a Plain, encom∣pass'd with an Infinite Number of Trees just Budding, which surnish'd a most delicious Shade in that Solitary Place. These are the Names of the Gods which appear'd there. Saturn or Time with a Hunger Starv'd Countenance, devouring every thing he met with; the very Stones not excepted: Jupiter darting Thunderbolts, and keep∣ing the Universe in Obedience; The Sun environ'd with a thousand Lights, and his Oracles, was mounted on a Cha∣riot drawn by the Hours; Mercury the God of Eloquence, Ambassador and In∣terpreter to all the Gods with Wings at his hands and feet, and a Caduceus in his hand, twisted with two Serpents, to denote Peace and Concord; Bacchus on a Triumphal Chariot drawn by Ti∣gres cover'd with Deer-Skins, his Scep∣ter Adorn'd with Leaves of Ivie and Vines; Mars the God of War and Bat∣tel
Arm'd Cap-a-pee, having a Helmet on his Head, a Lance in one Hand, a Pike in the other; Neptune with his Trident, sitting in a Great Scallop-shell for his Chariot, and being drawn by Whales and Sea Calves; the Tritons half Men and half Dolphins, attended him Sounding a Trumpet made of the Scales of Fish. Pluto with an Infernal and Gloomy Air, marcht before the Old Ferryman Charon, who receiv'd into his Barge without distinction, all those that Ar∣riv'd in the other World, and had by his side a horrible Dog, with Three Heads crawling full of Serpents. The Furies follow'd after, with Burning Flambeaux, soming with Rage, their Eyes sparkling, and instead of Hair, had their Heads cover'd with dangling Vipers. Sleep bringing quiet Repose to man∣kind, attended by one of the Officers, called Morpheus the God of Dreams, who drew all sorts of Figures. The Theatre chang'd Scenes, and re∣presented a pleasant Meadow, enamel∣led with thousands of Flowers; and there all the Goddesses appear'd. Cibele Queen of the Earth sate
Crown'd with Cities, and a multitude of of Trees and Animals. Round her was Juno in the middle of Kingdoms and Riches, follow'd by Hebe the Goddess of Youth, who continually fill'd out Nectar for Jupiter to drink. Pallas Arm'd all over, having a Lance in her hand, with the Liberal Arts, and the Sciences for her Ornaments; she was follow'd by Diana Goddess of the Woods, and Huntsmen carrying a Bow and Arrows, with her Nymphs attending her. Venus the Goddess of Love and Sensuality, an incompara∣ble Beauty, was drawn in a Chariot with Swans and Doves, and followed by the three Graces her Daughters. After her came Aurora Laughing, in a Guilded Chariot, with her rosie Fin∣gers, to proclaim the Coming of the Sun; she was followed by Blind For∣tune, having Honour and Riches in her Power, and managing a Wheel which she turn'd about without ceasing. Flora was in the midst of a fine Gar∣den, which produc'd a thousand Flowers, caress'd by the Zephyri, which never abandon her; and Proserpina with her other Nymphs, who are always busie in gathering Posies.
The Third Scene represented Mount Helicon, Parnassus the Fountains of Dip∣nocrania and Aganippides Consecrated to the Muses, Apollo sate in the middle of that pleasant Solitude, composing Mu∣sical Airs and Verses. Upon the Mountain sate Pan, God of the Shepherds, with his Beard. Goats Feet, and Horns on his head, playing on a Melodious Flute. The Goat-footed Fauns and Satyrs, danc'd several Giggs with the Neighbouring Nymphs. Cupid the God of Love, hover'd pleasantly over this Illustrious Assembly, fluttering his Wings with extraordinary Delight and Sweetness, but maliciously surveying all the Arrows in his Quiver, with a design to Wound all the Heroes and Heroesles. He thought fit to Wound Jupiter as the most sensible, and metamorphos'd him into all sorts of shapes, as assuming the form o a Ball, carrying Europe on his back and passing the Sea; at another time into a Showre of Gold, descending through a Power of Brass to the fair Danae; then into an Eagle to Ravish young Ganimedes, and putting himself into all Shapes conve∣nient
for his Gallantries; so that we must say here with Tertullian, that we must not be surpriz'd at those Natural Inclinations, to which Love carry men, since the Deities themselves give us Examples of it. All those Gods and Goddesses were the Idols of the Pagans, who moreover believ'd, that the Air was full of Pet∣ty Gods or Demons, and imagin'd that they did ordinarily imploy themselves in humane Affairs. They paid them homage every day, because of their sub∣lime Vertues and extraordinary Merits, coming very near, say they, to the per∣fection of the other Deities; and they did ordinarily Consecrate a Dra∣gon to them, as a Mark of their Immor∣tality to which they were Arriv'd, as may be seen in Plutarch, where Cleome∣nes was esteem'd a God by the Aegypti∣ans, because they saw a Serpent come out of his body after he was put to Death. All those Fictions did strongly seize the Spirits of those people, and the young following the Example of the Old, made one of the Ancient Philoso∣phers say, that Man was a True Ani∣mal of Imitation.
But we must leave those thoughts, and return to our Theatrical Piece, which was made designedly, and by the Dauphin Commanded to be represented by the Kings Comedians, on purpose to divert those disquieting thoughts, into which that Monarch falls many times in a day, upon the Account of France, which lies desolate on all sides, and cries out, that it can do no more, if Heav'n don't Bless it with a favourable Aspect. Another considerable disquitet, which he Labours under, is how to find Mo∣ney to maintain such a pressing War; but all those Reflexions don't hinder the King and Court from diverting them∣selves, as if they were in the most pro∣found Peace. Every day a thousand pleasant designs are formed to please the Ladies. The Comedy enter∣tain'd them a long time in Charming Sports of Wit. All the Princes and Lords taking a mighty pleasure to give proofs of their fine Genius, by drawing Morals from the Figures represented, and applying them conformably to their Inclinations.
I don't find since France was Go∣vern'd by Kings, that there has been any Reign more like this of Louis XIV. then that of Hen. III. When Pleasures a∣bounded, in spite of the Miseries of the Kingdom. Sensuality Triumph'd, and led all other passions Captive. When that Prince had tri'd all the di∣vertisements which Nature had form'd, and deni'd himself nothing which could Charm his Senses; he went in Pennance with all his Minions and Lords, to the Convent of Augustins, and to the Great Church of our Lady, two and two, like the Votaries of Rome, or Avignon, clad in White Holland, in the same manner that is observ'd by the Religious Fra∣ternities. In this Procession, the King marcht without Guard, or being distinguish'd from others, either by Habit or Order, the singers went before, cloath'd in the same Livery, and Singing the Litanies of the Blessed Virgin Melodiously. All those Pious Penitents being Arriv'd at Church, Sung Salve Regina on their Knees in Char∣ming Musick. The Great Rain which lasted the whole day, did not hinder
them to perform those Mysteries and Exemplary Ceremonies, tho' their Hoods, &c. were Wet through to the Skin. 'Tis ordinarily the Genius of the most Voluptuous, to give some share of their time to Devotion, to make it appear by that External preciseness, that their heart is always fill'd with good Princi∣ples, and that all the Pleasures which they are taken up with, bear no propor∣tion to their Piety. I cannot leave this Subject, without taking notice how well Henry III. could make his Devotions and Sensuality a∣gree, by an unusual Sympathy. After having us'd divers Mortifications, du∣ring the Festival of Corpus Christi, where he was Solemnly present. The Week following, he made a Feast for the Duke his Brother and the Lords and Captains who accompa∣nied him at the Siege of Charite, who were served by all the finest Ladies of the Court clad in Green and in Mans Habit, and all the Guests were Cloathed in the same, being follow'd by Pages and
Gentlemen, Cloath'd in like manner; so that, there was bought in Paris and other Towns, 60000 Livres worth of Green Silk for the Solemnity. It may be said without Hyperbole, that this is to carry on their Criminal Pleasures too far, and a very sorry ac∣knowledgment to Heav'n for its Boun∣ties. Men in General have Natural Weaknesses, with which they can in no manner be Reproach'd, without refle∣cting upon the first Cause as Unjust, God having sinish'd and bounded his Nature: It is not in the Power of Man to surmount his Infirmities; but we must distinguish well, betwixt Natural Defects, and those acquir'd by Habit or Imitation. The Latter may be cur'd by care, and our endeavours by good E∣ducation, to form a second Life in our selves; for to continue always in Evil, is not to Live. I have lest my pleasant Company to employ their Wits. Let's now see, what our Heroess is doing. We shall find her Labouring under Jealousie, not that she Loves the King so intirely,
but that she is afraid, lest her Rival should carry off some part of her Hap∣piness, and share in her good Fortune. After she had well ruminated on the in∣constant humour of the Prince, and reason'd in a Philosophical Manner; she found it good to put a New Obli∣gation upon him, being well assur'd, that that was the way to take him in the most sensible part, and that by this Method, she should always keep her Station with his Majesty; for we are or∣dinarily thankful, to those who procure us such things, as we believe to be pro∣per for us. Our Marchioness then, to divert that Prince, brought to him at Versailles, the most Beautiful Damsel of the World; but you will pardon me, if I don't tell you her Name, because 'tis a Court Intrigue, which we keep very secret for Madam Maintenons sake. 'Tis sufficient, that she is under her Con∣duct in the Abbey of St. Cyr. Let's return to our fair Lady, who was pre∣sented to the King, on purpose to Charm him, and to give the greatest Mortification that could be to her Ri∣val.
His Majesty, whose tenderness to the Sex is unlimited, and who Loves all A∣miable Objects, took it very kind∣ly from our Heroess, and thankt her ve∣y Joyfully, telling her, that he was indebted to her, for the most pleasant Moments of his Life, and that having ost Madamoiselle de Fontange that she had also given him, and whom he che∣isht alone, as an Adorable Person, and one Worthy to be Loved, This Lady might with Justice be said to fill her place, and satisfie for the Loss which he had sustain'd, finding her every whit as Charming as she was. Madam de Maintenon was extreamly glad, to find that her design had ta∣ken so well, and that thereby, she had rendred her self always necessary for every thing that might tend to the satis∣faction of the Princes desires, and ha∣ving brought him acquainted with the Beauty of the Seraglio, she left our A∣morous Monarch with his New Chains, to satisfie himself at Leisure, with the Pleasures of his New Conquest.
In the mean time, she was taken up in her Ordinary Devotion, which was, to pray to God for the Soul of the Deceased Scarron, and Lent being at hand, she went continually to St. Lazarus, to say her Prayers, with an almost un∣parallel'd Devotion. La Caverne, one of her Maids, whom she lov'd for her good Qualities, Na∣ture having Adorn'd her with a Wit proper for her purpose, accompanied her every where; and her Mistress oftentimes entrusted her with her Secrets. One Day our Heroess acquainted her with the trouble she endur'd, in Dreaming continually of Scarron's Ghost; I confess to you my Dear, says she, in a Mournful tone, that so long a Pe∣nance in Purgatory, is a severe Pay∣ment for the Pleasures which we may enjoy here in this World. For my part, Madam, replyed La Caverne, I believe Monsieur Scarron to be at rest, and methinks that you have no further need of Praying to the
Saints, and the Saints for Him: and this I observ'd when we were together in the Church of our Lady of Delive∣rance; for as you were upon your Knees before her, the good Mother of Devo∣tion seem'd to me to have heard your Prayers. Ah! my Dear, (cry'd the Marchio∣ness) how cam'st thou to penetrate her Sacred Mysteries: thou must have surely had some secret Revelation from Heaven. I feel within my self that Comfort which is not to be ex∣press'd, from what thou hast told me; and with all my Heart I beseech that In∣comparable Saint to afford me her As∣sistance all the rest of my Life. Never question it in the least, Madam, (reply'd La Caverne for she is a good Conductress to Salvation, that listens to every word that is said to her with a most Saint-like Affability, and works surprizing Miracles every day. One of my Cousins, (Madam) who had lost her Sight with the Small-Pox, had no sooner perform'd a Pilgrimage to this
same Queen of Heaven, but she saw as well as I do: moreover, she makes the Cooked Streight, and the Dumb to speak, and does a hunder'd other things becoming her Grandeur. I was inform'd a long while ago of the most Admirable Vertues of this renown¦ed Queen of Glory; for which reason I cannot do better then in addressing my Prayers for Mr. Scarron, to this Motion of Mercy, whose Goodness is so much to be admir'd. I assure thee, I have always had a particular Veneration for the Discretion and Civility of our La of Deliverance: as long as I live I shall always make her a Sacrifice of all the Affections of my Heart, my Vows and my Prayers: nay, I will make her privy to all my Sins and Transgression for I am perswaded she will cleans me with Hysop, and pardon 'em all. What a Happiness it is, (reply'd La Caverne) to find a Loving, General Saint, that will pardon us our Sins; for I find, (Madam) that you and I wan∣der and go astray every hour of the
Day, as Father Commire said in his Pulpit last Sunday. And therefore it behooves us to pray to her, That she would be pleas'd to let her sweet Fac'd Angels continually accompany'd us. There would have been no end of this Superstitious Jargonry between the Marchioness and her Secretary, but that she was to send her to Paris to buy something that was plain and modest for her to wear all the Lent; for that she resolv'd to haunt the Capuchin's Church in the Dress of a Penitent. The Im∣parting of which Secret to the King, gave him as great a Satisfaction, as if his Minioness had made him a Disco∣very of a Gold Mine. Nor did his Majesty make any Body privy to it, but the Duke of Luxemburgh, and that too under Enigmatical Expressions, telling him, That he had a Dream which had so vehemently charm'd him, that 'twas impossible for any man to express in words the Pleasure he found in it. Oh—Sir, (said the Marshal) of ne∣cessity these must be some Sweets of
Love that have infus'd into your Ma∣jesty this charming Enthusiasm. For I know nothing in the world that more delightfully invades our Sences then Amorou; Reflections. Moreover, con∣tinu'd the Marshal) I know that you are never offended to see your self willingly drill'd along by that inevitable Inclina∣tion to which we are reduc'd by the powerful Attractions of Beauty that so strongly fascinate us sometimes, that we are no way able to defend our selves against 'em. 'Tis true, (answer'd our Monarch) that the Great Pleasure of my thought∣ful Meditations, was to see my self be∣lov'd of the Person most deserving A∣doration in the world: but my Hap∣piness appear'd so great, that it fur∣pass'd my Knowledge. I could have wish'd with all my Soul, that the Dream had been real, but Felicities so real are seldom to be met with. Nevertheless, (reply'd the Marshal) a Prince that carries a thousand Charms about him as you do, never sighs long,
as being assur'd of his Conquest. You are like Caesar, you do but see and van∣quish. I'le swear it upon all the E∣vangelists in Christendom, that you are passionately belov'd when er'e you please. In good sooth, (said the King to the Marshal) if all Womens Hearts were as tender as yours, We might affirm our selves happy. But I know some that are not so easily subdu'd. A man must take an incredible deal of Pain; about 'em, and yet they continue cruel to the end. I know very well, (reply'd the Marshall) that a Woman's Merit is extream∣ly serviceable to her, toward the sup∣port of her haughty Humour: but so soon as they begin to love us, that Cru∣elty ceases by degrees; and then a Man may easily perceive that Love which they take so much care to con∣ceal upon the score of Modesty: and generally 'tis that same Modesty that charms me most: the more Reserv'd∣ness I find in Virgin; or marry'd
Women, 'tis all one to me, the more eager am I in my pursuit. All Men (answer'd the King) are of the same Opinion: no body loves an easie Victory: the Pleasure consists in the Pains, and Resistance increases it, if it be not carry'd on too far. Painters therefore are in the Right to shew us Enjoyment attended by a Tomb, to let us understand by that Emblem the Death of our Passions. But, Sir, (reply'd the Marshal) 'tis seen that we continually aspire to what we have not; and when we have it, our Joy deceases in the Possession. There∣fore 'tis better to enjoy the Felicities of Life in Imagination, then lose 'em in the Taste of Pleasures. That which causes this unequal Con∣duct in us, (answer'd our Monarch) proceeds not from our selves. Nature is the Occasion of all these Changeable Motions, with a design to inform us, that the Creatour is only constant and unvariable.
But then Madam de Maintenon, whose Entrance alter'd the Scene of the Mar∣shal's discourse, appearing, said the Mar∣shal to her with a Smile, I thank my good Fortune that has afforded me the Honour of your good Company, which I never could yet enjoy, since I return'd from the Army. To tell you the Truth, Sir, (an∣swer'd the Marchioness) I have been for some time taken up with a world of Business; beside that, I was forc'd to undertake a long Journey of above twenty Leagues from Paris, greatly to my sorrow; for I do not love to be absent from the Court: besides that I am continually slav'd and turmoil'd with looking after my Young Fry at Saint Cyr.'s 'Tis very true, Madam, that your Eminent Piety and Vertues are very rare in our Age; for, methinks, De∣votion is at a very low Ebb. Any other Person but You would endeavour to make the best of so fair an Opportuni∣ty,
being the Darling of so Great a Prince as you are; 'tis a wonder to see you place your Felicity in such Noble and Sublime Employments. But the King, who was desirous to improve that little time the Marshal had to spend in Winter-Quarters, fell into a long Conference with him concer∣ning the Strength of the Enemy, and other Important Affairs of the War. Which being at an End, the King told him, That he intended to treat him with a Splendid Banquet and a Ball. The next day, his Majesty gave Order to Madam de Maintenon, to take Order for a Magnificent Banquet, and a Jolly Ball, to which several Princes and Princesses were invited, and where all the Ladies of the Court ap∣pear'd in the most pleasant disguizes in the World: and the Queen of England was the Goddess of that Charming As∣sembly. The King, whose thoughts were all entangl'd in his new Chains, carry'd
himself with an Extraordinary Gaity toward that Princess; he never stirr'd from her all the while the Ball lasted, making a thousand Courtly Addresses to her, to which the Queen gave all along most engaging Answers: So that a man would then have thought she had forgot all those Fears, which the Jealousie of her Rival had infus'd into her. On the other side, our Heroess, who was at her Wits end to hear all those Expressions that past between our Mo∣narch and the Queen, durst not for her Ears display her resentment; but ra∣ther condescended to several Com∣placencies, which the King took mighty obligingly at her hands. 'Tis the usual Humour of the Mar∣chioness to favour and forward all the King's Amours: On the Other side, she procures all the Lovely Morsels she can meet with, to feed his Pleasures by the By, a sort of Afternoons Lunche∣ons in Love; as being assur'd that 'tis the Only way to keep Possession of
his Heart: but she cannot endure that his Majesty should make the Choice himself. And this is that which has lain heavy so long upon her Stomach, to see the King have such an Inclina∣tion for the banish'd Queen. The King also, who wants no Wit, obser∣ving her Jealousie, takes great delight, in his turn, to fret and discompose our Heroess, by caressing the Queen, some times, with a greater Passion then ever he shew'd to his Mistress. The Day was spent in the usual Em∣ployment of Eating and Drinking; and now the Night being come, they fell to Dancing helter-skelter. But as for Madam de Maintenon, she was always reserv'd in all her Diver∣tisements; and it may be said of her, That she made good the godly Cha∣racter which she had acquir'd. You shall never see her blither nor more jocund at one time then another and this Equality of Temper gains her the Esteem of all that see her; and for these Eminent Qualities it was that the King deem'd her worthy of his
Affections. But Marshal de Luxemburgh, who had taken notice of the Tender∣ness which the King had for the Queen of England, being desirous to assist him in his Inclinations, took her out to dance several times; and in regard she carries her self with a most charming Air in Dancing, our Monarch signify'd his Acknowledgment to the Marshal, by telling him, That there was no Sight so amiable, as to see two handsom Per∣sons dance together. To whom the Marshal reply'd, That if there were any thing of Extraordi∣nary and Eminent in him, he was be∣holding first to the Queen's more Orient Lustre, the Rays of which re∣flected only upon Him; and that it was a usual thing for the Sun to shed down his Beams upon every Thing in this World, and conferr Ornament up∣on Things the most deformed. This was look'd upon as a notable Complement for a Soldier, who has not time to study soft Addresses to La∣dies.
The next day, the King remain'd all day long with the fair Queen of the Seraglio, where he display'd the Excess of that Passion which he felt for her; assuring her a thousand times of his Constancy, and the Continua∣tion of his Love, and that he would never so much as seek after another change, as having never met so lovely a Person, and one so worthy of Royal Affection. Nor was our Prince, who found his Happiness so great, content to load his charming Minioness with tender Pro∣testations; he put it home to her se∣veral times, When he should be so happy as to be belov'd by a Person so much deserving Adoration as she? To whom the lovely Queen, with an Air of perfect Modesty, Sir, (said she) though you had neither Scepter nor Crown to embrighten the Lustre of your Person; yet all your Linea∣ments concurring with so much Ma∣jesty and Accomplishment, 'tis impos∣sible
that you should be put to the Recoil where-e're you attempted Vi∣ctory. 'Twould be a Crime in Love, to permit a Hero, like your self, to re∣ceive a Foil in his Amours. Charm'd with so much Wit and Ten∣derness for his Mistress, he testify'd his Acknowledgment in so passionate a man∣ner, that nothing but the Vehemency of his Love could have supply'd him with the Vehemency of Expression. Madam de Maintenon, who then lay at her Abbey, busily taken up with Re∣ligious Care, expected the Queen's Re∣turn; who gave her a faithful Ac∣count of all the King's Love. On the other side, she begg'd her Counsel what Course to take for the good Manage∣ment of this fortunate Beginning. The generous Abbess told her, That all de∣pended upon the First Movements, and that no body but she alone could secure her an advantageous Success: That her Experience had infus'd into her a little Knowledge in these Affairs; and there∣fore when she was alone with his Ma∣jesty,
at the same time she study'd all manner of Ways to accompany her Words with a discreet and modest Air; a little Haughtiness (continu'd our Heroess) intermix'd with Softness, if it be well manag'd, produces no bad Effect; for several young Ladies have lost their Fortune, by rendring the Victory too easie. Mademoiselle de Lude may serve yee for an Example, whose good Fortune prov'd so short, that one Day began it, and the next concluded it: her too much Con∣descension spoil'd all; she made too much haste to be happy, and became unfortunate in a moment. These were the admirable Instructions which Ma∣dam de Maintenon gave her Illustrious Scholar. But Madam de Villeroi, who had been severely reprimanded by Madam de Maintenon, was under a most mortal Affliction, to see her self so contemp∣tibly look'd upon by that Lady. The important Occasion of the Quarrel that had so warmly chaf'd the pious Marchioness's Choler, was this: Du∣ring
her Pilgrimage to our Lady of Deliverance, Mademoiselle de Villeroi had taken a Walk with some of her Com∣panions, among whom were several Courtly Gentlemen, as the Chevalier Colbert, the Marquis of Belfond, the Duke of Cheuvreuse, and the Count of Bussi; and she had been a little too profuse in her Expences upon 'em. Madam de Maintenon was no sooner return'd from her Pilgrimage, but she was inform'd of Madam de Villeroi's Adventure. Upon which, she rated her with all the Rigour and Severity imaginable; she spar'd for no Re∣proaches the most tart and cutting; telling her, she would never see her more; That she would banish her for ever from the blessed Assembly, where her good Fortune had enroll'd her; That the Habit she wore ought to have put her in mind that she was a Per∣son distinguish'd from the Common sort of young Damsels in the World; and that by meeting Young Men abroad at publick Houses of Entertainment, she herded her self with the Gossips of the Town, that met their Gallants
above half way. Did you but know (continu'd our Heroess to the fair Damsel) how dangerous it is for a young Maiden to hearken to the de∣ceitful Language of such Enamorato's, especially Soldiers, who talk at ran∣dom a thousand things more then they think, and who have no sooner made the Heart of a young Virgin flexible to Love, but they are presently seeking out for another Booty, you would never trust that inconstant and wavering Sex, who thinks their Happi∣ness consists in roving from one fair Lady to another, and never speak sin∣cerely. You see how Painters set forth Love with Wings at his Back, to shew the Lightness and little Consideration of that Passion. It becomes a modest Vir∣gin to stick close to her Needle; to spend her Time in Prayers and Devo∣tions to God, and his Holy Saints; and to endeavour to imitate Them, as the Divine Patterns of her Life and Con∣versation. 'Tis also very necessary that young Maids should read and study the Life of one of St. Lewis's Disciples, where you find that that same holy Martyr
having had the Misfortune to feel in his Heart a petty Scuffle between the Flesh and the Spirit, flung himself into a Bath of Water so cold, that it pre∣sently mortify'd all the criminal Desires of rebellious Nature. Do you believe, that if the King knew you were a Coquet, he'd ever permit yee to live at St. Cyr's? Never deceive your self,—he's too Reli∣gious a Prince to encourage Libertinism. The Marchioness was just concluding her Morality with several severe Me∣naces, If ever, &c. when Marshal Luxem∣burgh arriv'd to the seasonable Relief of the poor disconsolate Mademoiselle de Villeroi, who was presently dispatch'd away to pray for more Discretion for the future. On the other side, Madam de Maintenon, who still retain'd that An∣ger in her Eyes which her holy Zeal had kindl'd in her Countenance, receiv'd the Duke but very coldly: who there∣upon demanded the Cause of her Dis∣composure? Oh,— Sir, (cry'd the Marchioness, if you knew the Trouble that these giddy-brain'd Girls put me to, you would never wonder at it: I en∣deavour to give 'em good Education,
and set 'em an Example of Prudence and Piety; but the idle Baggages are so given to Romances and Love-Stories, so carry'd away with Coquettry, and other considerable Miscarriages, that I have much ado to rule 'em; and this has put me into an ill Humour. Madam, (reply'd the Marshal) you must consider the Ladie; are Young, and Youth is apt to go astray; but riper Years, and your sublime Instructions, will make those deep Impressions in their Hearts, that there is no question but you will reap the expected Fruit of your glorious Labours. What you say, Sir, (reply'd our No∣ble Heroess) is very obliging; but there is a necessity of correcting the Vices of Nature, and to make it our business to infuse Vertue betimes. There is no∣thing in the World so praise-worthy in young Maidens, as Discretion and Mo∣desty; which are the Principles by which they ought to act, and which only can assure 'em Happiness both in this and the other Life.
'Tis true, Madam, when Nature has made us a Present of these Noble Prin∣ciples, 'tis a glorious thing to improve 'em, so that they may be the prevailing Vertues triumphing in our Hearts. Sir, (said Madam de Maintenon) I would entertain yee further upon this Subject, but that I hear my Nephew, the Abbot d'Aubigné, entring in, who will certainly alter the Scene of our Discourse FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for H. Rhodes, at the Star in Fleet-street: And J. Harris, at the Harrow in the Poul∣trey. THE Great Historical, Geographical, and Poetical Dictionary: Being a Curious Miscellany of Sacred and Profane History, &c. collected out of the best Historians, Chrono∣logers, and Lexicographers; but more espe∣cially out of Morery's Sixth Edition, Cor∣rected and Enlarg'd by Le Clerke By seve∣veral Learned Men. To which are added the last Five Years Historical and Geographical Collections of Edmund Bohun, Esq The General History of Europe, contain'd in the Historical and Political Monthly Mercu∣ries, from the late happy Revolution in No∣vember, 1688. to this present Time. Giving an Account of all the Publick and Private Occurrences, Civil, Ecclesiastical and Mili∣tary,
that are most Considerable in every Court: The Interest of Princes, their Pre∣tences and Intrigues, &c. and generally all that is Curious. With Political Reflections upon every State. Done from the Originals, publish'd at the Hague by the Authority of the States of Holland. In Four Volumes: With an Index to each Volume. Memoirs for the Ingenious: Containing se∣veral Curious Observations in Theology, Phi∣losophy, Mathematicks, Physick, History, Philology, and other Arts and Sciences. In Miscellaneous Letters to several of the Re∣verend Bishops and Clergy, Eminent Phy∣sicians, Fellows of the Royal Society, &c. for the Year 1693. Bound up in one Vo∣lume. With a large Alphabetical Table to the Whole. By J. de la Crose, Eccles. Angl. Presb. The Triumph-Royal: Containing a short Account of the most Remarkable Battels, Sieges, Sea-Fights, Treaties, and Famous Atchievements of the Princes of the House of Nassan, &c. Describ'd in the Triumphal Arches, Pyramids, Pictures, Inscriptions, and Devices, erected at the Hague in Honour of William III. King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland. Curiously Engraven in 62 Fi∣gures on Copper-Plates, with their Histories; an Elaborate Piece of Curiosity. First done
in Dutch, then into French, and now into English. Dedicated to Her Majesty. The Present Court of Spain. Or, The Mo∣dern Gallantry of the Spanish Nobility un∣folded: In several Histories, and Seventy five Letters from the Enamour'd Teresa, to her Beloved the Marquis of Manscra. By the Ingenious Lady — Author of The Memoirs and Travels into Spain. Done into English by J. P. Voyages and Travels over Europe. Vol. I. Containing the Curiosities of France. The Second Volume of the Historical Voyages and Travels: Containing all that is most Curious in Spain and Portugal. An Antidote against a Careless Indifferency in Matters of Religion. Being a Treatise in Opposition to those that believe that all Re∣ligions are Indifferent, and that it imports not what Men profess. Wherein the vulgar Objections of Atheists, Scepticks, Libertines, Latitudinarians, &c. are briefly Answer'd. Done out of French. With an Introduction, by Anthony Horneck, D. D. Chaplain in Or∣dinary to Their Majesties. The Present Condition of France, in refe∣rence to her Revenues, comparing them
with the infinite Expences she is forc'd to be at. Demonstrating thereby, That it is impossible for her to support her self, if the War with the Confederates continues. Done out of French. The Paris Relation of the Battel of Landen, July 29th. 1693. between the French, Com∣manded by the D. of Luxemburgh; and the Confederates, by the K. of Great Britain; publish'd by the French King's Authority: With his Letter, ordering the Archbishop of Paris to sing Te Deum. And a Private Let∣ter from a very good Hand in Paris, with another Account of the Battel. As also Re∣flexions upon the King's Letter, by a very Learned French Pen. And Observations by another Hand here, proving the French King and his Gazetteers Account to be inconsistent with themselves, and one another, as well as contrary to Truth: And that though the French kept the Field, yet they were really Losers by the Action. Publish'd for Unde∣ceiving the Publick, who are so much Abus'd by Seditious Relations. An Exact Relation of the Battel of Landen, July 29. 1693. between the Army of the Confederates, Commanded by the King of Great Britain; and that of the French King, under the Command of the Duke of Luxem∣burgh. With his Majesty's Letter to the
States o0f Holland, from his Head-Quarters at Eppegem, Aug. 12. 1693. With a De∣scription of the Order and Embattelling of both Armies at the Beginning of the Fight, in a Copper-Plate.
