B4552 R43608 42475015 151117
A Brief Chronicle OF THE TURKISH WAR, From July to January, 166 Turned out of High-Dutch. TOGETHER With his Imperial Majesties Rea∣sons for the undertaking of the War, and a Map for the better understanding of the Story. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Mabb, fo Henry Brome, at the Gun in Ivy-Lane, 1664
TO THE READER. THE Turkish War upon the Empire, being at present the Great Action of Chri∣stendom; and that where∣upon all Mens Eyes, and thoughts are fix'd, who have any Consideration, even for Christi∣anity it self: It will perchance be a work not unacceptable, to give the World a brief Relation of the Rise, and Progress of the Quarrel; which is the Business of this lit∣tle Treatise, being a Narrative of the most Remarkable Passages of the last Campag∣nia, Written in High Dutch by an Indu∣strious, and Carefull Hand, and turned into English, for the Satisfaction of the English Reader. There is likewise Order taken for a Continuation of the Story, which shall come forth in its due time, be∣ing Committed to the Care of diverse In∣telligent Persons, where the Scene lyes, to gather the Materials for it; to the End, that nothing Worthy of Observation
may be omitted. As to the Narrative in Hand; (to give the Reader a clearer Prospect of the Matter;) We shall Ʋsher it in, with an Accompt Lately deliver'd to the States General by Count Zinzen∣dorf, (his Imperial Majesties Envoyé at the Hgue) concerning the Reasons of the War, and so proceed. The Reasons, whereupon was grounded the Proposal from his Sacred Imperial Majesty, to their Honorable Lordships the States General, which they may be plea∣sed to Weigh, and Consider. 1. THat His Sacred Majesty gave no Cause for this War; but that Perpetual, and Irreconcilable Enemy to Christianity, provoked by no Injurie; without any Colour, or Pretence of Justice, or Honesty; In the Year 1660. Seized upon Waradine, a strong Castle on the very Borders of Hungary, which he Garrison'd with a great party to infest the Neighbou∣ring Provinces.
2. Ʋpon which account, his Sacred Imperial Majesty, was not onely forc'd to Raise a suddain Army Himself, to oppose so great an Enemy, but also to call for ayd from the other Princes and States of the Empire; as likewise to look out to other Christian Kings and States, unlesse he would have exposed the whole Kingdom of Hungary to present danger, and let those Royal Provinces of Transylvania, Wil∣lachia, and Moldavia be rent off from Christendom, and Enslav'd to the Tur∣kish Empire. 3. When the Enemy gave some hopes of a Friendly Composing the Busines, his Sa∣cred Imperial Majesty was defective in nothing which upon hon st Conditions might conduce to Peace. 4. When the last Year a Treaty was be∣gun between his Majesties Ambassadur, and Ati Bassa, Plenipotentiary from the Turk, which afterwards was by Common Consent perfected, and in Expectation of a Ratification, then began other more weigh∣ty Conditions to be required, and harder erms, with a great deal of Perfidiousness, were almost imposed upon us: And at last
having gathered a great Number of Forces together, both out of Asia and Europe, vio∣lating the Faith and Religion of all former Treaties, he brake into Hungary at the same Instant, both Proclaiming, and Wa∣ging War; (His Majesties Embassadour, contrary to the Law of Nations, detain'd by force,) was proudly, and contumeliously used. 5. 'Tis clear, this fraudulent Enemy hath taken his opportunity in a time, when his Majesties Hereditary Dominions have been exhausted by continual Wars, and other Causes; as likewise almost all other Chri∣stian Princes weakned, by Civil Discords amongst themselves. 6. Notwithstanding which, his Sacred Impeiral Majesty, and his Dominions have omitted nothing, whereby they might sustain the burthen of so great a War, by their own strength, and hinder the progress of the Enemy until the Assistance from the Princes of the Empire could be ready. 7. Which neither coming in time, nor with so considerable a Force as was necessa∣rily requir'd, the storms spread further: Newhausel, and other Cities of less Note
were subdued by the Turks; Moravia laid wast by the Incursions of the Tartars; many Thousand Christians carried away to perpetual Captivity, The Faith and Con∣stancy of Transylvania wavered; and which is most considerable, the Ambitious Enemy took courage from his Success; So that now he doth not onely promise himself the Kingdome of Hungary, but likewise publickly boasts, that he will suddainly be Head of the Western Empire. 8. To which purpose, as we are inform'd from good hands, he intends to be in the Field the next Spring, and with a greater Force then formerly, set upon his Imperial Majesty, and the Christian Empire, re∣solving to carry away with him all that he meeteth with from fourteen Years of Age to Sixty 9. 'I is true indeed, the danger of this War doth more immediatly hang over his Imperial Majesty, and his Dominions, but then it is not less a truth, that all other Christian Princes, both in General and Particular are concern'd. 10. Not onely because all professing Christianity are by that Bond united into
one Body, espeicall against him who equally detests all, taking his first Rise from the Ruines of Christian Kingdoms; particu∣larly the Eastern Empire it self, and now desires nothing more then by propagating the Mahumetan Superstition, to extin∣guish Christian Religion 11. But in another respect it is clear, that the Event of this War doth concern All, and every One, although they regard nothing but their own security 12. For seeing it is manifest, the King∣dome of Hungary, and other his Majesties Dominions have been for a long time the sole Bulwark of Christendom; and no lesse manifest that, That being broke through, the rest lies open to an Infinite Rab∣ble of Barbarians; Germany being in the midst of Europe, and joyning upon most Christian Kingdoms; the Consequence muct needs be this; His Sacred Majesty, and the strength of the Empire being once over-thrown, (which God forbid) that Cruel Enemy will lye heavy upon them all, and be equally formidable to every one of them. 13. Neither is he only so for number of
Souldiers, (which all Christian Princes should they Muster their Forces together, would scare equall) but likewise for Mili∣tary Discipline; for in so numerous an Army there is none, that drink Wine; are delicate in the Dyet, or in any other un∣necessaries: none that maintain Char∣riots Feuds, Women, or any such like Impediments of War: So that the Turks can with less charge maintain Three Hun∣dred Thousand in Armes, then any Christian Prince Fifty Thousand. 14. Moreover, he hath this Advantage, he never regardeth the losse of his Men; the Effusion of whose blood he careth not for, so he may gain his design upon those he Warreth against; Subduing Town, and Country: the Common Souldiers them∣selves, out of a strange Superstitious per∣swasion, voluntarily devoting their Lives to his Service, whilst all Christian Princes are in another Condition, there being no Victory so great, but may be purchased too dear by Christian Blood. 15. To these, we may add, that at this time (to the great disgrace of Christen∣dome) the Turk hath verynigh a perfect
Army of Christian Rebells, and Rene∣gadoes; who being formerly brought up in Warrs amongst Christian Princes, by en∣gaging themselves to the Turk, teach them the readiest way of Pitching Battles, Be∣sieging Towns, and ordering their Camp, heretofore not know by them. 16. In the Common cause this is the sole difference; his Imperial Majesty cannot venture without some considerable danger, every wound given him (as the Proverb is) goes to the heart; but other Princes may engage without any Considerable da∣mage, in respect of their power and strength, so that they shall not partake of his Maje∣sties danger, but gain to themselves Eternal praise and honour. 17. Six Hundred Years agoe, and diverse times since, the Christian Princes undertook a Forreign Expedition against the Turk; onely out of a design to propagate the Christian Cause; and the Common people Emulating their piety, Contributed thereunto voluntarily upon their own account. 18. Neither is it probable any Chri∣stian Princes have so far degenerated from
the piety of their Ancestors, as not to assist the same Cause, which is now more necessary, because to repell, not wage a War; so that that confederacy cannot but be most accep∣table to God, wherein all Christian Princes unanimously agree to maintain the Common Cause of hristendom. 19. The Report of this Confederacy (for Fame makes all things sound at the best) may not alittle Contribute towards the War, or at least-wayes take from the Ene∣my that hope, which he hath hitherto pro∣mis'd himself from the discords of Chri∣stian Princes, by which means he will not be so far Conceited, but dread that Power when united, which he Contemned, whilst divided into Factions. 20. However things happen, his Sacred Majesty, under the protection of Divine Providence is resolv'd to venture, and Sa∣crifice, both to his own, and Peoples For∣tunes in defence of Himself, and the Pub∣lick good. 21. But least he should seem defective in that which was his Duty, (it being a satis∣faction in misfortune to have omitted no∣thing, that might prevent it) he thought fit
to send some of his Chief Nobility to most Princes in Christendom, that as well by his Entreaty, as Example, they might par∣ticipate of so Glorious and Enterprize. 22. Which thing having once purpos'd, He immediately thought upon their Ho∣nourable Lordships the States General, not doubting, but that their Prudence, and Acquaintance with such Affairs will give an answer that may be an Example to other Princes, and let them understand that a Common danger, is to be Engaged against by a Common Charge and Councell, hoping they will give such Assistance as shall be agreeable to the greatness of the danger, the Dignity which they bear amongst other Christian States; the Publick and Pri∣vate Wealth of those Provinces they com∣mand and that Glory which hath accru'd to them both in Peace, and War; and lastly to the True, and sincere Friendship which hath alwayes been between them, and the Roman Empire. 23. Especially when they well know there seldome occurrs Matter for so much Virtue and Praise, and therefore his Ma∣jesty doth easily assure himself that upon
their own accord they would engage inso Holy a War, and not suffer the Christian Cause to be Over-thrown, or stand still whilst others reap the Glory. 24. One thing more must be observ'd, that the Greatest Concern in the Affaire, Consists in the Expedition, which as it Commends all Courtesies; so it is absolutely necessary to this that his Majesty may have sufficient time to anticipate the Councel of his Enemies. 25. But above all things, this must be taken notice of (viz.) how much it concerns all men that will bear part in so Pious a work, that this Year, or as soon as can be, the War be undertaken, that so the Enemy being frustrated of his design of overcoming Hungary, and Subverting the Roman Empire, may be willing to Embrace an ho∣nest Peace, which is a happiness his Majesty cannot promise himself, unless assisted from other Christian Princes; all being little enough, either to obtain the Victory, or con∣tinue the War. 26. But the War being prolonged for some Years, the whole Strength of the Em∣pire will be consum'd, and by Consequence
a greater necessity of requiring Forreign Ayd, which in so miserable a Condition cannot be denyed, by those that regard their own security; so that we may say, how much the less Christian Princes contribute this Summer to the War; so much the more will they be fore't to give for the Future, neither then will it conduce so much to their praise, because requisite to their preservation. 27. This is all his Majesty thought fit to Enform their Lordships of, though he might have added much more, but chose rather to omit it, least he should seem to doubt their Lordships willingness to Embrace so Noble a Specimen of a pious and generous a spirit, as it must needs be to ayd a distress'd Friend. 28. As for the form and mannerof send∣ing the Assistance, it is very reasonable the whole Business should be left to the prudence and discretion of their Lordships; unless it may be thought expedient, that their Lord∣ships Commissioners, together with the un∣derwritten Envoyé Extra; from his Im∣perial Majesty should Examine, by what meanes the Business may be best perform'd, for the Publick Good, and least to their loss and dammage.
29. And as the Conscience of so Noble a Fact, is a sufficient Reward to valiant Spirits; so his Majesty, and all the Princes of the Roman Empire shall for ever keep in memory, the greatness of the favour, and do promise upon the Faith of Germany, if occasion sever, they shall be willing to repay, what ever Obligations your Lordships will lay upon them.
Imprimatur, April 18. 1664. Roger L' Strange.
A Brief Chronicle Of the Late TVRKISH WAR. COncerning the Grounds of the Late Turkish War, which by Many Men, both Learned, and Un∣learned, has been long since foretold, several Men are of several Opinions: Some impute it to the
Action of Ragotzi, in the Year, 1657. in Poland;The grounds of the Tur∣kish War. being under∣taken without the Consent of the Grand Signior: Others, to other Causes; but the Most (with my self) look upon it as the heavy Judgment of Heaven drawn down upon us by our multiply'd Trans∣gressions. But it is not My Pur∣pose to deduce the Causes of the Warre, I shall only acquaint the Reader with some Remarquable Passages concerning the Proceed∣ings of This Barbarous Enemy a∣gainst Hungary, and other Coun∣tryes Bordring upon him. To recite the Actions of Prince Ra∣gozi in Poland, I reckon needle as being already Breviated in my Polonian Relations. In the Year 1657. George Ra∣gotzi, Prince of Transylvania, fi∣nished his War in Poland; and
with much ado, made his Retreat to his Principality; where he found, too late, the extream mi∣sery which he had brought upon himself. For so it was, that the Grand Signior, making the worst Construction of all Ragotzi's Act∣ings in Poland (which Kingdome was then in Amity with the Turk) resolved to punish This Underta∣king in his Vassal, as an Assront to the State of Turkey. Upon the Apprehension of which Conse∣quence, Prince Ragotzi put him∣self into a Posture of Defence, to the utmost of his Power. In 1658 he was yet at Quiet;The Turk falls upon Ragotzi. but in 1659 the Grand Signior pour'd in a Nu∣merous Army of Turk and Tartar into Transylvania; who practis'd all the Insolvencies and Outrages of Burning, Killing, Ravishing, (and the like) imaginable. This Horrid
Invasion of the Infidels was vali∣antly oppos'd by Ragotzi's Forces, Skirmishing with them at severall times very successefully, and so long as He liv'd, his Forts were not Attempted. Soon after; the Grand Signior (no longer brooking this Audacity in his Vassal) dispatch'd an Embassadour to the Emperour at Vienna, with Rich Presents; Desi∣ring his Imperial Majesty not to concern himself in Prince Ragot∣zi's Affairs, the Turkish Emperour being resolv'd to prosecute the said Rogatzi to the highest point of Ex∣tremity. In 1660, the Turk lost no times; but sent a greater Power then be∣fore, into Transylvania. In the mean whise, Prince Ragotzi march∣ed with a Considerable Force be∣fore Hermanstad, and it come to a Bloody Encounter, wherein Ra∣gotzi
deported himself valiantly killing 17 men with his own hand;The Turk worsted by Rogotzi. and so the Infidels for That Bout were forced to quit the Field, and leave the Victory to the Transyl∣vanias, and 6 or 7000 Turks and Tartars upon the place. Ragotzi in the Persuit received 5 wounds,Who dyes of his wounds. and 5 dayes after This Fight (June the 6th) he was brought to Great-Waradin, where he departed this Life. The fall of this Prince ballanc'd the Advantage of the Victory, and exceedingly Animated the Turks, who pressing more and more ea∣gerly upon the Transylvanians, drove them every where to their strong Holds: Whereupon Ge∣neral Souches by Order from Vi∣enna, drew toward Transylvania, to make it good against the Turks; and forthwith march'd thither with a
considerable Body, and possess'd himself of several Holds. July the 14 of the same year, the Turk with 100000 Men laid close Siege to Great-Waradin,Great Wa∣radin Besic∣ged. which was stoutly defended by one Marcus Claudius, a Scotchman, the Gover∣nour of the Town. During the Siege, the Turk sent abroad strong Parties to subdue smaller Towns, forcing the People unto severall works, as the building of Bridges, and the Like, putting them to the Sword at last for their Reward: At one time killing 150 Christians, and at another, Loading 20 Wagons with Christians Heads which they carried away. On the 6 of August,The Gover∣nour killed, and the Place yield∣ed up. that brave Souldier and Governour, Marcus Claudius was slain by a short, & (the Besieged being left without any hope of Relief) This strong Place
was surrendred upon the Turk upon Accord; being a passage into Tran∣sylvania, Hungary, and Poland. After the death of Ragotzi, there started up One Barkay,Barkay U∣surps upon Transylva∣nia. a Creature of the Turks, making himself Prince of Transylvania, whom the Turk protected and supplyed with Forces, whereby he undertook to reduce several Places, siding in pretence with General Souches (who wel understood this violence of the Turks, to be a design not only upon Transylvania, but also upon the Empire it self) and ma∣king large Professions under hand, that whatsoever he got by the Tur∣kish Ayd, was meant for the good of the Emperour, to whom he said that he Intended a Just and an Ho∣nourable Restitution, reserving on∣ly Waradin to remain under the Power of the Prince of Transylva∣nia;
but the matter prov'd other∣wise in the end. Toward the Close of this Year, a Blazing Star appear'd with the Tayle toward Dalmatia, and the Head toward Transylvanta, which prov'd but a forerunner of the en∣suing Calamityes. Soon after This, the Labolizish Peasants Rebell'd against the Chri∣stians in Transylvania, whom they partly put to the sword, some they took Prisoners, and others they sold to the Turk, The Right suc∣cessour of Ragotzi, was Kemini Ja∣nos, (by many Transylvanians,Kemini Ja∣nos opposes ar kay. re∣ceiv'd and entertain'd for such) who was bitterly persecuted by Barkay and the Turks. Anno 1661 He fought them at Thassabat, and made a great slaughter: But at Last, oppressed with Numbers, he left Transylva∣nia,
and retreated to Tokay. And now it appear'd that the Turks bu∣siness was not to stop there, but to fall also upon Hungary. Where∣upon his Imperial Majesty granted Commissions for the raising of an Army, which was dispatch'd, part of it into Hungary, and part into Transylvania. In the Interim; Count Nicholas Serini began to look to himself, and rais'd a strong Fort on the Wall over against Canisia, Naming it Serinswar:The Build∣ing of Se∣rinswar. getting to∣gether a strong Body of Croats, and other Nations, that lay heavy up∣on the Quarters there about: which the Turks stomach'd not a little, however they carried it fair at pre∣sent, and for a while they talk'd of nothing but Peace, but at last they brake out into high expressions, that they would have Serinswar de∣molish'd,The Pre∣tence of the Quarrel. Count Serini punish'd,
and Transylvania subjected to the Power of the Turk by way of Re∣paration. None of which follow∣ed; but the Christians lookt upon it as every mans Interest to do his Best to defend himself against the Ambition, and Outrages of This Common Enemy; and there being nothing now to be expected but a great Turkish War, which was al∣ready begun by Parties;The Christi∣ans enter upon Turky. the Chri∣stians entred upon the Borders of Turky, drawing toward Stul-Weis∣senburg, and Offen: and they sub∣dued Zamock, Warda, Erzy, and Hirt: all these being inconsiderable Houses, and Castles, which with their Defenders were blown up, and fired. While this was doing, the Turks gathered together a Mighty Army Consisting of Asicatick, African, and Europaean People;The Turks Preparati∣ons. and from this
Acheron issued those Devils in the shape of men, that have since tor∣mented Christendom. To this nu∣merous Army, they had likewise provided an incredible proportion of Victuals, Ammunition, and Ar∣tillery. Nevertheless, several Trea∣ties were set a foot, which the Turk so long insisted upon, till he had gained his End, and drawn a for∣midable Power into the Field, to break in upon the Christians, who laboured as much as in them lay, to preserve the Peace; but who can live longer at Peace, then his Neighbour will give him leave? The Army of the Christians in Hungary Consisted of 40000 Ger∣man Souldiers, who had the Turks for their Open, and the Hungarians for their Private Enemies (the ani∣mosity being so great, that many times it came to Blows betwixt the
Germans and the Hungarians.) These many Inconveniences, part∣ly from the Hungarians, who deny∣ed Victuals to the German Army, and partly from diseases arising from the disagreement of the Cli∣mate, were much weakned, and di∣minished. Hungary is questionless a very brave Country, and abounds in Wine, and certain Fruits, which taken to Excesse, breed dangerous Surfeits. The Hungarians in their deportment are generally Grave, and Modest, but being Affronted by the Germans, and others of a dif∣ferent Religion, they are prone to revenge, and hard to be Reconciled. Toward the Month of October, the Dutch Army was exceedingly pester'd with Surfeits, so that be∣twixt those that dyed, Many that lay sick, and others that were carri∣ed
out of the Country, it fell to a low Ebbe: and moreover, being then as far as Clausenburg, or there∣abouts, they were put to some di∣stress for Victuals and Forage: the Enemy encreasing daily more and more against them, (for in those Parts the Turkish Power was strongest) About this time, the Up∣start Prince Barkay fell into dis∣grace,Barkay in disgrace, Abafiv pre∣ferr'd. and the Turk preferred one Abafti to that dignity in his stead. Against Him, Kemini Janos bore up,Kemini Ja∣nos makes head. Opposing him, and his Promoters in the Head of 8000 men, and for tune so far befriended him in the first Engagement, as to deliver his great Enemy Barkay into his hands,Barkay ta∣ken and Be∣headed. whose Head he caused to be struck off, and then for a while the people flocked in to him, and Augmented his Army; But at last, he met with a Lions Fortune, when being sur∣rounded
rounded on all sides, and striving to clear his passage, he seemed only carefull how he might fall with Honour: for his Army through ma∣ny Skirmishes, Diseases, and great Scarcity of Provision, was melted away, and hope of Succour there was none left; the German Army by the like Accidents being weak∣ned and put to a Retreat. Upon these Terms it was, that he com∣mitted himself to places of more security, and in Zathmar, He with Others, expected the Issue of the Treaty. But the Turks, (as has been said already) making use of a Trea∣ty only for their own Advantage, put themselves into a stronger Po∣sture: In the mean time dischar∣ging their Choler with great indig∣nation, one while against the Va∣liant Venetians (that have held them tack so long in Candia) by
and by against the divided Poloni∣ans; and now and then against the half-Conquered Transylvanians; but not a word all this while, nor so much as a look of displeasure a∣gainst Hungary. This Fox-play of the Treaty lafted till the Year,The Warre breaks out in 1663.1663, and then the-Fury of these Infidels brake out, not only upon Transylvania, and Hungaria; but upon the Emperours Hereditary Countries also; yea, and upon the Roman Empire it self. This shall serve for an Introdu∣ction to the following Narrative. What further occurr'd betwixt these two Parties, is expos'd and publish'd at large, both at Franck∣fort, and elsewhere: so that I shall only take notice of such Passages as happen'd since July 1663. con∣cerning the Turks Proceedings in Hungary, and upon the Borders, and
what Opposition those Infidels have met with from the Christians. UPon July the 17, 1663. the Grand Vizier came in great Pomp and Magnificence to Offen,The Grand Vizier comes with 100000 men to Of∣fen. encamping himself in the Pesterfield, being 4. German miles in Compass. His Army was upward of a hun∣dred thousand men, above one hun∣dred great Guns, and of Wagons, & Beasts, a number not to be belie∣ved. His first work was to lay two Ship-Bridges over the Danube; the one near to Gran and the other not far from Parkam. His Forces being quarter'd about those parts in Pro∣digious Multitudes, it was as yet doubtfull, whether he would fall upon Newhausel, or Raab; having his eye indifferently upon both, and lying still for a good while without Action. But this Blood-Thirsty
brute had shew'd himself much sooner, if a continual fall of Rain, and the Overflow of the Da∣nube had not hindred him: How∣ever at length,The Turks passe the River to∣ward New∣hausel. he pass'd some thou∣sands of his Army over the Bridge near Parkam toward the side of Newhausel; when immediately a Report was spread by some of the Pesants that were turn'd to the Turk, that the River had torn their Ship-Bridges, and that those 4000 Turks that had passed over, were now Cut off from the Main-Body. This Rumour it was, that in vei∣gled the Governour of Newhausel (Count Forgats) into a Couragious but an unhappy Refolution, which was, to fall upon those 4000 Turks, upon the supposition, that the Miscarriage of the Bridge had cut off their Retreat. It is very true, that he was earnestly dissuaded
from that Attempt, and told, that the Body was greater then he ima∣gined, but still persisting in his Re∣solve to fight them, upon the 28th of July, with his Hungarians, Hus∣sars and Heydukes, and 11 Troups of Germans, and 500 Musquetters (in all 6000 strong) he marched up to them, and finding the Enemy four times more then he expected, became sensible of the Abuse, al∣though alass! too late: for the In∣fidels having gotten certain Intelli∣gence of the Christians design, and of their coming, caused the Bridges presently to be Repayred, which they had purposely disordered, and marching over with a strong Power surrounded them. The Hungarians, and Hussars, that were appointed to stand, for a Reserve, seeing the Enemy come on so strong, betook themselves to flight;
but the Germans, and Heyducks that gave the Onset behaved themselves stoutly, and sold a Dear Victory to the Turks.Count gats def∣ed. At last by Multitudes they were overcome, and those that could not get away, were mi∣serably Cut, and Mangled, Forgats, and some few others escaped to Newhausel. This Combat lasted 3 hours, and about 3000 of the Germans, and Heyducks were put to the Sword. After this Victory, the Turks be∣ing therewith encouraged, and the Christians not a little dejected, the Enemy made ready to lay a formal Siege unto Newhausel,The  lay Sie Newhausel. with what Success will be seen in this ensuing Relation.
A Narrative of the Most Re∣marquable Occurrences at the Siege of Newhausel. ON the 15th of August, a Trou∣per of the Walterish Regi∣ment, who in an Encounter had been taken Prisoner hard by Par∣kam, came to Newhausel, and Affir∣med that the Grand Vizier, in his Presence, caused all the Prisoners to be put to the Sword, whereup∣on 40 of the Turkish Prisoners in Newhausel were behead in re∣quital. On the 16th. dito, the Enemy some Guns into the Turks Campe,
that did Execution among them. Toward the Evening, the Grand Vizier summon'd the Town, giving them three dayes to consider of a Surrender; but being Answered Negatively, the Enemy began to play upon the Fort. On the 18th. the Turk, with a great Shout, and a Peal of Cannon, Approach'd the Vienna Gate Posted themselves there, and presently fell to digging, Notwithstanding the continual shot made upon them; and over against Forgats Bulwork, they raised a Battery from beneath. On the 19th. the Turks play'd their great Guns, and continued till the 23, making every day at least 350. great Shot against the Wall, the Balls weighing 65, 48, 35, and 22. pound. On the 21th. the Besieged made a Sally, putting some of the Turks
to the Sword, and took one Ensign from them, whereupon the Turks in their Post at the Vienna-Gate, possess'd themselves of a Roundel, in which Action, many were slain on both sides. On the 25th. the Turks began to Batter the Vienna-Gate. On the 27th. there came one Turk into the Mote, who was taken Prisoner, and confess'd that he was sent to Scout, for which he was immediately knock'd on the head. On the 29th. the Turkish Horse retired from the Fort, and drew near unto the Island Schutt, at which time they fir'd twelve Guns. On the 31th. the Enemy At∣tempted the Pallisado's, and began also to fill up the Mote; and on this day, Lievetenant Colonel Mortinisa Lamberg received a Shot, of which he dyed the day follow∣ing.
September the First, at night the Besieged, vowed to stand to it with their Officers to the last drop of their Blood. On the 2d dito, a great Number of Janisaries came into the Mote, against whom many shot were made, at which time it was suppo∣sed that the Enemy would give an Assault. On the 3d, two Corporals were condemned to dye for deserting their Post. On the 5th 140 Auxiliaries came in from Comorra, and Lievetenant Colonel Hagen, was touched light∣ly with a ball of two pound eight, and upon the same day the Turks forced out of the Ground some of the Pallisado's hard by the Fort, at which work, many of them were slain. On the 6th, the Turks Approach∣ed
in digging, to the middle of the Town-Mote. On the 7th it rained, so that they could not work. On the 9th, Nine of the Defen∣dents were killed by shot, and our of the Turks were slain by one Christian. On the 10th, and Officer was Con∣demned to dye for leaving his Post, and giving way to the Enemy. On the 11th, the Turks brake down the Vienna. Gate Bridge, which was repaired, and drawn up the next night; Many shot were this day made, and great Execu∣tion done upon the Enemy. On the 13th they played strong∣ly with their great Guns, both up∣on the Wall, and into the City, but without much Harm. On the 15th the Turks made a shot just into the mouth of a great
Gun in Newhausel, which made the Gun fly, and killed one man hard by it. In the Afternoon, 5 of the Turks that intended to passe the Mote, gave an Alarme, at which time the Lievetenant Colonel of the Walterish Regiment was killed with a Shot. On the 17th, the Marquis of Grana was hurt with a Bullet be∣low the knee; but the Grand Cap∣tain was wounded in the Head, whereof he dyed; also between eleven and twelve of the Clock, the Enemy made an Assault in two places, which lasted till two, with great losse on both sides. At the Evening, the Besieged flung light∣ed Pitch-Barrels among the Enemy, which drove them out of Frederick Sconce; but at the going out of the Lights, the Turks pressed in again with two foot Companyes.
On the 18th, the Turks were working of a Mine, but the Besie∣ged in their Counter-mining drove them back; However by this means, they made a Breach in the wall sufficient for a Passage; at which time, the Besieged stood but one pace from the Enemy, whom they forc'd to retreat with kindled Pitch-Barrells. On the 20th, the Turks climb'd over the Pallisado's and began to undermine Forgats-Sconce: and about four in the after-noon they Attaqued Frederick-Scone, and planted seventeen of their En∣signes upon it; but were beaten off successfully, they likewise made an Assault upon Forgats-Sconce to their great losse. On the 21th, they came on by night in great silence, and made another Assault; at which time an
Eminent Bassa was slain, and two Captains of the Besieged; and on both sides many Souldiers lost. On the 22th, they made an∣other furious assault, but they were repulsed with losse, and kept off with flinging of kindled Pitch-Barrels among them: yet they came on again, but to no purpose. At this Bout, the Besieged lost a∣bove forty men, amongst whom were two Lievetenant Colonells, on whereof was a Spaniard, the other was Hagen: On this day, Marquis Pio was wounded in his Head with an Arrow, and in his Neck he received another wound, Marquis de Grana was wounded also on the Head. On the 23th, the Enemy Batter∣ed 2o furiously, that Frederick, and Serin-Sconces were beaten to the Ground, and a Breach made Large
enough for three Horse-men to have passed a Brest. This whole night they shot, without Intermis∣sion, and with Incredible Labour and Delving, they raised a Mount of Earth so high, that from thence, they could Command the Town, and beat the Besieged from the Walls. Wherejpon the Hungarians whispered one another, to Surren∣der, (out of a fear to dispute it any longer) which moved the Germans likewise to speak of an Accord, to Marquis Pio, who telling them that the Enemy kept no Accord; one of the Souldiers replyed, that he did; and thereupon, the Marquis ran him through, and kill'd him: How∣ever, presently after, they sent to the Grand Vizier, demanding Ho∣norable Conditions, whose An∣swer was, that they should set
down their own Terms, leaving only their Creat Guns in the Fort. On the 25th, the Turks were ad∣mitted to the Gran-Gate. On the 26th, they stay'd there till twelve at Noon, and then the Christians marched out, with 2422 sound, and Armed men, many sick Germans, four Piece of Ordnance with Baggage, for which the Turks allowed Horses, and Waggons, and Conducted the Garrison to Comorra. The Tartars, and some of the Turks fell to plundering of several Houses in Newhausel, and some of the Waggons of those that marched out; but a Bassa staid their hands, and kept them in or∣der by force. At this Surrender, the Enemy got seventy piece of Ordnance; great store of Armes, Powder, Wine, Meal, and Corn; Many of the Hungarians tarrying in Newhausel with the Turks.
THis Siege drew in many of the Tartars, Moldavians, and Wal∣lachians, taking their March through Transylvania (where they began their Horrid Cruelty upon the Christians) toward the Camp before Newhausel. From Thence, September,The Infi∣dels passe the Waegh, and break into Mo∣ravia. the 3d. (being encrea∣sed to the Number of 20. or 30000 by the Addition of may Turks) they sought to make their way o∣ver the Waegh, which at last, they carried by force, putting those Christians to the Sword that guard∣ed the Passe, and so Crossing the Mountains, they Entred into Mo∣ravia, to Ʋngrishbrod, Hollishau, and the parts about Olmitz, which Towns, together with a great num∣ber of the Neighbouring Villages, they burnt to the Ground.
Many Christians they put to the Sword;The Turks Barbarous Cruelties. Women, and Maids, these Bruits Ravished: the strong men they tyed in Couples, and drove them along. Little Children they put in∣to Sacks life Geese; some they cut in two, and others they dash'd against the Stones. Let the Sun Blush, and the Rocks Weep at such Cruelty, and let the Earth open her Mouth and swallow up these Execrable Mur∣derers! The Number of the Slain, and Captiv'd Christians, is reckon∣ed to be above ten Thousand. These Barbarians, although Stran∣gers to the Passes, and wayes of these Parts, wanted yet no Guides: but furnish'd themselves with Lea∣ders from among the Boores of the Country, whom they admitted likewise to their shares of the Booty: and in particular, they
made use of the Treacherous Pea∣sants of Werbouitz, little VVerbte, and Rutzelau, to Conduct them o∣ver the Mountains: Whither the People about Straswitz fled for Sanctuary; but were fetch'd from thence with 120 Wagons, and carried into Captivity. The Count of Oppersdorff, Upper Governour of Brunner Crayses Escap'd narrow∣ly to Brin, so sodain, and unex∣pected was this Invasion. on September,The Enemy pass'd the Mark. 5th. The Enemy pass'd the River Mark, and dis∣pers'd themselves withou Oppo∣sition; but the strong Towns they declined, being ill Arm'd, and bet∣ter fitted for a Pillage than a Com∣bat. Upon This day they took the Prince of Dietrichstin's Secre∣tary, together with his Lady, One Child, and his Wives Sister, One Canonico, and others, as they were
upon their flight from Nicolasburg to Bohaun. (Situate among the Mountains) These being overta∣ken, the Canonico, with his Ser∣vant were put to the Sword; the Secretary made a strange Escape through a water; But the Lady, her Child, and her Sister, they kept in their hands, with whom they danc'd at Night after their Barbarous rude manner at Popitz; till at last (according to the Report of Eye-Witnesses) Sated with Lust, and Moravian Wine, they lay∣ed themselves to sleep; in such se∣curity, as plainly signified the In∣telligence they had, that there were none near to revenge the Fact. While they slept, the Sister made her escape; but the Lady her self, with quieting her Child, waked the Dancers, who presently dash'd out the Childes Brains
against the Wall. My Hand trembles at the writing of it! Oh! How many Christians are there that make this Horrid story their Sport, as if it were but a Fiction: as if the thing could not be done at all, because they were not at the doing of it. But I proceed, At Auspitz there came Gallop∣ping six Troupers, habited after the German Fashion; and in bro∣ken Language, called for a Dinner in an Inn, and Provender for their Horses, telling the People they would pay for it. Being demand∣ed, whence they came? They Answered, that they were pursued upon the way; To which the Inn-keeper replyed, (as one well pleased with the Accompt) that if the Masters of the Town knew it, that were then met at the Councel-House, they would bid him wel∣come
for his News. But before the tydings could be carryed thi∣ther, there followed into the Town a great Body of Tartars after these scouting Troupers, who put those that were then Assembled in Councel, to the Sword, with many others; plunder'd the Town,Auspitz plunder'd and burnt and afterward burnt it to the Ground; but the Youths, and Children were most of them car∣ried away for Slaves. Some of these Treacherous Scouts were af∣ter ward brought Prisoners to Ol∣mitz, and suffer'd Condigne Pu∣nishment. For Ten dayes This Havock lasted in Moravia, and then they pass'd over the Mark-stream into Austria (at which time, the Coun∣try People with their best move∣ables were fled to Vienna.) At length, having laden themselves
with all manner of Booty, they return'd to the Camp at Newhausel, where they exposed the Men, and Beasts, which they had taken up in several Places, to Common sale in the Market: While these things were doing, the Turks bu∣sied themselves against the Fort Serinswar, and by way of Strata∣gem, attempted Clausenburg in Transylvania; but at both Places, they were repuls'd, with losse and shame.unt Seri∣ breaks in∣ the Turks uarters. At which time Count Se∣rini, with a Considerable Body of Croattans, and other Neighbou∣ring People; made a sudden In∣cursion into Turky, to the great dammage of the Infidels. The Garrison of Comorra made diverse Sallyes upon the Enemies Camp before Newhausel, and spoil'd their Forage, which put the Turks upon a Necessity of fetching it at a great
distance: wihch they might well do, for they had with them 26000 Camels; besides Horses, Buffles, Mules, &c. not to be numbred. General Spork made diverse At∣tempts in Parties, upon the Enemy, but most commonly they were too strong for him, which cost him ma∣ny a brave Souldier. General Souches likewise, did all that was possible to way-lay the Enemy, and defend the Passages: Principally, Those that led into Moravta; but the Infidels marching alwayes in greater Numbers, then was re∣ported, were too hard for him also. The Hungarians were often de∣sired to put themselves into a Body against This Common Enemy; but it seems they had no mind to it, till at last, after great Importunity,Count N∣cholas er∣ni made Ge∣nerall. Count Nicholas Serina undertook the Generalship; and was by Prince
Genzaga presented General upon September 13. at the Head of the Army near presburg. At which time, he drew toget her his Croats, and there joyning with the German Forces, under the Command of Monteeuculi, they put themselves in a Posture against the Turks, but too late; For the Enemy before they were ready, was Master of Newhausel. Some Auxiliary Forces were drawn up also from the Em∣prie, and took up their Quarters at Crembs, for Rest, and Refreshment. While the Grand Vizier was re∣peiring Newhausel, (where the Grosse of his Army continued for sometime) the Tartars were order∣ed upon Excursions into Moravia,Second tursion o Mora∣. and forcing through the Passages at Selin and Rosingkau; they de∣stroy'd the People thereabouts, and came to Wettin, in the way to Si∣lesia.
Wzettin they burnt down, and Globau, and other Places adja∣cent; Partly Killing, and partly carrying People away into Capti∣vity. Both Invasions were Barba∣rous and Bloudy; but having staid some few dayes there, they went their way. Their Aim was like∣wise to have broken through into Silesia, by the Passe Jablunca; but the Silesians kept themselves upon too good a Guard for that Bout, and have never been troubled with them since. In all This Action the Grand Vi∣zier has play'd both the Fox, and the Lion, mingling Fair words, and Threatnings; and Publishing still before the Blow, such promi∣ses of Liberty, and Immunity to all that would range themselves under his protection, as he well
knew most likely to work upon the People, he had to deal with. It is true, that these Overtures of Cle∣mency, from so barbarous an Ene∣my, were look'd upon by the wiser sort, rather as a trick of State, then Good-faith; yet with the Genera∣lity, This way of dealing took effect. The Place most in the Turks eye was Presburg;The Turks eye upon Presburg; being the Chief City of the Nether Hungary: (wherein is laid up the Hungarian Crown) A Place, considerable both for the Goodlinesse of the Town, and for the Scituation of it; to which ad∣vantage the Turk was no Stranger, as appears by the frequent Alarms, he gave to that City, the gaining whereof, would have opned him away to Vienna, on the One side, and to Raah, Comorra, and Newhau∣sel, on the Other: The Danube pas∣sing
sing by, in Two Branches, to the Island Schut, at the end whereof stands the Fort Comorra; and Raah not far off. Nor was it unknown to Count Strozzi, (the Governour of Presburg) how much the safety of the Whole, Depended upon the Security of This Part, which mo∣ved him to make timely provision, for the Defence thereof. But the neighbouring Places, that lay open, as St. George, Posing, Modern, &c. chose rather to submit, then ex∣pose themselves to the extremities of Fire and Sword,Neutra Ren dred. by an unprofi∣table Opposition. Neutra indeed (a Place not far from Newhausel, nor less defensible) might have re∣sisted, but did not, and upon the Redition, the Garrison, according to agreement, was conducted to Presburg. Tyrnaw, and other Towns yielded also.
The Enemies next Attempt was upon Schinta,The Enemy Attempts Schinta, and is beaten off wherein was lodg'd a fair Artillery, but the Gover∣nour deported himself valiantly, and beat them off. By this time, October was half over, and the sea∣son, call'd the Turk to his Winter-Quarters: who finding his time lost upon Schinta, drew off to New∣hausel; which place is now repair∣ed, and strongly Garrison'd, the River neutra being brought round about it. From Thence, the Turk took his March, with a Considera∣ble Body, to the Ship-Bridge at Gran, and caused some of his great Guns to be pass'd over there, as if his purpose had been to Vinter in his own Territories. Those of New∣hausel laboured hard to get into the Schut,The Island Schut, At∣tempted. and settle themselves, be∣twixt the Two Forts of Raah, and Comorra: whereupon Montecuculi
and Serini joyn'd their Forces to oppose them. And now the fortune of the War seem'd a little to flatter the Christi∣ans;Two defeats given to the Enemy by the Two Serini's. Nicholas Serini on the 17. of Oct. defeating a Party of 300 Turks, and his Brother Peter, near the same time falling upon a Body of about 7000 of them near Carlstat, on the Frontiers of Stiria: where they de∣signed and Inrode upon the Christi∣ans; but Count Serini, and Coun Ausburg, from an Ambuscade, brake in among them, slew 1000, and took 100 Prisoners; among which were diverse Persons of Note, and the son of a great Bassa: The rest disperst themselves; and the Vi∣ctorious in this Adventure got great Booty. The Serinies have shew'd them∣selves, in This their deportment, the true Heirs of the Honour, and
Valour of that Noble Family; and they bring to mind a memorable Action, which was performed by their Grandfather, Nicholas Serini in the year 1566, To his Eternal Glory. ON the 6th. of August 1566,Sigeth taken by Solyman in 1566. and the Ho∣nourable Death of Count Ni∣cholas Sere∣ni. Solyman the Magnificent layd Siege to the Fort Sigeth, wherein this great Captain, Nicholas Serini was Governour; who made many bold Sallyes upon the Enemy, took many Prisoners, and at one time caused 300 Turks to be beheaded; which so far enraged Solyman, that he plyed his Batteries, and Attempts, with greater fury then before. Serini perceiving the New Town to be upon the point of being entred, caused it to be set on sire, and retreated into the Old. A while after, the Turks assaulted
the Old-Town, but were so bravely received, that in One storm they lost 2000 men. However they attempt∣ed it again, and carried it; where∣upon, Serini was forced to retire into the Castle, against which the Enemy planted a Battery, and gave One furi∣ous Attaque; but were beaten off with great loss. While this pass'd, Solyman died of a Bloody-Flux, (Sept. 4.) but Ma∣homet Bassa labouring as much as possible to keep his death conceal'd from the Turks, caused the Corps (Em∣balmed, and Gloriously Cloathed) to be expos'd in a dark place to the Peo∣ple, as sitting on his Throne, and the Bassa himself, with all his usual Cere∣monies, and Reverence, feigning some singular matter of privacy, and busi∣ness with him. At length, the Bassa went out of the Tent, wiping his eyes as if he had been crying; which gave
the Officers occasion to enquire, why he wept? To whom he replyed, that It grieved his heart to think how many brave Souldiers would be suddenly put to the Sword: for (sayes he Solyman has maded a deep and desperate Oath, that if this Place be not taken in two days, every Colonel that hears any Charge in the Attempt, shall certainly be put to death. Hereupon, the Janizaryes fell into a direct Rage, and gave a fu∣rious Assault; but were repulsed with exceeding losse: they had however set fire to the Castle, and now the No∣ble Defender of it, seeing his fate be∣fore his eyes, call'd the small remainder of his men about him, and exhorted them to stand by him, and resolve to dye with him. Whereupon, he Clo∣thed himself in a Violet-Coloured Velvet Suit, took the Key of the Ca∣stle, and some Gold in his Pocket;
caus'd the Gates to be open'd, and the great Guns to be drawn thither, and discharged among the Enemy: and in a Cloud of smoake, issued forth with his Men, among the Turks, and fought till he was shot in the head. This was the end of the Valiant Seri∣ni. It was reckoned that 20000 Turks were slain before this Fort. No sooner was Serini faln, but the Infidels thronging about the Corps, cut off his head, and set it on a Polo for one day, after which, they sent it with a Scoffe to Maximilian the Em∣perour. Now to returne to the Story. IN October, the Count of Hollach,The Coun of Hollach  General of the Imperia Auxiliaries. being chosen General of the Im∣periall Auxiliaryes, came to Vienna, his Forces (amounting to 6 or 7000 men) being Enquarter's betwixt
That and Crembs; The Emperours Army, lying at that time near Presburg, to recruit, being much weakned by many Inconvenien∣cies. the whole Army, (which the Hungarians, Croatians, and Auxi∣liaryes, was computed to be 40000 strong; but the several heads, of so many Nations, who at this time were almost all in Vienna, could not (it seems) agree so well together, as not to need his Imperial Maje∣stie's singular Care, and Circum∣spection, to keep them from start∣ing into Partyes and Passions. There was an Intent to joyn 7 or 8000 men that were raised in Silesia to This Body; but the Silesian Forces would neither march out of their native Country, nor obey any For∣reign Command; so that They stayd at home to defend their Bor∣ders, and especially, the Passage by Jablunka.
While the Christians were lay∣ing their heads, and their Forces to∣gether, to put themselves into a Posture, the Enemy brake up with his main Body before Newhausel,the Turk breaks up from before Newhausel. and about the end of October, took his March toward Gran, and Offen. The Tartars also with their Prey marched toward Tartary, carrying along with them their Chiefest Captives in Coaches, and Wagons, driving their ordinary Prisoners a∣long with Whips, naked; and their hair flying about their eyes, like so many Beasts. In Ʋpper-Hungary, they met with some opposition, at which time many of the Captives were forced out of their hands, and about 2000 of these Tartars put to the Sword. Count Nicholas Seri∣ni's Design, was to fall upopn them, at their passing over the Ship-Bridge, and followed them close,
sometime in the Rear, other while on the Flanck, still observing their motion till he found his opportu∣nity to attaque them. Upon the last day of October, he set upon the Rear,Serini falls upon their Rear. and took from them 5 Wagons full of Captives, that they had gotten in Moravia; 200 Oxen, and 40 Wagons with Provision. In this Action, he did not only release the Captives, but defeated also their Drivers, which were about 600 Janizaries. They fought stoutly for 2 hours from behind their Wagons, so that Count Serini with his Hussars, were forced to quit their Horses, and fight them on foot: which they did with excellent conduct, and successe, giving Quarter onely to Two Persons of Note, whose lives were at their mercy. This Campagnia seem'd now to
be at an end, and Count Serini, ha∣ving in appearance little to do fur∣ther with the Enemy, let his men march homeward: (wanting Fod∣der for their Horses) the Enemy in the mean while steering their Course toward Gran, Offen,The Ar draw to their Win∣ter-Quar∣ters. and Weissenburg, as to their Winter-Quarters. The Turks left a Gar∣rison of 4000 in Newhausel, under the Command of Two Bassaes; and 10000 about the Fort, partly to defend the Place, and partly to repair the Fortifications. In Neutra, the Enemy left 1500 men, which Place was plundred before the Ar∣mie march'd away. The Earls Co∣chary, and Tekelly, with a Body of near 15000 men raised in the Ʋpper and Nether-Hungary, came In to Count Serini; which Conjunction the Turks mightily endeavoured to hinder, but could not effect it.
These Forces arre likewise drawn out of the Field, since that time. The Auxiliaryes, That is to say; the Hessen, Brunswick, Lunenburg, Munster Forces; and Others from the Rhyne (some of which, namely Those from Hessen Darmstadt pe∣rished upon the Danube) are put into Winter-Quarters on the side of that River; but the Saxon, and Brandenburg Auxiliaryes, are to lye in Bohemia, and Moravia; and the Silesian Forces to tarry in their own Country: For the Councel of Warre at Vienna, did not hold it Advisable, to Quarter all the Auxiliaryes near together, for fear of Surfeits up∣on the Fruits; beside that they would have wanted Fodder for their Horse, and in the foule deep wayes they would have
found great trouble to have fetch'd it. Another Consideration was, the Easing of the Hungarians, who were already sufficiently weary of Billeting Souldiers. In Fine; there is no great Noyse of Armes, and Action, at pre∣sent, but how the Enemy may be oppos'd next Spring, is the Consultation, and the Question; who threatens Vienna, and the Empire, with no lesse then 3 or 400000 Men at the Next Cam∣pagnia. It was now Resolv'd by his Imperiall Majesty, to go to Re∣genspurg about the end of No∣vember following; there to Ad∣vise about the Reliefe of the Empire, and indeed of Christen∣dome: and his Imperial Majesty did likewise Resolve to send
Embassadours to the Pope, Spain, France, &c. To Sollicit Succour. From the Pope, Moneys are ex∣pected; France proffers Men (but who dares receive them?) Swede is willing to Assist in respect of their Interest in Germany, and they have sent already 700 well mounted that came from Bre∣men: So that the Instant Busi∣nesse of the Empire seems to be rather Preparation, then Present Defence; and to look forward to∣ward the Spring: The Grand Signior having already dispers'd his Letters of Menace, and De∣fyance to all Christendom through∣out the Emperours Hereditary Countries.
UPon the turks withdrawing the Grosse of his Army, from about Newhausel, over the Danube, with a Countenance of Disposing himself to his Winter Quarter; Mens minds began to be a little Compos'd and Quiet; till Abafti,Abafti trou∣bles the Imperialists in this Tur Absence. the Grant Signiors Creature in Transylvania under∣took the Turks Aftergame, with those Forces that stay'd behind; Labouring his Utmost to possess himself of the Berg, or Mine-Towns, (whence comes the Hun∣garian Gold) and other Frontier Places, and Houses belonging of Right to his Imperiall Majesty: which Perfidious Designe the Christians Army could not con∣veniently either prevent, or op∣pose, being already dispers'd for
want of Necessaries both for Man, and Beast. This same Abafti; pass'd in of Common Esteem,Abfti's manner of roceeding. for a Person well affected to the Christians, and as One that wayted onely a fayre Opportunity to draw his Sword against the Turk; but his Actions have now disco∣ver'd him: for perceiving what Reputation, Presents, and other Popular Advantages, have ac∣crued to the Grand Vizier, and and the Chief Officers of the Turkish Army, upon the Gayn∣ing of Newhausel; He likewise turn'd his Study, and Endea∣vours the same way, not doubt∣ing by his interests, and Ser∣vices, to draw from the Turk∣ish Emperour as fayre a Reward; undertaking not only to keep, what was already gotten, but to
Enlarge the Conquest by a Consi∣derable Addition. It being found neither Com∣modious, nor Beneificiall to ex∣pose the Turks, and other Asi∣atick, and African Forces (whose Bodyes have been used to a Temperate warme Ayre) to the cold Winter-Blasts of Hungary: (which are sharp, though not long) the Hardship of the Win∣ter-Warre was rather Committed to the Mountaineers; That is; to the Abaftish Transylvanians, Moldavians, Wallachians, &c. whose part it is, to Mainteyn the Turks Ground at least, if not carry the Victory further; and in Brief, to hold the Imperi∣alists in Play, till the Ottoman Ar∣my, may conveniently take the Field again toward the Spring. And least the Town Neutra should
be left Naked; instead of about six hundred Turks, and Janiza∣ryes, that were taken out of That Garrison, Others, that could bet∣ter endure the Ayre of the Place, were put in, and a Garrison of one hundred and fifteen Janizaryes into the Castle, (a Sort of Peo∣ple which are of great Credit with the Turk in Martiall Affayrs; And in truth, These were the Men that ventur'd the hardest be∣fore Newhausel.) Janizaryes are Christians Chil∣dren,Janizaryes, what they are. which were either taken Captive, or given in the way of Tribute, by such Christians as have done Homage to the Turks, These Children are tryan'd up from their Child-hood, in the Mahumetan Belief, and Inur'd to Military Exercises. They are very Nu∣merous and Valiant; and doubt∣lesse
the best Support of the Turkish Empire. As their Pow∣er is of great Use, and Service to the Ottoman Emperour in some Cases, so is it in others not lesse dangerous, their Revolts and Tumults being seldome laid, or quieted without Horrible Ra∣pine, and Effusion of Blood. Misery of Miseryes! That the Children of Christians should be thus engaged in so Implacable an Enmity to the Dictates both of Christ and Nature! About This Time; Newes was brought that a Young Son was born to Mahomet; upon which Tydings, such a Face was set upon the Businesse, as if it had been a Material Part of their Religion to welcome this young Idoll into the world with the Sa∣crifice of more Christian Blood.
Abafti's Ayme, (as we have said before) was to work himself in among the Mine-Towns. The two first considerable Blocks in his way were Lewents, and No∣vigrad; (beside others of lesse Importance.) In Lewents were good Fighting men, Back'd with a Castle that was well Fortifyed with Thick Walls, and Firm Tur∣rets. In This Place, the Enemy found Stout Opposition, and Lost many Men before it;Lewents Rendred upon Ac∣cord. but at last, pressing upon it with greater Numbers, and no Relief appear∣ing within distance, they took it upon Accord. Those that March'd out were in no sort In∣jured, and Those that stay'd be∣hind were disarm'd, and did Ho∣mage. After Lewents, followed Novi∣grad, that lyes deeper in the Ʋpper-Hungary;
which although a strong Place, and environ'd with a Mo∣rasse; yet after a stout Resistance was forc'd to Render to the Ene∣my.Novigrad Renders to the Turk. The Forces in it were Con∣ducted to Waitzen, where they be∣took themselves to work for their Living, as the Rest of the Peasants, and are enjoyn'd to be ever in Rea∣dinesse with their Armes. The Governour of it, by Name, Le∣dami, got leave from Abafti to go to his Country-House in Transyl∣vania, and to dwell there, which soon after he did. On the Christians side, there was no good will wanting to∣wards the Relief of any of these Places; but all their Attempts fell short, by Reason of many Faralities, and Accidents Interve∣ning.
These Successes Encouraged the Enemy to draw nearer to the Mine-Towns, and to Endeavour the making of their Winter-Quar∣ter thereabouts, and in Ʋpper-Hungary. A Rumour was then dispersed, that the Great Vizier had Commanded the Magistrates of Frystadt, and the Neighbou∣ring Parts, upon pain of Death to make a Ship-Bridge over the VVaegh with all speed, and to provide Victuals and Fodder to entertain him at his comming back. Thus did new Cares and Troubles come on, in a Season, when every man flatter'd himself with some hopes of Respit and Re∣pose. Count Serini, that till now, staid in the Isle of Schutt, put him∣self Instantly into Motion, and now and then, met with some
Parties, and took good Booty from them; But alass! This would not serve to set the Ballance even. Upon November 12. He took, in a Moorish Place, betwixt Raab, and Comorra, ten Camels, and as many Mules, laden with Truncks full of Gold and Silver-Plate; to∣gether with the Conductours, who were bound for Constantinople with this Booty. In Comorra (where the Officers were at that time under Que∣stion, and came off well, about the Surrender of Newhausel) there were great Complaints of Scar∣city of Provision; the Country being so miserably wasted round about it. Whereupon, at Vi∣enna it was taken into thought, how those out-lying Garrisons might be supplyed, and the Ene∣my disappointed of their Ayme,
who knew full well the State of their Necessities. It is certain, that the Auxiliaries, and other Forces that were Quarter'd in Co∣morra, would much rather have kept the Field, if all other Cir∣cumstances would have permitted it; but those Auxiliaries, who by too liberall Feeding on the Au∣strian and Moravian Fruits, had Contracted Diseases, neither could, nor would stir; beside that their General, Count Hohenlo, a Pru∣dent, Expert, and Judicious Com∣mander, gave many weighty Rea∣sons against it. No sooner had this Lord made an Acquaintance in Vienna; But ill Fortune met with him,Count Ho∣henlo's Chamber Robb'd. his Chamber being Robb'd of Writings, Moneyes, and Jewels, to the value of betwixt twenty and thirty thousands Rix Dollars.
The Swedish Auxiliaries were not yet come up; but by Advice from Leipsick, they were then upon their March, not far from Thuringen, (about the midst of November) and 150. horse were likewise to come from Pomera∣nia, which Forces became the Ground of great Mistakes hap∣pening to be in Motion just upon that Nick of time, when the Er∣fordians (being then Outlawed) were in expectation of the Ment∣zish Troups: Upon whom they Issued forth, and in their Re∣turn left two Carpenters behind them, whom they hanged upon a Waggon, which did much en∣flame the tumult: but the Swe∣dish Troups, which had so much troubled the heads of divers Peo∣ple, proved to be a Force of a∣nother design, and quality.
The Rumour of the Return of the Turkish Army, (now so late in November) encreased more and more; at which time Filleck (some ten Mile from Cassaw) was given for lost; So that cer∣tain Regiments were immediate∣ly sent to make good the other Mine-Towns, which the Enemy had particularly in their Eye for a Winter-Quarter. Those Chri∣stians which about this time ran∣som'd themselves from the Turks, speak much of the Stupendious Preparations, which are now in hand against Christendome; Af∣firming it for a certainty, that the Grand Signior is resolv'd to take the Field next Spring, with an Army of three hundred thousand Men, which causes great perplex∣ities in Poland, Hungary, Mora∣via, Silesia, and Bohemia; but
the Polanders, being at peace with the Turks, conceived them∣selves in some measure secured by virtue of that Agreement; but in the Tartars, Moldavians, and Wallachians, they have not much confidence: Especially, when they are upon their Excur∣sions. Many were of opinion, that the Turks were forc'd upon an irregular and precipitate Re∣treat for want of Provisions, and that their attempts so late in the year, upon Moravia, and the neighbouring Provinces, were caused partly by the Inviting plen∣ty of all necessaries, which those Countries afford; and in part, by the encouragement they received from their correspondents in those Quarters; beside the scarcitie, which their longer continuance, upon the Danube would infalli∣bly
have produced thereabouts, to the great inconvenience of their Armies next Spring. Hungary lay now groaning un∣der the burden of the Turkish Power, and longing for aid; the Infidels over-spreading it like a dismal Cloud, charged with Hail and Thunder: all mens thoughts being sollicitous for deliverance, and in continual expectation where the storm would fall. Many were of opinion, that submission was the best expedient in this ex∣tremity; but betwixt the sense of their Allegiance sworn to the Emperour, and the distrust they had of the Turks Justice to his word, divers held off. The Enemy (who did nothing rashly, though as is generally sup∣posed, rather acting by Instigati∣on then choice) counted it most
adviseable to draw toward Cassaw the head City of Ʋpper-Hungary; knowing full well that when ever the Christians should Ʋnite, they would make this place the Seat of War, and Settle themselves there: Wherefore the Infidels went roundly to work, removing whatsoever might hinder their Progresse, before any succor could come up to them, which succour would however at last signifie not much against so Potent an Enemy. About this time, the Polanders were a little Frighted with the Tartars, who though returning homeward with their booty al∣ready gotten, might yet be temp∣ted by their greediness after more to break into the Cracovian Way∣wood-ship; and from thence, to advance into Silesia, according to
the old saying, Si Turca veniet in Germaniam, Ibit per Poloniam. If the Turk comes into Germany, he shall passe through Poland. These Incarnat and Rapacious Devils, however kept off yet, and carried their prey to their Caverns there to divide it. One thing is, that Cham, being the Head and Soveraign of these Tartars which had been in Moravia, was a friend to Poland, and about this time his Forces went in abundance with the King of Poland, (in per∣son) and the Army, together with a great number of Cossacks, against the Muscovite, marching over the River Nieper, otherwise called Boristhenes. The Turks however went on in their proceeding, sub∣duing Shemniz, Cremniz, & other Mine towns, & sending threatning Letters to the Magistrates there∣about,
who being over-aw'd by the Terrour of Menaces, moved the People under them to do Ho∣mage to these Infidels. The ta∣king of the Fort Navigrad, (upon the strength whereof the People so much depended) did not a lit∣tle conduce to the Subjecting of the rest. And now they made their excursions towards Tokay, (where their noblest Wines grow) a strong Hold, Moted round a∣bout, and alwayes reputed as in∣vincible. Upon this place they practised both subtilty and force,Tokay at∣tempted. as they had done before Novigrad; but honest men had the keeping of it, and so they were forc'd to pass it by. About this time the Turks caus∣ed the late subdued Lewents to be demolish'd,Lewents demoli∣shed. as not liking the manner of the Fortification, and
sent a threatning Order to those of Frystadt, to dispatch out of hand two Bridges over the Waegh larger then the former, and to make them broad enough for whole Squadrons to pass a Breast; And now they began to talk loud of another Invasion into Moravia; to which end, many thousands of the Tawny-Tartars throng'd into the Camp, as if those of the o∣ther complexion, had not yet play∣ed the Devils sufficiently in the Country; Whereupon to prevent that Inrode, a Counter-mand was sent to most of those forces, that were now march'd, or marching off to their Winter-Quarters; and Order given them to bend their Course toward the Waegh. Al∣though this Countenance of the Turks design gain'd not much Credit, in regard of the season
of the Year, it was however held for good discretion, not to be too secure. Near the end of November, came to Vienna diverse of the ser∣vants of Baron de Goes, (who had been long employ'd as the Empe∣rours Agent toward the inten∣ded treaty for Peace) Affirming that the Grand Signior with the Tartar Cham, have resolved, with an Incredible Force, to come per∣sonally into the Field next spring; and joyn the utmost of their pow∣er against Christendome. Upon the taking of which Re∣solution, vast Quantities of Rice and Corn were ordered at Adri∣anople, and Philippopoli to be car∣ried to Greek-Weissenberg, and from thence to Offen. This de∣termination and proceeding, en∣gaged the Christians to use their
utmost Endeavours possible, for the bringing of a considerable bo∣dy into the Field next Spring; and to this purpose, his Imperial Ma∣jesty having first given Audience to the Report of the said Baron, gives immediate Order for Pre∣parations; taking his Journy to the Diet at Regenspurg,The Em∣perour goes to the Diet. to stir up the Princes of the Empire to a General Conjunction against the Turk. In the Interim, the Arch-Duke Charles Joseph, being de∣sign'd to keep his Residence in Vienna, put himself upon the way thither from Lintz; but fell in∣to such a weakness upon the Jour∣ny, that he was enforc'd to go back. The Chief Officers ap∣pointed to stay behind in Vienna, applyed themselves with all dili∣gence to the putting their Orders in Execution.
Schinta was now provided a∣fresh with Ammunition and Pro∣vision, and the Great Artillery removed from thence, the Mon∣tecuculish Army, which for a long time had been Quarter'd near the Presburg Ship-Bridg, moving likewise toward Moravia. The Count de Souches conceived some hopes of recovering Neutra, and prepar'd accordingly; the loss of that place being reputed not much inferiour to the loss of New∣hausel: Neutra being an Episco∣pal Seat, New-hausel only a Quar∣ter for Souldiers, which begat a greater Zeal, and Earnestness to∣ward the Recovery of the Place. This Fort (in Latine, Nitria) lies upon the River Neutra,Neutra descri∣bed. which encloses the Fort like an Island, together with the high and low Town; and from hence it takes
it's denomination. The River is pretty large, but not Navigable, although of a strong and deep stream, abounding with varietie of Excellent Fish: The Castle stands upon the top of a Craggy Rock, and the Prospect from it, is fair and large, upon a spacious Level; without any Mountain or high place, within distance to command or endanger it. The Town under it is built upon the side of the Hill, declining by degrees, till it comes to the River, which parts the upper and the lower Town. Within this Castle stands an Eminent Minster, of a strong and goodly Structure, overtopping all the rest of the Buildings abou it. There is also a Princely Pallace, which hath been formerly famous for Rich Furniture, and choice
curiosities of Paintings, Hangings, and the like. From without, it is encompassed with a brave wood: So that in fine, This Place consi∣dered within it self, together with it's Situation and Prospect, can∣not be said to want any thing re∣quisite, to the accomplishment of a most delicious Habitation. The Ʋpper-Town below the Castle, contains a new-rais'd Fran∣ciscan Cloyster, and many other fair Fabricks, and Houses lately Erected. In this Town were ga∣thered together many Rarities, not onely of strange Birds and Beasts, but also of Mechanical and Artificial Works. Now albeit, that this Fort, in respect of it's Site and Fortification, might well enough Stile it self Impregnable, as in former times it has ever been reputed, (nor indeed was it ever
Assaulted till now) yet were not all these advantages sufficient to Maintain it, against the Malice and Treachery of a single Person, who without any Opposition, or the least colour of necessity, de∣livered up this Episcopal Seat, into the Hands of Blood-thirsty Infidels: the Places of so many Religious Persons, and other Chri∣stians, being at present supplied by seven or eight hundred Jani∣zaries, among, and with the rest, which the Grand Ʋizier has put in for a Garrison. To conclude, in outward appearance it was plain enough, that the taking of this Place, was no Winter-Work. When it was too late, the Suc∣cour above mentioned drew near to the Mine-Towns, and punish'd some of those that were too for∣ward in going over, and submit∣ting
to the Turk: as particularly in Bugans, which in truth brought great misery upon the poor Coun∣try people; who amongst so many coming and going Parties, were in a great straight how to behave themselves. Count Peter Serini, with some of the Auxiliary forces attempted a visit upon those in Bosnia, and the other Turkish Troups, which he had lately ruf∣fled near to Carlstadt. Count Nicholas Serini likewise, did all that was possible by several ways and means, to gall and weaken the Enemy: Nor were the Gar∣risons of Raab and Comorra lesse Vigilant and Active; but every day looking abroad, and many times returning with Prisoners, and good Booty. The Silesians also stood ready upon the Bor∣ders, with a Body of Nine or Ten
Thousand Men, to prevent the Turks breaking in upon them; but about this time, there pass'd not any Action of great Import: The Enemy toward the Month of December, lying close and quiet about Gran, Offen, and Greek-Weissenburg, to which last place the Grand Vizier betook himself in Person, taking along with him Baron de Goes, his Imperial Ma∣jesties Resident at the Ottoman Court. On the other side, Abafti, with his Agents, were close at work in Ʋpper-Hungary, trying what good might be done there, either by force or surprize, and using their utmost endeavours to dis∣pose the Hungarians to a general Revolt;Abafti tampers with the Hungari∣ans. Abafti in the mean time chalking out the way to the Grand Vizier, which he thought most
conducing to his purpose, telling him, that the Hungarians were most likely to be wrought upon by mild and gentle means, which might be so propounded, and re∣presented to them, that of two Evils, they might look upon sub∣mission to be the least. In this Injuncture, Prince Ra∣gotzi's Widow began sensibly to perceive, that Hungary would be no place for her to abide in: Whereupon, She and her Son ad∣dressed themselves to his Majesty of Poland, making Suit, that in this their distress, some place of Retreat might be afforded them within that Crowns Dominions; but to this Request of Hers, the King of Poland demurr'd; not only out of particular respects to Her Husbands demerits from that Crown; but for fear also of disobli∣ging
the Turk, by allowing her Entertainment: Beside that the Cracovian Waywood-ship, by rea∣son of the Turks drawing that way, was now in greater care and fear then ever, and with all speed sent a Messenger to the Crown-Marshal, to sollicite the Court to consider of it: The Waywood himself refusing to go in Person to Ʋkrain, and to attend other peoples business, to the hazzard of his own: Whereupon he not onely obtained leave to stay at home, and look to his Charge; but also to write an amicable Let∣ter to the Grand Ʋizier, desi∣ring that a faire understanding might be continued, and invio∣lably preserved betwixt him and Poland. About this time, in December, his Imperial Majesty began his
Journy towards Regensburg;The Em∣perour begins his Jour∣ny to∣ward Regens∣burg. and in his Absence, the direction of the Frivy-Council at Vienna, was committed to the Count of Swartzenburg; and now were se∣veral Rumours (how unlikely so∣ever) raised at Vienna. First, as if the Polanders intended to con∣ferre that Crown upon young Ra∣gotzi; to the end, to Incorporate Transylvania with Poland; and the young Prince was then to Marry into the House of Inspruck. It was bruited in the next place, that the Turkish Chiaux, who came along with Baron de Goes, brought with him Plenipotence to propound a new Treaty, and to offer new Conditions of Peace; but this was a Story that gained little credit; for who could be so simple as to believe, that so Crafty, Powerful, and so Insolent
an Enemy, should in the full course of his Victories, entertain any thought of admitting, much less of propounding an Agreement with a People, whom at this time, he did equally both hate and de∣spise. The Christians (one would think) had suffered too much, by their former Credulity, to trust him again: And yet the late Go∣vernour of Novigrad (Ledami by Name) was so easie, as to rely up∣on the Turks word, and to per∣swade himself, that by the sur∣rendry of Novigrad, he might compound for the full enjoyment of his goods in Transylvania; but he found himself deceived; being not onely bereaved of his Fortune, but effectually of his Life too, by the Barbarous usage of those perfidious Insidels: The Turks it seems, not having as yet
forgotten the faithful services in time past, which he had rendred to Prince Ragotzi, and that this Ledami had had a hand in putting Barkay to Death: (the Grand Signiors Creature, and who had formerly Usurp'd upon that Prin∣cipality, under the protection of the Turk.) The Strong-Hold Filleck was hard put to it, and suffered much; but has hitherto neverthelesse stood firm, and defended it self to the utmost. The Fort Sent∣shai indeed, in which one Ro∣chart commanded, yielded un∣worthily. True it is, that the Ottoman Army in the Field, was not now so numerous, as it was said to be: It was yet strong e∣nough however to oppose the Country, and to keep many Strong Hold, and several Provinces, in
continual Apprehensions and Al∣larmes. The Various Motions, and Counter-Changes of the Turkish Army, had now for a good while amused the Christians, giving them occasion several times to draw to their Quarters, and then back again, till at last, the Ene∣mies design discovered it self to be directly upon new Serinswar. In this Interim, little past of Moment, onely now and then the Free-Heydukes Issued out from Comorra, and sometime met with a Purchase betwixt Gran and Newhausel. About the Sixth of December, some Thousand Turks and Tar∣tars moved toward the River Mur,The Turks de∣signe up∣on Se∣rinswar. (which encloses the Fort Serinswar) with design to gain a Passage that way, and fall upon
Count Serini; not much doubt∣ing by that means to make them∣selves Masters of the Fort.They pass the Mur. A matter of two Thousand of them had the fortune to pass the River, but it proved their Ruine: For Count Serini (forewarned, fore∣armed, and) finding his Life and Fortune at stake; with his small, but Valiant Party, fell upon the two Thousand Infidels with such a Prodigious Fury and Courage, that they quickly turn'd Head, and by their flight, east the rest of the Party into such a confusi∣on, that they lost at once, both the use of their Reason, and Re∣solution;And are Worsted. and more of them pe∣rish'd in the Retreat, then in the Combat: During this Action, Serini received hourly supplies, without which, it had not been possible for him to have main∣tained
the fight so long: A ful∣ler view whereof, may be gather∣ed from what follows. The Copy of a Letter from Count Nicholas Serini to His Imperial Majesty. THe Providence of God did never more signally appear then Yesterday, in the preservati∣on not onely of my self, and the Forces uner my Command, but likewise of all the Neighbouring Countries hereabouts: At which time the Turks and Tartars with a mighty Power, and in the open day, advanced toward us, bring∣ing with them an orderly well-framed Ship-Bridge, with all
things appertaining thereunto; and two thousand Tartars were sent before, to lay it, and make it ready for the rest of the Forces. The little strength I had, I dispo∣sed here, and there, as I thought most for my advantage, and kept Guard my self with three Hun∣dred Horse. About break of day, notice was given me by a Warn∣ing-Piece, of the Infidels ap∣proach: Whereupon I instantly moved into sight, and found that two thousand of the Enemy were already over the water; our con∣dition was now desperate, it being neither possible for me to make a faire Retreat, nor indeed advise∣able to think of one; in this streight we took up a resolution, and Char∣ged into the middle of their Body, where we were wholly encompas∣sed; but God Almighty, out of
his Love to Christendome, took a∣way the Enemies Strength and Courage: for after the first shower of Arrowes, (that look'd as if it would have buried us, although doing very little Execution upon us) such a consternation seized them all, that they presently fled toward the Mur, where Encoun∣tering their Fellowes that were coming over to their assistance, they fell into such a distraction and amazement, that they could neither Advance, nor Retire, nor Swim, nor save themselves by Re∣sisting. In fine, the face of the River was quite covered with Horse and Men; and of this op∣portunity, I made what use I could, taking not so much as one Prisoner; so that betwixt killing and drowning, not many of them escaped: Above a thousand of
their empty Horses we took com∣ing out of the River, but the rest, together with their Riders (saving a very few) sank to the bottom. Hereupon, they sent immediate∣ly for their foot, (being not far from the place) but before they could come on, two hundred of my own Foot came up to me with two Field-Pieces, and with these we maintained our Ground till the rest of my men came in like∣wise from other Parts; and when we had fought out the whole Day, and into the Night, the Enemy drew off before Morning in great Silence and Indignation. This Yesterdayes Deliverance and Vi∣ctory must never be forgotten, either by us, or our Neighbours; and yet how it may go hereafter with us, in the condition we now stand; no man is able to deter∣mine;
the Turk lying still in a great Body about Canisia; and only waiting for an Opportunity of taking his Revenge. Touching the strength of their Army, and who Commands it, I cannot ren∣der your Imperial Majesty any warrantable Account, having taken no Prisoners; but common Report speaks them to be 40000 strong; although I must confess, that to my Eye, from the other side of the Water, they did not appear to be above 10000 Men. Their drift was undoubtedly to quit scores for the Mischief my men had done them near Co∣morra; to Plunder, and Destroy the Island; to enter into Steir-Mark, where they might have Ravaged, as far as Gratz, with∣out any Opposition: After which, to pass the Mur; and again to
March about to Count Budiani's Territorries; and so to lie upon the Frontiers. This Enformation, according to the best of my Knowledge, I do present most Dutifully to Your Imperial Majesty, with my hum∣ble Request, that You will Graci∣ously be pleased, to Order some further provision of Men, Artil∣lery, Ammunition, and other Ne∣cessaries for these Parts; or we must all yet be Ruin'd at last. God preserve your Majesty in a good Government. Seredin, Novemb. 29. 1663. Your Imperial Majesties most Obedient, and Loyal Servant, NICHOLAS SERINI.
Upon this Rout abovementio∣ned, Serini with his Croats about a Thousand strong, pressed the Enemy so hard in the Rear, that at this Bout, there were slain and drown'd of them at least three Thousand: The Souldiers got good Booty, beside three Piece of Ordnance, one Morter-Piece, many Ammunition-Wagons, and other things that their hast would not give them leave to stay for; and so they Retired to Canisia. The Turks were at this time Strong and Numerous about that Quarter, intending, as is already said, an attempt upon Serinswar: The ten Thousand before-menti∣oned being reckoned only as their Van. This disappointment gall'd the Grand Vizier to the Heart, and minded him of his late Dis∣aster at Carlstadt, where Peter
Serini had treated him much at the same Rate, which made him threaten Count Nich. Serini, & his Fort, with the bitterest Expressi∣ons imaginable of Indignation and Revenge: Whereupon the Count Sollicited his Imperial Ma∣jesty for Aid, and at his Request, the Earl of Hohenlo was ordered with six Thousand men to be at hand to Second him. While these beaten Dogs were licking their Wounds at Canisia, contenting themselves for a while to Bark, where they could not Bite. General Souches in Con∣junction with the Forces of Saxe, Brandenburg, Bohemia, and Mo∣ravia, Marched fourteen Thou∣sand strong toward the Mine-Towns, to make all good against Abafti. In their March, they passed as far as Neutra and New∣hausel,
without any Encounter; no Enemy appearing in the Field, and the Houses and Castles along the way, which the Turks a while before had Garrisoned, were now found Empty; into which the Count put Garrisons to keep all open behind him. Lewents, he took by Assault, being but weak∣ly Man'd, and put about four Hundred that were in it to the Sword. While these things were doing, Abafti plaid his Game another way; labouring by Craft and In∣sinuations, to bring over the Pro∣vincial-States, which were assem∣bled at Cashaw, to his Party; and so to Unite those Corporations unto Transylvania. December,Baron de Goes comes to Vienna. 10. Baron de Goes came to Vienna, and confirmed the Report of the Enemies migh∣ty
Preparations; further intima∣ting, that the Grand Signior was resolved to Prosecute the War; unless Transylvania should be wholly Surrendred to him; Se∣rinswar Demolished, and Hun∣gary submit to pay him a yearly Tribute. At his last Audience, the Great Vizier said little more, then (smilingly) that he might go to his Emperour; and that he himself intended within a while to wait upon him with three or four Hundred Thousand Men,The Great Vizier's Bravado. to Talk with the Croatians, and give the Germans a Visit. When his Imperial Majesty was come almost to Regenspurg, the Baron made Ready to follow him, to give his Majesty an Ac∣compt of his Errand; together with a Missive from the Turkish Emperour, sealed up in a Red Velvet Bag. 'Tis said, that three
Hundred Turkish Horse had Way∣laid him, upon his Passage from Offen; and it was suspected to have been done by Order; but an Over-ruling Providence pre∣served him from the Ambush. Of all the Discourses, that pas∣sed from him; the saddest was, the Relation he made of about Thirty Thousand Naked Christi∣ans,A sad Specta∣cle. in Fetters, and Chains, Whip∣ped, and driven along before his Face; and so carried away (lesse Regarded then Beasts) into Per∣petual Slavery: Which Hideous Outrages, were not yet commit∣ted, without a pretended Impulse of Piety, & Conscience, as may ap∣pear by one of their Blasphemous Prayers against the Christians. THE TƲRKS PRAYER. THou God of all things, and thou divine Prophet Ma∣homet!
Although we do not in the least, fear the Christians (who believe in their dead God, and like mad Dogs Wor∣ry one another) because that we in Strength and Force are much above them, through thy Assistance and Power. We do however beseech thee, to stretch forth thy mighty hand against those thy Enemies; and to help us suddainly to Destroy them: to root out the whole Race of them, with their Wives and Children; to lay waste their Lands, and to break their Wea∣pons in pieces; that these mad People may become yet more like unto mad Dogs, Amazing
and Confounding one another; deliver them into our Hands according to our long and ear∣nest desire; to the end, that we may every where advance thy Ʋncorruptible Kingdom. Make thy Crown Glorious, and thy Temples Famous throughout the world, Adorning them with the Oblation of many Heads. Blow us like a whirlwind into their Countries, and let them be to us, but as a small Prey. Fling Fire among them to Con∣sume them, and Dust into their Eyes to make them Blind. De∣vour them in thy Wrath; Tear them with thy Teeth; Let them drink their own Bloud, and
take thou away their Flesh from the Earth; because they despise thy Offering and Cir∣cumcision. Hang them on the Cross; Let them be sprinkled with Water till they grow Mad, because they make a Son to God without a Mother. Now let their Ruine hasten, and take them away from the Face of the Earth, that thy Name may not fall into Contempt for their sakes. It was now about the middle of December, and the Enemy made great Preparations to take the Benefit of the first hard Frost: Whereupon, strong Guards were set upon the Rivers; and Vienna was at that time much troubled,
with a Discourse of pulling down a good part of the Suburbs, to make the place Defensible. The Enemy had his Eye now upon Moravia; and for Prevention, the New-raised Forces in Vienna, were Ordered to the River Mark, to keep a constant Watch upon the Infidels. Presburg was also care∣fully provided for, & a Subterra∣nean Retreat made from the City, to the Castle, for an After-game, in case the Town should come to be Taken. About the beginning of December,Three Suns. there had been seen three Suns (some say five) with several Rain-Bows, that appeared over the famous Fort of Dreis∣den, which began now to work upon the People: So that mens Minds were filled with Perplexi∣ty, both from Above, and Be∣neath. Some would have it, that the three Suns portended so many
mighty Princes, that should come to be Rulers over Germany; and briefly, every man had his Guess. (God grant Peace and Comfort to Christendom.) It was now daily expected, that the Turkish Army should attempt something in Re∣venge of the Blow they had lately received near Canisia; and Prince Abasty was on the other side ob∣served to aspire more directly to the Crown of Hungary; but the Vigilance of Counts Serini, Ho∣henlo, Souches, &c. still found means, either to divert, or disap∣point the most dangerous part of their designes. They kept how∣ever in a Body near Canisia, mak∣ing many proffers upon the Christi∣ans Territories; although to little purpose; Heaven and Earth con∣spiring to frustrate their Intents, by a mild and open Winter, and the Conjunction of so many brave
Commnanders, keeping a Watch, and check upon their passage. On the other sides; those Turks which lay near to Offen, and a∣long the Danube, (even as far as the Save) took great care to main∣taine themselves in a Body, and to provide before hand for the next Campagnia; furnishing New∣hausel, and Newtra, with Am∣munition, Provision, and all other things whereof they had need; and in particular with 40000. Suits of Cloths, for the supply of their tattered Troops: But Provi∣dence disposed otherwise of a good part of these Turkish Provi∣dings, by casting them into the hands of theGarrison at Comorra, which upon several Sallies had the better of the Enemy, and many times brought off considerable Booty into the Castle. As for in∣stance, on the 15th of December,
they snapt a prize of 60 Wagons (drawn by 400 Oxen) laden with Ammunition, and comming from Gran for Newhausel, which they caryed off safely to Comorra; the Purchase being valued at 16000. Rix-dollars. Those Carriages were committed to the Convoy of 300 men, whom they surprized, and Routed, distributing the Oxen amnong the Garrison. About this time, Tidings were brought from Adrianople, that 50000 of the Asiatick Forces were come thither, & to the Parts there∣abouts, to take up their Winter-Quarters; and that there was a Monstrous Tax laid upon all the Turkish Dominions, in order to the carrying on the War against the Christians. The Turks and Tartars were now at Five-kirk, and elsewhere waiting for a Frost, in great Bodies, having furnished
themselves with many Thousands of Sleds, for the furtherance of the Design; but the Season was so gentle, that they could make nothing on't. As on the other side of the Danube, toward Cro∣atia, there passed not any thing considerable at this time: So not much of Action neither, by the Forces of General Souches, which drew toward the Mine-Townes. A Party of Christians, in Turkish habits, adventured into Neutra, and killed some of the Turks; but the Castle presently took the Alarm, and put them to a Re∣treat, wherein they saved them∣selves, and carried away 20. con∣siderable Prisoners; but a Turkish Party from Newhausel to Schinta come not so well off; who sup∣posing that the Garrison, as well as the Artillery was removed; advanced so near the Place, that
what with he Guns from the Wall, and after that, a Sally out of the Town, 150. of them were kill'd upon the Spot, and the rest fled for their lives. They were now busie in Vienna, upon Mounting and fitting the Artillery that came from Schinta, and cast∣ing of Granadoes, and Field-Pieces, keeping an eye in the mean while upon Ʋpper-Hungary, where indeed the greatest danger lay, by reason of the Practises, and Insi∣nuations of Abafti: for preven∣tion whereof, the Counts of Ro∣thal, and Nadasti were employed to endeavour the upholding of the People in their Obedience. To which purpose, the Forces under the command of General Souches, where very serviceable: There was good hope likewise, that the Hungarian Palatine at Newsol, might have done some
good upon them, against the flat∣teries of Abafti; but he excused himself in regard that he was neither in health; nor if he were, could he pretend to so much In∣terest as to prevail upon them; beside, that he mistrusted Cashaw, and other places in Hungary would take it ill at his hand: So that the Counts before mentio∣ned, were forced to return, and seek their way through Po∣land, into Ʋpper-Hungary: Nei∣ther were the Inhabitants of the Mine Towns any kinder to the Forces that were sent to their Re∣lief; but partly, by the ill usage they found among the Hungari∣ans; & partly, upon necessity they were forced to go back, leaving many of their Companions be∣hind them, that dyed of Surfets, and Hungarian Feavours. In fine, the Germans, and Hunga∣rians
could not set their Horses together; and Ahafti making use of their Divisions, betwixt fear, and perswasion, drew a great Par∣ty to his side. These heart-burn∣ings among the Christians, were of great service to the Infidels; Especially being encouraged by Letters from Zekelheit, giving Ad∣vice that the Garrison had alrea∣dy Revolted, and Expel'd their Commander, with all the chief Officers out of the Castle, upon pretence, that they had received thirteen Months Pay, that was then due to them, and kept it from them; openly declaring, that if they could get nothing where they were, they would serve another Master; (aiming no doubt at A∣bafty.) This Example had so great an influence upon other pla∣ces, that toward the end of this year, the whole Ʋpper-Hungary
seem'd to be upon a desperate Pin. By this time his Imperial Maje∣sty was safely arived at Regens∣purg, where all diligence was used in preparations, and dispatches for the Relief of the Empire; E∣specially, for sending of Ayd to Count Serini, whose wants of Military Provisions, were drawn out to the last point of expectati∣on. It was also taken into thought, how to raise 10000. men in Hun∣gary, without charging the Gen∣try, out of a desire to spare them, till the utmost Exigent of a Field expedition should require it. At this time also were designed the Respective Imperial Embassa∣dours, to be Employed to all Chri∣stian Princes, and States, on the behalf of the Cause of Christen∣dom, against the Common Ene∣my; who threatens Hungary with
150000. men, and the Grand Sig∣nior in the head of them. The Great Ʋizier with 100000. men, to break into Croatia; and Aly Bassa with 50000. men to com∣mand in Ʋpper-Hungary; the sooner to bring Hungary, Austria, Moravia, and Silesia, under Sub∣jection to the Turk. Beside the loss of Zekelheit, and the wavering of all Ʋpper-Hunga∣ry; about this time was brought the ill news of 200. Sporkish Horse going over to Newhausel, for want of pay; and of the defeat of a Party of a matter of 120. that in their return from about Weissenburg, where they had sei∣zed good Booty, were ovrtaken by 400. Turks, 12. of them kill'd, 20. made Prisoners, and the rest dispersed; Neither as yet did Matters go much better toward the Frontiers of Croaetia, the Grand
Vizier summoning all the Bor∣ders upon miserable Penalties, to provide for the numerous Tartari∣an forces, which had those Parts Assigned them for their Quarter; but Count Serini thereupon com∣manded immediately 600. Croa∣tians to endeavour the breaking of their design, who persued their Orders effectually, Burning all the Barns and Forrage for 12 miles round: So that the Enemy was forced to dis-lodge, and Retire. Thus far the Dutch Relation of the last Campagnia; reserving what has pas∣sed since, for another occasion; to be∣gin from the breaking off of this: wherein the Reader may expect, over and above the scattered particulars of the more Ordinary Chances, and En∣counters of the War, an exact and pun∣ctual Narration apart, of Count Serini's late Inrode into Turkey; together with whatever else Remarkabel shall here∣after occurre. FINIS.
Mouse. Mus. most every where, in houses and barnes, &c. bread, cheese, corne, and tallow, &c. s. Heb. Achar. Arab. Phir. Chald. Acbe. se. Arnold. T. The flesh eaten causeth oblivion, and cor∣ the meat; yet those of Calechut eate them; it is hot, so tish, and expelleth melancholy, so Rhas. and Albert. yet  doubteth therein. V. Plin. A Mouse dissected and applied,  out reeds, darts, and other things that stick in the flesh. cel. After being flead: and helps the wounds of Serpents.  Gal. Avic. Rhas. Albert. The same helpeth the wounds of ons. Plin. Applied fresh it helps the bitings of the shrew;  it selfe applied. It killeth warts, so Rhas. and Albert. Some  satt thereof rosted in a Goose against the scirrhus. Young uised, and reduced to the consistence of an acopon with old  cause haire on the eyebrows. Diosc. Rhas. Avic. Alber. aten by children when rosted, they dry up their spittle. The Magicians eat them twice in a month against the paines eth. Marcel. The water in which they have been boiled against the quinsey. Plin. So boiled with vervain. Boiled ile and salt, they help the vices of the lungs, and spitting of Being boiled and eaten, they help childrens pissing in bed: So the ashes with wine or Goats milk. Being dissected ied they help the gout. Plin. The ashes help burnings,  and the falling off of the haire, with that of cypresse balls, ose of a Mule, mnyrtle oile, that of a hedg-hog, sandaracha, , and tarre: the same with oile help the tetter. Archig  daily plaister-wise with axunge, it helpeth the alope∣ng first rubbed with garlick. Rasis and Albertu adde oile
the paines of the eares. Marcel. Plin. with honey rubbed on eeth, they sweeten the breath; but some adde the roots of el Gal. The flesh stamped with the yolk of an egge, to the c∣ence of a cerot, and applied with a linnen cloth, helps the ose inflammation of the cornea. Plin. Marcel. Gal. Avi.  bloud killeth wats Gal. With the gall of a Cock, and  milk an. it mightily helpeth suffusion. Plin. The a he skinne, applied with vineger help the paines of the head.  bert. The head worne in a cloth, helps the headach and ep∣y. Gal. The ashes of the head with honey helpe the alo Some se them with hellebore and pepper after cantharides,  and nitre; as also flies torrified. Sext. The ashes with honey  en dayes, cleare the eyes. With that of a hare, and spike hey sweeten the breath. Marcel. The braine being steeped in  and applied to the forehead helpeth the headach. Used with er it cureth the phrensey. Sext. The heart taken out of a  when alive, worne about the arme of a Woman, causeth no  ption. Seren. The filler of the liver drunk with austere  helpeth quartans. Gal. The liver rosted in the new of the  rie the epilepsy. Plin. Marcel. Seren. The gall with v dropped into the eare, bringeth out living creatures in the Plin. The dung is corrosive. AEt. It is mixed with remedies  ingworms. Plin. With vineger it helps lichens in the face,  rst fomented with nitre and vineger. Marcel. So it helps  reps. With earth-worms, white pepper; & myrrhe an. un mixed with vineger, and applied it helpeth the hemicrania. With frankincense and sandaracha it discusseht the pani.  Seven of the pills applied to the forehead or temples, with ger, helpe the paine thereof: Marcel. Stamped with the trunus, and applied to the forehead with vineger, it pr∣epeth the paine of the hemicrania. With vineger it helps   Var It helps the alopecia. Diosc. So with vineger, so  nd Gal. some add tarre also. Rhas. Albert. Some adde the of rket, cresses, onions or garlick. Avic. And honey,  frankincense, white hellebore, and pepper, with tosted  applied with that of a Goat and honey they help bald eye
